18886 S113632 99848864 13981
❧ THE FIVE Bookes of the Famous, learned, and eloquent man, Hie∣ronimus Osorius, contayninge a discourse of Ciuill, and Chri∣stian Nobilitie. A WORKE NO LESSE pleasaunt then profitable for all, but especiallye the noble Gentlemen of England, to vievv their liues, their estates, and conditions in. Translated out of Latine into Englishe by VVilliam Blandie late of the Vniuersitie of Oxeford, and novv fellovv of the middle Temple in London. Imprinted at London in Fleete-streate by Thomas Marsh. ANNO 1576. Cum Priuilegio. decorative border incorporating the monogram of Thomas Marsh, printer (TM)
TO THE RIGHT HO∣nourable the Lord Roberte Dud∣ley, Erle of Leycester, Baron of Denbigh, Ma∣ster of the Horse to the Queenes Maiestie, Knighte of the noble order of the Garter, highe Chauncelour of the Vniuersitye of Oxeforde, and one of her high∣nes most Honourable priuie Counsell: VVilliam Blandie wisheth perfit health wyth in∣crease of honour. THe Historyes of auncient me∣morie doe giue sufficient testi∣monie (right noble Earle) that many haue bene for their mani∣folde giftes, and noble vertues right worthily cōmended to po∣steritie. Some, for that they were the first inuen∣tours and finders out of Artes and Sciences: some, for that they ordayned good Lawes & statutes, for the restrayning the vnbridled desiers of men, and the abandoning all barbarous crueltie: some, for their magnificence, bountie, & franke nature: some for their inuincible minde, exceeding greate prowesse, puissaunce, & magnanimitie. But how much prayse, how great honour & renowne hath bene in all well gouerned commonwealthes giuen to such as haue bene patrones of Iustice, maintey∣nours
of learninge, defendours of truth and ho∣nestie. For why, the fame of many worthy wryters, the credite and estimation of learning, the loue & honour due vnto vertue it selfe and Godlines, had lōg ere this time ben vtterly put out, & rakte vp with their cinders, had not the patronage of Prin∣ces propt vp their painefull labours, had not some vnmoueable and royall rocke beene a sure defence and bullwarke of liberall Artes, had not the gra∣cious countenaunce of moste worthye and noble men puissauntlye repelled the force and rage of impietie. In like maner the fames of mightie Kinges had died and beene intumbed wyth theyr bodyes, the very Crownes & Scepters of the most famous and noble Monarches, had been rustie & warpte wyth obliuion, had not learned men (yel∣ding curteous acceptaunce to labours full of peril) celebrated and painted foorth their memorable actes and noble enterprices. So that it may ap∣peare moste manifeste, that neither Princes maye liue cleare and knowen to posteritie wythoute the penne and helping hande of learneds Arte: ney∣ther men excelling in learning, woulde be eyther in lyfe reputed or spoken of after death, withoute the countenaunce, defence, and patronage of no∣ble Peeres. VVherfore sith no small prayse hath
beene giuen in all ages to patrones of learninge, and also wheras learned men haue yelded to their patrones such dutie and obseruaunce as might bee required at their handes: I do as litle doubt, that your honour will refuse to entertaine Osorius, who would become familiar wyth vs Englishe men, as it is most certaine that this Gētlemā for his part in these his bookes of Nobilitie, hath most highlye commended you. For thoughe Osorius do treate of Nobilitie in generall, yet principallye and as the Greekes terme it,  hee seemeth to de∣scribe the worthines of your excellent nature and noble minde. So althoughe there is no doubt but that all noble mē will take the Patronage of him, yet he in this kinde of argumente being very pre∣cise and making as it were great choise of the ex∣cellencie and surpassinge clearenes of many noble natures, seemeth to reste in your worthines, and therfore coueteth greatly to creepe vnder the bā∣ner of your protection. And verely it were an vnseemely thinge, that wheras Osorius is in Por∣tugale highely priced, in all Spaine praysed, in Ger¦manie generally commended, in Italy honourably reported of, that he arriuing in Englande (the in∣habitaunts wherof beinge of all other Nations e∣specially praysed for their singular humanitie, &
great curtesie) that he (I say) arriuing in a straūg countrye, and turned as it were oute of his coate, shoulde masterlesse gad abroade, and not be har∣boured by some noble personage, and especially of such, of whom vndoubtedly he hath well deserued. VVith which staine of dishonour, no gentle & no∣ble nature wilbe blemished, much lesse those which are placed in the toppe of honour and dignitie. This being so, I most hūbly craue of your Honour that not onely Osorius himselfe for his owne sake, maye be welcome vnto you, but also his guide, con∣ductour, & interpretour, who hath (if not trim∣ly, yet truly, if not finely, yet faithfully) expoūded his learned and graue inuentions. VVhich office of safe conduct, sith it is happened vnto mee, I doe in our mother tongue most humbly recommende vnto your Honour so well my charge as my selfe: hoping that as messengers of euill tidings are ex∣cusable, so hee that happely bringeth to lighte any secrete and hidden treasure, maye accordingly be well intreated. At Newberie the vi. daye of Ap 1576. By your Honours most hum∣ble and daily Oratour. Willaim Blandie.
Henricus Ferrarius Badisleius Guilielmo Blandeio suo. QVam prope Romanos super abat Osorius omnes, Dum sua Romano dat monumenta stylo: Tam prope te vicit nuper Blandeius Osori, Dum tua de Latijs scripta Britanna facit. Ampla quidem sunt haec verae praeconia laudis, Quam simul interpres, quam simul author habet. Si tamen in veris, fas est mihi dicere verum, Interpres verae plus propè laudis habet. Author vt inuentum, sic libera verba tenebat, Arbitrij interpres non erat ipse sui. Eiusdem. Multi sunt apinas, quibus, trichas{que} Et nugas, volupe est, meraciores Omni scribere temporis minuto. Hinc est cernere, tot librariorum Plenas vndi{que} semper officinas Chartis, non obòlo, nec asse dignis, Nec flocco, aut nuce putrida aestimandis. Illas vix foricis suis libenter Quisquis munditiem appetit, receptet. Vix thure institor ornet, at{que} scombris, Tanta spurcitie scatent priori. At multo melius suos labores Blandeius modo noster elocauit, Rem scitu satis arduam, satis{que}
Dignam, dexterit Scribens: Nobilitas quid? vnde? qualis? Queis authoribus orta? quos recuset? Per quos culta? quibus{que} debeatur: Perscite duplici docens libello. Vis plura? inuenies satis disertum, Et (quae laus fuerit perennis) illi Hic, quem transtulit esse comparandum. Leonardus Louelaceus. ARdua in excelsi defixa cacumine montis Nobilitas, radijs, vndi{que} clara suis, Aurea, inauratos attollit in alta capillos: Foemina de toto corpore, fronte Dea. Spirant mortales habitus & pectora, partes: Vires diuinas, frons animus{que} docent. Diuinis igitur, bene qui mortalia iungit, Et disiuncta vno corpore iuncta facit, Hunc recolas, huius sacrata volumina voluas, Nobilitare solet Nobilitatis opus. Tantos Blandaei tu Lector blande labores Accipe, sint loculis scrinia sacra tuis.
Ioannes Butterwike. ET meritò Blandaee tuos, tua dona, libellos Qui reserant verae nobilitatis iter, Vouisti egregio Comiti, cui tempus in omne Debetur verae Nobilitatis honos. Materia ille tui est operis Comes inclytus, ille Cui semper cordi Pegasis vnda fuit. Et sibi sic animos deuincit amabilis omnes, Temporis vt nostri iure vocetur honos. Perpetuos igitur superare laboris honores Possis, & tua post fata superstes eris. Non video quid plus tua dent tibi secula, viues Eternùm, foelix pectoris arte tui. Richardus VVarnefordus. NOn dubito Osorij de Nobilitate libellos Tam bene materno qui facis ore loqui: Quin Blandaee suo te afflauit numine totum Nobilitas, studijs nobilitata tuis. Ioannis VVakemani Distichon. NE metuas (Blandaee) tuos ne blenna labores Obscuret, non est blittea vena tibi. Aliud. atta solet fatuas Blateronum rodere chartas, Blandaei blandum non morietur opus.
Thomas Newtonus. MAgna est Nobilibus laus esse parentibs ortum, Estudijs maius stemma decus{que} fluit. Maxima sed Pietas & vera insignia laudis Ʋendicat, haud vna concelebranda chely. Qui tribus his claret titulis, ter maximus ille, Ter meritò foelix, ter venerandus erit. Percitus Aonio facundus Osorius estro, Haec panxit, calami dexteritate sui. Diuite quem vena Glaucopis Athena beauit, Qui{que} ardet Clarij totus amore chori. Quem iuga Parnassi lambentia vertice stellas, Quem capit alati fons pede factus equi. Grandisono cuius splendent monumenta cothurno, Praecipuum{que} tenent à Cicerone locum. Cuius voce loqui cupiunt, si voce latina Quicquam efferre velint, ipsae Heliconiades. Quo tellus tanto Lusitanica iactat alumno, Qui Tartessiaco condecoratur agro. Romulidis, Gallis, Germanis, notus & Anglis, Pannonijs, Dacis, at{que} Caledonijs. Ʋerborum phaleris, Phrasibus{que} vberrimus, omnes Aequiparat veteres, exuperat{que} nouos. Nec sapit obscurum genus aut ignobile stemma Sermo suus, suamens, docta Thaliasua. Ille, ille est nostri Phaenix & Tullius ui, Alpha disertorum dicier ille potest. Numine Blandaeus Phoebaeo concitus, huius Scripta Latina docet verba Britanna loqui. Perspicuè, nitidè, succinctè & Apolline dignè, Cuncta{que} plectro agili & blandisonante tuba. Cuius melliflua celebratur Osorius arte, Nam{que} etiam hunc fouit Diua Minerua sinu. Viuite vter{que} igitur foelices, pergite plures Omine tam fausto scribere vter{que} libros. Thomas Newton.
VVilliam Foster. AS no mannes els, but Caesars pen could Caesars deedes indite: Who was himselfe right wel enur'de both well to doe & write. So no man but of noble price, Nobilities actes may blase, The vulgar sort of creeping wormes, cannot come nie her grace. How hapneth then that Blandie durst so great attempt to trie, Where many are of greater birth, that could not soare so hie? The cause is this (as I suppose) loke what he wants in bloud, His curteous manners, learned skill, and vertues maketh good. When these gaie gifts of Blandies breste this Goddesse once did see, Shee cher'de him on and frendly sayd, thou art a trumpe for mee. Let Nobles doe as thou prescribes, their bloud shall neuer fall, Do thou thy selfe, and be assur'de thy bloud shall rise withall.
THE EPISTLE DE∣dicatorie of Hieronimus Osorius, written to the most noble and vertuous Prince Lewis, sonne to Emanuell king of Portugale. AFter I had obtayned throughe your good meanes, & fauoura∣ble helpe (Lewes moste renow∣med Prīce) to haue recourse a∣gaine, vnto my accustomed ex∣ercises of studie, I employed my selfe more dilligētlye then I did before in the searche of know∣ledge and wysedome. For in my first entrie being mo∣ued onelye wyth the instincte of nature, I moderately folowed my studies, wherby reaping at the length some fruite, I might imparte parte thereof, to the profite & commoditie of my natiue country. But now whereas I haue alreadie proued sufficientlye your bountefull harte and clemencie, and therefore am alwayes mind∣full of your honour and worthines: it lyeth mee vppon, to bend therunto all the force & vehemēt intentiō of my minde, that I may in some case seeme worthy to be reckoned of & esteemed, for knowledge & learning. Neither do I seeke herein the praise of mine own wit, but that I may if not rēder due thanks, yet declare my greate good will, and dutifull hart, ready alwayes and glad to accōplish your good desire. VVherfore I wil in no
wyse  to set forth in this kinde of wryting the full meaninge of my good disposition, and will bring to passe, that my obseruaunce towards you, shalbe knowen in all places. And I am fully perswaded, that whatsoeuer I do in she∣wynge my singular loue towards you, wherewith I am maruelyously inflamed, it is notwithstanding in it self but smally to be accompted of. But it behoueth them not to bee squemish in geuinge a small & simple gift, who may not, throughe vvante of abilitie bestowe of greater valewe and estimation: and they which in matters of greater importaunce cānot stand their so∣ueraignes in steede, should not therfore by not geuing a trifle, slacke their dutye towards such, whom they a∣boue all other honour and reuerence: especially where∣as in euery kinde of duty and curtesie, not so much the valewe of the rewarde, as the bountifulnes of a true meaning minde is generally allowed of, and accepted. VVhereas therefore the rather to discharge my dutie towards you (most noble & renowmed Prince) I haue taken in hand for exercise of my stile, after the maner and fashion of Aristotle to dispute of many questions, I thought principally to entreate of true Nobilitie. And because that so high & stately an argument, see∣med vnto mee most meete for a worthy & noble per∣sonage, and for that these my discourses, and treatises of Nobilitie, were more curiously compyled, and wyth more laboured studie, I determined to present thē vn∣to your maiestie. And so muche the more readily was I induced so to do, by how much the more eminētly ap∣peared in you, the glistering gleames of true, and aū∣cient
deserue due prayse and cōmendation, then there is no∣thing amonge men more honourable then the title & name of a king: & of them especially, which according to the will and pleasure of God vseth theyr auctoritye and iurisdiction, such as were truly the predecessours, from whom issueth the fountayne of your Genealogie. If renowme be obteyned by vertue, who is more vali∣aunt then you, who more bountefull, who more endued wyth wysedome and pollicie? I omitte to speake of the great loue and amity betwixt your brother, and you, a king endued wyth much honour & Nobilitie, a iust Prince and louer of his country: againe of your great curtesie towards all men, & lastly (which is principall) of the rest, of your feruent and most earnest desire to set forth and aduaunce Christian relligion. But I will here stay my selfe. For I thincke it not at this present meete, the goodly giftes and indumēts of your minde to set forth and describe wyth due prayse and commē∣dation. Now therefore I am to beseech you (most va∣liaunt and renowmed Prince) that you will vouchsafe to take these my trauayles curteously, and most grati∣ously bestow some leysure & time in readīg my doings (such as they are) accordinge to your accustomed gen∣tlenes and clemencie. VVhich if I may vnderstād to be fauourably receyued, I shall enforce my self t wade farther, neyther shall I wyth any maner toyle bee wearied, so that I maye be assuredly perswaded, these my endeuours vnto your highnes not to be vnpleasaunt.
THE FIRST BOOKE of Hieronimus Osorius, contay∣ning a treatise of Nobilitie, ordayned by man, maintayned and established by ciuill Pollicie. WHereas sondrie sedi∣tious cōtrouersies arise betweene them whoe haue receiued the like discipline, & are bounde to obserue one Lawe, no one broile is founde more pestilent and hurtfull, to any weale publique then that, which is betwixt the Nobility and Commi¦naltie. For this fyre brand hath so wasted many flourishing and noble Citties, that the estate of the common wealth hath ben thereby miserably mangled, then the which no∣thing can be imagined more hurtfull, and poysonous to ye cōmon societie of man. For if we call to memory what is reported in Histories of antiquitie, wee shall finde no one Cittie so happely founded & begonne, which hath not ben shaken and rente in sonder through ciuill dissention, risen betwene men of auncient Nobility, & the meanest sorte of the rascal and peuish people. In so mutch that sometimes but very fewe had the gouernment of the whole, agayne some other time, the multitude hauinge violentlye exclu∣ded those fewe, furiously abused the Empyre, and place of maiesty. Which alterations, and vtter confusion of al Es∣tates, could not be without bloudye, and cruell slaughter of many, neither yet without the pestilent and ruthfull o∣uerthrowe of Noble Peeres. For what is hee if he were
more folish hardy then the rest, which durst not attempte bouolye the breach of lawes, whiche durste not wickedly violate the ordinaunces of the forefathers, whose consciē∣ce would be any thing moued, if he saw the sodayn change and alteratiō of all estates, if he might be perswaded ther∣by to be aduaunced to higher estate. I let to shew in this place what mischiefe and miserye this kynde of sedition betwixt the nobility and the people hath wrought: wher∣as it is apparante that manye worthy cityes hath beene through sediciō & ciuil discord vtterly wasted & confoūded. For whyle the subiectes haue enterprysed to displace the rulers & Magistrats, as though their gouermēt were ri∣gorous and proude: on the other syde whyle their Lordes and Princes soughte with all extremitie to suppresse the outragious furye of the people: there is no facte so horri∣ble, cruel, and odious, which hath not of both parties bene practised, and hauinge cōceiued great rancker and malice against each other, haue bene at such defiance, that to bee reuenged, they haue to the enemie be traied their common safety, and peculiar liberty. And for this it is the more to be merueyled at, that they liue vnder one lawe, and are di∣uersly affected: so that there seemeth to bee no occasion of theire eygre strife and contentious dealinge. For in thys one poincte which merueylously encreaseth mutuall loue and amity, both of them, accorde together, that is in defen∣dinge their country, and they altogether want that which causeth great discorde and enmity in the common wealth. For all displeasure, and deadly debate proceadinge from enuy and malice, is commonly founde amonge such as pro∣fesse the same arte, and are entangled with the desire of ye selfe same thinges. But there is no cause why men of high Estate should stomach such as are more base & of viler cō∣dicion whereas their endeuours be contrarye, and theyre myndes not ledde with the like affection. For Noble men are inflamed with the desire of renomne and glorie, but ye
multitude desyre not so mutch to exceed other, in worship, as in wealth, in pompe, as in power, and ability. Therefore whereas they stande not for the like promotiō, there is no cause why they shoulde contentiouslye striue a∣gainst each other: especially seeinge that neither of them may attayne his purpose and desyre without eache others aide & furtherance. For neither may the subiects liue in safty excepte they be defended by Rulers & Princes, ney∣ther may men of Honoure and highe degree, maintayne their countenance withoute the people, whiche liue vnder their winge & iurisdiction. So that the multitude is all∣waies preserued through the defence and power of Nobi∣lity: Likewise the Estate of Noblemen is of the People both through their trauell amplyfied, and also throughe prayse and admiration exceedingely magnified. Whereas therefore these both Estates should by the lawe of nature and man principally embrace the league of amitie and cō∣corde: yet notwithstandinge as it appeareth by the testy∣monies of aunciente wryters, there hath beene no debate more spitefull and deadly, neither that hath more soughte the vtter ruine and subuersion of many commōwealthes, then that whiche ariseth oftentimes betwixt the Nobili∣tye and comminalty. Wherefore so oft as I consider with my selfe so great and common misery. I am somwhat per¦swaded, that all these seditions for the moste part do pro∣ceede from the intollerable pride of suche, as haue the pre¦rogatiue of gouernment. For albeit the heade of the mul∣titude is fraighte with fury, and their imaginations ten∣deth to owtrage & madnes: yet notwithstandinge what∣soeuer mischieue they imagine, or take in habe, is to bee imputed to Rulers and Magistrates. For wheras the cō∣mon and baser sorte of men are folowers of the māners & conuersation of their Rulers and Princes, no doubte the people woulde not be entangled with such lewde liberty, licentious lust, and wilfull desires, except they sawe No∣ble
Personages immoderately delyghted therewt. Here∣hence it commeth to passe that the wicked lyfe of subiects, which Noble men might by the example onlye of good li∣uinge represse, is through their loose life, mutch more en∣creased. And when the peoples mindes are poysoned with al kind of mischife, riot, & excesse, no lawes, no authority, no feare of punishemēt may stay their furious, & heady enter∣prices: neyther any reason may perswade them, but that one time or other, they will desperately breake out to the vtter vndoinge of their Natiue Countrye. All kinde of mischiefe therefore as from a fountaine first springeth frō the Peeres & Noblemen, in whose power it rested to staye such vnbridled desires both by seuerity of lawes and ordi∣naunces, and by the good example of their innocent life. I cannot but meruayle in the meane whyle, what moueth many men to make so great accompte of their gentilitye, that they thincke theym selues worthye of suche honoure and estimation. For either Nobility by nature hath no re∣nowne, or preheminence annexed thereunto, or els ye grea∣ter parte of those who commonlye are tearmed Noble & of gentle bloude (whose myndes are infected with manye maladies) come nothinge neare to true Nobilitye. For it were not to be doubted thē, but if Nobility were knowen by exercisinge it selfe in some notable exploite deseruinge due prayse and commendation, it would stirre vp the min∣des of a greate many to embrace and loue the excellencye thereof: in so mutch that all men woulde willingely obey the lawes, and submit theymselues to the aucthoritye of their superiours. For ther is no man which would not ex∣ceedingely bée inflamed wyth the loue of vertue, and all men woulde thincke themselues moste happy and blessed, to be gouerned by the wisedome and vertue of Noble Per¦sonages. I haue thought it therefore must appertynent to my purpose, to search out diligently the nature, ori∣ginall, right rule, and foundation of true Nobilitye, & the
vertues whiche bee incident thunto, in the inquisition whereof, it will eftsones appeare howe mutch it auaileth to dignity & worthines, & what oddes there is betwixt the counterfayt, and liuely image of perfecte Noblenes. But whereas this name of Nobility is, many and sūdry wayes to be interpreted, that onely will I touche, whiche impor∣teth the worthines and dignity of Noble Parentage. THe first thinge that may be questioned of, is to knowe whether that Nobilitye may be accompted amongest those thinges, wt deserue honour & estimation. For we may alledge many argumentes, whiche maye seeme to proue, that the Noblenes of byrth and worthines of Parentage, may neither conteine in it selfe anye superioritye, neither by any meanes to be reduced to those thinges, which in thē selus are tearmed good. For as mutch as apperteineth to our nature, and the common course of wordly welth, wée cannot conceiue what gaine may growe, by this wonder∣full shewe & admiration of Princelye porte. For as soone as we entre into this life full of lamentation and miserye, we are all ruled & gouerned by the same kinde of lawes, neither is any man exempted and set free from an infinite heape of miseries, wherewith the condition and estate of mortal men is afflicted, wee therefore make our first entrie into life, with blubberinge teares, and bitternes of sorow, wee from our natiuity are wrapped in woe and misery, wée sighe in sobbes, and liue in lamentation, and wée in the ende dolefully draw to death, through the continual afflic∣tion of mutch perturbation. But so farre of from Nobili∣ty is it to be preserued from such plagues and scourges, ye mutch more slippery and daungerous is that estate, & the ende more intermedled with mischiefe and misery, then a∣ny other estate of mankinde whatsoeuer. For as euery va∣pour
ascendeth more naally to the highest places: euen so sicknesses, murders, subtill vndermininges, perilles, poysons and a number other intollerable plagues & mys∣chiues doe alwayes pursue theym, whiche are placed in hyghest roomes. But if any man ponder & weyghe in his mynde the natural qualities of the body, in the same true∣ly shall he finde nothinge whye noble bloude shoulde bee preferred before base Parentage. For neither is he whi∣che is of gentle bloude more valiant then hee, which is of lowe degre, neyther in his race more swyfte, neyther yet in health more lusty, and of greater force. Nay rather the more daintily be feedeth, the weaker is his body made, the more apte to be troubled with extreme payne, in any kynd of infirmity. If then the case standeth thus, that neither the fauour of fortune, nor the comely feature of the bodye distinguissheth man from man, and as it were by distincte offices deuideth them, then no doubt the diuersity of man hys estate is knowen manifestlye by the qualities of the minde, or els it is no place els where to be founde. For the perfect shew of Nobility is to be seene by one of these thre vertues, besides ye which there is none whereby it may be perceiued. But whereas wee see the pathwaye to vertue open vnto al men, and that Gentlemen descendinge of ho∣nourable families geue themselues to all impietye, and o∣ther of lowe and simple parentage excelleth the rest in ho∣nesty, vertue, and integritye of life: me thinketh therefore that, that Nobility which is generally so mutch aduaūced is but vayne, and grounded onely vppon the vnconstancye of peoples phantasie. These thinges no doubt may be ob∣iected against the worthines of noble Parentage. But yet wée must thincke it to be for some great cause, that all men willingly do yelde the Souerainty to someone house and progeny so that the generall consente and agremente of all countries is to be taken for ye lawe of nature. Which
thinge that wée may perceaue more playnly, I will begin with nature her selfe. VVHosoeuer therefore wyll intentiuelye behoulde the woonderfull woorcke of Nature, and the degree of al liuinge creatures, shal finde that euery thinge is not of like qualitye, but that some one thinge in excellē∣cye of nature exceedeth other, and some other thinge yeel∣deth vnto other, in estimation and dignity. For so meruei∣lously nature hath wrought in her creatures, that euen as they one in forme and shape differ from a nother, so they should in like manner be disposed diuersly, and not endued with the like power and vertue: in so mutche that some shoulde moue, other bee moued, some rule, other willinge∣ly obey. Prīcipally therfore if you will more deapely pon∣der this matter, and aduisedly waygh the gloryous hue of Heauenly constitution, you shall vnderstande the partes thereof not to be of like worthines, or endued with ye selfe same beauty and seemelynes. For it is most apparant that the Starres obserue not the some course, neyther are of like proportion, neyther of like operation, in so mutch that by their influences wée see the one as it were to haue do∣mynion ouer the other, and to receaue of the partes more excellent and predomināt light, power, and vertue. Further wée may find the Element of fyre whiche for the exellentcy of his nature right worthtly hath the hygher place, to rule the bodies mouinge vppon the face of the Earthe, whose properties are diuers, and dislike eache to other. To descend to the Earth and the creatures therof, what needeth it to discourse howe diuersly they are dispo∣sed? Are they of one nature, are they all endued with the same quality and vertue? Neyther is this difference to be
noted in those creatures alone which are of contrary na∣tures, but also in those which are of one kynde and qualy∣tye. For trees which are of one kynde spreadeth not their braunches in like fayrenes, nor euery Stede doth his car∣rire wtih the lyke loftines, neither euery Lion is of lyke strength. Finally in al the worckes of nature, there is to be noted some variety and alteration of degree, place, and dignity. This excellency of nature neuer decayeth in the thinges that be euerlastinge, but in the thinges which for a time doe florishe, nature most secretly throughe the qua∣lity of the parent conueigheth to posterity accordinge to ye sayinge of that worthy Poete. Good men and stronge by course of kinde, lyke issue doe require, The Stere, the Stede, most times vvee see mutch like vnto his sire. THerefore whereas the force of nature is such, & that ye inclination thereof so mutche preuayeleth that it is seene in brutishe thinges and creatures mere voyde of reason and vnderstandinge maye not wee thincke it hath imprinted in man some thinge of greater excellencye, who is made by God his prouision reasonable, and lorde of al other Creatures? I pray you is it not for great good cause that many are carful & haue an especial regard frō what Tree they plucke their plante, of what kynde they choose their whelpe, or their horse? And shall wee thincke it a thinge little to bee considered, of what Parentage a man taketh his ofspringe? In good sooth if wée woulde obsti∣nately deny it, the thinge it selfe would eftsones appeare, and conuince vs of errour, For it is most cleare and euidēt that euery Region and Country doth keepe the same ac∣customed maner & facion. A note whereof may hereby bee gathered, that nature hath so fastened her foote in euerye
Nation, that it is not possible to withdrawe them from ye, whereunto they ar , and that the māners of men are conueighed euen to posterity. For example wée sée the Frenchmen with what fury and rage they runne vppon their enemies: againe how quickely they are qualified, & founde most curteous to their countreymen. This there∣fore is he nature & property of that nation hasty to be re∣uenged, & easy to be entreated. The Germanes haue bene euermore accompted a moste cruell and a fearce people, who nothing dismayed die desperatly. The Spaniards at this present as heretofore, are noted aboue other Natiōs to excel, for their diligence & industrie in martiall affairs, whoe euermore wyth a iollye stomacke and good courage wageth battayle. The Italians are preferred before all other in finenes of wit, & purenes of eloquēce. So yt there is no coūtry which is not through the inclination and in∣stinct of nature more apt to excell in vertue, or more prone to al impiety, wt is through generatiō in al places cōtinu∣ed. A more euident & clere profe wherof may be gathered out of some one stocke & familye. For this almost euerye where is seene and experienced, that those whiche are des∣cended of a noble lyne, doe embrace those vertues, which chieflye brought to theyr auncestores greate renowne and glory. So that as manye as are of that linage, are moste commendable for their valiant stomache, other are nota∣ble for their liberalitye, some other atchiue to great glory for their knowledge, wysedome, and pollicie. Wherevpō it foloweth that vertue is not obteined so much by studye and industrye, as gotten by nature and by the good bloud of Noble parētage. And that we cal true Nobility, for as mutche as it is nothinge els then the glorious sparcke of vertue ingraffed in some Noble and renomned familye.
IT hath bene sufficientlye declared that th  true Nobilitye coceth not in the opinion of manne but commeth by naturall descence. Which is to be vnder∣stoode in this maner: euen as good groundes & fruitefull fyeldes are hadde in gerat estimation, not for that they are fyeldes, but that they bring through their fertilitye great gayne & commoditye to the owner of the soyle: euen so we preferre that kinred especially, which yeldeth aboūdante fruite of vertue and godlines. But who so now listeth to behold the perfect nature of true Nobility may looke ther∣on with litle laboure. For gentility is a most glorious, and liuely image of auncent progenie, most commonlye gar∣nished wyth excellente vertues. and for asmuch as euerye one which excelleth in all vertue add honestye, cannot at∣tayne the title of honoure and Nobilitye, this large defi∣nition is to bee restrayned by limitation, for neyther may they, which the rather to attayn knowledge and wysedom haue abandoned all company and liue in continuall studye be thought most worthye & honourable, although they be fornished wyth rare and singular vertues, and for profoūd knowledge in deepeste matters be had in admiration, for that they do not earnestly employ ye benefit of their artes and sciences to the auaile and commoditye of the common¦wealth. Neither yet any Noble family hath bene able at any tyme to winne vnto it self the tytle of honour & soue∣ranty, for that many of that Noble line excellinge in qua∣lities of witte, to a voyde a Courtiers life, haue addicted them selues to the dimensions of Geometry, or the rules of Phisicke, or the recordes and sweete Harmony of Mu∣sicke. If this be true, what kinde of vertue is that through the cleare shininge whereof the Noblenes of any Kinred, the Dignity and Honour of any family may be knowen? Forsoth euen that kinde of vertue which extendeth it selfe to the common profit of al men, which a voydinge idlenes is altogether occupied about the maintenaunce, and pre∣seruation
of a Commonwealth: as for example puissance, and valiantnes in warlike affaires, in time of peace the ex∣ecution of Iustice and Equity, add to these the study of O∣ratorie, the knowledge of the Ciuil lawes, and whatsoe∣uer is of force, & apperteineth to the gouernmēt of a Cō∣monwealth. Nobility therefore is an highe and honoura∣ble degrée of aūcient progeny frō whence hath issued owt such vertues as the Estate of the hole country hath bene by them established, and the safegard of all men kept and maynteined. Of this honourable order there are two kin∣des. The one is generall, apperteininge to a whole Citty, the other speciall and concerneth any priuate family. In this maner wee accounte Athens to bee honourable, for yt in that famous commonwealth were bredde manye wise sages, and valiaunt captaynes, which throughe their coū∣sell and wisedome did rule and preserue the weale publi∣que, by whose puissance the enemy was repelled, by whose vnconquerable prowes & vertue their dominions were enlarged, by whom the country was with īnumerable be∣nefites endowed. In this manner Sparta is honourably reported of, by this onely meanes wanne Carthage so great renome, and for this cause Roome the noblest Cit∣ty that euer was, merueilouslie tryumphed. The selfe same rule is obserued in euery priuate familye. For that house excedeth other in honour and nobility, from whence hath issued and descended a greater company of renoumed personages. Wherby it foloweth that the force of vertue is found as excedinge in ye one, as in the other: onely this is the difference, the one is priuate, the other is publique. To exemplefie thys second poincte we haue reade of the Noble house of the Fabians, of the Claudians, of the Scipi∣oes, and Cornelians, all which haue beene honoured in all posterity for their prowes and magnanimity. So oughte we notwithstandinge weigh both these partes before seue∣red, that he is in no wise to be deemed noble and honou∣ble
and honourable, which wanteth eyther of them, ye per∣fet is. It may not be therefore that in a blinde, and obscure Citty there should be a family of any fame (for were it not a thinge incredible, that such a commonwealth should be obscure & as it were ouershadowed with darkenes, wher∣in there dwelleth sutch a one, as may be tearmed a lighte of most deuine and resplendent vertue, for so it should bee accoumted not barbarous but famous) neither yf there were in that commonwealth a mēber neuer so exceadinge fraight with especiall vertues, yet could he come foorth to light, and chalenge due deserued dignity and commenda∣tion, shakinge of the cloudy mistines, wherewith ye whole countrie was ouerwhelmed. Therefore the chyefest bene∣fite that nature can bestowe on vs, is to be borne and brou∣ghte vp in a country in fame and glory, the next good gifte of nature is to bringe owr descent from some noble linage and worthy parentage. Themistocles his aunswere to Tymodeus Aphydneus, most fitely agreeth to this mat∣ter: To whom it was disdainfully obiected that he was not through his owne vertues so mutch honoured of the Lacedemonians, but onely for that he was borne an Athe∣nian. Thowe hast sayde, {quod} Themistocles for neyther I my selfe if I had bene borne in thy countrey Aphydnum, coulde euer attayne so greate renoume and glory, neither thou if Athens had bene thy countrey couldest thereby at∣chiue to the title of honour and dignity. Which may in this manner be applyed. For he which is obscurely borne and of low degrée may not throughe the worthines of a∣ny place be made noble, neither any of gentle bloude shall haue yelded vnto hym estymation dewe to hys byrthe and estate in a barbarous and obscure Citty. Noble men therefore haue their due honoures, in their owne manour houses and country. But perfecte and true nobility is not chaungeable through the alteration of place, but where∣soeuer it hath his beinge, and is déepely rooted and printed
in mens myndes, it is of all men honoured and magnified a like. For what is hee amongest the Romaines (at what time the estate of that renoumed Citty florished in all prowes and Nobilitye) that hadde in admiration, or made any accompt of the Princes of Sicilie, or Bythinia? On the other side ye Barbarians did magnify the Romains as Gods. Therefore nobility may also be deuided in this maner. The one most absolute and florishinge in al natiōs, the other tyed to the place from whence it first proceded. This nobility therefore sheweth her selfe no farther forth then the boundes of his natiue countrey will streach, ra∣ther vaynely of the people commended, then deseruedlye honoured: But that nobility beautified with the glory of Princely parentage euery where and amonge al men shal haue deserued reuerence. This caused Helena to thincke, that she beinge amonge straūge people might vse her ac∣customed liberty in speakinge, who in this manner vaun∣teth her selfe. Who will as captiue coumpte, or seruile her assigne, who by descēt doth come from Gods, and sacred lyne? IT is a thinge most surely ingraffed in true nobility, not to faynte for any trouble, not to dispaire in any perill, not to languish in any wo, and greuous misery. Yea if for∣tune froune, if daunger & death ensue, a noble mynde will not be forgetfull: So that nothinge may a like shewe a gentle and valiant harte, then not to be vanquished: whi∣ch is seene in sorowe, tryed in trouble proued in persecuti∣on. Which thinge Virgill wittely noteth vnto vs, where Queene Dido commendeth exceedingly thus, Aeneas. Forsoth I thincke, ne am beguilde, frō Gods descends his lyne.
There is no labour lost in examininge the cause why he deemed Eneas to be allyed vnto the Gods in byrth and cō∣sanguinity. See what reason he yeeldeth. A bastard borne of base degree, by dastardnes is knowen. Nothinge might haue bene sayd more truely or wt better profe. For euen as patience in persecution proueth a noble nature, as valiantnes in aduersity argue than vncōquera∣ble minde. So truely timerousnes in terroure and daun∣ger, euidently sheeweth a man to bee base, and of vile con∣dition. Nowe finisheth he the commendations and praye∣ses of Eneas. A griefe it is to tell how he was tost by cruell fates, what warres to him befell. IT seemeth a thing farre passinge the reache of reason ye suche a one, who abode stoutlye so greate a brunt, who valiātly ouerstoode so many dangerous skirmiches, to be no gentleman borne: whereas he declared before that ba∣senes of byrth & linage, was knowen by feare, & coward∣lines. Whereas then (to return again from whēce we haue digressed) Nobility is diuersly sorted, that is the one more generall, absolute, and principall, whiche not onely recei∣veth his light from a countrey florishing in all vertue, but taketh his ofspringe of a familye, famous & muche spoken of for equitye, iustice, and magnanimitie the force whereof may be nowhere abased & deminished, grounded and fixed surelye on some vnspeakable vertue: The other not of such excellencie, onely professed in sme one particuler prouince and country, where is decayed the studye of noble quality∣es, My meaninge therfore is to descrybe the nature of the most principal and chiefe nobilitye. And to the entent that
I may leaue no one parte thero hed, I wil speake of the original and beginninge thereof grounding my ar∣gument on some other principle. VVHat time nature tooke in hande to make man, & to frame in him a spirit much like to ye diuine nature, it apeareth wt what prouidente, foresight, & iudgement she finished so hard and great an enterprice. not for this cause and consideration onely that mankynd was endued with the selfe same gifts and qualities of the minde, and so knit and vnited together throughe the likenes of their nature, that amongest al other liuing creatures, none was so fitte to keepe and maintaine society: but in this also that in dis∣posinge their affections diuersly it was broughte to passe that those whych were by nature ordeyned to liue in loue and amity, should be therunto forced by necessity: for wher∣as innumerable sorts of artes hath bene deuised, to main∣tayne the common societye of man, and no one may excell in al, it was not without the prouidence and deuine decree of nature appoynted, that some should seeke out ye hydden secretes of scyences, other some shoulde bestow themsel∣ues busely in their faculty, whereby euery one labouring in his calling earnestly myght by the trauaile of other at∣chiue to that, which by his owne industrie he should neuer attaine. It may not be, because Hippias most arrogant∣ly gloried of him selfe, that hee throughe the sharpenes of his witte, and quycknes of his capacitye, coulde vnderstād all thinges, that therefore euerye other man shoulde stand in like manner in his owne coneit: who besides that he attributed to hymself the skil of al such sciences whiche contayne all learninge and wysedome, was not ashamed allso to saye, that in euerye vyle and seruile occupation he had an especiall gifte, that he through ninge dyd make
the ring that he woare, the  that courted him, and ye sockes that serued his necessitie. I say it were hard for anye man were his witte neuer so quicke and pregnante, to take vppon him so many intricat laboures: In so much that I thinke that Hippias could not acquite himself in ye entermingling so many contrary sciences, who besydes yt he vnreuerently ioyned liberall artes, and seruile occupa∣tions together, omitted ye knowledge & skil of som things, wherby the estate of a common wealth is kept and main∣teined. To passe ouer many which myght be spoken of, I find not where he maketh mention of chiualrie, which is ye onlye defence and safegard of a common wealth. But it could not be that Hippias, nowe cutting out his cloake▪ thē grauing his ring, and sowing his sockes, could haue any leasure to learne ye feats of warre, & poynts of a good souldiar. It is a thinge therefore most nedefull that some shoulde beare rule & sit in the place of maiesty, by whose wisedome and pollicye the multitude should be gouerned, other some should geue them selues to warlike practises, or to be cōning in some science through the perfectiō wher∣of they mighte in distresse and daunger be a staye to theyr countrye, other till the ground, other worke at annile, all to the commoditie of their natiue countrie. Whereas then it is very requisite that men should differ in degree▪ & dignitie, in labour & industrie, Nature hath prouidētly wrought the varietie of witts, of dispositions, & qualities. Herehence the sharpe witte & deepe iudgement, the high and loftie minde proceedeth, wherewith some are especi∣ally through Natures benefite endued. Who through their good constellacion may both wisely forsee daunger, and couragiously repell imminente mischiefe. Socrates in the Booke entituled Phaedro, calleth this excellency of Nature the gould of the Gods, whereby he is indured to thincke that they whose mindes are thus beautifyed, are vnto them allyed, and fitte of all other to be placed on
the earth in the Throne of Maiestie. Dame Nature therefore the mother of all things, hath placed them prin∣cipally in highest roome of dignitie. Other some she hath not framed in such perfite wise, either for witte, prowesse, and valiauntnes, yet hath shee imparted vnto them greate strength and much courage, in so much they will not easly fainte, but manfully obseruinge lawes and ordinaunces, and aide their country in time of daunger. Other she hath made more simple of vnderstandinge, more coulde of cou∣rage, and therefore iustly hath appointed them to toyle in seruile Artes, of which sort are they whom we terme men of occupation. For so it is brought to passe by the wōder∣full prouidence of God, that whereas ech man helpeth an other, and laboureth in the Vocation wherunto he is cal∣led, the estate of man kinde is thereby happely preserued. And the diuersitie of man his inclination and disposition was knowen euen from that time when men as Barbari∣ans wandered in woods and desolate places, voyde of rea∣son and all good ciuilitie. For at that time some one, be∣side the rest excelling in witte, knowledge, and industrie, withdrew them through great perswasiōs from rudenes, to ciuill gouernment, from barbarousnes, to all maner of gentlenes. The which thing the best learned haue decla∣red vnto vs vnder fictions and Poets tales. As when Or∣pheus is fained to haue drawen vnto him, the woods and wilde beastes by his sweete sounde and pleasaunt Harmo∣nie. Amphion in like maner is sayd to driue at his plea∣sure whither him listed stones, and sensles things through the swetnes of his songe. Whereby, it is geuen vs to vn∣derstand, that those men which for want of vnderstanding were as blunte as blocks, were wonne by wysedome, and brought by the pollicie of other to much ciuility. By such a deede Theseus wanne great fame & immortall memory. Who first assembled into one place the people of Athens miserablye deuided, geeuinge them profitable lawes and
good ordinaunces. I will in meane time let to speake of those, who were longe before Theseus, whiche erec∣ted and builded many Citties. Then was it to bee seene howe much the gentlemanlike and Princely mynde was preferred before the base and abiecte courage. In those vertue was so much loued and merueyled at, that they which had receyued so greate benefite by such which ex∣celled in vertue and honestye, yelded themselues with all submission to be ruled by their wysdome, in so much that when they were deade, they gaue vnto them deuine ho∣noures, and embraced wyth entyre loue, theyr children and ofspring. Principally they were moued therevnto, for that their benefites were freshe in memorye, which were so great and many, that of deutye they thought to render thanckes to theyr posteritye. When afterwardes they founde, and had experiensed, that there was in the issue the true and liuely image of the parente, not to be seene so much in the feature and makinge of the bodye, as in the qualitye and disposition of the mynde, then they were styrred vp excedingly, not onely for the loue that they bare to theyr auncestours, as for the especiall regarde that they had to the Noble dispositions of their progeny, to honour that stocke and family, to whom they did offer the swaye and gouernment of the common wealth most wil∣inglye. If then any man will demaunde at what tyme Gentilitye first began, hee is to learne, that then it firste entred, when men oute of order were reduced to good or∣der, by the perswasion and pollicie of such, as were endu∣ed with the excellency of good Nature and noble bloud. Which degree of honour was geuen for two causes. First for the iust desertes of parents, then for the great expecta∣tion and hope which they had in their ofspringe and pro∣genie. For it was imprinted in the minds of men in time paste that the father which did excell in vertue, coulde not but leaue a sonne endued with the like giftes: and the be∣hauour,
maners, and disposition to declare the worthines of noble birth and parentage which is most wisely noted by Euripides. In tender yeares a Princely grace, Is token sure of noble race. The opinion wherof so much preuayled wyth our fore∣fathers, that who so descended from a worthy stocke, him they hoped to see in processe of time adourned with noble vertues. If so then the worthines and vertue of any one man was had in such admiration, that he might challēge vnto himself as his owne right, the superioritie, the same man litle regarding these vaine and transitorie pleasures, deriued the first originall cause of his birthe and Genera∣tion from the Deuine Nature of the Gods. The cause why the common people was induced and brought to this opinion, proceeded not so muche from ignoraunce and su∣perstition, as from the great shew of vertue which appea∣red in their life and conuersation. For it seemed vnto them a thinge very likely and probable, that those sprang of a Deuine Nature, which were endued with the excel∣lencie of vertue and honestie. Herehence arose those wor∣thy wighes which Homer setteth out in his Ilias, amonge whom no one was founde, which fotte not his petegree, from the Emperiall throne of Maiestie. As for example, Hector ye noble Troian, who whyle hee liued was the ve∣rye strength and staye of his countrye, of whom Neptune warneth the Greecians. Aie me, I feare the enmies force the Grecians to retire Will cause, for Hector raging wood, like flaks of flamīg fire Did hither traine his band of men, & saith, Ioue is his sire.
Who after he was cruelly slaine by the Greekes, Pria∣mus pinched with extreeme paine, excedingly cōmendeth to all men the manhoode and valiantnes of his sonne He∣ctor, in so much that hee made the Troyans constantly to beleeue that he was not begottē by any mortall creature, but that he was a God by kinde. It were in vayne to re∣porte how greatly some men of noble bloud haue conten∣ded of their linage & petegree, onely to rayse vnto them∣selues a name and glorious title of immortalitie. Much like vnto that which Achilles sayth of Asteropeus the ne∣phew of Axeus the floud. Asteropeus, I sigh to see thy dolefull ende, May Neptunes broode in field, with bloud of Ioue cōtend? Admit Axeus floode did yeld thee life: yet thou (Sith Gods mee gat) of force to vs must yeld and bow. My father Peleus hight, whom Aeacus begot, Who eke from mighty Ioue, his noble line hath fot. What maye be gathered of this also that Tlepolemus did with such bitter nippes reuile Sarpedon of Lycia, be∣inge daungerously assaulted in the fronte of his enemies, because hee fayned himselfe falsely to be the sonne of Iu∣piter: who cleared himselfe of that vayne vaunte not one∣ly in woorde but in deede also, when as hee vanquished and slue Tlepolemus, a valiaunt and worthy wight the sonne of Hercules. For there was no such waye for him to sup∣porte his countenaunce, and to shew the worthines of his birth, as by vanquishing so stronge and valiaunte a Cap∣taine. But some man will saye, whereto serueth it that you tell vs so manye and sondry descents of Gods, and to mingle your matter with so many fayned inuentions, and forged fables of Poets in a case that requireth nought els to be alleaged but simple trothe. In all that Homer
wrote (that we leaue other vntouched) there is no thinge to be seene or read, that may not be thoughte very ridicu∣lous, and worthye to be reiected of all men vtterly: In whom you shall finde the Gods lamenting and howlinge miserably, great vprores and seditions stirred in heauen it selfe, great mischiefes committed, many as the Goddes appointed, nay rather in despite of the Gods, cruelly woū∣ded, pitifully plagued, and slaine. It maye seeme there∣fore to some mē, a thing most vnfitt to enterlace the vaine phantasies of Poets with the simple and plaine reasons of Philosophers. This I say may bee obiected vnto mee. But if I maye be suffred some thinge to digresse and goe from the matter, I will aunswere easlie, by disputinge brieflie of the studie of humanitie, these weake and vnlear∣ned assertions. And so much the rather I am moued thereunto, for that I often vse the auctoritie of Homer. I am truly of this opinion, that all Poets are sworne ene∣mies to lies, and do vtterly detest falsehode: but amongst the reste Homer especially was the searcher and louer of all truth and veritye. Which opinion the most noble and wyse sages of Greece haue ratifyed, what time as by fol∣lowing the counsell of Homer contayned in two Verses, they yelded vp a right vnto the men of Athens being then at greate strife wyth the Megarenses aboute the title and possession of Salaminia. Men of greate learninge and iudgemente were of this minde, whose monumentes and woorkes are garnished with the highe and stately style of Homers inuention: I saye all such which excelled the rest in witte, in eloquence and learninge fully accorded in this opinion. Neither is it expediente (which those most wise, good, and experte men knewe righte well) that in the Hi∣storian and Poet, the like euidence of troth is to be loked for. For in Histories are onely set out the worthy actes of valiaunt men, that they should thereby liue in perpetuall
memory. But Poets whose maner of wryting is farre vnlike, many times applyeth themselues to the eares de∣light and pleasure. The chiefeste thinge therefore that commendeth an Historian is to describe plainly, all super∣fluitie being set a part, the acte of what Nature soeuer it be, limited with circumstaunce of place, person, and time. But a Poeticall description as it is most tyed to nomber and feete, so the discourse thereof hath a greater licence & libertie. And yet there is a kinde of truth looked for at their hands, which if they doe not conningly declare, they are not onely of the learned iudged ignoraunte, but of all men condemned and cryed oute vppon. The dutie therfore and parte of a Poet is no lesse truly, then trimly, not lesse vnfainedly, then finely, no lesse approuedly, then pikedly, as wyth a pensile to describe the maners of men, to descrie the fromphes of Fortune, and the whole estate and condition of mans life. Againe, to set forth elegant∣ly and in most decent sort, the Nature of honestie and ver∣tue, the deformitie of sinne and impietie, what is to be em∣braced & followed, what to bee detested vtterly & abhor∣red. Whosoeuer then wil take vpon him so great & hard an enterprise, and can so acquite himselfe thereof that hee maye be thoughte to haue omitted no one pointe of a good Poet, the same is not to be condemned as an vntrue spea∣ker, but commēded highly as a Deuine & learned writer. For who is he of so simple a witte and iudgemente that in reading the wandringes and doubtfull viages of Vlisses, sixe hundred shipwracks, the great golfe and swallowing sourge of Charibdis, the roaring of Scilla, the daunger in auoyding Antiphates, the greeuous conflict which he had wyth Polyphemus: who is hee, (I say) so beside himselfe that will thincke those thinges so set downe and descri∣bed by Homer, as if they were to bee beleeued or mighte come to passe by any possibilitie. And yet men excellent∣ly well learned haue wondered at him for his deepe iudg∣mente
and deuine witte, whoe did expresse so liuely the true & perfect image of Vertue, which would be vanqui∣shed by no terror, allured by no wanton entisements, pine for no peril, languish and faynte for no woe and miserye. In this maner Achilles is gazed on as the glorious i∣mage of puissance and magnanimitie. In this wyse Ne∣stor is accompted most noble for his wysedome and polli∣cie. Neither hath hee described these thinges roughly, or in a crabbed style, thereby to tyre and loth the reader, which maner of wrytinge Philosophers vse, but wyth a wonderfull, or rather with a philed phrase of deuine elo∣quence, the rather to allure men to the study and exercise of vertue and honestie. What is hee then that can charge or steine Homer wyth the blot of vntrothe, whereas hee hath perfourmed with such perfection the thinge, which was at his handes in that matter required. If then at any time we alledge him for auctority, wee do it wholy for this intente, to imitate as neere as wee maye him, who throughe the sharpenes of his deuine witte and vnderstā∣ding was able fully to consider of euery matter, and perce the secretes of all things. Truly not for that ende, that I did beleeue those thinges to be true, as they were set downe by him, but that such in deede I supposed to bee the maners of men, such to be the Lawes and ordinaūces of Countryes, such to be the nature and force of thinges, and al other matters to be of the like sorte and condicion, as they were by him in wrytinge declared. Wherefore (to come to my former treatise of Nobilitie) in that hee doth by wryting expresse Achilles to be the sonne of The∣tis, Memnon of Aurora, and Sarpedon of Iupiter: his meaninge no doubte agreeth with the minde and opini∣on of all wyse men of that time, that they who for wyse∣dome and vertue, did farre excell the rest, might be iudged not without the especiall prouidence of the Gods to haue
bene bore, and therefore to haue bene of their linage, and consanguinity. And this was the chiefe cause that These∣us was thought to haue beene the sonne of Neptune, and Romulus borne of the God Mars. Alexander also the greate did longe time since delight to bee called the sonne of Iupiter, which opinion also grue of Scipio Affrican. For the self same rumour which was raysed before of A∣lexander, was vainely bruted of Scipio, which was, that a Serpent in shape monstruous, was oftentimes seene in his mothers chamber. Which beinge once of many men euidently noted, sodainly vanished, and was seene no more. Herehence arose this opinion, that many did thincke that Scipio his mother was great and conceaued by the Ser∣pente a child. But you wil say, O notable & shameles lie. I pray you is there any man so voide of wit, reason, and vnderstandinge, or so farre from the fayth of Christ, whi∣che wilbe perswaded that these thinges are true? But yet this lie is grounded on a true and good opinyon, which is, to thincke that the nobilitye of bloude issueth from the excellency of good nature, and that the worthines of vertue proceadeth from some noble and Princely paren∣tage. Hereby it is euident, and most playne, and many∣fest, howe greatly men of auncient memory dyd esteeme gentle and noble families. Verely not without good cause. For if any thinge were, that for the worthines thereof de∣serued perpetuall and euerlastinge memory, it issued from those noble personages for the most part: As it is a thing most cleare and euident to him, that listeth to reade the reportes and commentaries of antiquity. Who knoweth not yt the stocke of Hercules so farre excelled other in pro∣wes and vertue, yt it did easely subdue the force and power of the Pelopidanes and wonderfully strengthened the state of Athens, readye to bee ouerronne and destroyed vtterly. So greately was any noble familye esteemed, that who so were descended by them, did thinke they were
protected by the power of some heauenly garrison. What auaileth it to shew you of ye stocke & noble line of Perseus? Or what should it skill to recite the worthy Actes and fa∣mous enterprises of suche, as haue beene of the race of Aeacus? If any one woulde call to minde howe many and how great affayres, howe straunge and howe daungerous enterprices haue bene done & wrought by the Athenians, should vnderstand for the most parte that nothinge hath ben amōge thē either attēpted, or accōplished, but by such, whose progenitors were in their life honourable, whose progenye after their death were honoured of the people. To omit to speake of Kinges and Princes whom euerye man knowes to haue béene of singular vertues, whose fame was sounded farre and wyde, truely Clisthenes, who first wrought the ruin and vtter subuersion of tyran∣nous gouernment, Myltiades, Cimon, Themistocles, Pericles, and many moe, whome to recite were ouer tedi∣ous, whoe tooke vppon them moste weighty affayres and harde enterprices, as well against the Grecians, as Barba∣rians, all those for the most parte came of some noble line and princely parentage. The like is to be founde amon∣gest the Thebanes, the men of Sparta and a numbre of o∣ther nations and countries besides. But let vs leaue these foraigne and straunge examples, and search the Histories of our owne tyme. If you geue your selfe to the readinge of holye scripture, you shall haue therein conteyned what great oddes there is betwixt man and man, and finde ma∣ny testimonies there specified in confirmation, and cōmen∣dation of true nobility. And that I leaue other vnspoken of it is apparent that the stocke of Iuda did farre excel the Hebrue Nation in vertue, honour, and dignity. Who frō the time they were happely deliuered from the thraldome and slauerye they susteyned amongest the Egiptians, haue bene well approued for their greate vertue and godlines. Amongest whom I will onely note vnto youe certaine.
What time the Egiptian Kinge did greuously torment the Hebrues, neither woulde vppon any condition release them as God had geuen them commaundement, but ra∣ther encreased their misery dayely more & more: At the length accordinge to his desert suffered iust punishment, at what time God him selfe appeared vnto him. For their lādes were wasted, their fruicts cōsumed through a great and terrible plague, then by the verye appoyntmente of God mutch bloude shed, great cruelty committed, all ty∣rānie practised. In conclusion the kinge being as it did ap∣peare well reclaimed by so many greuous & bitter scour∣ges, permitted the Hebrues to departe to offer sacrifice. The Hebrues then departinge therehence, and pitchinge their tentes neere the read sea, perceaued some mischife imagined against them, otherwise then they looked for. For as sone as they passed the boundes of Egipt, it repen∣ted the kinge much, yt he had set them at libertye. For he beinge puffed vp with great pride did perseuere in his for∣mer wickednes, in so mutch he purposed to pursue them with great force, notwithstandinge knowinge them to be protected by the hande of Almightie God. For whereas he was vtterly ouerwhelmed with the outrage of his fu∣ry, coulde not perceaue what plagues were appoincted readye to confounde hym and his people, he prepareth therfore a great troupe of horsemē, multitudes of footemē are mustered, and all delay beinge set a side hee bendeth his mayne force agaynst the Hebrues. At that instante Moyses besought God with earnest prayer and petition for the peace, and the happy deliuerance of his people, and with that rodde which represented the omnipotent power of Almighty God, which he alwayes carried about with him stryketh the Sea, and immediatly he made a wide and open way for them through the middest thereof. For the Sea beinge subiect and obedient to the will and power of God, was vnto them in both sides as a stronge wall, and
mighty fortresse, whereby they did securely passe witho feare of imminente daunger. Notwythstandynge so greate was the feare of those Hebrues (as it is reported in certaine histories of the Iewes, for holy scripture ma∣keth thereof at al no mention) they report therefore yt such was their horrour & dread, ye albeit they were assisted by ye power of God, yet with great adoe were they brought to cōmit them selues to the daungerous passage of water. Moreouer it is verified, that they whiche discended from Iuda, did manifestly shewe foorth a great experiment of puissance and valiātnes, who lingred not or drewe backe, but by the example of Moyses with merueylous constan∣cye aduentured firste the Sea, and by their stoute stomach encouraged the rest to folowe them. But what follow∣ed that great and notable confusion, wherein the wicked and damnable Kinge, hauinge his minde poysoned with moste deadely rancoure, and beinge blinded with moste horrible impiety rashely aduentured to passe through the Sea, and was with all his armye swallowed vp with the surges and gulfes of the same. Was not this people of Iuda euer afterwardes more honoured then the rest, for their manly courage and valiaunt harte? therevppon it was decreed that among the twelue rulers and Princes (for oute of seuerall trybes were elected diuers Cap∣taynes) hee shoulde haue the soueraignetie whiche dis∣cended from the Trybe of Iuda, hee shoulde conducte the hooste, he shoulde make peace, he should firste offer sa∣crifice, his rule and aucthority the rest did obey. Wherby it is most playnly & euidentlye gathered that Moyses had consideration of the noblenes of bloud and nature, in that he assigneth vnto one peculiar people the title and prero∣gatiue of honoure and dignity. Out of this stock of Iuda sprange one Caleb whoe firste wan great glorye, for that he gainesayd the most shamefull oration of such as would againe retorne into Egipt and had rather liue in bondage
and slauerye vnder the Egiptians, then trye theymselues lke mē in the fielde. This worth ye wighte Caleb didde spread farre and wyde the glorious renoune of his vertue and constancie, by great exclamations working so effectu∣ously in the harts of the souldiars, that whereas through their former conceite theyr hope fayled, and theyr hartes faynted through feare, yet he made them wyth a good sto∣mache and iollie courage wage agayne battaile, and exce∣dingly styrred them vp to al vertue and manlines, where∣as he might paraduenture in that wycked and dastardlye, assembly, bene moste vndeseruedly torne and dismembred wt cruel tormētes. This Caleb vnder ye noble captain Iosua, beyng thē foure score and fiue yeares of age, behaued him self so valiantly that no one might be compared vnto him in handlinge his weapon, or for his greate skill in mar∣tiall affayres. He was of that mynde that hee woulde be∣stowe his daughter (beyng very bewtifull) vppon no man in mariage, except on him whiche coulde subdue a strong and mighty citye of his enemyes: and in fine, his brothers sonne vanquished the same. Herby it may euidētly appe∣are that vertue is accompaned wyth nobilitye. This glo∣rious and perelesse p rsonage had in chosynge his sonne, no respect to the kinred, but to the vertue of the mā. For ye name of gētilitie taketh his beginning frō no other thing then from the praise and due commendation of vertu. Yet this often times happeneth, that the glory and renoune of vertue is surely knitte and tyed to the worthines of byrth and parentage. So that none could imitate so wel or com so neare vnto Caleb in prowes and vertue, as hee whiche was nearest vnto him through cousanguinity. What hap¦pened after the death of Iosue? was not the whole charge of martial affayres, the swaie, and gouermēt of the whole nation appoynted to the trybe of Iuda? Tyme would not sufyce me to recite and speak of particularly, eache noble wight of this familye that by his vertue merited euerlas∣tinge memory. If then the definition and nature of trewe
noblenes whiche I haue set down, be euident & true, there is no doubt then, but that the stocke and trybe of Iuda ha¦ue attayned the perfection of honour and soueraigntie. From thence sprang vp a nombre of noble captaynes, frō thence issued out most wise and prudent fathers, frō thence proceded many excellent men for equitye & iustice, from∣thence hath discended kinges and princes righte worthye and honourable, and emongest the rest (whō I passe ouer wyth silence) the most noble and holye Kinge Dauid, a myrroure and spectacle of all vertue and godlines. To conclude onely for the excellencie of their vertue, as long as the estate of the Iewes florished & cōtinued prosperous the kingdome remayned in this stock & family, but to omit these matters of antiquity, truely it is most clear and ma∣nifest that in holy scripture where the glorious workes of our sauiour Chryst are regestred, there is regard made of honoure and nobility, whereas in entringe to speake to anye on, their is mention made of his excellency and wor¦thynes, as apperteynynge to hym wythe whome wee haue communication. As for example when the An∣gell & heauenly messenger of God speaketh thus. Ioseph the sōne of Dauid feare not: and agayne. Iesus the sone of Dauid haue mercie vppon vs. Moreouer Paule speaking to the Romaynes, what tyme hee would set forth the ho∣noure and glorye of Christe as well touchinge his deuine as humayne nature doth say that he in respecte of his hu∣manity is discended from the stock & house of a kinge. I haue of a great many picked out a few examples only to auoyde yrksome tediousnes. Yet notwithstanding it may appeare by these fewe parcells, that noblenes of byrth, & distinctiō of bloud is by auctority of holie scripture allow∣ed and confyrmed. NOwe I haue to my simple skill shewed sufficientlye the first grounde and originall of nobility, deriuynge
the foundation thereof from that good inclination whiche is through the benefite of nature printed in haughty min∣des which yf it happely grew and by continuance of tyme come to perfectiō, it bringeth forth that noblenes of birth and parentage, whych euery where is so muche esteemed and honoured. For it is a thing worthye to be noted (that we speake som thinge of this also) how muche antiquitye setteth foorth the glorye and dignitye of true nobility as a greate profe & confirmation, through ye testimony wherof-al worthy actes and noble enterpryses are committed and commended to posterity. For those thinges which for wāt of memory haue almost bene forgotten, are most highlye of vs esteemed, so that we do much more admire them for theyr prowes and vallantnes, then that we suppose many of our tyme not able wyth al labour and industrie to ensue and imitate. Herehence doth arise that great emulation recorded in aunciēt historys) betwene nation & natiō, while some do vaunt themselues to haue beene beyonde all me∣mory, agayne other seeke to draw al renowne of antiqui∣tye to themselues. The Egyptians did willingly yelde the antiquity to the Phrigianes, and onely exceptinge thē they vaunte themselues more auncient then any other na∣tion. The peple of Arcadia proceaded to fictions, and fay∣ned fables. They affirmed thēselus in auncienty of birth to exceede the Moone. What shall I say of the Atheni∣ans? whoe did attribute so much vnto themselues for the glory and title of antiquitie, that they thought themselus onely by that name of righte moste worthye to rule all Greece. For whereas the firste beginninges of other partes of Greece were regestred either in some memora∣ble Chronicle, either in some worthy monumente: onely the beginning and originall of the Athenians could by no steppes of auncient descente euidently be traced oute. Af∣terwards when they knew that they were beyonde al the memorie of man, they were of this opinion, yt they sprang
firste of the soyle of that lande, and came not together through the assembling and meeting of any other people, but euermore from their generation enhabited their owne and natiue country. And for that cause they adorne their heade wyth fine nets or caules garnished and wroughte wt Grashoppers of Gould: signifyinge that as Grashoppers are engendred of the soyle where they are first found, so ye Athenians came naturally from the place they do inha∣bite. For which cause they were called the ofspring of their owne lande. They were therefore desirous of two names, as well to shewe and manifeste that there was nothinge to bee founde in their auncestours that was borrowed of Barbarians and straūgers, as also to the end, they would be knowen to excel all other Nations for the prerogatiue of their antiquitie. Wee also see in priuate stockes and families howe greatly it auayleth them which stande on the pointe of their petegree to shewe the Records of their Seignorie. For it semeth a thing most reasonable, & cānot bee denyed that those families are of more honour, whoe haue a longer time supported their countenaunce by ver∣tue and honestie. And this is the cause that vpstarte gen∣tlemen are so litle regarded. Which opprobrious disdain commonlye proceedeth from a contemptuous and proude stomach, and an vntollerable loftines, and yet not altoge∣ther voide of good reason. For albeit Gentlemen which haue bene lately promoted, excel in vertue, wit, and pol∣licie, yet doe not they cary with them such credit, yet haue they not that hore heade, whych especially in greate fami∣lies, and noble bloude is to be estemed and honoured. For euen as we doe chiefely reuerence graye heares, and elder years, euen so the auncient race of nobility shoulde beare the sway, porte, and aucthority. In whiche opinion not∣withstandinge certaine bondes and limittes are to be pit∣ched. For as feeble and weake olde age doth impayre the force of reason, of memory, and vnderstandinge, and bree∣deth
a disparagemēt of honour and dignity: so the true na∣ture of glory and renoume is with longe time beautified, but with ouer mutch continuance bereued of his accusto∣med light and beautie. Which howe it happeneth I will hereafter shewe, nowe I am forthwith addressed to folow orderly my intended purpose. VVHereas the glory & dignity of true nobilitye hath bene declared by me with many excellent and wor∣thy ornamentes annexed thereunto, it remaineth to be cō∣sidered whether it be expediēt and profitable for the peo∣ple to be gouerned by the will and auctority of noble men. For it may seeme vnto many a thinge most vniust and be∣sides reason, that whereas all men are by nature desirous of liberty, and voide of the yoke of bondage, they shoulde be restreined of theyr freedome, and shoulde be forced by lawes to obey others, and not folow their owne will and pleasure: especially whereas men of honour and highe de∣gree for the most parte do most insolently abuse their cal∣linge, both through pride, and ambition, and are founde captaines to all mischiefe and cruelty. But that I maye more plainly expresse the same, it is to be considered not so mutch that which may augment the weale of any priuate person, but rather that which may enrich the state of man∣kinde, and preserue the same in wealth and felicity. For looke what thinge soeuer apperteineth to the preseruati∣on and welfare of all men, must nedes be thought profita∣ble to euery singular man and peculiar person For it may not be that any one parte or member of a common weale shoulde be sounde and perfect, where the whole body ther∣of is greuously afflicted and annoyed. But if any one part and member of a commonweale bee greatly oppressed, so longe as the estate of ye whole be soūde & perfect, it may the souer be restored to his former felicity. But that we may
the more plainly beholde the pyth hereof, it is requisite to vewe the estate of those Citties, which haue bene accoū∣ted most noble and honourable. Athens, after the death of Kinge Codrus was happely preserued by the lawes and ordinaunces which Solon made, who notwithstan∣ding was reprehēded of many excelling in wit & learnīg, for yt he made ye people péeres, & gaue to subiects souerai∣gnety & vnto the multitude ouer much liberty. The estate of that commonweale was sufficientely hereby argued of what time within the compasse of xl yeares the gouern∣ment was spoyled by the wilfulnes of the people, and yel∣ded it selfe subiect to the tyranny of Pysistratus. But af∣ter that they had set them selues at liberty againe, and were no more subiect to the tyranny of Princes, a greate number of yeares both in Greece, and in the greatest part of Asia they held the soueraignety, rule, and gouerment. Whiche power, and principality was sone tottered and brought to ruin, through the intollerable pryde and am∣bition of some who sought to féede ye humoures of others, and to be accoumpted people pleasers. Amongest whom Pericles is named, who although he did excell in Orato∣rie, and was wondred at for his swéete tongue & fine vtte∣raūce, and was skyllfull in gouernment, yet notwithstan∣dinge did not sée what mischiefe he brought to the country when he made equal the Prince which the people, the sub∣iectes with Nobility, and by that meanes confoundinge estates together, did violate and breake the aucthoritie of Areopagus. For no other thinge is it, to make equall in liberty, the Nobles and common fort of men, then to geue weapons to vnbridled rage & lust, whereby it may worcke all maner of mischiefe. But will you see what euell and misery ensued, when the commonwealth was ruled ac∣cording to the wil and pleasure of the people? First a ter∣rible scourge and miserable destruction was saide on the neckes of men for life and vertue approued, (whiche had
preserued and increased the weale publique) by obscure men and disposed to al kinde of villanny. For in the whole commonwealth of Athens after the estate thereof was miserably rent in peeces, no one was to be foūde, whiche was moued with the loue of vertue, agayne which did not conceiue hatred and indignation, againste his wretched, and vngratfull country. Where at length the myserye grewe so great and violent, that some were openly dam∣nified and vtterly spoyled of their goods and possessions, o∣ther some banished, many slayne and put to cruell death, who had in their liues throughe great vertue and puis∣sance, victoriously conquered the enemy, nobly defended theyr countrye. This calamity was great and intollera∣ble, that the body of the weale publique should be bereued of his principall and most excellent partes, that the auto∣rity of ye nobles was abolished, who would haue wrought the remedy and preseruation of their wounded countrey. Therefore whereas sage heades mighte not preuayle, where cutthrotes were counsellers, where fury and mad∣nes ietted vp and doune vnpunished, no mischtefe coulde be imagined, no misery deuised, wherewith that countrye was not ouerwhelmed and cleane ouerflowen. For when the citty of Athens was assaulted with most terrible and cruell warres, and that all Greece had conspired agaynst them, it came to passe by the furye and outrage of the peo∣ple, that at the same tyme they proclaimed battayle with no lesse daunger against Sicilia, Nycias notwithstandinge with many peeres and noble counsellers persuadinge the contrary. Wherefore they worthely susteined in that la∣mentable siege of Syracusa, not onely the losse of their honoure, but the ruin of their houses, landes, and possessi∣ons and fell pitefully into greate wo and misery: and be∣inge at the length through sedition and ciuill battaile vt∣terly wasted & cōsumed with many bitter scourges & ter∣rible afflictions, loste with great languor and heauines
miserably their former liberty. But after the thirty Ty∣rantes were for their sharpe and tirannous gouernmente displaced, what was it that did scatter those goods careful∣ly gathered, but the loose life, and immoderate desire of the frentike people? Whose fury and madnes was suche, that by no force or restreint of lawe, they coulde be indu∣ed to haue any care or regarde of the common estate. For when it was lawfull for euery odd felowe to robb the cō∣monweale, thereby to augmente his priuate gayne, then fell they from labour, and worldely busines to a slouthful and loyteringe life, they repaired to stageplayes and com∣modies, and vsed other vayne pleasures, which decaied the loue of verte, and did vtterly extinguish and put out the memory of the Athenian renoume, and their aunciente dignity. Wherefore not manye yeares after, that nation which had foyled so many armies of the Persians, whiche wrought som any noble actes, which obteined the Empire ouer all Greece, was by the Macedonians (an obscure, and vnknowen people at that tyme) subdued vtterly, and con∣founded. The first and principall cause of this so greate a calamity was the leude, and licentious life of the people. Amongest the men of Sparta also (to speake some thinge of them) many worthy and noble actes haue bene wrought by their Kinges and Princes, as well against their ene∣myes, as also with their subiectes, profitable to their cō∣monwealth, and meritinge euerlastinge fame and memo∣ry. On the other side the Ephori whoe by the election of ye people came to their office of dignity, did greatly annoy & impouerishe the inhabytauntes of their countrey, while they seekinge greedely their owne priuate gaine and com¦modity, did procure the vtter ruin and vndoinge to their natiue coūtry. For what other thinge doe they which vio∣late & infring the positiue awes, whereupon the safegard of all men dependeth, then vtterlye ouerturne the commō wealthes estat▪ And wheras Lycurgus had ordained ma∣ny
good lawes and profitable statutes, only to bring them to labour, honestie, and vertu: the Ephori many yeares af∣ter his time corrupted with voluptuousnes and filthye lu∣cre (which two are pestiferous and moste hurtfull to anye common wealth) abolished his most excellent decrees, and caused his lawes to be of none effect. Which fact caused their honour and dignitie sodenly to fall to the grounde. And when certayne kinges woulde establishe a newe the lawes of Lycurgus, which were abrogated, and tooke counsell howe to reforme their dissolute lyfe, immediatly they were of the Ephori dispatched and cruelly murdered. So it came to passe that the common wealthe of Athens whiche for a long tyme florished in honoure, pompe, and nobility, and was furnished wyth many fathers excelling all other in the worlde in witte, learninge, and iudgement, and had defended it wyth greate glory, was now through the furye of the subiects, made subiecte to all villany and slauery. VVHat shoulde I neede in this place speake of the Romaynes? wheras it is confessed of all men that nothing did so muche ouerthrowe the florishinge estate of that noble Citye as when the subictes rebelled agaynste their rulers and princes. That Empyre therfore which was first by the puisance of princes purchased, then main∣tayned and amplefied by the Senate & Elders, was shor∣telye brought to confusion through the seditious and tro∣blesom people. For when the vnsatiable desire of the fren∣tike people waxed so extreme & outragious, that it coulde be kept vnder by no lawful gouernmēt and pollitike coū∣sel & ws geuen in hope of pray to vprores through the se∣ditious orations of people pleasers, they feared not (so they might content & satisfy their vnlawful lust and appe∣tyte) to violate and breake the Lawe of God and man. This caused the Tribunes to bee seditious, this encoura∣ged
thē to the great detriment and ur of the cōmōwele: to make lawes touching distribution of grounds, euen to the time of Gracchi which were ye chiefe authors of those calamityes wherewith after that time the cōmon wealth was ouerflowen. All whith sturre and hurliburly as it were by fatall desteny grewe daylye more and more vntill the time of Marius, whose raigne although it was verye lamentable, yet did it open a way to muche more mischife besyde, vntill the gouernmente came to Iulius Cesar. You see the cōmō wealth of Athens some time most florishing, the kingdome of Sparta earste noble, the Citye of Rome a long time much renoumed to haue bene happely begon, kepte & maintened by princes & noble personages, whiche agayne were through the rashe and vnruly multitude mi∣serably spoiled vtterly wasted & confounded, Which great misery and intollerable mischiefe is not onely sene in those Cities, but also in other places, for where the people hath least to doe in a common wealth, there the estate of that countrye is found most stable and parmanente. Whervpō it foloweth that the gouernment of the vulgar and com∣mon people is very easely ouerthrowen, and scarcely en∣durth the tyme of one generation. But the rule of a king is not subiect to often alteration, and doth as it were con∣tinue for euer. Some men wil here obiect agaynst me Alcibiades and Critias, who were the vtter subuersion & ouerthrowe of theyr natiue country or els Pausainas who trayterously conspyred agaynst all Gre ce, or Silla and Ce∣sar wyth many such like who were renomned for theyr ho∣nour and nobylity, but yet beyng entangled with ambitiō and oute of measure Enflamed wythe the desyre of rule, and aucthoritye, spared not to spoyle crueltye their frien∣des and countreymen. I must truely of force confesse that many heinous acts haue ben enterprysed, much mischiefe committed and wrought by suche as were of highe degree and aucthoritye. Neyther the highe and loftye stomache
which is ingendre through nobilitye of bd, haue bene alwayes enclned to equity and iustice. Yet do I defend this opinyon that no common wealth ath bene at any ti∣me well gouerned by the people. For euery noble wighte hath alwayes weapons in readines either t defend, either to spoyle his country, as wysedome, wealth, knowledge, and fortitude. Contrariwyse the multitude for the mo part is headlong, vnskilful, feareful, and orous. They may therefore throughe their furye and madnes hurt and wounde their countrye, but beyng oute in daūger of vtter vndoyng, they are able by no meanes to saue it, or restore it beyng once lost and decayed to his for onour, and dignity. It is therefore, most cleare and euident, that the estat of that coūtry is lamētable, where people are prefer∣red before their peeres, and the ignoble and lborn be∣fore the honourable. But when the case standeth thus that noble men do flow and abound in al vertue and noblenes, and are not onelye through ye good inclination of thyr no∣ble natures, but also through the loue of vertue inflamed with iustice and temperance, and daylye study to do good to all men, and to knit (vp al in one word) doe depely cō∣sider the office and duty of a noble personage, what is hee were he neuer so vilanos a verlet or cursed caytiue wt wold not willīgly obey their wil & autoriti. Nay who wil not ra¦ther persuade ye body of a cōmōwealth to be geuerned by so worthi and noble a coūsel. For who soeuer is of so a le mynde, as to thinke it not a thinge most needful & pro∣fitable, to yeld himselfe conformable to the protection of some one most wise and modeste gouernour, who for his wisedom and modestie onely deserueth commendation, is not to be thought a louer of liberty, but rather corrupted with the luste of licentiousnes, and would by his ryot and foule demeanour molest the quiet estat of the country. For there is nothing in the vniuersal worlde that is more apt to preserue the common societye of men then good lawes
with out the which no familye, no nation, no countrye is l, to stande and haue any contynuance. But you will saye it is greeuous and intollerable burden to become ser∣uile. Truely I am of that mynde that no euill may be compared to seruitude: but it is one thinge to serue, and another to obeye. For ther is greate odds between a lorde and a gardian. The gardian is carefull for the sa∣fegard of those who are committed to him to be defended, the lord onely doth respect his priuate commodity. E∣uen so the loyalty and obedience of hym that is free great∣lye dyfferethe frome the bondage of hym that is seruyle. For seruitude is thus, when the slaue wanting will & free election foloweth the commaundement and becke of his lorde, and hauinge no choyse repyneth at his lordes auc∣toritye. But it is the propertye of a liberal nature to yeelde all dutye and reuerence to them whiche doth excell other in knowledge and wisedom, and to whom for a long tyme haue bene committed the care and custodye of many people. And as the sicke man doth no maner of seruice to the Phisition, but willinglye foloweth his aduise and councell, because he shal thereby be restored to health: and as the passenger obeyeth the master of the shippe, and the souldier his captaine: so it behoueth a multitude well dis∣posed to yeeld them selues wholy into the handes of right noble and worthy personages. For the people through their dull wits and brutish nature cannot perceyue what is profitable eyther to themselues, or for their countrye: on the other side ye noble mynd is not onely the worker of present profite, but also through great foresight preuents imminent daunger. Furthermore the people hath no taste or feelinge of honoure and renoume, and glorye, excepte they be by some strayght law brydeled, and therefore are most couetous and giuē to al impyetie, and in the defence of their countrye are of no stoute & hardye stomache. On the other syde the noble bloude is inflamed with the loue
of renoume, and abhorreth dastardlines as a most foule & vgly vice, and in defence of a common profitt accompteth greate and daungerous enterpryces. Whiche by Homer (whose graue sentences I do often recite and willinglye repete) is in manye places most playnly declared. For af∣ter suche sorte hee bryngeth in the king with sundrye and diuers kyndes of oracions perswadinge with the people, as thoughe therby his meaninge were to geue notice and intelligence to al worthy and noble personages by the re∣citall of Agamemnon his prayse, and worthines, that they in like maner ought to excite and stirre vp themsel∣ues to striue with him for fame, and glory. But vnto the rude and barbarous people yf they turne their backes in battayle, scourginge and killinge he denounceth. There∣fore as the stomach and courage of a lusty horse doth most appeare, when hee yeeldeth to be guided by the will of a skillfull rider: And as we suppose our minde to bee best setled, when will to reason geueth the soueraignty: And as we thincke a houshoulde to be well ordered, when it lea∣neth to the aduised disposition of a wise and carefull hous∣holder: So must we persuade oure selues that the good estate of the people is then best ordered and established, when they yeelde the free administration, and as it were the sway of gouernmente to true Nobilitie.
❧ THE SECONDE Booke of ciuill Nobilitie. WHat the nature, force, order, & efficacie of true Nobilitie is (Le∣wis most noble & famous Prince) & how first beinge bred & fostered by worthines of witte, and excel∣lencie of vertue, it attayned the highest place of honour and soue∣raingtie: and howe the people in all antiquitie was fully perswaded that noble birthe and worthines of parentage by bloude and aliaunce, was ioy∣ned and linked to the Gods, and how great and honoura∣ble titles & ensignes in all wel gouerned cōmon wealthes were attributed and geuen thereunto: I haue alreadye not onely by testimonies of excellent Poets, and manifeste presidents of aunciente Records, but also by authoritie of holy Scripture aboundantly declared and confirmed suf∣ficiently. And after I had put downe in writinge howe much antiquitie might preuaile for the furtheraunce and settinge forth of true Nobilitie, I declared consequentlye that they who were of highe degree and noble parentage were not onely borne to beare rule, and sitte in the place of Maiestie, but also that the securitie, safegarde, and preser∣uation of the people was then beste kept and maintayned, when the whole gouernmente was yelded vnto worthy & noble personages. But for as much as there is nothing in this world certaine, stable, and permanent, but al thin∣ges are frayle, mutable, and much subiect to alteration, it may not be that Nobilitie, and the glory thereof, shoulde continue alwayes and be euerlasting. Nobilitie ther∣fore (as most part of other thinges to the state and condi∣tion
of man) is subiect to mortalitie. Wherefore  f ll  hings, o o nobilitie, there is a certaine prime and youthly Estate, then riper yeares ensue, and old age folo∣weth, last of all death wasteth and consumeth all vtterly, so that no printe or signe appeareth of auncient Nobility. Wee see therfore that many families which were in time past barbarous, obscure, and litle reckoned of, are excedīg∣lye stirred vp and enkindled to purchase prayse and winne glorie. Againe other wee see scarcely vphold the renowne of their auncestors, other daily cracke their credite more and more, and being throwen headlonge downe at length are extinguished vtterly, which Glaucus by the mouth of Homer noteth vnto vs in this maner. O stoutest of the Grecian campe, why searchest our degree? Since that ech mortal race most like is to the leaues in spring: Some, smallest breath & blast of wīds thē skattreth frō the tree. Some eke amid the groues do grow, when trees their branches bring, So chaunce doth nowe mens state aduaunce, nowe downe doth headlong fling. I pray you doth there at this present appeare in any place any small token of the progeny of olde and auncient fami∣lies? all those which haue descended from Fabius, Iulius, Paulus, Metellus, & Scipio are together with the glorye and pompe of the Romaines so vanished, and as it were buried in the pit of obliuion, that if any man which now li∣ueth will affirme himselfe to be of their race, or ioyned to them in birthe and consanguinitie is a like skoffed at, as if he did defend the dreame, and peuishe phantasie of Pytha∣goras. After those noble and worthy wightes whom I haue already spoken of were extinguished, succeded many other of like fame and estimation, who also through trace of time, & continuance of many yeres were vtterly forgot∣ten, againe other after their time were aduaunced to ho∣nour,
of whō no writer reporteth. Which thing happeneth for two causes especially. The firste and chiefeste cause is the britle & fraile condition of nature, throughe the muta∣bilitie whereof it cōmeth to passe that the estate of world∣ly thinges may in no wyse be perpetuall and euerlasting: but all thinges as I haue before declared are ful of chaū∣ges and alterations: In so muche that they either before they come to perfection are cut of through the malice and frowardnes of Fortune, either throughe olde age withe∣red, wasted & brought to nothing. The second cause maye be imputed to impietie it selfe and abundaunce of vices, which vtterly extinguisheth the cleare shyning brightnes of aūcient families, before the course of nature doth so re∣quire. As exprience teacheth in those who by ouermuch winebibbinges impayre their bodies health, and through superfluitie, & immoderatenes of belly cheere (as it were with a deadlye poison) procure their owne bane & vtter de∣struction. Wherfore it is requisite and necessary to search out diligently the qualities and vertues whereby wee at∣tayne nobilitie, so will the vices whereby it is lost and be∣reued of his wonted grace and accustomed brightnes, eft∣sones appeare. But here I may something doubte least yt this my discourse may seeme to deserue iust reprehension, because it may at the first shew appere contrary to it selfe, wheras in our first entrie this assertion we mainteyned, yt no man was to be accompted honourable, excepte hee did first descend from some noble line and family. Which if it be true, neither he which is borne of low degree and base parentage may by any meanes be honourable, neither he who descendeth from noble race, maye throughe his owne industry attaine renowne & glory, but defende onely and maintayne carefully the Nobilitie gotten and purchased by the manhode and puissaunce of his auncestours. These are the scruples and doubtes wherewith some maye bee ledde to argue mee of lightnes and inconstancie.
But I in good sooth am not he, which do beleue those one∣ly which are comonly called Gentlemen to be by naturall inclination apte to vertue and valiauntnes, whereas the pathwaye to prowesse and vertue is open to all them, that do desire thinges in their nature most excellent and com∣mendable. Notwithstāding to that ende tended the drifte of all my disputation that the gentle and noble bloude is more then the other, by nature enclyned to dignitie & com∣mendable actes, the worthines whereof notwithstandinge is surely grounded on vertue. For like as we attribute to the seede and carnell in the ground the cause and generati∣on of the Tree: so we deeme the worthy and noble parent, through generation, to poure on his posteritie some part of true Nobilitye, which then appeareth most liuely and florishing, when it is throughe good studies and exercises brought to perfection. And where we would haue nobili∣tie to bee highlye esteemed and honoured, because it doth commonly excell in vertue: truly oure meaninge is, that Vertue which is worker and causer of so noble a qualitie, doth deserue greate honour and estimation, which manye times wee see of noble men, let passe and forsaken, and of such exceedinglye embraced, who are not commended vn∣to vs for their noble progenie. For no doubte it is not founde true in all, that the loftie and hautie minde which is seene in Nobility doth eftsones stirre them vppe to the loue of Vertue, neither would we haue established that o∣pinion, but that we chiefely meant, that was founde moste vsuall and generall. Notwithstandinge Vertue from Nobility fraighte and beautifyed with vertue, differeth in this one pointe: that the prayse and commendation of vertue belongeth to euery priuate & singuler person, but noblenes is found more ample and large, and concerneth the honour and magnificence, of a whole stocke and fami∣lie. Therefore there maye happelye aryse some late and new made gentleman endued with al kinde of vertue,
who also through his worthines maye beare such a coun∣tenaunce, that amonge all men hee may onely excell: yet notwithstanding because he is the first of that linage, may not be reckoned amonge noble men. But after that ma∣ny of the same family shall bee founde by his ensample to be inflamed with the loue of honour and glorie, then at the length that exceeding brightnes of true and perfecte No∣blenes shal shine, and glister most gloriously. Therefore at the first hee is called a man endued with much gentlenes and curtesie, in no wyse a noble man. That, that maye be the difference which the Grecians make betweene one that is a noble Gentleman, and a gentleman. For the lat∣ter hath relation to the worthines of the minde, and the o∣ther signifyeth the honour and dignitie of the race and fa∣milie. Therfore as one we terme not a number, but the beginning of a number: so that first man we suppose and iudge worthy of chiefest honour, but yet no noble man, but rather an authour & beginner of Nobilitie vnto his race and ofspringe. Which name and title I my selfe know not, whither I may esteeme farre and in many degrees to exceede and passe the other. Wherefore that is moste cleare and manifeste, that neither that is false which wee before put downe in wryting, and this also which we now take in hande to explicate and set forth, doth beare wyth it credite of vndoubted trothe. For that famous man who through the excellencie of his nature applyed himself first to the studie of renowne and glorie, albeit commonly he be not termed noble, when notwithstandinge hee hath at∣tained great fame and commendation, and hath left to his progenye the tokens and ensignes of vertue doth seeme to haue layd a notable foundation of Nobilitie, and with his vertuous actes to haue geuen a cleare lighte, and purcha∣sed true fame to his posteritie. Now therfore it remay∣neth that we know by what meanes this so noble aduaū∣sing of his stocke and kindred maye happen to him who is
the first rayser of his family to the highe & princely place of honour & Nobilitie. No doubt (that I may aunswere briefly) by the same meanes whereby it is mainteyned and preserued. But it is sayd before, that Nobilitie is a kin∣red excelling in moste rare and principall vertues. And those according to the opinion of Aristotle the moste lear∣ned Philosopher, I accompt principall vertues which are occupied about the preseruatiō of cōmon societie, through which also the safetie and securitie of men is best kept and maintayned. But he which through priuate education is verye well trayned, and well instructed with preceptes of moralitie, may of good right be termed a good and vertu∣ous man: but yet by other qualities he shall neuer procure great prayse, and worthynes, except he applie them to the profite & cōmoditie of the weale publique. For if we were borne onely for our owne sakes and our owne cōmodities, it were sufficient that we sought the aduauncement of our owne selues, and the preferment of those which are contei∣ned within our owne family. But wheras we are moued by the instinct of Nature to helpe and profite other, he see∣meth beste to haue discharged the dutie to him assigned, whose labour, studye, and diligence hath bin imployed in matters of great waight and importaunce to the benefite and wealthe of his natiue country. Not for that truly yt the vertue of any priuate man should bee despysed and set at noughte: for by his good aduise and counsell if not all, yet some parte of the common wealth as his owne house & family is well ruled and ordered. But wheras the vertue and wisedome of this priuate and peculiar man is contey∣ned wythin the bound and walles of his owne house, and extendeth it selfe no further, it seemeth good reason that the like honour and dignitie should not be due to him, that is to some other, whose vertues are founde more vniuer∣sall and generall, and whose minde is more occupied with the carefull cause of his common wealth. For all men
would not generally accord to honour & reuerence a few, except they did all manifestly perceiue thēselues, in cases of great extremity by theyr greate paynes and trauaile to be assisted. Therefore by knowledge of ciuill affayres and experience, there was made a certaine entrie to this kinde of gentilitie. THe chiefest and most principall part therefore of ciuil gouernement is iustice, which hath in it selfe the grea∣test and most apparaunt shew of vertue. The admiration whereof did in the beginning so greatly excite, & stirre vp the minds of men, that they surrendered theyr goods and possessions, into the hands of some especiall peeres, whom aboue all other they did honour and reuerence. For thus, when we treate of vertue, we vse to dispute. The tyme hath bin when men like barbarians haue lyued in woods, open fields, and desolate places, without politique rule, & ciuill gouernment: neyther embracinge religion nor by mutual loue and dutie shewing theyr humanity. Nothing was done in those dayes, by due order of reason and disci∣pline but most matters were executed violently, whereas frantique and furious headines had the vpper hand. Whē then robberies were rife, murthers infinite, & those who in force and sturdines passed other, would afflict and trou∣ble iniuriously the weaker sorte, and theyr whole lyfe com∣passed wyth innumerable mischiefes, all they which had receyued the greater & more greeuous iniuryes besought the assistaunce of some one man in witte and pollicy excee∣ding other, whom they perceyued to be vnto the rest as it were a lanterne of Iustice, a myrroure of myldnes & cur∣tesie. This Patrone and supporter of right, when he had taken on him the charge of those seely soules miserably & suppliantly yelding themselues, & declared vnto them the earnest desire he had to take away pillages & robberies, &
to represse violent murders, & valiantly to reueng wrong∣full oppressions, and to sincke vnder like lawes both the mighty men & simplet sort: it came to passe that as many as tenderd their peculiar liberty, and soughte their owne security and quietnes, supposed him to be the defence and bulwarke of their safety & prosperous estate, whose fame moste flourished for iustice and equity. From this foun∣tayne therfore and head spring of iustice, issued out the po∣wer and auctority of Kinges, and the prerogatiue of prin∣cely gouernment: herehence proceeded the high degree of Nobility: herehence soueraingtie and the cause of all re∣nowne & glory was deriued: so that there is no one stocke more aunciente or more excellente, then the petegree of Kinges, which through their owne vertue and valiaunt∣nes abandoned al barbarous crueltie, reducing the people to good order and ciuilitie. Whose moste deuine nature Hesiodus hauing in great admiration, in his Booke inti∣tuled the Genealogie of the Gods, fetcheth the liue and des∣cent of Princes, from Iupiter himselfe. Which opinion & iudgemente of his, hath ben also receyued of many, in so much that they did most certainly surmise, that hee coulde not but descende from the Gods, which moste of all other excelled in vertue. For it is reported that AEacus, Minos and Rhadamanthus, were iudged to be the sonnes of Iu∣piter, they were so much of all men for their iustice mag∣nifyed: who as the Poets do fayne are sayde to appointe lawes to the infernal spirites. So much did antiquity, yea euen amonge the deuils and hellishe hounds beleue, yt seueritie of Lawes and force of iustice was expedient and necessary to restraine the vnbridled desires of a disordered multitude. Pittacus of Mytilene was through his per∣fect skill and experience in iustice, aduaunced to the highe estate of a ruler. Which thinge also befell to Numa Pō∣pilius being at Rome, for by vpright dealing and suppor∣tinge of iustice, hee was thoughte and proclaymed by the
whole consent of the Romaines worthely to succeede Ro∣mulus in the state of royal maiesty. What needeth mee here to speake of Lycurgus, Draco, and Solon, that I omit in meane while to make any mention of Mercurie, Phoroneus, and diuers other, who haue beene longe time before, which haue wrought the safegarde and preseruati∣on of their Citizens, by prescribinge lawes and ordinaun∣ces, and haue thereby bene aduaunced to great honour, & haue purchased to their posterity perpetual fame and me∣mory. Therefore to perswade our selues that no one ver∣tue deserueth the like preheminence, eyther is a like to be honoured, it is hereby to be séene, that each kinde of vertue beinge voyde of Iustice hath lost his honour and estimati∣on, whereas Iustyce alone, secluded from other ver∣tues, reteineth still his especiall grace and dignity. For profe whereof I mighte alledge a number of examples, but because I meane to vse breuity, I wil stande onely vp∣pō two. Aratus of Sicyon although him selfe held no Em∣pyre, yet through commendation of Iustice gotte such re∣noume that by the iudgement of al men he might be com∣pared with the chiefest of all that euer raigned or ruled. He in his life time was euer prest to wage battaile against tyrantes and wicked and disordered Citizens, neither refused he in the defence of the lawes of his Cittye at any tyme to venture his life. Aristides who was also longe before the time of Aratus, was so highely esteemed and honoured for hys preseruation of Iustyce, that Themisto∣cles, though famous for hys valiaunt Actes, was neuer more highly reuerenced then he. Whereby it is euident & plaine that there is no way more certaine then this, to en∣large our honour and glory: Or no waie ye more readilye commendeth our posterity to famous memorye. NExt and immediately after Iustice, a valiaunte cou∣rage, which consisteth in daungerous attemptes, is
lifted vp righte worthely to the highest steppe of honoure and dignity. For it is a matter of no small importaunce so little to estéeme of life as to bestowe it willingely and cherefully for the safegarde and preseruation of all men, and to refuse or feare for the wealth of our country no daū¦ger or terrour of the enemy. Wherefore almoste euerye man which is inflamed with the loue of glory, and desireth greately renomne, doth employ his labour most earnestly to the study of chiualry and martiall affaires. For the re∣cordes and ordenaunces of antiquity doe plainly and ma∣nifestly shewe, that there hath bene no glory so greate, no renomne so honourable in anye well gouerned common∣wealth, as that whych hath beene attributed to valiaunt∣nes and fortitude: Of purpose to prouoke and pricke fore∣wardes each manly wight willingely to take weapon in hande and to repell the iniury and force of the enemye. On the other side there were for dastardes euen by verye good ordinaunces most bitter taūtes and reproches moste iustly appoincted. There was in olde time amonge the Macedonians a lawe ordeyned, that hee who had not in fight of battaile ouercame one, shoulde in the sight of all men be trust vp with a halter. The Scythians at theyr sa∣cred and solempne feastes, would not haue any man touch a golden cuppe, that was caried aboute, which had not in battaile shewed some signe of a warlike and valiaunt cou∣rage. To none of the Amazones was graunted liberty to marry, excepte she had in warre valiauntly vanquished an enemy. Solon also made this decree, that their children, whose fathers had lost their liues fightinge in the defence of their cōmonwealth, should be brought vp at the charge of the common treasurye. Whiche was most wisely vsed and practised in many other great and famous Citties. For most wisely was it thought of Solon, the wisest of the Grecians, that the security and preseruation of a common wealth did consist in prefermente, and punishment. For
by this, wicked and desperate persons are restrained, and by the other noble natures and florishing wittes are more vehemently stirred vp, to the embracinge of vertue, and honesty. It hath bene the refore by deuine prouidence esta∣blished of oure forefathers yt in what kinde of men so euer this vertue eminently appeared, the same should be wyth many worthy and noble ensignes and titles honoured: one the other side, wante of courage, and dastardlines shoulde be after the shamefullest maner as might be taunted, and reuiled. Therefore whereas thys was by lawe ordeyned, they seemed to haue bene of this minde and opynion, that all men which were endued with a more excellent nature and Noble minde, mighte be stirred vp to the worthines of renomne and glorye: againe hereby they purposed to disgrace cowardes and white lyuered men, yea albeit they were by birth honourable and of a noble line. But what should I speake of the Romaines? For can any man be a∣ble to recite so many images of men of armes? So ma∣ny garlandes either geuen to them that firste faled the walles, or first entred their enemies Tentis, or to them yt by mayne force saued the life of some citizen, or to thē that triumphed ouer their enemies? Is anye man able to re∣coumpt so manye ensignes of vertue, so manye prices of prayse, as to prowes and puissaunce were by the the Ro∣maine lawes assigned? Therefore it is the lesse to be mer∣uailed at, yf that Citty grewe to her greate, and large in Empire, wherein prowes and valiantnes was so well & honourable rewarded, that not onely noble men, but also very many of the people were so inflamed with desire of renomne, that they in defence of their country neuer refu∣sed to venter bothe limmes, and life. And that I may of a great and infnite number call a few to memory, the two Decij by race and birth no gentlemen, yet for their rare and singular fortitude they aspired in the commonwealth to the hyghest degrée of honour and dygnity: And in the
ende in the defence of their country consecrated themsel∣ues, as valiaunt and vod vessels to glory and immorta∣lity. Lucius Martius euen he which in Spayne recouered the Romaine Empire, then sore shaken and fallen owne to the ground, was borne of simple and poore parentage, yet through puissaunce obteyned in his country great ho∣nour and a principal dignity. What should I recite Mar: Portius Cato, a man much commended for his wysedome and pollice? To what ende shoulde I speake of Marcus Marcellus, who first gaue Annibal the ouerthrowe, and shewed plainly that the way to ouercome was by prowes and valiantnes? Againe why should I omit Marius that worthy wight, and a thousand  beinge no gentle men borne, whiche notwithstandinge: throughe their passinge skill and experience in feates of armes, were aduaunced to honoure, and promoted to high estate, leaninge to their posterity fame and immortality. Here hence the armes & cognizances of honour and noblenes, which euen in these our daies are borne, and had righte worthely in greate honour and estimation, did fetch their originall, and firste beginninge. For when any man had in battayle shewed some notable poyncte of a good and valiant souldiar, hee was by the Generall made a gentleman, and had some badge or token thereof assigned vnto him, whereby his bloude might be enobled, throughe the prayse and glorye whereof his ofspringe might be in lyke manner pricked with the desyre of fame and commendation. Therefore some haue in their scochin so manye Castle les engrauen, as were by them in warre wonne and vanquished, other some Ringes, or Bandes, or any other thinge for the num¦ber of enemies, which they had in some doutfull and daun∣gerous battayle subdued. Other haue in their scochyns starres signifiynge percase that they broughte lyghte and comforte to the miserable afflycted estate of theyr coun∣try, other some haue other Cognizaunces representinge
puissance mannehoode, and valyauntnes. All theese thinges we haue alleaged to this ende, and purpose that we maye vnderstande playnly that fortitude openeth the way to worshippe and bringeth vs to the beholding of the excedinge bryght, and cleare nature of true nobilitye. Many also throughe their liberalitye and francke mag∣nificence, haue as it were layd worthy fundations of honoure and nobility: as by geuing largely and byndinge vnto theym their neyghboures and Cityzens, by bestow∣inge on them bountifullye, most ample rewards & great benefytes. By this onely way Tarquyne of auncient me∣mory, beynge a banished and obscure man, wonne greate fame and honour in Rome, and at length obteyned there the auctority of a Kinge. By this kynde of curteous dea∣lynge Pelops longe before his tyme, beinge a mere strā∣ger & barbarian, came to bear rule in that part of Greece wc he alluding to his own name called Peloponesus. And that I may shew you an historie of later time Cosmus Me∣dices and Laurence his nephewe weere so muche for their liberall and francke natures commended, that they ther∣by were made chiefe gouernoures of Florence and were in all nations besydes excedingelye magnifyed. Neyther truly is their any vertue which doth more become a noble mynde, or setteth for the more a worthy wight, either that winneth more praise & commendation, and getteth more goodwill, loue and reuerence: withoute whiche no man may mayntayne his owne estate, or attayne to liue in any worshipful callinge. And this seemeth to be their drift who by distinction say, nobilitye is a noblenes of byrth and parentage ioyned wyth aboundance and store of riches. For wheras the vertue of magnificence and liberalitye is chieflye seene in noble menne) for moste parte of theim are aboue other found most curtious and liberall and no man
may be therefore commended, except he be furnished with worldly substance, moste learned & wyse men haue though treasuer it selfe and the aboundance of riches to be the ve∣ry grounde and foundatyon of lyberalytye, and there∣fore as termes necessarye to bee included wythe in ye defy∣nition of true nobilitye. Whether the force and true natu∣re thereof, be fully therein declared, it is a thinge where∣on I meane not to stande, so that by that definition this may be graunted, that the vertue of liberalitye to the en∣hauncinge of men to honoure and dignitye and the setting forth of their posteritye is most expediente and necessarye MAnye not of oure tyme onelye but allso of aun∣ciente memorye hathe bothe throughe the excel∣lencye of eloquence, and theyr perfect knowledge of the ciuile Lawe, atayned wonderfull fame and glorye. For these sciences are right worthely reckoned among those, that haue beene not withoute greate cause accompted the principallest staye in the cōmon wealth, without which ye estate of Pollicy, and the safegarde of common societye, maye in no wyse longe continewe. For to no pur∣pose and in vaine do we abroade bidde battaile to the ene∣myes, excepte oure affayres at home bee gouerned by the sounde aduise of prudent counsellers. Besydes those whō we haue allready spoken of, many are made gentlemē ey∣ther through the grace & fauour of the Prince, or through the common consent of a free Cittye. But this kynd of promotion seemeth at the first shewe, not to be agreeable eyther to truethe, or to the righte and perfecte nature of true nobility. For nobilitye eyther resteth vppon opy∣nyon of men or is obteined by vertue, and the qualityes, of the mynde: eyther consisteth in nature and is deriued frō puisance and valiantnes. Wyse and graue mē haue alwayes made litle accoumpt of wauering opynion and
the inconstancie of peoples Phantasie, But the commē∣dation of vertue resteth especyally in our selues, neyther can by any meanes bee borowed abroade. Agayne the force of gentle bloude deryued from our auncestors, and apperteyninge to vs by naturall descēt, cannot be wrested hither and thither, by the iurisdiction and auctoritye of Princes. For no easyer matter is it for any man by the assignement and benefit of Princes to become of baseborn a gentleman by byrth then to be sodenlye chaunged from a foole, to a wyseman, from on that wanteth vtterance, to an eloquente orator, from a whyteliuered and fayntharted cowarde, to a venturous and valiant champion. Which also in bestowing the freedom of a Citty may be euidently knowen and considered. For yf he (as many suppose) bee taken and tearmed a Citizen which is bred and borne in a citye: no reason is, why into a Citye should be receyued an alian and straunger. Thence it proceeded that Gorgias Leontinus skoffing at the rulers of Larissa, because they had receiued into their City many straungers, was wont to saye that euen as plastereres of anye kynde of stuffe, would make morter, or any thinge of lyke sorte: so there were some so cunning craftesmen in Larissa whiche of a∣ny kynde of people were able to make Cityzens to inha∣bite Larissa. But I for my parte do neyther lyke of Gorgias his oppyniō, nor of any other mens iudgemente which in lyke maner would staye the cause of aduauncing subectes through the kinges and Princes most gratious fauour, and clemencie. For wheras all men which are of a more haughty mynde and soy stomache, are meruey∣lously inflamed with the desire of vertue, honour, and re∣noune: yf then you would frustrate the hope and expecta∣tion imprinted in mens mindes of promotion, no doubte you shall make men slacklye, and sclenderlye endeuoure to become puissant and venturous, whose mynds should rather be inflamed and set on fire. Then the which nothing
canne be deuised more hurtfull to ciuill gouernment and disciplyne. For this hath bene the purposed meaninge of Lawes and ordinaunces, and all well gouerned com∣mon wealths ought to haue in theim this practysed and published, that men desyrous to shew their valiant harts by daungerous attemptes, albeeit they are of their owne nature apt to defend the rights and lybertyes of the com∣mon wealth, yet notwithstanding, they should stirre them therevnto, through an earnest and ardente desire of fame and glorye. For by this meanes the wealth of their coūtrey is most strongely defended, and the indifferencie of Lawes & ordinaunces best maynteyned. For what fowler shame, what greater dishonour can there be imagined then to ha¦ue in the common wealthe appoynted vnto famous men, for their exceeding great and worthy exploytes, no reward at all? Eyther what reward may in any one poynte fully aunsweere and satisfy a noble mynde, then to be receyued triumphantly of the people? Furthermore what is in it selfe more princely and more glorious, then to geue vnto vertue his due desert, and to yeeld to worthines, honoura∣ble titles, & to true nobilite the principallity? that iustice might not onely by this meanes be happely kepte and pre∣serued, but also many thereby moughte be allured to bend themselues to the study of vereue. For it is not in the po¦wer of the Prince (that now I may answere that whiche mighte be obiected afore) to bringe to passe that a bile and abiecte mynde shoulde bee noble and honorable, whiche commeth not by grace and fauoure, but proceadinge from nature, is fully made and perfected by ye exercises of moste worthy and lawdable sciences. And yet a Prince maye adourne and sette foorth excedingly a noble & inuincible mynde withe worthye and honourable titles. Which thinge is not onely right good and expedient, but also so requisite and necessary, yt in the performing therof ther se∣meth to rest the safete and security of the commonwealths
estate. To approue this my opinion I coulde vse the authority of most excellente men, and moste skilfull in the gouernment of a common wealth, but I will alledge one∣ly Plato, in whom, in his thirde boke entreating of a com∣mon wealth Socrates by a certayne fable, wherein manye armed men were feined, to aryse out of the earth, perswa∣ded the Cityzens to mutuall loue and concord. And then immediatly proceedeth in his talke in this maner. Geue eare (quoth he) to the rest of the fable. All ye that liue in one Citty are brothers, beinge streightly linked, and vni∣ted together. But yet when God created you, he gaue not to euery one, the same property, and vertue. For they that were most meete to rule, were tempered with gould: Againe those who in the defence of their countrye woulde valiauntly assist the Péeres of the realme, hee mingled with siluer: And vppon sutch as applied theym selues to tillage and other base occupations, hee bestowed brasse, & Iron. So it falleth out yt you that haue like beginninges cōmonly engendre children like to your selues. Notwith∣standinge many times t happeneth, that a golden father hath a childe of siluer, sometimes a siluer father a golden childe. Which thinge in like maner is in the other kindes experienced. God therefore commaundeth that Princes themselues should haue such an speciall regard to search and inquire, with what mettal their childrens mindes are tempered, that they shoulde take heede to no one thinge more diligently then that. So that yf they founde anye Brasse or Iron in their childrens senses, they shoulde not be by folish pity hindred to assigne them a trade conueny∣ent and agreable to their grosse and rude nature: In so much they should make thē handicraftesmen, or clounes of the country. But if they fynde in them any golde and siler, they should bestow on them honourable roomes and vocations: in so mutch that sme they shoulde assigne to ye guerenmēt and ruling of Cities, some other they should
appoyncte to ayde and assiste them, and traine them vp in the knowledge of mrtial affayres. And that they should beare alwayes this in minde, that this was longe sithens foresheewen by an oracle, that then the commonwealth shoulde be vtterly wasted and destroied, when Iron and Brasse did guide the stearne. Plato in the person of So∣crates disputeth in this manner, of the office and dutye of a kinge. Who in all he hath saide, vttereth greate wyse∣dome, but this latter parte proceedeth no doubte from a more deepe, and deuine consideration: Which is, that all commonwealthes shall fall to vtter ruin and decay, where Brasse and Iron, that is, where a grosse and dul wit, destitute of iudgement and wisedome beareth the chiefest sway in the cōmonwealth. And therefore he hath thought it expediente and profitable, that such as excelled the rest in wit, industry, and experience should be called from the carte, to the Courte, from their priuate places, to gouern the weale publique. Againe such as were honourablye borne, yf they did degenerate, should be disgraced vtterly, and reputed as part of the people. And hee thought this ordinaunce to be of suche force, for the maintenance of a commonwealth, that he woulde haue it kept with all re∣uerence of all men, but especially of Princes, as a lawe made and ordeined by God, for the establishment and pre∣seruation of common society. Which if it be true that the worthines and excellency of vertue is to bee magnified i as ample maner as any wit is able to deuise, that Princ that wil geue eare to Socrates, must decree that those me must be forced to husbandry and tillage, whiche repine a the promotion of those, in whome vertue abundantly ap¦peareth. For if the honour, safty, and security of any cō¦mon wealth is through vertue both preserued, and ampl¦fied, vndoubtedly he which is an enemy to vertue, both de¦cayeth the wealth of the countrey, and impaireth the ho¦nour belonginge to the citty, or place where he dwelleth▪
Therefore to returne to our former purpose, a Prince can not bringe to passe, that a base and abiect minde should as∣pire to glorye purchased by matters of greatest impor∣taunce. Notwithstandinge he maye to a noble and vali∣aunt courage yeelde honour, by him duely deserued. Therefore a Kinge doth not in any one poyncte so mutche make a gentleman, as cause a noble gentlemanlike na∣ture, and a passinge valiauntnes of minde, throughe his bountefulnes and curtesie to be famous and honourable. Therefore when any man hath by some great exployt she∣wen his couragious and valiaunt harte, and when deserts and merites goe before, then the Prince deapely poude∣ringe his approued prowes and manlynes, geueth to him some title of honour and dignity. Otherwise that shall in no wise be demed true and perfect nobility, but a coun∣terfayt shewe of nobility finely coloured, oney confirmed by opinion, and inconstancy of peoples phantasie. THerefore whereas it is cleare and euident, that anye stocke and familye is ennobled and made honourable by commendation of curtesie, and liberalitye, and also by the knowleadge of sutch sciences, as hath bene in all flori∣shinge commonwealthes had in great honour and estima∣tion: It will easely appeare by what kinde of vice the worthynes of bloude and parentage, is vtterly extinct and disparaged. Truely by these which are opposite and con∣trary to the vertues a fore recited. For althoughe (as it was before declared) it happeeneth often tymes that they that come of an honest stocke haue no small aptnes, and disposition to vertue, yet sometime it salleth out, and more oten truely then it is behouefull for the good estate and condition of men, that eyther the most vertuous and no∣blest mens sonnes degenerate: Or to speake the leaste, that good inclination that is ingraffed in their Noble
mindes, by the hurte, and infection they take in lewde and euel companye doth perishe, and is steined with all kinde of dissolute behauiour. Therefore when any one is of vile condition, and invreth him selfe to so loose a life that hee maketh no accompt of vertue and honesty: hee doth as it it were cast him selfe into a dongeon of darkenes, and as mutch as in him lieth, steineth his bloude, and vtterly dis∣graceth the nobility of his auncestry. For like as manye hath bene through equity and Iustice aduaunced to great honour, euen so iniurious inuasions, oppressions, cursed speakinges, and cruelty hath bene the ouerthrow of many great gentlemen, and honourable Peeres, whereof the wretched endes almost of all cruell tyrantes, maye geue sufficient testimony. For not onely they were bereued of their liues and dignities, but they al that were ioyned vn∣to them by bloude and consanguinity: In so mutch that the greater part of them died the like death, and the reste beeinge spoyled of their goods and possessions, escaped death by banishment, yet sclaunder and shameful obliquie they could not auoide. And that I maye in this place lett to speake of Phalaris the most boucherliest bloudsucker, and cruellest tyrante that euer was, against whom rebel∣led the whole multitude of the Citty Agrigentum, that I also passe ouer all other with silence whose manners were infected with the like barbarous cruelty: Truely all the bloude and race of Pisistratus lost by this only way their gouernment and principality. For Armodius and Aris∣togiton attēpted that so great and notable an enterprice, not so mutch to redeeme their coūtrey from tiranny as to be reuenged of a notorious iniury. For when the sonne of Pisistratus, could neither by his sweet, and sugred entise∣mentes, nor by his large, and fayre promises, allure Ar∣modius, beinge a passinge fiue, and proper yonge gentle∣man, on whom he extremely doted in loue, to sarisefye his more then beastly appetite: he deuised with him selfe how he might be reuenged of so proude, and scornefull refusal.
In meane season, ye day came when at Athens ther should be solemnised a greate festiuall day, wherein certaine vir∣gines piked out for the purpose, shoulde carrye vppon their heades after the manner and facion of the coun∣trye certayne thinges of greate holines, conteined in fyne Wicker baskettes. Hipparchus thinkinge that nowe he might haue fit occasion to wreak his mallice on Armodius, procured his sister to be one of that company. Afterwardes when this solempne shew was setting forth Hipparchus remoued ye sister of Armodius, as if she were vnworthy of ye place, that it myght be knowen to al men, that she was not for any other purpose appoynted in that roome, but onelye that shee by her displacinge mighte re∣ceaue an open rebuke, and greeuous contumelie, whiche boyled in his breast againste her brother Armodius. But this was no smal dishoner amōg ye Athenians which thīg beyng taken verye displeasauntly by Armodius he brake his mynde to Aristogiton his louinge and trustye frynde, and to other also, and conspired against Hippias Hippar∣chus his elder brother, whithe was then their kinge & go∣uernour, and flewe Hipparchus him selfe. Althoughe this conspyracie took not effect then presently, yet it any∣mated and stirred vp the Athenians, in so muche not long after Hippias loste the kingdome, and they were restored to their former lybertye. What should I speake of the Tarquines? were not they for ye selfe same cause banished Rome, because they dealte nothing by right but wrought all by vyolence, extremity, and crueltye. And therfore wheras Sextus Tarquinius following the soule and abo∣minable steppes and wickednes of his father, had after many iniuryes wherewith he had wronged the Romaines, by force committed with chaste Lucrece a ruthful rape, he liued with his father, and brethrē, as an outcast in a strāge countrye. After the same maner Dionisius the later, when hee was for his abominable lyfe banished Siracusa, through the vertu and iustice firste of Dion then of Timo∣leon
liued at Corinth with great shame, and no lee mise∣ry. So ther are a number besydes that haue throughe their leude lyfe and dishonest demeanoure, loste their ho∣nour and their Empire withal, gotten of their auncestors through greate vertue and thereby haue caste a cloude of Darkenes ouer al their posteritye. I will not any longer staie in this matter, whereas nothing is so playne and e∣uidente as that the heinous blott, and cryme of Iniustice maketh the whole kinred obscure, ville, and of no reputa∣iō. Furthermore, what thing is more detestable and disho¦tnourable then dastardlie feare? what thing more absurd, and vnsitting with the nature of a gentlemā? what thing I pray you proueth so muche a wretche and a dastarde, as that any man should so feare that he shoulde steppe asyde from constancie, or forget his estate and dignity, nor haue his mynde so well setled, that he shal seeme to haue a stay∣ed aduise and iudgement? I shal not neede to proue this by many examples, whereas it doth appeare sufficientlye that the honoure of many nations throughe feare and in∣constancie, hath beene wrested out of their handes. And to what purpose shoulde I declare the foule and vnseemly vice of avarice, and other greate blottes and inormityes of the minde? through the which many right honourable and of high degre procure to themselues perpetual shame and infamye: and so shake and ouerthrowe the worthines of their stock and kinred that they seeme to be desyrous of nothinge so muche as to be made mates and companions of the vilest raskalles that may be. Whereas it is ther∣fore manifest that nobilitye doth both ryse and fall, and is much subiecte to mutabilitie, truely as they deserue with prayse to be lifted vp euen to the skies, through whose ver∣tue, glory and renomne to the whole racei purchased, euē so are they ryght worthy of the hatred and indignation of all menne, by whose blotte and shame so greate honoure and worthines is extinguished: for as much as they could
neyther throughe their goode inclinations, neyther by the laudable example of their auncestors, be stirred vppe to the loue of vertue, beynge as it were wrapped within ye bandes of shame and volupte. Wherefore the folye of certayne is to be pityed (yf compassion maye bee hadd on pryde and folye) who whereas they are not famous for commendatiō of witte, and haue neuer in their lyfe de∣serued any thinge, and haue neuer to any fruite or commo∣dity born the estates of noble personages: yet they so flat∣ter themsēlues with the bare name of nobility, as though they discended from Heauen aboue. I say they are gre∣ately to be lamented, and their case is pitifull, who think theym selues so happye and fortunate, when they are vexed wythe soe manye miseryes of the mynde, and some tymes of the bodye also. But it is a worlde to see their intollerable insolencie, and then espe∣cially when they are in the Pallaces of Princes. There seruauntes, some goe before, some in a greate traine fol∣low, they themselues in their gate vse a certayne number muche lyke as if they did moue by meausre. But when they are lette in of the porters, and that they crye rounde about, roome for the noble men, then thinke they themsel∣ues more happy, then cāne by wordes bee vttered. No man is ignorante, what a solempne matter it is made if a∣ny one of them, that take themselues great worthies, and not so borne, but I weene made of some of ye Gods, happen familiarly to goe in company with some one no gentlemā borne, they crye oute, all the solempnitye is defaced, and the sacred order of nobilitye is violated & vtterlye decaid. Why shoulde not I (sayth he) stande on my pantable and delight in my selfe beyng borne as I am of a noble house? why haue you not then a mynde worthye that noble race from whence you come? thou hast throughe thy beastly ly∣fe, and ouermuch licentiousnes steined the honoure of they auncestors, which they through vertu wōne. They were
aduaunced to an high and crtable place in the cōmon wealthe, for that they excelled in valiantes of the minde, integritie of lyfe, liberalitye and bountifulnes: i o n ye other syde, throughe thy cowardlins, thy vitious and fil∣thy lyfe, throughe thy slendernes of skill and knowledge in euery matter hast made thy self equal with ye people. To conclude therfore what is in thee, wherein wee maye per∣ceyue any shewe and resemblance of aunciente nobilitye: Sir (saith hee) whatsoeuer your make of me, I am a gētle∣mā borne. Diddest thou neuer vnderstande, thou ignorant and peuishe person, that anye stocke or linage is set foorth & beutified by vertue, & vertue not beutified and set forth by linage, and that all nobilitye proceedeth from the ex∣cellencie of vertue and honestye? but what thinge is more vayne, then the bare and naked name of nobilitye, yf you take away the ornamente of vertue, and the fruite that is reaped of true glorie? but though vertue be seperated frō worthines of birth, notwithstandinge there is nothing in the whole life of mā mor excellēt, nothing better to mayn∣teyne common societye, nothing more cōsonāt and agree∣able to nature whiche is alwayes of it selfe moste amia∣ble & beutiful, and wheresoeuer it is placed remayneth cō∣stante, nor at any tyme can lose his worthines and digni∣ty. But I pray you let vs vnderstande how this gentle∣man by name onely would bestirre himself yf his country were in great daunger of the enemye, or afflicted cruelly with ciuill dissention. In this cause valiantnes and pol∣lecie preuaylethe, & not ye vayne ostentation of cognisance and armes. I am sure, you must of force yeelde and ge∣ue place to gentlemanshippe latelye made, whiche you so muche disdayn, if wyth long experience in common affai∣res and singuler vertues, you se it defēded and vnderprop∣ped. Nay sayth he I wil maintaine the same countenaūce honoure, and estimation, wherein my auncestors liued wt great fame & commendation, and let these vpstartes kepe their owne houses and aplye themselues to those occupti∣ons
which their parentes professed, & theyr fathers before them folowed. Assuredly you haue spoken full wyselye & pleasaūtly. Your meanīg is yt we should in a tēpestuous & perillous time, & when ye estate of the cōmon wealth is daūgerously assaulted, follow the follie of certayne gētle∣mē delighting alwayes in Fethers & feastīgs, & neglect ye aduise and counsell of righte worthy and valiaunte men. But I coulde wishe you were perswaded of this opinion, that you do a greate and wonderfull reproch to your aun∣cestours, from whom hath descended to you, this so great a shew of honour and Nobilitie. For truly he that was first rayser of your royaltie, and the chiefest cause that you are in this estate and countenaunce, was an vpstarte and newe made gentleman. Therefore whereas you in this maner taunt and reuile them which are most like to your predecessours, and do disdainfully rippe vppe those repro∣ches agaynste them, which maye bee turned backe vppon your owne frendes, you do not onely bring that to passe ye throughe your shamefull behauiour you staine and demi∣nishe the prayse of your auncestours, but also vngrateful∣ly and most vnkindly you demeane your selfe, whilste that with scorneful speaches you debase and extenuate the wor∣thy renowne of them, of whom you first receyued this out∣ward shew of honour and dignitie. But I will omitte to speake any more of those lustie and loftie gentlemen, who hauing nothing in them worthy of prayse and honour, stā∣deth so much vppon their worship and gentilitie: to whom fitly maye bee applyed that sayinge of Dionisiodorus of Trezene in Greece, who oftentimes was wonte to vtter this sentence of great efficacie. Who braggeth so much of theyr line and petegree, as a foolishe and vntowarde progenie. Notwithstāding I would haue the greatest re∣uerēce & dutie that may be, giuen to true Nobilitie, which is throughe the excellencie of vertue aduaunced to highe degree, which also in vertue reposeth the chiefest staye &
onely felicitie. Againe I could wish that those who so cold∣ly followe the steppes of their auncestours, and playe the partes of gentlemen foolishly, should be plucte downe the stage, & as they are most worthy, to be hissed, and skoffed at of all the company. AFter that I haue reproued their brainsicke dealinge, who vtter bitter & contumelious taunts against such, as are of late through their wysedome & vertue preferred to the estate of gentlemen, they themselues notwtstanding being defiled wyth all kinde of wickednes, now it remay∣neth to be cald in question, whether of them are to be pre∣ferred, or more commended of all men. They, who haue through their vertue & honestie purchased to themselues greate renowne, prayse, and commendation, being stirred therunto by no example of their auncestours: or they, who do earnestly folow & embrace those vertues, which chiefly shined, & were highly cōmended in their forefathers. For it is a doubtful and perplexed question, and probable truly on either side, in so much that either of them maye be de∣fended by argument. For the new made gentleman may defend his cause arguing in this maner. I haue applyed my minde to the loue of vertue, I haue bin inflamed wyth the desire of renowne, not stirred therunto through the ex∣ample of my forefathers, or prouoked by the fame & glory of any auncestour. Againe, I haue atchiued to the place of dignitie, not by the helpe and furtherance of any other, but by mine owne industry. I haue aduaunced to honour my name & bloud, which was before obscure and litle rec∣koned of, and I haue giuen an example and lighte to my posteritie. But you sir, who are descended of an honou∣rable line, and came of a righte gentlemans house, haue had great furtheraūce to ye attaynīg of renowne & glory. First examples at home pricked the forwarde, so did that countenaunce and estate that thy auncestours had: then
thy education and trayninge vp gentlemanlike, last of all the expectation of men, which ioyned together forced the as it were by necessity to embrace vertue. Neither is the commēdation so great which you haue gotten through the imitation and folowing the actes of your auncestours, as the reproch and rebuke woulde haue bin, if you had not manfully endeuoured to be like vnto them in glorye & re∣nowne, which were of your owne house and kinred. Therefore you haue done nothinge with praise and com∣mendation, whereas you were therunto brought and for∣ced by necessity. On the other side, I had by no meanes stayned my bloud, if I had remayned base and obscure, e∣specially whereas I wanted all those helpes and ordinary meanes, wherewith you were greatly furthered to the at∣tayning whatsoeuer you toke in hande. Whereas there∣fore I beinge vrged with no necessitie, but allured wyth sincere loue of vertue, disposed my minde to do thinges of great importance, soundinge to my greate credite and ho∣nour, and that I perfourmed with no small praise and cō∣mendation, beinge hindered, and as it were intrapped wt many lettes and impediments: and I passed through the pikes of enuie, which is a common ennemye to them that raise themselues to honour, throughe my honest and ver∣tuous vsage: I see no cause at all why I should giue place to aunciente Nobility. And this is the language of a lately spronge gentleman. But what on the other side sayth the gentleman borne? Wilt thou then contrary to all lawe and equitie dispossesse mee, of praise and commen∣dation, which in so many ages of men hath bin cōfirmed? Doest thou well perceiue and consider that the inheri∣taunce of yt worthy renowme, which my auncestours ob∣teined doth no lesse belong & apperteine to me, then ye mā∣ners, ye lordships, the farmes▪ & the residue of their tēporall goods, which to mee as the true heire, hath fallē by lawe? what should thē hīder me, why I should not accōpt ye fruit
and benefite of this dignitie and worthines amonge mine owne proper goods? & that I should with all earnest en∣euour keepe possession therof? That if the case so stande, now thou seest, how many & sondry times this inheritance of prayse hath bin increased afore it came to mee. For as often as it hath happened that any one of my stocke and progenie broughte to happie ende any worthye exploite, so often know thou well that this porcion of prayse and inhe∣ritaunce of honour, was increased and amplifyed. There∣fore I may challenge vnto my self as mine owne right all the valiaūt actes of my predecessours, for as much as tra∣cing their footesteppes I earnestly bent by selfe to be like vnto any of my auncestours in those thinges which tended to fame & glorie. Thou art therefore to be commended onely for thine owne vertue, I am not onely through mine owne industry to be honoured, but also to be preferred for the puissaunce and magnanimitie wherein my forefathers excelled. But concerninge domesticall glorie, in that you say gentlemen are necessarilye stirred & forced to the attayning of vertue, nay truly wee see very many conten∣ted with the honour attayned by their parents, and there to rest seeking no further, because they accompt it suffici∣ente to enioye prayse and commendation gotten by other mens trauaile. Whose purpose and intent althoughe I mislike, yet this I set downe as a cleare grounde, that no∣ble men are stirred vp by no meanes so much to worthye attemptes, as by hautines of minde, and loftines of cou∣rage. These arguments, & many more may be brought to confirme either opinion: so that it is a matter very dif∣ficulte to iudge, whether should be preferred before other, if their vertues in equality match ech other. For if we cō∣pare honesties, & examine & wayghe their vertues in fitte and equal balances, his vertue seemeth to deserue greater admiracion, which first by his owne meanes grew to some estate and countenaunce, creepinge out of a bie corner and
obscure familie. But if there bee somewhat to be geuen & attributed to men departed, and their memorie, who haue well deserued of the common wealth, as reason requireth and lawes commaunde, bee after their death to be kepte with all heedeful care and diligence: they who folowing the examples of their auncestours, & are wōderfully bent to excell other in prowes and manlines, are before the o∣ther and not without good cause preferred. For not one∣ly their owne industrious trauaile, but their predecessors good demerits are to bee pondered. This is therefore a doubtfull controuersie, which I leaue to bee decided of o∣ther. To mee it is sufficient, to haue declared, which may perhappes seeme wythout my discourse most manifest and euidente, that the noblenes of birthe, and the worthy estimation of any stooke and familye, issueth from the cleare fountayne and welspringe of Vertue.
THE FIRST BOOKE of Hieronimus Osorius intreating of true Nobilitie, to them onely incidente, that professe the fayth, and true Religion of Christe. I VVas righte sure (Lewis most migh∣ty & victorious Prince) whē I had ful∣ly appointed to publishe and put in wry∣ting these my inuentions, that it mighte be, that this my trauaile woulde highly offende the learned. For some men wil iudge mee ouer bold and presumptuous, that I do de∣scriue or handle a matter of so greate valewe and impor∣taunce, as the like men of excellent learning & iudgemēte hath hitherunto scarcely taken in hand or enterprised: and it wilbe no lesse offence and griefe vnto other, that I shall not in any pointe, neither for the maiestie of matter, nei∣ther for the excellencie of philed phrase, and gorgeousnes of stile, be able to decke and beautifye an argument in his Nature both highe and stately. To conclude, some finde in me the lacke of experience, other require a finer head, o∣ther coulde wishe more ripenes of vnderstanding. Whom I will briefly shape an aunswere, before I enter into the discussing of any question. Truly for my owne parte, al∣thoughe I was neuer so farre in loue with my selfe, or so pricked with the desire of prayse, that I haue challenged anye cōmendation, for that I haue by witte compassed, or throughe the excellency of any learninge atchieued: yet I thought it the part and propertie of a noble natured yong mā, earnestly bent to the study of moste worthy knowled∣ges, not to rest contented with thinges of meane accompt, but desirously to pursue & hunt after the highest matters, and those which are entangled with greateste difficultie.
For no man oughte to thinke it impossible to be the beste learned, and to attaine the second place, to them onely it is graunted, which with a iolly stomacke, and loftie mind, purpose to be peerelesse. For this lessō we learne by an old Prouerbe. The shorte shooter neuer hitteth the marcke. For if men mighte enterprice no kinde of studye, but that which they deemed might with smal labour be obteyned, I thincke no man at any time should haue bin but meane∣ly learned, much lesse endued with the perfectiō of know∣ledge. For, neither do I thinck Plato himself, when first he set his hād to paper, to haue thought his labour should haue had such happie successe, as afterwarde hee gotte through great practise, & daily exercise. Neither Demo∣sthenes in his firste entrie, had anye such confidence in his wit and learning, that he thought, hee should afterwards excell Pericles. Neither Cicero, when he first applied his minde to the studie of Rhetoricke was of this opinion, yt he thoughte he should be a father of eloquence, a lighte of learning, and such a one which for the grace and wonder∣full gift of Oratorie, might triumph as one that had won the victorie. But when they were stirred vp by the in∣stincte of an excellente nature and noble minde, that they should attempt studies more great, then were at that time agreeable to their reach and capacitie, they gotte by this meane to be exquisitely learned, and attayned thereby the highest and principall pointe of knowledge. And what may bee sayde of those to whom is graunted but a meane measure of learning? Could they (I pray you) haue retei∣ned that place, except they had hardily presumed to folow and trace the steps of them, which in learning were of dee∣pest iudgement? Otherwyse truly it would not haue bin so wel with vs, that we could attaine so easely knowledge of vs desiered, or so happely discharge things of vs attēp∣ted. Wherfore it standeth greatly vpon all such which are as it were through loue, enamoured with the excellēcy of
any one science, not onelye to endeuour earnestlye for that which is chiefely desired, but also to centinue their studie further, yt they may with lesse paine, & labour be broughte to the attayning their intended purpose. Now therfore whereas it is diligently discussed and tryed out, that there is no mā esteemed or reckoned of, except he doth endeuour with all studie to attaine thinges in their nature most ex∣cellente and commendable, they are not to be aroused of boldnes, which bestow their labour in the search of highe causes, naye rather their lithernes, and vnmanlye cou∣rage is greatly to bee reproued, who dare not venture to do the like. Neither their talke withdraweth me from wryting, who peraduēture do looke for any other kinde of eloquence, then that, which the nature of the argumente wil require, and the slendernes of my knowledge wil per∣mit me in this dispute to follow. For if no matter should be discussed & entreated of, but that which mighte be lear∣nedly amplifyed, plentifully enlarged, and eloquently de∣clared, there should haue bin no monument extāt at all, of any such thinges (which I say not) could be by any tongue vttered, no not by reason comprysed, or by the imaginati∣on of man, but in part conceiued. For there is no man en∣dued wyth that excellencie of witte, and iudgement, wyth that wonderfull gifte of eloquence, that can dispute wor∣thely or exactly speake of pietie, true religion, of the holy, hidden, and secrete misteries of Christianity, lastlye of the vnspeakeable Maiestie, and omnipotencie of God almigh∣tie, of which wee shall for the most parte entreate. And truly there is no cause or reason, that those should deserue the name of modest and discreete men, which are through the greatnes of any argumente at the first discouraged, & therefore throughe such conceite fayntinge, take rather in hand other matters, then such, which should concerne the worthines and honour of Christiā relligion: there is not onely reason why they shoulde not purchase prayse of mo∣desty,
but also whye they shoulde iustly incurre the blame of impiety. And therfore al learned men who haue earnest¦ly embraced true godlines and integrity of life, hath fully accorded in this opinion, that they haue thoughte it an in∣tollerable offence, to bestowe their study vppon any other thinge then that, which should set forth the glory and dig∣nity of true religyon, when notwithstandinge they knewe for a certenty, that no mans eloquence, were it neuer so ex¦cedinge wonderfull, coulde effectuously declare so highe knowledge, most ample matter importinge. They haue therfore wrot many bookes, wherof some are finely & curi∣ouslye penned, other in rude and barbarous Phrase, yet greately to be had in estimation, for the substance of pro∣founde matter, and most feruent zeale of piety and godly∣nes. Furthermore many of those writers haue vtterly des∣pised all manner of picked eloquence, and figures of Rhe∣torique, as triflinge and childishe toies, and nothinge con∣fine or agreable with the worthines and dignity of Chris∣tian religion. Wherefore we must the rather be contēted if we do not perfit any thing as we would, either may not attaine that wt we haue longe desired: Whereas the ex∣amples of other excellētly wel learned, may in this case satisfy vs, & also ye excéeding deapnes of knowledge may be vnto vs no smal occasiō of let & impedimēt. Neither is it a¦ny whit impertinēt to forewarn you, that such matter hap¦peneth in handlinge holy write, in dyscussing whereof the purenes of the latine speach is not obserued: especially a∣monge such, which binde them selues to no streight lawe, and had rather open the meaninge of any harde & obscure matter playnly although not so smoothly, as darckely & elegantly. Neyther doubte I at all, if any thinge be set downe of vs in these bookes vnproperly or grosely, which notwithstandinge shall be avouched out of holy scripture, that I shall thereby deserue reprehension, if men not af∣fectionate may iudge therein. But I shewe herein my
imperfection (Lewis most renoumed Prince) in that I dooe at all feare the censure of other, in these thinges which on your maiesty I bestowe alone. For I do assure my selfe, that your highnes will take in good parte these my doinges (such as they are) more for the greate good will, which especially moued me to write, then for any skil therein conteined. And that I do so mutch presume, the excellency of your good nature, the noblenes of your boū∣tefull hart always to be remēbred, doth geue me no small occasion. For when I wrote vnto you my booke entitu∣led of Nobility established by ciuill pollicie, which was of me compiled nothinge learnedly, wherein no elegancy, or fine poinct of skill was shewed, I founde that my good∣will and earnest desier was vnto your grace acceptable, not onely by the plentifull rewardes and great giftes a∣boūdantly on me bestowed, but also by that whiche you spake very honourably soundinge to my great prayse & commendation, which I in deede haue more, then of any other, by a great deale accompted of. For I assure you, thoughe least of any thinge I desire praise, yet I was therewith moued with exceedinge ioye, wheras I holde this as an infallible truth, that the good opinion of a prince so great and vertuous, doth surmounte al titles of digni∣ty which might redounde to mans glory. I haue nowe therefore compiled a newe worke, more ample, & of grea∣ter force, then that which was in ye other two bookes dispu¦ted: principally moued thereunto through an ardente and earnest zeale, which I beare vnto godlines, then espe∣ciall to declare my diligence, and dutifull harte to youre royall maiesty. And albeit they haue one name, and beare the like inscription, yet the argument which we at this present do handle, is farre differinge from that, whiche was vttered, in that our breife instruction. For we disputed there, howe some linages through a good disposition of nature, embraceth vertue, which if it happely grewe, and
by continuall and daily practise come to perfection, it brin∣geth forth that excellencie of nature, which we call noble∣nes of birth. In which discourse truely, when first after the manner and order of Logicians, we defininge nobility, and deuidinge the same into certaine partes, endeuoured to expresse and declare the force and nature thereof, then we spake of the firste beginninge and antiquitye thereof, not omittinge whatsoeuer is in any olde monument repor∣ted of such, who hath susteined any laboure or perill, for the loue and true honour of vertue. Lastly whereas the estate of Nobility, (as of all other thinges incidente and apperteyninge to the estate of man, is variable and much subiect to alteration, we haue there taught, by what mea∣nes honour is obteined, and contrarywise, by what vices it is blemished and bereued of his accustomed lighte and beautye. And the dryfte of all our disputation and reaso∣ninge was this, to make it knowen vnto all men that no∣bility as vpon a chiefe Pyllour resteth on vertue, and that the Pillour of vertue beinge shaken and ouerthrowen, no∣bilitye it selfe falleth to the grounde. But beecause all that vertue whereof then especiallye we did intreate, al∣though it haue at the first a great and glorious shewe, yet doth it not reach vnto that absolute perfection of vertue that wee woulde gladlye attaine, but wholye consisteth in the practise of Policie, rather by the opinion of men vp∣holdē & aduaūced, then set forth through the true, cleare, and diuine light of perfect holines, I haue thought good, the grounde and beginninge thereof more deepely consi∣dered, by diligent studye to search and trace out, what is the full force, and nature of true and perfect vertue: that, that beinge considered, and manifestly knowen, we might euidently beholde the figure and image of that noblenes, whose substaunce is pure, whose qualities perfite, whose figure most delicate and excéedinge beautifull. For sée∣inge that noblenes of birth procéedeth from vertue, it stan¦deth
with good reason, that we should take those to be the worthiest and noblest houses, which hath spronge of that cōstācie, & inuiolate godlines, which is not through vaine pompe, and glorious ostentation ratified, but through sin∣ceritye of good life, and vpholdinge iustice, generally al∣lowed and confirmed. In this worke therefore distingui∣shinge that vertue which consisteth in opinion, from that which is true and perfect, wee purpose verily to describe the excellent qualities of that nobility, which by the bene∣fit and ordinaunce of Almighty God is geuen to them, that professe Christianity. But forasmuch as vertue in his right nature may not be knowen, except it be fully a∣gréed vppon, what is that soueraigne good and chiefe feli∣city, whereunto duringe our liues we direct all our deui∣ses and dooinges (forasmutch as vertue is nothinge els but a redie way guidinge vs to the chiefest and perfectest ende of all those thinges, which possibly we can in mans life desire:) therefore whereas the last ende must bée knowen, before we may vnderstande what vertue is: first of all we wll endeuour to declare, what is that last ende purposed to man, vnto the which we are by nature ordei∣ned, and from whence all honour and dignity hath flow∣en, and wherein chiefly is put the state of mans felicity. For we cannot so mutch as by imagination seclude nobi∣lity from vertue, and excepte vertue worcke to some good end and purpose it ought not to be called properly by that name: It remaineth therefore that without the know∣ledge of mans felicity no kinde of nobility can in any wise be founde or perceiued. Furthermore whereas it is the property of a Noble minde and excellent nature to clime higher, and to aduaunce his minde to the beholdinge of thinges in Heauen, and not regarde the vayne shéewe, of transitory pleasures: it is apparant that he is most no∣ble & worthiest of honour, which desireth some one thing most principall and excellent. Therefore I am determi∣ned
in this first booke to declare what felicity, is also to tret of ye estate & dignity of mā, lastly of his decay, fall & great misery: yt by this meās I may haue occasiō to declare vnto what dignity & worthines hee is restored, & what honour through Christianitie he hath attained. But now I am in∣stātly to besech you (most renoumed Prince) that you wil tēder these my doings with like gentlenes and clemencie as you haue alwaye most gratiously fauoured such which haue born towards you a faithful & loial hart. For I shall think my labour wel & sufficiently rewarded, if I may vn¦derstand that this my good will was vnto you acceptable offered in dilatyng this kynde of argument. VVHerfore that wee maye repete this matter from the beginninge, it is manifest that all menne hathe fyxed before their eies some certayne marke or end, vnto which they direct their doinges, & whatsoeuer is intēded in this lyfe. And al men with one voyce call this laste end a life blessed, florishinge and happye, deuoyde of all kynde of mi∣serie, and abounding with all kynde of felicity. But wher in this felicitye consisteth, there hath bene alwaies among mortall men a verye greate and a continuall dissention, in so muche the most part of mē hath not accorded in one o∣pynion. For suche as euery mans Phantasie is, suche an o¦pynyon touchinge the chiefest and soueraigne good dothe he embrace. For at the beginninge they that gaue them∣selues ouer wholy to carnall and sensuall delightes, ne∣ther coulde withe their eyes beholde the moste excellente parte of theymselues: they eyther in riches, or luste∣full pleasures▪ supposed that last desired ende of man to be reposed. For some of them did verely think that in a∣boundance of all external commodities felicitye was con∣teined, and those commodityes which (onelye their vnder¦stāding was able to reach vnto) by store of welth they saw procured. Some other when they were not able to con∣ceyue
any greater delight, then that which with a sweete pleasure moueth the sences, supposed felicitie to be replete with all kynde of ioye and pleasure, and therfore did with all earnest endeuoure seke to embrace the pleasure of the body. But they which were afflicted with any greuous calamity, eyther tormented and shaken with an incurable maladie of the body or weer vehementlye oppressed wyth aduerse fortune, suche placed the whole perfection of bles∣ed lyfe and chiefe happines in the sound and perfect health of the bodye, and in suche meanes as coulde ridde and dis∣pache them from all such distresse and misery. But the intollerable errour, and exceedinge folly of suche semeth rather with banninges and curses, then with woordes and argumentes to be refelled, as a thing more woorthy of cō∣demnation then confutation. For who seeth not their fu∣rious madnes, who, sith we consist of body and soule one∣ly make accoūpt of one part of themselus, and that truely which is in nature farre inferior to the other, & that which is common to vs with brute and sauage beastes: But the other parte they do neglecte which is euerlastinge, and hath in it imprinted the figure and true Charecter of ye di∣uine nature. Agayne other there are (that wee leaue this abiecte and vile kynde of people) who beeyng endued wyth more vnderstandinge, and conceiuinge muche more of the woorkes of nature dooe couet wyth all care and industry to atchiue to the titles of honour and dygnyty, for there is by nature ingendred in vs a certayne sparcle of excellencie and noble courage kindling in vs a desire of honoure and principality, whiche in those men that are of a princely mynde doth most euidently appeare and shew it selfe. And yet these in this one poynt are muche deceiued and greatly misse the mark, for they frame theyr life accor∣dinge to the opinion of the vnlearned people, and repose ye chiefe poynt of true praise and commendation on the vain brute and estimation, of the foolish and rascall multitude.
Lastly they are greatly to be reproued for that they desire preheminence and auctority, as the last reward of al their lyfe. For that laste and soueraigne good wherunto wee should directe all our actes, ought to be constante, certain, & permanēt, not variable britle & of smal continuance, nei∣ther suche as the common people, shall determine, or cō∣firme by their sottish reason, and brutishe testimonye. A∣gayne by what reason may we deeme that the marcke, and ende of al oure doynges, whiche for it selfe sake is neuer desired, but is euer referred to some other more absolute and perfecte ende. And truely it is daylye experienced, that al they that desire excedingly to be in aucthority, and to be placed in an honorable seate in the common wealthe, doe ambitiously seeke suche office and promotion especial∣lye for three causes. For some desire highe estate for that when they are of a great power, they may haue a free re∣course to al kinde of pleasures, and want no other cōmo∣dityes necessary, and incident to the life of man. Seconde∣ly other couet ye place of a magistrate that they may there∣by be thought good and indued with some notable vertu. For commonlye good opinion is conceiued of his prudēte pollicy, and excellēt vertue, which sitteth in place of great auctority. For the vulgare people suppose that honou∣rable offices are not bestowed on anye man, but for some especial vertue and singular honestie. Lastly, they which are of more wysedome desire to haue the rule and gouern∣ment of other for this onely consideratiō that they might in their office and gouermēt shew forth magnificente boū∣tefulnes, & in part such vertues vnto other as with which their mindes are frayght, and singularly furnished. For he that desyreth to reape that fruite that he ought to do of Iustice, integritye, and constancie can by no meanes pur∣chase the same in more ample wyse, then by that highe degre of honoure and dignity, in whiche he may not onely much benefyte and profite himselfe, but in greatest affai∣res
may be a great ayde and assistance to all those citizens and neighbours wyth whom he is conuersante. There∣fore whereas some wayte for a place of honour to the ende they may liue licenciously, ether that they might in deede through preheminence shew the true paterne of perfectiō, they of al other are most ignorante whiche suppose in ey∣ther of their desires accōplished that to bee conteined, yt of vs onely is, and ought to be desired. For as much the last desired ende hath no further relation, but eache thinge for that endes sake is desired and laboured for. Wherefore all kynde of pleasure, perfett health, and such lyke are to be numbred amonge the lowest and baseste sorte of goode thinges, yf they deserue suche name or tytle at all. For we may moderately sometymes desire auctority, more mo¦ued therevnto through reason then prouoked by ambitiō: that we may further the weale and profite of other, not that we shoulde thinke them the rewarde of all oure well liuinge. But I leaue to speake any more of the Phantas∣ticall opynions of the people, that I may march on apace towardes theym whiche haue professed theymselues guydes and instructoures of other in matters tou∣chinge honestye, and the good conuersation of lyfe. Yet I promise not to cite all, for it weere an endles labour to recoūte so many opinions as are in the mounments & wor∣kes of Philosophers deliuered vnto vs. But I wil passe ouer them with silence, whose iudgement hath nothinge differed from the opinion of the common people. For tru∣ly whereas they had defiled theymselues wyth all kynde of abomination they hauinge theyr sighte dusked with a dark cloud of filthines and shame were able to see nothing but that whiche apperteined to the lust and pleasure of the bodie, or to outwarde gaine & external commodity. Wher¦fore I wil lett to speak of Cyrenaickes, an obscure sect of philosophers Hierome of Rhodes, Aristippus, and the Epicure in whose bokes are cōteined both their opinions.
For it is vnmeete that they shoulde by any meanes be ac∣compted amonge them that are famous and renowmed for their witte and learning. THerefore that we may vnderstand what the opinion of the most renowmed Philosophers hath bin, it is ap∣parante that the Academickes and Peripatetickes haue sayde and affirmed that the nature of good thinges are de∣uided into three kinds. In the first parte they accompte those thinges which poolishe & adourne the minde: which againe is sorted into two partes. For one sort furnisheth the minde & prepareth it to the searche and knowledge of many thinges: the other instruct and enforme the will of man to all kinde of vertues, whereunto we are ledde and induced by wysedomes prescription and moderatiō. In the seconde place they accompte healthe and whatsoeuer maye keepe and preserue the bodye in his good estate and perfection. Lastly all those thinges that happen vnto vs by fortune and casual aduenture, they place in the last and lowest degree. But when all these good thinges are hap∣pened vppon some one man, they thinck then, that blessed life is complete and perfect. But so that vertue be embra∣ced, and the same continually exercised, and put in vre: but the good gifts either of the body or of fortune, they should to that ende retaine, to make them seruauntes and hand∣maids of vertue, which shoulde waite vppon her at euery becke, without the necessary helpes wherof vertue (for all that) could not commodiously, and well discharge her du∣tie. And Aristotle the beste learned, & Prince of Philo∣sophers doth after this maner declare by definition what felicitie is. It is (sayth he) an action of the minde, conso∣nant and agreeing to the prescript rule, of the most excel∣lent vertue, exercised all the whole terme and space of the life of man. And this opinion is likewise that, that great and excellente vertue can in no wyse shine and shew forth
his force, if the body be either afflicted wyth any greeuous calamitie, or the minde disquieted throughe the iniurie and malice of frowarde Fortune. Neither is he by any meanes so to bee perswaded, that hee maye suppose that life worthely termed a happie life, which in processe of time maye driue a man to wofull waylinge, and fall into miserable estate and extreme calamitie. He hath there∣fore determined that whatsoeuer wee shall do and take in hande in this life, shalbe to this purpose that first the moste excellente vertues of the minde shoulde be soughte for, and embraced, then hee that desireth to obtaine feli∣citie shoulde bee so well prouided of worldlye substaunce, that both hee maye in this life maintayne his counte∣naunce wyth credite, and that the continuall practise of vertue do not cease by the meanes of pouertie and mise∣rable penurie. And that the power and abilitie, which the qualities of the body and fortune do yelde, should to no other thinge haue more especiall relation, then to the maintenaunce of true worshippe and honestie. And ve∣rily these thinges, because they seeme to bee so sayd, that they may moste fitly bee applyed to the life of man: they are almoste so generally by euery mans opinion allowed, that no mans iudgemente at this day is more vniuersally receyued. For hee giueth to vertue the prorogatiue, by the shyninge and cleare brightnes whereof, all men well trayned and brought vppe, are chiefly guided. But when hee sayth that other good thinges both belonginge to the body, and depending on fortune are not to be despised, then hee seemeth to be one that fawneth on the people, and pleaseth their humour and fonde delighte. In which o∣pinion notwithstanding how many grosse errours be, hee may easely perceiue which wyth dilligent and deepe con∣sideration will ponder this matter. By the exercise (sayth hee) of the most excellente vertue, blessed life is per∣fectly
accomplished. If the case stande thus, then let vs vnderstande what maner a thing that vertue is, the cause efficient of so wonderfull and great blessedns, eyther by what meanes it is obtayned, or how wee maye distinguish honestie which is perfecte and absolute, from the false and pretended colour of honestie. For I coulde neuer yet gesse how vertue could be vnderstoode, excepte the nature of the last and soueraygne good be first plainly and mani∣festly knowen. For vertue is nothinge els but a perfecti∣on of reason, leadinge vs to the attayninge the last desired ende of blessednes and felicitie. And then reason (saye they) is most perfecte, when like as one that leueleth his shafte or darte at some marke: so reason beholdeth some purposed ende, as it were a marcke, whither it directeth e∣uery action. Therefore the excellencie of true vertue by no meanes can bee perceyued, excepte the ende vnto the which it shoulde readely bringe vs, bee perfectly kno∣wen. The which thing Aristotle himselfe hath taught: forasmuch as before he would any thinge at all entreate of vertue, hee tooke in hande to expresse and declare what felicitie was, that that being knowen, the nature power, and efficacie of true vertue mighte eftsones appeare, the which notwythstandinge he coulde in no wyse performe. For I woulde willingly learne of him, what manner a thing that felicity is, for the attayning wherof, I should refuse no laboure and trauayle. Here hee reckoneth the vertues of the minde, the qua∣lities of the bodye, the goods of Fortune, the which be∣inge obtayned, felicity is attayned. And in the firste place hee reposeth the duties that proceede from Ver∣tue. Nowe truly manifeste it is that this is a straunge and preposterous order that the laste desired ende should be knowen by Vertue, not Vertue by the laste desi∣red ende.
But let vs graunt him that, that at length wee moughte perfectly see into the nature of Vertue. Vertue (sayth A∣ristotle) is a constante affection of the minde, obtayned by free election, consistinge in a certaine mediocritie, and the same being directed by the righte rule of reason. But I pray you proceede a litle further in this matter, for as yet I perceiue not what vertue is. What meane you then by the righte rule of reason, which is to vs by you deliuered in the definition of vertue. That is it (sayth he) in another place, which beinge obscured by no kinde of darcknes wt∣out any difficultie seeth that laste ende vnto the which all the doinges and actions of our life ought to bee referred. Now thou doest turne mee ouer againe to the searchinge out of ye last desired end, which that I might plainly per∣ceiue frō the searching out of the same, thou didst put mee ouer to the consideration of vertue. I pray you what other thinge is it to tourne round in a circle, if this be not? First you say that vertue bringeth vs to felicitie. Then againe you so describe felicitie, that except first wee perfectly vn∣derstand the nature of vertue, what felicity is, we cannot so muche as by coniecture imagine. This therefore ma∣keth mee to stand in a muse: for neyther do I vnderstande what vertue is, neither whither it tendeth. But to leaue these crabbed and difficult matters, it shalbe very profita∣ble to know whether that felicitie which Aristotle would frame, be such a thing as we might happely at any time at∣taine. For if it bee of that nature that it cannot bee obtay∣ned, neither that any maye possibly cōpasse, because of the inconstancie and frailtie of mans estate and condition, what shall that description of happie life profite the com∣mon societie of man? Moreouer whereas all thinges in the whole vniuersall worlde do commonly at the length come to their ende and perfection, no doubte it were an errour intollerable to thincke, that onely man, for whose sake all thinges which wee see wyth oure eyes were or∣dayned,
should neuer come to his prefixed felicitie, which Aristotle must confesse, being thereunto dryuen by neces∣sitie. For whereas his opinion is that felicitie is to be obtayned in this life, and withall giueth such power and preheminence to Fortune, that with a boysterous blaste of her displeasure, our happie estate may be shaken in son∣der and vtterlye ouerwhelmed, hee seemeth thereby to make men euer in a wretched and miserable case. For who is hee to whom any priuiledge or immunitie is graū∣ted from those mischieues, wherewith wee see this life oppressed and continually afflicted? Is there (saye I) any man so free and exempted from miserie, but that sometimes, will hee, or nill hee, hee tasteth of the cuppe of calamitie, or at the least maye not dreade such discomfitu∣res wyth the which the happy life (if it may bee so called) maye bee both obscured and vtterly loste? For all men which liue on the face of the earth toke life chiefly to this ende and purpose, that they should consume theyr dayes in teares and mourninge, and spende the greateste part of their life lamentably, languishinge in greate woe and mi∣serye. Neyther in anye age or memorye of man coulde there euer so much as one man be founde, vnto whom by many degrees there did not more euill, then good betide. Solon for his wysedome the moste renowmed Grecian, beinge demaunded of Craesus Kinge of Lydia, whom hee iudged to bee of all other moste happie, aunsweared, one Tellus an Athenian which had begotten in a Countrye aboundinge wyth all commodities, children excelling in goodlines of personage, and strength of bodie: and after∣wards defendinge his Country manfullye, ended his life wyth greate glory. Also hee added to Tellus, Cleobis, and Biton, borne in the Cittie of Argos, who when they had marueylously shewed their good nature and dutifull obedience to their mother departed this life. For theyr
of theyr frendes wyth dauncing and singinge. For they thought it most conuenient to weepe and mourne at their natiuitie, being the beginninge of all misery: and contra∣riwyse to death as to the ende of all wretchednes, they thoughte reioysinge was moste agreeable. But what neede I to this effecte and purpose discourse any more ex∣amples? For not onely by the testimonies of aunciente wryters, but also by infinite examples wythin the time of our owne remembraunce it maye be clearely perceyued, that no man hath euer liued that hath not bin verye often times distressed wyth cares, vexations, daungers, and an infinite sorte of diseases and calamities. Yet there are some recorded by learned wryters, not many, which haue bin of the common people thoughte happie: Such as Metellus of Macedonia, Caesar Octauius, Lucius Silla were: and one or two more, which mighte bee reckoned wyth these. But they that write of the misfortunes which diuerslye happened vnto them, they that make reporte of their aduerse and crooked fortunes wherewythall they were oftentimes tossed from poste to piller, giue vs moste certayne and euidente notice of the intollerable burden of mannes miserye. For they that in their worldly af∣fayres had verye good and prosperous successe, coulde not escape those hard brunts and ineuitable calamities wher∣wyth mans life is compassed on euery syde, what maye wee thincke of all the residew, which by all mennes con∣fession were vnhappy and myserable. But admitte Fortune were vnto any man so fauourable, and bountiful, that shee woulde heape vppon him all commodities that possibly hee could in his life requyre: commonly we shall see him haue some Tragicall ende, beinge eyther for∣lorne as a Caytife, or trussed vppe like a Trayter. The which thinge happened to Polycrates of the Ile of Samos, who when hee had lyued in greate prosperi∣ty,
during the space and terme of all his life, was at len∣gth taken of his enemye, bereued of his life, and spoy∣led of all his goods. What shoulde I here speake of the death of Cyrus? What should I make mention of the ruthfull ende of Cambyses? What should I call to memory the heauy, lamentable, and dolefull death of Pō∣peie the great? To what ende should I recite a number of other, who haue yéelded sufficient matter of most pity∣full lamentations in tragedies and other solempne stage∣plaies? Whereas daily the course of common life geueth vs to vnderstande that there is in the whole earth no kind of liuinge creature more subiect to al kind of miseries, thē man. If therefore accordinge to Aristotles opinion these good thinges eyther of the body, or fortune, to the full furniture of a blessed life are required: And the euelles cōtrary to them, make our life wretched and miserable, no man (I assure you) can be accoumpted happy. For their is no man but is sometimes greatly disquieted wt horrible mischiues, or at least (which is to ye same effect) dreadeth not day & night al misaduētures that may happē to man, much like vnto those, which are sayd to bée in hellishe tor∣ment. Aboue whose heades great stones of flinte most ready still to fall do hange, and seemeth falling aie to crush their pates with all. Therefore that man of so great iudgement hath besto∣wed all his diligence in vaine, by settinge forth vnto vs such a felicity, which al men woulde wishe for willingely, but no man can attayne possibly. If so be that he, that excelled all other in wit, in industry, in iudgement coulde not redely see what was to be desired in this life: What may wee thincke of the rest, whose iudgement was farre vnlyke, whose conninge and knowledge in the searchinge
out of high and subtile qestions was farre differinge, such as the Stoikes were. ANd the chiefe of this Stoike secte was Zeno, a man bothe sage and continente, who thoughte him selfe through vertue sufficiently able both to withstand ye pric∣kinge griefes of sorowe, & to escape ye threatninge thūder∣boltes of frowarde fortune, because he was very well ar∣med with onely vertue, for the body he set at naught, and measured felicity onely by the qualities of the mind. Not∣withstandinge he taught such kinde of doctrine, which no wise man will beléeue, excepte he be wedded vnto his opi∣nion (for often times many doe stande in argument more that they mought seeme constante, then beinge thereunto induced by reason and vnderstandinge) I saye hee main∣teyneth such kinde of learninge, whiche may in no wise of the learned be defended, and is skofte at of the ignorant. For he would that the minde of man should be so firmely staied and grounded vppon constancy, that it shoulde at no time so mutch as one iotte be moued. For he thinketh it an hainous faulte to be tormented wyth griefe or care, to be inclined to gratious fauour and mercy, to be inflamed with any desire, to be prouoked with wrath, hatred or any perturbation of the minde. In this condicion of life, voide of all affection, which the Greekes call impassibilitye, hee thinketh the soueraigne good conteined: so that he which hath attained it, may be takē for a man absolutely wise, a Kinge, a blessed and happye man. Againe as touchinge the rest, theym as sottes, as seruile men steyned wyth all kinde of dishonestye hee contemneth and nothinge regar∣deth. First and principally therefore whereas hee placeth felicity in the dignitye & worthines of the soule of man, so that the vertue thereof can by no griefe of the body or pin∣chinge paine and calamity seuered from that blessed and
happy estate of life: Herein he hath disputed more stoutly and valiantly, then wisely and truly. For whereas the minde is through the coniunction of mutuall loue fast tied and vnited to the body, truely it can sincke into no wyse mans heade, as longe as they remaine one, if the bodye be through calamity afflicted, but that the minde eftsoones languisheth and is disquieted. If therefore the Stoikes o∣pinion is to bee folowed, teachinge vs that the heauines & dolour of the minde worketh mans miserye, then must it folow consequently, except they will wrest the truth from vs by violence, and tell vs that senses are deceiued in thin∣ges most cleare and euident, that no man were he neuer so wise can attaine felicity, in trouble and vexation of body. For if we wanted our senses, and that our bodye it selfe were not of our nature, then a man of meane perceyue∣raunce might be persuaded, that he whose bodye were tor∣mented with fire, were neuerthelesse happy. But where as we consist of body and soule, howe can we duringe this life suppose that to be felicity, which hath regarde only to one parte of vs, and in miserable distresses leaueth the o∣ther? Especially whereas by the necessarye operation of nature when the bodie feeleth paine, the minde suffereth the same. Therefore men of great wisedome and Iudge∣ment hath not affirmed without great consideration, that the appetite of anger and desire hath bene ingraffed in our mindes for two causes: that ye myndes themselues should haue good regarde to preserue those bodies whose guides and keepers they ought to be. That is to witt that they should by desire for bodily sustenaunce couet thinges méet and conuenient, and by anger should eschewe and auoyde thinges hurtefull and daungerous. Therefore whereas wrath and desire are in vs by nature, it cannot be againe∣saide, when there is a shew of any excéedinge good fortune, or great euell imminent or likely to follow, but that oure
myndes stirred vp with a kinde of more vehemency are ei∣ther more redy with ioy and pleasure to gratulate that which happely commeth to passe, either more stil and pen∣siue to bewaile that, which hath vnfortunat y chaunced. And whereas this terrour of feare (that I omitt to speake of any other passion) hath once by the wrestlinge of nature assayled the minde, it hath streight waies vtter∣ly ouerthrowen the Stoikes felicity which consisteth chief∣ly in security. And that they conclude all matters with their owne argumentes, what can be shewed out of their writinges which may profit vs at all? no dought nothinge. For they bereue vs of the vse of reason: Whereas they do vtterly abandon, and as it were plucke vp by the rootes all kindes of affections geuen vs by nature wherewith sometimes we are quickned to the exercise of vertue. Howe cleare and apparant that is, I leaue at this time to speake. For there is no man so very a dolt, but séeth how contrary it is to mans nature: and they that would driue into our mindes that astonishment, which the Stoikes call tranquility doe not determine mans felicity, but do vtter∣ly extinguish and bury in vs all kinde of humanity. That therefore that is so manifest let vs omit. And let vs con∣sider howe profitable to the preseruation of the ciuill soci∣ety of man that opinion is. Put the case that a rumour spread of the enemy comminge doth wonderfully terrefie the Citizens. The whole Cittie beinge astonied with feare taketh great care howe they may put from them the euell which maye ensue. In this case, the gouernours and cheife rulers will looke vnto the common safetye, the moste couragious and lustiest men they will appointe ready in armes, garrisons they will set in order, all the reste for the power and abylitye that euerye man hath wil diligentlye bestirre themselues to dryue from theire boūdes the force of the enemye, which as a mischiefe and that no small mischiefe they make accoumpte of. But
this great wyse man in that generall feare and horrour of all his country, will not be by any meanes he, which more will esteeme of this terryble tumulte, then his owne pry∣uate studie and contemplation. For why shoulde hee for a sorte of silye simplemens sakes withdrawe himselfe frō the study of wisedome? he wil not do it in any wyse. Nay whiche is more hee will not so much as chaunge his coun∣tenaunce in that greate hurlie burlye, of the whole citty. All this tyme he deludeth their doinges, accompting thē very simple and ignorante whiche dreade that as a greate daunger and mischiefe, which hee supposeth not to be ac∣compted among the nombre of euil things. At the length when he dooth see the siege layd agaynste the whole citye, and the city to be set vppon wyth mayn force, and that the chief rulers resist with might and main, he cannot refrain from laughing to see the citizens with whom he dwelleth tremble and quake for feare, sometymes to rūne all on a heape, sometimes to runne giddily hither and thither, and to trye and assay euery way how to remoue and put away the force of the enemy. Nay a wyse man woulde thynke in ihis pityfull plyght and common misery he should take armes and presently encounter with the stoutest of his e∣nemies, not for that he lightly thinketh it a great and peri¦lous mischiefe, as through reason and iudgemente hee is leade and induced to beleue the same. But let vs know (I pray you) to what end and purpose this Stoyck should take weapon? For wyse men are neuer noted to be rash in their doings and hasty, and what they take in hand proce∣deth of great iudgement and consideration. Therefore for what cause chiefly should he take weapō in that kind of enterpryse? Tel me I praye you, should he for ye assisting his neighboures and poore countryemen? But for that cause he estemeth them onely miserable, for that they are ignorant, and caried away with vanity and errour of opi∣nion. Agayne that by the glimse and otwrde shewe
whereof, he seeth them striken into suche a dampe of feare an euil thinge, he can in no wyse accounte. And albeit he confesseth it bee a sharpe showre, yet not to be so muche re∣garded that, for the peeuishe opynion of a sorte of fooles it should be so exceedingly feared. Therfore lasely and sloth∣fully, not manfully and couragiouslye doth he thinke that in that perilous conflict and bickeringe he shoulde behaue hymselfe. Then I pray you what great fruite bringeth this wonderfull wisdome? or where shall he shewe that so singular stoutnes of an inuincible mynde? I do think at the last this will be the end of this tragicall matter: whē he shall see the City beaten doune to the ground when hee shal see all the treasure, goodes and substance of the Ci∣tezens driuen & caried away before his face, he must shew himselfe suche a one, as whom no sorrowe will daunte or dismaye, no pouerty pinch, no calamity crucifye, but ra∣ther he vaunteth himselfe to be in bondage a kinge, in ex∣treame wante of all thinges a man stored wyth welthe, in grife happye, in misery florishinge and in good estate. And that he mought proue the same, and withdrawe his fryndes from folly, in which onely, hee reposeth the chife misery yt maye happē to mā, hee framth certain horned, crabbed & sophistical arguments, wherby he woulde geue vs a certyne salue for ye moste fonde opinion of his, ther∣by meaninge to proue death, banishment, pouerty, lack of ofpringe, contumelious reproche, bondage, not to bee ac∣compted euill. All these thinges to confesse the trueth, are lustely and lostely spoken, but the common socetye of men reapeth at al no fruit or commoditye thereby. For if a mā be furnished wyth no other kind of skill and wysedome thē this, it is not possible he should by wysedome preuent the imminent daungers of warre, or wyth a valiant force or courage resist them that be present. But paraduenture you will say. This opinion auayleth much in thinges ap∣perteyninge
to ciuill affayres. In what causes I pray you? In publique matters? Howe can hee vprightlye execute the office of a iudge or magistrate which maketh no difference of thinges doon in house of parlament, or in place of iudgemēt, which iudgeth him worthy of as much punishmente whiche hath but lightlye offended, as him, which hath most wickedly and abominablye destroyed his father. What shal I stande in shewinge you that in pri∣uate causes whiche happeneth betweene man and man, it profiteth nothinge at all? For how is it possible that hee wil haue compassion of the impotente, pitee the afflicted, succor the poore, whiche holdeth hym that is mercifull a manne base minded and seruile. Agayne may we thinke him apte to rebuke offenders and wicked persons sharply, eyther to rewarde bountefullye men liuinge vertuouslye, whiche is vtterly moued wyth no sence of loue? or hatred. And that I may knitt vp all in one woorde, what shall hee profit the common sotiety of man, which forgetteth him∣selfe to bee a man, and in a maner diuorceth himselfe from humaine nature? For the affections of the mynde are to be cutt of by reason, not rashly to be plucked vppe by the roo∣tes. For the one is good and a profitable way, and by wise∣domes moderation maye bee obteyned: the other maye in no wyse be compassed, and if it might, yet it were not so muche to be desired. For all maner of vertue of what kind soeuer it be, is at it were key colde and feeble, which doth not spring out of a mynd stirred with most earnest prouo∣cations of industrye and diligence. For whereas all kynd of dutye is framed and fashioned by the mynde, he can do nothinge lustely, valiantlye, forcebly, whose mynd is not kindled and wonderfully inflamed with ardēt desire. And wheras they take it for a thing already graūted vnto thē that euery affection is contrary to reason, that no wise mā wil graunte: whereas they see reason it selfe prescribeth lawes to al affections of the mind, and sheweth them how
farre forth it is lawful for them to ranige. And therfore according to reasō we somtimes waxe angry, & cholerick, we hate, we loue, we pitie, we feare many things that may ensue, we greeuouslye take present mischaūces, we are stir redde vppe wythe greate desire, wee are moued mar∣ueylouslye wythe ioye and pleasure. Which affections when they excede measure, they are to be restrayned with the bridle os reason and vnderstanding, not to be extingui∣shed and put oute vtterly. Therefore the motions of the mynd doe not impugne reson, whereas they for the most parte by her rule and gouermente are leade and ordered. Certes, lyke as in the sea such quiet and calme weather is not to be desired, where with the floud may not be with the lest puffe of winde troubled, but rather such open aire, wherby the shippe at the stearne may sulke the seas wyth a mery gale and prosperous wynd: euen so there is to bee desired in the mynd, a litle puffe and as it were a blowing billow to hoise vp ye sayls of the mynd whereby the course therof may be made swift and certayn. And euen as askil∣full and couragious horseman doth not alwaye delight in a softe & gentle pace, but sometymes geueth his horse the spurre: to the end his stede should moue more lyuely. So by reason sometymes the perturbations of the mynde are stirred and pricked forward, that we mought more chear∣fully dispatche our busines. Therefor what can we make of this felicitye which a man by no meanes may obtayne, & if it could bee gottē, it nothing furthreth ye good estate & condition of men. And wheras they argue ye onely vertue accōplisheth a blessed and happy life: they seem not to vn∣derstande what the nature of that word is, for vertue cā∣not so muche as by imagination bee conceiued to bee anye things els, but a thing perfecte & in his kynd absolute. But what force of with be it gotten by neuer so much study and diligence, is of that power and nature, that is able to con∣  that infinite gredines and desire (that is by
nature ingraft in our mindes) of thinges both many and wonderfull? Againe by what vertue (I beseech you that I may leaue other thinges vntouched) is a man ab e to diminish or stake the feruent zeale of tracinge out ye truth, wherewith they are most tormented which woulde fayne be accoūpted perfect wise men. Either hath there bene a∣nye man a liue, which hath attained the skill of all artes, which hath vnderstoode the reason of all naturall causes, which hath had the knowledge by wysedome to rule and gouerne a common wealth? All thinges are hidden so in the excéedinge deepnes and bosome of nature, that there hath bene at any time no questin so plaine and easie, wher¦of profound learned clarkes hath not geuen diuers and in∣tricate iudgementes. For howe harde is it to open effec∣tually the argument wee nowe entreate of, and presently haue in hande, and (I assure you) we are not able suffici∣ently to discourse of the nature of the body & soule, which playnly proueth what slender perfection in knowledge & learninge we are able to attaine vnto. Therefore howe may this wise Stoike haue through vertue his contentati∣on, when he infinitly desireth the science of those thinges whereof he is ignorant, neither only doth couet the know¦ledge of those thinges which he seeth with his eye, but al∣so would vnderstande manye other thinges whereon hys minde runneth, whereas he himselfe is not able through∣ly and perfectly to knowe the nature of the leaste thinge that is. But then we suppose that the estate of the minde is perfect, when the minde it selfe is so fully fraighte with vertues, that there is nothinge els which it may desire. No man I thinke by this time doubteth but yt the chiefe and soueraigne good cānot consist in single and bare ver∣tue (which the Stoikes so highly extol) when neither in ver∣tue are cōteyned al thinges which to ye estate & maintenā∣ce of a man are required: nor our mind wt vertue alone can rest cōtēted, especially desiring those things yt by no mea∣nes yt man can worke, are to be attained. For all humaine
thinges whether they be externall, or els worthy induements of the body and minde are streyghted into a litle and nar∣rowe compasse: but our minde hath bred and naturally ingraffed therein this affection and disposition euer vnme¦surably and insatiably to desire some one thing of great ex¦cellēcy & worthines. And easier maye you wt a litle drop of water quench the fiery flames of Aetna, then slake the vnquencheable thyrst of desire that naturally possesseth the mindes of men. In consideration whereof wicked & naughty persons, are not to be rebuked because they haue infynite desires, but beecause they desire thinges vnlaw∣full and abhominable. For it is geuen vnto vs by nature to haue vnsatiable desires, but to haue wicked desires yt procéedeth from a disordered custome, and leude conuersa∣tion. For truely neither he which doth endeuour with al study to atchiue to honour and worship kéepeth order and measure in the desire of honest thinges. But let vs feyne & imagine some one to haue attained that felicity which Zeno hath reposed in onely vertue. Let him be exquisite∣ly learned in all sciences. Let him be merueylously spoken of, for his excéedinge and great vertues. Let him haue (if it please you) all those good thinges which are within, and without the body, for as much as bothe the Academikes, and Peripatetikes are of this opinion, that these thinges are to be rekoned of, and had in estimation, as the instru∣mentes and handemaidens of vertue: As strength, puis∣saunce, goodlines of personage, soūdnes of senses, per∣fection of health and many other of like nature: then ry∣ches and substance, gentility, honour, children florishinge and indued with al noble qualities, frindes not wauering, but tyed with an assured knot of perpetual frendship. Last of all (yf you thinke good) that the Epicure maye not so mutch as bende his browe against vs, let the abundance be graunted vnto him of all pleasure, wt yt which ye bodie, & the minde might be delighted: againe let him haue cause neither of feare, or lamentation, if it may be possibly at∣tained
through mans counsell and prouidence. This man (saie you) may be thought of all other most happy, as who aboundeth in all thinges which appertaine to glory, prosperity, and pleasure. But if you woulde demaunde of this good felowe whether there were anye thinge els which he could finde in his hart to possesse, no doubte he would cry out, if he meane not to glose, and vse fayned speach, that he liuinge in this plenteous store, and aboun∣daunce of worldly glory, fealt himselfe neuerthelesse con∣tent, but moued with farder desire. Zeno immoderately with open mouth exclaimeth vpon this man, reuilinge him as a pezant and mad man: chiefly for that he cannot maister and qualifie that motion of the minde, throughe the power whereof he is moued to desire infinitely, then for that in the aboūdance of worldly wealth he professeth himselfe still oppressed with penury. Whom for all that if you indifferently iudge, you ought to pardon. For put case his minde with those good thinges should rest contē∣ted, which can come to passe by no reasō. For if you should powre into the mind all those good qualities that mought be procured by mans trauaile and industrie, you coulde not by any meanes satisfy the vnsatiable capacity thereof. But admit it satisfied, yet notwithstandinge shall it be in∣flamed continually with the desire of immortalitye. But this saieth he, no wise man will desire. Which hath ap∣poincted vnto him selfe such boundes and limites, that he ordereth his life by the rule of nature and not of de∣sire. As thoughe it were beesides nature to lyue e∣uer: Or as though there were any thinge more agrea∣ble to nature. To proue this, wherefore are we pensiue and carefull of those thinges that happen to vs after our deathes? Wherefore doe we desire ofspringe and the succession of children? Why do wee thinke it a worthye thinge to be commended to oure posteritye? Whye are most pregnant and florishinge wittes moued with the de∣sire of perpetuall fame and glory? Assuredly this affecti∣on
proceedes of no other cause, then of the desire of im∣mortality. For whereas man beinge a creature endued with reason and vnderstandinge plainly and euidently se∣eth that, that is not to be thought to appertaine to per∣fecte blessednes, which is variable & subiect to alteration: knowinge also for a certainty, that those thinges whiche may be lost or taken from vs are mutch disagreinge with the nature of felicity, he dreadeth death, and is stirred vp wyth an egree motion of the mynde and moued wyth a wonderful instincte of nature, to couet the fruition of im∣mortality. And beinge yet vncertaine to attaine the same, is duringe this life tossed and turmoyled hither and thy∣ther, and imployeth therto his whole study and diligence, that by all meanes he possibly may, he moughte preserue himselfe from vtter destruction and finall decaie. Some man therefore holdeth himselfe most happy if he leaue be∣hinde him after his death a perfecte portrayture of his owne name: and one that shall be as it were himselfe in in another person. Some man striueth excéedingelye by sententious sayinges and worthy monumentes of an excellent wit, by noble and valiaunt Actes to purchase to himselfe continuall fame and memory. Some other in erectinge great and sumptuous buildinges séeketh there∣by to commende himselfe vnto posterity. Which geueth a sufficient note, that euen by natures instincte and fore warninge all men tremble and quake at the memory of death, and then doe by all meanes sheewe their desire of perpetuity of life. Therefore whereas the nature of man is such that it cannot haue on earth any longe conty∣nuance (for all kindes of estates are equally subiecte to death, and the way to the graue (as Horace saieth muste once be trode) for this cause all men generally do apply therunto their whole diligence, after death at least wise to leaue some representation, or counterfaite shewe of life. Howe can it therfore be gainsaide but that a creature de∣sirous of euerlastingenes, must needes bee stroken with
great feare and terrour of death? And seinge that no man in this life can attaine his ioye and hartes rest (for how can the mind haue his contentation hauing not obtei∣ned that, for the which it so mutch longeth) it doth euidēt∣ly appeare that we are created to some other greater and more excellent purposes. And therefore is it that oure myndes are not satisfyed wythe those good thin∣ges that happen in this lyfe, beecause all thinges here are of no estimation, and streyghted into a narrow compasse in comparison of those, whiche we through a secrete working and inclination of nature are prone to desire. But to the knowledge of those good thinges which onely are accom∣ted the chiefest and by all meanes possiblye to bee desired, two wayes there are that may conducte vs. First of all the very desire of the mynd it selfe wil open vnto vs plain∣ly what it is: then our byrth and the consideration of owr generation will more playnly shew vs, what it is that we desire. For we must not suppose anye other ende to bee proposed to eache thinge wee desire, then that whereunto nature it selfe beynge not corrupted or depraued is bente and inclined, neyther from any other fountaine ought the end of blessed life to be deryued thē frō that, frō which we first borowed the beginning of lyfe. FIrst therfore it is requisite to vnderstand what that ap∣petite of desire is, which is so depely imprīted in ye mind of mā. We se al mē for ye most part do avoid as much as in thē lyeth the things that are displeasant, and paynful and to desire inordinatlye that whiche maye stirre vp delecta∣tion and pleasure, to make greate pryce of riches & ability, to be inflamed with the loue of learning, the which if ma∣ny through their dull and barrayn wits do not attayn, yet they can do no lesse then loue and honour the learned man, in so much that him whom they see furnished wyth moste excellente artes and sciences they thinke moste lyke, and
semblable to immortal Goddes. Agayne dayly experiēce doth shewe vs, that all mē are enamoured with the bewty and worthines of vertue and honesty, in so much that wic∣ked and euil disposed persons are moued and allured with the perfection thereof, and beeyng taken in a trippe wexe ashamed at their offence, desiring rather to be accompted honest and vertuous, then leude and vngratious. To con¦clude al mē are of that nature that they are not contented hauinge attayned one kynde of those thynges whyche are tearmed good, but they would be fullye fraight with al to∣gether and cleane exempted from all feare and griefe of ye mynd. Agayn they immoderatly desyre to haue al those good thinges reache to the higheste degree of perfection and to haue theym continue and remayne for euer. But what is this els then to desire to bee lyke vnto God in es∣tate and conditiō? For the omnipotent and diuine nature of God is suche that it aboundeth in all felicity, and beyng re∣plenyshed wyth his vnspeakable wysedome and vertue, & seperated from the contagion of all corruption reigneth in a most glorious kingdom, blessed & endles. They ther∣fore that woulde inioye the thinges that in perfectnes and principality exceede all other, and woulde with an ardent desire couet an eternity and perpetuity therein, wisheth hym selfe as it were to be of the numbre and companye of Heauenly sainctes. What should I heere speake of the earnest zeale of religion by nature giuen to vs men in ge∣neral, which stirreth vp all menne by all wayes and me∣anes to loue and reuerēce the omnipotēt Godhead of him that ruleth this worlde, and by manye outwarde signes, but yet most certayne tokens to declare that they are won¦derfully inflamed wt an earnest desire to se, & haue ye fruiti∣on of him. Doth it not manifestly shew, that there is in vs some diuine and heauenly nature, which withdraweth our myndes from the desire of thinges earthly and transi∣tory, to the beholding and admiration of diuine and celes∣tiall
things? for no creature in the whole vniuersal world desireth any thinge whatsoeuer it bee, excepte it be agree∣able to his disposition and nature. And if there were any man that hathe giuen himselfe as it weere prisoner vnto lust and sensuality & were so entāgled with ye pleasur of this lyfe, that he rekoned not of the lyfe to come, yet this one thinge woulde apparantly shewe him to be indued wyth some heauenly wisedome, in that he coulde neuer bee sa∣tisfied sufficiently neither wyth any pleasure, nor with a∣ny stoare of worldly substance. In so muche that no ri∣ches was able to satisfie Craesus, no kynd of pleasure could contente Sardanapalus, no worthy exploytes in martiall affayres was able to quench that vnsatiable thirst and de∣sire of glory wherwith Alexander ye greate was so muche inflamed. Of whom this is most truly written. The youthly Macedoniā Prince one world coulde not suffice. All whiche maye fullye perswade vs that there is no∣thing vnder ye Cope of heauen that may content the infini∣te desire of the mynde: whereas all worldly thinges are brittle, mortall and mutable: but the mynde of man co∣ueteth greate thinges, thinges permanente and eternal, and by all meanes seeketh to aspyre vnto immortalitye. And whereas it doth often times throughe euill custome declyne from the right way, and seeketh nothinge els but that whiche is frayle, and subiecte to mortalitye, and in the aboundance of these earthly and transitory thinges re∣poseth blessed lyfe: albeit he obtaine al that he desire, yet ne¦uer can yt whiche is sufficient be gotten, and to late shal he vnderstande that he hath desired rather a false and coun∣terfayte, then a true and perfect blessednes. And lyke as wee say the fier, the water and all thinges els haue a certayn ende to the whiche (yf there bee no impedimente) they bee by a certayne naturall desire caried: so also to man, God is proposed, as an ende, whom by the instinct of
nature we desire: and of whom they which are partakers shalbe most happy and blessed, replenished with all kynde of perfect ioye and pleasure. The whiche wil more cle∣arly appeare, if we sette before our eyes, the originall and beginninge of mans creation: which if we aduisedly consi∣der, we shal fynd therin al things right excellēt & perfect. But the birth and generation of man, must not bee ftche from Poets fables, or groūded on the opinion of Phi∣losophers, the which albeit we must needes graunt were of excellent wit, and learninge, yet being in a tyme ouer whelmed with erroure and blindnes, could not behold the trueth, and in steed of trueth, they defended and mayntey∣ned those things, wherin through palpable ignorance they were grossely deceiued. Therefore we wil omit their o∣pinons vncertayne, and disagreeing amonge themselues, that out of no other bookes then holy wryt, we may fetch the trueth it selfe. For in it is conteined the true and perfect Philosophie. And first of all me thynks it conue¦nient after the maner of Poets in this cause to crye & call for the aide and assistance not of the Mufes, or Apollo, but of the highest, and most mighty God that he wil so washe and clense me from all spotte of cryme. that I may be able vprightly, purely, and syncerely, to handle so greate and wonderful ssmieties. THe most excellent power, and maiestye of that heauen∣lie mynde, whiche beynge most highe and euelastinge, we condignely reuerence and adore, as oure God, and as ye euerlasting fountayn of life, as the maker and creatour of all thinges, when it did seeme gaod vnto this wysedome ao deale liberally, and to imparte his benefytes to manye for nothinge sheweth so much the goodnes of God, as his (free beneficence) in the beginninge hee created the inui∣sible world, bewtifyed wyth holy angels, who beholding
alwayes that incomprehensible lighte and brightnes, do liue in euerlastinge blessednes. Vnto whiche estate of glo∣ry and immortality, all came not, but onelye they that de∣lyghtinge not so much in the exceding bewty of their own nature, as reioysing in the Prince and geuer of all lyghte and brightnes did thinke with themselues, that the castle of their safetie, and the ende of their blessed life, was to be reposed in their lorde and maker. For they that beinge to much enamoured with the beautie of themselues, did fall to the neglect and contempt of God, and laying a side due reuerence of their Lorde and creatour, thoughte all good∣nes to proceede frō themselues, yelding to their owne na∣ture as it were a certaine Godhead, being for euer depri∣ued of that passing cleare lighte, whereof they were most vnworthie, they were throwne downe into the place of per¦petuall and euerlasting misery, and into the darke donge∣on of that night that shal euer continue. But after God had made the Heauens and wonderfull worke thereof, which no eye hath seene, then he framed this worlde most beautifull and of exceeding fairenesse, garnishing it with all pleasures and commodities. In the making where∣of, he vsed no other engine or deuise, then his owne will & pleasure. For with God, the word is the fulfiller of all workes. And thus God bringeth to passe by his greate prouidence those thinges at the length, which he hath ap∣poynted before all worlds. But first some man will aske of mee this question. To what purpose, and for whose vse, that moste highe creatour and Lorde of all thinges, hath made this so beautifull workemanshippe, this so excellent forme and shape of heauenly bodies, this so large and spa∣cious greatnes of Sea & Land? For it is not the practise of his infinite wisedome to do any thing in vaine, & to no end and purpose. For whose sake then did he after a most wō∣derful order, frame that most goodly & seemely substance of thinges dislike in nature, yet agreeing among themsel∣ues?
for his own sake thinke you? because he would haue a trimmer habitaciō, wherin he mought more cōmodiously dwel? But it were not onely a wicked thing, but a point of extreme madnes, to thīcke so of that most blessed mind, then the which nothing more perfect and absolute may be imagined, the vertue & power wherof is infinite, to haue needed anye earthly & bodily tabernacle, or that all times before he wanted some what to thee accomplishing of per∣fecte blessednes, or to the fulnes of his glory: or that God could be inclosed wythin any certaine roome or compasse. What then? were these things prouided for the Angels, & saincts of God? In no wyse: for they being seuered & free from all felowship and coniunction of the body, desire no∣thing els but to behold their maker, neither cā they reape any cōmoditie, or conceiue any pleasure of things beneath in these lowe parts. And to thinck this substanciall work∣manship was made cheiefly for vnreasonable creatures, or for the vse of trees, & plantes, it were a thinge to absurde. For, were it not a thing farre vnsitting wyth the maiesty of God, to haue framed so great and wonderfull a worke for brute beastes, and creatures voyd of reason and vnder∣standing, and therefore ioyned vnto him by no kinde of af∣finitie and likelines? God hath not therfore deuised this so goodly a frame for himselfe, for Angels, for the fruites of the earth, for liuinge creatures voyde of reason, but for man made of body & reasonable soule, & consistinge of both those natures cōioyned, yt he might both with his outward sences vew the excellent workemanship of the worlde, and also conceiue in minde deepely the exceding glory & great∣nes of the workeman. Wherefore all the world with the beauty & pleasure therof, was ordeyned for the profite and vtility of man. Firste and principally yt hee mighte haue a dwellīg place, wherin not onely the body should be nouri∣shed & comforted wyth diuers & sondry fruits of the earth, which it aboūdantly bringeth forth for the maintenaūce &
sustentacion of all lyuing creatures: but also yt the minde obseruing through vnderstanding & iudgemēt the works of Nature, with the varietie, pleasure, and delectacion thereof, might by a proper & peculiar foode, which chiefly consisteth in the manifeste seinge of the truth, be fedde and receyue his solace and contentation. That when the or∣der, settled rule, and constant gouernment of so greate a woorke, should stirre vp exceedingly the minde of man: it mought also induce him to the cōtemplacion of the chiefe and principall workeman. So that the goodly proportiō and frame of the worlde mighte be a schole and a certayne way and trade of learning, wherby man might be taught to honour and worship his lord & maker. And thus it is cleare & apparant, that the most high & mighty God hath for mans sake made and created fruites and cōmodityes, which the earth wyth wonderfull plenty yeldeth, sensible creatures, all maner of soyles whatsoeuer, the seas ouer∣whelmed wyth a grosse and foggie aier, the heauens, the firmament, the sterres, by whose gentle mouinges, much good happeneth to all lyuing creatures. Man was not as yet created, when God had prepared for him so beauti∣full, so rich, so bountefull a kingdome. At length when the world it selfe was fully finished he made man his bo∣dy of earth, and be breathed thereinto a soule finely fashio∣ned, accordinge to his owne Image and similitude. Here may you see manifestly the originall and beginning of the most excellent & noble soule of man, which being deriued and taken oute from no other thinge, then the spyrite of God, and being inclosed in the body as in a worthy vessel, retayneth a deuine forme, pure, and deuoyde of all filthye corruptiō Then the body was not infected wyth any vice, whereby reason mought be disturbed, or the minde it selfe wt darcknes ouerwhelmed. The first mā therfore knew all sciēces, vnderstoode ye causes of all things, was sufficiētly learned in the rule and discipline of life, beinge instructed
by no other teacher then God himselfe, the giuer of all knowledge & wisedome. And he did not onely excel all o∣ther creatures in the comely shape & feature of his bodye, but he was farre beyond them all, in the amiable, and the most excellent and deuine shape & forme of the minde. For both parts thereof were wyth so singuler & passing clere∣nes enlightened: & also vnited with such concord & agree∣ment ye scarcely any surer concord, or any more decent and seemely maner of comlines could be imagined. There was in the mind no errour, no motion in the sence, wherby the rule of reason might be disordered: whereas reason it selfe, as it were in a perfect & flourishing cōmonwealth, so in a peaceable & quiet estate coulde very easlie restraine all raging affections. The minde therfore had no kinde of let, and impediment wherby it might be hindered from daily contemplacion. But the vnderstandinge & capacitie of mā being flourishing, quick, & bent to the search of highe mat∣ters, when it had found out and discussed the nature of all thinges that were contayned and as it were hidden in the ayre, the sea, & earth beneath, it was not satisfyed wt those things which were vnder the circle & sphere of the Mone, and with those things which mighte be seene, but woulde needes pearce the clouds, and search the nature of heauen it selfe. And being thus made of so excellent a dispositiō and nature, was also indued with those vertues which ex∣cede the common state of man, by the exercise and fruition whereof he might be the more assured alwayes of the loue and grace of his lord & maker. For the charecter & figure of true & perfect iustice, which prepareth the minde to all holines, & is the most surest bulwarke and defence therof was deepely imprinted in him. There was therein a firme and assured constancie of vertue, & the exceedinge perfecte shape & comlines of honestie it self. Againe he had his wit tyed to no kinde of necessity, neither parcially inclined to a∣ny cause, nor intermedled with any kind of affectiō or per∣turbation.
To be briefe, God hauing shewed himselfe so li∣berall & bountefull towards man, he made him presidēt & chiefe ruler of the earth, & appointed him a Princely place for his habitaciō. The Grekes call it Paradise, a gardeine flowing with most pleasaunt springs, most delectable, and decked with great store & varietie of sweete smellinge flo∣wers, most fit to liue in, in all felicitie & pleasure. In this most pleasaunt seate mā was placed, yt by that place which they say was high and mounted alofte, he mought learne not onely like a ruler and gouernour, wysely to guide the sterne thereof: but also thereby be admonished wt discrete gouernment, & free liberty, to take vppon him the charge and rule ouer all other lyuinge creatures. In the orde∣ring of which kingdome he folowed not a written law, but the law of nature: yt is a most perfecte order, & agreeable to the deuine nature of God, which they terme the chiefest and most soueraigne law of all other. Furthermore there was a promise made, a reward appointed that if he did ad∣minister the gouernment assigned vnto him godly & righ∣teously, he should enter into that heauenly kingdome and euerlastinge blisse, the which in this life he would so much desire. This was the first estate allotted and appointed to mā, this was the first beginning & foundatiō of that No∣bility, whereunto man aspired: in which no man can note any thīg, but that which is right honourable & worthy of high estimacion. Whereby it is euidently to be perceiued what a miserable miste of darcknes auerwhelmed ye mīds of them, which hauing theyr soule created by ye prouidēce of God, (& to speake the vttermost) as it were proceedinge from the nature and substaunce of God himselfe, suppose notwythstandinge their felicity to be reposed in thinges transitory and subiect to chaunge and alteration. It was therefore most wysely sayd of auncient Philosophers, and of the Stoikes especially, ye beatitude and happines is no∣thing els, but to liue a life correspondent to the law of na∣ture.
But being ignorant what best did agree with ye na∣ture of man, it consequently followed, that they coulde not pefectly knowe what did appertaine to the nature of blessed life. Therefore that great ouersighte and blinde∣nes bread mischeiuous errours, and was cause of manye wicked and desperat opinons. For looke vnto what opini∣on any man of himselfe was leudly addicted, that ende, and felicity he vnto himselfe appoyncted. For they that knew not part of themselues to be immortall, and supposed the sence of the soule to be extinguished with the body, hunted after with all diligence and paine nothing els but things transitory, and appertaininge to their bodily substance. But they that sawe somewhat, although through a miste, thought not the desired ende of mans life to consist in thin∣ges subiecte to inconstancy, and mutability, but rather in the qualities, and ritches of the minde. In this poyncte truly they sayd well. But let vs vnderstand what quali∣ties and ritches they ment. If those which are borowed and deriued from no other but of God allmighty and are by his grace powred into our hartes, naye remaine all∣waies in God himselfe, in this opinion there is no oddes betwixt them and vs. But if they defend this learning, ye felicity consisteth in the vertues of ye mind, which through the study & diligēce of many are attained & after this ma∣ner deme all to be chiefely in thēselues, herein they shew howe ignorant they are of their owne natures, & are foūde also most wicked and blasphemous against God him self. For they seeme not to vnderstand that the soule is not of it selfe, but toke his beginninge of God, who referre the desired ende of all their life not to God, but to their owne propre wit, & vnderstandinge, and beinge impudente and presumptudusly mynded, all their actions in their whole life which they ought to dedicate to ye honour of Almigh∣ty God, they cōferre and bestow vpon settinge foorth their owne fame & glory. If therefore true felicity, and the end
of our life is to be fixed in the cause and geeuer of life, there is no man so blinde, or selfewilled, but may easelye perceiue that he is to be of vs chiefly desired, as the laste ende of our actions, by whose benefit, aide, and helpe, wee came into the worlde, whome through a meruaylous and exceedinge inclination of nature wee feruently desire, wee entirely loue, wée deseruedly reuerence, worship, and mag∣nifie. Let vs therefore eftsones turne, and be spedilye cō∣uerted vnto that fountaine of all good thinges, that is euer¦lastinge & can neuer be drawen dry, from whence we came, by whose grace we liue, & are preserued in our good estate. For it is not to be doubted when we haue ended our life in this world, we shal at lēgth enioy an endles & most blested so that all that restlesse desire wherwith our mindes were inflamed, shalbe satisfied, neither shall we haue any thinge els iustly to require. Wée must therefore referre all our doinges and actions to this ende, yt we maye at the length haue the fruition of the highest and euer liuinge God. For if pleasures do in any wise appertaine to perfecte blessed∣nes, then shall we with him enioy stable and permanente pleasures, and those which in no age shall decaie. But if our soueraigne good rest in Sapience, then at the length shall that insatiable desire of tracinge and searchinge out the truth be satisfied, when all darknes and obscurity be∣inge taken away, we shall not only contemplate & beholde the perfect and true nature of each thinge, but him that is Lorde and Ruler of nature it selfe. And if longe life ma∣keth vs happy, that is onely to be tearmed longe life whi∣che is immortall, and not that which through age and cō∣tinuance of time is consumed. Lastly if they iustly thinke that quietnes and security must be a part of the definition of felicity, (for they holde this opinion that our life is hap∣pye and blessed when we are assured of those good things wherewith it aboundeth shall longe continue.) If
therefore without securitie, wee cannot so much as vnder∣stand what happines is, there shal we be sure to be released from all cares & vexations, when no terrour, no sodaine motions shal disquiet vs, when we shal haue the most high and mighty God ye buckler of our defence, & the preseruer of our safety. But now I wil briefly conclude & knit vp those reasons, which occasioned me to fall into this kind of disputacion. This was set downe by vs as a grounde and principle, yt vertue was a certayne perfection of the mind, directing vs the right way to our last & chiefe desired end. Againe felicity (as it is declared) is no where to be put but in God alone. Then it foloweth by good reason, yt no qua∣lity or affection of the minde can be sayd vertuous, except it be ascribed vnto God. Wherfore if neither felicitie, ney∣ther any thing which it cōteyneth may be thought fraile & mutable (for it were a grosse errour to thinck those thīgs happy & blessed, yt vanish away sodainly) but assuredly mē passing theyr times as they that are tossed in a trouble tē∣pest, or sea of wauerīg affections, no doubt men in no wise may be thought happy, except they be daily by the grace & fauour of God stayed vp, & protected. Againe it is of all men confessed, that vertue is the meane whereby wee are conducted & ledde to felicitie, and therefore that is not to be taken for a vertue that doth not ioyne vs to God, and is not referred to him alone. And therin onely consisteth the worthines of true vertue, where all other are in no wise to be esteemed as vertues, but the shadowes & false coun∣terfaytes of vertue. For by what reason should we giue ye name of vertue vnto that, which hath not prefixed before it an end of blessednes? Aristotle affirmeth that Diomedes, was in no wyse puissaunte eyther shewed anye pointe of manhoode and true magnanimitie, when the Grekes be∣ing put to flighte hee remayned behinde alone, and had ra∣ther wyth daunger of his personne stande agaynste the force of Hector, then to beare the ignomye of a Turne∣backe,
& ranne awaie. I praye you whie so? Was it not a noble acte and worthy of greate honour, when Diome∣des, beinge relinquished of his friendes and countrimen, himselfe alone or with a very fewe, stoode to his tacklinge, thinking it better to die manfully, thē to liue wretchedly, makinge more accoumpte of his glorye and estimation, then of his safety, and preseruation? No doubte it was very well done (quoth he) but for that Diomedes in hys enterprice sought not so mutch true praise, as the vayne brute of the people, (for he feared mutch least that Hector in the middest of his glory would the more triumphe, if he might saie, he had put Diomedes to flighte) he therefore purchased not due prayse of vertue. In like manner Aristotle iudgeth of Hector, for that he openly confessed that he tooke great care least that the men and women of Troye woulde spreade any rumour soūdinge to his disho∣nour, and therefore would more boldly and couragiouslye venture his life in battaile. This man of singular wit and learninge, iudged them not to haue deserued the title of true honour and vertue, for because they did not respecte true & perfect honesty, wt he thought should be considered as the principall and chiefe ende of our life, and therefore remoueth them from that ordre and degree that vertue purchaseth: and placeth theym in a seconde roome, in which he reposeth that counterfaite image of vertue, whi∣che bringeth vs to do our office and duety through an am∣bitious desire of glory, and is conteined within the com∣passe of law, and ciuill discipline. The ende therefore (accordinge to Aristoteles opinion) proueth euery Acte to be honest, or dishonest, ignoble, or honourable. For one, and the selfe same action may be taken in hande, whereby sometimes great estimation, sometimes no small discredit and shame is procured, according to the diuersity of the in¦tent and purpose. Whereby it foloweth necessarily yt they onely may be termed stoute and valiaunt men, whiche ha∣uinge
respect to the true ende of vertue, worthely die the death: and they that regarde rumoures and vaine re∣portes of the people, and for that refuse not to endaunger themselues, are to be estéemed as vaine and light: but they that through some naughty and vnlawfull desire, or some lewde and vicious perturbation of the minde, are stir¦red vp to do some valiant enterprice, are of all other to be holden most wicked. Whereby it is concluded that ney∣ther Hector, nor Diomedes were to be commended for their prowes and puissance, and that Achilles, and Paris, were not only not valiante, but worthy of all shame and dishonour. For the one in defence of an infamous, and wicked marriage came forth into the fielde, the other shed so mutch bloude, and made that great slaughter of his ene¦mies, only to quench, and satisfy the immoderate angre and rage of his mind. Aristotle may be with al conuinced of the ignorance of true magnanimitye & fortitude, where∣as he could not, beinge ouerwhelmed with the like cloude of blindnes, vnderstande what felicity was, from whence the constancie and stability of vertue, and the decent seme∣lines of honesty issueth and floweth. But you will saye he hath written many thinges of God, shewinge therein great wisedome and learninge. I knowe that very well. But (I pray you) what place hath he assigned him in the makinge and creatinge of all thinges appertaininge to man? For whereas he denieth the world euer to haue bene made, in deede this one onely office he appoynteth to God to moue the worlde aboute the Pole with a wonderfull swiftnes. By the conuersion and turninge whereof, the chaunges, and courses, Generations, and corruptions of al thinges vnder heauen are made. Againe there were many of great learninge and iudgemente which supposed the worlde to bee ruled not by fortune, or any meanes ca∣suall, but by the deuine prouidence and ordinaūce of God. But not so, that they either thought that vertues procee∣ded from him or that the desired ende of our life shoulde
rest in him. Therefore what auaile their incōstāt opinions of God dusked & defaced wt so manifold errours to the cō∣sideration of our last desired ende? For yf they confessed an eternall & euerlasting God, forced thereunto through beholdinge the meruaylous and exceedinge beauty of the worlde, and the wonderfull order of heauenly bodies, yet for all that, they did not due honour vnto him, neither dyd put in him the hope of a blessed and happy life. Therefore none of the whole packe of them, either could beholde the end of our life, or could perceyue in their mindes the per∣fecte fourme of vertue, desiringe rather the shadowe and counterfaite, then the plaine and liuely image of nobility, representinge it more in a glorious ostentation and bragge of wordes, then fullfillinge it absolutely in their maners and life. To conclude, if that onely may be iustly iudged true vertue, which bringeth vs to perfecte felicitye, it is most cleare (which also hath bene proued sufficiently be∣fore) that, that onely is to be taken for vertue which lif∣teth vp our mindes intentiuely and with great affection to the beholding of God euerlastinge, the beginninge and ende of all thinges. Whereuppon this may also conse∣quently folowe that all honoure, and true noblenes recei∣ueth light and beauty of that most excellent and notable vertue. But all nobility whatsoeuer, if it do not issue and spring out of this diuine vertue, albeit it hath a faire shew glistereth gaiely, neuerthelesse in very deede it is vaine & mutable, neither can it participate the nature of perfecte and true nobility. And no doubt that race and kinred, in which that heauenly kinde of vertue appeareth, may not so much be thought to fetch his descent & genealogy from men, as to spring out of some celestiall and diuine genera∣tion. Therefore after I haue declared the fall and mise∣ry of the first man, I will manifestly discourse vnto you, the worthy notes and properties of this diuine and celesti∣al kinred. For the declaration of that calamity and dis∣stresse
wherwith the first parent of all mankind being op∣pressed fell, will conteine the cause of that error, & cloude of ignoraūce, wherwith the minds of men ouerwhelmed, so many ages lay hidden in darcknes, yt neither they could behold any heauenly light, neyther sufficiently consider ye worthines of true Nobility. Wherby it came to passe that Nobility being vtterly extinct in steede thereof succeded an abiect minde, and a vile estate, rude, base, & barbarous. After these so many and wonderful miscryes be layed opē and euidently knowen, then will it more clearely appeare by what meanes wee were againe restored to our former dignity, & how we againe recouered ye name & worthines yt we afore loste. TO returne therfore to man, he (as it was, declared be∣fore) was placed in the earth, to the intēt he should be lord & owner thereof. Againe that he should gouerne all lyuing creatures, & behold the heauen aboue with al god∣lines, and dutifull reuerence. He had therefore a Prince∣ly iurisdiction ouer the earth, he serued onely the Lord of heauē, & being a holy one wholy dedicated to God, he was the expounder of his holy will and pleasure: and the chiefe Prince & first parent of al mankind. Who hauing in body a most comely & goodly personage, in minde notwythstan∣dinge attayned to honour due to celestiall creatures, in so much that throughe a heauenly inspiration, he could fore∣shew many thinges to come. And thus naked he wandred in yt sweete and delectable gardeine. For neither wāted he any kinde of vesture to cloth himself, whom the sharpenes of no kinde of weather could greeue & offend, neither had he about him any staine, & vnseemely thinge, for the coue∣ring and hiding wherof, he might be carefull. And hee had a law giuen him that he should exercise that free will that was geuē vnto him in the practise of vertue, that at length hee myghte by hys owne demerits deserue to bee of the
numbre and company of heauenly sainctes. And the lawe was that he shoulde not presume to touch the fruite of a certayne excedynge goodlye tree whyche conteined the knowledge of Good and Euill. God gaue him this commaundement not that he disday∣ned that mā whom he had manifoldly blessed, should haue the vnderstandinge thereof, but that by that meanes hee woulde the better forsee and prouide those thinges which apperteined to his good estate, and preseruation. For he knewe ryghte well, that if man were sette at libertye, hee wooulde strayght way worke his owne confusion. So therfore God did moderate his libertye, that hee agayne myght restreine the same by a very necessarye and expedi∣ent lawe. Neither did hee so muche forbidde him to eate of that fruite, as that he shoulde not slippe in to that, which by that fruite was meante, and signifyed. For whither this was signifyed, that he should not meddle with those causes, or search by his own industry to attayn the know∣ledge of those thinges whiche his capacitye coulde not re∣ache and comprise: Or that he should not in the choyse of good, and refusall of yll, vse rather his owne iudgement, then the will and pleasure of the almighty, by whose wise∣dome he shoulde yeelde hymselfe to be gouerned: or this that hee shoulde not inclyne him selfe to the loue of those good things whiche are mixt and intermedled wyth a nū∣ber of euills (For in the scriptures to knowe, is earnestly to desire and followe:) Therefore I saye whither he gaue that commaundemente to man that hee embracinge that soueraygne good, that is not entermedled with any euill, shoulde vtterly refuse other good thinges whiche appeare faire and pleasant, and yet are corrupt and poysoned, what more wholsom precept and commaundement might haue ben ordeined more profitable for mā? For our wits are vt∣terly confounded, and cloyed wt the search of those causes, the excedinge deepenes wherof oure wittes maye not be
able to compasse, and in any affayres to folowe our owne brayne, and not to be leade by the wysedome of God, it is a moste vndoubted token of oure fall and vtter confusion: but to be lead awaye from that good thinge which is most principal, and chiefest of all other, beyng deceiued with ye swetnes of any vayne, and transitory pleasure, is to be hol∣den generally as a thinge daungerous, and deadlye. This was the estate of our first parente, which should haue bene most happy & blessed, if hee had not bene acquaynted with that huge, and cruell monsterous beast, that hath brought to all nations pestilent infections, and vtter decaye. For when that Prince of darcknes vnderstoode, that aucthor of all sinne and wickednes, nd chiefe captain of those an∣gels, who (as we haue declared) puffed vp with pryde, would through their own power be lyke vnto the immor∣tall and euerlastinge God, and therefore fell into the la∣mentable and pitifull pytte of perdition. I saye therfore when the deuill saw man made of earth, ascende vnto that place of glory, from whence he fel, he through enuie wax∣ed whote and imagined all kynd of craftes and suttelties, to destroye and vtterlye ouerthrowe the state of mankynd. Takinge on him therefore the shape of a serpente, assaul∣teth through guiles and fayned sleights the woman, whō he thought to subdue with lesse laboure, for that shee was fraile and the weaker vessell. He therfore enticeth her, & with swete and sugred woordes allureth her to the eating of the fruite forbidden. Bearyng her in hande that as sone as shee shoulde take a tast of that most pleasant apple, shee shoulde eftsones be inspyred wyth that heauenlye know∣ledge of good and euill. The woman therfore beeynge marueylouslye allured with the fairenes of the tree, and also inflamed aboue measure with the desire of that hea∣uenly science and wysedome, was easely induced to drinke that cuppe of deadly poyson, offered vnto her by that most pestilent Serpent. Thus the woman neglectinge the
commaundemente of the moste hyghe God, and gratious geuer of all goodnes, by whose fauour and mercie shee re∣ceyued lyfe, and was indued wyth many giftes, folowed the counsell of her most deadlye enemy, inuitinge also her husbande vnto that wofull, and bloudye banquet. This was the original and beginning of the misery of mā, this was the roote of all euills. Herehence proceeded death & immortality, which afterwardes increased more & more and with most cruell tyranny oppressed all the world. For as soone as man had yeelded himselfe by sufferance, to bee corrupted with the filthy contagiō of that foule fault, that euill immediatly ranne to the vaynes: and searched euen ye verye bowels of the bodye, and at one time did slea & mur∣der both bodye and soule. Whiche the siely and wretched soule of man incontinently felte, when it perceiued it selfe seperated and haled from God, from whēce it toke his be∣ginninge, and by whose diuine power it mayntened lyfe, & when it vnderstode that the bodye was not to feele harme or iniurye by sharpenes of ayre, and at lengeth shoulde be bereaued of life, after it had passed through diuers distres∣ses, & most bitter and greuous lamentations, and sorowes, and of deathe and mortalitye these weere certayne and e∣uident signes and tokens, troublesome motions in the bo∣dye, whyche declared the myndes inconstancie, affections subiecte to no rule of reason and vnderstandinge, and vile, chaungeable and waueringe desires. For this was moste iustlye decreed, that hee whiche had broken the commaun∣demente of his lorde, and most impudently and wickedlye stode agaynst his will and pleasure, in like maner should haue those whiche before were obedience, rebellious and contrarily disposed, assaying most desperatelye to inuade and ouerthrowe the fortresse of reason. And whereas two things especially belonged to mā, that is to excercise him self in action and contemplation, and therfore was indued with a reasonable soule, that in what soeuer he toke in hād
he shoulde wysely gouerne euery affecte of the mynde and imploy all the power of his soule in the searchinge oute of heauenlye wysedome: he in both these partes was deeply wounded. For the mynde, when the cleare lighte thereof was extinct, wherwith it before glistred gloriously, laye now ouercast with darknes and obscurity, and the whole order of lyfe beynge as it were with darcke nyghte ouer∣whelmed, was welnigh put beside his rule & soueraign∣tye, so yt although in that darckenes some glimse of lighte appeared, yet coulde it not thereby be guided to the ende desired. For the reasonable, soule was miserably afflicted and wounded deepely, and diuerslye tossed mith trouble∣some stormes of the mynd, whiche it coulde by no meanes resist. Then shameful filthines shewed it selfe before, that tyme vnknowen, by the vglye syght and monsterous as∣pecte whereof our firste parentes beynge dismayed, shrow∣ded themselues in darcke woods, and couered those par∣tes with leaues of trees whiche they felt to bee most stri∣uing agaynst reason and vnderstanding. Heerehence ca∣me all kynde of corruption, herehence rofe al folish & vain opinions. Frō this fountayn sprange all vile and wicked dsires: from thence came grefes, vexacious, all carnall and fleshelye lustes whiche easelye wryth and wreste the fraielty and weakenes of the mind whythersoeuer them∣selues are bent and inclyned. And those miseries that hap∣pened to the mynde, were also imparted to the body which was appoynted to endure moste paynfull toyles, and la∣boures, and at last to suffer the bitter panges, and paynes of death. And in few to conclude, man was in suche case left, as they are that beyng remoued frō high degre, & frō a singular hope of further preferment, are cast headlonge downe into extreme misery, and wretchednes. For hee was spoyled of all his ornamentes, expelled Paradise, es∣traunged frō his own house, his owne country & the good∣ly felowship of ye heauēly wights, and that which mought
greue him most of al being shut out from the loue of God, which was afore ratefied vnto him by assured couenaunte and promise, the residue of the whole race of his life he spent in continuall teares, and in calamitye, and my∣serye mooste intollerable. And whereas briers and brambles (which by the commaundement of God, the Earth brought forth to his paine) pricked his body: yet mutch more tormented was his minde, beinge wounded with the remembraunce of his heynous contempte, and transgression, and with the secret knowledge of his faulte within his owne conscience, which kinde of remorses, and gripinge griefes woulde suffer him to take no delight in worldely pleasure, and did continually drawe aside all his cogitaciōs to the desire of his former felicity, & the sēsible feelinge of his present miserye. So that this heauines & hart breakinge which now happened, proued manifestly the trée to be of great vertue and efficacy. For nowe had he by his owne déede sufficient experience, how much mise¦rye grewe vnto him by his mischieuous acte, and presente euelles so wrought with him, the better to knowe prospe∣ritye, when we happen to fall into some aduersity. This was the miserable wretchednes and lamenta∣ble misfortune of oure firste parente, into the which hee fell headelonge, in that, yeeldinge vnto the tempta∣tion of the serpent, he forsooke his soueraigne Lorde and God. Neither did he onely vndoe him selfe, but also vt∣terly spoyled his posteritye. For whereas by course of ge∣neration we descende from him which is himselfe sicke & diseased, it cannot be chosen but that wee shoulde drawe neare vnto him in the similitude of infirmity and heynous offence, and beinge corrupted with ill bloud deriued from him, wee should be borne infected with the qualitye of the same nature. Therefore all posteritye hath suffered through him a greuous, and deadly wounde. For where∣as our vnderstandinge and reason is not a litle decayed
through the incurable maladie which we haue fallen vnto vs, from our first parentes, as parte of our inheritaunce, it commeth to passe that all our affections and passions of the minde like as wilde beastes vncheined, waxe outragi∣ous & not able to be maistered, not sufferinge the mind in a quiet staye, but disquietinge the same with infinite vexati∣ons. The seely minde therefore troubled with feare, and lustfull desire, and miserablye plunged with diuers kin∣des of maladies, and distemperatures, is so into contrarie sides plucked, and haled, that it is almost besides it selfe, in so much it is leade whither any willful and licentious pleasure, and pestilent appetite will bringe it. The image therefore of our first father sufficiently expressed in this so greate changeablenes and frailty of minde and body, dyd sow in vs the seede of all other mischiefes, wt afterwards dyd inuade the children of men. For firste of all when those outragious affections had by litle and lyttle diminished & ouercome the power of our vnderstandinge, then was yt apparant that man his countenaunce aduanced and lifted vp to heauen, nowe beinge disgraced was more proue to looke on the Earth, and beinge thereon fullye fixed, repo∣sed all the confidence and staye of his estate in vaine and worldly goods. Therefore the loue of honesty, the glorye and honour of true nobility must of necessity decay, and be extinguished vtterly by the neglecte and contempt of that chiefe and soueraigne good, in which remaineth the sūme and perfection of all true honour and godlines. But whē the vse and custome of sinninge increased, & dayely grewe to greater force, and was founde more aboundant, it came to passe that no horrible acte could be imagined, whither it proceeded of luste and concupiscence, or of raginge furye, and impudent boldnes, wherewith man defiled not him∣selfe. Neither did it suffice him to committe all kinde of villanies whereby faith and the leage of common society might be hindred: but he fought against God most high,
by pollutinge his relligion, and violatinge his holy lawes and ordinaunces. For whereas their mindes were ouer∣whelmed with darkenes, they coulde not easely comprise the nature of any thinge excepte they had a certaine war∣rant from the eye, either some other external sense of the body might geue them knowledge thereof. Therefore see∣inge they could in no wise vnderstand the maiesty of God, & had bent themselues to the beholding of the Sunne, the Moone, & the Starres in whose beautyfull and cleare as∣pectes they were exceedingely delighted, they beganne to honour and worship them as though they had conteyned in them the deuine maiesty and Godhead. From thence they eftsones fell, (for the minde beinge clogged with the multitude of iniquity could not stay in the Starres themsel∣ues) and not onely to mortall men, but also to brutish crea∣tures (as longe as by them they reaped any fruit or cōmo∣dity) they ordeined diuine honour to be attributed, & when they were dead, aulters to be erected and dedicated vnto them. What should I recite the Aegiptian Serpent? What shoulde I make mention of the wicked and horri∣ble honoure done vnto Osiris, and Isis? What shoulde I call to memory ye rest of their Idolles, bearinge the image and likelines of brutish and vnreasonable creatures? A∣gaine it were to no great purpose, to vnderstande of the ce¦remonies or rather reuelles of Bacchus, wt as it maye ap∣peare by ye word it selfe, were wt a certaine furious rage & madnes done and celebrated. To conclude what shoulde I rippe vp the rable of that vyle and stinckinge religion, which hath abused the simplicity of all natures, and defi∣led all people not onely through licentiousnes and outra∣gious wickednes, but also by bloudsheddinge and detesta∣ble murther. As though it were lawefull and no offence, if it were done by shewe and colour of religion, to abandō all honesty and shamefastnes: which was both in the cere∣monies of Venus, and Bacchus vsuall, and in many of the
rest solemply practised, in so mutch that such horrible and detestable cruelty hath bin shewē, that their Aulters hath bin oftentimes imbrued and stayned wyth mans bloude. The which thinge verelye hath bin practised not onely a∣monge the Barbarians, but also where learning and hu∣manitie hath bin professed. For both the Rhodians who for credite of learninge were supposed to haue Minerua their Patronesse, did offerre in their yearely Sacrifice a mā to Saturne. And almost all the Grecians, before they would marche on towards the fielde, woulde after a most detestable and horrible maner defile the Aulters and Tē∣ples wyth manslaughter. And the Romaynes thoughe not often, yet sometimes wyth men offerred vppe in sacri∣fice, thoughte good to appease the wrath of their Gods. Wherefore litle is it to be marueiled at, if the Thracians, the Frenchmen, the Scythians, and other Nations, at that time voyde of all humanity and good ciuility, em∣braced and well liked of those Sacrifices, by the instiga∣tion and motion of euill spyrites, which consisted in mur∣der and effusion of bloude. And to speake of Diana ho∣noured in Scithia, which was neuer satisfyed wyth bloude (that I mighte let passe the other cruell Gods of the gen∣tiles) it is manifeste that the Princes of Phaenicia in the greate calamities of their country, were wonte butcherly to kill for sacrifice that childe which they most entierly lo∣ued. The Ecclesiasticall Historyes doe witnesse also that this was the maner in Scythia, that parents layinge aside all good Nature, and fatherlye loue and pitie, were wonte to appointe, and as it were consecrate their chil∣dren to the fire. But what do I staye in this matter, whereas it is deliuered vnto vs by the handes of manye wryters, that almost no sacrifice was done by them with∣out some notable and great impietie. In fine it came to passe that a wonderfull immunitie and liberty in sinning, followed that outragious furie and wickednesse.
For whereas it is the propertye of true religion to keepe men within the boūdes of dutye, after that, that religion was published & allowed which did not only set at naught all dutyes appropried and belonginge to honest shamefast∣nes and good humanitye, but also brought men to this o¦pynion that the Godes were pleased in vnlawfull lustes, in bloudshedinge, in wilfull and horrible murder: nowe it coulde not be chosen, but that al men in general thus des∣perately set, shoulde defyle thēselues with al kind of beast∣lines, and detestable villany. In the ende it came to passe that sinne takinge roote, and beginninge of the deprauati∣on of nature, then increased by vse, lastly perfyted and con¦firmed by vncleane and vile religion, should worke the vt∣ter vndoinge, and ouerthrow of all mankynde. But par∣aduenture some man wil say what of al this? do you think in that greate wracke and decay of vertue, to haue ben re∣mayning not one signe, or relique of true nobility, neyther any one man of those auncient tymes, to haue giuen him∣selfe to the studie and loue of honestye? I cannot denye but manye in that common miserye of man haue bene allured through that counterfayt shewe of honesty, and haue bene after a sorte stirred vpp to the exercise and practyze of ver∣tue. There was no doubte, there was the image and cha∣racter of God imprinted in the mynde of man, disgraced through sinn not clerely put out, and vtterly extinguished. And when thou heareste the image of God, thou must not thinke I meane any suche picture as might be paynted by Protogenes in a table or curiously sette out in couloures by Apelles, or any other resemblance of anye thinge made in yuorie by som exquisite craftesmā, which might repre∣sēt ye liuely image of God, For ye image of god is nothing els but ye imitatiō & folowinge of his vertue, as near as a mā possible may. And that is, a prouident wit, able to cō¦prise many things, quick and sharp, conteining within it selfe all seedes and causes of vertue. Therefore whereas
we are by the handie work of God thus made and created, nothing is more agreing to our nature, and constitution, then true worthines and honesty. And if so be that we had bene from the beginninge free from the infectious conta∣gion of sinne and iniquiye, and deliuered from all fonde peruerse opynions, and from all heynous and deadlye of∣fences, vertue it selfe woulde haue easely wonne vs to the loue of Godlines. But whereas the multitude of those so many mischiefes conspyring together seketh the spoyle of this image of God, it is most commonlye lead away frō the good inclination of nature: and then falleth oute that contencion and as it were ciuil broyle, in which reason en∣lightned with a certayne glimse and similitude of diuine nature oftentymes victoriouslye triumpheth: but is ma∣nie more times lead captiue and yeeldeth to beastlines and sensuality, yet so, that it leaueth some certayne signi∣fication of doloure and grief in that striuing and as it were drawinge backe, it is caried away from vertue and Godli∣nes. Whiche manifestlye proueth that the sparcke and grace of vertue maye bee throughe some lewde luste and outragious concupiscence enfeebled, but neuer subdued. For no man hath euer bin so exceedinglye giuen to licenti∣ousnes, either so dronken wyth the dregges of sensuality, but as soone as that wauering and wilfull pleasure (the mistie vapoure whereof had bleared the eyes of his vnder∣standinge) was vanished, waxing heauie, crucifying him∣selfe through sorrowe and lamentation, he was in consci∣ence greuously tormented. Which ye yong man in Plautus sufficiently testifyeth, for he in this wyse complayneth. Al those things knew I perfectly which thou didst thē declare I had in mind imprinted fast, how I did neuer spare To spēd & spoile my fathers goods, to stayn their aunciēt name That glory purchasde to our race, and eke renoumed fame. I knewe what beste did mee beseeme, ne coulde it put in vre, Such force did Venus worke in me, so did she me allure.
Whereas hee maketh mention of the force of Venus, it maye playnly appeare that he noteth vnto vs those euil affections and the inconstancie whiche wee receiued of our first father whiche also grew and was increased, through the sin of al posteritye. Agayne where he inuaieth against himselfe miserable and wretch that he was, and by an in∣ward consideration of his offence conceiueth griefe, herein he sheweth some sparck of grace and heauenly wysedome which delighteth in nothing except it be honest, and righ∣tuous. There are who can deny but there are in vs by na∣ture remayninge (that we returne from whence we haue digressed) the sedes of vertue, the feruēt and earnest zeale of honesty, the desire and loue of true nobility. Yet notwt∣standinge such hath bene the fraylty and weaknes of man his nature, suche hath bene the calamity of man throughe synne receiued, that although very many through a good inclination of nature haue attayned a certayne apparante shewe of vertue: yet very few haue imbraced the true and perfecte forme of honestye and vertue. For albeit they af∣fected a certayne kynde of worthy renoume, yet what true worthines was, they knewe not, when they neuer looked vp into heauen, whence wee oughte to fetche al true and perfect vertue. And how coulde they behold the heauens? whose minds were fully fixt on the yearth, supposing they should direct al their deuises either to the gatheringe of worldely pelfe and riches or to the attayning of such pray∣ses and glory as the people pleased to bestowe on theym. I pray you therefore what haue those iolye fellowes, and great wise mē gottē. which liued so manye yeares agoe? what hath most noble & valiaūte Emperours cōpassed by their worthy and great enterpryces taken in hand for the titles of honour and glory? may we thinke they haue be∣stowed al their industrye, labour, and trauaill, in the se∣king of glory and renoūe in vayne? No doubt in vayn. For they carefully embraced that vertue, that was fayre and
goodly in shew but in dede a coūterfayt, & a vayn shadow: For all menne although they had before their eyes a cer∣tain resēblance of vertu yet could they not kepe thēselues safe & free frō the cōmon plague and infectiō that annoyed generally all mankinde. Neyther could they be deliuered from these straunge maladies of the soule wherewith they were miserablye entangled, whereas it was not in their owne power to helpe themselues: and God both the foun∣tayne, and last ende of all vertue, by whose onely vertue, they mought obtayn it, they did not with the eyes of their mynd sufficiently beholde. Therfore there reigned in that age no true vertue but the false and counterfayte forme of vertue: no true and perfect worthines, but the vayne sha∣dowe of worthines: no true desire of renomne, but a pre∣tensed, vnruly and fonde lusting after fame and glorye. All whiche trulye were not so muche incited with the ex∣cellent, & delectable shape of honesty it selfe as that they mought mounte vp to the state of honour, and with admi∣ration be reuerenced of the people, did take in hand those notable and famous actes. That if it so be that they which seemed somewhat to put to their indeuour to their attay∣ning of vertue had not ye fruite of theire labors, what may be thought of the reste, who hauinge broken the bandes of pyety, honestye, and godlines, did vnto nothinge so much bende thēselues, as to enterpryce all horrible factes and villanyes, therby to fulfil the immoderate and outragi∣ous luste that they had, to make profe of all thinges. IN time past Iury onely kept it self within the compasse and boūdes of dutie, beynge lincked and streyghted in withe the lawes and precepts of God, and with moste pu¦re and sincere religion, and a longe tyme free from all a∣bominable superstition, of whiche it is writtē▪ There is no Idoll in Iacob neither carued image in Israell. The lorde their God is there.
And in a nother place: God is knowen in Iurie, and his holy name in Israell. This Nacion did diligently exercise it selfe in the studye of Holines, and hopinge for the life to come, practised as muche as in it did lye, all maner of pie∣tie and righteousnes. Notwithstandinge the nature of true and perfect Godlines was not expressed in their law, but such a kinde of honestie, which mighte seeme to haue bin not absolute and entire good, but rather an vnfini∣shed and rude shape of honesty. No doubt it restrayned men from many wicked, and wilfull enterpryses, it with∣stoode furious madnes and impietie, it did seuerelye and sharpely punishe offenders, yet did it not leade and guide any man to the perfectest and highest steppe of vertue and wysedome. For they were prouoked to the loue of vertue, not by the incitinge and allurement of vertue it selfe, but partly by dread and feare, partly by prefermente, appoin∣ted for suche as did surpasse all other in innocencie and in∣tegritie of lyfe. For whereas they sawe in the firste or∣dinaunce & establishment of the Law, flames of fire flashe out in euery part of Heauen, the Earth, and aire to quake wyth the vehemente and terrible ratlinge of thunder, straunge lighteninges fall from the firmament, through the flakes and flames whereof the highest mountayne on euery side was set on fire, besides the dreadfull sounde of the trumpette, the wonderfull smokes and thicke mistie cloudes, and the rest of those terrible aspectes which ma∣nifestly declared the maiestie of the Godheade it selfe pre∣sente: thus beinge marueylously daunted wyth feare, and striken with astonishmēt, wyth lowde voyce they call vp∣pon Moses. Speake thou (say they) vnto vs, and wee will eftsones giue eare vnto thee. Let not the Lord speake vnto vs, leaste happly wee die. But vnto all this what aun∣swereth Moses? He biddeth them to be of good courage, and giueth them to vnderstand the prouident will of God. Feare you not (quoth he) for God is come to proue you,
and that you should stande in awe of him, and that you should sinne no more. Which in effecte soundeth thus. As yet you are not by the will and appointmente of God free from wicked desiers, & from other euill affections of the mind: neyther are you such which of your owne good nature will be broughte to honesty and Godlines. This terrour therfore God hath striken into your mindes, that at the least by that meanes he mighte restrayne you from your wilfull and wicked wayes. But wyth what re∣wards doth he allure them to the exercise of vertue? Euē wyth the same almost doth hee intice them, the which the rude and ignorant multitude doth so much desire & wish, wyth plenty of corne, wyth aboundance of riches, wyth sounde and perfect health of the body. But if that be one∣ly to be termed vertue, which not cōstrayned by feare, but by a mere voluntary motion doth her office and duty, and taketh anye worthy enterprice in hande not for the attay∣ninge transitory thinges in this life, but because it direc∣teth it selfe to God the finall ende of life in deede, then how may that he deemed a vertue which is by feare forced and wrested oute, whose ende and felicity is put not in the true worshipping of the euerlasting God, but in the care∣full coueting of worldly commodities? I would not haue those hereby signifyed, who hauing more experience of the frailty of man his nature, righte wysely vnderstoode that they coulde not of themselues perfourme those thinges yt were commaunded in the lawe, except they shoulde seeke refuge at Gods hands, the onely stay of ruling & guidinge their liues aright. For they that farre passed all other in rare and singular wysedome, had no confidence in theyr owne naturall strength, and did put their whole truste in God, and being confirmed wyth the power of the holy spi∣rite, came to the higheste perfection of vertue. Who not∣withstandinge were fewe in nomber. All the rest, who ey∣ther leaned to much to their owne reason and vnderstan∣ding,
or for worldly respects did their duties, could by no meanes purchase renowne, to vertue due and appertay∣ning, neyther could any longe time because of the infirmi∣tie and imbecilitie of their minds, continue in good liuing, nay rather fell headlong into great and horrible impietie, beinge intangled and snared with wicked desires, and the entisements of most filthy pleasures. Besides this ma∣ny of them when they had defiled and polluted themselues with the foule and shameful stinkinge sinne of any super∣stition whatsoeuer, they were in that desperate state and condition, that no outragious & detestable villanie could be imagined, which they willingly woulde not committe, in so much that they would throw their naturall children into flaming fire, in honour of their false & fayned Gods. Of this so great and notable impietie, furie, and madnes, many holy and worthy fathers complaine, but especially Ieremie most lamentably aboue all other. For example, when he speaketh in the person of God thus: They haue broughte their wickednes into my house, in which my name is called vpon, that they might pollute it, and that they might builde alters in Tophet, which is in the val∣ley of the sonne of Ennom, there to destroy their sonnes and daughters vvith fire. And agayne, This place shall not hereafter be called Tophet, and the valley of the son∣nes of Ennom, but the valley of murther, And I vvill bringe to noughte the Counsaile of Iuda and Hierusa∣lem in this place, and I vvill cutte them vvith the sword in the sight of their ennemies. These wordes spake Ie∣remie. But it is not necessary to rippe vppe the rable of those mischiefes, with the which that Nacion was infe∣cted, through the corruption whereof, true beliefe was de∣cayed, and relligion subuerted, the law of God brought in contempt, and by the meanes of lust and superstition, tro∣den vnder foote. It is sufficient that we vnderstand yt not so muche as in that nation, but onely in a very fewe, there
remayned the desire of true and perfect vertue, and yt the greatest parte of them yelded themselues thrall to more impietie of sinne & wickednes, then any other men. Nei∣ther is the crime to be valued alike in him that hath had no kinde of instruction and learning, as in him, who to all kinds of vertue hath bin by the lawes of God trayned and directed. That if neither reason to men, nor practise to the vertuous, nor the lawe to the Hebrewes, had sufficient force in it selfe to the attayning true and perfecte commē∣dation and glorye annexed to vertue, and nothinge els in thinges appertayning to man, is left to put vs in minde of vertue: it followeth by good reason that all perfection & worthines of true vertue and nobilitie lay hidden and ex∣tincte all that time of our auncestours, neither that there was any place in the world, whither the abhomination of sinne, as a certayne deadly and pestilente infection did not creepe. Verelye this was that huge and monsterous kingdome of sinne and death, which had a longe time op∣pressed all Nations, of the which the holy Scriptures in so many places complaine. There is no man (sayth the Scripture) which loueth iustice and righteousnes, there is no man that seeketh earnestly after God, all men are gone astraie oute of the right waye, there is not one man liuing that hath done his dutie, to conclude all the world is oppressed with the tirannie of sinne, and the crueltie of death. This also: All men are occupied in the studie of vanitie, they are caried awaye with dreames and fayned phantasies. They embrace nothinge but that which is voyde of wisedome and honestie, and full of all errour and damnable impietie. That also is a moste worthye saying, wherein the glory and flourishing estate of man is compared to grasse, and to the flower of the fielde, which if any boysterous blast shal happen to shake, it is so scatte∣red that the least signe thereof maye be no more seene and perceiued. Much like vnto ye saying of Esaie. All flesh is
grasse, & all the glorie therof, is as the flower of the field, the grasse wythered, the flower eftsones vanisheth away, but the word of the Lord endureth for euer. All which e∣uidētly proue, yt there was no liuely & perfecte image of dignity and worthines, after that fall of the first man, nor any absolute kinde of true and righte renowne, nor anye forme at all of true Nobilitie, when all the worlde was vniuersally ouerwhelmed wyth all kind of sinne and abhomination, and all things o∣uer spread wyth darckenes, had loste theyr beautie & seemelines.
❧ THE SECONDE Booke of Christian Nobilitie. NOw sufficiently (as I thincke) it may appeare, that the nature of true and perfecte vertue and noblenes, hath these manye yeares passed lien hidde in darcknes: whereas the chiefe, and soueraigne good was to moste parte of men vtterly vnknowen: whereas the pestilent and tyrannical raigne of sinne had enfebled ye force of mannes reason: whereas their righte worthy at∣tempts, who in witte and industrious trauayle excelled o∣ther, stretched onely so farre, to practise and exercise one onely kinde of vertue, and that not in deede, but in word & shew goodly and glorious: whereas they also that had vn∣derstanding of the law of God, through weakenes and im∣becillitie of minde, infected with moste pestilente and per∣nicious errours, were occupyed & conuersaūt in all kinde of filthines and abhomination. Generall therefore was that plague and miserie, vniuersall was that fier brande and flame, which a longe time ranne throughe the whole world, that darcknes was common & euery where, wher∣with all those meanes to attayne renowne and worthines were couered and obscured, till the time came which by ye secrete purpose and prouident will of God, was before all worldes declared, at what time man kinde should be deli∣uered from so great misery and wretchednes. For whē the Sonne of righteousnes appeared, who dispersed the foggie miste of errour and impietie, that afore darckned ye mindes vnderstandinge, and gaue a cleare and heauenlye light to the seely & miserable estate of man: Men began wt theyr eyes to behold the true seemely shape & forme of ho∣nestie. Then beganne they to be inflamed and stirred vp to the attayning of prayse & glory incidente onely to true and perfect vertue, being by the holy spirite of God directed, &
established. Who truly was not so much incensed against man in the correction & punishment of his heynous trans∣gression, yt he would cleane blot and race out of his memo∣rie the most excellent image of himself, imprinted in man. But rather for the excedinge greatnes of his offence, vsed a milde and gentle chastisement: and also appointed to mā such a paine, as whereby hee soughte not seuere reuenge∣mēt of his impietie: but to applie to his disease, a holsome medecine and remedie, & to recall him againe to vertue & honestie. But it was necessary by ye law of righteousnes, yt some, whose weldoinge through their intollerable pride and stubbernes, was not to bee hoped for, shoulde feele the whippe & scourge of seueritie, onely to be a terrour vnto other: and they beinge an example vnto them, it fell out yt manye returned from their wicked wayes, & by that mea∣nes the nomber was farre greater of those that might re∣ioyce in the loue and mercie of God, then complaine of his sharpe and seuere iudgemente. To conclude after sinne and wickednes was once committed, all meanes possible were deuised, to heale ye festered soore, by sinne procured. There were laid forth menacing threatninges, there was sente amonge men death and destruction, generall ouer∣whelming of waters, great waste & hurt by fire. Againe, there happened straunge sights & prodigious monsters, to feare and terrifie the minds of mē. Further the broiles and tumults of warre, the vtter ruine and subuersion of countryes, had this meaninge to strike into men some re∣morse of sinne, and to withdraw them frō their wickednes & abhominaciō. On the other side the cōmodities of this life, the law set downe by the finger of God, the institutiō of holy religion, Gods promises, his exceedinge benefits, were to reduce men both to their dutie, & to the purcha∣sing of theyr owne health & safetie. God therfore of his en∣tyre and fatherly clemencie, goodnes, and mercye, pro∣uided for the safegarde and preseruation of man his e∣state by all kinde of meanes, whether they were▪
ordayned for his chastisemēt, or for a meanes to allure him to vertue & goodnes. But after that the extremitie of his sickenes so much increased, and his wickednes waxed so great, that his wounded soule seemed almost incurable, ye chiefe and principall of all Phisitions, applyed vnto him another soueraigne medecine, and gaue vnto him an espe∣ciall preseruation, not onelye to repayre that which was impayred, and lost by disease, but also fully to restore his former healthe, with further encreasinge the same wyth strength, and all other necessary supplies. This no doubt was the wysedome of Almighty God, the eternall sonne of the father eternall, begotten in such wyse as no tongue can declare, the perfect image of his fathers glory, ye foun∣taine & welspring of life & immortalitie. He therfore who had in the beginning of the worlde, imprinted in man the shape and liklines of himselfe, hath losed him which was bound wyth fetters of sinne & death, & compassed about wt al kinde of misery & calamitie, and hath by his singuler & diuine prouidēce restored him to his former liberty. First therefore it was expediente and necessary that, that abho∣minable and most haynous offence wherewith mankinde generally was infected, should be washed away: and that the violating and defacing of the relligion of God shoulde be by some holy sacrifice or satisfaction raunsomed, & that the filthie staine by wickednes and sinne receyued, shoulde be clensed, and cleane taken out. That at the length man beinge thus deliuered from the bondage and tyrannie of sinne, mought recouer the worthy titles of his aunciente dignity and renowme, and in the ende attayne the glory of lyfe euerlastinge. But no such sacrifice coulde possiblye be found, by which so great impietie might be purged, or the iust iudgemēt of God satisfyed, or the staine receyued, quite and cleane taken oute, and washed awaye. There∣fore we all defiled wyth sinne, subiecte and thrall to moste woofull calamities, soyled wyth the suddes and filthye
frothe of all kinde of dishonesty were borne to perpetuall and euerlastinge miserye. This shoulde haue beene our wretched and vnfortunate estate, excepte our most bounte∣full & mercifull Sauiour Christe, had beholden vs most miserable and cursed aitifes with the eies of his mercy, & had of his singuler gracious goodnes, taken vppon him ye true fourme and shape of man, and retaininge still the ma∣iesty of his Godheade had after a wonderfull order vnited and ioyned thereunto the nature of man. Therefore the Lord and Ruler of all the worlde, at ye bendinge of whose browe the Heauens and Earth do quake and tremble, to the intent he mought bringe man (lamentably loste, and ex∣pelled out of the territory and pleasant place of Paradise) to his natiue soile, and country againe: hee descendinge from the highest heauen, was conuersaunte here with vs in Earth, in such sorte yt hee neither layd aside the rule of Heauen aboue, nor yet did seclude and seperate himselfe from the swaie and gouerment of the whole world beside. By this league and mutuall coniunction of the deuine and humaine natures, sinne that had taken déepe roote in man was incontinently plucke vp by the rootes: the rule and aucthority of death was abridged, and for all manner of wickednes wt the purest and holiest sacrifice yt moughte be, satisfaction was made. For what more holye kinde of sacrifice could be inuented, then that which was done and celebrated by the Highest Bishoppe, who was by the aun∣cient Prophecies of the holy Fathers saide to be a Prieste accordinge to the order of Melchisedech? Who made sacrifice not with shéepe or calues, or any offeringes by the vaine supersticion of men allowed of, but with his owne most pretious bloude. Who that hee moughte keepe vs from that death and destruction that did hange ouer our heades, was content for the generall saluation of vs all to let those thinges light vppon his owne heade, and for our sakes to offer vp himselfe a pure and vndefiled sacrifice.
Who suffered himselfe to be scourged with roddes, and to be hanged on the crosse, that he mought heare the puni∣shment of our generall offence, and appease Gods wrath against vs with the sacrifice of his sacred body. O excee¦dinge greatnes of God, O plenty infinit, and vnmeasu∣rable of the benefites of God, and wonderfull largnes of his giftes, heaped and powred vppon vs. He the maker of all thinges, by whose power all thinges bothe aboue & beneath were framed and finished: who ruleth and dispo∣seth all thinges, the excéedinge glorye of whose maiestye the Heauens cānot containe, did lie inclosed in the wombe of a most blessed Virgine, and tooke vppon him the verye true and perfect shape of a man, that he mought place man in some degree and deuine perfection. This was that which many hundred yeares before was foretolde by men inspired with the holy ghoste: to witte, that time woulde come, that God couered with humaine shape, shoulde vse the office of an instructer and teacher, & should deliuer vn∣to vs the holsome discipline of vertue and godlines. For Esaye writeth thus. All nations shall runne to him, and mutch people shall goe, and they shall saye, come ye lette vs ascende vp to the hill of the Lorde, and to the house of the God of Iacob, and he shal teach vs his waies, and wee shall walke in his pathes. And in another place he vttereth such speach as if God the father should impart his minde and counsell with his sonne. In this manner: I haue appoyncted thee to be the atonement betwixte me and mankinde to be á light to lighten all nations, to make the blinde to see, to set him at liberty, which is fast tyed in chaines. Againe in another place the sonne of God speaketh thus of him selfe. The spirite of God res∣teth on me, for that he hath annoynted mee, and sent me to instructe the meeke in spirite, and to remedye thē that are afflicted. Baruch the Prophet calleth him God, from whence hath spronge all knowledge, and wisedome. And a little after this, he saith: he hath appeared in the Earth
and talked with men. And Ioell doth with these wordes stirre vp all Godly men. Reioyce O you sonnes of Sion, and be glad in the lorde your God, for that he hath sent you a teacher to instructe you in all righteousnes. There∣fore after that the voice of that heauenly docter, in darke∣nes gaue lighte, & had instructed mankinde with the rules of true religion, and the discipline of wisedome, and had taken away the gréedy mindes desire of humayne ad trā∣sitory pleasures, and had sheewed them that nothinge in Earth was greatly to be feared, not death, which killeth onely the body, but doth not so mutch as touche the soule: not want of children, lacke of friendes, pouertye, and such like, which if they ircke and greue the carcas, yet neuer∣theles the good estate of the soule, which is immortall, they cannot hurte, and had taught them afterwardes to imbrace charitye, lyberality, temperaunce, when he had deepely imprinted these thinges in the minde of man: and had confirmed the hartes of his folowers and auditours with an assured hope of immortalitye, and inflamed them with a feruent desire of diuine perfection: who can doubte but that nowe, not an image and shewe of vertue, but the wonderfull excellency of perfect vertue allured them, that were borne to renoume and after a merueylous sorte infla¦med? What shall wée say? In that he did not only teach them is exercise themselues in all honesty and godlines, but also cōfirmed their strength whereby they mought be able constantly to perfourme those thinges that he afore had taught them. Which also by holy Oracles and Pro∣phesies was afore shewed. The eies (saith he) of the blind shalbe opened. It is not to be vnderstoode that the holy Prophet did prophecie these thinges onely of bodyly eies. For all those thinges that haue bene declared vnto vs through the instinct and inspiration of the holy ghoste by those excellent menne, are not to be applyed to the body, bt referred to the mynde, and soule. Againe it foloweth.
The eares of the deafe shalbe opened. He calleth them deafe, which hath shut their eares, to the intēt they would not vnderstande the will and pleasure of God, of whome Ieremye speaketh. Beholde their eares are vncircumci∣sed, and they cannot heare. Notwithstandinge Christe of his meere mercy hath brought to passe, that the deafe with their eares shoulde receiue good instruction. I pray you what foloweth afterwardes. Then shall the lame leape as the Harte, and the toungues of the dombe shall sounde forth the praise and glory of God. What is vn∣derstoode by the lame, they are not ignorant, which are but yonge and simple schollers in diuinity. For they are lame that haue any kinde of let or maime in their soule, by the impediment whereof they are stopped in the race of piety & godlines: who can neither endeuoure by force of strēgth nor by any meanes so deale by swiftnes of runninge, that they may obtaine the rewarde of vertue. Therefore con∣sider and ponder with your selfe how manifoldly the soule of man is blessed by him that restored the liberty of man and browghte hym out of daunger and captiuity. Who gaue sighte to the blinde, opened the eares of them that were deafe, gaue swiftnes to the lame, so that like Hartes they are able to runne vppe to the toppes of the highest mountaines, and make engines to destroye Ser∣pentes. Lastly infantes, suckinge babes, and dombe men can vtter Hymnes of praise, and songes of thanks ge¦uinge. But in this chiefly God did deale with vs moste lyberally, that wheras we were before altogether lost and forlorne, & no parte of oure life voyde of miserable wret∣chednes, nowe by the greate goodnes and healpe of Iesu Christe, wee are restored to oure former felicity. And yet his benefyte in this one poyncte farre exceeded all other, that he poured into man largel his wisedomt and grace, and wyth continuall care and studye preferued his holy lawe, not ingrauinge and curiously caruing the same in tables, but most deepely imprintinge it in his harte and
mynde. For now nothinge letting the mynde, beynge in great felicity and blessednes, it did wholie yelde it selfe to all kynd of righteousnes, and celestiall discipline, the vertue and power of the most high and euerlastinge God shewed it selfe moste louinglye vnto the soule of manne beynge his owne image and liklines, which he in his cre∣ation had endowed with al grace and vertue, and now ap∣peared, and gaue vnto it a clearer light and did inflamed it with an earnest desire of heauenly wysedome. And if the Lawe be nothinge els but a right and perfecte rule of reason, assuredly that reason which not onely by nature, but that whiche is muche and farre better and by the prest and readye helpe and power of almightye God was made so perfec that it mought easelye applye it selfe to folowe the will and pleasure of God, it canne not bee gainsayde but that it cōteineth the law of God. For thus it is writtē in ye Prophet Hieremie. This shalbe the couenant which I will make with the house of Israell. After those dayes fayth the Lord, I wil geue them my law to possesse the bowels of them and wil wryte it within their hartes. And this lawe is Christ himselfe euen he which is called the wisdome and power of God the father, who is to mor∣tall men an example of rare and excellent vertue, and the onely means to gouern their lyfe by, beynge alwayes pre∣sent wyth those myndes which of vnpure he made chast & holye and be kindleth them beyng stirred vppe with the motion of the holy spirite of God, to the desire of immor∣tall glorye. And wheras by the capacity & vnderstāding of man there can be nothinge comprised greater then the po∣wer, maiesty, and godhead of Christe, whiche we knowe is presente alwayes with vs, by whose grace wee are mo∣ued to imbrace true and perfect vertue, certes there is no∣tonge so eloquent, no discourse of man so copiouse, and so rhetorical, that can declare sufficiently, or effectually set fth the exceedinge greatenes of the mercie, and lemen¦cie
of God. And nowe me thinke I see (most renowmed Prince) that I haue through a certayne boldnes, incidēte to young men, rashelye and aduenturously taken vpon me so great an interpryce, as I shal not in any one poynt hap∣pely discharge. For I am entered into ye discourse of those thinges as it were into the deepe, and mayne Sea, with ye profoūdnes whereof all eloquence, and oratory of mā must needes bee confounded and ouerwhelmed. But what doe I speake of the vnderstanding of manne? The heauenlye Powers themselues, cā scarcely through their diuine and angelicall vtterāce, worthely handle matters of so great importance: so farre of is it, that the tongue of a mor∣tall mā, oftē defyled with vnpure and vnsemely speaches can with exquisite learninge describe the wonderful bene∣fites of God, bestowed on man. For is there any manne endued withe suche singularitye of iudgement, that hee is able to conceyue, muche lesse expresse in woordes in what māner the Sōne of God hath taken vnto him the shape and forme of man, and with so wonderfull a linke of con∣iunction, vnited his and our natures, that beynge verye God, was perfect man, that he mought clense and purifie the whole generation of mā, from euery blot & blemish of sinne and mought keepe them safe, holye, and vndefiled frō all kynde of wickednesse? further what kynd of eloquence is able to expresse the miserye of the crosse, whiche Christ himselfe prouided, and prepared as a bulwark and engine to vndermyne and ouerthrow the force of our enemy who cā set forth as the worthines of the matter it self requieth the vnconquerable vertu of him with the which he stroke to the ground, and crushed in peeces that venemous ser∣pent, into whose power al th generally were fallen, and extinguished the farre stretched kingdome of death, and banished and put to flight all superstiiōs, and barbarous behauours. That in meane tyme I omitt that, how he was raysed from death and bearyng with him the spoyles
which hee beeynge the victor and conqueror in all battails procured to himselfe with wonderfull glorye entered into the throne celestiall, that from thence forthe hee moughte bring vnder his authority & eternall iurisdictiō al coūtri∣es, and nations. Also that I omit to speak of that kind∣lynge of fyre of the holye spyryte, wherewythe the Apostles mindes inflamed wyth a rare and syngular con∣stancie, declared thinges secrete and heauenly, and filled the whole worde with Christes holye name. All these thinges stryke into our myndes a wonderfull admirati∣on, and through their exceeding greatnes bereue man of his reason and vnderstanding, and maketh his tounge to folter, and stagger. Therfore it is a great matter and dif∣ficult, and not onely excedeth the slendernes of my simple witt, but is a thing, whch cannot be compassed by mans reache and capacity to vtter and declare any one parte of those thinges, which not the doctrine and traditiō of men, but the wysedome of God hath inspyred into our myndes, notwithstāding: that should haue ben cōsidered, before we had in our first enterance as it were passed forth out of the heauen. Now truely wheras we haue boldly launched into the depe, we must hoyse vp our sayles. Therefore le∣auinge that argumente whiche we haue before dilated so farforth as it was lawful and we durst presume, we wil by Gods aide and assistance brieflye speake of those thinges which concerne the worthie titles of a Christian name. ANd first as touchinge vertue yf (as it was of vs before declared) yt onely is to be demed a vertu, which procee∣dinge from God, alwaies is referred to God, and to him directeth al her actyons: and euident it is that the heauen∣ly and celestiall kynde of vertue did onelye procede origi∣nally from the doctrine & mighty power of Christ, and it was powred onely into the myndes of thē which were the
true folowers of Christ: it consequētly foloweth that one lyin Christians the perfecte light of true nobilitye appe∣areth. For this is the onely vertue which weakened al the strengthe and cutte a sunder the synowes of sinne which restored to the former bewtie the most excellēt and diuine substāce of the soule, defiled with al vncleanes, which did make strong and lusty the feble strength of the soule with a marueylous swiftnes and constācie farre passinge the o∣pinion and credit of men, which hath aliened all our cogi∣tations from all humaine and transitory pleasures, to the study of holines and pure religion, and hath layde open a sure and ready path way to heauen. Let any man (yf it so please him) compare that kynde of vertue which was in ye Grctians and Romaines both, that was to outward ap∣parance worthy greate renoumne, with the nobilitye of a Christiā man, he shal eftsones perceiue what great odds and difference there is betwixt them both. Theire ver∣tue attained by mans trauaile and paine resteth in things vayne and transitory. The vertue of Christiās geuē to thē by the francke, and free gift of God hath a moste assured hope, fixed in God. Theire vertue hath respecte to tem∣porall treasure, and the glorious glisteringe of wordlye pleasures (whiche in shorte space perisheth and comes to nothinge) the vertue of Christianes respecteth onely the thinges that no time shal consume, the thinges that are heauenly, and euerlastinge. Their vertue darckned with the contagions of sinne, and brought low creepeth on the ground: but the vertue of Christians beyng pure, and vn∣defyled swyftly, and confidently flyeth vp to heauen. Their vertue with a waueringe hoope and fainte courage thinketh on their glory. The vertue of Christians, re∣steth & stayeth on a most forme and assured hope of immor¦tality and thinketh certainely to inioy the true fruict, and effect of glorye. Lastly their vertue pufte vp with moste light and phantastical opinions stirreth vp amonge sim∣ple
and fonde men great admiration. The vertue of Christians illumined with the true lighte of holines, and sanctimonye, rauisheth wyse men with the desire & loue of true & euerlastinge worthines. To con∣clude in the one, may you see a certaine halfe deade image of vertue: in the other vertue her selfe, furnished with all necessary healpes, and beautified and setforth with all her due titles, and ornamentes. Againe he shall easily vnder∣stande, wherein they both differ, which will geue himselfe to the vnderstandinge of their effectes & operations. For he that will examine and diligently consider Christian ly∣berality, méekenes, and temperance, and the offices, and dueties that springe out of their other vertues: and will compare theym with the actions that procéede out of hu∣mayne vertue: shall finde that the soule of a perfect chris∣tian man, is an holy place and Temple in the which the e∣ternall Godhead of the blessed Trinitye inhabiteth. For so he him selfe testifieth. I and my father will come to vi∣site him, and we wil make with him our abode and man∣sion place. And els where. I will make my habitati∣on amonge them, and will walke vp and downe. And Paule in many places calleth the myndes of Christians the churches, and Temples of God. Therefore wher∣as God himselfe hath made his seat, and dwellinge place in the mindes of them, that trace the steppes, and treade the pathwaye of Christe, that his aide and assistaunce be∣inge allwayes prest, and at hande, he mought inflame thē with an earnest desire of followinge his diuine vertue, it is a ridiculous thinge, co compare the bare shewe of anye humaine vertue, to a vertue so excéedinge excellent, BVt nowe touchinge nobility what should I saye? For if it be true that the wise and learned suppose all noby∣litye to springe out of vertue, and do thinke the fame to be nothinge els but a race, and kinred illumined with rare &
singular vertues, truely that stocke a family yt is fryght with diuine vertues, cannot be thought but to issue oute of a diuine race and progeny. And therefore we do not timerously, and staggeringely, but with a lowde voice, & bolde courage saie yt the whole generation of Christians fetch their petegree from God himselfe. Who haue not their generatiō in that maner as the race of those famous worthyes that Homer wryteth of. For they, when some of them excelled other in anye notable and famous Acte, did easely challenge vnto theimselues a fayned nobilitye, referringe the first beginninge of their whole kinred to ye false and wicked Goddes of the Gentiles. But wee Chris∣tians truely call our father not Iupiter, or Bacchus, but the highe, allmighty and euerlastinge GOD. Neither can any man, without an heynous, & intollerable offence, doubt of this so worthy and famous gentility, seinge it is made euident and knowen vnto vs by so manye and so im∣munerable testimonies of holy scripture. First Iohn the holy Prophet of God, doth saye that those which hath re∣ceaued the faith of Christe, haue receyued this speciall be∣nefit, that they are made the children of God. In so much that they are not in any wise to be esteemed of that line, to the which by cōsanguinity they are linked, or of that race into which by adoption they are receyued, but are to be re¦puted and referred as the ofspringe, and children of God. Beholde (saith he in an other place) what benefit we haue receiued of God in that we are called the sonnes of God. But what saith Paule? In howe many places? Howe notably, howe rhetorically, doeth he dispute of the excel∣lencye of nobility. As where he calleth Christe our bro∣ther, where he sayeth that by the meere bounty, and free grace of the holie spirite, we are adopted into the kinred and family of God. VVheras he with vehement speach calleth that vniuersall creator of all thinges, the father of vs all. But can you require a greater warrant then his
owne testimony? I will declare (sayth he) thy name vnto my bretheren, and in the middest of thy holy Temple will I prayse the. And in another place. You must not call vpon any father in Earth, for one only is your father in heauen: finally this. I goe vp to my father and yours, my God, and your God. It were an endles labour to col∣lecte and gather together all aucthorities that ratifie and confirme this diuine kinde of generation and kinred. But I haue saide inough and to mutch all ready, especially whereas I hasten to speake of other matters. But this I suppose not out of the way to warne you of that they are not diuerse families and kinredes in which we repose this holy and godly nobility. For although they are by bloud seuered, by estate and condicion diuerse, by reasō of distinct places infinite: yet after they are into one place assembled, to the intent they should shew thēselues valiant souldiars vnder their cheife, and generall Captayne Christe, they are incontinently tyed together, & vnited with one bloude of kinred, and consanguinity. For they haue nowe laide aside all alliaunce and proximity of bloude, by which afore they were seuered, and beinge adopted into the house and kinred of God, in which there is no distinction of birth, they are nowe equall and all a like Gentlemen. For after that they being inwardly sanctified by the outwarde ele∣ment of water in the holy sacrament of Baptisme, for most parte had renounced the olde vse and custome of sinne, and had laid aside the prince and image of our first father, and leauinge their former life, and beinge as it were borne a∣gaine, began to enter into a newe life, there was wrought incontinently a newe disposition of the mynde of man, and there did springe vp and arise therein a wonderfull perfec∣tion, and excellencye of nature: so that noe no signe of mans infirmity was left. Therefore that birth daye of ours we ought not to solempnize wherein we are borne in to the worlde, beinge by nature appoincted to all kinde of
miseries, and wofull calamities, but that daie (I saye) we ought to celebrate with wonderfull ioye and pleasure, in which the light of heauenly grace was offered vnto vs, & our saluation and liberty by the gratious goodnes and be∣nefit of Christe our blessed sauiour, procured. For we are not so much to be called the children of those Parentes by whose meanes we inioy this wretched and mortall life: as the children of God himfelfe, of whom wee haue this kind of life, that is full of diuine perfection, and by whom at length we shall obtayne immortality. Therfore although a kinred be made of them that are nowe ioygned togea∣ther, but were distincte, called, and chosen allmoste out of all Nations, differinge in place, in manners and nature dislyke, although they are all called to the participation of this most holy couenaunt, yet one kinred of al kinredes is made, hauinge the very selfe same holy rightes, the verye selfe same roote and originall of their gentility. The first beginning of our race and kinred (as it is afore declared) is God himselfe, at whose becke all thinges were made, & are preserued in their good estate, vnto whom all thinges are caried with a desire passinge mans cogitation & credit. For he was the aucthour of our generation, hee blessed vs with most excellent giftes, and called vs to the inheritāce of immortall glory, he enritched vs with all heauenly and celestial ornamētes. What thinge can a man deuise in his minde in estimation and worthines more excellent then ye man should be raised out of ye slime of the Earth, to climbe to so highe a degree and estate of dignitye. Let any man therfore (if him listeth) vaunt of his badges and cognizances, let hym brynge doune the line of his no∣ble race from the very first founder of his nobility, let him with woordes of verye light credite▪ aduouch Hercules, or some one of the worthies to be the chief and first beginner of his house and kinred, or if he may purchase credite ther¦by,
let him descende from the race of Iuppiter himselfe, so that we may truely call the eternal and euerlasting God our father, whiche truelye wee may be bolde to do, wher∣as we retaine within vs inclosed the spyrite of god, which is vnto vs a pleadge of this our diuine and spirituall no∣bility. For no more assured and more substanciall testimo∣ny can possibly be spokē of, thē that gift of the holye Ghost most bountefully bestowed vpon Christian men, wt which they are inflamed, with which as with an earnest desire of celestiall thinges in all kynd of vertue, they are made vi∣gilant which purchaseth to the soule, security, ioye, and a wonderfull charity. This assistance of the holye spy∣ryte is of that sort, that it will not suffer vs to be of weake and faynt eyther courage, or hope. Of the whiche that we mighte the better intreate, the verye Etymologie, and worthynes of the name of a Christian is to be declared, the beginning of whiche name I will somwhat more at large expresse. And whereas that is cōmonlye knowen, it is not needefull for me to geue noyce thereof that the name of Chryst, implyeth a certayne vnction and annointing. foorthe verye same signifyeth  in Greeke, that Vngi in latine, whyche in oure tonge is to bee annoyn∣ted. THere was in tyme past an oyntment of greate holines and vertue, white wonderfull solemne ceremonyes made, wherwith they that were ordeined Pryestes, Prin∣ces, and Prophets were wont to be annointed. And that it was lawfull for no man to enter into priesthode, eyther to take vppon him the maiesty and aucthority of a Kinge, except he were anoynted with this holye oyntment, it is a thinge more commonly known then that itne deth by any man more amply to be discoursed. And how Prophets should haue the same, poured vpō them it appeareth by the
histories of kinges. For ther God commaunded Elias to annoynt Ahael and Iehu, and to create one king of Si¦ria, the other of Samaria Further he addeth. Thou shalt anoynt Helizeus the sōne of Saphat and appoynt him a Prophet in thy roome. It was not therefore at that time lawfull neyther to execute the office and dutye of a kinge, nor to enter into holy orders of Pryesthode, nor for Pro∣phettes sometimes by diuine inspiration to foretel things to come, or to enterprete any difficulte or secrete misterye, except they had beene before with this oyle anoynted, and consecrated. Not truely because there was that vertue in Cassia or Cinamome or other sweet odoures tempered with oyle, that without them wee should thinke no man able to attayne honour and soueragnetye. But no doubte ther was another kynd of oyle secret and spyrituall, wher of this compounde deuised by Moses, was but a shadowe and outwarde signe, without whiche no man could as his estate required gouern a kingdome, no man vncorruptly exercise ye most holy functiō of Priesthode, no mā through the diuine spirite of Prophesie,, foretel things to come. For no other thinge is this kynde of oyle, but the ayde and assistance of the holy spyrite alwayes at hand, and a hea∣uenly gift by Gods gratious goodnes bestowed vpon pu∣re and vndefyled myndes, by the power whereof many a∣bydinge here in earth, haue after a sort obteyned, the esta∣te and condicion of heauenly wightes. This is that oyn∣ment wherewith Christe was washed from top to toe as it is written. The spirite of God resteth vppon me, for that he hath anoynted me. But Daniell doth not onelye Prophecye of the annoyntinge, but sheweth that it is li∣mitted within the space of iii. score and x weekes within which tyme it should come to passe that the stayne of sinne should be cleane washed away, and the gilte of impyetye satisfied, and the chefe of thē which are called holy, should
be annoynted not with any such oyle, wherwith the bodye mought be for a shorte tyme through the swete smell and pleasant sauoure delighted, but whereof the soule should receiue endles comforte, & euerlasting ioye, and pleasure. Which is more plainly in another place declared in this wise. Whō God hath anoynted (saieth hee) with the holy ghost and vertue And whereas al those functions which haue bene of olde time in some signe signifyed, & bestowed on diuers men, were after a most excellente order and all at ones to be bestowed on Christ. For his euerlastinge kingdom, his most high priesthode, was by diuine oracles foretoulde and he was called many hundred yeares afore the excellent Prophet: seyng therfore he was after a won∣derfull order to bee magnified with all glory, and to be ad∣uaunced aboue all men to the higheste estate of honoure: meete it was that aboue all other partakers of the same inheritance, and glory, he shoulde be annoynted. As it is wrytten in the boke of Psalmes Thovv hast loued righ¦tuousnes and hated iniquity, therfore God euen thy God hath annoynted the vvith the oyle of gladnes aboue thy felows. A drop of Myrrh, and Cassia hath destilled from thye garmentes. He therefore aboundinge with sweete smelles, and precious oyntmentes, and therefore called by the name of Christ, beyng appoynted kinge of kinges, and aduaunced to the higheste dignity of Priesthode, par∣taker of all determinations and purposes of God, & being the dealer and worker in them, so gouerneth all thinges, that he obteineth for vs at Goddes handes peace & attone¦ment, and inspyreth into our myndes all good lessons and precepts of wisedome & things far beyond ye reach and ca∣pacity of mannes knowledge. Therfore all those worthy tytles of Power, holines, and spirituall perfection in this one name of Chryste are conteined. Seeynge therfore of that whiche plenteously abounded in Christe or kinge, some parte was also deriued vnto them that walked in his
wayes, and folowed his aucthoritye whom he calleth bre∣theren, companions, pertakers of all those good thinges that should be geuen vnto himself, therefore of good right the name of Chryste was applyed to theym, and they were tearmed Christians, eyther because they worship∣ped Christe, or because, they weere partakers of the same annoyntinge. For thus it is written in Iohn You haue the annoyntinge from the holye one and you knovv all thinges. And agayne shortlye after hee say∣eth The annoyntinge that you receyued of him remay∣neth in you: no neede haue you of anye man to teache you, but his annoyntinge shall teach you all thinges. Wheras therefore the vertue and efficacie of this annoint∣ment is suche that it is able to creat kinges, to make Pri∣estes & to inflame the harts of al men with heauenly mo∣tions: it is no doubte, but that al true Christians are par¦takers of the perfection of all those worthye and honou∣rable functions: for they are not onelye kinges, or chosen to bee pryestes as Iohn wryteth in his Apocalipse, but they haue also a wonderfull knowledge of the hidden and secrete misteryes of God. For more iustly maye you cal hym a kinge (that here I mought omitte to speake of the incomparable riches of that eternall and spirituall king∣dome) which vseth the restraint of the Law of God to mo∣derate his lustfull desires, and to brydle the euyll affecti∣ons and vices of the minde, and directeth all his actions to the princely precepts, and royall rules of Christ then hym that liueth in Princely aucthoritye, and lyke a vyle drudge, is a bond slaue to shame and sin. More iustlye may youe call hym a pryeste whose holye and deuoute prayers doth farre, and by a great many degrees excell in respecte of the perfection of pure relligion the sacrifice eyther in morning or euening vsed in old time: then Caiphas who wyth sinfull hands, did celebrate most detestable and hor∣rible sacrifices. More iustly maye you terme him a pro∣phete
which by the instinct of God, knoweth many things which are aboue mans capacitie, and knoweth the ready, and most certayne way to saluation, then Balaam, who be∣ing blinded with desire, saw not destruction for him prepa∣red. Diuinely therefore was spoken that Godly saying of Moses, when he disputed of the worthines of Christian men. You are (quoth he) a chosen people, a Princely, or peerles Priesthoode. See how he ioyneth wyth the dig∣nitie of a kinge, the authority of Priesthoode. For hee by no meanes would haue those auctorities seuered. For he cannot wyth a good conscience exercise the function of a priest, who can neither iustly rule himselfe, nor wysely go∣uerne other. Neither he that Princelike maynteyneth iu∣stice and vpright dealing, can want that honour that to a prieste is properly belonginge. Not so truly, that hee which liueth vertuously can incontinētly administer holy rightes. For wee should so make a confusion of all offices, and all degrees of authoritie should be taken away, then the which thing nothing can be more pestilente. But yet shall euery man be a prieste, that is a follower of righte∣ousnes, to vse that kinde of holy right, which is to offer vp his owne body, a liuely sacrifice, holy, and pleassnge God: and to offer vppe due honour and reuerence proceedinge from a sincere and pure minde, and vnderstanding. What then foloweth? A holy Nation, a conquering people, that you mighte shewe forth and preach vertues proceedinge from him, which oute of darcknes hath called you into a marueylous light. Nowe in that hee sayth Holy, which was taken out of darckenes, and called forth into maruey∣lous light, that is to the knowledge of deuine and heauen∣ly thinges, it is the gifte of the Holy Ghoste, wyth his po∣wer and vertue, inwardly illumininge oure mindes, and stirringe them vppe, and bringinge them to the chiefeste thinges of all. And that this is the peculiar token of a
heauenly gift, and concerneth the auctority of Prophecie, who seeth not? For the function of Prophecie is nothing els, but a declaration made by the holye Ghoste of hidden secreces, the searchinge and finding out whereof is aboue the reache and Nature of man. Seing therefore many thinges that farre exceeded mans senses, are broughte to light by God: do wee doubte, but that there is imprinted in our mindes a certayne excellente gift of prophecie, and a most certayne foretellinge of many thinges to come? For what els is fayth wherewyth wee are all sealed, and whereon wee are all grounded, but an assured hope of those thinges which wee truste to obtayne, engrafte in our mindes by God himselfe? So falleth it oute that by the instincte and secrete workinge of God himselfe, wee promyse oure selues those thinges which farre exceede ye cogitacion of man: which oute of doubte appertayneth to the office of prophecying. Therefore this name of Chri∣stians, is commended vnto vs by no base gifte, and aucto∣rity, giuen thereunto by Almighty God, but by moste ex∣cellente and honourable titles. For so it is ayded and as∣sisted by the holye ghoste, that it hath sufficiente ability to obtayne Princely iurisdiction, to haue a moste excellente Priesthode, and to be lifted vppe by the vertue and power of a heauenly minde, to immortality. BVt now sith we haue already spoken of the beginning and worthynes of so holy and so excellente a name: I must also in few woordes intreate of the antiquity there∣of. Not to that ende truly as thoughe it greatly auayled to the worthines of Christian kinred, how many armes and cognisaunces of our generation wee can accompte, or howe longe continuaunce of time it helde the possession of gentilitie. For seinge that it fetcheth his beginninge,
and taketh his firste ofspringe and Originall from God, it feareth not the enuious reporte of newe made, and late spronge Nobilitie. But least wee shoulde seeme to ex∣clude not a fewe, who in this kinred were the verye chie∣feste, and whose excellent vertue was renowmed in many places, I thought it expediente to entreat also of them. For there is no cause why wee shoulde fette the first origi∣nall grounde of this name from the Actes of Antioche, in which Cittie first (as it is mentioned in Luke) the name of Christians grew to be common. For althoughe this name then first was commonlye receyued, yet in deede, longe before IESVS was conuersaunte wyth vs in earth, the worthines and excellencie of this name was v∣sed amonge men. For Christians are so called, eyther because they folow the doctrine or gouernment of Christ: Or els this name proceeded from that heauenly motion and annoyntinge: Or as I rather suppose both these thin∣ges auayled to the firste inuention of the name, both be∣cause they were wholy prest to folow their maister Christ, as thoughe they were by othe bounde thereunto, and also were pertakers of the selfe same annoynting. For who is so madde that he dare out of this kinred, to thruste oute Moses? Who had rather take vppon him reproche and contumely of Christe, then to haue plentie of all Princely wealth and sumptuousnes? Who dare denie Iacob, who wyth greate deuotion worshipped Christe on a lad∣der? Or Isaac, who as a Sacrifice offered vppe to God, was a shadow of Christes his punishmente? Or Abra∣ham which behelde the daye of Christe, and by the sighte thereof conceyued a great and wonderful pleasure? Or to conclude, who will suppose Dauid to be rased oute of this lineall descente of Christian kinred? wyth whom the couenaunte of Christe to bee borne of his line, which was sometime made wyth oure forefathers, after a most holy maner and fashion was renewed. But what ma∣ner
of man was Dauid? Such a one as in the whole order of his life declared himselfe to be a man excellently furni∣shed wyth all Christian vertue. It were an infinite la∣boure, if I shoulde go aboute to recite them all that were before the law, and vnder the lawe. This one thinge I say and affirme, which by euery mans testimony is confir∣med, that there was neuer in any age anye man commen∣ded for singular godlines and vertue, but he which wyth∣all his hart embraced Christ. Those thīgs yt he should do, the Prophetes stirred vp therunto by the holy spyrite fore∣tolde. Most holy kinges haue had their harts set on fire, wyth an earnest longing and desire after him. A figure of him many men furnished with all kinde of vertue by many signes, expressed and signifyed. And euen as when in a maner of a triumphe he was brought into Hierusalem, wt an innumerable company and multitude of people, wher∣of parte which went before with their garments strowed the way, and parte that folowed after wyth a wonderfull clapping of hands, signifyed gratulation and harty reioy∣singe: yet one generall voyce of them all was heard, set∣ting forth to the vttermost they could his vnuanquishable vertue. So those worthyes of auncient time prepared the way vnto Christe, and their posterity followed Christe, wt a most ardent desire: and by the general voyce of them all the prayses of their onely King and Lord, are lifted vp as highe as heauen. This was that example which was proposed to Moses to followe. Beholde (sayth God vnto him) and do according to the example vvhich in the hill is shewed vnto thee. And not onely to Moses, but vnto al them in whom singular godlines & deuine wysedome ap∣peared, who throughe Christe the onely refuge of all hu∣maine affayres, haue obtayned all those worthye indu∣mentes and qualities of the minde, which made them in fame and reporte flourishe. Who, as they were by fayth
perswaded, they hooped woulde come: whom already in minde they beheld as present: and according to whose wil they kepte themselues within the bounds of dutie, in exer∣cising themselues in all godlynes and puritie of life. And so to passe ouer that, that they did not altogether lacke the sight of him, For not so seldome as ones he offered himself to be seene of those moste holye men. As to Moses both in manye places, and especially in that fire and flame of the Bush: As to Esaie being placed in that Princely and hea∣uenly seate: As to many other whom to recken it is not ea∣sie. That here therefore I should not declare how ma∣ny of them behelde Christe couered vnder some certayne forme: that truly is most euidente that they all examined all their actions in their whole life accordinge to the rule of Christian discipline. But when a man considereth with himselfe, that Moses humbly lifted vppe his handes vnto God, and beseeched him to appease his wrathe, and graunte mercie and pardon for those that were then the ennemies of God, can any man doubt but that he confor∣med his life to the commaundements of Almighty God? That I shoulde wyth silence passe ouer other, who moste stoutely and valiauntly, and wyth a marueylous cōtempt of death wyth singular meekenes, and lowlines of minde, and with other greate veres haue shewed themselues worthy folowers of the rule and discipline of Christe. For what needeth mee declare the actes of euerye particuler person? Hee that shall looke into the life of Samuel, he that shall consider the actes of Ezechias, hee that shall beholde Iosias, and all the Prophetes: he that shal consider all the residue of the like condition and nature, shall plainely per∣ceiue, that they referred all theyr actions in their whole life, rather to the end of the lawe that is Christe, then vn∣to the lawe it selfe. If therefore it liketh vs that Chri∣stians shoulde therefore be called, because they followe the
prescript rule and discipline of Christe, no man can doubt but that they also who foresawe that Christe shoulde bee borne, and reposed all the hope of theyr saluation in his doctrine, and his gracious goodnes, maye well and truly bee called Christians. Or if you had rather the name shoulde bee deriued from annoyntinge, there is no cause why we should doubte that this worthy name was also to be applyed to them. For thus is it written of Abraham and his children. Touche not my annoynted, and against my Prophetes deuise no euill. Whom God calleth an∣noynted it is euidente enoughe that hee meaneth that an∣noyntinge not of the Law, but of the holy spyrite, and for that cause they were called annoynted. But to what purpose should I speake any more f this gifte of the holy Ghoste? Is it not a thing manifest ynoughe that no man after that scourge of our first fathers offence was layde on the neckes of all mankinde, could do anye one action pro∣ceeding from true and perfect vertue? Therefore who∣soeuer haue perfourmed the perfecte dutie of vertue and holines, they haue obtained that, not by their owne power, but by the ayde and assistaunce of God. For whosoeuer euen in ye memory of those men, distrusting his owne wit, and helpes of nature, flyeth to God, and hath piteously be∣seeched him of mercie, and fauour, he hath eftsones tryed the greatnes of his gracious clemencie and goodnes, and hath felte his minde afore striken wyth sorrowe, and mi∣serablye afflicted, to bee reuiued with Gods helpe and as∣sistaunce, and to be stirred vppe to all maner of vertue. Nothinge therefore worthy to be remembred, neyther in the gouernaunce of the publique weale, nor in the relligi∣ous and deuoute obseruaunce of sacred and holy thinges, nor in martiall affayres, hath bin brought to good effecte, excepte the minde of some righte Noble personage, haue bin stirred and moued thereunto, by the especiall instiga∣tion, and furtherance of the holye spyrite. Whence pro∣ceedeth
that saying? Powred vpon Iepthe was the spirite of the Lord: Vpon Sampson fell the spirite of the Lord: There lighted vppon Saule the spirite of the Lord. And other such places infinite, contayned in bookes of holye Scripture, and for euer commended to posterity. Can a∣ny man then doubte to attribute vnto them the order and dignitie of true Christians, who receyued the same gifte of the holy Ghost that we our selues did, and which supposed that all the meanes and procuremenses of their saluation rested onely in Christe? By whose onely grace and fauour they coulde attayne that worthy callinge which they haue obtained alreadye. For no other refuge is there for the myseries of man, nor from any thing els can there be she∣wed forth any hope of faluation. All they therefore that refusinge the base condition of seruilitie and bondage, so farre proceeded that they obtayned the spyrit of adoption, are of our kinred & cōsanguinitie, are to be accompted our forefathers: and Abraham himselfe is also our father. And we are rather descended from him, seinge that the si∣militude of him came vnto vs, and wyth like godlye affec∣tion resemble his faith: then they that thinck themselues to come of his race and line, and yet by that this example which was euidently seen in their owne kinred and fami∣ly, are not restrayned from theyr wickednes, and vngodly life. For seinge that in this spiritual kinred all things are to be drawen from bodilye sence, to the excellent nature of the minde, it skilleth not greatly of whose bloude you are begotten, but whose steppes you follow in the orderinge & disposing your life. Iustly therefore were ye minds of them repressed, and beaten downe by the forerunner of Christe, which were puffed vp wt a vaine opinion of Nobility. Say not ({quod} he) we haue Abraham to our Father, for God is a∣ble of these stones to raise vp sonnes vnto Abraham. Thē after in vehement woordes hee threatneth them. Now ({quod} hee) the Axe is put to the roote of the tree.
They were surely striken wyth an axe, wyth which they were cutte of from theyr gentle bloude. And wee againe are ingraffed and fast ioyned thereunto. They therefore which supposed themselues to descende from a noble line, being brought to a very base estate, are iustly and by good right taunted wyth these reprochfull woords. A wicked, and adulterous generation, a generation of Vipers: and other such woords to like effecte. But we that were of an obscure and basebloude, are translated into the house of Abraham, and in the accompt of our auncestours we rec∣ken all those kinges and Princes. Yet perceiue they not that, seely wretches as they are. But as they call them∣selues Iewes being not so in deede, so do they boast in the name of Abraham, whereas from the dignity and wor∣thines of that most flourishing kinread many hūdred yea∣res agoe, they were throwen headlonge, and now like va∣gient persons and outlawes, wander vppe and downe be∣inge excluded out of all places, and bereeued of all other externall commodities. Wee (I saye) wee are the true Iewes, so that wee maintaine the worthynes of our aun∣cient stocke, wyth iuste and vpright dealinge, and wyth an honest and godly conuersation. For althoughe wee cir∣cumcise not the fleshe, the circumcision of the minde wee willingly embrace. And althoughe wee keepe not oure Passeouer, making solempne sacrifice with the bloud of a Lambe, yet wee worshippe Christe offered vppe for oure selues, and being marked wyth his bloud, wee haue an as∣sured confidence, that thereby all pestilence is cleane put away. And although wee abstaine not from Leuen, yet wee are afrayde of the infection of the olde sinne and wic∣kednes. And what neede many wordes? All these Ce∣remonies of our elders in old time appoynted with all re∣uerence we thincke ought to be receyued. Yet all things as the true dignity and worthines requyreth, wee suppose oughte to bee drawen from a bodily and corporall sence,
which nowe, the time so requiringe is vtterly buried, and to be applied to a spirituall vertue, and efficacie, inwardly workinge. And that Iuda, we haue the chiefest of our name and kinred, of whom this is mistically written. Iuda thy brethren shall prayse thee, thy hande shall lie on the neckes of thy enemies, thy fathers sonnes shall worship thee. The which prophecie that it apperteyneth to Christe no man in his right wittes will deny. Whether therefore are they which folowe the bare shadowe of the olde lawe, and refuse saluation by the louinge kindnes of God ordai∣ned, and by the lawe declared, to be called Iewes? Or they rather that with all Godly reuerence obserue the secrete wisedome of the lawe hidden vnder the letter? Further whether is it meeter to affirme those the ofspringe of A∣braham, that haue degenerated from his vertue, and haue shewed themselues stiffenecked, and rebellious towarde God, or those rather which haue loued to mayntayne the glory of Abraham, and with a most ready goodwill haue embraced true religion? As therefore those excellent men were renoumed and made noble, by the purenes and sin∣ceritye of a Christian life, so also we that trace their foote∣steppes doe obtaine the praise and name of a Iewe. There∣fore now no oddes in kinred, no distinction of sacrifices, no dislyke condition of life, is lefte. Forasmutch as all thin∣ges, which afore time were at deadly debate and variance, are now linked together with the fast bonde of necessarye affinite, by the mighty reconciler, and intreater for peace, who hath not onely reconciled thynges diuine & humayne, but hath also brought to perpetuall agreemente, and con∣corde the most diuerse intentes and purposes of men, and hath of a condicion of life iarringe and kepinge no concord, made a pleasant concent and harmonye farre beyonde the expectation and credit of men. If therefore Abraham be of our bloude and consanguinitye, who shoulde let vs to suppose them to be contayned within ye same worthy house
and family who liued a great while before him, and were pertakers of ye same faith & the same religiō. But why do say before him? When as rather from the beginninge of ye world we may bring down ye line of this worthy petegrée. To what purpose should I here recite those holy men by nature appoyncted to all excellency, and preheminence? Of which sorte Abell was, whose bloude after he was murthered and slayne, made such a loude cry, that it pear∣ced Heauen, and came to the eares of Almighty God. Also what maner of man was he which of God was takē vp into Heauen, and no more appeared in earth? What maner of men were a numbre of other, whom (as Moyses witnesseth) God himself aduanced to nobility? Therefore what is more auncient, what of longer continuance then the noblenes of this Christian kinred? Whiche euen frō that time wherein the beautifull and goodly proportion of the worlde was firste framed, hath bene had in highe esti∣mation: which beinge continued with a singuler truste & faith in God, with notabe vertue, with meruaylous sanc∣timony, and holines of life remained in the state euen vntil the cōminge of Christe: & now by the gratious goodnes of Christe is plentifully stored with al those goodly qualities, all which afore, with a constante minde and hope, trusted through Christe it mought obtaine. For what can want thereunto, to the settinge forth the true praise and glorye thereof? For if honour through vertue be attainted, thē truelye in this Christian kinred great honour by vertue procured, and the cleare light of perfecte renomne appea∣reth. If for the glory & fame of most excellēt men ye stocke is to be commēded, innumerable is the multitude of them which by their continuall exercise in vertue and godlines haue kepte possession of this nobility. If high aduaunce∣ment by antiquity be procured, there is nothinge amonge men of more antiquitie, then this kinde of nobility.
BVt because it will not suffice that we dispute of vertue in generall, excepte wee touche also some perticuler braūch thereof: wee shall not doe mutch amisse after that we haue generally spoken of the singularity and excellen∣cy of Christian vertue, & declared the antiquity of Christi∣an nobilitye, nowe to discourse of euerye speciall membre thereof. Not truely of them all, for that were an infinie labour: But of them onely which especially seeme to lay open an enterance to worshippe and renoume, & make the waie plaine and readye to perfecte nobilitye. That if nobility be a kinred furnished with excellent vertues, and they be called the most excellent vertues with which they yt be adourned seeke not their owne priuat gaine and com∣modity, but are carefull for the common estate, of which sorte are Iustice, liberality, and stoutnes of stomach: true∣ly by this meanes onely euidente it is that the chiefest no∣bility is only in Christians: because they only are fraight with those vertues, whereby their kinred and family doth purchase true renoume and famous memorye. And that I should beginne with that vertue yt is coumpted the chie∣fest of all: they onely can mayntaine Iustice, who are let∣ted with no gredy desire, who haue not their mindes dis∣turbed with anye motion of anger, whoe are not to bee moued with any mans hatred, or malicious dealinge, bre∣dinge offence, who to conclude seeke not to bee pleasers of the peoples phantasie, but haue their mindes supported & stayed by an assured persuasiō in their conscience of their honest and vertuous conuersation. For as longe as the minde is disturbed with wrath, cōcupiscence, or any other euell affection, it cannot easely be staied from desiringe o∣ther mens goods, or offeringe to other force and violence, or by any other meanes, to vse wrongefull and iniurious dealinge. And he also which respecteth the brutes and reports of the people, and for that cause vseth iust and vp∣right dealinge, is not in deede therefore a iust and vpright liuer, but hunteth after praise, and commendation by a
pretended shewe, and vaine ostentation of Iustice. For seekinge to get himselfe a name by honest and sincere be¦hauiour, so longe as he shall haue witnesses of his vsage and conuersation, he will kepe himselfe within the boūdes of duty: but when the feare of infamous obloquie shall cease, he will make no staie at the violatinge all maner of lawes for his owne profit and commodities sake. Where∣fore as they whose mindes are fixed on the earth, and are tossed with sundrye troublesome motions of the minde, which are doted in loue with worldly pelfe, and in them thincke all thinges to be reposed, can by no meanes ab∣steine from iniury: so they whose mindes cannot be van∣quished with desire, and are free from the corruption of e∣uell affection, who despise all worldly and transitory plea∣sures, and loke vpward to heauēly thinges, will in no wise abuse their neighbour, through any kind of iniurious dea∣linge. For I speake not of them that haue no poyncte of Christianity in them but the bare name, beinge in deede fardest of from all conscience and honesty: but of those onely that are true Christians & frame their maners ac∣cordinge to the prescripte rule of Christe. For how shall a man thinke him to doe iniury, who neither will followe his owne desire, nor burne in raginge luste, nor yeelde to any other affection of the minde? Can any man thinke that he may by bribes be incited to do that is wronge? No surely: he despiseth, and as thinges of naught estée∣meth all wealth of the worlde. What? Shall he stande in awe of sharpe and cruell punishment? No truelye. For in vaine maye a man vse towardes him menacinge threates, whych esteemeth as mutch of the shame by vn∣iust dealinge procured, as of the punishmentes yt maye be laid vppon him. Yea (but you wyll saye) he wyll doe wronge by the meanes of hatred for some offence cō∣ceyued. No verely. No hatred can bee greater then that whych hee wyll allwayes keepe agaynste sinne and wyckednes all readye conceyued. Neyther will
hee agaynste anye thynge conceyue suche offence, that hee will thereby purchase the offence and displea∣sure of his Lorde and father in Heauen. And in one woord to conclude, what iniurie cann that man finde in his harte to doe who in all his lyfe endeuoureth to seeke the goodwill of all men. Who thinketh it an heinous offence to mayntayne hatred, and a wicked and abomina∣ble faulte to reuenge iniurye. Who that commeth moste neare to the bountefull goodnes of God) is most of yt mind that hee supposeth wee most doe good to our enemyes. For it is a quality most properlye incident to God to shew mercie vnto them that are most vnworthy, to let his light shine vppon wicked and sinfull personnes: vnto the vilest sinners of al other to geue aboundance of wordly commo∣dityes. Who doth not assigne to any man the paine due to wicked personnes, as soone as hee hath committed anye haynous offence, neither doth he fling him down headlong to the place of euerlastinge misery: but geueth space to re∣pent, and of his wonderful clemency calleth him home to amendment, that at the lengthe after his returne home a∣gayne hee may take mercie vppon him. And so desirous are they which follow the rule and disciplyne of Christ by immitation to expresse the gracious goodnes and mercie of God, that in the same they repose the wle somme of religion. Therfore neyther prouoked wyth taunts they are any thinge moued: neither vexed with slanderous re∣ports they are kindled with angre, nor prouoked with in∣iuries they goe about to be reuēged Nay rather, which is a greate gift of God, they suppose that tryall to be layd vppon theym, that they by a heape and multitude of good turnes, shoulde turne the edge of theyr enemyes malice, and that they should desire the safity and good estate of thē of whom very wickedly they are opressed with wronge. Do you thinke then that they can be prouoked by any me∣anes to doe wronge, who neyther can bee ouercommed wt
desire, nor daunted with feare, nor stirred vp towardes a∣ny man with immoderate hate & malice? who euē to their enemyes shewe all dutye, and curtesie? whoe to conclude thinke thēselues then to haue made the greatest gayn whē the haue generally procured euery mannes commoditye? for what shoulde I heere speake of liberalitye? seeynge that is most euident, that al ye lessons to conforme oure life by, whiche of the chiefeste and moste excellente doctor we∣re geuen vnto vs, do appertayne to the settinge foorth of mercie, and bountefull dealinge. For he doth not with more earnest endeuoure instructed vs to exercise the office and duety of any vertue whatsoeuer, nor more often bea∣teth into our heades, nor with more earnest and vehemēt speaches beateth downe anye vice, then the foule vice of a∣uarice and cruelty. So that when hee proposeth before our eyes the seueritye of the last generall iudgement, and declareth who are to be chosē and called into heauen: who agayne to be thrust doune into the place appoynted for the wicked, and into vtter darcknes: hee rekoneth vppe no other duetyes, but those that proceede out of curtesie, and liberalitye. Neyther powreth he out threates, namely agaynst any, but cruel and vncurteous men: You did not (sayth he) harboure me when I was a straunger, you did not cloth me, when I was naked, you did not visite mee when I was weake, and al the residew of lyke sort. Which truely wee must not thinke so to be taken that through o∣ther vertues there is no accesse to glory and renoumne: or that other offēces are not to be punished with most sharp & bitter punishement. What is the cause then why he doth not recon vp other offences. Whither for that cause, that as there is no vertue whiche moore resembleth the good∣nes of God, then curtesie and liberality: so nothing more detestable, more odious, more repugnant to the pleasure and wil of God, then the vice of auarice & cuttethrote cru∣eltye. Therefore when he had declared the order of the
laste iudgemēt, no nede had he to recite all kynds of dutyes but those he woulde onely contayne in his treatise whiche are simply the best in al our lyfe especially to be practised. For nothinge can be donne in earth that is more accepta∣ble to God thē to belpe them that be in misery, to geue suc∣coure to them that be aflicted, to shewe mercie to them yt be perplexed and dismayed, with good turnes to healpe a greate numbre, to deserue wel of al men in general, there is no more present remedy to cure all the maladyes of the mynd, there is no more expedite and ready way to heauē. Al they therfore that are not only in name Christians, but in life and conuersation conforme themselues to the rule and discipline of Christ, exercise especially this one vertue and suppose that they oughte with continuall earnestnes of desire to imbrace the same, and in the same they thinke reposed a great strength, and pilloure of their saluation. Then thinke they themselues to followe his rule and ex∣ample, whiche made vs partakers of heauenly and euer∣lasting ritches: whē they bestow al their whole substance vppon the generall profit and commoditye of all men. Now consider how greate the excellencie is, howe greate the honour and estimacion of Christian liberality? the cō∣mon sorte of men thinke that they haue gotten sufficiente prayse for their bountie and francke dealing yf they gra∣tifie other men in that, wherwith they abounde out of me∣asure. And the most part of men doe into so narrowe a compasse and into such strayghtnes drawe the office and dutye of liberalitye, that they suppose they owe no∣thyng to anye bodye, but vnto theymselues and vnto theym that by consanguynytye and aliance are lincked vnto theim. And if they bestowe good turnes vp∣pon other, they bestow them vppon suche that are lyke, & through the possessions able manfully to requite theym, & more aboundātly then they haue at their handes receiued. But they yt haue wholy geuē vp thēselues to ye rule & disci∣plyn
of Chryst, do not onely in aboundance of wealth, but also in aduersitye and when they liue porelye performe al dutys to curtesie & liberality appertayning. Further they thinke no man an alian whom they can by anye meanes healpe. Lastly of al they are not so much disposed to dea∣le franckly with them that are able to make them suffici∣ent amendes, as wyth thē who for their great necessitye, and want are not of abilitye to make requital of a benefi∣te receiued. Neyther are they of that nature and dispo¦sition that they wil onely lay out their money and leaue o∣ther good actes vndone, as geuing good coūsell, and good example of vertue and applying to al good thinges their industrye and dilligente. But whatsoeuer with their witte, labour, studye and payne can possibly be attayned, they will take in hand, so that they may do good to other men therby: neyther by venturinge their lyues will they at anye tyme sticke to saue other men harmelesse and free frome daunger, especiallye them that professe the name of Christ. For so great agreement is there amonge them in the profession of true religiō, that are instructed with ye lawes of God: suche a fryendly league in all honest & ver∣tuous accions, and to conclude such a perfect and firme knott of loue and frendshippe, that none of thē more estee∣meth of his owne estate then of the estate & condicion of other men, It is not therfore to be maruayled that the number of thē was so great which to relieue other mens necessitye and want, haue spente all that their fathers ha∣ue left theym: seeynge that manye to do good vnto other men haue most manfully and couragiously lost their liues. And what neede I in suche a numbre rekon a fewe? for in the firste beginninge of the churche theese duetyes of loue and charitye were generally embraced, and now they are not of all men forsaken. For there are not a fewe which doe not onelye dispyse all ryches, and wordlye substance but also yf the case so required woulde be contented for
other mennes sakes to loose their liues. For the cleare lighte of Christian vertue and honestie hath alwayes ap∣peared. Sometimes it hath bin more generall, and led verye manye into the righte waye. Sometimes it hath conducted but a fewe, yet alwayes hath bin well accomp∣ted of, and shall as longe as the worlde continueth, keepe his wonted honour and estimation. For it did not pro∣ceede of menne: but God himselfe did therewithall esta∣blishe mannes mutable estate, and brittle condition. Therefore there will neuer wante some which will not more esteeme of theyr owne priuate commodities, then of the safetie and preseruation of all men. In so much that they will bestowe wyth a righte good will theyr liues, so that thereby all men generallye maye reape some fruite, and commoditie. And this one thinge as each thinge els, deserued greate admiration: That men beinge by Nature lincked in loue, yet it hath so fallen oute, that they beinge intangled wyth vices and troublesome affections of the minde, verye seeldomlye haue applyed themselues to the maintenaunce of perfect frendshippe. And there∣fore so manye hundred yeares scarcelye two or three cou∣ples of frendes haue bin founde, that haue continued in a firme and stable league of frendshippe. Of whom also wee haue notice rather by the fayned Fables of Poetes, and by a generall opinion conceyued of our elders, then a certayne proofe, by testimony of sufficiente credite. But after that the mindes of men were able to beholde the exceedinge brightnes of his Heauenlye doctrine, so grrate consente of loue was incontinently amonge men, so firmely were they vnited in prrfecte frendshippe, that no manne would holde any thinge in seuerall, as his owne proper goods: but eche man bestowed all his worldly sub∣staunce to the vse and commoditie of all menne in gene∣rall. But whye do I saye worldly substaunce, seinge it
is manifest that the goodwilles of all men were so lincked together, that no man thought good of any thinge, but all men did allowe thereof, no man desiered anye thinge, but that, that was expediente and behoouefull for the saftye and good estate of all menne. Luke sayth: One vvas the harte and minde, of the nomber of them that beleeued in GOD. Neyther did anye of them accompte that which hee possessed to be his owne: but they had all thinges cō∣mon. Here you see that woorthy and excellente kinde of frendshippe, that throughe the opinion of Vertue is pro∣cured: (a bare paterne whereof resembled as it were in a shadowe in Poets Tales, strake into menne a greate ad∣miration: vnto the which scarcely two or three couples of men haue attayned) not embraced onelye of a fewe, but wonderfullye mayntayned of all the whole multitude of Christian people. For so firmely were they in mindes vnited and ioyned, that they did not onelye liue after one manner, and vnder one lawe, but all generallye were of one minde and one will, and desire. To conclude onelye in Christians the perfection of true frendshippe appeared, the cleare lighte of vnfayned loue shined. For euen as wee note in manye a certayne endeuour to be vertuous, but wee see in no man the perfection of Vertue, that hath not a taste of Christian relligion: so although many haue had the outwarde shew and appearaunce of frendshippe, yet the liuelye and naturall shape of true frendeshippe onelye in Christians hath beene to bee founde. For se∣inge that frendeshippe springeth oute of Vertue, it must of necessity folowe, that perfecte frendshippe shoulde re∣mayne onely in them, in whom perfecte Vertue is repo∣sed and putte. But let it in this Booke suffice of Iustice, liberalitie, and frendshippe the fountayne of liberalitye in fewe woordes to haue intreated. The residewe of my discourse, in which I must dispute more at large of Chri∣stian
fortitude and magnanimitie, because of the peeuish and peruerse dealinge of them which cannot finde in theyr hartes to yelde vnto Christian men the commendation of that Vertue, I will remitte, and put ouer to the processe followinge.
THE THIRD BOOKE of Christian Nobilitie. THe moste excellente and worthy pro∣perties belonginge to a Christian name, that is iustice, and liberalitye, haue bin declared of vs in the booke nexte afore, not wyth such eloquence, and in that kinde of lofty style, as the waightines of the argumente did re∣quire, but as the slendernes of my skill would permit mee in that dispute to follow. It remayneth therefore (Lewis moste puissaunte Prince) that wee in more ample manner speake of fortitude, and the vnconquerable courage of the minde, the worthines of which vertue is such, that by no flourish of eloquence it may be sufficienrly described. For they that haue not bin dismaide at the terrour of death, they which haue wyth most valiaunte courage suffred bo∣dely tormentes, they that would for no maner of griefe be disturbed in minde, and do anye thinge to stayne theyr ho∣nour and estimation, haue bin alwayes had in great admi∣ration. For whereas we all in generall thincke life to be sweete, and do follow the intisementes of Nature, whoe so despiseth death, ouercommeth vndoubtedlye Na∣ture it selfe. And truly how much admiration, and wor∣thy renowne hath in all Nations bin attributed to this contempte of death: Hereby we maye haue an euidente token, that no vertue is in the bookes and monuments of learned men so muche commended, no vertue wyth like prayse extolled. The iust and temperate men are after a meane sorte commended, but stoute and valiaunte men are placed amonge the starres themselues. Socrates which was in his time the onely mirrour and example of conti∣nencie
and sobrietie, purchased by no kinde of vertue so worthy fame, as by that his constancie which hee vsed in retayning his former dignity, when by the seuere senten∣ces of the Iudges he was condemned to die. They them∣selues which abydinge a very harde Fortune are throwen downe, being spoyled and bereaued of all their substance, and voyd of solace, if in extreme desperation they do them∣selues to death, although in that kinde of death, there is a certayne suspiciō of dastardly cowardise (because they ha∣sten their dyinge day not so muche for shewinge their con∣stancie, as for auoydinge of myserie) yet they themselues which so of their owne voluntary disposition depart from lyfe, are oftentimes wonderfully commended. For so muche is the vertue of the minde accompted of, that the counterfaite shewe therof stirreth vp admiration. Which if it so be, who can wyth words expresse the stoutenes and valiauntnes of Christian vertue? For if the wittes of them that haue most professed eloquence, whē they would wyth trim speaches, and rhetoricall woordes, describe the prayses of any humayne vertue, are sometimes ouerwhel∣med wyth the wayght of the matter, to what kinde of e∣loquence can be so wonderfull, or so excellente, whereby a man may be able with filed phrase and piked speach, to set forth the worthines of so greate a vertue? But I albeit by reason of any witte or exercise am able litle to do, seing that I haue taken in hande so great a matter, least grea∣ter shoulde be my blame in geeuinge ouer the same, then my boldnes in takinge it in hande, as farre forthe as my poore ability will serue, I will endeuour at large to dis∣course the excellencie of this so noble a vertue. ANd first wee ought to consider what great diuersitie there is betweene the fortitude nowe specifyed, and
mannes valiauntnes and magnanimitie. First of all if you respecte the ende, they that for Chri∣stes sake venture theyr liues, obtayne the true ende of vertue: but they that propose vnto themselues ritches or fame, and glorye, dependinge on the voyce and con∣sente of the vnlettered multitude, and respecte not the true soueraygne good, they are rather to bee accompted menne pufte vppe wyth a vayne desire and ambition, then valiaunte and couragious men. Further ma∣nye offerre themselues to daunger not wyth iudgemente, and prudente aduise, but beinge pricked forwarde wyth a certayne rage and furye of minde, conceyued eyther of ha∣tred, enuie, or some other earneste and whote affection. But Christians whereas onelye wickednes they dead∣lye hate, towarde the men themselues they beare a minde voyde and free from all manner enuie, rancoure, and o∣ther leude and wicked affection. Finallye they neuer take vppon the manye daungerous attempte, but beinge moued thereunto either with a verye earneste hope, or with a desperate feare of theyr present estate. For none of them except he had some certayne hope to escape daun∣ger, or gaine some priuate commoditie, or els were paste all hope of escapinge, woulde thincke it good to come into daunger: but oure men in many places haue beene ledde to theyr temporall bane, and death of the bodye, hauinge free election if they woulde, to liue in pleasure: so that on one syde no hope of life was offered, on the other side, if they woulde forsake their opinion, they had proposed vnto them manye thinges whereby they moughte liue a pleasaunte life: yet notwithstanding they marchinge for∣warde to a certayne and assured punishmente of most cru∣ell death, refused all pleasaunte intisementes of life, and neyther with threates, nor fayre promises coulde they be driuen from their profession of faith, and Christian pie∣tie.
And againe of what force is that, that of so manye as are contayned in the memorie of manne, verye fewe haue beene founde which by learninge, exercise, and con∣tinuall study to do well, haue come to that perfection, that they with a willinge minde coulde suffer death: vppon a sodaine there beganne to growe an innumerable multi∣tude not onelye of men and women, but also of children, and almost infantes, which haue for the fayth of Christe suffered stripes, death vppon Crosses and Gibbets, bur∣ninge fires, and to conclude moste cruell kindes of death, with inuincible mindes and willinge hartes. When all the rulers of the worlde, and Lordes of the earth bent their maine force as it were, and ventured lyfe and limme to the intente all relligion and feare of God should bee vtterlye rooted oute of the hartes of menne, when the Deuils themselues, authours of all mischiefe and wicked∣nes, stirred them to cruell tyrannie, whom they had with moste vncleane, and filthye superstition as it were, ledde captiue vnder their auctoritie, when moste straunge and terrible tortures were deuised to the vtter ouerthrowe of Christian discipline, when violence and horrible crueltye was practised in all corners of the worlde, where the faith of Christe was euer hearde of, when all these thin∣ges were inuented to the subuersion and ouerthrowe of Christian Pietie: Notwythstandinge suche was the vertue of true Nobilitie, and Christian magnanimitye, that it did not onely with constante, perpetuall, and in∣uincible defence of Christianity couragiously wythstande the assaulte of the ennemyes: but also moste willing∣lye and cheerefullye offered themselues in Christes quar∣rell to the sworde, to fire, and faggotte. They were leadde awaye to execution, and cruell tortures: whippes, gallowses, gibbettes, and tormentes neuer afore hearde of, were prepared for them.
Neyther coulde those butcherly bloudsuckers, growen through villanie into outragious fury, satisfie theyr cruel∣tie, if straight waye they should haue bereaued of their li∣ues those innocent Lambes, therefore wyth prolonginge theyr cruell punishmente they wente aboute to represse that kinde of contumacie, springing not out of presumptu∣ous pryde, but oute of rare and excellent vertue. Neyther were those horrible cruelties practised for the loue they boare to theyr owne relligion, but onely for the enuye and mallice they boare to theyr excellente vertue, throughe which they sawe all theyr thundring threates to be scor∣ned at, and vtterly despysed. Yet theyr Christian stoutnes could neyther be vanquished, nor daunted, and dismayde, nother wyth threates, nor wyth tortures, nor with anye neuer so exquisite punishmentes. And when the Tor∣tours, yea the tormentes themselues also beganne to slake their force, yet those worthye wightes remayned still in the same constancie and stoutenes of courage. But when againe, after a litle space, these butchers returned wyth all cruel meanes to teare in sonder the bodyes of Saincts, those righte holye men came wyth a minde after a won∣derfull maner confirmed, and newly imboldened to the same punishmentes. Neyther was there in the meane time any one word vttered of them, but that which did ex∣ceedinglye set forth the laudes and prayses of our Saui∣our Christe. Therefore what more excellente and wor∣thy matter then this maye be in woordes contayned, or in minde conceyued? It seemeth to euery man a iuste mat∣ter, and occasion of honour and glorye, to be paciente in the middeste of tormente and persecution: but these men did not onelye suffer death pacientlye, but willing∣ly and wyth a glad and ioyfull harte did beare the crosse of all kinde of trouble and affliction. For the assured hope of triumphe in Heauen, both diminished and abated the
bodily paine, and filled the minde which greate ioye and gladnes. A rare example of valiaunt courage is with praises euen to the sky extolled. But in this race and kinred of Christian people neyther the consideration of age, nor the imbecillity of Sexe, nor of bloude, or de∣gree, coulde bee anye lette or impedimente to this wor∣thye glorye and renoumne. For to what ende shoulde I make mention of those whyche were the best and chiefest in any kinred: whereas children, and virgines innumerable haue refused for Christes sake no punish∣mentes of cruelty whatsoeuer. Howe many bondemen that they might preserue and maintaine the free liberty of the minde, haue set at naught the bitter paines of moste sharp punishmentes? Howe many souldiars (which kinde of people most commonly abhorreth altogether the studye of vertue, and sanctimony) haue more esteemed of death referred to Christe his laude and praise, then all maner of garlandes & triumphes? What should I recount the Mauricians, Sebastians, Catherines, Agathes, & the Gor∣dians: whereas it doth sufficiently appeare that the mul∣titude of them hath bene innumerable and all most infinit, that haue attayned the praise of ye excellente vertue: the externall shewe and image whereof men indued with ex∣cellent wits, haue after longe exercise scarcely obtayned. All which may be to vs a sufficient argumente and token, that this kinde of fortitude and confidente courage farre differeth from that, which is in the rules and monumen∣tes of ethnike Philosophers contained: which was pow∣red into the mindes of Christians, not by secular learning, but by the gracious gifte and goodnes of God: beinge the worthiest of Christian name and nobilitye, and the moste certaine and assured testimony of Christes most pure, and holy religion. Notwithstandinge some there are who pre∣ferre before our men in vertue, and valiant courage I say not such as Cato, and Brutus were, whome some honoure
as Gods immortall, but Cleombrotus, who in his rage cast himselfe downe hedlonge from a high tower, or Empe¦docles who furriously raginge with ye like madnes threwe himfelfe into the flaminge fire of Etna, or some other foo∣lishe and desperate person. Therefore our men to wit, Cornelius, Cipriane, Laurence, Steuen, & Paule himself beinge most holy men, and excellinge in all vertue, are by no meanes rekoned of them in the numbre of stoute and valiaunt men. Further a certaine malepert, saucye, and wicked writer in bookes in which he hath contayned the history of his owne Citty, and many questions pertaininge to the state of a commonwealth, in the Hetruscan tongue thought not good to dissemble what his opinion was tou∣chinge the religion of our sacred and holy profession. For he reporteth that the faith of Christe and his holy re∣ligion hath vtterly destroyed the prowes and valiauntnes which was wont to appeare in men of oulde time. And therefore he imputeth the fall of the Romaine Empire, the decay of fame and glory, the ouerthrowe of chiualrye, to this most pure and holy religion of the most highe and euerlastinge God. Then afterwardes onely to currye fa∣uour of the Godly, he affirmeth yt the great decay of nobi∣lity came to passe not through the deprauatiō of religion, but through the defalte of interpretoures, misconstringe and euell vnderstandinge the same: whereas notwithstā∣dinge he is not able to shewe what crooked sence of inter∣pretation that was, that ministred matter of so great mis∣chiefe. But that leauinge behinde him the stinge of hys mallice, he mough seeke some shifte to escape by meanes whatsoeuer, hee salueth a greife moste iustly conceyued, with that remedy and medicine most foolishly applied. I would willingely haue some compassion ouer him, for that he is deade, yf he did not nowe corrupte manye more with his vile and pestilent writinge, then in time past with his leud life most reprochfull and subiecte to to contempt.
But for as mutch as his bookes though he be deade, do so greatly sclaunder Christian nobility, I will not doubte, beinge (as I truste) defended and protected with the ayde and assistance of Christe to combate with the spirite and ghoste of this wicked person. Whych notwithstandinge I do not for the desire I haue to encounter with another, but onely to withstande their brainsicke and wicked dea∣linge, whose mindes are alike dusked with errour and blindnes. For this mischiefe is spreade farre and wide, and hath greately infected manye with pestilente contagion. THys therefore firste would I demaunde of him, what he noteth in Christians, that he may by anye meanes deeme worthy of contempte? For if so that it argueth a valiaunt and noble minde to cotemne the pompe and va∣nity of worldly pleasure, beinge lifted vp in such maner, that it thinketh of nothinge, but that which is both heauē∣ly and excellent: then truely nothinge maye make more for ye honour & aduauncement of Christians, who hauinge full knoweledge and vnderstandinge that they are of the felowshippe and companye of heauenlye wightes, dooe iudge no worldely and transitory thinge worthy of estima¦tion, imployinge al their trauaile and labour to the attai∣ninge true honour, and immortality. If fortitude be ac∣companed with inuincible patience, who would not won∣der at the courage of Christians, when he shall consider that virgines themselues, for the name of Christe haue desired moste cruell punishmentes, and all maner of bo∣dylye tormentes. howe hyghelye was Leaena the Harlotte commended, whyche beynge rente and torne wyth manye tormenes would not detecte them that were pryuy to a certaine con∣spiracy? What praise won Anaxarch{us} for the like matter?
How greatly was Thraso of Syracusa commēded for that hee would not be forced wyth any kinde of punishmente to procure the death of them that were partakers of one cō∣spiracie? These men vndoubtedly Matchiauele himself (for so this notable wryter is called wyth whom I haue to deale) may not deeme in any wyse worthy of contempt, because they had no knowledge of true relligion, which he in no wyse woulde haue to be magnifyed: and were not∣withstandinge partakers of trayterous attemptes, the meanes of descryinge whereof hee supposeth worthye of great commendation. But how obscure is their constā∣cie if it be compared with the valiaunt courage and mag∣nanimitie of Christian men? For if you respecte the cause, they for hate of the tyraunts by whom they were annoyed paciently endured theyr cruell punishments: our men for the loue of Christe, of whom they had receyued wonder∣full benefits, thought all tormentes easye and tollerable. If you weighe the exceedinge greatnes of the tormente, & the continuance thereof, you shall finde them not common and vsuall as theyrs were, but new and straunge tortures were deuised for Christians, which as longe as might be, moughte teare their liue bodies, and wonderfully beate and bruse them. Furthermore, they when they were dri∣uen to extreeme miserye, and state of desperation, seemed outwardlye to beare an externall shewe of their former worthines, and hauty minde: Christians when they had free election to accepte that they best liked of, yet not with vnwilling minds they exchaunged a glorious and honou∣rable death, wyth a lyfe stayned wyth ignomye, and shame. If you regarde the nomber, it is a ridiculous thing to set an infinite nomber, against a very fewe. Dost thou then despyse this holsome discipline, oute of which hath bin yelded so manye notable, and worthy examples of vertue? Canst thou constantly affirme, that the mindes
of men are induced to thinke beastly and abiectly of them∣selues by this doctryne, which hath with stoutnes, far be∣yonde mannes creditte, armed the tender nature of womē and the feeble age of childred: whiche hath stirren vppe so great a multitude to an ernest desire of prayse and glorye? What peruerse & ouerthwart perswasiō of mind is this? that thou shouldest haue in admiration the vayn shadow of vertue, and shouldest suppose true vertue worthy of no es∣timation at all. But no doubte herehence procedeth this great erroure. Thou doste beholde onely the externall forme of the Crosse of afliction, that excellente vertue that vnder the forme of the crosse lieth hidden, thou dost not be∣holde. For the dull capacity of a simple vnderstandinge ouerwhelmed wyth darknes, and with filth defiled, is not able to abyde the bryghtenes of so cleare a lighte. For the doctryne of Chryste (as Paule saythe) seemeth to wicked and desperate persons to haue a shew of ignorāce and to muche humilitye: But to them that are of a milde spirite, and confirmed with the grace of God, it sheweth a fullnes of heauenly wisedome, and most excellent ver∣tue. For euen as in the personne of Chryst all men bee∣holde that face wherin as it was by the prophesie of Esaie foretolde, there was no forced bewtye, nor semelines, and yet all men sawe not the glory of that diuine nature which Iohn beheld, euen so manie through the lyke blyndes and wante of vnderstandinge contemne the lyfe of Christians voide of al wordlye pompe and are by no means able to be∣holde the excellent brightnes of Christian nobility. BVt as concerning the Romain Empyre (that we may say some thinge thereof, albeit it semeth a thing far frō our intent and purpose) hath not this fine fellow which is so expert in all matters of pollecie, reade in most lear∣ned wryters, that euen Cities themselues haue their chā¦ges
and courses: and that all comonwelthes do as it were by the course of nature rise and fal? Neyther, yt it is possi∣ble that any thing vnder the Moone should be immortall, and contynewe for euer. All thynges as they haue a beegynnynge soe necessarye it ys that they shoulde ones decay, and through the cruelty of death dispatchinge eue∣rye thynge perishe and come to nothinge. For how manye Cityes, how many countryes and nations are beaten flat to the grounde and couered with moolde, whiche long a∣goe most of all florished, both by reason of their farr stret∣ched Empyre, and glory and renoomne, purchased by fa∣mous and noble actes? who hath ouerthrowen the domi∣nions of the Assirians, and Persians? who hath wasted ye wealth of the Athenians? who hath abrydged the power & pompe of the Macedonians? Truely no other thinge can be alleaged as cause thereof but the natural course of the worlde, then the which nothinge is more britle and vncer¦tain. For if Cirns had not vtterly extinguished ye Assirians Empire, if Alexāder had not as it were crushed in peces ye power of the Persians, if the Macedonians & al Greece by the warres of the Romaynes had not beene vtterlye van∣quished: yet notwithstandinge it muste be graunted of ne∣cessitye that al these Empyres shauld haue bene destroy∣ed with some other power, or declyninge with age at last shoulde haue perished and decayed. Wherefore it fal∣leth oute that no wyse man doth wonder at the vtter sub∣uersions and destruttions of common wealthes: and on the contrary part they thinke nothing so worthy admira∣tion as ye continuāce of a City established & indued wt great principallityes. And therfore they suppose the question is rather to be asked why Sparta so many yeares continu∣ed in the selfe same maner of gouernmente, and in ye selfe same order of disciplyne, then why the glorye and wealth of the Athenians so soone decayed. And this also is soe much the more wonderful in the Romaines cōmon wealth
by howe mutch more this Cittye excelled all other that euer were in worthines both of glory, and dominion. For many thinges easelye beare vp themselues: but the high∣est thinges by their owne peyse & waight, are come in sun∣der, and fall doune to the grounde. Therefore wheras this fareth it with all Cityes and countryes, that no wyse mā wondereth at their fall, but thinketh the cause of their longe continuance with greate studie to bee considered of as a thing very incredible, This man well skilled, as he himselfe thinketh in ciuill pollicie, lamenteth the decaye and ruinous fall of Rome, and as thoughe it shoulde haue beene perpetuall, excepte it had beene hindered by the re∣ligion of Chryste, hee argueth of cryme the sonne of God himselfe. O thou man in madnes exceedinge all other. dost thou aske what other thing hath decayed the welth of the Romayne Empyre? First I answere that as that Ci∣tye was happely erected then grue to a more parfecte sta∣te, and by noble actes, florished thē confirmed with lawes, and ordinaunces, came to a perfecte rypenes of Dominiō and was wonderfully aduaunced: so was it necessary that it now yeelding to stooping olde age should at the length haue (as it weere) a laste daye to liue in and shoulde feele the heauy strok of the hand of death. Furthermore this I affirme that all those good meanes by the which ye Em∣pyre was first established, & by the which it moughte haue beene mayntained in the same estate, long before the birth of Chryste was lost and oute of their handes. Canste thou in any wyse thinke that when immoderate delicacy and riotte, when vnsatiable desire of riches had ones by inuasion entered into the manners of the Romaynes, whē no accoumpte at al was made of the aucthority of ye Law∣es, and Senate: when the myndes of the raskall multi∣tude by the sediciouse and bransicke orations of certayne desperate persons were tickled wt hoope of rauine & spoyle with violence and force to bereue the wealthyer sort, of
theire goodes and substance, when crueltye armed with impunitye, wt slaughter & effusion of the bloude of the Ci∣tyzens, with goare bloud staunched the Citty: when they that in feattes of Armes moste preuayled, didde bende their thoughtes not to seke the liberty of their coūtry, but their owne priuate aduauncemente: when with all theese weapons the body of the commō wealth was wounnded, do you think yt it could by any means be brought to pas yt the cōmōweale could lōge cōtinue? Adde thereunto (if it like you) Saleable Elections, Iudgementes raunsomed, mattes of Prouinces, extraordinarye and infinite auctho∣rityes, the chardge of the commonwealth committed to certayn men caried forth headlonge with a hastye desire of rule and principality, you may vnderstand, that it could no otherwyse be, but that the wealthe of ye City vtterly de¦cayed, it must nedes come to ruin. What should I in this place declare the bloudy broyls in the times of Scilla and Marius? whiche infinitelye plagued and vexed the Citye and with al manner of cruelty dismembred the same, and at lenghth by the infection of ye dissentiō euen to posterytie continued, layd open a gap to the gouerment of Tyrautes. Doest thou then doubte but that the Citye beyng gashed and mangled with so many woundes, should at the last be couered with moulde, the Cityzens with salte and bitter teares waylinge and lamentinge at ye funeralles thereof. And therefore if it be demaunded of wyse men what time Roome fell to vtter decay they wil aunsweere (I suppose) that euen frō that time wherin the old order of discipine and gouernment was abolished, that common wealth be∣gan to be of no reputation. For they linger no longer a∣boute the consideration of the euent of any thinge, which most certaynly gather the thinges that folow after by the causes that goe before. If you aske them that lacke wise∣dome and experience they wil straight way elleadge that tyrannicall gouernment of Cesar. For there is no man
so besydes himself that will thinke after the vtter abolish¦ment of lawes, the losse of liberty, and the ouertourninge of the whole state of pollicy, that any one sparke of ye olde common wealth remaineth. But I pray thee what toye tooke thee in the head that thou diddest impute the ouer∣throwe of that Empire to the manners of Christians? whereas not only the cause of that calamity, but the euent it selfe was many yeares before the birth of Christe oure Kynge? And if any man aske the question after tirannye had the vpper hande what wasted the wealth of Roome, taken from the whole Citty, and bestowed vpon one man, first I will repeate those thinges that I before rehearsed; that all those worthye qualities whereby the people of Roome obtained their auncient renoume, and large Em∣pire, a great while began to decline, at last fell hedlonge downe to the grounde. For then immediatly in steede of frugality, outragious riotte, in steede of enduringe hardi∣nes in warre, an excedinge tendernes and nicenes both of the whole body and minde: in steede of dreade, and awe of the lawes, impudent boldnes, vnsatiable luste, immode∣rate desire, vehemently assaulted the myndes of the Ro∣maines: and stirred vppe men that bare goodwill to their country to vprores, and ciuill broyles. Further this I af∣firme that the barbarous demeanour of their Emperours, and their ouerthwarte nature, ioygned with immoderate ryot, and vnbridled lust, did as it were cut them of from al their prosperity. Neyther is there cause why I shoulde here recite so greuous plagues as wherewith the cōmon∣wealth was afflicted, seinge that it is euidently knowen that many for their cruelty, and horrible factes haue bene sline, bothe of their Cittizens, and of souldiars, and oftē∣tymes of them that enuied them their place, and high auc∣thority. But when the custome of killinge of Rulers grewe to be familiar, and there was not onely counter∣waites and treachery deuised against wicked tyrantes, but
against discreet, and moderate gouernours, and that the name of rule and Empire wanted due reuerence, at length the matter grewe to that passe, that nothinge was so vily reputed of as the Emperour of Rome. In the ende when the aucthority of the Senate, and people of Rome was extinguished, and the knowleadge of Souldiarfare together with auarice excessiuely increased, it fell oute ye souldiars for a booty in ready money to be paide, did assign afore hand to whome they listed the Imperiall Crowne. Therefore whereas they had respect neither to vertue, nei∣ther to nobility, but as it were makinge a bargaine of by∣ing, & sale vnto him yt promised most, sold ye Empire, euery vile caitife & leude varlet had free accesse to the swaye and gouernmente of the whole common wealth. Therefore whereas the people of Rome were gouerned by sutch heades, it coulde not be but all those thinges shoulde fal to vtter confusion, whereby that common wealth was wont to be renoumed. Especially seinge that oftentimes, least there shoulde want at any time an occasion of ciuill dissention, there was appoyncted in diuerse places, many Emperours, if they were to be called Emperours, and not rather straunge and prodigious monsters. Therefore ye wealth of the Romaines partly by ciuill discord, and hor∣rible dissentions wasted, partely dronke vppe and consu∣med by the meanes of great and terrible warres, which throughout the whole worlde was waged againste the Romaine Empire, was subiecte to common thraldome & misery, of all thinges incident and appertaininge to man. And here (I pray thee) what cause hast thou to accuse the name of any thinge that is called Christian? For if the doctrine of Christe had wrought in the manners of the Romaines, contempte of lawes, ryot, wantōnes, immode∣rate desire of rule, most egre and vehement dissension of Cittizens amonge themselues, if to conclude, it had indu∣ced them to violente dealinge, fury, & rage: then mough∣test
thou haue iustly and truely sayd that, that had bredde in the state of Rome all these mischieues. For they be those horrible vices, that haue plagued and destroyed not onely Rome, but all other Imperiall Citties. But if nothinge be more repugnant to Christian maners, and conuersation then the vyces afore rehersed, wyth whome nothinge agreeth, but that whych is iuste, and vpryghte, tendinge to quietnes and temperaunce: which most reue∣rently accoumpte of modesty, and innocency, and aboue all mischiues hate ciuill discord: which abhorre all trouble∣some and desperat enterprices, yet wilt thou be so sottish & impudent, that thou wilt seeke with this sclaunder to de∣face the dignity and worthines of Christianity? Can there any maner of discipline more confirme and establishe cy∣uill pollicie thē that, which teacheth Iustice, equity, méek∣nes, loue of our country, and constant affection of vertue? And all these thinges truely in the maners of Christians are founde in degree of most excellēt perfection. I could recite howe many Christian Emperours there haue bene by whom the Empire impayred and fallinge to decaye, hath after innumerable calamities beene reared vppe a∣gaine, and restored to his former estate and dignitye. I could shewe that the borders thereof haue bene more am∣ply enlarged then euer they were before, by the most ear∣nest maynteynours of Christes religion. To conclude, I could by force of reason constraine them to graunt that those miseries which afterwardes lighted vppon them, happened not throughe the loue, but throughe the contempte of Relygion. But beecause I make haste to the ende, this one thinge will I saye, that death pursueth not onely al men, but also al humayne artes and sciences, all nations, and estates of gouerment: and they al at last fade awaie, and are ouerwhelmed with the loth∣some darkenes of sloggishe obliuion. Onelye it is the kingedome of Christe, which can by no force of enemies
be ouerthrowen, by no worldly wealth ouerborne, by no ciuill broyles and dissensions at any time torne, and rent in sunder. The ritches of the Persians are cleane consu∣med, the mighty powre of the Grecians is vtterlye ouer∣turned, the Empire of the Romaines is beaten downe, & hath had a great fall. All thinges that eyther are, haue bene, or hereafter shall haue beinge, after one sorte or o∣ther shall perishe and come to nothinge at the length: but ye kingedom of Christe wt all goodly ornamēts enritched, worlde without ende shall florishe, and shall abound with immortall and euerlastinge glorye: by sacred Oracles it hath bene foretolde, the powre, of him is an euerlastinge powre, which neuer shall be taken away, and his Kinge∣dome it is that shall neuer be dispersed. And in an other place, It hath pleased mee therfore to shewe forth signes of him, because they are great, and his meruailous things because they are stronge, and his kingedome, because it is euerlastinge. And that sayinge also. Thy kingedome is a kingdome of all worldes, and thy rule from generati∣on, to generation. Also that which is recorded in the histo¦ry of the kinges, is to be vnderstoode of this kingedome. For in this manner God talketh with Dauid. Thy house shall be sure, and thy kingdome shall continue for euer. Which also may be gathered out of Luke God (saith he) shall geue vnto him the seate of Dauid his father, and he shall raigne in the house of Iacob, and his kingedom shal haue no ende. Let therfore men of simple vnderstandinge leaue of wickedly to complaine of the ruin and decaye of the Romaine commonwealth, let them not wickedly and vngodly laie the blame of that ruin and decaye vppon the goodnes of God. Let them at the length vnderstand ye on∣ly the name of Christe is such, as no age or time can extin¦guishe: to wit, whose glorye, praise, vertue, worthines, ritches, power, are immortall, & heauenly. And whereas all other thinges are fraile, and brittle, they haue deter∣mined
and appoyncted to thē a shorte race of life to ronne. Onely therfore the names of Christians leaninge and res¦ting vpon the stayes and proppes of the aide and assistance of God shall florish for euer and euer. IT foloweth that wee saye somethinge of fortitude and chiualry, the practise & vse wherof he demeth to be vnsit¦ting & far vnfit for ye profession & conuersatiō of Christiās. For how agreeth (sayeth he the contempt of glory, which is wont to be prescrybed to Christians, with the excellen∣cie of this vertue. For no man excepte hee be stirred vp with the desire of renomne, wil thinke good to take vppon hym any straunge and daungerous aduentures. Nowe whereas he affirmeth that no man can be valiaunt except he be induced thereunto throughe the desire of fame and glory, I do not doubt that those Philosophers will ease∣ly graunte that, whiche haue both written bookes of con∣tempte of glory, and haue deliuered vnto vs manye rules & principles of prowes and valiaūce. For if they had sup∣posed that of those thynges, one had destroyed the other, they would neuer haue bene so mad, that by the selfesame reasons, and meanes, men might bee disswaded from the desire of glorye, and incited to the studye, and loue of ver∣tue? And they defined vertu to be that, which did not depēd on the vayne brute and reporte of the people, but whiche tooke in hande great and noble enterpryces onelye for the loue of honesty. But this iolly fellow so argueth, as if the onely desire of prayse shoulde pricke men forwarde to ver∣tue and there were not muche better prouocations of ver∣tue, and industrye, with which good mens myndes, night and day vrged and allured, tooke vppon thē daungerous attemptes, both with a right goodwil, and with great ca∣re and payne. As the entyre loue of oure countrye, the greate care of our honour, and estimation, a reuerent due∣tye
both towardes the lawes, and also toward religion it selfe. All whiche thinges are most perfectly contayned in the rules & institutiō of Christians. What if they be most desirous of prayse? yet will any mā be either so mad or impudente, that for this cause hee will seeke to discre∣dyte them, and stayn theyre honoure. They are trulye far of from the desire of vayne prayse, yet wonderfully in∣flamed with the desire of immortall and true glorye. They sette at nought the report of men, yet they are ear∣nestly bent to true prayse, which is contayned in the testi∣mony of Christ, beholding al things. They desire not to haue mē the beholders of their matters, for asmuch as they knowe when they attempte any worthy actes, the an∣gells of heauen loke vpon them. This is the proper∣tye of a noble mynd, of a gentlemanlyke and haughty cou∣rage not to hang vpon the opinion of the ignorant multi∣tude, to neglect all thinges here below and to viewe and contemplate thynges heauenlye and spyrituall. For what he calleth abiect and base I cānot wel perceiue. For if he thinke that pryde and insolencie, cruel and brutish be∣hauiour, myndes loftye and disdaynfull, and maruailously puft vp, argueth a noble and valiaunt courage: then graūt I that there is nothing more vile and abiecte thē the stock and generatiō of Christians, which doth forsoth with ear∣nest endeuoure watchfully apply the study of temperance, mildnes and lenitie. But if al vertues as the best learned men haue testified, and declared, are conteined in one linck of loue, society, and coniunctiō, neither can there be amōg thē any repugnance, so far of is it, that the prayse of mild¦nes and modesty shoulde be opposite and contrary to man∣lye courage that by no meanes they maye bee dislinked, & feuered. Therefore no man can be valiante excepte he bee both mylde and moderate. For he is muche deceiued in o∣pynion which thinketh the force of the mynd stirred vppe not with desire of Equitye, and humanity, but with whote
desire and furious rage is rather to bee called māhode thē cruel egrenes of a sauage beast. But this notable authour yt instructeth Princes how to vndoe their countrye which teacheth them to establishe the wealth and estate of theire kingdomes not so much by equity, and curtesie, as by guil∣full pollice and crueltye: let him truelye call by what na∣me hee will that furious dealinge farre passing the vsage of the barbarians themselues in villany, and tyranny, so yt no man in his right wittes will assent to so fonde and wic∣ked an opynion. But wee will neuer be so woode and frentick, yt we wil say that, that meknes of mynd which ye holy scripture calleth humility, whereof he was an exam∣ple vnto vs yt was also a paterne of notable prowes, is any impediment to fortitude it selfe. For whereas all ver∣tues are as it were with glue fastned together: then truly especially meeknes of mynde and valiaunt courage. For eache of them proceeding out of a noble mynd are al∣most of like honour and estimatiō for it is no greater signe of a valiaunt courage to be able to withstande the force of his enemyes, then to refrayne his angry mode: & to sub∣due al troublesome affections, and by no grudge of offence to bee remoued from humanity and constancie of mynde. Therfore there hath not beene any man lightlye famous for valiantnes, but he hath purchased prayse by mildnes and curtesie. How greate was the glory of Themistocles who sittinge in counsell with the Grecians, was of the o∣ther Captaynes contrary to order of ciuilitye bitterly taū∣ted? but he thoughte good not to restrayne theire lauishe speaches with yelding taūt for taūt, but wisely to appease them with patience and sufferance. What shoulde I spe∣ake here of Pericles? what shoulde I reherse Iulius Ce∣sar, and many other, who did no more earnestlye seeke to get them a name by martiall prowesse, then to win com∣mendation by curtesie and pacience. On the other side as eache mā is of a more shrinking and dastardly courage,
so is he moore disposed to anger and crueltye. All those barbarians whiche can by no meanes be trayned vp in ye preceptes of fortitude haue bene counted so cruel that our vsuall speach hath ascrybed the name of barbarousnes to cruellty it selfe. What shoulde I shew you here of ye nature and qualityes of women? then whom, as nothing is more feble and weake, so nothinge more swyftlye cari¦ed to reuengement of iniurye? For if mildnes and curtesi-do not at al dimme the lighte and exceedinge brightnes of vertu, but issuing oute of ye lyke haughtines & generositie of mind, is a great ornamēt to fortitude: is ther any mā so voyde of reason, that Christian mildnes he will terme co∣wardise, repugnāt and opposite to the rules of fortitude? what peruerse dealinge? what an vngodly moode (a mis∣chiefe and sorowe come to it) is this? that wee make light accompt of those thinges that are true and perfect in our men, the bare shadowe whereof in other men wee haue in admiration? they haue alwayes bene counted of a noble and valiaunt courage, who beeyng girded and nipped wt taūtes & prouoked with iniury are not kīdled with wrath. But our men, of Christ haue learned this lesson, that they shoulde requite with curtesie reprochfull wordes, and in∣iury with good turnes. Then some man may saye vnto me: wheras christians are so gentle and merciful, they wil neuer dryue backe from their boūds the force of their ene∣myes, neyther wil resiste villanye wt duety of sworde, but they wil with a good turn requit al outragious dealing. Who so alledgeth this, litle considereth distinctions of du¦tyes, neyther considereth that distinct and diuers thinges are mete & cōueniēt for destinet & diuers persōs, places, ty¦mes, & causes. For Christiās thēselues who in priuate grudges & iniuries embrace mildnes & patiēce, they in cō∣mō dystresses & daūgers are most egre of al & are most ear¦neste and vehemente maynteiners of the common safetye
and liberty. Especially whereas the state of religion is impugned. For they thinke in this case all sufferance an intollerable offence, and patience to be a horrible faulte. Of this minde was Moyses the beloued of God, whom the holye scriptures do testifie and declare of all men to haue bene the myldest, who notwythstandinge with sin∣gular valiaunce vanquished the host of his enemies, and appeased the wrath of the maiestye of God offended, with the sharp punishmente of many. Dauid also was of like nature whom about other the scriptures do highely com∣mend for his exceedinge gentlenes. He neuerthelesse vā∣quished and put to flight a great and puissaunt host of ene∣mies, and put to the sworde huge multytudes of Alienes and straungers. Euen so, manye Christian Princes be∣inge most dysposed to all kinde of humanitye, haue mat∣ched the glory of Martiall prowesse with ye praise of low∣lines and courtesie. What? Hath not Christe himselfe sufficiently taught vs by his owne example, howe farre foorth wee should vse lenity, and againe when wee ought to take vppon vs the person of seuerity, when with whips he seuerely and sharpely punished them that cōmittinge sacriledge, polluted the holy Ceremonies? Therefore there is no cause why any man should contemne Christi∣an meekenes, wheras it is so ioygned with true fortitude, that nothinge can be more firmely and surely tyed there∣vnto. For they both issue and flowe from one headspringe and fountaine, and the one wonderfully beautyfieth and adourneth the other. NOwe let vs come vnto the last argument of this nota∣ble writer, wholy consistinge in religion, and in those olde Ceremonyes wyth all wickednes polluted and defi∣led. For he thinketh that bloudy sacrifice, and slaugh∣ter of beastes, to haue sutch force, and efficacy, that was
able vppon a sodaine of timerouse persons to make fearce and hardy. And vs that neither vse any such bloudy sa∣crifice, nor imbrue our aulters with the bloude of fowre footed beastes, nor looke vpon the bowells and intralles of beastes, he supposeth by this inconuenience happening by the meanes of our religion, to be depriued of many ne∣cessarye meanes and furtheraunces to the attayninge of vertue. Here truely I knowe not what might be added eyther to the rage of his impietye, or to the blindnes, and folly of his minde: for to compare horrible supersticion with the most holy religion of the euerlastinge God, it is an offence paste all satisfaction, and abhominably wicked: but to thinke him that can beholde with a countenaunce voyde of quakinge and tremblinge feare in the butcherly manglinge of beastes, like to proue a valiaunt man, it is a plaine argument of extreme madnes. For if wee shall followe his counsell, why do wée not muster all the but∣chers wée can get? Why do wée not also presse foorth to battaile hangemen, for they of force must be more cruell then other, which quarter and cut vp the bodies of men. That they forsooth with that Noble courage that they haue gotten by thrustinge in their armes elbowe déepe in the bloude of beastes, and by sharpe punishment of con∣dempned persons might desperately venture amonge the thyckest of their enemies, and keepe vs safe & harmeles from all imminent daunger. What if I shewe that all thinges contayned in those sacrifices and ceremonies dyd tende to timorousnes and cowardise, nor that there was in them any thinge to imbolden the minde of man? First those prayers of theirs in olde tearmes and solempne woordes appoyncted to be sayde, what a deale of trouble and feare did it containe? In which if they should hap∣pen any whit to stomble and stagger, if any thinge were vttered in woordes out of course, or with signes & tokens of sinister happe they thought all the Goddes of the peo∣ple
of Rome would be incontinently angry and highlye displeased. Further what a great feare was cast on those men, intangled with that oulde wiues supersticion, when each thinge in the sacrifice did not fall out to their minds? When the intralles threatned vnto them some dreadfull and dolefull destruction? But when it so chaunced that they should at one time offer vppe manye sacrifices, and it happely so fell out, that the bowelles of one beast gaue those signes whereby men supposed that the Goddes dyd promise that all thinges should prosperously and well suc∣ceed, and the bowells of other, portended some dolefull e∣uentes, it must needes bee that their mindes should hange in doubte through wonderfull feare, which coulde neither be animated and encouraged wyth the intralls betoke∣ninge good fortune, because of their variety and inconstā∣cy, nor againe despise those that betokened ill lucke, be∣cause of that religion which they were so misseled in. What say you to straunge sightes monsters, the aūswers of Birdgazers, and Southsayers, what greate force haue they to rebate and appaule the courage of men? When nothinge happened either by course of nature, or casuall chaūce, yt they did not interpret to be done by the singular prouision of the Goddes, pretendinge some great plague, or calamity. Therefore either the flyinge of birdes, ey∣ther trēblinge of ye Earth, or a thūderclap on ye right side, or any other such mōsterous matters &, sometimes prodi∣gious thinges fained, did wōderfully terrifie & feare poore miserable men. What shoulde I recite the daūcinge of the Sunne? Which beinge forced, it woulde not suffer them that were superstitious and verye mutch geuen to halsoninge to conceiue any firme and assured hope at all. And if by anye chaūce chickens happened to refuse their foode, and yt matter beinge once hard, sonke into ye mindes of the souldiers: they as thoughe forewarned of the Gods themselues of some great ill that shoulde betide them, be∣inge
astonied, with that which they made so religious re∣koninge of, and beinge troubled and dysmaied with doubt∣full feare encoūtred with their enemies. In many places therefore it is recorded that many hosts haue bene put to wracke, & slaine, because with ill lucke, & ill chiuinge they were conducted agaynst their enemies. Which thinge truely is nothinge to be meruailed at. For they beinge wholy addicted to ye religion, to beleue that without the especial prouision and powre of the Goddes, foreshewinge some great scourge and plague, chickēs refused to eate of a soppe cast amonge them, and for that all their courages began to quaile, and their handes through feare waxe chil for colde, and they themselues did not with wonted hope and courage marche on to battaile, it must needes be that they should haue some notable ouerthrow. And by yt mea∣nes it was broughte about, yt all men yt were wonderfully geuen to that kind of religiō, whom they tearmed fanati∣call, were troubled with continuall feare, and care of the minde that bredde continuall doubt. What, if many very valiaunt men moued with the least and lightest straunge sightes yt might happen in many places haue geuen great token & signe of feare? The Lacedemonians (that we al∣so speake somewhat of the Grecians) when they tooke any warre in hande, and the Kinges accordinge to the maner dyd make sacrifice in the vttermost boundes of their coū∣trey, if by any chaūce they were hindered that they coulde not accomplish or finish their sacrifice, they incontinently leadde their hosts backe home againe. And whereas the Lacedemonians obseruinge the guise and facion of their countrey were trained vp to indure hardnes, & to practise feates of armes, yet they became so dastardly by ye means of their affiance in that filthy supersticiō of their abhomi∣nable sacrifices, that they at such times woulde dimisse their souldiars. Further yf any great noice should chaūce to be heard, all their coūsells & deuises tēdinge to ye main∣tenāce
of war were vtterly forsakē, & clean laid aside. And to procede: what other thing (I pray you to let passe ye La∣cedemonians ouerthrew the wealth of ye Athenians, but a certayn peuish old wiues superstytiō? for whē Nicias vn∣doubtedly a valiaūt captain, was together wt Demosthe¦nes made chefe conductor of ye nauye, & general of ye whole bād, & laid seege agaynst Siracusa, & had certain intelligen∣ce of ye Cittye beeyng defended with their owne strength, and by the healp and assistaunce of all Greece beside could not be taken: and Demosthenes was earnest with him to remoue the nauie frō the hauens mouth, least the passage beyng stopped by their enemies all the whole force of the Arhenians which was in that nauie contayned should af∣ter a most miserable sort be spoiled & slaine. Nicias him self liked wel of his aduise, yet did not put in vre the good and holsome councell by the meanes of a fond religious feare. For duringe the space of a fewe dayes about that tyme, the light of the mone (as at certayne seasons it must needs happen) was eclipsed by reason of the earth betwixt the mone and their sightes. That Nicias thinkinge a rare and straunge matter, thought good to deferre the same to the interpretors of secrete holye misteries. They returned aunsweare, that it was not lawful within thirty dayes to scoure the seas with their nauie, or to take in hande any o∣ther great enterpryse: In the mean tyme the men of Sycil with huge heps of earth dammed vp the mouth of the ha∣uen, and placinge there many mighty shippes stopped vp their passage. Therefore that nauie of theirs, in which was contayned ye flowre of ye youth of Athens, & the who∣le force of the Athenians, whē now in vayn they soughte to break through the nauie of their enemyes and endeuou∣red to passe out of the hauē, by that fond supersticious per∣swation of Nicias was most miserably scattered and beatē doune and all the whole nobilitye had by dent of sworde their bloudy bane and destruction. Wilt thou say then
that those ceremonies, those filthye and oldwiues super∣stitions did instruct men and trayne them vp in prowesse & chiualrye? which make mē stout of stomache and courage tremble, which misleade their myndes from constancie, which hinder their deuises that tende to common safty? doest thou in this māner shew thy dutifull harte towards Almighty God, by whose meanes and gratious goodnes we are disburdened and deliuered from so wicked, so vn¦cleane, so frantick and mad superstition, that thou dareste presume to preferre the same before the religion of Christ? For if the minds of men instructed with precepts of Chris∣tian religion are thereby made cowardlye, and dasterdly, and by those olde and vnclean ceremonies (in which God∣lye honoure was doone to the Idols of wicked men) they were incited to valiantnes, surely they seame to be prefer∣red before the rules of our religion. But consider with thy self the foolish, madde, and erronious opinion thou hast helde. They whiche haue truelye tasted of Christes re∣ligion are not moued with the flyinge of birdes, the scry∣chinge of shrechowles, nor the intralles of beastes, thre∣atninge some dolefull euent. They are not troubled with earthquakes, with thunderclappes, with any prodigious and monsterous wonders. To conclude there is nothinge that can daunt or dismay the mynde of a Christian man. For he is so trayned that if hee should se all the worlde egrelye bente to battayle, if hee shoulde see all man∣ner of daungers deuysed and prepared agaynste hym, if he shoulde see euerye thinge rounde aboute set on lighte fire and almost consumed,, hee notwithstandinge through an assured hope and confidence, shoulde remayne vnchan∣geable, neither be discouraged through the terrour of any mischiefe. First because he beleeueth that he is garded and defended with a mightye and puissante armye. For he readeth in the holy scriptures that there are garrisōs
of Angells whiche defende the Godlye from all iniurye, and in tyme of neede qualifie the outrage & force of ye ene∣mye. For Iacob knew him selfe with this strength to bee fortified when he declared that he saw the tents of God. Agayne when the Syrians army was euen vppon Helizae∣us readie to deuoure him, and his seruaunt stroken with great fear cryed for help: feare not (sath,) Heliseus, and be of good courage, for our number farre excedeth theirs. And it foloweth in that holye history. And when Helise∣us hadde made his prayers to god, hee sayth O Lord open the eyes of this boye that hee may also see. And the Lord opened the eyes of the boy and he sawe, and be∣hold a mountayn al couered with horsemē and fiery cha∣riotes that compassed Heliseus rounde aboute. And that no man may thinke that God dealeth but with fewe in that maner, it is written els whereof all them whiche with a pure and vndefiled hart embrace righteousnes, and honoure God in all singlenes and simplicity. The An∣gell of the Lorde hath pitched his tentes rounde aboute them that feare him. He therefore which doth faithful∣lye creditte those testimonies. and doth vndoubtedly bele∣ue that he is by the power of God protected, can in no wi∣se tremble with feare, but wyth a lustye and boulde cow∣rage will vse that sayinge that in another place is writtē. If tentes stand vp agaynst me my hart shall not feare. If a battaill rise vp against me, in him wil I put my trust. And that place also. These in chariottes, they in horses, but wee in the name of the Lord haue our hope reposed. They beyng vanquished weere slayne, but wee beeynge of good courage caried away the victory. This hope therefore (I say) will not suffer the familye of Christians to be weake and fayntharted. Further the cogitation of immortalitye, and a certayne foreknowledge of glorye to come, what force hath it to the confirmation & establishing of their constancie? Caesar reporteth that the Frenche
men were maruaylously stirred vppe to all prowes and va¦liauntnes throughe an opynion that the Druides did per∣swade thē to be of, which was that the soules of mē were not subiect to death but after their departure passed from one bodye to another, and therefore castinge a part all fe∣are of death, they valiauntly tooke in hande wayghty and daungerous enterpryces, not makinge accompte of lyfe. Whereas they were perswaded that death was nothinge els but the chaung & alteration of lyfe, and passinge of the soules from bodies to bodies. And is it euen so in deede? The auncient Frenche men through a moste vayne opiny∣on, grounded vppō a vile fond superstition, feared no mā∣ner of daunger: and shall Christians feare death, who be∣leeue not through a slender opynyon, but throughe a con∣stāt trust and affiaunce that after they haue departed this lyfe they shal obtayne most perfecte blessednes? For what is moore manifestlye knowen in Christian religion, then that all they that embrace iustice and godlines, after that they are losed out of their bodies, as it were oute of bonds shall as it were flye vp into heauen, that they mighte ob∣tayne worlde without ende euerlastinge glorye? Agayne what is more deepelye printed in oure myndes then that the bodyes whiche are nowe vtterlye consumed, shal bee agayne restored, and beeynge wyth celestyall and hea∣uenlye bryghtenes illumyned, shallbee agayne vnyted to the soules wyth so fyrme and sure a league and band, that it can bee by no meanes vyolated and broken: that we beeynge after suche an heauenlye sorte renewed mought enioy al perfect & eternal pleasurs both in bodye & soule. He who in this poynte is fullye perswaded (beleeue me) will neuer vnwyllynglye and wyth a grudgynge mynde departe from this lyfe intermedled wyth so manye my∣seryes & calamityes. Lastly what should I speak of ye infi∣nite & wōderful loue wt the which they yt are truly entered into Chrysts holy profession, are euery day more and more nflamed?
This vndoutedly is moste euidente that our minds are by no meanes so muche incited and stirred vp to hazard & ad∣uenture our liues, as by loue and charity. For to him that is in loue nothinge seemeth harde, and all thinges are moste sweete and pleasaunte which are enteprysed for the attayninge that thinge which is vnto him moste deare and tender. In so much that he not onely contemneth death, which seemeth to all men most terrible and dreadfull, but sometimes perswadeth himselfe moste willingly to desire the same. That if loue lightly begonne betwixte man and man, and grounded on very small causes hath such force, that it causeth ye contempt of death, what may be thought of the excellencie of charitie, which is through the gifte & grace of the holy spirite moste liberally powred into pure and vndefiled mindes? by the force thereof Christian No∣bilitie supposeth all the sweete pleasure of life to be repo∣sed in labours and perils, despising all pleasures of the bo∣dye, and the britle estate of honoures, and all aboundance of worldly wealth. And being greatly inflamed wyth the desire of Christe, it cannot be remoued from Godlines, neither wyth threatninges, nor wyth terrours, nor wyth straunge and newe deuised punishmentes. To conclude this loue maketh a man thincke that all tormentes which he suffreth for Christes sake, whom hee tenderly and ear∣nestly loueth, are lighte and pleasaunt. Furthermore no∣thinge is so much desiered and wished for of Christians as for the relligiō of the euerliuing God, to loose theyr liues, in the middest of the most exquisite tormentes of the body that can be deuised. Which truly is not to be wōdered at. For whereas loue turneth aside ye cogitacion of the minde from feare, it muste needes be that perfecte and godly loue is armed wyth a wonderfull stoutenes and constancie of minde. Therefore which of these two relligions would sooner allure men to the embracing of Vertue? doth that thincke you which holdeth the weake and frayle nature of
of man alwayes in suspence, through the vayne and folish credite they geue to ye litle stringes that are in the intrals of beastes, to the flying of byrdes, to the hyuinge of Bees, and to such other fained monstrous deuises: or rather that religion which so establisheth and confirmeth the myndes of mē that they would not be dismayd if the whole world should be turned vpside douē? Further that religiō which with fond superstition sometymes doth hinder the course of perfect exercise of humayne vertue? or that which with constancie proceedinge from vertue farre passing the cre∣dite of mā, strengthneth the weake and soft nature of wo∣men, and the tender yeares of yong children? Finally is ye religiō to be embraced which is not able to fortifi the min∣des of men with any assured hope? or that rather, whiche sheweth foorth the helpe & assistance of God, with a moste certayne hope of immortalitye, with an especiall loue to∣wardes almightye God, and with an earnest and feruēte desire of him, who hath taught vs the perfection of heauē∣ly wisedome and perfectly instructed vs to dispise al world¦lye and transitorye vanityes. But what neede I con∣uince with many argumētes either ye impyetie or madnes of this most detestable & vile caitife? wheras both of those are so cleare and manifeste, that nothinge is more easilye noted and espyed. His wicked impyetie appeareth in that hee woulde seeke in suche order to stayne the honoure of Christians, whiche hee woulde neuer haue done, if hee had conceiued any good opynion of the Godhead of Christ His madnes appeareth in that he with so false, so fond, so ill codcluded reasons confirmeth his wicked opiniō. But I knowe I haue longer stayed in this processe, then per aduenture neede required. Which if anye man thinke worthy of blame, I would partlye he shoulde pardon my griefe wherewith agaynste hym I was wonderfully styr∣red: And partlye that he shoulde thinke that that was not altogether impertinent to my purpose. For whereas I en¦terprysed
to set forth the honour and dignity of Christian noblenes, and ye Tuscā writer in a most barbarous kinde of stile endeuoured to obscure the same, I thoughte good not to dissemble, especially sith that I perceyued the nūber of them which either stirred vppe by his wrytinges, or of theire voluntarye motion, were partakers of his wicked∣nes and fury were, farre and wide dispersed. Now ther∣fore whereas I haue refuted theyre broade and lauishe speaches, and haue declared that whiche was cleare and manifeste, that no dastardlye feare and basenes of abiecte myndes, but al thinges righte worthy and excellent were to be founde in the profession of Christians, and the whole order of this most holy disciplyne did excit men to valiant∣nes of courage, and contempte of death: yt was not beside my purpose, makinge mention of fortitude that consisteth in martial affayres, to refute in few, their kynd of discour∣ses, which detest generally the noble knowledge of feats of armes, and all worthye chiualrye as a godlesse & wic∣ked thing and quite repugnante to Chrystes commaunde∣mentes. Firste therefore I can conceyue no reason why they shoulde despyse warfare when it is ryghtfullye begon, and taken in hande in the defence of religiō, wher∣as wee see it wonderfully extolled in innumerable places of holy scripture. Which they do not denie, but what say they? manye thinges (say they) were conteined in the olde law which rather for the tymes sake were tollerated, thē worthy due commendatiō. As to make a diuorse, to ta∣ke vsury of forrayne countryes, of which sort they saye is to make warre vpon our enemyes. But what semblāce or similitude hath either vsuoye, or diuorses with martial affaires? For they were not commended, but tollerated, be∣cause of mens weakenes and imbecillitye. But he that durst presume not to obey, when commaundemēt was ge∣uen to wage battale, cōmitted an offence so hainous, that he coulde redeeme the same by no satisfaction.
For in what place reade wee that it was decreed that hee should other abide a payne, or be subiecte to a curse if anye man, whereas after the first offence his wyfe committed it was lawfull so to doe, did not depart from his wyfe, or ex∣acted no vsurye of forrayners and straungers? But in many places wee haue well noted, that men rauished and replenished wyth the holye spirite, haue decreed that they should die the death which throughe cowardise refused to come forth into the fielde. But what shoulde I in this place make mention of Debora, who being inspyred wyth the holye Ghoste, curseth them which for as muche as in them lyeth, take not in hand the warres of the Lorde: and inuegheth against their cowardise in sharpe and vehemēt words. Againe they lay to our charge circumcision, the offering vp of a lambe, olde sacrifices, which were in olde time with great deuocion kept, and after the comminge of Christe lackte their wonted reuerence. As though warre∣fare did any whitte appertayne to the ceremonies and mi∣steryes of holy thinges, and were not rather ordayned for the preseruation of the common wealth? For those ho∣ly rights, in which were foreshadowed the expresse signes and tokens of Iustice and saluation to be procured by our highe and mighty sauiour Christe, after the comming of the thing it self which was by those signes declared: were by good right and iust desart abrogated and disanulled. But this cannot bee thoughte of the noble knowledge of feates of armes, for as much as it is not comprysed vnder the nature of ceremonyes, but embraced for the mainte∣naunce and preseruation of the common safetie, and who∣ly appertayneth to ciuill policie. And to confound those thinges which are to be distinguished, it is eyther the pro∣pertie of extreeme madnes, or an argument of wonderful temeritie, and rashnes. And whereas the estate of the commonwealth cannot be established, but it must needes be stayed, and as it were propped vppe wyth strength and
force of armes, for asmuch as all thinges in time of peace to be practised and exercised, are vnder the tuition and de∣fence of martiall prowesse: he that taketh away the know∣ledge of feates of armes, worketh the ouerthrowe of the cōmon wealth. Which thinge if it had happened through Christian discipline, then madde men moued wyth some reason, might lay to our charge that some commonwealth by meanes of Christian discipline was ouerthrowen. Which slaunderous accusation howe wicked and vaine it is we haue afore declared. For Christ would not that the estate of ciuill pollicie should be ouerthrowen, but rather established and confirmed. And therefore as he hath not wrested the sworde out of the hand of a Magistrate, so nei∣ther would he haue a souldiour to wante his weapon. To the intent that the Magistrate, beinge armed wyth aucto∣rity of lawes, might with seueritie of the same lawes, sup∣presse wickednes, annoying the members and inward par∣tes of the common wealth, & the souldiar clad in armour, might wyth dint of sworde repell and put a side from the commonwealth all imminent daunger. For this cause Iohn neuer exhorteth men from applyinge themselues to the knowledge of feates of armes, but prescribeth lawes vnto souldiours of harmelesse vsage, and temperate beha∣uour. And Paule calleth those magistrates the seruaunts of God which wyth the sword punishe wicked and despe∣rate persons. Truly nothing were more hartely to bee desired of a Christian man, then that all men woulde re∣frayne themselues from wickednes and sinnefull luste. But forasmuche as that cannot alwayes fall oute, and in steede of continencie, vnbridled luste, in steede of iustice ei∣ther forraine force, or ciuil broyles vse to aryse, then of ne∣cessitie either the force of the ennemye is wyth weapons & mayne strength to be beaten backe, or the outrage of oure citizens with sword to be repressed. That say they is con∣trary to Christian charitie. As thoughe any kinde of cru∣elty
were greater then to be dissolute and negligēt in a ge¦nerall distresse and miserie. Chryst hath commaunded that we shoulde bee reuenged of our enemyes. No doubt it is the propertye of perfecte and absolute vertue, when priuatlye wee susteyne wronges and iniuryes to shewe a singular and wonderfull patience of the mynde: but when ether the common wealth and saftye of our countrye, or the honour & estate of religion is impugned, thē agaynste outrage and villanye to take an inuincible stomach. Chryst hath especiallye commended vnto vs peace. No doubt that peace he hath commended whiche hee himselfe gaue vs, which doth not cōsiste in pleasaunt reste and qui∣etnes that mannes nature is prone to desire (for who can suppose that he hath graunted vnto vs that kynd of secu∣ritye when he suffered his owne discples to be tossed as it were with troublesome waues of mannes outragious fu∣ry) but that peace by the which we were reconciled into ye grace and fauoure of God, whiche had conceyued greate wrath and indignation agaynst vs, and to whose religion our wilfull aypetytes were moste repugnāte. These e∣nmityes therfore and dislykinges betweene vs and God, Christe (as Paule testifieth in manye places) with his own precious bloude hath done away, and hath purchased for vs a peace continuall and euerlastinge The which we may then especially enioy, when we most vehemently and egrely fighte other for the safetye of our country or main∣tenaunce of the sayth of Chryste and his religion. Vnlesse paraduenture wee suppse that Abraham wanted the be∣nefite of this peace, at what time he gathering a bande of men of his owne domesticall seruauntes encoutred with a huge and puissante host of his enemyes, and valiauntlye farre exceedinge the estimation of man vanquished fowre mighty Kynges: and his enemyes, beyng parte of theym slayne, the other part put to the worse, he caried away the
spoyle Or if wee thinke likewyse of Gedeon, who be∣ynge garded onely with three hundred men of warre slew innumerable multitudes of his enemyes. Agayne what thinke you of Iosua Moses his sucsessour? what of Ieptes? what shoulde I reherce manye other noble menne, honowred as well for theire feruente zeale of religion as magnifyed for theire worthye exploites in martiall affay∣res? May we think that they did offende God when they most valiantly set vpon theyr enemyes? Or shal we not ra∣ther say yt thē especially ye peace of God tooke effect among them, when in the cause of righteousnes agaynst Godlesse they waged battaile But what haue we to do (say they) wt those examples of antiquitye? They were Hebrues, but we are Christians. And are you still of this opinon, that you will exclude oute of the numbre, and from the worthy callinge of Christians, those holye men who as I haue be¦fore declared were right good & true worshipers of Christ and had receiued the same gifte and grace at the handes of God yt we our selues haue receiued? for what other thīg sig¦nifyeth that outcry The sword of God, and Gedeon? & a gayne yt place. The spirit of god was poured vpō Iephthe and other like places innumerable: but that not withoute the mightye power of Christe so greate warres coulde be takē in hand and dispatched? Further what signifieth that out of heauen battail was waged agaynst thē & the stars continuinge in theire order, and in theire proper course fought agaynste Sisara, but that the hostes of Heauen vn¦der the charge of Christ their captayne, whom the holye scripture calleth lorde of hostes, do fighte for the God∣ly against the vngodly and wicked? Therefore there is no cause why we shoulde lightlye make accounte of those ex∣amples of vertue, left vnto vs by those most holye men for a memorial to cōtinue wt vs as lōg as time indureth. For they are not to vs straūg exāples but properly belonging
vnto vs, and familiar, as done by our owne auncestours, to the imitation whereof wee must at length stirre vp our dull natures. For I woulde not haue any man so weake-brainde, to thincke that contrary to the will and pleasure of Christe, which we know assuredly to haue beene don by his holye ayde and assistaunce, and to the accomplishinge whereof it is most euidente that the valiauntest men of all haue bin with his voyce almost excited and stirred vp. For to omitte Historyes of auncient time, Constantine ye Em∣perour ouercame Maxentius not so much throughe the multitude and nomber of his souldiars, or strength of his hoste, or his skill and experiēce in warrefare, as by the fur∣theraunce and helpe of Christ, whom at the very first on∣set he so terrifyed, that after a moste shamefull sort he put him to flighte, and made him ready to seeke his owne de∣struction, & in the ende compelled him to drowne himselfe in the channel of Tiber the riuer. The which maruaylous and wonderfull terrour Christe himselfe stroke into the hartes of his ennemyes. For whereas Constantine at that time thought very well of Christian relligion, he saw almost at the very instant when he should encounter with his ennemy, the ayre being most fayre and cleare, the signe of the Crosse shyning marueylous brightly, and hearde a voyce sent downe from Heauen, declaringe vnto him that he should obtayne the victory, if he would folow the crosse as the ensigne and flagge of God most high & euerlasting. From hence proceedeth the ground and cause that kinges and Princes especially in theyr Ensignes haue a crosse. In this signe Constantine not onely obtained victory, but reposed in the same the cause of immortalitye, and euerla∣sting glory. Hauing that signe caryed before him, he put to wracke hostes of his ennemyes innumerable, and did most largely extende the handes of the Romayne Empyre.
VVHat shoulde I speake of Theodosius? Who had such a conflicte with Eugenius, that he might easily perceiue that by the helpe of Christe himselfe pre∣sent with him, he gat the vpper hand. Whych Emperour truly in one poincte was mutch to be meruailed at For at such time as others cherished their bodies with sleepe and delicious meats, he cōfirmed his mind with praiers, pow∣red out to God with an earnest and Zealous affection. Which his godlines and deuotion a singuler good effecte followed. For as sone as the banners beinge displai∣ed, he came hand to hande to bicker with his enemies, so∣dainely there arose most vehement and mightye whirle∣windes, which ouerthrewe his enemies host, and reboun∣ded with great force their dartes, slonge at Theodosius his host, vpon their owne heades. This noble victorye Claudian recordeth, for in this maner hee writeth vnto Theodosius. O too too deare to mighty God, to whom from caues belowe In armour clad colde winter stormes Don Aeole out doth throwe Whom souldiarlike the welkin serues, to whom at trōpets soūd The Windes obeye, as thoughe conspird their enmies to cōfound. Agayne what may be spoken of Carolus Martellus? is it to be thought he coulde, beinge at the firste a man of small power and ability, haue raised himselfe to so greate honour and glory, without the aide & assistance of Christe himselfe present? Especially sith he hath done those vali∣aunt actes that by mans power could by no meanes possi∣ble be atchiued. It may seeme peraduēture vnto many in credible, that is written, three hundred seuenty thowsande Arabians were in one skirmishe slaine, through the onely valiaunt dealinge and happy gouernmēt of the said Mar∣cellus,
and in that time whē that nation was most stronge and puissaunt, and had subdued and spoyled all Spaine & Affrica. But vnto me truly nothinge seemes lesse to be wondered at. For there is nothinge so hard to ouer∣come, or so well fortified and defended, which a most noble minde inflamed with the loue of God may not vtterly o∣uerthrowe, and beat downe to the grounde. Charles the greate bourninge with the like zeale, made moste sharpe and vehement warres againste the enemies of them that professed the name of Christe, and for the wealthe of Chrystyans neuer refused anye daunger what soe∣uer. Therefore his greate vertues by the which as by certaine staires he climebed vp to heauen, are cōmended to immortall memory, by all manner of worthye Monu∣mentes. Longe after him many other Princes Italians, and French, beinge inflamed with the like feruent zeale of religion, Godfreye beinge their captaine generall, a man mutch renoumed aswell for his singular stoutnes of cou∣rage, as for his rare & exceedinge sanctimony, banishinge the Turkes and Saracens recouered Syria & Cylicia, & all that parte of Asia, and in the ende with mayne force and with a stronge army wonne Hierusalem, for deliuerance whereof they relinquished all those thinges which in mans life are deare and pleasunt, and tooke vppon them vnmeasurable toyle and laboure. In whom I knowe not whether I shoulde more admire their princely puis∣saunce, or their vnspeakeable vertue and godlines. For their valiantnes was so great, that they subdued the Bar∣barians driuinge them out of the borders of Syria, whych were so stronge and many in number yt they had in theyr mindes purposed to extinguishe and raze out of the me∣mory of man the very name of a Christian Their excee∣dinge great vertue and godlines dyd appeare in this, that beinge neither vrged by necessity, nor prouoked by iniury, they made warre vpon all the enemies of them that were
called by the name of Christians: to the intent they might reuerence and render due honour vnto such monumentes as Christe had left behinde him, and to the footesteppes of Christe imprinted there in the grounde, for the more liue∣ly remembrance of the benefit of Christe bestowed vppon vs, and also to take awaye, and blot oute vtterly that olde infamy and reproche wherewith Christian people were somewhat stayned before, as concerninge the moste holy place of his sepulchre, which had bene spitefully abused by the Barbarians. VVHat shoulde I intreate of the worthye and noble actes of the Spaniardes, with most stoute and cou∣ragious stomaches, and rare and singular godlines done and accomplished? Which were of such sorte that no wyse man can otherwise surmise, but that they coulde not possibly be contriued without the present healpe and assis∣taunce of Christe, for whose loue the whole nation of the Spaniardes did cherefully aduenture and hazarde their liues? For when as the powre and strength of all Arabie and Afrike together makinge a rode, and rushinge into Europe had subdued the Spaniardes by sworde, and mur∣dered most cruelly an infinite numbre of men: a very fewe persons in numbre, of them that were left a liue, after that great ruin and wracke gatheringe themselues together, did so valiauntly withstand and kepe backe ye force of their enemies, that they deliuered a great parte of Spaine, and set them againe at libertye. Their successours also not longe after followed the ensample of those their aunces∣tours in such sorte that beinge but a fewe in numbre at yt time, when as Africa did vse very ofte to sende in greate strength of men to succoure and ayde the Saracens then dwellinge in Spaine: they did not onely withstande the forcible inuasion of so huge a multitude, and valiauntlye
abide their violent force, but also at length they droue all the Barbarians cleane out of Spaine. The which noble and valiaunt acte, your graces graundfather Ferdinande the Kinge, (Lewis most noble Prince) was wonderfully commended and praysed of all men, as a man of stomach vnconquerable and excellent man, for all qualities euerye waye singularly to be honoured. But if a man shoulde aske the question, howe it came to passe that the selfe same people which had brought vnder their subiection Spaine, then florishinge and in good estate, was afterward by the remainder of Spaine, expulsed and put to flight: he shall finde no other cause thereof, but an earnest zeale to set forth the religion of Christe, which afore truely was al∣most extinguished, but after that generall scourge and ca∣lamity wherewith those our countries were afflicted, was wonderfully stirred vppe and renued. They there∣fore set on and vrged forwarde, with that wonderfull fer∣uent loue of vertue and godlines, when they aduentured to do all maner of worthy actes in defence of Christes ho¦ly name, those thinges they accomplished deseruing euer∣lastinge memorye. It would be an endlesse laboure for mee to rehearse in howe manye places they haue put to flight and vanquished a meruaylous number of their ene¦mies with a small bande of men, howe often by most eui∣dent signes they haue perceiued that healpes and sup∣plyes came downe from Heauen vnto theym, whych was playnely to bee seene in Alphonsus the first kinge of Portugale, and the chyefest of youre name and kin∣red. For that man indued wyth ryghte excellente vertues, and sutch pyetye as exceedeth common cre∣ditte, hauinge consumed his whole age in moste holye warres taken in hand for the honoure and dignity of true religion, and seeyng on a certayne day himselfe with a ve∣ry smal bande of men ready to encounter with a huge and mighty host, he he held in the element the image of Christ
being rounde about it enlightened wyth a shyning bright∣nes, wyth which sight hee was so encouraged & animated, that he ouerthrew and vanquished fiue kinges in one day. Moreouer what should I say of his sonne Sanctius? whose other valiaunt acts at this presente to omitte, that dede of his truly was notable, whereby he purchased to himselfe a memorye of a name for euer to continue, in that, when a stronge and mighty armie of Moores inuaded Portugale, yt passing along from thence they might bring vnder their iurisdiction all the whole country of Spayne, he did not onelye abate their courage, but wyth rare & singular va∣liaunt stoutenes, he broughte them vnder, and as it were maugred them together. It is needelesse for mee to re∣hearse and speake of the ages and times of other kinges, lineally descending of theyr race and progenie? For this truly appeareth plainely by the recordes and testimony of our owne Chronicles, that there was almost none among them all, that in his time procured not vnto himselfe wor∣thie prayse and commendation, as well for his valiaunte courage, as for his pietie and godlines. Wherefore when all the worshippers of Mahomet were with great conflict in warre subdued, & expelled out of the king of Portugale his territorie, they ledde forth their hoste, not so much for nomber as prowesse inuincible, and inuaded the coastes of Affrica, wher after they had gottē most famous victories, and subdued many citties, they helde by force of armes a great part of the Moores land. Truly it is no easie matter to expresse wyth howe whote and lustie courage our coun∣trymen dealt in those cōflictes, who ranne into the middest of their ennemies hoste, that a man would haue thoughte they had earnestly desired death. For they right wel vnder¦stoode yt the race of this life is soone runne, and therefore they referred all their thoughts, to that immortall glory which is prepared for all them yt manfullye and in a good quarel depart this life. And so being incited & prouoked wt
that most assured hope of immortality and earneste zeale they heare to the aduauncemente of true religyon, some∣tymes they wished nothing more desirously, then that they mought vowe to spende their fraile and short lyfe (whiche shortly after they must deeds yeelde to nature) in Chrstes quarell. So that at length it fell oute by their meanes and worckinge that all those countryes which for numbre of people, and violent inuasion mighte els haue swarmed and increased through all Spayne, were nowe so cutte of, that they stande more in feare of oure force and weapons bent agaynst them, then wee haue any cause at al to be dis∣maied at their fury and outrage. And to conclude, what a noble acte was this of theirs, that they sayled ouer the greate mayne sea wyth a wonderfull longe and fearefull nauigation, and by force of armes passed through almost al partes of ye West, East, North, & South? To what pur∣pose should I reherse here how they ouercame and how ye wā ye mightiest towns yt were in Arabia, Persia, & Aethio∣pia? how hardly & wt what great difficulty they ended those warrres wherein they ouercame India? how they discom∣fited and put to flight on the seas, nauies maruaylouslye wel furnished, & huge and mighty hostes. Howe the whole Power that ye Turcks were able to make about those par∣tes was put to wrack and vtterly vāquished through ye pu¦issance and valiauntnes of our countryemen. And are al these thinges (think you) of that nature, that they coulde be doone without the most prest and ready healpe of the e∣ternal God? Certes, I for my parte will neuer thinke so wel of the vertue and passing politique witt of your father Immanuel that noble Prynce for prowesse and chiualry farre passing all other within ye compasse of our memory: I will neuer so muche maruayle at that singuler forecast and wonderful vertu of your brother Iohn, a most iuste & merciful Prynce: To conclude I wil neuer be farre in lo∣ue with the stoutnes of our countryemen and their peculi∣ar
and naturall inclination thereunto, that I will suppose they were able to doe such worthy actes by means of wi∣sedome and strength, but by the prouidence and mightye power of God Almighty. For oure countrimen were neuer able to ouercome neither the Moores in policie, nor the Persians in strength, nor the Turkes in chiualrye, nor the Arabians in number. And yet onely by the earneste zeale to piety and godlines and the most sincere profession of Chrystes religion which hath alwayes most playnlye appeared in our countriemen, they haue bene ouercomed and theire power scatterred. This is the onely thinge that hath encreased the wealth & estate of Portugall, that hath purchased to our kinges & princes euerlastinge fame and glory, and hath by longe custome taughte an infinite numbre of Alians and straungers to submyt themselues to their rule and dominion. But what should it auayle to vse more examples in this matter? seynge that nothing is more cleare & euident aswel by the testimonie of holye scripture, as also by a greate number of other thinges for memoryes sake leste in wrytyng then that, yt kynd of war wt either for ye preseruatiō of cōmon safty, or defēce of reli¦giō is takē in hāde so acceptable to Christe, yt it is directed by the present assistance of his mightye powre. Wherefore if Christian religion bee no hinderaunce at al to the know∣ledge & exercise of martial affayres, but doth rather won∣derful set forth and confirme the same: in as much as it ta∣keth away al feare and dastardly cowardnes through the assured hope of immortality and maruailoslye stirreth vp our myndes vnto ye attaining true glorye: then it foloweth by good reason that ye christians more thē all other are fa∣mous not onlye throughe the prayse and commendation of integrity, innocēcy, tēperāce, liberality, & iustice, but al∣so that they farre excede al other men in renomne of Chi∣uallrye, and all other lawdable propertyes of vertue. For that is to be sette downe as a sure ground and princi∣ple
whiche was heretofore declared that, that onely is to be tearmed a vertue, whiche directeth it selfe vnto that so∣ueraygne good, and laste desired ende, for whose sake al o∣ther thinges are to be wished for: and that also whiche is directed and guyded by Gods holy will and pleasure, not by mannes owne wilfull appetite and ficle phantasie. So that it may easily be gathered hereby, that they neuer shewed any notable stoutnes of courage in warre whiche sought after shadowes of false renomne, but true fame & glorye the could not obtayne. Onlye they that seeke af∣ter Chryste beholdinge alwayes the true ende for whose sake to come into perill and daunger of venturynge lyfe, & limmes they think it not onely honourable, but most swete & pleasaūt are in dede truely to be iudged stout & couragi∣ous, and full of magnanimitie. THe conclusion of all is this, that wee shoulde diligent∣ly consider, and depelye ponder with oure selues howe greate the dignity and maiesty is of this Christian kinred whych God hym selfe the hyghe prynce, and ruler of all, purging the same from al contagiō of sinne and impietie, hath made his by adoptyon, and hath aduaunced it to all worthy tytles of great renoume, and hath powred theron such giftes as shalbee immortall & neuer decay. Which is not līcked to any mortal affinitie or alliāce, but acknow∣ledgeth God as an onely gouernour & parent. The which Christe our mighty and blessed sauiour hath so vnited vn∣to himselfe, that he hath imparted therewith almost wor∣thye and heauenly indumentes. Hee hath also made vs partakers of his spirituall vnction: he hath bestowed vp∣pon vs kingely, & priestly aucthority: he hath inspired in∣to our myndes knowleadge of Heauenly thinges, & hath instructed vs after a wonderfull order, & by Heauenly se∣cret workinge in all maner of vertue. He therefore that
seeketh praise, worthines and renoume, must endeuour all he can to attaine Christian vertue, must earnestly en∣brace true iustice, absolute liberality, perfect temperance, and other vertues which our lorde hath prescribed vnto vs: and must retaine that fortitude, vnto which the wor∣thines and excellencie of that name is duely and fitly ap∣plyed. For what thinge els in the life of man is perma∣nent, highly aduanced, worthy great honour and estimati∣on? Nay rather what is not vnconstant, lowe in estima∣tion, vile of condicion? For whether wee respect the vn∣certainty of ritches, or the waueringe cōdicion of honour and humayne glory, or the paynted shewe of kinrede and nobility: or lastly the counterfaite and deceiptfull resem∣blaunce of humaine vertue, wee shall finde nothinge that may fully satisfy our hartes desire, or delight our mindes with anye sutch pleasure as longe may continue. For all these thynges are vile, transitorye, mortall, full of errour and contemptible vanity. Onely the worthye titles of Christian nobility are highly esteemed, immortall, of dy∣uine perfection and excellency. Such as no force can vn∣dermine, no continuance of time drowne in the pit of obli∣uion, no kinde of calamity vtterly extinguishe. And al∣though mans base and abiect minde be in no wise able to aspire vnto so great honour and dignity: yet they which through the healpe & gratious goodnes of Christe haue se∣uered thēselues from the society & felowship of men & are nowe adopted into the houshoulde & familye of GOD, beinge staied by the helpe & assistaunce of God, shall moste easily beare and maintaine that their honourable porte. For although they be conuersaunt here with vs in earth, yet all thinges appertaine to thē, which are due to Heauē∣ly wightes, & they are nowe after a sorte rekoned & accounted in the numbre of the Goddes immortall.
The Epilogue. THus haue you receyued of mee (moste renoumed Prince) a present, not truely with wit and learninge polished, in either of which because I knowe my defect, I am right hartely sory: but yet meete and conueniente bothe for that trade of life which you apply your selfe vnto, and also for your noble and haughty courage. For beinge as you are wōderfully furnished with the vertues of courtesie, liberality, constancie, and fortitude, that is suely amonge the rest of youre morall qualities worthy singular commendation, that you frame and measure all your deuises conformably to the rule of Godlines and Christian relligion. For the nobility os your house and familie, comminge as you do, of the race of noble kin∣ges by lineall descent, doth not so puffe vppe your mind with pride and insolencie, but that you suppose mutch more glory and worthines reposed in the worthye cal∣linge of a Christian, then in those glorious titles. Ney∣ther so tooke you in hande noble actes, as thoughe you should respecte therein the laude and prayse of the vul∣gar people. Neyther with that mynde and intent dyd you expose your life to many perillous daungers, that you might thereby purchase a rewarde of mortall men. But beinge as you are of haughty mynde, in all thinges which you bringe to passe both with singular forsyghte and prouidence, and also with wonderfull courage and stoutnes, whether they appertaine to ciuill gouernment in time of peace, or to martiall prowesse in time of warre, you geue most manifest notice and significatiō, that you set no store by humaine thinges, but do with moste ear∣nest endeuour and intention of minde affect those thin∣ges that be Heauenly and euerlastinge. Therefore not without iust desarte of yours, all good men loue you, all nobility with reuerence beholde you, all Spaine with all maner of praise and cōmendation extolleth your name.
So that there is no man that knoweth your maiesty, but you haue him bounden vnto you, either for your gentle & curteous vsage, or for your rare & singular wit, or for your wonderfull earnest motion to vertue and godlines. And although hardest of all be the condicion of appro∣ued vertue, forasmutch as it is no easie matter to be aun∣swerable to the expectation of men, all ready by reason of worthy actes conceyued, yet such is the haughtines of your Graces minde, that you can most easily passe and ouercome the opinion of all men conceiued of you. For Christe our mightye and blessed Sauiour wyll ne∣uer faile you at your neede, sith you referre all your worthy actes and enterprices to his ho∣nour and glory, but will protecte you with his mighty power, and will in∣due you wyth such honoure and glory, as shall for euer and euer continue. FINIS.
