19230 22458855 25561
An Exact Description Of the manner how his Maiestie and his Nobles went to the Parliament, on Munday, the thirteenth day of Aprill, 1640. to the comfortable expectation of all Loyall Subiects. To the tune of Triumph and Ioy, &c. COme the merriest of the nine, And now unto my aid incline, I need a little helpe of thine For now I have intent Unto the world to say and sing The praises of our royall King, Who now this present hopefull spring Hath call'd a Parliament. This happy Aprill will, I trust, Give all fiue subjects reason just Of joy to feele a pleasant gust, To yeeld them hearts content: For we may be assur'd of this, If any thing hath beene amisse, Our King and State will all redresse In this good Parliament. The order how they rode that day To you I will in briefe display, In the best manner that I may, For new my minde is bent To publish what my selfe did sée, That  (Loyall) hearts may be Participants as well as wee Ith' joy oth' Parliament. The Messengers In their rich coats, on horses tall, Rode formost as their places fall, And next in order went Some Gentlement of quality, That serve the King for annuall fée, Thus every man in his degree Rode to the Parliament. Heralds in rich coats did ride, Whose proper office was to guide, And range the show on every side By place or by descent: The Trumpets made a chéerfull sound, Thus joy did every where abound, Heaven blesse King Charles, the word went round, And guide the Parliament. The Masters of the Chancery The next present themselves to th' eye, The Councell of his Maiestie, All learn'd and eloquent: Next came the Iudges grve in sight, In scarlet furr'd with Miniver white, Thus every one in order right Rode to the Parliament. The Master of the Rls i place Rode next along with gene pace, A fable Uelvet gowne tha space He wore for ornament: The sons of our Nobilitie Each one according to's degrée, In rich apparell brave to se, Did ride to th' Parliament. The Barons of the Kingdome all, In Parliament (robes as we them call) Each one iust as his place did fall, In noble order went By the antiquitie of blood; The hops next made places good, Each one in's Scarlet gowne and hood, Rode to the Parliament. The Uiscounts next inorder past As due decorum did fore-cast, Clad every one, both first and last, In fit acoutrement: Our Princely Earles in rich attire, Did cause spectators to admire The peoples hearts were set on fire For joy oth' Parliament. The noble Marquesse Winchester, Whose vertue doth on him confer Such excellencie which all prefer Most high and eminent, Did ride alone with gallant grace, As was indeed his proper place, Thus all rode on with stately pace Vnto the Parliament. Earle Marshall with a Scepter of gold, The Lord high Chamberlain brave and bold, His staffe of office then did hold, And thus in State they went: Lord Treasurer, Lord Privie Seale brave, Lord Keeper, and the Archbishop grave, These next the Prince their places have Ith' Court of Parliament. Then Princely Charles (that hopefull Lad) Whose sight made all true subiects glad, Did ride (as he good reason had) In place most eminent: the streame of honour bring all to the head Spring, Prince, fromth Prince oth King In this high Parliament. The next and last in honours seat Was he who made the show compleat, Our gracious King, our Charles the Great, Our ioyes sweet complement, Did ride in state to open sight, The royall band of Pensioners wait About him with guilt Polaxes bright Vnto the Parliament. The Master of the horse did lead (On horse-backe) in his hand, a Stéed, A horse of State tis call'd indeed: And last behinde him went The Noble Captaine, and the Guard, All in rich coats (for this prepar'd) Against this day no cost was spar'd To grace the Parliament. Besides all this which hath béen told (To speake the same I dare be bold) Though corporall eyes could not behold, A Legion did present Celestiall service to attend King Charles, and him from harm defend, The King of Kings did's Angels send T' assist our Parliament. FINIS. M. P. Printed at London, and are to be sold at the Horse-shooe in Smithfield.
