19613 99849619 14778
A viewe of some part of such pub∣like wants & disorders as are in the seruice of God, within her Maiesties countrie of ƲƲales, togither vvith an humble PETITI∣ON, vnto this high Court of Parlia∣ment for their speedy redresse. ¶ WHEREIN IS SHEVVED, not only the necessitie of reforming the state of religion among that people, but also the onely way, in regarde of substaunce, to bring that reformation to passe.
¶ To all those that faythfully loue the lord Iesus, and vnfainedly desire the flowrishing estate of Sion, together vvith the vtter razing of vvhatsoeuer obscureth the perfect beutie therof: & namely, to such of my brethren and countrimen, as the Lord hath enlighte∣ned with a true knowledge, the ioy of an vpright and comfortable profession, with the encrease of all other the Lords good graces, be multiplyed in Iesus Christe our LORD.
I Am not ignoraunt (beloued in the Lord) hovv many and great causes there are, vvher∣of the very least might seeme to haue bene sufficiently able to discourage me from this enterprise, vvhich vnder the holy hand of my God I haue novv vndertaken. J am guiltie vnto my selfe of great corruption and vveakenes. The glory of God is not so regarded amongest men as it ought to be. The Parliament hath hytherto reiected this cause: The enemies thereof are many and strong. But as the discouragements are not a fevve, so J confesse my self to be dravvn back vvith none more, then vvith the con∣sideration of my selfe. For looking into mine ovvn hart, I do from the bottom therof protest, so sinful, base, contem∣ptible, and euery vvay so vveak a vvretch as J am, to be the vnfittest instrument vnder heauen, to deale in so vvaighty a cause. Jt commeth into my minde, that the Lord in iust iudgments tovvards my sinnes, should deny any blessing vnto my endeuors. J knovv that my vveak∣nes in handling the cause, might disgrace the same. And inasmuch as states for the most part, looke vvith fleshly eyes; It commeth into my minde, that the suit, by reason of my base estate should be reiected and cast off. But all those likelihoods notvvithstanding: yet I see that the  Lord vvill haue the cause once againe brought vnto the Parliament in my hands, to try vvhether men vvill not acknovvledge the Gopell, and the gouernment of his son; to vvit, the scepter, vvhereby alone Christ Iesus ruleth a∣mong men, to be vvorth the entertaynment in their as∣semblies, thogh it be not accompanied vvith that vvorld∣ly maiesty, vvhervvith vvhen it pleaseth him, he is able to countenance it. And hereby it is in deed, that men do truly shvv themselues to tremble before the son of God, and to stoop vnto his royall Scepter, vvhen they are not ashamed of his vvord, hovv base soeuer they be that be∣come suiters in the behalfe therof.
For mine ovvne part, hovvsoeuer I haue iust occa∣sion to lament mine ovvne great corruptions, yet J may boldly say in the presence of God, & al those, vnto vvhose consideration these labors of mine are offred, publish thus much, that this cause, as near as I could, is altogither se∣parated from those foul staines, vvhervvith J acknovv∣ledge my selfe to be defiled. And J hope, that it so offereth it selfe vnto the publike vievv and consideration of the Parliament, as they haue no iust cause by reason of my great vveaknes and base estate, to reiect the same. Ney∣ther is any man to maruell, that J being charged of late, by M. Doct. Some in publike vvriting, to be not onely a defender of many blasphemous errors, but also an vnder∣miner of the ciuill State, durst presume to become a su∣tor vnto the high Court of Parliament, before J had first cleared my selfe of those crimes. For my purpose being to haue published an ansvvere to M.D. Some, before this cause should be made knovvn; I vvas dravvne vvhe∣ther I vvould or no, to take the opportunity of setting out this, vvhich I thought to be most vvaighty; least that if I had deferred it vntill th'other had come forth, I might  haue bin preuented of the means to publish it in any due time. Besides the 185. page, line 2. & 30. of M.D. Somes booke, vvherein he hath freely graunted me the contro∣sie betvveene vs; vvhich is, that vnpreaching ministers, are no ministers, and consequently, not to be communi∣cated vvith: do euidently shevv, that he did not vvell knovv himselfe vvhat he did in charging me, so far be∣yond christian modesty, for defending nothing els in these points, but that vvhich his ovvne vvritings do publike∣ly vvitnes against him to be Gods truth. So that of al o∣other causes, his bare (and by his ovvne vvitnes, for the most part false) accusations, ought least of all to disvvade me from this labour, though I neuer ment to aunsvvere him. But by the grace of God he shalbe ansvvered, and that very shortly. And the Petition being in the behalfe of Gods honor, and the good of his Church, the small regard that the Parliament hath had heretofore vnto such suites, ought not greatly to discourage me, the nomber, might, povver, and authoritie of the enemies of the cause, much lesse. He that ruleth the harts of men, can encline them to the setting forth of his ovvne glory vvhen he thinketh good. That vvhich the Lord, for some cause seeming good vn∣to his vvisdome, doth not grant at one time, he (being for the promoting of his honor) lightly bringeth to passe at some other season. And the attempts of his children for the buylding of his Church, haue not alvvayes that suc∣cesse vvhich they vvish vnder their hands. For he vseth the endeuors of some, not to finish the building, but to be a preparation vnto that vvorke which he meaneth to effect by the hand of others. Zerubabel and Ezra la∣bored very hardly in the building of Ierusalem; the Lord did not finish the vvorke by their means: and yet that
vvhich they did, vvas a great furtherance vnto Nehe∣miah, vvhose hands the Lord vsed in ioyning the vvall. So the endeuors of Gods children in our dayes, may haue their effect to the glory of God, and the comfort of his Church amongst our posterities. It vvas a common demaund the last Parliament, vvhere the cause of reformation (being then labored for) vvas 26. or 28. years agone, and vvherfore after so ma∣ny years of the Gospell, enioyed in this land, the motion of altering the outvvard state of the Church, in the offi∣ces and officers therof? Came it so out of time to be con∣sidered off? Least the like obiection should be vsed in the ages to come; behold, the mountayns of ƲƲales, do novv in the 31. yeare of the raign of Queen ELIZABETH, call heauen and earth to vvitnes, that they are vveary of their dumb ministers, nonresidents, Lord Bishops, &c. and that they desire to be vvatered by the devve of Christs holy Gospell, and to be compassed about, vvith that beautifull vvall of his holy gouernment. Be it then granted, that the Lord in anger tovvards our sins, doth not account vs novv liuing, vvorthy to be inuited by hir right excellent Maiesty and the state, as Jsrael vvas somtimes, by the godly king Hezekiah; to giue the hand to the Lord,2. Chro.
31.8 and to come vnto the Sanctuary vvhich he hath chosen, & serue the Lord our God, that the fierce∣nes of his vvrath should turne avvay from vs: yet not∣vvithstanding, least it should be preiudiciall vnto our children, that vve neuer claymed any interest vnto the trueth of the Gospell, and neuer desired to be vnburde∣ned of our blinde and tyrannicall guydes: This Petition of mine shalbe a vvitnes that both hath bin labored for. VVhosoeuer they be then, that vvould vvish men, not to trouble themselues in that cause, vvherein in their  iudgements, they can see no hope of preuayling; doe not consider, that thereby they bereaue our posterities of a great means, to come by that vvhich the children of God novv liuing, vvould so vvillingly obtaine. And they do not consider, that as the Lord hath appointed some to lay the foundation, & make vp the buylding of his Church; so he hath ordayned others, to prepare, and as it vvere, to clense the place vvhere he meaneth to buyld his Tem∣ple. The aduersaries of this cause may be many, and of great countenance; but vve knovve that the Lord hath committed all povver in heauen, and in earth, not vnto man, but vnto his ovvne sonne Christe Jesus, the alone head and king ouer his Church.Math. 28.18 The cause therefore in hand being his, in vvhose hands is all povver and domi∣nion; vvhy should vve feare any thing that earth can inuent against the same? And if the question vvere, vvho ought to be terrified in this matter, they by vvhom the Petition is promoted, or they vvho oppugne the same: it shall be found that the aduersaries hereof, haue no other cause, but to be stroken vvith a desperate and vncom∣fortable feare: ƲƲhereas on the other side, the patrons of the suite may be euery vvay exceedingly comforted. For vvhat els do the enemies hereof, but (after the man∣ner of the vvicked mencioned in the booke of IOB) say vnto the Almighty, depart thou from vs?Chap. 2.13 15. Because we desire not the knowledge of thy wayes, any fur∣ther then it may stand vvith the vpholding of the cor∣ruptions receaued and mayntained in our Church, by the consent of the State. Yea, and in their practize they say, vvho is the Almighty that vve should serue him; if he be so strickt in his vvorshipp, that he cannot abide a Church gouernment to be mayntained, vvhich may be
changeable, at the pleasure of the ciuill State? ƲƲho is the Almighty that vve should serue him; if none must he in our ministery, but such as both for their gifts and faythfulnes, do in deed shevv themselues to be his true messengers? ƲƲho is the Almighty that vve should serue him; if men for the bettering of their outvvard state, may not be Lords ouer their brethren, and ioyn li∣uing vvith liuing, that they may be able to maynayne a part vnbeseeming their calling. And I vvould they did not say, vvhat profit is there, if vve did stoup so lovv vn∣to him, as vvithout delay, there should nothing be in our Church, vvhich might svvarue from that seuere rule of his vvord? Should Gods children then feare least these men should haue the vpper hand ouer them, and the Lords cause vvhich they mayntayn. Nay, I tell you, that although such aduersaries, vvere of that povver and au∣thority, that it might be demaunded, ƲƲho they vvere that durst presume to declare their euill vvayes vnto their faces: yet should they vndoutedly be made as stub∣ble before the vvind, and as the chaff, vvhich the storm caryeth avvay. For this cause and euery one, that in the sincerity of his hart, seeketh the prosperous successe ther∣of, may boldly say vvith IOB: Mine enemie shalbe as the wicked;Iob.
27.7. & 20.27. & 21.10. and he that riseth against me, as the vnrighteous, the heauens shall declare his wic∣kednesse, and the earth shall rise vp against him. The encrease of his house shall go away, it shall flowe away in the day of his wrath, his eyes shall see his destruction, and he shall drinke of the wrath of the Almightie. This shalbe the portion of as many as to the end, oppose themselues against the cause of reformation novv labored for. Jt is not a mat∣ter of dalliance, to vvithstand the povverfull ordinance  of God, in the gouerment of his Church, especially vvhen in the steede thereof, the marchandize of shamelesse Ba∣bylon is maintayned. Jt is but folly to fight against the lambe, in the defence of her pleasant things; For the lamb shall ouercome, because he is the king of kings, and the Lord of Lords, and they that are of his side, chosen, and called, and faythfull. Great Babylon the mother, that mighty harlot, being in her ful strength in this land, vvas not able to stand against him; vvhat then shall it boote the vveake daughter to striue? And let them feare and take heede, vvho defend the daughters fornication, least they be made partakers of the punishment denounced a∣gainst them, vvho committed adultery vvith the mo∣ther. Themselues they may hurt, but their practizes a∣gainst Gods trueth and his Sayntes, ought not to discou∣rage the Lords chosen, from standing to the cause of their master. Be they then neuer so many, neuer so povverfull, neuer so flovvrishing, neuer of so great authority in the eyes of the vvorld, vvho cannot abide that the Gospell should haue such a free passage in this kingdome, as the heat thereof shoulde melt vvhatsoeuer is amisse in our state; yet the Lorde not being of their side in this poynt, they shall not be able to preuaile. For this is that cause a∣gainst vvhich, neuer man as yet striued and prospered. J knovve there vvill be many in this Parliament, vvho questionlesse fauor the cause of God from their heart, & vvould be forvvard in pleading for the soueraigntie of Christ Iesus, if they savv not their endeuors crossed and vvithstood, by many of high place and authoritye. All those vvhosoeuer they be, J do from the bottome of mine heart earnestly beseech, that they vvould consider, that in dealing for the putting dovvne of the dumbe ministe∣ry, for the abolishing of Nonresidency, and the rooting out of Lord Archb. and Lord Bishops, and vvhatsoeuer
els the right hand of the Lord hath not planted: and in seeing that the vvorde preached, may freely sound tho∣rowout this kingdome, they do therby nothing els, but de∣sire that the God of heauen and earth may be acknoled∣ged, and accounted vvorthy alone to rule in his Church vvithin this land. The consideration vvhereof, ought so to mooue and stir them vp, as no creature vnder hea∣uen should be able to dismay them, in this their Petition and request. They seeke that he may rule his Church by his vvord and lavves alone, at vvhose reproffe the2 Iob. 21.12 pil∣lers of heauen do tremble and quake. They seeke that he may be acknovvledged for the onely Sauiour and redee∣mer of men, and for the onely lavvgiuer in his Church, vvho hath protested that he vvil not abide to impart the glory thereof vnto any other. And vvhom should they then feare in this suite? The Lorde hath promised, that none vvho trust in him shall perish, Psal. 34.22. And he hath promised, that although the vvicked vvatch to slay the righteous, yet he vvill not leaue him in his hand, psal. 37.32. Yea, he hath promised to be vvith those that fear him, vvhen theyEsay. 48.1.2. passe through the vvaters, that they should not be ouerflovven; and vvhen they vvalke tho∣rough the fire, that they should not be burnt. VVherefore then, shold they fear man, whose breath is in his nostrels, as long as they sincerely stand to the cause of their God. Though they be but a fevv in nomber, yet the Lord vvith legions of Angels standeth on their side, to d scomfite all those that contende vvith him. Oh J vvould that the vvords of the Lord spoken by
Isaiah the Prophet, vvere thoroughly vvritten in the hearts of as many in this ho∣norable assembly, as for the feare of man vvill be the hardliar dravvn, throughly to stand to the cause of their God. For thus comfortably the Prophet, Chap. 51 of his prophesie, speaketh vnto all those that vvith an vpright  heart seeke the honor of the Lord. Heare me, ye that follow after righteousnes, and ye that seeke the Lord, looke to the rocke whence you are hewen, and to the hole of the pitt whence you are dig∣ged. Consider Abraham your father, and Sarah that bare you; for I called him alone and blessed him, and encreased him. Hearken vnto me, yee that know righteousnes, and the people in whose hearts is my law, fear ye not the reproch of men, neither be you afraide of their rebukes: I, euen I am he that comfort you. Who art thou that thou shouldest feare a mortall man, and the sonne of man, which shalbe made as grasse, and forgettest the Lorde thy maker, which hath spredd out the heuens, & layd the foundations of the earth, &c.
Novv then, vvhosoeuer they be, that are timerous in the cause of God, (as alasse, vvhat flesh and blood is not too too feareful) here is a stedfast rocke for them to leane vnto; here is a defender for them, vnder the shadovv of vvhose vvings, they might be bold to contemne vvhat∣soeuer their aduersaries can bring against them. Are they but a fevv in nomber, let them looke vnto Abraham, he vvas called alone, and yet the Lord blessed him, and en∣creased him. Are they afrayd of the rebukes of man? vvhy they seeke the righteous vvayes of the Lord, and there∣fore he commandeth them not to feare. Are they povv∣erfull and mighty, by vvhom the suit is d scountenaun∣ced: yea, but notvvithstanding they are but mortall, & they shalbe made as grasse, and the time vvill come, vvherein it shalbe demanded; ƲƲhere are they novv that vvithstood the cause of God in the Parliament of England? Js not their memory vvritten in vvater, and their hope perished together vvith them? To desire the free passage of the Gospell in this land, together vvith  the speedie remoouing of all that hindereth the same, is to plead the cause of that God, vvho hath controlled kings and great Monarches, yea quite ouerthrovvne them & their kingdomes, for denying the free vse of his seruice vvithin their dominions. Euen the cause of that God, vvho hath not onely brideled the rage of tyrants, enten∣ding the suppression of his trueth, but also turned that, vnto the great good of his Church, vvhereby they sought to vvorke the ruine thereof. Pharaoh, Achitophel, Sena∣cherib, Haman, came to the graue vvith blood, vvhen in the eyes of men, the most of them vvere likeliest to pre∣uayle, and the cause of God and his children vnlikeliest to stand. The Lord in this kingdom can do the like vvhen he thinketh good.Ezra. 4.7.8. & 5.3. Cap. 6.7. & 7.23. The accusations and slanders of Mi∣thridath, Tabeel, Rehum, Shimsai, Shetherboznai, vvith their companions, did seeme likely once and againe, to hinder the buylding of the holy citie: but at the length it broght frō Darius, a most sure & strong commandement for the furtherance of the work, clean contrary to the ex∣pectation of the enemie. And vvho knovveth vvhether the Lord at this Parliament, vvill not stir vp the spirits of the Sates, and especially, of her R. excellent Maiestie, that they may say vnto the enemies of this cause, as Da∣rius did vnto the men aforenamed. Therefore Tatnai, captaine beyond the riuer, & Shetherboznai vvith their companions; be ye far from them. Suffer the vvorke of this house of God to go forvvard. AndEzra. 7.23. vvhatsoeuer is by the commandement of the God of heauen, let it be done speedely for the house of the God of heauen; for vvhy should he be vvroth against the realm, &c. vvher∣fore beloued, vvhosoeuer you be, that at any time shalbe imployed, eyther as Parliament or othervvise, in the st∣ting forvvard of the cause of reformation, stand man∣fully in defence of the truth, & the liberty of his Church
The practises of the aduersaries, I mean of our bishops, shevv manifestly, that these reliques of cursed Babylon, vvhich they maintayne among vs, must needs go avvay vvith a noyse, as the rest vvas ouerthrovvne. They vvill not yeelde to the trueth, hovvsoeuer it hath gotten the vpper hande of them. The Lord must vse violence to throvv them out, as he did against the caterpillers their forefathers. Reuel. 18.19. They haue manifested hitherto, hovv desperate and past recouery, the cause vvhich they defend is become, in that they haue denyed, to yeelde a quiet and a brotherly conference or disputation, vvith those vvho are contrary minded vnto them. Jf J may but procure this vvith our BB. in ƲƲales, I vvill loose my life, if they be not ouerthrovven: vvhich I speake not, vvithout the humble acknovvledgement of myne ovvne vveaknes. And let me not be thought by any, to deale too confidently, for J deale in a sure and a confi∣dent cause, vvhich is not timerously to be delt in, but in the feare of God, vvith all boldnes to be stood to, and a∣uouched. And whensoeuer they or any of theirs, shal but aduenture their places against my life; they shall perceiue by the grace of God, that there is strength in the cause, which hitherto they haue withstood to their smal gaine.
Yea, but I might haue dealt more sparingly against them. It vvere pity in deed, but J should intreat the high court of Parliament to heale the disease of my countrie, but so notvvithstanding, as they vvould suffer the cause of the griefe and misery thereof still to remaine. The Par∣liament should be sued vnto for helpe, against the disease and bane of the country of ƲƲales, but so as they vvould fauor the causes thereof. And vvhat malladie is there J pray you in our Church, vvhereof the dumbe ministers, nonresidents, our Lord BB. vvith the rest of that vngodly generation are not the cause. J should spare them vvho spare not the Church, and in vvhose eyes the glory of God  is not esteemed, and yet the Lord knovveth, I hate them no farther then they are Gods enemies. Their fauor I de∣sire not, as long as they continue to be the aduersaries of the Church. If they vvould yeeld peace vnto it, I vvould be soon brought to lay dovvn my complaints against thē. Concerning you my deare countrimen, vvhom God of his infinit goodnes and mercy, hath translated out of the kingdome of darknes, vnto the blessed possession of the heauenly Ierusalem; I beseech you very earnestly, that you vvould be carefull to walk vvorthy the Gospel of christ. Be carefull hereof, vvhether your abode be in England or in VVales, and at any hand, endeuor to liue vvhere you may enioy the meanes of the vvord. And be carefull to haue the Lord purely vvorshipped in your families. Take heed of the profanenes, vvhereby the most novve liuing, are dravvn to contemne Gods iudgements against their sinnes. The time vvil come, wherin it shalbe made known that your hope vvas not in vaine. Labor diligently, as far as your callings vvill suffer you, to be a means to conuay that treasure vnto your country, vvhereof you your selues haue bin made partakers. Particularly, let me here put you in minde, R. honourable and vvorshipfull, vvho of my countrye are in this Parliament, to acquaint this ho∣norable court, vvith the miseries of our country, and to be earnest for a redresse. And you my brethren, vvho ha∣uing fit gifts, and are employed in the ministery, either in your ovvn countrie or in England, forget not I pray you, to be remembrancers of Sion, giue the Lord no rest, vntill the righteousnes thereof breake foorth as the light, and the saluation thereof as a burning lampe. J vvould to God that I might ioyne vvith you, and you vvith me, in some endeuor, vvhereby the means of saluation might be had in our natiue countrie; it is my harty desire. The God of peace, who hath called vs to his eternall glory by Christ Iesus, make vs perfect, confirme, strengthen and stablish vs to the ende, Amen.
A viewe of some part of such pub∣like wants & disorders as are in the seruice of God, within her Maiesties countrie of ƲƲales, togither vvith an humble PETITI∣ON, vnto this high Court of Parlia∣ment for their speedy redresse. Anno 1588. THe aeternall God, before whom I nowe stand, and shall stande in that day, eyther to be acquited or condemned; knoweth that the pitifull & miserable estate of my pitifull and miserable countreimen, the inhabitants of Wales; doe inforce me in most du∣tifull and humble maner, at this time, both to lay open before your eyes, whoe by the prouidence of God, are now to be assembled togither in this highe court of parlament: the wantes and defor∣mities of the seruice of god in wales, my deere & natiue country, and also to intreat with the like submission, that the same by your wisdomes may be speedely redressed. The Lords holy seruice a∣monge that people hath many corruptions and more wants. Their case in regarde therof is very pitifull. Few or none there be who are thorowly touched to haue compassion thereof. The means of redresse is in the hands of this assembly, who are met together, to the end that al the subiects of this kingdome, may with fredome and liberty acquaint them with their suits and Petitions, for the promotinge of Gods glory, and the good of their cuntry. And therfore, in that I make known vnto this high court, the greefes of my country, & desire the redresse thereof; therin I neither in∣treat
any thing which lieth not in your power to grant, nor craue that, wherin the case being neg∣lected by others, I may not lawfully be a suter. The reason that mooueth me thereunto, is the discharge of my duty towards the Lord my God, towards his Church, towatdes my natiue coun∣try, and towards you of this honorable assemblie, which coulde not stand with my silence nowe in this suit. Concerning the Lorde, because I am a pore wretched sinner, vpon whom he hath shew∣ed great mercies, in pardoning my great offences often committed against his maiestie; I haue by his grace taken a bonde of my selfe, to seeke the promoting of his honor by al means possible: and in the seeking thereof, to vtter the truth as far as my calling wil permit, without respect of person, time, place, estate, or conditiō of life whatsoeuer; and so to become an vtter enemie vnto all these corruptions (by what authoritie or person soeuer they be maintained) whereby his holy seruice is hindred. And therfore you of this honorable as∣sembly are not to maruel, that I both seeke the o∣uerthrow of these corruptions in Wales, whereof a non I wil speak more at larg, wherby the Lords holy and sacred ministery is shamefully polluted, and his seruice with the saluation of his people greatly withstood: and also lay vppon you whose authority, good name, credit, estimation, and high place, I ought and by the grace of god wil defend, against al the detractors therof, euē with the losse of my life when it shalbe needful; the staine and discredit of denying gods heauenly truth, the pas∣sage joyned with the continuance of the lamen∣table miserie of soules, and the defence of mon∣strous  impietie, euē in gods own house, vnles you yeeld vnto the suit, whervnto at this present you are entreated to be fauorable. As for the Church of God into which I haue bin begotten thorowe the word preched, by means of my abode in Eng∣lande, in these peaceable dayes of her highnes. I haue wholly dedicated my selfe to seeke the flow∣rishing estate thereof by labouring to beutifie the same, both in the plucking vp by the rootes, of these filthie Italian weedes, wherwith it is nowe miserably deformed; and planting therein what∣soeuer might be for the comlines of Gods orch∣ard, in respect of my poore countrey; because it pleased the Lord of life that therin I first sawe the light of the sunne, and haue been by my parents there liuing, brought vp in both the vniuersities of this land, to the end if euer the Lord enabled me, I should procure the good of my natiue country∣men. I haue vowed my selfe dutifully to benefite them al the waies I may. And in doing them good, I purpose not to respect mine own quietnes, yea or life, where my death can win them the gospel. And wherein shal I stand my deare cuntrimen in any steed, if not by speaking in their behalf then, when their wantes are most pitiful, & they not a∣ble, or not willing, to make knowne their miserie? if not in blessing their deaf ears, in remouing the stumblinge blocke from before the eies of the blinde? if not in labouringe to bring them to hea∣uen, who of their owne natures should liue eter∣nally in a worse place to their woe? Their misery at this day consisting partly, in the great igno∣rance of God wherein they liue, partly in those corruptions and vnlawful callings, where by the  Church generally within her maiesties domini∣ons is pestered; I am nowe with all humilytie to seeke the redresse both of the one and the other at the handes of this honorable assembly. This ignoraunce also, and these corruptions standing as enemies in the way to hinder my bretheren from eternal life, I professe my selfe to seeke their overthrowe and confusion, and by the Lords as∣sistance as longe as I liue, neuer leaue either of both, vntill the Church of God in Wales be dis∣burdened of suche vnnaturall plantes. Con∣cerning you of this honorable assemblye, seing I haue receaued the former blessings throughe your handes by meanes of the outward peace, whereof hir right excellent maiestie hath made the whole land partaker from the Lord, I cannot of conscience; but in most humble submission & reuerent manner, put you in minde of the estate wherein you stand before the Lord, vnlesse at this your meetinge, there be order taken, for the reforming in Wales of such things as now shalbe made known vnto you to be amisse, and you ear∣nestly with all reauerence and dutie, entreated to reforme. May it please you therefore to vnder∣stand, that there is not only such a defect of the seruice of the euerliuing God in all the publike meetinges for the most part, of all the inhabi∣tantes of Wales, hir maiesties free borne subiects and people: as the most parishes within that cun∣try, want the means of saluation, and haue wan∣ted the same all this time of her prosperous go∣uernment: but also that there is such corrupti∣ons in that part of Gods seruice which is esta∣blished, as the Lords holy and sacted ministerie,  with al other ecclesiastical functions, pertayning vnto the outwatd seruice of God, and the gouern∣ment of his Church, are most intollerablie abu∣sed, and prophaned by such as are there tollera∣ted to intermedle with them. And may it please you in like sort, that some order may be taken, whereby the seruice of God in his pure worship, being as you heare, many waies defectiue and corrupt among the people, may be without delay restored vnto the integritie, which shalbe accep∣table in the sight of God, and the meanes of their saluation who professe the same. This most hum∣ble and most waightie petition, I am the rather encoraged at this time to prefer, in as much as it doth not only tend to the saluation of many thousandes soules, whō now (alasse) perish in mi∣serable darknes and ignorance, but concerneth the furtherance, which is the point especially to be respected, of the pure and sincere worship of the eternall God. And it is that cause, being my second incouragement, which you of this high court of parliament professe all of you to fauour. For who is he that will not professe him self to be the fauorer of a suit tending to the honor of God, and the deliuerance of men from eternall woe and perdition? And it is that cause wherein e∣uery of you are bound vpō your alegeance vnto the Lord and her maiesty, laying al other maters aside, first and principally to deale; and so to deale as you suffer not your selues, for any worldly re∣spectes, either by the vtter reiecting, or by the cold and carelesse intertaining hereof, to betraie God, to betray his truth, to betraie the saluation of men, and to betray the whole kingdome vnto  the fiery wrath of Gods heauie displeasure: Of all which sinnes the Lord himselfe findeth and pro∣nounceth euery one of you to be guiltie, that will not labour at this time of your assemblie, for the promoting of the cause nowe in hand. And howesoeuer in former times, he hath seemed hi∣therto to wincke at the carelesse respect, which you haue had to his true seruice: yet you are now to vnderstand, that it is to be feared, lest shame∣full and speedie destruction wil betide the whole kingdome, if the suite wherevppon the worshipp of Gods owne Maiestie standeth; be as slenderly entreated of the parliament of England, as alway heretofore it hath bene. And that the petition may apear to be no other, then that, which he by whome alone all kingdoms and common welths are maintained, requireth without contradiction to be graunted, by this honourable assemblie, ex∣cept his heauie wrath and displeasure, would be procured vpon the whole land. And that it may apear to be no other then that, the graunt where of, is the onlie way to saue them on whose be∣half it is made; no other thē that which no state, no kingdom, no councell, prince, potentate, high or lowe can denie, except they would shewe them selues to haue no care of religion and pietie: that these thinges I say may appear, we are to consider more at large of the petition, and then whether it be such, as vpon the denial thereof, the wrath and anger of God is to be expected, for to fal vp∣pon them, who shall denie the same, and the whol land for their sinne. Nowe therefore, if there be nothing else required at your hand, in this whole treatise following, but that which the Lord him∣selfe  from heauen, pronounceth to be so neerly joined with the former points; as vpon the refu∣sall of the suite, you shal openly declare, that you are an assembly wherein the Lords cause shal not be hard; an assemblie wherein the felicitie of mi∣serable men shall not be respected; an assembly who wittingly and willingly call for the iudge∣ments of God vpon the whole kingdome; an as∣sembly wherein trueth, religion, and pietie can beare no swaye: then I hope that none will be found in this honorable court, to be such an ene∣mie vnto the honor of God, the felicitie of men, and the quiet state of this common wealth: none so prophane, wicked, and irreligious, as euen to thinke that the consultation of this matter may be differred. But if on the other side, the suite be founde to be of no such importance, as before is expressed, or if I be found to write any thing im∣pertinent vnto the former points, or not to haue behaued my selfe so dutifull in my stile and ma∣ner of writing towards this honorable court, as it became the basest vassel vnder heauen, hauing a calling to deale in the like cause, to carie himself towardes the princes of his people, then let not my life be precious in your sight. Here therefore, with all humility and reuerence, before the eter∣nall God, his elect Angels and Church, her right excellent, our dread soueraigne, Queene ELI∣ZABETH; I call euerye one of you to recorde, that vpon the perill of my life, I will shewe, that you cannot but giue eare vnto the suite, which is now preferred vnto you, though by my base and sinnefull hands, except you will neglect the ho∣nor of God, set light by the saluation of his peo∣ple,  endanger the state of her Maiesty (whom the Lord long preserue vnto his glorie) with the whole kingdome, and proclaime vnto the world, that all religion and truth is perished from a∣monge you. My manner of dealing herein, as it shalbe by the grace of God in all dutie and sub∣mission; as writing vnto those, whose authoritie and places, I am not without great reuerence to consider, so shal it be plaine and free without mi∣nishing or clipping any part of the trueth (for the feare or fauor of any creature) which it concer∣neth you to heare; wherein I will vtter nothing but that, which by the assistaunce of God, I will seale with my blood, if I shall be driuen therevn∣to. The reason moouing me to so free and plaine a kind of writing, as neither I dealing in the same cause, nor yet any els before me haue vsed, is not (the Lord is my witnes) because I would hereby, arrogate vnto my selfe, the prayse of a bolde re∣buker of states, & great personages; but it is first, because I deale in that matter, vpon the goodnes whereof, I may presume to speak the whole truth of God, especially writing vnto an assembly pro∣fessing true religion. Secondly, because the suite is put vp vnto them, who although they professe to seeke the honor of God: yet haue heretofore altogether vndutifully refused to giue the hea∣ring vnto any motion tending vnto the reforma∣tion of the religion, which they pretend to fauor and professe. Some of them thinking the cause at all not worthie to be delt in. Others, not altoge∣ther disliking the suite, iudged notwithstanding the time wherein it was to be handled, not to be as yet come. Because they saw that the base and  supplicatorie maner whereby it desired the hea∣ring, made al other causes comming with autho∣rity from men, to be preferred before it. The most who in deede sincerely fauoreth the cause, haue thought it to be a gaineles matter to deale at all therein. For as much as it is the generall voyce of all men, that reformation cannot be taken in hand, without the high and heauie displeasure of her Maiestie, who (to speake as I am perswaded) being borne in hand, by the vngodly perswasions of some godlesse and irreligious men of the Ec∣clesiastical state, that the Church within her Ma∣iesties dominions, cannot be at a better stay then it is; hath not without great reason, bene hither∣to the hard liar induced to haue the cause of re∣ligion againe dealt in, which she is perswaded al∣together to be in a tollerable sort, according to the will of her God. Being also vndutifully borne in hand that the endeuour of reforming religion is nothing else, but a new fangled and seditious attempt, proceeding from the factious & discon∣tented braines of those, who are slandered to de∣sire thereby nothing els, but the alteration of the present state, dangerous to her royal crowne and person, and ruinous vnto the whole king∣dome. In respect whereof, the cause offering it selfe againe to be considered of this high court; it became the same to come, with a maiesticall and terrifying countenance; that if it pleased the Lorde, it might this way for feare compell them dutifully to stoupe vnto it, whose fauor and good liking in a peaceable manner, hitherto it coulde by no means procure. And it became it so to offer it selfe, as withall it might appeare, that the en∣terprise
of reforming religion, is not a matter tendinge to the disturbinge of the common∣wealth, and the disliking of her Maiestie. Except men would slanderously surmise the estate of this kingdome, to be so out of square, as Gods trueth cannot haue passage therein, without the immi∣nent ruine of al, and slanderously report her Ma∣iesties will and affection, to be then intollerably crossed, when the will of her God, is sought to be established: which assertions, shalbe manifested to be grieuous, and vndutifull slaunders against hir Maiestie and the state; by the opening of such thinges as being amisse within Wales, the Lorde requireth to be reformed, at the handes of her Maiestie and this Parliament. The wants therefore, and corruptions of the seruice of God in Wales, joyned with the misery of that people are; first, in that the most congre∣gations within that countrie, haue all this time of the Gospell preached in Englande, had no o∣ther seruice of God, for the working of fayth and repentance sounding in them, but such, as where∣by the people partaking the same, cannot possi∣bly be saued ordinarily. Mistake me not. For I doe not saye, that eyther that seruice, which all this time of her Maiesties gouerment they haue had, and now haue, is idolatrous, or that by the pub∣like authoritie of her Maiestie and the Parlia∣ment, they haue bin publikely enjoyned, to pro∣fesse any other religiō, then that only true religi∣on, in the professiō wherof alone, ordinary salua∣tion is to be had. But I affirme that God is not o∣therwise serued in the most assemblies there, then that way, whereby the food of eternall life,
shall neuer be ordinarily conuayed to the peo∣ple. This I affirme, and this I will stand vnto, be∣cause for the space nowe of 30. yeares complete, they haue euery where, for the most part, wan∣ted the preaching of the word, without which, as it is plainely set downe in manye places of theIam. 1.12. 1 Pet. 1.2. Iob. 33.23. 1. Cor. 121. Rom. 10.14. Ephes. 1.13. and 2.17. Acts. 20.32. Pro. 8.34.35. Isay. 53.11. word, and I haue elswhere largely prooued vn∣to her Maiestie and this high court, ordinarily, no fleshe can be saued. Now my Lords, and you the rest of this Parliament, consider I pray you, what care hath bin had of the soules of men vn∣der her Maiesties gouernement, and how in the dayes of reckoning and account these things wil be answered. Consider how lamentable a case it is, that in the flowrishingest gouernment for out∣ward peace, that is again vnder the cope of hea∣uen; where publike idolatrie hath bene banni∣shed, not one family or one tribe; but a whole na∣tion should perishe for want of knowledge. And see whether I haue not sufficient cause to deale with you on the behalfe of my countrie. My crie, my crie is not the crie ofDeut. 11.8 giltlesse and innocent blood, which were verye woefull, but of lost and damned foules, which is most lamentable: and giue you eare vnto it, my LL. least the blood of soules bee laide to your charge, and required at your hands. For it is not the judispensible du∣tie of the Parliament to giue eare vnto this crie? Howe then I pray you, will it be answered before the judge of all the worlde in the day of judge∣ment, if you be carelesse of a dutie so necessarily required at your handes: when our Sauiour Christ affirmed it to be nothing availeable vnto men, to winne the whole worlde,Luk. 9.22. if they lose their  owne soules. Did he thereby thinke you, not only enforce that they are in a miserable taking, who in respect of the knowledge of their saluation, know not the right hand from the left: but also forcible in feare, that gouernours vnto whome of trust he hath committed inferiours, discharge not their duties in his sight, vnlesse they haue great care of the saluation of their people? Que∣stionlesse he doth. Let them therefore be afraide of aeternall shame and confusion, who blushe not to be busie in the consultation of euerye trifling matter, and would be accounted great state men for tything Minte and Cummin, whereas in the meane time, they are not ashamed, no not to withstande the consultation, purposing to bring that to passe, which the wisdome of God himselfe Iesus Christ, hath pronounced to be worthy the whole world, euen the sauing health of men. Wel the day will come, how soone he alone knoweth, in whose handes are the keyes of all knowledge; wherein it shall appeare by wofull experience, & that too late, what an heauie reckoning will bee made with such Parliament men. And take you heed that are of this assembly, now at the length after so many warnings, lest you be found in their number, who make light account of the cause of the Gospell offered vnto them, and who thinke the matter of mens saluation, to be nothing else but a conceit, wherewith the immaginations of melanchollicke heads are vsually troubled. The cause one day shalbe found worth the considera∣tion, howsoeuer men now thinke that they may without dammage securely contemne the same. And I woulde humbly intreate this high courte  more seriously to consider thereof. The suite is, that Gods honour may be truely yeelded vnto him by the subiectes of this kingdome, and that their soules may be saued in the daye of Iesus Christ; such a suit as a greater cannot be consul∣ted of amongst the sonnes of men. And will not the wisest and greatest assembly in the land, take order that this may be harkened vnto? Wil they not consult of a waye how men may come vnto the means whereby they may be saued; To what end else my Lordes should you be assembled to∣gether, if this cause be not handled in your mee∣tings? A Parliament gathered together in Eng∣land, in the dayes of the Gospell vnder Queene ELIZABETH, and the cause of Gods honor, & the felicitie of the subiectes neuer thought vpon, neuer accounted worthy the consultation. Such a state and such a gouernment may flowrish and continue in peace for a time: but vndoubtedly the destruction therof is decreed with the Lord, the execution of which decree, shal not be ouer∣long deferred, without speedie repentance. Can there be a meeting of all states in the lande to consult in Parliament, what may be most behof∣full for the promoting of Gods glorye, and the good of the common welth, and yet no care had, how the aeternal miserie of a whole nation, euen almost the fourth part of the kingdome may be preuented? What is this else but to dally with Gods honour, and to delude his people of their saluation? When especially after so many Parli∣aments, in a kingdome freely professing the Gos∣pell for the space of 30. yeares, in the fourth part of the kingdome, there shalbe founde such grosse  ignorance, as no region vnder heauen, coulde at anye time yeelde the like president, so long after the bannishing of idolatrie. I doe not solace my self in considering the miserie of my natiue cun∣trimen, neither do I thinke thereof at all, vnlesse it be to bewaile their estate, and to consider how it may be redressed. This I may say of them with∣out offence, that they neuer as yet for the most part, enjoyed the preaching of the Gospell, since they wer professed idolators vnder poperie. Now what felicitie concerning spirituall things, a pro∣fession without the Gospell preached can haue, the same they may enjoye I denie not. But what will be the end of such a profession? verely euen this. After a few dayes miserably spent in this life such professors shalbe sure (for any thing that is otherwise reuealed) to liue in hell for euermore. Will it then profit them at all, to haue liued in a kingdome professing true religion, though they haue gayned the whol world therein, seeing they are sure to lose their owne soules: because in this life they haue wanted the preaching of the Gos∣pell. And if this that I haue set downe be not suf∣ficient to expresse their miserie, and to mooue you to consider of them, I know not what may be accounted miserable, or what may procure com∣passion. Or if this will not mooue you to graunt them the preaching of the Gospell, then shal you leaue vnto posterities, but a small testimonie of your religious hearts, and loue to the Lords san∣ctuarie. Is there not an heauen my Lordes, after this life for men to goe vnto? Is it possible that they shall ordinarily go thither, who neuer en∣joyed the preaching of the Gospell? Or can our  people in Wales looke for extraordinarie saluati∣on? And will not you see that they be no longer destitute of this meanes, whereby they may walk in the statutes of life and not die? Is this peticion that God may be truly honored, and the soules of men saued, hurtful to the state, dangerous to her Maiesties ctowne and dignitie, and contrary vnto hir affection? cannot this state stand if God should be truly honored, and that people trained in the waies of godlines? Cannot her Maiesties crowne and dignitie stand, if these thinges be en∣acted in Parliament? And must shee needs be vn∣dutifully gainsaid, when the honor of her God, & the blessednesse of her people are pleaded for? Whosoeuer haue, do, or will slaunder their soue∣raigne, and the whole state, in this vile and vn∣dutifull sort, it is pitie they were not seuerely pu∣nished. Againe my LL. is that a religious assem∣bly? Is that an assemblie wherein trueth, pietie, the honor of God, and the aeternall happinesse of men shal beare any sway, where this petition can not be granted? Which desireth nothing els, but that whiche may be enacted without the great hurt of any, & which ought to be graunted, what∣soeuer in the judgment of fleshly wise men might seeme to ensue thereof. They will neuer there∣fore in the sight of God and his Churche, escape the ignominie and staine of irreligious and pro∣fane men, whose eyes will not be mooued with compassion at the estate of our people, and de∣fects of Gods seruice among them. Nowe if I be thought to haue reported any vntrueth, concer∣ning their estate, let me be brought face to face, for the triall hereof, with those vnto whom the  care (I should say the spoile) of the Church there is committed, and being conuinced to haue vtte∣red any vntrueth, let me haue no fauour, but dye the death, before you of this honourable assem∣blye, and my blood be vpon my owne heade, for impeaching the credite of the rulers of my peo∣ple, and their gouernement, vndutifully by pub∣like writing, whose estimation I know it to be vn∣lawfull for me, euen in thought once to violate.
I doe here therefore before your Hh. offer to prooue more at large, that the most congregati∣ons in Wales, want the very especiall outwarde markes of a Church, and so the meanes of salua∣tion by the worde preached, and the comfort of fayth, by the right administration of the Sacra∣ments. I also offer to prooue, that your Hh. with∣out your speedie repentaunce shalbe reckoned with, because that in this point, you haue plowed but iniquitie, and sowed wickednes, and so as Iob sayth,Iob. 4.8. you shall reape the same. Beleeue them not, who tell you that all is well within Wales, & that they are a sort of clamorous and vndiscreet men, who affirme the contrary. Beleue them not, who tell you that it belongeth not vnto your duties to be carefull of the estate of the Church, and that the Lorde requireth no more at your hands, but the mayntenance of outwarde peace. As though men committed to your gouerne∣ment, were but droues of bruite beastes, onely to be foddered,Ie. 17.13.14. and kept from external invasions and inroods. Giue eare rather vnto the words of the Prophet, who with a loude voyce crieth vnto you; Why will you die, you, your families & peo∣ple, by the sword, by the famine, and by the pesti∣lence.  And why will you be damned (I may alude without injurie vnto the word) as the Lord hath spoken against all those gouernours, that wil not see their people prouidedEzra 7.17.23. psa 2.10. & 101. 2. chr. 29 10. & 30.9 & 34.27. ex. 20.10. gen. 18.19. 2. chr. 15.12.13. & 17.7. for, of the meanes of saluation. Therefore heare not the words of the prophets, who tell you, that you shall neyther see sword nor famine, though you be still as careles of your people, as hitherto you haue bene. Looke the punnishments both of flattering prophetes, and of those that are deceiued by their flatterie. Ierem. 14.15. Heare them not I say, but obeye the Lord in the execution of that dutie which he ex∣acteth at your hands, by calling your people to the knowledge of his sonne, that you may liue. For why should this lande be made desolate, for this your carelesnes? Ierem. 27.17. They prophe∣sie vanitie and lies vnto you, which saye peace, peace, while you dispise the Lorde, and walke in this secure course, or else Ieremiah is deceiued. If they be prophets, and if the word of the Lord be in their mouths, let them intreat her Maiestie, & you of this parliament, that the misery of helples Wales, may at this time of your meeting be con∣sidered off, and redressed.
Thus I haue set downe some part of the wants n the seruice of God in Wales, and some part of hat miserie, wherein my countrie is bewrapped; nd which you are bound vnto the Lord (but by e most humbly entreated) to redresse. And this s the cause wherein if you deale not, you betray he honor of God, betraye his trueth, betraye the eligion which you professe, and betraye her Ma∣estie, and the whole kingdome, vnto the reuen∣ing hand of God. For without controuersie, the  continuance of our ignorance, and the defectes of Gods seruice, will one day, and that shortly, I feare me, bring the Lord in fearefull and consu∣ming judgementes to take punnishment of you, your wiues children, families and the wholland: because in your states & consultation, his honor, and the blood of mens souls were not regarded. But this is neyther all the miserie of the inhabi∣tants of Wales, neythet is this all that the Lorde requireth to be amended by this Parliament, vn∣der paine of his heauie wrath.
In the seconde place then we are to consider, the corruptions tollerated by the positiue lawes of this land, and countenanced by the authority of this high court of Parliament, in the seruice of God within Wales. Whereby no small disho∣nor redoundeth vnto the Maiestie of God, and wherein no small part of the spirituall miserie of that people doth consist. For the remouing of which corruptions, it behoueth the Parliament, with speede to be very carefull, euen before such time as the Lord calleth the land to an account, for the wicked constitutions therein maintay∣ned. Here therefore I affirme, vnlesse without delay you labour to cleanse the Churche vnder your gouernement in Wales, of all L. Bb. dumbe ministers, nonresidents, archdeacons, commissa∣ries, and all other romish officers & offices, there tollerated, and so tollerated, as by the consent & authoritie of the Parliament they are maintey∣ned; that you are both in this life and the life to come, likely to be subiecte vnto the intollerable masse of Gods wrath, the execution whereof is not vnlikely to fall vpon you and your houses,  vnlesse you preuent the fiercenes of the Lordes indigna▪ If Moses by a positiue lawe, should haue allow∣ed the offring of strange fire by Nadab and Abi∣hu, tollerated the ministery of blemished &Leu. 20.18 23. de∣formed Leuites, ennacted that one not being of the line of Aaron, might presse before the Altar,Num. 16.10.18.7. to offer the bread of his God: if Dauid had made it lawfull for Vzzah, to lay his hand vpon the Arke; if Iosiah or any other the godly rulers had, either giuen leaue to the cursed shepheardes in their dayes, to place others in their stead, to takeEzek. 44.9 the ouersight of the Sanctuary? Or permitted a con∣secrated priest to be a ciuill gouernour; briefely had established any thing in the Churche gouer∣ment prescribed by Moses, contrary to the com∣mandement, had they not bene in danger of the Lords wrath? They had without controuersie. And shall you of the high court of Parliament be dispenced with, being guilty (except you labor to remoue the dumbe ministery, nonresidence, with the vsurped and Antichristian seats of L. Bb. &c.) of tollerating & establishing greater sinnes among your people in Wales, in steed of the go∣uernment prescribed by Iesus Christ? assure your selues no. I do therefore in this point also, for the discharge of my dutie and conscience towardes the Lord, his Church, my countrie, and the whol estate of this kingdom, taking my life in my hand
estifying vnto you, before the Maiestie of God, nd before his church that our dumbe ministers, hat the callings of our L. Bb. archdea. commiss. with al other remnants of the sacriledge brought nto the Churche by that Romishe strumpet, and  now remaining in Wales; are intollerable before the Lorde, and that it is not likely  uer you tollerating these thinges any longer, shall escape Gods fierie wrath. The trueth hereof I do briefly make knowne by the reasons following, and of∣fer to prooue them more at large, euen vpon the peril of my life, against our 4. L. Bb. all their chap∣lains, retainers, fauorers and wel willers; whether in eyther of the two vniuersities of this lande, or in any place els whatsoeuer. These things I offer to prooue against M. D. Bridges, who lately in a large volume, hath vndertaken their defence. In which booke of his, he hath offered her Maiestie & the Parliament most vndutifull injurie, by go∣ing about for the maintenance of his owne belly, & the belies of the rest of his coat, to allien at the hears of the loyallest subiects in the lande, from their most carefull prince and gouernours. As though her Maiestie and this honourable court, ment to turne the edge of the sword against thē, who indeed deserue not to be threatned with the scabbord.Compare pag. 448. of D Bridges his booke with Bellar∣mine. cap. 10. li. 5. cont 3. and you shall finde the one to haue writen the verie same thing for the Ach that the o∣ther hath for the pope Into which booke he hath crammed as plaine poperie for the defence of our Bb. as euer Harding, Saunders, Turrian, Bellarmine, or any other the firebrands and ensigne bearers of Ro∣mish treason against her Maiesties crowne, haue brought for the Popes supremacie. And for as much as he in that booke, hath both vndertaken the defence of those corruptions, for the tollera∣ting wherof, the anger of God hangeth ouer the whole land; and also shewed himselfe to be Am∣monitish Tobiah, against the buylding of Ierusa∣lem in Wales, by defending the very breaches & ruins of the Babylonish ouerthrow, which by the  just judgements of God vnder poperie we sustai∣ned, to be the perfectest building that Sion can be brought vnto; and so by this slander withstan∣deth the saluation (which I doubt not) her Maie∣stie and the parliament wishe vnto my country. I haue so framed the reasons following, as they o∣uerthrow the very foundation and whole frame of that wicked book & of al others, writtē for the defence of our established Church gouernment. Now that our dumbe ministers, nonresidents, L. bishops, archdea. &c. are nothing els but an en∣crease of sinnefull men,Num. 22.14. risen vp in steed of their fathers the idolatrous Monkes and Fryars, stil to augment the fierce wrath of God against this land and our gouernors: & that this booke of D. Bridges, and whatsoeuer els hath bin written for their defence, are nothing els, but edicts, trayte∣rous against God, and slanderous to your sacred gouernment, to defend the sale and exchange of Church goods, & the very destruction of souls: to speak al in a word, that both these corruptions & their defences, are cōdemned by the Lords own reuealed wil, as things directly against the same, and the lawes of her Maiestie, expressed in his written word; and therefore not to be tollerated by your authoritie, vnlesse you thinke that you may tollerate sinne by your lawes; nor yet once to be spoken for or countenaunced, vnlesse you would plead for Baal, I prooue by these reasons.
That forme of Church gouernement whiche maketh our Sauiour Christ inferior vnto Moses,Iudg. 6.38. is an impious, vngodly, and vnlawfull gouerment flat contrarye to the worde,Heb 3 6. Nom. 12.7. and therefore in no case to be tollerated by any lawes or authoritie,  and the booke or bookes defending the same, are vngodly and impious bookes. But our Churche gouernment in Wales, by L. bishops, archd. dumb ministers, and other ecclesiastical officers (as for nonresidents, let this one reason for all serue a∣gainst them; they as much as in them lieth, be∣reaue the people ouer whome they thrust them∣selues, of the onely ordinarie means of saluation, which is the word preached) is such gouerment, as maketh the Lord of life, Iesus Christ inferiour to Moses, and this booke of D. Bridges, with all o∣ther bookes of the like arguments doe the same. Therfore this gouernment is a gouernment, not to be tollerated by law in any state, vnlesse men woulde feele Gods heauie judgementes for the same, and therefore also it is a gouernment most pernicious and dangerous, euen in pollicie vnto the ciuil gouernment where it is established, and this booke or books defending the same, are vn∣gody wicked and pernicious bookes, trayterous against the Maiestie of Iesus Christe; crying for vnsufferable vengeance vpō such as tolerate thē.
The proposition is not to be doubted off. For is that Church gouernment or bookes to be tol∣lerated, which make Christ Iesus the sonne of the aeternall God, yea God himselfe inferiour vnto Moses? The assumption is thus prooued. That gouernement, and that booke or bookes, whiche holdeth Iesus Christ God and man, to haue pre∣scribed no externall forme of the gouernment o his Churche; but such, as at the pleasure of the magistrate, when time and place requireth may be altered without sinne; preferreth Moses be∣fore Iesus Christe. This is manifest out of the ex∣presse  wordes of the text. Heb. 3.2.6. Because the Lord Iesus, being the sonne, is in that place com∣pared with Moses a faithfull seruant in deed, and preferred before Moses, in regard of the external gouernment, which Moses had so faythfully pre∣scribed vnder the law, as it was not to be chaun∣ged at the pleasure of any magistrate, vntillDan. 9.27. the Messiah should cause the oblations to cease. For what king was there euer in Iudah, who without the breach of Gods law,1 Chron. 23.24. could alter the external regiment of the Iewish Church in the Leuitical priesthood and officers? Dauid I grant, ordained some things not mentioned in the bookes of Mo∣ses, but that whiche he did, proceeded from the spirit of God, and he had the worde for his war∣rant. The same is to be saide of whatsoeuer was done by any other of the godly kings in Iudah.
Nowe that the former comparison, Heb. 3.2.6. betweene the sonne and the seruant, Christe and Moses, is concerning the externall regiment of the church, and not the spiritual gouernment of the inner man (as D. Bridges affirmeth pag. 51. lin 30.) it is plaine. Because Moses had nothing to do with the gouerning of the inner man; and there∣fore it were no prerogatiue for the Lorde to be preferred in faithfulnes before Moses, in that dis∣pensation wherein Moses neuer dealt. Hence thē I assume, that our forme of Church gouernment in Wales, and this wicked booke, holdeth Iesus Christ to haue ordained such an externall forme of gouernment in his Churche, at his departure from earth to heauen, as at the pleasure of the magistrate, might be altered without the breach of Gods institution: which thing D. Bridges affir∣meth  pag. 55. And all our prelates grant that this high court of parliament may lawfully alter the forme of Church gouernement now established. Therefore this gouernment, and this booke, pre∣ferreth Moses before Iesus Christ. And I cannot see how far this differeth from blasphemie. Now if Christ should be saide to ordaine no externall regiment at all, then Moses is far before him, and the thirst of superioritie in our prelates, and their accomplisses, is turned into extreame drunken∣nes of impietie by this assertion.
I beseech the Lord in mercy to open your eies that are of this assemblie, that you may see how he and his people haue been dealt with by retai∣ning such laws in force, as justle & ouerthrow the  prerogatiue of his sonn. And the Lord make you to see whether those men, that defend the in∣terest of the sonn of God in this point against the tiranicall vsurpation of Bb. and haue brought for his title vnanswerable euidēce, out of the sacred records of Gods owne writings, offending eyther in matter or circumstance in no one thing, but that they haue not dealt more earnestlie with your Hh. and more roundly with the aduersaries in the right of their master; haue deserued to be imprisoned, thruste out of their liuinges, reuiled, & railed vpon by vngodly and wicked prelats vn∣to the state, as seditious and discontented men with the ciuil gouernment, dangerous subiectes & enimies vnto her Maiesties crown. And surely the cause being made knowne vnto you, as nowe it is, how soeuer the Lord may beare with your ouersight heretofore, in the ignoraunce of the waight thereof: yet if you doe not, nowe abrogate  such a church gouernment, well may you hope for the fauour and intertainement of Moses, that is the curse of the lawe: but the fauoure and lo∣uing countenaunce of Iesus Christ, I doe not see how you shal euer enjoy. To prosecute this point a litle farther. In most humble manner, I would know of you that are of this high court, whether of these 2. pointes following you would be said to maintain, by the continuance of the aforesaid cal∣lings & corruptions within Wales? For of either of the 2. you must needes be guiltie. First doe you think you may presume to defend by your autho∣ritie and lawes, such offices and officers in the ecclesiastical state, whereby the churche is to be gouerned; that is, such a Church gouernment, as in your consciences you cannot, but acknowledg to be vnlawful before the Lord, and hurtful vnto his Church? Secondly doe you thinke that any Church gouernment can be lawfull before your God, and profitable vnto his church, which the Lord Iesus Christ himself hath not prescribed in his word? The which point whosoeuer goeth a∣bout to defend, he, as before you haue hard, ma∣keth Iesus Christ, who as he is the onely head of his churche, so he hath the alone jurisdiction to ordaine the gouerment therof, not to haue in the gouerment of his owne house, as great a pre∣rogatiue as Moses had. I earnestlie intreat you thē, that as you would not be accounted, ether to defēd & countenāce those things which in your owne consciences are sinful, or to account such a Church gouernment to be lawful, as cannot stand with the roiall souerainty, that Iesus Christ hath in his church: so to see the spedy abolishing  of al dumbe ministers Lorde Bishops, Archdea∣cons, commissaries, chauncellors, &c. Out of the church, vnder your gouernment in Wales. You are now intreated to abrogate no other Church gouerment then that, which either in your own consciences you must acknowledg to be vnlawful and odious in the sight of God, and therfore with∣out delay to be remoued, or such a regiment the vnlawefulnes whereof, if with our Bishops you should go about to maintaine, then should you rob Iesus Christ of the prerogatiue & priueledge wherwith the spirit of God hath adorned him. Heb. 3.6. Because it hath ben shewed, that it was not lawful for any state or power to ordaine any other forme of gouernment in the church vnder the lawe, then that prescribed by Moses. If then you think our church gouernment by Lord Bb. Archdeacons, dumb ministers, &c: in your con∣sciences to be vnlawful, that is; if you think it vn∣lawful for a minister, to ioine the office of a ciuil Magistrate with his ministerie, and to beare rule and dominion ouer his bretheren either as a spi∣ritual or temporal Lord; if you think it vnlawfull for a Lord Bishop to beare soueraigne authoritie of al the ministers within his diocesse; and if you think it vnlaweful that their ministerie with the execution thereof, should depend vpon his ple∣sure, or disliking; if also in your conscience you think it vnlawful for him to take the charge of al the soules within 4. or 5. shires, and to take the charge of those mens soules, whose faces for the most part, he wel knoweth he shal neuer behold; if in like mannet you think it vnlawfull for an Archdeacon, whose name and office was neuer  read of in the word, and in his best institution is, but to atend vpon the ministers and looke vnto the poore (to haue a great number of ministers at his becke and controlment) or if you think it vn∣lawful in your soules and consciences, for our dumb ministers, the patrons of al ignorance and blindenes, to take vpon them the office of the im∣bassadors of Iesus Christ, to declare his will vnto the people, the best, part wherof, they them selues neuer know: thē there is no question to be made, but that either you wil vtterly raze the memorie of this wicked and vngodly generation out of the Churche of Wales, or openly manifest, vnto men and angels, that you will to the contumeli∣ous dishonor of your God, and the vndoing of his church, countenance and maintaine L. Bishops, Archdeacons, dumbe ministers, with the rest of that vngodly race, whose corruptions in youre owne consciences you cannot but detest. On the other side, if you think it lawful for you, to ordain, what forme of church gouernment you like best of: and so holde it lawful to maintaine this esta∣blished among vs; then see what wil follow the di∣minishinge of the prerogatiue that Iesus Christ hath in the gouernment of his church. And that I feare me wil be this. The Lord will enter into iudgement with you of this parliament, for al the soules that hereafter shal be damned in Wales. Because you make it lawfull by your authority, for such guides to be ouer your people, as can∣not possiblie lead, and direct them in the waies of godlines and saluation. He wil enter into judg∣ment with you for al the sinnes that shalbe there commited, for want of gouerment, which his son  Christ hath ordained as a meanes to keepe men from transgressing against their God. He will enter into judgment with you for the monstrous profanation, whereby those proude, pope like, and blinde guides, haue polluted his house in the dayes of your gouernment, which you shoulde haue withstood. He wil enter in to judgmnt with you for the punishments that are likely to fall vp∣on them, because you haue countenanced, and freely priueleadged them by lawe, to prouoke his wrath in that greuous sort against their own souls. He wil alsoe (it is to be feared) enter into judge∣ment with the whol land, for this your sinne, and make his sword drunk with the bloud of our slain men, yea he wil giue the whole kingdom, high & and lowe, into the handes of the enemie, that is cruel and skilful to destroy, that all the nations vnder heauen professing religion, may feare and take heed, howe they doe not only denye to be gouerned by the lawes of his sonne Iesus Christ, but which is more grieuous in stead thereof, esta∣blishe such institutions as are directly against his maiesties reuealed will. If those thinges be not likely to fall vppon vs, except the aboue menci∣oned vnlawfull callings of Lord Bb. dumbe mini∣sters, &c. be now at once euen in this Parliament rooted out of the churche in Wales, let not my head go to the graue in peace. Where are they now, who vsually affirm the intent or motiō of re∣mouing L. Bb. dum ministers, ye the whol church gouerment established in wales, to be a matter o∣dious in the sight of her Maiestie, & dangerous to the state? Cannot hir Maiesty abide to heare, that Christ Iesus should be more faythful in his owne  house, then Moses was? Is it an odious hearing vnto her Maiestie, that the churche in her king∣dome should be cleansed of al vnlawful callings and corruptions, and beutified, with the holy or∣dinances of her sauiour Iesus Christ, euen in her daies; that the same praise might be trulie ascri∣bed vnto hir, in the adges to come, which the spi∣rite of God hath yeeled vnto King Iosiah.2. Kin. 23.25. Like vnto Queene Elizabeth was there no Queene before hir, that turned vnto the Lord with all hir hart, with all her soule, and with al hir might, ac∣cording to all the lawe of Moses, neither after hir arose ther any like vnto hir. Cannot hir Maiestie I say abide these things? Far be it that any should perswade them selues she cannot. Then are they vndutiful slaunderers of hir highnes, who to ter∣rifie the Parliament from dealing, concerninge the redresse of the church, vsually avouch such purposes, to be altogether vaine, because hir Ma∣iestie will neuer be induced to yeeld hir consent vnto the remouing of the established gouerne∣ment of the Church; neither is the slaunder any whit lesse vndutifull against the estate, when the kingdome is said to be indangered, except Iesus Christ, should make it lawfull for the Parliament to tollerate what Church gouernment the ciuill state can best away with. And it is a point wherin you of this Parliament may shew what harts you beare vnto the sinceritie of religion. My 2. reason followeth.
That forme of Church gouernment, and that booke or bookes, which make the established re∣giment to be an humaine constitution, that is in∣clusiuely according to the worde (but no other∣wise  according to the worde then the ciuill go∣uernement is, whiche also must1. Pet. 2.13 2. Pet. 2.10. bee inclusiuely according to the same,) and so may at the plea∣sure of man bee altered, as the ciuill gouerne∣ment may: that gouernment and that booke or bookes, (besides that they prefer Moses before Iesus Christ) is a wicked and pernicious gouern∣ment,Pag. 55. and they vngodly and pestelent bookes. But our Church gouernment in Church causes, and this booke of D Bridges with al other books of this grieste, make the ecclesiasticall gouern∣ment to be nothing else, but an humane consti∣tution, which may be lawfully altered, and abo∣lished at the magistrates pleasure. Therefore our Church gouernment in Wales, and this booke or bookes, are vngodly and wicked. The proposition is proued by these resons. First they are wicked and intollerable, because they make no difference between that which belong∣eth to the true worship of God, as ecclesiasticall gouernment doth, and that which apertaineth vnto ciuil pollicie. Contrarie to the apostle Pe∣ter, who affirmeth in expresse wordes, that wee haue reaceaued by the knowledge of God, what∣soeuer belongeth vnto true religion, in such sort as it is vnlawful for man to add any thing of his owne inuention therevnto. For soe the worde Eusebeia translated, godlines, signifieth in that place. Whereas the worde hath not so furnished vs, with whatsoeuer belongeth to the ciuil magi∣stracie, calledPet. 3.13. mans ordinaunce by the same a∣postle, but that therein those thinges, that haue been and are inuented by them that neuer knew God, are warrantable, and may be inclusiuely ac∣cording
to the word. Secondly ecclesiasticall gouernment being granted to be an human con∣stitution, maketh the Pope to haue sufficient war∣rant out of the word,If you read D. Bridges pag. 448. lin 3 you shall finde him not far from auouching this point. not of his Idolatrous and false religion, but of his superioritie, ouer all ci∣uil Maiestrates and pastors within the ecclesiasti∣cal bodie of the church. For whie should not the pope the ciuill Maiestrate granting him this su∣perioritie, as all they vnder his jurisdiction doe) be alowed by the word, to be aboue the emperor, and all other Magistrates and ministers whatso∣euer, if the ecclesiasticall gouernment be an hu∣man ordinance? For I am assured that the empe∣ror, with al other princes in Europe, may lawfully chuse a Magistrate superior vnto them all, if they wil. And why may not this magistrate whom they may lawfully chuse (and he lawfully yeelde vnto their choyse) to be the highest and superiour go∣or in christendome, to be a bishop, or an archb. f the Church gouernement be an humane ordi∣naunce, or if it be lawfull for either of them to be Lordes, and to beare a ciuill office? Before I goe farther, I am particularly in this poynt, to deale with such in this parliament, as are our L. Bb. in Wales. Here therefore in the audience of her R. excellent Maiestie, and this honorable councel,  prooue before you the B. of Landaff, Dauids, A∣aph and Bangor, that the Pope of Rome, whose uperioritie all sounde hearted christians doe ac∣nowledge to be intollerable and accursed, hath ltogether as good warraunt from the worde for his ecclesiasticall hierarchie, as you, vnto whom I ow speake, to be L. bishops in Wales. My reason  conclude after this manner; and if you can in∣fringe  anye part thereof, I will not refuse anye death, or other punishment, that shalbe laide vp∣on me. What Bb. soeuet they be, that haue no o∣ther warrant of their lordly jurisdiction, whereby they exercise temporal gouernment, as ciuil ma∣gistrates, hauing still their ministery vpon them, & claime vnto themselues superiority ouer their felow brethren, as ministers, then the ordinance, good will and pleasure of man, that is, of the state wherin they liue; they haue no better warrāt frō the word of god, for this their lordly superiority, then the Pope of Rome hath for his, who clay∣meth no other jurisdiction and superioritie vnto himselfe, ouer magistrats and ministers, then that which he hath, by the free consent, good liking, and authoritye of those states, who voluntarilye submit themselues vnto his idolatrous religion. But you the Bb. of Landaff, Davids, Bangor, and Assaph in Wales, haue no other warrant to be L. bishops, that is, to joyne both magistracie and mi∣nisterie together, and claime vnto your selues authority spirituall (in deed according to the spi∣rite that ruleth in the ayre, as the Apostle sayth) ouer your fellowe ministers, then the constituti∣ons of man, to witt; the will and pleasure of her Maiesty and this high court of parliament. Ther∣fore you the said L. bishopps, haue no other war∣rant for your Lordships and superioritie ouer o∣ther ministers, thē the pope hath for his supream authoritie, and vniversall prerogatiue. As for hi crueltie, pride, and idolatrous profession; far be it but I should make difference betweene you an him. Although euery part of this reason be alrea¦dy prooued; yet I demand of you, by what autho∣rity
you are so far, in respect of temporal things, and the abuse of ecclesiasticall jurisdiction, pre∣ferred before many godly and learned ministers in this land; as you by vertue of your places, are Barons of the parliament house, enjoye great re∣venews, and are Lordes ouer your brethren and fellow ministers? Your answere will be I knowe, that you hold this by the sole authoritie of man, and no otherwise. This must needs be your aun∣swere. For if you woulde claime your jurisdiction by any other title, your bishoppricks would soone be forfeited. Now I pray you tell me, hath not the pope as good warraunt for his hierarchie as this is? For hath not the Emperor, the king of Spain, the Frenche king, with other states, now profes∣sing poperie, as good allowance from the worde, in regard of the office (as for the abuse in the per∣son or religion, that is not the question) to make whom they will the superior B. within their owne dominions, as her Maiestie and the parliament hath to make one of you to be aboue al the mini∣sters in your dioces, or as good warraunt as they might haue to make eyther of you, to be Primate and Metropolitane ouer the rest; which authori∣tie you will not denie vnto them, as vnlawfull I am sure. Eyther therefore, the superiour power of the pope in his vniuersal bishoppricke, is a law∣full superioritie, or els your lordships hauing no better warrant from the word, then the popedom hath; are vnlawfull, and intollerable. And it be∣ing vnlawfull for the parliament to tollerate, and countenance (I doe not say the popishe religion) but his superiority ouer the ministers within this land; it is also as vnlawful for thē to tollerat your  spirituall jurisdiction ouer your fellow brethren. Here then I appeale vnto your consciences, whe∣ther you doe not see that the pope hath altoge∣ther, as good allowaunce from the worde, of his Antichristian jurisdiction, as you haue of your lordly callings. And againe I appeale vnto you, whether you, who dare not, but holde the pope∣dome of the B. of Rome to be an vnlawfull juris∣diction; do not you thinke, that the pope (though hee professed the trueth of religion, as you doe, which in the dayes of the first bishopps of Rome they also did) were not bounde in conscience, to giue ouer this vniuersall soueraigntie? Or if he coulde not abide to heare, that his place and of∣fice, whiche by the positiue law, and the good ly∣king of the present gouernement, were authori∣zed, shoulde nowe be accounted vnlawfull in the sight of God; do you not thinke that hir Maiesty, and this high court of parliament, notwithstan∣ding the lawes established, and the fauour they beare vnto his juriidiction, were bounde before the Lorde, to abrogate his superioritie, as vnlaw∣full and intollerable in Gods Church. If you thus judge of the pope, as I hope you do! Oh then, why wil not you execute this sentence against your selues, whiche you haue pronoūced against him? you beeing no lesse guiltie of tyrannizing ouer your brethren, by vertue of your vnlawful cal∣ling. The jurisdiction of the pope is vnlawful (say you) notwithstanding all the states in Europe a∣low him to be vniversall bishop, and it is vnlawful notwithstanding poperie were true religion, and hee a most holy man who sate in the Romishe chaire. And you holde it also vnlawfull for the
parliament, notwithstanding al the former excep¦tions, to tollerate the popish supremacie, euen o∣uer the ministers in this land. Why the worde of God by the same reason, pronounceth your cal∣lings to be vnlawful, and denieth it to be possible for them to be lawfull and tollerable, no though her Maiestie and al the states and parliaments in the world ratified them to be lawful. To returne againe vnto the whole bodie of this honourable assemblye. I intreate you in the name of God to consider, how prejudiciall it wil be for our posterities to refuse the popes juris∣diction (if euer motion should be made in parlia∣ment, for the reducing of that man of sinne, as God forbidd there shoulde) seeing you haue not thought it vnlawful to retain their Ll. & superio∣rity, who haue no better warrant for their calling then the pope might haue for his, beeing confir∣med by the free consent of the state. I go forward. Thirdly, if Church gouernment be an humane constitution, then it may be lawfull for a church gouernour, vz. a bishopp, archdeacon, or some o∣ther of that order, to preache, administer the sa∣cramentes, ouersee, excommunicate, &c. and to be a king. For the holy Ghoste maketh it lawful, 1. Pet. 2.13. for any, supplying the place of an hu∣mane constitution lawfully, to be a king. And I woulde our bishopps durst denie it? Where then learne they that diuinitie, that it is more against the word, for a bishop to be Basieus, a king, Hyperi∣chon, a superiour, Hegemon, a captaine or gouer∣nour, being titles1. Pet. 2.13 sanctified by the holy Ghoste for ciuill officers, then Curios a Lord, Hyperpheron, a prelate,
Euergetes, a lords grace. The former and  latter, vz. Curios & Euergetes, being denied by our SauiourLuk. 22.25 Christe vnto bishopps or ministers, the 2. vz. Hyperpheron, neuer red in the word, for ought that I can remember. If they saye, that the abuse of Lordlines, and graceles grace is forbidden by Christe, they haue bene answered, they are aun∣swered, and let them replye when they can; that our Sauiour Christ neuer alowed abuse or tyran∣nie in ciuill gouernors, when as he doth not for∣bid them to rule as Lordes, or to be called grace; and therefore speaketh in this place, Luk. 22.25. of the lawful and sanctified vse of ciuil gouerne∣ment, and titles, which sanctified vse being lawful in the ciuil magistrates, he denieth to be lawful in his ministers. He denieth I saye, the vse both of the name and title of the magistracie, and also of the office vnto his ministers. Because it were pal∣pable absurd, to thinke that the Lord in deed for∣biddeth his ministers to beare the name and ti∣tle of the magistrats, whereas he granteth them the office and dignitie, wherevnto that name or title may be lawfully joyned in the ciuil magi∣strate. Here I knowe that the example of Ely the high priestes ciuill gouernment, will be brought in for the confirmation of the ciuil authoritie of our bishops; wherevnto I wil make no other an∣swer at this time, but that I hope that our bishops do not thinke, that we vnder her Maiesties raign and peaceable gouernment, are brought to that exigencie, which the prophet threatneth should come vpon the people of Iudah:Isa. 3.6. namely, that we shoulde take holde of some bishop, and saye, thou shalt be our gouernour, because we meane that our fall and ouerthrow shalbe vnder thine hand.
For when Ely joyned the ciuil gouerment of the Iewes with his priesthood, then the philistims gaue the Iewes a shameful ouerthrow, and tooke away the Arke of God. So that vnlesse we holde it lawful for vs to seeke such meanes, as wherby we shal be sure to fal before our enemies, and to be bereaued of the Arke of God; I see not why the example of Ely (who to make the best of it, shew∣eth some extraordinarye thing proper vnto Ely, and not to bee drawen into example by others) should make it lawful for ministers to beare ciuil offices. For in deed it sheweth nothing els for our instruction, but that a readie way to bring a final destruction vpon the land, is, for the parliament to giue our ministers leaue to joyn the magistra∣cie & the ministery together. And here it woulde be knowne, whether they (whoe in their bookes haue whotly and egerly pursued this example of Ely, to defend the ciuill jurisdiction of ministers) haue not therein some secret meaning, if oppor∣tunitie woulde serue, to aspire vnto the crowne. For they may be suspected to hope, if euer an in∣erregium should fall (as I trust in God it shall ne∣uer be in their dayes) that the estate would think t most convenient, to commit the soueraigntie vnto som conscionable Churchman, vntill it may be otherwise disposed off. And therefore it may be justly suspected, that in disputing from the example of Ely, they had one eye vnto this wher∣of I speak. For they may procue far better by the example of Ely, who was the chiefe magistrate in his dayes, that a minister may joyne a whol king∣dome vnto his ministerie, rather then any other nferiour office.
To conclude this point. Seeing, First to make that which belongeth to the outwarde worship of God, to haue no more ground out of the worde, then that which appertaineth vnto the ciuil ma∣gistracie. Secondly, to allowe of the popes superi∣oritie as lawful. And thirdly, to holde that a mini∣ster may be both a king and a minister, are wic∣ked and absurd assertions, and as we see directly against the word. Therefore it is wicked in like maner, to make the ecclesiastical gouerment to be an humane constitution: and not vnlikely by little and little, to paue the way for the vndermi∣ning of the ciuil gouernement; as the reasons which our Bb. do bring for the maintenaunce of their superioritie, and experience vnder poperie do giue vs just cause to suspect. For why may not a forged donation of Constantine, or Lodouicus pius, in time joyne the crowne of England, to the sea of Davids or Bangor especially; whiche from Ioseph of Aramathea, can be prooued to haue a little better continuance of personall succession, then Rome can from Peter; as well, as it joyned the kingdome of Sicilia, the Dukedome of Na∣ples, the Ilandes, Corsica; Sardinia, &c: vnto the popes Miter.
The thirde reason is thus framed, and I will be briefe. That forme of Church gouernement, and that booke or bookes, which teacheth, that there is something to be obserued, besides that, which was included in the commission giuen by our sa∣uiour Christ vnto his Apostles,Math. 28.19 wherin they were enjoyned to teache men, to obserue whatsoeuer he commanded, is a gouernement execrable and accursed by the spirite of God in plaine wordes,  Gal. 1.9: and so are the bookes. And being such, far beit, that eyther the gouerment, or the books shoulde be maintained by the authoritie of this high court of parliament. Such a curse being pro¦nounced against the maintaining of execrable things, as we finde Deuter. 7.15. But our forme of church gouernement in Wales, and this booke with many others, published by authoritie teach the same. For where is it included, much lesse pre∣scribed in the word, that our Sauiour Christ abo∣lished an outward gouernment of the Church in the Leuitical pollicy, being in no sort an humane ordinance, but altogether prescribed by the lord himselfe, to the end, that vnder the Gospel there should be no gouernement of the Church but an humane ordinance, that might lawfully be chan∣ged at the pleasure of man? Or where is it reuea∣led, that the Apostles gaue the ciuill magistrate, when any should be in the Churche; the commis∣sion to abolishe the Presbytery by them establi∣shed; because there was no christian magistrate in the Churche, as our aduersaries themselues confesse: but as the worde sayth,1. Cor. 13.5 11. ephe. 4.4 rom. 12.6. 1. pet. 4.10 math. 21 25. established by the Lorde; and therefore not to be abrogated by the magistrate, vntill his pleasure in that poynte be farther knowne: therefore this gouernment, & this book or books, are execrable & accursed. Lastly, that forme of Church gouernement, & that booke or books, which affirme the kingdom of Christe in the outwarde gouernement, to be a kingdome that cann be shaken, that is, altered, or remooued as the ceremoniall gouernement was: affirme that, which is contrarye to the ex∣presse written word of God. Heb. 12.28. and ther∣fore
are not to be tollerated. But our Church go∣uernment in Wales by L. Bb. archdea. dumb mi∣nisters, commiss. &c, in their making of ministers, excommunication, &c: is such, and suche is this vnlearned heape and sophisticall booke, with the rest written on this argument. And therefore both the booke or bookes, affirme things contra∣rie to the worde, and so are not to be tollerated, vnlesse we would haue the Lorde to bring speedie shame and confusion vppon vs, for mayntaining sinne by lawe.
The proposition is apparant. Because that by the word kingdome that cannot be shaken in the a∣foersaid place. Heb. 12.28. must needes be ment perticularly (whatsoeuer significatiō els thei haue as more generall) the outward gouernment esta∣blished vnder the Gospel, since the abolishing of the ceremoniall lawe, which being compared, in regard of continuance, and remouing or doing a∣waie with Moses his gouernment, (is saide to be a kingdome that cannot be shaken) that is, such as the Lorde neuer meaneth to alter again vnto the worlds end: as to haue any other gouernment placed in stead thereof by himselfe, much lesse by man, wheras that vnder Moses is affirmed by the prophet Haggaie,Haggai 2.7. and heare by the apostle, to be a kingdom or gouernment that could be shaken, that is, altered. And this is the proper meaning of the place, Heb. 12.28. For by the kingdome that cannot be shaken, must needes be meant, either the assurance of saluation, which we haue vnder the Gospel, or our inioying and professing of ex∣ternall life, or else the outwarde gouernement, not only in the preaching of the word, and admi∣nistration  of the sacraments, but in the Church officers, the manner of their choise & their sub∣ects, wherin they are to be occupied. But as con∣cerning assurance of saluation in this life, & the profession of eternal life in heauen, which the fa∣hers enioyed vnder the lawe, it was no more to be shaken then ours, the meanes thervnto by the word preached, they want no more then we doe. And so in these respectes they had a kingdome hat could no more be shaken then ours. It re∣maineth therefore, that theirs was to be shaken, n regarde of their outward gouernment, which was abolished by the comming of Christ. And herefore ours immooueable in this respect, vn∣il his second comming, which were senslesse to be affirmed, if Christ in his kingdome, wherevnto we are subiect, had instituted no externall regi∣ment of his Churche. Can that be vnmooueable which is not at all? More senseles it were to think, his kingdom to be immutual in regard of the sa∣craments, and not of the persons, and officers, who are to deale with those misteries.
To come againe vnto you of this honourable ourt of Parliament, you are not to learne, that o defend, by lawe, or to countenance by authori∣ie, the breach of gods ordinance is the defence of sin, and that the defence of sinne, is the hatred of God, who rewardeth them to their faces that ate him, Deut. 7.10. and therefore also you are ot to be taught, what horrible sinnes you shall ommit,Nomb. 26.9. if hereafter you stil maintaine such plain & manifest impieties. They are no trifles as you ee. For I assure you, that Dathan and Abiram he sonnes of Eliab, men famous in the congre∣gation  had more colour of right, to claime vnto themselues either the ciuill gouernement from Moses, or the priesthood from Aharon. Because they were the sonnes of Reuben the firste borne (vnto whose lotte, had he not defiled his fathersGen. 49.4. bedd, by all likelihood, either the scepter or the priesthood should haue fallen) then these vsur∣pers haue to claim the places they are in, where∣vnto either by right of inheritance according to the flesh, or ordinaunce from God, they came by no title. Here it must needes followe (you of this hono∣rable assemblie hauing regarde vnto the estate of your soules and bodies before the Lord, and your good names amōg posterities) that if these things set downe be true (if not bring vppon me deser∣ued shame and punishment) you wil either labor to redres the miserable estate of distressed wales, by erecting there a godly ministerie, and abollish∣ing all Cananitishe relikes, or for the defence, of a fewe vnconscionable and godlesse men, ad∣uenture to vndergoe the fierie and flaming exe∣cution, of the burning decree of Gods wrath: My Lords, and you the rest of this assemblie, be not deceiued, the Lord of heauen is angrie with you and his whole hoast for the Babilonish garments of these Achanes.Ioh. 7.9.21 Retayne them no longer if you would not fall before the enemie. When the L. shall plead with you, your wiues, children, family, & the whole land,Ezek.
38.22. with pestilence or with blood, as he is likely to do for these wedges of execrable golde, it is not the pontificall Lordships of Bish∣ops, at whose commaundement the Lords sword wil returne again into his sheath, when your gas∣ping  soules shal cry for mercy at the Lords hand; it is not the proud and popelike Lordshipps of Bishopps, their vsurped jurisdictions, their pro∣fane excommunications, their pitiles murthe∣ring of soules, their railinge slaunders, against Gods truth and his seruants, their impious bre∣thing of the holy Ghost vpon their Idol priestes, that wil driue the Lord to giue you any comfort. Let me therfore (thogh my persō be base) entreat you, that the judgments of God against sin, both in this life, & in that other of eternal wo & misery may apeare so terible in your eies, and of that vn∣douted consequence, as you wil no longer retain vnder your gouernment these things, whose con∣tinuance do giue the Lord just cause in this life to pronounce this sentence by the mouth of Ie∣remie against euerie on of you,Iere. 22.29. that wil not pro∣mote this sute, and execute the same. O earth, earth, earth, here the wordes of Iehouah, write these men destitute of children, men that shall not prosper in their dayes, yea there shal not bee a man of their seed that shall prosper, and bee a-parliament man, or beare rule in England any more. And in the life to come to say moreouer: These mine enemies that would not haue me to beare rule,Luk. 19.27. by mine owne lawes ouer them and their people, bring hither & slay before my face, yea bind them hand and foote, and throw them to vtter darknes, there is weeping & gnashing of teth. And let me, crauing vpon my knees, with all submission and earnestnes, and more earnest if it were possible to obtane, that my countrymen by your meanes may haue the word preached, e∣uen the meanes whereby they may liue for euer,  with Abraham, Isaac, and Iacob, in the kingdome of heauen. Graunt them this my Lordes, though I dye for it. And this the Lord knoweth is the on∣ly scope of my writing, and not the discrediting or galling of our Lorde Bb. Let not their places withstand the saluation of my brethren, and the true seruice of God among them, and if euer I ei∣ther write or speake more against them, any fur∣ther then their places, are like to be the ruine of hir Maiestie and the whole state, let it cost me my life. Here me in this sute good my Ll. The re∣ward thereof, your soules shall find; otherwise I am likelie to become a wearisom and an impor∣tunate sutor vnto this high assemblye. The cause is so juste, that if it were as sometimes it was, by the apostle him selfe decided in the Athenianes Areopago, a court for heathen justice of famous and celebrated memory, I doubt not but it should be hard. And shal it not haue justice in the christi∣an parliament of England; Iustice my Lords I say, for I seeke nothing else, but that the statutes of the God of judgment and justice may be made known in my country, wher now they are vnhard of. Then the which, I know not what can be more just; neither can I see what justice in truth can be administred by them that neglect this cause. Tru∣lie for mine owne parte, God aiding me, I wil ne∣uer leaue the suite; though there shoulde bee a thousand parliaments in my dayes, vntill I ei∣ther obtaine it at your handes, or bring the Lord in vengeance and bloud to plead against you, for repelling his cause. I hope it wil not be here said, that the parliament can doe nothing in the mat∣ter, because hytherto all Churche causes haue
bin referred vnto the conuocation house & the leaders thereof, namelie to our Bishops. And doe you meane it shalbe so still? Then shall you still maintain these horrible profanations of Gods sanctuarie, whereof I haue spoken. Then may it be said vnto your shame, that Sion lying vppon the ground, and mourning like a widdow, stretched out her handes vnto the parliament of England, but could find no comfort. Then may you stil be said to betray Gods truth, to betray the saluation of his people, yea and to betray the liberties of this parliament. For what assembly is there in the land, that dare chaleng vnto it selfe the ordering of religion, if the parliament may not? When you say then, that you may not deale in the matters of religion, because the determinations of that cause is referred vnto the Bishops assembled in the conuocation house, who in their Cannons, are to prouide and see that the church be not in a decaied state, do you not thereby thinke you rob your selues of your owne prerogatiue and li∣berties, and take order that the church without controuersie may be starued and spoiled.
In deed if the conuocation house were such as it ought to be, vz. a sinod of sincere, and godly lear∣ned ministers, wherein matters of relligion were determined of according to the worde, and the cause of God heard with out partiallitie, then in¦deed were it their partes to set downe for the direction of the parliament, such thinges as were behoofull for the glorie of God, and the good of his church, & the parliament by their direction according to the word, ought to enjoine all the ministers and people, whatsoeuer should be thus  enacted by the ciuil state. And if the conuocati∣tion house were such an assembly, then were it not laweful for the parliament, to establish any thing in the matters apertaininge vnto the pure worship of God, among their people, but that wherein they shoulde be directed, by the aduise of the churche gouernours. For as in a christian common wealth, where the ciuill state sincerely fauoureth the true worship of the Lord, it is not tollerable, no not for the right and lawful, much∣lesse (say the vsurping tiranical gouernors of the church) establish any thing in the church, but by the authoritie of the christian magistrat: so wher there are godly wise and sincere ministers, it is vnlawfull for the ciuill gouernour, to order any thing in the church within his domminions, but by their direction according to the word. So that I doe not denie, but that the conuocation house being an assembly of true and lawful church of∣ficers, you ought to vse their advise and direction how the wants of the church might be supplied. But you shoulde not permit them to enact what they would by their owne authoritie, especially their decrees being as now they are, to the rati∣fying of corruptions, and to the continuance of vngodly callings within these dominions. And if you mean to giue ouer your right in dealing with the case of God vnto the conuocation house, to what end shall the states of the land meete toge∣ther in parliament, be euer againe sued vnto. But alasse, that any thing in church causes, shalbe referred vnto that assemblie, which would not stand as it doth, if there weare that good or∣der in the church which the Lord requireth, and
and as long as it doeth stand, must needs be the cause of all disorders therein, and must needs be a meanes of continuing that staruing ignoranuce which raigneth in this land. Why my Lords, to re∣ferre the cause of religion vnto the Conuocation house, is nothing els, but to charge the wolues vn∣der paine of the displeasure of careful shepherds, to see that the lambes may be fedd, besides the injurious derogation that thereby is offered vn∣to the liberties of this house. And that it may appear how justly I apeal from that sinagogue, vnto this high court of parlia∣ment, and what small hope there is to be concei∣ued of reforming the abuses of our Church, if the redresse be committed vnto that meeting; you of the honorable court of parliament are to vnder∣stand, that the conuocation house condemneth this cause of christ now in hand, before it be hard: and that their onely endeuours who are there mett, is howe to preuent him from bearing rule in the Church by his owne lawes. For it is well knowne, that all of them haue banded and linked them selues together, to maintaine the corrupti∣ons of our Church, whereof I haue before spoken; as the vngodly and popish hierarchie of bishops, the ignorant ministery, &c. Which thing shal be manifested by the consideration of the persones, who are admitted vnto the consultation & mee∣ing. And they are of 2. sorts. First, these whoe by easō of the superiority they vsurp over their bre∣hrē, must needs be the chief doers in that house, ow ignorant, vnconscionable, and vnfit for the gouernment of the Church soeuer they be. Of which number, are our Archbb. and L. bishops,
&c. The second sort is of these, who hauing no in∣terest to be there, in respect of anye superioritie they beare in the Churche, are therefore elected and chosen to be there as the clarks of the Con∣vocation house, &c. But there is such freedome and liberty in the choyse of these men, that great care and heede is alwayes had by our L. Bb. that none shalbe chosen thither, but such, as for good causes are knowen to bee vtter enemies vnto all sinceritie, and strong maintainers of the establi∣shed corruptions: if any other by some meanes be gotten thither, who doth but once mention the healing of the wounds of our Church, he is straightwaies taken for a Nicodemus among thē; namely, for a man fauoring that side, which none of the great Scribes and Pharises can brook, and lightly they take that order with him, which the Iewes tooke with those, who professed our Saui∣our Christ; that is, they bannish him out of their Synagogue. To be briefe, whosoeuer are of the house there is nothing done there, but what the former sort; to wit, L. archb. & Bb. would haue en∣acted. For the rest, eyther cannot or wil not with∣stand their proceedings. The whole sway then, & direction of this synod, being in their hands, who are for the most part, the greatest cause of the teares of our Church; will you referre the orde∣ring of religion, & the reformation of the church vnto the Conuocation house? I haue alreadye shewed, that you ought to be so far from permit∣ting vnto L. Bb. the disposition of any thing beho∣full vnto the Church of God, as the very names and places should be razed from vnder your go∣uernment. And wofull experience these 30. full  yeares, hath taught vs what a lamentable refor∣mation these men now bring to passe, if they may haue their owne wils. Why these men my Lords, and consequently, the whole Conuocation house are in judgement contrarye vnto ourLuk. 22.25. Sauiour Christ; for they holde it lawfull for ministers to be Lordes ouer their brethren. These men my Ll. are of judgement, that the exhortation of the Apostle Peter, was not directed vnto them? The Elders which are among you, sayth the Apostle, I beseech, which am also an Elder, and a witnes of the sufferings of Christ, & also a pertaker of the glorye that shalbe reuealed, Feede the flocke of God which dependeth vppon you, caring for it, not by constraint, but willingly, not for filthy lu∣kers sake, but of a readie minde, not as though ye were Lords ouer Gods heritage, but that ye may be ensamples to the flocke; and when the chiefe shepheard shall appeare, you shall receiue an in∣corruptible crowne of glory. These men I say, are in judgement, contrary vnto this blessed Apostle, for they drinke it lawful for thē to be Lords ouer Gods heritage. They are of judgment, that christ Iesus was not so faythfull as Moses, in the gouer∣ment of his owne house. And do you then thinke that they care how vnfaythfull rhey doe behaue themselues, in the ouersight of the Church? They hold the gouernment of the Church to be an hu∣mane ordinaunce, and so holde the Pope to haue sufficient warrant of his hierarchie. They my Ll. hold the kingdome of Christe in the outward go∣uernment, to be a kingdome, the lawes whereof, may be chaunged and abrogated, at the pleasure of man. They do not stick to affirme it lawful for  them, to teach many thinges, not included in the commission giuen by our sauiour Christ vnto his Apostles. These men reject as vntrue, that which the spirite of God hath set downe by the Apostle Paule, 1. Cor. 1.21. Rom. 10.14. which is, that men are ordinarilye saued, by the preaching of the word. For they are perswaded, that saluation may be ordinarily attayned vnto by reading; & so they are perswaded, that the Lorde hath promised his spirit to seale that doctrin in the heartsEphes. 1.13. of men, which through preaching was neuer made kno∣wen vnto them. What care then will they haue, to see the people prouided for of preching, wher∣as they are not perswaded of the ordinary neces∣sitie thereof. They my Ll. maintaine the continu∣ance of the dumb and ignorant ministery, where∣by our Church hath long since gotten her bane. Their judgement is, that they may be tollerated for lawful ministers, in a christian commonwelth and that the parliament may securely maintain them in our Churche, without all feare of Gods judgementes for tollerating them! O the great hand of God in punnishing our ingratitude, that in this cleare light of the gospell, they who take vpon them to be Archseers, willingly see not, that none can be lawfull embassadors of Iesus Christ, but they out of whose mouthes, this embassage is heard;1. Cor. 5. VVe beseech you in Christs steed, that you be re∣conciled vnto God: And yet such is the blindnes of the convocation house, that they cannot see this. But I blush to thinke, that they dare once pre∣sume to giue any countenance vnto nonresiden∣cie, that gastly and fearfull sinne: and yet behold notwithstanding, they are not onely all of them
guiltie thereof themselues, but euen in the books which they haue published vnto the world, in the defence of their corruptions, they haue not bene ashamed to advouch the lawfulnes of this vnna∣turall and desperat murther: Yea the verye pul∣pits haue rung again & againe, with invectiues a∣gainst al those that withstood this their madnes. O my Ll. & you the rest of the R. honourable and worshipful of this high court of parliament, I can not stay my selfe, but I must needes in this place, crie vnto you for helpe and justice, against these vnnaturall men. The Conuocation house my Ll. defendeth nonresidencie to be lawfull! Nonre∣sidencie my Ll. is defended to bee lawfull in the Conuocation house! And will you then trust thē with the ouersight of the people, who are of judg∣ment, that they may lawfully starue & murther them? Can you hope for any good to come vnto the church of God from that councel, where it is enacted, that it may be lawfull for a bond of mur∣thering nonresidents to destroy the same If ther∣fore in the parliament of Englande, there be any care of the glorye of God, and the libertie of his Church; if any pitie and compassion of the star∣ued soules of men, let others bee trusted to pro∣uide foode for your people, and not those, whose very judgements are so darkened, that they hold it allowable by the worde, for them to take order, that men may not be fedd. It is now meet my Ll. that they who holde it lawfull for men to make a trade of murther, should be allowed for phisici∣ons. And what els are they, who defende the law∣fulnes of nonresidencie, but suche as professe it lawfull for men to bee maintayned (rather then
they shoulde want liuing) euen by the murthe∣ring of their brethren.
Is it not great pitie then, but that this Conuo∣cation house should be stil countenanced by the state, to be the only place whence reformatiō of all the things out of order in our Church should be expected? For therein doubtles, any thing shal be heard, which may tende to the furtherance of the gospell; seeing none sound (few excepted) are admitted into that assembly, who are not guiltie of the merciles and cruell murther of soules, as beeing all of them for the most part, cursed and bloody nonresidents. And is it not great pitie, but that the parliament should staye and go no fur∣ther in the reformation of religion, then it should bee directed by the Conuocation house. For it may be hoped, out of question, that the Cōuoca∣tion house will see, that no calling be henceforth tollerated in the ministerie, but such as the Lord in his worde warranteth to be lawfull. And there∣fore it may bee hoped, that the leaders thereof will not sticke to put downe Archbishops, and L. Bb. that Christ alone, by the officers which he in his word hath appointed may rule in his church. They will not abide that anye blemished & may∣med Leuit should come neere to the Lords San∣ctuarie, nor any pharisaicall high priest shoulde vsurpe anye authoritie ouer his brethren in this lande. If this hope might be conceiued of them, then in deed woulde they bee meete to cure the diseases of our church. But the truth is, that there is no reason why this should be expected at their hands, because they are so far (as this whole land knoweth) from hauing anye remorse of the vn∣lawfull  and vngodly callings wherein they nowe remaine, that their practises against God and his trueth, doe proclaime vnto the worlde, that they neuer meane to restore againe her owne autho∣ritie vnto the Churche, whereof by their Lord∣ships it hath bene spoyled. I haue determined with my selfe, not to trou∣ble this honorable assemblie at this time, with a∣ny large discourse, concerning these men & their dealngs: otherwise, I would shew by euidēt profs, that they (and so the whole Conuocation house) are guiltie of such crimes, as the fauorablest in∣terpreter of their proceedings, woulde of neces∣sitie be drawne to giue this sentence against thē, namely; That they are intollerable oppugners of Gods glory, and vtter enemies vnto the liberties of his Church. And they should also be drawne to confesse, that the parliament in maintayning the Conuocation house, did maintayne and defend, together with the hindering and smoothering of the trueth, not only the deformed ruines; but al∣so the lamentable oppression of the Church. So that it should appeare, that as long as that house standeth, as at this day it doth; there could be no hope at all, that either Gods heauenly trueth should haue free passage, or the Churche her ly∣bertie in this kingdome. The briefe heades of the publike crimes, whereof the leaders of the Con∣vocation house are guiltie, I will here set downe, & they shalbe herafter evidently prooued, if they vnto whose charge they are laid dare deny them
First therefore, their very callings and places, that is, the callings & places of our Archbishops and L. Bb. are such as they they cannot possibly,  but dishonour God, and bereaue the Church of her libertie by continuing in thē. Secondly their practises in those places, for the maintenaunce of their tyrannicall superioritie, & others the cor∣ruptions of the Church, which they wilfully con∣trary vnto all trueth and aequitie doe maintaine, are such, as by them, they haue not onely mon∣strously maymed the outward face of the church, in the matter of gouernement and ceremonies: but also grieuously wounded the same, in the matters of doctrine and sacramentes: vnto the mayntenance of all which corruptions in the go∣uernment of the Churche, in the ceremonies, in the doctrin & sacraments, they haue joyned the crimes of seducing and deceiuing the ciuill state and people, by bearing all estates in hand, that al hath bene and is well in the Church; and in like manner, as much as in them lay, they haue vex∣ed and persecuted as many of the deare seruants of God, as haue but entended to motion the re∣dresse of any of the former corruptions. Hereof if I shall not be able to prooue the eyes and lea∣ders of this synagogue, & consequently the whol house to bee guiltie; let mee to the terror of all slaunderers, be put to all the torments that may bee invented. The Conuocation house cannot here object, that I deal injuriously with the whol assembly, by laying vnto the charge of the whol, those crimes whereof our Bb. alone are guiltie. For the whole house, neuer as yet, disauowed the hierarchie of Bb. their practises in vrging sub∣scription, in maintayning the dumbe ministerie, nonresidencie, &c. And vntill the corruptions of the Bb. be ouerthrown in that assembly, the whol  house shall be still justly subject vnto the former accusations.
See now my Lords whether they doe not be∣wray their impietie who think, that men weary them selues about small matters, when they call for a reformation of the church. And see whether there be not many and vrgent causes, to inforce the parliament to take the gouernment of the Church out of the hands of these men, vnlesse the continuance of the ruinous breaches of our Church would be stil maintined, it is not the mat∣ter of capp, surplice, tippet, and other beggerlie and popish ceremonies, whence al the dissention and dissagreement in our church is sprong vp. But the controuersies arise, because our Archbb. and Bb. are not permitted with the silence and consent of the seruants of God, to smother, per∣secute, depraue & corrupt, the truth of that true religion which in name they professe, & to vnder∣mine, and captiuate the church of God in this land. Those who withstand, their vngodly proce∣dings, haue hitherto dutifully kept them selues within the bonds of the calings, wherin the Lord hath placed them, they haue in al submission and duty entreated that the cause of God might be equally hard, and that her Maiestie and the par∣lament would amend the things proued to be a∣mis, they haue neuer as yet, presumed thēselues, to take in hand the correction of any thing. But how quietly on the other side, haue the leaders of the conuocatiō house behaued them selues, whē a redres hath bin caled for at the hands of the ci∣uil state? Surely they haue alwais hitherto presēt∣ly betakē thēselues, to imprisonments and bonds  and would neuer suffer the truth to haue the he∣ring, nor any man with quietnes to stand in the defence therof. And therefore also, al the tumults that hereafer are like to arise in the Church of God within this land, about these controuersies, the leders of the conuocation house, are the cau∣ses thereof, for they wil not yeeld vnto the truth, but labour by all meanes possible, to smother the same. Gods seruants cannot winke at their proce∣dings, vnlesse they would betray Gods truth, and the libertie of his church. The least parte of the sinnes of our Bb. hath bin in the maintenance of vnprofitable, supersticious, and corrupt cere∣monies. If they would but yeeld free passage vnto the truth, and hir authority vnto the church in o∣ther matters, they should not be gretly molested for these things. And woe be vnto them, if they had rather prouoke god and his church to battel against them for the defence of the truth, then receiue the light, & grant peace vnto the church. Concerning her Maiestie, who (as it is thought) can neuer be induced to aulter the established gouernment, I answere, that if it be made known vnto her, and proued out of the word, that the e∣stablished regiment of the church, is traiterous a∣gainst the Maiestie of Iesus Christ, that it confir∣meth the popes supremacie. O therfore it is dan∣gerous vnto her crown, that it is besides the com∣mission giuen by our Sauiour Christ vnto his a∣postles; and therefore accursed, that it sheweth them to be void of all care of reigion, who wit∣tingly countenance the same, and that it calleth for the judgments of God against her, and her kingdom, and then if shee yeeld not vnto the ra∣zing  of all sinful callings, out of the church, I will not desire to liue, if this be thought a matter wor∣thy of death, for a man to be dutyfully perswaded of his soueraigne. Be it that her Maiestie hath bin moued, by some of this house, for the redresse of the church, you should moue her againe, and a∣gaine, and neuer leaue vntil you be heard. Great matters are neuer brought to passe, without great and mighty endeuours. Our sinnes haue other∣wise deserued, then, that the Lord should at the first encline mercy vnto vs, in the sight of her highnes. Would any of you alter any part of the gouernment of his family, being perswaded by leud flatterers, that all were well, vnlesse the a∣buse were shewed, and you earnestly dealt with for a reformation. And can you then maruel, that our soueraigne is hardly drawne to reforme the church, whose estate, in her hearing, is daily said out of the pulpit to be most florishing, wheras the deformity therof is not made knowne vnto her. I know it is no smal perswasion that should driue a monarch, to abrogat the receued constitutions, and establish new, vnles the vnanswerable neces∣siry thereof, were made knowne vnto her or him. I am perswaded that her Maiestie knoweth not, the exacting necessitie, that lieth vppon her shol∣ders of reforming the church. Shee knoweth not the estate of her vntaught and damned subiects to be as it is. Wherefore serue parliament men, if her eies must be in al places to see euery thing, and what doe you see, if you do not see our mi∣serie and lament it? I grant indeed, that of this point she ought to be most careful, but if of over∣sight, the waightiest matters be omitted, shoulde  not you put her in mind hereof? And in submissi∣on entreat her and neuer leaue entreating, vntill shee yeeld to turne away the wrath of God from her, and her kingdome, by abollishing vngodly or∣dinances, and restoring beauty vnto Zion. Well, I haue forged, the most notable slanders that euer were coined, or els, the state of my cun∣trey vnder her Maiesties gouernment, is very mi∣serable, & yours no lesse lamentable, if it so con∣tinue. And if you make not the same knowne vn∣to her Maiestie, and see it be speedely amended, the Lord make Quene Elizabeth, and her crown free, from the bloude of her destroyed people. And I pray God if it be his will, that their soules be not required at your hands in the day where∣in quick and dead shalbe judged.
But it may be, that you wil pretend the wante to be so difficult, that it cannot possiblie be per∣formed. Do what lieth in you, and then the Lord is answered. The farther you go herein, the esier wilbe the passage, you are desired no more, then not to countenance sinn, and for reformation to go no farther then meanes will reach. Because it is a worke of difficultie, therefore must you needs hinder the same by lawe as you doe, by tol∣lerating these abuses; Because the whol worke is difficult, therefore shal it not begin; Because it is a hard matter to plant the ordinance of God, therefore must the breache thereof be in force, & maintained? Because in Canaan the sonnes of Anak,Num. 13.14. & towns walled vp to heauen (mountains of pretensed excuses, haue ben seene) therefore must you needs suffer the people, brought by her Maiestie and you, out of Egipt, to remaine stil in  he wildetnes, on this side Iordan, euē vnder these men, the dumb ministers L. Bb. I meane which are it for nothing els, then to be leaders, whensoeuer portunitie shall serue,Num. 14.4. to bring the people again nto Egipt? Because our land, by reason of our con∣tinuance in sinn, and that wee haue not had skil∣ful workmen among vs, doth not now bring forth religion and godlinesse in the measure it should, therefore must you needs be sure, that profanesse and atheisme shalbe sowen, and the breach of Gods lawe flourish there, in the persons of those men? Therefore the just Lord,Ezek. 2. wil be just in the midst of you, whensoeuer he reckoneth for these things, because you are so far from doing what you may in the planting of godlinesse, that you suffer impietie against his Maiestie, to bear sway, and that by law and authority. Concerning the hardnesse of the work, this I make knowne vnto you, that if you wilbe ruled by the cannon of the word, you shalbe able with ease and the good liking of your people, to do so much therein, as you shal deliuer your owne liues from the wrath of God. But if that rule shal take place no farther, then it may stand with the continu∣ance of Lord Bishops, and other corruptions of the ecclesiasticall state, I see not what you can say vnto the Lord, when he hath made you an a∣stonishment, and an hissing vnto all the nations vnder heauen:Nehe. 9.39 but surely thou art just in all that is come vpon vs for wee would not be ruled by thy words.
Wel the word teacheth and requireth of you 2. things and no more, in this worke. In both it re∣quireth your practise, if you would be directed by  it. First it requireth, that Wales may be redresse by proclaiming that commission giuen by ou Sauiour Christ vnto his apostles, Math. 28.19.20 in euery corner thereof, and both the parts of th commission, it requireth to be kept inuiolably as well that, of goe preach and baptise, as the o¦ther, of teach them to obserue, whatsoeuer I haue commanded you. Secondly, while you stay the Lords leasure to raise vp fit men for this worke in euery congregation, it requireth, that the peo∣ple where preachers cannot be placed at the first, may haue som stay, that inconueniences be avoi∣ded. For the Lord will not haue religion, so vndis∣cretly established, as that the inconueniences that might growe thereby vnto the ciuil state, as much as may be, be not wisely preuented; in the effectinge hereof, 2. things are to be looked vnto, both of them greatlie furthering the worke. First the blessing of God is to be labored for, by humb∣ling your selues and your people with Daniel be∣fore the Lord,Dan. 9.1.3. in fasting and praier, and then you shal see, he wilbe with your endeuours. Secondly you must enjoine euery one according vnto his place, to haue a hand in this worke, and encou∣rage the gentlemen, & people that shalbe found forward, by gracing and countenancing them for their forwardnesse in religion, and shewing that the more forward they be, the more credit they are like to purchase with your Hh. And you must not suffer an vncircumcised mouth,Nom. 14.39. to bring a slander vpon that good land, whereunto the Lord offereth to bring you and your people,Nom. 14.10. if you would obey, much lesse, to lift vp a stonn a∣gainst Caleb or Ioshuah, that withstand the fury
of a whol wicked hoast in the defence of the Lord. For otherwise, if you suffer al to sit stil, and looke vppon our desolations, the most to liue on the sweetnes of our ruines, and discountenance all that labour therein, you can looke for nothing else shortly; but that lamentable complaint, and it is a great work of God, that we haue heard the same long agoe, of euerie possessor in this land. Whyther shall wee goe? Our brethren and their hard intertainment haue discouraged our harts;Deut. 1.18. woulde to God that we had died in the Land of Egipt, would to God we weare dead: were it not better for vs to turne into Egipt?Nom. 14.2. com let vs make a captaine and returne thyther. The land indeed is a good land, whereunto, when our soueraigne brought vs out of Egipt, wee entended to make our iorney: but alasse, we are neuer able to stand against the pouertie, losses, imprisonment, dis∣countenance by our superiors, that our brethren haue sustained, which haue set their faces against this land, neuer able to swallowe vp the slanders and bitter names of Puritans, precisians, traitos, seditious libellers, &c. that wee see, raised against those that would bring vs thyther. And therefore my Ll. and the rest of the high assemblie, in vaine shall you vse other meanes, and leaue this vnat∣tempted
The redresse of Wales, consisteth of 2. partes, both must be speedely set vpon by your Hh. or els certainly the judgements of God will finde you out. First you must abolishe out of the Churche, whatsoeuer you shal finde to be a breach of gods ordinance (as I haue prooued dumbe ministers, nonresidents, and L. Bb. to be) or els your refor∣mation  will be little better then that of theKin.
17.33. Sa∣maritanes, who feared Iehouah, but worshipped their owne gods. I woulde haue it marked in this place, what is required at the handes of the par∣liament, that it may thereby appeare, whether with any colour of reason, this part of the petiti∣on in hand can be denied. The parliament is de∣sired to enact, that no vnlawfull calling be tolle∣rated vnder the gouernment within the church of God in Wales; if they will not yeeld vnto this part of the suite, now put vp in the behalfe of that people; what cloake doe they leaue vnto them∣selues, whereby they may but couer their small care to glorifie God? Is not the case to be asto∣nied at, that an assembly professing true religion, cannot be drawne to yeeld vnto so just a request, it is a hard matter I grant, to build the church of God: Men most willing to bring that worke to passe, cannot doe it; but there is no difficultie in the worlde, for the parliament of England to ma∣nifest that, although they cannot go so far in pro∣moting the Gospell as they would wishe; yet that they will not at any hand maintaine by lawe any thing, which may hinder the course thereof. Wel let as manye as are parliament men, looke vnto this, as sure as the Lord liueth, they shall answere one day, before him, who is the judge of quicke and dead, and giue a reason why they would not consent to root out sinne, and the breach of gods law, out of this common wealth. Do they seek the innovation of the state, who desire, that no lawe or statute may be in force, which vpholdeth the transgressing of Gods holy institution? Or may they be accounted dangerous subjects vnto their  prince, who cannot abide that any treson against God should be countenanced? Well, this branche of the suite is such, as the Tridentine conspiracie would blush to profes the rejecting therof. What then may be thought of the high court of parlia∣ment, if it cannot be there granted?
The second meanes for you to redresse the e∣state of Wales must bee this; you must place as many godly learned men as can be found, to call the people, and see them prouided for. But here great aduice is to be taken, where, and howe they be placed. First then, you are to looke out the pla∣ces, that are fittest by all likelihood to receiue the word, and vnto those, to haue the speciallest re∣gard. For seeing you are not able at once, to fur∣nish the whole countrie with able men; you must first haue regard of that part of the haruist, which is most readie for the mowers. This respect we see the spirite of God to haue had, Act. 16.7. Where the spirit woulde not suffer Paule to go to Bythi∣nia, but rather tooke his iourney to Macedonia, where by reuelation, verse 9.10. hee was assured, that there was preparation made for the recey∣uing of the gospell. Concerning the other point, the ministers that shalbe sent, must not be scatte∣red asunder, one here, and another there in the countrie; neither sent one by one, but many must be sent together, & placed so nere one another, as may be. And so the ministers hauing aedification, and comfort one by another, shall neither decay in their gifts, nor be discouraged; and the people by this meanes, shalbe sure to be thorowly called. If the complaint be made for want of sufficient men, and sufficient stay for their liuings: For the  men, take al those, whome the Lorde hath made fit for this worke, and he can require no more at your hands, vntill he rayse vp more: which if he neuer do, your good endeuours, and encourage∣ment vnto students and others, not being wan∣ting to bring this to passe, he cannot in justice pu∣nish you, though your people be not taught. Be∣cause you haue sene all those well bestowed, whō he quallified for the calling, and so doe now ex∣pect a blessing from him vpon your labours, that you might send more. The subterfuge will be but the coat of a net, to aske (as cōmonly your prelats do) how there should be possibly founde, as many learned men, as wales requireth, seeing they who are found, are not placed there. And do you deale well with the Lorde, that because all cannot be brought at once to serue him, as he willeth, ther∣fore they that may shall not? The same is to bee sayd of the ministers liuings. Remoue the dumb ministers, nonresidents, L. Bb. (if you will not do this, you go besides the word of God, and so there is no direction for you) and there will be more li∣uings void, able to maintain godly ministers, thē shalbe I fear me, good men found to supply their places. And verely I maruail, what men perswade themselues the Lord to be; whereas they thinke, he can be satisfied with such sielie shifts? Is it not a strange matter to find Church liuings in wales for L. Bb. nonresidents, and dumbe ministers, to sinne against God, and starue soules withall, and deny any to be there, for godly ministers to ho∣nor God, and worke the saluation of his people. The children must starue for want of bread, be∣cause the dogs before their eies must be fed ther∣with.
Good reason? yea, but the remouing of those men, would be likely to set the land on fire. Marke how subtill the deuill is, in the maintenaunce of his kingdome. When godly ministers are depri∣ued, because they will not linke themselues with wicked Bb. to betray the kingdome of Christe, & ouerthrow the lawes of this land, there is no in∣conuenience feared. But if Satans messengers be once shoued at, behold, the land will not be able to bear this losse. I grant indeed, that men which make no conscience for gaine sake, to breake the law of the aeternall, and massaker soules (as these do) are dangerous subjects, and not to be trusted any farther then they are fed.
The most of them are vnsauerye salte, such as haue hitherto liued vpon sacriledge and the spoil of soules. Order might be taken, notwithstanding by the magistrate, that these and their families, should neyther want thinges necessarie for their outwarde estate: nor yet be maintayned in idle∣nes. For the people, the stay for them is, eyther in regarde of publike meetings on the Sabboth, or the sacraments, mariage or buriall. For the kee∣ping of the Sabboth, the worde requireth they should, if possiblie they can, resort where prea∣ching is, vntill good ministers be placed in euery parish: if the places be far, as commonly our pa∣rishes be verye large, and it is not likely in short time, to plant preachers so neere together, as the people may euery Saboth resort vnto them, they must be enjoyned to meete together in their pa∣rish churches, & some discreet man among them selues to read the worde, and vse some forme of prayers, as shalbe thought meetest: by the aduise  of the godly learned. Concerning the sacramēts, the word requireth, they should resort vnto a pre∣ching minister for them, and not attempt to keep their children vnbaptized any longer, then they must of necessitie. Mariage is most conveniently to be don by the minister, but is no proper essen∣tiall worke of the minister; and therefore may be solemnized by others, at the magistrats appoint∣ment. Concerning burial, it is a worke of christi∣an charitie, and being the last duetie that we are to performe towards the departed; we ought to accompany them decently and orderly, with all comlines to the graue. The word mentioneth or includeth noe forme of prayer vsed at buriall; therefore they are superfluous, neyther is the mi∣nister as in an action belonging to his office, to haue any more to doe herein, then any other of the brethren. Thus I haue set downe vnto your Hh. the on∣ly course in regarde of substance, that the worde warranteth to be taken in such a deformed estate as ours is. And nowe my Ll. and the rest of this honorable assembly, let my counsell be accepta∣ble vnto you, breake of your sinnes, by rooting out these plants, which the Lorde neuer planted in his vineyarde, and your iniquities, by abando∣ning the same, so much as in you lieth; so there may be a healing of your former ouersight. If not the Lords face will be against you, yours, and the wholland for euil, & not for good. Oh my Lords, is it not a miserable case, that men should so liue vnder your gouerment in this life, as they cannot possibly, but liue in hel in the life to come. Oh my Ll. heauen cannot be obtayned whē we are gon.
Oh my Ll. now is the time for the gospell to flo∣rish in Wales or neuer. Oh my Ll. if her Maiestie and your honors (whome from my verye heart I wish the Lorde to blesse) should be gone the way of all the world; for mine owne part, the staffe of mine hope, to see any good done amongst my brethren should be broken. Blame me not there∣fore, if I deale earnestly in a cause of so great a moment, and so vnlikely to be obtayned of our wofull posterities, whom my suit in a most neere sort concerneth. Oh, why should they haue cause to say, the Lord be judge between vs and the go∣uernours which were vnder Queene Elizabeth, in the dayes of our fathers; for they might haue opened our eyes, and healed our woundes, which now alasse, are desperat and past recouery. It is now full 30. yeares and vpward, since Ba∣bylon hath bin ouerthrowne in Wales, rather by the voice of her maiesties good laws (whom good Lord forget not for this worke) then the sounde of any trumpet, from the mouthes of the sonnes of Aaron among vs. But alasse, what shall we and our posterities be the better for this, if Sion bee not built. And what comfort can Zerubbabel, or Nehemiah haue, to bring them out of Babylon, if they meane but to reaedifie Shilo, seeing it is the beautie of Sion, wherein the Lorde delighteth. We haue cause in deed to thanke God, that this wicked citie hath beene by her Maiestie broken downe in some sort; but are neuer the better, see∣ing the walles of Sion lie euen with the grounde. Nowe for the space of 28. yeares, no man greatly laboured to her Majestie, the parliament, or the people themselues, eyther by speaking or writing
in the behalfe of eyther of these vnreconcilable cities. Men belike, thinking no more to be requi∣red at their hands, then the razing of Babel, and the diuel as yet, contenting himselfe with Bethel. The last parliament, by al liklihod the very same week vpon a sodaine, the interprises of the buil∣ding of both in 2. seueral books, issuing from
2. of the remotest corners in our lands. (Southwales and Northwales) was taken in hand. The one of the books pleading the cause of Sion, & cōminig forth by publike authority and alowance, was di∣rected vnto her Maiestie and the parliament, re∣quiring at their hands by vertue of the lords own mandatory letters, the performance of this work shewing by euidence of greatest antiquitye, this to be required of duty at their hands, as a part of the homadge, due vnto his highnes, whose foeda∣ries and vassales, all the princes and states vnder heauen must acknowledg themselues to be, and a portion of that inheritance being theirs by li∣neall dissent, from their predecessors, the godly kings and rulers, who time out of minde alwaies laid their shoulders vnto this burthen.y druch Christiano-gawl. The other written in weltch, printed in an obscure caue in Northwales published by an author vnknowne & more vnlerned (for I think he had neuer read any thing but the common published resolution of. R. P. a booke contayning many substantiall errors, Fryer Rush, and other shamful fables) stood to by non, and hauing no reason to shew why his Babi∣lon should be raedefied, it contained it self within the hands of a fewe priuate men, and neuer durst to this houre be made knowne vnto any of our magestrats. Both the books in this thing had the  same successe, in that both together they fel into the hands of the prelats, who as they pretend, are enemies vnto both places, but vndoubtedly vnto Sion especially, as it apeared by their hard dea∣ling with the patrone of that cause,This is spo∣ken in re∣spect of the church go∣uernment. whereas the fautors of the other, being also in their handes, were either not at al delt with, or very curteously entertained of them. The reason of their enemity vnto both, but their hatred vnto Siō is, that neuer I feare me, meaning to go thether, and constrai∣ned by lawe to be enemies vnto the other, they haue of the gold of Caldea, and the drosse of Ie∣rusalem compacted them a citty, wherewith they meane to content them selues vntil they returne to Babel again, or (the Lord be merciful vnto thē) vnto a worse place. Haue they not therfore good cause to be the more beholding to the on for the gold, then the other for the drosse; Wel be you a∣sured hereof, that they who stirred vp both these instruments, both at one time, will neuer suffer them to cease, vntil in Wales either a church of Christ, or a sinagogue of sathan be built. Out of question the concurring of both causes, sheweth that the lord hath som secret work in the matter. Sathans instruments for their parts, were neuer busier then they are at this houre, and shal I be si∣lent? They trecherously against the lawes of God and this land seek to bring the people again vnto Egipt. I according vnto both, endeuour neuer to let them rest, vntil it please the Lord by meanes of her Maiesty, and the parlament, to bring them within the land of promise, no though they were vppon mount Nebo, whence with their eies they might view the same. They haue delt, and deal se∣cretly
with poor soules in dark corners, and dare not make knowne the fabulous cause. I haue delt al this while in the face of the sun, and nowe be∣fore the state of the land assembled together. I-want not a good cause, and by the grace of god, it shal neuer want the poore defence which I cann yeld vnto it, or hide the face as long as I liue; whe∣ther you countenance it or no, I know that on day it shal preuail, when this wilbe the Lord knoweth best: but the matter is, whether you wil embrace Christ in the building of his Church, or Sathan in continuing the breaches thereof. Therfore en∣tertaine this cause, & you giue Sathan the foile, reject this, and you strengthen him. And try if you deny it the hearing, whether the very papists in this land, wil not be thereby encoraged to suppli∣cate vnto the parliament, that you would graunt them the liberty of their seared consciences, to commit publike idolatry
Al that hitherto I haue spoken, hath ben said ei∣ther in the cause of Christ, which is a good cause, or in the behalfe of Sathan. If I seeke the building of his sinagog, wil you let me liue? If of the church of Christ, wil you deny me your help? which yet a∣gaine and againe, in the name of the eternal God I require, & for the precious deth & passions sake of Iesus Christ, I earnestly desire at your handes. My Ll. and whosoeuer are parlament men, as you would haue the Lord to entertaine your souls in the life to come, as you would haue him shewe you any mercy, as you loue her Maiesty and her life, as you would haue the continuance of her peaceable raign over vs, which the Lord vndou∣tedly threatneth to shorten, because he woulde  bring destruction vpon you and vs al, for the con∣tempt of his truth, as you would not haue your names razed from vnder heauen, as you would not haue the Lord to bring vpon vs and our land, the Spanish, Italian, Romish or Guisian forces, as you would not haue these, who shal liue to see the desolation and desperat sorrow, which the Lord is likely to bring vpon this land, not abide to see you or your childrē ride, or go in the strets, as you would not haue the most contemtible to stretch forth his hand vpon the derest things you posses, and offer violence vnto the frute of your bodies? So entertaine this cause, grant this suite, and be careful of the Lords true seruice in wales. Other∣wise, the vengeance of God I feare me, will neuer leaue you and your posterities, as long as there is a man of your houses left vnder heauen.
Ezekiel in deed is not nowe liuing, to put you in mind of the necessity of redressing the things amis, by laying open the corruptions of all estates vnder your gouernment, as he doth cap. 22. of his prophesie. His words I wil set downe that you may wey our estate, with the time wherin the prophet liued, and see whether the Lorde wil spare you & vs, if we stil prouoke him to smite. There is a con∣spiracy of her prophets in the middest thereof, saith the prophet, like a roring lyon, rauening the pray, they haue deuoured soules, they haue taken the riches and the precious thinges: they haue made her many widdows in the middest thereof, her priests haue broken my law, and haue defiled my holy things: they haue put no difference be∣tweene the holy & profane, neither discerned be∣tween the vncleane and the cleane, and haue hid  their eies from my sabboth, and I am profaned a∣mong them. Her princes in the middest thereof are like wolues rauening the pray, to shed blood and to destroy soules, for their owne couetous lu∣cre. And her prophets haue daubed her with vn∣tempered morter, seeing vanities, and deuininge lyes vnto them, sayihg, thus saith the Lord Ieho∣uah, when Iehouah had not spoken. The people of the land haue violently oppressed, by robbing and spoiling, and haue vexed the poor and needy: yea they haue opressed the stranger against right. Thus far Ezechiel. Be the sinns of our prophets, of our princes, and of our people the same, that here he speketh against, be they greater or be the lesse: yet without controuersie, if the Lord may say, I haue sought for a man in the parliament of England, that should make vp the hedge, & stand in the gapp, before me for the land, that I should not destroy it, but I found none: then woe be vnto vs, for that shal follow, which is set downe in the prophete. Therefore haue I powred out mine in∣dignation vppon them, and consumed them with the fier of my wrath: their own waies haue I ren∣dered vpon their heads, saith the Lord Iehouah; And vnlesse there were just cause to thinke that this Lorde, had either already or shortly ment to pronounce this sentence against vs, we might cō∣temne and scorn at the broken assalts of the Spa∣niards, or any other the enemies of the Gospel, and her Maiesties whosoeuer. But as long as we giue not the right hand to the Lord, by entering into his sanctuarye, we haue just cause to feare a nation that is no nation, much more a people in number as the sand, which is by the seashore. Our  leagues and most stable couenants with the ene∣mies; the Lord will soone disanul, standing thus at the staffes end with his Maiestie, as we doe. Let it not be sayd in this pIace, that the Lord would not haue so wonderfully wrought our late deliueraunce, out of the hand of the Spaniarde, if he ment at al to haue called the land to recko∣ning for the great ignorance, and wicked ecclesi∣asticall constitutions, which are truly sayd to be maintained therein. For this, both Moses and Sa∣loman,Deut. 29.18.49.20. note to be the man of all those that shall not prolong their dayes, Moses warneth al states in any case to take heed, that there should not be among them, man, woman, family, nor tribe, which should turne his hart away from the Lord God, so that when he heareth the wordes of the curse, he blesse him selfe in his hart, saying, I shall haue peace though I walked after the stubborne∣nes of mine owne hart, thus adding drunkennes vnto thirst. For saith he, the Lord wil not be mer∣cifull vnto that man: but then the wrath of the Lorde shall smoke against that man, and euery curse that is written in this booke shal light vpon him, and the Lord shall put out his name from vnder heauen, & the Lord shal seperate him vnto euil, according vnto all the curses that is writen in the booke of the lawe.Eccles.
8.11.13. And Soloman knowing the corruptions of men to be such, as their harts are fully set in them to doe euil, because sentence against their euil works is not spedely executed, openly testifieth, that although a sinner doe euill an hundreth times, & the Lord prolong his days, yet it shal only be well, with them that feare the Lord, and do reuerence before him. But it shall  not be wel with the wicked (saith he) for he shalbe like a shadow, because he feareth not before God. And therefore although at this time the Lords anger hath not visited, nor caled the sinnes of our land to account, with gret extremity by the hand of the Spanyard: yet let vs be assured, that it shall not goe wel with vs, vnlesse you of the high court of parliament, shew that you feare your God, and doe reuerence before him, in purging out of his holy seruice, what soeuer is superfluous therein, and in adding whatsoeuer is wanting therevnto. The Lord by that deliuerance, gaue vs warning that he passed by vs, but so, as vnlesse the corrup∣tions of his seruice be clean don away with speed by her Maiesty and the parliament, meaneth to passe by vs no more: but to suffer his whol displea∣sure to fall vppon vs, at his next comming. And in deed, as often as I consider our late defence from the Spanish invasion, together with our de∣serts, I am induced to think, that the Lord then was affected towards vs, as somtimes he was to∣wards Israel his owne people, concerning whom he speaketh, Deut. 32.26. I haue sayd, I would scat∣ter them abrod, I wold make their remembrance to cease from among men, saue that I feared the fury of the enemie, lest their aduersaries should wax proud, & lest they should say, our high hand and not the Lord hath done al this. Therefore let not our deliuerance harden, you of the parlia∣ment, in the sinn of maintayning the breaches of the Lords house. The same Lord that wrought our deliuerance, wil surely be the cause of our ru∣ine, if his honor be so neglected by you as vsually before time it hath ben. And we are to take heed,  lest the Lord seeing our profane, and vaine insul∣ting of the victory, when we are not a whit bet∣tered thereby, send some Ieremy among vs which may cry, as he did vnto the king, and states of his time, in the like matter. Thus saith the Lord God of Israel, thus shal you say to the parliament of England. Behold, except at this your meeting, all the deformities that are tollerated in my seruice, be at once done a way, and except you grant free passage vnto my gospel: the nauy of the Spaniard which I discomfited before you, shal come againe, and fight against this land, and waste it with fire and sword. Therefore deceiue not your selues, saying, the Spaniardes are so weakened by their last discomfiture, that they are not able to pursue their intended inuasion, for it shal not be so. No though you had smitten the whole hoste of the Spaniard, that fought against you, and there re∣mained, but wounded men amonge them: yet should euery man rise vp in his tent, and ouer∣run this land. And let vs looke assuredly, when∣soeuer the abject and contemtible enemy shall assaile vs, abject and contemptible I say, in al re∣spectes, in comparison of the value and strength of our men and munition (and the Lord increase them a thousand fold more) that this God, whose seruice is so litle estemed of vs, wil send a terror into the hart of our valiantest and stoutest men, so that he, whose hart is as the hart of a lion, shal∣be as weake as water: and on enemye shal chase a thousand of vs, because the hand of the Lord wil∣be against vs for our sinns. It is not therefore the Spanish furniture and preparations: but the sins within the land, which we are most of all to feare.
For although the army of the Spaniard were cō∣sumed with the arrowes of famine: although the contagious and deuouring pestilence had eaten them vp by thousands: although their totterting shipps were dispersed, and caried away with the whirlwinde and tempest, although madnesse and astonishment were amongst them, from him that sitteth in the throane, vnto her that grindeth in the mill: although the Lords reuenging sword, in the hand of our valiant captaines and souldiers, had so preuailed against them, as it had left none in that vncircumcised hoast, but languishing and foyled men, notwithstanding a contemptible, & wythered remnant, of the plague and famine: a navie of winde and weather beaten ships, a refuse of feeble and discomfited men, shalbe sufficiently able to preuaile against this lande; vnlesse ano∣ther course be taken for Gods glory in Wales by your Hh. then hitherto hath bene. If I did speake vnto infidels, & vngodly atheists, I know I should not be so plaine, because vnto such, the trueth at sometimes is vnseasonably spoken. But I speake vnto those, that haue vndertaken the profession of Christianitie, and therefore should at all times be fit to heare the trueth of God. And I know no temporizing trueth, no temporizing judgements of God against sinne; no trueth that is to be con∣cealed vnto christians, because their Hh. cannot brooke the same; no trueth that is, eyther not at all, or minsingly to be vttered, because states loue not to here thereof. So that I was in this matter, not to consider what your high places were con∣tent to here, but what was the dutie of your high places to heare. And therefore I should thinke it
(I protest) an vndutifull and flattering petition, to entreat your Hh. not to be offended with mee, for vttering the trueth. As though I supposed, you would thinke it wonderful, that a man should ad∣uenture to speake, euen in the cause of his God, any farther then stood with your good liking. The sum of all that the Lord requireth at your hands in the cause of his honour, is concluded in these 2. points. First, that you abrogate out of the Churche, whatsoeuer you finde therein, to be a breach of Gods ordinaunce. Secondly, that you countenance the preaching of the word, in such sort, as the course thereof be not stayed, for the pleasure or profit of any creature. These poyntes are so reasonable, that whosoeuer vpon choise, & deliberation, denieth any of them (of inconside∣racie and want of due examination of matters. I know many things may be done amisse) I cannot see, what he differeth from a plaine Atheist. And therefore againe I admonish you, in the name of God, to looke vnto your selues, and thorowly to waigh, what the Lorde by the mouth of Ezekiel, threatneth against you, if you stil refuse his waies and mainteine these bypaths of mans inventions in his Church. You haue feared the sworde,Ezek. 11.8 10.12. sayth the prophet, and I will bring a sworde vpon you sayth the Lord Iehouah, and I will bring you out of the middest of this land, and deliuer you into the hands of strangers, and execute judgements among you. You shall fall by the sworde, and you shall know that I am the Lorde; for you haue not walked in my statutes, nor executed my judge∣mentes, but haue done after the manner of the heathen that are round about you.
The lawes offices and officers of our church for the most part, being not according to the statuts of the lord, but framed after the maner of the po∣pish gouernment, whereby the nations round a∣bout vs are tiranized by the mā of sin; that is not a matter to be wondered at, that the alteratiō of our ecclesiastical state is desired. And besides our sauior Christ & his Gospell came into the world, to alter, yea, and ouerthrow states and gouerne∣ments, in al things wherin they should be contra∣ry vnto his wil, and I hope that you of this parlia∣ment wil not deny him this prerogatiue. If I haue sought the remouing of any thing, which the lord requireth not to be altered, I craue no pardon of mine ouersight. What I haue written in this whol treatise, I am ready by the grace of God, personal∣ly to make good (though it were vppon mine vt∣termost peril) whensoeuer I shalbe therevnto cal∣led, by you of this honorable assembly; wherein there are many of good estimation and credit, who vpon the motion of mine apperance by this house, wil I trust, vndertake that I shall come to stand vnto the premises by me set downe. So that I may obtain (which I most humbly craue of you, R. Hh. and worshipful) that vpon mine apperance I be not y any court, or prerogatiue (only the H. court of parliament excepted, vnto whom, as be∣ing the highest councel in the land, in this cause I apeale) debarred of my liberty, before my cause according vnto the word be ouerthrowne. The injury which I sustained the last parliament (be∣ing a suitor in this cause) enforceth me to craue this at your hands, which otherwise, I should haue perswaded my selfe to be a needles suit. For wher∣as  the auncient priueledges and liberties of this house, do giue leaue (during the parliament) vnto any that are suitors thereunto, quietly to follow their suits without feare of any arrest, and being arrested, do presently deliuer and set them free, I was not suffred to enioy any the former liberties. But contrary vnto all religion, law, equity, and conscience, to the great derogatiō of the liberties of this noble court, was committed close prisoner by some, who abused the high commission; their dealing might haue appeared more tollerable, & lesse derogatorious vnto your Hh. & worships, if they had shewed any cause of mine imprison∣mēt (their abused authority only excepted) which vnto this day is altogether vnknowne vnto me. I know, that the infirmities and wants of men, who deale in good causes, are commonly beaten vppon the back of the cause they handle. There∣fore the Lord knoweth how careful I haue bin to keepe it vnspotted, and my selfe out of all vnne∣cessary danger. Setting downe nothing before I had considered what might insue, ether in regard of the matter or manner of deliuery. But why did I publish a matter of such waight, before I aquain∣ted the parliament therewith? Whie it is publish∣ed to the ende, that the parliament may bee ac∣quainted with the suite, which could not be done by priuate writing. And it is but an vngodly shifte of those that woulde smother the trueth, to pre∣tend it to be against the law, to moue the parlia∣mēt in any suit that is printed. As thogh the suits of men vnto that high courte, were parliament statutes. In deede if the parliament had enacted the remoouing out of Wales, all L. Bb. dumb mi∣nisters,
&c. Then were it an intollerable part, for any to publishe their actes, but by their appoint∣ment. Graunt you the petition, and the cauill of committing it to the presse, will easily be answe∣red. If you do not meane to yeeld vnto the suite, neither woulde you haue done it, being mooued therevnto by priuate writing. The cause I make knowne, to the end it may be granted, and herein let not my life be precious vnto me; vpon the ne∣cessitie of the publishing hereof I stande, because that the worlde may see when you redresse these things, that you did nothing, that you durst leaue vndone, vnles you would bring swift destruction vpon your selues and the whole lande. But what follie is it to thinke, that such great matters wilbe reformed in our dayes. Rather what injurie doe they vnto the whole state, who thinke that they wil any longer tollerate the breach of Gods law. And in this point, let the good opinion, that they who alledge such pretences conceiue, be wayed with my dutiful perswasions of this honorable as∣sembly, and both causes judged accordingly. For mine owne part, I think the majestie of the cause to be such, as they who are the Lordes, dare not but entertaine it, and tremble to thinke, that all this while, it hath beene so carelesly attended vp∣on. And it is in the behalfe thereof, that I haue presumed to deale with you, who otherwise durst not haue suffered my voyce to be hearde, in the ears of the princes of my people. Let what I haue written bee examined, yea by mine aduersaries themselues (if I haue any) and it shal appeare, that I haue made a conscience, howe I haue delt with my superiors, especially those, concerning whom  it is said, you are Gods, lest I should seem to leaue behinde me, the least print of a minde in any sort tending to defame them or their gouernement, As I haue bene carefull hereof, so let the Lorde, yea and no otherwise, (which I speak as far as my corruptions will permit) grant this cause, and my selfe also, if it be his will, fauour in your eyes. In deed in regarde of the cause, I come Mandatorie wise, vnto this honorable assembly, but in regard of my selfe, I come in feare and trembling as vn∣to the Lords vicegerents, entreating most hum∣bly, that the dignitie of so high a cause, be thoght off, nothing the more dishonorably, because it is brought in my hands. And I protest in respect of my sinnes, that the Lorde may justly denie it the fauour it deserueth in your eyes, because I am a dealer therein, But this should be no reason why the parliament should giue it a repulse. For in the eyes and eares of al the world I make it knowne, that it is the cause of the liuing god wherin I deal And that if it had beene possible for me to haue written more humblye and dutifully, I had done it. Or if I had seene anye waye, that might haue bene likelier to preuaile wirh my superiors, then this, I take the Lorde to witnesse vnto my soule, that I woulde not haue vsed this course. And I would to God I could tel how to make the cause plawsible. So farre I am, from setting downe any thing, that might cary with it any shewe of occasion to hinder and disgrace the same. Well I haue don my endeuour, the successe I expect at the Lords hands, vnto whome I commend the cause and the saluation of that poore people. The sword of iustice reached vnto you by the
Lord himselfe, to take punishment onely of him that is an euil doer. I fear not, because I haue not offended. If it should be drawne against me for this action, the president would be such, as they who ment herafter to prophesie vnto you, might be aduisedly counseled not to prophesie, and the Lord as a token of your iust destruction to ensue, would say they shal not prophesie nor take shame If I haue spoken any vntruth, beare witnes there∣of, if a trueth, I dare stand to it by the Lords assis∣tance, and demand what he is that will presume to obiect and throw him selfe vnto the vengance of God, by punnishing me an innocente; It is a common manner with some in these dayes, to threaten those who deale in this cause nowe in hand: but they are to know that it is not so easie a matter to spil their bloud, whose daies are num∣bered with the Lord. The Lord may (I confesse with griefe) in regard of my other sinnes, bringe mine head to the graue with bloud, but in this case what haue I offended? And therfore vndou∣ted woe wil betide him, that shall molest me for this worke. Howe soeuer it be, thus I haue per∣formed a duty towards the Lord, his church, my country, & you of this high court, which I wold doe if it were to be done againe, though I were assured to endanger my life thereby. And be it knowne, that in this case I am not afraid of earth. If I perish I perish. My comforte is, that I knowe whither to go, & in that day wherein the secrets of all hearts shal be manifested, the sincerity also of my cause shal apeare. It is inough for me, how∣soeuer I be miserable in regard of my sinnes, that yet vnto Christ, I both liue and die, and purpose  by his grace, if my life should be prolonged, to liue hereafter, not vnto my selfe, but vnto him and his church, otherwise then hitherto I haue don. The Lord is able to raise vp those that are of puerer hands and lipps then I am, to write and speak in the cause of his honor in Wales. And the Lord make them whosoeuer they shalbe, neuer to be wanting vnto so good a cause; the which, because it may be the Lords pleasure, that I shal leaue them behind me in the world, I earnestly and ve∣hemently commend vnto them, as by this my last wil & testament. And haue you R. honourable & worshipful of this parlirment, poore Wales in re∣membraunce, that the blessing of many a saued soule therein, may follow her Maiestie, your Hh. and worships, overtake you, light vppon you, and stick vnto you for euer. The eternal God giue hir Maiesty & you, the honor of building his church in Wales, multiply the daies of hir peace ouer vs, blesse her and you so in this life, that in the life to come, the inheritance of the king∣dome of heauen, may be her and your portion. So be it good Lord. By him that hath bound him selfe continually to pray for your Hh. and worships. IOHN PENRI▪
