21630 99847396 12429
WONDERFVLL PROPHECIES FROM THE BEGINNING of the Monarchy of this Land, hid∣den vnder the PARABLES of: Three young Noble-men in a fiary Fornace. A chast wife, and two old Fornicators. BELVS and his Dragon. DANIEL in a Den amid Lyons. agreement with Canonical Prophecies: Also  Temperate Defence of the Apocryphals annexed to the Canon of the Scriptures. Together with an Essay touching the late Prodigious COMETE; how farre forth the Praesages thereof doe accord with such Prophecies, as are found to pertaine to these our times. By all which, the discrete and wise in heart may ga∣ther touching things to come, what is forewarned vnto Men; as for the General and Publique, so also for their Priuate and Particular. By ROBERT SALTER. The  hath foreseene the euil and hideth himselfe: but the rash haue passed on and shall bee plagued. Pro. 22.3. LONDON, Printed by WILLIAM IONES dwelling in Red-crosse streete. 1626.
TO THE RIGHT HONOVRABLE EDMOND Lord SHEFFIELD, Baron of Butterwyke, Earle of Mulgraue, Knight of the most Noble Order of the Garter, and my singular good Lord, Life and Light from God in the Loue of Christ, WHat Ʋnthrifty kinde of Spirit is it, that the minde of the Man is now so obessed with! For what notion so e∣uer shall bee offered vnto it, differing but the least point from the vulgar ayres which Praeiudice hath formerly taken hold off: howbeit there appeare, whether manifest Argument of Necessity, or strong Inducement of Benefite; yet it is reproued and rejected onely for this; Because it is NEW. Where∣as
on the Contrary, let it present vs with va∣nity of delight, or choise of idlenesse, though to the ineuitable destruction of one and all of vs, yet by how much the Newer it is, by so much the more is it honoured, rewarded, and greedily imbraced. An Instance hereof, may bee the present state of this our Christian world, in whose greatest part, this is found to be trew, that albeit there be tendered vnto vs, Stability of Estate, Treuth of Society, Peace and Plen∣ty on earth, and fauor with God and Man, such, as greater the world neuer before en∣ioyed: yet is there no place of audience to be gotten, euen for none other reason but this. That the path is New and vntroden; And wee must not bee weained from walk∣ing on still in the spiritual blindnesses, where∣with wee haue hitherto like Mould-warpes beene holden and delighted, as if it were writen in Capital letters for a Frontispice, on the Gate of our common sense [Non intret fru∣gi.] Let not a good Obiect be admitted, nor a thought of Grace be conceiued amongst vs. Such lot hath this man of God, the Pen∣man of these Parables, bin forced to passe
vnder. Concerning whom, because in men of former times, there was onely a doubt∣fulnesse, for they were vnto them (perhaps through their owne negligence) not yet vnsea∣led; Therefore the men of our daies will out of a Preiudicate wilfulnesse,Iohn 9. vtterly abo∣lish them, and (as the Iewes did concern∣ing Christ) excommunicate as many as beare witnesse to any of them, how well so euer they shall be by the Spirt of God opened, and how comfortable so euer the things contained in them bee found vnto vs. [Thus doe men loue darkenesse rather then light,Iohn 3. least their deedes should be reproued.] In the middest of so desolate a wildernesse more disordered then the brute sea (for the Ocean hath kindly returnes of ebbes and flowes, and his Decumanos fluctus, I was by a Mighty hand guided, to the taking vp of this our Prophet, cast out as condemned to perpetuall exyle, and not worthy the light of the Sun of Righteousnesse in his Church, when viewing well, I could discerne in him the life of Diuine seede; which I acknowleg∣ed my selfe bound by the lawes of Nature, common to vs both, to foster and cherish vn∣to
full growth, according to the best skill of my vnderstanding and light in heauen∣ly Mysteries. Wherefore I profered him my seruice and helpe, which euen at the very first was so chearefully accepted of him, that he immediately directed me to present him to you my excellent good Lord, with assu∣rance of good speed therby▪ wherfore with∣out delay I hasted to accomplish this re∣quest, neither hath my expectation erred for the Gratious enterteynment hee found at his first accesse to your Presence: simply clad (as he was) in Pilgrims Habit: No more then was sufficient to auow him one of Gods good Creatures, and a Christian (I meane that Extemporary Interpretation of him which some few Moneths sithence it pleased Your Honor to accept at my hands) now since he hath gotten about him better attyre and Language, hath emboldened him to make a Second shew of himselfe, in hope that by Your Noble Protection he shall not onely re∣couer against the vniust and vnworthy im∣putations layd vpon him, but be Restored wholy to the possession of his Original Ho∣nor: Namely; An Evangelical Prophet of our Lord Iesus Christ.
Certainly he acknowlageth the large∣nesse of Your Heart in vnderstanding the things of God, The brightnesse of Your Light in maters of Profoundest Search; and the Ardor of Your Spirit constantly aspiring vnto Motions of the Purest Aire: Such Hearts onely can vnderstand in these: Such Lights onely can discerne of them: And such Spirits enioy the Comfort of theit Dew vse: And because there are so few of such ones; therefore is it that this louely Stran∣ger hath beene so little set by among Men to their owne Reproofe and Losse inualua∣ble. His demands are just, and the profit he tendreth to the Honorers of him singu∣lar, as appeareth by that which is here re∣uealed out of him. So that the goodnesse of the cause it selfe remoueth all doubt, but that vnder your Excellencies countenance he shall assuredly finde plentifull regard, the Newnesse of his present habit and speech notwith∣standing. As for my selfe; when I beheld (as I do dayly) the zelous and continual exercise of Pi∣ety in your owne Person, the gracious pract∣ise of Relligion in your family, the singular
good gouernment of your house, whereby the late dangerous times came not neere you, to touch you; nor any of yours (though be∣ing in the middest of them). I cannot but be perswaded, that your Noble and Pious spirit will vouchsafe to regard this my ende∣uors (weake that they are) and fill vp the wants with the sweetnesse of your good ac∣ceptance, which is wont not to reject any (proceeding from a single heart) that is not altogether vnsauory. Wherefore my prayers vnto God for you (my Lord) are, that the Integrity of your wisdome, your Relligious learning, your ver∣tues and your valor may crowne you with Honours and Richesse, and graces and fa∣uors both with God and Man, as if with full Sheffes the field which the Lord will haue blessed. These are the vowes which do with con∣tent and delight vnspeakable open the light of the Morning, and shut in the sight of the Euening dayly, to your Honours trewly loyal seruant and Chapellan: ROBERT SALTER.
VINDICIAE DANIELIS. Of Apocryphals in Generall. FIRST, when I doe enter in to serious consideration of the Sobriety of our fore-Fathers, that hauing receiued from their Elders a volume of Gra∣tious writings, would not bee want∣ing to deliuer them ouer to their Posterity in the same Number and Or∣der, they had receiued them; I cannot but approue their Pious Ingenuity, choosing rather to subscribe to their Elders in things not altogether intolerable, then to question their discretion. And in the Second place, when I behold the Synceri∣ty of men of our owne times, that will not admit the least blast of Earthly Ayre to mixe it selfe with the Ora∣cles knowne to bee immediately breathed vnto vs by the Divine Spirit, I must needes admire their Religious inte∣grity, that cannot indure any shew of Parity to finde place betwixt the things of God and of Men. Wherefore blessing them both in their seuerall Gra∣ces; it is a Motion (I make no doubt) proceeding from the Spirit of Vnity and Truth, adored of them and vs all, that wee indeuour (by reconciling them what in vs ly∣eth) to injoy the benefit of both their Lights in common
with them; As wee rejoyce in the acknowledgement of Life in Communion with them. The Question about which they differ is, That where∣as there are certaine writings deliuered vnto vs, toge∣ther with the bookes of the First Couenant, partly ad∣joyned as Members of some of those bookes, and partly subjoyned as Entire workes in themselues, and yet not found recorded in the same Character; whether they be to bee permitted to passe joyntly and promiscuously as hitherto they haue done, or whether they ought at length to be diuorced as not lawfully brought together? Touching them all I haue not at this time to speake; but leaue it to those, whose libertie of time and happi∣nesse of State may solace themselues in the louely con∣templations there to bee found. For my part, (First answering the exceptions brought against them in Gene∣ral such as I haue found) I shall by the helpe of the Di∣uine Grace discouer the Heauenly Mysteries implyed in some one Particular of them, if perhaps thereby, some other of them may finde the better entertainment. And thou ô Holy Spirit, which makest the light of truth to spring vp in our Hearts,Pstl. 112.6. out of the darkenesse of our Corrupt Nature, strengthen mee by the heate of thy Loue, that the clouds of my sinnes may bee so throughly dissolued into shoures of contrite teares, that they neuer returne againe to hinder the sight of thy comfort and conduct, this night of ignorance so powerfully praeiudicating vs in the things of God and our true happinesse. One objection is that they are acknowledged on all sides to bee writings Apocryphal; And therefore as some doe seeme to vnderstand (ipso nomine) not Canonicall: for as much as these Names are taken to bee so contrary in themselues, as to be applyed to one and the same thing in one and the same respect is altogether impossible. Whereto I answer out of the Different meanings and vses giuen to the name Apocryphal, which are found to be these.
First, this word Apocryphal indeede in a proper and li∣terall signification importeth [Hidden] or Remoued from our sight, as it is saide [] to hide the earth, when by sayling farre into the Sea wee doe (as Sea-men vse to speake) bring land to wa∣ter and the sight of the Land is wholly taken from vs. And in this Passiue Nature it is after a figuratiue manner made conuertible with the word [Priuate,] which is to say [Sequestred] or hidden from publique vse. So that taking the word [Canonical] to bee vsed for that which is made and ordained for publi{que} vse, and is so receiued and vsed; in this sense indeede these Names vn∣to one and the same Subiect as is aboue saide are vtterly incompatible. But this word [Apocryphal] is found also capable of a Secundary intention. And that is by an Actiue significa∣tion to expresse an Excellencie of things, by which some haue in them a Preheminency of Brightnesse and Illuminati∣on, or a superiority of Dignity and victory in outward pre∣sence, whereby the presence of others (of not so great Outward note) is obscured; And so these become (La∣tebrae) Hyding places (as the word is also found vsed) vn∣to those others. And in this sense these Apocryphals be∣ing according to the dead letter, but as the Shells, may haue for their kirnells maters of High and spirituall Myste∣ries enclosed and hidden in them, in sort, that the Names of [Apocryphal] and [Mysticall] may be found in them of one and the same Aire and Sense. And these Mysteries being found Consonant and Analogicall to the Canon of the Sacred Scriptures, purchase thereby the ti∣tle of [Canonical] together with them. For whereas according to the Literal context the Hy∣stories Apocryphal seeme to make mention of some passa∣ges amongst the Iewes, either in their Babilonian captiui∣ty or soone after, and so of no vse nor Reference vnto fu∣ture times: now if by a more illuminate search they bee in Mystery found to conuey vnto the present Church of
Christ such Gratious speculations, as either it cannot well want them, or at least wise it be much holpen by them in their times and seasons (which I doe verily beleeue our fore-Fathers did see, though the notice thereof, out of some speciall worke of the Diuine prouidence haue not as yet beene imparted vnto vs:) Then will this applicati∣on of the name [Apocryphal] bee sufficient to vindicate them from the Aspersions cast on them by the Praeiudice of the former sense. It is againe objected, that many falsities and doub∣lings, indecencies, and impossibilities are found in the Relations of their Histories, and therefore not to bee admitted. This (for answer) is indeede confessed according to the letter of them to bee true; and I suppose many the like are to bee brought forth out of the Canonicals them∣selues, which (as these) doe call for Spiritual eyes to discerne of them,Ezeck. 4. Hos. 1. Luc. 16. as Ezekiels bands and bread, and Ho∣seahs wife of fornications, the Rich mans charitie in Hell and such like; So that to the one as well as to the other this seemeth to bee imputable. And therefore in these ca∣ses, the eyes of flesh and blood are of necessity to be clo∣sed, and wee must submit our selues wholly to bee led by the light of the Spirituall man, and striue to acquiet our selues in the Mysteries of them, without nice satisfacti∣on of the Naturall reason. A farther Exception is, that because they are not con∣cluded within the Number of the Alphabeticall letters, ful∣filling the Old Testament, as the Rabbines register them to haue beene taken in Ezraes time, nor found in that holy tongue, nor admitted by Hebrewes old nor new, therefore they cannot haue beene breathed by Gods Spi∣rit. For answer hereto, first I cannot but make vse of the words of that good Father Saint Augustine, in an Epistle which hee writeth to Saint Hierome for instructions from him, as from his Elder. Hee there, vpon the words of
our Sauiour, [Bee yee not called Rabbi,Math. 23. for one is your Ma∣ster euen Christ] goeth on thus: Nec alius docuit Mosen, &c. Neither was there (saith hee) any other, that taught Moses by Iethro; nor Cornelius by Peter his Elder; nor Peter by Paul his younger. For by whom soeuer Truth is spoken, it is deliuered by the guift of him who is the Truth it selfe. And this same also and almost in the same words doth he repeate in his second booke and 18. Chapter, touching the Doctrine of Christianity, affirm∣ing that it is the dutie of euery good Christian to know that wheresoeuer Trueth is found, (as well in Profane Authors as in Sacred) yet it is to bee referred to the breath of our Lord and Maister Christ Iesus, from whose alone spirit all Trueth doth proceede. And so when in these, Truth is to bee found, whether after the Letter or in the Mystery; then in respect of the fountaine whence it springeth, it is to bee receiued for Certaine, with∣out any Conditionate Admission of [Magis & Minus] more or lesse trueth in the one of them, then in the o∣ther. Secondly, I say, that Trueth being so found in them, it is not to bee beleeued,Vnius cuius{que} linguae par est et eadem virtus, mdo par sit & eadem pietas. Cor. Agrip. de Cabala. that the Spirit of God hath so confined it selfe, to any one Language of the Man more then other; that the Aire of the words being but Signes should bring any credit to the Trueth, of the Things sig∣nified. Or if any will needes haue, that it doth; why then may wee not rather beleeue, that for as much as the things of Trueth deliuered in these Apocryphals, per∣taining principally to the Church of Christians, from that time shortly approaching, and not to the Mosaical now declining, were by the speciall instinct of Gods Spirit, dictated in the Mouth of the Pen-men, in such language of the Gentiles, as was ordeined to bee the instrument of conueighing the Doctrine of Christ, at hand, to bee reuealed to all the world?Isa. 28.11. 1. Cor. 14.21. Therein to the very Letter ful∣filling the Prophecie, as the Apostle rendreth it, [with other tongues, and with other lippes will I speake vnto this
people.] And euen in that it selfe, intimating to the people of the Iewes, that as they were now (by the pleasure of God) made subject to the Gentiles in body; so they should in minde submit themselues, to bee ruled by that forme of Doctrine, which was in the Gentiles lan∣guage, to bee made Authentical vnto them. And this may wee bee the rather induced to beleeue, in that wee finde the first miraculous confirmation of the Euangelical Doctrine of Christ,Act. 2. after his full Glorification, to bee in this same kinde: namely, the Sanctification and Consecra∣tion of Languages vnto that Ministery. Yet, notwithstanding all that hath beene saide in de∣fence of these Apocryphals, I doe neuerthelesse humbly desire so to bee vnderstood, that it is farre from mee, so much as in the least shadow of my thoughts separately to parallel them to the Holy Scriptures, (which haue from the beginning, and euermore beene by the whole Church acknowledged Canonicall and Authentique,) whether for Measure of spirit, or Light of iudgement, or Authoritie of bynding power,2. Tim. 3. or finally, for sufficiencie of Doctrine [to make the man of God perfect, &c.] Yet may it bee no dis∣paragement to those pure fires of Holy Scriptures, that these Apocryphals be to them taken [Coniunctim,] as the Golden Pot,Exod. 16. to the Manna laide vp therein; or as the Vehicula which Physicians doe vse in the applying of their Medicines, whereby their richest Antidotes are brought to a more vniuersall benefite, for the whole body of the Man; or as the steely Armour of the Lode-stone, which is altogether impotent of its owne seperate strength, to worke Magneticall Attraction; Howbeit, fitted duely to that inualuably precious Gem, doth by copulation, mul∣tiply the virtues thereof, to dispart it selfe into a much greater Orbe, and with more powerfull rayes. How justly this that hath beene saide, is applyable to these Apocryphals, I leaue to the Aestimate of their de∣serts which haue laboured in some parts of them, not vnthriftily; their worke is their crowne, and the Sterres
thereof shall be multiplyed dayly, vnto the day of Consum∣mate Retribution. The Apocryphals of Daniel. THat which by mee hath hitherto beene saide, serueth first, to remoue the Obiections which praeiudice had laide to the charge of those Mysti∣call writings; which doubtlesse, had neuer beene so Constantly, Reuerently, and Relligiously preser∣ued, in one and the same closet with the Sacred Scriptures, had not the Diuine Prouidence specially wrought, and beene pleased to shine forth therein. And so in the se∣cond place, this serueth also, to purchase a respectiue Attention, to that which is therein contained; and that we labour and vse meanes, that the same may be Reuea∣led vnto vs, in regard of the great benefite resulting. The speciall part, I haue chosen for the present to speake vnto, is the Auctary of Daniel. Which appeareth to me, whether for the necessity of knowledge of the Trewth, implyed in it; either for the Amplitude of th' Extent of it; or lastly, or the Height of the Spirit, by which it was dictated, to aduow vnto it selfe place in the former ranke. First therefore, whereas wee finde the Name of Da∣niel adfixed vnto it; whether it be literally after the Au∣thor thereof, the Pen-man of the Canonicall Prophecie: Certainly, the matter therein contained, doth acquite it selfe, not vnworthy the name of so Glorious a Pro∣phet. Or if it bee Parabolically, according to the Resem∣blance of the Subiect, to that of the former. The Com∣munion of the Name, and Adiection of it vnto that other, doth no way impaire the Honour and selfe-sufficiencie, of that Gracious Canonical Prophecie: As will appeare by that which followeth.
But what if in a Mystery, we vnderstand the Name of Daniel, giuen vnto it from the Abstract of the Name it selfe without any Reference to any person in Concrete? And so the Name intimating the Manner of Gods work∣ing in his iudgements,Daniel. 1. The iudgement of God. Or, God is iudge. according to those times in the which the Seueral parts of this Prophecy were to be ful∣filled? In trewth when I behold the gracious vnity in Spirit, betwixt the workes of God of this kinde, in the times before this Prophecy,Deut. 32. Iud. 2. 2 Sam. 24. Psa. 90.106. Ioel. 2. Iona. 2. Luc. 18. 2. Pet. 2. 1. Tim. 1. as Moses speaketh of them, [The Lord will iudge his People, and be compassionate over his Ser∣uants,] And as we finde it often repeated by the Pro∣phets successiuely; and in the times as they ensued after this Prophecy, as they are spoken of by our Sauiour him∣selfe and his Apostles after him; I am wholly possessed with Persuasion and ample Assurance, that this Name of Daniel giuen to this Auctary, is Principally (accord∣ing to the letter,) Apocryphal; that is to say, A couert and shell wherein the Nature of Gods Iudgements then to ensue, were Mystically enclosed. For this Auctary, albeit that it is found dispersed into diuers Sections, as Namely, the Additional to the third Chapter of the Canonical Prophecy, and the XIII and XIV chapters, as they are added to the end of the Canoni∣cal Prophecy: yet by the Coherence and dependency of them one on the other, it appeareth to be one continent Prophecy; reporting in Angelical Language the State of the Church and Faithfull, from those times to the End of times; vnder the Type of the Babilonian Captiuity of the Iewes, the onely faithfull Church at that time manifest in the world. And distributeth it selfe into IIII. distinct Passages or Periods very regardable. Namely. Dan. 3.I. A DIVINE PROTECTION of three Religious young men in a fiery Fornace. Dan. 13.II. A IVDICIALL DELIVERY of a chast
wife distressed by Calumny of II. old Forni∣cators. III. An INGENIOVS CONFVTATI∣ON and Conviction of an IDOLA∣TROVS CVLTVRE.Dan. 14. IV. A IVST RETRIBVTION executed on a tumultuous People,Vbi. 5. BRVTISHLY conspiring against their FAITHFVLL RVLER sent them from GOD. And into such IV. Periods are the Times of the world thence ensuing exactly reduced, as appeareth by the Ex∣plications of other Prophecies Canonical. The first Period is of the Martyrdome of three young men. VVHerein the first Circumstance is of these III. Noble men,And they walk∣ed in the mid∣dest of the flame. which if they bee ta∣ken figuratiuely [A Definite number for an Indefinite,] Then is it to bee taken for that competency of witnesses, that should spring vp with one voice, confessing the Trewth of God in his Administration and Prouidence, That in the mids of all the Tumults and vexations of the world, it is directed wholly to the worke of his Mercy and Loue, to the Man in Christ, by his Spirit comforting and confirming them. Secondly, if wee consider them Typically, it is to bee taken for the three Lawes Natural, Mosaical, and E∣uangelical; which in the mids of all the Frowardnesses of
worldlings,Al the workes of the Lord blesse ye the Lord, &c. doe by a sweete and melodious vnicent, publish the prayses of the Creator, to bee testified by the voice of the whole frame of the Creature, and parts thereof. Thirdly, if taken Mystically, it putteth vs in minde of the present and ready Assistance wee injoy in the Per∣son of the Manhod of God, by his Offices of Prince, Priest, and Prophet, in the Administration of his Prouidence ouer all his creatures, for our seruice and good. In assurance whereof, hee doth not faile to rayse vp vnto his Church in all Tentations and Pressures faithfull ones of all these sorts, namely, Princes, Priests, and Prophets, from time to time representatiue of himselfe,Ap. 1. walking in the middest of it. Fourthly, if taken after the the manner of Parabolical History, it doth report vnto vs, vnder the Notation of the names of these three young Men, the threefold differen∣ces of Men, as they are descended from their first fathers af∣ter the Deluge.Iapheth Enlar∣ged. Chananiah, Gra¦tified with fa∣vour frō God. Europe wholly, The greater part of Asia: Indies, East and West: South-Pole Lands. Shem. The name. Azariah. The helpe of God. Cham. Burnt with heate Mishael. God is with-drawn. Chananiah answering to the name of Ia∣peth the eldest brother, whom (according to the Pro∣phecie of his Father Noah vpon his name) it should please God to Gratifie with Largenesse of Earthly Dominion, (namely, the greatest part of the whole Habitable,) and to coinherite with the Blessed Shem in the Heauenly Pos∣session. Azariah answering to Shem the second brother, who was also (according to his name) to bee as the Name of Helpe from God, vnto the Generations of both his Bre∣thren. Mishael answering to Cham the youngest, who (ac∣cording to his name also) was by the burning of his Fa∣thers displeasure Excomunicate from any Society, and confined to a seruitude vnder the Church of Shem and Ia∣peth, whereby God might be thought to haue withdrawne himselfe from him. These in the mouth of Azariah the holy Shem, vnto whom the blessing (as is aboue saide) was most pecu∣liarly
alloted in his issue the Messiah, are summoned to beare witnesse, to the praises of Gods, who had beene alwaies a present Helpe to himselfe, and would now re∣ceiue into fauour his elder Brother Iapheth, as hee had promised; and also returne and draw vnto him his yongest, whereof the forlorne seede of Cham had no Argument of Hope. Which applicataon is to me the more approoued, in that Azariah representing the People of the Iewes sprung from Shem, (and chiefe Author of this holy Hymne;) doth name himselfe in the second place onely, after Cha∣naniah, (his brother Iaphet) elder then himselfe ac∣cording to Nature, though inferiour in calling accord∣ing to the Blessing. And this song fulfilled in the Iewes, who being now againe brought into a fornace of Capti∣uity vnder the Babilonians,Ps. 81. as they had before beene vn∣der the Aegyptians, are made the Preachers of Gods Trewth by their Dispersion throughout the world. And the Nations thereby prepared and brought more flexible to entertaine the Mystery of their Reconcilement to God by Christ shortly to be reuealed. Fifthly, and lastly, Prophetically it beareth thus; That whereas the Nation of the Iewes, the onely now-visible Church of God, were to be as the comnon thresh∣ing floore, or fornace of Affliction, wherein the Peo∣ples round about them should expresse their furyes: yet the trew Iewes,Rom. 2. whose Circumcision is not Outwardly of the flesh, according to the Letter, but inwardly of the Heart, and according to the Spirit; should be comforted by the Sensible Notice of Gods gratious care ouer them in their Reliefe from People of all sorts; whether of the Iewes in Azariah,Azariah. Ananiah. Publique Professors of God according to his written word, or of the Gentiles in Chananiah; such as (though far of) yet had some Light of the Trewth, wherein they reioyced themselues, and shewed Grati∣tude vnto the Iewes the bringers of it vnto them; by the benefite of whose inclination, the Iewes were per∣mitted
freely their Sabbaths and Iubilees, and other Re∣ligious Rites among foreine Nations, and vncircumcised People where they were scattered,Gozan. Chalac, & Ha∣bor. 2 R 17. Act. 7. euen as far as Goesa∣num, Colchis and Iberia, and the inland parts of Arme∣nia most remote from their owne Countrey: and (as the blessed Martyr St. Stephen saith,) beyond Babilon. Or lastly,Mishael. of those Libertines and Pagans in Mishael; such as for their profanenesse hauing beene by the hand of God smitten into furies with Nebuchadnezzar, are compel∣led to proclaime their owne shame, and Gods glory, though still persisting Incendiaries to the whole world be∣sides. Then Azariah stood forth and prayed, & ope∣ning his mouth in the midst of the fire. 1. Pet. 1.7. & 4.12.The second Circumstance is of a Fiary fornace, which re∣presenteth vnto vs, that fire whereof the Apostle Peter maketh mention; Originally poynting to the words of Moses, [His law to them was a fire] which for their try∣al the faithfull were to passe, that they might come forth precious vessels for their Lords seruice, whose comming to Bridals, by his Incarnation and Humiliation did now hast∣en, and they earnestly wish and waite for. Deut. 33.2. The Kings ser∣uants that had cast them in, cea∣sed not to make the ouen hot with Naptha, &c.The third Circumstance is the Materials of the fire, Naptha, Pitch, Tow, and Vine-twigs, which doe de∣signe vnto vs, that the Countrey where these were found, most kindly breed and manured, were to bee the most proper places of these Tryals and Combustions, and those were Babilonia, Persia, Chaldaea, Syria, Phae∣nicia, Asia minor, and Aegypt. The Angel of the Lord smt the flame of the fire out of the for∣nace. Gen. 3.The fourth Circumstance is, of the flame beaten forth of the Fornace, which is the Combustions that the world was then shortly to bee cast into, which (as it was in the Beginning a Seraphim to the Tree of Life, separating be∣twixt it and The Man fallen from his Perfection; so now) was to as many as by faith were restored to their first E∣state,Ex. 13. Deut. 1. made a Partition (as the Pillar to the Israelites in their departure out of Aegypt) & a Lode-starre of Directi∣on, (as it was to them in the wildernesse) to as many as will rejoyce in the Light thereof; but a sword consuming
the vnbeleeuers (as was that from Heauen vpon Sedom,Gen. 19. 2. Reg. 1. and that vpon the two Captaines and their troupes that came against Elijah,) while in the meane space the ser∣uants of God in the midst of these Combustions, walke Inuisible to the world, (as the Aire by Inflammation is made Intransparent,Not to be seen through. Zac. 2. God making it to them a fiery wall of Infinite extent for the Receptacle of his Church, an im∣pregnable Rampart against them that are without, and a Gracious Communion of his Holynesse and Glory, by his constant presence among them. Thus to them is it a fire, not to burne, but to Illuminate, Purge and sanctifie them, but to the others, consuming and destroying. The fifth Circumstance is, of the XLIX.The flame went out of the fornace 49 cubits. And it brake forth & burnt those Chal¦deans that it found by the for∣nace. Dan. 9. A Decade is the number of ten, as we vse to say A couple, or a brace for two, or a leash for three. Cubits of the fires rage, which is the Period of those outragious times; either answering to the LXX. weekes of the Ca∣nonical Prophecie, euery Cubit fulfilling a Decade of yeares, from the time of the commandement giuen, for the re∣turne out of Captiuity, as the Prophet had limited; Either else it is a Decade of Iubilies, in the end whereof, the trew Iubilie (whereof all the former were but Types) should bee celebrated, by the grant of Liberty from the Rigor of the Mosaical Law and Ceremonies, and from Sin, Death, and Hell (vnto which onely Enemies the man was obnoxious.) And this Liberty and Manumission to bee graunted Indefinitely and without Limitation, to as many as did content themselues, in the sober and pa∣tient expectation and salutation of it, yet so far off. That the Jubile is called the fiftieth yeare,Leuit. 25. will make no difference. For the computation of Iewes and other those Easterly Nations, being [Inclusiuè] accompting both the termes, as is the manner of Physitians in their Paroxysmes of sharpe diseases, (whereby appeareth from whence they are to acknowledge the Propagation of that Learning), And the computation of the Greekes (in whose tongue this our Prophecie is found written) be∣ing [Exclusiuè] leauing out one of the Termes, it fal∣leth out, that one and the same yeare in the Compute of
Time, commeth to bee the fiftieth yeare vnto the Iewes, which vnto the Grecians and other Western Nati∣ons is but the fortie ninth. As appeareth by this Dia∣gram. IVBILE. A figure of seuen sides, euery side conteining seuen yeares for the Iehudean Sabbath of yeares, which maketh forty nine yeares, In sort, that the first of the first Babbath, being reck∣oned also for the last of the Iubilean Period (as it is Leuit. 25.) maketh vp the full number of fiftie for the yeare of Iubi∣le vnto the former, and the first yeare of the Sabbath follow∣ing.
The Accomplishment. FOr from the time of the Returne vpon the Going forth of the word, vnto the Consummation determi∣ned for the ouerspreading Abomination, were trou∣blous times through the whole world: As the Harmony of Annals do shew; In the which God did not∣withstanding raise vp from time to time for the Comfort of his Church, a competent number of witnesses to his Trewth. (This word was not that giuen by Cyrus, (Ezra. 1.1.)This Note (though not all so proper in the matter) I could not omit, for loue of the gracious medi∣tation it ocasio∣neth. which was about the 29. yeare of the Epocha or Style of the Persian Monarchy, and the 222. yeare of the Building of Rome; which fel in the time of Tarquinius Superbus the last King of Rome about 530. yeares before the word became Man. But the Going forth of the word (Daniel 9 25.) by the Ministery of Haggai and Zachariah the Prophets, vnder Darius Nothus otherwise called Syrus; which was aboue 100. yeares after the former; Namely, about the 137. yeare of the Persian Aera; the 330. yeare of Rome built, 420. yeares before Messiah the Prince; and about the first Reducing of this our Albion into a Monarchy by the Great Mulmutius father to the valiant Belinus and Bremus: where we haue to obserue that the Foundation of the Politique State of this our Land, beginneth with the Foundation of the Second Temple, (the Type of the calling of the Gentiles) laid by our Prophets aboue praised. As afterward, the full comming in of the Gentiles and Submissi∣on to the Gospell of Christ by Publique Consense was (first of all Nations) begun by the Politique State of this Land vnder our Christian King Lucius, before the first generall Conuersion of the Romane Empire vnder their Emperour Constantine neere 130 yeares.) First among the Iewes; As of Rulers, such were Zerub∣babel,
Tirshatha, the valiant Maccabees, &c. As of Priests, such were Ezra, Iehoschuah, Iadduah that turned the Heart of Alexander the Great from demollish∣ing Ierusalem, Eleazarus to whom Ptolome sent for in∣terpreters, Simon the Just, Onias the Holy, &c. As of Prophets,Matth. 1. Luc. 3. such were Haggar, Zachary, Malachy; and that Sterry Streame from Zerubbabel to the Virgin Mother as the Euangelists doe record them. Secondly, among the Gentiles as of pious Proselites and Proficients; such as were those noble Pythagoreans, Sybills,Tit. 1. Sages of Greece, and other Phylosophers, Hystori∣ans, and Prophets, (so doth the Apostle call their Poets;) And those (not inferior in learning to the best of them) Druides of this our Heauen-named Albion, (I weigh not fables,) Ptolomaus Philadelphus and Aristaus his fauorite, to whome the whole world is indebted for hauing beene instruments of bringing the Diuine Oracles to speake to vs in our owne tongues, and others of whome we finde large testimonies in that most diligent and trusty Annalist Iosephus, and else where. Lastly, among profane Libertines, such as were Alex∣ander the Great, Antiochus the Great, Seleucus Nicanor, and others both Asiatiques and Africans, Grecians and Romans, whereto beareth Suffrage the Inscription of that Altar in Athens:Act. 17. [To the vnknowne God] and the common speach of those dayes [of the world to come] which the Poet profanely enough wresteth in his verse. Magnus ab integro Seclorum nascitur ordo. Virg. Pollio.All these I say, and many moe from time to time, e∣uen to the comming of the Messiah, were vnto the faith∣full in the mids of those Combustions, as the still small voice to Elijah,1. Reg. 19. And the Angell made like a moist hissing wind in the midst of the fornace. 2. Macc. 6. & 7. refreshing their wearied Spirits, with the solace they tooke in the Expectation of their Redeem∣er; though to the world they seemed ineuitably embra∣ced with flames no lesse tormenting, then were those constant Martyrs, Eleazar the Scribe, and the Mo∣ther and her seuen sonnes in the fornace of Epiphanes:
But this was (I say) vnto them a refuge from greater euills; and to the world, and to them that were without, a gulfe of destruction,The flame burst forth and burns those that is found by the for∣nace. as appeareth by the continuall desolations betwixt the Persians and Graecians, Seleucidans, and Lagidans, vntill they all at length, fall before the Romans, as was foretold by our Prophet in his Canonical message. And now is the Messiah come,The Angel of the Lord went downe into the fornace with them that were with Azarias. and though nothing be found in him, yet must hee enter into the same for∣nace, no lesse [Passiaè] to suffer with them; then [Pri∣uatiuè] to take the force of the fire from them. And so must the rest of all those holy vessels, his Confessors follow as they did, vntill the time of these Desolating fires accom∣plished, as is aboue shewed. And so this Period end∣eth with the expiration of the Mosaical bondage; to the obedience whereof, these holy witnesses were engaged, euen to the Death, and were now to rise againe, and come forth to the life of Euangelical Liberty. The vtmost limitation of which their stay in this fornace,Luke 21. our Sauiour designeth vnto them to bee [the beleaguering of Ierusa∣lem.] The second Period is of the chast wife. IT was very fit that there should bee a large distance betwixt the Relating of the former passage, touch∣ing the three Noble young Men martyred, and this next insuing. For there was a long course of Oc∣currents to bee accomplished betwixt them; Euen so much as was to take vp fortie nine Cubits, or seuentie weekes of time, which (as was shewed before) were those foure hundred and ninety yeares, in which all the Prophecies ensuing that part (namely the third Chapter of the Canonicall Prophecy, whereto our former Progresse is subioyned) were to be fulfilled. And so the Connexion
of these Passages which now follow, to set an end to the whole Prophecy. In this Period of the Chast wife. THe first Circumstance is of the Place named Babilon: Not the first,There dwels in Babylon a man called Ioacim, &c. Babilon. Con∣fusion. Psa. 137. Isa. 13. Ier. 50. & 51. Ap. 13. for it was long sithence desolated in the flames of the former Period, and made an Extemplary Confusion to al the Enemies of God and his People, as it was foretold, and commanded by the Prophets. And al the Saints of God were called out of it long sithence. But it is of the Second now, by this time standing and growne great, by the spoiles of all the world besides; And which was to begin a New Captiuity of the People of God, and to make a New Depraedation of the Church of God, and to set vp a new Confusion, out of the Ruines of the old. So then this chast wife must be put to her Pur∣gation in Babilon the NEW. And he tooke a wife named Su∣sanna. Susanna. A Lil∣ly. Cant. 2. Ap. 17. 1. Reg. 7. Iehotakim. The establishment of God. 2. Cor. 1.The second Circumstance is, of the Person, [The Church] which is first described by her Name [Susanna] A Lilly. For so doth God decipher his Church in the world [As the Lilly among the thornes,] Susanna a chast wife in Babilon the mother of Harlotry. Secondly, by the name of her Husband [Iehoiakim.] The Pillar which God hath established, and not Man. For Christ is the spouse of his Church, in whom God hath ratified all the purposes and promises of his loue vnto the man by an irrefragable Couenant of Yea and A∣men. And Hee taketh her to wife; for Christ loued his first. The daughter of Helkiah. Helkiah. Gods-Lot. Eph. 1.Thirdly, by the name of her Father; Helkiah, that is to say, The portion of God. For God had chosen vs to him∣selfe in Christ before the foundation of the world, that we should bee holy and without blame before him in loue. Fourthly by her presence, Shee is very faire, for Christ hath presented her to himselfe Glorious,A very faire woman. Eph. 5. without spot or wrinckle, Holy and without blame. Fifthly, by the Regularity of her Education. Shee is
by her righteous Parents bred Religiously;And one that feared God. Her father and mother also were godly people, & taught her ac∣cording &c. Ps. 119. Now Ioacim was a great rich mā, Col. 2. 1. Tim. 4. Vrbem fecisti. qui prius Orbis erat. Rutil. For it is the word of God that must bee the [Lanthorne to our feete,] without which, the wisdome of the man is folly, and his righteousnesse, prouocation and vnexcusablenesse. Lastly, her Husband is very Rich and Honourable, for in Christ are all the Treasures of the Deity; and the Godly haue the Promises of this Life and of the Life to come. So then, here haue we a perfect Purtrait of the Church, as our Sauiour at his departure from the Iewes, the place of his earthly abode, had sequestred her to himselfe, from amids the world of the Gentiles (the new Babilon) for his owne and Onely beloued, and shee a chast wife, faithfull and loyal to her deere Lord and Husband, whose onely voice shee followeth. The third Circumstance is, of two Luxurious Iudges,The two Elders seeing her, haue a lust vnto her the one of them, the Idolatrous Paganisme of the Gentiles not yet conuerted to the faith of Christ: the other, the obstinate superstitiousnesse of the Iewes, still persisting in hardnesse of heart and vnbeleife, concerning any of the promises of God, that they should bee accomplished in our Lord and Sauiour Christ Iesus. And that these are the persons which they represent doth very liuely ap∣peare by the seuerall Detections brought against them in the mouth of our Mystical Daniel (The iudgement of God) though but a childe; For the Doctrine of the king∣dome of God in Christ, was yet but as in the nonage a∣mongst them. First, Against the former is brought forth the same burden that is by the Apostle laide vpon the Gentiles, for their vnthrifty Ingratitude towards God,Rom. 1. namely vnrighteousnesse, vnmercifulnesse, vnnaturalnesse, &c. And in the next place, against the later is vrged Canaanitish vncircumcision and spirituall fornication,Rom. 2. Mat. 15. where∣by they seduced the people of God from their pure and chast Religion and seruice of him,Isa. 57. through their Adul∣terous traditions. The fourth is, the crime these lay to the charge of this
chast wife [The Church] which is Adultery,A young man come to her and lay with her. Ezek. 16. 1. Cor. 5. Iac. 4. that is to say, a violation of the Law of God in point of Relligion, which by the mouth of God is called Spiritual Adultery: and a violation of the Law of man in point of society, which is also by the Spirit of God termed, the Adultery of the world. The fifth is, the vindication of the Innocency of this chast spouse the Church of God. And that, out of the mouth of the Accusers themselues, in their examinations (seuerally taken) found contrary one to the other (Obserue here the weaknesses of iudgement giuen, vpon Testimonies joyntly taken before men, how circumspect soeuer otherwise; and how easily the most sufficient vnder∣standings may bee seduced and abused therein. To which onely end, this circumstance seemeth to be inserted.) And herein are we to consider the matter of their con∣fessions, whereby the falshood of their Testimonies is dis∣couered, namely, that the one nameth the place to be vnder a Lentisque Tree; the other, vnder a Scarlat-bery Holme Tree. Wherein literally is shewed (out of the difference of these two Trees;) the impossibilitie that either that thing should bee trew, which these false wit∣nesses did arme with such contrary circumstances; Or that they should be mistaken in the sensible differences of such manifest obiects. For first, both these Trees are obserued to haue on them through the whole yeare, both leaues and fruite; so that there could not bee wanting vnto these Accusers sufficient appearance of their differences. Of the Lentisque is thus sung. Iam verò semper viridis, semperque grauata. Lentiscus triplici solita est grandescere foetu Ter fruges fundens. Plin.The Lentisque euer greene, thrice yeerely burgeoneth, Thrice yeerely rendereth fruite and flourisheth.
And of this kinde of Holme is recorded.Plin. Ilici folia non decidunt — The Scarlat Holme sheddeth not leaues. And againe: Ilex annifera, novusque fructus illis cum annotino pendet. The Scarlet Holme beareth fruite the whole yeare, and shee hath new sprung fruite on her together with the fruite of the former yeare. Secondly, both these Trees are acknowlaged to bee Arbores indigenae: Trees naturally growing and breeding in that countrey, and of much and often vse among the People there, So that the youngest child that can dis∣cerne of things among them according to Naturall sense, cannot bee ignorant of the Difference of these two Trees. Differences of them, either from other are found these. The Lentis{que} hath the leaues of a deepe greene colour, & the edges of the leaues, and the ribbes or veines some∣what red. But this sort of Holme hath leaues greene on the vpper side (but not so darke) and white vnder∣neath. The leaues of the Lentisque doe resemble them of the Licorice, or Oliue. But the leaues of this kinde of Holme are like them of the Bay and prickly in manner of a Saw. The Lentisque fruite is first mossy flowers in clusters vp∣on long stems, after which comen beries like Fitches or Elder-beryes, first greene, then purple, and last of all blacke, which fruite is sometimes pressed into an Oyle; and sometimes is seasoned into a Sallade. But this sort of Holme hath first an Acorne like the Oake, though shor∣ter and smaller, yet such as many vse for bread in time of penury of Grayne; And afterward hath a Bery cleau∣ing to the boughes, without stemme (other then as the Oake-apple) and of the bignesse of a Pease, or lit∣tle other; coloured first White, after Ashcolour; in which is gendred the vermine, whereof is made the rich
Scarlat dye [Coccus Baphicus] by vs called Coccianel. The barque of the Lentisque is bright red, and is (as are the barques of those teary Trees) thin,The gummes of all these sorts of trees are properly called Lacrymae, Teares. and apt to bee wounded, and to send forth their teares, those precious Gummes they yeeld. But the barque of this sort of Holme is very darke red inclining to blacknesse, and is thicke and dry and spon∣gy like that of the Corke-Tree, insomuch as in some places the one is vsed insteed of the other. These obseruations as they are deliuered by the most approued Authors, Dioscorides, Galen, Cic. Plin. Matthiolus, Amatus Lusitanus, Dodoneus, Gesner, Ge∣rard, &c. may suffice to shew, that it ought not to bee reckoned vnlikely or hard for a childe, to close these two false Accusers in the net they had laide for the Inno∣cent; And euen so easie was it for any that were not hard∣ned in mischiefe, to discouer the accusations laide a∣gainst the Primitiue Church by the Iewes and Gentiles, to bee so incompatible in one and the same subiect, as it must of necessity appeare to haue proceeded not out of Trewth, but of meere enuy and malice, that they were so charged with them. What out of the Nature of these two Trees seuerally considered doth farther arise, is properly pertaining to the Accomplishment following. The Accomplishment. THe Primitiue Church at the first, (that is to say, af∣ter the Apostles dispersed themselues from Ierusalem into all parts of the world) consisted onely of priuate persons, and was as a wife in the house, without any commanding power in order as to the Publique state. And had these two Aduersaries, the Heathen Idolatry,
and the Iewesh superstition, euermore standing forth in accusation against it. By which it suffered grieuous Per∣secutions and Martyrdomes, through their Calumnies put into the eares of the Emperours, and Kings of the earth yet Infidels and vnconuerted. Which as I haue saide did no better agree together, then that two Trees so much different, should be saide to resemble one the o∣ther, or to be of one and the same kinde. But what if wee shall say, that out of the Appellatiue names of these two Trees, are foretold what kinde of ac∣cusations should be brought against it by either of them? Certainly when I consider the Nature of them both to∣gether, with the reference they haue to the persons to whose Accusations they are adpropriate, I cannot but vnderstand some speciall Mysterie hidden in it. For first to the Gentile is allotted the Lentisque Tree, whose teare is that vsuall gumme Mastique, so seruicea∣ble vnto them that study wholy for the outward beauty and graciousnesse of the body, as if (with the Epicure) they made the pleasure and contentment thereof their Summum bonum and onely end. And so did the Gentiles lay to the charge of the Christians, that vnder pretence of their religious meetings, they gaue themselues whol∣ly to Anarchy, Sensuality, and carnall liberty, which must breed a reiection of all good Gouernment, Order, and care of the common good. And on the other side, where∣as to the Iew, is adscribed this kinde of Holme-Tree, whose beryes (as I shewed before) yeeld that precious dye (which pertaines onely to the Princes and great states-men of the world to bee attired in). So the accusations which these men brought against the Christians, were (altogether or for the most part) matters of Ambition, Treason, and Innouation, as if they aspired to a worldly Power and Souerainty. And this they charged them with, thereby to make them odious to the Gentiles, in whose hand the state then was. And if either of these hapned to change into the others Arguments, it procee∣ded
of the lyding they bare either towards other against these Christians whom they had set vp for the Common enemie to them both; and not of their owne Apprehensi∣ons. But Daniel [the iudgement of God] steping forth in the mouth of sundry learned men,Iustinus. Aristides. Athenagoras. Tertullian. Vid. Euseb. (which were not∣withstanding but Priuate, and as it were vnder age in order as to the State) by their Discrete and just Apolo∣gies doe make manifest, both to Princes and People, the Innocency, and holinesse of conuersation among the Christi∣ans; and so their cause being heard they are acquieted, and those false Iudges, (the Heathen, and the Iewish Lawes) exautorate as condemned to death, and the Trewth of God in the Christians generally approued, and recei∣ued. The last Circumstance is, of the great reputation that (vpon his judgement giuen) the young Prophet grow∣eth vnto among the people. For after that the Integrity of the Christians was made thoroughly knowne;Sella in Curali struma Nonius sedet, Per con∣sulatum peierat Vatinius. Catul. they increased dayly in number and power; the Doctrine of Christ obtaining the more credit, by meanes that men did looke into the intolerable mischiefes and furies of the impious, when they were in Authority, and the fearefull plagues and punishments sent by God among them, which were Defenders of Idolatrie and Superstiti∣on. And so this Period is continued, from the Determina∣tion of the Mosaical Church (where the former Period ended,) for so long time as the Primitiue Church Christi∣an is in Priuate estate, and not receiued into place of So∣ueraine Gouernment; as is represented both by the Sex and Order of a wife, and the childhood of the Prophet. Namely, the times of the Church as they are by Saint John typed vnder the Ephesine, Smyrnaean, and Pergamine Churches; The visions of the opening of the Seales; of the Queene of Heauen in trauel; and the King of Heauen and earth borne, which was vntil by Publique Edict, the
Crowne was set vpon the Head of Christ, and the King∣domes were acknowlaged the Lords, and the bynding power to pertaine alonely to Christ and to his Lawes. The third Period is of an Jdola∣trous Culture. AN entrance is made into this Passage by a solemne Preface (for preparation) taken from the time, when, it is to be obserued to haue beginning. Namely after the change of the Imperial state. Now in this Preamble, first is to be noted,When King Asly ages was laide with his Fathers Cyrus the Persiā receiued his Kingdome. that Lite∣rally it seemeth a manifest absurdity, vnworthy the spi∣rit of Prophecie, to make mention of Astyages, as per∣taining to the State of Babilon. For albeit, that trew it is, that Cyrus succeeded Astyages in his Kingdome, yet this taken, as I say, according to the letter, is altoge∣ther impertinent to the matters of Babilon. For Astyages was King of the Medes and Persians, and not of Babilon; And the succession of Cyrus vnto him, was in his owne right of inheritance to the Crowne of Media and Persia, for hee was the sonne of Cambyses a Persian, and Maudane the onely daughter of the saide Astyages,Thereof was Cyrus (by the Oracle) called . A Mule, becaus he had a Persi∣an to Father, & a Mede to Mo∣ther. Gen. 10. Gen. 7. who was a Mede by birth: so that hee could by no meanes make title to the Crowne of Babilon, not from the very first dispersion of peoples vnto their seuerall seates. For Babi∣lon came of Cham; But the Medes from Iaphet, and the Persians from Shem, and from these two later (as is shewed) came Cyrus. So that in this translation of the Empire of Babilon to the Medes and Persians, is no rela∣tion to humane right, that Astyages should bee mentio∣ned; But in it, is (first) accomplished the blessing of Noah vpon his two elder sonnes, and his curse vpon the younger; And (secondly,) the burden vpon Babilon from
God in the mouth of his Prophets, personally calling forth Cyrus to the performance of it. Isa. 44. & 45.In the second place therefore, the spiritual sense of this Introduction yeeldeth more Grace. For the name Asty∣ages duely searched into, signifieth One, that not so by Iustice and right as by crafty Policy, and violent Tyran∣ny hath the rule of the People;Astyages. Tyrannus. And such were those, that had the Empire of the world, and of the Kingdomes of the Heathen, in the time of their ignorance concern∣ing Christ; vntil it pleased God to send and set ouer them Cyrus, the Substitute of his Heire (as the name bea∣reth),Cyrus. Pro-haeres. Psa. 2. And Daniel did eate at the Kings table, and was honored aboue al his friends. namely Christian Princes, the Lieutenants of Christ Iesus, the Heire Apparant, and Lord Paraumont of Heauen and Earth; which as they acknowlage to Reigne by God; so they conforme the whole Reason of their Gouernment to the Plat-forme of his Law. Know∣ing that wherein so euer their Lawes are not Regulated by it; their Rules are Tyrannicall and inordinate, how faire a shew soeuer they make otherwise. And in this sort is Daniel taken into presence and conuersation with the King and State in Babilon. Thus then (by this Preface) we are prepared to vnder∣stand, when this Idolatrous Culture is timed to be in Babi∣lon. Namely, after the change of the Empire thereof, from vnder the Curse, to pertaine to the Promise; that is to say, from Heathenish Idolatry to the Confession of the liue∣ing God in Christ; and yet the seate of the Empire conti∣nueth still in Babilon; which because it was not found in the old Babilon: for it was vtterly ruined and desola∣ted, and so continueth euen to this day (in order, as to Impery, as appeareth by that which hath beene saide before). Therefore it must of necessity bee verified in the NEW; and this Idolatry, spoken of it (not as it was before [Ethnique] But) as it is now become Christi∣an, and had sworne Homage and fealty to Christ, in Con∣stantine the Great, the Christian Cyrus of the Empire, and in Lucius our Christian Cyrus of this Land of Albion, and
so of other Kingdomes respectiuely. And thereupon commeth into question the Idolatrous Culture of the Ba∣bilonian, whereof this third Period hath to speake of. In which, the first thing to be considered is,The Babilonians had at Idol cal∣led Bel. of the Jdol Belus or Bel. The Appellatiue [] if it be ta∣ken after the Original vse, for [Rei verae effigies], the shape of a trew thing. (For so it is saide, that the Lacedemonians did carry about [] the Idol of their dead King in a bed well adorned or set forth), And the name Belus for the proper name of the first founder of that Empire; then doth it in Prophetical Language import, that this second Babilon should (notwithstanding their professed conuer∣sion to Gods Lawes, and to Christianity) still hold in ad∣miration, and euen to Idolatry, adore the Heathen Poli∣cy of their founder, (as Belus was to the old Babilon) and his Successors, in their National Discipline. Which how trewly wee finde euen to this day verified among them, is so manifest; as I suppose it would seeme superflous to men of knowlage and vnderstanding, to haue report made vnto them of it, whether in their Lawes Ciuil, Oe∣conomical, or Moral. (For this point and some others, I haue chosen to referre the Reader to the obseruation of particulars, as they are ob∣uious in many that haue formerly written to those purposes, and passe by the instances of them my selfe, least I might both bee thought to haue drawne the waters of other mens Foun∣taines into mine owne Cisterns; and also that the labour selfe might not grow to a greater bulke, then that might bee no way greiuous to the meanest to purchase it.) And these lawes (though not according to their Writ∣ten tables, yet to the Acception of their Brutish spirits) so inuiolable, as were the Lawes of that Dracons, of whom it is saide, hee wrote them not in Inke, but in Bloud. Witnesse the seuerity of them, vpon their owne children, yea, vpon their owne selues, in case of breach of their Lawes, though perforcely committed.
But if the Appellatiue [] bee taken as by a Se∣cundary Intention, for the Representation of a feigned thing;And the King worshipped it, & went dayly to honor it. And this Name [Belus] be drawne from that common Name of Bahal after the Radical Hebrew, or Be∣el the Chaldaean sprout thereof, and vsed for any Lord hauing and exercising Diuine Power and Right of Pro∣priety ouer Persons or things; Then doth it discouer vnto vs, in what steede these New-Babilonians should hold the faith of God in Christ. Namely, with such Reference vn∣to Imaginary Patrons and Coadiutors (if not chiefe Au∣thors) of their vowes and prayers in special to bee obser∣ued, as should bee best for the promotion of the cause of their Politique respect in general. Now what is the multitude of their Canonized Interces∣sors (howsoeuer in shew they serue to set Forth their vo∣luntary Deuotion and Humility,Colos. 2. as to the Particular) o∣ther then (for the trewth of it in General,) like to their owne Countrey North-East winde, the more lofty, the more cloudy?Ater thit expel∣lens mendaci nu∣bila statu— Caeias. So doe they as juglers lift vp their eyes most fixedly to Heauen, thereby to draw the spectators eyes to accompanie theirs, when they the meane while may the more vnperceiuedly bring to passe their Legier-du-maine, and earthly ends. Namely, to get credit where they most purpose to deceiue, and to purchase opinion of loue and frendship, where they seeke soonest and most summary destruction. And that this is to be vnderstood of them, The se∣cond thing to bee considered,In that same place was a great Dragon, which the Babilonians worshipped. (Namely, the trew and liuely presence of this their Imaginary Belus) doth make to appeare, which is (indeede) found to bee a Dragon. And euen so is their Relligion made in shew to bee Hu∣mane, Reasonable, Gratious, Godly, as by the Idol. But is in trewth Bestial, Cruel, Bloudy, Deuillish, as by the Dragon, whereof let none others but their owne Re∣cords be brought forth to witnesse. As in Diuine letters, the Character of the Diuel is a
Dragon; and Idolatry called Deuils worship. 1. Cor. 10. So in Pagan-learning the Hieroglyphique of Witch-craft (which is the Inuocation of Deuils) is a Dragon, (as by the Poet-Nunc ego Medeae vellem fraenare Dracones-) To intimate, that the Man that doth either set vp, or so much as conniue at Idolatry, doth thereby make himselfe fit, both to worke, and to bee wrought vpon, by Witch∣craft. Whereof what plentiful Instances wee haue had in the New-Babilonian Idolatry, I suppose none but the deafe Neighborers of Nilus ouerfalls are ignorant of. Secondly, if there bee any that will needes haue this Idol of Belus, to expresse the whole of their Relligion,There were spent vpon this Idol e∣uery day twelue great measures, &c. to stand in the worship of those trunkish Gods they call vpon, and the Realty of this their worship to bee the ser∣uice of the old Dragon the Deuil; Or thirdly, if any will otherwise haue the Idol Belus to bee that Great Mounta∣bancque their Pope; and the Dragon that Infernal Conclaue of Cardinals, whose onely breath doth enliue that Idol; Or if there bee any other light here in emparted to others of my brethren in the Ministery of the Prophecie of our Lord and Master Iesus Christ; I will not refuse to joyne with them, so farre forth as they make the parts to a∣gree and moue together, as in this they are found to doe. As wee haue hitherto beene enformed touching the forme of this Idolatry: so in the third place wee are taught, what to esteeme of it in respect of the end, and that is ex∣pressed in phrases of speech pertaining to foode, where is to be obserued, that to the dead Idol is offered an vnmea∣surable dayly allowance of meate and drinke; whereas it could not be vnknowne to any Reasonable creature, that the Idol could take none. And on the other side, the Dragon was acknowlaged to liue by foode, and there is none found to bee offered vnto him. And such are the ends of this their double dealing Impiety, according to the saying. Simulata sanctitas duplicata iniquitas.
For the former their Belus or Belly-god, doth set forth their insatiable Couetize, according to the word of their chiefe Minister: Non sufficit Orbis. And the later their Dragonly policy sheweth their vnli∣mited Ambition, whereby they haue in conceipt already swallowed vp Heauen and Hell, and yet are not satisfi∣ed. But God be thanked, it is not found in our Prophecy, that either of them taketh any sustenance. For [Babi∣lon is fallen,Ap. 18. it is fallen,] and that by Daniel, first disco∣uering vnto Christian Princes and Magistrates, the sly conueighances of these Babilonian Impostures. And se∣condly, remouing the preiudicate conceipt of their im∣pregnable force and strength. The former, (Namely, the discouery of their Abu∣ses) is by tracting their footsteps in ashes.Daniele comman∣ded his seruants to bring ashes, and these they strawed, &c. And ashes is that which is left of the dissolued bodies of the dead, whe∣ther Animals or Vegetables. So did the discreete wis∣dome of Relligious Princes, by the aduise of our Daniel (the iudgements of God) search into the ashes, that is to say, into the Records and Memorials left of the Decessors of these Priests of Baal, and the fruites of their workes while they liued; And discouered whereto tended all their Hipocritical shew. Namely, to deuoure the whole earth, which how trew it is in them, let the dead speake, as in all the world ouer,Dan. 7. so more specially in these parts wherein wee liue. For France let the whole Treatise of La Cabinet du Roy de France, &c. bee viewed; And for Germany, the Articles of the Diet at Wormes, Anno. 1521; and at Noriberg, Anno. 1523. be considered. And for Eng∣land, the sundry passages of Fox in his Martyrology, and of Iewel in the defence of his Apology, and diuers others be called to accompt, as the footesteps of those times in ashes, and it will appeare, that the greatest part of the wealth and treasures of these Lands (and consequently of all the King∣domes
in Christendeme) were in the hands of their Pari∣zaus, which (as horseleaches when they are filled with bloud) this Belus and his Dragon did by salting and poudering them, make them to disgorge into their cofers. The later, namely, the ouerweening of their irre∣sistable power, is voided by the vse of a Medicinal Pil ministred to them which, as it is not foode to giue nou∣rishment to their Nature, but Medicine to worke vpon and alter Nature. So there is no hope by faire meanes to preuaile with them (for Improbitas nullo flectitur obsequio) but the Humors abounding in them must bee met with and subdued. As appeareth by the Ingredients. First;Daniel tooke fat, and pitch, and haire, and boyled them together, and made lumps thereof. This did he put into the Dragons mouth, & so the Dragō burst in sunder. all of them are things not suffering Putrefaction easily. Next they are euery one in their kinde, apt to joyne with the other of them; so that while their Natures in themselues remaine vndestroyed, it is very hard to seuer them one from the other. Thirdly, they haue a glutinous and clammy quality, wherby they are hardly remoued from the place or thing, whereto they are once made to cleaue. So that by the Ingredients of these Pils are three princi∣pal vertues commended to vs, by which this venimous Beast is to bee destroyed. For Their Incorruptiblenesse of themselues, doth betoken vnity. The Inseperablenesse either from other, doth designe secrecy. The Vnremoueablenesse from whereto they are apply∣ed, is Constancy and Perseuerance, which the Daniels of Nations in their Councils are to vse for performance of this Rare Cure. Those that wil in a more literal manner haue it vnderstood, that these Materials, being of special vse in Sea seruices (as the Tallow for speedy way,—Natat vncta carina. the Pitch for stanch∣nesse, and the Haire for defence against Orcs and gnawing Wormes,) doe intimate the manner how this Dragon is to bee taken out of the way. Namely, by a Nau∣tical
expedition against the Den of his abode; these doe herein commend vnto vs the vertues of Integrity, Secricy, and Expedition. And so vpon the Mater both these come to one, in Point of Performance. The Accomplishment. THis third Period wee finde to haue beene taken vp with the discouery of the viperous generation of Haere∣sies, Schismes, and Heathenish impieties, in Maters as well of Church as of Comon-wealth, put vpon the Church, vnder the masque of Relligion. All which haue bin either first bred and begun, or otherwise by Protection and Maintenance,See for this Ca∣rion Image of both Churches Acts & Monu∣ments▪ Myste∣ry of Iniquity. Pisgah Euange∣lica. Problemes concerning Antichrist: and a million moe, both Ancient and Moderne. Ap. 2. & 3. seconded and continued by the New Ba∣bilon. And haue beene brought to their Tryal by [Da∣niel] The iudgements of God, in the mouth of faithful Mi∣nisters, and in the hand of zelous Magistrates. As wit∣nesse those Armies of Holy Professors from time to time; and their vnweried spirits, in the encounters and com∣bats they maintained euen to death, against this Babilo∣nian Belus and his Dragon, and their Sectaries concern∣ing their Tenents, so farre forth as they were not Regular, and Demonstrable out of the Arche-type of Gods word and Law. By meanes whereof, the New Babilon is brought into contempt with all Princes and People of vnderstanding; And Belus and his house and his Priests destroyed, by abrogating the bynding power of his lawes; And his Dragon slaine, by remouing the Pagan policy, and by de∣molishing the place of their Antichristian prouocations. And so doth conclude with the destruction of Babilon the later, which is (at the length) to be as Real as was that of the former. Thus this Period of our Prophet doth square with those Reuelations of the Euangelical Diuine, deliuered vnder the types of the Thyatirian and Sardeian Churches, and the
visions of Michael and his Angels,Ap. 12. 13▪ &c. and of the Dragon and his Beasts. The forth Period is of a tumultuous Conspiracie. AS to a turbulent enterprise among the multitude, it is not found, that they vse any precedent consideration, either touching Motiues, Manner of doing, or Ends, but Quâ data porta ruunt — They are cari∣ed headlong, they neither know nor care whither:When the Babilo∣nians heard it, they were won∣derous wroth & gathered them∣selues together against the King So needed not any Preface by way of connexion to bee inter∣serted, betwixt the former Period of those Babilonians sub∣posed wrongs, by demolishing their Idolatry, and this of their vnquenchable thirst of Reuenge; but that the Hint of that, should (according to their Brutish Natures) ne∣cessarily draw on their outragiousnesse in this, to their owne confusion. In which we haue first to consider, that by these Tumul∣tuous Babilonians are designed, what inordinate Conspiracies the Sectaries of the Mystical Babilon would enterprise, now that they are made headlesse, by the conuiction of the dead truncke of their Idol Bel-Pope,Saying deliuer vs Daniel, or else we will destroy thee and thy house. and the Ignis fatuus of their Cardinal Dragons Conclaue. All which their In∣tendments and Conspiracyes are against the Church, vpon pretence of maintaining their old (Antichristian) Rel∣ligion and Policy, which the trew Church of Christ doth indeede mainely oppose. Secondly,In the Den were seuen Lyons. the seuen Lyons are an Heptarchy of an Ido∣latrous people which shall bee by these Antichristian Ba∣bilonians in all places stirred vp,Ier. 51, 17. as brute Beasts exaspera∣ted by famine, to the spoile and deuouring of the Church.
They cast him into the Lyons Den.Thirdly, the sixe daies or weekes-worke of the Pro∣phets imprisonment is, a terme of time in which Profes∣sors of trew Relligion shall (notwithstanding) be giuen o∣uer to be drawne into brutish and prophane courses and waies, and to the compassing of earthly ends, as worldly mind∣ed men doe in the weeke dayes, to the labors and cares of flesh and bloud; without any reference of their workes, to the setting forth of Gods glory. Vpon the seuenth day the King went to bewayle Daniel.But on the seuenth, that is the Sabbath day; name∣ly, so soone as they settle to a serious reformation of themselues in the seruice of God according to his will and ordinance; they shall bee released and rewarded (for that they haue suffered) with double honor, according to the rites of the Sabbatical Culture. Fourthly, the shutting of the Lyons mouths is, the louing care of the Almighty ouer them that feare him and trust in him,When he came nigh the Den hee looked in, & be∣hold Daniel sat in the midst of the Lyons Num. 24. whereby notwithstanding their many Er∣rors and wrenches betwixt God and them; yet are they (by his holy hand holden ouer them) safe amidst those furious people, and that in recompence (whereunto these people are guided by God, as Balaam was to blesse the Israelites) for the inuitation they had by them, to the acknowlagement of Gods glory and power in the first Period. There was in Iewry a Prophet, called Habaq.Fifthly, the foode miraculously brought by the Pro∣phet, may bee taken for the Succors that by Gods Proui∣dence shall come vnexpectedly to the faithful from farre, and very swifty and strongly. Or else it may bee according to a moral vnderstanding, taken for an admonition to the faithful, that they make recourse to the gracious medita∣tions deliuered by that Prophet (literally to the Iewes, but Mystically pertaining to all faithfull Christians in that case), as vnto the spiritual foode of their soules, the word of God therein. Namely, that albeit God doth chastise his Children by the rod of the wicked, as here in the Per∣son of Daniel: yet they should not therefore fall from their hope, as here hee may bee saide to speake vnto Daniel;
But that [the godly and iust shall liue by their faith] and contraryly, the Impious, Oppressors,Habaq. 2. 4. Idolaters and Ty∣rants, shall perish in their sinnes. And this is the summe of that gracious Prophecie, which how fitly wee may per∣ceiue it to appertaine to this state of the Church wherein Daniel is now made to bee; euery good Christian may see. Sixthly, Daniel deliuered,He drew him out of the Den and cast them that were t e cause of his destructi∣on into the Den, and they were deuoured in a moment before his face. and Lyons deuouring the Babilonians, is the turning of those peoples hearts and forces against those Babilonians that had stirred them vp to destroy the trew seruants of God, which when these faithfull ones shall behold, they shall tryumph and giue God the praise. Seuenthly and lastly, one thing is to be added which is not in the Text. For though it be not expressed, yet is it of necessity to bee vnderstood; And that is how our Prophet spent all this time of his Bondage with the Ly∣ons? which out of Decency and Analogy with other Saints of God in like cases as Manasses in the Dungeon,2. Chro. 33. Iona. 2. Dan. 3. 2. Cor. 11. Ionah in the Whailes belly, Paul in the depth of the Sea, and the Young men in the Fornace, (as in our first Period) must be vnderstood, to haue beene first in Reconcilement to God, as touching former delicts (considered in this place, not altogether so much in respect of himselfe, but specially in the Person of his Nation; as hee doth also elsewhere). Secondly,Dan. 9. in thanksgiuing for his present preseruation, and Petition of reliefe and comfort to bee continued; And thirdly, in Prophetical exultation vpon stedfast assurance, that hee shall be in good time deliue∣red, and his Enemies taken in the Pit they haue made for others. And many meditations doe wee finde of this kinde, both in the booke of the Psalmes, and o∣therwhere,Psa. 3. & 4. dispersed through the whole volume of the Holy Records.
The Accomplishment. VVHo so will enter into an accurate and discrete search of the proceedings of these Babilonians, and compare their practises of these daies with thoe of for∣mer times; shal easily finde, how tenderly they take the late Entryes made vpon the freehold of their Conclaue, as well in word as in writing,King Iames in his Praemonito∣ry Epistle, &c. Novus homo. by sundry worthy Agents in the cause of the Church. Specially a New man, which hath ex professo, debated and proued out of their owne mouths euen by the Rules and Lawes of that their Conclaue, that there is not now, nor for long time past since, hath beene any Regularly made neither Pope nor Cardinal; wherefore from thence forth they haue not dealt (as they were wont before) by a shew of Legal proceedings, as by Excomunications, Interdicts, Jndulgences, Dispensati∣ons, and such like formalities. But now they plainly declare themselues by Assasinats, Leagues, Proscripti∣ons, Inuasions, Breaches of promise and faith, Treasons v∣niuersal and particular,Vid. Cancel. His∣pan. as is discouered by their owne letters and Remonstrances one to another, which they hoped should neuer haue come to light in Testimony a∣gainst them. Deut. 29.17. O King bee not deceiued for this is but clay with∣in, and brasse without, and did neuer eate oughtAnd hereby they shew what reckoning they make and euer did, of their Dunguy Belas. Namely, no more then according to the matter whereof hee is made, [Ne∣hustan, a piece of brasse, or a lumpe of clay]. But the Dra∣gon in the Cage is that, which so long as they could beare the world in hand, of the life and strength of it, they held themselues safe enough. And now at length, they proclayme fire and sword against Daniel and all the Kings and Princes that call him to counsel against their Heath∣enish Idolatry and Dragonly Policy,The King is be∣come a w, for he hath destroy∣ed Bel, &c. and they are to them, Iewes, and worse, that presume to moue or to bee seene in it.
Wherefore they haue stirred vp an Heptarchy of Nati∣ons,Classicum Belli sacri. that is to say, a full and competent power of sundry Kingdomes (which as Lyons kept in dennes, are at their command) to set vpon Daniel and his followers, the sincere Professors of Gods trewth, who seeme to bee thereby vtterly forsaken by all their friends, and assailed on all sides by Aduersaries, in such ineuitable distresse (as farre as man may discerne by the eye of flesh and bloud) as if they were in a dungeon, among deuou∣ring Beasts. But they that behold them with spiritual eyes,Period. 1. doe contrarily see them as safe as they were before in the fornace. Those that out of much curiosity wil not be contented with the vnderstanding of this Number of Seuen, after the for me of Prophetical speech (wherein a Definite Number is vsu∣ally put for an Indefinite, as it is found in many places of the Canon of Holy writs, both Old and New) seeme to presse a Nominal designation of them. And so reckon France, Spaine, the Empire, Italy, Bohemia, and Poland, for sixe of them. In some of which may bee perhaps some doubt. But for the seuenth, I cannot, neither doe I thinke any other will make doubt of. And that is, A home party in the bosome of the Church, and of all them of the trew Rel∣ligion, which must needes bee the most dangerous, by how much the greatnesse thereof is not possibly to bee discouered. By this wee may perceiue, what is to be exspected by the trew Professors, from all those that are at the Babilo∣nians becke (specially the last of the seuen named Lyons). The home par∣ty. Let them otherwise make what shew they will of society and common Countrey, their bridle is the onely power of God, without any disposition to peace in any of them. And it is a very dangerous Security in men, to set so light as they doe of that Tenent of theirs [How that it is a prin∣cipal case of conscience in them,Fides non habē∣da cū Haereticis. not to keepe faith with Here∣tiques.] For so consequently it is to them a meritorious worke to purchase credit with the faithful, that so they may bee deceiued, and by their credulity vtterly cut off
by these Infidels. Yea, and a sinne inexpiable, for them to enter into any such faith of league and society with the trew Professors, which they doe not before hand purpose and practise to breake when soeuer they shall see their best time to doe most mischiefe thereby: so that it is lesse perilous to trust a Viper in the bosome, then these men vpon any termes. For that is felt at his first wound∣ing, and so may the venime bee encountred and expel∣led. But these are not felt to sting, till the wound bee past recouery. Howbeit for all this God hath not forsaken his people; but so soone as they turne and call to him, he will heare them,Ps. 46. Habaqquq. Affectionately embraceing. and that right early; as hee doth our Prophet in the den, by the reliefe of Habaqquq, that is to say, such as shall louingly embrace them in the acknowlagement of the trewth they professe. Specially those old Confes∣sors the Jewes,Iehudah: Confessing or raysing. who with new prayses in their mouthes, that is to say, by their conuersion vnto Christ their Messi∣ah, shall either come themselues with that irresistible speed, and vnperceiued secrecy, as if they were borne in the Aire,gelus. messenger or ssage. by Angels, aboue the reach of mans sight; Or else (as the name of Angel doth import) by message of comfort from them, no lesse speedy then secret, of their mature assistance and confederacy. But when shall this bee (say some)? vnto whom it is answered, that it shall be so soone as we begin to hunger and thirst after righteousnesse, as Daniel is to be vnderstood to doe for natural foode, according to the long time of his stay in the Den. Yea, and that by the special worke of God, who other∣wise could as wel haue preserued him, without feeling hunger, as hee did Moses in the Mount, and Elijah in his journey. 34. & 34. g. 19. But this was disposed by God after this manner, to the end, it might bee to the Prophet a cor∣poral and natural signe incurring into the senses for the strengthening of his faith, as the message of the conuer∣sion of the Iewes shall be to the true Professors of Christ, in the middest of their Terrors.
And herevpon is it, that no sooner doth hee pray, but euen before the prayer is past his lippes,Isa. 38. Act. 10. hee (as Heze∣kiah and Cornelius) receiueth answer of grace, and graunt of his demand, by an Angelical message in the hand of a louing and louely Prophet; namely, Hebrewe conuerts confessing Christ. Which tidings brought shall amaze the Babilonians,2. Reg. 19. Ap. 17. as the tidings of the approach of the Aethiopians did Senna∣cherib and shall turne the hearts of these Nations against the Babilonians (as the flames were turned against the fewellers in the first Period, and as the Beasts, vnto whom the Christians were cast forth to be deuoured in the second Period,Euseb. Isa. 66. were turned against those that prouoked them) and shall destroy them; the Saints of God looking on and reioycing. Thus in this Period is contained the warres of Gog and Magog, and the vision of the New Ierusalem,Ap. 20. Ap. 21. Ap. 3. and of the Philadelphian and Laodiecian Churches. That is to say, the distresses of the Church by an Anarchical Apostacy, and the causes thereof, with the time of the endurance and meanes of deliuery; the calling and conuersion of the Iewes, and their vnion vnto the trew Professors of Christ, whereby shall be purchased Triumphant daies. Namely,Num. 28. Vpon the seuenth day the King went to bewayle Daniel. the double sacrifice due to the Sabbath, which is the sacri∣fice of both Iew and Gentile, with one heart and mouth praysing God. And this Sabbath neuer did the Church yet enjoy, but at length must, for a preparation to the end. Which time hasten ô Lord, thou which art the trew and Aeternal High Priest, in whom thy Church doth cele∣brate a perpetual Sabbath, offering themselues vp a Holy,Rom. 12. Liuely, and Gracious Sacrifice, by their (not Brutish but) Reasonable and Intelligent seruice of God. Euen so Lord IESV, come quickly. Amen.
The first Corollary. IN the meane space; the Light that this Parabolical Prophecie doth illuminate vs with, is: That all the members of the Church of God generally, and euery one seuerally bee hereby informed to a due conside∣ration of the state, wherein they presently stand; either for their spirit of their inmost conscience, or for the priuate of their worldly state, or for the publique of the politique society, wherein they liue. And that they doe accor∣dingly dispose of themselues. First, whether suffering  in the fornace of Gods tryals, that they abide constant, rather to dye then to fall from their hope. Secondly,  whether brought into vndeserued Obloquy, that they pacify themselues out of the testimony of a cleere conscience.  Thirdly, whether in Authority, that in the first place, they aduance the honor of God, that hath aduanced them vnto honor aboue others. Or lastly, whether in the  midst of a Brute-hearted generation, that they bee not a∣ny way dismayed, but cheere themselues, in assurance, that the power of their Aduersaries is limited, and shall not bee able to stretch it selfe farther, then shall bee for the honour of God, and good of his faithfull seruants. Re∣membring this withal, that so long as wee giue our selues ouer to the Pursuite of our priuate ends, so long shall wee bee left to the danger of these our Brutish Enemies. But so soone as the Day-starre of the Lords Sabbath shall arise in our Hearts, and wee by the conduct thereof, seeke his face, leaueing our owne selfe wranglings:Psa 148. Isa. 60. Ap. 21. The whole creature shall ioyne with vs vnto a perfect celebration thereof. And of that Sabbath day shall be no Sun-set: for Christ our righteousnesse shall euer more and more lighten vs vnto Triumph,1. Cor. 15. and treading downe of our Enemies, Death, and all, vnder our feete, in him and by him. Amen.
But — Paulo maiora. Here is in this Quadripartite Parable described vnto vs a fourefold state of the man in Christ. The first is the state of Nature,Natural Propa∣gation. originally deriued vn∣to him from his Parents; touching which, are the the words of the Prophet: In iniquity was I formed, and conceiued in sin. Out of the remembrance whereof,Psal. 51. so long as hee beholdeth himselfe as in that state,The fyary for∣nace. he find∣eth nothing in himselfe but fights (of his owne guilty conscience) within, and feares (of the whole Creature cal∣ling for Iustice against the Man for his abuse of them) with∣out; Thus euery where bearing about in the body, the dying of our Lord Iesus Christ by his afflicted spirit.2 Cor. 4. Onely the zeale of his inward LOVE, the feruor whereof is farre more mightie, then to be inuaded by outward and Elementish considerations, maketh him a freshure, as vnto these young men in the midst of the flammes in the first Period. The second is,Adoption and Spiritual Rege∣ration. the state of his Adoption and Childhood in Christ through Grace. By the meanes whereof, euen in his greatest weakenesse, hee saluteth (as it were a farre of) the louely Reuelations of God vnto him, in such liberal manner as hee is ouercome, and in feare to bee puffed vp by them. And therefore it is good for him,The false Iudges. yet to indure the buffetings of Satan,2 Cor. 12. whereby the Testi∣mony is sealed vnto him, that the grace of Christ is suffi∣cient for him, as the Chast wife doth in the second Period. The third is,Man-hood and Strength. his full growth and strength of manhood in Christ, whereby hee is able with all Saints to com∣prehend, what is the bredth, length, depth and height:Eph. 3. and to know the loue of Christ, which passeth all knowlage. And therefore from the former Period, of being able to Suffer, hee is now growne to bee able to Doe. Namely, to cast downe (Belus) Imaginations,2 Cor. 10. and euery high thing that exalteth it selfe against the knowlage of God, and to bring into captiuity (the Dragon, and) euery thought to the obedience of Christ. So that by times,
euen at his first comming into the entertainment of Cyrus (Christ risen,Belus and his Dragon. ascended, and reigning in him) hee taketh away all the vngodly out of the Land, and doth cut of all the wicked doers from the City of the Lord.Psal. 101. And this Citie, is not onely his outward ranke in the world: but the inward man of him, as hee is the Temple of the Holy Ghost, and those wicked ones are the many bayts, suggestions, excesses, and wants, as well within him, as round about him. In all which, hee now can say with the Apostle,Phil. 4. I can doe all things by him that strength∣neth mee, as wee finde it the part of all Daniels to doe, in the third Period. Perfection.The fourth is, the glory of the mans consumation. By the which [although hee doe yet walke in the flesh (assayled on euery side with the spurres thereof, as with so many Lyons),2 Cor. 10. notwithstanding [hee doth not warre after the flesh] that hee should stand in feare of them,The Den of Lyons or bee an∣noyed by them, because hee liueth in Christ. And for as much as hee is able in the brightnesse of a good conscience, to beare witnesse to himselfe with the Apo∣stle [I haue kept the faith;]2 Tim 4. therefore doth hee conclude, that [neither tribulation,Rom. 8. nor distresse, nor persecution, nor famine, nor nakednesse, nor peril, nor sword, shall seperate betwixt Christ and him.] For in all these, wee are more then conquerors, as wee finde Daniel amidst the Lyons, in the fourth Period. And euen this very Mysterie is it, that a right learned and vertuousMr. Edmund Spencer. The great con∣tentment I some∣times enioyed by his Sweete socie∣ty, suffereth not this to passe me, without Respect∣iue mention of so trew a friend. Sine nomine Cor∣pus. The young men in the fyar. Gentleman hath so liuely decyphered, in his Legend of the Patron of trew holinesse, the Knight of the Red-Crosse; whereby, and by the rest of those his louely Raptures, hee hath justly purchased the Lawrel of honorable memory, while the Pilgrimage of those his wor∣thies are to indure. Hee there hath brought forth our Noble Saint George; at the first onely in the state of a Swayne, before his Glo∣rious Queene cast downe on the ground [Vncouth, vnkest] Vnacknowne, vncared off as a dead trunke, and onely fit for the fire (as in our first Period).
But when hee had arrayed himselfe in the Armor of his Dying Lord, his presence is then become Gracious,The Chast wife accused and fre∣ed. and his Person promising great things [as one for sad in∣counters fit].Belus and his Priests suppres∣sed. Which hee first Passiuely (as in our second Period), and after Actiuely (as in our third Period) doth so victoriously passe through and finish; that at the length (as in our fourth Period,) hee is become altoge∣ther Impassible,Daniel amids the Lyons vntouch∣ed. whether of Assalts of the fraylety of Na∣ture within, or Affronts of Aduersaries without, as be∣ing fully possessed of that Kingdome, against which there is none to stand vp. The second Corollary. BY that which hath beene saide, is made manifest, how exactly these Apocryphal Prophecies of Daniel doe agree. First, with the Prophecies,Sacra Scriptura dum narrat gest∣um, trodit Myst∣erium. Para∣bles, and Prophetical Histories of the Canonical Scriptures. Secondly, with the gracious Speculations and Obserua∣tions of the Religiously learned. Thirdly, with the Accomplishments of them all from time to time. And so (according to the Law, that In the mouth of two or three witnesses the trewth be stablished) how worthily they haue to chalenge to themselues,Deut. 19.5. their ancient place and right. Namely, if not to goe [promi∣scuè] with the Sacred Scriptures, as they formerly did; yet to hold their attendance on them inseperable, aboue all other writings whatsoeuer. And how dangerously any shall presume to diuorce them, which haue beene found yoaked and drawing together, so many ages of the Church of God, inconstant and vn-interrupted succession. Where∣by their coupling together, may be judged to haue beene the worke of God, and not of man. But for farther confirmation of a thing already so ma∣nifest, let vs adde [ex abundanti] one Testimony more,
whether as necessary as the former, I forbeare to say, cer∣tainely no lesse Gracious. The wonderfull Light (I meane) exhibited vnto vs from Heauen by the late Prodigious Comete, according to the seueral differences to bee considered in it. Namely, 1. The Influence of its Compound receiued from the Aethe∣real bodyes. 2. The peculiar motion allotted vnto it. 3. The large progresse ouer the heads of so many Nations. 4. The sundry constellations it visited in progresse. 5. The different Extention of his trayne. 6. The great distance of it from this Habitable of Mortality. 7. Lastly, the place of Exspiring and Disparition. In all which it hath by Diuine Characters and Lynes drawne in the Heauens (that all Mortals might by them be made Inexcusable) preached vnto vs, the Approach and Accomplishment of those workes of the Creators proui∣dence, which were so long before ordained and reuealed, that they should bee performed in their due time. To the worldlings, and to them that put their trust and con∣tent in the vncertaintie of Transitory things, Dismal and Desolatory, according to the word of God by his Prophet, [They shall say to the Mountaines couer vs, and to the Hills, fall vpon vs.] But to the trewly faithfull, and those that haue in Christ, crucified themselues to the world, full of ioy and comfort, according to the word of their Lord, [when these things begin to come to passe;Luc. 22. then looke vp, and lift vp your heads; for your Redemption draweth nigh. For proofe whereof, let vs make a Superficial Essay of some few. Ara, Lar. The Original of it, esteemed neere to the Constellation of [The Altar,] and as it were bred out of the smoake ther∣of; As it seemeth to declare that the worldlings vnder pretense of Relligion did put themselues into Secret Combi∣nations and in manner of Relligious vowes for the Prosecuti∣on of their pernicious calumnies, and vniust Persecutions against their Enemies the Faithfull now more then euer:Sap. 2.12.
So in like manner it putteth the Godly in mind of the Glo∣rious Altar from vnder which the Soules of the Blessed Martyrs cal for vengeance;Ap. 6. and the Gratious answere they receiue for Confirmation of vs that are left behind. The Influence it receiued from the Planetary Lights in the Generation of it as in the Euil,Oppos. with  Coniunction with, ♂ and ☿. it sheweth their ouer-growne Frowardnesse, Infidelity, and Rashnesse: So in the Pious it portendeth their Constancy, Princely Patience, Martiall valor and boldnesse, and Ingenious Compasses for their discreete and Conuenient Ends. The Lustre it gathered at the first by Reflection on Cauda Pauonis as in a Mirraur sheweth that notwithstanding the Pretext of Holinesse the Hypocrites make:Cauda Pauonis. yet it is wholy to aduance the Painted plumes of some whether Peacocke or Austriche, that display their gay fethers more for vaine shew then for any gratious vse they put them to. The Constellations is passeth through;Lupus and ♏. First Wolfe and Scorpion, in the Euil is signe of their Rabide and veni∣mouse Implacability against the Saints; But in the Good their Inward Ardor in Piety towards their Godly Generati∣on as Iacob fortelleth of his Louely Son the Wolfe Beniamin;Gen 44. and their outward help from God against their Enemies, as was vnto the Israelites amids fiery Serpents, Scorpions,Deut. 8.15. and drought in the wildernesse. The not appearing of the Comet during his being vn∣vnder the Constellation of Libra (because he was then vn∣der the beames of the Sun) doth touching the Euil,In ♎ sub radijs ☉ is. testi∣fy the Summons of them to declare, and a Compulsion of them to speake openly their Designes, by Legall Proceed∣ings, Ambassyes, Treatyes, &c.The trayne of it towards ♍. which (by the pro∣jection of his Trayne to the Characterisme of Virgo) are then manifested to be intended against the Church [eo nomine] as it is the flocke of Christ:☉ is motus a ♏ in ♐. Motus Cometae a ♏ in ♎ & inde ♍ versus. On the other side to the Good it sheweth that howsoeuer by the Sunnes going forward (according to the Order of the Signes) in the Zodiaque, and the Comets Retrogradation (against the Order of the
Signes (God doth seeme to leaue the wicked to their Counsels, with free liberty to pursue them; yet doth he neuerthelesse impose a Seuere restreint of their Malice by Order of Iustice, that it shall not bring any damage to his Spouse the Mayden-Mother Queene his Church. Serpens.Herevpon the Comete by his Northward way is carri∣ed to the Serpent by which he is stung and pricked forward (for then the Comete is seene in the Mornings▪ and his Motion is become most swift) shewing that the Euil find∣ing their Projects frustrate in manner as is aboue shewed, should change their priuy Conspiracies into open Hostilities, which they should pursue in most violent manner, & by the greatest strength they were able to make or procure: But to the Godly it sheweth that by meanes of the Noble Serpent [Dan the Iudge] the more Expedition and Strength their Enemies should vse,Gen. 44. the sooner should they be dissolued and vanish by the Chariot and Horse-men of Israel,2 Reg. 13. as the Comet in his comming to Bootes and the Rest of those Polar Characters is seene to languish:Arctophilax &c. And so by a slower Motion and through a Part of the Heauens not honoured with Constellations (as through a Desert of Ob∣scuritie)Vrsa maior &c. to hide the head. Cauda Draconis.Lastly, the Comet drawing to the taile of the Dragon is by the Light of the New Moone (then gathering strength) wholy darkned,Nouilunium. his body dispersed, and his fire quenched. Shewing that howeuer the Euil doe yet a third time seeke to gather more new poyson from the Old Dragon (and the Purple Harlot his Rider the founder of all their Practises) yet it shall not be her Nasty skirts that shall serue to releiue or shelter them, but by the Brightnesse of the Church, comming forth as a Bride out of her Chamber,Cant. 6. Gratious as the Morning, faire as the Moone, pure as the Sun, and terrible as the Banners of Ma∣chanaijm (Men and Angels,Gen. 32. or Angelical Men) they shal be vtterly frustrate and end in a Smoke and Stench as the Comete then did.
These few (as I said) haue I for an Essay thought good to touch vpon: which how trew they haue beene vnto vs thus farre, and how fully they doe square with the Captiuity of our Prophet in his last Period I neede not en∣large. As also that (no lesse in euery ones Particular then as before in the Generall) it is in the faculty of Men to make vse hereof (if they list) to their Priuate counsels. Neither let any vnderprise these as no more then volun∣tary Applications: For if they thinke that eyther the Names first allotted to these Constellations were [Sine Nu∣mine] things wherein God had not a Speciall hand; Or that they were not so Distributed into Characters by Diuine Inspiration; Or lastly, that these Caelestial Appa∣ritions haue not Reference nor Enterview with this Habi∣table Orbe: Let all such vnderstand, that how much so euer knowlage whether of Humane or Diuine Letters they haue scraped vp together: They haue not yet so much as by sight aloofe saluted the threshold of Trew wise∣domes Sanctuary.Pro. 9. The Conclusion. NOw therefore for Conclusion, let euery one as he ten∣dreth his trew & Aeternal good, settle himselfe thrif∣tily & carefully to search into his owne heart, & that with∣out wearinesse or Intermission, vntil he finde in which of these 4. wayes of our Prophets Parables he standeth, & ac∣cordingly shape his Course. With this rest to be laid vp, that if in order as to the Church, he finde not the world vn∣to him as in one of these States; or that in order as to himselfe, he beare not himselfe as by these precedents he is informed; The same man hath no comfort out of this Prophecy, nor out of any other that doth Analogize with it. And such are the scorners of these times, whom the God of this world hath so blinded, that they begin to say a∣gaine
as some did of old [where is ] Things are to day as they were yester  shalbe to morrow as they are to day. If we shal be sa∣ued we shal be saued, let vs liue as we list, and so moch at Reproofe and hate the Reproouer. Oh that there were not so many of them in these dayes, which turne the sweetest juices of Wit, Learninge, Tongues, Fauor, Strength, Honor, Wealth, Place, yea Relligion and all into the floaty Gall of vpbraiding and contemning others. As I surmise there wil not be wan∣ting some that wil doe of this my Labour: vnto whom (if any be) I reply none otherwise then thus; That there are yet other things enfolded in this Prophecy per∣teining to the Influence of a Different Climat,Mundus alter & idem. which by the Rule of Prophetical wisedome; and Sacred Sobriety in Spiritual matters are not to be entrusted to Paper and Enke;1 Ioh. 13. and therefore haue I in them followed (I hope vpon good warrant) the Apostles Rule of Reseruation. Now my request to these men is, that they first please to make Essayes of their owne Illuminations vnto the Disco∣uery of those things. Which if they atteine vnto, it shal be to me a double comfort that I shal enioy their brotherly concurrence, whereby more hopefully then by my sin∣gle strength may be endeauoured the shortning of those Dayes which our Sauiour hath declared out of his incom∣prehensible loue and care ouer his Elect to be expedient that they be shortened vnto which worke euery good Christian is bound to conspire. And herein I doe in the bowells of Christ Iesus desire these my deere brethren, that laying aside al bitter∣nesse and superfluity of Malice they wil joyne with me; That so in them and in me and in al that loue the comming of our Lord may be heard the Melodious Harmony of the Angels Singing, GLORY TO GOD IN THE HIGHEST.
