22604 99846457 11426
HEre Folowythe dyuers Balettys and dyties sola∣cyous deuysyd by Master Skel∣ton Laureat. Arboris omne ge¦nus viridi conce∣dite lauro.
¶with lullay lullay lyke a chylde. Thou slepyst to long thou art begylde. My darlyng dere my daysy floure. Let me quod he ly in your lap. Ly styll quod she my paramoure. Ly stll hardely & take a nap. hys hed was heuy such was his hap. All drowsy dremyng dround in slepe. That of hys loue he toke no kepe. with hey lullay. &c. ¶with ba ba ba & bas bas bas. She cheryshed hym both cheke and chyn. That he wyst neuer where he was. he had forgoten all dedely syn. he wantyd wyther loue to wyn. he trusted her payment & lost all hys pray. She left hym slepyng and stale away. wyth hey lullay. &c. ¶The ryuers rowth the waters wan. She sparyd not to wete her fete. She wadyd ouer she found a man. That halsyd her hartely and kyst her swete. Thus after her cold she cought a hete. My lefe she sayd rowtyth in hys bed. I wys he hath an heuy hed. wyth hey lullay. &c.
¶what dremyst thou drunchard drousy pate. Thy lust & lykyng is from the gone. Thou blynkerd blowboll thon wakyst to late. Behold thou lyeste luggard alone. well may thou sygh well may thou grone. To dele wyth her so cowardly. I wys powle hachet she bleryd thyne I. Qd skelton Laureate ∴
THe aūciēt acquaītāce madā betwen vs twayn The famylyaryte the formar dalyaunce. Causyth me that I can not my self refrayne: But that I must wryte for my plesaunt pastaunce. Remembryng your passyng goodly countenaunce. your goodly port your bewteous visage. ye may be countyd comfort of all corage. ¶Of all your feturs fauorable to make tru discripciō I am insuffycyent to make such enterpryse. For thus dare I say without tradiccyon. That dame menolope was neuer half so wyse. yet so it is that a rumer begynnyth for to ryse. How in good horsmen ye set your hole delyght. And haue forgoten your old trew louyng knyght. ¶wyth bound & rebound bounsyngly take vp. Hys Ientyll curtoyt and set nowght by small naggys. Sur vp at the hynder gyrth with gup morell gup. with Iayst ye Ienet of spayne for your tayll waggys ye cast all your corage vppon such courtly haggys. Haue in sergeaūt ferrour myne horse behynde is bare. He rydyth well the horse but he rydyth better ye mare. ¶ware ware the mare wynsyth wyth her wanton hele. She kykyth with her kalkyns & keylyth with a clench. She goyth wyde behynde & hewyth neuer a dele. ware gallyng in the widders ware of that wrenche. It is perlous for a horseman to dyg in the trenche. Thys greuyth your husbād that ryght Iētyll knyght. And so with youre seruantys he fersly doth fyght.
¶So fersly he fytyth hys mynde is so fell. yt he dryuyth thē doune with dyntys on ther day ach. He bresyth theyr braynpānys & makyth thē to swell. Theyre browys all to brokyn such clappys they cach. whose Ialawsy malycyous makyth thē to lepe ye hach. by theyr conusaūce knowīg how they serue a wilypy Ask all your neybours whether that Ily. ¶It can be no counsell yt is cryed at the cros For your Ientyll husband sorowfull am I. how be is he is not furst hath had a los. Aduertysyng you madame to warke more secretly. Let not all the world make an owt cry. Play fayre play madame & loke ye play clene. Or ells with gret shame your game wylbe sene. Qd Skelton Laureat.
Knolege Aquayntāce resort fauour with grace Delyte / desyre / respyte / wyth lyberte. Coage wyth lust conuenient tyme & space. Dysdayns / dystres / exylyd cruelte. wordys well set with good habylyte. Demure demenaunce womanly of porte. Transendyng plesure surmountyng all dysporte. ¶Allectuary arrectyd to redres. These feuerous axys the dedely wo & payne. Of thoughtfull hertys plungyd in dystres. Refresshyng myndys the aprell shoure of rayne. Condute of comforte and well most souerayne. herber enverduryd contynuall fressh & grene. Of lusty somer the passyng goodly quene. ¶The Topas rych and precyouse in vertew. your ruddys wyth ruddy rubys may compare. Saphyre of sadnes enuayned wyth Indy blew. The pullyshed perle youre whytenes doth declare. Dyamand poyntyd to rase oute hartly care.. Geyne surfetous suspecte the Emeraud comēdable. Relucent Smaragd Obiecte Imcomperable. ¶Encleryd myrroure and perspectyue most bryght. Illumynyd wyth feturys far passyng my reporte. Radyent Esperus star of the clowdy nyght. Lode star to lyght these louers to theyr porte. Gayne dangerous stormys theyr anker of supporte. Theyr sayll of solace most comfortably clad. whych to behold makyth heuy hartys glad.
¶Remorse haue I of youre most goodlyhod Of youre behauoure curtes & benynge. Of your bownte & of youre womanhod. which makyth my hart oft to lepe & sprynge. And to remember many a praty thynge. But absens alas wyth tremelyng fere & drede. Abashyth me albe it I haue no nede. ¶you I assure absens is my fo. My dedely wo my paynfull heuynes. And if ye lyst to know the cause why so. Open myne hart beholde my mynde expres. I wold ye coud / then shuld ye se mastres how there nys thynge that I couet so fayne. As to enbrace you in myne armys wayne. ¶Nothynge yerthly to me more desyrous. Than to beholde youre bewteouse countenaunce. But hatefull Absens to me so enuyous. Though thou withdraw me frō her by long dystaūce. yet shall she neuer oute of remembraunce. For I haue grauyd her wythin the secret wall. Of my trew hart to loue her best of all. Qd Skelton. Laure∣at. Cuncta licet cecidisse putas discrimina rerum Et prius incerta  tibi certa manent
Consiliis usure meis tamen aspice caute Subdola non fallat te dea fraude sua Sepe solet placido mortales fallere vultu. Et cute sub placida tabida sepe dolent. Ut quando secura putas & cuncta serenas. Anguis sub viridi gramine sepe latet. ¶Though ye suppose all Ieperdys ar paste. And all is done that ye lokyd for before. ware yet I rede you of fortunes dowble cast. For one fals poynt she is wont to kepe in store. And vnder the fell oft festerd is the sore That when ye thynke all daunger for to pas. ware of the lesard lyeth lurkyng in the gras. Qd Skelton laureat. GO pytyous hart rasyd with dedly wo. Persyd with payn bleding with wōd smart Bewayle thy fortune with vaynys wā & blo. O fortune vnfrendly fortune vnkynde thow art. To be so cruell & so ouerthwart. To suffer me so carefull to endure. That wher I loue best I dare not dyscure. ¶One ther is & euer one shalbe. For whose sake my hart is sore dyseasyd. For whose loue welcom dysease to me. I am content so all partys be pleasyd. yet & God wold I wold my payne  easyd. But fortune enforsyth me so carefully to endure. That where I loue best I dare not dyscure∴ ¶Skeltō laureat at ye instāce of a nobyll Lady.
Cum privilegio.
