22919.9 38160721 29308
A pleasant new Song, betwixt The Saylor and is Loue. to the tune of Dulcina. WHat doth aile my Loue, so sadly in such heauy dumps to stand: Doth she grieue or take vnkindly, that I am so néere at hand? Or doth she vow, She will not know▪ Nor speake to me when I doe come: If that be so, way Ile goe, first kisse and bid me welcome home. Had I euer thée forsaken, putting thée out of my minde, Thou then mightst haue iustly spoken that I was to thee vnkind. Or should I take Some other make, Then mightst thou haue iust cause to mourne But let me die Before that I, doe so: then bid me welcome home. Sooner shall the grasse leaue growing, from the hare the hound shall run, usbandmen shall leaue their sowing, flouds shall run the land vpon, The fish shall flye. The Sea run dry, The birds no more shall sing but mourne Ete I of thée Unmindfull be, then kisse and bid me welcome home. Smile on me, be not offended, pardon grant for my amisse: Let thy fauour so be friend me, as to seale it with a kisse: To me, I sweare, Thou art so deare, That for thy sake Ile fancy none, Then doe not frowne, But sit thee downe, Sweet, kisse and bid me welcome home. If thou hast proued chast Diana, since from thée I did depart. I as constant haue béene to thee, for on thée fixt was my heart: No not for she Iupiter sée, Dinae in her tower alone. Should me intice, No Ile be nice, then kisse and bid me welcome home. No nor Venus Cupids mother, nor the fairest wife of Ioue, Should Lucretia or some other, séeke by gifts to win my loue, Should Hellen faire, To me repaire, And vnto me for loue make mone, Yet none of these My minde shall please, then kisse, and bid me welcome home
The second part. To the same tune. FRom thy sight though I was banisht yt I alwayes was to thée, Far more kinde then was Vlysses, to his chaste Penelope: For why away He once did stay Ten yeares, and left her all alone. But I from thée, Haue not béene thrée, Sweet kisse and bid me welcome him. Come swéet heart come sit downe by me, and let thy lap my pillow me. While swéet sléepe my minde beguileth, all my dreams shall be on thee. I pray thee stay, Steale not away, Let lullaby be all my song: With kisses swéet, Lull mee asleepe, and say sweet heart thou'rt welcome home, The womans answer. I Haue beene sad to see how from me, thou so long away didst stay, Yet now I more reioyce to see thee, happily ariu'd this day. Thou from our shore Shalt goe no more, To wander thus abroad alone: But thou shalt stay With me alway, for here's my hand, thou'rt welcome home. I haue prou'd Diana to the, since from me thou wentst away, I haue had suters well-nigh twenty, and much adoe had for to stay: But I denyed, When they reply'd, And sent them all away in scorne: For I had sworne, To liue forlorne, vntill that I see thee come home. Seeing thou art home ariued, thou shalt not goe away in haste, But louingly come sit downe by me, let thine armes embrace my wast: Farewell annoy, Welcome my ioy, Now lullaby is all my song, For now my heart, Sings loath to part, then kisse, sweet-heart, thou'rt welcome home Since sweet heart thou dost befriend me thus to take me to thy loue, Neuer more will I offend thee, but will euer constant proue. Thou hast my heart, Not to depart, But euer constant to remaine: And thou hast mine, And I haue thine, then let vs kisse and welcome home▪ FINIS. Printed at London for Iohn Grismond.
