25964 S102217 99838014 2371
WOODALLS VIATICVM: The path-way to the Surgions Chest. CONTAINING CHIRVRGICALL INSTRVCTIONS For the yonger sort of Surgions now imployed in the service of His MAIESTIE for the inten∣ded reliefe of ROCHELL. And Composed by Iohn Woodall, one of the present Masters or Governors of the Com∣panie of Barber Surgions LONDON. Intended chiefly for the better Curing of Wounds made by Gun-shott. Published by Authoritie: Omnia Terrenae per vices sunt Alienae. August 11. 1628. Imprinted at London. 1628.
¶ THE PREFACE. LOving Brethren, for as much as these times doe rather menace VVarre then Peace, men of our calling should be readie ad omne quare, for our King and Country. Wee and our Country haue beene long happy in peace, and now it seemes the times presage the con∣trary. Wherefore from the wise heathen Phi∣losopher, let vs all learne as followeth, Iam tua res agitur pare cum proximus ardet. I desire in briefe, to let you know, that our Company were commanded by Authoritie, to provide six∣teene of the best Surgions at this time to be had for his Majesties speciall service, such as are men most expert in the healing of wounds made with Gun-shott. And generally, for the most part, I know many of vs that would be esteemed good Surgions, being put to it, at the
first will be somewhat to seeke therein, how much more then our young men. Where∣fore the matter of providing, preparing, and fitting his Majesties service, being by his Highnes referred to our Corporation. And our Company having for the time deputed my selfe to the worke. I am tyed in consci∣ence to doe somewhat, though I confesse, it be little to the better inabling and incoura∣ging our younger men vnto their duties in that point. But before my entrance thereunto, I could in my dutie doe no lesse then to ac∣quaint you with those especiall favours which it hath pleased our gracious King to bestow vpon our Corporation in particular, aboue and beyond his ever-blessed Ancestors, for our incouragement, to enable vs the more chearefully to serue him First, his Highnes hath beene pleased to augment the monethly wages of each Surgion and Surgions-mate in his Sea-service, almost to a third penny. He hath also beene graciously pleased to giue as free a benevolence to the Surgions in all his Sea-services, which never was given them before, as followeth, viz. to all Surgions that serue in his Highnes owne Ships, I meane to∣wards
the furnishing of the Surgions Chests, for each of them xl. Vnto each Marchants Ship, imployed in his service vl. And to each New-castle Ship iijl. And neverthelesse, his Highnes is well pleased that the Surgions may demand and take by the head of all men that are in pay in any of his Shipps ijd. of each man by the moneth, as they did before. And for the Surgions in his Land-service at present, he alloweth each Surgeon ijs. vjd. the day, which is iijl. xvs. the moneth, and to each mate iijl. a moneth: And moreover, provi∣deth, and giveth to each Surgion appointed to 250. men a Surgeons Chest of xvijl. vallew, and over and aboue a Magazin or store-chest of xlviijl. vallew, for to supply and furnish vpon all wants. His Highnes hath further beene well pleased to giue authoritie vnto the Masters and Governors of our Societie, for to haue the making, compounding, fitting, and ordering of all the Medicines, as well Physi∣cals Chirurgicall; together with all other provisions belonging to the Surgions Chest, he hath referred to the Masters and Gover∣nors of our Societie. These favours and pri∣viledges our Corporation haue received from
his Highnes, together with his gracious fa∣vour and graunt vnto vs of a new Charter, wherein he hath likewise gratiously beene pleased to promise to confirme all our privi∣ledges formerly graunted vnto vs, and to giue vs divers new priviledges for the better sub∣sistance of our Corporation in future times. And now having acquainted you with his Maiesties favours vnto our Corporation, it followeth in my dutie that I should acquaint the younger sort of Surgions with the vse of the Surgions Chest, I meane the particular medicines therein contained, and that in some methodicall manner, were it not that time hastens me to an end before I begin, yet ne∣verthelesse I haue strained of time to lend the younger sort a word or two for a Viaticum, not to all as a teacher, but as a loving Remem∣brancer to the elder, which I pray you to per∣use, and vse as you haue occasion. And so in Gods name without painting of phrases, or collecting of great Authors, my methode you may know by the plainenesse of the stile, and my methode is no other then the old beaten path-way of all Surgions, wherin each Artist ought to be vnderstanding: And if any Artist
by forgetfulnesse erre, I desire but to informe his memory, and craue his charitable accep∣tance. And for the younger sort, I know it is charitie to shew them, for they haue neede, and ought to desire and seeke knowledge, ac∣cording to an old doctrine of that sweet Lillie in his Grammer rules, viz. Qui dubitat, qui sepe rogat mea dicta tenebit. Is qui nil dubitat, nil capit inde boni. I knowing you could not haue the learned advise of the graue Doctors at hand to advise you, made me presume I confesse somewhat beyond my scope: Wherefore in want of the aforesaid helpes, consult with good Authors in their wants, with the Surgions mate, and this poore Extempore. Vale.
A HELPE TO THE SVRGIONS Chest. The first dressing of Wounds made with Gun-shott. AFter extraction of vnnaturall things forced into the woūds with the Bullet, which ought with all circumspection, care and possible ease to the pati∣ent to be effected, for feare of hurting the offended Arte∣ries, Veines, Nerues, &c. As also such fractured bones greater or lesse, broken by force of the Bullet be taken
out. I say of all such of them as may without danger of life and limme be removed. For the first dressing, Draw not fractured bones out at first without Caution. wherein note, that a fractured bone, though wholly divided from the greater fixed part thereof, is not as by a generall rule alwayes to be cut or forced out at the first dressing, except it doth apparantly indanger a Gangrena, or other fearefull accidents, by pricking of Nerues, and the like, but you should doe well ra∣ther to forbeare such bones for the first dressing at the least and furthest, vntill either nature or other iust Tarry if you may vntill na∣ture helpe. reasons in the true art of healing offer the worke, and to the dressing as followeth. In the more simple sort of Gun-shot wounds, as followeth. I meane in wounds where no Gangrena may be expected, nei∣ther Fiux nor Furtiue Hemorage may be feared, dresse the Patient either with artificiall Balme, or Oleum bi∣periconis Balme in the Chest. cum gummis, & de Aperisi, oleum Cattellorum, or Arceus Linament, or one of these, and apply it warme, and somewhat warmer then the patient would willingly suffer it, and cover the wound with an Emp: of Mellilot, Stipt: Paracelsi, Minium, or any Emplasters fitting. other according to art, namely, according to the temper of the griefe, with convenient bandage, I meane due legature, and so proceede in Gods name as in all contused wounds is most convenient to the end of the worke, I meane first to supperate and di∣gest, Order in Curing. then to mundifie them, then to incarne, and so on to sigillate or siccatrise with due respect, if occa∣sion be, to temper and fit the body by good regi∣ment. Onely in Gun-shot wounds almost in all dressings
the spirit of Wine doth well with some of the afore-sayd Spirit of w Balmes, vntill the wound be well mundefied at the least. But in wounds where great danger of Gangrena is Dressing of great wound. to be feared, the Surgion hath nothing more safe for the first dressing then Vng: Aegiptiaticum, and a little spirit of Wine, somewhat to warme, put in vp∣on soft lynt or fine towe, pledgents, or by a Serringe to be carried in at first into the bottom of the wound, which done, with some good astringent defensatiue medicine and fit bandage, let it be bound vp. And if the Surgion be not forced thereunto, let not the wound be opened againe vntill forty-eight houres be past. Then at the next dressing, if Fluxes hinder not, Second dres∣sing. haue ready (if it may be) white Wine and Hony for a fomentation, or faire water and mell for necessitie if better cannot be had, and with a little Aqua vitae added if you thinke fit, and with the Stupes very warme, foment the wounded part a prettie space. Then apply vnto the wound if the Flux be stayed one of the forenamed Balmes warme, or with the ordina∣ry digestiue of Terebinth, Vitallorum, Ovorum, &c. And cover it with an Emp: and embrocate, the part about which Ol: Rosarum, Camom: Anethi: or the like, and binde it vp, and after dresse the wound but once a day without vrgent necessitie. But faile not to Time of dressing. dresse it once every day and more, if the Surgion see cause. But I hold it fit, that the Surgion leaue off Ol: hipericon cum gummis, for that it hath Oleum Terebinth therein, and may be too quicke: And rathor vse Ar∣teus
Linament, Oleum Catullorum, or some digestiue of your owne practice, vntill perfect digestion. And if accidents chance not, the Surgions methode may be to proceede as in all contused wounds. Onely let the Surgion make vse of pure Aqua vitae, or rather spirit of Wine, as is said, with the Egiptiaticum, where he findeth not a iust cause to the contrary. Cautions, Advises, and Instructions for the younger sort of Surgions in wounds of Gun-shott. COnceale from the Patient the great danger of the wound, except iust cause vrge to acquaint him with it. Fomentations are very good medicines in wounds Fomentation. with Gun-shott, but foment not at any time, except you can haue fire at hand, and let ever your fomenta∣tion be very warme applyed. Foment not too long at any one time, neither vse it but vpon vrgent occasions. Embrocate often if no Gangrena be at hand, whe∣ther Embracation. you haue fire or not. Let all your Vehickes for your Medicines, as Tents, Dorsells, Plegents, &c. be soft and pleasing to your patient, as much as may be, and cramme not the wound too full.
If you can come to the worke inlarge not, other∣wise Inlarging of wounds. doe it warily, observing that you doe it not to thwart any member, neither any Veine, Artery, Nerue, or Muscle. No wound of Gun-shott can be said to be a simple Gun-shott wounds ever compound. wound, neither ever was there any Artist that could truely say, that he healed any Gun-shott-wound by the first intension of vnition, without due supperation. For the composition of Gun-shott-wounds are ever reall, and very substantiall, witnesse the poore patient, where Fibres, Nerues, Membrances, Veines, Arte∣ries, et quid non, suffer together, so that such wounds in their recency resemble Vlcers rather then wounds. And the difference of these from other contused Differonce  contused wounds. wounds, is that other contused wounds for the most part suffer but by way of contusion onely, and these by contusion and delaceration, if not fraction of bones, &c. and thereby all the whole member suffe∣reth together, and the parts adiacent in the highest degree. If discolouring, blistering, or other apparant shewes Beware a Gangrena of a Gangrena appeare, giue the patient a Diaphore∣ticke Cordiall, then scarifie gently at the first, and deeply afterwards, as cause shall vrge, and haue ready a Lixiuims, made of water and ashes, to the height of an ordinary ley, that Women vse to driue Bucks with: And put a reasonable quantitie of common Salt into it, and when it is cleered, if you haue hearbes, as Scordium, Wormewood, Centaney, Hipericon, Ca∣momill, Mellilot, or the like, or Lupines, make vse of them, according to Art, it will be much the better, if
not, vse it without, & apply it very warme with Stupes often shifted and wrong out: and if that cannot be had, vse Salt water rather then want a medicine. Aqua vitae is also pretious in all Lixiuims against Gan∣greanes. But you may not boyle the Aqua vitae, but put it in when you will vse your medicine. You may never in any case boyle Aqua vitae without error; For the spirits will evaporate, and the vertue resteth in them. Obserue in great lacerated wounds, as followeth, viz. If you finde by the wound that the one halfe of the member be taken away, there is no hope to saue on the rest. But you are rather to make present Ampu∣tation, for that the rest is contused, and must therefore Iust cause of Amputation. admit, by consagument some losse of substance by supperation, and then the remaining part can doe no seruice to the bodie, but will indanger the life of the patient, and be a hinderance. Nay, I dare say, if but halfe of any member be taken away, with the fracture of the bone, it is impossible to saue it on to doe ser∣vice. If you haue Hemoragie, I meane bleeding or weeping of Veines or Arteries in your worke, search for that Veine or that Artery that bleedeth. If you cannot make legature, which seldome or never you can in Gun-shott-wounds, then apply to the end of the Veine an actuall Cautery, a small one will serue, but apply it very hott, and not all over the wound, onely to that Veine if you can which bleedeth; you may if the Fluxe be not great, vse burning hott Egip∣tiaoum vpon Lynt dipt and neately brought to the place, and then well boulstered, But a small actuall
Cautery is safer. Or the Surgion may vse strong re∣strictiue Actuall Cau∣tery Restrictiue powder. powder, adding thereunto burnt Vitrioll a little, or burnt Allum, and Precipitate mixed maketh a strong Esker: and often restraineth a great Fluxe ap∣plyed thereon. But take heede of an old received error of vnwise Obserue at old errour. Practitioners, whose vse is to cramme the wound full of Bole, or restringent powder, or some other stuffe, and then thrust in Plegeants, or Dorsells, into each corner of the wound, yea sometimes forgetting to take all out, yet thinking they haue done all worke∣menlike, not considering the harme that often en∣sueth thereby. I dare say, that in contused wounds of Gun-shott, they force and draw a Gangrena, if not death thereby, by but thening nature, by obstructing the parts, and grieving the patient. It is a safe and faire way at the first dressing ever to striue to ioyne together the parts of all incised wounds, and vnite the wounded parts, if it may be, with this cuation to order that fit breathing be left to evacuate the pec∣cant humours, then to apply apt and fit astringent medicaments outwardly over all together, with apt and due ligature, and by that course to stay a Fluxe. But in contused and lacerated wounds of Gun-shott, the Surgion hath nto that benefit, but must trust to other helpes not so readie, namely, as is said in the lesser wounds, to very warme Balmes, astringent, defensatiues, and good ligature, and in greater wounds to Causticke Medicaments, Cauteries, and forcible helpes. But in the Surgion his carefull desire to restraine A Caveat.
Fluxes, let him ever beware of hard binding as much as is possible, which is also a common dangerous error, and certainely draweth on evill accidents, as Flegmon, Gangrena, &c. Also on the other side, over-slacke binding is as bade; due, comely, and smooth ligature, with the due composing the parts wounded with soft and smooth boulstering, greatly honoureth the Artist, and cureth the Patient almost as much as the medi∣cine. Obserue also, that you put never one Causticke or Eskaroticke Medicine after another too sonne, namely, not vntill the first Eskar: hath beene gone at the least three dayes. If in a contused wound of Gun-shott any slough or putrified part, as of the head, of the Muscle and Artery, or Veine, or the like appeare in the wound, which needeth an Eskaro∣ticke Medicine. And the Surgion doe desire to clense that part, striue to vse your Causticke Medicine, namely, your hott Egiptiacum, or a Cautery if you can apply it onely on that place, and not all over the wound. For you are to consider, that as too much gleeting, Over-drying Medicines dangerous. weeping, or expence of humiditie from wounds of Gun-shott is dangerous many wayes; so too much vse of drying Medicaments in wounds made with Gun-shott, is no lesse dangerous by stopping the pores, repelling the peccant humors by reason of the contusion collected, being choaked in the wound, aptly indanger a Gangrena, and all other deadly acci∣dents, incident therevnto.
Now a word or two in want of the graue Phisition, Aduice tou∣ing the gen∣rall regimen of wounded men. how the young Surgion may in part demeane him∣selfe being put to it, for the more happy performance of the cures made with Gun-shot, which are very much regulated, by the gouerment of the Patient tou∣ching his Diet; as also in the carefull keeping his body Diet. in temper from much costiuenesse; and also to stay in∣ordinate fluxes, thereby to preuent accidents, as fea∣uors, &c. And further also to meete with an helpe to cure euill accidents when they happen: to the effe∣cting whereof good diet and other fitting helpes are to be wished, might attend valiant men which fight for their countreys defence; which failing much with Souldiers, there the Surgions must take it as they can haue it and make vse in necessity of what the Surgions Chest affordeth: viz. if the Patient before his wound had not a loose body, let the Surgion giue him a Sup∣pository or Glister, & if he seeme disposed to a feauor Suppository or Glist. though he hath bleed by his wound, yet if his strength be answerable, open a veine on the contrary side of his griefe: but purge him not being wounded, without very iust cause, rather keepe him by gentle meanes, to haue the benefit of nature, either by Glister, or Sup∣pository. If he be distempered with heate, make him a Barley-water: viz. water two gallons, Barley six oun∣ces, Liquirise one ounce, or iuyce of Liquirise two dragmes: boyle it gently a little, then cast away the first waters, if water be plentifull, else not; and boyle it in fresh waters till one third part bee spent: and being boyled and clarified to the said decoction, adde some few droppes of oyle of Vitrioll, to make it somewhat sowre in taste, but not too much, but if to this six grains
of Confectio Alkermis, with one spoonefull of Rosewater were added, the drinke would bee much the more gratefull in taste, and more prefitable. I conceiue it will bee needlesse to vrge a course for a sparing diet, for I feare gluttony will not be their sinne. But if fullnesse of body be a hinderance, the Surgion hath meanes to euacuate, as for a vomit by Stibium, the A vomite. infusion of six or eight graines, if such be fitting in able bodies by laxatiues; as Conf. Hamech. six dragmes for a dose, Diaphenicon or Diacatholicon the dose to an a∣ble body is a full ounce. The pills in the inuoyce of this pill. Chest vpon their seuerall occasions one dragme is a dose of any one sort of them; of Pull. Sanctus may be giuen two dragmes, of Pull. Artheticus one dragme. If Cordialls be required, the Surgion hath in his Chest to prouoke rest in feauors, seuerall ones, as more parti∣cular; there is Diascordium which hee may giue to the full of two dragmes for a dose, to a strong body, either in wine or water as hee please, or in a bolus or lumpe of it selfe. Also he hath Laudanum, which hee may safely giue Vse of Lauda∣num. three or foure graines to asswage paine in painefull wounds, to giue rest in feauors, to stay fluxes, and in diuers other cases, being vsed with iudgement, and pro∣uided that the partie which taketh it bee not costiue: Likewise in fluxes of the belly often accompanied with crude nautiousnesse of the Stomake, as also a∣gainst venemous or pestelentiall infection of the bloud, there is in the Chest Phyloniū Persicum, of which the patient may take from one scruple to halfe a dragme, & to one dragme safely in a reasonable body: & this is a safe medicine which causeth rest, and corro∣borateth
the stomake and mightily preuaileth to stay a fluxe of the belly, and doth also correct venemous and maligne humors, and is therefore very fit to bee v∣sed in fluxes that bee contagious or pestelentiall, after some fitting euacuation if occasion so be. What I here write it is of mine owne practice, you may take it on my word for truth, for you shall find it to be so, if with due caution you make right vse of them. These there cordials swage paine, (viz. Diascordium, Laudanum  and Phylonium) or either coole or contemporate the blood. The Surgions Chest containeth also diuers Cordi∣all Of Cor generall medicines which may bee profitably administred each vpon due occasion, viz. Conf. Alkermis either giuen alone or to aromatize any purgatiue or Cordiall medicine from 4. grayns to a scrupell for a dose. Aqua Celestis, and Cinnamon water to refresh the spirits, halfe a spoonefull, or one spoonefull for a dose and so of spirit of wine, and also Aqua Vitae made of wine, which so much as it containeth of the spirit of wine, is, quasi spiritus vitae. Also the Surgions Chest hath against contagion Against Plague  of the Ayr. and the Plague Mithredate, Ther. Londinensis, Diates∣seron, Elec. de ouo; as also Diascordium, Conf. Alkermis, and Laudanum mentioned; all these being proper for Pestelentiall occasions, the vses and vertues of which I would touch, though but in a word: And for exam∣ple, if the Surgions desire a Cordiall to bee made to cause rest, it is made either of Laudanum to 3. graynes as it is said, or Diascordium to 2. dragmes, or Philo∣nium to one dragme mentioned; & Note, that Laudi∣num
is best to be taken in a pill, because of his vngrate∣full taste, and Philonium in a bolus, or lumpe for the like reason; and so also may Diascordium be vsed well, and especially in War; where neither the aduise of the lear∣ned Physitian, nor the helpe of the Apothecaries shop is at hand; but if the Surgion be occasioned, and that hee would haue Diascordium giuen in a Potion, then let him take of Diascordium 2 dragmes, of White Wine, or faire Water 3. ounces or 4. of Sir. Violarum halfe an ounce. Conf. Alkermis 8. graines, Oleum vitri∣oll gutt. 4. and let the Patient incline himselfe to rest. Also if a Cordiall to comfort the spirits be required, then the foresaid Cinnamon water, Aqua Celestis, or Cordiall. comfortiue. Aqua vitae, of wine is at hand without mixture or addi∣tion, or with some addition, halfe a spoonefull or a spoonefull for a dose. If against malignitie of the bloud, or any Pestilenti∣all Contagion feared; then the patient may take as followeth: Re. Diatessaron 2. dragmes, Mithridate 1. dragme, Elect. de ouo halfe a dragme, desolue or mix A Cordiall Diaphoreticon. them together; and take it in White Wine, Clarret, or Sacke, or in Cardus, or faire water for need, of any of these to the quantity of 4. ounces, and sweate there∣upon, and if the Contagion be fierce, the patient may reiterate such a sweating medicine each 4. houres safe∣ly for three times. These or any of these other Cordi∣alls may be giuen in other waters, and other mixtures, according to the discretion of the Surgion, the time, place, and different occasion considered, and for need in a bolus or lumpe: likewise Mithridate, or Androma∣ches Treakel, a drame or 2. drams in White Wine, in Cardus water, or in beere or water for a neede, may
safely be taken for a Cordiall or in a bolus. Also Theriaca Diatessaron, three dragmes for a dose, taken either as it is in a bolus or lumpe, to bee swal∣lowed For torsions or gripings of the stomake or bowells downe, is an excellent Cordiall to prouoke sweat, to remoue Torsions, Stitches, or gripings of the stomacke, or lower belly, or any paynes therein; also it resisteth putrifactious and pestilentiall vapours, and is the most antients Treacle of all other: my selfe haue had very much, true, and good experience of it, and would trust my life vpon it, before the 2. asoresaid Alexifarmicks and the Lond. Treacle, in the like man∣ner is to be vsed and is a very good Cordiall. El. de Ouo, is also of it selfe a sure good Cordiall, a Scruple, I meane 20. graynes thereof in a bolus, or in wine giuen, it resisteth pestilentiall venome, and re∣fresheth the spirits, and either alone, or as is aforesaid mixed with other Cordiall Electuaries is also a true A Cordiall. Cordiall: for it comforteth the heart, prouoketh sweat, and by the poores of the skinne, expelleth poysenous vapours. Cons. rosarum, is vsed to resresh and strengthen the stomacke, either alone, or if you intend to coole and contemperate the bloud; adde a few droppes of oyle A contempe∣ratiue Cordi∣all. of Vitrioll to a little thereof, and if to warme the sto∣macke, mixe Mithridate, or Treacle one part, and cons. Roses 2. parts, and giue it in a bolus. Cons. Barbar. you should keepe either to mixe with Of Cooling Iulaps. your cooling, barley waters, or Iulaps to refresh the appetite, & the apalled spirits in feauors, or somtimes to giue a little of it in a bolus, to giue a relish to the mouth, to cause appetite in feauors and nautious distempers. There is also in the Chest Oximell Simplex which
I vse in the Surgions Chest, in want of Sir. Diamo∣ron, or rather being nothing inferiour for lotions in Vertue of Oximell. the mouth & throat orderly vsed, as also for the other vertues, it hath exceeding Diamoron, as namely out∣wardly in the asswaging tumors and paynes, this is a singular medicine, and also in Hernia humoralis,  tumors of the testicles, it excelleth, if it be mixed with a Cathaplasme of beane meale, boyled in beere with a lit∣tle oyle of Elders or Roses, and a little wax, so that the whole quantity of the Cathaplasme being by gesse 2. pound, if so, then put about 6. or 7. ounces of Oximell thereunto, and boyle it to a body, and it is an admirable good medicine, for it discusseth, and safely repelleth such tumors in their increase, with the helpe of Phlybo∣thomine and a vomit where the patient is strong, which tumors by error of the Surgion will otherwise come to supperation & proue fistulaes incurable, but he that will cure such tumors, must haue an artificiall sacke∣trusse, and bee sure that the griefe bee truely and easily borne vp at all times of the whole cure: and Oximell inwardly administred, purgeth the stomacke and in∣trals, openeth obstructions, and yet without any manifest signe of heate, and thereby helpeth much in feauours ingendred of grosse Phlegme. Of Lotions generally vsed in the Surgions Chest, the most common is of sanatiue herbes made in the sum∣mer, with water or wine, and honey; but at Sea if a lauatiue or washing Lotion, in need bee required, faire Lotion at Sea for a need. water, with as much allumne therein, as will make it tart, & so much honey as wil giue it a gratefull taste, & there is a Lotion: Or if in the diseases of the Scurfie, a Lo∣tion be required, then vse Coper as insteed of allumne, or
sometimes Vng. Aegyptiacum, for vlcers of the mouth or throate, the greeued part touched hot may suffice. And to wash and coole the mouth in feauours, I often take faire water 4. ounces, of Rose-water halfe a spoonefull, a little sirrup, Sugar, or mell for a need, and a few drops of Wine-vinegar or Oximell a little, or oyle of Vintrioll a few drops. I haue beene taxed, that my proportion hath not sufficient contained therein for wounds with Gun∣shot, but if any please to looke into the particulars, and well consider them, he will finde that the whole scope of the Surgions Chest, is of purpose contriued to that end, and that there is not any one medicine therein, but vpon the maine or vpon the by, tendeth that way; for a wound of Gun-shot at the first view, representeth a A true dis∣cription of a wound with Gun-shot at the lust view. wound, an vlcer, a fistula: Yea and sometimes a fra∣cture and a dislocation, and by Accedents calleth to it a feauour, an impostume, a gangrenne, & quid non; yea without Gods mercy ioyned to the great care of the discreete Surgion, death followeth. Iudge then if ought be in a Surgions Chest, which in such a wound vpon some occasion be not fit. And for an Instance, the Chest containeth, for the Medicines ready for the first intention curatiue of wounds by burnings of Gunpowder. first intention curatiue of Burnings with Gun-pow∣der. Vng. Populeon. 3. lb Album. 1. lb Triapharmacon. 2. lb Diaponpholigos, lb ss. Mellsaponis 4. lb oleum lini. 4. lb Ce∣ruse. 3. lb Mell-depurat. 3. lb the weight of all this a∣mounts vnto 20. lb and a halfe, being al directly fitting; for the first Intention, namely for taking out of the fire; and yet the Chest hath diuers other helpes as a Li∣nament made of Minium or Diacalsithios, and oyle ei∣ther
of Linseede oyle, or of Roses. And for all the rest as is said of wounds of Gun∣shot, so I say of Vlcers made by Gun-shot, the whole scope of all the Sanatiue medicines in the Chest, accor∣ding to their seuerall intention and times sute fitly to finish the cures, and wherein the rest wanteth; there is a Magazine Chest, stored with the like medicines, to the A Magazine Chest. valew of 48. lb. to supplie each Surgions wants; but saith some others, the proportion is very much wan∣ting of of restrictiue or astringent medicines, to stay flux∣es, or to Amputate vpon occasion; wherefore to satisfie the beneuolent young Surgion desirous to bee infor∣med: I answer, first that there is Pulueris Restring. Maius 3. pounds, also Bolus 6. lb. Wine Viniger, 2. lb. Myrrhae A stringent or Restringent or Restrictiue medicine. 4. ℥. Alluminis 2. lb. Vitrio. Crudae, 2. lb. Vitriol. Com∣busta, lb ss. Mercurie. precipitat. 2. ℥. Sublimat. 1. ℥. Beane and Barley meale 6 lb. Galles, 1 lb. Pomgranat Rindes 4. ℥. and whites of egges, besides good ligature & boulsters ready, all which, with Iudgement and discretion vsed: I dare say are sufficient. And for one instance, namely that the restrictiue powder is sufficient in quantitie: I can produce witnesse if need were, that vpon the 24. of Iuly, 1628. I tooke of 2. members, whereof one aboue the knee, with one 1. ℥ ss. of the powder to both, and had a fourth part to spare of the made medicine. There is also an astringent defensatiue powder pre∣pared, and made readie for vse as hereafter followeth. And if all what is said, (together with the supplie in the Magazine Chest, with also the helpe of Phlebotto∣mie ligature, actuall and potentiall Cauteries,) wil not suf∣fice; then I am I confesse mistaken. Note in burnings with Gun-powder, that if the face Nota.
or hands be burned, I haue found it best from the first Common pra∣ctise. to the last, namely to the end of the cure, to vse Vng. Album, either mixed with Populeon or with Linseed oyle, or Vnguentum Diapompholigos is fully as good made A note in the cure of bur∣nings in the face. into a very thinne linament, and warme laid on the face, with a feather & no clouts at all, nor ought else to couer the face; this healeth excoriations or scorchings best: or that the Surgion take Ceruse ground in a mor∣ter with Linseed oyle, and apply it as the former; I haue approued it to be very good: Triaphormicon is also very good so vsed. I spake but now of hony for burnings, and who so Of hony. shall proue it, shall finde it safe to take out the fire, and after to heale the griefe, but it is somewhat more pain∣full then some other medicines are, it being once or twice a day applyed vpon browne paper, being first rubbed soft, and the medicine spread thereon, and in that manner applyed, it healeth without any scarce. Also Mell Saponis, and all other medicines appropri∣ate, may be applied vpon paper at Sea, partly for spa∣ring Linnen. Moreouer, I finde a great weakenesse in young Sur∣gions, that I haue iust occasion to question, in that their Masters that bred them, haue not taught them the true knowledge of our vsuall weights and mea∣sures, but chiefely they faile in the weights, which doth euen great danger to their poore patients, whose life hangeth dangerously in the ballance by a graine; too much giuen when the Surgion knoweth not how ma∣ny graines are in a scruple, or in a dragme; no nor scarce that there is a waight so called; wherefore let young Surgions note as followeth: the Physitians, Surgions.
and Apothecaries haue two sorts of weights in vse, namely, Troy weights, which likewise are the Gold∣smiths weights; and that containeth 12. ounces to the pound; and Haberdepoys weight, which containeth 16. ounces to the pound; and is, that common weight which the Grocers and all other trades-men vse; and indeed which wee most vse: for though my selfe some∣times buy Muske, Ciuet, or Ambergreese & Drugges by Troy weight; yet I dispense, and administer all by Haberdepoys weight, which is 16. ounces to the pound, so I will onely for breuity speake thereof: A pound Haberdepoys, hath 16. ounces, an ounce hath 8. dragmes. A dragme hath 3. scruples. A scruple hath 20. graines, and by that ac∣count, a dragme hath 60. graines, and a full graine of barley is a reasonable graine, and a pepper Corne or a wheate Corne may bee vsed. And our Measures agreeing with our weights, most Of Measures. vsuall are as followeth; a wine gallon of water, con∣taineth 8. pound, a pottle foure pound, a quarte 2. pound, a pinte 1. pound, &c. and of ordinarie sallet oyles 7. pound and a halfe is accounted a gallon.
Of Cathaplasmes. OF all other necessaries in the Surgions Chest, I confesse my deficiencie therein, for I ought to haue had dryed hearbs of all sorts sitting, some store, but I pray you accept of my excuse, I had Sur∣gions Chests, and parts of Chests, 40. at once, and had but ten dayes respit to make and to fit them all, and yet the said Chests containe hearbs of diuers sorts, as also beane and barley meale, Lineseeds, Foeni∣greeke, Camomill-flowers, Cummen-seeds, Fennell-seeds, and diuers other things that are helpes that way, but what shall I say to some contentious persons, my best things fall too short for them? but to beneuolent vnderstanding Artists, they can many wayes make vse of fitting helpes in a ship, and not alwayes charge the Surgions Chest: viz. If my selfe were at sea, and put to If a Surgion be put to it it, I would find waste crummes of biskets, and I would boyle them in ship-beere, and with some fat of the beefe-kettle, or of the porke-kettle, I would make vp a supperatiue Cathaplasme and if it had not a fit consi∣stance or body, I would deale with the Steward for a little meale, or take of my owne store, and according to my store, inrich that with other helpes from the Chest. And if I neede a discutient Cathaplasme, and the Chest had not to helpe mee to my will being put to it, I would as I said make my ground of the medicine to bee of crummes of bisket or of soft bread decocted in beere, adding when it had well sod, viniger and hony a fit quantitie, these things with other rationall additi∣ons
according to seuerall occasions doe much com∣fort the weake patient and also grace the Artist: Nam frustra fit per plura, quod fieri potest per pauciora. And to put young Surgions in minde what other supperatiue medicines are in the Surgions Chest, there are either Vnguents, Oyles, or Emplasticke medicaments, (diuers) which my time will not admit me to informe you off, though I confesse I should aduise young men Of Suppera∣tiue medicines in their necessities, but to bee short, they shall finde Vnguentum Bazillicon spread thicke and applied to an Aposteme doth wel, and the better if the place Embro∣cated with some Oleum Lili. Lini. or the like, and you shall finde that Arceus Linament is good: and like∣wise Emplastrum Mellilote, and who knoweth not that shippe-pitch and a little fat mixed, ripeneth a Tumor duely applyed, or Pix Graeca with fat, or Turpentine and diuers other the like good things may bee found, where the discreet Surgion is put to his shifts: but no more of that, for whereas Bees may sucke hony, enen there Spiders will conuert a plaine stile into poyson and gall. Nonomnibus dormio. A readie defensatiue powder to bee applyed where iust cause is for a defensatiue; either for wounds with gunshot or other wounds which I haue long made vse of, and will impart the secret to young practitioners as followeth.
℞ Terra Sigillata. Aluminis. Vitrioli. Tartarae. Cerussae ana 1. Ib. Boli Armeni 2. Ib. Aque 1. Ib. ss Take a new earthen pot of almost a gallon and an halfe, put the water into the pot, and thereunto at the first put the Allom and the Copperas, then powder the Tarter and put that in also, and then haue ready the o∣ther ingrediences in powder, put them in by little and little, stirring them very well vntill all be incorporated, and without seething, keepe the medicine on the fire till it be hard, and if you cannot make it hard enough in that manner so that being cold it will pow∣der, then put it into some dripping panne or the like, and into an ouen when the bread is drawne and it will be hard: then being cold powder it, and keepe it to your vse; it will not decay nor alter his vertue in many yeeres. And when you would vse it for a defensatiue, take of this powder about halfe an ounce, of Posca, I meane water and vineger mixed foure ounces, put the pow∣der therein, which wil almost al melt, then dippe clouts therein and apply them. This medicine with moderation vsed is a true and excellent defensatiue and very Anodine. Also it healeth all Itchings, Smartings, gaulings, or
any Erisiphilas, or other Excoriations speedily, and safely and mightily preuenteth accidents either in great wounds or fractures, and being in small quantity vsed with faire water to bathe vsed with faire water to bathe vlcers, it cleanseth them well and healeth them. And if you haue whites of egges mixed with Posca it were the better, or in fractures with yelke and whites together it is very good, onely let the care of the Sur∣gion bee that he apply it in his true nature, namely as a defensatiue in fit time, and so touching the rest of the vses thereof, and hee may presume he hath a sure good medicine, and so for this time I make my leaue. FINIS.
