4102.7 22160476 25197
A Iewes Prophesy, WITH Newes from Rome. Of two mightie Armies, aswell footemen as horsmen: The first of the great Sophy, the other of an Hebrew people, till this time not disco∣uered, comming from the Mountaines of Caspij, who pretend their warre is to recouer the Land of Promise, & expell the Turks out of Christendome. Translated out of Italian into English, by W. W. 1607. Printed by W. I. for Henry Gosson, and are to be sold in Pater noster rowe at the signe of the Sunne.
❧ To the renowned Lord, Don Mathias de Rensie of Venice. AFter the particuler thinges allea∣ged in my former writings vnto your Lordshippe, I thought it good and conuenient by this my Letter, to aduertise your Lord∣ship, of certaine great, horrible, and fearefull things that hapned in this quarter. Purposing to certifie your Lordship of the pompe and great triumph at the presenting of the Captaines of the Sea, vnto the great Turke: the miserie and vn∣happines of the poore prisoners: the discorde & con∣tention that came by the sonne of the Vice Roy of Naples, being prisoner: the threatnings made to the Christians: the receiuing of the Ambassadors of the Soffy: the pompes, tryumphes, and entertainments made vnto them, and yet dissembled enough, with mocking one the other at their departing: the pre∣sents giuen: the going of the great Turke a hunting,
and all other thinges written at large, as your Lord∣ship shall vnderstand. But now your Lordship shall vnderstand at thys time, the greatest, the most wonderfull, and most strange thing that euer was heard of. The which partly hath so troubled the great Turke, and all the rest, that they haue left of all other affayres, to pro∣uide for the perrill and danger that at this time hang∣eth ouer theyr heads. Your Lordships to vse, Signior Valesco.
The Iewes Prophesie. THe newes are come that the king of Hungarie wa∣keth a great Army, which shall haue for his ayde the gailies of Buda, and of many other Princes of Christendome. And they say moreouer, that the King of Bohemia will helpe therein, and that the most part of Christian Princes will come and ayde him in this en∣terprize against the Turke, except the Signorie of Venice, which meddleth nothing at all in it. These re∣porters of newes affirme, that there shall come aboue a hundred gallies, besides other Barks, ships, & Hulkes without number, which is occasion that they hasten the Warre the more. Notwithstanding, men esteeme not so much hereof, as of the war that is made beyond the Mountaines▪ as you shall vnderstand not without wondering at it. The Tartars make friendes vpon the greater Sea, & haue made a league and friendship with the great Turke, requiring ayde, for they are molested with war by the great Emperor of Moscouia, & Prince of Sagodie, of Pogore, of Smengie, of Drossy, of Gazam, of Virgolosam, of Tartarie, of Cham, and of diuers other people and regions lying toward the South: they say that this Emperor or Duke hath two Armies, and is called Iohn Dwatillo, a young Man, of the age of xxiiii. yeares, noble and valiant, and a Christian, after the in∣stitution of the Greekes, and presumeth that by reason of his bloud, the Empire of Constantinople doth belong to him. And these two Armies are about a two hunde∣red thousand horse.
They were not wont in times past to be so strong, nor so feared of the Turkes, for they had not the vse of ar∣tillary in the warre: but nowe they haue maruailous great preparation in theyr warre. Hee hath in wages certaine Dutch Captaines, and about tenne thousand Maister gunners, and is maruailous well furnished with harquebushes and artillery, and because men vn∣derstand that hee hath so vanquisht the Tartarians, and brought thē to such a state, that they cannot much more resist him and that if the saide▪ Muscouite should bemaisters ouer the Tartars, they should consequent∣ly be Rulers of the great sea, & the way should be open and easie for them to come, not onely to Constantino∣ble, but also to driue the Turke out of Europe: And because that the saide great Turke is assured of this enterprize and commotion of the Greekes: he hath cō∣cluded and determined, to send to the sayde Tartars a good assystance of fifteene thousand fighting men, and also for this purpose, he hath sent to the Sea ten Gal∣lies to passe them ouer. Men make mention and doubt of Mondaccio, which is a great Prince and Ruler, and able to make foure∣score, or a hundred thousand Horse: and yet men are vncertaine whose part he will take, because he is a tri∣butary vnto the great Turke. There is newes also from Affrica, that the King of Bugien, the King Tramece, the King of Tunis, the Chil∣dren of Serif; the Lorde of Murocho, and of Gran, with the Arabians & other, haue taken in hand to dryue and expulse the Turke wholy out of Affrica, & to endomage him as much as they may. Men know not yet in what place they will war, but we shall know it shortly. The newes also is, that the Soffie is in Campe with a great
Army, and hath the Medes to helpe him, which border vppon the Caspian Sea, and of one side neighbur to the Hircans, called at this day Correxans and Zecatans, with whom he hath made a league and peace. There are on his side also the Ibeans and Albians, and also the people of Melar, which harbor vpon the Indians, & likewise with the King of Bosphorus, all beeing people maruai∣lous swift and nimble. In this so mighty an host and armie, is also Bascet the Sonne of the great Turke, by meanes whereof all in those partes is in great trouble, as well as heere. It seemeth that the Ianissaries bring him the lot of Turkie, as Baduget, Zermonia, Alepo, and all the Regions lying neere to the Sossi is reuolted, all the which particularities shall be vnderstood more at large. This newes is great, & hath made the great Turk to muse enough vpon it, but aboue all these maruelous and dreadfull newes which are hapned, there is yet chanced another, which hath greatly feared and aba∣shed all men, which although it seemeth to bee incredi∣ble, yet vpon my credit it is most true, and that is, that a people heretofore vnknowne, mighty, swift, & maruei∣lous nimble, hath taken weapon in hand, to the disad∣uantage and losse of the house of Ottoman. They saye that Alexander the great did in times past driue beyond the mountaine Caspe nine tribes and a halfe of the Hae∣brewes which worshipped the Calfe & Serpent of Gold and draue them away, that neuer since there was no newes of them, neither knew any man if they were in the Worlde or not: because the Sea of sande, or the sandy Sea, by a certaine inconuenience of sand Grauel or Beche, swelled and rose so high, that it vtterly took from them the way into this our Region. But now by
the meane of the new Nauigation that the Pollanders haue made, they are arriued in their country, and haue espied out all their dooings: and after yt the sayd Hol∣landers had instructed and taught them in the science and knowledge to artillery, and gun-powder for Har∣quebushes & dags, whereunto they are maruelous apt and ready, they are become in all thinges very perfit. After this they egged them forward▪ to take weapon in hand, and passe the sayd Mountaine by Land. And because the sandy Sea did hinder their passage, it ap∣peareth yt some Dutchman or Italian, which yet men knewe not, but notwithstanding some great Astrolo∣gian or Cosmographer taught them the way, making some hill plaine with fire, whereby they might easilye passe, which is a thing of great wonder. These people haue two mighty great armies, and infinite store of victualles, by reason of the fruitfulnesse of their Country, they are also well prouided of all ma∣ner of preparation for war, and cunning in the practise of their Weapons. They say they will come & recouer the land of Promise, towards the which the first army is already very neere, to the great terror and dread of euery man which hath either seene or hearde of them. The spyes which haue beene sent out by the great Turke to descry them, do affirme, that beside a hundred and two Armies, there followe an infinite number of people, as well foot-men as horse-men, and theyr first army is already arriued vppon the limmits of Turky, putting all to fire and sword. Theyr language is ba∣stard Hebrew: and because men speake much of it here, I will not forgette to speake also something thereof woorthy to bee noted, and well vnderstoode: The He∣brewes of Constantinople say, that they haue certaine
prophesies, among the which one maketh mention, that ftom the foure parts of the world, shall rise a peo∣ple, and come into Gog and Magog, and then shall appeare (as they perswade themselues) their Messias in might and power, and then they shall haue dominion and rule in the world, whereof they secretly reioyce, and are wonderous glad. They say moreouer, that there is a prophecie grauen in a piller set at Podromo which saith thus: A mighty Prince shall rise, whose begin∣ning shall be of smal reputation, who by his Issue shal wax of such force and strength (with the helpe of God) that he shall bring to nothing, the empire and rule of Ottoman, and shall be the right possessor and inheritor of the Empire of Constantinople, & they beleeue all that ii shall be this Emperor and duke of Muscouia. which is already in great estimation among the Greeks. The Turkes haue a prophecie, which they sing of∣ten and weepe bitterly the while, for it betokeneth and denounceth vnto them, their vtter ruine and destructi∣on. And although it seeme straunge, to say that the Turkes haue prophecies, it is no meruaile: for Balam was a false Prophet: the Sybilles also prophecied and were Pagans. For all these causes the great Turke hath forbidden wine, & will that all men goe fiue times in a day to the Moschea, and pray to GOD for theyr helth and safetie. And so he prepareth three great ar∣mies, one against the Muscouites, another againste the Soffie, and the third for to goe against the Haebrewes of the Mountaines of Caspij. Within these fewe dayes you shal haue other newes, wherefore thus making an end, I commend me vnto your good Lordship: From Rome, the first day of Iune, 1606. Your faithfull and trusty seruant, Signior Valesco.
The description of the first Armie, conducted by Zoroam a Iew, Captaine generall of the Armies. FIrst of all a Iew of verie great stature, of a fleshlie colour, more red then otherwise, with broad eyes, called Zoroam, is Captaine generall of all the Ar∣mies, hee leadeth vnder his Ensigne twelue thousand horse, and twenty thousand footmen. The horse-men are armed after a light sort, but very good Harnes, al∣most aftet our fashion: they carrie Launces of longe Reedes, very hard and light, yet so sharpe pointed, that they passe thorowe a thing with incredible lightnesse: they carry also shields or targets of bone, and in steede of swords, they vse certaine Courtilaxes. They are apparrelled with the colour of their En∣signe, and all clothed with silke: the foote-men carrie Pikes of the same sort, with Helmet and Habergin: their Ensigne is of blacke silke and blewe, with a Dog following a Hart, or Bucke, and a saying written in it, which is in our language thus: Either quick or dead. 2. Of the Armie of Don Phares. THere is one called Phares, which is an Carle, yong and valiant, not regarding this present life: this man hath vnder his commaund fifteene hundred Horsemen armed lightly, onely on the fore-part and head-peece: yet this Armour is so well tempered and wrought, that it keepeth out a Launce and Harque∣bush shot.
This manner of arming themselues, is to the in∣tent they may neuer turne their backe to runne away: they haue also fierce and light horses: they are eigh∣teene thousand footemen, apparrelled with a kinde of sodden leather, made of the skinne of a certaine Beast, so that no pike nor Harquebush can pearse it. These men are beastly people, and wil neuer flie for any thing, they are very obedient and subiect vnto their Prince, and their ordinary apparrel is Silke. The Ensigne that they beare, is a falcon pecking or billing with an∣other Byrde, with a sentence that saith, Either thine of mine shall breake. 3 Of the Marquesse of Galair. THere is a Marquesse of Galair called Goes, this man leadeth fifteen hūdred men of armes, which be all exceeding well armed and stout, strong, and rebust men: their horses be moriskes, the greatest, the strongest, the fairest, and the best that be in the world: there are also seuenteene thousand souldiors, very wel appointed with Launce and harquebush: theyr En∣signe or armes is a redde field, with a maide clothed in greene, holding a Lion in her hand, with these words, I hope to subdue a greater thing. 4 Of the Duke of Falach. THere is a Duke of Falach, called Obeth, who hath vnder his conduct xx. thousand footmen, armed with a certaine mettall like yron, but it is light and hard, they haue many good swords, launces, and otherforce, harquebushes, and wiflers: their Ensigne or armes, is a mermaid in a blacke field, and the deuise thus, My singing shall not cease vntill the end.
The description of the Armie conducted by Captaine Nauison: THere is a captaine called Nauison, which hath vn∣der him xx. thousand men, appointed and armed with the skin of a serpent, most hard & stiffe, they haue Axes, pollaxes, pikes, harquebushes, and other kind of weapons: their Ensigne or armes, is a white snaile in a blacke sielde, with a deuise about it, By litle and little men go very farre. Of the tribe of Simeon there is a Prince of Arsay, whose name is not yet known, but they say he is a de∣uill, great, grosse, & thicke beyond measure, with a flat nose, and both he and his men are of the stature of Gi∣ants: he leadeth with him xx. thousand footemen, al∣most all Alfiers, which are also so swift & nimble, that they will take horses running: they make a meruai∣lous noise, such as no people vse: their Ensigne is, an Eute in a blacke field, and hane for their posye, Such is my gouernment. 6 Of the Duke of Barsalda. THere is a duke of Barsalda, and he is the conductes of xiii. thousand footmen, which are all Harque∣bushers, & carry no fire matches, but strike it with a stone: they are apparrelled & armed with such a hard kinde of leather, and so enchaunted, that no yron wea∣pon in the world is able to perse it thorow. They bee also very swift and light: their Ensigne or armes, is a dry tree in a blew field, and their deuise thus, I hope to spread, and be greene againe. 7 Of the Armie of the Duke Pasill. THere is a duke of Pasill called Abia, he hath vnder his conduct a thousand footemen, very cruell, ha∣uing all kind of weapons to push or pricke far off,
and to strike night, but farre different from ours, they are very expert in artificiall fire, and make the greatest and most dreadfull thinges with all yt a man can ima∣gin: they do it either by arte or enchauntmen, so that it seemeth that it raigneth fire vpon their enemies, and yet notwithstanding hurteth not themselues at all, by reason they are apparrelled with a certaine Serpents skin which preserueth them. Their Ensigne is a Cat holding a Rat in her paw in a blacke sielde; and their posy thus, Euen so hapneth it to him that is not gouerned. 8 Of the Army conducted by the Earle THere is an Earle of Albary caled Orut, which hath vnder his gouernaunce a thousand Horse-men with Crosse-bowes, some of them weare certaine light armour of a kind of hard mettall, with Rapyers and daggers after theyr manner, they sight alwayes running, and their horses are so swift that it is won∣derfull. This man also hath xx. thousand horses bar∣bed with very fine leather. Some cary pikes and Par∣tisans, & such like weapons. Their Ensigne or armes is a man in chaines, in a field parted halfe with greene and Purple, and this deuise withall, My chaines shall bind another man. 9 Of the Marquesse of Vorio. THere is a Marques of Vorio called Manasses, who hath vnder his conduct xvii. thousand footemen, Armed with a very hard & strong leather, which men beleeue to be enchaunted, because that no weapon nor harquebush is able to perse it thorowe, yet it is as
light as Linnen cloth, and a thing very fayre to see to. These now haue all sorts of weapons that an Armie may haue: and they are diuided and set in a very faire, comely, and decent order: their Ensigne is an old man in a chariot, in a blacke fielde, saying thus, After a long iourney I shall be happy. Caleb Shilock his prophesie, for the yeere, 1607. BE it knowne vnro all men, that in the yeare 1607. when as the Moone is in the Watrye signe, the world is like to bee in great danger: for a learned Iew, named Caleb Shilock, doth write that in the fore∣said yeere, the Sun shall be couered with the Dragon in the morning, from fiue of the clocke vntill nine, and will appeare like fire: therefore it is not good that any man do behold the same, for by beholding thereof, hee may lose his sight. Secondly, there shall come in the same yeare a mer∣uailous great flood of water, to the great terror and a∣mazement uf many people. Thirdly, there shall arise a meruailous great wind, and for feare thereof many people shall be consumed or distraughted of their wits. Fourthly the same yeare, about the month of May, will arise another wonderfull great flood, and so great as no man hath seene since Noyes flood, which wil con∣tinue three daies, and three nightes, whereby many Citties and Townes which standeth vppon Sandie ground will be in great danger.
Fiftly, Infidels and Hereticks, through great feare and dread, will flye and gather together, and asmuch as in them lies, make war against Christian princes. Sixtly, in the same yeare after the great waters be past, about the end of the yeere will be very great and fearefull Sicknesses: so that many people are like to die by the infection of strange diseases. Seauenthly, there will be throughout the Worlde great trouble and contention about matters of Reli∣gion, and wonderfull strange newes vnto all people, as concerning the same. Eightly, the Turke with his God Mahomet shall bee in daunger to loose his Septer, through the great change and alteration in his Regiment, by reason of famine and warres, so that the most part of his people will rather seeke reliefe from the Christian, then from him. Ninthlie, there will also arise great Earth-quakes, whereby diuers goodly buildings & high houses, are like to be ouerthrowne and ruinated. Lastlie, there will be great remoouings of the earth in diuers places, so that for feare thereof, many people will be in a strange amazement and terror. These punishments are prognosticated by this ler∣ned Iew, to fall vpon the whole Worlde by reason of sinne, wherefore it behoueth all Christians to amende their euill liues, and to pray earnestly vnto GOD to with-hold these calamities from vs, and to conuart our harts wholy to him, whereby we may sind fauour in our time of neede, through Iesus Christ our Lord. Amen. FINIS.
