4626 99843198 7912
❧ The thre bokes of Cronicles, whyche Iohn Carion (a man syngularly well sene in the Mathema∣tycall sciences) Gathered wyth great diligence of the beste Authours that haue written in He∣brue, Greke or Latine. ✚ Whervnto is added an Appendix, contey∣nyng all such notable thynges as be mentyoned in Cronicles to haue chaunced in sundry par∣tes of the worlde from the yeare of Christ. 1532. To thys present yeare of. 1550. Gathered by Iohn Funcke of Nurenborough. ¶ Whyche was neuer afore prynted in Englysh. Cum Priuilegio ad Imprimendum solum.
o the moste excel∣lente Prince, Edwarde the syxte, by the grace of God, Kyng of England, Fraunce and Irelande, Defendour of the fayth, and in earth, immediatly vnder God, supreme head of the church of Englande and Ire∣lande: your graces humble and obey∣saunt subiect Gwalter Lynne wy∣sheth aboundance of all grace and Godlynes wyth a long and prospe∣rous raygne. COnsyderyng that the know∣ledge of thynges past (most excel∣lent prince) is most necessarye for such as woulde passe ouer the tyme to come in a decent and Godly or∣der, and that the greatest nombre of youre Maiesties people doo not vnderstande other languages, then theyr naturall tounge: I haue thought it my duetye (beynge one that spendeth all hys tyme in the settynge forth of bokes in the Englyshe tounge) emongest all other to set forth thys shorte Cronicle. Wherein is briefly declared all that is nedefull to be knowen, concernyng thynges done in tymes
passed. The learned haue  the latyne tounge, and therfore my laboure maye seme the lesse profy∣table vnto them. But yet yf my knowledge would haue serued me to haue translated it as eloquētly as it is written in latyne: I doubt not but the lear∣ned also myghte haue founde some swetnes in my laboures. And not wythstandynge my rudenes (most excellent Prynce) I trust your maiestie wyll (after your accustomed clemencye) accept my good wyll, whyche thynge I do not doubte shall encou∣rage all faythfull englyshe men to embrace my la∣boures and gather the fruytes of the same. To prayse the worcke which being set forth to be reade of all men wyll prayse it self, were but a labour halfe loste, for such a thing nedeth no prayse, but is so ma¦nifestly good that all men that reade it shalbe for∣ced to prayse it. Other prayse therfore I wyll not geue it, but that it is a worcke worthy the name of so excellent a prynce as your mayestye is, and ther∣fore worthy to be embraced of all your faythfull subiectes. Whyche thynge I most hartely wyshe to come to passe to the glorye of God, your Maiestyes honour, and the profyte of all your fayth∣full subiectes. Sobeit. Your Graces humble subiect and dayly Orator Gwalter Lynne▪
The  eadynge hystoryes. ALthough the readyng of Hystoryes be profytable to euery man in generall, for many causes as we hereafter shall de∣clare: yet doth it chyefely belonge to kyn¦gesHistories are bokes of kynges and prynces. and great men. And hystoryes maye worthe∣ly be called theyr bokes, because that the knowe∣ledge of them is profytable and necessary for all them, whyche are ordeyned to rule a commune welth. For not onely the Heythen hystoryes do make euery where much mentyon of prynces, but also the hystoryes of holy scrypture. For besyde that, the holy scryptures do makeHistoryes of holy scryp∣ture. mentyon of the wyll of God and of hys worde, and also of Christes spyrytuall kyngdome, they teache also of polityke administration, and set forth manye notable examples, whych are necessary to be kno∣wen in the gouernaunce of a commune weale, and by the whych, the myndes of Prynces may be stur∣red and inflamed to the endeuour of ryght pryn∣cely vertues. The hystoryes of the Heythen, declare of theHistoryes of the Heythen. ofsprynge and begynnynge of great realmes, and for what causes alteracyons and great chaunges do befall in realmes: besides that, they do conteine also preceptes of vocatyens and powres, by the whych commune weales be stablyshed and pre∣serued. And for thys cause chefely are hysto∣ryes worthy to be called the bokes of great pryn∣ces and lordes.
Seinge now, that it is necessary that euery man had nede of two maner of powers, namely, the poli¦tike or external, and beside this by the faith and dre¦de toward God, the examples of ether of them are propoundid and set before vs in the histories. And that we maye first speake of ciuil powres, Princes, and all suche as are set to gouerne greate thynges, must fyrste and chefelye considre and beholde thoseWhat muste be marked in the exāmples of princes. examples and histories, by the which they maye be admonished howe they also maye faithfully behaue themselues in gouerning a cōmune weale. In this must they set befor them the examples of good prin¦ces and kinges, and must learne of them by what meanes & wyth what vocacions chefely they haue vsed in gouernynge or rulinge empyres, that they haue had respect to nothinge saue only to the com∣mune profyt, that they haue only considered and ex¦ercised iustice and equite, that they haue punished greueously sinne, that they haue not warred for e∣uery cause, but that they haue oft kept peace by the polytyque forberynge of iniuryes. Also in theyr defence, they were of a doughtye and stronge cou∣rage, they haue vsed great gentylnesse and loyalte towarde the goode and peaceable. Fynallye they haue endeuoured to enuyrone their realmes wyth stronge fortresses and greate powre, besyedes the anauncemente of Godlynesse and goode ma∣ners. In the examples of tirauntes must they marke yeWhat is to marked in ye examples of tirauntes. contrarye, namelye, that theyr endes were full of miserye, and by reason of theyr crueltye, peryy∣ous: and soo there happened deadly alterations in
the commune weale. Of thys wyse is it euident that Pharao peryshed by reason of tyranny, and for lyke cause were the Romane kynges dryuen out. Oftymes also haue Princes vndone themsel∣ues ech other by reason of pryde, enuy or hatred, the whych somtyme grew of a thynge of no value. Lyke as Pompeius had no cause to oppresse Iu∣lius Cesar, saue only enuy. The lawes of ye Grac∣cyans amonge the Romanes do beare wytnesse, that newe alteracyon or chaunge, doeth oft geue occasyon of cruell warres. Nother hath the Tur∣kysh empyre hys ofsprynge by any other occasyon, saue by heresy and dissentyon of learnynge and doctryne of the fayth. Daungerous conspyracy∣ons cause oft tymes that kyngdomes are ouer∣throwen, the whyche wytnesseth the example of the Athenians, whyche loste theyr gouernaunce and goodes by reason of such leagues as they had made. To obserue and marke such thynges in rea∣dyng of hystoryes, doth greatly auayle them that beare rule, that thereby they maye learne to be∣ware in theyr gouernaunce, lest any suche lyke do befall: For such cases do dayly befall. Yea though the persons do somtyme chaunge in cōmune wel∣thes, neuerthelesse so much as is concernynge the equalytye of mattiers, the worlde is and alwayes abydeth lyke to hymselfe. Wherfore Thucydydes (whych was excellentThe say say∣eng of Then cidides cōcer¦ning histories both in knowledge of Martyall affayres, and had himselfe endured a great & contynuall warre, the which he him selfe wrote, wyth dyuers other thin¦ges) said most truely: Histories is a treasure which
neuer ought to be layde out of our handes: that w beinge holpen by the same, may the more commody ously in treat of the affaires that for the moost part in the commune welth. So noble a treasure verely are histories, by ye which that they that haue gouer¦naunce of the commune welche, are aduertysed of sundry publyke matters. Besydes these also are ther founde in historyesHow hysto∣ryes do pro∣fye prynate . such examples, which do profet euery priuate per∣son seuerally, such as these be: The magistrate must be obeyed. They, which rebelled against the higher powers, were neuer vnpunished, as Absalon, Cati∣lma, Brutus, Cassius and such like that were ther∣fore punished. Of faithfulnesse of frendes, as Iona∣thas, which saued the life of Dauid. Of the punish∣ment for aduoutry and suche like wicked dedes, as it appeareth by ye example of Dauid. What nedeth many wordes euen as in al sciences are set forth ex¦amples to be folowed: so are in histories set forth & painted examples of al kind of vertues. Yee and in examples and thinges cōmitted is more euidently sene the worthinesse of vertues, yea & also of what vnclennesse and dishonesty vices are, than in precep¦tes or doctrinees: Because that examples being set before vs as images, do not only teache openly, but do also admonish, sturre, and inflame the myndes yt are honestly brought vp, that they maye be kindled toward vertues and honesty with a certain plesur and loue. For who could be so cruel of minde, which shulde not be moued, yf he did reade some excellent and laudable dede, or an example of vengeaunces. I haue brefely shewed, how the examples of po∣litike
vertues and ciuill causes must be obserued inA Christen¦man muste searche the commaun∣dementes of sayth and feare out of hystoryes. readynge of histories: Nowe doth it pertayne to a Christenman, to whome godlynesse appertayneth that he maye knowe that out of historyes are to be gathered instructyons of fayth and feare of God. For these are the chefeste vertues of Godlye men, that are allowed before God. And thoughe the hy∣storyes of the Gentyls do not teache vs that God careth for vs, or that God worketh wyth vs: a godlye harte neuerthelesse shall marke thys, name¦lye, how commune welthes are kept and preserued in the worlde from heauen, and that it is the wor∣kinge and dede of God, to reuenge violence and wronge, and that God doth oftentimes distribute hys excellente vertues amonge the Heythen. For princes can not kepe their kingdomes against Sa∣tan, without the singular benefite of god, & the aide or assistaūce of great vertues. And of this wise shal the mind of a godly man think by himself, that such notable actes & punishmentes are the worck of god and shal by them learne to fear God, that is to saye, that tiraunces are greueously punished, according to that sentence: he that taketh the sword, (that is, he that taketh vpon hym the authoryte of venge∣aunce, without a commaūdement,) the same shal pe¦rish with y• sword. Contrary wise maie be sene also that good princes are kept and preserued of God: & the same haue the heithen perceued also, ye princes do rest vpon the aid of the goddes. For Homer the poet sayeth, that God holdeth for the hys shyide in battail, to defend princes. He faineth also that eue∣rye prince is in sauegard by the defence of his god,
as it appeareth that the goddesse Pallas was wyth Achilles in battayll. &c. Althese thinges are moost clerely expressed in y• histories of the holy scripture, as in Abraham, Da∣uid, Ezechias and other kinges, whome God hath defended. And their examples are prepounded to euery prince, yt they may be assured that god doth of likewise defēde the good. For the histories of ho∣lyThe distrēce of holy and proph hi∣stories. men and Heithen men do differ in that, that in y• histories of holy men are set forth and declared the witnesses of Gods workes, the which also do not only treat of politike matters, but do chefely sha∣dowe and declare vnto vs Gods kingdome, that God geueth his worde, that frely and of mercye he will saue: the which thing the histories of the Gen∣tiles can not speake of. Therfore ought euery Christen man chefely to know the holy scripture, that out of them they mayWhat holy histories do teache. learne the doctrine and confirmation of faith. First how al thinges are created of God, how sinne dyd beginne, that Christe hath set vp his kingdomes a∣gainst sinne, that he hath geuē his word, that Chri∣ste was promised, and that he is come to abandon sinne and to saue vs. Item how God, whan he had geuen his word, hath alway preserued and mainte¦ned Christes kingdome, and that Christes king∣dome, that is the true beleuing, haue alway ben cō∣uersaunt vnder the crosse sence the beginninge of y• worlde, and yet neuerthelesse are saued, that Sa∣tan with the greatest power of the world hath as∣saulted the word of God. Item that God hath wō¦derfully alway kept his promise, aboue the vnder∣standynge
and thought of mens wit or wisedome. Item that God hath set before vs bothe the exam∣ples of his dredefull vengeaunce, and also of grace or fauour. Of this wise haue king Dauid and other gotten remission and forgeuenesse of sinnes, that by theyr examples we may be comforted, and beleue that God wil forgeue. Nether is y• to be omitted, that God hath geuen vs al maner of prophecyes of exterior kingdomes, to stablish our mindes, that of the accomplishment of their chaunce, we myghte haue wytnesse, that our word is come of God, and that none other faith saueours is true. Item that we shuld be warned whan Christe muste come, and whan the ende of the worlde is to be loked for. Itē for so muche as we knowe that all thynges spoken of in the prophetes are come to passe, that we may beleue, that those shall happen also, the which holye scripture sayeth shall befal. Moreouer to vnderstande prophecyes arighte, it is greatlye necessary to knowe the order of king∣domes, the nombre of the yeares, and many o∣ther thynges, whyche in readynge of Heathen hystoryes do offer them selues: the knowledge whereof is chefelye necessarye for Chrysten men, that they may the better vnderstande the propheti¦es, and haue the better iudgment of them. Of all thys truely maye euery man iudge, how muche profyte is taken oute of the readynge of hy∣storyes, and the greate profyte or frute that com∣myth of them ought dylygently to steare and driue euery man to knowe them.
After what order hystoryes must be comprehended and red. HE that wyll reade hystoryes to pro∣fyt, the same must comprehende all the tymes sence the foundacyon of the worlde into a certayne order. For there were some that diuyded the worlde therfore in seuen ages, and haue rekened them diuersly: but those, where they endeuour to sett an order, they do nothynge but sett all thynges wythout order. As for me, I wyll folow the renowmed sayenge of Ely the pro∣phet, whych hath excellently dyuyded the worldeEly hath dy¦uyded the wolde into  ages. into thre ages wyth the whyche he sheweth the greatest chaunges of the worlde: also what tyme it behoued Christ to come, and how longe thys state of the world ought to last, and thus it is. The sayenge of Helias house. THe worlde shall stande syxe thousand ye∣res and after shall it falle. Two thousande yeares wythout the Lawe. Two thousande yeares in the lawe. Two thousande yeares the tyme of Christ. And yf these yeares be not accomplyshed, oure synnes shall be the cause, whyche are greate and many. That is to saye, the worlde shall stande two M. yeres without any prescript admynistration, & certayn lawe of the word of God: but whan these be gone, there shalbe geuen the circumcysyon and
lawe: besydes thys shall a certayne polytique lawe and seruice of God be institute out of Gods worde, and thys state shall laste two thousande yeares. Af∣ter thys shall Christ folowe, and the tyme of the go¦spell shall lykewyse stande aboute two thousande yeares: but here shall some yeares want. For God shall wyth the hayste of hys commynge preuent it, that the yeres of this age shal not be accomplished, the whiche Christe hymselfe in the, xxiiii. chapiter of. S. Matthewe, sayeth: Wythoute those dayes had ben shortened, all fleshe shulde not be saued. We shall in wrytynge of the hystorye vse thys or¦der,The fyrst age. and diuide the boke in thre partes, whereof the fyrst shal comprehende those thinges, which are chaunced betwene the tymes of Adam and Abra∣ham. For those are the fyrste thousande yeares: Of these is not much written, but suche thynges as a∣re moost worthy of memory, and of these times, the¦re is no certainte, but of that which is found wryt∣ten in the Byble. The nexte age of two thousand yeares, shalbeThe second age. counted from Abraham, vntill Christis commyng: all though concerninge to the full numbre of the yeares, the tyme is not accomplyshed. For as we haue sayde before, God maketh hayst to the latter day. As for thys age, is the propre and bery age of the worlde, in the which the moost myghtye kyng∣domes and monarchies haue succeded ech other by a certayn order: nether hath the worlde euer so de¦clared hys force and myght, as in this age. Wher¦fore we shall deuide thys tyme in foure monarchy∣es. For it semeth, that God wolde the worlde to be
maintened by a certaine gouernaunce in hys place, that a certen means of shame and honesty might be conseruid, and the wicked mighte be punished, and for that cause hath he institute Monarchies. Such Monarchies are kingdomes, where the chefe andWhat Mo∣narchyes , and of hat pups∣. vpper power of al thinges pertaineth to one alone for the conseruation of commune peace and ryght. Such a monarchy was of so great puissaunce, that the exterior of foren kinges, could not withstande or oppresse it. And by a certain ordinary successionThere e on∣ly oure Mo¦narchyes. were only four such monarchies. The fyrst was of the Assirians, y• second of the Persians, after them the Grekes, at the last y• Romanes. And to the ho∣nor of such an empire or superiorite, hath God exal¦tedThe honor of the Em∣re remay∣h by the s. y• Germanes before other nations in these lat∣ter times. For though the Roman empire be some deal minished now a daies:) for as it was prophecy¦ed before it was y• pleasure of god that y• monarchi∣es shuld finally decay) neuerthelesse the maiesty re∣maineth by the Romane empire, nether is ther any king, but he hath a respect towardes yt kingdome. Moreouer though we haue not alway alyke migh¦ty Emperoures, neuerthelesse God prouidinge so, there happeneth somtime an Emperour of such po¦wer, yt the maiesty of the empire may be conserued: and that to hold vp the religion and concorde of al natyons. The Germane princes, and chefely the e∣lectors ought to estime grearly this their honour, that they haue such high autoritye cōmitted them of God, to preserue religyon, iustice and commune peace. For verely, it is of great force that thys mo∣narchy be preserued, thoug it be not so very great. Therfore ought y• princes to beware, lest ther ryse
any sedes of sedition & discord among them, which might geue occasion to cause this empire to decay. For whan this empire, wyich is the head of al good gouernaunce or administratiō in the worlde now aThe empyre must be sa∣ued and kept by all mea∣nes. daies, shuld be diuided, pulled asunder or waisted, it could not be but that ther shuld folowe a pertur∣bation of al degrees in euery part of Christendom: the which is gretly to be doubted, without God do preuent such misery with his last cōming. For holy scripture doth cōforte vs, & teach openly, that after yt this Germaine empire shal decay & faile, yt latter day shal straight waye folowe. This is sufficient to be spoken of monarchies, lest any man be ignoraunt that al histories, and al thinges done in the world, must be referred to these monarchies. And besides that y• obseruing of the order doth ayde y• memory it doth also not a litle helpe thervnto, yt one may se how & for what causes kingdomes are chaunged: wherby is to be learned how al those things are to be eschued, which cōmunely bring chaūges of king∣domes. The last age frō y• natiuite of Christ vntyll the worldes ende, doth like wise contayne two M.The thyrd age. yeres, although we haue said before, that the yeres of this age shulde not be whole, that the two thou∣sand yeres may be complete. This sētence of Elias truely conteineth many notable doctrines, & is che¦fely to be considered therfore, because that from the natiuite of Christe, it speaketh also of that tyme, in the whiche the ende of al thinges is to be loked for, and therefore haue▪ I sett it in the begynnynge of the boke, that it myghte be commytted to e∣uery mans hearing. But howe that the Rhomane
monarchye dyd begynne after the incarnayon of Christ, and how the succession came to the Germa∣nes, also how the Mahometysh or Turkysh empire beganne, and howe the Popyshnesse hath gotten encrease offoren power, all these thynges shall we shewe in thys thyrde parte. But thys also is chefe¦ly to be noted with diligence in readyng of histori∣es,The kyng∣dome of the worlde and Christes Kyngdome▪ that God hath institute two maner of kyngdo∣mes: the one a worldly kingdome the other a kyng¦dome of Christ: and therefore it is necessary to mar¦ke here▪ howe that the churche hath begonne euen from the begynnynge of the worlde, and by whatt maner God hath alwayes kept her. Therfore that godly myndes maye haue a confyrmation of theyr fayth, we shall note by the state the tyme of eche of the kingdomes, where and by whome the kyngdome of Christ was, and what state it was in than: the knowledge of whiche thinge, bringeth no small profite to godlye rea∣ders. Adam is sett in a Paradyse of pleasure, to whome is forbyden the tree of lyfe. Genesis. ij. Adam and Heua are deceyued by the suttelty of the serpent. Thence com∣the transgressyon of the com∣maundement, and Synne.
The firste boke of the Cronicles, whych conteyneth the fyrste two thousande yeares, From Adam vntyll Abrahams tyme. HOly scrypture doeth teache vs,Adam and Heua. that God created heauen and earth, after that man, Adam and Heua, and sat them in paradyse, that is, that they beynge set oute of daunger of death and synne, mighte lyue in the earth happely: but when they forgat the commaun¦dement of God geuen, they fell into the daunger of synne and death. But forasmuch as all this is clear∣ly written in the holy Bible, out of the whiche they oughte to be learned, it is invaine to speake thereof here: it is sufficient onelye to aduertish the reader, that the worlde standeth by these beginninges, and that Adam and Heua are created of God, whyche are the ofspringe of all mankinde. Moreouer, about the very time of creation, dydThe institu∣tion of ciuill power and of all lawes. God institute the ciuyll adminystratyon, when he gaue Adam power ouer all those thynges, that are in the earth and sea, that he shoulde vse them, and should sett a good order in all those thinges that are exteriour. That commaundemente of God is the springe and beginninge of all lawes, and what∣soeuer ciuile ordinaunces there are, are begonne of it, the whiche are approued and alowed of God, by reason of this commaundemente geuen to Adam.
The churche hath her begynnynge here also: ForThe begin∣ninge of the churche. the commaundemente, wherein they shoulde exer∣cyse theyr fayeth, and feare before God, was here geuen: but whan they began to synne, hath God disclosed the power of Sathan, and against it hath promysed the Gospell or glad tydynge of the wo∣mans sede, that is of Christe, that Christe shoulde come, and wayst Sathans kyngdome, and shoulde delyuer vs from synne and death into liberte. Thys was the fyrst preachinge of the Gospell, whiche beganne the churche and Christus kyng∣dome.The fyrste preaching of the Gospell. For in the churche muste not onely be prea∣ched the commaundementes of good workes, but also the forgeuenesse of synnes by Christ: for there∣by onelye are we reconciled to God, and endure a∣gaynst death and all maner of temtation, whan by fayth we take the promyse of forgeuenesse of syn∣nes: And of thys wyse toke Adam and Heua con∣solacion out of the word that Christe was promy∣sed, and of these two persons is the churche fyrste begonnne. Besyde thys was it necessary also, theyThe begyn∣nyng of tem¦porall afflic∣ions. should suffer temporall afflictions: for they were dryuen out of paradyse: that is, they were subiecte to death, and all maner of other myseries, and so lyued theyr dayes in laboure and trauayl in that lande, which the Iewes possessed afterwarde. For it is written, that they were created by the cytye Damascus. Of Cain and Abel.
SCrypture sayth that Adam and He∣ua broughte forth children, and that Cain slewe hys brother Abel. And here begynneth the persecution of the sayntes of the wicked men, and is and example very dredefull. For thys manslaughter happened for none other cause,Persecution for the true gods seruice than for y• seruice of god, the which, whan it is done purely, Sathan can not abyde it: for the whyche cause he sturreth Cain to slaye his brother, that the worde of God and syncere doctrine maye be quen∣ched. And this dede sheweth howe vehement is the ire of Sathan and rage: also what mannes fraylnesse and blindnesse is. There are by the waye rehearsed in this history weyghty and graue prea∣chinges of the iudgement of Christ to come, of the dredefull vengeaunce for sheddinge of bloude, the whiche to rehearse here, were to longe. Cain after that he fled hys fathers sight, he be∣ganThe cytye Enoch. to buylde the citye called Enoch. Hys chyldren inuented all maner of handycraftes and sciences. Finally for the manslaughter was he punished, for he dyed a lyke kynde of death. Of Seth. AFter this was Seth boren to Adam. thys man beynge famous and renomed for his endeuour of honest and godlynesse enforced after Abel to auaunce and aug∣ment Gods kyngdome. Of this Seth were after∣ward engendred holy fathers, and the remnaunt of
thys kynred remayned: But the posterytie of Cain was whole drowned in the floude. Iosephus wyt∣nessethAdam and Seth finders of sciences. that Adam and Seth made two tables, the one of brasse, the other of stone, and that in them wer grauen the worde of God and prophesyes, by the whiche the worde of God was kepte. He wryteth moreouer, that they diuided the yeare into twelue monethes, and that they obserued fyrste the course of starres and taught it. For it had not bene possible, that the minde of man coulde haue attayned to the searching of so high and wounderfull things, with∣out God had opened them the knowledge of them. Wherfore to Adam and Seth we must ascribe the word of god, the figures of the letters and the grea¦test sciences. Ther are also many witnesses among the Grekes, that the writinge and all sciences are come of the Iewes aunceters. For Herodotus wri∣teth in his fyfte boke, that the Grekes haue recea∣ued theyr sciences and letters of the Phenices. The age of Adam was nyne hundreth and thir∣ty yeares, and reached vntill the time of Noes fa∣ther: but he dieth hundreth and. 26. yeares before Noe was borne. But in this tyme is written to be happened nothinge worthy of rehearsall, vntyll Noes tyme, saue only genealogy: that in the meane whyle we maye know surelye, of whom it behoued Christ to be borne. But neuerthelesse by the waye maketh scripture mention of the death of Enoch,Enoch is an mple of euerlastyng lyfe. that he be taken vp by God: the whiche dede God hath sett before the worldes eyen, that it mighte know and beleue that there is immortalitie after thys lyfe, and that God shall iudge, and saue the
good truely, but punish the wycked. Of the Floud. THE scripture maketh mention that the worlde was punished of God, and ioyneth therto the occasions thereof, namely that it begann to peier: and a∣monge the chefest of the euels are na∣med the despisynge of God, aduoutry and tyranny, in the which is vsed all maner of wyl∣fulnesse and wantonnesse. For of this wyse saieth the text: The childeren of holy men beganne to be∣comeGene. ▪ tyrauntes vpon earth, by the which is signifi∣ed, that whan Gods worde was despised and hys worshyp, they liued vnmaneredly and an vnbryde∣led lyfe, they oppressed the weake and poore, accor∣dinge to their pleasure, and vsed wylfulnesse of ru∣linge as they would. For cause of these thinges did God threaten the worlde wyth the floude: and be∣fore the same should come, he wylled Noe to preach it an hundreth yeare before, that some beynge con∣uerted, mighte be saued. Whan Noe was sixe hundreth yeare olde, came the floude, and accordinge to Goddes commaunde¦ment, went he into the arcke with his wyfe and his thre sonnes Sem, Cham and Iaphet, taking with them their wiues, and was saued. The residue of men and beastes hath the floude taken awaye and destroied. And are from the creation of the world, vntyll the tyme of the floude, thousand, sixe hun∣dreth and sixe and fiftye yeares.
Of the tyme after the Floude. WHan Noe had now ben aboue an half yeare in the arcke, and that the floud mynyshed, the arcke rested vpon the hyghesthyl of Armenia: and after the yeres ende, whan the earth beganne to drye, Noe was commaunded of God to leaue the arcke, wherein he had now ben a whole yeare. Than dyd God ordeine as it were a new worlde agayne. For fyrst he gaue hys worde, by the which he promysed not to drowne the world agayne, and in token of certayntye, he gaue the Raynebowe, which shulde admonysh vs of the pro∣myse made: and of thys wyse hath he set before vs tokens of beneuolence and mercy, to exercyse the fayth: He hath also than permitted the lybertye to e of flesh st ed cate flesh, the which the holy fathers before the floude dyd neuer vse. Besyde thys gaue God a new commaundement of outwarde administrati∣on, and commaunded more playnly that mansley∣ers shoulde lykewyse be putt to death, by those,The exam∣ple of ven∣geaunce. that be lawfullye permittted, that is by the offi∣cers. Of thys wyse than is a new state of the worl∣de ordeyned agayn. All these thynges haue I brefely recyted, spe∣cially that euery man may call to minde, and waye by hymselfe, how great Gods wrath is for synne. For God would cause the worlde to be more ware by this example, because he wyliudge and auenge: it is also shewed that God shall once iudge the whole worlde, for he will not that synne be vnre∣uenged
or vnpunished. Some haue written, that seynge the worlde hath fyrst be drowned with wa∣ters, it maye be gathered by naturall reasons, that it shall after thys be consumed wyth fyre. Yea and this is worthy to be marked, that they whiche belong to god, are kept of him, though they be few, abiect and despised. This is also to be noted in thys place, that the ciuyll power is ordeined, and punishment for man∣slaughter. For that is nerehande the heade of all ciuill exercise of iustice, after the which all other ca∣ses and trespaces ought to be iudged. Of the Tower of Babel. AFter the floude whan mankynd was now encreased, the Tower of Babel, and the citie of Babilon was begon to be buylded by the Chaldees, that they might begyn a kyngdome ther, and subdue to them other nations or people. But thys enterpryse hath God ouerthro∣wen: For whan they all vsed before one language, it befell that after the commune speche was chaun∣ged,The proprie¦tye of spe∣ches. they spake one one maner of language, another another, so that they vnderstode not eche other. Wherfore there was a diuision of speches, and the worke it selfe was left vnperfect. The posterite of Noe than was strowed here and ther in the world, the which the fygure folowynge shall declare. Sem the eldest sonne of Noe, of whose kyn∣redSem. is Christe, hath wyth hys childeren possessed
that parte of Siria, whiche is towarde the Easte. For of Aram hys sonne, came the Syrians: of Assur, came the Assyrians: of Arphaxat, came the Chaldeis: of Elam are the Persyans spronge.Cham. Cham the seconde sonne of Noe, hath optay∣ned that countrye, whyche goeth towarde the South. Of Canaan, are come the Chananeis: of Mizraim, came the Egyptyans: of Chus, came the Ethiopians: of Saba, came the Arabians.Iaphet. Iaphet the longest sonne of Noe went to the North and West, and this is the father of vs all, and therefore his name founde by the Poetes, whych haue called him Iapetus. Of his sonne Ia∣uan or Iaon are the Grekes, whiche are called Io∣nes:Iones are  fyrste s. for they be the first Grekes. And the voice Ia∣nan or Iaon, is no doute the same, whom the Lati∣nes do call Ianus.Wherfore Ianus hath lages. They vsed to paynte him with a double vy∣sage, before and behinde, because that of hym be sprouge both the nations, the Grekes and the La∣tines: and as oft they would begynne any thinge, they worshipped him wyth a spngulare honour, by the whyche they wytnessed that they countedThe Mace∣dones. Iaon their father. Iaons sonne was Cethim, of whome are called the Macedones, and thys confyrmeth the fyrste boke of the Machabees, and the worde Machetim sygnifyeth in Hebrue of Cethim, of the whiche is spronge the worde Macedo. For Stephanus the expounder of Gre∣ke wordes, wryteth that the auncient dyd saye Macetis.
Iaon had manye chyldren, Elisa and Doda∣nim, of the whiche haue their beginninge the Aeo∣lesAeoles. or Hellas and the Dodoneies: all these are the first of the Grekes. Of Tarsis Iaons sonne, is Tharsus in Cilicia called. Iaphet had other chylderen also, Gomer, Magog, Tyras and Mesech. Of Gomer are the Cunerij or Cimbry as witnesseth Eusebius. Of Ascanes Gomers sonne came the Tuiscones, that is, the Germanes. Of Magog are spronge theThe Ger∣manes. Scythe, and of them are begonne the Turkes. Of Thyras come the Thraces. I haue brefelye shewed what part of the worlde eche of Noes chyl∣deren hath possessed, the which doeth greately a∣uayle better to vnderstande many hystoryes. Of the fyrst Monarchye. THat it maye be vnderstande how the worke of God muste be knowen and honored in those thynges that the magistrate or superiorite doeth: we haue aduertysed before in the pre∣face, that God willed to entertayne the world by foure Monarchies, to the intent that policye, iustice and correction mighte be entertay∣ned amonge men: for this cause are many thyngesThe foure Monarchies are proposed to Daniel. Dan. ij. spoken here and there of these Monarchies in holy scripture God hath proposed them to Daniel two maner of waye: First vnder the figure of a greate man, whose heade was golden, the brest of syluer, the belly of copper, the legges of yron, the fete par∣tely
of earth, partly also of yron. And lest we should not know, that then finally shal y• end of the world be, there is added, how that the stone Christ doeth breake his fete, that the man hymself do fall, and so do the world cease. Daniel hym self hath expounded this vision of the foure monarchies. For he saieth that the head doth signifie the first kyngdome, that is, the Monarchie of the Assyrians. The brest of siluer, sygnifieth the kyngdome of the Persians. The belly of copper, signifyeth the kyngdome of the Grekes. The leg∣ges of yron signifyeth the kyngdome of the Roma∣nes. The fete of yron and earth, signifyeth the state of the Empire of Rome at this tyme, namely that now a dayes is much lesse and weaker, than it was wont to be. The foure beastes shewed vnto Daniel do also pretende these foure kyngdomes. The Lyonesse, sygnifyeth the force of the Assyrians. The Beere sygnifieth the Persian empyre. The Leoparde sig∣nifieth Alexander. By the fourth beast are the Ro∣manes signifyed. And there is added that besyde the Romaine empyre there shall ryse an other em∣pyre full of cruelnesse, and suche one that shall make a new lawe agaynst Gods worde: And that is the Mahometish and Turkysh empyre now a dayes. God wyll haue vs so truely warned, that as we knowe the histories of al the worlde, we should con∣syder that the tyme of finishyng be not farre of, and that of this wise we should haue wherewith to con∣firme our faith.
In the Bible it is manifest, that the fyrst king∣dome beganne by Nemrod amonge the Babylo∣nians, and the scripture calleth him a valyaunt hunter before God, that is, a mighty prynce, which wyth force subdued men to obeye. And he isNemroth Gods hun∣ter. called a hunter before the Lorde, as Gods hun∣ter: whereby it is signifyed, that the ciuill power is ordeyned of God, as a vengeaunce, and that she be a minister of God. Wherfore the fyrst Monarchye beganne by the Chaldeis, as wytnesseth also Xe∣nophon, and the successors of Cham raygned fyrst, of the whyche dyd Nemroth yssue. For though Noe had cursed hys sonne Cham, yet neuerthe∣lesse dyd God in the meane whyle by a wonderfull destiny differ the vengeaunce and promise. How∣beit the kyngdome remayned not by the poste∣ryte of Nembroth. For there rose a newe kyng∣dome by the Assirians thorough Assur, by whome also the citye Niniue was buylded. Oute of Ni∣niue went the Assyryans, and subdued the cytye of Babylon, the whyche Diodorus Siculus do∣eth wryte: and by thys occasyon is the Monar∣chye translated from the Chaldeis to the Assy∣rians. Strabo and other dyd make mention of the ci∣tyeNiniue. Niniue, that it lyeth in Assyria: whereby it may easely be gathered, that Niniue and Babilon haue ben two seuerall cityes, not one of dyuerse names. Many kynges are there rehcarsed in thys Monar¦chye: Howbeit seyng ther is nothing notably writ∣ten of their dedes, it maketh no greate matter to
rehearse their names onely: onely this behoueth it the reader to remembre, that this Monarchye be∣ganne neare hande before the ende of the fyrste two thousande yeares, whiche were accomplished be∣fore that tyme, whan Abraham was fyftye yeare olde. Hetherto haue wee treated of the fyrste age of the worlde, in the which may be sene of the crea∣tion of the worlde, of the churche, and ciuyll admi∣nistration ordeined of God, besyde that of other wonderfull dedes shewed in the world by god. ButThe churche from Noe  Abrahām the churche, came from Noe the patriarche, vntyll Abraham, whiche was eyght and fyftye yeare olde, whan Noe dyed. In the meane whyle whan this Monarchye beganne, vngodlynesse and idolatry beganne to ryse here and there in Babylon, and the true worde of God was in the meane tyme quenched.
seconde boke of the Cronicles, of the foure Monarchies, the whiche lykewyse comprehendeth two thousand yeares. FOrasmuche it is before all thynges necessary and profytable in histories, to consider the times and order of thinges that are happened: I willed to parte this Cronicle in most greate and certaine nombers, whiche maye easely be perceaued and kepte in memorye, in the whiche neuerthelesse mighte be comprehended the most and principall chaunges of the worlde. After than that we haue finished the first age, we shall vn∣dertake to speake of the two thousande yeares fo∣lowynge, in the whiche also appeared the greatest power of the worlde, and the most greatest monar∣chies haue folowed in order. Of the fyrst Monarchye of the Assyrians. Ninus kyng of the Assyryans. WE haue admonished afore that the Chal∣deis haue raigned first by the Babyloni∣ans, but they remayned not longe in the empyre, but that the Assirians the neigh¦boures of the Chalde is obtained the kingedome and they beginne the history of kyng Ninus: which beynge become moste puyssaunt in the Easte at theZoroastres fynder of witchcrafte▪ last also had warre wyth Zoroastres kynge of the Bactrians. It is sayde that thys Soroastres fand
fyrst wytchcraft, and to haue taughte the course of heauen, and the starres wyth great diligence. As the warre was fynyshed that Ninus had wyth Soroastres, he dyed, leauynge hys heyre a yonge sonne. Of quene Semiramis. SEmiramis the mother of the chylde, ru∣led her selfe after the kynges decease. For the feared in so newe a kyngdome, and where they were not all yet of their fre wyll subdued, that for the chyldes youth, the people mighte haue speded to rebellion, and lest she shoulde be despysed, by reason of wo∣man kynde: wherfore she vsed mans garment, and fayned her to be the kynges chyld. She was dou∣ghtyeSemiramis vsed mans garment. and excellent in princely affayres, and aug∣mented the borders of the dominion wyth vanqui∣shynge countries, and makynge fortresses. She raygned happely and with great prayse xlij. yeres. She fortifyed Babilon with costly buyldynges, dy∣ches and walles enuyroned about it. Whan the mo¦ther was deade, Ninias the sonne raygned wyth good quietnesse: and of this wyse was the superio∣rite of the worlde and Monarchye by the Assyri∣ans a great season, But, forasmuche as there is not much written of the kynges folowyng, I will passe ouer the rehearsall of their names, because the good reader can not well kepe them in mynde. Whoso wyll knowe them, may seke them by manye other wryters.
Neuerthelesse it is no doute, but that manys and sundry chaunges are befallen in this Monar∣chye, the which maye easely be gathered out of the Bible, which wytnesseth, that the Assyrians pos∣sessed Babylon, longe before the tyme of Cyrus, howbeit they were two kyngdomes: the one of the Niniuites, the other of the Babylonians. But for what causes or whan these mutations were, that is vtterly vnknowen. Herodotus wryteth that the Assyrians kept this Monarchy fyue hundreth yeares, and that after that longe tyme there was no certayne or fyrme kyngdome, but that the Me∣des vsed a proper kyngdome, and likewyse the Chaldees by the Babylonians, and the Assyrians had their kyngdome at Niniue, and amonge the kynges had nowe the one ouerhande, nowe the o∣ther. Finally the Medes beynge become myghty, drewe the vpper Monarchy to them, takynge also the citye Babilon. These thinges seme moost ly∣kest, to the whiche agre those that are written of Sardanapalus, not only by Metasthenes, but also Bion, of whom Agathias maketh mention. Of Sardanapalus. WE must speake a lytle of Sardanapalus, how he was depryued of his kingdome, & that afterward the kingdomes were diuided. Whan God wyll punyshe the worlde, he geueth it lecherous prynces. By the hi∣storiesA lecherous prynce. it is manifest, that Sardanapalus nothinge
regardyng the gouernaunce of the kyngdom, gaSardanapa∣lus wanton∣nesse. hym selfe only to pleasures, in so much also, that  vsed to paynte and coloure him selfe, to make h beawty, and to clothe him with womens garment. It is said that he sat in the middes of dishonest wo∣men, and vsed all maner of vnclennesse. How shuld not such an empyre haue had a pyteful ende? Whan nowe the Medes & Babilonians were fallen from hym and rebell, and that he had loste the battayll a∣gainst hys enemies, neither coulde no where mer∣chandes be more salfe, he set ye castell at Babylon inThe death of Sardana∣palus fyre, and burnt him selfe in it. Howbeit (as wryteth Duris) he sent afore his thre sonnes to Niniue: and hereby it commeth, that after the decease of Sar∣danapalus, the kyngdomes are diuided. Bolochus reigned at Babilon, whiche fell from Sardanapa∣lus with Arbace. Arbaces kepte the kingdome of the Medes. The posteryte of the Assirians dured a certaine space of yeares by them of Niniue. Ma∣ny yeares haue these thre kyngdomes foughte and stryuen for the Monarchye. Of Egypte. WE haue suffycyentlye spoken of thys fyrst Monarchye, but howe ma∣ny yeares there be, vntyll the tyme of the second monarchye, shall we note hereafter. At thys tyme must wee shewe brefely a few thynges of other kyngdomes, whych are come vp besyde this monarchy. For theThe kyng∣dome of the Egyptians. very large empyre of Egypt was in his floure, that whiche was gouerned by the posteryte of Cham:
which was gouerned by the posterite of Cham: but as concernyng his power, it was lesse then the mo∣narchye: as now a dayes the kyngdome of Fraunce is myghty in dede, but yet it is lesse then the Em∣pyre, concernynge ther power, or the dignite of his maiestie. Of Abraham and the spyrituall kyngdom. LEst we be ignorant in what state the word of God and the church was, we must also speake of the spirituall kyngdome. AbrahamAbraham was in Ni∣nus tyme. was in the time of kyng Ninus. For when he was old about fifty yeares, the first twoo thousande yeares had an ende, and the kyngdome of the Assy∣rians was already begonne. And that more is, whan now the true worshyp of God and his worde began to come out of vse in the kyngdome of Baby∣lon, There wēt out of Chaldea into Mesopotamia,Thare. with his two sonnes Abraham and Loth, lest he al∣so myght bee stayned with the wickednes of the su∣perstition that the Chaldees vsed. This idolatryVr of the Chald. es. doth the scripture cal Vt Chaldeorum that is, the Chalde fyre. For when in the sacrifice of the true Godly (the fyre fallyng downe from heauen) kyndled the obla∣cions: the wicked folowyng their examples, kynd∣led a fyre, and so set vp a newe Gods seruice, that with suche a worke, they might serue God, without the expressed worde of God, & without the know∣ledge of the promyse of Christ to come. Hereafter also in the histories is the same fyre called Orimasda,
that is, holyfyre, the whiche kynges caused also to be caried before them vpon a horse. The first occasiōThe first oc∣casion of ydo¦latry. of ydolatry among men began by this fyre, before Images were vsed. But lest y• worde of god should vtterly be quenched, God renewed afreshe the pro∣myse of Christe, and added a new ceremony too the worde, the which as a token, should kepe the remē∣braunce of the worde in mens myndes. For true doctrine is lightely put out of mens mindes, with∣out it bee beaten into the peoples myndes by out∣ward tokens and ceremonies. To that was Abra∣ham chosen of God, the whiche when he was olde thre score and fyften yeares, he was commaunded of God to go into Chalde, leauyng Mesopotamia, where a new promise was made hym, that the sede of Abraham should possesse the lande of Canaan, &The true wīg of the promi∣se made to A∣braham. should beare rule in it: and also that the sede of A∣braham, namely Christ should come, by the whiche God woulde blesse all nacions, that is, that GOD would be appeased by that sede and takyng awaye the power of synne and death, geue lyfe euerlasting To this promyse hath God added circumcision, theCircumcisiō is the token of promise. whiche should be a sygne of promission, and a prouo∣cation to beleue. And therfore remayned alway af∣terward in the churche or congregacion the worde and spirituall kyngdome of Christ among a certain people, that is, in Abrahams posterite, amonge the whiche it was necessary to haue bene alway some, whiche were true beleuers and Godly. As for the whole history of Abraham, is fully written in the holy Bible. In this place suffiseth it to shewe in what tyme Abraham hath bene, and what chaun∣ges
gion are happened in the meane season. But the promyse was other whyles repeted to A∣braham. As for the circumcision was geuen hymWhen the cir¦cūcision was geuen. when he was foure score yeare olde and nyne, thee yeare from the creation of the world two thousand and seuen and fourty, some count it to our Iubile two thousande and fifty. Abraham had of Agar his handmayden a someAgar. Ismael. called Ismael: the same began to growe in strength and puisaunce by the Arabians, and the Agareny in Arabia beare the name of this Agar, of whome we shall speake afterwarde. Of the destruction of Sodome. THE foure score and nyntenth yeare of Abrahams age hath GOD for thee abhominable euyll dedes, horrible and vncomly lecheryes, destroied fyue cities: Sodome and Gomorre, and the other cities lyeng therby, burnyng them with fyre from heauen. The place where the cityes were is become a great ma∣rasse, whose length and bredth conteyneth the spa∣ce of certain miles: euen yet at this time as though it were ful of pitche doth burne with cōtinual smoke and vapor for a token of Gods indignacion & ven∣geaunce for so greate synnes. This happened the thre hundreth and fourscore & eleuenth yere after the floude, after that Noe was deade the fourtieth and one. Of thys wyse hath God other whyles wytnessed to the worlde, that he wyll bee auenged and iudge synners.
Of Isaac. AFter this was a sonne borne to Abra∣ham, of his wyfe Saa, called Isaac,Isaac a fy∣gure of st. of whose sede is Christ. For he dyd beare hys fygure, whan God com∣maunded that he should be offered of hys father: wherby is signifyed, that Christ should bee a sacrifice, with the whiche should synne and death be disamilled. And by this example it is signifyed agayne, that God wyl forgeue synnes, rayse the dead, and geue euer∣lastyng lyfe to the beleuyng. Isaac had two sonnes Iacob and Esau. Of EsauIacob Esau. The Edo∣ fore  was called Edom  was called Israel haue the Edomites in Arabia their begynnyng: for Esau was called Edom, that is, reddish, because he solde his brother y• ryght of y• fyrst borne, the which God hath blessed, for a messe of potage y• was som∣what reed, despysynge the blessyng of God and his benefyte for loue of hys belly. But Iacob was sur∣named Israel, that is, prince of God, of whom the people Israel haue their of sprynge. But for al thee¦se thynges must the Bible be loked. Of Ioseph Iacobs sonne. BEcause Ioseph is rehersed amōg the chiefe and moost wysest gouernours, we do wor∣thely here make mencion of hym. For he taught the Egyptians both the religion and ciuyll maners: and aboue all is it worthy to bee marked, that the man whiche was endued with holynesse &Ioseph a man sage and holy. the holy ghost, had set vp a very hard and rigorous maner of rulyng, and that where the whole kyng∣dome
of Egypte was large and wyde, he ioyned them together as members of one body: so that we may learne thereby, that rygour is most nedeful to entertayn the people in there office or duety, & alo∣wed of God. For the common people is commonly destroied by lybertie. But for because he came into Egypte by the conspiration of his brethren, that he was solde of them, and also what chaunce he had in Egypte, of all this is there fully wrytten in the Bi∣ble. For by thys wonderfull occasion God wylled hym to come into Egypt, that in the same kyngdom also myght be taught the true worshyp of God and that the promyse of Christes commyng myght bee made manifest. For God would euer haue his word preached euen in the greatest kyngdomes: also that by this occasion God might fede Iacob and his po∣sterite in the tyme of derth. Of Moses, and of the punyshment of the tyraunt Pharao. ALthough God had promysed to the poste∣riteThe cause of affliction. of Abraham the possession of the lande of Canaan, yet hath he differred the pro∣myse a long season, that through the word they myght haue in the meane while wherewith to exercyse their faith: ye he suffred them before to be sore punished in Egypte. For as saith the booke of Genesis, Iacob and his chyldren fled into Egypte in the tyme of derth, where they dwelled a longe season, the which we shal note hereafter. But when Pharao ouercharged the people without measure and remission, and vsed tyranny, insom uche that he comaunded also to sley in contynently all the man∣kynde
that were borne: God sent Moses, to leade the people of Israel out of Egypte, the whiche after many wonders, brought the people to the redd see. Pharao folowed them wyth great force, trustynge to optayne hys mynde that he myght saye them: for ther was no place to escape, seynge of the one sy∣de they were closed in wyth hylles, of the other sy∣de wyth the see, and Pharao the tyraūte laye vponAn example of grace and goodnes. them behynde. But here declared God, that whan extreme necessite lieth vpon them that be hys, he is nere by them, and heareth them. For the water went back, and gaue the people waye a great space, that they myght passe wythout any daunger: but the tyraunt folowed into the sea vnhappely, which was drowned wyth the water that returned into hys fyrst course, and wyth hym the choyse of the people of Egipt. Here thē hath God sett forth againAn example of vengeaūce a new example to the worlde, that he wil iudge and be reuenged of wycked tyrauntes, and all that de∣spyse godlynesse. What time the ten commaundemen∣tes were geuen. THe fyftyeth daye after that the chylde∣renWhen y• law was geuen. of Israel were gone out of Egypt, whan they iournyed through thee desert by mount Suiai, were the ten commaundementes geuen, wyth incre¦dible magnificence and maiestye, namely wyth a voice out of heauen full of feare and drede. Thys worke of God is such, as none higher dyd euer hap∣pen to men at any tyme in the worlde. For the
doctrine of the ten cōmaundementes conteygneth the sūme of the godly wysedome, and in a brefenesse doth comprehende all maner of lawes and constitu∣tions that can be any wher. Therfore is it nedefull to know the tyme in the whiche suche a wayghtye lawe was geuen of God, namely the yeare from the creation of the worlde two thousande, foure hun∣dreth and foure and fyfty. Seuen hundreth, foure score and eyghtene after the floude. S. Paull sayeth, that the lawe was geuen afterThe time frō the promyse made to Abra¦ham, vntill y• goyng out of Egipt. that the promyse was made, foure hundreth and thyrtye yeares. For the same is the nombre of the yeres sence the tyme, whan Abraham beynge olde thre score and fyftene yeare receaued the promyse vntyll that tyme whan Israel was brought out of Egypte by Moses. And thesam that is redde in the xii. chapiter of Exodus that Israel dwelt in Egypt foure hundreth and thyrty yeares, the same maye not be rekened from the tyme that Iacob wēt into Egypt, seynge Ioseph was than in his floure. And that thys was not the nombre after Iacob only, maye easely be gathered here by, that Caath went wyth Iacob. And he begat a sonne Aram, whose sonne was Moses. Now can it not be that betwe∣ne Caath and Moses haue ben foure hundreth yea¦res. Wherfore the foure hundreth and thyrty yea∣res, whereof ther is redde in Exodus, are to be coū∣ted from that tyme, whē Abraham came fyrst from Mesopotamia into Canaan, and was afterwarde conuersant hymselfe in Egypte. And that the myn∣de of S. Paul may the better be vnderstād, I shall gather the nōber of y• yeares sōwhat more dilgētly
There are fyue and twenty yeares vntyl the byrth of Isaac, from the tyme that Abraham came fyrst in to the lande of Canaan, what tyme he hymself was thre score and fyftene yeare olde. Isaac begat Iacob when he was thre score yeare olde. The foure score and tenth yeare of Iacob was Ioseph borne. Ioseph lyued an hundreth and ten yeares. After Ioseph vntyll Moses was borne are thre score and fyue yeares. And this nombre of the yea∣res doth Philo note also. Moses was foure score yeare old when he ledde the people out of Egypt. If these yeres be numbred together, they mount to the nombre of foure hun∣dreth and thyrty. So muche tyme was there sence that the promyse was firste made to Abraham, vn∣tyll that tyme that Israell came out of Egypte, and after that was the lawe geuen. Now hath God ge∣uen this Israelitysh people a certayn policy and a seuerall kyngdome, in the whiche can nothyng bee requyred, that pertayneth to Gods seruice, to the presthode, also to the ciuyll iustice: that finally there myght be a certayn people, whiche should haue the worde of God, and of the whiche Christ shoulde fy∣nally be borne. By this people than hath alwaye bene the churche, Gods kyngdome and hystrue word, vntil that christ had suffered: the which must be marked, so that no man bee ignoraunt that she churche hath alway bene, and that God hath sence the begynnyng of the worlde reueled his worde, and to haue kept it alway with vs.
Of the princes or rulers of Israell. FRom the departyng out of Egypte vn∣tyll the begynnyng of Sauls kyngdome were thre hundreth thre score and nyne, yeres the which the texte of the syxt cha∣piter of y• third boke of kynges doth declare. Now had this people after Moses deceasē princes, whi∣che partely were created by the aucthorite of wyse men, partely were by a singular callynge raysed vp of God, by the whiche are notable thynges done: and of this wyse declared God, that he is faithfully with them that be his, and to defend them, though they seme somtyme to be tossed with the waues of peryls. These princes by an Hebrue costume werePrinces we called Iud¦ges. called Iudges. Howbeit for somuche as their histo∣ries be written in the Bible, we shall only rehearse their names, that the order of thee Cronicles, and course of the yeares maye the better be obserued. Moses raygned .xl. yeares. Iosue xxvij. Othoniel xl. Ehud lxxx. Barach with Debora the prophetisse xl. Gedeon xl. Abimelech iii. The same committed murther vpon his owne brother, and gotte thee kyngdome too hymselfe by sedition: and therfore was he not long after vnpunyshed hymselfe also. Chola xxiij.
Iair xxi. Iephthe vi. Abessan vij. Abdon viij. Sampson xx. After these gouerned y• people these hygh priestes: Ely xl. yeares. Samuel xl. yeares. The Kynges of Israel. THe iudges of the people of Israel wer not succedyng by enheritaunce: there∣fore was not the gouernaunce among that people firme or certayne, saue on∣ly with the hygh priestes: but God or∣deined somtyme wyse princes amonge thē in steade of a garnison, & those raysed God now here now there. But the people euell cōtented with this incertaintie of gouernaunce, required of Sa∣muel the hygh priest too haue a certayne kyng, the whiche might gouerne the kyngdom. Samuel wil¦lyng to do nothyng rashly, asked counsayl of God. god shewed that he was very wroth with that wil∣fulnesse of the people demaundyng a newe kyng & commaunding ye people to bee greuously punyshed therfore. Neuerthelesse God dyd in the meane sea∣sonThe institu∣tion of kyng∣domes and kyne e of . graunt to the makyng of the kyng and institu∣tyng and continuance of a kyngdome. The power of the kyngdom, and administration of it, is confir∣med here with wordes of no small importaunce: the whiche must chefely be consydered. Moreouer it is to bee marked, that God is not
dyspleased because he doth mysprayse the gouer∣naunce of a kyng (for he doth manifestly cōfirme it) but hee is displeased with thee peoples desyre of newfanglinesse in chaunging that commune welth,The chaun∣gynges and renewynges of kyngdōs displeaseth God. which he him selfe had instituted. For God will not suffre the chaunge of the kyngdomes, whiche are ordeined by hym. Also are we admonished by thys example, that we eschue any mutacion at all. In this historie are there many other notable com∣maundementes, the whiche for shortnesse, I mustThe confir∣macion of ci∣uyll gouer∣naunce. ouerpasse. This one thyng wyll I only reherse, that the ciuill gouernaunce, the aucthorite of prin∣ces and kynges is here cōfirmed of God, when he speaketh of the ryght and duetie of a kyng. Saul reigned fourty yere, and was destroied forSaul. his vngodlynesse, & all his kynred was destroted. Dauid reigned forty yeare, and God punishedDauid. hym for aduoutry committed, and by sedition was he dryuen out of hys kyngdom by his owne sonne Absalon: But God restored him into the kyngdom, and punyshed the sedition greuously. Absalon died a straunge death. Salomon was forty yeres kynge, but after hisSalmon. decease, was the kyngdom deuided in sundery par∣tes for the aduoutry of Dauid. Of the Kynges of Iuda, of Salomons linage and kynred. ROboam kynge raygned seuenten yeres.Roboam. And when hee woulde not obey thee Counsayll of the elders, in minyshynge the charges and exactions of the kyng∣dome, he caused wyth hys rygorousnesse, that a
chaunge of the kyngdome is casued. For he o∣wedThe occasiō of the kyng∣dome of Sa∣maria. the counsaill of younge men, nother wolde re∣lease ought according to right. Wherfore deciuered from him the moost part of the kyngdom, and dyd begynne a new kyngdome in Samaria, the whiche was the occasion of many greate battayls on both partes. As for the posteritie of Dauid, retained the kyngdome in Iuda, and the tribe of Beniamin, fo∣lowed that kyng. Abia reigned thre yeare, and in battayll vanqui∣shedAbia. the kyng of the ten tribes in Israel. Asa reigned fourtene yeare. The same obtainedAsa toke a∣way the wic∣ked Gods . great praise, because he rooted out the wicked wor∣shyp of God, which was institute against the worde of God: in so muche, that he fauoured not his owne mother in this behalfe: for she also folowed a sun∣dery worship of God. For this cause gaue him God good fortune agaynst the Arabians, the whiche he vanquished in battayll. At the last was he punished also of God, for a certayn conspiration that he had made, leauyng the trust in God. The mydde or half part of the worldes age. ABout the twelft yere of this kyng Asaes raigne, are accomplyshed there thousand yeares of the worlde, that is, the mydde or half part of all the worldes age, accor∣dyng to Elias saynge, the whiche we haue noted in the beginnyng of the boke. Henceforeward may be marked, that in cōtinently after happened moost greatest and sodayn chaunges in all kyngdomes, that there dyd aryse battayles and man slaughter, for the last tyme of the worlde dyd drawe on.
Thys is also to be noted, that the publike wellThe Iewes are elder. the Iewes are elder than of the Grekes and Ro∣manes: wherby it maye easely be gathered, that all other nacions haue their spring of the Iewes aun∣cetry, and that the eldest doctrine, yea euen Gods word hath ben by the Iewes fathers or auncetres. Iosaphat raygned fyue and twenty yeares:Iosaphat a defender of the religion. he is alowed for hys endeuour of religion, and that he hath exercised all kinglye duetyes wyth great diligence. And for that cause dyd god▪ geue hym ex∣cellent victories. Elias the prophet was in his tyme, which was taken vp quieke into heauen: & soElyas was in the mydle age of the worlde. rayseth God a prophet, euen in the myddes of the worldes age, no lesse of famous doctrine then mira¦cles, that the word and promise of Christ might be sometyme renewed. The rest than of the thre M. yeares of the worlde, began vnder thys Elias. Af∣ter Elias, succeded Eliseus the prophet. As for these two prophetes, how they haue reproued theEliseus. wycked seruice of God, and what miracles they haue done, is sufficiently treated in the Bible. Ioram reigned eight yeares: he commaundedIoram a set∣ter vp of new Idola∣try. to kyll his brethren euen the eldest, & was a begin∣ner of a new Idolatry, wherfore he was also wor∣thely punished of God: he dyed vanquished of the Philistenes. the which caryed away his wiues and chylderen, saue Ochosias, which was the yongest. Ochosias raigned only one yeare, and accor∣dyngeOchosyas. as his father dyd, he permitted the false ser∣uice of God to be set vp, wherfore he was slayne. But whan his mother Athalia saw that her sonneAthalia. was dead, she caused to be slayn all them that were
a lyue of the kynges bloud, & of this wyse was the kyngdome translated from Salomons posterite: that hereby we maye learne how rygorously GodExample of egeaunce. doth punish synne. Before all thinges must princes consider and marke this, that God doeth rout out the kynred of great princes because of wickednes. Athalia the mother of Ochosias kept the kyng∣dome with violence, and vsed seuē yeares great ty∣ranny. At the last she was worthely punished, when through the commaundement of the high priest she was slayn. Of Nathan and his posteritie. IN the rehersall of y• fathers, of the which Christ is borne, hath Luke the euangelist est out Salomon. For Salomons poste rite was destroied: neuertheles Dauids posteritie succeded in the kyngdome, accordyng toNathan Da¦uids sonne. the promise of God. Dauid had also a sonne Nathā of whom Luke maketh mēcion. Of his kynred wer these kynges of Iuda folowyng, namely. Ioas reigned fourty yeres: the same was of nota∣bleIoas. Ioiada. godlinesse, so long as Ioiada y• high priest liued, whom he obeyed: afterward fell he to vngodlinesse and Idolatry, and caused zachary the prophete theZacharias the prophete. sonne of Ioiada to bee slayne before the temple, of whom Christ doth also make mencion in the .xxiij. chapiter of Mathew. Wherfore God willed to pu∣nysh hym by the Syrians, and finally was he slayn by his owne seruauntes. Amasias was kyng nyne and twenty yeares:Amasias usi  godlinesse. this also was conuersant in Godlynesse at the fyrste, and herkened to the prophetes: whereby he
dyd luckely vanquyshe thorough God the Id∣means. But heyng after become haut and presum∣ptuous, he made war of pure wilfulnesse and with out constraynt, in the whiche he was taken and fy∣nally dyed. Ozias raygned twoo and fyfty yeares, the sameOzias which also is called Azarias. was also called Azarias. The same was at the fyrst also Godly, and ouercame the Philisthines. After∣warde whan he woulde hymselfe offre in the tem∣ple agaynst the ordinaunce of God, he was strykenOzias. Amos. Micheas. Ionas. with leprosy. In his tyme lyued Oseas, Amos and Micheas, whiche prophecied agaynste either kyn∣ges of Samaria and Iuda. Ionas was lso at this tyme, whiche was sent to preache to the kynge of the Assirians. Ioatham reygned lykewyse syxten yeares: the∣sameIoatham. was Godly, & fought luckely against Ammon. Achas reygned lykewyse syxten yeares: hee setAchas. vp false worshipping of god & of ouer great supersti¦tion and peruerse opinion of godlinesse, he buylded euery where throughout al the lande chappels and altars: wherfore God suffered hym and all his ro∣yalme to be greuously punyshed and spoyled. Ezechias reigned nyne and twenty yeares: He∣wasEzechias  godly kyng. a Godly kynge, he restored Gods worshyp, auoidyng Idolatry, he gaue the priestes their ten∣thes agayne. And because these are true feates of good princes, therfore hath God geuen hym noble victories. For when the kynge of the Assyrians be∣syeged Hierusalē he called vpon God for aide, & the citie was deliuered of the syege, by the angel slaingEsaye. the enemies. Esaye the prophete was in the time of
this kynge in great worshyp, by whome the kynge was instructed in suche thinges as pertayne to the feare of God. But in the syxte yeare of Ezechias,The wayst∣ynge of Sa∣maria. gat the king of the Assyrians the citye of Samaria, and led awaye the ten tribes of Israel in bondage. The moost parte of thys were the people of God, that were fallen from Iuda, and had set vp a pro∣prehe wasting of Samaria. kyngdome. But whan the kynges of Samaria were afrayed lest the people shoulde fall agayne to the kyngdome of Iuda, the which was ordeined of God, yf they shuld somtyme resorte to Hierusalem feastly, to do theyr sacrifyce, and to heare the word of God, accordinge to the ordinaunce of the lawe: they set vp a certayne peculiar or propre Gods ser∣uice, a propre doctrine, and a sacrifice agaynst Gods worde: and so haue they abused all thinges against the worde of God vnder pretence of Gods name, to entertayne the priuate power of their kyng∣dome. Agaynste this worship of God are sometyme sent prophetes, to the sauegarde and conseruation of many: in the meane season haue the mighty with alThe  a w d worship th not shed. The exam∣ple of the fe∣are of God. stubbernes kept their false gods seruice. Wherfore, God hath greuously punished these kinges wyth warres and vproures, neither lasted the raigne of this empyre longe by any kyndred, in so much also, that at the last God suffred the kynges and people to be led away. Duely oughte this example make vs afrayde, that we learne to feare God: For if god spared not the posterite of Abraham, vnto the which happened so manifest promises and so great, but hath sodenlye ouerthrowen theyr kingedome,
and cast them out: who is so sure minded, which can beleue that we shall escape fre? But in myne opiniōSamaria i a figure of the church of the East. that part of Samaria▪ semeth to beare the figure of the churche of the East and of the Grekes: for lyke as Israel caried away by the Assyrians into Sa∣maria, came neuer agayne: euen so also the churche or congregacion of the East is vtterly destroied by the Saracens and Turkes. And as it happe∣ned to the tribe of Iuda afterwarde: I feare me lest it chaunce lykewyse also to the West parte. It is to be feared truely that God shal handle vs more rygorously, because of the greatnesse of our mysde∣des. Houbeit God woulde in the meane season blesse the sede of Abraham before all natiōs. Wher∣fore ought the godly reader consider this example by hymselfe, and pray God, that he wyll chasten vs with mercy, and not to cast vs vtterly away. This kyngdom dured only two hundreth and foure and fourty yeares. That tyme verely was very shorte, specially seyng thys people had soo excellent promises, euen of outwarde goodes also, and in the meane season had they warre also and vproures. So litle doth God suffre the wicked seruice of God vnpunished. The wastyng of the kyngdom of Sa∣maria was done the thre thousande, two hundreth and fourtieth yere after the creation of the world. Manasse the sonne of Ezechias succeded his fatherManasse a wicked kyng in the kyngdom of Iuda, and reigned fyue and fifty yeres. The same restored the false Gods seruice, & for false zele of godlinesse, he burned in sacrifice his own childrē. He persecuted the prophetes. Esay y•The death of Esaye. most holy prophet hath he caused to be cut asunder
with a sawe and slayne: at the last was he taken o his enemies and caryed awaye. Howbeit whan he knowledged his trespasse, and called hartyly vpon the Lorde, he was taken frely to mercye, and GodManasse an example of petes. hath set him for an example to synners, that they doute not, but that God shall haue mercy, and as∣swage hys wrath & vengeaunce, if they turne from their wyckednesse. Amon raigned two yeare: heAmon. was a wycked kynge, wherefore he dyed with the swearde of hys seruauntes. Iosias raigned thyrty & one yere: he toke awayIosias. the wicked worship of God. He ouerthrew the chap¦pels and Idols: he cōmaunded to burne the bones of false prophetes. In his tyme were the bokes ofThe bokes of Moses  founde. Moses found again, which had many yeres be lost. That truely is a notable example, that wickednesse & mens traditions doth grow so excedingly & pre∣uayle, that holy scripture is so greatly despysed, y• euen the very bokes be lost. But God so prouiding & for seynge, she is neuerthelesse at the last restored and brought to lyght. This history no doute dothThe figure of pure doc∣tryne before the worldes de▪ shewe the figure of the last times in the church, to y• which the true and sincere knowledge of the word shalbe opened, euen before the ende of the worlde. But though Iosias was a verye godly kynge, yet wanted not he finally his errour. For whan he had now liued in good peace a great whyle, & had done many noble actes, beyng waxen hardy, he thought he might haue no misfortune by reason of his god∣lynesse. Wherfore he warred vpon the kyng of the Egiptians, the whiche neuerthelesse demaunded condicions of peace. But because he toke that warr by trust of mans power, he dyed of a gre wounde
that he had gotten in y• battayll. Ioachas raignedIoachas. thre monethes: and was caried awaye into Egipt. Ioakim raigned two yeares. In his time inua∣dedIoakim. Nabucho∣donosor. Daniel Nabuchodonosor kyng of Babylon all Iewry, whose tributary he became: many men were led a∣way, among the which was also Dauiel yet yonge. Afterward whan Ioakim kepte not the bonde or treaty, Nabuchodonosor came againe, and takyng Ioakim, caused him to be slayne at Hierusalem, & his body to be cast amongs y• other dead carcases, without the citie, according to y• prophesye of Iere¦my which prophesyed that he shuld be buried as an asse. Ioachim or Ieconias was kyng thre mo∣nethes:Ioachim  Ieconias Nabuchodonosor about this tyme beynge come agayn, beseged the city: Ieconias yelded him selfe frely through the counsel of Ieremy the pro∣phet, vnto whom God had reueled, that Hierusalē shuld be destroyed, & the people caried away: how∣beit he shuld not wholy be destroied, but y• he shulde once come agayn, & Hierusalem shuld be buylded a∣gayn. Ieconias was kept in Babilō by god, because he had obeied y• voice of the prophet, the which we shall note hereafter. The best of the people were led in captiuite at Babilon with▪ Ieconias, and also all the moost costlye vessels and ornamentes that were in the temple at Hierusalem. SedechiasSedechias. raygned eleuen yeres: he fell from the kyng of Ba∣bilon, whome he wolde not geue tribute: for which cause Nabuchodonosor came again & besieged the citie. And though Ieremy counseled hym, that he shuld yelde him self, (for it were so foreseen of god, y• the people▪ shuld be led away, and Iuda punyshed)
ye would not he obey, oldened and trustynge too Gods promyse, that the people of Iuda should not perishe. This did Sedechias boaste, and the hygh priests did interpretate the promyse of God per∣uerfly. For God could neuerthelesse saue his peo∣ple, though he dyd suffre them to bee caried awaye and to be punished a certain space. And thus was Ieremias prophecy despysed, specially because it was so long differed, nother did it so come to passe. Beside this had the king of Babylon bene now thre times in Iewry, & yet had not profited in besieging the citie of Hierusalē. Moreouer it was now y• ele∣uenth yeare, in the which many were fled out of the cytie, the toune yet saued. These thinges were the cause, that after mās iudgement they stifly trusted, that nothyng lesse shoulde be, then that general de∣struction, which Ieremy had prophecied. Also wasAn example of greate hū∣ger. the citie euery where fortified with fortresses, a∣gainst the power of the enemies. But Nabuchodo∣nosor destroyed them wyth hunger for whan he be∣syeged the citie a yeare and an halfe, it is saied that there was suche hunger, that many did eate theirAn example of mens sto∣ny hertes. owne children. So stony harted is mans nature in her purpose that where she was cōstrained with so great necessitie, yet refuseth she to come and take succoure and consolacion of God. For if they had yelded themselues after the prophetes counsayll, though the banyshement had bene harde to them, yet myght they haue had peace at the least wayeThe death of Sedechias. with the aliens. Finally when Sedechias toke the flyght, he was taken, & after that sawe he his chyl∣dren slayne in his presence: but his iyes were put
out, the citie of Ierusalem was destroied, the tem∣ple that God caused to be buylded, was burnt, the best of the people of the Iewes, was caried awaye to Babylon into bondage, this example ought ear∣nestly admonyshe vs, that God wyl not spare other kyngdomes and princes, but that he wyll greue∣ously punyshe synne, seynge he hath vsed so greate rigour agaynst this kyngdome, the whiche he hym selfe dyd set vp, for the scripture witnesseth that God hath punyshed Iuda, with innumerable kyn∣des of punishmentes for his synnes: and added thoose synnes whiche were the chefest synnes, namely, despysyng of Gods worde, the wicked wor¦shyp of God, tyranny agaynst the true preachers of Gods worde and prophetes. The destruction of the citye happened the threThe destruc∣tion of Ieru∣salem. thousand thre hundreth and thre score and therten yeare sence the creation of the worlde. The yeares From Dauid vntyll this spoylynge of the citie Ierusalem are fiue hundreth and sixten. Hytherto remayned the kyngly name by the po∣steritie of Dauid, amongest the whiche were many notable and renowmed kynges, as the lyke in none other kyngdome. For that kyngdome of Iuda had God specially created, and gouerned it: but because they were not without synne, therfore were theyThe kyng∣dome of Iu∣da. punyshed of God, and the kyngdome was chaun∣ged. For the kyngdome of Iuda was kept in capti∣uite in Babylon thre score and ten yeares: howbeit in the meane season dyd God declare hymselfe so, that it myght bee perceaued that hee cared for hys people and churche, and that he neuer would for∣sake
her. For he sent notable prophetes, as Daniel amongest the Babilonians, whiche conuerted alsoNabuchodo¦nosor was conuerted of Daniel. Nabuchodonosor ye kyng. For whan he was puny∣shed by Gods iudgement for his vngodlynesse, and was become madde & woodde, so that he differred nothinge from a beast, Daniel prayed God for him, and he was restored: afterward comminge to hys ryght mynde agayn from hys wyckednesse, he re∣nounced hys Idolatry, and as he was taughte of Daniell, he toke vpon him Gods true seruice. After Nabuchodonosor, raygned his sonne Euil∣merodach.Euilmero∣dach The same commaunded to entreate Ie¦chonias the kyng honestlye, and accordinge to hys kyngly dignitye, the which by the cōmaundemente of Ieremy the prophete, yeldynge him selfe frely, went also in exyle. And after this wise dyd god for∣tunate this kyng, which beleued the wordes of the prophete: though he was in daunger for a season. Of this wyse verelye was Dauids kynred saued from destruction by God, through gods prouidence the which we shall declare at large hereafter. After Euilmer odach succeded Balthasar in theBalthasar kingdome. The same was a despiser of godlinesse & Gods word, he restored of a new the old & abrogate Idolatry of the Chaldeis: he vsed the vessels that were caried from the temple of Ierusalē at his ban¦kettes: he mocked the God of the Iewes, and for a reproche, he caused to be songe, that the God of the Chaldeis was a true God, & greater than the God of the Iewes. But what happened. These blasphe¦mousBlasphemy∣es are not vn¦punished. voices brought the destruccion of the whole kyngdome. For ther was clerely sene a hande that
wrote vpon the wall, that Balthasar should perysh with all his kingdome. The same happened the ve¦ry same night: for the Medes and Persians fell so∣denly vpon the Babylonians, and gat the kynge∣dome, and killed the kynge Balthasar. This exam∣ple witnesseth also that the blasphemies agaynste God, remayne not vnreuenged. Now hath the tyme of the first monarchy an ende,The ende of the fyrst mo∣narchye. vntyllthe Perses and kynge Cirus. Betwene the byrth of Abraham and kyng Cirus are a thou∣sand, foure hundreth and four scor and fyften year∣es, in the which was y• monarchy first by the Chal∣deis, after that by the Assyrians. But whan it be∣ganne to be alienated, now preuailed the Assyrians than the Babilonians, vntill the Medes and Per∣ses dyd growe, and finally gat Cyrus Babylon, re∣couering the Monarchy and makyng all one. It is chefely to be consydered, that the whole kingdome of the Iewes is cōprehended vnder the tyme of this fyrst monarchy: where by it is euidentThe Iewes are most aun¦cient. that the Iewes are most auncient people, and that only their histories are certayn and true of the first kyngdomes of the worlde. Of the Grekes. WE shall now note brefely the state of the Grekes, in the tymes of the fyrst Monarchye: where by it shalbe ease∣lyThe history∣es of the Ie∣wes are el∣der than of the Grekes. gathered, that the histories of the Iewes are much more auncient, than the Grekes: for all their histories are written after the fyrst Monarchy. Nether can the
Grekes rehearse any thyng certayue or of longer space, than that theyr Olympiades do shewe. But the Olympiades began the eyght & thertyth yere of kynge Osias. And if that be diligently rekened,Whan the Olympya∣des  it shall appeare to be about two hundreth yeare be∣fore the monarchye of the Peries. But because of vnlearned readers I shall leaue the Olympiades, and shewe brefely what hath happened by the Gre∣kes in the tyme of the fyrste monarchye. The country of Grece had no certayne kyng,The country . as other nacions, but there were in it partly many prynces, partly also mighty cityes, & sundry greate chaunges happened with the princes. For the city∣es encreasyng in puyssaunce, coulde not well suffre Princes, as we haue sene in Italy in oure dayes, and as I shall afterward set some examples, which are profytable to know, and haue true wytnesse of hystoryes. For there are fewe historyes withe the Grekes before the battayl of Troye. Of the battayl of Troye. THE battayll of Troie happened before the tyme of Dauid, the whiche maye be proued by the wytnesse of Virgil. For he sayeth that the kyngdome of Alban, du∣red thre hundreth yeares. Of thys wyse sayeth he of that kingdome of Alban. Thre hundreth yeares wholy, shall be the raygne vndoutedly. Before the ende of thys raygne beganne Rome to be buylded, the which we shall declare afterward. And if ye re∣ken backward the nomber of the yeres, ye shal find that from the tyme of the buylding of Rome, vntyl the begynnynge of Salo mons kyngdome, are thre
C. and thre yeares. And it is euident that the bat¦taill of Troie was not long before. Some history wryters do differ here, whiche saye that thys bat∣tayl was of more antique, but I coulde proue the contrary by many argumentes, the whiche I doo now passe ouer, because of brefenesse. Forsoth thys one thyng is worthy to be marked, that the occasy∣on of the Troian battayll is spronge of adultery.The occasp∣on of the bat∣tayl of Troie was aduou∣try. For Paris the sonne of the Troian kyng, led away Helena the wyfe of Menelaus prince of Grece, the hefe of the Grekes and the cytezens takyng this  displeasure, making a conspiracy, went to Troie, nd besyegyng it ten whole yeares, at the last they anne the castel Ilium and the cytye Troye, and ayeng kyng Priamus, the kyngdome of Troye as wholy quenceed. From Troye sayled EneasEneas. to Italy, in ye which he possessed that part, which as called Latium. He beganne here a new king∣dome,Latium. Ascanius whiche also was called. Iulus. and buylded for hys sonne Ascanius, whych was also called Iulus the citye Alba, in the which he posteryte of Eneas raigned, vntyll the tyme hat Rome was buylded. In the battayll of Troie ere many doughty and renoumed princes, whose ames maye be sought other wayes. Out of Thes∣aliaAchilles. Hector. was there Achilles, of whom Hector the most aliaunt capitaine of the Troianes was slayne: nd Achilles him selfe at the last was slayne also by yle. For the Troianes had maryed to hym a dou∣ghter of Priamus, and as he satt knelinge in hys prayer before the altare in the temple, he was strycken through wyth a dart of Parys by a decepte.
Of the battayl of Thebe. NOt long before the battayll of Troie, ther was another of Thebe much more cruel.The occasy∣on of the bat∣taill of The∣bes. For seynge the kyngdome of Thebe was fallen of right by inheritaunce to the two brethren Ethrocles and Polinices, they agreed to∣gether vpon this condition, that they shuld raigne euery one a yere one after y• other. Howbeit whan Ethrocles had receaued the kingdome, he woulde raigne continually contrary to the appointement.Ethrocles. Polynices. Wherfore hys brother Polynices beyng constray∣ned, fled to Adrastus king of the Argies, the which as he had geuen him in mariage his doughter, heAdrastus. woulde set him into the kingdome againe by force, but Adrastus was slayne before Thebe with other princes. Ethrocles and Polinices brethren, meting together by chaunce in battayll were slayne wyth woundinge eche other. The discorde of the brethe∣ren was the cause of thys great and dolefull slaugh¦ter of the brethren. Nother was the warre yet fy∣nyshed: for other princes beseged the cytye agayne afterward with a mighty power, and gettinge it, dyd at the last ouerthrowe it. Of Hercules. ALytle before thys tyme, that is, shorte∣y before Saul was made kynge by the Iewes, lyued Hercules in Grece, whichHercules of Tyrin∣thus. before other princes is chiefely praysed for hys noble vertues. His elders were Amphy∣tryo and Alcmena boren of the cytye Tyrinthus, whych lyeth not farre from Argis. But Amphy∣trioTyrynthus
fled to Thebe, because that in a discorde be∣twene hys brother and hym, he slewe hym: and for thys cause fortuned Hercules to be borne at The∣be, and here he shewed the fyrst profe of his power.Minya. For whan they of Minya a toune in Thessalia, (which at that tyme were of renoumed puyssance, and raygned in the cytye Orchomenus,) assaulted the towne of Thebe, Hercules defended it, driuing the enemies of from it, and toke the citye Orcho∣menus,Orchoneme∣nus. the dominion whereof began than to fayle. This citye was most ryche, whose greate prayses are in Homers worckes, for her plentyfulnesse. This victory gat Hercules first a great name, in so much that afterwarde other prynces of Grece ca∣meThe dedes of Hercules. frely to him: therfore was he euery where a ma¦ker of peace, he ayded princes and cities, he reuen∣ged and chastysed vnryghteous dedes, and against them that he had holpen, vsed he great mekenesse, nother layed anye charge vpon them, that they were not able to beare. These are the thynges for the whiche he deserued so greate prayse, as none other prynce the lyke. Afterwarde toke he hys yourneye into Asia, where he ouercame kyng La∣omedon, and slewe hym: but in thys vyctory, vsed he a very kyngly moderacion of mynde. For he saued the kyngdome, nother woulde destroye it, but gaue the possession thereof to Priamus, as to the true heyre. And because he restored the kingdome to Priamus, it is easye to gesse what tyme Hercules lyued. Besyde thys he made the sea in Italy and Spaine safe from robbers, and for
this cause, caused he to be raysed two rockes in the vtter coastes of Spayne and Aphrica, which shuld alwaye beare wytnesse of this dede. For at thysHercules pil∣lers. time yet are they called Hercules pyllers. Charles the fyfte, the most victorious or most valiant Empe¦rour, hath these at this tyme as a peculiar badge, namely that he may be knowen to be sent to vs of God, to the intent that in thys troublous state of the worlde, he maye be in whole Europa as an Her¦cules, to restore agayne wyth hys prowesse and stronge victorious hande, peace and instyce. Hether to haue we spoken of the notable thyn∣ges that are happened in Grece in the tyme of the fyrst monarchye. But I shall neuerthelesse adde a few thynges besyde these: For in reading of hysto∣ryes must speciallye be consydered, what state the kyngdomes were of, what religions, what maner of lawes, Fynally what sciences they had, wherein they floryshed. Whan the sonnes of Noe dyed, the of  after  true vnderstanding of Gods worde peryshed also in Grece: though in the meane whyle they retay∣ned of thepr fathers the maner of ceremonies, and sentences of godlynesse, yet neuerthelesse was the vngodlynesse encreased, and otherwyles was one or other Idolatry set vp. For enery one ymagyned for him selfe an order to worshyp God, accordynge as hys constraint and necessite compelled hym. For it is spoken of a Poet: The fyrst feare that came to men mortall. Caused gods that be immortall. That is most euidente and true in fayninge of the wicked seruice of God. For noman is so cruel of nature, whyche beynge in necessyte, that doeth
not seke God: and for so muche as he knoweth not that God must be sought by faith only in Christ, he falleth to some outwarde worke, and faineth some new maner of worshippyng God. Of this commethThe occasiō of all maner of vngodly∣nesse. the fountayne and sprynge of all the vngodlynesses nere hande that are in the worlde. Nether nedeth any man suppose, that men erred so greatly, that they thought Images and contrefaitures to bee God: for they knewe ryght well, that they were wood and stone, but they were of this opinion, that this worke and this seruice pleased God, and that he would be worshipped of this maner: where as yet God wil not be worshypped by vnfaythfulnesse without onely Christe by what maner of worke or fashion soeuer it be. And so could thei neuer be sure, whether God were fauourable to them: for no man can surely persuade hymselfe the same, without the manifest promyse of God, and without Christ. TheThe head of Idolatry. heade then of all Idolatry is to truste in a peculiar and in a forged worshyp of God, excogitated of hys awne hed and in the meane season neuerthelesse, to doubte in tribulations whether God will be fauou∣rable. This doute I saye is the principall parte of Idolatry. And the vngodly, whiche neuerthelesse estemeth hym self good and wise, doth in this point much differ from the tren christian & godly. SuchHow muche an vngodly doth differ from a chri∣stian. an vngodly man hath goodly vertues & very shy∣nyng workes: but his hart doubteth whether God be fauourable to him. As for a godly man and true Christian, may wel be lesse then he, cōcerning other vertues: but in his hart he is surely persuaded that he is in the fauour of God, according to ye promises for
sitting in a chere vpō the denne, prophecied of thin∣ges to come, out of the whiche denne, in the meane whyle came smoke & blast of windes. Of this wise is it sayd to haue bene happened at Delphis. After that these prophecies were supposed to be written of the priestes, as vndouted south saynges: and be∣cause they were doutfully written, they might bee taken diuersly. These were deceates of the deuel, wherewith he begiled the worlde. Of Homerus and Hesiodus. BY the Grekes only were first the best lear¦nedWith the Grekes were pt firste of renowe. poetes, whiche were partly musicians partly priestes: some of them also were w sene in phisyck and astronomy. These com¦prysed their wysdome and learnyng with verses short sentences. But among them, whose workes are yet manyfest, were Homerus and Hesiodus theWhat tyme erus ly∣. chiefe. Cassius writteth that Homerus liued after the battaill of Troie thre hundreth and thre scor yeres, and before the fondacion of Rome euen there about whyche maye bee gathered to haue bene a¦bout that tyme, when Iosaphat reigned in Iewry His dwellyng was at Smyrna, whiche lieth in the forth part of Asia, where the moost auncient of the Grekes dwelled, whiche were called Iones and Acolidas. And all though Homerus was not myghtye in gouernaunce of the common wealth, it semeth yet that he vsed the cōpany of the greatest princes of all Greke. For he described of the best m¦ner the kynred and ofspringe nearehande of a
princes: and his bokes are euen a myrour of all ciuyl occupation and princely vertues. For he hath payn¦tedHomers bokes are a myrour of all ciuyl and princely vertues. and set forth all thynges, that can befall in go∣uerning a commune welth. Besydes this also what is the duety of princes and great men in there coun¦sels gathered together, and in other afferes what∣soeuer they be: he hath set them forth so conning∣ly, that he semeth to be most exercysed in parliamen¦tes, and diuising of most weyghty matters apper∣teining to kingdomes. Moreouer the sage wry∣ters dyd neuer prayse so highly no poetes writing, as the poetry of Homer, the whiche Alexander the great would neuer suffre to be out of his handes, because he might haue, wherout he might be admo∣nished and taught of the duety and vertues of an excellent kynge. Hesiodus (as wytnesseth Porphirius) lyueth anHesiodus a prest at Helicon. hundreth yeare after Homer. He was a neighbure or priest of the mount Helicon, where was a greate and a famous temple. His writinges are for the most parte sermones of good maners. For they are short sentences, comprisinge the pyth of all kynd of vertues: but they treate nothinge of Christe. For thys heauenly doctryne was hydden to the Gen∣tyls. Thys poetes writinges, conteyne also as it were a iust and perpetuall Kalendar, ordeyned af∣terHesiodus bokes. the course of the Sonne, and the obseruation of those starres, whiche shewe the difference of the yeare. Thys boke is worthy to be learned by rote of yonge chyldren, and it semeth that wyse men of Grece, haue in tymes past apprehend theyr chyldrē here to knowe these noble sciences. But the poet
Hesiodus, a man of notable learnynge and tempe∣raunce at the ende dyed wretchedly by some of hys frendes, whych dyd euyl recompence hym for hys good dedes. Of the buildinge of the citye Rome. PRoca Kynge of Alba had two sonnes. . . Numitor and Amulius. Nowe had the father determined to geue the kyngdom to hys sonne Numitor, because he was the elder: but Amulius that was the yonger, droue hym out, and vsurped to hym the kyngdome. And lest he myght feare any daūger by the yssue of Nu∣mitor, he stew hys sonne Agistus by fraude, & hys brothers doughter▪ Rhea Syluia, bounde he wyth Syluia. a vowe of perpetual chastitye in the company of the virgins Uestales. But she beynge made greatwith chylde, brought forth two twynnes, whych after∣warde were called Romulus and Remus. But whan Amulius knew of thys dede, he caused the mother to be kept in pryson, and the chyldren to be trowen into the floude of Tyber, to drowne them. Whan the chyldren were now set at the brinke of ye water, by chaunce came a wolfesse out of the nexte mountaynes, which gaue thē soucke, vntil they we∣re founde of the Kynges shepherde, who bringin∣ge them home, toke them hys wyfe to nouryshe. Wherfore whan they were waxen greate, and herde of the pretended murther in theyre youth, of Amulius, and that the Kyngdome was taken from theyr vncle Numitor by force, they determyned to auenge the tyranny, and by occasion slew kynge
Amulius, restorynge theyr vncle Numitor into his Kyngdome. Of thys wyse doth God not suffreAn example of vengeāce. vnrighteousnesse to be vnpunished. Romulus and Remus brethren, buylded afterwarde a citye in hat place, where they were founde and layde. Whan stryfe was rysen amonge the brethren, for soThe stryfe of Romulus and Remus for ye realme. much as they were equal in age & strength, whiche of them shulde raygne: they agreed that the Gods should iudge it, so that whose shulde haue the grea∣ter flyght or voyces of byrdes, the same shulde beare rule. To Remus therefore dyd fyrst flye syxe great ra∣uens, afterwarde flew twelue for Romulus. Now whan Remus demaunded the Kyngdome by rea∣son of the fyrst flyght, ther rose agayne debate be∣twene the brethren. It is a wonder, how fear∣cely mens myndes betossed wyth couetousenes to beare rule, nother can it lightelysuffer and be quiet But what nedeth many wordes? At the last rayse a commotion, Remus was slayne, and Romolus raygned alone, of whome also hath Rome the name By this appeareth that ye citye of Rome, was buyl∣ded by the posteritye of Eneas. For Syluia the mo∣ther of Romulus, had hyr sprynge of Eneas. But for as muche as Romulus Father was vnknowen, they fayneth that the god Mars was he, because of a more honester cloke or pretence of the aute. But how Romolus dyd ordeyne hys kyngdom, & what warres he made, doth Titus liuius wryte. I wyll only shewe brefely the ordre of the tymes, and what notable chaunges of realmes are happened in the meane whyle that euery man maye knowe,
what is chefely to be marked in readynge of all hy∣storyes: nother shall we also passcouer these won∣ders, that are happened by some heauenly prouidē¦ce, that we may se that vnryghteousnes is punyshed of God, and for what causes cōmune wealthes and Kyngdomes are chaunged. Pomponius Atticus and some other, whych re∣ken the nomber of yeares mooste dyligently, doethWhan Rome was ydeth. affirme that the citye of Rome was begonne to be buyldeth, in the begynnynge of the thyrde yeare of the syxte Olympias: that is, the tenth yeare of Io∣athan Kynge of Iuda, but after the creation of the worlde, the thre thousand, two hundreth, and one. Rome was before Christes byrth, seuen hun∣dreth and nyne & twētyyeare. I wyl also adde, that Varro wryteth, the twelue great rauens, to sygni∣fye the tyme and lastyng of the citye, namely a thou¦sande and two hundreth yeare. For euery great ra¦en shulde sygnifye a Seculum, that is a hundret yeare: and this is no euyll interpretacion. For from the begynnynge of the cityes buyldynge, vntyll the tyme of Honorius and Archadius, whan it was destroyed of the Gotes, was a thousand and thre hundreth yeares. The kynges raygned at Rome two hundreth and foure and forty yeares, as wytnesseth Liuius. Eusebius addeth also two yeares. Romulus xxxviij. Numa xliij Tullius hostilius xxxij.Tullius hostilius Alha the citye, and punyshed theyr gouernoure which was a true breaker wyth dew punyshment.
He gaue anotable example to men therin, how traytours ought to be punyshed. For he caused hym to be bounde and stretchedThe death of Metius Suf∣fecius. out betwene two wagons, and with horsses dryuen sundery wayes, to be pulled insunder, and toren to peces. The kyngdome of Alba ceasyd here, and this happened alytle before that tyme, whan Manasses raygned in Iewry. Whan Alba was ouerthrowen, the posteritye of the Troyans, chefely of Iulius the sonne of Eneas, write to Rome, leauynge Alba the whych after war∣de became myghty by the Romanes, toke all the monarchy alone, in the tyme of Iulius Cesar. Therfore was it well prophecyed of Homerus, concernynge Eneas, that hys posteritye should ha∣ue dominion euerlastingly: and that is no doubte to be vnderstande of the Romane dominion: for theyr monarchy is the last. But we shall speake more lar∣ger of these thynges hereafter after Tullus Hosty∣lius succeded in the kyngdome and raygned. Ancus Martius. xxiiij.Ancus Mar∣cius. Tarquinius Priscus. Seruius. Tullius. Tarquinius Priscus. xxxviij. Seruius Tullius xliiij. In his tyme began the monarchy of the Persians and for because I myght be brefe, therfore wylled I also to comprehende here the kynges of Rome, be∣cause they for the moste parte all reygned beforeWhan the monarchy of of the Per∣sians, began. the monarchy of the Perses: durynge the whiche few thynges worthy of remembraunce are befallen by the Romanes, vndoutedly whose puyssaunce was not great before that tyme. Tarquinius Superbus raygned xxv. yeares
was dryuen out of the kyngdom, for the abhomi∣nacion of his sonne Sextus Tarquinius, the whichTarquinius Superbus. did by violence misvse the moste honeste wyfe Lu∣crece, whiche moued with shamfastnes of such wic∣kednes pearced herself with a swearde, euē through the hart. Her kynsfolke moued with the wickednesLucrecia. of the dede, droue out the kynge. This example doth also witnesse, for what causes God doth suffre kyngdomes to be changed, and tyranny to beAn example of vengeaūce punished. This is ynough spoken of the beginnyng of the foundacion of the citie, and whence happened the first chaunge of the com∣mon wealth. ¶ Of the second Mo∣narchye. WHen the Iewes had bene thre score and ten yeares in exile by the Babylonians, as we haue sayde before, the kyng of Ba∣bylonBalthasar kyng of Ba∣bylon. Balthasar was punyshed of God▪ because he blasphemed the God of Israel, and vsed the vessels that were ordeined for the tempels vse, in his bankettes. For the Medes and Perses were fallen into his kyngdome, and toke the citie of Ba∣bylon, with the kyngdomes of Chaldee and Assy∣rya. Worthely therfore is this to bee called the se∣conde monarchye: For the greatest kyngdomes of the worlde, began now to growe together, too the
whiche all Asianearehande was ioyned afterward by the Persians. Here ought y• godly mynd before all thynges to consyder these noble benefytes and workes of God, whiche brought agayne all thee worlde in one certayn body and a lawfull empyre, that iustice and honestie myght be mainteined. For it were necessary, that all ciuilitie and good lawes should peryshe amonge men, without God chose and ordeined somtyme myghty monarchyes, and puyssaunt princes, the whiche might defende them, and if they were decayed, to restore them agayne. This monarchy of the Persians was knowento the Grekes, and for the moste parte are happened in this monarchies tyme, whatsoeuer notable andThe histories of the Gre∣kes begynne at thee Per∣sians. greate fetes are done in Grece. And thereby com∣meth that the Grekes begyn their histories at the Persians, the whiche it semeth to haue litle know∣ledge, what hath bene done in other kyngdomes, before the Persians tymes. As for the order of the yeres in histories, I must here aduertyse the reader, that I haue hetherto bo∣rowed the rekenyng of the yeares out of holy scri∣ptures, the whiche shewe by order the counte of the yeares, euen from the creation of the worlde, untyll these seuenty yeares, in the which the Iewes were kept in the Babylonicall bannyshment. Moreouer, in the holy Bibels are conteyned certayne Croni∣cles of the yeares, vntyl the tyme of the Perses: but after that is thee order of the yeres not so wel kept, saue that Daniel saith, that there are four hundreth and seuenty yeares, from that tyme that it was
graunted to the Iewes to repare the citye Ierusa∣lem vntyll Christ was borne. And of so easy a thyn∣ge, some men maketh a great question, of countin∣ge these yeares a ryght, in the which we shall shewe to be no difficultye. For Daniel hath very well ex∣pressed and marked the tyme of Christes cōminge. The begynnynge of the Monarchye of the Persians. BUt that the nombers do agre wyth the seuenty yeares aforesayde, we shal reken in the Monarchy of the persyans a hun∣dreth nynety and one yeare. Although the Grekes do reken the nomber of these yeares greater in the Monarchy of the perses. Howbeyt thys is come thereby, that the Grekes, haue not begonne fyrst to reken whan these seuenty yeares were expyred, but that about a twenty yeares be∣fore. And of this wyse must the rekenynge of PhiloThe rekenin∣ge of the Gre¦ Philo. and other Grecians be made equal. For the Iewes begynne in the yere of Cyrus, after that he had wonne the cytie Babylon. But the Grekes reken those yeares wythal also, the which he had reygned before: but they are not to be referred to the yeares ensuynge. Moreouer that the matter maye the bet¦ter be vnderstande, accordynge to the order of Philo, we shall fyrst rehearce the high priestes, af∣ter that, shall we also adioyne the Persian kynges, as the Grekes do reken them. But he that vnderstandeth Cyrus kyngdome to beginne after the conquerynge of Babylon, the∣same maye easely laye together the nomber of the
Grekes with these. CxCi. yeares. Iesus the high prest. xxxvi. Ioakin his sonne in his fathers absence. viii. Iesus beynge returned. xx. Ioakin agayne. xlviii. Eliasib. xxi. Ioiada. xxiiii. Ioathan. xxiiii. Iaddus. x. Summa of the yeares is. CxCi. Iosephus wytnesseth, that Iaddus lyued whan Alexander wente into Asia. The Persian kynges as the Grekes do reken them. Cyrus xxix. Cambises vij. and. v. moneths. Darius Hystaspis sonne. xxxvi. Xerxes xx. Artaxerxes with the longe hande. xl. Darius the bastarde. xix. Artaxerxes Mnemon. xl. Ochus. xxvi. Arsames. iij. Darius. vi. The order of the tymes doth for the mooste parte allowe this nombre. For as the historye wryters haue lyued at sundery tymes: euen so hath euery one made mencion of hys kynge, that raygned atHerodotus Theusidides hys tyme: euen as Herodotus maketh mencion of xerxes, Theucydides of Artaxerxes with the lon∣ge hande: after these made Xenophon mencion ofXenophon.
Darius the bastarde and his yonger sonne Cyrus, he wrote also of Artaxerxes Mnemon: Xenophon went a warrefare also, in those warres, that were vsed at these tymes. Therfore the late wryters do greatly erre of the Iewes, they be very dull asses, which set but four Persian kinges, lesing more thē an hundreth yeares in this euident counting of the worldes yeares: of the whiche do spryng more gre∣ueous errours. In Daniel and Esdras is mencion made of the Persian kynges, but they varye in some names from the Grekes. As for me, (that all thynges may be knowen more manyfestly) I wyll brefely shewe what my mynde is. Metasthenes is of some reiec∣ted,Metasthenes because he nameth some Persian kynges other wyse, then the Grekes. But for so muche as Es∣dras and Philo do not disceuer from hym, I do not reiect those kynges, whiche Metasthenes reher∣seth. For it is no doubt, but that Esdras was per∣fecte of the kyngdome and state of the Persians, forEsdras was sed and gh in the Persian mat¦ts. so muche as it is euident that hee was one of the chefe of the realme and of the kynges counsayll. Metasthenes doth set in this order the Persian kynges, and these be the fyrste wherein they vary: but Philo and Esdras kepe the same order. Darius and Cyrus to gether twoo yeres, and after that Cyrus alone xxij. Artaxerxes Assuerus xx. Darius Artaxerxes with the long hand xxxvij. Darius the bastarde xix. Artaxerxes Mnemon lv.
Ochus xxvi. Arsames iiij. Darius vi.Darius reig¦nynge wyth Cyrus. This variaunce after my mynde may easely bee iudged. Of the fyrst Darius, whiche reigned with Cytus, haue the Grekes no certainte (for so much as saieth Daniel,) he neuer reigned, and therefore was his name all together vnknowen, to men of straunge nacions. And Daniel hath separated this Darius from Cyrus. For he sayeth that Darius of Media was Cyrus of Persia. Now do the Gre∣kes reken only the Persian kynges, nother do they myngle with them the Medians affeirs, whose kyngdome was already translated too the Per∣sians: therfore do the Greke wryters dissent no∣thyng from the holy scriptvres, though they leaue out Darius, seynge they counte onely the Persian kynges. Iosephus wryteth that this Darius were Cyaxares, the sonne of Astyages, of whome Xeno∣phen wryteth, the whyche I wyll not stryue wyth∣all. The seconde Artaxerxes Assuerus, is DariusArtaxerxes, Assuerus. Hystaspis sonne, and Cambyses is passed ouer, be∣cause hee reigned hys father yet lyuynge, or not long after his fathers death. For the Persians had this custome, that whan ye kyng went forth on war, they ordeined another before, which shuld supplie yeCambyses. kings rowme being absēt. And by this occasiō was Cambyses ordeined kyng & gouernour of y• realme
of Cyrus hys father, whan he made warre agaynst the Scythyans, wyth the which he hadde warre syxe yeares: and for this season dyd Cambises raig∣ne, whome the Grekes saye to haue raygned se∣uenyeare, the which must be vnderstande of that ti∣me wherein, the father was yetlyuing. And the hi∣storyes of Assuerus do wytnesse that he was Da∣rius because Philo wryteth that these kyngdomes be recouered of hym agayne by warre, whiche we∣re fallen back and rebelled, whan Cyrus had fough∣ten wyth the Scythes hauing no goodlucke. The thyrde was called Darius ArtaxerxesWherfore Darius Artaxerxes was called with the long hande. wyth the longe hande: the same do the Grekes sim∣ply call Artaxerxes wyth the longe hande: and he had the name thereof, that hys ryght hande was longer than the left, whome Metasthenes calleth Darius, Esdras doth call hym Darius and Arta∣xerxes indifferently: for they vsed these names no∣ne otherwyse, than oure Emperours vse the na∣mes of Cesar and Augustus, But that Artaxerxes doth strayght waye folow Darius in order, that is happened for thys cause, that Xerxes forthwyth in the begynnynge of hys raygne wente in to Grece and that in the meane space Artaxer∣xes ruled the kyngdom in the East. And be∣cause Xerxes remayned not at hande in the East, therfore do not the Iewes make mention of hym, but holde Artaxerxes, for the kynge, seynge he beynge made gouernour of the kyng∣dome ruleth so longe as Xerxes was from ho∣me. After thys is ther no varyaunce more, and of thys wyse maye the hystoryes of the
Byble and Grekes be made very well to agre. The disagreynge of the yeres ryseth therof y• some Kynges gouerned the other yet lyuinge: and ther by is it come, that some other haue gathered the yeares otherwyse. Of Cyrus.Cyrus. CYrus the fyrst Prince of the Monarch of the parsiansis rekened one amonge the moost doughtyest Kynges & lordes of the worlde. For besyde the manyfold excellent and very princely vertues, had God geuē and endued hym wyth sundery luck and fortune in rulynge, and very excellent vyctoryes of hys ene∣mies: yea he fortuned to be taught and instruct also by Daniel the prophet in godlynes and in the trew worshyp of God as holy scriptures do wytnesse, Such kynde of Princes, beinge so garnyshed wythHow great men ought to be folo∣wed. the vertues of God, ought we to honoure, as noble gyftes of God, by the whych God wyll helpe the worlde, retayne men in theyr vocacion, haue mo∣destye kept and peace, finally to haue lawes ordey∣ned. And seynge it is so, it is a very vngodlynesse ether to despise or to set nought by suche Princes, as the commune sort of people do. But this Cyrus is worthtely to be counted among such ministers of God and very excellent Princes of the worlde. Nother can the noblenesse of kynred be requyred in hym. For it so pleasyd God, that the worthynesse of gouernaunce be kept and maynteyned and by men auanced wyth moost hyghe vertues, and renow∣me of theyr auncerters. And for so much as God
hath preferred with so high honors, therfore ought they lykewyse to be honored of vs, as a most excellēt gyfte, of God. The father of Cyrus was a prince, or a gouer∣nourThe father of Cyrus. of Persia, borne of the ofsprynge of Sem: his mother was borne of the kynges blude of Medes. And Herodotus wryteth, that Astyages kynge of the Medes sawe in a dreame, out of hys dough∣tersAstyags . wombe to grow a vyne, whose sprynge should ouer shadowe whole Asia. Of this was the coniecture taken, that a moost myghty prince shoulde be borne of her. Therefore whan Cyrus the chylde was now borne, Astyages feared, lest his kyngdome should be remoued from the Medes, to the Persians. For the which cause he commaundeth his vsher Harpagus, to put forth the chyld to be slayne. But whan Harpagus busied to slayne it, he was saued by a wonderfull destiny: So vayne are mens enterpryses and studyes to hynder Gods counsels. The chyide was taken to the shepeherde to beare it vpon a hyll, that thete it myght dye for honger: the shepeherde was also cō∣maunded not to leaue the chyld, vntil it were dead, and to shewe this same to Harpagus, that he might certifye the kynge the truth of the thinges, and to se the chylde buryed accordynge to the dignitie. But what dyd happen? At the same tyme by chaun∣ce, whan the shepeherde bryngeth this chylde: into his house, his wyfe was delyuered of a deade chyl∣de: the which whan she herde of her husbande that thys chyld shoulde be layed abrode to perishe, who∣me besyde the comlynesse of bewty, she perceaued
to declare some kyngly strength and courage, and also because it was borne of the kynges bloude: she counseleth and prayeth her husbande to laye hyr deade chylde in his steade, and to take it her for to brynge vp for hers. She admony sheth hym also to committe no murther with the kynges chylde, che∣fely seinge no daunger can befall or happen to the realine by this chylde, for asmuche as it shalbe brought vp and taken for the shepeherdes chylde. The shepeherde foloweth his wyues counsell he sende worde to Harpagus that the chylde is dead. Who sendeth some to see wheter it were so, and causeth the chylde to be buryed: and all this is she∣weth the kyng for a trueth. In the meane whyle is Cyrus brought vp by the shepeherde: and as he grew vp by processe, forth wyth appeareth in him kynggly towardnesse, and sharpnesse of wyt. Moreouer amonge the chyldren (as the chyldrē costume is) he ordeyned a kyngdome, and hym that offended, dyd punysh greueously. But it happened by this chaunce, that whan he had beaten a gentlemans chylde very rygorously for a transgression, he was accused to the chyldes elders, the which made complaynt to the kynge. The kynge callynge and demaundynge of the chylde, he maruayleth at his great graue constan∣cye and the wysdome in answerynge, than to the chyldes age. Beynge streght waye astonyed in hys mynde, he aduysed hym of the tyme, wherein hys doughter was delyueted, and as he had searched out all the circumstances of hys age the tyme and the bryngynge vp he knewe that it was his cosyn,
his daughters sonne, the which in tyme past he had commaunded to be destroyed. Knowynge hym he kept hym in hys court a certayn space: and whan Astyages dyd now dout no more of hym, by reason of hys syngular towardnesse & honesty, the whych dyd shyne in the chylde, he sent hym into Persia to hys elders. Howbeit the kynge was in the meane whyle greatly wroth wyth Harpagus, for the de∣ceate, because he dyd not accomplyshe the kynges commaundement, in slayeng at that tyme the chyl∣de. He commaundeth Harpagus yongest sonne to be brought to the court: the which whā HarpagusThe notable crueltye of Astyages had done, the kynge commaunded to slaye him and seethe him and to set it before Harpagus for to eate wythout hys knowledge: but whan he had now ea∣ten ynough, Astyages commaunded to brynge the heade, fete and handes of the chylde that were he∣wen of, and shewe them to Harpagus, that he my∣ghte se that he had eaten the fleshe of hys owne chylde. As harpagus sawe the heade, he knew the kynges dede, & also whence the occasion came: but all grefe suppressed, he worshpped the kynge accordynge to hys wonted reuerence and drede, thynkyng in the meane season to be once greatly reuenged of thys tyranny of the Kynge. But Harpagus euer after ceased not to stere vp the chefe of Media & the mostThe dede of Harpagus put Astyes tyranny. puyssant nobles to fal to the Perses, and to make Cyrus Kynge: he sheweth it to Cyrus also, and ex¦horteth him to inuade the kyngdome, nother suffre the tyranny, that the Kynge hath vsed agaynst other of them to be vnreuenged.
And that the enterpryse be secrete, he hydeth a let∣tre in the belly of a holow hare, and taketh him to a trustye messenger to bringe it into Persia to Cy∣rus, and sendeth no worde els by the messenger, but that kynge Cyrus him selfe doo flee the hare. Cyrus fyndynge the letter, and knowynge Harpa¦gus counsell, maketh continently ready an hoost, and goeth agaynst the Medes. Astyages on the o∣ther syde commaundeth hys army to withstande the enemy, of the which he maketh Harpagus chefe captayne: but whan the felde shulde be fouten, he yelded both hym self and hys army wyllyngly to Cyrus. Wherfore Astyages hauyng lost the kyng∣dome of Media, was vanquyshed. Howbeit Cyrus saued and kept hym, and caused hym to be intrea∣ted accordynge to hys royall dignitie. Thys alte∣ration happened in the kyngdome of the Medes, by reason of the kynges tyranny, for the which also the whole empyre was translated to the Perses. After thys warred the most ryche Cresus v∣pon Cyrus in the fore parte of Asia, whome CyrusCresus king o Asia▪ metyng wyth an hoost, ouercame, and toke in the whole kyngdome, and wynnynge the moost stron∣gest citye Sardis, toke Cresus prysoner. But whan by the kynges commaundement, Cresus shulde be burned, and was nowe vpon the pyle of wood, he cryed wyth verye pytefull waylynge: O Solon, Solon. Cyrus woundred at this noyse, and caused to demaunde for what cause he dyd so crye nowe and than, wyth so greate doulfulnes. Than he syghynge from the depst of hys harte, sayde: Solon was in tymes past a moost wyse man
among y• Athenians, whom I dyd somtyme great∣ly worshyp, whan he was with me, and I shewed him all my power and treasures, and finally asked him, whether any misfortune myght euer happen to me, that were so well fortified with ryches and power, against all chaunces of fortune, and against the power of my enemies? But Solō answered toThe graue  ighty ▪ that with a rebuke: That noman is so happyin this lyfe, which before his death can be called happye of euery syde: nether is anye man so mighty or puys∣saunt, whom an vnhappy chaunce can not make fe∣ble and ouerthrowe. But that as than he beynge safe by reason of prosperitye, he sayde he despysed those wordes, nother coulde he drede this notable fall, the which he had now proued: and because that now first he vnderstode Solons sayenge, therfore dyd he now name him before his death, and that he wyshed al men to remembre in prosperity aduersy∣tyes, which may befall, lest they become proude for the presente felicitie, to enterprise or vndertake oughte, that by chaunce myghte bringe mischief to them. Whan Cyrus heard this, he was moued trample o pitye. with pitye toward Cresus, sayenge: That hereaf∣ter he woulde not entreate Cresus so cruellye, which had intymes past be a moost myghty kynge: for he knew that he was a man also, and to hym also it myght befall, to haue nede of an other mans helpe and mercye. After thys commaunded he Cresus to be brought to him, and had him in greate reue∣rence, as a great prince, and vsed hys counsel in go¦uernaunce.
Cyrus demaunded of hym also, by what cause he had taken this warre, whether he were moued, by the answer of Apollo, whome he had asked coun¦sell before? To this answered Cresus, sayenge: That Apollo counselled him right well with these wordes, Knowe thy selfe, and all thyng shall pro∣spete. He dyd not refuse thys counsell of Apollo. For whan his hoost had gotten the worsthande in aydinge the Assyrians, he had purposed thence∣forth to lyue in rest and peace, chefely for so muche as he sawe Cresus to haue such prosperitie and po∣wer in bringinge all thinges to passe. But whan he was praysed of the cityes that laye rounde aboute, and of his great princes for his power and conning of warrfaringe, he was agayne deceaued by pryde and vaine glory of him selfe, and was so by the o∣ther princes made capitaine of the warre agaynst Cyrus. And that by these praises he was brought, to take the answer of Apollo otherwyse, and that he thought he was suche a one in dede, as he was praised, namely, that he was no lesse in power, than king Cyrus, and by these meanes had he taken the warres in hande. But hetherto is ynough spoken of Cresus. Hereof maye notable examples be ta∣ken,Example that princes do oft, warre constrayned by no neces∣sytye. What is to be consyde∣red in kyng Cyrus. that princes be oft brought to warre by no con∣straynt of necessytie, and to theyr greate hynde∣raunce, by the counsell and flattery of them, which can falsely persuade and extolle with vaine pray∣ses theyr power and vertues. In king Cirus is chefely to be considered, that in so great prosperities of all thynges, he vsed great
moderation of minde, and that in so great violence of victories, he swaged tyranny wyth mekenesse. Cyrus than toke in all the kyngdomes from Persia, vntyll the fyrste borders of Ionia: from thence beynge returned, he besieged the cytye Ba∣bylon, which semed moost strongest against all forceHow Cyrus  Babylō. Euphrates. of mans power. But Cyrus wanne her, and that by this meanes: The floude Euphrates runneth through the citye by some ryuers: dyggynge tho∣rough hys caucyes, he ledde the course of the wa∣ter another waye, and as the floud was dryed, men myght safely go into the toune on foote. Besyde that had he hys espyals, whych shewed what tyme the Babylonians were at reste, and so broughte he hys army into the cytye in the styll of the nyghte, whan they douted nothyng lesse. But what nedeth here to prayse and auaunce much the prosperytie of Cyrus? seynge it maye ea∣sely be thought and consydered, that it is Goddes worke, and not of mans wysedome or power, that so many and so stronge tounes and kynges be sub∣iect to hys kyngdome, vnto whome it semeth no mans power nearehande myght wythstande. For those hygh monarchies are ordeined & conserued by an heauenly power, for to preserue the state of a cōmune wealth, agaynst the will of Satan. More∣ouer after that Babylon was wonne, than began that kyngdom of the Perses fyrst to be called a mo¦narchy: For the heade citye or see of the monarchy,Babylon is the hde ci∣tye of the mo¦narchye. was Babylon, and the kyngdomes of Chalde, As∣syria, Medes and Persians be now brought vnder one empyre. The moost parte of Asia was ioyned
thereto also, and other great countries, which bor∣der vpon these kyngdomes. Cyrus gouerned the∣se kyngdomes with great prayse, insomuch that no princes prayses, wherof historyes do make mency∣on, can be compared wyth his commendacions and uauncementes. I suppose that thys monarchy began after that Babylon was wonne in the thre score and tenth yeare after that the Iewes were ledde into capty∣uyte in Babilon. But sence the creation of y• world, the yere of thre thousand, foure hundreth and thre and forty, and before Christus byrth the fyue hun∣dreth and one yeare. Whereby it maye easely be ga¦thered, that those histories of the Grekes that be∣gynne at Cyrus, be not very olde. Of the Iewes delyuered out of the Babylonycall captiuite. HEtherto haue we spoken of the state of the commune wealth and empyre of those tymes: nowe resteth it that we speake also of the spyritual king∣dome of God, and of the churche. After that Cyrus had subdued the Babylonians, he set the Iewes free and at libertye out of all his kyngdomes, and resto∣red them into the kyngdome of Iewry. This ex∣ampleHow muche God careth for his churche or congregatiō. wytnesseth howe muche God doeth care for the church or congregacion of the godly, and howe lytle he doth forget them. For that the church my∣ght be released from the seruice & bondage, it was necessary that Babilon the citye shuld be taken and peryshe
For a prince must not be a cowarde, to represse the force of his enemies. Herodotus wryteth also that some do suppose otherwise of Cyrus death: and Xe∣nophonWhat Xeno∣phon writeth of Cyrus. writeth that he dyed in his bedde, and that before his death, he exhorteth his childeren to the feare of God, to vnitie and loue to eche other, and that with a greate relation and manye wordes he admonished them to remembre that mens soules dye not with the bodies, but that they remayne im¦mortall, and that the godlye after thys lyfe enioye an euerlastinge reste wyth God: and that contrary wyse the wicked shalbe greueously punished. And to this is it saied that he shoulde haue added a sub∣stanciall euidence of mans reason, concerning euyll doers, the which in this lyfe haue a great inwarde drede in their minde, for the conscience of theyr wi∣cked dedes: and that therby may be gathered that the soule hath a certayne beynge: and that seynge this feare is beaten in by God, it is euidente that God will be reuenged of all thynge that is vniustly committed. Hetherto is ther ynough saide of thys moost holy kinge Cyrus. In what tyme the Philosophers were fyrst in Grece. BEfore haue we shewed that by the Grekes were the Poetes fyrst in high reputation, by reason of ther learning: afterwardes inThe Philo∣sophers were pst  Cy∣rus tyme. The Philo∣sophers of Ionia and Italy. Cyrus tyme began another kynd of learned men, whiche were called Philosophers, & of them were two sectes at one time: for some were philosophers of Ionia, & some were called philosophers of Ita∣ly.
The philosophers Ionici were in Ionia, they v∣sed greate diligence in naturall thinges, and sear∣chinge out the course of starres. The beginner ofThales be∣gynner of philoso∣phers i Grece. them was Thales, which diuided first for the Gre∣kes the yere in thre hundreth and thre score daies. For though they had before twelue monethes, yet were they constrayned to brynge the mouynge of the sonne to the course of the mone. Thales did al∣so shew first of the Eclypse in Grece, and found the poynte whan the daye and nyghte are equall, the which was no small conning. He had learned these thinges of the Egiptians, with whom God had kept this science. These Thales taught also that the soules are ymmortall: and he is the fyrste and true begynner of the philosophers of Grece. The other parte of the philosophers, whychePythagoras begynner of philoso∣phers of Italy. are called the Italians, began by Pythagoras: for the same lyued also aboute the tyme of Cyrus, in that vttermost part of Italy, which bendeth to Si¦cilia, and was sometyme Grece. In the tyme of Py¦thagoras raigned at Rome Seruius Tullius: his scole was not occupied in Phisick and Astronomy, as the other, but in Arithmetick, Geometry & Mu¦sick. Pythagoras liued a very solytary lyfe wyth his disciples, and vsed sundry ceremonies, & taught many inconuenient thinges of the soules nature, that mens soules remoue into beastes to be puny∣shed. The Pythagorians taughte their doctrines priuatly amonge themselues: and it was commaun¦ded amonges them that noman shoulde publishe them, lest by reason of a doctryne not accustomed, the commune sort of men mighte be sturred ether
to discorde, or to a despisynge of good maners. But such kynde of phylosophers dured not longe: nother is it now necessary to speake more of the be¦gynnyng of philosophers. I would onely shewe i here, lest any man might be ignoraunt, what tyme the connyng of sciences began and encreased: wee shall hereafter in hys due place speake of them, whych haue before all other garnyshed and had in reuerence Philosophye, whereof there is not so great nomber. For very few are ther that be wor∣thy to be called wyth so excellent a name Phyloso∣pher, and therfore shall we not rehearse so many of them. Of Solon. THough wee studye to be brefe here, yet wyll not I passeouer Solon vnrehear∣sed:Solon  and be∣g of the Romane lawes Thales and Solon at one . for of hym hath the ciuyll lawe of the Romanes, whych is yet in vse his orygi∣nall begynnynge. Thys Solon lyued about thys tyme, and was very familyar wyth Thales. But whan at Athenes were spronge great debates, be∣cause that the greatest of the citye, had made bonde men of theyr creditours, that were not able to pay them, euen of pryuate wylfulnesse, the whole citye of Athenes dyd agree to Solon, that he shoulde take order and correcte thys wyllynglye of the greatestmen, and the other misvses of the com∣mune wealth. Solon toke thys wyllynglye vpon hym, and set forth manye excellente constitutions and lawes, the whych are yet manyfest.
Now was Draco the law geuer by the Atheni∣ans, before, Solons lawes were not ordered with anye mercye at all, for he ordeyned that all trans∣gressions and trespasses shoulde be punished wyth the swearde: and for thys cause sayde one, that Dracons lawes were wrytten wyth bloude, andDracons lawes. not wyth yk. So hard and cruell constitucions were in the worlde at the begynnynge. But no∣thyng can be durable, that is to extreme, and is not mitigate with the temperaunce of mercy or iustice. As for Solon made a difference in these thynges or degrees, and ordeined that some synnes shoulde accordynge to reason be punyshed greueously, and other more mercyfullye ordeined also of geuinge trybute, of weyghtes, and of the seasōs of the whole yeare. And specially is this lawe praysed, in theSolons law concernynge vagabondes whiche he ordeined, that euery man should certyfy the higher officers once in the yeare how great his substaunce were, and of what maner crafte he were, where with he gat hys lyuynge: and if there were any ydle fellow or vagabounde, too dryue the same out of the cytie. Of Cambyses. CAmbyses began to raygne whan hys fa¦ther Cyrus went to warre agaynst theCambyses▪ Scythians. He ioyned the kyngdome of the Egiptians, to his fathers domy∣nion. But he was greatly vnlyke his father in ver∣tues. Whan Prexaspes one of hys chefe coun∣selersPrexaspes. had admonyshed hym somewhat boldelye, and sayde that the Perses dyd alow hym greatly,
but that the same myslyked them, that he was ge∣uen to dronkennesse. He caused the Peeres of hys realme to be called together, and demaunded whe¦ther he might worthely be blamed in any thynge. But they answered, No, but that he also surmoun¦ted hys father Cyrus in vertue: for by hys actiue∣nesse was Egypte also ioyned to his kyngdome. But Cresus (to whom Cyrus had chefely commen¦ded his sonne Cambyses to be taughte & norturedThe . in honesty) sayd the cōtrary: Cābyses (quod he) can not yet be compared to hys father Cyrus, for he hath not left such a sonne of his begettinge, as Ci∣rus hath left Cambyses. This delectable sayenge pleased Cambises at that tyme. But as the counsel departed, whan none of the princes had blamed ou¦ght in him, he commaunded Prexaspes to be called to him, and bad him bringe his yongest sonne to him: For he woulde declare howe sobre he myghte seme to be, euen whan he were droncken. For he woulde shute wyth a bowe at his chylde, whan he was droncken, and if he coulde hyt his harte with the darte, than he might thynke that in drinkynge he were not besyde the capacite of his reason: but if not▪ than he might worthely be sayde to be geuen to dronkennesse. But what nedeth many wordes? Whan Camby∣sesThe  of Cam¦byses. had well dronken, he shott at the chylde as at a marke, and as the darte was pearced thoroughe, he caused it to be rypt vp, and shewed to hys fa∣ther Prexaspes, that the harte was shot thorough a ryght, sayenge, that thereby he might haue euy∣dence, that he was not dronken.
So barbarous, cruel and tyrannicall maners brin∣geth dronkennesse into mens mindes, though theyDronken∣nesse bryn∣geth in most wycked ma∣ners. be well taught before: euen as no doute was that kynge Cambyses was from hys youth brought vp in moost honest nourture. And though a dronken man can hytt a right in shoutinge, yet in the meane whyle can he not vse the ryght counsels of reason, and wanteth those vertues, whiche communely steare men to modestye and auancement of glory. Such lyke examples ought to be shewed to yonge men, whiche sometyme be enclyned and geuen to dronkennesse: for what ende folowed of these, shall we shewe shortely hereafter. He slew also hys own brother Smerdis, whome he caused priuely to be put to death, lest he shuld raygne at any tyme. He maryed also hys owne syster, where neuerthelesse nature doth abhorre such kynde of maryage. It fortuned vpon a tyme, that whan kynge Cambyses sat at borde wyth the quene, at y• meale tyme, set he a lyons whelpe and a strong dogge to∣gether to make a game: and whan the lyon had the ouerhande by reason of hys fearcenesse & strength,The fayth∣fulnesse of dogges. another dogge of no lesse fearcenesse brake wyth great strength the bandes y• he was bounde with∣al, and holpe his brother the dogge, and so was the lyon ouercome. The kyng had great delyte at that game, because of the faythfulnesse of the dogges. But the quene moued wyth the same dede, began to wepe very bytterly, and whan the kynge toke that sorowfully, and asked the cause of her weping, she answered: To my brother happened nothynge lesse, than such faythfulnesse, as I haue sene in these
dogges helping eche other. The kyng taking thisThe cruel∣nesse of Cam¦bses toward is ster the . answere wrothfully, caused her strayght waye t be had out of hys syght, and lew her. But such co¦dicions can not longe prosper. For God sayeth in the scryptures: The bloud thyrsty and deceatfull shall not lyue oute halfe theyr dayes vpon earth. Wherfore God stroke hym not longe after wyth a greueous and heauy vengeaunce. For as he should come out of Egypte into Persia, as he sat vpon his horsse, hys wearde fell out of hys sheeth, and woun¦ded hym so sore in the one syde, that he dyed. This example sheweth, that God suffreth tyrauntes not. very longe. For he lyued not much more than one yeare after Cyrus, nother left he anye heyre after hym: and of thys wyse is he cleane deade. It is truely a pyteous thynge and greatly to be beway∣led, that in so lytle a space the kingdome of the Per¦ses is taken from the posteritie of Cyrus. The rule of the empyre remayned neuerthelesse wyth Cy∣rus bloude. For Darius had wedded Cyrus dou∣ghter the whyche neuerthelesse was also of Cyrus bloud. Of the punishment of a wicked iudge. NO prince is of so desperate hope, which doth not at any tyme some laudable or honest thynge. For God doeth garnishe the offyce of a gouernour or high officer, and maketh that other whyles notable and neces∣sary thynges are done necessarely, for the conser∣uation of publyke administration.
Cambyses is alowed in all historyes for thys one ede, for the which he is worthy to be praysed. HeSiamnes a wicked iud∣ge. had a gouernour in the fore part of Asia, called Si¦amnes: he heard saye that this iudge iudged vniu¦ly, beynge corrupt wyth gyftes of mony: Where∣fore he caused him to be slayne, and the skynne lain o from his body commaunded he to be fastened v∣pon the iudges seate, and ordeined in steade of the deade iudge his soe called Otaes, and sat hymOtaes. in the seate diciall vpon this maner and conditi∣on, that by the beholdyng of his fathers skynne he shuld beware, lest he should be punished lykewyse. This example warneth those that are in authory∣tye, to remembre that God will not suffre wycked∣nesse to be vnreuenged. Of Darius Kyng of the Persians. WHan Cambyses was gone into Egypte, the Magi rebelled agaynst him at Su∣sa,An example of a notable intepāce. Who were called Magi and one of the Magies toke the name of a kyng vpon him by gyle. Magi are called y• wyse men & priestes of those contryes. But whan Cambyses made him now ready to returne into the kyngdome, that he might punish worthely those seditious Magies, euen in his yourney by a mischaunce (as we haue sayd before) he dyed. Ater the death of Cambises the Magies beyng slae, y• Peers of the realme toke the kingdome to them: selues after that poyntyng a day of assembly, they came to treate of restoringe one into the kinge∣dome Persy for a certayn order. The peers or Princes were seuen in nomber,
as in the Germne empyre are seuen Electors: those doutlesse were chosen and poynted by greate wysedome and counsell, as the hyghest counsellers of the whle empyre of Persia. Whan now these se∣uen prynces were come together, to deuise for the commune health of the realme, there rose contro∣uersy in deuisynge, and of thre thynges specially. One Othans counselled to chose no more kyn∣ges, lib∣ o se∣ ces  Pr of  ∣. but that the princes bounde by an aliaunce, shuld rule a lyke, libertye beynge retayned of ether¦syde: for it were euident ynough before and proued by example, that one man lord of so many and great thynges, becommeth lyghtely haut and presump∣teous, and to fall to tyranny, as it was euident that Cambyses had done. The seconde Megabysus refusynge that coun∣sell sayde, that such lybertye shoulde be worsse than tyranny: for the princes and cityes, yf they want a Lorde, can not but misvse that libertye to priuate wylfulnesse. But lest anye suche do happen, it were good not to choyse one onely kynge, but to ordee some princes, by whome shoulde alwaye remayne the full power of a kynge. The thyrd called Darius refelling the sentence of ether of them, counselled one kyng to be chosen: for though in thys poynt, as in all other thynges of men myght befall great and many inconuenien∣ces, yet is no royalme or dominion more surer thanrchy  he bet   of  py  le. the Monarchy, that is, yf one raygne, in whose po∣wer and handes the chefe poynt of the raygne do consist. For though these thre counsels be a lyke ho∣nest and verye good: yet if they be conferred, toge∣ther,
it is most euident, there can no fayrer or more profytabler thynge be founde, tha a Monarchye, namelye, whych goeth nexte to a godly kingdome. Moreouer it can not be that concorde can be kepte longe amonge fre princes, or yf some princes be cho¦sen to gouerne some myghtye realme in steade of a kyng: and that for the diuersytye of moost weighty causes, whych myght some tyme befall in so large a dominion, in the whiche the princes coulde not all∣waye agree together. Besydes thys that there shoulde not want amongest the princes the ende∣uour of souerayntye and gouernaunce aboue the other, ouer the which he shoulde procure to rule, as ouer subiectes or inferiors. These were the cau∣ses which Darius alleged: vnto whom agreed the other foure princes, and ordeyned to choyse a kyng after the costumble maner. But lest any debate myght aryse amonge the princes of the royalme they determyned to com∣mitte the lot of the kynges eleccion to God. They agreed that the princes shoulde come together ve∣ry early on horses into a certayn place, and whose horsse shuld neye fyrst, the same should be kyng. Da¦rius beynge come home, shewed thys cousell to the controller of hys court, whych sayde he would easely brynge it to passe. For before the euenyng of the appointed daye he dyd lead Darius horsse and a mare into the place appoynted, and there letteth he go the horsse to the mare▪ that in the mornynge the horsse comminge to the place, myghte neye for the mare beyng absent. And as the princes came together in the ap∣pointed
a place at y• set houre, Darius horsse neyen fyrst: & lest they might dout whether it were Gods will that Darius should be their kinge, sodenly at y• same very tyme whan the horsse neyed, was ther a lightening in an open and cleare ayer with thon∣deringe. Forthwith the other princes lyghtynge from their horses, dyd to Darius dew reuerence.Darius is made kyng of Persia. And by this occasion was Darius set vp in the hygh dignitie of the Persian empyre, the which he gouerned after that with great praise. He restored with great power the countries that were rebel∣led whan Cyrus dyed in Scythia, to the empyre. Babilon the citie also, refusynge now the dominion of the Perses, he recouered after longesiege, and that by this meanes: One zopyrus the sonne of Megabysus, one ofThe notable thfulnesse  Zopyrus  Da∣rius. the seuen lordes or princes, caused willinglye hys nose, eares and lyppes to be cutt of, maketh the kinge priuy of his counsell, and falleth to the Babi∣lonians as one that were fled: he complayneth of the kinges cruelnesse, whiche caused him to be of this wyse dismayde and toren, because he gaue him counsell to forsake the cytie: nother fayned he hym¦selfe otherwyse, than to be the kynges enemy, and that he were fled to the Babilonians for cause of counsel taking. The Babilonians did frely receaue him, and as he was made capitaine of them, he slew some of Darius souldiours: for so was he agreed with Darius, that therby he might at the first aug¦ment the confidence of the Babilonians in him. Af∣terward ye Babilonians trusted him with the whole army, the which he betrayed to Darius: and made
also that he recouered the whole citye, the whiche he had nowe besieged syxe monethes and a whole yeare. As for Darius gaue hygh thankes to thys zopyrus for hys faithfulnesse, for he set hym after∣warde before all the princes of his kyngdome. And as a pomgranate was geuen hym, he sayde: HeA graue say∣enge of Da∣rius. woulde wysh him no better thinge in this lyfe. than that if he might get so many zopyries, as there are graines in this apple. For therby would he signifie that a kynge can haue no worthier treasure, nor no stronger fortresses, than faythful frendes and coun¦sellers. Of Darius Warres in Grece. THE Persians assayed to drawe byEmpyres haue theyr boundes. claime to them the kingdomes of Ma¦cedony and Grece, because they bor∣dered vpon Persia. But because God hath prefixed euerye royalme as it were certayne boundes, the whyche it can not passe: therfore coulde the Persian kinges subdue nor make subiectes to theyr empyre, nother the Macedonians nor the Grekes. Wherfore hap∣pened about that tyme in Grece many and greate chaunces: the which as they are many, euen so to rehearse them all ordely, were to longe: but I shall rehearse them all ordely, were to longe: but I shall rehearse some of them, howbeit none saue the very best, and that brefely. The Persians sendinge Ambassadours toAmyntas kyng of Ma¦cedony. Amyntas kynge of Macedouy, desyred that he woulde yelde hymselfe to them.
Amintas being afrayd because of the Persians, po∣wer, graunted willingly to do their request in a ma¦ner prostrate, & treated messengers very courteou¦sly. And whan a royall banket was ordeined for y• Ambassadours after their wil, they desired to haue brought to them noble women and ladyes, for to garnyshe the banket. Amyntas which durst denye them nothynge, commaunded to brynge them. Whan the Persians were now droncken, they da∣lyed wyth the gentle women vncourteously, inso∣much that theyr vnmanerelynesse yrked and disple¦sed kyng Amyntas, and his sonne Alexander theAlexander  A∣myntas. yonge king: and by reason of the shamefulnesse and reuerence of age, desyred Alexander his father the kynge Amintas, that departing out of the com¦pany, he would go to bed, & he wold remayne with the gestes. As the father went now away, Alexan∣der faynyng myrth, he suffred the Persians to da∣ly and playe more frelier wyth the women: at the last he prayed them all to ryse, and suffre the lady∣es to go a lytle apart, for they should strayght way of Alexander returne better trymmed. The nobles of the Per∣sians suffred that wyllingly. In the meane season caused Alexander the fayrest yongmen apparelled wyth womens garmentes to returne into the ban¦ket, and hyde sweardes vnder theyr garmentes, wherewyth in daylienge they should slaye the Per¦ses, the which was done. For the Persyans were kylled of euery one of these yonge men, and thus was theyr vnshamefulnesse greueouslye punished. This Alexander is rehearsed amonge the greate grauntfathers of Alexander. After this rebelled the Grekes also, which were vnder Darius in the
forepart of Asia, and taking the citye Sardis, bur∣nedSardis. it, and to this dyd the Athenians ayde them.The sutteltye of Histieus in makinge an vproure. For one Histieus a noble prince sente a seruaunt to their captayne, and lest the matter should be disclo∣sed, polyng his seruauntes heade, he prynted vpon hys heade letters conteynynge this sentence, that they should disceuer and rebell to the kynge: after∣ward as the heare was growen agayne, he sent no letters, but this seruaunt to the capitaine wyth this message only, that he should klyppe of his hea∣re, and loke vpon his heade: the whiche whan the capitaine had done, straight waye fell he from Da∣rius. But thys traytour was kylled, and Histieus was hanged, and the commotion beynge swaged wyth these remedies, went no farther. This and other lyke gaue Darius occasion toHow great settinge forth to warre vpō Grece Da∣rius made. gather a great hoost, namely a hundreth thousand footemen, and ten thousand horsemen, and to sende them into Grece to be reuenged of the Athenians for the sedition and vproure. They pytched their tentes two myle from Athenes. Whan nowe some counseled not to wythstande the enemies, but yf they besieged the citye, to defende it manly, onely Miltiades counsellinge the contrary, shewed that the syege should be heauy and verye intolerable for the communalty: but with a sodayn inuasyon my∣ght the enemyes be lyghtely vanquyshed. TheyThe counsell of Miltia∣des. folowed Miltiades counsell, whom also they made captayne of the warre: the Athenians made an ar∣my agaynst the enemies of ten thousande, nother had they any succourse out of the other cyties, saue of one thousand men that the city Platea had madePlatea.
out. And wyth thys small army, was that greate and chosen company of the Persyans discomfytedThe reow∣d victory  Miltiades and layed doun: and thys battayll deserued a very great prayse, for it deliuered all Grece from a great and incredible feare, where wyth she was no lesse taken at that tyme, than yf at oure tyme the turke shulde inuade Germany. We must not ouerpasse here, what recompense the Athenians haue made finallye to Miltiades, and how they haue requyted hym, for thys good dede. For besyde this victory, had he done other great actes for the commune welth. Wyth chy∣ualry had he added other cities and yles, where∣wyth he augmented the empire and dominion of the Athenians. But because greate vertues can not want the enuy and detractions of euell men, it was procured by the people and broughte to passe, the  that Mltiades was cast into the commun preson, vntyll he payed to the communalty thre hundreth thousande crownes. But whan he was not able to paye that summe, and beganne nowe to be sycke of the longe presonment and stenche, his sonne Cy∣mon sonne  Mltiades went into preson to delyuer the father: at the last whan the father was deade, a very ryche city∣sin maryed Myltiades doughter, and disbursynge out the summe of money, he delyuered Cymon out of preson. Can not good men be duely rewarded of the communaltye on thys wyse? Of Kyng Xerxes. DArius had two sonnes: the elder was be¦gotten ear he had the kingdome offred, but the yonger called Xerxes was in yXerxes.
tyme of the kyngdome of hys mother Atossa that was Cyrus doughter. The same by reason he was of both parentes of the kynges bloude▪ he succeded his father beyng dead in the royalm, that the king∣dome myght remayne by the yssue of Cyrus. The elder brother suffred this wyth a great modesty of mynde, stryuynge in no manere wyth his brother Xerxes. As now the hoost of y• Persians was ouer throwen in Grece, Darius assembled a new army, but in thys appoyntynge dyed he. Wherfore Xerx∣es straight before hys raygne accomplished the pre¦paration that hys father had begonne, and entred into Grece with a moost puyssaunt army, insomuch that some haue writtē, that neuer was so great anHow great Xerxes army was agaynst the Grekes. army assembled before at one tyme, as was kynge Xerxes armie. Iustine sayeth, that of his own king¦domes were seuen hundreth thousand men in ar∣moure, and of the other that were confederat with hym, thre hundreth thousand men. Though it se∣meth not wel to be beleued, that ther haue ben such a multitude, yet beare histories wytnesse ynough, and also sunderye battails that were had at that tyme, that Xerxes hoost was very great. And now at this present time do we proue sufficiently, wyth howe great an hoost, howbeit lyght armoure, the Turkes and other nations of the Easte do make theyr warre. Daniel also wytnesseth, that a kynge shall come oute of Persia againste the Grekes wyth a very great hoost of souldiours. It is red also, that whan thys great multitude was now gathe∣red in one felde, Xerxes weping, sayd with an hy
harte. The cause of mans life is very miserable: for of so many thousand men, can not one lyue ouerThe graue yenge of Xerxes. a hundreth yeare. It is also sayde that whan Xerxes nowe ouerlayed the strayghtes of the see wyth brydges, as there rose a tempeste, he com∣maunded to beate the see. To thys belongeth it also, that it is not vnwor∣thely sayd, that in goynge forth, hys hooste dryed vp floudes wyth drynkynge. Wonders were also sene, the which admonished. the kyng to desyst of his enterpryse, because of the myshappe to come. For a a brought forth an hare in the hoost, where by was signifyed flyght. Ther appeared also a comet, called Ceratias, the which is bowed lyke a horne. Ther was also an Eclipse of the sonne. And as hystoryes make men∣cion, suche signes are not sene wythoute some vn∣happynesse or hurt, namely by the which God thre∣ateneth hys wrath: and therfore oughte they not to be despysed, but rather a pryck or synge for vs that we do feare God: for here maye be sene what alteracions of commune welthes and all estates of the worlde are ensued. Xerxes wolde fyrste set vpon the Grekes wyth the Grekes is . battayll by lande. As for Grece is closed rounde about, and ther is no entry into it saue by see, or by some strayghtes of the mountaynes, wher certayn thousands of the Grekes were set to kepe the ene∣myes from entrynge in, of the whyche the greatest parte fled contynently as the Perses would entre: only foure hundreth Lacedemonians abode whichThe of the Lacede∣monians. vsed greate force to resist the enemies: and though
they were farre lesse in nombre and weaker, than that they could dryue back so great force of the ene¦mies, yet declared they such strength in fyghtynge, that they slew about twenty thousande of the Per¦ses. For beynge ayded wyth the oportunite of the strayghtnesse of the mountaynes, they were safe of the inuasion and oppression of the multitude of the enemies, nother coulde they be enuyrouned by waytes layenge. In the skyrmisse dyed Xerxes two bretheren, but on the other syde died the foure hundreth Lacedemonyans, wyth theyr kynge Leonides. The acte is greatly praysed by reason of the courage and strength to defende the coun∣try, because that they beynge so fewe in nombre, were not afrayed to set them selues agaynste so great a multitude: and though they had not the vi∣ctory, yet was the power of the enemies greately abated with thys yght, and theyr hardenesse my∣nyshed. Whan the Perses had the victory in thys bat¦tayll, wounder it is, how greatly all Grece was a∣frayed, and in that parte of Grece did some cities yelde them selues frely to Xerxes. At Athenes al∣so one Cyrsylus, or as sayeth Herodotus, LycidasCyrsylus. counselled, that the Athenians also shoulde geue themselues vnder Xerxes power: for in no maner are they able to wythstande so myghty an enemy. Themistocles contrary wyse counseled to defendeThemisto∣cles a defen∣der of the li∣berty of the countrye. the lyberty of the contrary. For if the Perses for∣tune to haue dominion in Grece, all honesty of ma∣ners shall be in daunger, all lawe, all good vertues
shall peryshe. The Perses shall vse all wyllfulnesse agaynst their wyues and chylderen, as it were eui∣dente they haue done agaynst them, whiche were now subiect to them: therfore were it more honeste to dye in the libertye, than willinglye to admitte such lordes. Thys counsell of Themistocles was accep∣ted of euerye man wyth a commune consent, that they shoulde defende themselues manlye agaynst the enemies. The Athenians beynge wroth wyth Cyrsylus for hys wycked counsell, commaunded▪ to stone hym: and the women lykewyse stoned hys wyfe, because her husband had put forth such coun∣sell, the whyche if they had folowed, they shoulde haue broughte all theyr chylderen to dishonesty. Thys dede is praysed for the vertue, and is worthy of remembraunce, that they woulde ra∣ther dye for the lybertye of the contry, than they shoulde yelde themselues to a straunge nacyon, to ouerthrowe the state of theyr citye and all policye and honesty. As the Athenians asked counsell at the aun∣swere▪ of Apollo at Delphas, it was aunswered them: that they should haue victory with walles of wood: the whiche Themistocles expounded of the defence of shyppes, and he exhorted that leauynge the citye, they should lead their wiues and children into the shyppes: for their citie should at length not be able to wythstande the power and so great mul∣titude of the Persians, besyde that also be not the Perses very well appointed by see. Thys counsell was alowed, and the residue
of the cities haue folowed it. Sparta and Corin∣thus, the whiche with a furnyshed nauye helde by force the straightes of the sea, by the yle Salami∣na, lest they mighte be compassed by the multitude of the shyppes that Xerxes had. Whan Xerxes hearde that the Grekes had made a nauy, and vnderstode that greate daunger shoulde come to hym, yf the Grekes vsed the sea frely, and as they had oportunitie, should falle into the kyngdome: it was counselled Xerxes, that contrarywise he shoulde combre the Grekes wyth warre vpon the sea. The same was done. But as the Grekes had the victory, the mooste part of the Perses was discomfyted, and many shyppes were drouned. This victory restored a courage to all Grece, and made Xerxes feble. The kynge him selfe was not in the battaill, but remaininge with a fewe shyppes vpon the coast, he dyd onelye beholde it. All the Grecians rendred the renoume of the battaill to Themistocles onelye, because that the victory beynge gotten by his counsell, all Grece was saued. Amonge the reste of the traynes, whyche Themistocles vsed in thys warre, I thoughte toThemisto∣cles suttyll deuyse. rehearse thys one suttyll deuyse. Whan Xer∣xes was abashed after the battayll, he thought the kynge mighte easelye be broughte thereto, that leauinge Grece, he shoulde returne for alltoge∣ther into Persia wyth the reste of hys armye. Therfore faynynge hym selfe humbly prostrate▪ as wyllinge to procure fauoure by the kynge, he
caused to shew hym by the messenger, that the Gre¦kes deuised to breake the bridge, the whyche he had caused to be layde before vpon the sea: Where∣fore to haue hym strayght waye oute of Grece, be∣fore the occasyon of flyenge were taken him, wyth∣out he woulde cast him selfe in great daunger. As he hearde thys tydynge, he made him strayghte waye readye to flye. But whan in flyenge he fande the bridge broken by the tempeste, he passed ouer wyth a lytle boate, euen wyth vtter daunger of his lyfe, because the sea was troubled wyth the vehe∣mency of the floudes. Of thys wyse dyd God turne the fortune of the dice, and punyshed themple ▪ pryde. Great princes haue here an example sett be∣fore them, whereby they must learne not to truste in their puyssaunce, but that in the feare of God and trust to God must great thynges be taken in hande. That he had thys shamefull ende, for be∣cause this expedicion made euery man amased, and also for because Xerxes dyd brynge on to Grece such a great multitude and power none otherwise than in oure tyme the Turke was constrayned to forsake the city of Vienne with great shame, which came into Germany with an hoost of two hundreth thousande men. Howbeit Xerxes departynge out of Grece, left Mardonius the capytayne there wyth threni∣▪ thousande souldyours: and that for thys cause, because the kynge persuaded by Mardonius coun¦sell wente into Grece, agaynste the mynde and wyll of the other Lordes.
And because it happened not as Mardonius promysed, therefore dredinge lest beynge retur∣ned home he might lose hys heade, because of the mischaunce of the warre, he desyred that he might be left in Grece wyth that army, to assaye all fortu¦nes of warre, yf by chaunce he coulde make feble the affayres of the Grekes. Xerxes than suffred that, and betoke hym to hys fortune. Fyrst beganne Mardonius frendely to entreate the Grekes, that hauing layde before them tolera∣ble condicions of peace, they woulde willingly yeld themselues. But the Grekes beynge become more couragious, by reason of the victory, refused vtter∣ly all dominion of the Perses, and denyenge the leage, asked that he shoulde defende hym selfe with force and fyghtynge hande. Than toke Mardoni∣us and burnt the citye of Athenes, and wente tho∣rough vntyll Thebe: for they of Thebe were fallen to the Perses. The Athenians and Lacedemoni∣ans makyng than agayn a fresh army by land of an hundreth thousand men, met at sundry times with Mardonius in battayll: at the laste Mardonius constrayned for faut of vytayls, made an ende. A∣lexanderAlexander. kyng of Macedony was wyth the Per∣ses, of whom we made mencion before: the same she∣wed the Grekes before the euenynge, that they should make them ready in armes on the next day, for Mardonius was determined to pyche hys last felde, and that was so done, but the Perses beyng ouercome, lost the felde, Mardonius beyng slayne also, whiche thynge the other counsellers of kyng
Xerxes tolde him before the warre began. But this was the ende of so great a settyng forth to warre: and whan this warre was ended, the cities of Gre∣ce began too encreace in power and enlargynge of their dominion subduyng many yles of the Perses, whiche they adioyned to their dominion. Moreo∣uer the Grekes beyng become puyssaūt, waxed also haut and presumtuous, and for desyre of dominion, they procured also inwarde sedicion & warre with in themselues: and beyng ouercome with mutuall damages that eche had done to the other, they were constrayned fynally to yeld themselues to straunge princes, quenchynge and destroyeng all the estate of their common wealth and the vertues, whereby they floryshed before. But of this shall we treate a lytle hereafter. It is necessarye to knowe Themistocles exam∣pleThemisto∣rded for . before any thyng, the whiche for so muche as he was the man, by whose prouisse and counsail whole Grece was saued, for the whiche thynge also hys prayses are auaunced, more then of any valeaunt captaine, whiche Grece had: yet was he euel rewar¦ded of his citesens: for they droue him out of y• citie. This thanke geueth the commō people for the most worthye vertues: yea the deuell hymselfe blyndeth men, that they do not acknowledge so hygh gyftes of God. Wherfore it behoueth the best and excel∣let men to haue pacience before all thynges: for it can not bee, but they must haue grefes and all vn∣thankfulnesse in that state of lyfe. After that fledThemisto∣cles flth too Artaxerxes. Themistocles to Artaxerxes, by whome he was had in greate honor, in all thynges equall to the
princes and peeres of his royalme. It is wrytten also, that Artaxerxes should haue sayde: he coulde wyshe his enemies no more euyll, but that they blin¦ded with such madnesse, dyd put awaye wyse men from them. Of Artaxerxes with the longe hande. AS Xerxes was deade, raigned his sonneLōgimanus▪ that is with the lōg hand. Artaxerxes: whose right hande was lon∣ger than the left, whereof he gat the surr¦name, wyth the long hand. Thys kynge is chefely praysed for his syngular wysedome and gentlenesse of maners and endeuour of peace. Therefore do I rehearse his historye here nomore at length, that wee maye finallye returne to the Iewysh hystories, lest we be ignoraunce what state was in the church and spyrytuall kyngdome. Of Zorobabel the Iewysh capitayne. WE haue shewed before that in the Bible is one of the Persian kynges called Assuerus: but the same wasAssuerus. Darius Histaspis, and as I suppose, thys Darius is Assuerus, which hadHester. quene Hester. Herodotus doth also make mencion of Artistona, the whiche Darius had besyde queneArtistona▪ Atossa. Atossa, and sayeth that the same Artistona was ve∣ry well beloued of Darius: and it appeareth that thys same was Hester. Philo writeth also that the history of Iudith happened in the tyme of this Da¦rius: and that Arphaxad, whereof the history of Iu¦dith maketh mention, was captayn of y• Assyrians,
after that they were now fallen from Cyrus, wh was ouercome of the Scythyes. I do not disalow thys meanynge of Philo: but verely as I do sup∣pose, the history of Iudith was now already fulfil∣led, before that Iuda was led into bondage: and al∣so before the Persians monarchy. For Arbaces kynge of the Medes was be∣foreArbaces. the monarchy of the Perses: and Ninius was destroyed in the tyme of the Persians kyngdome: and whan the Perses had the monarchy, nether Ninius, nor the Medes had theyr kynge. How∣beit I graunt here euery man to defende hys mea∣nynge. After Darius Histaspis setteth Philo Artaxer∣xes wyth the longe hande, passynge ouer king Xer∣xes, but doutlesse for none other cause, saue as is shewed before namely, than whā Xerxes was gone into Grece, Darius wyth the long hand gouerned the royalme in the East in the meane season. And this is that Darius with the longe hande, whiche is,  long hand. gaue the Iewes leaue the seconde tyme to buylde agayne the temple. For though Cyrus had permit¦ted the Iewes to returne to Ierusalem, for to tyll theyr lande, and to restore the kingdome & the wor¦ship of God: neuerthelesse in the meane season after Cyrus death▪ were they letted by the borderers, y• the building could not goo forewarde, vntill the se∣conde yere of Artaxerxes with the long hand, whō Philo calleth Darius with the longe hande. The∣same commaunded in the second yeare of his king∣ by a commune proclamation & commaunde∣ment, that Ierual & the temple shuld be repared.
This was the occasion, by the whiche the Iewysh natiōs was restored to his libertie, instituted again the gouernaunce of the royalme, with the Gods seruice, and builded agayne the temple and cities. And though Iuda had not hetherto his kynges, yet had they princes of Dauids posterite, vntil that tyme, that the Machabees began to reigne. Firste reigned zorobabel, whose posteritie what fortune they had, and how finally the whole kyngdome is translated from Dauids posteritie, shall we shewe hereafter. For so was it prophecied afore by the prophetes, that Christe should be borne about thatChristes cō∣myng. tyme of Dauids bloude, that foren princes shoulde vsurpe to them the kyngdome of the Iewes, that was now already alienated. The rekenynge of the seuenty we∣kes out of Daniel. IT was shewed Daniel by heauenly reue∣lacion of Christus commynge, and howe long the Iewysh people should last. Ther is a notable wytnesse in this prophecy, to confirme the certaynte of our faith against the Ie∣wes, whiche striue and contende that Christ is not yet come, and wayte yet for another Messias. Verely the rekenyng of the tyme appointed by Daniel, is easy, and specially it is pleasaunt to know thereby, that Christe was surely come about that tyme, the whiche Daniel hath prescribed. For though other do count diuersly, yet if ye go not frō the order of the histories, there shall bee found no great dissention, wherfore ye could doubt. For the diligent rekening of the tyme, is requisite to repete
out of Ptolome these Eclipses, that are happened, and to gather out of them ordely euery yeare: but that were not one mans laboure. And diligently ought Byshops to occupie them in these thynges, with doyng costes, that the vnderstandynge of so notable prophecies, myght bee clerely had in the churche. I truely wyll gather here out of the best histories the nombre of the yeares, and endeuoure to make the rekenyng there of very playne. Daniel sayeth: Seuenty wekes are concludedThe place in Daniel of the seuenty we∣kes. vpon this people, and specially accordynge to the commaundement of buyldyng agayne Ierusalem, shalbe syxty and nyne wekes, vntill Christes kyng∣dome, and than shall Christ be put to death. Fyrst must it be knowen what that the wekes do yearly signifye, so that euery weke make seuen yeares, the whiche maye easely be proued. Where∣fore the seuenty wekes make foure hundreth and nynety yeares. Secondly sayeth Daniel: Christe shalbe put to death after thre score and nyne wekes: but so that he teache the half weke, and afterward bee put to death. The tyme and office of Christ is notable ex∣pressed of this maner. Thyrdly must the nyne and seuenty wekes bee rekened from the seconde yeare of Darius Longi∣manus, that is, wyth the long hande: For then dyd God sende Zachary and Aggeus the prophetes, that they shoulde comforte and certaynely assure the people of repairyng Ierusalem hereafter with∣out any hynderaunce. And of this worde, that is, of this reuelacion are the aungels wordes to be vn∣derstande:
Because then was made the sure pro∣myse to the people, of the furtheraunce of the tem∣ples repayryng. Besyde that commaunded Longimanus that self same yeare by an open commaundement, that he Iewes shoulde not be hyndered of their purpo∣d worke of buyldynge the citie and temple, as it was done before. But all this is to be red in the bo∣dies of Eldras. And surely to this same delaye of tyme in repai∣ryng of the temple had saint Ihon respect in the se∣conde chapter of his gospell, where the Iewes said, that in buyldyng of the temple, were spent syx and fourty yeares: for that is the nombre of the yeares, from the seconde yeare of Cyrus, vntyll the syxte yeare of Longimanus, wherein the worke of the temple was accomplyshed. But now is it gathered out of the booke of the Machabees, and out of Iosephus, that from the be¦gynnyng of Alexander, after the death of the last Darius vntyll Christe was borne, to be thre hun∣dreth and ten yeares. From Christes byrth vntyll hys baptyme thyr∣ty yeares. Summa, from the begynnynge of Alexander vntyll the baptyme of Christe, thre hundreth and fourty yeares. To these put the tyme from the seconde yeare of Longimanus, vntyll Alexander after the death of the laste Darius, and as Metasthenes coun∣teth there shall be a hundreth and fyue and four∣ty yeares.
Summa, from the second yere of Longimanus vntill, the baptisme of Christe are foure hundreth, foure score and fyue yeare. And therfore thre score and nyne yearly wekes make euen foure hundreth and foure score and two wekes. Whereby it is manifest, that when Christe was baptysed, were fulfylled three score and nyne yearly wekes, and in the weke folowynge taught Christ, & in the same half weke was he put to death: For Christe was put to death the fourth yeare af∣ter that he was baptised. Wherfore when this we∣ke that foloweth is added to the thre score and nine, there shalbe seuenty wekes: and this is the maner to count the tyme appoynted by Daniel. For after Christes death are the Iewes nomore Gods peo∣ple, and their temple was afterward an abomina∣cion, the whiche Daniel witnessed playnly. Besyde this are other notable doctrines, and consolacions of troubled cōsciences in this prophe∣cy, of Christes office and kyngdome, that he came to preache forgeuenesse of synnes: but to expounde all this maketh to no purpose here, nother is it here taken in hande. I haue truely sought out with so great diligēte as I could, the maner of countyng the seuenty we∣kes of Daniel: nother do I fynde that it can great∣ly varye, if ye wyll folowe the fourme of histories. For though ye wyll not folowe Metasthenes, yet doth the rekenyng of the Grekes agre very well here with. For after the countyng of the Grekes are betwene the death of Alexander, and the begin∣nyng of Augustus twoo hundreth and foure score
yeares, the whiche I can proue with very stronge reasons. If ye do now take the yeares of the Per∣sians, after thee seconde yeare of Longimanus by the Grekes, ye shall fynde the same also. After Alexander vntyll Christes byrth, are thre hundreth and two and twenty yeares. After Christes birth vntyl hys baptysme thyr∣ty yeares. Put therto the nomber of the Persians from the second yeare of Longimanus an hundreth and two and thyrty yeares after the Grekes. Summa of this is foure hundreth, foure score and foure yeares. So perfectly do the hystories of the Grekes agre with the tyme that is founde in Iosephus and Philo, that ye maye openly perceaue, the tyme of Christes commynge to be moste fyttly appoynted by Daniel. And truely I doubte not, but wyse and learned men will alowe and testifye, that both these rekenynges that we haue set here, maye bee very well proued by wytnesses of hystoryes. And without it were to longe, I coulde brynge yet o∣ther more rekenynges, whyche shoulde agre with these also: So that it is no doubte, but that Daniel hath moste ryghtely hytt thee tyme of Christes commynge. It hath also no small pyth of consola∣cion or comfort, (though the maner of the tyme do not agre so iustly with euery minute,) that we may be certyfyed, that the tyme prophecyed of Daniel be longe sence past. Wherfore are the Iewes in ma∣nifest erroure, whiche can by no reasons proue, that the same tyme is not yet past, though they wyll vn∣derstande
the wekes of dayes or yeares. But her of is ynough. The table of the yeares of the worlde, whiche sheweth the tyme poynted by Daniel. M De. lvi vntyll the floude. C C xciii. vntyll Abraham was borne. C C C C xxiij. vntyll Moses was borne. L xxx. vntyll the goyng out of Egipt. C C C C lxxx. vntyll Salomons temple was buylded. C C xxxviii. vntyll kyng Ioas. C C xci. vntil Ieconias was caried into Babylō. Xi. vntyll the wastyng of Ierusalem by Nabu∣chodonosor. L xx. dured the captiuite of Babylon. C xci. dured the monarchy of the Perses after the captiuitie of Babylon. Vii. was Alexander after Darius. C xlvi. dured the rule of the Grekes vntyll Iu∣has Machabeus. C xxvij. dured the kyngdom of the Machabees as wryteth Iosephus. XXX. Herodes. In the thyrtyeth yeare of Herode was Christe borne. M. D. xxxii. sence Christe our lorde and Sa∣uiour was borne. Our of this table is easely gathered the reason and maner of the yeares in Daniels wrytynge. But I fynde by the Grekes the tyme after Alexan∣ders
death of this wyse: In the .cxiiii. Olympias dyed Alexander. Clxxxiiii. Olympias began the rule of Augustus after the death of Iulius. The xlii. yeares of Augustus was Christ borne. These yeares together sence the death of Alexā∣der make about cccxx. yeares. This nomber doth not so greatly disagre wyth the other aboue rehersed, and can easely be made to gre of learned men. Of Esdras. A Certayne space after the cōmaundement publyshed dyd kynge Artaxerxes let Es∣dras the scribe returne to Ierusalem. And duely not without a cause ought mē∣tion to be made of this man in the histories: for theEsdras gathe¦red together the bookes of the Bible. bookes of the holy scripture, that were now scatte∣red and strowed, dyd he gather agayne and set in order. For this worke was worthy to be the duety of a true byshop. Because that without holy scrip∣ture, cannot be maynteined the true religion and worshyp of God. In the tyme of this Artarerxes Longimanus began the great warre of Peloponnesus, whicheThe warre of Pelopon∣nesus. the Grekes had amonge themselues, in the whiche the citie of Athens at the last was vtterly destro∣yed. This warre lasted neare hande vntyl the ende of the Persian monarchy: and therfore I wyl first brefely reherse in their order the Persian kyng. s. suche as are yet behynde. Of Darius the bastarde.
DArius the bastarde reigned after Longi∣manus, and of truth he was not the sonne of Lōgimanus, but had his sister to wife and was his brother in lawe. He had two sonnes, At taxerxes whom they cal Mnemon, and Cyrus the yonger. Artaxerxes succeded his fatherArtaxerxes Mnemon, Cyrus. in the empire. Cyrus was made most puissaunt in Ionia. Of Artaxerxes Mnemon. AS Darius was deade, Cyrus began to take falsly to hym the kyngdome: for be∣syde that he ruled in a most puissaunt du∣chy, he was apte also for all manner of thing, and delited chefely in warre, and therfore ar∣med he hymself with great power against his bro∣ther.The warre of Cyrus agaist  brother. Beside this had his mother more affection to hym, than to his brother, whiche had a modest and gentle mother wit. But God did not prosper this wicked enterprise of Cyrus: for in a battaill, where he tought against his brother, was he slaine. Arta∣xerxes declared hymselfe not without courage in this battaill: for he was greueously wonded of Cy∣rus, and lept vpon another horse, that he shoulde knowe, that the victory came to hym afterwarde by God only. Of Ochus. OChus the sonne of Artaxerxes was moste gredy of mans bloud: for beside the great tyranny that he vsed, he slew also his own brothern. He buylded the citie Sidon, and brought Egypt againe to the Persian monarchy:
but they kept the loyalte of their yeldyng not very longe. At the last was he slayn of one of his gouer∣nours. Of Arsames. ARsames was the sōne of Ochus: the same was made kyng being yet yonge, by the capitain of the host, which flew his father Ochus. But when Arsames began now to wax great, the capitain of the hoost fearyng, by reason of the wycked dede that he had done, he slew by a disceat this Arsames also. Afterward makyng a league with Codomanus prince of Armenia, he toke to hym the kyngdome also, and called hym, Darius. Thus was the kynred of the noble princeCyrus kyn∣red was quē∣shed. Cyrus quenshed, and the kyngdome of the Per∣sians beyng translated from Cyrus posterite, came to a foren prince. Nether is that onely to be lamen∣ted, that suche power and honour, and so hygh gyf∣tes of God, were deleyed and put out of remem∣braunce within so few yeares: but muche rather, that Cyrus folowers beyng strayght waye vnlyke hym, dyd declare their father to haue no maner of vertue, the whiche appeareth in Ochus, whose fea∣tes of tyranny gaue occasion that the whole kynred of Cyrus was abolyshed. Of the last Darius. The same was straunge from Cyrus but heDarius the last. was made prince of Armenia by kyng O∣chus for his noble actes of chyuairy, for the whiche actes also he was chosen kyng by them, that had slayne Arsames, left he should be
reuenged of Ochus, that had done hym good. ButAn example of vnkynd∣nesse. being blynded by this occasion, and with the hope of the kyngdome that was offered hym, he forgat all the benefites, that he had receaued of Ochus, and hauyng the kyngdome, he called hymselfe Da∣rius, that nothyng should be wanting to the royall dignitie. But he was greuously punished for his vn¦kynonesse and disloyaltie. For when he was van∣quyshed of Alexander, losynge all his landes and kyngdome, he lost also his lyfe & the whole monar∣chie of Persia. But we shall treate more largely he∣reof in the begynning of the third monarchie, and when we shall speake of Alexander. The Warres of the cities of Grece. WE haue touched before how the Grekes waxed welthy and presumptuous when the Perses were driuen out of their lan∣des: for pride and presumption do com∣monly folow after great prosperitie. Wherfore du∣ryng this monarchie, they had great and durable warres among themselues, by the whiche whole Grece went finally to naught: insomuche, that after ward it was open for euery man to breake in. And also for the most honest gouernaūce & lawes, which they vsed in their cōmon welth, succeded filthinesse and most corrup maner of behaueour. And whome would it not greatly pitie to reade, that so many & great commodities or yuels, and so durable and wic¦kedMost great warres ray∣sed very lyght causes. warres are raysed of so lyght causes. They be examples herely not onely to be wondered at, but also most worthyest to be marked, for they may ad∣monyshe
men, that they take no warre in hand ligh∣tely and for euery lyght cause, but only constrayned by great necessitie: seing the warre raised amonge the Grekes for a small occasion, could be in no ma∣ner nor meanes be swaged and layed downe, tyll finally straunge people fallyng into Grece, oppres∣sed both partes. It is not my mynde here to describe this whole warre: for Theucidides, Xenophon, and afterward other haue written therof whole bokes. But I wil reherse one thyng among all other, namely what fall the citie of Athens hath had in this warre, and what misery she hath suffered, when she was taken in. And agayne how she was at the last restored againe by the vertues, moderation and pacience of some good men. For as hautnesse, hardinesse & pre∣sumption brought the state of the citie in decay, euen so dyd pacience and mekenesse of maners restore the same agayne. The begynnyng of the warre was aforen cause,The occasiōs of the ware of Peloponne∣suswere light and how lōg they lasted. the whiche the Athenians myght easely haue es∣thued. For the Corinthians were enemies to the citie Corcyra, the which required ayde of the Athe∣nians: and optained it the easier, because that the A∣thenians, which were already strong on the see, ho∣ped that through the league and confederation of thē of Corcyra, which had also great puissaūce vpon the see, they should become lordes of whole Grece. On the other syde y• Corinthiās required assistaūce of the Lacedemonians, and of this wyse was Grece diuided. The Lacedemonians did ioyne them selfs with the Perses, of whome they were assisted with
mony and victuals: howbeit the Perses vsed in the meane season disloyalte or falshode, lest the Lacede∣moniās should become to mighty. And this warre dured (as sayth Xenophon) eight & twenty yere, frō the tyme of Longimanus, vntil Axtarerxes Mne∣mon, and many cities peryshed myserably in thys warre. Also may be sene a wonderfull alteration of fortune in the examples of this warre. For when Alcibiades was captayne of the Athenians, were the Lacedemonians greately put to the worse and slayn, and that in the foure and fyue and twentieth yeare: so that they despayred euer to come to their former abilitie. Howbeit shortely after, in the nexteAlcibiades. yere was the worlde turned. For when Alcibiades was driuen out of the citie, though the ene of some malepart or euel men, were the Athenians slayen ofLysander. Lysander by the citie Egos of Potanus, where had happened a straunge wonder in the begyn∣nyngeA wōder sene in the tyme of the Greciās warre. of this warre. For in the ayre was sene a great fyre the space of thre score and fyftene dayes. Afterward fell a great stone from aboue into the ci∣cie. After this battaill was the citie of Athens enui∣roned with a heuy syege. Many died of hunger. Being demaūded to yelde them, vpō this cōdicionThe obstma∣ and male∣partnesse of yt Athenians in time of warre confirmed al¦so with a de∣are. that they should breake downe the towres & fortres¦ses of the citie: they refused malepartly the cōdictōs of peace, & remained by their purpose: geuing also a common commaundement, that who so should coū∣saill to make a league of agremēt with the enemies, shold be put to death. As lately is happened with y• Florentines about .ii. yeres past. But after fyue mo¦nethes were the Athenians cōstrained with hūger
to sende Ambassadours into the hoostes tentes too demaunde peace. Wherevpon when they had taken deliberacion in the counsaill of thoos that had con∣ederated themselues the Corinthians and Theba∣nes did constantly counsail, that the citie of Athens should be ouerthrowen euen out from the founda∣cion, and that of all their dominion should be made commune pastures. But the Lacedemonians re∣proued that, supposyng to be not honest to quenche and cast it away at once of suche wyse and to forgett the remembraunce of suche benefites, wherewyth this citie had holpen whole Greke against the Me∣des and Perses. Moreouer could not also so excel∣lent a state of this citie be ouerthrowē, without the incredible hurte of all the Grecians. For they sayd: that Grece seyeth with two eyes, whereof the oneSparta and Athens are two eyes of Grece. was Sparta, the other Athenes: Wherfore hede must be taken, lest Grece haue but one eye. Where∣vpon it was concluded finally that Athenes beyng saued, onely the towres and walles shoulde bee cast downe, and a certaine gouernaunce should bee pre∣scribed the Athemans, after the whiche they should lyue, and so should peace be made on both parties.The yeldyng of the Athe∣nians. The Athenians yelded themselues frely vpon these condicions, and the walles were cast downe with great triumphe: for with minstrelsy dyd they daūse also. Part of their nauy was brent, and part caried they with them. This happened about the seuen & twentyeth yeare when this warre had lasted. Ne∣uerthelesse were the Lacedemonians alrayd of one Alcibiades, whiche was sled to the Perses when he was driuen out of Athenes. Wherfore the Lacede∣monians
required of the Perses, that they wouldAlcibiades Ayeng to the Perses is slayn. The Perses are an exam∣ple of dislo∣pal. slayn Alcibiades, whiche the Perses did by a trap though the Perses had receaued Alcibiades accor∣ding to the office of hospitalitie, and that he had put all his trust in the faith of the Perses. But it chaū∣seth so with men, that were fortune doth incline her self, that waye doth mans fauour loue also. There∣fore ought he chefely to be ware, euen of the vnfaith fulnesse offrendes, whiche is out of prosperitie, and he whom men do enuie and yrke, for hatred of hys vertues. This Alcibiades was hyghly furnishedAlcibiades as oble in eaes of war but restlesse & s. with feates of warre or chiualry, but of an vnquiet minde, & he was cause of the breche of the peace that was many yeares before concluded betwene the Lacedemonians and Athenians: He had vsed in all Grece so many wyles and so sundry craftes, that it was euen commonly sayde: If there had happened to be borne two Alcibiades in Grece, it must nedes haue gone wholy to naught. Howbeit suche ende∣uoure can not prosper, therfore died Alcibiades fy∣nally of this sorte. And though the warres of the cities were now synyshed, yet began now fyrst the destruccion of men at Athenes. For seyng the citie of Athens was full of rebellions, there were ordey∣ned of the Lacedemonians thirty men, whom theyyraū  were or∣deyned at Athens. called Tiranny, to whom was committed auctho∣ritie, that they should punishe the sedicious rebelles without law or iudgement: and lest any man should withstande this aucthoritie with any sedicion, they layed a great garnison of souldiours in the castell. Of the restoryng of Athens after the destruction of it.
THe Lacedemonians vsed this sharpnesse, to punish the common commotions, and hygh necessitie constrayned them to do that. The thirty men vsed their auctho∣rite at the first against no man, saue the sedicious: af¦terward did the olde hatred of some of them bruste out against ye best of the citie, but good men did they put to death: semblable examples of ye like we haueTheramenes is put to de∣ath. knowen in oure dayes. And whan this displeased one of them, named Theramenes, a doughty man and iust, they slew him also, to cause other to be afra∣yed: and that more is, thei parted the goodes of thē that were put to death, among their compainions. The best of the citesens fled to Thebe and Argos, where for pitie of so vnworthy mysery, the were re∣ceaued, euen agaynst the commaundement of the Lacedemonians, whiche was that no man shoulde receaue the Athenians that fled or were banyshed. Amonge these bannyshed men was one that was doughty and valiaunt in the common wealth, cal∣led Thrasybulus: the same ioynynge with hym theThrasibulus residue of the bannyshed men, and a preuy ayde or subsydy of them of Thebe, taketh in the castell by Athens, and afterwarde goyng to Athens, and py∣chyng a felde, vanquisheth the thyrty Tyrannos▪ and recouereth the citie. The citesens that were fled were restored by this Thrasybulus: and as cō∣cernyng gouernaunce of policy, iudgementes and lawes, the state of the whole common wealth was chaunged, after the olde custome. Thrasybulus de∣seruedThe prayse of Thrasibu∣lus. chefely a greate prayse for his moderation of the mynde, that after so notable a victory,
wherein he had also taken many of the enemies pri∣souers, he woulde rather spare them, then by good ryght to slaye them. And when he considered that there should be no ende of puttyng to death, yf thee goodes of the citesens that were taken away should be restored to euery man agayne or to the true hey∣res, namely, that were already come to the third ororgetul∣nesse of iu∣ries is ordei∣ned. fourth possessor: he bande them euery one with such a bande amonge themselues, that no man shoulde thenceforth remembre any vengeaunce or iniury done, but that euery man should kepe that he had, & kepyng the common peace, euery man to be content with his portion or lot. By this meanes and mode∣ration was a quietnesse set in the common wealth. And this is a noble example, that with beneuolēceA notable ex∣āple to main∣ame ve. and forgenyng is procured a more durable concord in suche cinyll commotion, then that euery man wyl go forth with rigour and force. Afterward were the Lacedemonians become proude and haut also with this lucky chaunce: For they would dryue Perses out of Asia, whiche hadodon capi∣tayn of the Perses. succoured them. But the Perses for that tyme ma∣de Codon capitaine of their hoost, whiche was fled from Athens in the ciuill commotion: of hym were the Lacedemonians discomfyted. The Lacedemo∣nians takyng greueously their misfortune, layde al the fault vpon them of Thebe, because they had en∣tertained the bannyshed Athenians: wherfore theyThe Lacede∣moniās ight with ye The∣banes, and a∣ diconed fell into their contryes of the whiche rose a new oc∣casion of warre, in the whiche the Lacedemonians beyng ouercome, were wholy vndone, & the The∣bane power encreased.
Whan this warre was finished, the ThebanesThe Theba∣nes destroye the Phociās. toke another warre againste the Phocians, the whiche were wholye abolyshed, and the residue were bannished. Finally dyd Philippe kyng of Ma¦cedonyPhilippe de∣stroyed the Thebanes. discomfite and tame them of Thebe. And thus were fyrst Athens, after that Sparta, finally Thebe destroyed, and al that power of the Grekes came to naught. Howbeit whan the Athenians and Thebanes dyd not kepe the conditions and ap¦pointementes of peace made with kinge Philippe, he was cōstrained to inuade for to take in al Grece. This is ynough spoken in brefe maner of the dolefull warres of Grece, the whiche were an hun∣dreth and thyrtye yeares after Xerxes, durynge which space was lytel peace. These warres are at large written by Thucidides and Xenophon, and some other. We haue thought it therfore sufficient, yf we had opened and declared the example of the Athenians, y• which is the principal in that history. Of the Philosophers. IN the meane tyme that thys befell, dyd learnynge also florysh. Hippocrates theHippocrates Phisicion lyued from the tyme of Lon∣gimanus, vntill Ochus, an hundreth and foure yeares. And besyde that all Grece had hym in greate estimacion, he was also muche made of by the kinges of Macedony, by the which also he spent great part of his lyfe. Soranus wryteth that Hip∣pocratesSoranus wrote the life of Hippocra∣tes. was sent for by kynge Perdicas, because many iudged that the kynge was fallen into a con∣sumption, and was forsaken of other Phisitions.
But whan Hippocrates was come, he perceaued that the kynge was not sycke for feblenesse of bode∣ly strength, but that he pined for loue and inwarde sorowe. For he loued out of measure the handemay¦den of his father, & as oft as he sawe her, chaunged both the mynde and colour in the kynge. Of thysPerdicas was healed of Hippocra∣tes. wyse perceaued Hyppocrates the cause of the syck∣nesse, and gaue remedy to dryue it awaye. Besyde this, whan the pestilence raigned, he caused a great☞ woode to be sett on fyre agaynste the infect ayer, whence the infection of the ayer came: and of thys wyse kept he the whole contry Thessalia safe from the pestilence. He was also renoumed of naturall miracles. Vpon his graue were bees a greate sea∣son, with whose hony were sycke chylderen healed, that were anoynted therewyth. About the tyme of Artaxerxes Mnemon, was Socrates, whych by the enuy of hys aduersaryesSocrates. was poysoned and dyed in the preson. He was ac∣cused to be a brynger vp of a newe learninge in the citye. But by the prouidence of God, were the ad∣uersaries not longe after punished worthelye, for they were put to death also. Of Plato, Eudoxus, Aristoteles. AFter these were Plato and Eudoxus aPlato, Eu∣doxus, Aristo¦teles. very connynge Astrologian, whych also brought this science oute of Egypte into Grece. After thys man was Aristoteles, I suppose these to be the chefe amonge the Philoso¦phers, and after my iudgement are the chefe of thē Eudoxus & Aristoteles, namely because they were
not only garnished with pleasaunt wordes or rea∣sons, but studious of the very thynges. For they accustomed that kynde of learning, as is most pro∣fytable, partely to knowe the propertie of naturall thynges, and partly to learne what waye men may lyue honestly. It is a moost pleasaunt thyng to be∣holde, howe God hath sett all kynde of vertues in oure owne nature. Aristotele was borne of paren∣tesAristotles el∣ders. Nicomachus▪ not of the bafest or lowest condicion. His father was Nicomachus, a man of very great authoritye by Amyntas kynge of Macedony: for he was hys Phisicion. Hys ofspring was of Hippocrates kyn∣red, & for thys cause had kynge Philippe that was sonne to Amintas, Aristotele in suchreputacion, af∣terwarde he gaue vnto him Alexander hys sonne to be taught of him his discipline: and was taught of Aristotle the learninge of Philosophie, that he might become more ready and wyser to make a re∣lacion and to geue counsell. Hetherto haue we spo∣ken ynough of the Grekes affeares, which happe∣ned about the tyme of thys monarchy. Of Rome. WHan the kynges were dryuen out of theWhan the counsels of Rome began citie, the state of the common welth was chaunged. The Counsuls beganne to beare rule, and yearly were two chosen, whose authoritie in that office was one yeare. This chaunge of the commune welth happened in the tyme of Cyrus the fyrste monarche of the Perses, the yeare after the worldes foundacyon thre thousande, foure hundreth and fyftye, and
the seuenth yeare after that Babylon was wonne by Cyrus. But besyde other great and innumerable affei∣res, that befell at Rome, were also horrible sedity∣ons and chaunges in the commune wealth: in the whych are examples geuen vnto vs, that great ci∣cyties and commune wealthes do endure seldome without great alterations. Howbeit in this ma∣ner, yt two Counsules wer chefe rulers, lasted per∣petually, vntyll the tyme of Iulius, which vsurped the monarchye. There were betwene the begin∣nyng of the Counsels rulyng vntyl Iulius raigne, foure hundreth and thre score and fyue yeares. It were to long to rehearse here the Romane histories. I will only recite the tyme of two nota∣ble chaunces, that were befallen at Rome in the tyme of thys Monarchye. In the hundreth and second yeare after that the citye was builded, that is, not longe after Xerx∣es warre, aboute the beginninge of Longimanus raigne, rose controuersy and dissension by the Ro∣manes.The occasi∣on of the Ro∣mane lawes. For seynge they vsed not yet a certayne iu∣styce or lawes, men were oft vniustlye wronged in and out of iudgemente: for noman knewe yet per∣fectly what was ryght. And whan the multitude dyd for this cause murmure, it was ordeined, that a certayne lawe should be written. Wounder it is of what importaunce be written lawes, to enter∣tayne commune peace and concord in the commun welath, the which this example doth witnesse ma∣nifestly.The Ten mē were sent in∣to Grece. For this thing were ten men chosen, whiche beinge sente into Grece searched oute and
espyed the maners and lawes of the greatest cities, and in gathering together the beste lawes dyd vse the counsell of Hermodorus of Ephesus and other Philosophers. Twelue tables were written, theTwelue ta∣bles. which were hanged vp openlye before the court of Rome. This is the begynning of the written lawe of the Romanes, the which they haue fyrst borow∣ed of the Grekes. The Ten men ruled thre yeare: for it behoued that the lawes were euery daye declared. But Ap∣piusAppius. one of the Ten men dyd abuse hys power, which caused one Virginius a cite sins doughter to be demed for another mans bondewoman, that by that cloke of lawe he might drawe her to hym and destore her: The whiche as the father perceaued, and sawe that by reason of Appius power his dou∣ghter coulde not be delyuered, he slewe her himself in the iudgement, lest his stocke shoulde be stayned with such a reproche. Afterward gathering an ar∣my, he made ready an ayde against Appius the ty∣raunt.The Ten mē were depo∣sed. An example of vengeaūce Than deposynge the Ten men from their office, a new dignitie was ordeined. Appius beyng taken and cast into pryson, slew him selfe. Thys ex∣ample sheweth that tyranny and iniustice remayne not vnreuenged. The thre hundreth and thre score yere after theRome was brent of the Frenchemen and Germa∣nes. Camillus. foundacion of the citye, fell into Italy an army ga∣thered of the Frenchmen and Germanes, whyche brent Rome. But Camillus, whom the commune people had before dryuen out of the citye, played y• part of an honest man: for coloring wholy the iniu∣ry, the which he had suffred vnworthely, gathering
an army out of the next contryes, he oppressed the Frenche men and Germanes wythin the citye, ke∣pyng the castel from besyegynge, and the residue of the citesins that were escaped. The dammage had the citye in the tyme of Artaxerxes Mnemon, and about that tyme nearehande was Athenes taken and spoiled. In this hystory is the first mencion madeThe firste ion of the Germa∣nes in histo∣ryes. of the Germanes, and this was not who¦ly four hundreth yeares before Chri∣stes byrth. Of these Ger∣manes was Milane and other cityes in Italy buylded. Of the thyrde Mo∣narchye. THe thre thousand, syxe hundreth and foure and thyrtyeth yeare after the worldes creation, whan the dominion of the Perses had lasted an hundreth and nynety yeares, that is thre hun∣dreth and twenty yeares before Chri∣stesThe begyn∣nyng of the thyrd Mo∣narchye. byrth, began the thyrd Monarchy, the whych we call the monarchy of the Grekes: and nowe is the dominion of the worlde translated from the coastes of the East, into the West: and oute of Asia, into Europa. From that time began Asia by lytle and lytle, more
and more to dekeye, not onelye in those thynges that were concerninge the power of the empyre: but also in those thynges that concerned modestye of maners, vertues, gouernaunce of cōmune wel∣thes and good learning. And though these thyngs are in a maner redressed and restored by the Ro∣manes, yet at the last came by violence the Barbari¦ans into Asia, and dyd spoyle it, in so much that the∣sameThe decaye of Asia. parte of the worlde, whiche was wont to bee the moost excellentes, by reason of the pleasaunt∣nesse of situation, wysedome, honestye of men and puyssaunce of countryes, is now turned nearehand altogether into a synke of fylthinesse, and murthu∣rous denne. And contrary wyse those hyghest gif∣tes are nowe in the Weste, seynge the worlde doth drawe by lytle and lytle to the ende. This monarchy beganne at Alexander kyngAlexander the greate. of the Macedonians, whom we do worthelye call the Great. For he was so excellent, not only in po∣wer of gouernaunce, but also in all other princelye vertues, that one woulde suppose he haue had but few that were equall to him. He is praysed in Iere¦mye and Daniel the prophetes, because he was a most sharpe and happy gouernoure. Daniel descri∣beth a buck, of whom is a ramme ouercome & ouer throwen, and doth expounde manifestlye, that the buck is the kyng of the Grekes, and the ramme the Persian kynge. The vertues and notable victori∣esAlexander the buck, Da¦rius the rāme wherewyth God had garnished kynge Alexan∣der, gaue some men occasyon to falle & fayne muche of hys ofsprynge, but I passe them ouer. But this is certayne, that great and fortunable
princes are gouerned and kepte of God, and that they are endued only of God wyth those▪ vertues and gyftes. For God wyll haue the maiestye of go∣uernaunces to be kept and maynteyned by those, whych are noble by noblenesse of aunceters, and flo¦rishing of kynred: and it is euident, that Alexander was borne of this sorte. Hys father was kyng Phi¦lippe, and hys mother was Olympias. And thatThe paren∣tes of Alexan¦der. Philippes e. nyght whan Alexander was conceaued, it is sayde that Philippe sawe in hys slepe, that he had a seale on Olympias belly, wherin was karued the ymage of a Lyon. It was expounded, that by that dreame was signifyed, that Olympias hauynge conceaued of Philippe should brynge forth a moost puyssaunt kynge As for Philippe and Olimpias both of them were borne of the hyghest and moost noblest kyn∣red of all Grece at that tyme. For Philippe (if wee maye geue credet to the moost true wrytynges of hystoryes) came of Hercules, and Olympias of A∣chylles, the valiaunt captayn before Troye. These are the aunceters, of whose stocke the renowmed prince Alexander is borne: The kynred of Alexanders father, The battail of Troye, Hercules Hyllus Cleodeus Aristomachus Temenus Perdicas Argeus
Philippus Eropus Alcetas Amyntas Alexander Amintas Philippus Alexander the great. Thys was the fyrst kyng of Ma∣cedony, whose ofspringe doth He∣rodotus describe. And Alexander the great was borne about eight hundreth yeares af∣ter the Troian warre. The kynred of Olympias mother to Alexander. Achilles Pyrrhus Molossus kynge of Epyrus and Pielus: they were both borne of Andromachus. Of Pielus doth Pausanias in the Atticall wry∣tinges draw the other kings of Epyrus folowing. Tarymbas Alcetas Neoptolemus and Arymbas Olympias Neoptolemus doughter, mother to to Alexander. This is the genealogy of Alexander, gathered out of moost certayn hystoryes, the whiche wytnes∣seth that the ofsprynge of Alexander was of the posterytye of very great men. Whan Philippe was stayne, because he left thePhilippe was stayne because he left a wicked dede vnpuni∣shed. wicked dede of a great man, that had shamfully de∣floured a noble chylde vnpunished, strayght waye after rebelled the Illyrians and Grekes, and fell from the Macedonians, and the kyngdome of the Macedonians stode in greate daunger. For whan his father Philippe was slayne, Alexander was
only twenty yeare olde. This was in the begin∣ning of the hundreth and eleuenth Olympias afterThe deedes of Alexander e great. the rekening of the Grekes. But wha Alexander had takē to him the administration of the royalme, he fyrst broughte the Illyrians agayne vnder the yock, after that wente he to Thebe. For they of Thebe besyeged the garnyson of men, that his fa∣ther Philippe had set in there castell, and also made a league wyth the Perses, the whiche inuaded the kyngdome of Macedony. In the meane season that Alexander besyeged them of Thebe, dyd the Athenians sende ambassadours to hym, for to op∣tayne peace. Alexander receaued them fauoura∣bly. They of Thebe in the meane season beyng ob∣stinate, nother soughte for grace, nor conditions of peace. And whan it was proclamed by the cōmaun¦dement of Alexander before the assaulte, that who∣so of them of Thebe that woulde yelde them frely, and go oute of the cytye, shoulde saue theyr lyues. They of Thebe caused to be proclamed contrarye wyse, that they that would haue the libertye of the Grekes wyth theirs saued, and the kynge of the Perses, against the tyraunte Alexander, shoulde drawe to them. Alexanders myde beynge chafed wyth that reproche, the citye was assaulted, andhhe oe , ate  o er s. wholy spoyled, and was neuer restored afterward. Thys was the fyrste greate citye that Alexander subdued. For we se most communely come to passe, that God ordeineth puysaunt monarches for the destruction of great cityes. Whan Alexander had now made a peace in Grece, he went into Asia with n hoost of fourty thousand
oote men, but of horssemen onelye foure thousand. The army that was in Asia, the whiche his father had sent afore, was but lytle. With this small hoost falleth he vpon the Perses, and maketh very great feldes, and taketh many mighty cityes with strong hande, amonge the whyche was Sardis, Mile∣tus and Tyrus. In conquering of the whiche, Ale∣xander was in many haardes. Vanquyshyng also in battaill Darius the kynge, he put him to flighte, and takyng hys mother, hys wyfe the quene, hysAlexanders gentlynesse. doughters and sonne, he entreated them gentely, and as it besemed there royall kynred. The quee that was aged, called he mother: he entertayned her sonne none otherwyse, than if it had bene hys owne. Wounder it is what prayse Alexander deser¦ued for these vertues in all Asia, and with Darius himselfe, insomuch that frely he offred hymselfe to treate of peace, offerynge to be content to delyuer vnto him euen the half of his royalme. To this an∣swered Alexander. that this worlde can not be ruled wyth two sonnes: but yf he were content to yeld frely him selfe and hys royalme, he wold gent∣lyDarius is ouercome of Alexander. take him to grace. But Darius renewynge an hoost, was vanquyshed, and was thrust through in the flight, by his own seruaunt and guyde Bessus. Alexander comming vpon Darius, founde him ve¦ry greueously wounded, and nearehand dead, and had pitye vpon him, & promised him that this vn∣faythfulnesse of Bessus against his owne lord, shuldThe disloyal tye of Bessus is an example of venge∣aunce. not be vnpunished. Wherfore Bessus beyng ta∣ken afterward, he caused him to be hanged betwen two trees, that were bowed doward, the which
whan they were suffred to dresse themselues agay∣ne, wyth a great swynge, they tare hym paynfully. Of thys wyse was Alexander become gouernou∣re of Asia, and toke in farther the residue of the con∣tryes and cityes, as Babylon, Susa &c. The begin¦nyngeThe begyn∣yng of Ale∣anders mo∣narchye. of thys monarchye of Alexander was after the death of thys last Darius, that is, in the begyn∣nyng of the seuenth yeare after that Alexander be∣gan to raygne. Alexander beynge become proude by thys vic∣tory, began to be dissolut in excesse of dronkennesse. He caused some of hys frendes and counsellers to be put to death, which was the moost excellent and sage captayne, the aged Parmenion. Besyde thysParmenion. in hys wrath he slew hys valiant captayne Clytus in a banket, because he preferred Philip his father. before Alexander his sonne. But whā his maners were chaunged, fortune chaunged also, though the mynde was not peasable. Ho warred also vpon the Iudyans and Scythians, but he liued not long af∣ter that. For he dyed the two and thyrtyeth yeare, and eleuenth moneth of hys age. He raygned af∣ter hys father Phylyps departure, no lenger than twelue yeare, and seuen monethes: and wythyn so lytle space had he dispatched so many and great warres, so that suche a multytude of men coulde scarce haue yournyed throughe so many contryes and realmes, euen whan it had bene peace and tran¦quyllyte. He raygned at Babylon after Daryus, only fyue yeare, and eleuen monethes. Such hysto∣ryes declare that greate kynges and princes are
guyded by a certayne heauenly power or will. Alexander was endued with many and excel∣lent princely vertues, the examples whereof to set forth here, by reaon of oure industrye to be short, hath no place. I will recite only one amonge so ma∣ny. As oft as the playntyfe in iudgement layde ou∣ght against any gylty man, the same beynge absent,A noble ex∣ample of Ale¦xander con∣cerninge a good prince or iudge. he gaue only the one eare to the plaintyfe, and was wont to shut y• otherwyth his hand: that he might signifie, he would kepe the other for the gylty man, and that both partes oughte to be herde alyke, the which pertaineth to an office of a good prince and true iudge. Alexander gaue here a notable exam∣ple for greate princes, that not onely the one parte should be admitted to speake, and laye for him selfe, but both partes: euen as at Athens they were wont to sweare, the iudges that were chosen, thatWhat the iudges at A∣thens dyd sweare. they should geue sentence accordinge to the lawe written, and that they shoulde heare both partes alyke. Of the moderation and godlynesse that Alexander dyd vse agaynst the Iewes. WHan Ierusalem was now builded a∣gayne, the Iewes lyued in greate peace vnder those Godlye kinges of the Perses. But whan Alexander besieged the citye Tyrus, he requy∣red ayde of th Iewes, which answe∣red: that they coulde do it by no honeste meane, be∣cause they were subiectes to the kynges of Persia,
whyche also had receaued many and great benefy∣tes of them. Whan Alexander had hearde thys ex∣cusation,The settynge forth of Alex∣ander against the Iewes. Iaddus the hygh priest. Alexanders reuerence to the hyghe priest. he was wroth, and whan he had wonne Tyrus, he came wyth hys hoost towarde Ierusa∣lem. But Iaddus the hygh prieste, puttinge on the prestly apparell, and other aged men, went oute of the citye to mete Alexander, for to aske peace. Whā he sawe y• hygh prest in that apparel, he lept incon∣tinently from his horsse, and fallinge vpon his kne∣es before the preste, he promysed hym peace frely. All hys princes maruayled that he vsed so greate lowlynesse agaynst a priest of a straung nacion, and also that he had swaged the rage of hys mynd in so lytle space. Parmenio which was entierly beloued of the kynge, by reason of his age and wysedome, demaunded of him: what reuerence moued hym, that he fell so lowly before the prest. To the whiche he aunswered: that in Macedony he sawe a lyke∣nesse in hys slepe, semblable to thys prest, that stode before him, and admonished hym that he should go into Asia, and promysed to ayde him: and that he dyd the honour to the verye same God, that than had appeared vnto hym: At that tyme went Alex∣ander peaceably into the citye, hearynge also reue∣rentlye the prestes reasonynge of the doctryne of theyr religion, the whych taught hym also the pro∣phesy of Daniel, that the kyng of the Grekes shuld rule in Asia, and amonge the Perses: Whereof was Alexander not a lytle coraged: and geuinge the Iewes great lybertye he enryched the temple also wyth great and noble gyftes. He returned to Babylon according to the prophecy of Ieremy.
Of thys wyse saued God hys weake churche at that tyme, whan for so notable mutation of domini∣ons, was warre nearehande in all countryes. The diuision of the realmes after Alexander. ALexander had maryed Roxane the dou∣ghterRoxane wyfe to Alexander of a prince in Persia, whiche was great wyth chylde whan the kyng dyed. Whan the kynge was deade, and there was none other true heyre of the kyngdome, than the kynges chylde, the princes toke counsel among them, how to gouerne the kyngdome a ryghte. First they thought it good to appoint certayne go∣uernours, vntyll the quene were delyuered: yf a man chylde were borne, the same should be kyng byThe stryft a∣monge the princes after Alexanders death. Perdicas Arideus bro∣ther to Alex∣ander. Perdicas crafte. inheritaunce and succession. Contrarywyse dyd some (among whom was Perdicas one) choyse in the kynges steade Arideus brother to Alexander, a man fearfull, and syckely: and to this agreed the moste parte. Neuerthelesse were the princes con∣strayned to choyse men, by whome the kyngdome should be gouerned: but amonge the gouernoures was Perdicas the chefe, and that in the name of Alexanders brother: vnder which pretense he pro∣cured in the meane season, that he myght by lytle & lytle optaine the whole kyngdome, and than began he to assaye fyrst wyth honcste engyns, afterwarde with open force also. For he wod Cleopatra the syster of Ale∣xander,Cleopatra. and trusted by that meanes easelye to op∣tayne the kyngdome. But Antipater that wasAntipater.
gouernour in Macedonia feling this gyle of Per∣dicas, dyd hynder thys weddinge: wherfore dyd Perdicas on the other part his diligence, that An∣tipater might be taken and cast into preson. This is to be brefe nearehande the cause of the warre, whych was rysen amonge Alexanders princes. For Perdicas had hys rebellions: againste him on the other syde conspyred Antypater, Antigonus &Antigonus. Ptolomeus. Ptolomeus. And Perdicas inuaded Ptolome first in Egypte, where he was forth wyth slayne of hys owne souldiours. This was a worthy punishment the which he deserued, that was fyrst begynner of the sedicion amonge Alexanders princes. But ther could be no ende made of this tragedy, nother was there any hope of peace, without the adheren∣tes of Perdicas were fyrst oppressed also: yee there coulde no stedfast peace be hoped for in the worlde, seyng whan Alexander was deade, the world was as headlesse. Nother appeared any thyng els in so great a perturbation of all thinges, than that al ho¦nestye and gouernaunce beynge wholy ouerthro∣wen, there shoulde be a continuall willfulnesse o murthuringe amonge men. So lytle can lawful gouernaunces last in this worlde, without they be institute and preserued of God. But it semed toOf Alexan∣ders kyng∣dome are made foure kyngdomes. God, that oute of Alexanders kyngedome should sprynge foure mighty princes. For so was it pro¦phesyed of Daniel to come to passe, namelye, tha whan the bucks (whiche signified Alexander) on horne shoulde peryshe, foure other hornes should growe: the whiche the angell expoundeth of th foure kyngdomes institute after Alexander. Bu
it is chefely to be maruayled at, that God woulde the realmes to come to those princes, which by de∣gre of bloude were neare to Philippe and Alexan∣der. Perdicas, which was not of the kinges bloud, was in the meane season depryued of this honor. For so doth it most commonely come to passe, that he which coueteth the common gouernaunce with∣outLawfull cal¦ling must be ensued. a lawfull callynge, & putteth himselfe in greate administrations of hys owne swynge, is reiected of God: as we se what happened to Absalon & some other. Moreouer these kyngdomes are diuided a∣monge those princes, which before were made de∣bities in the kyngdome by Alexander. Seleucus was made kynge of Syria. Ptolemeus was made kyng of Egypte. To Antigonus befell the kyngdome of Asia. Cassander ruled in Macedonia and Grece. These kynges had cruel warres for the mo∣narchye, the which euery one coueted. But in Ma∣cedonia was the greatest slaughter. CassanderThe tyranny of Cassander The mother of Alexāder a rare exam∣ple of chasti∣te is put to death. caused to put to death the moost honest quene, mo∣ther to Alexander, the whiche in dyenge shewed a very wounderful token of chastitye and constancy. For meting the hangeman frely wyth a coragious contenaunce, aboue the costume of women, she toke hym her heade to cutt of: and whan she fell doune, she couered her so wyth her rayment, that her bo∣dy should no where be disclosed dishonestly. As for Roxane Alexanders wyfe, caused Cassander to be taken & kept. But this vnfaythfulnesse hath God punyshed ryght well, whā after Cassanders deathAn example of venge∣aunce. hys two sonnes Antipater & Alexander disquieted
eche other wyth warres, for the kyngdome of Ma¦cedonye. Antipater one of them, drewe to hym Ly¦simachus, which raygned by Hellespontus, whose doughter he had wedded also. But the other bro∣ther Alexander, requyred ayde of Demetrius, the sonne of Antigonus. But ether of them was slayn of hys companyon, of whom they trusted to haue ayde: Antipater of hys father in law, Lysimachus, and Alexander of Demetrius. Fynallye besell the kyngdome of Macedonye to Demetrius sonne to Antigonus: for he was an honeste and lucky prince in gouernaunce. Of this Demetrius haue all theDemetrius kyng of Ma¦cedony other kynges of Macedony theyr ofspringe, vntyll these tymes, whan the laste of hys kynred was ta∣ken of the Romanes, in whom also ended the king∣dome of Macedony. I set forth here the history brefely, and as it were euē in passing away, out of the which thesage reder may easely cōsider, that in Grece, whan they destro¦ied themselues, & vsed now the assistaunce of foren princes, peryshed all honesty of good maners wyth the dominion and commone welth. For this Deme¦trius (of whom we haue now made mencion) whan he was oft conuersaunt wyth the Athenians, theyThe vnsham¦fast slaery of the Athe∣nians. slattered him so shamefullye, that they called hym God, and wyth prayenge dyd hym godly worship: yea and in theyr sacrifice vsed they a seuerall songe of him, sayenge: that the other goddes were a slepe, only Demetrius was a true God, whych dyd watche for theyr health. These vngodly and dred∣full voyces testifye that at Athenes was vtterlye quenched and lost all honesty and godlynesse.
Now resteth it, that passinge ouer the kynges of Macedony, I rehearse the names of suche kyn∣ges, as haue raygned in Syria and Egypte. For these kyngdomes were the mightiest among those foure, and to knowe the order of these kynges, do∣eth greatly auayle also in holy scrypture, wherein often tymes is made mencion of them. For the Ie∣wes had great conuersacion and occupyenge wyth these two kyngdomes. Of the kynges of Syria. SEleucus was a prince borne in Mace∣donie,Seleucus. on whose thingh appeared a natu¦rall token, in maner of an anker, the which had also all his posterity. He toke the citye Babylon by stronge hande. AfterwardeAntigonus Demetrius were Antigonus and Demetrius hys sonnes kyn∣ges of Asia, ouercome of him. Antigonus was pear¦sed through: Demetrius dyed in preson. After thisOf whom Seleucus was slayne. discomfyted Seleuchs Lysimachus. But in the seuenth moneth after thys victory, was Seleucus slayne by Ptolome Ceraunus brother to Ptolo∣meus Philadelphus. These are dredefull exam∣plesAn example of the feae of God. of the settynge vp and fall of so great kynges, which worthely oughte to styrre vs to feare God, lest we thynke to do great thynges by mans coun∣sell and oure wysedome.Antiochus Soter. Antiochus Theos. Selencus Callinicus Antiochus Hierax. Antiochus Soter the sonne of Seleucus, raig∣ned in Syria after the death of his father. Antiochus Theos his sonne, had fyrst to wife La∣odice, wherof he had two sonnes, Seleucus, Calli∣nicus, & Antiochus, which was surnamed Hierax.
Ptolomeus Philadelphus gaue to the same Bere∣nice his doughter afterward to wyfe. But whan Antiochus was deade, Laodice constrayned Se∣leucus her sonne to take the kyngedome, and to take his stepmother Berenice. Seleucus folowed his mothers counsell, besieged hys stepmother, & finally brought her to yelde willyngly wyth great promises. But kepynge no promyse, he caused that the quene was put to death very cruelly. For Da∣niel had prophesyed openlye, that the quene of E∣gypt should suffre such a thynge, and that the kyng of Egypt should reuenge the same. For whan thys cruel dede was done, Ptolemeus Euergetes bro∣therPtolomeus Euergetes. to Berenice went into Syria, droue Seleu∣cus out of the kyngdome, and takynge in many cy∣tyes, returned into Egypte. Afterward whan Se¦leucus had recouered some harte, he woulde reco∣uer the kyngdome agayne, and requyred ayde of hys brother Antiochus Hierax: he was very yong, and trusted by this occasyon to optayne the whole kyngdome. For whan peace was made betwene Ptolomeus & Seleucus, Hierax inuaded his bro∣ther Seleucus kyngdome, to the which thynge he vsed the ayde of straunge souldyours. For the Ga∣lathians,The Gala∣thians were brought by Brennus  of Ger∣many into Grece. which Brennus brought out of Germany into Grece, went farther into Asia, beynge hyred wyth those kynges wages, which had diuerse war¦res agaynst eche other. These Galathians had thā geuen them those landes in Asia, that they dwel∣led in. Of whom they be called Galathians, vnto whom S. Paule the apostle preached the Gospell. Nether is it anye doubte but that they were Ger∣manes.
For the Grekes dyd calle wyth one worde the Germanes and Gallies Celte, & by chaungyng of the worde, was the name Galate set for Celte. Finally ouercame Antiochus his brother Seleu∣cus with the ayd of the Galathians, but Antiochus was lykewyse vanquyshed of the kyng of Asia, le∣syng a great deale of the kyngdome of Syria: than was he constrayned to flye to king Ptolomeus E∣uergetes: & whan he was so receaued of hym, that he should go no wher, he wold haue fled, but whan thys counsell was perceaued, he was put to death. This ende finally gat Antiochus Hierax. AbouteNotable ex∣amples of vengeaunce. y• tyme nearehand fell Seleucus his brother from a horsse, & dyed. This miserable fortune & end had these two bretheren, which had done many wickedAntiochus magnus. Ptolomeus Philopater. dedes. Antiochus the great inuaded the kynge of Egypt Ptolome Philopater wyth warre, but he was dryuen back. Afterwarde whan Philopater was deade, he returned into Egypt with an army: but the Romanes had taken the child Ptolomeus Epiphanes into their wardshyp, to whom he wasThe occasiō of the warre of Antio∣chus wyth y• Romanes. Hannibal. committed as a warde. This was an occasion of a great warre, which was betwene the Romanes & Antiochus. Hanniball toke part with Antiochus, which was captaine in this warre a certayn space, and many more contries of Grece dyd stycke to An¦tiochus. But beynge weakened by reason of some mishappe, he was dryuen to demaunde conditionsAntiochus Epiphanes is sent to Ro for a pledge. of peace. Than left the Romanes hym only y• parte of the royalme, whiche lieth beyond the hyll Tau∣rus: besyde this was he constrayned to sende his sonne Antiochus Epiphanes to Rome in hostage.
But at the last whan Antiochus spoyled the rycheThe temple of Belus in Syria. temple of Belus in Siria, he was oppressed of the communalty inhabityng there, whych slew hym & hys company euery one. This was the ende of An¦tiochus the great. Hierusalem had metely goodThe start of Ierusalē vn∣der Antio∣chus. rest sence the tyme of Alexander, vntyll Antiochus the great. But whan the warre betwen these two kynges was raysed, by reason the Iewes laye be∣twene them both, they were a lytle oppressed & ve∣xed of both parties. And though Ierusalem dyd hetherto stycke more to Egypte, yet was it nether subiecte to Syria nor Egypte. Howbeit Ptolome∣usScopa a cap¦taine of Pto¦lomeus Epi¦phanes. Epiphanes sent a capitayne, one Scopa against Antiochus, which toke in certayne townes of Sy∣ria, and part of Iewry. Howbeit whan Antiochus had vanquished the same by ye Iordane, he went far¦ther tyll he came at Ierusalē. Than did the Iewes kneling, yelded thēselues frely to him, makyng also a commune league betwene them and the kyng: & for thys cause dyd the kyng Antiochus suffer them to lyue in peace, & asysted them in repayryng ye citye Ierusalem. And of this wyse, though they semed to be in daunger in the tyme of this warre, by rea∣son of the neighburhead▪ yet lyued they quietly vn¦der this Antiochus. Antiochus the great left af∣terSeleucus Philopator. him thre sonnes, Seleucus surnamed Philopa¦tor, Antiochus Epiphanes, & Demetrius. After ye fathers death raygned Seleucus a few yeres, the other two brethren were kept in hostage at Rome. Whan Antiochus Epiphanes knew of his fathers death, he led priuely frō Rome, & as he was come againe into Syria, he was made king. For Seleu∣cus
was vnmete to rule, nether liued he long after his fathers death. This Antiochus EpiphanesAntiochus Epiphanes, called Epi∣manes. truely was a man of much subtelty & hardinesse, & had well learned by the example of the Romanes, to apply himselse to the tyme and maners of euery man. For he could easely forbeare and suffre euery man that he was with: he was a wyse man wyth ye wyse▪ & agaynwyth vnbrydeled youth, he folowed such exercise, as he knew them to delyte in. He pro∣cured the fauour of the comon people with familia∣ritye & beneuolence: and whan he made any costly banket, he caused great summes of mony to be cast among ye people. For his vnbrydeled maners was he called Epimanes for Epiphanes. For Epimanes signifieth madde, but Epiphanes signifieth noble. His raigne began the hundreth & seuen and thyr¦tyeth yeare after Alexanders death. And whan he possessed now hys kingdomes that came to hym by heretage, he went into Egypte. For about ye tyme dyed Ptolomeus Epiphanes, the same had to wyfe Cleopatra the syster of Antiochus Epiphanes, the which vnder that pretence began to vsurpe ye king¦dome of Egipt, as if he were tutor of the yong king called Ptolomeus Philometor. Nether shewed hePtolomeus Philometor. himself otherwyse, but with all gentlenesse & bene∣uolence toward his cosin, & willed that Memphis & other great cities shuld yeld them to the kyng, y• vnder suche a pretense he mighte by lytle and lytle draw to him the whole realme. Whan he had now finished all thinges, he left the kingdome, and went to Ierusalem, & that at the request of Io, which coueted the dignitye of the hygh presthode by the meane of Antiochus.
For so stode the case thāwith the Iewes, that they myghte optayne the hyghe priesthode by decepte, by conspiracion offoren kynges, oppressinge & slay∣enge in the meane season those, that were the true successors. For which cause was this people greue∣ouslyThe your∣ney of Antio¦chus to Ieru¦salem▪ punished agayne of God. This was the fyrst yourney of Antiochus to Ierusalem, in the whiche he ordeined a hygh priest, and spoyled the temple▪ & slew many. This happened the syxte yeare of An∣tiochus, the which was the hundreth and thre and fortyeth yeare after Alexanders death. Two yeare after, which was the hundreth and fyue and fortieth yeare after the death of Alexan∣der,The seconde yourney of Antiochus into Egypte. made Antiochus ready hys seconde yourney into Egypt. For the cities had yelded themselues agayne to the yonge kynge, the which also had sou∣ght for ayde of the Romanes. Nowe whan Antio∣chusPopilius an Ambassa∣dour of Ro∣me sent to Antiochus. inuaded Egypte, the Romanes sente an am∣bassador Popilius, which shuld shew Antiochus in the name of the Romanes, to auoyde out of the co∣astes of Egypte, nether to warre vpon the yonge kynge Philometor. For the Romanes were myn∣ded to retayne him in the kyngdome wyth theyr ayde. Wherevpon answered Antiochus, he would deuise wyth him selfe, what he would do. But Po∣piliusAn example of Romane seueryte. wold graunt hym no space to deuise, but ma¦kyng a rynge wyth hys speare aboute Antiochus, commaunded hym to saye strayght waye, before he went out of the cyrcle, whether he wold auoyd out of Egipt, or no. Antiochus being abashed with this seuerite & constance of Popilius (for he knew & was afeared of the Romane power,) he promised frelye to go out of Egipt▪
Wherfore he was constrayned to leaue Egypt the second tyme with great shame. But inflamed withThe second yourney of Antiochus to Ierusalem The tyranny of Antio∣chus against them of Ieru¦salem. The bible is brent. re for the impacience of the grefe, he went agayne to Ierusalem: and this was hys seconde yourney to Ierusalem: for he was there twise, and than vsed e his tyranny much more cruelly, than before. For he commaunded the Iewes to worshyp the Idols of the Heythen, he commaunded to burn the bokes of the Bible, and left a great deale of noughtypack∣es to possesse the citye Ierusalem, in steade of a gar∣nyson: the which tormented then very cruelly that wolde not fall from theyr fayth, and to thys thinge dyd they assist them, that were deceuered from the Iewysh religion. The temple also was turned to a prophane vse, fore an image was sett therein of the Gentils superstition. But what nedeth many wordes? They busyed to roote out the worde of God, and the whole lawe, and in steade thereof to bringe in the maners of the Gentyls, Nether dyd Antiochus vse that counsel rashly, but with a great wytt & policye. For he perceaued that the Iewes wythstode the Heythen kynges, because of theyr religion, and therfore wolde he auoyde the diuersi∣tye of religion. Of thys wyse do mens thoughtesAn example of mans wys¦dome in thinges con∣cerning God Antiochus fygureth An¦tichriste. dalye in matters concernyng God, and wyll set vp religion after theyr wyll & iudgement. Moreouer vnder ye example and figure of thys Antiochus, doth Daniel also describe Antichriste, & that such a kyngdom shuld be, where in Christen men shuld be put to distresse, and Gods word shuld be quenched: and lykewyse shuld be set vp a religion for a shewe, which might be contrary to gods word, by y• which
may be had an occasyon, to optayne power & great ryches. Euen as it is euident that Mahomet hathWhy Maho¦metes religi∣on is accep∣table. set vp a false religion, and vnder pretence thereof, haue ordeyned a newe kyngdome. And this religi∣on semeth to be folysh religion, for it doeth greatly flatter mens reason. For passing ouer nearehande all the hygher sentences and articles of the fayeth, it hath kept onely that doctryne, whyche teacheth morall vertues. Wonder it is verely howe muche that same doth flatter mans reason, wherefore also it doth vse to crepe more easely into mens mindes, than the doctryne of fayth. As for the tyranny of Antiochus, thereof is writ¦ten in the bokes of the Machabees: & Danyel wyt∣nesseth that the people of the Iewes had deserued thys punyshment because of theyr synnes. And all∣thoughe God dyd punyshe hys people, yet for all that he dyd not destroye them vtterly. For God raysed Iudas Machabeus, whych gathe¦ryngIudas Ma∣chabeus . a small army, inuaded Antiochus captaynes: and by Gods assistaunce, ouerthrowynge the ene∣myes, he recouered the temple the thyrd yeare, af∣ter that Antiochus had sett an Idoll therein. Daniel hath comprehended all this tyme of the Iewysh affliccion, in two thousande and thre hun∣dreth dayes, whych make syxe yeares and syxe mo¦nethes, and some dayes ouerplus. For the persecu∣tion lasted from the thyrde yeare of Antiochus, vn∣tyll the eyght yere & some monethes. Daniel dyd vse thys diuision of the tyme also, that the Idoll should stande in the temple a thousande, two hun∣dreth and nynety dayes, whyche make thre yeare, and syxe monethes.
And y• temple was recouered an hundreth & eyght and forty yeares after Alexanders death. Thys was the thre hundreth and eight and fortieth yere after that the Iewes were delyuered oute of the Babylonicall bondage, and the hundreth and two and fyftyeth yeare before Christes byrth. But Antiochus deserued wyth hys vngodli∣nesseThe punish∣ment of An∣tiochus for his vngodli∣nesse. and blasphemy agaynst God, not only the vt∣ter extinguishment of hys kynred, but also the o∣uerthrowynge of the whole kyngdome of Syria. For after Antiochus death, there was euer warre betwene one or other, and after manye tymes for the succession in the kyngdome. That it maye be playnely sene by thys example, ho we begynneth matters to sprynge, for the whyche kyngdomes be ouerthrowen: as we se nowe a dayes to befall in Hungary. Antiochus Epiphanes dyed in that yourney, whyche made readye agayne to come agaynst the Iewes, to reuenge the dammage done. After hys death, hys brother Demetrius fled from Rome, & toke in the kingdome, kylling the yong Antiochus,Antiochus Eupator. surnamed Eupator, sonne to Antiochus Epipha∣nes. Alexander the capitayne raysyng a sediti∣on agaynst Demetrius slewe hym. Demetri∣usDemetrius, Antiochus Sedetes. left two sonnes after him, Demetrius and An∣tiochus Sedetes. Of this Demetrius verely was Alexander slayne lykewyse. Afterward was a sedi¦tion raysed by one Tryphon agaynst Demetrius, the whych droue him out of the kyngdome: but De¦metrius came agayne into the kyngdome, and dyed stryken thorough wyth a sworde.
Antiochus Sedetes was slayne of the Parthes. As for this Demetrius had a sonne Antiochus Gryphus. Antiochus Sedetes left after him a sonne Antiochus Cyzicenus. These stroue for the kyngdome of Syria, and were both slayne. After∣ward dyd their children warre one agaynst the o∣ther for y• kindome wyth no lesse stryfe, than their elders: and had at the last so febled eche other, that Syria was constrayned to yeld it selfe to foren kin¦ges. For it ioyned it selfe to Tigranes kyng of Ar∣menia. And of this wyse is the kyngdome of Syria transferred from Seleucus posterity, to foren prin¦ces. But finally whan Tigranes was slayne byTigranes is slayne by Pompepus. Pompeius, Syria was broughte vnder the Ro∣mane power. Hetherto is ynough spoken of the kyngdome of Syria. Of the kynges of Egypt after Alexander. PTolomeus the sonne of Lagus, wherofPtolomeus the sonne of Lagus. Pausanias wryteth, whych calleth hym the bastarde of Philippe father to Alex∣ander. ij. Ptolomeus Philadelphus. Greate prayses arePtolomeus Philadel∣phus an en∣deuour of peace and sciences. of thys kynge, by reason of his endeuour of peace, and also because he delyted in all kynde of sciences, and dyd institute a very good forme of the common welth. To hym drew wyse men out of all contryes, the which he maynteyned gently and liberally. He had a library, as there was none better furnishedThe library of Ptolo∣meus. in the whole worlde, and for thys cause toke he
acquaintaunce of the Iewes. For whan he diligent¦ly searched for the begynnynge of all nacions, reli∣gions and sciences, he founde that the people of the Iewes to be the eldest, and that they onely had the surest historyes of the worldes begynninge or crea¦tion. Wherefore he required to be sent to hym from Ierusalem thre score and twelue men, by whose di∣ligence the wholy Bible myght be translated oute of the Hebrue into his language: & by this occasi∣on were the Bibles syrste translated into straungeThe Bible translated. speches. And no doubt it is, but that Ptolome was conuerted to the true fayth by this same meane. iii. Ptolomeus Euergetes inuaded Syria, & dydPtolomeus Euergetes. reuenge the death of his syster Berenice. iiij. Ptolomeus Philopater, ouercame AntiochusPtolomeus Philopator. the great: afterwarde beyng become more sensuall and dissolute, he beganne to be enamoured vpon a wenche, insomuch that he caused also hys quene to be put to death, for the loue shewed to that wench.Ptolomeus Epiphanes. v. Ptolomeus Epiphanes, whom Antiochus the great dyd inuade: the same Antiochus gaue to him hys doughter. vi. Ptolomeus Philometor, the same dyd hys vn∣clePtolomeus Philometor. Antiochus Epiphanes inuade: But the Roma∣nes defendyng Ptolome, commaunded Antiochus to auoyde out of Egypt, the which we haue shewed before. vii. Ptolomeus Euergetes restored Demetrius,Ptolomeus Euergetes. that was dryuen oute of hys realme, into the same agayne. viii. Ptolomeus Physco, the same resembled morePtolomeus Phisco a beast and no man. a beast than a man, by reason of hys vylaynous cru∣eltye.
He wedded hys syster, and begatt chylderen of her. Afterwarde slayenge hys sonne, set him be∣fore hys mother to eate, fynallye was he dryuen out of the realme. The residue ensuynge were no∣table of lyke shameful behaueour, as of beastly med¦lynge and of farre more cruell tyranny. ix. Ptolomeus Alexander. Alexan.  Latyr{us}  Aulet. x Ptolomeus Latyrus. xi. Ptolomeus Auletes, whome Gabinius the Romane captayne restored agayne into hys kyng∣dome. xii. Ptolomeus Dionysius, which commaundedPtolomeus Dionysius. to slaye Pompeius, and afterwarde was also vn∣faythfull to Iulius: wherefore Iulius droue hym out of the kyngdome, and gaue it to his syster Cle∣opatra,Cleopatra syster to Iu∣lius Cesar. the whiche finally slew herselfe, whan An∣tonius (whom she entertayned) was ouercome of Augustus. After that came Egypte to the Roma∣nes, and so was the moost noble kynred of Ptolo∣meus quenched. Of the Iewes. WE haue sayde before that the superio¦rytie of gouernaunce remayned by the posteritie of Dauid, after the re∣turne of the Iewes oute of Babylon, only that they wanted the dignitie of the kynges name, and were only cal∣led Prynces. And the same rayned tyll the tyme of Antiochus, S. Luke doeth also make mencion of them in the genealogye of Christe.
i. Zorobabel lviij. yeares. ii. Resa Miseolam lxvi iii. Iohanna Ben Resa liij iiii Iudas the fyrst Hircanus. xiiij. in the tyme of Alexander. After Alexander. v. Ioseph the fyrst vij. vi. Abner Semei xi. vii. Eli Matathia xii. viii. Aser Maath ix. ix. Nagid Artaxat x. x. Hagai Eli viij. xi. Maslot Naum vii xii. Amos Syrah xiiij xiij. Matathia Siloa xviij xiiij Ioseph the yonger l. The same had greate familiarite wyth Ptolo∣meus Euergetes, and by Eusebius is he called Arses. xv. Iaanna the seconde Hircanus xvi.Ianna .ij. Hircanus. He had greate warres agaynst the Arabi∣ans, and had oft victory. But whan he was besie∣ged in a castell by Antiochus Epiphanes, nether coulde he defend hymself any lenger wyth his gar∣nyson, yet woulde he not yelde him selfe, but wyth∣stode his enemies valiauntly fightynge in battayl, tyll he was slayne. This was the laste prince a∣monge the Iewes of kyng Dauids bloude. After hym ruled the Machabees, whyche were of the priestly kynred. But after these was the kyngdome of the Iewes
translated to Herods kynred, whyche was a Gen∣tyle, but he was circumcised. Thys thynge truely had God prophecyed before, that the ceptre and ro∣yall maiestye shoulde be taken from Iuda, and Da∣uids successors before the comminge of the promy∣sedChristes cō∣minge. Christe. Nether was the kyngdome altered from Dauids posteritye aboue an hundreth & thre score yeare, before Christe was borne: so that it ex∣ceded not mens memory what kinred had raigned. Of this wyse doeth Lucas rehearse the princes of the Iewes, vntyll the last Ianna Hircanus, and af∣ter the same doth he counte the residue also, which ruled not, vntyll Christe. Wherefore I wyll brefe∣ly adde of the Machabees and Herodes kynred. Of the Machabees kynred. MAtathias exhorted hys chylderen,Matathias. to resist Antiochus, and these rayg∣ned in order by successiō, as princes. Iudas Machabeus the first, van¦quyshedIudas Ma∣chabeus. the capytaynes of Antio∣chus Epiphanes, and recouered the temple wythin thre yeare, and had notable victo∣ries. But assone as he had conspyred wyth the Ro¦manes,An example that no trust is to be set in mans helpe. makyng a league wyth them, he was slayn, and dyed. For God wyll not haue vs to leane to mans helpe, but that we shoulde sett oure truste in hym. He raygned v. yeares. Ionathas raygned nyneten yeare: he toke partIonathas. wyth Alexander, which vsurped the kyngdome in Syria. Afterwarde was he slayne of Triphon, ve∣ry vnfaythfully. He had an vnhappye ende, for be∣cause
he trusted too the ayde of naughty and sedi∣tious men. Simon reigned eight yeare: he ouercame An∣tiochusSimon. Gryphus. He was at the last slayn by trea∣son, of his owne brother in lawe. Ioannes Hircanus was Simons sonne: the sa∣meIoannes Hir¦canus. reigned syx and twenty yeare. In his tyme be∣sieged Antiochus Gryphus Ierusalem, but by ge∣uyng of mony was he apeased, and breakyng vp the syege, left the citie. Afterward gat Hircanus Sa∣maria. The Machabeis kynges. Aristobulus the sonne of Hircanus reignedAristobulus. one yeare, and woulde be crowned with a kyngely crowne. He was the first kyng in Ierusalem, after that the Iewes were re∣turned out of Babylon. He slew his brother Anti∣gonus, because he feared lest he woulde couet the kyngdome. Alexander the yonger, sonne of Hircanusreig∣nedAlexander ye yonger sonne of Hircanus. seuen and twenty yeare: his wyfe Alexandra reigned after hym nyne yeare. Alexander left two sonnes after hym, Hircanus and Aristobulus. Though Hircanus were the el∣der, yet was he dryuen out of the kyngdom, by hys brother Aristobulus, whiche by violence caught from his brother the dignitie of the kynges name.Antipater prince of Idu¦mea. Areta king of Arabia. But Antipater prince of Idumea and the father of Herodes, and Areta kyng of Arabia ayded Hirca∣nus against Aristobulus. Nether was there a lesse barbarous state at that tyme in Iewry, after the
Heythen maner, then in the kyngdomes of other na¦tions.Pompeus. Afterward when Pompeius toke in Ierusa∣lem, he made Hircanus high priest, and taking Ari∣stobulus prisoner with his two sonnes, Alexander and Antigonus, brought thē to Rome. But by the way as they went to Rome, escaped Alexāder, and commyng againe into Iewry, he became mighty a∣gaine. But then was he vanquished by Gabinius y•Gabinius. Romane capitaine in Syria, and afterward by the commaundement of Scipio, was he beheaded at Antiochia. Antigonus was released at Rome by Iulius: but longe after was he commaunded to be put to death at Antiochia by Antonius, euen the third yeare when Herode was made kyng. And yf the whole tyme that Hircanus was high priest bee wel rekened, it shalbe euen foure and thirty yeares: finally was he put to death by Herode: It is a dred∣ful thyng verely, to senerehande in al histories that not only the moste renow medest kynreds and fa∣milies amonge men decay, but that also the succes∣sours of holy men cleane doth degenerate from the honestie of there elders, and fall to all fylthynesse of mische ue and synne. What tyme the Phariseys and the other sectes began with the Iewes. WHen now the soueraintie and priesthode by the Iewes began to be toren and pul¦led asunder by the tyrāny & the warres of Antiochus (I passe ouer that the Ma∣chabeesThe Macha¦beys. ioyned them with Heythen kynges, the which ordeined or deposed princes & high priestes at their pleasure, the whiche cared for nothing lesse
then the endeuour of the religiō): it could not be t that sectes and sundry dissensions must & yse in the Iewysh religion. For uedes must it happen so, whē¦ether we want a certain head in the religion, or whē¦the heades of the churche or congregatiō do not re∣garde the studies of Godlinesse, and seke onely out∣ward puyssaunce, as prophane nacions do. The sectes that were sprong vp, were of thre sor¦es:The maner of sectes risen in Iewry. The Phari∣seps. the first wer called Phariseis, that is Seuered of the word Phares. These vsed (for they were bet¦ter learned then the other) certain constitutions of men aboue the lawe of Moses, whereby they were seuered from the other people. Howbeit their doc∣trine was a litle better & righter, thē the other. For they taught immortalitie after this life, & that God will punysh synnes: they beleued also that Messias should come a saueour for the faithfull, and a iudge for the synnes. To the men of this secte also was cō∣mitted the cōmon welth before other, and they wee of more aucthoritie. The second secte was of the Sadduceis. TheseThe Saddu∣ceyes. hidde their wickednesse with a very noble & not able callyng thēselues. For zaddik signifieth righteous. Sadducei, they that be righteous or holy. So is it moste commonly receaued in vsage in this worlde, that those that be moste wycked of all, do cloke their couetousnesses wyth moste honeste names. They taught that after death was no lyfe. That God had onely geuen the lawe to the intent we shoulde liue honestly & quietly, receiuing of God in y• meane season in this lyfe the rewarde of righteousnesse. They did expounde y• scriptures wholy according to mans iudgemēt, nether would they heare ought
els: & as concernyng for the maners that apperta¦ned vnto man, very Epicures, (that is to saye, su as did put the principall goodnesse in voluptuo¦tie,The Sadu∣ceyes were Epicures. as Epicurus the Philosopher dyd.) And tha more is when they at the length had gottē power▪ they troubled not a litle the Phariseis. It is a fear∣full thyng verely to heare, that among the peculiar and chosen people of God, are crept in euen heythe∣nysh doctrines: insomuche that cōstantly they were not ashamed, euen openly to teache and saye, that after this lyfe, was none other lyfe. The thirde were Essey, the whiche when theyEssey. The Anabap¦tistes do r∣ble these. perceiued that both the Phariseyes and Saddu∣ceyes folowed their appetites vnder the coloure of honest titles, nether did ought in a maner that were worthy their profession: therfore semed it them good, to declare the straitnesse and seueritie of lyfe with the dede, and would be called Essey, that is workers or doers. For Assa, whence the name Es∣sey commeth, sygnifieth to worke: as in these times the Anabaptistes do reproue bothe the Luthe∣rians and papistes, and endeuour to seme more ho∣lier then ether of them. For the Essey lyued in a ma∣ner in all thinges, as the Anabaptistes lyue: they maryed not, and woulde haue all thynges common among them. This was an vtter foolysh and dotish supersticion of monkerye, and whiche could not lastThe Note of the churche at this tyme. long. Of this wyse nerehand is the church deuided in thre partes also now a dates: for because y• second commyng of Christe also is harde by. The Anabap∣tistes resemble the Esseyes, and on the other parte, some be Phariseyes, some are Sadduceyes. For
the thniges that happened amōg the Iewes e a figuce of the Christē religion. These sectes rose first among the Iewes vnder Ioannes Hircamus the sonne of Simon before the byrth of Christ an hun∣dreth and fyue and twenty yeares. Of Herodes kynred. WHen Iulius Cesar had warre in EgyptAntipater is made goner∣noure of Ie∣wry by Iu∣lius Cesar. that was euery where full of daunger, Antipater prince of Idumea ayded him very faithfully, and for a remembraunce of this benefite, made hym Iulius gouernoure of Iewry, the whiche was now constrayned to obey foren and straunge princes in her owne royalme. The Iewes set themselues agaynst it with great force at the first, sufferyng very disdainfully the ru∣le of the Idumean prince, insomuche that he was poysoned at the last by a Iewe, called Malchus, and dyed. Herodes reuenged the death of his father An∣tipater,Herodes toke in Ierusalem and demaunded the succession of the Ie∣wysh kyngdome of Augustus and Antonius in the hundreth foure score and seconde Olympias: and this was after Alexander two hūdreth, foure score and twelue yeares. This was the occasion wherby Iewry receuied foren kynges out of Idumea and afterlong siege compelled Herode them of Ierusa∣lem to yelde thēselues: nether was there litle bloud shedde, before the Iewes yelded themselues frelyChrist was borne. to Herodes dominion. As for Christ was borne in the thirtieth yeare of Herode. These are nerehand the greatest and chefest mutations of the kyngdom
brefly comprehended, the whiche happened in Ie∣wry in the tyme of this monarchie, vntill the last mo¦narchie and the tyme of Christes birth. And though it is euident ynough, that the Ie∣wysh kynges after Christes birth were of Herodes kynred, yet wyll I set them euery one orderly, that the reader may more easely knowe, how the one is borne of the other, and haue ruled the kyngdome lawfully by a certayn succession, vntyll the destruc∣tion of the citie Ierusalem: though as concernyng the iust order of the historie, I am not come so farre. For I haue yet to reherse these thynges of the Ro∣manes, which happened in the tyme of the Grecian monarchie. Herode the first, whiche was also called Ascalon,Herodes As∣calon. . had many children, among the whiche he hymselfe caused thre to be slame, Aristobulus, Alexander and Antipater, by reason of a conspiracy, that they had made against their father. But after him remained aliue Archelaus, Herodes, whiche was surnamed Antipas, and Philippus. These parted the kyng∣dome amonges them. Archelaus was chosen by a testament to succedeArchelaus. his father Herode in the kyngdome: but Augustus the emperour would not confirme or ratifye thys wyl of the father, but made hym prince, howbeit vn¦der this hope, that he should be made kyng, yf he ru¦led honestly. And so ruled he nyne yeares, and vsed great tyranny: he set vp and deposed high priestes, and rauyshed his owne brothers Alexanders wyfeArchelaus was exiledly Augustus. Finally he was accused before Augustus for his wic¦ked dedes, who depriued hym of the dominion, and
in steade of a punishmēt was he bannished into Ga∣le, that he should leade the rest of his lyfe there in exile: But that parte of Iewry was afterward go∣uerned by Romane gouernours, first by Cyre∣nius,Herodes An∣tipas ledde away his bro¦thers wyfe. afterward by Pilate. Herodes surnamed Antipas, y• brother of Archelaus, was made prince of Galile by his father Herode. The same toke hys brother Philips lawful wife from hym, he being yet aliue, the which happened by this occasion: Herode went to Rome, & by the way he lodged by chaunce with his brother Philip, who dwelled in y• fore part of Iewry. As Herodes and Herodias had now ma¦de acquaintaunce, which Herodias was the daugh¦ter of Aristobulus, and sister to Herodes Agrippa, they were agreed, that he cōming frō Rome should leade her with him, the which was done afterward.Ihon Baptist An example of vengeaūce Ihon Baptist rebuketh this wicked dede, who was therfore beheaded. Howbeit Herodes went not vn¦punyshed at the last for it: For by Caius Caligula was he sent in exile at Leonia in Galile with Hero∣dias, the whiche constrained hym to go to Rome & require a kyngdome: but commyng home without doyng ought, he lost that part also of the kyngdom, whiche he possessed before. He reigned foure and twenty yeare in Galile. Herodes Agrippa was the sonne of Aristobulus,Herodes A∣grippa. of whom we haue mencioned before: for he was the sonne of the first Herode, & was slayn by his father. But Herode Agrippa was prisoner at Rome, in the tyme of Tiberius, afterward was he in high fauour by Caius Caligula the emperour: For he optay∣ned by request of hym fyrst the parte of Philippe
his brother, and the name of a kyng: afterward that lande also, whiche Herodes Antipas had. He optayned of Claudius Samaria and Iewry, and by this occasion was whole Iewry subiecte agayn to one mans dominion. The Apostle Iames thIames the ore. greater was put to death by this Herode, the whi¦che is mēcioned in the twelfe chapter of the Actes. He reigned seuen yeares. Agrippa, the sonne of Herodes Agrippa was yet very yonge whan the father dyed, for the whiche cause the Romanes Pretores or debites gouerned Iewry now agayne. But Claudius gaue Agrippa afterward that part of Syria, whiche is called the kyngdome of Chalcis: he gaue hym that part also which Philip had possessed by Iewry. Nero the em¦perour gaue hym also some cities of Iewry. In the tyme of this Agrippa was Ierusalē destroyed, andIn Agrip∣paes tyme was Ierusa∣lem destroied of him is mencion made in the xxi chapter of the Ac∣tes. He reigned seuen and twenty yeares. Philo the history Ographer sayeth, that this Agrippa had a sonne, whiche reigned with Ben Cosban, who vsur¦pedBen Cosban a kynges dominion vpon the Iewes and ray∣sed great vproure in Syria and Iewry in Hadrian the emperours tyme. This is all Herodes kynred, vntil the ouer thro∣wyng of Ierusalem: the whiche we haue brefely ga∣thered therfore, that it maye clerely bee knowen in what order they haue succeded in the kyngdō. And to know this, is very necessary in the Bible. Sence the tyme of the first Herode, vntyll the destruction of Ierusalem are an hundreth and thre yeares. Of Rome.
IN the thyrd Monarchie haue we made mencion brefely of the decaye of the Per∣ses, the prosperitie & fall also of the Gre∣kes, and also the sundry mutatiōs distur∣nces of the Iewes. Now remaineth that with yke brefenesse we reherse the tymes of the moste reatest battails that the Romanes haue had sence the great Alexander. For it I woulde reherse theeWherfore monarchies are chefely ordeined of God. whole histories, it would be to great a worke. We haue noted aboue, that hygh monarchies are some∣tyme ordeined to that intent, that great and moste mighty princes may be tamed, & that ryght should be set against great tyranny. For this may be sene in all monarchies, whiche are encreased by none o∣ther meanes in a maner, then that they haue sub∣dued moste mighty kynges. Euen so the Roma∣nes, as sone as they began to be very mighty in I∣taly, they inuaded first the Spanyardes and Car∣thaginians, and had moste cruell and durable war∣res: althoug they themselues in the meane tyme were somtyme greuously vanquished. Of the Carthaginian Warre. SIcily was cause of the Carthaginiā war.Sicilia was cause of the Carthaginiā warre. Hieron. For kyng Hieron required helpe and aide of the Romanes against them of Carthag the whiche for as muche as they occupied now a great part of Sicily a long season, they ray∣sed many commotions. Wherfore the foure hun∣dreth and foure score yeare sence the foundacion of Rome, did the Romanes appointe the first setting forth against the Carthaginians: and this warre
lasted twenty yeares continually. As for the fyrste disconfiture whiche was very myserable, sufferedRegulus is taken by the carthaginiās the Romanes, when Regulus was taken. This Regulus truely was sent to Rome by them of Car¦thago, to entreate with the senate for the deliuery of the prysoners: for if he could obtayne it, he should be set fre at libertie. If not, according to his promise he should returne agayn to Carthago. As sone as Regulus came to Rome, it was sayed that he hym∣selfe counsailed in the senate, that they would not suffre the exchaunge of the prysoners to be done for his sake, but that they woulde rather consyder hee were an old man and feble of body, whiche could ly∣ve not muche longer. What nedeth many wordes? The senate at the last folowed his mynde, and hee went to Carthago agayne, where he was tormen∣tedThe tormen∣tes of Regul{us} with sundry and new maners of tormētes. And among the rest of his tormentes, is this rehersed al¦so, that his eye lyddes beyng cut of, he was trauay∣led with continuall wakyng. First is the principallThe loue and faithfulnesse of Regulus towarde the comon welth loue of this man toward the commō welth alowed, namely whose profite he regarded more, than the health of hym or his. His trust and faithfulnesse is praysed also, because he went agayn to Carthago, specially seyng he knew that moste cruel punishmē∣tes were appointed for hym. But at the last were the Carthaginians constrained to demaunde condi¦tionsThe battayll by Egusa. of peace of the Romanes. By the Ile Egusa was a very sore felde foughten, and the Romanes slew thirtene thousand Cartaginians, and two and thyrty thousand taken prysoners. But whan the Carthaginians required peace, the prysoners were
frely were dismyssed without mony. These thyn∣ges happened after Alexander, whan Ptolomeus Euergetes ruled in Egipt. Of Haniball. THe fyue hundreth and .xxxvi. yeare senceThe seconde warre of Car¦thago. The occasion of the second warre of Car¦thago in Spayne. the foundation of the citie of Rome, began the second warre of Carthago against the Romanes. The occasiō of this warre was begonne by reason of Spayne, the which whan the Cartaginians had once lost, Hannibal had now sub¦dued it agayn. Nether truly had ye Romanes euer any greater discomfiture, then in this warre. For fortune was so contrary to them, that Hannibal be∣yng come into Italy, dyd thre tymes ouerthrowe them: & though the most part of the Romanes wasThe discom∣fiture of the Romanes in the seconde warre of Car¦thago. slayn in the two first battails, yet was it not to be cō¦pared to the third battail, wherin were slayn about fourty thousand Romanes, many also were taken prisoners. This discomfiture made the Romanes so sore afrayd, that many nobles gathered together began to deuise to flye into Grece, & leaue the cytie.Scipio the yonger. But whē Scipio the yonger harde of that, he went to them, & exhorted thē to sted fastnesse in defending the contrary, and sayed: yf he perceiued any man to flye out of the contrey, he would straightway strike him thorow with his sworde. Wherfore he compel∣led the young noble men to bynde themselues with an holy othe, that they shoulde not leaue the ci∣tie, but that they would frely abyde euery chaunce, for loue of the countrey. As for this same Scipio made an end of this warre, when it had lasted syx∣ten yeres. For he ouercame Hanibal in Aphrica,
and compelled the Carthaginiās to require peace: and peace was concluded vpon this condition, that they of Carthago should yelde Hannibal to the Ro¦manes.Hannibal fli∣th to Antio∣chus. But he beyng escaped, fled to kyng Antio∣chus the greate, whome he prouoked to ordeine a great and dredefull warre against the Romanes. But kyng Antiochus was slayne, whiche we haue sayde before. It may easely be gathered out of this, what tyme this seconde warre of Carthago was, namely twenty yeare before Iudas Machabeus. Of the warre of the Romanes in Macedonia. ABout the fyue hundreth and fyue andPhilippus. The occasiō of the warre of Macebo∣. fortyeth yere rose first the warres in Ma¦cedonia. First with Philippe, and that be¦cause of the league made with Hanniball against the Romanes. For kyng Philippe hated greatly the name of Rome. For he perceaued that the same citie crept vp to the destruction of all kyn∣ges and moste myghty Monarches: in so muche also, that he shoulde haue sayed somtyme: He fea∣red, lest a tempest shoulde once come out of Italy into Grece, whose vehemency shoulde be so greate, that all these slaughters and discomfitures whiche Grece had suffered of the Perses and othet com∣pared to it, might be called but a triful & toie. Wher¦forePerseus sōne to kyng Phi∣lippe, the last kyng of Ma∣cedony. when he was inuaded of the Romanes with warre, he required the cōdicions of peace not vnwit¦tingly, & made a treaty of peace & concord with the Rom. But afterward Perseus his sonne, as one yt
was more coragious, and of a more vnrestly minde, gathered an army, and made aliaunce with many kynges, and inuaded those cities of the Romanes, that were in Grece: and the Romanes were also greatly vanquyshed of hym at the first. But not lōg after this battayll, he required frely the condicions of peace: howbeit the Romanes refused to graunt the same, and sent Paulus Aemilius into Macedo∣ny,Paulus Ae∣milius. of whom Perseus was ouercome and taken pri∣soner, with his mother, wyfe, and children. Of this wyse were kynges tamed by the Romanes & sub∣dued. This Perseus was the last of the Macedo∣nian kynges, and with hym is that noble kynred of Demetrius gone to naught, where of we haue spo∣ken before. Howbeit the sonne of this Perseus be∣came a secretary at Rome: and the kyngdom of Ma¦cedony, was afterwarde alwaye gouerned by Ro∣mane gouernours. This warre with Perseus be∣gan not long before, when Antiochus Epiphanes inuaded the Iewes. Of the Spoylyng of Carthago. THe syxe hundreth and seconde yeareThe thirde Carthaginiā warre. after the foūdacion of the citie, began the third & last Carthaginian warre, by this occasion: The citie Carthago was at variaunce with the countreis adioynynge to it, (as somtyme ryse debates betwene cities and princes,) and these re∣quired ayde of the Romanes, againste the Car∣thaginians. After long reasonyng, it was disputedDisputation whether Car¦thago should be wholy o∣uerthrowen▪ Scip Masi∣ca. in the senate, whether Cartago shoulde be wholy
spoyled, because that it beyng restlesse, could not ly¦ue in peace. For Scipio Nasica counsailed that Ca¦chago should not be ouerthrowen: first, because it were not honest that the Romanes shoulde vse so great tyranny, and shoulde slaye so muche people. Beside this that it wer not profitable also: without that citie, could not Aphrica be entertayned too do her duetie, without it were wholy spoyled. Thyrd∣ly, that it were moost necessary for the Romanes, to haue suche a citie contrarieng them, by the whiche they should be sturred to lustinesse and courage, or els should they rayse warre within themselues, yf they feared no foren enemy. Contrary wise did Ca∣to bring this argument among other, as the chefest: that the Romanes dyd by lytle and lytle become vn lyke their auncetours in vertues & prowes. Wher∣fore if the moost myghty citie Carthago remaining in her estate knewe the cowardnesse, negligence sloughtfulnesse & feblenesse of the Romanes, there were nothyng more surer, but that she would striue againe for the empire and high gouernaunce, and oppresse the Romanes, and bryng them vnder her power. Wherfore lest this shoulde be, it were moste profitable and necessary, to destroye Carthago. Nether would the senate geue any certayn sen∣tence or verdice vpon this at that tyme: but they or¦deined Cato the aged, and certaine other to be sent with hym to Carthago, to trie out all the matter, whether any daunger were to be feared of the Car¦thagineans, that then at the last they might earne∣stly deuise what were to be done. But what nedeth muche to be sayed? Cato beyng returned, shewed
that more daunger were to be feared of the Car∣thaginians, than euer was before. For though they of Carthago were depriued of their dominions, yet could they easely perceaue that the citie were both myghty and also cruell, whiche coulde not rest but must by processe of tyme assay some thinge to re∣uenge her selfe. Besyde this brought Cato with hym grene fygges of exceadyng bygnesse, the whi∣che he shewed openly in the senate. And when he was demaunded, whence he had brought those fyg¦ges, he aunswered: within thre dayes may be saed thither. He said moreouer: they growe in the lande of your enemies. So neare dwel your enemies, and they that couet your empire. The senate being stur¦red with these so many persuasions, ordeined, that Carthago should be assaulted with warre, & should be roted out by the ground, that there should be noScipio y• yon¦ger sonne to Paulus Ae∣milius. hope of restoring it afterward. To accomplish this warre, was Scipio the yōger the sonne of Paulus Aemilius made capitaine, and in the fourth yeare, after the cōtinuall assault of syx daies, was Cartha∣go taken. And though Scipio permitted euery man a space to flye frely, yet was a miserable slau∣ghter in the citie whē it was dispoiled. Afterward by the cōmaundement of Scipio, was the citie set on fyre, and burned syxtene dayes continually. ThisCarthago is destroyed. is that myserable decaye of Carthago the moste noble cytie, in the whiche neare hande alwaye haue so many renowmed princes gouerned, of whome to speake by reason of their worthinesse, wyll not the brefenesse of writtynge suffre at this tyme. Carthago stode & continued about seuen hūdreth
yeares. The godly reader may aboue all thynges behold here a dredeful example of Gods vengeaūce in so truely ouerthrowyng of so mighty and very excellent a citie. It is sayed also that after that it was set on fyre. Scipio came rydyng to the place of the citie, and sawe the myserable case of Carthago that was spoiled and destroyed, and beyng moued with a pitiful affeccion, he did wepe very sore, & said at the last these wordes: I pitie the case of so excellēt a citie, and I se before that Rome also shall once bee ouerthrowen of this wyse: and that more is, it is playne, that no gouernaunce in this worlde is long lastyng, and no power can be stable. Of the warre of the Cimbry in Italy. THis is the seconde history of the Germa∣nes,The seconde mention of y• es in . & of their prosperitie, that they haue had in Italy. For the Cimbriare properly Germanes, whiche witnesseth the name Cimbrica Cheronesus. For so are called the coun∣treis of Holsatz and Denmarck. Moreouer by the witnesse of Strabo are Cimmery and Cimbriboth the es of . one thyng. The beginnyng of the names is Goe the sonne of Iaphet, who dwelt in these countries beyond Thracia, that he toward vs, wherein dwell the▪ people of Littow. And for this cause knew Ho∣mer the poet the people Cimery: For the Grecians knew Thracia and the countreis ioynyng to it. Howbeit the name of Cimbri remayneth onley by Denmark and Holsatz▪ But these people that lie to¦wardeGoth the East of Thracia, are called Gotthi, of whome we shall speake hereafter, in the history of
the Gothyes. There is also made playne mencyon of the lowe duchemen, whych went wyth the Cim∣bre. It is clere that it was an innumerable multy∣tude, about thre hundreth thousand gathered oute of all quarters of Germany, and such an army, that parted asunder they intended to take in partly I∣taly, partly Gallia. But whan they inuaded the Ro¦manes, they were gathered agayne, and the Ro∣manes were fyrste moost greueously slayne of theThe battayll of the Cim∣bri with the Romanes. Cimbri, for they had the worst in foure greate bat∣tayls: and in that one battayl, wherein Cepio was captayne, were slayne foure score thousand Roma∣nes: whych thynge made the Romanes and all the people of Italy so sore afrayd, as they neuer were in the time also of Hannibal. At that time was Ma¦riusMarius was made capy∣taine against the Cimbri. appointed captaine agaynst those Teutones, For he was to be rekened amongest the moost va∣liaunt men of armes, that Rome had. He went to thys warre in the syxe hundreth and two and fyf∣tyeth yeare after the foundacion of Rome: and this warre lasted tyll the thyrd yeare, so longe tyll the Cimbri were vtterly destroyed and oppressed. The histories make mencion, that in the last fy∣ghteAn example of vehement wrath of god the women vsed suche force, that they dyd no lesse slaughter, than the men: and with such a rage, that runninge agaynst the Romanes wyth theyr chylderen, cast them into theyr visages. This truely is an example of so greate cru∣eltye, that worthely maye he quake at the wrath of God, whoso fyndeth lyke miseryes in readynge of histories. For it must be a vehement and strong in∣dignacion, which bryngeth to mens wretched and
oppressed cases so great a misery. Of Sylla and Marius. THat whiche Scipio Nasica sayde in theThe con∣sultation of destroyenge Carthago. Senate to be true, dyd the dede proue. For whan ye Romanes could not be wea∣kened, wyth the power of a foren enemy, they were febled with theyr own strengthes, with∣in themselues. Marius, of whom we haue sayd be∣fore, broughte home notable victories of the foren enemies, but at the last was he cause of a most cru∣elMarine cau¦se o n vp∣roure▪ Sylla Mithridates vproure in the citie of Rome. For whan Sylla was ordeined captayne, to warre in Asia agaynst kyng Mithridates: Marius toke it displeasaunt∣ly, that the yonge Sylla shoulde be set before him, and he brought much to passe by the Tribunes, that they should set themselues agaynst the Senate, & by the commune voyce of the common people, to choyse Marius. By thys hatred was the occasyon sprong of that great warre betwene Sylla & Ma∣rius. For whan Marius had raysed thys rumoure at Rome, Sylla appointed a setting forth of an ar∣my into Asia. But Marius wyth consente of the people had optayned, that Sylla should not go in∣to Asia: & some frendes of Sylla dyed in this com∣motion at Rome, amonge the which was the sonne of Pompeius the consul the sonne in law of Sylla. But whan the Tribunes sent to Sylla them, that shoulde shewe hym, he should not go into Asia, he appoynted hys army incontinentlye, and came to Rome, and slew the tribune and many other. Ma∣rius fled into Aphrica. In the meane season set Sylla all thynges in order in the citye, and wente
into Asia, and brought great thynges to passe. He ouercame Mithridates, and toke in wyth stronge handes Athenes, and whole Grece, and subdued also many other contryes of Asia. Whan SyllaThe tyranny of Marius. brought this to passe, in the meane season doth Ma¦rius returne oute of Aphrica into Italy well ap∣pointed, and goynge to Rome, he slew the best and most excellent princes, and chefe of the Romanes, and thys slaughter at Rome was very miserable. Than was Sylla constrayned haystely to returne out of Asia, to ayde them that were of his part: but in the meane tyme dyed Marius. Howbeit the sonne of Marius restored the warre agaynst Syl∣la,Sylla fea∣reth the in∣constancy of fortune. where wyth Sylla beynge afrayed, he sayde as it is reported: that whan he was yonge, he had good fortune agaynst an aged man: but nowe he feared, lest a yonge man should lykewyse haue the∣same fortune agaynst him. Thys example wytnesseth, that wyse men haue earnestly ouerlayde, and also douted the vnstable∣nesse of fortune, whych happeneth in mennes affai∣res. But God prospered the enterprise of Syl∣la, that he triumphed of hys enemyes: for he had a mooste ryghte cause. But yet doo historyesSylla is more cruell than nede is. make mencion that Sylla was afterwarde more cruel than nede requyred: For he spared in a maner noman, than fauored Marius parte, no∣ther was there anye measure or ende to vse ty∣ranny at Rome. Of thys wyse was the ty∣ranny that Marius vsed agaynst the princes re∣uenged by Sylla at the last, who restored them in the gouernaunce. Thou shalt chefely perceaue
gentle reader by thys history, that so great misery and debate in the commune wealth, rose of a small begynnyng, and by a certaine alteracion or tourne crept it fyrst in among princes, afterward among y• people. But Sylla vsed great wysedome, and de∣serued great prayse, that after this commotion, he set and confirmed the commune welth in a certaine order, vtterly deposynge the authoritye of the Tri¦bunes:The Tribu∣nes were de∣posed by Silla. The Tribu∣nes are resto∣red agayne by Pōpeius. for they were wont euer to inflame y• myn∣des of the commune people agaynst the Senate. But Pompeius chaunged thys same afterwarde, who restored them, to doo the commune people a pleasure: Howbeit the euyll counsell was worst to the counseller. For the Tribunes were also the do∣ers in sturrynge to the ciuyll warre betwene Iu∣lius Cesar and Pompeius. Of Pompeius and C. Iulius Cesar. THE moost haynous warre, that was betwene Cesar and Pompeius, which caused an vtter destruccyon to the whole commune welth of Rome, toke occasyon of very lyght causes: & that euen of only enuye against Cesar, not so much of Pompeius, as of priuate persones, the whych coueted those prouinces, that Cesar posses∣sed. The occasion of the warre began of thys wyse:Occasyon of  ciuil warre Whan Cesar was in Gallia, he requyred that re∣gard should be had of hym in his absence, and to be remembred in choysynge of counsuls: for it must be pertayned to him, that it shoulde be so broughte to passe. For if he had returned to Rome wythout
there should be a consull, hys enemyes were min∣ded to oppresse him, and to brynge to passe, that he shoulde be exiled from Rome. But Cesar brought to passe wyth the ayde of the Tribunes, that the di∣gnity of Consulshyp was promysed him, the which was done wyth the consent of Pompeius the con∣sul also. But whan the tyme came to appoynte the consuls, some haue stered the Senate, to set them∣selues agaynst him, nother suffre Cesar to be made consul, & the same alured Pompeius to be of their syde, and droue out the Tribunes, whyche fled to Iulius Cesar. But whan Iulius perceaued that they woulde oppresse and betraye hym, he laye sore vpon the promyse that was made hym, and de∣maunded the consulshyppe: besyde thys would he haue the Tribunes restored into theyr place. Du∣ryng this controuersye, there were diuerse consul∣tations. Marcus Cicero brought the moost vehe∣mentesM. Cicero. reason, whiche were to be borne of ether parte. For he wylled that Cesar and Pompeius should forsake theyr hoostes, and that Pompeius should goo into Spayne, as he was also determi∣ned, and Cesar, so sone as he had forsaken the hoost, shoulde be consul. Iulius Cesar agreed to thys, but Pompeius refused it. Wherfore dyd Cesar co∣me to Rome wyth an army appoynted: Pompeius takyng the flyght, doth lykewise appoynt an hoost wyth all hys power. But Cesar taketh in Italy & Spayne, and persued Pompeius vntyll Grece. And though Iulius refusyd not hetherto the con∣dicions of an appointment of peace, but dyd also of∣freIulius a mā aded & so∣uer of peace. them frelye: yet Pompeius ceased not to make
aunswer, that he would graunt nor admitte no con¦dicions of peace, before he sawe the heade of Iulius cut of and brought to hym. But whan Cesar heard that, he was greatly moued. Though Pompeius had a more righteous cause, yet oughte he to haue vsed more gentlenesse agaynste so noble a prince, that offred condicions of peace, and sought onelye that he might haue ben fre, and withoute daunger of feare. Therfore whan Cesar sawe that he muste vse counsel by constraynt, he inuaded Pompeius, and ouercame hym. Pompeius fled into Egypte, where he was slaine by an entray of the yong king, whose father he hym selfe had set into the kynge∣dome. Afterward toke Cesar Asia and Aphrica to∣gether, insomuche that he alone had in all the em∣pyre of Rome wyth great puyssaunce. Thys so great alteration and misery in the commune welth of Rome began of a moste lyghte thynge: for this warre was dolefull both to hygh and lowe estates of men. For histori∣es report that ther were slayne aboue thre hundreth thou∣sand men in thys ciuill warre. ∵
The fourth and laste Monarchy, namely of the Romane empyre Iulius Cesar. THre thousand yeares, eight hundreth and foure score and seuentene were sence the creation of the worlde. Seuen hundreth and syxe yeares sence the buyldyng of Rome. Seuen and forty yeares beforeThe begyn∣nyng of the Romane mo¦narchy. Christ was borne, began fyrst the Romane monar∣chy: whan Iulius was made Consul, and the warr agaynst Pompeius, whereof we haue euen nowe spoken, dyd begynne. That the warre lasted fyue yeares. For whan Pompeius was deade, Iulius had yet much busynesse to do in Egypte, Asia and Aphrica, where Cato had slayne hym selfe: and inCato slewe hymselfe. Spayne, where he had also slayne one of Pompe∣ius sonnes. But whan all contryes were sett in peace, returned Iulius to Rome, and that was in the moneth October, and after that in the begyn∣nynge of Marche, was he stycked through in the Senate of Cassius and Brutus wyth their com∣panyons. Wherfore raigned Iulius in peace, nomore but fiueThe orde∣ring of the yeare was begonne by Iulius. monethes, and in that season caused he the yeare to be ordered, throughout all the Romane empyre, ac¦cording to the course of the sonne. He brought also with him out of Egypt a notable and most conning man in sciences, which taught by demonstracyons,
called a Mathematicus▪ and was the fyrst autor cause that those sciences were taughte in Italy. And this ordering of the yeare, which is handsome and that we vse yet now at this tyme, was begon fyrst by Iulius. But how dishonestly and very cru¦elly those that kylled Iulius, that is playn ynoug by theyr dedes. For Cassius & Brutus wyth they companions fauoured Pompeius. But by the mer¦cyfulnes of Cesar, were they take in agayne into the citye, and restored into their former dignitye & possession of goodes. For what shall I be prolixe? The worlde had neuer a prince so mighty, that e∣uerThe  gently∣nesse of Ce∣s vsed more gentlynesse towarde hys enemies, that frely yelded thēselues. He neuer shewed anye notable wrath agaynst anye man, wythoute it had ben in a battaill, where necessitie to fighte dyd re∣quyre: where neuerthelesse before him Marius & Sylla neuer ceassed of murtheringe, euen in tyme of peace. But Iulius did no such thinges, ye he fre∣ly toke to mercy euen the best of the cōmune welth, that were Pompeius adherentes, nether toke ou∣ght from them. He brought agayn also the true ma¦ner of gouerning the commune welth, whiche was decayed by sedition, and restored it wyth no lesse wysedome, than he kept it vp with authoritie. But how great a thinge this is, maye be gathered ther∣by, that in ciuill commotions wee se iudgementes, lawes and all modestie of maners go to wrack and to nought. Iulius truely was one of the most dou∣ghtyest princes, whiche beynge garnished of God with most greatest vertues aboue other men, that haue gouerned very great dominions.
Besyde this was it not possyble to retayne com∣mune peace long after that Iulius was deade: for there was noman after Iulius that had ether such authoritie or power, that with very force could en∣terteyn the quyetnesse of the empyre: for to retaine the same in great kingdomes, is requisite a greate and syngular puyssaunce. Moreouer it is reported that he should haue sayde: That he feared not for for his lyfe, but that his death should be mischeue∣ous and deadly to the commone welth & empyre. But all this refrained not them from the cursed enterpryse, of whom by a cōiuracion he was slaine. The first beginner of this wicked dede, was Cassi∣us,Cassius. and that only by enuy, because for Cesars sake he could not obtayne those prouinces, which he co∣ueted.Brutus▪ Brutus was a man of great wytt, and ther∣fore suffred he him lightely to be made a company∣on of this wicked dede: cloking it with this colour, that it were not honest for the Senate of Rome, to suffre a lord greater in the empyre then he. Item, that Cesar also was a tyraunt, and that it was law¦fully permitted to slaye tyrauntes. With such lyke inconuenient argumentes, whiche are oft wont to begyle yong and vnlearned men in lyke cases, was Brutus inflamed: for without his helpe had Cassi∣us brought nothynge to passe. This is the summe of this history. But God suffred so great a mische∣uousnesse not longe vnpunished. For as manye as had conspyred to the death of Iulius, were also slayne themselues not longe after. Cesar was olde syxe and fyftye yeare whan he was slayne, and ruled fyue yeares: and the begin∣ninge
of rulynge was in the consulshyppe, in the which he beganne the warre agaynst Pompeius. This is the begynnynge of the Romane monar∣chye, the whych God hath paynted very horribly in the prophet Daniell: and wytnesseth, that the world shalbe much more heauely oppressed by the∣same, than euer it was before. Item that Christ shall come in the same monarchye, and therfore shal it be the last. For all these thynges are prophesyed before by God, to stablyshe the fayth of the godly, concerninge the certayntie of Christes comming. Besydes thys also that it mighte be knowen that the world shall not endure foreuer, but shall once pe¦ryshe, and that the vngodlye shalbe punyshed, but the Godly shall loke at Gods hand for a lyfe euer∣lastynge. I suppose verely that the prophecy of the Heythen prophetes, and sayenges of the Sybilles of the durablenesse of the Romane empyre, are per∣taynynge to thys, as is the sayenge of Virgil: I haue geuen an endlesse empyre, the whych seme to be taken of this, whiche the scrypture sayeth, thatThe Roman monarchy is the laste on earth. the empyre of Rome shalbe the laste monarchye on earth. Though the scripture doth in the meane sea¦son teache also, that thys monarchy shall decaye: yet shall parte of the same last euer, wherein shall re remayne the name and hygnesse of an Emperour, vntyll the worldes ende. These thynges are to be knowen, that wee maye be assured that thys empyre can not be ouer∣throwen, whyche the examples of histories wyt∣nesse also. For after that the hyghnesse of an Em∣peroure was translated to the Germanes, hath
thys kyngdome suffred many assaultes, and hath oft bene weakened: but yet coulde it not be aboly∣shed by nomans power, but remayned allwaye stable, and restored it selfe otherwyles. For it had nowe Emperours of small power, than very puyssaunt Emperours. To consydre these thynges in historyes maketh greate matter, chefely to knowe the wyll of God aryghte in suche chaunces. Augustus. WHan Iulius was deade, rose greate commotions at Rome. Marcus Ci∣ceroMarcus Cicero. counselled to make a peace on thys wyse: that thence foreward no∣man should laye handes on the fauou¦rers of Iulius, & that all they lyke∣wyse, whych had slayne Iulius should be wythout daunger or feare: but all discorde layde doune on both sydes, they shoulde prouide for common and perpetuall peace: none otherwyse than of late dyd Thrasybulus make a concorde at Athenes, the whych they called Amnistia, that is, that▪ ether parte shoulde forget the iniury done, and that ne∣ther of them shoulde inuade the other afterwarde. Thys was very gentely and handsomly counceled and consydered of Cicero, but thys contynuall peace coulde not endure longe. For whan afterwarde euerye man woulde rule, it was ne∣cessarye that factions shoulde ryse. The Se∣nate drue Octauius Augustus to it, agaynst An∣thonius.
For Anthonius coueted y• raygne. But the souldi∣oursAnthonius. conspyryng against the Senate, slew manye of the chefe men of the citye, among the which wasAnno. l. be∣fore Christes  Cicero beheaded also. But the empyre remayned by Octauius Augustus only, which was kynsman to Iulius: for Iulia syster of Iulius had spoused Accius Balbus, but theyr doughter was Accia, whose husband was Octauius: of them was borne Octanius Augustus, whom Iulius had appointed and chosen hys heyre, whereby he was surnamed Cesar, and that name remayned euer afterwarde by the successors, euen as though by ryght of succes¦sion, they dyd entre into Cesars kynred: as it was wont to be, whan successors were first adopted and chosen. Nether was Iulius called Cesar fyrste by reason of the empyre, but many of his kynred were so surnamed before. For the old & approued Gram∣marians do wryte that the name of Cesar cōmeth of the worde or name Cesaries, whiche signifieth goodly heare or a bush of fayre heare: and of that gat the Iulies fyrst that name, because that one or other happelye had a fayre heare in that kyn∣red. As for the name Augustus dyd the Senate adde to Octauius, for hys luckynesse and prospe∣ritye in hys affayres. Augustus commeth of Auguruim, (that is, a diumation or soythsay∣enge by the crye or slighte of byrdes) and betoke∣neth fortunate, and he whom God doeth prospere by lucky sygnes or tokens. This addition, is a right geuen to a supreme gouer¦nour of y• world: for god is with y• ciuil power, & the
gouernaunce of an empyre, is the gyfte and ordi∣naunce of God. Augustus raygned syxe and fyfty yeares, but he gouerned not the empyre alone the twelue fyrst yeares. For beyng yong, not passyng nyneten yea∣res of age, was he set in the gouernaunce: he was made counsul, because he stack by the Senate, of of the which he was made consul, in despyte of An∣tonius. But the souldiours agreyng wythin them selues, set them agaynst the Senate and his adhe∣rentes. But for so much as thys concord could not be durable, Augustus was fayne afterwarde to be at variaunce and stryue also wyth hys felowes, and so optayned he the whole empyre alone. But whan the gouernaunce was stablyshed with peace, he vsed moost hygh moderation in all thinges, and confirmed the whole empyre wyth honeste lawes and statutes: in so much that it is reported, he shuld haue sayd: The kyngdome shall last for euer, yf these ordinaunces be not auoyded and disanulled. But what shall I saye much? Augustus is scasely coun¦ted the fyrste and chefest a∣mong the sage and mo∣derate princes.
¶ The thyrde boke of the Cronicles, whych conteyneth the tyme sence Christes byrth. BEfore, in the begynnynge of thys worke, haue we diuided thys whole Cronicle and tymes of the worlde in thre partes, and that ac∣cordinge to the sayenge of Elias, that both the moost alterations of thynges in the world, and order of the tymes my∣ght be knowen more surely. Besydes thys, that we shoulde also knowe, that the worldes end is nowe not farre of. Howbeit we haue nowe dispatched all∣moost foure thousand yeares, and about that time nearehande was Christ borne, the whyche Elias had prophecyed. Now in this thyrd boke, shall we lyke wyse treate of the thyrde parte of Elias mea∣nynge, and begynne thys boke wyth the same. And how lytle Elias had fayled in the order of the yea∣res, truely it maye be perceaued verye easely: for CHRISTE our LORD, very God and man,Whā Christ was borne. was borne into thys lyfe of the virgin Mary euen the two and fortyeth yeare of Augustus raygne: and thys was thre thousande, nyne hundreth and foure and fortyeth yeare sence the creation of the worlde. But to counte the yeares exactely and na∣rowly, there is somewhat requisite in the nombre of the yeares. For the foure thousande yeares are not fulfilled.
But the prophete sayde moreouer: that God wold preuent and come spedely before the tyme of hys comminge, because the ende of all thinges my∣ght be more neare. Howbeit the thynges that are concernyng the knowledge of Christes natiuyte, Passion and Resurrection for euerye Godly man, the same maye all be searched in the Euangelistes. But as concerning the tyme whan Christ suffred, and rose agayne from death: also how the Gospell is spred abroade in the worlde, and by what mea∣nes also the holy Gospell began in the worlde vny∣uersall, we shall intreate afterwarde. Of the Germanes. IN the tyme of Augustus were theThe Germa¦nes were fyrst couque∣sted by warre. Tiberius Drusius. Germanes first attempted of the Ro¦manes. Tiberius and hys brother Drusius were wyth an hoost in high germany, and inuaded those coastes, that are ioyninge to Rhetia and Vin¦delicia. But they dyd not wholy subdue those con∣tryes vnder theyr empyre. The Rheti are thoseRhetia. that dwell in the valley of the floude Enus or Ihn, they of Tyrol vntyll Bregetium or Rab, Kempte and dounwarde vntyll Nordlingen, where yet re∣maynethVindelicia. the name Ryes. They of Vindelicia are Augspurg and vpper Beyerlande. Drusus went doune vntyll Mentz, and there gettynge a disease he lost hys lyfe. Aboute that tyme made the garnyson of the Romanes, that was appoynted at Colen an
assaulte vpon Westphalen and Saxony. But one called Hermannus was captayne of Saxony, whō the historyeus do call Arminius lord of Cherusia.Cherusci. Armnius. As for the Cherusci are euen the Saxons & Thu∣rynges, dwellynge by the wood called Schwartz∣walde, of that syde, that stretched beneth by the floude Wesurgus vntyll the citye Breme, And by my iudgement is that called Cherusci, whych now is communely called Hertzishe. This Arminius oppressed the Romanes vnwarres, and slew about one and twenty thousand of them. Besydes also a great army of the ayders and confederates of the Romanes, whych warred wyth them, as French∣men do wyth the Scottes. Quintilius Varus the captayne of the Ro∣maneQuintilius Varus. hoost slew him self wyth hys swearde. Taci∣tus the historyographes sheweth at larg of the bat¦tayl that was had, namelye betwene the floudes Lyppia and Amisia, that is, beneth the toune Cas∣sel, not farre from the toune Padeborne in West∣phalen. For thus sayeth Tacitus: They ployled so much as lyeth betwene the floudes Amisia & Lyp∣pya, not farre from the woode of Teutoburgum, where the residue of Varus hooste and legions is sayde to lye vnburyed. As for this slaughter made the Romanes no lesse afrayde, that in tymes paste whan the Cimbriwaysted Italy. For the Roma∣nes were afrayde lest Arminius wyth force of ar∣mes had inuaded the Romane empyre, and come vntyll Rome. Augustus was in suche distresse by reason of the feare of the greate daunger, that he caused euery man to be euery where in armes. It
is also sayed, that he sayed of wepyng & with great crye: Quintily restore the legions. But when the Romanes were dryuen out of Saxony, they brou∣ght to passe, that Arminius was inuaded with war of his neighbors, there was at that tyme the Swe∣des and Belhems, dwelling by the ryuer Albis: but Arminius ouercame them also, and takyng in their contreis, he had Westphalen, Shwartwald, Saxo¦ny, Marck, Misen, and Bohemy. He reigned about twelue yeare, and finally was he slayne by the op∣pression of his. But this is ynough sayed of Augu∣stus tyme. Tiberius the third Emperoure. The yeare of the worlde. iii M. ix. C. lx. The yeare of Rome .vii. C. lxix. The yeare of Christe .xvi. THough many excellent Emperours haue bensence the time of Augustus, (for when God kepeth the common welthes, he geueth also suche men, that are mete to do great thynges.) yet haue the in the meane seasō now and than princes dissolute and wicked: so that a me∣ry conceated man semeth to haue sayed very true: that the ymages of al good princes may be grauē in one rynge. It is very profitable to beholde in histo∣ries the thynges that are declared and the exam∣ples of wycked princes, that we may drede y• wrath of God, by the feare of the punishment, wherewith they are punyshed. Tiberius was not the sonne of Augustus, but forTiberiu.
somuche as the true heyres of Augustus were deade, he toke in steade and chose for heyre Tibe∣rius the sonne of Liuia, whiche was already ma∣ried to Augustus: and because Tiberius was a va∣liaunt man of armes, Augustus vsed hym alway for a captain. This Tiberius was the first Emperour, to whome the senate of Rome did yelde it selfe. He reigned thre and twenty yeares. The fyuetenth yeare of Tiberius was ChristeWhā Christ was baptied our Lorde thirty yeare olde, and that yeare was he baptised of Ihon Baptiste, and beganne the preachyng of hys Gospell, of penaunce, of remis∣sion of synnes, and lyfe euerlasting. This was sence the creation of the worlde the .iiii. M. ix. C. and lxxv. yeares. But after the beginning of Alex∣anders Monarchie the .CCC. and .xl. yeare. Ad∣de an hundreth and fyue and fourty yeares vn∣tyll the second yeare of Longimanus. Thus haue ye the foure hundreth and foure score and fyue yea∣res: and these are the thre score and nyne wekes of the whiche is spoken by Daniel: whiche thynge we haue treated at length before. In the eyghtenth yeare of Tiberius was ChristWhā Christ was cruci∣fyed. oure Sauioure crucified, dyed, and rose agayn the thyrde daye. But after his resurrection he com∣maunded his disciples, that they should preache the Gospell thorowe all the worlde, the whiche they began strayght way, when they had receaued the holy ghost from heauen vpon Wytsonday, and af∣ter the visible ascension of Christ into heauen. Therfore is now the worde of God and spiritualWhere the Churche or spirituall kingdom is kyngdom, and also the churche or congregacion of
the faithful or christen people not only in the Iewish kyngdom: but in the whole worlde, where the Go∣spell is preached by the Apostles, and where theyr writinges are brought For God promised to worke by preaching of his worde. Moreouer where Gods worde is taught, ther is it necessary to be some that pertaine to Gods kingdom, where Christ is ruling and workyng, accordynge to that sayenge: I shalbe with you vntyll the worldes ende. To this oure Lorde Christ our sauiour and true God, be prayse, glory and thankesgeuyng for euer. Amen. But now it remayneth that we do shew further how greate and heuy assaultes the churche of chri∣stenmen hath suffered, both by outwarde persecu∣tions of enemies, and also chefely by heretikes, whiche haue nowe and than toren wretchedly the vnitie of the churche with wicked doctrines: which thynge hath brought a farre more dammage and despysynge to the Churche or congregacion, than any outwarde persecutions. The nyntenth yeare of Tiberius after Christes resurrection was Steuen the fyrst martyr stonedWhan Ste∣uen was sto∣uen. and the same yeare was Paule conuerted to the fayth. And this befell. The yeare of the worlde .iii. M. ix. C. lxxviij. The yeare of Rome .vii. C. xcii. The yeare of Christe .xxcix. CAius Caligula the fourth Emperoure reig∣nedCaius Cali∣gula. thre yeare and ten monethes: he was of a veri dissolute and vmbrideled lyfe, he defyled
all his systers with an vnnamed or an vnnaturall medling: Fynally was he slayn by the chefe of hys hoost through a preuy conspiracy. This Caligula caused his ymage to be set in the temple at Ierusa∣lem, to be worshipped, whiche thyng was also pro∣phecied by Daniel, namely: When Israell shall se anDaniel. ix. Idoll set in the temple, then shal the ende be at hād. This happened. The yeare of the worlde. iii. M. ix. C. lxxxvii. The yeare of Rome. vii. C. lxix. The yeare of Christe .xliij. CLaudius the fyft Emperour reignedClaudius. thyrtene yeare and nyne monethes: he was poysoned. The secōd yeare of Clau¦dius came Peter the Apostle to Rome, who had preached before certayn yeares at Antio∣chia: and here begynneth the Romyshe churche. The yeare .xliiij. After Christes natiuite. The yeare .iii. M. ix. C. lxxxviij. after the worl∣des creation. The yeare .vii. C. xcvii. after the buyldynge of Rome. The yeare of the worlde. iiii M. The yeare of Rome .viii. C. ix. The yeare of Christe.lvi. NEro the syxt. Emperour reigned fourtenNero. yeare. At the begynnyng lyued he honest¦ly fyue yeares, afterwarde was he moste vngratious by reason of hys intemperan∣cy of maners and tyranny. He put to death his own mother & his wyfe, and also many noble men, amōg whom was also Seneca. Finally whan his officers
was gone from hym, whan he was sought to be put to deaht by the Senate of Rome, he fleing slew him¦selfe, before he was founde out by the souldiours: and this was done the two and thirtyeth yeare of his age. But the kyngdom of the Romanes is now wholy remoued from the posteritie and kynsmen of Augustus and Leuia.When Pe∣ter was cru∣cified. Linus by∣shoppe. Paul is be∣headed. In the tyme of Nero was saint Peter crucifyed at Rome. After hym was Linus made byshop, and afterwarde was Paule the Apostle beheaded also. And yf ye counte the yeares of Paule, hee preached the Gospell about foure and thyrty yea∣res. In the tyme of Nero appeared a comete syxeA comete se∣ne in Nerois tyme. monethes contrary too all cometes, whiche are not wont to be sene so longe. There was also a comete sene before in the tyme of Claudius, and three sonnes, whiche sygnyfyeth doutlesse, that three princes shoulde shortely striue for the empire. In lyke maner do I suppose, that their great Co∣mete dyd sygnifye not onely the sedicion and vp∣roure, but also the mutacion and chaunge in the Ro¦mane empire, and specially the lamentable decaye of the Iewysh kyngdom. Sergius Galba, Otho, and Vitellius. AMong these thre was a stryfe for the em∣pyre,Sergius Gal¦ba, Otho. after Neroes death. As for Galba was slayn in ye marketplace of Rome by y• layenge wayte of Otho. Afterward was Vitellius chosen Emperoure in Germany of theVitellius. hoost, and sent some men of armes into Italy. The
whiche metyng Otho, he fought foure feldes with them: thre tymes dyd he ouercome them, but in the fourth was his hoost ouerthrowen. And though the souyldiours drue frely to hym, yet would hee warre no more. For it is reported that he shoulde haue said: that he set more by the comon peace, then by his owne lyfe or priuate glory: and the fourth moneth after Galbas death, slew he hymselfe with a daggar. In the meane season was Vespasianus chosenVespasianus Emperoure in the Easte, by the souldiours: thesa∣me sent an hoost into Italy, the whiche ouerthrewe Vitellius men of armes. Of that rose vproures at Rome, and Vitellius was taken his handes bound vpō his backe, and with a halter cast about his neck, he was drawen through the myer in the stretes, and fynally was he slayne as he had deserued. For he was suche one, that deserued rather to bee called a cruell beaste, than a man. This was the fyrst vproure that was in the Empyre for the elec∣tion or chosyng, after Augustus. The yeare of the worlde .iiii. M. xvi. The yeare of Rome .viii. C. xxv. The yeare of Christ .lxxij. VEspasianus the Seuenth Emperoure reig∣ned nyne yeares. It was a man renowmed in wysedome and honesty, and a prince moste worthy of the Empyre. For where Caligula, Clau∣dius and Nero dyd nott onely suffre all intempe∣rancy out of measure in other, but dyd it themsel∣ues also: this man contrarywyse restored at Rome
the nourture of modestie and honest lawes. He au∣gmented also the Empyre with all maner of vic∣tuals, and in the prouinces ordeined he necessary aydes. Besides this ordeined he also at Rome com∣mon pensions for professers of phisyck and other sciences. Of the last destruction of Ierusalem. IN the seconde yeare of Vespasianus be∣ganWhen Tit{us} the sonne of Vespasiane besyeged Ie∣rusalem. Titus the sonne of Vespasian to be∣syege the cytie Ierusalem, whan Easter began to be kept in the moneth of Apryll, and afterwarde in the moneth September dyd he spoyle and burne it. But in the meane tyme was so great mysery in the cytie for hunger, vproure and inwarde manslaughter, as neuer was red to haue bene in any cytie. The mothers dyghted their owne chyldren to satisfye their hunger, but in∣uayne: For the souldyours tooke them awaye from them par force, and deuoured them, and the mothers dyed with hunger the whyles. Many slew themselues. Iosephus wryteth that in the cy∣tyTen hūdreth thousād men were in the ci¦tie whan Ie∣rusalem was besyeged. were about ten hundreth thousand persons. For because it was Easter, a very great multitude came together into the cytie: Besydes this, they that dwelt here and there in villages, in all Iewry, drue all together to Hierusalem, for none other cause, but that they trusted to bee in saue garde by the defence of so well afortified citie. In so great nō∣ber of people, the moste parte nere hande dyed with
hunger, pestilence and sworde. Titus sent syxtene thousand to Alexandria, to do seruice, none other wyse then slaues. He brought twoo thousand with hym, whiche hee shewed in a triumphe, and caste them to wylde beastes in common games to be to∣ren in peces. But what shall I saie muche? nomans oraciō can be sufficient to expresse so great a mysery. For God woulde propose to men a new and syngu∣larAn example of Gods wrath. example, wherein myght be sene the greatnesse of Gods wrath against despisers of Godlynesse. For it must be a very stony and harde harte, whiche shoulde not be sore afrayed at so dredefull an exam∣ple. And it is aboue all thynges to be ouerloked in this hystorye, that yf God vsed no mercy towarde thys people in punyshynge them for their wycked∣nesse, whome he called hys peculiar people, whyche also was come of so holy fathers: He shall muche lesse spare the Heythen. And God in threatenynge thys, declareth also in the same example the shewe of mercy and Godly beneuolence: namely, that we do not doubt that after that the Iewysh kyngdom is ouerthrowen, we that are Gentyls, are truely the chosen people and Gods chyldren, yf we do tru∣ly beleue in Christe. This destruction of Ierusalem befell in the secōd yeare of Vespastanus: and it was the threscore and fortene yeare after Christes natiuite, the fortieth yere after that Christ had suffered his passion. But from the creation of the worlde the foure thousand and eightenth yere. And this temple dyd stande af∣ter the second yere of Longunanus fyue hundreth and syx and twenty yeares.
Many dredefull tokens signifyed this destruc∣tiōStraung thī∣ges were se∣ne before the destructiō of Ierusalem. afore, which for shortnesse we can not here reher¦se. A burnyng sworde was sene aboue the temple nearehande a whole yeare. I haue added thys ther¦fore, lest no man do rashly despyse the tokens, which pretende the euidēces of Gods indignacion, by the which we are called to repentaunce, that the wrath of God maye be ether auoyded, or mitigated: which thynge of mercy happened to the Niniuites. The yeare of the worlde iiii. M. xxv. The yeare of Rome. viij. C. xxxii. The yeare of Christe. lxxxi. TItus the eyght Emperoure reigned twoThe gentle∣nesse of Tit{us} Vespasian{us}. yeare. He was the sonne of Vespasianus, endued wyth all kynde of princely ver∣tues, wherefore he was praysed of euery man, and called: The loue and delite of man kynde. But when he perceaued, that some went about to optayne the Emperyall dignitie agaynst hym, he☜ commaunded to admonyshe them frendly, to ab∣stayne from suche enterpryses: For all theyr labour was inuayne in suche thinges, and that the gouer∣naunce is a gyft of God, whiche befalleth to hym, whome it pleaseth hym to geue: He dyd nothynge more rygorously to them. Titus (as some suppose) dyed of poyson. After that Linus was deade, was Anacletus made the third byshop of Rome. The yeare of the worlde .iiij. M. xxvij. The yeare of Rome viii. C. xxxvj. The yeare of Christe .lxxxiij.
DOmitianus the nynth Emperoure, the bro∣therDomitianus of Titus reigned fyftene yeares. He had warres in Germany, and cesely agaynst the Catti, that now a daies are called the Hesses. HeCatti. vsed incredible intemperancy and great tyranny at Rome, wherfore he was fynally slayne. He droueThe Mathe∣matici are en out of Rome. out of Rome the Mathematicos, that is, teachers by demonstracion and Philosophers. He persecu∣ted the Christen, and put them to death, lyke as Nero dyd. Whan Anacletus was deade, Clemens the fyrst of that name was made Byshop of Rome. The yeare of the worlde .iiij. M. xliij. The yeare of Rome .viij. C. lij. The yeare of Christe .xcix. NErua the tenth Emperoure reigned one. yeare and foure monethes. He adopted and made heyre apparant Traianus, who was as then capitaine in Germany about Collen. Ner∣ua dyed being olde .lxviij. yeare. The yeare of the worlde .iiij. M. xliiij. The yeare of Rome .viij. C. liij. The yeare of Christe .C. TRaianus the Emperoure reigned nynetene yeares and syxe monethes. This same wasTraian{us} as ho . the fyrste of the straunge Emperours: For he was no Italian, but a Spanyarde by kynred. He was of suche notable honestie, that euer afterward, as oft as an Emperoure was electe, he dyd wyshe☞ with open requeste, that: he might be lyke to Traia∣nus in honestie, & Augustus in happenesse. When he
had made the principall officers of his court, he ga∣ueThe noble sayenge of Traianus when he ga∣ue his heade officer the po¦wer of the sworde. hym a sworde in hys hande, sayeng these wor∣des: Vse this sworde agaynst myne enemies in iu∣ste causes. If I do not iustly, then drawe it vpon myselfe. The Romane empyre was neuer so large, as in the tyme of Traianus: and aboue the exam∣ples of other Emperours, possessed he the realmes of the East most largely. He had very great warres in Hungary and Germany. Ihon the euangelist that was driuen out by Do¦mitian,Ihon the A∣postle retur∣neth out of Pathmos. returned agayne to Ephesus out of the yle Pathmos. If ye wyll reken the nōbre of the yeres, it shalbe founde that Sainct Ihon hath preached aboue thre score yeares. Good Lorde howe many☜ myseries hath Sainct Ihon sene in so longe space, among the whiche was euen the greatest, the de∣struction of Hierusalem hys countrey: I wyll passe ouer how greueously hee hath stryuen wyth many and euen peruerset heretikes. For we reade that vpon a tyme Sainct Ihon came into a bath, and founde Cherinthus the Heretike sittyng with hys company, and disputynge earnestly amonge them, and the vnshamefast blasphemer denyed Christe to be man. But Sainct Ihon rysynge, bad hys frendes that were set wyth hym, to de∣parte with hym from thence: For God woulde not suffre any lenger so vnshamefast blasphemies. But strayghtwaye as he was gone out, the houseCherinthus the heretike was killed  the fallyng of an house. An example of vengeaūce fallyng downe, slewe Cherinthus wyth hys com∣pany. It is a dredefull example of Gods wrath a∣gaynst them whiche blaspheme the name of GOD, wyth open and manifest vngodlynesse, howe
litle he wyl suffre them to be vnpunished at length. Euaristus the fift. B. of Rome succeded Clemēs After Euaristus death succeded the .vi. B. of Rome Alexander the first of that name. Vnder Traianus were many Christen men tor∣mented.e persecu∣ of Chri∣st mn v∣r Traian{us} But afterwarde was a sentence ordeined, that they shoulde not be brought into iudgement, without they were fyrst openly accused, and then shuld they be punyshed: and this was gotten by the benefite of Plinius. Traianus died of a flyxe in theThe yeares of his age . belly. The yeare of the worlde .iiij. M. lxiiij. The yeare of Rome .viii. C. lxxiij. The yeare of Christe .C. xx. ADrianus the .xii. Emperoure, reigned twenty yeares: He was adopted of Traia∣nus. He was a prince of greate wysdome, he was not geuen too warre after the example of Traianus, but was geuen to common peace by al maner of meanes: and of this wise restored he the Empyre in moste best fashion, wherfore he also deserued moste hygh prayse with euery man. Ther was neuer a more profytable Emperour to the Ro¦mysh kyngdome, sence Augustus, then this Adria∣nus. He was excellently learned in astronomy, andAdrianus a  learned perr  cōing tronomy composed euery yeare a pronostication for hymself. Vnlearned readers of sciences put he out of wages, howbeit he prouided of hys own coste for thē, that they had no nede in the meane season: and set other learned and profitable mē to teache in their steade. He furnished also excellent libraries: for he was rea¦kened to be very well learned in Greke and Latin.
In the tyme of Adrianus began the Iewes to re∣storeThe Iewes▪ rayse an vp∣roure throu¦gh one Mes∣sias. their kyngdom, fyndyng also out one Messias among thē: But Adrianus ouercame them, though it was not without great busynesse. Afterwarde commaunded he to repayre Ierusalem, and called her Elia, after his name Elius. At the fyrst was he sore against the Christians,The clemen∣cy of Adria∣nus towarde Christen mē and commaunded to torment them: but afterward, when some learned Christen men wrote bokes to the Emperoure, the whiche are yet now adayes a brode, he chaunged his mynde, and commaunded that from thence foreward no man should be atta∣ched for his religion. Xystus the fyrst of that name, and seuenth B. of Rome succeded Alexander. After Xystus succeded Thelesphorus the eyghtWho ord∣ned ent. B. of Rome. He is reported to haue ben the institu∣ter of Lent. The yeare of Christe .i. C. xl.Antonius Pius. ANtonius the Godly the .xiii. Emperour, was adopted by Adrianus: He reigned xxiij. yeres, & that with so great modesty and endeuoure of peace, that he shoulde oft haue sayed, that it were more honest to saue one citesyn by an Emperoure, than to slaye a thousand enemies. Hyginius the nyneth B. of Rome succeded Thelesphorus. Pius the .x. succeded Hyginius. Anicetus the xi. B. of Rome succeded Pius. The yeare of Christe .c. lxiij.
MArs Anthonius the philosopher the .xilij.Mars An¦thonius. Emperoure reigned .xix. yeares. The same gouerned the Empyre by good ryght with hys brother Lucius Verus: and these two wereLucius Ve∣rus. the first that ruled the Empyre together. But Ve∣rus liued not lōg in the gouernaūce. Marcus was lyke excellent, both in vertue and learnynge. He had also warre in Germany, agaynste them that dwelt in Morauia and Slesia, and also against the Vandali. He wrote many excellent lawes, the whi∣che are yet to be red in the Pandectes of the ciuyll lawe. He wrote also whole bookes wherof we haue sene some. Moreouer in his tyme lyued Ptolomeus thePtolomeus th astrono∣. astronomian, of whom we do worthely make men∣cion. For it hath pleased God, that so excellent doc∣trines should be kept and reserued vntyll these our tymes, through this man. Nether truely was this Ptolomeus a kyng, (for at that tyme had Egypte ceased of hauyng kynges,) but was a philosopherEgypt was garnhed  mathemati∣call sciences. at Alexandria in Egypte. For God had garnyshed Egypte with mathematicall sciences, sence the ty∣me of Ioseph the sonne of Iacob the patriarke, by whome Egypte had fyrst receaued them, and kept them vntyll this Ptolomeus: and that is about twoo thousande yeares. For first Alexander, after∣warde the Romanes also had Egypte in greate esti∣macion for thys cause, and lest so noble sciences should perishe, they bestowed muche cost to enter∣tayne the Schole, whiche then finally wente tooThe Schole of Alexan∣dria. nought also, whan the kyngdome of Egypte was translated from the Romanes, and was myserably
spoyled by Mahomet. But that at the least some remnaunt of so necessary sciences should remayne, no doubt but God would them to be set in an order by this man, that they maye be kept of them that come after▪ for the whiche thyng God is greatly toThe Maho∣metistes. be thanked. But how litle they of Mahomets secte are worthy to be called men, ye that they may be ra∣ther called beastes than men, doth it appeare there∣by, that they willed so auncient a scole to peryshe & be lost, whiche had nowstande and floryshed aboue two thousand yeres, being kept by so noble princes, in the whiche were taught all maner of wysdome and learnynge, not wythout the hygh benefite of God. Soter the xij. byshop of Rome succeded Anyce∣tus, who ordeined, that they that were spoused, shoulde be wedded openly before the Churche or congregacion. The yeare of Christe .C. lxxxiij. COmmodus the .xv. Emperoure gouernedCommodus xij. yeare, and was equall euen to Nero in cruelnesse. Eleuterius succeded Soter in the byshopricke. The yeare of Christe .C. xcv. Aelius Pertinax the .xvi. Emperoure reignedAelius Per∣tinax. syxe monethes. He was slayne of Iulianus, who had bought the name of an Emperoure of the soul∣diours. The yeare of Christe .C. xcvi. Didius Iulianus the .xvii. Emperour reignedDidi{us} Iulia¦nus. vii. monethes. He was very wel learned in y• lawe.
He was slayne by Seuerus. The yeare of Christ .C. xcvi. SEuerus the .xviij. Emperoure reigne eightene yeres. The same restored agai. the empire that was decaied wyth sund¦ry perels. Victor the .xiiij. byshop of Rome succeded Ele¦therius in the byshopryke. Zepherinus the .xv. succeded victor. In his ty∣me was Origene, who taught the holy scripture atOrigene a trache at A∣leader. Alexandria. This mans bokes were afterwarde re¦fused, because he brought in vnprofitable disputa∣tions and allegoryes. Afterwarde was it the com∣mon fashion to mengle the phylosophy of Plato with holy scripture, whereof the churche had great dammage and inconuenience: For the phylosophy of Plato is farre from the common trade of lyuing:The philoso¦phy of Plato The philoso¦phy of Ari∣stotel. and contrary wyse the philosophy of Aristotel hath a beawtiful and ryght order, and yf she be wel vsed, exercised and vnderstande, she may verely brynge muche profite to Christen men that be learned. The yeare of Christe .cc. xiiij. ANtonius Bassianus Caracalla the .xix.Antonius Bassianus. Emperoure reygned syxe yeares. He commaunded hys brother Germane Ge∣ta to be slayne. He was wedded to his ste∣pmother. He required of Papinianus the great la∣wier to excuse the manslaughter that he had done with hys brother, to the whiche Papinian aunswe∣red:pinianus the lawier. It were not so easy to defende a manslaughter, as to committe or do it. Wherfore dyd Antonius
cause to slaye Papinianus also, which was worthy to be reputed & taken for a lawier: namely because for righteousnesse and honesties sake he woulde ra¦ther yeoparde his lyfe, than to alowe a dishonesteAn example of venge∣aunce. dede. Not longe after the Emperoure Bassianus was duely rewarded for his tyranny, whan he ly∣kewyse was slayne. Calistus the .xvi. byshop of Rome succeded Ze∣pherinus.Macrinus. Macrinus the .xx. Emperoure wyth hys sonne Diadmenus raygned but one yeare and two mo∣nethes. They were both slayne. The yeare of Christ .CC. xx VArus Heliogabalus the .xxi. Emperour raig¦nedVarus He∣liogabalus. foure yeares. He left no remembraunce of him, saue of a moost fylthye beaste: at the last was he slayne by the souldyours. The yeare of Christ, CC. xxv. ALexander Seuerus the .xxij. Emperoure:Alexander Seuerus. his mother was called Mammea. He raigned xi. yeares. He was made Emperoure beyng no more than twelue yeare old, ordeined by the soul¦diours, and that dyd the Senate alowe. He is greately praysed for hys diligence and God∣lynesse.lpia. In all thinges vsed he the counsell of Vl∣pianus the lawier only, nether spake he wyth anye man alone, saue wyth the same. But the souldi∣ours toke that in euyll worth, and specially because that by thys mans counsel, they were kepte more straytely in their duety by the Emperoure.
And whan for thys cause vpon a tyme the souldy∣ours rushynge vpon hym threatened to slaye hym, the Emperoure stept forth, and set his bodye in the daungers of Vlpianus, and couered hym wyth his cloake: that the souldiours myghte vnderstande, that the Emperour cared for Vlpianus health. Thys was a notable example of Emperyall ver∣tue,A notable ex∣ample of maintenan̄ce of vertu▪ whereby is euidentlye declared, that greate men ought not to regarde theyr lyfe and body for the mayntenaunce of iustice and ryhteousnesse. Vrbanus the fyrst of that name, the .xvij. bishop of Rome succeded Calistus. Pontianus the .xviij. succeded Vrbanus. The yeare of Christ .CC. xxxviij. MAximinus the .xxiij. Emperoure raygned thre yeares. The same whan he was yonge,us d y. was a shepeherde in Thracia: afterwarde folowed he the warre: and for the vnacustomed greatnesse of hys bodye, wyth the whyche he had a syngular boldnesse ioyned, he mounted by processe of tyme so hygh, that he was chosen Emperoure of the army, wythout anye consent or authoritie of the Senate. He subdued Germany vntyll the wood Her∣cinia, and the vpper parte of it, vntyll the Fran∣kes. He vsed greate tyrannye, wherefore or∣deyned the Senate other Emperoures agaynste hym: and for that cause were somtyme feldes fou∣ghten amongest the Romanes, in the which theGordianus. yonger Gordianus was slayne, and the elder Gordianus hanged hym selfe. But fynally was
Maximinus slayne of the souldiours wyth hys sonne by Aquileia. Autherus the xviij. byshop of Rome succe∣ded Pontianus. The yeare of Christe, CC. xli. GOrdianus the .xxiiij. Emperoure raygnedGordianus. syxe yeares. He was ordeyned Emperoure by the Senate wyth Pupienus and Bal∣nus against Maximinus. Whan Pupienus and Balnus refused to graunt ye souldiours all their requestes, they were slayne of them at Rome: and by thys meanes op∣tayned the yonger Gordianus the empyre alone. He brought home the victory of the Perses in the East, and restored some cityes agayne to the em∣pyre. But whan the hoost suffred hunger, Philip∣pus was made vpper captaine, by whose commaun¦dement Gordianus was slayne. Whan Gordianus was made Emperoure,An Eclipse of the Sunne there happened an Eclypse of the Sunne so great, that durynge the same, men were fayne to vse can∣del lyghte. There were also earthquakes, where∣wyth some cities were euen destroyed. The yeare of Christ .CC. xlvij. PHilippus the .xxv. Emperoure raigned fyue yeares. He was an Arabian, and had bene longe tyme captayne of the hoost. This samePhilippus was ye fyrste Christ▪ Em∣peroure a baptysed. toke vp his sonn Philippe also to the gouernaunce of the Empyre. But they were both slayne by the procurement of Decius, for takynge vpon them baptyme and knowledgyng of the name of Christ.
For thus raged the Emperours amongest them∣selues wyth manslaughter, by the sufferaunce of God, whyche thyng ought duely cause vs to drede and feare God. The yeare of the worlde▪ foure thousande, one hundreth and two and nynety. The yeare of Christe, two hundreth and eighte and fourty. In the tyme of theyr gouernaunce was it a thousanth yeare sence Rome was buylded, whych was feasted and celebrate wyth a moost renoumed pompe of playes that wer had once man hundreth yeares, called Ludiseculares. Fabianus the ninetenth byshop of Rome suc∣ceded. Antherus. It is sayde that he baptysed Phi¦lippus the Emperoure, and that Philippus was the fyrst Emperoure, that acknowledged the Chri∣sten fayth. The yeare of Christ .CC. L. iij. DEcius the .xxvi. Emperoure raygned two. yeares. He was no lesse a wyse prince, than a doughty warriour. He sett vp hys sonne also in the empyre wyth him. They were both slayne of the Gotthies, after that they had inuaded Thra∣cia,The begyn∣nyng of the Gthian y. and after that wended them towarde Hunga∣ry. And though the Romanes had to do wyth the Gotthies before also, yet wyll I begynne the Got∣thian history here. For at that tyme they had an ar∣my of thre hundreth thousande: and they dyd a re∣noumed
acte in vanquy shynge Decius, so valiaunt a prince. But God woulde at the laste be reuengedAn example of venge∣aunce. of that tyrannye, wherein he commaunded by an open commaundemente to putt all them to death, that worshipped Christ. He putt to death Fabia∣nusFabian  Cyprian martyrs. the byshop of Rome, and Cyprian in Aphrica, and many other holy men. As for the Gotthies and other straunge nacions, breakynge into the Romishe dominion pulled awaye by violence the∣same, because of sheddynge of Christen mennes bloude. And this same had Sybilla prophecyed for to come. Besyde that is it clerely expressed in the Apocalypse. Cornelius the .xx. byshop of Rome succededThe heresy of Nouatius is codēe Fabianus, who condempned the heresye of No∣uatius, concernynge the peruerse doctryne of pe∣naunce. For he taughte, that they whyche had receaued baptysme, and fell agayne into synne▪ coulde not come agayne to saluacyon: and wyth thys erroure broughte he manye to desperacy∣on, and spoyled the concorde of the churche or con∣gregatyon. The yeare of Christ .CC. lv. VIbius Gallus the .xxvij. Emperoure rayg∣nedVibius Gal¦lus, Volusianus. two yeare wyth hys sonne Volusia∣nus. For whan Decius was slayne, Gal∣lus was saluted Emperoure of the hooste. Afterwarde were they both slayne of the souldy∣ours. Lucius the .xxi. byshop of Rome succeded after Cornelius.
The yeare of Christ .CC. lv. VAlerianus the .xxviii. Emperoure raygnedans. syxe yeares. He was chosen Emperoure of the hoost in hygh Germany, and the Senate confirmed the same. For he was borne of a moste noble kynred at Rome, and had behaued hymselfe valiauntly in Germany. At the laste was he taken of kynge SaporesSapores kyng of the Perses. An example of great pre∣sumption. by the Perses, and lyued in moost vyle seruyce For the barbarus king was so haut and presumptuous, that whan he had taken the Emperoure, he vsed hym for a chayre: and whan he wolde ride, he trode vpon the backe of Valerianus lyenge on hande and fete, and so stept on hys horse backe. But Sapores was lykewyse punyshed by Odenaus the Ro∣mane captayne. GAlienus sonne to Valerianus the xxix. Em∣perour,e. gouerned ye Empyre with his father▪ & after that the father was taken, he raigned nyne yeares. He was learned in good sciences, but lyuynge in greate excesse and dronkennesse, he gouerned but slowly the empyre, wherefore it mynyshed in many contryes. In the meane season was Posthumus made captayne of the hooste inPosthumus. Germany, whofor the singular endeuour to accom¦plysh his duety▪ was made Emperour of the hoost. But whan Galyenus had sent hys army agaynst Posthumus, he appoynted amonge the rest the Frankes to be in the hooste. And by thys occasyon were the Frankes fyrst steared to warre, the which afterwarde also, whan Posthumus was slayne
by sayenge of wayte and treason, remayned stylle in harnesse: the whyche we wyll also treate of here after, whan we shall treate of Carolus magnus. But we wolde lyghtely shew thys, lest the readerThe Fran∣kes settinge themselues against the Romanes. shulde be ignorant what was the occasyon why the Frankes dyd fyrst set them selues agaynst the Ro∣manes: and by the same meanes became they mygh¦ty in Germany and Fraunce. Of thys maner than beganne the Gotthyes fyrste to destroye the Ro∣mane domynyon, afterwarde the Frankes, and so forth other nacyons, so that I passe ouer in the me∣ane season that great slaughter, that the Perses in the East haue done. The yeare of Christe .CC. lxxij. Flauius Claudius the xxx. Emperoure raig∣nedFlauius Claudius. two yeares. Thyssame deserued mooste greatest prayses. For hys notable and very princely vertues. Wherfore was the empire offred vnto hym both by Galyenus before hys death▪ af∣ter that of the hooste and senate wyth one consente of them all. Agaynst the Gotthyes foughte he in Hungary and Macedonya aboue mans thynkyng, and euer had the victorye. He ouercame also the Germanes that were fallen into Italy. He resto∣red Egypt to the Empyre. But Claudius deste∣ny suffred hym to lyue no longer, happely because the Romanes were not whorthy of suche a prin∣ce. For it behoued the empyre of Rome now to be∣gynn to decay, the which was somwhat repared &
restored by Claudius, and thre or foure of hys suc∣cessors. Constantinus the great was of thys Clau∣diusConstanti∣nus y• great. kynred, which we shall shewe hereafter. Valerianus a debite put Lucius the byshop of Rome to death by martyrdome, whome succeded in the byshoprycke Stephanus the fyrste of that name the xxij. byshop. Xystus the seconde of that name the .xxiij. by∣shop of Rome, succeded Stephanus. Dyonysyus the xxiiij. byshope of Ro. succeded Xystus. The yeare of Christ .CC. lxiiij. AVrlianus the xxxi. Emperoure raygned fy∣uelianus▪ yeare and yxemone thes. He was taken vp to the gouernaunce of the empyre by Claudi∣us for hys excellent prowises and feates of chyual∣ry. He ouercame the Frankes in a sore battayll, not farre from Mentz, afterwarde the Gotthyes alsoe   b∣ayll. in Illyrycus. Besyde thys ouercame he in the East the quenezenobya, the which did great actes abo∣ue womanly nature, and had great warre with the Romanes. He is worthy no small prayse also, because that inAu  deo∣ o the di∣ of e▪ the hoost and amonge the souldyours he wolde al∣waye haue strayhgtly kepte and maynteyned mo∣desty and discipline of warre. For it befel vpon a ty∣me, that a souldiour forced hys hostesse and had to do with her: of which thing whan Aurelianus had knowledge, he wolde haue hym punyshed wyth a moost greueous kind of punyshment: He commaun¦ded two trees to be bowed doe to the earth, and
to binde the mydoer to the boughes of ether of the trees, and than lettynge the trees louse, dressynge themselues agayne, shulde wyth a greate violence teare the yonge man in peces. Thys Aurelianus was also a greate persecutor of the Christians. Of the Manicheis the heretykes. STrayghte waye after the Gospell was preached, rose sectes and dissensyous a∣mong Christen men. But I am not min¦ded to rehearse y• erronious opinions of euery one in this treatise: I wyll only recyte the moost greatest, which haue infect and troubled ma∣ny and greate cityes and contryes wyth theyr ve∣nm: that the reader maye knowe, nothynge to beHeretykes are bgyn∣ers of vp∣roure▪ more venimous in this commune lyfe of man, than false doctrine: and that all heretikes are desyrous of vproure, nether couet ought els, but that they maye defende and spreade abrode theyr erroure by vprour and commune ryot. For Sathan their che∣fe doer, is both a lyar and manslayer. Ether of thē truely is euident in all scismatickes, which both te∣ache false, and are wonte to rayse manslaughter through sedysyon and perurbatyon of commune welthes.Manichei the heretikes Manes born in Persia. In the tyme of Aurelyanus beganne fyrst the Manycheis, and one Manes borne in Persya was begynner of them. Thyssame spred hys venim a∣brod largely, fyrst by y• Arabians, afterward in Afri¦ca: the which went so spedely on, that it coulde notThe doctrine of the Ma∣nicheis▪ be swaged the space of two hundreth yeares af∣terwarde▪ The chefe of theyr doctryne was: that
ther were two goddes▪ the one good the other euel, and both lyke euerlastynge. This doctrine semed vnto mans reason alowable. For seynge God is good by nature, and that in the meane season the euell hath such power: it is necessary there be also a peculiar God▪ which is author and doer of euels, equall to the other God wyth power and euerla∣styngnesse. Besyde these had they other opinions that they taught, namely, that Christe was no true God: nether receaued they the bokes of the Apost∣les, but fayned there seuerall doctrines, the which they called Christes Gospel also: they boasted also of seuerall illuminations of heauen, and sayde they gaue the holy ghost. They ordeyned sundrye cere∣monies: they vsed also choyse of meates: they for∣badde wedlocke▪ sayenge that thereby is optayned the holy ghost. They taught also to reiect ciuil po∣wer. For matrimony and gouernaunce of commun¦welth they sayde to haue theyr ofspringe from the euell God, and not to be ordeined of the good God. Thomas Monetarius or mynter at ThuringenThomas Monetarius was playnly fallē into the same heresy in our daies. The yeare of Christ .CC. lxxx. TAcitus y• .xxxij. Emperour raigned vi. mone∣thes.Tacitus. bus▪ Probus y• .xxxiii. Emperour ruled syxe☞ yeares and foure monethes. Thissame is rekened among the most worthiest princes: he was chosen by the souldiours and confirmed by the Senate. He was the cause that peace was made both in the lower and hygher Germany. He ouercame y• Fran¦kes & them of Thuringen▪ & in the histories of thys Emperour is the fyrst mencion made of the nacio of Thuringen.
Felix the .xxv. bysh. of Rome succeded Dionisus. Eutichianus the .xxvi. succeded Felix. Caius the .xxvij. succeded Eutichianus in the by∣shopryke. The yeare of Christ .CC. lxxxvii LArus the .xxxiiij. Emperoure raygned twoLarus. yeare. He made hys sonnes Carinus and Nu¦merianus emperours wyth hym. Numeria∣nus was excellent in honestye and learninge. But Carinus was equall wyth Nero for his wicked∣nesse. The yeare of Christ .CC. lxxxviij. DIocletianus the .xxxv. Emperoure raygnedDiocletia∣nus. twenty yeare, He was a prince of rype wyse∣dome, and garnished wyth manye noble de∣des. He restored Egypt to the Empyre. But he was a very fearce enemy to Christes religion. For be endeuoured to restore the olde state of the em∣pyre and olde fashyon of the commune welth: And for as muche as he dyd all thynges by the iudge∣ment of reason, he woulde not suffre the opinions of religion that were disagreynge. And whan he perceaued that in so greate trouble of warres he coulde not entertayne alone the largenesse of so great an empyre: besydes that, that it had oft fortu¦ned, other to couet the empyre by vproure, and to ben made Emperours, he willingly willed Maxi∣mianusMaximia∣nus. to raygne wyth hym, and to be of lyke po∣wer, and the same warred in Gallia. As for these two were a lyke called Augusti in the empire. These two Augusti chose other two▪ which
were not egall of power, but were as successors: nether were they called Augusti, but Cesares. Diocletianus chose Galerius, Maximianus chose Constantius. But ether of them both Diocletia∣nus and Maximianus were called Augustus. Afterwarde layenge aparte the gouernaunce of the empyre, they returned both to the quietnesse of a pryuate lyfe. But Maximianus woulde fayne haue returned to the gouernaunce, that by the∣same occasion, he myght haue promoted hys sonne Maxentius to the gouernaunce: and for that causeMaxentius Constantius dyd Constancius hys brother in lawe cause hym to be slayn. Communely doth it so befal, that whan great empyres shall decaye, all shalbe fyrste fylled wyth vproures and inwarde debates, the whyche thys example doth wytnesse. Diocletianus lyued manye yeares priuate or withoute rule: at the last dyd he slaye hym selfe, whan he was afearde for Li¦cinius and Constantinus, whyche suspected hym that he woulde take Maxentius theyr enemyes parte. The yeare of Christ .CCC. viij. COnstantius the .xxxvi. Emperoure wyth Ga∣lerius Maximinus, and was ether of them Emperoure wyth greate prayse. After Dio∣cletianus death, raygned Constantius foure yea∣res. The contryes of Fraunce and Germany were subiect to hym, and he set them at quiet. He ouer∣cameThe n of Germany the Frankes and Almaynes. For of thys wise is Germany diuided: The Frankes toke that part of Germany to them, which is about ye Rene: They that be called Alemanni are ye hygher Germanes.
Constantius dyed in England, in whose stead was ordeined for to rule the empyre Constantinus hys sonne. The yeare of Christ .iij. C. xij. COnstantinus the .xxxvij. Emperoure raigned thyrty yeares. He restored the empyre to hisCōstantinus former rest and tranquillitye. For whan Ma∣xentius had cruelly vsed tyranny at Rome, beynge ouercome by Constantinus, he was in a flyghte drouned in the ryuer Tybur, and receaued wor∣thy punishment for hys tyranny, the whyche he v∣sed both agaynst other men, and speciallye agaynstMaxentius drowned in the Tybur. Christen men. And so dyd Constantinus and Lici∣nius gouerne the empyre together certayne yeres wyth greate concorde, and Constantinus wedded hys syster to Licinius. But we see somtyme to be∣fall in a great empyre such causes, wherin two dooThe cause of disagrement betwen Con¦stantinus & Licinius. seldom agree. It is saide, that the cause of the disa∣gremente betwene Constantinus and Licinius shoulde thence haue spronge that Licinius shoulde haue ben enemy to the Christians, and to haue oft required Constantinus to enterprise such thynges nomore. Finallye Constantinus beynge compelled wyth great necessitye ouercame Licinius: howbeit left him alyue, vpon this condicion, that he layenge awaye the rule of the empyre, should lyue pryuate∣ly. Wherfore Constantinus gouerned the empyre afterwarde alone, and broughte all thynges into peace and honeste lawes. The emperour was the fyrst that openly knowledged the name of Christe.
Nether is it to be doubted, but that he was a trueThe ede∣our of Con¦stantinus to kepe the Go¦spell▪ The duety of a Christen prince. The coun∣cel of Nicea called i  Nice∣▪ godly prynce: for he had the holy Gospell in such re¦uerence, that to the open wytnesse of hys fayeth, he caused the boke of ye Gospel to be boren alway open∣ly before hym. He commaunded also bokes of the Bible to be written at his owne coste, and caused them to be sent into all contryes here and ther. He brought to passe, that the holy and profytable coun¦cell of Nicene was gathered, that so in hys tyme, he might set the state of the churche in a quietnesse. These finally are actes worthye for a good prince, which deserue a farre greater prayse, than that it is sayde he haue geuen to the bishop of Rome ma∣ny gyftes. Although the good Emperoure is wor∣thy to be praysed for that, that he gaue almesses & benefyces to mainteyn Euangelycall doctryne and ministers of the churche. But that Constantinus should haue be so liberall toward the byshop of Ro∣me, that he shoulde haue geuen hym for his vse the citye of Rome, and the halfe part of the empyre, as some do fable: no historyes that be alowed do wyt∣nesse the same. The city Constantinopolis was builded by thisConstanti∣ Emperour and hath the name of him, whan before the citye of marchaundise that was in that place, was called Bzantium. The see of the empyre was afterward brought to Constantinople, as the histo¦ries folowinge do testifye. Moreouer seing it is▪ no doubt that this prince is one, and that of the chefest of those princes, which God hath garnished wyth great vertues, we shall worthely recyte the ofspringe of hys kynrede, that
it maye be knowen, those most great and noble ver¦tues to be syngularly geuen of God to greate and noble families or houses. Claudius the Emperour of most commenda∣ble name, had two brethren, Quintilius and Cris∣pus. Claudia the doughter of Crispus was wed∣ded to the noble prince Eutropius. And these areThe aunce∣ters of Con∣stantinus. the ofspringe of Constantinus kynred. Eutropius a chefe go∣uernour at Rome. Claudia the brothers doughter of Claudius Constantius the Emperour had Helena: her sonne was Constantinus ye greate, hys wyfe was Fausta the doughter of Maxi∣mianus, whose chylde∣ren were Constantius, Constantinus and Con¦stans. Theodora the stepe∣doughter of Maximi¦anus: her sonne was Constantinus, & the∣same had sonnes, Gal∣lus and Iulianus. Of Arrius the heretyke. ARrius lyued in the tyme of Constanti∣nus.Arrius an o∣pen reader in the scole of Alexan∣dria. The doctrine of Arrius. He was an open reader in the scole of Alexandria in Egypte. The churches concorde was miserably spoiled wyth hys error and heresy: For he taught yt Christ was not truely and naturallye God. But what prac∣tyse and vicious pleasauntnesse of persuasyons he dyd vse to confyrme this error, it were to longe to rehearse. Howbit it pleased the world so wel, that great learned bishops, and neare hande the whole churche of the Easte, wyth manye also in the Weste
dyd embrace hym. Neuerthelesse in the meane sea∣son wythstode heauely this heresy two bishops of notable godlynesse. The fyrst was Alexander, whoAlexander & byshop. optayned of Constantinus to gather the councell of Nicene, wherein was condemned the heresye of Arrius. Wherfore was Arrius forsaken and ban∣nished out of the dominion. But whan Constanti∣nus was deade, a certayne preste was in fauoure wyth Constantius, whom also he committed al his counsels: the same broughte to passe wyth his per∣suasyon by the Emperoure, that Arrius beyng cal∣led agayne, was sett in hys former office. The fyre that was metely well quenched afore, began nowe agayne to burne more fearcely, insomuche that the Emperoure Constancius beganne also to embraceConstancius   Arrius. thys erroure of Arrius. Whan at the last a daye was appointed by Constantius, wherein Alexan∣der and Arrius shoulde openly reason of the scryp∣ture, concerninge this learninge, Alexander spent the whole nyghte in prayenge in the temple, pray∣enge God, that the secte of Arrius should crepe no farther. Wherfore in the morninge before the ap∣poynted houre of the disputation, whan Arrius went to the place, he beganne (as he went) to haue payne in the bellye, and went to a preuye to do hysThe death of Arrius i an ample of . easement, where he aboue all mens estimacion, dy∣ed incontinent. Howbeit whan Arrius was of this wyse deade, yet ceased not the sede of his poysoned doctrine to be sowed larger abroade, because that they that were conspyred together of this secte, be∣ganne to sprede it more vehemently. At the laste whan Alexander was deade also, Athanasius hys
successor disputed hymselfe agaynste the Arryans: but the same beynge banyshede by Constantius, heAthanasius beynge ban∣nished, flyeth to Triere out of Egypt. fled from Egypt, vntyl the citye Tryere in Germa¦ny. And though thys was a very farre flyghte, yet was the bannyshed man fayne to hyde hymselfe se∣cretly at Tryere vntyll the eyght yeare. In the meane season was that heresy fearcely growen tho¦rough out in the East churche, euen so muche, that for a season a greate part of Christen men did leane to the Arrian secte, and out of thys secte sprange by lytle and lytle, other sectes many. Fynally whan the name of Arryans was by the decrees of many councels quenched, yet was it now and than rene∣wed againe in the churche vnder other names. In one citye were sundery opinions, and diuerse sec∣tes persecuted eche other, insomuche that the one running vpon the other in theyr temples, made ry∣ots and committed man slaughter. At that tyme was the state of the church very wretched and py∣teous, the which worthely gaue an occasiō of slaun¦der, not only to the Gentyls, why they dyd not em¦brace the word of God: but dyd offende other also, that they went from the Christianity to the Idola∣try of the Heythen, among the which was also Iu∣lianus the Emperoure. In the tyme of this so mys∣cheuousArrius was yc forerunner of Mahomet heresy, came vp finally Mahomet, to whō by Arrius was as it were a window handsomly o∣pened: & was the forerunner of this most cruel An∣tichrist. For whan the myndes of men went astray in so great dissension of opinions, came Mahomet, & inuented very wysely the thirde way, wherwith he should heale the variete & diuersyty of errours.
For he toke awaye all disputacions, whiche thinge men dyd alowe. But hereof shall we speake after∣warde. And let thys suffise to be rehearsed of the Arryans erroure and other lyke heresyes: of the whiche we haue here made mencyon therfore, that it may be sene how greate dammages, manslaugh∣ters, seditions & ryotous heresyes do brynge both to the commune welth, and to the churche. Marcellynus the .xxviij. byshop of Rome succe∣ded Cains. Marcellus the xxix succeded Marcellinus. Eusebius the xxx. bysh. succeded Marcellus. Melciades the .xxxi. succeded Eusebius. Syluester the xxxij. succeded Melciades. Marcus the xxxii. was bysh. after Syluester. Not long before Constantinus death, was a ve∣ry comete was ue. greate comete sene certayne monethes, whiche signifyed the greate warre and commotion, that folowed after Constantinus death. The yeare of Christe .CCC. xli. COnstantynus the .xxxviij. Emperoure rayg∣ned.Constanti∣nus. Thre brether̄ raigned toge¦ther. xxiiij. yeares. But the father had so or∣deyned the empyre, that the thre bretheren shulde raigne together, Constantinus in Fraunce, Spayne and Germany: Constantius in the Easte, Constans in Italy and Illyrieus, But the yonger brother Constantinus, was not content wyth the dominion of his empyre, but woulde raygne alone, and wente into Italy agaynste his brother Con∣stans, trustynge to his puyssaunce, because he had valyaunt souldyours. But God suffred not thys rashnesse longe vnpunished: for thys Constanti∣nus
was slayne not longe after.An example of venge∣aunce. And by this occasion optained Constans y• whole empyre of the West, the which he gouerned lucke∣ly. Moreouer had he a captayne called Magnenti¦usMagnētius an example of an vnkind vnfaithfull and disloyal man. at Ausburch, whose life he had once saued. The same slewe his most gentle mayster, and made hym selfe Emperoure, and made a settyng forth of war vpon Constantius. Constantius made hys nepheu Gallus Emperoure of the Easte, and went wyth an army agaynst the seditious captayne, and ouer∣came hym. The manslaughter in thys stryfe was so great, that as it is redde, y• power of the empyre was so abated, that many yeares after they coulde not come to theyr former strength: because the best and chosen part of the people was so slayne, that the empire could not a great while resist and with∣stand the Barbarians. After that this manslaugh∣terMagnenti∣us slayeth himselfe. was done the mooste myscheuous man Mag∣nentius slew himselfe, and so punished God the de∣ath of Constans the good prince. Iulius the fyrst of that name the .xxxiiii. bysh. of Rome came after Marcus. But whan this Iulius was deade, was Ly∣beryusLiberius byshop of Rome Felix bishop of Rome a dislembler. the .xxxv. made byshop who (because he wythstode the heresye of Arryus) was dryuen a∣waye by Constantius, and Felix was ordeyned in hys steade, who for feare of the Emperoure dys∣sembled the erroure of the Arryans. At that tyme was Conuocatyons hadde at Mylane and Ari∣mium playn contrary to the decrees of the councel of Nicene: but theyr mindes were nothing set by.
These examples wytnesse y• the state of the church was piteous and miserable at that tyme. The yeare of Christ .CCC. lxv. IVlianus the Apostata or forsaker of his pro∣fessionIulianus apostata. the .xxxix. Emperoure raygned two yeares. He was the nephew of Constantius & brother to Gallus, the which we haue spoken of be∣fore. He was of so greate learnyng, that beynge yong, he taught holy scripture openly in the church of Nicomedia: afterwarde goynge to Athenes, he learned philosophy. But whan hys brother Gal¦lus was slayn, Constantius sent hym into Fraunce and Germany, and not farre from Strasburch he vanquyshed thyrty thousande Almanes, for whych cause he was sodenly by the fauoure of the souldy∣oursIulianus   Empe∣ at Sras¦ made Emperoure at Strasburch. More∣ouer whan greate dyssensyons were amonge the Christyans, by reason of the varyetye of opinyons, for the whyche some dispayred, some dyd wholy de¦cyuer from the Christen fayth to the worshyppinge of Idols, Iulianus became an apostata also: for he was yet yonge, and vsed the company of Rhetori∣cyans and Phylosophers, whiche disputed of God after the vnderstandynge or meanynge of mans reason. Yet dyd he not persecute Christen men by open force, but he thought rather to destroye them by suttelltye. For openly he forbadde them to haue scoles, that they myght not be taughte: thynkynge (as it is in dede) that whan teachyuge were auoy∣ded, the doctrine of relygyon shulde easely go to nought. He forbadde also, that Christen men shulde
haue no authoritye to vse warrefaringe wyth theIulianus fo¦badde Chri∣sten men the authoritie of warrfare. Romanes: that by no occasyon they might come to the gouernaunce of the commune welth. He toke the goodes of the churches with laughter, sayenge he dyd Christen men a pleasure, namely that they beynge become poore, might thesooner come to he∣uen, seynge the Gospell promyseth heauen to the poore. He dyd assault the Christian fayeth fearcely, euen with wrytinges also. Agaynst those hath Cy∣rillus the bishop of Alexandria written, whose bokeCyrillus & Nazanzenu haue answe∣red Iulia∣nus. is yet founde among the remembraunces or moni∣mentes of Ihon Reuchlin in the toune Pforsa in Germanye: not vnprofytable veryly to be redde. Gregorius Nazanzenus hath answered him also, but very easely: for he was not effectual ynough to put of those reproches, which Iulianus vsed in con¦futinge the Gospell. For he intreated moost chefest vpon that: seyng the Gospel teacheth that man ou∣ght not to reuenge, that thereby is taken awaye and forbodden ciuill vengeaunce in iudgementes, and gouernaunce of commune welthes: wythoute the which mans estates can by no meanes endure. And this same false accusation doth he treate wyth many wordes, where as yet euerye Godlye study∣ant of true godlynesse doeth knowe that the sameHow venge∣aunce is for∣bodden. vengeaunce, whiche euery office vseth, is not for∣bydden in the Gospell: but only the foryng of pry∣uate vengeaunce, which is done withoute officers authoritye. These suttyll forged and slaunde∣rous reproches of Iulianus were very greueous to Christen men, insomuche that they prayed o∣penly against so pernisius hostilitie of the Gospell.
And therfore whan he was gone into Persya, he was slayne in a wyldernesse. It is wrytten thatThe death of Iulianus is an exam∣plo venge∣nce. whan he was wounded, and laye vpon the ground dyenge, he shulde haue taken hys hande fulle of bloude, and castynge towarde heauen, to haue sayde: Thou Galylean hast vanquyshed at the laste▪ Meanynge Christe, whome he called a Ga∣lylean. Therfore it is come by Iulyanus vngodly∣nesse, that the Empyre is remoued and transla∣ted from the mooste noble stocke of Constanty∣nus. The yeare of Christe .CCC. lxvii IOuinyanus the ▪xl. Emperoure raygned se∣uen monethes. It was a noble prince of god∣lynesse.Ionus a godly Em¦peroure. He called agayne the bishops that were bannyshed by Constantyus and Iulyanus: he commaunded also the tythes to be payed to the churches. He was taken wythan ague gotten by ouermuche weerynesse of trauaylle, whereof he dyed. The yeare of Christe .CCC. lxviii VAlentynianus the .xli. Emperoure raygned twelue yeares. He ordeyned hys brother Valens a companion in the empyre. Valens ruled in the Easte, Valentinyanus went into the Weste, Ether of them was a Christian. Valentiny∣anus had ben a captayne of the louldyours vnder Iulianus: but he forsoke him, because he wolde notValentinia∣nus eth a then prest a blow. forsake ye integrity or soundnesse of Christen religi¦on: beside also because he had geuen a Heithen prest a blowe, by whom he was biddē to do sacrificy with
reachynge hym water of Idolatrye, whan he ta∣ryed for the commynge of Iulyanus. But God recompensed hym afterwarde wyth the honoure where he came to, for the iniurye that Iulyanus dyd hym. He had greate warres in Germany he subdued the Saxons and Burgunnyons: ForBurgunni∣ons be Sx∣os. they also are counted amonge the Saxons, whiche aboute that tyme went by the floude Rhee. And though they were vanquyshed by Valentinian yet afterwarde recouerynge strenghte, they passed the Rhene, and toke in these contryes, whych yet he∣therto are called Burgundy. But of these shall we speake hereafter. VAlens raygned after his brothers death twoValens  Arria. yeare. He was a defender of Arrias heresy. But for thys vngodlynesse was he punished, whan he was layne by the Gotthyes by Constan∣tinople. For whan Valens beinge put to flyghteAn example of venge∣aunce. gat hym into a lytle towne, the Gotthyes set it on fyre, and burnt hym. Whan Valens was deade, the Gotthyes dyd muche harme to them of Con∣stantynople: but the quene Valens wedowe, ge∣uynge them large mony refrayned them from the destructyon of it. Whan Liberius was dead, Damasus was made the xxxix. byshoppe of Rome. By this man was S. Hierome in his youth lyke a notarye.S. Ierome was notarye to Damasus After Damasus was Siricius bysh. the xl. The yeare of Christe .CCC. lxxxiii. GRatyanus the xlii. Emperoure raygnedGratianus. after the deathe of Valens syxe yeares. This same was the eldest sonne of Valenty∣nianus,
and taken in the felowshype of the empyre, by hys fathers lyfe. But whan the father was deade, he toke for hys companyon into the empyre hys yonger brother Valentinianus. But seynge the empyre was here and there troubled by reason of many vproures, nether couldbe gouerned with∣out some sage and fortunable prince, he chose The∣odosyus for a companion in the empyre, and senteTheodosius ercōth thes. hym into the Easte, where he ouercame the Got∣thyes by Constantynople, and droue them out of Thracya. Gratyanus was slayne by intrappe in Fraunce of hys gouernoure Maximus, who made hymselfe Emperour by tyranny. Gratyanus was a prince excellente both in honestye and learnynge, and a true maynteyner of Christen relygyon: he sent the knowledge of his fayth in wrytyng to. S. Ambrose. Valentinianus hys brother was also slayne by a trayne of hys gouernoure Arbogastes: but Theodosyus gatheryng a greate army, ouer∣threw & tes es of y both Maximus and Arbogastes. Maxi∣mus beynge taken, was put to execucyon. Arbo∣gastes slew hymselfe. Wherfore Theodosius had the Empyre alone. The yeare of Christe .CCC. lxxxviij. THeodosyus the xliij. Emperour raygned af∣terTheodosius that Gratianus was slayn by Maximus xi. yeares. He was a spanyarde, and set all the Empyre in quyet, from Germany vntil Egipt. He was fyrst in Germany, but beynge called into Thracya by Gracyanus, afterwarde was Styl∣licoStillico. sent in to Germany by Theodosyus, who com¦pelled the Frankes and Saxons to kepe peace.
Besides this restored he peace also to the church:The godly∣nesse of The¦odosius to∣warde the churche. He gathered commune conuencyous, and willed the doctrine of relygyon to be publyshed in all con∣tryes. S. Ambrose bewayled his death, & amonge other wordes he sayeth: I loued the man whan he☜ dyed: for he was more combred for the state of the churches, than for hys owne daungers. To be combred so greatly wyth cares for the relygyon, that be verily true vertues worthy for goode prin∣ces. Anastasius the fyrst of that name the .xli. bysh. of Rome succeded Syricus. Innocentius the fyrst of that name the xlii bysh. of Rome succeded Anastasius. Of Pelagius the heretike. IN the tyme of thys byshop of Rome, onePelagius an heretyke in Britanne. Pelagius liued in Britanne. The same taughte, that we are not iustyfyed and saued by the mercy of God for Christes sake, wythout our deseruynge: but by oure owne workes and naturall vertues, is true and sounde ryghteousnesse purchased by God, and remyssy∣on ofsynnes optayned not by the fayth of Christe, but by oure workes and procuracyons. AgaynsteS. Augustin hath written against Pe∣lagius▪ thys man hath. S. Augustine wrytten moost sub∣stancially, and hath bickered fearcely wyth this sentence, and hath defended it agaynst hym, that we are saued by fayth wythout oure deseruynge, and that we optayne remyssyon ofsynnes by the mercy of God only, yf we do truste to it. For yf remyssyon or forgeuenesse of synnes came by
oure workes, the conscience should neuer be in qu∣er and assured, but should alwaye be in doubte: For mans endeuoure is to weake, than that God be∣ynge displeased, can be apeased therewyth, and the drede of death taken awaye. Neuerthelesse God requyreth of vs obedience and good worckes and that the conscyences be sure, we doo please God, that he wyll heare them that call vpon hym, and saue vs. Howbeit that thys doth not stande in the worthynesse of oure worckes: but in the promyse and mercy of God. Thys mynde of S. Augustyne whan it is knowen, doth brynge greate comfort to the consciences of the godlye, and teacheth what the true fayth is, and that God in the meane sea∣son requireth good workes of vs. The same veryly doth he requyre of vs: but by fayeth onely wyll he haue vs to receaue the forgeuenesse ofsynne, with∣out regarde of oure deseruynges. The doctryne of Pelagius is condempned in some councels of our tyme. The spoylyng of the fourth Monarchy. The yeare of Christ, CCC. xviij. ARcadius the sonne of Theodosius raignedArcadius. thyrtene yeare in the East at Constantinople. Honorius hys brother raygned in the Weste wyth lyke authoritie nyne and twenty yeares▪Honorius. both whyle hys brother was alyue and whan he was deade: for whan Arcadius was deade, Hono∣rius was yet alyue.
Of the Gotthies. The yeare of Christe CCCC. v. The yeare of Rome M. C. lvii. The yeare of the worlde MMMM. CCC. xlix. ABout thys tyme came the Gotthy fyrste intoThe Got∣thies▪ came fyrst into Italy. Italy, wyth a greate and dredeful army. But for asmuche as euerye where is made muche mencyon of the Gotthyes▪ we shall here summare¦ly draw the histories of theyr of spryng and actes. The Gotthi, Vandali, Rugiani and Hunni be not estimed to be one people: but the Gotthi are Dutchmen out of the Ile Godtlande, which dwelt in a parte of Lislande and Littowe: For ether of these contryes lyeth ouer against Godtland by the seasyde. And therefore doth Procopius call them aryght Cimmeij and Gethe. These than in the time of the Romanes were gone into Thracia and Hungary, and the Romysh Emperours assayed to dryue them out agayne, but all was in vayne. In the rehearsall of Decius, haue we touched the be∣gynnyng of their history: For the fyrst great battail of the Romanes agaynst them was vnder Decius, wherein also Decius was slayne. But afterwarde though the Romane Emperours made the Got∣thies haue much ado: yet remayned they in Thra∣cia and Hungary, and in, Asia about Constantyno∣ple they toke in certayn contryes. It is sayde, thatGotthies in the halfe Ile Taurica. yet now adayes dwell Gotthy in the half Ile Tau¦rica, which speake Dutche, and call themselus Got¦thi. Howbeit they lefte Hungarye and also Thracia so at the laste, that of theyr free wyll they
went fyrst into Italy, and afterward into Spayn: Afterwarde were the rest of the Gotthies destro∣yed by the Vandalyes and Hunmes commyng out of Scythya. The Hunny made theyr dwellinge place in Hungary. But the contryes that lye part∣ly vnder, partly aboute Hungary, haue the Van∣daly taken in. But in the tyme of Arcadius and Honorius are the Gotthy come into Italy. The mooste noble Emperoure Theodosius ordeined to his sonnesTheodosius two capitaines Rufinus and Stillico, and wylled them to care for the Emperours yong sonnes: but the one was disloyal to hys lorde. Rufinus was of Gallia: the same enticed the Gotthies against Arca¦dius, and hoped to optayne the kyngdome by that meane: but he was frustrated of his purpose, for he was slaine by Stillico. As for Stillico was a Van¦dale:Stillico. and whan some of the Gotthi were come a∣gaynst Arcadius, Stillico broughte to passe, that the Gotthi which Theodosius hadde taken in wa∣ges, were letten go. Beside that did Stillico sett the Vandalies against the Gotthies: and so whan the Gotthies were fyrste angered thorough Rufinus, and than chafed by Stillico, their kinge Radagasus brought two hundreth thousand Got∣thiesRadagasus. into Italy the same yeare that we haue speci∣fied a fore. And as histories do make mencion here, that at Rome wer great cōplaintes against Christ. because that so lamentable decaye of the empyre they supposed to come of the despisynge of the god∣des, and small regarde of the worshyppe and ho∣nour of the former religion. As for Stillico van∣quished
and ouercame Radagasus and hys hoost in the straytes comminge from the citye Florence, goynge to Apenninum. This is the fyrst history of the Gotthies in Italy.Alaricus. After Radagasus came another hooste of Got∣thies into Italy, whose captayne was Alaricus. With the same dyd Honorius agree, that he should depart out of Italy, & go into Gallia, the whyche at that tyme was awaystynge of y• Frankes, Burgun¦dions & Vandales: insomuche that Honorius mis∣trusted he could kepe Gallia no lenger: & therefore thought he to bringe to passe, that the Barbarians shuld stryue among thēselues for it. But what hap¦pened? Whan Alaricus taketh his yourney vpon him, Stillico doth fall vpon him vnwarres, vpon Easter daye, whyle the truce did yet last. The next day after, doth he lykewise wyth an appointed ar∣my ouerthrowe and vanquyshe Stillico, and being angry vpō him, he besyeged Rome. Honorius was at Rauenna, & caused Stillico to be putt to death, as one y• had not done faithfully, & willed ye empyre to be taken frō Honorius & to be geuen ouer to him. Wherfore there was now no captayne mete to de∣lyuer the citye of Rome from the syege. TherforeAlaricus wynneth Rome. dyd Alaricus take in Rome after two yeres syege: and that was about the xv. yeare of Honorius, the foure hundreth and twelft yeare of Christ, and the thousand, hundreth and thre score and fourth yere after the building of Rome.the .xij. ra∣uens or raue∣nous beastes whiche Ro∣mulus sawe. That Var ro writeth of the xij. rauens, whiche Romulus sawe, to signify, that Rome should last a thousand and two hundreth yeares, though thys
nombre of the yeares be not farre from this reke∣ning: yet I suppose their interpretation rather toTotilas. pertayne to Totilas, who afterwarde in the tyme of Iustinianus dyd set Rome in fyre, & wholy spoy∣led it, and that was an hundreth and syxe and thyr∣ty yeares after Alaricus. For Alaricus dyd not spoyle the citie, but rather gaue a commaundement that they should be spared, whyche fled to the tem∣ples of the Christians, Alaricus drue back agayne out of the citie and not longe after dyed. Whan heAtaulphus. was deade, Ataulphus was made kyng of the Got¦thies: the same came agayne to Rome, and takynge to wyfe Placidia Honorius syster, beynge pacified by her, he spared Rome, and wente into Fraunce, and afterwarde into Spayne: and of this wyse did finally the Gotthies leaue Italye, and went into Spayne. For Alaricus had before inuaded y• Spa¦niardes, & the Gotthies remaining in Spayne af∣terward, had ye dominion ther. The Vandali came into Spayne, & after that the Suein: but the Got∣thies remaining ther, the Vandali came into Aphri¦ca. Of these Gotthies are borne the Christē kingesThe kynges of Spayne are sprong of y• Gotthies. in Spayne, of whom hath his of springe the most fa¦mous Emperoure that now is, Charles the fyft of y• name. For though y• Sarraceni inuaded Spaine afterward, & became mighty in it, yet could thei not destroy the residue of the other kinges of y• linage. The yeare of Christe .CCCC. lvi. The yeare of Rome. M. CC. vij. came out of Aphrica to Rome Genserichus the Vandall, and spoiled the citye haynously. But what was y• causeGenserichus of Genserichus comminge, shall we shew, whan we
shall haue occasyon to treate of the Vandalies. Dietrichus of Berna.Some call him Theo∣dericus, some Titri∣cus of e∣rona. Othacarus. THe Gotthies came nomore into Italy af∣terward, saue in the tyme of Zeno the Em¦peroure, whan Othacarus was become mighty at Rome. The same was a Barba¦rian, borne in Rugia, & was a souldiour vnder Au∣gustulus, & being become puissaunt by that meanes he vsed great tyranny at Rome: insomuch ye the Ro¦manes required ayde against him: Than was sentDietrichus of Berna. by Leno into Italy Dietrichus surnamed of Ber∣na. The same slayenge Othacarus, raigned two & thyrty yeares in Italy: he loued peace out of mea∣sure, and had most deserued to haue the fauoure of Italy, insomuch, that as histories do make menciō, Italy neuer had a foren prince more frendelier and gentlyer. He gaue also much goodes to the chur∣ches vse, to entertayne the ministers of the word, & to mainteyne the doctrine of religion. But he was infect with the heresy of Arrius, as also the reste ofThe Got∣thies were Arrians. y• Gotthies. For whan y• Gotthies required of Va∣lens ye Emperours prestes, of whom they might be instructed in yt Christen religion, he sent them Arri∣an doctors. Howbeit y• most noble vertues of this Dietrichus deserued those praises, which cōmonly are songe in those dityes as are vsed now adayes. In thē is made mencion of giauntes, which signifi∣eth the Barbarous, whō Dietrichus hath vanqui∣shed & slayne. He is surnamed of Berna, because he was wonte to be muche at Verone wyth the court. Besydes this man was also another Dietri∣chus
a Gotthian lykewyse, by whose valiauntnesse Attila was slayne, but he dyed in the same felde. HeAttila. was so great a man, that besyde him, noman coulde lyghtely haue enterprysed oughte against Attila. The same Dietrichus was not surnamed of Ber∣na, but he was his cosyn. He was fyue and forty yeare before the tyme of Dietrichus of Berna. Kynges of the Gotthies in the West in Spayne. AlaricusThe Weste Gotthies. Ataulphus Mallia Kynges of the Got¦thies in the East in Hungary. DietrichusThe East Gotth. Hermerichus Ditmarus Dietrichus of BernaHimelsuita. Adelrichus. HImelsuitha the doughter of Dietrichus of Berna had a sonne called Adelrichus: the∣same raygned eight yeres at Rome in Italy after the death of Dietrichus of Berna, and the mo¦ther ruled with great praise. Whan her sonne was deade, she delyuered the gouernaunce to her ne∣phew Theodatus: but the same not remembrynge the benefyte that he had optayned, caused by a trayne her to be slayn, in the tyme of Iustinian the Emperoure. Dietrichus of Berna had mo dough∣tersAn example of distoyalty. besydes this: he had also geuen hys systers doughter in mariage to the kynge of Thuringen: whyche thynge I would not passeouer here, with∣out the syngular prayse and commendacyon of the princes of Thuringen. THeodatus raigned ii. yeres, & was worthely punished. For whan the moost honeste queneTheodatus.
Himelsuith a had commended herselfe and her sōne to. Iustinian the Emperoure, Iustinian toke an oc∣casion to reuenge the murther, and sent Bellisarius into Italy against the Gotthies. Now was Theo∣datus suspected, because he withstode not Bellisa∣rius, as though he would betray the Gotthies: theAn example of vengeaūce Witichus. whiche Gotthies made Wittichus kyng, by whose commaundement was Theodatus slayne. VVitichus reigned thre yeares. Against hym warred Bellisarius with greate policy: For Wittichus had an appoynted army of more then twoo hundreth thousand men. Bellisarius kept hymselfe within the walles of Rome, whome Wittichus besyeged a whole yeare, and there was a great derth, not onely at Rome, but also in al Ita∣ly. But as the Gotthies fled and strayed here and there without order, by reason of the great derth. Bellisarius folowed vpon them and ouerthrue thē and enclosyng in Wittichus by an intrap, toke him. But in y• meane seasō could not the Gotthies be vt∣terly weded out, but Iustinianus making peace wt them, graunted them to dwell in the contreis from the Alpes, vntyll the ryuer Padus, nether shoulde passe these bondes. He called Bellisarius back agayne: for he feared, lest he being made Emperour, he should take to hym the empyre of Italy: though Bellisarius trustyd in his affayres, went not about suche thynges. Wherfore beyng returned to Con∣stantinople, he brought Wittichus and other of the greatest nobilitie prysoners with hym in a greate triumphe. Totilas was made king of the Gotthies after the depar∣
THus was Rome foure tymes taken of the Gotthies and Vandalies within an hundreth and nyne and thyrty ye∣res. First by Alaricus, vnder the Em∣perour Honorius. The yere of Christ .CCCC. xij. After that by Genserichus the Vandal in the ty∣me of Martianus. The yeare of Christe .CCCC. lvi. THyrdly by Totilas kyng of the Gotthies: and this oppression of the citie was the moste he∣uiest of all. For she was both taken and burnt the .xxi. yeare of Iustinianus: the yeare after the buyldyng of her a thousand, and thre hundreth. The yeare of Christ .CCCCC. xlviij. Fourthly, the third yeare after this destruction. The yeare of Christe .CCCCC. li. After this spoylyng beganne Totilas to restore agayne the citie of Rome, and suffered the cytesens to returne agayne into her. But what fauoure he shewed, and how gently he behaued hymselfe, wyt∣nesse the wordes that are written concernyng hys frendlynesse, that he bare suche an affection toward his subiects, and specially the Romanes, as becom∣meth a father to haue toward his chyldren: and it is sayde that Totilas learned by saynt Benets doc∣trineTotilas was h of S. e. and admonition to beare rule of that sorte. Afterwarde sent Iustinianus a prince of syngu∣lare wysdom, called Narses, into Italy against To∣tilas. The same called the Lombardes to ayde him.Narses. The same were Saxons, whiche with appoynted armies had brought themselues to the coastes of
Austria: the same brought Narses into Italy, and by their ayde ouercame he Totilas, and after ward Teia, whiche was the last kyng of the Gotthies inTeia. Italy. And this is the ende of the Gotthies kyng∣dome by the Italians, whiche had last sence Dietri∣chus of Berna vntyll Teia thre score yeares. That Dietrichus, Totila and Teia were both very wyse and doughty princes, testifye their dedes and noble actes, insomuche that if ye wyl esteme them by their vertues, they ought not to be called Barbarians. When the Gotthies were ouercome the power and rychesse of the Lombardes beganne to growe, and gatte one of the kyngdomes of Italy: howbeit they possessed not whole Italy, but onely that part of I∣taly that yet is called Lombardy. The kyngdomeLombardy. of Lombardy lasted vntyll the tyme of Carolus ma¦gnus. Though the Gotthies were dryuen out of Italy, yet were they myghty in Spayne, and ruled there vntyll this oure tyme. And of this wyse wasWhē Spain and parte of Fraūce was trāslated frō the empyre. at the last Spayne and part of Fraunce translated from the empyre of Rome vnder Homorius. As for Italy was restored to his tranquilitie while Hono∣rius lyued yet. For the Gotthies drue partly into Lombardy, partly into Spayne: besyde this were the Frankes myghty in Fraunce. After Innocentius was Sosimus made the xliiij. byshop of Rome. Bonifacius the first of that name and xlv. byshop of Rome succeded Sosimus. After Bonifacius death was Celestinus the first of the name made byshop of Rome. The yere of Christe .CCCC. xxvij.
THeodosius the yonger the sonne of ArcadiusTheodosius the younger. the .xlv. Emperoure reigned at Constantino∣ple seuen and twenty yeares after the death of Honorius. He made Valentinian the sonne of Con∣stantius and Placidia, whiche was the daughter of Theodosius, fellow in the Easte empyre. Of the Vandalies. IN the tyme of this Theodosius the yereWhan the Vandali ca∣ into A∣phrica. of Christ, CCCC. xxxiij. came the Vādali into Aphrica by this occasion. Thos two capitaines of the Romanes hated eche o∣ther, and fought other whiles with playn fielddes. Wherfore the one, called bonifatis, entyced busely the Vandalies that were in Spayne at that tyme to come into Aphrica, which thyng they did gladly. For the Gotthi beyng myghty in Spayne, coulde not suffre the Vādalies. For (as we shewed before) the Vandalies moued by Stillico against the Got∣thies, toke in the contreis that be about Hungary, namely Walachia & Illyricus, where the Gotthies dwelt afore. Besyde that were they also in Germa¦ny, from whence as they went into Fraūce, they did much hurte: howbeit they were driuen out of Fraū∣ce by the Frankes and Gotthies. Afterward beyng come into Spayne, they vere constrayned to fyght agayne with the Gotthies: but in Aphrica beganne the power of the Vandalies to growe and encrease S. Augustine also died about that time, when Gen¦serichus. Augustin kyng of the Vandalies besieged the towne Hippo, wherein. S. Augustine was byshop.Hippo. When Valentintanus was dead, one Maximus
made hymselfe Emperoure at Rome of his owne mynde. But the quene Edoxia, because she would haue the heires that were left to succede in the em∣pyre, sought ayde by Genserichus againste Maxi∣mus, by whose helpe the citie of Rome was taken & spoyled. But the Vandall vsed a Vandalians faith∣fulnesseA Vandaliā faythfulnesse and stedfastnesse with the quene: for he lede her, with her two daughters away with hym intoAn example of dystopate Aphrica prysoner. For so doth it somtyme befall, when we call foren ayde to defende oure goodes. Howbeit afterwarde vnder Iustinianus, though the Vandalies were not vtterly roted out in Aphri¦ca: yet were they brought to suche strayghtnesse, that they could neuer floryshe any more. For Geli∣merus the kyng was taken by Bellisarius, & Aphri¦ca beyng subdued, obeyed the Empyre agayne. But not lōg after began the Saracens to haue dominiō in Aphrica. Let this suffise to speke of the Vādalies Of the Boemes. IT is also to be noted, that about this timeWhan y• Vā¦dali came first into Germa∣ny. came fyrst of all in Germany the Vandali, wherein they haue yet a great part nowe a dayes, namely the kyngdom of Boeme, whiche was in tymes past part of Germany: whichThe Boemes are Germa∣nes. the word Boeme, which is a Germane worde doth testifie sufficiently, whiche was before the Vandali came into these countreis. The worde hath his syg¦nificacion of the Bauaries or Beyers, to whō it was wont to be subiect, wherfore it is properly called Bo¦ienheim. Nether wyll the Vandali of Boeme be cal¦led Boemes, but zeski, after their capitayne, by
whose guyde they were fyrst brought into Boeme. But these auncient Boemes, the Germanes, were in greate admiracion and confederacion with the Romanes, and by Cornelius Tacitus the history writer they are highly praised. By this occasiō also is Germany translated from the Roman empyresGermany is frō . monarchy. For in low Germany were the Frankes puyssaunt, in hygh Germany Alemanni, and in Boe¦me the Vandali. But what is happened to Boeme afterward, and whan it was subdued again by the Germane Emperoures, that shall we shewe in the histories of the Emperours: for there shall we shew some other thynges of the chaunge of the thynges of Germany. The yere of Christ .CCCC. liiij. VVhen Theodosius the younger was deade,. reigned Valentimanus the .xlvi. Emperour in the Weste, fyue yeares, and whyle Theodo¦sius liued, reigned he fyue and twenty yeres. But after Theodosius death was the .xlvii. Emperour in the Easte Martianus. In his tyme was the hor∣rible settyng forth of Attila. Of Attila. FIrst of all came into Hungarye the Got∣thies afterward the Vandali, last of al the Hūni, and these last kept the lande, of whō it is called Hungary. This cruell peopleThe callyng of Hungary.  in dedes of Attila. dyd moste mischefe nerehand to all Europa. Attila brought an army of three hundreth thousande into Germany, and toke in many myghty cities, among the whiche was Basil, Ausborowe, Strasborowe,
Wormes, Coelen, and many other cities. Goynge forth from thence into Fraūce, toke the kyng of the Bourgunyons, he besieged the citie Aureola, and entended to vsurpe the dominion of whole Europa At that tyme was in the hether part of Fraunce whiche the Romane Emperours kept, a Romane captaine, called Aetius: the same made a confedera∣cionAetius. with the Frankes and Gotthies, that with ly∣ke hande they should resiste the moste cruell tyraūt. But Attila, because he was afrayed for the power of the Gotthies he procured by Dietrichus theyr kyng, that they should not ayde the Romanes: but after their singular constance refused the Gotthies al maner of frendshyp or allegeaunce with the Bar¦barous tyraunt. Wherefore both hostes met at To∣louseThe battaill with Attila by Tolouse. in Fraunce: on the Romane syde Aetius, the Gotthi and Frankes, and of the other syde Attila. And histories make mencion, that in the West came neuer so great an hoost and multitude together, as at that tyme. The battaill lasted from the Sunne rysyng, vntyll nyght. At the last Attila beyng driuē to the flyght, lost a hundreth and foure score thou∣sand men: he himselfe also was driuen to such strait∣nesse, that he had nearehande slayne hymselfe. And though Aetius, the Frankes and the Gotthies had the victory, yet dyed Dietrichus kyng of the Got∣thies in that battayll. The sonne would haue reuē∣ged the fathers death, and entended to gather an army, and persue Attila, and to destroie the resydue of his hoost: and would vndoubtedly haue done it had he not chaunged his mynde through the coun∣saill of Aetius. But that counsaill of Aetius was
nought, for Attila myght at that tyme haue bene o∣uer come with a small army. But afterward beyng returned into Hungary, restoring his host, & recoue¦ryng strength, he inuaded Italy, taking in the cities from the first entry of Italy, vntyl the moūtayn Ap¦penninus. Then Leo the byshop of Rome metyng hym, knelyng besought hym, that he would go back again. It is reported y• Attila shuld haue said, he saw the image of a man standing by the byshop, threate∣ning him with a drawen sworde, & he being afraied, promised to go backe again. Whē he was come againath o  The  of Au The urge of God. into Hungary, he made a great wedding, and being the fyrst nyght sore dronken, dyed a certaine death. Of this wyse died this tyraunt, that was not asha¦med to call hymselfe thescourge of God. Venice. AT this tyme was Venice the citie builded in the sea, where the best of Italy fled for feare of Attila. After Celestinus was Xystus made the xlvij. byshop of Rome, the third of that name. After Xystus succeded Leo the .xlviij. byshop the fyrst of that name. When Leo was deade, Hilarius was made the xlix. byshop of Rome. Valentinianus the Emperoure caused Aetius toh . be put to death, because he suspected hym to couet y• empyre. But this is the worldes reward forsoth, for the great valiauntnesses. Stillico Aetius & af∣terward Bellisarius were most excellēt captaines. Nether were in the empyre any els, which resēbled the vertues and strength of the auncient Romanes
so well, as they: but they were not worthely rewar∣ded for suche desertes. Valentinianus demaunded of a Romane prince, whether Aetius were not wor¦thely punyshed? who said, he could not tell: but this was he sure, that the Emperour had with his left hande cut of hys ryght hande. After Valētinianus was the empire of Rome nere hand toren in peaces, & many called thē Emperours in Italy. Yet in ye meane season remained y• maistie of an Emperours name by them of Cōstantinople, & afterwarde restored Iustinianus the West empyre by Bellisarius & Narses. But after that Valētinia∣nus was deade, many were called Emperours at once, & within .xx. yeres had Italy .ix. Emperours, whiche reigned by a succession, & the one was slayn of the other by occasion. The last was called Augu∣stulusAugustulus. (that is, litle noble or litle ful of maiesty.) The diminution of the name, was an euidence that the gouernaūce of the Augustus▪ should fayle in Italy: for with this Augustulus failed finally the empyre. Othacarus droue out the same Augustulus, agaīst whom was Dietrichus of Bernasent into Italy, in the tyme of zeno the Emperoure. Wherefore was the empire of Italy translated to the Gotthi, which afterward were suppressed vnder Iustinianus, as we haue sayde before. The yeare of Christe .CCCC. lx. LEo the fyrst of that name, the .xlviij. EmperourLeo. reigned syxten yeares. The same made hys sonne of lyke name Emperour, who because he was to yonge, fet the emperial crowne on zeno his stepfathers heade.
The yeare of Christe .CCCC. lxxvi. ZEno the .xlix. Emperoure reigned .xvii. yeares.en▪ The same sent Dietrichus of Berna into Italy, and made hym a Consul. For Dietrichus for his noble feates was he more renowmed, then for his own vertues. For he ruled not as an Augustus, but lyke a tyraunt. The yere of Christe .CCCC. xcii. Anastasius the .L. Emperoure reigned .xxvi.Anastasius. yeares. He died stricken with alyghtenyng. The yeare of Christ .CCCCC. xix. IVstinus the .li. Emperoure reigned nyne ye∣res.Iustinus. In his young age was he a swyneheerde, afterwarde became he a souldiour. But when Anastasius was dead, a gelded man that was ry∣che, gaue Iustinus muche mony, that with the con∣sent of the souldiours, the same gelded man myght be chosen Emperour. Howbeit Iustinus remem∣bryng hymselfe, brought to passe, that he hymselfe myght be made Emperour. The yeare of Christ .CCCCC. xxv. IVustinianus the .lii. Emperour reigned eight and thirty yeares. The same set his mynde to repaire the Empire. He was the syster sonne of the former Iustine, & by a syngular gift of God hadarius. res. he two captains or marshals, Bellisarius & Narses by whose aide he hath brought to passe most renow¦med thinges. Bellisarius ouercame y• Perses, & sa∣ued Syria, & restored Aphrica to ye empire: beside y• had he also great victories in Italy against the Got¦thies, whose power was afterwarde vtterly brou∣ght to nought by Narses. Iustinianus made peace
and amitie with the Frankes that were in Fraunce and graunted them frely to haue parte of Fraunce, as writeth Procopius the historyographer.The ciuill lawe is rest o¦red by iusti∣nianus. The dige∣stes. When euery where was peace made, Iustinia∣nus caused also the auncient lawes of the Romans to be gathered in bookes called Digesta, that is, bo∣kes appoynted in order: but the same bookes were darkened not long after Iustinianus, through la∣wes of the Lombardes and Frankes: neuerthelesse after a good season, were they brought too lyght agayne by. Lotharius a Saxon Emperour, of whō we shall speake hereafter. Howbeit, it were to long to reherse here how greatly this wysdome is to bee praysed in the Emperoure, who wylled that iustice and these lawes to be commonly executed, as by the iudgement of all sage and good men can nothynge be more honest, holy and more profitable. Of Bellisarius. I can not worthely ouerpasse that of Belil∣sarius, which he hath handled most faith∣fully in all thynges: he was a peace and concorde maker in all the worlde. He dyd wholy restore the empire of Rome, that was neare∣hand decaied and altogether weakened: to be short, he shewed hys lorde and all the worlde suche plea∣sure,☜ that none coulde be greater nor more prayse worthy: and if they were estymed aryght, they are hygh and incredible gyftes of God. But what thā∣kes the worlde geueth agayn for so great vertues, and suche gstes of God, that doth the example ofBellisarius was very Bellisarius declare sufficiently: whom Iustinianus
of a very lyght suspicion without cause, caused to put out his eye, and droue him away, that he shuld be fayne to seke his meate with beggyng: at the last dyed he lyke a moste wretched begger. Of this wy∣seThe ende∣f the . doth the deuel at the last set hym against the grea¦test men, whiche vndoubtedly hateth all Gods wor¦kes, and moste hygh vertues in men. Besyde thys dyd Narses also fall in the Empe∣rours indignacion, but he woulde not returne to Constantinople: For that he myght be more safe for daungers, he remayned all hys lyfe longe at Na∣ples in Italy. Simplicius the .l. bysh. of Ro. succeded Hilarius. Felix the secōd of that name succeded Simplicius. After Felix was Gelasius the .lij. bysh. of Rome. Anastasius the seconde of that name was after Gelasius. After Anastasius was Symmachus the .liiij. by∣shop of Rome. In hys tyme was the fyrst trouble raysed for the per  of y•  of R chosyng of the byshop of Rome. For some woulde haue had one Laurentus, agaynst Symmachus▪ and thys stryfe was the cause of a greate slaughter at Rome. At the last did Dietrichus of Bernaswag this vproure. After Symmachus succeded Hormisda ye lv. bysh. Ioannes the first succeded Hormisda. Felix the thyrd the .lvii. bysh. was after Ioannes. Bonifacius the secōd the .lviii. bysh. succeded Felix Ioannes the second succeded Bonifacius. Agapetus the. l. byshop succeded Ioannes. This same optained of the Emperoure Iustinianus that
heretikes shuld not be brought to Constantinople. Syluerius the .lxi. bysh. succeded Agapetus. Vigilius was bysh. after Syluerius. Thissame was taken of Iustinianus, and vncourteously en∣treated, because he would not consent to the restitu¦cion of the bannyshed heretikes. Pelagius the first succeded after Vigelius in the tyme of Totilas. Ioānes the third was ye .lxiiij. bysh. after Pelagi{us}Wonders sene in Italy before Ma∣homet. In these tymes were sene very dredeful wōders in the skye, by the Italians. There were sene bur∣nyng battayls, Cometes. Besyde this also was Ro¦me nearehand drowned wyth the surroundyng of the Tyber. These tokens signified the decay of the Romane empyre and the Churche, the whiche en∣sued afterward. For not long after rose the Maho∣meticall pestilence. The yeare of Christ .CCCCC. lxvi.Iustinus. . IUstinus the second of that name, the .liij. Em∣peroure reygned ten yeares. He was Iustinia¦nus systers sonne. In his tyme toke in the Lō∣bardes parte of Italy to dwell in, whyche was the yeare of Christe .CCCCC. lxxij. The yeare of Christe .CCCCC. lxxvi.Tiberius. . TIberius the second of this name, the .liiij. Em¦peroure reigned seuen yeares. He was Iusti∣nus marshall, and was taken of hym for hys sonne and heyre of the empyre. He vanquyshed the Perses: but had no good fortune in Italy agaynst the Lombardes. Benedictus the .lxv. bysh. of Ro. succeded Pelagi{us} Pelagius the second was bysh. after Benedictus.
Of Mahomet and of the kyngdome of the Sarracens. The yeare of Christe vi. C. xxx. The yeare of Heraclius xv. The yeare of the worlde iiij. M. v. C. lxxiiii The yeare of Rome M. iii. C. lxxxii MAhomet auaunted hymselfe a prophet & also a king in Arabia, by the AgareniesMahomet  phet ▪ and Saraceus, & that by this occasion: The Agareny dwellinge in the entryng of Arabia, were alwaye geuen to robbery and exer¦cyse of warre. Whan they were now enticed with the Persianrō of Maho∣ by- warres, they receyued wages vnder Heraclius. And whan it was shewed them by ye Emperoures captaynes, they lokynge for no more wages, ray∣sed an vproure agaynst the Romane captayns. By reason of thys commune vproure beganne Maho∣mets power to encrease. For seynge the commune people coulde want no captayne, they dyd lyghte∣ly stycke to Mahomett, who passed all other for his greate ryches, and other syngular vertues. But that he myghte the more easely bryng the peoples maners into some certayne order, he purposed to make lawes, not only in ciuill matters, but also to bind the mindes of the cōmune people to a certaine and new forme of religion, that he might the better kepe them all in their duety, nother might ryse any occasion of disscucion. For he sawe that euery wher were sondry & disagreing mindes of the doctryn of religion. For ye concord of the Churches was spoy∣led
by sundery heresyes, and chefely wyth the wic∣ked learning of Arrius. But whan the consciences are tangled wyth errour, and the myndes wauer, than do they lightely suspect the doctrine of Christ, and be in shorte space dryuen hether and thether. Wherfore as mens myndes were thus relyng andThe fourme of Maho∣mets religiō. vncertayn, Mahomet hauyng gotten oportunitie, prescribed suche a forme of religion, wherein those heade chapters of the fayeth, that spake of Christe were past ouer, and that therefore, lest the doctrine of the fayth should more be broughte into doutfull disputatyons: but restynge only in the vnderstan∣dyng or capacyte of reason, myghte commaunde of courtesye of maners, and maner to lyue honestlye. Thys truely is acceptable to mens nature. Ther∣fore embraced thys doctryne the Gentyls, Iewes, Arrians and such as were deciuered from the Chri¦sten religion. For thys fayth semed to be alowable to euery man: Wherfore men of vnlyke kynred, vn∣lyke language▪ the one liuynge otherwyse than the other, it is vnpossyble to saye how easely they grew and increased in myght to resyst the Romanes va∣liauntly. For first began they to subdue Arabia andMahomet subdueth fyrst Arabia. part of Syria. For Damascus was Mahomets courte. Afterwarde became they myghty in Egipt also. Let thys suffyse brefely spoken of the begyn∣nyng of ye dredefull kyngdome of Mahomet, wher∣in raygned fyrst the Arabians & Egypcians, which called them Sultan or Souldan, that is, prince:Sultan or Souldan. afterward was the empyre brought to ye Turkes. As for ye kingdome is ye greatest part of Antichrist, & in the Prophetes are ye most certayne prophecies
of it, wherein voe are earnestlye warned of GodThe place in Daniel of Mahoet. to eschue thys pestylence. In Danyell is he payn∣ted of thys wyse: In that terryble beaste, whyche is the figure of the Romyshe empyre, doth growe a horne, throughe whose power are thre hornes pulled out, and hath eyes, and speaketh dredefull blasphemyes agaynst God. Thys horne is Ma∣homet: the eyes and dredeful blasphemies against God is the Alcoan and doctryne of Mahomette, whiche spred farther, than the dominio was. For neare hand all the East quarter is infect wyth that deelyshe doctryne. The thre hornes ignifye the hre kyngdomes Arabia, Sirya and Egyt which Mahomee had taken in. All those thinges she∣wed God before, that we beyng aduertised should not be offended at thys tyme. Also that we shulde not be ignorant, that it is he laste kyngdome, and that the daye of the laste dgement is to be loked for. The posteritye of Mahomet, not beynge con∣tent wyth the boundes of hys kyngdomes, stoue also wyth the Emperours of Constantinople, for the kingdome of Aa. Thys kyngdome of Mahomet was fyrste cal∣led the kyngdome of the Saacens. For thoughe ng∣ of he . he was an Agarene borne, yet chaunged he that name not wythoute a greate cause, for the promise made o Abraham in sriptre was made to the▪ so of Sara, and not of Agar. Now were the Agare∣y of Agar. But forasmuche as Mahomet vnder∣ne a color pretended that hys people were accep∣table to God, ye & to whom perteyned the promesse of the blessing, that they shuld haue dominion of the
world, (for he expounded all the promises of y• scrip¦ture carnally) chaungyng the name of set purpose, he called his people Saacens, as children of Sa¦ra, and not Agarens. These Saracens becameThe pow of the Sara∣cens. myghty, not only in Asia, but also in Aphrica. And from thence went they into Spayne also, and kep a greate parte of it a longe season. Into Italy haue they made many inuasyons also. Of the urkes begynnyng. THE cause of the comming of the Tur∣kesThe Tur∣kes were Tartares. out of Tartary into Asia was, that whan the Saracens warred against y• Perses, the Perses required ayde of the Turkes. As for these Turkes wer Tartares by the yll Caucasus. Thys happened not longe before Carous Caluus, about the yeare of Christ eyght hundreth thre score and ten. After thys assistaunce beganne the Turkes by lytle and yle to remayne in Asia, euen as it happeneth most commonly whan we call for foren helpe. But foras∣much as the Turkes were chefely geuen to warre∣faring, it came to passe, that the rule of the royalme came to their handes. And fyrst began Othoman∣nusOthoman∣nus y• Turk the Turke to excelle in power and myghte, in the tyme of Albert of Eastenriche the fyrst, whyche was sonne to Roduphus the Emperoure. Thys was about the thousand and thre hundreth yeare after Thristes incarnation. Now sence thys Otho∣mannusWhan the Turkes be∣gan to haue dominion. tyme, was Mahomets kyngdome chan∣ged into the name of y• Turkish empyre. It is wor∣thy to be noted here, that this present nacion of the Turkes began to subdue contryes, & to beare rule
in the yme of the fyrst Emperour of the astryh house: and it is to be hoped that it shalbe lykwyse repressed at the aste by an Emperoure of the same stocke of Eastryche. The figure of this Turkysh kyngdome is dri¦bed full of dredefulnesse in holy scripture, that we shuld not be ignoraunt that this were the deels kyngdom, and by whose power and prosperity we might not be with drawen, to deer from Christe to Mahomets vngodlynesse. Ezeche and▪ S. Ihon call the Turkes Gog and Magog. Gog, is called a ent: Magog▪ is the people with ou the tentes: for the Tartaryes wel in entes. And Ezechiel wreth plainly, that God fuffred the power of Gog o be augmented, because of peoples synnes Mahomet signifieth rage or indignation. ura signiyeth soud your or wayster. Me∣thodius called thys people Redde Iewes becase hy haue borowed some ceremonyes of y• Iewes▪ Nether were they the very Iewes, but were cal∣d the Red Iewes, ether because they were coue ous of man saughter and bloude, or els because ∣. Mahomet was born of Edom in Araba: for Edom signifieth reed. Methodius sayeth that Gog and Magog were closed in beyond the hylles Caspii: that is Caucasus, and that a oxe shal make them a passage. This ox is Mahmet: for beyng prouo∣kd by mahomets law, they became mighty and be¦gan to beare rle. We haued ared before how the Romane Mo¦narchy came to y• East▪ But now are y•
of Egypte, Syria Asia and Aphrica y he Mahometystes▪ vntyll finally the Turkes at hys yme haue taken and waysted Grece, and what more was restynge. Deus dedit the, xxi. ish. of Rome succeded Bo¦ifacius▪ in the tyme of Heraclius. After him was bonifacius the fyft the lxxii. bysh In hys tyme was. S. Gallus. The same taughteWhat me S. Gallus preached in hygh Ger∣many. Christes doctrine in hygh Germany. After hym was byshop Honorius the fyrste, and in hys tyme was Mahomet. After him was Seuerinus y• lxxiiii. ish. of Rom. After him. succe. Ioannes the▪ iiii. the lxxv. bysh. After Ioannes was Theodorus a Greke y• lxxvi The yeare of Christe .vi. C. xli COnstantinus the sonne of Heraclius the▪ lviij.Constanti∣nus the son of Heraclius Emperour▪ raygned four monethes. His step mother Martyna poysonned hym, that she might make hyr sonne Emperoure. The yeare of Christe .vi. C. xli. HEracleonas the son of Heraclius the lix. Em¦perourHeraceona raygned two yeares after that Con¦stantinus was poysoned. But▪ whan y• senate and communalty of Cōstantinople had knowledge of the myscheos dede, risyng vp agaynst the mo∣ther example of venge∣ace. and son eracleonas, cuttynge of his nose, and hyr and the atryarkes tunges, who dyd ayde them to do the dede, bannyshed them all thre. The yeare of Christ .vi. C. xliii COnsans the sonne of Constantinus the lx.Constans. Emperoure raygned xxvii. yeares. He was ouercome in the East of y• Saraens in Italy
of the Lombardes. He was a mooste couetous manne, and at the laste was he slayne of hys owne men in a bath at Syracuse. Martinus the first succeded Theodorus in Con¦stans tyme. Eugenius the fyrst the lxxviii. byshopp succeded Martinus. Vitalianus the lxxix. bishop. succeded Eugenius. The yeare of Christe .vi. C. lxx. COnstantinus y• sonne of Constans the lxi. Em¦peroureConstanti∣nus. Pogonatus. raygned xvii. yeares. He was called Pogonatus, that is, bearded. He had warre with the Saracens seuen yeres, of the which were slayn in one feld thyrty thousande, insomuche that theyr power beyng weakened, they were constray¦ned to demaund peace with Constantyn: the which he graunted them, but vpon this condycyon, that they shuld geue to the Emperoure yearly tribute. After Vitalianus was Adrodatus made y• lxxx bys. of Ro. in y• time of Constantinus Pogonatus. Donus was the lxxxi. byshop after Adrodatus. Agatho succeded Donus. Leo the ij. succeded Agatho. Benedictus y• secōd was y• lxxxiiij bish. after Leo Ioannes the v. was the lxxxv. byshop after Be∣nedictus. Conon the lxxxvi. byshop succeded Ioannes. The yeare of Christ. vi C. lxxxvii. IVstinianus the son of Constantinus the lxii.Iustinianus Emperour raygned xvi. yeres, but not conty∣nually. For whan he had ruled ten yeare, he was put downe and driuen out by Leontius, who
raigned thre yeare after that Iustinianus was cha¦ced oute. Leontius was taken prisoner of Tiberi∣usLeontius. Tiberius Apsimarus. Apsimarus, who raigned after him seuen yere. But thenceforth was Iustinianus restored agayn, and dyd tread both vpon Leontius and Tiberius that were prisoners, beyng cast downe before hym, and caused openly to be cried out: Thou shalt treadPsal. xi. vpon the serpent aspis and the coccatryce. After∣ward were they beheaded. Sergius the lxxxvii. bishop of Rome was after Conon, and than was great dissencion for the elec∣tion.Beda in En∣glande. In his tyme lyued Beda in England. Ioannes y• vi. was after Sergius y• lxxxviij. bish Ioannes the vii. was after Ioannes the vi. Zosimus the xc. bysh. succeded Ioannes the vii. Constantinus was byshop after Zosimus. The yeare of Christe vij. C. xiii. PHilippus Bardesanes y• lxv. Emperour raig¦nedPhilippus Bardesanes. one yeare and sixe monethes: Beyng ta¦ken of his marshall, was depriued of the Em∣pyre, and hys eyen put out. The yeare of Christe vii C. xv. ANastasius the lxvi. Emperoure raygned one yeare & thre monethes. The same was also ta∣ken of his captayn Theodosius, and depriuedAnastasius was thrust into a mona∣stery. of the empyre: and that he mighte lyue solitarely, was he putt into a monastery. The yeare of Christe vii. C. xvii. THeodosius the lxvii Emperour raigned onlyTheodosius one yeare. He forsoke the empyre, whan he perceaued that he was inuaded of Leo, and mystrusted he coulde not kepe the Empyre.
He became a monke, and dyed in a priuate lyfe. The yeare of Christ .vij. C. xviij. LEo the .iij. the .lxviij. Emperour raigned twen¦tyLeo y• thyrde surnamed Iconoma∣chus. yeares. He was surnamed Iconomachus, that is, assaulter of ymages, because he had cō∣maunded to take oute of the tempels the ymages of saynctes, and to burne them. The citye Constan tinopole was besyeged viij. yeare longe of the Sa∣racens in his time, yt which suffered great misery in that fyege, by reason of the greate hunger and pe∣stilence. Yee and were also slayn of the Bulgaries, whych ayded the emperoure. Besydes that also were the Saracens shippes burnt, wyth fyre that was craftely made vnder the water. After Constantinus was Gregorius the second made the .xcij. byshop of Rome in the tyme of Leo Iconomachus. Gregorius the .vij. succeded Gregorius the .ij. The yeare of Christ .vii. C. xlii. COnstantinus the sonne of Leo, the .lxix. Em∣peroure the  was  Coprony∣mus. raygned thyrty yeare: he was surna∣med Copronymus, because that at his bapty∣synge, he dyd hys casement in the founte. He also was a destroyer of ymages. The yeare of Christ .vii. C. lxxvii. LEo the .iiij. the sonne of Copronymus the lxx.Leo y• fourth Emperour raygned fyue yeare. The yeare of Christ .vii. C. lxxxiii. Constanti∣nus Leo the hs sonn Irene. LOnstantinus Leo the fourth sonne the lxxi. Emperoure raygned wyth hys mother I∣rene ten yeares. She was of Athens, and ruled moost sagely, aboue
the vnderstandyng of woman kynne, and wyth the alowance of euery man. After her, raygned her son fyue yeares, she beynge put from the gouernaunce. But they of Constantinople not sufferyng hys wi∣ckednesse, called the mother agayne from the aexile, whych raygned after warde thre yeare. Of thys wyse were Irene and Constantinus gouernynge the empyre together xviij. yeares, vntyll the yeare of Christ .viij. C. and i. But though the Christen Emperours were all∣waye at Constantinople, whiche called themselues Emperours of Rome also, vntyll at the last, the ci∣tie was taken in of the Turkes: yet in ye meane sea∣son whan the power of the empyre began so to faid, that the Emperours were notable to defende no∣ther theyr tytle, nor Italy, the Romanes were con¦strayned to seke ayde at the Frankes, whose pow∣er was than the greatest. Wherefore came the ma∣iestie of the Emperours name to Carolus. And be∣cause oure Emperours haue alwaye maynteyned and defended Italy wyth stronge hande, we wyll aduysedly passe ouer here the Greke Emperours, (for some were tangled with want on pleasure, effe∣minate, and wholy vnapt to haue gouernaunce,) & recite orderly our Emperours, which are worthy to be cōmēded for their notable vertues & prowesses. Zacharias was the .xciiij. bish. after Gregori{us}. ye iij. This same wynkyng at the matter, was the olde Hilderichus kyng of Fraunce pryued of the empirePipinus. and put into a monastery, and Pipinus was made kyng in his stead. For all the power was come to ye princes, by reason the kynges were enpoueryshed.
In the tyme also of thys zachary dyd. S. Bonifa¦ciusWhat tyme S. Bonifa∣cius prea∣ched in Ger∣many. preache in Germany. Stephanus the ii. succeded zachary. The same prouoked Pipynus into Italy agaynste the Lom∣bardes, whose kynge he besyeged, and compelled him to require peace. Paulus the fyrste was after Stephanus the xcvi. byshop. Stephanus the thyrde was after Paulus. Ine for th eleccion of the bishop of Rome. hys tyme happened greate stryfes and rumors at Rome for the chosynge of theyr byshop. One Con∣stantynus was chosen byshop by force, and agayne putte downe, and all they that he had consecrated, were destitute and forsaken. Adrianus the fyrste succeded Stephanus. The same enticed Carolus the great to come into Italy agaynste Desiderius kynge of the Lombardes Leo the thyrde the .xcix. byshop folowed after Adrianus. Whan a seditious vproure was raysed against him at Rome, he fled to Carolus the great or Charlemayne, by whom he was restored. And the same ordeyned Charle∣mayne Emperoure, and crowned hym. ∵
¶ Of the Germanes Emperours. Charles the greate. The yeare of Christ viij. C. i. The yere of the worlde .iiij. M. vii. C. xlv The yeare of Rome .M. v. C. li. CArolus magnus was crowned Empe∣rourCarolus magnus. The begyn∣nyng of the translatyng the empyre to the Ger∣manes. of Leo the iij. the very Christmasse daye. Thys was the begynnynge of translatinge the empyre to the Germa∣nes, and by this translatynge happened vnto Ita∣ly and the Best kyngdome a moost mightye heade, and a moost sure fortresse. For though the Empe∣rours of Germany were not alway of lyke power, as in no kyngdome the kynges were alwaye of lyke power or lyke fortunate: yet in prowesse were they such somtyme, that they dyd rydde Italy out of daungers, and preserued not onely in the Weste quietnesse in the commune welth: but also kept the Christen religion sound in the churche. And if ye wyll ponder the feates dedes, and maners of oure Emperours, ye shall iudge them to haue ben excel∣lent wyse princes, and not barbarous, and in no∣thing to be estimed lesse, than those excellentand al∣lowable Emperours Augustus, Traianus, Adria∣nus and Constantinus: yee yf ye do aduisedly pon∣der all thynges, ye shall saye, that ther hath bene more honestye and modestye in oure Emperours, than in them. Thys shall ye fynde also, that ours haue enterprysed no warre of any ambicion or pri∣uate
profyte: but only of necessitie, to mayntayne re¦ligion, to defende the liberty of the empyre and the sauegarde of the subiectes. As for me, beynge certayne of myne owne vna∣blenesse, though I can not iudge nor speake of the vertues of greate men acrording to theyr worthy∣nesse: yt is my mynde to praise some princes aboue the other. For I iudge it to be pertaynynge to the duety of euery history wryter, that he do nowe and than turne asyde into the rehearsall of the most best vertues, and shewe them to the reader for a shewe as an example to folow. Now in mens assaires can nothinge e more honeste nor more pleasaunt, than the consyderacion and knowledge of princely ver∣tues in great men. Wherfore I woulde oure Ger∣mane Emperours were so set before the eyes of our Germanes, that they myght know theyr vertues, and wonder at them: wonder it is how greatly the same wolde helpe and further to the amendement, and also rayse a flame in the hartes of good men to folowe. In my iudgement are these princes doute∣lesse suche, whyche be worthy farre to be preferred before the auncient Romanes, whether ye wyll re∣garde wysedome, or strength, or finally the ende∣uour of honesty and modestye. The rehearsall of the Germane Emperours. Carolus magnus. Ludouicus pius the sonne of Carolus mag∣nus▪
After the syxe Saxons. Henricus the fyrste. Otho the greate. Otho the second. Otho the thyrd. Henricus y• .ij. which is buried at Bamberch. Lotharius the Saxon. Item these Frankes. Cunradus. Henricus the sonne of Cunradus. Item these Schwaben. Fridericus Barbarossa. Fridericus the second. Afterward Rodolphus. Sigismundus. Maximilianus. Of Germany, and occasyon of the kyng∣dome of the Frankes. ALl Germany was not subiecte to the em¦pyre, but had onely those contryes, that are betwene the Rene and the Danow. And much worke had the Emperoures, before oure nacion could be subdued and kept. For in the tyme of Augustus had Drusus war∣resBy whom Germany was vexed wyth war∣res, sence the tyme of Au∣gustus. and Germanicus, afterwarde Caius, and after him Vitellius, Domitianus. Traianus had subdu∣ed the lower Germany vntyll Moganus. Maxi∣minus was come vntyll Schwartzwald. Valeria∣nus was wyth an hoost in hygh Germany.
After hym vnder Galienus the Frankes beynge sett in a commotion, began to ryse: but by the Em∣peroures folowynge, were theyr violences some∣tyme assuaged. For Aurelianus vanquyshed them by Mayntz. Probus had many and noble victory∣es in lowe Germany. Constantinus buylded the citye Spyre. Iulianus, Valentinianus and Theo∣dosius dyd lykewyse subdue the Alemans & Fran∣kes, and the contries that lye by the Rhene, and toke in Schwaben land also. But after that the power of the Frankes and Alemans begonne to encrease, the Emperours re∣turnedThe of∣springe of y• Frankes not into Germany. Some fable diuersly of the fyrst begynnynge of the Frankes: but it is cer∣tayne, that they were hyghe Germanes in Augu∣stus tyme. For we haue no certaynty of the Ger∣manes estate out of histories before Augustus. But that the Frankes were in suche estimacion by the hygh Germanes, that it can easely be proued out of Strabo, who wrote an history in the tyme of Au∣guste, and warrefared wyth the Romanes. As for Strabo sayeth that the Frankes were ioynyng to the Vindelici, that is, Bayerlanders, vpon the which they border partly at thys tyme also. TheThe dedes of the Fran∣kes, and by what occasi∣on they de∣iuered frō the empyre. commotion of the Frankes beganne by thys occa∣syon: In the tyme of Galianus the Emperoure, was Posthumus captayne in Germany: the same was made Emperoure by the people for hys syngu¦lar honestye, and vertues in gouernynge the em∣pyre, Galienus in the meane season lyued in ydel∣nesse and pleasure at Rome. But whan Galienus hearde that Posthumus was made Emperoure,
he sent against hym an apointed army. Posthumus likewyse commaunded his men to be in a readinesse among the whiche were euen the Frankes the prin¦cipall. And though Posthumus was afterwarde slayne priuely by an intrap, yet the Frankes once prouoked to weapons, remayned alway in the set∣tyng forth to warre, and came downe from Moga∣nus to the Rene, and ouer the Rene toke they first the citie Trier from the Romanes, and afterwards went into fraunce. But after that they had foughtē against Attila with the Romanes, they were alway in great fauour wyth the Emperours, in so muche▪ that Iustinianus the Emperoure through a conue∣naunt made with the Frankes, suffred them to haue and inhabite that parte of Gallia, whiche at this ty∣meFrancia or Fraunce  part of Gal¦lia. is yet called Francia or Fraunce. Wherefore the Frankes toke in both the contreis of the Ryne, and parte of Fraunce and both the contreis were mayn∣teined by one common kyngly gouernaunce. The histories make euery where mencion of great pray∣ses of the Frankes, partely for their goodly polycy and prosperitie in gouernyng their kyngdome, but specially because they embraced the Christen religiō in the begynnyg of the kyngdome, and wylled it to be publyshed and spred abrode. In the meane tymeBy what or∣casion the Al¦manes decy∣uered from the emppre. dyd the Alemans decyuer from the Romyshe em∣pyre also. The Alemans were the hygh Germanes, whiche now are called Schwaben, Schweitzer & Baier. Therefore when the Romane Monarchy was sundered, then was Germany first deuyded inGermani is deuided in Al¦manes and  Frankes. Alemanes and Frankes. But in the time of Pipine, father to Charles the greate, became the Frankes
lordes of the Almaines: and therfore as the empyre was thus deuided, they called hygh Germany the Easte kyngdome, and lowe Germany wyth Fraun∣ce the West kyngdome: And by thys partynge of the kyngdomes remayne the names yett in Ger∣many. The elders of Charles the greate were princes of Germany and Lordes of the courte, and that more is, the chefe gouernours by the kynges of theThe elders of  y• greate were Grand may∣sters. Frankes, and by the commission of their office, were called Grande maysters. It is also sayed, that the∣same was theyr duchy & dominion by enheritaunce, where now is the countyshyp of Palatine about the Rene syde. For certayne it is, that the fyrst sprynge t Palatine  ha he greate of the stocke of the Palatine, commeth of Charles the greates yssue. But at the last, when the kyngly progeny decreassed and fayled by processe of tyme more and more, and that these princes became more myghtyer, it came topasse (by the consent of the by∣shop of Rome) that the gouernaunce of the kyng∣domePiping king of Germany and Fraūce. was brought ouer to the princes: and Pipi∣nus beyng made kyng of thys wyse gouerned both Germany and Fraunce. When Pipinus was deade, Charles surnamed the greate was kynge of the Frankes two and thyrty yeares before he was Em∣peroure, and after that he was made Emperoure he reygned fourtene yeares. Of this wyse reygned he both in the kingdome and empyre together .xlvi.Charles is borne in In∣gelheim. The dedes of Charles the greate. yeares, when they be counted together. He was boren in Ingelheim in the county of Palatine, not farre from the cytie Mentz. In the begynnynge of his reigne warred he agaynst the Saracens in
Gascon: afterward warred he about thirty yeares with the Saxons, the whiche he subdued at the last and made them to obeye the empyre, & embrace the Christē faith, besyde other many and great battails, whiche he had in the meane season also.Desiderius kyng of the Lombardes. Desiderius kyng of the Lombardes coueted the dominion of whole Italy, & goyng to Rome, caused some of the chefe cytesens to be put to death. Wher∣fore Adrianus the byshop of Rome sendyng ambas∣sadours to Charles, desyred he woulde come and rydde Italy and Rome out of daunger. (For Pipi∣nus the father of Charles had also before delyuered Rome from the tyranny of the Lombardes.) Char∣les goyng into Italy, besyeged Desiderius at Pa∣uye, and constrayned hym to yelde hymselfe. But when Charles perceaued in dede that the vprou∣ryshnacion of the Lombardes coulde not rest, (for he had assayed the matter with them afore also, that they beyng content with their borders, shoulde re∣mayne within their owne realme.) and that there myght be a sure peace thoroweout Italy. CharlesCharles op∣tayueth Lom∣bardy. toke in whole Lombardy, and in the same as in hys owne kyngdome set he gouernoures and capitay∣nes. As for Desidexius with his wyfe the quene & chyldren led he with hym prysoners, and commaun∣ded them to be kept at Ludick or Liege. Thys was the end of the kyngdome of the Lombardes in Italy, whiche had lasted two hundreth and thre ye∣res, from the yere of Christ .CCCCC. lxxij. when Iastinus reigned, vntyll the yeare of Christ .vij. C. lxxv. thys was the syxte yeare before Charles opteined the empyre. For though Charles was
gone to Rome in this settynge forth, and had set at quiet not onely Lombardy, but also that parte of I∣taly that is beiond Rome: yet would he not vsurpeThe mode∣s o Char∣. for hym the title of Imperiall maiestie, lest he should robbe the Grekes of their honoure and this digni∣tie. He graunteth the Emperours cities in Italy to enioye their former lybertie wythout any hynde∣raunce: but he kept the kyngdome of the Lombar∣des as his owne: for long ago was it not subiect to the Emperours. Tassilo duke of Baierland raysed warre againstTassilo duke of Baierland was ouerco∣me of Char∣. Charles, but he was ouercome of Charles the twē∣tieth yeare of his reigne, and takyng in the duchy. Tassilo wyth his sonne was put into a monastery. Nether did Charles vse so great rigour against his cosyn rashly: for Tassilo raysyng an vprour against hym afore, and taken to mercy, kept no promyse. Charles goyng to Rome the two and thirtieth yeare of his reigne, restored Leo the byshop of Ro∣me, against whome the Romanes had raysed vp∣ours, insomuche that the byshop was compelled to flye. But when now Charles erceyued certeynly, that no peace could be satteled in Italy, vntyll suche cyties in Italy as had fraunchyses graunted them, dyd ceasse to do all thynges accordyng to their ap∣petite, he was constrayned by necessitie to take to him the dominion of whole Italy. But he betoke to the byshop of Rome some cities and contreis, for the mayntenaunce of ministers in the churche. In the Christmasse nyght cryed the byshop of Rome: Char¦les to be Emperoure of Romanes, and alwaye full of maiestie. And it is sayde, that Charles shuld haue
aunswered to this: yf I had knowen that any suche thyng should haue happened to me, I would not ha∣ue entered into the temple. Nether would he accept the title of Emperoure, wythout the consent and a∣lowaunce of them of Constantinople. Wherefore I∣rēne the mother of Constantinus and Nicephorus consented that Charles should be Emperoure in theCharles was made Empe¦peroure of the West. West, to that dyd they consent frely: for these coun∣treis dyd not obey to the Emperours of Constanti∣nople, any more. But as sone as Charles was made Emperoure,The Hunga∣rians are as∣saulted with warre by Charles the greate. and that the state of Italy was nowe satled with great trauaile, he determined to warre vpon the Hungarians. And this warre lasted eight yeares, wherein the Hungarians were in a maner rooted out. He set also garnysons of Germanes in Hunga∣ry, to kepe the realme: by the whiche occasion do vn∣tyll this tyme Germanes dwel in the coastes of Hū∣gary, whiche is called Seuenburge. It is mencio∣nedTraslua∣nia or Sept castra called Seuenburg. in histories, that Charles brought great ryches out of Hungary, and that is lyke ynough: for the Hū¦garians had bene occupied in warrefarre and robbe¦ry aboue two hundreth yeares, they ledde prayes of al nacions nerehande, in the meane season was their realme inuaded of no foren naciōs: wherby no doubt were great and precious treasures founde by them. In the meane tyme dyd Charles, the sonne of Char¦les the great, subdue Bohemy, vanquyshyng LechoBohemy was ouercome wt Lecho theyr kynge. their kyng: and thus was charles at the last a moost myghty prince of all Italy, Fraunce, Germany, Bo∣hemy and Hungary, and brought the whole West empyre in a quiet estate, & kept it in the same. Wher∣fore
for these vertues, and thys strength of courage, whiche he vsed in all his enterpryses, is Charles worthy to be counted amonge these princes, which God hath now and than geuen to the worlde to re∣payre common welthes, iustice, equitie, shamefast∣nesse, ally to restore amonge men the bandes of modestie and common peace, as were in tymes past Dauid, Hercules, Cyrus, Alexander, Iulius, Augu∣stus, Constantinus, The odosis. In Charles affai∣res is chefely worthy to be noted, how kynges and great men make umors among them. For GodWhrfore monarches &  of God sendeth sometyme the chefe monarches to represse them. Euen as in oure tyme Charles the fyfte hath brydeled the excesse and want onesse of the Roma∣nes, and the Venetian power. But it is expedient for moste hygh princes to be excellent, not onely in feates of warre and handlyng of weapon: but also to enforme common welthes with honest lawes and dectrine of religion. And this was Charles chefe care. He caused some coun∣sails ded to be kept at Rome and Franckforde and some tyme in Fraunce. He founded also thre vniuersities to spreade abrode and maintayne the doctrine of Christenreligion, namely at Bonony in Italy, Pa∣ris in Fraunce and at Paduam Italy. In Germa∣ny dyd he lyke wyse founde many monasteries, for to teache youth in steade of scoles. Besyde thys dyd he set the lawe of the Frankes morder, and caused the bokes of the lawe to be written. For that olde lawe of the Romans was long before put out of re throug the Lombardes and Frankes. He caused also to gather together the olde histo∣ries
of the Germanes and songes, wherein it is said he had suche pleasure, that he learned them by rote. He was excellently well sene in the GermaneCharles the greate was learned in Greke & La∣tin. toungue and Latine: he coulde also speake Greke, for he herde the Greke messangers, and aunswered them in Greke: but in along and durable relaciō did he speake Latine. There are yet verses that be not greatly vnsemely, whiche is sayde he dyd make at the death of his cousin Roulande. In his olde age he gaue hymselfe to Astronomy. At diner and sup∣per at home delyted he in hearyng reade the bokes of saincte Augustine. In the temple dyd he syng the canonicall hou∣res and also lessons with the pristes, and he woulde other princes to do likewyse after his example, whō he prescribed lessons, which semeth to pertain to his and their amendemēt. For he was an exciding louer of christen doctrine. In all maners of liuyng dyd be haue hym so, as nomā might passe him in godlinesse. Beside this sent he succours of mony to the christiās in straunge contreis, and obteined by the Saracen kynges that the christians should be more easely en∣treated. He gaue the wyndes and monethes those names, whiche remayne yet now a dayes: so that by these thynges may easely be gathered, that thys prince was garnyshed of God with greate vertues and hygh happenesse by hys studyes, so that he may wor¦thely be surnamed great. When he was nowrenow¦med throughout all the worlde of all these vertues, peace stablyshed, y• lawes restored, the state of religiō set in order, because he might auoyde the occasion of
great euels, he appoynted hys sonne Lewis before hys death to be an heyre and successour in the em∣pyre, afterward dyed he at Aken the two and seuen∣tyeth yeare of his age. Before his death the brydge that was layde ouer the Rene by Mentz, burnt, whiche was made in the space of ten yeres, at Char∣leshe  by ▪ greate costes. Thys burnynge sygnyfyed, that Germany shoulde not long after be separated from Fraunce. Lewis the gentle, the second Empe∣roure of the Germanes. THe yeare of Christ .viij. C. xv. began Le∣wis the gentle to gouerne the empyre, he he ▪ reigned syx and twenty yeares. Charles had many chyldren, whiche dyed before the fathers deceasse. Lewis renewed the peace that his father had made with them of Constantinople in the begynnyng of hys reigne, and wylled it to be stablyshed. After hose he hys sonne Lotharius for. a party ruler in the empyre, that he shoulde rule in Italy. Beyng sent to Rome, he was crowned Em∣peroure of Paschalis byshop of Rome, and was cal∣led Augustus or full of maiestie. Sence that tyme kept Lewis a parliament at Aken, for the reforma∣tion of the state of the Churche: and he brought to pase wyth greate diligence, that to the ministers of the Churche shoulde bee geuen necessary relefe to maynteyne their lyues. An agrement was also ma∣de betwene hym and the byshop of Rome, that suche as came after them myght be sure, what part is per∣taynyng
to the byshop, and what to the empyre. Thys Godly or gentle Emperoure was takenLewis the gē¦tle is taken of hys sonne. prisoner of his sonne Lotharius, through the coun∣sayll of the Byshops and some princes, because he was afrayed lest by hys stepmothers inspiracion, hys father would remoue the empyre from hym to hys younger brother. But Lewis beyng delyue∣red returned to thempyres gouernaunce, and cau∣sed Lotharius hys sonne by force to go into Italy: but at the last was he reconciled wyth hys father agayne. After Leo was Stephanus the fourth madeSphanus was confir∣med of Le∣wis. the hundreth byshop of Rome. The same demaun∣ded the confirmacion of his byshopryke of Lewis the Emperoure. Paschalis the hundreth and one byshop of Ro. succeded Stephanus. Thyssame sent also for hys confirmacion to Lewis. Eugenius the .C. i. byshop. succeded Pascalis. Valentinus the .C. iij. byshop succeded Euge∣nius. Gregorius the .iiij. the .C. iiij. byshop succeded Valentinus. He refused to take the byshoprycke before he were confirmed of the Emperour Lewis. Lotharius the fyrst of thys name, the thyrde Germane Emperoure. THe yere of Christ .viij. C. xli. after ye death of Lewis the Godly or gentle reygned Lotharius hys sonne fyften yeares. But now hath the golden worlde of this pro∣genyThe brethren of Lotharius were the,  an end. Lotharius had many brethren, Lewis Germanicu and Charles the balde: amonge the
whiche was debate for the departynge, whereofwis, Germa¦nicus & Char¦l the balde. grewe no lesse greate then a dolefull warre. For in Fraunce dyd the brethren mete with suche a fygh∣tyng, that, (as histories recorde) the power of the Frākes was so febled, that afterward they could ne¦uer wholy recouer it. Lewis, Germanicus & Char∣les the balde had the ouerhand. After so great man∣slaughter, when truce was made amōg the princes, they fell to an atonement. Lewis had for his parte Germany, Schwaben, Bayerlande, Boheme, Eastē¦ryche, East Fraunce, Thuring, Saxen, and all that was vntil y• ryuer Rene. This Lewis is called the Germane kynge, and greate prayses are spoken ofThe dukes of the Fran∣kes  of ▪ hym. The residue of the dukes of the Frankes folo∣wyng are his successours in bloude. He brought Bo¦hemy also to receaue the Christen faith. Charles the balde optained by conuenant heredi¦tare the greatest part of Fraūce or Gallia, & the Frē∣che kynges folowyng haue their ofspringe of hym. Lotharius kept Italy, and Prouentz, & that part that hetherto is called Lothring or Lorain: and by. this man remained the hyghnesse of the Emperiall maiestie. By this occasion thefore was Gallia or Fraunce separated from Germany Lotharius toke afterwarde the gouernaunce of the empyre to his se¦cond sonne Lewis, and he beyng aged, went into a religion and became a monke. Not few Cometes were sene this yeare before this dissencion and warre of the brethren. After Gregory the .iiij. was Sergius the second made the .cv. byshop of Rome. The same was the first that chaunged his name: for it is sayde he was
called before Swines mouth. Of hym was LewisSwynes mouth was y• first that chaū¦ged his name Castel Angel the second the sonne of Lotharius crowned at Ro. Leo the .iiij. the .cvi. byshop succeded Sergius. The same buyldded Castel Angel at Rome. He was accused by Lotharius that he went about to optain the hyghnesse of the Emperiall maiestie from the Frankes, to the Grekes. Wherfore whē Lotharius was come to Rome, the byshop did declare hymselfe vngylty. After Leo was Iohannes the .viij. The same isIohānes. vi byshop of Ro¦me a woman said to be borne at Mentz, & that she was a woman. Benedictus the .iij. was made the .cvij. byshop of Rome after Iohannes the .viij. In his tyme were raysed greate stryfes and rumours for the election of the byshop of Rome, but Lotharius swaged them. Lewis the seconde, the fourth Ger∣mane Emperoure. THe yeare of Christe .viij. C. lvi. toke Le∣wis the .ij. the sonne of Lotharius the em¦pyre: he reigned twenty yeares. He re∣strayned the Saracens cōmyng into Ita¦lyLewis the. . is buried at Milane. with a greate violence, and ouercame them. When he had restored peace again in Italy, he died, and is buried at Milane. Nicolaus the fyrste the .cviij. byshop of Rome succeded Benedictus the .iij. Adrianus the .ij. chosen of the priestes and com∣mon people, succeded Nicolaus. Iohannes the .ix. was made the .cx. byshop after
Idrianus. The same by a conspiracy made wyth theThe disloyal¦te of the by∣shop of Ro. in transfer∣ryng the em¦pyre to Fren¦chemen. kynges of Gallia or Fraunce, endeuoured to trans∣ferre the maiesty of the empyre from the Germanes vpon Charles the balde, afterward vpō Lewis the stammerer his sonne: but the Germanes kept the empyre par force, whiche thynge we shall saye after∣warde. In the meane season that the byshop goeth aboute this, was he taken, but beyng escaped, he fled into Fraunce to Lewis the stammerer. Charles the bald of Fraunce. THe yeare of Christe, viij. C. lxxvj. cameCharles the balde. Charles the balde at Rome, and by the ayde of the byshop of Rome Iohannes the .ix. was made Emperoure. Char∣les the balde was Lotharius brother, sonne to Lewis the gentle, whose part in deuydyng became Fraunce or Gallia. Now went the byshop of Rome about, to transferre the maiesty of the Empyre from the Germanes, vnto the Fren∣chemen, but that the sonnes of Lewis woulde not suffe the Germanes. Which thyng when Charles the balde had herde, he threatened to bryng so ma∣ny hoostes of enemies ouer the Rene, that the hor∣ses drynkyng vp the Rene, the hoost should go tho∣row it drye shodde. O the ouerfolysh maners of theThe French nings Frenchemen. But they met hym at Colen with fyf∣ty thousand, where he was ouerthrowen of the two sonnes of Lewis the Germane, not farre from A∣bach. The next yeare after went Charles the balde in to Italy, where the two cosins the sonnes of Lewis
folowed hym. As he herde this, he was taken with a disease of a soden feare, and died. Yet in the meaneThe death of Charles the balde. season persysted byshop Iohannes in transferryng of the empyre, and willed the sonne of Charles the balde to succede in his fathers place. Wherfore he was taken at Rome of the Germane legates, and such as were of their partes: but escapyng their han¦des, he fled to the Frenche kyng, where he made Le¦wis the stammerer the sonne of Charles the balde Emperoure. This Lewis lyued nomore but twoo yeares after hys fathers deceasse. And of this wyse was this earnest couetyng come to an euell ende at the last for the Frenchemen, and also was the byshop frustrate of his false engines. Charles the grosse, the fyft Germane Emperoure. THe yeare of Christe .viij. C. lxxxi. came theCharles the grosse. empyre agayne to the Germanes. For the Saracens commyng agayne into Italy, and spoylyng all thynges, dyd the Roma∣nes call their byshop agayne out of Fraunce: for the Italians had nede of succourse agaynste the Sara∣cens. And when the kyng of Fraunce was deade, seyng the kynges heyre was not yet of ful age, there were raysed euery where great dissencions and de∣bates in Fraunce, for the gouernaunce of the realme vntyll the kynges sonne were come to age. Where∣fore the byshop of Rome constrayned by this necessi∣tie required ayde of the Germanes to rescue Italy out the brunt of daungers. Then came Charles the grosse sonne to Lewis the Germane into Italy, &
driuing out the Saracens, toke the emperial crown the yeare of Christe .viii. C. lxxxij. Charles reigned after that he was crowned, ix. yeares. About thisThe Normā¦des fell into Fraunce. tyme the Normandes fallyng into Fraunce, dyd so much harme euery where, that the Frenchmen wer compelled to require ayde of the Germanes: and by consent of euery man, was Charles made kyng of Fraunce, and by thys occasion gott Charles the Grosse the realme both of Germany and Gallia or Fraunce agayne. But these kyngdomes were separated againe not long after. Charles beynge wery of the warre in Morauia or Meerhen by rea∣son of the greate combraunce and trauail, forsakyng the empire, he made Arnolfus his brothers sonne Emperour, who pointed Charles out of the empire so muche reuenues, so long as he lyued, as was suffi∣cient for a kynges state. Arnolfus the .vi. Germane Emperoure. ARnolfus the sonne of Carolomanus, dukeArnolphus Emperoure. of Baierlande, Schwaben and of the Frā∣kes y• cosin of Charles the third, was sub∣stitute by hym in the empyre the year of Christe .viij. C. xci. he reigned .xij. yeares. Fyrst ouercame he the Morauians or Meerhlanders, af∣ter that the Normandes, whiche beyng now retur∣ned out of Fraunce, came vntyll the Rene, and com∣myng to Worms, put the byshop of Mentz to execu∣tion. As the Normandes, were vanquyshed by theThe Normā∣des are ouer∣come. Emperours, at the last became they Christen. After¦warde when Vido duke of Spoleta by a rumor was made Emperoure, Arnolfus goyng into Ita∣ly, toke in Rome by greate force, and was crowned
of Formosus the byshop of Rome. Wherfore whē he had taken in Italy agayne, Vido was bannyshed. He restored againe also the duchy of Bourgondie to the Germane dominion. Marinus the .C. xi. bysh. of Ro. succeded Ioānes Adrianus the .iij. was byshop after Marinus. Stephanus the fift C. xiij. bysh. succeded Adrian{us} Formosus succeded Stephanus. At that tyme was again a great debate at Rome for the election: For Sergius was also created by∣shop: but the fauoures of Formosus driuynge out Sergius, Formosus sent for the Emperoure into Italy, that he myght kepe styll the byshopryke by that meanes. For Sergius was fled into Fraunce, and went about to obteine the byshopryke by the ai∣de of Frenchemen. Howbeit after certaine yeares, when Formosus was deade, he was made byshop, & vsed more tyranny and presumpcion, then he ought to haue done, accordyng to byshoply mekenesse. HeAn example of moste nota¦ble cruelnesse of a Rompsh byshop. Sergius vn∣learned and a tyraunt. caused to digge vp the deade carcas of Formosus, to degrate it, and beheadyng it cast it into the floude Tyber with moste shame. It is written that this Sergius was very vnlearned & vnmanered, which thinge his cruell dedes declare plaine ynough. Bonifacius the .vi. the .C. xv. byshop succeded Formosus. Stephan{us} the .vi. folowed Bonifacius. Thissame disanulled & condempned al Formosus ordinaūces. Romanus the .C. xvi. byshop of Rome succeded Stephanus. Theodorus the .ij. succeded Romanus. Ioānes y• .x. the C.xix. bysh. of Ro. succeded The
dorus thissame alowed agayne the ordinaunces of Formosus, whiche Stephanus the syxte had disa∣nulled. Benedictus the .iiij. was the .C. xx. byshop after Iohannes. Leo the .v. was after Benedictus the .C. xxi. byshop of Rome. The same was taken prysoner by Christophorus. Christophorus was byshop after Leo. Thissame was taken by Sergius. After Christophorus was Sergius the .iij. ma∣de the .C. xxiij. byshop of Rome. The same caused the deade coarse of Formosus be dygged vp agayneThe tyranny of y• byshops of Rome. and beheaded. It is a thynge full of drede ether to reade or to reherse byshops of Rome to haue vsed so great tyranny among themselues. And it could not be that any regarde could be had of Christen godly∣nesse: let no man then marueill in the meane season, yf any abuses and wycked opinions be broken into the churche in the meane whyle. Lewis the .iii. the .vii. Germane Emperoure. THe yeare of Christe .ix. C. iij. Lewis theLewis the. iij sonne of Arnolphus, being substitute in the empyre of hys father, reygned ten yeares. It is no where redde that he was crow∣ned.The Hunga∣rians wayt Germany & ly. For when Arnolphus was deade, the Hunga∣rians inuaded Germany wyth greate violence. Agaynst them dyd the good prince Lewis the Em∣peroure set hymselfe, and dyd greuously disconfite them by the ryuer Lyeus, but he was afterwarde ouercome of them lykewyse. Then the Hungarians
beynge vanquishers, dyd euery where muche mys∣chefe and harme to the Schwoben, Frankes, Ba∣ierlanders and them of Ostenryche. Slayeng eue¦ry one wythoute regarde or mercy, burnynge tem∣ples, cityes, tounes, villages, yee euery thynge. Afterwarde entrynge into Italy, vsed lyke cru∣eltye.Berengari∣us prince of Foroiulium. At that tyme was Berengarius prince of Fo¦roiulium, which gatherynge a great army aganyst the Hungaryans, although somtyme he fought vn luckelye: yet gat he hym such a good name by thys settynge forth, that afterwarde he wylled to be cal¦led Emperoure. Cunradus the .i. the viij Germane Emperoure. THe yeare of Christ .ix. C. xii. was Conra¦dusConrade the fyrste▪ made Emperoure, he raigned seuen yeares. But he was not crowned of the Romysh byshop. He was Lewis the .iii. brothers sonne: he was duke of the Frankes, and the laste of the mooste noble posteritye of Charles the great, whiche ye maye gesse by the order of the genealogye wrytten hereafter: the whych I haue added therfore, yt it maye be knowen, to how great chaunces, and how many alteracions the kingdom of the Germanes hath ben putt, the which thynge can not be red wythoute greate wonderynge at. For that maye be sene euerye where that greate kyngdomes floryshe a certayne space in the world, but at the laste they be weakened, and tossed wyth troublous commocions: howbeit in the meane sea∣son be they so kept by Godes prouidence, that they
do not wholy perysh. Lewis the thyrd left no so after hym: and therefore stroue the Frankes and Sacons together, to make Otho duke of SaxonyOtho duke of Saxony. Emperour: but the good prince withstode the same not wylling that to the moost noble stocke of Char∣les, shulde happen suche a reproch. Therefore coun¦selled he to make Conradus duke of the Frankes Emperoure. Of thys wyse succeded Conradus in the empyre, but Otho was in more greater autho∣rity, & whyle Conradus lyued, he dispatched more busynesses also: yet in the meane time shewed he great loyalty and honestye toward Conradus the Emperoure. But in the meane tyme vsurped BerengariusBerengarius duke of Foroiulium the name of the Emperoure in Italy, and enticed the Hungarians, that they shuld spoyle Germany agayn: but Conradus ouer came those, by the ayde of Otho. But whan Otho was deade; Conradus the Em¦perour fearyng happely, lest the son of Otho Hen∣ryHenry the Fouler. The occasiō of the warre betwene the Frankes & Saxons. the Fouler shoulde growe ouermuche in power: therefore wythdrue he parte of those thynges, whyche before he had graunted hys father Otho. And whan Henry toke it greueouslye, the Empe∣toure endeuoured to slaye him by an intrap, and to bryng thys to passe, was ye byshop of Mentz made out: But the intrap was disclosed. Than was Hen¦ry very greuously moued▪ & went home, and toke from the byshop of Mentz all that was hys domi∣nion in the land of Turyngen and Hesse. But hereof rose a greate warre betwene the Frankes and Saxons.
But whan Conradus was a dyenge, callyng to him his brother Eberardus, he commaunded hym to brynge the Emperyall croune to Henry duke of Saxony: for him he iudged best worthy to gouern the Empyre. He admonyshed prince Eberarde also with al diligence, to make an ende of the warr that he had taken in hande wyth Henry duke of Saxo∣nye,The empyre is translated to the Saxōs lest the Frankes that were yet alyue, shuld vt∣terly he roated out and perysh. For he marked wel that God prospered Henryes affayres. To thys counsell dyd duke Eberardus agre willyngly, and bringyng the crowne to Henry, and makyng peace on both sydes, he was afterward loyall to Henry. And by thys occasyon came it to passe, that the em∣pyre was remoued from the successors of Charles the greate to the Saxons. The genealogye of Charles the greate. Charles the great Emperoure. Lewis te Gentle, whose sonnes were these thre. Lewis the Ger∣man he had Alma∣ny, & subdued y• Bo¦hemes, his sonnes wer: Lewis, char¦les y• grosse, which toke y• empyre frō Charles the bald and Caroloma∣nus the sonne of Caroloman{us} was Arnolphus, who raygned after Char∣les the Grosse. Lotharius y• Em∣peroure. He had Loraine & Italy, his sonn was Le∣wis the seconde the .iiij. Germane Emperoure. He droue y• Saracens out of Italy. After him woulde the bishop of Rome transferre the empyre to the Frenchmen vpon Charles y• balde, but the sonnes of Lewis y• Germane restored the em∣pyre agayn to ye Germanes▪ Charles the balde kynge of Gallia or Fraunce: his sonne was Lewis the stammerer kynge of Fraunce.
The sonnes of Arnolfus were Lewis the .iij. Empe¦roure. Conradus, and hys sonnes were Eberardus, whose successors are the princes of ye Fran∣kes. Conradus the last em¦peroure of this linage Not longe after was the kyngdome of Fraunce also translated from the posteritye of Charles the greate. So lytle doeth anye thynge remayne euer sted fast in his estate among men, so that the genera¦cions of great prynces, do now florish in the height, now agayne layde in the duste to be weakened and discouraged. Anastasius the .iij. the .cxxiiij. byshop of Rome, succeded Sergius. Lando was made the .xxv. byshop after Anasta∣sius. Ioannes the .xi. succeded Lando. Henry the .i. surnamed the Fouler, the ix. Emperoure of Germany. THe yeare of Christ .ix. C. xx. was Hen¦ry the fyrste, surnamed the Fouler, the . duke of Saxon made Emperoure, he raygned seuenten yeares. He was not crouned of the bishop of Rome, nether went into Italy, though twayne toke vpon them the name of the Emperoure, and by vproure ray∣synge battayll fought now and than a great felde.
For Henry had busynesse more than ynough in Ger¦many, which the good prince apeaced wyth greate diligence, accordinge to hys syngular policye, and endeuored to make it more excellent. Surely the kyngdome of Germany dyd neuerThe kyng∣dome of ger¦many neuer wanted vp∣roures. in a maner want vprourish commotions, ther was almost neuer an Emperour chosen, wythout the se∣dition of some princes, which went aboute to take vpon them the name of the Emperoure. Yet was God alway wyth those Emperours, that were du∣lly called, detended the authoritye of the lawfull empyre, and the sedicious were punished. Arnolde duke of Bayerlande set him selfe wyth hurtfull en∣terpryse agaynst Henry, who recountred ye Baiers wyth appointed armyes: but behauynge himselfe not as an enemy, he requyred to speake wyth duke Arnolde familiarly. He reasoned wyth hym, & ear∣nestlyThe reaso∣nyng of Hen¦ry the Em∣perour wyth Arnold duke of Bayer∣land. admonyshed hym, that the maiesty of the em¦pyre, is geuen of God: yf it were so, that he wer cho¦sen Emperoure by the consente of other prynces, than wolde he frely geue place, and be ready y• fyrst that shuld submitte themselues. Duke Arnold she∣wed these thynges to his counsel, which answered: That it were euident that Salomons sayenge of wysedome were most true, which is: By me do kyn¦ges rule. And for asmuch as it appeareth euidently ynough that Henry is endued with wisedome and gentlenesse, it is no dout, but God doth assiste him: he shuld therfore thenceforth leaue of from his en∣terpryse, nether to go about any thing against Hen¦ry. Wherefore duke Arnolde ceased, & obeied frely without ye slaughter of any of his men. Who I pray
you wold not saye, y• these Germane princes were no Barbaryans, and that they excelled in pryncely wisedome & high gentlenesse? This is also wryttē: that. S. Vdalryck had a visty on of the duke of Ba∣ierland,The vision of S. Vdal∣rke. which he obserued: For it was shewed him by God, that the duke had a swearde wythout hyl¦tes or handel: wherby was signified, that the duke shulde not vse the sweard, that is, that he shuld not retayn the empyre. Wherefore he admonyshed the duke to do nothyng vnaduisedly. After that dyd Henry take Brandenburge: andThe des  by Hen¦ry the fyrste. the Vandales beyng subdued, they receaued the Christen fayth vntyl the see. He besieged the city Praga, and brought the Bo¦hemes to the Empyre. After that vanquyshed he fourty thousand Hun¦garyans by Mersburge, whereby he gatte hym a great renowme and drede by the straunge nacions and gat tranquillitye to al Germanye: He restored the contry of Lothring or Lorayn to the kingdom of Germany, and gatt the speare that Christe was pearsed through of Rudolphe kyng of Burgundy: the same was Constantinus wont to haue. Henry the Fowler beynge now neare to his de∣ath, made his sonn Othe succeder in ye empyre after him, lest any stryfe shuld happen in the empyre after hys death, concernyng the possession of it. Leo the .vi. succeded the .C. xxvii. byshop after Ioannes the .xi. Stephanus succeded Leo. After Stephanus was Ioannes the .xii. the. C xxix. byshop.
Leo the .vii. succeded Ioannes the. xii Stephanus the▪ viij. a Germane the .C. xxxi▪ byshop succeded Leo. Otho the .i. the .x. Germane. Emperoure. OTho the fyrst the sonne of Henry the Fow¦lerOtho the fyrst. beganne hys domynyon the yeare of Christ .ix. C. xxxviii. and raigned .xxxvi. yeares. He toke the emperyall crowne at Aken of the byshop of Mentz. In the begynnyngeThe vpron∣res raysed a∣gainst Otho Eberardus the Palatine Giselbert prince of Lo¦tharing or Loraine▪ of Othes gouernaunce rose thre greate and daun∣gerous vproures at one tyme. The doers of the fyrste vproure were Eberar∣dus the Palatine, and Giselbert prince of Lorain. These (because they were of the posteritie and li∣nage of Charles the greate,) affirmed, that the em¦pyre came from the Saxons to the Frankes by ri∣ght of succession: and that such enterpryses myght seme to be more ryghtfull, they drew on their syde Henry the elder brother of Otho, vnder the pre∣tence,Henry bro∣ther to Otho that by reason of the age, he oughte to go∣uerne the empyre, and not Otho. Thys warre wyth the counte Palatine Ebe∣rardus and duke Giselbert lasted syxe yeares, and many feldes were foughtē in the mean season. Her¦man duke of Scwaben, and Conradus duke of theHerman prince of Schwaben▪ Lonradus duke of the Frankes. Frankes toke the Emperours parte. This Conra¦dus of Worms, called the wyse, was cosyn to Ebe∣rardus. These fought the last against ye enemies by Andernak, with a great camp, wherin Eberardus countye Palatine was slayne, and duke Giselbert
in the flighte, was drowned in the Rene. It is a dreadfull example, wherein we may be aduertised,An example of eage∣ also on greate . that the endeuoure of sedition remayneth not vn∣reuenged, euen in greate princes also. But whe∣ther thys Eberardus be he, yt we haue sayde of be∣fore to haue broughte the Emperyall crowne to Henry the Fowler, it is not specifyed for a trueth. For the hystorye wryters of the Germanes, were grosse and vnlearned men, ignoraunt of these thin¦ges, whyche are necessary to be obserued in wry∣tynge of hystoryes. But after thys victory, was not the stryfe yetThe seconde vpouce was wyth hys brother. alayed which Otho the emperoure had wyth Hen¦ry his brother, and besyde that wyth the byshop of Mentz: Henry was besyeged at Mersburg: but he seynge that hys interpryses were inuayne, and that hys defence beganne to be feble, he hymselfe came knelynge to ye Emperoure, desyryng pardon for his offence, was receaued to mercy by Otho: and not long after, the duke of Baier deceassynge wythout heyre male, Otho the Emperoure gaue hys brother Henry the duchy of Baierland. As for that Henry the Emperoure whyche is buryed at Bamberg, was thys Henryes sonnes sonne, as we shall shewe hereafter. Afterwarde was Mentz besyeged and taken in by the Emperoure, and the byshop taken also: but shortly after was he letten louse agayn. The thyrde rysynge agaynste Otho was manyThe thyrde  was by his owne . yeares after, by his owne son Ludolfe, by this occa¦sion: Otho had fyrste a quene out of Englande cal∣led Edyth or Ide, which is buryed at magdeburg.
Of the same had he hys sonne Ludolphe. After the same was deade toke he another quene of the Burgundyon bloud, which thynge Ludolphe dyd not alow. But what happened farther, that is vn∣knowen. For the Germane hystory wryters dyd in maner expresse no thynge wholye by theyr occasy∣ons and circumstaunces: nether ruely could they do it, seyng they were monkes, lyuynge in priuate idelnesse▪ beynge somtyme farre from all thynges, that be done in gouernynge the commune welthe: I passe ouer that they were to southfull also to search & enquyre the causes and occasions of great matters of other men, as ye duety of a true hystory wryter is to do. Yet do they make mencion of thisSalfelde  deadly place for counsels. that Ludolfus kept an assemble at Salfelde, & to haue conspyred agaynst hys father: and that place Salfeld, is called a deadly place for counsels. Lu∣dolfus had neuerthelesse in the meane season most great princes y• were partakers wyth hym in thys conspiracy and counsel, among the which also was Conradus the wise duke of the Frankes. But in y• meane tyme that thys was in bruynge, was the fa¦ther in Italy, who besieged hys sonne at Mentz soRegenspurg sone as he cameinto Germany: Ludolfe escapyng, fled vntyl Regenspurge: but the father folowyng, besyeged Regenspurg also straytly two moneths. In that syege dyed not a few men, among ye which was the chefe, Arnolde the yonger duke of Bay∣er. After hys deathe Ludolfe requyrynge pea∣ce frelye, came barefooted knelynge befoore hys father, and lyenge vpon the grounde, he desyred pardon for hys trespasse very humblye. Wherfore
the father toke hym to mercy, and a verye stronge peace was made. No Emperoure in a maner dyd dispatche euer anye more greater and daungerous busynesses than the Emperour Otho, so farr as I can marke. But in all them was he in the meane season luckye, not wythout the incredible fauoure of God. For whyle he had these warres he ouercame the Bohe¦mes, the Hungarians, and Frankes, besyde that made he quyet the troublous state of Italy, which thynge we shall brefely shewe. He vanquyshed the Hungarians by AugsburgeThe Hunga¦rians are vanquished. neare the floude Lycus, and weakened he the strenght of them so, that they durste neuer after come into Germany. In thys battayll dyed Con∣rade.  the Wyse, and. S. Udalricke byshop of Augu¦spurg was wyth the Emperoure in the hooste. Moreouer whan Otho enuironned euery wher¦with greate peryls, the Frenchmen trusted easely to bryng the empyre to them agayn: but here wasAn example that  God . it founde in Otho, that it is inuayne for men to sett themselues agaynste him, whome God fauoureth. Innumerable enemyes had compassed Otho a∣bout, the Bohemes, the Frankes, the Hungarians Italyans, the Frenchemen: but the power of all these, coulde not breake and oppresse the vertue of thys good prince. The Frenchemen threatened to brynge into Germanye so greate an hooste, as neuer had ben sene afore. Whereto it is reportedThe aun∣swer of O∣tho to the Frenches threaten y∣ges. Otho shuld haue aunswered: That such vayn my∣naces became not wyse princes, seyng it is euident, that ye victory & fortun of warr is in Goddes hand.
He aunswered thys also: that he wolde brynge soStrawe hattes. many couered with strawe hattes into Fraunce, as they neuer had sene before: and therefore had all they that were in the hooste strawe hattes, whych hooste he broughte vntyll parys. For Hugo princeHugo prince of Fraunce of Fraunce had taken the kynge his lorde prisoner, and entended to take to him Fraunce and the dig∣nyty of the empyre. Thyssame Hugo was taken ofLewis is re∣stored agayn to the realme of Fraunce. Otho in the citye of Paris, and delyuerynge Le∣wis his brother in Lawe, restored him to y• realme of Fraunce agayne. For Gerberga the syster of O∣tho was maryed to Lewys. Otho restored than to to the Germane empyre lowe Germanye, Lorain and Burgundye. The Hungaryans had many skyrmyshes also in Italy, but some Emperoures before Othoes tyme were so occupied in Germany, that they could'not ayde Italy. Whan now the princes of Italy were dryuen to extreme necessity for to resist the Hunga¦rians, it happened that Berengarius prince of Fo∣roiulium, gat hym a great wonderyng at his pro∣wesse, and afterwarde coueted the gouernaunce of whole Italy. And though other prynces dyd also stryue for the souerayntye of Italye, yet dyd Be∣rengaryus, excellynge in power, kepe Italye tyll the thyrde heyre. The same toke vpon hym the tytle of Emperoure, and vsed greate crueltye in Italye. The Italyans requyred ayde and suc∣coureBerengari∣us peldeth hymselfe to Otho. of Otho agaynste hys tyrannye. Wherefore Otho goynge into Italye, he inuaded Lombar∣dye, and gat it. Berengarius wyth yeldynge himselfe frely, optained of Otho that grace, that he
shuld not wholy be dryuen out of Italy, but should retayne a duchy to possesse. After twelue yeares was Otho called into Italy agayne, to defende or clayme the Italians wyth the clergye and byshop of Rome, from the tyranny of Berengarius, which thynge he also dyd valyauntly. For whan he cameBerēgarius wyth hys sonne are a∣ for their disloyaltye. agayne into Italy, he toke Berengarius and hys sonne Alberte, and bannished them for theyr dislo∣yaltye: the father wyth hys wyfe to Bamberge in Germany, wher they spent theyr liues also as out∣lawes: but the sonne sent he to Constantinople. Otho entrynge into Rome in thys settynge forth,Otho y• first made the  othe to the bishop of Rome. was crowed of Ioannes the .xii. This Otho was the fyrste Emperour that made an othe to ye bishop of Rome, wherof the maner and tenor is in ye canon lawes, begynnynge: Tibidomino Ioanni .iii. & ce. After that is Otho come the second tyme to Rome to rebuke Ioannes bish. of Rome, because he was accused of many fautes. Wherfore the bishop kno∣wynge himselfe gyltye, fled for feare of Otho. And therfore was Leo the .viij. made bishop in his steadThe es of the ppes of . But before that Otho went from Rome, Ioannes commynge to Rome, thrust Leo out agayne: Leo fled to the Emperoure. But the moost wyse Empe¦roure vsed greate policy, lest he shoulde geue an oc∣casion of debate: He suffred Ioannes to vse the bi∣shopryck, so longe as he lyued. But so sone as he was deade, to take Leo as lawfully chosen bishop: but the Romanes wolde not alowe it, whych refu∣syage Leo, chose another called Benedictus in spete of the Emperoure. Otho than retur∣nynge, inuaded the possessyons of the Romyshe
byshops, and dyd much hurte. He besyeged also the citye of Rome, vntyl the cithesins constrayned by famine & necessity, opened the gates frely to Otho. He than puttynge to death manye Romanes, and banny shinge the Consuls, restored Leo: & whan he had apeased al thynges, returned into Germany, leadynge wyth hym Benedictus, who was kept at Hamborowe. Otho goynge the thyrde tyme to Rome, droue the Saracens and Grekes out of the farther coa∣stes of Italy. Than chosynge Otho hys sonne to be partener in the Empyre, bringyng hym wyth hym, commaunded to crowne hym, and caused the Em∣perour of Constantinoples doughter to be geuen hym in mariage. By all these thynges maye it ease∣ly be gathered, that this Otho was one also of the∣se princes, which God hath now and than geuen to repayre the decayed state of the worlde. For he set vp agayne the decayed empyre of Rome, and set all Europa in quiet: by hys succour hath he defended whole Italy and Germany. He subdued the Hun∣garians and Frenchmen. To be shorte, he hath re∣stored the maiestye of the empyre to hys former bryghtnesse, and set it in order: afterward dyed he at Quedelnburg in great quyetnesse. It is writtenQuedeln∣burg. Who fande fyrst the syl∣uer Mines in Misen. also, that he found fyrst the syluer mines in Misen. He gaue also muche good to the churche, to mayn∣teine religion, and to promote the doctryne of god∣lynesse, to which intent he made also not a fewe by∣shops, as at Magdeburg, Misen, Brandenburg, Mersburg, and Ceitz. Martinus the .iij. was the .cxxxij. byshop after Stephanus.
Agapetus the .ii. succeded Martinus. Ioannes the .xiii. the C. xxxiiij. bishopp was af∣ter Agapetus. The same crowned Otho the fyrst: afterwarde fled he from Rome, fearynge leste for hys vnclennesse of lyfe, he shulde be caste from the offyce by Otho. Leo the .viii. was chosen in Ioannes steade. But whan Ioannes was returned to Rome. Leo fled to the Emperour, but whan Ioānes was deade, was Leo restored agayne. Ioannes the .xiiii. and .C. xxxvi. bishop succeded. Leo. Of hym was Otho the seconde crowned. Otho the seconde, the .xi. Germane Emperoure. THe yeare of Christ .ix. C. lxxiiii. raygnedOtho the ▪ Otho y• .ii. after hys fathers deceasse ten yeares: against him was an vprour ray∣sedHenry due of . also. For Henry duke of Baier hys co∣syn coueted ye empyre. This Henry is not the bro∣ther of Otho the firste, of whome is spoken before, which conspiringe rose agaynst his brother Otho, and afterward reconciled again to his brother, gat the duchy of Baier. Thys fyrst duke of Baier, that was of the Saxons bloude, dyed .xv. yeare before Otho. But thys fyrste Henryes sonne is the same whyche set hymselfe agaynste Otho the seconde: but Otho had soone tamed this newe enterpryser. Afterwarde dyd the Frenchemen fall sodenlye vpon the Emperoure at Aken, and he dyd searcely escape theyr intrap. But Otho repayring an army, went into Fraunce, and spoyled euery where vntyl
Paris, & constrained the Frenchmen to demaunde peace: whyche dyd than bynd them wyth an othe,The French men are sub∣dued of O∣tho the secōd that they wold neuer claime Lorain any more. Whan he had set Germany at quyet, he went in∣to Italy. There did he fight wyth the Grekes and Saracens in Apulia: but hys hoost beyng vanquy∣shed, he was taken by mariners, as he fled. But be∣causeOtho the se∣cond was ta¦ken by mari∣ners. he was vnknowen to the mariners, by reason he could the greke language, nether was he taken for a Germane prince, he redemed himselfe with an easy price, and comming to Rome, he gouerned the empyre as he dyd before. It is sayd that the Ita∣lians poisonned hym, for his rigoure that he vsed in the gouernaunce. Benedictus the .v. the .C. xxxvii. bysh of Rome was after Ioannes the .xiiii. Donus the .ii. succeded after Benedictus Bonifacius the .vii. the .C. xxxix. bysh. succeded Donus. Benedictus the vi. succeded Bonifacius. In his tyme became Otho the thyrde Emperour. Otho the .iii. the .xii. Germane Emperoure. THe yeare of Christ .ix. C. lxxxiiij. rayg¦ned Otho the thyrd after hys fathers deceasse .xix. yeares. He was yonge, scarcely passed xii. yeres whan hys fa¦ther dyed: wherefore Henry duke of Bayer, cosyn to thys Otho, caused him to be kept at Rome, and beganne agayne to vsurpe the Em∣pyre. Some Italians counseled to make Cres∣centyus Emperoure, that the emperyall maie∣stye myghte be broughte agayne to the Italyans.
But the Germane princes beynge loyall to theyrThe ende∣uoure and faythful∣nesse in ke∣yyng the em¦pyre▪ lorde, called the yonge Otho agayne from Henry, and made hym Emperoure wyth commune assent, whereto Benedictus the byshop of Rome gaue his consent also. The fyrste warre that he hadde, was wyth the Frenchmen, whyche forgettynge theyr othe that they had made, inuaded Lorayne agayn, takynge in many cityes: but Otho dryuyng out the French men, kept Lotharyng or Lorayn. In the meane tyme a Romane prince, called Crescentius, takyng vpon hym the name of an Em¦peroure, vsed great crueltye in Italy. Wherefore Otho commynge to Rome, enuyrouned wyth a greate army, and takyng Crescentius, cutt of hys nose and eares, set hym arswarde vpon an asse, cau¦sedThe punish∣ment of Cre∣scentius a Roman Prynce for yng y• Emp hym to be caryed about the city Rome to won¦der at, and at the last to be hanged. Of the begynnynge and institution of the Electors in Germany. WHan Otho was nowe eyghte and twentye yeares olde he was endued wyth so ready wytt, that for hys syn∣gularOtho the iij. called the Worldes wonders▪ wysedome, he was called the Worldes wonders. Besyde that knewe the Saxons readye wytted and valyaunt men, the deceatfull traynes of the Frenchmen. Wherfore whan they perceaued that great and dangerous commotions were raysed by the. Ro. byshoppes, bothe agaynste Emperoures, and also in the commune welth, Otho chose Bruno
a Saxon his cosin to be byshop of Rome, who wasBruno a Sax¦on was made bysh. of Ro. called Gregorius the fyft after that he had the by∣shopryke. Of hym was Otho the thirde crowned. Besyde this when the wyse prince consydered that the Frenchemen and Italians raged euer to trans∣fer the emperiall maiestie from the Germanes, and that among the aunceters of him was now and thā strife also for the election: and that in the meane ty∣me is so greatly requisite a myghty monarche to the Christiantie, for to defende the bishop of Rome, and libertie of Italy: yea to maynteyne concorde of religion in whole Europa. But that the same mo∣narchy could not last long and be stable euermore, without the ayde and succourse of some peculiar & moste mighty nacion. Therfore with the assistence and ayde of Gregorius the byshop of Rome (who, because he was a Germane, did lyghtely consent to so necessary a thyng,) dyd make the ordinaunce of the princes Electors for to choyse an Emperoure. And that concorde might be had in the election be∣cause of religion, among the prelates spirituall and princes temporall the aucthoritie to chose an Em∣peroure is committed to seuen Germane princes,To what pr¦ces the elec∣tion is com∣mitted. the Archebyshops of Mentz, Colen and Trier. To these are ioyned the prince of Boheme: (for at that tyme had Bohemy yet no kynge,) the County Pa∣latine of the Rene, the duke of Saxony, & the Mar∣ques of Brandenborowe. I maruayll verely why so hygh a dignitie is not bequyethed to other prin∣ces, which at that tyme were farre more puyssaunt, as namely to the dukes of Baier, of Schwaben & of the Frankes, and specially the duke of Baier, who
was nearer of kynred to Otho, than the other, and more greater of domynyon. For he had subiect to hym Bayerland and Eastenryche, vntyll Aglar or Aquitanya, the whyche Henry brother to Otho the fyrste had wonne. The duke also of Schwaben was neare kynsman to Otho the Emperoure. For whan Herman duke of Schwaben vnder Otho the fyrste had no heyre male, He gaue his doughter in maryage to Ludolfe sonne to Otho the fyrste, agaynste whome hys father Otho dyd warre for hys rebellyon. Of this Ludolfe come the dukes of Schwaben. Therefore maye it be maruayll, what was the occasion to orden that institutyon of pryn∣ces Electors. The Germane history wryters seme to be so voyde of all iudgment, that it may of goodIhon Stabi∣us an astro∣nomer. ryght lothe any man to reade them. Ihon Stabi∣us the astronomer of Maximylyan shewed me oft, that Maximilian was went to complayn vpon the rudenesse of the Germane hystorye wryters, thatThe Ger∣mane history wryters vn∣learned. they dyd not only wryte the dedes of so noble and wyse princes, that God had sent wythoute order: but dyd also corrupte them wyth euell wrytynge. And he had commaunded to compile in a short Cro¦nycle orderly the mooste notableste thynges out of all hystorye wryters: whych thynge doutlesse had ben done, yf the mooste wyse Emperour had ether lyued longer, or had not left it by reason of the care of more weyghty matters. As for me, (though I might seme to be rash, yf I allege or shewe what me thynketh,) yet wyll I de∣clare what gessynge I haue, wherewyth I maye shewe some certayntye of so great a thynge. Bohe∣my
no doute is come in the election for his cōmody∣ousWhy Bohe∣my hath the authorytye of eleccion. Saxony. sytuatyon, & because yt is fensed round about. To the Saxons hath Otho that was a prince of the Saxons bloud worthely geuen that honour: for at that time was the same duchy most puissaunt. The princes of Saxony kept Brandenburg atBranden∣burg. that time also, the Emperours kinsmen: and it may easely be gathered, that Otho dyd fauer those con∣tryes more, than other duchyes. I suppose that to y• countyshyp of Palatyn wasThe county∣shyp of Pa∣latyne. geuen thys prerogatiue, more than other princes dominions, for none other cause, than that to Char¦les the greatest posterity myght rebound thys ho∣nor, so that it shuld be not only by the Saxons, but part thereof shuld also be sent ouer to the Frankes: for the countyes of Palatine were at that tyme of the kynred of Charles the greate. What prayses thys ordinaunce of the princes E¦lectorsWhat pro∣fite is by the princes Ele∣ctors. is worthye, that can I not now sufficiently declare according to the worthynesse of it: the dede proueth yt selfe what profite it hath broughte. For by thys ordinaunce hath the Empyre remained in Germany aboue fyue hundreth yeares. Besydes that is nothyng so good nor wholsome in mens e∣states, than those counsels and ordinaunces, whe∣reby is auoided the occasion to alter of tymes the gouernaunce of Empyres: whyche thynge by the goodnesse of God is done by thys instytutyon of the Electors. By thys meanes is yt come to passe, that the Empyre is prouyded, that the tray∣nefull and secrete conspiracyons of the byshoppe of Rome and Frenche kynge dyd not prospere,
whiche endeuoured oft to transferre the hyghnesse of the Empyre from the Germanes to the Frenche¦men. The Emperoure also hath more sauegarde or defence of the princes, when he is chosen by their cō¦sent: and lesse stryfe can ryse for the election, when the desyres of the chefe princes consent to one. Be∣sydes this also, forsomuche as the maiestie of the empyre is remitted to many princes together, it is to be trusted that the state of the empire shalbe both stronger and more durable, then if it dyd stycke by the succession of one bloude. All these thynges ma∣ke for that purpose, that no great stryfe come by re∣son of the election or choysyng: and also that the heade of the West empyre be in some certayn place, and that because the concorde and tranquillitie of the religion in all this West kyngdome, be mayntei¦ned vnder one certayne heade. The Athenians in tymes past auaunced their ordinaunce of the Areo∣pagites with great prayses: lykewyse dyd the La∣cedemonians their statutes of the Ephories: and that worthely, for by them remained their common welthes stedfaste a great while. But forsoth this in stituciō of Otho made of the Electors, as it is farre more profitable, so it is worthy muche more prayse and auauncement: as by the whiche stablenesse of the empyre and constant religion are mainteyned many yeares, not onely in one or other citie or con∣trey, but in the whole Weste. And the princes Elec∣tors ought worthely make muche of this their pre∣rogatiue. First because of the whole Christiantie, that by them is this hyghnesse set aparte. For they are as a stedfast heade, wherewith foreuer all this
Weste kyngdome is kept and bounde together: for they maye be called the very route, out of the which emperoures must euermore growe. Moreouer also can no hygher dignitie happen them in this ly∣fe then that worthynesse is geuen them lawfully, whiche passeth farre the hyghnesse of kynges and princes. Then must this ordinaunce be estemed a hygh gyft and an ordinaunce of God: Wherefore also it must greatly be made of and kept without blemysh, least any occasion bee geuen to dissolue so Godly and wholsome, yee and moste fayre harmo∣ny in this lyfe. For by them standeth the summe of the Romane Empyre. And therfore whan the Elec¦tours are seuered, it is necessary that the kyng∣dome or empyre fayle, and that the last iudgement is at hande. For the worlde shall ende vnder thys empyre. It is written that the institucion of the Electours was. The yeare of Christe .M. ij. The yeare of the worlde .iiij. M. ix. C. xlvi. The yeare of Rome .M. vii. C. lij. The yeare after Charles the greate his coronacion .ij. C. i. When this ordinaunce was made, the Italians made diuers vproures against Otho the .iij. inso∣muche that he could not be safe at Rome: and when he went towarde Germany, Crescentius wyfe sen∣dingOtho the. i▪ was poyso∣soned. hym poyson by an intrap, was kylled the thir∣tyeth yeare of his age. Iohannes the .xv. the cxli. byshop of Rome succe¦ded Bonifacius the .vi. He was taken by Bonifaci{us} father, because he wold not consent to Bonifacius election.
Iohannes the .xvi. succeded Iohannes the .xv. Iohannes the .xvii. succeded Iohannes .xvi. Beynge taken and dryuen out by Crescentius, he ought ayde of Otho. After Iohannes the .xvii. was Gregorius the fyft made the .C. xliiij. byshop of Rome a prince of the Saxons bloude, and that for the same cause, as we haue declared a lytle before. For the Italians deuised now and then newe thynges agaynste the Emperours, nether dyd they euer want matters of vproures. Therefore semed it a necessary thyng to maynteyne common quietnesse that a Germane shoulde be made byshop of Rome. But yet in the meane season was Gregorius driuen out by the Italians, ordeinyng in hys steade one Iohannes: but Otho returning to Rome with a great power, restored Gregorius kynsman againe.Syluester by¦shop of Ro a wother with ll spectes. Siluester the .ij. succeded Gregorius the .v. It is sayde he was an Inchaunter. After this sorcerer was Iohannes the .xviii. made the .C. xlvi. byshop of Rome. In hys tyme appeared towarde the South a comete of a drede∣full syght, the whiche folowed no lesse hunger then pestilence. Hrnry the .ij. surnamed the Haultynge, the. iij. Germane Emperoure. THe yeare of Christ .M. iij. was HenryHenry the .ij. the secōd of that name duke of Bayer chosen Emperoure. We haue sayd be∣fore that Otho the fyrst gaue his bro∣ther Henry the duchy of Baier. But I reken this Emperoure Henry was
the brothers sonne of that Henry. For Hēry Otho the first brother died .xv. yeares before Otho decea¦sed. The Germane history writers were so negli∣gent, that out of their writynges I can not saye for a certayne, whether he were that Henries sonne, or his brothers sonne. Truely that is wonder that the chanons of Bamberg knewe not certaynly the genealogy of their founder. This Henry was the first that was chosen Em∣peroure by the Electors, and raygned .xxii. yeres. He was famous by wysdome and noble victories, he made many and greate warres with maruay∣lous luckinesse. Fyrst making werry y• Bohemes &The dedes of Henry the .ij. Vandalies wyth warre, he subdued and made thē tributaries to hym. He besyeged Metz and Gaunt: he wanne also Lorain and Flaunders. He ought in Italy agaynst the Saracens, and droue them out of Italy. Then was he crouned victori∣ously at Rome by Benedictus the seuēth. He brou∣ght the Hungaryans to the Christen fayth, and ga∣ueSteuen kyng of the Hunga¦rians. to Steuen the Hungarian kyng his syster in ma¦riage. Before his death optayned he of the Elec∣tors lawfully, that Cunradus the .ij. of that name a Franke, should succede hym in the empyre. He foū∣ded the byshopryck of Bamberge, and is buryed there. Iohannes the .xix. the .C.xlvii. byshop succeded Iohannes the .xviii. Sergius the .C.xlviii. bish. of Ro. succeded Ioh. Benedictus the .vii. folowed Sergius. Of hym was Henry the Emperoure crowned. Iohannes the .xx. the .cl. byshop of Rome succe∣ded
Bedictus. Of hym was Cunradus crowned▪ Cunradus the .ij. the .xiiij. Germane Emperoure. THe yere of Christe .M. xxv. was Cunra∣dusCunradus y• second. a Franck chosen Emperoure, who dwelt in the Limburg castell by the citie Spire, and gouerned the empyre fyftene yeares. But in the begynnyng of hys reigne when he perceaued all thynges in a rumour euery where, he brought to passe that hys sonne should be chosen a party ruler with hym, lest when he were gone in to Italy, the subiectes in Germany shoulde make a rumour without a certayn heade. Ernestus duke of Schwaben and the Catuli: forErnestus du¦ke of Schwa¦ben the Catuly were also lordes in Schwaben. These (I saye) were rebelles to the Emperoure: but he dyd so assuage them, that they dyd strayghtwaye obeye frely. From thence went he into Hungary, and redressed that also. He toke Bourgundy and Liege or Ludich, he toke the realme of Orleaunce agayne, and gouerned it vnder his dominion. Af∣terwarde going into Italy, he besieged Milan, and commyng to Rome, he was crowned of Iohannes the .xx. The Romanes about that tyme rysynge agaynst Cunradus, were fearcely slayen of the Em¦perours men: But the Romane affaires were apea¦ced. In the meane tyme whyles this was done in Italy, Ernestus duke of Schwaben, raysed a newe commotion wherfore Cunradus in hys returne droue hym awaye, and pearsed hym through. Cun∣radus gaue the duchy to Herman hys brother.
This Cunradus made many lawes, which are yet now a daies. Vnder this Emperoure, was a couu∣saill kept at Tribur by Ment. He builded wyth great costes the Churche of Spire, wherein he is buried with his quene Gisela. Greate prayses are of this Gisela. She was aGisela a que∣ne of Bour∣gundy. quene of Bourgundy, of Charles the greates poste ritie. Her first husbande was Ernestus duke of Schwaben, of whom she had two chyldren: Erne∣stus that was driuen out, and Herman: afterward was she wedded to Cunradus the Emperoure. Here do the writers make the first menciō of theThe first mē∣cion of y• mar¦queshyp in Easteuriche. marqueshyp in Eastenriche, whiche at that tyme possessed Albert duke of Schwaben, brother to Er¦nestus the elder. Nether was Eastenryche yet at that time a duchy, but the Schwaben kept it, which had taken it from the Hungarians by strong hand.The begyn∣nyng of the erldome of Thuryngen and whence y• lordes therof be. Lewis the Bearded. The Erldome also of Thuryngen beganne in the tyme of thys Cunradus: For Lewis the Bear∣ded of the lynage of Charles the greate was cosin to Gisela. The same because he had longe bene con∣uersaunt in the courte of the Emperoure, and had bene diligent in many thynges, was made Earle of Thuringen. And by this meanes haue the Lordes of Thuringen their ofsprynge of Charles the grea¦tes bloude. Benedictus the .vij. was made the .C.li. byshop of Rome after Iohannes the .xx. who beynge dri∣uen out, one Syluester bought the byshoprycke with money. Therefore Benedictus beyng retur∣ned, to the intent he myght rayse factions or com∣mocions agaynst Syluester, he solde hys ryght of
the byshoprycke to one that was the thirde, called Gregorius the .vi. And so did Benedictus geue place to hym: but Syluester woulde contrarywyseThre bishops of Rome stro¦nyng for the  deposed defende hys ryght against Gregorius. This con∣trouersye dyd compell the Emperoure Henry the black to come to Rome, who dyd worthely depose those thre monsters from the byshoprycke, and or∣deined in steade of them one Syndeger byshop of Bamberg, who was called Clemens the .ii. the .clii byshop, of whom Henry the blacke was crowned. About this time began the name of Cardinals toWhen  Car∣dinals began . be vsed: whereby it may be supposed, that this same dignitie in the church, was not elder. But for somuche as oftymes happened moste he¦uy contencions and stryfes, of the diuersitie of wyl∣les in makynge of the byshop of Rome, Henry the Blacke made an ordinaunce, that thenceforth no by¦shop of Rome should be chosen, without the consent of the Emperour & also his confirmacion. This or∣dinaunce was afterwarde sore foughten against of the byshops of Rome, insomuche also, that most hay¦nous warres are rysen thereof in the tymes of Hē∣ry the fourth and fyfth Emperours. Henry the thyrd surnamed the Black, the .xv. Germane Emperoure. THe yeare of Christe .M.xl. beganne toHenry the .iij raygne Henry the third, called the Black, and raygned seuentene yeres. Fyrst inua¦ded he the Bohemes with warr, but they beyng ayded of the Hungarians, ouercame hym. The yere after were the Bohemes so weried with
warres of Henry, that their prince constrayned by necessitie came to Regenspurg, and made hymselfe tributary frely to the Emperour. After that going into Hungaty, warred thre yeares, and takynge in certayne cities, he compelled the Hungarians to de¦maunde peace. He subdued also the duke of Lorain, that he obeied the empire. At Rome put he down thre byshops at once, stri¦uing for the see, and made a Germane byshop to be byshop there, whō they called Clement the .ii. Thē∣ceforth ouercame he the Saracēs by Capua. After¦ward came he again into Germany & kept a cōgre∣gatiō at Mentz, wherein was Leo the bysh. of Ro. Cuno duke of Bayer, whiche was after. S. Hē∣ry,Luno duke of Baier. An euel coun¦sayll. &c. trustyng to the ayde and conspiracion of the Hū¦garians, set hym agaist the Emperoure: for by that meanes entended he to drawe the possession of the kyngdome to hym. But the Hungarians were o∣uercome, the duke Cuno was driuen out, and liued all his lyfe a bannyshed man in Hungary. The land of Bayer was in the meane tyme wythout a duke and gouernoure. Before Henry the Black dyed, he caused hys sonne Henry, fyue yeare of age to be chosen Empe∣rour, and was crowned at Aken, to the intēt there shoulde be a certayne heade of the empyre, nether should any rumour be for the election. Wherefore the sonne raygned a certayn space vnder the mo∣thers protection. The mother of Honry the .iiij. was called Agnes, borne in the county of Pisto in Fraunce. After Clemens was Damasus the .ij. made the
cliij. byshop of Rome, whiche optayned the byshop∣ricke by force. Leo the .ix. succeded Damasus. The same was in the counsaill kept at Mentz and was conuersaunt wyth Henry the black a whyle afterwarde. In his tyme Berengarius a deacon of AngeweBerengarius  of trewe ar i the  of Christes bo∣dy and bloud in Fraunce taught, that the true body and bloud of Christ were not in the breade and wyne, according to Christes institucion. Leo the byshop of Rome condempned this in the counsaill of Vercelli: but the sedes of this doctrine that were left hath caused great persecucion to them that came after. Victor the .ij. the .clv. byshop of Rome succeded Leo. The same was before byshop of Eichstet. Stephanus the .ix. succeded Victor. Benedictus the .ix. the .clvij. byshop of Rome succeded Stephanus. Nicolaus the .ij. folowed after Benedictus. The same deposed Benedictus, and is sayde to haue or∣deined fyrst, that Cardinals shall haue aucthoritie to chose the byshop of Rome. Berengarius was al∣so condempned againe by hym, and was compelled to reuoke that he had taught of the sacrament. Alexander the .ij. the .clix. byshop of Rome suc∣ceded Nicolaus, then also was greate strife for the delection. Gregorius the .vij. before called Hiltebrande was the .clx. byshop of Rome after Alexander. The same dyd excommunicate and persued Henry the iiij. raisyng also fearce warres, that he myght get & obteyne, that a byshop of Rome myght be chosen and confirmed wythout the Emperoures consent
and confirmacion, lest the Emperours shoulde cla∣me any aucthoritie vpon the byshops of Rome to rule them, whereof we shall speake more in Henry the fourth. Henry the .iiij. the .xvi. Germane Emperour.Henry y• .iiij. THe yeare of Christ .M. lvij. began Henry the .iiij. to reigne after that his father was deade, beynge yet a chylde, and raygned fyfty yeares. In this man dyd not onely the vertue of suche kynde of Emperours fayle, but the empyre of whole Germany began so to decaye, that afterwarde it neuer coulde nether be brought to his olde state, nor recouer his former strength. Hiltebrand byshop of Rome was causer of this la∣mentableOf how great euell Hilte∣brand was oc¦casion. game, who turned neare hād al Germany vp & down with warres among the princes therof. In Henry the Emperours chyldhode, dyd Ag∣nes his mother gouerne the empyre, not without prayse: she set Germany and Italy at peace and trā¦quilitie. But the byshop of Colen dyd priuely leade away the chylde beyng now twelue yeares of age, and ready to be gyn to beare rule, and in the meane season he hymselfe ruled afterwarde the empyre. It is saide also that he caused the Imperiall childe to be brought vp vnsemely. It were longe to reherse here all the causes and circumstaunces: I wyll onely reherse here brefely the most worthy of remēbraunce. Henry the BlackThe constitu¦tion of Hen∣ry the blacke of choysynge the byshop of Rome. father to this Henry, had made a constitucion of ma¦king a byshop of Rome by a most wyse aduise, that y• same should not be done without the knowledge and consent of the Emperoure. But now that Hilte∣brand
was come into the see, he made a decre cōtra∣ryThe tyranny of Hiltebrād in deroga∣ti the au∣thritie of Emperoure. wyse, that the confirmacion of a byshop shoulde not be demaunded of the Emperoure. But the Em¦peroure woulde, that this his fathers constitucion should beare effect. Besydes that also had the Em∣peroure aucthoritie to geue the byshoprycks of the empyre: but Hiltebrand would not suffre that also. For it happened oft, that when one byshop was dead, another was made in his stead of the Empe∣roure, and agayne another of the byshop of Rome, whiche dyd then excommunicate the other. Finally came the game to this ende, that the Emperoure was not onely excommunicated, but it was also cō∣maunded, that other greate Lordes of Germany, should make another Emperoure. And the maister of this game was the byshop of Halberstat in Saxo¦ny, to do the byshop of Rome a pleasure. Wherfore fell from the Emperoure Henry the fourth Othoha the were that tell  Henry the ourth   ishops pleasure. duke of Saxony, Rudolfus duke of Schwaben, to whom was maried the Emperoures syster germa∣ne, and certayne byshops, specially Saxons. On the Emperours syde were the Bohemies, and the lordes Catuly, whom the Emperoure gaue Baier∣lande, driuyng out Otho the duke of Saxony, and some byshops also, whiche disalowed the byshop of Romes tyranny, in derogatyng and takyng away the aucthoritie of Emperours at his pleasure. Wherfore they made congregacions also, and reiec¦tyng the byshop of Rome excommunicacion, excom¦municated hym lykewyse. Now went the Empe∣roure into Italy to treate and finish this controuer¦sy. In the meane season was Rudolfus duke of
Schwaben chosen Emperour of y• contrary partyRudolfus is made Empe¦roure of the bishops at Phorcen. in the town Phorcen, whych was about the yere of oure lorde .M. lxxvii. The byshop of Rome sente Rudolfus a crowne, wherein was wrytten thys verse. Petra dedit Petro, Petrus dyadema Ru∣dolfo. That is: Chryst the Stone gaue the crowne to Peter, Peter geueth to Rudolfe both crowne and septer. Whereby he wolde sygnyfye, that Christe gaue the Empyre to the byshoppe of Rome, and that he lykewyse geueth it to princes. Therfore came Hen¦ry haystely agayn into Germany. & droue Rudol∣fus out of Schwaben into Saxonye, and foughte some battayls wyth hym by the ryuer Vnstrote, in the which were slayne the byshops of Worms and Magdeburg. The yeare .M. lxxx. was foughten the laste felde agaynste Rudolfe by Mersburge, and in the same battayll was Rudolphus ryghte hande stryken of. Whan euerye man nowe fled into the cytye Marsburge, the hande was brought to the new Emperoure, lyenge in hys bedde, where the by∣shopsThe com∣plaint of Ru¦dolfus the Emperoure vpon the bi∣shops. stoode aboute. The whyche as he sawe, he sayde: Lomy Lordes ye byshops, thys ys the hande, wherewyth I haue promysed my lord Hen¦rye sayeth and loyaltye: iudge ye your selues now howe godly ye haue counseled me to decyner from him. Thys is a very myserable complaynte, whyche declareth the troubled mind of the prince to haue iudged it self gilty of vprour. Of this wise dyed Rudolfus about the .iiij. year of his election.
Whome I praye you would it not moue (wythout he be of yron) this so dredefull example to obey hys magistrate, & to beware of vproure? Yet were not the byshops in the meane tyme in reste, and set the sonne also against the father. Hiltebrand the byshop boasted to haue sene a vision in his slepe, that an vnlawfull Emperoure should dye that same yeare. But thys was Caiphas prophecye: for the punish∣mentHiltebrande the byshop of Rome was another Cay¦phas. fell not vpon Henry, but on the byshop of Ro∣mes adherentes. After this victory came Henry to Rome, and ta∣kyng in the citie by force, he toke Hiltebrand the by∣shop and put hym from his office: and in his steade was chosen the byshop of Rauenna, called Clemēs, and of hym was Henry the fourth crowned. As for Hiltebrand died not longe after in exile. Sigebertus the history writer doth not greatlySigebertus  history wryter. prayse Hiltebrande, and doth reprehende the man dedes, that he did disquiet the peaceable state of the churche and empyre without greate cause: and writeth also, that Hiltebrande when he was dyeng should hymselfe haue complayned it, and should ha∣ue required of Henry by embassage forgeuenesse of hys trespasse. Hiltebrande forbade the priestes ofHiltebrande did first for∣byd the Ger∣mane priestes to mary. Germany to mary, and many that were maryed, caused he to be diuorced. The yeare of Christe .M. ciij. when Henry had vāquished the Saxons, & the erle of Misen Erbert was slayne, whome the byshops made to truste to be Emperoure after Rudolfus. Besides that when al maters of Germany and Italy were set at a stay, was Henry the fyft chosen Emperoure by Henry
the fourth hys father. Wherefore dyd the byshop∣pes procure by this Henry, that he shoulde ryse a∣gainst his father, and driue hym out of the empyre. But this greued the good prince greatly. Where∣foreHenry the .v. set to worke by ye byshops besyeged hys father. Henry the sonne makyng a leage the yeare. M C. v. dyd fyrst besyege his father at Mentz: but the princes refusyng to assault it, Henry the sonne was fayne to departe, and leauyng Mentz went with the hoost to Norinberg, and gat and spoyled it inNorinbergh is taken by Henry the, v. the space of two monethes. The father persued the sonne, and on both sydes were they a while in their campes by Regensburg: but they came neuer to playne felde by reason the princes went alwaye be∣twene. But the sonne warned the father to beware of hys owne seruauntes, wherefore he fled priuely to Ludich, and dyed there that same yeare. But when he had lyen vnburied fyue yeares, by reason of the excommunicacion or course of the Romyshe byshop he optayned absolucion, and was buried at Spire. There are yet wrytynges at thys houre, that were sent to the kynge of Fraunce by Henry the father, treatyng of the iniury of the sonne, and their malice, which set the sonne against the father. Reade more of this tragedy in the life of Hiltebrād, prynted seuerally in Englyshe. Of the takyng in and possessyng the citie Hierusalem. IN the tyme of this Henry the fourth be∣gan the settyng forth to warre into Ie∣wry against the Saracens and Turkes. The fyrst capitayne was Godfre of Bi∣lion,
prince of Lothringe or Lorain. Hym accom∣paniedGodfre of Bi¦lion. the best princes and lordes of Gallia. The yere .M. xcix. Godfre wan the citie Ierusalē, and was straight waye made kyng. But he refused to be crowned with a golden crowne there, whe∣re Christes was crowned with a crown brayded of thornes. This happened foure hundreth thre score and eight yeres before that Hierusalem was taken out of the Perses power by Heraclius. But not muche aboue thirtene yeres after became the Sa∣racens lordes of Hierusalem. Many yeares after were the Saracens dryuen out of Hierusalem by the Turkes. About this tyme gat the Christiās Ie¦rusalem again, and subdued many cities & contreis there about. They had the realme of Ierusalem. lx¦xxviij. yeares, vntyll the yere of Christ a thousand, one hundreth & foure score & seuen. The Souldane wanne Ierusalem againe in the tyme of Frederick Barbarossa. The chaunge of many duchyes in Germany. HOw many miseries the inwarde warreThe  raysed in Germany  the bishop  Rome. of Germany, whiche was sturred by the byshop of Rome wylenesse, hath brought with it, may easely be gathered thereby, that when the princes and great men were slayne, the lord shyppes and dominions were chaunged. Henry the fourth gaue to the Catuly Lordes of Schwaben the lande of Baier. After Rudolphus death gaue Henry the fourth the duchy of Schwa∣ben to Frederick of Stauffen hys sonne in lawe that had maried hys daughter. The auncetry or
kynred of the Frankes dyed in a very shorte space. Ecbertus erle of Misnia was slayne. Gebhardus the father of that Lotharius, whiche became after∣ward Emperoure, was slayne also in a battaill: and to conclude, the power of Germane is wholy made feble and turned vpsyde downe by this debate of the princes. Whan Hiltebrande was deade, a byshop called Victor the third of that name was chosen out of the citie of Rome by his companions, in spete of Cle∣ment. But when Victor was deade a litle after, by them was Vrbanus the, ij. chosen byshop of Rome The same returned to Ro. by their ayde that were▪ now appointed to go to Ierusalem. Being restored in the see, he droue out Clemens. Paschalis the, ij. succeded Vrbanus the .ij. This∣same was first taken by Henry the fyft. Afterward did he constrayne hym to crowne hym Emperoure. Henry the fyft, the xvij. Germane Emperoure. THe yeare of Christe .M. C. vii. beganneHenry the. . Henry the fyft to reigne after his fathers decesse, and reigned .xx. yeres. Verely he was well rewarded of the byshops, that folowyng their counsails, he warred vpon his fa∣ther the good Emperoure. Comminge to Rome, he coulde not obtayne the crowne of the byshop of Rome, without he dyd fyrst ordeyne that thence∣forth it shoulde be alowed that both the byshop of Rome and other byshops should be made without the Emperours approbating and consent. Besides
that also was at that tyme so great an vproure ma∣de in the citie of Rome by the byshop of it, that ex∣cept the Emperoure had defended his lyfe with his owne hande, he had bene lost. When the Emperour had the ouerhande, many Romanes were put tomple graūce death and taken prysoners. The byshop was taken also, and led out of the citie: And when communica∣tion was had wyth hym of the coronation & right of makyng the byshop of Rome and other byshops, Paschalis dyd frely graunt, that Emperours shuld take to them that prerogatiue, that no byshop of Ro¦me nor other should be chosen, without their graūt. From thence are they returned to Rome, and Hen∣ry was crowned Emperoure of Paschalis. But after that the Emperoure was departed out of Italy, the byshop turned hys mynde, and ma¦kyng an assemble or counsayll dyd not onely reuoke the graunted priuilege, but dyd also excōmunicate and accurse the Emperoure. Whiche thyng when it was shewed Henry the fyfte, retourning straight waye to Rome with a greate power, he droue out the byshop, and ordemed another in his place. In the meane season dyd not the byshops of Germany syt styll, whiche dyd againe set the Saxons against the Emperoure, so ore also, that Germany beynge eftsones styrred with mutuall debates, dyd mete eche other with displayde banners, and in the yere M. C. xv. the .xi. daye of February was the battailThe ba  Mansfeld by Māsfelde, neare by the wood Catulaia, wherin was slayne Hoterus Erle of Mansfelde. Wherfore the Emperoure prceauynge, that this playe coulde not be assuaged without cōtinuall
battail, nether would the Romish byshops leaue of, tyll they had oppressed hym as they had done hys father before: the good prince had aduice to the com¦mon peace of the empyre, and renounced frely theHenry the .v. renoūced hys ryght of the choysynge of byshops. right of his priuilege. Therfore as the peace was made betwene the byshop of Rome and Emperour by this occasion, and also betwene the other lordes, and was proclaymed not farre from Wormes by the Rhene, where greate armies were together on both parties: greate ioye was made in all Germa∣ny for this accorde of common peace. This Henry warred also in Hollande and Lo∣rayne. As for Lotharius duke of Saxony, who was made Emperour after Henry, came to Mentz in along and vile garment humbly requyryng par∣don of the Emperoure. The same dyd Henry graūt hym frely of hys syngular mercy. This Henry had no manchylde, and therefore came the duchy of the Frankes to Conrade sonne to Frederick of Stauf∣fen and Henries the fyftes syster. Gelasius the .ij. succeded Paschalis the .ij. This∣same was dryuen out of Rome by Henry the fyft, and in hys steade was Gregorius made byshop. Gelasius died in Fraunce in exile. When Gelasius the .ij. was deade, was chosen in Fraunce byshop of Rome Calistus the .ij. who commyng to Rome, fought some battayls wyth Gregorius the false byshop, whome Henry the fyft had made. At the last was Gregorius taken, and set arswarde vpon an asse, was caried about the citie. Vnder Calistus was the peace made with the Em∣peroure Henry the fyft.
Honorius the .ij. succeded Calist{us} the bysh. of Ro. Innocentius the .ij. was made byshop after Ho∣norius. In spite of this man was Petrus Leonis chosen, who called himself Anacletus. Of hym was Innocentius driuen out with force. Lotharius as∣swaged this rumour, who was crowned Empe∣roure of Innocentius. Lotharius the Saxon, the xviij. Germane Emperoure. THe yeare of Christe .M. cxxvii. was Lo∣thariuss  Saxon. duke of Saxony chosen Empe∣roure by the Electors. whose father Geb∣hardus was slayne by Henry the fourth. Lotharius reigned thyrtene yeares. This Germane empire hath oft ben shaken with moste heuy assaultes. For now agayne is raysed a great and durable vproure against Lotharius al∣so. For the Schwaben and Frankes, which had lōg warred with the Saxons toke in euell worth, that the highnesse of the empire came to the Saxons. Besydes that also were the sonnes of the dukes of Schwaben borne of Henry the fyftes syster: & ther¦fore did they pretend, that the empire of right shuld be belongyng to them. Henry the .v. (as is sayd be∣fore) gaue to Conradus of Schwaben his systers husbande the duchy of Franken. Godfry counte of Palatine was with him, who chofe Conradus Em¦peroure, & to him did leane the cities of the Schwa¦ben and Franckes. But Catulus Henry duke of Baierland toke Lo¦tharius parte, for he was Lotharius daughters husband, wherby also the possessiō of Saxony came
to the Baiers by succession hereditare. And thoseThe princes of brunsig came of the Ca . also that now a daies are called princes of Brun∣swig, are of the Baiers bloud, of Catulus Henry du¦ke of Baier. That Conradus might prenent Lotharius he went into Italy, and toke in Lombardy, where he was also crowned with an yron crown. In the mea¦ne tyme besyeged & wan Lotharius the cities Spr¦re, Vlme and Nurenberg, and after that persued he Conradus into Italy. For the Saxon Lotharius beyng more sage and wyly, thought well, that with¦out Germany were well assured, Conradus coulde not kepe Italy. Wherfore when Conradus knew that both the cities of Germany were lost, and that no hope of succoure was to be loked for out of Ger¦many, to retayne Italy: leauyng Italy, he dyd ma∣ke a conuencion of peace with Lotharius throughS. Bernarde made the pea¦ce betwene y• Emperours Conradus & Lotharius. the entreatement of sainct Bernarde, and left the empyre that he had taken vpon hym. Lotharius went twyse into Italy. First to assuage the commo¦tions that were raysed at Rome against Innocen∣tius the byshop, for choisyng another byshop. After that against Roger, which had inuaded Campania and Apulia. He droue hym out of Italy: but when Lotharius was deade, Roger returned. Of the Roman lawes repared and restored. LOtharius is not onely praysed for his no∣table valiaūtnesse in warres, where with he hath set both Germany and Italy at a staye & rest: but also for his endeuoure in ye
religion and good lawes. In his tyme was in Ita∣ly by the quene Mectildis a man of great learnyngWernherus restorer of y• lawes. called Wernherus, whome Accursius the lawer cal¦leth oft Irnemerius. The same founde the bokes of the Romane lawes in the liberaries dusted & vn∣regarded, and brought them to lyght agayne: Lo∣tharius commaunded to vse them openly in scoles, and to geue sentence agayne after them in iudgemē¦tesThe pyse  profitables of the Rom. lawes. of the empyre. And so by this meanes was that treasure brought to lyght agayn, whiche none can be more profitable, nor more costly, namely whereof innumerable profites are flowen. For first it is a cer¦taine lawe and conformable to mans reason resto∣red to whole Europa: by reason all nacions, and all other lawes vse this Romane lawe in searchynge right as a certayne line or carpenters rule: for it is moste nearest applyed to common honestie. Secōd¦ly do thees restored Romane lawes not a lytle pro∣fyte thereto, that they gyue commaundementes of the common behaue ours of this lyfe and best ma∣ners, whiche are no where founde better: I passe o∣uer that the purenesse of the Latine tungue began to florysh agayn, by restoryng of this lawe as borne again. But when this study of the lawe was in∣stitute, straightwaye were become great and many excellent lawers, whiche busied both to interprete the lawes, and to set them againe in vre. Truely, I can not maruaile ynough, that men became so well learned at that tyme, wherein the vse of the Latine tunge, the histories, finally al the auncient Romane disciplines were left of for the whyle: so that it may easely be supposed, that those fyrst lawers were not
onely men of greate diligence in studies, but also greate and wyse men exercysed with muche expe∣rience of common matters: For wythout exercyse, had it bene impossible to knowe the Roman lawes. Wherefore are the same doctors of the lawe to bee iudged no lesse, than those auncient lawiers Vlpia∣nus, Seruius and other. Azo, whiche is euen the chefe of the expoundersAzo. of the lawe, lyued in the tyme of this Lotharius. After the same lyued Accursius, the same also lyuedAccursius. vntil the time of Frederick the second. In the tyme of Henry of Lucelborowe were many and notable doctors, as Bartholus and other. Gratianus, whoBartholus. Gracianus. gathered the Decrees of the common lawe, was also in the tyme of Lotharius. But before were su∣che bookes also. For of this sorte was a lytle booke written by a byshop of Wormes, whiche at that ty∣me was vsed: we also haue sene it in our daies. But when the studies of the lawe floryshed now euery where, and that the best learned embraced them,By what oc∣casion the mō¦kes are brou∣ght to wryte. (as it happeneth moste commonly in a new thing,) the monkes perceauyng that the knowledge of ho∣ly scripture beganne to coule and be despysed, for studieng the lawe: they also beganne a studye of Theology or diuinitie, and ordeyned scole disputa∣tions in diuine matters, as the lawers dyd in ciuyll matters. Thus beganne the diuinitie scole, wherof we shall saye more hereafter. Cunradus a Schwabe, the .xix. Germane Emperoure.
THe yeare of Christ .M. cxl. succeded Con¦radusConradus a Schwabe. borne duke of Schwaben Lotha∣rius the Saxon in the empyre, who was made prince of the Frankes by Henry the fyft. He reigned fourten yeres. It is no where red that he was crowned of the Romysh byshop. This Cunradus (as we said before) rose against Lotha∣rius, but he was constrained to yelde himself vnder the Emperours power. But when Lotharius was deade, the succession of the empire fell vpon Conra∣dus: though Henry duke of Baier & Saxony that had marted Lotharius daughter coueted the empi¦re, and besyeged Conradus at Auspurg. But Con∣radus the Emperoure minished Henries power, & gaue the duchy of Baier to the Erle of Eastenrich. Howbeit this warre was not very long: for not lōg after died Henry in Saxony, and was laide in Lo∣tharius his wiues fathers graue. After that dyd a prince of Catuli warre with the duke & Emperour Cōradus for the duchy of Baier, but inuain. Wher∣fore he was afterwarde reconciled againe with the Emperoure, through Frederick that became Em∣peroure afterward. Conradus with many princesConradus went to Ieru¦salem against the Saracens and a great hoost went to Hierusalem, againste the Saracens Christes enemyes, through the counsail of sainct Bernarde, against the whiche also toke wa¦pen Lewis kyng of Fraunce: but many souldioursEmanuel Em¦perour of Cō¦stantinoples disloyaltie. dyed thorough the disloyaltie of Emanuel Em∣peroure of Constantinople. Yet had our men ma∣ny and great battails in Asia and at Hierusalem in the meane season. Cunradus returned the fourth yere after into Germany & died, and was buried in
the towne Lorch by Gemund. In the warre that Conradus had with the Ca∣tulies, he toke the castel and town Weinsburg, that lyeth not farre from the riuer Necehar. Then com¦maundedThe vertue of noble dames in the citie Weinsburg. the Emperour to take al the gentlemen: but the gentle women shoulde be letten go with so great packe of goodes as they could cary. Thē the gentlewomen forsakyng the goodes would rather cary away their chyldren. Whiche thing when som did blame, whiche would haue the yong children be prisoned, sayeng: the graunt was to cary goodes, & not men. The Emperour delited so in the vertue of the noble women, that he gaue them leaue not only to cary away their childrē, but also al their goodes. Celestinus the .ij. was byshop of Rome after In∣nocencius the .ij. Lucius the .ij. was byshop after Celestinus. Eugenius the third was made byshop after Lu∣cius. Against the same was another byshop chosen by the Romanes, of whom Eugenius was driuen out: but gatheryng a Frenche ayde, he returned, o∣uer came his aduersary, and was restored againe. Anastasius the .iiij. succeded Eugenius. Adrianus the .iiij. was byshop after Anastasius. Of hym was Frederick Barbarossa or with theWilliam of Sicily. reade bearde crowned Emperoure: but afterward sticked he to William of Sicily, which kept Naples and made the Lombardes obedient to hym, by a moost haynous coniuracion against the empyre. HeAn example of the Romish bysh▪ disloyal¦tie & tyranny. did excōmunicate Frederick, & raysed most haynous warres in Italy. It is written yt he shuld haue saied not long before he died: there is no more wretched
state in earth then the byshoprick of Rome: and toThe cōplaint of Adrian by∣shop of Rom. whē he shuld dye. get that byshopryck by bloude, is not to succede Pe¦ter, but Romulus rather, who flew his owne bro∣ther, that he myght haue the monarchy and reigne alone. These wordes wytnesse sufficiently, that it repented hym of the debate that he had begonne against the Emperoure. After Adrianus began a greate diuision. Some Cardinals chose Octauianus, who was called Vic∣tor. Some chose Alexander the .iij. Frederick Bar¦barossa helde Octauianus for the true byshop of Rome. But yet in the meane season commaunded he by a counsayll to enquire who shoulde abyde by∣shop. But Alexander refusyng the aucthoritie of the counsayll, kepeth hymselfe in Fraunce, and ac∣curseth Frederick. At the last gat Alexander the by shopryck by the ayde of the Italians, and returned to Rome, where Frederick came then also. But A∣lexander beyng afrayed, fled to Venice, where at the last, peace was made. But hereof shall we spea∣ke more in the history of Frederick. Frederick the .i. called Barbarossa, or wyth the red bearde the .xx. Ger∣mane Emperoure. THe yeare of Christe .M. C. lij. was Fre∣derickFrederick y• fyrst. chosen Emperour, the fyrst of that name, surnamed Barbarossa. He gouer∣ned the Empyre .xxxvij. yeares. He was a borne duke of the noble house of Schwaben, Con¦radus ye Emperours brothers sonne, a most renov∣med prince of hardinesse, valiauntnesse and iustice.
So farre as I can perceaue by his dedes, it semeth that Frederick, as a gentle Schwabe, could not pa∣ciently beare these iniuries, that the byshops of Ro∣me dyd hym: and I thynke it came by this, that he was more harde againste them. In the begynnyng of his empyre, set he Baier∣lande and Eastenriche at one, and restored to Catu∣lus Henry duke of Saxony, and Henry sonne tooWhen the du¦chy of Easten riche began. Lotarius doughters husbande, Baierlande. He made his Cosin Henry Erle of Eastenryche duke, and set boundyng borders to ether duchy. Then began first the duchy of Eastenriche. But Ca¦tulus Henry kept Baierlande not longe: for he for∣soke Fredericke in Italy, and raised new rebellionsWho are the dukes of Ba∣ier and coun∣ties of Pala∣tine. in Germany against hym. Wherfore Frederick dri∣uyng away Henry afterwarde, the duchy of Baier∣lande was geuen to Otho of Witelsbach. And of this Othoes bloude are those princes borne, which now a dayes haue Baierlande, and the counties Palatine by the Rene. The right of election on the Saxonies behalfe, gaue he to Bernarde prince of Anhalt. Henry flyenge, went into Englande wyth his wyfe and chyldren: but at the last when he re∣turned, composition was made, that Catulus Hen∣ryLubeck. should possesse the duchy of Brunswich. But thē dyd Phillippe byshop of Colen take the countrey Westphalen from the duchy of Saxony withforce. Frederick besyeged Lubeck, and subdued it toMilan. the empyre. He compelled also the kyng of Denne∣marck to require peace. They of Milane rebelled, and went about to brynge the other cities of Italy vnder their subiec∣tion.
For that maner and wylfulnesse to haued omi¦nion, doth last yet by the Italians: wherfore Frede¦rick goyng into Italy, apeased all rumors. But af∣terwarde did the byshop of Rome entice the Mila∣ners, and the other cities to a coniuracion againste Frederick, and dyd excommunicate hym. For whi∣cheFrederick was excom∣municate by the byshop of Rome. cause he went nowe the fourth tyme into Ita∣ly, he subdued and spoyled Milane, and assayed all the meanes he coulde to alaye the debate betwene the byshop of Rome and hym: but it was inuayne. For Alexander the third byshop of Rome could not be brought to that poynte, that he shoulde not vexe the moste gentle prince: wherefore Frederick went to Rome, but Alexander fled to the Venecians. Then was Otho Fredericks sonne sent agaynste the Venecians: who beyng taken in a battayll vpon the water, condicions of peace were accepted. For Frederick the Emperoure sawe that the byshops of Rome coulde reste by no meanes. Moreouer consydered he also, that besyde that hys sonne was taken, what was chaunged to the Emperours that were afore hym. Wherefore Frederick vsed sub∣mission and moste lowly humblenesse. For he cameThe humilite or lowlynesse of Frederick to Venice, and layed hymselfe downe before the Churche dore afore the Romyshe byshop, and suf∣fred hymselfe to be troden with his fete: who com∣maunded also to be cried out: Thou shalt treade vpō the adder and coceatrice, and then dyd he absolue hym at the last. Frederick sayde contrariwyse, that he dyd not shewe that lowlynesse to Alexander, but to Peter. Whereto aunswered Alexander: both to me and to Peter. But what is to be thought of this
dede of the byshop of Rome, that do I committee the reader to iudge. The byshops of Rome rayse war∣res without any lawfull cause. For Alexander stri∣ueth for his priuate election, nether woulde he euer admitte any counsaill, nor any other condicions. And besyde this iniury, dyd he vse also extremeThe extreme tyranny of A¦lexander the thyrde bysh. of Ro. against y• Emperour Frederick. wylfulnesse and pryde againste the hyghest power of Christianitie, when he dyd treade vpon the Em∣peroure with his fete, whome God commaundeth euen to honoure. But when this agremēt was made, he chose Hē∣ry his sonne to be party ruler with hym, the yere of Christ .M. C. lxxxvj. lest the empyre shuld be with out a gouernoure, when he toke his yourney into Asia. He maried his sonne to Cōstantia the daugh∣ter to Rogerius, by whiche meanes the kyngdome Sicily and Naples came to the empyre & Germa∣nes, and made the young kyng gouernoure of Ita∣ly. Not long after went he into Asia with a greate preparacion of warre & company of many princes, to recouer again the citie Ierusalem, that was lostFrederick the fyrst goynge into Asia what warres he had. not long before. He toke in many & mighty cities in Cilicia, & vanquyshed the Saracens & Turkes. He made the Souldane so afraide for hym, that he cau¦sed many of his greate cities to cast down their wal¦les in Syria, when he did mistrust to kepe them, & he himself fled into Egypt. For the kynges of Eng∣land & Fraūce were already arriued into Asia with a great army. But what fortuned when they had gathered a greate hoost? Fortune whiche is not alwaye good, beganne to turne. Frederick when he had now takē the cōtrey Armenia, by reason of ye
heate, went into a swyft water with his horse, and the doughty prince was drowned the yeare .M.C lxxxix. Nether ought it to be maruayll, that Frede∣rick peryshed of this wyse in a ryuer: for historiesFrederick went oft into waters. do make mencion, that he otherwhyles also went into waters. In the second setting forth vpon Mi∣lane, the Italians pitched their tentes on the other syde of the ryuer Abdua, whiche is no lesse then is the Tems about Sion, and mocked Frederick the Emperoure, who was of this syde the ryuer with his hoost: thynkyng, that by reason the ryuer was betwene them both, they myght mocke the Empe∣roure wythout daunger. Then did the Emperour steppe into the ryuer without feare, and commaun∣ded the horsemen to folowe hym. Whiche thynge seyng the, Italians thought shoulde neuer come to passe, (for ether they laye here and there, or vnadui∣sedly went vp and downe without order,) they to∣ke the flyght, and were ouercome of a small compa∣ny of horsemen. This feate witnesseth that Frede∣rick was a prince of excellent hardinesse▪ and also one that doubted not to put hymselfe lyghtely into waters. The prince of Boheme was made a kyng by Fre¦derick,The prince of Bohem is made a kyng for his sundry and excellent faithfulnesse, that he vsed toward Frederick at Milane. Lucius the .iij. was made byshop of Rome after Alexander. Vrbanus the .iij. succeded Lucius. Gregorius the .viij. succeded Vrbanus. Clemens the .iij. folowed after Gregorius. Celestinus the .iij. was after Clemens. Henry
the .vi. was crowned of hym. Henry the .vi. the xxi. Germane Emperoure. THe yeare of Christ .M.C.xC. began Hen¦ryHenrye the syxte. the vi. of that name to raigne after his fathers deceasse, and raygned seuen yea∣res. He had great warres in Apulia, and finally subdued the whole realme. In Germany had he enemyes the byshop of Colen and Lutich or Liege, besyd them also the Burgundions. In this vproure was the byshop of Lutich slayne, and the other beynge abashed by thys myshappe, left of frō theyr enterpryse, and obeyed frelye. He made hys sonne Frederick yet a chylde Emperour wyth the consent of y• electors. The election was confirmed with sealed letters of the princes electors. the same was afterward called Frederick the .ii. But whanFrederick the seconde. Henry was now dyenge▪ he committed the warde∣shyppe of the chylde, and empyres gouernaunce to his brother Philippe, who had the gouernaunce of the empyre, whan Henry was yet alyue. Innocentius the .iii. was byshop of Rome after Celestinus. The same persued Philippe the Emperour, and it is reported he shulde haue sayde: He wolde takeThe Romish byshops crake. awaye from Philippe the Emperours crowne, or hys thre crowned miter shulde be taken from hym. He made Emperoure Otho the Saxon. But thys frendeshyp was not stedfast nether: for Otho was excommunicated of the Romyshe byshop not longe after.
Philippe sonne to Barbarossa, the .xxii. Germane Emperour. THe yeare of Christ .M.C.xcviii. was cho¦senPhilippe Emperour. Emperour Philippe the sonne of Bar¦barossa, duke of Schwaben, and gouer∣nour of Italy on y• Emperours behalfe, he raygned ten yeares. In hys tyme rose greate vproures in Germanye. For whan Henrye was deade, haystynge out of Italy, Philippe dyd admo¦nysh the princes electors of the election had of hys yonge cosyn made Emperoure. And that the em∣pyre shulde haue no alteracyon, ether they shulde cōmitte to hym the admynistracyon, or make hym Emperoure, and none other prince. But whan In¦nocentius the Bysh. of Rome smelled that, he dyd earnestly procure by the princes electors that ano∣ther Emperour shulde be chosen, shewyng openly: he coulde not brouke Philippe: for he was displea∣sed wyth hym, because that whan he was gouer∣noure in Italye, he had done I wote not what a∣gaynst the Byshop of Rome wherefore also he was excommunicated of Innocentius. But nowe had alegat absolued Philippe of the excommunication, wo also was punyshed therefore of the Byshopp of Rome. But what nede many wordes? The byshop of Ro. hated all Fredericks kinred, & intended▪ to rout it out. Wherefore was chosen by the electors Emperour Bertholdus duke of zaryngē, who be∣syde yt he was riche, was worthy noprayse in a ma∣ner.Bertholdus duke of Ze∣ingen. Philipp was in the toune Mulhausen, where were come also many princes, as of Bohemy, Sax∣ony, Baier & Schwaben, of whome he was made
Emperour. But whan the duke of zeryngē knewe that he was weaker than Phlippe of pussaunce and power, he came frely to him, and yelded himselfe as to his lyege lord, refusing to take vpon him the na∣ming of the Emperiall maiesty. But the byshopp of Ro. ceassed nothyng the more of his forepryse: but broughte to passe that the prince of Brunswich O∣tho,Otho the fourth. the fourth of that name, sonne to Henrye that fled, was made Emperoure of the bysh. of Colen, and county af Palatine. The same dyd Innocenti∣us confirme and crowne, cursynge and excommu∣nicating Philippe. Wherefore went from hym to Otho not a fewe princes, the prince of Bohemye, the erle of Thuringen Herman and the byshop of Argentine or Strasburg. But yet dyd God in theGod prospe¦red the busi∣nesses of thē that are law∣fully called. meane season prosper Philips affaires, insomuche that he gouerned the empyre all the tyme of hys lyfe. Fyrst goynge in Alsace, he toke in Strasburg and compelled the byshop of Strasburge to yelde hymselfe. In the meane tyme was Otho come tyll Spyre: but he also was dryuen backe by Philippe into Saxony, and as Philippe folowed now vpon hym into Thuryngen, thether came the kynge of Bohemy, and ye erle of Thuryngen. But they refu∣syng to geue battayl, yelded thēselues to Philppe. Afterwarde besyegynge the citye Colen also, he compelled the bysh. to yelde himselfe: who though he had crowned Otho before, yet crowned he Phi∣lyppe also at Achen wyth the Emperyall crowne. Not longe after Otho strengthened wyth the suc∣course of some byshops, he forsoke the byshoppe of Colen, because he was fallen to Philippe: but than
returned Philippe to Colen, and fought some fel∣des wyth Otho, and gat the victory: but Otho fled into Englande. At the laste whan the princes sawe that Othoes parte was weakened, and that Phylippe kept the empyre, who also made hym selfe familiar with the princes. He had to wyfe Irene, doughter to theIrene dough¦ter to the Em¦perour of Cō¦stantinople. Emperour of Constantinople: of the which he had foure doughters, whereof he maryed the one to the kynge of Bohemes sonne, another gaue he to the prince of Brabant. Than I saye, whan the prin¦ces sawe all these thinges, they deuised to make an accorde. To the bishop of Rome wer Legates sent to make an atonement betwene him and Philippe, and also that Otho shuld be taken in fauoure. Whe¦refore the Bysh. of Rome sendyng embassiadours into Germany, Phylippe the Emperoure was ab∣solued of the excommunicatyon. The agrement was made also, that Otho shulde marye one of the dougdters, to the intent the bande of the concorde and familiaritye made, myght the better be kepte betwene both partees. All thys was done. But whan this agrement and leage was made, Philip dwelt afterward at Bamberg. And vpon a day whan he was lettē bloud, and the good prince suspected now no harme, and had in hys chamber no more wyth hym, than the Chaunceler and hys karuer of Walpurch, ther came in to him Otho of Witelspache, whose kynred Friderick the first had made honorable & famous, by geuynge him the du∣chy of Baier. The same whan he sawe that the Em¦perour was alone without any company or ayde,
he fell sodenly vpon hym not thinkyng any thing,Philippe the Emperoure was slayne of Otho of Witelspach and stroke a greate wounde in the Emperoures necke. The Karuer came runnynge, to helpe hys prince, but the murtherer by reason of hys swyft∣nesse escaped. Thys woūd was deadly to Philipp: and as he was deade, he was buryed, at Bamberg. But afterwarde was the bodye dygged vppe, and brought to Spyre by Fridericke the .ii. Vpon the stone that lyeth on the graue, is written Philipp of Bamberg. Nether wanted Otho of WytelspacheAn example of venge∣aunce. the murtherer finally his worthy punyshment: for he hym selfe was slayne also not longe after. Of the institution of the freres beg∣gynge ordres. IN the tyme of Philippe founded Domi∣nicusDominicus. Franciscus. and Franciscus the Orders of beg¦gynge Freres. For the monkes or cha∣nons that were ryche the same beynge now become mighty lordes, despising the seruice of teachynge in the Churche or congregacyon, went to warre wyth ye Emperoures and princes. Ther∣fore beganne these two men than to preache, and toke to their companions sobre and peaceable men, as men geuen to learnynge and thus beganne that thinge. After that began more orders after the ex∣ample of these, as it commeth moost communely to passe, as oft as new thynges begynne to be wonde∣red at. But as nothyng remayneth stedfast alway, and durable in his degre, in mens affayres: euen so do we se the orders of Freres and monkes to lose theyr state and doctrines.
Otho the fourth, the .xxiii. Germane Emperoure. THE yeare of Christ, M.CC.ix. afterOtho the fourth. that Philippe was deade, fell the ma∣iestye of the empyre to Otho prince of Brunswich, who was chosen Empe∣roure afore also agaynste Philipp. He raygned after Philips decease foure yeares. But wythin these foure yeares went he fyrst to Rome, and receaued the Imperiall crowne of Innocen∣tius. In Italy vsed he a very kynglye and mooste costly apparelynge, and shewed a notable grauitye toward all princes and cityes, insomuch, that they all dyd humbly worshyp hym. After hys coronaci∣on toke he some imperyall cityes, whyche the Ro∣mysh bysh. dyd possede: but thys was an occasyon of the breche of frendeshyp with the bysh. of Rome. Wherefore Innocentius dyd accurse Otho, euen whan he was yet present in Italy: and before O∣tho came agayne into Germany, he sent ambassa∣dours to the princes, that they should choyse ano∣ther Emperoure, namely Frederick the seconde, sonne to Henry the vi. It was very proudly and cruellye done of theThe pryde and cruellye of the by∣shoppes of Rome. Bysh. of Rome, so to excommunicate and accurse the Emperoures, nether to excommunicate them only, but also to put them from the empyre, so that one can thynke no honestye in these dedes of the Romysh byshoppes, specially yf ye ponder and way all the causes and reasons. All these were excom∣municated in a rowe, and yet were they myghtye and wyse Emperoures, that haue brought to passe great and notable thinges.
Henry the fourth a Franke.The Empe∣rours that were excom∣municated by the by∣shops of Rome. Henry the fyfth a Franke. Friderick the fyrst a Schwabe. Philippe sonne to Frederick the fyrste. Otho the iiii. duke of Brunswig. Friderick the .ii. Henry the .vi. sonne. Conradus Fridericks sonne. The yeare of Christe .M.CC.xii. Otho beyng come agayne into Germany, though he knew that the princes myndes were set agaynst him, yet poyn¦ted he a day of parlament at Norinberg, and admo¦nyshed the princes, that they shulde not graunt the bishops of Ro. that authoritye, that they shulde put downe Emperoures at theyr pleasure: for the em∣pyre pertayneth not to Romysh byshops, but to the Germane princes. He brought some princes to his mynd with this admonition, and fell vpon HermanHerman county of Thuringen. S. Elizabeth erle of Thuryngen the father of erle Lewys, to whome. S. Elysabeth was spoused. For erle Herman, to do the Byshoppe of Rome pleasure, set hymselfe agaynst the Emperour, as a man condem¦ned wyth byshoppe of Romes excommunicatyons and curses. But afterwarde was Otho forsaken of all the princes, except one erle of March in Mi∣sen. For Fryderycke the yonger, enemy to Otho, was alreadye come into Germany: besyde that by the byshoppe of Romes procurynge, was the Fren¦che kynge in armes agaynste Otho. But whan tydynges came to Otho of Frideryckes com∣myng he prepared hym to go agaynste hym into Alsasse, and was wyth hys hooste at Brysacke: howe beyte beynge destytute of all the ayde of
hys, he was constrayned to flye into Saxony. But than repayring an hooste, and beyng holpen of the kynge of Englande, he went into low Germany, a∣gaynst the Frenche kynge, of whome he was ouer∣come, and dyed afterwarde, the yeare .M. CC. xviij. He lyued wythout the tytles of thempyre .v. yeares. Friderick the .ij. the .xxiiij. Germane Emperoure. THe yeare of Christ .M. CC. xiij. was cho¦senFriderick the second. Emperoure Friderick the .ii. of that name, the sonne of Barbarossa, kinge of Naples and Cicily, and duke of Schwa∣ben, whan Otho was put downe, and was crow∣ned Emperoure at Achen. He raygned seuen and twenty yeares. Yet before he dyed, was he depry∣ued fyue yeares of the Empire, by Innocentius the Bysh. of Rome. Noman can pitye ynough the case of thys laudable Emperoure, that he was endued wyth many and noble vertues: and yet in the mean season suffred he moost extreme and heuy persuin∣ges of Romane byshops. He was verye well lear∣ned in many languages. For he knew perfectly the Latine, Greke, Germane and Saracens langua∣ges. Besydes thys set he forth also the disciplines of good sciences. He brought to passe that the bokeThe science of Astrono∣mye was brought to lyght agayn by Friderik the .ij. of Ptolome, called Almagestū was translated out of the Saracens language into Latyn, and by that meanes the doctryne of Astronomye, whyche no∣man had taughte many yeares before in Europa, was brought to lighte.
Hys fyrste warre had he in Germanye agaynste Otho the .iiii. by the bishop of Romes counsel: but he had the same rewarde for it, that other Empe∣rours afore him haue had. The seconde warre had he in Brabant, agaynste the duke of Brabant and Othoes adherentes, and restored Lorain againe to the Germane empyre. The yeare of oure lorde .M. CC. xx. was Fri∣dericke crowned of Honorius the .iii. Emperoure. Two erles in Tuscia had taken in some cityes that belonged to the empire, the which whan Friderick had taken agayne, the erles that were driuen out, fled to Honorius bysh. of Ro. who toke them in hys defence and commaunded Friderick, to restore thē into the possession of the cityes, that he had taken from them. But whan Friderick refused that, Ho∣norius excommunicated hym, settyng asyde all the former loue. The yeare .M. CC. xxii. came Friderick again into Germany, and holding a parlamēt at Wyrtz∣purg, he made Henry his yonger son felowgouer∣noure of the empyre, and was crowned at Achen.Henry the sonne was taken by Frideryke hys father. But afterwarde was the same Henry taken by his father, because he had made a leage with certayn ci¦tyes of Lombardy agaynst the father: & while the father liued yet, died he of ye filthinesse of the prison. Though the city Hierusalem, was now loste, yet possessed the Christians other great and mighty cy¦tyes in Siria. But whan the power of the Tur∣kes grewe dayly more & more, and the fortune of yeIoannes kyng of Hie-rusalem. Christiās went back: Ioannes came to Rome, who had yet the title of ye king of Hierusalē, and desyred
ayde of Honorius the byshop of Rome, and optay∣ned by Honorius, that Friderick who was accur∣sed, was absolued. Wherefore Fridericke and the Germane princes consented frelye to make an ar∣mye for the delyueraunce of the cytye Hierusalem: and the kyng of Hierusalem gaue Iole hys dough¦ter in maryage to Friderick the Emperoure. Whe¦rebyWhy the kynges of Sicyly clayme the tle of Hie∣rusalem. it commeth, that yet at this houre the kynges of Sicily ascrybe to them the title of the realme of Hierusalem. Fridericke the Emperour than went wyth a great army, well furnyshed to Hierusalem and wyth hym many princes of Germany, among the which was also Lewis y• landtgraue, to whomLewis the Landtgraue S. Elisabeth was maried, & the same dyed in that settynge forth at Brundusium. The yeare .M. CC. xxviij. went Fridericke to Hierusalem, and dyd hys busynesse so, that the Souldane gaue hym frely agayne not only Hieru∣salem, but many other cytyes there about. Fride∣rick was crowned at Hierusalem the yeare .M. C C. xxix. He caused the citye Hierusalem to be made sure agaynste the power of the enemyes. He made treuce with the Souldane for ten yeres. All thys shewed he by a letter to the byshop of Ro. and requyred absolucion of the curse: for by thys Gre∣gorye was he accursed also. I wote not for what title in the kingdome of Sicily. But it was a small matter for the byshop of Rome to deny to the Em∣peroure the absolution: for this gyle also or rather iniury had he done to Frederick being absent. For he set y• Italian cities against him, & toke in by force some cityes in his patrimonial realme Naples. By
thys constraynt was Friderick driuē to come back agayn into Sicilye, and to rescue his realme come by inheritaunce, from feare of daunger. Although the bysh. of Ro. had ben sore dissoial against the Em¦perour in his absence, yet required he absolution so lowly, that he promysed he wolde holde the kyng dome of Sicily of him by fealtye. Besydes this also caused he the princes of Germanye to come into I∣taly, that at the least by them myght the debate be∣twen hym and the Emperour be alayed. Therfore dyd Gregorius absolue the Emperour agayne the yeare of Christe .M. CC. xxx. After yc came the Emperour Friderick the thyrd time into Italy, and warred in Eastenrich agaynst the Hungarians, & toke the eyty Vienne the which that she shuld be & remain an emperial city, he wold haue it confirmed with letters geuen there vpon. The yeare .M. CC. xxxviij. Whan Fridericke went agayn into Italy, they of Milan rose agaynst him, and many other strong cityes. To Milan dyd Friderick great harme: for the which cause the city es makynge an aliance wyth the byshop. of Ro. conFriderick y• ij. is excom-municated y• thyrd time. spired against Friderick the Emperour whome for this cause Gregorius the Romysh byshop doth ex∣communicate the third time, and condemneth him for an heretike, stearing also the Venecians to war vpon him. Friderick with opē writynges dyd com∣plain of the iniury done to hym, and in the meane tyme dyd he also humbly require absolution of the byshop of Ro. Ther were many of the Cardynals, whiche alowed not the bysh. of Romes counsels. But whan Frederick could by no meanes optayne
pardon of Gregorius, necessitye compelled Frede∣ryck to defende hymselfe: he had also his faction or diuision. For at that tyme was Italy diuyded in Guelphies and Gibelines, the Gibelini were for the Emperoure, and the Guelphi were wyth the Byshop of Ro. Ether name beynge brought vp in Germany, was translated and brought ouer intoGuelphi. Italy. For the kynred of the Guelphi, had conti∣nuall hatred agaynst Fredericks bloude. Whereof also they were called Guelphi, as alwaye hatefullGuelphi. enemyes of Fredericke. As for the spring of Frede¦ricks kynred was of the Weiblings, whereof they are called Guiblings, which the Italians (chaun∣ginge the name) do call Gibelini. The bysh. of Ro. constrayned by great necessitie dyd proclayme the crosse and pardon agaynst Fri∣derick the Emperoure, as though he were many∣festly vngodly, and destroyer of the religion. Fri∣derick toke that very euell: he besyeged Rome, but drue back agayne wythout takyng it, and toke the citye Rauennas. The yeare of Christ M. CC. xlv. Innocentius the iiij. holding a councel at Lyons in Fraunce, de∣posedFrideryk y• Emperoure  deposed of y• empyre by the byth. of . Friderick of the empyre, vsynge therto the Frenchmens ayde: and by letters he shewed the princes Electors, to choyse another Emperoure. But they made Emperoure Henry the Landt∣graue of Thuringen. The same was slayne before the citye Vlme wyth an instrument of warre. Friderick buylded a new citye in Italy, whiche was called Victoria. Whan he wanted syluer, heVictoria yty. caused to make a coyne of lether, y• he mighte haue
where wyth to pay his men of warre: but so sooneFridericke coynet ether in tyme of nede. as he had gotten syluer, he shulde geue them good and lawful mony for the lether coyne, which thing he dyd liberally. But now whā he could loke for no more ayde out of Germany: and that besydes thys hys sonne Encius was taken, who also dyed in the preson, he was sore distressed, and went into Apulia were he also dyed the yeare .M. CC. l. Some wryt that he was poisonned. Yee surely, the moost holy fathers coulde not rest, without they sawe the good prince clene rydde out of the waye. The king¦dome of Naples left he to hys sonne & heyre Cun∣radus. As for Italy remayned alwaye after diuy∣ded. For one part helde wyth the empyre, another wyth the byshop of Rome, vntyl the powers of the Venecians and of them of Mylane beganne after to growe and increase. Honorius the .iij. succeded Innocentius the .iij. of whome Friderick the .ii. was crouned, and after warde excommunicated. Gregorius y• .ix. was after Honorius, of whome was Friderick lykewyse accursed. After Gregorius was Celestinus the .iiij. bysh. of Rome. After Celestinus was Innocentius the .iiij. The∣same deposed Friderick from the empyre, and ac∣cursed hys sonne Cunradus. Cunradus the .iiij. the xxv Ger∣mane Emperour.
THe yeare of Christ .M. CC. l. raignedCnradus the fourth. Conradus the sonne of Fridericke af∣ter hys fathers deceasse, but he was ex¦communicated by Inocentius the .iiij. Henry the Landtgraue of Thuryn∣gen ouercame hym by Francoforde, whyle hys fa∣ther Frederick was yet alyue. Some wryte that thys warre was after hys fathers death, by Wyl∣lyam the Landtgraue. But whan Conradus per∣ceaued that he was destitute of the Germane prin∣ces ayde he gat him into his hereditary kyngdome Naples, and there he dyed the yeare .M. CC. liij. The ende of the dukes of Schwaben. CVnradus, of whome we haue now spo∣ken, had a wyfe of the Baiers bloude, of the whiche he had a sonne Conradinus who was nouryshed and brought vp in hys hereditary duchy of Schwaben, and after hys fathers deceasse wolde go to Naples hys heredy∣tary kyngdome. But Clemens the bishop of Rome called Charles the Frenche kynges brother into the realme of Naples agaynst hym. Conra∣dynus for so muche as he was duke of Schwaben, had a greate bende and hooste of Germanes about hym, and at the begynnynge had he greate vycto∣ryes. But at the laste were Conradinus the sonne of Conradus, and Fryderyck duke of Eastenriche taken by a trayne. Besydes thys were they en∣treated more vnsemelye than was pertaynynge and put to shame. At the laste were they behea∣ded throughe the counsell of the Romyshe byshop.
O notable crueltye. He must be euen as harde as aThe notable cruelty of Clemens bi∣shop of Ro. agaynst Cū∣radinus. stone verely, whome the examples of so great cru∣elty dyd not moue, namelye so noble a kynge, borne ofso many Emperoures, to be so shamefullye put to death by Clemens the Romysh byshop, without any ryghte or reason. Ther are yet euen at thys houre writinges, which were written at that time, in the which the good prince complayneth of the in¦iury, and rehearseth at length the whole matter or¦derly: so that it is no doute, the bishoppes of Rome haue vsed playne tiranny against Conradinus. Wiliam, the, xxvi. Germane Emperour. THe yeare of Christ M. C. C. liiij. wasWilliam Emperoure. chosen Emperoure Wylyam counte of Holland. It is sayde he was an ho¦nest manered prince, and of notable innocency of life: but he was slayn by the Friselanders the yerre. 1256. Vacation of the Empyre. WHan thys Wiliam was dead, the empire stode with out a certayne emperoure se¦uentene yeares, and that not wythout great destruction of the Germane naci∣on. Thys mischaunge grewe by the cyuyl warres, that were raysed in the empyre by the bysh. of Ro. Now whan the debate was rysen amonge the E∣lectorsAlfonsus kynge of Spayne and astronomiā. for the choyse, some chose Alfonsus kyng of Spayne Emperoure, because he was a very wyse man, and endued with notable vertues. As for thys Alfonsus is he, who not only had hys plea∣sure in the science of Astronomye, but also aug∣mented
and amēded the study thereof with many bokes wrytten. Thoughe Alfonsus was admony∣shed by the byshop of Rome to take vpon hym the Emperyall maiestye: yet refused he it earnestly, be∣cause of the vncertayn faythfulnesse and vnstable concord of the Romysh Byshops wyth the Empe∣rours. The other parte of the Electors chose Ri∣chard, the king of Englandes brother, and brought hym vntyll Basyll: but he was not accepted of the Empyre. Alexander the .iiij. succeded after Innocentius. At thys time lyued Albertus the greate. and Tho¦mas Aquinas. Vrbanus the .iiij. was after Alexander. Clemens the .iiij. succeded Vrbanus. Thyssame caused Conradynus Conradus sonne to be be∣headed. Whan Clemens was deade, was the see voyde two yeares through the dissension of choysynge a Byshop at the last was Gregorius the .x. chosen. The same admonyshed the Electors in the begyn∣nynge of hys byshopryck, to choyse agayne an Em∣peroure wyth egall consent, leste the state of the em¦pyre dyd wholy decaye. Rudolfe the .xxvij. GermaneRudolf erle  Habys∣burge. Emperoure. THe yere of Christ .M. CC. lxxiij. was Rudolfe chosen Emperour the erle of Habisburge, and counte prouincial of Alsace. He raygned .xix. yeares. He was confirmed of the Byshopp of Ro.
For the Emperoure and byshop of Rome came to∣gether at Lausana euen accordyng to the saieng of these two verses of auncient men. Twelue hundreth thre score and thertene yere, dyd stande. Lausana, tyll the pope and the kyng came the∣ther into that lande. Howbeit Rudolfe went not into Italy, nether receaued he the Imperiall crowne. He was wont to reherse Esops fable of the Foxe, which said to the Lion sicke in his denne: she were afrayd to come in therefore, because she sawe the footsteppes of bea∣stes that were gone in, but not of beastes that were come out. That lykewyse he dyd consyder, how his aunceters went oft into Italy with greate hoo∣stes: but mooste commonly returned home euell in∣treated. Yet in the meane season sent he a Lieute∣naunt into Italy, who was receiued of the bestpart of the Italian cities. The Bohemies and Baier withstode Rudolfe at the fyrst, but he subdued Baierlande forth with. Othacarus kyng of the Bohemies wold not obey, and besydes that helde Eastenriche, (that was now without heire, & belongyng to the empyre) against ryght and reason. Wherfore Rudolphe sent the Burggraue of Norenberg into Bohemy, to shewe the kyng on the Emperours behalfe, to obeye, andOthacarus hyg of the Bohemes. to voyde out of Eastenryche: but Othacarus refu∣sed both. Wherfore after muche reasonynge vpon the matter, brought Rudolphe armed hostes into Eastenryche, and toke it in. He besieged the citie Vienne, & fought a great battaill by Nidersbrug▪
in the yeare .M. cclxxviij. In that battayll was O∣thacarus slayne. Of this wyse was Eastenriche at the last brought vnder Rudolphes dominion, and after that made he Albert his sonne duke there: so that henceforth Eastenriche by this meanes is hol∣denAlbert duke  Eastērich of the empyre by fealtie or benefite. Moreouer the princes of Eastenriche haue their offpringe of this Alberte, vntyll the moste prayse worthy Char¦les the Emperoure that now is, & his brother kyng Ferdinande. Rudolphe the Emperoure shewed high fauour and gentlenesse towarde Wenceslaus Othacarus sonne: for he left hym the kyngdome of Bohemy, and gaue hym his daughter in mariage. ThisWenslaus g of Bo∣ ma∣. Wenceslaus is canonisated for a saynt, and is wor∣shypped. Rudolphe subdued the Bourgundians also. In Alsace dyd he take by violence those cities that rebelled and conspyred agaynst hym, and pu∣nyshed them worthely: amonge those were Hage∣no, Colmar, Tzurig and Berne. The yeare .M. cclxxxvi. dyd he inuade the Erle of Wirtenberg, and besyeged the citie Studtgard: at the laste was an accorde made by the byshop of Mentz. The yeare .M. ccxc. had Rudolphe a great par∣liament at Erfurde▪ and by the aide of the citie Er∣furdeErfurde. did he spoyle & cast downe about .iij. score hol∣des in Thuringe. O this wyse fynally dyd Ru∣dolfe bryng the troubled & full of sedicion estate of Germany, whyle it had no certayn Emperours to a peaceablenesse, and dyd in a maner set vp the de∣cayed empyre. He dyed the yere of Christ M. ccxcii.
Innocencius the .v. succeded Gregorius the .x. Adrianus the .v. succeded Innocencius. Iohannes the .xxi. a phisicion succeded Adrian{us} When Iohannes was deade, Nicolaus the .iij. was made byshop of Rome. He went about to geue his two cosins the two kyngdomes of Italy, that the one should be kyng of Hetruria, the other kyng of Lombardy: For the Romysh byshop sawe that Rudolphe had more then ynough to do in Germa∣ny, and thought he coulde not therefore come into Italy. But the imperiall cities wythstode the by∣shop of Romes enterpryses, that they could not pro¦sper, and Rudolphe sent a Lieutenaunt into Italy also. Honorius the .iiij. was byshop after Nicolaus. Nicolaus the .iiij. was byshop after Honorius. Adolfe the .xxviii. Germane Emperoure. THe yeare of Christ .M. ccxcij. was AdolfeAdolfe coūte of Nassau Emperoure. counte of Nassau chosen Emperour. The same was before in greate estimacion by Rudolphe. Besydes that was his bro∣ther byshop of Mentz, and by his voyce in the elec∣tion was he holpen to be made Emperoure. He raygned syxe yeares, and was deposed from the empyre by the Electours: For hys substaunce was not sufficient to sustayne the costes of the Empe∣ryall hyghnesse: Besydes that was he very in for∣tunable in dispatchynge greate thynges. The warre, worthy of remembraunce that he hath had, was that he brought an army into Thuryngen. For Albert Landtgraue of Thuringen had a
stryfe wyth his sonne Dieterus, and Frederick sur¦named Gnawed cheke. And the same solde to Adol¦fe the Emperoure the prouinciall Erldome of Thu¦ringen. He also endeuoured to make his kynreds nobilitie more renowmed, and went into Thurin∣van, and dyd much harme to it. He besyeged Crutz¦berg, Frankenstein and Friburg: But Frederick droue him back agayn. Howbeit to apeace sundry & many perturbacions that were at that tyme in the empyre, it was requisite to haue a more puyssaun∣ter heade in Germane. And therefore the princes Electors makyng an assembly at Mentz, they chose Albert duke of Eastenrich, sonne to the Emperour due f sterich Rudolphe. But for asmuche as Adolfe would kepe the empyre by force, duke Albert went against hym with an army, and they fought fearcely together by Worms. In that battayll was Adolfe slayne the yeare .M. ccxcviij. as these verses folowynge do witnesse. The yeare thousand, thre hundreth two lesse. Was through the swearde kynge Adolfes de∣ceasse. After Nicolans the .iiij. was Celestinus the .v. made byshop of Rome. The same leauynge the by∣shoprycke became an heremite. After Celestinus became Bonifacius the .viij. Byshop of Rome. It is sayde that Celestinus was begyled by thys man with a voyce spoken to hym through a rede or pype, as though it wer come out of heauen, that he should forsake the byshopricke, & ordeyne Bonifacius. He raysed greate warres in Italy. He dyd excommunicate the Frenche kyng,
and gaue the tytle of the Frenche kyngdome to Al∣berte the Emperoure, that by this meanes at the last the Garmanes and frenchemen might come to strokes. At the last was Bonifacius taken, and dy∣ed in the pryson. And hereby commeth that it isA feate saieng by Bonifaci the .viij. sayde of hym: He entred as a Foxe, he reygned as a Wolfe or Lion, he died as a Dogge. Albert the .i. xxix. Germane Emperoure. the .M .cc. xcviij. yere of Christ began Al∣berteAlbert Empe¦roure duke of Estenriche. duke of Eastenriche, sonne to Rudol¦phe the Emperoure to raygne. He ruled the empire ten yeres: he ouercame in bat¦taill Adolfe the Emperoure. At the first would not bonifacius confirme Albertus empyre: afterwarde did he frely cōfirme it, to do the Frenche kyng a spi∣te, and geuyng Albert the title of the kyngdome of Fraunce, he set hym agaynst the Frenche kynge. But the kyng of Fraunce geuyng hys daughter to Alberts sonne, he appeased hym, that he should en∣terpryse no enimitie agaynst hym. He made a set∣tynge forth agaynst Bohemy, and made his sonne kyng of Bohemy. He dyd so tame Bohemy and Mentz, whiche made fyndely confederacions toge∣ther that they obeyed the empyre. At the last was he slayne of his brothers sonne & some erles of Eastenryche. It was happely Gods pleasure so, lest the manslaughter that he had done against Adolfe the Emperoure should be vnpuny∣shed. For though he was not of lyke power: yet in the meane season ought he to haue worshipped him as his lorde, ordeyned of God. The kyllers of hym
were punyshed also. For God letteth not manquel∣lersn example of vengeaūce vnpunyshed. Benedictus the .x. was byshop of Rome after Bonifacius the .viij. The remouing of the Romysh byshops se from Rome into Fraunce. WHen Benedictus the .x. was deade, Cle∣mens the .v. was made byshop of Rome. The same dwelt at Lions in Fraunce, & absolued the Frenche kyng of the excom¦munication. Wherfore sence that tyme, which was the yeare .M. cccv. was the byshop of Romes see translated from the citie Rome, to Auinion in Pro¦uence a contry of Fraunce .xvii. yeres. At this tyme were the Fratrielli, whiche werericelli. euen of lyke opinion with the Anabaptistes, that in oure dayes go astraye: their opinion was, that no∣man should haue ought propre or of hys owne, that Christen men should not gouerne cōmon welthes, and suche lyke madde opinions had they. Of the Turkes. IN the tyme of Albert of Eastenriche, be∣gan the kynred of Othomanus to growOthomānus among the Turkes in power and estima¦cion: of whose bloude are spronge those kynges of the Turkes that raygne at this tyme. Henry the .vij. called of Lucelburg, the .xxx. Germane Emperoure.
THhe yere of Christ .M. cccix was chosenHenry the vi Emperoure Henry the prince of Lucel∣burg. He reigned .vi. yeares. For in the meane tyme that the Romish bishop was in Fraunce, the Frenche kyng desyred inordinatly the dignitie of the empire, and trusted to obteayne his request. througe the consent of the Romish by∣shop. But the cōcorde was not long durable betwe∣ne the byshop & the Frenche kyng. Wherfore the by¦shop aduertised the princes Electours, whiche had now long disagreed for the electiō, to hayste to choy¦se an Emperoure with one consent the prince of Lu¦celburg, who at that time was demed a most renow¦med prince, for his wysdome ioyned with hygh gra¦uitie. As he was chosen, strayght waye dyd the by∣shop of Rome cōfirme hym. And thus was the Frē∣che kyng disapointed of his request & endeuoure▪ to remooue the dignitie of the Romish empire to him. First toke he from the duke of Wirtenberg al his goodes, because he was a rebel to the empyre. To his sonne Iohn gaue he the kyng of Bohemies dau¦ghter in mariage: & by this meanes became Iohn prince of Lucelburg, the father of Charles the iiij. kyng of Bohemy. Afterward went he into Italy with a great ar∣my, and made Italy so afrayde of hym, as no Em∣peroure had done a greate whyle before hym. Some cities woulde not yelde them to hym, with∣out they were compelled by force, namely Cremo∣na and Brixia: the residue obeyed frely. At RomeHenry the vij was poisoned of a black fri¦er in the Sa∣crament. was he crowned Emperoure. He besyeged Floren¦ce with a heuy and strayght syege, at the whiche
tyme (as it is reported) a frere of y• preachers order or Black freres, that was made out of the Florenti¦nes, destroied Henry with venim, whiche he strake vpon the syngynge breade, yea and the byshop of Rome hymselfe also, beynge now armed with hys weapons, threatened Henry wyth the dart of ex∣communicacion, as he perceaued that he began to be sett by in Italy. Ludouicus or Lewis the Baier, the .xxxi. Germane emperoure. And agaynst hym was chosen Emperour Frederick Duke of Eastenriche. THe yere of Christ M. cccxiiij. were as∣sembled together at Franckforde the princes Electors the bysh. of Mentz▪ Trier and Colen, Ihon kyng of Bohe my, Rudolphe counte Palatine of the Rene, Rudolphe duke of Saxony & Volcmarus marques of Brandenburg. On saynct Lucies daie was chosen Emperoure Lewis theLewi the Ba¦er Baier by the byshops of Mentz & Trier, the kyng of Bohemy and Marques of Brandenborowe. And agaynst hym was chosen Friderick duke ofFrederick du¦ke of Easten∣che▪ Eastenriche be the byshop of Colen, the cunte Pa∣latine and duke of Saxony. Lewis was crowned Emperoure at Aken, & Frederick at Bonne. This controuersye in chosynge, brought an occasion of greate inwarde or ciuyll warre in Germany. The duke of Eastenriche had fauourers the byshop of Rome the kynges of Fraunce and Bohemy, the Schwabes, the counte of Palatine, them of Stras∣borow
and other cities many. But God prospered Lewis, who was lesse of power, & destitute of mans ayde. He raygned .xxxiij. yeares. The yeare .M. cccxxiij. dyd they stryke a felde by the floude Nechare, whereof both sydes many were slayne. The yeare .M. cccxxv. on saynt Michaels euen gaue Lewis a greate battaill to Frederick. Frede∣rick did ayde Lupoldus hys brother, ioyned wythLupoldus. hym the Schwaben and Switcers, and a greate parte of the Hungarians. As for Lewis dyd folow the kyng of Bohemy, and the erle of Norenberg, and some other princes. Now when Lupoldes ta∣ried so long, that he could not passe the water, y• host of Eastenriche was slayne, and Friderick was ta∣kenFriderick du∣ke of Easten∣riche was ta∣ken by a Eb∣rarde Mo∣sbach. by a Franke, whose name was Ebrarde Mo∣sbach: the same led hym to the erle of Norenberg, who sent hym to Lewis. But when Lupoldus sa∣we he coulde not helpe hys brother, he was so an∣gry and ragious, that he had in a maner vndone hymselfe, had not hys men refrayned hym: whiche also consayled hym to withdrawe, nether dyd rash∣ly cast hymselfe into the daunger. Afterwarde assa∣yed Lupoldus many thynges inuayne both by the byshop of Rome, and also the Frenche kyng, that he myght take his brother awaye by force: for the Frē¦che kyng made no greate force of a strange matter Friderick was a prysoner the space of thre yeares in a castel in Baierlande: at the last when the con∣trouersy was brought to a poynt, he was let louse vpon this condicion, that he shoulde renounce the empyre: whiche thing when he had frely promised
he was restored into Eastenriche by Lewis. Of this wyse behaued Lewis hymselfe very gently to¦ward his enemy: Lupoldus yet in the meane tyme not ceassynge of raysynge commocions, euen after that Frederick was deliuered. Afterwarde dyd Iohannes the .xxij. cast hysLewis is ex∣cōmunicated thonder boltes of coursyng agaynst Lewis the Em¦peroure, because he vsed the Imperyall aucthori∣tie and empyres gouernaunce in Italy, before hys coronacion. Thereof rose an occasion of a greate diuision in Germany, and that lasted about .xxiiij.A diuision in Germany. yeares. In the meane tyme rose here and there greate sedicions in the empyre and cyties, and one parte busyed to dryue out and oppresse the other by conspiracion. And though Lewis desyred absolution not once, but often of the byshop of Ro∣me, yet could he not obtayne it wyth any prayers, so that both Benedictus that was after Iohan∣nes, and other many and honest men dyd refuse the processe. There are yet now a dayes wrytynges of the controuersie, wherein the Romyshe byshop. Iohannes the .xxii. is not ashamed to boaste, thatThe boastīg of Iohannes he .xxij. bysh. he hath the full power and aucthoritie to make and depose, not onely kynges, but also all Emperoures at hys pleasure. By thys it maye be gathered ease∣ly, that the Romyshe byshop vsed so greate hatred agaynste the Emperoure, for no very weyghty cause. There were also about that tyme some lear∣ned men, whiche openly blamed the Romyshe by∣shops writynges, amonges these was Occam one▪Ocam a re∣ouer of the omh bish. the princes of Germany euery one, as wel ecclesia∣sticall, as of the nobilitie helde with the Emperour:
at the last were some compelled by the byshop of Ro¦me to fall back, and also to choyse another Empe∣roure. Lewis had very greate vproures in Italy. Ga∣leaciusGaleacius of Milan. of Milan, and the counsayll of Rome lon∣ged for Lewis commyng into Italy. Wherfore he went thether with the Emperesse, which also was delyuered of a chylde at Rome, that was called Lewis the Romane, and was afterwarde by the Emperoure made marques of Brandenborowe. At Milan was Lewis crowned of the bysh. there, and at Rome of the Cardinall de Columna. He made also Peter of Corbaria byshop of Rome, who was not longe after caried bounde to Auinion in Fraunce, to Iohannes the .xxii. who cast hym into pryson, wherein he dyed. But whyle allthys was adoynge, Lewis by noLewis the Romane. requestes coulde optayne to be released of the excō∣municacion by the byshop of Rome. But forsoeth the Romysh byshop brought that to passe wyth his busy laboure at length, that in an assembly or daye holden at Lucelburg, the byshops of Mentz, Trier and Colen, the kyng of Bohemy and duke of Sax∣on, dyd choyse another Emperour. There was cho¦sen Charles the fourth erle prouincial of Morauia, the sonne of the kyng of Bohemy. The same was then confirmed by Clemens the .vi. byshop of Ro. But for as muche as the cities of Aken and Colen would not knowe hym for an Emperoure, he was crowned at Bon. Of Nicolaus Augustus, that is, Nicolas the noble, that was at Rome.
ABout this tyme happened at Rome anNicolas the noble or ful of maiestie, an ex¦ample of nota¦ble folye. example of a notable folye: There was at Rome one Nicolas, a towne clarke or recorder of Rome, of suche power and aucthoritie, that one would haue sayde he had the rule of the whole citie: for at that tyme were the Ro¦mysh Byshoppes yet in Fraunce. This Nicolas cal¦led hymself Tribunus Augustus, that is, the noble hygh officer: and with open scriptures wytnessed, that Rome is yet the true heade of the empyre: and therfore by ye citie of Romes aucthoritie, had he the hyghest power to handle maters of the empyre. And by reason of this aucthoritie called he Lewis and Charles to appeare before hym, and to cōmitte their matter to his arbitremēt or iudgement. Ly∣ke folyshnesse vsed he oft agaynst other cities and kynges ye space of two yeares. At the last this pore Augustus being driuē out by the byshop of Romes partie, fled to Charles the fourth. But Charles sent the rash man to the byshop of Rome at Auiniō, of whom he was kept in pryson. The yeare of Christ .M. cccxlv. died Lewis the Bayer. And then came Charles with a great hoost out of Bohemy to Regenspurg, where he was knowen for an Emperoure. From thence was he also receaued at Norenberg: for Charles made thē beleue, he had gotten a fauourable absolution of the bishop of Rome to put out the great offences, wher¦with they had offended, in that they were adherent to Lewis. When they of Basyl sent out their Bur∣gemaisters to Charles, that he in the name of the ci¦tie should aske absolution, he answered: he thought
they had not done amisse, in that they had Lewis for an Emperoure, nether thought he that Lewis was an heritike: yet in the meane tyme if they could be absolued of their trespasses, he wold be content. And thus were they absolued. The yeare of Christ .M. cccxlviij. when Lewis was now deade, there rose yet a greater discorde: the byshop of Mentz, the counte Palatine, the mar∣ques of Brādenburg, and the duke of Saxony, his sonne that hath chosen Charles Emperoure, assem¦bled and refusyng the election of Charles, they cho¦seEdward the iij. kynge of Englande, & Fredrick erle of Misen re∣fuse the digni¦tie Emperial Edward the third, kyng Englande to take vpon hym the maiestie Emperiall: but he refused it, as a thyng ful of cumbraunce. After that chose they Fre¦derick Erle prouinciall of Misen. But he also forso∣ke that title of the empyre: for he would not fyght and warre with his neyghbours the Bohemies to vndoe his countrey. Guntherus Erle of Swartzburg is chosen Emperoure. THe yeare of Christe .M. cccl. was cho∣sen Emperoure at Franckforde Gun∣terus Erle of Schwatzburg, yet not with consent of all the Electors. The∣same accepted the gouernaunce of the empyre, and garnyshed with all defen∣ce to retayne the empyre, he was armed ynough a∣gainste the force of Charles, who then abode at Mentz. But shortly after died Gunterus at Frāck¦forde sodenly poysoned. Wherefore Charles was Emperoure alone. He came to Franckforde, and
was receiued for an Emperoure. After Clemens the .v. became Iohannes the xxii. byshop of Rome who without a iuste cause dyd excommunicate the good Emperoure Lewis. Benedictus the .xi. was made byshop of RomeBenedictus the. i. after Iohannes. The same neuer alowed the ac∣tion of Iohannes against the Emperoure Lewis, and when he was made byshop of Rome he had frely absolued hym, had not the kynges of Fraunce and Naples with their threatenynges withstande hym. When in the relacion the orators or embassa∣dors of the kinges alledged, that Lewis had enter¦prysed many haynous thynges against the byshop of Rome. Benedictus answered: yea, we haue done against hym. He liued not long in the byshopricke, & therefore dyd al the causes hang vndispatched. Clemens the .vi. was made byshop after Bene∣dictus. The same renewined the thonder boltes cast against Lewis, and persued hym moste fearce∣ly: though in the counsayll of Vienne in Fraunce were treated in the meane tyme of the condicions of peace, and that Lewis declared hymselfe hum∣ble. This Clemens bought the citie Auenion of Io∣annaAuenion a ci∣tie ppall. quene of Sicily, and so hath the byshop of Ro. aucthoritie vpon this citie. Moreouer at this tyme went about here & ther¦inThe de∣r in ∣many & Fraū¦ce g themsels. in Germany and Fraunce, a great nomber of men, whiche did beate themselues with roddes. Many of them came to Spire, when the day or parliamēt was holden there pretending great holynesse. For their holinesse sake were they bidden to the meales of the citesens. And as the deceate of the erroure
dyd not differ from the Anabaptistes supersticious opinion: euen so was that secte no lesse daūgerous in those daies. But at the last it was condemned. Innocentius the .vi. succeded Clemens. In his tyme was Charles the .iiij. crowned at Rome. Charles the .iiij. the .xxxij. Germane Emperoure. THe yere of Christ .M. cccl. began Charles y•Charles y• iiij iiij. to raigne, after ye death of Guntherus of Schwartzburg. He was a prince of ye bloud of Lucelburg, the sonne of Ihon kyng of Bohemy: for Iohn was ye sonne of Henry of Lucelburg. Frō this yere of .M. cccl. reigned Charles. xxvii. yeres The yeare .M. ccclv. went Charles downe into Italy, & was gently receaued of the cities. At Ro. the senate & all the best metyng Charles, did recea∣ue hym with all reuerence. He likewyse, to declare to the Romanes his gentlenesse, lyghted from his horse, & receaued on fote the yelding of the citie. Af∣terward was he crowned of the cardinal of Hostia. The cities of the bysh. of Rome in Italy, that were rebels, subdued he to do the Romysh byshop a plea∣sure, so that they repyned nomore. I fynde none o∣ther thynges that he dyd in this iourney. They yeare .M. ccclx. he ouercame and spyled Ebrardus erle of Wirtenberg with a great army. But at the last was the debate layde downe, by the byshop of Ausburg, Strasburg and Spire. The yeare .M. ccclxvi. went Charles agayne in to Italy, in the whiche iourney he assuaged and sub¦dued some cities, desyrous of vproure.
Charles besyeged also y• citie Vlme, but I reade no where for what cause. For oure Germanes not knowyng the propertie of histories, haue not taken hede to the circumstaunces and causes of thynges.Charles the  maker of ye gold buile Charles hath deserued greate thankes for the golden bulle that he made, wherein he hath hand∣somly comprised many thynges, that make to enter¦tayne common peace. He did chefely endeuoure & procure the affayres of Bohemy. He ordeined the:The viuersi∣tie of Praga in Bohempe. vniuersitie of Praga. Some there are that disa∣lowe, that he gaue the French kyng ryghtes in the kyngdome of Orleaunce. The yeare .M. ccclxx. caused Charles his sonne Wenceslaus to be made Emperoure. To his other sonne Sigismundus gaue he the Erldome of the marques of Brādenburg, the which he had bought of Lewis the Romane. The yere .M. ccclxxvii. fought Vdalricus Erle of Wirtenberg mishappely, before the citie Rut∣lingen.The battayll by Rutlingē In that battaill dyed many and noble men. Switzer league. ABout this tyme began the Switzer lea∣gue,The Swi∣tzers league. and first the citie Lucerna, then Ber¦na, at the last Tzurich dyd ioyne themsel∣ues to the Switzers: and the noble prin¦ce Lupoldus duke of Eastenriche, was ouercomeLupoldus du¦ke of Eastenri¦che was slam by the Swit∣zers. and slayne by the Switzers the yere .M. ccclxxxv. But for as muche as there are in mans handes euery where histories of the Switzers dedes. I re¦ken it neoelesse to make longe rehersall of their ac∣tes in this lytle boke.
Vrbanus the v. succeded Innocentius the v. Gregorius the x. was byshop of Rome after Vrbanus. The same remoued y• see out of Fraunce to Rome agayne, the yeare MCCCLXXVI. A diuision AFter Gregorius the xi. rose a greate di∣uisiōA diuisiō af∣ter Gregory us the .xi. in the spiritualtye. The Italians made an Italian Byshoyp of Rome cal∣led Vrbanus the vi. and the same remay¦ned at Rome. The Frenchmen also chose a Byshop of Rom. in Italy, whome they called Clemens the vii. The same gat hym to Auinion. Thus was Rome diuided, and ther were two byshoppes of Rome: the one dyd accurse the other. Truely Ita∣ly, Germany and Hungary dyd hange to Vrbanus the byshops of the Romanes. Thys diuision lasted vntyll the councel of Constance .xxxix. yeares. Wenceslaus the .xxxiii. Ger∣mane Emperoure. THe yeare of Christe .M. ccc. lxxviij. afterWēceslaus Emperour. Charles deceasse, began Wenceslaus his sonne to raygne, and raygned after hys fathers death .xxii. yeares. At thys tyme began Ihon Husse opēly to teacheIhon Husse teacheth opē¦lye agaynst pardons. at Praga agaynst the byshop of Romes pardones: and by thys occasion rose hurteful insurrections in Bohemy agaynst prestes and religious men. Wenceslaus was at the laste taken by hys bro∣ther Sigismundus, and kept at Vienne in preson. Other thinges do I not fynde of this Wenceslaus that I iudge worthy to be put in writynges.
Rupertus the xxxiiij. Germane Emperoure. THe yeare of Christ .M. CCCC. was Rupertus the counte Palatine madeRupertus Emperoure. Emperour. He raigned tenne yeares. But seynge the Emperours had now ben long from Italy, the power of the kynred of Galeacyus was waxen greate at Milan and the Florentins were become ryche also, and warred agaynst them of Milane. The Florentins asked ayde of Rupertus the Emperoure, to repre∣sse the power of the Galacians. Wherefore Ruper∣tus went vppe into Italy to helpe the Florentius. and toke Galeacins. Howbeit Rupertus beyng destitute of the assistaunce of the duke of Easten∣riche, and bishop of Colen, was to weake, than that he coulde haue brought so greate thynges to passe: and though he had assayed many thinges, yet was he constrayned to returne agayne into Germanye hys bussinesse beyng not disprched. Bonifacius the .ix. was made bishop at Rome af¦ter Vrbanus. And against him was made bish. after Clemens ye .vii. Petrus de Luna called Benedictus the .xii. After Bonifacius was Innocentius y•. vii made byshop at Rome. After Innocētius was Gregorius the xii. made byshop at Rome. The same promysed y• he woulde renounce the byshoprycke, yf Benedictus lykewise dyd not refuse to renounce also. But whā Benedic¦tus fled into Spayne, leauyng Auinion, Gregori∣us reuoked hys promise concernyng to resigne the
byshoprycke. Wherefore was a councell gathered at Pysis, whereyn bothe Gregorius and Benedic∣tus were deposed of the byshoprycke, and in theyr steade was the thyrde Romysh byshop chosen Alex¦ander the .v. Gregorius fled to Ariminum, where he remayned vntill the counsel of Constance was. Alexander the .v. dwelt at Bonony, for the Hunga¦rians hauing than taken in Rome, vsed incredible tirāny, & warred with the Frenchmen for Naples. After Alexander the .v. was Ioannes the .xxiii.The diuision of thre Rom. vysh. made byshop of Rome at Bonony. And of this wise were a lyue, vntil the general councel of Constance thys Ioannes the .xxiii. at Bonony, Gregorius at Ariminum and Benedictus in Spayne. But they were all thre set besyde y• Romyshe byshopryck in that councel. Of Tamerlanes the ty∣raunt of Tartaria. IN the time of Rupertus the EmperourTamerlanes a tyraunt. lyued the passynge cruell tyraunte Ta∣merlanes the Tartarian, who by greate spoylynge, wente aboute nearehande al y• East and Asia, with an armye of tenne hundreth thousande men. He spoyled the Perseans, Arme∣nians and Syrians. He inuaded also the lesse Asia and toke Paiasetus the Turkysh Emperoure, and caryed hym in a cage as a byrde aboute wyth hym for a wonder and mockage. Sigismundus the .xxxv. Ger∣mane Emperoure.
THe yeare of Christe .M.CCCC. afterSigismun∣dus Empe∣roure. Rupertus the Emperours deceasse was Sigysmundus made Emperoure. He was the sonne of Charles the fourthe, marques of Brandenburg, kynge of Hungary and Bohemye. He was Emperour seuen and twentye yeares. He was a moost famous prince in wisedome, learnyng and honestye: suche one of stature, as was semynge a lyke prince. His countrefaytoure very connyng∣ly made, is to be sene yet this daye, by the erle Hoi∣er of Mansfelde. He had greate warres in Hunga∣ry agaynst the Hungaryans of the whyche he was taken. He fought oft agaynst the Turkes. But whan he was made Emperoure, he made a greate settyng forth agaynst the Turkes with the ayde of all nacions, whereof we shall speake hereafter Of the councell of Constance. IN the beginnynge of Sigismundus raygne he went vp into Italye, and toke counsell with Ioannes the bysh of Ro. of callinge a generall councel for to auoyde the diuision. He went also to the Frenche kynge, and com∣pelled hym to agre to the callynge a general coun∣cell. Wherefore by the consent of the byshop of Ro. Ioannes, the Emperoure, and also the kynges of Fraunce, Spayne and England, was the councell of Constance begonne the yeare .M. C C C C. xiiii. to the whiche came Ioannes the Byshop of Rome hymselfe. The Emperoure Sigismundus came to Con∣stance
before Christmasse, and at masse songe he the gospell as Deacon: Ther went oute a commaun∣demente from Augustus the Emperoure &c. Afterwarde was ther treated of Ihon Husse,He that wyll knowe the whole histo∣ry of Ihon Husse & Hie∣rō of Pragga yt were burnt in ye councel at Cōstāce, let him read Eneas silui∣us ī his boke of yE begin∣ning & dedes of ye Bohemi¦es ye .xxxv. & xxxv. chapy. and hys doctryne beyng condemneth, he was bur¦neth wyth Hieronimus of Praga. After that treated they to a peace the diuisyon, and deposyng the byshoppes of Rome. Ioannes the .xxiij. Gre∣gorius and Benedictus, was chosen in the see O∣thode Columna, who was called Martynus the fyfte. But whan it repented Ioannes the .xxiii. that he had consented frelye to the renouncynge of the Byshoprycke of Rome, he wente aboute to flye pry¦uelye, wyth the ayde of Frederyck duke of Easten∣ryche. But in the flyghte Ioannes was had backe agayne, by the Emperoures men. And the duke of Eastenryche was bannyshed by the Emperoure, and some of hys townes taken in hys duchye. At the last was the debate layed downe of thys wyse: It was coūselled Frederyck, that he frely yeldyng to the Emperoure all hys landes, shulde humblye requyre forgeuenesse of hys offence. Wherefore by the Emperoures gentlenesse and fauoure he was restored in the duchy of Eastenryche. But Ioannes the byshoppe of Rome, was dely∣uered to the counte Palatyne to be kepte. The∣same caried him int ye castel Māheym, not farre frō the citye Heidelberg: there was he kepte the space of thre yeare. After yt was he receaued to grace by
Martinus the Romish bish. and made a Cardinal. Whan of this wise that hurteful diuision that was betwene the bishops of Rome was anoyded, peace and reste was restored to the churche, and that by the endeuoure and procurement of Sigismundus the Emperoure, who therefore deserued greate prayses. The residue that were done in that assemble or councel, is no nede to rehearse: for whole bokes are wrytten thereof. Of the prouincial erles of the mar∣queship of Brandenburg. THe yeare of Christ .M. C C C C. xvii. the fyrste sondaye after Easter, dyd Sigys∣mundus the Emperour in the councell geue to the mooste prayse worthy prince Fridericke Burgraue of Norinberg, the ryghte of Imperyall election, and the prouincyall marque∣shyp of Branbenburge: and that for hys excellent vertues, and greate truste, that he had shewed in dispatchinge great causes of the empyre. But true¦ly it were long to rechearse here how noble princes haue ben both before thys dignitye was gotten, & also afterward in this progeny of Burgraues: yee and before hath oft ben made mēcion of them. But after that they were made Electors, they were di∣ligente euer in treatynge the greateste and mooste weightyest matters of the empyre, for the whyche thynges sake shalbe oft made mēcion of thē hereaf∣ter. Wherfore in the histories of our time, is Alber¦tus the Marques praised before al other, who for
his vertues sake is surnamed y• germane Achilles. It is also not vnknowen in oure dayes, y• Mar∣ques Ioachim of Brandenburg Elector, my moost gentle lorde, and his brother Albert Cardinal and Elector, Archebyshoppe of Mentz and Magden∣burge &c. are garnyshed with hygh wysedome, and all princely vertues: and that therfore theyr coun∣sel & ayde is requyred before other in hyghe and harde matters, not only concernynge the empyre, but also to y• whole Christiantie. Nother cā it other wyse be in gouernaunces and dominions, y• whych so longe as they haue theyr beynge, must be deser∣ued and maynteyned by the wysedome of men of greate authoritye, whiche thynge the Wysedome her selfe wytnesseth in holye scriptures, sayenge: By me kynges do raygne. Whan the councell was broke vp, many settyng forth were appoynted agaynst the seditions and e∣uell disposed men, whiche spoyled and robbed both churches & monasteryes after Ihon Husses deathZischa cap¦tayn of the Hussites sect. Theyr captayn was called zyscha. Greate man∣slaughter was of both sydes, of the Bohemes and Germanes, which went against them: yet was notThe settyn  forth of Sy∣gismundus a¦gaynste th Turkes. that brunt of vproure so quenched. Sigismundus (as we sayd before) had prepared & brought vntill Adrianopolis a verye greate army of Germanes, Frenchmē, Italians & Hungarians against y• Tur∣kes. In this setting forth were most greatest prin∣ces y• Emperour Sigismundus & Philippe duke of Burgundion. But by reason the Frenchemen stroue, sayenge they must haue the foreward in the army, y• orders were broken, not without an incre∣dible
losse of Christen men: for theyr enemyes van∣quyshed them, and the duke of Burgundy was ta∣ken. Sigismundus the Emperour fled to Constan tinople. After longe season after, was the duke of Burgundy delyuered. A mery story is recited of Sigismundus. HeThe history of Sigisinū∣dus with his seruaūt. had a seruaunt y• was many yeares familiar wyth him, whom he had not greatly rewarded, (though in the meane season he was a liberal & free prince,) which thing Leonardus Aretinus also doth write who sawe Sigisinūdus the Emperour, & had done many messages to him, on the bysh. of Ro. behalfe. It fortuned that whā he was ridden into a water, hys horse dyd stalle. Whyche thinge whan the ser∣uaunt, that went strayght before the Emperoure did see, he sayd in sporte: The horse was of lyke na∣ture that hys lorde was. The Emperour hearyng it by chaunce, maruayled, & commaunded to shewe him what he saide. The seruaunt aunswered. The horse pourech out water into the ryuer, where as is water ynough alredy. Euen so is the Emperour lyberall to those, whych haue ryches plenty, & nede them not greatly. Sigismundus the Emperoure perceaued that he was aduisedly touched or taun∣ted, that he had not rewarded hys olde seruaunt with some peculyar or greate rewarde, and sayd: He neuer wanted the wyll to recompense, but that princes gyftes are not properlye theyrs, that de∣serue them: but theyrs that they are appoynted by Goddes prouydence and dysposycyon. The same sayde he that he woulde proue wyth the dede, so soone as he shulde be at leasure and reste. After∣warde
whan the Emperour had gotten leasure he caused to make two boxes of one bygnesse and fa∣shion. In the one he put golde, in the other leade of lyke weyght, and callyng the seruaunt, he bad hym take one of the boxes. The seruaunt being abashed weyed now the one boxe, than the other douting y• whiche he myghte rather take: at the laste he toke y• boxe, wherein the leade was. Which whan he had opened, the Emperour sayde: It may be sene open¦ly, that hys wyli was not in the faute, why he was not rewarded hetherto, but hys misfortune. This dede wythnesseth verely, that the Emperoure dyd wysely consyder, that the fortunable prosperity ofThe prospe∣rity cōmeth of God. Albert duke of Eastērich. thynges commeth of God. Sigismūdus the Emperour had no heyre man∣kynne, he gaue hys only doughter to Albert duke of Eastenryche, who became kyng of Hungary and Bohemy by that meanes. The yere .M. CCCC. xxxiiii. whyle Sigismun∣dus was yet alyue, began the councel of Basil. ForThe cosicel Basil. it was ordeyned in y• councel of Constance, that of a newe coūcel shulde be gathered after twelue yea∣res. But after that Sigismundus was deade, the bysh. of Ro. holdinge a councell fyrste at Ferraria, and from thence at Florence, letted y• furtheraūce of the councel of Basill: and that had he so muche the more easy a do, because ther was no monarche or noble prince that defended the decree: of y• coun∣cel of Basill. After that Martinus was deade, Eugenius the iiii. was made bysh. of Ro. The same crowned Si∣gismundus Emperour at Rome.
Albert the .ii. of that name, the .xxxvi. Germane Emperour. THe yeare of Christe .M. cccc. xxxviii. af∣terAlbert the .ii. the death of Sigismundus, was Al¦berte, a prince of the bloude of Easten∣ryche, kyng of Hungarye & Bohemye, made Emperoure. He dyed in the seconde yeare of hys raygne. Parte of Bohemy dyd cleue to the kyng of Po∣len, & endeuoured to drawe y• kyngdome of Bohe∣my to Polony. The Poles brought a great army into Bohemy, & drew into their faction the vprou∣rysh kynde of men called Thaborites. Agaynst thē sent Albert y• Emperour Albert marques of Bran denburg. The same brought to passe wyth manye battayls, that the matter was agreed betwene the Emperoure and the Poles. Albert the Emperoure came wyth a greate ar∣my into Hungary, agaynst Amurates the Turke, who at that tyme was fallen into Hungary. Whan Albert the Emperoure came he fled backe, and be∣sye gynge the cytye Sinderouien, he returned in∣to Grece, and wann the city Thessalonica. In this settynge forth fell Albert into a sycknesse, and be∣ynge broughte agayne to Uyenna, dyed wythyn few dayes. Friderick the .iii. the .xxxviij. Ger∣mane Emperoure. THe yere of Christ .M. CCCC. xl. af∣terFrederick y• third. Albertus deathe, was Fridericke the thyrd duke of Estenrich, made Em¦peroure. He raygned .liii. yeares.
The doughter of Sigismundus, wyfe to Albert the Emperoure was now bygge wyth chylde: but some of the Hungaryans despayrynge of an heyreIoannes Hu¦niades. of the realme, chose Vladislaus the yonger kynge of Polen for a kyng. The kings gouernour in Hun¦gary was Ioānes Huniades, father to Mathias. The same had weakened the power of the Turkes wyth a great battail, and compelled Amurates toVladislaus. demande peace. But so soone as Vladislaus was come into the realme, the Hungariās trusted, that yf they & the Poles powers were ioyned together, they shuld easely gett great prayse yf they inuaded the Turke. And happely had the yonge kyng Vla∣dislaus pleasure in thys prayse. Wherfore Iulia∣nusIulianus the Cardinal. the Cardinall brake the treuce made wyth the Turke, vnder thys pretence and coloure: that it were not lawfull to make peace wyth the Turkes, wythout the Bish. of Romes consente, seyng y• case is belonging to whole Christendome. Thus Vla∣dislaus gathering an hoost went against Amura∣tes vntill Varnam, which is not farr from Cōstan∣tinople: though Ioannes Humades in y• mean sea∣son dissuaded to take warre, because that he knew well the weakenesse of his men, & the power of the Turkes, & also had he made peace with the Turke, not without necessitie. It is also sayd that Vladis∣laus desyred ayde of Dracoles y• Malache, but heDracoles y• Wlache also dyd counsell to leaue y• setting forth to warre. Yet dyd he send his sonn with him to aide king V∣ladislaus with two thousand horsemen, to whom he shuld haue said: He gaue hym a couragious andDracoles gaue Vladi∣slaus a horse. swyft horse, suche one as he wold geue to his sonn
also for his mynd gaue that they shuld lose the feld, and therefore shuld they haue these horses at hand that as nede shulde requyre, the myghte troughe theyr swyftnesse escape the daunger. As for the Turkes dyd forse themselues wyth nolesse car¦fulnesse, than wysedome, and were euery where ap¦poynted in a readynesse, before the Hungaryans were set in an order. Wherefore thoughe the Hun∣gariāsThe battayl by Wardam. fought fearcely for ye glory of Christes name and ouerthrwe verye great hoostes of the enemy∣es: yet dyd the Turkes at the last ouercome wyth the multitude, stayeng Vladislaus the yong kinge, and afterward was Iulianus the Cardinal slayen also in the flyght. Humades as he was a ware soul dioure, toke hede to hymselfe by tymes, and esca∣ped. This felde was the yeare .M. CCCC. xliiii.Amurates be me  mōke rp man. the tenth daye of Nouember. Amurates became a Mahometyshe monke after thys vyctorye, suppo∣synge to haue accomplyshed hys duetye in the em∣pyre, after so greate prosperitye in vanquyshynge hys enemyes, leste he rashely trustynge smylynge fortune farther, dyd stayne hys glorye wyth some euell. But Hunyades dyd inuade and fell vponHuniades hurteth the Turkes greueously. the Turkes agayn, and dyd hurt them so sore, that they called Amurates agayn to the realme, to resist Hunyades their enemy, and shuld driue him out of Hūgary. Afterward whā Cōstantinople was lost, Huniades ouercame Mahomet ye Turkishe Empe¦rour bringing into Hūgari an hurtful army with a great discōfitur, & deliuered whole Europa from ye fear of daūger. For yf that setting forth had lucked Mahomet ye Turkish Emperour, he had now takē
in not only Italy, but other contryes also. Whan Vladislaus was deade, the Hungarians receaued the chylde Ladislaus, the heyre of the re∣alme, borne of Sigismundus doughter, for theyr kyng. Thys Ladislaus whan he was ful growen, dyed at Praga the haed citye of Bohemy. The yeare .M. CCCC. xliiij. broughte the Dol¦phinThe Dol∣phin and Ar¦meniakes go into Germa¦ny. with the Armeniakes an army into Elsace, vn¦tyll Basil, not wythout a greate and horible man∣slaughter of the Germanes. Some thynke that Eugenius the bysh. of Ro. sent hym into Germany to trouble the councel of Basil. The Dolphyn had aboute fyue and twenty thousand men. The Swi∣tzersThe power of the Swi∣tzers agayn¦ste the Dol∣phin. sent foure thousand men against them, to res¦cue the citye Basel out of theyr handes. They sett vpon the enemyes wyth so greate strengthe and corage, that none of them gaue backe: and thoughe they coulde not ouercome them, by reason of the multitude of thē, yet left they theyr enemies a blou¦dy & dolefull victorye. For the Dolphin lost in that battayl about ten thousand men, and was fayne to flye out of Germany, with the residue y• remayned The yeare .M. CCCC. xlix. dyd Albert mar∣ques af Brandenburg warre agaynst imperial city¦es Norinberg and some other. Thys was calledWarre of ye cityes. the warre of the cityes. Many princes dyd ioyne themselues to ether syde, and thys warre lasted. ii. yeares. Albert the marques ouerthrue them of Norinberg wyth .viii. battayls. The yeare .M. cccc. lii. went Friderick into Ita¦ly, and was receaued of euery man wyth seastly ho¦noure. In the citye Sena dyd he acomplyshe hys
weddynge wyth Leonora hys spouse, doughter to the kynge of Portingale. Commynge to Rome he was crowned of Nicolaus the fyfte wyth hys quene the .xviij. daye of Marche. Returnyng from Rome at Ferraria made he Borsius of Esta duke. From thence shipped he ouer to Venice, and abode there ten dayes. I haue herde of a man of greate renowme, that it was tolde him of the prince of Ve¦nice, who beynge Senator, serued the Emperour Fridericke and the prince of Venice at the table, that Frederick shulde haue sayd at the meale: that he truely wold be a frende to the Venecians conti∣nually, but they shulde haue muche trouble and dā∣mage of hys successours. Of Constantinople Wonne by the Turkes. THe yeare of Christe .M. CCCC. liiii ye xxix daye of Maye after longe syeg¦gat Mahometes the Turkysh Em∣peroure the citye Constātinople at ye laste with a very strong assaulte: and vsed thereyn so muche cruelnesse, that it can not be expressed wyth no wordes. Con∣stantinusConstātinus Emperoure of Constanti¦nople. the Emperoure was slayne by the gate of the cytye, in the flyghte, whose heade caused the Turke to be smytten of, & stycked vpon a pole to be caryed thorow out the citye. He commaunded alsotable of ye whā nn ino pl. to set vp an image of the crucyfyed Christe in the ci∣tye, and towrytte vpon it: The same is the God of the Christians. But he commaunded to moke it, and caste fylthe vpon it, and all to defyle it. The
Emperours wyfe and doughters wyth other ho∣nest matrones were drawen to a banket, and there were they fyrst misused, after that hewed to peces These examples, and other mooste cruel dedes of ye Turkes, ought duely to rayse and styrre our min¦des, that we shulde earnestly fight agaynst those e∣nemyes,The Turkes are beastes & not tirauntes whyche one nede not to call tyrauntes, but rather cruel beastes. The yeare .M. CCCC. lxi. dyd the bysh. of Ro. depose Dietericke of Isenburge from hys byshop∣rycke, and in hys steade was made Adolphe of Na∣ssau. This chaunce gaue an occasion of greate war∣res in the Empyre. Friderick the counte Palatyne toke vpon hym to defende & retayn byshop Diete∣rych. Agaynste the same dyd the Emperour sturre the erles of Wyrtenberg and Baden, and the bysh. of Mentz. Whan these spoyled ye contry of ye count Palatine, they were taken by Frideryck count Pa¦latine about the yeare .M. CCCC. lxii. The same yeare dyd contrarye wyse Adolfe the byshop take in the citye Mentz. The yeare .M. CCCC. lxiij. was Friderick the Emperoure strongly besieged in the castel at Vien∣na, by hys cityesins, and the doer of thys was Al∣bert, the Emperours brother: but George kyng of the Bohemes delyuered the Emperoure, driuing awaye the cityesins. The yere .M. CCCC. lxxiiii. dyd Charles prince of the Burgundyons besyege the towne Nuce a whole yeare, and that because the chapiter chanōs of Colen had dryeuen out Rupert byshoppe of Co¦len, whome Charles wold haue restored agayne.
But whan he went about to, turne the byshopryck of Colen from the empyre &, haue gotten it to him, the Emperour appoynteth an army agaynst hym. The captayne of the hoost was Albert marques of Brandenburg, and the empyres standardebea∣rer Albert duke of Saxony. At the last whan di∣uersly was treated of alayenge the debate, Char∣les gaue place: and it is sayde, that at y• tyme was fyrst treated of geuyng Maximilian the doughter of Charles of Burgundy. The yeare .M. CCCC. lxxvii. was the duke of Burgundy vanquished by Nansen, by them of Lo∣tayn and the Switzers, and slayne. For Charles had taken from them of Lorain Nansen: & in Swi¦tzerlandNansen▪ Gransen. had he taken in Gransen, and other small townes: besides that also, caused he in the towne of Gransen, to be hanged .v. C. and .xii. Germanes. Whan Charles was deade, the Frenchemen en∣terprised to ioyne Flaunders and Brabant to theyr kingdom, & this desyre of the Frenchmen brought the cause of great warres. But whan the Burgun¦dions wold not that theyr duchies shuld be straun∣ged or alienated from Charles doughter, they deli¦vered to wedde Charles doughter to MaximilianMaximili∣ane. son to Friderick the Emperour. Wherfore Maxi∣miliane went wel appointed into Brabāt, the yeare M. cccc. lxxvii. and wedded Mary Charles dough¦ter: whereby it came to passe, that he augmēted not a litle the glory of the Eastenrychs name, and that Maximiliā did many renowmed prowesses, to de∣fende those countryes agaynste the assaulte of the Frenchemen.
The yeare .M. cccclxxxvi. was Maximilian ma¦de Emperoure: at Aken he was crowned the tenth daie of Apryll. When he was chosen Emperoure at Franckforde, Albert marques of Brandenburg dyed there, whome the Italian history writers also do geue the prayse of a sage and wyse prince, and al∣so a doughty man of armes. The yeare .M. cccclxxxvii. was MaximilianeMaximilian istakē at Bru¦dgis. taken of his subiectes at Brudgis in Flaūders, by a preuy trayne of the Frenchemen. But when Frede rick came downe into lowe Germany, furnyshed wyth the ayde of the whole empyre, Maximilian was letten fre of them of Brudgis. The yeare .M. ccccxc. he asked agayne and tokeFrederick dyeth. possession of his hereditary landes of the duchy of Eastenriche, the whiche Mathy kyng of Hungary had taken in. The yere M. ccccxciii. dyed Frederick the third Emperonre in the towne Lyntz, and was buried at Vienne. The same yeare dyd the Turkes fall in to Croacia: but they were dryuen backe agayne by Maximiliane, that then was in Eastenriche, surny∣shed wyth an army of fyftenth ou saude men. When Eugenius the .iiij. was deade, NicolausNicolaus the v. a fauourer of learnedinē the .v. was made by shop of Rome. Friderick the Emperoure was crowned of hym, and he entertay¦ned with moste hygh liberalitie not onely learned men of Italy: but also suche as were fled from Con stantinople to Rome, namely Gaza, Trapezontius, Argyropylos, by whose procurement al good scien∣ces are renewed and amended. Calistus the .iij. was bysh. of Ro. after Nicolaus.
Pius the .ij. before called Eneas Syluius succe∣dedEneas Sil∣uius. Calistus. He was Frederick the Emperoures Chaunceller. He had gathered a greate army of all nacions against the Turkes: but while the army is demissed without doynge any thyng. Paulus the .ij. was after Pius. Xystus the .iiii. was by shop of Rome after Pau∣lus. In his tyme the yeare .M. cccclxxx. dyd Ma∣hometesMahometes besyeged Hy∣druntum. the Turkysh Emperour besyege Hydrun¦tum in Italy, and wanne it, vsyng therein incredi∣ble tyranny. Italy was so asrayed, that Xystus the Romysh byshop made hrm reade to flye into Fraun¦ce. But Mahometes died the same time when Hy∣druntum was a takynge, and that by some destiny, lest he should straie farther into Italy. MoreouerAlfons kyng of Naples. whyle this was dayng, Alfonsus kyng of Naples, warred with them of Sena: but when he harde the tydyngs of Hydruntum, he haisted to returne into his kyngdome, and getteth the besyeged citye Hy∣druntū out of the Turkes handes. For whyle Ma∣hometes was deade, and that the Turkes haysted now to returne home, lest any variaunce myght ry∣se in their kyngdome, Alfonsus obteined the citie ea¦sely, driuyng the Turkes out of Italy. After Xystus was Innocētius the .viii. by. of Ro. Alexander the the .vi. was made byshop of Ro.The prince of rbinas sa∣yenge. after Innocentius. The same had a sonne duke of Valencia, whom he made prince of Vrbinas. Hys sayeng it was: O Cesar, o nullo. that is: Ether Em∣peroure, or nothyng. At the last was he nothyng. For he was slayne for his sundry craftes, that were mengled with gite and deceate.
The beginning of the science of printyng, is saydThe science o printyng. to haue bene vnder Frederick the thyrd: and thys science of boke printing they saye to haue ben found fyrst at Mentz, the yeare .M. cccc. xl. The craft of the gonnes is much elder, & it is sup¦posedThe craft of gonnes. that the same was also founde in Germany, by a frear the yeare .M. ccc. lxxx. Maxi milianus the .xxxviii. Germane Emperoure. THe yeare of Christe .M. ccccxciiii. beganMaximilia∣nus the Em∣peroure. Maximilianus hys raygne, when his fa∣ther was deade, with whome he gouer∣ned the empyre his lyfe tyme .viii. yeres. But after hys fathers deceasse raygned he .xxv. yeares. Though the begynnynges of the empyre were lowe and weake: yet at the last turned they to hygh auauncement and encrease of the Germane kyngdome. In the begynnynge of Maximilanus raygne,Charles with the bunched back the Frē∣che kyng. brought Charles wyth the crooked backe an army into Italy, and toke Naples. But a yeare after, when he was returned into Fraunce, gat Ferdinā∣dus the yonger Naples agayne with ayde of Ma∣ximilian dryuynge the Frenchemen out of Italy, whiche the Frenche kynge had left at Naples, for a garryson. Maximilian had many and great battails. First in low Germany. Flaunders and Brabant, in the whiche it is sayd he dyd many noble actes with his owne hande, where of I haue herde some, but I know not the very truth thereof. And would God
there would once come one that is sure of such thyn¦ges, who would writh all those histories in a cōplet boke to the prayse of so greate a prince, and myght auaunce worthely, before the worlde the puyssaun∣ce and vertues of so doughty an Emperoure. I my¦selfePyrcamer. haue herde of Pyrcamer of Norenberg, that Maximiliane hymselfe had written some of his de∣des for certayne yeares. For he sayde: He sayled from Lynda to Constance with Maximilian the Emperoure: and when Maximilian was nowe at leasure in saylyng, he called his Scribe to hym, and rehersed to hym in Latine hys dedes of one yeare, in a moste feate order, with the declaracion of all the circunstaunces and occasions. But when Pyrca∣mer thought the Scribe should note some secrete thynge, and therefore would auoyde, the Empe∣roure cōmaunded hym to remayne and lysten. Yea and at euening he toke it to Pyrcamer that he had rehersed to rede, and asked: whether that souldi∣ours Latine dyd lyke hym? and should haue sayde moreouer: He were mynded to comprehende those thynges so brefely and clerely, that afterwarde lear¦ned men might declare them so muche the more di∣ligently by their causes and circumstaunces. And Pyrcamer sayde: that no Germane history writer had vsed so pure a stile, as was that of Maximilian: And that after maximilianus death he had asked af¦ter this writynge, but he coulde not obteine it. But let this suffyse to be spoken of low Germany. The yeare .M. ccccxcv. was in the parliamentWhen the du¦chy of Wirtē¦berg began. holden at Worms of the earldome of Wirtenberg made a duchy, and erle Ebrarde was made the
fyrst duke. The yeare .Mccccxcix. toke the Switzers warrThe switzers warre against their neigh∣bours them of Eastenriche. against their neyghbours them of Eastenrich, the whiche to rescue, Maximiliane came haystely out of Gelderlande, where at that tyme he had to do al so. Wherefore hauing many skyrmyshes of both sy∣des, it is certayn that .xx. thousand mē were slayn: at the last was an agrement made. The yeare .MDi. were euery where figures ofFigures of a crosse sene v∣pon garmēts. crosses sene vpon mens garmentes. But suche lyke was oft happened before also. The yeare .MDiiij. was the warre of Baier∣lande,The warre of Baier. wherein the Emperoure Maximilianus de∣fended the princes of Baier, agaynst Philip count Palatine of the Rene, and duke Ruperte sonne to Philippe the Palatine. For the same maryeng the daughter of George duke of Baier, woulde haue Landshut and thatsame parte of Baier to be geuē ouer to hym by a tytle of inheritaunce. But Ruper∣tus dyed with his spouse, whyle this warre was in hand, & the count Palatine was put besyde a great parte of his lordeshyppe by the Emperoures men and them of Wirtenberg. Yea and a great army of the Bohemyes that came to helpe the count Pala∣tine, were ouerthrowen of the Emperoure. At the last neuerthelesse Maximilian vsyng no lesse wysdō than fauoure, toke the count Palatine to mercy, lest any perturbacion myght be raysed in the ryght of the election in the empyre, that long sence was alo∣wed and approued. The yeare .MDv. besyeged the army of the Em¦peroure the duke of Gelders in the citie Arnheym,
and constrayned hym to yelde hymselfe. The yeare .MDvi. died Philippe sonne to Ma∣ximilian,Philip sonne to Maximi∣lian dth Maximilian warreth a∣gainst the Ve¦necians. Lewis kyng of Fraunce. kyng of Spayne and duke of bourgundy, beyng of age .xxviii. yeares. The yeare .MDvii. beganne Maximiliane the warre againste the Venecians, no lesse greate then durable: in the whiche befell both many bloudy bat∣tails, and wonderfull mutacions. Lewis kynge of Fraunce was first with the Venecians, afterwarde fell he from them to the Emperour. Contrary wy∣se the byshop of Rome Iulius, was first of the Em∣peroures syde, afterwarde toke he parte with the Venecians. The Venecians lost in this warretheir best cities. Verona, Pauy, Teruas & other many. Howbeit when the Romysh byshop deciuered and fell to the Venecians, the Frenche kyng began to warre vpon hym also, seyng he had yet the Empe∣rours souldiours in Italy. Now feared the Empe∣roure, lest if he had the victory, he shuld fall into Na¦ples also, and do also some euell at Rome, to the em∣pyres destruction. Wherfore he sent the Cardinall Matheus Langius bishop of Saltzburg one of his counsaill to Iulius the byshop of Ro. to demaunde peace, before the Ro. byshop and the Frenche kyngIulius the by shop of Rom. was discomfi¦ted in a bat∣taill by the ci∣tie Rauennas vpon Easter daye. had foughten a felde. Iulius, for asmuch as he was very well appoynted with the ayde of Spaniardes and Italians, he thought to be sure of the victory, & therfore refused he the peace. The battail was vpō Easter daie the yeare .MDxii. by Rauennas. The byshop of Romes host lay vnder, & there were slain in that battaill syxtene thousand. Nether is there red of a more greuous felde to haue ben about this
tyme, wherein men haue fought so fearcely. But af∣ter this victory lost, dyd Iulius frely demaūde pea∣ce. Howbeit lest the French kyng enterprisedought farther in Italy, dyd Maximilian and the bysh. of Rome set the kyng of Englande, Germany and the Switzers against hym: and of this wyse was the Frenche kyng at the last constrained to leaue Ita∣ly. The Venecians were afterwarde reconciled to to the Emperoure also. The yere .MDxix. dyed Maximilian the Em∣peroure, and thatsame yere the princes ElectorsWhat Elec∣tors chose Charles that now is Em∣peroure. Albert Cardinall byshop of Mentz. Herman by∣shop of Colen erle of Wida. Richarde byshop of Trierlorde of Grieffenklau, the deputie of Le∣wis kyng of Bohemy. Lewis coūt Palatine of the Rene. Frederick duke of Saxony. Ioachim mar∣ques of Brandenburg, did chose lawfull and with great wisdom at Frāckford Charles duke of Eastē ryche and Bourgundy, and kyng of Spayne, the xxviii. daye of Iune. Pius the iij. was bysh. of Ro. after alexander the vi. The same died shortely after. Iulius the .ij. succeded Pius. Against him wrote Bernardin{us} the Cardinal in the tyme of the Vene¦cian warre of kepyng a counsail. The matter shuld haue geuen an occasion of a diuision, had not Maxi∣milian preuented it by his syngulare wisedome. Leo the .x. sonne to Laurence Medices was ma¦de byshop of Rome. after Iulius. In the tyme of this Leo y• yere .MDxvii. wroteMartine Lu∣ther▪ Martin Luther fyrst against the Romysh byshops pardons, & from thence rose many disputaciōs after ward, whiche thynge caused no small alteracionin
the churche by the Germanes. Charles the .v. the .xxxix. Germane Emperoure. He yeare .MD. xix. was Charles the .v.Charles y•. chosen Emperoure the nepheu to Maxi∣milians, kynge of Spayne, prince of Ea∣stenryche and Burgundy. The Electors sent into Spayne to shewe Charles of this election Fride∣rick count Palatine. Wherfore the next yeare after he came into Germany, and was crowned Empe∣roure at Aken. The yeare .MDxxv. was Frances the FrencheFrances the French king taken. kyng taken by Pauy in Lombardy, by the Empe∣roures souldiours in a felde, and afterwarde brou∣ght into Spayne. Charles vsed a very incredible gentlenesse & moderacion of mynde in so great pro∣speritie of victory. For he dyd not onely let fre the Frenche kyng, restoryng hym to his kyngdom: but also bounde hym with affinitie to hym, geuing hym his syster Leonora to wyfe. The capitaines of the battail, whereof we saied euen now, were Nicolas coūt of Salma, George of Frūsberg knight, Mark Sittich, duke Burbon, & the marques Piskerame. The same yeare were raysed in Germany horri∣bleThe commo¦tion of vplan¦yh mn. and neuer afore herde comotions, by vplandishe men in Elsace, Schwaben, Frankenlād, Thuringē, and in those contreis that lye by the Rhene. This commotion was alayed by the great force & armes of the princes, so that within the space of thre mone¦thes nere hande, were slame in battaill aboue hun∣dreth thousand vplādysh men, none other wyse thē
as beastes. Moreouer one called Schapler, wroteSchapler. Twelue arti∣cles of the se∣dicious rusti∣kes. xii. artickes of the Christē libertie, among the whi∣che this was euen the chefest: Tribute ought not to be geuen to the magistrate or superioritie. By thys doctrine, vpon hope to get libertie, the gretest part of the rustikes beyng enflamed, it is saide to haue ta¦ken weapons agaynst their lawfull magistrate. In the towne of Thuringen, called Mulhausen, was aThomas Mynter. preacher, called Thomas Mynter. The same prea∣ched openly, that he shoulde restore the decayed sta∣te of the churche: and dyd boiste, that reuelacions were priuely shewed him: and that Gedeons sword was geuen hym, to roote out the tyranny of the vn¦godly. He led forth by heapes the vplandish men, and commaunded the houses of gentlemen to bee spoyled, and the goodes of monasteries to be polled and waisted. But when the rustical armies spoiled euery where without order, the prince of Saxony and Landgraue of Hesse destroied them. Thomas Mynter and some of his felowes were takē and be∣headed, and were punyshed for their enterpryse. This Mynter was the first begynner of the madde erroure of the Anabaptistes, which yet causeth muche ado in Germany. The yere .MDxxv. dyd Iohn OecolampadiusIohn Ocal∣padius & Hul¦drich Zwin∣glius renew the doctrine of Berengarius ndreas a∣rolestadius. at Basel, and Huldrich zwinglius in zwizerlande fyrst of all with there writing renewed the doctrine of Berengarius that in the bread and wyne was not really present the body and bloude of Christe, though the yeare before the learned man Andrew Carolostadius had proposed the same argument. The yeare .MDxxvi. was Lewis kyng of Hū∣gary
ayne by Solyman the Turkysh Emperour. The yere .MDxxvij. dyd duke Burbon bryngeRome taken by Burbon. the Emperoures hoost to Rome, the citie was besie¦ged and taken, and also spoyled. The byshop of Ro. constrayned by necessitie into the Castell angel, yel∣ded hymselfe to the Emperoures men: but the Em¦peroure of his gentlenesse let hym fre agayne, and restored hym to hys former dignitie, that the com∣mon peace of Christendome were nothyndered. The yere .MDxxix. went Charles into Italy, & was receaued of all princes and cities, with moste hygh honoures. The same yeare in the moneth of October theWith what an ost So∣lyd be¦ge iēn. Turkysh Emperoure Solyman brought about a hundreth and fourty thousand men into Germany whiche nomber they shoulde afterward haue boa∣sted themselues in the citie Cracowe in Polen: and besieged the citie Vienne certayn wekes and assaul∣ted it greueously. But Friderick count Palatine, apointed by the empire captaine of the souldiours, gatheryng an army with all spede, sent it to Viēne, thre dayes before the Turke besieged it. Philippe counte Palatine was with them in the citie Viēne. Wherfore by the gracious fauoure of God was the citie Vienne so strongly defended, that the Turkish tyraūt was fayne to turne backe agayn with great shame, and losse of hys host. The messaunger of the Poles is reported to haue sayde: that in the assault of Vienne, were slayne about foure score Turkes, and partely to haue dyed by the waye, for lacke of itayls, and fearcenesse of the colde. The yeare .MDxxx. the .xxij. daye of February,
was Charles crowned Emperoure at Bonony byCharles is crowned Em¦perour at Bo¦nony by the bysh. of Ro. Clemens the byshop of Rome with a great solem∣nitie and coste. After that went he agayne into Germany, and came on Corpus Chist euen at Ausborow, wherthe parliament was adiourned. The chefe princes of Germany came thether, of whom Charles the Em¦peroure was receaued with high honour. ThoughThe parlia∣ment of us∣borow. the Emperour assaied many waies to appeace y• de¦bates in the religion, & to restore them into a quiet∣nesse, yet could no certayne thynge be brought to passe or ordeined, in so great diuersitie of myndes. At the last commaunded he by an open commaunde¦ment to retaine and kepe the accostumed maners of ceremonies, and the doctrine afore vsed. The same yeare. the eight daye of October, wasAn ouerflo∣wyng at Ro. an ouerflowynge at Rome so greate, as no man coulde remembre to haue bene sene, and the same lasted about foure and twenty houres: and when thys ouerflowynge stode styll in the place called Campo Flore, the hyght of a longe moryshpycke, many buildynges, walles, houses and goodes were destroyed. When Leo was deade, Adrianus alowe Germa¦ne, borne at Vtrecht was made byshop of Rome. After Adrianus was Clemens the .vij. chosenClemens the vij. is taken. by. of Ro. The same was taken by the Emperours hoost at Rome, for makyng a confederacy with the Frenche kynge, whome also he sent ayde agaynste the Emperor. But the same iniury dyd y• very good Emperoure dissemble with hygh softnesse: and lest any occasion myght ryse of a greueous debate
in Christendom, he set the byshop of Rome Clemēs the .vij. at libertie, of whome he was afterwarde crowned at Bonony. Ferdinande the .xl. Germane Emperoure. THe yeare .MDxxx. was Ferdināde kingFerdinande kyng of Hun∣gary. of Hungary and Bohemy, Archeduke of Eastenriche &c. brother to Charles the Emperoure, made kyng of the Romanes: and that after the example of the aūcient Emperours, which were wont to take to them other, that the empyre myght haue a successor, and that when the other were deade, no debate or occasion of warre myght ryse amonge the princes of the empyre. This elec∣tion was at Colen the yeare .MDxxx. The yeare .MDxxxi. was Ferdinande after the election crowned at Aken in Ianuary. The same yeare was a Comete sene in Germa∣ny,A Comete sene. Italy Fraunce and Englande, about the syxte daye of Auguste, and fyrst appeared it certayne da∣yes in the morning before Sunne rising, after that folowed it the Sunne, and was sene the space of. iij wekes about the euenyng, after Sunne sett, vntyll the thyrd daye of September. Hys course was through the celestiall or heauenly sygnes Cancer. Leo, Virgo and Libra, where it was sene nomore nether appeared any more after that. Not long after in October rose a warre in Swi¦tzerThe Switzer warre within themselues. lande. For to they of Tzurich stopped the passa¦ges, that to their neghburs of zugia, Vria. Suicia.
Siluia and Lucerne, noman coulde bryng corne, salte and other victuals. Wherfore they armed thē against those of Tzurich. They met eche other wt displaied banners, & they of Tzurich beyng vanqui¦shed with thre fieldes, had the worst. In the fyrst battayll was slayne the preacher of Tzurich, Hul∣drich zwinglius. In the meane tyme endeuoured they of Stralborow and Constance their neigh∣bours, to make an accorde among the cōfederated. And thus after .viij. monethes and .vi. wekes was the vproure alayed. Of thē of Tzurich died about fyue thousande, of the other syde a fewe. The yeare M D. xxxii. came Charles the Em∣peroure againe out of Brabant into Germany, and came in Marche with his brother kyng Ferdinand to Regenspurg to kepe a parliament. ThithercameThe parlia∣ment holden at Regēspurg the deputies sent frō the Imperial cities. There ca¦me also many princes, or at the leaste, their Ambas∣sadours. Not very long before that Constantinople was taken by the Turkes, I reade there was a solitary man, not farre from the citie Constantinople, and he shuld haue prophecied: that the Turkes in dedeProphecies of recouering Constantino∣ple, and of ro¦ting the Tur∣kes out of Eu¦ropa. should winne Constantinople, and should roote out the kyngdom of the Grekes: but anone after foure score yeres, should they lose Constantinople agayn, and that the Turkes should be rooted out of Euro∣pa. But that tyme sence Cōstantinople was wonne, is expired the last yeare. A most connyng Astronomer also at Naples, cal∣ledLaurentius Miniatensis an Astrono∣mer. Laurētius Miniatensis, scholemaister to Pon∣tanus, wrote these verses in his boke .lx. yeres ago,
concernyng the coniunction of Iupiter and Satur¦nus in the sygne Cancer, the whiche he sayeth shall be, and was in the yeare thousande, fyue hundreth and foure last past. That age succedyng oures vpon the heles. Shalbe better, and more prayse worthy, Lytle of oure lawe shall it disanull scarcely: But the greueous and harde to suffer thynges. In holy matters, shall it auoyde doubtlesse. All kynd of wickednesse, and also holy pryde. A kyng also shall it geue vs harmelesse, Who shall the worlde ende, and peoples represse: Rebellyng naciōs shall he subdue to the empyre. And the whole worldes dominiō shall he possesse. These verses are moste worthy to be marked: and I woulde not passe them ouer, because of the re¦nowme of the moste famous Emperour. For what hygher prayse can be in the Emperour, then that he calleth hym a Harmelesse kyng, euen as Iohn Lich¦teberg sayde of hym: The shamefast of visage shall raygne euery where. At Magdeburg is founde .C. yere ago a Latine cronicle, wherin are these wordes: Of the bloude of Charles the Emperour, and the kynges of Fraūce, shalbe borne an Emperoure, called Charles: thesa∣me shal haue dominion in all Europa, by whom also the decayed estate of the church, shalbe repared, and the auncient glory of the empyre shalbe restored. For there shall come a people, that shalbe called: peo¦ple without heade, and than we to the priestes: Pe∣ters lytle shyppe shall suffre greate force, but the wa¦ues shall crasse at the last, and it shall haue victory.
Greate and dredefull mutacions of al kyngdomes, are at hande, and the settyng store by monkes, shall peryshe. The Beaste of the West, and the Lion of the Easte shall haue dominion of the whole worlde, and the Christians shallwander through Asia in sa∣uegarde fyftene yeares: but after that shal dredeful thynges be herde of Antichriste. Abbas Ioachim saieth in the ende of Ieremye: A great Egle shall come, whiche shall ouercome eue¦ry man saue one, who at the last beynge despysed, shalbe for saken of the people. I fynde also another prophecie, whiche is renow¦med: The Emperoure shalbe awaked, as a man fal∣len into a swete slepe. The same shalbe counted of men as deade, and shall go vp vpon the greate sea, and inuade the Turkes, and shall ouercome them: he shall leade their wyues and Chyldren captiues. Greate feare and drede shall ouerwhelme the Tur¦kes, their wyues and chyldren shall wepe and la∣mente: all the Turkes landes shalbe geuen ouer in to the Emperours handes of Rome. I haue herde a Portingale saye, that an Astrono¦mer should haue sayde to Ferdinandus oure Em∣peroures greate graundefather: that the Turkysh empyre shoulde be subdued and ouerthrowen by a kyng of Spayne, and that the same should haue in∣terpretated the kyng to be Ferdinande. But Ferdi¦nande should haue answered: That he shoulde not do it, but hys heyres that should succede hym. Other emdences more that are yet restyng, wyl I at this tyme passe ouer. God the father of mercy, geue and graunte Christendom victory and grace,
for the glories sake of his godly name. Amen. Moreouer the thinges that shal yet happen, shal doutlesse marke greate and wyse men, whiche are now in this settyng forth of warre. As for me, I haue onely rehersed suche thynges of this prepara¦cion of the settynge forth to warre, as I was sure of, and therefore do I now make an ende of wry∣tynge. In the moneth of September this yeare, wasA Comete sene. a Comete sene agayne certayn wekes, two houres before Sunne rysyng, and toward the Easte. Whē I sawe it, it was in Virgo to my iudgemen, & stret∣ched his brandyshynge tayll betwene the South & West. But by reason of the gloumynge and cloudy ayer in these contreis, coulde it not be sene here. Howbeit, who wil not iudge it to be a fearfullthing, that two Cometes haue bene sene in the space ne∣rehande of twelue monethes? and seyng the Co∣mete of the last yere, namely of the yere M D. xxxi. dyd not appeare without the hurte of Easte and North: for it semed to threaten those partes. For the tyrannyshe Turke fell into Hungary and Ea∣stenryche kyng Christiernus goyng into Denne∣marck with a greate nauy, to demaunde againe his kyngdome, yelded hymselfe into Frederick hys fa∣thers brothers the kyng of Denmarck handes. Christiernus also his sonne, that was brought vp in the Emperours court, dyed. Veryly it is to be feared also, that the Comete of this yeare of. M D. xxxij. do signifye greate euell to the partes of Italy and the Rene. The ende of the Cronicle.
The cōclusion of this Cronicle of Iohn Carion. A boke of Chronicles ought to cōprehende moste greatest thynges in a feate order, so that the reke∣nyng of the yeares, and the chefe alteracions, that befall into the religion and other greate thynges may be ryght obserued and knowen. For it can not be that all thynges that are done in one realme, can be written in one boke, though it were great, by rea¦son of the sundry circumstaunces and occasions of y• businesses, the whiche must chefely be consydered. Of this wyse truely wrote Herodotus, Theucydi des, Xenophon & Tit{us} Liuius histories. The otherWriters of Histories. Cronicles. are onely to be called Cronicle writers, whiche also ought not to take vpon them the name of History wryters: For they do brefely shewe thynges done, and settyng the order of the tyme before, seme onely to aduertyse the wyse reader, to marke some of the notablest thynges. Whiche thinge we haue done al¦so in this Cronicle: we haue only drawen those thin¦ges as it were in a pathwaye, whiche semed moste best, and haue other whyles shewed their occasions, to the intent we maye learne to marke and forse so much thenarower suche lyke thynges, in like chaū∣ces, Howbeit what profites otherwise besides this do Cronicles bryng, that same haue we declared be¦fore in the preface. Truely I muste before the ende of this wryting put the reader agayne in remembraunce of the sa∣yeng of Elias, the whiche we haue set in the begyn¦nyng of this treatyse, that he may so much the mo∣re easyer marke both the order of the tyme, and also the dedes of the histories. Item that he thinke that
also, that the ende of mens affaires is at hande, ac∣cordynge to the sayeng of Elias, that the worldes age conteyneth .vi. M. yeares, and that the same space shall not he fully expyred: for God shall preuēt it because of the worldes corrupte maners. Now seyeng there are expyred .v. M. and .v. C. yeares sence the worlde beganne, as may clerely be gathe∣red out of the table folowing: it is no doute but that the worldes age is nerehand come to the ende, that Christe our lorde do rayse vp the death by his com∣myng, and iudge the whole worlde, and that more is also appoynt the deuels and wicked men euerla∣stynge fyre, but take the very godly out of al sorow, and set them into the euerlasting fruition of God & blesse. Besydes this do the wonderfull mutacions and chaunges of all kyngdomes nearehande wyt∣nesse that the worlds ende is not farre of. For withWhat the mutacions of kyngdomes de signifye. in fewe yeares euen by our remembraunce we ha∣ue perceaued the hyghnesse of the Romish byshop, Fraunce, Hungary and Dennemarckes kingdoms to haue greucously fallen, and lyke chaūce are short¦ly to be loked for in other kyngdomes also. Daniel witnesseth that shortely after that the Turkes po∣wers be minyshed, shall the ende of all thynges of the worlde be at hande. But the Turkysh kyngdōs decaye shall doutlesse be sene wythin few yeares (if Goddes wyll be so,) and after that our Emperoure Charles shalbe deceassed, it can not be, but that the empire also shalbe miserably toren of the Germans themselues. For I feare me two wyll then greatly stryue for the monarchye. Almighty God of his in∣finitie mercy, swage so horrible commotions & tur∣ne the
princes hartes, to concorde and peace. The toren tranquillitie and spoiled peace in the churche, maye also be a signe and token, and it is to be feared, lest the same do also growe and sprede far∣ther by warres and negligence of Romish by shops. But seyeng Christe hymselfe aduertiseth vs in the Gospel of the perils, that shalbe at hande in the latter dayes, not only in those thinges that pertayn to the body, but also those that belong to the sprete, yea the heauen itselfe also threateneth with horry∣ble darkeninges and coniunctions: I wil passe ouer to speake of those tokēs, that be rehersed in the scri∣pture cōcernyng the latter dayes, so that at the last we maye learne to beware & take hede to our selues and doute not to demaunde and loke for ayde and comfort of God onely in so greate misere of al thin∣ges. Wherefore I willed the reader to be admony∣shed in this place, to call to remembraunce, that tho∣se tymes full of peryls & wretchednesse, are at hand, and that the same peryls ought not to be despised with a rechelesse mynde. For it is no lyght thynge, and suche one as all maner of men do proue wyth their harme and damage, that realmes are chaun∣ged, empires pulled out of their frames, and con∣corde of religion is spoyled. The buyldynge or fa∣brike of the worlde semeth to represente a greate and moste olde buyldynge, whyche oftentymes is more and more ready to fall, when nowe doth one wall fall downe, then the other. Likewise doth the world seme to be ready to fal at this time, & doth by litle and litle bryng a more greuous fal with it, one and other kyngdomes falling down and decayeng.
Nether let any man thynke that so greate a buyl∣dyng shall fall without a moste excedynge commo∣tion. God lyghten oure myndes, that we beyng ad∣monyshed with the earnest threatenynges of the Gospell, maye seke at onely Christe consolation and refreshynge: and that greate princes maye vse no lesse wysedome in the feare of God, then mekenesse, to assuage the occasions of all euels. For thereto are they ordeined of God, that with their care and wisedom, they maye gouerne and de∣fende mankynd that is weake & wret∣ched. And yf they do their duetye in the feare of God. God shall lyke∣wyse be with them, and pro∣sper their enterpry∣ses. Amen.
A Table of the worl∣des yeares, out of the Bible and Philo. M. vi. C. lvi. vntyll the floude. CC. xcij. vntyll Abraham was borne. CCCC. xxv. vntyll Moses was borne. Lxxx. vntyll the goyng out of Egipt CCCC. lxxx. vntyll Salomons tempel. C. xxxviij. vntyll Ioas the kyng. CC. xci. vntyll Ieconias was remoued into Babylon. xi. vntyll Ierusalē was waysted by Nabuchodonosor. Lxx lasted the captiuitie of Babilō. C. xci. lasted y• monarchie of the Per¦ses after that the captiuitie of Babylon was finyshed. vij. was Alexander after Darius death. C. xlvi. lasted the kyngdō of the Gre∣kes vntil Iudas Machabeus C. xxxvij. dured the kyngdō of the Ma∣chabeis. vntyll Herodes the fyrste tyme after Iosephus. xxx. raigned Herodes: for Christe was borne the thirtieth yeare of Herodes. MD. xxxij. sence Christ our saueour was borne. The yeare of the was Christ borne. worlde. iii M. ix. C. lxxiiij.
This present yeare .MDxxxii. are accomplished sence the worlde was made .v. M. CCCC. lxxvi. yeares. The citie Rome (as witnesseth Eutropius) stode before Christe was borne .vij. C. liij. yeares: and yf the yeares shoulde be counted a ryght, it can in a maner be no better rekened by true histories. This present yere of oure lorde .MDxxxij. are past sence the citie Rome was builded. ii M. CClxx xv. yeres. Babylon was not so olde before Alexan∣der. For from Abraham vntyll Alexanders tyme are .M. vi. C. lxxxvi. yeares. But now seyeng Ro∣me is elder then Babylon, it is no doubte but that her ende shalbe shortely also, after the twoo Mo∣narchies. Nether doth the nomber of the yeares that is in the Bible greately disagre from the order of the Monarchies that is in the chefe aucthors of the Greke histories. Herodotus wryteth that the Assyrians kept the Monarchie .Dxx. yeares, and sence that tyme to haue bene no certayne Monar∣chye, vntyll the tyme of the Medes. He rekeneth the Medes to haue ruled vntyll Cyrus tyme C. xxx. yeares. And the same, as it can not seme false, euen so do I greatly alowe it: for yf any man do waye it aryght, the same shall easely perceaue that it doth not disagre wyth the Bible. That he sayeth the monarchy of the Assyrians to haue stand .Dxx. yeares, that wyll he doubtlesse haue referred to that tyme, when the kyngdome of Babilon and Ni∣niue the citie were not yet diuided, euen when the Assyrians reygned only at Babylon.
Agathias wryteth in the seconde booke of theAgathias. Gothian warre, that Ctesias set the nomber of the yeares, and the order of the Monarchies of thys wyse. As for Ctesias was a Grecian, who whenCtesias. Artaxerxes Mnemon and Cyrus the yonger war¦red with eche other, he was also in the army, and was a Phisician. Beynge taken in warre, he was at the last caried to Babylon, where he was honest∣ly entreated, and then readynge the hystoryes of Babylon, he set the nomber of that kyngdome in an order of this wyse. From Ninus vntyll the begynnyng of the Me∣des kyngdome, wiche did deciuer from the Assy∣ryans the fyrste, are .M. CCC. lx. yeares, and this order do all those obserue, that wrote afterwarde, Diodorus Siculus and Iustinus. Diodorus Si∣culus wrote of this wyse in his thyrde booke: Lyke wyse also the resydue of the kynges thyrty in nom∣ber, helde the kyngdome, vntyll Sardanapulus, by whose tyme, the kyngdome of the Assyrians, which had lasted .M. CCC. lx. yeares, (as wryteth Cte∣sias in the seconde booke,) fell to the Medes. Iusti∣nus sayeth of this wyse: The assyrians, who after∣warde were called Syria, had the gouernaunce M. CCC. yeres. Herodotus doth passe ouer som∣thynge, in the meane tyme that the decayeng kyng dome of the Assyrians came to the Medes. I thyn∣ke this also, that these yeares of Ctesias concer∣nyng the begynnyng of Babylon, to be vnderstand from the tyme of Nembroth, not Ninus. The Medes reigned after the fallyng from the Assyrians vntil Cyrus, about thre hundreth yeres,
as Agathias gathereth out of Ctesias. The kyngdome of the Perses vntill Alexander, dyd last .CCxxviij. yeres, as witnesseth Agathias and some Grecian wryters. Alexander and his posteritie kept Babylon vn∣tyll the tyme, that the power of the Parthians be∣ganne to grow: and Agathias setteth CCC. yeres seuen lesse, and that is from Alexander vntyll Au∣gustus tyme. Afterward raigned the Parthians in the Easte hundreth yeares, vntil the tyme of Alexander Se∣uerus the Emperoures, and then dyd Artaxerxes the Persian stick through and slaye Artabanus the last kyng of the Parthians. And of this wyse came the East kyngdom agayne to the Perses, which we¦re myghty vntyll Mahomets tyme. For the succes∣sors of Mahomet inuaded the Perses, and teke in the empire of whole Arabia. But the Turkes toke from them afterwarde Syria and Asia the lesse. And thus were the kyngdomes of the Easte tossed finally with diuerse mutaciōs, the one people was oftymes remoued to the other. It is greatly necessary to ouerlaye all these thynges, and often to consyder them, that the order of all tymes and histories may be knowen aryght.
An addition vnto the Cronicle of Iohn Carion contaygnyng the actes and histories come to passe in dyuers and sun¦dry partes of the worlde from the yere of our lorde .MDxxxij. vnto the yeare of our lorde .MD. L. excerpted and gathe∣red out of the best historiographers by Iohn Funke of Nourenbo∣rough. And caused to be tran∣slated by Gwalter Lynne. AT the entraunce or beginning of the con∣uocationThe conuoca¦tion or coun∣saill holden at Ramsburgh. holden at Ratisbone or Rayne∣sborough in the yere of our lorde .MD. xxxij. in lent, ther lay at Nurrenborough certayn princes electours, with many other nobles of the empire, among whom were as principall Al∣bert Archebyshop of Mogunce or Mence, Lodo∣wike Palatine of the Rhyne, Iohn Frederike duke of Saxon and electour imperiall, whiche princes & nobles did there treate and consulte vpon mattersThe duke of Saxon agre∣eth not to the election of ye kyng of the Romaines. of religion, and about the establishing of kyng Fer∣dinandus (to whose election as to be king of the Ro¦mains, the said Iohn duke of Saxō & electour impe¦riall would not accorde nor consent) and after much intreataunce they obtayned of themperours maie∣stie a graunt and promes of a sure and stedfast peace vntil the next general coūsail that was to come, yea and is to come yet, euen at this day. Other notable actes cōcerning matters of religiō was there none
concluded in that conuocation. For Soliman Em∣peroureThe seconde breakyng in of Soliman into Germa∣ny. of the Turkes was vp with all his power and inuaded the lande of Hungary, wherefore the Christian princes were constrained with all spede and strenght possible to prepare themselues to re∣sist the said aduersary. Insomuche that there was prepared suche an armie and hoost of men of diuers nacions as neuer was sene before in all Germany, y• beginnyng wherof was about the feast of S. Iohn the baptist, the warriours of the towne of Nuren∣burgh beinge the firste that arryued at Weene in Austriche, for there was all the whole hoost ap∣pointed to assemble and come together: & the same assembling continued vntil the feast of saint Bartho¦lome we next ensuyng. The nombere of Duche pie∣tons or footemen was about foure score thousande stoute and valiaunt fyghting men. And of the horse men there was about .xxiiij. thousand. The Bohe∣mes were in the nomber aboue twenty thousande. All these lay about Wyene by the ryuer called the Danube a lycle myle frō the towne, Their chefe ca∣pitaine was the right noble and mighty prince, lord Frederick Palatine of the Rene &c. nowe being e∣lectour imperiall. About the said towne laye also vpon a fifty thousand Spanyardes, whiche in the∣se affayres vsed but small kyndnesse towardes the germaynes. For in their passage from the Countie of Tyroll ouer the Eye and the Danube into Au∣strich they burned certayn strong holdes and tow∣nes well inhabited, and some they pylled, and with women and maydens they wrought suche vylanye and enormitie (whiche is horrible to be spoken) that
many of them dyed thorough their said outtragi∣ousnes. The goodly and plesaūt Citie of Krembes was vtterly by thē subuerted and brent vp except fourtenne houses wyth certayne walles. After this when they lacked vitualles in their campe for the space of one daye, they russhed with violence be∣fore the Cytie of Wyene, wherein the Emperoure and the kyng had theyr beyng, wyth a great nom∣bre of other greate men of armes and warriours whiche were come thether wyth them, and would haue assaulted and ouerrunne the same towne if the Germaynes had not the sooner resysted them, and letted their enterpryse. In the meane season the Turke layde syege to aGuns assaul∣ted of the Tur¦ke by the spa∣ce of .xij. daies certayne lytle Towne called Guns, whiche lyeth about twelue or thirtene myles from Wyene, in the coastes of Hungary, and assaulted the same most fier¦cely by the space of twelue dayes, during the which tyme he sought all meanes possyble to subuerte and ouerthrowe the same. But the right noble and wor¦shypfull Syr Nicolas Iuristhi knight and Ruler of the sayed towne dyd so manfully and valiauntly behaue hymselfe in those affayres wyth hys cyte∣sens or bourgeouses beyng in nombre about eight hundreth men, and one hundred souldiours whiche were layde there in garnison for the sauegarde of the same towne that the Turke maruayled not a lyttell of it. Wherefore he promised vnto the sayed Ruler fre passage and saulf conduct, and hauing per¦sonally himself talked wt him, did highly prayse him for his constauncy & faithfulnes which he had vsed towards his prince, in y• he had so cōstantly resisted
and repelled his aduersary: and after that he had endued hym with great giftes, he sent hym againe to his owne. Assone nowe as the Turke with his armie was departed from the saied towne, and had geuen ouer the sayed syege, the wall of the sayed Towne fellThe wall of  falleth e by it elfe. downe to the grounde by it selfe. whereby it may appeare that the same was afore preserued and de∣fended from that violent power of the Turke by the myghty hande and assistence of God. Nowe when the Turke perceiued suche a great power of the germayne nation commynge agaynst hym▪ he retyred backwarde againe with his power whiche all ready entred into Stewermarke as farre forth as Graytes, and made his arryr to mar¦che and passe alonge by the sayed Towne of Gray∣tes euen from the dawnyng in the mornyng vntyll the next morowe folowyng, whereof it maye easely be gathered with what power he was come the∣ther. But yet to thyntent he myght not seme to ha∣ue bestowed all his laboure in vayne, and to haue led without any harme done to the Germayne na∣tion he left behynde hym not farre from the newe towne in Austriche, about. xi. thousande▪ some say xvi. thousand men, to destroie the borders of Ste∣yerm and Austrych as sone as the Germayne warriours shoulde haue remoued. Howbeit af∣ter muche searchyng thesaied nomber of men was espyed and theyr▪ enterpryse brought to lyght. For thys cause Duke Frederike chief Capitayne
toke vnto hym a certain nomber of launce knightes or Pietons, and a certayn nomber of heauy horse∣men with whome he vndertoke and attempted to smite the said multitude of Turkes, and compassed them on euery syde, besydes the montaynes by a great cawssy and caused certain dubble souldiours well armed to folowe them at their hyles & to barre them in, for turnyng backwarde agayne of the whi∣che dubble souldiours was Capitayne one Seba∣stiane Skartell of Ausborongh, insomuch that the saied Turkes were first assayled with two heapes, against whom they defended them selues stoutely, but yet they lost ther about a thousand of their own men, whereupon eftsones they toke their flyght, but as they would haue fled out of the mountaines the other heapes of our men were in their neckes, by whom also they were all discomfited and slaine, so that no Turke might escape. Some of them they founde afterwarde on the mountaynes and in wo∣des, and some vpon trees, where they were fled to saue their lyues, amonge whome some were shot¦down with gonnes lyke byrdes or wyldefoule, and some were taken and deliuered to the Trosse to cut and mangle them at their pleasures, whiche were very pyteously chopped and carued of the younger sorte of people. After that this alarme was ceassed and quali∣fied the Emperoure and the kyng roade forth into the campe of the Germaines, and the Emperoures maiestie beholdyng the people as they stode in aray maruayled excidyngly cōcernyng the nombre and multitude of them, insomuche it was reported that
he should aske of duke Frederick the vpper capitain whether suche an other multititude of men might be founde and assembled thoroughout all Duche∣lande, whereunto thesaide Duke made aunswere, that it was scant perceyued in the townes of Du∣cheland that any man there was missing or lackyng after this (as some do affyrme) there should be takē a certayne truce and agrement with the Turke for a certayne tyme, but how, after what sorte and ma∣ner, or on what condition, this hangeth yet within the penne▪ and is lyke also there to remayne yet a whyle. Some are of this opiniō, that the cause why the Emperoures maiestie made no haste to pursue after the Turke was this, that winter was at hād, and that therefore the warriours were dismissed and sent away, so that with the saied innumerable multitude of warriours littel good was donesauig that muche money was vnprofytably wasted and expended. Wherfore I suppose after myne owne iudgement that in case the Emperours and the kin¦ges maiestie had proceded and gone forward with that armye or multytude whiche was there at that tyme assembled and gathered together and had ma¦de sure certayne townes in Hungary which would gladly haue rendred and yelded themselues again, while the Turkes fled, and had at the going out of winter be gonne agayne to seke the Turke at home in his owne lande, the Turkysh tyraunt woulde no more so spitefully plage vs in our cōtreis. But thus wold God punysh vs yet lōger for our wickednes, for the whiche cause also God did suffre the best coū sail to be hindred by one man only: for it is thought, that the Emperours maiestie was by the only coun
sayll of Anthony de Leua turned from thesaid purAnthony de Leua. sewte, so that the Turke had a free and sure passage home agayne into his owne dominions, and remai∣ned vnharmed in Hungary for somuche as he was not there put to any losse or hynderaunce by our men, or on our behalf. While these thynges were a doing in AustricheAndrewe de Aurea. and Steirmarke, Andrew de Aurea chief capitain of themperours maiesties nauy vpon the seas, wēt at themperours cōmaundement, with an exceding great Armade or navy, vnto the citie of Corona,The citie of Corona takē whiche lieth in the Ilonde of the Grekes somtyme called Poloponesus, and nowe Morea, whiche citie he did ouercome, and expelled from thence all the Turkes. But the Christians did not longe enioye the same, for within two yeres after the Turkes ob¦tayned the possession of the saied towne agayn, smal to our reioysing. When the matter was nowe in Austriche quali∣fiedThe Empe∣rourre turned into Italy to the Pope. and all thinges quiet, the Emperour Charles the fift returned thorough the mountaines of Sti∣ermarke namely thorough kerint and Frioulesont∣tyme called Forum Iuly, and so through MantuaThe Pope meteth them∣perour at Bo¦nonia. into Italy agayne to the Pope, Clement by name, who came to mete hym at Bononia with greate pompe and solempnitie, in so muche that he conti∣nued in Italy all the winter of this yere, stablishing the same in order peace and tranquilitie. In Englād was also in this yere moued a battel.Battell mo∣ued in Eng∣land against the Scottes. For kyng Henry the eight sent men into Scotland against Iames the fift, kyng of the Scottes where in cōclusion they slew a great nomber & toke many prisoners, and so returned.
Also in the same yere dyed the ryght hygh andThe death of Iohn duke of Saxon. myghty prince▪ Iohn duke of Saxon, and electour imperiall &c. and was honorably buried at Witten∣borough in the Castel churche: whose sonne and heire is the ryght noble and christen Prince Iohn Fredericke, whiche after the deceasse of his saied fa∣therIohn Frede∣rick duke of Saxon. succeded in the gouernaunce of the saied duke∣dome of Saxon as electour imperiall, rulynge the same moste honorably in the feare of God muche to his prayse and commendacion. There was also a Comete or blasyng starre seneA Comete or blasing starre . this yere in the moneth of September, whiche ap∣peared early in the morning two houres before the risyng of the Sunne, by the space of certayn wekes, in the sygne of Virgo, Libra, and Scorpius, at the oriental corner stretchyng her blasyng tayle towar¦des the southwest.A great in∣cion of wa¦t in Hollād Seeland &c. The second day of Nouember was there a great inundacion of water brokē in, into Freeseland, Hol∣land. Seeland, and Flaunders, which was very da¦mageable to the said countreis and to thinhabiters therof. Also Christerne kyng of Norway being retour∣nedChristerne kn of D¦ke after h returta oure e l. into his said kyngdome the yeare before, from the parties of lowe Ducheland, where he had kept hym selfe by the space of ten yeres, was required, by the counsayll of Denmarke to come to Copmanha∣uen, otherwyse called Coppenhagen, against kyng Fredericke, whiche was put in there by the helpe of the towne of Lubeke, when the said Christerne fled out of the Realme, that he myght there receyue and take in possession the kyngdome of Denmarke,
but when he suspected no guyle, relented and put away hys souldiours, and came into Denmarke, the Counsayll of the Lande toke hym prisoner, not regardinge the promises and saulf conduit by them made vnto hym: And so they kept hym in the castel of Sunderborough, oute of the whiche he came neuer as yet. So that after this kinge Frederick did peaceably enioye his kingdome vn∣tyll he dyed. At Lindowe by the sea coaste was inA mōstruous Calfe borne by ye sea coste aboute Lin∣dowe. The Empe∣rour Charles retourneth from Genua into Spaine. thys yeare borne a dubble calfe, wyth two hea∣des, foure eares, and eighte feete, hanginge allto∣gether. In the yere of our Lord .M. ccccc. xxxiij. when ye Emperour, namely Charles the fift had sta∣blyshed vnity and concord among the Prin∣ces and Cities of Italy and Lumbardy, he depar∣ted wyth a competent and wel appointed Armada or Nauye from Genua, and hauynge a prospe∣rous passage, arryued within fewe dayes after in Spayne where he was receyued of hys subiectes wyth great ioye. After this by the counsayll and instigation ofNewe Indes or Ilandes plentyfull of golde and sil∣uer founde out by the Spāyardes. themperours Maiestye, the Shypmaiesters and maryners of Spayne founde oute certayne In∣des or Ilandes in the sea, beynge vnknowen be∣fore, whyche do so excedynglye abounde in ryches of golde and syluer, that it is vnspeakeable. These toke they in by force of armes and subdued them vnder the subiection of the emperours Maiestye.
In thys yeare the Pope and FrauncysA solēpne cō∣munycacyon holdē at Mas¦silia betwene ye Pope & the French kinge. the Frenche kynge helde a solempne communy∣catyon together at Massylya whyche lyeth in the Prouynce of Fraunce, where after manye and dyuers consultacyons it was concluded that Henry Duke of Orleans, sonne to the sayde Frenche kynge shuolde marye Pope ClementesThe duke of Orleans ma∣rieth the Po¦pes cosyn. cosyne, the doughter of Laurence Medyce Duke of Vrbyne, wyth whome the Pope hadde promy∣sed a ryche dowrye. Thus hath thys Pope Clemente alway∣es endeuoured hym selfe to allure and drawe vn¦to hym the hyghe Potentates and Rulers of the worlde, by the helpe of whome he myghte ex∣tyrpate and roote oute the pore Chrystyans, who∣me they call Lutheryans and Heretykes: But God woulde not suffer it longe: as it is wryt∣ten, There is no deuice nor counsayll agaynste the Lorde but it shall come to naughte. In the same yeare the myghtye bond andThe Euange¦lycal bōd is opened by ye french kyng. confederatyon of the Germayne Natyon, which was called the Euangelycall confederacyon, or the bonde of the Gospell, beynge kepte secrete of manye was at the prouocatyon of the Fren∣che kynge opened and disclosed. There apeared also another Comete orAnother Co∣mete or bla∣sing starre a∣peared. blasynge starre from the ende of the moneth of Iune, vnto the begynnynge of Auguste, in the Northe, and in the sygnes of Gemyny, Tau∣rus and Aryes, thoroughe the whyche sygnes she made her course in her goynge backewarde,
hauyng her tayle extended towardes the South. And thys was the thyrde Comete or blasynge starre that hadde appered wethyn those two ye∣res. What they portended or sygnyfyed, or what alteracyon of Estates and other thynges they broughte wyth them, maye a dyscreete rea∣der gather and perceyue by the Storyes herafter folowing. For suche wonderfull workes of God (althoughe they come by the course of nature) yet are they not wythoute theyr specyall wor∣kynge. It is sayde also that in this yeare of .M.Shiltagh bur¦ned downe to ye ground. CCCCC. xxxiii. the Deuyl burned a lyttell Tou∣ne in Germanye called Shyltagh downe to the grounde, by the meanes of a certayne wythche, on maundy thursdaie. The fyfte daye of October in the nyghte burned at Andwarpe the Churche called our la∣dye Churche beynge sodaynly sette on fyre. At Nurrenboroughe and in manye otherA great Pesti¦lence in Ger∣many. places of thempyre lyenge there aboute reygned thys yeare a greate Pestylence, in so muche that at Nurrenboroughe onelye from. S. Mar∣gretes daye, vntyll. S. Martins day folowinge dyed ten thousande persons. The sixtene day of Nouember was a great earthquake, and an horryble tempeste of wynde,A great earth¦quake & tem∣pest of wind. whyche plaged and troubled the Townes in hygh Germany verye sore, namely, Cu Felde∣churche. S. Gall, wyth other townes and vylla∣ges lyenge nyghe vnto them, by the Ryuer cal∣led the Rhene.
Thys yeare Henrye the eighte, kynge ofKynge henry the .viii was duorsed frō hys fyrste wyfe maried to an other. Englande. &c. for certayne consyderacyons hym therevnto mouynge was dyuorced from hys wyfe whiche had bene fyrste maryed to hys brother prynce Arthur, and maryed another, on wyt∣sonday. In the yeare of our Lorde .M. CCCCC.1534. The Anabap¦tystes tke the Cytye of Mynster in Westphale. xxxiii. in the moneth of Ianuary, The Anabapti∣stes, whyche had gathered them selues together out of Hollande and Freselande, by preuy subtel∣tyes and conspyracyes whych they had made with certayne burgeouses of the Cytye of Mynster in Westphale, inuaded the same Cytye. toke possessy∣on of it, and expelled from thence al the Burgeou∣les and inhabytauntes therof, that woulde not take parte wyth them and folowe theyr facultye.The Anabap¦tystes make them a kyng. They chose them also a kynge, that was a Tayl∣loure, named Ihon of Leyden, whyche ordeyned for hym selfe two specyall Counsayllours, the one called Knypperdullynge, and the other kregh¦tyngeKnypperdul∣lynge &c. kregh tynge. and in conclusyon they made suche a dys∣order and confusyon whytin the sayde Cytye, that not wythoute a cause all the people of Weste∣phale dyd ryse agaynste them. But when the ryghte noble Prynce Phi∣lyppe Land¦graue of Hessen toke in hande to ac∣cordePhilip Land¦graue of He∣ssen. the matter betwene the sayde Anabapty∣stes and the Byshoppe, whome they had expel∣led, he coulde nothynge preuayle, so sore hadde the Deuyll blynded that Anabaptystycall gene∣ratyon. Wherefore the sayde Byshoppe compassed
the sayde Cytye wyth a greate power on eue¦rye syede to thyntent he myghte ouercome andThe Citie of Minster be∣sieged by y• bihop. Scarcitye of victualles in Mynster. The Ana¦baptistes ea∣te lether & co¦uerynges of bookes. subdue them ether wyth the sworde or elles by famyne. And althoughe there was greate scar∣cyte and lacke of vyctualles wythyn the saide Cyrye in so muche that at the laste they were sayne to eate lether and couerynges of bookes yet dyd they sustayne, bearcoute, prolonge and holde oute the sayde syege vntyll the next yeare folowynge, wherof we shall speake more in place conuement. In the meane season dyd Philip Land∣grauePhilip land¦graue of He∣ssen goeth a∣bout to set his vncle in∣to his owne land agayn. of Hessen prepare hymselfe after the best maner, to restore hys Vncle Duke Hulderyke of Wyrtenbergh agayne to hys Dukedome, from whence he was expelled fyftene yeares before durynge the whyche tyme kynge Ferdynando had the gouernaunce and vse therof. But fyrste because the sayde prince of Hessen woulde do nothynge presumptuously nor temeraryouslye, he sente worde to themperou∣res Mayestye in Spayne, and to the kynge in Austryche, desyrynge them to restore hys said Vncle Duke Hulderyke to hys Landes agayn for so muche as he had nowe suffered sufficient punyshemente for hys offence, and presumpty∣on by hym commytted agaynste the Empyre (for he hadde taken a certayne towne pertaynynge to thempyre called Rutlynge, whyche was the cause of hys expulsyon) in that he hadde lac∣ked and forborne the vse and profytes of his
Landes all that space and season. Whyche thynge yf they were not wil∣lynge to do he was in a readynes hym selfe to set hym in agayne parforce, Althoughe he woulde be loth to vse anye carneste and rigou∣rous fashions. But whyle he was not answered ac∣cordynge to hys expectatyon and requeste, he wente furthe wyth hys power into the lande of Wyrtenbergh that where bothe Prynces met together sloutelye, but Philippe the PalatynePhilip y• pa¦latine put to flyght and wounded. Hulderike duke of wi∣tēberg resto∣red to his o  dō. wyth hys men was put to flyghte, and he him selfe wounded in hys hele wyth a shot, wher∣fore the said Landgraue was verye sorye. After thys battel the townes yelded them selues one after another, so that wythin fewe dayes the sayd Duke Hulderyk brought all his Landes agayn vnder hys power and subiection. But whyle the sayde Landgraue by rea∣son of thys acte hadde nede to feare thempe∣roures and the kynges Maiestye, leaste they myghte worke oughte agaynste hym, he went wyth hys armye towardes Vlmes besydes the Ryuer of Danube, where he taryed eyther for an agremente and a peaceable retourne, or elles for another answere. In so muche that a sure peace on the Emperoures and kynges Mayestyes behalfe,A peace graūted vn∣to y• anga e on them perours be∣half. wyth sure appendycles and circumstances, was there promysed hym by Albert Archebyshoppe of Mence, Ihon Frederyke Duke of Saxon, bothe Electours imperiall, and George, Duke
of Saxon After the obtaynyng wherof he dis∣persed hys armye wythoute delaye, and retour∣ned home agayne into hys owne lande. HereThe lādgra∣ue retour¦neth into his owne lande. A cōmēdati∣ō of liberaly¦ty & boldenes in ye land∣graue. myghte I take occasyon to extoll and hyghly to prayse not onelye the bolde and reasonable deade or acte of the Landgraue, in that he dyd so true∣lye and faythefullye helpe hys Vncle into hys owne domynyon agayne, wythoute any respect hadde to the power of them that hadde the same landes of hys Vncle, in possessyon more by suffe∣raunce, then by any ryghte tytell. But also the pacience and mekenes both of the Emperoures and the kynges Maiestye, in thata cōmēdatiō of pacience & mekenes in thēperour & ye kyng of Hungary. they dyd so gentlye and wyllyngly renounce the sayd Dukedome, Whych they myght very easely, accordynge to theyr power amonge men, haue sub∣dued and brought agayne vnder their subiection and dominatiion. But forasmuch as I am not minded here to descri∣be hole stories with al their circūstances, but one¦ly to touch brefely the principal actes and doinges, I wil commet the same to another, or peraduēture intreate of it my selfe herafter to my power.The death of Frederike kyng of Dē¦marke. The same yere of. 1534. died Frederick kinge of Denmarke, about whose corse happened a won∣derful and straung thing, which doubteles did sig∣nifie the sheding of bloud that folowed afterwarde in the same kingdome. For when the dead corps of ye said kyng (accordyng to the custome and maner) was enbawmed or anoynted wyth bawme & other spyces and wrapped in clene seryng clothes, & was inclosed in a shrine piched & prepared accordinglye
the same dead corps (contrarye to nature) be∣ganneA straunge thing or tokē happened a∣bout y• dead corps of the kynge. The erle of Oldēborou∣ghe  y• Lu∣bekes inuade y• dukedom of hlsaes. The death of George weuer & mar¦kes mayer. to blede in suche sorte, that the bloude was receyued and taken vppe in vessels, and immedyatelye after the people of the land we∣re vysyted wyth warres and battayles. For Chrystophore Counte of Oldenboroughe, ac∣companyed wyth them of Lubeke, whose Ca∣pytaynes were George weuer, and Markes Mayer (whyche afterwarde accordynge to their deseruynges were condemned and put to death) inuaded the lande of Christyans Duke of hol∣stone, and toke certayne townes and Castels, whyche not longeafter the sayde Duke recoue∣red agayne, puttynge them of Lubeke to great losse bothe by water and by lande, vntyll suche tyme as the other Sea Townes wyth Hen∣rye Duke of Mekelboroughe toke the matter in hande, and concluded a peace and vnyty be∣tweneA peace con¦cluded be¦twene the towne of Lu¦beke and the dukedom of ho sure. The captay∣nes of Lube∣ke desyrous to inuade dē∣marcke. the Towne of Lubeke, and the Duke∣dome of holstone whyche peace was registred and proclamed the eyghtene daye of Nouem∣ber. After thys were the Capytaynes of Lu∣beke moued towardes Denmarcke, and consul∣ted wyth the sayde Counte of Oldenborough howe they myghte conuenyently inuade and entre the sayde kyngdome of Denmarke and Nor¦waye, wherof dyd ensue a newe warre, asA newe war . shalbe declared in the next yeare. Thys yeare was also sene a wonderfull apparition in Denmarke besides the towne of
Sleswyghe lyenge not farre from Lubeke, whych (as a certayne Secretarye of the saide pla∣ceA wōderfull apparitiō in Dēmarke. by an othe affyrmeth in hys wrytynges to the Quene dyaected) apeared in the ayer the thyrd daye of Iune at after noone, and was sene of a thousande persons or more, as hereafter folo∣weth. Fyrste there apeared a greate multy∣tude of Lyons fyghtynge one wyth another. Secondlye there apeared a man armed on horsebacke wyth a iustynge speare vnder his arme as thoughe he woulde haue iusted with an other, hauynge a longe bearde, and many busshes of fethers. Thyrdelye, there appeared a man with a crowne imperyall, as lyke vnto themperours Mayestie, that the sayd Secretary and manye of hys seruauntes, thoughte none other but that it hadde ben themperoures owne lyuyng personne, wherefore some of them toke of their cappes and were readye to do reuerence vnto hym. Fourthelye there apeared the symyly∣tude or Lykenes of a greate Regyon or Coun∣tree, replenyshed wyth Cytyes, Castels and Vyllages, well distinct and set in order, which were all consumed thoroughe a swyft fyre which went vp in the same. Fyftly, there apeared an other Regy∣on not vnlyke to the fyrste garnyshed wyth Cyty∣es Castels and vyllages and specially wyth one
greate and myghtye Cytye, wych Cytye was myghtelye assaulted by a greate multytude of warryours wyth gonnes and all manner of ar¦tyllerye bothe by lande and by water wyth migh tye shyppes vnder sayle. There appeared al∣so amonge the sayde warryours certayne Ca∣pytaynes, whyche in swyftnes or agylyty and in length of body exceded the other. Syxtelye, there apeared halfe a blacke Egle, whyche lepte out of the sayde horse, out of whose clawes or talentes fell small Snakes, among the which was one great Dragon. Seuentlye, there apeared afterward in the place where the greate Cyty hadde ben, a Camell, whyche dranke oute of a tempestuous water, as thoughe it hadde ben the ragynge sea, by the waues wherof the sayd beast was couered. Eyghtlye, there appeared after thys a cer∣tayne horse, wheron noman dyd ryde, but a li∣on whyche laye vpon hys backe, hauing a crowne hangynge on hys heade, and vpon the sayde ly∣on sate a Cocke, whych by continuall pickynge and bytynge consumed the hole head of the Ly¦on, but the skull remayned a greate while hanging vpon the horse. Nyntly, there appeared also a great Crosse of a bloudy colour, which immediately diuyded it selse into many small and black Crosses. Tentlye and last of all there apeared a fye∣ry man wyth a crowne imperiall, all armed, whych helde on eyther syde of him a horse, and vnder this was the for sayd Crosse.
But vnder al these were manye sortes of Dragons & vnknowen beastes, As Lyons, bea∣res, and of other kyndes whych were neuer sene before for some of them hadde heades of wylde swyne wyth greate tethe, and yet resembled not the swynes in any other parte. But the moost part of them were Lyons. The Crosse, the Camell, and the Ly¦on whose head the Cocke dyd eate were sene last of all. Henrye the eyghte oft hat name kynge ofHenry king of Ingland excōmunica¦ted by the po¦pe. Englande, whan he was by the Pope excōmuny¦cated for makyng dyuorse wyth hys wyfe (which was hys brothers wyfe before) called the noby∣lytye and beste learned of hys Realme together, and consulted wyth them, In the whych consul∣tatyon or parlyamente it was concluded, thatThe Pope hath  au¦thority ouer Ingland. the Pope hadde none authorytye nor power ouer hym, nor yet ouer the Churche of hys Realme: but that the kynge hym selfe was both kynge of his Royalme, and also supre me heade and de∣fenderking Hēnry forsaketh yt Pope. A bokt sett furth vp kin¦ge henry a∣gainste the primacpe of ye Pope. King Henry ioined in cōfederatin̄ with yt Prin¦ces & mayn∣tainers of  gospel. of the same Churche. Werefore he dyd vttterlye forsake the Pope and fell from hym. He dyd also set furthe a booke of the authori¦ty and power of Christen Princes ouer their Churches agaynste the vsurped authorytye of the Pope and hys detestable abhomynatyon, and procured afterward to be ioyned in confe∣deratyon wyth the Euangelycall Prynces and townes, agaynste the Pope and specyally wyth the towne of Lubeke. Whithin a littel whyle after this, his deputye in
Irelande fell from hym, and caused the whole I∣landeIreland re∣beeth agai∣nst their prin¦ce. Pope Cle∣ment dyeth. to rebell agaynst theyr Prince. In thesayed yeare the fyue and twentiest daye of September dyed Pope Clement the se∣uenth of that name, beyng old syxe and fyftye yea∣res and foure monethes. After hym was elected and chosen, the twelft daye of October, Paule the thyrde, a veryePaule y•▪ iii. chosen to be Pope. olde man, whyche before was called Alexander Farnesius, a Romayne borne, and had ben byshop of Ostia. What Romysh touches the same hath wrought and vsed, shalbe mentioned hereafter in place conuenient. Whyle thys was a doynge in the Weste, the bloudthurstye Mars was busy in the Easte: For the moost myghty Sophy kynge of the Per∣syans, inuaded the Lande of Armenia agaynstSophi pin∣ of y• Per∣sians ∣beth y• Turk. Imbrai ba¦ssa. the Turke wyth a myghty army. Where∣fore the Turke sent hys chyefe Capytayne (cal∣led Imbrai Bassa) wyth a stronge hoost, to defend Armenia from and agaynst the Persyans. But whan they met by the Ryuer of Eu∣frates, Imbrai Bassa wyth the moost parte of hisImbray ba∣ssa with hys host slayne. hoost was slayne. Then Soliman the Turky she Emperoure intendyng to reuenge the sayde losse receyued at the handes of the Persyans, went out of the cytye of Epiphania (whyche lyeth in the ende of the lande of Cilicia, and abutteth vponThe Turke cometh agai∣nste y• sayde Sophy. Syria) wyth a great nombre of men well appoin∣ted, and had a prosperons iorney and a lucky pas∣passage vntill he approched nygh vnto the costes of Armenia.
But as soone as he hadde attayned vnto it heThe turke cō∣passed aboute of the Periy∣ans. The Turke escapeth a roe with a lewe. was vnwarres enuyronned, compassed and be∣syeged rounde aboute of the Persyans in the mountaynes on euerye syde, in suche wyfe, that thesayd Soliman had muche to do to saue hys lyfe, and to escape wyth a fewe of hys men into Syria. Whylest Solyman was thus pestered and busyed wyth the Persyans, a certayne Pyrate or Sea roauer, whome the Lombardes and theBarbarossa inuabeth the kyngdome of Tunyse. people of Mauritania do call Barbarossa, rose vp in Grece, and gate vnto hym a Turkyshe Ar∣mad a well appoynted, intendynge to inuade and ouertunne the kyngedome of Tunise, lyenge in Affrica, where sometyme Carthago was buyl∣ded, and at hys arryuynge he pilfered and spoy∣led syrste the Cytye of Ostia, lyenge not farre from Roome. After that he kept the sea aboute Genua aBarbarossa suodueth A∣ffryca the lesse good whyle, and whan they of Affrica suspected least of all, they were of hym inuaded. In so muche that he subdued vnto hym selfe all the lesser Af∣frica, and expelled kynge Altzachenus from Tu∣nise.Kynge Altza∣chenus expel¦led from Tu∣nyse. Thus hath thys Tyraunt ouercome Af∣frica, wherein he reygned and tryumpheth yet at thys daye wyth greate pryde and arrogancy. The fyfte daye of Iulye in the sayd yeareThe  of Breda bur∣ned. of .M. CCCCC. xxxiiii. were burned at Breda in the lande of Brabant, nyne hundreth and thre score houses by a sodayne fyre.
In the begynnyng of the Winter arose ma∣nyeGreat tempe¦stes of wind. horryble and tempestuous Westerly and also Southerly wyndes, wherby certayne quarters in lowe Duchelande and thinhabitauntes of Sea∣lande dwellynge nygh the sea syde sustayned no∣table losses and dammages. In the lande of Pole were all waters andWaters & ry¦uers exceding¦ly increassed  y• ande of Pole. ryuers so excedingly increassed, that they brooke downe at Crakowe and at Casymyre myghtye stonebridges and walles, wyth many other strong buyldynges, notwythstandynge that in a maner thoroughoute all Europa besydes all waters were verye small, and partely dryed vp thorough the greate heate of the same Sommer. Thys yeare the Duke of Millan maryedThe duke of Millā mari∣eth y• dough∣r  y• kyng Denmarke. the doughter of Cristerne captyue kyng of Den∣marke, whych was borne vnto hym of Izabell sy∣ster to the Emperour Charles. IN the yeare of our Lorde, 1535.Themperour prepareth an armada to∣wardes Affri¦ca. the Emperoure Charles prepared hym selfe wyth greate power, and made out a myghty Armada or na∣uy, furnyshed wyth all maner of ne∣cessaries, and thoroughlye manned wyth Duche, French and Spanyshe warriours,The kingdō of Tunise re∣cred b the peour. Barbarossa exlled frō Tunise. wherewyth he sayled fyrste oute of Spayne into the Ile of Sardinia. From thence into Sicilia, and from thence he sayled into Affrica in the mo∣neth of Iune, and recouered the cytye and kynge∣dome of Thunise agayne, whyche Barbarossa had taken before, whome the Emperoure expel∣led
agayne from those quarters, and restoredKyng Altza∣chenus resto∣red to hys kyngdome of Tunise. The castell of Golleta reserued for themperour. the olde kynge Altzachenus agayne to hys kingedome on thys condytyon that he shoulde yearelye paye a certayne trybute to the Empe∣roure. But the Castell of Golleta dyd thempe∣roures Mayeste reserue to hys owne vse, whyche he furnyshed also wyth men, retaynynge the same onelye from the kyngdome of Tunyse, All the residue of the sayde kyngdome dyd he delyuerer to the sayde king. Thys battayll and affayres beynge endedThemperour returneth frō Affrica. themperoures Maiestye returned agayne wyth hys Nauy into Sicylya, and arryued wyth a pros¦perous course at Palerrno, (whyche sometyme was called Panormus. Whyle the Emperoure was busy to settBarbarossa inuadeth the Ile of Mi∣norca. all thynges in ordre in the kyngdome of Tu∣nise, Barbarossa inuaded the Ile called My∣norca, whyche is the leaste amonge the Iles of balearis, destroyenge the same by spoylynge and burning very piteously. Also the Affrycanes in the kyngdomeThe Affrica∣nes attempte rebellion. of Thunyse dyd not behaue themselues verye faithefullye towardes themperoures Mayesty. For when they woulde saue them selues from hys power and some of them wente aboute to make an insurrectyon. The Emperoures Maiestye sente hysAndrewe e Aurea apoin∣ted to kepe ye Affricanes in awe. chiefe Capytayne Andrewe de Aurea vpon the sea towardes Affryca to punyshe and correcte the rebelles, for the better establyshemente of all thynges in the kyngdome of Tunyse.
In the lowest partes of Ducheland dyd theThe sect of the Anabap∣tistes in crea∣seth. The Anabap¦tistes kem w  go naked. Secte of the Anabaptistes myghtelye increase, Wherefore the townes by the sea syde feared a great destruction on there behalfe. Among the whych Secte some were so deuelysh and shame∣les, that they dyd not onelye wythoute anye con∣scyence and shame take manye wyues, but also went altogether naked euen as they were borne in thys worlde. Suche is the ordre where the Deuell is Capytayne, that neyther nur∣tour, honestye nor yet the feare of God is regar∣ded. But they that were wythin the TowneThe Anabap¦tistes within e pplled. of Mynster, and had ben nowe more then a yeare therein besyeged, were not very well at ease, all∣though by the reason of theyr foolyshe Phanta∣syes and hardened hartes they coulde not nor yet woulde not perceyue it, vntyll they were vtterlye destroyed. For notwythstandyng that the sayed syege pressed them, and an horrible and importunate famine (as was mencioned before in the last yeare) reygned among them, Yet were they by the com∣fortable persuasyons of theyr false Prophetes so hardened, that they mynded nothynge lesse then to yelde by the Towne and saue theyr ly∣ues, notwythstandynge that thereunto they were often tymes requyred wyth lyberall and gracy∣ous promyses. But contrary wyse they defended themselues the longer the fearcer, and shot out of the Towne
with ordinaunce as though the deuell had bene a∣mong them, to the great auoyaunce of their aduer∣saries, in so muche that not a fewe valiaunt war∣riours in the Campe were slayne with their ordi∣naunce. And to declare the madnes of the said Ana¦baptistesThe madnes of the Anaba∣ptistes. I haue thought it mete not to omitte a fo∣lysh acte done by a certayne woman among them. Forasmuche therfore as they within the towne had this opinion of the saied towne of Mynster, that itThe Anaba∣ptistes bele∣ued that Min¦ster was new Ierusalem. was that new Ierusalem mencioned in the Apoca∣lipse, thorough the whiche all the heathen should be destroied, so that the christians should reigne in pea¦ce a thousand yeres (whiche sayeng although they must be vnderstande spiritually were they expoun∣ded by them carnally) the said folysh woman wouldA woman would con∣terfet Iudith. counterfette the acte of Iudith which slewe holo∣fernes, and deliuered her Citie. Wherefore she made her boaste that if she myght be costely arayed and decked, she woulde go furth (if she were per∣mitted) into the hooste of her aduersaries, and ea∣sely ouercome the byshop. Whyle nowe the kyng & the other in the town were so foolysh and made not only to beleue her, but also to further her in the said affayres, trustyng that their deliueraunce was at hand, she went out, and behaued her selfe in all poin¦tes as though she had bene escaped and fled out of the citie. But her dissimulacion beyng espied & per∣ceyued, she was taken and brought before the By∣shop, and after her confession, rewarded wit death, accordyng to her deseruyng. For asmuche nowe as the saied craft and practise bad no good successe the Anabaptistes within the
citie ought to haue consydered that there was no fortune in their doyng, seyng they were yet oppres∣sed to the vttermost. But they dyd herein resemble the Iewes in their last destructiōat Ierusalem, for the more God plaged them with famine and dissen∣tion among them selues, the more hard harted and stifnecked they were, vntill at the last one escaped priuely out of the saied citie, and brought in certaine of the byshops souldiours at the gate called the ho∣ly crosse gate, which souldiours after they had slain the watchemen opened the gate and so made away into the citie for the other. Thus was the citie of Mynster taken in again and deliuered from the po∣were of the Anabaptistes at the feast of S. Iohn the baptiste in the night. And the next day folowing whatsoeuer would make any resistaūce being slayn with the sworde, the kyng with his chief counsayl∣lours craftyng and knipperdulling were taken pri¦soners.The kynge ing and knipperdulling taken. The kyng of the bapti∣stes with his cōsellers put to death. These three were aftewarders for the spa∣ce of certayne monethes caryed about in the coun∣trey from place to place for a spectacle and example to all men. And at the last on S. Vincentes day in the yere of our lorde .MDxxxvi. they were put to death with fyry tonges, and their dead bodies han∣ged vp in yron baskettes or grates, out of the steple of S. Lamberts Churche, within the saied citie of Mynster, the kyng in the middes somewhat hyer then his said two coūsailers, for a perpetual memo∣riall and warning to all commocioner raysers of tu¦multe & rebelles against ye lauful magistrates ordei¦ned of God. Thus toke this kyngdom of the Anaba pristes a shameful ende, according to their desertes. In Denmarke raged the duke of Oldenborough
with the capitaines of Lubeke (as he had begonne the yere before) but the moste part of the germayne counsayll chose Christiane Duke of Holston to beChristian du∣ke of Holston chosen to be kyng in Den¦marke. kyng in Denmarke, desyring hym to assiste them a∣gainst the saied duke of Oldenborough and them of Lubeke. While nowe the said request was easy to be graunted, and the said duke of Holston had taken Iudland in possession all ready (whiche is no small porcion of the kyngdome of Denmarke, abutting v∣pon the lande of Holstone) he passed with his army into the Ile of Funa▪ otherwyse called Fion, and o∣uercame the citie of Asnites. But when the duke of Oldēborough with them of Lubeke assaulted him with an hoost of men well appointed both on horse∣backe and on foote, the said Christian obtayned the victory, so that the duke of Oldēborough lost much people where among other was slayne Iohn countThe count of Hoya, and the Erle of Tec∣kelborough slayne. of Hoya, and an Erle of Teckelburgh in Westphale, and euen the same daye (whiche was the .xi. daye of Iune) they of Holstone toke from them of Lubeke an Armada of shippes, and put the men of Lubeke whiche they founde in the same, in captiuitie. In so∣muche that the said Christiane had the ouerhande on euery syde, whiche was vnto him a witnes from God that he should be kyng in Denmarke. In Hungary and Austrich were diuers loueda∣yesLouedayes kept in Hun∣gary. kept betwene Ferdinando and Iohn Weyda kinges of Hungary, and the Turkes imbassadour, to wete if Hūgary might be brought to apeaceable estate neuer theles there was nothing concluded that was notable and profitable. Also in this yere. 1535. there was a mariage cōclu∣dedThe kyng of Poles ma∣ried the daughter of erdanto kyng of Bo∣hemy. betwen ye king of Poles & the king of Boheme.
For Sigismonde kyng of Poles maried Sigismū∣de his sonne to Elisabeth the daughter of Ferdi∣nando kyng of Bohemy, whiche in the yere of oure Lorde .MDxliij. folowyng was celebrated with great solempnitie, as shalbe mentioned hereafter in place conuenient. In the moneth of Nouember the second day theThe death of the Duke of Mylan. duke of Mylan departed out of this world. And im¦mediatly, after Frauncis the Frenche kyng prepa∣red hym selfe with all his power to recouer the du∣kedome of Mylan, and entred into the land of Sa∣uoy, whereof ensued great warres the yere next fo¦lowyng, in those quarters. Frederike Duke of Baier, Palatine by the ReneThe duke of aer mari∣eth the daugh¦ter of Den∣marke. (now electour imperiall) toke to wyfe the right ex∣cellent princesses Dorothee, daughter to Christier∣ne late kyng of Denmarke, whiche he had begotten of Izabel syster to Charles themperour, the solem∣pnitie whereof was kept at Bruxelles in Brabant.ir Thomas more Chaun∣celour of En¦gland and y• byshop of Ro¦chester behea¦ded. In England, in the moneth of Iune the byshop of Rochester, and Sir Thomas More (which had bene lorde chauncellour of Englande, and in great aucthoritie vnder the kyng) was beheaded for de∣nieng the kyng to be supreme heade of the churche of Englande. And in this yeare were there thre monkes of theThe monkes of the charter house. Charter house executed in Englande for the same offence. In the partes of Shlesy about and within theA wonderful tempest. the towne of Olse arose the same yeare on Sainct Gyles day an horrible tempest, in suche sorte, that the bookes whiche were newely prynted, were ta∣ken
out of the Iewes houses and founde in a great corne felde harde packed in belles as though they had bene stamped and beaten into them with pestel¦les, whiche belles were conueyed thether out of the churche steples by the violence and outragiousnes o the saied tempest. Besides this there were men and women taken vp in the stretes, & caried a great way of into y• feldes. In the houses were in dyuersNeuer suche a tēpest sene. places the dores and wyndowes lifted of from the hynges, the tables subuerted, and great holes ma∣de and beaten in the walles: So that there was ne¦uer suche a tempest sene before. Besides this there was the same yere in the par¦ties of Duchelād in Sommer very many sodaine & fearfull tempestes, with hayle, lightenyng and thō∣der, more then euer was hard of before, with great colde and muche rayne, which also was an occasion that the wines in many places had no good successe This yere the .viij. day of Ianuary. died in Eng¦lande the lady Katherine Dowager which had benQuene Ka∣therine dow¦ger dieth. diuorsed from the kyng, by due proces of the lawe two yeres before. This yere in England was Anne bulleyne que∣ne of Englande, the lorde Rochiford, Nores, We∣ston,Quene An∣ne Bullyn be headed. Que. Iane Semour ma¦ried to the kyng of En∣land. Brutō, and Markes beheaded. And the kyng maried lady Iane Seimour. This yere also in October began in Englande a foolysh commotion in Lincolinshyre and in yorke shyre, whiche by the kynges wysedome and his pru¦dent coūsaill were appesed without bloud sheding. I In the yeare of oure lorde. 1536. The byshopThe citie of Geneue besie¦ged. of Geneue & the duke of Sauoy besieged the
citie of Geneffe, because thinhabiters of the same had receiued the Gospell. And when they of Gen∣neffe admonished thinhabitantes of the towne of Berne of their cōfederaciō, they of Berne sent their imbassadours to the Duke, exhorting and admony shyng hym to remembre al loues, faithfulnesses and confederations that had ben betwene them of a lōg tyme, and requiring hym to departe from the citie of Genneffe. But in as muche as their request dyd not onely take no place, but also the saied duke main tayned and defended their open enemy and aduer∣sary called Mussy Castellanus, and in al this nogē∣tyll exhortacion could serue nor preuayle, they of Berne aduertised hym that they would visitie him with warres, and renounced the bonde of cōfedera∣tion whiche had bene made betwene them before, in so muche that they sent their capitaine called Iohn Frauncis Clauicula with an host of men wel apoin¦ted into the lande of Sauoy, whiche ouercame all the lande within fewe dayes, whiche the said DukePreachers of the Gospel or¦deyned  Sa¦. had inpossession, euen from the moūtaines of Swi∣tzerland, vnto the fortresse of Rodani, with the two bisoprikes of Genneffe and Lausana: Wherein they cōstituted and established ministers to preache the gospell, and ordeined rulers and magistrates ac¦cordingy. So that now the Switzers reposed a∣gaine their olde coastes which they had in their po¦wer many yeres before. But there were within the space of a moneth very many Castelles and strong∣holdes destroied by the Switzers, among the wihIulius Lesar builded Clau¦sa Rodani. also the olde & strong clausa Rodani, builded by the Emperour Iulius, otherwise called Iulius Cesar▪
to stoppe vp & barre the way of the Switzers for commyng into Fraunce, and had bene hetherto in∣uincible, was quite ouerthrowen and destroied. Of this battaill of y• citesens of Berren apeared a good sygne a litle before, where about .iiij. hundreth men of Berne Newebourgh & other quarters of Swi∣tzerlande preuely beyng called together were sent thorough by pathes to ayde and strengthen the citie of Geneue, which helde a notable battaill & con¦flict with the men of Sauoy. For when they were for lacke of victuals cōstrained to come forth out of the moūtaines, they were assaulted by their aduer∣saries being strong about .xv. hundreth men, which moued the said .iiij. hundreth men to battaill & con∣strained them to fyght. Insomuche that they, as hū¦gry & faint as they were layde so about them & de∣fended themselues in such sorte, as they slew about iiij. hūdreth of their enemies, & put the rest to flight, with the hoste which was not farre of being in nom¦bre about .v. hundreth men: so that they obtained a fre and a sure passage to accomplishe their iourney: hauing lost on their side, ten mē, & one womā which was slayne with her sonne as she was fighting be sydes her husbande. Here must I make mencion al so of the constancie that was in the people of Berne▪ in that they coulde neither by power be feared, nor yet by prayers and great giftes be prouoked to lea∣ue the defence of their confederates. For when the Emperour very earnestly offred them peace, and attempted dyuers and sundry wayes to brynge them to an vnitie, and by threatenynges and mi∣naces to mollyfie them, they proceded neuerthe∣les
to assiste their frendes and to set them at liber∣tie. But when Fraunces the Frenche kyng studied by many giftes to allure them and by great promy∣ses to prouoke them, to assiste him in his warres be gonne against themperoure and the Dukedome of Mylan, they caused his imbassadours and messen∣gers to auoyde out of their citie, declaring vnto thē that the kyng ought to content hymselfe with the couenaunt and confederation whiche he had with them already, that is, that they should not endama∣ge hym. These thynges passed in Swicherlande & Sauoy in the beginning of the sayd yere. But the Frenche kyng proceded with his army,The French kyng clay∣meth the suc∣cession of Milae. to recouer the lande of Sauoy, and to take possessiō of all that he came nygh, for he pretended to clayme the heritage of the same Dukedom by his mothers syde. Then fled the duke to the Emperour, who at that season intended to kepe his Easter at Roome with the Pope, as he did. For vpon maundy thurs∣day he wasshed the fete of twelue pore mē, (as their costume is yet at this day) fed them, and serued thēIt is the con∣dicion of an ap to coun∣trfaite all y• is done in his ght. at the boorde in his owne person, and in fine gaue them the vessels and disshes, (being of syluer) wher∣with they were serued. Thus do suche Lordes and potentates counterfaith the outwarde actes & dedes of our sauiour Christe, after thexample of A∣pes: But in their hartes where Goddes worde ought to be earnestly embraced, learned and folo∣wrd (and not the preceptes and tradicions of men) they are vtterly against Christ, and clene contraryAprai of the author. to his doctrine: God graunt them ones to be illumi¦ned with the lyght of his Gospell, that the poore
flocke and congregation of Christe may be brought to a perfect vnitie. Amen. Now when the feaste of Easter was past the Em¦peroursThe Empo∣roures com∣playnt to the Pope agaīst the Frenche kyng. maiestie made his complaint before the Po¦pe and his Cardinalles, concernyng the greate in∣iuries whiche the Frenche kyng had inferred and committed againste hym all ready and yet preten∣ded to do, by the reason whereof he was vtterly cō∣strayned against his will to defende his quarel and to warre against hym: And to moue the Popes moste holy fatherhoode (God forgeue me that I do hym wronge) to holde on his syde, and to take his parte he rehearsed vnto hym all the euilles and wic¦ked feates whiche Fraunce had perpetrated and wrought against hym, namely howe that alwayes when the Emperours maiestie was about to mete and resiste the infideles, the sayd Frenche kyng had stirred vp one mischiefe or other whereby hys god∣ly enterprises and purposes were either letted and hyndered altogether, or els begonne with smal pro¦fite, and ended or brought to passe to small effecte. Itē howe that he had made cōfederatiō now with the turke, and then with Barbarossa, and had also hym selfe stirred vp all the vngracious warres, which had so many yeres continued in the borders of his maiesties dominions. In consideracion wherThe Empe∣peroures re∣quest. of themperours maiestie besought the Popes holy¦nes, that he would take his parte, and helpe hym to resyst the vngodly enterpryse of the Frenche kyng, that a generall peace myght be establyshed, where∣by the Turke myght be repelled and ouercome. When the Popes holynes had hearde the Eempe∣rours
oration, accordyng to his kynde (which theyThe Popes aunswere. haue alwayes vsed sence the tyme of Adriane the thirde towardes themperour) he made aunswere openly to themperours request, that he would ney∣ther take parte with themperours, nor yet with them of Fraunce, but that he woulde sytte styll as neuther, and se to whome fortune would leane most and hym that should ouercome his aduersary and get the ouerhande woulde he mete with all his po∣wer, and succour hym that shoulde haue the worst. Here myght Emperours learne, what goodnes is to be loked for at the handes of suche beastes, if they were not altogether blynde. Vpon this aunswer ofThe Empe∣roures re∣tourne from Rome. the Pope, themperour toke his iourney the .xviij. day of Aprill (for Easter daye was the .xvi. daye of Aprill) from Rome towardes Mylan. In the mea∣ne season did the Emperours Capitaines assemble a great multitude of warriours both on horsebacke and on foote, of the Germayne, Welche, and Spa∣nysh nations, whome they brought with great fea∣re thorough Piemont, and many small battayles, whiche consumed no small nomber of men, before Marsilia, whiche is an olde citie lyeng in Fraunce by the sea syde, and is enuironned with the sea in thre partes or endes, whiche Citie themperoures company besyeged with al their power both by wa¦ter, and by lande, but there happened suche a conta∣gious disease and mortallitie in the Emperoures hoost, that within fewe dayes there dyed aboue twelue thousande persones. So that the Empe∣roure by the meanes of this necessite was constrai∣ned to dysperse hys armye.
But the Frenche kyng was at that season migh¦tyer a great deall, bothe of Money, and of People, and laye with a greate power of hys owne men, with a great company of Swytzers and with syxe thousande duche launceknyghtes, whose Capitain was William Counte of Furstenborough besydes auinion, about a fyftene duche myles from Marsi∣lia, from thence to occurre and mete themperoure, and to rescue Marsilia, if the Emperoure had not bene caused to retire by the meanes of the sayde greate death and mortalitie. Neither remayned he in this case harmeles, for there dyed in hys hoost a∣boue two thousande Swytzers. And hys eldest Sonne Fraunces the Dolphyne was poysoned, whiche thynge also shoulde haue lyghted vpon the king himself if god had not specially preserued him.A trapone put to death at pos. The traytour whiche was an Erle of Montecu¦culo (as Anselmus Rid doth call hym) was at Li∣ons by the kynges commaundement miserably put to death, being drawen and plucked in sunder with foure horses tyed seuerally to his handes and leg∣ges: His head was set vpon the Brydge whiche goeth ouer the water of Rodani, and hys foure quarters were hanged before the foure principall gathes of the Cictie. Whyle these thynges were inThe Count of Nassowe. doing. The Counte of Nassowe marched through Pycardy into Fraunce, and toke certayne small townes lyeng on this syde, and also on the farther syde of the water of Some, by force of armes, AndPerone be∣syeged. besieged the citie of Perone, whiche he pressed very sore by spoilyng and burnyng rounde about it, by the meanes whereof he made many poore folkes in that countrey, neuertheles he coulde not wynne
the citie, but was fayne to leaue it as he founde it, & so retyred from thence the .xi. daye of September, after that he had besyeged it by the space of a mo∣neth. Thus muche of themperour and the Fren∣che kyng concernyng their actes and the thynges done betwene them for this present yere. In Germany assembled the princes and nobles of the Empyre, whiche as then had receyued the Gospell, at Smalkalde, whiche lyeth besydes the woode of Duringe, and thither came also thambas∣sadours of the kynges of Denmarke Fraunche and Englande: Where the nobles and princes of theThe Euan∣gelical bond Gospell made a bonde and confederacion together, wherein also Christiane kynge of Denmarke was bounde, that they shoulde truely and faythfully holde together and take one an others part, yf they should at any time be assaulted by an enemy of God∣des worde. And thys bonde or confederation is called the bonde of Smalkalde, whiche yerely in∣creaseth more and more: And many Potentates are dayly added to the congregacion of Christe, in so muche that greate Monarchies may stande in awe of them, and feare them. And yf they do truely cleaue to Goddes worde, and be thankefull vnto hym that gaue them that greate benefyte, no doub∣te there shalbe no power so myghty that shalbe a∣ble to preuayle agaynste thys bonde, and to sup∣presse it. For yf GOD be on theyr syde and they put theyr truste and confidence in hym vn∣faynedly, they shalbe stronger and myghtyer then all worldely power whyche they haue
nowe in a maner throughout all Germany, God graunt them to consydre it, and to be thankeful vn¦to God for it, and for all other benefites which they haue receaued at his hande hitherto. There was also a Synode and cōuocation keptThe Synode or conuocatiō of Wittenbo∣rough. at Wittenbourgh in Germanye in the moneth of May betwene them that cleaued vnto the doctrine of Huldrike zwynglius, concernyng the Sacra∣ment of Christes body and bloud, on the one partie, and them that folowed the mynde of Martine Lu¦ter on the other partie, where after long disputa∣cion had betwene thesayed parties, there was a cer¦teyne determinacion and agrement taken betwene them as touchyng the controuersy of the Sacra∣ment, albeit that the moste parte of the PreachersSwinglius cōsenteth not with Luter in the opinion of the Sacramēt on zwinglius syde would not consent thereunto. But what controuersy there was betwene the said parties as touchyng the Sacrament, may be ga∣thered ease out of the bokes of both parties, for the rehearsall thereof here in order would be to long. Betwene the sea Townes, Homborough, Lu∣beke,A new peace concluded be¦twene the sea townes of Eastlande & Denmarke. Suno, and Christiane chosen kyng of Den∣marke, was this yere a newe peace cōcluded, wher∣vnto they of Rostocke and of Wismare woulde not agree. For their Duke Albert of Mekelborough, at Coppenhaghe (whiche is the chief citie of al Den¦marke, and of the Iland called Seeland. Then the townes whiche were accorded and agreed vpō the sayed peace sent their imbassadours to Coppenha∣ghe, aduertysyng the sayd Duke Albert, and count Christopher of their agreement, requiring them to yelde vp the cytye to the chosen kyng Christiane.
But when the said two lordes and thinhabitances of thesayd contry of Coppenhagen denyed themThe citie of Copenhage beseged by y• kyng. their requsst: kyng Christiane beseged the sayd ci∣tye wyth such power, and troubled them so sore on euery syde, that no victualles might come at them by no maner of meanes. In so muche that wythin short space victualles waxed so scant and famme so increaled wythin the cyty, that they were glad to vse dogges fleshe for theyr meate, and also cattes.Dges and . And when thys prouisyon dyd also fayle them, and no deliueraunce eppeared of no part (for they ho∣ped that Frederike the Palatine, who had taken to wyfe the doughter of kyng Christierne, as be∣fore is mentioned, should haue moued battayll a∣gaynst the Duke of Holstone, whyche came not to passe) they yelded vp the cyty to the chosen kyngeCoppenhagh yelded vp to kyng. Warborough taken Markes ma∣yer taken and quartered. Christian aboue mencyoned. Durynge thesayed siege the kynges souldiours ouercame Warbo∣rough, and toke that false Capytayne of the Lu∣bekes, called Markes Mayer prysoner who wyth hys brother Gerard Mayer and a Danysh pryeste was quartered shortly after. After that thesayd Christian had ouercome and subdued the hole kyngdome of Denmarke (accor∣dyngAgly e∣ple for all kyn¦ges and con∣querours. to the duety of all godlye kynges and pryn∣ces) he directed all hys doynges and procedyn∣ges to thys ende, that the worde of God myghte be purely and syncerely preached and taughte to hys pore subiectes in all partes of hys dominions.The practise of papistes. But when he perceyued the preuy practises, which the Bishoppes of that lande (for they were in a maner the mightyest of both the kyngdomes of
Denmarke and Norway) imagined and purposed to worke against hym, to hyndre his godly enterpri¦se, and to mayntayne their Idolary, he toke themAll the by∣shoys of Dē∣marck depo∣sed. all seuen (for so many were they in nombre) and de∣posed them from their power and dignitie, so that they were not able any more to make diuision, sedi∣cion or commotion within his kyngdome, as they were wonte to do. When this was done, he sent messengers to WitIohn Bugen hagh. tenbourgh, and called for the right honorable and well learned doctor Iohn Bugenhaghe, borne in the dominion of Pomerlande, who is yet at thys daye preacher of Goddes worde and minister or cu¦rate at the parysh Churche at Wittenbourgh, as he was then. This godly man came at the kyn∣gesThepreachig of the gospell instituted in Denmarke. xxiiij thousād parishes in Denmarch & Norway fur∣nyshed with preachers. request and by the helpe of God establyshed in bothe the kyngdomes the preaching of the Gospell and the true ministracion of the Sacramentes ve∣ry frutefully, so that within the space of thre yeres (for so long was he by & about the kyng) all the pa∣ryshes of the lande (which were aboue .xxiiii. thon∣sande in nombre) were prouided and furnyshed with preachers and ministers, hauing Super attenden∣res ordeyned and appointed ouer them to haue the ouersyght of them and to haue an earnest respecte and a watchefull eye to their doctrine and conuersa¦tionThe corona∣tion of Lhri∣stiane siyng of Denmarck. The vntuersi¦tie of Luppen¦haghe furny∣shed with mē¦learned in y• scripturs. of lyuing. He crowned also kyng Christian at Coppenhaghe in the presence of all his nobles with the kyngly crowne of the land, & of both the kyng∣domes. And after this at the kinges request he pro¦uided and furnyshed the high Scole or vniuersitie of Coppenhaghe with Lecures and Reders of holy scripture, and of all other laudable sciences.
For the better increase and furnyshyng whereof he called for certayne learned men frō Wittenbourgh although the lande was not all voyde of suche men before. To the mayntenaunce of whiche Godly or∣der and institucion of doctrine, as wel in the Chur∣cheLiuinges ap∣pointed for preachers & ds in Dē¦ as in the vniuersytie, the kyng gaue large gyf∣tes, and appoynted great liuynges. And he set such an order in both the kyngdomes, that his subiectes may be glad, and geue God hygh thankes, that of his goodnes he woulde sende them suche a kyng, God sende hym longe to reigne among them, and styrre vp the like in many other regions, to the prai¦se and sanctifycacion of hys moste holy name. Amen. Henry the eyght kyng of Englande had his im∣bassadoursThimbassa∣dours of En∣gland at Wit¦tenbourgh. certayne monethes at Wittenbourgh, whiche accordynge to the kynges request, caryed wyth them in Englande certayne wel learned doc¦tours, to preache the Gospell of Christ within hys Realme and dominions, whereof the hole congre∣gacion of Christ thoroughout all Germany concei∣uedDoctour n. a speciall reioysynge, and comforte: But alas their ioye was not longe permanent, for the saied kyng within two yeares after repelled them and caused some of them to be put to death, as here tikes: And Englyshe men haue had a certayne pro∣phecyAn olde pro∣phecy of En∣land. of great antiquitie, that when saynt Geor∣ges daye should fall on good frydaye (whiche is in the yeare of oure lorde .MD. xlvi.) the worde of God shoulde myghtely increasse and taken place among them, which I praye God graunt vnto thē, to his prayse and glory.
This yere in England also the lorde Darcy, syrThe Lorde Darcy with other. Fraunces Bygot, Syr Robert Constable & other began a newe conspyracy, whiche were attaynted and put to death in Iune. This yere in October in England also on sayntEdwarde the syt borne. Edowardes euen was Prince Edowarde borne at Hampton Court, whiche was proclaimed & anoyn¦ted kyng of Englande the .ix. yere of his age as shal be declared hereafter in due place. This yere the .xiiij. daye of October also dyedThe death of Quene Iane Quene Iane mother to the saied Prince Edward, and was buried at Winsor. This yere did Iames the kyng of ScotlandeThe kyng of Scottes, ma∣rieth the dau∣ghter of Fra¦unce. The cōquest of the kyng of Portingals Indes. puyssaunt kyng Iohn of Portingale, Sonne to the excellent kyng Emanuell had a great conflicte and victory agaynst the infideles in the Realme of Cam¦baia or Guzuratum, lyeng in the Indes. For after that he had by his capitaines, & specially by Nonne a Cugria, who was ruler and gouernour of the kin¦ges army, in the Indes, destroyed the coastes lieng towardes the Indysh sea, subiecte to the kyng of Cambaia, and when the same kyng was not able to resyste hym, although he was of power to brynge foure hundred thousand men in Campe, he made a gentle agrement with the Portyngalles, and dely∣uered them two mighty cities with all their abily∣ties, priuiledges, liberties and dominions, whereof the one is called Bazaim, and the other Dium, this
the stronger and the other the rycher. Whiche ha∣ue both vnder them about a syx hundreth Villages with certayn smal townes and srutesul landes con∣tayning in length about a .lxxx. myles or leaques. wherof the king hath yerely an .C. thousand crew∣nes at the least in bare tribute, besydes the woode whence for the mooste part all the prouision is takē that is occupied for the shyppes in the Indes, with other aduauntages. In those partes caused the kyng of Portingall the Christian fayth to be plan∣ted,The Christē faith planted in the kyng∣dome of Cā¦baia. and at the last kyng Badur of Cambaia (for so was he called) when he was inuaded by kyng Dey (who was kynge of the Scythians and of the Tar¦tares) fled with all his treasure, mother, wyfe and chyldren into the Cytie of Dyum, whiche he had geuen vp before, desyrynge succour and defence a∣gainst his enemy. So that by this meanes the king of Portyngall had obtayned the moste parte of all the lande of the Indes vnder his tuition and defen¦ce without any notable shedyng of bloude. These actes are described at large by the sayed kyng in a certayne letter by hym to Pope Paule directed. Also this yeare in the Moneth of Iuly dyed atThe heath of Erasmus. Basill that excellent Clarke Erasmus of Roterda∣me beyng about the age of .lxx. yeares who was a special instrument of God, to restore the Greke and Latine tonges agayne to their puritie: Whiche al∣so hath done no small seruice with his writinges to¦wardes the settyng furth of the Gospell, the true lyght of our soules, as euery wyse man may right well perceyue and gather by his wrytynges, wher∣of he hath left behynde hym a greate sorte, and in a
maner innumerable bookes. IN the yeare of our lorde .MDxxxvij. euen inA preuy con¦spiracy in Germany a∣gainst the Gospell. the begynning of the yere began certayne pre∣uy practyses and conspiracies to be wrought agaynst the Euangelicall Princes and their confe∣derates. For the Pope sought all the meanes possi∣ble to stirre vp some commotion and dissention in Germany, and had procured all ready, by the mea∣nes of the Duke of Brounswike called Henry the younger, and brought to passe by certayne byshops, namely the byshippe of Mence with other that the Duke George of Saxon shoulde assiste the Duke of Brunswyke with money, to inuade Iohn Frede∣rikeHenry the younger du∣ke of Brun∣swyke. Duke of Saxon and electour imperiall, and Philippe Land graue of Hessene: whiche Practise and conspiracy was begonne so preuely, and kept so close, that if God had not specially preserued the fauoures of hys worde, it myght haue turned them to muche wo and trouble. For the Duke of Brun∣swyke had all ready assembled a competent nombre of men within his lande, and that so preuely, that many dyd afterwarde wonder at it. But when he thought with hys adherentes that the matter had bene sure, almyghty God red their treasurer DukeThe death of George duke of Sax¦on. George out of the way by death, sodaynely or euer any man suspected hys infirmitie. And so succeded Duke Henry into his brothers heritage, whiche had kept hys Court poorely many yeares at Fry∣burgh in the lande of Myssene, beyng a good lau∣dable and Euangelicall Prince. And albeit
that Duke George brother to the sayed Duke Hen¦ry, was also in his actes and gouernaunce a very wyse and circumspecte Prince, and experte in cy∣uyle policies, as his buyldynges and townes which he hath left behynde hym beare wytnes, yet had he this faulte, that he (as it happeneth commonly to suche as are worldly wyse) had his prudence and hipocriticall conuayaunce so blynded▪ that he would not cleaue vnto the Gospel, where of neuer∣theles he was not ignoraunt, for none other cause then that some Pope or some Cardinall had not set it furth and brought it to lyght, but apore frere (as was doctor Luther) yea he was suche an enemy to the Gospell that he dyd not onely persecute and ba∣nyshe hys subiectes that embraced and fauoured the same, but also woulde depriue his saied brother Henry of his heritage, whyle he cleaued sted fastly to Goddes worde. But God tourneth all thynges to the prophite of his bleuers. For when Duke George was in this minde, & had sought al meanes possible to disherite and dispossesse his brother, all was sodaynely turned vpsyde downe. For after that Iohn his sonne was departed out of this worl¦de leauyng no bodely heyre behynde hym (in as mu¦che as it was not well possyble for hym to procreate chyldren, beyng continually geuen to superfluitie and dronkennes) he had yet an other sonne (not be∣ing endued with to muche witte) called Henry, vn∣to whome, not withstanding that by the reason of his oolysh behaueour he was vnmete to haue the rule & gouernaūce of the lande, he gaue hym a wyfe of a basse stocke and lowe degree, to thende that by
this meanes he myght (if it were possible) obtayne an heire for the lande, and defraude his brother of his heritage, commaundyng his Phisicians to ge∣ue his sayd Sonne good prouisions whereby hys lust myght be the better stirred and prouoked to∣wardes his wyfe. But what was the ende? Thys hope and expectation continued but a small tyme, for within the space of two monethes thesaed yong maried man died. Many wyll say and affirme that the Phisicians kylled hym with their confortati∣ues: But it was the worke of God, who would ha∣ue the Gospell to reigne in the sayed Duchye by the administracion of the sayed Duke Henry: For the saied Duke George dyed also shortely after the de∣ceasse of his saied sonne as before is mencioned. When nowe the Papistes were thus destitute of their comforte, hauyng lost all their hope and expec∣taciō, in that the land and the treasures wherwith they intended and trusted to haue resysted the Gos¦pell, was nowe fallen into the handes of hym that would therewith auaunce and promote the same, their capitayne Duke Henry of Brunswycke was faine to geue ouer and disperse his army for the mo¦ney wherwith the souldiours should haue bene pai¦ed was now withdrawen. Wherfore (as it was reported) the saied Duke should say, that he had ra∣ther lost God in heauen, then this man: Wherby euery Christen man may easely perceyue, wheron the hope of the Papistes is grounded. But let vs learne here that a Christian may not truste in any man, nor feare any mans threatenyng nor yet dys∣payre in pouertie and tribulation, but must onely
put al his trust and confidence in God, who is able to breake and ouerthrowe the imaginacions of the proude, and to exalte the pore, according to the song of Mary, he trusteth downe the proude from their seates, and lifteth vp the lowely. When God had on this wyse deliuered his littel flocke in the lande of Saxon and of Hessen, from the craftes and enterpryses of their enemy, the said duke Henry succeding in the rowme of his brother deceassed, abolyshed the abhominacion of PopyshPopr abo¦lyssed in the nde of . Idolatry thoroughout all his iurisdiction and do∣minion, and cōmaunded Goddes worde to be prea∣ched in all places sincerely and purely, for the main∣tenaunce whereof he sought all about for learned men to geue dilygent attendaunce to the settynge furth of the same. After this he dyd also erecte andThe oole gh re¦std. restore the Scoole of Lipsigh whiche was sore de∣cayed before, to the mayntenaunce whereof he dyd institute and appointe speciall priuileges and newe stipendes, and ordeined the excellently learned man Ioachim Camerary of Bambery, reder in liberall sciences, and prouided for other faculties also sage men & well learned, so that both gods worde & also learnyng dyd myghtely increase and florysh agayn in thys lande, God graunt it may long continue to the prayse of his mooste holy name. In Fraunce was not the warres yet ceased whi¦che was begonne the yere before. For the king was yet mightely armed, and came furth in the moneth of Marche towardes the west into the Duchye of Artois, whiche is called Picardy, where he dyd great harm, and about the .xviij. daye of the same
moneth he beseged y• towne of Hedin, which wasHeding bese∣ged & taken. yelded vp vnto hym the .xiij. day of Aprill next fo∣lowing. When he had ouercome the sayde towne, he furnyshed it, and other places lyeng there about with mē and so retourned home again. In the mea¦neThe lady re∣gēt inuadeth Picardy. season Mary quene of Hungary, syster vnto the Emperours maiestie, and lady Regēt of the lower partes of his dominiōs prepared her selfe, and whē she had assembled a mighty company of pietons or footemen, as well of the partes of hygh Germany, as of the lower partes of Duchelande, with an ar∣my of horsemen well appointed, she marched with power into Picardy, and hauyng destroyed that whiche was left in the lande, she went and beseged the towne called S. Paule, whiche lyeth in theS. Paule be¦seged and de¦stroyed. borders, and was also furnyshed by the kyng at his departyng from thence, with foure thousand soul∣diours, and certayne hundredes of horsemen. And when they that were within ye towne made resistaū¦ce against her, she ouercame it with a strong assault, and caused to be destroied whatsoeuer was a lyue within the towne, except two of the chefe Capitai∣nes, which were caried away captiues. But as tou∣chyng the towne after it was spoyled by the souldi¦ours it was set on fyre, and burned downe to the grounde. The seuen and twenty daye of Iune theyTurwyne be¦seged. went to the citie of Turwyne, & beseged the same. But when the Frenche men dyd pryuely brynge into the Towne certayne Souldiours for the sa∣negarde of the same Towne, and the Capitayne of the same retourned agayn (by lyke to fetche more helpe) they were takē by y• lady Maries warrious. Anone
violently destroyenge all that made resistaunce againste them, murtheryng the men, and vicia∣tyng the women and the virgines, whom also they caried away captiues with them. After that, they Iohn Crisp came also to the Ilande called Naxus, wherein dwelled a Prince called Iohn Crispus, who also wrote the sayde affaires to oure Potentates in Europa, wyth a certayne exhortacion and warning there unto annexed, whenche I also haue taken thys story. But when the Turke offered peace vn∣to the sayde Prince, promisyng not to hurte nor trouble hys subiectes, in case he woulde gentely and wyllyngly yelde hym selfe vnder the obedien∣ce of the Turke, the sayde Prince consideryng that he was to weake and notable to resyste suche great power, not knowyng any helpe or assistaunce to bee loked for, yelded hymselfe and hys subiectes to the Turke the eleuenth daye of Nouember, on thys condition that he shoulde yearely paye vnto the Turke a tribute of fyue thousand guldens of gold. When this was done, the Turkyshe Armada re∣tourned homewarde with a greate spoyle and ab∣reption of Golde, Syluer, and many poore impry∣soned Christians.A hoble . There was also the sayde yere of our lord God a thousand fyue hundreth thyrty and seuen an hor∣rible and fearefull tempest, at Heydelbery on the Necker lyeng in the Lower partes of the Palati∣nes iurisdiction, where the Electour by the Rhene kept his Courte. For on Sainct Markes daye when euensonge was done, rose a sodayne darke∣nyng
of cloudes with an horrible noyse of wynde, and immediately folowed a wether of Thonder and Lyghtenyng, whiche lyghted within a Tower lyeng by the olde Castell of Heydelbergh, wherein was muche gon poulder kept, insomuche that the sayde poulder beyng set on fyre by the power of the sayde Thonder and Lyghtening, the sayd Tower and Castell brast in sunder in ye twinkling of an eye, and made suche an earthquake, that within the Towne the dores and wyndowes were moued and flewe from the hinges, so that the people thou∣ght none other, but that the daye of dome had bene come. And the stones of the walles were throwen here and there in the Towne by the rea∣son whereof dyuerse persones runnynge out into the stretes and forsakynge theyr houses for feare, least they shoulde fall downe on theyr heades, were sore hurte and harmed. There dwelled also in the olde Castell a couple of folkes, wyth seven chyl∣dren,Misfortunes happened & harmes done by the mea∣nes of the tē∣pest. whereof fyue were hurte and two slayne out of hande. And not farre from the newe Castell came a stone of the wall flyeng and slewe a man, and cut awaye a foote of another man that was by hym. In Englande was thys yeare begonne a collec∣tionA collection for the pore. for the poore, and a greate nombre cured of many greuous diseases thorough the charitie thereof. There was also in Englande a certayne frereFrere Forest called frere forest hanged and burned for treason and heresy.
IN the yeare of ourelorde .MDxxxviij. TheA cousilta∣on holden at Rome a∣gainst the Turke. eight day of February, assembled at Rome Po¦pe Paule, with certayne Cardinalles, Syr Iohn Mantry Marquys of Angilaria Oratour of themperous maiestie, and atturnay for the same, & the kynges maiestie of the Romaines, Syr Mar∣kes Anthomus Contarenus knight, the imbassa∣dours and attournays of the Duke and rulers of Venice, in the name and power of their superiours, whiche there cōsulted together, howe and by what meanes the Turke who did mightely enlarge hys empyre by his power myght be resisted. Whereit was agreed and concluded, that they would alto∣gether prepare a great power both by lande and by water out of Italy, whereof the Pope should main tayne and laye the syxt part, the Emperours maie¦stie the ene half, the Venetians the other third part and that there should by water be armed foure hun¦dreth shyppes and gallees. And to thintent that the Turke myght be so muche the easier ouercome, kyng Ferdinando should with a strong army inua∣de hym in Hungary. Besydes this should the Po∣pe moue and exhorte Sigismonde kyng of the Po∣les, to do his parte likewyse. But as thesayde con∣tracte and agreement was made with great pretē∣ce o proceded it to small effect, for it went forwarde very slenderly & slowely as ye shall heare herafter. The same yere when the Counsails betwene the Emperours maiestie & the French kyng departedThe Empe∣rours ra∣un to i¦c. and could not agree of any durable & stedfast peace, the Pope himself toke ye matter in hand, & apointed both parties to mete in ye coastes of Italy orlōbardy
at the Citie of Nice. Into the which themperours maiestie made his entraunce with great triumphe the .xv. day o May. The next day entred the Po∣pe into the saied citie also, whose entraunce I do he∣reThe entraun¦ce of the Po∣pe into Nice described. gladly descrybe, that al men may see and knowe, howe that holy father folowed the steppes of hys predecessour Peter, and of his maister Christ. Fyrst there rode before hym two hundred men vpon the goodliest mules that migt be founde, very gorgiou¦sly apparelled. Then folowed .lx. Trompetters in yackettes of veluette costly sylkes and scarlette. Af¦ter them folowed hys garde and footemen with pertisanes, apparailled in yelowe, hauyng on their heades black veluer cappes with goodly Eastryche fethers. After this folowed the Lorde great Mai∣ster of the Popes moste holy housholde, very coste∣ly apparelled. Then came the ryght swarme andthe religious rabl. rable in a long procession, that is to say, a great nom¦bre of Monkes, Freres and priestes, with many re∣lyques of dead sainctes. And the last of them bare a lx. burnyng candels of white waxe, to lyghte before the blynde Idoll of Rome, the Pope, whiche was borne of many men, in a Chayre garnyshed with fi∣ne golde, and the Sacrament (as they cal it in their abuse) was borne before hym. On both sydes of the borne Pope were seuen Cardinalles with .xlij. Pre¦lates. Then folowed an hundred valiaunt launce∣knyghtes for his defence. With this army entred the shepehearde of Christes shepe (if I do hym no wrong) at that tyme into Nice, after thexample of Christe on Palmesondaye, and according to hys cō∣maundement in the twenty Chapiter of Mathew.
After this ode the Pope in the same ordre to the chiefe Minister of the citie, to make his prayer whi∣che beyng ended, he caused hymselfe to be borne in to his Palice: where themperoures maiestie came vnto hym, and kissed hys fete: whome the Pope lif∣tedThe Empe∣roure kisseth the Popes e. vp, embraced hym, and kyssyng hym on the top∣pe of his heade (by lyke for a witnes that he is lorde ouer the Emperours head) And after they had ben a good whyle together, themperoure retourned a∣gayne to his lodgyng. Not long after this arryued the Frenche kyng at Villa Noua, whiche is a place of his owne dominion lyeng not farre from Nice, and shortely after repayred towarde the Pope,A peace con∣cluded betwe¦ne the Empe¦rour & Fraū¦ce▪ where in fine a sted fast peace was concluded betwe¦ne both the parties, that is to saye betwene thempe¦rours maiestie and the Frenche kyng, to continue for the space of tenne yeres, accordyng to the pro∣myse made betwene them, (although it lasted scant two yeres as shalbe sayde hereafter) whiche peace was restored the .xviij. day of the moneth of Iune, and afterwarde at the commaundement of bothe thesaide heades, all the pointes and articles of the same were described and published, as yet apeareth by the copies thereof remainyng in printe. In the meane season Leonora the Frenche que∣ne▪Leonora. Syster to themperours maiestie prepared her selfe very sumpteously to come towardes Nice▪ where she commoned many wordes with her bro∣ther themperours maiestie, abidyng there certayne dayes. But when the peace was made and conclu∣ded, she came the ther agayn, and was receyued be∣ry
honourable of the Emperours maiestie: And af∣terwarde on Corpus Christ day she retourned a∣gayne, with great solace. The same daye at nyght the Pope and the Emperoures maiestie toke ship∣pynge towardes Genua: Where the Emperou∣res Counsayls remained with the kynge, and the kynges with the Emperour, intreating of matters concernyng the sayde peace. But when the Empe∣roure coulde not tary long in Italy by the meanes of his hat whiche he made to retourne into Spay∣ne, it came to passe, that both the high Potentates, the Emperoure and the Frenche kyng dyd lonyng¦ly agree and come together. For when the Empe∣roure arryued at the Porte and Citie called, the dead waters, lyeng not farre from Marsilia, which was the fourtenne daye of Iuly, the Frenche kyng came thyther also with hys wyfe and with his son∣nes. And when the Emperonr abode in his Gallee, the king went vnto him in his owne person, & after they had embraced and kissed eche other (according to the maner and custome of noble men) they talked louyngly together. The next daye folowynge the Emperoure went a lande, and rode into the sayde Citie, where he was receyued of the kyng, the Que¦ne and the kyngs Sonnes very ioyfully. And whē muche honoure and greate triumphe was declared and shewed towardes hym, he abode there vntyll the tewesdaye at nyght, and then takynghys leaue of the kynge and his affinitie, he commended them to God and returned to hys shyppe, wherewith he sayled luckely towarde Spayne, trusting assuredly
that thesaied peace should be firme and stable, and also durable to the profite and furtheraunce of the Christen common welth. After this also the lady Mary regent of the lo∣wer partes of themperoures maiesties dominions accompanied with the kynge came into Camerike the viij. day of October. And the next day folowing they went to the Citie of S. Quintine, where the sayed Quene Mary was receiued with great pom¦pe, and intreated very honorably. But when she had remayned there .vi. dayes she retourned again to her owne dominiō. So that this yere there was thre honorable assembles of the mightiest in Euro∣pa: But what folowed thereof shalbe mēcioned her after, in place conuement. While these thynges were in doinge the aboue named Estates of confederation prepared their na¦ures against the Turke, and first inuaded Castell N ded. Nouo, (whiche is a Castell lyeng in the Duchye of Sabe▪ sometyme pertaynyng to the crowne of Hū∣gary) and ouercame it by violent assaulte, destro∣yeng aboue .iiij. hundred, and about .viij. hundred on horsebacke, whiche were come to rescue them. But when Barbarossa hearde of this, he sayled outBarbarossa. of the sea Ambraike, where he had kept hymself a longe tyme, intendyng to preserue the Cities and Townes of the Turke lyeng in the Coastes of Sla uony and Macedony from the assaultes and inua∣sions of the Christianes. For he feared least they should be serued as Castell Noua was serued. In the meane season was also the Citie of Bisana o∣uercomeBisana taen of our men in lyke maner. But when they lacked
aud prouander, they were constreined of necessitey to separate them selues, In suche sort, as ye Prince of Aurea wyth the shippes pertayning to thempe∣roures Maiestye was constrayned to runne into Brundysh, which is a port and City in Apulia, Ly∣eng ouer agaynste Grece, and the Popes Legate into Ancona (which is a port and Citie lyeng ouer agaynste the coastes of Slauony) So that onelye the Venetianes remained and kept ye Seas. And as touchynge Castello Nouo they dyd fortifye it with. foure thusande. spanyardes &. sixe hundreth light horsemen, whiche dailye put the Turke to muche losse in the Lande of Bosen. When Barba∣rossa had knoweledge of his seperatyon and diuisi∣on of our shippes, he toke his waye towardes Du∣racho (somtime called Durachium, and lyeng in Al¦bany which was somtime called Epyrus) to encou∣rage thinhabitaūtes of the same Citie, and to make them harty, that he might the better ouercome the Venetianes in the sea of Risana. But when he say∣led towardes Duracho with a Southeast wyndeThe shipw∣rach of Bar¦barossa. (which bloweth from the rysynge of the Sunne in winter) the same winde (accordinge to his nature and property) chaunged sodaynely into a ful easter¦ly winde, & blewe so outragiously, ye Barbarossa lost aboue fyftye shippes and about a two .c. thou∣sand men, with his best mariners. After the which naufrage and shipwracke when he sayled back a∣gayne eastwarde with the remnaunt of his shippes wich for the moost parte were lecke and wetherea ten, there came suche a mortalitye and pestilence amonge them that were remayning and left in the
shippes that euen in the greateste shippes, were scant left, tenne men able to rule the helme, and as many apt for the voarres: So ye God dyd specially declare his helpe to our men. Whyle these thinges passed betwene them∣perour, the Pope, Fraunce, Venice, and Barbaro∣ssa (as is before mencyoned) they of Nurrembo∣roughThe Castell Nurg ylord. began theyr strong holde or Castell wyche lyeth in the vpper parte of the Toune vpō a migh∣ty rocke, and is a lodging for themperour and the king of the Romaynes defenced with a strong Bul warke, and amyghty wyde dyche: which buylding as concerning the walles was finished in the yeare of our Lord .M. D. xlv. nexte folowynge. When George Marquys of Brandenburghe perceynedTh Mar∣quea of Brā¦denburg. theyr sayde enterpryse and intent, he thought that they dyd hym great iniury, for he asscribed vnto hymselfe certayne ground▪ and laude wythout the towne of Nurremborough (which is neuer theles pertayning to the Empyre) and claymed it as hys owne heritage, wherfore he marched somtime by▪ day as farre as the Landmark, and by night vnto the towne, euen hard by the forsayd buylding. But when they of the towne feared some great malice and mischief, they fenced theyr building with much ordenaunce and artillery, & kept great watch vpon the walles and in theyr turrettes. When thys hyndered the people of the Marquys of theyr purpose, some of them went & toke certayne inhabytauntes of Nurremborough as they went a fowlynge or byrdyng in the woode and stopped certayne of theyr wagens or cartes
commyng from Lipswyke and other places, laden with goodes and marchaundyses, and broughte them to the Castell of Bayerthorp: Wherfore they of Nurremburgh, being occasyoned and moued to displeasure▪ and indignatyon by the reason of the sayde cruelues, assembled a certaine nombre of oul dyours, and layde them in the countree rounde a∣bout the town, and furnished the smal townes and vyllages about them after the best mauer, purpo∣syng, in case the sayd Marquys or hys men would persiste in theyrfrowardenes (as they had begon) to be in a readynes to defend themselues from such iniuris, But yet thorough intreataunce of certaine Potentates and Princes of the Empyre the mat∣ter was qualified, & put in arbitrement, so ye in con∣clusion the sayde Marquys suffered them of Nur∣renburgh, wythout contradiction and molestation accordynge to the tenoureof theyr lybertyes and priuyledges (to buylde on the grounde of the Em∣pyree. This yeare dyed Charles Duke of GeldresThe death of ye duke of Gelders. & in his place succeded William Duke of Cleue, al∣though he did not long enioye it, as shalbe declared in place conuenient. Thys yeare dyd Godde so punyshe the a∣uaryceAuarice pu∣nyshed. of marchauntes whyche occupye by the sca¦syede, whyle they do so enhaunce the goode crea∣tures of God in pryces that the poore are not a∣ble to bye them, that thoroughe oute all the coa∣stes of Denmarcke, in harueste (whyche is the best time of the yeare, no hering could be taken. In the kingdom of Naples ye .xxviii. day of Septemb.
The Sea decreassed and fell away about the space of eight Italyan myles, so that al the grounde was drye, which afterwarde dyd cast certayn holes, out of the which for the space of many dayes continual∣ly ascended fyre wyth ashes, which dyd great hurt in many places there about at the falling do wne therof. For the sayde ashes fell downe lyke snowe rounde about Naples for the space of thenne Itali an myles, vntyll they lay on the grounde the thic∣kenes of thre fingers. Which is a fearful argument of Goddes wrath towardes vs, wherby we ought al to be warned, and specyally Italy, to forsake our sinfull liuynge, yf any warning would helpe. But it is not regarded, vntill Gods wrath lighteth v∣pon vs by heapes, and then men would fayne re∣pente, but it is to late: Wherfore let vs repente in time, and lyue according to our professyon. In Inglande, thys yeare in December wasThe lorde marquish of exter  the rd mōtacu¦te beheaded. the Lorde Marques of exceter, the Lorde Mon∣tacute, and Syr Edwarde Neuell beheaded for high treason duely proued. IN ye yeare of our lord. 1539. Thecōfede rat of ye Romane league prepared thēsel ues wyth all theyr power to warre a∣gaynst the Turcke by water, but they profyted not muche. For ther was greate lacke of vyctual, & a great dearth in Italy and at Venice▪Barbarossa robbeth ye e eās & Ita∣lians goodes vpō ye see. For Barbarossa came wyth a great army and rob∣bed vpon the sca and toke all that he might laye hand on, so that ther myght no coarne be shypped vnto Venyce, nether out of Cypers nor out of Can dye, And there was also nomore prouisyon in Ita∣ly. That done, he shipped with a great power vnto
the strong newe Castell (which oure Christen menBarbarossa bth C▪ stelou. had wonne in the yeare before, fortified it after the best facyon (there vnto he layed seage in thre pla¦ces, and shot daye and night ther at wythoute cea∣ssynge and yet wanne nothyng, tyl certen of the dalThe dalma∣cians flye to ye Turckes, & betrai their felowe soudi¦ars & ye Ca∣stel. Barbarossa wynneth Ca¦stel nouo. macyans fell to fliyng awaye and ranne oute vnto the Turkes, and tolde them where they myghte best and onest hurt our Christen men. Then the e∣nemye dyd accordyng to theyr councell, and shotte both for tresses and walles doune, so that the could assaulte them on euen grounde. And although the spanyardes and the Italyans that were in the Ca¦stell defended themselues manfullye and couragy ously, and slewe at the least syxtene thousand of the enemyes, yet at the last, because they werewery, &The spaniat des & Italy∣ans feight māfully. the enemyes gat euer fresch men, they forsoke the Castell, and loste bothe the Castell and the assault: and althoughe they were ouer manned, yet they fought and defended them selues so longe tyll they were all mooste all slayene. Thys was done in August. In the meane whyle Isabel the Emperou∣resTheēperou∣res widieth. Mayestyes wyfe, the kynge of Portugalles doughter, dyed of chylde, the fyrste daye of maye, the chylde was a sonne whyche lyued not longe. She leaft behynde her lyuynge a sonne called Phi¦lyppe, and two doughters, whyche she hadde by the Emperour. A none after ther was an insurreccyon rayAn insurrec¦ciōat Gent▪ sed at Gent amonge the commens of the Cytye, so that it apeared that the cytye shulde haue bene destroyed. By occasion wherof the Emperoures
Mayestye was compelled to come oute of Spayn into Flaunders, to appease that dissencion. And as he was mynded to take his iorney toward Italy,Embassadou¦res out of Fraunce into Spayne. the Frenche kyng Fraunches sent an embassage to hym, desyrynge hym amyably to come thoroughe Fraunce, promysing that all that was in his kyng∣dome shulde be at his pleasure. But the cause was for that they had concluded a peace to gethers, as is aboue remembred, the one shulde haue suspected the other, if they hadde not kept frendshippe to ge∣ther. And for as moche as the Frenche kyng had often broken the leaghe, hys myssedoyng myghte thesoner be for gotten, if the Emperoures mayesty woulde seke frendshyp at hys hande. Thys thinge could by nomeanes be better or easelier done, than that his maiesty for this once shuld iorney through hys lande. By thys mocyon was the Emperours maiestye wyllyng to iorney thoroue Fraunce, and sent hys chefe Counseller Granduel in Nouembre oute of Spayne into Fraunce to signyfye hys com¦myng, and folowed shortlye after. And when he came to. S. Sebastians, therThe perour cōmeth into Flaūderstho ou Fraunce the Duke of Orliens the kynges youngest Sonne reaceaued hym. And not farre from the city of. S. Iohn was also the dolphyn wyth the chefe of y• no∣bles of Fraunce, whyche receaued the Emperou∣res maiesty wyth al due reuerence, and dyd leadde him thorowe the lande, till he came to Lochias the tenneth day of December. There was the kynge in hys awne personne, and Helenour hys wyfe, tarynge for the Emperoure, and receaued hym (as it appeared, for it was not all golde that
glyttered cleare, as here after wyll appeare) wyth all ioye and reuerence, and were to gether tyll the ende of the xxxix yeare. The inhabytoures of the nether parte ofAn ābassage out of ostēric¦ke into beam. Austeryche of the erldome of Goertz, hadde sente forth theyr ambassadours the laste daye of Decem¦ber from Vyenne wyth a pityfull and humble re∣queste and petycyon to the states and degrees of the kingdome of Behame which were at that time assembled at Preslowe, that they woulde vouche∣safeLatine Wr¦tislauya. to helpe them agaynste the turcke, whych had two yere before taken in the marqueship of Woen¦don. and that present yeare manned it, and cariedThe Turcke carieth away lxxx thou∣sād christē mē into turckye. from thence foureskore thousande chrysten men in to his lande, and laie at that tyme hard vpon their neckes, the chefe ambassadours of thys ambassage were .M. Vlryche of boskawyts and. M Tscher nafor, whyche were of the kynge of the Romaynes councell. But what they obtayned wyth theyr pe∣ticion, I can not tell (at thys tyme) but I suppose that they obtayned an honeste promesse and helpe. For so pytyfullye as they made theyr petycyon it woulde haue made a stonye herte to meltte: speci¦ally if men consider that yf they be suffred to be de∣stroyed wythoute helpe, that then theyr aduersity will be at the next time our awne. In the somer, in Iuly, ther was a blasingA blasynge sterre. ster in the eauening in y• Northwest in the signe of the virgin. It was elles a metely good yere as tou¦ching wether & other thinges y• happened therin: but in the winter euery full mone ther was muche raine speciallye about the elue and other waters that ronne therinto.
Here I must sett to, new tidynges that are counted true of many, whych I take to be a speey∣all myracle (if it be so). It is sayde, and it is openly putt oute in prynte, That the Emperour of Turc∣kye in Iune caused all hys chefe and best learned priestes to come before hym, and commaunded them vpon a great payne, to tell hym, whyche is the ryght true and best belefe vpon earth. And when they had for feare excused themselues, they had a tyme appoynted to remembre them, and af∣ter were called before hymagayne. Now when they were agayne monished to saye the trueth, ofThe laerned in Turcky acknowledg our Christen relligiō to be y• best. theyr conscyence, and heard the commaundement of the Tyrant, they answered one after another wyth one assent that the Christen beliefe is the best, and that it is a ryght and a true belefe, albeit it is very much misused of the Christen. For it tea∣cheth the beste poyntes that can be, as to wytte, loue toward God and man, whych is not so well taught in any other belefe. And forther that they haue wytnesse in their lawe and alkorane, that Mahomet must go to Christ for grace, &c. And that Christe is therefore better than Mahomet. Whē they now had thus answered wythout feare,The urch headeth▪ priestes. the Tyrant waxed angrye, and caused them all (which were aboue fyfiye) to beheaded. And in the same place was there a syght sene, as though all the headed priestes had bene together, and lighted clearer than manye candellyghtes in theA miracle. nyght: through which miracle manye of the other priestes of Mahomet folowed theyr confessyon & belefe, & also many of y• Lay people, which acknow∣ledged
openly and wythout feare, that those prie∣stes were vniustly kylled for the truethes sake. All thynges are possible to God, so that it may well be. For God cā raise vp a Daniel or an Ezechiel amōg the Babilonians. Howbeit no man shall be compel∣led to beleue this, but at his pleasure. IN the yeare of our lord .M. D. XL. in the beginning of the yeare dyd the Em∣peroures Maiestye ryde to Paris, andThe Empe∣rour at paris as he rode in, was excedyng royally con¦ducted and receaued, and afterwarde great and pryncely Banckettes made, wyth great momery∣es and daunces. And the second daye after, there were great Iustynges and fyghtynges made `to do hym pleasure and honour, wyth all. There his Maiesty abode tyll the second day after the twel∣ueth daye. Then he departeth into Flaunders wyth al his company and was conducted vnto Ca¦merick of bothe the kynges sonnes: and there with great royalty receaued of the Bishop of Camerick From thens they iorneyed to Valencyne, there taryed the ladye Marye Quene of hungarye for them. There also toke the kynges sonnes theyr leaue of the Emperoures mayestye and tourned home agayn. But as the Emperoures Mayestye wasThe frēch kyng crafti¦ly seketh ye e¦perour dt * or be ro∣wed. in all places royallye receaued, so was ther wayte layde falslye pryuelye and craftelye to kyll hym. For as the Emperoure shulde sayell from corbe to Paryse, and hadde wyth hym a Cardynall the Duke of Albuge and the kynges Marschalle to
beare hym companye the water men rowed or boote the shyppe vpon a pyele, so that the shyp turned round aboute, and he stpan. that hylde the rother fell oute of the or shippe. The p rrs cōplaint to y• ih. of Ro. boot (what that meant it is easy to gesse) whe¦rof the Emperour complayneth in a letter written to Paule the thyrde byshoppe of Rome (whereyn he sheweth the cause why he could not come to the councell appointed to be holden at Trente) that he had perfect knowledge that the kynge of Fraunce was mynded at that tyme to take hym presoner and kepe hym in holde, as it also afterwarde suffi∣cyently appeared by the affaires of the sayde king. But after the Emperours mayestye was comenThe Empe¦roure cōmeth to Gent. in to hys awne lande he wente streyghtwayes vn∣to Gent, and after he was suffred to come in to the cytye, he fyrste earnestlye punyshed the insurrecty on raysers, and caused a great parte of the citye to be broken downe, and a stronge Castell to be buyl∣ded castel buil¦ded in Gent. Ferdinādus cometh to y• Emperoure in to flaūders . in the same place. A none after cam Ferdinādus in to Flaūders to y• Emperours maiesty to consult with him after whatt maner they myghte wythstande the turcke and howe hys greate tyrannye agaynste vs poor Chrystyans myghte be resysted and auoyded. Euen whyle these thynges were done inA cōmunica∣cion at Wor Flaunders, ther was a communycacyon holden at Wormes at the Emperours commaundement, concernynge Relygyon, and the speakers of both sydes were, master Philip Melanthon myne ente∣relyePhil. Melā. beloued master of the Gospellers syde, and Doctor Iohn Ecke of Ingolstadt whyche woldeIoh. Ecke. haue defended the Byshoppe of Romes parte,
Thys communycacion beganne the fourtenne day of Ianuarye, there the Artycle of orygynall synneWheter ther remain sines in yt saintes & Christiās af∣ter baptisme. was specyallye intreated of, whether the same syn abyde and remayne in Chrysten and holy men af∣ter baptyme. And was concluded that ther yet abyede remnauntes of synne in the saynctes, al∣thoughe they raygne nott or haue the ouerhande (As. S. Paule sayth, let not synne raygne in yourRom. viii. mortall bodyes) But suche synnes are not im∣puted to the saynctes for Christes merytes sake, as the Apostle forther saythe, ther is nowe no condemnacyon to them that are in Chryste Ie∣su. &c. After thys treatye was that communyca∣cyon so ended, and dyffered tyl the Emperoures and the kynges mayestyes of the Romaynes were personallye presente. But what sutteltye and craft Eccyus vsed in dysputacyon, to adourne and gar∣nysh hys cause, maye euerye wyttye manse by the treaty it selfe, whych is whollye wrytten and put out in prynte Nowe when that communicacion was ended, ther was another appoynted by the Emperoures and the kinges maiesty at Spiers. But in as much as ther was at that tyme a great pestylence there, that day was appointed to be holdē at HaganouwA day at ha∣ganouwe. to entreate of matters of relligyon, whether those myghte be ended and vtterlye finyshedde and con∣cluded or nott▪ And thoughe manye greate lordes oute of all the coostes of dutchelande we∣re come in wyth the kynge Ferdynandus, partely in theyr awne personnes, partelye throughe their
embassadours, yet ther was no specyall thynge con¦cluded, but that ther shulde a nother assembly be¦holden the next yeare at Regensburg, at which the Emperoures maiestye hym selfe shulde be, where all matters, concernynge Rellygyon and also con∣cernynge warre agaynst the Turcke shulde be a∣greed of. Afterward vpon the .xx. daye of Septem¦breThe Empe¦rour ly forbedeth good bokes to be readde. the Emperoure caused a commaundemence to be putt oute wher in besyde other statutes concer∣nynge hys inheretable landes in the netherlande, he forbodde all his subiectes vpon payn of great punyshemente, that they shulde not reade theyr bokes that haue nowe in these laste dayes brought vnto lyghte the truethe of the Gospell.But what is wōne  per¦secutyon. But what he wanne wyth hys commaunde¦mente, dayely experience teacheth, as to wytte, that ther be many goode Christen men found, that rather lese their lyues than to forsake the woord of God, that the persecutoures of Chryste, pryestes and monckes, myght still betray and shedde Chri∣sten bloude, whyche thyng God wyll fynde a time horrybly to puysh. But in asmoche as Gods woorde was soThe marque s ādā∣ recea∣ y• word  God. ouerpressed in netherland God raised it vp so moch the moar in another place. For Ioachim the Mar¦quesse of Brandenburge elector after hys father was ded, which cared not much for any relligion, and he knewe that it was neadefull to leade hys subiectes the ryghte waye to saluacyon, and al∣so to kepe them thereyne, receaued the doctryne of the Gospell: had ordeyned in all Cytyes and
parishes good preachers, to preache the woord of God with diligence vnto the sympel people. He al∣so redressed the vniuersity of Franckford vpon the Odder, and sent for learned Men in all Sciences which when they came he augmented and amen∣ded theyr wages. He also ordeyned Newe stipen∣des for poare Scolers of the lyuings of the vnpro∣fytable Massynge priestes to thintent that suche lyuinges might from hence forth be bestowed to y• true seruyce of God. But in what an horrible blindnesse that Lande was before, and how euel it was prouided for with the word and doctryn of God, wytnesseth an histo∣ry, which I (although it appeare but simple) wyll therfore tell, that it may be so knowen what maner of teachers the popedome coulde suffre, and what they yet haue. As I at that tyme came by chaunce with the vi∣siters to Stēdel in y• old marquiship, to enquere af¦ter a seruice for me, it chaunsed that the admission into al the offices of the Church was differred the space of syxe wekes. In the meane whyle were the parsons and the paryshenars enquired after what facyon they hadde taughte and had bene taught. Then came ther forthe a Parson wyth his Congregation, whyche beynge demaunded of my goode Frynde Thomas Mathyas the Maye∣res sonne of Brandenburge, to whome that office was committed by the Vysytours, what he had preached to his Parishners, He answered, y• belefe And being asked again, what y• belefe is, begā to re¦hearce
Thys I could not chose but tel, to the counfort of the Christen, that they shulde learne, that God de∣fendethGod befen¦heth his flock & preserueth his, thorough his holy aun∣gels, and that although the deuell and his soart be neuer so woode, that they yet be able to do nothing if we but abyde in the confessyon and acknowled∣ging of Christ, and in the obedience of his woorde. These burning mortherers that were taken inThe : of y• burning mor∣therers. the Electours dukedome of Saxon and in other places suffred an horrible death. For ther was a thing made muche lyke a crosse, therupon was the gyltye fastned aboute the necke wyth an yron coller or rynge, and aboute the body with yron Chaynes, and then a fyer made wyth strawe and other glowing matter, a farre of, and so the Gylty roasted tyll he dyed. In thys fourtyest yeare also vpon the vii. daye of Aprill ther was an horryble Eclipse of clipse . the sonne, in the mornynge at the sonne rysynge, whyche endured two goode houres longe. After thys Eclypse, and the blasynge sterre that appea∣red in the yeare before, folowed ther an excydyng drye and a hoate somer, wherin corne was yet meately well taken, but hey and fother for beastes was cleane burnt vp. Wyne was so well taken y•Wyne both  & good cheape. yeare and so good in all places, y• many dronck them selues to deeth therwith, and was therto verye good cheape. Thys yeare in Iune the TurckeVnderstand The true king of Hun¦gary, kynge Iohn. sygnyfyed vnto the kynge of Hungarye, that he shuld pay him tribute for y• kingdō, or elles loke for warr. The Emperouer therfor sent Cornelius sce∣perus & consailed thē to pay no tribut, promesing
that he would shortely bring an armye against the Turke wherewith he would defende the Hungars and the other princes their neighbours. But the kyng of Hungary being vnpaciēt, could not tary so long, but required a tribute of his subiec¦tes, by the meanes whereof many of the chief of the nobilitie fell from hym, whome he persequited with warre. At the last when he had geuen the tribute to a tertayne Moncke to beare it to the Turke, he sodenly dyed. But the Moncke retourned quicklyThe kyng of Hungary dyed. agayne as whiche beyng a loyterer was not farre proceaded in his iourney, sending the Chaunselour and a certain byshop on the forwarde Embassage a foresayde to the Turke, where they dyed. The Monck dissemblyng the deeth of the kyng made a leaghe with those princes that had rysen a∣gaynst the kyng, and when they had al sworne to be true to the Quene and her Sonne went and toke Latine. Bda. Offen, and laye there. When Ferdinandus the kyng of the RomainesFerdinand{us} would take in the kyng∣dome of Hū¦gary. hearde, that he set all other thynges asyde and got hym into Ostenrike to take in the kyngdome of Hū¦gary. He toke in Weissenburg, Pest, and other cities of Hungary, and afterwarde beseaged Offen. At the last when helpe came out of dutcheland agaynst the Turck to helpe the kyng of Hungaries sonne, he was compelled to returne home agayne into Ostenrick, not without the great losse and damma∣ge of his subiectes. IN the yeare .MDxli. came the EmperouresThe Empe∣rour comith to Noren∣berg. maiestie first to Norenberg, and was receiued with great honoure, and leadde into the citie
and into the Castell rydyng vnder a hyghe canna∣pe of Veluet, whiche foure of the Alder men bare. In all the streates where through he roade, were hys cognisaunces and badges sett vp and other goodly triumphant thynges, and on both sydes of the streates the Cytesens standyng one by ano∣ther, all Iolyly arayed in their harnesse from the Spitell Gate vnto the Castell: betwene them rode the Emperoure. And aboue by the Castell there was a Gate of triumphe sett full of goodly sayen∣ges and Latyne verses, made for the Emperoures pleasure, and to his honoure. And aboue vppon the toppe of the Gatether was asplayed Eegell made, whiche a man gouerned, and when the Emperou∣res maiestie came to the Gate, the Egell plucked in his Whynges, and bowed hymselfe to the Empe∣roure reuerently with his body. And dyd lykewise on the other syde, when the Emperoure was rid∣den through the Gate. The day folowyng did the Emperour ride to the counsail house. There was a royal seate & cloth of estate set vp in the streate ouer against the shewing place, whereūto the Emperour was leadde by certen of the Aldermen. Thether ca¦me the comens of the citie before the councell house, whiche after the priueledges & liberties of the citie were cōfirmed & made better, did there sweare vn∣to ye Emperour. After that y• Emperours maiestie. toke his iourney to Regensburg, where the parlia∣ment was appointed. Thither came many dukes &The parlia∣ment holden at Regensburg. lordes both spirituall & temporall, & the kyng Ferdi¦nandus. And when the most part was come toge∣ther, the Emperours maiestie deliuered vnto the
states & degrees of thempire a boke, wherein ye arti∣cles of our christen beleue were contained, willing thē to shewe it to their learned mē, that they might agree in all these Articles, but with this condicion, that all that was said & done on both sydes should a¦gaine be deliuered vnto the Emperour in writing. And after the states & degrees of the Empire had willingli agreed thereūto, werther learned mē cho¦sen to cōmen together & to agree therein. On oure syde were chosen Phillipe Melanthon, Marten, Bucer, Iohan Baker superintendent of Nidda. And on the other syde Doctor Eckius. Doctor Iulius png, and Iohan Groepper. These after muche and long disputacion agreed concernyng the most part and chefe of the Articles of the Boke, as of these folowing. The first, of the power of the fre wil of man, both before and after the regeneration & newe birth. The second, of the byrth synne or Original sinne. The thrid, of Iustificacion and righteous making before God, which is the summe and the chefe and principall pointe. The fourth, of the new birth and of the working of the holy ghost, in them that be newe borne. The fyfth, of belefe, of the grace of God, and of the merytes of Christ. The syxth, of good woorkes, and their merites. The seuenth, of the churche of Christ, and of the tookens thereof, and also of the falsse membres of the churche. The eigth, of the Cannonical scripture, and their aucthoritie.
The nyneth, of the aucthoritie of the churche, and of the counsayls, that is to saye, that they must alwayes agree with the holy scripture. The tenth, of the power and vse of the Sacra∣mentes. The leuenth, of Repentaunce. The twelueth of the ministers of the churche & their aucthoritie. The thirtēneth, of the Ceremonies of y• church. The fourtenneth, of the commemoraciō and re∣membraunce of the Sainctes. The fyftenneth, of Images. The syxtenneth, of the Masse. The seuētenneth, that the Sacramēt of the sup¦per ought to be deliuered vnder both the kindes to the laye people. The eightēneth, of the discipline and Nourtour of the churche, both of the spirituail and temporall. the .xix. Of the visitacion of the Christen. The twētyeth, that euery nacion should holde a counsayll among them selues euery yeare to the cō∣seruacton of relligion, and condempnacion of Er∣rowers. Of all these Articles they agreed on both par∣ties, as appeareth by the reatie thereof, whiche is put out in prynte. And when the treatie and consul tacion of both partes was desiuered to the Empe∣tours maiestie, he she wed it to Gaspar Contarenus Cardinall S. Apolinaris the byshop of Romes Ambassadour, and desyred hym to cōsent therunto. Ds iter  The Pope hall But forasmuche as it is not the byshop of Ro∣mes incanyng, to haue any agrement made accor∣dyng
to the scripture, the Cardinal wold no notherOne of his croked pi∣pes hynde∣reth all that thegodly had goe about  greate while before, and those me of greate no∣bilitie besy∣des the excel∣ent learned. wyse consent▪ but so that the Articles should be sent vnto the Byshop of Rome, that he myght conclude therein what should please him at the next general Counsaill that should be holden. And in as muche as many of the States and de grees of the Empyre were discontent there wyth (for they knewe that the Pope woulde neuer be contented wyth that Agreement, seyng it woulde do no small barme and dammage too hys kyng∣dome) they desyred the Emperoures Maiestie to geue them leaue that they myght haue those Ar¦ticles that were agreed of, to bee openly taught in their Churches, whiche thynge also was gracious∣ly graunted them, to do, as the dissolycyon of thesa∣me Parliament declared. Whereupon also the Princes hereafter namedThe prince that receaue the worde of God after ye parliament holden at Re¦gensburg. caused the sayd Articles to be preached in their lan∣des and dominions. Fyrst Duke Otho Henrick of Bayer, Countie Palatine on the Rene. Phillip his brother. The Citie of Regensburg. The Citie of Swyneforth. Whom the Cytie of Rottenburg on the Taw∣ber folowed in the yeare of oure lorde a thousande fyue hundreth fourty and foure. And there wouldeDoctor Ec∣kius vse▪ hhe cuel his ma∣sters conning that is, lying▪ vndoubtedly moa haue folowed, if the deuell had not hyndered them thorou hys membre Doctour Eckius. For he, after he had, all the whyle the dis¦putacion
lasted) done all hys diligence to disanulle the whole booke that the Emperoure gaue theim to agree of as Erroneouse, but coulde not brynge his purpose aboute: and yet muste bee affraied of the Emperoures Maiestie, whiche had caused the Booke to be diligently wrytten thorowe the coun∣sall of hys learned men, or muste elles hane bene proued a lyer wyth the playne truthe thoroughe the wytnesse of the disputers of oure syde, and of his awne felowes: wrote vnto those states and de∣grees that leyned to the Byshoppe of Rome after this soarte. That vnmeete Booke neuer lyked me, ner yet dothe, nor euer shall, wherein I haue founde so ma∣nyThe beuls   al , owes es  errours and fawtes. Wherefore I wyll geue this sentence, that it shall not bee receaued of the Catholikes, as whiche dispyseth the veyne of the old fathers, and smelleth vtterly of Melancthon. And I Eccius haue not agreed thereunto, nor ha∣ue also seene the Booke that was delyuered to the Emperours maiestie, but that certer: of the Luthe∣rians Articles were read vnto me, much lesse haue I agreed vnto the wrytyng that was (as I heare saye) delyuered to the Emperoures Maiestie with the Booke, whiche I neuer sawe. This wrote Eccius, as is mencioned, but howe is pro¦d r▪ vntruely, his awne companions in a supplication wrytten vnto the Vmpeeres and presidentes of the disputacion, wyt nesse: wherein they complayne of Eccius, and of hy sfalsheede, excusyng them sel∣ues: besydes that the presydentes also, as the
Lorde Frederick Countie Palatyne Electour on the Rhene, and the Lord Granuell one of the Em∣peroures Maiesties counsayll, and the Empe∣roures Maiestie hym selfe, excused Eccius compa∣nyons and praysed them: that they had done true∣ly and honestly, and confessed that Eccius had a∣greed and consented to that that they dyd, as then all these thynges maye suffyciently be sene in the treatye it selfe. Nowe the whyle the matter stoode thus as touchyng Rellygion, and by the hynderaunce of the Popes Ambassadoure and Eccius coulde pro∣ceade no forther, was the Turkes matter taken in hande to sende an Armye against him, and to with∣stande hym, and to bee shorte all the States and degrees of the Empyre agreed and consented to helpe agaynste the Turke with men and money, and there was a taxe leuyed the wholle Empyre thorowe, in all the Lordeshyppes thereof, bothe spyrituall and temporall, that euery man shoulde geue accordynge to hys substaunce of an hun∣drethMoney is geuen to sēd an armye a∣gainst the Turke. guldens one gulden. And he that was but a poore man and not worth and hundreth guldens, should paye syxtene pence for his Body. This taxe was counted to be of suche valu∣re, that it was able to kepe an hundreth thousande men, bothe footemen▪ and horssemen three yeares longe. And the Marques of Brādeburg Electour was chosen to be the hyghe and chefe Capitayne ouer all that wholl multytude in the fyelde: And thys Armye shoulde goo forwarde in the Somer
folowyng in the twoo and fourty yeare. These thinges beyng ended and cōcluded, the states & de∣grees of the Empyre departed and went home, and beganne to make preparacion for the money and Armye aboue mencioned. As the Emperoures Maiestie and the states and degrees of the Empyre were assembled and consulted together at Regensburg, the Turke also in the meane while consydered what was meetest for hym to do. For when kynge Iohn Weyda of Hungary was deed, and left a Sonne after hym,Iohn Wey∣da kynge of Hungary dy¦. a Monke, called Brother George Ordinis pau∣linor at Offen, behaued hymselfe so that he was chosen of the Hungars to be the tutor of the Iunge kynge and admitted to be Regent. He beynge promoted to suche an hygth, and beyng affeared of the Turke, whiche came wyth a greate power to∣warde Offen, sought all the wayes that he coulde, to kepe Offen and to abyde in the gouernaunce whereunto he was chosen, and that on thys wyse, He made as thoughe he woulde haue holpen theThe Turke Bassa ese∣geth Pest. Turcke, And when the Turkes Bassa, called Ma∣hometwerck, Lieutenaunt of . Alb▪ greca▪ Grekeweissen∣bourg, came before Pest with a greate Armye of the Turkes to wynne it, the Moncke sent hym a greate soorte of Sowdiars oute of Offen to hel∣pe hym to take in Pest, whiche full shrewdly heard the confessyon of those sely Sowdiars that were layde in Pest by Ferdinandus. For it was done in the Lente, betwene the twenty daye of Martche and the fourth of Aprill.
But after the Turkes Bassa was compelled to departe from thence, the Moncke so fenced and fortifyed hys Gouernaunce and the Cytye, that he trusted to  the same againste all the power of the Turke. Shortely after, at the Emperoures and the kynges Maiesties request, there was a meetely good Armye sent into Hungary by the Empyre, to thyntent to haue brought Offen out of the Monc∣kes power agayne vnder Ferdinandus. But as sone as those Sowdiars were come together, there beganne an horrible Sycknesse among them, so that there died many of them euery daye, and all that were sent thether to strengthen them and to fulfyll their nombre was in vayne. For they dyed more dayly than coulde be sent vnto them. And thereto the Turke hymselfe came downe wyth a greate and a myghtie power to take in Offen, and to dryue oure Company back agayne: Whiche seyng that they were to weake to fyght agaynste so greate a multytude, and were also plaged wyth the pestylence, went vp a lyttell aboue Offen and pytched their tentes and made them a Trenche by Sainct Gertrudes hyll. But for as muche as there dyed euery daye many of them, and the Tur∣kes encreased dayly more and more: They fel vpon oure men the twenty daye of August in the mor∣nyng wyth an horrible shoute and oute crye, but oure men defended them selues manfully, and com∣pelled the Turckes to flye back agayne into their their Tentes. The daye after our men seyng them¦selues
to weake, beganne to consult that it was best to flye, and in the nyght after the horsemen went o∣uer the Tonaw. And thereuppon the Capitaynes that kept the watche the same nyght▪ toke with thē the other watchemen before the tyme that they should haue left the watche, and gat ouer the water in Shyppes. When the Commen soarte of the sow¦diars perceaued that they were forsaken of the hor∣semen, they fledde in all the hast, and as many as could obtaine the Shyppes eskaped, many were drouned that woulde haue Swymmed ouer the water, all the reaste, whiche were well eight thou∣sandeA notable  ordi¦ lost  Hungary. were pitifully kylled of the Turkes. And the Turkes obtayned suche a notable soorte of Gonnes and Instrumentes of warre, as had not bene before sene in Hungary. And it was the Com∣men sayeng of all the Soudiars, that that misera∣ble worke was begonne by the treason of WillyamWillyam of Rogendorpe ▪ of Rogendorpe, whiche at that tyme was chefe ca∣pitaine of the Armie. Whereuppon they also haue made a Ballett, whiche they openly synge, where∣in they exhorte all other Capitaynes to be warre that they do no suche shamefull deade. And let no Sowdiar whether he be of hyghe or lowe de∣gree, that hath a mynde to honestye, set so muche ether by money or rewardes, that he woulde ther∣fore be a shamed to all the worlde, so that shame should be spoken and songen of hym for euer of all them that shall lyue after hym all christendom ouer. But we wyll come agayne to the Turkes mat∣ters. That Tyrrant caused foure score prysoners
of the Christen to be brought starck naked beforeThe Turke▪ eweth. lxxx Christians in peeces for a pastyme. his Sonne, and for hys pleasure and pastyme he∣wed them into small peeces. Certenne of the no∣bilitye that were taken prysoners, were caried in∣to Turkye and there compelled with greate and paynefull mysery to be slaues. After this victory, he Imagyned howe he my∣ght take Offen in. And therefore called vnto hym the chefe Lordes of Hungary, as Valentyne Te∣reck, Peter Petroreyck, Vrban Vathniani, and other that folowed hys ordinaunce and stuffe, tho∣roughe whose counsayll he brought his Armye in to Hungarye: and sayde vnto them, that if they coulde fynde the meanes to delyuer Offen into his handes, he woulde make them the Rulers ouer Hungarye. Vppon this promesse they allured the Monck, and the Quene and her Sonne and the other lordes that were within Offen to agree to their request sayeng the best that they coulde of the Turke, that he woulde be good and graciouse vnto them, if they woulde yelde vp the Cytye into his handes, and re vnto hym in to hys tentes, shewynge them on the other syde that they were not able to resyste and wythstande hys power. Nowe when they vppon this coumfort came out of the Cytye, to receaue and take the Turke for theThe Turke breaketh hys promesse, and excercyseth tyranny. ruler & father of their Coūtrey, was that promesse not kept vnto them, but they were streight wayes taken prysoners, and Offen was taken inne by for∣ce. And there was suche a surie and woodnesse ex∣cercised out of hād against y• indwellers both citizēs & soudiars, & against wiues & maidens, that a stony
hart woulde haue pytyed it. For after they had moste shamefully misused them, they were ether kylled, or caried awaye into a straūge countrey into extreame mysery and wretchednesse. After this the Turke caused the Quene and her Sonne, and the Moncke, and many other of the Courtyers to bee sent vnto Lyppa, whyche is a stronge Castell. And then sent oute three Com∣panies into thre coastes of Hungerlande to robbe and steale, in euery companye twelue thousande men of whiche the fyrste coulde do no great harme, for they coulde not come into Mehrer lande by the meanes of the Water, where their purpose was to haue made hauock. The second Company came all moste as farre as Vienne. The third made hauock in the landes of the lordes of Balassa, and kylled ma¦ny poore men, and caried many awaye for pryso∣ners. In the meane whyle sent kyng Ferdinādus his Ambassadours the Lorde Nicolas the Earle of Salme, and the lorde Sigismundt of Harmonsto∣ne to Offen to the Turke, to Take a Truce. Andan l yeare. when they had obtayned the same for an half yeare▪ and made it sure on both the sydes, the Ambassa∣dours toke their way home againe to the kyng. And the Turke when he had furnyshed OffenThe turcke eth▪ xx. thousand mē¦ wyth twenty thousand men, tooke his Iourney to Constantinople. But the Turkes that were left in the Cytye of Offen kept not the Truce longe, but fell often oute, and toke the Christen prysoners at Vnwares, whyche thynge caused oure men also
to do the same with them, whereupon there folo∣wed a cōtinuall Robbing and Roauing on both the sydes, the whole wynter ouer, so that some tyme the Turkes somtyme our men had the victory.The Turke geueth alē tyne Teeck his reward. The Turke, as he departed, toke valētyne Te∣reck, thorou whose helpe he gatt Offen, and caused an yeron chayne to be put about his necke, and cast him in to the Tonaw by Grekes weissenburg, and so rewarded hym for his true seruice.The Turke taketh cer∣tayn Castels in▪ The Turke assaulteth the citie of fyue∣churches. He also sodenly fell vpon these Castels and toke them in, zeckzaart, zeckehen, Baranianara, and o∣ther that laye by them. He also toke his pleasure vpon the citie of Fyuechurches, and assaulted it, but founde lytel pleasure there. For the Indwellers de fended themselues well. But they that were left within Offen fell twyse out at vnwares vpon Grane, and the towne Kakat that lieth ouer against Grane, on this syde the To∣naw they pitifully cleane robbed and pulled doune: so that there was an excidyng myserable worke in Hungary this yere. Besyde this Armie in Hungary had the TurckThe Turck hathaarm in Pelopoe so. an other myghtie armie at this time both by water and by lande in the Ile Peloponesus, nowe called Morea, wherewith he droue the Venecians from all the Cities that they had there, and tooke them in. The whyle the Turck was thus woode dyd the Emperoure Charles prepare hym selfe in Ita∣ly, Spayne, Sycyll and other of hys landes and I∣les with a notable great Nauye, wherein he had a good armye, well foure and twenty thousand men, of whiche syxe thousande were dutchemen, whose
chefe Capitaine was Master George of Regens∣burg, and sayled into Affrica vnto the Citie of Al∣gier, whiche Barbarossa had in. And although the Poape disswaded the Emperoure that he shoulde not take suche an vntymely shyppyng, as to wytt, in Wynter, at Luke, where they were both toge∣ther▪The Empe∣rour and the Pope to ge∣ther at Luke. yet must the Emperoures purpose forward. For he hoped to haue dryuen Barbarossa oute of that hauen, and so to haue had none Enemy whom he should haue neaded to feare the somer folowing, by the meanes whereof he coulde the better haue withstandeth the Turke by Sea. Nowe when he hauyng a prosperouse wynde, was come with the aforesayde Armie to Algier, and brought his Sow¦diarsThe Empe∣roures passa∣ge to Algier. oute of the Shyppes, and gotten them on lande, than beganne sodenly suche an horryble tem∣pest to aryse vppon Sea, with wynde and rainne, and lasted three dayes longe wythout ceassyng: that not onely the Sowdiars wacksed doussye in the heed and syck, but also through the violence of the Storme there were more than an hundreth and thyrtye Spyppes beaten shaken to geather, and peryshed, wherein many men, and specially all their packes and baggage, and all their vyttalles, and the ordinaunce to beseaghe the Cytie wythall was lost, of whiche thynges our men had no great Ioye. Nowe when they of Algier sawe that oure men were in suche greate necessitie, they fell oute of the Cytie, and kylled them that kept the watche, and
fell vppon them that were in the Tentes with sha∣tes and hagbushes, but were yet dryuen back a∣gayne into the Cytie of the Spanyardes. After∣warde they laye in the waye to hynder certayne knightes of the Rodes in a strayte waye (of whome and hundreth folowed the Emperoure agaynsie the vnfaythfull) tyll the Emperoure came and helped them with the doutch Sowdiars. But when the Enemies had shott seuen thousand of the Ita∣talians thorou wyth hagbushes, and the reast we∣re dryuen to flye, than the Emperoure exhorted the dutchemen to withstande, and saide, ye beloued dutchemen helpe your Emperoure thys daye, or elles neuer, And euen as he spake those woordes, were they that stoode next by hym in order kylled with a gonne whiche thynge yet nether feared nor Amased hym any thynge at all. When the dut∣che sowdiars perceaued that, they gat a Courage, and althoughe they coulde not shote for the great∣nes of the raynue, yet they droue the Enemies backe agayne into the Cytie wyth Speare and sworde. But for as muche as all their victualles were spente, and (as is before sayde) destroyed wyth the violence of the Storme, the Emperoures Ma∣iestie made prouision to departe, and to the entent that the sowdiars myght haue some what to eate, the whyle they shoulde sayle, they toke the horsses oute of the Shyppes, kylled them and ate them, and afterward brought the sowdiars into the shyppes
that were left, and sayled from thence. And in the saylyng homewarde they were also in greate. Ieo∣pardy and perel vpon the sea, and many of the ship∣pes and men were drowned. Let this muche bee ynough of this viage. He that wyll knowe further thereof, may reade the whole history, whiche Nico∣las Villagagnome a knyght of the Rhodes hath diligently written, which also was present thereby hymselfe. In the meane whyle dyed the Godly ChristenDuke Hen∣ry of Saxon dieth. prince Duke Henry of Saxon, Duke Georges bro∣ther, and his sonne Maurice, whiche after maryed the Landgraue of Hesses daughter, succeded in the gouernaunce. The pestilence reigned greuously in many pla∣ces this .xli. yeare, and specially at Vien in Osten∣rick. there dyed well .xviij. thousande the whole so∣mer all moste was weete and rayne. by the meanes whereof also the wyne could not come at his due sea son, and was very sower. And yet was this yeares r  more wyne wacksen, then in the three yeares folo∣wyng: Wherein the grapes were all dryed vp and wythered, vndoubtedly for oure vnthanckfulnesse sake, and for the mysuse thereof. THe yeare .MDxlij. in the beginning of the yeare there came certayn souldiours, Ita∣lians borne into a towne in Histria called Maran, not farre from Tryest, belonging in Hi¦str is taken in. to Ferdinandus. There were about thre hundreth of them, and the second mornyng after they came into the towne, they cried Frantza, Frantza and kept them together with their wordes and other weapons.
Nowe in the towne was very fewe people, and vnape to warr, by the meanes wherof they yelded them selues. This towne (as men suppose) dyd the Frenche kynge therfore cause to be taken in, to let the turck in ther in to styrmarcke, kernton and the other landes nyghe: ther vnto, for it was a goode hauen, and meate for that purpose: whyche thyng yet God hath thus longe graciously preserued vs from. In the meane whyle ther was preparacion madeAn armye a∣gainst the Turck. the whole Empyre thorow, and a myghtye greate armye gathered to send in to vngary (as was con∣cluded at Regensburge) agaynste the turcke: and ther were men sent out of all the coastes of Dutche lande, whyche came to geather harde by Vyenne. Nowe euen when they shulde goforwarde wyth the wholl multytude togeather, whyche were a∣boue an hundreth thousande, yet was therby the meanes of hyndraunce, no greate thynge brought to passe for it was in the later ende of harueste, so that it wolde be shortely tyme to prepare for theyr wynter Campe. Yet the chefe and hyghe captayn for that he woulde nott be counted to haue gone forth in vayne, went forwarde and beseged Peste,Pest is be∣seaged of our men. whyche the turcke hadde wonne the yeare before in wynter, and assaulted it wyth the greatlosse of our men. And as they in the citye fell often oute to feyghtDuke Mau∣rice in Ieo∣perdy of ta∣kynge. wyth oure men, duke Mauryce of Saxon play∣ed the man, and folowed after the enemyes so farre from hys awne company that he was com∣passed rounde aboute of the turckes and taken,
But because they coulde get nothyng of hym in his complete harnesse, they woulde leuer haue takene of Du∣ke Maurice Ieen eth mā¦fully to dely¦uer his ma∣ster. hym therout alyue, the whyle the Turckes were aboute hym to haue shyfted hym oute of his harne∣sse, one of hys Ientellmen soughte so manfully to delyuer hys master, tyll the reaste of the horse men myssed theyr master and came to help hym, and vt¦terlie delyuered hym from the Enemyes. But the Ientylman that fought so manfullye for him was kylled of the turckes. In the meane ceason ther came a great horribleA sicknesse in the Camp sycknesse amonge the soudyars, whyche wacksed greater and greater, by the meanes wherof they were compelled to brekeup the Campe and gyue the soudyars leaue to departe. So that haply tho¦rou the handyworck of God, whyche wyll moare punyshe vs wyth the Turcke, as we then daly wel deserue with vnthanckfulnesse and with the perse∣quntynge of his woorde, ther was no moare done, but that we loste bothe our men and monye and all oure labour, and made our selues mockyng stoc¦kes to the Turcke. At the departynge from thence they so dyed ofThe grenous¦ie of ye sick¦nes in. Duga . the afforsayde sycknesse, that skant the tenth man came home agayne. Thys sycknesse was so conta∣gyouse, that yf one butt blewe vpon a nother he muste dye, and the whyle they laye, they were full of fantesyes as though they had bene madde, and as on as that madnesse was gonne from them, they dyed by and by. Very fewe recouered that had this syckenesse, but they that dyed not of it, lay wounderouse long syck.
Whyle the Marquesse of Brandenburge, as is for sayde, laye wych thys multitude in Vngary,Warre be∣twene ye Du∣ke of Saxon & Brunswick in the meane whyle the famouse prynce Ihon Fry¦derycke Duke of Saxon. Electour. &c. and Phi∣lyppe Landgraue of Hesse and they that were in leaghe wyth them toke in to waghes a reasonable goode sorte of horsse men and fote men, agaynste Duke Henrye of Brunswycke. The occasyon of thys warre was, that the Duke of Brunswycke, after he hadde of shamefully and hyghly slaundred bothe the Electoure and the Landgraue wyth o∣penlye prynted bokes, dyd them of Goslar and Brunswycke whyche bothe weare in leaghe wyth the afforsayd prynces, manye and greate iniuryes, as that he belayed the wayes to these twoo cyty∣es, toke theyr cytezens presoners, toke raunsome for them, & yet killed them. And although he were often commaunded to leaue those proude poyn∣tes, by the Emperoure and the kynge of the Ro∣maynes, yet woulde he not leaue hys euell pur∣pose: & sayd, that it shoulde coste hym hys wholle Dukedome, yet he woulde leue it. Nouwe in as muche as ther coulde no meane, be founde to helpe the matter, the aboue mencyoned Noble Prynces and they that were in leaghe wyth them, were dryuen to defende ther felowes, membres of the same leaghe. Therefore wente they forwarde in Iu∣ly with their soudyars (whiche were aboute two and twenty thousand) in to the land of Brunswick. There the cities and castelles were yelde vppe one
after a nother, and were wyth frenshyppe gracy∣ouslye receaued and defended, and euery man suf∣fred to kepe hys awne goodes wyth out any losse or hynderaunce. But suche as wolde wyth stande, were compelled to be obedyente. When he of Brunswyke sawe that, he mannedThe duke of Brunswyke flyeth. hys beste and strongeste house, called Woluenbu∣tell, whych lyeth in a flatte euenfelde wyth strong walles and water ditches, wyth hys awne subiec∣tes, and wente hys waye, as thoughe he woulde fetchemo men and shortely come agayne and helpe them, commaund ynge them to playe the men, and kepe the house tyll he came agayne. They hadde al¦so all thynges ynoughe in the Castel that was nea¦defull ther to, yf they shoulde haue bene long be∣seaged.Woluenbu∣tel is beseged Nowe when the princes came before the Castel, they sent word thyther that they shuld haue peace and a safe conduyte to come oute wyth all that they hadde, yf they woulde yelde vppe the Castell. Ther vnto answered the captaines that were with in the Castell, that they shulde come agayne threWoluenbu∣tel is vntap∣led for .iii. peares. yeare after, and then woulde they geue them an Answer to that question. For they trusted to kepe that Castell so longe, they thoughte that it was nott possyble to wynne it, if it were nott hun∣gred oute, and they hadde made prouision for thre yeares, wherefore they woulde not yelde it vp. Vpon thys prowde Answere, the prynces and the cytye of Brunswyke treuched in thre
places, and pytched theyr tentes. And the Land graue came so nyghe wyth hys ordynaunce, that a man myghte caste a stoane in to the Castell dyt∣che oute of hys trenche. And when they hadde begonne to shote the ordynaunce, the trompettoure of the Castell syt∣tynge aboue in the tower, beganne to playe thys ballatte to anger the Prynces wyth all. If thy pastime repent ye, than get ye home again. &c.The mening was, y• they shuld at the length repēt them of their ioznep, and go hom, and winue no thing. Therwyth all was the Land graue so angrye, that he leuelled al his ordinaunce against the tower, and so shott ther at, that the tower, and the trompet∣ter wyth all hys pypynge fell downe. Thys fallynge downe of the tower made them that were in the Castell so affearde, that they that dwellte in the countreye harde by the Castell beganne streyght wayes to come oute oneThey fly out of the Castel ouer the wal¦les & ditches after a nother swymmynge ouer the dytche by a duffhouse. And when ye other mercked that many of theyr men were gonne, and were to weeke to wythstande the greate power that was there a∣gaynst: them, they yelded vppe both them selues and the Castell vnto the Prynces. Afterward was the Castel and the wholleThe Gospel is preached in the land of Brunswick. lande sett in an order, and the Gospell (whyche be∣fore was kepte from it throughe that tyranne the Duke of Brunswycke) ordeyned to be preached therinne. And when they hadde ordeyned all thyn¦ges after the beste facyon, and the Duke of Brun¦swycke appeared no where wyth any sowdyars
and the Empyre requyred. But the Emperoure coulde smell what the Pope meante. Wherefore he vtterlye refused that councell, and exhorted hym by wrytyng, that he woulde rather see thatt the Frentch kyng kepte peace, to thynthent that the Turcke myghte be wythstanded: than to call a councel at suche an Vnmeete time, which might be an hynderaunce to the other purpoose to make peace. Afterwarde the Emperoures Mayestye prepared hymselfe after the beste facyon to wyth stand the Frentche kynge and hys partetakers. Aboute thys tyme dyd the a boue mency∣oned Prynces, Duke Otho Henrycke, and Phy∣lyppe prn¦ces and   the Go¦spell hys brother bothe countye palatynes on the rhyne, and the cytyes Regensburgh and Swyne∣forthe, receaue the Gospell: for whyche thynge they were compelled to take muche harme, and specyallye they of Regensburge, to whome Duke Wyllyam of Bayer did al the hurte that the could:Duke Willi¦am  Baier th to v. and forbadde all hys subyctes, that none of them shulde carye anye thynge to Regensburge or by or sell wyth them, or yf anye man dyd, he muste nott come agayne in to hys lande, and must leese all hys goodes. Thys was a greate hyndraunce to the cy¦tye, of Regensburge. For it lyeth in the myd∣des of the lande of Bayer, Yeth hath God gracy¦ously preserued it. In the begynnynge of the herueste therGrassehop∣pers. came oute of Lytowe, thorou the land of pole and
through schlesye and vnto the land of myssen great multytudes of Grassehoppers flyinge, and layed them downe in the aboue mencyoned landes by greate multytudes, an hundreth dutch myle long and ae vppe all that was grene in the felde and lo we medowes. They were as greate as a mannes fynger, and some of them greater, they hadde sca∣les as it hadde bene harnesse vpon them, and as it were an hatte vpon theyr heades lyke an olde row¦stye year on sallet, and were harde lyke an horne, so that a man coulde skante treade them in sonder. They had four winges as it wer, which wereread speckelde, some of them were yellowe and gray and of other speckelde coloures. And where so euer they layed them downe in the felde, there they laye well a foate thycke from the grounde. And specyallye in the lande of Pole they saye that they laye an halfe elne thick from the grounde. When the sunne beganne to schyne then they flewe vppe by greate heapes, in battell order so thycke to gether, that they shadowed the sonne lyke a clowde. They flewe also as swystlye as o∣ther birdes, a wholl dutche myl befor they reasted. In the lande of myssen they came as farre as to the water Mylda, for ther they came nott. Euerye man thoughte that then shoulde a greate deathe haue folowed in the same landes, where as yet hy∣ther to ther hath none bene hearde of. Haplye it was a warnynge (as certen learned men wryte) that we should take hiede that
we myght be able to withstande, if the Turck came in wyth suche a multitude of people, from whyche thynge God gracyously defende vs. In Italye vpon the .xiii. daye of Iune therA eartha∣e in . was a fearfull and an horryble Earthquake by Flo¦rence, whyche threwe downe manye Chymney∣es in Florence, and almooste a wholle lytell towne lyinge not farre from it called Scharbarya, and destroyed many men. They wryte also that in Turckye a lytellAn earth∣quae in ye towne lyinge not farre from Solonychyo, from whence the Saffren cometh, was destroyed wyth men and women and all that was ther in wyth an Earthquake. They saye also that ther stode ouer Con∣stantynople    ple an horryble blasynge sterre .xl. dayes longe, and that in the same dayes, in Iune and Iu∣lye, there was there an horryble weether, and an Earthquake. They saye also that a Dragon burnt the Turckes Castell and treasure, and that ther came a greate multitude of wolues rennynge into the cyty, whyche dyd men muche harme. And ma∣ny suche wounders done at that tyme were wryt∣ten oute of Constantynople, wherof, as me semeth some be but lyes. Howe beit I lett euerye man thynck ther in as shal please hym, and beleue what he wyll. Let thys be ynoughe of thys yeare. The Brabanters beyng prouoked of Marten van Rosheyme rusch et in to the lande of Gulyck▪The Bra∣ ll to the land of Gulick. and burne certen Castels & lytel townes, or robbe and make hauocke of them. They manne Duren, Gulycke, yttard, Sustern and Hynsberg, which
were yelded vp vnto them. On the other syde the Duke of Cleue, after he hath gathered an armye round aboute oure all places wythstandeth the po∣wer of the Brabanders: Whyche after they had made Hensburg stronge & entended also to Fence Duren, entred into fyght wyth hys Enemyes, Wherein when there were many kylled on both partyes the fyght was ended. Syttard and Gulyck, because the walles were ouerthrowen of the Brabanders, the Duke of Cleue causeth to be strongly walled agayne, and beseaged Duren and compelleth them to yelde vp the towne in the ende of December. Thys yeare Iames the fyft kynge of Scott∣land,The kyng of Scotland dyeth. beyng .xxxiij. yeare of age dyed in Decem∣ber, leauyng but one onely doughter alyue of two yeare of age, borne of hys second wyfe, ouer whom he ordeyned tutors and gouerners of the Realme the Cardynall of S. Andrewes, and the lorde Ha∣melton. IN the yeare of our Lord, 1543. euenA Councell kept at Nu∣reburg. in the begynnynge of the yeare was a conuocation or Counsell kept at Nu∣remburgh, at the whyche conuocation was present kyng Ferdinandus wyth hys two el∣dest sonnes, and besydes them the moost parte of the Ambassadours and deputies of the other prin∣cesAnother counsel ap∣poynted at Spyer. of the Empyre. And when all theyr actes and doynges were prolonged vntyll after Easter, ther was another day appoynted to be kept at Spyer, where the Emperours Mayestye shoulde perso∣nally appeare hym selfe.
In the moneth of Ianuary the Emperours ma∣iestyAn army sent by them p  land. sent out of spain a mighty army bothe on hors∣back & on foot wherof the erle of Aultete was capi∣taine, into ye land of the Mores called Mauritania, enge in the coastes and borders of Afryca, ouer a¦gaynste Spayne, to inuade the kynge of the cytye of tremetz, wherof also the kyngdome hath hys name: because that by the helpe of the Moores he hadde proflygated and expelled hys brother, vnto whome the gouernaunce of the kingdome by right dyd appertayne whyche soughte redresse and suc∣cour at the handes of themperours maiesty. This armye arryued the .xxvii. daye of Ianuary at the cytye of Tybyda lyenge by the sea syde, where they founde a greate multytude of Mores, which soone auoyded, and lefte ye cyty vnto the Spanyar¦des. After thys they marched from Tybyda to∣wardes tremetz, and endamaged the Mores by the waye whyche were departed from Tybyda: vntyll at the laste they tourned them selues again and made a conflycte and skyrmyssynge wyth the Spanyardes, whyche dyd soone beate them of and putt them to flyght agayne. In the meane season departed the kyngeof . oute of the cytye of tremetz wyth hys fyghtynge men, and the beste treasures that was wyth in the cyty, and camped on a hyll next vnto the cyty. And when he perceyued the Mores to be smytten and putt to flyghte, he hasted inconti∣nently to succour thē: but he wāe euen as much as they whome he came to succour had wanne before.
Nowe when the kynge was departed out of the ci¦tye,The city of Tremetz ta∣ken. the Spanyardes went and toke it wyth all theyr armye, whervpon the chyef Ruler that was yet left in the cytye caused themperoure to be ac∣ceptet and proclamed for theyr souereygne. Which cytye was wonne on tewesdaye the .vi. daye of Fe¦bruary. The Frenche kynge proceded in the lande of Lu¦xeeburgheThe French king and the Duke of le¦e pro their marshi¦al affaires. as he hadde begonne the yeare before, to waste to destroye to ouerthrowe, and to take in possessyon al that euer he might ouercome, neither was their any to resist hym, sauing that ye townes which were able to abide a blowe, were furnyshed with souldiours. In like maner did also william duke of Cleue in the land lieng by the Maze, again¦steThe Ladye Mary sen∣deth an ar∣my againste the Duke of Cleue. whom the Lady Mary sister vnto themperou∣res maiesty, and regent of the Lower partes of Du¦cheland, prepared and assembled an host of Launce knightes being in nombre about ten thousand, and aboue a thousand horses, by the which she caused ye towne of Sytterd pertaining to the duke of Cleue and lieng about thre miles from Masetright, to be beseged. But when the said army had martched in haste vntyll the thyrde daye, and came to the sayd towne on easter euen whyche was the .xxiiii. daye of Marche, pytchynge there theyr Campe, and intendynge to refreshe them selues with foode andThe Cleue∣uers appro¦che towar∣des▪ the Bra¦banders. reste after theyr hungre, and paynfull iourneye sustayned: The Duke of Cleue approched wyth hys armye, whyche by estymacyon exceded nott the nombre of them that were sente by the sayde ladye Marye (as I am infourmed of waryours
that hadde ben in and amonge the sayde company) whyche nombre beynge espyed a farre of, caused the Brabanders to make an alarme, thynkynge none other but that the Prynce of Orenge, Rena∣tus counte of Nassowe, who hadde the yere be∣fore for the mooste parte hyndered the enterpryse of Martyne van Rossem agaynste Brabante, was come to ayde them. Wherefore manye of them ran oute before the Campe nott halfe beynge armed. Neuertheles they brought them selues in battayl aray at all aduentures, to prouyde in case the said companye were theyr frendes, that they myghte honorablye and tryumphauntly receyue them: yf nott, that they myghte take the lesse hurte. But when the hoost of Cleue approched near in hys bat¦tell raye, the Brabanders espyed the whyte Cro∣sses in theyr banners, whereby they knewe assured¦lye that they were enemyes. Wherefore they dyd also marche forwarde in theyr ordre and araye a∣gaynste theyr enemyes. And when they hadde wel vewed and beholden one another on bothe syedes, the horsemen of bothe partyes caused theyr trom∣pettesnflict e the Ceueers & ders to blowe, and theyr companye to stande by valyauntly. Vpon thys dyd also the pyetons inuade one another, wyth these woordes. Whatt coun∣tre man, do we fynde one another here? and furth wyth rushed to gether lyke valyaunte souldyours: I so muche thatt the horsemen of the Cleueners. after harde byckerynge were soone put to flyghte by the Brabanders. Butt theyr pyetons defended them selues
so muche the more manfullye, and pressed vpon the Brabanders after suche sorte as they were con¦strayened to flee backwarde. And whan they that were formoost beganne to drawe backwardes, the hole hoste, fled to gether in suche wyse as theyThe victory of the Cleue∣ners. coulde nott be stopped: Whereupon the Cleueners hasted after them, and smote downe all that euer they myghte ouertake. And yf the horsemen of the Brabanders hadde nott smytten the horsemen of the Cleueners, and turned them from the sayde pursuete, of all the pyetons of the Brabanders shoulde nott one haue escaped on lyue: Butt by the meanes of the sayde horsemen there were not myssed manye more then two thousande and thre hundreth at the nexte musterynge after. In thys conflycte gate the Duke of Cleue besydes the boutye of them that were slayene a∣boute syxe tenne or seuen tenne peaces of ordy∣naunce, wyth theyr munycyons and appurtenaun∣ces. Wherefore he became so hyghemynded that he assured hym selfe to be able to resyste all the power of themperoure, but howe thys matter suc¦ceded wyth hym shalbe sayde hereafter in the next yeare. Durynge these affayres, there was noThe slepe of themperour. cettayntye knowen, concernyng the Emperours Mayestye thoroughout all Dutchlande, where or in what condytyon he was. Manye sayed he was dead▪ wherevpon there was muche money & great waghers laid betwen marchaunt and marchaunt.
Some sayde he warred before Argyeres, and in summe, all mens sayenges were vncertayne, in so muche that the practyses of certayn Astronomers were partelye veryfyed vpon hym. For they hadde prophecyed, that themperoure shoulde slepe thys yere, in suche sorte as thoroughout al Ducheland but fewe men shoulde knowe howe or where he was, or whatt he toke in hande. But the nexte yeare folowing it was perceiued that he had prepa¦red himself in spayn against Fraunce and the duke of Cleue, with a great power. And leaste Spayne should be left without a head and Gouernour, he had made and establyshed his sonne Philip kynge therof. After that the conuocacion or Councell of No∣nburghThe s f the e∣he e nd th∣ d de. was dispersed king Ferdinandus prepa¦red hymselfe wyth hys affynytye, towardes the solemnysatyon of the maryage of hys doughter whyche was betroughted to Sygysmunde the younge kynge of Poles. Whyche feaste was kept and celebrated wyth great pompe and solem∣nytye in the cytye of Cracowe, whyche is the chyefe cytye of the Lande of Poles, called Polo∣nya▪ begynnyng the .iiii. daye of maye, and con∣tynuyng manye dayes after. But when the tyme was come wherein they hadde appoynted to shewe pastymes and to vse iustynges, there chaunced suche a coulde and raynye whether contynuynge manye dayes that manye became vnlustye, and had no delyte in pastymys and myrth.
While there was suche myrth and pastime vsedHungary in∣uaded by the Turke. in the Lande of Poles, the Turke prepared hym selfe in Hungary, to bryng a present vnto kyng Fer¦dinando at that feaste, in so muche that the .xxiiij. day of Iuly next folowyng he beseged the stronge Castell of Grane, with a great power, and brought with hym about a fyfty great peces of ordinaunce, all wall breakers, wherewith he shott both nyght & day very uttragiously, and cast downe the walles in many places so that they of oure syde within the Castell could not occupie their great ordinaunce by the space of two dayes. And when this shutyng of the Turke had continued vntill the eight daye of August he caused thesayd Castell the next morowe after to bee assaulted with an excedyng greate po∣wer: And when the same assault had cōtinued about fyue houres, the Turkes were fayne to drawe back¦wardes againe with greate losse. But whatsoeuer God by the administracion of the Germaynes had preserued in Ferdinandus kyngdom, the same was by his owne Capitaynes and seruauntes betrayed and deliuered. For many Launceknyghtes of the Germayne nation sawe with their eyes, that the chief Capitaine of the Castell called Salamancko deliuered letters to the Turke with his owne han∣des ouer the walles, at the tyme of the said assault. Whereupon the Turkes came by heapes the .xix. day of August next folowyng, to take the Castell in possession, accordyng to the promise whiche the vp∣per Capitayne had made them: whiche notwithstā∣dyng were put of agayn by the violence and power of the Germaines that knewe not of the sayde con∣spiracy
commaunded the same sincerely and purely to bee preached thoroughout all his diocese and iurisdic∣tion. But this greued the Chapiter and the Citie of Collyn very sore, wherfore they haue also hither to endeuoured them selues to worke vnto hym mu¦che wo, sorowe and persecution, here and there by the hier powers. God vouchsafe to preuente their bloudy counsailes and deuices, and graunte them to be taken in their owne snares, that his name in them may be sanctified. Amen. This yere also dyed at Ingolstade doctor IohnThe death of doctor . Eckius a faithfull seruaunt and chāpion of the Po∣pe, and a defender of the abhominable Papacy. But as his lyfe was full of all vngodlynes, vnclennes & blasphemy, so was his ende myserable harde and pi¦tifull: insomuche that his laste worde (as it is noted of many credible persones) was this, in case the fou∣re thousand guldens were ready the matter were dispatched. Some say that the Pope had graūted hym a certaine Deanerych, whiche he shoulde haue redemed from the courte of Rome with the saied summe. And although some of his adherentes would fayne haue extolled hym into heauen, wher∣fore also the sayde rumour was myghtely resisted with vayne excuses, yet haue they not preuayled, but opened his shame so muche the more. the .xxvi. day of Nouember a certayn womanA wōderfull birth besides Basell▪ besydes Basell in a village called Renach, brought furth a wonderfull burthen namely twoo chyldren fast together and double from the nauell vpwarde, so that both their bellyes and brestes were growen together vnto their neckes, their heades beyng par¦ted
lokinge one vpon an other, and embrasing eche other with their armes. Frō the nauel downeward it was but one childe wyth one arse, membres of a manchilde▪ two legges and two fete, & the one was alyue when it came into the worlde, but it lyued not past an houre. Also the fourth day of Iune were sene at WhitēWonderfull visions sen. dall not far frō S. Ioachinis valley many & sundry visions. As .ii. cities, against whō  many Lyōs with gonnes, & the reapeared many visages & figu¦res of men wt wonderful beardes, one prayeng after the shape of Christ, an other striking of a mās head, & an other sitting vpon a Camell was destroied of a lyon. There apeared also .ij. maidens, the one of thē playeng on a lute, with other like wonderfull fanta¦sies: whiche altogether (after my iudgement) may represent vnto vs the pore flock of Christ scatteredThe interpre¦tacion o the vision. through out Germany & Duchlād, which is assaul∣ted & persecuted of many lyons, that shede much in nocēt bloud, & yet is alwaies preserued & enlarged through the earnest prayer of faithfull Christians, according to the significacion of the lesser citie of thē both, which increassed & became larger & larger the more she was assaulted of the lyons. IN the yere of our lord. 1544. the EmperoureThe councel of pre. Charles came againe into Germany, & helo a councell at Spier, as it was apointed at Nur¦renburg the yere before: but what was there done & concluded, may all men perceiue by the breakyng vp of the same councell. In the meane season dyed y• right & peaceable prince Lodowike Palatine by y• Rene, electour imperial &c. who as touchīg his pea¦ceable behaueours, might be called the father of the
Empire: For the celebration of whose buriall them∣perour & the kyng went to Heidelbergh. And after this was the election by the Rene graunted by the Emperours mai. to duke Frederike palatie, which had the daughter of Christierne king of Dēmark, & had hitherto kept his court at Newemarke. This andable prince after y• he had aspired to this digni∣, endeuoured himselfe to y• vtermost of his power to solowe the steppes of his brother of laudable me¦mory. Almighty God vouchsaue of his grace to pre¦serue & increase hym & all lyke peaceable princes to the welfare of the christen common welth. While this passed about the Rene, themperoure caused his capitaines to take vp a great multitude of mē in the cōtreis of Germany, Burgūdy, & Spai¦ne, a sent first. 7600. Germayns. 4800. Span∣yardes. 12800. Italians, with. 1500. horses of whō was chief capitain markes de quass to inuaded the Frenche kyng through Piemont. And where the said army came within a duche myle of Carniol (for so it is called of the warriours) they were assaulted of the kynges hoste, whiche was but litell stronger then themperours hoste. Wherfore they brought themselues bothe at once in battellraye, & stode on two hilles, whence the one might well beholde the other, & betwene them beneth was a depe muddy valley, with dyches full of foul water. Nowe when neither part would geue ouer his holde, & auēture through the mudde, & the dyches, there was many a shot made betwene them, vntyll at the last the said Markes put furward the Spanyardes, promising them comfortably to assiste them, with the Italians and with the horsemen, insomuch that they attem∣pted
with their armures and artillery to wade tho¦rough the mudde and myre against their enemies, whereupon the sayde enemies stoode styll vntyll they sawe the Emperours hooste troubled and pe∣stered in the myre, in suche sorte as they could kepe none ordre, for euery man had ynough to do to sa∣ue hymselfe out of the mudde. Then went theyWith their ordinaunce. downe easely with their ordinaunce & fell vpon thē that were entangled, & toke certaine horsemē whi∣che had brokē the aray that was made agayn. And vpon this they russhed among them without vio∣lence. Nowe when the Duchemen and the Span∣yardes trusted that theyr superiours woulde suc∣cour them wyth the Italians and the horsmen, the sayde bolde and stoute champion turned hys backe with them and fled, sufferyng thesayde poore men to perysh without any succour. So that in this bat¦tayll were slayne about .viij. M. Dutchemen and Spanyardes, among whom were many olde & ex∣pert warriours, and .ij. M. of them were taken pry¦soners,The kynd∣nes of Swit¦chers. whiche were well intreated of the Swy∣chers, as prysoners, & by them cōducted out of the kynges dominions, vntill they came within a littell dayes yourney of Geneue. And if the Swychers had not shewed them suche kyndnes they had bene all kylled of the Frenchemen, besides that they were so taken & spoyled of all thinges euen to their shertes. Wherfore they be herein muche bounde to thanke the Swytchers. After this, when the conuocatiō or counsaill was cōcluded at Spyers, &A counse∣lour o Nur∣renburgh ta∣ken. euery prince departed homeward to his owne, syr Ierome Bomegardener, a learned mā y• feared god being sent to the said coūsail frō the towne of Nurrē
myght haue ouercome & subdued all Fraunce with out any notable losse of his men. For the warriours of the Frenche kyng were become so faintharted yt they durst in no place resist their enemies. To the which act themperour might haue ben greatly ad∣uaunced, by the meanes that the kyng of Englande saye also in Fraunce with a great power. Howbeit through great intreataunce & mediation of ye chiefe lordes of the parliamen at Paris, & the duke of Or¦leans, the kinges sonne, who did specially fauoure ye Emperour, the matter was brought to a staye, but on what cōdicion I haue no certaintie of knowled∣ge as yet, for somuch as some say one thing & some another. Wherfore I wil rather write nothing, thē I shuld therof affirme any thing vncertaine. In this yere chaunced foure horrible Eclpses or darkenings. The first of the Moone. the .x. daye of Ianuary about .vi. of the clock in ye morning, which lasted .iii. houres & .xxviii. minutes, & the Moone was hidden .xii. pointes, & .xlvi. minutes. The se¦cond of the Sūne the .xxiiii. day of Ianuary, about ix. of the clock before noone, lasting .ii. houres, & .vi. minutes▪ & the Sūne was darkened about .xi. poin¦tes & .xvii. minutes, & when this darkenes was at the hiest, it was so darke euerywhere, as it is cōmon¦ly at night whē the Sunne is newely set, insomuch that all fowles & cattaile whiche were mery before, became still & sad, as though they had mourned & had compassion with the Sunne being darkened. The third Eclipse was of the Moone, the .xiiii. day of Iuly about half an houre after eight, whiche la∣sted .iii. houres & .xlii. minutes, & the Moone was darkened▪ xvii▪ pointes and .xxv. minutes.
The fourth was of the Moone the .xxix. day of december in the morning about half an houre befor seuen, & lasted .iii. houres & .xxxvi. minutes, the mo∣ne being depriued of her light by the shadowe of ye earth about .xiiii. pointes and .xviii. minutes. But what effecte and operation the sayde Eclip∣ses and darkenynges brought with them, maye e∣uery wyse man partely perceyue by the contentes of the Story of the yere next folowyng, and parte∣ly by the dayly discourse, and exercyse bothe of ma∣gistrates and of subiectes. For without special alte∣ration of earthely creatures, suche constellacions are not wont to passe, as experience doth sufficient∣ly teache and declare. This yere henry the eight, king of England sentScotland ¦uaded by ¦gthmen. an armye into Scotlande in the moneth of May, whiche landed at Lyth in Scotlande, and so went burnyng and destroyeng the countrey about, spa∣ryng nether castel, towne, pyle nor vyllage, vntyll they had ouerthrowen and destroyed many of thē, as the borough and towne of Edenborough with the Abbey called Holy Rodehouse, and the kynges Palice adioyned to the same. The towne of Lyth also with the hauen and peyre. The castell and vyl∣lage of Cragmyller, the Abbay of Newbottell, and parte of Muskelborowe towne, the Chappel of our lady of Lawret. Preston towne, and the castell Ha∣rintowne wyth the Freres and Nunery, and ca∣stell of Oliuer Sancklers, the towne of Dunbar, Laurestone wyth the Graunge, with many other townes castels, vyllages and pyles.
Also this yere thesayd kynges maiestie prepared an army into Fraunce, & thither he went his owne per¦sonBullyn bese∣ged & beseged the strōg towne of Bullen in Fraunce, and there wanne the watch toure otherwyse called the olde man the .xxviij. day of Iuly. And the .xxix. day of the same moneth Basse Bullyn was wonne. the .xiij. day of September the towne of hygh. Bullyn was victoriously cōquered by the said kyng of England, whiche after the entreaty & humble pe¦ticion made of the French men gaue them licence to take bag & bagage with them & so departe. the .xiiij. day of Septēber at .iii. of the clocke at after none, ye towne gate was opened, & the people began to come out, & they helde on vntill .vij. of the clocke at night. And there were in nombre of men, women & children. iii. M. & of them .xv. C. able mē of warre, & they had with them as muche as they could cary, both men women & children, that was a¦ble to beare any thing: and their horses & kine were loded with as much stuffe as they could beare away And they had .lxxv. wagens laden with them. IN the yere of our lord. 1545. was another coū¦cell. kept at Wormes, where many thinges we∣re discussed & entreated, as the breakyng vp of the same publyshed maketh mencion. There was also cōcluded as touching matters of religion, that a cōmunication & disputacion shuld be kept at Rain¦sburgh the next yere, whereunto ye estates of the Go¦spel, or Euangelical princes shoulde appointe. vii. learned men on their partie, and likewise the Pa∣pistes eyght men on theyr syde, whose mutu∣all agreementes and conclusyons shoulde bee
propounded and declared vnto the Emperoure: That afterwarde he might cōsulte vpon suche thin¦ges as shuld seme to make for an vnitie & concorde. Whyle these and suche other matters were de∣bated and determined at Wormes, in the presence of the Emperoure and the kyng of the Romaines, the ryght high and myghty Prince, and lorde Fre∣derikeThe Palati∣ne a fauorer of Goddes worde. Palatine and Electour Imperiall by the Re¦ne, cōsideryng & pondring the necessitie of his prin∣cely graces poore subiectes, wherein they lay mise∣rably captiuated and clogged vnder the yoke of that wicked and detestable Papacy: and how many soules might be lost and brought to dampnacion or euer such vnitie as should be made at Raynsburgh could be brought to passe: And also howe many con¦sultacions and disputacions had bene kept before this tyme, wherein alwaies the papisticall secte had bene conuinced and ouercome▪ and yet neuertheles had alwayes persisted in their Idolatry, and defen¦ded it the longer the more violently, whereby it myght be easely perceiued and concluded, what ho∣pe of amendement or agreement there was to be lo¦ked for: He determined and cōcluded with hymselfe furth with to forsake all popysh abhomination, and not to tarye the yssue or ende of the sayde conuoca∣cion and disputacion, but in asmuche as thorough the grace and mercy of God he had obtained know¦ledgePopery pa downe & the Gospel prea¦ched in the palatines iu∣risdiction. of the truthe and lyght of the Gospell, to can∣se the same without delay to be ministred and decla∣red to his poore subiectes. Wherefore he ordeyned and constituted in all his iurisdictions, that the Po¦pish abhominacion should be put downe, and that in
stede of the same the Gospell of Christ should be fre∣ly preached, that his pore cōmons might be taught and brought into the right and true way of salua∣cion. Our Lorde and sauiour Iesus Christe preser¦e hym and all the fauourers of his worde to pro∣cede and go forwarde in the settyng furth of hys wyll to the glory of his blessed name. Amen. This yere also died the doughter of kyng Ferdi∣nando,g  Po¦les . whiche was maried to Sigismunde the younge king of Pooles, whiche was no small grefe to the kyng her father. But of what death she dyed I could neuer heare no certayntie as yet, only this is manifest that she was not very well entertayned of the kyng her husbande, although it was a syngu∣ler grefe to the olde kyng his father. When the Emperour (the conuocation at Wor∣mesp o . beyng expired) came downe into the lower par¦tes of Duchlande, he proued the good byshop of Collyn diuers maner of wayes, yf he myght by any meanes haue caused hym to forsake and renoū∣ce the Gospell, and haue brought hym agayn to the obedience of the Pope. But the good christē father remained vnmouable hitherto as a rock surely cou¦ched vpon Christ the true fundacion. God preserue hym to the ende, & vouch saue also to illuminate the Emperours maiestie, that he may knowe the truth and be deliuered from the snares of Antichrist. After this themperour toke in hand to make pea¦cepro∣ d and e. betwene the kyng of Englande and the Frenche kyng. For the king of Englande lay yet strongly in campe against the Frenche kyng, but to what effect the said matter was brought shall appeare in tyme conuenient.
In the meane season Henry of Brunswike whichHenry duke of Brunswi∣ke goeth a∣bout to reco∣uer his land before thre yeres had bene expelled out of the land, gathered an hoste of men, as preuely as he coulde. And when he had assembled a competent nombre of men in the bishopriche of Werden, he marched with xv .C. horses or more, and .viij. M. Laūceknightes towardes Rottenburgh into the byshoprike of Bre¦me, trustyng there to obtaine the byshoppes greate ordinaunce. But when they of the citie of Breme had knowledge of his cōming they sent a certayne nōbre of souldiours for the defence of Rottēburgh, which hindred the duke of brūswike of his purpose. When he perceiued that his enterprise toke no bet∣ter successe, he went with all his power into the lād of Lunēbourgh, where he dyd sore endamage the poore people, and so proceded to recouer his lande from whence he was expelled. First he recouered Stonebridge, which yelded vnto him without any great nede. From thence he toke his way towards Woluesbutell, & in his going he wrought much wo to the citie of Brunswike roauing and burnyng in her suburbes, villages land markes & inrisdictions, wherupon he wrote to diuers townes, to make an agrement with him: he did also require money of one of Electours, & of certain byshops, attempting partely as it were by threatenings & minaces to cō∣pell thē to do hym this pleasure. And while the du∣keThe ount of Deckelen¦bourgh inu¦ded for the Golpell. raged thus about Brūswike, his ministers Otho counte of Rithberg, Alhard of Hoord with other brought at their Lordes commaundemēt, into the Countie of Deckelenburg about .viij. C. some saye M. horses, & about .iii. M. launceknightes which inuaded the said counte in his dominions, because he fauoured the Gospel,
troublyng and spoylyng the poore people with bur¦nyng and raunsaking to piteously. After this the sayd hoste marched towardes the water called the Weser, where they endamaged certayne gentelmē and fermers of the Lādgraue: And after that they had constrained a certayne officer belonging to the Byshop of Minster and of Minden, whiche dwel∣led in the place vpon the hyll, to disburse vnto them a certayn summe of money, they departed from thē∣ce to Duke Henry before Woluesbutell. In the mea¦ne season had the said Duke Henry caused the coun¦trey ll beseged. to receiue hym agayne as their Lorde, with due solempnities according to the custome and ma∣ner in that behalfe done accordingly, the towne of Shennigen whiche was garnysshed wyth soul∣diours by the confederates of Smalcalde onely ex¦cept. After this he beseged the towne of Woluesbu¦tell with both the sayde armyes, and caused the wa¦ter to be conuayed out of the diche that compasseth the Castell, whiche lytell preuayled hym. For they that kept the Castell defended them selues manful∣ly, and with skyrmysshing and shutyng they vexed and harmed their enemies very sore, stoppyng also and fyllyng the diches and sluses, whiche their ad∣uersary had digged to let out the water. Besydes this God sent a rayne whereby their for saide dyche was soone fylled with water againe. Whyle nowe Duke Henry was troubled in hisPhilip Land¦graue of Hes¦sen Capitaine of the Euan∣gelicall con∣federation. affaires, Philip Lādgraue of Hessen as a Capitain of the Euangelicall confederacion establyshed at Smalcalde, prepared hymselfe, hauyng also men sent hym from the Electour of Saxō, whose Capi∣tayne
was Duke Ernest of Brunswike, Duke Phi¦lippes Sonne, and also from all the Estates of the sayde confederacion. To hym came also duke Mau¦riceDuke Mau∣rice of Saxō. of Saxon with a 1000 horses, &. 4000. &. 500. laūceknightes, & a competent tyre of ordinaūce, at hys owne charges to helpe the sayde Electour and the Landgraue. When the sayde Landgraue ther∣fore had a competent nombre of warriours in a rea¦dynes, he went furth and pytched hys Campe by the towne of Northeim, where bothe the aboue na¦med princes came vnto hym. But when the sayde Duke of Brunswyke had knowledge of thys com∣myng of the Landgraue, he lefte Woluesbutell and went to mete the Landgraue, pitching hys Campe besydes Bierbergh, in a vyllage called Calfelde, a good duche myle from the Landgraues Campe. And on Saturdaye the .xvij. daye of October, cer¦tayne horsemen wyth certayne launceknyghtes of the Brunswykers shewed them selues vpon the hil of Northeim, and schirmysshed with the Landgra∣ues men, whiche were soone repelled with the smal ordinaunce, and turned backe agayne to their Cam¦pe.Duke Mau∣rice seketh ▪ meanes to ma¦ke a peace. In the meane season Duke Maurice at the re∣quest of Marquis Iohn, who had a daughter of Brunswyke to wyfe, and of certayne other Prince∣cely persons sought meanes to make a peace and a∣greemēt betwene the Duke of Brunswyke and the Landgraue. But whyle the Landgraue durst con¦clude nothyng wythout the counsayll and consent of the other confederates, the matter was delayed. vpon this the sonday next folowyng whyche was the .xviij. daye of October, Duke Henry brake vp
with his army to take and recouer a certayne hyll, and a Cloyster, from whence he myght haue done notable hurt to the Landgraue with his ordinaun¦ce. But when the Landgraue perceyued this, he caused that hole to be stopped. For the thre princes with all their power (except a small quantitie of horsemen and a certaine nombre of launce knyghtes whiche were left in the Campe to kepe the ordinaū∣ce) toke in the sayde hyll before hym. In so muche that there was muche shutyng on both parties, in whiche conflycte many good men and horses were endamaged and hurted on both sydes. And whyle this skyrmyshing and shutyng endured duke Mau¦rice proceded (to auoyde muche sheding of bloude if it were possible) to set a stay in the matter, by the whiche his earnest labour he brought to passe, that a truce was taken frō that hore vntyl the monday at nyght. In the meane whyle dyd Maurice cōmen wt the duke of Brunswike howbeit there coulde no certainte be gottē at his hand, but he went without any respect of the said truce, & caused his horsmen to  by i . spoyle and take. xiij. wagens sent for prouandr with horses and all their appurtenaunces belon∣gyng to the Landgraue, whiche also kylled certain husbandmen at the takyng of them. But the Land¦graue and his men were quiete and peaceable vn∣tyll the tewesday the .xx. daye of October within night. And then about midnight the watche worde was geuen that euery man shoulde be ready with his weapon, and so the hole hoste, which after the common sayeng of warriours contained an hū∣dreth thousand men (a great nōbre to be assembled
within the space of one moneth) marched ouer a cer¦tain water called the Rume, which the Landgraue had caused to be furnished ouer with brydges accor¦dingly. (For what Henry of Brunswike had caused to be concluded and determined in the meane sea∣son, was refused for diuers good causes) and early in the mornyng they came to an hill not farre from the Brunswykers Campe by a landmarke, whiche the Landgraue caused hastely to be dygged vp and cast downe in many places, that he myght brynge thorough his armye without stoppe or let. For the Brunswykers intended there to stoppe thē of their passage whome the Landgraue at the last was fay∣ne to beate away with his ordinaunce. Nowe whē the armis of ye Landgraue & of the other were both brought through ye Lādmarkes vpō the plaine of ye hil, ther were also brought through into ye felde thre great slynges, & certain Canons, whiche, as sone as the enemies were espied, were discharged & shot a∣mong the thickest of them. But as soone as the Brunswykers sawe this they dyd furthe withse∣ke meanes to flee and turned thē selues towardes an hyll lyeng by a wood, whome the horsemen folo∣wed without delay. When duke Henry sawe thys, that there was suche shuting towardes his hooste, and that they were put to flyght▪ all his bolde cou∣rage was done, and his proude harte fainted, wher¦fore he sent incontinently to Duke Maurice, desy∣ryng to impetrate some grace & fauour for hym at ye handes of the Landgraue. And although the Lād graue shewed hymselfe gentyll & ready, yet would he not trust hym (for he suspected y• Duke Henry &
hys Sonne sought wayes to escape) but marched strayghtwayes wyth his hooste and artyllery to∣wardes hys enemies, and shot among them fearce∣ly, vntyl suche tyme as Duke Henry and his sunne. Charles victor thorough the Counsayll of Duke Maurice, yelded and submitted them selues into the handes of the Landgraue. At whiche tyme the Landgraue made vnto Duke Henry this shar∣pe oration. Yf thou myghtest haue somuche power. ouer me, as I haue nowe ouer the, surely thou woul¦dest not saue my lyfe. But I wyll vse my selfe better towardes the then thou hast deserued at my hande. Why hast thou presumed to disobey∣the Emperoures maiestie, and to refuse sequesra∣cion? For if thou haddest obeyed, thou shouldest not haue brought thy selfe into thys trouble, neyther should so many poore men haue bene endamaged, vndone and destroyed. And furth with he com∣mitted hym and hys Sonne to the kepynge of cer∣tayne of hys chyef gētylmen, which toke them both into their custody. Whyle these thynges were a doyng betwene these two prynces, the Landgra∣ues company both on horseback and on fote pressed in among the company of Duke Henry in suche sort that but fewe of them should haue bene left on lyue, yf Duke Maurice had not the sooner aduertysed the Landgraue thereof, who as then rode hastely among them, and with much a do stylled and paci∣fyed hys men, and turned them backe from fygh∣tyngThe Land∣graue qui∣eth an othe of duke Hen∣ cōpany. and shutyng. Nowe when the people was qualifyed and pa∣cified the Landgraue called Duke Henryes com∣pany
before hym, and required thē to sweare, that within the space of thre moneths next ensuing they should worke nor pretende nothyng agaynst the E∣uangelicall confederation. Whiche some of them promysed without delay, but the horsemen depar∣ted by heapes with opē banners without any othe or promyse made: whom the Landgraue pursued in haste, and ouertoke the next day, wherefore they attempted to make resistaunce, but when they sa∣we that they were ouermached, they layed downe their banners, and made an othe not to enterpryse ought agaynst the sayde confederacion within the space of syxe monethes. When this was done both the father and the sonne of Brunswyke was with a strong garde caried to Cassell, and the father from thence into the Castell of Zigenheim. After thys dyd the Landgraue take in agayne the lande of the sayde Duke Henry, and caused thinhabitauntes ofThe lande of Brunswike ta¦ken in againe and sworne of newe to ye confederatiō the same to sweare agayne of newe to the confede∣ration of the Gospell, and consequētly turned hym selfe agaynst the Erles, Ihon of Shauenburgh, & Otto of Rithbergh whiche are both lonemen to the Landgraue, and yet had succoured them of Brun∣swyke with men, artillery, and other necessaryes, insomuche that Iohn Erle of Shauenburgh wasThe Erle of Shauēburgh deposed. deposed from his stronghold Buckēbourgh, which was geuen to his brother and other of the stocke, to enioye, on this conditiō that they should not suffre hym to come in agayne oneles he were before suffi∣ciently agreed with the sayde confederation for all hys offences committed against them. But Rit∣berghRithbergh ge¦uen vp. was geuen vp to the Landgraue by the pos∣sessours
thereof. When all this was done, and by Goddes grace finysshed without greate bloudshe∣dyng, the warriours being honestly contented and payde, were licensed to departe euery man home to his owne. All these actes haue I drawen and ex∣tracted out of the Copie of the Land graue, & ther∣fore described them so muche the more at large whi¦le suche writynges, whiche are called newes are cō∣monly soone dilated. Neuertheles consideryng that thereby the common sorte of people and our po¦steritie may haue a shorte and sure information and declaration of these marciall affayres, I truste that no wyse man will mislyke this my labour and dili∣gence. About Mighlmas dyed Albert Archebyshopth of che of  of Mentz, whiche was Marquis of the Marke, brother to the olde Marquis Ioachim. In whose rowme was elected by the chapiter sir Sebastiane of Housenstone, a Doctor of a notable stock, whose dwelling and mansion was betwene Aschaburgh and Franckeforde. Also not long after this Albert the sonne of Casi¦mireThe Ruler of har ed by ye Marquis of Branden∣burgh lorde Marquis of Brandenburgh assaulted Onoldesback which is cōmonly called Onesback wt 600. horses in the name of one of knobelsthorp who was the chefe amōg the rulers of the land, which ye lord Marquis George (deaceassed a littell before) had left to his young sonne, whome he had by the daughter of Duke Henry, sister to Duke Maurice of Saron, and requyred the same to be deliuered vnto hym. But the Ruler of Knobelsthorpe beyng warned of thys, gate hym out of the way. So that
thesayd Lord Marquis was fayne to departe not hauing his purpose. In Hungary raged the Turke with roauyng &The fury o the Turke. spoylyng of the pore subiectes of Ferdinando, whō he put to muche losse and hynderaunce. This yere also dyed the younge Duke of Orle∣ansThe death of the Duke of Orleans. the Frenche kynges Sonne. Of wondres and sygnes happened this yere, o∣ne in especial to be noted is come to my knowledge, whiche chaunced in the lande of Poles, and myght be sene of all thinhabitauntes of the same on sonday the .xxix. day of Marche which was on Palmeson∣dayWonderfull apparitions and visions. about .viii. of the clocke in the mornyng. At what tyme there was heard suche a fearefull thon∣derclappe, that the hole lande trembled. After that, there apeared in the east thre red crosses, twoo of them aboue, and the third vnder them both. In the middes whereof apeared a man armed, with a fyry sworde. agaynst whom came a great multitude of warriours on horseback and on fote, which fought with hym vntyll one of the clocke at after none, and were in fine ouercome of hym that they al peryshed and vanyshed awaye, he remaynynge alone in the fielde betwene the crosses. Immediately after this came a terrible Dragon behynde the man, and de∣uoured hymwith the sworde. When this visiōwas past, the skye waxed all red and of a fyry coloure, whiche lasted about an houre, euen vntyll twoo of the clocke or there about, then arose there suche blacke cloudes vnder the skye, that it was as dar∣ke as though it had bene nyght, whiche conti∣nued so vntyll the next daye, the thyrty daye
of Marche in the mornyng about .ix. of the clocke. And then the skye wyth the day appeare dagayne. There appeared also thre goodly & well fauoured Raynebowes one aboue another whereon sate an holy Aungell, whiche appeared by the space of an houre and a half. And after this it was fayre we∣ther for the space of certayne dayes. These thyngs were written out of the Lande of Pooles, and af∣terward set furth in printe openly, but the interpre¦tacion thereof wyll I committe to the iudgement of other. The rest of the Sommer of this yere was very propice and warme, the frutes of the earthe were competent, and the wynes had good successe and chaunced very good, so that they caused muche dis∣sentiō and debate, and also manslaughter betwene suche as abused them. This yere in the lande of Bullenois there cam∣ped in Iannuary on the West syde of Bullyn beyōd the hauen an army of Frenchemen to the nombre of. 18000. & lay there the space of .x. dayes, & the .vi. day of Febru. they were all put to flight by the erle of Harforde & the lorde Admirall, with a small com∣pany of men and without any bloudshedyng on the Englyshe syde, but diuers of the other were slayne, they left al their ordinaunce with bagge and bagga¦ge behynde them. This yere about the .xx. day of Iuly the Frenchmē with a greate nauy of shyppes muaded the Ile of wight in England, where as they were driuen back and a great nomber slayne. In the yere of our Lorde. 1546. euen in the be∣ginning
of the yere was a conuocation of the Euan¦gelicallA conuocatiō at Franke forth. confederation kept at Francke sorde on the mayne, & the disputacion to be kept at Raynsburgh was also begonne. &c. This yere was doctor Martyn Luter and doc∣torThe death of Maten Lu∣ter. Iustus Ionas called too Isleven of the Erle of Mansfelde, to caste of and accorde certayne deba∣tes and dissentions that were happened betwene them. Where doctor Martyn Luter was ouerco∣me with the olde impedimentes and diseases of his body, whiche renewed vpon hym whereby he felt and perceiued his ende to be at hande. Wherfore he called hartely vpon the name of our Lorde Ie∣sus Christe, and with open confession commended his soule into the handes of God oure heauenly fa∣ther. In so muche that the eighten daye of Februa∣ry he departed out of this miserable worlde into the handes of God with Christ whome he had bol∣dely confessed before the worlde all moste thyrty yeares aswell by his paynfull preachyng and tea∣chyng as by continuall wrytyng. Hys body was at the commaundement of the Princely Electour caried from Isleven, by the Er∣le of Mansfelde accompanied with fyfty horses to Wittenburgh, and of all estates of the Princely E∣lectours Court bothe of high and lowe degrees, &The buriall of doctor Martine Lu¦ter. of the vniuersitie of the citie he was sorowfully but yet honorably brought into the Castell, and reue∣rently buried besydes the burials of the Electours of Saxon the .xxii. day of February. the .lxij. yere of his age. This man so highly endued with knowledge
from God, was apointed and ordeined of our hea∣uenly father to be a minister and teacher of his chur¦che and a preacher of his Gospell, euen as in al ages he hath raised and ordeined some to be Prophetes, some to be Apostles, and some to be teachers of hys congregacion. For he opened and declared vnto the worlde (by Gods grace) the necessary and holsome doctrine of the Gospell, and taught the true repen∣taunce and comfort of the harte, whiche is feared with the knowledge of Goddes wrath. He hath godly set furth the doctrine of Paule, whiche saith: That a man is iustified and made ryghteous by the faith in Christe. He hath also declared the differen∣ce betwene the Lawe and the Gospel, betwene the rightousnes of y• spirite, & of the outward workes. He brought to light agayne the true worshypping of God, whiche had bene vnknowen to the moost parte of the worlde by the space of a thousand ye∣res. And brought the vniuersall Church from that fonde opinion, whiche imagineth, that God is wor∣shypped although y• minde of man being suppressed with perpetual doubting, abhorreth to come to god He taught also howe we ought to pray in faith & with a good concience, and ledevs to the only me∣diatour Christ the sonne of God▪ whiche sytteth at the right hand of the father euerlastyng, and ma∣keth intercession for vs: And not to the soules of dead men as the vngodly Papistes haue taught with fyre and fagot. He declared also what good workes were acceptable to God. He hath so garnis∣shed and establyshed the temporal lawes and gouer¦naūce, that sence the Apostles tyme it was neuer so confirmed by Scriptures. He dyd also abolysh the
chyldysh custome and ceremonies of mans tradi∣cion, whiche hyndered true prayer, and seperated them from the necessary workes. To thyntent also that the heauenly doctrine should extende to hys posteritie, and that the people whiche shall come af∣ter myght haue knowledge, he translated the Pro∣pheticall and Apostolicall Scriptures into Dutch with suche lyght and clarite, that the reder maye haue more knowledge thereby, then by some mens expositions. He made also many expositions, whiche do far∣re excell many other, as Erasmus of Roterdame witnesseth in his writynges. And as it is writen of them whiche repayred Ierusalem, that they buyl∣ded wyth one hande and helde the swoorde in the other: Euen so warred Doctor Martine Luter with the enemies of the true doctrine and buylded neuertheles the heauenly doctrine. Besydes thys he dyd helpe many mens conciences, with good coū¦sayll. And whylest a greate parte of his doctrine is aboue mans reason, (as the doctrine of remission of synnes, and of faith) it must nedes be graunted that he was taught of God. In prayer for the vniuer∣sall Churche of Christe was he very earnest and di∣lygent. He dyd also eueryday chose a certaine hou∣re to recite certayne Psalmes, wherin also he mix∣ed his prayer with great deuotion. He taught also that it is not ynough to praye only with the minde and with sighing, but that the maner & fourme of prayeng is prescribed vnto vs by the Counsaill of God, that the hartes by the reding may be stirred, and moued, yea that the voyce also may knowledge
and confesse what God we worshyppe. He was also in the assault and resistaūce of the e∣nemies of Gods truthe of a constant mynde and of a bolde courage, neyther was he abasshed for their threatenynges. He was also in difycult matters of a sharpe and hygh wytte, and well spoken, as his famous do sufficiently declare. For asmuche therefore as this man was garny∣shed with suche a great witte and other godly ver∣tues, and was specially ordeyned of God to repay∣re his temple agayn, wherin he hath not bene negli∣gent, we ought not to suffre his vertues and bene∣fites to peryshe among vs, and whylest he was an instrument of God, we ought gladly to folowe hys Doctrine, and therein to learne the vertues necessa∣ry for vs, as the feare of God, fayth and feruentnes in prayer, diligence in the office of the worde, Cha∣stite, abstinence and abhorryng from sedition or tu∣multe, diligence and desyrous to study. &c. whiche God graunt vnto vs all. Amen. In the moneth of Marche anone after that the conuocatiō at Raynesburgh was ended, there was an horrible act committed at Neweburgh besides the Danube, in the iurisdiction of the Palatine, be∣twene two brethren being Spanyardes, of whom the one was called Iohn Diasy, well learned in the Lare, Greke and Hebrue tonges, a man that fea∣red God, and loued the sincere doctrine of Christe and his holy Gospell, and was at that season sent from Raynesbourgh by the Dysputers of the Go∣spell, wyth whome he had greate acquayntaunce,
towards Newburgh, to correcte and fynyshe cer∣tayne bookes to be imprinted. But when his brother Alphonse Diasy, a Doc∣tourAlphonse dia si a trayte∣rousmurther of the lawe and at Rome in hygh office, a ser∣uaunt of the Pope, and an enemy to the Gospell of Christe, was come from Rome to Raynesburgh, & there had knowledge, that hys brother Iohn was at Newburgh, he hasted hym selfe thyther with all spede, to see his brother, where he attempted in cer¦tayne dayes with many disputacions to drawe and turne hys brother from the pure doctrine of the Gospell to the wicked doctrine of the Pope wyth many checkes. But Iohn remayned constaunt in the doctrine whiche he had learned and searched to the bottom, and instructed his brother wyth inuincible argumē¦tes and testymonyes of the doctrine out of the Pro¦phetes and Apostles, in all the Articles of the Chri∣sten fayth, endeuouryng hym selfe wyth all diligēce to conuerte hys brother to the sincere doctrine of Christe. When Alphonse sawe the constauncy and per∣seueraunce of hys brother, and that he could not re¦sist nor confute his doctrine, nor yet bryng hym to the Popes way, he dissembled & behaued hym selfe as thoug he had gladly and earnestly embraced the Euangelicall doctrine, and gentely suffered hys brothers charitable and Godly instructions and ex¦hortacions, abiding wyth hym almoste thre dayes. In so muche that he sayd vnto hym: whyle he sawe and perceiued that hys doctrine of the Gospel was the very sounde and true doctrine of God, and
knewe that there were many honest men at Rome, and also in other cities and townes of those parties whiche were very dysyrous to be instructed in the true and sincere doctrine of Christ so that they lac∣ked nothyng but men of good learnyng, that were expert in settyng forth of the same doctrine accor∣dyngly: wherfore he besought hym of Brotherly lo¦ue, to goo with hym to Rome, where he myght by his godly doctrine do muche good, and a dede accep¦table to Christe. But what happened? This good mā Iohn Dia∣sy, being symple and suspecting no gyle, suffered his brothers perswasion to take place, & graunted hym his request, howbeit he wrote back vnto the Dispu¦ters and Auditours of the Euangelicall doctrine, desyrynge to haue their counsayll in this matter: who perceyuyng the crafte and papisticall murde∣rysh harte of his brother, gaue hym counsayl not to go to Rome with his brother. Nowe when Iohn Diasius folewed their coun∣sayll, and gaue hys brother an aunswere that he could not at that tyme go with hym to Rome, the sayde Alphonse behaued himselfe frendely towar∣des hym, and gaue hym certayne crownes and du∣cates for his farewell, takyng hys leaue and depar∣ture of his brother very louyngly and frendely, as though he would haue gone strayghtwaye towar∣des Rome. But within fewe dayes after, he came to Newe burgh agayne from Ausburgh, where he had pre∣pared good post horses to be in a readynes to flee
when he should se cause. And when he came to the sayde towne of Newburgh early in the mornyng at the openyng of the gates, he taryed hymselfe be∣fore the gate with the horses, and sent his seruaunt (beyng a murtherer, whome he had hyred at Ro∣me for suche affayres, and brought hym forth with hym) into the towne with a lettre, who whan he came to the sayde Iohn, delyuered hym the sayde lettre, and whyle he red the same, the MurthererThe good doctor Iohn Diasy mur∣thered. smote hym with a greate sharpe halbarde and cleft his hed in twayne, that he fell downe dead, but the Murtherer ranne out of the towne, to hys Mai∣ster, so that both the Murtherers gate themselues awaye. Whan thys horrible acte was knowen in the towne, souldiours were prepared and appoynted out of hande to pursue them, whyche at last caught and apprehended bothe the sayde Murtherers at Isebredge, where they were brought to pry∣son. And although there was muche suet made to the Iudges ordeyned and appointed by kyng Fer∣dinando and the officers there, for due punishment, by the subiectes of the Palatine, whiche had spent about the same aboue foure hundreth guidens, yet coulde they obtayne no iustice agaynst the sayde Murtherers. But manye exceptions were made and propounded, namely that whyle the Brother was a Spanyarde, the matter ought not too bee pleated in Dutche language,
but in Spanysh, and before Spanyshe Iudges. Yea when the Emperoure came to Raynesburgh he was also moste humbly desyred and besought to se iustice ministred concernyng the sayde matter. But answere was made, that whyle the offenders were taken within the Iurisdiction of the kynges maiestie the Emperours maiestie had nothyng to do with the matter. But in conclusion thys was the last sentence & Iudgement geuen, that for so muche as the sayde Iohn was an heretike, he had deserued death: And forsomuche as his brother Alphonsus was conse∣crated, and a spirituall persone, the temporall lawe had nothyng to do wyth hym, wherfore they were letten go free, and set at libertie. This horryble murther of Cayn was doubte∣les a forgaine of the detestable warres whiche the Pope & hys Churche of Cayn hath moued against Abell and the fauorers & teachers of the holy Gos∣pell in Germany, where so muche innocent & Chri∣sten bloude hath beneshed, all the whiche thynges the Lorde God wyll punysh in tyme conuenient, seyng there is no more iudgement in earth.The Emp∣ com∣ Rai∣sburgh. In the moneth of Aprill came the Emperoures maiestie to Raynesburgh on Saturday after myd∣lent Sonday: where he founde but fewe princes of the Empyre, besydes a small nombre of certaine by∣shoppes. Consequentely after Easter when certayn prin∣ces,The ion beg at Rains∣burgh. and Ambassadours, or Legates of other were come thither, the conuocation was begonne, and the propositions were of the agreement of the Ar∣ticles
in controuersy in religion, of the ordre and e∣stablyshment of the chamber court and of the Coy∣ne, Item howe the Turke myght be resisted. But in the meane season, when there was great prouision and preparation made to take vp men &The begyn∣nyng of the emperours warres a∣gaynst the Germanes. warriours in the name of themperours Maiestie thoroughout all Duchelande, the Electours prin∣ces and estates of the confession of Ausbourgh desy¦red moste humbly at Whitsontyde to knowe of the Emperours Maiestie, against whome suche prepa∣ration of warre was intended, whereupon they re∣ceiued this darke aunswere, that the Emperoures Maiestie woulde punishe certayne rebelles of the Empire. After this darke aunswere when many thyngs were feared, and the sayde warriours were in a re∣dynes, the conuocacion toke an ende, and another was instituted and appointed against the next yere to begynne the fyrst day of February. Forasmuche therfore as Duke Iohn Frederike Electour in Saxon, and Lorde Phylyppe Land∣graue of Hessen with the other Princes, Lordes, e∣states and townes of the confession and confedera∣tion of Ausburgh perceiued that the saide great pre¦paracion of warres was enterprised and intended against no man, but against them, they prepared al∣so an hoste of men for their necessary defence, for the mayntenaunce and preseruacion of the pure and sin¦cere doctrine of the Gospell, for the defence also of their Landes, dominions and subiectes, and for the continuacion of the liberties and priuiledges of the Germaine nacion, and went furth in the moneth of Iune
ouerthrowen and destroyed. Fyftely, the Postmaysters house, where them∣perour was wont to haue hys posthorses, when he had nede of them, wyth the stables and the horses in the same at that tyme, was quyte stryken awaye by the thonder, and burned vp. Syxtely, Saynt Barnardes place, wherin the Abbot of S. Barnarde had hys lodgyng when he came to Meghlyne, was vtterly destroyed by the thonder, and the cloyster of the Augustyne freers was a great parte ouerthrowen and destroyed. Seuently, The Voogstrete, which was a fayre large strete was also in lyke maner ouerthrowen, that there remayned neuer a house standyng, nor yet, as they sayd, block nor stone. Eightely, The Palace of Hyghstrete, whyche was an excedyng fayre and strong buyldynge, be∣longyng to a certayn great lorde, was quyte and clene ouerthrowen and destroyed: And as the in∣habitauntes of the sayd towne of Meghlyne do af∣fyrme, yf the sayd Palayce of Hyghstrete wyth o∣ther places and greate buyldynges had not bene there standynd, The hole towne of Meghlyn must nedes haue ben vtterly ouerthrowen and destroy∣ed, so that nether house, stycke nor stone shuld haue remayned in the same: For the sayd hygh and strong buyldynges were a greate defence to the towne: Besydes thys there were also other pla∣ces and great buyldinges, whose names (to auoyd prolyxite) are not here rehearsed, whych were in lyke maner ouerthrowen & destroyed of the thon∣der as the other together with seuen hundred hou¦ses.
Insumme, almoost all the houses of the towne were endamaged, fewe or none excepte that hadde not some hurte done by the thonder. Nyntly, the nexte daye after, when the sayde pi∣teous calamite was done, whiche was the. 8. day of August, when they beganne to make rowme, there were founde about thre hundred persons men, wo¦men, and children which were slaine by the meanes of the thondre, whome they loded in wagens & car∣tes and buryed them in great holes that were dig∣ged for the same purpose. There were also founde aboue, 150. persons sore wounded and harmed. And there happened one thing in the sayd toune specyally to be meruayled at, which is, that certayn gestes sate in theyr hostes hous drynkynge to ge∣ther and plaieng at the cardes, and while they cal∣led for drynke, and theyr hostesse went doune into the seller to drawe them a pot of byre, in the meane season was the house stryken awaye by the thon∣der, and the players found dead wyth the cardes in theyr handes, as though they had ben styll play∣eng, but the hostesse saued her lyfe by the meanes, y• she was in the seller whan the sayd hurt was done. Tenthly, There was also a man founde in a cor∣ner the thyrd daye after that the sayde hurte was done, hauyng no harme whych asked whether the world were yet standyng or not. There was also a woman founde dead, beynge great wyth chylde, whych was afterwarde cut opē and the chylde taken out of her belly, was baptised Muche harme was there done besydes, not one¦ly within the towne of Meghline, but also without
the towne, as in the townes, villages, castels, and boroughes lyeng there about, where thesaide we∣ther hath done much harme, and there were many, innumerable, fearfull and wonderful sygnes and to kens sene, so that bothe the Emperoure and the la∣dy Mary had nede to remembre them selues, for it is to be feared that God will beginne to reuenge the innocent bloude, whiche is very piteously shed in the lower partes of Duchelande, for the Gospels sake, for it crieth into heauen and so fylleth the boso me of Gods high matestie that he can suffre it no lō∣ger, yea he wyll laye on yet greater loades, oneles they repente and amende in tyme, for he hath suffe∣red them long ynough. When this warre betwene themperour, & the e∣lectour of Saxon, & the Landgraue of Hessen had continued into the first moneth, & themperour had declared hymself an open enemy both to the forsaid princes, onely of his owne mynde, without either right, reason, or warnyng, and without the know∣ledge & consent of the estates & membres of them∣pire:Duke Mau∣rice prepa∣reth  to . In the meane seasō did Maurice duke of Sax on with great feruentnes prepare a great nōbre of horsemen & pietons, wherefore al men stode in great feare, not knowing against whom he made the same preparation. And forasmuche as the electour of Saxon was out of his lande, & duke Maurice was next of hys bloude, and his nere kisman bothe on the fathers & the mothers syde, & was also by bym brought vp, & had receiued many benefites at his hand, many we∣re of this hope & iudgemēt, that thesaid preparatiō
was made for the defence & succour of the landes & subiectes of the electour, so that fewe or none suspec¦ted any gyle in duke Maurice. In the meane season did kyng Ferdinando also endenour hymselfe to stirre vp the Lusenitianes & Bohemianes against the lande of the Electour of Saxon, but with honest & vertuous men coulde he litle preuayle, notwithstāding by the meanes of his importunate labour and instaunt intreataūce he as∣sembled a sorte of Pietons in Boheme being in nō∣bre about eyght thousand men, & in Hungary abo∣ue a thousand husbandmen, a wicked & rauenish ge∣neration, to destory & waste the landes & dominiōs of thesaid Electour, which mē did first inuade Voyt land, & there toke the townes vilages and liberties pertaining tothe Electour, piteously spoyling, roa∣uingburning & destroieng many men young & olde.A cruel mur∣ther. And specially therwas an execrable madnes & mur¦ther cōmitted vpō an honest Curate & minister that feared God at Newechurche, whom when thesaid husbād mē had mostcruelly martyred & murthered and sawe that he was fatte, they cut him in peces af∣ter the maner of a fatte Swyne, casting the peces from one to another and sayeng, Lo brother, there hast thou a good roastyng pece of an hogge. Of whiche innocent bloud are gilty all they that do helpe or consent to the sayde murtheryshe and intestine warres, whereof doutles God wyll take vengeaunce in tyme conuenient. Nowe when the matter as it was fyrst begonne and purposed against the Electour & his dominiōs (for Duke Maurice had bene first with the kynge
in. Bohemy) toke effect, and apeared euidently as though the kyng woulde ouercome and take in, all the Landes and dominions of the Electour, DukeDuke Mau∣rice gm∣ to  Maurice exalted hymselfe with his army, and first toke the townes lyeng to warde the mountaynes, and then he went with thesayde Bohemians and husband men to besege the towne of Zwickowe. But least I be demed to stande to muche in my∣ne owne conceite, and to take vpon me to Iudge o∣ther wise than it becometh me in this matter. I will set hereafter the true Copye of his lettres where∣by he required and admonyshed the towne of the Electour to yelde them selues vnto hym, by the cō∣sentes whereof men of honestie and vnderstanding may easely perceyue what good grounde and sure foundacion he pretended in these affaires. of . By the grace of God we Maurice duke of Saxō Land graue of During, and Marquis of Myssene, aduertyse you our welbeloued and trusty counsayl and commons of Saron. &c. That forasmuche as the myghty Prince our Cosyn Duke Iohn Frede∣rike the Elder, hath ben founde negligent in doing of hys dutie and it is manifest that men are about to bryng you from the house of Saxon, into the po∣wer of straungers, and we beyng a borne prince of Saxon hauing also parte in the lande wyth our for sayd Cosyn, and be charged by earnest commaundement of the Emperoures Maiestie our moste gra∣cious lorde, for the auoydyng of greuous penalties and corrections, and also by the losse of our Regal∣tie and preeminēce, our seiues to take the same land in possession, or elles to permitte and suffre other to
do the same, whereby oure owne Landes and do∣minions must nedes come in daunger and destruc∣tion. Wherfore we require you to sutmitte your selues vnto vs as Prince of Saxon, and to recey∣ue vs accordingly with due solempuisation. And we are prone & graciously inclined to desen de you in the Christen religion wherein ye bee, and lyke mayer your bodyes, goodes and possessions, and to leaue you by youre olde liberties and priui∣ledges. And when the matter or controuersy be∣twene the Emperoures Maiestie, the Romyshe kynges Maiestie, and our forsayde Cosyn shall co∣me to an agreement, we shalbe ready, as touchynge the landes whiche we shall haue taken in possession of hys, by the knowledge and wyll of their Maie∣sties, and as muche as maye be done without their preiudice, thorough our owne dominions to be in∣treated & ordered accordyng to ryght and reason. But yf ye should refuse so to do, it should apeare vnto vs, as though ye would wylfully be put from the house of Saxon, whiche may not be suffered of vs. Wherefore we require herein your directe auns∣were by the bearer of the letter in hast, whyle oure enemy is at hande, that we may auoyde the daun∣ger. Geuen in our Towne of zwickowe the syxt daye of Nouēber. Anno a thousand fyue hundreth fourty and syxe. Duke Maurice, of Saxon. Manu propria. When zwickowe had yelded vnto him, the syxt day of Nouember, he toke also the townes lyeng there about, and consequētly, Aldenbourgh, Ilen∣bourgh, Grymme, Torgawe. &c.
the .xvi. day of Nouember duke Maurice sent a Trompetter with two lettres, the one to the De∣putie, and the other to the Communaltie of Witten bourgh directed, betwene thre & foure of the clocke at after none, before the Elue gate, but before the lettres were receyued, the suburbes were set on fy∣re whereby was sygnifyed that they intended to stande to their defence. The same daye dyd he also aduertise thinhabi∣tauntes of Torgawe whiche lay in gareson for the defence of Wittenburgh, that oneles they woulde come home by the next daye before Sunne set, he would sende their wyues and chyldren after them, and besydes that depriue them of all their goodes. The ende of the Appendix or addition com∣pyled by Maister Iohn Funke. Brefe Annotations added vnto the pre∣misses gathered out of dyuers historiographers. IN the sayd yere of our lorde .MD. xlvi. apeace was concluded betwene EnglādA peace betwene En∣glande and Fraunce. and Fraunce, whiche on Whitsondaye was proclaimed. For conclusion whereof the Viscount Lisse high Admiral of England with the Byshop of Duresine and a goodly company of Gentylmen went out of Englande into Fraunce, af¦ter whose retourne Monsure Denball high Admi∣rall of Fraunce, the Byshop of Eureux and two Er∣les came into Englande with the Sacre of Depe, and .xij. galleyes, and were honorably receiued.
The saide yere also in lent before, was the Ste∣wesThe stewes put downe in London. ☝ ☝ Anne Askewe Iohn Lassels burned. at London put downe and abolysshed by the kynges commaundement. the .ix. daye of Iuly was burned at London in smithfielde. Anne Askew a gentill woman, Iohn lassels, of the kynges preuy chambre, Iohn Adlam tayler of Suffolke, and Nicolas Belenyam priest, for opinions consonaunt to the trueth, and contra∣ry to the acte of the syx Articles: At whiche tyme alShaxton re∣canted. so Doctour Nicolas Schaxton somtime Byshop of Salisbury recanted and denied the trueth whi∣che before he had professed. Whiche thing also one Doctour Crome (whiche had bene a great and fa∣mous preacher) had done at Paules Crosse the xxvij. daye of Iune before, affirming openly that he had bene seduced by noughty bookes. &c. In England, also in Nouember was the duke ofThomas du∣ke of North∣folke & Hen∣ry his sodne attainted. Northfolke and his sonne the Erle of Surrey, at∣taincted of treason, for the which his sonne was put to execution in Ianuary after, and hym selfe cōmit∣ted to the Towre, where he doeth yet remayne. IN the yere of our lord God .MD. xlvij. there were in Germany dyuers and wonderfull in∣nouacions of thinges chaūces of warres chaū¦ges of fortune, yeldynges of Princes, ouerthro∣winges and subuersions of townes and castelles, fallinges of great men, & conuocatiōs of Synodes, and counsayles, which I do here omitte partely to auoyde prolixite, and partely for that the certaintie of suche thinges taken by heare say onely is often∣times deceiuable. Trusting to haue occcasion and oportunitie hereafter to declare and set furth the sa∣me matter at large.
The inhabitauntes of the countie of Tiroll and Isebredge were this yere sore plaghed with won∣derfullA plague of locustes and grashoppers locustes and grashoppers both creping and flyeng, whiche were there in suche aboundaunce that the creping sorte couered all their lande, & the flyeng sorte couered that lyght of the Sune, in so muche that thinhabiters of the lande were cōmaun¦ded to go furth and to take & gather thē that crept on the grounde which they did continually during the space of thre wekes, gatheringe euery daye a∣bout. 2400. quarters, in a quarter of a myle, for in euery quarter of a myle were appointed thre hun∣dreth persons, men and womē, and euery hundreth persons gathered euery day 800 quarters. during the space of. 3. wekes. And they came into Isebred∣ge ouer the brydge with such a power as though they had ben an hoste of warriours that woulde haue entred into the towne In so much that the Magestrates commanded the inhabitauntes of the same towne to make resistaunce agaynst them before the gate with besomes and bromes and to swype them into the water as they came whiche they ded in suche sorte as they couered all the wa∣ter with grasherppers that no water coulde be sene: Thus did they resiste them & kept them also from the brydge by the space of .iii. wekes after this the said locustes or grashoppers turned into. the fieldes and there destroyed and wasted the cor¦ne and the grasse, vndoynge in a maner all the people of the lande: so that after thys the pe∣opel resysted them no moore, butt onelye trusted to the mercy of god with instaunt & feruēt prayer.
The sayde Locustes or grashoppers were littell at the begynnyng and krepyng, but afterwarde they grewe and began to flye, doyng great hurte throu∣ghout the sayde lande. In the meane season the Emperoures maiestie,A godly com¦maundement and the kyng of the Romaynes set furth a commaū¦dement that noman shuld be founde in dronkenes, horedome, aduoutery, vsury, and blasphemy but he should be punyshed by death, and forfayte all hys goodes. In a littell towne called Albers lyeng besydes Lyndawe in the Dukedome of Zweyburgh wasA prodigi∣ous grape. this yere founde two clusters of grapes growynge vpon one braunce hauyng a long read bearde, whi∣che was a wonderfull syght. The same yere in flaunders and the countreesA wonderful miracle. there about was a great scacitie of corne, so that the¦re was a great dearth in the lande. And there dwel¦led besydes Beke aboue Gand a certayne farmer well prouided and stored with corne, vnto whome his neyghbours came lamentyng and intreatyng hym to sel them some of his corne, who refused so to do, neuertheles he sent none away comfortles that had nede: for he lent and delyuered vnto euery man accordyng to their necessite on this condicion that they should rendre and repaye hym agayne at the next haruest, on this condicion did he lende cor∣ne to dyuers nedy persons. After whiche tyme it chaunced that his corned fyelde beyng sowed was by Gods grace so multiplied and increassed that on euery stalke grewe an exceding nombre of eares la∣den with corne, so that thorough the blessyng of
God he was well rewarded. By this may we see that the sayeng of Salomon is an vndoubted veri¦te, namely, he that taketh pitie on the pore lendeth vnto the Lorde vpon vsury, and loke whatsoeuer he layeth out it shalbe payd hym agayne. There was also this yere a wonderfull vision se¦neA wonderful ision. and heard of many within the towne of Witten∣bourgh, in the Lande of Saron the .xviii. daye of September early in the mornyng betwene foure & fyue of y• clocke. For there appeareth in the ayre a fi¦gure and lykenes of a dead corse or beere couered ouer with blacke cloth, and a read ribband auer the same, and there went before the coarse six men with trompettes, and a greate multitude of people folo∣wed with croked instrumentes and trompettes blowyng, whyche made a greate noyse in the ayre, insomuche that many in the towne whiche laye yet in their beddes were thereby awaked out of theyr slepe, thynkyng that the sayde trimblyng had bene in the towne. After this the black cloth vanyshed awaye from the boere, whiche then was couered ouer with awhyte cloth, then appeared besydes the beare a man armed in harnas shewyng hym selfe very angry, and pullyng the whyte clothe from the beere, he rent it in twaine, wynding the one half about hys arme and so pressyng it harde to hys bo∣dy: Wyth this the coarse vanyshed away. The man armed dyd also apeare a lyttell whyle after & so in lyke maner banished away. After this were al¦thynges quiet as before. God graunte euery Chri∣sten man to remembre thys wonderfull sygne with feare, for it is to be feared that it is a fearefull war∣nyng
sent vs of God. In Englande the nyntene day of Ianuary wasThe Erle of Surrey behea¦ded. the Erle of Surrey beheaded, as was mencioned the yere before. The seuen and twenty daye of the same monethThe death of kyng Henry the eight of England▪ &c. Edward the syxt byng of England. Henry the eyght kyng of Englande &c. ended hys lyfe, and was buried at Windsore. Edwarde the syxt kyng of Englande &c. succe∣ded his father in the gouernaunce of his royalmes and dominions, and was crowned the nintene day of February, in the nyneth yere of hys age. Vnder the sayde kyng in the tyme of his minori∣te his vncle Edwarde Duke of Somerset was ma¦de lorde Protectour of all hys Royaulmes domi∣nions and subiectes, and Gouernour of his maie∣sties persone, who with the residue of his maiesties Counsayll gouerned the realme with great mercy and gentilnesse, by whome to the surtheraunce of goddes worde and true religion, cōmissioners we∣re sent into al partes of the Realme, with commaū∣dementImages and beades put downe & abo¦lysshed in En¦gland. to cause all Images to be taken out of chur¦ches, for auoydyng of Idolatry, and to wyll men & women to leaue the vse of beades, hauyng with thē also godly and learned preachers assigned, whiche do exorted them to geue them self to true and vn∣fained worshippyng of God in the hart and minde, with due obedience to their prince. Richard Smith a doctour of diuinite recāted opē¦lyA recantaciō of Doctor Smith. at Paules crosse within ye citie of Lōdon diuers articles cōtained in two bokes which he had made,
one for the defence of the sacrifice of the Masse: an other to proue vnwritten verities to be beleued vn¦der payne of damnacion. This yere also in Enland commaundement wasProcessions lt in Eng∣lande. An hoost of men sent out of Englande into Scotlād geuen that processions should be no more vsed. This yere also in England the duke of Somer∣set then Lorde Protectour and the Erle of War∣wyke went into Scotlande with a strong army, re¦quiring the Scottes to fulfyll their promyse, made before to kyng Henry, concernyng the mariage of their younge Quene with the younge kynge of Englande, but the Scottes stubbournely came a∣gaynst them, with great puissaunce. And not longe after the two armyes encountred in the fieldes of Muscleborough, at a place called Pinker slough. The Englyshe part not thynkyng as than to haue battayle, at whiche tyme because the front of the Scottyshe armie was so terrybly set wyth pykes, the Englyshe horsemen (which gaue the fyrst onset) were fayne to recule backe, with losse of certayn gē∣tylmen: whiche reculing much abasshed the English footemen: but yet by the great wysedome and dily∣gence of the Lord Protectours grace, and the va∣liaunt hart and courage of the Earle of Warwike they gaue a newe onset, and without any notable fyght discomfited the Scottes, and obtayned the victory. At this tyme were slayne of the Scottes betwene thirtene and fourtene thousand, and not passyng an hundred Englyshemen.Chaunteries geuen to the ng of En∣gland. After Michlmas a Parliament was holden in England wherein chaunteries were geuen into the kynges handes, to be altered and disposed at
hys pleasure. It was also ordeined that the sacrament or com∣munionThe Cōmu∣mō ordeined to be receiued in both kin∣des. Latimer set at libertie. should be receiued of all men vnder bothe kyndes of breade and wyne. This yere also anone after the kynges coronatiō Maister Hughe Latimer a famous preacher, who had bene long detayned in miserable captiuite for ye Gospels sake by the procurement of the Popishe by shoppes, was deliuered and set at lybertie. In this yere the last day of Marche Fraūcis theThe death of the renche King. Frenche kyng ended his lyfe in the .xxxiii. yeare of his reigne, after that he had admonyshed his onely sonne Henry of the thynges pertaining to his king¦dome and commended hym to true officers and ser¦uauntes. After whome succeded the same Henry being the seconde of that name. His body was ca∣ried after .x. dayes to the brydge of S. Clodoalde, and from thence to the suburbes of Paris, into the Churche called the virgine of the fieldes: where by the commaundement of the kyng were brough the bodyes, of Frauncis the Dolphyne Duke of Brita∣igne, who dyed in the yere of. 1536. before, in the mo¦neth of August: And of Charles his brother, Duke of Orleans, whiche dyed in the yere of our lorde. 15 45. in the moneth of September, that they myght accompany the body of their father to his buriall: And so were the sayde thre bodyes brought with great pompe and solempnitie into the Churche of the blessed virgin at Parys, and from thence to S. Denis, where they were buried, the body of the fa∣ther being layde betwene his sonnes. This Frauncis the Frenche kyng was hyghly
commended for diuers singular giftes bothe of the mynde and of the body wherewith he was endued, but chiefly for his humanite and clemencie whiche he vsed towardes all men. He was beneficiall to mē endued with vertue, and liberall to men of lernyng. For by his benefite were the Latine, Greke and He brue tonges restored agayn to their puritie in Fraū¦ce, whereof he entertained & norished publike pro∣fessours, ordeining for them most ample stipendes▪ his other actes are here omitted to auoide prolixe In the moneth of December at Paris was S. Michaels bridge broken by the great power & vio¦lence of the waters so that the East part thereof fel downe quite, & the houses which were built theron were ouer throwen with a great parte of them that were annexed vnto them. IN the yere of our Lorde. 1548. in the moneth▪ of Iuly themperour sent an army of Spanyar¦des priuely to inuade the citie of Conitaunce▪ while the legates of Constaunce that were sent to August vnto themperour to intreate for peace we∣re not yet retourned homewarde. For he intended quite to extinguish the citie because they professed y• Gospell. Wherfore the sixt day of August early in y• mornyng the said army inuaded y• citie, & ouercame the basse towne which ioyneth to y• great bredge cō¦monly called Peter housen. When this was obtay∣ned, and ouercome at their first assaulte, some fell to spoiling and rouing, some to deflouring of virgins and honest matrones, & some gat thē to the bridge, and there made a bartaill with the citesens, whiche were constrained to reule back into the citie being
ouerpressed with the multitude of their enemies vnto whō they barred y• gates of the bredge. The bridge was ful of Spanish warriours, against whō the citesens could nothing preuayle vntil many pe∣ces of artillery whiche kept the bridge being losed by chaunce, but yet not without the will of God per sed the gate & ouerthrewe the enemies, & put thē in such feare yt they fled euerychone, setting the bridge on fyre & also Peterhousen, least the citesens should haue folowed & pursued after them. So that Con¦staunce sawe in one daye y• iuste punishmēt of pride, & the singular benefite of God towardes his electe, would to God they had not vnthankefully forgot∣ten this great benefite. Themperour after that he had in Germany setThe Empe∣rour retour∣neth out of Germany in∣to Flaūders The Duke of Saxon cap¦tiue. Leonora re∣tourned to themperoure The sonne of Ferdinando marieth them perours dau∣ghter. all thinges in ordre, & propounded a certain fourme in religion after the prescripte whereof they should liue while a counsaille were decreed, & hauing com∣mitted the Landgraue of Hessen in safe custody, re retourned into Flaunders bringing with hym the Duke of Saxon captiue. Thither came Leonora Themperours sister & late Quene to the Frenche king departed. This yere Maximiliane the first sonne of Ferdi∣nandus king of the Romaines toke to wife thempe¦rours daughter. This yere also y• king of Spay¦ne leauing his brother Maximiliane as gouernour in his absence, departed out of Spayn into Italy, & went frō thence to Trident & into Germany, & soThe eldest sonne of the Turke ∣keth insurr¦tion agynst his father. at y• last came into Flaūders to his father thēperour The same yere towardes the spring time the first begottē sonne of y• Turke, which was gone ouer to y• king of y• Persiās, because he thought his brother
should be by his father promoted before hym to the Empyre, assembled an army of Persianes, and ma∣de insurrection against his father, and inuaded the borders of Turkie nere vnto the lande of Persia, and had ouercome many places, vntyll his father beyng armed with fyue hundred thousande souldi∣ours came thither and caused the Persianes, being striken with feare, to recule. But they hauyng set on fyre all the townes and villages by the whiche they fled the space of fyue dayes, brought their ene∣my whiche folowed and pursued after them, too greate pennury, in so muche that an hundred thou¦sande of his men being dead thorough pouertie fa∣mine and pestilence, he was constrained of necessitie to returne thither agayne from whence he came▪ A certayne king in Aphrica toke Argieres andArgiers takē  the other places there about, with certayne ca∣stels and strong holdes whiche themperoure vsed for the defence of Spayne: and also certaine strong holdes in the coastes of Portingall towardes the sea occeane. In Englande at Easter was there a great con∣iunctionA mociō  corall. The masse & Images put downe in En¦glande. of rustikes in Cornuall, by ppysh priestes. There was also great disputation in the Parlia∣mēt that yere for putting downe of the masse. And Images were put downe in al churches thorough out Englande to auoyde Idolatry. This yere the last daye of Iuly Stephen Gar∣dinerThe byshop of Winche∣ster commit∣ted to thei our of o. byshop of Winchester in Englande, was com∣mitted to the Towre of London for papisme, and this sedicious opinion, that the kynges maiestie in his minoritie or none age coulde not make or ordei∣ne
any lawes in his Realme, as did Iosias & other godly & vertues princes, and gouernours in their dominions. This yere the mariage of priestes was grauntedThe maria∣ge of priestes graunted law¦full. An insurrec∣tion at Nor∣wiche. lawfull in England by the Lawes of God, to the vt¦ter abolyshement of all Papisticall sodomitry. This yere in august was a great insurrection of rustikes at Norwiche, one kite (a rustike) beyng their Capitayne▪ and the .xxvij. daye of August it was ended, foure thousand beyng slayne, the vic∣tory geuen (through goddes grace) by the handes of Iohn the noble Erle of Warwyke. At the same tyme the Cornysh and DeuonshyreThe rebelles in Cornwal  Deuonshere subdued. The byshop of London de¦posed and cō¦mitted to pri∣son. The duke of Somerset cō∣mitted to the tour of Lōdō. The death of the Pope. A wonderful vision sene be¦sydes Brun∣swyke. men were ouercome, and very many of them slayn, besydes many of their gentilmen taken. This yere also Bonner byshop of London was put from his byshoprike for his stubborne Popysh∣nes the first day of October, and for certainte obsti∣nate articles cōmitted to the Marshalsee, the peo∣ple muche reioysyng at it. In this moneth the Duke of Somerset was cō∣mitted to the toure, to the great lamentacion of ve∣ry many. In this moneth also died the Pope of Rome cal∣led Paule the thyrde. This yere the weke before Whitsontide, thre ho¦nest marchauntes and a younge lad, beinge honest mens sonnes of Brunswyke yourneyed from And∣warpe to Brunswyke, there to heare at that feast goddes word preached. And as they rode on Whit¦son euen after midnight halfway betwene Celle & Brunswyke on a heath ouer gainst a certayn farme, they
nor yet Christ hymselfe dyd knowe, namely, howe a man can serue twoo maisters at ones, God and the wicked worlde. Item howe we can be good Chri∣stianes & yet knowledge not Christ, nor helpe hym to beare his crosse, yea rather persecute hys poore membres, God geue vs grace to knowledge his son ne a ryght, suffre paciently all miuries and endure to the ende, that he may also at the great and feare∣full day of the lorde knowledge vs before hys hea∣uenly father, and hys vniuersal churche, and before all hys aungels. Amen. IN the yere of oure Lorde. 1550. the xix. dayeCapitayne Gambold slayne. of Ianuary Capitayne Gambolde, who was Capitayne of the Spanyardes that serued the kyng of Englande in his warres, and an other Capitaine was slayne without Newe gate in an euenyng, by a Spanyarde, whiche was taken and hanged the. xxiii. daye of Ianuary, and thre more with hym. in . the .xxviij. day of the same moneth was Hum∣frey arundell and Bury with two other mo draw∣ne hanged and quartered, for because they were the these capitaynes and mayntayners of the rebellion among the Cornyshe and Deuonshyre men.The duke of Somerset de¦lyuered out of  A generall p etme∣ne Englande  Frannce. The sixt day of February came the Duke of So¦merset out of the Tower, with greate reioyiyng of muche people. In the same moneth went out of Englande cer∣tayne lordes of the counsaill to Buileine, where cer¦tayne of the Frenche counsayll met with them and after long consultacion had and dyuers metynges betwene them, there was a generall peace conciu∣ded,
whiche peace was proclaimed the .xxix. daye of Marche folowyng. Also about the .xxv. day of Apryll folowyng theBullayne de¦lyuered. towne of Bullayne with the fortresses thereto be¦longyng was delyuered by the Englyshemen, into the Frenchemens handes. The second daye of May was brent at London30 one Boo∣cher in smythfielde a certayne woman called Ione Boo∣cher otherwyse called Ione of Barkyng for the hor¦rible heresy of the Apellites, Cerdonians, procliani∣tes, Valentinians, Manichees, Timotheans, A∣polinarianes, Nestorianes, & sedicious Anabapti∣stes of our tyme, whiche she helth commen with all them, of a set wilfulnesse, for all those hereticall pa∣triarkes was she sure to haue as maisters and doc∣tours of her pernicious errour, that Christ toke no fleshe of the virgine, as largely apeareth in the cro∣nicles. About this tyme there were certayne lyght per∣sones pretendyng a newe commotion in Kent, but they were apprehēded and dyuers of them for that trespas hanged. It is sayde that this yere the .xxi. daye of Mar∣cheA wonderful miracle oftor ue fallyng do¦wne from the element. in the countie of Carinte besydes the Lande of Bauariam Austryche by and aboute a lyttel towne called Claghenforth, it rayned corne out of the ele∣ment by the space of two houres, which rayne stret¦ched in lenght .vi. Germayn myles, and in breedth halfe a Germayne myle in some places: so that the sayd corne beyng some white and some browne lay in some places the thickenes of an hand broade vpō the groūde. Whereupō the people of the lande came
and gathered of the sayde corne, and brought it to the mylles, and baked thereof good & sauery bread. the significacion of whiche mistery is reserued to God alone, to whome be honoure glory and prayse in all thynges for euer and euer. Amen. This yere the kyng of Spayne went home a∣gayne out of Flaunders. This yere also there was a cruel proclamatiō setA moste nnicall persecution. furth by the vniuersitie of Louayne in the name of the Emperoures Maiestie, for the persecution of the faithfull Christianes, condempning al maner of scripture bookes as well Bibles as other in what tonge so euer they were written or translated that had bene printed within the space of .xxx. yeres be∣fore, with moste extreme death prosecutinge all the fauourours of the doctrine set furth by Martine Luther. Iohn Ecolampadius, Hulderike zwinglius, Iohn Caluine, or their ad herentes and condempning them for heretikes and their doctrine for moste pernicious and pe∣stilent heresy without any probable argumentes or good reasons. After this themperoure went vp agayne into Germany. The ende of this cronicle. The conclusion,
THus haue I, Christen reader, brefe comprehended the principall Storie  whiche I haue founde and thought ne¦cessary, as they haue bene done here & there thoroughout Christendom the∣se. xviij yeres last past. Howe be it if ought seme to be omitted and left out (whiche is a thyng that may lyghtely chaunce to any man) I be∣seche you that it be not interpretated in the worst parte, cōsideryng that I haue done my diligence to set furth y• truthe. Wherfore yf I haue bene truely infourmed it is wel. Also if it fortuned y• in the sayd Story were made mēcion of any man, vnto whō it might apeare, that iniury were done vnto hym, in that he is not so muche cōmended as some other, & woulde therefore be angry, let hym remembre i, at the faulte is not in me but in hymselfe. For it beco∣meth an historiographer or Story writer to de∣clare the truthe in all thynges. Wherfore if men vse honestie, their prayse shalbe the more, but if they walke inordinately, they deserue no prayse at all. For the actes and histories that are written ought to edifye and profyte them that come after, that they maye thereby learne what ought to bee es∣chued, and what to be folowed, whiche thynge without sure and certayne declaracion of the truth can not be done. Therefore let suche men be an∣gry wyth them selues, yf they bee greued at the matter, consideryng that they haue done nothyng
and thy of commendacion: And let them from hen∣the rth endeuoure them selues by honest conuersa∣the si and Christen behaueour to couer their shame. God then shall all thynges be counted vnto them cō∣uendable, for somuche as euery thynge that is past, is rather imputed to the tyme and to fortune, then to the will of the person, when the same is perceiued and knowen to haue forsaken the euyll whiche heA moste Tannicall persecution. vsed in tymes past and to folowe honestie and good¦nes. And although I haue abstayned from all that myght be tedious and bitter, as muche as the truth myght suffre, yet hath the common course of the worlde moued me to make he re this exceptiō: For y• Deuil alwayes wil be praised in his wicked dedes, but the discrete Christianes nede no suche commen∣dations. Wherfore also I commende me selfe next vnder God to the defence and prayer of all the fauourers of the truthe byn∣dyng me selfe to do the lyke for them to my power. Dated the twenty day of Au∣gust. 1550. ∴
BReuely to close vp this present chronicle. This yere is the ful .xxxi. Iubilie from chri¦stes incarnacion, declaring vnto vs christia¦nes here in Englande, by many most graciouse and godly argumētes, the glad iubilie of the lord, what though not to the pagane Papistes, arrogaūt Ana baptistes, licenciouse lybertines, cruell coueters, ex¦cedyng extorcioners, fre wyll men, new Iusticiari∣es, and sprete speakers, with other sediciouse secta∣ries, all sekyng to take the glory from Christ and to deminysh the frutes of his helthful sufferinges. To make this to you more familiar, the kynges moste excellent maiestie, by assent of his noble counsel, and fre vtteraunce of faithful ministers by them apoin∣ted, haue this yeare proclaymed a godly christen fre¦dome to the longe captiued consciences of his natu¦ral and obedient subiectes (I speake nothing of the forenamed obstinates) none otherwise than dyd Moyses to the children of Israell, Leuit. 25. and no¦ble kyng Iosias to their posteritie vnder hym. 2. Paralip. 34. the temples and aulters in sundry pla¦ces destroied, and the true christiante in many poin∣tes restored. Considre the lent preachynges that were this yeare afore the kyng, the delyueraunce of the duke of Somerset, the change in London dyo∣cese, the necessary sequestracion of Gardyner, Bon∣ner, Hethe, and other proude popish Babylonians, the godly discourse of Peter Martir the inexpug∣nable defence of the Archebyshop of Caunterbury for ye full ouerthrowe of Idolatry, with other good chaunces more whiche are apparaunt though they be not named, are manifest tokens of the premysses,
and speciall good argumentes of this Iubylie of grace. Let vs therefore with our noble yonge Io∣sias be thankefull vnto God in the latter parte of this yeare holdyng holy in soule the perfyght pas∣seouer of the lorde. And let vs styll valiauntly fight with the two edged sworde against the mali∣ciouse kyng of Egypte or blasphemouse Byshop of Rome and all his trayte∣rouse trayne, after the Godly example of the first Iosias. 2. Paralip. 35. So be it.
A table of those thyn¦ges that be conteyned in thys boke worthy of memory. A ABbas Ioa∣chyms pro∣phecy, cxci Abel kylled for the trewe worshyp of God, fol. ij Abia fo. xiiij. Abraham was in Ninus tyme, ix. the tyme of ye promise made to hym vntyll the goyng oute of Egypt. xij. the renuyng of the promyse to him, fo. ix Absalon the wycked. fo. xiiii Achas fo. xvi Achilles fo. xxi Accursius the man of law. clvij Adam and Eue, fo. i. He and Seth the setters forth of Astro¦logy Fo. ij Adelricus fo. cxij Adoulfus County of Nassau is made Emperour fo. clxx Adrianus a well learned Empe¦rour, was connyng in Astro∣nomy, fo. xciiij. and mercy∣full toward Christian men, fo. xcv Adrianus byshop of Rome com¦playneth when he should dye, fo. clviij Adultery punyshed, xxi. xxvij. c the occasyon of the battel of Troye. fo. xxi Aetius fo. cxvij Afflictyon temporall and the begynnyng therof .i. the cause of them fo. xi Agar fo. x Agarenes, cxxi. why Mahomet dyd channge the name to Sa∣racens fo. cxxij Aggeus fo. xlix Agrippa vnder whom Ierusa∣lem was spoyled fo. lxxvi Alaricus xi. wynneth Rome. cxi Albany was ouerthrowen, fo. xxvij Alberte duke of Eastenryche, clxix. cxcix. clxxx. Is Empe∣peroure, clxx. called Marques Achylles, clxxix. the seconde fo. clxxx Alcibiades, liiij. is dryuen from the Athenians. liiij. is slayne agaynst all ryght, lv. was no∣ble in feates of warre. fo. lv Alexander sonne to Amintas xlii. xlvij. The greate, lx. the begynnyng of his monar∣chy. lxij. hys elders, lx. hys deedes, lxi. Aristoteles Scoler lviij. he maketh greate battels
in Asia wyth smal power. lx. hys gentellues. lxij. lyttel sett by for syghte matters. lxi. he kepeth an eare for the gyltye. lxiij. his setting forth against ye Iewes. lxiij. howe greate hys hoost was. lxi. hys reuerence toward the hygh priestes of the Iewes. lxiij. hys kyng∣dome is made foure kyngdo∣mes. liiiij the yonger sonne of Hircanus. lxxiij. he is called the Goote. lx. Seuerus. xcvij. a byshop of Rome. ciii. hys extreme tyranny agaynst the emperoure Frederycke. clx Altonsus kyng of Spayne, and an Astronomer. clxviij. kynge of Naples. fo. clxxxiiij Alphonse diasye a traytours rtherer. fo. cclxij. Allegories of Origene nothyng sett by. fo. xcvi Alzachenus kyng fo ccvi. Aasyas kyng geuen to God∣lynes. fo. xv. Ambision punyshed. xxi. xxxix. lxiiij. cxxiiij. cxxxv. cxlv Ambrose sprakyng of Theodo∣sius fo cxc Amon the wycked. fo. xvij Ams fo. xvi Amuus fo▪ xxv Aastasius. cxviij. was put in∣to a monastery. fo. cxxv. Amurates became a mouche, fo. clxxxi Amyntas kyng of Macedony fo. xlii. Ancus Marlius. fo. xxvij Anabaptistes do resemble the Essis. lxxiiij. They take the cytye of Mynster in West∣phalen, and they make them∣selfe a kyng. fo. cci. ccvij ccviij Andrewe Carolostade. clxxxviij Andrew de Aurea. cxcix. ccvij. Anthony de Lena. fo. cxcix Anthony. fo. lxxxvi. Pis. xcv. Bassianua. fo. xcvi Anne Bollen behedded. fo. ccx Anne Askew burned fo. cclxx AntiChriste .lxix. Mahomet a a part of hym. fo. cxxij Antigonus lxiiii. lxvi Antiochus the great. lxvi. lxvij. the occasyon of the warre wyth the Romaynes. lxvij. Epiphanes is lent to Rome for a pledge. lxvij. Wherefore called Epiphanes. ibidem. his iorney into Egypt. lxviij. to Ie¦rusalem. ibidem. his seconde iorney to Ierusalem. lxix. the tyranny of hym in the cytye, ibid Danyel resembleth hym to Antichrist. ibid. his vnpu∣nyshemente for hys vngod∣lynesse. lxx. Hierax. lxvi. Eu∣pater. lxxvi. Sedetes. lxx. So∣ter. lxvi. Theos. lxvi. Epi∣mates. fo. lxvij Antipater. lxix. prince of Iou∣mea. lxxiii. Is made gouer∣ner of Iurp by Iulius. Cesar. fo. lxxv▪ Answer at Delphis. fo. xxiiij.
Appius vnshamefast and a Ty¦rant folix. An apparition wounderfull in Denmarke fo. cciiij Apsymarus o. cxxv Arboces fo. xlviij Arbogastes fo. cviij Arcadins fo. cix Archelaus was exyled of Au∣gustus fo. lxxv Areta kyng of Arabia. lxxiij Argires fo. cclxxviij Arideus brother to Alexander. fo. lxiiij Aristobulus fo. lxxiij Aristoteles. lvij. his elders, lviij his philosophi. fo. xcvi Arminius fo. lxxxviij. Arsames fo. liij Arnoldus, Duke of Banary fo. cxxxix Arnolfus Emperoure. cxxxv Arrius an open reader in the schole of Alexandria. ciiij. his death. ibid. he was the forerun¦ner of Mahomet. cv. his doc∣tryne. fo. ciiij Artaxarxses wyth the long hād mnemon. lij. wherfore he was called with the long hand. xxx Artycles of the seditious Rusti∣kes fo. clxxxviij. Aristona fo. xlviij. Assuerus fo. xxx. xlviij. Asatoke away y• wycked ser∣uice of god. fo. xiiij. Ascanius Iulius fo. xxi Asia decayed fo. lx Astronomy was renewed by Frederyke the seconde. clxiiij. Astyages dreame. xxxi. hys cru∣eltye fo. xxxij. Ataulphus king of the Gooths fo. cxi. Athalia. fo. xv Athanasius beynge banyshed out of Egypt flyeth to Tryer fo. cv. Athens burned, xlvij. the vn∣shamfast flattery of them. lxv. the obstynacy and malipart∣nesse of them in tyme of warre confirmed also wyth a decre, liiij. The yeldynge of them. fo. lv. Atossa. fo. xlviij. Attila. cxij. the death of hym, cxvij. his battel at Toulhouse ibidem. he called hym selfe the scourge of God, ibidem. hys deedes fo. cxvi Auenion a cytye papall. clxxiiij August an parliament lxxxvi S. Augustine of hippo. cxv. his wrytynge agaynst Pelagius. fo. cix Augustulus. lxxxvi▪ fo. cxviij. Augustus. ibid. Whence com∣meth the callyng of Augustus fo. lxxxvi Aurelianus. c. studious in the discipline of warre. ibidem Ausborough parlyamēt. clxxxix Azo a lawer. fo. clvij B Babylon the head cytye of the Monarchy fo. xxxiiij Bayre who are the Dukes
clix. the warre of Baperland fo. clxxxvi Balthazar kyng of Babylon. fo. xix Bartholdus Gracianus, clvij. Duke of Reyge. fo. clxi Barbarossa inadeth the kyng∣dome of Tnesse. ccvi. ccxxiij. shypwrake. ccxxiiij. he beseged castell noa, ccxxvi. He wyn∣neth it fo. ccxxvi D. Barnes burned, fo. ccxv Battell by rttlyng. fo. clxiv Beggyng orders, fo. clxiij Bellisaris very euyll rewar∣ded of Iustus. fo. cxviij. cxix Benedictus the xi. fo. clxxiiij S. Barnard made the peace be∣twene the Emperour Lora∣dus and Lotharius. fo. clvi Beringars prince of Foroi∣ilium. cxxxvn. he yeldeth him¦selfe to Otho, fo. cxlij. Beringars of the sacrament fo. cl. Bedam England. fo. cxxv Ben Lo an. fo. lxxvi Besus distoyaltye is an exam∣ple of vengeaunce. fo. lxij Besus temple in Syria, fo. lxvij Bible burnt, lxix is translated, lxxi. sent into all countries, fo. ciij Bishop, hys cracke. clxi. the payde and crueltye of the by∣shop of Rome, clxiij. an exam¦ple of the Rom. byshops dis∣loyaltye and tyranny, clviij. Example of most notable cru¦elnesse, of a Rom. bysh. cxxxvi the cyuyll warre raysed in Germany by the B. of Rom. cliij. Thre byshops of Rome strynyng for the Byshoprpcke were put donne, cxlij. cxlix. the disloyaltye of the byshop of Rome, in transferrynge the empyre to Frenchmē, cxxxiiij the tyranny of the byshop of Rom, cxxxvi. Stye for the election of the bish. of Rome cxix. the fyrste perturbatyon for the chosynge of the by∣shop of Rome. cxix. Whe∣ther an vnyuersal byshop ou∣ght to be, cxx. all the byshops of Denmarke deposed, ccxv. the diuision of the Rom. by∣shops, fo. clxxvij Bizantium, fo. ciij Blasphemyes neuer vnpuny∣shed fo. xix Bohemes the prynce is made a kyng, clx. they were vanqy∣shed wyth there kyng Lecho, cxxxi. they are Germanies, cxvi. the rysynge agaynst the priestes and monckes, clxvi. Why it hath the anthoritye of the election, fo. cxlvi Bolen wonne fo. cliij. Bolē geuē vp to the Englysh∣men. cliij. delyuered. cclxxvij. Bonesacius, cxxi. What tyme he preached in Germanye, cxxvi. the feat sayeng of Bone facius the eyght fo. clxx Bouer bysh. of London, depo∣sed. fo. cclxx Brabanders fo. cxliiij.
Brandenborow. cxxxix. Lxliij Breda towne, burnt, ccxv Brethren thre in nombre rayg∣ned together, fo. cxv Bridge burnynge by Mentz, what it signifyeth. fo. cxxxij. Bruno a Saxon was made B. of Rome, fo. cxlv Brutus fo. lxxxv Burgundyons were Saxons, fo. cviij C CAin fo. ij Caius caligula, fo. xc Calfe monstreous borne by the sea coast about Lindow fo. cc. Callinicus fo. lxvi Christen fayth planted in the kyngdom of Cambia. ccxvi. Cambises. xxx. xxxvii. hys cru∣ell deede, hys crueles to∣warde hys syster the quene xxxix. an example in hym of vengeaunce. fo. xxxix Camillus fo. lix Captayne Gambolde slayne. fo. cclxxvi Cardinals beganne. cxlix. why they had aucthoritye geuen vnto them to choyse the Po∣pes. fo. clij Carinus fo. cij Catholykes fo. ccxxxiiij Charles the greate. cxxvij. hys elders were graunde may∣sters. cxxix. is borne in In∣gelheim, ibidem. hys deedes ibidem. He optayneth Lom∣bardy. cxxx. Hys modestye ibidem. he was made Empe∣roure ouer the Weste. cxxxi. hys diligence in the tyme of peace, ibidem. he founded thre vniuersytyes. ibidem. he was learned in Greke and Latin. cxxxij. hys genealogy he readeth Saynt Augustyn. ibidem. the grosse. cxxxv. the balde. cxxxiiij. the death. cxxxv the fourth. clv. made the gol∣den boule. clxxv. wyth the bunched backe. clxxxij. what Electors choose Charles the fyft, that now is Emperoure clxxxvij. he is crowned Empe¦roure. fo. clxxxix Carthago, the seconde ware of Carthago. lxxviij. the occa∣sion of it in Spayne, ibidem. the thyrde warre of it. lxxix. Disputatyon whether it shuld be wholy spoyled and ouer∣throwen▪ ibidem▪ it is destroy∣ed. lxxx. the consultatyon of destroyeng it. lxxxi. Cato. lxxix. he slewe hym selfe fo. lxxxiiij Cassius fo. lxxxv Cassanders tyranny. fo. lxv Castell Angell. fo. cxxxiiij Catti. fo. xciij. Caldees vr fo. ix. Cesar beynge full of Clemency and gentelnesse lxxxiii. Cham fo. iiij.
Chaunteres geuen to the kyng o. CCixxij. Cherusa. fo. lxxxviij Chs the heretycke was kylled wyth the fallyng of an house. fo. xiiij. Cristen men were persecuted vnder ranus. xv. vnder iberius. xc. vnder Doii∣a. xciij. xciiij. vnder Adria. xcv. vnder Decian. xcx. vn∣der Arelia, C. vnder Dio∣cltin. fo. Cij Christs kyngedome allwaye troubled *v. Meruelouslye presrued. *▪ ibidm. hys com∣mynge. xlix. whan he was borne. lxv. lxxxvij. baptyzed lxxxix. crucysyd. ibidem. Chrche begynnth▪ i. from oe tyll Abraham. vi. the ate of it in thys tyme. xxij. how much God careth for his churche and congregation. xxv. where it is▪ lxxxix. o was beycyall to it. fo. Cxliij. Christre kyng of Denmarke after hys returne taken pry∣soner of hys owne councell. CCxix. CCix Cicero fo. lxxxiij Cyo sonne to Milads. fo▪ xiij Cbri the Germaines of Go∣er. v. the batll o ri wyth the Romayns. lxxxi. Cirumcision is the token of promyse. ix. when the circum∣cision was geuen o▪ x Clause Rodai was buylded of Iulius Cesar. fo. Cx. Clands. fo. xc Clemens the seuenth is taken Cxxxix. the notable crultye of Clewence wyh. of Rome agaynst ouradus. Clxviij. t dyth. CCv Clemency after victory. Cxiij Cleopatra. lxiiij▪ syer to Iu∣lius. fo. lxxi. Clee. CCxlvi. CCij. Cs fo. xij Collection for the poore. CCxxi lv. Coetes see. Cv▪ Cxci clxxxix in the tyme of Nero. xi▪ be∣fore pestylence and fayn,  Iohn Frederikes tye duke of Saxony Cxc Comods fo. xcvi Cootious of vpladye en fo. Clxxxvij Commotion in Cornewall. fo. CCxxviij. Councell of Nice. C. Basell Cixxx. Raiuesborough. Cxcvi. Maa. CC. Witteborough CCxiiij. Rome. CCxxi. lviij. Cocyra the Turke adeth, fo. CCxc fo. Cxiiij. Constns pryely inuadeth. CClxxiij. Cons. Ci. Cv. he becom¦meth an Aan. fo Ciii. Cots. . Ciij. hys dili∣gnce to hepe the Gospell. Ciij. the aunceters of hym, Ciii▪ the soe of Heralius, Cxxiiij. Pogonatus . y• o
of Leo was urnamed Copro∣ius. Cxxv. Leo the fourth soe. ibidem. Emperoure of Constantinople. fo. Clxxxij. Constantinople. Ciij. a notable crueltye of the Turke, whan he had wonne it. Clxxxij. Prophesyes of recoueryng of it. fo. Cxc. Conrad the fyrst. Cxxxvij. duke of Frankes. Cl. the seconde vproure was wyth hys bro∣ther. ibidem. the thyrde was hys owne sonne. ibidem. the second. cxlviij. a Swabe. clij he went to Ierusalem against the Saraces. ibidem. The fourth. fo. Clxvij Copnhagen besyeged by the kyng. ccxiiij. the vniuersyte furnyshed. fo. ccxiij. Corona taken. Cxcix. Cosdroa kyng of the Persyans fo Cxxi. Crescentis a Romayne puny∣shed for couetyng the empyre fo. Cxliiij. Cresus kyng of Asia. xxxiij. his sayeng. ibidem. a ery sayeng fo. xxxiij Cruelltye. xxxij. xxxiij xxxvi Co duke of Bayre. fo. Cl Cyprianus the marter. xcix Cyrillus made answere to Iu∣liaus Apostata cvij Cyrus. xxxi. lij. hys kinred extinguished. liij. hys father xxxi. what is to be consydered in hym. xxxiiij. howe he gatt Babylon. ibidem. he was tau∣ght of Daiell. xxxv. hys say∣eng, ibid. the battel of the S¦thias agaynst him. xxxvi. Cyrsylus▪ xlv. he and hys yfe are stoned. fo. xlv D Dalmacyans flye to the Tur∣kes. CCxxvi. Damasus the kyngdome of Mahomet. fo. Cxxij. Danyell a youngman. xviij. xc. a councelar of kynge Cyrus. xxxvi. of y• Peseis. xxxvi his place of the vij weekes. xli. a place of Mahomet is expoun∣ded. fo. cxiij. Darius raygneth wyth Cyrus xxx. how great a settyng forth he made into Grece. xlii. the last. lii. is ouercome of Alex∣ander. lxij. is made kynge of Persia. xli. hys graue sayenge. fo. xlij Dauid fo. xiiij. Decius Cesar fo. xcviij Deetrius kyng of Macedo∣nia. lxv. lxvi. lxx. Desiderius kyng of ombardy. Cxxx. Diethricus of Bera. some call him Theodorus. cxiij Cxiij. Didius Iulius. fo. xcvi. Digestes. fo. cxix. Diocletianus. fo. Cij. Diuision after Gregorius the eleuenth. fo. clxxvi Doctrine before the worldes de. fo. xvij.
Dogges & cattes eaten. ccxiiij. Dogges beyng fthfull. xxxix Dolphyn and Armeniackes go into Germany. fo. clxxxij Domitin. fo. xciij Dominick and Francis. clxiij col the walche. clxxx. he gaue Dladistaus an horsse, ibidem Dronkennes ringeth in most wyked maers. fo. xxxix Drss. fo. lxxxviij E Earthquake. fo. ccxliiij Ebrrous duke, cxxxviij. the Palate fo. cxl. Ekis. ccxxxiiij. hys death fo. ccxlix Eclips of the soe. xcviij Eclips. fo. cclij Edo fo. cxxiij Edotes fo. x Edward due of Somest and lorde protector, committd to the Tower. cclxv. delyuered out agayne. cclxvi Edward the thyrd kyng of En∣gland and Frederyke eale of Misn refuseth the dignitye Emperiall. fo. clxxiiij Egypte was garnyshed wyth Mathematycall scyences, xv. from whence they come and there kyngdome. viij. Egusa the battel there. lxxvij Elyas was in the myddell part of the world fo. xv Elye hath diuided the world i thre ages, * xij. he was taken vp in to heauen in the myddel age of the worlde. fo. xv Elizens ibidem S. Elizabeth. fo. clxiiij. Emanuel Emperoure of Con∣stantynople fo. clvij Emperoure, he muste be sa∣ued & kept by al meanes, * xv Emperoure haue there boun∣des. xij. the empyre is transla∣ted to the Saxons, cxxxviij. the endeuour and faythfulnes in kepynge of the empyre, cxliiij. a rehearsall of the Em∣peroures o Rome that was excommunicated. clxiiij. the Emperoure turneth into Ita∣ly. cxcix. cc. ccx. ccxxij. by what occasion the Allains deceyuer from the empyre. cxxi he commeth into Flaunders thorough Fraunce. ccxxvi. to Paris. ccxxviij▪ he forbyddeth good bokes to be redde. ccxxx. ccxxxij. ccxxxviij. ccxlviij. ccxlv ccl. ccliij. cclxiiij. cclxxiiij Eas. xxi. Sils. clxxviij. Enoch is an example of euer∣lastyng lyfe. ij. hys cyte. ij. Eloes fo. v. Erasmus death. fo. ccxvi. Erforde fo. clxi Ernestus duke of Swaben fo. cxlviij Esay. xvi. hys death. xvij. Esau. . wherfore he was called Edome. fo. x
Esdras was learned in the par∣sian toung. xxi. he gathered together the bokes of the by∣ble. fo lj Esseis. fo. lxxiiij Easten ryche the fyrste mencion cxlix. when there dukedome began fo. clix Eilerodach fo. xix. Euphrates xxxiiij. Euangelycall bound is opened by the French kynge. fo. cc ccxiij. Example for all kynges. ccxiiij Examples of engeaūce. iij. xi. xv. xxvi. xxvij. lix. lxv. lxvij. lxxvi. xcvij. xcix. cvi. cviij. cxiij cxxi. cxxiiij. cxl. cliiij. clxx Example of grace and good∣esse fo. x. clxiij Example of the feare of God. fo. xvi. lxvi Example of pytie. xxxiij. Example of greate crueltye fo. xxxvi. Example of notable intempe∣raunce fo. xl. Example of vnkyndnes. liij. Example o maynteyne vnitye fo. vi Example of mans wysedome, fo. lxix Example of the vehemēt wrath of god. fo. lxxxi. xcij Exāple of disloyaltye. cxij. cxvi Example of maintenance of vertue fo. xcvij. Example of great presumption fo. xcix Example that noman can hurte hym whome God wylleth good. fo. cxlv Ezechias. xvi. a godly king. ii. F Fabian and Cyprian martyres fo. xcix. xcviij. Felix byshop of Rome, a dis∣sembler fo. cvi Ferdynand kyng of Hungary fo. clcxxix. ccxxxij. Figures of crosses sene vpon garmentes. fo. clxxxvi. Flauius Claudius fo. c Fleshe eaten and fyrst permit∣ted fo. iij Focas dyd graunte the fyrste prymacy to the byshop of Ro. fo. cxxi. Forgettfulnes of iniuyes is ordeyned. fo. lvi. Frankes are ouercome in bat∣tayll. c. they sett them selues agaynst the Romaines, ibid. there of sprynge. cxxviij. there deedes and by what occasion they deceyuered from the em∣pyre. ibidem. the dukes of Frankes come of ewes the gentell. cxxxiij. the occasion of battel betwene the Frankes and Saxons. fo. xxij. Francia or Fraunce is part of Gallia, cxxix. by what occasi∣on Gallia or Fraunce was dyuyded from Germanye. cxxxiij. French threatenynges fo. cxxxiiij Fraunces the french kynge ta∣ken▪ fo. clxxxvij
holy and prophane *x What they doo teache* x. the Ger∣maines hystorye wryters wer vnlearned. cxlv. the histories of the Iewes are elder then the Greekes. fo. xx. the histo∣ryes of the grekes begyune at the Persians. fo. xxviij Himelsuita. fo. cxij. Hipocrates fo. lvij Histius subteltye in makyng an vproure. fo. xliij Hollande and Sealande, there was a greate inundatyon of water. cxcix Homerus when he lyued. xxiiij his bokes are a mirror. xxv Honorius fo. cix Hungaryans are called. cxvi they are assalted wyth warre by Charles the greate, cxxxi. they spoyle Germany and Italy. cxxxvi. they be van∣quished. cxli. they becoome contrybutaryes to the Turke CCxxxi. CCxxxij Hungarye a greate example. xviij Hugo: prynce of Frauce, cxlij Hulderych Zuinglius▪ fo. Clxxxviij. CCxiiij Huldryke duke of Wyrtenberg restored to hys dmyyon. ccij Hunyades hurteth the Turkes greueously. clxxxi. Husse in Bohem ryseth agaynst the pope. Clxxvi. Clxxviij I Iacob. x. he was called Israel. x Iaddus the hyghe prieste▪ lxiij. Wherfore Ianus hath two visages fo. iiij Ianna the secōd Hyrcanus. lxxij Iames the moor lxxvi Iames the kyng of Scottes ma ryeth the Freinch kynges dau∣ghter. ccxvi Iaphet iiij Iason monynge Antiochus to take Hierusalem lxviij Idolatry the fyrst occasyon, ix. the hedde thereof .xxiij. the kyndes of it by the Gre∣kes. xxiij. the punishment of idolaters. xvi. howe muche it differeth from Christianyte xxiij. and Idoll in the temple of God fo. lxix. xc Ieconias hauynge a truste to gods promyses is kept, xviij. The Iewes are eldar. xv. the rayse an vproure thorough one Messias. xcv. are mooste auncient. xx. Ierusalem the state of it vn∣der Antiochus. lxvij. the de∣struction. xix. xcij. straunge thinges seen before the destruc¦tion of her. xciij Iesus the hygh priest, fo. xxxv. Ioachas. xviij. Ioachim or Ie∣conias. ibid. Ioakim. ibidem. Ioachim the yong marques of Branden borough. CCxxix Ioiada. xv. Ioachim. xv. Ioas. xv. Ioathain. xvi. Ihon Hercanus. lxxiij. Iohn Baptist. lxxvi Iohn the Apostle returneth out
of Pathmos fo. xciiij Ihon Stabius an Astronomer fo. cxlv Ihon the eyght byshop of Ro. a woman fo. cxxxiiij Ihon Chrispus fo. ccxx Ihon the twelfth byshop of Ro me bostede fo. clxxiij Ihon kynge of Hierusalē. clxv. Ihon Husse teacheth openly a∣gayust pardons, fo. clxxvi clxxviij Ihon Cassels burned cclxx. Ihon Humyades fo. clxxxi Ihon Oecolāpadius. clxxxviij The death of Iohn duke of Saxon. fo. cxcix Ihon Wida kyng of Hungary fo. ccxxxij Ihon Diasy fo. cclxiij Ihon Ecke fo. ccxxviij Iohaune bocher fo. cclxxvij Ihon Frederike duke of Sax∣on taken captyue, fo. cclxxiiij Images and beades put doune in England fo. cclxxij Iusurrectiou at Gent, ccxxvi Ionas fo. xvi Iona has fo. lxxij Ioram a setter vp of new idola∣try fo. xv. Iosaphat studiose in religion fo. xv Ioseph a man sage and holy. x. Iosias fo. xvij Iones are the fyrst Grekes. iiij Iouiianus a godly Emperour fo. cvij Irene daughter to the Empe∣rour of Constahtynople. clxij Iren cxxv Irnerius the restorar of the lawes clvi Isake a figur of Christ fo. x Ismael fo. x Iuda a kyngdom fo. xix Iudges at Athens dyd sweare fo. lxiij Iudas Machabeus power. lxix lxxij Iudyth xlviij Iulianus Apostata. cvi▪ he is made Emperour, ibidem▪ at Strasborough. cvi. he forbad Christen men the authorytye of warrfare. cvij. hys death is an exāple of veugeauuce. cvij Iulyau the Cardynal. fo. clxxxi Iulius a man aduysed, and a louer of peace. lxxxiij. he is called Cesar, lxxxvi The orderyng of the yeare was be∣goen lxxxiiij Iulius byshop of Rome was discomfyted in a battayl by the cyte Raueunas vpon Ea∣ster day fo. clxxxvi Iupiter called vpou agayust tempests. xxiij Iustmus, cxviij. the second. cxx. Iustinianus, cxviij. cxxiiij. he re∣stored the lawes. fo. cxix K The kyngdome of the worlde and Christes kyngdome * xvi Que Katheryn dowager dy∣eth, fo. ccx The institution of kyngdomes
and of kynges is of God. xiij The chaunsyng and reynge of kyngedomes displeaseth God. riiij. What the muta∣tions of them do signifie. cxcij Kyng of Anabaptilles Knypperdullynge & Crafting fo. CCviij L Lacedemonians valiauntnes, xlv. they fyght with the The∣baus: and are discosyted. lvi Landersey Landtgraue fo. CClvij. Latier at libertye fo. cclxxiij Latium fo. Cxxi The institution of cyup power and of all lawes i. clvi Lawes cyuyll restored by Iusti¦nianus fo. Cxix Law was geuen fo. xi Lawes of Solou concernyng vagabounds. fo. xxxviij Lawes of the Romaynes. lviij the occasion of them. lviij Lawes of Draco. xxxviij Lawfull callyng must be en∣sued fo. lxv Let fo. xcv Leo the thyrde named Leouo∣machus fo. Cxxv Leo the fourth Cxxv. Leots ibidem Lewes the gentyll. cxxxij. he is taken by hys sonne. Cxxxiij Lewes the seconde buryed at Mylan. Cxxxiiij Lewes the thyrd. Cxxxvi. he is restored to ye realme of fraūce Cxlij. Lewes the berdyd. Cxli Lewes the Landtgraue. Clxv Lewes the Bayer. fo. Clxxi Lewes is excōmunicated. clxxij Lewes the Romayn. Clxxiij Lewes king of Fraūce. clxxxvi Liberius bysh▪ of Rom. cvi. Linus bysh▪ of Rom. xci Lombardy. fo. Cxv Longimanus, wyth the long haud fo. xlviij Lothoius. Cxxxij. the Saxon, Cxv. the brethren of hym were these: Lewes, Germanicus, & Charles the bolde. Cxxxiij. Lothring. ibidem Laurentius Miniatensis, an astronomer fo. Cxc Lubcke fo. Clix Lucius Warrus. fo. xcv Lucrece xxvij. Lupoldus▪ Clxxij. duke of Ea∣stenryche. Clxxv. was slayne by the Swytzers. ibid▪ Luxsborough parliamente. fo fo. CCxlij. Lysander fo. liiij M The Macedonians. iiij. the oc∣casyon of the warre of Mace¦donia. lxxviij Machabees. lxxiij. the power of them. lxix. ther kyngs. lxxiij Macrinus fo. xcvij Magi fo. iiij Magog fo. Cxxiij Magnentius an example of vn kyndnes. Cvi. he slayeth hym selfe fo. cvi.
Mahomete. xcvi. wounders seen in Italy before hys com∣myng. Cxx. the occasions of hys kyngdome. Cxxi. why his religion is accepted. lxix. the form of his relygiō. Cxxij. an Arabiā prophet. Cxxi. he sub∣dued Arabia. Cxxij. Why he wold be called a Saraen for an Agaren, ibidem. they be∣sieged Hadriantum. Clxxxiiij. the place of Danyel, of Ma∣homet. Cxxij. what he sygni∣fyeth. fo. Cxxiij Manfyld battayll Ciij Manasse a wycked kyng. xvij. an example of repentaunce, fo. xv. Manes begynner of the Ma∣naches sect borne in Persia, Ci. hys doctryne. ibidem Manichei ibidem Mantua fo. cxcix Marcus Cicero fo. lxxxvi Marcus Antonius fo. xcv Mardonius a capitayne. xlvij Mariages of priestes. CClxxv Maran. fo. CCxxxix Mary lady Regent. fo. Cxivi Marques of Brandenborough receaueth the gospell. CCxxx Marius was made captayn a∣gaynst the Cimbry. lxxxi. he was causser of an vproure lxxxi hys tyranny. lxxxij. Martyn Luther. Clxxxvij. dy∣eth. fo. CCix. Marten of Rosheim. CCxliij Mary Lady Regent enuadeth Picardy. fo. CCxix Mathaths fo. xxj Mathematica ars dryuen oute of Rome. fo. xciij Maurice duke. fo. CCxl. cclvi. cclxviij. Mauritius Emperour. Cxx. Maximianus fo. Cii Maxentius. ibid. he was drow∣ued in the Tybur fo. Ciij Maximilian. Clxxxiij. is taken at Brudges. Clxxxiiij. he war reth agaynst the Venetians, fo. Clxxxvi Maximinus subdued Germa∣ny. fo. xcvij Maximinus and Arbogastes are examples of disoyalte, Cviij. he warreth agaynst the Venetians fo. cviij Meghlyne burned. fo. cclxv Motate behedded. ccxxv. Melanthon & Eckius. ccxxxiij the reason concernyng religion. ccxxviij Men tenne in nomber were sent to Grece. lviij. they were deposed fo. lix Metasthenes fo. xxix Mesius suffesius death. xxvij Micheas fo. xvi. Melciades counsell. xliij. He was yll entreated of the Athe∣nians. xliij. hys renowmed vi∣ctory ibidem Mylane. Clix. ccxi. the duke ma¦ryeth y• kyng of Denmarkes daughter. CCvi. ccxi. Minia. fo. xxij Myns of syluer in Misia, who found them fyrst. cxliij
Mithridates. fo. lxxxi. Monarchies what they are and of what puissance* xiiij. there be onely foure Monarchyes, xiiij. they are propoued to Da¦uyell. v. the ende of the fyrste Monarchy. xx. a monarchye is the best forme of an empyre or realme. xl. the begynnynge of the thyrde Monarchy. lix. Wherefore Monarchyes are chefly ordeyned of God. cxxi Wherfore Monarchyes and princes are sent of God. lxxvij Monasteryes were scholes in tyme past fo. cxxxi Syr Thomas Moore Chaun∣celor of England: and the by∣shop of Rochester, behedded fo. ccix The bes of Moses are found fo. xvij Moonkes are brought to wryte clvij Maurus duke. fo. ccxl. cclvi. cclxviij. N Nabuchodonesor. xviij. He was conuerted by Danyell, fo. xix Narses, fo. cxiiij. cxviij Nathan Dauid sonne▪ fo. xv. Nauu fo. clxxxiij The Counte of Nasowe ccxiii Naxus ccxx oth gods hooter. vi. Nero fo. xc fo. xciij Nyce Counsell fo. ciij The Emperour enterteyned at Nyce. fo. ccxxij Nicolaus the noble. fo. clxxiij Nicolaus the fyft a fauourer of learnyng fo. clxxxiiij Nichomachus fo. lviij Ninine fo. vi Ninus kyng of Spria fo. vij. Norynbergh is taken by Henry the fyft. cliij. ccxxxv. the Ca∣stel buylded. fo. ccxxiiij. Normandys fell into Frannce cxxxv. they are ouercome, fo. cxxxv Norwych insurrectyon. cclxxv Nouacyaus heresy is condem∣ned fo. xcix Castel nona cunaded. fo. ccxxiij Numitor fo. xxv Nuce clxxxiii O Occan a reprouer of the bysh. of Rom. fo. clxxij Ochosias fo. xv Octanius Augustus. fo. lxxxvi Oecolampadius lxxxviij Olympians began. fo. xx. Oldenborough Erle, and the Lubycks innaded the Duke∣dome of Holsats fo. cciij. Onedeluburgh Orchomenus. fo. xxij Origen a reacher of Alexandri fo. xcvi. Oseas. fo. xvi. Otanes fo. xl. Othacarus. cxij. kynge of the Bohems. fo. clxix
Othomannus. Cxxiij. Clxx. Otho the tyrt. xci. Cxl. the vp∣coures raysed agaynst hym, cxl. the aunswere of hym to the Frēchmens threatenyngs cxli. duke of Saxon. cxxxvij. he made the firste an othe to to the byshop of Rome. cxliij. the second. cxliij. he was taken by Maryners. cxliiij. The Frenche men are subdued of hym. ibidem. the thyrd, called the wounders of the worlde. ibid. he was poysoned. cxlvi. the fourth. clxij. clxiij. of Wy∣telspach. clxiij. Ochyas whyche is called a∣ries. fo. xvi. P Padua an vninersyte cxxxi. Paiasetus a Turkyshe Empe∣rour was subdued and brou∣ght low clxxvij. Palatyne the Countyes. cxlvi. cl. ye annceters of Palatyne came of Charles the greate. fo. cxxix. ccliiij Papinianus a lawyar. xcvi. Peafable studyes. lxx. xciiij Parmenian fo. lcij The Persyans inuade Meso∣potamia fo. ccxix Paul the thyrde chosen to be pope. fo. ccv Paul is behedded fo. xci Paulus Eemilius lxxix S. Paul besyeged fo ccxix Peace graūted. ccij. cciij. ccxiiij fo. ccxxij Peace procured betwene En∣glande and Fraunce. ccliiij. cclxix Pelagius an heretique. cix. was byshop of Rome. cxiiij. Peron beseged. ccxiij. Perdicus was healed of Hypo∣crates. lvij. lxiiij. hys art. lxiiij Persys are example of dislo∣palte, lv. when the monarchye of the Persyans begaun. xxvij the delyberation of them xl. of Persia of the kyngdom fo. xl. Persequntion for the true ser∣uyce of God. fo. ij Persecutyon most tyrannycall, fo. lxxvij. Perseus the last kyng of Mace donia, sonne to Philip. lxxviij Pestes fo. ccxl Philip. lxxviij. Philip destroy∣eth the Thebans. lvij. his drea¦mes. lx. he was slayne because he left a wycked dede vnpuni∣shed. fo. lxi. Philip Bardesanes. cxxv. sonne to Maximiliane clxxxvi Peter was crucifyed xci. Pharisees fo. lxxiiij. Philip was the fyrste Christen Emperour & baptysed. xcviij Philip Emperour. clxi. he was slayne of Otho at Wytels∣pach by entrape. clxiij. Philip sonne to Maximilian, dyeth fo. clxxxvi Philip Landtgraue cci. Phylyp ye Palatyn put to fly∣ght
and wounded. CCij Philip Melanthon. ccxxviij Philosophy wyth the Grekes. fo. xxxvi Philosophers of Ionia and Italy. ibidem Pipinus. Cxxvi. kyng of Ger∣many and Gallia. fo. Cxxix Platea fo. xliij. Plato: Endoxus: Aristo. lvij the philosophy of Plato. xcvi Plyy benefycyall to the Chri∣stians. fo. xciiij Poets fyrst of great renoumes, fo. xxiiij Polmices fo. xxii. The pope meteth the Empe∣roure at Bonony, fo. cxcix Popery abolyshed in the lande of Saxon. fo. CCxviij Pope fo. CCxxxiij. Clxiiij. Poperye put donne. CCliiij. Popilius an Ambassadoure of Rome sent to Antiochus. lxviij The conquest of the kynge of Portugals Iudes. CCxvi Posthumus xcix. Pragaan vninersytye in Bo∣hemy fo. Clxxii Preraspis fo. xxxviij Prince, an exāple that princes do oft warre not constrayned by necessyte. xxxiiij. prynces were called iudges. xii. what must be marked in the exam∣ples of prynces *. vi. to what prynces the electyon is com∣mitted. Cxlv. what profet is by the prynces electors. Cxlvi The prynces of Brunswycke came of Catnly. Clvl. Pryntyng fo. Clxxxv. Preachyng fyrst of the Gospel fo. i. Preachars of the Gospell. i. or∣deyned in Sauoy. CCix. ccxv. Probus fo. Ci Proca fo. xxv Prosperytye commeth of God clxxx Prolemeus. lxiiij. Euergetes. lxvi. lxxi. Philometor. lxviij. lxxi. the sonne of Lagus. lxx. Philadelphus. lxx. both lo∣uyng peace and seyence. ibid. hys lybrary. ibid. Anletes. lxxi Astronomer. xcv. Phisopater. lxvij. lxxi. Epipha∣nes. fo. lxxi Phisco. lxxi. Alexander. ibi. La∣tyrus. ibi. Diomsius. ibidem Puissance of men ought not to be trust in. fo. xl Pyrcamer. fo. clxxxv Pythagoras begynnar of Phi∣losophars in Italy. xxxvij. Q Quedeluburgh Cxliij Quintilius Varus. lxxxviij. R Radagasus fo. Cx Rainsborough. CCxxxij. cclxxij Rauens or Ranenose beasts. xij in nombre that Romulus saw fo. Cxi Rea Siluia xxv Recantation of Doctor Smyth fo. CClxxij Regenspurg. Cxli. parliament fo. Cxc. Rekenynge of the Grekes and
Philo xxviij. Regulus is taken by the Car∣thagmians. lxxvij. Hys tor∣ments. ibidem. hys lone and faythfullnes towarde the com¦mon wealth ibidem Rhecia lxxxviij Remus xxvi. Rigour in gouernāce is allow∣ed of God. * Risaua taken fo. CCxxiij. Roboam fo. xiiij Romulus. xxvi. the stryfe of Ro¦mulus and Remus. xxvi. whā Rome was buylded. ibidem. It was burned of the French men. lix. The discomfytynge of the Romaynes in the se∣conde warre of Carthago. lxxviij. The Romayn Monar¦chy is the laste on the yearth fo. lxxxv. Rome taken by duke Burbon. clxxxviij. an ouerflowenge at Rome. Clxxxix. An example of Romayn seneryte. lxviij The begynnyng of the Monar¦chy. lxxxiiij. Rome is wasted by Totylas. Cxiiij. The prayses and profy tablenes of the Romayn law∣es. fo. Cliii Roxan wyse to Alexander. lxiiij Rudolphus is made emperoure of the bishops at Phorcen ch The complaynt of the Empe∣rour vpon the bishops ibid. Rudolfe of Habisburge. clxviij Rupertus fo. clxxvi S Saducees. lxxiiij. they were epi∣cures. ibidem Salfelde a dead place for coun∣cell. fo. Cxli. Salomon. fo. xiiij. Samaria is a fygure of the east church. xvii. the occasiō of the kyngdome of it. xiiij. The wai∣styng of Samaria. xvi. Saraceus kyngdome. there power. Cxxij. Cxxij Sapores kyng of the Persyans xcix. Sardanapalus fo. viij Sardes fo. xliij Saul fo. xiiij Saxon CCxl. Saronye the duke of Saxon, wherfore he was made woun of ye electors. Cxlvi. Schapler a seditions man. clxxxviij Scotland inuaded. fo. CClij. Scipio ye yonger. lxxviij. Nau∣sica. lxxix. sonne to Paulus Aemilius. lxxx. Sicilia was ye cause of the warre of Cartha∣go. lxxvij. Why the kynges of it doo clayme the tytel of Hie∣rusalem. Clcv. The battail of the Scythians agaynst Cyra, xxxvi. Scopa a captayne of Ptolomens by the schole of Alexandry. xcv. Sets rysen in Iury. lxxiiij Sedechias deceaued by ye high priestes. xviij. hys death. ibid. Sedicious punished. liiij. xci. cxxxix cl. xiiij xliij. clv. Selnns lxvi. of wō he was stayn. lxvi. Philopater. lxvij. Sem. fo. iiij
Smiramis did were mens gar¦mentes fo. vij. Seeca. fo. xc. Sergius Galba. xci. vularned and a tyraunt fo. cxxxvi Sers Tllius. xxvij. Sth ij Shaueburgh cclviij Shyltage ned doune to the ground. cci. Shartou recauted cclxx Srs fo. xvi Sigebertus an history wryter. fo. clij. Sigisūus emperour. cixxvij hys rpd you agaynste the Tuk. clxxix. the histore of hym, wyth hys serauntes, fo. clxxix. Simon. fo. lxxiij. Sisannes a wycked idge. xl. Socrates fo. lvij So dome is become a marysh, x. Thre sns seen together, x. Solon the grae and wryghte sence of hym to Cresus. o. xxxii. the author and be∣gyar of common lawes, fo. xxxvij Solituan wyth hys great hoste be seged Uira. clxxxviij. the econd breakyng of hym into Germany fo. cxvi Sophi prince of the Perspas, adeth the Turke. ccv. Soras wrote the lyfe of Hy∣pocrates. fo. ivij Soter. fo. lxvi. Sparta and Athens two yes of Grece iv Spayards found new Ides pltyull of gold and syluer CC. When Spayn and part of Gallia was traslated rō the empyre. cxv. the ynges of Spayn o come of the Go∣thes fo. cxi Spches fo. iiij Spyre fo. ccxxxv. ccl Stephen Gardener byshop of Winchester cclxxviij Stewes put donne at London. fo. lxx Stephan was confirmed of Lewes fo. cxiij. Sphan was stoned. xc. kynge of the Hungaayans. cxlviij Stillo fo. cviij. cx Straw has. cxlij Sultan or Soldan cxxij Swedeners rebell agaynst ther kyng cxlix Swines moth was the fyrste yshop of Rome, that chaun∣ged hys me. cxxxiiij. The Swytzers and there league clxxv. the power of them a∣gayt the Dolphin. clxxxij. the warre agaynst there ney∣ghbours: them of Easten∣riche. clxxxvi. the warre with∣in themselues, clxxxix Sibilla is not the proper name of a woman. xxiiij. they were worshyppars of Idols. ibid. Silla. lxxxi. he feareth the in∣constancye of fortue. lxxxij. he was more cruell, than nede reuyred ibidem.
Spluester Byshop of Rome a worker wyth euyll spirites, fo. cxlix T Twelf tables of the law. lix. a table of the worlds end. cxciiij Tacitus fo. x Tamerlanes a tyraunt of Tar∣tary fo. clxxvij. Tarquinius Priscus. xxvij Superbus ibid. Tassilo duke of Bayerlande, was ouercome of Charles, fo. cxxx. Teia the last kynge of the Go∣thes. fo. xv. Thelesporus xcv An example of temperance xl. An horrible tempest CCxx Thales a begynner of philoso∣phi in Grece. xxxvij. he and Solon were both at one tyme xxxvij Thare. fo. ix. Thebes the occasion of the bat∣tayll. xxi. the Thebanes de∣stroye the Phocyans. lvij. the The warre ouercome & spoy∣led nether were restored a∣gay fo. l vij. Thefe taken. ccxxxi. Themisocles a defendor of the liberte of the country▪ xlv. his subtyl denyce. xlvi. he flieth t Artaxerxes. xlvij. he is euyll rewarded. xlvij. Theodotius ouercometh the Gothyans. cviij. cx. cxxv. hys godlynes toward the church cix. the yonger. cxv. Theodatus fo. cxij Theramenes is putt to death, fo. lvi. Theos fo. lxvi Thomas Aqiunas. clxviij. Mi¦ter. ci. clxxxviij. moor. ccix. au∣thor of Anabaptistes. clxxxviij Thomas duke of Norfolk, com¦mitted to the Tower. cclxx Thrasibulus and hys prayre, fo. lvi. Thuryngen the begynnynge of the Erldome: ad whence the lords therof fo. cxlix. Thydydes. xxix. hys sage a∣yenges conernyng hystoryes * iiij. Tyberius Arimarus. lxxxviij. lxxxix. cxx. cxxv Tigranes is slayn by Pompe∣ius. fo. lxx. Titus sonne to Vespasian be∣feged Hierusalem. xcij. tenne hundreth thousande persones were in the cytie, when Ieru∣salem was besyeged. xcij. hys gentelnes. fo. xciij Tyraunts are to be marked * vi Thyrty ty rannts were ordey∣ned at Ahus. lv. Totilas. cxi. he was taught by Beet called the Sayt. cxiiij. he fyghteth ckely. cxiij Traianus was of greate hone∣sty. xciij. hys sage sayng: whē he gaue hys head offycer te power of the sworde. xciiij. Perseqution of Christen men vnderneth hym. xciiij.
hys age. xciiij. Transiluania called Seuen∣burgh fo. Cxxxi. Tremtes fo. CCxlvi Tribunes were deposed by Sylla. lxxxij. they are restored agayne by Pompeius. lxxxij. Truce taken. CCxcvi. Tullus Hostilius fo. xxvi. Thesse CCvi. CCvij Turck what it sygnyfyed. cxxiij the Turkes were Cartarians Cxxiij. when they beganne to haue dominion. ibid. he prepa∣reth an arye to inade the the Christians. CCxix. they are beastes and not tyrauntes Clxxxiij. Turke careth away eight thousand Christians, in to Turky. CCxxvij. Turkes paste wyth Christians. ccxxxvij. they in Turkey ac∣knowledge our Christian reli∣gion to be the beste. CCxxvij. CCxxxv. CCxl. CCxlviij. CClix. the Turks eldst sonne maketh insurrection agaynst hys father. CClxxiiij. Trust is not to be put in the hlp of man. fo. lxxij. Tyriths xxi. Twelue artycles of sedicions rstickes. Clxxxviij V Valens an Arran. Cviij Valotinians. Cvij. Cxvi. Valras xcix Vandalls came into Affrica. Cxv thre faythullus. Cxvi wh they came yrst into Ger¦many fo. Cxvi. Varius Hehiogabalus. xcvij. Vardam battel. Clxxxi. Vision of S. Vdalryke. Cxxxix Venece buylded fo. Cxvij Vengeaunce how it is forbyd∣den. fo. Cvij Vertue of noble Dames in the cytie of Wenisburg. clviij. Vespasianus fo. xci. Vibius Gallus Cxcix Victoria a cyte. Clxvi Vindelicia fo. lxxxviij. Vitellius fo. xcvi. Vngodlynesse. xxiij. how much an vngodly doth differ from a Christian. ibid. Vnkyndnesse toward God and doughty persons Clxxvij Vladislaus kyg of Poole, xcvij. Vlpianus ibidem Vlsias fo. xx Vrof the Caldeis. fo. ix. Vrbinas sayeng. Clxxxiiij. W Wanderers in Germany and Gallia scourgyng themselues fo. clxxiiij. Waalles of wood answere. xlv Warre of the Peloponneses. lij the occasion of it was lyghte and how long it lasted. . of Cyrs agayst hys grandsa∣ther. xxx. of the ypes. Clxxxij of lyght matters. liij. the occasion of cyuyl warrs. lxxxij. Willyā of Rogendorp. ccxxxvi William duke of Bayre. ccxliij
Wencelaus kyng of Bohemi∣es made a sainct. Clxix. Empe¦roure. Clxxvi Weuherus, a restorer of the lawes fo. Clvi Wertenberge Duchy when it beganne. Clxxxv Willyam of Sicilie. Clviij. Emperour fo. Clxviij. Wittichus fo. Cxiij. Wonders sene in the tyme of ye Germaines warre. liiij. Wolfenbtel. CCxli. CClv Wonderfull vicious. CCl. CClxxi. CClxxv. Wormes CClxxiij Wryters of Histories. and Cronicles cxcij Seke peace and ensue it. Psál. xxxiij. i. Pet. iij. WL printer's device of Walter Lynne The feare of the lord is the beginnyng of Wysedome. Psalm. cxi. b. Prou. ix. b. Iob. xxviij. c Eccle. i. c
Imprynted at Lon∣don for Gwalter Lynne, dwellynge on Somers Keye, by Byl∣linges gate. In the yeare of our Lord M. D. L. ¶ And they are to be solde in Paules church yarde, nexte the great Schole, at the sygne of the sprede Egle. Cum Priuilegio ad imprimendum solum.
