4958 99849127 14262
A MANVAL OF CONTRO∣VERSIES. wherin the Catholique Romane faith in all the cheefe pointes of controuersies of these daies is proued by holy Scripture. By A. C. S. Search the Scriptures, for you thinke in them to haue life euer∣lastinge: and the same are they that giue testimonie vnto me.Ihon cap. 5. vers. 39. Printed at Paris by Peter Buray. M. D. C. XIV.
THE EPISTLE to the reader. I Haue courteous reader ta∣ken some paynes to put to∣gether this litle manual of controuersies, entending nor pretending anie other thing therby then thy profit: yf thou reape anie by it: my trauayle shalbe richly recom∣penced. Howsoeuer, in requitall of my good-will let me intreat this fauoure of the, that, if thou wilt dayne it the rea∣ding, thou wouldest doe yt with some attention, and such intention, as the sub∣iect requireth: which howsoeuer, or by whomsoeuer it be handled, is of that wey∣ght and moment, that may duly demaūd thy best, most setled, & sincerest thaughtes.
The insuing preface wil acquaynt thee both with the drift and motiue of this treatise, and also with those few pointes which I haue thaught worthie of remark concerning the same. Therfore haue I no∣thing more to trouble the with, but only to entreat thee to take some heede in decer∣ning the Catholique Positiones, from tho∣se of the Protestantes, because they are not so euidently distinguished in chara∣cter (especially before the page 76.) as they might haue beene: and also to par∣don the faultes escaped in the print, but most of all those in the margent as most important. In the latter end of the booke they are all corected and therfore may more easely be born with. Farewell. Thy freind as thou art a freind to truthe: how∣soeuer thy well willer. A. C.
A TABLE OF THE CONTRO∣uersies. 1. SCriptures pag. 15. 2. Traditiones. pag. 20. 3. Difficultie of scriptures. pag. 26 4. Churches infallibilitie. pag. 31. 5. Churches markes: vniuersalitie. p. 43. 6. Visibilitie. pag. 39. 7. Succession. pag. 42. 8. Consecration and vocation of Pa∣stores. 45. 9. Supremicie of S. Peter and Pope. 49. 10. Honoure of sainctes. 57. 11. Prayer to sainctes. 59. 12. Reliques. 63. 13. Images. 67. 14. Purgatorie. 76.
15. Of the Sacraments. 81. 16. Necessitie of Baptisme. 84. 17. Ceremonies of Baptisme. 85. 18. Eucharist: reall presence. 86. 19. Transubstantiation. 89. 20. Adoration of Christ in the Eucha∣rist. 91. 21. Communion vnder one kinde. 93. 22. Sacrifice of the Mass. 98. 23. Confirmation. 102. 24. Pennance with indulgences. 107. 25. Holy orders. 118. 26. Extreame vnctione. 120. 27. Matrimonie. 122. 28. Effect of the Sacraments. 125. 29. Character. 127. 30. Iustification and concupiscence. 128. 31. Iustice once had may be lost. 141. 32. Certayntye of Saluation. 142. 33. Merit of workes. 145. 34. Free will. 148. 35. Commaundementes possible. 152. 36. Euangelicall counsels. 155. 37. Preistes single life. 159. 38. Seruicce in the vulgar tongue. 162.
FAVLTES ESCA∣ped in the margent. PAge. 23. for cap. 27. Read cap. 23. 24. sert sect. 29. degenesi ad literam lib. 2. lib. 7. 30. 2. Petri cap. 2. v. 7. cap. 1. v. 20 30. Malachie. v. 2. 3. v. 7. 30. Math. v. 27. v. 2. 32. Luc v. 16. 20 v. 16. 33. Math. v. 28. cap. 20. cap. 28. v. 20. 33. [Actes 15] is placed to high 36. Cresco: cap. 3. cap. 33. 37 Psal: 27. 71. 37. Math. cap. 18. cap. 28. 40. Math. 19. 18. 41. corin. v. 18. v. 28. 45. Act cap. 13. cap 14. 46. Rom: cap. cap. 10 55. epla 65. epla. 165. 61. Apocalip. cap. 3. cap. 2.
64. Act. v. 18. 12. 69. psal. 9. 98. 86. after. 24. add. [Luc] 91 Psal. 69. 96. 95 Smaforward. forward 100. Malachic v. 1. v. 10. 11. 102. Act v. 20. v. 17 109. Act. v. 6. v. 3. 109. pag. 10. pag. 109. 120. want these citations Iames cap. 5. v. 14. 15. Chrisost. De Sacerdotio. lib. 3. ad initium. 122. 5. v. cap. 31. cap. 5. v. 31. 126. Actes cap. 22. v. 17 v. 16. 128. ser. sect. 128. & oncu. & concu. 132. contra Iuliam: c. 5. c. 15. 136. is omited. De spiritu & litera cap. 27. 137. Ephesios cap. 3. cap. 1. 143. is omitted the citation of Ecclesiastes cap. 9. v. 1. 146. 2. Timo. cap. 5. cap. 4. 1. Regum. v. 45. v. 4. 5.
FAVLTES ESCA∣ped in the text. Page. 7. for. hall. read shall. 13. cotrouerted controuerted 19. this. that 21. nothinges nothing. 42. word. world. 44. then. them. 46. In the secund line wan∣teth this word [inward]. 62. sayed. saued 62. sod. so. 68. placc. place 68. the. he 73. his. is 78. eueire. euerie, 96. sam chapter. same chapter 96. cheest. cheefest. 135. whose prayse is not of god. For whose prayse is not of men, but of god.
A MANVALL OF CONTRO∣uersies. Wherin the Catholique Ro∣mane faith in all the cheefe pointes of controuersies of these daies is proued by holy Scripture. The Preface to the Reader. THis brief treatise (courteous reader) being at the re∣quest of à friend speedely compiled, may serue to conuince them of
manifest calumnie, who no lesse vntruly then boldly, doe affirme the Doctrine of the Catholique Roman Church, to be ether a∣gainst holy scriptures, or at least to haue no ground or proofe frō them: And it maie also giue sa∣tisfaction vnto such, as more v∣pon the confident boldness of them that affirme the Roman Religion to be destitute of scri∣ptures, then vpon anie other rea∣son, are drawne, ether to think this to be true, or at least to doubt of the truth of the contra∣rie. But before thou proceede to vieue the thinge it selfe, I desire thee to consider well these fewe pointes followinge. First that no proofe of anie one point of Christiā beliefe, can be so direct and full out of holy scri∣pture, that may not be deluded by false interpretation. For the damned Arrianes, and most o∣ther
heretiques, could interpret all places of holy scripture bro∣ught by the Catholiques against theire heresie in such sense, as beinge so vnderstood, they made nothinge against it: yea, that, as seely, as peruers heretique Lega∣te (burned in smithfield not long since for Arrianisme) could not be conuinced of heresie by one∣lie scripture. Such proofes ther∣fore of Catholique Doctrine, as cannot be deluded by anie inter∣pretation, are not to be expected out of holy scripture. Secondly that though Prote∣stātes maie alledg textes of holy scripture for the proofe of some pointes of theire Doctrine, yet that alone is not sufficiēt to ma∣ke it true. Both because the same pointes are proued false by other places of scripture: and also for that all heretiques, haue euer brought scripture for their here∣sies,
and none more apparant, or frequent then the blasphemous Arrianes: to say nothinge of the Deuill his citinge of scripture e∣uen against oure blessed sauiour. By all which it is more then e∣uident, that the sense of holy scripture, besides the wordes, is necessarely required to make suf∣cient proofe of true doctrine. For which reason I oftē bringe the vncorrupt testimonie of so∣me holy father for the sense of the place alledged by me, who haueinge liued at least on thow¦sand yeares before these contro∣uersies began, cannot be estee∣med partiall on our side. Thirdly, that I expect and ex∣act of him, or them that shal goe about to answer this treatise, the same roūde sincere, and direct dealinge, which I haue here vsed. Remembringe before all things that he first set doune his faith
in direct positions, and then proceed inlike methode as I haue done for the rest. To whom I willingly graunt this large liber∣tie aboue that which I haue vsed that he tye not himself vnto the first 500. yeares for the fathers interpretations, but that he take boldly 1500. yeares so that he bringe not condemned hereti∣ques for his auctours, and with all obserue the point follow¦inge. Fourthly, that it shall not be to anie purpose in waye of answer, that anie aduersarie bring ano∣ther interpretation of some fa∣ther upon the places of scripture alledged by me, besides that which I haue brought. For it is not denied, that one & the same place of scripture maie be, and is often diuersly understoode, not onely of diuers fathers, but of one and the same father. But
if he will saye anie thinge to the purpose in this kinde, he must bring an interpretation contra∣dicting that which I haue brou∣ght: and withall labour rather to proue his owne Doctrine thē to impugne that of the Catoli∣ques. For seeinge it is (as all men Knowe) à far more easie thīge to impugne anie doctrine, though neuer so true, then to proue the same: no truth (espetially of faith) being so euidentlie clere but that some thing with shew of probabillitie maie be obiect∣ed against it: it is not now expe∣cted, that anie aduersarie should stand to answer those auctorities of scripture and fathers wich I haue alledged for proofe of the Catholique Doctrine, or to im∣pugne the same: but rather to bring others in proofe of his owne: that the iudicions reader maie compare our groundes in
scripture both together; and by the uieu of his owne eie, trie whether of them be more con∣formable to Gods sacred worde. And when anie one shall haue produced his proofes for Protes∣tantisme, in the like maner as I haue done in the behalfe of the Catholique religion; (if he can so doe) yet shall he gaine no more therby, but an euident de∣monstration against the cheef∣est ground of the Protestātes do∣ctrine, that ether, to the true and full decision of controuersies in matter of faith, is necessarily re∣quiredNote. some other iudgment or triall, then the only wordes of holy Scripture, or ells that there∣re is no meanes at all to end cō∣trouersies of faithe; which later neuertheless to affirme, is no less iniuriouse to gods wisdome, goodness, or power, then to saye that he hath prouided noe
sufficient meanes for men to know the way to saue their soules. For both parties bringing scripture for them selues whoe shall finallie determine whether of them, doth applie the said Scriptures more sincerlie and ac∣cordinge to their true meaninge? Fifthly that wheras, before I can proue anie point of Christian beliefe by scripture I should first by good order, proue that there is a holy Scripture, and secondly in what bookes of the Bible it is contained: yet because nether of these two pointes can be pro∣ued by scripture, vnless wee first beleeue some scripture wi∣thout proofe: therfore that, I may proue those pointes of faith wherin the Catholique Roma∣ne church doth differ from the Protestantes by holy scripture (which our aduersaries vrge me ūto) I must necessarilie to satisfie
their disordered desire, proceede disorderlie, and suppose that for truth without proofe, which requireth most to be proued: I say without proofe, if no proofe be good, but that which is ma∣de out of scripture. And here occurr by the way two things worthie of note, Thone that the scripture cannot be an vniuersall rule of our faith, seeinge some thinges are to be beleeued with out proofe of scri∣pture, as are (for example) that there is a holy scripture contayn∣inge gods word and reuela∣tion, and that these and these bookes be suche: therfore must there of necessitie be some other rule of our faith more vniuersall then the scriptures, and conse∣quently before the scriptures. And this cannot be but the au∣cthoritie of godes church: which is clerly S. Augustins Do∣ctrine,
who was not afearde to saye. I would not beleeue the Gos∣pell,Contra epistolā funda∣menti cap. 5. but that the auctoritie of the church doth moue mee. Seeinge therfore the authoritie of the church is a sufficient motiue for vs to beleeue what is scripture, why should it not haue the like aucthoritie with vs in other pointes of faith? which is also S. Augustins argument in the same place: but I will notwithstand∣ing satisfie our aduersaries in their owne humoure. The Secund thing to be no∣ted is, that they that beleeue nothing, but that which is pro∣ued by Scripture, are euidently conuinced to beleeue nothinge at all. For they that cannot be∣leeue that there is à holy Scri∣pture, or what bookes be holy Scripture, cannot beleeue anie thinge, because it is proued by scripture. For it is euident,
that before they beleeue anie thing because it is proued by scripture, they must beleeue that there is a Scripture, and what bookes are scripture: but they that beleeue not anie thing but that which is proued by Scripture, cannot beleeue that there is a scripture, nor what bookes are holy scripture: for nether of these two, can be pro∣ued by Scripture. Thefore they that beleeue not anie thinge but that which is proued by scriptu∣re, cannot beleene anié thing at all. This Argument is a plaine demonstration, and compelleth the Protestantes ether to con∣fess that they haue no faith at all: or to acknowledge this their positione, to witt [that nothinge ought or can rightly be belee∣ued, but that which may be pro∣ued by Scripture] to be false: which notwithstandinge is the
maine ground of all their reli∣gion. But now haueing shew∣ed the absurditie of their Do∣ctrine in this point, I will ioyne with them in the Scriptures, as they themselues do desire, obse∣ringe this method. First I sett downe the Catholique Roman belief in direct and playne posi∣tions: then I bringe in proofe of it, one, two, or moe places of holy Scripture, citing the aun∣cient vulgar translation, and of∣ten times I ad the testimonie of some auncient father of the frist 500. yeares vnderstandinge such Scriptures as I cite, in the same sense and meaninge that I cite them for: Furthermore those fewe places of Scripture, which seeme to sounde directly against the Catholique faith I shewe in brief how they are to be vnder∣stood. And last of all I put do∣wne the position contradicto∣rie
to the Catholique doctrine, to the end that the indifferent reader (be he Catholique or otherwaies) may more easely iudge whether Doctrine hath better ground in holy Scriptu∣res. And further that he that will impugne this treatise may see, what he hath to proue if he wil proue anie thinge to purpose. who is to vnderstand, that though the Protestantes doe maintayn the negatiue part, in almost all the positions cotro∣uerted betwixte them and the Catholiques, yet is he not for all that, to be excused from the proofe of those pointes, vnless he will withall confess, that in them the Protestantes haue no faith at all, but onely a mere de∣niall of faith. For, faith beinge not a simple denying or not be∣leeuing, but a possitiue assent and belief of such articles as are
reueled vnto vs by God; it hath possitiue groundes, wherby it may and ought to be proued, euen in those pointes which are negatiue. And therfore as Ca∣tholiques doe proue theire faith, in these negatiue pointes: that onely faith doth not iustifie: that we are not certayn of our iusti∣fication or saluation and the like: so likewise are the Prote∣stantes to proue theyr faith in these: that there is no Purgato∣rie: no reall presence: no sacrifice of the Mass, and the rest. Vnless as is sayd before, they will con∣fess, that they haue no faith in these pointes, but onely a mere deniall of faith. Haueinge thus aduertised thee good Reader of these fewe things I leaue thee to peruse the treatise it self, desiringe thee to expect onely the bare positiones proued with the self text, of ho∣ly
Scripture, and some fewe fa∣thers, without anie florishe of wordes at all: The worke being such as doth rather resemble the bare bones of a great bodye tied together with dried Si∣newes, then a bodie throughly furnished with flesh, and orher habiliments of friendly narure. For which cause, though to such as rather respect fashion then substance, it may happ to ap∣peare hideous, yet to others of contrarie appetite (for whose contentment it is speciallie in∣tended) it will not paraduenture be iudged altogether without forme. THE FIRST CONTRO∣uersie Of Holy Scriptures. IT is Knowne that the Ca∣tholique Roman Church doth admitt more bookes and
percells of holy Bible for Scri∣pture, then the Protestantes doe, and consequently acknow∣ledgeth a larger canon then they, and yet notwithstanding shee teacheth. Chato∣lique Positiō 1. That all such articles as by her, and the Protestantes them∣selues are beleeued and holden for articles of faith, are not so expressly contayned in holy Scriptures, as out of them one∣ly, full proofe may be made therof. Proofe. The articles which the Pro∣testantes doe beleeue to be of faith, as well as Catholiques, and yet are not contayned ex∣presly in holy scriptures, are ma∣ny, but wee will giue instance onely in a fewe, 1 That there are three distincte personnes and one onely substance in god. 2. That the secūde and third per∣sonns are of the same substance,
nd equall gloire with the first. . That the third personn pro∣ceedeth from the seconde and from the first. 4. That there are two distinct and compleat natu∣res in our sauiour Christ, and but one onely personn. 5. That there are in him two willes, and two operations, to witt, of god and man: about all which pointes haue been diuerse heresies as is well Knowne to the learned. And thoughe all these articles haue most true ground and proofe in holy Scriptures, yet are they not soe expressly con∣tayned therin, as they may be ful¦ly prooued by them alone. One example shall serue for all. To proue the sonn to be consub∣stantiall or of one substance with the father, the Catho∣liques doe alledg (and tru∣ly)Iohn. cap. 10. v. 30. this testimonie: I and the fa∣ther are one: yet because there are
moe meanes of beinge one then in substance, as namely to be of one will, desire, and affection of which sorte of vnitie, specially the Arrianes did explicat this place: alledging for them selues that testimonie. I pray that they all may be one, as thou Father in me andIohn. cap. 17. v. 21. I in thee: that they also in vs may be one: which cannot be vnderstood of vnitie in substance. Therfore this testimonie without the in∣terpretatiō of the Church (which is the piller of truth) doth not fully proue the father and the sonn to be one in substance. The like may be sayd of the other ar∣ticles here mentioned. Catho. posi. 2. All such articles as are of faith, and so holden by the Protestātes them selues, are not contayned so much as indirectly or impli∣citly in holy Scriptures: but one∣ly so farr, as the Scriptures con∣tayne and testifie the auctoritie
of the Church, and traditions. Proofe. That all the Bookes of the Bi∣ble, and euerie parte therof which are acknowledged for canonicall scripture ioynthy of Catholiques and Protestantes be such indeed. That the most bles∣sed mother of our Sauiour Christ continued perpetually a Virgin. That it is lawfull for Cristians to eate strangled things and blood (which were expresly for∣bidden them. acts. cap. 15. vers. 20) are not so much as indirectly contayned in holy Scriptures, otherwaies then is mentioned in our position. But this being more amply proued in that whi∣ch followeth of traditions, this which wee haue sayd already shall suffice for the present. The Positions which the Pro∣testantes in this question are to proue be these.
Protes∣tāt po∣sition. 1 All articles of faith are so ex∣pressy contayned in scripture as out of them onely full proofe may be made therof. 2. All articles of faith are at least so contayned in holy scriptures as with out anie testimonie or auctoririe of the Church, or tra∣ditions they may thence be plainlie and distinctly deduced. TE SECOND CON∣trouersie of Traditiones. Catho∣lique. Posi∣tions. 1. THe holy Apostles deli∣uered by worde of mouth moe thinges to be beleeued and obserued by the Church, then ether they found written or wrot them selues. And these thinges are vsually called tradi∣tiones. Proofe. 1. Haueing moe things to write vnto you2ae. Iohn
would not by paper and e, for I hopev. 12. 3ae. Iho: 13. shall be with you and speake mouth to outhe. 2. And the rest I will dispose when I1. Cor. cap. 11. v. 34. ome: where the holy Apostle eui∣dently sheweth that he reserued something more to be ordayned by worde, then he wrote. 3. The Apostles were commaun∣dedMat. cap. 28. v. 20. to teache all nationes to ob∣serue all things which our saui∣our had commavnded: which doubtless they fulfilled: but they were not commaunded in anie place to write all the same: nether doth it appeare by anie Scripture, that they did write all thinges which they taught men to beleeue and obserue. This is à demōstration that they taught more then they wrote, if nothing be to be beleeued but what is contayned in holy Scri∣pture.
4. They taught Baptisme giuen to infants to be good and law∣full: or ells the Anabaptistes are not heretiques for rebaptising them. 5. They taught the sonday to be solemnised. and the Iewes Sab∣bathe to be left without all so∣lemnitie though most strictlyExod. cap. 31. v. 16. commāded by god to be solem∣nised as an euerlasting couenāt. 6. They deliuered and taught the creed by worde and not in writ∣ing, which from theyre tyme till now hath continued in the church by tradition onely. 7. They taught Baptisme mi∣nisteredAugust. de Bapti. con: Do∣natistas. lib. 2. cap. 7. by heretiques to be good: and therfore S. Augustin speakinge therof, saith: Manie things which are not founde▪ in the
Apostles writinges: nor in latter coun∣cellsDe bap∣tis. cōa Donatis. lib. 5. cap. 27. yet because they are obserued by the whole church, are beleeued to be deliuered and recommended by none but by thē: Agayne he sayth: There are many thinges which the whole church doth hold, and therfore are well beleeued to be commaunded by the Apostles, albeit they be not found written. Catho∣lique positi. The Catholique church doth & ought to beleeue those things which the Apostles deliuered onely by worde, without writ∣inge: in the same degree of faith with those, which are written. Note that the proofes of this position doth also proue thother going à fore. Proofe. 1. Therfore Brethren stand and hold2. The∣salo. cap. 2. v. 15. the traditions which you haue learned whether it be by worde or by our epi∣stle. S. Basile saith, I account it
Apostolique to continue firmly in vn∣writtenBasil de Spiritu. sancto. cap. 29. cap. 27. Fulk. 2. The∣sali. cap. 2 sert. 17. traditions and alledgeth this place of S. Paule. S. Chrisostome cited by Fulke himself saith thus: Hereof it is manifest that they [the A∣postles] deliuered not all by Epistles: but many things without letters, and the one is of as great credit as the other. Therfore we think the tradition of the church to be worthie of credit: It is à tradition inquire no more. 2.1. to Ti∣moth. cap. 6. vs. 20. O Timothee keepe the depositū: That is that which is comitted to thy trust: not certes by writinge. For litle or nothinge writren of the new testament was knowne to Timothee then. See à large dis∣course herevpon in Vincentius lirenensis. 3. But if anie man seeme to be contentious1a. Cor. cap. 11. vs. 16. wee haue no such custome: nor the church of god: where S. Paule al∣ledgeth the custome of the church as à sufficient disproofe
of anie practise: why not ther∣fore for the proofe of anie? The things which thou hast hearde2. ad Timo. cap. 2. vs. 2. of me by many witnesses these com∣mende to faithfull men which shall be fitt to teach others also: loe no word here of writing, but of hearing & teaching by worde of mouthe. Nowe haueinge proued by Scripture it self, and euident in∣stances, that many thinges are to be beleeued, that are not di∣rectly contayned in Scripture, it appeareth à sensless thinge to de∣maunde direct proofe of euerie thinge we beleeue out of Scri∣pture. Prote∣stants. Positi. The holy Apostles deliuered not by word of mouth moe∣things to be beleeued and obser∣ued by the church, thē theyether founde written or wrote them selues: And therfore are there no traditions to be holden or beleeued.
2. The Catholique church ou¦ght not to beleeue those thinge which the Apostles deliuered onely by worde of mouth wi¦thout writinge, in the same de¦gree of faithe with those which are written. THE THIRD CON trouersie of the difficultie to vnderstand the Scriptures. Catho. positio¦nes. 1 All places of holy scripture conteyninge articles of fayth (the obstinate misbeleife whe¦rof is Damnable) are not eas to be vnderstoode but requi some rule to be interpreted by. Proofe. 1. Philipp sayd to the EunucAct. 8. vs. 30. 31. whom he founde readinge th Prophet Esay; Trow est thou th thou vnderstandest the things which thou readest? who sayde: how can vnless some man shewe me?
2. Our Sauiour accordinglyLuc. 24. vs. 45. pened the vnderstādinge of his Apostles that they might vn∣derstand the Scriptures: see ther∣fore what à speciall grace it is to nderstand the Scriptures in the∣re true sense and meaninge. In the which [the Epistles of2. Pe∣tri. 3. vs. 16. sainct Paule] are certayne thinges hard to be vnderstoode which the vnlear¦ned and vnstable depraue, as also the  of the Scriptures to theyr owne per∣ione. Sainct Hierome explicatingeEpist. 103. ad Pauli num. e text now cited out of the actes concludeth thus. These thin∣ges haue I breifly touched as the li∣mitts of an Epistle would permitt; that thou mayest vnderstande, that with out a guide and teacher, thou canst not en∣ter the pathe of holy Scriptures. which is easie to conceaue, see∣inge as he notethe in the same place no trade, nor mechanicall
art is learned with out à maister. Certes it is not onely an here∣sie but à meere frensie to saye, that all scriptures conteyninge poyntes of faythe necessary to be beleeued are easie to be vn∣derstoode of priuat beleeuers, sithence all heresies whatsoeuer, haue bene begōn and mayntey∣ned for want of true vnderstand∣inge of holy scriptures: wherof Vincentius Lirenensis sayth thus Some man may peraduenture aske, foHis boo∣ke a∣gainst the pro∣phane oueltie of here∣sie. asmuch as the canon of the scriptures  perfect, and in all pointes very suffi∣cient in it self, what neede is ther t ioyne therunto, the authoritie of the ec∣clesiasticall vnderstandinge? For this cause surely, for that all take not the holy scriptures in one and the same sen∣se, because of the deepness therof: b the sayinges therof some interpret one way, and some another way, soe tha tbere may almost as manye senses b picked out of it, as there be men. Fo
Nouatian doth expound it one waye, and Sabellius another waye. otherwise Arrius, Eunomius, Macedonius, other wayes Photinus, Apolinaris, Pris∣cillianus, otherwayes, Iouinian, Pela∣gius, Celestius, lastly otherwayes Ne∣storius; Thus far that aūciēt father: to whom we may ad: otherwais wicliffe, Luther, Caluin, Ana∣baptistes,San∣ctes de Eucha: repet. 1. cap. vlto in fine. with the rest: and this most truely, seing of these fewe wordes [This is my Bodye] the∣re are found aboue 80. diuers senses, besides the Catholique ense and meaninge. S. Augustine also auouchethDe gen. ad lite∣rā. lib. 2. crp. 9▪ the samesayinge. For no other rea∣son are heresies made, but because men not rightly vnderstandinge the Scriptu∣res, doe obstinatly affirme theyre ow∣ne opiniones against the truthe of them. Catho. pos. 2. Priuate personnes though true beieeuershaue not the spirit of interpretinge the holy Scri∣pture in the true sense and
meaninge of the same. Proofe. 1. No prophecie of scripture is made by2a. Petri cap. 2. vs.. 7. Malachi cap. 2. vs. 2. 3. priuate interpretation. 2. The lippes of the Priest shall keepe knowledg and the lawe they shal re¦quire of his mouthe: be cause he is the Angell [that is the messēger] of the lord of hostes. loe here the office of interpretinge the lawes of god, giuen to priestes, and not assured to euerie faythfull person. 3. Vpon the Chaire▪ of Moyses haue sit∣tenMathe. 3. vs. 27. scribes and Pharisies, all thinges therfore whatsoeuer they shall saye to you obserue yee and doe yee. loe here à commaunde to heare the pre∣lates & pastoures of the church and no man lefte to followe his owne fantasie in matters of faythe, and manners. Protes∣tantes Positiō. 1. All places of holy Scripture onteininge articles of faith, the
obstinate misbelief wherof is dānable, are easie to be vnd er stood, & therfore require not a∣nie rule to be interpreted by. 2. Priuat persounes that are true beleeuers haue the Spirit and gift of interpretinge the holy Scripture in the true sense and meainge therof. THE FOVRTH CON∣trouersie Of the infallibili∣tie of the churche. Catho. pos. THe sense and meaninge of holy Scriptures giuen or aproued by the holy Catholique church, is vnfallibly true, as are also the definitiones and declara∣tiones of faithe, deliuered by the same, and euery one is bounde vpon his damnatiō not to reiect the iudgment therof.
Proofe. 1. My spirit that is in thee, and myay cap. 59. s. 22. wordes that I haue put in thy mouthe, shall not departe out of thy mouthe and out of the mouthe of thy seede and out of the mouthe of thy seedes seede, sayth our lord for this present and for euer. A manifest promise of the spirit of god to continue for euer in the church. 2. All power is giuen to me in hea∣uenMathe. 28. vs. 18. 19. and in earthe: Goinge therfore tea∣che yee all nations teachinge them to ob∣serue all thinges what soeuer I haue cōmaunded you. Loe here commis∣sion to teache giuen to the A∣postles and in them to all pa∣stores. 3. He that heareth you heareth me:Luc. cap. 10. v. 16. 20 and he that dispiseth you dispiseth me: Loe here obligation for o∣thers, to heare, and obaye that which they, who haue the for∣mer commission shall teache.
4.Mat. vs. 28. cap 20. Behould I am with you all daies euen to the consūmation of the worlde; Loe, here the assurance of Christs asistance to his church, and the lawfull pastores therof, till the ende of the worlde. who can now doubt of the infallibili∣tie of the doctrine of godesIo. cap. 14. vs. 16. 17. Act. 15 vs. 28 church? 5. I will aske the father, and he will giue you another Paraclet, [that is an aduocate or comforther] that he may abyde with you for euer. The spi∣rit of truthe: loe here the spirite of truthe promised to abide with the church for euer. By warrant of which promised the first gene∣rall coūcell that euer was houl∣den (which was at Hierusalem) sayth thus. Yt▪ hath seemed good to the holy ghost and to vs, to laye no further burthen vpon you then these necessa∣rye thinges. 6. In respect of the singuler pri∣uiledges
of the church and spe∣tiallye of the infallibilitie it hath in doctrine, sainct Paule callethe it: the howse of god, the church os the liuinge god, the piller and grounde of truthe. 7. He that will not heare the churchMath 18. vs. 17. let him be to thee as the Heathen and the publican. Touchinge which pointe ofAgaynst Crsco∣nius. lib. 1. cap. 3. the infallibilitie of the church sainct Augustine hath this ex∣cellent doctrine: Althoughe (Saith he) no example is brought out of cano∣nicall Scripture of this thinge. (Spea∣kinge sf the validitie os Baptis∣me ministred by heretiques) yet doe we followe the truth of the same Scriptures in this pointe whilst we do that which pleaseth the whole church which the auctoritie of the Scriptures doth cōmēd: And because the holy Scri∣pture cannot deceaue, whosoeuer fea∣reth to be deceaued by the obseurite
of these questiones let him consult ther vpō with the church, which without all doubt the Scripture doth shewe. Protes. Pos. The sense and meaninge of the holy Scriptures giuen, or approued by the Catholique churche, is not alwaies true: nether are the definitiones and declarationes of faythe deliured by the same vnfallible truthes. Here the reader may marke à strāge peruersitie or blindness in the Protestantes who graunt the gift of interpretinge the Scriptures to priuate belee∣uers and yet deny it to the who∣le chuche; THE FIFTH CON∣trouersie of the marKes of the true Churche. THe true Churche of god is but one. This being not denyed by the Protestantes nee∣dethe
no proofe. The question is which of all those Churches which doe challenge vnto them selues the name of the Churche, is that one true churche; which doubt will easelie be cleared by the notes and markes fololw∣inge. Vniuersalitie. Catho: Posi∣tions. The true Churche of Christ is Catholique or vniuersall as∣well in respect of place, as of tyme, That is: the true church of Christ hath euer continued since his gloriouse ascention in∣to heauen till this day, and shall doe till the end of the world: which is to be Catholique or vniuersall in respect of time. And it hathe or shalbe spred throughe all kingdomes and countries, that are vnder heauen; which is to be vniuersall or Catholique in respect of place. Proofe in respect of place.Psal. 2. vs. 8. Aske of me and I will giue thee the
gentiles for thin inheritance, & thy po∣sessioneIn hunc Psalme the endes of the earthe. By this promise of god to Christ S. Au∣gustine conuīceth the Donatistes and in them the Protestātes, that they haue not the true Chruche, because theyrs is not vniuer∣sall in such sorte as here is pro∣mised. 2.Psa. 27. vs. 8. He shall rule from sea, to sea; and from the riuer euen to the endes of the rounde worlde; These Prophesies are clearely vnderstoode of the inheritance and kingdome, that is, the Churche of Christ as he is man: Accordinge to which pro∣phesiesMath. cap. 18. vs. 18. 19. our sauiour saythe; All power is giuen me in heauen and in earthe. Goeinge therfore teache yee all nationes: baptisinge them in the name of the father and of the sonn and of the holy ghost. 3. You shall receiue the vertue of theActes cap. 1. vs. 8. holy Ghost comminge vppon you, and you shall be witnesses vnto me in Hie∣rusalem,
and in all Ieury and Sama∣ria,Con. Petilian lib. 2. cap. 38. and euen to the vtmost of the ear∣the. See Sainct Augustine Lear∣ned reader if thou pleas. Proofe in respect of tyme. 1. In the dayes of those Kingdomes,Daniell. cap. 2. vs. 44 the god of heauen will rayse vp a Kingdome that shale not be dissipated for euer, and this Kingdome shall not be deliuered to another people. 2. And he shall reigne in the howseLuc. cap. 1. vs. 33. Mathe. 28. vs. 20. Mathe cap. 16. vs. 18. of Iacob for euer, of his Kingdome the∣re shall be no ende. 3. Behould I am with you all dayes, euen to the consummation of the world. 4. Vppon this Rock will I build my Churche, and the gates of hell shall not preuayle agaynst it. A faithful sayinge (Saith SainctOratio∣ne qnod Christus sit vnus. Athanas.) and not à waueringe pro∣mise. and the Church is an inuincible thinge althoughe hell it self should be moued. The vniuersalitie of the chur∣ch, all christians profess to belee∣ueī
the creed of the Apostles and of the first councell of Constan∣tinople, sayinge, I beleeue the holy Catholique church. protes. pos. The ttue Churche of Christ is not necessarily Catholique or vniuersall; nether in respect of place nor tyme. This positione most cleerely against holy Scri∣pturs must the Protestantes de∣fende, and proue, yf they will proue and defende theyre Chur∣che to be the true Churche of god and consequentlye theyr religione to be true. Visibilitie. Catho. pos. The true Churche of god ys visible and apparant, both to the faithfull beleeuers, that are in it, and to heretiques, and tho∣seMathe. cap. 5. vs. 15. Psal. 13. that are out of it. Proof. 1. A Citie cannot be hid, situated vpon à mountayne. He put his tabernacle in the Sunn. S. Augustine proueth our po∣sitione by these textes: say in∣ge, The true churche is hid to no
man: whence is that which he [ourContra literas petibani lib. 2. cap. 32. sauiour] Sayth in the Gospell, A Citie sett vppon à mountane cannot be hidd, And therfore is it sayd in the Psalme: hee hathe put his tabernacle in the sunn, that is in manifest. 2. In the latter dayes the mountayneIsay. c. 2. vs. 2. of the howse of our lorde, shall be pre∣pared, in the top pof mountaynes, and it shalbe eleuated aboue the little hil∣les, and all nationes shall flowe vnto it. 3. Men doe not light à Candell and.Mathe. cap. 5. vs. 16. put it vnder a bushell, but Vpon à Candlesticke. To these textes doth S. Augustine allude, whenTract. 2. vppon the. Epist of S. Iohn. he saythe; what ells am I to saye then, that they are blinde that doe not see so great à mountayne that shutt theyre eyes against the lampe sett vp∣pon the candlesticke? 4. If thy brother offende against theeMathe. 19. vs. 17. tell the churche; therfore must it of necessitie be apparent and vi∣sible.
5. The Churche consistethe of Pastores and sheepe, Superiors, or rulers, and subiectes. And heEphes. cap. 4. vs. 11. first to the co. cap. 12. vs. 18. gaue some Apostles, and some Pro∣phetes, and other some Euangelistes, & other some pastores and Doctores▪ Are all Appostles? are all Prophe∣tes? are all Doctores? But superi∣ores and subiectes, must be Knowne to one another, as also Pastores, and theyre sheepe. Therfore must the Churche of necessitie be visible and appa∣rent. Prote∣stantes. posit. The true Church of god is not necessarily visible nor appa∣rent, ether to the faithfull be∣leeuers that are in it, or to here∣tiques and those that are out of it. This position must the Pro∣testantes also proue and defend, though directly against the holy Scriptures, vnless they will con∣fess their church not to be the
true Church as (if the Scriptures be true) it cannot be: seeinge that before Luther it ether was not at all, or was inuisible, and therfore no true church of Christ. Catho∣lique. Positi. The true church of Christ can neuer want à lawfull personall succession of Pastors from herSucces∣sion. first institution till the end of the world. Proofe. 1. And he gaue some Apostles andEphesia. 4. vs. 11. 12. 13. some Prophets, and othersome Euan∣gelistes, and othersome pastores, and Doctores. To the consummation of the saintes vnto the worke of the mi∣nisterie, vnto the edifyinge of the bodye of Christ. Vntill we meete all in the vnitie of faythe. Loe here Pasto∣res giuen for the Churche till all meete in vnite of faythe which is till the ende of the worde. 2.Mathe. 28. 19. 20. Goinge teache all nationes bap∣tiseinge them in the name of the Father
&c. and behoulde I am with you all dayes, euen to the consummation of the worlde. Loe here Christ promi∣seth to be with the pastores of the Churche, whom he sende∣the, all dayes till the ende: ther∣fore there shall alwayes be pa∣stores. 3Psal 44▪ vs. For thy Fathers there are borne sonnes to thee thou shalt make them princes ouer all the earthe: Vnder∣stoodeVpon this Psalme tovvar∣des the ende. by S. Augustine, of the successione of pastores in the churche Sayinge. The Apostles begott thee (ô Chri∣stian Churche) they were sent, they preached, they are thy fathers. But could they bee alwayes corporally with vs? could any of them tarye here till this tyme? could they tarie till the time yet to come? But was therfore the Chur∣che left desolate by theyr departure? God forbidd. For thy fathers sonns∣are borne to thee, what is this for thy
fathers sonnes are borne to thee? The Aposstles were sēt fathers: inplace of the Aposstles sonnes are borne to the: Bis∣hoppes are appointed. For whence were the Bishoppes borne that are att this daye in the worlde? the church her sel∣fe callethe them fathers, shee begate them and appoynted them in the seates of the fathers. Doe not therfore think thyself desolate (O Christiā church) because thou seest not Peter, seest not Paule; for thou seest not them by whome thou wast borne, but of thyn issue, fa∣therhoode is spronge to thee. For thy fa∣thers sonnes are borne to thee, thou shalt make them princes ouer all the earthe This is the Catholique church. Her chil∣dren are made princes ouer all the ear∣the: her sonnes are constituted for fa∣thers: lett them acknowledge this that are cut of: let them come to the vnitie: be they brought into the temple of the kinge Thus S. Augustin. prote. pos The true church of Christe may be without a lawfull per∣sonnall
succession of Pastores. This position they must alsoe proué or ells theyr church can∣not be anie true churche. For they cannot shew any Pastores of theyr religion be∣fore Luther to whom he suc∣ceeded. Catho. pos. This lawfull succession of Pastores in gods churche is not withovt consecration and au∣thenticall mission or sendinge by an ordinarye power residing in the churche. Proofe. 1. when they (S. S. Paule and Bar∣nabas)act. cap. 13. vs. 22. had ordayned to them Priestes in eueri churche and had prayed with fastinge they commended them to our lord in whom they beleeued. 2. Nether doth any man take the ho∣noureHebru: cap. 5. vs. 4. (of priesthoode) to himself but he that is called of god as Aaron. Note that if Luther, Caluī, and Be∣za, with the rest who say they are
called of god as Aaron: can shewe the like proofes of theyre calling that Aaron did: and besides the externall consecratiō which he also had notwithstanding his internall callinge of god: they shalbe beleeued to haue godes caling. Tough Aaron being the first of his order, and therfore could not haue his callinge by succession his case is farr vnlike to our newe maysters; vnless they will cōfess a truthe and saye, that they are also the first of their order, wherin they shalbe belee∣ued, and therby conuinced, not to be preachers of Christ, but of themselues, because they haue no mission from him, but come of them selues beinge sent by none. 3. Howe shall they beliue himRo. cap. Vs. 14. 15. whom they haue not hard? And howe shall they heare without a preacher? But howe shall they
preach vnless they be sent. Amen Amen I saye vnto you, he that10. cap. 10. Vs. 1. 2. entereth not by the dore, (that is by the ordinarie waye) into the fould of the sheepe, but climethe vp another way he is a theefe and a robber. But hee that enterethe by the Dore is the Pa∣store of the sheepe. The Prophets prophesie lyes in myHiere. cap. 14. vs. 14. name, I haue not sent them. I haue not sent these Prophets, yet they rann. with many such like wher∣byHiere. 23 vs. 21. it appeareth that we are not to beleeue euerie one that pretē∣deth to come from god, vnless they shew their mission, and cō∣missiō. To which purpose heare this notable saying of the aun∣cient Ireneus. It behouethe to obaielib. 4. cap. 43. att. the ende. those priestes, that are in the churche, those who haue the succession from the Apostles, as we haue shewed who to∣gether with Episcopalitie, haue receiued accordinge to the will of the father, the assured certayne gift of truthe. But to
suspect the rest that stande of from the originall succession in what place soeuer the are assembled, ether as heretique and of bad doctrine, as makeinge schis∣me, and as highe mynded and pleasin∣ge themselues: and of S. Cypriane▪ If the church was with Cornelius whLib. 1. epla. 6. succeeded the Bishope Fabiane, and whome beside the honoure of Preistho our lord glorified with martyrdome Nouatian is not in the church, nor ca he be esteemed à Bishope, who dispi∣sing euangelicall and apostolicall tradi∣tion, succeeding to none is sprong out from himselfe. For nether can  haue or houlde by any meanes the chur∣che who is not ordered in the churche. Prote∣stantes. Pos. The lawfull succession of Pas∣tores in gods churche, may be with out consecration, and au∣thenticall mission or sending by any ordinarie power residing in the churche.
THE SIXTHE CON∣trouersie of the supremicie of S. Peter and of the Pope or Bishope of Rome. Catho. Posi∣tions. 1 SAint Peter was by our sa∣uiour Christ constituted su∣preme head and souraigne Bis∣hope or Pastoure ouer his whole churche militant. Proofe. 1. Our sauiour sayd to S. PeterIo: 21. v. 17. 1▪ Symon of Ihon louest thou me? Feede my sheepe: a speeche directed to S. Peter and to no other of the Apo¦stles: containing charge, to feede as a shepherde doth his sheepe all christes flok whithout exceptiō: so vnderstood by S. Cipriā say∣inge. To Peter our lord after his resurre¦ctionDe vni∣tate Ec- sayde, feede my sheepe and buil∣ded
his churche vpon him alone, and to him he gaue charge of feeding his sehepe By S. Chrisostome: he gaue himHom. 1. depenit. [S. Peter] the primacie & gouernment of the churche thrughe the whol world & which is aboue all he sheweth him to haue loued our lord more thē All the A∣postles sayinge. Peter louest thou me more thē these. Our sauiour sayth to S Pe¦ter Thou art Peter & vpon this rock wilMathe 16. v. 18. I builde my churche. Note that ac∣cordinge to the Greke & Siriake text these wordes sound thus, thou art a rocke and vpon this rocke I wil builde my churche, which is also the true sēse of the vulgare latī. Here did our sauiour christmanifestly promise to S. Pe∣ter souerayntie ouer his churche. For the foundation is to à buil∣dinge, the same that the heade or prince is in a kingdome or common wealth. Thus doth S.In Anc∣corato. Epiphanius vnderstand these
wordes sayinge. Our lord him selfe hath constituted him [S. Peter] the first of his Apostles, the firme rocke v∣pon which the churche of god is built. To these wordes also manifestly alludeth the holy generall coun∣cell of Calcedon, in the sentence of cōdemnatione against Dios∣corus, sayinge. Leo the most holy &Coūell. of Cale∣don. actiones. 3. blessed Archebishope of great and aū∣cient Rome by vs and by this presēt ho∣li synode, together with the thrise most blessed and all prayse worthye S. Peter whoe ys the Rock and very topp of the Catholique Churche, & he which is the foundatione of true faithe hathe spoyled him [Dioscorus] of all episcopall dignitie. Our sauiour sayth to S. PeterMath. 16. I will giue to thee the keyes of the king¦dome of heauen: wher is also most clerely signified S. Peter his preheminence in godes chur∣che; For none hath the gouerne∣ment or commaundemēt of the Keyes of any towne or citie, but
the prince or gouernour of the same: & that soueraygne power is signified by the Keyes, it is proued by that of our sauiour Christe. I haue the keyes of death andApoc. 1. v. 18. Apoc. 3. v. 7. hell. That is the rule and prower ouer deathe and hell. And agayn Hee that hath the Keye of Dauide he that shuteth and noe man openeth. S. Peter practised the authori∣tie of supreame pastoure, in declaringe Iudas to haue fallenAct. cap 1. v. 15. vnto the 26. from his Apostleship, and pro∣posinge another to be chosen in his roome: Peter risinge vp in the midest of the bretherē sayd: & as folo∣weth. S. Chrisostome vnderstā∣dingeIn hunc locum. it so saythe; How feruent is he? how he acknowledgethe the flocke committed by christ? how he is prince of this company? and in euery place begineth the first to speak. His supremicie was acknowled∣gedGala. 1 vs. 18. by S. Paule goeinge to Hie∣rusalem to see him. Then after
three yeares I came to Hierusalem to see Peter. S. Chrisostome vnderstan∣dethHom: 87. in Ihoan. it so, sayinge, Peter was the mouthe of the Apostles, prince and topp of that companye, therfore also Paule goethe vp to see him beside the others. Catho. pos. . The Pope or Bishope of Ro∣me is the law full and lineall suc∣cessoure of S. Peter in that charge and office which our sa∣uioure gaue vnto S. Peter ouer his churche militant. Proofe. The power which our saui∣oure gaue to S. Peter ouer his churche militante was giuen him, as likewise the power giuen to other Apostles: to the consūma∣tionEphesiās cap. 4. vs. 12. 13. of the saintes, to the edifnge of the bodye of Christ. vntill we all meete in the vnitie of saith & knowledge of the sonn of god. as S. Paule testifiethe, and therfore to continue in the churche, soe longe as the chur∣che is to continue.
which is also prooued by that: Vpon this Rocke will I build my chur∣che, and by that: feed my sheepe: for so longe as the buildinge of the churche cōtinueth, or the flock of christe is to be fed which will be to the end of the world: so long must the rock wherupon the churche is built, and the pa∣stours who must feede the shepe continue: But this cannot be in S. Peters personn: therfore in his successoures: see S. Augu∣stin his wordes before in that positione, that the true chur∣che can neuer want a lawfull personnall successione, of pa∣stores, vpon these wordes of the psalme 44. For thy fathers are borne sonnes to thee. And S Chriso. who. saith: whyLib. 2. de Sace. did oure lord shed his blood? surely to redeeme those sheepe the cure wherof he commited to Peter, ād also to his successoures
Now, that the Bishope of Rome is the lawfull and lineall successoure of S. Peter is as au∣thentically and euidently pro∣ued as that Lewis the 13. of Fran∣ce is lineall successoure to Hu∣ghea. lib. 3. cap. 3. b. lib. 2. against parmea niane c. here∣sie. 27. d. epla. 65. Capet or his maiestié of In∣gland to wiliam the cōquerour S. Ireneus, Optatus, S. Epi∣phanius, and S. Augustin, doe deriue the successione of the bis∣hopes of Rome from S. Peter vntill the bishopes that liued  theyr tymes. Besides Eusebius,1 or S. Hierosme, Prosper, and all such as haue written the cro∣nicles of ecclesiasticall affayres, doe not omitt to continue the Bishopes of Rome vntill theyransvver to a coū∣terfai∣te catho∣pa. 27. owne dayes And soe wel is this successione knowne that M. Fulke sayethe, wee can coumpt it on our fingares. And S. Augustine doubteth not to saye, that the succession of preistes
from the seat of Peter, (to whom ourContra eplan. funda∣menti. cap. 4. lorde after his resurrection commen∣ded his sheepe to be fed) vntil that pre¦sent Bishopp held him within the lapp of the churche. Protes. pos. 1. S. Peter was not by our saui∣our our Christ constituted supreme head and soureygne pastoure or Bishop ouer his churche mili∣tant. 2. The Pope or Bishope of Ro∣me is not lawfull and lineall suc∣cessoure to S. Peter in that char∣ge and office which our sauiour gaue to S. Peter ouer his chur∣che militante.
THE SEAVENTH Controuersie of the honoure due vnto the holy An∣gells and Saintes in heauen. Catho. pos. 1. TO the holy Angelles and saintes in heauen is due more then ciuil honoure and re∣uerence. Proofe. 1. To mee thy frendes (ô godPsalme. 138. vs. 17. are exceedingly honorable: loe here Dauid beinge inge, a∣uowethe that the frendes of god are greatly to be honoured, by him: Certes not with ciuill ho∣noures for suche he ought not to them he beinge kinge, and the frendes of god, beinge allIo: cap. is v. 14. those that doe the thinges he
cōmaūdeth (as our sauiour testi∣fiethe)s. 13. of what condition or de∣gree soeuer. 2. where this Gospell shalbe preachedMath. 26. vs. 13. in the whole worlde, that also which shee hath done, shalbe toulde for a me∣morie of her. Loe here an exeeding honoure decreed by our sauiour him self to S. Marie Magdaleyne. whereLuc. cap 22. vs. 19. is to be noted, that this is cōmaū∣ded to be done in memorie of her in like manner of speeche as our sauiour commaunded the holy misteries to be celebrated in memorie of him. 3. Iosue beinge in the feild of the citie of hie∣richo,Iosue. cap. 5. vs. 13. saw a man stādinge against him, how ldinge a drawne sworde, and he went nere to him, and sayde, art thou oures, or our aduersaries? who answe∣red noe: but I am a prince of the host of our lorde. Iosue fell flatt downe to the grounde, and adoreinge he sayd, what speaketh the lord to his seruant? loose
sayth he thy shooe from thy foote for the place where in thou standest is holy. And he did as he was commaunded Loe here the Angell not onely a∣dored to the grounde but also the ground it self nere where he stoode duely reuerenced for respect of him. Protest. pos. To the Angelles and Saintes in heauen is due no other honoure or reuerence then ciuil. THE EYGHTETH CON∣trouersie. Of prayer to the holy angells and saintes in heauen. Catho. pos. TO pray to the Angelles or saintes in heauen doth not derogate anie whitt at all from our sauiour Christ his office of mediatoure. Proofe. 1. S. Paule prayeth to the RomāsRom. cap. 15. vs. 30. in this sorte. I beseeche you bre∣thren
by our lord Iesus Christ, and by the charitie of the holy ghost, that you helpe me in your prayres for me to god. The like he hath to the Ephe∣sianes. cap. last v. 19. the first to the Thesalo: cap 5. and elles w∣here often. But if the prayer to saintes on earthe do the not de∣rogat from the mediatorshipe of Christ: certes the prayers made to them in heauen cannot. Agayne Iacob prayed to hisGenesis. cap. 48. vs. 16. good Angell in this sorte: The Angell that deliuereth me from all eui∣lles: biess these children. Catho. pos. The saintes in heauen doe heare our prayers and vnder∣stande our perticuler estates ther fore it is not idle or in vaine to pray to thē, as thoughe they did nether, Proofe. They are as the Angelles of god inMatth. . 22. v. 0. Luc. c. 20. vs. heauen. They are equall to the Angel∣les. but the Angelles Knowe our
particuler estates: see that you dispise36. c. Matt. cap. 18. vs 10. d. Luc. cap. 15. vs. 10. not one of these little ones (saith our sauiour Christ) For I saye vnto you that theyre Angells in heauē doe alwa∣yes see the face of my father which is in heauen. yea they knowe our se∣cret thoughts: I saye to you, there shalbe ioye before the Angelles of god vpon one sinner that doth pennance. The saintes haue power ouerApocal. cap. 3. vs 26. 27. nationes to rule them, therfore doe they know theyre estates. He that shall ouercome and keepe my wordes vnto the ende I will giue him (sayth our sauioure) power ouer na∣tiones, and he shall rule them with a rodd of Iron. Catho. pos. 3. God doth somtymes heare & accepte the prayers of his seruāds or saintes for a nother man, whē he will not heare that man pray∣inge for hymselfe: therfore is it profitable to praye vnto them. God sayd to Eliphas the ThemaniteIob last. cap. vs. 7 my surye is wrothe against thee and thy
two freindes. Take therfore vnto you8. 9. 10. seauen oxen and seauē Rāmes, & goe to my seruande Iob and offer holocaust for your selues, and my seruande Iob shall pray for you, his face I will recea∣ue, that the folly be not imputed vnto you. They went and did as our lorde had spoken to them, and our lorde receaued the face of Iob. Our lord also was tourned at the penance of Iob whē he prayed for his freindes. Againe, Pray one for a nother thatIam. cap. 5. vs. 16. you may be saved: for the cōtinuall pra∣yer of a iust man auayleth much. I alledge not the fathers testi¦monie for prayer to saintes they beinge confessed by the learned protestantes to haue taught that Doctrine; namely Fulke saythe: In Naziāzen, Basile and Chrisostome,2. pet. cap. 1. sec. 3. re∣minder to Bristo. 3. pa. there is some mentione of the inuocatione of saintes to help vs with theyr prayers The like he confesseth of Am∣brose Austine and Hierome. So that wee see the doctrine of the
Greke and latin churche in this pointe (by the cōfessione of one of our seuerest aduersaries) to ha∣ue bene 1200. yeares agoe the same with the doctrine of the present churche of Rome. Protest. pos. To praye to the saintes or Angelles in heauen doth deroga∣te from the office of mediatour of our sauiour Christ. 2. The saintes in heauen doe not heare our prayers, nor know our particuler estates, or ne∣cessities, and therfore is it in vayne to pray to them. 3. God doth neuer accepte of the prayers of his saintes offered for another man, when he doth not accept of the same mans prayers for him selfe. THE NINTH CONTRO∣uersie of holi Reliques. Catho. posi. 1. God doth honor the Reliques of saintes by working miracu∣louse thinges by them to his ow∣ne
glorye, the honoure of the saintes, the benefit of man, and the edification of his churche: and therfore are they to be ho∣noured and reuerenced by faith∣full Christianes. Proofe. 1.Actes. cap. 19. vs. 18. There were brought from his [S. Paule] bodye napkins, and hand kercheeses vpon the sike and the disea∣ses departed from them; and the wic∣ked spirites went out. 2. They did bringe forth the sicke into stre¦etesActes cap. 5. vs. 15. and lead them in beddes and cou∣ches that whē Peter came, his shadowe at the leaste might ouer shadowe anie of them, & they all might be deliuered from there infirmities. 3. Certayne persones buryinge a man4. of the imges. cap. 13. vs. 21. sawe the rouers; and threwe the bodie in the sepulcher of Eliseus, which when it had touched the bones of Eliseus, the man reuiued and stoode vpon his feet.
For the testimonie of the fa∣thersThe. 22. booke of the cit. e of god. cap. 8. in this pointe I wil onely alledg S. Augustine, whom vn∣ess our aduersaries dare condem∣ne both of erroure in Iudgment and falsitie in historie, they must needes confess that holy reli∣ques in his tyme, were had in great and publique honoure and reuerence. The reader that desi∣rethe to see or heare himself spea¦ke, must be content to turne the booke himself, for this wor∣des, to this purpose, are ouer Pro∣ix to be inserted in this briefe treatise. The Doctrine and practise ofExam. 4. partē. sec haec gentilia. ancient churche is soe euident in this pointe, that Chemnitins a renowmed protestant is forced to, write in this sort. Of translation of riliques followed the caryinge them a∣bout in processiones, as is mentioned by Hierome against Vigilantius: And by Augustine when in the translatione of
the reliques of Steuen, à blinde wo∣man receaued her sight, Lucilius the Bishope streyght ordayned the carieing abont of the Reliques of Steuen. And be cause sometimes certayne miracles were done at the reliques: all per sōne in any īfirmitie or necessite, what soeuer rann to them. Augustine mentioneth that flowers and otherthinges: Am∣brose that garmentes cast vpon the se∣pulchers, or cofines of martyres were caried by Christianes, as defenses and preseruatiues frō euill; They did think that the martyres them selues were present with theyre ashes. Nor did they call vpon god onely, but the very mar∣tyres did they inuccate at theyre reli∣ques: and thinkinge grace and heauenly vertue, to reside in theyre bones by pra∣yer and other worshippe did they seeke them at reliques: As Basile discours∣ethe vpon the Psalme. 115. Nor did they seeKe theyr onely corporall cures: but did imagine that spirituall graces, as holiness and charitie was giuen and
creased by tovching and Kissing of liques as Nyssenus doth gloriouslie eache of Theodore the martyr: with any other thinges to the same urpose. Protes. positi. God doth not honoure the re∣ques of saintes by worKeinge y miraculous thinges by them her to his owne glorie, the onoure of the saintes, the be∣efit of man, or the edification of his churche: or thoughe he oe, yet are not the reliques of intes for all that to be honou∣ed or reuerenced. 2. THE TENTHE CON∣trouersie of holy images Catho. posi. 1. THe images of holy person∣nes may with out feare of i∣dolatrie or anie other inconue∣nience be placed in churches, and oratories.
Proofe. 1. Two Cherubins thou shalt makeExodus. cap. 25. vs. 18. 19. 20. beaten golde on both sides of the ora¦cle. Lett one cherubin be on the one si and the other on the other, lett them co¦uer both sides of the propitiatorie, spre¦adinge theire winges and coueringe the vaile, and lett them looke one towar¦des the other, theire faces turned vn the propitiatorie wher with the Ark is to be couered. Loe here the com∣maundement of god himselfe for the placeinge of holy ima∣ges, in the most holy place of the temple or tabernacle, not with stādinge that the jewes we∣re most prone vnto idolatric. 2. All the walles of the temple rounde3. of the kinge. cap. 6. vs. 28. 29. aboute e graued with diuers engraue∣inge and caruinge and hee made in them Cherubins and Palme trees and diuers Pictures, as it were standing out of the wall, and cominge forthe:
e here holy images made in the mple with out anie express cō∣aundinge of god. 3. Our lorde sayde to Moyses make aNübres cap. 21 vs. 8. asen serpent and set it for a signe: that beinge striken looketh vpon it all liue. Catho. pos. 2. The jmages of holy persōnes ay and ought to be honoured reuerenced and worshiped. Proofe. The holy Scriptures approuue nd commaunde honoure and euerence to be done to diuers thinges, for the sole respect and elatione which they haue to ho y personnes, thoughe nether soe euident, nor so naturall as the re∣specte which images haue to the personnes whome they represēt: therfore is it euident, that they approue and cōmaund the liKe to be done to them. Adore you his footestoole because it isPsulme.
holi. The Rabins by the foo9. vs. 5. stoole vnderstand the Arke of the owld testament, which therfo according to this commaunde¦ment they adored. I will adore towarde the holi temple,Psalme. 5 vs. 9. thy feare. Loe here adoration o the temple for respect of god whose how se it is. God hath giuen him a name whichPhilipē cap. 2. vs. 10. aboue all names: that in the name IESVS euerie knee bowe of the cele∣stialls terestralles and infernales. Lo here reuerence commaunded to be done to the holy name of I∣SVS. Lose of thy shooe from thy foote, forExodus. cap. 3. vs. 5. Iosue. cap. 5. vs 13. the place wherein thou standest is ho grounde, Loe here reuerence cō∣maūded to be done to the groū∣de neere where the Angell stood onely in respect of his presence there. woe to you blinde guides that saiMatthe. cap. 23. vs. 19. 17 whosoeuer shall sweare by the temple
t is nothinge, but he that shall sweare by the gold in the temple is bownde ee blinde, for whether is greater the gold or the temple that sanctificthe the gold. Loe here the gold in the temple sanctified, for bein∣ge in the temple, and therfore deserueth reuerence, but much more the temple it selfe. Now e let the iuditions reader consider, whether the image of anie personne hath not a more neee and euident relation and respect unto the personne repre∣sented by it; then these thinges which the holy Sripture auoweth & cōmaundeth to be honoured forthe respecte which they haue to some persone worthye of ho∣noure. And yf he finde that they haue so in deede, as doubtless they haue: and further, if the persōnes represented by the im∣ages deserue honoure and reue∣rence (as is proued before that
the saintes and Angelles doe then vnless he be depriued of the light of naturall reason, he can∣not denye but such holy images may and ought to be honoured and reuerenced in regarde of the persōnes represēted by thē. whic yet is made more playneby this reason. The iniurie or contume∣lie done to the image of any per∣sonne, is by all men esteemed to redounde to the iniurie or cō∣tunielie of the persōne represen∣ted by it, which (to omitt infinit other proofes) is euident by the wrathe and indignatione which Theodosius a good & wise prince, conceaued against the ci∣tezensTheodo. 5. booke ofhis hi∣storie cap. 19. of Antioche for castinge downe his wifes statua: which iniurie he had reuenged with the ruine of the whole citie, yf he had not been preuented by the prudent & piouse endeuoures of others. The curious reade
may see Eusebius of MaximinEuseb. lib 9. cap. 9. his statua defaced in dishonoure of the person and also Suetonius of the the like disgrace shewed to Domitiane. The dishonoure therfore done to the images, re∣downding to the personnes; the same must necessarily be sayd of the honoure Vsed to them. And this is euidently true if all natu∣rall reson & discours be not false.Math. cap. 9. Of the woman cured of the bloodie flix wherof mention is made in the gospell, it is recor∣ded that returninge home, shee in memorie of that benefit, sett vp an image of Christ, at theExseb. lib. 7. cap. 14. foote whereof, grewe an herbe, which when it touched the hem of the image, cured all diseases: which image Iuliane the Aposta∣ta threwe downe, and sett vpp his owne in the place, which was īmediatly destroyed by fyre from heauen. But the Image of
Christ broken in peeces by the heathen: the Christiannes after wardes gatheringe the peeces togeather, placed in the churche wher it was: as Sozomen writ∣etheSozomē. lib. 5. cap. 20 vntill his tyme. Seeinge therfore god doth ho∣noure holy images by doing miracles by them for our beue∣fit; why should not wee also ho∣noure them, with due reueren∣ce and worshipp, or rather the personnes represented by them?Exodus cap. 20. Therfore when god forbidethe the makeinge and adoreinge of any grauen thing, or any simi∣lude; the meaning is only, that no such thing should be made o adored as god; & not otherwise. For he himself hath commaun∣ded both to make holy images and also to adore his footstoole as is already shewed. In like ma∣nner therfore, as he torbideth to kill, not certes absolutly, but by
priuate auctoritie, vpon reuenge, malice, or other vnlawfull cause. so doth he forbid to make and adore anie grauen thinge: not absolutlye, but as a god. And for confirmation of this thou mayest note [prudent reader] that noe one Catholique father for these 1600. yeares hath euer vnder stoode this commaundement in that sense which the protestan∣tes would drawe it vnto: which is more then a probable argu∣ment that it is not the true sense therof.Demost. of his proble title: sinum Crucis. For the testimonie of the fa∣thers in this pointe: I will con∣tent my selfe with M. Parkins confession: sayinge that the cross begann to be adored about the 400. yeare of Christ. And thou∣ghe fraudulently he say yt be∣gann to be adored yet to the ma∣nifestation of his owne fraude doth hee bring diuers testimo∣nies
of Prudētius, Hierome, Pau∣lin, and others which manife∣stly shewe, that it was then in publique vse, & not in begining only. Note, that what is say de of the honoure due to the cros may be sayd of anie other holy image. Protestantes position. 1. The images of holy personnes may not without idolatrie or other inconuenience be made & placed in churches, oratories, or places of prayer. 2. The images of holy person∣nes may not, or ought not, to be honored, reuerenced, or wor∣shiped. THE ELEVENTHE Controuersie: Of Pur∣gatorie. Catholique position. AFter this life there is a pur∣gatorie, or place where the
soules of the faythfull, depar∣tinge out of this world Ī the state of grace are detayned vntill they be wholly purged from all guilt and payne due vnto sinn. Proofe. 1. Hee that shall speake against the ho∣lyMath. cap. 12. v. 32. ghost it shall not be forgiuen him ne∣ther in this world nor in the world to come. Hence it is manifest that some sinnes are forgiuen in the world to come: not in heauen whither no sinner entereth: nor in hell where there is no remis∣sion, therfore in a third place which is Purgatorie, S. Augustin aludinge to this place expresly sayth that some sinnes are remit∣tedDeciuit lib. 21. cap. 13. in the next world. 2. Bee att agrement with thy aduersa∣rie betymes whilest thou art in the wayMa the. cap. 5. v. 25. 27 with him, lest perhappes thy aduersa∣rie deliuer thee to the iudg, and the
Iudge deliuer thee to the officers and thou be cast into prisone. Amen I saye to thee thou shalt not goe from thence till thou repaye the last farthinge. To these wordes S. CyprianEpistle to Anto∣nian. alludinge Sayth. Another thinge it is for him that is in prison, not to goe out til he hath payde the last farthinge, ano∣ther thinge presently to receaue rewarde of faythe and Vertue: another thinge beinge by longe payne tormented: to be clensed and purged by longe fire. 3. The worke of eueire one shal be mani∣fest for the day of our lorde will declare,1. Corin cap. 3. vs. 13. because it shal be reuealed in fire, and the worke of euerie one of what kinde it is the fire shall trye. Vf anie mans worke burae he shall suffer detriment: but hee himselfe shalbevs. 15. Vpon the Psal. 37. saued, yet soe as by fire. S. Augustine Vnderstandeth this place of Pur∣gatorie, sayinge yf they did build vpon the foundation gold, siluer, and pre∣tions stones, they should be secure from
both fyres, not onely from that euerlasting which shall torment the impiouse eter∣nally: but also from that which shall amende them that shalbe Saued by fire. For it is sayd, hee shalbe safe yet soe as by fyer. Catholique Positions.2. Catho. pos. 2. The soules in Purgatorie are holpen by the prayers, Sacrifices, and other workes of pietie done for them by the faithfull liuinge in this world: And therfore is it à good worke to praye for them. Proofe. Otherwise what sh. il they doe that1. Corin. cap. 15▪ vs. 29. 30. are baptised for the dead, yf the dead rise not agayne at all? why also are they baptised for them? By baptisme he∣re is vnderstoode all corporall afflictione and chastisement vn∣dertaken for the departed; in li∣ke manner as it is vnderstoodeMarc. cap. 10. vs. 38 by our sauiour when he say the, with the baptisme wher with Iam
Baptised shall yee be baptised. 2. And (Iudas) makeinge a gather∣inge2. Ma∣chah. c. 12. vs. 43. 44. 46. he sent 12000. Drachmes of Sil∣uer to Hierusalem for sacrifice to be of∣fred for sinne, well and religiouslye thinking of the resurrection (for vn∣less he hoped that they that were slayne, should rise agayne, it should seeme super stuouse and vayne to pray for the dead) it is therfore a holy and healthfull cogita∣tion to pray for the dead that they may be loosed from sinnes. For the iudgment of the chur∣che, in & before S. Augustines tyme, lett the industrius reader see the confessione of Chemni∣tius3. part. octaua. secte in his examen where he vn∣dertaketh to dispute against S. Augustine and S. Chrisostome of purgatoire & prayer for the dead. Protestant position. 1. After his life there is no pur∣gatorie or place where the sou∣les of the faithfull, departed in
the state of grace are purged ether from guilt or payn of sinn. 2. The sowles in purgatorie are not holpen by the prayers, and other workes of pietie done for them, by the faithful liueinge in this worlde. And therfore it is att least in vayne to pray for them. THE XII. CONTRO∣uersie of the Sacraments. Catholique position. THere are seauen Sacramēts of the newe lawe properly so called. That is seauen visible or sensible signes, ordayned or instituted by our sauiour Christ: wherby grace is giuen to those that worthely receaue thē. The protestantes doe confess that Ba∣ptisme and the Eucharist are pro∣perly sacramentes, therfore are wee onely to proue the other fiue.
Note that as nether baptisme nor the Eucharist are in any pla∣ce of holy scripture called or said to be sacramentes: and yet be∣cause they are visible or sensible signes, and ceremonies giueing grace (as the catholique chur∣che beleeuethe: or signifyinge the same as the protestās teache) they haue euer in gods churche (euen by the confession of our ad∣uersaries) beene truly called and esteemed sacramentes: soe like∣wise all other externall and sen∣sible signes, or ceremonies pro∣ued by scriptures to haue the li∣ke effecte and haue beene called and esteemed of the auncient churche sacramentes: ought also of the protestātes to be acknow∣ledged for such: nether are they to require any other proofe for the other sacraments, then they are able to produce for these two.
And albeyt the protestantes confess with the Catholiques that Baptisme and the holy Eu∣charist are Properlie sacramen∣tes: yet doe they deny diuers thinges pertayninge to them which the Catholique churche tacheth: which are therefore to be spoken of before we pro∣ceede to the proofe of the other sacramentes.
OF THE NECESSI∣tie of Baptisme: Catholique position. It is necessary for euerie mans saluation that he be baptised.Io. cap. 3. vs. 5. Proofe. A Men I say to thee, vnless a man be borne agayne of water and the spirit, the cannot enterinto the king∣dome of god. S. Augustine numbe∣rethHerese 88. amongest other heresies of Pelagius this: that he promised eternall bliss though without the kingdome of god to infantes without Baptisme. Protestant position. It is not necessarie for any mans saluation that he bee bap∣tised.
OF THE CEREMO∣nies of Ba∣ptisme. Catholique position. THe exorcismes and other ceremonies vsed by the Ca∣tholique churche in Baptisme, haue example in the holy scrip∣ture and are agreable there vnto. Proofe. And takeinge him from the mul∣titudeMarc. c. 7. vs. 33. 34. apart, he put his fingers into his eares, and spitting, touched his tounge, And lookeinge vp to heauen, he gro∣aned, and sayd to him ephpheta whichFirst booke of sacra∣ment. v. cap. 1. is, he thou opened. Sainct Ambros testifiethe these ceremonies to haue bine vsed in his tyme. Protestant position. The exorcismes and other ce∣remonies vsed by the churche in Baptisme are disagreable to holy scripture.
OF THE HOLY EV∣chariste, or most blessed Sacra∣ment of the Aulter. Catholique Positions. IN the holy Eucharist, the true body and blood of our saui∣our Christ is truly, really and substantially, and not in figure only. Proofe. Take yee and eate: This is my body.Matth. cap. 26. vs. 26. 27 28. Marc 14. v. 22 24. cap. 22. vs. 19. 20. Drinke yee all of this. For this is my blood of the newe testamēt which shal∣be shed for many vnto remission of sin∣nes Agayne. This is my body which is giuen for you. This is the chalice the newe testa∣ment in my blood which shall be shed for you. and yet agayne Our lord Ie∣sus in the night that he was betrayed1. corint. cap. 11. vs. 23. 24. 25. tooke breade: And giuinge thankes brake, & sayd. Take yee, & eate: This is my body which shall be deliuered
for you, this doe yee for commemoration of me. In like manner also the chalice after he had supped, sayinge this cha∣lice is the newe testament in my blood this doe yee as often as ye shall drinke, for the commemoration of me. Note that these wordes (this is my body) beinge vnderstoode as they sounde there can be no more controuersie about this poynt: And that they are to be vnderstoode as they sounde, and without all figure, may be con∣uinced in this sorte. There can nether reason nor aucthoritie be alledged why anie other wordes of holy scripture are to be vn∣derstoode as they sounde, and namely these wordes which areMatth. cap. 17. vs. 5. most like them (This is my wel∣beloued sonne) which doth not proue the same of these wherof we now speake. Therfore with∣out all sense & reason, & mere∣ly of hereticall wilfulness, is
a figure sought in these Wordes, more then in any other, and na∣mely in these I haue mentioned. But here I intēd not any further dispute. OF TRANSVBST AN∣tiation. Catholique position. THe worde Transubstātia∣tion is not founde expressly in holy scripture, as like∣wise is not cōsubstantiall: but as the Catholique churche did euer beleeue the equalitie of power, & vnitie of substance in the Fa∣ther, and the sonne, and by the assistance of the holy ghost theIohn ca. 16. vs. 13. spirit of truthe, which teacheth her all truthe did express her beleefe in that point, by the worde consubstantiall in the ho∣ly councell of Nice: so like wise
haueinge euer beleeued the true & reall presence of Christes body in the most holy eucharist, by the change of the bread into the sa∣me body: did, (beinge assisted by the same neuer fay linge spirit of truthe in the holy councel of La∣teran first, and since in diuerse others) express her beleif in that poynt, by the worde transub∣stantiation, as most fitly decla∣ringe the veritie of that most ho∣ly mystery. Nether can the pro∣testantes produce anie thing against transubstantiation, which they themselues are not bounde to solue and answere: the Arriannes obiectinge the ve∣ry like against that of consub∣stantiall. That the doctrin of trā∣substātion is not newe Adamus Francisci a learned protestantMarga. theologi. pag. 256. (with others) confesseth in the∣se words. The fiction of transubstan∣tiation crep into the churche betimes:
And this shall suffice for this pointe till occasion be giuen of a larger discours. OF ADORING THE holy Eucharist. Catholique Positions. OVr Sauioure Christ beinge noe less truly present in the holy Eucharist thē he was in the stable. in Bethelem, or vpon the cross, he is noe less to be adored of all faithful christians in the sacrament, then he was there: or then beinge in the forme of a gardiner he was of S. Marie Magdalein. Proofe. Adore yee him all his Angells:Psal 69 vs. 8. which wordes S. Paule hebrwes cap. 1. vnderstādeth of the ado∣ation
of Christ in his huma∣nitié. Adore yee the footstoole ofPsalm. 98. v. 5. S. Au∣gust. vpon that pla his feete. By which footstoole S. Augustine vnderstandeth the fleshe or bodie of our sauiour Christ and saith, Because he wal∣ked here in fleshe, and gaue the same fleshe to vs to be eaten for our Salua∣tion: and no man eateth that fleshe vnless he first adore it, it is foūde howe the footstoole of our lord is adored. Certes he that acknowled∣geth our sauiour Christ truly pre∣sent in the B. Sacrament and yet thinketh him not worthie of Adoration is more sensless and vnthankfull then that vngratfull kaytiff that seeinge his grations soueraigne cōming to visit him in his vile cottage, should thinke him less honorable for suche ex∣ceeding grace and fauoure. Protestantes positions. In the holy Eucharist the true
body and blood of our sauiou Christ is not, truly, really an substantially, but in figure only 2 The body of Christ is not i the Eucharist by transubstantia∣tione. 3 He ys not to be adored in the Eucharist. OF COMMVNION vnder one kinde. Catholique positions. 1. IT is no where forbidden i holy scripture to minister the holy communion to lay person∣nes vnder one Kinde onely. This Positione is clear no such prohi∣bitione appearing in the scrip∣ture. And yf the Protestātes gro∣wndes of beleeuinge nothinge but what is proued by scripture were true; would sufficiently warrant the practise of the Ro∣man
churche in this poynt. But urther. It is no where commaunded  holy scripture to giue the holy ommunion vnder both kindes o the laye people. This Posi∣sion ys also cleare no such com∣maundement anie where appea∣ringe. For that which is sayd: doeLuc ca. 22. v. 19. his for remembrance of me: is spokē onely of the kinde of bread: and therfore doth well prouue the contraire: S. Paule in deed1 Corin. cap. 11. ddeth it to both kindes: therby also declaringe this holy mysterie taken ether under both or one kinde, to be a memoriall of Christ, and his passione: and ther∣fore doth rather proue the Catho∣lique Roman practice, then anie waye disproue yt. Thoughe the∣se wordes, doe rather giue power and auctoritie to the Apostles & priestes, to consecrate and offer the vnbloody sacrifice here insti∣tuted
and offered by our sauiou Christ: then import anie com¦maundement of ministringe th same to the laye people vnde both kindes. And this shal ap∣peare more euidently by tha which followeth. Catholique position. The Catholique Roman chur∣che doth not anie wronge or in¦iurie to the lay people, mini∣stringe vnto them the holy Eu∣charist vnder one kinde onely, They receauinge the same bene∣fit by one that they should do by bothe: christs bodie & bloodIo: cap. 6. from the 53. smasor∣vvard. beinge whole in eache. Proofe. He that saythe vnless you eate the fleshe of the sonn of man and drinke his bloode you shall not haue life in you sai∣the also. He that eatethe me the same also shall liue by me. And agayne: he that eateth of this bread shall liue fore∣uer. And he that sayth; he that eate∣eth
my flesh and drinketh my blood, a∣bideth in me and I in him: The same also sayth, the bread that I wil giue is my fleshe forthe life of the wolrde. And he that sayth, he that eateth my fleshe and drinketh my blood hath life euer∣lastinge. The same sayth, he that eat¦eth this bread shall liue for euer. All these are the sayinges of our saui∣our Christ in on & the same hapter of S. Ihon, where if we say with most Catholique Docteurs that he speaketh of the holy Sacra∣ment Sacramentally receaued it is manifest, that he ascribeth the same effect and vertu to one kinde that he doth to both. And therfore can they haue noe wrō∣ge done them, that for most iust causes haue it ministered vn∣der one kinde onely. But yf we saye with the Protestantes that here is no speache of sacramētall eatinge of Christ his body: thē is there noe difficultie in theyr che∣est
argument, which is grounde vpon the first wordes alleadge in this proof. 2. The were perseueringe in the doctrinActes cap. 2. vs. 42. of the Apostles, and in the communica∣tion of the breakeing of bread & prai Loe here communion vnder on kinde. For this breakinge o bread was the ministringe of th holy sacrament. Agayne. And the first of the Sabothe whActes cap 20. v. 7. Epistlo. 86. to Cassla. we were assembled to break bread This S. Augustine vnderstand et of breakinge bread, as in the Sa∣cramēt of Christ his body. so that it appearethe the practice of the Apostles to minister the Sacra∣ment to the people in one kinde onely. Protestant Position. 1 It is forbidden in holy Scrip∣ture to giue the holy commu∣nion to the lay people vnder one kinde onely. 2 It is commaunded in holy Scri∣pture
to giue the holy cōmu∣nion to the lay people vnder both Kindes. The lay people haue wronge done them, in that they are a brid∣ged of the Sacrament vnder both Kindes: therby receauinge less benefit then yf they receaued it vnder bothe. OF THE SACRIFICE of the Mass Catholique Position. THere is in the newe lawe a Sacrifice; truly and properly so called to wit the holy mass wherin is offered the body and blood of Christ. Proofe 1. Our Sauiour Christ gaue Pow∣er and commaundement to his Apostles and all Preistes to doe that which he did in his last sup∣per:
Sayinge doe this for commemora∣tionLue. cap. 22. v. 19. 1 cor in: cap. 11. v. 23. of me. But our sauiour Christ in his last supper sacrificed his bo∣dy and blood vnder the for∣mes of bread and wine: therfore the Apostles and all preistes haue now power and commaunde∣ment to offer the same sacrifice, which is not done but in the ho∣ly Mass. That our sauiour Christ sacrificed in his last supper is pro∣ued thus. Christ was, and is, for euer to the ende of the world a preist accordinge to the order of Melchisedeche, whose priesthoodPsal 109 cōsisted in offering bread & wine Melchisedech kinge of Salem bringingGenesis. cap. 14. v. 18. forth bread and wine for he was the Preist of god most highe: therfore it is euident tha tour Sauiour was to offer some tyme in the same for∣me, which he neuer did but in his last supper where though he offe∣red his body and blood, sayinge, this is my body wich shalbe giuen for you
this is my blood which shalbe shed for you, yet did he performe this vn∣der the forme of bread and wine, accordinge to the rite or vse of Melchisedeche his sacrifice. 2. I haue no will in you sayth the lordeMala. chie. cap. 1. v. 1. of hostes: and gift I will not receaue of your hand. For from the riseinge of the sunne euen to the goeinge downe, great is my name amonge the gentiles, and in euerie place there is sacrificinge, & there is offered to my name a cleane obla¦tion. This prophecie is not fulfilled but by the sacrifice of the mass. This is the sacrifice (sayth S. Augu∣stine)Deciuie. dei lib. 18. câp. 35. by the Preisthoode of Christ accor∣dinge to the order of Melchisedech: se∣einge we now see it to be offered to god in all places from the riseinge of the sunn vnto the settinge therof. And many other fathers in like sorte. who∣se wordes we canot here rehearse studyinge to be breif. But for the Doctrine of the
most auncient fathers in this point I will taKe the confessioneTrue re∣formatiō of the▪ churche. of Caluin. Saiynge thus; It is an vsuall thinge with these knaues [soe modest is this newe Apostles.] to rake together whatsoeuer ys vitiou∣se in the fathers. Therfore when they obiect the place of malachi to be expoūded by Ireneus of the sacrifice of the Masse The offeringe of Melchisedech to be see handled of Athanasius, Ambros, Au∣gustin, Arnobius, it is breifly answered, the same writers else where to interpret also bread the body of Christ, but so ridi∣culusly that reason, and truth causeth vs to dissent. Thus M. Caluin, but whether he, be not ridiculus ra∣ther then these fathers lett the in∣diffrent reader iudge. Protestantes Position. In the newe lawe is there not anie sacrifice truly and properly: nether is the mass à sacrifice of the body and bloode of our sa∣uiour Christ.
OF CONFIRMA∣tion. Catholique position. COnfirmatiō as it is practised in the Catholique Roman churche is truly and properly a Sacrament of the newe lawe. Proofe. It is a sensible signe giueinge grace: therfore a Sacrament.Actes cap. 8. v. 20. Then did they impose theyr handes vpon them, and they receaued the holy ghost wherof sayth S. Cyprian: They that in Samaria were baptised of PhilipEpistle. 73. to Iubai. because they had lawfull and Eccle∣siasticall baptisme, ought not to be bapti∣sedanie more: But onely that which wā∣ted, was done by Peter and Iohn; to witt, that by prayers made for them, & impositione of handes the holy ghost mi∣ght be powred vpon them; which now also is done with vs. that they which
in the churche are baptised, by the rulers of the churche offered, and by our prayers and imposition of handes receaue the ho∣ly ghost, and be signed with our lordes seale. Agayne. It is to little purpose to impose handesEpistle. 72 vpon thē to receaue the holy ghost, vnless they receaue the churches baptisme. For then may they be fully sanctified, and be the Children of God, if they be born by bothe Sacramentes. And S. Augustine: the SacramentAgaynst the let∣ters of Petilian lib. 2. cap 104. of Chrisme in the kinde of visible seales is sacred and holy, euen as Baptisme it self. Protestant Position. Confirmation as it is practised in the Romā churche, is not tru∣ly & properly a Sacrament of the newe lawe. Of Pennance. Catholique Positions. 1. Pennance consisting of contri∣tion, confession, and satisfaction of the penitent, and absolution of
the preist is truly and properly a Sacrament of the newe lawe. Proofe. It is a visible signe or ceremonie as appearthe by the confession of the penitent and absolution of the preist: it remitte the synnes & therfore giueth grace. Receaue you the holy ghost; whose sin∣nesIohn. cap 20. v. 23. you shall forgiue they are forgiuen them: And whose sinnes you shall re∣taine thei are retained. Of this power of remittinge synnes S. Chrisosto∣me saythe thus. For they that dwellLib. 3. de Sacer. dotio: one the earthe that conuers in it, to them is cōmission giuen to dispense those thin∣ges that are in heauen, to them is it giuen to haue the power which god would not to be giuen nether to Angells nor Ar∣changells. For nether to them was it sayd, what soeuer you shall bynde in earthe shall be bound in heauen and whatsoeuer you shale lose in earth shall belosed in heauē. The earthly Princes in deede haue also powre to binde but, the
bodies onely: but that bonde of preistes which I speake of, toucheth the ve sule it self, & reacheth euen to the hea∣uenes: in so much that whatsoeuer t preistes shall doe be neathe; the self sa god doth ratifie aboue, and the sentence  the seruantes▪ the lord doth confirme. F in deed what ells is this, thē that the po∣wer of all heauenly thinges is graunted them of god? whose sinnes soeuer (saith he) you shall retaine, thei are retaine what power I beseeche you can be grea∣ter then this? Haueinge thus proued the po∣wer of preistes to remit synnes▪ And the protestantes confessing contrition, which they call re∣pentance: it remaynethe, that I proue the other two partes of Pennance to wit confession and satisfaction.
OF CONFES¦sione. Catholique position. OF the power of retayning (that is not remittinge) of synnes giuen to preistes follo∣weth the necessitie of confession of all synnes. For if on the one side, the synnes retayned and not remitted by Preistes vpon earthe be retayned and not remitted in heauen, as is manifest by our Saui∣oures owne wordes; and yf on the other side, the priest cannot remitt the synne vnless he knowe it, as is manifest he cannot: nor cā he know it vnless it be towlde him: it followeth necessarilie, that he that will haue his synnes remi∣ted, must by his owne confes∣sione make them knowne vnto
him, to whome god hath giuen power to remitt them. Confession was practised in the Apostles tymes as appear theActes cap. 19 v. 18. for manie of them that beleeued came confessinge and declaringe their deedes. It is also probable that S. Iames speaketh of this Sacramētall con∣fession when he sayth: Confess your sinnes one to another. for soe dothIames. cap. 5. v. 16 Origen homilie 2. vpon. leuiticus. Origen vnderstand it saying. There is a seauen the kinde of remissione of sin∣nes, though verie hard and laboursome when the sinner washeth his bedd with teares & they are made his bread both daie and night: and when he is not ashamed to declare his sinne to the Priest of our lorde, and to seeke re∣medie accordinge to him which saithe: I haue saide I will pronounce my iniustice against my selfe to our lord, and thou hast remitted the impietie of mine hart. In whom also that is fullfilled which the Apostle saith: yf anie be sick lett him bring in the preistes of the churche
and yf he be in sinne they shall bere mitted to him. The iudgement of the auncient churche is soe clere in this point of confession, that Mr. Fulke (a most piuishe enimie to all Catho∣lique Doctrine) is compelled, by the multitude of most clere te∣stimonies of the auncient fathers to cōfess, that it is expedient some tymes: in these wordes. That it isVpon th 20. cap. of s. Iohn Sect S. ovvar∣des the ende. expedient in some cases for men to con∣fess theyr sinnes to theyre pastoure, we deny not. OF SATISFAC∣ction. Catholique position. 3. THe guilt of the sinne bein∣ge remytted, the payne due therfore is not alwayes so pardo∣ned, but that often tymes, ther remayneth a temporall payne to
be suffered for it, ether here in this life, or els in purgatorie. Proofe. 1. Forgiue I beseche thee the sinne of thisNūb cap 14. v. 20. 21. thy people, accordinge to the greatness of thy mercie, as thou hast beene propitiou∣se to them since their goeinge out from Egipt vnto this place. And our lord said I haue forgiuen it accordinge to thy wor∣de: liue I and the whole earth shal be re¦plenished with the glorie of our lord. But yet all the men that haue seene my ma∣iestie, and the signes that I haue done in Egipt and in the wilderness, and ha∣ue tempted me nowe tenn tymes nether haue obeied my voice they shall not see the lande for which I swore to their fa∣thers: nether shall anie of them that haue detracted me behould it. The like is recorded of Moy∣ses Deuter: cap. 32. v. 49▪ and of Aaron. Nūbers cap. 20. v. 23. yet noe man doubteth but the sinn for which they were pu∣nished was forgiuuen them be∣fore
theyre deathe, Dauid sayd to Nathā I haue synned2. of kinges cap. 12. v. 13. 14. to our lord: And Nathan sayd to Dauid our lord also hath taken away thy Syn thou shalt not dye: Neuertheless becau∣se thou hast made the ennimies of our lord to blaspheme, for this thing the sonn that is borne to thee dyinge shall die. Catholique position. This temporall payne remay∣ning after the guilt of the sinne is remitted, may be redeemed by good workes; as by fastinge pra∣yer, Almes and the like, which therfore are truly called satisfa∣ctorie. Proofe. 1. If I shall shut heauen, and reane fall2. of Pa∣ralip. cap. 7. v. 13. 14. not, & shall bid & cōmaunde locustes to deuoure the lande and shall send Pe∣stilence into my People: And my poeple beinge conuerted vpon whom my name is inuocated shall doe pennance from theire most wicked wayes: I also will heare from heauen & will be propitious
to theyr sinnes, and will saue their land. 2. O kinge lett me counsell thee and re∣deemeDaniell. cap. 4. v. 24. thy sinnes with almes & thy ini∣quities with the mercies of the poore. 3. Therfore are there amonge you manie1. Corī. cap. 11. v. 30. 31. weake and feeble and manie sleepe. But yf we did iudge ourselues we should not be iudged: that is yf we punishe or chastice our selues, we should not be chastised of god, for our synnes remitted, for of such the Apostle speaketh as is manifest by the vers followinge But whi∣les we are indged of our lord we are chastised, that with this world we be not damned. Catholique Positions. 5. workes done for the satisfactiō of the temporall payne remayn∣ing after the sinne be pardoned, do no way derogate from the satisfaction of christ his passion.
Proofe. 1. I Paule, whoe nowe reioyce in suffe∣ringeCollosē. cap. 1. v. 24. for you and doe accomplishe those things that want of the passiones of Christ in my fleshe, for his body which is the churche. 2. we are heires truly of god, and cohey∣resRoman. cap. 8. v. 17. of Christ yet yf we suffer with him that we may be gloriffied which him. Loe here our sufferinge at least a condition necessarie for our glo∣rification. 3. To him that is such an one this rebuke2. Cor. cap. 2. v. 6. sufficeth that is geuen of many: where S. Paule speaketh of the Pēnance enioyned vpon the incestious Corinthiane. Doe Pennance sayth S. Iohn BaptistMathe. cap. 3. v. 2. and by his life and example she∣wed what pennance he spake of: And agayne: yeeld therfore fruit wor∣thy of Pennance.
But Zacheus standinge sayd to our lordLuc. 19. vs. 8. Behould the half of my goodes I giue to the poore: and yf I haue defrauded anie man of anie thing, I restore fowre fould. The doctrine and practise of the auncient churche thouchingCentu∣rie. 3. coll. 127 Satisfaction, is confessed by the Centuristes in these wordes: The life of those that confessed lesser sinnes was considered, & iudged whether they had done iust pennance, as appreareth by Ciprian lib. 3. epistle 16. and that sa∣tisfaction was accustomed to be imposed vpon them according to the quantitie of the fault appearethe by his S. sermone de lapsis. Tertuliane also mentioneth the same in his booke of Pennance.
OF INDVL. gences. Catholique position. THere is in the churche of God power to giue Indul∣gences, or graunte pardonnes: that is to remitt and pardonne parte or all the temporall payne, pennance, or punishment which (for the most parte) re∣mayneth to be performed, or suffered, for the satis-faction af the sinne after the guilte of the synn be taken awaye. Proofe. To the will I giue the keis of the king∣domeMatth. cap. 16. v. 19. 6. Mat. ca. 18. v 18 2. Cori. cap. 2. v. 10. of heauen and what soeuer thou shalt lose in earthe shalbe also losed in the heauens. And the same repea∣ted agayne to all the Apostles, in another place. This power is pra∣ctised by S. Paule, whom you haue
pardonned anie ing. I also. Formy self also that which I pardoned yf I pardoned anithing for you in the personne of Christ. Loe here S. Paule at the prayer of others, pardoned and assoyled of mere mercie and grace, the in∣cestu ouse corinthiane, of the rest of his Pennance, which with out the same pardone, he was boūde to haue performed, though his sinn was already forgiuen him, Protestant Positions. 1. Pennance, consistinge of contri∣tion confession, and satisfaction of the penitent, and absolution of the preist, is not truly & proper∣ly, à Sacrament of the newe lawe. 2. It is not necessarie for the pe∣nitent to confess all his synnes: or that cōfession is not necessarie for obtaynīg remissiō of our synnes. 3. The guilt of the synn being pardonned there remainethe no temporall payne to be suffered, or other satisfaction to be made,
ther in this life or in the next. , The temporall payne re∣ayning cannot be redeemed y anie workes: nor are there nie satisfactorie workes. ▪ workes done for Satisfaction or synn, or for the payne due to t, doe derogate from the satifa∣ction of our Sauiours passion. . There is not in the churche of Christ anie power to giue indul∣gence, or graunte pardon of anie parte of the the temporall payne, or pennance to be performed af∣ter the guilt of the synn be par∣doned, and remitted.
OF HOLY OR∣ders. Catholique position. HOly orders wherby power is giuen both to consecrate the true body of Christ as the ca∣tholique church doth beliue: & also to minister other Sacraments in the churche (which is the my∣sticall body of Christ) & to exer∣cise other ecclesiasticall functio∣nes is truly and properly a Sacra∣ment of the newe lawe. Proofe. Holy order is giuen by a visible or sensible signe with the effect of grace: therfore properly a Sa∣crament. Proofe. 1. Neglect not the grace that is in thee:1. Tim. cap. 4. v. 14. which is giuen thee by prophecie with imposition of the handes of preisthoode.
gayne. 2. I admonishe thee that thou resuseitate2. Tim. 1. v. 6. he grace of god which is in thee by the mposition of my handes. Further. 3. Then they fasting and praying and im∣posingAct. ca. 13. v. 6. handes vpon them dismissed them S. Ambrose vpon the wordes before cited out of the first to Timothee 4. sayth thus. The imposition of handes is mysticall wordes where with the elect is confirmed to this worke receauing auctoritie (his con∣science bearing witnes) that he may be bould in our lorde steede to offer sacri∣fice to god. M. Bilson proueth by the aucto∣ritiePerpe∣tuall gourn∣ment pag. 10. of Caluin, holy orders, or creating ministers (as he tearmeth it) to be a Sacrament: which Cal∣uin doth not only affirme, but proue (if the other cite him truly) by these reasones: because it is a visible signe, with grace.
Protestans positions. Holy orders wherby power i giuē to minister other Sacramēt and exercise other ecclesiasticall functiones is not properly & tru∣ly a Sacrament of the newe lawe. OF EXTREAME vnctione. THe anoylinge of the sicke with the forme of wordes ioyned ther with, vsed in the Ca∣tholique Roman churche, is truly and properly a Sacrament of the newe lawe. Proofe. It is a sensible signe with the effect of inuisible grace, therfore properly a Sacrament. Proofe 1. Is anie man sicke amonge you let him bring in the priestes of the churche and let them praye ouer him anoyleing
im with oyle in the name of our lord: Loe here the externall signe, And he prayers of fayth shall saue the sick: nd our lord shall lift him vp: and if hee e in sinnes thei shall be remitted to him: Loe here the internall grace of which S. Chrisostome saythe hus: They [to witt preistes] haue auctoritie to forgiue sinnes; not only when they regenerate vs but after war∣des also. For, is anie sick amonge you, aith the Apostle let him bringe in the Preistes &c. Protestantes position. The anoyleinge of the sick with the forme of wordes adioyned, vsed in the Romane churche, is not properly a Sacrament of the newe lawe.
OF MATRI∣monie. MAtrimonie contracted be∣twixte christianes is not a bare ciuill contract, but truly & properly a Sacramēt of the newe lawe. Proofe. It is a Symbole or signe of a holy thing with the effect of grace therfore a Sacrament. For this cause shall man leaue his fa∣therEphe. 5. v. cap. 31. & mother & shall cleaue to his wife, & they shal be two in one fleshe. This is a great Sacrament, I speake in Christ & in the churche. Note that Catho∣lique auctores vrge not this wor∣de Sacrament to proue that ma∣trimonie is properly a Sacramēt: but to proue it a holy signe, or a signe of a holy thing; and therfo∣re not a mere ciuill contract, and this doth the text euidently im∣porte:
declareing that the ioining together of mā & woman, as it is vsed in Christ his church is a Sym∣bole or signe, of the inseparable vnione, & āmitie of Christ & his churche. The effect of grace in this Sacrament, is also shewed by the same wordes. For matri∣monie is not onely a signe of the vnione of Christe, and the chur∣che, in conformitie of nature, but also by spirituall charitie wher with Christ loued his chur∣che, & gouerneth it holily, & the church doth inseperably adhere vnto Christ by faythe, hope, & charitie, and is subiect to him by obediēce: which spirituall vnione mariage cannot signifie, vnles there be betwixt man and wife a spirituall vnione of mindes be∣side the ciuil contract: and ther∣fore the Apostle doth warne, thatIn the sam cap v. 24. 25. husbandes should loue theyre wiues as Christ doth his churche, and that wiues
should obaye theyre husbandes as  churche doth Christ. S. Augustine to omit other fa∣thersDe bono coniuga∣li cop. 18 saythe thus of this Sacra∣ment. In the mariage of our people [meaninge Christianes] the holi∣ness of the Sacrament is of more worth thē the fertilitie of the wombe Agayne. The good of mariage in all nationeThe sa∣me boo∣ke cap. p. 4. and men is in the cause of procreation and fayth of chastitie: but for as mu as pertaynethe the people of god, it is  in the holines of the Sacrament. which places besides others manifestly shewe that he speakethe of a Sa∣crament properly, for els these sayinges were not true. Protestant Position. Matrimonie contracted betwixt Christianes, is but a bare ciuill contract: and not anie Sacrament properlye.
OF THE EFFECT OF the Sacraments. Catholique Position. 1. THe Sacrament of Baptisme as it is a Sacrament of the ewe lawe (& therfore all the Sa∣cramēts of the newe lawe) giueth grace ex opere operato, or of the worke it self, or is the true cause of grace in those that receaue it worthilie, which is to giue grace ex opere operato: or of the wor∣ke wrought, and is not onely a signe, or a seale of godes good will to vs, or a bare meanes to stir fayth vp in vs, as the preaching of the Gospell is. Proofe. 1. Vnless man be borne agayne of waterIohn cap 3. v. 5 and the spirit he cannot enter▪ into the kingdome of god. Loe here our regeneration
ascribed to Baptism as to a true cause. 2. Doe pennance and be euerie one of Actes cap. 2. v. 32. baptised in the nme of Iesus, Christ.  remissiō of your sinnes: Loehere remis∣sion of sinnes atributed to bap∣tisme as to a true cause: as yf one should saye, take medecin for your health. The like or moreActes cap. 22. v. 17. playne is that Rise vp and be bapti∣sed, and washe away thy sinnes inuoca∣ting his name. 3. Not by the workes of iustice which wee did but according to his mercie hTitus cap. 3. v. ▪ hath saued vs by the lauer of regenera∣tion and renouation of the holy ghost. Loe here wee are saued by baptis∣me. 4. wherunto Baptisme being of the like1. Petri: cap. 3. v. 21. forme now saueth you also As Noë (say∣the S. Augustine) with his, was de∣liuered by the wtr nd the woode. So the family of Christ by baptisme si∣gned
wth the pssion on the Crosse.Lib. 12 against fausius cap. 14. Protestantes position. Nether baptisme, nor the other Sacramentes of the newe lawe giue grace as cause therof, but are onely signes of gods good will towardes vs, or meanes to stire vp faythe in vs. CHARACTER. Catholique position. THe Sacrament of Baptisme Confirmation and orders; (besides the grace which they gi∣ue) doe make and leaue a signe or seale in the soule of the receauer which after S. Augustine is or∣dinarily called a Character. Proofe.2. Cor. cap. 1. v. 21. 22. And he that confirmethe vs with you in Christ, and that hath anoynted
vs, god, whoe also hath sealed vs. of S. Augustines Doctrine cōcerninge this matter M. Fulke sayth thus S. Augustin doth righely conuince theVpon the 2. to Cor. cap. 1. Scr. 7. Douatistes, that the Sacrament of Baptisme ought not to be reiterated, be∣cause it is the Scale or character of rege∣neration, which beinge once giuen, by godes ordinance is not to be repeated; the like he sayth of ordination. Protestans positions. Nether Baptisme nor anie other Sacrament of the new lawe doe leaue anie signe, mark or chara∣cter in the soule of the receauer.
THE 13. CONTROVER∣sie; Of Iustification. Catholique positions. IVstification is the translation of sinners from the state of sinne vnto the state of grace, and adoptione of the Childrē of God: and therfore consisteth not in the bare remission of synnes, but in true sanctification and renoua∣tion of spirit. Proofe.Colloss: cap. 1. v. 12. 13. Giuing thankes to god and the father whoe hath made vs worthye vnto the parte of the lott of the saintes in the ligtht whoe hath deliuered vs frō the power of darkeness, and hath translated vs, in∣to the kingdome of the sonn of his loue.De N. & oncu. lib. 1. cap. 20. The diligent reader may see S. Augustine, alleadging this place in the same sence.
2.Gallatas cap. 4. v. 4. 5. God sent his sonn made of a woman, made vnder the lawe. That he might redeeme thē that were vnder the lawe, that wee might receaue the adoption of sonnes. 3. He hath saued vs by the lauer of re∣generationTit cap. 3. v. 5. 6. & renouatiō of the holy ghost, whome he hath powred vpon vs abun∣dantly by Christ Iesus our sauioure. 4. Nor theeues, nor couetouse, nor drun∣kards nor raylers, nor extortioners shall1. Cor. cap. 6. v. 10. 11. possess the kingdome of god. And these thinges certes you were, but nowe you are washed but now you are sanctified, but now you are iustified, in the name of our lord Iesus Christ, and in the spirit of our god. 5. Lay you away accordinge to the ould conuersation the owld man, which isEphesios cap. 4. v. 22. 23. 24. corrupted according to the desires of er∣roure: And be renewed in the spirit of
your mynde: and put on the new man which according to god is created in iu∣stice and helines of truthe. Behould (sayth S. Augustine)Degene. ad lt. lib 6. cap. 26 & 27. what Adam lost by sine, in that ther∣fore we are renewed, according to that which Adam lost that is according to the spirit of our minde. Spoyling our selues of the owld manColoss. cap. 3. v. 9. 10. with his actes: And doeing on the newe, him that is renewed vnto kno∣wledge according to the image of him that created hym. This image (sayth S. Augustine)In the place last cited. imprinted in the spirit of our minde Adā lost by sinn which we receaue by the grace of iustice. Catholique position. 2. Synn is not onely couered, or not imputed by iustification, but it is washed, purged, and quite ta∣ken away. Ezechiel cap. 36. v. 2.Proofe. 1. I will power out vpon you cleane wa∣ter
and you shalbe clensed from all your contaminationes. 2.Psalme 50. v. 9. Thou shalt sprincle me with hysope and I shalbe clensed, thou shalt washe me, and I shalbe made whiter then snowe. 3.Psalme. 102. v. As farr as the cast is distant from the west: hath he made our iniquities farr from vs. 4.Iohn. cap. 1. v. 29. Behould the lambe of god, behould him that take the awaye the sinn of the world. 5.Actes. cap. 3. v. 19. 1. Iohn cap. 1. v. 7. Be penitent therfore and conuert, that your sinnes may be put out. But yf we walk in the light as he al∣so is in the light: we haue societie one toward another, and the blode of Iesus Christ his sonn clensethe vs from all sinn.
OF CONCVPIS∣cence. Caetholique position. THat rebellion or concupis∣cence of the fleshe which remay nethe in man after Baptis∣me, is not properly sinne of it self, or with out the free consent of the will. Proofe.Iames. cap. 1. v. 15. Concupiscence when it hath conceaued bringe the forth sinn: therfore of it self is it not sinn. As S. Augustine playnly prooueth by these wor∣desAgainst Iuliane. lib 6. cap. 5. sayinge: when concupiscence hath conceaued it bringeth forth sinn: verely in these wordes, that which is brought forth, is distinguished from that which bringeth forth: that which bringethe forth is cōcupiscēce that which is brought forth is sinn: but concupisence doth not bring forth vnless it haue conceaued, it conceaueth not vnless it hath allured,
that is vnless it hath obtayned the assent of the will to doe euill. There is nowe therfore noe damnation to thē that are in Christ Iesus, that walkeRomanes cap 8. v. 1. Roma. cap. 7. not according to the fleshe. S. Paule calleth it sinn because it his the roote, cause, matter, and also the effect of sinn. As likewise the golden calfe made by the people of Israell isDeutro∣no. cap. 9. v. 21. called sinn, because, it was the cause, and effect of sinn. Our sauiour also is called sinn, because he was the Host & obla∣tion2. Cor. cap. 5. v. 21 for sinn. Catholique position. Asynner is not iustified, that is, clensed from sinn, made iust, ho∣ly, and the child of god▪ all which are effected by iustification) by the externall iustice of Christ im∣puted vnto him: but by internall grace truely receaued and inhe∣rent with in him. Proofe.
1. The holy scripture playnly tes∣tifiethe that there is a grace whichRoma∣nes cap. 8. v. 11. is the spirit of god dwelling with in vs: yf the spirit of him that raysed vp Iesus from the dead dwell in you, he that raysed vp Iesus Christ, from the dead, shall quicken also your mortall bodyes, because of his spirit dwellinge in you. 2. which is the life of our spirit:Roma∣nes cap. 8. v. 9. 10. you are not in the fleshe but in the spi∣rit, yet yf the spirit of god dwell in you. But if anie man haue not the spirit of Christ, the same is not his. But if christ be in you the bodie in deed is dead because of sinn, but the spirit liueth because of iustification. 3. which is the circumcision ofRoman cap. 2. v. 29. the hart in spirit. Not that which is in open shew, in the fleshe, is circumcision, but the circumci∣sione of the barte in spirit, not in the letter whoe prayse is not of
god. The circumcision of the hart sayth▪De Spi∣it & litera cap. 8. S. Augustine, is the will, pure from all vnlawfull cōcupiscence, which is not made by the teaching & threating letter, but by the helping and healing spirit. 4. which is a scripture or writing2. Cor. cap. 3. v. 3. made in our hartes. Being mani∣fested that you are the epistle of Christ ministred by vs, and writ∣ten not with inke, but with the spirit of the liuing god: not in tables of stone but in the hart, where vnto S. Augustine allu∣ding saythe. By the grace wher∣by we are freely iustified, iustice which was blotted out by sinn, is written in the interriour man re∣nued. 5. which is powered out abun∣dantlyTitus. c. 3. v. 5. 6. vpon vs: he hath saued vs by the lauer of regeneration, and renouation of the holy ghost whom he hath powered vpon vs abundantly by Iesus Christ, our
sauiour. 6. which is powered forthe in ourRoma∣ues cap. 5. v. 5. hartes: And hope confoundeth not because the charitie of god is powered forthe in our hartes, by the holy ghost which is giuen to vs. wherupon S. Augustin saythe, the charitie of god is sayd to be powered forth in our har∣tes not that by which he loueth vs: but that by which he makethDespiri∣tu & li∣tera cap. 32. vs louers of hī as the iustice of god is sayd that wherby we are made iust by his gift. And not to be ouer prolix in this point. which maketh vs the. 1. Cor. cap. 3. v. 16. temple of god. Gala. c. 6. v. 15 A newe creature. 2.  Petri. c. 1. v. 4. makethe vs pertakers of his diuine na∣ture. Gala. 3. v. 27. wherby wee put vpon vs Christ. Ephe. cap. 3. v. 14. which is a pleadg of our inheritance, and the.  Iohn cap. 3. v. 9. seede of god ay∣dge in vs, with other such like: lett now the indifferent reader iudge, whether this grace wherof all the∣se things are sayd is not truly with
in vs: but being in our sauiou Christ, is but onely imputed to vs. Catholique position. It is not onely faythe that wor∣keth in vs remission of sinnes, & the adoption of the children of god, or to saye the same in other wordes, it is not onely faythe that doth iustifie vs. Proofe. 1.1. Cor. cap. 13. v. 2. Tom: 7. concio de gest ū Emerito ante me∣dium. If I should haue all faythe, so that I could remoue mountynes, and haue not charitie I am nothinge: wher v∣pon S▪ Augustine excellently saythe, what  man would say, Prophecie is nothing? These thinges are not nothing: but whlst I haue these greate thinges, yf I haue not charitie I ā nothing, these are great thinges, and I haue great thinges, and I am nothinge, yf I haue not charitie, by which these greate thinges doe profitt me. If I haue not charte these thinges may be in me (note these wordes) but they can not
rofitt me. 2.The sa∣me. cap. v. 13. Now there remayne faythe, hope, charitie these three, but the greatest of these is charitie. Therfore doubtless doth it saue & iustifi rather then fayth. 3.Iames. . 2. v. 20. wilt thou knowe O Vayne man, that faythe with out wor∣kes is idle? yf idle, therfore it alo∣ne doth not iustifie. 4.Same. . v. 24. Doe you see that by workes a man is iustified and not by fay∣the onely? 5. For euen as the body withoutSame ca. v. 26. the Spirit is dead, soe also faythe with out wotkes is dead. 6. In Christ Iesus nether circon∣cisionGalatas. cap. 5. v. 6. auaylethe ought, nor pre∣puce: but fayth working by cha∣ritie.
7. The ende of the precept is cha∣ritie1. Timo. cap. 1. v. 5. from a pure hart, and a good conscience & a fayth not fayned. The ende, that is the accomplish∣ment and perfection of the lawe or commaundement being cha∣ritie, certes with out it we cannot be iust nor iustified. Goe yee away from me you cursed into eternall fier &c. for. I was hungryeMathe. cap. 25. v. 41. de fide et operi{bus}. cap. 15 and you gaue me not to eate. Hee doth not blame them sayth S. Augustine that they did not beliue in him, but be¦cause they did not good workes. If thou wilt enter into life keepe the commandements. I see not sayth S. Au∣gustine De fide & operi. cap. 15 why Christ should say yf thou wilt haue life euerlastinge, keepe the commandements: yf whith out obseruin∣ge them, by onely fayth one might be sa∣ved. Protestantes positions 1. Iustification is onely the re∣mission of synn with out renoua∣tion
of spirit, or interioure san∣ctification. 2. By iustification sinn is onely couered, or not imputed, and not whashed or quite taken away. 3. Concupiscence of it self. and with out the consent of the will is properly a synn: 4. Synners are instified by the o∣nely imbutation of Christ his iu∣stice and not by anie internall grace or iustice receaued, or in∣herent with in them. 5. It is onely fayth that iusti∣fiethe. Catholique position. True faythe, or iustice once had may be lost. Proofe. 1. For they vpon the rocke: such asLuk. 8. cap. 13. when they heare, whith ioye receaue the word: and these haue noe rootes be∣cause for a tyme the beleeue and in time of temptation they reuoult.
2. Haueing faythe, and good conscien∣ce,1. Timo. cap. 1. v. 19. which certayne repelling, haue made shipwrake about the faythe. 3. The roote of all euills is conetousness:1. Timo cap. 6 v. 10. & vc 21. which certayne desiering haue erred frō the faythe. 4. They went out from vs: but1. Iohn: cap. 2. v. 19 they were not of vs: not because they dissembled iustice but be∣cause they perseuered not in iu∣stice, sayth S. Augustine, de cor∣rep: & gratia cap. 9. Protestantes Position. True faythe, or iustice, once had can neuer be lost. Catholique Position. whith out particuler reuelation no man in particuler is so cer∣tayne of his iustification or salua∣tion, that he may not iustly feare▪ the contrarie.
Proofe. 1. Thou by faythe doest stand beRomanes ca. 11. v 20. 1. Cor. cap. 4. v. 4. not to hihgly wise but feare. 2. I am not guiltie in conscience of anie thing: but I am not iusti∣fied herein, but he that iudgethe me is our lord. 3. I chastise my body, and bring it1. Cor. cap. 9. g. v. 27. into seruitude lest perhappes when I haue preached to others, my self become reprobate. 4. He that thinketh himself to1 Cor. cap. 10. v. 12. stād, lett him take heed lest he fall. Man knoweth not whether he be worthie of loue or hatred but all things are reserued vncer∣tayn for the tyme to come. wherefore S. Augustine saytheDe cor∣reptione & rat. cap. 13. thus what one amonge the fay∣thfull, soe longe as he liueth in this mortallitie can presume that
he is of the number of the prede∣stinate? For it is needfull that this should be hidden here: where hautiness is soe to be taken heede of, that euen soe great an Apostle2. Cor. cap. 12 was to be buffited by the Angell of satan, lest he should be puffed vpp. Protestantes position. Euerie faithfull beliuer ought to be soe assured of his iustifica∣tion or saluation, that he should be with out feare of the contra∣rie.
THE 14. CONTRO∣uersie Of good workes. Catholique position. GOod workes done in the state of grace are merito∣rious of life euerlasting. Proofe. 1. Come yee blessed of my fatherMatthe. cap. 25 v. 34. possess the kingdōe prepared for you from the foundation of the world. For I was an hungred and you gaue me to eate, I was a thirst and you gaue me to drinke. &c. Come yee blessed of mi father saytheVpon the Psalme 49. S. Augustine, receaue, receaue what? a kindome: For what? I was hungrye and you gaue me to eate: what is so cheape, what soe earthly, as to giue bread to the hungrye? so much is the kingdome
of heauen, worthe. 2. I haue fought a good fight I2. Timo. cap. v. 7. haue kept the faythe, concerning the rest, there is laid vp for me  crowne of iustice, which our lord will render to me in that daye a iust iudge. Vpon which wordes most excellently sayth S. Augu∣stine, explicating both the neces∣sitie of grace that wee may merit, and the iustice of reward due to merit. To whom sayth he should theDe gra∣tia & libero arbitrio cap. 6. iust iudge render a crowne, yf the merci∣full father had not giuen grace? & howe should there be a crowne of iustices, vn∣less grace which doth iustifie the wicked had gone before? 3. God is not vniust that he shouldHeb. cap 6. v. 10 forgett your workes and loue which you haue shewed in his name which haue ministred to the sainctes and doe minister.Against Ioui. lib. 2. cap. 2. In deede great were gods in∣iustice,
if he would onely punish synnes, and would not recea∣ue good workes. Sayth S. Hiero∣me vpon these wordes. The sonn of man shall come inMath. cap. 16. v. 27. the glorie of his father with his Angels: and then will he render to euerie man according to his workes. He sayth not accordingSerm: 35. de verbis Apost. to his mercie: sayth S. Augustin: and I also add, not according to fayth onely. Protestantes position. Good workes done in the state of grace are not meritorious of life euerlasting.
THE 15. CONTRO∣uersie of freewill. NOte that I speake here of freewill onli ī such things: as appartayne to our saluation, and not in naturall, morall, or indifferent actions as in eating walking, or saluting, others. Catholique position. Man through the help of gods grace which is neuer denyed him hath free will and power both to fly such euill, and to doe such good, as is necessarie for his sal∣uation: nor is he forced or con∣strayned to ether. Proofe. 1. He that hath determined in his harte1. Cor. c. 7. v. 37. being setled not hauing necessitie, but hauing power of his owne will, and
iudgeth this in his hart to keepe his vir∣gin doth well: This place is cited by S. Augustin for this same pur∣pose, de gratia, & libero arbitrio cap. 2. 2. Come yee blessed: gett yeeMathe. cap. 25. v. 34 41. De actis cum Fe∣lice ma∣niche cap. 8. away from me you cursed. It is no incōgruitie (saith S. Augustin) that god should saye, goe īto euer lasting fire, to them that by theyr will haue repelled his mercie: And to the other, come yee bles∣sed of my father, that by theyr free will haue receaued fayth, confessed theyr synn and done pennance. He hath sett before thee wa∣terEcclesi. cap. 15. v. 17. 18. and fier: to which thou wilt stretch out thy hand: before man is life and death, good and euill, what pleaseth him shalbe giuen him. Behould (sayth S. AugustineDe gra∣ct lib. arbitirio cap. 2. hauing cited these wordes) we see the freedome of mans will
most playnly expressed, which in the begining of that chapter he promised to shewe out of holy scriptures, and therfore is it mani∣fest that he tooke this booke to be holy scripture but this by the way only. He that is not satisfied with these testimonies, lett him take the paynes to read S, Augu∣stin his 2. cap. of his booke of grace and free will in the. 7. tome of his workes, where haueing ci∣ted aboue 20. testimonies out of the oulde and newe testament to proue mans free will, he conclu∣dethe thus: whith others of like sorte to witt, where it is said, doe not this, or doe not that, and where, to the doeing or not doeing of anie thing the act of the will is required, by gods admonition free will is sufficiently declared. Of the iudgment of the mostCentur. 2. cap. 4 collum: de libero auncient church, (to witt of the secunde hundretho yeares after Christ heare the confession of the
cēturistes, these are theyr wordes.arbitrio. There is almost no poynt of doctrine which begann so soone to be obscured as this of free will. And after. In like māner Clemēs doth euerie where teach free will: that it may appeare, not onely all the doctors of this age (meaninge age after Christ) to haue beene in the same darkness, but also in the ages following theyr darkness did much en∣crease. Protestant Position. Man thoughe holpen by gods grace hath not freewill ether to flye anie euill, or to doe anie good auayling to his saluation, but in both is forced to doe that, which god hath ordayned he should doe.
THE 16. CONTROVER∣sie of the possibilitie of ob∣seruing godes commaū∣dements. Catholique Position 1. IT is not vnpossible for a man assisted whith gods grace to obserue and keepe all gods cō∣maundements. Proofe. 1. The iudgments of our lorde be truePsal. 18. vs. 10. 11. 12. iustified in them selues: to be desired aboue gold and much pretious stone & more sweet then the honie and the honie combe. For thy seruand keepeth them, in keeping them is much rewarde. 2. They were both iust before god, wal∣kingLuke. c. 1. vs. 6. in all the commaundements and iustificationes of our lord whith out blame.
3. Take vp my yock vpon you and le∣arneMathe. cap. 11. v. last. 1. Iohn ca. 5. v. 3. Dena∣tura & gratia. c. 69. of me &c. for my yocke is sweet & my burthen light. And in another place. His commaundements are not heauie. S. Augustine sayth, it being most constantly beleeued, that the iust and good god, could not commaunde impossible thinges, we are admonished what we ought to doe in easie thinges, and what to aske in hard thinges. For all thinges to charitie are easie, accor∣ding to which it is sayd: that his cōmaun∣dementes are not heauie. The diligent reader may please to see what S. Augustine writeth of this pointe, in his booke de perfectione iustitiae cap 10. to. 7. where for the proofe of this Ca∣tholique doctrin, besides other testimonies he alledgeth that. This commaundement that I com∣maūde the this daye is not aboue the nor so farr of &c. Deutronomie. cap. 30. v. 11. and. after.
4. Roma∣nes. c. 8. v. 4. That the iustificatiō of the lawe might be fulfilled in vs. who walke not accor∣ding to the fleshe but according to the spirit. Loe here the lawe fulfilled by those that walke not accor∣ding to the flesh. Protestants position. It is not possible for a man though assisted whith godes gra∣ce to obserue all godes cōmaun∣dements.
THE 17. CONTRO∣uersie Of workes of supererogation. Catholique position. A Man by the help of godes grace may doe many things not commaunded▪ but onely co∣unselled or (which is the same) may doe workes of supereroga∣tiō, which are of more perfection then the commaundements. Proofe. 1. If thou wilt be perfect, goe sell theMath. c. 19. v. 21. vpō the 1. to the corinth. cap. . things thou hast, and giue to the poore, & thou shalt haue treasure in heauen: and come & followe me. Some things (sayth S. Chrysostome) he commaundeth, some things he leaueth to our owne fre
wil. For he sayd not, sell that thou hast but yf thou wilt be prefect sell that thou hast. & much more to the same pur∣pose hath that holy father in that place. As concerning virgins a commaun∣dement1. cor. c. 7. v. 25. of our lord, I haue not but coun∣sell I giue, as haueing obtayned mercie of our lord to be faythfull. Because (sayth S. Augustine) byDe S. Virgini∣tate cap. 14. auoyding synn or obtayning remission therof, life euerlasting is to he got, in which there is a certayne excellēt glorie, not to be giuē to all the blessed but to some certayne, for the obteyning wherof it doth little auayle to be free from synn, vnless somthing be vowed to our deliuerer, which to haue not willed is no sinn, but to haue vowed and performed is prays worthy: therfore he sayth I giue counsell as haueing obtayned mercie of god to be faythfull. 3. There are euneuches which haueMath. c. 19. v. 12 guelded themselues, for the Kingdome
of heauen, he that can take, lett him take. Haue care of him, and whatsoeuerLuke. c. 10. v. 35. De S. Virgini∣tate. cap. 30. thou shalt supererogate, I will at my returne repaye thee S. Augustine al∣luding to these two places sayth, you that yet haue not vowed: who can take, take, runn, whith perseueran∣ce that you may obayne, take euerie one his sacrifices, and enter into our lordes court not of necessitie, but hauing power of yor owne will, For as it is said thou shalt not kill, it cannot so be sayd thou shalt not marrie. For these things are exacted, they are profered, yf they be done they are commended yf thother be not done they are condemned: in these thinges god cōmaundeth a debt, in those what you shall supererogate (or be∣stowe more) he will render at is retur∣ne. with much more to the same purpose in the whole booke where he proueth virginitie to be onely a counsell, to be more perfect then wedlok, and to haue
a greater glorie in the next life. But for the Doctrine of the aūcient churche in this poynt I neede no other witnesse then Mr. Caluins owne confession set do∣wne in these wordes. This (saylib. 4 in∣stitu. c. 13. sect. 27. they) hath from furthest memorie be∣ene obserued, that they which would dedicate them selues wholy to our lord, should bynde them selues with the vo∣we of continencie. I graunt indeed that this maner hath also beene of ancient ty∣me receaued but I doe not graunt, that that age was so free from all fault, that what soeuer was done, might bee taken for a rule. Protestantes Position. No man though assisted with gods grace can doe anie workes of supererogation or of counsell nether are there anie councelles of more perfection then the cō∣maundementes.
THE 18. CONTROVER∣sie Of Preistes not Marrying. Catholique Position. IT is most conformable to the Doctrine of holy scriptures and practise of the auncient chur∣che that all Preistes and other church men should vowe perpe∣tuall chastitie. And leade a single life. Proofe. 1. I woulde haue you without carefulness1. corint. cap. 7. v. 32. he that is with out a wife is carefull for the things that pertaine to our lorde how he may please god. But he that is with a wife, is carefull for the things that per∣tayne to the world, howe be may please his wife, and he is deuided. 2.
No man being a souldier to god intāgl2. Timo. cap. 2. v. 4. ethe himself with secular businesses that he may please him to whome he hath approoued him self. After the dayes of is office were expired he departed into his owne howse. It isLuke. c. 1. v. 23. playne hereby & ells where, that the Preistes of the ould lawe did abstayne from theyr wiues du∣ring the tyme of theyr ofice which they exercised by turnes. Yf thou haue aniething at hand1. Re∣gum. c. 21. v. 45. yea yf but fiue loaues giue me, or what soeuer thou shalt fynde, & the preist answered Dauid saying, I haue no laye breades at hand but onely holy bread yf the ser∣uantes be cleane especially from weomen? And Dauid answered the preist, and say de to him. And truly yf the matter be concernīg weomen we haue refrayned our selues from yesterdaye and the day before. Now yf such cleanesse, euen
om the law full vse of weomen was required in laye men, to eate the hallowed bread of the owld lawe which was but a bare figure of that which is offered in the newe lawe, what cleaness may we think is required in Preistes them selues of the newe lawe? For the practice of the auncient church in this poynt I will one∣ly alledge the 2. Councell of Car∣thage where S. Augustine was presēt which sayth thus. It plea∣sethconcelli, cartagiū 2. can. 2. all, that Bishopes, preistes, and Dea∣cones abstayne from wyues. that we may also obserue that which the Apo∣stles taught and antiquitie obserued. Protestantes positions It is contrarie to the doctrine of holy Scripture & practice of the auncient primitiue church, that preistes and other church men should vowe chastitie and leade a single life.
THE 19. CONTROVER∣sie Of the churche seruice in the learned tongues. Catholique position. IT is no where forbidden in holy Scripture that the pub∣lique Seruice of godes churche should be in a tounge not vnder∣derstood to all the assistantes. Proofe. No such prohibition appeareth in all the Scripture. Yea the practise of the contra∣rie is euidently gathered out of these wordes According to the custōeLuke. c. .1. v. 9. 10. of the preistlye function, he went forth by lott to offer incense entering into the temple of the lord. And all the multitu∣de of the people was praying with out at the hower of the incense Loe here
the people did not vnderstand ne¦ther the prayers nor the actions of the preist; yet neuer the less did they participate of both. The sa∣meLeuie cap. 10. v. 17. is more expresly cōmaunded in these wordes. Let no man be in the tabernacle when the highe preist goeth in to the sanctuarie to pray for him self and for his howse and for the whole as∣sembly of Israël vntil he come forthe. nether doth that of S. Paule yf thou bless in the spirit: he that supplieth the1. Cor. cap. 14. v. 16. place of the Vulgar howe shall he say A∣men vpon thy blessing bycause he kno∣wethe not what thou sayest? nor anie thing ī all that chapter make anie more against the practis of the romā churche in this point, then it doth against that of the Iewishe churche now menrioned S. Paul speaking not of the ordinarie, pu∣blique, receaued and established churche seruice, (werof all the assistantes are parttakers because it is performed by the preist a pub∣lique
officer in all theyr behal∣fes, thaugh they vnderstande not the wordes, nor see the actions done by the preist) but of certaīe perticuler exhortationes, hymes; Psalmes, and other holy & good things vttered by particuler per∣sonnes, haueing the gifte of ton∣gues: which being not vnder∣stood of others, ha no other fruit then the edification of the speaker, and that nether to his instruction, for often tymes he vnderstood not him self: but to an eleuation of his mynde, or spirit to god, as appeareth by that: For yf I pray with tongue, my spirit prayeth, but my vn∣dersting is with out fruite. Ther∣fore S. paule would that thesev. 14. exercises showld be vsed with much moderation, and in good order, but forbiddeth them not. Therfore that which he sayth of that matter toucheth nothing,
he publique seruice of the chur∣ch which the perpetuall practice of the same church (a sure rule to all those that desire to be gods children) doth shew to be most cōueniētly celebrated in the lear¦ned tounges. Agaynst which yf anie will wrangle or be conten∣tiouse we aunswere thē as S. Pau∣le1. cor. c. 11. v. 16. doth theyr like in another occa¦tione: we haue no such custome, nor the church of god. Protestantes position. It is forbidden in holy scrypture that the publique seruice of the church should be in a ton∣gue not vnderstoode by all the as∣sistants. Haueing as thou seest (iudi∣cious reader) gone throughe al or at least all the cheef poynts of controuersie of these tymes, and proued thē by express scripture: thou mayst vnderstād that I haue not laboured to bring all the pla∣
holy Sripture for euer poynte, which maketh for th proofe therof: for, I profess not to compile here an index, or concor∣dance of all such passages which prou the poyntes of the Catho∣lique religion, but haue brought those that I esteeme sufficient to satisfie anie indifferēt vnderstan∣ding, thoughe I haue not perad∣uenture brought alwayes the most pregnant according to thy iùdgment: wherein so, far as I haue fayled, I humbly request the de∣fect to be supplied by thy dili∣gence, and zeale, in defence of the Catholique truthe; yf thou be Catholique. Finis.
