A3492 R16438 13618359 100810
AN ANTIDOTE AGAINST Dr E. Stillingfleets Ʋnreasonableness of SEPARATION. Being a Vindication of the NONCONFORMISTS From the heavy Charges of SCHISM and SEPARATION, Wherewith they are loaded By the Doctor, and Two Anonymous Authors. In Two Discourses conjoined, and seasonably published. LONDON: Printed for Richard Janeway, in Queens-head-Alley in Paternoster-Row. MDCLXXXI
To the Reader. THOU art here presented with two Discourses conjoined, in Vindication of Protestant Dis∣senters, the publishing whereof is become highly necessary, by reason of the heavy charges wherewith the Nonconformists are lately loaded by the Reverend Dr. Stil∣lingfleet Dean of St. Pauls, in his Ʋnreasona∣bleness of Separation; and by the Authors of two Answers to a Letter from a Mini∣ster to a Person of Quality, shewing some rea∣sons for his Nonconformity. There hath been already published a modest and peaceable Inquiry into the design and nature of some of those Historical mistakes that are found in the Doctors Preface to the
aforenamed Book, wherein the innocency of Protestant Dissenters is cleared up and vindi∣cated from the Doctors indecent censuses; and these Discourses come after to encounter the body of his Book. In the first Discourse we appeal to all our Neighbour Protestants, touching our sincerity; giving them an Historical Ac∣count of the rise and growth of those thing which are the causes of our divisions; and then leaving them to judg where the faut lyes, and whether these heavy charges of the Doctors are not unmerited. The second is principally calculated for the Meridian of the two Anonymous Authors of the aforesaid Answers, where human invention is elevated many degrees above Divine Revelation; but may in∣differently serve for an answer to the Do∣ctors
charges of Schisme and Separa∣tion. It may be here objected, Is this a time to dispute about these smaller things, when the Church is like to be swallowed up of Popery, and the Holy Cloy it self rea∣dy to be trod under foot of the Gentiles, and our common Enemy will rejoyce to see Protestant against Protestant, (that they may divide the spoil) and so great a Champion of the Protestant Cause as∣sailed? To this several things must be said. 1. The Doctor himself as a Protestant ought to have considered this, and not have given this provocation. 2. And as the Doctor and his Party may
write for their Way when they will, why should others neglect the year of release, which falls out but once in an age? It is not long since we were under the Hatches, and had not leave to give our Reasons a∣gainst Conformity, nor were allowed to be once heard, till about Two thousand Mi∣nisters were silenced. 3. As to the Reverend Doctor, he hath done so worthily in this our Israel, especi∣ally in his so learned Writings against the Papists, that he deserves well of all good Protestants; but yet seeing the learned Do∣ctor seems to have repented of his former Writings, particularly his Irenicum [hav∣ing since the writing of that Book to much applauded and congratulated the happy re∣stitution of the English Prelacy to its wont∣ed luster and grandure, far enough from his formerly desired reduction to Primitive
Presbyteries] I know not but he may find as good reason here for his repenting this his Book against Dissenting Protestants. For the end of his Epistle to Irenicum may be recanted, but never reconciled to the beginning of his Episile to Archbishop Land's Defence against Fisher. What pity so grave and great a man should thus expose himself by a Contest too palpable between Principle and Prefer∣ment. Now tho' this his Book hath the last word, and carries it with the world, yet the elder Brother will be accounted the honester with the wise, because born of the Free-woman; while the after-seed was con∣ceiv'd and brought forth in bondage. 4. It may be judged a fit season of as∣serting the Kingly Power of Christ, in set∣ling the government of his own House,
when men so liberally give away the Lords prerogative. Our Pulpits now so ring with a Catholick Jus Civile, that there is scarce any Jus Divinum left, but of Tythes, which I hope they will hold to the last, be∣ing good Church men. A fair Charter hath Christ sealed to his Church with his own blood, giving her Officers, Ordinances, and free Courts within her self; all which some unfaithful children with prophane Esau, often sell for Morsels of Meat. Now could men let Christ alone to govern his own House in his own Way, by his own Officers and Ordinances, how happy should we be? Who can better reprove the Atheism of the world in set∣ting up mans post by Christs, than Doctor Stillingfleet hath done in his other Works, while he saith, that to say a man may be of any Religion according to the laws of
men, is to take it for granted that there is no such thing as Religion in the World. And again, that no men do so dangerously under∣mine the foundation of Civil Government, as those who maguifie it to the Contempt of Religion. Politicians and Court-Parasites must not dare to form a Religion in the flexible mould of State. A Municipal Religion would many fain promote, fol∣lowing Reasons of State, more than Rules of Conscience; like the Heathens, who first built Cities, and then instituted a Religion sit for the Inbabitants. The Roman Inspire flourished, while vertue was nou∣rished; to shew, faith Austin, how hap∣py they should be, who should have Religion superadded. And indeed they had no better Subjects than Christians: for none can give onto Caesar the things that are Caesars, upon any valuable or
holding Account, who make no Con∣science of giving unto God the things that are Gods. How the learned and unprejudiced (if it fall into such hands) shall find this Defence managed, Judicium sit poenes lectorem. Now may the most High, after all the encroachments on the Scepter of his Son in the World, bring back the hearts of this People to himself, making them yield to the internal Government of his Spirit, and the True Apostolick and ancient ex∣ternal Government of his house; that the Glory of the latter House may be grea∣ter than the Glory of the former, even a Spiritual Glory of the Power of the Lord may appear among us; and the
work of the Lord may prosper by his own Ordinances in the hands of his own ap∣pointed Servants, as the beauty of his house, and the blessing of his chosen, Amen. Even so Lord Jesus, let thy King∣dom come! Jan. 24th. 1680/1.
An Antidote against Dr. Stillingfleet's Un∣reasonableness of Separation, in a Vin∣dication of the Nonconformists from the Charges of Schism and Separation, &c. FOR the full and clear understanding of the state of the controversie between Conformist and Nonconformist, it will be absolutely necessary (especially since we appeal to Protestants abroad) to give an hi∣storical account of the rise and growth of our Differences from the beginning of the Reforma∣tion. Know then, 1. That the first reformers in the days of King Edward the 6th, though of several judg∣ments about the external part of the Govern∣ment, were all of honest Principles and Senti∣ments in their Doctrine, and had the same mind and design to purge the then present Church of its Idolatry, Superstitions and gross Errors, and to bring in the same pure Doctrine that was pro∣fessed by Calvin and the Reformed Churches in France, and which hath been, and is still re∣tained by the Nonconformists in England.
2. That the said first Reformers being divided in their Opinions about retaining that which was good, and taking away whatsoever was amiss in the Romish Church, as to the outward Govern∣ment, the Opinion that the Reformation could not be thoroughly done for matter of Govern∣ment and externals, as it was possible for matter of Doctrine, prevailed so far with Bishop Hooper, Rogers, and others that wisht it had been other∣wise, as to make them forbear any further urging of a compleat Reformation, in hopes that when the people that were instructed in the true saving Doctrine, should be more numerous, the oppo∣sition to a thorough Reformation in all points would be less. 3. That this rude draught of Reformation, suit∣able to that time, had very bad success, because the Conformable Party prevailed to have it a standing law, which was neither to be repealed nor alter∣ed, and which drew along with it Non-Residency, Plurality of Livings, and entward Pomp and Gran∣deur, as best suiting a worldly interest, whilst another Party, who were then called Puritans, and now Nonconformists retained, and still do to our days, a desire and longing after a tho∣rough Reformation, and they have endea∣voured
by Conferences, Remonstrances, and Writings, to have it introduced. 4. That yet the Conformists were not all of one mind, there being still a party among them very peaceable and orthodox, and at less distance from the Non-Conformists, especially among the Gentry, that were no Courtiers, and in great Towns, Ci∣ties, and Corporations, whilest the other Party, made up of Conformists, grew corrupt, and so far from hearkening to a further Reformation, that they made nearer advances towards Rome. 5. That Jealousies and apprehensions daily encreasing, and fears of inclining to Popery, and the Troubles in Scotland intervening in the Years 38, and 39; and the Discontents rising up in Eng∣land, the King was forced to call a Parliament, which began in 1640. 6. That that Parliament, both Lords and Com∣mons, was most, if not all, composed of such peace∣able, Orthodox Church of England men I have but now mentioned, and all conforming to the Rites, Ceremonies of Episcopacy and Hierarchy, but yet greatly averse to Popery, Tyranny, and the Corrupt party of the Church of England that inclined to wards Rome; Witness the many Speeches in Parliament they made, as of the Lord Faulckland, Sir Benjamin Rudyer, Digby, and others, with whom Good and Honest Bishops joyned.
7. That the Ground and Rise of the Civil War in 1640, and 43, was in opposition to such as Bishop Land, and other bad instruments. 8. That the Lords and Commons in 1642, and 43, were all in perfect Conformity to the Church of England; so was the Army too that they raised; for the General, the main Body of the Army, the Officers and Captains both by Land and Sea, were all conformable to the Church of England, and none of them Puritans, Presbyterians, Independents, Ana∣baptists, Sectaries, or Conventiclers. 9. That likewise, the Assembly of Divines in West∣minister, chosen by the Parliament, were all Confor∣mists, and none of them Silenced Ministers, except 8. or 9, and 4 Scots. 10. That the first Intentions of the Parliament was so far from subverting the Government of Church and State, established by Law, and from taking away the House of Lords and Bishops root and branch; that it was only to reform the abuses of both, and to settle such a Model of Church Go∣vernment as was recommended by the Pious and learned Bishops, Ʋsher, and Hall, and which did not much differ from that which our Gracious So∣veraign that now is, recommended to his parlia∣ment in his Declaration 1660. about Ecclesiastical Affairs. 11. That the parliament had no thoughts of
bringing in the Covenant into England, had not the necessity of their Affairs forced them to joyn with the Scots. 12. That no man was obliged by it to take away Bishops, but only as they are in Conjuncti∣on with the English Hierarchy. 13. Neither was it the Intention of the Lords and Commons, at first, to take away Deans and Chapters, but to make them more serviceable and useful, to take away Pluralities, Non-residencies, and to settle a more proportionable Maintenance for Ministers. 14. That the Change, or Subversion of Go∣vernment, the taking away the Lords House, and with them the Bishops, and excluding the greatest part of the House of Commons, and last of all, the taking away the King, and all the Confusions, and Disorders, that happened thereupon, did arise from a third Party, viz. The Army, that was nei∣ther for the King, nor parliament; Neither for Conformists, nor for Non-Conformists, but was an E∣nemy to them all, and sought their absolute ruine and destruction. 15. That the Non-Conformists, who usually no go by the name of Presbyterians, Fanaticks, Independents, Rebels, Sons of Belial, &c. by the cor∣rupt Church-party, that have been always ma∣king advances towards Popery, were so far from being the first in Arms in opposition to the King, our late bles∣sed
Martyr; and being contrivers of his Death, and of taking away Monarchy; that on the contrary, it was the only party (while the others of the King's Friends sate still) that appear∣ed before, and since 48, in his behalf, to the hazard of their Lives (witness Mr. love,) and that in 1660, had a chief hand in restoring our gracious Soveraign Charles the II. to his Throne; for which never enough to be valued Benefit and kindness, although it was but duty, no Party has been more se∣verely persecuted by the Corrupt-party of the Church of Eng∣land; But of this, more anon. 16. That the Declaration of the King, mentioned in the Tenth Consideration, was a confirmation of another former Declaration. 17. That whereas, when the King came over from the Hague, there was a great expectation that his Printed Declar∣ation for Ecclesiastical Affairs, would be sufficient to compose all differences and heats, and unite all Parties, by taking away the stumbling block of subscribing to those Ceremonies that were not warranted by the Word of God; but just on the contrary, the Clamours of the Corrupt Party of the Church of England at length prevail'd for restoring of those Ceremonies. All which good Bishop Brownrig foretold, a little before his Death, in saying, That there would continue the same Con∣fusions and Animosities, that were before; and, with them, the same spirit of Persecution which the Corrupt Church-Par∣ty before 1640, was the cause of. 18. That the Zeal and Fervour of the prevailing Corrupt Church-Party in England at this present juncture of time, in writing so many Books against the Papists, and standing up so stoutly against the Horid Attempt upon the King's most Sa∣cred Life, and introducing of Popery, and hearkening to some terms of Reconciliation with the Non-Conformists, to make the opposition the stronger against Papists, does no way seem to be the effect of a Christian Moderation, but a meer worldly Interest, like the zeal of Jehu, the union of Aristides, and Themistocles, two Mortal Foes against the Common Enemy. Or like that of Augustus, Brutus, and
Cassius, against Antony: 'Tis the goodness of a stubborn Boy, just so long as the Rod is over his Back; for had another spirit moved the cor∣rupt party of the Church of England, than a Worldly one, it would have appeared above these 10 Years; when (alas!) no such at∣tempts were made by the Papists against their Lives, and Livings, when a Hundred Remon∣strances were made to them, with Prayers and Tears, for the removing of the offending Rites and Ceremonies; and of the great inclination they had for Popery, in depopulating England, by driving men away to Colonies abroad: but could never be heard. 21. Things being thus stated, one may ra∣tionally and strongly conclude, That it is a most horrid untruth, and calumnie to make the Presbyterians and Conventiclers, or Non-Conformists, not only the first authors, and abettors of the Civil Wars, and of the first taking up of Arms in opposition to the Evil Counsellors about the King in 42 and 43, but also the Mur∣therers of King Charles the First; when as they have been, and still are the great preservers of the King's Person, Life, Honours, Digni∣ties, and Prerogatives; the best Christians, the
best Reformed, and the best Subjects of the King. 22. And the false and unworthy stiling of these Restorers of the King, Rebels, Fanaticks, Sons of Belial, &c. doth carry along with it the same devillish Malice; which makes it now become a common Proverb in the Mouths of this corrupt Church of England-Party, That they had rather be papists, than Presbyterians; and that were there a Turn of State, (as God forbid) they would sooner turn papists, than presbyte∣rians. 23. besides, the idle, foolish, senceless, but also malicious mistake, to make the holiest of the Non-Conformists to pass for presbyterians, who, though they love their persons, and the holiness of their Doctrine, and Lives, yet either they are wholly avense to the Presbyterian Govern∣ment, or else they do not very well know what it means; Since the Well-affected fol∣low their Preaching, and imitate their Lives, but yet by no means upon any account of their Government. 24. That the worst thing in the carriage of
the Conformists towards the Non-Conformists, is their rash, uncharitable, and unchristian judg∣ing of the hearts and Insides of men, (which are only known to god Almighty, who is the Searcher of hearts,) as if they were made up of Deceit and Hipocrisie; and alike construing their unblameable behaviour and carriage, as if it were but formal, and extrinsecal, and of the pure, Orthodox Doctrine of their Sermons and Writings, though never so much summed up in Scripture phrases, as if all was but Cant and Tone, and taking of God's Name in vain; when they make a quite different Judgment of the Conformists, both of their Lives and Do∣ctrines, and when they make use of the same Scripture terms as the others do; for in their esteem they are looked upon as true, sincere, and holy Christians, though their out ward de∣portment do somewhat differ from that of the other. this I intend, by God's assistance, to make dear to you in a larger Discourse, from the testimony of Dr. patrick, who doubtless can∣not, in handling of the Nature of Justification by Faith, but agree with the Non-Conformists, in making use of the same Scripture-Expressions,
and commend such as Bishop Davenant, Don∣nam, Usher, Hall, and Hooker, all Conformists, for doing the like, and who will tell us, that this Justification by Faith is a Recumbency of a poor Sinner upon the Lord Jesus Christ; a casting of our selves upon him, relying on his Merits, laying hold on him, closing with him, going to him, and shrowding our selves under the Robes of his Righteousness: Most of which are Scripture phrases: But yet for all this, the very same Expressions, being uttered by such Non-Conformists, as mr. Baxter, Dr. Owen, Manton, Annesly, Jacomb, Bates, Mr. Jenkins, Alsoph, Cradock, Silvester, Watson, and others, for the better setting out the nature of Justification by Faith, are looked upon by Dr. patrick, as meer Imposters, Charms, Incanta∣tions, artificial Jugglings, Terms of Modist and Courtly Faith, by which this Doctor makes good the saying of pliny the younger, Epist. 21. multum interest quid à quo{que} fiat, Eadem enim facta claritate aut obscuritate facientium, aut tolluntur altissime, aut humillime deprimuntur. That such a prejudice against the Generation of God's Children, that make it their grand de∣sign to get an assurance of Heaven and of Eter∣nity, as are, not only many of the Peaceable
and Moderate Conformists, but such as they mis∣call and nick-name puritans, Presbyterians, Inde∣pendents, Rebels, Sons of Belial, and worse than papists. That such a prejudice, I say, is the great distemper of that corrupt-party of the Church of England, who have for these 100 years been making their advances towards Popery. I shall insist very particularly upon some very considerable Inferences and Conclusions which I shall draw from some Hypotheses that I have already taken notice of, but which can∣not be too often inculcated; the truth of which is known sufficiently by those that are most Eminent in Piety and Holiness of Living, and in Learning, of the Church of England, by the Bishops Hooper, Smith, Rudd, Carleton, Grindall, the two Abbots, Usher, hall, and by other Do∣ctors that were as Conformable as those Bishops. 1. That though the first Reformation in the time of Edward the 6th, was wxtremely pure as to its Doctrine, it was notwithstanding very defective and imperfect as to the exterior Go∣vernment, because it was adjusted to that pre∣sent time where the papists were twenty, for One, that was reformed in England.
2. That the first Reformers imagined, that when the People, converted to the true Faith, should be more Numerous, and more disposed to receive a more perfect Reformation, The Successors of the first Reformers would apply themselves to it with more Earnestness and Zeal. 3. But it never came into their thoughts, that their Successors would be guilty of so great a fault, as to act the quite contrary to such a good Project and Design, in persuading both Princes and Parliaments to bring the first Rude Draught of Reformation into a standing Law: but only to have it established for a certain time, untill they themselves should see they were able to effect a more perfect Reformation. 4. That the Practice of these Successors of the first Reformers hath been unreasonable, wicked, impious, and cruel; in the Imposition of several things, which they themselves have owned not to be necessary, and at best but in∣different, under pain of deprivation ab officio & beneficio; although all the Conformists have not been equally guilty, for some among them have approved of these measures they have taken towards the Non-Conformists, but yet have
connived at them either by their submission, or their silence, and have not vigorously enough set themselves against the Corruption that so much prevailed. From all these Hypotheses, I gather these Con∣clusions, which naturally follow the aforesaid Premises. 1. That several Bishops and Doctors of the Church of England, as Dr. Floyd, Dr. Tillotson, Dr. Stillingfleet, Dr. Patrick, that are acknow∣ledged by the Non-Conformists to be Persons of great Learning, Worth, and Piety, but who are Extreme Admirers of the Episcopacy of England, and all its Consequences, and who have also preferred its Government to all other Establishments in Europe, have by an unlucky accident, contributed more towards the Repu∣tation of the English Hierarchie, and its Practises, and towards the perpetuating the Feuds and Quarrels between the Conformists, and Non-Conformists, than it has been possible for any other Corrupted Party to do by all their Irregularities, and advances towards Rome. 2. That it may be said of these good Bishops and Doctors before mentioned, what the Po∣litique Sages have observed of Anselme, Bernard, Thomas Aquinas, John of Salisbury, and Gerson, That by their great repute of Piety, and Learn∣ing,
they have contributed more to the streng∣thening of the Pope's Tyranny, and Religion, in the Minds of the People, than a hundred such as Gregory the VII, and Boniface the VIII. were able to effect by their Tyranny, and the wicked∣ness and impurity of their Lives, for the discre∣diting of the Pope and his Religion. 3. That it is not to be believed how much the Non-Conformists of England suffer in the Esteem of our Great Men of the Protestant Party in Europe; who, hearing people talk of the Learning and Piety of so many English Bi∣shops and Doctors, all Conformists, and who resemble those four Doctors I have just before named, say aloud, that the Non-Conformists must needs be very unreasonable, and of a very nice and fantastical Piety, for refusing to Conform to the Church of England, after the Example of those four Doctors. 4. That how good soever the Intentions of some of the Bishops and Doctors of the Church of England may be, that are of the same temper of spirit with these four Doctors, and what kindness soever they may have for the Non-Con∣formists; it is impossible They should ever come over to them, and consent to terms of Recon∣ciliation and Moderation, so long as they re∣main in this Judgment and Opinion, That of
all the Established Ecclesiastical Governments in Europe, that of the Church of England is the most excellent, and the most Apostolical, and that there is nothing of defect in it; and so long as the multitude of their Benefices, and the great honour they are in, in the World, blinds their Judgment, there being no likelihood, nor hopes, that those, who are raised so high, and that live in honour and abundance, richly, and fatly, (unless they will imitate good Dr. Floyd, who bestowes most of his Church-Revenues on the Poor,) will diminish any thing of their great∣ness, both as to their Retinue, or their Kitchin, and will descend from high to low; and that a Bishop, who now goes before the Barons, will quit his Place, to be only a poor simple Mode∣rator, and Watchman over a small company of Priests, such as were St. Cyprian, and St. Austin: For this Eminence of Fortune and Dignity does absolutely shut up the door to all the Over∣tures of Reformation, which we learn from Mounsieur Claude in his Defence of the Reforma∣tion of the Churches of France, where he tells us, That the Cardinal du Prat, for this very rea∣son, was the most violent of all men, and the most inraged against Luther's Reformation, be∣cause he was provided of Five Bishopricks, and I know not how many other good and fat Bene∣fices.
That for these Reasons, Methinks, it might be expected from these good Bishops and Do∣ctors, that by a Christian condescention, they would endeavour to incline their Brethren the Non-Conformists, to abate something of their heat and vigorousness against the Non-Conformists; but so long as they themselves are neither sen∣sible of any error or defect in their Church, it is not to be expected, or hoped for from them, that they should go about the doing of any such good work, how great and eminent soever they be, no more than it ought to be expected from the Romish Doctors, so long as they do look upon, and verily believe, their Church to be infallible. And therefore it cannot be considerately ima∣gined, that the perfect day of hope, of the Church of England's Reformation, and of the Reconciliation of the Conformists to the Non-Con∣formists, should break forth from these good Bi∣shops and Doctors, nor from any of the Clergy, but from KINGS, and the Princes of the People, whose hearts are in God's hands, and who holds them as the Rivers of Waters. 25. As for the Odium that is cast upon the Congregational Way, and those who are called Independents, as being the more immediate an∣thors and abettors of the King's Murther, and of taking away Monarchy, it can be easily wiped
off, and made out, That Oliver Cromwell's Army, like that of King David's in the Wilderness, was a Medley or a Collection of all Parties that were discontented, as some Courtiers, some Episcoparians, few of any Sect, but most of none, or else of the Religion of Thomas Hobbes, and Dr. Scarborough, not mentioning the Papists, who had the greatest hand in the Death of King Charles the First; the success of which made them so daring and impious, as to con∣trive another most Damnable and Hellish Plot to cut off the Life of his Sacred Majesty that now is, how Royal Son, and our most Gracious Soveraign. 26. That since the Non-Conformists were a generation of men, either of the first date (as it is most likely,) or, at least, that rose in En∣gland at the same time as the Conformists did; and since they were for number and quality, as great, or rather greater, and more considerate than the other, and who, in their Judgment, came nearer, as to the outward Government, and Purity of Worship, not only to the first Reformers, Zuinglius, Luther, and Calvin, but also to the Apostolical Practice; and who, in∣deed were the TRUE PROTESTANTS, most Conformable to that Party in Germany, who so stiled themselves Protestants, in oppo∣sition
to the Imperial Edicts of Worms and Spire, it must needs be a great wickedness and cruelty too in the Conformists, because they had all the while the Countenance of Princes, and the lon∣gest Sword, to persecute the Non-Conformists, and to deprive them of the liberty of setting up Purer Ordinances in Conventicles, and of sharing in the Publick Maintenance for the Ministers. 27. That it is a most barbarous, improper, uncharitable, and unchristian language in the Corrupt-Party of the Church of England, to stile themselves the only true, and properly so called, PROTESTANTS, and to discard all others in Europe, from the right to that name, for want of such Episcopal Ordinations as are in England: as if that 500 men possessing the three parts of the Church-Revenues in England, should better deserve to be called Protestants, than the first so called in Germany; whereas what ever Bishop Bilson, Andrews, Dr. Floyd, Dr. Tillotson, and Dr. Stillingfleet, could say in the behalf of the Government of the Church of England, (as being the most Apostolical and Primitive,) there is none more opposite, not only to that of the first Protestants, but also to Scripture, Reason, and Antiquity. 28. These being the Material Heads, or a
Summary Idea of the whole, to be more largely and particularly handled hereafter, (if God gi∣veth Life and Time to the Author,) I shall ex∣cerpt much from the Scrinia of the Reverend and Learned Divine Mr. Richard Baxter, but yet so, as to take the liberty to follow my own Method and Genius, as to the menage of it. 29. So then the main design of the Subsequent Book, whereof this is a brief, but full Specimen, shall be to shew, prove, and make clear to You, the unreasonableness, unconscionableness, and consequently the ungodliness of retaining, ur∣ging, and pressing the things in debate between the Conformists and the Non-Conformists, and of persecuting those, that refuse to submit to them, or at least to approve of them. 30. That Dissenters could not, cannot, ought not, neither in reason, nor in Conscience, to sub∣mit to them, at least for the assenting, and con∣senting to them, and the approving of them. 31. That those Conformists, whom I call Peace∣able, and Orthodox men, such as were the Mem∣bers of the Parliament of 1640, and those of West∣minster assembled, and their Predecessors, and all others, however otherwise, most upright, sincere, Orthodox, holy, and well-minded persons, since the first Reformation in King Edward the Sixth's dayes, and Lovers of the Non-Conformists, that
have hitherto been Conformists, were all guilty of prevarication, and of a sinful yielding, comply∣ing, assenting, and subscribing to a Church-way, which doubtless is sinful. 32. And therefore, that the Non-Conformists, who ever since King Edward's dayes, in Conformity to the true Doctrine of those of the best sort of Conformists, kept gathered Churches, and Meet∣ings out of the Parishes, had right Reason, and Scripture on their side, and walked with a pu∣rer Conscience, were the best reformed from Popery, and those that preserved the true Apo∣stolical Doctrine, Worship and Government, and conveyed it to Posterity. 33. The Author may Incidently speak of the nature of the Church, Synods, Associations, and Fraternities by a confederate discipline, but can∣not by any means hear of a National Church-Tribunal, independant on the Magistrate, to whom only he allows the setting up of a Na∣tional Worship, by Persuasion and Commen∣dation, but not in the least by forcing men to it, by penal Lawes, except they be Papists, or disturbers of the Publick Peace. FINIS.
