A4082 R29126 10826521 46043
A SERMON Preached at Westminster Abby. March the 25th 1691. By THOMAS ASTON, M. A. The 2d. of Timothy the 4th. and the 3d. For the time will come when they will not endure sound Doctrine, &c. LONDON: Printed, ANNO 1691.
A SERMON Preached at Westminster-Abby. March the 25th. 1691. Psalms LI. ver. 6. But lo! Thou requirest Truth in the inward Parts. TO that Question, Micha 6, 8. O Man! what does the Lord require of thee? My Text gives a direct An∣swer. God requires truth in the inward parts.
But what he requires, he must first bestow; so that in all our performances, we may truly say with Holy David, Of thine own Lord have we given thee. This Truth is a Conformity of Man to his most Holy Creator. God made Man in his own Image, perfectly upright, but he conti∣nued not in that Honour, Rebelling against the VVorlds Monarch, was disinherited, lost himself and all his Posterity, depraved their Nature, disenabling them to perform that good some are inclin'd to. Now (though he cannot reach it in performance) God requires that Man in his heart and affection, should be according to what he was in his first Crea∣tion. This Truth is four-fould, 1st. Of Judgment. 2d. Of Heart. 3d. Of Speech, and 4th. Of Action. First, Truth of Judgment is a Conformity to the Word of God, the Rule and Proof of Truth. (viz.) when a Man informed by the Sacred Scriptures, and enlightned by the Holy Spirit, remaineth stedfast in that Doctrine the word of God teacheth: then there is Truth in Judgment. 'Tis for this that St. Pe∣ter commends the scattered Tribes, 2. Epi∣stle,
1.12. I will not be negligent to put you in remembrance of these things, though you know them, and are established in the present Truth. And unto this settled Judgment St. Paul ex∣horts the Ephesians, 4, 14, 15. Be not like Children tossed too and fro with every wind of Doctrine, but speak the Truth in Love. Error and Unstableness is contrary to this Truth. Secondly, Truth of Heart is Godly Simpli∣city and Sincerity (Mel Sine cera) In 1 Pet. 2.2. We have this Expression, The Sincere Milk of the Word. Milk not mixed with Water. And in 1 Cor. 5.8, Sincerity and Truth are con∣joyned, Let us keep the Feast with the unleave∣ned Bread of Sincerity and Truth, Contrary to this Truth, is Hypocricy or Pretence. Thirdly, Truth in Speech, is when the Tongue becomes a direct Interpreter of the Heart, when a Man plainly speaks the Truth from his Heart. Contrary to this is Lying (speaking one thing and thinking another) which St. Paul positively protests against. I speak the Truth, I Lye not. VVe are dehorted from the one, and earnestly advised to the other by the Apostle, Eph. 4.25. Put away Lying and speak every Man Truth to his Neighbour.
Fourthly, Truth in Action, is a just and plain Dealing, both with God and Man; an ho∣nest rendering to every one, what of right belongs to him. Contrary to this Truth is Per∣fidiousness, Collusion and ungodly encroach∣ing upon the Right and Property of others. Our Lord and Saviour (not out of Comple∣ment, but as he really deserv'd) honoured Nathaniel with the Character of a Just Dealer. An Isralite in truth, in whom there is no guile. These are the four Branches of Truth, and we dare not to exclude any of them, the whole lump of Man must be leavened with Truth. His Judgment and Opinion must be sound. His Affections Sincere, his Speech Verity. And his Coversation so plain that it cannot be blamed. And that which Stears all, is a true Judg∣ment. For though the Heart be sincere, the Speech true, the Actions never so just, yet if the Judgment be missed, there is no Truth in any. An Error in the Urstanding begets an Error in the Will, in the Affections and Actions. An instance hereof we have in St. Paul, before his Miraculous Conversion. He had a kind of Truth in Heart, For he was
Zealous towards God. And for his Speech and Actions he was unblamable, concerning the Righteousness of the Law anrebukeable, He had no double Tongue nor unjust Hand. At that time when he persecuted the Church, He was very confident that that action was good and warrantable. He wanted nothing but Truth in Judgment, and upon the account of that Want (notwithstanding all his Honour and Proficiency in the Law) when he arrived at a true Judgment, he despised them all. Yea doubt∣less (saith he I account all things loss for the Excellency of the Knowledge of Jesus Christ, my Lord. But though this Truth be the prime and ab∣solutely necessary, yet alone 'tis not sufficient. Religion doth not consist in Speculation. A Man may acquire a right Judgment of things, and yet be wanting in the practice of his Duty. The Head may be well furnished with Know∣ledge, and the Heart rotten and deceitful. Judas, (whose very Name is odious for his un∣parrallel'd Treachery) knew much, and doubt∣less Preached the Truth, and possibly did as much good thereby as another Disciple; but he had a hollow false Heart, he wanted this se∣cond Branch of Truth in the inward Parts, (viz.)
Truth in Affection, and so got nothing by his outward Profession, but a Sting of Conscience. But if there be Truth in Judgment, and Truth in Heart, then the Speech will be true, and the Actions just; For the Heart dictates to the Tongue, and prepares the Hands, Out of the abundance of the Heart the Tongue speaks, and the Hands act. When the Heart Indites a good matter, the Tongue will be like the Pen of a ready Writer to express it; then the Bowels will be enlarged, the Hands open to the ne∣cessities of the Saints, the Feet will move to the place where his Honour dwelleth; in brief, all the Members of the Body will be∣come Instruments of Righteousness unto Holi∣ness: Therefore King Solomon gives this ex∣cellent advice, Keep thine heart with all dili∣gence, for out of it proceeds the Ishews of Life and of Death, Prov. 4.23. Thus you see what God requires, a sound Judgment without Error, a sincere Heart without Hypocricy, the speaking the Truth without a Lye, and Just Dealing without Deceit. Some render the words, Thou delightest in Truth in the inward parts, which is according
to wise King Solomons Affirmation, Such as are upright in their way, are his Delight.Prov. 11.2. This we may readily assent too, when we remem∣ber that it is his own Image. I am the Truth. Truth hath made you free. There is nothing Counterfeit in him, or from him; He is per∣fectly sincere in all his Proposals, and will exactly perform his Promises and Threats, He is not a Man, that he should Lye, his Veraci∣ty is Essential to him. And the Truth that is in him, is the Foundation of all the Truth that is in us. Our Faith could have no ground, without his Truth in promising: Our Hope no ground, without his Truth in per∣forming: Our Charity no ground, without his Truth in Loving: Our Repentance no ground, without his Truth in Pardoning. And what is in him, he loves in his Creatures: And he is resembled in nothing more than this Virtue, which Metaphorically is said to yield a sweet Savor. The Vulgar Translation expresseth it thus, Thou desirest Truth, &c. This desire inti∣mates a want, none desires what he has; de∣sire terminates an Enjoyment. 'Tis much to be lamented. Men are extreamly deficient
in it; God made Man upright, but he sought out many Inventions. The Children of Men are deceitful upon the Weights, Deceit, and Falshood commonly lurk undiscernably un∣der the most specious shews of Reality. The Sons of Men are become Vanity, the Sons of Noble-Men are become a Lye. Now, God see∣ing that wanting in Man, which in his Crea∣tion he bestowed upon him, desires that it might be recovered. And we can never sufficiently admire the exceeding great love of our Lord and Ma∣ster, he deals with us as a Father, whereas he might deal with us as a Judge; as a Judge he might punish the want, as a Father he desires the supply, and takes more delight to see us recovered of our Miscarriages by Repentance, that he may mercifully Pardon, than to see us perish in them according to the severity of his Justice. And as God delights in Truth where it is, desires it where it is wanting, so he rewards it. All his promises are made to it. He will do good to them that are good, and to them tha ae true of Heart. He will give Grace
and Glory, and no good thing will he with-hold from them that walk uprightly. Grace! and Glory! What can there be wanting where the Almighty is pleas'd to dispence these? Grace here! and Glory hereafter! but to satisfie the most extensive and unlimitted expectation, if there be any thing that can be called good, that is not included in these two, He will give that also; No good thing will he with-hold, &c. Plal. 84.11. But as God Loves, Desires, and Rewards Sincerity; so he Hates, Loaths, and will pu∣nish Hypocricy. He despseth the perfor∣mance of those very Duties which himself Commanded, if smutted and stained with Dissimulation. Bring no more vain Oblations, Incense is an Abomination to me, I hate your Burnt Offerings, my Soul nautiates your Solemn Assemblies. If. 1, 14, 15, Doubtless all these were of Divine Institution, and though they were performed with the greatest seeming Veneration and Devotion, yet because they were meerly superficial, and in appearance, without any Reality and Truth in the inward parts. The God of Purity and Truth is so far from acceptance, that he pronounceth them abominable.
To little purpose then 'tis to be present at Prayers in an unknown Tongue, or to per∣form any outward Ceremonious Adoration wherein some Persons Religion consists. This is not a serving God with Truth in the in∣ward parts, as he requires. It is (Pardon the Comparison) a kind of Complementing the Almighty, and saying they are his Servants (which is a transcient, formal Expression in the Mouths of Men without Intention.) When they have performed the outward Act, can they imagine they have done enough? Alas, this cannot please the true God, this can no more benefit their Souls, than the Picture of Ripe Fruit can satisfie their Appe∣tites. Such unthinking Devotion, (though never so Rompous and Splendid in Appear∣ance) is odious in the sight of the Omnisi∣cent God; while a few, unpolished, bro∣ken Expressions, proceeding from a contrite heart, are Rethorical, Pleasing, and Effectual. A broken and a contrite heart, O God, thou wilt not despise. Jehu did many Galant things, he destroyed the Worshippers of Baal, and carefully pre∣served the Servants of the Lord. He exe∣cuted
that which was right to Ahabs house; But his heart was not right, inclining to the sins of Jeroboam, &c. and by reason of the want of his hearts sincerity, all his Glorious Actions did lose their Grace in Gods sight. There are many Inducements which may move Men to a seeming honest Deportment, Some for the Applause of Men, as the Scribes and Pharesies. Some for Profit, as the Shecamits. Some for Honour and Re∣putation, as King Saul. Some to avoid trouble, and the danger of the Law, as in Queen Hesters days, many Heathens pretended they were Jews. And in King Charles the Se∣cond's Reign, many Scismaticks came to Church, and counterfeited true Members of the Church of England. Some for Com∣pany sake, as Ananias and Zaphira, they would do as the rest, though deceitfully, which was their Ruine. Some seem to do good, that they may be the more capeable to do evil; and with Saint-like Actions pal∣liate their Wickedness. As Absolm and Jeza∣bel. And indeed a Hypocrite may make a great Progress in outward Performances. He may be Baptized; so Magus. He may
Fast and Pray; so the Pharesie. He may Preach and Repent; so Judas. Nay more, he may take Root, and bring fourth Fruit, and yet but a Hypocrite. Jerem. 12.2, 3. Thou hast Planted them, yea they have taken Root, they grow, yea they bring forth Fruit; thou art neer in their Mouth, but far from their Reins. Now as our Inward Affections should have their true Stamp from God, so should they make a true Impression upon our Outward Actions. The increase above ground (whether Wheat or Tares) is the same with the Seed under ground. The Fruit is like the Tree, whether good or corrup. And we in our Morals should not sustain one person in our Bosom and another in our Countenance. When a Mean Contemptible Mecannick personates an Emperor, King or Prince, we call him an Actor,Histrio perso∣nam aliquam in Fabula susti∣ners. the word in the Lan∣guage our Saviour spake, is , one in a Vizard or Counterfeit Face.Qui aliud pectore clausum habet, aliud ore promit. A Heathen observed that the World was like a Stage, and that the persons that acted upon it had scarce a true Visage They give good words (saith the Royal Prophet) with their Mouths, but Curse with their Hearts. The Jewish Hypocrites described. Ez. 33.31. with their Religious
out-sides, did appear to be Gods peculiar Ser∣vants, but the Lord saith, They come as my People, (viz.) in outward formality, but not his people in Sincerity and Truth. Apes that did imitate his People, in some good things they did resemble them. Their Beauty was but Painted and Meritriceous. Like Sepulchers Curiously Wrought, and richly Guilded on the outside, having nothing but Rottenness and Pu∣trifaction within. So wicked Affections are covered with Saint-like Actions. Religion is not only courted by the Virtuous; there are many who make pretentions to her; who never will be brought to Espouse, and Cleave to her for Better and Worse, and yet would be thought her Admirers. 'Tis much to be lamented, that Religion should be made a Sanctuary to Fraud and Azilum to Villanous and Destructive purposes. Former Ages supply us with Instances of such Counterfeits. Jezabel designing Mur∣der, caused a Fast to be proclamed. Micha under the disguise of a Levite, acts Idolatry. Judas under pretence of making Provision for the Poor, indulged his own Covetous Temper. The Pharesies with their long
Prayers commit horrid Wickedness, devour Widdows Houses. Absolom under colour of distributing Justice, would Usurp Dominion. Thus (you see) the most Bloody, Mischie∣vous, Barbarous, and Trayterous Actions have been committed under the specious shews of Religion and Piety. ('Tis an unacceptable Office) I am very unwilling to tax this present Age, Discour∣ses of that Nature are frequent, publick Evils are in every ones view, and few so pa∣tient as not to complain. We may innocent∣ly Mourn in private, and earnestly Pray that he who is the Way, the Truth, and the Life, would by his Holy Spirit guide us into all Truth. I shall content my self at present, hum∣bly to advise you in King Solomons words, Prov. 23.23. Buy the Truth and sell it not, (viz.) use all possible means for the gaining and retaining of it, to pursue the Metaphor. First, the Scripture is the Field, where Truth grows. Secondly, the place where Gods Word is Devoutly Read, or sin∣cerly and powerfully Preached, is the
Market where you may be furnished there∣with. The first is easily manifested; For, that the Scriptures are the ground of Truth, St. James assures us. Of his own wll begat he us by the Word of Truth; 'tis the Voyce of God (who is Truth in the Abstract) 'tis the Breath of God. All Scripture is given by Inspiation, &c. But the second is more difficult. For every Profession (how distant soever from it) pretend to Truth. And if you be not wary, you may be strangely deluded, and let that pass currant for Truth, which is indeed a Lye. Really, I pitty that sort of Ignorant (and I have Charity to believe) well mean∣ing poor Souls, who so inordinally admire the Persons of their Factious Teachers (ha∣ving gained upon their Credulity by their affected Canting, and Counterfeit Piety) that they as readily imbrace their ill groun∣ded Tenets, as if they were as true as Gos∣pel. The over-weening Opinion of the Author, rather than the Truth of the Mat∣ter,
procures their Affiance. This alas, has mouldred Protestants into many insigni∣ficant parcels, while not only great Doctors, as Paul, Apollo, Cephas, but Ignorant, Contemptible, Prevaricating Praters, are become the distinctive Characters of Sects and Separate Communions. And there are another sort of Preachers, who suffer their Judgments to stoop to their Temporal Ad∣vantage ('tis much to be lamented, that our Holy Mother the Church of England, should be dishonoured by such undutiful Sons) whose Consciences are so pliant, that they make Religion a TRADE, a meer Diana of the Ephesians: And follow their Occupa∣tions, because thereby no small gain is brought unto them. Acts 19.24. They went out from us, for they were not of us. Every Di∣vision weakens, these (in effect) strengthen the hands of our Common Enemy (I mean Popery) and if ever it prevail (which God forbid) this is the means. Since such dangerous Consequences pro∣ceed from Error in Judgment, and false Teachers are the Destructive Planters and
Spreaders thereof. Therefore Christians, Try the Spirits, whether they be of God, prove all things, but hold fast that which is good. Be industrious in the search after Truth, but humbly acquiess in that Sence which the Word of God rightly Interpreted, affords, viz. when one Scripture doth not contradict, and dash against another. Having obtained Truth in Judgment, we must seek for Truth in Affection: Our Theo∣retical Truth must be turned into Practical. And of our Hearts Sincerity, our Words and Actions are the Comments and Paraphrases. A good Man out of the good Treasure of his Heart, bringeth forth good things, &c. Luke 6.45. And if you desire to know how to pass a right Judgment upon your selves, whether your Hearts are sincere or no, This is a Sign. 1. If, when you have all oppertunity of privacy, when without any Blemish of your Reputation, you may Indulge Corrupt Na∣ture: If then (with Joseph) you have a desire to approve your self to God, your Heart is sincere.
2d If you prefer and imbrace, what your Conscience assures you, is True, Just, and Honest, both before God and Man, though in all probability the Profession there∣of, will expose you to Poverty, and many unhappy Disquietudes, and the contrary (in all Humane Reason) free you from Trouble and Danger, and render your Condition Easy, and Plentiful. If at such a time as This, neither Fear of Punishment, nor Hope of Reward, nor any other left hand Respects, but meerly a regard to Gods Commandments, and the Comfort in your own Bosom, can in∣fluence you, then your Heart is sincere. This sincerity is a sort of Evangelical Perfection, whereby a Man resembles God; For he is the Lord God of Truth. 'Tis our Petition in that Heavenly Prayer our Saviour taught us. Thy Will be done on Earth, as it is in Heaven (that is) That we who are here below, may imitate those Glorious Saints and Angels above, in doing Gods Will in Sincerity. Thus qualified, you may approach Gods
Holy place, and say with good K. Hezekiah, Remember now (O Lord) how I have walked before thee in Truth with a perfect Heart, &c. In regard of this quality (though of no other) we may Appeal to the Sentence of the Im∣partial Judge of Heaven and Earth, as the Prophet David did. Judge me O Lord, for I have walked in mine Integrity, Psal. 26.1. But without Sncerity, no Grace is of any use or worth, therefore we find in the Sa∣cred Oracles these Adjuncts, Faith unfained, Love without Dissimulation; and Wisdom must be thus qualified, St. James 3.17. The Wis∣dom that is from above, is first Pure, then Peaceable, Gentle, and easie to be intreated, full of Mercy and good Works, without Par∣tiality, and without Hypocricy. If Faith be not unfained, and so true: Love without Dis∣simulation, Wisdom without Hypocricy, all's Vain and Fruitless. The Pharesies Fa∣sted, Prayed, gave Alms, paid Tythes: Yet our Saviour (who required Truth) who knew, and alone can punish secret Thoughts, denounced a Woe against them. A Hypo∣crite can expect nothing from the true God,
who requireth Truth in the inward parts; But the just desert of his Hypocricy. A Hypocrite (indeed) has one great Prerogative above other Sinners, (viz.) that he can never be accused by Men. But withal, 'tis well worthy your Observation, that in the Sacred Sciptures we never find one single instance of a Hypo∣crites Repentance, in order to be Pardoned by the Just God: For whereas Conversion is left as a means to Recover all other Sinners; What means remains to restore him who turneth even Conversion it self into a Sin? On the other hand, Happy is the Man that is Sincere; for this makes every Action acceptable too, and himself beloved of God. If Faith be but True, (though it come short in parts and degrees 'tis forceable and avail¦able, Nothing is impossible to such. Blessed is the M in whose Spirit there is no guile! For the Lord will not impute to him sin. He will guid m ich his Councel in this Life, and af  receive him to Glory. And to his unxptable Comfort, the Sincere Person may y with Holy David God is my King, and hough he cannot express his Allegiance to his King, either in his Person or Purse,
being Imprisoned by Sickness, or in a Goal, having neither feet to approach the Courts of the Lords House, hands to lift up as a Morning Sacrifice, Tongues to utter his Praise, nor Silver and Gold, nor so much as a Cup of cold water to distribute to a Prophet in the Name of a Prophet. Yet this Glorious King (being the searcher of Hearts) will ac∣cept and reward his good inclination, and intention, as if exerted into Performance. But God be thanked, we have all precious oppertunities tendered to us; 'tis therefore my Humble, Earnest, Concluding Exhorta∣tion. Let your Words and Actions manifest the Solidity of your Judgment, and your Hearts Sincerity. In order wereunto. First, Abhor in your selves, utterly Re∣nounce, Discountenance in others, not only Down-right Perjury and notorious Lying, but all Equivocating, Dissembling, and the least tendences to Falshood. To be esteemed a Lyer, is so Base and Ignominious a Reproach, that nothing can be more Shameful and Inglo∣rious. To be protected from such dangerous Society, was the Royal Prophets earnest
Prayer. Deliver my Soul O Lord from Lying Lips, and from a Deceiful Tongue. Every Mans Credit is dear to him, and cannot en∣dure to be distrusted, insomuch than the giving the Lye (you know) is thought a just ground of a Quarrel, and not to be recom∣penc'd, without the Blood of him that offer∣ed the Affront; so that the most Immoral and Wildest Men, have a value for Truth, and will tell you, they Scorn to be found in a Lye. And if You b not directly of the Temper of the unjust Judge in the Gospel, who neither feared God, nor regarded Man; These considerations (I hope) will influence you to keep your Tongues from Evil Speaking, Lying and Slandering, never, never deviate from entire Veracity in your whole Con∣vrsation. Scndly, In order to discover a sound Judgment, and an honest Heart, you must be true and jut in all or Dealings. It will be ackowledgd, eve by thos who do not prctice i, that cleer and fre Dealing is the Honour of Mans Natu nd that there is no Vice that doth so cover a Man with
shame as to be detected False and Knavish. A Man that is known to be Fraudulent and Persidious, is as much to be dreaded and as circumspectly avoided, as a venemous Ser∣pent. In the Fear of God therefore decline every occasion that may give just suspicion of such unworthy Collusion. And let that Gol∣den Rule of our Saviours (for your Peace, for your Credit, and for your Comfort) be daily in your Thoughts and constant Practice. What oever ye would that Men should do unto you, even so do to them, for this is the Law and the Prophets. And by this Carriage, (viz) by using no Deceit in your Tongue, and doing no Evil, but Good to your Neigbour, you will be fit to reside in Gods Tabernacle, and to rest upon his Holy Hill (namely) to be Gracious Members of the Church Militant, and Glo∣rious Partakers with the Church Tryum∣phant, &c I shall conclude all with our Churches Collect. Almighty God, who shewest to them that be in Error, the Light of Truth, to the intent that they may return into the way of Righte∣ousness; Grant unto all them that are admitted
into the Fellowship of Christs Religion, that they may eschew those things that are contrary to their Profession, and follow all such things as are agreeable to the same, through our Lord Jesus Christ. Amen. October 24th. 1691.
