A4184 12124901 54551
THE LIVES Of all the Princes of Orange; FROM WILLIAM the Great, Founder of the Common-wealth of the United Provinces. Written in French by the Baron Maurier, in the Year 1682, and published at Paris, by Order of the French King. To which is added the Life of His Present Majesty King William the Third, from His Birth to His Landing in England. By Mr. Thomas Brown. Together with all the Princes Heads taken from Original Draughts. Chara Deo Soboles. Virgil. LONDON: Printed for Thomas Bennet, at the Half-Moon in St. Paul's Church-Yard, 1693.
To his Honoured Friend THOMAS CHAMBERS OF Hanworth, Esq SIR, THough I know what a just aversion you have to the common strain of Dedicati∣ons, yet with the usual assurance of an Authour of the Town, I have pre∣sumed to inscribe this History to you; so much too powerful was either my gratitude or my interest for the Complaisance I ought to have had for your Modesty. As I have recei∣ved too many Obligations at your hands not to endeavour at some sort of a requital (if Addresses of this
Nature don't rather serve to in∣crease the Debt than to acquit it) so I am too well acquainted with your Temper to offer at any thing that may look like Flattery. 'Tis I con∣fess somewhat hard to be avoided upon these occasions, and few Pa∣trons quarrel with the poor Slaves, that make these Applications to them, for being too liberal of their Incense. But you need not fear any such dreadful Entertainment from me: For contrary to the received Practise of all my Predecessors in Dedication, I intend not to say one Word in your Praise. Nay what is more surprizing, instead of being a Panegyrist I here come publickly to reproach you, and that freedom as gross as it looks, I know you will much sooner excuse than being prai∣sed.
I must therefore, (though it is much against my inclination to be the bearer of ill News) take the bold∣ness to inform you that the World speaks very strange things of you, and such as I am afraid you will find it a difficult matter to justifie without the affectation of being sin∣gular. It complains in the first place that in a time of Universal perfi∣diousness and degeneracy, when the profession of Friendship serves only to usher in some piece of Treachery with a better grace, you have the opiniatreté to be sincere and unde∣signing; that at an Age wherein o∣thers of your quality wholly aban∣don themselves to their pleasures, and generously neglect the pursuit of every thing besides, you are so ill∣natured as to use them only en pas∣sant, and cannot be brought to al∣low that Learning sits ill upon a
Gentleman; and lastly, that amidst so vast a Wealth, which uses to have no other effect upon the rest of Man∣kind, but either to make them neg∣lect themselves or despise others, you obstinately continue to be un∣fashionably virtuous and condescen∣ding. I could tell you of several other objections of the like terrible importance that are frequently made against you, but as by these I have mention'd, you may sufficiently judge what malicious Worlds thinks of you, I shall forbear to recount the rest. And now Sir, if I may be per∣mitted to speak something of the fol∣lowing Translation, I hope it is a Present not altogether unworthy of your Acceptance. There is this at least to be said in the behalf of it, which very few done out of the same Language can pretend to, and that is, the extream Scarcity as well as
Excellence of the Original, there being (as far as I can inform my self) not above four or five of them in England. That very Book which my Friends and I made use of, (for you must give me leave here to inform you, that I have but a small share in this performance) and is now in the Possession of a Learned Gentleman, had formerly passed the Hands of King Charles the Second; for he having recei∣ved a mighty Character of it, was so impatient to read it over, that he could not stay to be furnished with one of them from France, but sent to borrow this. As for the Author, though I ingenuously own that I am so uncharitable to his Country-men, as to believe they are for the general part as unfit to write History as Dutch-men are to write Epic Poems (for Dutch Epic
Poetry is down-right. History dis∣guised with Metre, and French Hi∣story, as far as Fiction will make it so, is down-right Poetry,) yet he has happily escaped the Genius of the rest of his Nation, who are so apt to run out into strange Love∣adventures, and other Chimera's e∣ven upon the most solemn occasions, and, as appears by his Writings, was a Person of great Quality, Pro∣bity and Experience. If he has a∣ny fault 'tis this, that he is now and then too much upon the Nar∣rative, but his Old-Age will ex∣cuse that Infirmity. As for the rest, he was a passionate Lover of Truth, and an Adorer of true Me∣rit, where-ever he found it, whether in Catholic or Hugonot. Diffe∣rence in Religion not being able to prepossess him to any Man's disad∣vantage, if he were otherwise valu∣able.
In short, he has discovered several important Matters of State, which, till he revealed them, were Mysteries to all the World, and I shall but do him justice when I say that he has joyned the unaffected Simplicity of Philip de Comines, to the Veracity of the great Thua∣nus. The last Life has been done by a modern Hand; but though it does not come up to the former, seems to be written with great Impartia∣lity and Freedom. I have thus given you a short Ac∣count of the Author: It now re∣mains that I should conclude, which I find I must do in a different man∣ner from most Dedications: For whereas they generally end with some devout Wishes for the Person, to whom they address; you have been so eminently well treated both by Nature and Fortune, that I can
wish you nothing but what you pos∣sess already. Therefore not altoge∣ther to depart from so ancient and received a Custom, I will pray, but it shall be for my self, who need it most. My first Petition is, that you would be pleased to forgive all the defects in the Translation, I mean in my own Part of it; and my se∣cond, that when your Candor has forgiven them, you would once more employ it, and pardorn this Presump∣tion in, Sir, Your most Humble, and Most Obliged Servant, T. Brown.
The TABLE. A. DUke of Alva sent to succeed the Dut∣chess in the Government of the Low Countreys, page 19. Establishes a Councel of Twelve, called the Councel of Blood, p. 20, 21. The Arch-Duke Brother to the Emperour Ro∣dolphus, chosen Governour of the Nether∣lands, p. 64. Amsterdam surrendred to the States, p. 65. Duke of Anjou invited into Holland, p. 73. Retires into France, and dies, p. 113. Arminius and Gomarus, their Quarrel, p. 160, 161, &c. B. BArnevelt's Story, p. 156, 157, &c. Bon besieged, p. 240, 241. And taken, p. 242. Marquess de Bellefonds, banished by the French King, p. 251. Battle of Senef, p. 256. C. COligny (Gaspor de) His Character, p. 3. Coeverden lost, p. 231, retaken, p. 232. Coligny (Lovise de) Her Life, p. 137. Cambray besieged and surrendred, p. 280.
D. DOn Iohn of Austria, made Governour of the Low Countreys, p. 57. His Story, p. 58, 59, &c. Surprises the Castle of Na∣mur, and Charlemont, p. 61. Defeats the Army of the States at Gemblours, p. 65. Dies of Grief, p. 67. E. COunts Egmont and Horn Executed, p. 20. Q. Elizabeth loved to be thought hand∣some, p. 153, &c. F. FRench King almost over-runs the United Provinces, p. 214. G. CArdinal Granville, his Character and Sto∣ry, p. 14, 15, &c. Name of Gueux (or Beggars) whence the Rise, p. 17. Grave besieged, p. 265. and taken, p. 269. Ghent taken, p. 291. H. HAerlem taken by Famine, p. 42. Henry Frederick born, p. 114. His Life, p. 177, &c. His Children, p. 178. I. INquisition declares those guilty of High-Treason, who had not opposed the He∣reticks of the Netherlands, p. 19. Ipres taken, p. 291.
L. COunt Lodovick, &c. presents a Petition to the Governess of the Low Countreys, a∣gainst the Inquisition, New Bishops, &c. which at first is slighted, p. 17, 18, &c. Lewis de Requesens made Governour in the place of the Duke of Alva, p. 44. Leyden relieved by breaking down the Dykes, p. 45, 46. and the University settled there, p. 47. M. MArgaret of Austria, made absolute Go∣verness of the Low Countreys, with Orders to Establish the Spanish Inquisiti∣on, and several new Bishopricks in the Ne∣therlands, p. 14. Mons surprised, p. 32. and retaken by the Spaniards, p. 34. Count de la Mark, takes the Brill with seve∣ral other Cities, p. 36. Middburg taken by the Spaniards, p. 44. Maurier traduced at the French Court, &c. p. 120, 121, 122. Maurice Prince of Orange, his Character, p. 125. raises the Siege of Berghen ap Zoom, p. 129 and 140. takes Breda, p. 130. and Sluise, p. 134. defeats Arch Duke Al∣bert, p. 135. and the Lord de Balancon, p. 138. his Description, p. 148, 149, 150, &c. Maestricht besieged by the French, p. 235. and taken, p. 236. Mansfeld's Story and Character, p. 141, 142, &c.
N. NArses (the Eunuch) his Story, p. 8. House of Nassau their Genealogy, p. 9, 10, &c. The Netherlands demanded to have all the 'Spanish Forces drawn out of the Low Coun∣treys, p. 14. Nimighen Treaty, p. 273. O. OStend taken by the Spaniards, p. 134. St. Omers surrendred to the French, p. 285. P. KIng Philip the Cause of the Disorders in the Low Countreys, p. 8. His Descripti∣on, p 13, 14, &c. Perpetual Edict concluded between the States and Don Iohn of Austria, p. 60. Prince of Parma made Governour of the Low Countreys, p. 68. King Philip published a Prescription against the Prince of Orange, p. 74. Philip William of Nassau, his Life, p. 115. ta∣ken by force out of the Colledge of Lovaine by King Philip, p. 115. shut up in a Castle in Spain at 13 Years Old, p. 116. released, and sent to bring the Infanta Isabella into the Low Countreys, p. 117. marries Eleanor of Bourbon, p. 118. S. STates General Consent to a Toleration of both Religions, p. 66. Request the Duke
of Anjou and Alemon to be their Lord and Protector, p. 73. T. Treaty of Peace set on foot at Breda, p. 48. Treaty of Peace at Ghent, p. 50, 51, &. Treaty of Peace at Nimighen concluded, p. 297. V. MArquess Vitelli, his Character and Epi∣taph, p. 28. Valenciennes taken by the French, p. 279. W. WIlliam the First of Nassau his Birth, p. 3. the Favours show'd him by Charles 5th, p. 4. made Generalissimo at 22 Years Old, p. 5. builds Charlemont, and Philipville, p. 5. supports the Empe∣rour at the Resignation of his Empire, and is recommended by him to the King of Spain, p. 6. his Description, p. 12. Re∣tires into Germany, p. 19. Raises an Army there, which is defeated near the River Ems, p. 24. Raises another of Twenty Four Thousand German Horse and Foot, p. 25. which refusing to follow him into France to assist the Hugonots, he disbands, p. 27. Enters the Low Countreys with a great Army, and is received into Rure∣mond, Malines, &c. p. 33. Acknowledg'd Governour of Holland, Zealand, &c. by the States, p. 38. banishes the Romish Ce∣remonies
out of the Church, p. 39. recei∣ved into Brussels in great Triumph, p. 62. lays the Common-Wealth of the United Provinces, p. 68. publishes his Apology a∣gainst King Philip's Prescription, p. 75, 76, 77, &c. Marries Lovise de Coligny, p. 113. killed at Delft, p. 115. his Funeral, p. 119. William Count de Buren, Eldest Son to Prince William, seized at the Colledge of Lovain, and carried Prisoner to Spain, p. 23. William Henry of Nassau, his Birth, p. 211. deprived of the Offices belonging to his Family, p. 212. chose General of the Ar∣my, p. 215. and restored to all the other Commands belonging to him, which Cor∣nelius de Witt opposes, p. 220. Prince Wil∣liam takes Naerden, p. 237. falls sick of the Small-pox, and recovers, p. 270. besieges Maestricht, p. 275. and raises it, p. 277. Marries the Princess Mary, p. 288. At∣tacks, and almost Routs Luxemburgh near Mons, p. 298. Cornelius de Witt, and his Brother killed, p. 224. William the Second born, p. 203. besieges Amsterdam, p. 206. dies of the Small-pox, 208.
THE Author's Preface. THE Reader, whoever he is, must not expest in these Memoirs, to find a gay, or rather an im∣pertinent Discourse, filld with New Terms, which some presumptuous lit∣tle Authors, who mind nothing but bare words, call fine Language. These people are to understand that I was never bred at a Colledge, and that the little Skill I have in Languages I receiv'd from Masters at home, or from common use in Conversation. I never read one single Line of Priscian, or of any o∣ther Grammarian. Their Lexicons, and their Syntaxes, which my Father was used to call, The Plague of Youth, are as much unknown to me as the Isle of Pines. I never was able to comprehend what a Gerund or a Supin meant, and though perhaps I use them upon occasion, I neither know how to define or
describe them. I have not without a great deal of pleasure read the Quintus Curtius of Mon∣sieur de Vaugclas, whose solid Vertue, and extraordinary Sweetness, as well as his invio∣lable Fidelity to his Friends, I esteem; al∣though I was never able to edify much by his Remarks upon our Language. And, what is more than all this, having had the misfortune to debauch my own Natural Language, during my long abode in Forreign Countries, where I was bred; as also by my long stay at Mayne, where their Language is extreamly vitious; and thinking it not worth the while to spend money to no purpose at Court, and to feed my self with Vain Expectations, my Reader ought not to be surpris'd if he meets in this Work some terms and manners of speaking that have not receiv'd the Approbation of our Modern Criticks, who make no Scruple to condemn a good Book upon the account of one word which they have banish∣ed out of conversation, or an Expression which does not carry with it (to use the stile of these Foplings) the delicacy of Lan∣guage. Therefore I humbly desire these Gentlemen to  me alone, since I have been so ingenuous as to lay open my Infirmities before them; and by way of Requital, I here give them full possessi∣on of the Eight Parts of Speech, all the Grammars, and all the Dictionaries, with all Remarks and Observations whatsoever, upon Languages in the World, upon this condi∣tion,
that they'll leave things that are above their capacity to persons of better Iudgment and Experience. For to deal plainly with them, It's a sad but a certain Truth, that these Coyners, and Admirers of New Words can attribute no other sort of merit to themselves, than what belongs to those Mechanicks that make good Tools, by the help of which excellent Statuaries form admirable Statues, and famous Architects erect Noble Structures. For my own part, I have a great Respect for those people that can speak regularly and justly upon all Occasions, but I cannot endure those Vain glorious sops, those Would-be-Criticks, who in the Ruels of Ladies use to damn the best Compositions in the World, and all for the sake of one Term or Phrase that has the ill luck to displease them. I would not have so wild an Inference drawn from this, as if I were of Opinion that 'tis impossible for a man to write solidly and politely at the same time. No, I have more Sense than that comes to, and preserve as great a Veneration for those Il∣lustrious Persons that possess both these Ta∣lents, as I have an Aversion and Contempt for those puny Grammarians that are made up of nothing but Pride and Insolence. 'Tis not for such unthinking Insects as these to judge of an History. If I had the am∣bition to desire fit and competent Iudges for these Memoirs, I should wish that the Fa∣mous
President de Thou, and those celebrated Brothers the Messieurs du Puy, and that the President Ardier might come again into the World. The latter of these was a long time Secretary of State under Mr. d' Herbaut, his Unkle. His Dispatches were so Natural, but at the same time so strong and Masculine, as were all the publick Declarations that pass'd under his hands; That Mr. Conrait, a man generally esteem'd in the World, and who knew the Value of Things extreamly well, has told me several times, more than Thirty Years ago, That the Kings of France ceased to speak with a Majesty befitting their Empire, e∣ver since they did not explain themselves by the Pen of Mr. Ardrier. I shall for∣bear to speak more largely of this Illustrious Man, who was a singular Friend of mine, and to whom I have Infinite Obligations, till I meet with a fitter Opportunity. The greatest part of those Histories that have appeared in the World, are properly speaking, nothing else but so many Panegyricks compo∣sed by Interessed Hands, that elevate Vice and Iniquity to the Heavens. Of this Charact∣er are the Works of Paterculus and Machia∣vel, who propose Tiberius, and Caesar Bor∣gia, that in True History were downright Monsters, as Examples fit to be imitated. Directly opposite to these Retailers of Unjust Commendations are a sort of people that deal in Pasquils, and yet have the Impudence
to stile themselves Historians. These merce∣nary, or partial creatures, make no conscience to attack Vertue it self, and have frequently represented the most excellent Princes that ever wore a Crown, as Tyrants and Wicked Per∣sons: Witness so many Histories, and so ma∣ny Printed Satyrs of the Huguenots upon Ca∣tholick Princes, and among the rest upon Francis of Lorrain, Duke of Guise, for no other Reason but because that excellent General made War against them. Witness so many Cart-loads of scurrilous Invectives composed by Monks, and other Superstitious Catho∣licks against Queen Elizabeth of England, the most glorious Princess that ever wielded a Scepter. For to these hot-headed passionate Bi∣gots 'tis sufficient for you to be of a Party, or of a Religion contrary to theirs, to be defamed, condemned; and pursued with a Thousand Ca∣lumnies. These ridiculous Monsters vainly endea∣vour to render Queen Elizabeth odious and exe∣crable to all posterity, for putting Mary Queen of Scots to Death, although 'tis a notorious Truth, that the above-mentioned Unhappy Princess was of so unquiet and turbulent a Spi∣rit, that she could not forbear to embarras her self with Q. Elizabeth, who was much more powerful than her self; and by that Ill advised Conduct was the occasion of her own Ruine. The Truth of this Assertion cannot be called in question, as being confirmed by the Testimony
of Monsieur de Castelnau, Intendant of her Affairs in France, and Ambassadour in Eng∣land, who tells us in his Memoirs, that she ow'd this Ill-management to the Cardinal of Lorrain, his Uncle. Nay, after she was Pri∣soner in Engand, she continued to keep a cor∣respondence with the Male-content party there, who endeavour'd to disturb the Repose of that Kingdom, so far as to attempt the Life of Q. Elizabeth. Which obliged her to bring her to a Tryal where she was condemned by more than Forty Judges, the greatest part of them consi∣sting of Earls, Barons, Peers of England, Officers of the Crown and Members of Parliament. Notwithstanding all this, her Sen∣tence was for a long time respited, and Q. Elizabeth had never dared to execute her, if she had not been persuaded to it by France. For I have heard my Father say, That both Friends and Enemies concurred, out of different Views, and Interests, to bring that unfor∣tunate Princess to the Block. Monsieur de Bellievre, who was sent Envoy Extraordi∣nary into England, in appearance to solicit for the Life of this poor Queen; for which purpose he carried large Instructions with him, told him, That he had quite contra∣ry Orders under Henry the Third's Hand, to perswade Q Elizabeth to behead this Common Enemy both of their Persons ☞ and Kingdoms. All which the King was forced to do out of an apprehension, that if Ma∣ry Stuart, who was not only Heir to Q. Eli∣zabeth,
but much younger than she, should come to succeed her; the Guises, her Relations, who Govern'd her absolutely, and who by their great Number of Creatures made his Crown shake al∣ready at home, being supported by the united power of England, Scotland, and Ireland, would in the conclusion make a second Childe∣ric of him. For those of the League had the Insolence to change the King's Device, which was Manet ultima Coelo, into Manet ulti∣ma Claustro. The King's meaning was, That after he had enjoy'd upon Earth the Crowns of France and Poland, he ho∣ped he should wear a Third in Heaven. But these of the League publickly declared, That they would bestow a Third Crown upon him in a Cloyster. And as a Learned Gentleman of that Age had enlarged upon the King's Device in this fine Hexameter, Qui deditante duas, triplicem dabit ille Coronam The Fury of the Leaguers thus paraphrased it in the following Distick. Qui deditante duas, unam abstulit, al∣tera nutat, Tertia tonsoris est facienda manu. Besides this in a private Cabal held by those of that party, where this Execrable Design was proposed, it hapning that one in the compan,
who was more moderate than the rest, demand∣ed, Who should be the Man that durst put the King in a Cloyster? The Cardinal of Guise, who was of a hot fiery constitution, af∣ter he had reproached him for his faint earted∣ness, roundly told him, That were the King in his hands, he would for his head be∣tween his knees, and immediately make him a Monk's Crown with the point of a Poiniard. An Ar  cost him very dear; for after Henry III had caus'd Mon∣sieur de Guise, his Brother, to be executed, and was considering with himself what he should do with the Cardinal, whom he had order'd to be apprehended: Col. Alphonso d' Ornano, Father to the Mareschal of that Name, having put him in mind of these cruel words, and re∣monstrated to him, That the living Brother was infinitely more dangerous than he that was now dead, had ever been; the King swore he should dye, and immediately sent Monsieur de Gaast, Captain of the Guards, with positive Orders to dispatch him. This secret Solicitation of Henry III. a∣gainst Mary Stuart, his own Sister in Law, Queen of Scotland, and Dowager of France, makes it appear, That to preserve our selves we often sacrifice our Allies and Relations, and e∣ven Religion it self to Interest, and Reason of State. Witness what the aforesaid Q. Eliza∣beth heretofore told my Father, That she held her Life by the Courtesie of King Philip II.
her Brother in Law, although he was the greatest Enemy she had. Upon this conside∣ration she kept his Picture in her Bed-chamber, and made him be looked upon by all the World as her Saviour. And in effect he hinder'd her Si∣ster Mary from putting her to death. For Q. Mary, Second Wife to K. Philip, being a great Catholic, and very infirm, had reason to fear that her Sister Elizabeth, who was a Pro∣testant, when she came to succeed her, would ba∣nish the Catholic Religion out of England, as afterwards it happen'd, and therefore mightily prest the King her Husband to cut off her head, she being at that time Prisoner in the ower of London. But. K. Philip od the motion with all his power, fearing lest Mary Stuart, Heir to Q. Elizabeth, who then was marry'd to K. Francis II. should one day beco Queen of Great Britain, by Right of Succession and joyning it to France, as it would unqueionably happen if she had any children, by te Union of so many Kingdoms, a formidable power would be erected, that would uerly ruin and confound his vast design of an Universal Monarchy. At this very juncture the Spaniards make Religion truckle to Interest; and those Grave Gentlemen who have so often in their Writings reproached us for our Alliances with Hereticks, and particularly with Holland and Sweden, in order to recommend themselves with a better grace to the Court of Rome, at present look upon the Hollanders as the greatest support
of their Monarchy, permitting them to preach publickly in their Cities; Nay, to show what a consideration they have for these people, Admiral d'Ruyter, a little before his death, got a great Number of Hungarian Ministers to be relea∣sed out of the Gallys of Naples, whither the Emperour had sent them, at one word's spea∣king to the Marquiss de Los-Velez, the Vice∣roy. Thus any body may perceive, that 'tis Inte∣rest only that governs the World, and that a great Captain had reason to say, That Princes commanded the People, but that Interest commanded Princes: Which is so palpable, so apparent a Truth, that the most sacred things among men, have been often devoted to this wic∣ked principle, and the greatest part of Crown'd Heads observe the Rules of Iustice and Religi∣on no farther, than they find them consistent with their dearly beloved Interest. As for what remains, if any scrupulous person shall think sit to quarrel with my Memoirs for comparing William Prince of Orange and Admiral Colligny, who were both Hereticks, and both Rebels, to the greatest Heroes of An∣tiquity, yet I would not have him conclude that I have the least leaning towards Heresy and Rebellion, to which I have an equal Aversion. My meaning is, That it is a Sign of as much, if not more Vertue, to make ones self a Prince of a private person; than to be one, and being
weak, to resist mighty powers; than to gain Bat∣les, being born to a Scepter, as Alexander and Gustavus Adolphus were. Kings owe their Victories to the Valour of their Captains and Troops, and sometimes to the Winds, and to the Sun; that is, to meer Fortune. Thus Ci∣cero speaking to Caesar, tells him, That he ac∣quired more glory in pardoning Marcellus, and restoring his Enemy to his Estate and Dignities, than if he had gained a great many Battels, be∣cause his Soldiers and Officers would attribute the principal honour of it to themselves: and for an undeniable Argument, That the gaining of a Battle is owine to the Experience and Courage of the Soldery. the Prince of Con∣de, who had as much personal Bravery as ever any man in the World had, after he had defeated at Rocroy the old disciplined Regiments of the Low-Countries, and those of the Empire at Nordlingue. durst not appear in Guyenne be∣fore the Count of Harcourt, who had but a small Body of old experienced Troops with him, altho the Prince had twice the Number of New raised men. Difference in Religion ought not to diminish our Esteem of any man. We have seen several good Catholicks of very shallow Understand∣ings; as for Instance, the Cardinal de Pelleve, who as he was once haranguing the States Ge∣neral, broke off abruptly, and made nothing on't, which gave occasion to the following Lines:
Seigneurs Etats, excusez le bon-homme, Il a laissé son Calepin à Rome.Excuse the man, and don't pronounce his doom, Poor Soul! he left his Calepine at Rome. On the other hand, we have seen some Hu∣guenots; as for Instance, Monsieur de la None, whom the most celebrated Writers have compared to the greatest men of former Ages. As for my self, I adore extraordinary Merit, where∣ever I find it, be it in an Heretic, in a Rebel; nay, even in an Enemy. The Duke of Lesse, Viceroy of Naples, has left an Eternal Monu∣ment of this Generous Maxim behind him, by e∣recting a magnificent Tomb in St. Maries de la Nove, at Naples, to Peter of Navarr, with this Inscription: Petro Navarro Cantabro, solertissimo in expugnandis Urbibus duci, Consalvus Ferdinandus Luessae Princeps, Ludovici fili∣us, Magni Consalvi Nepos, quamvis Gallo∣rum partes secutum, Pio Sepulchri munc∣rum honestavit, cum hoc habeat in se praecla∣ra virtus, ut ctiam in hoste sit admirabilis. This Hero honour'd Vertue in an Enemy, in a Rebel, and in a Deserter; and not thinking it sufficient to commend him in private, erected a Noble Mausoleum to his Memory.
Caesar was not less regarded at Rome, be∣cause he was an Epicurean, than if he had been of any other Sect of Philosophers, who held more favourable Sentiments of the Divinity and of his Providence; And in our days we more esteem the Poetry and History of George Buchanan, for all he was a notorious Heretic, than the flat insi∣pid Verses, or jejune Histories of several good Ca∣tholic Authors. Generally speaking we follow the Opinion we suck'd in with our Milk; and as to matters of Religion, 'tis a plain case, that we implicitly embrace the Sentiments of the Doctors of our acquaintance, and believe upon the Faith of other people, without searching into the bottom of things. But altho it has been a man's misfor∣tune to have evil parents that have educated him in a false Religion, yet this does by no means de∣stroy his Moral and Heroic Vertues, which appa∣rently discover themselves in an extraordinary Genius. Rebellion is full as detestable as Heresy, for 'tis a bare-faced revolting against our Soveraigns, who are the Images, or Representatives of God upon Earth. Nevertheless, one may say, in de∣fence of William Prince of Orange, That Phi∣lip II. occasion'd the defection of the Low Coun∣tries, by his contempt of them, and by violating the priviledges of those Provinces, which the Emperour Charles V. his Father always gover∣ned with Clemency and Mildness. And as for what respects Admiral Coligny, whom I compare to the Prince of Orange, al∣tho it has been frequently said by his Enemies,
who were both numerous and powerful, That he served himself of the pretence of the Re∣formed Religion, the better to cover his ambition: And after them Davila has asserted as much in his History; yet setting all prejudi∣ces aside, tis certain he was firmly perswaded of the truth of his belief, and that the principle Mo∣tive of his rising up in Arms was to support and defend it. His most familiar Acquaintance, who pryed diligently into his behaviour, never so much as question'd it, and the ardent prayers he pour∣ed out at the moment of his death, as well as se∣veral Letters to his Confidents and Relations, which are the faithfullest Pictures of the Soul, do sufficiently demonstrate it. And here I cannot forbear to exclaim at the Massacres of St. Bartholomew, wherein abun∣dance of good Catholicks were sacrificed to the Revenge of their Enemies Thus it was general∣ly condemn'd by all honest men both in France and elsewhere, except the authors of that barba∣rous butchery, and their dependants. A Latin History lately Printed with the King's Priviledg, speaking of this bloody Execution, has these words, Atra illa dies quam Sequana non abluat suis undis. And Monsieur Hardouin de Pe∣refixe Bishop of Rhodez in his History of Hen∣ry IV as he mentions this Massacre, calls it the most abominable Action that ever was, and wishes, if it please God, that nothing like it may ever happen again. I don't pretend to injure the memory of King Charles IX. nor of the Queen his Mother, but only say that this Action has
been universally detested without naming any names: However, if it were necessary to espouse one party or other on this occasion, in my opinion a good Frenchman would do much better to inter∣est himself for Henry our present King's Grand∣father, who ran so great a risk of his Life, and who was so dishonourably treated on this cruel day, than for Charles IX. who scandalously vio∣lated his promise. Upon this doleful Subject Henry IV. thus explain'd himself very often, and my Father was a Witness of it, that the most sensible displeasure he ever receiv'd in his whole Life, was that on this fatal day of St. Bartholomew, eight hun∣dred Gentlemen, all of them men of con∣siderable Estates and Quality, were basely Murdered for their affection to him. These were his very words, and he spoke them when he was King of France, at a certan time when some zealous Catholicks came to demand justice of him for certain Chronological Tables, which the Huguenots had printed at Geneva before their Psalms, where was to be seen, In the Year 1574 dyed Charles the Massacrer. To Authorize this cruel Action, it must not be alledged that it was approved of at Rome, where I have seen in the Pope's Chappel the Tragedy of St. Bartholomew represented, and the Admiral thrown out at the Window, with these words at the bottom, Pontifex Colinii necem probat. I have read these strange words there some fifty years ago, not without a great re∣gret, and a certain pious Bishop told me he could never see them without astonishment.
To conclude, no one ought to be surpriz'd, that writing the Life of William Prince of Orange, I have set down the substance of his Apology against the Prosecution of the K. of Spain. If it contains any severe passages on the memory of that Prince, I am not the first person that divulg'd them. This piece was printed in several Languages near a hundred years ago, and was sent by the Prince of Orange to the Emperour Rodolphus, and to se∣veral other Princes of Europe, amongst the rest to Henry III. accompanied with a long Letter which the K. received kindly, altho this Apology, which in truth is none of the gentlest, was against his own Brother in Law. This is all I have to say upon the subject of these Memoirs, which I hope will be approv'd by all lovers of Truth, and Truth is the Mistress I have courted all my life time. The strong aversion I have to flattery and calumny have somewhat transported me against several Writers, that don't deserve the name of Historians, but only of scur∣rilous Authors, and little low fulsome panegyrists, who being led away by different passions, have en∣deavour'd to conceal the Truth, which I have taken pains to discover, which will appear by seve∣ral Secrets of State, that I have laid open en passant, and which without question, will not be unwelcome to good men. I have nothing more to add, but that I com∣posed these Memoirs to pass away some hours of a dull, melancholly solitude, to which I find my self reduced, having been never bred up to Hunting, or any other sports of the like nature, which di∣versions, if they don't make a country life happy, yet they serve at least to render it less tiresome and disagreable.
WILLIAM of NASSAU Prince of Orange. Founder of the Republique of the United Provinces. portrait
THE LIFE OF WILLIAM of NASSAW, Prince of ORANGE, Founder of the Commonwealth of the United Provinces in the Ne∣therlands. NO Age of all Antiquity has produc'd a more extraordinary Man than William of Nassau, Prince of Orange. Examine all the Heroes of Plutarch, and all those great Men who lived since that admirable Historian; and 'twill be difficult to find any upon Record, who possess'd more eminently all those Virtues and good Quali∣ties that enter into the Composition of a brave Man.
The Victories and Conquests of Alexander and Caesar do not so much deserve our admi∣ration. The first was Master of all Greece, and at the Head of a War-like and Well-disci∣plin'd Army. The other absolutely Com∣manded half the Roman Legions, who govern∣ed all the World. With these great forces and advantages they entred upon the Stage, made their first Victories the fore-runners to the next, pursued their blow, and one over∣threw the Empire of the Persians, and the o∣ther the Roman Commonwealth. But Prince William has equall'd the Glory of these great Conquerors, by attaquing the formidable Power of King Philip of Spain without any Army or Forces, and by maintaining himself many years against him. His Courage was always greater than his Misfortunes; and when all the World thought him ruin'd, and he was driven out of the Netherlands, he en∣tred 'em again immediately at the Head of a new Army, and by his great Conduct laid the foundations of a Commonwealth, that co∣vers the Ocean with its Fleets, and over∣matches all Europe in the number and strength of its Naval Forces. His Enemies had no o∣ther way to ruin him, but by a base Treache∣ry, which he might have avoided, if he had reposed less confidence in the love of the Peo∣ple, who served him instead of Guards, and considered him as the Father and Tutelar God of their Country. After having reflected on all the Illustrious Persons that have lived before him, I can
meet with no one that equall'd his profound Wisdom, heroick Courage and Constancy under all his Adversities, but Gaspar de Co∣ligny, Lord of Chastillon, Admiral of France; so great a Man, that D'Avila his Enemy was forc'd to own that he was more talk'd of in Europe than the King of France himself. This Admiral, after the loss of four Battles, was so far from being broken or ruin'd, and conti∣nued still so powerfull, that his Enemies were oblig'd to grant him a Peace; and had it not been for a Treachery, whose Memory will be eternally abhorr'd by all good Men, he might have ended his days in Peace, and done great service to his Country by the Conquest of the Low-Countries; which he propos'd at so favourable a conjuncture, that we might easily have made our selves masters of 'em. But the ill maxims of those Divines, who would conform all Religion to the humours and passions of Princes, and the Doctrine, That no Faith ought to be kept with Rebels and Hereticks; and that 'tis lawfull to do a small evil to bring about a greater good, ad∣ded to the powerfull Motive of Revenge; pre∣vail'd over all the Ties of Honour and Faith, which ought always to be sacred and invio∣lable. William of Nassaw, Prince of Orange, was Born in the Year 1533, at the Castle of Dil∣lembourgh, in the County of Nassaw. He was Nine years Page of Honour to the Em∣perour Charles the Fifth, who continually ad∣mired his extraordinary good sense and mo∣desty.
This great Prince took delight to commu∣nicate his most important affairs to him, and instruct him, and has often declar'd to those he was most familiar with, That this young Prince furnish'd him with Expedients and Counsels that surpriz'd him, and which other∣wise he had never thought of. When he gave private Audience to Foreign Princes and Ministers, and Prince William was about to retire with the rest of the Company, he usu∣ally bid him stay. All the World was surpriz'd to see this great and wife Monarch esteem him above all those that were about him, and trust him at so ten∣der an Age with all the secrets of his Empire, the management of Affairs, and the weighti∣est Negotiations. He was scarce Twenty years old when Charles the Fifth chose him out among all the great Lords of his Court, to carry the Imperial Crown which he re∣sign'd to his Brother Ferdinand. An Office which he discharged with much unwilling∣ness; assuring his good Master, That 'twas an unwelcome Task he had imposed on him of carrying that Crown to another, which his Uncle Henry Count of Nassaw had put upon his Head. And for a proof that Charles the Fifth set on less a value on his Courage than his Pru∣dence; when Philibert Emanuel, Duke of Savoy, was obliged by his own private affairs to be absent some time from the Netherlands, tho' the Prince was but 22 years old, and was in Breda at that time; Charles the Fifth
of his own accord, against the advice of all his Counsel, made him Generalissimo, to the pre∣judice of so many experienc'd Captains, and among the rest of Count Egmont, who was Twelve years older, at a time when he had to deal with two great Generals Moun∣sieur de Nevers, and the Admiral of France. But the Prince was so far from receiving any blow that Campagn, that he built Charlemont and Philipville in sight of the French Ar∣mies. I do not pretend to relate all the Actions of the Prince of Orange, which would require a Volume, and which so many Historians have done in several Languages. 'Twould be a strange itch of writing, and a manifest rob∣bery to publish what may be met with in particular Books. My design is only to make some Reflections and Observations on this great Prince, and acquaint the World with some particulars of his Life, which I learn'd from my Father and other eminent Men of that Age. But in order to make my History more intelligible and agreeable to those who have not read his Life, I was engaged, con∣trary to my former intentions, by an Illustri∣ous Person (to whom I have too many Ob∣ligations to refuse him any thing) to make a short Abridgment of his Life, enough to give a general Idea of him, as Geographers pre∣sent us at one view all the Old and New World in a little Map; not doubting but a Narrow Portraicture of so extraordinary a Man will cause these Particulars I know of
his Life to be read with greater pleasure, and besides will show to all the World upon what foundations this Prince has erected the pow∣erfull Commonwealth of the United Provin∣ces. Besides the esteem the Emperour had for his Vertue, there was no Man at his Court whom he lov'd so tenderly as the Prince of Orange. Which he made appear to the last moment of his Administration. For at the famous As∣sembly at Brussels, A. D. 1555, when the Em∣perour resign'd all his Kingdoms to his Son Philip, 'twas remarkable that in so considera∣ble an Action he was supported by the Prince of Orange. All these marks of Confidence, and profes∣sions of Friendship, which the Emperour made him, were the cause of his Misfortunes. For tho' at his departure into Spain the Em∣perour recommended him particularly to the King his Son, the Spaniards who govern'd him (for he had been bred always in Spain) being jealous of the growing Greatness and good Fortune of this young Prince, made the King entertain such suspicions of him, that his most innocent words and actions had an ill interpretation put upon 'em, and the re∣fusel which the States made of complying with the demands of the King was laid to his charge. He easily perceived by the cold receptions of the King, that his Enemies had ruin'd him in his good opinion: But he was confirm'd in his belief when King Philip was going aboard the
Ship at Flushing, which was to carry him into Spain. The King looking on him with a great deal of anger, reproach'd him with hin∣dring the execution of his designs by his pri∣vate intrigues. The Prince replying with much submission, that the States had done every thing voluntarily and of their own accord; the King took him by the hand, and shaking it, answer'd in Spanish, No los Estadós mas vos, vos, vos, repeating the word vos several times, which the Spaniards use by way of contempt, as we say in French Toy, Ioy, Thou, thou. This particular I had from my Father, who learn'd it from a Confident of the Prince of Orange, who was present. The Prince, af∣ter this publick affront, had more wit than to conduct the King aboard his Vessel, but contented himself with taking leave of him, and wishing him a good Voyage into Spain: For he was secure enough in the City, where he was well beloved, and where there was a great concourse of people from all parts to see the King's Embarkment. As a further proof of his disgrace, instead of having the Government of the Netherlands conferr'd on him, which his Ancestors had enjoy'd, and which he passionately desired, he saw Cardi∣nal Granville, his Enemy at the Helm, in∣trusted with all the secrets of the Court of Spain under Margaret of Austria, Duchess of Parma, and Governess of the Netherlands, who had particular Orders to have an eye on his Actions, and to communicate no affair of importance to him; which made him re∣solve
for the preservation of his Honour and his Life too, which he saw openly threatned, to support himself with the love of the Peo∣ple, and court Foreign Alliances. From hence 'tis reasonable enough to con∣clude, that King Philip by his ill usage of the Prince of Orange, who had done such great Services to the Emperour his Father, was himself the cause of all the Disorders in the Low-Countries. For had he continued a fa∣vourable Treatment to the Prince of Orange, according to the advice and example of his Father, he had without dispute been a good Subject, and never had taken those de∣sperate resolutions, which kindled a fire that lasted above a Hundred years, and cost the Lives of so many Thousand Men, and drain'd the Treasure of the Indies. This ought to be a warning never to drive great Courages to despair. We meet with a Thousand instances of this nature in Histo∣ry, but particularly of Narses. This famous Eunuch, after all his great Services were slighted, (for the Empress Sophia, Wife of Iu∣stin the Second, had sent him word that she would make him Spin with her Women,) re∣plied, That he would weave such a Web, that she and the whole Empire should never be able to cover. And to make his Threat∣nings good, he call'd the Lombards into Italy, who conquer'd the best part of it, to which they left their Name. This done, without returning to Constantinople, he stay'd some time at Naples, where he died quietly in his
Bed, in spite of all the designs of this proud Empress, who had sent Longinus, a wicked and cruel Man, to succeed him, with Orders to dispatch him. But before I enter upon the General Hi∣story of the Actions of this Prince, 'twill be proper to say something of his Family, lea∣ving the Particulars, which would be too te∣dious to the Genealogists. The House of Nassaw is, without contra∣diction, one of the greatest and ancientest in all Germany. For besides its high Alliances, the number of its Branches, and the honour of giving an Emperour near Four hundred years since, it has this particular advantage to have continued Ten entire Ages, and to boast with the State of Venice, as a Learned Man says, That its Government is founded upon a Basis of a Thousand years stand∣ing. Count Oiho of Nassaw, who liv'd Six hun∣dred years since, had two Wives: The first brought him in Marriage the Country of Guel∣dres, and the other Zulphen, which were pre∣served Three Ages in the House of Nassaw. After him another Count Otho of Nassaw Married the Countess of Viandden, who had great Estates in the Netherlands, above Three hundred years since. His Grandson Engilbert, the first of that Name, Count of Nassaw, Married the Heiress of Laeke and Breda, A. D. 1404, and was Grandfather to Engilbert of Nassaw, the se∣cond of that Name.
This Prince was great in War and Peace. He won the Battle of Guinegaste, punish'd the Rebellion of Bruges, and was Governour-General of the Netherlands under Maximilian the First. He died without Children, and made his Brother Iohn Heir of all his E∣states. This Count Iohn had two Sons, Henry and William. The Lands in the Low-Countries fell to Henry's share, the Eldest; William the Youngest had those of Germany. This is that Henry Count of Nassaw, to whose strong Soli∣citations against Francis the Fifth, Charles the Fifth owed his Empire. This was he, who on the Day of his Coronation put the Impe∣rial Crown upon his Head: Nevertheless, after the conclusion of Peace between those great Princes, when he was sent by the Em∣perour to do Homage for the Counties of Flanders and Artois; King Francis by an in∣credible generosity forgetting all what was pass'd, Married him to Claude de Chalon, on∣ly Sister to Philibert de Chalon, Prince of Orange, who had been brought up by Ann of Bretan his Mother-in-law. By this means Rene de Nassaw, and of Chalons his only Son, was Prince of Orange, after the Death of his Uncle Philibert de Chalons, who died without Issue. William Count of Nassaw Brother to Count Henry, embraced the reform'd Religion, and banish'd the Catholick out of his Dominions. 'Twas he who was the Father of the great William of Nassaw, whose Life I am writing,
who became Prince of Orange, and Lord of all the Estates of the House of Chalons by the Will of Rene de Nassaw, and de Chalon his Cosin German, who was kill'd at the Siege of St. Desier, A. D. 1544. and left no Children behind him. The Emperour Charles the fifth, who was so much obliged to the House of Nassaw, was extreamly concern'd to see this young Prince bred up a Heretick, with much ado he re∣moved him from his Father, and placed him near his Person, in order to his Conversion to the Catholick Religion, which indeed the Prince made a publick profession of as long as the Emperour liv'd, and in the beginning of the Reign of Philip the Third. But the prejudice of the Education and the new Re∣ligion which he had suck'd in with his Milk, and had a taste of afterwards at the Court of France, where the new Opinions were very much in Vogue when he was a Hostage at Paris for the Peace of Cambray, made so strong an Impression on him, that he could never wear it off. His Father Count William of Nassaw had Five Sons and seven Daughters, by Iulienne Countess of Stolbourg. The eldest was this William of Nassaw Prine of Orange. The youn∣gest was Iohn Count of Nassaw, who left a nu∣merous and renowned Posterity behind him. The Three other Sons were Lodowick, Adol∣phus, and Henry of Nassaw, who signaliz'd themselves in the Civil Wars of France and the Netherlands: They were never married,
and all three died with their Swords in their hands, Couragiously seconding the Design of their elder Brother. The Seven Daughters of William of Nas∣saw were all Married, one to the Count of Bergues, who was Mother to that Count de Bergues, who in our days Commanded the Spa∣nish Armies against his Cosin Germans, Prince Maurice, and Henry Frederick, and afterwards quitted the Spanish Service upon some dis∣gust. The other Six were married to Sove∣reign Counts of Germany, one amongst the rest to Count Schouarsbourg, who had the mis∣fortune to be present at Antwerp, when Iohn Iauregny a Biscayner had like to have kill'd the Prince with a Pistol-shot, and at Delft when he was Assassinated by Balthasar Guerard a Native of the Franche Comtè. For she never left her dear Brother, who loved her entirely. William Prince of Orange was of a middle Stature; a brown Complexion, with Chesnut hair, he talked little, thought much, but spoke always to the purpose, and his words passed for Oracles. No private Man in the time of Charles the Fifth liv'd with so much Splen∣dour as the Prince of Orange, he entertained all the Foreign Princes and Ministers at his House, and in short was the Glory of the Emperours Court and his Sons, who in his Proscription which he thunder'd out against the Prince of Orange, having upbraided him with the Favours he had received from him, & how ill he had return'd them, the Prince in
his Apology replyed, that he was so far from having any Obligations to the King, or in∣riching himself in his Service, that he had born the principal Expence of the Court composed of many Nations, the King taking so little care of it, that he was forced to desray it out of his own Pocket. This splendid way of Living, and this en∣gaging manner of insinuating himself into all Peoples Affections, gain'd him the Esteem and Friendship of all the World. Besides he had a great advantage over all the Princes and Lords of the Emperors Court; the House of Nassau having had the Honour to produce the Emperour Adolphus, who was kill'd, A. D. 1298. at the Battle of Spires, upon whom these Verses were made. Anno milleno trecent is his minus annis, In Iulio mense Rex Adolphus cadit ense. When King Philip who had been bred up in Spain, came into the Low Countries in his Fathers Lifetime, there appear'd such a vast difference between the Father and Son, that all the People, and particularly the Nobility, con∣ceived as much Aversion and Contempt for one, as they had Love and Adoration for the other. The Emperour was good Natur'd, easie of Access, treated all sorts of Nations familiarly, and talked to 'em in their own Language, which won him an universal Re∣spect and Veneration. King Philip rarely ap∣peared in publick, wore his Clothes always
in the Spanish Fashion, talked little, and still Spanish, which procured him the general hate of the Nobility, and the People of the Ne∣therlands, who hating and dreading the Pride of the Spaniards that govern'd him, demanded of him in full Assembly of the States held at Gand, to withdraw all foreign Troops out of the Netherlands, and use their own Forces for the Security of the Towns, and make no Stranger Governour of the Low Countries; these Demands surprized, and in∣censed the King, who believed all was done by the Instigation and Contrivance of the Prince of Orange; but concealing his Resentment, he gave the States hopes of complying with their Requests. In this Assembly he made Margaret of Austria his natural Sister, Wife of Octavio Farnese Duke of Parma absolute Governess of the Low Countries, created many Knights of the Golden Fleece, and then Embarked for Spain. At his Departure he left Orders with the Governess, to establish the Spanish Inquisition the in Netherlands, and erect several new Bishopricks. These Inno∣vations were the Original cause of all the Ci∣vil Wars and Confusions, so strange an Aver∣sion had the People for the very name of the Inquisition and the new Bishops, whom they considered as the Agents, and under Officers of the Inquisition. Anthony Perrenot Cardinal de Granville, first Bishop of Arras, and then of Malines, was Minister of State, and had all the Manage∣ment of Affairs under the Dutchess of Parma;
He was Son to Nicholas Perrenot of Besancon, Secretary of State to Charles the Seventh, who for his personal Merit had advanced him from the Quality of a private Citizen. This Cardinal naturally haughty and inso∣lent, treated the Nobility in a very imperi∣ous manner. For which they hated him to that Degree, that at last Count Egmont, Count Horn, and the Prince of Orange, no longer able to bear his insupportable Pride, writ plainly to King Philip, that his Arrogance and violent Proceedings were abhorr'd by all the Nobility and People, and would ruin the Ne∣therlands if he was not recall'd in time. This Remonstrance was considered as a cri∣minal Boldness in Spain, and from that time they took a Resolution to destroy these three Lords, and all their Adherents. But at that Conjun∣cture they were constrained to dissemble and recall the Cardinal. Great disorders hapning in the Netherlands, Count Iohn de Bergues Governour of Hainault, and Iohn de Mont∣morency, Lord of Montigny, Governour of Tor∣nay, were dispatched into Spain, with Orders to acquaint the King with what had passed, and perswade him to compose the Differen∣ces by Mildness and Clemency, rather than by Severity and Roughness. But both losing their Lives there, was a warning to the rest to stand upon their Guard. Assoon as the Prince of Orange, who was a great Politician, knew of the Resolution the King had formed, by the Advice of the Spanish Ministers, and at the instance of Car∣dinal
Granville, who resented his being dri∣ven out of the Low Countries, of sending the Duke of Alva with an Army of Spaniards and Italians into the Netherlands, he wisely judg'd, that the King design'd to revenge himself on the States, for the Demands they had made him, and the forcible removal of the Cardinal, which was generally imputed to him. Knowing besides, that the Altera∣tions which were to be made, would infalli∣bly occasion great Convulsions and Com∣motions; he desired the Governess to request the King to give him leave to resign his Go∣vernments of Holland, Zeland, Utrecht, and Burgundy, which was denied him. He was only perswaded to remove from him his Brother Count Lodowick, who was thought to give him Counsels which were prejudicial to the Peace of the Netherlands. Which he did not think fit to Consent too; no more than the new Oath of Fidelity to the King, which many other great Men refused to take, for this Oath obliging him to root out Here∣ticks, he must consequently have sworn the ruin of his own Wife who was a Lutheran. Be∣sides he alledged, that having already taken the Oath of Fidelity, 'twas needless to take a new one unless they question'd his Fideli∣ty. The same Course was followed by An∣thony de Lalain Count of Hochstrat Governour of Malines, Count Horn, Philip de Montmo∣rency, Admiral of the Low-Countries, and Hen∣ry Brederode, Baron de Viane and Vicount of Utrecht, descended from the Soveraign
Counts of Holland, and by many other Lords. A. D. 1566, in April the Governess, pressing with great heat, the Establishment of the Inquisition, and the New Bishops, Four hundred Gentlemen, headed by Count Lodowick of Nassaw and Count Brederode (the next day arrived the Count de Bergues and Culembourg,) met at Brussels in the Hotel de Culembourg, and had the boldness to present a Petition which they had drawn up, to the Governess in the Palace. The Heads of this Petition were to reject the Inquisition, the New Bishops, and the Publication of the Council of Trent, which they maintained to be contrary to the Interest of the Provinces. This boldness let loose the reins to all the Se∣ditions and Factions in the Netherlands, and occasion'd all the Sacrileges, all the Villainies, and Impieties, the breaking down Images, demolishing Churches, and Altars, &c. which are preserved in History, and are abhorr'd by the Protestants themselves. This famous Petition presented by the No∣bility marching two by two modestly clad, and arm'd only with their Swords, was at first slighted; and Count Barlaymont a great confident of Madam de Parma, because he saw a great many in the Company not so rich as himself, told the Governess, by way of Con∣tempt, that they were a Troop of Beggars, and that she ought to take no notice, or have any regard to 'em. Hence the name Gueux or Beggars, continued to that party, as that of
Hugeunots to the Protestants of France. The confederate Nobility, far from taking offence at this Nick-name, applyed it to themselves, and cloathed themselves all in Gray cloths, and wore little wooden Porringers, and Beg∣gars Bottles in their Hats, and drank Healths publickly to the Gueux or Beggars, at their Entertainments. The Gentlemen who entred into this Asso∣ciation, wore at their Collar a Medal of Gold, on one side of which was stamped the Kings Image, on the reverse two hands joyn'd, hold∣ing a Bag with this Inscription, Fideles au Roy jusque a la besace: Faithful to the King even to the Bag. The greatest Lords on their Footmens Liveries embroider'd Dishes, Bot∣tles, and Beggars Bags, glorying in the Nick∣name, and publishing that they would Sacri∣fice their Fortunes to support so just a Confe∣deracy. About the end of the Year 1566. the Prince of Orange had a Conference at Dender∣monde with Count Egmont, Horn, Hochstrat, and his Brother Lodowick, to consult of means for their own Security, and the good of the Provinces; most of them were of opinion to take up Arms, and oppose the entrance of the Spaniards into the Low Countries, who had a design to ruin them, as the Prince of Orange made appear by Letters of the Spanish Resi∣dent at Paris, which he had intercepted: But Count Egmont Governour of Flanders, and Artois, who had a great Interest with the Soul∣diers, would not hearken to it, but remon∣strated
to the Assembly, that they ought to trust to the King's Clemency and Goodness. Which he repeated again at Villebrook in an∣other Meeting, and the Prince of Orange re∣plyed, That this Clemency of the King would be his ruin; and that the Spaniards would make him a Bridge over which they would pass into Flanders, and which they would break down as soon as they had entred. After this the Prince told him, that since he took so little Care of his safety, he would provide for his own by retiring into Germany. To which the Count answered, Farewell, Prince without Land; and the Prince replyed, Farewell, Count without a Head, which Prophecy prov'd too true. A. D. 1568. the 10th. of February the Spanish Inquisition declared Guilty of High Treason, all those who had not oppos'd the Hereticks of the Netherlands. Which was in effect condemning all the Nobility, which the Council of Spain had a design to destroy, par∣ticularly the Great Men and Governours of Provinces, and those who had presented the Address against the Inquisition: Which the King confirm'd by an Edict, which bore the same Date. This done, he sent the Duke of Alva with an Army of Veterane Souldiers, composed of Spaniards and Italians, to succeed Marga∣ret Dutchess of Parma, in the Government of the Low Countries. The Duke passed from Spain into Italy, where having made a ren∣dezyous of his Troops, he entred into Lux∣emburg,
through Savoy, the County of Bur∣gundy and Lorrain, and crossed all those Coun∣tries without the least complaint of the In∣habitants in so long a March; so severe was the Duke, and so strict an observer of Military Discipline. The Prince of Orange, before the Arrival of the Duke of Alva, retired into Germany to his County of Nassaw, giving out, that under pretence of settling the Inquisition, and o∣ther Illegal things contrary to the Liberties and Privileges of the Provinces, the Spa∣niards design was to force them to rebel, that they might have a plausible pretence of en∣slaving them, and Erecting a Despotick Go∣vernment in the Netherlands, as a revolted, and conquered Nation, in the same manner as they had done with the Indies, Naples, Sicily, Milan and Sardinia. And indeed the severity, and cruelty of the Duke of Alva confirm'd what the Prince gave out; not only to the Provinces, but all the neighbouring Princes, who condemned his unjust and violent Pro∣ceedings, and particularly the Emperour Maximilian, a good natured and a merciful Prince. At his first coming the Duke established a Sovereign Council of twelve Judges, of which he made himself the President. They were all men of the Long Robe, of no Birth nor Merit, except le Sieurs Barlaymont, and Nor∣cairme, who were Gentlemen of Quality. The most eminent was Iohn Vargas a Spa∣niard, so famous for his Cruelty, that the
Spaniards used to say, They had need of as keen a Knife as that of Vargas to cut off the Gangreen of the Low Countries. There was also one Hessels, a Flemming, of this new Coun∣cil, who slept always at the Tryal of Criminals, and when they awaked him to deliver his opi∣nion, he rubbed his Eyes and cryed between sleeping and waking; ad Patibulum, ad Pati∣bulum, to the Gallows, to the Gallows, as William Guerin Advocate General of the Parliament of Provence; who said, when they brought before him, one of Herindol suspected of Heresie, Tolle, Tolle, Crucifige, in Imitation of the Iews. This Hessels was afterwards hanged upon a Tree, without a∣ny form of Justice or Process, by the Go∣vernours of Gand, Imbise and Rihove, whom he had often threatned by his gray Beard to hang. Sentences were often passed by only two or three Judges of this Council, as the Judg∣ment against Strales a Burgomaster of Ant∣werp, which was Sign'd only by Vargas and two other Spaniards. This Council was called by the Duke of Alva, The Council of Troubles, and by his Enemies, The Council of Blood. By the Esta∣blishment of this Council, which was a su∣pream Court of Judicature, the Duke of Alva deprived all the other Councils of the Netherlands of their Power and Jurisdiction: For all men, without Exception, were denied the Liberty of appealing, even the Knights of the Golden Fleece, who by the Statutes of their
Order were to be tryed by their Peers alone, in the Presence of the King: Which was contrary to all Privileges. The Judges of the Country were forbid to take cognizance of the last Troubles; and all the Councils of the Provinces were to Answer before this Tri∣bunal. A rich Burgher was condemned to Death, his hands being tyed behind his Back, being bound to the Tail of a Horse, and mer∣cilesly dragged to the place of Execution. The First and second Days of Iune, Eigh∣teen Lords and Gentlemen were barbarously executed at Brussels; among the rest the two Barons of Battembourg Brothers; Iohn de Montigny Lord of Villiers, and the Lord de Huy a Bastard of the Counts of Namur; Drums beating all the time of their Execu∣tion, that their dying Speeches might not be heard; nor the People stirred up to Compas∣sion by hearing them complain of the In∣justice which had been done to them. The Fifth of Iune following were publick∣ly executed at Brussels, Count Egmont and Count Horn, several Regiments of Native Spaniards being drawn up in the great Square to guard the Execution. I may say, that the Death of these two Lords cost the Spanish King the Low Countries, so universally were they loved and esteemed. The First won the Battle of St. Quintins and Gravelins. The French Resident at Brus∣sels writ to Court, that he had seen that Head cut off, which had twice made France tremble.
Cardinal Granville never feared any of the great Lords of the Netherlands, but the Prince of Orange, for the rest were not capable of forming or maintaining a Party; and when the News was brought to Rome in general, that the Duke of Alva had seized on all the great Lords of the Low Countries; he asked whether Silence was taken, meaning the Prince of Orange, and when they told him, No: he replyed, The Duke had done no∣thing. The Prince of Orange who had put him∣self into a place of Security, was Summoned to appear before the supream Council, who condemned him for not obeying: For he ap∣peal'd to the States of Brabant, his natural Judges, and the King himself, because he was Knight of the Golden Fleece; and consequent∣ly, could not be tryed by subdeligate and suspected Judges, and his professed Enemies, but by the King himself, assisted by his Peers the Knights. Which he represented at large in publick Manifesto's to the Emperour Maximilian and the German Princes, who approved his Rea∣sons, and condemned the violence of the Council of Spain, which went so far as to seize on his eldest Son William Count de Buren, who was arrested in the College of Louvain at the Age of thirteen, contrary to the pri∣vileges of the University, and the Country of Brabant, and afterwards carried Prisoner into Spain.
This hard usage made the Prince resolve to pass the Rubicon, and hazard all as Caesar did, and endeavour to do himself Justice, and have satisfaction for his Injuries by way of Arms. He raised an Army in Germany, and sent it into Friezland under the Command of Count Lodowick his Brother, who made a happy beginning of the Compaign by the entire defeat of Iohn de Ligny, Count of A∣remberg, Governour of the Province, a fa∣mous Captain; who the year before was sent General of a considerable Army into France, to the Assistance of Charles the Ninth, against the Huguenots, who had the boldness to be∣siege him in Paris, after having missed of surprizing him at Meaux. This Count of Aremberg died upon the place: But 'tis said, he revenged his Death by that of Count Adol∣phus of Nassau, Brother to William Prince of Orange, and Count Lodowick, who remained Master of the Field of Battle, of the Bag∣gage, and Artillery of the Spanish Army. But Count Lodowick did not long enjoy the pleasure of this Victory; for the Duke of Alva fell upon him in the same Country with old Disciplin'd Troops, at a time when the Germans, instead of preparing for a vigo∣rous defence against so powerful an Enemy, mutinied and demanded their Pay, and routed his Army, the most part of which were drown'd in the River Ems which lay behind them. Count Lodowick with great difficulty saved his Life which he had certainly lost, if he had not met with a little Boat, and crossed the River
which is very wide as it falling into the Seas, leaving all his Baggage, and Artillery in the hands of the Spaniards. The Prince of Orange, a man of a steady and unshaken Courage in all his misfortunes, without being startled at this Blow, raises an∣other Army of Twenty four thousand Ger∣man Horse and Foot, which he joyned with a Body of Four thousand French, Commanded by Francis de Hangest Lord of Genlis. Before he entred into the Netherlands, he published a Manifesto, in which he lays open the Rea∣sons he had to take up Arms, clears himself of the Crimes he was charged with, excepts against the Bloody Council, and the Duke of Alva who pretended to be his Judge. He owns that he had quitted the Church of Rome, for a Religion which he thought more agreeable to the Holy Scripture; declares that he was forced to make War for the pre∣servation of his Country, and to free it from the Slavery the Spaniards were preparing for it, as in Duty bound, being one of the great Lords of the Netherlands. He hopes that King Phi∣lip whose good Inclinations were obstructed by the ill Counsels of the Spaniards, will one day better consider the Fidelity of the Pro∣vinces, and the Oath he publickly took of preserving their Privileges: He says that the Laws of the Dutchy of Brabant dispense with the Subjects, from paying that obedi∣ence to the Errors and Mistakes of their Prin∣ces, which they only owe to their lawful Commands, which ought to be confor∣mable
to the Customs of the Province. He added that the Brabantines never suffered any Prince to take Possession of the Govern∣ment before they had agreed with him; That if the Prince breaks the Laws, and the Con∣stitutions of the Dutchy, the Subjects shall be absolved from their Oath of Allegiance, till their Injuries are redressed. After this the Prince having passed the Rhine, crossed the Meuse happily between Ruremonde and Mastreicht, though the Duke of Alva was on the other side of the River to dispute the passage with him. He passed his Foot over at a Ford, whilst the Horse who stood above, broke the force of the River; in the same manner as Caesar passed the Ri∣ver Segre near Lerida in Catalonia. The Duke of Alva would not believe the Count of Barlaymont, who brought him the first News of it, but asked him whether the Prince of Orange's Army were Birds. Thus the Prince of Orange entred into Brabant. But the Duke who would not stake the Netherlands upon the Success of a Battle against a fresh Army, and stronger than his own, having fortifyed all the Towns, and covering himself with Rivers, and po∣sting himself very advantageously, laughed at the Prince of Orange, who presented him Bat∣tle every day. For after the Prince had made Twenty nine Incampments, without being able to draw the Duke to an Engage∣ment, being received into no City, contrary to his hopes, and pressed by Famine in a lit∣tle
Country, uncapable of supplying longer so numerous an Army, and his Souldiers mu∣tinying and demanding their Pay, (in one of which Mutinies some Officers were killed in his sight, and he himself had been shot if the Pistol bullet had not lighted on the Pommel of his Sword,) he was forced to disband his Army, which refused to follow him into France, to the Assistance of the Hu∣guenots, the greatest part of the Officers telling him, That they promised to serve only against Spain, not France. He paid the Army with the little ready Money he had, with his Plate, and the Money which the Sale of his Artillery and his Baggage yielded him, engag∣ing to the principal Commanders, his Prin∣cipality of Orange, and his other Lordships for the Security of what he ow'd them. The extraordinary prudence and firmness of the Duke of Alva can never be enough admired, who found out an excellent way of beating his Enemies without fighting, whereas other Victories are usually won by bloody and hazardous Battles. He swore to the Messenger who came from his eldest Son Frederick de Toledo, and Chia∣pin Vitelli, Marquess of Celone, his Mareschal de Camp, to press him to give the Enemies Battle, That 'twas a strange thing they would not suffer him to manage the War as he pleased, and that if any durst talk to him of fighting again, he should never return alive.
This Marquess of Vitelli was a brave Cap∣tain, and had done such great Services to the Duke of Tuscany in his Wars, that King Philip demanded him of the Duke, to Command his Army under the Duke of Alva. He be∣haved himself extreamly well in Flanders, and died in the time of the Commendador de Requi∣sons, who succeeded the Duke of Alva in the Government of the Low Countries. He was so prodigiously Fat, that he was forced to gird up his Belly to be able to walk. As he was a great Eater, and reckoned an Atheist, after his Death the Gueux made this Epitaph on him. O Deus omnipotens, crassi miserere Vitelli, Quem Mors praeveniens non sinit esse bovem. Corpus in Italiâ est, tenet intestina Brabantus; Ast animam nemo, cur? quia non habuit. The Prince of Orange disbanded his Army in Strasbourg, where he arrived from the Ne∣therlands through the Frontiers of Picardy, Champagne and Lorrain. Between le Quesnoy and Cambray, the Prince cut off Eighteen Companies of Foot, and three hundred Horse, and made almost all the Offi∣cers Prisoners. Don Rufillé Henriquus, Son to the Duke of Alva, with many others, were kil∣led upon the place, which was some satisfaction to him for the Blow he had received in Bra∣bant, where Count Hochstrate received a mortal Wound, and died not long after very much regretted by the Prince of Orange, for
his Valour and unmovable Fidelity to his Party. Philip de Morbais Lord of Louverval, was taken Prisoner in the same Action, and afterwards beheaded at Brussels. The Prince out of this great Army reser∣ved to himself only a Body of Twelve hun∣dred Horse, and with his Brothers, Count Lodowick and Henry, joyned the Prince Pala∣tine Wolfgang, Duke of Deuxponts, whom he found ready to enter France, to the Succours of the Huguenots. He was present at the taking of la Charité, which was very hap∣py for that Party, for if the Germans had not made themselves Masters of a passage o∣ver the River Loire, they could never have joyned the Admiral. He was afterwards in the Battle of Roche la ville. D' Avila observes, that the Prince of Orange on this occasion Commanded the main Battle of the Hugue∣nots Army, with the Count de Rochefoucaut, and that Count Lodowick of Nassau his Bro∣ther, signalized himself in the Vanguard against Philip Strozzi, Colonel of the French Infantry, who advancing too forward, was made Pri∣soner by the Huguenots. The same Author assures us, that 'twas at Roche la ville, where the King of Navarre, afterwards Henry the Great, began to give Proofs of the Courage, which he has since made appear on so many dangerous occasions. He was afterwards at the Siege of Poictiers which was fatal to the Huguenots, for when they had ruined their Army before the place, they were forced to raise the Siege to relieve Chatelleraut. At last
he quitted the Camp at Foy la Binese near Richelieu, disguised like a Peasant, with four Men in his Company; and after having cros∣sed Tourrain and Berry with great difficulty, he arrived at la Charité, and then Montbeliard, from whence he retired into his County of Nassau to raise new Forces. His Brother Count Lodowick was afterwards at the Battle of Moncountour, whence he saved himself in Company of the Admiral de Chatillon, and a Body of the Huguenot Horse. This year the Admiral advised the Prince of Orange to give out Commissions for Com∣mands at Sea, to several Persons of Quality, who had been driven out of the Low Coun∣tries by the Duke of Alva, who after ha∣ving put to Death a vast number of Men, forced all People to pay the Tenth penny for the Sale of their Moveables, the Twentieth for immoveables, and the Hundreth pen∣ny for all they possessed. The Admiral assured the Prince, that if he could once set Footing in Holland or in Zealand, Countries very strongly situated, 'twould be difficult to force him out, because he was so well be∣loved by the People, who would never fail him at his need. William Lord of Lumay, descended from the Count de la Mare, was the chief of these Refugees. He and his Associates were called the Sea Gueux by way of distinction from the Land Gueux. This advice of the Admiral was very useful to the Prince of Orange, and was a sort of Prophecy of his Establishment in
those Provinces, for by this means he possessed himself of all Holland and Zealand, and was as Successful and Victorious at Sea, as he had been unfortunate at Land; for 'twas obser∣ved, that in Ten years continual War, the Spaniards were always beaten by the Hollan∣ders at Sea. In the Year 1570. Peace being concluded with the Huguenots, the Court of France, the better to amuse and over-reach the Huguenots, made a shew of employing them against the Netherlands, under the conduct of the Duke of Alenzon, Admiral Colligny, and Count Lo∣dowick of Nassau. The Court pretended to be dissatisfied with the King of Spain, for poysoning Isabella of France his Wife, whose Death the French gave out they would re∣venge, and the Murders of the French that had been Massacre'd in Florida by the Spaniards. They promised to the Prince of Orange by Count Lodowick his Brother, whom they had loaded with Honours and Caresses, a conside∣rable supply of Men and Money, and the Sovereignty of Zealand, Utrecht, and Friezland, and that they would joyn the other Provin∣ces to France. The Prince of Orange, upon these great hopes and appearances which proved false, refused a very advantageous and secure Trea∣ty, which the Emperour, offered him from the part of the King of Spain, and sent For∣ces under the Command of his Brother-in-Law the Count de Bergues, to make an At∣tempt upon Gueldres and Over-Yssel. The
Count took Zutphen and several other places. His Brother Count Lodowick was to make a considerable effort on the side of Hainault, where he surprized Mons, the Capital of that Province, which diversion hindred the Duke of Alva from retaking the Cities of Holland and Zealand that had newly declared against him, and which he might easily have done at a time when they were unprovided of for∣ces and necessaries for their defence. But nothing incensed the Duke of Alva so much as the surprizing of Mons which he resolved to recover at any rate, leaving every thing else to apply himself wholly to this seige, which gave time to the revolted Cities to draw breath, and furnish themselves at Leisure with Men and Ammunition. The brave Defence of Count Lodowick, assisted by Mounsieur de la Nove bras de fer, and many of the French Nobility, made the Siege of Mons very long and difficult. The Spaniards fired above 20000 Canon∣shot against it. In the mean time the Prince of Orange who had retired into Germany, had raised a greater Army than his first, to enter into Brabant, where the Cruelty and Exactions of the Duke of Alva made him hope for better Success than he had in his first Inva∣sion. This Army was to be paid with the money the French Court had promised to sup∣ply him with. Thus the Prince believed with reason that the Spanish Forces would not be able to defend the Low-Countries,
attack'd on so many sides by Land, whilest by Sea they were gauled by the Counts de la Mark, Sonoy, Treton, the Brothers Boisols, and Bertel Entens his Lieutenants in Holland and Zealand, where they had great Success, as I shall afterwards declare. The Spaniards were never in so great dan∣ger of losing the Netherlands as at that Con∣juncture. The hopes of the Prince were not groundless, and in all probability the Spa∣niards had been quite driven out of the Low-Countries, if France had made good its pro∣mises. Thus this great Man, who had so many Strings to his Bow, parted from Germany with a great Army to enter into the Low-Countries, when he found all People driven to despair by the Tyranny of the Duke of Alva, and ready to receive him with open arms. First he was received into Ruremonde, where he passed his Army over the Bridge into Brabant. Louvain gave him a sum of money, and Malines opened its Gates to him, which cost that poor City very dear. The Duke of Alva was absent at the Siege of Mons which he resolved to take, and the Prince designed to relieve, as well to save so important a Place, as to deliver his brother Lodowick from the danger he was in. But Mr. de Genlis who marched from France to the relief of the place with 7000 Horse and Foot, having been defeated and taken Priso∣ner by Frederick de Toledo, who had gone out to meet him, upon the secret intelligence
which he received from the Court of France of his marching towards Mons, and the con∣dition of his Forces. The Prince having at∣tempted in vain to raise the Siege, for the Duke of Alva had intrenched himself so strongly that 'twas impossible to force his lines, and at the same time understanding by the discharging of the great Guns and other signs of rejoycing in the Camp, of the Mas∣sacre of St. Bartholomew, where Admiral de Chatillon and all his principal friends had been kill'd, and having no hopes from the French who had deceived him, but on the contrary having all the reason in the world to be apprehensive of so great a Kingdom which had declared against his party and religion, he advised his brother Lodowick to make an honourable Composition, which was granted him, and he himself retired by small Marches towards the Rhine. In this retreat he was in great danger of being kill'd by the Enemies and his own Soldiers. For the Ger∣man officers talked of arresting him to se∣cure the payment of their arrears, which they were promised should be paid at their arrival in Brabant, where he expected to receive the money the French had promi∣sed him. But this eloquent and engaging Prince appeas'd the mutiny, by assuring them 'twas not his fault, and satisfied them with promises and the little ready money he had. On the other side he was in great danger of his Life at Malines; 800 Spanish Horse, who had chosen men mounted behind them,
entered into his Camp by night, and pierced as far as his tent, and would have killed him as he slept, if a little dog who lay in his Bed, had not waked him by scratching his face with his claws; the greatest part of the Spa∣niards being cut off, he marched strait on to the Rhine, where he disbanded his Army at Orsay, and went through Over-Yssell to U∣trecht, and thence to Holland and Zealand, which had declared for him, all except Middleburg and Amsterdam, in the follow∣ing manner. Whilest the Prince of Orange was a Refugee in France and Germany, and wandring from Province to Province, William de la Mark Bo∣issols. Siegneurs de Lumay, Sonoy, Treton, the Bois∣sols Entens, and others who acted under the Orders of the Prince, turned Pirates and practised the trade a long time with great Success, till having no longer a retreat in the Ports of England, which Queen Elizabeth denied them at the instance of the Duke of Alva, and for Fear of making the Spaniards her Enemies, the Count de la Mark and the rest, designing to seize a Port in North-Holland or Friezland, were obliged by the contrary Winds to put in for shelter, with 30 great and Small Ships, into the Isle of Vorn in Hol∣land where the Brill is, which they took by surprize, having found it without a Garrison, which was sent to punish Utrecht for refusing to pay the tenth penny. This Count de la Mark was a rash and a cruel man. He swore never to shave his
Beard nor Head till he had revenged the death of Count Egmont and Horn. When he had surprized the Brill, which signifies Spectacles in the Flemish Tongue, he had him∣self painted in a large piece, with the Duke of Alva behind, whom he stood and put Spectacles on his Nose by way of Derision, it being a term of Contempt in Holland, to say a man wants light. He put ten pieces of Money in his colours in hatred of the Imposition which the Duke of Alva had established, and to make him more odious. The Count de Bossut Governor of Holland for the Spaniards, made a fruitless attempt to drive them out of the Brill. Many other Cities of Holland, viz Horn, Alkmar, Edam, Goude, Oudewater, Leyden, Gorcum, Harlem, and all Zealand, except Middleburg, following the Example of the Brill, abandoned the Duke of Alva, and declared for the Prince of Orange. Flushing, a considerable City and Port of Zealand, was one of the first that re∣volted, by the perswasion of the Priest, who on Easter-day, as he was saying Mass, exhor∣ted the People to recover their Liberty. This Air of sedition having blown the People into a flame, they immediately went to their Arms, and forced the Spanish Garrison to leave the place. But they arrested Alvarez Pa∣checo, a Spaniard and Relation of the Duke of Alva, who was superintendant of the For∣tifications of the Cittadel which was building at Flushing. He was immediately hanged
by order of Treton, who revenged on him the death of his brother, who had been be∣headed by the Duke of Alva at Brussels 4 years before. Pacheco in vain represented that he was a Gentleman, and desired the fa∣vour to be beheaded, but he was hanged pub∣lickly on a Gibbet. I wonder at the variety of opinions I have met with in the most famous Historians of the Netherlands concerning this Pacheco. Grotius says he was a Savoyard, though Ben∣livoglio, Strada, Meursius and Emanuel de Metteren, do all agree he was a Spaniard. Car∣dinal Bentivoglio says he was beheaded, and others write that he was hanged: on the o∣ther side Meursius calls this Gentleman who was executed, a Relation of the Duke of Alva, Pacioli, although the others call him Pacheco, confounding this Pacheco with Francis Paciotti of Urbin, Count de Montefabre, so fa∣mous for his skill in fortifications and other engines of War, that when he had built the Cittadel at Antwerp, his name was given to one of the Bastions by order of the Duke of Alva, the four others were called the Duke, Ferdinand, Toledo and Alva, not one by the name of the King his Master But to return to this Pacheco, Emanuel de Metteren, though a very exact Historian, names him Pierre Pa∣checo, though Famianus Strada, who was better informed, names him Alvarez. Which shows that the greatest men are liable to mistakes. The Sea Gueux in requital of the Duke of Alva's cruelty, hanged all the Prisoners they
made without distinction, but the Spaniards they tyed by couples back to back and threw them into the Sea. As soon as the Prince of Orange arrived in Holland and Zealand, he made the Sieur Die∣deric or Theoderick de Sonoy, a Friezland Gen∣tleman, his Lieutenant in North-Holland, o∣therwise called Westfrise, and Charles Bissol Governor of Flushing, and his Brother Lewis Boissol Admiral These two Gentlemen were of Brussles, and being condemned by the Duke of Alva, follow'd the ortunes of the Prince of Orange. About that time the States of Holland and Zealand met at Dordrecht, where they acknow∣ledg'd the Prince of Orange for their Gover∣nour, though he was absent, and obliged themselves by oath never to abandon him, and the Prince in like manner swore by his proxy Philip de Marnix Sieur de St. Aldegonde, to continue inviolably devoted to their inte∣rests. 'Twas observed in this Assembly that St. Aldegonde gave his hand to all the Deputies of the States, and they to him, in token of their mutual confidence and fidelity. William Count de la Mark then present, was declared Lieutenant of the Prince of O∣range, but rebelling some time after against the Prince with his confidentt Bertel Entens as rash as himself; they were both seized on, and they would have proceeded to the Trial of the Count, if the consideration of his al∣liances and great services had not pleaded for him, for he had been guilty of great cruelties
to some good Ecclesiasticks which deserved a severe punishment. After he was out of Prison he retired to Leige where he died of the bite of one of his mad dogs. The Prince did all things in the Name of the States, though he had all the Power of the Government in his own hands, such an intire confidence had the People in him. There were anciently but six Cities in Hol∣land that had right to vote in the States, viz, Dordrecht, Harlem, Leyden, Delft, Amsterdam and Goude, the Prince added twelve others to these six, viz, Rotterdam, Gorcum, Schedam, Sconen, la Brille, Alkmar, Horn, Enkhusen, Edam, Munikedam, Medimblet and Purme∣rend, that he might engage these Cities in his interest by the honour he had done them, and that they might be the better affected to him in the assembly of the States, and ease the publick miseries and grievances the more effectually by being acquainted with them. He had the absolute disposal of all Employ∣ments and charges, but refused the name of King and contented himself with the Power. At that time he banished all the Romish Ce∣remonies out of the Churches, that this dif∣ference of Religion might out off all means of an accommodation with the Spaniards who were sworn Enemies to the new opinions. A. D. 1572 the Duke of Alva, after the recovery of Mons, being very much indispo∣sed, sent his Son Don Frederick de Toledo, to take the Cities of Holland and Guelderland that had revolted from him. Don Fre∣derick
resolved to make Malines an Example, for opening its Gates to the Prince of Orange: He did not think it enough to pillage the Town for several days together, but per∣mitted his Souldiers to commit all sorts of Cruelties and Barbarities, even to ravish the Women, without excepting the Nuns. After this he marched against the Marquess of Ber∣gues, routed him, and possessed himself of all the Towns he had won, among the rest of Zutphen, which he mercilesly gave up to the Plunder of his Army. He retook Narden and intirely de∣stroyed it, cutting off the Innocent and Guilty without distinction of Age or Sex, and con∣trary to the Promise which Iulian Romero a Spanish Colonel, had made to the Burghers of saving their Lives, He burnt the Houses, razed the Walls, let the dead Bodies lie Three whole Weeks in the Streets without Burial. An ex∣cess of Barbarity which was considered by the most Cruel, rather as a detestable Villainy, than a just Punishment for their revolts. This made Harlem take a Resolution to hold out to the last Extremity, having to do with so Merciless a Conqueror. The Dutch Historians write that the Art of Printing was begun at Harlem, A. D. 1440. by Laurence le Contre, and Thomas Pieterson his Son-in-Law; but that their Factor Iohn Fau∣stus betraying them, carried away the Let∣ters to Amsterdam, then to Cologne, and from thence to Mayence, where he stopt, and where Iohn Guttemburg, a German Gentleman, who is commonly reckoned the Inventor of Print∣ing, improved it very much.
Wibald Riperda a Friezland Gentleman, Commanded in the City of Harlem, and Don Frederick declared, that he would make use of no other Keys to enter the City than his Canon. But this proved a long and a bloody Siege, having lasted from December 1572. to Iuly 1573. The Spaniards lost above Four thousand Men before it, among others the Sieur Crossonier, Great Master of the Artillery, and Bartholomew Campi de Besoro an excellent En∣gineer. There was so great a Famine in the City, that a little Child Three years old was dug up by its Parents some days after it was bu∣ried, to prolong their miserable Life. During this Siege Don Frederick, tired with its length, and despairing of good Success, talked of re∣turning into Brabant; but the Duke of Alva, blaming his impatience, sent him word that if he resolved to raise the Siege he himself would come in Person, sick as he was to car∣ry it on. But if his Indisposition hindred him, he would send into Spain for his Mother to supply the place of her Son. This reproach made Don Frederick resolve to continue the Siege. In the heat of the Siege, the Spaniards ha∣ving thrown into the City the Head of a Man with this Inscription; The Head of Philip Konigs, (id est, King,) who came to relieve Har∣lem with an Army of Two thousand Men, and aftewards another with this Inscription; The Head of Anthony le Peintre, who betrayed Mons to the French. The Inhabitants of Har∣lem,
put to Death eleven Spanish Prisoners, and put their Heads into a Barrel which by Night they rolled into the Enemies Camp: With this Inscription. The Citizens of Harlem pay the Duke of Alva ten Heads, that he may no longer make Waer upon them for the Payment of the Tenth penny, which they have not yet paid, and for Interest they give him the Eleventh Head. As they had hopes that the Siege would be raised, they suffered themselves to be tran∣sported to prophane Mockeries, making the Images of Priests, Monks, Cardinals, and Popes, and then tumbled them down from the top of the Walls, after they had stabbed them in a hundred places At last the City being reduced to the grea∣test extremity, by an unheard of Famine, which swept away above Thirteen thousand Persons, and all hopes of relief being vani∣shed by the defeat of the Succours, which the Count de la Mark, and the Baron de Balem∣berg were bringing to the City, they were obliged to surrender at Discretion, by the Crys of the Women and Children, for the Men had resolved to Sally out in a Body, and cut out an honourable passage with their Swords through the Enemies Army. The Spaniards forced the Citizens to pay a great Summ of Money, to hinder the en∣tire Destruction of the place; and hang'd and drown'd above Two thousand Persons in some few days; among others all the Ministers, the principal Men of the City, and the Offi∣cers of the Troops. Wibald Riperda Gover∣nour,
and Lancelot a Bastard Son to Brede∣rode, were both beheaded. The Cruelty of the Spaniards at Harlem, in∣stead of doing their Cause Service, ruin'd it, and made the People resolve rather to suffer the last Miseries, than submit to so Cruel and Tyran∣nical a Government. Thus the little City of Alkmar bravely repulsed all their Attacks, and the Prince of Orange surprized Gertrudem∣berg which belonged to him in his own Right, and which covered Dordrecht. About the same time Maximilian de Henin, Count de Bossut, a famous Captain, and very much valued by the Duke of Alva, who was made Governour of Holland, was taken in the Zuider-Zee, which is the Sea of Amsterdam, and his Fleet defeated by that of the Prince of Orange. His great Ship was also taken, which he called the Inquisition to reproach the Dutch, with the principal Cause of their revolt. This Count was carried to Horn, where he remained Prisoner Four years, till the Pacifi∣cation of Ghent. The Spaniards having taken Prisoner at the Hague, Philip de Marnix Sieur de St. Aldegonde, Minister of State to the Prince of Orange, he assured the Duke of Alva, that he would treat the Count de Bos∣sut, in the same manner as he did St. Alde∣gonde. The Prince of Orange can never be enough commended for his good Nature, in treating the Count with so much Kindness, and Ci∣vility, though not long before he had cor∣rupted a Burgomaster of Delft, and prevailed
upon him to betray the Prince, and deliver him into his hands, whilst he was walking out of the City. But the Conspiracy was disco∣vered by a Letter intercepted from the Count to the Burgomaster. About that time the Duke of Alva and his Son were recalled into Spain; King Philip ha∣ving found out too late, that their Cruelty confirmed the▪ Low-Countries in their Rebel∣lion. Lewis de Requesens, great Commander of the Order of St. Iames in Castile, and Go∣vernour of Milan, who had a great share in the famous Victory of Lepanto, succeeded the Duke of Alva in the Government of the Ne∣therlands. The Duke at his Departure boast∣ed, that he had put to Death by the hands of the Hangman, above Eighteen thousand Men, yet cruel Vargas who returned into Spain with him, cryed at parting, that his Clemency and Gentleness had lost the King the Netherlands. A. D. 1574. Middleburg the Capital City of Zealand, having been a long time defend∣ed by that renowned Captain Christopher de Mondragon, and endured a great Famine, and after the defeat of the Spanish Fleets, who attempted in vain to reliee it, was re∣united to the rest of the Province. This Siege lasted two years, and the Spaniards spent above Seven Millions in the several Fleets they set out to Succour it. The Prince of Orange so successful at Sea, had always ill Luck at Land. For the fourth Army which Count Lodowick of Nassau
brought him out of Germany, to assist him in driving out the Spaniards from the rest of Hol∣land, was defeated near Nimeguen by Sancho D'Avila, a General of great Experience, who from a private Souldier, had advanced him∣self, through all the Degrees and Employ∣ments of War, to that great Command. The Germans of Count Lodowicks Army, instead of providing for their own, and their General's Defences, fell to Mutiny according to their u∣sual Custom, and demand their Pay. In this Action, Count Lodowick and his Brother Count Henry of Nassau, and Christopher Count Palatine, were all three killed. D'Avila remai∣ned Master of the Field of Battel, of Sixteen pieces of Canon, and all the Baggage. This Battel was fought in the beginning of the Go∣vernment of Requesens. The Prince of Orange who loved his Brothers tenderly, was sensi∣bly afflicted with this loss. But he abated no∣thing of his Constancy and Courage. A. D. 1575. the Spaniards, encouraged by the defeat and death of the two Brothers of the Prince of Orange, laid Siege to the City of Leyden, which after a long and unparallell'd Famine, was miraculously saved by breaking down the Banks, which drowned a great many Spaniards, and by the Succours which was conveyed into the City, by an infinite number of Boats that swam on the Lands that were overflown. When the Prince represented to the States, the Damage which the breaking down the Dikes would occasion, they replyed, that a
Country spoiled was worth more than a Country lost. But in regard this was a very memorable Siege I think fit to say in general, that they had built two hundred flat bottomed Boats, with Twelve, thirteen, fourteen, sixteen, and eighteen Oars. The greatest carried two pieces of Canon before, and two on the sides; they sent for Eight hundred Seamen from Zealand, who had all little pieces of Paper in their Hats with this Inscription; Rather serve the Turk than the Pope and Spaniard, upbraiding them with the violence they used to their Bodies and Consciences. This Fleet was Commanded by the Admiral Louis Bossut. One of the Seamen having plucked out the Heart of a Spaniard, eat it publickly all raw, and bloody, so violent is the Aversion and Passion of these Country-men. They had no Bread in the City for Seven weeks, and their daily allowance to a Man was half a Pound of Horse-flesh or Beef, but by good Fortune to the City, that very day the Spaniards drew off, Twenty six Fathoms of the Wall fell down, and a North wind dryed up the greatest part of the Water, and they must unavoida∣bly have fallen into the power of the Spani∣ards, if they had stayed only one day longer. Such an Accident happened at Rochelle, for a little after the surrender, a tempest broke down a great part of the Bank. In this Siege they made Paper Money with this Inscription: Haec libertatis imago. They Coyned Tin Money at Alkmar, and had Five
hundred Rix dollars for Five thousand pieces of that Coin. Before the Relief of Leyden, Ferdinand de la Hoy, the new Governour of Holland, and the Sieur de Liques, Governour of Harlem, sollici∣ted the Citizens of Leyden to surrender, flat∣terring them with a good and favourable Treatment. They answered him only with this Latin Verse, Fistula dulce canit voluerem dum decipit anceps. Continuing to perswade them by Letter to a Surrender, they replyed, That they would defend themselves to the last Extremity, and that if they hadspent all their Provisions, and had eaten their left hands, they should have still their right hands remaining, to guard themselves from the Tyranny of the Spa∣niards, and that they remembred the Cruel∣ties which had been committed at Malines, Zutphen, Harden, and Harlem. The Prince of Orange after the relief of Leyden, was received into the City as a God. He preserved and embalmed seven Pigeons in the Town-house, in token of his perpetual Acknowledgement of the Service they did him in carrying the Letters of the besieged to him, and his Answers back again. At that time he founded the University of Leyden, setled annual Revenues upon it, and endow'd it with great Privileges.
The Year before, the Prince, having lost his second Wife Anne of Saxe, married Char∣lotte de Bourbon, Daughter to the Duke of Montpensier, who had retired to the Court of Frederick the Third Elector Palatine. The Marriage was celebrated at the Brill, where she was conducted from Heydelberg, by the Siegneur de St. Aldegonde. She had been a Nun formerly, and Abbess of Iouarre. The Father, a zealous Catholick, demanded his Daughter of the Elector, by Monsieur the President de Thou, and after that by Monsieur D'Aumont. The Elector offered to restore her to the King, provided she might be allowed the free exercise of her Religion, but Mr. de Montpensier choosing rather to have his Daughter live at a distance from him, than see her before his Eyes make profession of a Religion, which was so much his Aversion, gave at last his Consent to the Marriage, and gave her a Fortune. After the Siege of Leyden, a Treaty of Peace was set a foot at Breda, but it did not take effect. The States of Holland and Zea∣land demanded the departure of the Spaniards out of the Netherlands, the meeting of the States General, and the liberty and exercise of their Religion. Requesens, on the contrary, of∣fered to withdraw the Spaniards, and a gene∣ral Act of Oblivion of all things passed, and the Re establishment of their Privileges, but added that the King of Spain would never to∣lerate any other Religion in his Dominions, than the Roman Catholick.
The Treaty of Peace being broken of, the States Coyned Money, on one Side of which was stamped the Lyon of Holland, holding a naked Sword with this Motto; Securius bellum pace dubiâ, War is safer than a doubtful Peace. About the same time the Commander Re∣quesens made himself Master of Zirczee in Zea∣land, by the incomparable Gallantry of Chri∣stopher de Mondragon, who waded over seve∣ral Leagues of the Sea to the Amazement of all the World, and the great hazard of his Troops. But Requesens dying not long after, the Spanish and German Soldiers mutinyed for want of Pay, and fell to ravage all the Coun∣try. They sack'd Maestritcht, and Antwerp it self, where the loss was computed at Twen∣ty four Millions in Money and other movea∣bles, and in the Destruction of houses. The plundering of this great City lasted several days, and was called the fury of the Spa∣niards, many of whom made their Guards of their Swords and Corselets of pure Gold, but the Goldsmiths of Antwerp mixed Cop∣per with it. The Spaniards made Prisoners in Antwerp, Count Egmont, the Seigneur de Goignie, and the Baron de Capres. This last making a low Bow to Hieronimo Rhode chief of the Muniteers, who sate in an Elbow Chair at the entrance of the Citadel, received a kick in the Belly from this insolent Spaniard, who told him by way of Scorn, that he had nothing to do with his reverence.
The Spanish and German Troops after the taking of Antwerp, living with insupporta∣ble Licentiousness, and committing great Bar∣barities, the Provinces who continued firm to the obedience of the King of Spain, called in the Prince of Orange to their assistance, for they lay exposed to all the Robberies and In∣solence of those Mutineers, and declared the Spaniards Enemies to the King and Country. At that time all the Provinces of the Low Countries, except Luxemburg which is divided from the rest, united for their common de∣fence, and made the famous Treaty of Peace at Ghent, A. D. 1576. containing Twenty five Articles, the principal of which were, That there should be a general Amnesty of all that was past. That all things should continue in the same po∣sture they were in at that time. They took a solemn Oath to mutually assist each other to free the Country from the Yoke of the Spaniards and other Foreigners. That all Placarts and Condemnations, which were made upon the Account of the late Troubles, should be suspended till the meeting of the States General. That all Prisoners particularly the Count de Boissut should be set at Liberty. That the Pillars, Trophies and Statues with Inscriptions, which had been Erected by the Duke of Alva should be pluck'd down, particularly that which was set up in the Court of Antwerp, and the Pyramid he had raised, in the place where the
Hotel de Culembourg stood, which he had ra∣zed, because the Nobility met there to draw up an Address against the Inquisition. At that time all Men believed the King of Spain had entirely lost the Nether∣lands, for he was forced to comply with the time, and ratify and approve the Peace. In pursuance of this Treaty the Castles of Ghent, Valenciennes, Cambray, Utrceht and Gro∣eningen were demolished; all Friezeland de∣clared for the States, and Gaspar de Robb who had married the Heiress of Billy and Male∣pert, Governour of the Province was laid close Prisoner in the Town-house of Groeningen with Irons on his Legs. This Gaspar a Man of Sense and Courage, was Son to King Phi∣lip's Nurse, and Native of Robb in Portugal. He was advanced and employed by Marga∣ret of Parma, and in her time was Gover∣nour of Philipville. He was released out of Prison, by Vertue of the perpetual Edict, which was made under the Government of Don Iohn of Austria. Christopher de Vasquez who had hid himself in the Monastery of the Cordeliers, shaved and disguised like a Monk, was also taken; and carried in that Habit into the great Square of Groeningen, the people crying out in Mockery. that they had got a new Bishop favourer of the Inquisition. Upon this Subject, I cannot forbear observ∣ing, how addicted the People of these Countries are to turn their Enemies into Ridicule upon
the least good Success, as they did after the ta∣king of Levarden in Friezland, for the States hav∣ing surprized it, they brought all the Monks, and Priests into the great Square, where their Troops were drawn up in Battalia, and pla∣ced them by Ranks, between the Ranks of the Souldiers, and then conducted them out of the City in the same order, at the sound of Fises and Drums, with incredible Mocke∣ries, and there left them without do∣ing them any other injury than laughing at them. They had already given Proofs of this In∣clination to Derision and Raillery, after the surprizing of the Brill, in that Picture which I mentioned before, where Count de la Mark put Spectacles on the Duke of Alva's Nose, and at Harlem; where the Citizens believing, That Don Frederick de Toledo would raise the Siege, made Processions of Images clad like Monks, Priests, and Cardinals, holding the Figures of the blessed Sacrament, which they flung down from the tops of their Walls. I my Self at Twelve years old, observed the particular bent of this Nation to Mocke∣ry. My Father who was Embassador into Holland, had put to Board in the Year 1622. with Doctor Iohn Gerard Vossius a German, and Native of Heidelburg, who has published a vast number of Learned works: My elder Brother, my Self, and my younger Brother called Daniel, who was killed in the Battle of Harlingen, in the Year 1645, who had so great a Genius for the Mathematicks, that he
would have equal'd, the Reputation of Gali∣leus, and Archimedes, if Death had not snatch'd him away in the flower of his Age. That Year 1622. Maurice Prince of Orange; hav∣ing forced the Marquess Ambrose Spinola, to raise the Siege of Bergen-op-zoom, assisted by Count Ernest of Mansfield, and Duke Chri∣stian of Brunswick; the Cities of the Low Countries were transported, with inexpressible Joy. Among others Leyden joyned Derision to its publick rejoycings. This Doctor's House stood before the Square of the Church call'd Hoguetanskirk, where was one of the great∣est Bonfires. Upon the top of the Pile was placed a great Spinning Wheel, which they call Spin in Dutch, and round it little Tickets of Paper, on which was written the Name of Spinola General of the Spanish Army. Upon the Cord of the Wheel there were other Tickets, with the Names of Gonsolvo de Cor∣doua, one of the chief Commanders of the Spanish Army. Upon the Wheel was a great Distaff loaded with Flax, which they call Ulas∣que in Dutch, and upon it was writ the Name of Don Louis de Valasco, General of the Horse; this done they put Fire to it, and the People over-joy'd, fancied they had burnt these Gene∣rals with their Names. This bears some Re∣semblance with the Rebus's of Picardy, and ac∣quainted me at that time, with the raillying Humour of these People. Pursuant to this Inclination of the People, 'twas reported with probability, some years since, That the Sieur van Beuningen, which
is the Sieur du Boudon in French, had caused himself to be ingraved an a Medal, like another Ioshua making the Sun stand still, meaning that he had put a stop to, and been the Iupiter Stator of the French King's Conquests, who had taken the Body of the Sun for his device. But Persons very well informed, have assured me that 'twas a scan∣dal fastned on him, to cast an Odium upon him, and his Nation, at our Court, and that the Medal was never seen, nor had ever any Being, unless in the Imaginations of those Men, who contrived the Story. It is true, That the united Provinces, af∣ter the Peace of Aix la Chapelle, all the Ho∣nour of which they assum'd to themselves, puffed up with the Glory of a Treaty, which they imagined so advantageous to them, Coyned Medals with a pompous Motto, which their Enemies call'd proud, and which as I am assured was this, Assertis Legibus & sacris, Defensis exteris Regibus, Vindicata perorbem Christianum Marium libertate, Egregiâ pace virtute Armorum partâ. Batavia P. Which I thus translate in favour of the Ladies. Having vindicated our Religion and Laws, And defended Foreign Kings, our Allies,
And established the security of Navigation in the Seas of the Christian World, and made a glorious Peace by the force of our Arms, the States-General, &c. The Consideration of which made Mon∣sieur de Lamoignon, the greatest and most famous Man in France for his Learning and Vertue, say to me, that the Romans, after the Destruction of Numantia, and Carthage, the Rival of their Empire, could not have talked of their Victories in more lofty and magnificent Terms. At the end of the Year 1671. the States-General seeing that those Medals drew upon them the Envy and Hatred of the most pow∣erful Monarchs, suppressed them as well as they could, by breaking the Coins and Molds, insomuch as there remain very few unless in the Hands of the Curious. These proud Medals with the continual and insolent Reflections of the Amsterdam Gazzette, which took a Liberty of openly rallying all things without sparing Crowned Heads, which ought always to be respected. was not the least Motive of the last War. 'Tis this gave credit to the imaginary Medal of the Sieur Van Beuningen, whose Airy and Extravagant Discourses made any thing to be believed of him. Upon this Subject I may affirm with Rea∣son, that those Men are the wisest who are never arrogant in good Fortune, which ma∣ny easily change into bad by the ordinary
Revolutions of the Affairs of this World, which suffer nothing to be settled or lasting Besides Moderation make Men lamented when they are unhappy; but we rejoice at the Misfortune of Insolent persons. When Duke Charles of Burgundy had been defeated by the Suisses, he sent the Seigneur de Contay his Favorite, to Louis the XI. at Lyons, to court his Friendship in the most humble and submissive Terms imaginable, contrary to his usual Custom; upon which Philip de Comines says these very Words, If a Prince would take my Advice, he should behave himself with so much Moderation in Prosperity, that he should never be forced to change his Language in Ad∣versity. He adds, that the Seigneur de Con∣tay, as he pass'd through Lyons, had the Mor∣tification to hear Songs sung in honour of the victorious Suisses, and to the disgrace of his Ma∣ster, whom they had routed. But most Princes and Ministers display all their Sails to the favourable Gales of good Fortune, without thinking of contrary Winds which often shipwrack them. Since we have been talking of the Sieur Beuningen or Boudin in French, I make this Observation, that at the Beginning of the War, the principal Officers and Ministers of Holland had very odd pleasant Names. Their great manager of Business was the Sieur de Boudin, in English, Pudding; their Mareschal de Camp the Sieur Urst, dead lately at Hamburgh, (he was of Holstein, of mean Birth, and raised his Reputation by
defending Cracovia so long time for the Swedes against the Imperialists.) Urst in Dutch signifies Hogs Guts season'd; their o∣ther General that defended Groeningen and retook Grave, was the Sieur de Rabenhaupt, which is Ravens-Head; and one of their Colonels was Paen, Bread, and Vin, Wine, who had his Head cut off. 'Twas observed also that the Swedish Mi∣nisters and Commanders had strange Names, Oxenstiern signifies Ox-forehead. One of their most Famous Colonels was called Douffell, which is Devil, who was killed at the Battle of Leipsick; and another Sthtang, a Serpent; and Colonel Wolfe, who defended Stetin so bravely. I am of Opinion these Digressions will not be disagreeable to the Reader, which serve to divert and refresh him after he has been tir'd with Narrations all of the same Nature. This has been practised by Herodotus and o∣thers with general Approbation. But to return to our principal Subject, the Affairs of the Low Countries. Don Iohn of Austria, natural Son to Charles the V. Fa∣mous for the Victory of Lepanto, succeeded the Commander de Requesens in the Govern∣ment of the Netherlands, and arrived at Luxemburg the very day that Antwerp was sack'd. He went Incognito through France, and passed for an Attendant of Octavio de Gonzague, and saw Henry the III. at Dinner; and at Paris he was informed of the State of the Low Countries by Don Diego de Zunega the Spanish Embassador.
Don Iohn of Austria despised the Dutch, and thought them very easy to be imposed upon, as did the Duke of Alva, who used to say, he would stifle the Hollanders in their Butter. But these heavy stupid Men, as he thought them, having more Solidity and good Sense than florid Wit, easily discovered that he had a design to deceive them by fair Words and affected Civilities. He was at that time thirty years old, a man of high and ambitious Thoughts: He had formed a Project of making himself King of Tunis by the Assistance of the Pope, but King Philip would never hearken to it. Af∣terwards being made Governour of the Low-Countries, he had a design to depose Queen Elizabeth, and rescue Mary Queen of Scots, whom he pretended to marry by the Favour of the Guises her Relations, who encouraged him to this Attempt for their own private Interests. These vast Designs gave great Jealousy to King Philip, who was apprehen∣sive with Reason, left a war-like Prince as he was and who had won so much Reputa∣tion over all Europe, by gaining the Battle of Lepanto, by this new Accession of Power, suffering himself to be hurried away with his Ambition and the natural desire of Empire, should one day endeavour to make himself Master of his Dominions to the prejudice of his Children. These Thoughts frightned him extreamly, with Reflection on the old Example of Iugurtha, who, though a Ba∣stard, possessed himself of the Kingdom of
Masinissa by the Murder of the lawful Heir; and the fresher Instance in his own Family, of Henry the Bastard, his Predecessor, who dispossessed and put to death Pedro the Cruel the lawful King of Castile. King Philip, who to rid himself of the like Fears had not spared his own Son Don Carlos, had more Wit than to suffer any longer the just Grounds of Su∣spicion which his bastard Brother gave him, he resolved to set himself at ease of that side. Iohn d' Estovedo Secretary to Don Iohn, who was accused of inspiring his Master with these ambitious Designs, being dispatched into Spain about some Affairs of consequence, he was privately assassinated by Antonio Pe∣rez, Secretary of State, and Favorite to King Philip, by his Orders; whose death made all the World believe, that Don Iohn's, which happened not long after, had been hastned. Upon Don Iohn's arrival into the Nether∣lands, his favouring the Spaniards who were declared publick Enemies, made a Rupture between him and the States, who took up Arms against him by the Advice of the Prince of Orange. He earnestly exhorted them not to suffer themselves to be deceived by the false Hopes which Don Iohn gave them from the Part of the King of Spain, representing to them that angry Princes dis∣semble for some time, but they never forget an Injury but when 'tis out of their Power to revenge it, and that they are sparing of no Words nor Promises to conceal their Re∣sentments;
quoting that Maxim of the Ro∣man Emperours, that They who had offended their Princes ought to be numbered among the dead. In fine, the perpetual Edict was conclu∣ded between the States on one side, and Don Iohn on the other in the Name of the King, by the Mediation of the Emperour Rodolphus and the Duke of Cleves and Iuliers, on the 17th of Febr. An. Dom. 1577. By this the Treaty of Ghent was ratified, a gene∣ral Amnesty granted, and the holding of the States. The Departure of the Spaniards and Germans out of the Low-Countries was agreed to, and that they should leave behind them all the Provisions, Ammunitions and Atille∣ry which were in their Garrisons. The Spa∣niards promised to punish the Soldiers who had been guilty of so many Outrages, and to set at Liberty the Count de Burin Prisoner in Spain. But the Prince of Orange, and the States of Holland and Zealand, entered their Protestation against the Edict, maintaining, That a great many things, particularly those which related to Religion had not been suffi∣ciently explained. In pursuance of this perpetual Edict, the Spaniards went out of the Castle of Ant∣werp, and Philip de Croy Duke of Arschoite was made Governour of it, who took an Oath publickly bare-headed to Iohn Escove∣do, that he would keep the Castle of Ant∣werp for King Philip his Master and deliver it up to no Man but Himself or his Successors,
but by his express Command; to which Es∣covedo replyed, If you perform what you pro∣mise, God will help you; if not, the Devil take you, Body and Soul! and all the standers by cryed, Amen. By Virtue of this Edict all Prisoners were released on both sides, the Count Egmont, the Sieur de S. Goignie, the Sieur de Capres, and others in the Custody of the Spaniards, and Gaspar de Robb, and others by the States. This done, Don Iohn was received into Brussels in great State, as Governour-general of the Low-Countries: But beginning to op∣press the Provinces, pursuant to the private Orders he received from the Court of Spain, which were discovered by several Letters in∣tercepted, which Don Iohn and his Secreta∣ry Escovedo writ in Cyphers to the King and his Ministers, which Philip de Mornix, Seignieur de St. Aldegonde decyphered: This made them resolve to oppose his pernicious Designs by Force of Arms. Don Iohn, under a pretence that they had a Design upon his Person, retired from Brussels, and having received the Queen of Navarre into Namur, surprized the Castle of Namur, and then Charlemont, and made preparations for War; and recalled the Spa∣nish and German Troops. He called that day he seized the Gastle of Namur, the first of his Government, as Henry the III. after∣wards called the Day of the Murther of the Duke of Guise, the first of his Reign.
The States took up Arms on their side, demolished the Castle of Antwerp, and joined themselves to the Prince of Orange. But the States-General assembled at Brussels demand∣ing the free Exercise of the Catholick Religion in Holland and Zealand; he made answer, that he could make no Alterations in that Affair without consulting the States of these two Provinces, who had the sole and abso∣lute Power of doing it. This was a funda∣mental Maxim of that State; which was af∣terwards changed by the Factions and Force of Arms under the Government of Prince Maurice, his Son, as I shall manifest in his Life. Prince William of Orange being arrived at Breda with his third Wife Charlotte de Bour∣bon, he was invited by the States to come and encourage them by his Presence: For this Effect the Burghers of Antwerp went out to meet him, and conducted him into their City, where the States-General deputed to him the Abbots of Villiers and Marotes, the Barons de Fresin, and Capres, to be∣seech him to come in all haste to Brussels. The Prince went to Brussels through the New-Canal, attended by the Burghers of Antwerp who marched in good Order on one side of the Canal, and on the other side by the Burghers of Brussels, all in gilt Armour, who came out of their City to meet him. He was receiv'd into Brussels with great mag∣nificence and Triumph, with incredible Ac∣clamations of Joy by all the World. Imme∣diately
he was declared Governour of Bra∣bant, and Superintendant of the Finances of the Provinces. Upon this we may observe that tho' the Life of this Prince has been cross'd by strange Dis∣appointments and Misfortunes capable of sink∣ing a Man of less Resolution than himself: Yet these Accidents were sweeted from time to time with those secret pleasures and Delights which the most Stoical and in∣sensible Men are overjoyed at, as the Accla∣mations and Applauses of the People, whose Hearts and Affections he entirely possess'd. Other Princes command only the Bodies of their Subjects, without having any Empire over their Minds, which ought to make up the noblest part of their Dominions. But as Envy is the inseparable Companion of Vertue; and a great Reputation is often more dangerous than a bad one; this pom∣pous Reception of the Prince of Orange added to the Authority his great Birth, Experience, and Merit gained him in the States and in the Hearts of the People, procured him the Jealousy of many Lords and Gentlemen of Quality; the chief of whom were the Duke Arschot newly made Governour of Flanders, the Marquess of Havret his Brother, the Count de Lalain and his Brother, the Sieg∣neur de Montigny, the Viscount of Ghent, Count Egmont, the Sieurs de Compigny, de Rassinguem, and de Sueveguem, and many o∣thers: This jealous Party dispatched private∣ly the Sieur de Malstede to offer the Govern∣ment
of the Low-Countries to the Archduke Matthias Brother to the Emperor Rodolphus. He made so much hast, and pressed the Arch∣duke so strongly to depart, that he was arri∣ved at Cologne from Vienna before 'twas known that they had sent for him. These Gentlemen imagined that they should have all the Management of the Go∣vernment under the Archduke, who would consider them as the Authors of his Esta∣blishment; and at the same time should ruine the Authority of the Prince of Orange by giving him a Superiour of that Quality. But the Prince of Orange, who had the Art of Complying with all Times, and turn∣ing Poison into Antidotes, made a Modest Complement to the States General for not ac∣quainting him with so important a Resolution as they had taken of sending for the Arch∣duke; whereas nothing ought to be transa∣cted without the common Consent of all, e∣specially Matters of such Consequence. But he made no Opposition to the Reception or Establishment of the Archduke. Then ha∣ving brought over to his party the Count de Lalain who had the chief Command of the Army, he managed Matters so well by his Address and Submissions that he gained the Archduke who was made Governour of the Netherlands upon certain Conditions; and he himself was declared Lieutenant-General by majority of Voices in the States; and the Archduke in consideration of his great Abi∣lities trusted him with the intire Management
of Affairs. In this manner the Prince of Orange by his good Conduct and Prudence, turn'd that Storm upon his Enemies, which they raised with Design to ruin him. For the Duke of Arschot, the head of the Faction, had the Mortification to be seized in the Ca∣pital City of his Government (Ghent) by a Creature of the Prince of Orange (Rehove) who bore the greatest Sway in that large City: And to make his Grief the more sensible, his best Friends, the Bishops of Bruges and Ypres, and the Sieurs de Ressinguem and de Sueveguein, and many others of his Dependants, were seiz'd on at the same time. Don Iohn of Austria, having been declar'd Enemy of the Low-Countries by the States-General the 7th of September, 1577. recall'd all the Spanish and Italian Troops who had retired out of the Netherlands, in pursuance to the perpetual Edict. with a great Body of Germans under the Command of Alexander Farneze Duke of Parma, Son to Margaret of Austria, formerly Governess of the Nether∣lands. With this Reinforcement the last day of Ianuary, An. Dom. 1578. he defeated the Army of the States, at Gemblours, commanded by the Sieur de Goiguin in the Absence of the Count de Lalain and the principal Officers who were at a Wedding in Brussels; for which they were extreamly censured. All the Cannon was taken, with 30 Colours and 4 Cornets. But the Reduction of the Fa∣mous City of Amsterdam, which surrender'd to the States, and was united to the Body
of Holland, the 8th of February following, eight days after the Defeat, made sufficient amends for this Loss. Don Iohn, encouraged by this great Suc∣cess, and hoping that this Victory would be the Instrument of another, advanced with great Forces to attack the Army of the States at Rimenant near Malines commanded by the Count de Bossut. But the Count had intren∣ched himself so strongly, that Don Iohn was obliged to retire in great Confusion, and con∣siderable Loss: And 'twas agreed on by all Hands, that if the Count de Bossut had mar∣ched out of his Camp he would have intire∣ly defeated Don Iohn, who had a Crucifix in his Colours with this Motto; With this Sign I have beaten the Turks, and with This I will beat the Hereticks. In Iuly the States-General consented to a Toleration of both Religions in the Provinces, which was called the Peace of Religion, which all Men were not satisfied with; by this means a Third Party sprung up, called the Male∣contents; the principal of which were Ema∣nuel de Lalain, Baron de Montigny, the Vis∣count of Ghent, Governour of Artois, Valen∣tine de Pardieu, Sieur de la Motte Governour of Gavelines, the Baron de Capres, and others. Thus the Provinces of Artois and Hainault returned to the Obedience of the King, not∣withstanding all the Remonstrances which the States made to them by Letters and De∣puties.
About this time the States coined Money with the Bodies of Count Horn and Count Egmont, and their Heads upon Stakes on one side, and on the reverse two Horsemen and two Footmen fighting, with this Inscription, praestat pugnare pro patriâ quam simulatâ pace decipi; It is better to fight for our Country, than be deceived by a feigned peace. The Malecontents, to secure themselves a∣gainst the States, desired that the Foreign Troops might be recalled into the Nether∣lands, contrary to the Pacification of Ghent, and the perpetual Edict. On the other side the States, in order to their Defence, treated with the Duke of Alencon, whom they call'd the Defender of the Belgick Liberty, upon con∣dition that he should supply them with 10000 Foot, and 2000 Horse, paid at his own Charge. This Treaty was concluded by the Means of the Queen of Navarre his Si∣ster, who in her Journey to the Spaw-Waters, had drawn over a great number of Men to the party of her Brother, whom she loved so tenderly; among others the Count de La∣lain, and the Sieur D' Enchy Governour of Cambray. A. D. 1578. in September died Don Iohn of Austria, in the Camp at Namur, of Grief for being suspected in Spain, where his Secre∣tary had been Assassinated, or of Poyson as many are of Opinion. Immediately after died the Count de Bos∣sut General of the States; who after his Death, desired Mr. de la Nove Bras de fer, in Consi∣deration
of his Reputation, Valour, Conduct and Experience in War, to take upon him the Charge of Mareschal de Camp of their Army. Alexander Farneze Prince of Parma, suc∣ceeded Don Iohn in the Government of the Low Countries, and by his Civility, and obli∣ging Carriage to all Men, added to the great Promises he made, strengthened the Party of the Male-Contents, and weakened the power of the States. About this time, the 22d. of Ianuary, A. D. 1579. the Prince of Orange laid the first Foun∣dation of the Commonwealth of the united Provinces, by the strict Union which he made at Utrecht, between the Provinces of Gueldres, Zutphen, Holland, Zealand, Friezland, and the Ommelands, consisting of Twenty six Articles, the chief of which were these, The Provinces made an Alliance against the common Enemy, and promised mutually to assist each other, and never to treat of Peace, or War but by common Consent. And all this without prejudice to the Statutes, Privileges, and Cu∣stoms of every particular Province: Which Ar∣ticle was broken under the Government of Prince Maurice, when the States General as∣sumed a Jurisdiction over all the Subjects of the Provinces, who till that time had no other Lords than the particular States of the Pro∣vince. This Treaty was called the Union of Utrecht, because 'twas made in that City. It was rtified by all the Governours of the Provinces, and the States to show how neces∣sary
a perfect Union was to their Preservati∣on, took those words of Micipsa in Salust for their device. Concordiâ res parvae crescunt, little Things become great by Concord. That Year Maestricht was taken by Storm by the Duke of Parma, after a Siege of four Months, and a Treaty of Peace was set afoot at Cologne by the Mediation of the Emperor Rodolphus, but the King of Spain, refusing to grant a Toleration of Religion in the Nether∣lands, though it had been allowed in France and Germany, the design did not take effect. Under the Government of the Duke of Parma, many Actions passed between the Male-Contents, and the Troops of the States commanded by Mr. de la Nove, who surprized Ninove in Flanders and took in their Beds Count Egmont, his Wife, and Mother with Count Charles his Brother, and carried them Priso∣ners to Ghent, where the People, as they pas∣sed through the Streets, threw Dirt upon them, and treated them with a thousand In∣dignities and abuses, upbraiding them with abandoning their Country, to joyn with the Executioners of their Fathers. But Monsieur de la Nove after great Suc∣cess, was surprized himself with the few Men he had with him, by the Viscount of Ghent and Marquess of Risbourg. The Cause of this Accident was the Sieur de Marquette's not obeying Monsieur de la Nove's Orders in breaking down the Bridge which led to him. By order of the Duke of Parma he was car∣ried Prisoner to the Castle of Limburg, where
he was barbarously treated by the Spaniards, who offered to set him at Liberty, provided they might put out his Eyes. From whence 'tis visible how apprehensive they were of this great Captain. At last, after a long Im∣prisonment, he was exchang'd upon Count Eg∣mont's Swearing never more to bear Arms a∣gainst Spain, of which the Duke of Lorrain and many other Lords and Princes were Guarrantees. Besides his great Skill in the Art of War, which is celebrated by all Historians, ne∣ver was a Man of so clear and dis-interested a Vertue, which he gave continual proofs of during the whole Course of his Life; but a∣mong the rest one very remarkable Instance: Monsieur de la Nove Bras de fer was a Gen∣tleman of Bretaigne, and had a Sister married to Monsieur de Vezins, a Man of Quality and Fortune in Anjou, who had by her a Son and two Daughters; this Sister had 20000 Crowns for her Fortune; but dying young, Monsieur de Vezins married a Woman who was one of her Attendants, by whom he had several Children: This Megere, after the Death of her Husband, desiring to secure to her Children the great Estate of the House of Vezins, could think of no more effectual way than by delivering the Children of the first Wife, her Mistress, to an English Merchant for a Sum of Money, upon Condition that she should never see them more. The Mer∣chant carried them immediately to Iersey and Guernsey. No one knew what became of the
Daughters; but the Foreign Merchant, ha∣ving more good Nature than the Mother in Law, took pity of the Boy, and brought him with him to London, where he bred him up, and taught him the Trade of a Shooma∣ker. This Boy, when he was grown up, travelling up and down the Country, hap∣pened to be in Flanders at the time that Monsieur de la Nove commanded the Army of the States, and bringing him some Shooes, Monsieur de la Hove, having narrowly view'd him, told those that were about him, that this young Lad had much of the Air, Stature and Mien of his Brother in Law de Vezins. Though he was exposed at the Age of 4 or 5 years, he still retained some memory of his Name, his Country, and what he was; and told him that his Name was Vezins, and that he was a French Man by Birth. But the great Business of Monsieur de la Nove hin∣der'd him from making further Enquiry in∣to the Matter at that time. Some years af∣ter, being released from his Imprisonment at Limburg, and retiring to Geneva, this same young Man who travelled over the World, as Apprentices do, once more meeting him when he had no Affairs, after having very well examined him, and, besides the general Resemblance, discovered some particular Marks which those of the Family de Vezins bore, he resolved to make him be acknowledged Heir of that House; and in order to it, contra∣ry to his own Interest, made all the necessary Proceedings in Anjou, at the Council and
Parliament for the recovery of the Estate; but being kill'd at Lambette in Bretaigne with a Musquet Ball, before the Affair was complea∣ted, his Son Odel de la Nove, (whom I have seen in my youth) Embassador extraordina∣ry into Holland, a Man that pursued the ge∣nerous Example of his Father, put an end to the Process; and by a famous Decree made him be declared Heir of the House of Vezins, which the Children of his cruel Mother in Law had so long usurped. These Heroick Actions of the Father and Son can never be sufficiently praised, which the curious Rea∣der will be glad to learn; and the Example of so rare a Vertue may Spr on a generous Mind to an Emulation of such noble Perfor∣mances. In this time the Prince of Orange who had been made Governour of Flanders, was at Ghent, where he altered the Magistrates of the City; erected contrary to their Privileges by the Violence of Iohn Imbese a turbulent daring Fellow, who had at that time the chief Authority of the City. Imbese retired into Germany to Prince Casimir Palatine, who had formerly brought such a great Body of Horse to the Assistance of the States, that they had much more been harass'd and incon∣venienc'd by them than relieved or defended. But he returned again to Ghent and domi∣neered there for some time with a Guard of 30 Halberdiers who still accompanied him; but in the end a contrary Faction setting up against him, as nothing is more changeable
than the Affections of the People, he was ar∣rested, tryed and beheaded. An. Dom. 1580. the Prince of Orange re∣presented to the States-General, that Consider∣ing the Desertion of some Provinces, and the Falling off of a great many Men who quitted their Party to reconcile themselves to Spain, by the means of the Duke of Parma; they could no longer defend themselves against so powerful an Enemy; and that they were obliged either to make an Accommodation with Spain, which he would never advise them to do, when they could have no Secu∣rity for their Lives or Religion; or else to chuse some neighbouring Prince for their Lord, and that he could think of none more proper than the Duke of Anjou and Alencon only Brother to Henry the III. King of France. Which Resolution the States approving of they sent Deputies into France; the most con∣siderable of whom was Philip de Mornix, Seigneur de S. Aldegonde, who made a Treaty with him in September An. Dom. 1580. at the Castle of Plessis les tours. The Heads of which were, That the States of Holland, Brabant, Flanders, Zealand, Utrecht and Friezland, would acknowledge him for their Sovereign Prince, and his Posterity after him, upon Condi∣tion that he should leave Matters of Religion in the same Posture they were in at that time; and preserve the Privileges of the Provinces That he should hold an Assembly of the States-General every year, who nevertheless should have power to meet when they pleased. That he should put
no Man into any Employment, Place, or Go∣vernment of the Provinces without their Con∣sent. And that if he invaded their Privileges and broke the Treaty, he should forfeit his Right, and that they should be absolved from their Oath of Fidelity, and have power to elect a new Prince. The Archduke seeing that there was no further Occasion for his Presence in the Ne∣therlands, and that they were looking out for a more powerful Protection, withdrew, after having received Thanks and many Presents, according to their Abilities and the Times, leaving behind him the Reputation of a good and moderate Prince: But his Enemies in the End made him suspected of holding Intelli∣gence with the Spaniards. The Prince of Orange with all his Power sollicited the coming of the Duke of Alencon, to support himself and his Country with so considerable a Prince; but more particularly because in Iune 1580. the King had publish∣ed a terrible Proscription against him, in which he upbraids him with the Favours he had received from the Emperor; among o∣thers, for having secured to him the Succes∣sion of Renè de Nassaw and de Chalon Prince of Orange: That he had made him Gover∣nour of Holland, Zealand, Utrecht, and Bur∣gundy, Knight of the Golden-Fleece, and Councellor of State: That though he was a Stranger, he had loaded him with Honours and Riches, for which he made him very un∣grateful Returns. That by his Instigation
the Nobility had presented the Address a∣gainst the Inquisition: That he had introdu∣ced the New Religion into the Low-Countries, and disturb'd the Catholick Religion, by the breaking of Images, and demolishing Altars: That he had made War upon his Lord: That he had opposed all the Pacifications, even that of Ghent, and broken the perpetual E∣dict; that, in short, he declared him an un∣grateful Man, a Rebel, a Disturber of the publick Peace, a Heretick, a Hypocrite, a Cain, a Iudas, one that had a hardned Con∣science, a profane Wretch, who had ta∣ken a Nun out of the Cloister to marry her, and had Children by her, a wicked and perjur'd man, the Head of the Troubles of the Netherlands, the Plague of Christendom, the common Enemy of Mankind: That he out-law'd him, and gave his Life, his Body and Estate to him that could seize on it; and to free the World from his Tyranny, he promis'd, upon the Word of a King, and as a Servant of God Almighty, to give 25000 Crowns to any man that should bring him alive or dead to him, and besides a free Par∣don and Indemnity of all his Crimes; and to make him a Gentleman, in case he was not so before. He declared all his Adherents to have forfeited their Nobility, Estate and Honour, if within a Month after the Publi∣cation of this Out-law'ry they did not leave him and return to their Duty. In December following the Prince of Orange published his Apology, which is a very long,
eloquent and handsome Piece, and read it publickly in the Assembly of the States-General. The Prince made a Discovery of a great ma∣ny Secrets which 'twas the King's Interest never to have had known. Kings have not so much Advantage in Defending themselves against their Subjects with their Pens as their Swords, and for that Reason the King made no Answer to it; but because this Apology is very considerable, 'tis proper to put down the Substance of it. After having submitted his Life and Con∣duct to the Consideration of the States, he says, He was forc'd, contrary to his Nature and Custom, to discover some Indecencies which he would very willingly have concealed; and, if they had not loaded him with Injuries and Abuses, he would have only answered the Proscription, which he would have made appear unjust and without any Foundation. That his Enemy who made it, and the Duke of Parma who published it, not being able to kill him by Poison or Sword, endeavour to blot his Reputation by the Venom of their Tongues. As for the Obligations they reproach'd him with, he owns to have received a great deal of Honour from the Emperor, Charles the V. who bred him up 9 years in his Chamber; and that his Memory (these are his own Words) will be for ever honoured by him; but at the same time he is obliged to justifie his own Innocence, to declare that he never
received any Advantages from the Emperor, but, on the contrary, suffered great Losses in his Service. That he could not deprive him of the Succession to Renè de Nassaw and de Chalons Prince of Orange his Cousin-german, whose sole Heir he was without a manifest Injury, unless they reckon the not seizing upon ano∣ther Man's Right to be a Liberality. That he was so far from having received any Advantages from him, that on the con∣trary, the Emperor, for the good of his own Affairs, being pressed on one hand by the Protestant Princes, and on the other by the King of France, had by the Treaty of Nassaw disposed at his Expence of the County of Catzenellebogen in favour of the Landgrave of Hesse, though it had been adjudged to him by the Imperial Chamber at Spires, with a∣bove two millions of Arrears, and the Em∣peror had taken no care to restore Prince Renè of Nassaw, his Cousin-german, to the Possession of the third Part of the Dutchy of Iuliers which belong'd to him by their Grandmother Margaret Countess de la Mark, though he had gained the Victory by the Va∣lour of that Prince. That the King had deprived him of the Possession of the Seigniory de Chartel velin, (for which there was due to him above 350000 Livres) by bringing the Cause to be tryed in his Council, when it was to be judged by the Parliament at Molines; and it has ever since continued undecided. Which
he mentions to show the World who ought to be taxed with Ingratitude, he or the King. That h had spent above 500000 Crowns in the Embassy he made, against his Will, to the Emperor Ferdinand; and when he was Hostage in France for the Peace of Cambray; and that year when he commanded the Im∣perial Army, and built Charlemont and Philip∣ville in sight of the French Generals; in all which time he only received 300 Florins a Month, which would not pay for the pitch∣ing his Tents. That, quite contrary, those of his Family had spent great Estates, and exposed their Lives freely in the Service of the Princes of the House of Austria; that Engilbert the se∣cond Count of Nassaw, his Great Grandfa∣ther, being Governour of the Netherlands for the Emperor Maximilian the I. had secured him these Provinces by the gaining of a Victory. That Count Henry of Nassaw, his pater∣nal Uncle, prevail'd upon the Electors to preferr Charles of Austria, Grandson of Maxi∣milian, to Francis the I. King of France, and put the Imperial Crown upon his Head. That Philibert de Chalon Prince of Orange, had conquered Lombardy, and the Kingdom of Naples, for the Emperor; and that by the taking of Rome and Clement the VII. his Enemy, he had gained him vast Honour and Renown.
That the Nephew of this Philibert, Renè de Nassaw and de Chalon, his Cousin-german, was killed at the Emperor's Feet before St. Dizier after having repaired the Loss of a Battel and conquered the Dutchy of Gueldres. That if the House of Nassaw had had noBe∣ing in the World, and had not done such great Exploits before the King was born, he could never have been able to put so many Titles, Countries and Seigneuries, in the Front of that infamous Proscription, which declares him a Traitor and a Villain, Crimes which none of his Family had ever been guilty of. That for so many Expences, and signal Services of his Family, they could not shew the least Mark of Acknowledgment from the House of Austria. That the Kings of Hungary had given to his Predecessor as a perpetual Proof of their Valour in defending them from the Invasion of the Infidels, several Pieces of Artillery, which were carried away by Force, out of his Castle of Breda when the Duke of Alva tyranniz'd in the Low Countries. When the King reproaches him with ha∣ving made him Governour of Holland, Zea∣land, Utrecht and Burgundy, Knight of his Order, and Councellor of State, he answers, That if he ought to thank any one for that, 'tis the Emperor Charles V. who at his De∣parture for Spain, had so appointed it in con∣sideration of his great Services. That the King himself had forfeited his Pre∣tensions to that Order, by breaking the Statutes
(which expressly enjoyn, that no Knight can be tryed but by his Peers) in Condemning the Counts Egmont, Horn, de Bergues, and Montigny, by Rascals, and Men of no Birth or Merit. That the Government of Burgundy be∣longed to him hereditarily, the House of Chalon having all along enjoyed it without Contradiction. And as for the Employ∣ment of a Councellor of State, he obtained that by the Policy of Cardinal Granville who screen'd himself from the People by the Authority of the Prince, in whom they re∣posed an intire Credit and Confidence. When the King, to render him odious, charges him with Marrying a Nun, he an∣swers, That Slanderers ought to be free from all Blame, and that 'tis an unaccountable Im∣pudence in the King to reproach him with a lawful Marriage, and agreeable to the Word of God; whereas the King is all covered o∣ver with Crimes. He maintains that he was actually married to Donna Isabella Osorio, and had three Children by her, when he mar∣ried the Infanta of Portugal, Mother to Don Carlos. That he murthered his own Son for speak∣iing in Favour of the Low-Countries; and poisoned his third Wife Isabella of France, Daughter to Henry the II. King of France, in whose Life-time he publickly kept Donna Eufratia, whom he forced the Prince of Ascoti to marry when she was big with Child by him, that his Bastard might inherit the great
Estate of this Prince, who died of Grief, if not (says the Prince) of a Morsel more easy to swallow than digest. That afterwards he was not ashamed to commit publick Incest in marrying his own Niece, Daughter to Maximilian the Empe∣ror and his Sister. But, says the King, I had a Dispensation. Ay, says the Prince, only from the God on Earth; for the God of Hea∣ven would never have granted it: These are the very Words of the Prince. That it was as strange as insupportable, that a Man blacken'd with Adultery, Poison∣ing, Incest, and Parricide, should make a Crime of a Marriage approved of by Mon∣sieur de Montpensier his Father-in-law, a more zealous Catholick than the Spaniards are with all their Grimaces and Preterisions. That if his Wife had made Vows in her tender Age, which is contrary to the Canons and Decrees, according to the Opinion of the ablest Men; And though she had never made any Protestations against it, He was not so little vers'd in the Holy Scriptures, but He knew that all Bonds and Engage∣ments entred into meerly upon the Score of Interest, had no Force before God. To that Article, where the King calls him a Stranger, he answers, That his Ancestors had possessed for many Ages Counties and Baronies in Luxemburg, Brabant, Holland and Flanders; and that those who have E∣states in the Provinces have still been reckon∣ed Natives.
That the King is a Stranger as well as himself, being born in Spain, a Country which bears a natural Aversion to the Low-Countries; and he in Germany, a neighbour∣ing Country and Friend of the Provinces. But (says the Prince) they'll say he is King; to which he answers, Then let him be King in Castile, Arragon, Naples, the Indies, and Ierusalem, and in Africk and Asia, if he please; that for his part he will acknow∣ledge but a Duke and a Count, whose Power is limited by the Privileges of the Provinces, which the King has sworn to ob serve. That he must let the Spaniards know, if they are not acquainted with it already, that the Barons of Brabant, when their Prin∣ces go beyond Bounds, have often shown them what their Power was. He ended this Discourse by saying, That 'twas strange that they had the Impudence to charge him with being a Stranger, in regard his Predecessors were Dukes of Gueldres, and Owners of great Possessions in the Provinces, when the King's Ancestors were only Counts of Hapsburg, living in Switzerland, and their Family was not known in the World. The Prince maintains that the Design of the Spaniards was always to enslave the Ne∣therlands and erect a tyrannical Government, as they have done in the Indies, Naples, Sicily and Milan. That the Emperor Charles the V. being acquainted with it, represented to King Philip, in his Presence, and the old
Count of Bossut and many others; That if he did not curb the Pride of the Spaniards he would be the Ruin of the Netherlands. But that neither the paternal Authority, nor the Interest of his Affairs, nor Justice, nor his Oath, which is sacred among the Barba∣rians, could bridle his unbounded Passion of Tyrannizing. That the Country granted a considerable Supply of Money, with which and the Courage of the Nobility of these Provinces, having won two famous Battles, and taken a great number of Prisoners of the highest Quality in France, he concluded a Peace at Cambray, as Profitable to himself as Disad∣vantageous to his Enemies. That if the King had any Gratitude remaining he could not deny but that he was one of the principal Instruments in bringing it about; having ma∣naged it in particular, with the Constable de Montmorency, and the Mareschal de St. Andre, by the King's Orders, who assured him that he could not do a more grateful piece of Service to him, than by effecting a Peace, at a time when he was resolved to go into Spain upon any Terms. But these Supplies of Money, and this great Success obtained by the Blood of their Nobility, were reckoned Crimes of High-Treason, because nothing would be granted, but on Condition the States-General should meet, and the promis'd Subsidies pass through the Hands of Commissaries of the Provinces, to clip the Wings of these Harpies, Barlay∣mont
and others like him. And these as he as∣sures, are the two great Crimes, which crea∣ted that implacable Hatred in the King and Council to the Low-Countries. The first of these Crimes was the Demand of an Assembly of the States-General; who are as much hated by bad Princes for bridling their Tyranny, as they are loved and reve∣renced by good Kings the true Fathers of their Country, who consider them as the most sure Foundation of a State, and the true support of Soveraigns. The second is the Demand they made of having Commissioners of the Provinces for managing the Subsidies; the Prince affirm∣ing that these Devourers of the People rec∣kon their Robberies and Cheatings a better Revenue than that of their Lands. That seeing themselves out of Condition any long∣er to enrich themselves at the Expence of the publick with Indempnity; they look out for all Pretences, by flattering their Princes, to incense them and set them at odds with their Subjects. He concluded this Article by assu∣ring the States-General to whom he addresses himself all along) that he has seen their Acti∣ons, heard their Discourses, and been Wit∣ness of those Counsels, whereby they de∣signed to make a general Massacre of them, as they had practised in the Indies, where they had destroyed thirty times more People than are in the Low-Countries To that part of the Charge where the King accuses him of gaining the Hearts of all
those who desired Innovation, particularly those who were suspected of the Reformed Religion, by his private Intrigues; and of being the Author of the Request against the Inquisition. He owns that he was always of the Reformed Religion in his Heart, which had been established by his Father William Count of Nassaw in his Dominions. That he heard the King of France, Henry the II. say, when he was Hostage in France, that the Duke of Alva was then treating with him to root out all the Protestants of France, the Low-Coun∣tries, and all Christendom besides. That they had resolved to establish the merciless Inquisi∣tion; the Severity of which was such, that the looking a squint upon an Image was Crime enough to deserve burning. That he could not suffer that so many good Men and Lords of his Acquaintance should be design'd for the Slaughter; which made him firmly resolve utterly to extirpate this cursed Race of Men, and that if he had been well second∣ed in so just and generous a Design there would have been nothing left to preserve the Memory of the Spaniards but their Bones and their Graves. As for the Address which they make a Crime of, he thinks it as advantageous to his own Credit and Honour, as to the King's Service, and the Interest of the Provinces, to have advised the presenting it, as a certain method to divert the Deluge of these infinite Disorders which afterwards happened. And as for the Protestant Sermons, he advised
Madam de Parma to permit them, things be∣ing in such a posture that they could not be hindered without a manifest danger of the en∣tire Subversion of the Government. When the King says that the Care and Providence of Madam de Parma was so great, that he was obliged to quit the Netherlands; he owns that the Charge would be true, if his Treachery and Disloyalty had been the Cause of it; but that, a year before, he would willingly have retired and surrendred all his Employments. When he saw that Monsieur de Bergues and Montigny had lost their Lives in Spain, and Gibbets were erect∣ed, and Fires kindled all over the Country, he thought it high time to put himself in a place of Security, without trusting to the King's Lerters, full of fair Promises and Offers, the better to deceive him. That they had fallen upon his Person and Estate. That neither the Consideration of the Privileges of the University of Louvain, nor the Province of Brabant, could hinder them from carrying his Son Prisoner into Spain: And that by so rigorous and unjust a Treatment he was absolved from all his Oaths, and had good Ground to make War upon his Enemy; which was objected to him as a Crime. That the King laid nothing to his Charge, but what his Predecessor Henry of Castile had been guilty of: who tho' a Bastard rebell'd a∣gainst his lawful Prince Don Pedro King of Ca∣stile and Leon, and kill'd him with his ownhand.
If the King answers, that Don Pedro was a Tyrant, and that he possessed Castile only by that Title; wherefore, says the Prince, should not the King of Spain be used in the same manner; for there never was a Tyrant who subverted the Laws and Constitutions of the Country with more Arrogance, or broke his Oath with more Impudence than King Philip. And that at least Don Pedro was neither guilty of Incest, nor a Parricide, nor a Murtherer of his Wife: And though he was born the King's Subject, and should take up Arms a∣gainst him, 'twas no more than Albert the first Duke of Austria, formerly Count of Hapsburg, his Predecessor, had done against the Emperor Adolphus of Nassaw, his Lord, one of the Prince's Ancestors. The Prince affirms, that there is an origi∣ginal, mutual Contract between the Dukes of Brabant and their Vassals; that they owe O∣bedience to their Prince, who, on his side, is bound to preserve their Privileges; the chief of which are, That the Dukes cannot change the Constitution of the Province by any De∣cree; That they are to be satisfied with their ordinary Revenue; That they can lay no new Impositions, nor bring any Troops into the Province without the Consent of the States; nor alter the Price of Money; nor imprison any man without the Information of the Magistrate of the place, nor send him out of the Country. The Lords of the Pro∣vinces are obliged by their Oath to maintain and assert these Privileges; because by their
Prerogative they have the Charge of the Mi∣litia, and the Arms of the Province; and not doing it they are to be accounted Perjur'd, and Enemies of their Country. That the King has not violated only one of these Privileges, but all, and many times over. He has seiz'd up∣on his Estates, his Dignities, and his Son, contra∣ry to his Immunities. That for this Reason he was absolved from his Oath of Allegiance, and by Consequence had a right to defend himself by Force of Arms; and above all, because the King would never redress and make Amends for his Faults, having rejected the Intercessions of the Emperor Maximilian, and the Petitions of his Subjects who depu∣ted to him the principal Lords of the Nether∣lands, which he put to Death by the Hands of the Hangman against the Law of Nations, as he had served all others whom he could seize on by his Artifices, and who were too credulous, in believing his false Promises. This abundantly justifies the Prince for ta∣king up Arms for his own and his Country's Preservation; and if he could not take foot∣ing in the Netherlands at his first Entry, as the King reproaches to him, 'twas no more than what had happened to the greatest Ge∣nerals, and to the King himself, who has of∣ten invaded Holland and Zealand, and been driven shamefully out without being able to make himself Master of one Inch of Ground. And in regard, by his Oath, he dispenses with his Subjects from obeying him if he acts contrary to the Laws, why is he so impu∣dent
to say that the Prince has taken up Arms against him unjustly. To that Article in which the King says he returned into Holland and Zealand by Bribery and Corrupting the Inhabitants; he makes answer, that he went there at the Instance and Sollicitation of the principal Men of the Province, which he is able to make appear by their Letters. When the King accuses him of having per∣secuted the Church-men, driven out the Ca∣tholicks, and banished that Religion; he re∣plies, That all this had been done by a com∣mon Consent, to preserve their Lives and Privileges against Men who had taken an Oath to the Pope, and were setting all En∣gines a work to subvert their Liberties, and the newly established Religion: Which was represented at the Treaty of Peace at Breda, where this Article of Religion was confirmed by the Decree and Seal of all the Cities, and that 'twas not fair to impute that to him, which was done by an unanimous consent of the whole Country. When he reproaches him for granting Li∣berty of Conscience; he answers, that he had always been as averse to the Burning so ma∣ny Men as the Duke had taken pleasure in it; and that he was of Opinion to put a Stop to all Persecutions. He ingenuously owns, that the King be∣fore the holding of the States at Ghent, and his Departure into Spain, had commanded him to put to Death many good Men suspe∣cted
to favour the new Religion; but he ne∣ver put these cruel Orders in Execution, but gave them notice of it, not being able to do it with a safe Conscience, and chusing rather to obey God than Man. He says that they do him Wrong in laying the Murther of some Ecclesiasticks to his Charge; for he punished the Criminals with Death; and those who were of an illustrious Family, as the Count de la Mark, convicted of those Outrages, were condemned only to Imprisonment and loss of their Employments, in Consideration of their great Alliances. To that Head wherein the King declares that he did not command the Duke of Alva to establish the Imposition of the 10th and 20th penny; he answers, That his not being punished for it, is sufficient Proof that he had Orders to do it. And that he cannot escape the Imputation of a Tyrant for Imposing this Tribute, or suffering so great a Boldness com∣mitted against his Will to go unpunished. He adds, that the Duke of Alva had too much Sense to dare settle so severe an Imposition without the express and reiterated Orders of the King; and that otherwise he would ne∣ver have fined the Burgo-master of Amster∣dam 25000 Florins for opposing the raising of this new Tax. That the King would have done much better to preserve the Kingdom of Tunis and Guletta, which the Emperor had conquered from the Turks, and which he preferred to all his other Victories, than to make an unjust War
upon his own Subjects. But that his Passion and Fury had transported him so far, that his Eyes and Understanding were blinded, and hindred him from seeing the ill Measures he had taken: And that he chose rather to ex∣pose his Weakness to his Subjects than employ his Forces against the common Enemy of Christendom. He adds, that as Hannibal had sworn the Ruin of the Romans upon the Altars of his Gods, so the Duke of Alva had vowed the Destruction of the Ne∣therlands; which is visible from the Cruelties he committed there. That if a Master is known by his Servant, they might easily guess at the good Affection the King bare to the Low-Countries by the Tyranny of this un∣relenting Minister. When the King says, That the Pope dispen∣ses with him from keeping his Oath; the Prince answers, That he does not consider, that by breaking his Oath, at the same time his Subjects were absolved from their Oath of Fidelity. He adds, That the Duke of Alva was preparing to hang the principal Men of Brussels for refusing to submit to the raising of the tenth Penny; and that the Hangman was ordered to get ready seventeen Ropes; that the Dictum of the Sentence was already writ, and the Spanish Soldiers going to their Arms to guard the Execution, when the hap∣py News of the Taking of the Brille arrived, and saved them from the Gallows. Speaking of the perpetual Edict, he says it was concluded by the Artifice of the Spa∣niards
contrary to his Advice, and that of the States of Holland and Zealand. That there was no other Difference between the Duke of Alva and the Commander de Requesens and Don Iohn; but that the last could not dissem∣ble as well as they, nor conceal his Venom so long. For 'tis undisputable from the Letters which were intercepted, that he had the same Orders as the other Governours had to oppress the Low-Countries. When they charge him with Breaking the Pacification of Ghent and the perpetual Edict; he answers, That 'twas the Spaniards that broke it, by restoring no man to the posses∣sion of his Estate, or Charges, and by de∣taining the Prisoners. That the King had given Orders to Don Iohn not to observe the Peace, as appears from the intercepted Letters, and that when he swore to it, 'twas on Condition that he would keep it till he re∣pented of it, as he explained himself to some Deputies of the States. Thus the Peace of Ghent and the perpetual Edict being once vio∣lated, 'twas in the Power of the States to pro∣vide for their own Defence, by explaining, enlarging and altering the Treaty. That he is extreamly concerned at the In∣solencies which the Soldiers committed in his Governments, though they were not to be compared with the intolerable Outrages of the Spaniards. He Complains of the Treachery of many Lords and Gentlemen of the Netherlands who preferred their own private Interests, and the
Spanish Tyranny, to the Good of their Coun∣try, which they have torn by their Division, and might have rendred flourishing by their Union Inveighing against the Infidelity of his false Brothers called Male-contents, he says, He cannot enough admire the Inconstancy and the unsettledness of their Resolutions. They serve the Duke of Alva, says he, and the Commander Requesens, like Servants, and make a vigorous War upon me. Imme∣diately after, They treat with me, are reconci∣led, and declare themselves Enemies to the Spaniards; Don Iohn arrives, they follow him and contrive my Ruin; when Don Iohn miscarries in his Attempt upon Antwerp, they quit him and recall me; I am no sooner come, but, contrary to their Oath, without acquainting me with it, they call in the Archduke Matthias: And him too they im∣mediately forsake; and without giving me notice, send for the Duke of Anjou, and pro∣mise him Wonders, and then abandon him and join with the Duke of Parma; upon which the Prince cries out, Are the Waves of the Sea or the Euripus more inconstant than these Men, who consented to this Proscription, when 'twas my Courage and Firmness that re∣stored them to the Enjoyment of their Estates and Places! When they say that he got the Government of Brabant and Flanders by Intriguing and making Parties; he answers in a Word, That these Governments were conferred on him at the Desire of the States, and by a general Ap∣probation.
When they endeavour to make him odious, by saying that he loads the People with Im∣positions; he replies, That they are laid on by the Consent of the People, and if the King raises such excessive Taxes upon his Subjects to oppress Holland and Zealand and the other United Provinces, why should not they have the same Liberty allowed them, in order to defend themselves from the Spanish Ty∣ranny. When they blame him for turning out those Officers in the Cities who were well affected to the King; he says, That they were Enemies to the Country, and he did well to drive them out. When the King taxes him with the Credit and Authority he had over the People, as a great Crime; he answers, that 'tis a great Honour to him that they have chosen him for their Defender against so cruel a Tyranny, which has kindled so just an Hatred and A∣version in all their Hearts. When they reproach him with hating the Nobility; Yes, says the Prince, those who degenerating from their Ancestors, and not treading in their generous Steps, betray their Country, and join with those who endeavour its Ruin. When the King says that the Peace treated at Cologne by the Mediation of the Emperor Rodolphus, was judged reasonable by all men of Sence; the Prince says, That it follows thence necessarily, that all those who think it unreasonable and deceitful, have neither Rea∣son
nor Judgment. For what Appearance is there, (continues he,) that a People har∣rassed and impoverished by so long a War, would refuse an equitable Peace with their Prince, unless it appeared to be a Bait or a Blind only to surprize them? That this Peace projected at Cologne was worse than War, and that the Honey of a treacherous Tongue is more dangerous than the Point of a Sword. That if the Emperor thought this a reasona∣ble Peace, he was perswaded so by the Be∣trayers of their Country. When they object to him the Union of U∣trecht, which they reckon the worst and greatest of his Crimes; he answers, That the Spaniards like nothing that contributes to the Interests of the States; and what is whole∣some to the Oppressed, is mortal to the Fa∣vourers of Tyranny. That their Enemies had grounded all their Hopes upon their Di∣vision; against which there is no such Spe∣cifick as a Good Union, nor a more certain Antidote against Discord than Concord, which has prevented and made useless all their Intrigues and Intelligences. He owns that he was the Author of this Union; and speaks it so loud, that he wishes that not on∣ly Spain, but all Europe may hear him. Up∣on which he exhorts the States to preserve it, and to practice the Moral of the Bundle of Arrows tied together by one Band, which they bear in their Arms. Instead of blush∣ing at it, he glories in an Action so conducive to the Preservation of their Liberties.
When they upbraid him with driving out the Church-Men; he denies that he ever did so, till George de Lalain, Count de Renneberg Governour of Freizland, surprized Groningen by Treachery, and the Massacre of the prin∣cipal Burghers, among others the Burgo-Master Hillebrand, a Man of the greatest Authority in the City, having supped with him and caressed him, the better to over∣reach him, the day before this infamous Sur∣prizal. And that they could not reproach him, that in all the Troubles and Confusions stirred up by the Spaniards he ever stained his Hands in the Blood of the Confederates, who relied on his Faith. When he is accused of driving out some of the Nobility; he denies it, and declares that they retired voluntarily through the Ter∣rour of their Consciences, having openly con∣triv'd the Ruin of their Country; and, Wou'd to God, added the Prince, all they who are like them would follow them, to rid the Country of all Fear. He says 'tis ridiculous to call him Hypo∣crite, who never dissembled with the Spani∣ards. When he was their Friend he talked freely to them, and foretold them by Word of Mouth, and Writing, that those rigorous Persecutions would ruin them. That being forced to become their Enemy, to support the Liberty of his Country, what Hypocrisy can they charge him with, unless they call Hypocrisy the making open War upon them, taking their Cities, driving them out of the
Country and acting against them with all the Vigour the Right of a just War entitles him to. That if they will take the Pains to read over his Defence, which he published 13 years since, to justify his Taking up Arms, they will see the Letters of a King, who is a Hypocrite and Dissembler, who thought to surprize him with fair Words, as now he thinks to daunt him with Threats. When King Philip calls the Prince of O∣range Desperate as Cain and Iudas; he says 'tis a quite different thing, to distrust the Grace of God who cannot Lye, and to sus∣pect the Words of a treacherous and deceitful Man: Witness the poor Moors of Granada; Count Egmont, Horn and many others. That the fall of Cain and Iudas was Despair cau∣sed by the dreadful Sins they had been guilty of; to which State he was not yet reduced, his Conscience upbraiding him with nothing. But the Style of a Man in Despair is visible in this Heathenish and Turkish Proscription. When he accuses him of Distrust, and says it is an ordinary thing with wicked Men, he makes an Apostrophe to Cardinal Granville (whom he believed the Authour of this Pro∣scription) in these Terms: And thou Cardi∣nal, who hast lost so much time at the Col∣lege, unless thou callest that Learning, to be trained up in thy Youth in the Arts of Lying and Deceiving, what answer canst thou make to that sententious Orator and Lover of his Country, when he says that Distrust and Jealousy is the strongest Bulwark of Li∣berty
against Tyranny? Which was said a∣gainst another Philip, a puny Tyrant in com∣parison of this Dom Philip, who has out done the greatest, and whose Tyranny the divine Philippick it self is not able to express. Consider of it; and I for my part, says the Prince, will speak, write and ingrave every where this fine and useful Sentence. And would to God, I may be better believed by my People than Demosthenes was by his, who suffering them∣selves to be imposed on by such Villains and Dissemblers as thou art, were in the end ut∣terly ruined. When the King reproaches him with refu∣sing very advantageous Offers which were made him upon condition he would retire into Germany, and abandon the States; he says the Spanish Folly and Impertinence can∣not be sufficiently admired, who endeavou∣ring to blacken and defame him, raise his Reputation, by owning that he preferrs the Safety of the States, and their Liberty, to his own Repose and Native Country. That he would willingly be freed from all his Trou∣bles and Disappointments, and enjoy his E∣state and the Presence of his Son in Peace. But since this could not be effected without perjuring himself, and betraying the States, violating his Faith, and abandoning them to the Cruelty of their mortal Enemies: No Consideration of his Estate, his Life, Chil∣dren or Wife should prevail upon him to de∣liver them over a Prey to the Spaniards, to be worried and massacred by them. He con∣cludes,
'twas a very great Crime which they reproach'd him with, to be a Man of Honour and of unshaken Firmness and Constancy, not to be wrought on by Threatnings nor Promises. And that on those false Accusa∣tions the King and Spaniards have grounded this barbarous Proscription full of Calum∣nies, Abuses, and inconceivable Imprecati∣ons, which he is no more frighted with than Philibert of Orange was with the Bull which Pope Clement the VII. thundered out against him; who for all that made him his Prisoner. He declares to the States and all Europe, that whatever Spaniard, or whatever Man in the Spanish Interests says or shall say, as this Proscription does, that he is a wicked Man and a Traitor, lyes, speaks falsely and against the Truth. That though the Spaniards for∣bid him the use of Fire and Water, in spite of all their Rage he will live by the Assistance of his Friends as long as it pleases God, who alone has the Disposal of Life and Death, and who has numbered all the Hairs of his Head. As for his Estates he hopes (God willing) that the Purchase of them will cost the Spaniards so dear that they will be obli∣ged to seek out others elsewhere at an easier rate. As for those they wrongfully de∣tain from him, he hopes to dispossess them, and that they never usurped the Possessions of a poor Prince who proved a greater Bur∣then to them. When the King promises 25000 Crowns to any Man that shall bring him alive or
dead, to make him a Gentleman if not so be∣fore, with a full Pardon of all his Crimes how hainous soever; he answers, that if a Gentleman had been guilty of so villainous an Action, no man of Honour would eat or drink with the Wretch or endure his Presence. That if the Spaniards reckon such Men No∣ble, and if this is the ready way to Honour in Castile, no wonder all the World believes that the most part of the Spanish Nobility are descended from the Moors, and Iews who sold our Saviour's Life for ready Money; and that they inherit the Vertue of their Ance∣stors. Upon this Subject, the Prince writes that the Just God has taken away the King's Understanding, who by the ennobling of Villains and pardoning of the greatest Crimes, would destroy the Defender of a People ty∣rannized over. That he has the Impudence to mix the Name of God with so many abo∣minable Promises, though he calls himself the Minister of God, and assumes the power of not only permitting what God forbids, but of rewarding it with Money, Nobility, and indemnity of all their Offences. The Prince concludes by a Persuasive of Union to the States, and not to suffer them∣selves to be dazled with the false Praises the King gives those who forsook them contrary to their Oath, to scatter Division among them. His Enemy gives out that his Quarrel is only to the Prince of Orange as Author of all these Troubles and the War, which will last eter∣nally so long as he lives, imitating the Wolves
in the Fable, who published that their De∣sign was only on the Dogs, (the Keepers and Guardians of the Flock) to devour after∣wards the Sheep at their Leisure. But for a Proof of the King's Dissembling and his Cruelty, when he was absent in Germany the Country was as much persecuted as ever. As many were drown'd hang'd and burn'd as before; and the Liberty of the Country was extreamly well maintained by their mild Governour the Duke of Alva. That the King's principal Design was to root out the Religion, the only bulwark of the State, without which it could not support it self three days: For they of the Reformed Reli∣gion could repose no Confidence in Spaniards or Papists. He repeats once more, that Union and Religion may defend and protect them from all their Enemies, and concludes in these Words, That he would willingly purchase their Ease and Repose at the Expence of his own Ba∣nishment or Death. That Exile and Death up∣on these Conditions would be grateful and agree∣able. But if they thought his Life might con∣tribute to the Defence of their Liberties, he offered them his Assistance, Industry, and Blood it self, which he would spill to the last Drop in their Preservation. The Prince of Orange would willingly have had the States-General publish this Apology in their Name. But some Provinces finding the Reflections on the King to be too severe and bitter, and not being acquainted with
the Crimes he imputed to the King, thought it not proper. They contented themselves with declaring by a Decree, That the Prince of Orange was wrongfully accused, that he had accepted the Government at their ear∣nest Desires; and offer'd to maintain a Troop of Horse for the greater Security of his Per∣son: Desiring him to continue to defend their Liberties, and promising all Obedience and Deference to his Commands and Counsels, which they acknowledged to have no other aim but their Safety. Not long after, An. Dom. 1581. the City and Castle of Breda were surprized by Clau∣de de Barlaymont Count de Hautepenne, by the Means of the Baron de Fresin kept prisoner in the place by Order of the States upon Su∣spicion of holding Intelligence with the Spa∣niards, the Truth of which he confirmed, as much a Prisoner as he was, by causing the City to be surprized by the Means of one Soldier, whom he had gained over to his Party. This was a great Loss to the States and a sensible Affliction to the Prince, whose hereditary Estate this City and its Territories were. This is an Instance that a Prisoner ought never to be kept in a Frontier-Town, but in the Heart of the Country; for as they think of nothing but setting themselves at Liberty, and all their Thoughts are bent that way, they are always contriving Me∣thods and inventing Ways to bring it about; 'tis in effect Nourishing a Serpent in our Bo∣som, and there needs nothing more to take
an Impregnable Fortress than the corrupting of a Centinel when the Enemy is in the Neighbourhood, who may come at the time appointed to Petard or Scale the place. We should have seen in our time a remar∣kable instance of a Surprize of this Nature, to the great Advantage of the Arms of France, if Hatred and Revenge had not born a grea∣ter Influence over the great Minister, than the Glory of his Master or the Good of his Kingdom: But this Mystery has lain concea∣led hitherto, for fear of his Resentment who governed all things with an absolute Autho∣rity in the last years of the Life of Monsieur the Cardinal de Richelieu. The Story is this; After the Defeat of Honne Court, in May 1642. Don Francisque de Mello Governour of the Low-Countries, put several Prisoners of Quality, in the Castle of Ghent, to the Number of Seventy. The principal of whom were the Count de Rantzau, since Mareschal of France, the Marquess de Roque∣laure now Duke and Governour of Guyenne, the Marquess de St. Maigrim kill'd at the Battle of St. Anthony, and the Sieur de Lalen Captain in the Regiment of Piedmont, who died afterwards at Cremona, commanding the French Infantry of the Army of Italy. This Monsieur de Lalen was originally of Lyons, of mean Birth, but of extraordinary Valor and Fidelity, which might give him just Grounds to hope for the highest Employ∣ments of War. Monsieur de Rantzau, impa∣tient in his Prison, obtained Leave of the
Spaniards to send Monsieur de Lalen into France to propose some Exchange of Prisoners. But during his stay at Court, where the va∣riety and multitude of Business hinders their speedy Dispatch, and where Monsieur de Noyers, who hated him, did not take much pains to get him his Liberty. Monsieur de Rantzau, tired with the long Stay of Mon∣sieur de Lalen, and holding a secret Corre∣spondence with me by Letters, who did him all the good Offices at Court of which I was capable, upon the Account of the Esteem and Friendship I had for him; he complai∣ned extreamly in all his Letters of Monsieur de Lalen's being detained so long, at a time when his Presence was necessary for a great Design, which he had projected. At length overcome by his Impatience he writ me a long Letter in Cyphers, part French, part Latin, by which he advised me that nothing was easier than to surprize the Cittadel of Ghent, by the Means of the Hollanders who were Neighbours to it; and the Prince of Orange might advance near with a Body of Foot, without giving the least Jealousy; and in short desired me to go to Court and make this Proposal. But, in Order to make appear how easy this Enterprise might have been put in Exe∣cution, 'twill be convenient to insert the pro∣per Terms of the Letter which was writ in Cyphers, a Copy of which I transcribed be∣fore I presented an Original to Monsieur de Noyers.
SIR, I Am extreamly concerned that my Endeavours have had no better Success; and that Mon∣sieur de Lalen is detained for such slight Rea∣sons. If he had made a quick return, 'twould not have been difficult to surprize this place. There are now but 300 Men in Garrison, many of whom are old and can scarce go, and as many disabled and can make no Defence; besides the 28 or 30 Portugese and Catalonians, who have promised us their Assistance, and above 70 Offi∣cers who are Prisoners. Philippine, where there is a Garrison of Dutch, is but four hours March from us. All the Country between this Place and that is under Contribution. Their Parties come up to the very Gates of the City, and many of them enter upon several Pretences. For they carried off lately a Horse from the mid∣dle of the Market-place, by a cunning Strata∣gem, in the Presence of all the World. The Co∣vetousness of the Governor, the Count de Sala∣zar, gives all People a free Entrance into the Castle, that he may sell off his Wine at the greater Gain, which by a particular Privilege pays no Excise to the King. And a Measure which costs fifteen pence in the City is worth but six pence in the Castle. Here are still five or six thousand Burghers and Strangers, Men and Wo∣men who drink without being search'd or examin'd. If you will consider all these Circumstances, and reflect upon what happened at the Surprize of A∣miens and Breda, you will find a fairer Occa∣sion and a greater Probability of Effecting this.
To hasten so important an Affair I waited on Monsieur de Noyers, who was at that time at Chaume en Briè with the King to tae care of the Preservation of Monsieur le Cardi∣nal de Richelieu, who stayed behind at the Bourbon Waters, in great Suspicion of his Master and many of those who were about him. But this Minister having assured me that he would give the necessary Orders a∣bout this Affair, and commanded me to speak to no Man of it, I retired, easily per∣ceiving by his Looks and Discourse, that he did not relish this Proposal, however advan∣tageous it was, when it came from a Man to whom he had such an Aversion. He never acquainted the King with it, for fear he should reward and consider Monsieur de Rantzau for so important a Service. The Campaigne being at an End, the Spaniards, according to their usual Custom, reinforced their Garrisons, among others, that of the Castle of Ghent, with the Troops of their Army, which changed the Face of Affairs, and made the Execution of this Enterprize impossible. The same Year that Breda was surprised by the Spaniards, the Duke of Anjou, pursuant to his Engagement with the States of the Provin∣ces, came from Chateau Thierry with 10000 Foot, and 4000 Horse to the Relief of Cam∣bray besieged by the Duke of Parma, who raised the Siege. Not long before the Vis∣count de Turenne, who was afterwards the famous Duke de Bouillon, Henry de la Tour,
the Counts of Ventadour, and de la Fenillade, and four other Lords, having run the Risque to pass through the Army of the Duke, and throw themselves into the Place, were made Prisoners, and forced to pay a great Ransom. At that time the States-General, assembled at the Hague, declared the King of Spain to have forfeited the Soveraignty of the Nether∣lands, broke his Seal and Arms, and com∣manded all People to acknowledge him no longer for their Prince, and take the Oath of Fidelity to them. The Beginning of this Decree runs thus, That a Prince is appointed by God Almighty, the Head of his People, to defend them from Oppression, as a Shepherd to keep his Flock; and that when a Prince oppresses them, they may choose another Lord to govern them in Iu∣stice according to their Privileges. The rest is nothing but a long Narration of the Cruel∣ties and Infractions of their Privileges by the King and his Ministers, which obliged them to have Recourse to another Prince. At the same time the Duke of Parma took Tournay from the States notwithstanding the vigorous Defence of Mary de Lalain Princess D'Epinoy, Sister to Emanuel de Lalain Seig∣neur de Montigny, one of the chief Malecon∣tents. She gave great Proofs of her Courage in this Siege, encouraging the Soldiers and Burghers to a gallant Resistance, and expo∣sing herself so much in the most dangerous Places, that she received a Harquebuss Shot in her Arm. This Lady, who deserves a
Place among the Heroines, died the Year af∣ter at Antwerp extreamly regretted by the States-General, for her Courage and Firmness to maintain their Party. Immediately after, the Duke of Anjou pas∣sed into England, to have the Advice of Queen Elizabeth, and to endeavour to ac∣complish his Marriage with that Princess, a Contract being made, and Rings having been presented on both sides. But the Queen having found out some Excuses to hinder it contented her self with supplying him with Money for his Voyage into the Netherlands, and sending with him my Lord Leicester, Admiral Howard, both Knights of the Gar∣ter, and 100 other Lords and Gentlemen of Quality, who carried with them a Train of 500 Men. An Dom. 1582. He repassed from England into Zealand, aboard the Ships of this Prin∣cess, arrived at Flushing, and because of the great Cold went a foot to Middlebourg the Capital of Zealand, which is a League from thence, where he was received and treated very magnificently. The Prince of Orange and Epinoy went to meet him, and going a∣board the 50 Ships provided for them, arrived at Antwerp, where this great City received him with surprizing Pomp and Splendour. All the Keys were lined with the Burghers in Arms, most part very richly dress'd, and with gilt Arms: Triumphal Arches were erected in all parts very richly adorned with fine In∣scriptions. This Prince marched under a
Canopy of Cloth of Gold, from the Port to the great Piazza, where a Theatre was built with a Throne upon it. There the Prince having cloathed him with the Ducal Cap and Mantle of Red Crimson Velvet lined with Ermins, he sware publickly in the presence of the States and the Officers of the City, and an infinite Concourse of People from all parts to see so extraordinary a Sight, That he would religiously observe the Treaty concluded with them, and the Privileges of the Provinces, and govern, not by his Will, but by Iustice and Equity. Afterwards the States, and the Ma∣gistrates of Antwerp swore Fidelity and Obe∣dience to him as their Sovereign Prince. But this publick Rejoycing was interrupted by an Attempt made on the Prince of Orange. One Iauregny a Spaniard of Biscay, Factor to a Merchant called Anastre, spurred on by the Reward promised in the Proscription, fir'd a Pistol at him, loaded with one Ball, which struck him under the Right Ear and went out through the Left Cheek, breaking seve∣ral of his Teeth. At first they believed the French to be the Authors of this Attempt, but the Murtherer being killed by the Halber∣diers of the Prince, and Papers found in his poc∣ket, which proved him to be a Spamard, they were undeceived, and the People who had run to their Arms to revenge his Murther on the French at the Cloister of S. Michael, where the Duke of Anjou lodged, retired to their Houses. The Prince of Orange, to ap∣pease the Tumult, with much Difficulty,
writ a Letter with his own Hand to the Magistrate, to assure him that the Spaniards were the Authors of this Attempt. The Grief and Concern of this great City, for the Wounding of the Prince, cannot be expressed. Immediately publick Prayers were appointed, and as long as he continued in Danger the People stayed in the Chur∣ches praying to God for his Recovery. When he was well, they kept a general Fast, and the whole Day was imployed in thank∣ing God for restoring to them the Father of their Country. When he was in a Condition to travel, the Duke of Anjou carried him to Ghent and Bru∣ges, where another great Conspiracy against those Princes was discovered. The chief Man concerned in it was Nicholas Salvedo a Spa∣niard, who confessed that he had received 4000 Crowns from the Duke of Parma, to make away the Duke of Anjou, and the Prince of Orange, by Poyson or any other way; and that he followed them in order to put his villainous Design in Execution; Francis Baza an Italian and Native of Bresse, one of his Complices, was arrested likewise, and confessed the same thing, but before Exe∣cution stabbed himself with his Knife, to pre∣vent the Severity of the Punishment which was preparing for them. Salvedo was carried to Paris, where by a Decree of the Parlia∣ment he was drawn in pieces by four Horses in the Greve.
The wretched Salvedo seeing himself a Pri∣soner in the Conciergerie, accused Monsieur de Villeroy, in hopes to save himself, by making so great a Man a Partner in his Guilt, or at least suspend the Punishment he deserved. But no Credit was given to so Hellish an Ac∣cusation of a Minister of the greatest Abilities, and the most devoted to the Good and Inte∣rest of the State, of all those who ever had the Administration of France. And it must be acknowledged, to his Honor, that in all the Fury of the League, he was the Man that prevented its falling into the Hands of Foreigners, and after a Ministry of fifty years, died poorer at the End than the Beginning of his Greatness. His Father had been likewise Secretary of State, and his Grandfather, of the same Name, De Neville, was so under Francis the First, and Superintendant of the Finances. The Duke of Anjou, imitating the Con∣duct of Rehoboam who ruined himself by fol∣lowing the Counsel of the young Men, by the Advice of the Sieurs de Fervaques, S. Ag∣nan, de la Rochepot, and other hot-headed young Fellows that governed him, without acquainting the Prince of Orange, the Duke of Montpensier, Count de Lavall, nor any o∣ther Lords who were capable of giving him good Counsel; resolved, contrary to his Oath and against all Justice, to seize, the same day, on all the most considerable Cities of the Netherlands, as Dunkirk, Dendermonde, Bruges, and Antwerp it self, not being able
to bear any longer the great Authority of the Prince of Orange, and so limited a Power, complaining to be only a Sovereign in Name. And for a Proof of his just Resentment, and in his own Justification, he alledged that the People of Antwerp had taken up Arms to destroy him in his Lodgings, and having re∣belled against him by so rash an Act, he was consequently absolved from his Oath. Thus he surprized Dunkirk, Dendermonde, and some other places, but missed of Bruges and Antwerp, when he thought himself Master of it; for though he had poured into the City 17 Companies of Foot supported by all his Army, which he had advanced near the Walls, under pretence of making a review of it; nevertheless, the Burghers ran in all hast to their Arms, and made so brave a Re∣sistance, that the French were obliged to re∣tire in Disorder to the Gate by which they entred, where there was made such a terrible Slaughter of them, that 'twas impossible for those without to succour their Friends within; for there were Mountains of dead Bodies pil'd in Heaps one upon the other, which block'd up the Entry and cut off the Retreat of the French, of whom there were more stifled than kill'd. In this bloody Dispute, called the Enterprize upon Antwerp, there were killed only 83 Burghers, and 1500 French, among whom were 300 Gentlemen, who were all buried without Distinction in a great Ditch. And as the people of these Counties who are much of the same Humour with the Germans, in all
extraordinary Events make Computations up∣on the Numbers, they observed that this De∣liverance fell out in the Year 1583, which Number made up that of the 83 Burgh∣ers and 1500 French who were killed that day. The Duke of Anjou, having miscarried in his Attempt, surrendred by a Treaty made with the States all the Places he had possessed himself of, and returning into France, died of Grief in his Appenage of Chateau-Thierry, in the beginning of the next year, with the Re∣putation of a violent and unsettled Temper. The Flemmings believed that the Prince of Orange was concerned in the Attempt the French made to surprize Antwerp, and his Enemies and Enviers (which great Men ne∣ver fail to have) made use of this false pre∣tence, to lessen his great Credit, and of his fourth Marriage with Louise de Coligny, Daughter to the Admiral de Chastillon, whom he married after he had lost his third Wise Charlotte de Bourbon, who died at Antwerp not long after he was cured of his Wound, which was a visible proof, as they said, of his Inclination to the French, who at that time were had in Execration by all the Ne∣therlands. Seeing himself thus suspected, and that the Party of the States declined in the Walloon Provinces, he retired into Holland, where he thought his Life in greater Security and less exposed to those Attempts which Su∣perstition on one side, and the Reward pro∣mised in the Proscription on the other, made
every one ready to undertake against his Per∣son. He chose the City of Delft for his ordi∣nary Residence, where at the Beginning of the year 1584. he had a Son born called Henry Frederick, Grandfather to the present Prince of Orange, who did not de∣generate from the Vertue of his Ancestors. Prince William employed Philip de Mornix, Seigneur de S. Aldegonde, in the Manage∣ment of his greatest Affairs, and made him Burgomaster of Antwerp when he left it. He was a Man of Quality, Integrity and Learning. About the End of his Life he made use of Iohn Barneveld, whom he va∣lued very much upon the account of his Ho∣nesty and great Capacity. Having been almost overset with the Tem∣pests which had been raised up against him and having a Heart above the Storms, he took for his Devise, a Sea-Gull or Didapper, in Latin Mergus, with this Motto, Saevis tranquillus in Undis, Undisturb'd in the midst of the stormy Waves. He behaved himself with so much Sweet∣ness and Civility to the common People, that he never wore his Hat as he walked through the Streets, where People of all Ages and Sexes crowded to see him. His most intimate Friends assured my Father, that in his Passage through the Streets, if he heard a Noise in any House, and saw a Hus∣band and Wife quarrelling, he entred, heard the Difference patiently, perswaded them to a Reconciliation with incredible Sweetness.
The Breach made up, the Master of the House asked him if he would not taste his Beer; the Prince said yes; the Beer brought, the Burgher, according to the Fashion of the Country, begins the Prince's Health, in a Gup which they call a Cann, and which is usually of blew Earth, then wiping off the Froth with the palm of his Hand, presented the Can to the Prince who pledged him. And when his Confidents told him, that he condescended too much to Men of such mean Quality, and treated them with too much Civility, the Prince used to answer, that what was gained by pulling off a Hat or a little Complaisance, was bought at a very easy Rate. No wonder, after this, that he was so u∣niversally lamented by the People when he was unhappily assassinated in the 51st. year of his Age. 'Twas done by one Baltazar de Guerard a Gentleman of the Franche Comtè and Native of Villefons in the County of Burgundy, who in Hopes of a Reward, or pretending to merit Heaven, by taking out of the World an Enemy to the King and the Catholick Religion, killed him at Delft, as he rose from Table, with a Pistol Shot loaded with three Bullets, of which he died without saying any thing more than Lord have Mercy on my Soul, and this poor People! This dismal Accident happened in the presence of Louise de Coligny his fourth Wife, and the Countess of Schouarzebourg his Sister, whom he loved very tenderly, and who never forsook him
and was present at Antwerp when Iouregny wounded him. This Villain had insinuated himself into the Acquaintance of the Prince, under the name of Francis Guyon Son to Peter Guyon of Besan∣con, who suffered for Religion. He had al∣ways the Huguenot Psalms in his Hands, and was a constant Frequenter of Sermons, the better to conceal his Design: Insomuch as the Prince trusted him, and sent him upon several Dispatches, and at the very Moment he assassinated him, he demanded of the Prince a Pass-port to go somewhere where the Prince was sending him. He was but 22 years old, and made appear as much Constancy and Resolution in suffering the Punishment of his Crime, as Boldness in un∣dertaking it. He repeated a hundred times, that if he had not done it, he would do it again; and when his Flesh was plucked off his Limbs with burning Pincers he did not utter the least Cry or Groan, which made the Hol∣landers believe he was possessed by the Devil; and the Spaniards, that he was assisted by God Almighty; so different are the Opinions and Passions of Mankind. The Marks of the Balls which entred into a Stone of the Gate, after they had gone through the Body of the Prince, are shown to Stran∣gers at this day in Delft in Holland, and I my self saw them when I was young. Thus died William of Nassaw Prince of O∣range, and these are his principal Actions, which are like so many solid Pillars upon
which he has erected the great Fabrick of the Commonwealth of the United Provinces. There was need of as vast a Genius and Capacity as his was to undertake so great and difficult a Work, an unparallelled Cou∣rage to carry it on to the End, and an un∣heard of Constancy in arriving to it, in spite of the formidable Power of Spain, and the domestick Treasons, which crossed his gene∣rous Designs. After this I believe no Man will accuse me of an Hyperbole for ranking this great Man among the Heroes of Anti∣quity; and asserting that the Life and Ver∣tue of the Admiral de Coligny bore a great Resemblance with that of the Prince of O∣range. They had both a very great share of Con∣duct, Wisdom and Moderation. They both had the Address to clear up and unravel the most perplexed and embroiled Affairs. Both heard more than they talk'd. They had both the Art of persuading, and were full of good Counsels. Both possessed the Hearts, the Esteem and the Veneration of all those of their Party. Their Courage was above their Misfortunes, and their Constancy in support∣ing them was admirable. Both were often routed, and still found some glorious Resour∣ces in all their Adversities. Both had to do with the most powerful Kings of Christen∣dom. Both made use of the Assistance of England and Germany to maintain themselves. Both lived in the same Time, and out∣lived 50 years. Both supported the same
Religion, and established it one in France, the other in the Low-Countries. Both were pro∣scribed, and Prices set on their Heads. The Prince was seconded in his Wars, by the Courage of Count Lodowick, Adolphus, and Henry of Nassaw, his Brothers. And the Admiral was supported in his, by the Coun∣sels of Odel de Coligny, Cardinal de Chatillon, and by the Valour of Francis de Coligny, Seig∣neur d' Andelot Colonel-General of the French Infantry, his two Brothers. In fine, both died a violent Death and by Treason, and both equally dreaded. The powerful Princes whom they had attacked not thinking themselves secure till they had cut off these two great Men; and not being able to com∣pass it by open Force and War, made use of Treachery and Fraud to bring it about. The Prince would never have perished as the Admiral did; for he would never have committed himself to the Power of his Ene∣mies being of the same Opinion with the Man who said, that when a Subject draws his Sword against his King, he ought to throw away the Scabbard. The Prince died by giving all sorts of Persons too free Access to his Person, at a time when Superstition was the Motive to such horrible Attempts, and perhaps by be∣ing of Caesar's Opinion, who told his Friends when they advised him to guard himself, and make himself fear'd, That 'twas better to die once, than live in continual Apprehensions of Death.
As soon as the News of his Murder was spread about, nothing was to be seen over all Parts in the Cities but Tears, nothing to be heard over all the Villages of the Country but Lamentations, as if all had lost what was most dear to them. The People of the United Provinces, in the Celebration of his Funeral, shewed the greatest Mourning which was ever heard of, and their Affliction went even to Despair. The Funeral Pomp was very Magnificent; all the Nobility assisted at it, and the chief Men of the Provinces, in deep Mourning followed by an incredible Num∣ber of People of all Conditions. Prince Maurice his Son followed the Corps, having on his Right Hand Gerard Trucses Archbi∣shop and Elector of Cologne, and on his Left Count de Hohenlo or Helac. This was that Elector, who falling desperately in love with Agnes de Mansfield a Nun, chose rather to lose his Soveraignty and Electorate than his Mistress. He was of the same Opinion with that Greek Poet who writ, that a beloved Nymph stood in instead of all things, and that we can want nothing with her; but not enjoying her, we are poor amidst the plenty of all other Goods. This Archbishop delivered into the Hands of the United Provinces the City of Reneberg in the Diocess of Cologne. It was so often taken by the Spaniards and Dutch, that the Marquess Spinola called it the Whore of War, and it was seven years since in the Hands of the States, the Consideration of which made
the present Elector of Cologne join with France, to recover again this Place of his Electorate, which this Trucses had alienated, and this Al∣liance gave us an Opportunity of falling up∣on Holland behind, which some years since was almost over-run. The Gravers of Holland have represented this Magnificent Funeral Pomp of the Prince of Orange, upon several Sheets of Paper glu'd together, which take up the whole side of a great Hall, in order to perpetuate the Memory of so remarkable a Mourning. Count Maurice his Son built him a very stately Monument of Marble, where his Images stands made to the Life; the Basis of this fine Monument is adorn'd with several Statues representing all the Ver∣tues, and the upper part is surrounded with weeping Loves. It stands in one of the prin∣cipal Churches of Delft, and is not inferiour to the most sumptuous and stately Tombs in Italy. Reflecting on this Tragical Death of the Prince of Orange, I have often wondred that so wife a Man, and who had so powerful E∣nemies, had not better guarded himself. For when he passed through the Cities he was commonly attended by only three or four Domesticks; and I wondred at it the more because, not long before, Iouregny had like to have killed him at Antwerp, where he e∣scaped miraculously. And there were many Salcedes in the Country who wanted only an Opportunity to assassinate him. For after
his Death the Spaniards gave out, that when he was murthered by this Burgundian, there was the same time at Delft, a Lorrainer, an English Man, and two more of different Na∣tions, who had the same Design, and could not have failed to put it in Execution. It seems to me that his own Dangers ought to have made him provide better for his Secu∣rity; but he feared only two Nations, the Italians and Spaniards, imploying all others but these two; and in the City of Delft which he had made the Seat of his Residence there was neither Spaniard nor Italian. He ob∣served that though a Price had been set on Admiral Coligny's Head, nevertheless no Man durst run the Hazard of Assassinating him in hopes of a Reward which could prove of no Service to them when they had lost their Lives; for there was no Appearance of making an Escape after they had killed a Prince in his own Country and in the midst of his Attendants. Had he lived till the year 1589. and seen a little Monk, spurred on by a false Zeal of Religion, have the Boldness to assassinate Henry the III. at St. Cloud in the midst of his Army, he would have taken more Care of his Safety. These dismal Accidents, and the deplora∣ble Death of Henry the IV. massacred in the middle of Paris, were a Warning to Richelieu who had always in his Mind, this Proverb, that Suspicion is the Mother of Security. For when he saw all Europe had conspired his Ruin, he stood upon his Guard, and died
peaceably in his Bed, in spite of all the Dis∣gusts of his Master, and the Contrivances of his Enemies. The Superstitious Catholicks and Spani∣ards celebrate this Belthazar de Guerard, and have ranked him in the Number of their Martyrs. Upon which Subject I can∣not but admire that Famianus Strada in his excellent History of the Low Countries has insinuated that Iouregny who narrowly missed of killing the Prince at Antwerp, had a good Design, because he had fortified and prepared himself before he executed it, with the Sacraments of the Communion and Pen∣nance, as if God Almighty who has express∣ly forbid Murther in the Decalogue, and our Lord Iesus Christ, who hath said and taught that he who should strike with the Sword, should perish by the Sword, would guide and strengthen a Murtherer in his Attempt. Some Examples of the Old Testament will not serve to justifie him, where God Almigh∣ty for the Preservation and establishment of the people of Israel, and for other Reasons best known to himself allowed of such Actions, otherwise there could be no Security for the Life of any Prince. The Huguenots on the other side made a Martyr of that execrable Poltrot, who killed the Great Francis of Lor∣rain Duke of Guise, who had given him a treat in his House and made him eat at his Table, insomuch as Adrianus Turnebus one of the learnedst men of his Age, made a La∣tin Poem in Honour of this Poltrot, who
was called Iohn de Merè, where he says, Conspicuus fulvo stabit Mereus in auro. And toward the End, Plurimus ut maneat Mereus in ore nepotum. Another learned Heretick said this in his Poem, Praemia multa Meret, alluding to his Name de Merè. Another Heretick goes so far as to say among other things in French Verse, Ce valeureux Poltrot qui tant s'ever tua Que le tyran, tueur de Chretiens il tua. I knew in my youth the Lady of the Sieur Alard a Captain in the French Troops in Holland, so prepossessed with false Zeal and Bigotry for Calvinism, that she shewed pub∣lickly to all the World the Picture of Poltrot, like Iudith having killed Holofernes, which she kept in the Reuelle of her Bed, as a great Martyr, and whom she considered as the Deliverer of the little Flock. The Doctors of the League honoured with many Elogies Iames Clement a Iacobin, the Murtherer of Henry the III. comparing him to Ebud who freed the people of Israel from their Servitude, by killing Eglon Prince of the Moabites in his Chamber. For Men's Passi∣ons are so violent, and their Animosities pre∣judice them in such a manner, that they ce∣lebrate
Actions which deserve not only the Blame of all good Men, but an exemplary Punishment. William Prince of Orange made more noise in Europe than all the Kings of his time put together, and has left behind him a renowned Posterity, who pursuing his glorious Example, have amazed all the Christian World by Acti∣ons which are immortalized in History. He may boast to have been the Father of two very great Captains, to have produced Kings, Electors, Landtgraves, and Sovereign Princes in Germany, to have peopled France with Princes, Princesses, Dukes, Cardinals, Ma∣reschals, and many great Lords. But for a clearer Understanding of the Matter, we must first declare that he had four Wives. His first Wife was Anne D' Egmont Daugh∣ter to Maximilian D' Egmont Count of Bu∣rem and Leerdam, a great Heiress, whom he married by the Favour of Charles V. and had by her a Son and Daughter. The Son was Philip William Prince of Orange, of whom more hereafter, and the Daughter Mary de Nassaw who was married to Philip Count de Hohenlo, commonly called de Holac, a great General, who after the unexpected Death of the Prince of Orange which put the United Provinces into a strange Consternation, ge∣nerously resisted all the Efforts of the Spani∣ards, and taught the first Rudiments of War to Prince Maurice his Brother in Law who was at the College at the time of this un∣happy Accident.
His second Wife was Anne of Saxony, Daughter to the Great Maurice Elector of Saxony who made head against the Emperor Charles the V. by whom he had the Famous Maurice, of whom we shall give a very large Relation, and a Daughter named Emilia de Nassau who married Emanuel King of Por∣tugal, Son to King Anthony of Portugal, who was dispossessed by King Philip the II. This Prince Emmanuel won so much on the Prin∣cess by his Civility, Courtship and Addresses, that she chose him for her Husband as poor as he was, and of a contrary Religion, and tho' Prince Maurice opposed the Match as ad∣vantageous to neither. They had two Sons, whom I knew in my youth, one of whom left a Son, among other Children, who went lately into Holland to demand of the Prince of Orange the Remainder of his Grandmo∣ther's Fortune; and many Daughters, some of whom were married to Persons of a very unsuitable Quality. She was a very good Princess, but about the end of her Life, ha∣ving fallen out with the Prince of Orange her Brother, she retired to Geneva. An. Dom. 1623. and died shortly after of Melancholy, leaving six Daughters whom I saw at Gene∣va, An. Dom. 1624. She was Godmother to one of my Sisters and gave her Her Name Emilia, who is still alive and is married to the Seigneur de Montrevil near Menetoon in Champagne: Her Godfather was the Count de Culembourg, Son to Florent de Pallant Count de Culembourg, whose House at Brussels was
pulled down by Order of the Duke of Alva, and who having done nothing after the Ad∣dress of the Nobility, retired into Holland and lived so privately that he died unknown to those of his own Party. The third Wife of William Prince of O∣range was Charlotte de Bourbon of the House of Montpensier, whom I have declared before to have been a Religieuse or Abbess of Iouarre. But the Love of Liberty which is an invalua∣ble Blessing, prevailed over all the Vows she had made in her youth, which she pleaded she had been forced to, and had made several Protestations against. She died of a Pleurisy at Antwerp, A. D. 1582. leaving six Daugh∣ters behind her. The eldest Lovise Iulienne de Nassau was married to Frederick the IV. Elector Palatine, Father to Frederick the V. Elected King of Bohemia, who by the Princess Elizabeth of England, Sister to Charles the I. King of Great Britain, had many Princes and Prin∣cesses. The eldest, Henry Frederick Design'd King of Bohemia with his Father, A. D. 1620. was a ve∣ry handsom and hopeful Prince. He studied at Leyden, and Our Tutor Benjamin Prioleau Au∣thor of the Latin History of the last Regency, carried us duely every Sunday after Dinner to play with this young Prince, who loved us ex∣treamly, which made us the more regret his Death when we afterwards heard of it. He perished unhappily in the Sea of Haerlem, going in Company with the King his Father to see
the Spanish Galleons laden with an inestima∣ble Booty, which had been taken by Peter Hain the Dutch Admiral near the Island of Cuba. A Vessel by Night, sailing full Speed, having fall'n soul on his, split it in two; thus the Prince and all that were in it were drowned, except the King his Father, who by great Fortune, having caught hold of a Rope that was thrown out to him from the Ship, was miraculously drawn aboard. The Second is the present Elector Palatine, who has several Children by the Princess of Hesse, among others, Madam the Dutchess of Orleans, a Princess of great Wit and Judg∣ment, who has already Children who are the first Princes of the Blood in France. The third is the Famous Prince Robert who has won so much Reputation by Sea and Land, having not deceived the hopes which he had given in his Infancy, by the Martial and Manly Look which was then taken notice of. The fourth was called Edward, who lived a long time in France, where turning Catho∣lick he married the Princess Anne de Gonzague Daughter to the late Duke of Mantua, Mont∣ferrat and Lions, and Sister to Maria Louise Q. of Poland, and Wife to two Brothers Uladislaus and Casimir Kings of Poland. She was cele∣brated for her Beauty under the Name of the Princess Maria. Concerning whom, I add this by the way, that having been de∣signed Queen of Poland, and understanding that I was very well acquainted with the
State of that Kingdom where I had been twice; she desired me by the Duke de Noailles to give her some Instructions of it, which I did several Afternoons; and in To∣ken of her Acknowledgment she would be Godmother to my eldest Daughter, with Monsieur the Coadjutor of Paris, then Archbishop of Corinth, who is the famous Cardinal de Retz, the learnedst Prelate in the Kingdom. But to return to the Prince Palatine, Ed∣ward: He left three Daughters by the Prin∣cess Anne of Mantua, the eldest of whom is Madam the Dutchess of Enguien, already the Mother of several Princes and Princesses of the Blood. The other married the Duke of Brunswick Hanouer, who had only Daugh∣ters, and the third the Prince of Solme who was made prisoner at the Battle of Seneff. If I well remember (for I write all this by my memory which is very good without the Assistance of any Book) there was another Son of the King of Bohemia, a very handsom Man, Godson to Prince Maurice of Nassau, called Maurice. I saw another Son of his, called Philip, who retired to Venice, for an Action which 'tis better to pass over in Silence than men∣tion. Another Son was called Louis, who died young, whom my Father named so for the late King who was his Godfather, by an Or∣der of his Majesty which follows.
Monsieur de Maurier, BEing acquainted with the Desire my Cousin the Count Palatine of the Rhine has to in∣vite me to be Godfather to the last Son which God has given him, I shall be extreamly glad to pay him this Testimony of my Friendship and good Affection, and that you should perform this Office in my Name when the time is, first informing him of the Charge I have given you, and renewing the Assurances of my Af∣fection to him: Referring this to your Care I desire God (Monsieur Maurier) to keep and preserve you. Written at Paris the 15th day of Novemb. 1623. Signed LOWIS; and below, Brulart. In pursuance of this Order the Ceremony of the Baptism was performed. Prince Mau∣rice represented the King of Sweden, who was likewise Godfather, and the Coun∣tess of Nassau, the Queen of Sweden. My Father Walked as Embassador of France, with the King of Bohemia on his Right Hand, and the Prince of Orange on his Left. The Ceremony was celebrated with great Pomp in a Church at the Hague called the Cloistre, where I was present, with my three Brothers. For which great Honour the King and Queen of Bohemia thanked the King of France by Monsieur D'Ausson de Villeroul, of the House of Iau∣court,
Brother-in-Law to my Father, who was in their Service, and afterwards unhap∣pily perished with Prince Henry Frederick by the splitting of the Vessel which I mentioned before. The Pope's Nuncio Resident at Pa∣ris hearing of this Baptism, made great Com∣plaints of it at Court, and said 'twas a great Shame for the most Christian King and eldest Son of the Church to have his Person repre∣sented by a Huguenot in an Ecclesiastical Ce∣remony. The King and Queen of Bohemia left be∣hind them several Princesses eminent for their Beauty and Merit, one of whom turned Ca∣tholick, and is now Abbess de Maubuisson. The Princess Louise Iuliane de Nassau, eldest Daughter of Charlotte de Bourbon, and William Prince of Orange, had also a Daughter by Frederick the IV. Elector Palatine, who was married to the late Elector of Brandenburg, Father to the present Elector. I saw (A. D. 1635.) the old Electoress Palatine a Konigs∣berg, the Capital of the Ducal Prussia, where she had retired to her Daughter the Electoress of Brandenbourg after the Disorders of the Palatinate. These two Princesses were extreamly civil to me. The second Daughter of Charlotte de Bour∣bon and William Prince of Orange, was Eli∣zabeth de Nassau, Wife to Henry de la Tour, Duke of Bouillon, a Famous General in the the Wars of Henry the IV She was living in the year 1641. and I saw her in the Castle of Sedan, after the Battle wherein the Count
de Soissons was killed. She left two Sons and four Daughters who had Children The eldest was Frederick Maurice de la Tour, Duke of Bouillon, as great a Captain as his Fa∣ther, who by the Countess de Bergue had the present Duke of Bouillon, Great Chamberlain of France, and the Cardinal de Bouillon, a Prince of great Learning and Merit, and the Count D'Auvergne who has distinguished him∣self in our Armies, and other Children, a∣mong the rest the Dutchess D'Elbeuf. The second Son of Elizabeth de Nassau and Henry de la Tour Duke of Bouillon, was the Famous Henry de la Tour, Viscount de Turenne, a General of as great Wisdom and Valour, who during the whole Course of his Life was held for one of the firmest Pillars of the State, and in consideration of his extraordi∣nary Valour and great Services, was interr'd at St. Denys with our Kings, by a just Order of his Majesty. He married the Heireress of the House de la Force, whose Vertue equalled her Birth; she was Daughter to the deceased Duke de la Force, and Grand-daughter to a Mareschal of that Name, two Famous Cap∣tains, and died without Issue, but if she had left any Children behind her they could not have failed of being great Men, being de∣scended on both sides from an illustrious Number of generous Ancestors. Besides these two great Sons, Elizabeth de Nassau had several Daughters by Henry de la Tour, Duke de Bouillon.
The eldest, Anna Maria de la Tour, mar∣ried Henry Duke de la Trimouille and de Thouars her Cousin German. Iuliane de la Tour was married to Francis de Roye de la Rochefoucault, Count de Roussy, Father to the Count de Roye, very Famous in our Armies. Elizabeth Wife of Guy Alfonse de Darfort, Marquess of Duras, Father to Monsieur de Duras, Captain of the Guards du Corps to the King, Mareschal of France, Governour of the Franche Comtè, and of the Count de Lorge like∣wise Mareschal of France. I believe that the youngest was called Henrietta de la Tour, Wife to the late Mar∣quess de la Moissy of the House of Matig∣non. She is Mother to the Marquese Du Bordage, and the Count de Quintine, who married a Lady of the Illustrious Name of Montgomery, as considerable for her Beauty and Merit, as the Greatness of her Extra∣ction. The third Daughter of Charlotte de Bour∣bon and William Prince of Orange, was na∣med Catharine Belgique, who married Philip Louis Count of Hanau a Sovereign Lord near Francfort on the Main, from whom, besides the Counts of Hanau, is descended Amelia Elizabeth, Wife to that generous William Landtgrave of Hesse, who died in the year 1637. after whose Death this Princess, a Wo∣man of a masculine Courage, continued on the War against the Imperialists, and pursued the Steps of her Husband who after the Peace
of Prague (where most of the Protestant Prin∣ces forsook their Allies and joined with the House of Austria) had the Courage and Re∣solution to make head almost alone against so formidable a Power. Among other Chil∣dren she left the present Landtgrave of Hesse, called William as his Father was, the Ele∣ctoress Palatine Mother to the Dutchess of Orleans, and the Princess of Tarente, Mother to the present Duke de la Trimouille who is married to the Heiress of the House of Crequi. The fourth Daughter of Charlotte de Bour∣bon and the Prince of Orange, was Charlotte Brabantine, Wife to Claude Duke de la Trimou∣ille, and de Thouars, Count de la Val who had Henry Duke de la Trimouille, dead lately, and Frederick de la Trimouille, Count de Laval killed in a Duel in Italy by the late Monsieur Du Coudray Montpensier. I saw him, and knew him in my youth, and because his upper Lip was slit, they called him Bec de lievere or Hare-Lip. Henry Duke de la Trimouille had by Mary de la Tour, his Cousin German, formerly mentioned, the Prince de Tarent and de Talmont who is dead, and who had the Duke of Trimouille already mentioned by the Princess of Hesse. The fifth Daughter of Charlotte de Bourbon and the Prince of Orange, was Charlotte Flan∣drine de Nassau, who returning to the Reli∣gion of her Ancestors died Abbess of S. Croix in Poictiers. She was a very good Princess, I knew her, but was little, and so deaf that she could not hear without a little Silver Trumpet.
The sixth Daughter of Charlotte de Bourbon Princess of Orange was Aemilia of Nassau, Wife to Frederick Casimir Count Palatine, of the Branch of Duponts, called the Duke of Lansberg. This is the illustrious and great Posterity of this Fruitful Abbess. The fourth and last Wife of William of Nassau Prince of Orange, was Louise de Colig∣ny, Widow to Monsieur de Teligny, and Daughter to the great Admiral de Chatillon; by whom he had only one Son, the renow∣ned Henry Frederick Prince of Orange, of whom we shall speak hereafter. Besides his celebrated Posterity of legiti∣mate Children, the Prince of Orange left a Na∣tural Son called Iustin de Nassau, who led a considerable Body of Men to the Assistance of King Henry the IV. before the Peace of Vervins. He was a Brave, Vertuous Man, and died Governour of Breda. I have heard my Father say, that in the year 1616. ha∣ving dispatched to Court upon some impor∣tant Affair, a Garson Captain, named Lan∣chere, famous in the Netherlands, where he served. This Courier in his Return passing through Breda, Monsieur Iustin de Nassau asked him, what News? He answered, no∣thing considerable but the Imprisonment of the Count D' Auvergne, since Duke of Angou∣lesme. Iustin de Nassau asking him the Rea∣son, he replied, bluntly striking him on the Back, (for he was acquainted with his true Extraction) Don't you know, Sir, that a
Son of a Whore was never good for any thing. A Fault which the poor Lanchere confessed to my Father when he knew that he was a Bastard. Which is a proof that 'tis good to be informed of Pedigrees and Alliances, otherwise we are liable to Mi∣stakes, and to offend innocently Persons of Quality. The End of the Life of William of Nassau Prince of Orange.
THE LIFE OF LOVISE de COLIGNY, THE Fourth and Last Wife of WIL∣LIAM of NASSAU Prince of ORANGE. THIS Lady had very excellent Ver∣tues, without having the least Mix∣ture of any Weakness incident to her Sex, through the Course of her whole Life, though it was very long. She had been married to Monsieur de Teligny before the Famous Day of St. Bartholomew, which was in 1572. and she died in 1620. The Admiral her Father esteem'd her very much both for her Modesty and Prudence She gain'd every Body's Heart and Affection, by her Way of Conversation, which was easy and graceful; and had an universal Respect, as well for her true Sence, as her extraordinary
good Nature. She was very well shap'd, though her Stature was but low; her Eyes were very beautiful, and her Complexion lively. The Admiral, who loved her tenderly and passionately, desired to have her well disposed of, after having cast his Eyes upon all the Persons of Quality that were of his own Religion and Party, he found none so deserving to marry this excellent Lady as Monsieur de Teligny, (Son of Monsieur de Teligny a Famous Captain in the Wars of Italy) in whom he had observed more Va∣lour and Conduct than in any other Gentle∣man of his time; besides, his Vertues were so considerable, that those who writ in Fa∣vour of Queen Catharine Queen of Medices, (who mortally hated the Admiral have con∣fessed, that she and the King her Son had ve∣ry great Difficulty to consent to the Death of Monsieur de Teligny, who had rendred him∣self agreeable to both of them, by his hand∣som Deportment, and by his sincere and no∣ble Way of Acting; which shews that Ver∣tue is always attractive, from whencesoever it proceeds, and that it has uncommon Charms to make it self admired and favoured, though in the Person of an Enemy. The Admiral then advised this beautiful Lady to accept of Monsieur de Teligny, and to preferr a Man indued with so many good Qualities, though of moderate Fortune, to others, who though they had greater Riches and Titles, were still less worthy to possess
her. But she soon lost so good a Husband, together with the Admiral her Father, in the cruel Day of St. Bartholomew. Having heard of this Misfortune in Burgundy, her Mother-in-Law and she, with the young Lord of Chatillon her Brother, had much a∣do to get into Switzerland to secure their Lives, the Massacre of the Protestants being universal throughout all France. This great Admiral was Son of another Gaspar de Coligny, Lord of Chatillon upon Loyr, Mareschal of France under Louis the XII a Famous General, who died at Aix, as he was commanding the French Army a∣gainst the Spaniards, and of Louise de Mont∣morency, Sister to Anne de Montmorency, Con∣stable of France. He left behind him three Sons that were very considerable; Odet Car∣dinal of Chatillon the eldest, who was Patron to all the Wits and Learned Persons of his Age; Iasper Admiral of France, who, before that, had been Governour of Paris and Picardy; and lastly, Francis de Coligny Lord of Andelot, Colonel General of the French Infantry. A Son of the Admiral, named Francis was like∣wise Colonel of the French Infantry, he sig∣nalized himself, as well upon the Bridge of Tours, by saving the Persons of Henry the III. and the King of Navarre, from the Forces of the League, and afterwards in the Battle of Arques, by which he gained the Reputation of surpassing the Admiral. He left two Sons by a Daughter of the House of Chaune de Pequigny; the eldest, who promised much,
was taken off by a Cannon Bullet at the Siege of Ostend; the other was the Mareschal de Chatillon, Father to the Count de Coligny that died young, and the Duke de Chatillon who was killed at Charenton. The Mareschal Chatillon had likewise two Daughters, one married to the Prince of Montbeliard, and the other named Henrietta, Countess of Adinton and Suze, had so great a Genius for Poetry, that she has out done Sappho her self, by her exquisite Works, which are the Delight of all such as are Lovers of Gal∣lantry. Madam de Teligny having lived during her Widowhood with a Conduct that made her admired by the whole World, she was sought to by Prince William of Orange after the Death of Charlotte de Bourbon, and he married her in the year 1583. upon the Re∣putation of her Vertue. But soon after, by a Fatality that usually snatches from us That which is most dear, she saw him assassina∣ted before her own Eyes, having had but one Son by him, born a little before his Father's Death who was the Famous Henry Frederick Prince of Orange. She had this Advantage, to be Sprung from the greatest Man in Europe, and to have had two Husbands of very eminent Vertues, the last of which left behind him an im∣mortal Reputation; but she had likewise the Misfortune to lose them all three by hasty and violent Deaths; her Life having been nothing but a continued Series of Affli∣ctions
able to make any one sink under them, but a Soul that, like hers, had re∣signed her self up so totally to the will of Heaven. She has told my Father freely, that at her coming into Holland, she was very much surprized at their Rude Way of Living; so different from that in France, and whereas she had been used to a Coach, she was there put into a Dutch Waggon, open at Top, guided by a Vourman; where she sate upon a Board, and that in going from Roterdam to Delft, which is but two Leagues, she was crippled, and almost Fro∣zen to death. There never was one of a more noble Soul, or a truer Lover of Justice than this Princess. But it was observable, during the great Differences between Maurice Prince of O∣range her Son-in-Law, and Monsieur Barne∣veldt, she took part with the latter, and used all her Endeavours to save his Life, having founded her good Opinion of him, upon his having been one of the chiefest Confidents of the Prince her Husband. This Princess was my Father's greatest Support in his Long Embassy; and ren∣dred him always agreeable to the House of Orange. This was a Favour which at that time he stood mightily in need of; for the Court would suffer no person there, but one that stood fair in the Opinion of that Family. This Protection was so much
the more advantageous and necessary to him, because there were several Persons of Quality in France that were Brothers-in-Law or Cousins to Prince Maurice, who used all their Endeavours to render him suspected, and to have him recalled from that Employment, which was the most con∣siderable that could be hoped for from France in that Conjuncture. All Europe was then in a profound Peace, so all Embassies at other Courts lay dead, and had no Action stirring that was considerable. That of Holland only was of Importance, by reason of the War, which on their part was managed under the Conduct of that Famous Cap∣tain Count Maurice; and in Flanders by the great General Ambrose Spinola a Genoese. The English, Scotch, Danes, Swedes, the Germans those that were Protestants, and the French went thither to learn the Rudi∣ments of War under the Count; and the Germans, the Italians, the Sicilians, the Po∣landers, and the Spaniards, that were Catho∣licks, did the same under the Marquess; so it seemed as if all the whole Christian World was met in this little Corner of the Earth to learn how to fight against one another. France then maintaining divers Companies of Foot, and some Troops of Horse in that Countrey, being very much interested in what concerned the Good of the United Pro∣vinces, who then Employed the Arms of
the Spaniards their ancient Enemies; and ha∣ving likewise very often an Occasion for the Assistance of the Dutch Men of War, the Embassador had continually some matter of Importance to write to Court, and to dis∣patch his Couriers thither. Besides the King every year gave large Sums to the Hollanders for the Payment of the French Troops; and the Embassador, besides the Allowance for his Employment, and his Pensions from Court, had moreover fourscore thou∣sand Livres a year as Treasurer in Holland; and all the Money went through his Hand. Besides the great Profit of this Employment, there was likewise much Honour and Plea∣sure in the Service; for all the French Nobi∣lity, when they came from the University, went to learn the Art of War under Prince Maurice, as heretofore they had done in Piedmont under the great Mareschal Brisac. In Winter the Hague was full of French Lords and Gentlemen, who to honour their King, and the Person of his Minister used to accompany him to his Audience of the States-General; and it not being possible to provide Coaches for two or three hun∣dred Gentlemen and Officers, that some∣times came together, the Embassador him∣self used to march on Foot at the Head of so splendid a Company; and his Coach to follow after empty.
I shall spend no more time upon the Concerns of my Fathers Embassy, or his Obligations to the Princess Louise of O∣range; but return to my principal Mat∣ter, and relate what I know concerning Philip Prince of Orange, eldest Son to William of Nassau, by his first Wife Anne of Egmont.
PHILLIP WILLIAM Prince of Orange. portrait
Philip William of Nassau, Prince of Orange, and Eleanor of Bourbon his Wife. THis Prince was Godson to King Philip the Second; and when Prince William his Father was forced to take Arms in his own Defence, he studied in the Colledge of Lovaine: where, amongst other priviledges, it is not permitted to arrest any person upon what account soever. Notwithstanding this, Iohn Vargas, a Spaniard, accompanied with several Souldiers of the same Nation, took him thence by force, pursuant to an Order from the Duke of Alva; in spite of all the clamours of the Rector of the University, who complaining vehemently and in good Latin, that their Priviledges were violated, was answered by Vargas very inconguously in this Barbarous expression, Non curamus Pri∣vilegios vestros. The Prince of Orange his Father complain∣ed of it by Publick Manifesto's, which set forth the Cruelty of the Spaniards; and pro∣ved that there were neither Laws nor Privi∣ledges, nor Innocence of Age, that could exempt any person from their Tyranny.
This poor Child was carried Prisoner into Spain at 13 years old, and shut up in a Castle in the Country, where he could have no Education, and where he pass'd the greatest part of his time in playing at Chess, which the Governour of the Castle had taught him. Towards the end of his Imprisonment, which was about 30 years, they allow'd him a little more Liberty. This Prince was naturally Complaisant; his Body sat, and wore a very large Beard. Being carried young into Spain, he continued a Catholick; so the Spaniards, to justifie this unjust detention, said they had brought him thither only to preserve him from the poyson of Heresie, and to keep him in security from it. During his stay in Spain, the Captain who guarded him having spoke much to the disadvantage of Prince William his Father, this generous Son, push'd on by affection for his Father, which animated him to resent∣ment, took him about the middle, threw him out of the Window, and broke his Neck. He thought that so bold an action would bring him into trouble: and indeed upon this occasion there were different ad∣vices given in King Philips Council, but at last it was resolved to use mildness, and in∣dulgence in this encounter; Gabriel Osorio, a young Gentleman, who was present at the action, having reported it in favour of the Prince, said the Governour had been want∣ing in his respect towards him; so this death
was allowed to his just resentment. The Prince thought himself so obliged to Osorio, for this favorable representation which he had made of him, that he ever after kept him near his Person, and bestow'd on him a great many favours. At last, King Philip II. either moved by so long a Captivity, or weary of punishing the pretended Iniquity of the Father upon the Son that was Innocent, or rather hoping that his deliverance would raise jealousies and divisions amongst the Brothers of the House of Orange, (as the escape of Monsieur de Guise, from the Castle of Tours, had caused amongst the heads of the League) re∣solved to release him, after so long an Im∣prisonment. Then Count Maurice shewed upon this occasion, that he had a Soul that was whol∣ly disinterested, and let him enjoy all the Estates which were then in his Possession, as Breda and other places; and Madam the Countess of Holoc, his Sister by Father and Mother, used him very generously, making him a Thousand fair Offers, and rich Pre∣sents, upon his arrival in the Low Countries, where they two met at Cleves; but Count Maurice for fear of being suspected, satisfied himself with visiting him by an Envoy. Prince Philip came into Flanders with Al∣bert the Arch-Duke, who a little while after sent him back to Spain, to bring the Infan∣ta Isabella (afterwards his se) into the
Low Countries, to whom her Father Philip gave in Marriage, the Soveraignty of the Seventeen Provinces; all Europe was very much astonished, that the Son of a man so odious to Spain, should be chose to execute so im∣portant a Commission, which could not be given him without a large Testimony both of Esteem and Confidence. He lived after∣wards in the Court of Brussels with the Arch-Dukes of Flanders: for the States of the United Provinces conceived such a distrust of him by reason of this employment, and be∣cause King Philip had reestablished him in his Lands, situated in the Spanish Low Coun∣tries, and in the Franche Comte, which had been confiscated; that they would never let him come to visit their Provinces, much less to continue there, though he had often testi∣fied his desire of it. He never appeared there before the Year 1608, when the Truce with the Spaniards was almost concluded; and in this Journey he did nothing else but re∣concile the Princess Emilia his Sister, with his Brother Count Maurice, who would ne∣ver see her since her Marriage with Prince Emanuel of Portugal, because it had been con∣cluded without his consent. He married Eleanor of Bourbon, the Sister of the deceased Prince of Conde, a very vir∣tuous Princess, by whom he had no Children. This Marriage with the first Princess of the Blood of France, put him in possession of his
Principality and Town of Orange, where the Sieur de Blacons who was Governor of it, as being a Kinsman of Monsieur the Marshal des Lesdiguierres, who commanded absolutely in Dauphiny, would not let him enter; but the Sieur de Blacons, had so many express or∣ders from the King to leave the place; and Monsieur des Lesdiguierres had an order to make them be precisely obeyed, that at last the Prince saw himself possess'd both of the Place and his Soveraignty; for before he had been look'd upon as an Enemy, having followed the Arch-Duke Albert when he was at Calais, and would make King Henry IV. raise the Seige of Amiens. Prince Philip farther confess'd to his most intimate Friends, That in his whole Life he was never in so great pain and such strange uneasiness, as at the time when the battle of Newport was fought; for the Arch-Duke, who presumed very far upon his own Forces, think∣ing them as much superior in Valor, as they were in Number, to those of the Hollanders, had boasted, that if he had gained the day, he would send the two Brothers, Maurice and Henry Frederick, bound hand and foot as his Prisoners into Spain. So he sent out his Scouts on every side, kept all his Horses rea∣dy sadled and bridled in his Stable, and his People all in a condition to retire suddenly into some place of safety, thinking that his Brothers being lost, he likewise must perish by the Spaniards: so that during the whole
fight he was at his Prayers, and made ardent and continual Vows that his Brothers might obtain the Victory. During the Truce, which was concluded for 12 years, he made a Voyage into Holland, in the Year 1615, with Madam the Princess his Wife, and they lived generally at Breda. My Father had the honor to see them, and converse with them often, and he was so far in both their good graces, that they helped him to overthrow a great many calumnies which had been invented to draw upon him the indignation of Monsieur the Prince of Conde, and several other Lords and great Per∣sons of the Kingdom, who during the Mi∣nority of the late King, had been several times in Arms upon diverse pretences; it hav∣ing been told them by my Fathers Enemies that during these commotions, he had acted with too much heat and violence against them, having caused several Vessels full of Arms to be seized, and stopped divers Offi∣cers from Holland, who would have come over to their Service; to all these disobliging actions were added some discourses to the disparagement of these great Persons, which my Fathers Enemies had likewise im∣puted to him. These Princes had so far given credit to such Impostors, that not being able to seize upon my Fathers Person, they testified their resentment by sacking his Castle of Fountayne Dangé, near Chateleraut, which they pillaged
by their Troops; but Mary de Medices, the Queen Mother, who had knowledge of this disorder, being then at Poitiers, made him ample satisfaction; so that he had no further loss, than of several original Papers, and an∣cient Titles which were not in her Majesties Power to repair. The King himself upon this occasion wrote to my Father as follows, Monsieur de Maurier, Then after this are two pages in Cypher. AS for what remains, I am very sorry that your House has suffered for the Services you have rendred me. I will takecare of my Servants, and encourage them to do well by the Protection which I give both to their Persons and Estates. The Sieur de Puysieux may acquaint you with what I have ordered upon this account; continue only to serve me with care and fidelity as you do at present, and you shall receive both the Honor and the Profit of it. I pray God keep you Monsieur de Maurier, un∣der his holy and safe Protection. Written at Poi∣tiers, Jan. 20, 1616. Signed Lewis, and a little lower. Brulard. The Queen likewise wrote him the follow∣ing Letter.
Monsieur de Maurier, THE King, my Son, answers your dispatch by this Bearer, whose intentions I am assured you can so well execute, as they may produce the effect which we desire, pursuant to your good Coun∣sels; we confide therefore in your affection and care in this encounter; nor shall I add any further Com∣mand. You know likewise what considerations he has made you, for the House which you have lost in his Service; to which, if you continue firm with the same fidelity and diligence, you shall receive all possible Content and Advantage. I pray God keep you Monsieur de Maurier in his holy and safe Protection. Written at Poitiers the 20th of Janu∣ary, 1616. Signed Mary, and a little lower Brulard. Monsieur de Puysieux writ to him likewise, towards the end of a long dispatch. AS to what concerns your Interests, and the loss and damage you have sustained in your House of Fontayne, I have not been wanting to represent it to their Majesties, in all those circumstances which were requisite; at which they are much con∣cerned, and do not intend that any of their Servants shall suffer upon account of the good services they have rendred them. They have ordered you 2000 Crowns for a Recompence of your loss, and would have you know, they do it upon that consideration; and have thought fit to encrease your Pension to 1000 Crowns a Year. I wish I could still testifie more to your content, the extream desire I have of
serving you, that you may know that I am truly your very humble, and very affectionate Servant, From Poitiers, Jan. 20th 1616. Puysieux. Prince Philip, and Madame his Princess, had so much goodness as to disabuse the Princes and Grandees, who had raised a war, which they called the War of the Henrys, be∣cause the greater part of the Heads of that Party were so called; Mounseir the Prince was called, Henry of Bourbon; Monsieur du Mayne, Henry of Lorrain; Monsieur du Longe∣ville, Henry of Orleans; and the Duke of Bo∣villon, Henry de la Tour. They told them all, that these injurious Speeches were pure in∣ventions to animate them against my Father. They acquainted them likewise that whilst he acquitted himself of his duty, he all along continued to preserve that respect which was due to them; That for what remained there was no reason to object it to him as a crime, to have served his Master faithfully. And that he could not without betraying his trust, and endangering his own ruine, but execute such orders as came to him from Court. I remember that I saw them at our House in my infancy, and particularly the Princess, who had the goodness to make very much of us, and did my Father the favor to think fit, that one of my Sisters, who was born at that time, should have the honor of bearing her Name of Eleanor: She was presented in
Baptism by Prince Henry Frederick of Orange, who was her Godfather. This Daughter was married to the Baron de Mauzè, near Rochelle, Brother to the Marquess de la Ville∣dieu, and died without Children, in 1660. She was a Woman who painted the best in France, and writ the most correctly, whose Letters were all of a vigorous and masculine Stile, without one word that was unneces∣sary. Prince Philip died at Brussels, in the begin∣ning of the Year 1618. He had the He∣morrhoids very much inamed; and Gregory a German Chyrurgeon having hurt him with the Syringe whilst he gave him a Clyster, a Gangreen insued, and it was impossible to save him. The Princess his Wife died like∣wise in the same Year. After his Death, Count Maurice his Bro∣ther took upon him the Quality of Prince of Orange, and inherited his whole Estate; whereas before he was contented with the bare Title of Count.
Maurice of Nassau, Prince of Orange. THis great Captain has falsified the Pro∣verb, which says, The Children of Heroes are generally good for nothing; for though he was the Son of a most excellent Father, who left behind him an immortal Glory, yet he has not only equall'd him in his pru∣dence and greatness of Soul, but has likewise surpassed him in the Art Military, and great Performances; As the Father for 20 years together made the discourse of all Europe, so the Son for 40 years successively, did it much more than all the crown'd Heads in Europe: for from the Year 1584, when he came first into action, to 1625, when he died, Prince Maurice was never mentioned without admi∣ration and astonishment, as being held for one of the greatest Captains that has ever yet appeared: In truth, though Nature does not always make extraordinary efforts to produce great men in the same family and succession, yet the great Actions of the Fa∣ther are powerful Incentives to stir up their Children to imitate them: The Glory of their Ancestors being a Light, which directs their posterity to march in those generous paths which they have trod before them
If the vertue of strangers has often stirred up some couragious Souls to do great things, (as that Greek whose rest was discompos∣ed by the Triumphs of Miltiades;) sure domestick examples must be much more mo∣ving, that they may not incur the shame of having degenerated. Upon this occasion I shall here relate what I have often heard my Father say in his lat∣ter years, That he had undoubtedly past his life in the Country like some of his prede∣cessors, had not it been for the example of Iames Aubrey, his great Unkle; who by his Vertue, his Knowledge and his Eloquence, discharged the office of Advocate General to the Parliament of Paris, was Lieutenant Civil of the Council to Henry the Second, and his Ambassador Extraordinary to En∣gland; where he concluded a Peace between Henry the Second, and Edward the Sixth; and left behind him the reputation of being the French Demosthenes and Cicero, by that famous Plea which he made, pursuant to an order of the King, for the people of Cabrieres and Merindol; and which Monsieur the Chan∣cellor de Hopital admired so much, that he has translated great part of it into Latin verse. My Father therefore thought, that by his labour he might arrive to honourable employments; and so well ordered the Ta∣lents which God had given him, that he likewise was employed in Embassies, and admitted to the Council of his Princes.
Prince Maurice of Orange from his very childhood discovered the passionate desire he had to follow the glorious steps of his Fa∣ther; and took for the body of his Device the Trunk of a Tree, cut off so as to seem about two foot high, from whence there grew a vigorous Sprout, which apparently would renew the noble Tree which had produced it, with these words, Tandem fit circulus arbor, At last the Sprout becomes a Tree: To show that he would revive the glories of his Fa∣ther. I do not pretend to represent the great Actions of this Prince in all the particulars; I shan't say any thing that may be found in common Annals, nor add to the number of those who transcribe other People; my design is only to draw the Portraicture of his Per∣son and his Manners, to inform the World of some transactions of his Life which are not known, and to set forth the causes of those great differences which hapned between him and Mr. Barneveld; which, as it was thought, would have overturn'd the Commonwealth, by an intestine division that has remained al∣most to this day, and threaten'd its ruine if it had not been prevented. But before we come to these things, it is necessary briefly to represent his principal Actions, and to tell you, That Prince Mau∣rice had a great stock of Constancy and Cou∣rage from the 17th year of his age, when he was called to the government of Affairs up∣on
the decease of his Father; for he was not cast down by that torrent of Success which attended Alexander Farnese Duke of Parma, Governor and Captain General for the King of Spain, who had then taken Bruges, Ghent, Dendermond, Deventer, Nimeghen, the Grave, with a great many other places, and even Antwerp it self, (which was held for impreg∣nable) by a Siege, which was looked upon as a Miracle of the Age; having stopped the River Schelde, and repell'd the force of the Sea by a Dyke, which was then held as a thing impossible, and which afterwards set an Example for undertaking the same thing at Rochel. Prince Maurice was not more disturb∣ed by the confusion and disorder that had reigned for a long time in the Common∣wealth, occasioned by the haughty conduct of Robert Dudley Earl of Leicester, Captain Ge∣neral for the Queen of England in the United Provinces, whose insupportable Pride, and un∣measurable Ambition, did them more preju∣dice than the Sums of Money which he brought, and the Troops which he com∣manded, ever contributed to their Service; for four entire years the States were reduced to strange Extremities, so that it was thought impossible for this young Prince to rid him∣self of so great Difficulties; and to cure those Evils which were occasioned by the Intrigues of Spain, and the Treachery of some of the Earl of Leicester's Dependants; who, after their return into England, sold the most im∣portant
places to the Spaniards. To be short, as the Affairs of this World do not always continue in the same posture, and are subject to a perpetual change, so that good Fortune, which till then had favoured the Duke of Parma in all his Enterprizes, of a sudden came over to the Party of Prince Maurice; for the Spanish Navy, which they had entitled The Invincible, and was designed to swallow up England, and the United Provinces, was de∣stroyed in the year 1588. by the Fleet, and good fortune of Queen Elizabeth; the third part of so great a Navy scarce returning into the Spanish Havens, after having undergone incredible dangers upon the Coasts of England, Scotland, and Ireland; and this inesti∣mable loss was accompanied with the morti∣fication which the Duke of Parma received before Berghen ap-zoom, which he had be∣sieged; Prince Maurice having forced him to quit his Enterprize, with the entire ruine of his Reputation. After this Success the Prince, for the course of 20 years, to the time of the Truce, had fortune still so favourable to him, that he con∣quered 38 or 40 Towns, and more Fortres∣ses, and defied the Spaniards in open Field at three signal Battels: besides, he obtained se∣veral great Victories at Sea, as well upon the Coast of Flanders, as upon that of Spain and the Indies, by the Valor of his Lieutenants and Vice-admirals.
But nothing gained him so much Reputa∣tion, as the happy Surprizal of the Town and Castle of Breda, which belonged to his own Propriety. He made himself Master of it in 1590, by the stratagem of a Boat of Turfs, without any effusion of Blood, or lo∣sing so much as one Soldier upon so impor∣tant an occasion; and since this remarkable Action has made so great a noise in the World, it may not be unnecessary to give some account of it, in as brief terms as pos∣sible. A Boatman, called Adrian Bergues, who furnished the Garison of Breda with Turfs, being discontented with the Spaniards, propo∣sed a way to Prince Maurice, how to surprize the place, by placing some Soldiers in the bottom of his Boat. The Prince seeing the probability of the matter, gave the manage∣ment of this great design to Charles de Herau∣giere, a Walloon Gentleman, Native of Cam∣bray, Captain of Foot in his Guards, reputed a Man of Bravery and Conduct. As soon as he received this Order, he made choice of 70 Soldiers out of several Companies, and some Commanders, whose Courage had been tryed. These he put at the bottom of the Boat, where they were placed very uneasily, as being forced either to lie down or stoop, the rest of the Boat being filled up with Turfs to a very great height. It was extreme cold weather; besides, they were up to the knees in water, which came in by a leak, which at
last they fortunately stopped. The excessive cold made them cough very much, but above all, Matthew Helt, a Lieutenant, (whose name ought to be remembred here in testimony of the Courage he shew'd upon this occasion) not being able to hinder himself from cough∣ing as they came near to the Castle, drew his Sword, and desired his Comrades to kill him, that the Enterprize might not fail, and he be∣come the cause of their ruine; but the Boat∣man hindred him from being heard, by often pumping, as if his Boat had took water. The Garrison, consisting of Italians, wanted Firing, the Soldiers, because of the Ice, helped to draw the Boat by a Sluce within the walls of the Castle, as the Trojans brought the wooden Horse into their City; which gave occasion to the Poets of the time, to compare the taking of Breda to that of Troy; but withal remarking this difference, that the Horse made the Enemies Masters of Troy, from whence proceeded its ruine, whereas this Boat put the right Lord into possession of Breda, who thereupon caused it immediately to flourish. Prince Maurice having spread the report that he had a design upon Gertrudemberg, made the Surprizal of Breda become more easie; for Edward Lanza vechia, who was Governor of both places, ran to that which he thought was most in danger. So the Castle being without a Commander was easily carried. As soon as Heraugiere had made himself Master
of it by the death of 40 of the Enemy, Prince Maurice, attended by the Counts de Hohenlo and Solmes, Francis Vere the General of the English, Iustin of Nassau the Admiral, and the Sieur de Famars General of the Ar∣tillery, being entred into the Castle with several of his Troops, was afterwards recei∣ved into the Town, whence the Italian Garri∣son, which, for the most part, consisted of Horse, ran, with full speed, by the way of Antwerp. Heraugiere, with a great deal of Justice, was made Governor of Breda, and Lambert Charles a French Man, a brave Soldier of Fortune, was made Serjeant Major: I saw him af∣terwards when he was Governor of Nime∣guen. There were Medals stamped upon so considerable an occasion, which had these words upon one side, Breda à Servitute Hispanica vindicata ductu Principis Mauricii à NASSAU. 4 Martii 1590. Breda delivered from the Spanish Yoke, by the conduct of Prince Maurice of NASSAU. March 4. 1590. And upon the Reverse was represented a Boat, with these words, Parati vincere aut mori, prepared to over∣come or dye.
One of these Medals was given to each of the Soldiers in the Boat, as likewise a Sum of Money, with the promise of future ad∣vancement; Adrian de Bergues the Boatman had likewise a Medal, and was rewarded with a very large Pension. This Surprizal may occasion this necessary Reflection, That ye ought never to trust the guard of two Frontier places at the same time to one only Governor, who has but too much trouble to preserve his own Government from the neighbouring Enemy, whose mind is always intent, and his eyes open, for some opportunity to be able to surprize him. The taking of Hulst in Flanders, was a very considerable Action, and that of Gertrudem∣berg much more so, by reason of a long and difficult siege, in sight of the Spanish Army, consisting of 30000 Men, commanded by the old Count Peter Ernest of Mansfeldt, in the absence of the Duke of Parma, who was then in France, with Succors for the League: This old General could never force the young Prince in his own Lines, nor oblige him to come out of them, though he presented him battle each day continually; so that when Count Mansfeldt said one day to a Trumpe∣ter whom P. Maurice had sent him, That he admired his Master, who was a young Prince, full of heat and courage, would always contain himself within the covert of his own retrench∣ments; the Trumpeter answered him, That his Excellency of Nassau, was a young Prince,
who desired to become one day such an old and experienced General, as his Excellency of Mansfeldt was at present. The year following he took the great and famous Town of Groninghen, Capital of the Province; he likewise took, and retook Rimbergues, and seized upon Maeurs, and the Grave, Towns belonging to his own Patri∣mony; having by the death of several Spa∣niards revenged the public injuries and those of his Private Family. The Reputation of Prince Maurice was very much increased, by the long and memo∣rable defence of Ostend, where the Spaniards having lost more than Threescore Thousand Men, in a Siege that continued above 3 Years, and exhausted their Treasures by the ex∣pence of above two Millions, at last became Masters of a bit of ground which might seem to be a burying place rather than a City. At the time of this loss Prince Maurice was so happy and diligent, that to return it with Usury, in a few days he seized upon the Town of Sluise in Flanders, which was of more consequence than Ostend, that had cost so many Men, so much Time, and so vast a Treasure; upon which Theophilus says very well in the Ode he made for the Prince of Orange.
Much time, and many years the Spaniards spend Before their Forces gain Ostend. But, Sir, when you resolve to seize a Town, Few Days suffice to beat its Bulwarks down. Each Day of yours much more importance bears. Than all that space of time, which mortal Men call Years. This Ode did not displease Prince Mau∣rice, and tho he was naturally an Enemy to Flattery, and Vain glory, yet he recom∣penced this Poet with a Chain of Gold, and his Medal, to a very great value. But this Prince showed at the battle of Newport, where he overcame the Arch-Duke Albert, that he knew as well how to defeat a numerous and well appointed Army in open field, as to defend places, or else to force and surprize them. The Arch-Duke, and the Duke d'Aumale were wounded in the fight, Francis Mendoza Admiral of Arragon, Maister de Campe, was taken Prisoner, with a great many other Commanders, and even the Arch-Dukes Pages, whom Prince Mau∣rice sent him back very civilly, without any Ransom. All the Cannon, the Baggage, and above 100 Cornets and Colors, remain∣ed in the hands of the Conqueror, who saw above 6000 Enemies dead upon the place, and had all other marks of a full and entire Victory; which made several People say,
because this great Success happened upon the 2d day of Iuly, that the Fortune of the House of Nassau was changed, seeing that 300 years before, upon the same day of Iu∣ly, the Emperor Adolphus of Nassau, had lost his Life and Empire near Spire, in a Battle against Albert of Austria; and that the same day Maurice had revenged the disgrace of his Ancestors, by the defeat of the Arch-Duke Albert, who was a Descendant from the for∣mer Albert of Austria. A little before the fight, there was a dis∣pute of Honor, between Prince Maurice, and Prince Henry Frederick his younger Brother, who was then but 17 Years old; for when the Elder desired him to retire into some place of Safety, that in case of any misfortune, he might defend his Family, and his Country; Prince Henry being offended, said, he would run the same fortune with himself, and live or dye by him. Prince Maurice showed that no ill success could daunt his courage, for the Resolution he had taken to give Battle, was not altered notwithstanding that the night before the Arch-Duke had defeated the Count Ernest, whom the Prince had sent to seize a pass, with 2 Regiments of Foot, and 4 Troops of Horse, that were all cut off, and several Colors, with 2 pieces of Cannon taken. It is remarkable that the Prince, to take away from his Army all hopes of a retreat, and to show his Men that they had nothing
to trust to, but their Arms, made all those Vessels that brought them into Flanders to be sent away, for which he was much commend∣ed by the Admiral of Arragon, as the thing which had gained him the Victory by, the ne∣cessity that was laid upon his Soldiers to fight boldly, as having no prospect of Life but in the defeat of the Spaniards; so he told his Men before the fight, that they must either overcome the Enemy, or drink up all the water in the Sea. There came out at that time a magnificent Inscription upon this Battle, in honor of Prince Maurice, which is this. Anno 1600 secunda die Iulij, Mauricius Aran∣sionensium Princeps in Flandriam terram hospitem traducto exercitu cum Alberto Archiduce Austriae conflixit, copias ejus cecidit, Duces multos pri∣mum{que} Mendosam coepit, reversus ad suos victor signa hostium centum quinque in Hagiensi Capito∣lio suspendit Deo Bellatori. In the year 1600, the 2d day of July, Mau∣rice Prince of Orange, having brought his Army into Flanders, then possessed by his Enemy, fought with Albert Arch-Duke of Austria, slew his Forces, took several Commanders, and especially Mendoza, then returning Conqueror to his Coun∣try, he hung up 105 of the Enemies Colors, in the Councel House at the Hague, to the Honor of God the Disposer of Victory.
This was not his first Essay of a Field Bat∣tle, for otherwise he might have passed for one, that was good only at the taking of Towns, but he had long before forced the Duke of Parma to raise the Seige of Knotsem∣burg, over against Nimiguen, having defeated 7 Troops of his best Cavalry; a disgrace which the Duke lessen'd, by the necessity laid upon him, by Orders from Spain, to go and succor Roan. In the year 1594, he had likewise at the Battle of Tournhout, defeated and slain the Lord de Balancon, Count de Varax, General of the Artillery of Spain, who commanded a body of 6000 Foot, and 600 Horse, of which, besides the General, above 2000 were left upon the place, with several Prisoners of Note, amongst whom, a Count of Mansfeldt was one; there were 38 Ensigns taken, with the Cornet of Alonzo de Mondragon, which were all hung up in the great Hall of the Castle at the Hague, for a perpetual Memo∣rial. And upon this occasion, I shall here relate, how an Ambassador of Poland, being come from King Sigismond, to exhort the States General to reconcile themselves to the King of Spain, whose Power he magnified so far, as that sooner or later it would entirely sub∣due them, and speaking as if he would frighten them with lofty words, full of Va∣nity, and according to the Eloquence of his Nation: Count Maurice, who was then
present at this Harrangue, upon his going out of the Assembly, led the Ambassador into this Hall, where he show'd him all the Co∣lors and Cornets, taken from the Spaniards at Knotsemburg, and Turnholt, and without using many words, let him understand, that in re∣ality the King of Spain was not altogether so invincible. But as Prince Maurice was victorious at Land, so he was not less successful at Sea, having always got great Advantages over the Spaniards, by the Conduct of his Vice-Ad∣mirals. They were assisting to the ruine of the Spanish Flota, stiled the Invincible, and brought several of the Galeons into Zealand. In the year 1596, Iohn de Duvenvorde, Lord of Varmont, contributed his help to the Earl of Essex, in taking the Town of Cales, and burning the Spanish Fleet, for which Queen Elizabeth returned thanks to the said Sieur de Varmont, by a very obliging Letter, which extreamly commends his Bravery. In the year 1599, the Vice-Admiral Peter Vanderdoes, seized upon Allagona, Capital of the Canary Islands, where he forced the Spani∣ards to fly into the Mountains, and followed them even thither, and then having sacked and burnt the place, returned victorious to his own Country. In the year 1603, Don Frederick Spinola, not being able to endure that these Vessels of Zealand should always lye before the Haven
of Sluise, went out, with 8 Gallies, and some other Vessels of War to chase 'em thence; He was slain in the fight, and his Fleet so ill handled, that it was constrained to retreat into Sluise with a considerable loss: not to mention here a great many other con∣siderable advantages obtained in the Indies, and diverse other parts of the World, over the Vessels of the Castilians, and the Portugueses. This is what I shall say in general of this great Prince, only adding, that in the year 1622, the Truce of 12 years being expired, and the Marquess Ambrose Spinola, having be∣sieged Berghen ap Zoom, with all the Forces of Spain, the Prince of Orange made him raise the Siege, being assisted by Count Ernest of Mansfeldt, and Christian Duke of Brunswick, that he had expresly sent for out of Germany. These Generals had taken Arms in favor of the King of Bohemia, and passing through Brabant, had defeated at Fleuru, (if my me∣mory does not fail me) Don Gonsalvo of Cor∣duba, who was sent to oppose their passage: In the fight the Duke of Brunswick had an Arm cut off as he was forcing a Barricade, which obliged him to wear one of Silver, which I myself have seen. There was great rejoycing through all the United Provinces for this happy Victory, public Thanksgivings were ordered to be made in every Town, where there were such prodigious Bonfires, that they seemed to be all on fire. So this Count of Mansfeldt,
and the Duke of Brunswick contributed to the Prince of Orange's Glory, which seemed to have been decay'd and worn out of Mens minds by so long a Truce, but was renewed and revived throughout the whole World, by so illustrious an Action. And because that here there has been oc∣casion to speak of these two Men, who in their time were the scourges of Mankind, it may not be amiss to let the Prince of Orange rest a little, and to relate what I know of their manner of Proceedings, and their Principal Encounters. This Count Ernest was a Bastard of the fa∣mous House of Mansfeldt, which has produ∣ced great Generals; he was a Man so subtile and cunning, that some have rightly stiled him Ulysses Germanicus, or the German Ulysses. He was so bold, as to maintain the Quarrels of the Elector Palatine, elected King of Bohemia, with a great deal of Constancy and Resolu∣tion, against the Family of Austria; He had several successes both unfortunate and happy; at last being called into Holland to the succor of Berghen ap Zoom, I remember that I saw him there; he was then about 50 years old, fair, much wrinkled, of a good stature, but a little stooping; He always wore a gray Hat, without a Hatband, and said that he would never put it off till he had made his Fortune, which I myself have heard him speak. France, that too late understood its true Interest, (for it had unadvisedly sacrificed the Elector
Palatine to the fury of the House of Austria, as I shall more fully relate hereafter) assisted him with a Sum of Money, which my Fa∣ther paid him, and with the succor of 4000 Foot, under the conduct of Monsieur de Mantereau, who had his Winter Quarters in East Frizeland, beyond the River Ems, with the Troops of Count Mansfeldt. This New Attila afterwards ravaged the lower Saxony, from whence being chaced by the Count de Tilly the Emperors General, he marched through the Country of Branden∣durg into Silesia, where he had some fortu∣nate Successes, and from thence at last retired to Bethlem Gabor Prince of Transylvania. A little after, as this unquiet Spirit, fruitful in new Expeditions, was going to Venice, to propose some League, passing through Bosnia in November 1626, he was taken with a violent pain in his Bowels, of which he died, not without suspition of Poyson, and was buried at Spalatro. He was a man of great Courage, who run through and ravaged the greatest part of Germany, having spread the terror of himself both within and without the Empire, and so frightned Champaigne and Paris itself, when Montpelier was besieged, where the late King was then in Person, that the most part of the Inhabitants of that great City, seeing their King and his principal Forces upon the Confines of his Realm, con∣veyed themselves, with what they most esteemed to the City of Orleans, to avoid a
Fire which consumed all things that were found in its way: Some Blockheads of Paris being frightened with his approach, com∣monly called him Bloody Bones, and used his Name to frighten Children that were trou∣blesome. As to Duke Christian of Brunswick, he was of the illustrious and ancient House of Bruns∣wick, one of the richest and most powerful in all Germany, which at present maintains Ar∣mies both within and without the Empire, and which having conquered the Dutchy of Bremen, assists the Kings of Spain and Den∣mark, the Hollanders and Elector of Branden∣burg with its Forces. This Duke Christian was commonly called Halberstat, because he was Bishop of that place, and sometimes Dol Hartzoch, which is as much as to say, one that acts like a Madman. He was a Prince of good Mein, and well made; he was very brave, but his Courage had something more of Brutishness than true Valor: for when he saw a Workman on the top of a Steeple, he took no greater pleasure than to fetch him down with a Stone, which in my time he did in Holland: He had a great Passion for the Queen of Bohemia, from whom he had taken an English Glove, which I saw him wear, tied to a String in his Hat, and hang∣ing below the brims of it. Having raised an Army in Lower Saxony, and not having wherewithal to pay it, he turned a Statue of St. Liberius into Money,
which was much bigger than the Life, and at that time in the Cathedral Church of Pa∣derburn. This Saint Liberius had been Bi∣shop of Mans. Such a beginning enticed him farther, and knowing that at Munster there were 12 Apostles, all of Silver, of a prodi∣gious bigness; he went thither, and seizing upon the place, marched directly to the great Church called the Dome, accompanied with all his Collonels and Captains, made a Speech to these Apostles, reproaching them with their Idleness and Disobedience, in not observing the commands of their Master, to go instantly through all the World, in these words, Go throughout all Nations; swearing that he would make them Travellers, and become obedient: So he immediately com∣manded to coin them into Rix Dollars, with which he paid his Army, and so spread them throughout all Germany. He had taken this for his Device, Gottes freindt, und der Psaffen feint, which is to say, Friend of God, and Ene∣my of Priests, whom he slew, or at least guelt them, without any remission; at last this outragious Spirit departed in 1626, at Wol∣fenbottle, of a burning Fever in the prime of his Youth. After having raised the Seige of Berghen op Zoom; Maurice Prince of Orange did nothing considerable besides the Project he laid for the surprize of Antwerp, but Heaven and the Winds were opposite to his design; he had given so good order for every thing, the
Undertaking was so well laid, and he pro∣mised to himself such a happy Issue, that he said that it was God alone that could hinder the Success. Prince Maurice before he had resolved to ruine Mr. de Barneveld, honored my Father with his esteem and confidence, insomuch that he undertook his defence against those that had aspersed him, as his elder Brother Prince Philip, and his Princess had done before; which was very well known to all those who were then in Holland, and which appears evident∣ly by a Letter which Prince Maurice writ to Monsieur de Villeroy, after the Peace of Lan∣dau, wherein he not only justifies my Fathers conduct, but moreover tells him, that the Court had no Person thereabouts, who could serve France so much as my Father, and that was so agreeable to him and the States General. The Letter is this. SIR, AT my return from Zeland, upon the instances that were made me by Monsieur de Maurier the Kings Ambassador, for the Re-establishment of the French Officers in their Employments, I used my endeavors for the satisfaction of their Majesties, the States having taken the same Resolution, their Act shall be executed; I am very much pleas∣ed that the Troubles in your Kingdom have been so happily composed, and particularly that your La∣bors have so well succeeded in it, wishing that this
repose may be of long continuance to the prosperity of their Majesties, which is the thing that I desire: besides, although the Care and Diligence which Monsieur Maurier has show'd in his faithful Exe∣cution of the Kings Commands, may speak suffici∣ently for themselves, yet I must render this Testi∣mony to his Behavior, that it has been such as has served their Majesties heartily, and to the purpose, without giving any one reason to complain, having managed all his Actions, which are very well known to us, with Modesty, Respect and Honor, and thus much I can give you certain assurance of; whereas if any other reports may be spread to his Prejudice, they must do great injustice to his Con∣duct and Integrity: The States General and all of us, are fully satisfied with his whole proceedings, and think their Majesties cannot hereafter make use of any other Minister, that will be more faith∣ful and serviceable to themselves, or more agreea∣ble to this Commonwealth, which, as I have reason, I must declare to be my own opinion; and with that I shall conclude, together with assurance of my desire to serve you, and prayers to God to give you health and long life. Sir, your very affectionate Servant Mauriceof Nassau. This Letter, and several others of the same Strain, which Madam the Princess Dowager of Orange, and the principal Persons in the Country had writ to Court, contradicted the Aspersions of several Persons of Quality, who had assured the Queen Mother and her Ministers, that my Father was disagreeable to the Prince and States General.
In short, Prince Maurice, upon all occasi∣ons, gave my Father very signal marks of his Esteem and Friendship; so that in the Year 1615, having a Son born, the Prince would be his Godfather, and gave him his own name of Maurice, with a little Picture of a great value, this is he who has been known by the name of Villaumaine, and who having past all his Life in Holland, where he was born, arriv'd by 40 years Service and his own Merit, without any favor, to the com∣mand of Collonel; He had a mortal aversion for this last war, for he drew his extraction from France, where his Family was esta∣blished; on the other side he saw himself ob∣liged to defend the place of his Birth, where he had all his effects, and where he was at last arrived to an honorable Post, by an extra∣ordinary Patience: never Man had more true Friends than he, and they of all Nations, so that he gained the Esteem of all the consider∣able Frenchmen that had known him in Hol∣land, amongst others of Monsieur de Beringhen, chief Querry to the King, of Mr. de St. Ro∣main, who was Ambassador in Portugal and Switzerland; and towards his latter days, of the Princess of Tarentum: He lived in great Esteem for his Valor and Fidelity, and died at the Head of his Regiment in the Battle of Senef, very much lamented by all that knew him, and by the Prince of Orange himself, who placed a great Confidence in him. I hope I shall be pardoned for the tenderness I
had for this only Brother that was left me, which occasioned this digression. But let us now come to the description of Prince Maurice's Person and Manners, even to the secrets of his Life, which have not hi∣therto been divulged, as I have learnt them from my Father, and several Noble Persons of that Country. This Prince was very strong, and indefa∣tigable in Labor; he appeared lesser than he was, by being full and fat; his Face was plump and ruddy, his Beard fair, which he wore very large and broad; he always made use of little pleated Ruffs about his Neck: He never clothed himself but after the same fashion, with the same Stuff, and that always of a sort of brown or musk color; his Doublet was of Silk with Gold stripes, the rest of his Cloaths were Woollen, but his Cloaks, or long Coats, were faced with Velvet; I speak of his common Habit, and not of those that were designed for great Feasts and public Assemblies. He often wore in his Hat a Band of Diamonds, he was never without a Girdle, to which was fastened a sort of Belt for his Sword, that was gilt: I never saw him in any other Habit, and yet I have minded him a thousand times, at the French Church, in the Castle at the Hague, which heretofore was a Chappel for the Counts of Holland, and often at my Fathers, whither he used to come, either to eat, or play at Chess, which was his chief diversion; for during the
Truce, when he was not busy in war, he often plaid at it, and for that reason look'd upon such as did so. Hehad a great affection for Mr. de la Caze, a brave Captain of Bearn, whose Son served in the Troops of Holland, and played very well at it. This Mr. de la Caze had no Revenue more certain, than what he won of the Prince at this Play, scarce ever parting from him without 9 or 10 Crowns of Gold, which was worth more to him than his Company. They never plaid for above one at a time, without ever dou∣bling, but la Caze that he might not dishearten the Prince, would let him win one Game in three or four. This Monsieur de la Caze has told my Fa∣ther, that the Prince would be very much vexed when he lost, which happens even to the greatest Men; and the reason is evident, because it is their own fault if they lose, for this Game does not depend at all upon chance, but good conduct; and 'tis very provoking to see ones self surpassed by others in Know∣ledge or Judgment. Monsieur de la Caze said, that when the Prince had lost, and it was late before they gave over Play, the wax Lights being almost burnt out, he would pull his Hat down over his Eyes without rising from his Seat, or bidding him good Night; but at such times as la Caze had let him win, the Prince would be very pleasant, conduct him on his way, and command his Pages to light and wait upon him to his
Lodgings; Such particulars as these show the temper of People, and that the greatest Men are not without their weaknesses. In relation to Chess, Prince Philip of Orange told my Father, that he had heard for certain in Spain, when he was there a Prisoner, that an old Spanish Lord having been winner all the Evening at this Play, and continuing so good part of the Night with King Philip the 2d, without being so complaisant as to let him carry one Game, and having remarked much disturbance in the Kings Countenance, he told his Children upon his return home, that he must depart the day following, and never think of coming back to Court, where there was nothing to be done or hoped for, either for himself or them, because he had beat the King at Chess all that Night, and should ne∣ver be forgiven for it. Prince Maurice used to make himself very merry with us Frenchmen, who to cloath themselves after the Fashion of those times, wore slasht Doublets, with one single Shirt, which made those freeze that look'd upon them, being so thin cloathed, and shivering, in the midst of Winter, which is very long and sharp in Holland; and as he was jesting one day upon them in a great Company, one of these Gentlemen told him, he had a way to deceive People, for he had two Shirts on, and that nothing was so warm as two Shirts; the Prince was pleasant, cried, Lay a wager upon it; to which the other replying, That
he knew nothing warmer than two Shirts, Prince Maurice answered, That undoubtedly three were warmer than two; and that the weather was cold enough for him to make use of them. Prince Maurice related to my Father, that one Winter at the Hague, when there was a great many German Princes of his Kindred there, they met one day at one of the chief Inns to divert themselves, where after hav∣ing drank till scarce any of them could see, one of the Company proposed the putting out the Lights, and throwing Stools at one another all night long, which being done, one of these soveraign Princes found his Arm broke, another his Knee out of joynt, ano∣ther his Skull crackt, and those that came off best had horrible Bruises and black Eyes; af∣ter this they were all forced to go to Bed, and consider what to do with themselves. This Story the Prince learnt from Monsieur Luc his Surgeon, a Frenchman, very expert in his Profession, who was called to their help upon this occasion: Prince Maurice smilingly ask'd my Father, if this was not a very fine and agreeable diversion for the Princes his Rela∣tions, and whether they had not extraordi∣nary reason to boast of their Pastime. Prince Maurice loved Mathematicians and Engineers very well, and amongst others of that age, he very much esteemed Monsieur Alcome, one excellent in the profession, to whom he gave a large Pension, though he
had a very good one from the King; but there was no body could teach the Prince in that Science, he having contrived several fine Inventions for the passage of Rivers, and fiege of places, so that in his Age, he served for a Pattern to Engineers, as well as Cap∣tains. He would not suffer his Troopers to wear straight Boots, saying great inconveniencies might arise from thence, being often in haste to get on Horseback; ridiculing us Frenchmen, for affecting to have fine Legs, so that they would be whole hours in getting their Boots off, or on; and to set them an example, he had his own Boots so large, that he could al∣most leap into them. He did not approve those Italian Grooms who taught their Horses to prance, which he said was very dangerous, and had been the death of several People; he had no People to manage his Horses, and was content if they would only turn to the right and left. During the Truce, the King of France sent him a magnificent Present of Spanish Horses by Monsieur de Pluvenelle, Querry to his Ma∣jesty, who had the honor to teach the King to ride, being a person of great Reputation, and the most famous Man of his time in that Art. The Prince, though he was very vigilant and laborious, yet had so great a Quietness of Mind, that so soon as ever he was in Bed, and his Head laid upon the Pillow, he fell
into so sound a Sleep, that it was a difficult matter to wake him; but knowing his own in∣firmity, that he might not be surprized in time of War, as his Father, who was of the same Complexion, was like to have been in his Tent, near Malines, after having given necessary orders, he made two Men watch by turns every hour, with command to wake him, if any accident should happen. Mar∣quess Spinola was of a humor quite contrary to the Prince, and could never sleep if he had the least business upon his Spirits; the Marquess was very lean, the Prince very fat, and their Tempers very different; the one being dry and choleric, the other plump and sanguine. Prince Maurice, being one day in a good humor, told my Father, That Elizabeth Queen of England, by a weakness common to her Sex, had so extraordinary a desire to be thought handsom, that when the States Gene∣ral had sent her a magnificent Embassy, which consisted of the principal persons of their Country, accompanied by a great many young Gentlemen of the United Provinces, a Hollander who was in the Ambassadors Train at their first Audience, having looked earnestly upon the Queen, told an English Gentleman, with whom he had been ac∣quainted in Holland, that he saw no reason why the Queens Beauty should be generally spoke of to so much disadvantage; that he thought People much to blame for doing it,
that to him she seemed very agreeable, and that if he durst, he would let her see what passions she was able to raise in a young Gentleman; with several other such like discourses, often looking upon the Queen, and then applying himself to the Englishman. The Queen who took more exact notice of the private persons than the Ambassadors, as soon as the Audience was ended, sent for the Englishman, and commanded him on pain of her displeasure to tell her, what his discourse was with the Hollander, being cer∣tain that it was concerning her, as was evi∣dent by their mein and behavior. The Gen∣tleman made a great many excuses, saying it was not worth her Majesties knowledge, at last the Queen being very urgent, he was forced to declare the whole matter, and con∣fess the extream passion which the Hollander had testified for her Royal person. The event of the affair was this, that the Ambas∣sadors were each of them presented with a Chain of Gold worth 800 Crowns, and every one of their Retinue with one of 100 Crowns; but the Hollander who thought the Queen so handsom, had a Chain of 1600 Crowns, which he wore about his Neck as long as he lived. This Queen, who had a Thousand great qualities, had still the vanity of being thought handsom by all the world, and I have heard my Father say upon this occasion, that being sent to her, in every Audience
that he had, she would pull her Glove off a hundred times to show her hands, which were very white and handsom. But to return to the character of Prince Maurice, he was naturally good and just, and died with the reputation of an exemplary Honesty; to show that he deserved this cha∣racter, I need only relate the following Sto∣ry. Two of his Domestics who were French∣men, one called Iohn de Paris, who waited upon him in his Chamber, the other one of his Halberdeers, named Iohn de la Vigne, hav∣ing assassinated a Jeweller of Amsterdam, who had Stones of a great Value, which he would have sold the Prince; he was so far from pro∣tecting them, (as several Persons of Quality would have thought it concerned their Ho∣nor to do) that on the contrary, he himself prosecuted the Actors of so inhumane a Butchery, and made them both be broke alive upon the Wheel. If this great and just character of Prince Maurice, might be any way in the least sul∣lied in the opinion of some persons, it was occasioned by his contests with Monsieur Barnevelt, who had been one of the princi∣pal Ministers, and Confidents of Prince Wil∣liam his Father, and who after his Death got the soveraign Command both by Sea and Land, to be put into the hands of Prince Maurice; for People being in a terrible con∣fusion after that disaster, and several seeing themselves deprived of their principal sup∣port,
being desirous to have recourse to the Amnesty which King Philip offered them, he said publicly that matters were not in so desperate a condition; that they ought to take courage, they had indeed lost a real support by the Death of the Father, but that he had left a Son, then studying at Ley∣den, who was capable to fill his place, and gave very great Testimonies of his inclinati∣on to Vertue; so by the Perswasion and Authority of this great Man, Prince Maurice was no sooner come out of the Colledg, but he was placed, as Commander, at the Head of Armies; upon this account the Prince looked upon him as his Benefactor, till time made him think, he had reason to alter his opinion, and use other measures to∣wards him: Whilst Monsieur de Barnevelt was for the continuance of the War, which the Prince desired to uphold his Authority, they kept a very fair Correspondence; as likewise in the year 1598, when he met King Henry IV. in Brittain to diswade him from making the Peace of Vervins. But when Barnevelt shew'd himself inclinable to a Truce, after a War of 40 years, which had so exhausted the State, that it was impossible, by reason of the pro∣digious number of Debts, to have the War continue any longer; it was then that this Prince, who thought the Truce would give a mortal blow to his Glory and his Interests, could no longer conceal his resentment, but
fell openly at variance with Monsieur de Bar∣nevelt, even in publick Conferences, so far as to give him the Lye, and one time to lift up his hand against him. Prince Maurice used all imaginable endeavours to perswade King Henry IV. to break the design of the Truce, as inconsistent with the welfare of France, since the Spaniards, being no longer engaged against the United Provinces, would without all doubt turn their whole Forces against his Kingdom: He spread several Papers which accused those who were for the Truce, of being Traytors, and holding aCorrespondence with the Spani∣ards, but Monsieur de Barnevelt, made it be represented to the King by such Ambassadors as had their dependance upon himself, what he had several times before told to Mr. Buzan∣val his Ambassador, and Monsieur the Presi∣dent Iavin, who had been dispatched Extra∣ordinary Envoy into Holland; That it was necessary for the United Provinces, to use the King in the same method that sick and wounded persons do their Physicians, or their Chyrurgions; That is, to discover plain∣ly their Wounds and Infirmities, whereby his Majesty may see, if it lay in his power to afford them such remedies, as would heal them; That their State was charged with excessive Debts, whose Interest was to be paid to private persons, that had lent their Money to the Public, and had scarce any thing else remaining for their own subsistence; and that except that Interest was exactly
paid, the greatest part of them must be left to starve. That the several Imposts which were established to maintain the charges of the War, were not sufficient for its continu∣ance, and that 13 or 14 Hundred Thousand Crowns were over and above necessary, to pay the Interest of their Debts, and the Troops which were then in their Service; but that if his Majesty would supply them with what was necessary for their continuance of the War with Spain, they would pursue it more vigorously now than ever. The King, whose Treasure was exhausted, seeing that he would be obliged to furnish them every year with at least 4 Millions of Livres, consented to the proposal of the Truce, which was concluded by his Authority, not∣withstanding the perpetual opposition which Prince Maurice made to it by his Creatures. So the Truce being concluded, in the year 1609, by Monsieur Barnevelt's perswasions, it is not to be admired, if the Prince of Orange bore no good will to him; seeing France had followed the sentiments of that great Man, and had so little consideration for hisInterests and Councel: After this time, the Prince sought occasions to revenge himself of Barnevelt, but before he came to his final resolution, he en∣deavored to gain him over, by the means of the Princess Dowager of Orange, his Mother-in-law; but this did not succeed, for Mon∣sieur Barnevelt intimated to the Princess, as if Prince Maurice had a design of possessing
himself of the Soveraignty of the Country, and that it was upon this account he so ma∣nifestly pursued his Ruine. The Prince finding that Barnevelt was not to be brought over, began to encourage such persons as were jealous of that Power and Authority which Barnevelt had gained upon the States; but the Prince managed this af∣fair with such discretion, that those, whose ruine perhaps he might design, should have least reason to distrust him, or provide for their own Safety; pursuant to this, he be∣stowed upon them all imaginable Favors; he gave to Monsieur de Grouneveld, Monsieur Barnevelt's eldest Son, the Office of Master of the Dykes, and Forests in Holland; to Stau∣tembourg his youngest Son, he gave the Go∣vernment of Berghen ap Zoom, which is one of the principal Keys of the Country. Among others, he brought over Francis Aersens, Son of Cornelius Aersens, Secretary to the States, originally of Brabant, who had been a long time Resident, afterwards Am∣bassador in France: This Man was Author of all the violent Councels, and principal Executor of the passion of the Prince; he was a Man of Ability, and very bold, who aspired to new things, that so he might be∣come great; eloquent to the public damage, and desirous to heap up Riches by any means whatsoever. The Prince likewise made use of several other persons, who were of an un∣quiet and ambitious temper, willing to fish
in troubled waters, and to make their ad∣vantage of the disgrace such people were fallen into, as they before had reason to envy. But as it was not safe, so neither did it seem just, to fall upon Monsieur Barnevelt, and his Dependants, till they had rendered themselves suspected, and odious to the peo∣ple; the difference which happened at this time upon the matters of Religion, between the Followers of Gomarus, and Arminius, gave an occasion for the Peoples disgust against him: for this diversity of opinions had so divided the State, that there were great quar∣rels in the Schools, and even fights and murders, upon their coming out of the Churches; what one Minister had preached in the Morning, after Dinner was confuted in the same Pulpit, by another Minister of a contrary opinion; so all the Doctors and Ministers having banish'd Charity, which is the chief Foundation of the Christian Reli∣gion; instead of instructing People in true Piety, and explaining the Word of God, that breathes nothing but peace, and which is sufficiently intelligible to minds that are meek and well disposed, amus'd themselves only with handling such questions, as the vulgar never could comprehend; and all full of Animosity and Revenge on either Party: employed their whole Wit and Knowledge to make their Adversary appear ridiculous, employing Scurrility more than Arguments
against one another. These different Ser∣mons, in which the Ministers mutually accu∣sed one another of Ignorance and Heresie, sowed divisions amongst the People, each following the opinion of his own Minister, as being uncapable to judge for himself in questions so difficult, as those of Free-will, Grace, or Predestination; like as it happens at this time, when Ladies of the greatest Quality, follow some the opinion of the Je∣suits, and others that of the Doctors of Port Royal; besides this division encreased daily, and not only took deep root throughout the whole State, but an infinite number of print∣ed Books, swarmed in every place, and entertained mens minds with Schism and Bitterness. The Gomarists, wedded to the opinion of Calvin, maintained that God had sentenced by an eternal Decree, what men were to be saved, and what were to be damn∣ed; that this Sentence drew the one into the path of Piety and Salvation, whilst it left the other buried in all that Vice which is common to humane Nature. The Arminians said, on the contrary, That God who was a most righteous Judge, and a most merciful Father, made this distinction between Sinners, that those who repented of their faults should obtain Grace and Life, whereas such as were disobedient and obsti∣stinate in their crimes, should be punished for them; That God desired all would come into the right way, and had given them good
precepts for to follow, but that there was no necessity that might force either the one, or the other, it depending upon each Mans will, either to damn himself, or to be saved. In the heat of the disputes, and in several writings, the Arminians accused the Gomarists of making God the cause of mens sins, and maintained that by a sort of destiny, they made Souls immovable, being submitted to the irrevocable fatality of Eternal Life or Damnation. The Gomarists on the other side, blamed the Arminians for blowing up mens minds with so great an arrogance, as to think they could possess the greatest of Treasures, which is a Soul well constituted, without being be∣holding to God alone for it, but to the Me∣rits of their own Good Works. These Opi∣nions were defended with so much heat and positiveness, that I have heard Daniel Tilenus (a Famous Arminian, Native of Gaulsberg in Silesia, who had been driven from Sedan, by the Ministers of a contrary Opinion, and who died at Paris in an extream old Age) of∣ten say, he had much rather embrace the Opinion of Mahomet than that of Calvin; al∣ledging that the Turks believed in God, whereas the Calvinists did not, forasmuch as the principal Attribute of God was to be in∣finitely Good and Merciful; that the Turks acknowledged a God of such a Nature, but that the Calvinists framed one that was Cruel, Pittiless, and that damned his own Crea∣tures
with a set deliberation. Upon the mention of Tilenus I shall add, that he dis∣puted against Cardinal Perron, and that the Conference which they had together was Printed; and that tho he was a German, and upon the Frontiers of Poland, yet there was no Person in France, who writ in our Lan∣guage with more Elegancy and Neatness, which I am certified of from my Father, who received a thousand Letters from him, and who was a competent Judge in this matter, as be∣ing himself esteemed to have had one of the best Pens of the Age; He lived in the same Country of Silesia, which has likewise produ∣ced Monsieur de Borstell, who had the same Talent at writing, and was so much esteemed by Madam des Loges, and immortalized in the Letters of Monsieur Balza. The States General being often assembled to remedy these disorders which daily happen∣ed in all their Cities, by reason of these di∣visions upon the account of Religion, it was the advise of Monsieur Barnevelt, that all Ministers, and Professors of Divinity, should be prohibited to speak concerning Grace, and Predestination, either in the Pulpit or the Universities; that all Printers likewise should be forbid to publish any books upon this Subject; that both Parties should live together in Brotherly Union, without scan∣dalously dividing the Church; that this Doctrine was so subtle, and so incomprehen∣sible to the Common People, that the whole
Country would be at rest and easie, as soon as nothing more should be spoke con∣cerning it: that there remained a field large enough for the Ministers to comfort and in∣struct their Flocks, by exhorting them to the practice of Gods Commandments and Chri∣stian Vertues, by explaining to them the Old and New Testament, which leads Mens Minds to nothing more than Peace and Cha∣rity: In short, he added that the book of Pre∣destination was a book so difficult and ob∣scure, that the greatest Doctors could not see a Letter in it, and that the very Angels had much ado to comprehend it. This Council was so wise and prudent that at the same time it was followed by the French King, who seeing his Kingdom disturbed with the same Questions, and threatned with a dangerous Schism, by the disputes and fre∣quent writings of the Iesuits, and such as were called Iansenists; imposed a perpetual silence to all these Writers. But Prince Maurice and his dependants op∣posed themselves to the sentiments of Mon∣sieur Barnevelt and his Party, as esteeming them to lye under a suspition of holding cor∣respondence with the Roman Catholicks and the Spaniards, and that by this means they would bring back Popery into the United Pro∣vinces, which was the only thing that could ruine that Republick, and Francis Aersens be∣ing a bold Man that could write and speak
fluently, he was ordered to make use of his Pen upon this Occasion. There were several papers published at this time, among which, one was called Prae∣via Detectio, another Dissertatio Necessaria, a third Hispanici Concilii Artes: and whereas Monsieur Barnevelts Party had commended his wisdom and the pains he had taken for the good of his Country, and the Counsels he had given so much for its advantage; so Monsieur Aersens by these writings accused him openly of being in League with the Pa∣pists, and corrupted by the Spaniards to ruine the true Religion, and bring his Country back again into Slavery. Monsieur Barnevelt answered Aersens, with a very large Apology, wherein all his long services for the good of the State were repre∣sented to the sull; but this gained no ground upon those who were affected to Prince Mau∣rice, who had the Power in his hands, and the Soldiers all depending upon him, and then the common People could not but fol∣low him, as having no reason to think he could have any design to their prejudice, who had so long exposed himself to a great many dangers in the defence of their Liberties. Monsieur de Barnevelt seeing himself thus attacqued, complained to the States of Hol∣land, as his Judges and Natural Lords, who took him into their protection by an authen∣tic Act; but he having counselled those of Utrecht to preserve their new Garrison which
they had levied for their particular safety, upon their own charges, affirming they might do it by the priviledge of their Province; the States of each Country having reserved their Rights by the Union of Utrecht: The Prince of Orange and his Party imputed this action to him as a crime, and made it pass for an attempt against the good of the confe∣derated Commonwealth. The Prince soon after went to Utrecht, assisted by some De∣puties of the States General, disarmed the new Levies, and changed the Magistrates, as at Leyden, Haerlem, Amsterdam, and other places; afterwards he displaced several of the States of Holland, and substituted others in their room; a little while after by an ex∣traordinary Order of Eight Persons under the Title of States General, Prince Maurice caused Monsieur Barnevelt to be arrested, he was put into the Castle of the Hague, in the same Chamber where Admiral Mendoza of Arra∣gon had heretofore been Prisoner; at the same time Monsieur Hoguerbeis, a Person of merit and known capacity was arrested likewise, with Monsieur Hugo Grotius, Pentionary of Rotterdam, a Man of great Learning, and the Sieur de Leydenberg Secretary to the States of Utrecht. They were accused of several crimes a∣gainst the State, amongst others, that they would have laid the whole Country in blood, and betray'd it to the Spaniards.
The Prince to secure himself from any hatred that might be drawn upon him in this conjuncture, declared that whatever he acted, was in the Name of the States General, as principal Conservators of the safety of the Republic. The Prisoners on the other side remon∣strated, That though this was done under the Name of the States General, yet that in effect it proceeded only from the power of the Prince, who was armed, and followed by the greatest part of the common People; that the change at present made in the Common∣wealth was so considerable, that it ought to astonish all those who were true Lovers of the Laws and Liberties of their Country. That as for the States General, they had no Jurisdiction over the Subjects of particular Provinces, much less to arrest Persons of their Quality, who were deprived of their Em∣ployments without any process, against all Justice, and in opposition to the States of Holland, who were their only Lords and Su∣periors; that their true crimes were their opposition to the ambitious desires of Prince Maurice, their obedience to the States of Holland, who were their Masters, their Coun∣sel to some Towns to preserve their Privi∣ledges, and to arm themselves for their own safeties; and finally their refusal to give con∣sent to the calling of a General Synod, which they thought would cause more mischief than advantage to their Country: that they
were opprest by their Enemies under the Title of States General, who are the Deputies of Provinces, only for the affairs of Peace and War, for the receiving proposals from foreign Ambassadors, and reporting them to the particular States of each Province; the States General having no other lawful Right of intermedling with the affairs of the Provinces, each of which are soveraign States, and have time out of mind been Masters of the Life and Fortune of their Sub∣jects; that this was only a specious Pretext, by which the Neighboring Princes, who did not know the true constitution of the Pro∣vinces, might be hindered from defending them, and to put some sort of colour upon so great an Injustice; they alledged farther for themselves the ancient Customs sworn to by the Earls of Holland, the Dukes of Burgundy, and Charles the 5th, which for several ages had been inviolably observed, and for whose preservation their Ancestors had taken Arms; That as for a General or National Synod, they could not agree to it, because it would seem, as if the Seven Provinces were but one Nation, contrary to the priviledge of parti∣cular Provinces, which had always provided for matters of Religion in their own bounds, which was so true, that when the States of the 17 Provinces, assembled at Brussels, having instantly demanded of Prince William of Orange, that the Roman Catholic Religion might be exercised in his Governments, re∣turned
answer, That this depended only upon the States of Holland and Zealand. That they appealed from these Judges as incompetent, and visibly suspected of being their Enemies, to such Judges as were natural and proper to their cause. At the same time Prince Maurice with the States General, called a National Synod in the Town of Dort, and several Divines of Foreign Countries were invited thither; in this Assembly the Opinion of Arminius was declared to be Heretical, scandalous, and tending to the Re establishment of Popery in the United Provinces, and in pursuance of this decree, Utembaugarts, and all the other Ministers and Doctors suspected to be of that Opinion, were dismissed from their Cures, and banished the Country, and forbid to re∣turn under pain of severe punishment. After this, Monsieur Barnevelt and the other Prisoners, were tried before Judges nominated by the States General; these Judges Condemned Monsieur Barnevelt to death, upon the 12th of May 1619. My Father had several times interceeded for him in the Name of the French King, and Mon∣sieur de Boissise had been twice sent Envoy Extraordinary into Holland, to exhort the States to consult their proper welfare, and treat their Prisoners with moderation. Pursuant to the Sentence, he was executed in the Court of the Castle at the Hague, be∣ing 66 years old, where the Scaffold was
raised against his Chamber Window, oppo∣site to the Prince's Apartment, who was said to have beheld this Execution from his win∣dow by the help of a prospective; upon which some people made their Reflections. Prince Maurice and the States had less re∣gard to the Intercession of France, because the King of England was in their Interest, as being perswaded that Monsieur Barnevelt was none of his Friends, and that he had done him a sensible displeasure, by causing the Eng∣lish Garrisons to retire from the Town of Flushing, the Brill, and the Castle of Rame∣kius; which the English held for a security of those Sums which Queen Elizabeth had lent to the States General. Monsieur Barnevelt (being the chief of a very splendid Embassy) made great Instances to the King to recall his Forces from their Towns; King Iames pro∣mised him publickly and solemnly that he would do it, provided they paid the Money due to him, thinking he had imposed an im∣possible condition upon them, considering how the Provinces had been exhausted by their Taxes; but Monsieur Barnevelt having got the Kings word, applyed himself with so much diligence to the collecting of the Mo∣ney, and by his Credit the people bled so freely, that in a little time these vast Sums were carried into England, which King Iames, tho' very much surprized at, was obliged to receive, and consequently to recall his Garri∣sons;
and the remembrance of it stuck so close, that he had always a great aversion for Monsieur Barnevelt. Prince Maurice had another reason to make him have less regard to the intercession of France, which was because he was not in the least afraid of their resentments; Lewis the 13th was then come out of his Minority, and a new Favorite was absolute Master of Affairs, who had more regard to the raising of him∣self and two Brothers, than to meddle with the Affairs of other Countries, which appeared in the business of the Elector Palatine, King of Bohemia; for though by reasons of State he should have been maintained, to weaken the House of Austria, which at that time was become formidable, and because this Elector was one of our principal Allies, who might always have so divided Germany, as that one of the Parties should have assisted us when we had occasion; yet Monsieur de Luynes promised the Marquess de Mirabel, the Spanish Ambassador, then at Paris, to ruin the Affairs of the Palatinate, upon condition that Monsieur de Cadenet his Brother, should marry Mademoiselle de Pecquigny and Chaulns; one of the most noble, most beautiful, and richest Heiresses of her time, who was educated at Bruxels, in the Family of the In∣fanta Isabella. Upon these hopes, which were not ill grounded (for the Spaniards had given him their word) Monsieur de Luynes sent a splen∣did
Embassy into Germany, consisting of Monsieurs d' Angouleme, de Bethune, and de Chateau-neuf; who deceived the Protestant Princes, that were armed for the defence of the Palatinate; for it was concluded by the Treaty of Ulme, where all the Princes of both Parties were assembled, to hearken to the propositions of France; That both Catho∣lics and Protestants should lay down their Arms, and the Quarrel be decided by the King of Bohemia, and the Emperor only. The Protestant Princes suffered themselves to be abused, and did perform the Treaty honestly, so that the Marquess of Ansbatch, the Gene∣ral of their Forces, had orders to disband them; but the Duke of Bavaria, and the other Catholic Princes of the same Parties, sent their Troops by the Danube to the Empe∣ror, who overthrew the Prince Palatine at the battel of Prague. After this, Monsieur de Luynes, having thus sufficiently raised his Family, began to consider what might be for the In∣terest of the Kingdom, and thereupon coun∣celled the King to weaken the Hugonots, who as he told his Majesty, had the Insolence to make a distinct State within themselves, and had hitherto been held invincible; hereupon Monsieur de Luynes seized upon all their im∣portant places, except Montauban, from Sau∣mur to the Pyreneans, and after his death, in the year 1622, pursuant to his Maxims Mont∣pelier was taken, and at last (some time after) Cardinal Richelieu counselled the King to
attack Rochel, which he gained, and razed immediately; and having in that destroyed the principal strength of the Hugonot Party, their entire ruin soon followed, upon the Duke of Rohans retreat to Venice, who had a long time upheld them by his Valor and In∣dustry. Prince Maurice was sufficiently informed of this condition of France, by the Dukes of Bovillon, and dela Trimoille, who had married his Sisters; besides these, he had a great many Friends in Germany, where several of the Soveraign Princes were related to him, either by his own side, or his Mothers, who was Daughter to Maurice Duke of Sax∣ony. The Elector Palatine was his Nephew likewise, and he afterwards was chose King of Bohemia, which he accepted, as 'tis said, upon the advice of Prince Maurice, and the persuasions of the Princess his Lady, though contrary to the Counsels of King Iames, his Father in-law, who thought a young Prince was not capable to manage an Affair of such Importance, and resist the power of the House of Austria; protesting that he would neither succor him with men nor money, except he quitted this design, which would infallibly become his ruin: but the Duke of Bovillon perswaded the Elector Palatine to the contra∣ry, as having some power over the young Prince, who was his Nephew, and had been bred up with him at Sedan; and the Duke discovered some Ambition to have his Ne∣phew
a King, when he wrote to some Friends at Paris, that whilst Lewis was making Knights at Fountainbleau, he was making Kings in Ger∣many. But this Royalty did not continue above 6 months, so that his Enemies called him a King of Snow, because the single battle of Prague, in the beginning of the year 1621, lost him all Bohemia, Silesia, Lusatia, Mora∣via, with the adjoyning Provinces; and the year following, the Spanish Forces marching from the Low Countries, deprived him of the Palatinate itself, in which he was not re-esta∣blished, but by Gustavus Adolphus's Descent into Germany; Charles Duke of Lorrain, who died many years after, one of the oldest Cap∣tains of the age, signalized himself very much at the Battle of Pragne, where Count Har∣court was likewise, tho very young. But to return to Prince Maurice; France being so apparently inclined to the Interests of Barnevelt's Party, its Ministers, which were then in Holland, used to say, that Prince Maurice would have pretended to the Sove∣raignty of the United Provinces, but that such People, who in the beginning had been hot∣test against Mr. Barnevelt, and most devoted to the Prince; yet when they fathom'd his designs became averse to them, notwithstand∣ing their former obligations; besides the Exile, Death and Imprisonment of persons who had been so considerable in the State, and had likewise a great many Friends and Dependants, wrought a mighty change in
the Peoples affections to the Prince, which ap∣peared very visibly; for whereas before when he went through the Towns of Holland, every body came out of their houses praying for him with extraordinary Acclamations; now, as he was one day going through the Market∣place at Gorcum, which was full of people, there was scarce a single man that pull'd his Hat off to him: For the common people were so variable, that the very Writings which heretofore had made Mr. Barnevelt become suspected by them, were now pro∣duced as so many motives for their pity and compassion towards him. To this they ad∣ded, that the assistance which probably he might have hop'd for, from the Elector Pa∣latine, was since the loss of the battle of Prague, no longer to be expected; and the Emperor Ferdinand the 2d, having by the happy success of his Generals, Count Tilly, and Wallestein, made himself absolute Master of all Germany, even to the Baltick Sea, where he established an Admiralty at Wismar, reduced all the Princes, and Im∣perial Towns under his Obedience; Prince Maurice could no longer expect Succors from Germany, whatever Friends he might hereto∣fore have had there. But those who adhered to the Interests of Prince Maurice, and the House of Orange, acquitted him of a Design so prejudicial to the good of the United Provinces, by main∣taining that it was a perfect Artifice of his
Enemies, to make him become odious to the People of the Low Countries; for said they, what probability was there, that Prince Maurice ever had it in his thoughts to become Soveraign of his Country, since after the extirpation of Barnevelt and his party, he never made one step towards it, which he might have done, having then no farther obstacles. Prince Maurice did not long survive a great Conspiracy, which the Sieur de Stautemburg, youngest Son of Mr. Barnevelt, had laid against his Life, which being happily disco∣vered some hours before its execution, ob∣liged him to punish a great number of the Conspirators, throughout the pincipal Towns of Holland. The Prince was never married, but had several Natural Children, the most consi∣derable of them all was Mousieur de Bever∣vert, a man very well made, and very brave, he was Governor of Bolduc, after whose death the Prince of Tarentum had that Government, and was succeeded by Collonel Fitz Patrick, a Scotchman. Prince Maurice died in the Spring of the Year 1625, when the Marquess Spinola be∣sieged the Town of Breda. And as some pretended it was for grief that he did not succeed in the Soveraignty; so others said that it was, because he could not relieve that place, which was his own propriety, and had been surprized by him 34 years before.
FREDERICK HENRY. Prince of Orange. portrait
Henry Frederick of Nassau Prince of Orange, and his Posterity. THis Prince was born the 28th of February 1584. He was of a good mein, and of a strong make, and his parts were as emi∣nent, as his person was agreeable. He was a very great Captain, and equall'd the Glory of his Brother Maurice, who taught him the Art of War, and lead him into the most dangerous Adventures; and amongst others, at the battle of Newport, where though he was very young, he contributed much by his Valor to the gaining that great Victory in a conjuncture, where the Army of the States Ge∣neral had before them a powerful body of men commanded by Albert the Arch-duke in person, and the Sea behind them, so that it was absolutely necessary, either to make themselves Conquerors or to perish. When Prince Maurice died, in the year 1625, he advised his Brother Henry Frede∣rick his chief Heir, to marry Madam de Solmes (who was come into Holland with the Queen of Bohemia) whose Beauty and good Carriage were accompanied with a great deal
of Modesty and Prudence; she died a little while ago, being very antient, and her Name was Amelia, Daughter to Iohn Albert Count de Solmes. This Prince had one Son, and four Daugh∣ters, the eldest of these Ladies married Fre∣derick William the Elector of Brandenburg, by whom she had several Children. This Prince has the greatest Territories in all Germany, they reaching from the Low Countries to Po∣land and Curland. The 2d Daughter Henrietta Emilia, mar∣ried the Count de Nassau. The 3d Henrietta Catherina, married Iohn George Prince of An∣halt; and the 4th married the Duke of Si∣meren, the youngest Son of the House Pala∣tine, who died a little while ago. The Son was called William, was born in 1626, and died the 6th of November 1650, after the business of Amsterdam. He was a Prince naturally ambitious, and of great Courage, so that his Enemies reported of him, that though he was so young, yet he aimed at the execution of that design, which had been laid to Prince Maurice's charge, by Barnevelt and his Adherents. His sudden death changed the whole face of affairs in the Low Countries. He had great prospects from his alliance of England, having married Princess Mary, Daughter of Charles the first King of Great Britain, by whom he left Prince William Henry of Nassau (now King of England, &c.) who was born the 14th of
November 1650, some days after the death of his Father. This young Prince William was very re∣markable in his Infancy, for his reservedness and moderation; his Prudence increased as he grew up, and such people as were nice observers of merit, and took great notice of him, have affirmed, that never Prince gave greater hopes than he, even in the most ten∣der years. He suffered with an admirable temper the injuries of Barnevelt's Party, which revived itself in the persons of the two De∣wits, who were Brothers; expecting with a silent patience, which was greater much than that of his Ancestor, the great Prince Willi∣am, what time would produce, and what favorable occasions might occur, at last for his Re-establishment; for having by a so∣lemn sentence been deprived of all the Em∣ployments of his Family, after the sudden death of the Prince his Father; he was re∣stored to them again, at the beginning of the last war, by an Ordinance that was made on purpose for it. His Rise and Re-establishment were ow∣ing to France, which having made great Conquests for almost 8 years together; the greatest part of the Frontier Towns, and several capital places of the Provinces Utrecht and Zutphen among others, were rendered up at the very sight of their Armies, though these places were provided with large Garri∣sons, yet being composed of Officers and
Men without any experience, the King of France became Master of more than 40 places, in less than two months. These mis∣fortunes, which seemed to be the presages of greater, and had put the United Provinces into the utmost consternation, gave occasion to the People to complain of the ill conduct of the two De Wits, who governed till that time; and furnished those who adhered to the House of Nassau with a reasonable pretext to affirm, that the Princes of Orange were on∣ly able to uphold their tottering State, and defend them against their most potent Ene∣mies; and that, as heretofore, they had pro∣tected them against the Tyranny of Spain, so it was they alone who could preserve them from the Fury and Violence of the French Armies. The Grand-mother of this young Prince, who was a Woman of a Masculine courage, and suffered the indignities that had been offered to the House of Orange with great impatience, having beheld it, in its great∣est splendour, was not a little serviceable in stirring up all the creatures and dependants on the House of Nassau, who were very numerous; these people being angry to see themselves fallen from their credit, the prin∣cipal employments being given to the Sons of Burgomasters; and seconded by the fury of the people, that were grown out of all patience at so many disasters, and the sight of a victorious Army, through the very bow∣els
of the Countrey, massacred the Enemies of the Young Prince, who was afterwards restored to the possession of all the dignities that had belonged to his Ancestors, which is to say, that of General of their Forces, Stadt-holder and Admiral, which were more∣over by a solemn decree made hereditary to his Family. Upon this occasion it cannot but be ad∣mired, how so powerful a State, that had made head for Fourscore years against the Crown of Spain, had taken such large Towns, and gained so many Battels, and had become formidable at Sea to all the Princes of the world, having carried its Arms and Victory to the farthest part of the Earth; that this State, I say, which had rendred itself so famous by the long defence of Ostend, which has equall'd the reputation of the famous Sieges of Tire, and the ancient Troy, should be reduced in less than two months to the very brink of its ruine; and it had as∣suredly been destroyed in the year 1672, if by a desperate resolution it had not resolved to save itself by drowning part of the Coun∣try; as a Pilot who throws all his Cargo overboard, during a furious Storm, that so he may preserve his Men and Vessel. But those who knew the constitution of these Provinces, and were not ignorant that discord is the plague and certain destruction of the most flourishing States, were not so much amazed, considering it was more than
Threescore years since that Country had been torn in pieces by two contrary Factions, which threatned its subversion without any Foreign Forces: This Gangreen likewise had so seized upon the most noble parts of the United Provinces, that in the year 1672, by a strange fatality and an unaccountable passion, the greatest part of the chief Persons in that Country, desired the loss of their Land Army, and the defeat of the Prince of Orange, whose Rise and Power they so much envied: For this reason they had not suffici∣ently provided his Army with necessary pro∣visions, whilst they applied their principal cares to increase the Fleet, to resist the Kings of England and France, who attacked them jointly with a Navy of above Fourscore Men of War. But it is not less surprizing to consider the expedition the French made in this Campaign, when as these people for fear of becoming subject to the House of Orange, allied to these great Monarchs, had committed a consi∣derable fault in their Politicks: for after the Peace of Munster, imagining themselves to be in perfect security, and that they had nothing more to be afraid of, and being acknowledged Soveraigns by Spain, they might rather give Laws than receive them from any body. They disbanded the greatest part of their old Forces, that were Strangers, and those experienced Officers who had gained so great Glory to their Country, imagining
that the surest means of freeing themselves from the Slavery which they thought them∣selves threatened with, was to take from the Prince of Orange the support of his Govern∣ment, by reforming those Troops which looked upon him as their Master, having taken an Oath to him, and were devoted perfectly to his service. Besides the principal men in the Country had, as they thought, some interest in this change, for they gave all the Commands in the Army, and the Government of places to their own Relations, thinking by the assist∣ance of this Souldiery to sortifie themselves, and at the same time to weaken the House of Orange; but they found by sad experience, that endeavoring to avoid one inconvenience, they fell quickly into a greater. For having given the great Employments in the Army, and Government of places to Sons of Burgo∣masters, and Deputies of Towns; People without any experience, and who wanted Tutors for themselves, rather than to be Commanders; when a strong and powerful Enemy made War against them, these young men show'd none of their Northern courage in this storm and danger, for there were places that were garrisoned with 5000 Foot and 800 Horse, that rendred themselves all Prisoners of War, at the very sight of the French Army, without making any resist∣ance.
My Brother de la Villaumaine, who came into France a little before this last War, giv∣ing me an account of the state of the Army in Holland, told me that if a powerful Enemy should attack them, the Officers must resolve to perish and bear the brunt in their own persons; having no confidence in the Soul∣diers they commanded, who did not know how to manage their Arms; a Prophecy which was since accomplished at the expence of his Life; A little before he told me like∣wise, that the Dutch Horse were so ill equip∣ped, that 50 Reyters of Munster would put to flight two or three Hundred Dutch Troopers, who would fly before these Germans as Sheep before a Wolf. There happened the like inconvenience to the Swedes, for having committed the same fault as the Hollanders, because after the Peace of Munster, they likewise disband∣ed the old Troops which had done such great actions, and revived the antient Glory of the Goths, who had conquered a great part of Europe, being so bold as to attack the Elector of Brandenburg and his old Souldiers, with their new Levies, that never durst maintain their ground against him, and were always beaten when he could joyn them; so that if by an extraordinary good fortune they had not had so faithful, and so mighty a Protector as the French King, they had quite lost Pomerania, and been sent back to their own cold Countries beyond the Baltick Sea:
All which shows us that a Prince ought always to keep a large body of old Troops to defend his State, which without such a sup∣port runs the hazard of becoming a prey to the first Enemy that shall be bold, and strong enough to attack it. To these two causes of the extremities to which Holland was reduced in 1672, that is to say, to the intestine divisions, and to the disbanding of the old foreign Souldiers; there may a third be likewise added, which was the extraordinary and unheard of drowth that happen'd that year; for it was so great, that the Rhine, one of the greatest Rivers in Europe, that carries Men of War, was so low, that the French Troops were able to ford it; so the Country being frightned to see itself attacked both by Sea and Land, by the powers of France and England united to its ruine, was reduced to the utmost despair, seeing Heaven conspire to their destruction, by taking away those Ramparts which Nature had designed for its preservation. The French Army for the reasons before mentioned, had penetrated into the very Heart of the Country, and 40 places were taken in a small space of time, whereas the State thought they might have found work for 20 years, these people that were a little too haughty in their prosperity, lay then under a terrible consternation; almost in the same condition as the Venetians were hereto∣fore, when King Lewis the 12th made himself
Master of the greatest part of the Territories which they had upon the Continent. Being in this despair, they were constrained to the last Remedy, which was to overflow their Country, and breaking down their Dykes to oppose a Sea to the French forces, so hin∣dring them from passing further, they avert∣ed the ruine of the Commonwealth, which else had assuredly run its period. Heretofore seeing themselves reduced to a like extremity, they made use of the same Remedy against the Spanish Army at the Siege of Leyden, having succoured the place then at the very point of being lost, with an innumerable company of Boats, which swum upon the Land, which they had over∣flow'd; and then the United Provinces were reduced to so strange circumstances, and to such a height of despair, that the principal persons amongst them proposed, in imitation of the ancient Switzers, to burn all their Towns, Villages and Castles, and to spoyl the Country as much as they could, and go on board their Ships to settle themselves in the Indies, so to be delivered from the Spa∣nish Tyranny; but they had not Vessels enough to transport a fourth part of the people, and were unwilling to leave the greater number to the mercy of so pityless an Enemy: and for a Motto of the lamen∣table condition which this Country was then reduced to, they engraved upon the Money which they coyned at that time, a Vessel
without Masts and Sayls, tost by the waves and storm, with these words, Incertum quó fata ferant: words which represented the ex∣tremity of their condition. But to return to the Prince of Orange; He appeared at the head of an Army at 22 years old; as his Great Grandfather Prince William, who was Generalissimo to the Em∣perour Charles the V. at the same Age; and throughout the course of this great War, he show'd so much Courage and Conduct, both in Sieges and Battels, that he had assuredly pass'd the Actions of his Illustrious Ancest∣ors, who for 200 years serv'd for a model to the greatest Generals, if he had not had the misfortune to be born in the age of a King, whose Genius and Power no common forces could stand against. I do not design to make an exact Journal of the Actions of his Illu∣strious Father Prince Henry Frederick, since they may be learnt from other. Histories, but speak of them in general, and relate some certain passages not commonly known. In the year 1626 he took Oldensell, Capi∣tal of the Country of Tuiz, in the Neigh∣bourhood of Friezeland and Groninghen: and the same year Peter Hein, one of his Vice-Admirals, in the Bay of Todos los▪ Santos, in the Road of St. Salvador, took a Spanish Fleet laden with Sugar. In the year 1627 he took Grolle, before the face of Count Henry de Bergues, General of a powerful Spanish Army, that could put
no succours into it, nor make the Prince raise his Siege, he being so well entrenched against the Enemies Army. At the end of the year 1627 the same Peter Hein mentioned before, took the Spanish Silver Fleet near the Isle of Cuba. This prize, without reckoning the Galeons and Vessels, was esteemed at more than twenty Millions; there were, besides other Riches, 356000 Marks of Sil∣ver, and 300000 Marks of Gold, abundance of Pearls, Cochinele, Jewels, Bezoar, Musk, Ambergreese, 250 Chests of Sugar, and an infinite number of Stuffs, and other mer∣chandizes of great value. This Vice-admi∣ral Peter Hein arrived gloriously in Holland in the beginning of the year 1629, which was remarkable by the Conquest of the strong Town of Bolduc, where by a Siege that was very long and difficult, Prince Henry Frede∣rick show'd by his conduct and valour that he could overcome that which had resisted his Brother Maurice, who had heretofore attacqued that important place without suc∣cess. But what was more marvellous was, that whilst Prince Henry Frederick lay before the place, Count Henry de Bergues having pass'd the River Isell with a great Army, ra∣vaged all the Country of Utrecht, where he seized upon Amersfort, and put Holland into such a consternation that several people counselled the Prince to quit his enterprize upon Bolduc, and succor the heart of his Country which was made desolate by the
Enemy; but he had the constancy to perse∣vere, till he had made himself Master of so considerable a Town, without being moved by the Councels of his chief Officers, or the Lamentations of the People that had been plundered. At the same time the Prince by the vigi∣lance and resolution of Otho de Guent Lord of Dieden, Governour of Emeric, having happily surprized the Town of Wesel, where was the Magazine and Artillery of the Spa∣nish Army (which obliged Count Henry de Bergues to repass the Issel in all the haste imaginable) he gained by this double con∣quest the reputation not only of a very brave, but likewise of a very fortunate Captain; a quality so desirable to a General, that Scilla the Dictator preferred the surname of Happy to that of Great. In the year 1630 he seized upon the Town of Olind in Brazil, by the conduct of his Vice-Admirals; and the same year Count Iohn de Nassau, his Cousin, who for some discontent had gone out of the Dutch service to that of Spain, was defeated near the Rhine, and taken by Collonel Illestein, who was not half so strong; he was carried Prisoner to Wesel, from whence he was ransomed for 18000 Rix Dollers. The year following the same Count Iohn de Nassau, who had gathered together a very strong Fleet in hopes to surprize Willemstat, he was totally defeated by the
Hollanders, above 4000 of his men taken Prisoners, and the rest either slain or wound∣ed, and the Count had much ado to save himself with the Prince of Brabanzoon. In the same year 1631, the States General, to gratify the Prince of Orange, and to testi∣fy their acknowledgment for the services which he had continually done his Country, gave the reversion of all his Offices to his Son Prince William, and the writings for it were presented to the young Prince in a Box of Gold. In the year 1632, Prince Henry after hav∣ing taken Ruremond, Venlo and Strale, he set about the conquest of Maestricht, a place somewhat distant from Holland, scituated upon the River Meuse, in the confines of Brabant, where he provided his Ammuni∣tion and Victuals for the Siege with so much Prudence, that he had enough to make him∣self Master of the place; he had surrounded it with a great circumvallation, which the Spanish Army could not force, no more than another German Army, under Henry Godfry, Count of Papenheim, a famous Captain; both which were constrained to retire with disgrace, after several efforts that were un∣successful, and many considerable losses. In the year 1633 the Prince besieged and took Rhineberg, and the year following the Spaniards having besieged the Fort of Phillip∣in, which incommoded the Town of Ghent, the Prince of Orange made them raise the
Siege. A little before Count Henry de Bergue, complaining that he was ill used by the Spani∣ards, had quitted their service and retired into Holland, upon which he published a Manifesto; and two years after, in the year 1634, he was condemned as contumacious, to have his Head cut off, by the sentence of the Court of Mechlin. In this place I must tell you how in the year 1628, after the taking of Rochel, the Cardinal Richelieu, who was absolute Governour in France, was mighty desirous to gain the reputation of having destroyed all the retreats of Heresie, having an unmeasurable desire of making himself be canoniz'd; and to arrive at it the more easily he made his Confessors say, that he had never committed so much as a Venial Sin, as I have often heard from Mr. Lescot de S. Quintin, his Confessor, whom he made Bishop of Chartes: as crafty a man as ever came out of Picardy, who under the pretence of freedom and apparent simplicity, conceal'd a great deal of subtilty and artifice. The Cardinal to gain a reputation among the Zealots for the Catholic Religion, had treated underhand with Iohn Osmael Lord of Walkem∣bourg, Governour of Orange, who seemed discontented with his Master, to deliver up the place to him. This man bred up by the Family of Orange, and intrusted by Prince Henry with the charge of his Soveraignty, was gained by the promise of four hundred thousand Livres in ready Money, and an
Estate of twenty thousand Livres a Year in Provence, whither he designed to retire and renounce Calvinism, having no other Religi∣on besides his interest. But this affair being long in hand, and Walkembourg resolving not to render the place till the Money was paid down, the Prince was so happy as to get some intimation of this Treason: He dis∣patched the Sieur Knuth, a Zealander, a man of Resolution, in whom he had an entire confidence, with an express order to dispatch this Traytor; but that he might not cause the least suspicion, he sent him to Orange alone, as pretending other business. This Knuth with whom I was acquainted, and who was a very bold and dexterous person, having made sure of the principal Inhabitants of the Town, and of several Gentlemen in the Principality of Orange, watched his opportunity to surprize the Governour; who being one day come down from the Castle into the Town, with very little company, contrary to his usual custom, he attack'd and killed him in the house of one Pyse a Scrivener, whether he was retired. Afterwards Knuth went directly to the Castle, where the Lieutenant after having levelled the Cannon against the Town, and being doubtful for some time what he should do, at last received him upon sight of the Prince's order, and took a new Oath of Fidelity to Prince. Henry Frederick of Nassau, together with all the Garrison; the Prince
afterwards sent the Baron de Dona his Brother-in-law to command in the place. This Walkembourg had married the Daughter of the Sieur de Bic, Treasurer to the States, a Lady of great probity and merit, who had used all possible endeavours to alter his pernicious designs. She had the trouble as well as his Daughters to see him expire, for he was forced to render himself to Knuth, after having been wounded through a Chamber-door, where he had for a long time defended himself. I have heard my Father relate this story with great indignation, he being a professed Enemy to all Ingrati∣tude and Unfaithfulness: and to shew me and my Brothers the horrors of those crimes, he related to us upon this occasion, the Treason of Bernardine de Corte, who delivered up the Castle of Millan to King Lewis the 12th, for a Hundred thousand Crowns, that had been intrusted to him by Duke Lodowick Sforza his Master, by whom he had been bred in the quality of a Page, and was at present preferred before all his other Subjects to the command of that place, where he had put all that he thought most precious, whilst he was going to seek for succour in Germany. He recounted likewise to us such another Treason of Donat Rafag∣nine, who sold Valencia to the same King for fifty thousand Crowns; and remarked to us from Guicciardine that these Traytors were so look'd on, and detested in the
French Army, and that shame made them die with discontent. This Mr. Knuth rendred an important piece of service to his Master, who re∣warded him with a Present, and a Pension of two thousand Livers a year for his Life. No body can imagine but that the Prince of Orange must bear some ill will to Cardi∣nal Richelieu, for having endeavoured to take away this Soveraignty, which was as dear to him as his Eyes; but he concealed his resentment, as expecting some favourable opportunity of shewing it, which it was not long before it was offered him: for some time after the Cardinal having some difference with Mary de Medicis, the Queen Mother, who being of the house of Austria by the mothers side, was upheld by all the power of Spain and Germany, he was forced to have recourse to foreign Alliances, and to caress those whom he had before despised and of∣fended. This storm which was raising against the Cardinal for his destruction as well within as without the Kingdom, obliged him to seek the friendship of the Prince of Orange, who tho he had not the title of Soveraign, disposed of all things belonging to the United Provin∣ces. There was a Treaty concluded between France and the States General, by which they were to attack the Spaniards, and to di∣vide the Conquest of the Low Countries,
which they had already devoured in their imaginations; the Prince of Orange was to enter Holland with the Dutch Army, and France was to joyn him with thirty thousand Men, and the French Generals had orders from the King to obey the Prince of Orange; so much it seems at that time they thought him neces∣sary to their affairs. In short, the Spring fol∣lowing the year 1635, the French Army under the Command of the Marshals Chatil∣lon and Breze enter'd the Low Countries, and defeated the Spanish Forces at Avein commanded by Prince Thomas of Savoy, who afterwards took the name of Prince of Carignon; all the Baggage and Cannon re∣mained in the possession of the French, with abundance of Prisoners, several of which that were of the best quality were carried to Maestricht: These Generals after this Victory joined the Prince of Orange, and sacked part of Brabant, but the Prince who did not love the Neighbourhood of the French better than that of the Spaniard, and had still the remembrance of the affair at Orange very fresh in his mind, for want of victuals and subsistence ruin'd the French Army that had been so victorious: which being retired into Holland after raising the Siege of Lovain, under pretence of the ap∣proach of Picolomini with a German Army, the greater part of it perished there with Hunger and Sickness; the sixth part of it
never returning back again into their own Kingdom. The Prince of Orange looked upon Car∣dinal Richelieu as an Enemy, that was re∣concil'd to him only out of the necessity that he had for him in his present circumstances, and for this reason he under-hand did him all the displeasure, and gave him all the mor∣tification that he could possibly; granting a favourable reception to such as had been disgrac'd by him in France; honouring them with his confidence and considerable im∣ployments; as amongst others it appeared by Mr. Hauterive and Mr. Beringhen, whom he respected not only in spight of the Car∣dinal, but because they deserved it; and Cardinal Richelieu as powerful as he was, was forced to swallow those Pills, having necessary occasion for Holland to make some diversions, which conduced to the good of his other affairs; this made the Cardinal know, that it was not good to offend people of courage, and being a very great Politician, he could dissemble so far as not to be angry at this ill treatment; so he continued to seek the Prince of Orange's Friendship, and it was agreed that each should attack the common Enemy from his own side; he maintained a faithful and perfect correspon∣dence with the French; and the Prince who was sufficiently revenged, and drew great advantages from his alliance with France,
executed the Treaties he had made with great sincerity. The same year in which happened the battle of Avein, and the Siege of Louvain, the Spaniards surprized the Fort of Skink, by means of Lieutenant Collonel Enhold, who made himself Master of it by a party of the Garrison of Guelders, whom he made use of to execute so bold an Enterprize. The Sieur Veld the Governour being waked with the noise of the attack, and rising in his Shirt, had his Arm immediately broken, and being in despair to see himself surprized, would not render himself Prisoner, what∣ever offers of quarter they could make him, still defending himself till he was over∣whelm'd with blows. The Father of this Enhold had been be∣headed at the Hague for some Crime, and the Son to revenge the death of his Father, quitted the Dutch service, and put himself under the Spaniard; which happened very luckily for him, for by the surprize of so important a place, beside the inward sa∣tisfaction which he had, to cause so great a loss to the States, the Cardinal Infant Ferdinand of Austria being newly arrived in the Low Countries, where he had the Sove∣raign Command presented him, for so bold and happy an action, with a Chain of Gold of great value, and gave him the summ of fifty thousand Livres. But Prince Henry was so set upon the regaining of this place,
that he gave the Spaniards free entrance into the Countries of Guelders and Utrecht; having besieged it in the month of August 1635, he re-took it in April 1636, by a Siege of six months. In the year 1637, Cardinal Richelieu, to oblige the Prince of Orange, gave him the Title of Highness, in a discourse made on purpose by Monsieur de Charnasse, Am∣bassadour of France to Holland, in the Name of his Majesty; and at an Assembly of the States General, which was soon after printed: In which he was followed by the Ambassadors of all other Princes, who before had used no other Title but that of Excellence. In the same year 1637, Prince Henry, by a Siege of four months, re-took the Town and Castle of Breda, which the Marquis Ambrose Spinola had conquered in the year 1625, by a long Blockade of a whole year, with incredible Expences; although this place was defended by France, England and Denmark; so the Marquis put over one of the Gates of the Town, that he had carry'd it, tribus Regibus frustra renitentibus, notwith∣standing the Resistance of three Kings. It was at this last Siege of Breda that Monsieur de Charnasse was killed; for though he was Ambassadour of France, yet he would serve at the Head of his Regiment, which he had in the Low Countries; hop∣ing to become a Mareschal of France, by
the favour of the Mareschal de Breze, whose Aunt he had married, and who had gained him his Employments. In the year 1639 the Hollanders gained a considerable Victory at Sea over the Spa∣niards, the Fleet of Don Antonio Doquendo, consisting of 67 Men of War, that had been equipping so long in Spain; joyned to some Vessels from Dunkirk, who were considerable in that time, came for some great design, (which none yet have ever penetrated) were stopped in St. George's Channel by the Renowned Admiral Martin Erpez Tromp, with only-twelve Ships; but being afterwards reinforced with ninety Men of War, and several Fire-ships; that came from diverse places, he encompassed the Spanish Fleet, (that had put itself into the Downes, near the Fleet of the King of Great Britain, as thinking itself to be there in safety); and then attacqued it with so great resolution, that after a long Combat, where abundance of persons of France, En∣gland, and the Low Countries, ran from all parts to see from the shore so extraordinary a spectacle: The greatest part of so pow∣erful a Fleet was burnt, destroyed, or se∣parated; and those which escaped put themselves under the covert of some English Vessels; and so retreated into the River of Thames, or some Port in Flanders. The Spaniards lost above 7000 men, that were burnt, or drowned, besides 2000 who were
made Prisoners by the Hollanders. This Victory was very great and memorable, for there were 40 large Vessels sunk, burnt, or taken; and amongst others the great Galeon of Portugal, called Mater Tereza was burnt, which was 62 foot broad, and had 800 men on board, who all perished. This Tromp was the Father of Count Tromp, who was engaged in the King of Denmark's service, and gained great advantages over the Swedes. In the year 1641, Prince Henry Frederick married his only Son Prince William, to the Princess Mary of England, eldest Daughter to Charles I. King of Great Britain, and Madam Henrietta of France; and this Marriage was celebrated with a great deal of Pomp and Magnificence. The year 1645 was remarkable for the taking of the important Town of Hulsh in Flanders, which was carried in spite of the Spaniards, who could neither put succors into it, nor make Prince Henry raise the Siege. This Prince during the space of two and twenty years that he had the Government in his hands, was remarkable for his wife and moderate conduct. Because the Prin∣cess Louise de Coligny his Mother, had main∣tained Barnevelt's Party, some people thought that the Prince following his Mothers inclinations, would re-establish that Party, and recall such of them as had
been banished, and among others Mr Grotius: But this Prince, like a good Politician, thought it better to let things continue in the posture he found them in, than to embroil'em afresh, by bringing a prevailing party upon his back: I have seen Mr. Gro∣tius in a great passion upon this occasion, and he has spoke very ill of the Prince, accusing him of Ingratitude, and of having no respect for those who had been Friends to his Mother. Prince Henry was very rich; but instead of finding any support from England, he was forc'd to help King Charles in his ne∣cessity, with all his ready Money: The greatest part of which has been repaid by the King of England, since his Restauration, to his Nephew the Prince of Orange. Henry Frederick died the 14th of March 1647, and was buried with a great deal of State. Besides his Children that we have mentioned before, he left a Natural Son, remarkable for his Valor, his name was Mr. Zulestein, Collonel of the Dutch Infantry, who died at the attack of Vorden. Prince William of Orange, laid the Foun∣dation of the Commonwealth of the United Provinces, and was their first Founder; his eldest Son Maurice secured and established this Commonwealth by his Victories, which forced the Spaniards in the Treaty of Truce for 12 years to acknowledge the United Provinces for a free State; and Henry
Frederick Brother to Maurice, and Grand∣father to the present King of England, by the continuation of his Conquests, at last forced the Spaniards to renounce entirely the right which they had pretended to that Country; so that we may say with reason and justice, that this illustrious Father, and his two generous Sons, who have imitated his Vertues, are the Founders of this Com∣monwealth, which sends Ambassadors that are covered before the most powerful Kings in Christendom, even before the King of Spain himself, whose Vassals they were about 100 years ago. Henry Frederick had for his devise this word, Patriae{que} Patri{que} intimating thereby, that he thought of nothing but serving his Country, and revenging the Death of his Father.
WILLIAM II; Prince of Orange. portrait
THE LIFE OF WILLIAM II. Prince of Orange. THis Prince was born in the year 1626, the States General were his Godfathers, and by the appointment of his Father was called William, after the name of his Illustri∣ous Grandfather. In the year 1630 this young Prince was declared General of the Cavalry of the Low Countries, and the year following the States granted him the Survivorship of the Government of their Province. He was no sooner of Age to bear Arms, but he followed his Father to the Army, and was present at the Siege of Breda, giving
great proofs of his Courage, though but 13 years old. Immediately upon the death of his Fa∣ther Frederick Henry, he took the Oath of Fidelity to the States, for the Government, of which they had granted him the Re∣version. All Europe was in a profound Peace up∣on conclusion of the Treaty at Munster, which was done the next year after Prince Frederick Henry's death. The States con∣sidering the vast Debts they had contract∣ed by the extraordinary Expences they had been obliged to make, resolved to retrench all unnecessary ones; having a great num∣ber of Troops in their pay that were of no use now the War was at an end, they pro∣posed to disband a considerable part of them. William the Second, who had succeeded in all the Places of the Prince his Father, and knowing very well that nothing but the Army could support the credit of the Places he was possessed of, made a strong opposition to this design of the States Ge∣neral: He represented that it was against all the Rules of Policy to disband Troops who had been so faithful to the Provinces, and that France or Spain might make use of this opportunity to fall upon their Common∣wealth, in a time when they could not be in a condition to defend themselves. The
States, who were already resolved to break 120 Companies; to make some sort of satisfaction to the Prince, offered to conti∣nue the ordinary Pay to the disbanded Offi∣cers: The Prince agreed to this proposal; but the Province of Guelders and the City of Amsterdam opposed and protested against it for several reasons. They who were in the Prince's Interests, advised him to visit the principal Cities of the Netherlands, to perswade the Magistrates to take a Resolu∣tion of leaving not only the Officers, but the Troops in the same condition they were in before the War, that they might be in a readiness to serve where-ever there was occasion. Pursuant to this advice, the Prince having sent for the principal Collonels of the Army, went in person to four or fiveCities of Hol∣land; The Burghers of Amsterdam, who were well assured that the Prince would visit them too, and apprehending his presence would cross the Resolutions they had taken; desired him by their Deputies to put off his intended Journey to this City, for several Reasons which they gave him: Haerlem, Medemblic, and several other places followed the Example of Amsterdam. The Proceedings of these Cities was so considerable an Affliction to the Prince, and incensed him so much, that in a meet∣ing of the States General, he resented it
with inexpressible concern: He endeavour∣ed to insinuate to them by a great number of Reasons, that the Affront they had put upon him, in refusing to give him Audi∣ence, was designed only to lessen his Au∣thority; that nothing but a publick satis∣faction would make him amends for this Affront; which he demanded earnestly of the States. The Deputies of Amsterdam, and other Cities, answered this Remon∣strance by a long Manifesto, wherein they alledged the Reasons that induced them to make the Prince that Request; this touch∣ed him to the quick, and made him con∣tinue more obstinate against disbanding the Souldiers; and transported him so much, that he Arrested six of the principal Magi∣strates, and sent them Prisoners immedi∣ately after into the Castle of Lovestein. This violent proceeding of the Prince alarm'd all Holland. The people were gene∣rally apprehensive that he aspired to the Soveraignty of the United Provinces, and that he opposed the disbanding the Troops for no other reason. All Europe said some∣thing, and tho probably the Prince had no such design, the attempt that he made upon Amsterdam, confirmed the suspicions all men had entertained of him, that he was too arrogant to obey the orders of a popular Government: But those who judge impar∣tially of this action, are of opinion, that
he never aim'd at making himself King, and that he had no other prospect in besieging Amsterdam, but to revenge some private affronts, and support his authority and credit by humbling such a powerful City. Whatever his reasons were, he resolved to besiege it, and actually perform'd it on the 30th of Iuly, 1650; he narrowly miss'd of surprizing it, for the Citizens had not the least apprehension of such a design. The Troops appointed for this enterprize put their orders so punctually in execution, and met so exactly at their rendezvous, that the City must unavoidably have fallen into the Prince's hands, but for the Hamburgh Courier who passed through the Prince's Army without being perceived, and gave timely notice of it to the Magistrates. The City immediately took the alarm, the Council of Thirty six met, the Burghers run to their Arms, the Bridges were drawn up, the Cannon mounted upon the Ram∣parts, and the City put in a posture of defence; Deputies were dispatched to the Prince with proposals which took up all the next day, which was done to gain time for the opening of their Sluces. The Prince seeing all the Country under water, and the impossibility of continuing a long Siege, and the firm resolution of the Burghers, hearkened to a Treaty of accommodation,
which was concluded three days after; very much to his advantage. The Prince was sensible the States would resent this attempt, and the better to make his peace with them, he released the Prisoners out of the Castle of Lovestein, upon condi∣tion that they should be for ever unqualified for any public employments or places, and at the same time presented a Memorial to the States with a particular account of the motives he had to form this Siege. The States sent it back without opening it, assuring him that there needed no justifi∣cation, since the difference had been so soon adjusted. About a month after the Prince assisted at a particular Assembly in the Dutchy of Guelders, where by his prudence and good conduct he entirely quieted all the jealousies they had enter∣tained of him. He returned to the Hague about the beginning of November, and went to bed very weary with his Journey. He had been observed to be melancholy ever since the miscarriage of his design upon Am∣sterdam, for which reason the Court was not alarm'd with this little indisposition. He was let blood the next day, and the day after the Small Pox appeared, and proved so violent, that the Physicians be∣lieved him in danger; he died the 6th day, in the Twenty fourth year of his age, on the 6th of November, 1650.
There wanted but three things to make his memory immortal, viz. The Continu∣ation of the War, which he passionately desired, a longer Life, and a little more Deference to the State, whom he treated with too much authority; for he was Master of a great many good qualities, and eminently possessed the advantages of body and mind. He was a great General, and would have been as renowned for all civil and military vertues, as the Heroes of his Family. He had a vast comprehensive Genius, and learned in his Youth the Mathematics, and spoke English, French, Italian, Spanish, and High Dutch, as readily and fluently as his Mother Tongue. He was buried at Delf in the magnificent Tomb of the Princes of Orange in great state. He married Mary Stuart, eldest Daughter to Charles I. King of Great Britain. An Illustrious Birth, Interest of State, and Glory, are the three ordinary motives which sway Princes in the choice of their alliances, and all three concur in the making this match; for the Glory of the immortal actions of his Father Frederick were spread over all Europe. William his Son had given a Thousand proofs that he did not degene∣rate from the Valour and Vertue of his Ancestors? and the Family of Nassau, had given five Electors to Cologne and Ments, and an Emperor to Germany.
The proposals were no sooner made, but they were accepted, and the Marriage was celebrated at London with great magnificence. From this Marriage was born William III. whose History we are now entring upon.
WILLIAM III. KING of ENGLAND. Prince of Orange etc. portrait
THE HISTORY OF WILLIAM III. Prince of Orange, AND King of GREAT BRITAIN. Out of the French by Mr. Brown. THe sudden and unexpected death of William II. (who died in the 24th year of his age) threw the Court and Friends of the House of Nassau into such a consterna∣tion as is not easie to be exprest. But to moderate their grief, the Princess Royal within eight days after was delivered of William Henry, a Prince in whom the valour and all the other qualities of his glorious an∣cestors revived; and who may justly be
stiled the Restorer of that flourishing Repub∣lick, whereof his Fathers were the Archi∣tects and Founders. Accord∣ing to the new Stile, which I have all along fol∣lowed with my Author. He was born on the fourteenth of November, 1650, and had for his Godfathers, the States of Holland and of Zealand, the Cities of Delf, Leiden, and Am∣sterdam. As it was his misfortune to be born at a calamitous conjuncture, when his enemies were furnished with a plausible pretence to deprive him of those Dignities which his Ancestors had enjoy'd; the States General find∣ing themselves now at liberty, by the death of William II. and concluding from the en∣terprize of Amsterdam what they might ex∣pect from a single Governour, resolved to remedy all inconveniences that might for the future happen upon this occasion, and so ap∣pointed a General Assembly to meet at the Hague. This Assembly began on the eigh∣teenth of Ianuary 1651, and did not end till the month of August the same year. In the first Session it was resolved, That since the Country was now without a Governour, by the death of the Prince, the choice of all Officers and Magistrates for the time to come should be in the disposal of the Cities; and that not only the ordinary Souldiers, but even the Guards of the deceased Prince should take an Oath of Fidelity to the States of Holland. This was unanimously carry'd, notwithstanding all the representations made by the Princess his Mother, who ineffectu∣ally
labored to preserve him in those Offices which her Husband possessed, and before him the other Princes of Orange: the Royal Fami∣ly of Great Britain, from whom principally she could expect any assistance, being at that time under an Eclipse through the wicked Machinations of those execrable Parricides, who after they had barbarously Murder'd their lawful Soveraing King Charles I. of Bles∣sed Memory, by a train of Hypocrisy and other Villanies peculiar to their Party. shar∣ed the Soveraignty between themselves. Our Prince, who like Hercules was to en∣counter Snakes in his Cradle, suffer'd a great deal from the intreagues and contrivances of Barnevelt's Party, now re-established in the Persons of the Messieurs De Witt. But he bore all with incredible moderation, still waiting for a favorable opportunity to be restor'd to those dignities and great Employments he had been deprived of by a publick decree, ob∣tained by a predominant Faction, immedi∣ately after the death of his Father. It must be confessed that France in some measure con∣tributed to his re-establishment, altho with∣out the least design to favour the Prince. Heaven so ordering it that that mighty Mo∣narch should ravage and almost destroy this flourishing Republic, to convince the world at the same time that only the Family of the Founders of this Republic was capable to re∣pair its Ruines, and restore it to its former Grandeur.
The Reader can scarce imagine with what a prodigions torrent the King of France over∣ran and surprized all the United Provinces, obliging the greatest part of the Frontier Towns and other Capital Cities to surren∣der themselves. Amongst the rest, Utrecht and Zutphen open'd their Gates at the first approach of the Enemy; for altho there were large Garrisons in both those places, yet being composed of Burghers, and com∣manded by Officers of little or no experi∣ence, they were frighted at the sight of a well disciplin'd, couragious army, that knew how to make the best advantage of the victo∣ry, and the fright they had put their ene∣mies in. These calamities, which had been foreseen long before by some of the most prudent persons of these Provinces, as they occasi∣oned a general consternation, so they gave the people subject to complain of the ill conduct of the Mrs de Wit, who at that time had all the authority of the Government in their hands; and by this means furnished the friends of the House of Nassau with a favourable opportunity to speak their thoughts upon what passed at that time: Which they did by way of advice to the People, giving them to understand that the Princes of Orange were probably the only Per∣sons that were able to support their totter∣ing State, and to defend them against their most puissant Enemies: Adding that as these
illustrious Princes had formerly deliver'd them from the tyranny of the Spaniards, so they alone could stop the fury and career of the French. The Princess Dowager, Grand mother to his Highness, a Lady of incomparable pru∣dence and of a courage above her Sex, did not contribute a little by her address to awak∣en those Persons that were in her interests, and who were not inconsiderable for their number: These at last not being able to see themselves any longer despised, or that all the great Offices of State shou'd be thrown away upon Persons that were not worthy of them; and at the same time making use of the fury of the people, who justly alarm'd to see a vi∣ctorious Army in the bowels of their Coun∣try, spoke of nothing but Sacrificing the De Witts, managed their affairs so dexterousl that they attained their designs: for after the Prince had made a Journey towards the be∣ginning of the Year 1672 to visit the fortifi∣cations of some Places, the States of Holland and West-Frizeland being assembled, it was un∣animously agreed, that he should be chose General of their Army, which was notified next day to the States General; and on the 24th of February the Prince having accepted their offer, took the Oaths before them with the accustomed Ceremonies. It is very re∣markable that the Peasants of West-Frizeland, who make excellent Souldiers, wou'd not take up Arms but with this condition, that
they should swear to be true to the Republic, and to obey the States and his Highness the Prince of Orange. The immoderate ambition of some Per∣sons had formerly occasion'd two fatal Facti∣ons, who to fortify their own particular in∣terests weakned the Nerves of the public se∣curity: which made those who had the great∣est Credit with the People commit the greatest Solecism's in matter of Policy that any Party can be guilty of. For these short∣sighted Statesmen imagining that after the Peace of Munster, there was nothing left them to fear, and that no body cou'd hurt them in their Pretensions, but the too great power of the House of Nassau, by reason of its Alliances with France, and particularly with England, they casheer'd their Troops com∣posed of old Soldiers, and experienced Cap∣tains, who had preserved the Country, but were looked upon to be intirely devoted to the Prince of Orange; and at the same time gave the greatest Posts in their Army and in their Garrisons to the Sons of Burgher Mast∣ers and Deputies of Cities, People who how∣ever brave they might be in their own Per∣sons, were for the most part of little or no ex∣perience, as having never seen a Battle, and this was the reason that when they came to be surprized by a vigorous Enemy, whole Cities, altho they had in Garrison five thou∣sand Foot, and eight hundred Horse, sur∣rendred at discretion, without discharging
one Gun, at the first sight and appearance of the Enemy. Thus Faction and Interest, that are commonly the destruction of the most flourishing Kingdoms, having reduced the States General to the brink of despair, they were constrained to have recourse to their last Asylum, the Prince of Orange, in order to avoid their approaching ruine; and to place the little hope that was remaining, in the hands of one person. whom the prevailing party had formerly rejected with a great deal of ingratitude, and who indeed did not de∣serve such a hard destiny: for, in fine, Chil∣dren ought not to be responsible for the acti∣ons of their Fathers, when they have by no means justified them. The Prince had no sooner accepted the high Charge of General of the Armies, which was presented to him from the part of the States by Monsieur de Beverning, Iohn de Wit, and Gaspar Fagel, but he immediate∣ly repaired to the Army, which was then posted near Nieu Rop; where all he coud do against the united forces of the French, com∣manded by the King in person, was to keep his post. And this he performed with so much conduct, that the Enemy, as power∣ful as he was, cou'd have no advantage over him on that side. On the other hand, think∣ing to force the Prince out of his retrench∣ments, they were forced to retire with loss, and to abandon their works.
All this while the frontier Towns and Garrisons in the Province of Holland sell eve∣ry day into the hands of the Enemy, which made the people complain openly, and di∣strust the fidelity of those that governed. The Inhabitants of Dort were the first that rose; and sent one of their Captains to the Magi∣strates, to know whether they were resolved to defend the City, or to sit still. The Ma∣gistrates answered that they were ready to resist the efforts of those that should attaque them, and to do all that could be expected from them; the people demanded at the same time to see the Magazines. But the Keys being missing, this put the Mobb into so great a serment, that there were a thousand voices crying out at the same time, That there was Treachery in the case; That they would have the Prince of Orange to be their Head and Governour; threatning to murder the Magistrates upon the spot, if they did not immediately comply with their demands. These menaces so terribly alarm∣ed the Magistrates, that they dispatched Commissioners that very moment to his Highness, desiring him to come to their Ci∣ty with all possible haste, to prevent by his presence the insurrection of the people. The Prince alledged several reasons to them, to convince them how dangerous it was for him to leave the Army; but all was to no pur∣pose: they persisted still in their demand, till at last the Prince resolved to grant what
they desired. Being therefore with great so∣lemnity conducted to the Town-Hall, they intreated him to signify his pleasure to them. To which his Highness answered, that it be∣longed to them to make proposals to him, since they were the occasion of his com∣ing. After some demur they requested him, that for the satisfaction of the People, he would be pleased to visit the Fortifications and Magazines of the City, without taking the least notice of making him Stadt-holder; to which the Prince freely consented, and to that effect made the tour of the Town im∣mediately. But at his return, the people suspecting that the Magistrates had deceived them, as well as they had done the Prince, flocked in great multitudes about his Coach, and boldly asked him, but with a great deal of respect for his person, whether the Magi∣strates had made him their Governour or no? His Highness having modestly answered, That he was content with the honour they had already done him, and that he had as much as he cou'd desire; they unanimously declared, That they wou'd not lay down their Arms till they had chose him Stadt-holder. So that at last, the Magistrates, terrified with the menaces of the people, and not know∣ing what other measures to take in so cri∣tical a juncture, were not without some repug∣nance, constrained to accomplish what they had before only done by halves: So difficult a matter it is for men to lay aside a settled ha∣tred
and aversion, that has once taken root in their hearts. Upon this they passed an Ordinance to abolish the perpetual Edict; which the Prince refused to own, unless they would absolve him of the Oath he had taken, when he accepted the Charge only of Captain Ge∣neral, which they gave him likewise by this Ordinance. So they immediately made ano∣ther Act, which was read in the great Hall by the Secretary, by which the Magistrates declared his Highness the Prince of Orange to be Stadt-holder, Captain, and Admiral General of all their forces, as well by Sea as by Land; and gave him all the power, dignity, and authority which his Ancestors, of glorious memory, had enjoy'd. After this the whole City rang with ac∣clamations of an universal joy, and the arms of the House of Orange were immediately placed upon the Towers, and Ramparts. Only Cornelius de Wit, an ancient Burgher∣master, coming from the Fleet sick and indisposed, said he wou'd never sign the Act, whatever instances were made him to do it. He was pressed after an extraor∣dinary manner not to refuse the signing of it, but neither the perswasions of the chief men of the City, nor the threatnings of the peo∣ple, who were ready to plunder his house, nor the tears of his Wife, who was sensible of the great danger he was in, cou'd prevail with him to alter his resolutions. Nay, it went
so far, that his Wife threatned to show her self at the Window, and declare her own in∣nocence and that of her Children, and to abandon him to the fury of the populace; but all this made no impression upon him. Dort was not the only place that rose up after this manner: All the Cities of Holland and Zealand, where the Burghers took notice of the ill conduct of their Magi∣strates, did almost the same thing. So that upon a report made by the Deputies of the respective Cities, the States of Holland, Zea∣land and Friesland, did not only confirm what had been done by the City of Dort, but in a full Assembly of the States, they presented his Highness with some publick Acts, by which the Prince was absolved from his first Oath of Captain General, and at the same time was invested with the Dignity of Stadt-holder, together with all the rights, jurisdictions and priviledges heretofore grant∣ed to his Predecessors. In conseence of which his Highness the very same day, in the Hall of Audience, took the place of Stadt-holder, Captain, and Admiral Gene∣ral of the United Provinces, with the usual Ceremonies; and afterwards returned to the Army, that was encamped at Bodegrave. From this very moment, as if the re-esta∣blishment of the Prince had inspired the people with new Courage, a body of five thousand French were twice repulsed before Ardemburgh; and without counting those that
were killed upon the place, were forced to leave five hundred Prisoners behind them, amongst which were several Officers, and persons of Quality; and all this effected by the extraordinary bravery of no more than two hundred Burghers. 'Tis true, that the Women and Boys assisted them, no body being spared upon this occasion; which will be an everlasting disgrace to France, that looked upon the City as good as in their own possession. The Burghers of Groningen did not defend themselves with less Courage and good for∣tune against the Bishop of Munster, than those of Ardemburgh had done against the King of France. For that Bishop having besieg'd this City with an Army of twenty five or thirty thousand men, he was obliged to raise the Siege, with the loss of almost half his Souldiers, after he had been at a prodigious expence in buying all sorts of Ammunition and Instments of War, necessary to make himself master of that important place. In the midst of this extraordinary zeal the people show'd for the Prince, an acci∣dent happen'd that served to confirm him more effectually in their affection, and occa∣sioned the death of two of his greatest ene∣mies. For a Chyrurgion having accused Cornelius de Wit, Bailiff of Putten, with having secretly proposed to him to poison or kill the Prince of Orange; after examination of the matter
the Baoliff was apprehended and put in Pri∣son, and altho he denied what was laid to his charge by throwing back the same crime upon his Accuser, in order to justifie himself to the Prince and People, nevertheless being confronted with the Chyrurgeon, who still persisted in his Accusation, which he con∣firmed by a promise that he said the Bailiff had made him of 300000 Franks for a re∣compence, and of six Ducatoons which he had given him in hand, and by several other cir∣cumstances, usual in affairs of this nature: the Court of Holland, after they had ma∣turely considered the report made by the Advocate General, condemned Cornelius to be divested of all his dignities and employ∣ments, and to be perpetually banished out of the Territories of Holland and Friezeland. But the people seeing the States had pushed on the matter so far, and imagining that a Criminal who was treated with so much severity, wou'd have received a greater pu∣nishment if the Judges had not favoured him, began to murmur at the Sentence, as too mild and gentle; and immediately ran towards the Prison with weapons in their hands. It hapned at this moment that Iohn de Wit came in his Coach to take his Brother out of Prison, when one of the Burghers dropping these words amongst the people; Now the two Traytors are together, and it is our fault if they scape us. This was enough to animate the Mobb who were heated enough
before: but another thing happen'd, that helped to exasperate them more; which was, that whilst the people were waiting for the coming out of the two Bro∣thers, some body or other had maliciously spread a report, that above a thousand Pea∣sants and Fishermen were marching towards the Hague to plunder it. Upon which ano∣ther Burgher saying, Come along Gentlemen, let us make these Traytors come out; follow me and I will show you the way. These words in∣flamed them to the highest degree, so they immediately burnt the Prison-gates, drew out the two Brothers by main violence, dragg'd them about the streets, murder'd them, and cut them to pieces, crying aloud, Behold the Traytors that have betray'd their Country. Thus fell Cornelius and Iohn de Witt, two sworn Enemies of the House of Orange. 'Tis commonly pretended that Iohn was Author of these politic resolutions, viz. the exclu∣sion of his Royal Highness from all his Offi∣ces, of the perpetual Edict, and of the Quali∣ties requisite for a Stadt-holder. Min Heer Fagel succeeded the Pensioner in his place, the Prince of Orange having approved his electi∣on. The Elector of Brandenburgh writ a Let∣ter to the States in favour of the Prince, tel∣ling them that since he heard his R. High∣ness was re-established in the dignities of his Ancestors, he did not doubt but Heaven would prosper a resolution so advantageous
to the public, especially since he knew the Prince inherited all the Vertues of his Glo∣rious Predecessors; protesting besides that he found himself obliged since his Elevation, to contribute all that lay in his power to assist the Prince, to recover and preserve what his Ancestors had acquired at the expence of their own blood, with so much reputation to themselves. About this time the Prince being resolved to dislodge the advanced Guards of the French, made a Detachment of Horse and Foot, and with them gives an Alarm to the Enemy, whom he chased as far as their tren∣ches before Utrecht, disheartened with the loss of their own men before Cro∣nemburgh. While both Parties were thus bu∣sied in the Feild there was great changing of the Magistrates in most of the Cities, to the great satisfaction of the Inhabitants, who now hoped to see their Country enjoy its ancient Tranquillity. His Highness not be∣ing any longer able to suffer the corruption of Military Discipline, which had been so fatal to the Republic in general, ordered se∣veral Officers to be punished for their Cow∣ardice and Treachery. But nothing touched him so sensibly as to see the Season almost past without any considerable action, which made him resolve to attack Narden. For this purpose he commands Coll. Zulestein and Count Horn to advance; the first to take his quarters between Utrecht and Narden, and
the other to intrench himself at Polanen, on the Mill side. His Highness intrenched on that part near Bodegrave with four Regiments, The Duke of Luxemburgh made all imagina∣ble haste to relieve the besieged, and with about eight or nine thousand men fell up∣on the quarter of Coll. Zulestein, but was repulsed with loss, and forced to retire. The Town was afterwards batter'd in a very furious manner, and reduced to such extre∣mities that they sent Deputies to capitulate. But in this interval the Duke of Luxemburgh having received a new reinforcement, marched by a way full of water, by the help of some Peasants, who served him as Guides; he once more attacqued, when they least expected him, the very same quarters of Coll. Zulestein, from whence he had been beaten the night before; and after a bloody resolute dispute, wherein the Collonel was slain, (having refused quarter,) the Duke at last threw three thousand men, by way of relief, into the Town: Nevertheless he was repulsed the second time by Count Horn, and forced to leave his Prisoners behind him. Of the French there were 2000 killed, and fifty Officers who dyed of their wounds within 5 days after the engagement, without reckoning those that lost their Arms and Legs upon this occasion: Which caused so great a consternation amongst the French that were at Utrecht, that after this time the Offi∣cers drew lots, when they were go out in any
Parties against the Prince of Orange. Of the Hollanders were slain Six or Seven Hun∣dred Men, besides Coll. Zulestein, and a Lieutenant Collonel. His Highness seeing the City had received so considerable a relief, retired to his own Quarters, with the honor of a compleat Vi∣ctory, and raised the Seige without the least loss, having defeated almost five entire Regi∣ments, the greatest part of their Officers being either slain or mortally wounded, and having twice repulsed an old General, who had never succeeded in his design had it not been for the perfidiousness of the Peasants. After the unsuccessful attempt upon Nar∣den, his Highness assembled a Council of War, at which the principal Officers of the Army assisted, and having commanded the Horse that were quartered at Helden to hinder the English Merchandise from being transport∣ed from Rotterdam to Brabant, he marched himself to Rosendael, which was the place of the general Randezvous, from whence with an Army composed of Twenty four Thou∣sand Horse and Foot, he took his march di∣rectly to the Country of Liege. At his ap∣proach the Count de Duras, who was at Moseyk, retired with his Army to Vassemburgh, and higher towards the River Roer. 'Twas believed that his Highness's principal design was to chase the French from their quarters near the Meuse, and give battle to the Count de Duras, who commanded the Enemy's
Troops, in case he found a favorable op∣portunity to do it. To effect this, hav∣ing passed his Army upon a bridge of boats near Navagne, and joyned the Aux∣iliaries which came to him from Spain, he marched directly to Tongres, and invested it on all sides with the Spanish Cavalry and his own. He had no sooner done this, but news was brought him that the Count de Duras had decamped, upon which re∣passing the Meuse between Sittart and Maseik, he encamped near Ainsberg, where he conti∣nued two days, to see if he cou'd engage the Count to give him battle, but the River which was swell'd with the late rains not favouring his design, he returned the same way to Mastricht; from whence he detach'd a party of Horse and Foot to possess them∣selves of the Castle of Valcheron. This Castle was strongly fortified, but after some resistance surrendred at discretion. They found in it great quantity of Hay and Corn, and other Provisions. After this his Highness marched to Lewick, hoping to engage the Enemy, but the Count had retired in mighty speed, and was got at such a distance from the Princ's Army, that it was impossible to overtake him. At last perceiving that the Count de Duras had no mind to hazard a battle, he ordered the Count de Marcin to invest Charleroy with the Van-guard, while he himself followed with the main body of the Army; but the
weather was so violently cold that it was impossible to open the Trenches, or to make the least circumvallation, so that after he had made himself Master of Bins, taking three Captains with Three Hundred Soldiers Pri∣soners, pillaged and demollished the Town, he marched back the same way, and put his Army into Winter Quarters. The Count de Montal, who sometimes shut himself up in Tongres, and sometimes in Charleroy, because he was afraid for both these places, and yet could not tell which of them the Prince would besiege, was much mistaken to ima∣gine, that the Prince would undertake a long siege in the most rigorous season of the Year. However it was very remarkable, That a young General, who commanded an Army composed of so many different Nati∣ons, should be able to march in the midst of so violent a Winter into the Enemies Coun∣try, to beat an old General from his post, to offer him battle, and for this purpose to follow him from place to place, to alarm two strong Garrisons, and return home with abundance of Prisoners, and the booty of two fortified places, and all this in the compass of nine days, without the loss of any of his men, or at least very few. Not to mention the terror he put the Archbishop of Colen in, who neither thought himself safe at Bonn, or any other place within his own Territories, while the Prince was so near him.
During the Prince's Expedition, the Duke of Luxemburg got together an Army of Forty Thousand Horse and Foot, with a resolution to conquer the Province of Holland, and hoping to enrich himself and his men with the pillage of Leyden and the Hague, designed to march upon the Ice, with the Flower of the French Army, towards the end of December; but being arrived at Slin∣wetering he found the Waters so high that only Three Thousand five Hundred Foot could pass, the rest being obliged to return to Naerden. This party first attacked Nieucrop, but was repulsed by the Peasants, so that he marched toward Swammerdam, where the Soldiers were the first that fled, leaving the Inhabitants to the Mercy of the Enemy. Nevertheless Count Koningsmark, who com∣manded at Bodegrave, having advice of the coming of the French, made all imagina∣ble haste to march by Leiden, and posted a Regiment at Goursluys to hinder their incur∣sions on that side. This desperate and unexpected march of the French at first put the people into a great consternation, particularly those of the Hague; but nothing discouraged them so much, as to hear that while the States took all imaginable care to prevent the Ene∣mies returning, Collonel Painvin had aban∣doned his Post at Niewerbourg, and retired to Tergou. By this means the Enemy had an open free passage to go home when they
pleased, whereas otherwise they must either have perished in the Water, or else surren∣dred themselves at discretion, by reason of the great Thaw which followed soon after: But all their fears and apprehensions vanish'd at the Prince of Orange's return, who having at Breda received advice of this enterprize of the French, arrived with incredible diligence at Alfen, and in a short time his presence re∣established every thing as before. All this while the Duke of Luxemburg ravaged the heart of the Country, where he had like to have lost his life by a fall from his Horse into the water which was thaw'd, his people saving him not without a great deal of diffi∣culty. But tho he made a shift to escape, it did not fare so well with Six Hundred of his best Soldiers, who there perished. Thus ended this bold and hazardous Expe∣dition. It is certain the French committed unheard of cruelties at Swammerdam, and all other places that fell into their hands, ravishing the women, stripping and wounding young and old, and throwing Children into the Fire. But these losses nevertheless were in some manner recompenced by the taking of Coe∣verden, which is one of the strongest Cities in the Low Countries, the Key of Friezland and Groningen, encompassed on all sides with a Morass, fortified with large deep double Ditches, the Ramparts extreamly high and strong, and defended by seven Bastions that
carry the names of the seven United Pro∣vinces, and a very regular Castle, looked upon by ancient Writers to be impregnable. This City fell into the hands of the Bishop of Munster, in the fatal Year 1672, not without suspicion of Treachery. But Fortune now declining to espouse the French Interest any longer, since his Highness was restored to all his paternal dignities; it was retaken with as much gallantry and courage, as it had been lost with dishonor and cowardice. For this very same place, which Verdugo had in vain besieged, for the space of one and thirty weeks together; and which the Bishop of Munster, after he had rendred himself Master of it, had plentifully stored with provisions, out of a prospect of making it the Magazine for those parts, was by a party of Nine Hundred and Sixty men only, commanded by M. de Rabenhaut, retaken in less than an hour, without the loss of more than Sixty men, whereas the Enemy lost above an Hundred and fifty, besides the Officers that were slain at the assault, and four Hundred and thirty Prisoners taken, of which number were six Captains, eleven Lieutenants, and fourteen Ensigns. The rest of the Garrison, for in all it consisted of Nine Hundred men, saved themselves by a precipitate flight as soon as they saw the City was lost. But what was most considerable, there was found in this important Fortress such a prodigious quantity of all warlike
Ammunitions, and other Provisions, that without question the Enemy might have maintain'd the Siege much longer. Besides as the retaking of this strong place by the Hollanders, gave infinite incouragement to the people, so the loss of it extremely mortified the Enemy, and put them into such a terrible consternation, that upon the news of this loss they abandon'd several other places. All this served to increase the reputation of his Royal Highness, for the people observing how much all affairs went for the better, ever since the management of them was lodged in his hands, they were easily perswaded, and that not without good reason, that all this unexpected series of successes was the sole effect of his bravery and conduct. At this time the disputes between the new and old Magistrates of Friezland were carried on with that warmth and vigour that they held their Assemblies apart, and formed re∣solutions intirely opposite to each other. This disorder, which might in time have proved pernicious to the public tranquillity, cou'd neither be determin'd by the Governor of that Province, nor by the Princess Dow∣ager of Orange, whatever instances and pre∣cautions both one and the other used to ex∣tinguish the differences; but no sooner had the Commissioners sent by the Prince arrived there, but all these breaches were repaired, and the Country once more settled in order and union.
After this, his Highness went in person to Zealand, where the same divisions reigned as in Friezland; and at the moment he ap∣pear'd in the Assembly of the States at Mid∣dleburg, all the differences vanished, and the Province was in a condition to defend it self, to the great satisfaction of the people in general, the Magistrates in particular, and the eternal praise of this illustrious Prince. He took occasion from hence to go and visit the frontiers and fortifications of Flushing, Sluyis, and Ardenburgh, where they deliver'd him the Keys in a Silver Bason by the hands of the young Maids of the City, all drest up with Flowers. He did the same thing at Assendyck, Bergen ap zoom, Breda, Boisleduc, and other places; and afer making an exact review returned to the Hague. The Spring was by this time well ad∣vanced, and the Hollanders had business enough on their hands; for on one side they were attaqued by the King of France in per∣son with a powerful Army, and the Prince of Conde and the Duke of Luxemburg were at Utrecht with great forces, watching an op∣portunity to throw themselves into the heart of the Country; and on the other side the King of Great Britain, with his Fleet and that of France conjoyn'd, vigorously attacqued them. For these reasons the Prince of Orange cou'd not stir abroad, being constrain∣ed to keep his post, as well to have an eye upon the Prince of Conde and the Duke of
Luxemburg, as to prevent the descent of the English. In the beginning of May 1673, the King of France parted from Paris at the head of a great Army, which several other Bodies in the French Acquisitions were to join; and after a slow march sate down before Mae∣stricht on the 10th of Iune with all his forces, consisting in all of forty two thousand Horse and Foot; having given Orders before to the Count d' Orge to invest the place with three thousand Horse. The Garrison of Maestricht consisted of about four thousand Foot, and eight or nine hundred Horse, under the command of Monsieur de Farjaux Governour of the Town, a brave experienced Captain, as he abundantly convinced all the World by the generous resistance he made, and by that vast inundation of blood it cost the French King to take it; who lost on this occasion more than 9000 of his best Souldiers, all his Musqueteers except seven, and an infinite number of gallant Officers: and perhaps it had not been purchased so easily, if the Be∣sieged had been in time relieved with a re∣cruit only of a thousand men, or if they had been better provided with ammunition, which now began to fail them. It would be too tedious to give an exact relation here of all the rencounters, and bloody combats that happen'd night and day, and of the firing which was made on both sides, this being rather the business of a Journalist than
an Historian. I shall therefore content my self to say in a few words, that after the Gar∣rison, by a vigorous defence, which lasted near three weeks, had lost one half of her men, by continual Batteries and Assaults one after another, and those that remained were not in a condition to defend themselves any longer, by reason of the perpetual fatigues they had endured, the Governour was sorced at last, at the repeated instances of the Ma∣gistrates, or rather by the treachery of some Ecclesiasticks of the Romish perswasion, to capitulate and surrender himself. In effect, upon a faithful relation which the Governor gave his Highness of all that had happen'd, the Prince was so well satisfy'd with his con∣duct, that he made him Major General of his Army. And to say the truth his opposition had been so vigorous, and withal so fatal to the French, that the King of France thought he had done enough for this Campaign in only taking Mastricht. So that after he had demo∣lished the Fortifications of Tongres, he di∣vided his Army at the same time, part of which he sent to the Mareschal de Turenne, another body was appointed to ravage the Country of Triers, because the Elector of that name had taken the Emperor's side. And three Brigades marched immediately to rein∣force the Army which was in Holland. The French Army being thus dispersed, and the English Fleet after the last Engagement
leaving the Coasts of Holland, the Prince of Orange found himself more at liberty, and not enduring to spend any more time with∣out action, he recalled all the Troops that were in Zealand, to come and joyn the rest of his Army, and marched all on the sudden to besiege Naerden with twenty five thousand Men. He gave the Command of the Ca∣valry to Major General Farjaux, and took his Quarter on one side, and Count Waldeck on the other. While things were in this posture, the Duke of Luxemburg having made up a body of ten thousand Men besides four Regiments of Munsterian Horse, ad∣vanced within sight of the Dutch, as far as the Prince's intrenchments, which by that time were finished; but not daring to relieve the Town, the Prince pursued his design, took the Counterscarp by assault, and the Ravelin before the Huyserport after three hours resistance, forced the besieged to retire into the Town in great disorder, and oblig∣ed them the day following after the loss of their Forts to demand leave to Capitulate. In short the Town was surrendred, on con∣dition the Garrison should march out with Colours flying, Drums beating, and two pieces of Cannon. The Governour, as he passed by, saluted his Highness with a profound Reverence, and as 'tis reported, told the Prince that he had very good reasons, for delivering up the Town in so short a time, which he would
acquaint the King his master with at a proper time and place: but in all appearance his rea∣sons upon examination were not thought valid, for he was condemned to perpetual imprisonment, after he had been degraded at Utrecht in a very ignominious manner. 'Tis true, all the world was surprized, that the French so easily abandon'd a place of that im∣portance and strength, and which was in so good a condition to defend it self; for there were Two thousand Nine hundred and thir∣ty Souldiers in the Garrison, who wanted no provisions; besides that the French, ever since they had rendred themselves Masters of it had fortified it extremely. But whatever was the cause of it, whether some divisions arising between them and the Swissers, as some people imagine, or something else which we don't know, his Highness, who to encourage the Souldiers by his own example, exposed his person to all dangers, both in the Trenches and upon the Batteries, carried the Town in four days, having only 100 men slain outright, and about 200 wounded, whereas the Enemy lost abundance more, which is quite contrary to what happens in all other Sieges. Nor was he less careful to preservehis conquest, than he was to acquire it: to this purpose having given all necessary orders to repair the Forti∣fications, and placed a sufficient Garrison in in it, he made Count Coningsmark, a brave experienced Captain, Governour of the Town, and then returned to the Hague to
prepare himself for some greater designs. For after the States of the United Pro∣vinces had made a stricter alliance with the King of Spain and the Emperor, to defend themselves mutually against France their common Enemy, by which they were obliged to assist one another conjointly with all their forces; after this triple alliance, I say, in consequence of which, the Imperial Army consisting of about Twenty Thousand Foot and Ten Thousand Horse was already on their March; the Prince of Orange to perform something remarkable before the season was over, caused his Army to advance to Rosen∣dael in Brabant, and following it soon after himself, he joyn'd with the Count de Monte∣rey, who without the least difficulty yielded to him the preheminence and command of the whole Army. But finding that the Prince of Conde had changed his post upon the news of the two Armies being joyn'd, and that he had so well intrenched himself that it was impossible to attack him, he advanced higher, and joyn'd the Imperial Army commanded by Montecuculi, between Andernach and Bon. In his march he summoned Rhinbeck to sur∣render, which thro the perswasion of a Burgher, who encouraged the rest to make resistance, being refused, he commanded the Sieur de Walkenburg to take two Regiments of Dragoons, and two of Infantry, and to make an assault, which they did with that vigour, that the Souldiers entring the Town
put all to the Sword, and hang'd up the Burgher who had so ill advised them as to make an opposition. The Confederates being now joyn'd, it was resolved to attack Bonn. The better to effect this the Marquis d' Arsentar was dis∣patched to Kessenning to take his quarters there, and on the next day Montecuculi lodged the Imperialists at Goedesbourg. His Highness went to post himself with all his forces at Rynford, and General Spork, who command∣ed the Imperial Cavalry, planted himself on the other side of the City, near Westerwaldt. Bonn is a considerable City, called by the Romans, Iulia Bonna, scituate upon the Rhine, within four Leagues of Colen. As it was then in the hands of the Elector and the French, they had placed in it a Garrison of two Thousand men, under the command of Lants∣berghen, and had provided it with all ammu∣nitions of war, with Twenty four piece of Cannon planted upon the Walls and Ram∣parts. The Confederates not thinking them∣selves sufficiently paid for the loss of Mastricht by the retaking of Naerden, resolved to render themselves Masters of Bonn. The Pr. of Conde durst not hinder them in person, but sent the Mareschal d' Humieres with a body of five Thousand Horse to oppose them, and to en∣deavour to throw some relief into the Town in the beginning of the Siege. To put this in execution he advanced as far as Birchem, from whence he sent a party of an Hundred
Horse, who pretending that they belonged to the Duke of Lorrain, passed through the midst of the Imperialists, without being stopt by any of the Centinels, and so got safe into the City. But another Hundred hoping to meet the same success, as they passed by his Highness's Quarters, found the Centinels not so credulous as their Brethren were, so they were all cut in pieces, or made Prisoners; which news coming to the ears of five Hun∣dred more, who had hid themselves in a neighbouring Wood upon the same design, they fled with the greatest precipitation ima∣ginable. At this time General Spork detached a body of five Thousand Horse to go and meet the French, which the Mareschal being informed of, he sounded a retreat, and went back to Utrecht. On the other side, the Bsiegers having finished their Batteries, and made their ap∣proaches, gave but little, or no rest at all to the besieged, and after they had made three Mines ready to spring, they prepared to give a general assault. Nevertheless the Generals of the Confederates being willing to spare their own People, and hoping to make them∣selves Masters of the place by gentler methods, sent to summon the Governor afresh, remon∣strating to him that he had no hopes of being relieved, that they were ready to spring three Mines; that to be farther satisfied of the truth of this matter he might if he so pleased, send one of his own men to behold them;
and that in case of longer resistance they were resolved to put all to the Sword, without giving quarter to any whom they found in arms. This message so effectually frighted the besieged, that after a few days siege they demanded Articles, and surrendred the same day upon the ordinary conditions, viz. to go out with Drums beating, Colours flying, without carrying any provisions, or ammu∣nition with them, except two pieces of Cannon. There went out of the Garrison a Thousand five Hundred men, the rest being either slain or wounded, All the Germans who were in this number immediately deserted, and listed themselves in the Empe∣rour's service. The City being taken, his Highness retired to Vesseling, and from thence marching lower with his Army, and that of the Imperialists (for he commanded both ever since the de∣parture of Montecuculi for Vienna, till the arrival of the Duke de Bournonville) he took the two Castles of Brevel and Sechuich, the latter of which had a Garrison of two Hun∣dred French commanded by a German, who perceiving that the Soldiers, after they were summon'd to surrender, resolved to hold it out to the last, bethought himself of a stratagem to make them alter their opinions, for having commanded the French to go down into the lower Court, under a pretence to defend it, when he saw them all there, he drew the Draw-bridge upon them, who
finding themselves by this means exposed to a much greater number, were forced to yield up the place. This same Castle in the year 1642, had been besieged by the entire army of the Duke de Weimar, and the Landgrave of Hesse, un∣der the command of the Counts de Guebriant and d' Eberstein, and for six weeks together was battered with extraordinary fury. But after all their efforts they were constrained to raise the Siege. All this while the Mareschal de Turenne kept himself at a distance, for altho he receiv∣ed the news that Bonne was besieged by the Confederates, and had a mighty desire to attempt the raising of the Siege, yet knowing that the Duke of Lorrain lay upon the banks of the Moselle to observe him, he moved up and down in the Electorate of Ments, mightily complaining that he was no sooner informed of the joyning of the Confederates. The mighty multitudes of the French were by this time reduced to so inconsiderable a number, and all through their prodigal ill∣managed effusion of blood, that they were not in a condition to keep the field without draining their Garrisons. This necessity ob∣liged them to abandon the greatest part of their conquests in the Low Countries, and draw out their men from thence, rather than suffer so powerful an Army as that of the Confederates was, to retake without any
manner of resistance the Cities upon the Rhine, the Meuse and the Moselle. Woerden was the first place they quitted, as it was the first that suffered under their Ty∣ranny, the Governor having received orders from the Duke of Luxemburg to demolish the Ramparts, and to carry away with him all the Ammunition and heavy Canonn: But as in the bodies of persons possessed, the Devil before he departs, leaves terrible marks of his rage behind him; so after the same manner the Governor of this Town, before he left it, sent for the Magistrates and demanded twenty Thousand Livres of them to save themselves from plunder and fire; alledging that he had orders from the King and Duke of Luxemburg to pillage and reduce the place to ashes, unless they gave him the above mentioned Summ. The Magistrates repaired to Utrecht, but notwithstanding all the Remonstrances and Submissions they made to the Duke of Luxemburg, were ob∣liged to comply with what he demanded of them, nay and more than that, to save their Castle, their Gates, and their Fortifications, which ohterwise they threatned to lay level with the ground, and were forced to leave Ho∣stages till the summ was paid. The malice and perfidy of the French was such, that they had min'd the Castle and one of the Bastions, and had insallibly destroy'd them, if the Swissers that werein the place had not discovered their treacherous intention.
Harderwick was intirely dismantled, yet for all that they had the good manners to de∣mand twelve Thousand Livres of the Inhabi∣tants, but the richest Burghers having long before quitted the Town, they were forced to go without it. The Fort of Crevecur was utterly demo∣lish'd: nevertheless the French made an offer to save the Church and the Governor's House for the summ of three Thousand Pistols, to be paid by the Inhabitants of Boisleduc, but this proposal being rejected, they neither spared the House, nor the Church. Bommel, a Fortress of great importance, upon the Fortifications of which place the King of France had expended the summ of Sixscore Thousand Livres, was deserted at the same time; the Inhabitants giving a dozen Hostages for the payment of two Thousand Crowns, to preserve their Houses from being pillaged. Utrecht, where the French had always in Garrison between six and seven Thousand men at least, and which place consequently was a mighty expence to them, was likewise abandoned. Nevertheless this City was obliged to give Hostages for the payment of 100 Thousand Crowns. The French leav∣ing it all on the same day, the Burgher-mast∣ers were absolved from the Oath they had taken against the re-establishment of the Pr. of Orange, and sent their Deputies to him to acknowledge him for their Stadt-holder,
in the name of all the Province, which change was very agreeable to the People. Elburgh upon the South Sea, Campen on the Overyssel, and Hattem were likewise quitted by the French, and Steenwick and Weppel by the Munsterians. In consideration of so unexpected a change, which was intirely owing to the prudent conduct and great courage of the Prince of Orange, the States confirmed him in the Office of Stadt-holder, to testify how sensi∣ble they were of the services he had done the Republic; and not content with this, entailed this Dignity upon the Heirs of his body, born in lawful Wedlock in an instrument dated Febr. 2d. 1674. The same day the States of Zealand conferr'd the same admi∣nistration upon his Royal Highness, and declared him chief Nobleman of their Pro∣vince. It was high time now to deliver these States from those consusions and disorders, which the French had occasioned in the Go∣vernment. And the Prince very wellknow∣ing that it was no less glorious for a good Governour to reform and correct what was amiss at home, than to make Conquests abroad, went to Utrecht to settle the Go∣vernment of that Province upon the antient Foot. To effect this, he conven'd immedi∣ately after his arrival an Assembly of the States, where it was resolved that new mem∣bers should be chose to compose the body
of the Nobility and Magistracy; which was put in execution in the very same manner he had projected. For having given them to understand, that at the request of several of the Burghers, he had drawn up a Scheme of certain Orders for the better government of the Province for the time to come; but yet wou'd by no means impose any thing upon them without the advice and consent of those that were present; at last, after a ma∣ture deliberation, they all unanimously sub∣mitted to the Ordinances proposed by his Highness, which were, That the Govern∣ment of the Province should be in the hands of three distinct Societies, as it anciently had been, viz. the Councellors elect, the body of the Nobility, and the Deputies of Towns: that the Councellors elect should be continued three years and no longer; that after that time was expired, which they were to acquaint the Governour General with three months before, he should have power to continue them, or else to make new alterations, as he should see con∣venient; provided he nominated none but those that were of the Reformed Religion, and that amongst these Councellors Elect there were four Burghers and four Gentle∣men; moreover, that the Governour Ge∣neral should have the disposal of the vacant places of the Provosts, as also of the Reve∣nues of the Vicaridges belonging to the Provosts, Deans and Chapters of Monks, as
soon as they fell, and employ this for the maintenance of poor Ministers, and other pious uses in the Province; that to avoid all disputes relating to the Nobility, the Go∣vernour alone should have the power, after the death of one or more of that body, to put in his or their place, such Person or Persons as he should think fit, provided they made profession of the Reform∣ed Religion, having a due regard to their Age, Birth, Estates, and such other circum∣stances; that after the first nomination and election of a Governour General, all vacan∣cies of Bailiffs of Towns, Presidents, Advo∣cates, and in short of all civil and military Offices, should be at his disposal. After this a form of an Oath was agreed upon, which all that were present were to take without further scruple, and all others should be obliged to do the same, according to their several functions. And when the following proposition was made, whether it were ad∣visable to confer the Charge of Governour General, Captain, and Admiral General of the Province upon his Highness and his heirs male lawfully begotten; they all nemine con∣tradicente approv'd the motion, and so con∣serr'd that Dignity upon his Highness. At the same time General Rabenhaupt, with the Militia of Frizeland and Groningen, reinforced with the Regiment of Bumarnia, took the field, and made himself master of Northom, which he fortified with sixteen
Companies of Horse, and six of Foot; and from thence advancing to Tuvent, took seve∣ral other places of less importance, designing to chase all the Munsterians out of that part of the Country, and to that end marched as far as Nienbuys. The Enemy was no sooner informed of the General's march, but they invested Nor∣thom with five Regiments of Horse, three Companies of Dragoons, and three hundred Foot, commanded by General Nagel, and beat the advanced Guards back into the Town. General Rabenhaupt had no sooner received intelligence of this, but he came back the same way to relieve the place; which he performed so happily, that the Enemy was obliged to betake themselves to flight, after they had lost a hundred and se∣venty of their men; of which number six∣score were slain upon the place, and the rest made prisoners. The next day he return'd to Nienbuys, and being resolved to make short work on't, gave orders to five Regi∣ments to make an Assault in five several places all at the same time; which they executed with that bravery, that after a quarter of an hours resistance, the enemy was forced to retire into the Castle, which was encompassed but with one single Ram∣part, and defended with no more than two pieces of Cannon. The Besiegers, who pushed the point home, were now just ready to enter the Castle, when the enemy begged
quarter, which was granted them. The Garrison consisted of three hundred Foot, thirteen Officers, and two hundred and se∣venty Horse and Dragoons, with fifteen Officers. General Rabenhaupt after so happy a success put his small body of an Army into Winter quarters, which news being brought to Nagel, he came back again to Nyenbuys, and retook it for the Bishop of Munster. But the Bishop, either dreading these un∣certain chances of War, or rather fearing the approach of the Imperialists, made his peace with the Emperour. Which so migh∣tily alarm'd the French, who were still in possession of their Frontier Towns in the Low-Countries, that the Marquess de Belle∣fonds, who succeeded the Mareschal d' Hu∣mieres in the Government of the Conquer'd Provinces, resolved to abandon the rest, pre∣tending he had occasion for the men to pre∣serve those Conquests they had made upon the Rhine. Besides, being informed that the Prince of Orange designed to march into Bra∣bant with thirty Thousand men, there to joyn the Spanish Army that was composed of twenty Thousand, instead of fortifying the places of his Government, he began to de∣molish them. Thiel compounded for Twen∣ty two Thousand Florins, to preserve them∣selves from fire and plunder, which they threatned them with, and to save their For∣tifications. The Town of Zutphen promised Seventy Thousand, and gave Hostages for
the security of payment. Arnheim paid Twenty six Thousand Florins, and four Thousand Sacks of Corn and Meal, which the Magistrates of the Town engaged to see carried to Grave. Deventer paid six Thousand Rixdollars to the Bishop of Munster. Thus the whole Province of Overyssel regained its an∣cient liberty, and returned to its natural and lawful Soveraigns. After which his High∣ness sent Commissioners thither to make some necessary alterations, and regulate affairs, till he had an opportunity to come himself in person and put a full conclusion to them. The King of France seem'd to be exceed∣ingly displeased with the conduct of the Marquis de Bellefonds so that he banished him to Bourges, with a prohibition to come near the Court, altho all the world knew this was only a meer pretence to conceal his present necessities, and that he was forced to exhaust his Garrisons in the Low-Countries to rein∣force his Army which he had designed for the Conquest of the Franche-Comte. But the honour of all these desertions was justly at∣tributed to the Prince of Orange; for he, like another Scipio, carrying the war into the Enemy's Territories, in less than two years, forced all these French Hannibals to quit his own Country, and seek their fortune else∣where. In the mean time the King of France, endeavouring, like the Sea, to gain in one place what he had lost in another, entred the
Franche Comte with a prodigious Army, which joyning with another that was commanded by the Prince of Conde, became so formidable, that in a short time he made himself Master of Besançon, Dole, Salins, and in short of the whole Province. While these two Armies were thus joyn'd, the Prince of Orange re∣paired to his Army at Berghen op Zoom, from whence he marched to Malines, and kept himself on his guard in Brabant, during all the time the French King was in the Neighbourhood: but this Monarch being return'd to Paris after his new Couquest, where he lost both abundance of brave Offi∣cers, and of his best Souldiers, the Imperialists threw themselves into Namur, took the Castle, and Dinant, and the passage of the Meuse being by this means opened. they went to joyn the Army of the Confederates towards the end of Iuly. The three Generals after some conference, order'd that the Count de Souches should lead the Van, his Highness command the Main Body, and the Count de Montery the Rear. In this order the Confe∣derates prepared to attack the Prince of Conde, who with an Army of Fifty Thousand men was encamped on the other side the River Pieton, to prevent the designs of the Enemy. The Confederates, who had an Army of Sixty Thousand men, resolved to set upon the Prince and give him battle. With this prospect they marched strait upon him, having abundance of all sorts of pro∣visions,
which came daily out of Brabant. With this resolution the Confederate Army arrived at Nivelle by the beginning of August, where they incamped for some days. But because they saw the Prince of Conde was by no means disposed to quit his post, but on the other hand was still fortifying himself more and more within his Trenches, the Confederates judged it expedient to approach nearer to him, to see if he would not be willing to hazard a battle in open field. Being therefore advanced within five or six mile of the French Camp, they did all that in them lay to make him leave his strong scituation, but 'twas to no purpose; for the Prince (whether he had received orders from the King, or this was his own proper sense of the affair) would by no means quit it. And now the Confederate Army finding that all their efforts were in vain, resolved to at∣tack some important place, not doubting but the Prince would leave his post to come and relieve it, and so they should bring their designs about. This resolution being taken, the Prince of Orange decamped from Senef and marched strait on the side of Bins. The Imperialists had the Vanguard, the Hollanders the Main Body, and the Spaniards the Rear; and be∣cause the passage was narrow, the Cavalry marched on the left, the Infantry in the midst, and the Artillery with all the baggage on the left also; and to secure their march the Prince
de Vaudemont still kept behind, with four Thousand Horse and some Dragoons. The Prince of Conde being informed of their March, and knowing perfectly well the difficulty of the ways through which the Confederates were to pass, took care to range his Army in order. However not thinking it safe for him to engage the whole Army of the Confederates, he suffer'd the Vanguard with a considerable part of their Main Body to pass some leagues before, and when he saw they were too far advanced to return soon enough, he believed he might now fall upon the Rear. Thus the Prince came out of his Trenches, and attack'd Vau∣demont's Horse, who seeing himself in a Country where the Horse could do no great service by reason of the Hedges and Ditches, sent presently to the Prince of Orange for two Battalions of his best Foot, while he with his Horse kept the Enemy in play. His Highness sent him three under the command of young Prince Maurice of Nassau, who as soon as they came up, were placed on the other side of Senef, all before the Horse in a four square body. And now the whole Army of the Prince of Conde being come out of their Trenches, 'twas judged convenient to send for the Troops that were on the other side of the River, that runs by Senef, and then they placed the three Battalions that before were posted in the Wood, directly against the Bridge of Senef, over which the
French were to pass. They were no sooner got thither, but the French attack'd 'em all at once, Horse, Foot, and Dragoons. Tho they began this attack with wonderful vigor, yet they were not able to force the Enemy from his Post, so that they were forced to draw off, and make a Bridge over the River somewhat higher. Having by this means joyn'd all their forces together, the Confederate Horse ranged themselves behind the Infantry, but so that they might come upon occasion to their relief. In the mean time the Foot fired so warmly upon the French that passed the River, that abundance of them were killed; but the Confederates being unhap∣pily straitned for want of ground, and the French setting upon them as they came out of the Wood, on all sides, their Foot was obliged to retreat, being overwhelmed by the excessive number of their Enemies, which was the reason that they lost several of their principal Officers. Young Prince Mau∣rice who commanded the Brigade was made a Prisoner, with several Officers more, and Coll. Macovits was killed. As soon as the Infantry of the Confede∣rates was retired, the French fell with great vigour upon the Horse commanded by the Prince de Vaudemont; and the Prince of Conde began to range his Army in form of battel, commanding his Foot to march secretly under the covert of the Hedges and Bushes. The Confederate Horse had orders to charge them, and as they were going to do it,
found the way was so hollow between the Enemy and them, that they were obliged to turn about to the right, and joyn the rest of the Army, lest the Enemy perceiving their retreat, should charge them in the Flank. The French observing this, turn'd to the left, and made so much hast to charge this body of Horse, that Prince Vaudemont had only time enough to range his three Bat∣talions, to endeavour to make head against the Enemy. This first onset proved unlucky to the Confederates, for the three Com∣manders in chief of this Brigade were taken Prisoners, with several other Persons of Quality, as the Duke of Holstein, the Prince de Solmes, and Monsieur de Langerac, and many more were there slain. Whatever care was taken to make these four Battalions rally again it could never be effected, for away they ran, without making the least dis∣charge upon the Enemy. Prince Vaudemont gave convincing proofs of an extraordinary valour, but all his efforts were to no purpose. The Prince of Orange likewise discovered an undaunted bravery, behaving himself in all respects like an Old experienced General, for he got before these affrighted Troops with his Sword in his hand, and endeavoured by all sorts of perswasions, and by his own example, to encourage them to renew the fight, exposing himself frequently to the danger of being killed; or made a Prisoner, but he was not able to stop them, till they
met a body of Spanish Horse posted at the bottom of a little Hill, between them, and the Village of Fay. Another Party of these Runaways, joyn'd themselves to sixteen Bat∣talions commanded by the Duke de Villa Her∣mosa, who marched at the head of his Troops to oppose the French who pursued them, and did every thing that could be expected from a person of his valour and conduct, in the miserable condition that things were then in. The rest of the Confederates rallied togather with a body of Foot, posted likewise at the Foot of the same Hill. On the other side the Prince of Conde, who had advanced so far in pursuing the fugitives, fell with that fury upon the Spanish Horse, and the Foot whom he chased, that the Mar∣quis d' Assentar was forced to send for four other Regiments from the Foot of the Hill, to reinforce his Cavalry. Which the Prince of Conde observing, he ordered five or six Battalions to advance immediately, with a Brigade of Horse, and dividing his Troops on the right and the left, he charged the Ca∣valry of the Confederates in the Front, and put them in disorder. The Marquess did all he could, by his own example, to rally his men, and begin the Battel afresh, till at last, being wounded in seven places, he was killed at the head of his own Troops. The Cavalry being thus in disorder, he attempted to break his way through four Battali∣ons of Foot that were come to their relief,
and put them in great confusion, notwith∣standing the conduct of the Duke de Villa Hermosa and Prince Vaudemont, who used all the means imaginable to make them rally. They likewise disordered the rest of the In∣fantry that were posted at the bottom of the Hill, altho Count Waldeck did his best to stop their flight; but seeing it was time thrown away, he charged the victorious Enemy in the Flank with a fresh body of Horse, that had joined him a little be∣fore. And certainly there was all the reason in the world to expect a good effect of this onset, under the conduct of so courageous and experienc'd a Commander, if he had been but seconded: but as he was overpower'd by great numbers of the Enemy, he with∣drew from the heat of the Action, after he had slain two of the Enemy, who had par∣ticularly set upon him, and after he had rallied the rest of his Troops, altho he was all over bloody with three wounds he had received. In the heat of this Combat, some Batta∣lions of the Enemy had made themselves Masters of the Baggage belonging to the Dutch, and had already pillaged part of it. For the Leaders, instead of fortifying and barricadoing themselves with their Wag∣gons, cut the harness of the Horses, and fled away without ever looking behind them, some towards Brussels, and some to other places, where they gave out that all was lost.
It must be confessed, that the Prince of Conde had carried away all the advantages of victo∣ry in this Fight, had he given over here, but his natural impetuosity and ambition spurr'd him on to gain all or nothing, which in the end proved fatal to him. For after he had ranged his Guards du Corps, Cuirassiers, and the rest of the Army that stay'd behind in battel array, he advanced to∣wards the main body of the Confederates, commanded by the Prince of Orange, Prince Maurice, the Rhingrave, and Major General Vane. At the same time General Souches who led the Vanguard, and who was advanced some hours before the rest of the Army, hav∣ing received advice of what had passed, made all the haste he could to joyn the main Body: which he did at one a Clock in the After∣noon: By which time his Highness had ad∣vantageously bestowed the Imperialists, and the Spaniards on the left wing, and his own on the right. And now the Fight was renewed more furiously than ever. The Duke of Luxemburgh commanded the right wing of the French, and the Duke of Nouailles the left: for the Marquess de Rochefort, the Chevalier de Tourilles, and the Count de Montal, were all three wounded. The first onset of the French was by far the most ve∣hement that had been seen during the course of this war. Honour, Hatred, Revenge, Hope, and Despair, animated the courag of the
two Parties. Hope of Victory, which as yet had declared her self in favour of neither side, made them resolve to vanquish or dye. The Prince of Orange show'd himself every where, sparing nothing upon this occasion that might facilitate the victory: sometimes he threw himself into the midst of his Ene∣mies to the apparent hazard of his life, and the Souldiers who being encouraged by his example strove to out-do one another, sus∣tained the fury of the Enemy with a bravery greater than could be expected from them. Having thus frustrated the hopes of the Prince of Conde, he endeavoured to wheel about to the left. But Monsieur de Farjaux Major General of the Dutch Army, being sent with some Battalions, and seconded by the Count de Chavagnac, (who commanded a Squadron of Imperial Horse) to prevent this design, opposed the French with so much gallantry, that they were forced to retire: After this the Count sent for four pieces of Cannon, with which he gauled the Enemy so advantageously, that Count Souches with his Forlorn Hope broke into the strongest quarter of the Enemy, and gave proofs of an extraordinary courage, according to his cu∣stom upon such occasions. Nor did the Prince of Lorrain sit idle, but was seen to fight several times at the head of the first ranks, altho he lost so much blood, that at last he was obliged to withdraw from the battel. Prince Pio who lay with his Brigade
near Senef, accompanied by the Marquess de Grana, and Count Staremberg, after he had signalized himself by a Thousand noble acti∣ons, was wounded in the thigh by a Musquet∣shot. The Marquess de Grana, and the Sons of Count Souches behaved themselves so valiantly at the head of their Squadrons, that the French Swissers were not able to gain one inch of ground upon them, which did not a little contribute to the gaining of the battel for the Confederates. In the mean time the Prince of Conde charged the right wing of the Confederates, with his Cuirassiers, and the King's Houshold, but without effect: only about seven in the afternoon he broke two Battalions that were posted in a meadow at a small distance from thence. But Prince Maurice here performed a signal piece of service to the States, in stopping the Career of the Enemy, and pre∣venting the great disorder on that side with no less conduct than courage. The Rhin∣grave behaved himself with great bravery, and we may truly say, that his valor and prudence did not inconsiderably promote the good success of this battel. He was nevertheless constrained to leave the field by reason of a wound he had received. Major General Vane, and the Sieur de Villaumdire after having given remarkable testimonies of their valour, were mortally wounded, and died of their wounds.
The two Armies fought in this manner till night with unexpressible fury on both sides, tho the ground was covered with the dead and wounded; while the Combatants co∣vered with blood and sweat encouraged one another by so terrible a spectacle. One might have seen whole Battalions of one and t'other side sometimes give ground, and then immediately rally by the good conduct of their respective Commanders, amongst whom the Prince of Orange was chief, who was all along to be seen in the heat of the battle, encouraging his men by his own example. He had near him the young Prince of Frize∣land, who was not above twenty years old, and always engaged where the Ene∣mies stood thickest, and doing all that could be expected from so valiant and generous a Prince. Thus the first heat and fire of the French, which threatned to devour every thing that stood in its way, began to slacken about ten at night. The Infantry, great part of which they lost, kept off at some distance, in spight of all the Prince of Conde could do to bring them back, so that the Prince fearing a great∣er misfortune, ordered his Horse to retreat, leaving but a few Squadrons behind to favor their retreat, and these he commanded to move off as soon as the rest of his Army was safe; leaving the Victory and the Field of battle to the Prince of Orange, who two hours after the retreat of the French made his
Army draw off, and put them into Winter Quarters. Nevertheless he left Monsieur de Farjaux all night in the Field to observe the motion of the Enemy, who tho they could not well digest the rude treatment they re∣ceived the day before, durst attempt nothing: the Prince of Conde having only left some Dragoons in his old Quarters, and got above three hours march before, lest the Confederates should pursue him. This was the issue of this bloody battel, wherein the Confederates were beat at first, altho they got the victory at last. For on the Enemies side there were seven thousand men killed upon the spot, without reckon∣ing the wounded, whom the Prince of Conde left in the neighbouring villages, to the num∣ber of more than fifteen hundred On the side of the Confederates, the whole list of those that were slain, wounded, made Pri∣soners and deserted, did not amount in all to above six Thousand five Hundred, besides that abundance of their men after they had been dispersed on one side and t'other in the hurry of the Engagement returned to their Co∣lours. 'Tis commonly reported that a Let∣ter of the Prince of Conde to the King of France was intercepted, wherein he acquaints him, that after he had made a general review of his Army, he found it in a very deplorable condition, that he had lost the flower of his Infantry, and the better part of his Horse, and in fine did not look upon himself to be
strong enough to hazard a second battel. In effect, besides three Regiments, Seven Hun∣dred Swissers of the Guards, and the Swiss Regiment of Molandin were intirely defeated. An infinite number of Officers of note were slain, amongst whom were the Marquess de Chanvalon, de Clemerant, de Bourbon, and d' Iliers; three Counts, two Cornets of the King's Guards, more than Forty Officers of the Guards du Corps, Forty three Officers of the King's Regiment, Fourscore Officers of the Queen's Guards, Nine Collonels, Eight Lieutenant Collonels and Majors, and a Hundred and Sixty five Captains, without reckoning the subaltern Officers. So that the Prince of Conde did not without reason com∣plain that he had lost abundance of brave Officers in this bloody dispute; and a certain truth it is, that if he had not had the advantage in the beginning of the Fight his Army had been entirely defeated. Amongst several other Standards a white one was carried to Brussels, and hung up with a great deal of solemnity in the Church belonging to the Carmelites. This Standard was embroider'd with Gold and Silver, bearing a Sun in the Zodiac with these proud words: Nihil obsta∣bit eunti, Nothing shall stop my Course. The day after the battel his Highness marched with the whole Army by the way of Mons, and put them in quarters at S. Guillain, where he received five Regiments of new Recruits: and the Imperialists retired
to Queverain, where they stayed without doing any considerable action, till the eleventh or twelfth of September. In the mean time General Rabenhaupt un∣dertook the Siege of Grave, which was one of the most memorable Sieges that had hap∣pened for a long time, as well for the scitu∣ation of the place, the strength of the Gar∣rison, the great abundance of Ammunition and Provisions, as for the furious attacks and assaults of the Besiegers, and the vigorous resistance of the Besieged. And that which renders it still more famous, is, that it could never be ended till the arrival of the Prince of Orange, who soon determined it. The Garrison consisted of Fourscore and eleven Companies of Foot, who made in all four Thousand men, and of Nine Troops of Horse. The Sieur de S. Louis, an old experi∣enced Captain commanded the Cavalry, and the Marquess de Chamilly, a valiant and expert Commander was Governor of the Town; where were four Hundred and fifty pieces of Cannon, a Hundred of which were mounted upon the Ramparts, besides an infinite quantity of Powder, Corn, Granadoes, and all sorts of Provisions; for here the French had laid up all that they carried away from those places they first conquered, and after∣wards abandoned General Rabenhaupt laid Siege to this place, which extremely incommoded all the Neigh∣borhood, with Twenty Regiments of Foot,
and some Horse, which were soon after re∣inforced with two Regiments of Foot, and two Hundred Horse, commanded by Don Iohn de Pimentel, and a Regiment of Foot of the Prince of Courland, and two Regiments of Horse of the Elector of Brandenburg, un∣der the command of General Spaen. Coll. Hundebeck posted himself behind the great Dike on that side which lay nighest the Velp; Coll. Golstein on the side towards Overyssel. The Brandenburg Cavalry posted themselves higher towards the Est, to hinder any relief from coming into the Town. And the General himself approached near the Castle de Vegesak. The place being thus environ'd on all sides, the Siege was pushed forward with as much violence on the side of the Besiegers, as it was vigorously defended by the Besieged. In the mean time his Highness and the Imperialists that were quarter'd upon the Fron∣tiers of Henault, having recovered the disor∣der of the last battel, were thinking how to perform some remarkable action. Upon this consideration, as soon as the Grand Con∣voy was arrived from Brussels with the Spanish Army, consisting of eight Thousand Foot, without reckoning the Horse and Dra∣goons, the Prince of Orange decamped with the whole Army on the 12th of September, and passed the River Hayne near Tournay and Aeth, and marched from thence to Oudenarde. In the interim two Regiments of Foot, and
two Thousand five Hundred Horse near Ghent, were sent to break the Bridges of Deinse and Harlebike upon the River Ley, with orders after that to rejoyn the Army. That Evening the same Regiments brought abun∣dance of Barges laden with all sorts of Am∣munition and Provisions, and five Hundred Pioneers, who were ordered to advance by the way of Oudenarde, and were followed by a body of two Thousand five Hundred Horse, that posted themselves that evening before the Town, and shut up all the passages lead∣ing to the Garrison on that side. The Prince of Orange, and the Count de Souches arrived at the same time, and took each of them their quarters, the Prince in the Abby of Ename, and the Count on the other side the River at Leupegem and Elare: and the Spaniards cm∣manded by the Duke de Villa Hermosa, posted themselves at Beverem and Moregem. There were in the Town four Hundred Germans, six Thousand Swissers, a Thousand French, and four Hundred Horse commanded by the Sieur de Rosquaire. The Confederates having finished all their Works, made themselves Masters of the Counterscarp, when the Prince of Conde, having decamped from before Beaumont, began to approach with his whole Army, which consisted of forty Thou∣sand men, and resolved to give battel to the Confederates, in case he could not otherwise relieve the place. It was therefore his Highness's advice to get all things in readiness,
and meet the Enemy that was fatigued and spent with so tedious a March. But this resolution had no effect, because Count Souches was not to be found all that day, and thus the Army was constrained to keep within their Trenches. In the mean time the French still advanced on that side where the Imperialists lay posted, but Count Souches, instead of ranging his men in Battel, quitted his post, and passed the River in so much haste that he left some pieces of Cannon be∣hind him, which his Highness had sent him, and cou'd not be recover'd without extream danger. By this means the Prince of Conde having an open passage, entred the Town with part of his Army, and he had certainly gained that Advantage as to cut off all man∣n of Communication between the Confe∣derates, had it not been for a great Fog that arose on the sudden, and prevented his de∣sign. The Prince of Orange considering the present state of his affairs, was of opinion that it was the best way to draw off; and so followed after the Imperialists and the Spa∣niards, whom he joyn'd within a league of Oudenard, but finding that by reason of the great opiniatrete of the former, he should be able to effect nothing here, he was resolved to return the same way to Grave, where his presence was so necessary to carry on the Siege, leaving Count Waldeck to command the Army in his absence. The Prince arri∣ved
befor this place on the ninth of October with sixty Troops of Horse, and tho the Besieged, who were now reduced to great extremities, defended themselves with great vigour and resolution till the 25th of the same month, yet the Marquess de Chamilly seeing it was impossible to hold out against a general assault, because of the great breaches in the works, demanded a cessation of Arms for three or four hours, and after Hostages on both sides, the City surrendred on very ho∣nourable conditions; and thus ended this Campaign. The year 1675 began with the Addresses of the Burghers, wherein they thanked his Highness for the mighty services he had done them, in delivering them from the calami∣ties and miseries they had suffered under the tyranny of a foreign Enemy. In considera∣tion of which they offer'd him the Soveraign∣ty of the Dutchy of Gueldres, and Earldom of Zutphen, with the Titles of Duke of Guel∣dres, and Count of Zutphen. But the Prince reflecting with himself, that the accepting of this offer would give matter of jealousy to some persons, and give others occasion to in∣fer that he only aimed at his own Grandeur in this war: to convince the world of the sincerity of his intentions, he judged it the best way to refuse these Honours, but at the same time did not refuse the offer they made him of being hereditary Governour of that Province. This he readily accepted, and
after he had taken the Oaths, reformed seve∣ral abuses that had got footing during the Enemy's usurpation there. And now by reason of the continual alarms the People were in, upon the occasion of the French King's resolutions, who was to open the Campaign himself in Person, in the begin∣ning of the Spring, he continually applied his thoughts upon the war, and for that end al∣ways assisted at those Conferences, where they debated upon their military affairs. He was at Cleve to confer with the Elector of Brandenburgh, who entertained him with great magnificence; and soon after his arrival at the Hague, fell ill of the Small-pox, which news caused so much the greater consterna∣in the United Provinces, because that disease had been fatal to his Family, in the Person of his Father, his Mother, and the Duke of Glocester; but by the care and prudence of an able Physician, and by the assistance of some remedies which the Elector of Branden∣burgh sent him, he recovered his health, to the universal joy not only of Holland, but all the Confederates. No sooner was he perfectly recovered, but he repaired to the general rendezvous at Rosendael; for the King of France being now upon his march in Brabant, it was necessary for the Prince to observe his motions; and so much the more, because Limburg, which was besieged by the Marquis de Rochefort, de∣manded a speedy relief. For this reason,
his Highness parting with his Army from Duffel, joyn'd the Dukes of Lunenburg and Lorrain at Gangelt, with a resolution to raise the Siege. And in all probability it had come to a Battel between the French King and the Prince, since the King, who was then at Maestricht, having received advice of the Prince's march, had repassed the Meuse at Viset, to oppose his design, but the City not being any longer able to sustain the great numbers of their Enemies, surren∣dred sooner than was expected. After the taking of Limbug, the King of France encamped near Tillemont, ravaging all the Country round about Louvain, Brus∣sels, and Malines. He had a mighty desire to make himself master of Louvain, but his Highness and the Duke de Villa Hermosa watched him all along so narrowly, that he durst not undertake it; so that finding he was able to do no more, content with having gained Limburg, he returned to Paris, leaving the Prince of Conde to observe the Prince of Orange. And to say the truth, both these wary Generals watched one another so carefully, that they cou'd not gain the least advantage one over the other. But the Prince of Conde was soon commanded to go into Alsatia, af∣ter the death of the Mareschal de Turenne. Our Prince therefore had now to do with a new General, the Duke of Luxemburgh, but who in prudence and conduct was by no
means inferiour to his great Predecessor. His Highness had nevertheless this advan∣tage over him, that he hindred him from ravaging the territory of Triers; so that after the fatal and entire routing of Monsieur de Crequi, that City fell into the hands of the Imperialists. France having thus sustained two mighty losses, in the death of Turenne, and the Defeat of Crequi, the D. of Luxem∣burg, rather than run the hazard of receiving a third, which perhaps might have proved mortal, suffer'd the Prince of Orange to take Bins before his face, when there were 350 men in Garrison, and great store of Provi∣sions. His Highness ordered all its Fortifi∣cations to be demolished, to render it unser∣viceable to the Enemy, and finding the sea∣son now well advanced, dispersed his Army and came back to the Hague. The calamities of war, which had for some years afflicted and depopulated the greatest part of Europe, were so extremely great and deplorable, that several Princes moved with compassion, did deliberate of the most proper means to stop the progress of those miseries, under which the people languished. Tho this design was so highly advantageous to Christendom in general, yet it did but slowly advance, till at last the K. of Great Britain, having concluded a peace with Holland, resolved to offer his Mediator∣ship to procure an universal peace amongst all the Christian Princes, which having at
last been submitted to, the City of Nimeguen was chosen for the place of Treaty, where all the Plenipotentiaries met towards the be∣ginning of the year 1676. This hindred neither party from making as mighty preparations to renew the War in the Spring, as if there were not the least thoughts of a Peace: So that during the winter his Highness was sufficiently employed to get his Army ready against the opening of the Campaign, for it was an easy matter to foresee that there would be occasion for very considerable forces to oppose the com∣mon Enemy as soon as the season was ap∣proached. The French on their part began before the midst of April to make a review of several of their Troops under Mareschal de Crequi, near Charleville: and Mareschal d' Humieres was in the Field with a body of fifteen Thousand men, near Courtray, put∣ting all the Country to contribution, be∣cause the Spaniards were not strong enough to resist them. Before the Prince of Orange could come and join the Duke de Villa Hermosa, which he did at Cambron, on the 26th of April, the Mareschal de Crequi had blocked up Conde with an Army of sixteen Thousand men. Upon the receit of this news the King of France parted immediately from Paris, and was soon after followed by the Duke of Orleance, who brought with him a reinforce∣ment of ten Thousand men. The place was
so furiously attack'd and batter'd on all sides, that unable to hold out any longer, they were constrained to surrender at discretion, altho the Prince of Orange was advanced as far as Granville to relieve it. The King of France having given orders to repair the For∣tifications of Conde, and to place a Garrison of 3000 men in the Town, commanded the Duke of Orleance to besiege Buchain. This was a small Town, but exceeding strong, scituate between Cambray and Valenciennes, and defended the communication between those two places; for this reason it had a good Garrison, under the command of a Governor, who had the reputation of a brave and prudent Captain. But the Duke with such an Army did not find the Siege to be a work of great difficulty, and so much the less, because the King of France, who commanded the Army in person, was not far from him; and all this while kept the Dutch and Spanish Army in breath. The Prince who was now encamped in view of the Enemy, near Valenciennes, and was re∣solved to attack him the day following in case Bouchain had not been taken, would not quit his Post till the French King had decamp∣ed first, and having sent a considerable num∣ber of Horse and Foot to seize all the passes and bridges upon the River Dender; hin∣der'd him from ravaging the Country of Alost. About the beginning of Iune the King returned to Paris, and gave the com∣mand
of his Army in the Spanish Netherlands to Mareschal de Schomberg; and the Prince of Orange encamped before Maestricht. On the other side the Mareschal to make a powerful diversion, sent Humieres with 15000 men to besiege Air, a place of prodigious strength, for it is encompassed with a deep Morass, and excellent Fortifications on three sides, so that it can be entred only at one way, which was defended by a Fort called St. Francis, having five Bastions, two Half-Moons and a very deep Ditch. Nevertheless all this did not hider him from making himself soon Master of the Fort, the Go∣vernour not having men enough to oppose the great numbers of the French: who threw such a prodigious quantity of Bombs and Granadoes into the place, that most of the houses were afire. So that the Burghers having without the Governours privity demanded to capitulate, he was obli∣ged to surrender the Town, which never∣theless he did on very honourable conditi∣ons, that were easily agreed to by the French, because they were informed that the Duke de Villa Hermosa was on his way to attempt to raise the Siege. All this while the Prince of Orange never stirr'd from before Maestricht, which he had invested with his own Army, and the Troops of the Confederates, to each of whom he as∣signed their proper quarter. Amongst the rest of these Troops, the English, under Col.
Fwick Col. Widdrington, and Col. Ashley, to the number of two thousand six hundred then, without reckoning the Volunteers and Reformades, presented a Request to his Highness, wherein they petition'd him to assign them a particular quarter, and that they might be commanded separately, that so if they behaved themselves like valiant men, they might have all the honour, and if other∣wise, all the shame to themselves, it not being reasonable that they should suffer for the faults of other men. This the Prince readily granted, and gave them a separate post, over against his own Regiment of Guards, under the Com∣mand of Col. Fenwick, the eldest Collonel of the three; and they were as good as their word, as they really made it appear by their desperate attacques, where they signalized themselves by their extraordinary valour, as long as the Siege lasted. And in truth never was Siege carried on with greater vigour and resolution than this was; the Prince continually encouraging the Souldiers with his presence, till he received a slight hurt in his arm by a Musquet-shot; but two things hindered them from tak∣ing the Town which might otherwise have fallen into their hands. First, the River was so low that the Prince was forced to stay some days till his Cannon came from Ruremond, for want of water. In the second place, the forces he expected from the Bi∣shop of Munster and the Dukes of Lunenburg
came not to his relief. On the other side, Schom∣berg having received express orders to succour the Town, and for that purpose having marched as far as Tongres, his Highness sum∣moned a Council of War to consider what was to be done in this conjuncture; where, after they had reflected upon the present con∣dition of the Army, which was extremely lessen'd and fatigued, and found it was im∣possible to shut up the passes and avenues to the City on the side of Wick, and that the French would infallibly throw some relief into it, notwithstanding all their endeavours to the contrary: In short, after they saw their Horse cou'd not subsist any longer in the Trenches for want of forrage, it was una∣nimously resolved to raise the Siege. So the Prince commanded the Horse to join Count Waldeck, and sent the Artillery, Ammunition and Provisions, with the sick and wounded to Ruremond by water, keeping his Foot in a posture of fighting till the Vessels were out of all danger. Soon after this, judging the Campaign was ended for this year, he left his Army under the Command of Count Waldeck, and returned to Holland to assist at the General Assembly of the States. He gave them an account of the last expedition, which so highly satisfied them that the Pre∣sident congratulated him upon the score of his happy return, and in the name of the whole Assembly thanked him for the extraordinary pains and fatigues he had undergone for the safety of the Republic.
The Campaign being thus finished, all the world was in great hopes that a Peace wou'd be soon concluded; but as it is a much easier matter to kindle a fire than to extin∣guish it, a Peace like this, where so many different interests and parties demanded to be satisfied, was not to be so speedily concluded, as those persons who impatiently wished for it, did imagine. The very preliminaries of this numerous Assembly at Nimeguen cou'd not be regulated in the compass of one win∣ter; and notwithstanding all the instances and application of the King of Great Britain, those that reasoned solidly, saw well enough that the Peace was in no great readiness. Nor were their conjectures vain, for no sooner was the year 1677 begun, but tho it was the depth of winter, the French march∣ed directly into the Spanish Netherlands; so that in a short time all the places about Va∣lenciennes, Cambray, and St. Omers, were co∣vered with the Enemies Troops; and these three Cities were in a manner blocked up at a distance: The French openly boasting, that they wou'd make themselves Masters of two important places before the Spaniards were in a condition to take the Field. A great and stately City upon the Scheld, built, as 'tis commonly pretended, by the Emperour Va∣lentinian. Valenciennes was the first place that was invested, with a Army of 50 or 60 thousand men, under
the command of the Duke of Luxemburg and the Count de Montal: and four days after the King himself arrived in person in the Camp. There was in the City a Garrison of 2000 Spanish, Walloon and Italian Foot, with about 1000 Horse and Dragoons, com∣manded by the Marquis de Risburg, Brother to Prince d'Epinoy TheKing after his arrival view'd the posts, gave orders for the Trenches to be opened, and set up Batteries. In fine the siege was so vigorously pushed on in a few days, that the French were advanced as far as the Glacis of the Counterscrap, and a Horn work, that was one of the best defences the City had. But the King, not being willing to lose time in taking all the Out-works regularly, or∣der'd an Assault to be made on the Horn∣work, in four different places, all at once, by eight in the morning; and to facilitate this enterprize, alarmed the Besieged all the night with throwing of Bombs, Granadoes, and Carcasses, which had the desired effect: For after a short dispute the French enter'd the Town, losing no more in this expedition than only Count de Barlemont, a Collonel of the Regiment of Picardy, three Musqueteers, six Granadiers, and some Souldiers. The King having thus carried Valenciennes, sate down before Cambray, with part of his Army, commanded by the Duke of Luxem∣burg; and order'd the Mareschal d'Humieres to invest St. Omers with another part. Cam∣bray
is one of the oldest Cities in the Low Countries, built ever since the time of Servius Hostilius, but the Castle was built by Charles the Fifth, upon which account the Spaniards took great care to preserve it. There were in Garrison fourteen hundred Horse, four Regiments of Foot, besides two Companies of old Spanish Souldiers, under the command of Don Pedro de Laval the Governour. The Cathedral was in so great veneration for the beauty of the structure, that the Canons came out of the Town, and presented a Pe∣tition to the King, wherein they requested him not to fire at the Church, which he freely granted. The lines of Circumvallati∣on were no sooner finished, but the King commanded an Assault to be made on the two Half-moons on the Castle side, which the French having soon made themselves Ma∣sters of, they immediately began to under∣mine the Ramparts; this put the Besieged into such a consternation that they desired to Capitulate, and surrendred the Town on very honourable Conditions. But tho the Town was lost, the Castle held ut still; for the Governour taking advantage of the Cessation of Arms, gave orders in the mean time to have some Cannon and other necessary provisions got ready, com∣manded all the Horses to be slain, only re∣serving ten for each Company, and thus re∣tired into the Castle with all his Souldiers, before the French had the least suspicion of
it; being resolved to sell the Castle dearer than he had done the City. The King was obli∣ged to cease for some time, not only because the French Pioneers were repulsed by the Besieged in a Sally they had made to prevent their approach; but also because he was informed that the Prince of Orange was marching to the relief of St. Omers: he sent the Duke of Luxemburg with a great part of his Army, to reinforce his Brother the Duke of Orleance, who had set Siege to that City, and had already finished his Batteries. For the news of the great success which the French King had at Valenciennes and Cam∣bray, and the Siege of St. Omers had so migh∣tily alarmed the United Provinces, that the Prince of Orange was forced to take the Field, before the rest of the Confederates were ready to joyn him. He assigned Ipres for the general Rendezvous of his Army, which was composed of Dutch, and some other Troops drawn out of the Spanish Gar∣risons, and began his March on the 7th of April, and on the 9th arrived at St. Mary Ca∣pel, where he was informed that the D. of Orleans lay encamped on the great road to St. Omers, and had only left a few Regiments in the Trenches to keep the City blocked up. The straitness of the ways, which he was to pass, made his March very tedious, so that after he had marched all the next day, he advanced no farther than a small River called Pene, on the other side of which he perceived
the Enemy drawn up in battle. The Prince having consulted his Guides, and those that knew the Country, they all assured him that there was no other passage than this to go to Bac{que} which they looked upon to be the only place by which St. Omers might be re∣liev'd: Upon this consideration he resolved to pass the River, and set upon the Enemy; and having ordered some new Bridges to be made, and repaired those that the French had broke down, he accordingly passed it on the 11th of April by break of day, so that all were got over before the Enemy was aware of them. But when he had passed it with his Troops he was very much surprized to find that there was another River still be∣tween the French and him, encumbred with Trees and Hedges, altho those that were acquainted with the Country had assured him of the contrary, so that he found himself strangely embarass'd, as not having in the least expcteed this second Obstacle. But this did not hinder him from making himself Master of the Abby de Pienes; but in the mean time the Enemy having received a reinforcement of fifteen Thousand men came to attack the Abby, where the Prince's Dragoons were posted, who being supported by some Regi∣ments of Foot. received them so warmly that they were forced to retire. After this the Prince set fire to the Abby least the Ene∣my should post themselves there. At the same time the French advanced slowly with
the right Wing of their Army, to charge the Prince's left Wing in the Flank, which was covered with abundance of Hedges, where were likewise posted two Battalions. The Prince perceiving that the Enemy had received some new recruits on that side, sent three fresh Battalions to support his own, as likewise to guard the plain that was behind the Hedges. But the two first Regiments basely quitted their Post upon the first ap∣proach of the Enemy, so that the other three Regiments that were sent to their assistance, having not sufficient time to adjust themselves, and seeing the two first Battalions run away, betook themselves to their Heels, and break∣ing into their own Squadrons that stood there to cover them, occasioned an extraor∣dinary confusion. Upon this the French Cavalry coming to advance, and being sup∣ported by the Infantry that made perpetual firing, the Prince's Squadrons were beaten back, but they did not go far, and soon rallied again, and poured so vigorously upon the French that they made them fly, in their their turn. In the mean time the Enemy's Foot being advanced above, and having pos∣sessed the Hedges, where the Prince's men were posted before, they cou'd not possibly make a long resistance, nor hinder the rest of the Foot from being attacked in the Flank as well as the Front. So that the Foot, after they had done their duty extremely well, saw them∣selves obliged to quit their post; and the
Prince repassing the Rivet, retir'd in very good order to Steenword, and from thence to Poperdingue; the Enemy having been so rudely handled by Count Waldeck, who com∣manded the Prince's Right Wing, that they had no desire to pursue him. And this was the issue of the battel at Mont cassel. The Prince having retired in this manner as we have related it, the French King pur∣sued the Siege of the Cittadel of Cambray with all imaginable vigor, and it fell out very unfortunately for the besieged, that a Bomb set fire on one of their Magazines, where the Granadoes and other warlike Provisions lay, and utterly consumed it. However the besieged continued to defend themselves bravely, and recompenced their loss in some manner by the death of the Marquess de Re∣nel, one of the French King's Lieutenant Generals, who was slain by a Cannon-shot from the Castle. But at last the French hav∣ing made several breaches, and the Gover∣nour of the Cittadel being wounded, they were constrained to yield to the great num∣ber, and continual attacks of the Enemy, and to surrender the Castle, which was done on very honorable conditions. To return to the Duke of Orleans, altho victorious, he was so afraid, lest the Prince should once more attempt to throw relief into St, Omers, that he durst not quit the field where the battle was fought, but kept himself upon his guard for eight days succes∣sively.
But when he received the News that his Highness had passed the Canal of Ghent with all his Forces, he returned before the Town, which he besieged with his whole Army, and after a gallant resistance, which cost him several of his best Officers, they were forced, against their will, to sur∣render upon good terms. After the taking of these places, the French heat began to be somewhat abated, and those that were so forward to attack others, were now content to act on the defensive all the rest of the Summer, and durst never put it to the hazard of a battle, altho it was of∣ten presented to them. So that after several tedious marches and counter-marches on both sides, and the Confederates ineffectual lay∣ing Siege to Charleroy, which for several weighty considerations they thought expe∣dient to raise, the Prince returned to the Hague, being accompanied by the Earl of Ossory, Don Carlos, the Duke of Albemarle, and several other Persons of Quality. After he had given the States General an account of the last Campaign, with the reasons that obliged him to raise the Siege of Charleroy, and not to attack the Enemy, who were not only superior to him in number, but posted to the greatest advantage: Their High and Mightinesses thanked him for his conduct and indefatigable pains, humbly beseeching him still to continue his zeal for the public Interest.
A little after his return to the Hague, se∣veral of the English Nobility arrived at the Prince's Court who in an Assembly of the States General gave them to understand, that his Unkle the King of Great Britain, earnestly Sir W. Temple in his Memoirs represents this matter otherwise, for there we are told that K. Ch. the 2d. was so far from courting the Prince to come to visit him, that he was apprehensive of his arrival. desired him to make a Voyage into England, in hopes that his presence there would not a little contribute to the Peace then in agitation, which would be of such mighty advantage to the Republic. Thus his Highness took his leave of the States, and of all theColledges on the 17th of October, and being accompany'd by the Earl of Ossory, Monsieur d' Odyk, the Count de Nassau, and several other persons of condition, he em∣barqued at Hellevoetsluys, in one of his Ma∣jesties Yatchs, and arrived at Harwich on the 19th about ten in the morning, where the Duke of Albemarle, and the Master of the Ceremonies attended him in the King's Coaches, and conducted him the same even∣ing to the King and his Royal Highness, at Ipswich, who received him with all the testi∣monies of a particular kindness and affection. On the 23d he arrived with the two Royal Brothers at Whitehall, and was lodged in the Duke of York's apartment, who retired to St. Iames's.
What was at first nothing but a bare sur∣mize, was soon after confirmed by the King himself: For on the first of November, his Majesty acquainted the Council with his design to marry the Prince of Orange to his Royal Highness's eldest Daughter, declaring that he hoped this Alliance would facilitate the accomplishment of a General Peace, which his Majesty was resolved to advance as far as the Interest of his Kingdoms did engage him. After this the whole Council went in a body to compliment the Princess, and afterwards the Prince; the rest of the Nobility did the same after their exam∣ple. The Prince of Orange acquainted the States with it by an Express, giving them to un∣derstand, that after he had maturely weigh'd the reasons which might incline him to mar∣ry, he thought he could not make a better choice than the Princess Mary; that he had already demanded her in Marriage of the King, and his Royal Highness her Father, who immediately gave their consent: that he judged it advisable to inform them of it, expecting their approbation of the Match with all speed, that he might the sooner re∣pair to them for the service of his Country. Hereupon the States General were assem∣bled, and seriously considering the reasons of State upon which this Marriage was founded, with the great advantages it might produce; as for instance, a confirmation of
that strict Union that was between the King of Great Britain, and the States of the United Provinces; the establishment of the ancient House of Orange, and the conclusion of the Peace, so earnestly desired: I say, after they had seriously considered all this, but especi∣ally the happy choice his Highness had made of a Princess, who besides her natural sweet∣ness, possessed all the virtues that a Husband could desire, testified their approbation by a public Edict, in terms full of joy and satis∣faction, declaring moreover the mighty esteem they had of so glorious an Alliance, and their sincere resolution to cultivate the ancient Friendship and good Correspondence which had always been, and was between his Britanic Majesty and them. This answer arriving at London on the 14th of November, which was his Highness's Birth∣day, the Marriage was celebrated at eleven at night, but with so little noise, that the People knew nothing of it till the next morning, when they gave all public testimo∣nies of their joy by Ringing of Bells, and Bone fires. But amidst all this rejoycing and feasting, the Prince knowing how neces∣sary his presence was in Holland, made all possible expedition to arrive thither. He parted from London on the 29th of November with his Princess, and landed at Terheyde, from whence he went to Hounslaerdyk, where they tarried some time, till they made their public Entry into the Hague, which was a
few days after performed with extraordinary Magnificence. But I pass all these ceremo∣nies over in silence, in order to come to mat∣ters of greater importance. Towards the beginning of the year 1678, tho it was the midst of Winter, the French King made such mighty preparations of War, that all Europe was alarmed at them, but particularly Holland and the Consederates. This made the King of Great Britain send the Earl of Feversham to his Most Christian Ma∣jesty with a project of Peace, by which Charleroy, Aeth, Oudenard, Courtray, Tournay, Conde, Valenciennes, St. Guillain, and some other Towns were to be surrendred to the Spaniards, and the King of France to keep all the Franche-Comte in his possession, but he would not hearken to it; and as for the King of England he was as unwilling to abate any thing in his propositions. Which ob∣liged his Britannic Majesty to sent orders to my Lord Hyde his Ambassador at Nimeguen, to make a strict alliance with the States-General; which being concluded, he dis∣patched My Lord Montague into France to press the King to accept his terms, and gave out Commissions at the same time for raising an Army; but the French King reject∣ed these conditions of Peace, and made great provisions for the war on all sides but espe∣cially in his new acquisitions in the Low Countries. Upon which the King of England recalled the Troops he had in the service of
France, which besides their other ill treatment were sent home without their pay. The King of Great Britain held firm to his resolution, and summoning a Parliament, communicated to them the late alliance he had made with Holland, for the public benefit and repose of Christendom, protesting he was resolved to force the French King to a Peace, and therefore desired them to furnish him with a summ of Money necessary for such a design. The Lower House thanked his Majesty for the great care he took of the Protestant Religion, in marrying his Niece to a Protestant Prince, beseeching him not to consent to any conditions of Peace with France, unless they were better than those at the Pyrenean Treaty. To which the King having consented, the Commons after a long deliberation resolved to equip a Fleet of Fourscore and ten Men of War, and to raise an Army of 29870 Land Men, and nomi∣nated Commissioners to compute the ex∣pence. Whilst these things lay under debate, the French King who was sensible what designs the Consederates were forming against him, resolved to render them all ineffectual, by being before hand with them. For this effect he left Paris on the 7th of February, and marching by the side of Mets, entred Flanders, no one being able to determine where the storm would fail. All the World was of opinion that the design was upon Mons, or
Namur, or some other place of like im∣portance; and Ghent which never expected to be attack'd, had so weakned itsGarrison by drawing out their men, and distributing them in other places, that the French King, who knew this very well, sate down before it on the 1st of March with an Army of Threescore orFourscore Thousand men. It was impossible for a City of so large a compass, which had not above four or five Hundred Soldiers in Garrison, besides the Inhabitants, to defend themselves long against a vain-glorious Prince, who valued the taking of a Half-moon more than the loss of a Thousand men; and who by his assaults and batteries had ex∣treamly weaken'd it. So Ghent was forced to surrender nine days after it was besieged, from thence the Enemy came before Ipres, but that City being much stronger than Ghent, and besides furnished with a better Garrison, the Besiegers met so warm an opposition there, and lost so many Officers and Soldiers before they took it, that the King put the greatest part of his Army im∣mediately into Garrison, and returned to Paris: whether he thought his Army suffi∣ciently harrass'd by these two Sieges, or whether he thought he had humbled his Enemies enough to incline them now to ac∣cept his own proposals of a Peace, or lastly whether he was afraid of the English, who had sent considerable Forces into Flanders.
For about this time the D. of Monmouth was arrived at Bruges with three thousand Horse and Foot, which the K. of Great Britain had sent to re-inforce the Prince of Orange's Army; and the Parliament was so earnestly bent to pursue the War against France, that they petitioned the King to declare open War against it, promising to stand by him with their lives and fortunes, and to furnish him from time to time with sufficient summs to carry on so generous an undertaking. In the mean time all the world was astonished to ear that the French King had intirely abandon'd Messina and all Sicily. The more able Politicians imagined that now there were no hopes of a Peace, since this Prince had abandon'd his Conquests in Italy, as he had lately done those in Holland, for no other end but that he might the better compass his designs upon Spain and the Em∣pire. But others said, it was an infallible sign he was not so strong as he pretended to be, and that what he had done, was rather out of meer necessity, than for any other end. However it was, the Parliament of England were of belief that France was resolv∣ed to continue the War in Germany and the Low Countries; and therefore to stop his Career granted his Majesty a Poll-bill, and by the same Act prohibited the Importation of all French commodities. King Charles, who was desirous to enter into a League with
the Empire, Spain, and the United Pro∣vinces, would oblige them to make the same prohibition in relation to French goods, in their own respective Dominions. But while the Hollanders were demurring upon the last point, believing that such a prohibition would ruine their trade, an unexpected accident fell out that changed the whole face of af∣fairs. The King of France, after his return to Paris seeing his Britannic Majesty was resolved to support the Interests of his Nephew the Prince of Orange, particularly since his Voyage into England, and his Marriage with his Niece, formed of himself a project of Peace, which he sent to his Ambassador at Nimeguen, there to be distributed amongst the other Ambassadors and Mediators by those of England. The chief of these propo∣sitions were, That the King of Sweden and the Duke of Gottorp should be intirely satis∣fied. That the Prince and Bishop of Stas∣burg should be restored to all his Demains, Goods, Honours and Prerogatives; and that his Brother Prince William of Furstem∣berg, should be set at liberty. That as for the Emperour, he should alter nothing in the public Declarations that were made at the Treaty of Westphalia; only he offer'd either to keep Philipsburg and give up Friburg, or else to keep Friburg, and give up Philipsburg. That as for Spain, he would restore Charleroy, Aeth, Oudenard, Courtray, Ghent, and St. Guil∣lain
with their dependances, but in recom∣pence demanded all the Franche Comté, Valen∣ciennes, Bouchain, Condè, Cambray, Aire, and St. Omers, with all their dependances. In a word all the Places he was in possession off, except those above mentioned. Besides he consented to surrender Charlemont, or Dinant, to the Catholic King, provided the Bishop of Leige and the Emperor agreed to it. That as for what concerned the States Ge∣neral, besides the satisfaction he gave them by what he yielded up to Spain, he wou'd restore Maestricht to them, and continue the same treaty of Commerce they enjoy'd be∣fore: And as for the Interests of the Duke of Lorrain, he was willing to re-establish him, according to the Pirenean Treaty, or to surrender all his Territories to him except the City of Nancy, but that by way of recom∣pence he would give him Toul, reserving ne∣vertheless to himself a passage from his Fron∣tiers into Alsatia, and the Roads that would be necessary to him, from France to Nancy, and from Nancy to Mets, Brisac, and the Franche-Comte. That the Confines between Spain and the Low-Countries, to begin from the Sea, should be the Meuse, Nieuport, Dixmuyde, Courtrdy, Oudenard, Aeth, Mons, Charleroy, and Namur, and that these Confines should be secured by these Places, since they had cost him some Millions to fortify, and by quitting them he deprived himself of the advantage of march∣ing
up to the Gates of Brussels whenever he pleased. These Conditions were liked by some, but disapproved by others. The States Ge∣neral for instance had no reason to reject them, but the Ministers of the Allies, in a conference at the Hague, absolutely rejected them as unjust and unreasonable. After se∣veral warm disputes upon this occasion the Spaniards began at last to comply, and that the more because they saw both England and Holland consented to the proposals of France. Besides this, their Affairs grew every day worse and worse, by the conside∣rable loss of Fort Leeuw, which was much about this time unfortunately surprized by the French. But what served wholly to de∣termine them, was the return of the French King, who besides an Army he had near Brussels, had two more not far off, one upon the Rhine, and the other between the Meuse and the Sambre, which threatned nothing less than the entire loss of the Spanish Nether∣lands, in case the Hollanders made a Peace without them, and continued Neuters after it, during the course of this war; to which the King of France earnestly perswaded them. The Spaniards therefore being constrained to yield to the necessity of their Affairs, de∣clared they were ready to accept these Con∣ditions of Peace. Upon which the States General were very urgent with the other
Allies to give their consent; and upon the delay of the Ministers who amused them∣selves with making Memorials and Replies, dispatched express Orders to their Ambassa∣dors at Nimeguen to conclude the Treaty out of hand. But they were extreamly surprized when the Plenipotentiares of France refused to sign it, for they demanded that intire sa∣tisfaction should be given to the King of Sweden, protesting that in case of refusal, the King their master would conclude nothing. This started new difficulties, and gave oc∣casion to the States General to make fresh complaints of the procedure of the King of France, after they had so frankly submitted to the Conditions which he himself had pro∣posed. That King's answer was, that he should come to St. Quintin, where he wou'd carry six days for the Commissioners whom they should send to adjust this difference. But the States thinking they had done enough on their part, resolved in the presence of the Prince of Orange to send no body till the Treaty was signed. The News of this difference, and of the resolution of the Hollanders to continue the war, unless the King of France would some∣what abate the interests of Sweden, being arrived into England, the Parliament who be∣fore had voted to disband the Army, which the King had raised both by Sea and Land, were now resolved to keep it on foot. His Majesty sent part of the Army over to Flan∣ders,
and made a League offensive and defen∣sive with the United Provinces; wherein a very short time was limited for the French King to sign the Treaty, or declare his fur∣ther pretensions. This resolute conduct of the King of Great Britain put an end to this troublesome affair, so the Treaty of Peace between France and Holland was signed on the 11th of August, at midnight. 'Tis cer∣tain the French King had done better not to have refined so much in his Politics, for it had like to have cost him the entire loss of the D. of Luxemburg's Army. Mons had been a long time blocked up by the French, and was now in a manner reduced to the last extremities, when the Prince of Orange receiving advice that the Confederates had joined the Army of Spain and Holland, which was near the Canal of Brussels, he part∣ed by night from the Hague on the 26 of Iuly. Immediately after his arrival he call'd a Council of War, with the Generals of the Allies, where it was resolved that they should decamp and pursue the Duke of Luxemburg, who marched by Mons with a design to hinder any relief from being put into the Town. Thus resolved, the Prince parted with the whole Army at the beginning of August, and no sooner had he left Brussels, but General Spaen joyned him with a reinforce∣ment of six thousand men of the Elector of Brandenburg, and the Bishop of Munster.
The French who had rested some days at Soignes, hearing of the Prince of Orange's March, suddenly decamped, and the Con∣federate Army encamped in the very same place where the Enemy had been the day before. His Highness marching from thence, on the side of Rocles, advanced with his left Wing as far as the Abby of St. Denys, where the Duke of Luxemburg had his quarter. And as this post was in a manner inaccessible, by reason of the Woods, the Briars and Precipices it was encompass'd with, the Duke so little dreamt of being attack'd, that he was at dinner when they brought him word, that the Prince of Orange was coming to surprize him, and so he was forced to retire in some disorder. The Prince had Castrau before his right Wing, which the Duke had gained in great preci∣pitation, and it was happy for him that this place was as hard to be got to, as the other he quitted. In the mean time his Highness, whom these difficulties did not discourage, had no sooner drawn out his Army to battel, but he was resolved to beat the Enemy out of his new post, and sending for his Artillery ordered it to play upon the French, who were posted a little higher on one side of a Cloister near St. Denys, which the Duke of Luxem∣burg thought he might defend well enough with his Cannon. But it was impossible for them to sustain the shock of the Confe∣derate Dragoons, who beat them from this
Post, and made themselves Masters of the Cloister, while General Collier, advanced on the side of the Abby, and seconded by Ge∣neral Delwick, broke through the narrow ways, and mounting these horrible precipices with an invincible courage, routed the Ene∣miy who for some time made a vigorous resistance in their lines. In the midst of this engagement the Prince accompanied by the Duke of Monmouth, who fought by his side all the day, and encouraged with his good success, cried out, follow me, follow me, to encourage those Regimens that were to second the first. Both sides were very liberal of their Powder and Ball, and all the Regiments of the left Wing seconded one another till night with the same vigour and resolution. Count Horn on his side approached nearer with his Cannon, and or∣dered it to play on the French Battalions in the Valley, where he caused a terrible slaughter. From thence his Highness advanced with speed to Castrau, which was attack'd by the Spaniards on the side of the right Wing, where the Prince's Regiment of Guards led the Van, under the command of Count Solmes, who being seconded by the Duke of Holstein's Regiment, and by the English, forced the Enemies at last to quit the place The Regiment of Foot Guards conti∣nued in action with the French for the space of five hours, and pursued them a quarter of a League through fields and pre∣cipices.
'Tis certainly a thing hardly to be believ'd, that men should be capable of making such brave efforts in places so ex∣tremely disadvantageous, and several persons who have viewed and examined them since, say there are few places in the world natural∣ly so strong. The Earl of Ossory did wonders with his English at a small distance from the Foot Guards, where the French lost abundance of Men. But the Prince in the heat of the Action advanced so far that he was in great danger of being lost, had not Monsieur Onwer∣kerk come seasonably to his relief, and killed an adventurous Captain that was just going to let fly a Pistol at him. The Cavalry did nothing all this while by reason of the uneven scituation of the place, so that all the execu∣tion lay upon the Infantry and Dragoons. Night put an end to the dispute, by the fa∣vour of which the Duke of Luxemburg made his retreat without noise, and retired to∣wards Mons and covered himself with a Wood on one side, and a River on the other, leaving to his Highness as marks of Victory, the Field where the Battle was fought, the greatest part of the wounded, abundance of Tents and Baggage, with a world of Pow∣der, and other Warlike Ammunition. The States General receiving the News of so great a Success, sent Commissioners to the Prince to congratulate him for the victory he had gained with so much Glory and Repu∣tation,
and for the signal Actions by him per∣formed in this last Battle to the great hazard of his life. And to testify what a value they set upon his preservation, they presented Monsieur Onwerkerk who had so generously opposed himself to the danger that threatned his Highness, with a Sword, whose handle was of massy gold, a pair of Pistols set with gold, and a whole Horse Furniture of the same metal. The Prince of Orange having thus obliged the Duke of Luxemburg to retire, had with∣out question pushed his point, and thrown relief into the Town, but as he was consult∣ing how to effect it, word was brought him that the King of France, and the States Gene∣ral had accommodated all differences. The success of this Battle hasten'd the conclusion of the Treaty between Spain and France, which was signed on the 17th of September, to the great praise of the King of England; who having joyn'd the terrour of his Arms to the authority of his Mediation, had for his recompence the satisfaction to see the peace and general welfare of Europe given as a Portion with his Neice, while the two great Alliances between France and Holland, and between Spain and France, were the and happy effects of the conjugal Alliance between his Highness and the Princess Mary of England. The war being thus ended between France and the United Provinces, his Highness had
time now to breath himself after the fatigues and hurries of the last Campaigns: for after the Ratification of the Peace, and the Restituti∣on of Mastricht to the States, the King of France no more disturbed the Low Countries with the terrour of his Arms, so that when his High∣ness had reformed all those innovations that had been introduced by the French when they were Masters of the Country, the peo∣ple began to enjoy the repose and tranquillity they had so long desired. But matters were not so soon adjusted be∣tween the Kings of France and Spain. By the Treaty concluded between the two Crowns, it was agreed that Commissioners should meet at Cambray to regulate any disputes that might happen about the limits: This was in the Year 1679. But after several tedious contests occasioned by the excessive preten∣tions of the French, who demanded whole Provinces in the nature of dependances, to be delivered into their hands, the war was like to have kindled afresh, till at last by the unwearied Mediation of the States General a Treaty was signed at the Hague on the 29th of Iune 1684, after which his most Christi∣an Majesty having accommodated all diffe∣rences with the Emperour, by some other Articles of the same Nature, a Truce of twen∣ty years was agreed upon: which being ra∣tified, tho not without some delays on the side of the Spaniards, all those devastations and ravages that for the course of several
years had ruin'd the finest Country in Europe, began to cease. In the midst of all these negotiations, which the States seldom or never treated of, but in the presence of the Prince of Orange, whom they still consulted in the most diffi∣cult affairs, his Highness show'd an extra∣ordinary generosity; for when every one was minding his particular Interests, he neg∣lected his own, and preferr'd the peace and welfare of his Country, to that reparation he might justly expect for the great losses he sustain'd in his own Demains. For while the King of France burnt and ravaged the Low Countries, in order to force the Spaniards to accept his offers, a great part of the Prince's patrimony in Brabant underwent the com∣mon calamities. The same thing happen'd when Luxemburg and the Franche-Comte came to change their Masters; Prince d'Isenguyn, supported by the authority of France, expo∣sed to Sale by sound of Trumpet all the Lands, Furniture and Goods of his Highness, as having been adjudged to him by a formal Decree of the Parliament of that Country. The Provinces of Gueldres, Zealand and Utrecht, made great complaints in his High∣nesses name, but were not able to get satis∣faction done him. Nor suffer'd he less in∣justice in the Principality of Orange, where the Walls of his Capital City were demo∣lished, the University disfranchized, the Inhabitants barbarously plundered, forced
to send the young Students home to their Parents, and forbidden to educate any of the Reformed Religion for the future; all which was directly contrary to the Faith of the late Treaty. But when the States represented the great injustice of this procedure, the Court of France return'd them no other an∣swer save only this, viz. That they had good reasons for what they did. As soon as the Truce was confirmed, the States were of opinion they might now dis∣band their supernumerary forces, and the Deputies of Amsterdam wou'd without any further delay reform the recruits they had made the year before; but all the members coming to this conclusion, that nothing ought to be done without the advice of the Prince of Orange, his Highness, upon the mention of this proposal, assured them that no one more earnestly desired the ease of the people than himself; but however he wou'd never consent, till their affairs both at home and abroad were in a better posture of security, to leave the Country naked and defenceless. The States were soon perswaded to follow this advice, and accordingly resolved to keep their Troops as long as the necessity of their affairs demanded it. And now from the conclusion of the Peace till the year 1688, when his Highness made his wonderful Expedition into England, we have nothing remarkable in this Prince's Hi∣story. What was the success of that prodi∣gious
Descent, and by what means the en∣suing Revolution was carried on, which has occasioned so mighty an alteration in this Western part of the World, as it is suffici∣ently known to every English Reader, So a just narration of all the surprizing incidents re∣quires a person of more leisure and greater abilities than my self. FINIS.
