A840 12255721 57434
A COLLECTION Of Several LETTERS AND DECLARATIONS, SENT BY General Monck Unto the Lord Lambert, the Lord Fleetwood, and the rest of the General Council of Officers in the ARMY. AS ALSO, Unto That part of the Parliament, called the Rump. The Committee of Safety, so called. The Lord Mayor and Common Council of the City of London. The Congregated Churches in and about Lon∣don. LONDON, Printed in the Year, 1660.
A LETTER FROM General Monck TO KING CHARLES. May it pl̄ease your Majesty. SEeing it hath pleased God out of his gracious will and pleasure, to cause me to cast my Eye upon this Common-wealth of England, my native Country, (and your three Kingdomes;) and viewing there, to behold the sad and lamen∣table condition, that now, and for many years past, it hath been intangled in; which as Reason and Conscience together per∣swades me, is occasioned chiefly for want of its ancient and ever customed way of Government, (to wir) a King and Parliament, which hath been unsetled altogether amongst us, ever since the unhappy death of your Majesties late father our King; by reason whereof, our ancient and accustomed whole∣some Laws both of Church and State, are most strangely torn and massacred; and all through the self-seeking ends of some certain persons, which at present I judge not fit herein to be communicated, who having gotten the power of the sword in their hands, thought for ever to rule and reign over their op∣posers; (I think in spight of God or man:) But of late some of those (I hope I may truly bless the name of the Lord for it,) who were the chief Rulers of those unhappy Differences between our King, and his three poor distracted Kingdomes, are taken out of this World; insomuch, that the Power of those remaining, is much weakened; But yet they will (I perceive) seek to tread in the felf same steps of them that have gone before them, as seeking only to set up their own Interest,
although to the utter ruine of the Nation. Studying how of littleness to become great, hating the name of a King, but would joyfully imbrace the power thereof, (yea, I may say, they seek far more Power, than ever our late King did take up∣on him,) and all this done under the zealous pretence of Saint∣ship and Religion; the form or manner whereof▪ is plainly ma∣nifested by their tollerating and setting up of strange Sects of Re∣lgion, as Anabaptists, Quakers, and such like, seeking ut∣terly to destroy and pull down, our antient Orthodox Divines, unless timely prevented. I question not but your Majesty is very well knowing of the Power, which for some few years past, I have had in governing the English Army here in Scotland; which Power, when I had once obtained, I did resolve, as much as in me lay, to keep, until a fit time and opportunity should offer it self, that I might imploy it for the glory of God, and the good of your Majesty, whose faithful Subject I humbly acknowledge my self to be. Now so it is, may it please your Majesty▪ I plainly seeing, and with a sad heart beholding the threatning hand of the Lords severe Judgements stretched forth against these three Kingdoms, which forthwith must, and will inevitably fall heavy upon us, (for ought as can be imagined, to the utter ruin both of King and Subjects) unless suddenly prevented by our humble submission to the Lord, and an un∣feigned Repentance of our former miscarriages. May it also please your Majesty to give me leave to acquaint you, that I humbly conceive, I had never a better opportunity of doing my Country service, (in freeing them from their Egyptian bondage, as I may term it,) and in restoring the Crown to the right owner thereof; which if possible to be done, shall be done with as much care, safety, and diligence, as God shall enable me, and that with as little wrong as may be either to King or Sub∣jects; which work when it is perfected, I hope will tend to the settlement of our ancient Protestant Religion: In tender con∣sideration of all which Premises, I most humbly beg that high favour of your Majesty, that you will be graciously pleased, to permit me to make these Proposals following. First, whether your Majesty will be pleased, to accept of the real endeavours of me your unworthy Subject and Servant to be imployed in be∣ing
a means in helping your Majesty to a quiet and safe pos∣session of three Kingdoms; which have (with violence) been so long time withheld from you? If yea, Then, Will your Ma∣jesty be pleased, to consent to a Treaty to be had between your Majesty, and a free Parliament, which shall be lawfully E∣lected and Chosen by the Country, whose care I hope will be for the choosing of such honest, godly, and religious men, as had no hand in the death of our late King, or since his death, have (by any unlawful means whatsoever▪) enjoyed any of his Lands, Tenements, or Rents, or the Lands, Tenements, and Rents, of the late Deans and Chapters, or any of your late sequestred Subjects, or which since his death have appeared violent in their acting against Kingship, and consequently against your Majesty, our lawful King: Not in the least that I have any malice or evil will against such persons, but for that my Conscience tells me, that so long, as self-interessed persons are suffered to sit in Par∣liament, there is little good to be expected, either for King or Kingdome; for it is a hard thing for men to act against their own selves, to the loss of their Lands and Livings; which they suppose they have so honestly gained. If your Majesty will be pleased to consent to such a Treaty, and that thereupon it may be agreed upon, that your Majesty shall be restored to your three Kingdoms; which I question not, but will be the event of such a Treaty: Then I humbly beg, that your Maj. would be pleased to think fit to declare what mercy and pitty, you are pleased shall be shewn to all those that have been the chief of your ene∣mies, (whose blood in severity of justice, might deservedly be spilt,) upon their humble submission to your Majesty, and their promise of future obedience; for I hope you will judge, that the onely way to joyn the hearts of the People of your three Kingdoms, to pray for your happy success in all things; and not only so, but it will undoubtedly encourage them all to venter their Lives against all your opposers, if any shall con∣test: and also that your Majesty would be pleased, to declare out of your gracious goodness, what satisfaction shall be made to the poor Common Souldiery throughout your three King∣domes, who have been forced to take up Arms, although a∣gainst your Majesty, for meer necessity to keep them and their
Families from starving, who indeed are much behind in their pay; which will be utterly lost and undone, unless your Ma∣jesty take compassion upon them; which if you are pleased so to do, I question not but you will find as much humility and sub∣mission from them, as can be expected; and for the future it will ingage them to be as ready to serve your Majesty, as they were to serve your enemies for the time past: And moreover, I conceive it will be a great incouragment to them, to joyn with me in this design. I shall trouble your Majesty with little more at present; But to let you know, that my hopes are, that you would be pleased, to have that confidence in me, as not to cre∣dit any rumours or reports, that may seemingly contradict what I have herein proposed; for as for that, I would have your Ma∣jesty to be confident, that I shall not value neither the ill will, or yet look upon the favour of any, who shall yet appear in op∣position to a thing that I have so really purposed, so long as God and my Conscience perswades me, that in so doing I shall accomplish a good Work both for his glory, and my Countries good: and yet I think fit to carry as fair a correspondency as I can, with those that have taken upon them the Authority in England: To that end, I have thoughts of going to London very suddenly, that I may see their actings, and order things there somewhat for my advantage; I humbly beg your Ma∣jesties speedy Answer touching these Proposals: So with all submissiveness, I crave your Majesties favour, in giving me leave to subscribe my self, Your Majesties for ever faith∣ful and Loyal Subject, GEORGE MONCK. Edenborough Decem. 30. 1659.
SEVERAL LETTERS From the Lord Generall Monck, Commander in Chief of the forces in Scotland, and one of the Commissioners by Act of Parliament for the Government of this Common-wealth, VIZ. To Mr. SPEAKER, To the Lord FLEETWOOD. To the Lord LAMBERT. Printed, Anno 1660.
TO THE SPEAKER. Right honourable, HAving received notice, that there was a force put upon the Parliament on the twelfth of this instant, I have sent this Messenger to your Lordship, to know whether that force doth continue; for I am resolved by the Grace and Assistance of GOD, as a true English-man, to stand to and assert the Liberty and Authority of PARLIAMENT; And the Army here, (prai∣sed be God) is very couragious and unanimous, and I doubt not but to give a good accompt of this action to You. I have, accor∣ding to your Act of the 11th instant, being constituted a Commissi∣oner for the government of the Army, put out such persons as would not act according to your Commission: I do call GOD to witness, That the Asserting of a Common-wealth is the only intent of my heart, and I desire, if possibl e, to avoid the shedding of blood, and therefore entreat you, that there may be a good understanding between Parliament and Army; But if they will not obey Your Commands, I will not desert You, according to my Duty and Pro∣mise. Which is all at present from Your humble and faithful Servant; GEORGE MONCK. Edinburgh Octob. 20. 1659.
To the Lord FLEETVVOOD. Right honourable, I Have sent this Messenger to your Lordship, to let you know that we have received notice, that a part of the Army have put force upon the Parliament, which they so lately called together, and owned with the greatest I estimonies of Obedience and Re∣pentance for their former Apostacy from them; I hope your Lord∣ship will not abet an Action of such a dangerous and destructive Con∣sequence; I know that you love the Liberty and Peace of England so well, That you will use your best Care, That Attempts of this na∣ture be suppressed. I do therefore humbly intreat you, that the Par∣liament may be speedily restored to that Freedom, which they en∣joyed on the 11th of this instant, Otherwise I am resolved, by the Assistance of God, with ths Army under my Command, to declare for them, and to prosecute this just Cause to the last drop of my Blood; I bless the Lord, that the Officers here are very unanimons: and for such, whose hearts fail them, orwhich will not act according to their Commissions from the Parliament, I having Authority as one of the Seven Commissioners appointed by Act of Parliament, do constitute such as are chearful for this Good Old Cause▪ till the Par∣liaments pleasure be further known; And I do plainly assure your Lordship, that I was never better satisfied in the sustict▪ of any En∣gagement than in this: You cannot but remember that God hath al∣reay shewed Himself glorious in it, and determined the quarrel on this side, against Arbitrary power of raising Money without the Peoples consent first had, and the manage ent of the Militia by any other then the Parliament. I desire your Lordship not to be delu∣ded by the specious pretences of ay ambitious person whatoever▪ ad do not brig all the blood that will be shed upon your own head; My Lord consier how you will answer to the dreadful God for the ruine of three Nations, for to serve a lust or to gratifie a passion: For my particular, I am ashamed of these confusions and Changes that we have mae that we are now become a scorn an a reproach to our ve∣ry friends, and designed to ruine by all▪our Neighbours. I take God
to witnesse, that I have no further ends then the establishing of Par∣liamentary Authority, and those good Laws that our Ancestors have purchased with so much blood, the setling the Nations in a free Common-wealth, and the defence of godliness and godly men, though of different Judgment; And I take my self so far obliged, being in the Parliaments Service, to stand, though alone, in this Quarrell, And I doubt not but your Lordship, having the fear of God in your heart will carefully consider of this matter: which is all at present from Your Excellencies humble servant, GEORGE MONCK. Edinb. Octob. 20. 1659. To the Lord LAMBERT. Right honourable, HAving notice, that a part of the Army under the Parliaments Command, have, contrary to their duty, put force upon them; I have therefore sent this Messenger to your Lordship, to intreat you to be an instrument of Peace and good understanding be∣tween Parliament and Army: for, if they shall continue this Force, I am resolved with the assistance of God, and that part of the Army under my Command, to stand by them, and assert their lawful Au∣thority. For Sir, the Nation of England will not endure any Arbi∣trary Power neither will any true English-man in the Army, so that such a design will be ruinous and destructive; Therefore I do ear∣nestly intreat you, that we may not be a scorne to all the world, and a Pre to our enemies, that the Parliament may be speedily restored to their Freedom which they enjoyed on the 11th of this instant. which is all at present from Your Lordships humble servant, GEORGE MONCK.
A LETTER OF THE OFFICERS of the ARMY in SCOTLAND, under the Commander in Chief there, To the OFFICERS of the Army in ENGLAND. Dear Brethren and Friends, THis is, of all the dayes of Trouble God hath brought upon us, the saddest that ever our Eyes saw in these poor Nations; We have had to do often with the Common Enemy, but never before engaged against our Friends, the very thoughts of which is a wound▪ deeper in our Spirits than the sword can make in our Bowels. Above all things therefore it is our earnest Prayer, and shall be our endeavour, to Reconcile the differences in that which to our Consciences seemes the most equitable and just Medium for us o agree in, namely, To intreat you (as we have interposed with the superiour Officers of the Army) to labour a due understanding between your selves and the Parliament, the necessity and equity of which request we cannot but believe you must subscribe to, if you seriously consider a few Proposals. 1. Whether the asserting of a free Parliament, duly qualified, of faithfull men to GOD, and his people in these Nations, to be the Supream Legislative Authority of these Nations, was not the Good Old Cause we fought for, as that onely which vindicated in Spirituals our Consciences from Imposition upon them, contrary to the Liberty of the Subjects of JESUS CHRIST, and our Per∣sons, and Estates, and Posterity in Civils, from the Usurpations of
the late King upon the Liberties and ancient Rights of the Free∣born People of England. 2. Whether it be not the only vindication of your late laying a∣side the Son and Successor of our old General, because you did ve∣rily believe, as you have protested to the world, That the Go∣vernment of any single person might in time, ruine the aforementi∣oned Libertyes, purchased by our Blood, and the vast Treasures of this Commonwealth; Monarchy, however bounded, necessarily re∣quiring Uniformity as to Religion, and Prerogative as to Civil, both which must needs be oppressive and destructive to our Consciences and Rights. 3. Whether, when you set up again this Famous Old Parlia∣ment, you did not believe in your Conscinces that it was a Return to the Good Old Cause, from which you had Apostatized, and the best Expedient to heal the sad breaches of this poor Common∣wealth▪ which the Lusts of men have made; witness your Declara∣tion presented by the Lord Lambert, and the rest (the sixth of May) to the Speaker, as the Representee of the House. 4. Whether, this Parliament hath ever yet endangered or dis∣owned you, or the Nation in these Great Ends (which can only ac∣quit all the bloodshed from Murther) your Liberties as English∣men and your Priviledges as Christians, but rather have given se∣curity for both, in such Votes as they had time to pass, by such promises as they are too honest to forget, and by a Progress large enough, considering the Confusions and Difficultyes they found the Government in, by our setting up the things, of which we are now ashamed. 5. Whether, if your Consciences be better informed, it can sa∣tisfie ours, or any Christian Consciences in the Nation, to act ac∣cording to your particular apprehensions, when we see them cross so much the plain Rule of the Word; which, as it requires obedience to all Authority, so, much more to that which is asserted and setled upon the surest Foundation of the Peoples Rights, and to which you are so solemnly engaged by Protestations, as in the presence of God, who will not hold them guiltless that takes his Name in vaine. 6. Whether, if upon this occasion of our Dissentings, the Common Enemy should arise with a stronger party, and make use
of our Divisions to yoak us in bondage worse than ever: That their little finger should be heavier than the Loyns of those pre∣ceded them, the people of these Nations would not have sad Cause to leave at your doors the blood of those Innocents they must sacrifice to their Cruelty, Conside ing especially that the Redemption of these old Usurpations, must be by the Heads of Gods People, and bring worse upon us, the blood of Saints, whose death is precious in the sight of the Lord. We beg you therefore, to lay to heart the Premies, and believe we are n en of such Con∣sciences, as cannot close with this Action and Acquiesce in it, But would cordially desire, that God may humble us for the evil of our wayes, That in making Peace with Him, we may Unite in love to each other: And we shall also assure you, that though the present Emergency hath made our Commander in chief, to put some of the Officers from their Commands, whose actings have not been such as might promise they can cordially joyn in this business, yet he hath continued to them their Sallaries out of the Contingencies of the Army, till the Parliaments pleasure be further known: And we shall also assure you, That whatever endeavours may be for the set∣ling of this Parliament again in a free capacity to Act for us in these Nations, we shall be as ready as you to bear a Testimony against them suitable to our station, if they should violate the so of∣ten promised and engaged for Liberties of these Nations, whether Spiritual or Civil, There being a witness against them in their late Votes, that the Representative of the people, is entrusted not for the Ruine, but the safety of the Commonwealth. Linlithgow, Octob. 22. 1659. Signed in the Name, and by the appointment of the Officers of the Army in Scotland. WILLIAM CLARKE, SECRETARY. To the Right Honourable the Lord Fleetwood, to be Communicated to the Offi∣cers of the Army in and a∣bout London.
A SECOND LETTER TO THE Lord Fleetvvood. SIR, VVE think fit to acquaint you, that the Lord has so prosper'd our endeavours here, that my Lord General Monck and the Officers have accepted of our Overtures of mediati∣on, and they have appointed Col. Wilkes, Lieutenant Col. Clobery, and Major Knight, to repair to London Commissioners, to treat with the like number of Officers there for a firm peace and unity a∣mongst the Forces of both Nations; for which we doubt not but the prayers of all good men will be poured forth to the Throne of Grace. We have prevailed with my Lord General to dispatch Or∣der this night to his remotest Quarters, that they advance not fur∣ther Southwards during this Treaty, and we desire you will do the like, that none of yours may march more Northward then they are; And truly for as much as we can perceive, none of these Forces had so hastily marched out of Scotland, if yours had not gathered this way. In a few dayes we shall see you, and in the mean time desire you to believe we are, Sir, Your affectionate Servants, Thomas Clarges, Thomas Talbot. Dalkieth this 4th of Novemb. 1659.
GENERAL MONCKS LAST LETTER TO HIS EXCELLENCY THE Lord Fleetwood. My Lord, AFter I had answered the Letter your Lordship did me the favour to send me by Col. Talbot, I recei∣ved another from your Lordship, of the 29th of October, wherein your Lordship is pleased to express much of your Lordships Affection and Friendship to me, for which I shall ever acknowledge my self engaged to you; but truly I must assure your Lordship, no personal Discouragements (although I have had my share of them) have in∣duced me to the Justification I make of the Parliaments Authority, but the tie of duty to which I am in my Conscience obliged, and I shall be heartily sorry, if your Lordship makes any other Interpre∣tation of it, for your Lordship knows my Command has been of∣fered often up to those that had power to place it better: We are all I bless the Lord, very unanimous here, and I am confident when
the Gentlemen we send from hence have given your Lordship a true understanding of our actions, you will not have so severe an opinion of them, as you seem to have in your late Letters: The persons names are, Col. Wilkes, Lieut. Col. Clobery, and Major Knight, all well known to your Lordship, to whom I beseech your Lordship to give credit, in what they shall propose from the Army here, and I beseech you to believe, I am still with a sincere heart, My Lord, Your Lordships very humble servant, GEORGE MONCK. A Letter sent by General MONCK to Vice Admiral GOODSON, to be communicated to the rest of the Officers of the Fleet, in answer to a Letter with some Proposals lately sent to him from Them. Dear Country-men and Commanders, I Am glad thot you have not forgotten your old friend, and that by this occasion, I have such advantage to hear of your hearty affections to me, and kind remembrance of me, and that you have such a deep sence of the divisions amongst us, and the miserable consequence thereof; but I am very much sadded that you have en∣tertained such mistakes and misapprehensions of our proceedings. These enclosed Papers will fully satisfie you, that we have just grounds of dissatisfaction, and that we cannot comply with such vi∣olent and unwarrantable undertakings, both against our reason as men, and against our Consciences as Christians, that you and we should take our Commissions and pay from the Parliament, and yet to violate their Authority, after such solemn assurances of obe∣dience and faithfulness, contrary to the expressed word of God, and our own late Addresses. I hope I am so well known to some of you, that I am none of those that seek great things to my self, or delight in the shedding the blood of English men, much lesse of Christian
Brethren, but to preserve the name of God from Blasphemy and Reproach, which our actings (I wish I could not call them treache∣ousness and perfidiousness have occasioned; whereby Jesus Christ and his truth have been evil spoken of, which makes our very lives bitter to us, and to assert the integrity and honour of this Army, which is very dear to me, I have been forced with the Parliaments Army under my command, (though with much grief of heart) to beat our Testimony against the late violence of the Army; and the reasons thereof you will find in our printed papers, and our endea∣vours to perswade them in England to remove that force which they have put upon the Parliament. As to your Proposals, I beseech you seriously to consider and lay to heart these following Answers. 1. To the first, you are pleased to intimate the joy of the Cava∣liers that they see us stand to our Declaration, but I believe, that this violent interruption of the Parliament was the greatest courte∣sie to gratefie that Family and Interest that could be imagined in the World, (and I could wish it were not designed). I should be very sad to strengthen the hands of the Wicked, but let me assure you, this ariseth from the slanders and calumnies which men cast upon us in England, as if we that assert the Authority of those that brought the late King to the Block, are for introducing that Family, which I take God to witness, we in our very thoughts abhor, and shall spend our blood in opposition to any Single person whatsoe ver. 2. You are pleased to compare our present differences to that of the Israelites, with the two Tribes of Reuben, Gad, and halfe the Tribe of Manasses) and I earnestly pray that there may be the same issue, for if they will restore these persons to their lawfull Au∣thority, which have been established by many successes, and for the difference of which they so lately hazarded to blood we shall quiet∣ly sit down and wait upon the Providences of God in our places and Stations, and to this end we have sent Commissioners into England men faithfull and approved. What you are pleased to instance con∣cerning my satisfaction in the year 1653. When this Parliament was interrupted formerly, I shall answer you to that, it was never in my Conscience to go out of Gods way under the pretence of do∣ing Gods work, and you know the variety of times doth much vary the nature of affaires, and what might then patiently be submitted unto, we being engaged with a forraign Enemy in a bloody War,
cannot be drawn into a president at this time; after our Repen∣tance and assurance of Loyalty and Constancy; you may be pleased to remember that the consequence of the former Interruptions was the Introduction of a single person, and a manifest breach of all our pro∣mises and engagements, so that if God blessed me with success, then I do much more through mercy expect it now, when I put all to hazzard for the Glory of God and the good of his people. 3. I do acknowledge that the Army hath been in the hand of God and instruments of good to these Nations, yet if they shall apostate from the Cause of God and his people in exposing them to Arbitrary Power, and the wills of men, in taking upon them to Abollish Lawes, raise money without consent of the people, de∣stroy Ministery and property, and force Parliaments, I cannot but witness against such proceedings as unwarrantable not suited to any rule either from God or man. 4. I have taken care by Garrisons in this Country, and assurance from the whole body of the Nation, that they will not own the interest of Charles Stewart., and that they will preserve the peace of the Commonwealth in obedience to the parliament; So that if that part of the Army in England will set up a distinct interest in the Nation, in deserting that Cause that hath been so precious to us, and cost so much blood and treasure for to establish their own Inte∣rest and greatness. I do declare in the presence of the Great God I cannot own you, nor Ioyn with them; Now having opened my heart to you and as you know my plainness and sincerity, that I am none of those that dare assert any thing against my Conscience, from that experience ye have had of me, I heartily begg your belief and credit, that I shall keep in the way of duty, and endeavour to do the Lords work in my Generation, and shall not own any cor∣rupt interest whatsoever, and do desire of God his blessing accor∣ding to my Integrity in this undertaking, having this good Testi∣mony in my own Spirit, that I have nothing but publick and Righ∣teous ends upon my heart, and by all these respects and kindnesses that I have received from you, I desire you will joyn with us in your desires that this Parliament may be restored to the excution of their duties and trust, with freedome and honour; I have no more but my hearty Love and service to you all, desiring God to bless you all, and make you happy instruments for the good
these Nations in your severall places which shall be alwayes the Prayer of dear Friends. Your humble Servant and fellow Souldier, G. M. Edenburgh, Novemb. 29. 1659. To the Right Honourable Vice Admiral Goodson, to be Com∣municated to the rest of the Officers of the Fleet, in Answer to the Letter that was sent to me from them. A LETTER Of General George Moncks, Dated at Leicester 23 Ianuary, and directed unto Mr. Rolle to be communicated unto the rest of the Gentry of Devon: occasio∣ned by a late Letter from the Gentry of Devon dated at Exce∣ter 14 Ianuary, and sent by Mr. Bampfield to the Speaker; to be communicated unto the Parliament. Read in Parliament Jan. 26. Most honoured and dear Friends, MEeting with a Paper dated at Exon the 13 instant, directed to William Lenthal Esq Speaker of the Parliament, and subscribed
by divers of my friends and relations, purporting the recalling the Members secluded 1648. as the best expedient for establishing these Nations upon a foundation of lasting peace. I have taken the bold∣ness from my relation to some of you as allyed, and my affectionate respects to all of you as dear Friends and Countrey-men, to repre∣sent to your consideration my present apprehensions of the state of Affairs here, in order to all our better satisfactions; wherein I hum∣bly crave your leave of freedom without prejudice. Before these unhappy Wars the Government of these Nations was Monarchical in Church and State: these wars have given birth and growth to several Interests both in Church and State hereto∣fore not known; though now upon many accounts very considera∣ble, as the Presbyterian, Independent, Anabaptist and Sectaries of all sorts as to Ecclesiasticks; and the Purchasers of the Kings, Queens, Princes, Bishops, Deans and Chapters, and all other forfeited Estates; and all those engaged in these Wars against the King as to civils. These Interests again are so interwoven by Purchases and intermar∣riages, and thereby forfeited; as I think upon rational grounds it may be taken for granted; That no Government can be either good, peaceful or lasting to these Nations, that doth not rationally include and comprehend the security and preservrtion of all the foresaid In∣terests both Civil and Spiritual; I mean so far as by the Word of God they are warranted to be protected and preserved. If this be so, Then that Government under which we formerly were both in State and Church, viz. Monarchy cannot possibly be admitted for the fu∣ture in these Nations, because its support is taken away, and because its exclusive of all the former Interests both Civil and Spiritual, all of them being incompatible with Monarchical Vniformity in Church and State thus expired. That Government then that is most able to comprehend and protect all Interests as aforesaid must needs be Re∣publique. Wherefore to me it's no small doubt, if upon the Premises to admit of the Members secluded 1648. were not to obstruct our peace and continue our War, rather than establish the one, and end the other; in that very many of those Members assert the Monar∣chical Interest, together with the abolition of all Laws made since
their seclusion; Which I fear upon accompt of self-preservation both of Life and Estate as well as Spiritual Liberty, will immediatly involve all these Nations in most horrid and bloody War afresh; the very apprehensions whereof, I confess, I do infinitely dread, and sub∣mit the dangerous consequence thereof to your prudent considera∣tions, and the rather, seeing the Army also will never endure it. Having thus briefly laid before you the present condition of Af∣fairs, let me now intreat you to consider whither it were not better to desist from that Paper, and submit to the proceedings of this Parliament, who have resolved to fill up their House, determin their sitting, and prepare a way for future successions of Parliament; by which means being full, and thereby comprehending the whole Inte∣rest of these Nations, they may through God's Mercy, and all our patiences, establish such a Government in the way of a Common-wealth, as may be comprehensive of all interests both Spirituall and Civil, to the glory of God, and the weale and peace of the whole. But if by your impatiencies they be obstructed, our peace will be so much the longer a stranger to us; and we thereby a prey to our selves, and all forreign Enemies. Wherefore humbly pressing these upon your serious considerations with all the friendly and affectio∣nate respects and service to you all, I remain Dearest Friends,  Your very humble and affectionate Servant, GEORGE MONCK. Leicester, 21. Jan. 1659. For the honoured Robert Rolles Esq to be communicated to the Gentlemen of Devonshire, who signed the late Letter to the Spea∣ker of the Parliament of the Common-wealth of England.
A LETTER FROM THE Officers at Whitehal To the OFFICERS under General Monck In SCOTLAND. Dear Brethen and Fellow Souldiers, WE most heartily wish Grace and Truth to be multipli∣ed unto you, through the knowledge of God, and of Jesus our Lord; And also we desire the God and Father of all Grace, to add to your Faith, Ver∣tue; & to Vertue, Knowledg; and to Knowledge, Temperance; and to Temperance, Godliness; and to Godliness, Brotherly Kindness; and to Brotherly Kindness, Charity. Dear Brethren, We cannot but be deeply affected and afflict∣ed in our own spirits, to consider of your dissatisfaction with us upon mistaken grounds. You have known us this many years to be your faithful Brethren, that durst do nothing that is sinful; And we may affirm with plainness, honesty and simplicity of heart, we have done nothing in the late Revolution, but that which the Providence of the most wise God prepared to our
hands, and led us unto, without so much as one half hours time to design or resolve to take that course we were necessitated un∣to; Since which most of such persons that were not clear in the present and sudden Action, have made their acknowledment of their full satisfaction, and we are mutually reconciled, and they are received and tendered by us as affectionate Brethren: And for a more full Narrative of the providential Grounds, and gra∣dual Steps that led us to that Work, yet (with aking hearts) and as an Answer to your Queries, signed in your name by Wil∣liam Clerk, Secretary, bearing date the 22. instant, We refer you to a Book, Intituled, The Armies Plea, and also, The Ar∣mies Declaration, relation thereunto being had, we hope will give you satisfaction. Loving Brethren, What have we done that you are offend∣ed? we are not conscious that any thing is acted by us upon the publick Theater, but that which we judge is acceptable to God▪ And what we have done hath proceeded from uprightness of heart, and for the glory of God, the good of his Intrest, Cause, and People in these Nations: Nothing less than these worthy ends could have caused us to adventure our All, that is dear to us for your and their sakes; And after such a hazard, our Brethren to look shy upon us, yea such, with whom we have lived, and conversed together, prayed, fought, and jeoparded our lives to∣gether, and witnesses together of the glory of the most high God. in the high places of the field; Yea, we that are of one Society, of one Family and Houshold, that none hitherto (through the grace of God could dis-unite us) now to be at a distance with us, is the greatest wound to us, which is unexpressable: If it had been from our Enemies, we could have born it; Oh but, they are the wounds of the house of our Friends. And all this arising without dealing brotherly with us, and without so much as sending to know the providential Grounds that led us to these Undertakings; And likewise your and our unhappiness hath been possibly by mis-informations received by those who have corresponded with the principal occasioners of this Breach; How∣ever we are censured by you, we shall, we hope, carry Christi∣anly and Brotherly towards you, and exercise our selves in the Doctrine of our Saviour, If any be overtaken in a fault, restore
such a one in the spirit of meekness, knowing also, we are subject to like temptations: And we ought to pitty and pray for one a∣nother, and forgive one another, even as God for Christs sake hath forgiven us; We hope the fear of God will guide you, so that you may do nothing to grieve Him and his little Flock, and rejoyce the common Enemy abroad and at home, nor give them advantages to make a prey of these poor Nations: What can you propound to your selves? If you are for good things, so are we; if for a Free-State and Common-wealth, so are we; if against a Single Person, so are we; if for Reformation, so are we; if for Godliness, and the Nations to be exalted in Righteousness, so are we; Why do we differ in the form and way to it? Oh, dear friends if you should precipitately engage ito a War, and should Conquer your Brethren, would not   be a Conquest over your selves, and all the  People of the Land? And if they are gone, certainly (if you retain your old Principles) you would not desire to live long . Brethren, We commend unto you that place of , Josh. 1. 14, 15. We shall with our bended knees im∣plore the God of Heaven, and King of Saints, to guide you, and perswade you▪ as holy Noah said in another case, Gen. 9. 27. God shall perswade Japhet to dwell in the tents of Shim. Finally, Brethren farewel, Be of good comfort, Let us be of one mind, live in peace, and the God of love and peace shall be with you and us: We remain, Your most affectionate Brethren, and Fellow-Souldiers. Dear Friends, We hope to hear in your Answer to this, that all our dear Friends now in Bonds, are at Liberty, and that the Lord hath satisfied your hearts to acquiesce in his present Dispen∣sations, so as we may not expose each other to further Inconve∣niency .
A RETURN OF THE General & Officers IN SCOTLAND, To the aforesaid LETTER of the OF∣FICERS at Whitehall. Dear Brethren, and Fellow Souldiers in the Lord, IN the Name of our Lord Jesus Christ, We re∣turn you our most hearty wishes and prayers, That Grace, and Truth, and Peace also might be multiplied unto you: And that to your Faith, and your Vertue, and your Knowledge, and your Temperance, and your Godliness, and your brotherly Kindness, and your Charity, might be added, Pa∣tience, and Meekness, and Humility, and Self-denial. Great are the thoughts of our hearts, for the divisions in Reuben, and we are (as you express it) deeply affected and afflicted in our own spirits, when we consider what cause we have to be dissatisfied with you, our dear Brethren; you, with whom we have lived and conversed together; with whom we have prayed and fought and jeoparded our lives together; with whom we have taken sweet Counsel, and walked together in the House of God as Friends: But we cannot conceal from you that our Affection
and Affliction of spirit is much increased by the Letter you sent us by Captain Deane, and by the Books you referred us to in that Letter. We had before some small (indeed our onely) hopes that there might be some mistake between us; but alas! We can∣not but now think (since we find you have no more to say for your selves) that Our fears were but too true & the Causes of our Dissatisfaction at your present actings but too just: We shall deal with you with that plainness and freedom, and sincerity that becometh Brethren, for so we think it becometh us, To fulfil all Righteousness: And so we think it expedient both for you and us, that We may the sooner come to a right understand∣ing one of another. We could not be satisfied that there was any such need of more General Officers (the first occasion of this unhappy diffe∣rence) as that the Parliament should be pressed to it so unseaso∣nably, and so just a jealousie created in them that there was a Design to set up a Single Person (of which they had but so late, and so sad experience) and we could not but think it sufficient for the security of the good Interest, that the Army was united under one head, the Parliament. We were less satisfied, that after you declared your Satisfa∣ction and Acquiescence in the Votes of the House, you should endeavour by a new way to wrest the Power out of their own hands, and to prosecute the same Designe; This making the Army a Corporation in a manner Independent from the Civil Power, and creating to it an Interest, distinct from that of the Peoples, by whom they hitherto have, and still must live, and for whom they are by their Engagements and Duties bound to dye: and that after you knew the Parliament had in effect dis∣approved your Petition, you should still endeavour to get more hands to it, which neither the Parliament, not we our selves could look upon any otherwise, then as a design to force the Par∣liament to grant what they had already in effect disapproved, if not to do that which you say was done, at less then half an hours warning. But then that after the sad experience of so many confusions & tossings, which these poor Nations had already felt by such act∣ings as these, after the unhappy (& since acknowledged unlawful) former interruption of that (by your selves called) famous long
Parliament, after the Confusions and Distractions of that little one of your own, and not of the Peoples choosing; after the occasion by them given to some of setting up, and the necessity imposed on us of accepting a Single Person, contrary to our for∣mer Engagements, and to our Interests; after our late renewed Engagement, and our solemn and serious expressions of Repen∣tance, That you should so soon return to your former sin, and for the apparent interest of nine or ten Persons (who how pretious soever, yet cannot be worth the blood that may be shed in this quarrel) to put a new force upon the Parliament, and to destroy all Lawful Authority in the three Nations, and to put them out of hopes of ever having any for the future, but what shall be at your disposals; and to do these things in the Name of the whole Army, thereby usurping a Power over your Brethren, to which you have no right, and involving us in the same guilt with yours in the same actings, against which we are bound to protest before God and man: This is that which lieth the sorest upon our Spirits; This is that which wounds us deepest. This is that which must of necessity make the three Nations slaves to the Army the Armies of Scotland and Ireland, slaves to that of England, and that of England to nine or ten Persons, and perhaps in short time those nine or ten, to one single One. The best effect it can have must be that which you so much complain of in the Armies Plea, page 25. That all the pious and good People of this Nation shall not enjoy a peaceable and quiet life in all Godliness and Hodesty, but onely some part of them. We cannot but in the Name of the Lord tell you, that these Actings make us stink in the nostrils of the good People, and cause the Name of God to be evil spoken of, and his Enemies to re∣joice. And yet you say, Behold, what we have done? and tell us in many, but very general terms, what good things you are for: We likewise are for good things as well as you; We are for a Free-State and Commonwealth as well as you; We are against a single Person as well as you; We are for Reformation as well as yon: We are as well as you for Godliness and the Nations to be exalted in Righteousness; if so be that you be indeed for these things which you pretend▪ and that we differ not in the end as well as in the way to it!
But how can you be for good things, as long as you do that which is Evil? How can you be for a Free State and Common∣wealth, if for the Interest of nine or ten Persons you dissolve Par∣liaments? To what purpose is it to be against a single Person, if you be for nine or ten; or for Reformation, if you return so soon to former sins? Or, how can Godliness or Righteousness be exalted, by violent and unwarrantable means? Brethren, Our daily prayer to God is, That we may not be necessitated to War with you; but if we be, we must tell you that we do not precipitate our selves, or run rashly or inconside∣rately into it; We have had time, sadly and seriously to consider the whole Matter, and we must deal plainly with you, and tell you, that what you pretend, you had not half an hours time to deliberate about, We have expected from you some weeks; We could not but take notice that the occasion both of Calling and interrupting this Parliament, was, the making of General Officers. How little desire we have of making a conquest over you, He knows who knows how little joy we should take in it; If there were not something in the Quarrel that is dearer to us than our lives, we should never undertake it. And now Brethren, as yet dear and precious in our eyes, we beseech you for the mercies of Jesus Christ to lay these things to heart, and as we have done with, Josh. 1. 14. 15. so to reflect se∣riously upon Josh. 7. Verse 19. and once more to take the shame to your selves, and to repent with a repentance not to be repented of. Consider whose blood is to be shedd on both sides, what cause it is that lies at stake, who they are that are like to reap the benefit of our Contentions: Suffer not Self or Interest, nor desire of the things of this world, to intangle you again in the same snare, out of which you have so lately escaped▪ Lay not up your treasure in this world▪ But seek first the Kingdom of Heaven; Do not evil, because you think good may come of it. Finally Brethren, stand fast in that Liberty wherein Christ hath made you free, and be not entangled again with the Yoke of Bondage. The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with you, Amen. EDINBURGH, Your most affectionate and afflicted Bre∣thren, and Fellow-Souldiers.
POST-SCRIPT. Dear Brethren, VVE intreat you not put so hard a Name upon the necessary and short restraint of our Brethren, as Bonds; We still own them and use them as Bre∣thren; their Pay is still continued to them, and the Restraint put upon them, for their and your, and our Security, and the Security of all Gods People, we hope will be very short, shorter than either you or we can expect: And take it not ill, we acted any thing without first sending to you, We acted nothing but what was necessary to our present safety, and we im∣mediately sent our Letters to you, which if they came not to your hand, it is not our faults: We have lately sent Commissioners, Men faithful and approved, whom we hope you will treat as Brethren. For the Right Honourable the Lord Fleetwood, and the rest of the Officers of that part of the Army at London.
THE LETTER Of the Lord Mayor, Aldermen, and Common Coun∣cil of the CITY of LONDON; To his Ex∣cellency, The Lord General MONCK. Right Honourable, VVE dare not enter upon the answer to the merits of your Excellencies Letter of the 12th of November, which came to our hands the 23d of the same (which was the first and onely that came to us) without Prefacing our hearty, and thankful admiring and acknowledging the transcendent Mercy of God, in putting into your Heart those Pious and No∣ble Resolutions, to appear at such an Exigent to be the glorious Instrument in his hand, both to Assert and Vindicate the grea∣test Interest, both Civil and Religious of these Nations. And next, That your singular Humility of Spirit, and Affection to this City, in Communicating to us so early, those your just Re∣solves, and inviting us to share in the Honour of Assisting, to the obtaining of those great and glorious Ends, in which the hap∣piness of these Nations in general, and of the City, as a Cor∣poration, consists. In all which our Spirits were both enlightned & warmed by a spark from your zeal, and actuated by God to a present activity in our sphere and capacity, in compliance with your Excellencies advice, as we trust the whole world that hath seen our Actings since the receipt of your Letter, can bear us witness, and that we hope may be our sufficient Plea for Pardon for our not retur∣ning a more timely answer to your Excellencies said Letter. But we desire your Excellency to believe, that was principally retar∣ded by suspition cast on the Authentiqueness of it, by those who had the confidence on that score to imprison the Deliverers, and
by the Interposition of the Forces here, and led out against your Excellency, who lay in the passage to You. But now (may it please Your Excellency) seeing it hath plea∣sed God in some measure to remove those Obstructions, We presume by this to Assert in VVriting, what VVe hope all Our Actings, since the Receipt of Your Excellencies Advice, have evidenced. That VVe have cordially concurred with your Excellency, in disowing the Authour of that Force who interrupted the Par∣liament, and ravish'd the Birth-right of these Nations, by da∣ring to null and make void Acts of Parliament: and VVe think, have contributed somewhat by Gods blessing on Our Counsels, and Actings, to the preventing of the sad Conse∣quences of that exorbitant presumption. How fully and entire∣ly VVe comply with Your Excellency, in asserting the Autho∣rity and Freedom of Parliaments, and the just Rights and Liber∣ties of the People, a National Ministry, for the enlightning of the Ignorant, and suppressing of Atheism, VVe humbly Refer Your Excellency to Our enclosed Declaration, and do seriously assure Your Excellency, That VVe shall (by Gods assistance) persist faithfully and vigorously in this Good Cause: And pray∣ing God to preserve your Excellency, and those Noble Com∣manders with You, in these Your Just, Honourable, and Chri∣stian Undertakings, shall Remain, Your Excellencies Most Affectionate and Faithful Friends and Servants, The Mayor, Aldermen, and Commons of the City of London in Common-Council Assembled. In Their Names, and by Their Order, SADLER. Guildhall, London, Decemb, 29. 1659. This Letter is Conveighed by the Sword-bearer of London, by the several Directions of the Lord Mayor, Aldermen, and Court of Com∣mon-Council.
THE LETTER Of His EXCELLENCY, the Lord Gen. Monck, In ANSWER to the former LETTER. My Lord, I Received a Letter from your Lordship, and the rest of the Common-Council, of the 29th of Decem∣ber, and do humbly thank you for that great esteem which you are pleased to put upon our poor Endea∣ours of the Parliaments Army under my Command, far tran∣cending our Merits and Services. As to those Ends which we then declared for, I bless the Lord I acted Conscience, and I hope we were found in the way of duty, and are resolved by the grace of God to adhere to them, having found such won∣derful blessings following us in these our just and honest Under∣takings. As your prudent Counsels and couragious Actings, were the great means under God of restoring this Parliament to its just and lawful Authority, so of the safety and welfare of the Nations, for which I do for my Self and the rest of the Officers here, re∣turn my very hearty thanks, and we shall have ever cause to bless the Lord for this great mercy, in putting into your hearts such righteous and honourable Resolutions, to appear at such a time, when our Liberties and Properties, and all that is dear unto us, even the Ordinances of our blessed Saviour, were in such hazard.
Indeed, it was much in our hopes, that such a glorious City, that had redeemed themselves from slavery at the price of so much blood and treasure, and had been the great Instruments in the hand of God, for the carrying on the Work of Reformati∣on, and bringing three Nations out of the Captivity of Tyran∣ny and Arbitrary Government, could ever consent to such ille∣gal and unjust proceedings. As we do acknowledge your great activity in promoting those great Ends which we lately represen∣ted to you, so we do heartily thank you for the honour and en∣couragement, which you have been pleased in this your Letter to give to the Parliaments Army here; for our selves, we ha∣ving nothing to seek (we bless the Lord) in all this Affair, but to endeavour the safety and Settlement of these Nations in gene∣ral, and of the famous City in particular. We received your enclosed Declaration, and do chearfully joyn with you therein. And I do promise you for the Army under my Command, that they are resolved (by the assistance of God) to stand by and maintain this present Parliament, as it sate on October 11. from whom we received our Commissions; and do hope, that you that have been so eminently Instrumental in their restoring, will heartily concur with us therein; and shall to the utmost of our power defend the freedom of succes∣sive Parliaments, and the Liberties Spiritual and Civil of the People in these Nations, and shall encourage in our Stations, the Godly and Learned Ministers, and shall continue faithful in this Good Cause, that the Nations may be stablished in a Free Common-wealth, and the Army kept in due obedience to the Civil Authority. And as we have experienced the great affection of your City in such a day of Darkness and great Tryal, so we shall ever stu∣dy to the utmost, to express our services for you, and shall not think our lives too precious to hazard for your welfare. I think to wait upon you shortly, and shall reserve those further acknow∣ledgments to that opportunity, and remain, Your Lordships very humble Servant, George Monck. New-Castle Jan. 6. 1659.
A LETTER SENT FROM General Monck; SUPERSCRIBED, To the Right Honourable William Lenthall, Esquire, Speaker to the Right Honourable the Parliament of ENGLAND. To be communicated to the rest of the Members of Parliament at London. Right Honourable, I Received yours of the 22d. instant, and desire to return to our good God hearty thanks, that he hath been pleased to own and appear for his People in such glorious instances of Mercy and Deliverance. I bless the Lord, I never doubted of his presence and success in this undertaking, being so righteous a Cause; and had long since put it to Gods deter∣mination, but upon advertisements from Friends in England, That if I could continue here without engaging till the first of Ja∣nuary, the work would be done without blood. I cannot but admire upon what Intelligence you should be perswaded of a second Treaty: Indeed I was inforced to make use of such an Overture, to remove the Commissioners from London, whom I cannot but blame for receding from their Instructions; but I
hope they will give you a satisfactory account of their proceed∣ings. Yet I acknowledge that I could not but resent their car∣riage, having secured one of them for betraying the private in∣structions; of which I doubt not but you have been fully infor∣med. My last Answer to the Lord Lambert, who sent several Mes∣sengers to invite me to a second Treaty, was, That I could not treat without authority from the Commissioners for the Govern∣ment of the Army, and to that end desired a Pass for the same Messengers to go to Portsmouth to receive their Commands and Instructions; who was returned back with this Answer from Lambert and the Council of Officers, That they could not con∣sent thereunto: and since that, I have not heard from them. I have your Army (I bless God) upon the River Tweed, within three hours ready to be drawn together, and they are very chearful and unanimous, willing to endure any hardship for your Service. The last night Capt. Campbelt came express from Ireland, giving a full account of their affection to the Parliament, and of the late Transactions there; That they had seized Dublin Castle, and secured Jones and others, with a Declaration to stand by and own your Authority: for which (on this instant) we kept a day of Thansgiving. They writ also to the Irish Bri∣gade in England, which I dispatched to them. Six Hardress Waller gives me an Account, that all the Forces and Garrisons in Ireland had Declared for you. This is such a mercy, that I hope the Lord will make us sen∣sible of, and careful to improve. They required my opinion as to managing of the Affairs of the Army, which in such an urgent necessity I presumed to give. I have disposed of most of the vacant Commands in Scotland to very honest men, who are ready to dye for your Service, or to disband at your Com∣mand. And before your Letter came to hand, I had disposed of Col. Saunders and Major Bartons Commands the Lord Lam∣berts Forces pressing upon me. I could not leave my vacant Places unsupplied; but I know that (this Work prospering) you will have opportunity enough to gratifie them: Capt. Izods place is reserved for him according to your pleasure. I humbly
thank the Members of the Council for that Great Honour that they were pleased to conferr upon me, and hope you never shall find but such an absolute obedience from me to your Commands, that I shall be more ready to return that Commission then to re∣ceive it. I believe that you never doubted of my persevering in those good Principles I declared for, and that I should com∣fortably (if the Lord had pleased to frown upon us) have suffered in this most Righteous undertaking. I have made rea∣dy to March, but am unwilling to hazzard your Justice and Authority upon a Fight, when it may be done with more secu∣rity. I shall attend your further Command, and desire the Lord to bless your Forces and Counsels, and to restore you in your just Authority; which is both the Prayer and endea∣vour of Sir, Your most humble and faithful Servant GEORGE MONCK. Caldstream, 29. Decem∣ber, 1659.
POST-SCRIPT. I thought fit to acquaint you, That my Lord Warre∣ston hath endeavoured to stir up the People of this Nation as much as he could against your Interest. Col. Lyscot having been very faithful and active for the Parliament in this Undertaking, I entreat your Lord∣ships to be mindful of him for a Regiment of Horse. I have given him the Command of a Foot-Regiment, but he was alwayes of Horse, and is a very honest and stout Gentleman, and fit to Command a Regiment of Horse. I have sent your Lordships the Copies of my last Letters, and of the Officers here, to my Lord Lambert, and the Officers of Nen castle; and also to the Commissioners of Parliament at Portsmouth, that you may be acquainted with our Transactions. Major Knight has Col. Saunders Regiment, and Capt. Prime is Major. I entreat you to Communicate this to the rest of the worthy Members of Parliament with you. GEORGE MONCK.
A LETTER Sent by His EXCELLENCY The LORD General Monck, To the CONGREGATED CHURCHES In and about LONDON. Honoured and dear Friends, I Received Yours; and am very sensible of your Kindness; which you have expressed to the Army in Scotland, in sending down such Honourable and Reverend Persons, so
long and tedious a Journey, whom we have re∣ceived with thankfulness and great joy, as your Messengers of the Churches, and Ministers of Christ; and have taken notice of this Office of L ve, and of your care of these three Nations. I do promise for my Trust, and the rest of the Officers here, That your Intrest, Liberty, and Encouragement, shall be very dear to us; and we shall cake this as a renewed Obligation; to Assert to the uttermost, what we have already Declared for the Churches of Jesus Christ. I doubt not, but you have received Satisfaction of our Inclination to a peacebe Accommoda∣tion, and do hope that some Difficulties being united, we shall obtain a fair Composure. I do assure you, that the great things which have been upon my heart to secure and provide for, are our Liberties and Freedoms, as we re the Subjects and Servants of Jesus Christ, which are Conveyed to us in the Covenant of Grace, assured in the Promises, purchased for us by the Blood of our Saviour, and given as his great Legacy to his Churches and People; in com∣parison of what, we esteem all other things as Dung and Dross, but as they have relation to, and dependance upon this most noble end: The other are our Laws and Rights as Men, which must have their esteem in the second place, and for which many Members of the Churches hath been eminent Instruments, to labour in sweat and Blood for these Eighteen Years last past,
and our Ancestors many hundred Years before; the substance of which may be reduced to Par∣liamentary Government; and the People consent∣ing to the Laws by which they are to be Go∣verned, that this priviledge of your Nations, may be so bounded, That the Churches may have both Security and Encouragement, is my great desire, and of those with me. So that I hope you will own these just things, and give us that Assistance, which becometh the Churches of Christ, in pursuance of this Work; And we do assure you, that we shall comply as far as possible, with respect had to your Secu∣rity, and Safety of these Nations, and the pre∣servation of our Ancient Birth-Rights, and Li∣berties; and we shall pray that we may be kept from going out of Gods way, under pretence of doing Gods Work. I do in the Name of the whole Army, and for my self, give you all our affectionate thanks for this your Work of Love, and though we are not able to make such Returns, as are in our hearts and desires to do; yet we shall en∣deavour by all means and wayes, to express our Care and Love to the Churches; and shall leave the Reward to him, who is the God of Peace and Truth, in special assured a Blessing to the Peace-makers: And conclude with the words of David, 1 Sam. 25. 32. Blessed be the Lord God of Israel, and blessed be your Advice, and blessed be you all. Now the Lord be a Wall of Fire ronnd
about you, and let his presence be in his Chur∣ches, and they filled with his Glory. I have no more, but to intreat your Prayers for an happy Issue to these unhappy Differences; Which is the Prayer of him, who is, Reverend Sirs, and dear Friends, Your very Affectionate Friend and Servant, GEORGE MONCK. Edinburgh, Nov. 23. 1659. For my Reverend Friends, Dr. Owen, Mr. Hook, Mr. Greenhil; to be Communicated to the Chur∣ches in and about London.
THE Lord Generall Monck HIS SPEECH Delivered by him in the PARLIAMENT On Munday, Feb. 6. 1659. Mr. Speaker; AMongst the many mercies of God to these poor Nations, your peaceable Restauration is not the least: it is his work alone,
and to him belongs the glory of it: and I esteem it as a great ef∣fect of his goodness to me, that he was pleased to make me amongst many worthier in your service, some way instrumental in it. I did nothing but my duty, and do not deserve to receive so great honour and respect as you are pleased to give me at this time, and place; which I shall ever acknowledge as an high mark of your favour to me. Sir, I shall not now trouble you with large Narratives, onely give me leave to acquaint you, that as I marcht from Scotland hi∣ther, I observed the people in most Counties in great and earnest Expectations of Settlement; and they made severall Applications to me, with numerous subscriptions: the chiefest Heads of their desires, were, for a free and full Parliament, and that you would de∣termine your sitting; A Gospel Ministry, Incouragement of Learn∣ing and Universities, And for admittance of the Members secluded before 1648. without any previous Oath or Engage∣ment. To which I commonly answered, That you are now in a free Parliament; and if there be any force remaining upon you, I would endeavour to remove it; and that you had voted to fill up your House, and then you would be a full Parliament also; and that you had already determined your sitting: and for the Mi∣nistry, their Maintenance, the Laws and Universities, you had large∣ly declared in your last Declaration; and I was confident you would adhere to it: but as for those Gentlemen secluded in the year 1648. I told them you had given Judgment in it; and all people ought to acquiesce in that Judgment: but to admit any Members to sit in Parliament without a previous Oath or Engagement to secure the Government in being, it was never yet done in England. And although I said it not then, I must say with pardon to you, That the less Oaths and Engagements are imposed, (with respect had to the security of the Common Cause) your Set∣tlement will be the sooner attained to.
I am the more particular in these matters, to let you see how gratefull your present Consultations about these things, will be to the people. I know all the sober Gentry will heartily close with you, if they may be tenderly and gently used; and I am sure you will so use them, as knowing it to be our common Concern, to expatiate, and not narrow our interest; and to be carefull neither the Cava∣lier nor Phanatique party have yet a share in your Civil or Military Power; of the last of whose impatience to Government, you have had so severe experience. I should say something of Ireland and Scoland: Indeed Ire∣land is in an ill condition, and made worse by your sudden In∣terruption, which pretended the passing an Act for the settlement of the Estates of Adventures and Souldiers there, which I heard you intended to have done in a few days; and I presume it will be quickly done, being so necessary at this time; when the wants of the Common-wealth call for supplyes, and people will unwillingly pay Taxes for those Estates of which they have no legal assurance. I need not tell you how much your favour was abused in the Nomination of your Officers of your Army there; their Malice hath been sufficiently manifested: I dare affirm that those now that have declared for you, will continue faithfull, and thereby evince that as well there, as here, it is the sober interest that must establish your Dominion. As for Scotland, I must say the people of that Nation deserve much to be cherished; and I believe your late Declaration will much glad their spirits; for nothing was more dreadfull to them, then a fear to be over-run with Phanatique Notions. I humbly recommend them to your Affection and Esteem, and desire the intended Act of Union may be prosecuted, and
their Takes made proportionable to those in England, for which I am engaged by promise to be an humble Suitor to you. And truly, Sir, I must ask leave to entreat you to make a speedy provision for their Civil Government, of which they have been destitute near a year, to the ruine of many Fami∣lies: and except Commissioners for management of the Go∣vernment, and Judges to sit in Courts of Judicature, be spe∣dily appointed, that Coutry will be very miserable. I directed Mr. Gumble lately to present to you some Names, both of Commissioners and Judges: but by reason of your great Affairs, he was not required to deliver them in writing to you; but I now humbly present them to your Consideration.
A LETTER OF HIS EXCELLENCY THE Lord Gen. Monck, TO The Speaker of the Parliament from Guild-Hall, London. Right Honourable, IN obedience to the Commands received from the Council last night, I marched with your Forces into the City this morning, and have secured all the persons except two, ordered to be secured, which two were not to be found: The Posts and Chains I have given order to be taken away, but have hitherto forborn the taking down
of the Gates and Portcullises, because it will in all likelihood exaspe∣rate the City; and I have good ground of hopes from them that they will levie the Assess; They desiring onely first to meet in Common-council, which they intend to do to morrow morning. It seems probable to me, that they will yield obedience to your Com∣mands, and be brought to a friendly compliance with You; for which reason I have suspended the execution of Your commands touching the Gates and Portcullises, till I know Your further pleasure there∣in, which I desire I may by this Bearer: I shall onely desire that (so Your commands may be answered with due obedience) such tender∣ness may be used towards them, as may gain their affections: They desired the Restauration of those Members of their Common-coun∣cil that are secured; which desires of theirs I shall only commend to Your grave consideration, to do therein as You shall think most ex∣pedient; and, in attendance upon Your further commands, Re∣main Your most humble and obedient Servant. GEORGE MONCK. Guild-Hall, Feb. 9. 1659. To the Right Honourable William Lenthal, Speaker to the Parlia∣ment of the Common-wealth of England at Westminster. POSTSCRIPT. I Shall become an humble Suiter to You, That You will be pleased to hasten Your Qualifications, that the Writs may be sent out; I can assure You it will tend much to the Peace of the Country, and satisfie many honest Men.
Thursday Afternoon, Feb. 9. THis Letter from General George Monck from Guild-Hall, Lon∣don, of the 9th of February, 1659. was read. Resolved upon the Question by the Parliament, That the Answer to this Letter be, to send General Monck the Resolve of the Parliament, That the Gates of the City of London, and the Portcullises thereof be forthwith destroyed; And that he be Ordered to put the said Vote in Execution accordingly, and that Mr. Scot and Mr. Pury do go to General Monck and acquaint Him with these Votes. Tho. St. Nicholas, Clerk to the Parliament. Thursday, February 9. 1659. Resolved upon the Question by the Parliament, THat the Gates of the City of London, and the Portcullises thereof be forthwith destroyed; and that the Commissioners for the Army do take Order that the same be done accordingly. Tho. St. Nicholas, Clerk to the Parliament.
A LETTER FROM His Excellencie THE LORD General Monck, AND The Officers under His Command, to the Parliament; In the Name of themselves, and the Souldiers under them: Dated the 11. of February, 1659. With the Parliaments ANSWER thereunto. Mr. Speaker, VVE cannot but with thankfulness acknowledge the won∣derful goodness of God to You, in Your return to the discharge of Your remaining Trust; and Your Forces under our commands (after some difficulties) in bringing of Us by a tedious March in such safety to this place, to wait upon You in asserting the Freedoms of our Native Countrey: and being here (as we have to our utmost Hazard and Power been instrumental in your return) so
we shall be still ready to pursue your Commands so far as possibly we may. To evidence which, we have observed and executed your late Orders in relation to the Chains, Posts, and Gates of the City: which was some hing grievous to us, and to the Officers and Soul∣diers under out Commands; and that because we do not remember any such thing that was acted upon this City in all these Wars; and we fear that many sober people are much grieved at it & apprehend farther force to be offered to them, while they seem principally to desire the speedy filling up of the House, which you have declared for, as well as we have express'd our just desires of: and are apt to doubt, left what we have done may be so far from answering the expected end, as that it may encrease the discomposure of mens spirits in the Nation. Upon this occasion, it comes fresh into our minds, that when by the treachery of some Officers of the Army you were interrupted: we declared to the world, That the ground of our undertaking was not only your return to your Trust, but also the Vindication of the Liberties of the People, and the preservation of the Right of our Countrey, the protection and encouragement of the godly and faithfull therein, as the establishment of the Peace of these Nations. Which declarations mae before the Lord, Angels, and men, in the day of our extremity, we (as we expect the blessing of the Lord upon our future undertakings) cannot but still own, and stand by. We find that the asserting of the just Liberties of the people, is that which the generality of the Nation is much in expectation of; and that many sober people (together with our selves) are under fears, left this great price that God hath put into your and our hands, (as your Servants) should not be improved, but that we shall run in confusion again. Therefore we humbly crave leave to present before you some grounds of our fears: we are affraid that the late wonderfull and unparallell'd deliverance, is not so publickly and solemnly acknow∣ledged as it might be, that the Lord (who wrought so stupendiously) may have the glory of all: we are troubled that some as yet do sit in the House, who are impeached of Treason: we cannot but ob∣serve that divers Members of your House, (who contrary to their trust, acted in that Illegal and Tirannical Committee of Safety)
are not actually disabled from sitting there: Notwithstanding Colo∣nel Lambert hath onely the Vote of Indemnity to secure him from as high Crimes as have been Committed in this Nation, and is not obe∣dient to your Orders, yet he seemeth to be winked at. We understand that Sir. Henry Vane upon bare pretence is per∣mitted to stay about the City, to the great dissatisfaction of your best Friends; that there are dangerous Consultations, and that of those who had a chief hand in your late Interruption, and the haz∣zarding of the whole Nations, contrary to our expectation. We find continued in the Army some persons of dangerous Prin∣ciples, and such who were active enough in the late De∣fection. Though we are far from wishing the ruine of any, yet we could desire that your signal Indulgence to late Notorious Offenders, did meet with that Candid Reception from them, as to be so much the more ingenuous in their professed. Repentance: but we observe that many of them do seek to justifie themselves, and are not without their Agents in print to palliate their foul Enormities; which maketh us yet to suspect that we are in some danger of returning in∣to the late distempers that you and the Nation are but newly deli∣vered from. We are not ignorant, that there are those who lately struck at the Root of English Parliaments in practice and Design, thereby have inflamed the Nation, and given great advantage to the Com∣mon Enemy, yet they are not without a strange confidence to pre∣cipitate men into a belief, that they are not only Persons against the one, and for the other. With grief of heart we do remember and would lament over the too palpable breach of Engagements in this Nation; Therefore we should think it a duty rather to mourn over the same, then to pro∣mote any new Oath to be taken at this time: Yet we perceive that there is a design to provoke the Parliament to enforce an Oath up∣on the Nation, and to take notice, that amongst others there are
some who are most forward to promote the said design, who have made the least (if any) conscience in keeping Engagements already taken. Here we must not silence our deep resentment of a bold Petiti∣on, and of dangerous consequence, which was lately presented to you, the consequence whereof (if you should answer their desires) would be to exclude many of the most conscientious and sober sort of men from serving under you in Civil and Military imployments, who have and would prove themselves most faithfull, and a doore would be opened in design to retrive the Interest of those who have (by the just hand of our gracious God) made themselves so appa∣rently obnoxious. Moreover (which is not the least part of the venome of that Pe∣tition) we clearly see the same spirit which of late would have pull'd away the by-you-declared-just maintenance from Ministers, would now provoke you by an Oath to endanger the forcing away of many of the most godly from their maintenance. In urging our fears from the premises that concerns some of dif∣ferent principles from us, we would not be thought to (as we do not) design any thing that may incurre the censure of unjust ri∣gidity. We freely profess our desires▪ that tenderness of conscience may have its full just liberty, but we cannot in judgement account▪ that tenderness of conscience which will not scruple at treachery it self, or any unrighteousness to carrey on corrupt designes. Having presented you with our fears, we shall adde our Resolu∣tions, that by the help of God we shall stand by you in the pursu∣ance of what we have declared for; And therefore do make this humble request to you: we could desire, that whilst you sit, your ut∣most endeavours may be to manifest your affectionate desires for the publick good of these Nations; Our further desire is, that those Regiments underyour consideration (whose Officers are not) may be spedily pass'd. And in regard we find that the grand cause of the present heats and dissatisfactions in the Nation is, because they are not fully re∣presented in Parliament, and seeing no other probable Expedient
whereby to keep the Nation in peace, then by filling up your Number; we must therefore make this our main desire, upon which we cannot but insist, that you would proceed to issue forth Writts in order to Elections: for the better effecting whereof we entreat, that you would conclude upon due and full Qualifications, that not only those who have been actually in Arms against the Par∣liament may be excluded, but also such who in the late Wars betwixt King and Parliament, have declared their dis-affection to the Par∣liament: And because the distracted condition of this Nation is at this hour so evident and pressing, we are constrained for the just maintenance of your Authority, and the satisfaction of all true English men, earnestly to desire, that all the Writs may be issued forth by Friday next, returnable at the usuall and legall time; For we think it convenient to acquaint you, that to pacific the minds of this great City, in the prosecution of your late Com∣mand, the chief of us did give an assurance thereof. And we must not forget to remember you, that the time ha∣stens wherein you have declared your intended Dissolution; which the people and our selves desire you would be punctual in. Hereby the Suspition of your Perpetuation will be taken away, and the people will have assurance that they shall have a Succession of Parliaments of their own Election; which is the undoubted Right of the English Nation. You have promised and declared no less: both the people and your Armies do live in the hope and expectation of it. That we may the better wait for your full and free Concurrence to these just desires on the Nations behalf: upon Mature delibera∣tion we have thought it our duty as to continue the usual Guards for the safety of your fitting, so for the present to draw the rest of the Forces under Command into the City, that we may have the bet∣ter opportunity to compofe spirits and beget a good understanding in that great City, formerly renowned for their resolute adhering to Parliamentary Authority, and we hope that the same spirit will be found still to breath amongst the best, most considerable and in∣teressed persons there.
This Action of ours, as we hope it will receive your favourable interpretation, so we do believe it will (through the blessing of God) be of good use for the present peace, and future settlement of these Nations. These are our thoughts which we communicate to you, in the Names of our selves, and the Officers and Souldiers under our Commands, we are Your Honours most Humble Servants, GEORGE MONCK Colonels. Tho. Randers. Leon. Litcot. Io. Clobery. Io. Hublethorne. Tho. Read. Ra. Knight, Dan. Redman. Ethelbert Morgan, Lieut. Col. Nathaniel Barton, Major. Majors. Tho. Johnson. Ier. Smith. Tho. Pryme. Fra. Nichols. Pet. Banister. White-Hall Feb. 11. 1659. Saturday, Feb. 11. UPon the reading of the Letter the House Resolved, That the thanks of this House be given unto General Monck for his faithfull service in securing the City, and that as to filling up of the House, the Parliament were upon the Qualifications before the re∣ceipt of the said Letter: and the same will be dispatch'd in due time.
THE SPEECH AND DECLARATION OF HIS EXCELLENCY The Lord Generall MONCK, Delivered at Whitehall upon Tues∣day the 21 February, 1659. Ordered by his Excellency the Lord General, that this Speech and Declaration be forthwith printed and published. William Clarck, Secretary. GENTLEMEN, YOu are not I hope, ignorant, what Care and Endeavours have been used, and Means essayed, for healing the broaches of our Divisions amongst our selves, and that in order thereunto divers Conferences have been procured between you, though to small effect; yet having at length received fuller satisfaction from these worthy
Gentlemen that were secluded then formerly; I was bold to put you all to the trouble of this meeting, that I might open my self to you all even with more freedome then formerly: but least I might be mis-ap∣prehended or mistaken, as of late it besell me, I have committed to writing the Heads of what I intended to discourse to you, and desire it may be read openly to you all. THE DECLARATION OF His Excellencie THE LORD General Monck. Delivered at VVhite Hall upon Tues∣day the 21 of Feb. 1659. GENTLEMEN, IT appears unto me, by what I have heard from you and the whole Nation, that the Peace and happy Settlement of these bleeding Nations, next under God, lyeth in your hands. And when I consider that Wisdom, Piety, and Self denial, which I have reason to be confident, lodgeth in you, and how great a share of the Nations sufferings will fall upon you, in case the Lord deny us now a Settlement, I am in very good hopes there will be found in
you all, such melting bowels towards these poor Nations, and to∣wards one another, that yon will become healers and makers up of all its woful breaches. And that such an opportunity may clearly appear to be in your hands, I thought good to assure you, and that in the presence of God, that I have nothing before my eyes but Gods glory, and the settlement of these Nations, upon Common-wealth Foundations. In pursuit whereof I shall think nothing to dear; And for my own particular I shall throw my self down at your feet, to be any thing or nothing in order to these great Ends. As to the way of future Settlement, far be it from me to impose any thing, I desire you may be in perfect Freedom; Onely give me leave to mind you, That the old Foundations are by Gods Providence so bro∣ken, that in the eye of Reason, they cannot be restored, but upon the ruines of the People of these Nations, that have engaged for their Rights in defence of the Parliament, and the great and main ends of the Covenant for uaiting and making the Lords name One in the three Nations: And also the Liberty of the Peoples Representa∣tives in Parliament will be certainly lost, For if the People finde, that after so long and bloody a war, against the King for break ng in upon their Lberties, yet at last he must be taken in again, it will be out of question, and is most man fest, he may for the future govern by his will, dispose of Parliaments, and Parliament-Men as he plea∣seth, and yet the people will never more rise for their assistance. And as to the interests of this famous City (which hath been in all ages the Bulwork of Parliaments, and unto whom I am for their great affection so deeply engaged) Certainly it must lie in a Com∣monwealth; That Government onely, being capable to make them (through the Lords blessing) the Metropolis and Bank of Trade for all Christendom, whereunto God and Nature hath fitted them above all others. And as to a Government in the Church, the want whereof hath been no small cause of these Nations distractions; It is most mani∣fest, that if it be Monarchicall in the State, the Church must fol∣low, and Prelacy must be brought in, which these Nations I know cannot bear, and against which they have so solemnly Sworn. And indeed moderate not rigid Presbyterian Government, with a sufficient Liberty for Consciences truly tender, appears at pre∣sent to be the most indifferent and acceptable way to the Churches Settlement.
The main thing that seems to lye in the way, is the interest of the Lords, even of those Lords who have shewed themselves noble indeed, by joyning with the people; and in defence of those just rights, have adventured their dearest blood and large Estates. To that I shall onely say, that though the state of these Nations be such, as cannot bear their sitting in a distinct House, yet cer∣tainly, the wisdom of Parliament will find out such Hereditary marks of honour for them, as may make them more noble in after ages. Gentlemen, upon the whole matter the best result that I can make at present for the peace of these Nations will be in my o∣pinion, that you forthwith sit together in Parliament: In or∣der, 1. To the setling the conduct of Armies of the three Nati∣ons in that manner, as they may be serviceable to the peace and safty of them, and not to its own and the Nations ruine, by Faction and Division. 2. To the providing sufficient Maintenance for them; That is for the Forces by Land, and for the Navy by Sea, and all their Arrears of both, and other contingencies of the Govern∣ment. 3. To the appointing a Council of State with Authority to settle the Civil Government and Judicatories in Scotland and Ireland, and to take care for the issuing forthe Writs, for the summoning of a Parliament of these three Nations united, to meet at Westminster the 20. day of April next, with such qualifi∣cations as may secure the Publick Cause we are all ingaged in, and according to such Distributions as were used in the year, 1654. Which Parliament, so called, may meet and act in freedom, for the more full establishing of this Common-Wealth, without a King, single Person, or House of Lords. 4. To a Legal Dissolution of this Parliament to make way for succession of Parliaments, And in order to these good ends, the Guards will not onely willingly admit you, but faithfully both my self, and every the Officers under my command, and (I believe) the O ficers and Souldiers of the three Nations will spend their blood for you and successive Parliaments.
If your Conjunction be directed to this end, you may part ho∣nourably, having made a fair step to the settlement of these Nations, by making a way for successive Parliaments. But I must needs say, that if any different Councels should be taken (which I have no reason to fear:) these Nations would presently be thrown back into force and violence, and all hopes of this much desired establishment buried in disor∣der which the Lord in his great mercy I hope will prevent. And so God speed you well together, and unite your hearts for the preservation of Peace and settlement of these Nations to his own Glory and yours, and all our Comforts.
A LETTER From His Excellency the Lord General MONCK, And the Officers under his Command; to the Parliament, in the name of them∣selves and the Souldiers under them. Mr. Speaker, WE cannot but with thankfulnesse acknowledge the wonderful Goodnesse of God to you in your re∣turn to the Discharge of your remaining Trust; to our selves, and your Forces under our Com∣mands, (after some difficulties) in bringing of us, by a tedious March, in such safty to this place, to wait upon you in asserting the freedoms of our native Country: and being here (as wee have to our utmost hazard and power been instrumental in your Return, so) we shall be  ready to pursue your Commands so far as possibly we may. To evidence which, we have observed and executed your late Orders in relation to the Chains, Posts,
and Gates of the City, which was something grievous to Us, and to the Officers and Souldiers under our Commands; and that because we do not remember any such thing was acted upon this City in all these wars; and we fear that many sober people are much grieved at it, and apprehend further force to be offered to them, while they seem principally to desire the speedy filling up of the House, which you have declared for, aswell as we have exprest our just desires of, and are apt to doubt, lest, what we have done may be so far from answering the expected end, as that it may increase the discomposure of mens spirits in the Nation. Upon this occasion, it comes fresh into our minds, that when by the trechery of some Officers of the Army you were interrupted, we declared to the world That the ground of our undertaking was not onely your return to your Trust, but also, the Vindication of the Liberties of the people, and the Preservation of the Rights of our Country, and protection and en∣couragement of the godly and faithful therein, as the establishment of the peace of these Nations. Which Declarations made before the Lord, Angels and Men, in the day of our extreamity, we (as we expect the blessing of the Lord upon our future underta∣kings▪) cannot but still own, and stand by. We find that the asserting of the just Liberties of the People, is that which the generality of the Nation is much in expecta∣tion of; and that many sober people (together with our selves) are under fears lest this great price that God hath put into your and our hands, (as your Servants) should not be improved, but that we shall run in Confusion again. Therefore we hum∣bly crave leave to present before you some grounds of our fears: We are afraid that the late wonderful and unparalel'd Deliver∣ance, is not so publickly and solemnly acknowledged as it might be, that the Lord (who wrought so stupendiously) may have the Glory of all: We are troubled that some as yet do sit in the House, who are impeached of Treason: We cannot but observe that divers Members of your House, (who contrary to their Trust, acted in that illegal and Tyrannical Committee of Safety) are not actually disabled from sitting there: notwith∣standing Colonel Lambert hath onely the Vote of Indemnity to secure him from as high Crimes as have been committed in this
Nation, and is not obedient to your Orders, yet he seemeth to be winked at. We understand that Sir Henry Vane upon bare pretence is permitted to stay about the City, to the great dis∣satisfaction of your best Friends; That there are dangerous Consultations, and that of those who had a chief hand in your late Interruption, and the hazarding of the whole Nations, contrary to our expectation. We find continued in the Army some Persons of dangerous Principles, and such who were a∣ctive enough in the late Defection. Though we are far from wishing the ruine of any, yet we could desire that your signal indulgence to late notorious Offenders, did meet with that candid reception from them, as to be so much the more inge∣nuous in their professed repentance: But we observe that ma∣ny of them do seek to justifie themselves, and are not without their Agents in print to palliate their soul Enormities; which maketh us yet to suspect that we are in some danger of return∣ing to the late distempers that You and the Nation are but new∣ly delivered from. We are not ignorant, that there are those who lately struck at the Root of English Parliaments in Practice and Design, there∣by have inflamed the Nation, and given great advantage to the Common Enemy, yet they are not without a strange confidence to precipitate men into a belief, that they are the onely Persons against the one, and for the other. With grief of heart we do remember and would lament over the too palpable Breach of Engagements in this Nation; Therefore we should think it a duty rather to mourn over the same, then to promote any new Oath to be taken at this time. Yet we perceive that there is a designe to provoke the Parliament to enforce an Oath upon the Nation, and do take notice, that amongst others▪ there are some who are most forward to promote the said defigne, who have made the least (if any) Conscience in keeping Engagements already taken. Here we must not silence our first resentment of a bold Petition, and of dangerous consequence, which was lately presented to you, the consequence whereof (if you should an∣swer their desires) would be to exclude many of the most con∣scientious and sober sort of men from serving under you in Ci∣vil and Military Imployments, who have and will prove them∣selves
most faithful; and a Door would be opened in designe to retrive the Interst of those who have (by the just Hand of our Gracious God) made themselves to apparently obnoxious. Moreover (which is not the least part of the venome of that Pe∣tition) we clearly see the same spirit, which of late would have pull'd away the by you declared just Maintenance from Mini∣sters, would now provoke you by an Oath to endanger the for∣cing away of many of the most Godly from their Maintenance. In urging our fears from the premises that concerns some of different Principles from us, we would not be thought to (as we do not) design any thing that may incur the censure of unjust rigidity. We freely professe our desires, that tendernsse of Conscience may have its full just liberty, but we cannot in judg∣ment count that tendernesse of Conscience which will not scru∣ple at treachery it self, or any unrighteousnesse to carry on cor∣rupt designes. Having presented You with our fears, we shall adde our Re∣solution, That by the help of God we shall stand by you in the pursuance of what we have declared for: And therefore do make this humble request to You. We could desire, That whilst you sit, your utmost endeavours may be to manifest your affe∣ctionate desires for the Publick Good of these Nations; Our further desires is, That those Regiments under your considera∣tion (whose Officers who are not) may be speedily passed. And in regard we find that the Grand Cause of the present Heats and Dis-satisfactions in the Nation is, because they are not fully Represented in Parliament, and seeing no other pro∣bable expedient whereby to keep the Nation in peace, then by filling up your number; We must therefore make this our main desire, upon which we cannot but insit, that you would pro∣ceed to Issue forth Writs in Order to Erections: For the better effecting whereof we entreat, That you would conclude upon due and full Qualifications, that not onely those who have been actually in Arms against the Parliament may be excluded▪ but also such who in the late Wars betwixt King and Parlia∣ment have Declared their Disaffection to the Parliament: And because the distracted condition of this Ntion is at this hour so evident and pressing, we are constrained for the just mainte∣nance
of your Authority and the satisfaction of all true English-Men, earnestly to desire, That all the Writs may be issued forth by Friday next, returnable at the usual and legal time, For we think it convenient to acquaint you, that to pacific the minds of this great City, in the prosecution of your late Commands, the Chief of Us did give an assurance thereof. And we must not forget to rememeber you, that the time ha∣stens wherein you have Declared your intended Dissolution, which the people and our selves desire you would be punctual in. Hereby the Suspition of your perpetuation will be taken away, and the People will have assurance that they shall have a Succession of Parliaments of their own Election; which is the undoubted Right of the English Nation: you have pro∣mised and Declared no lesse: Both the People and your Ar∣mies do live in the hope and expectation of it. That we may the better wait for your full and free concurrence to these just Desires on the Nations behalf, upon Mature Deliberation, we have thought it our duty as to continue the usual Guards for the safety of your sitting, so for the present to draw the rest of the Forces under our Command into the City, that we may have the better opportunity to compose Spirits, and beget a good understanding in that great City, formerly renowned for their resolute adhering to the Parliamentary Authority, and we hope that the same Spirit will be found still to breath amongst the best, most considerable and and interessed Persons there. This Action of ours, as we hope it will receive your favoura∣ble interpretation, so we do believe it will (through the bles∣sing of God) be of good use for the present Peace, acd future settlement of these Nations. These are our thoughts which we communicate to you, in the Names of our selves, and the
Officers and Soulders under our Commands, We are, Your Honours most Humble Servants GEORGE MONCK. Colonels. Tho. Sanders. Leon Litcot. Jo. Clobery. Jo. Hubblethorne. Tho. Read. Ra. Knight. Dan. Redman Ethelbert Morgan, Lieut. Col. Nathaniel Barton, Major. Majors. Tho Johnson. Jer. Smith. Phil. Pryme. Fra. Nichols. Peter Banister White Hall, Feb. 11. 1659.
A LETTER From the Lord General MONCK, And the Officers here, to the several and respective Regiments, and other Forces in England Scotland and Ireland. Dear Brethren and Fellow-Souldiers, YOU cannot be ignorant of the many endeavours, and earnest Desires of many good men in these Nations, to bring us to a Settlement; which it hath pleased God to dis-appoint unto this day, and leave us as a broken and divided people, ready to run into Blood and con∣fusion: which that we might prevent so great Calamities im∣pending, after our earnest seeking God for his Direction and Assistance, we find no Expedient so likely, for the satisfaction of the good People, and the quiet and welfare of this Common-Wlh, as the re-admission of the Secluded Members, in order to a Legal Dissolution of this Parliament by their own free con∣sents; and to issue Writs for a future Full Representative of
the whole Common-Wealth of England, Scotland and Ireland, under such Qualifications, as may secure our Cause, o convene on the twentieth of April next at Westminster, for the establishing this Common Wealth upon the foundations of Justice and true Freedom. And to take away all just Jealousies from you, we do assure you, that we shall joyn with you in the maintenanceThat was his Speech at the re-ad∣mitting the seclu∣ded Mem∣bers. of those ends, expressed in the enclosed  and do expect your chearful concurrence with us. And we desire to take God to witnesse, that we have no inten ions or Purposes to return to our old Bondage: but since the Providence of God hath made us free at the cost of so much blood, we hope we shall never be found so unfaithful to God and his People, as to lose so glorious a Cause. But we do re∣solve with the Assistance of God, to adhere to you in the continuing of our dear purchased Liberties both Spiritual and Civil. The rea∣son of or Proceedings in this manner may seem strange: but if you duly consider the necessities of our Affairs, and the pre∣sent state of things, you will certainly conclude nothing so safe to secure Publick Interest, and to engage the Nations Peaceably to submit to a Free State; most of these Members having given us full assurance, that their Session in Parliament shall not be longer than absolute necessity will require, to the putting the Government into Successive Parliaments; they not being free so to Act by the old Writs, as when they shall be called upon a Common-Wealth Account; and its the Opinion of the truest Friends to a Free State, That it cannot be consistent with the perpetual sitting of these Members, being contrary to the Nature of such a Government. And as we are confident the present Parliament now sitting, will not Repeal any of the Acts, Ordinances, or Orders of this Parliament, for Sales of Publick Disposition of Lands; so we shall in our Station observe, and cause to be observed, all other Acts and Ordinances of this Parliament whatsoever; and hum∣bly interpose with the next succeeding Parliament, not only to passe a further Act of Confirmation of all such Sales and Dispo∣sitions of Lands, here & in Scotland but also of all the Distributi∣ons and Dispositions of Lands and Houses in Ireland, to the Souldiery, Adventurers, or any other Persons, made by or in pursuance of any of the Acts, Ordinances, or Orders of this present Parliament, or any pretended Parliamentary Authority.
And we entreat You to send up an Officer, to give to the Lord General Monck an Account of Your Acquiescence with Us here∣in. And if any dis-affected Persons shall hereby take occasion to make disturbance of the Peace of the Common Wealth either in fa∣vour of CHARLES STUART, or any other pretended Authority, We desire you to secure them, till the pleasure of the Parliament or Council of State be known in that behalf: you shall speedly receive Encouragement & supplies of Monies: and indeed, it was not the least Motive to induce us to this way of Composure of Affairs, that we might facilitate the raising of Monies for the subsistance of the Army and Navy; which would not otherwise have been done (if at all) but with effu∣sion of Blood. We have nothing more at this time, but to as∣sure you that we shall ever remain, Dear Brethren and Fellow-Soldiers,  Your very Affectionte Friends, GEORGE MONCK. Cols R. Knight John Clobery Tho. Read Jo. Hubblethorne Leonard Litcot Tho. Sanders William Eyre Rich. Mosse William Farley Arthur Evelin John Streater Jo. Butler. Quart. Ma. Gen. L. Cols Ethelbert Morgan James Mutlow James Emerson Joseph Witter Dennis Pepper. Majs. James Dennis Rich Wagstaff Th. Johnson Fra. Nichols Jer. Smith Nath. Barton Tho. Higgs John Clark Capts. W. Goodwin Hen. Ogle White Hall Feb. 21. 1659.
