B2997 R23090 12749194 93318
A LITTLE TREATISE CONCERNING Things Indifferent, In Relation unto WORSHIP: DIRECTED To the KING, and his COUNCIL, and all Others who are concerned (or do think themselves so to be) in matters of RELIGION; FOR THEM To Weigh well, Mind, and Consider (if they please) ere any Determination be had in Things of that nature. By one that loves the Truth and Peace. GEORGE BISHOPE. All things are lawful for me, but all things are not expedient. All things are lawful for me, but I will not be brought under the power of any, 1 Cor. 6. 12. All things are lawful for me, but all things are not expedient. All things are lawful for me, but all things edifie not, 1 Cor. 10. 23. Printed in the Year 1663.
A LITTLE TREATISE CONCERNING Things Indiferent, &c. THings Indifferent are so called, either from the Nature of the Things themselves; Or, of the things about which they are Conversant. And the General signifi∣cation of them, or of the word [Indifferent] (the Term unto which they relate, and by which they are understood) is, Something that may be done or not done, according to the Liberty and Choice of him that doth them, or not doth them. So that if they be done, it imports not any thing of a Necessity; and if they be not done, it implies not any matter of Guilt; but that they may be done, or not done, according to the pleasure of him who doth them, or doth them not. And this is the Nature and Signification of Things Indif∣ferent. And this I lay down in the first Place, because the Nature, and Signification of the things treated about, are necessary to be opened, ere that which is intended there-from comes to be Dis∣coursed. Now it may be demanded as to the Thing; What are things Indifferent, and what not, in relation to the Worship of God? For that's the Thing unto which this Little Treatise is terminated by me. I Answer, Things Indifferent, in relation to the Worship of God, are to be considered, either as things that may be done or not done;
as being so, or things Indifferent, in their own Nature; or, as things that are not so in their own Nature, yet are, or may be left so by him who orders all things according to the good plea∣sure of his will, especially as to that in which he will be Wor∣shipped. And so they may be considered, either as to the Wor∣ship it self, or, to the Manner thereof, or as to the things that are conversant thereabouts. As to the Worship it self, there is nothing that can be called Indifferent. For, nothing is indeed the Worship of God, or can be truly called so, but what he requires, or, what proceeds from the measure of him; and the very requiring of a thing takes away the Indifferency of it. So the Jews who were commanded (all the Males of them) once in a year to come and appear before the Lord, and worship at Jerusalem; and to observe New Moons, and Sabbaths, and to of∣fer Incense, and to keep appointed Feasts, to Pray there in the Place where he said he would be heard; yet they coming in the mind in which they should not come, and offering in that which he accepts not; which is not of him, of the measure of him, and from it, he said unto them, When ye come to appear before me who hath required this at your hand, to tread in my Courts? Bring no more vain Oblations (and all that is so, which is not from him, the measure of him; it proceeds from that which is vain, and its end is vain, it accomplishes not the thing it intends) Incense is an abomination to me; the New Moons, and Sabbaths, the calling of Assemblies, I cannot away with; It is Iniquity, even the solemn Meeting; Your New Moons, and your appointed Feasts my soul ha∣teth, they are a trouble unto me, I am weary to bear them. And when you spread forth your hands, I will hide mine eyes from you; yea, when ye make [many] prayers I will not hear. And the Reason is sub∣joyned, Your hands are full of blood, said the Lord by the Pro∣phet, Isa. 1. 12, 13, 14, 15. Now, if the Jews who were so commanded, coming to offer, and to tread in his Courts, and to pray, and to keep dayes, and to frequent the solemn Meetings, and to observe the appointed Feasts which they were commanded, had this said unto them; When ye come to appear before me, who hath required this at your hand, to tread in my Courts? because their hands were full of Blood; because it
was the murtherous spirit in which they came to appear; the spi∣rit that is out of Truth, the Devil, unto which he hath not re∣gard; nor to the offering of that which is not from the Spirit of him whom he accepts, the spirit of the Devil, who was a Lyar from the beginning, and abode not in the Truth; who caused Cain to slay his Brother about Religion, the Murderer, which was not accepted, nor his Offering; who slew his Brother, and therefore is said to be of that wicked one, and to slay his Brother, because his own works were evil, and his Brothers righteous; how much more will he say it, as to that which he requireth not? And the reason of this is plain; because all such things as are done as Worships, and the Lord commandeth them not, are Will-Worship; or, that which proceedeth not from the Lord, or the measure of him in man, (which he only accepts, that which is of∣fered from it) but from the Creature, the spirit which is in the Creature, and guides and rules it, which is not of God, which he doth not accept, but is an abomination in his sight. The Sacri∣fice of the wicked is an abomination to the Lord; but the Prayer of the upright is his Delight, Prov. 15. 8. Therefore it is said, They Sacrificed unto Devils, not to God, to gods whom they knew not; to new gods that came newly up, whom their Fathers feared not; when they Worshipped that, or did that Worship which he required not. But Jesurun waxed fat, and kick∣ed; Thou art waxen fat, thou art grown thick, thou art covered with fatness; then he forsook God that made him, and lightly esteemed the rock of his salvation; they provoked him to jealousie with strange gods; with abomination they provoked him to anger: They sacrificed to Devils not to God, &c. (though they seemed to pretend to Worship God when they worshipped, but not as he required, this was a sacrificing to Devils, and not to God, though he was in their mind; or though they thought they worshipped him; when it was not from him, the measure of him, the requirings of him, who will be worshipped as he requires; the thing and the mind, the spirit and the thing) And so (saith Moses) of the Rock that be∣gat thee, (this was Israel who had a measure of God, his first-born, something in which he might know how to worship God, and from which he will be worshipped, and he accepts no other but what comes from it, and is of it) Thou art unmindful, and hast forgot∣ten
God that formed thee, (when he went from this) said the Lord by Israel, Deut. 32. 15, 16, 17, 18. And of King Jeroboam, who set up the Calves at Dan, and at Bethel for Israel to worship, and the high Places, and ordained Priests unto them, which the Lord required not; it is said, (who did it without the command of the Lord)—And he ordained him Priests for the high Places, and for the Devils, and for the Calves which he had made, 2 Chron. 11. 15. And he it was that made Israel to sin. And of the Men of Judah it is said, And the Princes thereof, when they sacrificed that which the Lord required not,—They Sacrificed their sons and their daughters unto Devils, and shed inno∣cent blood, even the blood of their sons, and of their daughters, whom they sacrificed unto the Idols of Canaan; and the Land was polluted with blood; (Read this within, as well as without, for the offer∣ing up of the mind to a strange god, to, or in a thing which the Lord requires not, is the same; for the Birth of God is there strangled, and made to pass thorow the fire of that which is offer∣ed to that of which the offering is; even that from which it pro∣ceeds, for unto that is the Offering made, to that spirit from whence it comes, and it being from the Devil, it is to the Devil; though the Mind may be to God, which is deceived, and thinks he is worshipped, when it is the contrary.) Thus were they defi∣led with their own works, and went a whoring after their own Inven∣tions, (such is all that Worship which the Lord requireth not) saith the Prophet, Psal. 106. 37, 38, 39. And of them who worshipped Stocks and Stones, the works of mens hands, yet pretended that they minded God therein, and did it as a worship to God; or, that through them they intended the Lord, which he required not. It is said, Confounded be all they that serve graven Images, that boast themselves of Idols; Worship him all ye Gods, Psal. 97. 7. And their Idols are silver and gold, the work of mens hands; they have mouthes, but they speak not; eyes have they, but they see not; noses have they, but smell not; they have hands, but they handle not; feet have they, but they walk not; nei∣ther speak they through their throats: They that make them are like unto them, so is every one that trusteth in them, Psal. 115. 4, 5, 6, 7, 8. And Saying to a Stock, Thou art my Father, and to a Stone,
thou hast brought me forth. For, they have turned their back unto me (said the Lord) and not their face; but in the time of their trouble they will say, arise and save us. But where are the gods that thou hast made thee? Let them arise if they can save thee in the time of thy trouble. For, according to the number of thy Cities, are thy gods, O Judah, said the Lord to, and of the Kings, Princes, Priests and Prophets of Israel; who so said to a Stock and to a Stone, that is, the thing spake it, bowing to that which the Lord did not require: for that unto which any man doth bow he maketh that his God; and puts it as that which hath begot him, and which hath brought him forth. And what a thing this is, to say to a Stock, Thou art my father, &c. let the man whose eyes are open, judge, Jer. 2. 27, 28. As the thief is asha∣med (saith he) when he is found; so is the house of Israel ashamed, they, their Kings, their Princes, and their Priests, and their Pro∣phets, saying, &c. as aforesaid. And hence it is that the Apostle, speaking of such things as stood in the will of man, and were after the Doctrines and Com∣mandments of men, and from the Rudiments of the world, which he calls all that which stands not in the will of God; and the Com∣mandment of him (the measure of him in every one) who is the Head, by whom the Body by joynts and bands having nourishment ministred, and knit together, encreaseth with the encrease of God, saith to the Colossians, Let no man beguile you of your reward, in a [voluntary] humility and [worshipping] of [Angels] intruding into those things which he hath not seen, [vainly] puffed up with his [flesh∣ly] mind, and [not hodling] the [head] from which [all] the Body by joints and bands having nourishment ministred, and knit together, in∣creaseth with the increase of God. Wherefore if ye be [dead] with Christ from the [Rudiments] of the world, why as though [living] in the world, are ye [subject] unto [Ordiances?] (Touch not, taste not, handle not) which [all] are to perish with the using after the [commandments] and [doctrines] of men. Which things have in∣deed a [shew] of [wisdom] in [will-worship] and [humility] and [neglecting] of the Body, not in any honour to the [satisfying] of the flesh, Col. 2. 18, to the end. Thus as to the Worship it self. Now as to the manner of it. The Jews had not Liberty in any thing as to the Manner of the
Worship to order and appoint, but what the Lord Commanded, as they had not for the Worship, as the Books of Exodus, Leviticus, Numbers and Deuteronomy testify at large. Nor had David and Solomon liberty, as to the Manner of building of the Temple, as of the building (the figure of this Other, not made with hands, in which the Sacrifice is to be offered, Christ Jesus, who is come; but it was built, for manner, as well as matter, according to the Pattern, which David received from the Spirit of the Lord, and which the Lord made David to understand in writing by his hand upon him, even all the work of that Pattern, 1 Chron. 28. 12, 19. and which David gave to Solomon, vers. 11. &c. And Ezekiel had the Pattern of the second Temple from the Spirit of the Lord. And the Apostles were led into [all] Truth, (all, matter and man∣ner) by the Spirit. Howbeit (saith Christ) when he, the Spirit of Truth is come, he will guide you into [all] Truth; for he shall not speak of himself, but whatsoever he shall hear, that shall he speak; and he will shew you things to come. He shall glorifie me, for he shall receive of mine, and shew it unto you, John 16. 12, 13. And John speaking of the times after the Apostacy, which was to follow, yea, it entred before the decease of the Apostles, as he testifies; Little children (saith he) it is the [last] time; and, as ye have heard that Antichrist shall come, even now there are many Antichrists, whereby we [know] that it is the [last] time, 1 Joh. 2. 18. And saith Paul, Now we beseech you brethren, by the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ, and by our gathering together unto him, that ye be not soon shaken in mind, or be troubled neither by spirit, nor by word, nor by letter as from us, as that the day of Christ is at hand; Let no man deceive you by any means, for that day shall not come, except there come a [falling] away [first] 2 Thes. 2. 1, 2, 3. And—I know this, that [after] my departure, shall grievous Wolves enter in among you, not sparing the flock. Also of your own selves shall men a∣rise, speaking perverse things, to draw away disciples after them. Therefore watch, and remember, that by the space of three years, I ceased not to warn every one, night and day with tears, Act. 20. 29, 30, 31. And Jude saith, But beloved, remember ye the words which were spoken [before] of the Apostles of our Lord Jesus Christ; how that they told you there should be mockers in the [last] time, who should walk after their own ungodly lusts; [these] be [they] &c.
Jude Epist. ver. 17, 18, 19.) I say, John speaking of the times which should be after the Apostacy, which was then entring, saith, And I saw no [Temple] therein (that is, in the Holy City which had been long trod under foot by the Gentiles, of which he speaks, he saw no Temple therein, Nothing made with hands, No Insti∣tutions, No Ordinations, No Appointments of Men; Nothing that is made with Men's hands, or ordered by Men) for the [Lord] God Almighty] (saith he) and the [Lamb] are the [Temple] of it, (which the outward Temple signified as aforesaid) and the City had no need of the Sun (saith he) neither of the Moon (nothing that is made) to shine in it; for the [Glory] of [God] (saith he) did [lighten] it, and the [Lamb] is the [light] thereof. (Read this in the Light within, that which reproves, that which makes manifest, and there see the Mystery.) And the Nations (saith he) of them that are saved, shall walk in the [Light] of it. And the Kings of the Earth do bring their Glory and Honour unto it, Rev. 21. 22, 23, 24. And this he spake of the New Jerusalem, the Holy City (as aforesaid) which he saith he saw coming down from God out of Heaven, prepared as a Bride adorned for her Husband. And I saw (saith he) a New Heaven, and a New Earth; for the first Hea∣ven, and the first Earth were passed away, and there was no more Sea. And I heard a gréat Voice out of Heaven saying, The Tabernacle of God is with Men, and he will dwell with them, and they shall be his People, and God himself will be with them, and be their God. And God shall wipe away all tears from their eyes, and there shall be no more Death, neither Sorrow, nor Crying, neither shall there be any more Pain; for the former things are passed away. And he that sate upon the Throne, said, Behold I make all things new. Then (saith he) he said unto me, Write; for these things are true, and faith∣full. Then he describes the City, and the Gates, and the Wall, and the Foundation, and the Light thereof (the Glory of God like unto a stone most precious) and its form, and breadth, and height, and building, and the stones thereof; and who should, and who should not enter therein; and what was in it, as the Angel which carried him away in the Spirit to a great and high Mountain, shewed to him. And this (as I said) was what should be after the Apostacy, and
the Overthrow of Babylon; and the Casting of Satan, the old De∣ceiver, into the Pit, and Death, and Hell, into the Lake; and the Destruction of Gog and Magog; and the taking of the Beast, and of the false Prophet alive, and the casting them alive into the Lake of fire burning with brimstone, which had brought in and ruled the Apostacy, and the Great Supper of the Lord God Almighty, wherein was eaten the flesh of Kings, and of Captains, and of Mighty Men, and of Horses, and of them that sate of them; and the flesh of all men, both free and bond, both small and great. And when the time of the Lamb's Marriage was come, and his Wife had made her self ready, Rev. 18, 19, 20, 21 chapters. Then he saith, chap. 22.—He said unto me, These Sayings are faithful and true, and the Lord God of the Holy Prophets sent his Angel to shew unto his Servant the things which must shortly be done. Behold, I come quickly. Blessed is he that keepeth the Sayings of the Prophecy of this Book. And (he saith) he saith unto me, Seal not the Sayings of the Prophecy of this Book, for the time is at hand. He that is Unjust, let him be Unjust still; and he which is filthy, let him be filthy still; and he that is righteous, let him be righteous still; and he that is holy, let him be holy still. And behold I come quickly, and my Reward is with me, to give every man according as his work shall be. And he closeth up all and saith,—I Jesus have sent mine Angel to testifie to you these things in the Churches. I am the Root, and Off-spring of David, and the bright and Morning-Star. And the Spirit and the Bride say, Come; and let him that heareth say, Come; and whosoever will, let him take the Water of Life freely: For I testifie unto every one that heareth the words of the Prophecy of this Book; If any man shall add unto these things, God shall add un∣to him the Plagues that are written in this Book. And if any man shall take away from the words of the Book of this Prophecy, God shall take away his Part out of the Book of Life, and out of the Holy City, and from the things that are written in this Book. He that testifies these things saith, Surely I come quickly. Amen. Even so, come Lord Jesus, Chap. 22. 6. to the end. Lastly; As to the things conversant thereabouts, They must stand in the same that the Worship it self, and the manner of it doth. For it is [wholly] his own that the Lord accepts. For he is a Spirit,
and he that worships him, must worship him in Spirit and Truth throughout, and such Worshippers the Father seeketh. And he that cometh to God, must believe that he is; and that he is a Rewar∣der of them that diligently seek him. And Faith is the gift of God, and is the evidence of things not seen (which cannot be said of any outward thing, for that can be seen) the substance of things hoped for. And, whatsoever is not of Faith, is sin: for it stands not in the Root which is holy, Nor proceeds from it; in which stands Faith. And, therefore the Word preached did not profit (the Word nigh in the mouth, and in the heart; which witnesseth to God, Christ Jesus.) Say not in thine heart, who shall ascend into Heaven? (that is, to bring Christ down from above) Or, who shall descend into the Deep? (that is, to bring up Christ again from the Dead) but what faith it? The Word is nigh thee, in thy mouth, and in thy heart; that is the Word of Faith (which we preach, said the Apostle, Rom. 10. 6, 7, 8. And the Righteousness which is of Faith, saith he, speak∣eth on this wise, &c. as aforesaid.) I say, the Word (this Word) preached did not profit them, not being mixed with Faith in them that heard it. And, without Faith it is impossible to please God. This is my wel-beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased, hear him, saith the Lord of his Son, in whom he is well pleased, in the measure of him, and no other. And therefore hath he given a measure of him, a measure of the Spirit of him to every one to profit withal; that every one in it might know how to do his Will, so that he need not ask, Who shall ascend into the Heaven? &c. Or, who shall descend into the Deep? to bring Christ down, or up again, as a thing without them; Nor depend upon another to know the Will of God; but as every man must be saved for himself, or damned; and as the Lord will require an Account of every man; and as every man must give an Account to the Lord for himself, not for another, nor another for him, as to the deeds done in the body, whether they be good, or whether they be evil; So hath he put a measure of himself into every man, that every man might have in him something of the Lord to Direct him, and Guide him, and lead him into that which he should do; by which he might know what he is to do, and how to worship God, so as it may be acceptable in his sight: For that which pleaseth God, stands not in the will of man, (though it is fit there should: be in
the Creature a ready mind (If there be first a willing mind, it is ac∣cepted according to that a man hath, and not according to that a man hath not, 2 Cor. 8. 11. And thy People shall be willing in the day of thy Power, in the beauties of Holiness, from the Womb of the Morn∣ing thou hast the dew of thy Youth, Psal. 110. 3. My heart is fixed; O God, my heart is fixed, I will sing and give praise, Psal. 57. 7.) because of its Relation unto God, and its Dependency on him; to be ready when he moves, whose Spirit is as the Wind, which bloweth where it listeth, and thou hearest the sound thereof, but knowest not from whence it comes, nor whither it goes. So is every one (saith the Son of God) that is born of the Spirit, Joh. 3. 8. I say, that which pleaseth God, in which he will be worshipped, standeth not in the Will of man (though it's fit the Creature should be willing and ready when the Lord moves; and in the Day of his Power it will be so as aforesaid, as that which answers to God is hearkened to and obeyed, by which his Power comes to be made known, which makes his People willing) but in the measure of him in every one, which (as I have said) he hath placed in every one that every one may know how, and in what to worship him; which every one is to know, and in which every one is to believe, and to wait to know what is the Will and Counsel of God, and how and when, and after what manner, and in what he will be worship∣ped, that so it may be acceptable in his sight. Let the Words of my mouth, and the Meditation of my heart be acceptable in thy sight, O Lord, my strength, and my Redeemer, (Psal. 19. 14.) prayed the holy man of God. For all other Services, or things done from this measure of him, in the will of man; Or, of the spirit that is in him that lusteth un∣to Envy, and knows not God, is as Swines flesh—He that killeth an Ox, (saith the Lord by the Prophet) is as if he slew a Man; He that sacrificeth a Lamb, as if he cut off a Dogs neck; He that offereth an Oblation, as if he offered Swines blood; He that burneth Incense, as if he blessed an Idol; Isa. 66. 3. and such must come to an account for their Services and Worships, as for their Trans∣gressions and Sins; and this will be hard when in that Day a man shall find that that which he thought pleased God; and he there∣fore did it, as thinking it might please God (being deceived by the Enemy to offer that, and from that which is not God's, from
the measure of him which he requires, and only accepts) is Ini∣quity. For, then, what is left a man in which he can hope? If his Righteousness; if his Worships; if his Services (as he thinks) to God, be as menstrous rags, be iniquity, and the Lord is weary to bear them (as hath been said) and it is a trouble to him, and his Soul abhors them; and he cannot away with it; and it is an Abomination in his sight; What then is left a Man wherein to hope? Or, wherein is it that he can say I am accepted of God? seeing that in him alone, in the measure of him, that which comes from the measure of him, Christ Jesus, it is that the Lord is well-pleased; and that which is done out of him, out of the measure of him, can have no hope in Christ, (Nothing that is truly so, but all such hope will fail a man;) and that which is done out of the measure of him, is not in him; and that which is in him, is as he is: for, as he is, so are we in this world, 1 Joh. 4. 17. and, he that doth righteousness is righteous, as he is righteous, 1 Joh. 3. 7. And, if any man be in Christ Jesus, he is a New-creature. Old things are passed away, behold all things are become new, 2 Cor. 5. 17. And this will be found so in the Day wherein the Lord will judge the Secrets of all men by the Man Christ Jesus. Therefore it concerneth every one to come to, and to heed, and to know the measure of God in him, whereby to know in what, and when, and how to worship him, and to do that which is ac∣ceptable in his sight. For, God is a Spirit (as I have said) and they that worship him, must worship him in Spirit and in Truth; and that which is Letter, is not Spirit; and therefore the manifesta∣tion of the Spirit which is given to every man to profit withal, (which is that which reproves, that which makes manifest) must of necessity be come unto, heeded and believed in, ere there can be a worshipping in spirit; or, that the Worship which is in spirit (which the Father seeketh such to worship him; who will be worshipped in spirit and in truth) can be known: For nothing is known out of its Principle; and the Measure of God is the Principle of the things of God, in which only God is known, and the things that are of him; which Principle is as aforesaid; which must be come un∣to, believed in and obeyed, (viz. that which reproves, that which makes manifest) ere that the Worship of God (that which is truly so) can be known; or the way how to worship him, who will be wor∣shipped in spirit and in truth.
So hither all must come, to this Principle, to that which is of God in them, and from hence they must offer, who offer unto God, and are accepted in his sight. Something that is his own, from his own, of his own, the measure of him; which is not born of blood, nor of the will of the flesh, nor of the will of man, but of God; As David did in the figure, when he and his Princes offered unto the Temple (the figure of him who was to come, Christ Jesus, by whom all our Sacrifices are to be offered, who is come the second time without sin unto salvation) of thine own (saith he) have we given thee. For we are strangers before thee, and sojourners as were all our Fa∣thers; (see how low he was when he came to offer to the Figure; to that which perished, the Temple and the things thereof, against the time it should be builded, which was to be after his dayes. For he was not to build it, though it was in his heart; because he had made great wars, and had shed much bloud; but Solomon was to build it; for in his dayes peace and quietness, the Lord said he would give Israel, and that he should be a man of Rest, and that he would give him rest from all his enemies round about. He shall build an house for mine Name, and he shall be my son, and I will be his Father, and I will establish the throne of his kingdom over Isra∣el, for ever, said the Lord, 1 Chron. 22. 7, 8, 9, 10. See the difference between the man of Blood and the man of Peace, and the offering that comes from each, and what it signifies, and who it is that is to build the Temple of the Lord, and which the Lord accepts, and in whom he is well pleased; it is Solomon, the man of rest.) Our dayes on the earth are as a shadow, and there is none abiding. O Lord our God, all this store that we have prepared to build thee an house for thine holy Name, cometh of thine hand, and it is [all] thine own, 1 Chron. 29. 14, 15, 16. and this the Lord accepted. And it must be of his own, that now must be given him; else he accepts it not; and his own is that which is of him, of the mea∣sure of him as aforesaid. And therefore a necessity there is for all men hither to come, ere that they can come to serve or worship him acceptably with reverence and godly fear, who is a consuming fire, and will be had in reverence by all that are about him, Heb. 12. 29. Psal. 89. 7. Or, that he will be worshipped of them. Therefore hath he moved me, (and it hath lain upon me from the Lord) to write these things unto you, that you may not
be mistaken, as to your Worships; or think ye be doing that which is well-pleasing to him when he accepts it not. For, he is a God of purer eyes than to behold evil; and no iniquity can come near his dwelling, nor can he look on iniquity; and he beholdeth the proud afar off; and he scattereth the proud in the imaginations of their hearts; how then can they come near him? For nothing can come near him, but what is like him, and as he is, as aforesaid. This is my well-beloved Son, in whom I am well-pleased, hear him, saith the Lord. So to the Son every one must come, to the measure of him in every one (that which reproves, that which makes manifest) that they may know the Lord, and his Power, and his Arm, and his work∣ing, the mighty power of his working; who is able to subdue all things unto himself; and to bring down the mighty from their seats, and to exalt the humble and meek. For, Thus saith the high and lofty one, that inhabiteth eternity, whose Name is Holy; I dwell in the high, and holy place; with him also that is of an hum∣ble and contrite spirit; to revive the spirit of the humble; and to re∣vive the heart of the contrite ones, Isa. 57. 15. For, all these things hath mine hand made, (Heaven is my Throne, and the Earth is my Foot-stool; where is the House that ye build unto me? and where is the place of my Rest?) and all these things have been, saith the Lord: But to this man will I look, even to him that is poor, and of a contrite spirit, and that trembleth at my word, Isa), 66. 2. And thus it concerns every man to mind, for as much as he stands in a state of dependency upon God, and hath need of him and his Mercy, to save, and preserve him to all Eternity; for as much as there is something in him, which is eternal, that can ne∣ver be destroyed; with which if it should be ill with, for ever it will be sad; and this the Lord knowes; and in what state man is, and what need he hath of him, and therefore hath he placed something of himself in man to shew him how it is with him, and his state; and the way to God who is lost in the fall, and how he may please him, and do that which is acceptable in his sight; that so it may be well with him for ever. For otherwise, what is a man profited, (saith Christ) if he shall gain the whole world, and lose his own soul? or, what shall a man give (see how high it goes) in ex∣change for his soul? Mat. 16. 26. And now is the hour of your
visitation whilst ye are here; and whilst the Lord strives with you; the measure of him in every one of you which calls upon you to heed this, and tells you this is so, and ye believe this is Truth, but yet are not guided by that which tells you it is so, and which ye believe, though ye believe it, and know it is so, and that it is good for you to heed it, thereby to be led out of the evil, and to be delivered from all evil, and so redeemed unto God; for the Redemption is from evil, and the deliverance, which holds the mind in captivity, and estrangeth it from God; so that it knows him not who gives it life, and breath, and moving; and the displeasure of God is against the Creature, because his mind is alienated from God by wicked works. And therefore that his crea∣ture may be saved, and delivered from the wrath to come, from that on which his wrath is revealed, and will be revealed, (the Lord Jesus will) in flaming fire, taking vengeance on them that know not God, and that obey not the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ; who shall be punished with everlasting destruction, from the presence of the Lord, and the glory of his power; when he shall come to be glori∣fied in his Saints, and to be admired in them that believe, 2 Thes. 1. 7, 8, 9, 10. I say, that his creature may be saved, and delivered from the wrath to come, hath he put something of himself in him; that he may know whither to go to be delivered. And because no man may say in his heart, who shall ascend for me into Heaven, (that is, to bring Christ down from above?) or, who shall descend for me into the deep? (that is, to bring up Christ again from the dead) (as I have said) he hath placed a mea∣sure of himself in every man, that no man may be at a loss in this particular, or, at a stand how to know him, or come at him, in the knowledge of whom is eternal life. For, he is in man, and that of him in every man, that shews man iniquity and sin; the com∣pass and the end of his actings, the thoughts and the intents of his heart, and that searcheth the heart, and trieth the reins, and judgeth them, leads unto him. So all men are, and will be left without excuse in the day wherein he shall judge the Secrets of all men, by the Man Christ Jesus; whom he hath ordained, and appointed thereunto, and a day wherein he will do it, because he hath put a measure of him∣self in every one, whereby they may know him who is true;
and be in him who is true, even in his Son Jesus Christ; this is true God, and eternal life. And if it were not so, indeed it would be hard; and how in∣deed then could man be left without excuse, if he had not some∣thing in him of God and knew not that it was in him, to lead him unto God, and out of all evil; and to give him Dominion over sin and evil, and to redeem him unto God, from whom he is fallen; which is not of him, though in him; nor in the will of him, nor of the flesh, though in the flesh, but of God? For all men know something in them, that shews them evil, and that they should not do evil, and judges them for it, and makes them confess, that the Judgement is just; but all men do not obey it, all men do not heed it; therefore all men are not redeemed by it, all men are not delivered: For, He became the Author of eternal Salvation, unto all them that obey him, Heb. 5. 9. And, he came to his own, and his own received him not; but as many as received him, to them gave he power to become the sons of God; even to them that believe in his Name, Joh. 1. 11, 12. And, This is the condemnation, that Light is come in∣to the World, and men loved darkness rather than light, because their deeds were evil. For every one that doth evil, hateth the light, neither cometh to the light, left his deeds should be reproved; but he that doth truth cometh to the light, that his deeds may be made manifest, that they are wrought in God, Job. 3. 19, 20, 21. And, If ye were blind, ye should have no sin; but now ye say, we see; therefore your sin remaineth, Joh. 9. 41. So Friends all, this is the thing that ye are to mind, and the thing that ye are to heed, (viz.) That which witnesseth to God in you; and against every evil thing; and for every thing that is good; that ye may come to know the Lord, and his Power, and his Arm which delivers, and be purged from all your uncleannesses, and so ye may offer unto him an Offering in righteousness, in which he will be well-pleased, being sprinkled from an evil conscience by the blood of Jesus; that which takes away sin, which shews it, which delivers from it; and so ye will have Peace with God, and no otherwise; and know the Offering that he accepts, his well-beloved Son, in whom he is well-pleased, and in that which comes from him, and is in him, and offered by him; who
suffered without the Gate; Wherefore Jesus, that he might sanctifie the People with his own blood, suffered without the gate. Let us go forth therefore unto him, without the Camp, bearing his reproach; for here we have in continuing City, but we look for one to come.  him therefore let us offer the sacrifice of God continually, that is, the fruit of our lips, giving thanks to his Name, Heb. 13. 12, 13, 14, 15. (as hath been instanced) And so here all Indifferency hath an end. For, Man hath nothing to do in things of this nature to make this or that Indifferent, or not, out of the Will of God, is, or as, to his Worship, but Man must wait upon God in that is himself in man to shew him, how, and when, and after what man∣ner he will be Worshipped; As to all which, the Choice is in God, not in man, and the Indifferency is as the Lord shall require, and in his Prerogative, not as man shall make this and that, as the requirings of the Lord; and require the Lord, (the measured him in man) for where man shall so require, he requires the Lord; for that of the Lord in every man, is to lead every man, and to shew him how to worship him; and he that requires man to Worship God, requires the measure of him in man, by which man is to Worship him. For, Do I now perswade men, or God? said the Apostle, Gal. 1. 10. And these things are not onely requiring of men, but of God; because that of God in man, is that by which man is to worship God; and he that requires the lead∣ing of a man, requires that which was before to lead him; and this is manifest. And what an intrenchment this is on the Sove∣raignty of God, and an usurpation on him, that lives for ever; let that of God judge in every man's conscience? and whether the Lord will hold such guiltless, who intrench upon his Power, and encroach upon his Dominion, who lives for ever? Who will  them to pieces, and rule in the midst of his enemies; Whose Kingdom is an everlasting Kingdom, and his Dominion that which shall never have end. To him be glory, and praise, and do∣minion everlasting; Who cometh in Clouds, and every eye shall see him, those also who have pierced him; and all Nations shall wail because of him, Amen. I am Alpha, and Omega, the Begi∣ning and the Ending, saith the Lord; which is, and which way and which is to come; the Almighty.
And so here's no room for any thing of this nature, but every one must wait on the Lord for his pleasure, to know what he is to do, and to follow that, not to require others to follow that in the Worship of God which he pleaseth; for he that doth so, sets him∣self up above that which man is to follow, as to the Worship of God, (viz.) the measure of God in him; Or that of God in man, which witnesses for God, as aforesaid. For, he that requires over a People, where another hath the Proper Jurisdiction, requires Over him who hath the Proper Jurisdiction of that People; He gives Law to him who gives Law to them; and he that makes things so and so, as to the Worship of God, and com∣mands it, where the Lord doth not, makes things so and so as to God, and commands him; that is to say, the measure of him in every man, which every man is to follow, as to the Worship of God over whom, as to Worship it hath, and no other, the sole Jurisdiction. So men must here take heed what they do; It's a tender Case; It's the Jurisdiction of the Lord; It's his Soveraignty; his Do∣minion, which is an Everlasting Dominion; and his Kingdom which shall never have end; lest he Dash them to Pieces: For, the Day will come, wherein the King will say, As for all those mine, Enemies which would not have me to reign Over them, bring them hither, and slay them before me: which I would not have to be the Case of any of you; for then I know it will be very hard. For, whosoever falleth on this Stone, shall be broken; but on whom∣soever it shall fall, it will grinde him to Powder, said Christ to the Pharisees of the Stone which the Builders refused, which he told them was made head of the Corner: Yea, saith he—The King∣dom of God shall be taken from you, and given to a Nation bring∣ing forth the fruits thereof, Matth. 21. 41, 42, 43. And there∣fore have I written; for I desire your Salvation and that of God; and that none of ye may perish, but that all of ye may have Everlasting Life. For your dayes are short, and but as a ; and they pass away as a tale that is told; and you will, come to be Cut down, and to Return unto your Dust; and E∣ternity attends it; and then Blessed is the man whose God is the
Lord; whom he hath chosen for his own Inheritance. For, if the Tree fall toward the South, or toward the North, in the place where the Tree falleth, there it shall be, saith the Preacher, who had Experimented Vanity to the height, Eccles. 11. 3. And the Dayes of Vanity will have an End; that is, the Dayes of vain man will be cut off; and then he must account for the Deeds done in the body, whether they be good, or whether they be evil; and to Judgment must he come; and under it he must pass, and it he must abide for ever and ever, Whether as to Eternal Wo, or Life Everlasting; and in the Grave there is no Repentance. Therefore it concerns ye all to mind whilst it is your Day, to Day, whilst it is said, To Day if ye will hear his Voice, harden not your hearts, said the Apostle, Heb. 3. 15. To Day, lest any of you be hardened through the Deceitfulness of Sin, ver. 13. For what Good will all your Pleasure, and your Greatness, and your Pomp, and your Power do you, when ye shall come to be cut down, and his Wrath shall seize on you, (should it so be, which (as I have said) I desire not, but the contrary; and therefore have I written) and you bear the bur∣den of his Displeasure for ever and ever; which, who is able to bear? Who knows the Power of thine Anger? Even according to thy Fear, so is thy Wrath, said Moses the Man of God, Psal. 90. 11. So to the measure of him in them, every One must come to know that, and to do it, which is acceptable in his sight. And here is the true Ballance, and the Right Measure in things of this nature; Not what Man wills, but the Lord. Because Every Man must be accountable to the Lord; and be judged by the Lord in, and for his own Particular; and there∣fore is he bound to follow that of the Lord in him, and to be guided by that, as to, and unto which he is to give an account; and the Judgement of this cannot be avoided; and from this none can escape; Every Man that is born of a Woman comes under this state, not One is priviledged; from the King that sitteth on the Throne, to the Beggar on the Dunghil; Every One that hath something that is Eternal in him (and something that is Eternal in him hath every man) must heed that which is of
him in Him that is Eternal to guide and lead him; not that he must be a Guide to him who is Eternal, or, to that of him in Man, or think that he may so be. For, who hath directed the Spirit of the Lord; or, being his Counsellor, hath taught him? With whom took he Counsel? Or, who instructed him in the way of Judgment, and taught him Knowledge, and shewed to him the way of Understanding? Isa. 40. 13, 14. So Every Man must come to his Proper state, and know how 'tis with him; because Every Man must account to God; and before his Judgment all must stand. We shall all stand before the Judgment-Seat of Christ: For it is written, As I live saith the Lord, Every Knee shall bow to me, and Every Tongue shall confess to God. So then every One of Us shall give an Account of himself to God. Let us not therefore judge one another any more; but judge this rather, That no Man put a stumbling-block, or an occasion to fall in his Brothers way. And (so) why dost thou judge thy Brother? and, why dost thou set at nought thy Brother, saith Paul, Rom. 14. 10, 11, 12, 13. And this is needful for Every Man to do; because (as I have said) he must be accountable to God after all his Work in the World, and his doing whatsoever he pleaseth therein; he must come before his Judge, that cannot be avoided. Rejoyce O Young man in thy Youth, and let thy heart chear thee in the dayes of thy Youth, and walk in the wayes of thy heart, and in the sight of thine eyes; but know thou that for all these things God will bring thee into Judgment, saith the Preacher; that experimented (as I have said) all kinds of Vanity, and lavish'd himself forth into the extreams of Pleasures, and had an Understanding to search it out, and Opportunity, and Riches, and Power to his Will; such as No Man had before him, nor shall have after him; the Wise man, King Solomon, in his Repentance, his Ecclesiastes, chap. 11. 9. So to Judgement all must come, and all must receive ac∣cording to what they have done in the Body, whether it be good, or whether it be evil (as hath been said:) And seeing all must come to Judgement, and receive according to what they have done in the Body, It concerns all to heed what they
do in the Body, and how they Answer the Will of Him who hath put them in the Body, whilst they are in the Body, and ere it be too late, before his Spirit hath done striving with them, and the hour of their Visitation be over; For No∣thing will Priviledge any Man then, from the Judgement of Him, whose Judgement is Just. And this unto ye all is the Word of the LORD. And so I have done. GEORGE BISHOPE. THE END.
