B3454 12648467 65227
A GEOGRAPHICAL DICTIONARY Representing the Present and Antient NAMES and STATES OF ALL THE Countries, Kingdoms, Provinces, Remarkable Cities, Ʋniversities, Ports, Towns, Mountains, Seas, Streights, Fountains, and Rivers of the whole WORLD; THEIR Distances, Longitudes, and Latitudes, WITH A short HISTORICAL ACCOUNT of the same, and a general INDEX of the Antient and Latin Names. Very necessary for the right understanding of all Antient and Modern Histories, and especially of the divers Accounts of the present Transactions of EUROPE. Begun by EDMUND BOHUN, Esquire. Continued, Corrected, and Enlarged with great Additions throughout, and particularly with whatever in the Geographical Part of the Voluminous Morery and Le Clerk occurs observable, By Mr. BERNARD. Together with all the Market-Towns, Corporations, and Rivers, in England, wanting in both the former Editions. LONDON: Printed for Charles Brome, at the Gun at the West End of S. Pauls. MDCXCIII.
A REFLECTION upon Le Grand Dictionaire Historique, &c. OR, THE Great Historical Dictionary OF LEWIS MORERY, D. D. Printed at UTRECHT 1692. with the Supplement of J. Le Clerc, D. D. in Four TOMES in Folio, French; AND An Account of this Edition of the following BOOK. THE Great Historical Dictionary of Monsievr Morery, was an unexpected Work to come from a Person, who understood not any Greek or Hebrew; and had but an indifferent knowledge of Latin. For it will be al∣lowed, amidst such a multiplicity of Subjects, to contain many very in∣genious things. Yet I desire not to commend him for the Invention he ascribes to the Chinese of the Province of Xamsi: who boyl their Victuals (he says) over Pits of Subterraneous Fires, proceeding from the Bowels of the Earth: Which, to make the Fire burn the quicker and stronger, they contract at the Mouths in such a manner, as only to leave room for the Caldron to stand. For though the Chinese are famous over the World for their Inventions; yet the Wit of this hath so little in it of the Wisdom of their Other, or Common Sense, that it supersedes the Civility of the least pretence to approve of it. Neither yet is it possible for me to be reconciled to his Account of a Tribe of the Troglae∣dytes; dwelling continually in the Caverns of a Mountain, in the Island of Malta; near to a House of Pleasure, belonging to the Great Master of the Order of the Knights there. A tall, robust, long-liv'd, inhospitable people, as he describes them: Who speak altogether the pure Arabick Language, in which they are instructed, as to matters of Religion, by the Ma∣ronites that come to Malta. For there appears no more Probability of an Arabian Race of Christian Troglaedytes at Malta, than of a Nation of Pygmies in the Neighbourhood of the Nile. Therefore in a word, Monsieur Morery, as he hath his Excellencies, so he hath his great Faults too: And it seems to be none of the least remarkable of the Latter, That let a thing be never so Fabulous in Pliny and Herodotus, or the Histories of the old Greeks; never so extravagantly reported by the Modern Books of Voyages and Discoveries, or the Common Memoires of the Times; yet he mixes it with his purer Geography. Which hath given me continual reason to admire the Patience and La∣bour of his Pen: but I disagree with his Fancy, if he thought such Collections pleasing to Men of Sense; and with his Judgment, if he thought them true. In his Geography of the Kingdom and Counties of England, there is no body but must be offended with him upon other Accounts. The principal of our Rivers (next the Thames) the Severn, the Trent, the Humber, the Medway, the Derwent, &c. None of them have their Names with Descriptions in his Work. Peterborough, Wells, Cambridge, Shrewsbury, Richmond, and Rippon, are wholly omitted out of our Chief Towns and Ci∣ties. Cambridgeshire, Hertfordshire, Cheshire, Shropshire and Wiltshire, out of our Counties. And all the Description that he gives to Eleven of our Counties more, with the Capital Towns thereunto belonging, will be justly rehearsed in about Eleven Lines. To South∣hampton,
he says, a Town and County in the South of England, with a Port to the Sea. To Stafford, a Town and County of England, towards the middle of the Kingdom. To Sur∣rey, a County in the South part of England. To Sussex, a County in the South of England, whereof Chichester is the Capital. To Warwick, a Town and County of England. To Westmorland, a County in the North of England, which was a part of the Country of the an∣cient Brigantes. To Huntingdon and Leicestershires, he adds the Names of the Rivers Ouse and Stower, with two or three Towns. To Middlesex, a small County in the East of England, included in the ancient Kingdom of the East Saxons, and only considerable for Lon∣don its Capital. To Rutland, a County in the middle of England, but little considerable, having no more than one Town called Oakcham in it. To Suffolk, a Town and County in the East of England. This is Monsieur Morery's way of describing a next Neighbor Kingdom, and one of the most Powerful in the World. Which is the least that a Geographer says, of the most distant and obscure Provinces of China and Japan, or the unknown Regi∣ons of the Asiatick Tartary. And though he may be something larger upon London, Ro∣chester, Bristol, and now and then a County; yet he does it with so little Care and Art, so ungeographically in comparison to his Illustration of other Countries; that take his Accounts of England all together (with which those of Scotland, Ireland, and Wales, are done after the like manner) and they will be found the crudest and meanest and the most Contemptible part of his Volumes. I need take no Notice of his Mistakes about Rutland and Suffolk; which occur even in those diminitive Sketches that he gives them, and are already sensible to every running Eye. He is no less mistaken about the Bishoprick of Coventry and Lichfield. A Bishoprick (says he) about the year 656. was established at Lichfield. And there being another Bishop∣rick afterwards establish'd at Coventry, these two Bishopricks in time became united in one. Whereas it never from the beginning was otherwise than one and the same Bishoprick; primarily established at Lichfield in 656: Next removed to Chester in 1067; or as others, in 1075. From Chester, removed to Coventry in 1088: and from Coventry returned to Lichfield again in 1186. Whereupon followed an Agreement under Bishop Alexander de Savensby (who succeeded to the See in 1220), that the Episcopal Style should be deri∣ved from both Coventry and Lichfield, yet with the Precedence to Coventry. Mons. Mo∣rery is no less mistaken in the ancient Seat of the Bishops of Lincoln; which was Dorchester in Oxfordshire, situated at the Confluence of the Thame and the Isis. For he hath the fortune, not only to attribute it to Dorchester in Dorsetshire, upon the River Frome; but to quote William of Malmsbury for the same, to aggravate the matter, in mistaking both his Author and the place together. It is very pleasant to observe in his Account of Nor∣thumberland, what an extent he gives to it. All Northumberland (says he) compre∣hends six Counties; York, Durham, Lancaster, Westmorland, Cumberland and Northum∣berland. To which he ought to have added the South parts of Scotland too, as far as Edenborough; if he knew no other, than that the Limits of Northumberland now remain in the same State, as they were eleven hundred years ago, in the time of Saxon Heptarchy. Perhaps a Stranger will continually admire at the meaning of such Words as Lerbie, Barthe, Lanclastre, Torriger, &c. He may be pleased to know therefore, that Monsieur Morery is not much to be trusted for the Right Proper Names of Places or Per∣sons (Antient or Modern), out of his own Country. Yet neither can our Nation blame him for it, more than another. His Misnomers are most Universal: and the meaning of those mentioned, is Irebye in Cumberland, the Bath, Lancashire, and the anti∣ent Britain Vortiger. It is more strange to see him Misplace the Houses of Lords and Commons in the Abbey of Westminster; and to see Dr. Barrow of Cambridge attributed throughout his Character to the Chairs and Preferments of Oxford; and Dr. Stilling∣fleet quoted with the Title of the present Bishop of Winchester. Yet there is a stranger and a more admirable Passage still, expecting to be also remembred here; which says, in illustrating the occasion and manner of the Descent of the Troops from Holland in 1688. that they were landed at Torbay in Wales. It is true, these particular Defects and Errours import no more, than the unskilfulness of the Author, in the Geography and History of England; whereof the disparagement redounds to himself only, with Monsieur Le Clerc his late Editor at Utrecht, who certainly is the Father of a share. But if M. Morery hath happened to be as unfortunate as Maimbourg and Varillas, in mistaking in Particulars relating to England; He is also as injurious as Sca∣liger and Sorbiere in some of his General Characters of it. It is fit, I should repeat his Words. First, he bestows a line or two of commendation upon the Gentry and Nobility, who perfect their Natural Parts and Educations by Travel and Conversation with Stran∣gers, (Voc. Angleterre) But on the Contrary (he adds) the People of England, are cruel, inso∣lent,
brutal, seditious, Enemies to Strangers. The abundance of all the Necessaries of life produced by their Country with little pain, renders them proud and negligent. They have not the same Industry, nor the same Address to Works and Manufactures, as their Neigh∣bours and other People; who are made to love labour, and be industrious, by necessity and the sterility of their Country. It hath been long since said, Anglica Gens est Optima flens, sed pessima ridens. To be persuaded of the Truth whereof, one need only consider the Evils that England hath suffered these thirty or forty years, by the Transport and the Malice of its sour, querulous, opiniative, and dissembling Spirits.—The Men of Letters often compose their Works with a Pipe of Tobacco in their hands.—The Citizens and Peasants delight in the fighting of Bears and Bulls, Cock-fighting, and Wrestling; which agree with their Inclinations, which are a little cruel.—The Women go without Ceremony to the Taverns. The Gallants carry their Mistresses to them; to pleasure whom the Treat must be concluded with the fighting of Bears and Bulls, Cock-fighting and Wrestling, and many times with all those three together. By saying all three together, he imagines we fight the Bears and Bulls with one another. Now as my Grandfather Heylyn answers to the like Calumnies of Scaliger, by the shoot∣ing of the Bow, we may easily guess the quality of the Archer. If the People of France lived with all the Innocency and the Freedom of the Golden Age, their Censures might have been allowed to pass with the Authority of Oracles. But as it is their unhappiness to be Slaves to the Rack, and the Wheel, and the Galleys; who have filled the Universe with the Outcries of their Persecutions at Home, and their Devastations abroad; and can never be forgotten for the blood of Henry III. and IV. the Barracades of Paris, and the Nuptials of S. Bartholomew's Eve; before they begin the Cry of Cruelty and Seditiousness upon another Nation; let them remember that Divine Character of a Man, who quarrels with a Mote in his Brothers Eye, whilst he hath a Beam in his own. If I know any thing of the Native English Temper, Cruelty is the very Antipodes to it. There is nothing more odious in History amongst us, than the Memory of a Prince, who stains his Reign with Blood. As our Government is a Monarchy without Tyranny, it requires our Obedience without Servility. Torture is excluded our Laws with an abhorrence; not only as a Servility unfit for Christians, but a Barbarity unfit for Men. And that famous ancient comparison of Angli tan∣quam Angeli, shines most especially in the beauty of their minds; composed of Simpli∣city, Integrity, Modesty, Mercy, Open and Free-heartedness, Peace, Gratitude, Generosity, Gal∣lantry and Love; which are all comprehended in one Word, they call Good Nature, so appropriated by God to them and their Language, that it scarce admits of a direct Translation into any other. The true Reading of the Verse, that is quoted by Monsieur Morery, is by an Abuse corrupted and turned into Anglica gens. Otherwise it is Rustica gens est Optima flens, sed Pessima ridens. And understands the Peasantry, not of Ours, or any Particular Nation, but all in Com∣mon. Though the Sense and Equity of it neither so is any better than the Poetry: And I dare be confident the Rhiming Monk that wrote it, never knew in himself what La∣bour and Oppression means. Whilst the Peasant by the condition of his Being carries a Cross, to add to the weight whereof is barbarous in Oppressing the Oppressed. It is no small sign of a Disposition contrary to Brutal, Insolent, Querulous and Cruel, that England is to a Proverb the Paradise of the Tender Sex. For whom Monsieur Morery hath prepared such a Treat of Sports, as hath I believe at least one excellence in it, Not to be Common. He ought to have excused those Sports from Cruelty in their favours too; and to have known, that the particular pleasure of the Peasantry therein, is only to see the courage of their Beasts, or laugh at Cowardise even in Beasts. But for the Evils which England (he says) hath suffered these thirty or forty years, or more, it is very unjust to forget the Praises of all the Persons that were innocent of them, and to draw the Character of the whole Nation from the Crimes of the guilty only. Who so far as they forsook Peace, and Love, and the rest of the Virtues abovementioned, degenerated from the Native Spirits of English∣men. Whilst fearing beyond reason, and immoderately persecuting a Phantosme of Cru∣elty in others, they begat the Monster amongst themselves. So odious is the apprehen∣sion of Cruelty, Slavery, and Brutality here; that the Evils of England have been occa∣sioned by nothing more, than a false fear taken at their Names. His other Character of the People of England, is, that they are Enemies to Strangers. For which, I never could learn a better Argument, than that of Mons. Sorbieres; (see Dr. Sprats Observations upon the Voyages of Mons. Sorbiere;) because he was rudely called Monsieur,
and not respected in the quality of Historiographer Royal to the K. of France, by the Children and Schoolboys of Dover. For long before the reception of the French Protestants, the numbers of Strangers at Norwich, Canterbury, and London, were computed to be more than constantly resided at any twenty Cities, either of France, or Spain, or Italy. Virtue, Merit and Civility in Persons of a Foreign Country, like the Commodities imported thence, charm the hearts of the English; and have a greater value set upon them, than the equal products of our own. So far are we from being inclined to be Enemies to Strangers, that we are ambitious to be Friends to Strangers, even till we are Enemies to our selves. It is for their benefit, that in the Court of Admiralty we con∣stantly retain the use of the Civil Law; and have enlarged it with the addition of those admirable Laws of Oleron, published by our King Richard I. which have equalized the Fame and Justice, as to Marine causes, of the ancient Laws of the Rhodians. And how very careful both our Common and Statute Laws are, in doing the exactest justice in all Pleas betwixt Strangers and Denizens, or the King and Strangers; I need only appeal to the Inquest of Medietas Linguae, given by the Statutes of the 27. and 28. of Edw. III. Another Part of his Disgraces of the People of England, is, their Pride and Negligence, want of Industry, and of a Genius to Works and Manufactures, occasioned by their relyance upon the fertility of their Country. I must observe he joyns their Pride and want of Industry very ill together: For if ever they pretend to be proud of any thing, it is of the Effects of their Industry, and the Works of their Hands. Their Plantations in the West-Indies, and Commerce thither; Their African, Levant, East-Indian, Russia, Groenland, Hud∣sons Bay, Spanish, French, Hamborough, and Merchant Adventurers Companies, for other Foreign Commerce: At Home, their Inclosures and Tillage; the New Rivers of the Fenns, the Coal Mines of the North, the Lead Mines of Derby, and the Tin Mines of Cornwall; the Orchards of Hereford, and the Plough-lands of other Counties: Their Manufactures in Clothes, Stuffs, Linnen, Iron, Copper, &c. The Quantities of their Commodities transported yearly beyond Sea; Their Discoveries in the Mecha∣nick Arts, and their Perfection in the Learned; Their Books in all the Faculties and Sciences, upon all sorts of Subjects; Their Restauration of London in three years, which was supposed to be the Work of an Age; Their Ships of Trade and War; their Riches, their Knowledge, their Power by Land and Sea: All these, as they are the undeniable Demonstrations of a most Ingenious and Industrious People from the meanest to the highest quality; so they are justly verified of the English in the view of the World. Who notwithstanding insult over no Foreign State; neither detract from the Praises of any greater Trade: But if they value and caress themselves upon the happy Effects of their Industry, it is a Virtuous Pride that is so well grounded. When Monsieur Sorbiere travelled into England, he could not but take notice of the Convenient form of the Bridge at Rochester, for being so contrived, that the Mens Hats can∣not be blown over it. We have altogether as worthy an Observation here of Mons. Morery; that the Men of Letters in England often compose their Works with a Pipe of Tobacco in their hands. Whereby I truly, with regard both to the English and French Men of Letters, am as fully satisfied, that the Fancies of particular Persons, and sometimes of Nations are un∣accountable; as when I remember that the sage and noble Egyptians of old (and from them the Israelites) set such a high value upon Garlick and Onions, as to honour them with a place in the number of their Titular Deities. For if any English Man of Letters is so addicted to the Weed, to write and smoak together; yet the Fancy of Monsieur Morery seems no less unaccountable; first to employ his Observation upon such trivial and insignificant particulars; and next to print them in a Voluminous Work, amidst the general Character of one of the most illustrious Kingdoms in the World. If all the rest of his Geography had been conformable to this of England, there had been no occasion to use him in an unpleasing Labour that hath happened to be obtained from me. Particularly as to his own Country, he spares no Pains nor Eloquence to adorn it. And to be sure, he suppresses the ancient Glory of the Atchievments of the Victorious English in France, as much as possibly he can. Indeed the Interests of the French Crown, and the Use that Mons. Pompone made (sometime Secretary of State to Lewis XIV.) of the Obligations he laid upon the Author, are visible; not in that only, but in the great care that is taken in rehearsing the Titles, Pretences and Dependences of the Crown of France, as if they did desire to entitle it to all the Ancient Gallia, according as it was bounded in the times of Julius Caesar. I have followed him throughout his four Tomes from Place to Place; leaving his Adulterinae Meroes, the Infinite Trash that is in him, as undisturbed as Ashes of the Dead; to take what is purely Geographical and Chronological, proper, and easie, and short, according to the Quality and Genius of
the following Dictionary. Which is therefore in this Edition not only enlarged with the Antient Geography, and all such other Descriptions of Places, as occur in the French Work, above what it was possible to contain in the Editions of this Dictionary in lesser Volumes; and also with some Improvements made in the Geography of England in the like manner: But I have further taken care to supply the Defects of the Descriptions themselves, in those Editions, with whatever accrued that was really necessary to suggest a more perfect knowledge of each Respective Place. The Duodecimo ascribed to Monsieur Du Vall, (Geographer to the French King) and printed the fourth time in English 1681. with the Title of a Geographical Dictio∣nary, was rather a Geographical Nomenclature, than a Dictionary. It was Begun to be made properly into a Dictionary by Mr. Edmund Bohun, at the Perswasion and Charge of the Proprietor of the Copy. And undoubtedly, whatever the Faults of Mr. Bohun's Octavo are; yet it will always remain an useful Book, and a light Companion (as he proposeth), for Travellers: when, such is the Necessity and Pleasure of a piece of this Nature in the hands of all; that the very Nomenclature of Du Vall is entertaining still. But the advancing of this Work to an Absolute Perfection is a matter of a higher Con∣sideration: which requires the diligence of many Years, and the succession perhaps of many Hands, and must be content to proceed by Degrees. And tho the labour in en∣countring oftentimes a dry and difficult Soyl is unpleasing and deterring; which caused Mr. Bohun to declare, he never desired to do it a second time; yet as it is like to redound as well to the Honour of the English Language, as the Universal benefit of Learning amongst us; it will abide an encouragement to consider, that every Mite bestowed upon this Corban is Meritorious; and every Endeavor towards the Completing so great a Good may be placed in the number of Publick Services; for which reason, I am not only satisfied with my own contributing a Share thereto; but am obliged also to tell the World, that the Table of Measures was adjusted to my Hand by the Ingenious Mr. Halley. J. A. BERNARD. ADVERTISEMENT. Decemb. 30. 1692. IN March next will be Publisht, a complete HISTORICAL and POETICAL Dictionary, representing Alphabetically the Lives and most considerable Acti∣ons of all those Personages of both Sexes, who have at any time been illustrious in the World; as Emperours, Kings, Princes, Heroes, Captains, &c. Prelates, Doctors, Hereticks, Philosophers, famous Artists, learned Authors, &c. with the time when each Person flourish'd: Also an account of the several Sects, He∣resies, Factions and Orders, either Religious or Military, that have been consi∣derable in any Age. Compiled out of the most select Writers, whether Sacred, Profane, or Fabulous: Wherein is contain'd not only whatsoever is worthy of Notice in the bulky Labour of Monsieur Morery, and the Interpolations of Le Clerc, but also vast Additions from the best Authors by them omitted; especially great care is taken that the tedious Impertinences, the palpable Er∣rors, and fulsom Partialities, every where apparent in the French Work, be corrected or pared off. This Piece having been for above Four Years prepa∣ring for the Publick by several Hands is now in the Press, and will be Publish'd in March next, as is said above, without Subscription; that so the Buyer may see what he purchases before he lays down his Money. In Folio. Printed for C. Harper, at the Flower-de-luce over against S. Dunstan's Church, Fleet∣street. ☞ These Two Volumes will not only comprise every useful Matter in the pre∣tended Grand Dictionary; but excel it in very considerable Improvements, as will appear; and by being Printed in Two Volumes is made more commodious as well as cheaper; the Geographical Enquirer being at his choice to buy, or turn over only what concerns himself; and he who searches after any matter merely Historical, not being oblig'd to the charge or trouble of the other.
Of Divers MEASURES. THE Measures of differing Nations, and especially those of the Distan∣ces of Places, being very various, it was necessary to premise something about them, that the English Reader might not be at a loss when he meets with them in the following Work. The English Mile by Statute Law consists of 5280 London Feet, or 1760 Yards, and eight Furlongs. Of these Miles the Experiments of Mr. Norwood and Mr. Picart, do demonstrate 69, and somewhat more, to be a Degree of the Earths Surface; tho till lately a Degree has been reckoned but 60 English Miles. A Marine League is the twentieth part of a Degree, and most Nations agree to reckon so for Distances at Sea. A French League is the twenty fifth part of a Degree, being nearly two English Miles and three quarters. A German Mile is reckoned to be the fifteenth part of a Degree, or better than four English Miles. A Dutch Mile, such as are now used in Holland, is by the Experiment of Snellius, nearest the nineteenth part of a Degree, being about three English Miles and a half. An Italian Mile is mille passus, or a thousand Paces of five Roman Feet each; and the Roman Foot being ⅖ of an Inch less than the London Foot, or as 29 to 30, it follows that nearest 76 Italian Miles are a Degree. And the Turkish Miles are reputed equal to the Italian. The Danes, Swedes, and Hungarians make long Miles, being about a German Mile and half, or at least five or six English Miles. The Polish Miles are nearly equal to the Dutch Miles, and reckoned about 20 to a Degree. The Scotch and Irish Miles are longer than the English, by about half, and are not defined by any certain measure, that I can learn. The Spanish League is estimated at four Italian Miles, and are reckoned 17 and a half to a Degree. The Russians use a short Measure they call Vorst, which is little more than three quarters of an English Mile. The Arabian Mile, both Ancient and Modern, is about an English Mile and a quarter. As to the Measures of the Ancients, The old Roman Mile was nearly equal to the present Italian Mile, described al∣ready, and was divided into eight Stadia, or Furlongs, of 625 Roman Feet each. The Greeks measured by Stadia only, consisting of 600 Greek Feet, or 100 Orgyiae; eight of these made the Roman Mile, the Greek Foot being to the Ro∣man, as 25 to 24, nearly. The Persian League or Parasanga, was much about a Spanish League, being 30 Stadia, or three Italian Miles and three quarters. The Schoenus or Egyptian League was of two sorts, the greater of 60 Stadia, and the lesser of 40, the one of five, the other seven and a half Italian Miles.
A GEOGRAPHICAL DICTIONARY, In which are Represented The Present and Antient NAMES of all the Countries, Provinces, Remarkable Cities, Towns, Ports, Seas, Streights, Fountains, Rivers, Mountains, Ʋni∣versities, &c. of the Whole WORLD. AA, a River of Transisselane, or Over-Issel, a Province of the Low Countries. It washeth the Walls of Steen∣wick and the Fort of Block∣zil, and then falls into the Zuyder-Sea. The Word Aa is an usual Name in Ger∣many for Rivers, especially of the lesser. Aa, a River of Westphalia, falling into the Yssel, supposed by some to be the Velicer. Aa, a small River in the Canton of Bern in Suit∣zerland, called by the Inhabitants des Arquebusades, from the virtue it has for curing Wounds made by Gun∣shot. Aa, another River in the Territory of Bologne, called also Agnio and Euneno, disemboguing it self into the Sea at Graveline. Aade, a small River of Brabant which runs not far from Boisleduc. Aahuis, a small Town in the Bishoprick of Munster, situate on the River Aa, from whence it hath its Name. Aar, Arola, the principal River in Suitzerland, it springs from S. Gothards Hill near the Head of the Rhosne, and being increased with many Rivers, falls into the Rhine at Waldshut, one of the Forest Towns. There are two other little Rivers in Germany thus called. Aarbourg, or Aarberg, a pleasant little Town in Suitzerland, full of wealthy Tradesmen, tempted to fix their Habitations there by the Pleasantness of the Situation, and the frequent Marts there holden. Aba, a Town in Arabia Felix, according to mo∣dern Geographers. § Also a Mountain in the Confines of the Greater Armenia, at the foot whereof arises the River Euphrates. § A Town in Phocis in Greece, which gave the Surname Abaeus to Apollo, who had a Temple there. Being burnt by Xerxes, the Inha∣bitants retired into the Isle of Negropont, formerly Euboea; from them at that time called Abantis. Abacares, a People in the South of America up∣on the River Madera. Abahius, Abahuis and Abanhi, different Names of the River Nile. Abaimbe, Abaibe, Abibe; Abaibae, a Ridge of Mountains in Peru, in the Province of Carthagene near the Gulf of Ʋraba. Abanbo, a River of Ethiopia, it falls into the Nile a little above Meroë, it is supposed to be Ptolo∣my's Astapus. Abancay, a River rising in the Mountains of Andes in Peru, and after having washed a Town of the same Name with it self, falling into the River Maragnon in the Province of Lima. Abano, in Latin Aponus, a Village in the Territo∣ries of Padua, supposed by some to be the Birth-Place of Titus Livius, antiently famous for its Baths. Abantes, the Inhabitants of Aba. See Aba. Abanwiwar, a County of the Upper Hungary up∣on the Tibiscus, the Capital of which is Caschaw; it is called by the Germans Abaviwar. Abara or Abaraner, a City upon the River Alin∣geac in Armenia Major. The Arch-Bishop of Nas∣sivan frequently makes it his place of Residence. Abaraus and Aboraas, a Town in Guinea, upon the River Volta, about twenty five Leagues from the Sea. Abarim, a Ridge of Mountains in the Rocky Ara∣bia, of which Mount Nebo and Mount Pisgah, men∣tion'd in Scripture, are parts. Abarimon, a Country in Scythia, at the foot of the Mountain Imaus. Abasses or Abcasses, a People of Mount Caucasus, bordering on Mengrelia, well-shap'd and vigorous. They cherish Customs much differing from the People of other Countries. Abbefort, a Town in Norwey with a good Port, in the Government of Aggerhuys, about 20 Leagues from Anslo, and 25 or 30 from Stafanger. Abbeville, a City of the County of Ponthieu in Picardy, upon the River Somme; it is well fortified,
large and beautiful, and lies 34 Leagues from Paris to the North. It belonged heretofore to the Abby of S. Riquer, and from thence had its Name. Abdera, an antient City of Thrace, famous, among other things, for the Madness of the Inhabitants. Of latter days it was call'd Clazomenae, then Polystile or Astrizze, and at this time Asperosa. Abensperg, a little Town of Bavaria three German Miles from Ratisbon, and one from the Danube. It gave Birth and Surname to Joannes Aventinus a Learned Historian, who wrote Annals of his Country from the Flood to 1460. in Ten Books. Aberconwey, in Latin Conovium, a Town in the County of Carnarvon in Wales seated on the River Conwey and the Irish Sea. Aberdeen, in Latin Aberdenia and Devana, a Ci∣ty of Scotland, built upon the River Don, fifty Miles distant from S. Andrews to the North-East; Here is an Episcopal Chair brought thither in 1100. and an University founded in 1480. The Site thereof is of late times removed nearer the River Dee. It was yielded to the English without constraint, in 1651. Long. 18. 12. Lat. 57. 15. Aberfraw, Gadiva, a Town in the Isle of Anglesey, the Royal Seat of eleven Kings of North-Wales, where∣of Amarawd the first began his Reign there, A. C. 877. and Llewellin the last of all the Brittish Kings was slain in Battel, Ann. Chr. 1282. Long. 15. 20. Lat. 53. 10. Abergavenny, in Latin Gobannium, a Town in the County of Monmouth in Wales: It belonged to the Silures when the Romans conquered them; it is fortified with a Wall and Castle, and seated where the Ʋske and Gevenny meet. It was erected into a Baro∣ny, which in 1685. was possessed by George Nevil, Lord Abergavenny, first Baron of England. Abernethy, a Town on the River Tay in Strathern in Scotland, anciently the Seat of the Kings of the Picts, and since a Bishops Sea, is now removed to S. Andrews, where we shall speak further of it. Abia and Abiamu, a great River in Zagathay, coming into the Caspian-Sea on the East side; the Oxus of the Antients. The former Name denoting the upper part, and the latter the lower part thereof. Abilene, a Territory of Judaea, so named from Abila the chief Town thereof, the Tetrarchate of Ly∣sanias, mentioned Luke iii. 1. Abington, a Corporation in Barkshire, on the Thames, between Oxford and Wallingford, garison'd for the Parliament against Charles the First, in 1644. which proved a great Inconvenience to that Prince. It stands about 5 Miles South of Oxford. The Right Honorable James Bertie was created Earl of this place November 30. 1682. by Charles II. Abissinia, see Aethiopia. Abiz, Jatrus, Ischar, a small River of Bulgaria which falls into the Danube a little below Nicopolis. Ablon, a little Town with a Castle, about 3 Leagues from Paris, where the Protestants were for some time allow'd the Exercise of their Religion, till they had a Church at Charenton. Abo, the Capital City of Finland, under the Arch-Bishop of Ʋpsal, upon the River Aviaroki in South Finland, near the Shoars of the Baltick Sea, 25 Ger∣man Miles from Revel to the North-West, and 31 from Stockholme to the North-East. Longit. 45. Latit. 63. This City was well nigh burnt to the ground in 1678. Abocharana, a Town in Arabia the Happy, situate on a high Mountain, the Passage to which is for seven Miles so strait, that not above two Men can go abrest. Here the Grand Seignior keeps his Treasure. Aboras, or Chaborras, a River in Mesopotamia, sometimes call'd Giulap. Aborigines, were the most antient People of La∣tium, the Seat of the first Original Romans; they are mentioned by Tacitus Annal. 11. as one of the first Nations in Italy which received Letters from Evander the Arcadian. They are supposed to have been the first People which entred Italy after the Flood. The Word is generally used to signifie the first Inhabitants of any Country, of whose Original no account can be given. Aboy, a Market Town in East Meath, in the King∣dom of Ireland. Abrener, a City of Armenia the Greater. See Abara. Abreoios, otherwise Baxos de Babueca; certain Rocks near the Island of Hispaniola, so called by the Spaniards because of the great danger of them: their Name signifying Open your Eyes. Abrolhos, a litte Isle with a Ridge of Rocks near the Shore of Brasil, for the same reason thus call'd by the Portuguese as those aforenam'd by the Spaniards. Abruckbanya, Aurariarum, a Town in Transyl∣vania. Abruzzo, called by the Romans Aprutium, is a Province of the Kingdom of Naples; it is bounded on the East with Apulia, now Puglia, on the West with Marca Anconitana, on the North with the Adria∣tick Sea, and on the South with the Apennine; it was anciently the Seat of the Piceni, and the Sam∣nites, which latter People by their Valor put the con∣quering Romans to the last refuge of chusing a Dicta∣tor four times, and afforded them the Honor of XXX. Triumphs. Their last was in 481. year of Rome, 270 years before our Saviours Birth: This is one of the greatest, richest, and best peopled parts of the King∣dom of Naples. Absorus, an Island and City on the Coast of Illy∣riam, mentioned by Hyginus. Abugana, a Province in the Realm of Angota, part of the Dominions of the Grand Negus. Abuyo, one of the Philippine Islands in the East-Indies, between Luzonia and Mindanao; in this and the rest the Spaniards have Forts, and drive a great Trade with their American Territories. Abutich, heretofore Abydus, a very eminent City of Egypt, 22 Miles from Ptolemais to the North; it stands upon the Nile. Here was the Palace of Mem∣non, and the Temple of Osiris, so much celebrated in the ancient Poetry, and Mythick History. Long. 61. 20. Lat. 26. 50. Abydos, a Fortress in Asia opposite to Sestos in Europe on the Hellespont, both which are now called the Dardanelli; made famous by the Love of Hero and Leander, and by the vast Bridge here laid cross the Sea by Xerxes. Abyla, a Mountain in Afric, answering to Calpe another Mountain in Spain on the European side of the Streight of Gibraltar; they are usually call'd Her∣cules Pillars, because they were the bounds of his Tra∣vels Westward. This is now call'd by the Mariners Apes-Hill, either corruptly from Abyla; or, as they say, from the multitude of Apes there to be seen. Abyso, anciently Orinus, is a River of Sicily, which falls into the Sea between Syracusa and Pachynus, or Cape Passaro, the most Southern Promontory of that Island. Aca, Acre, Acri, or Acon, a Sea-Port in Pheni∣cia, which was called by the Grecians and Romans Ptolemais, the latter fixed here a Colony: After the loss of Jerusalem, in the times of the Holy War it was the Capital of that Kingdom for some time, till being taken by the Moors it was intirely ruined, it lies 24 Miles South of Tyrus. Long. 66. 30. Lat. 33. 00. From this place the Knights of S. John of Jerusalem removed to Rhodes. Acachuma, the Achuma of Ptolomy, a Town in
Ethiopia, which the Inhabitants take to have been the Residence of Maqueda Queen of Sheba. Acada, Sangarius, a River of Bithynia. Acadinus, a Fountain in Sicily, where they tried the verity of an Oath, by writing it on a Board, and throwing it into the Water, where if it sunk, it be∣token'd it to be false. Acafran, otherwise Celef or Quinalaf, a River of Mauritania, now called Vetxilef. Acamante or Acamas, a Promontory on the West side of the Isle of Cyprus, at this time known by the name of Crusocco, or Capo di S. Epifanio. Acanes, two Cities of Guinea in Africa; one called the Greater, the other Acanes the Less. Acanthus, the antient Name of several Towns and Cities at this time unknown, except one in Acarnania, now call'd Erisso according to Sophian, and another in Egypt now nam'd Bisalta. Acapulco, a City of New Spain, in the Pacific Sea, or Mar del Zur, near 100 Leagues from Mexico, where they usually imbark for Peru and the Philippine Islands. Acarnania, the antient Name of a Province of Epi∣rus, now by Niger said to be call'd Despotato, parted from Aetolia by the River Achelous and Mount Pin∣dus; heretofore remarkable for the Luxury of its In∣habitants, and the Excellency of the Horses there bred. § A Town also there was of this Name in Sicily, not far from Syracuse, mention'd by Tully to have been famous for a Temple there dedicated to Jupiter; which Temple was afterwards destroy'd by the Goths. Acaxi, a City of Japan, 25 Leagues from Meaco the Capital City of that Kingdom. Acaxulta, a considerable Port in New Spain on the Shore of Mar del Zur, about seven Leagues from S. Salvador, between New Leon and S. Jago de Gua∣timala. Accadia, a Province on the North-East Coast of America, part of Nova Francia, seiz'd by the English, and by them called Nova Scotia; but return'd to the French upon the Treaty of Breda, 1667. § Also a little City in the farther Principate of the Kingdom of Naples. Accadie, a Peninsula in New France. Accara, The Name of two Towns in Guinea, the Greater and the Less, between the River Volta and Fort S. George de Mina. Accaraig or Accarig, a Town in Peru, near the River Parana, called also the Nativity of the Blessed Virgin. Accaron, Ekron, heretofore a famous City of the Philistins, now a poor Village, and called by the same Name. Accettura, a little City in that part of Naples call'd the Basilicate. Acci, Guadix, a City, Bishoprick and Colony of Spain, in the Kingdom of Granada, nine Leagues from Granada East. It lies at the Foot of the Mountains not far from the Head of the River Guadalentin; it was taken from the Moors, in 1489. The Bishop of it is under the Archbishop of Sevil. Accia, a City and Bishoprick of the Island of Cor∣sica, now ruined, and the Bishoprick united with that of Mariana. Acdeniz, the present Turkish name of the Egean Sea, or Archipelago. Aceldama, a Field near the Valley of Tophet in Judaea, to the South of Mount Sion and of the Valley of Jehoshaphat, serving for a Burying-place for Stran∣gers and Pilgrims that die at Jerusalem. This Name signifying a Field of Blood, was given it instead of that of The Potters Field, because it was bought with the thirty Pieces of Silver, which were the price of Judas his betraying our Saviour. Acellaro, by some call'd Abisso and Atellari, the Elorus of the Antients, a River in Sicily, falling into the Sea near the Ruines of the old City Elorus. Acerenza, or Cirenza, anciently known by the name of Acherontia, a City of the Kingdom of Naples in the County called the Basilicate, which is a part of Cala∣bria; this City lies upon the River Bradanum at the foot of the Apennine, it was formerly an Archbishop∣rick, but the City being in a declining state, the See is united to that of Mateola. Acerno or Acierno, a little City in the Citerior Principality of the Realm of Naples, 15 Miles from Salern to the East. L'Acerra, a City and Bishoprick of the Kingdom of Naples, under the Archbishop of Naples, and but 8 Miles distant from the Capital City: it lies in Terra di Lavoro in the Road to Benevento. Acesine, a River in Sicily, having its rise on the North of Mount Aetna, said to be now called Cantara and Alcantara. § Also the antient Name of a consi∣derable River in Asia, which falls into the Indus, fa∣mous for the large Canes growing on its Banks. § Another there is so nam'd in the Taurica Cherso∣nesus or Przecop. Acha, Achza, a River of Bavaria, it flows through the Lake of Chiemeze, and falls into the Ri∣ver Inns, which last River falls into the Danube at Passaw. Achacica, Achachica, Achiacica, a Town of New Spain, where there are several Mines of Silver; it lies 18 Leagues North from S. Angelo. Achaia, is taken in a twofold signification, either denoting the whole Country of Hellas or Greece; still enjoying the same Appellation, as well as that of Li∣vadia, by which Name also it is now call'd. It con∣tain'd the Provinces of Boeotia, Attica, Doris, Pho∣cis, &c. being bounded on the East by the Aegean Sea or Archipelago, on the South by the Gulfs of Saro∣nique and Corinth with the Isthmus, on the West by Epirus, and on the North by Thessaly: Remark∣able for the great Confederacy made by the Cities here∣of against the Romans. § Or else it denotes a little Region in the Peloponnesus called Achaia propria, be∣tween Sicyon and Elis. § It was also the Name of a City in Crete, and of another in Rhodes, and of a Fountain in Mssenia. Acham, a Province of Africa, on the Coast of Zanguebar, in the possession of the Arabians, bor∣der'd on the South by a Country inhabited by Negros and Heathens. Achamba, See Ceylan. Achasse, a River in East-France in the Territory of Vivarez, rising in the Hills near Viviers, and having Teil on the left, soon after falling into the Rhosne. Achatbaluc or Achbaluo, by some Achbaluc-Man∣gi, or White Town, a little City in the Province of Tainfeu in Cathay, giving its Name to the adjacent Territory. Achates, the old Name of a River in Sicily, now call'd Drillo. Achbaluck, a City of the Asiatick Tartary, in the Province of Tainfeu, not far from Cambalu, and built upon a Lake. The same with Achatbaluc. Achelo, Anchialus, called by the Turks Keuchis, a City of Thrace, upon the Euxine Sea, mentioned by Orpheus and Ovid, 24 Miles from Develto. Achelous, a famous River among the Poets and fabulous Writers. It rises in Mount Pindus, and di∣viding Aetolia from Acarnania, falls into the Ionian Sea. It has at several times had the Names Geromlea, Catochi, Aspropotame, Aspri, and now is call'd Pa∣chicolamo. Achem, a very large City, the Capital of a King∣dom
of the same Name in the North part of Sumatra, in the East-Indies. The King of this City is in league with the Dutch, who export from hence many rich Commodities, and much Pepper. Acheron, a River in Epirus, rising in the Marsh Acherusia, and having receiv'd several lesser Rivers in its passage falling into the Sinus Ambracius in the Adriatic Sea. Now called Velichi and Verlichi. § Another River in Calabria, now nam'd Bassento, Sanuto, or Campagnano according to several Authors. Acherusia, the name of several Loughs or Marshes; one in Epirus aforenam'd. § Another in Aegypt▪ whereinto the Inhabitants were wont to put the dead Corps of their Friends in order to be transported to the contrary shore by a Ferryman there plying, in the language of the place call'd Charon. Hence many Fables. § Another in Campania, between Capua and Baiae, now nam'd Lago di Colluccia. Achillea, otherwise Achillis cursus, , a Peninsula near the Mouth of the River Bo∣rysthenes. Now call'd Cacearia according to some. Achlar, Araxis, a famed River of Armenia Ma∣jor, it is called in the latter Maps Arais, by others Caiacz, by the Persians Arass: Its ancient Name is fetched from the violence of its Stream. The Foun∣tains of this River are within 16 Miles of the Foun∣tains of the Euphrates. And it divides Armenia from Media Atropatia, and falls into the Caspian Sea. Bus∣bequius saith, that in his time (viz. 1545.) this River was the bound between the Persian and the Turkish Empires, as I believe it is still. There is another of the same name in Mesopotamia, which falls into Eu∣phrates below Thapsacum. Achonry, a decaying City in the Province of Con∣naught in the Kingdom of Ireland in the County of Letrim; it is an Episcopal Sea under the Archbishop of Tuam; the City is sinking every day more into ruin. Achrida, Achris, Achridius, Adirida, by the Turks called Giustandil, Justinian the Emperor being born here, rebuilt it, and called it Justiniana, and made it the Metropolis of Macedonia, in which it stands, and of Bulgaria; it is still a strong and populous City go∣verned by a Sangiack, it is situated near the Lake of Lychnidum. It has been in the Turks hands 200 years. Achterwaldt, Silva Arduenna, a famous Wood, that heretofore extended very near the whole breadth of Germany. Achyr, a City of Poland in the Palatinate of Kiovia, upon the River Vorsklo towards the borders of Moscovia: It has a Castle and is well fortified; some few years since it has been in the hands of the Moscovites. It stands 25 Polonian Miles beyond the Borysthenes. Acaponda, a Town of the East-Indies, in the confines of the Bay of Bengala, and of the Kingdom of Pegu: it has a Harbor belonging to it. Acierno, a small Episcopal City in the Citerior Principate, under the Archbishop of Salerno, from whence it is distant 25 Miles to the South-East. Acojolu, Armenia Minor. Acqs, commonly Dax, Aquae Augustae, called heretofore Tasta also, is an Episcopal City of Gas∣coigne, under the Archbishop of Euse, in Aquitain in France; upon the River Dour, or Adour, which falls into the Aquitain Sea at Bajonne. This City has Baths in it, and is distant about five Miles from the Ocean, and about ten from Bajonne to the South-East. Acquapendente, a City in S. Peter's Patrimony, seated on a rising ground by the River Pelia; aboun∣ding in Waters, from whence it has its name. It was made a Bishops See by Pope Innocent X, in 1650. in∣stead of Castro a ruined City; 40 Miles distant from Senis. Acqui, Aquae Statiellae, a City of Liguria, in the Dukedom of Montferrat, under the Dominion of the Duke of Mantua; and a Bishops See under the Arch∣bishop of Milan: it lies upon the River Bormia to∣wards the Apennine, about 16 Miles from Asta, to the North East. Here are several hot Baths, to which there is great resort of People. This City suffered much damage in the last Italian Wars. Acsa, a Lake in Bithynia, and a River of the same name. Acsar, Acserai, Ain-zarba, Anazarbus, A City of Cilicia, heretofore an Archbishops See under the Pa∣triarch of Antioch; now ruined by the Turks: it is 18 Miles distant from Flaviada towards the East, up∣on the River Pyramus. Long. 64. 20. Lat. 38. 50. Dioscorides was born here, a famous Physician in Nero's times; who wrote several things which are still extant. Actium, a most celebrated Promontory with a City of the same name in Epirus. It was here that Augu∣stus overthrew Marc Anthony and Cleopatra in the year of Rome 722 or 23, about 30 years before the coming of our Saviour. Apollo had a magnificent Temple dedicated to him, and Games every five years were celebrated in his honour in this City▪ after the manner of the Olympicks. Strabo gives us a particu∣lar description of all that Augustus did to it, to eter∣nalize the memory of his Victory. He reedified the Temple of Apollo, revived the Games, and called the City Nicopolis to carry the remembrance of his Vi∣ctory in its very name. The Promontory is now call'd, Trigalo. See Trigalo. Aczud, Aczudia, a small Town in Moldavia up∣on the River Missovo above Breslaw. Adamah or Admah, mention'd Gen. 0. 19. One of the Cities of the Plain that God destroy'd by fire from Heaven with Sodom and Gomorrha. Adavoi, a People of Guinea in Africa. Adda, Addua, a River that parts the Dukedom of Milan from the State of Venice, it ariseth in the Alpes, and falls into the Po, 6 Miles above Cremona towards Placentia, also the name of a Country in the Milanese betwixt this River and Serio; memorable for the Victory obtained by Lewis XII. of France over the Venetians May. 14. 1509. Adea, a Kingdom of Aethiopia in Africa, exten∣ded upon the Eastern Ocean at the entrance of the Red Sea: It was once under the Kings of Aethiopia, but has now a King who doth not depend upon them. Magadoxo, the Capital of this Kingdom and a Sea-Port, is become a separate Kingdom also; it lies in three degrees of Northern Latitude. Adegele, Chrysorrhoas, a River of Damascus, in Scripture called Pharpar: it flows through Damascus and its fields, where it is lost and never reacheth the Sea: its Fountains are in Libanus. This is one of the Rivers mentioned by Naaman the Syrian, 2 King. 5. as better than all the Waters of Israel. Adel, a small Kingdom in Africa at the mouth of the Red Sea, heretofore called Azania; with a City and a River of the same name. Adelsperg, Postonia, Pistonia, a Town in Cro∣atia. Aden, a very strong Town in Arabia Foelix, at the Foot of the Mountains not far from the Mouth of the Red Sea. It has a very large Sea-Port, and is also the head of a Kingdom of the same name. The Turks in 1538. took this Town and hang'd up their King, but not long after the Inhabitants revolted and put themselves under the Protection of the King of Mocha, and expelled the Turks again. This Country was known to the Romans by the name of Adana, who had here a great Trade. § Also a Mountain in the King∣dom of Fez, remarkable for Mines of Silver. § There
is a City of the same name in Cilicia, which is an Archbishoprick under the Patriarch of Antioch, upon the River Malmistra or Piramus, and often mention'd by the antient Geographers. Ader, or Eder, a Tower within a Mile of Bethle∣hem, said to be built by the Patriarch Jacob and that here the Shepherds were advertised by Angels of the Birth of our Saviour. Aderborn, a small Town in Pomerania upon the Oder, a little above Stetin, belonging to the Swedes. Aderburg, a small Town in the Electorate of Brandenbourg upon the Oder. Adiabene, a Province of the antient Assyria which for some time was itself a Kingdom; now called Bo∣lan, or according to others Mesere and Sarca. Its two Rivers, Adiabas and Diabas, are mention'd by A. Marcellinus. Admirati, a River of Sicily. Whether this or Ba∣jaria be the Eleutherus of the Antients is a dispute amongst Geographers. Adon, a small River of Bretagne in France, which falls into the Vilaine. Adonis, a River of Phaenicia in Syria, arising near to Mount Libanus and dividing the Kingdom and Patriarchate of Jerusalem from Tripoli and the Patri∣archate of Antioch, falls into the Mediterranean near Gibel. Adour, a River of Aquitain, vide Dour. Adra, a small Sea-Coast Town in the Kingdom of Granada in Spain, with a Port and a strong Castle: it stands upon the Mediterranean Sea, 9 Leagues to the West of Almeria, which has robb'd it of the Bishops Sea, heretofore belonging to it. Adran, Adranon, a Town in Sicily, of old famous for an Idol Temple of the name. Adraon, Adraton, a City and sometime a Bishops See in Arabia, mention'd corruptly by the name of  for  in the 16th. Session of the Council of Chalcedon. Adraste, a Territory, and an ancient City in Mysia, famous heretofore for a Temple dedicated to Nemesis. Adria, Atri, Hadria, a City, and an Episcopal See under the Archbishop of Ravenna, in the Pole∣sine, in the States of Venice; little inhabited. Some believe the Adriatique Ocean, which we now call the Gulph of Venice, derived its Name from hence. Adrianople, Ʋscudama, Oresta, is a City in the midst of Thrace, taken by Bajazet in 1362. after which it became the Seat of their Empire till the take∣ing of Constantinople, An. 1403. This City was re∣built by Hadrian the Roman Emperor, from whom it has its Name, but is now called by the Turks End∣rem, by the French Adrianople. It is an Archbishops See, under the Patriarch of Constantinople, and is di∣stant from it 150 Miles West, being seated upon the River Mariza, (Hebrus.) The late deposed Emperor of the Turks for the most part resided in it; he hating Constantinople, and loving Hunting. Adrinza, the present Name of Assyria, once the Mistris of the World. Adrobe, a River of that part of the Asian Tartary, which is subject to the Moscovites: it falls into the Wolga beneath Cazan. Adrumete, the same with Mahometa. Adula, the Name of a part of the Alpes from S. Gothard. Aduliten, Adulis, an antient City in Africa upon the red Sea, now called Ercoco. Adyrmachides, an antient People of Libya towards Egypt. Their Daughters, newly married, were pre∣sented to their King, who had a right to use or refuse them. Aethiopia, is about one half of Africa: it is di∣vided into two parts, the Upper and the Lower. The Upper is bounded on the North by Egypt and Libya, on the West by the Lower Aethiopia, as also on the South; on the East it is bounded by the Red Sea, and the Arabian and Barbarian Bays: it contains Nu∣bia, Abissinia, the Kingdoms of Muaci, Macoci, and Zanguebar, &c. The Lower Aethiopia is bounded on the North by Libya, on the East by the Upper Aethiopia, on the West and South by the Aethiopian Ocean: It contains the Kingdoms of Monomotapa and Monemugi, the Western Aethiopians, which are divided into the King∣doms of Congi, Loangi, and Angola, &c. This more Southern Part of Africa, which was little known to the Ancients, was found out by the Portugals. Aferat, The present Name of Euphrates, one of the most celebrated Rivers in the World: called by the Arabians Frat; it springeth from the Mountains of Armenia Major, and running to the West receives the Harpage and Arsametes; then it bends to the South, and divides the greater Armenia from the lesser. Then it washeth Mesopotamia on the West and South, and divides it from Syria, and Arabia Deserta; and at Cresiphon, it runs into the Tigris, with which it falls into the Persian Gulph beneath Teredon and Balsera. Afra, a strong Castle upon the Frontiers of Zaa∣ra in Africa, and stands divided into Egypt, Barbary, Biledulgerid or Numidia, Zaara or Libya, Nigritia and Aethiopia. AFRICA, one of the four principal Parts of the Earth, so called by the Grecians, because it seldom feels any Cold: it is bounded on the North by the Mediterranean Sea, on the West and South by the Ocean, on the East by the Arabian Gulph and the Red Sea, being only joyned to Asia by a Neck of Land. It was anciently known no farther South than to the Mountains of the Moon, till the Portugueses of late discovered the Southern Parts. The inland parts of it are generally barren, and almost Desert by reason of the Sands, and venomous Creatures, and want of Wa∣ter: it is almost twice as big as Europe. Afrique, Africa, the Aphrodisium of the Antients, a Town and Port in Barbary in the Kingdom of Tunis, 20 Leagues from Mahometa. Charles V. took it from the King of Morocco, and demolish'd it. Aga or Agag, a Kingdom with a City of the same Name in the Upper Aethiopia. Agades, a Kingdom with a City of the Name in Nigritia in Africa; tributary to the King of Tombut. Agan or Pagan, an Islet in the Eastern Ocean, be∣twixt Chomocoan and Guagan; where the famous Por∣tegueze, Magellan, was assassinated as he was going in search of the Moluccaes. Aganara or Aganagare, a City on this side the Ganges in the East-Indies, remembred by Ptolomy. Aganippe, a Fountain in Boeotia in Greece, cele∣brated by the antient Poets. Agaosi, a People in the Kingdom of Bagamedri in the Upper Aethiopia. The Agarens or Hagarens, a People of Arabia Foelix, descended from Agar and Ismael, who went to war with the Tribes of Ruben, Gad, and Manasse, in the time of Saul. Their capital City is called after their own Name Agarena or Agranum. When they revolted from the Roman Empire under Trajan, that Emperor attempted the Reduction of them without success: and since Mahomet was born amongst them, they have been of his Religion. Agarus, Sagaris, a River of the European Sar∣matia, which falls into the Danube in Moldavia, now call'd Stiret, according to Ortelius. Agathyrse, Agatyrium, Agathyrna, an antient Ci∣ty and Promontory in Sicily. The Promontory is the same with that they now call Cape d'Orlando.
Agathyrses, an antient People of Scythia, ap∣plauded by Historians for their Hospitality to one another. Agde, a City in Languedoc in France, the Bishop of which is a Suffragan to the Archbishop of Narbone: It is a fine and well built place; seated at the mouth of the River Eraud, which there falls into the Mediter∣ranean Sea. Agdus, a famous Rock upon the Frontiers of Phrygia in Asia Minor. Agen, a City and Bishoprick in Guienne in France, under the Archbishop of Bourdeaux, and the Capital of the County of Agennois, which gives the Title of an Earl. It stands upon the Garonne, where it receives on the opposite side the River L'Egers. It is large, beautiful, and one of the best Cities of Aquitain, be∣ing also the Birth-place of Joseph Scaliger; about 15 Leagues from Bourdeaux to the North-East. Aggerhuis, a Province of Norway, so called from a Castle in it. It is bounded on the East with the King∣dom of Sweden, on the South with the Sound, on the West with the County of Bergen, and on the North with that of Drontheim, from which last it is sepa∣rated by the Mountain Sevone. It reacheth in length from the North to the South 240 Miles. The chief Cities of it are Ansloga, Fredericstad, Saltzbeg, and Tonbg: The whole of it is under the King of Den∣mark. Agion Oros, Athos, a Mountain in Macedonia, in the Province of Jamboli, call'd by the Italians il Monte Santo, by the Greeks , the Holy Mount. It runs into the Aegean Sea, like a Peninsu∣la; it is joyned to the Continent by a Neck of Land, of an Italian Mile and half, which Herodotus saith, was cut through by Xerxes. It is 90 Miles in com∣pass, called by the Turks Scididag and Monastir, by reason of the vast numbers of Monasteries in it, being about 24 Cloisters of Caloirs, or Greek Monks, the chief of which are Garopedos, and Agias Laura, in which two are 600 Monks, in all 5000. Most of these Monasteries are fortified to secure them from Pirats. From hence the Patriarch of Constantinople fetches most of the Bishops he needs for his Patriarchate, it be∣ing now the School or University of all Greece, the Monks are all of the Order of S. Basil. This Moun∣tain lies between the Bay of Strymon on the North, and that of Singo to the South. Agira, Agurium, Argirium, and Agnina Ʋrbs, is a City in Sicily near Mount Aetna. The Birth∣place of Diodorus Siculus, now called San Philippo d'Argirone. Aglie, a celebrated Castle in the Province of Cana∣vois in Savoy, which gives a Name to one of the most illustrious Houses in that Country. Agmet, the Emere of Ptolomy, an antient City in the Province of Marocco, sometime the Seat of that Empire, and very populous and strong, before Ma∣rocco was built. Agmundesham, a Corporation seated upon a small River which falls into the Isis, a little above Ʋxbridge, in the County of Bucks. It sends two Burgesses to our Parliament, and is not otherwise remarkable to my knowledge. It stands 9 Miles from Ʋxbridge to the North-West, and about 8 from Maidenhead to the North-East. Agnabet or Agnetlin, one of the principal Towns of Transylvania, seated upon the River Harbach, which falls into the Alt. In this place Q. Isabella as∣sembled a Diet for the preservation of her Son, which Martinsius dissolved, and began a War upon his Ma∣ster, which ended in both their ruins. Agno, Clanus, a River of Campania in Italy, call'd afterwards Liris: it riseth in Mount Tiphate, and flowing West between Avella and Nola, entereth Terra di Lavoro, makes the Lake of Linterna, and at last ends in the Sea of Tuscany between the Ruins of Cuma and the Mouth of the River Voltorno. Agnone, a Town in the Province of Abruzzo in Italy, understood by some to be the antient Aquilonia. Agobel, a City in the Kingdom of Tremissen in Bar∣bary, understood by some to be the Victoria of Pto∣lomy. Also another in the Province of Hea in the Kingdom of Marocco. Agol, a City in the Upper Aethiopia towards the Mountain Amara. Agore, Agorum, a small City upon the River Cor∣devol in the Dominions of the Republick of Venice. Agouges or D'Agouges, a small River of Auvergne in France, which falls into the Allier a little above San Porzain. Agouste, Augusta, a City in Sicily, built by Fre∣derick the Emperor in 1229▪ upon a Peninsula, which in the last Age was turned into a little Isle with a Bridge to communicate betwixt it and the Continent. It has a very large Haven defended by 3 Cittadels to the Sea. Taken by the French in 1675. and abandon'd by them in 1678. Agout, Acutus, a small River in Languedoc in France, washing the two Cities of Castres and La∣vaur, it falls into the River Tarne. Agra or Agara, a new City seated in a Province of the same Name in India beyond Ganges: It is the Capital of the Moguls Empire, and his residence; a rich and beautiful City, built by Ekebar, one of his Predecessors, in the last Age upon the River Gemini. It is of a vast circuit, and adorned with a stately Pa∣lace; on the other side of the River lies another Ci∣ty called Serandra, which is well built, and but a kind of Suburb to Agra. Agragas. See Gergenti. Agramont, Agramontium, a Town in Catalonia, in the Plain of Ʋrgel, between Solsona and Lerida. Agreable, an Island in the Kingdom of Fez, form'd by the River Lisse. Agreda, a small City in the Kingdom of Popayan in the South America, belonging to the Spaniards. Also a Town in Arragon upon the River Queiles, which some understand to be the Grachuris, others the Augustobriga of the Antients. Agri or Acri, a River in the Basilicata in the Kingdom of Naples. It arises at the Apennines, and passes by Marsico to the Gulph of Tarentum. Agria, called by the Germans Erlaw, is a little but very strong City of the Upper Hungary, upon a River of the same Name, which falls into the Tibis∣cus 12 Miles beneath it. It is a Bishops See under the Archbishop of Gran. This Town was taken by the Turks, An. 1596. But after a long Blockade surrendred to the Christians in 1687. It is 17 Miles distant from Buda to the North-East, in the Confines of Austria. Agrimonte, Grumentum, an antient City, and a Bishops See in the Basilicata in Naples. The latter has been since united to that of Marsico. Agriophags, an antient People towards the West of Aethiopia, who lived, says Solinus, altogether up∣on the Flesh of Panthers and Lions. Agropoli, Acropolis, a Town in the hither Prin∣cipate in the Kingdom of Naples. Agualua, and Agua de Moura, two Rivers in Por∣tugal which fall into the Cadaon in Estremadura. Agueda, a Town in Portugal, built upon the Ruines of the antient Aeminium. It takes this Name from a River which passes by it. Aguer, at City at the foot of Mount Atlas in Africa. Taken by the Portugueze in 1536. and since retaken by an Army of 50000 Moors. Aguila, a City in the Province of Habat in the Kingdom of Fez, upon the River D'Erguile.
Aguilard, Agilaria, a pretty considerable Town in old Castile about 14 Leagues from Burgos. Agulha, Acus, an Island in the Aethiopian Ocean, 300 Miles from Madagascar to the North. Ahausen, Ahuis, Ahusa, a small City in Schonen upon the Baltick Sea, to which it has a very com∣modious Port: four Leagues from Christianstad. Under the Swedes. Aia, Allia, a small River in Italy, which falls into the Tiber near Monte Rotundo in the States of the Church. The Gauls under Brennus defeated the Ro∣mans upon the Banks of it. Ajaluni, a City of Caria upon the Borders of Ly∣dia. Ajan, or the Coast of Ayan, a Country in Aethio∣pia, which lies along the Coast of the Sea of Zangue∣bar, from Magadoxo to the Cape Guardafuy. It con∣tains the Kingdoms of Adea, Adel, &c. Ajas, a City of Arabia Foelix, two days journey from Aderi. Thevet calls it Hegias, and makes a Kingdom of it. Ajazzo, Ajaccio, Adjacium, Ʋrcinum, an Episco∣pal City of Corsica, under the Archbishop of Pisa; on the Western Shoar; it has a strong Castle and a large Haven, and is a neat and beautiful City, flourishing now under the Dominion of the Republick of Ge∣noua; the greatest part of it is surrounded by the Sea, and it lies at the foot of the Mountains not above a Mile from the Old Adjacium. Aichstadt, Aureatum, as appears by an old In∣scription found there; a City upon the River Altmul, which falls into the Danube between Ingolstad and Ratisbon; it is a Bishops See under the Archbishop of Mogunce: It lies in the Confines of Bavaria, and the Dukedom of Schwaben, and is under the Civil Juris∣diction of its Bishop; two miles distant from Neu∣burg towards the North, eleven from Ratisbon to the West. There is some Controversie amongst learned Men about the old Name of this City. Aidinelli, Caria, a Province of the Lesser Asia; it lies right over against Rhodes, and has had several fine Cities in it, but they are all ruined by the Turks, who have been a long time Masters of this poor Pro∣vince. Aidos, Abydus, a City of the Lesser Asia, upon the Bosphorus; distant about a Mile and three quarters from Sesto, on the Thracian Shoar; heretofore a Suf∣fragan See, under the Archbishop of Cyzicum, from whence it is distant 21 Miles to the South; but now the Bishop of it is made a Metropolitan. It has a strong Castle, well fortified by Mahomet II. after he had ta∣ken Constantinople; and it is one of the Dardanels, which has ever in it a good Turkish Garison to defend the Passage, and secure Constantinople. Aiducal, ATLAS, the greatest Mountain in all Africa; it begins in Mauritania, near the Atlantick Ocean, to which it gives Name; by Cap de Guer, and by various windings, it extends it self Eastward as far as the Deserts of Barca; raising it self out of barren Sands, it hides its towring Head in the Clouds; and has variety of Names. The great height of it was the cause the Antiens feign'd Atlas, (whom they make a King) bore the weight of Heaven on his Shoulders. There is another Mountain call'd Atlas Minor, now Errif, which parts the Kingdom of Fez from that of Morocco. Ajclo, a Dutchy in the Province of Abruzzo in the Kingdom of Naples, belonging to the Prince of Massa. L'Aigle, Aquila, a small City in Normandy upon the River Rille, which gives the Title of a Baron. Aigueperse, the capital City of the Dutchy of Mont∣pensier in France, near whereunto the antient Castle of Montpensier stood, till it was demolished in 1634. Aigues Caldes, Aquae Calid, a City with natural Baths in it, in Gallicia in Spain. It is a Bishops See un∣der the Archbishop of Compostel, upon the River Minio. Aigues-Mortes, a City in the lower Languedoc, upon an Arm of the Rhosne and near the Sea. The Seat of the Excises upon Salt. Aiguilles, or Capo de Agulhas, a Promontory of Africa to the Cape of Good Hope. Aiguillon or Eiguillon, a City with the Title of a Dutchy in the County of Agennois in France, upon the Confluence of the Le and the Garonne, between Agen and Nerac. It once susteined a Siege of fourteen Months against John Duke of Normandy. Ailesbury, a fair Market-Town, well peopled, and built upon the rising of a Hill, by the Bank of Tame, in the middle of the County of Buckingham. Taken by Cuthwulf the Saxon, from the Britains, Anno 572. Famous heretofore for S. Edith here born. The Honourable Robert Bruce, was created Earl of this place, on March 8. 1684. It is a Cor∣poration, and sends Burgesses to the Parliament. Ailly, a Seigniory in Picardy, whence one of the noblest and antientest Families of that Province, the D'Aillyes, receive their Name. Ailzall, an Islet, or rather a Shelf upon the Coast of Scotland towards Galloway. Ainaon, Ahinaon, an Island to the Southern Coast of China. Its capital City bears the same Name. Aindre, once an Island 3 Leagues below Nantes in Brittany, at the falling of the Loyre into the Sea. It had a Monastery in it built by S. Hermeland; but both that and the Island have since been swallowed up by the Waters. Ains, Ens, Indus, Indis, Danus, and Idanus, a River of France which rises in the Valley of Meige in Burgundy, and passes to the Rhosne by Chateau-Vilain, Constances, &c. Ainza, a small City in Arragon upon the River Cinga, and the Capital of the Tract of Sobarbe, which has sometime born the Title of a Kingdom. Ainzia, a Tract in the County of Buchan in Scot∣land. Aire, Aturum, the chief Town of Gascoine, and a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Aux; it stands upon the River Adour, in the Borders of the County of Armagnac, four Aquitane Leagues above S. Sever, and sixteen from Bajonne. Aire, Aria, called by the Flandrians, Arien; by the Spaniards, Ere: it is a strong City in Artois, seat∣ed in a Marsh upon the River Leye, which falls into the Scheld at Gaunt; taken by the French in 1641. and presently recovered by the Spaniards; but it was retaken ; the French in 1676. and is now in their possession by the Treaty of Nimeguen. It is 12 Leagues from Bologn to the East. Aire, Aeria, by the Scotch Ayr, is a small City and Sheriffdom in Scotland, upon Dunbritain-Frith, on the West of that Kingdom: it stands 22 Scotch Miles from Donbritoun, South-West. Airu, a River of Scotland, which springs from the Mountains of Mar, and unites with the Spei in Bu∣chan. The City Aire stands upon it. Airy, Airiacum, a Village in Burgundy in Au∣xerrois near Clamecy. Here was a National Council held in 1020. under Pope Benedict VIII. Aisace, a small River in Normandy which joyns the Colsnon below d'Autrain. Aisne, Axona, a River of France, riseth in the Dukedom of Barois; and flowing through the Pro∣vinces of Champagne, and the Territory of Argonne, and that of Soissons, cuts the City of Soissons in two parts; and at last ends in the River Oise, a little East of Compeigne in the Isle of France. Aix, Aquae Sextiae, a City of Provence in France.
It was a Roman Colony, and is now an Archbishops See, and the Seat of the Parliament of that Province: a fair growing Town, seated in a large Plain, upon a small Rivolet, about 15 Leagues from Arles, and 13 from Avignon to the East. Aix, in Savoy, an antient City at the foot of the Mountains, between Chambery, Annecy, and Rumilly, giving the Title of a Marquess. It is famous for Mine∣ral Waters. Aix la Chapelle, Aquisgranum, called by the Germans Aab, by the Dutch Aken, by the French Aix, by the Italians Aquisgrana; it is an Imperial free City of Germany, in the Circle of Westphalia, within the Borders of the Dukedom of Juliers, un∣der which Prince it now is. Charles the Great of France died here Jan. 24. 814. and here he was bu∣ried; having been the Restorer of this City after At∣tila the King of the Huns had ruin'd it. It was al∣most intirely ruin'd by Fire again in 1656. but is now rebuilding. In 1658. there was a famous Peace made here between the present Kings of France and Spain. Divers Councils have been held here. This City stands 8 German Miles from Cologn, 7 from Liege, in a low place, almost incircled with Hills. Aizu, a Province of Japan, with a Town of the same Name, which is one of the best in the Country. Akerhuys, a Sea-port Town in the County of Ag∣gerhuys, not above 15 Miles from Christianstadt in Norway. Akerman, Alba, a City of Moldavia. Akersondt, an Island belonging to Norway, in the German Ocean, over against the Cape of Shagen. Akertewe, a City in the Isle of Maragnan on the Coast of Brasil. Akill, Achill, Achillia, a small Island on the Coast of Connaught in Ireland, over against the County of Mayo. Akroczim, a City in the Palatinate of Mazovia in Poland, fortifyed with a Castle. Aksteede. Acsteda, a small City upon the River Lun in the Dutchy of Bremen in Saxony, under the Swedes. Akza, a River of Georgia, in Asia. Al, a River of Prussia, believed by some to be the Guttalus of Pliny. Alahanda. See Eblaba. Alacranes, Islands infested with Scorpions, in the New America, 20 Leagues from Jucutan. Aladuli, the Turkish Name of Armenia major. Alagon, a River of Spain, in the Province of Estremadura, and Kingdom of Leon: it falls into the Taio, a little above Alcantara, as Rodericus Syl∣va saith. Alaine, a small River in the Province of Nivernois in France. Alais, Alesia, a City of Languedoc, upon the Ri∣ver Guerdon, at the foot of the Mountain Cevennes, 10 Leagues from S. Esprit to the East. Alalcomene, Alalcomenium, an antient City of Boeotia, famous for a Statue of Minerva, and the Tomb of Tiresias. Afterwards call'd Ithaca, says Plutarch, and the Birth-place of Vlysses. Alan, a small River in Cornwal in England; it falls into the Irish Sea at Padstow: at the Head of it is a small Village called Camelford, where King Ar∣thur is reported to have been slain in Battel. Padstow lies about 17 Miles West from Launceston. Aland, an Island of the Baltick Sea, at the en∣trance of the Botner Sea, under the Dominion of the King of Sweden. Alar, a River of Persia in Hyrcania, falling into the Caspian Sea. Alarcan, Illarco, a Town in New Castile in Spain. Alares, an antient People of Pannonia. Tacit. Alaschhir, Hipsius, Ʋpsu, an antient City of Phrygia, and sometime the See of a Suffragan Bishop. Alatri, Alatrium, Alatrinum, a City of Campa∣nia in Italy, and a Bishops See, dependent immediately on the Pope. Mentioned by the Antients. Alava, a small Territory in Biscay in Spain. Alba, or Albe, Alba Pompeia, a City of Monfer∣rat, upon the River Tangro; it is an Episcopal See. under the Archbishop of Millan; heretofore subject to the Duke of Mantua, but taken from him in 1631. by a Treaty of Peace, and ever since under the Duke of Savoy. This City of latter times having suffered great changes, is reduced into a consumptive State for want of Inhabitants. It is distant from Aste 12 Miles to the South. Albana, a City of Albania in Asia, with a Port to the Caspian Sea. Albania, an antient Province upon the Caspian Sea in Asia, Westward; now call'd Zuirie, under the Turks. § Also a Province of Turkey in Europe, which was antiently the Western part of Macedonia, and part of Illyrium, upon the Adriatique Ocean; reduced under the Dominion of the Turks by Maho∣met 2. Its chief Cities are Croia, Durazzo, &c. The Inhabitants for the most part are Christians of the Greek Church. Albany, Albania, call'd in Scotland Braid-Albin, is a Dukedom in the highest part of Scotland, as the Name imports; the Seat of the Old Scots, upon the declining Western part of Mount Grampus, next Lorn and Argile. Charles I. in his Infancy at two years of age, was created Duke of Albany. This Title was also conferred on the Lord Darnly, his Grandfather; and given by Charles I. to his Second Son, afterwards James II. Albano, Alba Longa, the Mother of Rome, from which it lies about 12 Miles. It has been ruin'd ma∣ny Ages. It stood betwixt a Lake and a Mountain of the same Name. There has been another Albano built near its Ruines, which is a Bishops See, a Prin∣cipality, and the Title of a Cardinal. § Also a City with the Title of a Principality in the Kingdom of Na∣ples. Albanopolis, an antient City of Macedonia in Greece. Alba Julia. See Weissenburg. Alba Regalis, called by the Inhabitants Ekekes Fesarwar; by the Germans Stoel-Weissemburg: Is a City of the Lower Hungary, once the Capital of that Kingdom, famous for the Coronation and Burial of the Kings of Hungary. It stands in a Marsh upon the River Sarwitz. Taken by the Turks Anno 1543▪ retaken by the Christians in 1601. taken again by the Turks in 1602. surrendred again to the Imperialists upon Articles, May 9. in the beginning of the Cam∣pagne of the Year 1688. The Imperialists found 84 Pieces of Cannon in it, with almost an incredible quantity of Ammunition and small Arms. It is 45 Miles from Buda West, and 60 from Comorra South. Long. 41. 10. Lat. 47. 8. S. Albans, [Verulamium] is the fairest and the best Town in the County of Hertford. It arose out of the Ruins of Verulam, a Town more strong and antient, seated on the opposite side of the River Ver. This new Town took its Name from one Alban a Citizen of Verulam, who in the Dioclesian Persecu∣tion, suffered Death for the Christian Religion, and is esteemed the first of the British Martyrs. To whose memory the Britains built a fair Church, which being ruin'd in the Wars between them and the Saxons, Offa King of the Mercians built here a Monastery to his honor, An. Chr. 795. the Abbot of which obtained from Pope Adrian, the Preceden∣cy of all English Abbots, to which an end was put,
Dec. 5 1539. by the surrender of the said Abby to Hen. VIII. Near this place Richard Duke of York overthrew Henry VI. and took him Prisoner Anno Dom. 1455. who four Years after was restored to his liberty again, by a Victory obtained here too. This Town had the Honor of an Earldom bestowed upon it by Charles II. April 27. 1660. in the person of Henry Jermin, then Baron of S. Edmondsbury in Suffolk. Since raised to a Dukedom by the same King. This Town lies upon the River Ver, 10 Miles from Hert∣ford to the South-West. The Old Town I shall speak of in its proper place. Albarazin, Albarazinum, a City, and a Bishops See in Arragon in Spain, under the Archbishop of Sa∣ragossa. Albasequia, a City of Sarmatia in Asia, supposed to be the Ampsulis of Ptolomy. Albegna, Albania, Almiana, a River in Tuscany, which falls into the Gulph of Telamont. Albemarle, called by the French Aumale, is a Town in Normandy in France, near the Head of the Ri∣ver Bssine, in the Confines of Picardy. It is memora∣ble for giving the Title of an Earl to the Noble Family De fortibus: And of Duke to Edward Earl of Rut∣land, after Duke of York. Given with the same Title to the Loyal, Wise, and Valiant George Monk, by Charles II. (July 7. 1660. who died Jan. 3. 1669.) It stands 14 Leagues from Roven East. Alben, Albins, a Mountain of Carniola, remark∣able for Mines of Quicksilver. § Also a River (Alpis) in Corinthia, which runs into the Save. Albenga, a City and Port in the Republick of Ge∣noua, antient, large, handsom, but not very health∣ful. In 1175. it was burnt by those of Pisa. Pope Alexander 3. made it a Bishops See in 1179. Titus Alius Proculus the Emperor was a Native of it. § Over against it stands an Islet of the same Name. Alberg, a City and Bishops See in Jutland. It lies not far from the Baltick Sea, in 58. deg. of Lat. Alberton, a Town and Port in Barbary. Albigeois, a small Territory in Languedoc in France, with a City in it call'd Alby. This Province is divided by the River Tarn, and very much taken no∣tice of in Church-History, for those great Oppositions, the Albigenses, its Inhabitants, made long since against the Church of Rome. Albila, Mercë, an Island made by the Nile in Ae∣thiopia, before it enters Egypt. Albion, the antient Name of Great Brittain. New Albion. See New Albion. Albon, a Territory in the Province of Vienne in Dauphine, giving the Title of a Count. Albona, Albonea, a River in the Dutchy of Milan in Italy, which passes by the Province of Novara to the Po. Alboran, or Albusama, Erroris Insula, a small Island with some Villages in it, and a Castle, upon the Coasts of the Kingdom of Fez. Alborg, Aeburgum, a City, and a Bishops See un∣der the Archbishop of Lunden in the Province of Jut∣land in Denmark, upon the Bay of Limfort. Alborno, Alburnus, a Mountain in the Kingdom of Naples, mentioned by Virgil; now call'd Monte di Po∣stiglione, and Montagna della Petina by the Italians. Albret, a City, County, and Dutchy in Gascony, the Original of the late Royal Family of Navar. Albs, the same with Savio, a River of Italy. Albufera, Amaenum Stagnum, a Lake in the King∣dom of Valencia in Spain. Albula, the antient Name of Tiber. Albuquerque, a City and Dutchy in the Province of Estremadura in Portugal. Alby, Albia, Albiga, a City of Languedoc in France, upon the River Tarn, the Capital of Albigeois, of great Antiquity. Sometime an Episcopal See un∣der the Archbishop of Bourges, but by P. Innocent X. at the instance of the present French King Lewis XI. translated into an Archbishoprick. The famous Al∣bigenses took their Name from hence. § Also a small City in the States of the Duke of Savoy, betwixt An∣necy and Aix, upon the declension of a Mountain. Alcairo, Memphis, a famous City of Egypt, seated a little above the Delta, where the Nile is first divided; it is call'd in Scripture Noph, and Migdol. Now wholly desolate. Alcala, Complutum, is a City of the Kingdom of Castile in Spain, seated upon the River Henarez. It was heretofore a Bishops See, but belongs now to the Archbishops of Toledo. One of which Franciscu Ximenius Cisnrus Archbishop of Toledo, and a Car∣dinal, in the year 1517. in the time of Alphonsus Sa∣piens, opened here an University: it is 6 Leagues from Madrid, and  from Toledo. Long. 17. 30. Lat. 41. 00. Alcantara, Norba Caesarea, Pons Trajani, Turo∣brica, a City of the Kingdom of Leon, upon the Ri∣ver Tajo. It is a small City, and of late years has been sortified to preserve it from the Incursions of the Portugueze, being but 3 Leagues distant from the Borders of that Kingdom. It is ennobled by a Bridge built over the River, of 670 foot in length, and 28, foot wide, which is generally attributed to Trajan; it stands upon 6 Pillars. This City was taken from the Moors by Alphonsus VIII. Anno 1013. Alcay, a fertile Mountain, well inhabited, twelve Leagues from Fez. Alcazar-Quivir, the capital City of the Province of Asgar, upon the Coast of Barbary. Built by Jacob Almansor, King of Fez. Taken by Alphonsus V. K. of Portugal in 1448. Alcazer-Zeguer, a Town in the Province of Ha∣bat in the Kingdom of Fez, upon the Streights. Built by Jacob Almansor, K. of Fez. Taken by Alphonsus V. King of Portugal, 1458. Abandoned by John III. K. of Portugal in 1540. yet now under the K. of Portugal. Alcmaer, a Town in the Northern parts of Holland, besieged by the Spaniards in 1573. without success. Alcozar d'Osal, Salacia, a small City of Portu∣gal upon the River Zadaon. Alcyone, an antient City of Thessalia. § Also the Name of a deep Lake in the Morea, near Corinth; where there was in antient times a Temple dedicated to Amphiaraus, which gave this Lake the Name of Fons Amphiarai. Aldebourg, a Village in Flanders. Aldeburgh, Isurium, a small Corporation in the County of Suffolk, situated upon the Sea Shoar, which sends two Burgesses to Parliament. Aldego, Aldegus, a River in the Province of Vero∣na in Italy, which unites with the Adige in the States of Venice. Aldenburg, Brannesia, a ruined City in Holstein, 8 Miles from Lubeck, which robb'd it of its Bishoprick in 970. This is by some call'd Olden-borch. It is but 2 Miles from the Baltick Sea; there is now nothing but a Castle left. Aldenburg, a Town of Misnia in Germany, upon the River Pleiss, which heretofore was a free Imperial City; but in 1308. was taken by Frederick, Marquess of Misnia, and united to Misnia. In the Castle of this Town was the antient Residence of the Dukes of Saxony. It is 6 German Miles distant from Lipsik to the South, and 8 from Misnia to the West. Some call it Altenburg. Aldernay, an Island on the Coast of Normandy. Ale, the Name of a Kingdom in Africa, belong∣ing to the Barbeci. Alegransa, a small Island with a convenient Haven and Castle near the Canaries.
Alentejo, or Entre Tejo Guadiana, a Province in Portugal, South-East of Estremadura, divided into 5 Counties; the chief City of which is Evora. A part of old Lusitania and Boetica. Alenzon, Alenconium, a large and well built City in Normandy, adorned with the Title of a Dutchy; it stands upon the River Sarte. This Title has been car∣ried by Eight of the Royal Family of Valois, and has since been conferr'd, occasionally, on many of the younger Princes of the Royal Family of France. It is 42 Miles from Paris. Aleppo, Berrhoea, Beroa, is a City of Syria, seated upon the River Marsya, which falls into Euphrates; at this day the greatest City of Syria, a Mart filled with innumerable Inhabitants, and European Mer∣chants; being 6 Miles in compass, with 3 Suburbs, 10 Gates, and an oblong Castle, which is very strong. It is the Seat and Government of a Bassa, 28 Leagues distant from Scanderoon towards the Euphrates, and 200 Miles Northward from Damascus; the English, French, and Venetians, have each of them a Consul here. Long. 58. 20. Lat. 31. 25. Alexia, an antient City, and a Bishops See under the Archbishop of Pisa in the Island of Corsica; now ruin'd. § A River of the same Name runs thereby, which is supposed to be the Rhotanus of Ptolomy. Alesa, an antient City of Sicily, with a River by it of the same Name, now call'd Pittineo. Alesham, or Aylesham, a Market. Town in Norfolk, in the Hundred of South-Erpingham. Alessio, Lyssus, a City of Albania, near the fall∣ing of the River Drin into the Adriatique; also a Bishops See under the Archbishop of Durazzo: famous for the Sepulchre of the great Scanderberg, who died here in 1467. Alessio, Alex, a River of Calabria in Italy, which falls into the Bay of Tarento. Alet, Alecta, a City of Languedoc in France, and a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Narbone; out of which Diocess it was taken by Pope John XXII. It is 5 Leagues from Carcassone, and stands at the foot of the Pyrenean Hills. Alexandretta. See Scanderone. Alexandria, a City of Egypt, call'd by the Turks Scanderik, a celebrated Mart, and the Seat of the se∣cond Patriarch; built by Alexander the Great, Anno Mundi 3618. that is, 330 years before Christ. It was considered much more than now, before the building of Grand Cairo. Heretofore the great Trade for Spices was driven here, which were brought by Ca∣mels from the Red Sea; but are now brought to us by Sea from the East-Indies. Yet this Town is still much frequented by the European Ships for the sake of the Harbour. It is inhabited by about 2000 Souls, which being too few for so vast a City, accordingly much of it is nothing but Ruins. The Pharoal, once an Isle, is now joyned to the City, and a Fort built upon it by the Turks, with a Garison for the security of the Port. This City was taken from the Chri∣stians by Amrus the Moor, after a Siege of 13 Months; retaken from them in the times of the Holy War, Anno Christi 1167. but it fell soon after into their hands again. Long. 58. 20. Lat. 31. 25. § There is another City of this Name built by Alexander M. beyond the River Tanais. § A third, in the Palati∣nate of Lusuc in Poland upon the River Horin. § And a fourth in Susiana in Asia. Alexandria, Alexandrinum, a small Town in the Palatinate of Braclaw in Poland. Alexandria della Paglia, Alexandria Statellio∣rum, a large and well fortified City in the Dukedom of Milan in Italy; built upon the River Tanaro, which divides it. It was made a Bishops See under the Arch∣bishop of Milan, by Pope Alexander III. Anno 1175. from whom it had its Name. It is 52 Miles from Mi∣lan to the North-West, and 12 from Casal to the South. This City, in 1656. being besieged by the Prince of Conti, and the Duke of Modena, their Ar∣my was forced to rise for want of Money. Brietius. Long. 30. 30. Lat. 43. 54. Alexie. See Alize. Alfissah, a Country in the Southern part of the Isle of Madagascar. Aleford, a Market-Town in Lincolnshire, in the Division of Lindsey and Hundred of Calceworth. Alfreton, a Market-Town in Darbyshire, in the Hundred of Scarsdale. Algarria, a Northern Province of the Kingdom of New Castile, whose Bounds are not known; so that it is thought that both Madrid and Toledo are in this Province. Algarve, a small part of Spain, which under Al∣phonsus III. was added to Portugal, with the Title of a Kingdom; Tavira is the chief place in it: it hath Portugal on the North, on the West and South it is washed by the Ocean, and on the East lies Andaluzia. Algezire, a Town and Port upon the Streights of Gibraltar in Spain; supposed by some to be the Car∣theia of the Antients. Taken from the Moors by Alphonsus XI. King of Castile in 1344. now ruin'd. Algiers, or Argiers, Julia Caesarea, aliis Ruscu∣rum, Rusucurum, a City and Republick in Africa, up∣on the Confines of Barbary, on the Mediterranean Sea; famous for Piracies, and for the loss of a vast Fleet of Ships by a Tempest, belonging to Charles V. in 1541. when that Victorious Prince attempted the Conquest of this place. The English have had better success against them; twice entred their strong Har∣bours, and burnt their Ships. First under Admiral Blake, April 4. 1655. And afterwards (having been forced to a Peace in 1668. by Sir Thomas Allen, which they broke the year following), in 1670. Capt. Beach meeting 7 of their Men of War, forced them on shoar; two of which they burnt themselves, and the English the other five, releasing 250 Christian Captives. In 1670. Sir Edward Sprague destroy'd 9 more of their Ships near the Castle of Bugia, which plaid upon him with their Cannon. This last Victory reduced those Pirats to beg a Peace, which, with the English they have kept the better since. The French Fleet com∣manded by Marescal D'Estree, discharged 10420 Bombs into the Town, in July 1688. whereby above two thirds of it were destroy'd; also 5 Ships in Port, belonging to the Government there, were sunk or burnt. The Algerines enraged thereat, shot off the French Consul at the Mouth of a Cannon, with several poor Captives; which was revenged by the French upon three Algerine Officers they had brought in custody with them, whom they shot to death, and put their Bodies upon a Hurdle of Planks to be driven ashoar, to warn their Countrymen of the effects of their Cruelty. This Town is seated 100 Miles from Sally, right over against Minorca. Long. 20. 15. Lat. 32. 45. Algher, Algaria, Corax, a City of Sardinia, call'd by the Spaniards Alguer; it stands on the Western Shoar of that Isle, in the Northern part of it. This City is a Bishops See under the Archbishop of Sassari, from whence it is dist. 16 Miles to the South. The Bishoprick was translated from Orana hither, by Julius II. in 1504. Algow, Agovia, a County of Schwaben, a Pro∣vince of Germany. It is bounded on the North by the Danube, and by the Lech, on the East by the Lake of Constance, by the Territory of Hegow to the West, and by the Earldom of Tirol to the South. In this County lie the Marquisate of Burgow, Ausburg, and several other considerable Cities and Towns. Alhama, Artigi, a City of the Kingdom of Gra∣nada, seated upon steep Hills, which was the place
of delight to the Moorish Kings of Granada; it lies 7 Leagues from Granada North-West; called in the latter Maps Alcala-real. Alhilet, Sin, a Desert of Arabia. Alibaluch, an Island in the Caspian Sea, over a∣gainst the Province of Taristan in Persia, under the King of Perse. Alicant, Alonae, a Port of the Kingdom of Va∣lentia in Spain, on the Mediterranean Sea, 10 Leagues from Murcia to the North-East, and from New Car∣thage, now Valentia, 14. the Bay that comes up to it is now called the Gulph of Alicant. Alicate, a Town upon the Coast of Sicily. Alifa, Allipha, a City and a Bishops See under the Archb. of Benevento in the Terra di Lavoro in Naples, upon the River Voltorno. Almost ruin'd. Fabius Maximus gain'd a Victory over the Samnites here. Aliola, a small Island between Africa and Mada∣gascar, called in the Maps Alion. Alize, or Alise, Alexia, a place in the Dutchy of Burgundy, now ruinous; formerly famous for the Siege it endured against Jul. Caesar. Alkebulan, one of the Names by which Africa is called. Alla, a River in the Ducal Prussia in Poland. Allatur, a Town in the Kingdom of Cazan in Moscovy upon the River Cama. Alleburg, a small Town upon the River Alla in the Ducal Prussia in Poland. Allelujah, a remarkable Monastery in Aethiopia, so called from the continual singing of Allelujahs in it. Allemaign. See Germany. Allendorf, a small Town in Germany under the Landgrave of Hesse Cassel upon the River Wertz, 5 Leagues from Cassel. Allere, Allera, a River in the Lower Saxony, which rises in the Dutchy of M gdebourg, and passes through that of Lunebourg by Zell and Ferdin to joyn the Weser. Allersberg, a small Market-Town on the West of the District of Newmarckt, in the upper Palati∣nate: it belongs to the House of Newburg. Allia, a River of the Province of Sabina in Italy. See Aia. Allier, Elaver, a River of France, which riseth in Languedoc, in the Territory of Guivandan, in the Village of Condress, at the foot of Losere, the highest of the Mountains of Cevennes; then running to the North, it watereth and divides the County of Auvergne, as likewise that of Bourbon; where it slides by Mou∣lins, and a little beneath Nevers, falls into the Loire. Allobroges, an antient People of the Province of Narbona in Gallia▪ Transalpina, so called from the River Labroya, upon the Banks of which they had their Habitations at first, according to Viterbius. They assisted the Carthaginians against the Romans. In the Year of Rome 632. the Romans overthrew them under Cne Domitius Aenobarbus, and Fabius Ma∣ximus, whence the latter obtained the▪ Title of Allo∣brogicus. Allyn, a great Lake in the County of Kildare in Ireland. Almagra, a Village in the Kingdom of Castile in Spain, remarkable for being the Birth place, and giv∣ing Name to Diego Almagra, Pizarro's Comerade in the discovery of Peru in 1525. These two perfidious base-born Vilains taking up Arms afterwards against each other, Almagra became Pizarro's Prisoner, and was kill'd by Pizarro's Brother. Almaguer, Almagra, a small Town 20 Leagues from Popayan in the Southern America. Almedine, a Town sometime rich and populous, and the Capital of the Province of Duguela in the Kingdom of Marocco, but now ruin'd. Almeria, a City and Port in the Kingdom of Ga∣nada, which is a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Granada; seated upon the Mediterranean; having its Name from Amalricus, a Gothish King, who built it; it is distant about twenty Miles from Grana∣da, South-East. § There is another Town of the same name in new Spain with a good Port, upon the Gulph of Mexico; called also Villaricca, and by the Indians Naothalon from a River of that name. Almina, Abyla, a Mountain in the Kingdom of Fez in Barbary, near the Mouth of the Streights of Gibraltar, or the entrance of the Mediterranean, sup∣posed to be one of Hercules's Pillars. Almisa, Almisum, Dalmatium, by the Sclavom ans called Omisc, is a City in Dalmatia upon the A∣driatique, under the Turks. It was sometime a Bi∣shops See before it was united to the Archbishoprick of Spalatro. Almo, a Rivulet in Campagna di Roma, which falls into the Tibur at Rome. The Priests of the Goddess Cybele used to wash the Victims that they Sacrificed to her in these streams. Almondbury, Camulodunum, a Town in Yorkshire, in the West-Riding, seated upon the River Calder, about 7 miles from Halifax to the South-East; which was once a famous Roman and Saxon City, now a Village. Almoravides, a People near Mount Atlas in Africa, who Possessed themselves of the Kingdom of Fez in the year 1052. Almouchiquois, Savages of New France, towards the River Covacourt and the Isle of Bacchus. Almunequar, a Town in the Kingdom of Granada Alnewick, a Market-Town in Northumberland on the River Alne (Alaunus), which gives name to it, and soon after falls into the German Ocean. William the Lyon, King of Scots, fought a Battle here with the English in the Reign of Henry II. and was taken Prisoner. Alney Ise, a small Island near Glocester made by the Severn. Here Edmond, surnamed Ironside, one of the Saxon Kings of England, fought a single Com∣bat with Canutus the Dane, an Invader, in the view of both their Armies: After which they agreed to reign in Conjunction, each in his part, dividing the King∣dom betwixt them. Aload, one of the Names of Nilus. Alopecki, a People of Attica near Athens, amongst whom, according to Diogenes Laertius, Socrates had his Nativity. Alost, a Town in Flanders, upon the River Dender. This Town was taken by the French in 1667; but restored to the Spaniards again, who now have it. It lies in the middle between Brussels and Gaunt, one mile from Dendermonde. There was an Earl∣dom belonging to this place; which had Earls of its own till 1165. when it fell to Philip E. of Flanders, by Inheritance, and was by him united for ever to Flanders. Alpes, called by the Germans Alben, is a long Ridg of▪ Mountains, which divide Italy from France and Germany. It begins at Port Monaco, a Town belonging to the States of Genoua, upon the Mediterranean, but in the Hands of the French ever since the Year 1641. And ends at the Gulph of Carnaro, a part of the Adriatick Sea, South of Istria, a Province belonging to the Republick of Venice. It is divided into divers parts, and each of them has its proper Name, besides the General. From the Port of Monaco to the Fountains of the River Var, they are called the Maritim Alpes. From thence to Susa the Cottian Alpes, from Susa to S. Bernard the less, they are called the Greek Alpes: from thence to S. Gothard the Pennine Alpes: next to these fol∣low the Grison Alpes, to the Fountain of the River Piave; that part of them which lie near the City of
Trent, are called by its Name. Those that follow as far as Dolak, are called the Norician Alpes; from the Fountains of Tajamento to those of the Drave, they are called the Carinthian Alpes; the last are the Julian or Pannonian Alpes. Yet some extend them as far as Dalmatia, and others carry them to Thrace, and the Euxine Sea; but it is the most received opinion, that they end at the Fountains of the River di Kulpe in Liburnia. Thus far Clu∣virius. Alpheus. See Orfea. Alpon, Vecchio, Alpinus, a River in the Terri∣tories of Verona, which falls into the Adige; a Ri∣ver which belongs to the States of Venice. Alpuxaras, Alpuxarae, a considerable body of Mountains in the Kingdom of Granada in Spain; they were once well peopled, but are almost desolate now; the Moors that inhabited them, having been banished by Philip III. Alre, Alera, a River in Saxony in Germany. See Allere. Alrick, or Elrick, Alriens, a River in Twedale in Scotland, which falls into the Tweede. Als, or Alsits, Alisuntia, a River of the Duke∣dom of Luxemburg in the Low-Countries; which washeth the Walls of the principal City; and then with the Saar, another River of the same Dukedom, falls into the Moselle above Treves. Alsatia, called by the Germans Elsass, by the French Alsace, in a Province of Germany in the upper Circle of the Rhein: lying between Schwaben on the East, Lorain on the West; the lower Palati∣nate, the Territory of Spire, the Dukedom of Bipont, towards the North: and upon the Switzors toward the South. It is divided into three parts. Alsatia, (properly so called) and into the lower and upper Alsa∣tia: which two last parts, with the Bishoprick of Basil, Spire, and Philipsburgh, submitted to Lewis XIII. in 1634. and were yielded to the French, by the Peace of Munster in the Year 1648. The Territories of the Bishop and Chapter of Strasburg, which lie on this side the Rhine, belong to the lower Alsatia. Alsen, Alsa, or Alsia, is an Island of Denmark in the Baltick Sea, on the Eastern-Shoar of the Duke∣dom of Sleswick, from which it is parted by a small Channel. At the South end of it stands a magnifi∣cent Castle called Suderburgh, which belongs to a branch of the House of Holsatia, with the Title of Duke; and at the North end there is another Castle called Nordoburg, possessed by another Ducal Family. The whole Island is under the Dominion of the D. of Sunderburgh, and is a part of the Dukedom of Sleswick. Alsford, a Market-Town in Hantshire. Alster, a River in the Dutchy of Holstein in Ger∣many, falling into the Elb above Hamburgh. Alssfeldt, one of the antientiest Towns in Hassia. The Burgers of this Town were the first that em∣braced Luthers Reformation. Alt, Alta, a small River in Lancashire, falling into the Irish Sea at Ahnouth. § Another in Transyl∣vania. See Olt. Altahein, Alteimum, an antient Town in the Country of the Grisons. Altai, a Mountain, the same with Belgon. Altaich, the Upper and Lower, is the Name of two famous Monastries on the Danow, in the upper Palatinate. They have their Names from Altaha Altachum, or Altaichum, two great old Oaks. Altamura, or Altavilla, Altus Murus, a Prin∣cipality and City in the Province of Bari in Naples. Altem-bourg, vide Aldenburg. Altembourg, the Name also of a Town in Transyl∣vania, and of another in the Lower Hungary, by the Hungarians call'd Owar▪  Of another in Bavaria up∣on the Danube; as likewise of a Ruinated Castle of the Province of Argow in Switzerland, giving the Title of a Count. Alten, and Altenbotten, a River and Branch of the Norwegian Ocean, in the Province of Werdhuss. Altino, Altinum, an antient City and Episcopal See within the States of Venice, upon the River Sile, betwixt Padoua and Concordia. Ruined by Attila, King of the Huns. The Bishoprick is Transfer'd to Torcello. Alton, a Market-Town in Hampshire. Altorf, Altorfium, the Capital City of the Canton of Ʋri, upon the River Russ in Switzerland, at the Foot of the Alps. § Also a City and University in Franconia, upon the River Schwartzac. The Uni∣versity was Founded by the Magistrates of Nurem∣berg in 1579. and received its Privileges from the Em∣perour Rodolph II. in 1581. There is a Castle to it. § A small, but antient Town, within 2 miles of Ravenspurg, in the upper Schwaben in Germany▪ the Guelpian Family were usually Buried here. This Town belongs to the House of Austria, and is the Residence of the high Commissioners of Suevia. Altringham, a Market-Town in Cheshire, in the Hundred of Buclow. Alzira, a rich and pleasant (tho small) City in the Kingdom of Valencia in Spain, betwixt two Arms of the River Xucar, over which it has two Bridges; about 5 Leagues from Valencia. Am, a famous City in Armenia, computed to have 100000 Houses, and 1000 Churches. Taken by the Tartars in 1219. Amachaches, Amacari, an American People in Brasil, towards St. Sebastian. Amacusa, an Island and Province under Japan in the East-Indies, having its Capital City of the same Name. Amadabat, or Armadabat, a Populous City, of great Trade in the Kingdom of Guzurate in the East Indies, which finds out of its own Revenue, for the Service of the Great Mogul, 12000 Horse, and 50 E∣lephants. The Chan or Governour, assumes the qua∣lity of a Prince. It is 18 Leagues from Cambaya, near the River Indus, adorn'd with a Mosque of ex∣traordinary magnificence, where lie the Sepulchres of many of their antient Kings, being heretofore and Idol Temple of the Heathens, till the Turks got the Pos∣session of it. Amadan, one of the finest and most considerable Cities in Persia, about 9 days Journey from Hispahan, at the Foot of a Mountain. Amager, o Amac, Amagria, a Fruitful Island in the Baltick Ocean over against Copenhagen, under the Crown of Denmark. Amaguana, one of the Luccaye Islands in Ame∣rica, near St. Domingo. Amalfi, Amalphis, an Archiepiscopal City, and Dukedom of the Kingdom of Naples; but notwith∣standing these great Honours, it is little, and ill built. It stands upon the Bay of Salerno, the West part of which is called La Costa d' Amalfi. It is said the Body of S. Andrew is kept here. And in this place Flavio Gioia found out the use of the Compass in the Year 1300. It is  miles distant from Salerno, and 24 from Naples, to the North-East. Amana, another of the Luccaye Islands. Amnthea, Amantia, a City and Bishops▪ See, un∣der the Archbishop of Regio in Calabria in the King∣dom of Naples, upon the Mediterranean. There is a Castle to it, which, with the adjacent Country, de∣pends upon the Prince of Bisignano. Amanus, or Amana, a Mountain mentioned Can∣tic. 4. 8. dividing Cilicia from Syria. Alexander III. overthrew Darius the first time at this passage into Syria, called by the antients Amanicae Portae.
Aapai, a Province of new Andalusia in Ame∣rica, near the River Orenoque. Amara, an high Mountain with a City of the same Name built upon it, which gives Name to a Kingdom, in the very midst of Aethiopia; we are told the Chil∣dren and Reltations of the Royal Family are here kept in Custody, and that upon the death of their Prince, they fetch another from hence. But others pretend they are kept in Ovohni in the Province of Oinadag. It lies under the Line, in 65 degrees of Longitude. Amarantes, an antient People of Colchis in Asia Minor, dwelling upon a Mountain of the same Name, whence arises the River Phasis. Amasia, a City of Cappadocia, in Asia the Less, upon the River Casalmach (Iris,) which falls into the Euxine Sea. This City is called by the Turks Am∣nasan; it was an Archbishoprick, with four Suffragans. The Turks have been possessed of it three Ages: it is large, the Capital of those Countries, and the Seat of the Beglerbeg of Cappadocia, now called by the Turks Tocat. Strabo, the antient Geographer, who was born here, gives a very particular Account of this place. It now gives the Title of Archbishop to Signior D'Adda, the late Nuncio in England from P. Innocent XI. who promoted him to a Cardinalate amongst Ten others, Feb. 13. 1689. It lies in Long. 65. 52. Latit. 44. 25. Amath, Epiphania, a Town in Palestine. Built by Amath, the Son of Chanaan; and mentioned by Jo∣sephus as extant in his time. Pliny speaks of another in the East-Indies. Amathonte, Amathusa, an antient City of Cyprus, in which Venus had formerly a Temple Consecrated to her of great Fame: Since a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Nocosia. Amatique, or S. Thomas, a Town of North Ame∣rica in New-Spain, in the Province de Honduras, 18 Leagues distant from the North Sea; which was Built Anno 1597. There is a River in the same Province called Amatitu. Amato. See Lameto. Amaxie, an antient City of Troas in Asia Minor, where Apollo had a Temple in his Honour. § Another of Cilicia, given by Marc Anthony to Cleopatra. Amaxobient, an antient People of Sarmatia. The River of Amazons is one of the biggest Ri∣vers in the World: it belongs to the South America, and riseth near Quitum, a City of Peru, out of two Marshes which lie within two Leagues of each other at the foot of the Mountains of Cordillera; then run∣ning to the East, and being augmented by the Streams of Coca, Napo, and others, it passeth the Provinces of Canela and Pacamor, where it receives the River Xauxa or Maranio; so passing many other Provinces after a Course of 1200 Leagues, it falls into the North Ocean between Brasile and Guiana. The mouth of it is very large, and full of Islands: it was first found in 1541. by Joannes Orellano a Spaniard, and there∣fore some have called it the River of Orellan. Peter Texeira, a Spaniard, has made a very exact Descri∣ption of it, having spent 10 Months in surveying it, in 1639. Ambadar, a Town upon the Nile, in the Kingdom of Bagamedri in Abyssinia. Amba-Geshen, a Mountain almost impregnable in the Confines of Amhara, prodigiously high (in the form of a Castle, built of Free-stone. It is half a Portugal League broad at the top, and at the bottom half a days Journey about. Ambarri, an antient People amongst the Gauls, mentioned by Cesar. Amber, Ambrus, a River of Bavaria in Germany. It arises towards Tirol, and falls into the Iser near Landshut. Amberg, a City of Germany, in the Province of Northgow, upon the River Wils: it belongs now to the Duke of Bavaria; but both it, and the Country about it, did belong to the Elector Palatine. It is 7 German Miles from Ratisbone, and 8 from Noremborg. Ambiam, a Kingdom of the Higher Ethiopia, between the Kingdoms of Bagmid and Quara. It takes its Name from the head City of it. Ambiancativa, a City and Kingdom of Ethiopia the Higher, which has the Nile on the East, and the Lake of Amasen on the West. Ambibarri, an antient People amongst the Gauls, mentioned by Cesar, and supposed to be those of the Diocese (now) of Avranches in Normandy. Ambie, or Hambie, a Town in Normandy, thought to retain its Name from the Ambibarri. Amboina, is an Island of the East-Indies: the whole Circuit whereof is 16 Leagues; but yet it is of great Consideration, by reason of the plenty of Spice which it affords. It was discovered by the Por∣tuguese in 1515. In 1605. the Dutch drove out the Portugal Forces, and possessed themselves of Amboina, the principal Town, by one Stephen van Hagan; but that which makes this Island most infamous, was, the Cruelties of the Dutch executed upon the English in 1618. It lies not far from the Moluccoes, and is reckon'd among the Selebes. This Island lies West of Banda 24 Leagues, and very near the Line. Amboise, Ambacia, is a Town and Castle in Tou∣raine in France, near the Loir, over which it has a Bridge. The Kings of France have often retir'd hither for their Privacy and Pleasure. Charles VIII. was born here 1470. and died here April 7. 1498. But most memorable is this place for the Surprize intended against Francis II. by the Hugonots in 1560. which gave Birth to a lasting War in France. This Town lies 6 Leagues from Tours, and 10 from Blois. Amboule, a fruitful Valley in the Southern part of the Isle of Madagascar. Ambracia, a considerable Episcopal City of Epirus, upon a Bay of the same Name, in which the Battel of Actium was sought by the Fleets of Augustus and Mark Antony. This was the Regal City of the famous Pyr∣rbus, King of Epirus; distant from Prevesa, (Nico∣polis) 25 Miles. Ambres-bury, Ambresburia, a Town in Wile∣shire, about 5 Miles West of Salisbury, and 2 Miles North of Stone-enge, seated upon the River Avon; which takes its Name from Ambrosius, the first King of the Britains after the Romans forsook them, who is here supposed to have been slain and buried. Cambden. Ambrisi, Ambrisius, a River in the remotest Ae∣thiopia, in the Kingdom of Congo: it ariseth in the Mountains near the City of Tinda, and falls into the Aethiopick Ocean between Lelunda and the Lose, about 5 deg. from the Line South. Ambroise, a small Town at the entrance into Pi∣edmont, upon the River Doria. Near to it stands the celebrated Abby of L'Ecluse, that they say was built by the hands of Angels; belonging to the Be∣nedictines, and one of the four chief Houses in Europe of that Order. Ambroni, an antient People of Switzerland, or according to some, of Dauphiné in France on the side of Ambrune. Marius gave them a bloody Over∣throw near the little River Arc in Provence, between Aix and S. Maximin, in the year of Rome 652. The Marks of this Victory being yet extant upon the Rests of a Pyramid there. Ambrune, a City in the Dauphinate of France, call'd in Latin Ebrodunum: It is an Archbishops See, small but strong; seated upon the River Durance, which falls into the Rhosne, one League beneath Avignon: it lies 23 Leagues North-East of Grenoble, and 37 from Lint.
Amel, a Kingdom of Africa upon the Atlantick Ocean, between the Outlets of the River Niger, and on the Western side of it. Amelant, an Island belonging to the Dutch in the German Ocean, on the Shoars of Friseland. Amelia, a City of S. Peter's Patrimony in Italy, said to be built 964 years before Perseus: It is an indepen∣dent Bishops See, about 6 Miles from Narni. The Ameria of the Antients, and the birth-place of that Roscius whose Cause is defended by Cicero. AMERICA, the Fourth Part of the World, and greater than the other Three. Wholly unknown to us till 1499. when Christopher Columbo, or Colono, a Genouese, first discovered it; at the Charges of Fer∣dinando and Isabella, King and Queen of Spain. Americus Vespuccio, a Florentine, seven years after being sent by Emanuel, King of Portugal, went fur∣ther, and discovered the Continent, and from him it has its Name; but it is no less frequently call'd the West-Indies. It lies in length, from North to South, under the shape of two vast Peninsula's, knit together by the Streights of Panama, where the Land is not above 17 Leagues from Sea to Sea. On the Western side it has the Pacifick Ocean; on the East the Atlantick; on the South the Streights of Magellan or Le-Maire; but as to the North, the Bounds of it are not disco∣ered, by reason of the great Cold, and nearness to the Northern Pole. Great part of it is under the Spa∣niards, viz. Peru, New Spain, Terra firma, Paragua, Chili, and many of the Northern and Southern Islands; yet divers of the Maritime parts are under the Portugals, English, French, and Hollanders. Parti∣cularly the English, either by being first Occupants, or else by Conquest have made themselves Masters of the large Northern Continents adjoining to Hudson's Bay, New England, Virginia, Mary-Land, Carolina, and of many adjacent Islands: and in the more Southern Parts they are possessed of the wealthy Islands of Ja∣maica, Barbadoes, Mevis, &c. Those Natives that live in these parts with the Europeans are much civili∣zed; but those that inhabit the Inland Countries re∣tain their antient barbarous Customs. This vast Con∣tinent is divided into the Southern and Northern Ame∣ica, by the Bay of Mexico and the Streights of Panama. The Islands which lie about it in both the Oceans, are too numerous to be here recounted. Amersford, a small Town in the State of Ʋtrecht in Holland, upon the River Em, under the Dominion of the United States, tho once an Imperial City. In 1624. it was taken by the Spaniards, but soon after retaken by the Dutch; and in 1672. it fell into the hands of the French, who deserted it two years after. It lies about 3 Leagues East of Ʋtrecht. Amersham, a Market-Town in Buckinghamshire. See Agmundesham. Amhara. See Amara. Amida. See Caramit. Amiens, Samarobrina, Samarobriga, the chief City of Picardy, and a Bishops See under the Arch∣bishop of Rheims; it stands upon the River Somme, mid-way in the Road between Calais and Paris, about 25 French Miles from each. It was a long time the Frontier Town of France, surprized by the Spaniards in 1597. but soon after retaken by that Victorious Prince Henry IV. Built by Antonius Pius the Em∣perour, and was call'd at first Samarobriga, that is, the Bridge upon Samara. In the Cathedral Church of Nostre Dame they preserve the Head of S. John Baptist, which they say was found by a Gentleman of Picardy at the taking of Constantinople in 1204. as a most extraordinary Relique. There is an Historical Trea∣tise of this Head, written by the Sieur du Cange. The Country l' Amiennois takes it Name from A∣miens. Amilo, Amulus, a River in Mauritania mention'd by Pliny. Amiterno, an antient City in the Province of Abruzzo in Italy, and sometime an Episcopal See, which has been translated to Aquila. It was the Birth place of the Historian Salust. The Ruins of a Theatre, a Church, and a great Tower are yet to be seen. Amititan, or Amuitan, a Lake in New Spain in America. Amixoeares, an American People of Brasil. Ammerze, Ammer, a great Lake or Marsh in Ba∣varia in Germany. The Ammonites, an antient People of Palestine, descended from Ammon the Son of Lot; in the Hi∣story of the Old Testament, famous for their Wars with Israel, who gave them several great Defeats un∣der Jephtha, Saul, Joab, Joatham, and Judas Mac∣chabeus. § Also another antient People of Libya in Africa, who lived toward the Temple of Jupiter Ammon. Amond, Almon, a River in the County of Lothain in Scotland. It falls into Edenburg Fyrth. Amone, or Lamone, a River arising at the foot of the Apennines in Italy, and passing by Faenza to fall into the Po near Ravenna. Amorbach, Amorbachium, a Town of Franconia in Germany, upon the River Muldt, under the Ele∣ctor of Mentz. Amorium, an antient City of Phrygia in Asia Minor, and sometime an Archiepiscopal See under the Patriarch of Constantinople. Taken and burnt by the Saracens in 840. The Amorites, an antient People of Palestine, de∣scended from Canaan: who, with their two Kings Sehon and Og, were vanquish'd by the Israelites, and their Country distributed amongst the Tribes of Ruben, Gad, and Manasseh. Ampatres, an Indian People in the Island of Ma∣dagascar. Ampelusia, Ampelos, a Cape upon the Streights of Gibraltar in Mauritania Tingitana, now call'd Cape Esparto. § Also a Town and Cape in Macedonia, call'd now Capo Canistro. § And a Cape in Crete, now call'd Capo Sagro. Amphaxe, a small Town upon the Gulph of Con∣tessa in Macedonia. It did antiently give Name to the Country Amphaxites. Amphipolis. See Emboli. Amphryse, a River in Thessalia. § Another in Phrygia in Asia Minor, and a Town in Phocis. Ampthill, a Market-Town in Bedfordshire. The Earl of Alesbury has a noble Seat here. Ampurdan, a Country of Catalonia; its capital City was the antient Emporiae (Ampurias) upon the Mediterranean, 6 Leagues from Girona; some∣time divided betwixt 3 Nations, Spaniards, Greeks, and Romans. Cato obtain'd a signal Victory over the Spaniards here, in the year of Rome 558. It was af∣terwards the Seat of a Bishop; but being ruin'd in the Wars with the Moors, the See was translated to Gi∣rona. Amrom, or Amrod, an Island towards the Dutchy of Sleswick in Denmark. Amsterdam, Amstelodamium, is the chief Town of the Province of Holland, seated upon the River Yam. It is a new City, first Fortisied in 1492. but within this last hundred Years it has received its greatest growth, and is now one of the greatest Marts in Europe. It takes its Name from the River Amstel, which glides by it: and has a large, convenient, and a well-traded-haven. The Riches, number of Ships, and Merchants belonging to it, are equal to those of most Cities in Christendom. It was taken by the Hol∣lanlers
under Prince William of Nassau, from the Spa∣niard, in 1578. having been heretofore one of the Im∣perial Cities: it stands about two Leagues from the Zuider Sea, and four from Ʋtrecht. § The Hollanders have given the Name of Amsterdam to an Island in the Frosen Sea, toward Greenland. To a Town and Port of theirs in their Colonies in the Northern Ame∣rica. To an Island in the Indian Ocean, betwixt Ma∣dagascar and new Holland. And lastly, to another Island by them discover'd towards Japan. Amu, or Amus, a Lake in the Country of Ʋsbech in Tartary. Amudez, a Town in the Kingdom of Tunis in A∣frica. Amurgos, or Murgos, an Island in the Archipe∣lago, with a City that has sometime been the Seat of a Bishop. Simonides the antient Poet was born here. Amyclea, an antient City in the Terra di Lavoro in Italy; whose surprisal and destruction by the Ene∣my, occasioned that known Proverb, Amyclas perdi∣dit silentium. Amycles. See Scala Marmorea. § The Name also of an antient City in the Morea, where Apollo had his Temple. Amydon, an antient City of Macedonia, upon the River Axïus. Amyrus, a River of Thessalia. Amyzon. See Mezo. Ana, a Town of Arabia Deserta, upon the River Euphrates. Anabagatha, a City and an Archiepiscopal See, under the Patriarch of Antioch in Asia. Anacandrians, Indians in the Isle of Madagascar. Anachimoussi, other Indians in the same. Anactoire, an antient City of Epirus upon the Bay of Ambracia: the Anactorium of the Antients. And another in Ionia. Anacuies, Indians of Brasil. Anaf, or Anfa, a Town, sometime the Capital of the Province of Temesen, in the Kingdom of Fez up∣on the Atlantick Ocean. Burnt by Alphonsus King of Portugal in 1468. Anaghelome, a small Town in the County of Down in ulster in Ireland upon the River Ban. Anagni, or Agnani, a City and Bishops See in the States of the Church in Italy. Rich and powerful in the time of the old Romans; now almost ruin'd and little inhabited. Anagyrus, a Tract in Achaia; so call'd from the growth of Bean-Cod Trees there. Anandale, is a County in the West of Scotland, upon the River Solway, which parts Scotland from England: It takes its Name from the River Anan, as doth also the principal Town in it, which (saith Cam∣den) lost all the Glory and Beauty it had by the Eng∣lish War in the Reign of Edward VI. Anapanomene, a Fountain of Epirus mention'd by Pliny. Anaph, an Island in the Archipelago, now call'd Nanfio. Anaplyste, an antient Maritim Town in Greece near Athens. Anapo, Anapus, a River of Sicily. § Also an∣other of Epirus. Anapuia, a Province of Venezuela in the South America. Anaquito, a Country in the Province of Quito in Peru; where the two Parties of Almagra and Pizarro (joynt-discovers of Peru) engag'd each other in Battel in 1546. See Almagra. Anatolia, Asia Minor, call'd by the Turks, Natolie, is a considerable part of Asia, extending it self West∣ward to the Shoars of Greece. It is bounded on the North with the Euxine or Black Sea; on the East it is separated from Syria and Armenia Major by the Euphrates; on the South it has the Mediterranean; and on the North it is severed from Greece and Thrace by the Bosphorus and many other Seas. It is all of it in miserable Slavery under the Turks, who have strangly depopulated, impoverish'd, and ruin'd this once most rich and powerful Country. Anatolico, A Village of the Province of Despotato (or the antient Aetolia) in Greece: built in a Marsh like Venice. Anazarbe, See Aczar. Anazzo, Gnazzi, or Torre d'Anasso; a City in the Province of Bari, in the Kingdom of Naples; sup∣posed to be the ruinated Egnatia, whose Episcopal See is transferr'd to Monopoli. Ancam, Ancamia; an Island on the Coast of China to the Province of Canton. Ancamares or Anoamares, Indians in the South America, along the River Madera. Ancaster, the antient Crocolana or Crorolana; a Town upon Lincoln Heath, within 12 Miles of Lincoln. Ancenis, Ancenesium, a City in Britany in France upon the Loyre. The Castle that it had is ruin'd. Anchiale, the same with Kenkis. § Also a City of Cilicia in Asia, remarkable for the Tomb and Statue of the Effeminate Sardanapalus. Anchisa, a part of the Mountain Atlas. Anchora, Asine, an antient small City in the Morea near Modon, Anclam,, Anclamum, a very strong Town in Po∣merania, under the Government of the King of Swe∣den, upon the River Pene. It was taken from the Swedes by the Duke of Brandenburg in 1676. and restored to them in 1679. It lies 8 German Miles South-East from Stetin. Ancona, the principal City of Marca Anconitana; which Territory takes its name from this City: it stands upon the Adriatick Sea, near the Promontory of S. Ciriaco. Built by the Syracusans, who fled hither to avoid the fury of their Tyrant. The Ha∣ven was built by Trajan the Emperor, and is one of the fairest in the World, but not so safe as capacious In 1532. Pope Clement the VII. built here a a very strong Castle, upon pretence of securing the City a∣gainst the Turks, but in reality to bring it into a greater subjection to the Popedom, in whose Do∣minions it is; tho formerly a kind of a Republick: it has a Bishop who is not under any Archbishop. It is distant from Rome 110 Miles to the North-East, and from Ʋrbino 53 Miles to the South-East. Ancyra, See Engury Anczakrich, Anczacricus, a River of Ʋkrane in Poland, which falls into the Black Sea. within one Polish Mile of Oczakow, which is now in the Posses∣sion of the Turcks, and stands near the Mouth of the Neister, [Borysthenes.] Andaguaslas, Indians of Peru in America, be∣tween the Rivers Abanca and Xauxa. Andaluzia, Vandalitia, a Kingdom in the South of Spain: bounded on the North with the Province of Estremadura and New Castile; on the East with the Kingdom of Granada; on the South with the Ocean and the Mediterranean, and on the West with the Atlantick Ocean and Algarve in Portugal: This is the most rich and fertile Country in all Spain The Moors erected in it two Kingdoms, that of Cor∣duba, and that of Sevil (Hispalis,) which were both re-conquered and added to Castile by Ferdinand II. in 1248. It is divided into two parts by the River Guadalquivir (Betis) and the chief City is Sevil. New Andalusia, a Province of the Terra-firm in America, between Venezuela and Guiana. The chief City of it is new Corduba. They used to fish for Pearl upon those Coasts.
Anoanagar, a City in the Kingdom of Decan in the East-Indies, almost ruin'd. Andance, Andancia, a small Town in Vivarets in Languedoc in France; where the River Dome falls into the Rhosne. Andarge, a River arising in the Valleys of Ʋnsan in France, which falls into the Arron near Verneuill. Andaye, a Town in France upon the frontiers of Spain, two Leagues from S. Jean de Luz. Andeli, Andelium, Andeliacum, a Town in Nor∣mandy upon the Seine. Anthony of Bourbon King of Navarre and Father to Henry IV. dyed here of the Wounds he received at the Siege of Rouen. Anee, a River of France, arising hard by la Ferte, which falls into the Seine at l'Arche. Andelot, a Town in Champagne in France, upon the River Rougnn▪ of extraordinary Privileges. Andeman, the name of halt a dozen Islands in the Gulph of Ganges, near the Kingdom of Pegu, in the East-Indies. Andera, a City of Phrygia in Asia Minor. Anderna, Antenacum, a Town upon the Rhine, in the Archbishoprick of Cologne. Anderskaw or Andershouw, a great Monastery heretofore, now a strong Castle in the Island of See∣land in Denmark; delicately built. Here Frederick II. dyed, in 1548. Andes, called by some the Cordillera's, is one of the vastest and highest Ridges of Mountains in the World: they begin in the North part of the King∣dom of Peru, and are continued from thence, with∣out any Interruption, to the Streights of Magellan by the space of 1000 Spanish Leagues: much of the same height, and seldom above 20, 30 or 40 Leagues from the Pacifick Ocean: many of them burn per∣petually towards Chili. Andiatoroque, a Lake of New France in America Andore, a fruitful Valley of the Pyranees in Ca∣talognia. Andover, is a Corporation in the North-west part of the County of Hampshire, which sends Burgesses to Parliament, and gives the Title of a Viscount to the Honorable Earls of Berkshire, now in the Pos∣session of Tho. Howard: it is seated about 18 Miles from Southampton to the North-west. Andra or Adra, a River upon the Coast of Guinea in Africa. Andragiri or Gudaviri, a City and Kingdom in the Island of Sumatra in Asia, almost under the Equino∣ctial. Andres, Androsia, a City of Galatia near Engu∣ry, mention'd by Ptolomy. S. Andrews, [Andreapolis,] a City of Fife in the South of Scotland, North of the Frith of Eden∣burgh, upon the German Ocean, into which it hath a fair Prospect, and upon which it hath a large Ha∣ven. The ancient name of this place was Regimund: it hath an University, erected by James I. An. Dom. 1426. It is also an Archbishops See, erected by Pope Sixtus IV. An. 1471. instead of Aberneath. The Archbishops of all Scotland were heretofore un∣der the Archbishop of York, till James III. of Scotland representing to the Pope that there were frequent Wars between England and Scotland, obtain'd from the said Pope, That the Archbishop of S. Andrew should be independent Primate of Scotland, in the twelth year of his Reign: yet Innocentius VIII. who immediatly succeeded him, obliged this Pri∣mate and his Successors to observe the laudable Cu∣stoms of the famous Metropolitan Church of Canter∣bury. This City in 1651. not surrendring upon the first Summons, to our English victorious Rebels was sin'd Five hundred Pounds; but had it remitted upon shewing they were poor Scholars. It is 38 Miles from Edenburgh, to the North-east, and 23 from Aber∣neath to the East: it lies in Lon. 17. 28. Lat. 57. 46. Andro, Andros, Andria, an Island in the Archi∣pelago, with a City of the same name, which is an Episcopal See under Athens, inhabited by Greeks, Latins and Turks. The Antients call this Island, Cauros, Lysia, Nonagria, and by several other names. Androgynes, an antient People of Africa, com∣posed they say of both Sexes; their right Breast a Mans, the left a Womans. Pliny and Aristotle. Androsen or Androsen, Androsa, a small Town in the County of Cunningham in Scotland, upon the Western Shoar. Anduze, Andusa ad Gardonem, a Town in Lan∣guedoc in France, upon the River Gardon; hereto∣fore fortified; demolished by Lewis XIII. Anenas or Andenas, an Island upon the Coast of Norway, Southward. Anet, a Town in the Isle of France upon the River Eure, adorn'd with a Castle of extraordinary Magnifi∣cence, which was built in the Reign of Henry II. It gives the Title of a Principality to the Duke of Vendosme. Angamala, a City in the Promontory of Mala∣bar, in the East-Indies, upon the River Aicot, as likewise a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Goa, till Pope Paul V. in 1609. changed it into the Archi∣episcopal See of Cranganor, and constituted that as Metrapolitan of the Christians of S. Thomas, Angediva, a small Island under the Portuguese, in the Kingdom of Decan in the East-Indies. Angeles, Angelepolis, or Puebla de los Angeles, a City in a Province of the same name, (otherwise called Tlascala by the Indians) in New Spain in A∣merica; built in 1531. by the Spaniards, who have established an Episcopal See in it under the Archbi∣shop of Mexico. Angermund, vid. Tangermund. Angers, Juliomagus, in Caesar Andes, is the Head of the Dukedom of Anjou, a large well built City, and a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Tours. It is Seated on the River Sarre, in a very good Air; and is also an University, founded by Lewis II. Duke of Anjou, the Son of King John of France, Anno 1388. This City is 26 Leagues from Tours towards the West, and within 1 League of the Loire. In 1685. Lewis XIV. established by his Letters Patents an Academy here of Thirty ingenious Persons, who are all to be born in the Province of Anjou, under the Title of the Royal Academy of Angers. The fa∣mous Berengarius was Arch-deacon here. Angitia, the antient name of Selva d'Albi, a Forest between the City of Albi in Languedoc, and the Lake Fucinus. Anglesey, Mona, called by the Welch, Mon or Tir-mon, and Anglesey from the English after they conquered it: it is compassed on all sides with the Irish Sea, which separates it from the County of Carnarvan in Wales, by so narrow a Channel, that in some places it may be forded at low Water: it is in compass sixty Miles, making one of the Counties of Wales, and the most fruitful. This Island was the Seat of the Brittish Druides, subdued for the Romans by Suetonius Paulinus, in the Reign of Nero; but he not being able to perfect the Con∣quest, Julius Agricola his Successor, did it effectu∣ally. Edward I. brought it in Subjection to the Crown of England in 1282, till which time it was under the Kings of North-Wales. The Right Ho∣norable Arthur Annesly, a great lover of Learning and Books, was lately Earl of this County. Angola, a Kingdom in Africa, upon the South of the Kingdom of Congo. Angote, a City and Kingdom in the Upper Ae∣thiopia.
Angoulesme, Engolisma, is an Episcopal City in Aquitaine in France, under the Archbishop of Bour∣deaux; it stands upon the River Charme, which falls into the Ocean right over against the Island of Orleron. There is belonging to it also a Dukedom which is bounded upon the North with Poictou, upon the East with Limosin, upon the South with Pericort, and upon the West with Xantogn. This Dukedom is call'd by the name of Angoumois. Angra, the chief City of the Island of Tercera, and a Bishops See under the Archbishop of Lisbon. Anguien, Enguien, Angia, a small City in Hainault, between Mons and Brussels. It has the Honor to give the Title of a Baron to the Princes of the House of Bourbon. Anguilla, is one of the Caribby Islands planted by the English: it lies in 18 deg. 21 min. Nor. Lat. and 330 of Longit. in length about 10 Leagues, in breadth 3. formerly call'd Snake Island, from its shape. The Tobacco of this Island is well esteemed. Anguillara, a Town and Lake in the Padouan in the States of Venice. § Also a Town in the States of the Church, upon the Lake of Bracciano. Anhalt, a City almost ruin'd, and a Principality, but little considerable, in the Upper Saxony in Ger∣many, watered by the River Sala. The House of An∣halt has possessed the Electorates of Brandenburgh and Saxony for several Ages. Anian, a Streight, supposed to be between Asia and America, but could never yet be discovered where or whether there be any such Passage or no: It is thought to lie North of China and Japan, and to disjoyn the Ea∣stern part of Asia from the Western part of America. Anianu, a City in the Province of Chuqnami in China. Aniava, Aniwa, a Promontory discovered by the Hollanders in the Terra de Jesso to the North of Ja∣pan. Anigre, Anigrus, a River of the Morea. Animacha, a River arising in the Kingdom of Cal∣lecutt in the East-Indies, which falls into the Ocean six Leagues off Cranagor, giving its Name to a Town in its way. Anjou, Andegavia, is one of the noblest Duke∣doms of France: bounded on the East with La Be∣ausse, on the West with Britain and part of Poictou, on the South, in part by Berry, and in part by Poictou, in which Circumference are included Anjou, Tourein, and Maine. This Country is for the most part very fruit∣ful and pleasant, especially in Tourein, and along the Loire. Anjou, properly so call'd, is seated between Tou∣rein and Maine, and was so call'd from the Andegavi, the old Inhabitants of it. Henry II. King of England, was Earl of Anjou by Inheritance from his Father, as he was K. of England by Maud his Mother, Daughter to Henry I. King John, his Son, lost it; and ever since it has been annexed to the Crown of France, or given to the younger Sons of that Royal Family. Anna. See Ana. The Name also of a Town up∣on the River Astan in Arabia deserta. Annaberg, a City of Misnia in Germany upon the River Schop, near Marienberg. Annacious, Annacieugi, a People of Brasil in America towards Porto Seguro. Annagh, a Town in the County of Cavan in Ʋlster in Ireland. § Another in the County of Down. Anneci, Annecium, a neat City in Savoy, with a Castle. It is the Capital of the Dukedom of Geneva, seated upon a Lake of the same name; where the River Tioud issueth out of the Lake at the foot of the Mountain Saymenoz: heretofore greater, but now it is little, and not well inhabited, tho the See of the Bishops of Geneva has been translated thither a∣bove 100 years. In this place resteth the Body of S. Francis de Sales, who was Bishop and Prince of Geneva, near the time of the Reformation of Calv This City is 6 Leagues from Geneva, South. Annibi, a Lake of North Tartary in Asia, where there are Mountains of the same name. Annobon, an Island upon the Coast of Guiney, 10 Leagues in circuit towards the Isle of S. Thomas. The Portuguese gave it that name, because they dis∣covered it upon a New-Years Day. Annonay, Annonaeum, Annoniacum, a City with the Title of a Marquisate in the Province of Viva∣rets in France, upon the River Deume. Anone, Anonium, or Roque de Non, a Town in the Milanese in Italy upon the River Tana, al∣most ruin'd. Anossi, Carcanossi, Androbeizaba, a Province of the Isle of Madagascar. There are some Colonies of French in it. Anot, a small City of Provence in France. Anoth, one of the Scilly Islands. Anpadore, Cataractus, a River of Candia. Ansa, a River in the Province of Friuli in Italy. It passes by Aqueleia to the Adriatique Ocean. Anse, a small City in the Province of Lyennois in France. 4 Leagues from Lyons. Made a Roman Gar∣rison in the time of Augustus, who gave it the name of Antium. Ansene, Angria, a small City in Aegypt, 20 Leagues from Cairo, near the Nile. Ansianactes, a People of the Western part of the Isle of Madagascar. Ansiquains, Ansicani, a People of Abyssinia, commended for their Fidelity and Honesty. Anslo, or Opslo, Anslooa, a City of the Province of Aggerhuys in Norway, with a Bishops See under the Archbishop of Drontheim, seated upon a Bay of the same name, 35 Miles from the Baltick Sea, Northward: it has a Castle near it call'd Aggerhuslo. This City was miserably ruin'd by Fire, in the Reign of Christian IV. who rebuilt it in Anno 1614. and call'd it Christianstad from his own Name. In this City were celebrated the Nuptials of James I. King of England, with the Lady Ann, Daughter of Fre∣derick II. King of Denmark, Novemb, 23. 1589. It stands 56 German Miles from Stockholme, Wet. Anspach. See Onspach. Antavares, a People on the South part of the Isle of Madagascar. The French had settled themselves a∣mongst them, and were afterwards Massacred by them. Ante, Anta, a River in Normandy which washeth the Town of Failaise, and 3 Leagues lower falls into the Dive, which last falls into the British Sea, 4 Leagues East of Caen. Ante, Anta, a small Town and Port in Guiny in A∣frica, 3 Leagues from the Cape of Three Heads East. Antego, one of the Caribby Islands plac'd in 16 d. 11. . of Northern Lat. and 339 of Long. inhabi∣ted by the English for some years, and is about 6 or 7 Leagues in length and breadth; difficult of Access, and not much stor'd with Springs, which the Inhabitants supply by Ponds and Cisterns. Antequera, a small ill built City of New Spain in America, 80 Leagues from Mexico, which in 1535. was made a Bishops See under the Archbishop of Mexico, by Pope Paul III. § Also a small Town in the Kingdom of Granada in Old Spain. Antessa, Antissa, an antient City in the Island of Lesbos, which was heretofore a Bishops See under the Archbishop of Mitylene. Ovid speaks of it, as also the antient Geographers, under the notion of its being it self an Island in their times: whence some believe, that the Canal betwixt Lesbos and it, has, by degrees, filled up and united with the Island of Lesbos. Antibes, a Town and Port in Provence in France, which was heretofore a Bishops See under the Arch∣bishop
of Ambrun; but the See is since transferred to la Grace. There is a Castle to it. Anticyra, an Island of Thessalia, famous for its Hellebore. Antifello, Antiphellus, an antient City of Lysia in Asia upon the Mediterranean, and sometime the See of a Bishop. Antigonia, the capital City of the Province of Chaonia in Epirus: Heretofore considerable. § An∣other of Macedonia. § Also an Island discovered by the Portuguese near the Island of S. Thomas. Antilaban, an inhabited Mountain in Syria over against Mount Libanus. Antilles, the same with the Caribby Islands. Antinoe, Antios, Antinopolis, a City of Aegypt, 6 Leagues from the Nile, and heretofore a Bishops See under the Archbishop of Thebes. It had Twelve Religious Houses in it for Women in the time of Palladius. Now utterly ruin'd. Antioch, Antiochia, call'd by the Turks Antachia; by the Arabians, Anthakia. It was built by Se∣leucus, the Son of Antiochus King of Syria, one of the Successors of Alexander the Great, and call'd af∣ter his Fathers Name. This City was, during the times the Greeks and Romans were possessed of it, the Capital of Syria, or rather of the East; here the Disciples and Followers of our Saviour Jesus Christ were first called Christians; and accordingly, the Bishop of this City was accounted the Third Patri∣arch of the World, Rome being the First, and Alex∣andria the Second: others count it the Second Pa∣triarchate. As it had these great Honors, so it was excellently built, strongly fortified both by Art and Nature, and very Populous, till it fell into the hands of the Arabians, Mamalucks and Turks, who have made it desolate, and suffer'd all its stately, and most of its common Buildings, to fall into decay. June 3. 1098. it was recovered by the Christians, but in 1188. it was again betrayed into the hands of the Ma∣hometans, who have been the Masters of it ever since: it is incompassed with a double Wall, one of Stone and the other of Brick, with 460 Towers within the Walls: the greatest part of these Walls remain with a most impregnable Castle at the East end of the City, but almost all the Houses are falling down; so that the Patriarch has remov'd his Dwelling to Damascus. This City is built on both sides of the River Orontes over which there was a Bridge. It stands about 12 Miles from the Mediterranean, the River Pharpar passing on the South side of it. This place is called in the Prophets, Rilah, and was memorable in those times for the Tragedies of e∣cnias and Zedechias, Kings of Judah. It stands a∣bout 20 Miles from Scanderone, South, and 22 from Aleppo: in 68. d. 10. m. Long. and 36. 20. Lat. Antiochia Ciliciae, was a City of Asia the Less in Cilicia, a Bishops See, seated upon the River Pyra∣mus; but what it is now is not known. Antiochia Meandri, See Tachiali. Antiochia Comagenae, was a City and a Bishops See at the foot of Mount Taurus in Syria, between Anazarbe and Antioch upon the Euphrates. Some say it still retains its name. Antioch upon the Euphrates. This City is men∣tioned by Pliny, and upon the reverse of a Medal of the Emperor Severus. Perhaps the same with that which the Syrians call Arados in Stephanus; who re∣counts 10 others of this name, of less importance: the places of Situation are now unknown. Antiochia in America, a small City in the King∣dom of Popayan in the South America, 15 Leagues from S. Foy. Antiochia Pisidiae, mention'd Acts 13. 14. was afterwards an Archbishops See; but it is now a mean Village, and called by the Turks Versacgeli, or as o∣thers say Antachio: it is distant from Iconium 60 Miles North-West, from Ephesus 160 East. Antipatride, Antipatris, a City of Palestine, built by Herod the Great, and so call'd in Honor of Antipater his Father. Baldwin I. King of Jerusa∣lem took it in 1101. and erected the Church into an Episcopal See under the Archbishop of Caesarea: in 1265. the Saracens took it again and have quite ru∣ined it. It stood 6 Leagues from Joppe. Antiscoti, or the Isle of Assumption, an Isle in the Gulph of S. Lawrence in New France in America, where the French have establish'd some Colonies. Antium, Antio Rovinato, an ancient City of Italy, the Capital of the Volsci; Famous in the Roman times for a Temple consecrated to Fortune: Some∣time also a Bishops See, but since ruined by the Saracens. Antivari, Antibarum, a Metropolitan City of Dalmatia, seated upon a Mount upon the Shoars of the Adriatick Sea, under the Dominion of the Turks. The Archbishop of this City had 9 suffragan Bishops under him▪ it is distant from Budoa West, and Dol∣cingo East, 10. Miles; from Scutari South, 18 Miles. Antongil, a Bay and Country in the Northern part of the Isle of Madagascar. Antrim, the most Northern County in the Pro∣vince of Ʋlster in Ireland; divided into 9 Baronies, which are bounded on the East by S. Georges Chan∣nel, on the the West by the River Banne, that parts it from London-Derry; on the North the Deucalido∣nian Ocean, on the South the County of Down. The chief Town is Carrick-fergus. Antron, an antient Town of Thessalia. The Asses of this Country were said to be prodigiously great, whence the Proverb Asinus Antronius, for a very ignorant Person. Antros, a small Island at the Mouth of the Garonne, on the Coast of Guienne in France, where stands the celebrated Tour de Cordovan, to light the Vessels that go to Bordeaux. Antwerp, Anversa, called by the French, Anvers; by the Germans, Antorf, is a City of the Low Coun∣tries in the Dukedom of Brabant, upon the River Scheld. It is a large and beautiful City, and was a∣bout 100 years since, the most populous and best traded City in all those Provinces; and in 1559. was made a Bishops See, by Paul IV. In 1569. the Duke de Alva built here a strong Castle. In 1576. the Hollanders plundred it. In 1585. the Duke of Parma reduc'd it under the Dominion of the Spani∣ard again, in whose hands it now is: but all these Mutations, and the building of Forts upon the River by the Hollanders, has reduced much of its antient Glory, and it is now decaying. Abraham Ortelius, a learned Geographer, who was born here, has de∣scribed this City at large, as also Lewis Guicciardin, in his Description of the Low Countries. It stands 10 Miles from Ghant, and as many from Brussels. Anzerma, or S. Anna d' Anzerma, a small City in the Kingdom of Popayan in America. Aoaxe, a River of Abissinia in Africa; it riseth in the Borders of the Provinces of Xao and Oggo, and being augmented with the Streams of Machi, it runs Eastward through the Kingdom of Adel; the Capital of which, Avea Guerela, being watered by it, it falls into the Gulph of Arabia. Aonia, a mountainous Country of Baeotia in Greece with a River of the same Name: Aorna, Aornus, a City of Bactria and a very strong rocky Castle in the Indies, both taken hereto∣fore by Alexander the Great. § Also a River of Ar∣cadia, and a certain contagious Lake of Epirus, and a Lake in Italy, mention'd by Virgil.
Aouste, Augusta praetoria, a City and Dukedom of Piedinont: It is an Episcopal See under the Arch∣bishop of Tarantaise, and a part of the Dominions of the Duke of Savoy: it stands in a mountainous, but fruitful Soil; at the foot of the Grecian Alpes, upon the River Doria, where it receives the River Bauteg∣gio, which do both fall into the Po. This City was a Roman Colony, call'd by Pliny, Italiae Limes, the Frontier of Italy. It is 50 Miles from Turin, East. S. Anselm, Archbishop of Canterbury, was born here. Apalaches, Apalachites, Indians of Florida, dwelling in several distinct Provinces near the Moun∣tains of Apalaai. Their capital City is Melitot in the Province of Bemarin. Their King resides there, who acts the Sovereign over all the Chiefs of the other Provinces. Apaches, a numerous People of New Mexico in A∣merica, divided by the Spaniards into four sorts of Na∣tions, the Country is so vast where they live, and For∣tified with Castles upon the Mountains. Apamea, See Hamen. Apamea Clene, a City and an Archbishops See in Phrygia, of good Antiquity; now little inhabited, and almost ruin'd. The Turks call it Miarlea. § Al∣so two other Cities in Mesopotamia; one upon Tigris, and one upon the Euphrates. Apantum, a Province of the Terra firma in America. Apr, a Province of Peru in America, near the River of Amazons. Apennino, Apenninus, a known and very great Chain of Mountains, which divide Italy into two parts: it is 700 Miles long, and begins at the Maritim Alpes, and extends itself to the utmost bounds of Calabria; where one Branch of them ends at Capo dell' Arme, 12 Miles East of Reggio; and the other Branch at Ca∣po di Santa Maria in Apulia, at the Mouth of the Gulph of Venice. In all this long Course there is on∣ly the River Offanto (Aufidus) that crosseth it near the City Conza. It has divers names given it in several places. Apenrade, Apenrora, a little City of South Jutland, in the Dukedom of Sleswick, near the Baltick Sea; it belongs to that Duke with the adjacent Territory, and is distant from Hader Sleven, South, 3 Danish Miles. It has a large Haven, secured from the South-East Wind by the Island of Alsen. Apetous, Apetubae, a People of Brasil in America. Aphace, a place in Palestine, Dedicated sometime to the Worship of Venus in all maner of Luxury. Aphets, an antient City of the Province of Mag∣nesia in Thessaly, upon the Gulph now called del Vallo. Aphrodisium, a Cape now call'd Cap de Creuz, upon the Mediterranean, near Rosas in Catalogna. Aphytis, an antient City of Thrace, heretofore fa∣mous for a Temple of Apollo. Apina, an antient City of Puglia in Italy, long since ruin'd. Apiola, an antient City of Italy. Taken by Tarquin. Apodisia, Aphrodisias, a City of Caria in Asia Mi∣nor; heretofore a Bishops-Sée, under the Archbishop of Stauropolis. And the Birth-place of Alexander Aphrodisaeus; now almost Ruin'd. Appenzel, Abbatiscella, a very rich Burrough in Switzerland, and the Head of the last of the Cantons, it not joyning with them till 1513. It has its Name from this Town, and was once a part of the Jurisdicti∣on of the Abby of S. Gall. It is seated at the Rise of the River Sintra; distant from Curia 12 French Leagues, from Zurich 6 German Miles Eastward. The Inhabitants of this Canton are mix'd, of the Protestant and Romish Religion. Appleby, Aballaba, the County Town of West∣morland, almost incompassed with the River Eden; an antient Roman Town, and the Station of the Aure∣lian Moors. It has a pleasant Situation, being built upon the easie Ascent of a rising Hill; with only one Street, and that not mightily inhabited: yet for the great Antiquity of it, the Assizes and Sessions are kept here; and it has the right of sending two Burgesses to the Parliament. William, King of Scotland, surprized this Town, but King John soon after recovered it again. Appledore, a Market-Town in Kent, in the Hund∣red of Scray Lath, upon the River Rother. Apollonia Mygdonia. See Serres Apollonia in Polinam. See Pollina. Apollonia Magna, Anthium, now call'd Sissopoli, is a City in a small Island in the Euxine Sea, near Thrace. Heretofore a Colony of the Milesians, and had a Temple to Apollo in it. § The same Name was born by a City upon Mount Athos in Macedonia, and now call'd Erissos; by two others in the Island of Crete; by four in Asia Minor; by one in Palestine, near Joppe; one in Syria, near Haman; one in Caelesyria; one in Egypt; besides others, of which we have nothing extant. Aprio, Apros, Apri, a City of Thrace, and some∣time an Archiepiscopal See, under the Patriarch of Constantinople; so beloved by the Emperour Theodo∣sius, that it was also call'd Theodosiopolis from him. Apte, Apta, Julia, a City and Bishoprick in Pro∣vence upon the River Calavone, at the foot of the Mountains. This Bishop is a Suffragan to the Arch∣bishop of Aix: it is a small place, distant from Avig∣non 9 Miles to the East. Aptera, Apteron, Atteria, a City in the Island of Crete. Apuies, Apui, Indians of Brasil in America. Apulia, a Province of the Kingdom of Naples, bounded with Abruzzo on the East, with Terra di O∣tranto, and the Adriatick Sea on the North; and on the South with Calabria. The Italians do call this commonly Puglia, as the French call it Pouie. Apulia Daunia, is that part of Puglia which lieth next to Abruzzo, from which it is parted by the River Fortore; and so extendeth Eastward as far as the River Lofanto, where it meets with Peucetia. Apulia Peucetia, extendeth from the Banks of Lofanto to the Land of Otranto, East. Apurima, a River of Peru in America, arising at the foot of the Andes, from whence it passeth to Cusco and falls into the Xauxa, after a course of 60 Leagues. Apuroaca, Capera Vaca, or Piragua, a great Ri∣ver in Guiana in America. Aqua Dolce, Glecinero, Athiras, a River of Thrace falling into the Propontis by Selivrea. Aquapendente. See Acquapendente. Aqua-sparta, a small City in the Dukedom of Spo∣leto in Italy, upon a Hill, giving the Title of a Dutchy to a noble Family. Aqua Uiva, and Aqua Via, a Town in the Pro∣vince of Bars, in the Kingdom of Naples; giving its Name to an illustrions Family in that Kingdom. Aqui, and Aquita, a City and Province in the Island of Niphonia, belonging to Japan. Aquigires, Aquigirae, Indians of Brasil in Ame∣rica, towards the Praefecture of S. Esprit. Aquila, the chief City of Abruzzo in the Kingdom of Naples. It is a Bishops See, once under the Arch∣bishop of Chieti, but now exempted from his Jurisdi∣ction: seated on a Hill, and has a strong Castle in it; the River Pescara flows near it▪ it is 60 Miles distant from Rome, to the South-East. Aquileja, is call'd by the French Aquilee, by the Germans Aglar, and Aglareu: a Patriarchal City of Italy; in antient times very great, and one of the prin∣cipal Cities of Italy, the Residence of some Emperours. In 452. Attila, King of the Huns, took and destroy∣ed it, after a Siege of 3 Years: after this, being rebuilt by Narsetes, it was again Burnt and Ruin'd by the Lombards in 590. and was after this rebuilt by Popon, Patriarch of it. In antient times it was under the tem∣poral
Jurisdiction of these Patriarchs; but being after∣wards taken by the Dukes of Austria, it remains to this day in their hands. It is now almost desolate, by reason of its bad Air, troublesom Rubbish and Ruins, and the Vicinity of Venice, which draws all Trade from it. This City lies between the River Isonzo to the East, and Ansa to the West; and is not above 9 Miles di∣stant from the Shoars of the Adriatick Sea on the North. It lies in 36. 10. Long. and 45. 45. Lat. Aquino, Aquinum, a very antient City in the Terra di Lavoro, in the Kingdom of Naples: a Bishops See under the Archbishop of Capona, and heretofore a Ro∣man Colony. Almost Ruin'd, and little consiberable now, but for its being the Birth-place of S. Thomas Aquinas, as formerly of the Poet Juvenal. Aquisgrana, Aquisgranum. See Aix la Chapelle. Aqutaine, Aquatania, a third Part of the antient Gaul, supposed to be so call'd from the abundance of its Waters. The Emperour Augustus divided it in∣to Prima and Secunda, including within both, Bor∣deaux, Agne, Angoulesme, Xaintes, Poitiers, Peri∣gueux, Bourges, Clermont, Rodes, Albi, Cahors, Li∣moges, Mende, and Puy. Whereunto the Emperour Adrian added a third Province, by the Name of No∣vempopulonia. See Gascoigne. This Country con∣tinued in Obedience to the Roman Empire, till Hono∣rius about the Year 412. yielded part thereof▪ to A∣thaulfe, King of the Goths, whose Successours took occasion thereupon to Usurp the whole. About the Year 630. it came into the Possession of the Crown of France entirely: The Gascoigners soon revoulted, gi∣ving to Eudos their Leader, the Title of Duke of A∣quitain; which brought on a War that was not ended till the powerful Reign of Charles the Great. In 778. Charles the Great erected Aquitaine into a Kingdom, in the Person of Lewis the Debonnaire his Son. It con∣tinued a Kingdom about 100 Years, and then broke into particular Fiefs and Hereditaments. In 1152. it came to the Crown of England, as Dukes of Aquitaine, in the right of Eleanor Wife to Henry II. For its fortunes since, see Gascoigne. Arabia, is a very large Country in Asia: having on the North Syria and Diarbechia; upon the East the Persian Gulph, and the Streights of Basor, by which it is separated from Persia; on the South it has the Arabian Sea, and on the West the Red Sea, which cuts it off in great part from Africa. The Southern and Eastern parts, which are the greatest, are well cultivat∣ed; but the Northern is for the most part barren and sandy, having but few Inhabitants or Cities, by reason of the vast Desarts, barren Mountains, and want of Wa∣ter. It is all under Princes of its own, except a small part of Arabia Petraea, in which the Turks have some few Forts. This vast Country is divided into three Parts, viz. The Desart, The Happy, and The Stony. Arabia Deserta, (the Desart) is the least part of all the three, and lies most North: call'd by the Asia∣ticks Berii Arabistan; bounded on the South by the Mountains of Arabia the Happy, on the East by the Province of Iraca, heretofore Chaldea; upon the North by Diarvechia, from which it is separated by the River Euphrates; upon the West by Syria, the Holy Land, and Arabia the Stony. Arabia Foelix, (the Happy) is the greatest of all the three parts, and lies extended to the South and East: it is call'd by the Inhabitants Jemen, and is encompass'd on all sides by the Sea, except towards the North, where it bounds upon the other two Arabia's. There are in this part many Kingdoms and great Cities, the Soil being fruitful, and the Country not easie to be in∣vaded by the neighbour Nations, by reason of its Situation. Arabia Petraea, (the Stony) lies more West, and is call'd by the Turks Dase-lik Arabistan, or as others say, Baraab Arabistan by the Natives: it is bounded on the North by the Holy Land, and part of Syria; on the East by Arabia Deserta in part, and by Arabia Foelix in part, as also on the South; and on the West it has the Red Sea and Egypt. Two things have made these Countries known to all the World, The wander∣ing of the Children of Israel 40 Years, in the first; and the Birth of that great Deceiver Mahomet, in the latter of these three Parts. Aracues, a People of Chili, which are the most Warlike of all the Americans. Arach, Parthia, a Province of the Kingdom of Persia. Arach, Petra, the chief City of Arabia Petraea, once the capital City of Moab, and then call'd Rabath; afterwards an Archbishops See, under the Patriarch of Jerusalem, being taken from the Patriarch of Alexandria; it was also once call'd Cyriacopolis, and Mons Regalis; by some now, Krach: it stands upon the Confines of Pa∣lestine, near the Brook Zareth, and lies in 66. 45. Long. and 30. 20. Lat. Arad, Caucasus, is a Mountain of Asia, which the Fable of Prometheus has made very well known. It is that part of Mount Taurus which lies betwixt the Euxine or Black Sea on the West, and the Caspian Sea on the East; including the Mengrelians (Coraxicos) Caitachians (Heniochos) and the Achaeans (Achaeos.) It is continued also amongst the Asiatick Tartars, as far as to the Cimmerian Bosphorus, now commonly call'd Cocas. This Mountain is very high, and always covered with Snow. It is call'd by Hayton, the Ar∣menian Cochias; by others Albsor; by Niger, Ada∣zer; by Circassians, Salatto; and by the French, le mont de Circassie. Aradus, an Island and City of Phaenicia in the Syrian Ocean over against Tortosa: sometime the Seat of a Bishop, till it fell under the Tyranny of the Turks. Arafat, a Mountain within a League or two of Mecca in Arabia. On the top of it there is a Mosque, whither the Mahometan Pilgrims repair tofinish their Devotions, after their performance of the Ceremonies of Mecca. It is the same, they say, that Abraham would have Sacrificed his Son Isaac upon: in Commemoration whereof, before they part, they kill some Sheep in the Valley of Mina below; and what they present not a∣mongst their Friends, they distribute to the Poor, by the name of Corban, that is, their Oblation. Aragon. See Arragon. Arais, Araxes. See Achlar. Arakil-Uanc, a Celebrated Village and Monastery at the foot of Ararat in Armenia, in great esteem a∣mongst the People there; who believe it to be the place where Noah, after the Deluge, retired to offer his Sacrifices of Thanksgiving to God for his miraculous Preservation. Aran, Arania, is a very fruitful Vale in Aquitain n France, which lies between the Pyrenean Hills and the County de Bigorre, of which it was a part tiil 1192. when Alphonsus, King of Arragon, seised on it (as Peter de Marca saith) and annexed it to the Kingdom of Arragon, tho it lies on the French side of the Pyrae∣nei. In this Vale riseth the River Garonne, one of the greatest in France; and there are in it 33 Castles or Villages, of which Viella is the chief. Aranios, Aranus, a River of Transylvania arising near Clausenberg, and afterwards falling into the Ma∣sh. Ararat, Arat, by the Armenians call'd Mesesou∣sar, or the Mountain of the Ark, by the Persians Agri; is a part of the Caspian Mountains near Erivan in Ar∣menia, and the most renowned of all others, for su∣staining the Ark of Noah, after the Universal Deluge. It exceeds in height Caucasus and Taurus, carrying its head into the temperate Region, whilst some of the lower part of it is covered with continual Snow. E∣very 5 Leagues upwards, the Christians have built a lit∣tle Hermitage, where the curious Traveller may be re∣freshed. They will tell you there is a Cell, and ordi∣narily
a Hermite in it, upon the highest Top, who lives as a Recluse for his Life. But the story of Noah's Ark remaining uncorrupted and entire to this day, by rea∣son of the temperature of the Air, which the said Her∣mite shews you, I suppose is grounded upon as good an Authority. Arasch, a Town and Port in the Province of Asgar in the Kingdom of Fez: fortified with a strong Wall and a Castle. Arauco, a City, River, and Valley, in the Kingdom of Chili in America. The Natives had maintain'd a War against the Spaniards above 100 Years, before a Peace was made in 1650. Araxai, Araxius, a River of Brasil in America, which falls into the Mongagombe in the Province of Pairaba. Araxes. See Achlar. Arba, or Arbee, a Town in Palestine, call'd in Scripture Hebron and Mamre, being the Sepulture of the Patriarchs. § Also an Island and City, which is a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Zara, in the A∣driatique Ocean, upon the Coast of Dalmatia. Arbela, an antient City of Sicily. The People thereof were stupid to a Proverb. Arbelles, a Town in Assyria upon the River Lycus; where Alexander M. entirely defeated Darius the Third time, in the 423 Year of Rome, and 331 be∣fore the coming of our Saviour. Arbogen, or Arbo, a Town upon the River of the same name, in the Province of Westmania in Sweden. Arbon, Arborfoelix, a City of Switzerland under the Bishop of Constance. Arboriches, the antient People of the Province of Zeland in Holland. Arbois, a Town in the Franche▪ County, famous for the good Wines it yields. Arc, or L'Arc, a little River of Provence in France, which passes by Aix to the Berre. Arcadia, Pelasgia, an antient Province of Pelopo∣nesus, (or the Morea) now call'd by the Turks Tzaconia, with a City of the same name. In the Year of Rome 386, the Lacedemonians gave the People of this Coun∣try a bloody Overthrow; by reason their Sacrilege in Pillaging the Temple of Jupiter Olympius had contracted upon them the hatred of all Greece. § Al∣so the Name of a City heretofore famous in the Island of Crete, with a Suffragan Bishops See thereto. The Gulph of Arcadia is the same with Cyparissus Sinus of the antients. Arcani, Apsarus, a River of the Mengrelians, which riseth from the Mountains of Chielder in Armenia Ma∣jor; and running Northward, falls into the Euxine Sea at Arcani, a Town of Mengrelia, seated upon the Sea between Trapezunt, (from which it is distant 150 Miles), and Phazzeth a City of Mengrelia. Arcas, a small Town in the Kingdom of Castile in Spain. Heretofore a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Toledo; but united to that of Cuenca, by P. Luci∣us III. at the request of Alphonsus IX. King of Castile. Arce. The same with Petra in Arabia Deserta. Arch-Angel, is a very famous Sea-Port in the North of Muscovy, in the Province of Dwina, upon the Ri∣ver Dwin; which near this place is divided into two Branches, making the Island of Podesmeske, and then falling into the White-Sea, 6 German Miles beneath this City. The passage by Sea to this City was first sound out by one Richard Chandler, an English-man, in the Year 1554, or near that time, before which the Muscovites had no Communication with these parts of the World, excepting by the Baltick Sea, by Narva, and Poland: accordingly, the English were at first treated with great Kindness by the Princes of Muscovy, and in the Year 1569, obtain'd from Basilovits, the Emperour of Muscovy, that none but the English should Trade here; but since that, the Dutch, Danes, and Swedes, have had their share; and Arch-Angel, which when it was discover'd was a Village, is now be∣come a rich and populous City. This City lies in 64d. of lat. Archidona, a Town in Andaluzia in Spain. § Al∣so a small City of Peru in America. Archipelago, Archipelagus, mare Aegaeum, is a part of the Mediterranean Sea, which lies between Greece, the Lesser Asia, and the Isle of Creet: this Sea is stored with an innumerable Shoal of small Islands; and by Allusion, late Writers have for that reason given the same names to divers other Seas in the East and West-Indies; as Archipel de S. Lazare, des Maldives, du Chiloe, de Mexico, &c. Arcissa, Arcisso, the Lake of Van. See Van. Arcklow, is a small Town, with a County belong∣ing to it, in the Province of Leinster in Ireland: seat∣ed upon the Irish Sea, 31 Miles South of Dublin; and deserves the rather to be mentioned, because it belongs to the Noble and Loyal Family of the Dukes of Or∣mond, who are Barons of it. Arcuevil, a spruce Village within a League of Paris. its proper Name is Arc-Julien, which was given it by Julian the Apostate, in Commemoration of the A∣queducts he made here, whilst he sejour'd at Paris, in the Years 357, and 360. Ardaschat, Artaxata, a City of Armenia, upon the Confines of the Territory of Erivan: where are to be seen the rests of the magnificent Palace of Tyri∣dates, call'd by the Inhabitants Tact-terdat, or the Throne of Tyridate. Ardagh. There are Four Towns in Ireland of this Name; the 1st. in the County of Letrim; 2d in the County of East-Meath; 3d. in the County of Long∣ford; and the 4th. in the County of Cork. Ard bracan, a small Town in the County of East-Meath in Munster in Ireland. Ardea, a City heretofore of Italy, the capital of Ru∣tilij, and antienter than Rome: Now a Village of small consideration. Ardevil, Ardevila, a Town in the Province of Ser∣van in the Kingdom of Persia, about 20 Leagues from the Caspian Sea. It is a large City, but not Wall'd; remarkable for its being able to shew the Sepulchres of many of the Kings of Persia; and in the Year 1618, the Turks and Persians fought near this place a dread∣ful Battle; the Persians getting the Victory with a vast loss, which ended in a speedy Peace, offered by the Vi∣ctors, and accepted by the Turks. Brietius. Ardee, Ardea, a River of Normandy, which falls into the British Sea at Auranches, near the Limits of the Dukedom of Britain. Ardee, or Atherdee, a small Market-Town in the County of Louth in the Province of Ʋlster in Ireland. King James II. lay encamped upon the Plains here, with an Army of 20000 Men, whilst the Duke of Schomberg and his Forces were so strongly entrench'd at Dundalk: who not accepting of a Battle, when it was presented by King James; both the Armies reti∣red soon after, without fighting, into their Winter Quarters, November 1689. Ardembourg, or Rodenbourg, Ardenburgum, a Town in Flanders. Taken by the Hollanders in 1604. One League from Sluys. Ardennes, Ardenna Sylva, call'd by the Germans Ardenner-waldt, and Luitticher-waldt, is the greatest Forest in all the Low-Countries; it reacheth above 100 Miles in length; as this day extending itself through the Dukedom of Luxemburgh, the Bishoprich of Liege▪ the South part of Henalt, and to the Borders of Cham∣paign; it is taken notice of by Cesar and Tacitus. Ardes, a Tract in the County of Down in Ʋlster in Ireland, upon the Lake of Coin, in the form almost of a Peninsula. Ardesche, a River of the Province of Vivarets in France. It passes by Aubenas to the Rhosne, into
which it discharges itself near S. Esprit, and separates▪ Languedoc from Vivarets. Ardfeart, a Town in the County of Kerry in the Province of Munster in Ireland. Ardila, a River of Spain, whichriseth in Andaluzia, and dischargeth itself into the Guadiana, below the Ci∣ty of Olivenza in Portugal. Ardmonack, is a Territory in the County of Rosse in Scotland, belonging to the Royal Family of Scot∣land. Charles I. as second Son to King James I. had the Title of Baron of Armonack, given him at two year of Age. Ardrach, a Town in the County of Longford in the Province of Connaught in Ireland. Ardres, Ardra, is a little, but well fortified, Town in the County of Guienne in Picardy in France: it stands in the Marshes, in the Borders of Artois, three Leagues from Calis toward the South, and a little more from Gravelin. Francis I. and Henry VIII. King of England, had an enterview with each other near this Town, in 1520. Both Courts appearing so magnifi∣cent, that they call'd the place, a Field of Cloth of Gold. In 1596 Cardinal Albret took it for the Spaniards, who did not keep it long. § Also the Name of a King∣dom and City in Guiney in Africa. Ardret, Ardrathen, or Ardrat, Ardatum, a City, and a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Armagh in the County of Kerry in Ireland. Are, Arus, a River of York-shire. It arises upon the Borders of Lancashire, and falls into the Ouse be∣low York. Arembourg, Areburium, a Town of the lower Ger∣many, lately adorn'd wiah the Title of a Principality: it lies between Colen to the North, and Treves to the South, upon the River Aer. 7 German Miles from Juliers, to the South, and 4 from the Rhine, West. Arequipa, one of the most considerable Cities of Peru in America, upon the River Chila, 7 Leagues from the South Sea; 70 from Cusco. And a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Lima, with a commodi∣ous Port. It is made rich by the Silver Mines of the Andes, that are found within 14 Leagues of it. In 1582. an Earthquake (as the Country here is very sub∣ject to them) almost shook it to peices. In 1600, the Vulcano which stands by it, broke out into terrible Flames. They did use to bring the Treasure of Potosi hither; but the difficulty of the Road has driven them to Arica. Arestinga, Liba, an Island in the Indian Ocean, towards the Provinces of Kherman and Dulcinca, in Persia. Arethusa, a City of Syria, which is a Bishops See under the Archbishop of Apamea. § Another in Ma∣cedonia, by some call'd Taino and Renina, upon the Bay of Contessa. § Also a Lake in Armenia Ma∣jor, near the source of the River Tigris. Arezzo, Aretium, a City, and a Bishops See, imme∣diately under the Pope, in Tuscany in Italy. Famous in the time of the old Romans. Arg, Argus, a River of Swabia in Germany. Pas∣sing by Wangen, it afterwards falls into the Lake of Constance: Argan, a Town in New Castile in Spain. A Coun∣cil here held in 1473, enjoyns every Bishop to say Mass thrice, and simple Priests four times at least a year; and that none be preferred to Ecclesiastical Dignities, who understand not Latin. It seems the Learning and Devotion of that age went toutes par la main. Argens, Argenteus, a River of Provence in France. It arises from three several Sources; then falls into the Ocean near Frejus. Agentan, Argentomum, Argentomagum, a City of Normandy in France, upon the Ʋrne. Argenten, a Town in the Dukedom of Berry in France, upon the Creuse. Argentor, a River in the Province of Angoumois in France, falling into the Charente at Porsac. Argentrevil, Argentolium, a small Town three Leagues from Paris. There is a Priory in it, depen∣dent of the Abby of St. Denis. Argile, Argathelia, a very large County in the Western parts of the Kingdom of Scotland, upon the West of Dunbritaine Frith. This was the first Coun∣try the Scots who came out of Ireland possess'd them∣selves of, as is shewn by Camden out of Bede. First also made a County or Earldom by James II. King of Scotland, who invested Colin, Lord Campbell, with the Title of Earl of Argile, in regard of his own, and of the worth of his Family, which is deriv'd from the antient Princes of this Country. They have also, (saith Camden) been made Lords of Lorn, and for a good while General Justices of Scotland: but the two last Earls were unfortunate. Anginuses, an Island of Greece, where the Athe∣nians under Conon, obtained a great Victory over the Lacedemonians, in the Year of Rome 347. Argipeeni, an antient People of Sarmatia. They never would go to War with their Neighbours. Arglas, is a small Town in the Province of Ʋlster, in the County of Down in Ireland, with a Haven be∣longing to it. The Lord Cromwel of Oakham is Earl of this place. Argonne, a Territory, part in Champagne, and part upon the Borders of Loraine in France. Beau∣mont and Clermont stand in it. Argos, the antient capital City of a Kingdom of the same name in the Morea, now call'd the Province of Romania. This Kingdom was Founded by Inachus contemporary with Moses, or 346 years before him, in Eusebius's Calculation. It continued 546 Years; then changed into a Republick, which maintain'd several Wars with the Grecians. The City has been first an Episcopal, and next an Archiepiscopal See. In 1383, the Venetians bought it. In 1463▪ the Turks took it. In 1686. General Morosini reduced it under the Vene∣tians again. Argos, Amphilogium, was a City of Epirus, ruin'd long ago. § There was another of the Name in Thessalia in Macedonia, call'd now Armiro. Argow, one of the four parts of Switzerland, taking its name from the River Arg, upon the Borders of Constance. Arguin, [Arguinum] a small Island, with a Fort upon it, belonging to the Hollanders, upon the Coast of Nigritia. This Fort was built by the Portugals in 1455. Taken from them by the Hollanders in 1633. Taken from the Hollanders by the English, of late Years; and it was again taken and ruin'd by the French in 1678; and is now again under the Hollander. It lies in the Atlantick Ocean, upon the Coast of the King∣dom of Gualata, about, or in 20 d. of Northern Lat. Arhon, Asopus, a River of the Morea, falling into the Gulph of Corinth. Arhusen, Arhusia, a City of Denmark, in the Dukedom of Jutland, upon the Baltick Sea: it is a Bishops See, under the Archbisop of Lunden, seated upon the River Gude; 10 Miles South of Alburg, 2 West from the Island of Fuinen, and about 26 North of Lubeck. This City was taken, and severely treated by the Swedes in 1644. but is since that in the Poses∣sion of the Danes again. Aria, an antient Province and City of Persia. The one is now call'd Chorasan, the other Herat or Serat. Ariano, Arianum, a City in the further Principate in the Kingdom of Naples, and a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Benevento, giving the Title of a Duke. Ariano, upon the Po, is a small City in the Ferra∣rez in Italy, and Capital of a Territory call'd Polesin di Ariano, upon the Borders of the States of Venice.
Arica, a Port in the Kingdom of Peril, in the Province de los Charcas, where they ship the Silver brought from Potosi. It is a small Town, but has a capacious Haven, and a strong Castle, distant from La Plata to the South-East, and from Cusco to the South, 80 Leagues. Ariccia, or la Riccia, was heretofore a conside∣rable Town in the Campagna di Roma in Italy, upon a Lake of the name, now called lago di Nemi. It has since become a small Village, yet gives the Title of a Duke. Ariel, a River of the Precopensian Tartars, which falls into the Nieper, (Borysthenes) below Terki. Arieni, an antient People of Germany. Another in Asia, whom the Gauls reduced. Arima, a Town and Port of Japan, in the King∣dom of Ximo or Sacok. The Infidels have extirpa∣ted the Christians thence. Arimaspi, an antient People of Sarmatia Euro∣paea. Ariminum. See Rimini. Arimoa, an Island discovered by the Hollanders in 1618. near New Guiney, betwixt Moa and Schouten. Arles, Arelas, a City and Archbishoprick in Pro∣vence of France, upon the Rhone. In this place there was celebrated a great Council of the Western and African Bishops, by the Order of Constantine the Great, in the Year 312, or as Cabasutius saith, in 314. that is, about 16 years before the General Council of Nice; and there has been several others held in aftertimes in the same Place. This City was once made the Head of a Kingdom, which had Kings of its own from the Year 879. to 1032. sometimes call'd the Kingdom of Arles, and sometimes of Bur∣gundy beyond the Jur. (Jurana) It is seated on the left side the River Rhone, over which there is a Timber Bridge, 12 Leagues from Marseilles to the West. The Academy established here in 1669▪ and the grand Obelisk of Roman work erected in 1677▪ ought not to be forgotten. Arlington, a little Village in Middlesex, between Harlington and Shepeston; which being the Birth∣place of the Right Honorable Henry Bennet, he was by Charles II. created Baron of Arlington, the 14th. of March 1664▪ and Earl of the same the 22d of April 1672. sworn Lord Chamberlain of the Hous∣hold to King Charles II. Sept. 11. 1674. and died in the first Year of the Reign of King James II. in great Honor and Esteem. Arlon, Arlun, Arlunum, Orolunum, a Town in the Dutchy of Luxembourg, in the Low Countries, which has given the Title of a Marquess from the Year 1103. It stands 4 Leagues from Luxembourg, 6 from Montmidi. Arma, a Province and City in the Kingdom of Popayan in America, 25 Leagues from St. Troy. Armadabat. See Amadabat. Armagh, Armacha, a County of Ʋlster in Ire∣land, incompassed with the River Neury on the East, with the Country of Louth, on the South, and with the Blackwater North. This is one of the most fruitful Counties in all Ireland. Upon the River Ka∣lin, which falleth into the Blackwater, (a River so called) stands Armagh, a poor decayed City, tho an Archiepiscopal See, and the Primate of the whole Kingdom. This Primate was subject to the Arch∣bishop of Canterbury till 1142. when it was exempt∣ed by one John Papyrio, a Papal Legate, as Camden faith. The City was taken by Cromwel, in 1650. Armanac, Arminiacensis Comitatus, a County of Aquitain, or the upper Gascony in France, bounded on the North by the Counties of Agenois and Con∣dome, on the East by Languedoc, on the West by Gascony, properly so called, Bearn and Bigorro, and on the South by the County de Cominge. The Earle of this County are much celebrated in the antient French History. Armanth. See Ardmonack. Armanson, Armentio, a River of France in Bur∣gundy. It rises by semur, receives the Brenne, passes by Tonnere, and falls into the Lionne nigh Auxerre. Armenia major, called by the Inhabitants Curdi∣stan, by the Georgians Armenioba; a very large and well known Country of Asia; being divided from the Georgians, Mengrelians and Muscovites, by the Mountains; on the South by Mount Taurus from Mesopotamia, and by Mount Niphate from As∣syria, on the West it has the Euphrates, by which it is divided from Cappadocia, and Armenia the Less: The greatest part of it is under the Turks, but a small part towards the East is under the Prsin. In this Country both Euphrates and Tigris have their Fountains. Armenia minor, called now by some Aladuli, by o∣thers Ac-coionlu, is a part of Asia the Less, and was heretofore a part of Capadocia: bounded on the North by the Mengrelians and the Pontus, or Eux∣ine Sea, on the South by Cilicia and Syria, on the East by Armenia major, and on the West by Cappa∣dooia. This whole Country is now under the Do∣minion of the Turks. Armentiers, Armentariae, a Town of Planders up∣on the River Ley (Legia) which falls into the Schelde at Ghant. This Town was the Theatre of great Actions during the former Wars, and was left to the French by the Treaty of Aquisgrane, who have had it ever since the Year 1668. It is a fair Town di∣stant from Ghant 10 Miles, and something less from Cambray. Armes, a Seigniory in the Province of Nivernois in France, giving its name to a Noble Family there. Armorica. See Bretagne. Armoy, or Earmoy, a Barony in the County of Cork and Province of Munster in Ireland. nautes, an errant vagabond People of Albania. Arnay le Due, Arnaeum Ducium, a small Town in Burgundy in France; 5 Leagues from Autun, very agreeable. Arnebourg, a Town in the antient Marquisate of Brandenbourg upon the Elb; ruined in the Ger∣man Wars. Arneda, a City and Port upon the Pacifick Oce∣an, in Peru in America. The Land of Arnheim, is a part of the Terra Au∣stralis, discovered by the Hollanders, to the South of New Guiney. Arnheim, Arenacum, one of the principal Cities of Guelderland, and one of the States of Holland; seated upon the Rhine, which a little above it is di∣vided into 2 Branches, the Ysel to the East and the Rhine to the West: it is a neat Town, and has be∣longed to the United Provinces ever since the Year 1585. It lies 2 Leagues from Nimeghon, (the chief Town of Guelderland) and 7 from Ʋtrecht. Taken by the French in 1672. and deserted 2 years after; the Fortifications of it being first demolished by them. Arno, Arnus, a River of Tuscany in Italy, which springeth from the Apponnine, not far from the Head of Tiber; and running West, it obliquely passeth be∣tween Florence and Pisa. From the Sea, as far as Florence, it is Navigable. Arnon, a River arising from the Mountains of Arabia, which traverses all the Desart, then falls into the Lake Asphaltites, and divides the antient Seats of the Moabites from the Amorites; God Almighty rendred the passage over it miraculously easie to the People of Israel, Numb. 21. 13, 14.
Arnsbourg, the Capital City of the Island of Oe∣sel in the Baltick Sea, with a Castle, under the Swedes. Aroe, Arren, Aria, an Island in the Baltick Sea under the King of Denmark, dependent of the Dutchy of Sleswick. Aromaia, a Province of New Andaluzia in A∣merica, near the mouth of the River Orenoque. Arona, a Town and Castle in the Milaneze in I∣taly, upon a Lake, belonging to the Family of the Borromeos. The famous S. Charles Cardinal Bor∣romeo Archbishop of Milan was born here Octob. 2. 1538. Arool, a Town in Muscovy 40 Leagues from Moscow. Arosen, Arosia, a City and a Bishops See under the Archbishop of Ʋpsal in Sweden. It is the Capi∣tal of the Province of Westimania, with a Fortress upon the Lake Meler. Here Gustavus I. deseated Christiern II. about the year 1521. And in 1540. the States here assembled declared the Crown of Swe∣den Hereditary. Arow, Aarow, a frank Town in the Canton of Bern in Switzerland, upon the River Aar, from whence it takes its name. The Protestant Cantons are used to hold their Dyets here. Arpaia, Caudium, a City heretofore, now a Vil∣lage, in the further Principate in the Kingdom of Naples. Near to it, there is a very narrow defile for two Persons to pass, betwixt two Mountains, called Stretto d'Arpaio, and formerly Furcae Caudi∣nae; where the Samnites having obliged the Roman Army under T. Vetrurius and Sp. Posthumius, Con∣suls, to render themselves upon discretion, put them to the disgrace of passing under a Traverse of Pikes, with Hands tyed, disarmed and bare headed. Arpaion, an antient Barony in the Province of Rovergue in France, erected into a Dutchy in 1651. Arpentras, A City heretofore upon the Lake Le∣mane in Switzerland, now a Village they call Vidy, built out of the Ruins thereof. Great numbers of antient Medals are found here. Arpino, Arpinum, a Town and Castle in the Terra di lavoro in the Kingdom of Naples. Caius Marius (Seven times Consul) was born here. Ci∣cero is Sirnamed Arpinas from hence, it being but 3 Miles from the place of his Nativity. Arques, a Town in the Dutchy of Bar in France near the Meuse, supposed to be the Birth-place of Joane of Arc, the Maid of Orleans, famous in the Reign of Charles VII. Arques, Arca, a Village in Normandy in the païs de Caux, upon the River Arques, 2 Miles South from Diepe. This place was made illustrious by a great Victory Henry IV. obtain'd there in the Year 1589. Arra, a Barony in the County of Tipperary in Mnster in Ireland. Arracan, Arracaon, Arrachamum, a considera∣ble Kingdom and a City upon the River Martaban, beyond the Ganges in the East Indees. Arragon, Aragonia, a very large, and indeed one of the three principal Kingdoms in Spain; bounded on the North by Navarre and France, from which last it is divided by the Pyrenees, on the East it hath Catalonia, on the West New and Old Castile, and on the South it hath the Kingdom of Valentia. This Kingdom was united to Castile in the Year 1479. Arran, a Barony made up of four Islands, upon the Coast of the County of Dungal in the Province of Ʋlsier. And made an Earldom in 1661. in fa∣vor of Richard, the Second Son of James Duke of Ormond. These Islands lie in the Western Ocean. Arran, Arania, Glotta, an Island on the West of Scotland in Dunbritain Frith near Argile, which was anciently an Earldom. Arras, Atrebatum, Nemetocerna, called by the Dutch Atrecht, a great Episcopal See under the Archbishop of Rheims; the Head City of the Earl∣dom of Artois, and stands upon the River Scarpe▪ which flows also by Douay. It is considerably well sortified, and has a strong Castle; it came into the hands of the French in 1640, and when the Spani∣ards 1654▪ attempted by force to retake it, their Army was defeated the 25th. of August of that Year, since which time the French have peaceably enjoyed it. This was one of the greatest Actions of Cardinal Mazarine, and won him much Honor in France. It is 15 Leagues from Tournay, and 5 from Doway. Arren. See Aroe. Arroux, Arosius, a River of Burgundy in France: it rises by Amay le Duc, passes by Autun, and joyns the Loyre by Bourbon-Lancy. Arsa, Arsia, a River of Istria which divides Italy from Illyrium. It falls into the Adriatique near Pola. Arsinoe, a City of Cilicia in Asia Minor, betwixt Antioch and Seleucia. Arsinoe in Aegypt. See Suez. Arsinoe, between Berenice and Ptolemais in Afri∣ca, is a City and a Bishops See under the Archbishop of Cyrene; some say now called Trochara. The Ar∣tients give us three more of this name in the Island of Cyprus, whereof we have no farther account. Arta, or Larta, a City of Epirus in Greece up∣on the River Acheron, 15 Miles from the Sea, and a days Journey from Ambracia. Adorned with a Me∣tropolitan See and a noble Church. Artois, Artesia, bounded on the North with the Country of Flanders, on the West and South with Picardy, and on the East in part by Flanders, in part by Hanalt and Cambray. It lies in length from North to South 26 Leagues. It was once the East part of Flanders, but became a separate Earldom in 1198. and continued so till 1382. when it returned to the Earls of Flanders, but at the Pyrenaean Treaty in 1659. and that of Nimeguen in 1678. it was intire∣ly yielded to the French. This was the Country of the antient Atrebates. The Capital City of it is Arras. Aru, a City and Kingdom in the Isle of Sumatra in the East-Indies. § Also an Island of Asia, between the Moluccaes and New Guiney. Arva, called by the Germans Orova, a Town in the Upper Hungary, near the Confines of Poland, towards the Carpathian Mountains upon the River Vag (Vagus) six Miles from Bistricz, North, which Town gives Name to a County. Arva, a rapid River of Savoy. It springs out of the high Mountains of Fossigni, and passing by Bon∣ne Ville, falls into the Rhosne at the Gates of Geneva. Gold is found amongst its Sands. Arundale, Aruntina Vallis, a Corporation in Sus∣sex, upon the River Arun; in which there is a Castle, a stately place,▪ strong by Art and Nature. The Name State and Dignity of Earl belongs to whoever is possessed of this Mannor and Castle, without any o∣ther Consideration or Creation to be an Earl, as Mr Camden acquaints us out of the Parliament Rolls of the 11. H. VI. This Castle stands 9 Miles East of Chichester, and the Fee is in the Hands of the most Noble Henry Duke of Norfolk, Earl Marshal of Eng∣land by Inheritance; granted by Charles II. in 1672. to the Father of this present Duke; who is the Eldest Duke, Earl and Baron in England, and the first Pro∣testant of this Noble and Illustrious Branch. The marmora Arundeliana have made this name universal∣ly known amongst the Ingenious of all parts, The Corporation sends Two Burgesses to the Parliament.
Arzilla, Zilia, Azella, a maritime Town in the Province of Hasbata in the Kingdom of Fez, upon the Atlantique Ocean; well fortified. Alphonsus V. King of Portugal, surnamed Africanus, took it in 1471. The King of Fez besieged it in 1508. without Victory. Afterwards the Portuguese abandon'd it. Arzeron, Aziris, a City of Armenia upon the Euphrates; the Turkish Viceroy of which has under him 17 subordinate Governors. Asasi, a Town in the Kingdom of Marocco. Asaph, Ela, Asaphopolis, a Town and Bishops See in Flintshire in Wales: this Bishoprick was ere∣cted by Kentigern Bishop of Glascow in Scotland, in the year 560. He returning afterwards into Scotland made Asaph, a holy Man, Bishop of this place, from whom it has its Name. There is in this Diocese 128 Parishes. The Town is mean as well as the Church, and it stands upon the River Cluyd, about three Miles from the Sea, and sixteen from Chester. Lat. 53. 22. Long. 3. 17. Asborn, a Market Town in Darbyshire, in the Hundred of Wirksworth. Ascalon, was heretofore a City of Judaea in the Tribe of Dan upon the Sea Coast, and one of the strongest holds of the Philistines. Baldwin I. King of Jerusalem took it from the Saracens about the year 1153. It was made a Bishops See, but so de∣stroyed since, that not above 50 Families now dwell in it, who are Moors and Turks. Ascania, an antient Town in the Principality of Anhalt in Germany, betwixt Magdebourg and Nor∣thuhausen: it gives the Title of a Count. Aschaffenbourg, Asciburgum, a City in Germany in the Diocese of Mentz, but in the Limits of Franco∣nia, and therefore by some ascribed to that Province. Heretofore an Imperial or Hans-Town, but after∣wards exempted; it is divided into two parts by the River Mayn, which falls into Rhine at Mentz. There is in it a stately Palace, built of square Stone, called Johansburg, where the Elector of Mentz often re∣sides: This Town is distant from Frankford 6 Miles, Eastward. Aschen, a Castle in Bavaria. Aschersleben, Ascania, an old Town in the Dio∣cese of Halberstad in the Principality of Anhalt in Germany: whence the House of Anhalt receives the Name of principes Ascanii: almost ruined. Ascherne, Aschenten, Askarna, a Town in the County of Limerick in Munster in Ireland, upon a River of the Name. Ascoli di Satriano, (Asculum Apulum) a small decaying City, an Episcopal See under the Archbishop of Benevento in the Kingdom of Naples, in the County called the Principate, at the foot of the A∣pennine, 35 Miles East from Benevento. This City is built on a Hill; a former which stood near it ha∣ving been ruin'd in the year 1399. by a dreadful Earthquake: this was built in the year 1410. by the Inhabitants of the other. Ascoli upon the River Tronto, a City in the Mar∣cha Anconitana in Italy, with an Episcopal See im∣mediately under the Pope. The Birthplace of Pope Nicholas IV. as formerly of Betutius Barrus an Ora∣tor mentioned by Cicero. In 1557. the French and Spaniards had a Battle near this place. The antient Inhabitants were the first that confederated against the Romans in the Marsick War. Sometime after that it was almost ruined; but rebuilt, and fell to be one of the first Temporal Demains of the Pope. Ascot, a Mannor in the County of Buckingham, which has long belonged to the Loyal Family of the Dormers, Earls of Carnarvan, and Viscounts of Ascot; who were advanced to this Honor Aug. 2. 1628. by Charles I. for whom Robert, the first Earl, died fighting in the Battle of Newberry, in 1643. Asebin, Nisivis. See Nisbin. Asgar, a Province in the Kingdom of Fez in A∣frica, to the West, between the Provinces of Fez and Ha∣bat. Its principal Towns are, Arasch and Alcasar-Quivir. Ashby de la Zouch, a Market-Town and Barony▪ in Leicestershire, which, saith Camden, is now in the Earls of Huntington; one of which Family, Sir▪ William Hastings, procured the Town the Privilege of a Fair in the Reign of Henry VI. It stands in the North-West Corner of the County, about eleven Miles North-East from Eaton. Ash-burtun, a Corporation seated upon the River Dart in Devonshire, which sends two Burgesses to the Parliament: it stands about 17 Miles from Exe∣ter, to the South-West, and 5 Miles from Newton. Ashdale, a Place in Scotland, of which the late Duke of Monmouth was Baron. Ashdod, Azotus, a City in the Holy Land, which was one of the Principalities of the Philistines: in S. Jerom's time it was a Bishops See under the Archbi∣shop of Caesarea; now a Village, called Alzete by the Turks. See Azotus. Ashford. a Market-Town in Kent, upon the River Stower in Scray-Lath. Ashkrig, a Market-Town in Yorkshire in the North-riding, and the Hundred of Hang West. A S I A, the first of the Four parts of the World; the Mother, and for a long time the Nurse and Mistress of Mankind; for here in this, Man was created; and after the Deluge, this was the Place God chose to give Mankind a second Beginning in: the 2 first of the General Monarchies, (viz. the Assyrian and Persian) were in this part; and to it chiefly was the Church confined till our blessed Saviour came. It is washed on three sides by the vast Ocean, which on the East is called the Eastern or Pacifick Ocean; on the North the Tartarian Ocean or Mar del Norte, on the West the Aethiopian Ocean and the Red Sea; and it is divided from Europe by the Mediterranean and Black Sea, with the Rivers of Tanais (Don or Tana) Rha and Obb. It is only parted from Eu∣rope by the space of 300 German Miles, more or less, by these Rivers: connected to Africa by a Neck of Land of about 30 Miles; and whether the North-East part of it is not united with the North-West part of America, could never yet be discovered; tho proba∣bly there is a streight or narrow Sea between them; so that lying in the midst of the other three, it was the fittest place to be made the Cradle of Mankind, from whence the other were all to be peopled. It lies in length from the Hellespont to Malacca, the utmost Eastern Mart, 1300 German Miles: its breadth between the Mouth of the Red Sea and the supposed Streights of Aman, is 1220 Miles: now divided in∣to five principal Parts, 1 Tartary, 2 China, 3 India, 4 Persia, 5 and the Turkish Empire. Asia Minor. See Natolia. Asine, the same with Anchora. Asoph, Tanais, called Azack or Azeck by the In∣habitants, la Tana by the Italians, is a City of the Precopensian Tarters, at the Mouth of the River Ta∣nais, which cuts the City into two parts, and then immediately falls into the Lake of Moeotis. It has a large Haven, and a strong Castle which stands by the River: taken by the Muscovites, anno 1638. which upon false Accusation, cost Cyrillus Lucaris, Patri∣arch of Constantinople, his Life; but it was re-taken by the Turks, who are now Masters of it: the Town is square, and built at the foot of a Hill in 67 d. of Long. and 54. 30. of Lat. Asopus, the name of 3 Rivers, one in Achaia, now called Arhon, the second in the Morea, and the third in Asia minor near Laodicea.
Aspe, a Valley of the Canton of Bearn in Swit∣zerland: watered by the Gave de Oleron. Its princi∣pal Town is Accous. Asphaltites, or the Dead Sea, by the Arabians sometimes called Baar Lout, (that is, the Sea of Lot, in Memory of his Deliverance,) is a Lake of Judaea in the same place where formerly the Cities of Sodom and Gomorrah were consumed. The Rivers Jordan, Arnon and others fall into it: 580 Furlongs long, and 150 broad, according to Josephus. They say no Fish can live in it, for the Bituminousness of its Wa∣ter, and that nothing ever grows upon its Banks. Assasiniens, a People formerly inhabiting about 12 Towns in Phaenicia near Tyre, under a King of their own Electing. Whilst they paid a Tribute to the Templers, they offered to turn Christians, to be discharged of the same; but the Templers refused it; which, says William of Tyre, has been the cause of the ruine of Religion in the East. In 1231 Lewis of Bavaria was assassinated by these People. In 1257 the Tartars came upon them and killed their Anti∣ent (or King) and took their Towns: and we have had no further account of them ever since. Assinarius, a River of Sicily. See Falconara. Assinshire, Assinus, a County in the North-western part of Scotland: it has Strathnavern on the North, the Mountains of Marble and Alabaster on the East, Rosse on the South, and the Irish Sea on the West. This is properly a part of the County of Rosse and therefore little is said of it. Assisi, Aesisium, Assisium, a City of Ʋmbria in the Patrimony of St. Peter: it is a Bishops See, built on a Hill, 5 Miles from the River Asio. L'Assumption, Assumptio, a small new City in the Southern America, near the River of Plate in Paragua: it is a Bishops See, under the Archbishop de la Plata. Assyria, the first of all the Empires and Kingdoms in the World. It subsisted for 1300 years under 37 Kings, or according to the computation of others, for 1484 years under 41 Kings, that is from Nim∣rod and Ninus (the first of which reigned at Babylon in the year of the World 1879, the other at Ninive) down to Sardanapalus; who burnt himself in 3178. 876 years before the coming of our Saviour. Now it is a Province of Asia, called otherwise Mosul and Arzerum, between Diarbeck and Persia, under the Grand Seignior, See Mosul. Asta, a City and Roman Colony, lying between Piedmont and Montferrat: it is a Bishops See under the Archbishop of Milan, well fortified, with a strong new Castle belonging to it: once a Commonwealth, then it became a part of the Dukedom of Milan, and was under the Viscounti; being disjoyned from that Dukedom, in the year 1531. after various changes itfell into the hands of the Duke of Savoy, who is still Master of it. It is 15 Miles distant from Casal, to the South. § There is another City of the same name in Andalusia, and another in the East-Indies in the Kingdom of Decan. Astabat, a City of Armenia upon the Frontiers of Persia, within a League of the River Aras: not great, but very beautiful, and enriched with excel∣lent Wine. Astaces, the antient name of a River in the King∣dom of Pontus in Asia Minor. Astachar, Astacara, a City of Persia upon the River Bendemir, near the Ruins of Persepolis; which was once the Capital of the Kingdom of Persia, but is now decaying. Astarac, or Estarac, Astaracensis tractus, a little County 7 or 8 Leagues long in the Province of Gas∣coigne in France. Asterabath, or Sterabath, Asterabatia, a City and Province of Persia towards the Caspian Sea. The City stands 20 Leagues from Gorgian. Astetlan, a Province of the new Kingdom of Mex∣ico in America, upon the Coast of the Vermiglian Ocean. Astora, Astura Augusta, a City and Bishoprick in the Kingdom of Leon in Spain, 9 Miles from Leone, (the Archbishops See) to the South. This City is also called Astorga. Astracan, Astracanum, the Capital City of a Tar∣tarian Kingdom in Asia, near the Mouth of the River Rha, or rather Wolga, where it falls into the Caspian Sea: it is built in an Island made by that River about 25 German Miles from the Sea-shoar; and has been in the Hands of the Muscovites ever since the Year 1554. before which time it had Kings of its own. The Kingdom of Astracan is a considerable part of the Czar's Dominion: it lies in Tartaria Deserta, from the Head of the River Rha to the Caspian Sea; and extends West to the River Tanais, which parts it from the Precopensian Tartars. It was conquered by Johannes Basilovits, Emperor of Muscovy. Asturia, was once a Kingdom, but is now a part of the Kingdom of Leon in Spain: it lieth in length from Biscay to Galaesia. The eldest Son of the King of Castile is stil'd Prince of the Asturia's (it being divided into two parts), as the English Prince is of VVales, of which this is an Imitation; as also the Del∣phinate in France. Atacama, a Desart in the Province of los Charcas in the Kingdom of Peru in America, along the Coast of the Pacifick Ocean. Atad, Caucasus, a Mountain in Asia, much cele∣brated by the antient Poets. § Also a Country beyond Jordan in the Holy Land, where the obsequies of the Patriarch Jacob were performed by his Children. Gen. 50. 10. Atavillos, a People of Peru. Atha, a River of Germany in the Dukedom of Ba∣varia, which falls in the Danube, a little above In∣golstad. Athamania, a Country of Epirus, between Acar∣nania, Aetolia and Thessalia: free, and under Prin∣ces of its own, till it submitted to Philip King of Macedon. Athamas, a River of Aetolia in Greece, with a Mountain of the same name, from whence it springs. Aeth, Athum, a small, but strong Town in the Province of Henalt, upon the River Dender, (Tenera) which falls into the Schelde: 2 Leagues distant from the Confines of Flanders, 5 East from Tournay. Ta∣ken in 1667. by the French; and by the Treaty of Aquisgrane, this and the Territory belonging to it was yielded to them; but by the Treaty of Nimeguen, in 1679. it returned under the Spanish Dominion. In this place in 1357. there was a League concluded between Venceslaus Duke of Brabant, and Lewis Earl of Flanders. Athens, Athenae, one of the most antient and most noble Cities of Greece, the Capital of Attica. Built by Cecrops an Aegyptian, A. M. 2350. accor∣ding to Helvicus in 2390. the last of which Accounts precedes the going up of the Children of Israel out of Egypt, 64 years. It was governed by Kings to the Death of Codrus, A. M. 2882. under Archons for Life, till 3190. after which it had Archons for ten years, till the year of the World 3268. when it be∣came a perfect Republick, and had never more any rest or peace till it fell into the hands of the Kings of Ma∣cedonia first, and afterwards of the Romans. About 3430. Xerxes invading Greece, the Athenians burnt their own City, and sent their Wives and Children into the Islands of the Mediterranean: prevailing afterwards against that great Prince, they built the
City much more gloriously than before. The Re∣putation they gain'd in this War made them great at home amongst their Neighbors; till growing proud and injurious, their Neighbors became their Enemies, so that they fell into the Hands of the Lacedemoni∣ans, who ruin'd their Walls, A. M. 3546. They re∣covered their Liberty, but not their Reputation; and in 3613. they fell into the hands of Philip the Father of Alexander the Great; who, by being made the General of a Holy War, became the the Sovereign of all Greece. The Romans conquering Perseus, the last King of Macedonia, A. M. 3782. they became in some sort the Subjects of that Empire; yet under the Romans they had a shadow of Liberty, till the Mithridatick War, when being over-persuaded by Aristion, an Epicurean Philosopher, they incensed the Roman Powers against them; and Sylla, in the year of the World 3863. 86 years before the Birth of our Saviour, by a Siege reduced them to the neces∣sity of eating Man's Flesh, and took the City by storm in the Night. This was the Evening of all their Do∣minion, Glory and Liberty. But in this Interval, be∣tween their becoming a free and a subject People, they raised themselves to a greater degree of Glory by Learning, than ever they could have required by Arms, without it. Solon, who lived a little before the Babylonian Captivity, and became the Athenian Legislator about the 3359th year of the World, laid the Foundations of this, which Socrates, Plato, Aristotle, Xenophon, Thucydides, Demosthenes, Isocrates, and the rest that followed, raised to such an height, that Athens was truly more the Mistress of the World on the account of Arts, than ever Rome was on the score of her Arms; and tho both their times are past, yet A∣thens, being Dead, speaketh still in her Philosophers, Orators and Historians. To pursue her Fate, she rose out of her Ashes after the Syllian Ruin by the favour of the Romans; and flourished, till Alaricus the Goth, laid her in the Dust, under the Reign of Va∣lens, about the year of Christ 378. She recovered a∣gain under Theodosius, Arcadius and Justinian; Eu∣docia the Queen of Theodosius II. being an Athenian by Birth, as Irene the Lady of Leo IV. also was. About 1435. Antonius Comnenus Acciajolus was Duke of Athens; about 20 years after she fell the second time into the hands of the Turks, being taken by Mahomet II. since which last Captivity, not only her Flesh but her Skin is wasted, and she is become a Skeliton. An. 1687. the Venetians having taken Napoli di Romania in the Morea, arrived at Port Lione, (that is, the Harbor of this Town, formerly called Pyraeus) September 21. with the Fleet, com∣manded by General Morosini: the Greeks immediate∣ly sent their Deputies with the Tenders of their Sub∣mission to him. The Turkish Garrison, being about 600 Men, retired to the Castle, to make some resi∣stance; but were forced to surrender in two or three days after the Besiegers began to play their Batteries, tho the Castle was strong, seated upon the old Acro∣polis with Precipices on three sides of it, a Wall on the other, and 20 Pieces of Canon within. About 300 Souls embraced the Christian Religion, with the Chri∣stian Government. The famous Temple of Minerva being made a Magazine for Amunition, was set on fire by a Bomb, that fell among the Stores in the Attack. Some Remains of Lycurgus's Tower, of Phidias and Praxiteles's curious Works are yet to be seen. And the Athenians excelling all others through∣out those Countries, in Merchandise and Crafts, may be thought to retain some Seeds of their former Po∣liteness still. To this City, St. Paul Preached the Gos¦pel of Christ and the Resurrection as we read Act. 17. Publius and Quatratus were Bishops of it under the Emperor Adrian: the former suffered Martyrdom in the Year 123, and animated great numbers of Athenians by his death, to embrace the like with courage and joy. The latter, together with Aristi∣des, presented that Emperour at his coming hither in the Year 126, with an excellent Apology for Chri∣stianity. Since advanced to an Archbishoprick. They reckon about 10000 Inhabitants, most Chri∣stians, in it; who have oo Churches, and divers other Chappels, according to the Rites and Customs of the Graecians. Now call'd Setino, lying in Long. 50. 12. Lat. 38. 51. Athenree, or Atherit, a City and Barony in the County of Galloway, in the Province of Connaught in Ireland: More rich and more considerable formerly, than now. Atherston, a Market-Town in Warwick-shire, near the River Anker, in the Hundred of Hemlingford. Athlone, Athlona, Atlona, is a small Town in the County of Rosecomen, in the Province of Connaught in Ireland; in the Confines of Leinster; seated up∣on the River Shannon, where it comes out of the Lake of Lough Ree, 16 Irish Miles from Longford, South. This Place was the Refuge of the Rebels in the Irish Rebellion, who fled thither from Kilkenny in 1650. being pressed upon by other Rebels; where they had not much rest, the Town being taken by Hewson in 1651. The Strength of it lies in the Castle: whi∣ther, when Douglas with 10 Regiments of Foot and 4 of Horse of the Forces of King William, ar∣rived, in order to a Siege, about the middle of July, 1690. the Irish retired, burning the Town, and break∣ing the Bridge. And at the last he was forced to leave it in their possession. But it could not withstand the Army of General Ginckle the year after Athol, Atholia, is a small County or Earldom in the heart of Scotland; between the Mountain Gram∣pus on the West, and the Sherifdom of Pertb on the East; in which riseth the River Tau, the greatest Ri∣ver in all Scotland. This County is remarkable for nothing but its Earls, which have been great men both in England and Scotland. Athos. See Agion Oros. Atlantides, an antient name given to the People that dwelt about Mount Atlas in Africa. Atlas. See Aiducal. Atri, Atria, Adria, and Hadria, a City of A∣bruzzo in the Kingdom of Naples, where Hadrian the Emperour was born. This is an independent Bi∣shoprick, subject to no Archbishop, instituted by Innocent IV. Anno Chr. 1252. The City is built upon a high Hill, within 4 Miles of the Adriatick Sea; and tho it has few Inhabitants, yet it has the Honor of giving the Title of a Duke to the Family of the Aquaviva's. It stands 10 Leagues from Pinna to the North, and 15 from Theate, East: it lies in 38. 18. Long. 42. 51. Lat. § There is another Town belonging to the Venetians of the same Name, but almost swallowed up by the Sea. Attica, Cecropia, a Province of the antient Achaia in Greece, upon the Aegean Sea; now call'd the Dutchy of Athens from its Capital City. It was di∣vided in those times first into 10, then into 13 Tribes. Each Tribe assumed its denomination from some or other Hero of the Country, and was made to con∣tain a certain number of Towns and Villages, amount∣ing in the whole to 174; being then as populous a Re∣gion as Holland now. It extended its Dominion al∣most over all the Isles of the Archipelago: had Mines of Silver within its Mountains: and each Tribe fur∣nish'd 50 Persons a peice, to be the Judges of the Po∣litie at Athens. Attigny, Attiniacum, a Town in the Province of Champagne, in the Dukedom of Reimes, upon the River Aisne (Axona) 11 Miles from Reimes to the
South-East, in which Chilperius, King of France, died, Anno. Christ. 72. Lewis the Debonnaire, King of France and Emperour, did Pennnce and made a publick Confession of his Crimes before a Council here Assembled in 822. Attleborough a Market-Town in Norfolk in the Hundred of Shropham. Ava, or Aba, a Kingdom, City, and River, in the Terra-firma of the Indies, between the States of Siam and Arachan. § Also a Province and Town of the Isle of Xicoco, belonging to Japan. Availle, Avallensis Comitatus, a Territory in A∣quitaine, in the Province of Limofin in France. Avalon, Aballo, a Town in Burgundy in France, upon the River Cousin, betwixt Auxerre and Autu, with a good Castle. Avalon, Avalonia, Aveland, is an Island in So∣mersetshire, in which Glastenbury stands: It gives the Title of a Viscount to the Family of the Mordants. Avanches. See Wiflisbourg. Avares, a Barbarian People of Scythia, who took part with the Huns, and Ravaged the Empire on ei∣ther side the Danube, in the sixth Century. Avaux, a County in Champagne in France, in the Neighbourhood of Rheims, giving its Title to the House of Memes. Charlemaigne defeated the Nor∣mans here in 882. Aubanne, Aubanca, Albinia, a Town and Baro∣ny in Provence in France. Aube, Alba, a River of France, which riseth in the Borders of Bnrgundy; and flowing through the Pro∣vince of Champagne, watereth Bar; after which being encreased with some additional Rivers, it falls into the Seyne, (Sequana) at Pont sur Seyne. Aubenas, Albenacum, a Town in the Province of Vivarets in France, upon the River Ardesche. Aubrac, a famous Rich Hospital in the Diocese of Rodes, in Aquitain in France. Auburne, a Market-Town in Wiltshire, in the Hundred of Ramsbury. Aubusson, a Town in the Province of Auvergne in France. The Ruins of the Castle here shew the Gran∣deur of the Family of this Name, who are the Lords of the place. Aude, Atax, a River of Languedoc in France. It takes its source from the Pyranees in the County of Ro∣sillon, and falls into the Mediterranean near Narbonne. Avein, Aveinum, a Village in Luxembourg; made famous by a great Victory obtained by the French against the Spaniards, anno 1635. It is scarce 2 Leagues distant from S Huberts, to the North. Aveira, Lavara, a Town in Portugal near the Mouth of the River Vouga, in the Province of Beira. Aveiro, Averonius, a River in the Province of Ro∣vergue in France. It rises in the Territory of Sovo∣rac; passes to Rhodez, St. Anthonin, Bourniquet, Negrepelisse; and having entertain'd the streams of several Rivers in the way, delivers itself into the Tarn at Pointe d'Aveiron. Avella, a Town and Marquisate in the Terra di Lavoro in Italy, 4 Miles from Nola, and 15 from Naples: not considerable. Avellino, Abellinum, a City with the Title of a Principality, in the further Principate in the Kingdom of Naples; it's a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Benevento. Avenay, Avenoeum, a small Town in Champagne in France, 4 Leagues from Rheims, near the River Marne. Avenmore, Dabrona, the Broad Water, a River in the Province of Munster in Ireland: it arises near the Earldom of Desmond, and running East, it takes in several other Rivers; and having washed the Town of Lsmore, it falls into the Ocean at Youghal, where it maketh a Haven, about 20 Miles West of Water∣ford Haven. Averno, Avernus, Aernus, a deep Lake, surround∣ed with Mountains and a Wood, in the Terra di La∣voro, in the Kingdom of Naples, near to Baja and Cuma. The Vapours it sends forth are very corrupt and noxious; which made the Poets represent it as one of the Mouthe of Hell. Nero attempted to make a Navigable Canal from hence to the Disembogure of the Tiber; but the Mountains and Soil rendred it impracticable. To the West of it there is a Cave struck out of a Mountain, where they formerly con∣sulted an Oracle; and its supposed the same Cave was the Grotto of the Sibylla Cumana. Avera, a City and a Bishops See, in the Terra di Lavoro, in the Kingdom of Naples. Built in the Ele∣venth Century upon the Foundations, as some believe, of the antient Atella; and Fortifi'd with a noble Castle. It carries the Title of an Earldom too; toge∣ther with this Episcopal See, they have united that of Atella and Cuma. Avesnes, Avennae, a Town of Haynaut; little, but famous, and well Fortifi'd; standing upon a small River which falls into the Sambre. This Town stands 4 Miles South of Maubeuge, 8 from Mons. It was yielded to the French by the Pyrenean Treaty An. 1659. Avesnes le Comte, a small French Town in the Province of Artois, in the Borders of Picardy. Augarras, Indians of Brasil in America, in the Province of Puerto Seguro. Auge, a County in Normandy. Augatow, Augustavia, a New Town in Poland, upon the River Brebetz, on the Borders of Lithuania, betwixt Bielsko and Grodno. Avigliano, Aviliana, a small Town in Piedmont, upon the River Duria, 20 Miles from Turin to the West. (This River is call'd Grana in the late Maps) It stands on a Hill, and has a ruin'd Castle. Avignon, Avenio, a City of Provence in France, upon the Rhone: it is an Archbishops See, a large well built Place, and very much famed for having been the usual Residence of the Popes from 1306. (by the Grant of Joan Queen of Naples, and Countess of Provence, to Clement V.) to 1378. In which time died here, John II. in 1334. Benedict XII. in 1341. Clement VI. in 1352. Innocent VI, in 1361. and Ʋrbanus V. in 1370. This City is an University, and had once a Stone Bridge, which is now decayed. The Archbishoprick was erected here by Sixtus IV. in 1475. During the Difference betwixt the King of France and Pope Innocent XI. about the Franchises, the former took this City into his own Possession. It lies about 7 Leagues from Arles, on the Borders of the Principality of Aurange. Avila, Albula, a City of old Castile in Spain, fa∣mous for the Birth of S. Teresia. It is wholly built upon a Hill, well fenced with Walls, seated amongst many Rocks, and neighbouring Mountains, yet has a plant Situation near the River Adaja. It is a Bi∣shops See, under the Archbishop of Compostelle: it stands in the midst between Salamanca and Madrid, 16 Leagues from either. § There is another Town of the same Name in Peru, upon the River Napo. Avilis, Aulide, an antient Town and Port in Bae∣otia, upon the Gulph of Negropont. Avilla, Avilles, a Town in Asturia in Spain, to∣wards the Mouth of the River Nalon, and the Bay of Biscay. Avin, Avo, Avenna, is a small River in the County of Louthiane, which falls into the Frith at Blackness, near Lithgow. Aviquirina, an Island in the Pacifick Ocean, upon the Coast of the Kingdom of Chili. Avis, Avisum, a small, but Fortifi'd Town in Portugal; to which there belongs an Order of Knights of the same Name. It is 9 Miles from Ebora North, and a many from Port Alacri West.
Aukland, a Market-Town in Durham, in the Hun∣dred of W. Darlington. It has a Bridge over the Ri∣ver Ware, and is pleasantly seated in a good Air upon the side of a Hill. The Bishops of Durham have a noble Castle here. Aulayas, a Lake in Peru, also called the Lake of Paria. Aulcester, a Market-Town in Warwickshire, in the Hundred of Barlich-way, upon the Confluence of the Alne and the Arrow. Aulerges, Aulerci, a People of the antient Gaul, of Three Divisions: called Aulerci Cenomani, Dia∣blantes, and Eburovices: being those of (the now) Mars, Perche, and the Diocese of Eureux. Aumale. See Albermarle. Auneau, a small Town in the Province of la Be∣ausse in France, 14 Leagues from Paris: memora∣ble for the defeat of the Germans, Swisse and others, by the Duke of Guise, in 1587. Aunis, Alnensis Tractus, a small Territory of which Rochel is the Head. It is taken out of Sain∣togne, and bound on the West with the Ocean, on the East and South with Saintogne, and on the North with Poictou. Avogasia, a Province of Asia, betwixt Georgia, Comania, and the Black Sea. The chief Towns in it are S. Sophia, Ajazzo, Costa. This and Mingre∣lia answer to the Colchis of the Antients. Avon, Alaunius, a River that separates part of Wiltshire, and all Gloucestershire, from Somerset∣shire; and then passing under the Walls of Bristol, falls into the Mouth of the Severn. Avon the Less, a River of Northamptonshire; one Head of which riseth in Cherwelton, in the North part of that County, and the other out of Avon-Well by Naesby. § Also another small River of that name, in Merionethshire in Wales, which passeth by Dolgelhe to the Irish Sea. This Word in the Brit∣tish signifieth a River, as Mr. Camden acquaints us. Aups, Aulps, Ʋrbs & Castrum de Alpibus, a Town in Provence in France; so called, because the Alps begin to elevate themselves near it. Aurach, Auracum or Ʋracum, a Town in the Circle of Schwaben in Germany, in the Dukedom of VVirtenburgh, upon the River Rems, Remus, which 2 Miles lower falls into the Neckher, (Nicrum.) It is built at the foot of the Mountains, 4 Miles from Tu∣bingen, to the East, and 7 Miles from Ʋlm. Lately strengthened with a strong Castle, and is the Resi∣dence of the Younger Dukes of Wurtenburgh. Avranches, Abrincae, Avrenchea, a City of Nor∣mandy, upon the Borders of Bretagn: it is a Bishop∣rick, under the Archbishop of Roan: it stands upon the River See, 10 Leagues from Coutance South, and as many from S. Malo North: near the Sea. In 1172. the Cardinals Albert and Theodinus, Legates from Pope Alexander III. by his Order as∣sembled a Council here, to examine into the Murder of Thomas Becket, Archbishop of Canterbury. Auray, Auriacum, a Town and Port in Bretagne upon the Bay of Morbihan, 3 Leagues North of Van∣nes, twenty three North of Nantes, and within 2 Leagues of the Sea. This place is famous at present for a Chappel called S. Anns, from the Mother of the Virgin Mary; and much frequented and adorned with Presents, by the Votaries of Mother and Daughter: likewise in former times for a Battle here fought be∣tween John de Monfort, and Charles Earl of Bloise, Sept. 29. 1364. where the Title of Bretagne was de∣termined by the Sword; the English, who sided with the former, prevailing. Aure, a River of Normandy in France. It rises near Caumout, and passes to the Drome, by Vaux and Bajeux. Aure or Eure, a River of France, rising in the Dukedom of Berri; and passing to the Auron and Aurette by Bourges. Aure, in La perche. See Eure. Aurick, Auricum, a Town in East Friesland, with a Castle, in which the Count of Embden, for the most part resides. It is seated in a barren Coun∣try, a Plain, scarce 3 German Miles from Embden to the East: the Country about it is called from the Town Aurickerland. Auriege or Lauriege, Alburacis, Aurigera, a Ri∣ver of France; first appearing in che County of Foix; then it salutes Foix, Pamiers, Saverdun, &c. admits the Lers, the Arget, and the Leze into its Channel, so throws itself into the Garonne 2 Leagues from Tholouse. Aurillac or Orillac, Aureliacum, a very fine Town, well built, in high Auvergne in France, upon the River Jordane. It suffered severely in 1562. by the Wars. Auron, Eura, a River of Bourdeaux in Aquitaine. Ausbourg, Augusta Vindelicorum, Druso magus, Damasia. This City is called by the Inhabitants, Aus∣purg, by the French, Ausbourg, by the Italians, Au∣gusta. It is a famed City of Germany, a place of great Trade, and the Capital City of the Province of Schwaben. It stands near the Borders of the Duke∣dom of Bavaria, upon the River Lech, (Lycus) near that place where the River Werdach falls into the Lech about 6 Miles from the Danube, to the South; 9 Miles from Ratisbone, and 10 from Constance: it is a Bishoprick, under the Archbishop of Mentz, and the City is an Hans Town, and has been honored with many German Diets; but is especially remark∣able for that held there in 1530. when the Lutheran Princes and States did deliver in to Charles V. the Confession of their Faith, which from this place is called the Augustane Confession. This City first ob∣tained their Charter of Liberty from Frederick I. An. 1162. and afterwards in 1266. they purchased their Freedom from the Duke of Schwaben. Jan. 24. 1689. Joseph King of Hungary was here Elected, Sworn, and Proclaimed the King of the Romans, and Crowned on the 26. Ause, a River of Auvergne in France, joyning with the Allier. Auses, an antient People of Africa mentioned by Herodotus. S. Austel, a Market-Town in Cornwal, in the Hundred of Powder. It returns two Burgesses to the Parliament. Austerlitz. See Slawkow. Austrasie, Austracia, which the Germans called the Westrich; was a considerable part of France du∣ring the first Race of Kings; and had the Title of a Kingdom, which was afterwards called the Kingdom of Mets, because that City was the Capital of it. Under the second Race of Kings it was called the Kingdom of Lothaire. The bounds of it were very various, sometimes bigger, and at others less. Austria, called by the Inhabitants Oesterreich, by the French. Autriche; by the Turks, Beetstan or Weetzstan; by the Poles, Rakusy; is a Province of Germany, bounded on the North by Bohemia and Moravia, on the East with Hungary, on the South with the Dukedom of Stiria, and on the West with Bavaria and Salsburgh: it is divided almost into two equal parts by the Danube. This Province was first under Marquesses from 928. In 1156. they had the Title of Duke given them: and Frederick, who was after Elected Emperor, had the Title of Arch-Duke conferred on him; which is the only Title of Arch-Duke in the World. From this Country it is that the House of Austria takes its Name, of which Fa∣mily
the Emperors of Germany have been ever since 1438. and the Kings of Spain since 1515. It is a ve∣ry fertile Country, amply supplyed with Mines and Rivers. Vienna, the Capital. The Archduke has a particular power of creating Counts and Barons over all the Empire by antient Concession, with this privi∣lege besides, that he cannot be deprived of his Lands and Principalities by the Emperor himself. Authie, Attilia, a River of Picardy in France. It arises near a Castle of the same name in Artois; glides by Dourlens and Auxi; then falls into the Sea at a place call'd Pas d'Authie. Autun, Angustodunum, Hedua, is a very antient City in the Dukedom of Burgundy; and a Bishop's See, under the Archbishop of Lions; seated upon the River Arroux, Arotium, (which falls into the Loire,) 25 Miles West of Chalon, and about the same distance South-West from Dijon. Auva, a City and Kingdom of Japan. Auvagdonne, or Achad, Achadia, a City in the County of Gallway in Connaught in Ireland, which is a Bishop's See under the Archbishop of Tuam. Auvergne, Alvernia, is a large Province almost in the midst of France; it has the Dukedom of Bour∣bonne on the North, the Earldom of Forez on the East, the Marche and Limosin on the West, and on the South Rouergue. The Southern part is moun∣tainous, the Northern is very well watered and fruit∣ful. The chief Town is Clermont. It had Earls which govern'd it till 1024. when Philip the August put an end to this Earldom upon the Rebellion of Guido, the last Earl, and annexed it to the Crown of France. In this Province there are thirteen Towns, which send their Deputies to the Assembly of the States in France. Aux, Auscii, an Archbishoprick and a City in the County of Armagnac in France. This City stands upon the River Sers, which runs not far before it falls into the Garonne. It is distant from Tholouse almost 20 Miles to the North-West, and the Archbishoprick is esteemed one of the richest in France. Auxerre Antissiodorum, is a City and an Episcopal See under the Archbishop of Sens, upon the River Yonne, (Icauna,) which falls into the Seyne, (Sequa∣na.) This City is large and beautiful, seated in a fruitful Plain, about 12 Leagues from Sens. Auxerrois, a small Territory in France, adjacent to Auxerre. Auxois, Alexiensis tractus, a Bailiwick in Bur∣gundy in France. Auxone, Aussona, a small but very strong City of the Dukedom of Burgundy, upon the River Sone, from whence it has its name. It is five Leagues from Dijon, East, and four from Dole. Auzone, Auzonum, a small City of Auvergne in France, in a mountainous Country, near the River Allier (Elaver) which falls into the Loire. It has an old Castle, and is distant from Clermont ten Leagues North. Axbridge, a Market-Town in Somersetshire, in the Hundred of Winterstoke, upon the River Axe. Axel, Axella, a small, but strong Town in Flan∣ders, under the Dominion of the States of Holland, whose Surprisal was the first exploit of Count Maurice of Nassau, Captain General of the United Provinces, after his entrance upon that Employment in 1587. It stands 4 Leagues from Gant, and about 6 from Antwerp, West. Axholm, an Island made by the Rivers Trent and Dun in Lincolnshire: About 10 miles in breadth and 5 in length. The middle part, which is the more ri∣sing ground, is very fruitful; and particularly of Flax. Alabaster is found in it. Axmister, a Market Town in Devonshire upon the River Axe: the Capital of its hundred. Axum, Auxuma, a City, and heretofore the Capi∣tal of the Kingdom of Tigre, in the Province of Sire in Aethiopia. Ayr, a small Town upon Dunbritain Frith, in the South part of Scotland, with a River of the same name in the Territory of Kile; in which Oliver Crom∣wel built a strong Citadel or Fort, to keep the Scotch Nation in awe. Ayr, Arola, a small River in France, which riseth in the Dukedom of Barrois; and running North, watereth Clermont and Varenne; and at last falls into the Aisne. Aza, a Town in Cappadocia upon the Borders of Armenia betwixt Trebizonde and Neo-Cesaraea. Azack, Tanais, See Asoph. Azamor, a Town in the Province of Duguela in the Kingdom of Marocco, at the mouth of the River Ommirabi. The Portugueze took it in 1508 and in 1540 they abandoned it. The Moors afterwards re∣peopled it; but being all kill'd or taken in a night by a surprize of the Portugueze, it has continued de∣sart ever since. Azaotan, Azaot, the vast Desarts of Libya in A∣frica. Azeca, an antient Town of the Amorites in Cha∣naan, where God Almighty rain'd down Hailstones up∣on them from Heaven. Josh. 10. 11. Rehoboam re∣pair'd it. 2. Chron. 11. 9. It was afterwards ruined in the Wars by the King of Babylon. Jerem. 34. 7. Azem, a Kingdom in the Terra firma of the In∣dies, beyond Ganges, in one of the most plentiful Countries of all Asia, for all things necessary to hu∣man life. The Capital of it, is Kemmerouf, 21 days journey distant from the Town Azem. The People live altogether at their ease. They esteem the flesh of dogs particularly above other meats, selling great quan∣tities thereof in their Markets. Azores, commonly call'd by English-men the Ca∣nary Islands, are 7 Islands in the Atlantick Ocean, not unknown to the Antients; and by Pliny, Solinus, and others, mentioned under the name of the Fortunate Islands; and tho they differ as to the number, yet all agree, Canaria was one of them; but which is most wonderful, the knowledge of them was perfectly lost till 1330. when a Ship being distressed by Weather, discovered them; and it is not agreed whether it was an English, French, or Dutch Ship. In 1334. the Portuguese attempted to conquer these Islands, and were beaten off. In 1417. Henry King of Castile granted these Isles to one John Betancourt, upon con∣dition he should hold them under the Crown of Ca∣stile; and he accordingly subdued four of them. Fer∣dinando conquered the rest in 1483. and under Spain they are at this day. They had this name given them from the great number of Hawks the first Adventu∣rers found in them. See Canary Isles. Azotus, an antient City of Palestine. Taken here∣tofore by Joshua about the year of the World 2586. Then it became one of the five Governments of the Philistines, who detain'd the Ark in it. Since Chri∣stianity, it was made a Bishops See under the Arch∣bishop of Cesarea. Baldwin I. took it from the Saracens in 1101. It had a Church built in it, and an Episcopal House in the particular place (they say) where St. Philip left the Eunuch he baptized, when he was rapt away by the Spirit. Sometimes call'd Azo∣tus Paralia, to distinguish it from Azotus Ippini, which was another Episcopal See heretofore in Pale∣stine. See Ashdod. Azin-court, or Agincourt, a small Town in Ar∣tois in the Earldom of S. Paul, from which it is di∣stant somewhat above 3 Leagues to the West, as it is also from Hesdin to the North. In 1415. Henry V.
of England beat D'Abret, Constable of France, who came against him with a French Army consisting of 80000 Men, near this small Town; which has gi∣ven it a name amongst the most considerable Places of the World. See. Trussel. Life and Reign of Hen. V. Azuayes, a poor People of Barbary and Numidia in Africa upon the Coasts and Mountains. They wear a Cross engraven upon their face or hands to distin∣guish them from other Africans. A Custom first in∣troduced amongst them in token of their being Chri∣stians, according to a Law made, when the Gothish and Christian Princes reign'd in Barbary, that where∣as all such Infidels as would embrace the Gospel were excused Tribute, therefore those who became Chri∣stians in reality should make themselves known to the publick Officers of the revenue by a Cross of that na∣ture. They persevered in their Conversions till the Caliphs came in: And tho they wear the Cross still, yet it serves them with other Figures more for a pre∣tended Ornament, than a token of Religion. BAB. BAalhasar, mention'd 2 Sam. 13. 23. A place beside Ephraim in Judaea, where Absalom commanded his Servants to kill Amnon for forcing his Sister Thamar. Baar, Vargiones, a County in Schwaben in Ger∣many, near the Fountains of the Danube, in the Pos∣session of the Prince of Furstemberg. Die Baar are also the Mountains of Schwaben, call'd Abnobi by the Romans. Baaz, or the Isle de Baz, is an Island on the Coast of Bretagne in France. Babelmandel, Diodori Insula, is a small Island in the Red Sea, belonging to Aethiopia, mentioned by Pliny, Ptolemy, Arrian, and others: but the later Geographers are not agreed whether this be it, or Pri∣meira, which lies near it. It lies in the very entrance of the Red Sea, or Arabick Gulph, and gives name to that passage. Babylon, one of the most famous Cities of the antient World, celebrated both in Sacred and Profane Story. It is seated upon the Euphrates, and was the Capital of Chaldea, about 42 Miles from Bagdet to the South East, in 79. d. of Long▪ and 35 of Nor. Lat. Generally believed to have been built by Nim∣rod, the Grand-child of Noah, soon after the De∣luge; and to have been a continuation of Babel, so called, because the Lord did there confound the Lan∣guage of all the Earth, Gen. 11. 9. This City was antiently incompassed with Walls of Brick, which made a Circuit of 385 Stadia's, or 48 English Miles. They were so broad at the top, that two Chariots might meet, and pass, without any hindrance; and they are said to be 100 Cubits high; so that this was one of the seven Wonders that amazed the old World. This City was the Capital of the Assyrian Empire; and tho Nabonassar ruin'd that Empire, yet he for∣sook it not; but his Son Nebuchadnezzar very much increased and inlarged it, as appears Dan. 4. 30. After this, it was taken by Cyrus the Persian. Anno Mund. 3516. before the Birth of our Saviour 537 years; and tho it changed its Master, yet it kept much of its antient Greatness under the Persian Empire: Seleu∣cus Nicanor, one of the Successors of Alexander the Great, (who dyed here,) building Seleucia upon the Tigris, at about 40 Miles distance from it, as Strabo observes, it became thereby deprived of its Wealth, its Honour, and Inhabitants; whence Pausanias could say, that it had nothing in his time but its Wall: in the days of S. Jerom it was only a Park, and in after∣times it became an Habitation for Scorpions and Ser∣pents, so that no Man could safely pass through it. See Bochart. Geogr. Sacr. lib. 4. c. 15. It is very hard now to know assuredly so much as where it stood. For tho Bachad or Bagdat is often call'd by the same name, and divers have therefore been induced to ac∣cept it for the same place, yet that this is a great mi∣stake, see Bach. Babylon in Aegypt, stood over against Memphis, near the Nile. St. Peter wrote his First Epistle, its thought, from this Babylon; because the other was deserted before, as this since; yet forming Cairo out of its ruines. Babolitza, Carethna, or Vallis Cariniana, a Town placed by Antiochus in the Lower Pannonia, now part of the Lower Hungary. Baboliza, or Babolza, a Town of the Lower Hungary, call'd by Antoninus, Mansuetinum: it has now a Castle, and lies about five Hungarian Miles West of Zigeth; in our latter Maps it is call'd Ba∣bolcha. Babuco, Bauco, Bovillae, a Town of S. Peter's Patrimony, near the Confines of Campania, and the Kingdom of Naples. Babul, Pattala, or Patala, is one of the greatest Cities in the East-Indies, seated in an Island of the River-Indus, under the Dominion of the Great Mo∣gul. Bacalal, a Lake in the Northern America. Bacar, Ituraea Trachonitis, a Region of Palestine, often mentioned in the New Testament. It lies be∣yond Jordan between Samaria and Arabia, and be∣longed to the Tribes of God and Reuben. The Inha∣bitants are famed in the Roman History for good Ar∣chers; tho Cicero, [2. Phil.] calls them at the same time, Omnium gentium maxime barbaros, the most barbarous of all Nations. They are mentioned also by Virgil, Lucan, and Vopiscus, on the same account. There is another Country in the East-Indies, call'd by the same name. Baccharuch or Bachruch, a small Town in the Lower Palatinate upon the Rhine, in the greatest esteem for Wine of all the places in Germany: whence that Etymology of its name, Bacchi ara, descanted by H. Stephanus. Bachad, Seleucia, a City of Mesopotamia upon the River Tigris: in antient times called Coche, and afterwards Alexandria from Alexandria the Great, who rebuilt it; after which being re-edi∣fied by Antiochus King of Syria, (who call'd it by his Father's name, Seleucia) and being again ruin'd, it was rebuilt in 762. by Almanusor Abugiafar the 22d. Calif, first on the Western Shoar of Tigris, and after on the Eastern in Chaldea: in time it grew great, rich, and populous, being the Seat of many of the Califs, and was call'd Bagdad, or Bagdet; that part which lay on the Western side, being deserted by de∣grees, is become a heap of Rubbish. This City lies in an oblong figure, is great and well fortified; it has a Bridge of Boats over the Tigris, and a strong Castle, in which the Turkish Bassa resides. It has been very often taken and re-taken by the Turks and Per∣sians. The former possess'd themselves of it in 1638. after a bloody Siege, in which they lost 40000 Men, and have kept it ever since. It lies 79. 20. Long. 35. 40. Lat. and is by many Writers mistaken for Baby∣lon, tho it lies at the distance of forty Miles from it, and upon the Tigris, whereas that lies upon the Eu∣phrates. Bach, Bachia, a small Episcopal City of the Lower Hungary, under the Archbishop of Colocza, upon the Danube, where the River Srwizz meets
it. This Bishoprick is united for ever to the Metro∣politan See; and it was in the hands of the Turks, till 1686. when, by the taking of Quinque Ecclesiae, and the deserting of Colooza by them, after Buda was taken, it returned under the Obedience of the Emperor. Bachian, Bachianum, called Bacham by the Por∣tugals; one of the Molucco Islands in the East-In∣dies, and a distinct Kingdom; small but very fruit∣ful; under the Dominion of the King of Machian, from whence it lies about 30 Miles to the South, and a little less from the Island of Gioli; almost exactly under the Line. It has a Town of the same name, and a Fort belonging to the Dutch called Barnewelt. Bacha Serrail, or Bacie-Saray, the Capital City of the lesser Tartary upon the River Kabarta, and the usual residence of the Cham of the Crims. Bachu, a City of Albania upon the Caspian Sea; in the times of the Roman Empire it is supposed to have been called Albana; but there is some Contro∣versie about it. From this City the Caspian Sea is called by some Mar di Bachu. § And there is also another City in Arabia Felix called by the same name in Ptolemy. Backow, Bachow, Baccovia, a City of Walachia (as others of Moldavia) upon the River Alauta, which falls into the Danube a little above Nicopolis. This was made a Bishops See by Pope Clement VIII. under the Archbishop of Colocza: it is in the Northern Bounds of Walachia, about 25 Miles North, West of Targvisco, the Capital City of that Pro∣vince. By some called Braislow. Bacras, one of the Branches of Mount Taurus, which rises in Cilicia, a Province of Asia the less. Bactriana, (Batter in the modern Appellation) was an antient Province of Persia, answering in part now to Corasan in Persia, and in part to Ʋs∣beck in Tartary; divided by the River Geichon. Its Capital City was Bactra, hereafter mentioned by the name of Bagdasan, which is of little consideration. The River Bactrus of this Country has also changed its name to Buschian, falling into the Gei∣chon. The antient Inhabitants had the repute of the best Soldiers in the World: they were always in Arms upon the account of the Scythians their Neighbors, who lived by Spoil. And much addicted to Astrolo∣gy; Zoroaster their King being the supposed Author of that Science, under the name of Magick. Baeueen, Baduhennae Lucus, a famous Forest in Friesland, one of the United Provinces mentionedby Tacitus: it is still the greatest Wood in all that Pro∣vince; by the Common People called Seven-Wol∣den, that is the Seven Woods. It stands 3 Leagues from Groningen, to the Westward, towards Slote; others suppose it to be meant of Coevorden, a strong Town in Trans-Issillane, near the River Schwart-wa∣ter, or Groeningen-Diep, (which falls near Gronin∣gen) called by the Romans, Virus; but the most common and best supported Opinion is the first. Badai, a People of Tartaria Deserta, adoring the Sun, and some say, a red Clout elevated in the Air. Badajox, Pax Augusta, a City of Estremadura, which heretofore belonged to Portugal, (inthe Con∣fines of which it stands) but is now the Capital of Estremadura, a Province in the Kingdom of Leon in Spain: large, populous, and well fortified, and seat∣ed on a Hill. The Portugals after they had driven out the Spaniards very unfortunately, attempted the Recovery of this Place in 1658. It lies 3 Leagues from Yelves to the East, and 25 from Sevil to the North-West. It stands upon the River Guadiana, where the River Xevora falls into it on the opposite side. It is a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Compostella: has a Bridge over the River, and was heretofore a Dukedom, erected by Henry IV. King of Castile. Anne, the Wife of Philip II. King of Spain, died here in 1580. It lies in 13. d. of Long. and 38. 45. of Lat. Badara, a Town in the East-Indies, in a Penin∣sula on this side of the River Ganges, upon the Coast of Malabar, in the Kingdom of Calecut, 6 Leagues from Calecut to the East. Badascian, Maracanda, a City often mentioned in the Writers of the Life of Alexander the Great. Tamerlane the Great was born here, and had his Pa∣lace in it, who much beautified it, and erected here an University. It belongs now to the Province Zaga∣taja in Tartary, and lies about 100 Miles North of the River Oxu. A famous place for Merchandile, very large, and the Capital of the Eastern Tartars. Chalcocondylas calls it Samarachantan and the Tartars Samarcand. Badelona, a Town of Catalonia in Spain, call'd by Mela, Baetulo: once famous, now a Village, not far from Barcinone, and about a League from a Ri∣ver of the same name heretofore, now called Besos, which falls into the Mediterranean Sea between these two Places. Baden, Ober Baden, Aquae, Castellum Aquarum, Thermae superiores, a Town in Switzerland, between Zurich, (from which it is distant two Leagues) and Basil, from which it stands six Leagues. As the Assemblies of the Cantons are usually held here, this place is famed for a League treated amongst them∣selves in 1656. There was a general meeting of the Deputies of the 13 Suisse Cantons held here, Octob. 1690. wherein they resolved, in reference to the pre∣sent War betwixt the Confederate Princes and France, that they would maintain a Neutrality; but withal secure the pass of Augst, and the Bishoprick of Basle, with the four Forrest Towns, in which the French did pretend to take their Winter Quarters It lies upon the River Limat, (Limagus) which a little beneath falls into the Aar (Arola) the greatest River in those Countries, which falls into the Rhine at Waldhust, a Town of Schwaben. Baden, Bada, Thermae Inferiores, a small City of Schwaben in Germany, the Head of the Marquisate of that name; 5 Leagues from Strasburg to the South-East, 1 from the Rhine, and 8 from Spire: fa∣mous for its natural Baths, from whence it has its name. The Marquisate is of no great extent, but very populous, and the Villages so thick, lying along the Rhine, that the whole Principality is compared to one continued City. Long. 28. 40. Lat. 82. 20. It is called by the Germans, Margraven Baden, to distinguish it from other places called by the name of Baden. The Original of the Noble Family now pos∣sessed of this Honor, was from the Duke of Zering; for Bertholdus I. was the Father of Hermanaus, the first Founder of this Family, which is now divided into two Branches, the one professing the Protestant, and the other the Roman Catholick, Religion; of the later Branch comes the present Prince Lewis, who, since the Death of the Duke of Lorrain, has been hono∣red by the Emperor with the general Command of all his Forces in Hungary; and obtained great Victories. Baden, Aquae Pannoniae, a Town in Austria, 3 Leagues from Vienna to the South, seated at the foot of the Mountains. Badenoch, in Latin Badenochia, is a County in the North of Scotland, of a barren Soil, full of Mountains; divided in two by a great Lake, and bounded by the Counties of Murray, Ross and Athol. Badenweiler, a City in the Province of Brisgow in Germany, between Friburg and Basil; yet a part of the Marquisate of Baden, and famous for Hot Baths.
Baeotia. See Boeotia. Baern. See Berghen. Baetica, one of the 3 antient parts of Spain, taking its name from the River Baetis which we now call Guadalquivir; See Spain. Its principal Cities were Sevil and Corduba. From the time that Alphonsus King of Castile was defeated here, by Aben Joseph K. of Morocco, in the Year 1195. the Sara∣cens possessed it unto the Reign of Ferdinand V. Baeza, Biatia, a City of Andalusia. It was heretofore an Episcopal City, under the Archbishop of Toledo; but in 1249. its Bishoprick was united by Pope Innocent IV. to that of Jaen or Gaën. [Glenna] This City was recovered from the Moors by Ferdinand King of Castile, in 1227. It was a Roman Colony, then called Ʋrbs Baetica. Here is an University, erected in 1538. and the Town is large, and stands upon a Hill one League from the River Guadalquivir. Baffin's Bay, a Gulph extended from the 70th to the 80th deg. of North Lat. in the Terra Australis of America; discovered by an Englishman who gives his Name to it. Baffo, Paphos, a City in the Island of Cyprus, once famous, now ruin'd. Bagaloag, a Town upon the Frontier of Bosnia in Dalmatia, under the Turks. Bagamidri, a Kingdom in the upper Aethiopia, lying along the Nile to the West. It is ordinarily di∣vided into 17 Provinces, whereof some are large e∣nough to be Kingdoms. Bagaudes, a People amongst the antient Gauls. They revolted twice from the Romans, at the end of the third and in the Fifth Century; and were each time defeated. Bagaya, Bagy, Vaga, a City of Numidia in A∣frica. The Emperor Justinian Wall'd it, and new∣nam'd it Theodora from his Empress. In 394. the Donatist Bishops celebrated a Council here, concern∣ing the Cause of Primianus Bishop of Carthage. Bagdat, or Bagdet. See Bachad. Bagdasan, Bactra, a small City at the foot of Mount Caucasus, seated in a fruitful Soil, much cele∣brated in antient times; now of no Note. Bagnabar. See Golconde. Bagnarea, Balneum regis, Balneo regium, No∣vem populi, so called by the order of Desiderius King of the Lombards, as Paulus Diaconus saith. It is an Episcopal City in S. Peters Patrimony, built upon a Hill near the Lake Bolsena; it stands almost in the middle between Mount Fiascone and Orvieto, from which last it is not above 6 Miles distant to the South. In this Place S. Bonaventure, who flourished in the twelfth Century, with the Title of the Seraphical Do∣ctor, was born. Bagneres, a Town in the County of Bigorre in Gascony in France, famous for its hot Baths till 1660. when that natural Fire which heated them, was extin∣guished by an Earthquake, as Brietius saith. Bagni d'Abano, Fontes Aponi, Aquae Petavinae, a place that has Baths, in the Territory of Padoua in Italy. Bagni, di Salviati, a place not far from Cuma, where Cesar the Dictator had a Country House. Bagni di Tritolino, a place in Campania, where Cicero had a Country House, not far from Puteolum. To these and divers other places in Italy, they gave the Pre-names of Bagni, from their Baths; wherein the antient Romans delighted so, that P. Victor reck∣ons 800 of them in Rome only. Bagrava, Galesus, a small River that springs from the Apennine Hills, near the City Oria, in the County of Otranto in the Kingdom of Naples; and running Westward, falls into the Bay of Taranto, not far from that City which gives its Name. This River is now commonly called Galeso. Bahama, an Island, and the most rapid Channel in all America, Eastward from Florida; through which the Spanish Fleets pass to the Havana. Baharen, Ichara, Tylus, an Island in the Persian Gulph. Others say it is Carge, another Island in the same Gulph, over against the mouth of the River Euphrates, that the Ancients meant by these Names. It is called by others Elchadr. Bahar-Eunil, one of the Branches of the Nile in Aethiopia. Bahar-Zocoroph, the Persian Gulph. Bahar-Rumi, the Mediterranean Sea. Bahia de todos los Santos, the same with S. Sal∣vador in Brasil. Bahuys, Bahusium, a strong Castle situated in a small Island made by the River Trolhetta, which falls a little lower into the Baltick Sea. It hereto∣fore belonged to the Kingdom of Denmark, but in 1658. was taken by the King of Sweden, together with the County of the same Name. It stands two Danish Miles from Gottenburg towards the North. This Castle was built by Hakin IV. King of Norway in 1309. surrendred by Treaty to the Swedes in 1660 who before were in Possession of it; attempted by the Danes in 1678. but without any good Success. The Province in which it lies is bounded on the East with West Gotlandt, on the West by the Baltick Sea, and by the County of Aggerhuis towards the North. It lies 100 Miles in length from the North to the South, but it is not above 30 Miles broad, and in many places but 15. It has, besides the Castle I mentioned, a Town called Malstrano. This Terri∣tory was yielded to the Swedes by the Treaty of Ros∣child in 1658. Baja, Baiae, a City of Campania in Italy, now ruined. It was the delight of the antient Romans. Separated from Pozzuoli by an Arm of the Tyrrhenian Sea, about 2 Leagues over, which the Emperor Caligu∣la cover'd with a famous Bridge, passing and repassing the same in Triumph. The noble Rests yet extant discover that it has been a very magnificent Place. Since the times of Christianity, an Episcopal Chair was placed and settled in it, till its ruine was effected by Earthquakes. Bajaria, Eleutherus, a River of Sicily. It falls into the Mediterranean Sea, 8 Miles East of Paler∣mo and the River Oreto, on the Western side of the Island. Baicadul, Batancaesarea, a City of the East-In∣dies within Ganges. Baida, a Region of Tartary the Desart. See Badai. Baieux, a City and Bishops See, under the Arch∣bishop of Roan in Normandy in France, upon the River Aure, which a little lower buries itself under ground. It stands not above 2 Miles from the Brit∣tish Sea towards the South. The College of Bajeux at Paris, was founded in 1308. by a Bishop of this place. Bailleul, Baliola. See Belle. Baionne. See Bayonne. Bair, Barus, a River of the Low Countries. Bais, Bacium, a Monastery in France, which lies between Corbie and Amiens upon the Somme [Sumina] over against Peronne. Baise, Balisa, a River in Poictou in France. Bakewell, a Market-Town in Derbyshire in the Hundred of High-Peak. Bala, a Market-Town in the County of Merio∣neth in Wales, in the Hundred of Penllyn. Balagata, a Kingdom in the Peninsula of Mala∣bar, in the hither East-Indies, extended among the Branches of the Mountains of Gare, making a part
of the great Kingdom of Decan. Its chief City, Dol∣tabad, is a place of great Trade. Balaguer, Ballegarium, a City of Catalonia, seat∣ed at the foot of a very steep Hill, having a Stone Bridge over the River Segre: it was made famous by being taken by the French in the Year 1645▪ after a Defeat of the Spanish Forces, which should have co∣vered it. It lies 3 Leagues from Lerida. [Ilerda] to the South East. Balambuan, a City in the Island of Java in the East-Indies, with a Sea-Port towards the East. This City gives its Name to a Bay of the Sea, which lies near it. Balassia, Audus, a River of Mauritania in Afri∣ca: it falls into the African Sea, between the Towns of Jatath and Igilgilim, at the Promontory call'd Capo di Gibramel. Balaton, Volceae, a very great Lake in the We∣stern part of the lower Hungary, lying about thirty Miles in length from the North-West to the South-East, but its breadth is not above six Miles: it has Vesprin on the South, Canisa on the West, and Alba Regalis on the East: The Germans call it Platzee. Balbastro, Barbastrum, a City of the Kingdom of Aragon in Spain, upon the River Vero (Verum) where it falls into the Cinga about 8 Miles from Hu∣scar (Osca) to the West, and Ilerda, now Lerida, to the North East. It is a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Zaragoza, from which distant 14 Miles. This City was recovered from the Moors in the Year 1102. Call'd by some, heretofore, Bergi∣dum; and by others, Belgida. Balbec, Heliopolis, Caesarea Philippi, A City an∣tiently of Coelesyria, at the foot of Mount Libanus; which was at first a Bishops See, made afterwards a Metropolitan under the Patriarch of Antioch. It is incompassed with very high Hills on all sides; and lies at the equal distance of about 32 Miles from Damas∣cus, Tripoli, and Abyla. Baldino, Ʋfens, a River of Italy arising in St. Pe∣ter's Patrimony, at a place call'd Casenove, 2 Miles from Setia; and falls into the Mare di Toscana near Terradina a City of Campania. It is now common∣ly call'd il portatore. Baldo, a Market-Town in Hartfordshire, in the Hundred of Broadwater. Baleares, The Islands of Majorca and Minorca. See Majorca. It is remarkable, that amongst the slain in the Noble Battel of Creci in 1344. the King of the Baleares was one. Balestra, Balista, a Branch of the Apennine in the Road to Parma, by the Valley of Tari, between Liguria and Hetruria. Ba, The most Easterly Kingdom in the Grand Empire of Abyssinia in Africa. Balkan, a Mountain of Thrace call'd Haemus of old, dividing Thrace from Bulgaria: so very high, that from the top of it the Euxine Sea may be seen. It runs from the East to the West, and ends at the City of Mesembiria; out of it spring the Rivers He∣brus, now Mariza, which watereth Hadrianople; and Strymon, now Stromona. The Sclavonians call it Cumoniza; the Italians, Costegnazzo, or the Chain of the World; and the Turks Balkan. Ballingacarrigy, a Cale near Cavan in the Coun∣ty of Cavan in Ireland. It had a Garison of about 200 Men in it, when Colonel Wolseley with a Party of King William's Forces came to attack it. And is na∣turally so strong, that none (as the Account says) but Irish Men would have been beaten out of it without Canon. After some Resistance, which however cost Colonel Wolseley dearer than he expected; they agreed to surrender it on terms, May 13▪ 1690. Baa, or Balza, a Territory in the Dukedom of Angoumois in France, upon the River Charene, giving its name to the Family of the Guëz, which late∣ly produced the most eloquent Man of France, Mon∣sieur Balsac, a perpetual honour to his Country, and particularly this place. He died Feb. 28. 1654. §. The like in the Province of Auvergne, whence another an∣tient Family receives their Title. Balsara, Balsera, Teredon, a City attributed by Ptolemy and Aeian to Babylon, by others to Arabia. It belongs now to Arabia Deserta, and lies near the Confines of Arabia Foelix, near the Borders of the Province of Hierach. A great City, and of good Trade, and stands at the Conjunction of the Tigris and Euphrates, where they fall into the Persian Gulph. After the King of Persia had taken Ormus in the Year 1622, the English, Dutch, and Portuguese betook themselves to this Place, and setled their Factories here. In times past it was under the Kings of Persia, afterwards taken by the Turks. The Haven is safe and large, and stands about 12 miles above the Per∣sian Gulph, on the Western shoar; and in the neigh∣boring Villages many Christians of the Sabborites, or of St. John, live. Baltimore Bay, a Bay and Haven in the Province of Mounster in the Kingdom of Ireland, and in the Earldom of Desmond, upon the Western Ocean. The Baltick Sea, Sinus Co▪danus, may justly be call'd the Northern Mediterranean. It has no Communi∣cation with the Ocean, but by a narrow Streight call'd the Sound▪ which parts Jutland from Gothland: from the Cape of Schagen in Jutland, it bends to the South-East, as far as the Island of Zeland, which restrains it to so narrow a breadth, that the Castles of Elsener and Elsenborg command the Passage, and enable the King of Denmark to enforce a Tribute from all Ships trading in or out of the Baltick Sea: from thence it runs South, and washeth the Dukedom of Mekelenburg and Pomerania, as far as Dantzick: from thence it turns North again, and washeth Cur∣land and Livonia as far as Nargen, where it is divi∣ded into two other great Bays; one of which is cal∣led the Bay of Finland, and divides Finland from Li∣vonia. In this Bay lies Narva, the Capital of Livo∣nia, heretofore the Store-house of the North: a little more North it receives the River Severi; into which run Ladoga and Onega, two vast Lakes that part Megrina and Cornelia, and run up almost as far as the White Sea, with which they seem also to have some Communication by their Rivers: from hence the Baltick runs to the North, as far as Wybourg; where it turns again and runs South West as far as the Islands of Aland; and here begins the 2d, Branch of the Baltick call'd the Finnisch or Boter Sea; which runs North and South, leaving on the East Finland and Boddia, and on the West Sweden and Finmarck: at the most Northern Point of it lies Tor∣nia, a Sea-Port Town. The various Countries which do border upon this Sea, and have little or no Com∣munication with the other Seas, make it much fre∣quented by Merchants of all Nations. Baly, an Island of the East-Indies, East of Java, about 12 Miles in compass, very fruitful and well in∣habited. It is thought to be the lesser Java, being separated from the greater only by a Bay. Bamba, a Province of the Kingdom of Congo in Africa, with a Town of the same Name: it lies be∣tween Loanda to the South, and the River Zaire to the North, on the Western Shoar of Africa, beyond the Line. There is a Province in the South America, in the Kingdom of Papaian, under the Spaniards; and a Village in Castile in Spain, both of the same Name. Bamberg, Gravionarium, Bamberga, a City of Germany in the Circle of Franconia, upon the River
Rednit, which a little lower falls into the Mayn. It is a Bishops See, (under the Archbishop of Mayence, for some time) now immediatly dependent on the Pope. This City was made a Bishoprick by Henry II. Emperor; and had its Name from Baba, a Daughter of Otho the Emperor; and it signifieth in the German Tongue, the Hill of Baba. It is under the Civil Ju∣risdiction of its own Bishop; and stands about six Miles from Wurtzburg, to the North-East, and Nu∣renburg to the North-West. In this City died Hen∣ry II. in 1025. Conradus III. in 1152. Philip I. in 1208. It was antiently a free Imperial City, but not now: there belongs to it a small Territory or Diocese, which lies along the Mayn and the Rednit, extend∣ing in length from North to South 25 German Miles, but much restrained as to its breadth by the Marqui∣sate of Culembach on the East, and the Bishoprick of Wtsburg on the West: besides these, he has some few Towns in Carinthia which were subjected to the Emperor by a Treaty in the Year 1535. with Ferdi∣nando I. Henry II. (called St. Henry) built here a ve∣ry magnificent Church for the Remission of his Sins in the Year 1007, and subjugated this City, with all its Dependencies to the Popes of Rome; but it was after redeem'd by Henry V. who gave that See the City of Benevento in Italy in Exchange for it. The antient City of Prague in Bohemia, is a Fee belong∣ing to this Bishoprick; and the Electors of Saxony and Brandenburg hold other considerable Fees of it. There is another small Town of this Name in the Kingdom of Bohemia. Bamberg lies in 32. 49. Long. 49. 51. Lat. Bambycatii, an antient People near the River Tigris in Asia; said to bury their Gold, Silver, and all Mettal that can be coyn'd into Money, in the de∣sarts, to prevent the growth, thence issuing, of vice and corruption amongst them. Bampton, a Market Town in Devonshire, and another in Oxfordshire, both Capitals of their Hun∣dreds. The latter is situated near the River Isis, and affords a liberal Maintenance to 3 Vicars besides the Parson. Banea, a City and Island to the Eastern point of the great Island of Sumatra in the East-Indies; sepa∣rated from Sumatra by the Streights of Banca, over against Palimban. Bancok, a regular and important Fortress in the Kingdom of Stam in the East-Indies. Banda, an Island in the Indian Ocean to the South of the Island of Seran 20 Leagues, comprehen∣ding under the general name of Banda the 6 lesser Islands of Nera, Gunapi, Lantor, Puloway, Pulorin, and Bassingen: These being considered as parts of the Island of Banda. They drive a very great Spice trade, enjoy a perpetual Spring, and it is ordinary with the Inhabitants to live to 120 years. There is a good road to Banda, with two Forts to defend it, built by the Hollanders. The Natives are Mahome∣tans; but believe the dead will never come to life again, unless they living pray for them. Bandbury, or Banbury, a Corporation in the Nor∣thern part of the County of Oxon, upon the West side of the River Cherwel, which here divides the County of Northampton from that of Oxon. Near this place, Kimrick, King of the West Saxons, over∣threw the Britains in a set Battel, manfully fighting for their Lives and Fortunes: and after this, Richard Nevil, Earl of Warwick, in the same place overthrew Edward IV. and took him Prisoner, and restored Henry VI. to the Crown. In the late Rebellion, this Place was taken, and garrison'd for Charles I. in 164. after Edgehill Fight; in 1644, under the Command of Sir William Compton, it endured a sharp Siege, and several Storms, till it was relieved by the Earl of Northampton: after which it continued unattem∣pted till the Year 1646, when it endured another sharp Siege for ten Weeks together, under the same Governor; who at last (after the King had put him∣self into the hands of the Scots) when it was not pos∣sible the Place could be relieved, surrendered it upon honorable Terms to the Rebels the 11th of May. The Family of the Knollys have been Earls of this Place ever since the Year 1626. Bander-Abassi, a City upon the Coast of the Province of Farsistan in Persia, opposite to the Isle of Ormus; Sirnamed Abassi from Cha-Abas King of Persia the first Founder of its Commerce, which has rendred it the general place of resort for Vessels from the Indies, as of an English and Dutch Factory, being esteem'd the best Region of all the Persian Gulph. Yet so intolerably hot in the Summer Months, that the Air, the Arabians say, is poysonous, and causes sud∣den suffocations. It is fortified with two opposite Forts. Bander-Congo, A City of Persia two days sail from the precedent, where both the Air and Water are commendable. But the dangerousness of the pas∣sage from Ormus to it, amidst a number of Islets, de∣prives it of the benefit of Commerce. Bando, A City and Kingdom in the States of the great Mogul in the East-Indies, betwixt the Kingdom of Delli and the Province of Agra. Banghor, Bangor, Bonium, or Bovium (in the old British Language call'd Bamornabyrig) an old Roman Town in Flintshire; but belonging to Che∣shire; mentioned by Antoninus: and much more fa∣mous after the Plantation of Christianity in Britain, for a vast Monastery here, consisting of about 2000 Monks, qui omnes de labore manuum suarum vivere solebant, says Bede, who all wrought hard for their Livings: 200 of these, Edilfred, a Pagan Saxon King of Northumberland slew, because they implo∣red Christ's Assistance in their Prayers for their Coun∣try-men against the Saxons. When Augustin the Monk came to convert the Saxons, here was a nu∣merous Monastery; but before the Norman Conquest it was intirely ruin'd, as Camden acquaints us out of William of Malmsbury; to which Augustin the Monk is said or suspected to have lent his helping hand. Since that, those very Ruines are by time defaced: yet the Names of two of its Gates remain, Port Hogan and Port Cleis, which stand a Mile asunder; between which are found very often pieces of the Roman Mo∣ney. This place stands upon the River Dee, East of Wrexham. §. Bangor the Bishoprick, is a different Place from the precedent, and stands in the County of Carnarvan in Wales upon the River Menay; call'd by the Latin Authors, Bangorium and Bangoria. This Bishoprick is of so antient a foundation, that we do not find its Original. The Cathedral is dedicated by the name of S. Daniel, who was Bishop here about the Year 516. From which time to the 11th. Cen∣tury that Hernaeus filled the See, we have no Account of the succession. In 1496. Henry Deane, Bishop, repair'd the Cathedral after it had been defaced by the Rebel Owen Glendower. In 1541. Arthur Bulkeley Bishop, reduced the Bishoprick to a low Condition by unworthy sales and alienations. The Diocese con∣tains the County of Carnarvan, with parts of Den∣bigh, Merioneth and Montgomery, and the whole Isle of Anglesey. Banjaluth, Blandona, a large and well fortified Town in Bosnia near the Mountains, under the Do∣minion of the Turks, upon the River Cetina. Banjans, a People universally scattered over the Provinces of the Indies, but most numerous in the Kingdom of Guzurate, and notorious for worshiping the Devil (together with a God) as the author of all
the Evils of this Life, under a frightful Figure re∣presented to them, to pacifie him and engage him in their Favor. In some things they are Mahometan▪ like; in others, divided amongst themselves into Sects, greater or less, almost innumerable, according as they affect their particular Superstitions. The Europeans use them for Managers and Interpreters in their Deal∣ings with the Indians. Banara, a City of the East-Indies in the King∣dom of Bengala, upon the River Ganges; under the Dominion of the Great Mogul, about 40 Miles from Gouro to the North, and 100 from Halavassa towards the South. Probably the same with Benares. See Benares. Banny, or Ban, Argita, one of the largest Ri∣vers of the Kingdom of Ireland. It ariseth in the County of Downe in the Province of Ʋlster; and having entertained some other Rivers, it falls into the vast Lake of Neaugh; afterwards dividing the County of Colrane, on the West of it, from that of Antrim on the East, it falls into the Caledonian Ocean, a little below Colrane Castle. This River divides the Pro∣vince of Ʋlster into two parts: but Mr. Camden is rather of Opinion, that the Latin Name belongs to the Swilly, another great River in the same Province, but a little more to the West than this. Bantam, a very great City, and a famous Mart and Sea Port in the Island of Java in the East-Indies, and the Capital of a Kingdom of the same Name. This City is seated at the foot of an Hill, 18 Leagues from the City of Batavia towards the West, upon a narrow Passage call'd the Streights of Bantam, right over against the Island of Sumatra. It has a very good Harbor belonging to it called the Sound, and was much frequented by the European Merchants, especially the English and Dutch. The Kingdom of Jacatra is subject to this Prince, and he has of∣ten made War with the Dutch, with reasonable good Success, till about the Year 1684. A Son of the King of Bantam rebelling against his Father, called the Dutch to his Assistance, by which means the Dutch possessed themselves of Bantam, seized the English Factory and their Effects, and made themselves sole Masters of that Trade. The Controversie be∣tween them and the English not being determined to this day. The old King in the mean time was kept a Prisoner, first at Bantam, afterwards in the Castle of Batavia; whither he was conducted in November 1687, with a formal Solemnity, and there lodged with his Wife, and some Slaves to attend him. Bantry, a Bay in the Province of Munster in Ireland, where Admiral Herbert, now Earl of Tor∣rington, engaged the French Fleet, May 1▪ 1689▪ upon their arrival with Succors for Ireland: which however were landed the day after. Banya, Rivuli Puellarum, a Town of Transyl∣vania, 6 Leagues from Bestercze to the West, not far from the Confines of the Upper Hungary. Banza. See S. Salvador in Africa. Bapalme, Balma, a strong Town in Artois, seat∣ed upon a rising Ground in the Borders of Picardy. This Town has been in the hands of the French ever since the Year 1641. It was yielded to them by the Pyrenaean Treaty in 1659. It stands at an equal di∣stance from Peron, (a Town of Picardy) towards the South, and Arras towards the North. Bar, a strong Town in Podolia, having a Castle built upon an Hill, and surrounded with Marshes, which contribute very much to its defence: It stands upon the River Kow, 18 Polonian Miles from Camini∣eck to the East, and as many from Barklow towards the West. This Town is under the Turks. Bar, or Barrois, a Dukedom of France, betwixt Champagne and Loraine, incorporated after divers Revolutions, by the Concession of the Pyrenaean Treaty (as the French interpret it) in 1659▪ with the Crown of that Kingdom. Its Capital City is Bar¦le Duc. It lies on each side the Meuse; which divided it heretofore into the Royal and Ducal Barrois; both then belonging to the House of Loraine, they doing Homage to the King of France for the same. Bar sur Aube, a fine Town in Champagne in France, but ill pav'd; it has its name from the River [Albula] Aube, on which it stands; upon the foot of an Hill in a very pleasant Country; about 8 Leagues from Aris towards the South, and as many from Troys towards the South-West, and 7 from Chastillon towards the North-East. This place is in much esteem for the delicious Wine the Country yields. Bar, sur Seyne, a small City in the Dukedom of Burgundy, in the Confines of Champagne; seated in a Mountainous Country; about 5 Miles West of Bar sur Aube. Bara. a Town in the Province of Gorga, in the Upper Aethiopia, near the Lake of Zaflan. Barampour, a City of the East-Indies, under the Dominion of the Mogul, in the Kingdom of Candis. It lies 100 Miles from Surat towards the East, upon the River Tapi: this Place is called by others Baram∣pore, and heretofore Baramatis, as Herbert saith. Baranateta, the Name of a City and Kingdom in the Asian Tartary. Barathrum, a deep Pit in Attica in Greece, con∣trived with Iron Spikes and Tenters, for a place of Execution, throwing the Malefactors Headlong into it, in antient times. Barbadoes, one of the most considerable Planta∣tions which the English have upon the Caribby Islands: it lies in 13. d. 20. m. Northern Lat. and 321. of Long▪ about 8 Leagues in length, and 5 in breadth, and inhabited by 50000. English, besides Negros, who are three times their number. This Island was first discovered to the English by Sir William Cur∣teen, in the Reign of James I. but was then wholly desolate. The English soon after Planted it, and were driven at first to great Extremities; because Ships came very rarely and slowly thither from Eng∣land; till having about the Year 1627. raised some Tobacco, Indico, Cotton-Wool and Fustick-Wood, and after that falling into the Sugar Trade, its Reputation and Wealth increased. And this Colony which for a long time subsisted by the courtesie or negligence of the Spaniards, grew so strong and numerous, that all their after Attempts signified nothing. Their Sugars, which at first were coarse, and would quick∣ly melt if not spent, are now improved to a great Perfection. This Island is not well Watered with Rivers, or fresh Springs; yet lying now, they want not that Element, being supplied by Pools, Ponds, and Cisterns. It is very fruitful, and enjoys a perpe∣tual Summer: Hot, but cooled by the Briezes which rise with the Sun, and blow fresher as the Sun gets higher. The chief Town of this Island is S. Michaels, situate at the bottom of Carlisle Bay, in the South∣ern part of the Island, where Ships have a very secure Harbor. Barbara, a small Village in the Island of Sicily; but once a City of great Fame, and much taken no∣tice of by Greek and Latin Writers, under the se∣veral names of Aegesta, Egesta, Acesta and Segesta, &c. It lies 22 Miles from the Promontory and City of Drepanum, now called Trapano, to the North-West, and 40 from Palermo, upon the Western Shoar of the Island; near it runs a small River which now beareth the name of S. Bartholomew. Barbary, Barbaria, a large Country in the West∣ern part of Africa; lying a considerable length from East to West, but not of equal breadth: it is bound∣ed
on the North by the Mediterranean Sea, on the East by Egypt, on the West by the Atlantick Ocean, and on the South by the Atlantick Mountains, which se∣parate it from Biledulgeridia. In the times of the Roman Empire this vast Tract of Land was divided into divers Provinces, viz. Mauritania Tingitana, Casariensis, & Sitifensis; Numidia, Africa propria, Byzacena, Tripolitana, Marmorica and Cyreniaca: it is now divided into the Kingdoms of Fez, Morocco, Algiers, Constantine (antiently Cirta), Tunis and Tripoly, with the Territory of Barcana. This Coun∣try was in antient times subject to the Commonwealth of Carthage, and the great Kings of Mauritania and Numidia; after it fell into the Romans Possession, I have shew'd how they divided it. Here was a most flourishing Church till the 5 Century; in the begin∣ing of which, the Vandals then Arians, entered it, and brought in their Heresie with them: but that which more effectually contributed to the ruin of Christianity here, was the Conquest of it by the Moors in 647, when one Hucha a famous General (whom Osmen, the Third Caliph of the Saracens, imployed to that purpose) finally expell'd the Ro∣mans; and ever since the Moors have possessed it; who being the most enraged Enemies of Christianity that ever professed the Mahometan Law, have so far extirpated Christianity, that there is very few, (if any) of the Inhabitants of this vast Tract of Land, which profess it. Barbela, a River in the Kingdom of Congo in Africa, which falls into the River Zaire, which washeth the Walls of S. Saviour, or Banza, the Ca∣pital of this Kingdom. Barbenzon, Barbentio, a Principality in Hainaut. Barberino, Barberinum, a small Town in Tus∣cany in Italy, from whence the Noble Family of the Barberines receive their name; of which Family Pope Ʋrban VIII. was, who succeeded Gregory XV. and sate 21. Years, viz. from 1623. to 1644. This small Town is built upon an Hill, in the Road be∣tween Florence and Siena, 16 Miles from the former toward the South. Barbowyna, Berbis, a Village of the lower Hun∣gary, where the Ruins of an antient Roman Town are yet seen upon the Drave: 3 German Miles from Quinque Ecclesiae towards the South. Barbuda or Barbada, one of the Caribby Islands in America, under the English; but of no very great Account. It is in length 15 Miles, Lat. North 17. d. Barca, Marmorica, a small Kingdom in Africa, on the West of Egypt, and the Mediterranean Sea; under the Empire of the Turks. But there is no Town of any note in it; there is adjoining to it a Desart called by the same name. Barce, Barcetum, a Castle in the Dukedom of Parma, between the Rivers of Parma and Taro, and the Apennine: 22 Miles from Parma, toward the South, and 16 from Pentremoli. There was anti∣ently a very famous Monastery built here by the Kings of the Lombards. Barcelona, Barcino, a City of Catalonia in Spain which is a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Tar∣ragona; and an University: it has an excellent Port upon the Mediterranean Sea, well Traded, and also a Castle. This City is the Capital of that Province, and esteemed one of the best Cities of Spain. Built by Hamilcar a Carthaginian, and called by his Pu∣nick Sirname of Barca. In the Year of our Lord 805. it was recovered out of the hands of the Moors, by S. Lewis, King of France: it is seated between the outlet of the River Badelona [Baetulo] which runs on the Eastern sides, and that of Lobregat [Ru∣bicatus] which at the distance of 2 Miles on the East∣ern side, falls into the Mediterranean Sea. It stands 12 Leagues from Tarragona East, and 16 from ∣rona towards the South, and 13 from Ossuna Ta∣ken by the French in 1640▪ but returned under the Spaniard in 1652▪ after a very sharp Siege. This City was Honored with the Title of an Earldom by Lewis the Good, after he had taken it from the Sa∣racens. Charles the Gross, gave this Earldom to Godfrey d'Arria, for his Service against the Normans, and his Heirs: after the Death of Raimond the last Earl, it was united to the Kingdom of Arragon in 1162. There were 3 small Councils celebrated in this City; one in 540. one in 603. and the last in 1064. James II. King of Arragon died here in 1327 Alfonsus IV. in 1336. and John II. in 1479. Barcelonette, a Town and Valley in Provence heretofore, now in the Dominions of the Duke of Savoy. Built or rebuilt by Raimond V. Earl of Provence, in 1231▪ who called it by this name, in memory that his Ancestors came into Provence from Barcelona in Spain. Barcelor, a City of the East-Indies, under the Dominion of the King of Bisnagar, upon the Sea Shoar, between Goa and Canora. It lies in almost 15▪ d. of Northern Lat. and Long. 105. This City was some time under the Portuguese, but is now re∣covered bythe King of Bisnagnar, a potent Indian Prince. It was also heretofore the Capital of a di∣stinct Kingdom. Barcelos, Celiobriga, a small Town in Portugal, Honored with the Title of a Dukedom. It lies in the County of Entre Douro é minho, upon the Ri∣ver Cavado, which not far from thence falls into the Atlantick Ocean; 6 Leagues North of Porto, and 4 West of Braga. Barcena, Coloe, a Marsh in Aethiopia, out of which ariseth the River of Astapus, as Ptolomy saith. Bardewic, a most antient City in Saxony within a Mile of Lunenburg, said to be built 990 Years be∣fore the coming of our Saviour. Bardi, a People amongst the antient Gauls, in very great Esteem with them for Poetry and Musick: supposed to dwell about Montbard, or Mont-Barri, in Latin Mons Bardorum, a Mountain in the Terri∣tory of Auxois in Burgundy, which still retains their Name. Bardt, a small Town in Pomerania in Germany upon the Baltick Sea, which has yet a large Haven, and a very fine Castle, and a Lordship belonging to it, near the River Bart. This place was yielded to the Swedes by the Treaty of Munster, in 1647. ta∣ken by the Elector of Brandenburgh, but restored to them again in 1679. it lies 3 German Miles from the Borders of the Dukedom of Mecklebourg, and at the same distance from Damgarden towards the North-East, and about 8 from Berghen in the Isle of Rugia to the West. Bareyt, a well built Town, very handsom, in Franconia in Germany. The ordinary Residence of the Marquess of Brandenburg, who has a noble Ca∣stle here. Bargemon, Bargemonum, a Town in Provence in France, 5 Leagues from the Sea, in the Diocese of Freius, upon a fertile little Hill: heretofore one of the Apannages belonging to the Cadets of the House of the Earls of Provence. It is now observable for a miraculous Image of the B. Virgin, whose History is written by Lewis Sylvacane. Barwick. See Berwick. Bari, Barium, a City in the Kingdom of Naples in a Province of the same name, called Terra di Bari; which has been long Honored with the Title of a Dutchy; it is an Archbishops See, well fortified, and has an indifferent good Haven upon the Adriatick, about 20 Miles distant from Poliano to the South-East,
and Trani to the North-West. It has its name, as Festus writes, from Bara, a small Island near Brindisi, [Brundusium] the Inhabitants thereof building this City. The Body of S. Nicolas, Bishop of Myra in Lycia, one of the Fathers who opposed Arius in the first Council of Nice, is preserved in this City. P. Ʋrban II. celebrated a Council here in 1098. in which Anselme Archbishop of Canterbury disputed the cause of the procession of the Holy Ghost, and of the Union of the Eastern Church with the We∣stern, against the Greeks. The Terra di Bari is a part of the antient Apulia Peucetia, upon the gulph of Venice, betwixt the Basilicate and Terra di Otranto. Barilliana, an Island at the mouth of the Da∣nube. Barjols, Barjolum, a Town and Bailywick in Provence in France, in a very fruitful soil, adorn'd with a Collegiat Church since the Year 1060. During the Civil Wars of France, the Protestants took it in 1562. Those of the League retook it in 1590. Barking, a Market Town in the County of Essex in the hundred of Becontree. Barkshire. See Berkshire. Barkway, a Market Town in Hartfordshire in the hundred of Edwinstree. Barle-Duc, a neat and beautiful City, the Ca∣pital of the Dukedom of Barrois, built by Frederick I. Duke of Loraine in 951, upon the River Ornain, about 15 Miles from Nancy to the West, and thirteen from Chaalons: heretofore under the Dukes of Lo∣raine: but now incorporated into the Province of Champagne in France. Barletta, Barolum, or Barulum, a City situate in or near the place of the old Canusium in Apulia Peucetia in Italy; an Haven or Sea-Port, reckoned for one of the four strong Holds of Italy in the mid∣dle Ages. It lies upon the Adriatick Sea, about 24 Miles West of Bari, 4 South of the Outlets of the River of Ofanto. A large and beautiful City, and the Seat of the titular Archbishop of Nazareth. Barlinguas, Erythiae, a knot of small Islands upon the Coast of Portugal, call'd by various names. They lie between the C. de Rocca to the South, and the C. de Mondego to the North; and not above 2 Leagues from the Shores of Estremadura. Barmach, an extraordinary high mountain in the Province of Schirvan in Persia. The ruines of se∣veral Fortresses appear upon it, supposed to have been built by Alexander M. and demolished by Tamer∣lane. Barnagasso, one of the Kingdoms of Aethiopia, which pays yearly to the Turks 1000 Ounces of Gold. Its Capital City is Barva. Barnavelt's Island in the Magellanique Sea, was discovered by the Hollanders in 1616. It stands near Terra del fuego and the Streights of le Maire. Barnet, a Town in Hartfordshire; memorable for a bloody engagement here betwixt the Houses of Lancaster and York, wherein the latter carried the Victory. It affords medicinal Waters. Barnesley, a Market-Town in the West Riding of Yorkshire in the hundred of Staincross. Barnstaple, a Market Town in Devonshire in the hundred of Branton, upon the River Taw, over which it has a spacious Bridge. It sends 2 Burgesses to the Parliament. Baroche, a Town in the Kingdom of Guzerate in the Empire of the Great Mogul. The English en∣joy a good settlement in it. Barra, a small Kingdom in Guinea in Africa: the King of which was engaged by the Dutch in 1663. to fall upon the English Factory there. There is also a Town in Palestine call'd by this name. Barrant, a Marquisate in the Province of Guienne in France. §. Also a Fort upon the Frontiers of Dauphine and Savoy, one League from Montmelian: Storm'd and taken by the Duk. de Lesdignieres in 1528. Barrois. See Bar. Barrab. Arabia Petraea. Barow, a River of the Province of Leinster in Ireland, which ariseth in Queens County in the Moun∣tains of Sliew Bloemy; and running Southward, wash∣eth the Eastern Side of Caterlagh and Laighlin: after which it receives from the West, another great River call'd Neure, which divides Kilkenny: a little further to the South, it entertains the Sewer, which water∣eth the Walls of Waterford; and being thus augmen∣ted, it entereth the British Sea about 20 Miles West of Cape Carn, the South-Eastern Point of Ireland. Bart, Alisus, Bardum. See Barde. Bartas, a small Territory in the Province of Ar∣maynac in France, near Aux. William de Saluste, the famous du Bartas, a Huguenot born in Gascoigne in 1545. and Author of the Poem of the Worlds Cre∣ation, received his title from hence. Barton, a Market Town in Lincolnshire in the hundred of Yarborough, upon the River Humber over against Hull. Barva, a City of Abyssinia near the River Mara∣bu. The Capital of the Kingdom of Barnagasso. Basil, Basilea, written in two of the Lives of Charles the Great, Basla; in after times Basula and Basala; by Cluverius, Artalbinum. It was a Bi∣shops See under the Archbishop of Besanzon, after the ruin of Augusta Rauracorum, which happened about the Year 800. Now the Principal City of Switzerland. It has its name from Basiliana the Mother of Julian the Apostate: but Valesius thinks the name rather taken from the River on which it stands, which he supposeth was then so call'd. It has a pleasant Situation, and is adorned with many mag∣nificent Structures, and Churches; watered by many sweet Fountains, blessed with an healthful Air, a va∣liant People, and plenty of all things. Very antient; as being said to be ruin'd by the Almains in the Year 260. and suffered much in after-times from the Huns. It was beloved by Henry I. and II. In the Year 1368. much enlarged by Frederick Blacken∣heim, Bishop of Strasburg, and Administrator of the Diocese of Basil, who first obtain'd a Charter of Free∣dom for it: in the Year 1392. it was made an Hanse Town. One of the greatest things of antient Times which has made it famous, was the General Council held here under Sigismond the Emperor, and by seve∣ral sessions continued from the Year 1431. to 1443. where it was decreed, that a General Council was a∣bove the Pope. Therefore Eugenius IV. dissolved it and convocated another at Ferrara. They refused to dissolve, deposed Eugenius, and elected Faelix V. Pope. The same Council established the pragmatick Sanction, that the Gallican Church received in 1438. in the presence of Charles VII. This City taught the rest of the Cantons the way of Leaguing and Unit∣ing: for the Pope having excommunicated Lewis the Bavarian, Emperor of Germany, the City of Basil persevered in the Service of that Prince, and was for it excommunicated too: whereupon they threw the Popes Legat into the Rhine, and to secure them∣selves, entered into a League with Zurich, and Bearn, and other of the Principal Cities, in 1327. This City embraced the Reformation in 1529. It is one of the most celebrated Universities in Christendom, which was opened here by Pius II. Ann. Dom. 1459. The Art of making Paper was first found in this City, in 1470. by Anthony and Michael Gallicion. This gave great encouragement to Printers: the first of which was Bernard Richel, who began to Print here in 1478. This City stands upon the Rhine,
which runs through it: 6 Miles from Fribourg, 18 from Constance to the West, 12 from Zurich, 38 from Ausbourg, 14 from Strasbourg. Long. 29. 15. Lat. 47. 25. Basilicata, is a small County on the East of Campania, in the Kingdom of Naples. Taken out of Campania by Alphonsus, King of Naples; 33 Miles in length, and 10 in breadth; and was antient∣ly the Seat of the Picentini, a Colony of the Piceni, dwelling on the Adriatick Sea. It is bounded on the North by the Territory of Bari, and part of O∣tranto; on the East by the Gulph of Taranto; on the West by Principato, and on the South by Cala∣bria. The chief City of this Province is Cirenza, which stands near the Foot of the Apennine; it is a barren and not well inhabited Country. Basiligorod. See Vasiligorod. Basingstoke, a Market-Town, and a great Tho∣rough-fair in the County of Southampton. The chief of its Hundred. The Marquess of VVinchester, now Duke of Bolton, has a noble Seat hard by it. Basques, or Païs de Basques, the French Bis∣caye, a Territory in the Province of Gascoigne, com∣prehending the lower Navarre, Soule and Labour. It was the Country of the antient Vascones or Bas∣cones, that came out of Spain, and invaded it. Roger Hovedon calls them Basclos. It is certain, that they were a distinct People, and spoke a different Lan∣guage from the Gascones, according to De Marca. Basra, a Town in the Kingdom of Fez in Africa, near the River Lucus; 30 Miles distant from Sala towards the east, and not far from the Province of Asgar. Bassento, Bussento, Acheron, a River of Cala∣bria, in the Kingdom of Naples; it runs near Co∣senza, the principal City of Calabria, near which it falls in the River Grati, which falls into the Bay of Taranto. In the Bed of this River, Alaricus king of the Goths was buried, as Jornandes writeth. Bass, a small Island not far from Edenburg, famous for the great quantity of Geese, that fre∣quent it at certain seasons. There is a Castle in it, standing upon a Rock that is Iriaccessable. Basianello, a small Town in S. Peters Patrimo∣ny in Italy, towards the Confluence of the Ner a and the Tiber, which is here cover'd with a Stone-bridg. The Lake, antiently call'd Lacus Vadimonis, where P. Cornelius Dolabella, Consul, gain'd a Victory over the Thuscans and Gauls, in the year of Rome 471. lyes in the Neighbourhood of this place. Bassano, a Town in the Marca Trevisana, in the States of Venice, upon the River Brenta. La Bassee, a Town in Flanders, upon the Fron∣tiers of Artois, and the River Deule: Yielded to the French by the Peace of Aix la Chapelle, in 1668. Bassigni, a County in Champagne, towards the Sources of the Marne and the Meuse: Its capital Town is Chaumont. Bastia, the chief Town in Corsica, with a good Fortress and Haven to it. The Genoiiese Governour ordinarily resides here. Bastick, a small Town in Epirus, where they usu∣ally embark for Constantinople. Bastillca, a Country in the Island of Corsica. Le Bastion de France,, a City near Hippo, now Bonne, in Barbary in Africa; deserted by the French in 1658. Bastoigne, Belsonacum, is a Town in the Duke∣dom of Luxembourgh, near the Forrest of Ardenne; 3 Leagues from Neuf-Chateau, and from Luxem∣bourg. It is well so built and peopled, that those of the Country call it ordinarily Paris in Ardenne. Basure, a River of the South America, falling into the River of Amazons: in the Country belong∣ing to the Charibes, Indians. Batavi. See Holland. Batavia, a City in Java, an Island in the East-Indies, built by the Dutch in the Year 1619. It is very strongly Fortified, seated in a Fruitful Plain, and well Traded; so that it is now thought one of the principal Cities of that part of the World: It has a Castle with a good Garrison; and the General Governour of the Affairs of the Dutch East-India Company, for the most part resides here. This Ci∣ty stands 18 Leagues from Bantam to the East, and 60 from Materan to the West. The Kings of Ban∣tam made War many years together against it, and in 1659. besieged it, but without any success; which however much hindred the Growth and Lustre of this City. There is also a River in the Terra Australis, to which the Dutch have given the same Name. Batenbourg, a Town and Citadel in the Dutchy of Gelderland in the Low Countries, Two Leagues from Nimeguen. The cruel Duke D' Alva, Behead∣ed Two Brothers, Barons of this Place, in 1598. saying, The Jole of one Salmon was more valuable, than a number of little Fishes. Bath, Aquae Solis, is a City of Somersetshire, situate upon the River Avon, which is mentioned both by the Greek and Latin Geographers. It is seated in a small low Plain, environ'd round about with Hills of almost an equal height, out of which many Springs continually fall into the Valley, to the great Benefit of the Inhabitants. Within this City are three Springs of Hot Water, of a blewish Colour, sending up from them some thin Vapors, and a strong Odour. These Springs are very Medicinal, and cure many Diseases. They say, Minerva, the Goddess of Baths and Fountains, had a Temple Con∣secrated to her in the Roman times, where the Abby stands now. Many Roman Inscriptions and Figures in Ingravery, appear upon the Wells about the Town. It was taken from the Britains by Cewalin, King of the West-Saxons, in 577. In the Reign of VVilliam Rufus it was sacked and burnt. John de Villula de Tours, Bishop of VVells, removed the Soe to this place, in the Reign of Henry I. but retain'd also the Title of VVells. The most Noble and Loyal John Greenvil, was created Earl of Bath, in the 19th. of Charles I. Aug. 13. 1643. His Fa∣ther, Sir Bevil Greenvil, having been slain at Lands∣down near this City, by the Rebels. It stands 15 Miles East of Bristol. Long. 20. 16. Lat. 51. d. 21. m. Bathon, a Valley in Macedonia, where the An∣tients believed the Gyants Combated with the Gods. Pausanias says, they used to represent the manner of this Fight in some Sacrifices. Baticala, a small City of the East-Indies, the Capital of a Kingdom of the same Name; the Prince whereof is a Tributary to the King of Bisnagar: tho it is very small, yet it has a capacious Haven. § There is another of the same Name in the Island Ceylan, which is the Capital of a Kingdom there; and lately fallen into the Hands of the Hollanders. Baticano, a Promontory in Calabria, in the Maps sometimes call'd Vaticano. Battel, a Town in Sussex. Remarkable in the English History for the Victory of William the Con∣querour, here obtain'd, over King Harold, Octob. 14. 1066. In memory whereof, he built an Abbey of the Name, call'd Battel-Abbey. It is a Market-Town in Hastings Rape. Batter, a large Province in Asia, heretofore call'd Bactriana. which see Batta, a Province of the Kingdom of Congo in Africa. Batten, or Button, an Island in the Indian O∣cean, to the West of the Island of Macassar.
Los Batuecos, a People in the Kingdom of Le∣on in Spain inhabiting the Mountains, betwixt Sa∣lamanca and Corica. They are believed to descend from the Goths. Bavais, Bagacum, Bagacum Nerviorum, a ve∣ry antient Town in Hainault in Flanders, about 4 Leagues from Valenciennes, and 6 from Mons. It was twice burnt in the last Age, and repair'd again. The Cerque, Aqueduct, and Inscriptions here, are sufficient marks of its Antiquity. It stands upon the little River Osneau. Bavari, Boij, Bojares, the first of the antient Germans that passed the Alps, and fixed their Standards upon the Banks of Tiber. They carried their victorious Arms even into Greece, beyond the Hellespont. These were the antient Inhabitants of Bavaria. See Bava∣ria. Baudisten, a Town in Lusatia, a Territory be∣longing to the Elector of Saxony; between Misnia and Bohemia, where the Governour resides. Bauge, a small Town in Anjou in France, where Charles VIII. then Dolphin, obtain'd a signal Victory against the English, commanded by the Duke of Cla∣rence, who was there slain in 1420. It stands 3 Leagues from La Fleche, upon the River Covesnon. Built by the old Earls of Anjou. § Another in the Province of Bresse in the same Kingdom, giving the Title of a Marquess, besides its Name to a Family, who have been the Sovereigns of Bresse above 400 years. In Latin Balgiacum, the other Balgium. Baugenci, Balgentiacum, a Town upon the Loyre. In the Province of Orleans, betwixt Blois and Orleans. In 1152. a Council here Assembled, to take Cognisance of the degree of Parentage betwixt Lewis VII. King of France, and Eleanor his Wife, Dutchess of Guienne, Daughter to William X. the last Duke of Aquitain: (which said Degree of Parentage, rendred their Marriage nulland void from the beginning:) pronounced sentence of Divorce betwixt them; whereupon the said Prin∣cess remarried to Henry Duke of Normandy, afterwards Henry II. King of England; and in her Right, A∣quitane fell to the Crown of England. In 1428. the English took Baugenci, under the Command of the Earl of Salisbury, but abandoned it to the French the the Year after. For some time it continued under particular Sovereigns, who bought and sold it till the Year 1543. by arrest of Parliament, it was united to the Demains of the Crown of France. Baulme, a Town in the higher Burgundy or Fran∣che Comte; 2 small Leagues from hence you see a natural deep and spacious Cave in the Earth, which furnishes the Country with continual Ice in the Sum∣mer, and in the Winter flows with Water. Bauman, a vast Cave in the County of Regen∣stein in the lower Saxony, where they find numbers of Bones of divers Animals, and sometimes of Men as big as Gyants. Bautrey, a Market Town in the West Riding of Yorkshire, in the Hundred of Strafford. Bautzen, Budisinum, the principal Town of Lu∣satia in Germany, seated upon the River Sprew, 7 Leagues from Dresden East. This place being at∣tacked by the Duke of Saxony in the Year 1634, Goltz the Governor for the Emperor, firing the Sub∣urbs to give the Enemy a stop, the fire in the con∣fusion seized the Town, and burnt it all down, ma∣ny Persons perishing in the Flames. This place was thereupon left to the Elector of Saxony, who is still possessed of it, but before it was a Free and Impe∣rial City. Bayonue, Baiona, Boiatum, a very large, rich, strong City; seated upon the River Adour, about 2 Leagues from the Sea, in the Confines of the King∣doms of France, and Spain; honored with a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Ausch; and has a large Haven on the Brittish Sea. It stands 6 Leagues from the Confines of Spain, 7 from Dax to the West, and 30 from Bourdeaux to the South. There was a famous Congress in this City between Charles IX. with Catharine de Medices his Mother, and Elisa∣beth Sister of Charles, Wife to Philip II. King of Spain: in which an Agreement was closely made be∣tween the two Crowns to ruin the Protestant Reli∣gion, both in France and the Low Countries; which was followed by Rivers of Human Blood, shed on that account: this was in the Year 1566 and men∣tioned by Thuanus and Grotius. § Also a Town in the Kingdom of Galicia in Spain, near the mouth of the River Minho, which falls into the Atlantick Ocean, betwixt it and Lima. Baux, a Town in Provence in France, giving the Title of a Marquiss: it is situated upon a Rock, with a good Castle thereto, near Arles. There is an il∣lustrious House of this Name in Provence, and it is uncertain whether that has denominated the Castle of Baux, or the Castle it. Babaria, called by the Germans Beyeren, a Duke∣dom in Germany; the second Circle in the Empire; having its name from the Avares, a People of the Huns, who possessed this Country. It is also call'd Bo∣jaria, from the Boii of France, who once dwelt here. And in the times of the Roman Empire, Noricum. Bounded on the North by Franconia, on the West by Schwaben, on the South by the Italian Alpes, and on the the East by Austria and Bohemia, Be∣fore the Treaty and Peace of Westphalia, it had lesser Bounds: but then it was not only raised in Honor, the Duke of Bavaria being made the VIII. Elector, but enlarged as to its Extent. This Country had Kings (after it was Conquered) from the Romans, to the times of Arnolphus the Emperour; and S. Lewis is said to have declared his Son Lewis King of Bavaria, in the Year 817. From those times to ours they have had Dukes; the first was Arnolphus, slain by the Normans, about the Year 891. The greatest part of this Country is Fruitful, and well cultivated, and has many noble and stately Cities, the principal of which is Munchen, (Monachium) seated on the Isar. The Family thereof gain'd the Upper Palatinate, by the Peace of Munster. He is of the Communion of the Church of Rome, and the far great∣est part of his Subjects; by which and their new Grants and Dignities, they are very firmly united to the House of Austria: which the present Emperor has improved by Marrying his Daughter to the now Duke of Ba∣varia. Baz, Ocite, a small Island on the West of Ire∣land, over against the Earldom of Desmond in the Pro∣vince of Munster, North of the Bay of Dingle; call'd by the Irish Blasquo. Baza, Basti, a City of the Kingdom of Granada in Spain. It was once a Bishops See, under the Arch∣bishop of Eluire, at which time it was well Fortified; but now it is little inhabited, and every day decays; it stands upon the Borders of the Kingdoms of New Castile, and Murcia, 6 Leagues from Guadix to the South-East, 15 from Granato, and Gaen, or Jaen to the North-East, and 16 from Almeria to the North; it is built at the Foot of an Hill, in a Valley call'd from it Hoya de Baya, by an inconsiderable Brook. Bazadois, Vasata, a small Territory in the Low∣er Guienne in France, which has the River Garonne on the North and West, Agenois on the East, and Condomois on the South. It has its name from Ba∣zas, the principal City of it, and a Bishops See, un∣der the Archbishop of Ausch; this City stands searce 3 Miles from the River Garonne towards the South, 7 from Bourdeaux to the North-East, 10 from Con∣domois,
and 17 from Ausch. It is mentioned by the Antients under the name of Cossium Vasatum, Civi∣tas Vasatica, and Vasatae Arehosae. And likewise the People of the Territory of Bazadois by the name of Vasates, who were the same perhaps with the Coco∣sates of Pliny and Cesar. Bazaim, [Barace] a vast Tract of Land but very barren which lies between Egypt, and the King∣dom of Tunis in Africa; the same which was called Marmarica, as Bochart saith. § Also a Town in the Kingdom of Guzurate in the hither East-Indies: situated upon the Coast of the Gulph of Cambaia, 26 Leagues from Daman to the South. It has been in the hands of the Portuguese ever since the Year 1534. who have built a good Cittadel with several stately Churches in it, and made it a fine Town; therefore fuller of Gentry than Goa; insomuch that Fidalgos de Bazaim, a Gentleman of Bazaim, is become a Proverb with the Portuguese. Bazano, a Mountain of Abruzzo, in the Kingdom of Naples in the Territory of Aquila; of which mention is made in the Life of S. Justin. Bazas. See Bazadois. Bazois, a District in France in the Dukedom of Nivernois. Beaconsfield, a Market-Town in Buckingham∣shire, in the Hundred of Burnham, on a small Hill. Beareford, was a small Monastery built by the Danes in Greenland about 300 Years since, but now a long time ago deserted and ruined. Bearne, a fruitful and well Watered Territory in the South of France, advanced to the Honor of a Principality. It lies at the foot of the Pyrenean Mountains, which part it from the Kingdom of Ara∣gon towards the South; upon the East it has the County of Bigorre, and Armagnac le Noir; upon the North Gascogny, and upon the West the King∣dom of Navarr. This Country had heretofore Prin∣ces of its own, one of which by a Marriage with E∣lenora Queen of Navarr, united it to that Kingdom. Henry IV. brought it to the Crown of France, and by a Decree it was annexed for ever to that Kingdom in 1620. Beaucaire, a small City in the Province of Lan∣guedoc in France; upon the River Rhosne, right over against Tarascon; 4 Leagues from Avignon towards the South, and 3 from Arles towards the North; most remarkable for its Fairs. It is called in Latin, Belloquadra. This Town was taken and retaken in the Civil Wars of France. It had a Castle in it built upon a Rock to the River side, which the last King commanded to be demolished. Beauce or Beausse, Belsia, a Province of France, that heretofore was of very large extent, but is now much less, and the Bounds not well known. It lies between the Loyre on the South, and the Seyn to the North; the principal Towns in it are, Chartres, Chasteaudun, Montoir, Pluviers, Estampes, and Ven∣dosme. This Province lying so near to Paris, a con∣siderable part of it has been taken into the Isle of France. The Soil is dry, but very fruitful, and a∣bounding in all things, especially Corn; so that it is called totius Galliae Horreum, the Store-house or Gra∣nary of all France. Beauchamp, a place near Calais in Picardy. The Duke of Somerset is Baron of Beauchamp. Beaufort, a Castle in the Dukedom of Anjou in France; which belonged heretofore to the House of Lancaster, and was much beloved by John of Gaunt; who caused all his Children that he had by Catharine Swinford to be called Beauforts, who were after∣wards Dukes of Somerset and Exeter, and Earls of Dorset. The most noble Henry Somerset late Mar∣quess of Worcester being descended from the antient Dukes of Somerset, was December 2. 1682. by Charles II. of most blessed Memory, created Duke of Beaufort This Castle lies about 3 Leagues East of Angiers, and 2 from the Loyre. And is now possessed by the House of Beaumanoir-Lavardin, with the inferiour Title of an Earl from the King of France. § There is an∣other Beaufort in Champagne: this is a small Town, but honored above the other with the Title of a Dutchy by Henry le Grand, in the year 1597. which Title has been granted by Lewis XIII. to the House of Vendosme. Beaujalois, a small Country contained in the Ly∣onnois a Province in France with the Title of a Ba∣rony. It takes its name from the Town Beaujeu. in Latin Bdujovium or Beltiecum, upon the River Ardiere; the same does the House of Beaujeu. Beaumaris, a Town in the Island of Anglesey, with a Port to the River Menay. It is called in La∣tin Bellomariscus; and Elects one Burgess for the Parliament. Beaumont in Argonne, a Town in the little Country of Argonne near the Mense in France. It suffered much in the Civil Wars of that Kingdom. Beaumont sur Oyse, a Town upon the Oyse, at the foot of an Hill in the Isle of France, about 8 Leagues from Paris towards the North. Beaumont le Roger, a Town in the Dukedom of Normandy in France, upon the River Rugle; Four Leagues from Eureux towards the West, and about 6 from Roan towards the South; so called from Roger one of its Counts, who built or at least enlarged it; it having the Honor to give that Title. § There is another Town called Beaumont also near the Sea Shoar, in the District belonging to Coutance; three Leagues West of Cherbourg. Beaumont, a Town of Hainaut in the Nether∣lands, adorned with the Title of a Dukedom, to which belongs a Castle; it stands 7 Leagues from Mons to the South-East, and 4 from Chimay to the North, and about 2 from the Sambre. Beaumont le Vicomte, a small City in the Duke∣dom of Maine, which has the Honor to be a Duke∣dom; it lies in the middle between Mayenne and Alenzon, upon the River Sarte: And having for∣merly been a Viscounty, for that reason retains this name. Beaune, a Town in Burgundy famous for the ex∣cellent Wines it yields. In Latin, Belna; it stands upon the River Burgeoise, 4 Leagues from the Sone, betwixt Dijon Autun and Chalon. Lewis XII. built it a Castle: there is a great number of Churches and Monasteries in it, and particularly the Hospital is one of the finest Structures in the Kingdom. Beaute, was heretofore a Royal Castle upon the Maine near the Wood of Vincennes, belonging to the Kings of France; and Honored with this name, because it deserved it. Charles V. King of France, died here in 1380. Some Ruins of it are yet to be seen. Beauvais, Caesaromagus, a City of the Isle of France, which is a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Rheims; the Bishop is one of the 12 Peers of France: it is well fortified, and the Capital of a Di∣ocese of the same name; and stands upon the River Terrain, 16 Leagues from Paris towards the North, 18 from Abbeville, and 16 from Roan towards the East. In 1114. Conon Bishop of Palestine the Popes Legate held a Council here, which Excommunicated the Emperor Henry V. This Country of Beauvoisis was the Seat of the antient Bellovaci, so honourably mentioned by Julius Cesar. Beauvois, Bilumnum, a Village in Savoy. Bechir, Ligir, a River of Boetia, now called by the Turks, Seramulipa.
Bechires, an antient People of Scythia, who came with Attila into Italy; and further we have no account of them, but that of their hard drinking of the Wine there. Bechria, the Lower Aegypt. Beckles, a Market-Town in Suffolk, in the Hun∣dred of Wangford, upon the Banks of the River Wa∣veney. The Grammar School here is endowed with 10 Schollarships for Emanuel College in Cambridge. Becsangial, Bithynia, a Province of the Lesser Asia. Bed, the Mountains of the Moon in Aethiopia. Bedal, a Market-Town in the North Riding of Yorkshire, in the Hundred of Hang East, upon the River Swale and a small Stream there falling into it. Bedalac, Lethes, a River of Andalusia, common∣ly called Guadalete; it falls into the Ocean at Cadis. Bedford, Lactodurum, or Lactodorum, one of the most antient Towns in England, being mentioned by Antoninus. It stands on both sides of the River Ouse, which is here covered with a Stone Bridge. This Town is more to be commended for its pleasant Si∣tuation and Antiquity, than for the Beauty or Great∣ness of it, though it has 5 Churches. It is the Prin∣cipal or County Town; so it sends 2 Burgesses to Parliament. In the Year 572. the Saxons under Cuthwolf defeated the Britains near this place. Af∣terwards it gave the Title of Duke to John of Lan∣caster, Son to Henry IV. and Brother to Henry V. who was the Regent of France under Henry VI. The same Title was continued to Jaspar of Hatfield Uncle to Henry VII. The Honorable William Russel and his Ancestors, have born the Title of Earls of Bed∣ford, ever since the third Year of Edward VI. Bedfordshire, is bounded on the East and South by Cambridgeshire and Hertfordshire; on the West∣by Buckinghamshire, and on the North by Northam∣tonshire and Huntingtonshire. The River Ouse di∣vides it into 2 parts; the North parts of it are most fruitful, and better Wooded; the Southern parts tho leaner, yet are not altogether barren, but yield good Crops of Barley. Sir John Russel Comptroller of the Houshold to Henry VIII. was created a Baron in 1538. and Earl of Bedford by Edw. VI. in 1548 whose descend∣ent William the fifth Earl of this Family, now enjoys it. Bediford, a Market-Town in Devonshire, in the Hundred of Shebbear: the Earl of Bath has a Noble Seat here. It stands upon the River Towridge. Bedovins, a wild People dwelling in the several quarters of the Desarts of Arabia in Tents, (whence heretofore they got the name of Scenitae) and not to be perswaded by any Invitations to settle in Towns. They divide themselves into Tribes and Families, and take their quarters accordingly under their respective Chiess: but their principal business is to rob the Cara∣vans that go to Mecca, for which attempts they are provided with Horse and Arms. Befort, a strong Town in Alsatia, in the Terri∣tory of Suntgow, 4 Leagues from Pfirt to the West, and about 7 from Basil to the West also. This was yielded to the French by the Treaty of Munster: heretofore the head of an Earldom. Behemerland, the Kingdom of Bohemia. Behemerwald, a part of the Hercynian Forest lying in Bohemia. Behenhauseu, a Town of Schwaben, in the Duke∣dom of Wirtemberg. Beja, a City of Portugal, antiently called Pax Julia; it lies in the Province of Entre-tejoe Guadia∣na, near the River Odiarca which falls into the Gua∣diana; well built, fortified, and has the Title of a Dukedom; it stands 2 Leagues from the Guadiana, towards the West; called Pacca by the Moors. Bejar, a Village of the Kingdom of New Castile in Spain, upon the River Madera, in the Borders of the Kingdom of Murcia; searce 2 Leagues from Al∣caraz to the East. This is most propably thought to be the Roman Bigerra. Bejar de Melena, a ruined City of Andaluzia in Spain. Some take it to be the Mellaria of the An∣tients, which was the Birth-place of the excellent Geo∣grapher Pomponius Mela. Beila, or Beia, a Town in the Kingdom of Tunis in Africa, thought to be the Bulla regia of the Anti∣ents. It has the happiness to stand in a Soil that is so exceeding fruitful, that the People say there, if they had two Beia's, there would be as many Grains of Corn in Africa, as Grains of Sand in the Sea. Beilstein, Bilistinum, a small Town in the Pro∣vince of Weteraw in Germany, bearing the Title of an Earldom. Its Situation is betwixt Marpurg, Nas∣sau, and Coblentz. Bein Elnabarim, the Persian Gulph. Beira, a very large Province upon the Sea-Coast of Portugal, accounted 130 Miles long and 95 broad, and divided into 6 Counties, the chief City whereof is Coimbra. The same was the Seat of those antient People of Spain, called Transcedani, says Vasconcellos. Belac, a Town in the Province of Marche in France, under the generality of Limoges, upon the little River Vincon, which receives here below the Seve and the Basile. Belay, Belica, a City that heretofore belonged to the Duke of Savoy, but in 1601. was taken from him by Henry IV. It is the Head of the Territory of Baugey, and a Bishops See under the Archbishop of Besancon; it stands upon a rising Ground near the Ri∣ver Rhosne, not above 12 Miles from Lyons towards the East, 10 from Grenoble to the North, and 12 from Geneva. Beltingham, a Market-Town in Northumberland in Tindale Ward. Belvais, and Belbes, Pelusium, was a City seated upon the most Eastern Branch of the Nile, towards Palestine. Though this City is intirely ruined, and another called Damiata or Damietta is sprung out of it, which I shall mention in its proper place; yet the State of the antient Town ought here to be de∣scribed. This place in Scripture is called Sin; which (as the Greek name which it afterwards bore ) signifies Clay or Mire, because it was seated in a deep Miry Marsh upon the Nile. And it was for ma∣ny Ages the Key of Egypt; that Country being of a very difficult Access on the side of Syria; accordingly when Cambyses invaded Egypt, Polyoenus in his 7th. Book de Stratag. tells us, that Cambyses vigorously attacked Pelusium, and the Egyptians as couragious∣ly defended it, , Shutting up the Entrance of Egypt against him. Diodorus Siculus tells us, the Kings of Egypt fortified this place on the same account, with the utmost care and diligence; see M. Bochart in his Geographia Sa∣cra. lib. 4. cap. 27. The Grecian Race of Kings were no less careful of the keeping this Place; and after the Romans had it they did not neglect it neith∣er: Aelius Hadrianus, one of their Emperors, encom∣passed it with 3 Walls, and called it by his own name Aeliopolis. In the times of Christianity it was the Seat of an Archbishop under the Patriarch of Alexandria. But when the Arabians and Saracens prevailed, they, as their Custom is, intirely ruined this antient and most Noble City; and built another on the opposite Shoar of the Nile, which they called Damiata. Pelusium stands 150 Miles from Alexandria to the East, and 120 from Memphis or Grand Cairo, to the North-East, and not far from the Mediterranean Sea: in Long. 63. 20. and Lat. 32. 20.
Beleguanza, This has passed with divers for a Pro∣vince of Abyssinia; but Ludolfus informs us, there are 2 Kingdoms in Abyssinia, called Bali and Ganz; and  hat Baleguanza, instead of a Province, is but a Composition of their 2 Names. Belenas, a City of Palestine, called Dan in An∣tient times, Beles, Subi, a small River of Catalonia, which falls into the Mediterranean Sea between Barcelona and Tarragona, at the Town of Siges. Belesine, a Town in the Upper Perche in France, where the States of the Province ordinarily assemble. It is honored with a Castle. Belesta, a Fountain in the County of Foix in A∣quttain in France; which is particular for havinga flux and reflux, increasing and decreasing continually eve∣ry Hour, from the end of July to the beginning of December. Belforte, there are 3 places thus called; one in Narbone in France, the Seat of the old Vocontii, up∣on the Durance; another in Istria, and a third in Calabria Ʋlterior. Belgart, a Town in the Dukedom of Pomerania in the Territory of Cassuben; which lies between the Baltick Sea, and Prusia upon the River Persante; 2 Miles from the Baltick Sea, and 3 from Colberg. Belgan, a vast Mountain in Tartary, called Ima∣us by the Latin Geographers; which runs very near the whole length of Asia, from North to South. See Imaus. Belgae, a Warlike and Hardy People of the anti∣ent Gallia Belgica, mentioned with Honor by Jul. Caesar. For their Boundaries, See Gallia. The name now of Belgae and Belgium, all know, is given to the Low Countries. Belgiojosa, a Village and Castle in the Dukedom of Milan, within 5 Miles of Pavia near the Po, be∣longing to the Counts of Barbiano. Fort Belgique, Arx Belgica, the name that the Hollanders have given to one of their Forts in the Island of Nera belonging to Banda, amongst the Moluccaes. Belgrade, Alba Graeca, called by the Germans, Griechisch Weissemburg, by the Italians Belgrado, is a great and strong City belonging to the Kingdom of Hungary, seated upon the South side of the Save, where it falls into the Danube, in the Province of Rascia; this was a long time the Bulwark of Chri∣stendom against the Turks, who lost several Armies before it. Amurath II. lost here a Victorious Army in 1439. and when Mahomet II. his Son besieged this City a second time, An. 1456. with an Army of 250000 Men, the brave Huniades preserved it, and ruined that vast Army by a Stratagem; for he suffer∣ed a Party of the Turks to enter the Town, and whilst they were Plundering the Houses, made a Sally upon those without, took their Cannon and turned them upon themselves; in the Confusion destroying 40000 of them, and possessed himself of their Cannon, Camp, Baggage and Amunition; so that the Turks were forced to an inglorious Flight. Johannes Huniades died the same year of the Plague. But in 1521. So∣lyman the Magnificent took it after a Siege of two Months, Lewis then King of Hungary a Child of 15 Years of Age not regarding it, and all the other Christian Princes being engaged in mutual and de∣structive Wars. The Imperialists won it again Sept. 6. 1688. by Storm: about 600 Christian Slaves were happily released on the occasion; who being most of them chained together and placed before a Party of Turks to screen them from the Fury of the Soldiers, obtained Quarter for themselves and their Enemies. But the Turks possessed themselves again of it, Oct. 8. 1690. a chance Bomb communicating a Fire from one Magazine to another with so much fury, that a great number of the Garrison were blown up with the Walls and Ramparts, the Ditch filled and so large a passage made for the Enemy, that they entred by entire Squadrons, and cut to peices all they met. This City belongs properly to Servia; the Despot of which Consigned it over to Sigismund King of Hungary, for Lands of a better value; distant from Vienna 102 German Miles, 26 days Journey from Constantinople. Leo X. made it a Bishops See, un∣der the Archbishop of Antivari in Dalmatia. Long. 47. 00. Lat. 46. 50. Beligrard, Hermonassa, a small Town or City of Bessarabia, towards the Mouth of the River Monca∣stro, by the Moldavians called Bialogrod, and by the Turks Beligrard. See Bialogrod. Bella more. The White Sea. Bellac, a small City in the County of La Marche in France, upon the River Ʋnicou, 2 Leagues from Do∣rat to the South and seven from Limoges to the North. Belle, or Bailleul, a Town in Flanders, three Leagues from Ipre. Bellegarde, a small City in the Dukedom of Bur∣gundy, upon the River Saone, [Arar]. This City was once very well fortified; it stands 5 Leagues from Challon to the North, and not far from the Borders of the Dukedom. In 1620. itself was advanced to the Title of a Dukedom. § Likewise the name of a strong place in the County of Rousillon upon the Frontiers of Catalonia, betwixt Ceret and Jonquera. The Spaniards made themselves Masters of it in 1674. and after they had fortified it were obliged to sur∣render it to the French again, when they attacked it under the Comand of the late famous Mareschal Schomberg. Belle-Ifle, Calonesus, an Island upon the South∣ern Coast of Britany in France, not far from the Port of Brest; 6 Leagues in Length and 2 in Breadth, called by the Dutch Boelin. It is furnished with a good Road and Castles to secure it, and carries the honor to be advanced to a Marquisate. § Like∣wise an Island belonging to China in the Eastern Ocean, having the Province of Fuquien to the West, and the Philippins to the South. In Latin stiled For∣mosa. The Hollanders did their utmost endeavors to settle in it, but were expelled thence by the Chinese. Its chief Towns are Toyoan, Gillira, Wankan, &c. Belle-Perche, a Town in the Dukedom of Bour∣bonne in France upon the River Allier. Belluna, a City of the Marquisate of Trevigiana, which is the cheif, and gives name to a small Terri∣tory, under the Dominion of the Commonwealth of Venice. It is little but fair, and a Bishops See, un∣der the Patriarch of Aquileja. And stands upon the River Piave, which falls into the Gulph of Venice, 13 Leagues from Venice to the South-East; the Ci∣ty of Belluno lies 15 Leagues from Feltria to the South-East. Belvoir Castle, a noble Seat of the Earl of Rut∣land's in Lincolnshire, in the Hundred of Grantham, yielding a most delightful and spacious Prospect. The Astroites, a Stone irradiated with Beams like a Star, thought heretofore to be an infallible signal of Victo∣ctory to him that wore one, is found about this Place. Belz, a City of Black Russia in the Kingdom of Poland, 5 Leagues from the River Bug, between Lem∣bourg and Zamosky. This City is small, and built all of Wood, but yet it is a Palatinate, and possessed at present by a Person of great Worth. Beltz, or Belts, the Name of the Baltick Sea, taken from two very narrow Streights thereof so call'd, the one betwixt the Islands of Funen and Zeland, the other betwixt Funen and the Terra firma
of Jutland; which are rarely ever passed by Vessels of great Burthen, because the Sound is both a deep∣er Water and larger than they. The March of Charles Gustavus King of Sweden with his Army over this Passage upon the Ice, was certainly one of the most adventurous and memorable Actions of the War the last Age, neither is there an Exam∣ple like it to be found in any other. Belvedore, a Province in the Morea, heretofore call'd Elis, the Capital Place is so call'd also; it lies in the Western Part over against Zant. In anci∣ent time, Pausanias saith, the Silks of this Country were finer, and more esteem'd than those of Judea. It is a pleasant Country, and has its Name from its beautiful Prospect. § There is another place near Syracuse in Cicily, of the same name, which was cal∣led by the Ancients Euryalus. As is also a part of the Popes Palace at Rome. Belus, a river of Phaenicia in Syria. It be∣gins its course at the Lake of Cendavia near Acra; and passes a valley, where the Sands that it amasses together in vast Quantities, says Pliny, it changes into Glass: yet this is the least of those Wonders, which that credulous noble Author reports of it. Bemarin, a Province in Florida, under the command of the King of the Apalechites, Indi∣ans, at the foot of the Mountains; where stands its Capital Town Melitot. Bemyster, A Market Town in Dorsetshire, and the chief of its Hundred. Bena, a Kingdom in the Southern part of Gui∣nea in Africa, with a small City of that Name, seat∣ed on the South side of the River Forcados, about 20 Leagues from the Ocean; in Lat. 8. d. Long. 31. 50. The People of it are call'd Sousos. Benacus, The antient Name of one of the great∣est Lakes in Italy, otherwise now call'd Lac de la garde. It extends it self in Length from East to West 30 Miles; in Breadth, about 10. in the Ter∣ritory of Verona, within the States of Venice. There was anciently a Town Benacus in these Quar∣ters which gave name to it. It discharges it self into the Lake of Mantua by the River Menzo, and thence into the Po. Benanarim, a Province in Mauritania Tingi∣tana. Benares, A famous City of Indostan (or the Empire of the great Mogul) upon the Ganges, in a very good Country. It is the Ʋniversity of the Indies; the general School for Philosophy, Physick, Astrology, and Pagan Divinity, that serves all the Gentry and all the ingenious of these Parts. Here the Bramans and the Pendets, that is, the great Doctors of Paganisme, are attended, not as in Europe indeed in Colleges, but in their Houses and Gardens, with multitudes of Scholars that study with them many years. They learn first the Divine Language, call'd Hanscrit in which they say the holy Books of the Law were written that God gave to Brama their Prophet. Of this Language we have an Al∣phabet in Kircher. It is quite different from the ordinary Indian, and much more ancient; so that none understand it but their learned Men. Next, they read an Abridgment, they call Purane, of the Books of their Law; and so pass to Philosophy. In Philosophy, though they know nothing of the Learning of Greece, they argue much to the same effect with Plato, Aristotle, Democritus and Epi∣curus; and are divided in a manner into the same Sects as they, only with more Confusion of Thought, with Fables. Astrology they are mightily inclin'd to, had they but somemore lights into that Science. Their Physick is for the most part Receipts: But for Anatomy, they are in no Condition to know it, be∣cause they will not presume to cut up the body either of man or Beast. Some years since the Do∣ctors of this place held a famous Cabal, which made the more noise upon the account that they gain'd the Son of the Great Mogul to their Opinion. It seems they were fallen upon the Doctrine of an Anima mundi, An universal Soul and Spirit dif∣fused throughout the World, of which the Souls of Men and Animals are as so many Portions. And this is also the prevailing Opinion of the Sophies of Persia. Benavari, a Town of Aragon in Spain, to which belongs a Castle. It is seated in the Confines of Ca∣talonia, 6 Leagues distant from Balbastro to the East; this place is the Capital of the County of Ribagorza; a small ill Peopled place between the Rivers of Cinea and Segre. Benavente, a Town in the Kingdom of Portugal, in the Province of Estremadura, 1 League from the Tage or Tajo, 4 from Scalabi, and 9 from Lisbon, supposed to be the antient Aritium. § There is an∣other Town of the same name in the Kingdom of Leon, upon the River Esta, which washeth the Walls of Leon; It lies in a Plain, and has a Castle, and is the Capital of the County of Pimentel, 7 Leagues from Sentica to the North, about 12 from Leon to the South, and 15 from Palantia to the West: per∣haps this is the old Vallata. Ferdinand II. King of Leon, died in this Town in the Year 1118. Benda, a City of Albania in Macedonia, which is a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Durazzo, [Durrachium] It now lies in Ruins, under the sla∣very of the Turks, and the Bishop resides at Mamoli; yet from this place the adjacent Country is call'd Ben∣da, under which Title is included also Sermenica, a small District towards Croia, as I have heard (saith M. Baudrand) from the Archbishop of Durazzo. Bendarmasin, a City and Kingdom in the South∣ern part of the Island of Borneo in the East-Indies, about 3 Degrees from the Line on the West. Bene, a small Town in Piedmont, sometime bear∣ing the Title of an Earldom. The Spaniards besieg'd it in 1553. unsuccesfully: its Fortifications have been ruined since. Benevento, Beneventum, a City of the Princi∣patus Ʋlterior in the Kingdom of Naples, which is an Archbishops See, belonging to the Pope, upon the River Sabato, where it takes in the River Tamo∣ra: built by Diomedes, together with Arpi, a City of Apulia, and called the Colony of Concordia by Frontinus. It lies 28 Miles from Capua to the East, and 32 from Naples to the North-East. This was the Country of those two antient Grammarians, the Orbilii. Victor III. and Gregorius VIII. Popes were born here. Not far from it Manfred King of Sicily was slain in the Year 1266. by Charles Duke of An∣jou. This City was granted to Leo IX. by Henry IV. in exchange for Bamberg in the Year 1053. when he came into Italy to be Crowned. It was one of the 18 Colonies which continued faithful to the Romans against Hannibal: ruined afterwards by To∣tila, and rebuilt by the Lombards who made it a Dukedom. The Saracens became after this Masters of it; from whom Lewis II. Emperor, took it in the Year 866, and granted it to Aldegisus in the 871. Now annexed to the Papacy. A dreadful Earthquake which happened in June 1688. did al∣most totally ruin it; scarce 600 of the Inhabitants out of as many thousand and upward being left alive; amongst whom Cardinal Ʋrsini their Archbi∣shop was taken out of the Ruins of his own Palace. The Dukedom of Benevento was once a conside∣rable part of the South of Italy, in the times of the Lombards, and Charles the Great: instituted by Au∣tharius
King of the Lombards, and ended in the Year 851. when the Saracens conquered it. In 866. it was reconquered by the Germans: in 1053. it was granted to the Pope, but much restrained as to its Bounds: yet then it took in the greatest part of the Principatus Ʋlterior. Since which the Spaniards have restrained it; so that it extends not above 3 or 4 Miles from the Walls of the City. Benfeild, once a Wall'd Town, or City of Alsa∣tia▪ but dismantled by the Treaty of Munster; un∣der the Dominion of the Bishop of Strasburg; from which it lies about 3 German Miles towards the South upon the River Ill, about 2 Miles from Rhinaw to∣wards the North-West. Bengale, a Kingdom in the East Indies, on the River Ganges, under the Dominion of the great Mo∣gul for many past Ages, but which had before Kings of its own. It is a very fruitful Country, and extends 220 Leagues from East to West, and 120 from North to South. Bounded on the East by India extra Gan∣gem, on the South by the Bay of Bengale, on the West and North by the Territories of the Mogul. The City of Bengale lies in the bottom of the Bay, in the most North-Eastern Angle of it, upon the River Cosmi∣te. It is great, and drives a vast Trade with the Euro∣pean Nations, as generally Authors say that have written of Bengala; yet some modern Accounts will tell us, there is no Town or City of this Name there. Benges, a River which riseth in the Lower Au∣stria, and entring the Lower Hungary, falls into the River Rab. Benguola, a Country of the Lower Aethiopia, and a Town there with a good Port to the Sea of Congo, which the Hollanders have been Masters of for some time. This Country lies in the Kingdom of Angola. Benibessera, a large Country in Libya in Africa, upon the Borders of the Kingdom of Tremissen. Beni-Gebara, a Mountain in the Province of Cuzt in the Kingdom of Fez in Africa: so well in∣habited that it is able to produce 7000 fighting Men; and so fruitful, that they may endure a Siege of 10 Years without the fear of a Famine. The A∣venues of it are very difficult. Thence the Inhabi∣tants preserve their Liberty inviolate, paying a Tribute to the King of Fez. Beni-Guazeval, a Mountain containing above 120 Villages, together with a good large Town, in the Kingdom of Fez in Africa, in the Province of Errif: yet at the very top, opens and casts forth Flames of Sulphur. Benin, a Kingdom of Guiney in Africa with a Town of the name upon the River Behin. It is the best Town belonging to the Negroes. The said Ri∣ver discharges it self soon after into the Gulph of S. Thomas. Ben-Oriegan, a Mountain in the Province of Errif, in the Kingdom of Fez in Africa, towards the Coast of the Mediterranean: 3 Leagues in length, in breadth about half that: curiously enriched with Vines, Olives, and the odoriferous Cedars. Beni-Suaid, a Town upon the Banks of Nile in Aegypt, 2 Leagues from Cairo. It stands in a large Plain, which abounds with Line and Hemp. Beni-Tendi, a ruined Town in the Province of Habat, in the Kingdom of Fez, upon the River Er∣guile. The Rests of stately Edifices, ombs, and Fountains do incur here the Eye of the Spectator. Beni-Usa, or Bervira, a fruitful and well Inha∣bited Mountain in the Province of Errif in the King∣dom of Fez, near the Mountain of Gualida. The Inhabitants of these 2 Mountains are almost continu∣ally at War. Beni-Yasga, a Mountain in the Province of Cuzt in Africa, in the Kingdom of Fez, inhabited by a Rich and Martial People. There is an abundance of Vines, and Olives, and Cattle, and Corn upon it. The River Cebu or Suba glides near it. Benthem, a Town and Castle of Westphalia, which stands upon the River Vidrus, near Oldenzael, and is the Head of a small County in the West part of Westphalia; called in the German Tongue das Grathrtchaft von Benthem: lies between the Bi∣shoprick of Munster to the East, Over-Yssel and the Territory of Tuvent to the West; and upon the North and South it is inclosed by the River Vechta. The Castle or Town of Benthem lies 2 Miles from Oldenzael, a Town in the South-East Angle of the Province of Over-Yssel; ten from Deventer to the East. Bentivolio, Pons Poledranus, a Castle in the Do∣minions of the Church, in the Territory of Bononia; from which City it lies 10 Miles towards the North, in the Road to Ferrara; heretofore a Noble Pile, but now half ruined: this gave name to the Family of the Bentivolio's, who for many Years Principatum Bononiae tenuere, were Princes of Bononia. And of later times this Family has afforded some excellent Persons. Bera, a City of the Kingdom of Granada, com∣monly called Vera. Beraun, a small Town in Bohemia upon the Ri∣ver Mies: 3 German Miles from Prague towards the West: called by the Germans Bern, in Latin Berau∣na and Verona. Berbero, Arbis, a River of Persia, in the Pro∣vince of Send, [Sinda] which borders East upon In∣dia propria, and West upon Macran. Berckel, Velicer, the same with the River Aa, in Westphalia. Berdoa, a desart Country in Zaara in Africa, be∣twixt the Kingdom of Gaoga and the Country of Lempta. There is a Town in it of the same name. Sands, Scorpions and Monsters are almost the only things to be seen here. Bere Regis, a Market-Town in Dorsetshire. The chief of its Hundred. Bereberes, an antient People of Barbary in Afri∣ca, divided into 5 Tribes called the Mazamudins, Zenetes, Haoares, Zinhagiens and Gomeres; from which the Grandees of Africk derive their Original. They came hither out of Arabia Foelix under Me∣lech-Ifiriqui King of the said Arabia, and in time made themselves Masters of a great part of Africk; often Usurping upon each other for the Government, till they were all Conquered by the Turks. Berecynthus, a Mountain of Phrygia in Asia Mi∣nor, famous heretofore for the Worship of the God∣dess Cybele, who thence is styled Berecynthia. Berenice. See Bernish. Berg, or Berghen, the Dutch and German names for Mons, a City of Hainault. § Also a Province of Westphalia in Germany, lying along the Rhine, betwixt the County of Mark and the Bishoprick of Cologne, called the Dutchy of Berg, and in Latin Bergensis Regio. Dusseldorp is its Capital Town. Bergamo, Bergomum, a City of Italy, belonging to the Venetians, which was once a part of the Duke∣dom of Milan: a Bishops See under the Archbishop of Milan; built with others by the Orobii; call'd by Paulus Diaconus, Pergamum; and by the Writers of the middle Ages Bergamum. This City is placed on the side of a Mountain, the Foot of which is covered by large Suburbs: it is great and Populous, and lies between the River Brembo, (which 8 Miles further falls into the Adda) and the Serio, which falls also in the Adda. It has a Castle called Capella, and it lies 30 Miles from Brixia, towards Milan to the
West, and the same distance from Como to the East; from hence the Family of the Bergoma's take their name. The same is the Capital of the Country adja∣cent, called Bergamasco. Bergen, Bergos, or Berga, a City of Norway on the Northern Ocean, call'd by the Natives Baern, by the Germans Berghen. It is a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Drontheim: a celebra∣ted Mart, has a large and safe Harbour, surround∣ed almost on all sides with high Mountains, and lies in a winding Bay, call'd Jelta fiored, 12 Miles from the Ocean: it has a strong Castle call'd Bergen-Hus, and lies in the small Territory of Nord Horland, which is Subject to the King of Denmark, as King of Norway; 23 from Linde Noes, or the most Southern Point of Norway, and 80 from the nearest Coast of Scotland; at this day without dis∣pute, the best and richest City of all Norway. But made more famous by the Valour of the English, who in 1665. entred this Port, and fell upon the Dutch East-India Fleet, to their great damage; and had certainly destroyed them all, if contrary Winds had not given them time to draw their Canon ashoar to their defence. Bergen op Zoom, call'd by the French, Bergue sur le Zoom, is a small, but strong City in the Duke∣dom of Brabant, upon the River Schelde. Erected into a Dukedom in 1533. and revolting with the Ʋnited Provinces, was attempted without success, by the Marques Spinola, in 1622. So that it still belongs to the Hollanders. It stands 7 Leagues from Antwerp towards the North, and 5 from Breda to the South-West. Bergen, the chief Town of the Island of Rugen on the Coast of Pomerania in the Baltick Sea, which has belonged to the Swedes every since 1630. Bergerac, a City of Perigord, upon the River Dordogne; 5 Miles from Pergueux to the South, and about 9 from Sarlat; a rich and fine City. The English had it heretofore in their possession. They Fortified it, and afterwards lost it, about the Year 1371. It revoked upon the score of Religion in 1562. and was often taken and retaken. In 1621. it sub∣mitted itself to Lewis XIII. Bergue S. Uinoth, a small City in Flanders, taken by the French in the year 1658. and yielded to them by the Pyrenaean Treaty, in 1659. Digni∣fied with the Title of a Viscounty, as likewise of a Chatelany, with divers Villages under its Jurisdiction. It has various Names, and is sometimes call'd Groe∣nemberg, or (Green-wich;) it lies 12 German miles East of Gravelinge, and about one League and a half from Dunkirk. Al. VVinocksberg. Berkeley, a Market-Town in Gloucestershire; The chief of its Hundred, upon the Banks of the Severn: where stands the Seat of the noble and an∣tient Family of the Earls of Berkeley. Berkhamsted, a Market-Town in Hartfordshire, in the Hundred of Dacor. S. Brithwald, Archbishop of Canterbury, held a Council here in 698. In Latin Bergamstedum. Beikshire, Bercheria, is separated on the North by the River Isis from Oxfordshire and Bucking∣hamshire; on the South by the River Kenet from Hantshire; on the West it Bordereth upon Wiltshire, and on the East upon Surry; generally fertil and rich, but especially the Vale of VVhite Horse. The Right Honorable Thomas Howard was created the first Earl of Berkshire, by Charles I. in 1625. He was second Coronation Earl, as well as second Son to Thomas Earl of Suffolk, in which Family it still is; the present Earl being the fourth in the Succession. Berlin, Berolinum, or Berlinum, is one of the Noblest Cities in Germany. It belongs to the Upper Saxony, and stands in the middle Marquisate of Bran∣denburgh, upon the River Sprew, which a little fur∣ther to the North falls into the Hamel. This City stands in a Marsh, very strongly Fortified, being the capital of that Marquisate, and the Residence of the Marquisses of Brandenburgh; divided by the River Sprew into two parts; that on the East side is call'd Berlin; that on the West Coln, or the Colony. 17 German Miles from Magdeburg to the South East, and 11 from Frankfort. Built by Albertus Ʋnsus, Prince of Anhalt, In 1142. Bermudas, or the Summer Islands, are a knot of Islands on the Coast of Florida (supposed to be 400 in number) 1600 Leagues from England, 1000 from Madera, 400 from Hispaniola, and 300 from Caro∣lina, which is the nearest Continent. Accidentally dis∣covered by John Bermudaz a Spaniard, about 1522. Sir George Summers an English Man, being in 1609. sent by the Lord de la Ware to Virginia, stumbled again upon them, and suffered Shipwrack here; who was so taken with their verdure, plenty and delight∣fulness, that he neglected his return for England; and with the Assistance of Sir Thomas Gates setled a a Plantation here in 1612. and in 1616. Capt. Tuck∣er was sent after the first Adventurers with 500 Men who established themselves so well, and fortified the Accesses so, that it is now thought impregnable. It is one of the most healthful places in the World; none dying here of almost any other Distemper but old Age: fruitful to a wonder, abounding in all things need∣ful for the Life of Man but fresh Water, which is gotten with some difficulty from their Wells and Cisterns, for they have neither Springs nor Rivers. This Colony filled so fast, that in 1623. there were said to be 3000 English Inhabitants: called Ber∣mudas from the Spanish, and Summer Islands from the English Discoverer. Bermet, a City of the hither East-Indies, sup∣posed by Castaldus, to be the Barbari of Arrian. Bern, Berna, a great and well built City of Swit∣zerland, which has its name from a Bear, and car∣ries a Bear for its Arms. Built by Bertoldus Duke of Zeringhen in 1191. upon the River Aar, which falls into the Rhine at Waldhust, a Town of Schwaben: and adorned with a Library and an Arsenat that de∣serve to be remembred. It is the cheif City of the Can∣ton of Bern, which is one of the largest Cantons, and was added to the rest in 1353. To look a little back into the antient History of this City: it obtained the right of an Incorporated City from the Emperors Henry IV. and Philip II. Confirmed by Frederick II. it continued under the Empire till 1228. and then put themselves under the Protection of the Duke of Savoy. In 1241. it had an unfortunate War with Gothofredus Duke of Habspurg, whereupon in 1243. they made a League with Freiburg, as also for ten Years with Wallisserlandt, in 1251. In 1287. this City was besieged by Rodolphus of Habspurg. They suffered much also from Albertus, who had a set Battle with them near their Walls in 1291. wherein they lost many Men, but had better Success against the Earl of Savoy the same year. In 1346. they re∣newed their League with Freiburg, after which fol∣lowed the Perpetual League in 1353. whereby it ob∣tained the second place amongst the Cantons. In 1528. it imbraced the Reformation, and thereupon passed a Law against mercenary Service in foreign Wars. It stands about 13 Miles from Bazil to the South, 4 from Freiburg to the North, and about 20 from Geneva to the North-East. This Canton is so well replenished with Gentry, handsom Towns, good Castles and Villages, that you may compare it almost to one continued City: and as for the Civil Govern∣ment of it, it is managed by two Councils of Sena∣tors
under a Chief, whom they call in French an Avoyer, in German Schaltesch; which last is an old Word in the Laws of the Lombards. See Doctor Burnett's Letters. Bernards Castle, a Market-Town in Durham, in Darlington Wapentake, upon the River Tees; which takes its name from a Family that first came into En∣gland with the Saxons. Bernbourg, a small City in Germany, in the Up∣per Saxony, in the Principality of Anhalt, upon the River Saaldar, [Sala] 4 German Miles from Mag∣debourg towards the South, and as many from Dessaw to the West. It is dignified with the Title of an Earldom and the Seat of a Castle. Bernich, Berenice, a City of Africa upon the Mediterranean Sea, mentioned by Ptolemy and Pliny, but called Hesperia by Mela; one of the 5 Cities in Pentapolis; between the Promontory Boreum, (now il Capo di Teiones) upon the greater Syrtis, and the City of Arsinoe to the East. It had its antient name from Berenice the Queen of Ptolemy, the third King of Egypt, as Solinus saith. Bernstadt, Bernardi Ʋrbs, a Town in Silesia in the Dutchy of Olss in Germany upon the River Veid or Veida: 3 or 4 Leagues from Breslaw. Beroa, Berrhaea, believed to be the modern A∣leppo, was a famous City amongst the Antients, re∣edified by Seleucus Nicanor, and sometime an Arch∣bishops See under the Patriarch of Antioch. See A∣leppo. § Also an antient Town in Macedonia, near the River Lydius. Berry, Bituricensis Provincia, Bituriges, a Dukedom in France, bounded on the North by So∣logne, on the East by Nivernois and Bourbone, on the West by Poictou, and part of Tourein; and on the South by Limosin. The Principal City of this Province is Bourges; divided into 2 parts by the Ri∣ver Chur: a rich, fruitful and populous Province. The antient Inhabitants are famous in History for the 2 Colonies of Gauls they transmitted into Ger∣many and Italy under the Command of Segovesus and Bellovesus, both Nephews to Ambigatus King of Gallia Celtiqua, in the time of Tarquinius V. King of Rome: for from the Conquests by them made, proceeds the Division of Gallia Transalpina and Ci∣salpina. See Gallia. Bersheba, or Beerseba, an antient City of Pale∣stine, by the way of Gaza, to which Abraham and Abimelech gave this name, because of the Covenant they there mutually ratified by Oath with each other Gen. 21. 31. It fell afterwards by Lot to the Tribe of Simeon, Josh. 19. 2. and committed Idolatry with the Apostate Tribes, as we collect from Amos 5. 5. and S. Jerom. in loc. Some take it to be the same now with Gibel. Bertinoro, Bretinorium, Petra Honorii, a City in the Province of Romagna in Italy, with a Bishops See under the Archbishop of Ravenna hither remov∣ed from Forlimpopoli. Its Situation is upon a little Hill in the Borders of Tuscany near the River Renco. S. Bertrand de Cominges, Convenae, seu Lugdu∣num Convenarum, a City of France, at the foot of the Pyrenean Mountains; upon the River Garonne, in the Earldom de Cominge; which was destroyed by the Franks under King Guntchramnus, in 584 but rebuilt by S. Bertrand, in 1100. and from him in after times it had its present name. It is a Bishops See under the Archbishop of Auch; 25 Leagues from Thoulouse to the South, and 55 from Bourdeaux to the South-West. Berwald, a Town beyond the River Oder in the New March, in the Marquisate of Brandenburgh; re∣markable for the Treaty celebrated here in 1631. be∣twixt the Crowns of France and Sweden, and the Prin∣ces of Germany. Berwick, Burcovicum, Bervicium, Teusis, a Town in Northumberland, situated upon the North side of the River Twede; the most Northern Town in the Kingdom of England, and (saith Camden) the strongest hold in all Britain. It stands upon a Promontory, so that it is almost totally incompass'd with the Sea and River. Delivered up to Henry II. by William King of Scotland, as a Pledge for his Ransom, being then a Prisoner in England: restor'd again by King John upon repayment of the Mony. Edward I. in 1297. retook it. After this it was won and lost divers times; till in the Reign of Edward IV. Sir Thomas Stanley made a final reducement of it to the Crown of England. The English Princes have fortified it, but especially Queen Elizabeth, who Wal∣led it anew within the old Wall, and added Out-works after the later Modes, by which it was made incredi∣bly strong. Henry II. built the Castle, and other of our Princes the outward Wall; so that all its Works are owing to the English. After a long Peace, in 1639. this Town saw the English and Scotch Encamp∣ed under her Walls again in opposition, till a Peace was concluded there Jane 17. However I find before the end of the War they were possessed of it, and quitted it, Feb. 17. 1646. March 12. 1686. King James II, created Mr. James Fitz-James his Natural Son, Duke of Berwick. Ehis Town lies in Long. 21. d. 43. m. Lat. 55. 48. and sends 2 Burgesses to the English Parliament. Berytis, or Barut, an antient City of Phaenicia in Asia upon the Mediterranean Sea, and sometime an Archbishoprick under the Patriarch of Antioch. For in the 16th. Session of the great Council of Chal∣cedon we find the Bishop of Berytis taking the Title of a Metropolitan. In the year 1110. Baldwin I. King of Jerusalem, redeemed this City out of the hands of the Saracens, and settled particular Govern∣ors over it, till it became united with the Crown of Je∣rusalem, in whose ruin it received its own; and all the subsistance it now enjoys depends upon an in∣considerable little Commerce. Ibas Bishop of Edessa, was accused in a Council here in 448. of Arrianisme, and of treating S. Cyril as an Heretick; but acquitted. Besagno, Feritor, a small River which riseth out of the Apennine Hills, and falls by the Walls of Ge∣noua into the Mediterranean Sea: Besanzon, Bisontio, Vesintio, a City of Burgun∣dy in France, which is an Archbishops See, upon the River Doux, [Dubis;] an University, and has a Ca∣stle built of later times. Taken by the Spaniard in 1654 retaken by the French in 1668. and in 1674. and finally left to them by the Treaty of Nimeguen in 1678. Once an Imperial free City, made so by Henry I. in 1651. exempted from the Empire, and granted to the Spaniards. The Court of Parliament for the Dutchy of Burgundy sits here: it stands 15 Leagues from Montbelliard to the North-West, 20 from Dijon to the North-East. Joannes Chifletius wrote a particular Description and History of this City. The old Roman names of Campus Martius, Vicus Veneris, Vicus Castoris, Mons Jovis and the like, to several quarters within and without it conti∣nue to this day in French, as le Champ Mars, Rue de Venie, Rue de Chasteur, Mont Jouot &c. A∣bundance of Urns, Medals, Inscriptions, Vessels and Instruments of Sacrifice, are daily found here. The Ruins of the Triumphal Arch erected for the Em∣peror Aurelian in 274 are yet to be seen; which are undeniable marks of its being Antient, as now not∣withstanding all former Misfortunes, it is also a flourishing Place.
Besbre, Besbria, a small River in the Dukedom of Bourbone, which washeth the principal City, and then falls into the Loire. Besecath, one of the Names of Africa. Beses, Besos, Baetulo, a small River of Catalonia in Spain, which falls into the Mediterranean Sea, between Badelona and Barcelona. There stands a small Town call'd Beson by it, once Betulo from it. Besiers, Bliterae, Buterae, a City of Languedoc in France upon the River Orbe, which is a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Narbone; a fine and well built place, not above 2 Leagues from the Me∣diterranean Sea to the North, 11 from Mompellier to the West, and 3 from Pezenas. Bessarabia, is a small Territory between Podolia to the North, Moldavia to the West, the Danube to the South, and the Black Sea to the East. For∣merly a part of Moldavia, but in 1485. Bajazet II. Conquered it, and annexed it to his Empire, under which it has been ever since; the chief Town of it is Moncastrum, a very strong Town, taken by the Turks then also. It is called Budziack by the neigh∣bouring Tartars, and by that Name is best known to the present times. Bestercze, or Bestricze, Bistricia, a City of Tran∣silvania. It stands in a very large Plain, upon a Ri∣ver of the same Name, which 2 Miles further takes in the Saio: 5 German Miles North-East from Bur∣gles, and 15 from Weissenburg to the North-West. It is little and ill built. Beta, a River of South America, in the Coun∣try of Paria, which falls into the River Orenock. Betanzos, Flavium Brigantium, a small City in Gallicia in Spain, seated upon the North side of the River Mandeu, 11 Miles from Mondonnedo to the East. Betawe, or Betau, a small Territory contain'd in the Dutchy of Guelderland, in the States of the Ʋnited Provinces. It seems to retain the Name of the antient Batavi, who had their Habitations here. Nimeguen stands in it. Betente, an Island near Naples, call'd by the an∣tients Parthenope. Bethany, Bethania, an antient Town and Castle of Palestine near Jerusalem; of everlasting Fame for the Resurrection of Lazarus from his Grave at the Command of our Saviour here. John 11. There was another Bethany beyond Jordan. Bethel, that is, in the Hebrew, The House of God, (according to the Interpretation of Jacob's Dream, Gen. 28. 17. 19.) was a City of Samaria, call'd Luz till the Patriarch chang'd its name. Here Jeroboam erected his Idols: In derision whereof it was after∣wards call'd Bethaven, that is, The House of Iniqui∣ty, says S. Jerom in Oseam. Ch. 4 and 5. Josias de∣stroy'd those Idols. Bethlehem, that is in the Hebrew, The House of Bread, the Place of the Nativity of our Saviour, and the capital of the Family of David; as like∣wise the Birth-place of David: call'd Bethlehem of Judea in distinction from another Bethlehem in the Tribe of Zabulon, was never but a small place; two Leagues from Jerusalem to the South, and 32 from Nazareth. Now Inhabited by about 150 Houses of Turks, Moor's, Arabians, and some poor Christians, that make a Trade of selling Chapelets and Cruci∣fixes to Pilgrims. Yet St. Mary's Church, built by Helena, is entire still; and in the particular part of it where our Saviour first entred into this World, within a Circle illustrated with a Glory like the Rays of the Sun, there are these words Engraved, Hic ex Virgine Maria Jesus Christus natus est. The Greeks, Armenians, and Latin Cordeliers, have their several Quarters in this Church. It is a very noble Pile, envied by the Turks, who therefore have rob∣b'd it of some Ornaments to carry to their Mosques. S. Jerom says, the Pagans heretofore erected the I∣dols of Adonis and Venus in it to prophane it. In 1110. after the Christians had gained the Holy Land, they constituted Bethlehem a Bishops See under the Patriarch of Jerusalem. It stands upon a small Hill, and nothing can be pleasanter than the Valleys about it. § When the Christians were expelled the Holy Land again, in 1223. Raynaud Bishop of Bethlehem attended Guy Earl of Nevers into France, who con∣ferred upon him the Administration of an Hospital at Clameci, a small Town in the Diocese of Auxerre in the Province of Nivernois; which was afterwards augmented in Honor with the Title of Bishop of Bethlehem, to continue to the Successors of the said Rainaud for ever, in the nomination of the Earls and Dukes of Nevers: hence there is at this day a Bishop of Bethlehem in France without any Lands or Di∣ocese. Bethshan, an antient Town in Palestine in the Tribe of Menasseh, called Scythopolis by Josephus and Stephanus. The Philistines fixed the Body of King Saul to the Walls of this place. 1. Sam. 31. 10. Bethshemesh, Bethsama, at first called Abel, (1 Sam. 6. 18.) was a Town in Palestine belonging to the Levites Josh. 21. 16. whither the Ark came, when dismissed by the Philistines, 1. Sam. 6. 14. and 50000 Bethshemites were immediatly struck with death for presuming to look into it, according to the common Translations: whereas Josephus, S. Jerom, Isidore, Lyra, Tostatus, and Bochartus maintain the number of the slain was no more than 70. § There was another Bethlehem in the Tribe of Naphthali, remark'd because the old Inhabitants (the Canaanites) were not driven thence as God had commanded. Jud. 1. 33. And a third in the Tribe of Issachar at the foot of Mountain Carmel. Bethulia, an antient, strong and great City in the Tribe of Zabulon in Galilee; famous for the Siege laid to it by Holofernes, and the Victory of Judith over his Army and him at one fatal blow. Together with a Fortress formerly built by the Christians near Bethlehem. Bethune, a strong well built Town in Artois, upon the River Biette, 8 Leagues from Arras [A∣trebatum] toward the North, and 5 from Aire. It has been under the French ever since 1645. when it was taken by them; being ceded to them by the Py∣renean Treaty in 1659. This Town is raised to the Honor of a Marquisate. Betley, a Market-Town in Staffordshire in the Hundred of Pirehill. Betlis, a City of Armenia, 10 days Journey from Diarbeker, belonging to a Sovereign Bey or Prince, who neither acknowledges the Grand Seignior nor the King of Persia; but courted by both as being Master of a Country: so situated betwixt Mountains and Rivers, that he is able with 10 Men to defend the Passes against 1000, and intercept the Correspondence of Aleppo and Tunis at pleasure: he can send into the Field above 20000 Horse and very good Infantry. Bethsaida, an antient Town of Palestine in Ga∣lilee in the Tribe of Zabulon, near the the Lake of Genezareth. S. Andrew and S. Philip the Apostles were born here. Beveland, an Island of Zeland in the United Netherlands; rent asunder by a Tempest in 1532. from East to West, and since divided into North and South Beveland. Goes stands in this Island. Beverly, a Town in the East Riding of Yorkshire, seated upon the West side of the River Hull, about a Mile from it: about 5 Miles North of Hull. Cam∣den supposeth it to be the old Petvaria Parisiorum,
though there be no signs of a great Antiquity now to be found. One John Sirnamed de Beverly, Arch∣bishop of York, a Pious and Learned Man in the e∣steem of Bede, in his old Age resigned his Bishoprick, and retired hither, and in holy Meditations here died in 721. For the sake of this Holy Person, the Sax∣on Kings gave great Privileges to this place, particu∣larly Athelstan by a Grant in these Words, A is Free make I thee, as Heart may think or Eye may see. They had also a Sanctuary endowed with the largest Priviledges; so that the Town grew great, rich, and populous; governed at first by Wardens; but Queen Elizabeth made it a Major Town. It sends 2 Burgesses to the Parliament. Beuray, or Beureet, a Town in the Territory of Autun in Burgundy in France; supposed to be the Bibracte of Cesar, where he once assembled the De∣puties of all Gallia under him, and oftentimes Win∣tered his Troops: imparting his own name Julia to it. Bewdley, a Market-Town in Worcestershire in the Hundred of Doddington, which sends one Bur∣gess to the Parliament. It stands upon the Severn near the Forest of Wire; of particular Esteem in the Reign of Henry VII. he building a House here for Prince Arthur, called Ticken Hall. Beux, a Village near to Seignelay in the Province of Burgundy in France; made lately remarkable by one Couallier, surnamed the Phisician of Beux; a Man born and educated amongst the meanest Employs of the Country; yet he attained to so singular a Know∣ledge of all the Species of Diseases and Remedies, without studying the Faculty in Books or Schools, that not only Monsieur Colbert laid his obligations up∣on him to recide at Seignelay, but from all parts they came to consult him, so that he left to his Son at his Death an Estate of above 100000 Crowns. Beziers, Biterra, Beterensis Civitas, a great and antient City in the Province of Languedoc in France, with the Dignity of a Viscounty and of an Episcopal See under the Archbishop of Narbonne. It was a Roman Colony in the times of Julius Cesar and Tiberius; having afterwards 2 Temples built in it to the Honor of Julius and Augustus. In the year 356. the Arians held a Council here against S. Hilary, which occasioned his Banishment by the Emperor Constantius. The Goths and Saracens successively ru∣ined it. In 1209. the Croisade cut off 10000 of its Inhabitants. In 1233. a Council was assembled against the Albigenses at this place. About the year 1247. it became united to the Crown of France, whereas before it had been governed by its own Viscounts. It stands upon the River Orb, 2 Leagues from the Sea, and 3 from Agde: and had a Cittadel which was demolished in 1633. Biafara, a Town and Kingdom in Guiney in Afri∣ca: the former stands upon the River dos Camaornes; the other (that receives its name from it) extends itself betwixt the Kingdom of Benni, the Niger, and the States of Congo. Bialacerkiow, Bialaceria, a Town in the Pala∣tinate of Kiovia in the Kingdom of Poland, upon the River Ros, ill built. Bialogrod, Arvis, Hermonassa, the principal Town of Bessarabia, seated upon the Shoars of the Euxine, or Black Sea; 30 Miles from the North out∣let of the River Danube, called Moncastrum, by the later Latin Writers; Bialogrod, by the Moldavians, and Beligrad by the Turks; under whom it is, being taken by Bajazet II. in 1485. It lies 60 German Miles from Arhianople, and 63 from Constantinople to the North. Biaur, Biaurus, a River in Rovergne in France. Bibiena, a Town in the Principality of Piedmont in Italy; by some Authors esteemed to the be Forum Vibii of the Antients. Bibrach, Bibacum, Bibracum, a City in Schwa∣ben, in Germany, seated upon a small River which a very little farther falls into the Riss, which last falls into the Danube, 2 German Miles above Ʋlm; this City stands about 5 German Miles from Ʋlm to the North-West. This is an Imperial City, and takes its name from a Castor or Beaver. Under Pepin King of France, about 751. it was a Village, but Frede∣rick II. walled it. For some signal Services perform∣ed under Maximilian I. the publick Arms of it were changed from a Crowned Castor or Beaver, to a Crowned Lyon: it obtained also from Maximilian II. the right of Sealing with Red Wax. Long. 31. 51. Lat. 48. 00. Written sometimes Biberach; and fa∣mous for the Mineral Waters, they call the Waters of Jordan, within its Territory. Bicaner, a Town in the County of Bacar in the East-Indies, in the States of the Great Mogul, un∣derstood by some to be the Bardeatis of the An∣tients. Bicestre, an antient Castle below the Village of Gentilly near Paris. The name Bicestre is con∣fessed to be but a Corruption of Winchester: for from the time that John Bishop of Winchester made it his residence, when the English had Conquered France, it took the name of Winchester Castle from him, and kept it through the whole course of its Fortunes. Of late, since its total Consumption and Ruin, Lewis XIII. built an Hospital in the place of it for maimed Soldiers. Bicester, a Market-Town in Oxfordshire in the Hundred of Ploughley. Bicoqua, a small Town in the Milanese in Italy, 3 Miles from Milan. The French were here defeat∣ed by the Swisse in 1522. Bidache, a Town upon the River Bidouse in the Territory of Bearne in France; 5 or 6 Leagues from Bayonne. It sustains the Title of a Principa∣lity, and has a Castle which Charles V. never could Conquer. Bidassoa, Bidasso, and Vidasso, a small River which riseth out of the Pyrenean Hills, in the Con∣fines of Navarr, 7 Miles from S. Johns; and pre∣sently crossing the Pyrenean Mountains, it runs be∣tween the Territories of Labour in France, and Gui∣puscoa in Spain; and falls into the Cantabrian Ocean at Fontarabia, where it divides France from Spain. Famous for the Pyrenean Treaty here made in an Island of this River, between the Kings of France and Spain, Nov. 7. 1659. and also for an interview between those two Princes in 1660. in the same Island, called the Island of Pheasants. Bidlyn, the present name of Indus, one of the most famous Rivers of the East-Indies. Bidumi, Idumaea, a part of Palestine. Biela, Bugella, Gaumellum, and Laumellum, a Town in the District of Vercellois in Piedmont under the Duke of Savoy, and the Capital of a small Ter∣ritory called Le Biallese. It is rich, handsom, and populous. Francis II. Duke of Modena died here in 1658. Biela Osero, that is, in the Muscovian Language, the White Lake, is a Province of Muscovy, which is honored with the Title of a Dukedom; between the Province of Wologda to the East and North, and that of Novigrod (which is also a Dukedom) to the South and West. The chief City of it is Biela, seated upon a River of the same name; almost in the middle be∣tween Novigrod to the East, and Wologda to the West, and about 62 German Miles North-West of Moskow, the Capital of this Kingdom: written sometimes Bela.
The Grand Duke of Muscovy shuts up a part of his Treasures in this City; because its Situation in the midst of many Marshes, renders it almost impreg∣nable. Bielba, a City of Muscovy, towards the Confines of Lithuania, about 30 German Miles North of Smo∣lasko, and 59 North-West from Moscow; there is a Province annexed to this City called Bielki. This City is written Bielha, and Bielska, and the Province Bielski. It is one of the Titles in the Stile of the Grand Duke of Muscovy. Bielski. See Bielba. Bielsko, Bielco, a City in the Province of Smo∣laske in Poland, between Grodno to the South, and Bressici to the North. This place was by Treaty sur∣rendred to the Muscovites in 1634. together with Smolensko, Novograd, and other strong places, and the Territories belonging to them. It stands upon the River Biala, with a strong Fortress, betwixt Bres∣cici and Warsaw. Bienne, Bienna, called by the Germans, Biel, is a small City in Switzerland, seated upon a Lake of the same name, between Neufchastel to the South, and Solothurn or Soleurre to the East under the Bishop of Basil; but from 1547. it has been in the League with the Cantons and so in a manner almost free. It was once also an Imperial City, though now no part of the Empire. Bientina, a Town in the Province of Tuscany in Italy, under the Great Duke of Florence, taking its name from the Lake di Bientina. Biescid, a part of the Carpathian Fountains. Bietala, or Biutala, a strong Fortress upon the furthermost Borders of the Kingdom of Barantola in Tartary. It is the ordinary place of Residence for the Grand Lama, that is, the High Priest of their Law. Bievre, a small River in the Isle of France, which after a short course, falls into the Seyne a little above Paris. The Water of this River is accounted excel∣lent for dying of Scarlet. In the years 1526. and 1579. it overflowed up to the second Story of the Houses in the Suburbs of S. Marcell at Paris. Bigenis, Abacena, Abacenum, a Town in the Island of Sicily near Messina, upon the River called Fieume di Castro Reale, in the Valley of Demona. Bigleswade, a Market-Town in Bedfordshire. The Capital of its Hundred: pleasantly seated on the River Ivel. Bigorre, Bigerrones, Bigerrensis Comitatus, a Pro∣vince or County of France, so called from the prin∣cipal Town: in length 10 Leagues, and in breadth 3: bounded on the west with Bearn, on the East with Tholouse, on the North with Armagnac and Estrac, and on the South with the Pyrenean Hills. This was once, an Earldom of a larger extent as Peter de Mar∣ca saith in his History of Bern. Tarbes is its Capital City. Biguba, a Kingdom of Nigritia in Africa. Bilbao the chief City of Biscay in Spain, call'd by the Romans Flaviobriga; seated upon the River Ner∣vio, 2 Leagues from the Cantabrian Ocean; a large, beautiful, well traded City; from S. Andreo 13 Miles to the North-East, and 24 from Bayonne to the South. Joannes Mariana is of opinion, that Bilbao is of a later Origine, and saith it was built by Dida∣cus Lupus de Haro, Lord of Biscay, in 1298. which is true; but then it stands in the same place; the old Name of Flaviobriga was given it in Honor of Ves∣pasian. This City stands in a Plain, in a wet Ground upon a small River and is incompassed with very high Hills. Bilbilis, the Birthplace of the Poet Martial, was an antient City in Hispama Tarraconensis, belong∣ing to the Celtiberi, upon the River Xalon, famous for excellent Iron and Steel: some believe the modern Calatayud, others Xiloca to be the same with it. §. Bilbilis is also the antient name of a River in that Country, said to have a particular Virtue for temper∣ing of Iron and Steel: they now call it Xiloca. See Xiloca. Biledulgerid, a City and Province in Africa, which lies a great length from East to West, but is not of equal breadth. It is bounded on the North by Barbary, on the East by Egypt, on the South by Zahara or the Desart; and on the West by the At∣lantick Ocean: a vast, but barren Country, nor has it any Cities of great Note in it: Tarudante and Ca∣phesa are the most considerable. This Province was a part of the Country of the antient Getuli: about 980 Miles long from East to West, and 220 broad. The name signifies a Country fruitful of Dates. Bilefeld, a Hanse Town in the Province of West∣phalia in Germany towards Munster, with a good Castle. Bildeston, a Market-Town in Suffolk in the Hun∣dred of Cosford. Bille, Billena, a River of Germany. It riseth in the Province of Wageren, separates Holstein from the lower Circle of Saxony, and falls into the Elb at Hamburgh. Billericay, a Market-Town in Essex in the Hun∣dred of Barnstaple. Billesdon, a Market-Town in Leicestershire in the Hundred of Gartrey. Billingham, a Market-Town in Northumberland in Tindale Ward. Binbroke, a Market-Town in Lincolnshire in the Hundred of Walshcroft. Billom, a Town in the Province of Auvergne in France, 5 or 6 Leagues from Clermont. It is a very trading Place, in a fruitful Soil. Bimini, a small Island East of Florida in Ame∣rica. It is one of the Luccaye's, to the South of the Island of Bahama. Binche, Bink or Bins, Binchium, a Town in Hainault, near the River Haisne; 3 Leagues from Mons to the Eastward, and 4 from Maubeuge to the North; is now decaying: it was taken by the French in 1667. and restored back to the Spaniards in 1678. by the Treaty of Nimeguen. Mary Queen of Hun∣gary, Sister to the Emperor Charles V. built her∣self a Noble Palace here, to enjoy the good Air of the Place, which is still called Marimont. Bingen, a fine Town belonging to the Elector of Mayence, upon the River Rhine, where it enter∣tains the River Nar, which here is covered with a stone Bridge; once a Free Imperial City, but now ex∣empted from the Empire. The antient Geographers and Historians make mention of it. It has a Castle seated on a Hill, and stands 4 German Miles from Mayence towards the West, and 2 from Greitznack to the North: near it in an Island in the Rhine, is a Castle called Mauszthurn: wherein the Report goes, that Hatto the second Archbishop of Mayence was eaten alive by Rats; it is now almost wholly ruin'd. Bingham, a Market-Town in the County of Not∣tingham, the Capital of its Hundred. Bendimir, Bagrada, a River of Persia, which riseth in the Desarts of Carmania, about 20 German Miles South of Hispahan; and watering the Province of Fars, it washeth Astachar; after which having received another small River from the West, it falls into the Persian Gulph 25 German Miles West of Ormus. Biolizero, a Fortress built in a Lake, where the Duke of Muscovy keeps his Treasures. See Biela Osero. Biorneburg, a small City belonging to the Swedes in North Finland, where the River (Cumus) Rau∣to',
falls into the Bay of Botner in almost 62 deg. of Lat. It is a poor place, and consists of a few Houses. Biobio, a River of South America, in the King∣dom of Chili; which springeth from the Andes, and running Westward, falls into the Pacifick Ocean, near S. Conception a City of Chili and the Island of Aviquirina. Bir, Birtha, a small but Antient City of Ara∣bia Deserta, upon the Euphrates, 130 Miles East of Aleppo, in the Consines of Mesopotamia, 10 Ger∣man Miles West of Ʋrpha. The usual place of Em∣barking upon the Euphrates for Bagdet. This City is under the Turks; and formerly was a Bishops See un∣der the Archbishop of Edessa. Some write it Biro. Ptolemy mentions it. Birka, or Birkopin Birca, the Capital Town of the Province of Ostregothia in Sweden: heretofore considerable, but almost ruined now. Birkenfield, a Town in the Palatinate of the Rhine in Germany. Honoured with the Title of a Principality. It stands near the River Nab, 5 or 6 Leagues from Treves. Birmingham, a Market-Town in warwickshire in the Hundred of Hemlingford. Biron, a Town in the Province of Perigord in France, and one of the most antient Baronies of the same. Erected into a Dukedom by King Henry IV. It at present bears the Title of a Marquisate. Birs, and Biersick are 2 small Rivers in the Can∣ton of Basil. Bisaccia, a small City in the Principate, in the Kingdom of Naples, near the Apennine, 2 Leagues from Cedogna, and 7 from Monte-Verde. It consi∣steth of a very small number of Inhabitants; yet a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Conza; and il∣lustrated with the Title of a Dukedom. Bisagno, See Besagno. Biscay, Cantabria, called by the Spaniards Viz∣caja, by the French Biscay; hath on the North-West the Cantabrian Ocean, or the Bay of Biscay; on the East the Kingdom of Navarre, on the South the King∣dom of Castile, and on the West Asturia. It enjoys the Title of a Principality, because heretosore it had Princes of its own, of the Family de Haro; the last of which dying in the Siege of Algezira, this Princi∣pality fell to King John of Castile, and from thence∣forward became a part of that Kingdom. It is about 26 Spanish Leagues from East to West, but not so broad. Bilbao is its principal City; it is a fruitful and a populous Country, and full of Sea Ports. Re∣duced heretofore under the Roman Yoak with great difficulty. § The same name is also given to a part of New Spain in America. They call it New Biscay. It is bounded on the North with the Kingdom of Mexico, the Province of Panuco to the East, Zaca∣tecas to the South, and Culiacan to the West; there are 2 Mines of Silver in it. § The French Biscay, see Basques. Bisegli, Vigiliae, a City in the Province of Bari in the Kingdom of Naples, with an Episcopal See under the Archbishop of Trani, upon the Adriatick Ocean; between Trani, Molfetta, and Bari. Biserta Ʋtica, a City of Africa. Immortally honored by giving a Sirmane to Cato Ʋticensis. It stands in the Kingdom of Tunis upon the Mediter∣ranean Sea, between Carthage and Tabarqua: and is now become a Retreat of yrates. Bishops Castle, a Market-Town in the County of Salop in the Hundred of Purslow, not far from the River Chun. It Elects 2 Members of Parlia∣ment. Bisignano, Besidia, a little City in the hither Ca∣labria, in the Kingdom of Naples, which is a Bishops See under the Archbishop of Rossano, but exempted from his Jurisdiction: also honored with the Title of a Principality which belongeth to the Family of San Severini; seated on a Hill, and has a strong Ca∣stle, upon the River (Cotilum) Cochilo, which a little farther falls into the River Crate. It is a fine City of about 2 Miles compass, surrounded with high Hills: called Ʋrbs Brutiorum by Livy. Bisnagar, the Kingdom that bears this Name, is a considerable Country in the East-Indies; bounded on the North with the Kingdoms of Decan and Cun∣cam; on the East, with the Gulph of Bengale; on the West with the Indian Sea, and on the South with the Kingdom of Malabar, and Singa; it is sometimes also call'd the Kingdom of Narsinga. This Kingdom is subject to a Prince of its own; but then it is also divided into several petty Kingdoms, which have Princes that are Tributary Homagers to the King of Narsinga. The City that gives Name to it lies almost exactly in 15 d. of Northern Lat. and 107 of Long. on the Eastern side of a long chain of Mountains that divide this vast Promontory from North to South. It lies 45 Leagues West from the Shoars of the Bay of Bengale, and 35 from Narsinga to the West. Bisneghe, Hesperium Cornu, commonly call'd Capo-verde, is a Promontory in Nigritia in Africa, upon the Western Shoar, in 14 deg. of Northern Lat. Bisnow, the Name of a Sect amongst the Ban∣jans, in the East-Indies. In this, different from the Sect of Zamarath, That the Women live Widows after their Husbands death, and do not burn them∣selves in the same funeral Pile with them. Bitche, a County in Lorrain, upon the Frontiers of Germany. Bitetto, a City in the Province of Bari, in the Kingdom of Naples; with an Episcopal See under the Archbishop of Bari. It is but small, and in∣differently Peopled. Betwixt Bari and Bitonto. Bithynia, a celebrated Province of Asia Minor, where stood the famous Cities of Nice and Chalce∣don, Heraclea, and Apamea, &c. Heretofore a Kingdom; which ended in the Person of Nicomedes IV. when dying without Issue he nominated the Romans his Heirs, in the Year 679. that is, 75 years before the Birth of our Saviour. It lies towards the Euxine Sea, and the Archipelago: And now call'd Chintale. Bito, one of the Kingdoms of Nigritia in Africa: separated from the Kingdom of Benin by the Moun∣tains; with a capital City of the same name. Bitonto, Butuntum, a City of the Territory di Bari in Apulia in Italy, which is a Bishops See, un∣der the Archbishop of Bari: 5 miles from the Shoars of the Adriatick Sea towards the South, and 8 from Bari to the West; it lies in a very fruitful Plain, in pretty good esteem, and indifferently well Peopled. Also adorn'd with the Title of a Marquisate. Bitsin, Bitisinum, a Town in Silesia, where Si∣gismund, King of Poland, besieged and took Maxi∣milian Arch-Duke of Austria, his Competitor in the Kingdom of Poland, Prisoner, in the Year 1578. and after, upon the Intercession of Rodolphus II. and his renouncing of his pretence to Poland, released him. Bivar, a Town of Hungary, upon the Save. Bivoras, Salsum, a River of Andalusia. Bizano, a Kingdom of Ethiopia, divided from the Kingdom of Gojame, in the same Region, by the River Nile. Blackburn, a Market-Town in Lancashire near the River Derwent; the capital of its Hundred. Black Sea. See Euxine Sea. Blandiac, a Town in the Diocese of Ʋsez in the Province of Languedoc in France. Blanford, a Market-Town in Dorsetshire, in the Hundred of Pimpern, upon the River Stower.
Blankeberghe, a Town and Port, with a Castle, in Flanders; 2 Leagues from Bruges, and therea∣bouts from Ostend. Blanmont, or Blamont, Blamontium, a Town in the Dukedom of Lorain upon the River Voizi∣ere; giving the Title of an Earl. Formerly Forti∣fi'd. At present in a low condition. Blansac, a Town in the Province of Angoumois in France upon the River Nai, situated in a fruit∣ful Soil; betwixt Valette, Bonteville, and Angouleme. Blavet, a River of Bretagne in France, giving Name to the Town Blavet, (see Porto Loüis); and passing Pontivi and Hennebont, falling into the O∣cean at Porto Louis. Blaye, Blavium, Blavutum, a well fortified Town of great importance in the Province of Guy∣enne in France, upon the River Gironde, 6 Leagues from Bourdeaux. (The Gironde is a name they give the Garonne after its reception of the Dordogne). Since the year 1475. by the order of Lewis XI. the Foreign Vessels going up to Bourdeaux, use to leave their Artillery here. In the Civil Wars of France, This Town was first taken by the Huguenots; then by the Leaguers, who held it out against a Siege in 1593. tho the Spanish Fleet coming to their assi∣stance, was defeated by the Marshal de Matignon. Bleking, a Province in Sweden, yielded to them by the Danes in 1658. at the Treaty of Roskill. It lies upon the Baltick Sea, and was heretofore re∣mark'd with the Title of a Dukedom. Blemyes, Blemiae, an antient People of Aethiopia, reduced under the Roman Empire in the time of the Emperour Marcian. Fabulously reported to have their Eyes in their Breasts from nothing but an ill custom of holding down their Heads too low. Blene, a fruitful Country in the antient Kingdom of Pontus, in Asia Minor, watered by the River Amnias. Mithridates, King of Pontus, defeated Nicomedes King of Bethynia here; who thereupon retired into Italy. Bletterans, a Town in Franche Comtè, upon the Borders of the Dutchy of Burgundy, and the River Seile, about 9 Leagues from Dole and Chalon. Here∣tofore Fortifi'd, now without Walls Bliburg, or Blithborough, a small Town in the County of Suffolk, upon the South side of the River Blithe, which a little farther falls into Southwold Bay. In this Town, Anna, a Christian King of the East-Angles lies buried, who was slain by Penda, King of Mercia, in a set Battle, together with Ferminus, his eldest Son, in the year 654. Henry I. King of England founded afterwards a Priory of Black Canons. But that being demolished, the Town fell to ruin, and is now a very small Place. Blith, a Market-Town in the County of Not∣tingham in the Hundred of Bassetlaw. Blois, Blesae, a Town in France, and Capital of a County call'd Le Blois; it is well built and po∣pulous, upon the Loire, which is here passable by a Bridge of Stone; it has also a Castle, lately repair'd by Gaston, Duke of Orleans. The Kings of France have frequently retired hither to enjoy themselves, by reason of the pleasantness of the situation of it, and the Magnificence and Elegance of the Buildings. Lewis XII. was born here, in the Year 1461. Ann his Queen died here in 1514. also Claude the Queen of Francis I. in 1524. and Catharine de Medices, the Relict of Henry II. in 1589. Here was also that famous Assembly of the States of France, in which, by the order of Henry III. Henry Duke of Guise was Assassined, together with the Cardinal his Brother; which caused the Murdering of that Prince soon after, by James Clement a Dominican Fryar, in revenge of it. This place lies between Tours and Orleans: The County de le Blois is bounded on the East by the Dukedom of Orleans, on the West by Tours, on the South by Berry, and on the North by Beausse. Blonicz, Blonicum, a City or very great Town of the Kingdom of Poland, in the Confines of the Province of Mazowski, 7 Polish Miles from Warsaw towards the West; built all of Timber. Bobio, Bobi, Bobium, a City in the Dutchy of Milan in Italy, with an Episcopal See, under the Archbishop of Genoua. It takes its situation upon the River Trabia, and its Original from an Abby founded here in former times by S. Columbanus. Bocchara, a River of Bactria. Bochir, Canopus, a City of Egypt, upon the Western Branch of the Nile, where Claudian the Poet was born; 25 Miles East of Alexandria. Bochar, or Buchar, Bochora and Buchara, an an∣tient and a stately City of Asia, in the Province of Mawaralnahra, call'd by the Romans Trans Oxiana Regio, a days Journey beyond the River Oxus; this City was the Birth-place of Avicenna, the famous Arabian Physician and Philosopher, who flourish'd in Spain, in the X. Century. He is said to have been the first that settled the true method of Physick by the many Books published by him; he was born in 992. and died in 1050. Bodegrave, a Town in Holland upon the Rhine, 3 Leagues from Ʋtrecht: Made remarkable by a Battle here fought betwixt the French and Dutch, in the Year 1672. Bodmin, Voliba or Voluba, a Market-Town in Cornwal, in the Hundred of Trigg, which returns Two Burgesses to the Parliament. It is situated near the River Alan, and was heretofore the Seat of a Bishop. Bodrogh, a City of the Upper Hungary on the River Danube, which was heretofore the Capital of an Earldom. This place lies 7 German Miles South of Segedin, 16 East of Buda, and about 4 Miles North of Esseck; it is now in the hands of the Em∣peror, by the Conquest of Buda and Segedin in 1686. Bodrog, a River of the Upper Hungary, which riseth in the Carpathian Hills, and falls into the Ti∣biscus at Tokay. Boeotja, an antient Province of Greece, now cal∣led Stramulipa: Plutarch, and Pausanias, and Epa∣minondas were Natives thereof: the famous Helicon and Aganippe stand in it: the Rivers Asopus and Cephi∣sus watered it: and in all the former Wars of Greece, this Province bore a considerable Share, See Stramulipa. Bogazin, the Streight between Constantinople and Asia, antiently called Bosphorus Thracicus. Bogdiana, the same with Moldavia. Bohemia, a great Kingdom in Germany belong∣ing to the House of Austria; which though it is al∣most encompassed by the German Territories, yet is properly no part of Germany. It has a distinct and different Language, and been a separate Kingdom e∣ver since the year 1086. Bounded on the North and West by the Dukedom of Saxony, on the East by Hungary, and on the South by Bavaria and Austria: containing almost 40 Towns and Cities in it that they call Royal, whereof Prague is the Capital. This Kingdom maintained great Wars with the Caroline Race of Kings, till about the year 894. Borzivoius Duke of Moravia, becoming Prince also of Bohemia, procured their imbracing the Christian Faith univer∣sally. When in the year 1196. Petrus Capuanus, one of the Cardinals of Rome, would have brought in Celi∣bacy amongst their Clergy, he met with great opposi∣tion, and ran the hazard of being slain by the Bohe∣mian Priests. They received the Waldenses, who fled hither about the year 1230. John Hus's, and Jerom of Prague about the year 1414. had great success in their Preaching, and George Podibach King of Bohemia became his Convert. In 1454. there was
another Accession of the Waldenses; insomuch that in 1467. there was 200 Churches of this Persuasion in Bohemia and Moravia. In the year 1536, they imbraced Luther's Reformation: 1564, they obtained from Maximilian that Liberty which Ferdinand I. had deny'd them; which lasted but one Year. In 1575. they obtained their Liberty again, which was confirm'd in the Year 1611. by Rodolphus II. Matthias the next Emperor not maintaining these Grants, they chose Frederick Elector Palatine King of Bohemia, and Crown'd him at Prague in 1619. This caused a War with the House of Austria: The Elector being eject∣ed by force of Arms in the Year 1620, for 30 Years following, Germany became an Acheldama, a Field of Blood; and the Reformation was ruined by an Edict made in 1630. And the House of Austria in Germa∣ny was in almost equal danger. Albertus Duke of Austria obtained this Crown by Election in the Year 1437. And in the Year 1526, Ferdinand Arch-Duke of Austria was freely elected after the former Branch had been discontinu'd; since which time there has been no Interruption but that unfortunate one made by Frederick Elector Palatine; so that it is become, by the Strength of the House of Austria and the Weak∣ness of the Bohemians, an Hereditary Kingdom to the House of Austria. The King of Bohemia is the first secular Elector of the Emperor of Germany, though it be no part of the Empire. Boiana, a River that divides Dalmatia from Ma∣cedonia; this River is commonly call'ed il Drino; and in its proper place I shall speak more of it. Boiano, a Colony and City of the Samnites in the County of Molise upon the River Biferno, which falls into the Adriatick Sea: It stands at the foot of the Apennine in the borders of Campania▪ 18 Miles from Trivento towards the North, and 22 from Capua towards the East; and though it is a Bishop's See, un∣der the Archbishop of Benevento, yet it is little, and ill built, and ill inhabited. Boii, an ancient People▪ 1. of Gallia Celtiqua, possessing the Provinces now called Auvergne and Bourbonnois in France. 2. of Bavaria in Germany; otherwise mentioned by the Names of Bojares and Ba∣vari. See Bavari. 3 Of Gallia Cispadana in Italy, where are now the Dutchies of Modena and Parma. See Gallia. Boisclle or Enrichemont, Boscabellum, a Town in the Dukedom of Berry in France, with a Castle, and the Title of a Principality; betwixt Bourges and Sancerre. Bois-de-Trahison, or Bois-de-Gamelon, a For∣rest upon the Banks of the Seine betwixt Paris and Pontoise in France. One Gamelon in the time of Charles the Great, using to ambuscade Men here, has left his Name to the Place. Boisy, a Seigniory in the Country of Chablais in Savoy, near the Lake of Geneva. Bolena, Bolina, Bolaenae, an ancient City of the Morea, mention'd by Pausanias and Stephanus, near to Patras and the River Glaueus; and sometime an E∣piscopal See under the Archbishop of Patras. Bolene, a Town in the County of Venaisin in Pro∣vence in France; upon the Ascent of a little Hill with the River Letz gliding at its foot. It shews the ruines of a Castle. Boleslaw, Boleslavia, a small City in Bohemia, upon the River Gizera, which falls into the River Al∣bus: This City stands eight Miles from Prague towards the North-East. There is another call'd Irung-Bunczel, which stands within two Miles of Prague, where the Gizera falls into Albus; which last was built in 935. They are distinguished from each other by the Names of the Old and the Younger Boleslaw. Bollerbrun, a Lake near the Village of Altembeck in the Province of Westphalia in Germany; having a remarkable strong Flux and Reflux daily. Bolli, Paphlagonia, a Province of the esser Asia Bologna, in Italy. See Bononia. Bologne à la mèr, the Icius Portus of Cesar, Gessoriacus Portus, and Gessoriacum, a City of Picar∣dy, a Province of France; it is a Bishop's See under the Archbishop of Rhemes, and stands upon the River [Li∣ana] Lenart, which there falling into the British Sea on the South of this City, makes a convenient Hven. This City is distant from Calis about seven Leagues to the South, and five from Estaples to the North. It gives name to a small County which from it is called le Bon∣lenois. The Town is divided into two parts, the Up∣per and the Lower, both which are well fortified. This place seems to have been the usual place of pas∣sing into Britain during the Roman Empire; and both Claudius and Caligula came to it on that account: And Pliny saith, it was the shortest and most conve∣nient Passage. It began to be called Bononia about the time of Constantine the Great, who took it in his Passage to his Father then dying at York. Henry the VII. of England in 1487. reduc'd this City to a very low condition, when he entred France for the Prote∣ction of the Dutchy of Britain; but then Charles the VIII. of France bought his Peace, and preserv'd it. His Son Henry the VIII. took it afterwards in 1544. and kept it all his Life: Edward the VI. in the Disor∣ders of his Minority sold or surrendred it to the French again, for a much less sum of Money than it cost the Crown of England to gain it. The Bishop's See was translated hither from Tournay when the English took that City. It lies in Longitude 22. 42. Latitude 50. 30. §. Also a small Town in the Province of Gas∣coigne, near the River Gers, upon the borders of Bi∣gorre. Le Boulenois, or the County belonging to Bo∣logne, lies in the North part of the Province of Picar∣dy; bounded on the West by the British Sea, on the North by the County of Guisnes, on the East by Artois, and on the South by the County of Ponthieu; from which last it is separated by the River Canche. This County was once an Earldom of it self; during which time it gave one King to England, and another to Jerusalem, Godfrey III. was the latter, and King Stephen of England the other; it continued so till Ber∣trand de la Tour (the last Earl of it) in 1477. sold it to Lewis XI. of France, who with mighty Cere∣mony did homage to the Virgin Mary, and made her some Promises which his Successors never thought of keeping; as may be seen in Dr. Heyli's Cosmo∣graphy. The Bolognese, a Territory adjacent to the City of Bologna in Italy, generally epitheted la Grassa, from its Fruitfulness: Dove si legano le vigne con salsccie, where the Vines are tied up with Sausages, says the Proverb. Bolsena, Volsinium, a City of S. Peter's Patri∣mony in Italy, which was the seat of a Bishop untill the Translation thereof to Orvieto. It gives Name to the Lake Bolsena, in which the Island of Matana stands, where the Queen Amalazonte was put to death by the ungrateful Theodatus▪ Bolsover, a Market-Town in Derbyshire in the Hundred of Scarsdale. The Duke of Newcastle has a Seat here. Bolswert, or Boleswart, a Town in West-Fris∣land, in the Earldom of Holland, about 3 Leagues from Leeu Warden. Bolton, a Market-Town in Lancashire in the Hun∣dred of Salford; with the Title of a Duke of late to the Lord Marquess of Winchester. Bolzano, a small Town in the Vicentine in Italy, under the Republick of Venice, upon the River A∣dige. Others place it in the Trentine, and say it is a very Trading Place.
Bombon, a Province of Peru in the West-Indies, towards the River Xauxa. Bommel, Bommelia, an Island beautified with a fair Town in the Dutchy of Guelderland. The Town stands upon the River Maes, two German Miles from Boislduc towards Ʋtrecht, and belongs properly as a Fee to the Dutchy of Brabant, in the Confines of which it is; but it is under the Ʋnited Provinces. In 1672▪ it was taken by the French, and deserted the next year, after they had dismantled it: The Island in which it stands is about thirteen Miles in length, and lies between the Wael to the North, and the Maes to the South: call'd, by the Dutch, Bommelweert. Some take it for the Insula Batavorum of Cesar. Bon, Bonna, Ara Ʋbiorum, and Verona, Bonne, is one of the principal Cities of the Bisho▪ rick of Co∣logne, and the usual Seat of that Elector, upon the Rhine, four German Miles from Cologne. It was first a Ro∣man Colony, called Colonia Julia Bonna, and fre∣quently mention'd in the ancient Historians on that Account: In the middle Ages it became a Free Im∣perial City; Frederick of Austria was here elected and Crowned in 1314. against Lewis of Bavaria. In 942. here was a Synod held. In 1588. the Duke of Parma took it by Famine. In 1673. the Prince of O∣range took it from the French, (who had surprised it the year before) and restored it to the Empire; it has for a long time been exempted from the Empire, and possessed by the Electors of Cologne. Accordingly the Cardinal of Furstemburg, in pursuance of his Election to the Archbishoprick of Cologne, Jul. 19. 1688. took possession of it; whose Pretences, on the one side being justified by the King of France, and on the other being opposed both by the Emperor and the Pope, produc'd the general War that now flames among the Euro∣pean Princes. And though Bonne in this Conjuncture was strongly inforced for its Security with a French Garrison; yet, after about a Months Siege by the Ele∣ctor of Brandenburg, with the Forces of the Allies un∣der his Command, it was obliged to surrender to them, Octob. 12. 1689. This Town lies in Long. 28. 40. Lat. 50. 42. § Bonne, Hippo, a City of the Pro∣vince of Constantine in the Kingdom of Tunis in Africa, upon the Mediterranean; famous for it's being an Epis∣copal See heretofore, in the Person of the Great S. Austin. Hippo was quite destroy'd by the Caliphr in 651. This of Bonne was built near its Ruines, and call'd by the Arabians Beled-el-Ʋgneb; by the Christians Bonne, as being the best and fruitfulest Country in Barbary. The K. of Tunis built it a Castle in the year 1500. Charles V. Emperor destroy'd all its Fortifications in 1535. The Turks have since repaired it, and it is provided with a little Port. §. Also a Town in the Province of Fossigni in the Dukedom of Savoy, upon the Rivulet of Menoy or Monole, 3 or 4 Leagues from Geneva; supposed to be the ancient Banta. Bonaire, one of the Leeward Islands of America, which has its name from the Goodness of the Air. Ta∣ken from the Dutch by the Buccaniers in 1686. in 12 d. of Lat. Bonconvento, a small Town in the Province of Tuscano in Italy upon the River Ombrone, near Siena. It was here, that the Emperor Henry VII. was poysoned in 1313. Boncourt, a Village upon the River Eure, in the Diocese of Eureux, in the Province of Normandy in France: Strangely consumed by an unaccountable Wild-fire in the 4 years preceding 1670. Boni, a Town upon the Loire between Nevers and Orleans; the ancient residence of the Knights of S. Lazarus, an Order now abolished in France and incorporated with that of S. Maurice in Savoy. Bonifacio, a City in the Island of Corsica, which has a Port belonging to it. Thought to be the Palla of Ptolemy. It is well built and traded; and secured by one of the best Fortresses in Europe. The Streights betwixt the Islands of Corsica and Sardinia receive the Name of le Bocche di Bonifacio from hence; which Geographers conclude to be the same with the Fre∣tum Taphros of Pliny, the Fretum Etruscum of Ptolemy, and the Sinus Sardonius of Eustatius. They are sometimes also called le bocche di Beixonnere. Bonneval, a Town in the Province of Beauce, upon the Loyre in France, 6 Leagues from Chartres, and 3 from Chasteau dun. Boh its Name and Rise is come from a great Abbey of the Benedictines here. Bonneville, Bonopolis, the Capital Town of the Province of Fossigni in Savoy; about 5 Leagues from Annecy and Geneva, upon the River Arve, at the Foot of the Mountains; and at present but little considerable. Bononia, in Italian Bologna, is a City of Roman∣diola in Italy, an Archbishop's See erected by Pope Gregory XIII. a Bolognese of the Family of BonCom∣pagno, who in 1582. brought also the University here into great Fame. It has been under the Popes ever since Julius II. who extorted it from the Bentivolio's; it is beautiful and a populous City and thought one of the principal Cities of Italy; the second at least in the States of the Church: 25 Miles from Ferrara towards the South, at the Foot of the Apennine Mountains, near the little River Reno: extraordinarily full of Gentry. It was heretofore a Roman Colony, till it submitted to the Lombards in the 8th Century. And being afterwards a Republick, it maintained a War 3 years with the Republick of Venice; and another with the Emperor Frederick II. whose Natural Son Eu∣zelin became its Prisoner. Honoriuus II. Lucius II. Gregory XIII. Innocent IX and Gregory XV. were all born here, and Alexander V. died here. Lewis the Son of Lotharius, deprived this City of its Walls in 844. They chose the Bentivolio's for their Princes in 1308. who were conquer'd by John Galeacio in 1308. Here was a Council held in 1310. In 1529. The Emperor Charles V. was Crown'd in the most No∣ble Church of S. Petronio here by Pope Clement VII. And the Council of Trent was removed hither in 1547. holding their 9th. and 10th. Sessions under Pope Paul III. It lies in Long. 33. 35. Lat. 44. 15. About 6 Miles in Compass, and indifferently well fortified. Governed under the Pope by a Legate a Latere, with the privilege of keeping an Embassadour for its Service at Rome, where it is treated more like a Sister than a Subject. The University carries the greatest Name of any now in Europe for the Canon and Civil Laws; whence, Bononia docet, they say to a Proverb. The Streets are furnished with arched Galleries, for Preservation against Heat, in the Nature somewhat of the Rows at Chester. The Body of S. Do∣minique Founder of the Dominican Order lies interr'd in a stately Convent of that Order here. The Metro∣politan Church of S. Peters is built according to the same Plat with that of S. Peters at Rome. An Aca∣demy of the Otiosi is erected in this City: And for the learned Authors produc'd by the University, see the Bibliotheca of Joh. Antonius Bumaldi. The ad∣jacent Country has the Name of the Bolognese from hence. See Bolognese. Boot, an Island of Scotland in the Streights betwixt the Isle of Arran and the Province of Argyle. Bopart, Bopartium, Bodobriga, a Town in the Archbishoprick of Treves upon the Rhine in Germa∣ny, betwixt Coblentz and S. Goar. Boquerano, a litte Island of Asia in the Indian Ocean about 8 Leagues from Borneo. Borcholm, a Fortress in the Island of Oeland near Gothia in the Baltick Sea, not above two Miles from Calmar East, in Lat. 56. 50. and Long. 34. 17.
Borcholt, a small Town upon the River Aa in the Province of Westphalia in Germany, under the Bishop of Munster. Bordelong, Bordelona, a Town beyond the Gan∣ges belonging to the Kingdom of Siam. It has a Port upon the Gulph of Siam, betwixt Lingor and Sin∣gora. Borgo, a Town in the Province of Finland in the Kingdom of Sweden, upon the Gulph of Finland, be∣twixt Vibourg and Revel. Borgo S. Donnino, a City in the Dutchy of Parma in Italy, with a Bishops See erected by Pope Clement VIII. and placed under the Archbishop of Bologna by Pope Paul V. Heretofore call'd Fidentia and Julia. Its ancient Abbey was destroyed by the Emperor Fre∣derick II. Borgosan Sepulchro, Biturgia, a City in the States of the Great Duke of Tuscany in Italy, with an Episcopal See under the Archbishop of Florence. Some Synodical Constitutions were made here in 1641. Borgo di Sessia, a Town properly in the Milanese in Italy, but belonging to the States of the Duke of Savoy, upon the River Sessia from whence it receives this Name. Borgo-Ual-Di-Taro, a Town and Fortress in the States of the Duke of Parma in Italy, upon the Borders of the States of Genoua. Boria, Belsinum, a City of the Kingdom of Ar∣ragon in Spain, 11 Miles from Zaragosa to the East. Boriquen, one of the greatest Leeward Islands upon the Western Coast of America; betwixt S. Croix and Porto rico, under the Spaniards. The Natives of this Island in the beginning believed the Spaniards were Immortal, till one Salsedo they saw happened to be drowned in the River of Guarabo. Borysthenes. See Nieper. Bormes, Bormanico, a Town and Barony in Provence in France, betwixt Thoulon and S. Tropes, near the Sea. Bormia, a River within the States of the Repub∣lick of Genoua in Italy; formed by 2 Rivulets of this Name, that rise in Piedmont and unite at Sessana. Thence Bormia passes by Acqui, receives some other small Rivers, and is received itself by the Tanaro near Alexandria della Paglia. Bormio, the Italian Name for Worms in Germa∣ny. See Worms. § Also a small Town and County in the Country of the Grisons upon the River Adda near the Valteline. Borneo, one of the greatest Islands in the East-Indies; between Sumatra to the West, Java to the South, Celebes to the East, and the Philippine Islands to the North. It is of a round shape, and the Line cuts the Southern part of it. Reported to be 1800 Miles in Compass, and to contain several Kingdoms; but the truth is the Eastern parts of this Island were never well discovered by the Europeans yet. Borneo the principal City, lies on the North-Western Shoar in a Bay. It is a rich, populous place, well Traded, built in a low ground, not much unlike Venice, and has belonging to it a capacious Haven. Bornheim, a Territory and its Capital Town with a Castle in the Earldom of Flanders: being a part of the demeans properly belonging to the said Earldom. Bornholm, Boringia, an Island in the Baltick Sea, taken by the Swedes in 1644. from the Danes, and afterwards ceded to them in 1658. by the Treaty of Roschill; but restored again in consideration of an Equivalent of Royal Demeans in Schonen. This Island affords excellent Pasturage and Cattle. It lies towards the furthest parts of Bleking, and has a good∣ly Town called Nex, and a Castle named Sand∣hamer. Borno, a Kingdom, a Town, a Desart, and a Lake in the Division of Nigritia in Africa, being the Country of the antient Garamantes. The Kingdom stands bounded with Nubia to the East, Berdoa and Gaoga to the North, Gangara to the West, and the Niger to the South. Bosa, Bosi, Bossa, an antient City in the Island of Sardinia, with a Bishops See under the Archbishop of Sassari, betwixt Oristagni to the South and Sas∣sari to the North. Boscasle, a Market-Town in Cornwal in the Hun∣dred of Lesnewth, which Elects 2 Members of Par∣liament. Boscobell, a Name deservedly given to the Royal Oak which served as an Asylum to King Charles II. for some days after the Battle of Worcester in Sep. 1651. about 4 Miles from VVolverhampton in Staf∣fordshire. Bosleduc, Boscum Ducis, now called by the French Bolduc, and by the Flandrians S. Shertogen∣bosch, a City in the Dukedom of Brabant, which is a Bishops See under the Archbishop of Mechlen, seat∣ed upon the River Disa, Dios, which a little farther to the North falls into the Maze. It is a large new City, environed with Rivers and Marshes, very well fortified, and only one League from the Maze: taken by the Dutch in 1629. who are still possessed of it. Geofry Duke of Brabant made a Town of it out of a Wood, in the year expressed in this Chro∣nogram, GodefrIdƲs dƲX e sILVa feCIt oppIdƲM. The See was founded by Pope Paul IV. in 1559. And the Country called the Mayorality of Bosleduc, con∣taining above 100 Villages, has this City for its Capital. Bosnia, called by the French Bossen, by the Ger∣mans Wossen, is a Province of Europe, bounded on the North by Sclavonia, on the West by Croatia, on the East by Servia, and on the South by Dal∣matia; it takes its name from the River Bosna, which riseth in Servia, thence entering Bosnia, wa∣ters Bosna-Sarai and falls into the Save. It had Kings of its own from 1357. till 1465. having been before a part of the Kingdom of Hungary. The Turks under Mahomet II. Conquered it in 1465. and are still possessed of a great part of it. The same Mahomet caused Stephen the last King of Bosnia to be flea'd alive. Bosphorus Cimmerius, that famous Streight or passage at which the Euxine Sea communicates with the Paulus Maeotis or the Sea of Tana. They now call it the Streights of Caffa and Kerci from two Towns in the Peninsula of Taurica Chersonesus which are situated upon the Banks of it. Heretofore there was a Town called Bosphorus in those parts, which gave Name both to the Streights and to the antient People the Bosphori mentioned by Pliny, Strabo, &c. It afterwards changed its name to Panticapae∣um, which some believe to be the same with the modern Vospero, a late Bishops See under the Pa∣triarch of Constantinople. § Bosphorus Thracius, otherwise known by the Name of the Canal of the Black Sea and the Streights of Constantinople, is so narrow a passage betwixt Thrace and Asia Minor, that in some Streets at Constantinople they can hear the Cocks crowing upon the Shoars of Asia. Upon this Bosphorus stands Gallipoli, the Dardanells, and the Seven Towers where Prisoners of State are secured. It is now called Bogazin. Bosra, or Bostra. See Bussereth. § Strabo speaks of another Bosra in Phaenicia. Bossu, a Town in Hainault near Valencienne, dignified with the Title of an Earldom. Boston, a Corporation in Lincolnshire, seated on both sides of the River Witham, which is covered by a
Timber Bridge; the Town stands within 3 Miles of the Sea, and has a very convenient Haven, which in Mr. Camden's time was well Traded; it sends 2 Burgesses to the Parliament. § Also a place in New-England of the same name; well built and peopled. It is indeed the Capital Town of that Plantation. Bosworth, an antient Market-Town in Leicester∣shire, upon the River Sence, which a little farther falls into the Anker at Atherston. Near this place Henry Earl of Richmond, Aug. 22. 1485. over∣threw in Battle Richard III. and put an end to those long and bloody Wars between the Houses of Lan∣caster and York. And March 12. 1686. King James II. did this Town the honor to constitute Mr. James Fitz-James his Natural Son, amongst many other great Honors, Baron of Bosworth. Bothnia, a Province of Sweden upon the Baltick Sea, which gives Name to the Botner Sea or that Branch of the Baltick which lies most West; between which and Lapland this Province lies. Torn is its Ca∣pital City. Bova, a City in the further Calabria in the King∣dom of Naples, with an Episcopal See under the Archbishop of Reggio, near the Ocean; betwixt the Cape de Spartivento and Reggio. Bouchain, Bochonium, Buceinium, a small but strong Town, well fortified, in the Province of Hai∣nault in the Low-Countries upon the River Escaut betwixt Valenciennes and Cambray. It is the Capital of the County of Ostervand, which formerly belong'd mmediately to the eldest Sons of the Earls of Hainault. Taken by the French in 1676. and ever since by them retained. Boufflers, a Territory contained in the Diocese of Amiens in Picardy in France, upon the River Authie: Remarkable for giving Name to an Ancient and E∣minent Family in that Province. Bouhin, an Island of France between the Coasts of the Provinces of Poictou and Bretaigne, below the Mouth of the Loyre. §. Also a Town in the County of Foretz in the same Kingdom near the River Lignon, which is one of the best Places in Foretz. Bovines, Boviniacum, a small Town upon the River Maze, in the County of Namur; made famous by a bloody Battle given here by Philip the August, King of France, to Ferdinand Earl of Flanders, who was here taken Prisoner in the Year 1214: Where∣upon Philip founded the Abbey of our Lady de la Vi∣ctoire near Senlis in Commemoration of his Victory. This Town lies 4 Leagues from Namur to the South. Bovino, Bovinum, is a small City in the King∣dom of Naples in the Capitanata, which is a Bishops See under the Archbishop of Benevento; it stands at the foot of the Apennine near the River Cervaro, six Leagues from Troja to the South, and twelve from A∣riano to the South-East. Bouillon, Bullonium, a small Town and Castle in the Bishoprick of Liege, four Leagues from Masiers to the North, and ten from Namur. The Capital of an ancient Dukedom, which lies between the Duke∣dom of Luxemburg to the West, and Champagne to the South. This Dukedom was mortgaged to Otbrt Bishop of Liege, in 1096, by Godfery then Duke of it, after the famous King of Jerusalem; and ever since the Bishops of this Diocese have claim'd a Right to it. But by the Treaty of Nimeguen in 1679, it was agreed, that the Dukes of Bovillon, who are in possession of it, should peaceably enjoy the same; all Differences being referred to honorary Arbitrators; and that the Bishops should in the mean time use no Force against the said Dukes; and so it remains to this day in their Possession. Boulogne. See Bologne, Bolognese, and Bononia. Bourbone, Borbonium, a small City of France, the Capital of the Dukedom of Bourbone; bounded on the North with the Province of Niverne, on the East by the Dukedom of Burgundy, on the West with the Province of Berry and Marche, and on the South with Auvergne. The River Allier (El∣laver) cuts this Dukedom into two Parts; and it lies in length from the North-East to the South-West twenty eight Leagues between the Rivers of Loire and Cher. Robert, the fourth Son of Lewis the Ninth King of France, had this Dutchy in Marriage with Agnes of Bourbone, whose descendent after 300 years in the Person of Henry IV. came to the Crown of France in 1590, and his Grandchild Lewis XIV. now en∣joys that Throne. The principal City call'd Bour∣bonne l' Archambault lies 4 Leagues from Moulins, 56 from Paris to the South▪ near the River Allier. This City was erected from a Barony into a Dukedom, by Charles le bel in 1327. And its Castle is reputed a place of great Strength. §. The Island of Bour∣bon, otherwise call'd Mascarenhi, is an Island under the French ever since the Portugueze lost it to them; in the Aethiopick Ocean to the East of Madagascar, about 25 Leagues in Length and 14 in Breadth. They say there is a Volcano in some part of it; the rest is very fruitful. Bourbon l' Ancy, a Town and Castle in the Pro∣vince of Burgogne in France, 7 Leagues from Mou∣lins, and one quarter of a League from the Loyre. It is much in Esteem for Mineral Waters, which are here covered with a Noble Structure of the Ancient Roman Work. This Town was never taken in the Civil Wars. It gives Name to a Territory in the Diocese of Autun, that is parted from the Province of Bourbonnois by the River Loyre. Boyne, Bouinda, a River in the Province of Leinster in Ireland, which runs hard by Drogheda. where K. James II. and his Army, being about 25000 men encamped on the South side of this River, re∣ceived the Defeat of Jul. 1. 1690. by K. William in Person: The Duke of Schomberg was killed in the Action. Burbourg, Burburgus, a Town in the East of Flanders, not above one Mile from Graveling, which was taken by the French in 1657. and has remained ever since in their Hands. Bourdeaux, [Burdegala,] the Capital of the Pro∣vince of Guienne, and an Archbishops See; the Seat of one of the Parliaments of France; rich, well built, and populous. It has a noble Haven at the Mouth of the River Garonne, much frequented by the Dutch and English, and all other Northern Nations for Wine, Salt, &c. So that this City is deservedly accounted one of the best in France. It is also built in a very fruit∣ful Soil, and rarely improved by Art and Industry. It gave Birth to Ausonius the Poet, and to Richard II. King of England. It has also a very strong Castle call'd le Chateau Trompette: And was an University in the times of the Romans, which Honor has been reconferred upon it by Charles VII. Eugenius IV. and Lewis XI. since which times it has produced many very learned Men▪ First built by the Galls, improved by the Ro∣mans, made the Capital of a Kingdom by the Goths. It fell into the hands of lesser Lords, with the Title of Counts or Earls, after the times of Charles the Great: United with the Dukedom of Guienne in the times of Charles the Bald. Alenora the Daughter and Heir of Lewis VII. of that House, being married first to the King of France, and after to Henry I. of England; this Dukedom was annexed to the Crown of England, and continued so till wrested from them by Charles VII. of France, in the Reign of Henry VI. The French had indeed usurped it before upon King John; but the English were not without hope▪
of recovering it till this last mentioned time▪ It has given some disturbances to the Reigns of Lewis IX. and XIV. but is now finally brought under, having in 1650. been reduced by force of Arms, and a Siege. There has been many National Councils held here, and some Provin∣cial Synods; it stands about 12 Leagues from the shoars of the Ocean upon the South side of the Garon∣ne, in the most Southern Part of France, in Long▪ 20. 10. and Lat. 44. 50. The antient Inhabitants, by Pliny and Strabo have the Title given them of Bituriges Vivisci, to distinguish them from those of Bourges called Bituriges Cubi. Borganeuf, a Town in the Province of la Mar∣che in France, upon the little River Taurion; three Leagues from S. Leonard and 5 from Limoges. Some are pleased to include it in Poictou. Bourgen Bresse, Forum Sebusianorum, Tamnum, Burgus, a City in the County of Bresse in France, upon the River Resousse, 5 Leagues distant from Mascon to the East, and 9 from Lyons to the North: It has been under the Crown of France ever since 1601, when this whole County which before pertain∣ed to the Dukedom of Snvoy, was taken in. It had a strong Citadel erected in 1569, which was demo∣lished in 1611. The City is seated in Marshes, and called by some, by mistake, Tanus; adorned with a Bishops See by Pope Leo X in 1521. but this See was suppressed again by Pope Paul III. Bourg sur Mer, a Town in Guienne, built up∣on the mouth of the Dordogne [Duranium] where it unites with the Garone, which heretofore was well fortified; it stands 5 Leagues from Bourdeaux to the North. Le Bourg de Viviers, or the Bourg de S. An∣deol, Burgus S. Andeoli; is the most populous Town in the County of Viviers, seated in a Plain upon the River Rhosne, 25 Leagues lower than Lions; antient∣ly called de Gentibus. Here S. Andeolus a Sub-dea∣con suffered Martyrdom, under Severus the Emper∣or and from him the Town has its name, as appears by the Registers of this Church. Bourges, Bituricae, Biturix, Biturgium & A∣varicum; is a very great City, and an Archbishops See, the Head of the Dukedom of Berry; seated as it were in the centre of France upon the River Eure, which falls into the Seine above Roan, and naturally a strong Place. It has a noble Cathedral, and an U∣niversity, famous for the Canon and Civil Laws. The Archbishops enjoyed the Title of Primates of Aqui∣tain from the IX. Century to the time of Pope Cle∣ment V. who having been Archbishop of Bourdeaux transferred the Primacy from Bourges thither. Seve∣ral Councils and Synods have been held here; par∣ticularly in 1438. one under Charles VII. recogni∣zed the famous Council of Basil, and the Pragma∣tique Sanction, which continued thence in force, till suppressed by the Concordate betwixt Pope Leo X. and Francis▪ I. in the year 1516. It is 7 Leagues from la Charite to the West, 22 from Orleans to the North. Lewis XI. King of France was born here. Bourgogne, or Burgundy, Burgundia, a very large Province in France, divided into 2 parts, the one of which is called the Dukedom, and the other the County of Burgundy. The Dukedom of Burgun∣dy hath on the East the Franche County, and Savoy; on the West Bourbonnois, on the North Champagne, and on the South la Bresse, Lionois, and some part of Baujolois. A Country not fruitful in any thing but Wines and fine Rivers. This Dukedom was seiz∣ed by Lewis II. upon pretence of want of Heirs Males, upon the Slaughter of Charles the Hardy by the Switzers, in 1467 and ever since it has been in the possession of the Crown of France. The County of Burgundy hath on the East the Mountain Jour▪ which parts it from Switzerland; on the West the Dutch▪ of Burgundy; from which it is divided by the Sane on the North, and a Branch of the Mountain Vauge, which divideth it from la Bresse: it is reckoned to be 90 Miles in length, and about 60 in breadth: for the most part Mountainous, but fruitful of Wines▪ and intermixed with pleasant Valleys. The principal City of it is Besanson. The old Inhabitants were the Sequani, a potent Nation▪ In 1674 this County was taken from the Spaniards by the present King of France; and by the Treaty of Nimeguen confirmed to him. See Franche Comtè. Bourgouin, a small Town in the County of Vi∣nnois in the Province of Dauphine in France. A dependent formerly of the Barony of Tour du Pin, and famous for driving a Trade of Hemp. Bourn, a Market-Town in Lincolnshire in the Hundred of Aveland, upon a Spring called Brn∣head. King Edmund was Crowned here. It also shows the Ruins of a good Castle. Bouro, an Island of Asia (by some placed among the Moluccaes) in the Indian Ocean, near the Islands of Cambello and Manipe: under the King of Ternate. Bouron, Bistonia, a Town in the Province of Romania in the Morea near the Archipelago, with a Lake of the same Appellation, on this side the Moun∣tain Argentaro. This place has sometime been the Seat of a Bishop and is often mentioned by our antient Hi∣storians. Boutan, a Kingdom in the Terra firma of the In∣dies or according to others in the Great Tartary, to∣wards the Empire of the Grand Mogul, and believed to be the same with Barantola. Boutonne, Vtonna, a River in France, arising in Poictou; and flowing through Saintonge, (where it divides the Town of S. Jean d' Angel,) it ends in the River Charente, which conveys it into the Ocean 2 Leagues from Brouage to the North▪ right over against the Island of Oleron. Bowe, a Market-Town in Devonshire in the Hun∣dred of New Tauton. Bozagar, Exopolis, a City of Tartary in Asia, a little more East than the Outlets of the River Tanais. Bozolo, a Principality belonging to the Duke of Mantua, with a small Town betwixt Mantua and Cremona. Brabant, Brabantia, Ambavariti populi, is one of the most considerable Provinces of the Spanish Netherlands; bounded on the East with Luyekland, or the Bishoprick of Liege; on the West with the River Scheld, and a part of Flanders; on the North with the Maze, which parts it from Holland and Guel∣derland; and on the South with Hainault, Namur, and a part of Lyckland. This Country is generally fruitful, and the Air good, 22 German Miles long, and 20 broad; and in these narrow Limits it had 26 walled Towns and Cities. Governed by Dukes of its own, from the year 1004, till the year 1430, when it fell to Philip II. Duke of Burgundy; by whose Grandchild, Margaret, (married to Maximilian Emperor of Germany,) it fell to Charles V. King of Spain, and in that House it remains to this day. Bracciano, Arcennum, Bracennum, Brygianum, Sabata, a City of Italy, in the Dominions of the Church, upon the Lake of Sabato; honored with the Title of a Dukedom; now in the possession of the an∣tient Family of the Ʋrsini. It is a small, but fine City, about 20 Miles from Rome to the West. Brachmanes, Bramins or Bramans, a famous Sect of Philosophers amongst the Indians, consulted by the greatest Wits of Greece; its thought Pytha∣goras received his Doctrine of the Transmigration of Souls amongst them. They professed the study
of Nature and Astronomy and Morality; and pla∣ced their Happiness in the Contempt of Wealth. The Bramans, who are the Priests of the modern Banjans, inherit their Esteem with the People: For they teach their Schools, live austerely, are considered as Oracles in the Affairs of Religion; and as to the Pointof a Me∣tampsyhosis, they are equally Pythagoreans with their Ancestors. Brackley, a Market-Town in Nottinghamshire in the Hundred of Sutton, which returns 2 Members to the Parliament. It stands near the Spring of the River Ouse, and formerly had a College, which is since be∣come a School. Braclaw, Braclavia, a Town in the Province of Podolia in the Kingdom of Poland upon the River Bug, and towards the Confines of Volhinia. It is also written Bratzlaw. Bradano, Brada, a River in the Basilicata, in the Kingdom of Naples, which ariseth from the Apennine, and falls into the Gulph of Tarento, eighteen Miles from Tarento to the West. Bradfield Magna, a Market-Town in Essex in the Hundred of Freshwell. Bradford, a Market-Town in Wiltshire. The Ca∣pital of its Hundred, upon the Avon. Bradforth, a Market-Town in the West-Riding of Yorkshire in the Hundred of Morley near the fall of a small Stream into the Are. Brading, a Market-Town in the Isle of Wight, in the Hundred of E. Medine. Bradninch, a Market-Town in Devonshire in the Hundred of Heyrudge. Braga, Augusta Bracarum, Bracara, Braecara, a City and Archbishoprick of Portugal, call'd Bragues by the French, in the Province of Antredoureo Minho; it stands upon the South Side of the River Morillo, four Leagues from the Ocean, eight Miles from Porto to the North, and almost fifty from Lisbon to the same quarter. The Archbishop of this City pretends, no less than the Archbishop of Toledo, to the Primacy of all Spain. This was the Seat of the Kings of the Sueves for an hundred and seventy Years, and is now of great Circumference, but not equally populous. Braganza, Bragantia, Caeliobrigia, Tuntebriga, a City in the Kingdom of Portugal, which is hono∣red with the Title of a Dukedom: It lies in the Con∣fines of the Kingdom of Leon and Portugal, in the Province of Sera de Rebodaos; 7 Miles from Miran∣da to the North, and 25 from Braga to the East. John Duke of Braganza sirnamed the Fortunate being descended from the Kings of Portugal, in 1640, recovered that Kingdom out of the Hands of the Spa∣niards, and his Son now enjoys it. Braintry, a Market-Town in Essex in the hun∣dred of Hinckford. Brampour, a large Town in the Province of Can∣dis in the Empire of the Grand Mogul; and the second Government of Quality in that Empire. Adorn'd with a magnificent Castle, where the Governor of the Province resides. It is a place also of extraordinary Trade. Brampton, a Market-Town in Cumberland in Esk∣dale Ward. Brandenburg, Brandeburgum, Brennoburgum, is a very ancient City in the Upper Saxony in Germany: It stands in the middle March upon the North side of the River Havel, which falls into the Albis. This is a Bishop's See under the Archbishop of Meydburg: the See was erected by Otho the Great, Emperor of Germany, in 946. The City embrac'd the Augu∣stane Confession in 1563. It lies in Long. 35. 00. and Lat. 52. 39. The Marquisate of Brandenburg is bounded on the East by the Kingdom of Poland, on the West with the Dukedom of Saxony, on the North with Pomerania, and part of Mecklenburg, and on the South with Misnia, Lusatia, and Silesia: In Length from East to West sixty German Miles, and of a proportionable Breadth: In it there are fifty five Cities and Wall'd Towns; the chief of which are Brandenburg and Berlin. But it is neither very po∣pulous, nor very fruitful, except in Corn. The Prince is a Calvinist, and his Subjects Lutherans. He is one of the Electors, created in 1415. by Sigismund the Emperor. § Brandenburg Brunsberg; see Brunsberg. § Brandenburg Island, or the Island of Vulcan, Insula Vulcani, so called because it sometimes burns and vomits Fire like Aetna, is an Island in the Indian Ocean, towards the Eastern Coast of New-Guiney. Brandon, a Market-Town in the County of Suf∣folk, upon the lesser Ouse, 5 Miles West of Thetford, and ten North of Bury. Charles Gorard Earl of Macclesfield in Cheshire was created Viscount of this Place, July 23. 1679. by Charles II. Brantosme, Brantosma, an Abbey and Town in the County of Perigord in France, upon the River Droune, which there receives the Colle. Supposed to be founded by Charles M. Braskow, Brascovia, a City and Bishops See in the Province of VValachia in the Kingdom of Hunga∣ry, towards the Frontiers of Moldavia and Transil∣vania. Brasil, Brasilia, is a vast Country of the Southern America, bounded on the East with the Atlantick Ocean; on the West with some undiscovered Coun∣tries lying between it and the Andes; on the North with Guiana, and on the South with Paraguay. It reaches from 29. to 39 Deg. of Southern Latitude, and it is 500 Miles in Breadth; under the Dominion of the Portugueses, ever since the Year 1503. though the Spaniards claim it. Brassaw, a Town in the Province of Lithuania in the Kingdom of Poland, with a good Castle: It stands below the River Wilna towards the Frontiers of Cur∣land and Livonia. It is the Capital of a Palatinate. Brassaw, the same with Cronstat. Brava, a City upon the Coast of Ajan in Africa; well built and fortified: Govern'd by the Laws of 12 Xeques or (Princes) in the Nature of a Republick, being the only Government of that sort in this Quarter of the World. The Xeques are elected out of the De∣scendents of the 9 Brothers, who fled hither out of A∣rabia Felix, from the Persecution of the King of Lacah. Bray sur Seine, a small Town in the Province of Champagne in France, betwixt Nogent and Monte∣reau fant-Yonne: remark'd with the Title of a Duke∣dom. §. Bray sur Somme, a Town in Picardy in France betwixt Perone and Amiens. Bought of the Chatelain of Ponthieu, by Philip the August, in 1210. Brayne, a Town in Champagne in France, upon the River Vesle, betwixt Soisons and Fisines. Some pretend it is the Bibrax of Cesar. Brazza, Labraza, or Baac, Brattia, is an Island of the Adriatick Sea, upon the Coast of Dalmatia, under the Venetians. It is near the Island of Lesina, and takes its Name from a Town that stands in it. Brechin, a City in the County of Angus in Scot∣land; adorn'd with a Bishops See under the Archbishop of S. Andrews. About 5 or 6 Leagues from the O∣cean. In Latin called Brechinium. §. Also a Town and Fortress in the Kingdom of Bohemia in Germany, upon the River Laucntz, near Tabor. Brecknock, Brechinia, is one of the twelve Shires in the Principality of Wales: On the East it is bound∣ed with Herefordshire, on the South with Monmouth and Glamorganshire; on the West with Caermar∣thenshire, and on the North with Radnorshire. The chief Town is Brecknock, seated upon the North side of the Ʋsk, where the River Honthy or Hodney from
the North, and two other small Brooks from the South augment its Streams. It stands twelve Miles West of Abergevenny; and elects one Member of Parliament. This County is thick set with high Mountains, but fruit∣ful Valleys lie between them. Bernard Newmarch, who conquered this small Shire, built at Brecknock a Castle, which the Bohuns afterwards repaired. The most Loyal and Noble James Butler, Duke of Or∣mond, was created Earl of Brecknock, July 20. 1660. by Charles II. Breda, [Breda,] a City in the United Provinces in the Dukedom of Brabant, upon the River Merca, Merck, under the Prince of Orange. A little, but a strong Place, and the Capital of a small Barony; taken from the Hollanders by the Marquess of Spinola in 1625. after a Siege of 10 Months: taken from the Spaniards in 1637. and though it has been twice be∣sieged by them, yet they never could retake it. At this place K. Charles II. continued some time in 1660. and receiv'd the welcome News of his Restitution. And in 1667. after a bloody War of three Years continu∣ance, here was a Peace concluded between the Eng∣lish and Dutch. It lies eight Leagues from Antwerp to the North. Brederode, a Castle near Harlem in Holland, giv∣ing its Name to an antient Family. Bregentz, a Town in the Circle of Schwaben in Germany upon a River so named. It sustains the Ti∣tle of an Earldom. Brefort, Bredefort, or Bredervoerde, a Town in the County of Zutphen in Guelderland, in a marshy Place, strengthned with a Castle, near a Canal which joyns the Issel, two Leagues from Grol and Aanholt. The Prince of Orange took it by Storm in 1597. Brema, a City and Kingdom beyond the Ganges in the East-Indies towards the States of Pegu. It is a rich Country and makes a puissant Prince, who re∣sides either at Brema or Carpa. Brembo, a River in the Bergamasco in Italy, giv∣ing Name to the Valley of Brembo. It springs about the Frontiers of the Valtoline, and embraces the Adda a little below Bergamo. Bremefurde, a Town in the Dutchy of Bremen in the lower Circle of Saxony. The ordinary Residence of the Governor of that Dutchy under the King of Sweden. Bremen, Brema, is a very potent City in the lower Circle of Saxony in Germany; made more re∣nowned by an Archbishops See, instead of Hamburg. It stands upon the River Wiser, [Visurgis;] a Free Town, and under no Prince; with a small Territory about it, call'd Stift van Bremen. Tho the Swedes have many Pretences upon this Place, on the Account of the Dukedom of Bremen, yet they still main∣tain their Freedom. The Archbishops have embraced the Augustane Confession ever since 1585. This City was declar'd an Imperial Free City by Ferdinando III. Anno 1646. It stands 12 German Miles from Hamburg to the South-West. In Long. 40. 17. and Lat. 53. 25. First Wall'd in 1309. The Arch∣bishop never had any Sovereignty here. This Town was besieged by the Swedes in 1666. forty six Days, and at last rescu'd by the Interposition of the German Princes. The Dukedom of Bremen, which belonged heretofore to the Archbishop, was in 1648. yielded to the Swedes. It has the River Albis or the Elb, to the North, the Weser to the South, the Dukedom of Lunenburg to the East, and on the West the Duke∣dom of Oldenburg. Bremgarten, Bremocartum, a Bailywick in Switzerland, belonging to eight of the antient Cantons. Bullinger the Apocalyptick Minister was born here. Brene, or Breine-Aleu, a small Town in Brabant in the Low-Countries, with a Castle; 2 or 3 Leagues from Brussels. Brene-le-Comte, a little Town in Hainault near Mons. Brene sur le Vesle. See Brayne. §. Also a Di∣strict within the Province of Touraine in France in the Diocese of Bourges. Gregory of Tours was accu∣sed in a Council here in 581. or 83. for saying, that Queen Fredegonde had secret commerce with the Archbishop of Bourdeaux: but he was acquitted. Brenta, Brentesia, a River in the Dominion of the States of Venice in Italy. Brent, a Market-Town in Devonshire in the Hun∣dred of Stanborough. Brentford the New, a Market-Town in Middle-sex in the Hundred of Elthorn, so called from the River Brent, which falls into the Thames betwixt Henden and Hampsted Hills. King Edgar assembled a Council here in 960. In 1016. King Edmund Iron∣fide obtained a Victory over the Danes at this Place, which obliged them to raise the Siege of London. And 1644. It was advanc'd to the Honour of an Earl∣dom in the Person of Patrick Ruthen Earl of Forth in Scotland, by King Charles I. Brescia, Brixia, call'd by the French Bresse, by the Spaniards Brexa, is a City in the Venetian Terri∣tories in Italy, which is a Bishop's See under the Arch∣bishop of Milan, aggrandized with the Title of a Duke, Marquess, and Earl. The Capital of the Coun∣ty of Bresciano, a large well fortified Place, and has a very strong Castle upon a near Hill. It lies between the Rivers of Gorza and Mela, in a Plain 15 Miles from the Lake of Benaco to the West, and 50 from Milan to the South-East; built by the Senones, and was once under the Dukes of Milan, before it sell in∣to the hands of the Venetians. The County of Brescio has Verona to the East, Bergamo to the West, Cremo∣na to the South, and the Valtoline and the County of Tirol to the North. It is a great and fruitful Country. Breslaw, Budorgis, Ʋratislavia Budorigum, call'd by the Poles wroclaw, is the Capital City of Sile∣sia, and of the Dukedom of Breslaw. A Bishop's See under the Archbishop of Gnisen in Poland; great and well built, and once a Free and Imperial City; but it was afterwards exempted from the Empire, and is now a kind of Free-State: It stands on the River Oder, towards the Confines of Poland. Made a Bishop's See in 1033. About the Year 1000. it was built by Mices∣laus, Duke of Poland; the Cathedral Church was built by Casimirus King of Poland, in 1041. Near this place Boleslaus King of Poland was overthrown by Henry V. and forc'd to take an Oath of Allegiance. This City lies 35 Miles from Cracow, and 40 from Berlin. Bresle, a small River near Calais in France. Bresne, a small River near Tours in France. Bresse, Bressia, Sebusiani Populi, is a Province of France, bounded on the East by Savoy on the West, with Lionois, on the North with Charolois in the Dutchy of Burgundy and some part of the Franche County, and on the South with Dauphine. It is a pleasant and fruitful Country, and lies between the Soas∣ne and the Rhone. Bèllay and Bourg are its chief Towns. It belong'd from the Year 1285. to the Dukes of Sa∣voy, till 1600. when it was surrendred to Henry IV. of France, in lieu of Saluzzes, a Marquisate in I∣taly. Brest, Brivates, a very good Sea-Port in the Dukedom of Bretagne in France, which as Scaliger saith, was call'd Gesocribate by Ptolomy. It lies on the most Western Coast of Bretagne, about 50 Leagues from Nantes to the North-West. This is the Magazine of the Admiralty of France; situated upon the Ascent of a Hill, and secured with New and Noble Fortifications both to the Sea and Land. The Sea enters into the Gulph
of Brest by 4 Ways, and the Vessels there are always a∣float. §. Also a Town in the Province of Cujavia in the Kingdom of Poland with a Castle well built in a Marshy Place near Vlaldislaw and the Vistula. Here, in the Years 1595. and 1620. two Councils were as∣sembled for the Union of the Greek Church of Lithu∣ania with the Latin. §. The same Name is given to a French Colony in New-France in America. Brescici, Bressicia, call'd by the French Briescio, is a small City in Lithuania, the Capital of a Palati∣nate of the same Name: It lies between Lithuania, Russia, and Polachia, upon the Bug; and has a tole∣rable good Castle. Bresuire, a small City in France, in Poictou; 3 Leagues from Parthenay, and as many from Thu∣ray. Bretagne, Armorica, Britannia Minor, is a Pro∣vince of France, 70 Leagues long, and betwixt 35 and 40 broad; containing 9 Bishopricks who are all Suffragans to the Archbishop of Tours. In three of these, that is, Cornouaille, S. Paul de Leon, and Figuier, the Inhabitants entirely speak Briton, a Language the same in abundance of words with the Welsh: in the other three (to wit) Nantes, Vennes, and S. Brieux, they speak Briton and French mix'd; yet the most ordinary Sort, only Briton: in the rest, they speak all French. It is bounded on the East with Normandy, and the County of Maine; on all other sides with the Eng∣lish Seas; upon the South side it has the Loire, which divides it from Anjou; but yet the County of Raiz, which belongs to Bretagne; lies on the South side of that River, between it and Poictou. The Britains were first brought hither from England by Maximus, in 389. To which a great Accession was made by the dri∣ving out the Britains by the Saxons. They erected a Kingdom here in 485. (I suppose after the coming of the second Saxon Colonies) which lasted till 874. when a lesser Title was taken up with the same Power; which continued till 1498. under 28 Dukes; when Lewis XII. married Anne the Daughter of Francis II. the last Duke of Bretagne, who, in 1484. had been married to Charles VIII, K. of France before. Francis I. of France, succeeded in the Right of Claude his Wife; whose Issue failing, the Right fell to the Duke of Savoy, but the French kept the Possession. §. New Bretagne, a Province of New-France in A∣merica, upon the Gulph of S. Lawrence: Its Settle∣ments are call'd Brest, Belle Isle, &c. Brewood, a Market-Town in Staffordshire, in the Hundred of Cudleston. The Bishops of this Diocese had their Palace here before the Conquest. Bretevil, a Town in High Normandy in France upon the River Iton. Brianzon, a City in the Dalphinate, supposed to be one of the highest in the World. It is the Capital of the Bailywick of Brainzonnois; in Ptolomy call'd , in Antoninus Brigantium, in Am. Marcel∣linus Virgantia. The Dure and the Ance (the two Sources of the Durance) unite below it. The Castle stands upon the top of a Rock, and is very strong. Yet taken from the Leaguers by the Duke de Lesdi∣guieres in 1590. §. Likewise a Village in Provence, in the Diocese of Glandeves, where they find Num∣bers of Medals with Inscriptions. §. And a Castle in the Territory of Tarantaise in Savoy, upon the Ri∣ver Isere; about 1 League below Moutiers; with a Village of the same Name. These two last men∣tioned Brianzon's are also call'd in Diminution Brian∣zonnet. Briare, a Town in the Dutchy of Orleans, upon the River Loire, where the Channel is cut for the Com∣munication of the Loire and the River Seine. In 1652. a Battle was fought here betwixt the Army of the King of France, and that of the Princes. The New Channel takes the same Name: in Latin, Brivodurum, and Breviodurus. Bricquia, a Province in the lesser Asia, formerly called Licia. Bridgend, a Market-Town in Glamorganshire in Wales, in the Hundred of New-Castle. Bridge-North, a Market-Town in Shropshire in the Hundred of Stottesdon upon the Severn. Hereto∣fore fortified; since demolished. Bridlingtou, or Burlington, a small Town in the County of York, where Mary Queen of England Lan∣ding from Holland, February, 22. 1642. was most barbarously treated by 4 Parliament Ships, which a great while plaid with their Cannon on the Town, and especially on that House in which the Queen was en∣tertained. Bridge-Water, a Corporation in Somersetshire, upon the South side of the River Parret, which about five Miles further falls into the Irish Sea; 13 Miles from Wells to the West, and 23 from Bristol to the South-West. It was a great and a populous Town, as Mr. Camden saith; but suffered very much in the old Rebellion by the Scots, July, 23. 1645. And on Sunday, July 5. 1685. the late Duke of Monmouth, Natural Son to Charles II. of ever blessed Memory, was entirely defeated (being then in Rebellion against K. James II.) upon a Moor near this place, by the Pro∣vidence of God, and the Courage of the Earl of Fe∣versham; who the same day marched to Bridge-Water, the Rebels having before his coming deserted it, and dispers'd themselves. The greatest Honor this Town has, is to give the Title of an Earl to the Right Ho∣nourable John Egerton, whose Father was created Earl of Bridge-VVater, May 17. 1617. in the 5th. Year of James I. being the Son and Heir of Thomas Egerton, Lord Chancellor of England, who was created Baron of Ellesmere in 1603, and Viscount Brackley in 1616. Bridport, a Market-Town in Dorsetshire. The Capital of its Hundred; 2 Miles from the Sea, to which it had formerly a very good Haven. This Town was famous in the time of K. Edward the Confessour. It sends 2 Burgesses to the Parliament. Brie, a Country, part within the Government of the Isle of France, and part in the Province of Cham∣pagne, betwixt the Rivers Seine and Marne. Meaux sur Marne is the Capital Town of it. It is very fruitful. In Latin call'd Bria, Brigeium, and Bri∣giensis saltus. Brie-Compte-Robert, a Town in the Country precedent, upon the River Iere; four or five Leagues from Paris. Brieg, Brega, a Town upon the Oder in Silesia in Germany, betwixt Oppelen and Breslaw. The same is the Capital of the Dutchy of Brieg. Brienne, a small Town in Champagne in France, upon the River Aube; with the Title of an Earl∣dom; near Troyes, between Bar-sur-Aube and Planci. This Place gives Name to the antient House of Brienne. Brighthelmston, a Market-Town in Sussex in Lewis-Rape by the Sea Side. Brignoville, Brinnonia, Brinnola, a Town and Bailywick in Provence in France, near the River Ca∣ramie: Understood by some, to be the Forum Ve∣conii; by others, the Matavonium of the Antients. Charles V. the Emperor, took it in 1536. The Lea∣guers surprized it in 1589. Brille, or Briel, a Town and Port of Holland, in a good Soil, but a gross Air, at the Confluence of the Rhine and the Meuse, in a small Island of this Name. It was surprized by the Dutch, in 1572. by the help of the Succors obtained from Queen E∣lizabeth: And this Action was as the first Founda∣tion of the Commonwealth of Holland.
Brin, Eburum, Arsicua, Brinum, Brina, a City of Moravia, seated upon the River Zwitta, where it falls into that of Swarta, 7 German Miles South of Olmitz. This was the only place which in 1645. and 1646. held out for the Emperour against the Swedes in all Moravia, when being besieg'd it broke the Swedish Army, and forc'd them to rise: call'd by some Bruna; written Brenne also. Brindisi, Brundusium, is an Archiepiscopal City in the Kingdom of Naples, which has a strong Castle, and a safe Harbour at the mouth of the Gulph of Ve∣nice: 36 Miles from Tarento to the East. Pompey retired hither after his overthrow, in the Year of Rome 705. and was obliged to leave the place again, because Caesar pursued him. In the Year 735. the incompara∣ble Virgil died here; that is, about 19 years before the coming of our Saviour. It has been several times ruin'd and repair'd. Brioude, Brivas, Vicus Briatensis, a great and antient Town in the Province of Auvergne in France, upon the Allier. The Emperour Avitus was bu∣ried in the Church of S. Julianus here: The Chapter takes the Title of Earls of Brioude, being in the first institution Knights Confederated to make War a∣gainst the Normans in the Year 898. § 2 Leagues from this place, stands Brioude la Vieille, upon the same River; where there is a Bridge to cover it, com∣pos'd of one Arch, so extraordinary long and high, as scarce to have its parallel in Europe. Briqueras or Briquerasco, Briquerascum, a con∣siderable Town in the Principality of Piedmont, 4 or 5 Leagues from Pignerol, with a Castle. Taken by the Sieur de Lesdiguieres in 1592. and retaken by Charles Emanuel Duke of Savoy, in 1594. Also fa∣mous in the Wars of Piedmont in the years 1629. 30. and 31. Brisach, Brisacus Mons, a City with a very strong Castle, in the Territory of Brisgow in Alsatia, with a Stone Bridge upon the Rhine; 6 German Miles from Basil to the North, and 7 from Strasburg, and a from Colmar. It was a Free Imperial City till 1330. when it was exempted, and given to the House of Austria; call'd therefore the Key of Germany, the Cittadel of Alsatia, and the Pillow on which the House of Austria slept with security. In 1633. Gustavus Horne, a Swede, besieg'd it vain: but in 1638. it was taken by the French, under the command of the Duke of Weimar; who are still in Possession of it; their Title being confirm'd by the Treaty of Westpha∣lia, or Munster, in 1648. and afterwards by the Treaty of the Pirenees, in 1659. Brisag, or Brisiaco, a Town under the Grisons, upon the Lake Majour in Italy; between Lo∣carna, Canobia, and Domo. Brisgow, Brisgovia, is a Province of Germany, lying on the East of the Rhine, and the West of Wirtenburg, and on the South clos'd with the Can∣ton of Basil. The principal place is Friburg. This Province is in part under the House of Austria, and in part under the French; Brisach (which was once its Capital) being under the latter; but the greatest part under the former. The Prince of Conde obtain'd a Victory here in 1644. when General Merci was kill'd. Brissach, a Town in the Province of Anjou in France, upon the River Aubance, below Saumur. It gives the Title of a Duke. Bristoll, Bristolium, Venta Belgarum, Venta Si∣lurum, is a noble City in the County of Somerset, upon the River Avon, which runs through the midst of it; and so part of it stands in Glocestershire; but then it is a County of itself, and belongs to nei∣ther of them. It is a neat, strong, clean, populous, rich, well traded City; and after London and York▪ the Third principal Place of England; the Inhabitants of this City Trading into all parts of America, and most other parts of the World: tho no where nam'd before the Year 1063. Robert Bishop of Constance, a Seditious Man, first Wall'd it, in the Reign of Wil∣liam Rufus against that King. It has a Stone Bridge, with Houses built on both sides of it over the River. And also a Castle, in which King Stephen was kept a Prisoner some time, after he had in vain besieg'd it. The Bishops See was Founded by Henry VIII. and made Suffragan to the Archbishop of Canter∣bury. In the beginning of the Rebellions against Charles I. it sided with the Parliament, and was on that account besieg'd by Prince Rupert, July 24. 1643. who took it in two days; under whom it continued till September 10. 1645. when it was sur∣rendred to Fairfax the Parliaments General. It was preserved from falling into the hands of the late Duke of Monmouth, by the Vigilance of the Duke of Beaufort, who was Lord Lieutenant of this City and its County. Britain. See England. New Britain, a Country in the Northern Ame∣rica, between Hudson's Bay and New France; dis∣cover'd, nam'd, and possess'd, by the English. For∣merly call'd Estoiteland. See Estoiteland. British Sea, Mare Britannicum, by the French call'd la Manche, is the known Sea betwixt England and France: Extending, according to Pomponius Mela, to the Islands of Sain and Osismiens; that is, to the Diocese of Treguier in Bretagne. Brive-la-Gaillarde, Briva Curretia, a Town in the Province of Limosin in France, upon the River Coureze: 2 or 3 Leagues from Tulles. Gombaud Ballo∣mer, natural Son to Clotaire I. King of France, was here Crown'd, after the death of Chilperick I. Not a large Place, but situated to its commendation. Brixen, Brixinio, an Episcopal City in the Coun∣ty of Tirol in Germany, under the Archbishop of Saltzburg. Heretofore a Free Imperial City; but now exempted. It lies at the Foot of the Mountain Bruneck▪ upon the River Eysach, where it receives another River call'd the Riencz, not far from Siben, a ruin'd City, out of which it sprang. It lies not above 2 Miles from the Confines of the Dominions of the State of Venice, and 13 from Trent. In the year 1080. the Emperour Henry IV. presided over a Coun∣cil here of 30 Bishops of his Party; who all subscri∣bing to his resentments, of the Excommunication and Degradation pronounced against him by Pope Gre∣gory VII. deposed the said Pope, elected Guibert Archbishop of Ravenna (who took the Name of Clement III.) to succeed him in the Chair of Rome, and Voted that the Emperour should carry his Arms into Italy to put their Decrees in execution. Brocalo, a Kingdom of Nigritia in Africa. Brockersberg, a Mountain between Thuringen and Franconia. Brockmerlandt, a Territory in Friseland. Brod, a small Town in Bosnia upon the Save; famous for the Victory which Prince Louis of Ba∣den obtain'd near it over the Bassa of Bosnia, Sept. 5. 1688. whereby the Turks, pro illa vice, lost that whole Country. Broitzchia, a Town in the Kingdom of Guzurate in the hither East-Indies, 12 Leagues from Surate: under the great Mogul. Bromley, a Market-Town in Kent, in Sutton Lath, upon the River Ravensburn. Here there is a College for 20 Clergymen's poor Widows, founded by Dr. Warner. The Seat of the Bishop of Rochester stands by it. Bromley Abbots, a Market-Town in Stafford∣shire in the Hundred of Pirehill.
Bromes-Grove, a Market-Town in Worcester∣shire in the Hundred of Halfshire upon the Banks of the River Salwarp. Bromyard, a Market-Town in Herefordshire in the Hundred of Brocash. Bronchorst, a Town in the Province of Guel∣derland upon the Issel, very near Zutphen. It gives the Title of an Earl. Bronsbroo, Bronsbroa, a Town of the Kingdom of Sweden, in the Province of Ostrogothia: where the Crowns of Sweden and Denmark held a Treaty of Peace in the Year 1645. Brough, a Market-Town in VVestmorland, in East Ward. Broughton, a Market-Town in Lancashire in the Hundred of Loynsdale. Brouage, one of the fairest and strongest Forts in all France, in Xaintonge, not far from Burdeaux. Brower, a Name given by Brower a Dutchman to the Streights discovered by him in 1643. to∣wards the Island of Statenland in the Sea of Ma∣gellan in America. Browershaven, a Town and Port in the Island of Schowen in Zeland,  Leagues from Ziriczee. Rich and Populous. Bruca, Pantagia, a River of Sicily. Brucomat, Brucomagus, a Town in Alsatia Bruges, Bruga, a City in Flanders, call'd by the Dutch Brugg, which was made a Bishops See by Paul IV. under the Archbishop of Mechlin; a large, beautiful, well traded Town, and has its name from the multitude of Bridges in it; being seated on a knot of Dikes, 8 Miles from Gant to the West, and 3 from Ostend to the East. This is under the Spaniards, and is one of the best they have left: be∣ing 4 Miles in Circuit, wonderfully well Peopled, and once exceeding rich. They reckon 60 handsom Churches in it. Brugneto, Brunetum, a City in the State of Genoua, which is a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Genoua, at the Foot of the Apennine, 50 Miles from Genoua to the East; of little compass, thinly inhabit∣ed, and ill built. Bruno, Prilis, a Lake and small River in the Territories belonging to Siena, once a Commonwealth in Italy, now a part of the Dukedom of Florence; 8 Miles from the City of Grosseto to the South-West. Brunsberg, Brunsberga, is a Royal City belong∣ing to the Kingdom of Poland in Prusia, but some years since mortgag'd to the Duke of Brandenburg: seated upon the great Bay call'd Frish Haff, on the West side of the River Passerg, 8 Miles from Mar∣genberg to the East, and the same distance from Ko∣ningsperg to the West. Brunsbuttel, a small Town in the Dukedom of Holstein in Germany, towards the Mouth of the Elb, under the King of Denmark; 2 or 3 Leagues from Glukstat. Brunswick, Brunopolis, Brunonis Vicus, is a City and Dukedom in Germany: the Dukedom is a part of the Dukedom of Saxony, bounded on the East with the Earldom of Mansfield, on the West with Westphalia, on the North with Lunenburgh, and on the South with Hassia. This Dukedom takes its name from Brunswick, the principal City in it, which lies upon the River Onacra and was a Free Im∣perial City or Hanse Town, the Metropolis of the antient Saxony: a rich, strong, populous City, or rather five Cities under one Law, and within one Wall, which is 8 English Miles in compass: built by Bruno Duke of Saxony, in 861. and from him it had its name. It fell into the hands of the Duke in 1671. and is now under their Dominion; it has a Castle lately built, and well fortified, since which time it is much decay'd. This City embrac'd the Reformation in 1522. and Professeth the Augustan Confession, as all the rest of that Dukedom doth. It lies 20 Miles from Hamburg to the North, upon the River Oker. Brussel, Bruxella, the chief City and Seat of the antient Dukes of Brabant, and after that of the Dukes of Burgundy, as it is at this day the Residence of the Spanish Governour of Flanders: seated upon the Sinne, and other Springs and Rivers, which make it one of the sweetest Situations in Europe; 8 Leagues from Antwerp to the South, and 4 from Lovaine; being partly in a Plain, and partly on a Hill. In the Cathedral Church of S. Gedulle they pretend to have an Host, stabb'd sometime by a Jew in indignation at the supposed presence of the Body of Christ, which shed Blood out of the Wound; and the Jew (they say) immediately was struck with death: Where∣as the Life and Conversion of the Man had been a greater Proof of the miracle. In Long. 25. 6. and Lat. 50. 50. § There is another small City of the same name in Germany, in the Bishoprick of Spire. Brutij, an antient People of Italy, descended o∣riginally from the Lacedaemonians. They were di∣stinguish'd into Cismontani and Tramontani, posses∣sing that part of Italy which we now call the further Calabria. In the second Punick War they ran over to Hannibal; whereby they lost their Reputation to that degree amongst the Romans, that they could never afterwards get to be employ'd but in servili∣ties, and even their name became a Proverb for a despicable Generation of People, living continually in meanness and shame. Bruton, a Market▪ Town in Somersetshire, the capital of its Hundred, upon the River Brue. The Lord Fitzharding has a noble Seat here. Bua, otherwise call'd Chiovo, is an Island of Dal∣matia near Spalatro, under the Venetians. It is ve∣ry near to the Island of Troghir. Bucephala, Alexandria Bucephalos, a Town in the Indies, built by Alexander M. in honor of his Horse. It is mentioned by Q. Curtius. The Moderns suppose that it is the same with Lahor now. See Lahor. Buchs, a small Principality within the Territory of Burgundy in France, near Medoc; belonging to the House of Foix and Candale. Buckenham the New, a Market-Town in Nor∣folk in the Hundred of Shropham. Buckenburgh, a small Town in Westphalia in Germany, where the Counts of Lippe-Buckenburgh (taking their Style from hence) have a Palace. Buckinghamshire, Buckinghamia, is divided on the South from Berkshire by the Thames, on the North it hath Northamptonshire and Bedfordshire; on the West Oxfordshire; and on the East Hert∣fordshire and Middlesex; a County very Fruitful, and chiefly employed in Grazing. The first Earl of this County was Walter Giffard, a great Man amongst the Normans, whose Son Walter died in 1164. In 1377. Richard II. conferred this Title upon his Uncle Thomas of Woodstock. Humfry Earl of Stafford was the first created Duke of Buckingham in 1444. Edward, the last of this Race, was Beheaded in the Reign of Henry VIII. in 1521. After which this Title lay vacant till 1623. when James I. created George Viscount Villiers, Duke of Buckingham; his Son George succeeded him, who died April 16. 1687. without Issue, and left the Title vacant. On the North of the River Ouse, in the North-west part of the County, stands the Town of Buckingham, which gives Name to the whole County. It was Wall'd before the Conquest in 915. by Edward the Elder, to secure it against the Danes: in after times there was a Castle built here, which is now intirely ruin'd; the Town stands upon a low ground, very commodious for Mills, and incircled by the River on
all sides but the North. And it is a Corporation, and sends Two Burgesses to the Parliament. Bnckor, a Town and Kingdom in the States of the Great Mogul in the East-Indies. The former stands upon the River Indus; the other is bounded by the Kingdoms of Tattan to the South, Multan to the North, Hajacen and Persia to the West, and Jesselmere to the East. Buda, Buda Heraclia, Aquinum, is the Capital of the Kingdom of Hungary: call'd by the Turks Budun, by the Germans Offen, by the French Bude, and by the Italians Buda. Heretofore a very great and rich City, till it fell into the hands of the Turks, who ruin'd most of its stately Houses and Palaces: it lies on the West side of the Danube, over against Pest, which is joyn'd to it by a Bridge of Boats: and is divided into two parts, the Upper and Lower; between which there is the distance of a Mile: the Lower Town is weak; but the upper Town is by Na∣ture one of the strongest Forts in the World, and has a very strong Castle on the West side: said to be built by one Buda, the Brother of Attila King of the Huns, and from him to have its Name. In 1279. there was a Council held here under Pope Ni∣colas III. and Ladislaus III. King of Hungary. It was much improved by Sigismund King of Hungary about the Year 1387. and adorned with many stately Buildings; amongst the rest with a Castle, where at first the Kings and afterwards the Turkish Visiers re∣sided; which was so strong, that it was thought Im∣pregnable. The Successors of this Prince augment∣ed this City, and strengthened it with new Fortisica∣tions. Solyman II. Emperor of the Turks took it first in 1526. Ferdinand the Arch-Duke of Austria, retook it the next Year after. In 1529 Solyman re∣took it again, after the Garrison had stood eleven Aslaults; and restored it to the Weywood of Tran∣silvania, who had lost it before. Ferdinando in 1540. or 1541. attacked it again, when Solyman coming the third time to relieve it, raised the Siege, and made himself Master of the place by a Stratagem and Surprise. In 1598. Matthias the Arch-Duke a∣gain besieged it, and after in 1601. again, but with no Success. In 1684. the Duke of Lorrain sat be∣fore it from July 14. to November 1. but was for∣ced to rise and leave it: this brave General in 1686. reinvested it June 15. and after a bloody defence made by the Governor, took it by storm September 2. following; though the Grand Visier stood and looked on with an Army of 50000 Men, and was no way able to help him. In the lower Town there is a Hot and a Cold Bath, both adorned very much by the Turks, who are great lovers of Baths: it lies 49 German Miles from Belgrade to the North, 54 from Vienna to the South. Long. 42. 15. Lat. 47. 7. The Imperialists found in it 400 Peices of Artillery, a Treasure of above 300000 Ducats, and the antient Library of the Kings of Hungary, aug∣mented by Matthias Corvinus, entire; which last was ordered to be transported to Vienna. Buddesdalc, a Market-Town in Suffolk in the Hundred of Hartesmere. Here there is a Grammar School endowed with certain Scholarships assigned to Cambridge. Budoa, Butua, a City of Dalmatia, upon the shoars of the Adriatick Sea, which is a Bishops See under the Archbishop of Antivari: well Fortified, under the Dominion of the Venetians, but it is small; and has been severely handled by the Turks, who took it in 1571. and were obliged soon after to re∣turn it to the Venetians again. In 1667. it was al∣most ruined by an Earthquake. This City lies ten Miles from Antivary to the West, between the Gulph of Cattaro, and that of Lodrin, in Long. 43. 30. Lat. 42. 23. Budziack, more antiently called Bessarabia, which see. Buhiera, Arapotes, Maria, Marcotis, a Lake in Egypt. Buenos Aytes, or Civitad de la Trinidad, a City and an Episcopal See in the Province of Paraguay upon the River Plata in the West-Indies, whither the King of Spain was perswaded to bring his Silver from Potosi; but found it not convenient, by reason of the Vicinity of the Portugals in Brasil. Bugen, a Town and Kingdom in the Island of Ximo, belonging to Japan. Bugey, a small Country in France, betwixt the Rhosne and the Ains. The former separates it from Savoy and Dauphine, the other from Bresse and Bur∣gundy. In length 16 Leagues, and about 10 in breadth: the Capital Town of it is Belley. This Country belonged to the Sovereigns of Bresse, till the Year 1621. that it submitted to the Crown of France. Bugia, a City and Province in Barbary in the old Kingdom of Algiers. The latter extends itself along the Sea Coast, betwixt the River Sufegmar to the East, the River Major to the West, and the Moun∣tains to the South: the other stands upon the Mouth of the Major with a good Port, and was heretofore a Bishops See; they now reckon about 8000 Houses in it. It is the Salda or Saldae of the Antients. In 1508▪ the Spaniards took it, but the Turks soon after removed them. § Also a Town upon the Nile in Nu∣bia in Africa towards the Frontiers of Egypt, betwixt Jalac and Assuana: written sometime Bugiha Bugna, Abugana, a Kingdom in Aethiopia, Mountainous and small. Built, a Market-Town in the County of Breck∣nock in Wales, the chief of its Hundred▪ Bulgaria, pars Moesiae inferioris, is a County which is bounded on the East with the Euxine Sea; on the West with Servia; on the North with the Danube, by which it is parted from Moldavia and Walachia; and on the South with Thrace. It has this name from the Bulgares, a Scythian People, who in 566. possessed themselves of it. This Nation first received the Christian Faith about 700. but were not totally gained over to Christianity till about 860. since which time they have been subject to the Juris∣diction of the Patriarch of Constantinople: first un∣der Kings of their own, till 1310. when they were Conquered by Charles King of Hungary, having been before extreamly weakened by their Wars against the Eastern Emperors. They were finally subjugated by Amurath II. Emperor of the Turks about 1427. e∣ver since which time they have been subject to that Empire. The Country for the most part is full of sharp rugged Hills, Branches of the great Mountain Haemus, which divides it from Thrace; so that it is the most unpleasant and worst peopled part of Dacia; the People are accordingly patient of all Toil and La∣bor▪ and brutishly Valiant. Bullerborn, Fons Tumultuarius, a Fountain near the Village of Oldenbeck in the Province of Westpha∣lia in Germany. It is remarked for using to yield its Water with extraordinary noise and unequal Inter∣missions. Bullingbrooli, an antient Market-Town in Lin∣colnshire. The Capital of its Hundred; upon the spring of a River, which falls into the Witham. This was the Birthplace of Henry IV, thence surnamed of Bullingbrook. Made an Earldom first in the Person of S. Oliver S. Johns, descended from the Grand-Mother of Henry VII. which Title is now enjoyed by the Right Honorable Pawles S. John,
Bungay, a Market-Town in Suffolk in the Hun∣dred of VVangford, upon the Banks of the River VVa∣ve nay. Bungo, a Town and Kingdom in the Island of Ximo belonging to Japan in the East-Indies: this is in the Eastern part of the Island. The King and a number of his Subjects had once embraced the Chri∣stian Religion, but the terrible Persecution that fol∣lowed, reduced them to their old again. Buntingford, a Market-Town in Hartfordshire, in the Hundred of Edwinstree. Buqhan, or Buchan, a County of Stotland, bounded on the North and East with the German Ocean; on the West and South with Murray and Marr. The Castles of Stanes and Fendracht are the most considerable places in it. It affords good Pasturage. Bura, an antient Town of Achaia in the Morea, upon the Gulph of Corinth: famous heretofore for an Oracle of Hercules, whose Statue was Adored in a neighbouring Cavern. This Town had the fortune to be over-turn'd by an Earthquake. The remaining ruins have taken since the name of Pernitea; betwixt Patras and Vasilica. Buragrag, a River in the Kingdom of Fez in Africa, separating the Provinces of Fez and Thes∣mena. It falls into the Altantick at Cap de Sola, having at the Mouth of it a Town standing of the same Name. Buren, a small Town with the Title of an Earl∣dom, in the Province of Guelderland, 3 Leagues from Bosleduc and Ʋtrecht, near the River Slingh. Burford, a Market-Town in Oxfordshire, in the Hundred of Bampton, near the River Windrush. About the Year 750. Cuthbert King of the West Saxons overthrew Ethelbald King of the Mercians here, and won his Banner, wherein was depicted a golden Dragon. Whence came the Custom of this Town of making every year a Dragon in Jolity. It gives the Title of an Earl to the Duke of S. Albans. Burgaw, Burgavia, a Country and Marquisate in the Circle of Schwaben in Germany, lying along the Danube. It receives this name from Burgaw upon the River Mindel, which is the capital Town of it. This Country is about 10 Leagues broad and long; and has been possess'd by the House of Austria ever since the year 1282. Burgh, a Market-Town in Lincolnshire in the Hundred of Candleshow. Burglave, is an antient Diocess in the North Iut∣land, where now is the Diocess of Alborch, called by the Latin writers Alburgensis. Burnham Market, a Town in Norfolk in the Hundred of Brother Cross. So call'd in distinction from other Burnhams which are not Market-Towns. Burgos, Masburgi, Bravum, Burgi, called by the French Bourgues, is the Capital of old Castile. Formerly a Regal City, and grew up out of the Ru∣ins of Occa: made an Archbishops See by Gregory XIII. in 1571. having been a Bishops See from 1075. It stands on the North side of the River Arlanzon, which falls into the Duero below Valladolid; amongst the Mountains, upon the descent of an Hill, and declines itself also apace, being Inhabited but by a few Peo∣ple. Anciently call'd Bravum, and Masburgi: 37 Spanish Miles North of Madrid. In Long. 16. 32. and Lat. 43. 10. Burick, or Budrick, Budrichium, a strong Town in the Dutchy of Cleves in Germany, upon the Rhine, 2 or 3 Leagues from Gueldres: under the Hollan∣ders. This was one of the Four Towns which the French besieged at the same time at the opening of the Campagne of the year 1672. The Mareschal de Turenne commanded the Siege. Burnley, a Market-Town in Lancashire in the Hundred of Blackburn. Burntwood, a Market-Town in Essex in the Hundred of Chelmsford. Burrowbridg, a Market-Town in the West Ri∣ding of Yorkshire in the Hundred of Claro. Burton, a Market-Town in Lincolnshire in the Hundred of Manlake, upon the River Trent, near its fall into the Humber. § Another in Westmor∣land in Loynsdale Wapentake, near the great Hill call'd Farleton-knot-hill. § A Third in Stafford∣shire in the Hundred of Offlow, upon the River Trent. Bursa, Prusa, called by the Turks Bruss, by the Italians Bursa and Bourse, by the French Brusse, is a City of the lesser Asia, in the Province of Chintale, antiently Bithynia: built by Prusius King of Bithy∣nia, in the year of the World 3179. and gave Name to that Part of that Kingdom in which it stood. Ta∣ken by Orchanes the Turk, in 1325. after which it was the Seat of their Empire, till they took Adriano∣ple and removed it thither in 1402. In ancient time a Bishop's See under the Archbishop of Nicomedia; but afterwards it became a Metropolitan See of it self. It is two Miles in length, well built and peopled, and one of the richest Cities in Asia; and to this day en∣nobled with the Sepulture of the Princes of the Otto∣man Race, except the Emperors themselves: 5 Miles from the Propontis, 30 East from Constantinople. In Long. 57. 30. Lat. 41. 49. Bury Saint Edmonds, Villa Regia, Villa Fau∣stini, is a delicate sweet Town in the County of Suf∣folk, upon the River Lark, (as may seem by the Town of Larkford, a little more North) which falls into the great Ouse, between Ely and Little-Port-Edmund surnamed Ironside, one of the Saxon Kings, founded here a Church in the beginning of Christi∣anity, and called it the Royal Town; but after that Prince was brought hither from Hoxon in the same County, it was called St. Edmonds Bury. King Kanutus the Dane, to expiate the sin of his Father Swaine or Sueno, who murdered this Prince, built here a new Church and an Abby; and brought in the Black Friers, about 1020. to whom he gave the Town of Bury, and many noble Mannors thereabout; so that at the suppression it was valued at 2336 l. the year; a vast Revenue then. They governed the Town by a Seneschal or Steward; and when it was allowed to be a Corporation, the Alderman was not permitted to exercise any Authority till he had taken his Oath of Obedience to the Abbot. Afterwards Herveie the Sacrist, compassed the Town with a Wall, whereof there remain still some few Relicks; and Abbot New∣port Walled the Abby, and the Pope granted it great Immunities. Edward VI. founded here a Grammar School. Charles I. of Pious memory, Created Hen∣ry Jermin Baron of S. Edmonds Bury, Sept. 8. 1643. The delightfulness of its Situation, and the goodness of its Air, have ever procured it the residence of a great many of the Gentry, who living here inrich the Inhabitants, and support the Town, which would o∣therwise fall to decay. Henry II. overthrew Robert Earl of Leicester and his Flemings, (taking the Earl and his Wife prisoners), in a Battle not far from hence. Busiris, an antient City in Egypt in the middle of the Delta, where was formerly a vast Temple consecrated to Isis, whose Festivals they observed with the greatest Solemnity. Bussereth, Bostra, a City of Arabia the Stony, the Native place of Marcus Julius Philippus, Emperour of the Romans, and called from him Phi∣lippopolis. It is an Archbishops See, under the Patri∣arch of Jerusalem, being taken out of the Patri∣archat
of Antioch; and lies sixty Miles East from the Sea of Tiberias, in Long. 69. 45. Lat. 31. 30. Called in some Monies of the Emperor Severus, and his Mo∣ther Mamaea, Colonia Alexandrina; now under the Turks. Butera, a Town in the Island of Sicily, with the Title of a Principality in the Province call'd Valle di Noto; about 4 Leagues from the Sea. Butow, a small Town in Pomerania upon the Ri∣ver Stolp, towards the Frontiers of the Royal Prüssia. Under the Duke of Brandenburg. Butrino, a place upon the Consines of Epirus, be∣longing to the Venetians. It was heretofore a consi∣derable City, and the Seat of a Bishop. Call'd by the Antients Buthrotum. The Turks ruin'd it about 120 years ago; and the Venetians have not yet restored it to it's pristine Dignity. It stands over against the Island of Corfou, upon a Gulph of its own Name: being many times written Butrinto, or Botrinto. Button's Bay, the same with Hudson's Bay in the North of America. Butua, a City of the Lower Aethiopia in Africa, under the Empire of Monotopia, the Head of a King∣dom of the same Name, towards the River Zambre. Buyil Mancy, a River of Aethiopia. Le Buys, a small Town in the Province of Dau∣phine in France, in the Country call'd the Baronies, upon the River Oveze and the Borders of Provence. Surpriz'd by the Huguenots in 1568. Buzanich, Pausinus, a River of Dalmatia. Buzenzais, a Town in the Dukedom of Berri in France, upon the River Indre, and the Borders of Touraine. Bychow, Bychovia, a Town belonging to the Kingdom of Poland, in Lithuania, upon the Bo∣rysthenes, between Mohilow and Rohuczo, two Ci∣ties, ill handled by the Moscovites, some few Years since. Byrsa, the Name of an antient Cittadel at Carthage in Africa, built by Queen Dido; which had upon the top of it a Temple dedicated to Aesculapius. In the Phaenician Language, introduc'd by Dido into A∣frica, it is written Botzra or Bosra, signifying a Tower: Whereof the Word Bursa, with the Fable of the Hide thereon grounded, was but a Grecian Corruption alluding to the little Morsels of Leather stamped for Money in antient times; with which she purchas'd the Ground for the Building of this Castle and the City of Carthage. Byzacena, an antient City and Province of Africa within the Kingdom of Tunis. The City has some∣time been a Bishop's See under the Archbishop of Carthage. In the Year 646. a Council of 42 Pre∣lates was assembled at it against the Monothelites; besides others of less Note, in 602. 541. and 522. CAB. CAbe, or Cheyles, or Queiles, Chalybs, a River of Spain, rising in the Kingdom of Aragon, which waters Taracona, and falls into the Ebro. The Wa∣ters of this River have been ever famous for the tem∣pering of Steel. Cabeston, a Town in the Province of Languedoc in France near Nismes. Cabo d' Istria, a City of Istria in Italy, under the Dominion of the Venetians, upon the Adriatick Gulph; heretofore call'd Justinopolis, from Justi∣nian the Emperor, who rebuilt it. This is the Capi∣tal of Istria, and a Bishop's See under the Archbishop of Aquileia. It is a small Place in an Island three Bow shoots from the Continent, to which there is a Passage by Bridges; and in the midst of it is an antient Castle: 30 Italian Miles from Aquileia to the South-East, and 75 from Venice to the East: Long. 36. 26. Lat. 45. 31. Cabrieres, a Town in the County of Venaissin in Provence in France. Cabul, a Province or Kingdom in the East-Indies, under the Great Mogul, near the Fountains of the River Indus; it has a City of the same Name, standing upon a small River which falls into the Indus. The whole Country is full of Mountains, but very fruitful, and rea∣sonably well traded. The Rivers Nilab and Behat, fal∣ling into the Indus, have their Sources therein. Long. 305. and Lat. 31. In this City their Kings resided heretofore. There are two Fortresses standing in it. Cabusco, a Mountain in the Kingdom of Persia. Cacagioni, Charox, a City of the Lesser or Crim Tartary. Cacari, a River and Town of Mongrelia. Cacceres, Caceres de Camarhina, a City in the principal Philippine Island of Lusson or Manilha upon the Streights of Manilha, with a good Port to the same; and a Bishop's See under the Archbishop of Manilha. Cacelina, a City of Bithynia, antiently call'd Chalcedon. Cachan, a large City in the Province of Hyrach in Persia; 22 Leagues from Ispahan. Above a thou∣sand Families of Jews (said to be of the Tribe of Juda) dwell in it. It is a famous Place for Brocards. Cachar, the Indus or great River of the East-Indies. Caco, Cacus, Caunus, a Mountain in the Kingdom of Aragon, in the Confines of the Kingdom of Old Castile; now call'd also Moncaio. Cadenac, a small Town in the County of Quercy in France, upon the River Lot and the Borders of Ro∣vergue; 8 or 9 Leagues from Cahors. Some take it to be the Ʋxellodunum of the antient Gaul:, which stood out the last of all their Towns against Caesar. Cadillac, a small Town in the Province of Gui∣enne in France, near the Garrone; in a fertile Soil, and adorn'd with one of the best Castles in this Pro∣vince. Cachieu, or Sierra Liona, a Sea Port Town on the Coast of Guiney, much frequented by the Euro∣peans, towards the Promontory of Leaena. This Place was first discovered by the Portugals in 1452. Cadiz, Gades, is an Island and City on the Coast of Spain, in the Atlantick Ocean; call'd Cadis and Cales by the English, and Cadice by the Italians: But small, as being only 4 Leagues in length; whereas it was once much greater, as Pliny and Strabo both affirm. It lies on the Coast of the Kingdom of An∣dalusia, to which it is now joyn'd by a Bridge between the Outlet of the River Guadalquivir or Baetis, and the Streights of Gibraltar. On the Western Shoar of this Island lies CADIS, which gives Name to the Island, built by the Phenicians, and is perhaps the oldest Town in Spain. In the times of the Ro∣mans it was made a Municipal City, and one of the Juridical Resorts for the Province of Baetica; in which time it was thought one of the Noblest and Richest Cities in all Spain; scarce yeilding to any in the Empire for Greatness, Magnificence, or the Num∣ber and Quality of the Inhabitants; here living at one time five hundred Roman Knights, which Number was not equalled in any other Place but Padua only; beside the great Concourse of Merchants from all places of the World; which occasioned Cor∣nelius Balba, a Native of it, to build a New Town to the old one. By the Moors at the Con∣quest
of Spain, it was utterly ruined, and so conti∣tinued till it was recovered from them by the Spa∣niards, who rebuilt and fortified it, and made it the Magazine for their Navies: Yet it was taken by the English in one Day, under Robert Earl of Essex, and Sir Walter Rawleigh, in which they burnt the Indian Fleet, consisting of forty Sail of Ships, whose Lading was worth eight Millions of Crowns; overcame the Spanish Navy, which consisted of fifty seven Men of War; took the S. Michael and S. Andrew, two great Gallions, with their Lading, and carried away more Martial Furniture than could be again supplied in ma∣ny Years; forced the Town, in which they slew and took Prisoners 4000 Foot, and 600 Horse, and brought thence a considerable Booty in 1596. This City is a Bishops See under the Archbishop of Sevil. Long. 14. 10. Lat. 36. 28. Juno had a Temple for∣merly in her Honor in this Island, thence call'd Juno∣nis Insula; and also Hercules another, in which Caesar wept to reflect upon the Actions of Alexander the Great at the Age of thirty three. After the Reduction of Spain by Caesar, he left a Roman Colony at Cadis with the Name of Julia Gaditana. The Antients believed it to be the utmost boundary of Navigation; calling the two Mountains near it, at the Mouth of the Streights, the Pillars of Hercules. Here the Spanish Gallions rendezvouse. It is one of the Keys of Spain, and of so very great Importance, that Charles V. re∣commended it particularly, together with Flushing in the Low-Countries, and Goulet in Africa, to the Care of his Son King Philip II. as absolutely necessary for the Conservation of his Empire. Columella was a Native hereof, with Canius a Poet mentioned by Martial. Il Cadoriue, the most Northern Country of all Italy towards the County of Tyrol and the Alpes; contained within the Marcha Trevisana, in the States of the Republick of Venice. Its Capital Town is Pieve di Cadore. Cadouin, a famous Abbey of the Order of the Cistercians in the Province of Perigord in France; where they pretend to preserve a Handkerchief of our Saviour's, brought out of Jerusalem in 1105. and since visited by S. Lewis K. of France, in 1269. by Charles VI. and Lewis XI. as a most extraordinary Relick. Caen, Cadomus, famous for a Bishop's See and an University, on the River Orne, about 4 Leagues from the British Sea, 28 from Roan to the South. In the year 1063. the Archbishop of Roan held a Council here in the Presence of William the Conqueror King of England; who died in 1087. in the 74th year of his Age at Roan: and being deserted after his Death by all his Friends and Servants, was after a long time in∣terr'd by the Monks here with small Pomp, in the Abbey of St. Stephen which he him self had Founded, as his Queen had done that of the Holy Trinity. The U∣niversity was Founded by Henry V. K. of England, who took this City from the French, after a sharp resistance, by Storm in 1417. Its Long. is 22. 20. Lat. 49. 40. The learned Bochartus was none of the least Orna∣ments of this Place. They bear three Fleur de Lysses in their Arms, as a Token of their Fidelity to the Crown. Caer-Cadon, the Welsh Name of the City of Bath. Caerdif, See Landaff. Caerick-Fergus. See Knock-Fergus. Caer-Leon, Chester. Caer-Leon, Isca Legionis, Legio Secunda, an antient Roman Town upon the Ʋsk in the County of Monmouth, which was once one of the Metropolitan Seats of Britain, and an University, till the See was removed to S. Davids. The City was ruined in the Reign of Henry II. but there are still many very honourable Marks of its Antiquity and Splendor digged up here, for which the Reader may consult Mr. Camden. The Romans quartered the Second Legion, called Augusta, in it, to bridle the Silures. King Arthur kept his Court here. It stands 9 Miles East from Landaf, 21 from Brecknock South-East, and 26 from Here∣ford South-West. Newport has sprung out of its Ruins, and stands a little beneath it on the Severn. Caer-Lud, London. Caermarthenshire, is one of the Twelve Counties in VVales; bounded on the East by Glamorganshire and Brecknock, on the West by Pembroke, on the North by Cardigan, from which it is separated by the River Tivy; and on the South by the Irish Sea. This County is said by Mr. Camden to be very fruitful, and in some places to have plenty of Coal Mines, and to abound in Cattle. It takes its Name from the prin∣cipal City, which stands upon the River Tiny, about 5 Miles from the Sea: called by Ptolomy, Maridu∣num; by Antonius, Muridunum. It was Walled with Brick in the times of Giraldus Cambrensis, but was then decaying: Pleasantly seated between Woods and Meadows, and very venerable for its great Antiquity: taken from the VVelch in the Reign of VVilliam the Conqueror, after this by them retaken and burnt twice; till being first strengthened with a Castle by Henry Turbervil, an English Man, and after that walled about by Gilbert de Clare, it recovered some∣thing of its former Glory. The Princes of VVales settling here the Chancery and Exchequer for South VVales. Caernarvanshire, has on the North and West the Irish Sea, on the South Merioneth, and on the East Denbighshire; parted from the Isle of Anglesey by the River Menay. All the middle parts of it are covered and filled with Mountains; so that Mr. Camden calls these Hills Alpes Britannicas, the British Alpes; and saith they afforded the greatest Security to the Welsh in times of VVar: and so abounded with Grass, that they seemed sufficient alone to have fed all the Cattle of VVales. The Western parts are more level, and yield plenty of Barley. The chief Town or City, is seated in this part of the County, upon the River Menay; and was built by Edward I. King of England, about 1283. Small and almost round, but strong, and defended by a beautiful Ca∣stle. Edward II. was born here, and Surnamed from this Town, who was the first of the English Princes that bore the Title of Prince of VVales. In after times these Princes setled here the Chancery for North-VVales. Robert Dormer Baron of VVing was crea∣ted Viscount and Earl of Carnarvan in the sourth Year of the Reign of King Charles I. who after∣wards lost his Life valiantly for that Prince at Newberry, in 1643. to whom succeeded Charles his Son. Caerphilly, a Market-Town in the County of Gla∣morgan in VVales, where the Earl of Pembroke has a Noble Castle. It is the Capital of its Hundred. Caerwis, a Market-Town in Flintshire, in the Hundred of Coleshill. Caeron, a Country in Assyria, where Josephus says the Relicks of Noah's Ark were to be seen in his time. It produces your odoriferous Wood. Caesarea, Palestina, was anciently call'd the Tower of Straton: But Herod the Great, rebuilding it, called it Caesarea, in honor of Augustus: It is now call'd Caisar. It lies on the shoars of the Mediterra∣nean Sea, in the Holy Land; 30 Miles to the South from Ptolemais, and 45 from Jerusalem. After the Ruin of Jerusalem, it became the Metropolis of Pa∣lestine, and the Seat of the Prefect or Governor; the Bishop of Caesarea gained thereby the Authority of a Primate over the Bishop of Jerusalem, and for some
Ages maintained it; but in after Councils the Bishop of Jerusalem was exempted and made a Patriarch; several great Councils have been held here. Eusebius Pamphi∣lus the Church Historian was in his time Bishop of it. Cornelius, the first converted Gentile, was baptized here by S. Peter. S. Paul was a Prisoner here. And Origen taught here. But in 653. after a Siege of 7 years, Mu∣havia a Saracen took it from the Christians. In the Holy War it was several times taken and retaken; till at last intirely ruined by Barsus a Saracen. Long 66. 15. Lat. 32. 20. §. Caesarea Magna in Cappadocia, the Episcopal Seat heretofore of S. Basil. See Caisar. §. Caesarea Philippi. See Balbec. §. Caesarea in A∣frica, an antient City mention'd with Honor in the Roman History, upon the Coast of the Mediterranean; believed to be the same with the Iol of Ptolemy, Pliny, and Mela. It became a Bishop's See since Christianity, and likewise an University that produced divers Poets and Philosophers of Note, in the time that the Ara∣bians were Victorious in Africa. In the Year 959. the Caliphs ruined it. The Remains of its Walls make it appear to have been above 3 Leagues in Circuit: call'd by the Africans Tiguident. Caffa, a considerable City and Sea-Port in Crim Tar∣tary, upon the Eastern side of the Peninsula East of the City of Crim; supposed to be the Cavum of the Antients. It is a flourishing Mart, and furnished with a large and capacious Haven: Heretofore possessed by the Genoese, who (saith Dr. Heylin) by the Help of this Port and the Plantation they had in Pera, on the North Side of Constantinople, engrossed all the Trade of the Euxine Sea into their own hands. In 1475. it was taken by Mahomet the Great; ever since it has been in the hands of the Turks, and though by them much ruin'd, is still the principal Place in that Demy-Island. The Turks govern it by a Bashaw they send thither; and although the Tartars can possess them∣selves of it when they please, yet they chuse rather to leave it in his hands than to take it into their own. The Venetians have often sollicited a free Commerce with it for the Benefit of its Commodities: but the Port has constantly refused to suffer their Vessels to pass into the Black Sea for Reasons of State. They reckon about 4000 Houses of Mahometans, Tartars, and Christians; whereof some Latins, Greeks, and some Armenians, to the Number of about 800, who are obliged to wear a Distinction from the rest in their Bonnets. Caffreria, a Country of Africa of large extent. It lies from the Kingdom of Angola on the North to the Cape of Good Hope, and is bounded East, West, and South with the Ocean; the South-Eastern part is very fruitful, and well peopled; the rest barren, Moun∣tainous, and little peopled. The Inhabitants are so barbarous, that they are called by this Name from their rude way of living, which signifies the Lawless People; they were all heretofore Man-eaters, and ma∣ny of them continue such to this day. They call them∣selves Hottentots. Mr. Herbert an English Man, who was in these Parts, will scarce allow them to be perfect Men; and saith they sell Man's Flesh in the Shambles. They acknowledg a Soveraign Being under the Name of Humma, which they adore when he sends good Weather: But in cold and rainy, or very hot Seasons, they change their Praises of him, into Com∣plaints against him. Cagliari, Caralis, Calaris, a City of Sardinia, an Island in the Mediterranean Sea, which is the Ca∣pital, and the Seat of the Governor, on the South side of the Island upon an Hill: Also an Archbishop's See, and an University. When the Moors were Ma∣sters of this Island they ruined this City; but James II. King of Aragon recovering it Anno Christi 1330. the Pisans rebuilt the Town, which is now become great and rich under the Spaniards. It has three large Suburbs, a Castle and a very capacious Haven. The famous Lucifer was Archbishop of this See in the Reign of Constantine M. Pope Hillary was born here, and Martin King of Sicily died here in 1409. Long. 32. 12. Lat. 37. 30. The Cape Cagliari derives its Name from hence. Cagli or Caglio, Callium, Cale, Calle, a small City in the Dukedom of Ʋrbino, which is a Bi∣shop's See under the Archbishop of Ʋrbino; seated upon the River Metro, at the foot of the Apennine, 14 Leagues from Ʋrbino to the South-West, and the same Distance from Eugubio to the North-East. It was under the Dominion of the Pope in 1289. Caiors or Cahors, Doveona, Divona, Cadurcum, the principal City of Quercy in Guienne in France upon the River Loth, over which it has three Bridges. It is a large, fine, and strong City, and a Bishops See under the Archbishop of Alby ever since 1678. before which time it was under the Archbishop of Berry: ten Leagues from Alby to the North, and 45 from Bour∣deaux to the East. Pope John XXII. being born here, founded an University in it in 1331. The Bi∣shops take the Title of Earls of Cahors. Henry IV. King of Navarre, besieged it in 1580. and reduced it in three Days; since which time its Castle and For∣tifications have been demolished. Cajania, a Province of Sweden which is often also called East-Bothinia; between the Botner Sea, Lapland, and Finland. Cajanburg, the principal Town within the for∣mer Territory, which gives Name to it: it lies to∣wards Lapland upon the Lake Ʋla; with a Castle for its Defence and Honor. Cajazzo, Calatia, a City in the Province of Lavo∣ro in the Kingdom of Naples, about 7 Miles East of Capua; near the River Voltorno, and a Bishop's See under the Arch-Bishop of Capoiia. It was considerable in the times of the Caesars; a Colony having been setled there by Julius Caesar, as Apianus Alexandri∣nus saith, which on that account joyn'd with Au∣gustus. But now very small and in a declining Con∣dition. Cajenne, an Island to the South of the Mouth of the River Cajenne (which gives Name to it) in the Province of Guyana in America, under the French; 18 Leagues in Circuit. The River Cajenne springs from the Mountains, near the Lake of Parima, and continues its Course about 100 Leagues through the Country of the Galibes, before it falls into the Ocean with this Island in its Embraces. The Hol∣landers settled themselves here in 1656. and again in 1676. but were both times expelled by the French, who were the prior Occupants. Cajtta. See Gajetta. Caifum, or Caifung, one of the principal Cities in China, seated on the South of the River Croceus, in the Province of Honan, in Long. 142. 35. It was heretofore the ordinary Residence of the Emperors of China, till the Year 1642. that the Usurper Lyncungh besieged it: To drown whose Army, the People piercing the Banks of the River Croceus (which lies higher than the Town) brought the Water upon them∣selves more than on the Enemy, with so great an Impe∣tuosity, that the Houses were all overturned, three hun∣dred thousand Inhabitants drown'd, and the whole Town changed into a Lake from that Day. Caiman, a greater, and Lesser Island, North of Cuba, in the Gulph of Mexico; known by the Tor∣toise-Fishing-Trade there. Caiphas, a City of Phoenicia, at the foot of Mount Carmel, and heretofore an Episcopal See under the Archbishop of Tyre: Understood by some to be the
Porphyrcum of Polybius and Stephanus. The Lords hereof were of high renown in the time that the Christians were Masters of the Holy land. Cairo, Babylon, Memphis, Cairus, the Capital of Egypt, and indeed the greatest City in all Africa: by the Arabians call'd Alchair; seated on the East side of the River Nile, about 1 Mile from it; there is a Passage from the River into it, which divides the Town in the middle. This City sprang out of the ruins of Memphis and Babylon, which stood not far from it on the Western Shoar of the Nile, and was built by the Saracens, or Moors, after they be∣came Masters of Egypt; the Califfs of which Nation for a long time resided here, as did afterwards the Sultans. In 1517. it was Conquered by Selim the Turk, and it has ever since been in their hands; but is now sensibly declined from what it was. The Pa∣triarch of Alexandria resides here, who has six an∣tient Greek Churches in the place; there are many more belonging to the Cophtites; for whose Convi∣ction in the business of Nestorianisme, a Council was held here in 1582. by the order of Pope Gre∣gory XIII. but without effect, tho the Patriarch of the Cophtites had been first gain'd over to the Perswasion of the Latens. They have an Aqueduct of 350 Arches, which brings the water from the River to the Town. Its chiefest Manufacture is Tapestry. Three Leagues lower, the Nile is divided into two Branches, which make the Delta. It is 8 Miles in compass, and has at the South end of it a stately Castle, the Palace of the Mamaluck Sultans, built upon a Mountain which overlooks the City and a great part of the Country: When the Turks took it, it was very strong, but Se∣lim ruin'd a great part of it; and that which re∣mains, serves for the residence of the Turkish Bassa, who hath the Government of this Kingdom. About 10 Miles from this City stand those famous Pyra∣mids which have in all Ages been so much admired, and are certainly the most antient Buildings in the whole World, and may in all probability not perish before the general Conflagration. Long. 38. 48. Lat. 36 40. Cairoan, Cyrene, an antient and once very noble City in Africa, mentioned in the Acts of the Apo∣stles; and now almost ruin'd and depopulated by the Turks, in whose hands it is: seated right over∣against Matapan, the most Southern Cape of the Morea; an Archbishops See under the Patriarch of Alexandria, and once famous not only for its Anti∣quity, (being built in the year of the World 3560. 143 years after Rome;) but also for Learning, it having produced many noble Greek Writers; and particularly Aristippus, the founder of the Sect of the Cyrenaick Philosophers, with the ingenious Areta his Daughter, who succeeded him in his School. The Country antiently call'd Libya Cyrenaica, com∣prehending the Five Cities of Berenice, Teuchire, Ptolomais, Apollonia, and Cyrene, derived its name from hence. It had sometime the honour to bear the Title of a Kingdom. For in the Year of Rome 658. we read of a Ptolomy surnamed Apion, King of Cyrene, nomi∣nating the Romans to be his Heirs. The Libya Cy∣renaica was afterwards call'd Pentapolis from these its Cities, and now Mestrata. Long. 50. 00. Lat. 31. 20. § Also a Town upon the River Capullia in the Kingdom of Tunis, about 14 Leagues from the Sea. Built in 652. by the Caliphs of Syria, and adorn'd with a sumptuous Mosque, where you see the Sepulchres of the Kings of Tunis. For want of Foun∣tains in so dry and barren a Soil as this Town stands in, they drink altogether of the Water of the Ci∣stern. There has been formerly an University here, frequented from all the parts of Africa. It is the Thysdrus of the Antients. The Arabians call it Cai∣ravan: And a chief Pontiff of the Mahometan Law resides in it. Caisar, Caesarea Magna, a City of Cappadocia upon the River Haly, which was made a Colony by Tibenius Claudius; call'd before this Archelais, 60 Miles from Iconium to the North. Till the time of Valens the Roman Emperour, it was the Metropo∣lis of Cappadocia. The Great S. Basil was a Bishop here. Long. 64. 40. Lat. 41. 40. Caket, a Kingdom and City of Georgia in Asia towards the Mountain Caucasus: Conquered by the King of Persia, and Govern'd under him by a Viceroy. The ruins that are to be seen in the City are suffi∣ent evidences of its former magnificence. This Coun∣try is properly the antient Iberia. Calabria, Magna Graecia, Brutii Populi. This is the Name of an antient Province in the Kingdom of Naples in Italy; but now applyed to another, which is no part of that which had heretofore the name of Calabria. The antient Calabria was bounded on the North and East by the Adriatick Sea; on the South by the Salentins; and on the West by Apulia Pucetia, taking up that part of the Kingdom of Naples, which makes now the North of the Pro∣vince of Otranto. The present Calabria, is a very large, and the most Southern Province of that King∣dom; itself a Dukedom, the Title of which was given to the Eldest Son of the King of Naples, whilst it remained a separate Kingdom. This is bounded on the North by the Basilicata, on the East by the Ionian Sea, on the West by the Tyrrhenian, and on the South by the Sicilian Streights. Its great∣est length is from North to South; and it is one of the four principal Provinces of the Kingdom of Naples. Divided commonly into the Hither or Ʋpper (which is the more Northern), and the Further or Lower Calabria. The Saracens became Masters of it about the year 827. and were expell'd in the 11th. Century by the valour of the Celebrated Robert Gui∣chard, a Norman; who from a Souldier of For∣tune, made himself Duke of Puglia and Calabria about the year 1059. being the head of a Line, which soon after in the Person of Roger II. attained the Crowns of Naples and Sicily. Calabria is very sub∣ject to Earthquakes. There is an Historical relation of one particularly which continued more or less from 1638. to 1641. Calahorra, Calaguris, Clunia, a City of the Old Castile in the Kingdom of Spain, upon the River Ebro, where it entertains the River Cidacos di Castella; built upon an Hill in the limits of the Kingdom of Navarr, and was first made a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Tarragon, by Pope Alexander VI. in 1498. but afterwards Subjected to the Archbishop of Burgos. The Bishoprick of Calzada was united to this See in 1236. It lies 23 Leagues from Bajona to the South, in Long. 18. 50. Lat. 43. 26. Quin∣tilian and Prudentius were both of this City. The antient Inhabitants of it, call'd Caliguritani, sustain'd a Siege against Pompey with so much obstinacy, as at last to kill their very Wifes and Children, and salt them like Pork, and Eat them for Provisions. Pliny mentions two Towns of this Name; Cali∣gurris Nascica, and Caligurris Fibularia: the first was amongst the People of Husca: the other in the Country of the Gascons, as some interpret him. Calais, Caletum, Portus Iccius, a strong Town of Picardy in France, at the entrance of the Eng∣lish Channel, right over-against Dover. Taken by Edward III. in 1347. after a siege of a 11 Months, and lost again by Q. Mary in less than a Fortnight, in 1557. till when for 210 years together, we had the Keys of France at our Girdles; and that Princess accordingly resented the loss, dying soon after of
Grief, as it was thought, for it; saying not long before her death, that if she were opened they should find Calais at her Heart. Cardinal Albert took this Town from the French in 1596. but it was soon after by them recover'd, according to the Peace of Vervin in 1598. The Country adjacent had heretofore the Name of Caletes. The Long. is 23. 00. Lat. 51. 00. Calama, Thyamus, a River of Epirus: it falls into the Ionian Sea, over against the Island of Eri∣cusa, now Alicur; between Corfu to the North, and Cefalonia to the South. Calama, or Calamata, an inland City of Africa, between Hippo to the East, and Cirta to the West. Often mentioned in the Writings of S. Austin. It was formerly an Episcopal See under the Archbishop of Carthage. Calamata, Thuria, a Fort, and an unwalled, but well Peopled Town on the South of the Morea in the Province of Belvedore; opposite to Coron, from whence, it is distant 40 English Miles by Sea. This Castle or Fort was taken by surprize in 1659. and desert∣ed, but retaken in 1685. and is now Garrisoned by the Venetians. § Another in the Kingdom of Al∣giers in Africa, near the River Major. Calamianes, an Island of the East-Indies, which lies between Borneo and the Philippine Islands; and is subject to a Prince of its own. Calarauega, or Calaroga, a small Town in Old Castile in Spain, where S. Dominique de Guzman, the founder of the Order of the Preachers, was born. Calatagirone, an inconsiderable small Town in the Island of Sicily, amongst the Mountains: built upon the ruins of the antient Calata: some speak of another of this Name in the same Island. Calataud, a Town of Aragon in Spain. Built, as is supposed, by an Arab, who left his own Name to it. In Latin called Bilbilis Nova, from its situa∣tion near the ruins of the antient Bilbilis, between Saragossa and Medina Caeli. It stands in a Plain, but at the foot of a high Mountain, upon the River Zalon, which there receives the River Baubula. A large and handsom Town, in a fruitful Country, with a Castle to command and defend it. Calatrava, Oretum, a City of New Castile in Spain, upon the River Guadiana, 15 Leagues South of Toledo. Taken from the Moors by Sanctius III. in 1158. who granting it to the Templars, they di∣strusting the strength of the place, resigned it up again to him. Whereupon two Cistercian Monks undertook to fortifie it, as they did in a short time; and upon a new Grant of it to their Order, they Instituted the Order of the Knights of Calatrava, for the defence of it, which was confirm'd by Pope Alexander III. This Order of Knights was begun in 1185. under Alphonsus the Noble: at first they had Masters of their Order, but in 1489 that Dig∣nity was annexed to the Crown Paul III. granted them leave to Marry once. The Order hath 24 Mannors in Spain belonging to it. Their Habit was at first the same with that of the Cistercians, till Pope Benedict XIII. dispensed with it. Calavar, a Village of the Province of Balagate, which is the last Province and Town the Mogul has towards the Kingdom of Orixia, of Golconda. In this place unreasonable Tolls are forced from Tra∣vellers. Thevenot. Calcot, Calchutum, mentioned in the 7th. Tome of the Councils, for a Council here assembled in 787. under Gregory Bishop of Ostia, and Theophylact Bishop of Tali, the Legates of Pope Adrian I. But whether this be Calcot in Oxfordshire, or Calcot in Berkshire, or another, our Author is not express Calder, a River in Yorkshire falling into the Ouse below York. Calderino, a famous Bath, 10 Miles from Verona in Italy; ordinarily call'd the Bath of Verona. Calecut, or Calicut, Calecutium, a Kingdom in the Promontory of Malabar in the East-Indies, taking its Name from a City seated on the Western Shoars. Long. 105. dog. Long. and Lat. 11. 22. It is under a Prince of its own, who has some o∣ther Kings Tributary to him. And inhabited by Pagans, Mahometans, Arabians, the Christians of S. Thomas, with the Converts of the Mission, as to the several Religions of the People. Not the King's Sons, but the King's Sisters Sons succeed to the Crown. The City is very great, and has no Walls; the European Merchants drive here a plentiful Trade. This was the first place in the East-Indies the Portuguese discovered in 1498. Where at first they were kind∣ly received by the King; but afterwards he would have destroyed them at the instigation of some A∣rabian Merchants, which necessitated them to joyn with the King of Cochin against him. The English also have a good settlement here. Calemberg, a Country in the Dutchy of Brun∣swick in the lower circle of Saxony, lying along the Weser: it is a part of the Style of the Duke of Brun∣swick. § a Mountain in Austria, extended from the Danube to the Save, and divided into divers parts under as many different names: in Latin, Caesius, Mons, understands the whole Mountain. Calepio, Calepium, a Town near Bergamo in I∣taly upon the River Oglio, with a Vally to which it imparts its name. Ambrosius Calepinus was a Na∣tive of this Town. Cales, Gadis. See Cadiz. California, a vast Island of North America, in the South Sea near New Mexico, from which it is parted by the Purple Sea: 300 Spanish Leagues in length, and 60 in breadth. First discovered by Cor∣tesius in 1535. In 1587. Captain Cavendish, an English Man, took near the South Cape of this Island a very rich Ship. In 1620. it was found to be an I∣sland, which was thought before to be a part of the Continent: Sir Francis Drake in 1577. wintered in this Island, and took possession of it for his Mistress, calling it Nova Albion. Tho said to be exceeding fruitful, full of People, of a good and quiet humor and disposition, yet the Spaniards never attempted to settle here, till within about 7 years since. It is a dry and unfruitful Country: they fish for Pearl up∣on the Eastern Coast of it. Calingae, an antient People of the East-Indies, mentioned by Pliny. Calixine, Taniticum, one of the Mouths of the Nile. Calear, a small but fine City in the Dutchy of Cleve in Germany, under the Dominion of the Duke of Brandenburg, upon the River Men, within one German Mile of the Rhine, 2 from the City of Cleve; a little further from Emeri, and 4 from Wesel to the North. Callao: or Callao de Lima, Callaum, a small Island upon the Coast of Peru over against the Port of Lima, with a Town in it and a Castle. Callirhe, a Fountain of Judea beyond Jordan mentioned by Josephus: its Waters are Medicinal, and yet very pleasant to drink; falling into the Lake As∣phaltites. § Another in Attica, particularly taken notice of for flowing with 9 several Streams. Plin and Pausanias mention divers others. Callo, a Fort in Flanders, where the States Ar∣my received a sharp check in 1638. Calmar, Calmaria, a very strong City of the Pro∣vince of Smaland, upon the Baltick Sea over against
the Isle of Oeland: strangely ruined by Fire in 1647. Thenarrow passage between it and Oeland is call'd, Calmarsund; it lies in Lat. 57. 00. Long. 37. 30. This City was taken by Christian IV. King of Den∣mark, with the slaughter of all the Inhabitants, sa∣ving those who fled into the Castle, in 1611.: but was recovered by a Treaty in 1613. by Gustavus A∣dolphus, King of Sweden. It has a good Port, where the Swedes ordinarily Embark for Germany: And the Cittadel carries the greatest Name of any in the North. Calne, a Market-Town in VViltshire, which is the capital of its Hundred, upon a River of the same name, running from East to West into the Bristol Avon. There was a Synod held here in 977. where they say the Clergy presented complaints against St. Dunstan for his partiality to the Monks: but whilst the Cause was in debate, the Roof of the House fell, and St. Dunstan alone escaped unhurt. This Cor∣poration returns two Burgesses to the Parliament. Caloieron Oros, Olympius, Maesinus, a Mountain now called the Monks Mount by the Greeks, and Geschi∣dag by the Turks, as Leunclavius saith; it stands in the Confines of Bithynia, directly South of the fa∣mous City of Nice, and not far from it. Calojero, Atalantia, a small Island lying near Negropont. Calopinica, Taurocinium, a River of Calabria, which falls into the Straits of Sicily, between the Promontory of Armi, and the City of Regio. Calore, Calor, a River of the Principate in the Kingdom of Naples, which riseth from the Apennine, washeth Benevento, and then falls into the Sabbato. Calpe, one of the Pillars of Hercules; being a high Mountain in the Kingdom of Andalusia in Spain, opposite to the antient Abila upon the Coast of A∣frick. Calpurt, Colchis, a City of Armenia. Calsery, a small Town in the Kingdom of Iamba in the East-Indies, under the Great Mogul; about 25 Leagues from the Ganges: understood by some to be the Batan Caesara of Ptolomy. Calvary, Golgotha, the holy Mount near the Walls of Jerusalem to the South, on which our Saviour dyed. It is believed by divers of the Greek and La∣tin Fathers, that Adam was buryed, and that Abra∣ham offered to Sacrifice his Son Isaac here. Adrian the Emperor, in derision of Christianity, caused the Idols of Jupiter and Venus to be Erected upon it; which Constantine the Great and Helena his Mother demolished, in the same place building a Church (called Martyrion at first, now S. Sepulchre) not inferiour to the most beautiful one in the World. The Christian Princes have many times bestowed great Benefactions upon this Church. The Emperor He∣raclius reedified it in 628. after it had been ruined by Chosroes King of Persia in 615, at his taking of Jerusalem. The renowned Godfrey of Bouillon made large Additions to it in 1099. There are distinct Apartments in it for the Latin, the Greek, the Ar∣menian, the Syrian, the Cophtite, and the Abyssine Christians: who show you a Chappel, where the Cross stood that bore the Sacrifice of our Saviours Body, called the Chappel of the Crucifixion: the place where he was Embalmed, according to the custom of the Jews; the place where he is said first to appear to the Blessed Virgin after his Resurrection, called the Chap∣pel of the Apparition; the Rock out of which his Sepulchre was hewn, and the Tomb itself illumina∣ted with 62 Lamps that burn continually. Here are the Tombs of Godfrey of Bouillon the first King of Jerusalem, and Baldwin I. his Brother, who succeed∣ed him in that Crown. Calvi, Cales, a small City in the Terra di Lavoro, in the Kingdom of Naples, 6 Miles North of Capoua; which tho it has not much above 20 Houses, is a Bishops See under the Archbishop of Capoua. It with∣stood a Siege against the French and Turks in 1555. the Antients called it Cales. § a Town in the Island of Corsica with a Port and a considerable Fortress to the Gulph of the same name, under the Genouese. Calydon, an antient City of Aetolia in Greece; sometime adorned with an Episcopal See, and the Title of the Capital of the Country; giving Name to a Forest therein. § Also the antient Appellation of a part of Scotland towards the County of Perth, in which Dunkeld stands: see Dunkeld. The same con∣tinuing to the Northern Sea to this Day. Calydoni, a little Castle in the Vicentine in Italy, whence a Noble Family of Vicenza derives their Name. Calzada, Calciata, a small City in old Castile in Spain; once a Bishops See, which is now removed to Calahorra, from whence it lies 12 Spanish Leagues to the West. It is sometimes called S. Domingo de la Calzada, from the great Devotion of People to S. Dominick there. Henry II. King of Castile, dyed here in the year 1379. Calzan, Calzun, the Arabian Gulph. Camala, Emisa. See Hama. Camarina, an antient Town of the Island of Si∣cily, built in the year of Rome 150. according to Eu∣sebius, and long since ruined; leaving only its name to a River in the same Island. Its situation near the purulent Lake of Camerina obliging the Inhabitants to drain that Lake up, whereby the Enemy obtained a Passage to take the Town, occasioned the known Proverb Camarinam movere. Camb or Kamp, Cambus, a River of the Upper Austria in Germany, springing towards the Frontiers of Bohemia, and ending in the Danube. Cambaia, the Capital of the Kingdom of Guzu∣rat; and a noble Port, lying in a very great Bay of the same Name; now subject to the great Mogul; the City lies in Long 105. Lat. 22. 30. and is one of the greatest, the richest, the best traded Cities in the East-Indies; seated in a fruitful Soil, and full of People: commonly called the Cairo of the Indies; whence the Kingdom of Guzerate is often named the Kingdom of Cambaia. It is walled with a fair Wall of Free-stone, hath very large Houses, straight and broad Streets; greater than Surat, being ten Leagues in compass; and hath 3 Basars or Market places, and 4 noble Tanks or Cisterns, able to find the Inhabitants Water all the year: tho there is 7 fathom Water in the Haven at high water, yet at low water the Ships lie dry in the Sand and Mud, which cover the bottom of it. The Inhabitants are partly Heathens, partly Mahometans. And in 1638. the English had here a Factory, as Mandelslo ac∣quaints us; from whom the latter part of this De∣scription is taken. Cambala, a City in China. See Peking: some represent it to be 24 Italian Miles in compass. Cam∣balu is the Mascovian and Saracen Name for it, Peking the Indian. Cambaya, Camboya or Camboge, a Kingdom in the East-Indies, over against the Isle of Borneo; bounded on the West with the Kingdom of Siam, and on the East with that of Cochin. It is Tributary to the King of Siam. This Kingdom is almost e∣qually divided by a vast River, which in July and August overflows all the Country, as the Nile doth Egypt. The King of it is a great Friend to the Por∣tuguese, as he of Siam is to the Dutch. Upon the most Eastern Branch (for there are 3) of the River mentioned before, stands Cambodia the principal City, built upon a rising Ground to prevent the yearly De∣luges.
This Kingdom is extream fruitful, but not potent, the King not being able to bring above 25 or 30000 Men into the Field: first discoverd by Al∣phonso d'Albuquerque in 1511. as Mandelslo saith. Cambodia lies in Long. 135. 00. Lat. 10, 35. Cambray, Cameracum, called by the Flandrians Camerick, a City of Hainault upon the Schold; Guicciardin saith it is a great, fair, strong City, and has a strong Castle built by Charles V. That it a∣bounds in excellent publick Buildings, especially the Cathedral is very great and beautiful: that it is po∣pulous and rich, and was a very antient Bishoprick, under the Archbishop of Rhemes; but in 1559. ex∣empted by Pope Paul IV. and erected into an Arch∣bishoprick. The first place the French possessed themselves of, after they came out of Germany, in 1445. After this it became an Imperial City and continued so till Charles V. in 1543. built a Citta∣del in it, and annexed it to his own Dominions. The French, who all along pretended a Right to it, at last in 1677. took it by force after a sharp defence. The Archbishops are honored with the style of Dukes of Cambray, Earls of Cambresis, and Princes of the Empire. Cambresis is a considerable Territory be∣twixt Picardy, Flanders, Artois, and Hainault: ex∣treamly fruitful, and adorned with a Castle of its own Name, in which Henry II. of France and the King of Spain Celebrated that Treaty of Peace in 1559. which the French say was most disadvantage∣ous to them. It lies 4 Leagues from Doway South, in Long. 26. 06. Lat. 49 45. Cambria, the antient Name of the Principality of Wales: more especially of the Western part thereof to∣wards Ireland. Cambridgeshire, hath on the East Suffolk and Norfolk, on the West Huntington and Bedford, on the South Hartford, and on the North Lincolnshire; the River Ouse divides it almost in the midst. To∣wards the South end of the County lies the Town which gives it its Name. Mr. Camden saith it is called Camboritum, being seated upon the East Bank of the River Cam, which is here passed by a Bridge. This is one of the antientest and noblest Universities in Christendom; having 16 Colleges and Halls en∣dowed, or Nurseries in it of Piety and Learning; the most antient of which is Peter House, founded in 1257. by Hugh Balsham, a Sub-Prior; before which time there was only Hostels, wherein the Scho∣lars maintained themselves. This place sends 4 Bur∣gesses to the Parliament, 2 for the Town, and 2 for the University. It has been dignified with the Title of an Earldom in several eminent Persons; and lately of a Dukedom in 4 Sons of King James II. when Duke of York, who all dyed very young. Long. 21. 49. Lat. 52. 30. § The English have given the Name of Cambridge to a Town in New England also, situated upon the River Merrimick, and beautified with seve∣ral fair Streets, besides 2 Colleges, in which they aim at the Figure of an University. Camelford, a Market-Town in the County of Cornwal in the Hundred of Lesnewth. Camerino, Camerinum, an Episcopal City in the Marca Anconitana, in the Dominions of the Church. Seated at the foot of the Apennine, upon the River Chiento, which entereth the Adriatick Sea, 25 Miles South of Ancona. This was a considerable place in the time of the antient Romans; and has sometime since born the Title of a Dukedom. Leander gives it a strong Situation and plenty of People, which last is rarely found in these Italian inland Cities. He says also, there was another Town of this Name in Campagnia di Roma, which they call now Camerota. It lies 24 Miles East of Spoleto. Long. 36. 43. Lat. 42. 47. Camin, Caminum, a small City in the further Pomerania, which is a Bishops See under the Arch∣bishop of Gnisen, whereas heretofore it belonged to Magdeburg. It stands on the Eastern Shoar of the River Diwenow [Odera] over against the Island of Wolinsche, not above a Mile from the Baltick Sea, and about 7 from Stetin to the North. This belongs to the Duke of Brandenburgh, by the Treaty of Westphalia, and has imbraced the Augustan Confessi∣on. Long. 39. 30. Lat. 54 12. Caminiec. See Kaminieck. Campagnano, Campaniano, Acheron, a River of the Province of Calabria, flowing from the Apennine and falling into the Tyrrhenian Sea, about 8 Miles South of Amantea, over against Stromboli; a fla∣ming Mountain in an Island of that Name. Campagna, a City of the Kingdom of Naples, in the Principato, which is a Bishops See under the Archbishop of Conza; with the Title of a Marquisate. It stands between the Rivers of Atro and Tuza, 16 Miles from Salerno to the East, and 11 from the Shoars of the Mediterranean Sea to the East also. Campagnia di Roma, a Province of Italy, un∣der the Dominion of the Pope; on the West it has S. Peters Patrimony, on the North Sabina, on the South the Mediterranean Sea, and on the East the Kingdom of Naples; Rome itself stands in this Pro∣vince, and it contains the far greatest part of the an∣tient Latium; the inland parts are fruitful and popu∣lous; those towards the Sea are little inhabited, by reason of the unwholsomness of the Air, tho other∣wise the Country is plain and fruitful enough. Campanir, Astacapra, a City of the hither East-Indies. Campden, a Market-Town in Gloucestershire in the Hundred of Kistgate: the Earl of Gainesborough, Viscount Campden has a Seat here. Campen, Campania, a Town in Stiria. § There is another of the same Name in Over-Yssel in the Low Countries, upon the Western Banks of the Yssel, near the Zuider Zee, 5 Miles from Daventer to the North-East. It was heretofore an Imperial free City, but long since exempted, and under the States Gene∣ral. In 1672. taken by the French, and the year following deserted. It is a great, lovely, and impor∣tant place; and was the Birthplace of Albertus Pig∣hius, a very learned Man. Long. 27. 14. Lat. 52. 42. Campiano, a small Town in the State of the Val∣ley of Taro in Italy, near the River Taro. It is an important Pass, and therefore carefully fortified by the Duke of Parma. Campeach, a City belonging to the Spaniards, in the West-Indies, taken by Captain Mynnes an En∣glish Man in 1662, being deserted by the Inhabitants. The English took here 50 peices of Canon, 14 Ships, and the Governor Prisoner. Campus Piorum, a celebrated place in the Island of Sicily, near Catania: so called from the 2 Bro∣thers Amphinomus and Anapus, that carried their Fa∣ther and Mother upon their Shoulders hither out of the flames of Aetna. Val. Max. Cana, a Town in the Tribe of Zabulon in Gali∣lee in the Holy Land: heretofore famous for the first Miracle of our Saviours operation on Earth, at the Marriage of Simon Zelotes according to Ncephorus Calixtus, or of S. John the Evangelist, according to others. Now a poor Village inhabited by none but Turks. For the Church which Helena the Mother of Constantine, built in the place of that House where our Saviour celebrated the Marriage, has been long since converted into a Mosque. Nathanael was an Inhabitant of this Town. Canada, New France, a large Country in the North America, discovered first by the French, and
by them inhabited. It lies North of New-England. Quebec is the chief Colony of it. The Savages speak different Languages: and here, as in other parts of America, they have a custom to eat their Enemies taken in War; a fate that particularly befel John Ver∣razan a Florentine, who first took possession of this Country in the name of Francis I. King of France in 1525. There is a very great River of the same Country, already known to run 500 Leagues, full of large Islands, and about 30 Leagues broad at the mouth, called Canada by the Natives, by the French S. Lawrence, from their entrance into it upon that day. The Saguenay and the Three Rivers fall into its Channel from the North. Cananor, a Kingdom in the Promontory of Ma∣labar, on this side the Ganges in the East-Indies; abutting upon the River Gangerocora; 25 Leagues in length along the Coast, with a City of the same Name sometime since taken by the Hollanders. The Islands of Divandurou and Malicut amongst the Mal∣dives are subject to this King. Canara, a Kingdom on this side the Gulph of Bengala in the East-Indies in the Promontory of Malabar, separated from the Kingdom of Malabar to the South by the River Gangerocora, and from that of Cuncan to the North by the River Aliga. It is Tributary to the Great Mogul: by some called Tulamar, and at perpetual Enmity with the Kingdom of Malabar. Canary Isles, Canariae, are 7 Islands over against the Coast of Lybia Interior, so called from Canaria, the principal of the number, in which the Spanish Governor resides; being about 20 Leagues in circuit, and ennobled with a large, handsom, populous City of the same Name, which is an Episcopal See. These were called by the Antients the Fortunate Islands, in general: but their particular Names are Canaria, Te∣neriff, the Isle of Palmes, the Isle of Iron, Fuerte-Ventura, Gomera, and Lancelote; and because a great number of Dogs was found in them in antient times, therefore says Pliny, they had all the Name of the Canaries. In one of these the first Meridian is usually fixed, viz. Teneriff. They are are much fre∣quented for their excellent Wines, and Merchandises, by the English and other Nations. After the know∣ledg of them had been lost for many Ages, they were first discovered again in 1330. Vid. Azores. About the year 1344. Lewis de la Cerda, Grandson to Alphonsus X. King of Castile and Earl of Cler∣mont, undertaking the Conquest of them, thereby to introduce the Christian Faith, was Crowned King of the Canaries by Pope Clement VI. He in his de∣sign failing, they were afterwards granted to John Betancourt, according as it is already remarked un∣der the Word Azores. Canathus, a Fountain in the Morea, in the Pro∣vince of Napoli di Romania, celebrated by the anti∣ent Poets for a Fiction of Juno's washing herself eve∣ry year therein to restore her Virginity. § Also a City in Caelosyria in Asia, which has sometime been a Bishops See under the Archbishop of Bastro, men∣tioned by Ptolomy. Canavese, a Country in the principality of Pied∣mont, betwixt the City Juraea and the River Po: yielded to the Duke of Savoy by the Treaty of Que∣rasque in 1631. Canche, Cantius, Quentia, a River of Picardy, springing near Blavincour in Artois, passing by Lig∣ny sur Canche, receiving the Ternois at Hesdin, and falling into the Ocean at Montreuil and Estaples. Cancheu, a great City in the Province of Kiangsi in China, with a Territory of the same Name that is honored with the Government of a Viceroy, (distinct from the Viceroy of Kiangsi) who resides in this City, and commands also some Towns in the Pro∣vinces adjacent of Fokien, Quantung and Huquang. It is a place of extraordinary Trade and concourse. Candahar, Candahara, the Capital of the Pro∣vince of that Name, belonging to the Kingdom of Persia, and one of the greatest inland Cities of Asia; seated on the Eastern Shoar of the River Balcan, which running Northward, falls into the Oboengir, which last by Oxus or Gehun is conveyed in the Caspian Sea. On the East it is defended by a strong Wall, on the West by an high Mountain; in the middle of it is a Rock, on which is built a Castle. The Suburbs are greater than the City, and much frequented by the Persian and Indian Merchants, who pass to and fro through it. It lies in Long. 110. Lat. 34. 40. This City has been often taken and retaken between the Mogul and the King of Persia, till at lst the latter possessed himself of it and still keeps it. Cande, or Candes, Candensis Vicus, a Town in the Province of Touraine in France, upon the Loyre; where S. Martin the Bishop, so much extolled by Sulpitius Severus who writes his Life, dyed Nov. 11. An. Dom. 400. § Likewise a River in Languedoc falling into the Aveirou. Candea or Candi, the most considerable King∣dom in the Island of Ceylan in the East-Indies; and a great and populous City, the capital thereof, upon the River Trinquilemale. Candei, an antient People of the Gulph of Ara∣bia, call'd heretofore Ophiomages, from their eating of Serpents. Candelaro, a River of the Kingdom of Naples, springing out of the Apennine Mountains in the Capi∣tanata, and ending in the Adriatick near Manfredonia; Candelona, or Candelora, a Town and principality in the Province of Caramania in the lesser Asia. The Town stands upon the Bay of Laiazzo, between the lesser Asia and Syria, eight Miles from Antioch to the North, and 5 from Scanderoon to the South. Candia, Creta, Jovis Insula in Virgil (being here∣tofore consecrated to him) is one of the noblest Islands in the Mediterranean Sea, lying opposite to the Mouth of the Archipelago. In Length from East to West two hundred and fifty Miles, in Breadth sixty, in Circuit five hundred and forty. Heretofore it was full of a hundred potent Cities, and thence call'd He∣catompolis, most of which are now ruined. To omit the more antient Story of this Island; it was granted by Baldwin Earl of Flanders to the Earl of Montisferat, who in 1194. sold it to the Venetians. Others say, that when the Latins in 1204 took Constantinople, this and the other Islands in the Aegean Sea fell to the Ve∣netians for their share. In 1645. the Turks invaded it, and in 1669. by taking of Candia possess'd them∣selves of all but two or three Forts upon the Sea. The inland Parts are very mountainous, yet fruitful, espe∣cially of Wines and other such Fruits; but it wants Corn. Whilst it was under the Venetians, it was so populous, that they might raise in it 60000 Men. The Language there then used was the vulgar Greek, and they were accordingly of the Greek Church, though with a mixture of the Latin Service in some places. Now divided into four Territories or jurisdictions, call'd Candia, Canea, Rettina, and Sittia, from the four Principal Cities in it of those Names. Long. 51. Lat. 34. §. Candia, the chief City of the Isle of Crete, called by the Greeks Castro, and Candax, was an Archbishop's See, great, rich and populous, as long as it continued in the Hands of the Venetians. And stood the longest Siege against the Turks of any place in the World, but was at last forced to submit, Sep∣tember 27. 1669. upon Conditions very honourable, after a Blockade of 22 Years, from 1645. to 1667.
and a Siege of two more; from 1667. to 1669. In which space the Turks are thought to have lost about 600000 Men before it. It lies on the Northern shoar of that Island, something nearer to the Western End. The Labyrinth of Minos in a Grott cut out of a Rock is yet to be seen here. Canea, an Episcopal City in the Island of Candia, and the Capital of an adjacent Territory denominated from it. Taken by the Turks, Aug. 26. 1645. which loss was an Introduction to the long Blockade and Siege of Candia. Canesham, a Market-Town in Somersetshire, seat∣ed at the fall of the River Chire into the Avon, near Bristol. Cangria. See Gangra. Canisa. See Kanisa. Cannares, Savages of Peru, in the Province of Quito. Cannae, Cannata desrutta in Italian, is a ruined small Town in the Province of Apulia in Italy; where Hannibal engaging the Romans in a bloody Battle, slew 40000 of them upon the Place in the Year of Rome 558. with Paulus Aemilius Consul, and so ma∣ny Gentlemen, that he sent to Carthage three Bushels of Rings as a Token of his vast Victory. Cannes, a Town in Provence in France, to the Sea, over against the Lerin Islands; misunderstood by Cluverius to be the Oxibius Portus of Strabo, because it has no Port. Cannibals, the Savages of the Caribby Islands, notorious for eating their Enemies, whether taken alive or slain in the Field. Cano, or Ghana, a Kingdom in Nigritia in Afri∣ca, bounded by the River Niger to the South, the Kingdom of Cassena to the East, the Agades to the West, and the Desart to the North. The Capital City bears the same Name with it and stands upon a Lake. Canopus, an antient City of Aegypt, towards that Mouth of the Nile which is distinguished by the same Name. It has been an Episcopal See formerly; and in the opinion of some Authors, the Country of the Poet Claudian. The modern Bochira, near A∣lexandria, is supposed to be this antient Place under a new Name. Canosa, Canusium, an antient City in the Terra di Bari in the Kingdom of Naples, with an Episcopal See that is united to the Archbishoprick of Bari; five Miles from the Ruines of Cannae, upon the Ascent of a Hill with the River Ofanto at the Foot of it. Horace gives the Character of Bilingues to its Inhabitants in the old Roman Times, because the Language they spoke was an ill mixture of Latin and Greek. It was a famous place for fine Russet colour'd Cloath; whence the Word Canusinati in Martial for such as wore of it. In this City the Emperor Henry IV. ha∣ving been excommunicated by Pope Gregory VII. ren∣dred himself to the Pope's Discretion, and thereupon received Absolution in the Year 1077. §. This is also the name of a County in the Modenese in Italy, near Parmesan. Canstat, a small City in the Dukedom of Wirtem∣burg, upon the River Necker, within one Mile of Stuttgard, and five of Pfortzhaim to the East. Cantabri, an antient Valiant People of Spain, being those properly of the Provinces of Guipuscoa and Biscay, who withstood Augustus in several Ren∣counters, and at last kill'd themselves rather than to submit to Servitude. Canterbury, Cantuaria, Darvernum, Dorovernia, is the principal City in the County of Kent; very an∣tient, and without doubt (saith Mr. Camden) famous in the times of the Roman Empire. It stands on the Eastern Shoar of the River Stour, called by the Bri∣tish uvwhern; from whence it had its antient Names. Being the Royal Seat of the Kings of Kent, when Au∣gustine the Monk came over to convert them, it by that Means became the Metropolitan See of England. The Bodies of eight Kings lye interr'd in the Cathedral as likewise the Body of Thomas Becke the fa∣mous Roman-Catholick Saint, once Archbishop of this See. There has been several Provincial Councils cele∣brated here. The Coronation of King John and Queen Isabel his Wife, the Marriages of Henry II. and Edward I. were all performed here. Augustine the first Archbishop was consecrated in 568. Dr. Wil∣liam Sancroft the LXXVII. in this Succession, was consecrated Jan, 27. 1677. It lies in Long. 24. 51. Lat. 51. 16. Two Burgesses are elected for the Par∣liament by the Corporation. Canton, a Province and City in the East of China, suppos'd to be the Cattigara of Ptolemy; which, tho the least of their Metropolitan Cities, is yet beautified with many triumphant Arches, large Streets, and goodly Bridges over a Navigable River running on the South side of it; also fortified with deep Ditches, eight Bul∣warks, and seated in a rich and plentiful Soil. The Portugals drive here (saith Dr. Heylin) a wealthy Trade, being permitted in the day time to come into the City, but at night excluded and forced to find Lodgings in the Suburbs. This City lies in Alvares Sa∣modo's Map about Long. 125. and about 26. Lat. Ac∣cording to others, in Long. 170.00. Lat. 24.00. See Quancheu. The Switz Cantons, See Switzerland. Capace, or Capaccio, Caput Aqueum, a City of the Principatus Citerior in the Kingdom of Naples; and a Bishop's See under the Archbishop of Salerno, in the place of Pesti, which was ruined by Frederick the Emperor in 1249. though since rebuilt again. This City lies 22 Miles from Salerno to the South, in Long. 38 52. Lat. 40. 28. Caparra, Capara, a City of Extremadura in the Kingdom of Leon in Spain, which stands in the middle between Emerita, now Merida, and Pla∣centia. Cap-D-Aguer, the same with Santa Cruz in A∣frica. Capelan, a Mountain in the Kingdom of Pegu beyond the Gulph of Bengala in the East-Indies. A Quarry of Precious Stones of divers Colours is found within it. La Capelle, a Fortress in the Territory of Tierache within the Province of Picardy, towards the Frontiers of Hainault; built in the last Age to oppose the Incur∣sions of the Low-Countries; about a League from the River Oyse. It has been many times taken and re∣taken. Capernaum, or Capharnaum, the Metropolitan City heretofore of Galilee, in the Tribe of Naphtali, towards the Borders of Zabulon, near the Mouth of Jordan, and upon the Coast of the Sea of Tiberias; where our Saviour first began to preach. S. Matthew was a Publican here, when called to be an Apostle. Since Solyman reduc'd this City into Ashes, it has only been inhabited by a few Moors, who ask Money of the Pilgrims that goe to visit the holy Places. Capes, a River of the Kingdom of Tunis in Afri∣ca, springing from Mount Atlas, and discharging it self into the Mediterranean near a Town call'd Capes, where it makes a Gulph of the same Name. Caphareus, a famous Promontory on the East point of the Isle of Negropont, otherwise now call'd Capo del oro and Capo Figera, very dangerous to navigate. The Grecian Navy, seduc'd by Nupls King of Eubaea by a false Light in revenge of the Death of his Son Palimedes by Ʋlysses, being all said to have been shipwrack'd upon these Rocks.
Capitanata, a Province of the Kingdom of Naples, which in the more antient times was call'd Apulia Daunia: bounded on the North and East with the Adriatick Sea, on the West with the County of Molise, and on the South with the Principatus Ʋlterior, the Basilicata, and the Bariano: a very fruitful well watered Country; the chief City is Manfredonia. The Capitol, Capitolium, a famous Fortress▪ of Old Rome, founded by Tarquinius Prisous in the year of Rome 139. Perfected by Tarquinius Super∣bus in the year 221. Burnt in the Reign of Vitel∣lius. Rebuilt by Vespasian. Burnt again by Lightning under Titus, and reedified with very great pomp by Domitian, who constituted a Quinquennial Celebra∣tion of Games, (which became an Aera) by the Name of Agones Capitolini, after the manner of the Olym∣piads. Jupiter had a Temple here in his honour, whence they denominated him Capitolinus. In this place the Christians have built a Church call'd Ara Caeli, dedicated to the B. Virgin Mary. Capo D' Istria, Caput Istriae, Aegida, the capital City of the Province of Histria in Italy. See Cabo d'Istria. Capo, Cabo, cap, Cape de—Aden, Ammonium, a Promontory in Arabia Foelix, next to Africa, in Long. 76. 30. —de Alguer, Atlantis, in Mauritania Tingit∣tana. —de Bona Speranza, of Good Hope. Is a fa∣mous Promontory upon the most Southern Part of Africa: first discovered by Bartholomew Diaz, a Por∣tuguese, in 1487. in 32 of Southern Lat. 50 of Long. It had this name given it by Emanuel then King of Portugal, because he hoped by the doubling it, a pas∣sage would be open by Sea to the East-Indies, as it came to pass to the great enriching of his King∣dom. The Hollanders near this Cape have a settle∣ment of about 100 Houses with a strong Fort. The Natives are divided into several distinct Nations. —of Cornwall, or the Lands End; the most We∣stern Point of England. —di Corso, a Promontory in Corsica. —di Faro, Pelorum, the most Northern Cape of Sicily. —of Farewel, in Greenland. —di Formoso, in Guinea. —de Sierra Liona, Hesperium Cornu, supposed to be the most Western Point of Africa known to the Antients; 70 Spanish Leagues beyond the most Southern Mouth of the River Niger. —de Verde, the most, Western Point of Africa in the Division of Nigritia, South to the Mouth of the Ri∣ver Senega, in 14 deg. of Lat. There is an innume∣rable number of other Capes, which the Brevity of this Work will not admit. The Islands of Capo de Verde are a knot of small Islands, (by some taken for the Hesperides, by some for the Gorgades of the An∣tients,) lying demicircularly with the Points to the Sea, 150 Leagues off of Cape Verde: under the Por∣tuguese, but not all inhabited. Capoua, Capua, a City and Archbishoprick in the Kingdom of Naples, in the Province Di Lavoro, at the foot of Mount Tifata: 16 Miles North of Naples, and 12 from the Tyrrhenian Sea, in Long. 38. 04. Lat. 41. 00. A City that was never fortunate, and is now declining into ruins. It was built by the Lombards upon the River Voltorno, and advanced to a Bishoprick by P. John XIV, in 968. Two Leagues from the Ruines of the famous antient Capoua, that delicious City, as they call'd it, which compared it∣self with Rome and Carthage, and so debauched the Army of Hannibal with its pleasures, in one Winter that they quartered there after the Battle of Cannae, that they were not capable of beating the Romans a∣ny more. In 1118▪ Pope Gelasius II. held a Council here, in which the Emperour Henry V. was Excom∣municated, together with Gregory VIII. an Antipope. Cappadocia, a Province of Asia Minor, bounded to the East by the Lesser Armenia, to the South Cilicia, to the West Pamphylia and Galatia, and to the North by the Euxine Sea. It has been twice a Kingdom. The first time for 470 years successive∣ly, till the Romans overcame and changed it into a Province. The second, from the 12th▪ Century to the year 1461. by the Title of the Kingdom of Tre∣bisonde from the City Trebisonda, till Mahomet II. Emperour of the Turks took and carri'd the King prisoner into Greece. It is now known by the name of Tocat. See Tocat. Capraia, Capraria, Aegilium, is a small Island in the Tyrrhenian Sea, on the Confines of the States of Genoua, between the Coast of Italy to the East, and the Island of Corsica to the West: to which last it belongs, and is therefore subject to the State of Genoua: it is 18 Miles in compass, and has a Castle for its security against Pyrats: full of Mountains, but yet not barren nor unpeopled; and chiefly abounds in Goats, (from whence it hath its Name,) and ex∣cellent Wines: 36 Miles South from the States of Genoua, and 24 from Corsica. There is another Island of the same Name in the Adriatick Sea upon the Coast of Apulia; and La Palma, one of the Canary Islands, was antiently call'd Capraria. Caprarola, a stately and magnificent Palace in S. Peters Patrimony in Italy, 25 miles from Rome, near Viterbo, belonging to the D. of Parma and built in the last Age by Cardinal Alexander Farnese. It is par∣ticularly remark'd for a whispering Room in it, where four Persons at several Corners shall understand the lowest whispers of one to another, whilst those in the middle of the Room cannot here a word that is said. It is one of the noblest structures in all Italy. Capri, Caprea, an Island belonging to the King∣dom of Naples, famous for the Secession of Tiberius Caesar, who lived here in great privacy in the latter part of his Reign, spending his time in Debauchery and Villany. It lies in the Tyrrhenian Sea, at the Mouth of the Bay of Naples, about 3 miles from the Cape of Campanella, and is about 12 in compass. The chief Town of it is called by the same Name, and is a Bishops See under the Archbishop of Amalfi; seated at the South End of the Island. The Bishops best revenue comes from Quails, which twice in the year resort in vast numbers to this Island; whence some have called him the Bishop of Quails. This Island is much mentioned in the Writers of the Life of Tiberius, and other Roman Historians. Capsa, an antient Town in Libya Interior, defend∣ed by the Sands and Serpents of the Desarts that envi∣ron it on all sides better than any Walls and Ramparts could do, say Salust and Florus. Carabes, Pelusium, the most Eastern Mouth of the Nile. Carabogaana, one of the Names of Moldavia. Caragoza, Caesar Augusta. See Saragoza. Caraman, Caramania, a Province of the Lesser Asia, extended from East to West upon the Medi∣terranean Sea, opposite to the Isle of Cyprus; this Country had heretofore Princes of its own, but has now for many Ages been subject to the Turks; it includes the antient Provinces of Cilicia, Pamphylia, and a part of Caria. One of the potentest Viceroys or Beglerbegs of the Turkish Empire, takes his Title from this Province, tho his Jurisdiction is somewhat larger. The principle Cities in it are Cogni, Antio∣chia, and Satulia. There is another Caramania or Carnania, a large Country in Persia, bounded on the East with Gedrosia or Circan, on the West with
Farsi, Sublestan to the North, and the Gulph of Or∣mus with the Indian Ocean to the South: Contain∣ing the Provinces of Guadel, Dulcinda, and Ormus. It is now called Kherman, after its capital City, which stands upon the River Bessiry. The Nor∣thern part is rather barren; but the middle is blessed with fruitful Vales. Caramit, Amida, Ammaea, the capital City of Mesopotamia, which is an Archbishops See upon the River Tigris. Heretofore called Constantia, from Constantius the Emperour. The Romans in this place received a great defeat by the Parthians. Long. 75. 00. Lat. 39. 30. according to the latest Maps. It is secured with good Walls, and 360 Towers. Caragues, Salvages of Peru in the Province of Quito, towards the Coasts of the South Sea. Caratcholi, or Karakioles, a People about the Mountain Caucasus in Asia, descended from the Hunns, and speaking the Turkish Language. Caravacca, or Crux de Caravacca, (so called from a miraculous Crucifix there preserved, which they pretend was brought from Heaven by an Angel) is a Village amongst the Mountains in the Kingdom of Murcia in Spain, near the River Segura, upon the Borders of Old Castile. Caravaggio, a Town in the Dutchy of Milan in Italy upon the Borders of the Bergamasco: Where Francis Sforza, Duke of Milan, gain'd a signal Vi∣ctory over the Venetians in 1446. Carbury, a Town and Barony in the County of Kildare in Ireland: and another Town in the County of Cork. Carcanossi, a fruitful and well cultivated Coun∣try in the South of the Isle of Madagascar, where the French have established some Colonies not long since. Carcassonne, Carcassum, Volcarum, Tectosagum, a City and Bishoprick under the Archbishop of Narbon∣ne, upon the River▪ Atax, l' Aude, a little above its confluence with the Fresquel. Famous for Cloath∣ing, and other mechanick Trades. It stands 5 Leagues South of Aleth, having a Castle. Long. 23. 05. Lat. 42. 40. The Diocese belonging to this City is called Le Comte de Carcassonne, the Earldom of Car∣cassone. The antient Earls whereof were great pro∣tectors and favourers of the Albigenses: Whence One came to be Massacred in the Church at Besiers in 1167. and a Second had his Estate confiscated to the Earl of Monfert, by a Decree of the Synod of Mount∣pellier in 1214. and afterwards of the grand Council of Lateran in 1215. Carcinatus, or Carentus, the Western Bay of the Euxine Sea, which shuts the passage into the Crim Tartary, in that Neck of Land which makes it a Peninsula; and is defended by the Fort Pericop, that gives name to the whole Nation there. Cardaillac, a Town and very antient Barony in the County of Quercy in France near Figeac, upon the Borders of Auvergne. Adanced afterwards to the honour of a Marquisate. Cardiff, a fine Town in the County of Gla∣morgan in Wales, upon the South Side of the River Taf, 2 Miles from the Sea; to which belongs a very commodious Haven. This Town was fortified with a Wall and a Castle, by one Fitz-Haimon, a great Man in these parts. Here Robert, eldest Son to Wil∣liam the Conquerour, died after a long Imprison∣ment. It returns one Burgess to the Parliament. The Earl of Pembrook has a Seat here. Cardiganshire, or Caerdiganshire, is a County in Wales lying along the Coast of the Irish Sea, and taking its Name from Cardigan, the Capital of it, which returns one Burgess to the English Parliament. A Town pleasantly situated, within 2 Miles of the River Tivy; which divides the County from Caermarthen∣shire and Pembrokeshire on the South, as the Rivers Torvi and Dovi divide it from Merionethshire and Brecknockshire to the East. The Tivy is well stored with Salmon. Cardona, a Castle in Catalonia in Spain, built up∣on a River called the Cardoner, where there are seve∣ral Mines of Salt, and which gives the Title of a Duke to the Family de Folch. It stands 3 Leagues from Solsona to the South. Carelia, or Karelen, a Province of the Kingdom of Sweden in Finland, extended upon the Gulph of Finland. Heretofore in part under the Muscovites, but now entirely under the Swedes. Vibourg is the capital City of it. Caremboule, a Country on the South of the Island of Madagascar, lying betwixt the Divisions of the Ampatres and the Mahafales. It is very good Pa∣sturage. Carencia, a Town of the antient Rugij, upon the Coast of the Baltick Sea, in Pomerania. Here∣tofore notorious for Three Temples dedicated to Three of the most monstrous and horrible Idols, that ever were invented amongst the Heathens. Carentan, a Town of Normandy, upon a River of the same Name, 3 Leagues from the British Sea, and 4 from Constance to the North; which has a very strong Castle. It gives the Title of a Viscount. And was both taken and retaken in the Civil Wars of that Kingdom. Carfagniana, Carferoniana, Grafiniana, a Valley in the States of the Duke of Florence in Italy amongst the Apennine Mountains; betwixt the States of Luc∣ca, Regio, and Modena. Cargapol, a City of Russia upon the River One∣ga, or Poroga, almost 200 Russian Miles from Ar∣changel to the South-West. This City gives name to a Province on the White Sea. Caridia, a small Town and Gulph in the Pro∣vince of Romania in the Morea, about 10 Leagues from Gallipoli, upon the Archipelago. Heretofore a more considerable place, and known to the Anti∣ents under the Name Cardiopolis. Caria. See Aidinelli. It may be remembred, that a Council of 34 Bishops assembled in this Pro∣vince in the year 366. rejected the Doctrine of the Consubstantiality of Christ with the Father, to approve of the Confessions of Faith made at the Coun∣cils of Antioch and Seleucia. § Also an antient City of the Morea, whose Inhabitants uniting with the Persians in a War once against Greece, rendred them∣selves so odious to their Country, that their City was rased, their Men put to the Sword and their Wo∣men treated with all manner of ignominy. Cary, Incarus, a small Port in Provence in France, 3 Miles from Marseille to the West; famous for nothing but its Antiquity. Cariati, Cariatum, a City of Calabria Citerior in the Kingdom of Naples, upon the Gulph of Ta∣rento, which is a Bishops See under the Archbishop of Santa Saerina, from which it lies 20 Miles from the North, in Long. 41. 36. Lat. 39. 30. It is small, yet gives the Title of a Principality to the Family di Spinella. Caribes, or the Cariby Islands, are a knot of small Islands, whose numbers are not certainly known: they lie extended like a Bow from the Coast of Paria in America, to the Isle of Rico Porto. Carignan, a Principality and City in Piedmont, situated upon the Po, which is here covered with a good Bridge, betwixt Turin and Carmagnole: In a fruitful Soil, and defended with a Castle. Carin, Cyrrhus, a City of Syria, which had its antient Name from Cyrus the Founder of it: first
a Bishops See under the Archbishop of Hierapolis; afterwards a Metropolis under the Patriarch of Anti∣och; seated upon the River Marsyas, now Quars, which falls into the Euphrates at Samosat; 45 Miles from Zeugma to the North-East, and as many from the Euphrates to the West, and 25 from Aleppo to the North. Long. 70. 10. Lat. 36. 00. Carinola, Calenum, a small City in the Province di Lavoro in the Kingdom of Naples, which is a Bishops See under the Archbishop of Capua but the City is almost de∣solate, by reason of the unhealthfulness of its situation. It stands at the foot of Mount Massico, 4 Miles from the Shoars of the Tyrrheman Sea, and 25 North of Naples; giving the Title of an Earldom. Carinthia, called by the Germans Karnten, a Province of Germany, bounded on the East by Stiermark, and the River Lavand: on the West with Saltzburg and the Ri∣ver Saltzach; on the North with Austria; and on the South with Carniola, and the River Dravus. The antient Inhabitants of this Country were the first in Ger∣many that embraced the Christian Religion. It is subject to the Dukes of Austria, and being seated in the Alpes, is generally barren and mountainous: It lies along the Dravus an 100 english Miles, and is 47 in breadth. Advanced to the honour of a Dutchy. Its capital Town is Claghenfutt. Carizath, a Province of Asia, called antiently Hyrcania. Carlisse, Carleolum, a City and Bishoprick under the Archbishop of York; seated upon the Rivers E∣den, Poteril, and Caud, in the County of Cumber∣land; besides which it is defended by a good strong Stone Wall, and on the West side by a large Castle, and on the East a Cittadel built by Henry VIII. A considerable place in the times of the Romans. William Rufus finding it ruined by the Danes, rebuilt the Castle and placed a Colony here, which in after times became one of the principal Bulwarks against the Scots. June 28. 1645, it was yieided to the in∣vading People, by Sir Thomas Glemham upon honor∣rable Terms. In 1648. retaken for the King by Sir Phi∣lip Musgrave, who kept it not long, the Rebels over∣powering all. Long. 21. 31. Lat. 54. 55. Henry I. made it an Episcopal See. In the year 1661. King Charles II. dignified this City with the Title of an Earl∣dom in the Person of Charles Howard, whose Son Edward enjoys the same at this day, It returns two Burgesses to the Parliament. Carlingford, a Sea-Port in the County of Louth, in the Province of Ʋlster in Ireland; about 30 En∣glish Miles East of Armagh, and 5 North of Dun∣dalk. Carlsbourg, Caroloburgum, a small Town in the lower Circle of Saxony upon the Weser in the Dutchy of Bremen: built by the Swedes, who at the same time gave it the Name of their King Charles X. The Danes took it in 1676. but they yielded it to the Swedes again in 1679. according to the Treaty of Fointainebleau. Catmagnole, a strong Town in the Marquisate of Saluces in Piedmont, about 2 Miles from the Po, and 9 from Turin, in the Dominions of the Duke of Savoy ever since Charles Emanuel Duke of Savoy during the Civil Wars of France, made himself Ma∣ster both of the Marquisate and it in 1588. and that the same were ceded to him by a Treaty of Peace in 1601. This Town has been taken by the French, and retaken by the Confederates in this present War. Carmarthenshire. See Carmarthen. Carmel, Carmelus, a Mountain in the Holy Land (or Palestine) upon the Mediterranean Sea, 50 Miles North of Jerusalem; betwixt Galilee and Sa∣maria, in the Tribe of Issachar; about 30 Miles in Circuit, deliciously covered and adorned with Trees, Plantations, Springs, Villages, Valleys, and Caverns, which have been the retreats of the solitary in all Ages. Now inhabited by the Drsians, a Warlike People, who are supposed to be the Relicks of the European Pilgrims, and accordingly pay as little deference to the Port as they can. There is a Monastery belong∣ing to the Carmelites here, whose whole Order de∣rives their Name from the place. These carmelites regard the Prophets Elias and Elisha as their Patri∣archs, whose 2 Grots, with the Fountain that sprung miraculously up at the Prayers of Elias, now under the keeping of a Mahometan Anchorite, are much honored as well by Turks, Moors, and Arabs, as the Jews and Christians. The Prophet Agabus, they say, built a Chappel upon this Mountain in the year 83. a small part thereof being yet extant. In the time of the Emperor Vespasian there was a Temple of an Oracle here, so famous, that Vespasian came in Per∣son to consult it. Possibly it was some remains of the Idol of Baal or Beelzebub, that they used here∣tofore to adore in Acre, a Town below at the foot of the Mountain. The Prince of it pays yearly to the Turks for Tribute 12 Horses. Carnarvan. See Caernarvanshire. Curnia, Acarnania, a Province in Epirus, over∣against the sle of Corfu or Cephalonia. Carniola, called by the Dutch Krain, has Slavo∣nia on the East, Friuli on the West, Carinthia and part of Seirmark North, and Istria South: fruitful in Corn and Wine; this and Carinthia both belong to the House of Austria by descent; to which they give the Title of a Duke. The Inhabitants are part Sclavonians and part Germans: its Capital City, Lau∣bach. This Country was a Branch of the antient Carnia. Carolina, a Plantation of the English Quakers, upon the Continent of North America: which has its Name from Charles II. It lies between the Lat. of 29. and 36. deg. being the most Northern part of Florida. Tho the English began to plant it only since 1663. yet being extremely fruitful and tempe∣rate, the Inhabitants are already very numerous, and have built 2 considerable Town, Charles Town, and Albermarle. This Country is bounded to the South by Florida, to the North by Virginia, to the West by the Apulathean Hills, which are exceeding steep and high, and to the East by the Atlantick Ocean. The Colonies are endeavouring to improve it to Wine and Oil, which the English chiefly want. Carolstadt, Carolostadium, a Town in Croatia, built by Charles▪ Archduke of Austria, and well forti∣fied against the Turks; seated at the confluence of the Kulp and the Mereswiz, 2 German Miles from Meteling to the North-East; the Governour of Cro∣atia always resides here▪ There is another of the same Name in the Bishoprick of Wurtzburg upon the Maine, 3 German Miles North of Wurtzburg. And a Third in Sweden, in the Province of Westrogrothia, built by Charles IX. upon the Lake Wever, which suf∣fered much by the Danes in 1644. Carpathus. See Scarpanto. Hence the Carpa∣thian Sea, now called the Sea of Scarpanto, betwixt the Islands of Rhodes and Candia, derived its Name. Carpenterland, a vast Country in the Terra Au∣stralis of America, lately discovered by one Carpen∣ter, a Dutchman, who has left it his Name. Carpentras, Carpentoracte, a City in Provence in France, which is a Bishops See under the Archbishop of Avignon; and the Capital of the County of Vena∣cin, under the Dominion of the Pope: 4 Leagues from Avignon to the North-East. It stands upon a very well watered Soil. Caesarius Bishop of Arles presided at a Council here in 527. in the Papacy of Foelix IV. Long▪ 25. 49. Lat. 43. 18.
Carpi, Carpum, a small City in Lombardy in Italy, with a Castle and Principality, belonging to the Duke of Modena. It has a large Territory to it, and a Col∣legiate Church, built first by Aistulphus, one of the Kings of the Lombards, who died about 750. Re∣built by Albertus Pius, who was then Prince of Car∣pi, with greater magnificence; and is exempted from the Jurisdiction of all the Neighbour Bishops, who have any Pretensions to it, by the Decrees of Juli∣us II. and Leo X. This City lies 4 Leagues from Modena to the North. Carrara, a small Town in the Province of Tusca∣ny in Italy between Massa and Sarsina, belonging to the Prince of Massa, with the Title of a Principality. Carrhae, an antient City of Mesopotamia upon the River Charra, remarkable in History for the Defeat of Crassus by the Parthians in the year of Rome 701. It has had the honor to be a Bishops See under the Archbishop of Edessa. This is the Charan mentioned in the Story of the Patriarch Abraham. Carriek-Fergus, See Knock-Fergus. Carrict, Carricta, a small Bailywick or Earldom in the West of Scotland, which has Dumbritain-Fryth to the West and North, Nithisdale to the East, and Galloway to the South. It is fruitful, and supplyed both by Sea and Land with all the necessaries of Life. The Earldom belongs now to the Prince of Scot∣land. Cars. See Chars. Carthago, Carthage, call'd by the Grecians , was once the most famous and potent City in Africa, and the Rival of Rome; generally suppo∣sed to be built by Queen Dido, a Tyrian Princess, An. Mundi, 3725. 72 years after Rome, 874 years before the Birth of our Saviour. But then Justin makes it to be built before Rome, and Appian before the Ru∣in of Troy, and this is now thought the more pro∣bable Opinion. The Learned Vossius in his Book de Magnitudine Ʋrbium, is confident that it was not only built before the Trojan War, but in its greatest Dignity, Extent and Power before that time; and that Dido was only the Repairer of it, and that it was much older than Tyre itself. But however certain it is, that it was a Phaenician Colony. It subjected by degrees, not only all Lybia, but a great part of the adjacent Islands, and the greatest part of Spain and Sicily. It sustained 3 sharp Wars with Rome, the first lasted 24 years, the second 18, and had ended in the Ruin of Rome, if the Carihaginians had but sup∣plied their General effectually, and in time. The third lasted 3 years, and ended in the total subversion of this City, An. Mundi 3803. Yet it was made a Roman Colony, and rebuilt under the Gracchi, 25 years after the Ruin of it; and was, as Vell. Pater∣culus affirms, the first Colony the Romans sent out of Italy. After this it flourished greatly, and the Primate of it had 125 Suffragan Bishops under him. A Council held here in the year 348. condemned the Rebaptization of such as were baptized by Hereticks. And divers others were here assembled in the Primi∣tive Ages, sometimes by the Catholick▪ Prelates, some∣times by the Schismaticks and Hereticks, as they are called in the Languages of their respective Commu∣nities. An. Christi 432, it was taken by Gensericus King of the Vandals. In the year 533, under the Reign of Justinian, it was recovered back to the Ro∣man Empire. About the year 632, it fell into the hands of the Saracens, who made it Tributary only; before the year 684, they took it again, and treated the Inhabitants with great cruelty. About 690, Ju∣stinian II. recovered it again from them. About the year 703, the Saracens returned the third time, and made a third Conquest of it, ever since which time they have enjoyed it to the total ruin of Christianity, and when in 1269. it was again retaken by Lewis IX. the Saracens soon recovered it, and totally ruined it▪ This City lies 15 Miles West from Tunis; Long. 34. 50. Lat. 32. 20. § The Spaniards have given the Name of Carthage to a Town also of New-Spain in America in the Province of Costa ricca: which stands in the middle of the Country betwixt the 2 Seas. Carthagnea, Carthago Nova, a City of Murcia in Spain, built by Asdrubal one of the Carthaginian Generals in that Kingdom. It was afterwards brought under the Dominion of the Romans by Scipio. Poly∣bius gives an accurate Description of this City in his X Book: and Livy in his XXIV. The Moors be∣coming Masters of it, totally ruined that antient Pile; and it lay buried almost 600 years in Rubbish, when in 1570. Philip II. King of Spain rebuilt it. It is a Bishops See under the Archbishop of Toledo: three Leagues from Murcia to the South, and about 84. from Gibraltar to the North-East. Long. 20. 35▪ Lat. 38. 02. Carthagenia Nueva, Carthago Nova, a City of New Granata in South America, which is a Bishops See under the Archbishop of Santa Fe de Bogota. Also a safe and very large Port, defended by 2 Forts, and washed by the River of S. Magdalen, where the Spanish Fleet ordinarily rendezvous. Yet was this important place taken by our famous Drake, in 1585. This was also the first place the Spaniards Walled in the West-Indies. It lies in Long. 299. 30. Lat. 3. 10. 22 Leagues from S. Jago de Arma, in the Pro∣vince of Quimbaia, otherwise now called the Pro∣vince of Carthagena from hence, which has the Go∣vernment of S. Martha to the East, Popayon to the South, and the Ocean to the North. Carththuel, Carduelia, a Province of Georgia in Asia, in which is Teflis, the greatest City in that King∣dom. Cartmell, a Market-Town in Lancashire in the Hundred of Loynsdale. Casale, Bodincomagus, a strong City, the Capital of the Dukedom of Montferat in Italy. It was rai∣sed to the honor of a Bishoprick under the Archbi∣shop of Milan, by Pope Sixtus IV. in 1474. seated on the South side of the Po, with a very strong Ca∣stle built of late years; and was made famous by a Defeat of the Spaniards in 1640. when the French took this City; but in 1652. lost it again. It stands 4 Miles from Trino to the East: now under the Do∣minion of the Duke of Mantua▪ who is himself un∣der the protection of the French. But the ill Air it stands in, and the Contests of Princes, has made it very thinly inhabited. § Casal or Casal Maggiore, a small Town in the Dutchy of Milan in Italy, and in the Territory of Lodi near the Po. § Casal Pu∣strulengo, a small Town betwixt Lodi and Piacenza in the same Country. Casalmach, Iris, a vast River in Cappadocia, in the lesser Asia; which riseth out of Mount Argius, in the Borders of Armenia Minor, above Sebastia, now Savastia; and having increased its Streams by the addition of several Rivers, it passeth on the East of Tochat and Amasia, to the Euxine Sea; between Limania to the East, and Simisio to the West. Casan, Casana, a very considerable City in Mus∣covy, upon the River Casanka; in a pleasant Plain, about 10▪ German Miles from the Northern Shoar of the Wolga in Long. 99. 00. Lat. 55. 38. Of a con∣siderable bigness, but the Houses are all of Wood, as also the Towers and Ramparts; only the Castle and its Fortifications are all of Stone, which are well furnished with Cannon, and a good Garrison. The River Casanka serves it instead of a Ditch, by all which it is made a very considerable Fortress▪ The Town is inhabited by Muscovites and Tartars, but
the latter are forbidden entring the Castle upon pain of Death. This City, as Olearius acquaints us, was taken by John Basilovits, Duke of Muscovy, from Sapgery a Tartarian Prince, July 9. 1552. There is a Province belonging to it of the same Name, which of itself is very fertile and good, but in a manner de∣solate, by reason of the Incursions of the Cossacks. This was the State of things here in 1636. Casbin, or Caswin, Casbinum, Arsacia, one of the greatest Cities of the Kingdom of Persia, in the Province of Ayrach, or Parthia, towards the Caspi∣an Sea. Long. 85. 00. Lat. 36. 15. Heretofore called Arsacia, and is seated in a great Sandy Plain, which is half a days Journey off Mount Elwend, which runs to the South-West as far as Bagdat. The City is a German Mile in compass, having neither Walls nor Garrison, but is inhabited by 100000 People. Heretofore the usual Residence of the Kings of Per∣sia. It stands 65 German Miles North of Hispahan and the same distance from Tauirs to the South-East. Caschaw, Cassovia, a City of the Upper Hungary, and Capital of the Province Abanvivar, seated upon the rapid River of Hewath, or Kunnert, which soon after falls into that of Tarcza, which enters the Ti∣biscus by Dob. This City is under the Emperor as King of Hungary; but was lately in a manner free, till setting up Count Teckely as their King, it was re∣taken by the Imperialists in 1685. who have since bridled them with a very strong Garrison. It is very well fortified, and has▪ the best Arsenal in all Hun∣gary▪ about 4 German Miles from Esperies to the South, and 11 from Agria to the North-East, Long. 43 32. Lat. 48. 32. Cascar, or Kasghar, by others called Chazalg, a City and Kingdom in Turquestan, in Tartary. The Kingdom of Thibet stands South of it. Caserta, [Caserta] a small City in the Terra di Lavoro, in the Kingdom of Naples, near the River Volturno; which is a Principality, and a Bishops See under the Archbishop of Capoua: from whence it stands 4 Miles to the East: Not much inhabited: Casilimar, Halys, a River of Paphlagonia in Asia the Less, This falls into the Euxine Sea, 20 Miles West of Amisum, now Simiso. Cashel, Cassilia, Cassellia, a City of the Province of Munster, and County of Tipperary, not far from the River Sewer; built upon a Hill, and made an Archbishops See by Pope Eugenius III. but now meanly Peopled, having suffered much from the En∣glish. It stands 23 Miles North of Waterford. In 1650. it was almost wholly burnt down. There was a Council held in this City in the year 1171. Casimambous, a People of the Isle of Madagascar of the race of those Arabians which the Calif of Mecca dispatched thither about 200 years ago to in∣struct the Natives in the Arabick Language. Casius, see Lison, a Mountain of Egypt; at the foot whereof stood heretofore a Town called Casium, famous for the Sepulchre of Pompey and a Temple of Jupiter. Castona, Castulo, a City in the Kingdom of An∣daluzia in Spain, upon the River Guadalimar, which has sometime been a Bishops See under the Archbi∣shop of Toledo. Famous for the Defeat of the Moors in the year 1202. in the Reign of Alphonsus King of Castile; the Christians killing 200000 of them upon the spot near this place. The Caspian Sea, was named at first the Sea of Chosar, from a great Granchild of Noah: Nubius in his Geography stiles it the Sea of Thavisthan. The Moors call it and the Gulph of Arabia, Bohar Cor∣suin; the Persians call both Kulsum; the Greek and Latin Writers, the Caspian and Hyrcanian Sea; the Muscovites, Gualenskoy-more. The Antients general∣ly thought it a Bay of the Great Indian Ocean, or that it had some Communication with the Eux∣ine Sea. Though a vast number of Rivers fall into this Sea, yet it is not perceived any way to increase. It is in length from North to South 120 Miles, in breadth 90. Some represent it 800 Miles long and 650 broad. In the Winter for the most part frozen. It is in effect no other than a great Lake. The Wa∣ters of it are as salt as any other; yet it neither Ebs nor flows, nor has any Islands. This Sea has the Kingdom of Astracan on the North, Persia on the South, Circassia on the West, and Caratansca on the East. Casriae Portae, are certain difficult Passes through the Rocks and Mountains near the Caspian Sea, in the Province of Schirvan in Persia; only large e∣nough for a single Chariot 8000 paces together, leading to the Cities of Teflis and Derbent; whence they are sometimes called the Gates of Teflis; and Derbent amongst the Turks Temir Capi, that is, the Iron Gate: see Derbent. § The Caspian Mountains are a Chain of Mountains extended from North to South in Asia, betwixt Arme∣nia and the Caspian Sea. § The Caspii were an an∣tient People amongst the Scythians upon the Borders of the same Sea. Cassandt, a small Island upon the Coast of Flan∣ders over against l' Ecluse, with a Village in it and a Fortress under the Hollanders. Cassano, a City in the Hither Calabria in the King∣dom of Naples, and a Bishops See under the Arch∣bishop of Cosenza, with the Title of a Principality: situate near a small River called Lione. § Also a great Town in the Milanese upon the River Adda, between Crema and Bergamo. Cassel, a City in the Marquisate of Hessen, upon the River Fuld, which is well fortified. It stands 13 German Miles from Marpurg, in the Confines of the Dukedom of Brunswick; the usual Residence of the Landgraves of Hessen: antiently called Castellum Cattorum. It is a large City, well built and fortified and the Capital of the said Landgravate. § Cassel or Mont-Cassel, Castellum Morinorum, a small Town in Flanders, 4 Leagues from Bergue S. Vinoch, and at an equal distance from Aire; in a good Soil, and well fortified, with a considerable Jurisdiction belong∣ing to it. It has been taken and retaken upon divers Occasions; but most memorable for the Battle here fought Apr. 11. 1677. betwixt the French com∣manded by the Duke of Orleans, and the Dutch and Spanish Armies commanded by the Prince of Orange, who proposing to relieve S. Omers (then besieged by the Duke) was repulsed in this Battel: so that the Town yielded to the French within a few days after. Cassemir, or Chismeer, a Province of the Em∣pire of the Great Mogul, in the hither East-Indies towards Tartary. Casseneuil, a small Town in the County of Agenois in Guyenne in France, upon the River Lot, 5 Leagues from Agen. Formerly adorn'd with a Palace Royal, in which the Emperor Charles the Great took particu∣lar Delight, and Lewis the Debonnaire his Son was bornin 778. Casseuil, a Town upon the Garonne in the Diocese of Bazas, in Guyenne in France. Heretofore adorn'd with a Palace-Royal, which disputes the Honor of being the Birth-Place of Lewis the Debonnaire with the precedent Casseneuil. Cassian, or Caschan, a large, handsome, populous and trading City in the Province of Hyerach in Persia, in a Plain; 3 Days journey from Hispahan in the Way to the Caspian Sea; only it wants good Water, and the people are infested with Scorpions.
Cassin, or Mont-Cassin, a celebrated Abbey in the Terra di Lavoro in the Kingdom of Naples; built by S. Benedict the Patriarch of the Occidental Monks, and inhabited by him. There was heretofore a City of the same Name at the Foot of the Hill upon which this Abbey stands. It was an Episcopal See under the Pope; but falling into Ruines, the See became united with that of S. Germain, a City that has sprung out of those Ruines of Cassin. Cassiopeia, an antient City and Territory in the Kingdom of Epirus in Greece, upon the Frontiers of Macedonia. It has had the Honor of an Episcopal See, and is a different Place from the Cassiope of Pliny and Ptolemy, which stands to the Sea in the same King∣dom, and is now called Joannina. Cassiterides, the antient Name of two Islands upon the Northern Coast of Galaecia in Spain, given them by the Greeks from the White Lead they found in them. Now call'd Zigarga, and S. Cyprian. They lie opposite to the Cap d'Orteguere. Cassopo, a Town in the North of the Island of Cor∣fou, heretofore called Cassiopeia, and famous for a Temple dedicated to Jupiter. It is now nothing more than a ruin'd Fortress, besides a Church under the Care of some religious Greeks; where they have a Figure of the B. Virgin that is famed for do∣ing of Miracles. Cassovia. Vide supra Caschaw. This City was granted to Bethlehem Gabor, by Ferdinand II. in 1620. Cassubia, or Cassuben, a Dutchy in the Province of Pomerania in Germany, under the Elector of Brandenburg, between the Baltick Sea, Prussia, and Stetin. Colberg is one of its Principal Towns. Castabala, Perasia, an antient City of Cilicia in Asia Minor, upon the Confines of Syria and the Gulph of Lajazzo, between Anazarbe and Adana. Diana had formerly a famous Temple in her Honor here. Castalius, a Fountain of Phocis in Greece, dedi∣cated by the antient Poets to Apollo and the Muses. Castanovitza, a Castle on the River Ʋnna, which divides Croatia from Bosnia; surrendred to Prince Louis of Baden, Aug. 14. 1688. Castel-Aragonese, a strong Town in the Isle of Sardignia. Castel-Bolognese, a Town in the Province of Romagna in Italy under the Pope, betwixt Imola and Faiensa. Castel-Durante, a Town in the Dutchy of Ʋr∣bino in the States of the Church, in Italy: famous for curious Earthen-ware. Castel-Gandolphe, a Town in the Campagna di Roma in Italy, 12 Miles from Rome, where the Pope has a Mansion of pleasure. A Lake of the same Name, formerly call'd Albano, stands on one side of it. Castel-Geloux, a Town and Bailywick in the Pro∣vince of Guienne in France upon the River Avance: Honoured with a Collegiate Church, in which the Dukes of Albret lie interred. Castel A Mare, or Casell a Mere di stabia, Sta∣biae, a City in the Terra di Lavoro in the Kingdom of Naples, with an Episcopal See under the Archbi∣shop of Sorrento. It has a commodious Port upon the Gulph of Naples. The French took it in 1654. Castel A Mare della Brucca, an antient City in the Hither Principate in the Kingdom of Naples, betwixt St. Severino and the Gulph of Salerno. It has been an Episcopal See, but not now so conside∣rable as formerly. The Antients call it Helia, Elea, and Hielea. Castel-Tornese, a small Town built upon a high Ground in the Province of Belvedore in the Morea, about 3 Miles from the Sea, and not far from Cap Tornese. After the taking of Patras, and Lepanto, this Town surrendred upon the first Summons to the Venetians in 1687. It had 29 Peices of Cannon in it, and commands 200 Villages or Forts in the Country thereabouts. Castel dell Volturno, a City in the Terra di La∣voro in the Kingdom of Naples, lately made a Bi∣shops See under the Archbishop of Capoua. It stands to the Ocean, and is believed to be the Relicks of the antient Volturnum. Castellana, or Civita Castellana, a City of St. Peters Patrimony in Italy, with a Bishops See conso∣lidated to that of Otri, immediately dependent of the Pope. Castellane, a Town and Barony in Provence upon the River Verdon amongst the Mountains. Since the year 1260. the Inhabitants have rebuilt it nearer to the River, because before it stood upon a Rock. Castellanetta, a City in the Terra di Otranto in the Kingdom of Naples: advanced to the Dignity of a Principality, besides an Episcopal See under the Archbishop of Taranto. Situate upon the little Ri∣ver Talvo about 7 Miles from the Gulph of Taranto, between the Cities Matera and Motula. Castelnau, a small Town in the Tract of Medoc in the Province of Guyenne in France, upon a little River which falls into the Garonne, over against Blaye. § Castelnau de Bretenous, a Town and Barony in the County of Quercy in France, near the Dordogne. § Castelnau de Cernes, a Town near Podensac in Guy∣enne. § Castelnau de Manes, a Town near Bazas in the same. § Castelnau de Montratier, a Town in Quercy near Cahors upon a little River falling into the Tarn. Castelnau-Darry, a Town in Languedoc, near to which was deseated and taken, the Duke of Montmo∣rency, in 1632. not long after beheaded at Tholouse. It is the Capital of the County of Lauragais, betwixt Tholouse and Carcassone. In Latin Castellum Ariano∣rum, or Castellavium Auracium. Castel-Sarazin, a low but strong Town upon the Frontiers of Languedoc and Quercy in France, a little below the Confluence of the Tarn and the Garonne. Of great Fame in the Wars of Charles Martell with the Sarazens, and thence comes its adjunct Name of Sarazin. Castiglione, a Town in the the Province of Car∣fagnana in Italy, in the States of the Republick of Lucca. § A second in the Hither Calabria, digni∣fied with a Principality. § Castiglione Mantuano, a Town in the Mantuan towards Verona. § Castig∣lione delle Stivere, the Principal Town of a little Ter∣ritory, upon the Frontiers of the Mantuan, advanced to the Dignity of a Principality. It is a strong place, betwixt Mantoua and Brescia, belonging to the Duke of Mantoua. Castile, Castella, a Kingdom in Spain, which when largely taken is the greatest of all the Kingdoms in that Country; as containing under it the Kingdoms of Leon, Gallicia, Andalusia, Navarre, Murcia, Biscay, Granada, and Extremadura: It being the most pre∣vailing Kingdom in that Continent; to which the rest are united by Marriages, or Conquests: Yet was it at first but an Earldom belonging to the Kingdom of Leon, and was made a Kingdom in 1016, under Fer∣dinando. Bounded on the East with Navarre; on the West with Portugal; on the North with Biscay, Guipiscoa, and the Asturias; and on the South with Andalusia, Extremadura, and Granada. It is divided into the Old and the New Castile; whereof the Old Castile lies more North, the New more South, arising out of the New Conquest of the Kingdom of Toledo, and other Accessions gain'd from the Moors; which
is also more fruitful than the Old Castile. Burgos is the Capital of the Old; Madrid and Toledo the chief of the New. Long. 12. Lat. 39. Castile D'Or, or New Castile, a large and fruitful Country in the Southern America, containing the No∣ble Provinces of Panama, Carthagena, Ʋraba, Ve∣nezuela, Comana, New Andaluzia, and New Grana∣da. Bounded on the East with Guyana and the Cari∣bes Country, on the West with the Pacifick Ocean, on the South Peru and the Kingdom of the Amazons, and on the North with the Northern Ocean. It was first discovered in Columbus's third Voyage to Ameri∣ca by some of Castile, who therefore call'd it Castile Nuevo; and finding Mines of Gold in it, particularly in the Province of Ʋraba, they added the Name of Castile d'Or. The great Rivers Orenoque and Darien water it, besides others. The Spaniards have not been able to reduce the Natives entirely to this Day. Pearl also is found upon the Coasts. Castillon, a Town in Perigord in the South of France near the Dordogne, where the English were defeated and their General slain, in 1451. by which Victory Charles VII. recovered the County of Gui∣enne. Castle-Carey, a Market-Town in Somersetshire in the Hundred of Cattesash. Castlenovo, or Castel-Novo, a Maritime Town in Albania, upon the Gulph of Cattaro, surrendred to the Venetians after a Months Siege, October 1. 1687. in whose possession it had been reposed in antient times. The Spaniards enjoy'd it in the Reign of Charles V. till it was taken from a Garrison of 4000 of them Anno 1539, by Barberoasse, that great Ad∣miral, who from being a Pirate, and the Son of a poor Renegade Greek of Lesbos, became the most esteem'd Sea Commander that the Ottoman Empire ever em∣ployed. The Turks having been Masters of this Place for 148 Years last past, had long infested the Adria∣tick Sea with Piracies from it. § There are divers Towns of small Note in Italy that carry this Name. As Castelnovo Tortonese in the Milanese. Castelnovo di Carfagnana, under the Duke of Mantua &c. Castle Rising, a Market-Town in the County of Norfolk in the Hundred of Frebridge, which Elects two Burgesses for the Parliament. The Haven here being many years since choak'd up with Sands, has brought this Town into decay. Caston, a Market-Town in Norfolk, in the Hun∣dred of S. Erpingham. Castor, a Market-Town in the Division of Lindsey in Lincolnshire, and in the Hundred of Bradley. Castres, or Chartreux, Castrum Albiensium, a City and a Bishop's See upon the North side of the River Gout, in the County of Albigeois in Languedoc in France. This Bishoprick was first instituted by P. John XXII. in 1317. under the Archbishop of Berry; but in 1678. it was put under the Archbishop of Alby, from which place itstands 7 Leagues to the South, and 10 from Tholouse to the East. The Huguenots took and Pillaged it in 1567. It also honoured with the Title of an Earldom. Castro, a Dutchy and Town belonging to the House of Farneze, the Dukes of Parma; but like∣wise challenged by the Ecclesiastical State: For in the Wars betwixt Edward Duke of Parma and Pope Ʋr∣ban VIII. this Town, amongst others, was seised for the Pope in consideration of the Arrears of a certain Rent reserved to the Apostolick Chamber from the Dutchy, as held to be a Fief of the Church. Innocent X. razed it entirely to the ground; and in the place thereof erected a Pillar with this Inscription, [Here was Castro;] and annexed the Dutchy to his See. But the said Annexation was conditionally revoked by the Treaty of Pisa, in 1664. The admirable Palace of Ca∣prarola stands in this Dutchy. The Dutchy is bound∣ed on the East by S. Peter's Patrimony, the Siennese to the West, the Mediterranean to the South, and the Territory of Orvieto to the North. The City had the Honor to be a Bishop's See immediately under the Pope, till the Year 1646, that Innocent X. transferr'd the See to Acqua pendente, and quite de∣stroy'd Castro (as we said), in revenge because the in∣habitants happened to kill the Bishop that he sent thither to reside and govern. It stood about 11 Miles from the Sea near Toscanella and Corneto; environ∣ed with such Precipices as rendred the access to it very Difficult. § A City in the Terra di Otranto in the Kingdom of Naples, being a Bishops See under the Archbishop of Otranto, upon the Shoars of the Io∣nian Sea. Ravaged by the Turks in 1537. who car∣ried away a great Number of the Inhabitants into Slavery. Some suppose it to be the Castrum Miner∣vae of the Antients. § There are others of inferiour Note. One in the Hither Calabria near Cassano. A second in the Province of Abruzzo, call'd Castro Novo. A third in the Campagnia di Roma. A fourth in the Basilicate. Another in the Island of Meleos, &c. Catadupi, a People of Aethiopia about the Cata∣racts of the Nile, deafned (says Tully, in Somnio Scip.) by the Noise of them. Catalognia, a Province and Principality in Spain; bounded on the West by the Kingdoms of Ar∣ragon and Valentia, on the East and South by the Me∣diterranean Sea, and on the North it has the Pyre∣nean Hills, which separate it from France. Hereto∣fore it had Earls of its own, who were under the Pro∣tection of the Crown of France; but in 1137. it was annexed to the Kingdom of Arragon; a mountainous but fertile Country, and well watered with Rivers. The Inhabitants are great Lovers of their Civil Liber∣ties; and being ill us'd by some Irish Soldiers which were quartered upon them in 1640. they revolted from Spain, and call'd in the French; but during the Civil Wars of France, about 1652. they returned to their old Master the King of Spain again. By the Trea∣ty of Peace in 1659, the Pyrenees are made to di∣vide the two Kingdoms of France and Spain. Bar∣celona is the Capital City of this Country. Catania, one of the principal Cities of Sicily, on the Eastern shoar of that Island, about forty Miles North of Syracuse. It has a Port made of late Years and is a Bishop's See under the Archbishop of Mont∣reale. On the South of it runs a small River called Judicello. This City was built by the Chalcidian Greeks, as Eusebius saith. Charles V. wall'd and for∣tified it against the Turks and Moors, by which Securi∣ties it grew Great and Rich; but in 1669. it suffered very much by a dreadful Irruption of Mount Aetna, which stands about 20 Miles North from it: four Ri∣vers with Fire, or melted Rocks and Earth making their Way through the Territories of this City, and bearing down all before them, passed a Mile into the Sea before those Waters were able to conquer this out∣rageous Fire; so that it was then thought the whole Island of Sicily would have perish'd. Aetna is observ'd to overflow with Torrents of Fire every 15 Years. K. Hie∣ro died in this City. The Remains of an Amphitheatre with divers Inscriptions and Marks of its Antiquity are yet to be seen. Long. 39. 40. Lat. 37. 00. Our English Sandys saith, That the Bay upon which it stands is but shallow, and not capable of Ships. The Country fruitful; and the City being an Ʋniversity and not having much Trade, is the more inhabited by Gentlemen. Catanzaro, Catacium, a City in the further Cala∣bria in the Kingdom of Naples, with a Bishop's See under the Archbishop of Regio; 2 or 3 Miles from the Ocean, between Squillaci and Nicastro.
Cataonia, an antient City and Country in Asia Mi∣nor between Cilicia and Cappadocia, in Strabo's time subject to the King of Cappadocia. Bellona had a sumptuous Temple in her honour in this City, to whose service above 6000 Men and Women were Consecrated under the direction of a Soveraign Priest who here resided. Cateau, or Catteau-Cambresis, Castrum Camera∣cense, a small Town in the district of Cambre∣sis, 5 Leagues from Cambray, and 2 from Landreci. The Treaty of Peace in 1559. by the French, said to be so disadvantageous to them, was celebrated here. Ce Catelet, a Town in Picardy upon the River Escaut, and the Frontiers of Hainault and Cambre∣sis. Taken by the Spaniards in 1557. and once again in this Age, but restored to the French by the Treaty of the Pyrenees in 1659. A considerably strong place. Caterlagh, Catherlogh, Carlough, Caterlogum; a City in the Province of Leinster in Ireland on the West side of the River Barrow, 30 Miles South-West of Dublin; which Lionel Duke of Clarence began to Wall; and Bellingham, Lord Lieutenant of Ire∣land, fortified with a Castle. This is also the head of a County of the same Name. Cathness, Catnesia, Cathanesia, is the most Nor∣thern County in the Kingdom of Scotland: on the North and East, washed by the Caledonian Ocean; on the West it hath the same Ocean, and the County of Strathnavern in part; and on the South it hath Sutherland: Generally barren, little inhabited, yet it is a Bishoprick, and an Earldom. Catolica, a Town in the Province of Romagna in Italy, between Pesaro and Rimini; so call'd in the third Century from the Catholicks of the Coun∣cil of Rimini, who separating themselves from the Arians (who in the number of 400 Bishops convo∣cated by Pope Liberius to this Council carried the Majority by a great many) came hither to say their Masses. Cattay, or Catio, a Region of Asia, supposed by learned Men to be China, or some part of it towards the North, comprehending the Provinces of Peking, Xantung, Honan, Suchuen, Xensi, and Xansi; where∣of Peking is the Capital City. Being under the K. of Tartary, it is likewise called Tartary de Kan. Cattaro, Cattara, a City in Dalmatia, which has been under the Venetians ever since 1420. It is a Bishop's See under the Archbishop of Bari; and is a strong Place, well seated on a Hill, having a Castle belonging to it, and 17 Villages. It lies 40 Miles South of Ragusa, and 35 North-West of Scutari, up∣on a Bay of the Adriatick Sea, call'd Cattaro, which takes its name from this Place. The Turks have of∣ten attempted to take it in Vain. Catti, an antient People of Hassia and Thuringia, in Germany, who sometime passing into Holland, have left the Names of Catwick Opzee to a Town up∣on the Sea Coast, and Catwick op den Rhein to ano∣ther upon the Rhine. In the Reign of Tiberius, the Hermanduri gave them a terrible Defeat, wherein they destroy'd both Man and Beast, upon a pretence of ha∣ving Consecrated the Spoils to Mars and Mercury. Catzenelbogen, Catti Meliboci, a Country in the Province of Weteraw in Germany under the Land∣grave of Hesse Cassel. The antient Catti its Inhabi∣tants have left it this Name. In the Year 1548. the Emperor Charles V. adjudged this Country to Willi∣am Earl of Nassau who made pretensions to it: But the Arrest was afterwards cassated by the Treaty of Paslaw. Cava, a great and populous City and a Bishop's See in the hither Calabria in the Kingdom of Naples; seated partly upon a Hill, and partly in a Valley, within four Miles of Salerno, and about 20 from Naples to the South. This Bishop was heretofore a Suffragan to the Archbishop of Salerno; but now exempted; and is immediately under the Pope; which Honor was obtained from Boniface IX, in 1394. yet is the Bishop's Jurisdiction limited with the Walls of the City. There is also a Abbey in it. Cavado, Cavadus, a River of Portugal, which a∣riseth in Gallicia, and watering the City of Braga, falls into the Ocean. Cavaillon, Cabellio, Ʋrbs Cavallicorum, a small and ill built City in the County of Venaissin in Pro∣vence in France, in an Isle made by the River Durance, within 4 Leagues of Avignon to the South-East. This is a Bishop's See under the Archbishop of Avignon; and under the Dominion of the Pope. Cavan, a Town and County in the Province of Ʋlster in Ireland. The Duke of Berwick in an A∣ction before this Town, against K. William's Forces, Feb. 11. 1689. had his Horse shot under him. It is not without a strong Fort. Caucasus, a Part of the great Mountain of Taurus in Asia, towards Georgia, beginning about the Mouth of the River Phasis: It is very fruitful, and well inhabi∣ted by Christians, for the most part, of the Georgian Church. Full of Rocks and Precipices, and shewing the Ruins of several Castles and Churches: Yet cove∣red at the Top with Snow perpetually. Cauda, a River of Cumberland, which running through West-Ward Forrest, by Dauston, on the West of Carlisle, falls into the River Eden. Caudebec, Calidobeccum, a considerable Town in Normandy, upon the Northern shoar of the River Seine, in the Pais de Caux; about 5 Miles West of Rou∣en, 7 from le Haure East; much Celebrated for Weaving. This is one of the Principal Towns of the Pais de Caux, which is bounded by the British Sea to the North and West; by Picardy to the East, and by the Seine to the South; and lies from East to West 25 Leagues. The Caudebec Hats come from hence. The Caves in Wiltshire between Luckington and great Badminton upon the Edge of the County, nine in Number, of a Row, of several Dimensions; the least 4 Foot broad, and 9 or 10 Foot long, are credi∣bly supposed to be the Tombs of some Heroick Men among the antient Romans, Saxons, or Danes; be∣cause Spurs and Pieces of Armour have been digged out of them. Cavita de Manilha, Manilhanus Sinus, a Gulph of the Philippine Islands. Cavours, a Town 5 Leagues from Pignerol in Piedmont under the French, near the River Peles, fortified with two Castles. It was taken by Lesdiguie∣res in 1594. and retaken by the Duke of Savoy the Year after. Now made a Dependant of Pignerol. Caurestan, a great Village in the Province of Far∣sistan in Persia, betwixt Lar and the Isle of Ormus. Caux, or Pais de Caux, a District contain'd with∣in the Province of Normandy in France betwixt the Seine and the Sea; in which Diepe▪ Haure de Grace, Caudebec, Aumale, S. Vallery, &c. are comprehend∣ed. There is also of the same Name with it a Town and a Promontory. Cawood, a Market-Town in the West-Riding of Yorkshire, and the Hundred of Barkston. Caxamalca, a Country within the Province of Li∣ma in Peru; adorn'd heretofore with Divers Royal Pa∣laces of the Inca's of that Kingdom. Thirty Leagues from the Pacifick Sea, but near the River Vagna. It was here that the Noble Atabalipa King of Peru was defeated and taken Prisoner by Francis Pizarro, who basely and barbarously afterwards murthered him in 1533.
Caxton, a Market-Town in Cambridgeshire in the Hundred of Stow. Caxume, the Capital City of the Kingdom of Ti∣gremahon in Abyssinia, thought to be the same with the Tenesis of Strabo, where the Queen of Sheba dwelt that visited Solomon. Cayenne, an Island under the French in the North Sea, upon the Coast of Guyana; about 20 Leagues in Circuit; 4 Degrees from the Equinoctial Northward, and South of the Disembogure of the River Cayenne which glides betwixt the Countries of the Caribes and the Galibes. Its principal Commodity is Tobacco. The French have built themselves a Fort at Bourg, (their cheifest Settlement of about 200 Houses) and besides they guard the Harbor with Canon. Cayernittes, some small Islands frequented by the Fishers for Tortoises, which here are to be found of the largest Size, near the Western shoar of Hispaniola in America. Cayphas, an antient Town, so call'd from Caiphas High Priest of the Jews, who formerly re edified it, at the Foot of Mount Carmel in the Holy Land upon the shoars of the Mediterranean; 2 Leagues by Water from S. Jean d' Acre. Since Saladine demolish'd it in 1191. it has never been fortified again; and there∣fore now become a Village inhabited by some Moors, Jews, and Greeks. Cazan. See Casan. Cazares, an antient People who took part with the Hunns and the Avares in their Incursions to ravage the Empire. Cea, Ceos, or Zee, Zie, and antiently among the Greeks call'd Hydrusca, is one of the Cyclades Islands in the Aegean Sea; whereof Julide (Julis) is the Ca∣pital City, in which Simonides and Bacchylides, the two famous Lyrique Poets, with the Philosopher Ari∣ston, are said to be born. Cebarsussi, a Town near Carthage in Africa, where the Donatist Bishops in 394. held a Council, and deposed Primianus Bishop of Carthage. Cedar, or Kedar, the Hebrew name of Arabia Deserta, taken from Kedar the Son of Ismael, Gen. 25. 13. Cedes, a great and strong Town heretofore of Judea in the Tribe of Napthali in Galilee, 4 Miles from Cephet and Capernaum: given by Joshua, af∣ter he had killed the King thereof, to the Priests and Levites. It had an Asylum in it for such as com∣mitted accidental Murder, (that is, in the Phrase of the English Law, chance Medley) pursuant to the Laws of Moses provided in that behalf. Cedogna, Laquedoniae, an Episcopal City of the Further Principate in the Kingdom of Naples, suf∣fragan to the Archbishop of Conza: believed by some to be the Aquilenia of Livy. Cedron, or Kedron, a small Brook in the midst of the Valley of Jehosaphat in the Holy land near Jerusalem, passed by our Saviour a little before his Death, John. 18. 1. and frequently in Scripture men∣tioned upon other Occasions. Cefalu, or Cifalu, Cephalaedis, a fair City with a good Port and a Castle in the Island of Sicily, be∣ing a Bishops See under the Archbishop of Messina, upon a Cape; whence some conjecture that its name is derived from the Greek Word . It stands near Termini. Celena, the Capital City formerly of all Phrygia, which being once repeopled by Antiochus Soter, he caused it to be called Apamea. See Haman. Celtae, the antient Greek Authors give this name indifferently to the Gauls and the Germans, as some do to the Spaniards, upon the account of the Alli∣ances of the Celtae with the Iberi. See Celtiberi. But it more particularly understands the Original Gauls, whose Empire in a part of Gallia, (from them called Celtica, the Boundaries whereof you see described under the Word Gallia) flourished in the time of Tarquinius Priscus, when Segovesus and Bel∣lovesus Sons or Nephews to Ambigatus King of the Celtae, conducted those 2 Colonies into Italy and Ger∣many, we mentioned speaking of the Province of Ber∣ry, whereof these People were the antient Inhabitants. Celtiberi, a mixt People, as the name itself im∣ports, of the Celtae aforesaid and the Iberi, or the an∣tient Spaniards of Arragon and Castile: Recorded in History with great Honor, for their Courage and Fidelity. Florus calls them the Force of Spain. The Celtae passing out of Gallia into Spain, and there alliancing themselves with the Natives, was the Occa∣sion of this Denomination. Cemele, an antient City near Nice, in Provence, amongst the Maritime Alpes; of great Esteem here∣tofore with the Romans, and yet showing the Ruins of an Amphitheatre, a Temple of Apollo, Inscriptions, Tombs, and Canals, which were the Works of their curious Hands. Since Christianity, it became a Bishop's See, and bore the Honor thereof till either the Goths and Vandals in the sixth, or the Saracens in the se∣venth and eighth Centuries ruined it so, that the See was translated to Nice. Cenchrea, the Port over against Corinth, in the Peloponesus or Morea. Ceneda, Ceneta, a small but well peopled City, and a Bishop's See in the Marca Trivigliana, seated at the Foot of the Mountains; about 13 Miles South from Belluno, and 15 from Trevigi North-East. The Bishop is Sovereign of the City, but a Suffragan of the Patriarch of Aquileia. Cenis, or Mont-Cenis, Alpes Cottiae, the Name of that famous Passage over the Alpes, which parts Savoy from Piedmont. Centobrica, an antient City of the Celtiberi in Spain; which when besieged by the Romans under Metellus, placed the little Infants of Rethogenes, who had run over to Metellus, in the Breach where the Besiegers played their Battery. And though the Breach was of that Largeness as to render the Con∣quest of the Town indubitable, and Rethogenes him∣self offered his Family to be a Sacrifice to Metellus's Glory; Yet rather than so Generous a Father should see the Massacre of his own Children, Metellus raised the Siege: And the Town ravished with his Humanity and Clemency therein, voluntarily afterwards opened the Gates to him. Val. Max. Centum Celles, an antient Town of the Province of Toscana in Italy, in which Pope Cornelius during the Persecution of Gallus was confined and put to divers Torments. It is mentioned by Pliny and Procopius. Leander Alberti calls it Ferolle or Forcelle. Others believe it is the same with that which we now call Civita Vecchia. Ceperano, or Ciperano, a Town in the Campag∣na di Roma in Italy, upon the River Garigliano. P. Paschal II. held a Council here in 1114. in which William Guichard, Grandson to Robert Guichard the Valiant Norman that drove the Saracens out of Italy, was created Duke of Apulia and Calabria. Cephalonia, Cephalenia, call'd by the Italians Cefalonia, is an Island of the Ionian Sea, just oppo∣site to the Mouth of the Gulph of Lepanto. The Inhabitants are of the Greek Church; but with the Island, which is not above 90 Miles in Compass, sub∣ject to the Venetians. It is fruitful in Wines, excel∣lent Oil, and in those Grapes, whereof Currans are made. The Town wherein the Proveditor or Gover∣nor resides is Argostoli; a small Place, with a tolerable good Port on the East side of the Island. There is no other Town of any Note there; but only the Villages
of Liscuri, Finea, Erisso, Pillaro, Samo, and Lucato, after whose Names, together with Argo∣stoli, the whole Island is divided into seven Parts that are accordingly so notified. In the twelfth Century a Bishoprick was founded here, to which the Church of the Isle of Zante is annexed. In 1224. the Venetians received this Island by a Donation from Gaio the Lord of it at that time. In 1479. the Turks took it. In 1499. the Venetians retook it and repeopled it, and have since secured it with a strong Fortress called Asso, that stands upon a high Rock, surrounded with the Sea, excepting the Reserve only of a Point of Land a∣bout 20 Paces broad to join the Castle and the Island. The Proveditor's Commission is made to continue 32 Months. The Antiens call'd this, no less than that other Island in the Archipelago, Samos. Cephisus, a River of Phocis in Achaia, first spring∣ing up in the antient Country of Doris there, and passing by the Mountain of Parnassus, it continues its Course through Boeotia, where it receives the Rivers Asopus and Ismene: Then traversing the Lake Copae, now known by the Name of Lago Stivo, it falls into the Euripus or the Streights of Negropont. And with a little Variation from Cephisus, is now called Cefisso. The Oracle of Themis said to be consulted by Deucalion and Pyrrha stood upon the Banks there∣of. § Some other Rivers of this Name in Greece are remembred by antient Authors; as likewise a Fountain at Apollonia, mentioned by Strabo and Ptolemy. Cepuz, Cepusiensis Comitatus, a small County in the most Northern part of the Upper Hungary, to∣wards the Carpathian Hills, and the Confines of Po∣land; the greatest part of which is under the Crown of Poland; though the chief Town (Leutsch) with the Southern part of the County is subject to the Emperor, as King of Hungary. John de Zapol, Earl of this County, was crowned King of Hungary in 1526. Ceram, or Ceiram, a pretty large and well inhabi∣ted Island in the Indian Ocean, betwixt Terra des Pa∣paous, Gilolo, &c. and the Moluccaes. Affording Spices, and the like Indian Commodities. Ceramici, the Tuilleries of old Athens. Cerasus, an antient Town of Cappadocia upon the Coast of the Euxine Sea, now called Chirissonda and otherwise Emid o Omidie. In Pomponius Mela's Time, we find it was as considerable a Place as Trebi∣zonde; assuming this name from the abundance of Cherries that grew in it, which Lucullus first brought into Italy from hence, says Athenaeus and S. Jerom, in his Return from the Conquest of Pontus and Armenia. It is very little inhabited now, and under the Turks, as all the rest of Anatolia. Ceraunii, Acroceraunii Montes: The Greeks are us'd to call by this Name divers Chains of Mountains, whose Heighth exposes them to be struck with Lightning and Thunder: But it more especially understands those upon the Confines of Epirus, running a vast length from East to West between that Kingdom and Albania; about 50 Miles distant from the Island of Corfou: Now known by the Name of Monti di Chi∣maera in Chaonia, and Chimarioti. Cerdanna, Cerdagne, Cerretania, is a County annexed to Catalaunia, and belongs to the Crown of Spain, though it lies on the North side of the Pyre∣nean Hills. It has Languedoc on the North, the County of Rousillon on the East, from which it is se∣parated by the Pyrenean Hills, and on the North and South Catalaunia; divided into two parts by the River Segre [Sicoris]: the Eastern part of it has been under the French ever since the Year 1660. according to the Regulation of the general Peace in the Year precedent. The antient Cerretani were of this Country. The Ca∣pital Town whereof is Puicerda. Ceremissi. See Czeremissi. Cerenza, or Cirenza. See Acerenza Cerigo, Cytherea, an Island upon the Coast of the Morea, belonging to the Venetians, between Cape Matapan to the West, and Cape Anzolo to the East. The first Island of the Archipelago towards Europe, at the Distance of 40 or 45 Miles from Candia, about 60 in Circuit; and antiently dedicated to Venus, whom the Poets represent as born at Cithera which was a Town here of so much Note as to give Name to the whole Island. The Lacedemonian Vessels from E∣gypt and Libya made this Island their Retreat: Some∣times stil'd the Lanthorn of the Archipelago, because it is from hence that you may see the Countenance of the Turks: and sometimes Porphyris by the Antients, from the abundance of Porphyry found in it. It is now adorned with a City standing upon a Rock, having a Castle and a convenient Port to it very strong by Na∣ture and Art of the same Name with it self; which is also an Episcopal See, and full of People. Great Ve∣neration is paid to the Monastery of San Giovanni della grotta here above all others belonging to the religious Greeks, because the People have been perswa∣ded that S. John began the Book of the Revelations in the Place where it stands. Cerisoles, a small Town in Piedmont, near Car∣magnole; famous for the Victory obtained by the French, under the Conduct of the Duke d' Enguien, at 22 Years of Age, over the Marquess du Guast, in 1544. twelve thousand being kill'd upon the Place. Cerne, a Market-Town in Dorsetshire, in the Hun∣dred of Totcombe, standing in a Champaign Country, and watered with a fine Rivulet; considerable for its being heretofore an Abbey-Town. Cervetere, a great and flourishing Place in the Times of the Old Romans, under the Name of Caere Vetus; the Capital of Hetruria: Now a small Town in S. Peter's Patrimony in Italy, 8 Miles from Brac∣ciano, and 3 from the Thuscan Sea. The Tabulae Cae∣rites in which the Censors set down the Names of Persons who for Misdemeanours were deprived of the Right of Suffrage, received that Appellation from hence. For when the Gauls took Rome, this Town entertained the Refugee Romans with so much Kind∣ness, that they had the Honour afterwards the first of any People, as a Reward for the same, to be made a free City of Rome, nevertheless without the Right of Suf∣frage. Cervia, otherwise call'd Ficocle, is a City in the Province of Romandiola in Italy upon the Adriatick, with a Bishop's See under the Archbishop of Ravenna. A Synod was held in it in 1634. Cesena, Curva Cesena in Antoninus, is a City in the Province of Romandiola in Italy, upon the River Savio, with a Bishop's See under the Archbishop of Ravenna. It has sometime belong'd to the Bolognese, sometime to particular Families, till at last remitted to the Church. You see in it the Ruins of a Castle which the Emperor Ferdinand II. is said to have built. Pope Alexander VI. gave it to Caesar Borgia. But he did not enjoy it long. It has been many times near the being entirely ruined by Factions. Cesse, a River in the Dutchy of Luxemburg in the Low-Countries, passing by Ham sur Lesse, near Rochfort; then by the Mouth of a hideous Cavern throwing it self entirely under Ground for the space of a League, and at its Rise again appearing with the same Freshness as it hath at its Descent. Attempts are made to search into the subterraneous Abyss in vain; for the Fright∣fulness of the Danger frustrates all. Ceva, Ceba, a Town in Piedmont upon the River Tanaro, in the Borders of the Marquisate of Montisfe∣rat, towards the Apennine, and the Dictrict call'd the Langhe. This had heretofore Marquesses of its own,
but is now subject to the Duke of Savoy. It lies seven Miles from Mondui to the South, eighteen from Savo∣na to the North, and the same Distance from Alba to the West; being the Capital of the said District of le Langhe; with a Castle. In 1558 the French took it. Cevennes, a Territory at the Foot of the Mount of Cevennes in Languedoc. See Sevennes. This Coun∣try was for a long time the Theatre of the Civil Wars of Religion, towards the End of the last, and the Be∣ginning of this Age; till Lewis XIII. brought the Rebels under Subjection. Ceurawalth, the Name of an austere Sect amongst the Banjans in the East-Indies. They so supersti∣tiously believe the Metampsychosis, as to be afraid of killing the least Insect; and for the Mortifications of Life, they may be compared with the most Religious Votaries of any Profession whatsoever. Ceuta, a Town and Castle in the Province of Ha∣bat in the Kingdom of Fez in Barbary, upon the Streights of Gibraltar, belonging to the King of Portugal; the Capital in former times of Mauritania Tingitana, call'd by the Romans, Civitas; by Mela, Septa; by Ortelius thought to be the Exilissa of Ptolomy. From the Romans, the Goths; from the Goths, the Arabs; from them, John I. King of Por∣tugal took it in 1415. It has a Collegiate, with the Rights of a Cathedral Church in it: composing in conjunction with Tangier a Bishoprick under the Arch-Bishop of Lisbonne. Ceylan, see Zeilan. Chablais, a small Province of Savoy, North of the Lake of Geneva, with the Province of Velay to the the East, Fousigny to the South, and Genevois to the West: being part of the Country of the ancient An∣dates or Nandates, and the Veragrii mention'd by Caesar. The Romans call'd it Provincia Equestris and Caballica, from their breeding up of Horses in it; whence Chablais comes to be formed by a Corruption. The famous St. Francis de Sales, taking great pains to reduce the Calvinists here to their old Religion again, carries therefore the Name of the Apostle of Chablais. Chabli, a Town in the Tract of Senonnois in France towards Auxerre and Tonnere: made remar∣kable in 841. by a bloody Battle fought at Fontenay near it, betwixt the Children of Lewis the Debonnaire. Now, for good Wine. Chabria, or Cilabro, Chiabrius, a River of Mace∣donia, falling into the Thermaicus Sinus, or the Gulph of Salonichi, betwixt Cassandria and Salonichi. Chaeronea, is a City of Boeotia, upon the River Cephissus, on the Eastern side of Mount Helicon, North-West of Athens; memorable for the Ruine of the Grecian Liberty, in the Defeat of the Athenian Forces, by Philip of Macedonia, A. M. 3612. and al∣so for the Birth of Plutarch. Now not inhabited, but the Ruines are known by the former name. Chagford, a Market Town in Devonshire in the Hundred of Wonford. Chagra, a River between the South and North of America, upon which the Merchandises bound for Panama and Peru do pass; The Mouth of it on the North Sea being guarded by a Spanish Fort. It is thought, a communication might easily be made be∣tween the two Seas by the means of this, especially with other Rivers that fall into the Pacifick. A Town of the same Name with it stands upon its Banks. In 1670. the English Bucaniers went up it in their Ca∣noes to plunder Panama. Chaibar, a River in Arabia, which ariseth twen∣ty five German Miles West of Jamama, the Capital of Arabia; and passing by Chaibar and Tajef, falls into Eda. According to some judgments, this is the Chobar of the Prophet Ezekiel. Chalcedon, a City of the Lesser Asia in Bithynia, which was a Bishop's See, under the Patriarch of Con∣stantinople; and of great Antiquity, much celebra∣ted in ancient History: but now reduced to the mean∣ness of a poor Village, call'd by the Turks Calcitin it stands on the Mouth of the Propontis, over against Constantinople. Some believe that Scutaret is grown out of the Ruines of this City. This City is particu∣larly remarkable on the account of the fourth Gene∣ral Council here celebrated in 451. In which it had the honour to be advanced to the Title of a Metropolitan Church. According to Strabo and Eusebius, this Ci∣ty was built in the sixty ninth year of Rome, that is, 685. before Christ. Longitude 56. 15. Lat. 43. 15. Chalcis, the ancient Name of the Island and Town of Negropont. § Also a Town in Aetolia in Greece, with another in Syria, occurring in the Wri∣tings of the Ancients: but now unknown. Chaldaea and Chaldei: See Curdistan. Chalons sur Marne, Civitas Catalaunorum, a City and Bishoprick under the Archbishop of Rheimes, in the middle of Champagne, upon the River Marne; seven Miles from Rheimes to the South-East, and twelve from Troyes to the North-West. It is well fortified and built, standing in a large Plain, in which Attila lost 200000. men in a Battle with Aetius the General of the Romans, Meroveus King of France, and Theodorick, in the year 451. The Bishops are Earls and Peers of France. Chalons sur Sone, Cabillonum, Cabillo Aeduo∣rum, a City and Bishoprick upon the Sone, in Bur∣gundy in France, 15 Leagues from Dijon to the South, and the same distance from Thoulon to the West. The Bishoprick is a Suffragan to the Archbishop of Lyons. There are numbers of Inscriptions, Vessels, Statues, and the Reliques of ancient publick Buildings to be seen here. In 1562. the Huguenots made themselves Masters of it. It has been new fortified since; gives the Title of an Earl; and is the Capital of a little Territory called Chalonnois or la Bresse Chalonnois. Chalus or Chaslus, Castrum Lucis, a Town in the Province of Limosin in France towards the Borders of Perigord, betwixt S. Hirier and Limoges. Richard I. King of England dyed of the Wound of an Arrow that he received at the Siege of the Castle of this place, then belonging to Widomare Viscount of Li∣moges, in 1199. The occasion of which Siege, see in Daniel's Life of Richard I. Chamb, Chambum, a small Town and Territory in the Ʋpper Palatinate, upon the River Regen, se∣ven Miles East of Regenspurgh; something more than five Miles North of Straubing. This Town with the Territory annexed makes an Earldom, which be∣longed heretofore to the Count Palatine of the Rhine; but by the Treaty of Westphalia was given to the Duke of Bavaria, who to this day enjoys it. Chambery, Civaro, Chamberiacum, the Capital City of the Dukedom of Savoy, and the Seat of the Parliament of that Dukedom; It stands upon the Ri∣ver Laise, in a Plain ten Miles from Grenoble to the North-East: well built and beautified, and defended with a good Castle. Chambray, see Cambray. Chamen, Ʋrbs Chamavorum, a City of West∣phalia. Champagne, Campagnia, a great rich, fruitful, populous Province in France; bounded by Lorain to the East, the Low-Countries to the North; Pi∣cardy, la Brie, and the Isle of France to the West; and Burgundy to the South. The Earl of this County, being an Earl Palatine, was always one of the twelve ancient Peers of France. It is watered, or bounded, by six of the greater Rivers of France, viz. the Seine, the Aulde, the Marne, the Vere, the Meuse, and the
Vannes. The Principal Cities are Chaumont Rheimes, &c. Amongst which there are four Episcopal and two Archiepiscopal See. Champ Arrein, a small Town near Bourdeaux, where Charles the Great defeated the Goths. Chanad, a City of Hungary. See Gyngisch. Changcheu, two populous and Large Cities in China, with Territories of the same name belong∣ing to them; having Jurisdiction, the one in the Province of Fokien near the Sea, ove Nine; the o∣ther in the Province of Nanking, over Four Cities. The first is watered by the River Chans, the latter by the Kiang, and adorned with divers triumphant Arches. Changte, two great Cities and Territories adja∣cent in China, having under their Resort, the one in the Province of Honan, six; the second in the Pro∣vince of Huquang, three Cities. This last excels the fertility of the other. Changa, a great City and Territory, having Ju∣risdiction over ten Cities, in the Province of Huquang in China: watered with divers Rivers and Lakes. The Mountain call'd Jumo, yielding great quanties of Isinglass, stands here. Chanry, or Chanonry, a fine Town and Port, on the Eastern Shoar of Scotland, in the County of Ross, on the North of Murray Fyrth. Chantilly, a beautiful and ancient Seat belonging to the Prince of Conde, eight Leagues from Paris, two from Senlis, and near a Forrest call'd Chantilly. It is one of the most delightful Castles in the King∣dom of France. Chaocheu, A great City and Territory, having Ju∣risdiction over nine Cities, in the Province of Quang∣tung in China. The City is adorn'd with two stately Temples, a large Bridge over a Navigable River, and is a very trading place. Chaoking, the Capital City of a Territory of the same Name in the Province of Quangtung in China: having ten other Cities under its Jurisdiction. It is the Seat of a Vice-Roy, and full of Noble Buil∣dings. La Chapelle, a Town in the Province of Limosin in France. Chappel in the Frith, a Market Town in Devon∣shire in the Hundred of High Peak. Los Chares, sometimes also call'd la Plata from its Capital City, is a Province of the Southern Ame∣rica towards the Pacifick Ocean, below the Tropick, to the South of Peru. Chard, A Market Town in Somersetshire in the Hundred of Kingsbury. Charente, Carentelus, Caranthenus, a River of France, which ariseth in Limosin; and run∣ning Westward, entereth the Province of Poictou; from which it passeth to Angolesine, and Sainctes; and entereth the Aquitane Sea, right over against the Isle of Oleron, between the Garonne and the Loire. Charenton, Carentonium, a Town in the Isle of France, about two Miles from Paris to the East, up∣on the River Marne, where it enters the Seine. This Place was allow'd for the Exercise of the Reformed Religion, which together with its nearness to Paris, made it very famous, till the demolishing of that Re∣ligion there. La Charite, A large Town upon the Loire in the Province of Nivernois upon the ascent of a Hill be∣twixt Nevers and Cosne in France. Often taken and retaken in the Civil Wars of that Kingdom. Here the Loyre is covered with a good Bridge. Charkliqueu, A Town in Cappadocia in the Lesser Ajia, two Leagues from Tocat, standing in a fruitful Country for Wine. There is the Rock not far from it, which served in the Exile of S. Chrysostom for the place of his retreat, much frequented by the devout Christians. Charlemont, Carolomontium, a small but very strong Town, in the most Southern Border of the County of Namur, upon the River Mose, about four Miles South of Dinant, and nine from Namur. It belonged formerly to the Bishoprick of Liege; but was taken into this County, and fortified by Charles V. in 1555. by the consent of that Bishop. Charlemont, an old Castle in the Province of Ʋl∣ster in Ireland, in the County of Armagh, surrendred May 14. 1690. to the D. of Schomberg, upon Articles, for want of Provisions; having defended it self for about six Months, in the midst of all the Garrisons be∣longing to the said General, to admiration. Charleville, Carolopolis, a new and strong City in Champagne, in France, upon the Mose, in the Ter∣ritory de Retel; between Mezieres and Rocry; built by Charles Duke of Nevers and Mantoua in 1609. five Miles from Sedan, For which reason it not only bears his Name, but also is substituted in part un∣der the Duke of Mantoua, and part the King of France. Charleroy, a new built strong Town in Namur, where the Village of Charnoy stood; built by the Spaniards in 1666. and so called from the present King of Spain. In 1667. it was taken by the French, and in 1679. restored by the Treaty of Nimmeghen to the Spaniards. It lies five Leagues from Mons to the East, upon the River Sambre. Charley, a Market Town in Lancashire in the Hundred of Leyland. Charles-Town, the Principal Town in the Island of Barbadoes, built by the English, and so called from Charles II. of England, of blessed Memory. § A considerable Settlement in New-England has re∣ceived the same Name, from the same Excellent Prince: it is adorned with a large well built Church, and several fair Buildings. Charlieu, A Town in the County of Charolois in Burgundy, which has risen from an Abby call'd Ca∣rilocus or Carus locus in the Diocese of Mascon. A Council was here celebrated in 926. for the rebuil∣ding of Churches, and repairing of the Ruines of the Holy Places in Palestine. Chars, or Chirsi, Chorsa, a strong City of Arme∣nia Major, mentioned by Pliny, as standing near the Fountains of Euphrates. It is a Bishop's See, and the Residence of the Turkish Bassa, who keeps it with a strong Garrison against the Persians. It is well fortified, and has a fine Castle. Charolles, Carolia, Quadrigellae, one of the chief Towns in the County so called, in Burgundy, upon the River Reconse, six Leagues from Cluny and the Loyre. It is honoured with a Collegiate Church, and some Religious Houses. Charroux, Karrofium, an ancient Abby in the Pro∣vince of Poictou, not far from Berry. Du Chesne, a French Antiquary, says, it took this Name, according to the vulgar opinion, from Chair-rouge, meaning the Prepuce of Jes▪ Ch. that was cut from him at his Circumcision, and was heretofore preserved as a Re∣lick in this place. Chartres, Carnutum, a City, and Bishoprick of the County of Blois in France, upon the River Eure, eighteen Leagues from Paris to the South-West, and sixteen from Orleans to the North. This Bishop was heretofore subject to the Archbishop of Sens, but in 1621. was put under the Archbishop of Paris. The City is the Capital of the County of Blois; and more particularly of a little Territory call'd Chartrain from it self; and has a noble Cathedral, dedicated to the Virgin Mary, whose Smock is kept here. In 1528.
it was advanced to the honour of a Dukedom. Divers Synods of inferiour Note have been held here. It is likewise of good Antiquity, and one of the most agreeable Cities of France, by the general contribution of all things for that purpose. Charybdis, the notorious Gulph upon the Coast of the Island of Sicily to the South, opposite to Scylla a Rock upon the Coast of Italy to the North, made equally known by the common Proverb. Bochartus, derives the Name from Char-Obdan, in the Phoenician Language, signifying the hole of destruction. They now call it Capo di Faro. Chaslus, see Chalus. Chasteau-Briant, a small Town in Brittany, nine or ten Leagues from Nantes towards the Con∣fines of the Province of Anjou: Some esteem it as the Country of the ancient Cadates in Caesar's Com∣mentaries. There is an old Castle standing in it. Chasteau-Dun, Castelodunum, the Principal Town in Dunois, in la Beausse in France; upon the River Lore, nine Leagues from Blois to the North-West. The Antients gave it the name of Ʋrbs clara. And indeed we find in the fifth Century, that it was a City with the Seat of a Bishop. But being a de∣pendant upon the Bishoprick of Chartres, a Council soon after deprived it of this honour. Chasteau-Gontier, a Town upon the River May∣enne in the Province of Anjou in France, and the Diocese of Angers. Divers small Councils have been assembled at it. Chasteau-Landon, a small Town in the Terri∣tory of Gastinois in the Isle of France upon the Ri∣ver Loing, between Nemours and Montargis. Chasteau-du-Loyre, A Town upon the Loyre in the Province of Maine, five or six Leagues from Mans, with the Title of a Barony. It belongs to the Demesnes of the Crown. Chasteau-Meliand, a small Town and Chatel∣lany in the Province of Berry in France, remark'd particularly for its Castle and a Tower said to be built in the time of the Romans. Chasteau-Neuf, A Town in the small Territory of Timerais within the Province of Perche in France; with others of the same Name in Anjou, Berry, Bresse, &c. whereof nothing particular. Chasteau-Pelerin, a Fortress ten Miles from Cae∣sarea upon the Sea Coast in the Holy Land: built for the security of the Christian Pilgrims that travel'd to Jerusalem; and in the year 1217. enobled with a Palace which the Templars erected for the service of their Grand Master. It has been since neglected and nigh ruin'd. Chasteau-Porcien, A Town and Principality upon the River Aisne in the Territory de Retel in Cham∣pagne, below Rhetel. It was advanc'd to the Dignity of a Principality by Charles IX. in 1561. Chasteau-Regnard, a small Town in the Terri∣tory of Gastinois in France upon the River Ouaine, two Leagues from Montargis. Chasteau-Regnaud, a little Sovereignty upon the Meuse in Champagne, in the Territory of Retelois, two Leagues from Charleville. The Town is forti∣fied: and the Title now born by Monsieur Chasteau-Regnaud, the French Admiral, who engaged Admi∣ral Herbert at the Bantry in 1689. May 1. Chasteau-Rous, a Town in Berry, upon the Ri∣ver Indre, between Bourges and Blanc. Lewis XIII. advanced it to the quality of a Dukedom and Peer∣dom in 1616. It is a considerable large Town, with a good Castle and divers publick Buildings. In La∣tin, Castrum Rufum and Castrum Rodulphium. § Also a City and an Episcopal See in the Island of Negropont, by the Ancients call'd Carystus, by the Italians, Castel rosso. The famous Carystium Mar∣mor comes from hence. Chasteau-Thierry, Castrum Theodorici, a City in the Isle of France, four Leagues South of Cha∣stres: It stands upon the Marne, in the Confines of Champagne; and is a heat City, and a Dukedom; beautified with a Castle, and divers Churches. Bau∣drand placeth it in Brie, twenty Leagues from Paris to the South. Chastel-Chinon, a small Town in the Province of Niverhois in France near the River Jonne, towards the Confines of Burgundy. Chastellet; Castelletum, a Town in Namur, upon the River Sambre, six Miles West of Namur. There is another Town of the same Name in Picardy, at the head of the Scheld, three Leagues from St. Quintin North. This latter has been fortified being a Fron∣tier Town: but in 1674. it was dismantled. Chastel-herault, a Town upon the River Vienne, in the most Eastern Border of Poictou, seven Miles from Poictiers to the North-East. Francis I▪ digni∣fied this Town in 1514. with the Title of a Duke∣dom and Peerdom. It was often taken and retaken in the French Civil Wars. Chastillon sur Indre, a small Town in the Pro∣vince of Touraine, some say Berry, in France upon the said River. §. Chastillen sur Loing, a handsom small Town in the Territory of Gustinois in France, about 4 Leagues from Montargis upon the River Loing. §. Chastillon sur Loyre, a Town in the Province of Berry below Cosne upon the Loyre. §. Chastillon sur Cher, is in the same Province towards the Conflu∣ence of the Sandre and the Cher. §. Chastillon sur Marne, A handsome small Town in Champagne, with a Chatellany thereunto belonging between Espernay and Chasteau-Thierry. There is a noble and ancient Family deriving their Name from it. §. Chastillon sur Seyne, a pretty Town in Burgundy between Alsei∣le-Duc and Bar-sur-Seyne, divided in two by the River that distinguishes it from all the foregoing. La Chastre, A great Town upon the River Indre in the Province of Berry in France, between S. Se∣vere and Chateau-Roux: imparting its Name to a considerable Family of that Kingdom. Chatham, a long thoroughfare Town in Kent in Aylesford Lath, upon the Bank of the Medway, and near Rochester. It is the principal Station of the Royal Navy of England: and therefore well provided with Storehouses, and a Dock for the building and equip∣ping of the same. Chatzan, a Town in the Kingdom of Hajacan in the East Indies within the Dominions of the Grand Mogul, not far from the conjunction of the Rivers Behat and Nilab. Chaumont en Uexin, Calvomontium, a Town in that part of the Isle of France, call'd Vexin, upon a small River, about five Miles West of Beauvais, which has a ruined Castle. Chaumont sur Marne, called Vexin-Francois, a very fine Town in Champagne, five Leagues South-West of Joinville, and about the same distance from Grand to the West. This was first walled in 1500. and has received its growth from the hands of three Kings, Lewis XII. Francis I. and Henry II. Chauni, Calniacum, a small Town and Chatella∣ny in the Government of the Isle of France upon the River Oise, between Noyon and la Fere. It belongs to the Crown. Chaxan, a City in the Territory of Chingyang within the Province of Huquang in China. The Mountain Nuiqua, famous for a Temple that is built upon it in honour of a Woman a pretended Prophe∣tess amongst the Chinese, stands near it. Cheadle, a Market Town in Staffordshire in the Hundred of Totmonslow.
Checkley, a Market Town in the same County and Hundred preceding, upon the River Teane. Chekiam, a Province of China, which has Nan∣kim on the North, and the River Kiam; Kiamsi on the West, Fokien on the South, and the Chinian O∣cean on the East; the principal City is Hamcheu: it contains eleven Cities, sixty three walled Towns, and 1242135. Families. It lies between 27. and 32. deg. of Lat. Chelles, a Town in the Isle of France near the Marne; famous for a Nunnery founded in 662. by the Queen Bathilde. It had heretofore a Royal Man∣sion also standing in it. Chelmer, a River in Essex on which Maldon is situated. Chelmesford, Caesaromagus, a Town in Essex, twenty five Miles North of London. Chelo, A Fort in the Province of Junnan in China. Chelsey, a place deserving particularly to be re∣mark'd for the Magnificent and most Delightful Ho∣spital, begun by King Charles II. continued by King James II. and now perfected, for the refuge and maintenance of disabled, poor, and Veterane Soldiers here. This being such a stately Pile, as to surpass by confession in divers respects, the famous Hotel des Invalide at Paris. Its situation near London is better known, than that we should need to mention more. Cheltenham, a Market Town in Glocestershire, and the Capital City of its Hundred. Chemnis, an Island of Egypt mentioned by He∣rodotus. Apollo had heretofore a Temple in it. The people used to believe that it floated. § We find mention made in Herodotus of a great City also of this Name, near to Nea, in the Country of Thebes. Chepstow, a fine Market Town on the River Wye, on the Eastern Border of the County of Monmouth in Wales. It is fortified with a Wall, and has a spa∣cious Castle on the other side of the River; supposed to have risen first out of the Ruines of Venta Silu∣rum (the Capital City of the ancient Silures) four Miles distant from it. Cher, Caris, a River which riseth in Auvergne, near Clermont; and running North-West through Berry, and on the South side of Tours, a little below this last, it falls into the Loyre. Cherazoul, a Town in the Province of Curdistan in Asia, in the Road from Ninive to Hispahan, of very difficult access from the manner of its constru∣ction within a steep and cleted Rock. Cherbourg, Caroburgus, a Sea-Port in Normandy in France, which has a tolerable good Harbor: ten Leagues West of Constance. This Town was lost by the English in 1453. Honfleur and Beaumont stand near it. Chersonesus Aurea. See Malaca. Some believe this to be the Land of Ophir of King Solomon's time. Cherry-Issand, an Island on the Coast of Green∣land, in the most Northern part of the World; discove∣red to us, and denominated accordingly, by Sir Francis Cherry. There are many Mines of Lead growing in it. Chertsey, A Market Town in Surrey; the Capital of its Hundred, not far from the River Thames, over which it enjoys a Bridge. The unfortunate King Hen∣ry VI. was first interred without Pomp here, and af∣terwards removed to Windsor. Cherusci, an Antient and Valiant People of Ger∣many, that dwelled between the Elbe and the Weser; having the Catti and the Hermonduri their Neigh∣bours to the South, East and West. Their General, Arminius, is often mention'd with honour by Ta∣citus. Cherwell, a River in Oxfordshire, at the conflu∣ence of which with the Isis stands the most famous University of Oxford. Chesee, Povillux, a Town in Champagne, the In∣habitants whereof claim the privilege to assist at the Coronation of the Kings of France; and to convey the Holy Ampoulle or Oil (pretended to be brought by an Angel at the Consecration of the first Christian King of that Kingdom) from St. Rheimes to our Ladies Church in Rheimes. Chesham, a Market Town in Buckinghamshire in the Hundred of Burnham. Chester, Civitas Legionum, Cestria, is a City and Bishoprick, on the River Dee, in the Westernpart of Cheshire; whence often call'd West-Chester; with a fair Stone Bridge over that River. In this City it was that 7 Kings of the Scots and Brittains by way of Homage, rowed King Edgar in his Barge from S. John's Church to his Palace, himself as Sovereign holding the Helm. The East-gate is accounted one of the stateliest in England; and the Rows or Galle∣ries made along the chief Streets, for preservation a∣gainst the Rain, are very particular. It was an anci∣ent Roman Town, call'd by Ptolemy Devana: made a Bishops See by Henry VIII. who put it under the Archbishop of York. The ancient Earls of Chester fortified it both with Walls and a Castle. It is now at this day a fine Place with 10 Parishes in it, a Coun∣ty Palatine, and the usual passage from England to Ireland. Its Long. 20. 23. Lat. 53. 11. Cheshire, Cestria, hath on the South Shropshire, on the East Stafford and Darby, on the North Lancashire, and on the West Denbigh and Flintshire; towards the North-West it has a Promontory that runs a great way into the Sea. It abounds more in good Pasturage than Corn, well stored with Parks, and watered by the Rivers Dee, Weever, and Mersey; and the Cheese of this County, is thought the best of England. The Earldom of it belongs to the Prince of Wales. Chesterfield, a Market Town in Derbyshire in the Hundred of Scarsdale, pleasantly seated between two small Rivers in a very good Soil. King John made it a free Borough, King Henry III. and his Barons fought that Battel hard by it, in which Robert de Fer∣rers Earl of Derby was taken Prisoner, and lost his Estate and Dignity. King Charles I. advanced it to the Style and Title of an Earldom in the Person of Philip Lord Stanhop Anno 1628. whose Grandson at present possesses that Dignity. Cheuxan, an Island upon the Coast of the Province of Chekiang in China, planted by above 70 small Towns and Villages of the Chinese. Chewton, a Market Town in Somersetshire, the Capital of its Hundred: also written Chewton-Men∣dip. Chiampana, Ciampa, a Kingdom of the further East-Indies, between Couchin-China, Cambaja, and the Mare Sinicum. Pulocacien is the principal City of it. Chiamsi, a Province towards the South of China. Chiangare. See Galatia, a Province of the Lesser Asia. Chiapa, a Province of New Spain in America, watered by the Rivers Gryalva and rio blanco; and for many Ages past inhabited by 4 different Nations of Indians. Its Capital City is Civdad Real. Chiarenza, a Town in the Morea, fifty five En∣glish Miles from Patras to the South. It is a Sea-Port-Town. Chiaromonti, Claromons, a considerable Town in the South-East part of Sicily, in the Valley of Netina amongst the Mountains, about forty Miles from Pa∣chino to the West.
Chiavari, Clavarum, Claverinum, a small but well inhabited Town upon the Coast of Genoua, near Ra∣pello in Italy, towards the fall of the River Layagna. The Genouese are said to build it in 1167. and after it had been ruined, to rebuild it. Chiavenne, vide Claven. Chichester, Cicestria, a City and Bishoprick in Sus∣sex, founded by Cissa II. King of the South Saxons. After the Conquest it became a Bishops See, the Chair being removed from Selsey a small Village, not much above sive Miles to the Southward. This City is seated on a River call'd the Lavant, which encompasseth it on the West and South, about six Miles from the Sea, and almost in the Western Border of that County. The Honorable Charles Fitz-Roy Duke of Southam∣pton was created Earl of Chichester, September 10. 1675 by Charles II. his Father. It is a fair City, with five or six Parish Churches, and a Cathedral, first erected by Radulph the third Bishop, afterwards re∣built and beautified by Bishop Seffrid the second of the Name, when it had been almost consumed twice by Fire. The Corporation elects two Burgesses for Parliament, and would enjoy a better Trade, were not the Haven choaked up that is next adjoining to it. Chidley, a Market Town in Devonshire on the River Tinge. Chiemzee, or Chiempsee, Chiemium, a City and Bishoprick under the Archbishop of Saltzburgh in the Dukedom of Bavaria, about ten Leagues from Mu∣nich and Saltzburgh each. It is no very considerable place. An Archdeacon of Saltzburgh founded the Bishoprick in the year 1214. Chieri, a Town in Piedmont, where the French obtained a signal Victory against the Spaniards in 1639. It lies three Miles to the Eastward of Turino, and was heretofore a Potent City, and a Common∣wealth; but is now in Subjection to the Duke of Savoy. Chifale, an Island in the Gulph of Arabia. Chilafa, or Chielefa, is a Fortress on the South of the Morea, thirty eight English Miles North-West of Cape Matapan, a Place of great Importance, both as to its natural and artificial Fortifications; and surren∣dred to the Venetians in 1686. Chilca, a fruitful Valley in the Kingdom of Peru, ten Leagues from Lima and six from Pachacama. The Salvages manure it with Sardines. Chili, one of the most Potent Kingdoms of the South America. When the Spaniards entred the New World, it was first discovered by them in 1535. It lies four hundred Leagues in length from North to South, but its breadth is not great: bounded on the North by Peru, on the West by the Pacifick Ocean, or the Mar del Zur; on the South by Magellanica, and on the East by the Andes. A part of the Inha∣bitants of this Country retiring into these Andes, have defended their Lives and Liberties against the Spani∣ards ever since; and have sometimes given them great Overthrows. S. Jago is the Capital City of it. Ma∣ny Mines of Gold and Quarries of Marble grow within its bowels. Yet a very cold Country, governed by a Vice-Roy in subordination to the Vice. Roy of Peru. Chiloe or Chilue, an Island and Town belonging to the Kingdom of Chili; South of the extreme parts of that Country, in the West-Indies: giving Name to a neighbouring Gulph, called the Archipelago of Chi∣loe, because of the number of the Islands therein. Chimarioti, Ceraunii, are a Ridge of very high Mountains in Albania or Epirus; which run from the North-East to the South-West, and lie not above fifty Miles North of Corfu. See Ceraunii. Chimay, Chimacum, a Town and Castle in Hai∣nault, in the Confines of Champagne, upon the River Alby, which falls into the Mase, three German Miles from Mariebourg to the South-West. This Town was made a Principality by the Emperor Maximilian I. in 1486. Chimera, a City in the Confines of Macedonia, be∣tween the Mountains of Chimarioti, upon the shoars of the Gulph of Venice, which has a strong Sea-Port. It lies about 30 Miles North of Corfu, upon a Rock which has Precipices on all Sides; whither all the Country People retire when need requires; by which they have preserved themselves from the Turks, and will pay him no Tribute. They are stout Men and good Soldiers; but infamous for Theft and Robbery, preying equally upon the Turks and Christians. Yet they are Christians by Profession, and subject to the Bishop of Janina in Thessaly. Vide Wheeler's Tra∣vels. § There is a flaming Mountain, mention'd by Pliny, Strabo, Ovid, &c. in Lycia of this Name; from whence the Poets, and after those the Philoso∣phers derive the Fiction of a Chimaera, whereby they understand a meer Creature of the Imagination com∣pos'd of such Contradictions and absurdities in Relation to one another, as cannot possibly be any where united into a being, only in Thought: But what Occasion our Mountain gives for such a Whimsey, the Mytholo∣gists are put to others to invent. Chitu, one of the Principal Cities in China, the Capital of the Province of Suchyen, on the Borders of West Tartary, between the Mountains and the River Kiam, in Long. 131. 40. Lat. 30. 40. Chin, A famous Lake in the Province of Junnan in China, occasion'd by the total swallowing up of a great City which formerly stood in the place by an Earthquake. China, is a vast Kingdom in the East of Asia, bounded on the North by the Kingdoms of Tangut and Niathan, (or Cambalu,) from which it is sepa∣rated in part by Mountains, and in part by a Wall 500. Leagues long: on the West it has India extra Gangem, from which it is parted by the Lake of Cincujay, and a long Ridge of Mountains; on the South and East, it is surrounded by the Chinese and Indian Ocean. Since the year 1630. the Tartars have conquer'd this once most Potent Kingdom. This is a vast, populous, civil, fruitful Countrey; and for Learning and Mechanick Arts to be preferred before all the Pagan People in the World. They are very ingenious at Geometry, Arithmetick, Astronomy, and Physick; and since Confusius (the Socrates of China) brought that Faculty into repute with them, in Moral Philosophy also. Some maintain, the Arts of Prin∣ting, Gunnery, and the Magnet, were first invented here. Their Language for the most part consists of Monosyllables, written downwards in Characters ex∣pressing entire words and things, like the Egyptian Hieroglyphicks, without Letters; the Rules by which they are understood may be seen in the China illu∣strata of Kircher. Ptolomy calls this Kingdom Sina∣rum regio. It is watered by the great Rivers Kiang and Hoan. And stands divided into fifteen Provinces; six under the Division of Catay, and nine under the Division of Mangin; which are incredibly populous and rich, with Mines of Gold, Silver, and precious Stones. In every great Town there is a College for to teach the Philosophy of Confusius. And you have a perfect Catalogue of their Emperors from the year 2952. before Christ, to the present Lord of the Ʋni∣verse and Son of Heaven, as they call him. Chinca, a large and beautiful Valley in the Diocese of Lima in Peru, discovered by Pizarro, whose Go∣vernment by Order from the King of Spain, was limi∣ted by the River S. Jago to the North, and this Valley to the South. It yields plenty of Corn and Wine.
Chinkiang, a well built and populous City of the Province of Nanking in China, with a Territory of the same Name, whereof it is the Capital: having Jurisdiction over two other Cities. The Physicians of this place have the reputation of the best of that Faculty in all China. Chinon, a Town upon the Vienne in Touraine in France, above four Leagues from the fall of that Ri∣ver into the Loyre, and ten from Tours to the South-West. It was here that the famous Maid of Orleans first came and offered her service to Charles VII. of France in 1429. And for the Situation of it, it is thought to be of that importance, as to deserve a Garrison in the Castle. Chintin, a City in the Province of Pekin, in the North of China; having a Command over one and thirty Cities. Chintu, a great City and Territory, comprehending nine and twenty other Cities in the Province of Suchuen in China. See Chimtu. Chinyven, a Town in the Province of Junnan in China, situated in a Country that is rich in Silver Mines. The Fort called Loko belongs to the Govern∣ment of this Town. § A second in the Province of Quiechen in the same Kingdom, with a Territory cal∣led also Chinyven, having Jurisdiction over five Ci∣ties. Chio, an Island of the Archipelago, over against Smyrna, not above twelve Leagues from the nea∣rest Coast of Asia; call'd by the Turks Sakisadasi, that is, the Isle of Mastick. It belonged to the Family of the Justiniani of Genoua heretofore; but in 1566. conquered by the Turks, under whom it now is. It is about eighty Miles in Circuit, very fruitful and po∣pulous, and inhabited for the most part by Christi∣ans, who live here with greater liberty, and kinder usage, than in any other part of Turkey. The Men are proud, ignorant, lazy and ugly, but the Women are beautiful; Thevenot. In the Eastern part of the Isle stands the City Chio, which has had the honour in former times to be first an Episcopal See under Rhodes, and afterwards an Archiepiscopal one. Now inhabited by Turks, Jews, Latin and Greek Christians, with the free exercise of their respective Religions. It enjoys the advantage of a good Port and Castle to enrich and desend it: and they reckon about fifteen Villages in the Island besides. Chioza, Clodia Fossa, Chioggia, a small City which is a Bishops See in a small Island of the Adria∣tick, about fifteen Miles from Venice South; made famous by the Valour of the Genoese, who in 1380. took it; but it returned under the Dominion of the Venetians again. The Bishop is a Suffragan to the Patriarch of Venice. Chiorlick, a Town in Romandiola, near to which Bajazet defeated his Son Selim, who was then in Re∣bellion against him. Chippenham, a Market Town in Wiltshire. The Capital of the Hundred; upon the River Avon. It returns two Burgesses to the Parliament. Chipping-Norton, a Market Town in Oxford∣shire in the Hundred of Chadlington. Chipping-Ongar, a Market Town in the County of Essex in the Hundred of Ongar. Chisary, the only Town of Turcomania, the an∣cient Seat of the Turks in Asia; seated upon the Ri∣ver Euphrates, near its Head or Spring; forty five German Miles West of Testis. Chiton, a Province of the Empire of the Great Mogul in the Terra firma of the Indies, betwixt the Provinces of Malva and Guzurate; having a City of its own Name for the Capital, in which you see the Remains of divers Magnificent Pagods or Pagan Temples; together with a Castle which serves for a Prison of State. Chnin or Knin. The same with Clin. Chobar, see Chaibar. Chocolococa, or Castro Virreyna, as the Spaniards call it, a Town in the Kingdom of Peru, sixty Leagues from Lima to the South, and two from the Silver Mines of a Mountain that is perpetually covered with Snow. The Silver is fine, but the Veins not being very full of it, they pay no more than the Tenths to the King of Spain. Chogaco, a Castle in the Lower Hungary, surren∣dred to the Imperialists Octob. 18. 1687. Chogan, a Town in the Province of Xansi in China near the River Fy: remarkable for a Flying Bridge (as the Chinese call it, because it is elevated fifty Perches high in the Air)▪ which communicates a passage betwixt two Mountains on each side the River at the distance of forty Perches from one another, yet consists but of a single Arch. Cholm-Kill, Insula Sancti Columbani, Rana, an Island in the West of Scotland, famous for a Mona∣stery there built by Columbanus the Apostle of the Scotch Nation: it lies opposite to Knapdale: thirteen Miles North of Yea, and about fifty from New-Castle in Ireland. This is one of the five Islands called Hebudes or Hebrides. The ancient City Sodore stands in it. Chonad, Canadum, Genadum, a City in the Ʋp∣per Hungary, upon the River Merish; which falls into the Tibiscus at Segedin, about three German Miles East of Segedin. This is a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Colocza, and the Capital of the County of Chonad; which lies between the Rivers of Merish and Temez. Chorasan. See Corasan. Chotezim, Chotimia. See Cotzchin. Christ-Church, A Market Town in Hampshire, situated betwixt the Rivers Avon and Stower at their fall into the Sea. It is the Capital of its Hundred, and has the Privilege of Electing two Burgesses for the Parliament. Christianstad, Christianopolis, a Town of Den∣mark in the Confines of Sweden, adorned by Chri∣stian IV. King of Denmark. It lies in the County of Bleckling; taken by the Swedes, and burnt in 1611. which was the occasion of rebuilding it. There is a good Port to the Baltick Sea there. Christina, a Town in New Sweden in the Nor∣thern America, built by the Swedes in the year 1640. and so called from Christina their Queen of famous Memory. The Dutch and English have since taken it from the Swedes, and the latter again from former. Chthonia, a very ancient Name of the Island of Crete. Chucheu, a great City and Territory, extending its Jurisdiction over nine other Cities in the Province of Chekiang in China; set about with Mountains, but the Valleys thereof are fruitful enough. Chunking, the Capital City of the Territory of this Name in the Province of Suchuen in China, having nineteen old Cities under its Command. It is one of the most Magnificent Places in China. Chudleigh, a Market Town in Devonshire in the Hundred of Exmister. The Lord Clifford has a Noble Seat here, to whom it gives the Title of a Baron. Chulmleigh, a Market Town in Devonshire in the Hundred of Witheridge. Church-Stretton, a Market Town in the County of Salop in the Hundred of Munslow. Churnet, a River of Staffordshire. Chusistan, Susiana, a Province of the Kingdom of Persia, bounded by the Gulph of Balsera to the South, the Provinces of Eatz to the East and Hy∣rach
West: The Capital City, Sauster: whence some of the Moderns call the Province Schouster. Chuei, a People of the ancient Province called Chuta in Persia, who being transplanted to Samaria (whence afterwards called Samaritans) and there adoring the Idols that they brought with them of the Gentile invention, were infested with Lions out of the Desart, till they gat a Jewish Priest to instruct them in the manner of the God of the Land. And then they served their Idols, and the God of Israel toge∣ther. This transplantation happened upon the carry∣ing away of the Jews Captives to Assyria. 2 Kings 17. The men of Cuth, v. 30. meaning these Chutes. Cibola or Civola, a Province of the Southern Ame∣rica, the same with what the Spaniards call New Granada, from a City of that Name of their building. Cicones, an ancient People of Thrace, near the River Hebrus. Ovid mentions them upon the occa∣sion of a River in their Country, that would petrisie the Bowels of such as drunk of it. Flumen habent Cicones, quod potum Saxea reddit Viscera, quod tactis inducit marmora rebus. Cicules or Zeckels, a People in the North of Tran∣sylvania towards the Confines of Poland, thought to be a remainder of the Huns under another Name, or else derived from Tartary. In Religion they are ge∣nerally Calvinists or Socinians. They possess seven several quarters thereabouts, whereof the Capital Town is Neumark. Cilicia, a Province of Asia the Less, lying along the Coast of the Mediterranean, with Cappadocia and a part of Armenia to the North. Now contained in the Province of Caraman, and sometimes called Fi∣nichia. Tharsus, Pompeiopolis, Lajazzo, are the principal Cities of it. Cillei, Cilleja, Celia, a Town in Stiria, upon the River Saana, which soon after falls into the Drave. The Capital of a County of the same Name; about five Miles from the Borders of Carniola Northward. Cimbri, the Origine of this ancient People lies un∣der dispute; as whether descended from the Scythi∣ans, or the Saxons, or the Danes; or whether the same with the Cimmerii. Cluverius supposes that they did anciently possess the Cimbrica Chersonesus. It is certain, that about the year of Rome 639. these People marched with an Army of 300000. fighting Men, besides Women and Children, in search of a New Country to live in. And being joined by the Teutones, the Ambrones, the Tigurii, and others in the way, they ravaged Germany, Istria, Sclavonia, the Grisons, Switzerland; till met and overcome by Marius in a very bloody Battle in the Field, called Campus Marii, between Aix and S. Maximin near the little River Arc in Province, Anno Romae 652. Cimmerii, the ancient Name of a People in Italy, that dwelt in subterraneous Caverns near the Lake Averno; and of another towards the Euxine Sea, from whom the Bosphorus Cimmerius derives its de∣nomination. Whether of these two occasioned the Proverb Cimmeriae Tenebrae, from the darkness of their habitations, the Learned make a difference not worth the determining. Cinaloa, a Province of New Mexico in the South America, bounded by Guadalajara to the South, and to the North by the Vermiglian Ocean. Cinan, a great City in China, in the Province of Xantum, in the North-East of that Kingdom, in Long. 145. Lat. 36. It is adorned with divers stately Pa∣laces and Pagods. The Jesuits have also a Church here: and nine and twenty other Cities lie under the Jurisdiction of this. Cinca or Cinga, a River of the Kingdom of Ara∣gon in Spain, springing from the Pyrenees below Bi∣elsa; afterwards joining the Segre about Fraga, and ending with the Ebro. Lucan styles it Cinga rapax. Ciucheu, see Quancheu. Cingary, a People of Africa. Cingcheu, a great City in the Province of Xan∣tung in China, with a Territory containing thirteen Cities more. The Territory is full of Hills, yet not defective in the Necessaries of Life. Ciolfa or Zulpha, a Town of Armenia upon the River Aras; desolated by Scha-Abas King of Persia, and all the Inhabitants carried away into Persia and setled in Gilan and Hispahan there, for to promote the Trade of Silks. Cioutat, a fair Town and a secure Port in Provence in France, betwixt Marseilles and Thoulon; adorned with divers Churches and Religious Houses. Parti∣cularly, at a Monastery of the Services hard by it, there is a remarkable Fountain ebbing and flowing with the Sea. The Name is but a Corruption of Civitas. Ciradio, a River of Corsica. Circassia, is a vast space of ground extended from the Cimmerian Bosphorus and the Fens of Maeotis on the Eastern Shoars of the Euxine Sea, for the space of five hundred Miles; reaching two hundred towards the North. A Country fitly seated for Trade, but possessed by most Barbarous Tartars who delight only in War and roving: they pretend to something of Christianity, having been converted in the eighth Century; but then they never enter the Church till they are old, serving the Devil in their Youth and God in their Age, when they can neither Rob nor Murder any longer. Olearius placeth them upon the Western Shoar of the Caspian Sea. They are subject for the most part to the Grand Czar. Cirencester, Corinium, Durocornovium, Cornovi∣um, an old Roman City in Glocestershire, upon the River Churne, about twelve Miles South-East of Glo∣cester. Here the four Proconsular ways made by the Romans, crossed each other; and vast numbers of Roman Coins, Inscriptions, &c. have been digged up. But this City was so ruined by the Saxons and Danes, that what is walled in, is not a fourth part of it inha∣bited; the rest being Fields and Orchards: the Inha∣bitants subsist mostly by Clothing. It was taken by Prince Rupert by Storm, Feb. 2. 1643. Cirenza. See Acerenza. Cirrha, an antient Town in Phocis upon the Gulph of Corinth near the City Delphes, to which it serv'd as a Port; giving the Name of Cirrhaeus Sinus to a Part of the same Gulph. Cirte, or Cirtha, an antient City of Numidia in Africa; called afterwards Constantine, being the Ca∣pital of the Province of Constantine in the Kingdom of Algier. In this City, we read in Salust that Ju∣gurtha kill'd Adherbal the Son of Micipsa King of Numidia. It became an Episcopal See in the Primi∣tive Ages of Christianity. A Council was assembled at it in 303. by Secundus Primate of Numidia, where∣in almost all the Bishops of that Province were convi∣cted of the Crime of Traditores, that is, delivering up their Bibles to the Infidels in Persecution A Se∣cond in 412. whereat S. Austin assisted. Cithaeron, a Mountain of Boeotia consecrated a∣mongst the antient Poets to Bacchus. Citta di Castello, Tifernum, Tiberinum, a Town in the Dukedom de Ʋrbino, in the Ecclesiastical State, upon the River Tiber, 10 Miles from S. Sepul∣cher. It has a small Territory annexed to it, called il Contado di Castello, under the Popes Dominion; of which this City is the Capital. Citta di Chieti, Teatea, a City in the hither Ab∣ruzzo in the Kingdom of Naples, near the River Pes∣cara, 7 or 8 Miles from the Adriatick. Whence
the Order of the Religious Theatines derives their Ap∣pellation; one of their Founders having sometime been Bishop hereof. Citta-Ducale or Reale, a City in the further Abruz∣zo in the Kingdom of Naples, being a Bishop's See un∣der the Archbishop of Chieti. It stands upon the Ri∣ver Velino, 15 Miles from Aquila, within the States of the Church. Citta Nova, a City of Histria in Italy, with a Bi∣shop's See under the Archbishop of Aquileia, at the fall of the River Quieto into the Adriatick: In a bad Air and consequently little inhabited. Called Nova because built since, and a little below the Ruines of the antient Aemonia. Citta della Pieve, Civitas Plebis, a small Town in the Perugine in Italy belonging to the Ecclesiasti∣cal State. Citta di Sole, a well fortified Town in the Pro∣vince of Romagna in Italy upon the little River Fag∣none, belonging to the Grand Duke of Tuscany. Citta Vecchia, Medina, or Melita, a City in the Island of Maltha, with a Bishop's See under the Archbishop of Palermo, situated upon a Hill in the middle of the Island, having formerly been the Capi∣tal thereof. Cittadelli, Cittadella, the Capital Town with a Port and some Fortifications of the Island of Mi∣norca. Civdad Real, a City in the Province of Chiapa (thence▪ commonly it self call'd Chiapa) in the South America, being a Bishop's See under the Archbishop of Mexico; whereof the famous Bartholomeo della Casa was Bishop in the last Age. § There is of this Name a Town in New Castile in Spain, upon the River Guadiana, between Calatroua and Almagra. The same is a large Town in a fruitful Plain, but not very well peopled. Civdad-Rodrigo, a City of the Kingdom of Leon in Spain upon the River Agujar and the Frontiers of Portugal. It is a Bishop's See under the Archbi∣shop of Compostella. Supposed to have been built by Ferdinand II. in the Year 1200. for a Rampart against the Portugueze. Civencheu, a great City in the Province of Fokien in China, with a Territory of the same Name annexed to it, commanding six old Cities. This City is extra∣ordinarily traded; and in its Temples, Palaces, triumphant Arches and Houses, appears an admi∣rable and magnificent Place. A little West of it is to be seen the Bridge of Loyang over the River Loyang, 360 Perches long, about one and an half broad, so curiously contrived with great Pillars instead of Ar∣ches, and so finely imbellished with Sculptures, as no where to find a Parallel in the World. Cividad del Roy Philippo, a Colony of Spaniards planted in Magellanica, at the Mouth of the Streights of Magellan; but dissipated by Famine again, it being far remote from their Countries and seldom vi∣sited. Civita Nova, a small Town in the Marcha Anco∣nitana in Italy 5 or 6 Miles from Loretto, and near the Adriatick, upon a Hill; dignified with the Title of a Dukedom. Civita Busella, Bucellum, a Town in the hither A∣bruzzo in the Kingdom of Naples upon the River Sangro. Civita Vecchia, a famous Port in S. Peter's Patri∣mony in Italy; believed by some to be the Centum Cellae of the Antients. Civitella, a Town in the farther Abruzzo in the Kingdom of Naples, upon a Rock, with the River Librata at the Foot of it. Besieged by the French in 1557. under the Duke of Guise in vain. Clagenfurt, Clagenfurtum, Claudia, the Capital Town of the Dutchy of Carinthia in Germany,  Leagues from the River Drave, and the same Distance from S. Veir. There is a great Lake near it. It is a fortified Town. See Klagenfurt. Clain, Clanis, Clitis, a River of the Province of Poictou in France, which having received the Vonne, the Cloūere, &c. passes by Poictiers, and loses its Name at length in the Vienne below Chasteleraud. Clairvaux, Clarevallum, a famous Abbey of Champaigne, upon the River Aube, in the Diocese of Langres, 5 or 6 Leagues from the said City: Foun∣ded in the Year 1115. by the Great S. Bernard: Him∣self being the first Abbot: Who left above 00 Reli∣gious in it at his Death. Hence the Title of Abbas Cla∣revallensis given that very Divine Person. Clare, Clarence, Clarentia, a Country-Village in the County of Suffolk, upon the River Stour which divideth Essex from Suffolk; about 6 Miles West of Sudbury. It had once a Castle, but now ruined; yet famous for the great Men who have born the Titles of Earls or Duke of it: The last of which was George Duke of Clarence, Brother to Edward IV. King of England, who in 1421. was drowned in a Butt of Malmesey. The second King at Arms retains the Surname of Clarencieux, as appertaining for∣merly to the Dukes of Clarence. At present the Title of Earl of Clare, is in the Family of Hollis. § There is also a Town and County in the Province of Connaught in Ireland, of this Name; the former standing near the Fall of the River Fergus into the Shannon. Clarendon, or Clarindon, is a Noble Country House and Park, belonging heretofore to the Kings of England, about 2 Miles North of Salisbury in Wilt∣shire. Famous of old, for a Parliament here held in 1164. where were made the Constitutions of Clarin∣don. Charles II. of blessed Memory added a new and lasting Honor to this Place, when April 20. 1661. three Days before his Coronation, he created the Loyal Edward Hide (late Lord Chancellor) Earl of Clarn∣don, Viscount Cornbury, &c. who dying at Roüen in Normandy in 1674. was succeeded by Henry his eldest Son, a Person of great Virtue and Goodness. Clarentia, or Clarenza, a Country in the Morea, described to contain the antient Achaia, (properly so called) Sicyonia and Corinth. Heretofore renowned under particular Dukes of its own. The capital City bears the same Name of Clarenza. Claros, a mountainous Island of the Aegean Sea, consecrated in antient times to Apollo. Called at pre∣sent Calamo. § The Name of Claros is likewise born by a Town, now unknown; but mentioned we find amongst the Antients, as belonging to the Colophonii in Ionia: Apollo having had an Oracle in it, and his Attribute thence deriv'd of Clarius Deus. Claven, Cleven, Clavenna, a small City in the Val∣toline, with an Earldom call'd by the Germans the Graffschaft von Cleven. This City stands 5 Leagues from the Lake that bears its Name, to the North, up∣on the River Maiera; called by the French, Chia∣venne. Clausenbourg, Claudipolis, called by the Inhabi∣tants Coloswar, is the principal Town in Transylvania; great▪ populous, and ennobled with an antient Castle. All the Publick Affairs of that Principality are transa∣cted, and Justice administred here. It stands upon the River Samosch, nine German Miles from A'ba Jùlia North, and fifteen from Waradin East. The Duke of Lorrain put into it an Imperial Garrison, Oct. 19. 1687. upon Articles agreed in a peaceable manner by the Magistrates and Governor for the late Prince Abafti. Clay, a Market-Town in the County of Norfolk and the Hundred of Holt.
Clazomenae, the Birth-place of the Philosopher Anaxagoras; an antient City of Ionia in Asia Mi∣nor, built in the Year of Rome 98. upon the Aegeun Sea, betwixt Smyrna and Chio. Clebug Mortimer, a Market-Town in Shrop∣shire, in the Hundred of Stottesden. Clerac, or Clairac, a Town in the County of A∣gennois, in Guyenne in France; 4 Leagues from A∣gen, and the same Distance from Nerac. It stands upon the River Lot which a little below falls into the Garonne. And has a famous Abbey in it. Clermont en Argene, a Town in the Dukedom of Bar, upon the River Ayr, four Leagues from Ver∣dun West, and seven from Barleduc North-East. This belongeth to the Duke of Lorrain, but in 1654. was taken from him, and annexed to the Crown of France. It is honoured with the Title of an Earldom. Clermont en Auvergne, Arvernae, Claromons, Cla∣romontium; the principal City of the Province of Auvergne, and a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Bourges. It stands upon a declining ground in a Territory called Limaigne, which is very fruitful, up∣on the River Tiretaine; twenty Leagues South of Mou∣lins, and twenty five East of Limoges. Here was a Gene∣ral Council celebrated in 1095. under Pope Ʋrban II. in which the Croisade for the recovery of the Holy Land was concluded, and Godfrey of Bouillon decla∣red General of the same. Also Philip I. King of France was excommunicated, until his repentance, for Adultery. This is thought to have arisen out of the Ruines of Gergovia, an old Roman Town. It is ho∣noured with the Title of an Earldom belonging to the Crown ever since the Union of Auvergne with the Crown. Clermont on Beauvais, a Town in the Isle of France, five Leagues South of Beauvais▪ in the North-East Border of that County. The Earldom of this place is famous for giving a beginning to the Royal House of Bourbon, in the Person of Robert of France, Earl of Clormont en Beavais, the Son of St. Lewis. Clermont de Lodeve. a Town in Languedoc up∣on the River Lorgue, four and twenty Leagues from Avignon West. So distinguished, because standing in the Diocese of Lodeve. It gives Name to an Ho∣nourable Family, and is beautified with a Collegiate Church, a Cattle, and some Monasteries. § There are other Clermonts in this Kingdom: One in Dan∣phine in the Territory of Viennois, giving the Title of an Earldom, and its Name to an Honourable Fa∣mily. Another in the Province of Ansou, from which there is also a House of Quality denominated. Cleri, Clariacum, a small Town near Orleans upon the Borders of the Province of Sologne in France; where Lewis XI. lies interred in a Church dedicated to the Virgin, of his own establishment; pretending to Miracles. Cleveland, a Tract in the North Riding of York∣shire of good extent, taking its Name (says Mr. Camb∣den) from the Cliffs running along the side of it, at whose feet the Country spreads it self into a fine fruitful Plain. King Charles I. did this place the ho∣nour to make it give the Title of an Earl to Thomas Lord Weorth: who dying without issue, King Charles II. created Barbara Villiers Daughter to the Lord Viscount Grandison (who was slain in the Civil Wars) and Wife to the present Earl of Castlemain, Dutchess of Cleveland. Cleves, Clivia, Castra Ʋlpia, Calonis, a City and Dukedom in Germany; called by the Inhabitants Cleef; by the French, Cleves; and seated upon a small River about three Miles from the Rhine. Hereto∣fore much greater, as appeareth by the Ruines about it; and thought to have been built by Caesar. The last Duke dying in 1609. a War happened, in which the Duke of Brandenburg seized one part of this Duke∣dom, and the Duke of Newburgh another: the Hol∣landers in the mean time by Mauritius their General in 1628. seized the City of Cleves. But in 1672. the French having taken this and all the other Towns possessed by the Hollanders, and in 1673. being no longer able to keep them, he put them into the hands of the Duke of Brandenburgh. The Dukedom of Cleves is bounded on the North and West with the Dukedom of Guelderland; on the East by the Bi∣shoprick of Munster, and the Earldom of Marck; on the South with the Dukedom of Berghe, and the Bi∣shoprick of Cologne. The Rhine divides it into two equal parts. Clichy, Clipiacum, a small Village near Paris, which the former Kings of France delighted in as a place of Pleasure. King John instituted the Order of the Knights of the Star in it. Dagobert I. was here married to Commentrude or Gomatrude his first Wife, from whom he was afterwards divorced, because she proved barren. A Synod was also held here in 659. Cliff Kings, a Market Town in Northampton∣shire in the Hundred of Willibrook. Climeno, a Port in the Island of Sancta Maura, on the Coast of Epirus, thirty English Miles North of Samo. Here the Venetian Fleet rendezvoused in the year 1687. See Mr. Wheeler, pag. 36. Clin, an important Fortress in Dalmatia not far from Scardona; surrendred to the Venetian Forces, commanded by General Cornaro, Sep. 12. 1688. after a fortnights Siege; whereupon 150 Christian Slaves received their Liberty. Clissa, a Fortress in Dalmatia, taken by the Ve∣netians in 1648. Clitheroe, A Market Town in Lancashire in the Hundred of Blackburn, which returns two Members of Parliament. Clitumno, Clitumnus, is a small River in the State of the Church in Italy; it ariseth in a place called Le Vene, from three Springs beneath the Village Cam∣pello, two Miles from Trevi; and running West∣ward, watereth Fuligne; then falls into the Topino, which entereth the Tiber five Miles beneath Pe∣rugia. Clogher, Cloceria, a small City and Bishoprick un∣der the Archbishop of Armagh in the County of Ty∣rone, in the Province of Ʋlster, upon the River Black VVater: fifteen Miles East of the Lake of Earne, and twenty five West of Armagh. Cloucy, Clona, an old ruined City in the County of Cork in the Province of Munster, fifteen Miles from Lismore South, and twenty five from Cork South-East. Heretofore a Bishoprick under the Archbishop of Tam, but now a Village. Clonefert, Clonefertia, a small ruined Irish City in the County of Gallway, in the Province of Con∣naught, upon the Shannon; fifteen Miles from Gall∣way East, and twelve from Athlone South. This was a Bishoprick under the same Archbishop with the former. Clonmel, the Assize-Town for the County Pala∣tine of Tipperary in the Province of Munster in Ire∣land, upon the River Showre; considerably strong, handsome, and rich. Cluid or Clyd, Glota, Cluda, is one of the princi∣pal Rivers in Scotland; it riseth in Craufurdmuir, not far from the head of Twede; and running North-West by Lanrick, passeth by Glasquo; fifteen Miles beneath which, it falls into Dunbrittainfyrth: it gives Name to Cluisdale, Cluesdalia, Glottiana, or the Valley of Cluid. § Cluid, a River in Denbighshire, which passeth on the West of Ruthin and S. Asaph, through the delightful, fruitful and healthful Valley of Cluid, to the Irish Sea; which it entereth five Miles
beneath S. Asaph, carrying with it the Streams of ten other small Rivers. Cluny, Cluniacum, a famous Abbey of the Bene∣dictines in the Territory of Masconnois within the Dukedom of Burgundy, founded in the year 910. It gives Name to a small Town upon the Grosne, four Leagues from Mascon. The Popes, Gregory VII. Ʋr∣ban II. and Paschal II. with a great number of Cardi∣nals and Bishops have been given to the Roman Church by this Abbey; which is so very large a Foundation, that we find it lodged at once, S. Lewis King of France, Baldwin Emperour of Constantinople, Pope Inno∣cent IV. the two Patriarchs of Antioch and Constan∣tinople, twelve Cardinals, three Archbishops, and abun∣dance of Secular and Ecclesiastical Nobility of their Relations and Attendants, without obliging the Reli∣gious to quit any of their ordinary Apartments, in the year 1245 after the Celebration of the first Gene∣ral Council of Lyons. Clusium, or Chiusi, a City in the Dukedom of Florence in Italy, with a Bishops See under the Arch∣bishop of Sienna, upon the Borders of the Ecclesia∣stical States. It stands in a Valley called Chiana near a Lake of the same Name, and heretofore was the Capital of Hetruria under King Porsenna; call'd like∣wise Camers, says Livy. This is a different place from Chiusi novo in the same Dukedom, which stands to∣wards the Sources of the Tiber. Cnidus, see Gnido. Coa, Cuda, a River of Portugal which riseth East of Guarda, and falls into the Douro at Almendra, a Village about ten Spanish Miles East of Lamego. Coanza, a River in the South part of the King∣dom of Congo in Africa; springing from the Lake of Zaire, and thence running to throw it self into the Aethiopick Ocean near the Isle of Loanda. Coblentz, Cobolentz, Confluentes, a strong and po∣pulous City, seated where the Moselle and the Rhine meet, twelve Miles North-East of Trier, and ten from Cologne to the South. Heretofore an Imperial Free Town, but in 1312. by Henry VII. exempt, and now subject to the Elector of Trir▪ Auphus one of these Electors in 1250. first walled it. Gaspar à Pe∣tra, another of later times, much improved its Forti∣fications by drawing a Line from one River to the other, with Fortifications after the most regular Mo∣dern way. The situation hereof is very pleasant, ha∣ving a Stone Bridge over the Moselle, and another of Boats over the Rhine; and on the opposite Shoar of the Rhine, a very Noble Palace of the Electors; two large Wings of which, and the Front, with five Pavilions, stand towards the River. In the German Wars, the Spaniards put a Garrison into this Town, which was beaten out by the Sedes: and when the French had in later times wheedled the Elector out of his strong Castle, the Emperour's Forces seized upon the Elector (Philippus Christophrus) and carried him away to Vienna. In 60. nder Charles the Bald, here was a Council, or Diet held  and in 922. another under Henry II. The Marquis de Bouser came before it in November 1688. with seven or eight thousand French; but retired with the satisfaction only of ha∣ving shot into it  great  any Bombs. Coblentz, a Village in Switzerland upon the Rhine, where the Arola [Ar] fall into it, in the Borders of Schun, seven Miles from Basll to the West. Cobourg, Melocatus, a small Town in Fracoa upon the River Itsch, in the County of Henneberg, and in the Borders of Thiingen, under the Dukes of Saxony; which has also a fine Castle. It stands 8 Miles from Smaleald to the South-East, and 5 from Bamberg to the North. Cocas, Cochias, Caucasus, a Mountain in Asia. Cocco, Laus, a River of Calabria. Cochin, Cochinum, a City of the East-Indies, near the Promontory of Malabar; called by the Por∣tuguese Cochim, by the Italians Cochino; the Capital of a Kingdom of that Name, and a Bishop's See under the Archbishop of Goa. It has a large Haven and Fort called S. James's Fort, built by the Portuguese in 1503. The Country is very well watered and fruit∣ful; antiently called Colchi as some think; but how∣ever the Portuguese were Masters of it ever since they built that Fort, till 1663; when the Hollunders took it from them. The Kings of this City have always born a great Kindness for the Portuguese: And when at first the King of Calecut would have destroyed them, he took part with them against him, and pro∣tected them; and when the Hollanders had beaten them out, the present King refused to be Crowned in the usual Place, till the Portuguese were restored to it. This City stands 36 Leagues from Calecut to the South, and is watered by a fine River. The Country about it yields much Pepper. Those they call the Christians of S. Thomas have the Liberty of their Religion here; using an Office of the Chaldean Language. Long. 105. 00. Lat. 10 00. There is another Town of the same Name in the Island of Lemnia, but now ruin'd. Cochin-China, call'd by the Inhabitants Cachucy∣na, and by the Portuguese Cauchin-China, or Couchin-China, is the most Easterly Kingdom in the East-Indies, on the Continent; bounded on the North by the Kingdom of Tungking, on the West by a People called Kemis and its own Desarts, on the South by Tsiompa or Ciampa, and on the East it has a vast Bay of the Ocean, call'd after its own Name, the Gulph or Bay of Cochin-China, opposite to the Isle of Hai∣nan. Alexander de Rhodes, a French esuit, has lately given a large Account of this Country, which is subject to a King of its own; and stands divided into si Provinces, each under a subordinate Governour. Cockermouth, a Market-Town in the County of Cumberland, situated upon the River Cocker, near its fall into the Derwent; by which two Rivers it is al∣most surrounded. About 8 Miles from the Sea, with a Castle upon one of the Hills adjoining to it. Cocytus, the antient Name of two Rivers; the one in the Kingdom of Epirus, the other near the Lake of Averno in Italy. The Poets call one of their four fictitious Rivers of Hell by this Name. Coclosyria, the Region betwixt the Mountains Li∣banus and Antilibanus in Asia, in which the River Orontes springeth. Coesfield, a small but strong City of Westphalia, upon the River Berkel; about 5 German Miles from Munster to the North. The Bishop of Munster doth often relide in this Place. Coetquen, or Coesquen, a Town and Castle in Brittany, near Dinan, which gives name to a Family of Honor. Henry III. advanc'd it to the Dignity of a Marqinsate in 1575. Coeworden, Coevorden, Baduhennae Lucs, Co∣vordia, is a very strong and fortified Town in the Prove of Overyssel in the Low-Countries▪ the prin∣cipal Town of Drene, standing in the Marshes near the Borders of the Bishoprick of Munster, who has for∣merly possessed it; but it is now in the Hands of the Duoh; it lies about a Mile from the River Vet, (Vi∣dru,) and two from Hardenberg to the South-East. It was often taken and retaken in the Civil Wars of the Low-Countries. Coggeshal, a Market-Town in Essex in the Hun∣dred of Lexden. Cognac, Concuin, Campiniacm; a Town in the Dukedom of Angoumos in France, upon the River Charate, betwixt Jarna and Xntes. It stands in a fine fruitful Soil, for Wine especially. Francis I.
King of France, being born here, built it a Fortress. In the Year 1238. there was a Council held at it. In the Civil Wars of France it was taken and retaken: Ne∣vertheless accounted a place of Strength. Cogni, Iconium, a City of Cappadocia, in the Lesser Asia. which is now great and well peopled; the See of an Archbishop, under the Patriarch of Con∣stantinople; the Capital of Carmania, and the Seat of a Turkish Bassa. Still made more famous in 1658. by a Victory obtain'd against a Bassa Rebel. It lies over against the Western Cape of Cyprus, about 30 German Miles from the shoars of the Mediterranean Sea. In the Year 256. a famous Council of the Bishops of Cappadocia, Galatia, Cilicia, and the neighbour∣ing Provinces was held here, declaring the Baptism of Hereticks null; an Opinion which occasioned great and long Dissentions afterwards amongst Christians. Cogoreto, a small Town upon the Coast of Ge∣noua, where Christopher Columbo the Discoverer of the New World was born. It lies 10 Miles East of Savona, and is under the Republick of Genoua. Cohan, Albanus, a River of Albania. Coimbra, Commbrica, a City of Portugal, men∣tioned by Antoninus, but now destroy'd. There is a∣nother call'd by that Name in the Province of Beira, which sprung out of the Ruines of the former. It is built upon a Rock, and therefore sometimes called Aeminium; upon the River Munda (now Mendego;) 32 Leagues from Lisbon to the North, and is a Bi∣shop's See under the Archbishop of Braga. In 1550. John III. King of Portugal removed hither the Uni∣versity, which had been settled before at Lisbon. Se∣ven Kings of Portugal were born and three died here. It has the Honor also to bear the Title of a Dukedom. Coire, Chur, Choira, the capital City of the Country of the Grisons, upon the River Plessur, a little below the Rhine; between Chiavenne, Glaris, and Appenzel. The Grisons ordinarily hold their Diets at it. Though the inhabitants profess the Opinions of Zuinglius; yet they allow a Toleration to a few Ro∣man Catholicks under a Bishop residing at Marsoila, but taking his Title from hence; who is a Suffragan to the Archbishop of Mentz, and has the Honor to be a Prince of the Empire. Coisnon, Coetus, a River of France. Colachz, Araxes, a River of Armenia. Colalto, a Town and Castle in the Marcha Trevi∣sana in Italy, dignified with the Title of an Earldom. Colan. See Coulan. Colberg, a Town or small City in the Dukedom of Pomerania, upon the shoars of the Baltick Sea, ha∣ving a strong Castle at the Mouth of the River Persant; six German Miles from Coslin to the West, and three from Treptow to the East. This Town was taken from the Swedes in 1641. by the Duke of Branden∣burg after a tedious Siege; and confirmed to him since by the Treaty of Westphalia. The making of Salt here has rendred it considerable. Long. 38. 12. Lat. 54. 20. Colchester, Colonia, Colcestria, a considerable Town or City in Essex, mentioned by Antoninus by the Name of Colonia: Seated on the Ascent of a steep Hill, upon the Southern Bank of the River Colne, from whence it takes its Name. It has had fifteen Churches within the Wall, and one without, which Eudo Sewer to Henry I. built in 1105. There is also a Castle built by Edward Son of Alfred. The Inha∣bitants pretend that Helen the Mother of Constantine the Great was born and brought up here; and that she was the Daughter of an imaginary King Coel, who lent his Name to their Town. Being fallen into great Po∣verty and Decay in the Reign of Queen Elizabeth, She settled the Bays-Trade here, which has infinitely enriched and peopled it. It was first seized by the Royal Party, June 13. 1648. then besieg'd by the Parliaments Forces till Aug. 28. following, and forced to surrender by Famine; when, not contented to sine the Inhabitants 14000. l. (to which the Factious con∣tributed nothing;) they shot Sir Charles Lucas, and Sir George Lisle to death under the Castle, who were the Chief Commanders. Many of the Churches also were ruined in the Siege, which now stand as sad Mo∣numents of Fanatick Fury, and Rebellious Rage. The Right Honorable Thomas Savage, Earl of Rivers, is Vicount of Colchester. § There is another Town called Colchester in Northumberland. Coldingham, Coldana, a small Town in Merch or Mers in Scotland, in the South-East Part of that Nation; famous for the Chastity of its Nuns, in the times of the Danish Wars, mentioned by Bede; if the same with Cold-stream. And no less famous for the Encampment of the late Duke of Albemarle there, when with the Forces of Scotland, he marched for the Redemption of England from Anarchy and Slavery. Colebrook, a Market-Town in Buckinghamshire in the Hundred of Stock upon the River Coln. Coleshill, a Market-Town in Warwickshire in the Hundred of Hemlingford upon the River Cole. The Lord Digby has a Seat near this place. Colford, a Market-Town in Glocestershire in the Hundred of Briavells. Coligni, a Town in the Franche Comté, adorn'd with the Title of an Earldom, and giving name to a Family of Honour there. It is epitheted Coligni the Old, to distinguish it from Coligni the New, in the Province of Bresse. Some believe it was one of the Colonies that the Romans established amongst the an∣cient Gauls. Colla, a rich and trafficking Town of the King∣dom of Peru in the South America, two Leagues from Lima, to which it serves as a Port properly, wherein a large Fleet rides in safety. Colli, a small City in the Dukedom of Florence in Italy, with a Bishop's See under the Archbishop of Flo∣rence. So called from its Situation upon a little Hill about fifteen Miles from Sienna. Collo, Ampsaga, Alcol, a great River in Maurita∣nia, (now the Kingdom of Algier,) the Mouth of which is at Culhu in Africa. Collorede, a Gastle in the Province of Friuli in Italy, giving its Name to an honourable Family. Colmar, Colmaria, a City of Alsatia Superior, which is the Capital of that Country: It sprung out of the Ruins of an old Roman Town called Colonia Ar∣gentuaria; and stands upon the Rivers Lauch, Durus, Fetcht, and Illa, two German Miles from Brisach to the West. Once an Imperial Free City, fine and strong; but now in the Hands of the French, who in 1673. dismantled it: It is situate in a fruitful Plain. Colmars, Colmartium, a strong Town in Provence, upon the River Verdon, eight Leagues from Digne to the East, and as many from Sens to the North-East. This Town suffered very much by Fire in 1672. Colme, a River of Flanders, which runs by St. Vinox. Colne, a Market-Town in Lancashire in the Hun∣dred of Blackburn; upon a little Hill. § Also a Ri∣ver of Buckinghamshire, which severs part of that County from Middlesex. Colochina, a Sea-Port-Town on the South of the Morea; about ten Italian Miles South of Misiera, or Sparta: which gives Name to the Eastern Bay, next Cape Matapan. Colocza, Colocia, ad Statuas Colossas, a City and Archbishoprick in the Kingdom of Hungary, upon the
Danube, about ten Miles from Buda, eighteen from Segedin. This Town has been in a ruinous condition; but being recovered by the Emperor from the Turks in 1686. it is hoped it may in time return into its ancient Prosperity. Cologne, Colonia Agrippina, Colonia Ʋbiorum, called by the Inhabitants Coln, is an Archbishop's See in the Empire of Germany, whose Bishop is an Ele∣ctor; yet the City an Hanse Town, and one of the biggest in Germany, sixteen Miles South of Maestricht. The Name of Agrippina comes from the Mother of Nero, who being born here sent a Colony to it, as a Testi∣mony of her Greatness. It is not only a great and strong, but a rich and populous City, and lies in the Form of an Half-Moon, upon the Rhine. Therefore sometimes entituled the Rome of Germany. They reckon 365 Churches, great and small, in it; amongst which you see the Tombs of the three pretended Kings that vi∣fited our Saviour in his Cradle by the Guidance of a Star: Commonly called the three Kings of Cologne, because of these their Relicks brought hither from Mi∣ban and to Milan from Constantinople, as they tell you. The famous S. Brunb, the Carthusian, was born here. Divers small Councils have been assembed at it. Pope Ʋrban VI. in 1388. erected here an University. It was under the French from the Expulsion of the Romans, to the Reign of Otho I. since when it has been under its Archbishops▪ Of very ancient times it was a great Favourer of the Reformation. And in the last Age two of its Archbishops embraced that Church. The Learned Dr. Edward Brown has given it a noble Description in his Travels, pag. 113. and to him I must refer the Reader. Of the Election of the Cardinal of Furstemburgh to this See, vide Bonne. Long. 28. 31. Lat. 50. 55. Colomey, Coloma, a City of the Black Russia, in the Province of Pokutiae, upon the River Prat, to∣wards the Confines of Moldavia, nine Leagues from Halitz to the South. Having suffered very much from the Rebellious Cossacks, it is now become a Vil∣lage remarkable for nothing but its making Salt. Colomiers, or Columiers, Colomeria, a small Town in the Province of Brie in France, upon the River Morine, five or six Leagues from Meax. Colophon, an ancient City of Ionia in Asia the Less; now called Altobosco, and Belvedore; which has sometime been a Bishop's See under the Archbishop of Edessa. It pretends with others to the Honour of giving Birth to Homer. And in the Days of Anti∣quity was particularly renowned for excellent Cavalry. Colossis, or Colosse, an antient City of Phrygia in Asia the Less, upon the Confines of Caria and the River Licho. Now called Chonos by the Greeks. It has been an Episcopal, and afterwards an Archiepisco∣pal See. Made universally known by S. Paul's Epistle to the Primitive Christians that were here. Coloswar. See Clansenburgh. Columb Magna, a Market-Town in Cornwal, in the Hundred of Pider. Columbo, a City in the Isle of Ceylan, in the East-Indies, built by the Portuguese, on the West Side of that Island; but taken from them some years since by the Hollanders. Columpton, a Market-Town in Devonshire in the Hundred of Hayrudge. Coluri, an Island in the Gulph of Engia, called formerly Salamine or Salamis; which pretends to the Honour of being the Birth-place of Homer; and is famous in ancient History for the Defeat of Xerxes's vast Fleet. Colzim, a Mountain of the Desart of Gebel in the Kingdom of Egypt, a days Journey from the Red Sea. There is a Monastery of Religions standing upon it, called S. Anthony's. Com. See om. Coma, Como, Comum, and Novo Comum, a City in the Duohy of Milan, upon a Lake of the same Name, (a hundred Miles in Circuit, in Latin called Lars Lacus) seventeen Miles North of Milan. It is a rich, large, and handsom City; and gave Birth to the ancient Poet Caecils mentioned in Caullus, to the younger Pliny, to the Historian Paulus Jovius, and to the late Pope Innocent XI▪ who was chosen Pope Sept. 21. 1676. and died Aug. 12. 1689. in his seventy eighth year. Comachio, Comacula, a City of Romandiola, a Province of Italy, in the Dukedom of Ferard, which is a Bishop's See under the Archbishop of Ravenna▪ and under the Dominion of the Pope. It is little, and not well inhabited, by Reason of the badness of the Air; being seated in a Marsh amidst the Lakes that are made by the Po, three or four Miles from the Adria∣tick: giving Name to the Valley of Comachio. It lies twenty Miles from Ravenna to the North, and forty from Bologna to the East; and belongs to the See of Rome. The Venetians in 932. almost ruined it. Comagena, the ancient Name of a Country in Sy∣ria; which, as we find in Josephus, was a Kingdom in the Time of Mar Anthony, who overcame (he says) Antiochus King of Comagena. Afterwards made by the Romans a Province: Its chief City being Samosata; a place famous for giving Birth to Lucian, and Paulus Samsae the Patriarch of Anioch. Comana, an ancient City of the Kingdom of Pon∣tus in Asia the Less, upon the River Iris, having been a Bishops See under the Archbishop of Neocaesa∣rea. And famous in the Times preceding Christianity, for a Temple dedicated to Bellona. § Another of Cappadocia upon the River Sarus, with a Bishop's See under the Archbishop of Melitene. Comania, a Country of Asia betwixt Georgia to the North, and the Tannais to the South; for the most part under the Turks and Moscovites. It enjoys a fertile Soil▪ but ill cultivated; the People chusing rather to live by Robbery than their honest Industry▪ Comb-Martin, a Market-Town in Devonshire, in the Hundred of Branton. Comenolitari, Thessalia, a part of Maoedonia. Comine, Cuminum, a small Island in the Sicilian Sea, belonging to the Order of the Knights of Malta, who have built a Castle in it. It lies betwixt Maltha and Gozo. Cominges. See S. Ber and de Cominges. Commetcy, Commeroium, a small City in the Dukedom de Barrois, in Champaigne, six Leagues from Clermon to the South. It is seated on the West Side of the Moselle or Meuse. Commites, a Town and Castle in Flanders; up∣on the River Lis, near Messines, giving Name to an Honourable Family. Como. See Coma. Compiegne, Compendium, a City in the Isle of France, of good Esteem; in the County of Senlis, upon the River Oise, which a little lower falls into the Aisne; seventeen Leagues from Paris to the North, and five from Soissons to the West. In the year 833. King Lewis the Debonnaire, by the Conspi∣racy of his three Sons and the Sentence of a Council of Bishops here, was deposed▪ Clotharius the st King of France, and Lewis the Bald Emperor and King of France, died both here: the latter in 879. who built here also a Monastery, and adorned the City with so many magificer▪ Edices, that it was for some time called Carolopolis, or Charles wn, from him. Complutum. See Aleala. The Biblia Complu∣tensia have that Name after the old one of this. Compostella, Brigantium, Janasum, Compostella, the Capital City of Galaecia in Spain, upon the River
Sar or Sardela; which in 1124. was by Pope Ca∣lixtus II. made an Archbishops See, instead of Meri∣da, then in the Hands of the Moors. The Bones of S. James the Apostle are said to rest here in a cele∣brated Church, thence called S. Jago di Compostella; the Steeple of which was built by Lewis XI. King of France, in 1483. But Alphonsus the Chast, King of Gallaecia, had erected the Body long before upon an Hill in 835. out of the Ruins of Ira Flavia, an old Roman Town. There is a small Castle and an Uni∣versity here: Alphonsus I. King of Castile was also here born: it stands thirteen Leagues from Cape Fi∣nisterre, the most Western Promontory of this part of Spain. Long. 1. 00. Lat. 43. 00. by the Maps 8. 19. 43. 00. Compostella Nueba, is a City of America in New-Spain, in the Province of Xalisco, not far from the South-Sea, an hundred Miles from Guadalaxara to the West. It was for some time a Bishops See; but being in a bad Air and barren Soil, the See was translated thence to Guadalaxara in 1570. They formerly call'd it Villa de Spiritu Santo. Cona, Conos, see Colosse: a City of Phrygia, much celebrated of old; now ruined by the Turks. Conca, Crustuminum, a small River of Ʋmbria in Italy, which riseth in the Dukedom of Ʋrbino from the Appenine near Leopoli, and falls into the Venetian Gulph, six Miles South-East of Rimino. There was heretofore a City of the same Name; now eaten up by the Sea. Concarneau, Concarneum, a strong Town and Port in Britany in France, four Leagues from Quim∣perley to the East, saith Baudrand. La Conception, a small City in America, in Paraguaia, at the fall of the River Ʋrvaig into Rio de la Plata: with another of the same Name in Chili, which is the most considerable place there, & the ordinary Residence of the Governour of the Province: walled and secu∣red with a strong Cittadel, upon the Pacifick Ocean, over against the Island of S. Vincent. § The Spani∣ards have given this Name to a Town by them built in the Province of Mechoacan in the Kingdom of Mexico, which secures the Road of Mechoacan to the Silver Mines of Zacateca; besides to divers others in Califernia, Hispaniola, &c. Conches, a small Town in Normandy, three or four Leagues from Eureux, in a Territory called Ouche. There is an Abbey standing in it. Concorde, a Country in the Terra Australis, be∣yond the Indian Ocean, call'd t'landt van Eendracht by the Hollanders, who discovered it in 1618. as they were searching a passage to go to the Moluccae's. luca's. Concordia, a ruined City of the Province of Friuli in Italy, the Bishop whereof resides at Porto di Gruaro, and is a Suffragan to the Archbishop of Aquileia. They write, it became abandoned in Attila's time. Condapoli, a City in the Kingdom of Golconde in the Hither East-Indies, with a strong Fort upon a Mountain, betwixt the Cities Golconda and Canda∣vera. Conde, Condate, an ancient Roman Town in Hai∣nault, upon the River Haisne, where it entreth the River Escault, two German Miles North of Valen∣ciennes. This, though a strong Town, was taken by the French in 1655. and lost in 1656. But Lewis XIV. retaking it in 1676. is still possessed of it. The Title of it has been, and is still, born by many of the Princes of the Blood Royal of France: there is a small Village of the Name also, seated about a Mile West from this fortified Town. Conde sur Nereau, Condaeum ad Norallum, a Town in the Territory of Veuxin in Normandy upon the River Nereau, which soon after falls into the Orne, betwixt Vire, Falaise and Argentan. Condom, Condomum, a small City, and a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Bourdeaux. It stands upon the small River Baise two Leagues from Nerac, four from the Guaronne, and six from Aux; in the Province of Guyenne: the Capital of the Territory of Condomois, and first made a Bishops See by Pope John XXII. in 1327. It was taken and much abused by the Huguenots in 1569. This is the Condomium Visconum of the Ancients. The late Bishop of Condom, now of Meaux, has made this City as remarkable and as much spoken of, by his Writings, as the greatest Town in Europe. Condore, Condora, a Province in Russia, towards Tartaria deserta, in the North-East part of that Kingdom; bordering North upon the White Sea, East upon Obdora and Sibiria, South upon Per∣mia, and West upon the Province of Arch-Angel: extreamly cold, and but thinly inhabited, without Town or City of Note in it. The best and chiefest is call'd Wergaturia. Condrieu, Condriacum, a pleasant Town at the foot of an Hill in Lionnois in France, upon the We∣stern Shoar of the Rhosne; two Leagues from Vienne to the South, and seven from Lion to the same Quar∣ter; famous for excellent Wines. Baudrand ob∣serves, that some write this Name Coindrieu, though improperly. Congleton, a Market Town in Cheshire in the Hundred of Northwich upon the River Dane. Conflent, a part of the County of Rousillon, near the Pyrenean Hills and Cretania; the chief Town of which is Villa Franca. Once a part of the Kingdom of Spain, but now under the Crown of France. Congedo, Cogedus, a River of the Kingdom of Arragon, which falls into the Xalon near Baubula. Congo, Congum, a Kingdom on the Western Shoar of Africa in the Lower Aethiopia; which by the Por∣tuguese is comprehended in the Lower Guinea, and was once very great; containing Congo, Angola, Me∣tamba, Cunda, Lulla, Anunda, and the Kingdom of Loangh in trust; which Countries are yet in some Maps ascribed to Congo, though it is above one hundred and fifty years since they revolted from it. Congo properly so called, is a small, but fruitful, well cultivated spot of Ground: on the West it has the Atlantick Ocean, on the South the Kingdom of Angola and Bengala; on the North the Kingdom of Loangh, and on the East the Kingdoms of Cangela and Metamba: watered with the Rivers Zaire, Co∣anza, and Lelunde. The principal City is S. Salva∣dor, where the King resides. He and the greatest part of his Subjects are Christians, under one Bishop. They have suffered very much from the Portuguese, and by Wars; as Bandrand acquaints us from Jacinthi à Vetralla, a Capuchin, who lived many years amongst them. Coningsberg, Regimons, called by the Poles Krolowice, is a great City, the Capital of Prusia Du∣calis, and a Hanse Town, at the Mouth of the River Pregel, twenty Miles East of Elbing. It has a Castle and a fine Haven, and came into the hands of the Duke of Brandenburg in 1525. having before that time belonged to the Teutonick Order, who built it in 1260. Here was also an University opened in 1544. by Albert Duke of Prusia. Coni, Cuneum, a City in Piedmont, called by the Inhabitants Cuno. It is seated at the conjunction of the Rivers Stura and Grez, thirty six Miles from the Port of Vintimilia upon the Mediterranean Sea Northward, and the same distance from Turino to the South, built in 1150: And in 1641. taken by the French, under the Duke de Hartcourt. But since
in the Possession of the Duke of Savoy. The French have besieged it in the present War under Monsieur Cattinat, but were forced to rise again, and leave it in the possession of its Duke. Connaught, Connacia, is one of the four great Provinces of Ireland; bounded on the North by Ʋl∣ster, on the East by Leinster, on the South by Moun∣ster, and on the West by the great Western Ocean. It contains seven Counties, Slego, Mayo, Roscommon, Le∣trim, Longford, Gallway and Clare, or Tomound. Ptolomy calls its ancient Inhabitants, Gangani and Concani. Strabo, Coniaci and Conisci. When the Parliamentarians had fully subdued the Irish about 1655. they took up a resolution to transport all the Heritors of the Romish Religion into this Province; which is separated from the rest of Ireland by the River Shannon, and the Mountain of Curlewe; re∣serving to the English the Forts, Cities, and fortified Towns, the Passes, and the Sea Shoars for Garrisons; to secure them from any further Attempts of that Na∣tion; a Design which had been proposed before by Spencer, and thought easie; but it proved other∣wise. Elench. Motuum, Part 2. Connor, Coneria, a small City in the Province of Ʋlster, in the County of Down, upon the Lake Cone, toward the North-West Corner of the said Lake: the Bishoprick is united to that of Down, under the Arch∣bishop of Armagh; sometime ago possessed by the Elo∣quent Dr. Jeremiah Taylor, who died Bishop of this Diocese. Conquet, Conquestus, a fine Port in Britany in France, fourteen Leagues South of Brest. The Town though small, is neat, rich, and well built: taken by the English in 1416. Conserans, Consorans, a Territory in the Ʋpper Gascogny, on the Borders of Languedoc, which bounds it to the East, as Cominges and de Foix doth to the West; having Catalonia on the South, which is divi∣ded from it by the Pyrenean Hills; and on the North, the Bishoprick of Pamiers. Its greatest extent is from North to South along the River Salatum. § Con∣serans, or S. Lizier de Conserans, Civitas Consoran∣norum, and fanum Sancti Licerii, the principal City lies upon the said River, about twelve Miles from Tholouse to the South. This City (though small) is a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Aux, called by late Writers S. Lizier; but the People maintain the old Name of Conserans. Constance, Constantia, Constantz, Constanza, is a famous City of Germany, upon the Boden Sea, or Lake of Constance, where the Rhine falls out of that Lake, seventeen Miles from Ʋlm to the South-West. A free Imperial City, though under the Protection of the House of Austria. It has its Name from Con∣stantius Clorus, the Father of Constantine the Great, and is a strong and populous City. There was a Coun∣cil held here in 1094. But that which has made it so very well known, and often spoken of, is the great Council in 1414. procured by Sigismund the Empe∣ror, which deposed three Popes at once, and elected a fourth, Pope Martin V. who owned the Papacy to be subject to a Council. In the fifteenth Session of this Council, the Errors of Wickliff were severally re∣cited and condemned. Also Sentence of Fire passed upon John Huss, non obstante his Grant of Safe-Conduct from the Emperour, which said Sentence was executed July 6. 1415. In the 21 Session they passed the like upon his Disciple, Jerom of Prague; and that also was accordingly executed May 30. 1416. The House of Austria got a footing in this City in 1558. and when the Swedes in 1634. attempted to drive them out by force of Arms, they miscarried. It is a Bishops See under the Archbishop of Mentz. The Bi∣shop is a Prince of the Empire. Long. 31. 30. Lat. 47. 30. Constances, a City of Normandy. See Coutance. Constantia Tomi, a City of Mysia Inferior, now Bulgaria, which lies upon the Sea. Constantine, the Capital City of the Province of Constantine in the Kingdom of Algier, rich and well built, standing in a Soil that is exceeding fruitful of Corn. Some remains of the Works of the old Romans are yet extant here. Constantinople, Constantinopolis, Byzantium, a City of Thrace, now called by the Turks Stamboul, by the Georgians Isthambouls, is the Capital of Ro∣mania (or Thrace)▪ and of the Turkish Empire. Of old called Byzantium; built by Pausanias King of Sparta 3469. Tho in truth, he was rather the Re∣pairer of it, than the Founder. Besieged by Philip the Macedonian; but relieved by the Persians and A∣thenians in 3610. Severus the Emperour having ruined it in 197, Constantine the Great rebuilt it about 331. and called it by its own Name; making it the Eastern Seat of the Empire, the Key or Bridge of Europe and Asia; and giving it the same Honors with Rome it self; upon which it grew quickly to an equality for Extent, Wealth, and People, with Rome. It continued the Seat of the Greek Empire to 1453. when being subdued by Mahomet II. in the Reign of the last Grecian Emperour, Constantine XV. the Son of another Helena (he bravely dying in the defence thereof), the Turks left Hadrianople, to settle here, and built the Dardanels for its Defence, on the Helle∣spont. Vid. Dardanelles. This City is of a Triangu∣lar form, walled with Brick and Stone, intermixed or∣derly; about nineteen Miles in Circumference; full of lofty Cypress Trees, so intermixed with the Buildings, that they contribute much to its Beauty, if seen from the Sea, or adjoining Mountains. Heretofore it aboun∣ded with the noblest Buildings in the World; but since it came into the hands of the Turks, all the private ones are sunk beneath their ancient Splendor; whilst the Publick retain something of it, after the violence this Pile has suffered from Fire, Time, War and Tyrants. The Haven is (saith Mr. Sandys) the fai∣rest, safest, and most profitable throughout the World; so conveniently deep, that the greatest Ships may lay their sides to the sides thereof, for the more easie re∣ceipt or discharge of their Burthen; so seated that no wind can blow, which brings not in some Ships or other to the furnishing of the City. The Bishop is a Patriarch, and by two General Councils, (the second of Constantinople, and that of Chalcedon), de∣creed to be Second in Order, but equal in Power and Honour to the Bishop of Rome; and acknowledged for such by the three other Patriarchs, Alexandria, Antioch and Jerusalem. Many and great Contests, not to be repeated here, have been agitated, and still continue betwixt the See of Rome and this: and a great number of Councils held by it, as well of general as particular concern. It lies in Long. 56. 00. Lt. 40. 56. Constantinow, Constantinova, a small Town in Volhinia in Poland, upon the River Horin, twenty five Polish Miles from Caminieck to the North-East. Near this place the Poles were beaten by the Revolted Cossacks in 1648. who possessed themselves of it, and committed great disorders: But in 1651. the Tide of Fortune turned, and the Poles beat the Cossacks in the same place. Contessa, a considerable Sea-Port-Town on the Archipelago in Macedonia, sixty-five English Miles from Thessalonica to the East. Conty, Contejum, seu Contiacum, a Borough in Picardy in France, upon the River Alce, which falls in the Somme, four Leagues from Amiens to the North-East, and five from Baupalme to the South-West. This place is honoured with the Title of a
Principality, and worn by a Branch of the House of Conde. Conversano, Cupersanum, vel Conversanum, a Ci∣ty in Bari, a Province in the East of the Kingdom of Naples, which is a Bishops See under the Archbishop of Bari; distant fifteen Miles to the South from thence, as it is thirty from Taranto to the North. This City stands amongst the Mountains, and is of no great Circuit; but gives the Title of Earl to the Family of the A∣quaviva's. Conway, a Market Town and Castle Royal in the County of Carnarvan in Wales, in the Hundred of Lechwed Issaph. Conza, Consa, Compsaconsa, a small City in the Principatus Ʋlterior, in the Kingdom of Naples, which is an Archbishops See: it stands at the foot of the Appennine upon the River Ofanto; very small, twenty six Miles from Salerno East, and twenty five from Benevento to the South-East. The Archbi∣shop resides not in it (it consisting not of above two hundred and twenty Souls), but at S. Menna. This was the Country of the ancient Hirpini. Coos, Cos, see Lango. Copa, a Town upon a River so call'd of Asia, near the Lake Maeotis. Copeland, the South part of the County of Cum∣berland, lying betwixt the Rivers Duddon and Der∣went in the Archdeaconry of Richmond and the Dio∣cese of Chester. Copenhagen, Codania, Hafnia, Haphnia, called by the Inhabitants Klovenhaven, by the Germans Coppenhagen, by the Hollanders Kopenhaven, is the principal City of Denmark, the Capital of the Island of Zealand, great and well fortified. It stands on a Plain, with a new strong Castle, and a large Ha∣ven, upon the North-East Shoar of the Island, over against the County of Schonen. This City was of old called Stagelbourg, and afterwards Axelhus; and by the People had its present Name given it, which signi∣fies the Merchants-Haven: in 1161. here was an Uni∣versity erected, to which, by Pope Sixtus IV. the same Privileges were granted with those of the Uni∣versity of Bologna in Italy. In 1535. it received the Reformed Religion: in 1659. the Swedes besieged it in vain: in 1660. it was made an Archbishops See. It lies four Danish Leagues from Rotshilt to the East, and four from Elsenore to the South, in Long. 35. 20. Lat. 56. 28. Cophtites, Coptae, a seperate Church of Christians in the Kingdom of Egypt under a Patriarch of their own; following the Opinions of Eutyches and Di∣oscorus to this day, notwithstanding the repeated en∣deavours of the Roman See to diswade them from that belief. The Patriarch takes the Title of Pa∣triarch of Alexandria, and keeps his Residence at a Monastery of S. Macarius about twenty Leagues from Cairo. The Abyssinians are in part submitted to this Church. They have many Monasteries in Egypt, and one particularly in the house whither Joseph and the Virgin with our Saviour retired, to fly the Per∣secution of Herod. They use the Trine Immersion in Baptism. Yet at Jerusalem, there is an Apart∣ment in the great Church of S. Sepulchre allotted for their use. Copranitz or Caproncea, Copranitza, a strong Town in Sclavonia, which is one of the Bulwarks of the House of Austria against the Turks. It stands two Leagues from the Drave, four or five from Ca∣nisa, and the same distance from Waradin. Corasan, Bactria, a Province of the Kingdom of Persia near upon the Caspian Sea, which is one of the greatest in that vast Kingdom, the most sertile and best for Trading. This Province has also several of the greatest Cities of Persia in it; as Mesched or Thus, incompassed with a Wall of three hundred Towers, at Musket shot distance each from other, fa∣med for the Sepulture of Iman Risa, one of the twelve Saints of Persia. Also Herat, a famous Mart, the Pass into the East-Indies is in this Province. Corasmines, a People of Persia descended from the ancient Parthians, who fell upon Palestine in the twelfth Century (by permission from the Sultan of Egypt) with Fire and Sword, took Jerusalem, de∣stroyed above six thousand Christians, and likewise defeated the Army of the three Military Orders of Jerusalem in a Battel before Gaza (which held two days successively) in the year 1244. Yet this Race being driven out of Palestine by the Sultan of E∣gypt again, came to perish miserably by the hands of the Sarazens. Corax, two Mountains of this Name are menti∣oned, the one in Aetolia, the other in Sarmatia, by the ancient Geographers. § There is a Lake so called in the Province of Mongul in Tartary. Corbach, Corbachium, a Town in Hessen in Ger∣many, called by the Inhabitants Cuirbach; six Miles from Cassel to the East, and three from Waldec to the South-East, in the County of Waldeck. This was once a free Imperial City: but in 1396. the Count Wal∣deck seized it, and has it still in possession: in Long. 30. 31. Lat. 51. 20. Corbeil, Corbelium, Josedum, a small Town upon the Sein, in the Government of the Isle of France, seven Miles from Paris to the South; and only ob∣servable on the account of the Bridge over the Seine; except that it sustains the Title of an Earldom; and that Ingeburde Wife to Philip the August King of France died here in 1236. The Huguenots attacqued this Town in vain in 1562. Corbie, Corbeia, a little City in Picardy, upon the River Somme, which was heretofore well fortified, be∣ing then a Frontier Town. This has a Monastery foun∣ded by Bathilda Queen to Clovis II. King of France in 660. In 1637. it was taken by the Spaniards, but soon after recovered by the French; it stands sour Leagues from Amiens to the East; being dignified with the Title of an Earldom. § There is another place in Westphalia called Corbie by the French, but Corwey by the Germans. See Corwey: which is therefore call'd Corbeia nova, and the former Vetus for distinction in Latin Writers: or the one Gallica, the other Saxonica. Corck, a County, City and Haven in Mounster in Ireland. The City is a Bishops See, under the Arch∣bishop of Cashell, from which it lies thirty five Miles South, and about ten from Kingsale to the North. There are two other Bishopricks united to it for ever. The Wall and Castle of this City are considerably strong. Yet a Garrison of about 5000 Irish surren∣dred it to the English under the Earl of Marleborough, Sept. 28. 1690. after two or three days Siege, and were all made Prisoners of War. Corcu, Eleusia, an Island near Cyprus. Cordilleras, a Chain of Mountains near 1000 Leagues long to the East of the Kingdom of Chili in America, reaching from Peru as far as to the Streights of Magellan▪ and having divers considerable Mines in the Bowels of them, but extreamly cold up∣ward▪ La Tour de Cordovan, a famous and celebrated Light-House in Aquitain in France, at the Mouth of the Guaronne; built upon a small Rock, and encom∣passed with the Ocean; which was rebuilt with great Magnificence by the present King of France, in 1665. Corduba, an ancient Roman Town in Andalusia in Spain, upon the River Quadalquivir (Baetis), twenty Leagues from Sevil to the East. This City being
then the Capital of one of the Kingdoms of the Moors, was recovered by the Spaniards from them in 1236. It is now a great walled City, seated in a fruitful Plain, with a delicate Stone Bridge over the River. This was the Country of the two Seneca's, Lucan, and Averroes, some of the greatest Men for Learning the World has known; yet more famous for Hosius the President of the first Nicene Council, (as afterwards of the Council of Sardica) and Bishop of Corduba. The Cathedral was a Mosch, built by the Moors; it has 365 Columns or Pillars of Black Marble, and twenty four Doors. This City suffered very much by an Earthquake in the year 1589. The Bishop is a Suffragan to the Archbishop of Sevil. Long. 15. 40. Lat. 38. 00. Corea, a Peninsula of the Kingdom of China, East of the Provinces of Xantung and Leaotung, and joined Northwards by the Kingdom of Niche in Tartary. It is of a very fruitful Soil for Corn and Rice. There are Mines of Gold and Silver discovered amongst the Mountains of it, and Pearl upon the Coasts. The In∣habitants use the like Customs and Religion with the Chinese. The Chinese call it Chaosien, the Ja∣paneze Corea. And it stands divided into eight Pro∣vinces. Corene, Cyrene: See Cairoan. Corfu, Corcyra, Phaeacia, Drepano, an Island in the Ioman Sea, or Gulph of Venice, upon the Coast of Epirus; about one hundred and twenty Miles in Cir∣cuit, and reckoned to contain ten thousand Souls, who are a rich and polite people; seventy Italian Miles from Cape S. Mary, the most South-Eastern Point of Italy, to the South-East. It is under the Dominion of the States of Venice, and has one City seated on the Eastern Shoar called by the same Name: which about one hundred years since (saith Mr. Wheeler) was no∣thing but an old Castle, and the present Suburbs of the Castati. But now it is a good large City, and an Archbishops See; well fortified with Walls on the South, and two Castles at the East and West Ends; the side towards the Harbour is not so well fortified, nor needs it. This Town would be almost impreg∣nable, were it not for a Rock that stands towards the the West, and commands the adjoining Fort, with a great part of the Town. Here resides the chief Go∣vour of the Venetian Islands both in Civil and Mili∣tary concerns. The Inhabitants are of the Greek Church, but much Latinized. The Soil not so fruit∣ful of Corn, as to supply the Inhabitants; but then it produceth Wine, Oil, and all sorts of good Fruit. In the year 1537. Solyman II. Emperour of the Turks sent his famous General Barberoasse with an Army of five and twenty thousand Men to make a Descent upon this Island, as they accordingly did: but were forced by the Venetians to an Inglorious Retreat thence again. Cory, one of the chief Towns in Georgia, called Hermastis and Armactica, by the Latins. There is another of the same Name in Dalmatia, mentioned by Pliny and Ptolomy under the Name of Corinium; five or six Miles from Novigrod, upon a Hill: and a third in the Ecclesiastical State in Italy. Coria, Caurium, Caurita, a City upon the River Alagnon in Old Castile, five or six Leagues from the Frontiers of Portugal. The Bishop of it is a Suffra∣gan to the Archbishop of Compostella. Corinth, Corinthus, Heliopolis, a City of the Mo∣rea, which is an Archbishoprick under the Patriarch of Constantinople, built in the year of the World 3066. near the Isthmus, between the Ionian and Aegaean Seas. At first subject to Kings, but growing power∣ful and rich by Commerce, it became a Common∣wealth. Its situation affording it two Noble Ha∣vens to the East and West, it was the first City of Greece that set out Trireines, or great Gallies to Sea; by which it became the richest, and one of the most powerful Cities in all Greece: it treated the Roman Embassadors with that Insolence, that they decreed the total ruine of it; which was effected by L. Mum∣mius Achaius, 146. years before the Birth of our Savi∣our. Julius Caesar re-built it: S. Paul converted it to Christianity, and honoured it with two Epistles: and Clemens Romanus with a third, of the next im∣mediate antiquity and value. Thus it became the Metropolis of Achaia: in after-times it had Despots, or Princes of its own, from whom it passed to the Vene∣tians by their Grant. But in 1458. Mahomet II. dis∣possed that Republick of this Noble City; and they have since treated it with so much Tarkish cruelty, that there are not many Houses in it, inhabited by poor Men, rather out of necessity, than choice. It is hoped the Venetians may give it another resurre∣ction out of its desolation and ruines, they having recovered it in Aug. 1687. without opposition. They now call it vulgarly, Corantho. The old Acrocorin∣thus, a strong Cittadel built upon the top of a very high Hill, and the proud Curtezans here of higher prizes than for every one to give, it is supposed, severally or toge∣ther, occasioned the Proverb, Non licet omnibus adire Corinthum. Long. 49. 15. Lat. 38. 11. § Apol∣lodorus writes of three Corinths more: the first in Thessalia, the second in Epirus, the third in Elis. Corlin, Corlinum, a City in Pomerania, subject the Duke of Brandenburg ever since 1648. upon the River Persant, three German Miles from the Baltick Sea, and five from Treptow to the East. It has a Castle, and was before subject to the Bishop of Camin. Corneto, Cornuetum, a Bishops See in union with that of Monte Fiascone, subject only to the Pope, in the State of the Church; upon the River Marta, four Miles from the Tyrrhenian Sea, and forty six from Rome to the West; very little inhabited, being un∣healthfully seated. Cornovaile, or Cornoaille, a Territory in Bri∣tany in France, called Corisopitum by the Latin Writers: the Capital of which, is Quimper-Co∣rantine. Cornwall, Cornubia, Cornavii, Damnonii, is the most Western County of England. It has Devon∣shire on the East, from which the River Tamer parts it; and on all the other sides is surrounded with the Sea: For a long time the Store-house of Tin to the whole World, till in 1240. there were other Mines of this found in Misnia and Bohemia by a Cornish∣man. The Soil of this County is tolerably fruitful, but Mountainous. In some Rocks they find a sort of a Precious Stone, call'd the Cornish Diamond, shaped and polished by Nature, and many times as big as a Walnut: only not so hard as a Diamond of the right kind. The Inhabitants are the Reliques of the old Britains, and still retain their Language. It was by Edward II. in 1336. made a Dukedom, and given to his Son Edward; and has ever since be∣longed to the Eldest Son of the King of England, who is born Duke of Cornwall. Coro, a City of South America, near the Sea, in the Province of Venezuela, under the Spaniards. It is built after the manner of Venice, upon a Lake, a∣mongst a number of little Islets. Thence often it self call'd Venezuela, or Little Venice. Coromandel, a Kingdom on the East side of the Promontory of Malabar in the East-Indies: divided from the Malabars by the Mountains of Balagatta, which run from North to South to the Cape of Co∣mori: it lies along the Eastern Shoar an hundred Leagues in length. St. Thomas, a Town in 32. deg▪
of Latitude, is in this Kingdom; in which the Portu∣guese found Christians of the Greek Church, when they came first hither, who put the City into their Hands, and they enjoy it still: it hath many good Harbours, much frequented by the Europeans, espe∣cially in Winter. The Natives are yet for the most part stupid Pagan Idolaters, as Mr. Herbert saith, and and of a Dusky Complexion. This Country was di∣vided amongst many Princes; but at present is sub∣ject to one, (saith Mendelslo) who resides some times at Bisnagar and some times at Narsinga. Coron, Corona, a Maritime City in the Morea, on the Southern Shoar, opposite to the Coast of Barba∣ry: it is situate on the richest and most fruitful Pro∣vince of this Country, called Belvedora, ten Miles by Land and twenty by Sea from Modon. The Venetian's built here in 1463. a great Tower for a Magazine; but they enjoyed it not long: for Bajazet II. took it after a Siege in 1498. It was attempted in 1533. by the famous Johni Doria Admiral of Spain, and taken; but could not be long kept. It was ta∣ken again by the Venetians after a sharp Siege in 1685. and may they long enjoy it. It is a very strong City, with a safe and large Haven; and in former times was a Bishops See under the Archbishop of Patras. Coronea, an ancient City of Boeotia in Greece, near Leuctra to the East and the River Cephisus North. It was here, that Agesilaus the Athenian General de∣feated the Boeotians in the year of Rome 359. In the third Century it became a Bishops See under the Arch∣bishop of Athens. Now a Miserable Village, inhabited by none but Turks. Coropa, a Province in Guiana in South America, between the River of Amazons and the Lake of Pa∣rymaea, near the River of Coropatuba; but not inha∣bited by any of our European Colonies. Coronna, Varonnum, Adrobicum, and vulgarly the Groyne, a famous Sea-Port-Town on the North-West Shoar of Spain, in Gallicia; strong, rich, and full of people, ten Miles from Compostella to the North, and six from the Isle of Sisarga; in Long. 8. 40. Lat. 44. 20. The Town stands upon a Peninsula, and is almost surrounded by the Sea. The Country affords excellent Iron, Steel, and several other Metals, which cause the Port to be the more frequented. Corozaim, or Chorazim, mention'd Matth. 11. 21. an ancient Town of Galilee in Palestine, which was one of the ten that composed the Country of De∣capolis. It stood over against Capernaum upon the Banks of the River Jordan and near the Sea of Ti∣berias. Corregio, Corregium, a great and populous Town in the Dukedom of Modena, which had heretofore Princes of its own; but in 1635. it came into the hands of the Duke of Modena: it stands thirteen Miles from Regio to the North-East, and twelve from Mo∣dena to the North, between the Rivers of Navila West, and Fossa Rossa East: and has the honour of a good Castle. Corsica, called la Crose by the French, and Cor∣sega by the Spaniards; is a considerable Island in the Mediterranean Sea: in length from North to South 110 Miles, in breadth 50, and its Circuit 280; 100 Miles South from Genoua, and 8 from Sardinia. This Island has ever been ill inhabited by reason of the Asperity of a great part of it, and the great difficulty of approaching it. The Tusci, or old Italians, were the first Inhabiters of this Island; who were conque∣red by the Carthaginians: the Carthaginians yielded to the Tomans: the Saracens followed these, who fi∣nally in 1144. were subdued by the Genouese. The Pisans, and the Kings of Arragon, have since conte∣sted with the Genouese; but however that Republick has desended the place against all pretenders to this day. There are five Episcopal Sees in it; to wit, A∣jazzo, Aleria, Sagona, Mariana and Nebio: the three first, under the Archbishop of Pisa; the other, of Ge∣noua. It is watered by the Rivers Liamon and Ta∣vignan, which both spring out of the Lake of Crena. Bonifacio is its best Port, and Basta the Capital Town. There is a Cape call'd Corso, which is the same with the Sacrum Promontorium of the Ancients. Corschi, the Name of a Numerous people in Persia, living in Tents, and descended from the Turks, out of which the Sophy always composes his first Troops. Corthestan, Taurus. Cortona, Cortonium, Corto, a small but very anci∣ent City in the Dukedom of Florence in Italy: it lies on the Borders of the Estate of the Church, and is a Bishops See (made by Pope John XXII.) under the Archbishop of Florence: four Miles from the Lake di Perugia to the North, and fourteen from Arezzo to the South. Corwey, Corbeja Saxonica or Nova, called by the French Corbie, is a small City in West phalia, which has an Abbey founded by S. Lewis King of France, in 815. It lies upon the Weser, nine Miles from Paderborne to the West. Cosa, Cosas, a small River in the State of the Church, which falleth into Garigliano, (Liris) by Feretino and Veroli. Cosano, Cossano, Cosa, Cosanum, a City of Cala∣labria in the Kingdom of Naples: six Miles from the Gulph of Taranto, and one and twenty from Rosano to the North. It is a Bishops See under the Archbi∣shop of Cosenza. Cosenza, Consentia, the principal City of Calabria, and one of the greatest in the Kingdom of Naples; an Archbishops See, seated in a fruitful Plain, upon the River Crate; which has belonging to it a strong Castle upon a Hill. Alaricus XII. King of the Goths died in this City. In 1638. it suffered much by an Earthquake: fourteen Miles from the Tyrrhenian Sea, and thirty from Rossano to the West, in Long. 40. 20. Lat. 39. 11. Cosir, a City of Egypt upon the Red Sea: written also Cossir. Coslin, Coslinum, a Town in the Dukedom of Pomerania, under the Dominion of the Duke of Bran∣denburgh; upon a small River; three German Miles from the Baltick Sea, and six from Treptow to the East. Heretofore the Seat of the Archbishop of Cas∣mires, but given from him by the Treaty of West∣phalia, to the present Possessor. Cosmopolis, a Town in the Isle of Elbe, in the Mediterranean Sea, belonging to the Duke of Flo∣rence, which has a convenient and safe Port: it lies over against Piombino, twenty five Miles to the West. Cosne, Conoda, Conium, a small Town, some place it in the Province of Beausse, some in Nivernois, up∣on the Loyre in France betwixt Nevers and Orle∣ans: often taken and retaken in the Civil Wars of the last Age there. Cossa, a ruined City on the Coast of the Tyrrbe∣nian Sea, six Miles from Orbitello to the East, and seventy from Rome to the North: destroyed by Charles the Great. Ansidonia sprung out of its ruines; which last is now in the Possession of the Duke of Florence. Cossaques, a Martial People, inhabitants of the Province of Ʋkraine in Red Russia; renowned for their great services done as well to Christendom in general, as to the Crown of Poland, in guarding the Frontiers of that Kingdom against the Tartars: Never∣theless in some times guilty of great Revolts too, which have occasion'd divers Treaties of Peace betwixt them and Poland. They speak a Dialect of the Polonian
Language; and for Religion, are a mixture of the Greek, the Roman, and the Protestant Churches. Cosse, a Seigniory in the Province of Maine in France near St. Susanne, giving Name to a Family of Quality. Cossaei, an ancient People dwelling about a Moun∣tain of Media, whom Alexander the Great sacri∣ficed to the Manes of his dear Ephaestion, in a tran∣sport of Grief for his Death, say Polybins and Dio∣dorus. Cossovia, Campus Merul, a Plain in Bulgaria, not very much exceeding Lincoln-Heath, yet the Stage of great Actions. Here the greatest Christian Army that was ever brought into the Field in Eu∣rope, consisting of 500000 Men, under Lazarus De∣spot of Servia, fought with the Forces of Amurath I. and lost the day; in which Battel Lazarus was slain: and Amurath, viewing the dead bodies, was stabbed by Michael Cobloivitz, a Christian Souldier, left for dead in the field. Amurath hath here a Funeral Mo∣nument to this day. This happened in 1390. In the same Field was also fought that remarkable Battel be∣tween Huniades and Mahomet, for three days toge∣ther; in which Huniades his Forces were beaten, be∣ing very unequal in number. This Plain is bounded by the Mountains of Negri to the South, by the Ri∣ver Nesaus to the East, by Nissa to the North, and by Ibar to the West: one hundred and thirty English Miles from Thessalonica to the North-West, upon the Borders of Macedonia and Albania. See Dr. Brown's Travels. Cossir. See Cosir. Costagnazo, Haemus, a Mountain in Thrace. Coustantz, See Constance. Costa-Ricca, A Province of New Spain in the South America, lying betwixt the two Seas, and West∣ward of Veragua. The Capital whereof is the City Carthage. There are some Gold and Silver Mines in it, and a Soil which makes it worthy of its Name. Coste des dents, or Coste de l' Ivoire, the Ivory Coast, is a part of the Coast of Guiny in Africa, be∣twixt the Cape of Palmes and the Cape of three Points; whither the English, French, Hollanders, &c. traffick for Elephants Teeth. It is said to be well in∣habited, and to lye very conveniently. Coste d'Or, or the Golden Coast, another part of the Coast of the same Country, so call'd from the quantity of Gold that they find upon it. It is about one hundred and thirty Leagues long, reaching from the Cape of three Points (where the former ends) as far as to the River Volta, and the Kingdom of Be∣nin. The English, Danes and Dutch have divers Settlements upon it. The latter having dispossessed all the Portugueze. Cothon, the ancient Name of the Port of Carthage in Africa. Cotatis, the principal City of Imiretta, (a King∣dom or Province of Georgia) built at the Foot of an Hill, by the River Phasi, consisting of about two hundred Houses: those of the Grandees, and the Kings Palace, stand at a distance. The Town has neither Fortifications nor Walls nor any Defence, except where it is enclosed by the River and the Mountains. On the other side of the River, upon the top of an Hill, higher than that under which the City is built, stands the Fortress of Cotatis; which appears very strong: As Sir John Chardin describes this City in his Travels. Cotbus, Cotbutium, a Town in Lusatia in Ger∣many, upon the River Havel, which also passeth by Berlin; from which it lies thirteen Miles to the South, and ten from Franckford to the South-West. This Town came into the Hands of the Duke of Branden∣burgh in 1645. and is sometimes called Cotwitz. Cotrone, Croton, a City of the further Calabri in the Kingdom of Naples, which of old was twelve Miles in Compass, as Livy saith, and built eighty years after Rome: but now very small, and thinly inhabi∣ted: yet it is a Bishops See under the Archbishop of Regio, and has a Castle built by Charles V. It stands on the South-East side of Italy, fifteen Miles South-East of Severina. The Cottian-Alpes, Alpes Cottiae, a part of the Alpes, heretofore under the Dominion of King Cottius mention'd in Suetonius (as an Ally with the People of Rome, in the Reign of Augustus) and therefore by the Ancients called Cottiae from him. They begin at the Fountains of the River Var, and reach to Susa: that is, from Mount Viso, to Mount Cenis; dividing the Dauphinate from Piedmont. Cotzchin, or Chotozin, or Kotym, a Castle in Mol∣davia upon the Niester; four Polish, or twenty En∣glish Miles from Caminieck to the South-West: where in 1673. an Army of the Turks, consisting of two and thirty thousand Men, under the Command of Solyman Aga, designed for the ruine of Lemburgh, were en∣camped; having the Neister behind them, a Range of Rocks and Precipices on one side, the Castle of Cotz∣chin on the other, a Trench before them defended by Half-Moons, a Bridge over the Nieper, and ano∣ther over the Castle: yet Zobietsky, then Marshal, but now King of Poland, with much lesser Forces coming up October 9. battered down their Brest-Work with his Cannon; and the next day dismounting his Ca∣valry to second the Lithuanian Foot, (which had been beaten off) in Person at the head of his Men stormed their Camp; took it, slew or took Prisoners thirty one thousand five hundred Turks, (and the rest hardly escaped) Solyman their General being slain. In 1621. Ʋladislaus Prince of Poland, Son of Sigis∣mund King of Poland, in the same Field, defeated the Forces of Osman I. and slew the greatest part of them; amongst the rest Ʋssain le Borgne, who was esteemed the best Commander the Turks had in those times. Couco, Coucum, a Kingdom in Barbary, in Afri∣ca, with a City of the same Name; sixty Miles from the Shoars of the African Sea, between the Kingdoms of Algiers and Bugia. Coucy, a Seigniory in Picardy, giving Name to a Family of Honour. Coventry, Conventria, a City in the County of Warwick upon the West Side of the River Sher∣borne, which is of no very great Antiquity; but neat, strong, rich and populous, by reason of the Cloathing Trade: Also a Bishop's See in Conjunction with Litchfield, under the Archbishop of Canterbury. It has three Churches; the Priory or Convent (whence the Name Coventry) was the most ancient Foundation of the City, being built by Canutus the Dane. And the Cross may be reckoned amongst the finest in Eng∣land. The Noble George Villiers, late Duke of Buck∣ingham, was created Earl of Coventry, in the twenty first of James I. A Title that had lain buried ever since the Death of Edwin a Saxon, whom William the Conqueror created Earl of Coventry in the first Year of his Reign. Henry VI▪ annexing the adjacent Towns and Villages to this City made it with them a County Corporate, distinct from that of Warwickshire. Coulan, a City and small Kingdom in the East-Indies, in the great Promontory of Malabar, on the Western Shoar; thirty five Leagues North of the Cape of Comry, and about seventeen South of Cochin. The Country is well watered, and fruitful; not above twenty Leagues long from North to South, and eight or ten broad from East to West. Bounded by the Kingdoms of Cochin and Travancor. There are ma∣ny Christians in it, by the means of the Portuguese. The
City has a Castle, and a safe Haven, with the Chara∣cter of a rich and flourishing Place. The Portuguese were driven out of it by the Hollanders in 1663. Coulour, a Town of the Hither East-Indies in the Kingdom of Golconde in Malabar; seven days Jour∣ney from the City of Golconde. There is a Mine or Quarry of Diamonds very near it. Courreze, Curretia, a River in Limosin in France, which riseth two Miles above Tulle; and having wa∣tered both it and Brive, falls into the Vesere, two Miles above Condat. Courtenay, Cortenaeum, Corteniacum, Curtinia∣cum, a small Town in the Isle of France, six Miles distance from Sens West. The Princes who have born the Title of this small Place, are frequently men∣tioned by the French Historians; and some of the Emperors of Greece are deriv'd from their Family. Courtray, Corteriacum, by the Natives called Cortrick, a Town in Flanders upon the River Lys, five Leagues from Tournay to the North, and four from Lille to the West. Made famous by the Defeat of the French in 1302. This Town was taken by the French in 1646. and fortified; and again in 1667: But in the Treaty of 1679. it returned under the O∣bedience of the King of Spain, who is still possessed of it. Curzola, an Island under the Venetians upon the Coast of Dalmatia, full of Wood. There is, besides five Villages in it, a City of the same Name which is a Bishop's See under the Archbishop of Ra∣gusa. The Houses, built all generally of Marble. Coutances, Constantia Castra, a City and Bi∣shoprick in Normandy in France, under the Archbi∣shop of Rouen. It stands upon the River Barde, two Leagues from the British Sea, five from Auran∣ches to North, and twelve from Caen to the West. This City has a large County belonging to it, called by the same Name, le Coutantin; which lies extend∣ed from North to South, in the form of a Peninsula; on the North and West it has the British Sea, on the East the River Viere, which parts it from Bessin; and on the South le Auranchin, divided from it by another small River. The Isles of Jersey and Guernsey here∣tofore belonged to this County; which being in the hands of the English, are not now esteemed a part of it, but annexed to England. Coutras, Curtracum, a Town in Guienne in Peri∣gord, seated on the Confluence of Lille and Drma, twelve Miles from Bourdeaux to the North-West: Made famous by a Battel here sought in the Civil Wars of France in 1587. Couverden. See Coeworden. Cowbridge, a Market Town in the County of Glamorgan in Wales. The Capital of its Hundred. Cowes, a noted Harbour at the Entrance of the Creek that goes to Newport in the Isle of Wight; for∣tified with a Castle. Cracow, Cracovia, call'd by the Inhabitants Krakow, by the Germans Craaw, by the Italians, French, and Spaniards, Cracovia, is the Capital of the Kingdom of Poland, and stands on the River Weya, (Vistula) about fifty Polish Miles from Presburg to the North-East, 85 Miles from Dantzick South. It is a Bishop's See under the Archbishop of Gnezna; there belongs to it a strong Castle built upon a Rock, with vast Suburbs; and an University opened in 1401. by Ʋladislaus K. of Poland. The Palatinate of Cracovia, which belongs to this City (and is one of the three which make up the lesser Poland), has Silesia on the West, Hungary on the South, Sandomiria on the East, and the Palatinate of Siradia on the North. This Bishop∣rick was founded by Mieczislao, who received the Christian Faith in 965. The City was burnt by the Tartars in 1241. The Custody of it was after this committed to the Germans, in 1428. A Disputation being had here with the Hussites, in 1431. the King sent for some Preachers out of Bohemia, who preach∣ed many Years in the Sclavonian Tongue Helvigis the Queen caused the Bible to be translated into the Po∣lish Tongue; and when the Pope in 1448. sent a Legate to this Nation, the University shewed him no Respect, but stuck to the Council of Basil. In 1591. they burnt the Protestants Church there, as they did in 1635▪ by the procurement of the Jesuits; who the next year were banished for it out of that University. This City was also taken by the Swedes, in the Wars under Charles II. King of Sweden, in 1655. It is stiled the Rome of Poland, for its Excellency. They tolerate the Jews, wearing a distinctive Habit. There are be∣twixt fifty and sixty Churches in it. Cragno. See Carniola. Crambourn, a Market-Town in Dorseishire; the Capital of its Hundred; seated near the Spring of a Ri∣ver that runs into the Stower; it is a Town of good Antiquity. Cranbrook, a Market-Town in Kent in Scray Lath, seated at the Head of the River Medway. Cranganoor, Cranganora, a Kingdom and a Ci∣ty in the Promontory of Malabar, in the East-Indies. The City lies upon the River Aicot, two Leagues from the Ocean, and seven from Cochin to the North; being a Bishop's See, whilst it was in the Hands of the Portuguese; but in 1663. the Dutch took it from them, and put it into the Hands of the King of Cale∣cut, together with the small Kingdom belonging to it. Cranostaw, Krasnostaw, Cranostovia, a small but well fortified Town in Black Russia, in Poland, up∣on the River Wieprez, and a Lake made by the said River; five Leagues from Chelm to the South-West, and as many from Lublin to the South-East. Now the usual Residence of the Bishop of Chelm. Craon, a small Town in the Province of Anjou in France, upon the River Oudon, towards the Fron∣tiers of Maine in Brittany; giving Name to an ho∣nourable Family. Crapack, the Carpathian Mountains, which divide Hungary, Moravia, and Transilvania from Poland. This ridge of Mountains, called by the Antients Car∣pates, and Mons Carpathus, runs from East to West, under various Names given by the Nations which bor∣der upon it. Crapone, a Canal in Provence, made in the last Age by the ingenious Adam de Crapone from the River Durance to the Arles, beginning at Roque a Village six Leagues below the Fall of the said River into the Rhine. La Crau, a large Heath of seven or eight Leagues length in Provence; filled with a prodigious Quan∣tity of Stones, whereof divers of the Antients have conjectured, but none give, a satisfactory Cause. Craven, a Part of the West-Riding of Yorkshire; hilly and rough, in which Shipton stands. It gives the Title of an Earl to the Right Honourable William Craven, created by King Charles II. Anno 1664. Cray S. Maries, a Market-Town in Kent, in Sutton Lath. Creci, Cressy, Creciasensis, Cressiacum, a Town in Picardy, upon the River Serre, in the most Eastern Borders of that Province; three Miles from la Ferre to the East, and the same Distance from Guise to the South. This small Place, by the English Valor under Edward III. and his Son the Black Prince, in 1346. August 26. received a Name that will last for ever: Philip de Valois being here beaten in a set Battle, in which the Kings of Bohemia and Major∣ca, Charles Duke of Alensone Brother to the King of
France, the Duke of Lorraine, Lewis Earl of Flan∣ders, and in all 11 Princes, 80 Barons, 1200 Knights, and 30000 common Soldiers were slain; and King Philip himself escaped with great Difficulty, being scarcely admitted into one of his own Castles, upon his Reply to the Question, Who is here? The For∣tune of France. §. There is another Creci in Picardy, upon the River Serre, near Laon, in the Tract of Tierache, §. And a third in the Province of Brie, upon the River Morin, two or three Leagues from Meaux, within the Government of Champaigne. Crediton, a Market-Town in Devonshire, upon the Rivers Credit and Forton: The Capital of its Hundred; and formerly a Bishop's See, till King Ed∣ward the Confessor translated the same to Exon. It is adorned with a fair Church, built Cathedral-wise; well inhabited, in a rich Soil, and drives a good Trade of Serges. Both the aforesaid Rivers fall into the Ex. Creil, reolium, a small City or great Town in the Isle of France, upon the River Oesia, (Oise,) o∣ver which it has a Bridge, between Clermont to the North three Miles, and Senlis to the South two. Crekelade, a Market-Town in Wiltshire in the Hundred of Highworth; which returns two Burgesses to the Parliament. Crema, [Crema,] Forum Diuguntorum, a City in the State of Venice, called by the French Creme; which is a Bishop's See, under the Archbishop of Bo∣oma; seated upon the River Serium, Serio, sixty Miles from Verona to the West, and twenty from Milan to the East. This City was once a part of the Dukedom of Milan, and is very strongly fortified: Made a Bishoprick in 1579. by Pope Gregory XIII. being the Capital of the Territory adjacent, called Cremasco. Cremera, a small River in the Dukedom of Thus∣cany in Italy, falling into the Tiber five Miles below Rome. The 300 Fabii were cut to pieces by an Am∣buscade of the Enemy upon the Banks of it: A Mis∣fortune so lamented by the Romans that, they cursed the very City-Gate, by which they marched, with the Title of Scelerata, and placed the Day of their over∣throw in the Catalogue of black and dismal Days. Cremona, Colonia & Ʋrbs Crenomanorum, a Ci∣ty of the Dukedom of Milan, which is a Bishop's See under that Archbishop and stands upon the Po, in the Borders of the Dukedom of Parma, forty Miles from Mantua to the East, and the same distance from Mi∣lan to the South-East. This City was built 445 Years after Rome, and made afterwards a Roman Co∣lony; it has been often ruined, and rebuilt; at present a strong, great, rich, populous City; and has a strong Castle to the East, with an University granted by Si∣gismund the Emperor. The Territory belonging to it is a fruitful delicious Plain, having on the North and East the River Ollio, on the South the Po, (where there are several Districts beyond that River belonging to it,) and on the West the River Abdua. The French and Modenese besieged this City in 1648. but were not able to take it. Crempen, Crempa, a small but fortified City in the Dukedom of Holsatia, in the County of Stormaren, up∣on the River of that Name; not above one Mile from the River Elb to the North, about ten Danish Miles from Lubec to the West, and fifteen from Embden to the East. This belongs to the King of Denmark. Crequi, a Seigniory in Artois, upon the Confines of Picardy, giving Name to an honourable Family which has been famous for divers illustrious Persons. Cressy, See Creci. Crespi, Crepiacum, the chief Town of the Duke∣dom de Valois, in the Isle of France; built in a fine Plain; seven Miles from Meaux to the North, and three from la Ferte. Francis I. and the Emperor Charles V. held a Treaty of Peace here in 1544. Crest, Crestidium, & Crista Arnaldi, a City in the Dauphinate in France, upon a River of the same Name, two Miles from the Some to the East, and twenty two from Avignon to the North. Fortified with a Castle and a Tower. Creta. See Candia. Crevant, Crevantium, a Town in Burgundy in France, upon the North Side of the River Sure, in the North-West Border of that Dutchy, two Miles from Auxerre to the North, and twenty three from Dijon to the North-West. In 1423. there was a sharp Fight here between the English and the French, with the Victory, by Confession, to the English. There is a Stone-Bride over the Sure here. Creuse, Crosa, a River in France, which riseth in la Marche; and running to the North West, enter∣eth Berry, and passeth through the Town of Black in the Borders of Berry; then entering Touraine, it falls (having in this Course received the Little Creuse and some other Rivers) into the Loyre, at ndes a∣bove Saumur. Crewkern, a Market Town in Somersetshire; the Capital of its Hundred: Seated on the Banks of the River Parret. Written also Crokehorn. Crickhowel, a Market-Town in the County of Brecknock in Wales; the Capital of its Hundred. The Marquess of Worcester has a Castle here. Crim Tartary, or the Precopensian Tartars, is a vast Tract of Land, bounded on the North by Russia, (from which it is parted by the River Donetz in great part, and also by Ockraina and Dikoia,) on the East by Pervolock, on the South by the Kingdom of A∣starcan, the Petigori, Cabardia, the Palus Meotis, and Euxine Sea; and on the West by the Boristhenes, which parts it from Wolynia. Extended vastly from East to West, but not so broad. The chief Force of it lies in the Peninsula in the Black Sea. These Tartars have been heretofore Christians, but now Ma∣hometans, and the inseparable Allies of the Turks, in hopes to succeed upon the failure of the Ottoman House; otherwise they live under a Prince of their own. See Krim. Crincon, Crientio, a River of Artois, near Arras. Crinisus, a River in the West of the Island of Sicily, springing in the Valley of Mazara, twenty five Miles from Palermo; and afterwards falling into the Sea of Tunis. Now called Il Belicidestro. Crismato, Phaenus, a Mountain in Normandy. Croatia, Liburnia, a Dukedom belonging to the Emperor of Germany, call'd by the Germans Cra∣baten, and is a part of the Kingdom of Hungary Bounded on the North by Sclavonia, on the East by Bosnia, on the South by Dalmatia and the Adriatick Sea, and on the West by Carniola a Province of Germany. The Turks were heretofore possessed of all the Southern Parts of it; but the Emperor has lately recovered them. The Inhabitants are excellent Horsemen, and have of late done great Service against the Turks. Crocodilon, an ancient City in the Kingdom of Aegypt, upon the Banks of the Nile, in the Country called Thebais. They adored the Crocodiles as Gods (in the vulgar Opinion) at this Place, and therefore it came to take their Name. Croia, the principal City of Albania; a Bishop's See under the Archbishop of Durazzo, Dyrrhachium, upon the River Lisana; within ten English Miles of the Adriatick, thirty from Durazzo to the North, about a hundred and ten South of Ragusa. It was heretofore very strong. George Castriot, commonly called Scanderbeg, often broke the Fury of the Ot∣toman Forces here; but after his Death it fell into their Hands.
Cromer, a Market-Town in the County of Nor∣folk, in the Hundred of North Erpingham, lying to the Sea. Croncarty, a Sea-Port-Town in Ross in Scotland, upon the Eastern Sea, at the North Point of Murray Fyrth. Cronenburg, Coronaeburgum, a strong Castle in Zealand, belonging to the King of Denmark: taken by the Swedes in 1658. but since restored again. At this place (which was built by Frederick II. King of Denmark for the purpose, in 1577.) all Ships are forced to pay their Toll, which pass the Sound. Cronstat, Corona, a City of Transylvania, often called Brassovia, by the Inhabitants Brassaw; in the middle of the Eastern Borders of that Dutchy, to∣wards Walachia; at the foot of the Carpathian Mountains, upon the River Burzazgh. It is a strong Place, and has three great Suburbs, inhabited by three several Nations: forced to receive an Imperial Garri∣son, in May 1688. General Heusler in a Fight near this place, Aug. 21. 1690. suffered a great Defeat, wherein himself was taken Prisoner by the Tartars; who not knowing him, sold him to Count Teckeley, (who commanded the Action) for seventy Rix Dollars. Crosno, Crosna, a small City in the Black Russia in the Kingdom of Poland, in the Palatinate of Primyslie, near the Carpathian Hills and the Rivers Visloc and Jasiolde. Crossen, Crossa, a City in the Province of Silesia, and Kingdom of Bohemia, upon the River Oder; where it entertains the River Borber from the South; about ten Miles above Franckfort. This is the Capital of a small Dukedom, which being many Ages ago mortgaged to the Duke of Brandenburg, and not redeemed in due time, has ever since been in his Possession. Crotona, an ancient City in the Further Calabria in Italy, which is now a Bishops See under the Arch∣bishop of Regio. Milo and several other famous Ath∣letae were Natives of this place: in whose times it was no less than twelve Miles in circuit. Croty, a Sea-Port on the North side of the Somme in Picardy, two French Miles from Asselane to the South, and the same distance from Caen in Normandy to the North. Crouch, one of the little Rivers of the County of Essex. Crow, or le Crou, Crodoldus, sometimes called Gonnesse, is a River in the Isle of France; which ari∣sing above a Village called Louvre, five Miles East from St. Dennis, falls into the Seine, at S. Dennis. Crowland, a Market Town in Lincolnshire in the Hundred of Ellow upon the River Weeland, in a very fenny low ground. The best Streets of it are severed from each other (not unlike Venice) by inter∣jacent Water-courses; and the Causeys leading to it, so narrow, that no Carts can possibly pass: which may justifie the Proverb, saying, All the Carts which come to Crowland are shod with Silver. Croy, a Village in Picardy, two or three Leagues from Amiens, giving its Name to a Family of Ho∣nor in the Low Countreys. Croydon, or Croyden, Neomagus, a Market Town in Surrey, the Capital of its Hundred; seated near the Spring head of the River Wandle, nine Miles from London, where the Archbishop of Canterbury has a Countrey House: it has an Hospital for the Poor, and a Free-School for Children, founded by Archbishop Whitgift. Crumaw or Crumeaw, Crumaviae, a Town in the Province of Moravia in Germany, betwixt Brin and Znaim: adorned with the Title of a Dukedom, and a fine Castle. Crussol, a Seigniory in the Province of Vivaretz in France, near the Rhosne, giving its Name and the Title of Earl to an Honourable Family. Cresiphon, an ancient Town of the Kingdom of Assyria, near the Tygris, said to be built by the Par∣thians. Cuama or Coama, a River of the Kingdom of Sofala in Africa, said to derive its Source from the Lake of Sachaf (where it has the Name of Zamber) towards the Mountains of the Moon: the same Lake, that the Moderns take to be the Head of the Nile. Cuba, an Island in the Bay of Mexico in America, to the South of Florida; which is one of the greatest that belongs to that part of the World. It has on the East Hispaniola, (divided from it by a Bay of the breadth of fourteen Spanish Leagues,) on the West the firm Land of America, on the South Ja∣maica at the distance of nineteen Leagues. In length two hundred Spanish Leagues, in breadth not above thirty five. The greatest part of it is Mountainous, but well watered. Infinitely peopled, when the Spa∣niards discovered it; but they destroy'd all the In∣habitants, and have not been able yet to people it themselves, so that the greatest part is desolate. This and Jamaica were the first Places of America which Columbus discovered in 1492. There are six Cities in this Island; the principal of which is St. Jago, on the South side; and Havana, a noble and well forti∣fied Sea-Port on the North side; under the Tropick of Cancer. Cuckfield or Cuxfield, a Market Town in Sussex in Lewis Rape. Cuco, a strong City by Situation (upon a high Hill) in the Kingdom of Algiers in Africa, towards the River Major. The Soil it stands in affords plenty of all things necessary for humane life. Cucusa, an ancient City of Armenia the Less up∣on the Frontiers of Cilioia and Cappadocia, having formerly born the honour of an Episcopal See: and the more remark'd in History, for being the place whither S. John Chrysostom was banished by the order of the Empress Eudoxa. Cuenca, Conca, a City of New Castile in Spain, which is a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of To∣ledo; the Capital of La Sierra. It stands in a Rocky and Mountainous Country, upon the River Xucar, twenty five Leagues East from Toledo, and thirty four West from Valencia. Built by the Goths out of the Ruines of a Roman City called Valeria, not far di∣stant. The Moors became next Masters of it, and kept it till 1177. when the Spaniards recovered it again. Cueva, a Town in the Kingdom of Castile in Spain, giving its Name there to a Family of Honor. Cufa, a City of Chaldaea or Yerach in Asia, upon the West side of Euphrates; sixty Miles South from Bagdet, or Babylon, on the Borders of Arabia De∣serta, and heretofore the Residence of the Califfs: after that it was under the Persians; and at present under the Turks, being much declined from its ancient Splendor, Wealth and Greatness. Long. 79. 10. and Lat. 32. 00. forty five German Miles above Balsera North. Cuhiung, a City and Territory of the Province of Junnan in China, having Jurisdiction over six other old Cities, and standing in a fruitful and pleasant Country that is provided with Mines of Silver and Precious Stones. Cujavio, Cujavia, a Province of the Kingdom of Poland, bounded on all sides by the greater Poland; but the North, where it has Prussia. The chief Town is Brestia, Brezestie, ten Miles from Thorn to the South, and thirty from Damzick.
Culhu, Cullus, a Town and Port upon the Medi∣terranean in the Kingdom of Tunis in Africa, where the River Collo or Culhu is discharged into the Sea; betwixt Hipone and Bugia. Culliton, a Market Town in Devonshire; the Ca∣pital of its Hundred. Culm, a City of Poland, upon the Vistula, in Prussia, built upon a Hill. This is a Bishops See, un∣der the Archbishop of Gnesa, though heretofore under the Archbishop of Riga: built in 1223. by the Knights of the Teutonick Order; but having suffered much in the Swedish Wars, it is now almost desolate, and the Bishop has removed his Palace to Colme, three Miles more to the East. Culm stands twenty Miles South of Dantzick, and ten North from Waldislaw; and is the Capital of a little Country adjacent, called by the Inhabitants Colmischland. Culembach, Culembachium, a small Town in Franconia, upon the River Mayn, near the Rise of it; six Miles from Bamberg East, and as many from Co∣berg South-East; the Capital of a Marquisate belong∣ing to the Duke of Brandenburg; and part of the Burgravate of Noremburg; between the Territory of Bamberg to the West, Misnia to the North, Bohe∣mia and Bavaria to the East, and Norimburg to the South: belonging also to the Duke of Bran∣denburg. Culembourg, Culemburgum, a Town and Castle in Guelderland, belonging to the United Provinces; yet as to the Revenue possessed by its own Count: it stands on the River Rhine, above two German Miles from Ʋtrecht to the South-East, and six from Nime∣guen to the West. Taken by the French in 1672. and dismantled in 1674. Culiacan, a Province in New Spain in America, within the Jurisdiction of the Governor of Gua∣dalaxara; between New Mexico to the North, New Biscay to the East, and the Purple Sea to the South and West. It has a City of the same Name. Cuma, Cumae, once a Colony and famous City of Italy, in the Kingdom of Naples; which in 1207. was utterly ruined by the Saracens. The Ruines of it are yet visible, upon an Hill, on the Tyrrheman Sea, twelve Miles from Naples to the North-West. In the latter times of the Roman Empire, this City was won∣derfully fortified; so that Narses the General of Ju∣stinian could not take it without a tedious Siege: and at this day the Ruines of it are wonderful: many Noble Antiquities are to be seen amongst them. The Bishops See, that was fixed here, is united with that of Avera. Virgil speaks of an admirable Temple of Apollo and a Fortress that adorned this City in An∣cient Times. Neither must it be forgotten, that the Sibylla Cumana, her Grott being in the neigh∣bourhood, took her Title from hence: whose Verses prophesied so favourably of our Saviour, that Julian the Apostate thought fit to order them to be burnt. § The Ancients mention other places of the same Name. One, upon the Gulph of Smyrna in Asia Minor, now called Foya Nova, betwixt Smyrna and Pergamus; accommodated with a Port and Fortress. Near to which, the Venetian Fleet obtain'd a Victory over the Turks in the year 1650. Of the rest, nothing said. Cumberland, is the most North-Western County of England; on the North bounded by Scotland; on the South and West it has the Irish Sea; and on the East Lancaster, Westmorland, the Bishoprick of Dur∣ham and Northumberland. It took its Name from the Inhabitants who being of the old British Race, called themselves Kumbri or Kambri. The Coun∣try though cold and uneven, is yet not unpleasant to the Traveller. And it affordeth great plenty of Corn, Cattle, Fish, Fowl and Metals: nor is it destitute of many Roman Antiquities, the Reliques of the Roman Garrisons who lay here to defend Britain from the devouring Picts. The principal City is Carlisle. Prince Rupert whilst he lived was Duke of Cumberland by the Creation of King Charles I. his Uncle, 1643. He dying without Issue November 30. 1682. that Honor is now in the Person of his Royal Highness Prince George of Denmark. It became a Dukedom from an Earldom. For in the year 1525. H. VIII. conferred the Title of Earl of Cumberland upon Henry Lord Clifford, in whose Family it continued from thence to 1642. The Eden is the principal River of this County. Cuneo, Cuneus: See Coni. Cuningham, a County of Scotland, on the Western Shoar over against the Isle of Arran; on the West it has the Irish Sea, on the North Dunbritoun Fyrth, (which parts it from Lentieth), on the East Cluyds∣dale, and on the South Kile. The chief Town is Largis on the Irish Sea, seventeen Scotch Miles from Glasco to the West. Cunsar, one of the Names of the Hyrcanian Sea. Curacao or Curassaw, one of the Islands known by the Name of Sottovento in the South America, over against the Province of Venezuela, betwixt Ora∣ba and Bonnaire. Taken from the Spaniards by the Dutch in 1632. Curdistan, Chaldaea, a vast Province in Asia, un∣der the Dominion of the Turks, but upon the Borders of the Kingdom of Persia; containing Chaldaea, part of Assyria towards Media, and a great part of Arme∣nia Major. The Western Bounds are closed by the River Euphrates, and the Eastern by the Tigris; ha∣ving Tarcomania to the North, and Alidulia to the South. The Curdes, a People partly Mahometans, Hea∣thens, and Christians, take their Name from, and dwell in this Province. The ancient Chaldaea was divided into two parts; the one, North of Mesopotamia, in which Ʋr stood the Country of Abraham: the other, South of Babylon, near Arabia Deserta; a large Cham∣pion Country in which the Philosophers lived and flourished, whose same became extended over all the East; and whose enquiries gave the first birth to A∣stronomy, Astrology, Magick, Philosophy and Theo∣logy. Babylon was the Capital of the ancient Chaldaea. La Cure, Cora, Chora, a River of France, arising in the Dukedom of Burgundy, and flowing through Nivernois, Vezelay or Verzelet and Clamessy, at Vermenton, just opposite to Crevant in the Dutchy of Burgoigne, falls into the Sure. Cures, an ancient Town of the Sabines in Italy; from whence the Name of Quirites became derived to the Romans; and remarkable also for being the Birth∣place of Numa Pompilius. It is thought Vescovio was afterwards built upon the Ruines of this Town. Curetes, a Name of the ancient People of the Island of Crete. Curiale, Dianae Oraculum, a small Town on the Coast of Arabia Foelix, towards the Persian Gulph; about twenty seven Miles to the North-West of Cape Raz, the most Eastern Point of that Country, and and eight from Mascate a City. Curland, Curlandia, a Province of Livonia, cal∣led by the Germans Kureland, by the Dutch Coer∣landt, by the French Courlande, is bounded on the East by Semigalen, on the South by Samogithia, and on the North and West by the Baltick Sea. This Country belonged anciently to the Teutonick Order; but Sigismund Augustus King of Poland, in 1587. forced Gothardus Ketler Master of that Order, to re∣nounce their Right; and hold it, together with Se∣migalen, as a Fee of the Crown of Poland. So that ever since it has been separated from Livonia, and an∣nexed to that Crown; and is still in the Possession of the Family of Ketlers, as Dukes of Curland, and
Subjects to the Crown of Poland. The Capital City of it is Goldingen. Curresi, Avens, a River of Italy, in the State of the Church, in the Diocese of Sabina; between Cam∣pania to the South, and Ʋmbria to the North. It watereth S. Lorenzo and the Abby di Farfa; and then falls into the Tyber, fifteen Miles North of Rome. Curta, a Village of Hungary upon the Danube, between Comora and Gran. It is a Roman Town ruined. Curzola, Corcyra Nigra, an Island of the Adria∣tick Sea, on the Coast of Dalmatia, under the Domi∣nion of the State of Venice; which is twenty five Miles in length from North to South, and five in breadth. It has a small City or Town of the same Name, which is a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Raguza: and there are five other small Villages in it. It lies only five Miles from Cape Cabiccello, a Promontory of Dalmatia. Le Curzolari, Echinades, Echinae, five small Islands over against the Mouth of the Gulph of Le∣panto. Near to which, the Christians gain'd that Sig∣nal Naval Victory over Selim II. his Fleet in 1571. in the Battel, called the Battel of Lepanto. Cusa, an ancient City of Nubia in Africa. And a River of the same Name in the Kingdom of Mo∣rocco. Cusco, Cuscum, a great City of Peru in the South America, one hundred and twenty Miles East from Lima. It was the Royal City of the Kings of Peru, adorned with a stately Temple dedicated to the Sun, and divers noble Palaces and an admirable Fortress, when the Spaniards conquered it; but now dispeo∣pled and ruined. Yet it is a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Lima. Cussit, a Province in Aethiopia. Custrin, Custrinum, a City in the Marquisate of Brandenburg, on the East side of the River Oder, where it receives the Warta; four Miles North from Franckfort: a very strong Place. Cuzagne, a small Territory or District in Aqui∣taine in France. Cuzt, a large Province of the Kingdom of Fez in Africa, lying eighty Leagues along the River Gurey∣gure as far as to the River Esaha, East of the Pro∣vince of Temesen; and containing all the courses of the Mountain Atlas betwixt those two Rivers. Cyclades, a Circle of little Islands in the Archipe∣lago, surrounding the Island of Delos: call'd Paros, Andros, Zea, Micoli, Naxia, Quiniminio, &c. Cyclopes, the original Inhabitants of the Island of Sicily, living about Mount Aetna; whose extra∣ordinary height mixt with fierceness, occasioned many Fictions amongst the Poets. Cydnus, a River of Cilicia in Asia the Less, pas∣sing by Cogni and Tharsus. Alexander the Great took a desperate Sickness by bathing in it; and some say, the Emperor Frederick Barberaosse died of the coldness of its Water, as he returned from the East in the year 1100. Cydonia, the same with Canea in Candia. Cylley, Celia, a City of Stiria in Germany, upon the River Saana, which a little lower falls into the Save; it stands ten Miles from Lambach to the East, and as many from Draburgh to the South-East. The Capital of a County of the same Name, and belongs to the Emperor of Germany: there is in it two very strong Castles, and many Roman Antiquities are there∣abouts discovered. Cynopolis, an ancient City of the Kingdom of Egypt upon the Western part of the Nile; remark'd heretofore for the Worship of the God, called Anubis, in it. Cynthus, a Mountain in the Island of Delos, up∣on which the ancient Pagans built a celebrated Temple in the honour of Apollo; who together with Diana was supposed to be born here of Ltona. Cyparissa, an ancient Town of the Morea, that did belong to the Government of Messene; and im∣parted its Name to the Cape and Gulph adjacent. Cyprus, an Island of the Mediterranean Sea, cal∣led by the Turks and Arabians, Kubros: about sixty Miles North from the Shoars of Syria, and Anatolia; and extended in length from East to West two hun∣dred and twenty; its Circuit about five hundred and fifty. This Island is so very fruitful, the Air so plea∣sant, and the Hills abounding so with Metals, that it was by all the Ancients call'd The Happy Island. Am∣mianus Marcellinus saith, it could build a Ship and fraight her out to Sea, out of what grew here, with∣out the help of any other place. The first Inhabi∣tants were the Cilicians, who yielded to the Phenici∣ans, as these did to the Greeks: Ptolomy the last King of this Island, knowing that Cato was sent against him by the Romans, put an end to his own Life. It continued in the hands of the Greek Emperors till 656. when it was conquered by the Saracens. In 807. the Emperors recovered it; but Richard I. King of England, going to the Holy War, in 1191. and being ill used by the Inhabitants, made a Conquest of it for England; and gave it to Guy de Lusignan, whose Successors were dispossessed by the Templars in 1306. In 1472. the Venetians possessed themselves of it; in 1560. Selim the Grand Seignor gained it from them, whose Successor at this day enjoys it, not without some Confusion and, as occasion serves, Insurrection of the Inhabitants against the Turks. There are three considerable places in it; Merovige at the West end, Colosso on the South side, and Famagusta on the same side more to the East; and about eight hundred and fifty Villages. Cypsella, See Ipsala. Cyr, Ciropolis, Cyrus, the same with Carin. Cyrene, See Cairoan. Cythera, See Cerigo. Cyziqua, an ancient City of Asia, built in the twenty fourth Olympiad upon the Propontis and ho∣noured in the Primitive Ages of Christianity with a Metropolitan See under the Patriarch of Constanti∣nople. Over against the Ruines of it, stands a little Island, famous for the Marble that they call the Marble of Cyziqua. Czaslaw, Czaslavia, a very small City in Bohemia, upon the River Crudimka, nine Miles from Prague to the East, with a considerable Prefecture belonging to it. John Zisca, the famous Captain of the Hus∣sites, who so sharply revenged the deaths of John Hus and Jerome of Prague, was here buried. Czeben, See Hermanstat. Czenstokow or Czeschow, Chestocovia, a Town in Poland, upon the River Warta; twenty five Miles East of Breslaw, ten North-West of Cracovia. It is strong as well by Situation, as its Fortifications. Czeremissi, a Province, or rather a People of Mos∣covy: reduced under the Empire of the Grand Duke in the year 1552. Lying on both sides of the River Wolga, betwixt the Cities Novogorod-Nisi, and Casan. They are partly Mahometans and partly Pagans, of the Race of the Tartars. Czeremicz, Sulonia, a Town in Dalmatia. Czernikow or Czernishaw, Czernihovia, a City and Dutchy in Poland, upon the River Deszna, which falls into the Nieper at Kiovia, twenty eight Miles South-West of Szernikow, or Czernihow. This City is now in the hands of the Russ, as also the Dukedom thereunto belonging, called by the same name. They belonged originally to the Russ; and together with Novogrod, were conquered by Ʋladislaus IV. King of
Poland; so that the Russ has only recovered what was his own. Czernobel, a Town in the Palatinate of Volhinia in Poland upon the River Ʋsz; two or three Leagues from the Borysthenes, of little consideration. Czersk, a Palatinate; and Czesko, a City upon the Vistula, seven Polish Miles above Warzovia or War∣shaw. Czyrkassi, Czyrcassia, a strong Town in the Ʋ∣kraine upon the Nieper, twenty seven Polish Miles beneath Kiovia, towards the Euxine Sea: it has suf∣fered great Extremities of late years from the Cos∣sacks and Tartars, being a Frontier to both those People. Czyrknizerzee or Zirichnitz, Lugeum, a great Lake in the Province of Carniola in Germany; ex∣tended the space of four Miles betwixt the Woods and Mountains, towards Italy; full of Fish, ebbing and flowing extraordinarily, and begetting a fruit∣ful Soyl. D A DAbir or Debir, an ancient City of the Ana∣kims in Palestine near Hebron. It had been formerly call'd Kirjah-Sepher, i. e. the City of Lear∣ning, as we read Judg. 1. 11. And was first taken by Joshua, Josh. 11. 21. afterwards by Othniel, Judges 1. 13. with a reward of the General Caleb's Daugh∣ter given him to Wife for his Victory. Dabul, Dabulum, Dunga, a strong Maritime City with a large Port and a Castle, at the Mouth of the River Helevacho, in the Confines of the Kingdom of Guzarate; but under the King of Decan: between Daman to the North, and Goa to the South, in 20. deg. of Lat. Dacia, the ancient Appellation and Division of a large Country of Europe: bounded on the North by the Carpathian Mountains, and the River Preuth; on the East and South by the same River, together with the Danube; and by the Theysse on the West. It was divided into 1. Dacia Ripensis, which contained a part of the present Hungary and Walachia. 2. Dacia Alpestris, answering to another part of Walachia and to Moldavia. 3. Dacia Mediterranea or Ge∣pida, in which was comprehended the present Tran∣sylvania. The Albocensii, Sinsi, Taurissi, Piephigi, Biepti, &c. were the then Inhabitants of this Coun∣try, under the Government of Kings of their own; till Trajan, conquering Decebalus, reduced them in∣to a Roman Province in the year of Rome 98. and af∣fixed the Name of Colonia Ʋlpia Trajana to their Ca∣pital City, otherwise called Varhel or Zarmisoge∣thusa. The Greeks called this people, Getae: It was the Romans that derived the Title of Daci and Dacae upon them. Dacia also in the Monastick Writers is put abusively for Dania, Daci for Dani, and Daci∣cum for Danicum. In the University of Paris the Danish College is called Collegium Dacorum. The Marish and the Olt were the principal Rivers of Dacia. Dacha, Paropanisus, a Province in the Greater Asia. Dada, an ancient City of Pisidia in the Lesser Asia: otherwise by Ptolomy and Strabo written A∣data and Adadata. Dadastana, an ancient City of Bithynia in Asia the Less, upon the Confines of Galatia: remarkable for the death of the Emperor Jovian here. Dadivan, a delightful Plain four or five Leagues in Circuit in the Province of Farsistan in Persia, be∣tween Schiras and Lar: richly planted with Orange, Lemon, and Pomgranate Trees; and traversed by a Ri∣ver that affords plenty of Fish. The English and Dutch, residing at Ormus, are wont to pass the end of the Summer here for pleasure. Dafar, the Seat of the ancient Homeritae in Ara∣bia Foelix, upon the Arabian Sea. Daghestan or Dachestan, a Province between the Kingdom of Astracan to the North, and the Pro∣vince of Schirwan in Persia to the South: Inhabited by Tartars, under a Prince of their own, in security against Invasions by the means of inaccessible Moun∣tains. The principal City here is Tarku. Dagho, Daghoa, a small Island upon the Coast of Livonia, to the North of the Island of Oesel, in the Baltick Sea, at the mouth of the Bay of Riga, which has two Castles; and is under the King of Sweden. Dagno, Thermidava, a City of Dalmatia or Al∣bania, upon the River Drino. Dai or Daae, an ancient People of Scythia Asi∣atica upon the Caspian Sea, adjoining to the Mas∣sagetae. Dalanguer, Imaus. Dalecarle, Dalecarlia or Dalarne, a great Pro∣vince in the Kingdom of Sweden, towards the Moun∣tains of Savona and Norway, which bounds it on the West; on the North it hath Helsinga; Gestricia on the East, and Vermelandia on the South: a vast Coun∣try, but it has never a City or good Town in it. Ta∣king this Name from the River Dalecarle, which is one of the most considerable of all the Rivers of the Kingdom of Sweden. It is a Mountainous Country. Dalem, Dalemum, a small Town of the Dutchy of Limburg in the Low Countreys, under the Hol∣landers. It stands upon a Stream two Leagues from Liege, and three from Aix la Chapelle: fortified with a strong Castle, and adorned with the Title of an Earldom, and likewise enjoying a Jurisdiction over a Territory of many Villages beyond the Meuse. Dalia, a Province contained within Westrogothia in the Kingdom of Sweden, between the Lake of of Vener and the Prefecture of Bahuys. Dalebourg is the most considerable Town in it. Dallendorf, a Village and Castle in Eyfel, in the Dutchy of Juliers, which was the Seat of the ancient Taliates: sometimes called Tallenford. Dalmatia, the Eastern part of the ancient Illyri∣cum, called by the Ancients Delmio or Dalmatia, from a City of that Name, its Capital. The Inhabi∣tants of which revolting with about twenty Towns from the Kingdom of Epirus, called this small Di∣strict by the Name of Dalmatia. Afterwards it was conquered by the Romans, and after this by the Scla∣vonians: called by the Turks Bosnaeli, by the Poles Slowienska, by the Italians Schiavonia, by the French Dalmatie. That Country which now goes by the Name, is but a small part of the ancient Dalmatia; lying upon the Adriatick Sea, and bounded on the North by Croatia and Bosnia, on the East by Servia, on the South by Albania, and on the West by the Adriatick; in which Bounds Morlachia is included. In the year 1076. Pope Gregory VII. in a Council held at Salona, actually erected this Country into a Kingdom, by the Investiture of Demetrius, then Duke of Dalmatia, with all the Ensigns of Royalty. Now the greatest part is under the Turks, but the Sea-Coasts and Islands are in the hands of the Venetians, who have taken several Forts from the Turks in this present War. The Common-wealth of Ragusa lies in Dalmatia also; which is not subject either to the Turks or Venetians, though it payeth a voluntary Tribute to the former; but in 1686. they were very earnest with the Emperor of Germany by their Em∣bassador,
to undertake their Protection against the Turks. The Sclavonian Language is spoken by the Natives of Dalmatia. Dalton, a Market Town in Lancashire in the Hundred of Loynsdale; seated in a Champaign Coun∣try, not far from the Sea. Dam, a strong Town in Flanders, built of late years to secure Bruges against the Hollanders, from which it stands but one League towards the North. This is still in the hands of the Spaniard. § Dam, a strong Town in the Dukedom of Pomerania, upon the River Oder, right over against Stetin, which is in the Possession of the King of Sweden. § Dam, a Town in Gronningen, three Miles from the chief City of that Province to the East, and one from Delfziil to the West, seated upon Damsterdiep. Damala, Troezeu, once a City, now a small Town or Village on the Eastern Shoar of the Morea; twen∣ty seven Miles from Napoli to the North-East, and fourteen from Corinth to the South-East. Daman or Damaon, a celebrated Port on the West of Malabar in the Kingdom of Guzurate, upon the Coast of the Gulph of Cambaia, twenty Leagues from Surate, in 20. deg. of Northern Latitude: in the hands of the Portuguese; who built it, and have so strongly fortified it, that the Great Mogul in vain of late besieged it with forty thousand men. Damascus, is the principal and the most ancient Town in Syria: seated in a Plain upon the Chry∣sorrhoas, or a River called the Golden Stream by the Ancients; surrounded with Mountains, one hundred and forty Miles from Jerusalem to the South, and Antioch to the North. This City is so ancient, that it is not known when or by whom it was built; but it is mentioned by Abraham. In the succeeding Ages of the World, it followed the Fate of Syria, succes∣sively subject to all the four great Empires, and fa∣mous under all. But then the Conversion of S. Paul, which happened in part near and in part within this City, is one of the greatest things that has in the Course of so many Ages befallen it. This was also one of the first great Cities the Saracens took from the Romans, after a Siege of six Months, in 636. by O∣mar the Successor of Abubecher. In 813. it was made the Seat of one of their Califs. Babylon being the second, and Grand Cairo the third. Conra∣dus III. Emperor of Germany attempted in 1147. to reduce it, without any good Success, by reason of the Divisions amongst the Christians in the Holy Land. In 1298. it was taken by Cassan the Turk, and 30000 Saracens slain; but the Saracens soon after recove∣red it. About 1395. it became a Prey to that Flagel∣lum Dei, (Tamerlane) the great Scythian Conque∣ror: After this it was subject to the Sultans of Aegypt, till Selim I. about 1514. subjected it to the Ottoman Empire, under which it still is. This City is an Archbishop's See under the Patriarch of Antioch; the Seat of one of the Turkish Visiers; in a fruitful Val∣ley, so extreamly pleasant withal, as amongst many Writers to gain the Title of the Paradise of the World. Yet not mightily inhabited of later times; being more visited by Pilgrims of the Turkish and Christian Reli∣gions, than by Merchants. The Current of the Trade running by Aleppo, fifty Miles more North. It is now called by the Turks Scham. Long. 69. 00. Lat. 33. 00. Dambea, a City and Kingdom in Aethiopia in A∣frica, near the Fountains of the Nile; which has a Lake in it of the same Name, (twenty five French Leagues in Length, and fifteen in Breadth) incom∣passed on all sides by Mountains, out of which arise a vast Number of Rivers to form this Lake, called Bar-Dambea, the Sea of Dambea, in the Aethiopick Lan∣guage: And out of these Waters, thus united; the Nile springeth, at some Distance from the Moun∣ains. See Nile. There are twenty one Islands stand∣ing in this Lake; the chiefest of which is Dek. Damiata, a City of Egypt, upon one of the more Eastern Mouths of the Nile: Anciently called Tamia∣tis or Damiata, and now by the Arabians Damiat. This City stands on the opposite Shoar to Pelusium, and grew out of the Ruins of it. Taken by the Christians in 1218. But in 1221. they were forced to restore it, being involved in such Miseries by the Waters that were let loose upon them, that they must otherwise have perished. After this it was reta∣ken by Lewis IX. in 1249. who being afterwards taken Prisoner by the Sultan, was forced to restore it as his Ransom; after which the Saracens burnt it. This is an Archbishops See under the Patriarch of Alexandria; and now a great, well peopled City, and one of the Keys of that Country. Long. 63. 20. Lat. 31. 10. Dammartin, or Dampmartin, Domnum Marti∣num, a Town in the Province of the Isle of France near Paris. Adorned with a Collegiate Church; and fa∣mous in French History for the Earls of the House that derive their Name from it. Damor, Leon, a River in Phoenicia, which ariseth from Mount Lebanon, and falls into the Mediterra∣nean Sea, between Sydon and Bayrut. Damut, Damot, or Damout, a Kingdom of the higher Aethiopia, heretofore under the Abissins; but now torn from them by the Gala's. Its Situation is towards the Lake of Zaire. There are many Golden Mines in it; and a City, the Capital, of the same Name. Dampierre, a Barony in the Territory of Aunis in France, upon the River Boutonne or Voltunna. Damvillers, Damvillerum, or Danvilliers, Dan∣villerium, a strong Town in Luxemburgh, upon the River Maes, seated upon a Hill, five Leagues from Verdun to the North, and about eight German Miles from Thionville to the West. Taken by the French in 1637. and annexed to the Dutchy of Lorrain; but in 1673. dismantled. Danambre. See the Nieper. Danby, an ancient Castle in the Tract of Cleveland in the North-Riding of Yorkshire; seated near a large Park and Chase of the same Name. First advanced to the Dignity of an Earldom by King Charles I. in the Person of Henry Danvers of the Line of the Lord Latimer, to whom this Castle did anciently belong: and afterwards upon the Default of Issue from the said Henry, in the Person of Thomas Osborn, crea∣ted by King Charles II. Baron of Kineton and Vis∣count Latimer in 1673. and Earl of Danby the year after: The now Marquess of Caermarthen, from King William. Dandalii, an ancient People of Germany, of great Power in the twelfth Century; and so addicted to their Paganism, that VValdemar King of Denmark with the Princes of Pomerania and Saxony were ob∣liged to force them by Sea and Land to hear Christia∣nity preached amongst them. Dangala, or Dancala, a City of the Ʋpper Ae∣thiopia, upon the Nile, in the Tract of Nubia, (whereof it is the Capital) and in the Kingdom of Gorhani, towards the North. Long. 52. Lat. 10. Danneberg, or Daneberg, a Town and County in the Dukedom of Lunenburgh, upon the River Tetza, four Miles from the Elb, and seven from Lu∣nenburgh to the South-East. The Town has a Ca∣stle belonging to it. The County belongs to the Duke of Zell, and is extended from East to West upon the Elb, between the Dukedom of Mecklenburgh to the North, the Marquisate of Brandenburg to the South and East, and the Dukedom of Lunenburgh to the West. It had heretofore Earls of its own; but Ni∣colas,
the last of them, in 1303. sold it to Otto Duke of Brunswick: Of latter Times it was under the Duke of VVolfembuttel, and by him was granted in 1671. to the Duke of Zell. Dantsick, Dantzik, Dantiscum, Gedanum, cal∣led by the Inhabitants and Poles Danske, and Dan∣zig by the Germans; is a vast well fortified City of Poland; the Capital of Prussia, in the little Pome∣rania, with a noble Haven and Castle upon the Vistu∣la which a League below dischargeth it self into the Bay of Dantzick, a Part of the Baltick Sea. So watered by two other Rivers, the Rodaun and the Motlau; towards the South and West it has some Hills, which in 1656. were first fortified against the Swedes. This City is Imperial and Free, belonging originally to the Empire. Primislaus King of Poland, in 1295. first walled it against the Knights of the Teutonick Order, as Cromerus saith, lib. 11. After this it was betrayed to the Marquess of Brandenburgh by one Peter Chancellor of Pomerania, who being in wrath with Ʋladislaus Lochicus his Master, King of Poland, and the Castle thereupon surprised by the Teutonick Order, (who pretended to assist Ʋladislaus) they demanded a vast Sum of Money, which the Citi∣zens refusing to pay, they proceeded to take the Ci∣ty, to plunder and slay great Numbers of the Inha∣bitants. In 1310. Sigismundus Augustus took away half the Customs upon their Disrespect to his Ambas∣sador, who was sent to quiet them, then in Tumult and Disorder: He reserved also the greater Causes to the Determination of the Diet of Poland, contrary to the Privilege granted by Casimirus his Predecessor. In 1569. Stephanus King of Poland, proscrib'd them, for taking part with the House of Austria against him; which Quarrel was ended by the Mediation of the Neighbouring Princes. In 1597. Ʋladislaus IV. had also some Controversies with this City about their Im∣posts. The Protestant Religion is imbraced here, the Roman Catholick tolerated. No Man is admitted into the Senate, except he be a Luthoran. In 1596. the Senate granted the Jesuits the Monastery of S. Bridget, and S. Maries Church; but the City op∣posed it so vigorously, that three Days after they were forced to recall their Edict. In 1657. this City was forced to burn her own Suburbs to prevent their being taken by the Swedes. It lies in Long 41. 30. Lat. 54. 20. Danube, Danubius, Ister, is one of the greatest Rivers in Europe, and no less celebrated both in An∣cient and Modern Story: Called Danubius and Ister, whence Ovid. lib. 1. de Pont. Stat vetus Ʋrbs ripae vicina Binominis Istri. The upper part next the Fountains, was for the most part called the Danube; and the lower from Illyri∣cus or Sclavonia, the Ister, as Pliny saith; by the Germans Donaw, by the French Danube, by the Italians Danubio, by the Poles Dunay, by the Turks Tunay. It ariseth in the County of Bar in Suabia, sour German Miles from Freiburgh to the East, and nine from Basil to the North-East; running North-East, it passes by Ʋlm, having received a great many smaller Rivers on both Sides, which for Brevity I must omit. At Leucy it entereth Bavaria, and a little fur∣ther from the South receiveth the Leck, which passeth by Ausprugh; and still continuing its Course as far as Regensburgh, it then turns and runs more Easterly to the Confines of Austria, where at Passaw it enter∣tains the vast River Inn, which comes from Inspruck, and brings many other with it; from hence it goeth to Vienna, where it makes an Island; then washeth the Walls of Presburgh the Capital of the Ʋpper Hungary, where it divides and makes the Island of Schut: at Comora it unites again, and goes on to Gran, bending its Course more Southerly; from whence it passeth to Buda the Capital of all Hunga∣ry, where it makes two other Islands, one above Bu∣da, and another a little below Colocza. The Sara∣witz, which comes from Alba-Regalis, falls into it from the West; then the Drave at Esseck; then the Tibiscus a vast River of Ʋpper Hungary from the East; and the Save again on the West by Belgrade, which is the first Town of Servia: from hence its Course is more East, having Moldavia, VValachia, and Bialogrod on the North, Servia and Bulgaria on the South; where it makes many Isles, and then entereth the Euxine or Black Sea by three great Outlets; the two more Northerly, being as it were reunited in the very Entry of them into the Sea. Dr. Edward Browne, in his Travels, saith; That at Crainburgh, not far distant from the Head, it appea∣red a considerable Stream; a little after from the City Ʋlm in Suevia, where it beginneth to be Navigable, it continues a long Course; passing by Ingolstad, Ra∣tisbone, Straubing, Passaw, Lintz and Vienna, un∣to Presburgh; from whence through Hungary it makes a Course of above three hundred Miles, before it passes by Belgrade. It drinks in above sixty con∣siderable Rivers; and in a sober Account performs a Course of above 1500 Miles, from its Rise to its Fall. This River has had many Naval Fights upon it between the Turks and Christians. At one time there were twenty Galliots, eighty small Pinnaces, and little less than a hundred Ships of Burthen employed upon it, in a Siege of Buda. At the Siege of Belgrade, Mahomet the Great brought two hundred Ships and Galleys up the Stream; the Hungarians sent so many from Buda down the Stream, that after a sharp En∣counter, the Hungarians took twenty, and forced the rest on shoar near the Camp; so that Mahomet was forced to burn them to prevent their being taken by the Christians. This perhaps is more than can be said of any other River in the World. It abounds in good Fish, as Trouts, Perches, large and delicious Carps, exceeding (saith Dr. Browne) any I have seen, &c. some of which is every Year salted, and sent into other Parts. This River, to conclude, was for many Ages the Boundary on this Side of the Ro∣man Empire, and against the barbarous Nations; ac∣cordingly the Roman Legions had their Stations upon its Banks: they were the Founders of many of the Cities; and many memorable Actions in those early Days happened near it, sometimes between the Ro∣mans themselves, and sometimes between them and the Barbarians. Danvilliers. See Damvilliers. Daphne, a delightful Village of old in Syria, upon the Banks of the River Orontes, five Miles from Antioch the Great. Where was a large famous Cypress▪Wood consecrated to Apollo, with a Temple to his Honour also, and another to Diana; and a Spring called the Fountain of Daphne. The Romans for some time kept a Legion here, till they found their Men effemi∣nated by the Pleasures of the Place. Pompey the Great, charmed with its Beauty, became a Benefactor to it. Constantine M. built a House of Pleasure in it in the Year 326. Gallus caused the Body of the Martyr Babylas, the Patriarch of Antioch, to be transported hither; whereupon it is said Apollo surceased his Oracle. Julian the Apostate comman∣ded the said Body to be removed in 362. After which the Temple of Apollo was so consumed in a Storm of Thunder and Lightning, that in S. Chrysostom's time only one Pillar, now nothing is remaining thereof. And the Christian Emperors succeeding Julian ere∣cted Churches in its Room. Darbon, Alpheus, a River in the middle of the Morea, which falls into the Ladon (which falls into the Orfea,) and divides at Pilus: one Branch called
Illiaco, runs West, and entereth the Ocean over a∣gainst Zant; the other (Alpheo) runs South, and en∣tereth the Gulph of Arcadia, over against the Town of Stroffhad, 20 Miles North-West of Arcadia. Darby, Derby, Derbia, is both a City and a County in England. The County has Nottingham∣shire on the East, Leicestershire on the South, Staf∣fordshire on the West, and Yorkshire on the North. The River Derwent divides it into two Parts, run∣ning North and South, and at last falls into Trent, which is its Southern Boundary. That Part which lies East of Derwent is plain and fruitful; the We∣stern Parts are more mountainous and barren, but a∣bound in Mines of Lead, Iron, Coals, and afford good Pasture for Sheep. In the South-East Part of this County upon the River Derwent, lieth the City of Derby, which first takes its Name from the River, and then lends it to the County: A fine, rich, well∣traded City. On the East Side it has Derwent, cove∣red by a Stone-Bridge; on the South it hath a clear Rivolet called Mertenbrook: and within it five Pa∣rish-Churches. Thomas Lord Stanley was created Earl of Darby in 1486. by Henry VII. in the first Year of his Reign. The present VVilliam Stanley, who is the ninth Earl of this Family (and the fourth of England) succeeded Charles his Father in 1672. A Title heretofore enjoyed, first by the Earls of Fer∣rers and Darby, and afterwards by several Princes of the Royal Family. Darda, a strong Fort at the North end of the Bridge of Esseck, built by the Turks in 1686. and taken by the Germans when they burnt the Bridge: Retaken by the Duke of Lorrain in 1687. and de∣signed to be fortified, but soon after deserted rather, that the Turks might have a free Passage to their ruin, as came to pass Aug. 12. 1687. when they received the greatest Overthrow near this Place, which has be∣fallen them in this last Century. See Mohatz. The Dardanelles, Dardanium, Dardania, are two Castles built by Mahomet II. The one in Europe, where anciently stood Cestos; the other in Asia, in the place of Abidos, upon the streightest part of the Helespont. They stand two hundred Miles South of Constantinople, as being the Keys of that City. The famous Monsieur Thevenot, who saw them in 1655. thus describes them (as he is translated). That which is in Romania, on the Side of Europe, is built in a triangular Form, at the Foot of an Hill, which com∣mands and covers it; where there is a little Town. This Castle hath three Towers covered with Lead, whereof two are towards the Land, and the third which is the biggest, upon the Harbor. It hath (said he) as I could discern with a Perspective-Glass, about twenty Port-holes▪ level with the Water; in which, besides what I could observe by my Glasses, I was as∣sured that a Man might easily creep into some of the Guns, they were of such a prodigious Bore. The o∣ther on the Asia Side is in a Plain, and seemed to me to be almost square. It hath three Towers on each Side, and a Dungeon or Platform in the Middle, but not so many Port-holes as the other. These Castles are of no Strength to Landward, being only designed against Ships, as Mr. Sandys and all observe; but they were kept by strong Garrisons. This Place is famous for the Loves of Hero and Leander, the Pas∣sage of Xerxes by a Bridge of Boats, the Passage of the Turks a little above these Castles; and of later times for three Naval Victories obtained here by the Venetians, in 1655, 1656, and 1657. Since that the Turks have built two other Castles, which bear just upon the entrance of the Hellespont, about three Miles more South than the old Dardanelles. That on Asia Side lieth not above two Miles from Troas upon a flat Ground. That on Europe, on the side of a Hill, with round Towers, and several Ascents after the old Fashion, as Mr. VVheeler observes; which, he saith, were built since Mr. Sandys's time, and in all probabi∣lity since 1655. upon the Occasion of those Venetian Victories. The Turks call Lepanto and Patras, at the entrance of the Bay or Gulph of Lepanto, the Dar∣danelles, by way of Allusion. There are two other such Castles call'd the Dardanelles of the Gulph of Larta in Epirus, eighty English Miles North-West from Lepanto. Dardania, the ancient Name of a Country in the upper Maesia, which became afterwards a part of Dacia, and now makes properly the South Quarter of the Province of Servia, wherein Nizza and Ʋscopia stand. § Also an ancient Town and Province of Troas in Asia the Less, mentioned by Mela, Pliny, &c. Darha, a Country, City, and River in the Divi∣sion of Biledulgeridia in Africa. The River is subject to an annual Inundation, which begin∣ning in April (if a great one) makes a fruit∣ful Year. Towards this River stands the City Darha in Darha properly so called, which is one of the three Parts this Country is divided into: the others being Itata and the Kingdom of Teslete. This Country lies between the Kingdom of Morocco, Tesset, and Segellomessa; under the Obedience of the King of Teslete, who is a Tributary to the Emperor of Morocco. It abounds particularly with excellent Palm-Trees. Daria, an ancient Episcopal City of Mesopotamia, fifteen Miles from Nisibin. It has also been called Anastasiopolis, and Anastasia, from its Founder, the Emperor Anastasius. Darien, a City upon the Gulph of Ʋrraba with a great River in the Province of Terra Firma in the South America. The See of this City has been trans∣ferred thence to Panama, being not so considerable a Place as formerly. The River is otherwise called the River of S. John, and El Rio Darien. Darking, a Market-Town in Surrey, the Capital of its Hundred, upon a Branch of the River Mole; which at a Place, called the Swallow, by the Foot of a Hill here falls under Ground and rises again the Distance of a Mile thence, near Norbury. Darlington, a Market-Town in the Bishoprick of Durham; the Capital of its Wapentake; with a fair Bridge over the River Skerne, where there runs another small Rivulet into it. Darmstad, Darmstadium, a Town and Landgra∣vate in the County of Gerawer in Franconia, upon the River Darmstad, which has a fine Castle; where the Landgrave of Gerawer or Darmstad resides. It stands two Miles from the Rhine, and three from Francfort on the Mayn towards the South. And belongs to a Branch of the House of the Landgraves of Hesse, thence entituled, the Princes of Hesse-Darmstad. Daroca, a Town in the Kingdom of Arragon in Spain, upon the River Xiloca, four or five Leagues from Calatajud, and about ten from Saragossa. Dartford, a large Market-Town in Kent in Sut∣ton Lath upon the River Darent, not far from the Influx thereof into the Thames. The Rebellion of John Tyler (alias Jack Straw,) in the Reign of Richard II. in 1381. began here. Darwent, a River in Darbyshire; another in Cumberland; and a third in Yorkshire. Sir Francis Ratcliff of Dilston in the County of Cumberland, was made Earl of Darwent-VVater, by K. James II. August 24. 1687. Baron of Tindale, and Viscount Ratcliff and Langley. See Derwent. Daventry, a Market and great Road-Town in Nor∣thamptonshire, in the Hundred of Fauseley, upon a Ri∣vulet that falls into the Nen.
Daulia, Daulis, an ancient City of Phocis in Achaia, not far from Delphi to the South. It has sometime been a Bishop's See under the Archbishop of Athens; now ruined. § A second in Macedonia, whose modern Name is Eladasagni. Dauphine, Allobroges, Delphinatus, a great Pro∣vince in the South-East part of France; bounded on the East by Piedmont, on the North by Savoy and La Bresse, from which it is separated by the River Rhosne; on the West by Lion and Vivarais, from which the same River divides it; and on the South by Provence. It had heretofore Princes of its own, cal∣led the Daulphines; but Humbartus II. their last Prince, in 1343. gave this Principality to Philip de Valois King of France, upon Condition that the eldest Son of the King of France should bear this Title, which has been ever since observed. The principal City is Grenoble. Dax▪ See Acqs. The Dead-Sea. See Asphaltites. Deal, a Member of the Town and Port of Sand∣wich in Kent; of Note for the Harbouring of Fleets from time to time here, in Order to sail East or West. Dean. See the Forest of Dean. Dean-Magna, a Market-Town in Glocestershire, in the Hundred of S. Briavells Deben, a River in Suffolk, upon which VVood∣bridge and Debenham stand. It discharges it self into the Sea twelve Miles below the latter. Debenhan, a Market-Town in Suffolk, in the Hundred of Thedwastree, upon the River Deben. Debir. See Dabir. Decan, or Decam, is a very great Kingdom in the Promontory of Malabar in the East-Indies; bound∣ed on the West by the Indian or Arabian Ocean, on the North by the Kingdom of Guzarat, on the East by that of Golconda, and on the South by the Kingdom of Bisnagar. The Capital of it is Visapar; and the greatest part has been subdued by the Moguls, or divided into petty Kingdoms; of which see Mr. Thevenot's Travels. The Portuguese overcame Goa, (a Member of this Kindom) in 1510. and have ever since retained it. Decize, Dececia, a Town in the Province of Ni∣vernois in France, seven or eight Leagues from Ne∣vers; standing in an Islet of the Loyre, where the River Airon beds with the Loyre. It is a Pass of some Consequence, belonging to the▪ Dukes of Nevers who have a Castle here. And the Roman Medals that have been found at it, demonstrate the Antiquity of it. Deddington, a Market-Town in Oxfordshire, in the Hundred of VVotton. Dedham, a Market-Town in Essex, in the Hun∣dred of Lexden. Dee, Deva, a River called by the VVelsh, Fridwy, ariseth in Merionethshire, from the Lake of Llyntegid; and running North-West, takes in the River of Alwen in the same County; then passeth into Denbighshire, and becomes a Boundary between that and Shropshire, admitting (another of its boundaries) the River Ke∣riog; and passing by Bangor the famous old VVelsh Monastery, it entereth Cheshire at Shocklidge. At Alford it takes in another small River, and in Flint∣shire the River Allen; so having divided Cheshire from Flintshire at VVest-Chester, it falls into the Irish Sea, making a great Haven, called by the VVelsh Eee, Etu, by the English Dee-Mouth. § Dee, Dea, a River in Galloway in Scotland, which riseth in the Borders of Coila; and running South takes in many other small Rivers, and at last buries it self in Solway Fyrth; which parts Scotland from the North-West of England at Kirkubrig, a famous Town of Galloway. Deeping, a Market-Town in Lincolnshire in the Hundred of Nesse. Deistan, Oxus. See Geichon. Deizer, Dordomana, a City of Persia. Delbrugk, Delbrugia, a small Town in the Circle of VVestphalia in Germany, between the Rivers Ems and Lippe. Its ancient Inhabitants were the Brucle∣ri whom Germacus overthrew. Dele, or Dyle, Dila, a River rising near the Vil∣lage Thile in Brabant in the Low-Countries; running by Louvain, and after the Reception of the Demer, falling into the Scheld at Rupel-Monde. Delft, Delphi, a City of the Province of Holland, which gives name to a District; one of the princi∣pal Cities of that State; very populous and well built. Here is the Monument of VVilliam of Nassaw, the Founder of the Low-Country Liberty, who was here assassinated by the Spaniards, in 1584 And like∣wise another of Admiral Trump. It is not above one League from the Hague, three from Roterdam, and as many from Leiden, in a Plain. In the year 1536. a Fire almost entirely destroyed it. The Town Delfs-Haven, within a quarter of a League of Rotterdam, is under the Jurisdiction of this City Delli, Crateres, two little deep Lakes, mention'd by the Ancients, in the Island of Sicily near Catania. They were consecrated by the Natives to the Di Palisci. Delly or Delhi, a great City and Kingdom under the Mogul in the East-Indies, upon the River Gemna, a hundred Miles from Agria to the N. towards Labor: length of time had much wasted it: whereupon Chah Jehan, the Father of Auran Zeb Emperor of that Country, in 1625. built up another vast one by it, called Chah Jehan-Abad, or shorter Jehan-Abad, that it might be the Capital of his Empire: since which it has flourished, and encreased above any City in the Indies, as Bernerius (cited by Baubrand) saith, who had often seen it. This City was the Seat of Porus the Indian King, who made himself famous by his Wars with Alexander the Great. Near it stands a Pyramid or Obelisk of Stone, which by its unknown Characters seems to be of great Antiquity; thought in the Indies to have been erected by Alex∣ander the Great after the Defeat of Porus. The River Gemna on which this City stands, runs East, and falls into the Ganges. The Fortress of it is half a League in compass, with round Towers at the distance of every ten Battlements: the Ditches are full of Water, Wharfed with Stone; and it has lovely Gardens round about it. In this Citadel is the Royal Palace. The Town has no Ditches, but Walls filled up with Earth behind, and Towers. Delmenhorst, Delmenhorstium, a small Town in the Principality of Oldembourg in Germany upon the Ri∣ver Delmen, which denominates it and soon after falls into the Weser. It hath the honor of the Title of an Earldom; three Leagues from Bremen, and a little more from Oldembourg. Under the King of Denmark ever since 1667. Delos, Ortygia, Lagia, Asteria, Midia, Cynthon, a famous Island of the Archipelago, the chief of the Cyclades, towards Europe: called by the Modern Grecks plurally , as comprehending the other Island Rhene or Rhenis with it, because these two at a distance seem to make but one Island. And by Mariners Sdille, by a corruption of . A∣pollo and Diana were supposed to be born here. The former had here his Temple and his Oracle; some Ruines whereof, with others of a Theatre, a School, &c. are yet visible at Sdilles, that is, the an∣cient City Delos, called afterwards Athenae Adrianae, which is little inhabited now. In the middle of the Island stands the Mountain Cynthus, which gave the E∣pithet of Cynthia to Diana; not above one hundred and twenty five foot high, and therefore short of shadow∣ing
the Island, as it was represented to do in the an∣cient account. It is a Rock of Marble. The whole Island is covered with heaps of the same. Besides which, it yields Mastick, and Hares in the like abun∣dance as formerly when it received the Name of La∣gia from them. Called Delos, says Aristotle, because it shew'd it self of a sudden in a place where no Island was before: which might be the reason of the Ancients sancying that it sometime floated. Delphi, Delphos, a City of Phocis in Achaia, at the foot of Mount Parnassus, which in ancient times was very great, though not walled otherwise than by the steep Rocks that encompassed it: it had a Castle which stood on the top of a Rock, now called La Castri. This Place once so famous for the most ad∣mired and rich Temple of Apollo Pythius and the Oracle which the Gauls under Brennus attempted in vain to spoil, in Christian times became a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Athens: but since it fell into the hands of the devouring Turks, it is become a poor small Village twenty Miles West from Leucadia, forty from Lepanto to the East, and about seven, saith Baudrand, from the Bay of Corinth. It is observed by Suidas, Cedrenus, Nicephorus, and divers others, that about the time of the Nativity of our Saviour, this Py∣thian Oracle became dumb. And Augustus, being asto∣nished at its silence, received for answer, Me Puer Hebraeus, divos Deus ipse gubernans, Cedere sede jubet tristemque redire sub orcum; Aris ergo dehinc tacitis abscedito nostris. Nero afterwards plundered it of five hundred Statues of Brass, with all its Wealth, broke down its Buildings, and distributed the Lands belonging to it amongst his Souldiers. Delta, an Island made by the Nile in Egypt, of the fashion of the Letter Δ in the Greek, in the way as that River flows from Cairo. Ptolomy mentions two, a greater and a less of this sort. The ancient City Busiris did stand in the midst of this Island. Demer, Tabuda, a River in Brabant. Demetriade, Dimnitrado, Demetrias, an ancient City of Magnesia in the Province of Thessalia in Ma∣cedonia, upon the Gulph dell' Armiro, or the Pelas∣gicus sinus of the Classicks. It has been heretofore a Bishops See under the Archbishop of Larissa, from which it stands twenty Miles to the East. Denbigh, Denbiga, one of the twelve Shires in wales, has the Irish Sea on the North; Flintshire on the East: Merinoth on the South, and Caernarvan on the West. The principal Rivers are Cluyd, Elway, and Conwey; which last separates this Shire from Carnarvan. The West part is barren; the middle, where the Cluyd runneth, is plain and very fruitful; the last part (except what lies upon the D is less fertil. Denbigh, the principal Town, stands up∣on a declining Rock. H. Lacy Earl of Lincoln obtai∣ning a Grant of this Place from Edward I. walled it, and set up a Castle on the South side; but wanting Water and being of difficult Access, the Inhabitants have by degrees removed their Dwellings nearer the River; and in Mr. Cambden's time were building a se∣cond Church, the former not being able to contain the Inhabitants. This Town has the River Aled or Elwy on the West, and the Cluyd on the East, which meet beneath it to the North: it has a Bridge over both of them; the later Maps place the Elwy on the South of the Town. It stands fifteen Miles from Chester to the West, and four from S. Asaph to the South. The Right Honorable William Fielding is Earl of Denbigh, and the fourth Earl of his Fa∣mily. Dendermonde, Teneramunda, is a strong Town in Flanders upon the River Schelde, where the Te∣nera from Alost falls into it; lying in the middle be∣tween Gant and Antwerp, about five Leagues from either. Denmark, Denemarck, Dania, Cimbrius Cherso∣nesus, called by the Italians and Spaniards Dani∣marca, by the Poles Dunska. Is one of the most ancient Kingdoms of Europe, yet of no great Extent. Part of a vast Peninsula, (called of old Cimbricus Chersonesus, in middle time Jutland) and some Islands in the Eastern and Baltick Sea, make the body of this Kingdom; except that the Kingdom of Nor∣way, together with Greenland, Island, and Feroe is now annexed to it. It was once a part of the King∣dom of the Goths, but now a separate Kingdom, consisting of two parts, Jutland and the Isles. The North of Jutland only is under the King of Den∣mark. viz. Nort Jutland, and the Northern parts of Suder Jutland. Of the Islands, Zeeland, Fuynen and Bornholm in the Baltick Sea, and Island in the Virgivian Ocean are the chief. Coppenhague in the Isle of Zeeland is the Capital of the whole. There were also three Counties on the Norway side; Bleck∣len, Schania and Haland, which belonged originally to Denmark: but in 1645. by the Treaty of Brooms-Boa, these and some other Islands were surrendered by Christian IV. to the Swedes for ever; and again in 1658. and 1660. confirmed to the Swedes. This Kingdom had heretofore the Isles of Shetland on the North of Scotland, which were granted to James VI. as a part of his Queens Dowry. The King of Den∣mark possesseth also in Germany, 1. Half the Duke∣dom of Holsatia. 2. The Counties of Oldenburgh, and that of Delmenhorst; which two fell to him by Inheritance from the last Count of Oldenburgh. Till 1660 the Crown was Elective, but then made Here∣ditary by Frederick III. The Danes have also enlarged their Princes Bounds by planting a New Denmark in the North of America. This Kingdom once was one of the most Powerful in Europe; (as may be remem∣bred more particularly to us, by their Incursions into England, Scotland and Ireland; where they maintained War with our Ancestors above three hundred years together): But by the Fate of Time, War, and other humane Calamities, reduced to the state in which it now is. The Danish Writers derive its Name, and pre∣tend to give a Catalogue of their Kings, from Dan the Son of Jacob. It is a cold Climate, but fruitful enough in Corn, Cattle and Fish; and the greatest Revenue of the Crown comes from the Toll that is payed for pas∣sing the Sound. Denia, a Sea-Port in the Kingdom of Valentia in Spain, over against the Isle of Yvica, on the Medi∣terranean Sea, eleven Miles from Valentia to the South. Denin, a celebrated Nunnery in the Low Coun∣treys, upon the Road from Valenciennes to Doway: where the Chapter is composed of 18 Chanonesses, who are all Ladies of Quality, taking the Title of Coun∣tesses of Ostrevan, from their Founder S. Aldebert, an Earl of Ostrevan, who left both his Estate and Dig∣nity to them. They enter into no Vows Marry at their pleasure, leaving only their thanks to the Chapter for the honour they have enjoyed by it. St Dennis en Uaux, ad Sanctum Dionysium in Vallibus, a Town in the Dukedom of Orleans in France. St. Dennis Carriere, a Town and a famous Monastery in the Isle of France, two Leagues from Paris to the South; one of the richest Monasteries in that Kingdom, upon the River Crou, which a lit∣tle lower falls into the Scin. The Abbey was foun∣ded in 636. by Dagobert King of France in honor of S. Dennis, whose Bones sleep here. But the Church
was rebuilt since by Suggerus one of their Abbots, in three Years and three Months, ending in 1144. Here are the Tombs of the Kings of France. Some of which have died here too. St. Dennis, a Town in Normandy in the Forest of Lyons, on the Borders of Beauvois, in which Henry I. King of England died. Deptford, a large Town in Kent in Sutton Lath; situated at the fall of the River Ravensburn into the Thames amongst rich and low Meadows, and provi∣ded with a Dock and Store-house for the Navy Royal. It is divided into the Upper and Lower Town. Derbent, Caucasie Portae, Porta ferrea, Alexan∣dria, a City of Persia upon the Caspian Sea, between the Foot of Mount Caucasus and that Sea; on the Borders of Georgia, near the River Korr: called by Turks Demir, or Temir Capi; that is, the Iron Gate: not that there is any Iron Gate, but by reason of the Strength and Fortifications of this City; which are such as may resist the fury of almost any Enemy, the Passage being but three hundred Paces. It has a sine Haven and a strong Castle, in the hands of the King of Persia; but it is declining, the lower part next the Sea, being little or nothing inhabited. It is said Alexander the Great built this City, to shut up that Passage against the Scythians, who were al∣ways the Terror of the civilized World, and have been often the Scourges of it. Long. 80. 00. Lat. 49. 00. Derbices, an ancient People about the Mountain Caucasus in Persia, towards the Caspian Sea, and the Confines of Scythia; said to be very Cruel and Bar∣barous in many Customs. Derby, See Darby. Dereham East, a Market Town in Norfolk in the Hundred of Milford. Dernis, a Town and Fortress in Dalmatia upon an Hill near the River Cicola. Taken and burnt by the Forces of the Republick of Venice in 1684. Derote, Latone, a famous City in the Egyptian Delta, which is still extant, and of some considera∣tion; but without any Walls, as Zeiglerus saith. Derpt, Torpatum, a City of Livonia, called Juri∣ogrod by the Russ. A small City belonging to the Poles, in the Province of Odenpoa, upon the River Embeck, near the Lake of Peibas on the West side, twenty one Miles from Ruel to the South-East, and fourteen from Pleskow to the West. Anciently a Bi∣shops See under the Archbishop of Riga, from 1230. but the Bishoprick is now extinct. Taken by the Swedes in 1625. under the Command of James de la Gardie. And in 1632. there was an University ope∣ned in it by Gustavns Adolphus King of Sweden. Derry, Roboretum, Derra, Deria, commonly cal∣led London-Derry, is both a City and a County in the Province of Ʋlster in the Kingdom of Ireland. The County is bounded on the North by the Ocean, on the East by Antrim, on the South by Tyrone, and on the West by Dunglass; and was heretofore called Colrane. The City is a Colony from London, sent about an hundred years since into these parts; and in 1664. the Bishops See was removed from Rapoe hi∣ther. In the great Massacre it preserved it self, and afforded shelter to as many as fled to it; the Irish be∣ing neither able to surprize, nor Master it: seated on the Western Shoar of the Lake of L. Foyle, twelve Miles from the Sea. Several thousands of this place perished through Sickness and Famine in the time they held it out for King William. At last they were relieved by Major General Kirke, July, 19. 1689. whereupon King James II. his Men decamped, lea∣ving little appearance of a Siege behind them by the damage done to the Houses or Walls. For after King James's own presence and all the inviting means that could be used by him, proved ineffectual to alter the resolutions of the People by Persuasion, they thought to have reduced it by Famine. Dertinouth, a fine Town and Haven in the South-West part of Devonshire, upon the River Dert, from whence it is so called; twenty four Miles South of Exeter. The Haven is much frequented by Merchants, and for that cause secured by two Castles or Forts. The Town has also a Mayor by the Grant of Edward III. And has often defended it self stoutly against the French; but especially in 1404. when de Castell a French Man, (who by his Men of War and Pyracies had stopped all Commerce in these parts, and burnt Plymouth), upon his at∣tempting this Place, was by the Women and Coun∣try people intercepted, and slain with all his Compa∣ny. The Loyal Colonel George Legge, was by Charles II. created Baron of Dertmouth, Novemb. 2. 1682. and by James II. Earl of Dertmouth. The River Dert riseth in the same County West of Cheg∣forde; and running South, takes in a small Rivolet which comes from Ashburton, giving its Name on the West to a place called Dertmore; at Dean Prior on the West, it takes in another; and a little further, one called Harborne on the same side; from whence it passeth to its Outlet or Mouth, having performed a course of about twenty Miles. Derwent, a River of Derbishire, which riseth in the Confines of the County of York; and running South, divides that whole County into two parts; at Bromford it takes in the New River; about five Miles further to the South, the Wye; then on the East side, the Amber at Danfield, another from the West; and at Derby, one called Merton-Brook; then having reached the other extremity of this County, the Trent, there and in that noble River it ends. Derwent-Water, a Tract in the East-Riding of Yorkshire, betwixt the Rivers Ouse and Derwent: Honoured with the Title of an Earldom. See Dar∣went. Dess, Disa, Dios, a River arising in the Bishoprick of Liege in the Low-Countreys, thence passing to Bosleduc, and a little further to the North losing it self in the Maes. La Desiderada, a little and fruitful Island in the South America amongst the Antilles, under the French; ten or twelve Leagues from Guadaloupe: First discovered by Columbus, and so named by him, in signification, that he had attained his desires. Desize, See Decize. Desmond, Desmonia, by the Irish Deswown, is a County of the Province of Munster, in the South-West part of Ireland, upon the Rivers Mare and Bantry; having Kerry on the North, the Ocean on the West, and Cork on the South and East. It has two small Towns, Doneyne on the North, and Ardey on the South of Mare. William Fielding, Earl of Denbigh, is Earl of Desmond also. Il Despotato, Despotatus, a Province of Greece, the same with the Aetolia, or according to others, with the Acarnania of the Ancients, or rather both; in∣cluding also the Isles adjacent: being in the time of the Grecian Empire, the Government of the second Despote in quality (after the Despote of Peloponne∣sus) of all Greece. Dessaw, Desavia, a strong Town in the Ʋp∣per Saxony upon the River Elb, six Miles from Me∣cydburg to the East, and five from wittenberg to the West; the usual Residence of the Prince of Anhault: at this Town the River Multa enters the Elb from the South. Also famous for a Victory obtained by Albert Wallenstein over Count Mansfield, in 1625. Dethgle, Tigris.
Deva, a Town of Guipuscoa in Spain, upon the Bay of Biscay, upon a River of the same Name; ten Miles from Valenzia to the East, and the same Di∣stance from S. Sebastian to the West; having a very convenient Haven. The River riseth in the Mountains of Segura, and running North, falls here into the Bay of Biscay, after a Course of about twenty Miles; in the middle of which it salutes the City of Placentia. Develtus, Develto, called by the Bulgarians Za∣goria, or Zagora, is a City of Bulgaria, at the Foot of the Mountains, upon the River Panize; ten Ger∣man Miles from the Euxine Sea, eighteen from Adrianople to the North-East; in the very Confines of Romania and Bulgaria: Heretofore a Bishop's See under the Archbishop of Adrianople; but now rai∣sed to an Archbishoprick it self. Deventer, Deventria, a City in the Province of Over-Yssel, which is the Capital of that Province. It stands upon the Yssel, four Miles from Zwol to the West, and seven from Nimeguen to the North-West. Made a Bishop's See by Pope Paul IV. in 1559. under the Archbishop of Ʋtrecht. Betray'd to the Spani∣ards in 1587. Subdued and brought under the Ʋni∣ted Provinces again in 1591. Taken by the French in 1672. and deserted in 1674. It is surrounded on all Sides with Water, and very strongly fortified. Deveril, a little Stream in VViltshire, which runs under ground a Mile. Devizes, a Market and Borough-Town in VVilt∣shire in the Hundred of Swanborn, near the Head of a Stream of the same Name with it self, which joyns the Avon. It returns two Burgesses to the Par∣liament. Devonshire, Devonia, is one of the Southern Counties of England, which takes its Name from the Danmonii, the ancient British Inhabitants. On the North it is bounded by the Irish Sea, on the West by Cornwall, (from which it is divided by the River Ta∣mar;) on the South by the British Sea, and on the East by Somersetshire and Dorsetshire. It hath on both these Seas many good Harbours; and is rich in Mines, especially the Western Parts. It abounds in pleasant Meadows, fine Woods, rich Towns: In o∣ther Places where the Soil is more barren, it is yet improveable, and rewards the Tillers Industry. Its chiefest Rivers are the Tamr, the Turridge, the Taw, Ex, and Dert. The chief City is Exeter, next to which is Plymouth. The Honourable William Ca∣vendish is Earl of this County, whose Grandfather William obtained this Honour from James I. Aug. 20. 1618. and has enjoyed it ever since 1628. Deux-Ponts. See Zweybrucken. Dewsberg. See Hensterberg. Diablintres, Diablindi, or Diablitae, an ancient People of Gallia Celtiqua; supposed to dwell in the (now) Province of la Perche; with Noviodunum, or Nogent le Rotrou, for their Capital. Others say, in the Lesser Brittany, near Neodunum or Doll, where there are some Lands still bearing the Name of les Diableres, and Families of les Diables. Le Diamond, a great Rock upon the Coast of the Island Martinique in the South America, at the Distance of a League. Observed to swarm with Fowl. Diarbech, Mesopotamia, a Country in Asia, be∣tween the Euphrates and the Tygris; which is now in the hands of the Turks. Diarbekir, a great and populous City of Meso∣potamia upon the Banks of the Tygris; the Seat of a Potent Bassa, who is generally one of the Viziers of the Ottoman Empire, and has nineteen Sangiacs un∣der him in the Compass of his Province. It is sur∣rounded with a double Wall of sixty two Towers, and adorned with a stately Mosque which heretofore be∣longed to the Christians; whereof they reckon no less then 20000 still living in it, of the Armenian, Nesto∣rian or Jacobite Churches, together with some Capu∣chines. It stands upon an Eminence, affords plenty of Provisions, and is able to bring into the Field 20000 Horse. Diargument, Hyrcania, a Province in the North-East Part of the Kingdom of Persia. Dibres, a Town of the Kingdom of Epirus in Greece, taken by the Turks in 1442. Dichling, a Market-Town in the County of Sussex, in Lewis Rape. Dictamo, Dictamne, a Town in the Territory of Canea in the Island of Crete, whence comes the medi∣cinal Herb Dittany. Die, Dia Vocontiorum, Dea, a City in the Dau∣phinate in France; heretofore a Bishop's See under the Archbishop of Vienne; but in 1275. by Pope Gregory IX. united to that of Valence. This City stands on the North Side of the River Drome, which falls into the Rhosne, eight Miles from Valence to the East, and eleven from Grenoble to the South-West. It is a Roman Town, called by Antoninus Dea Augu∣sta, and in the Councils Dia. The Huguenots, in the Years 1577. and 1585. took and used it severely, and rased its Cittadel. An Inscription not long since was found in it, Matri Deûm Magnae Idaeae. For the Vocontii (its antient Inhabitants) were great Worshippers of that Goddess; whence the Name Dia came to be derived to this place. Diemens, Diemini Regio, a Part of the Terra Au∣stralis, discovered in 1642. by a Dutchman of this Name. Yet we know not, whether it be an Island or a Continent. Diepholt, a small Town in the Circle of VVest∣phalia in Germany, belonging to the Duke of Bruns∣wick. It stands upon a Stream betwixt Bremen and Osnaburgh; with the Honour to bear the Title of an Earldom. Dieppe, Deppa, a strong Sea-Port-Town, which has a noble Haven, in Normandy in France, upon the River Arques, fourteen Miles from Roan to the North, right over against Lewis in Sussex. This Town is remarkable for its Loyalty to Henry the Great, of France; who retiring hither, and not long after receiving a supply from Queen Elizabeth of 22000 l. in Gold and 4000 Men under the Lord VVilloughby, beat the Duke of Main, the General of the Leaguers, after all his Confidence, that he should either take this Prince Prisoner or drive him out of France. Which great Victory was unexpected∣ly gained in 1589. Diest, a Town and Barony in the Dukedom of Brabant in the Low-Countries, upon the River De∣mere, two Leagues from Dalen and three from Til∣lemon. There are two Collegiate Churches in it. Dietmarsh, or Dithmarsh, a part of Jutland in the Dukedom of Holsatia, at the Mouth of the Elbe; having the Ocean on the West, Holsatia on the East, the Elbe on the South, and the Dukedom of Sleswick on the North. It is so full of Marshes as to take its Name from them. The Inhabitants Rebelling against the Kings of Holsatia in 1500. obtained a great Victory; but in 1559. Adolph, Duke of Holsatia, being imployed by Frederick II. King of Denmark, conquered them, and deprived them of a barbarous Liberty which they had maintained four Hundred Years. The South part of this Territory is under the King of Denmark, whose Eldest Son is to reside here; and the North part under the Duke of Holsatia, which is separated from the Dukedom of Sleswick by the River Eyder. Dietz, or VVietz, a small Town in the Prin∣cipality of Nassaw in Germany upon the River
Lhone: Fortified with a Castle on each of the two Hills within the Walls. Digne, Dinia, Dina, Civitas Diniensium, a Ci∣ty in Provence, which is a Bishop's See under the Archbishop of Embrun; it stands upon the River Bleonne, ten Miles from Embrun to the South, and thirty two from Avignon to the North-East. It is a very fine City and particularly esteemed for its hot Baths. Dijon, Divionum, Divio, the Capital City of the Dukedom of Burgundy, and the Seat of the Parlia∣ment, upon the River Ousche; sixteen Leagues from Langres to the South, thirty six from Lion to the North. It is a great and well built City, and has an old Castle and a small Territory belonging to it. Long. 26. 02. Lat. 46. 50. Aurelian the Emperor walled it. The Children of Hugh Capet, who made this the Capital of the Kingdom of Burgundy, much enlarged and beautified it. Under the Dukes of Burgundy it had Counts: And Lewis XI. who got the possession of it, after the Death of the Duke of Burgundy, by the means of the then Prince of Orange, built the Castle to keep the Inhabitants in Subjection. The Reformed Religion, in 1562. beginning to spread here, was ex∣tinguished by an Edict; those that imbraced it being disarmed, and some of them banished. Near this City S. Bernard was born. There was a French Council held here in 1075. And another in 1199. under Pope Innocent III. at the Instance of Canutus King of Denmark, in the behalf of his Sister Isemburge, Wife of Philip the August King of France who had divorced her and remarried. Whereupon the whole Kingdom was interdicted by the Pope's Legate in this Council, and continued so seven Months, till King Phi∣lip vacated the said Divorce and received the Lady for his Wife again. By a Stone with an old Roman In∣scription here found, it appears that this City was in those times called Dibione. The Mayor of it is ho∣noured with the Title of a Viscount. Dilinghen, Dilinga, a City in the Circle of Schwaben in Germany, upon the Danube, in the Diocese of Auspurgh, seven Miles East of Ʋlm, and the same Distance North-West from Auspurgh. An University here was founded by Cardinal Otto Trucio, Bishop of Auspurgh under Pope Julius III. in 1549. This City and the County belonging to it, were united for ever to the Bishoprick of Auspurg, by Hermanus, the last Count, Bishop of this Diocese, who died about the Year 1260. The Jesuits of Di∣linghen gave great Provocations to the Swedish War in Germany, by perswading Ferdinand II. that the Protestants of his times were not the same with those of 1530. tolerated by Charles V. and therefore the Emperor who was then victorious, was not obliged to keep the Peace with them. By which Insinuation, in 1629. they put that Prince on those Actions, which brought on a War that had like to have ended in the Ruin of the House of Austria, the German Liberty, the Empire, and the Roman Catholick Religion there. Dillemburgh, a Town and County in the Circle of the Rhine in VVesterwalt. The Town stands on the River Dilla, five German Miles from Marpurgh to the West, and eleven from Francfort, upon a Hill; and has a strong Castle, in which the Counts reside. The County is called by the Germans, Das Graff∣schaft von Dillemburgh; bounded on the East by Hassia, on the North by Westphalia, on the West by the Rhine, and on the South by Solmis. This is un∣der the Dominion of its own Prince, who is of the Family of Nassau. There is in it, besides Dillem∣burgh, a Town called Herborn, which is an Uni∣versity. Dimel, Dimola, Dilla, a River of Germany, which divides Hassia from VVestphalia, and falls into the Weser at Helmerstrusen, seven Miles East of Paderborn. Dimitrado See Demetriade. Dimotuc, Didymotyches, a City of Thrace, upon the River Hebrus, (which almost surrounds it) about seven Miles from Adrianople to the South: Formerly a Bishop's See under the Archbishop of Adrianople, but now an Archbishop's. Bajazet, one of the Tur∣kish Emperors, was born here; who resign'd the Em∣pire and retired hither again. Dinant, Dinantium, a Town in the Bishoprick of Leige, upon the River Maes, over which it hath a Stone-Bridge that has been ruined often, but now repaired; ten German Miles from Brussels to the North-East. Taken by the French in the Reign of Henry II. in 1554. and almost ruined and its Cittadel demolished. But all very well rebuilt again, and its Cittadel is now standing upon a steep Rock. There is another Town of the same Name in the Dutchy of Britain in France upon the River Rance, five Miles South of S. Malo, which was heretofore a strong Place; and gave the Title of Earl to the younger Sons of the Dukes of Brittany. Dingle, Dinglae, a small Town, and a convenient Port, in the County of Kerry, in the Province of Mounster in the South-West Part of Ireland; which stands upon a large Bay of the same Name, seventy English Miles West of Cork. § There is a Marsh in the County of Suffolk of the same Name, which sig∣nifies, salt Water washes, as Mr. Camden seems to intimate. Dingolving, or Dingelfing, Dingolvinga, a small Town in the Dukedom of Bavaria; where there was a Council held in 772. Dinkesipiel, Dinchespila, a small Imperial City, in the Borders of Franconia, upon the River Warnaw; twelve Miles from Ʋlm to the North-East, and ten from Nuremberg to the South-West. It belongs to the Circle of Schwaben; and has been often taken by the Swedes and French in the Wars of Germany. Dionysia, a figurative Name of the Island Naxia in the Archipelago; given it by the Ancients in Allusion to Dionysius (or Bacchus) upon the Account of its abounding with excellent Wines. Dionysiopolis; divers antient Cities occur under this Name. One in Bulgaria; see Varna. One upon the River Indus in Asia, in the Country where stood the Pillars called Dionysii Columnae: This the Ancients re∣port to have been built by Dionysius (or Bacchus;) be∣ing the same with the Nagara, Nysse, or Nerus of the modern Geographers. One in Phrygia, mentioned by Pliny. And another in Africa, by Stephanus. Dioscoros, Dioscori, or Dioscoride, an Island of Magna Graecia, in the Calabrian Ocean, over against Capo delle Colonne, at a few Leagues distance. § A∣nother of Africa. See Zocotera. Diospolis, an ancient City in the Thebais in the Kingdom of Aegypt; surnamed Hecatompylos from its having an hundred Gates, or rather so many Prince∣ly Palaces in it, when the Kings of Aegypt, called Diospolites after its Name, made this place their Resi∣dence and Capital of their Kingdom. § Also an an∣cient City of the Holy Land, which was made a Bi∣shop's See under the Patriarch of Jerusalem: Called otherwise Lydda, Rama, and S. George; and remar∣ked in Ecclesiastical History for a Council assembled at it in 415. against Pelagius, wherein he was ac∣quitted of the Accusations of his Adversaries. Dirgh, a Lake in the County of Dungal in the Province of Ʋlster in Ireland; out of which the River Leffye springs. In an Island thereof you see the Cave the People call S. Patrick's Purgatory, near the Ruines of a Monastery that was dedicated to
S. Patrick. The Noise of some subterraneous Winds or Waters heard by the People hath occasioned this conceited Name amongst them. Disne. See Aisne. Disse, a Market-Town in the County of Norfolk up∣on the River Wavenay. The Capital of its Hundred. Ditmarsen. See Dietmarsh. Diu, Diou, or Dive, a small Island, with a Fort upon it, in the Mouth of the River Indus, belonging to the Portuguese. It has also a small but very strong City belonging to it, which the Turks, in the Years 1538. and 1548. besieged in vain. This Island is a part of the Kingdom of Guzarate, and lies fifty Leagues from Surata to the West, at the Entrance of the Bay of Cambaya. It hath been in the Hands of the Portuguese ever since 1535. Divan Du Rou, Insulae Divandurae, a Knot of five or six small Islands in the Archipelago de Maldi∣vas in the East-Indies, under the King of Cananor. About twenty seven Leagues distant from the Island of Malicut. They are reputed extreamly healthful. Dive, in Latin Diva, and Deva, a River in Nor∣mandy, which riseth near the Town of Dive; and running North-West, takes in the Ante at Morteaux, the Leison and Vie at Hervetot; the Mauch, the Be∣verrone, and some others; and falls into the British Sea below Cabour, five Miles and a half West of Hon∣fleure. § There is a River in the Province of Poictou of this Name which takes its Rise at the Town Grimau∣diere, receives the Gron at Moncontour, and continuing its Course to Londun takes in the Matrevil and the Briaude; till below S. Just it self is received by the Thouay, which soon after falls into the Loyre. Divertigi, Selucia ad Belum, a City of Asia, which was a Bishops See under the Archbishop of A∣pamea; lying in Syria, thirty Miles from Antioch to the East. It may be supposed to be now ruined; be∣ing hardly to be found in the later Maps. Divice, a famous Fountain at Bourdeaux. Diul, Indus. Dixmuyde, or Dixmude, Dixmuda, a very strong Town in Flanders, in the Possession of the Spaniards; though it has been often taken by the French. This Town stands upon the River Ipre, three Miles from New-Port to the South; and is now a Frontier Town against the French. Doblin, Dublinum, a City in Curland, upon the River Terwa, in the Confines of Samogitia, six Ger∣man Miles from Mittaw to the West, and fourteen from VVomic, or Mednici, to the East. Under the Duke of Curland. Dobroncha, Epidaurus, a Maritime City of Dal∣matia. Dobrzin, Dobrinum, Debricinium, Dobriznum, a Town in Poland, which is the Capital of a Palati∣nate upon the Vistula, between Ploczko to the South, and Wladislaw to the North, a few Leagues above Culm. The Palatinate is usually taken for a part of that of Ploczko, on which it borders to the North, as it does on the Vistula to the West, and Prussia to the North. Docastelli, Lycastum, a Town of Cappadocia in the Borders of Paphligonia upon the Shoars of the Euxine Sea, near the Bay of Amisenum, between Halis and Iris, (Irio): distant from Amiso to the East thirty six Miles. Docum, Dockum or Dorkum, Doccumum, Doco∣mium, one of the principal Towns in West-Friesland, four Leagues from Leeuwarden towards the North-West, and five from Groningen; upon a Canal near the Sea. Dodbrook, a Market Town in Devonshire in the Hundred of Colrudge. Dodona, an ancient City of the Kingdom of Epi∣rus in Greece, in the Country then called Molossia: famous for the neighbouring Grove of Dodona, in which Jupiter had his Temple and his Oracle, with the Title of Dodonaeus thence. It stood near a River of the same Name that joined it self with the A∣chelous. Doesbourg or Doesborck, Doesburgus, Drusibur∣gus, Arx Drusiana, a strong, rich and populous Town in the Province of Guelderland in the Low-Coun∣treys, upon the Issel, at the Mouth of the old Canal of Drusus, one German Mile from Zutphen. Taken by the French in 1672. It is no very great Town. Doffrini, the Mountains of Scandinavia. Doggers bank, the Name of some Sands in the German Ocean. Doira and Doria, a double River of Piedmont. The Greater, which is called Doria Balta, springeth from the Grecian Alpes in the Borders of Le Vallais; and leaving Aosta, Pont de S. Martino, and Inurea to the East, at the latter it divides; sends one Branch to Vercelli, called the Naulio; then continuing its course, it receiveth from the West the Cuisella, and ends in the Po at Verolengo or S. Giovan, thirty two Miles from Alexandria to the North-West. The Lesser Doria riseth in the Cottian Alpes, from the Moun∣tains called the Genebre in the Dauphinate; and running East, it washeth Susa, Bozolengo and Avi∣glana; and falls into the Po not above half a Mile be∣neath Turino. Dol, Dolum, Neodunum, Tollium, a City in the Lesser Britainy in France, which is a Bishops See, un∣der the Archbishop of Tours; called by the Ancients NEODƲNƲM: stands in a Marshy Ground, and of no great Circumference; not above two Leagues from the British Sea, and four from S. Maloe's, with a Castle. There was a Council here assembled by Pope Ʋrban II. in 1094. The Bishops of this See have formerly made strong Pretensions to the Metropolitanship of Bretagne. Dolcigno. See Dulcigno. Dole, Dola ad Dubim, a City in the Dukedom of Burgundy, strongly fortified, being the Capital of that Dukedom, the Seat of the Parliament, and an Uni∣versity founded in the year 1426. by Philip the Good, Duke of Burgundy. It stands upon the River Dou (Dubis), nine Miles from Dyon to the East, and from Verdun to the North. This Town was sack'd by Lewis XI. in 1479. Fortified by the Empe∣ror Charles V. in 1530. Besieged by the French without their taking of it in 1636. Taken by the French from the Spaniards in 1668. Retaken in 1674. and by the Treaty of Nimeguen annexed to the Crown of France for ever. The Country about is called the Bailage de Dole, which together with the Town, was then resigned to the French King. Dollert, a vast Lake or Bay at the Mouth of the River Amasus, between Groningen and Emden; which in 1277. was made by an Inundation of the Sea; in which thirty three Villages were swallowed up, and irrecoverably lost: It is otherwise called the Gulph of Emden. The South part of Groningen suf∣fered not much less by such another raging Overflow from Groningen diep in the year 1686. Dolomieu, A Village in Dauphine, betwixt Mo∣resel and La Tour du Pin. Much spoken of in France in the year 1680. for a feigned Story of the killing of a Flying Dragon there, and of a Carbuncle in his head of extraordinary value. Dombes, Tractus Dombensis, a small Territory of France, incompassed on all sides by le Bresse, except on the West, where it is bounded by the River Saone, which parts it from Baujolois. It lies be∣tween Mascon to the North, and Lyon to the South;
and though small, is yet very fruitful; honoured with the Title of a Principality under its own Princes of the House of Bourbon. The Capital of it is Tre∣voux, four Miles above Lyon to the North. This Principality was given to Lewis II. Duke of Bourbon, by Edward the last Duke of the Race de Baujolois in 1400. Domburg, a Town of good Antiquity and plea∣santly situated in the Isle of Walcheren in Zealand, a∣bout two Dutch Miles from Middleburg in the same Island to the West. Domezopoli, Domitiopolis, once a famous City of Isauria, in the Lesser Asia, and a Bishops See under the Archbishop of Seleucia; now a poor Vil∣lage. Dominico, one of the Caribby Islands in North America, twenty Leagues in compass; discovered by the Spaniards on a Sunday, and thence so called: Long. 322. 00. Lat. 14. 35. North-West of Barba∣does. S. Domingo, the principal City in the Island of Hispaniola, built by Bartholomew Columbus in 1494. on the East Bank of the River Ozama; and after in 1502. removed by Nicholas de Obando, then Gover∣nor of the Island, to the opposite Shoar. It is situate in a pleasant Country amongst rich Pastures, and has near it a safe and a large Haven; enriched with the Residence of the Governour, the Courts of Justice, an Archbishops See, many Religious Houses, and an Ho∣spital to which belongs a Revenue of twenty thou∣sand Ducats by the year. The Houses are neatly built, most of Stone; the Town is walled, and has a Castle at the West-end of the Peer to defend the Haven. It was much greater before Mexico was taken; but has now not above six hundred Families of Spaniards; the rest, Negroes. Sir Francis Drake in 1586. took it by force, and kept it a Month, burning a great part of the Houses, and forcing the Spaniards to redeem the rest with mony. Long. 305. 40. Lat. 14. 00. Domitz, Domitium, a strong Town not very large, but well fortified in the Dukedom of Mecklen∣burgh, on the North side of the Elbe, where it re∣ceives the Elde, in the Jurisdiction of the Duke of Swerine: eight Miles above Lavenburgh to the West, and ten from Lunenburgh to the East: Dommele, a River of Brabant, which riseth near Peer; and running North, passeth by Eyndhoven or Eindoven; then turning to the West, it falls into the River Runne, about half a Mile above Sher∣togenbosch, through which they both pass into the Maes. I find it by the Maps called De Dormale, but corruptly, as appeareth by L. Guicciardin; and a Town a Mile above Eindoven on this River, called Dommelen. Domochi, Domonichus, a small Village in Thessa∣lia, once a Bishops See under the Archbishop of La∣rissa. It lies South-West of Larissa and Volo, and is mentioned in Mr. Morden's Map. Don, Tanais. Donato, Isaurus, a River of Calabria Ʋlterior; it falls by Cerenza and Neto into the Mediterranean Sea, between Cotrone and Strongoli, one Mile beneath S. Severina. Donaw. See Danube. Donawert, Donaverda, Donavertia, Vertia, a City in Schwaben in Germany upon the Danube, over which it has a Bridge; it lies in the Confines of the Duke∣doms of Newburgh and Bavaria, seven German Miles from Auspurgh to the North, and from Ingolstad to the West. This City was in 1420. made a Free Impe∣rial City by Sigismund the Emperour; but in 1607. it lost this Privilege, and is now subject to the Duke of Bavaria. Doncaster or Dimcaster, a Town in the West-Riding of Yorkshire on the River Done or Dune, cal∣led by Antoninus DANƲM: in 759. burnt with Lightning; but being by degrees rebuilt with a fair Church and Castle, and becoming a Town of good Accommodations and Trade, it has had the Ho∣nor of giving the Title of an Earl to James, late Duke of Monmouth, and some others. The River Done riseth near Denbye; and running South-East, watereth Sheafield; then turning North-East, goeth by Rotheram, where it takes in from the North ano∣ther considerable River, called (as I suppose) Dar or Dare: then passing by Doncaster a little more East, it takes in the River Went; and soon after ends in the River Are at Tunbridge; and both the Are and Done enter the Ouse about three Miles further, thirteen Miles beneath York, from which great City, Doncaster stands two and twenty Miles to the South. Doncheri, a Town in the Territory of Retelois in Champagne, towards the Frontiers of Luxembourg, upon the Meuse; betwixt Charleville and Sedan. It is a fortified Town. Done, a River. See Doncaster. Donetz, a vast River which riseth in Dikoia, near Borissagorda; and running Eastward, turns and falls into the Tanais, now called Donon Donitz too, of which I shall give a further account in Tanais. There is another River Donitz, which riseth more East, and falls into the Tanais more to the North, at Gilocha. Dongo, a Town in Japan. Donostein, Menlascus, a River of Guipiscoa in Spain, commonly called Rio Orio. Donoy, Dinia. See Digne. Donussa, Donysa, a small Island in the Archipelago, remarkable for nothing but the green Marble brought from thence. Donzy, a Town of the Duchy of Nevers in France, upon a small River near the Cosne. The Capital of the Territory of Donziois. La Dorat, oratorium, a City of France in La-Marche, fourteen Miles from Poictiers to the South-East, and Limoges to the North, upon the little Ri∣ver Seve. Dorvie, a River which falls into the Taen, a River of Languedoc in France; which last falls into the Ga∣ronne, five Leagues above Agen. Dorchester, Duronovaria, a City of England, in the County of Dorset, upon the River Frome or Fraw, about five Miles from the Sea, and upon the Via Fossa, a Causey of the Romans; many Pieces of whose Coins have been found here. It is the Capital of that Shire, yet saith Mr. Camben, neither great nor beautiful; but certainly a Roman Town, of great Antiquity, which was ruined both by the Danes and Normans: and once of a large compass, as the Tract of the Walls and Trenches yet shew. Fortified also in former times with a Castle, which upon its decaying was converted into a Monastery, and the Monastery afterwards demolished. In the year 1645. King Charles I. created Henry Lord Pierrepont Mar∣quiss of this Place. At present it gives the Title of Countess to the Lady Catharine Sidley, advanced to that Dignity by King James II. It still sends two Burgesses to Parliament, and is adorned with three Parish Churches. § There is another old Roman Town called Dorchester (Dorcestria) in Oxford∣shire, at the meeting of Thame and Isis, nine Miles South of Oxford; where the Bishoprick of Lincoln was at first settled for four hundred and sixty years before it was removed to Lincoln. This last is called by Bede, Civitas Dorcina; by Leland, Hydropolis, i. e. (as the word Dorchester it self also signifieth) the Water-Town; Dor in the Brittish Language, being
Water. It was yielded to the Earl of Carnarvan, Aug. 2. 1643. Dordogne, Duranius, Dordonia, one of the prin∣cipal Rivers of France. It ariseth in the Province of Auvergne from two Fountains (saith Baudrand); one of which is called Dor, the other Done: running Westward, between Limosin to the North and Au∣vergne to the South, it takes in Chavanoy, Rue, Auze and Serre; then entering Limosin, Quercy and Perigort successively, it meets Vezere and Cozere; watereth Scarlat, Limiel and Bergerac; and so pas∣seth to Libourne, where it receiveth from the North the Lille, which comes from Montignac; and not far from Bourdeaux, it unites with the Garronne; and they send their united Streams to the Bay of Biscay, or Sea of Gascogne, called by the Romans Mare Aquita∣nicum, at the Tour de Cordovan. Dordrecht. See Dort. Dergwyn. See Derwent. Doria. See Doira. Doris, an ancient Country of Achaia in Greece, now known by the Name of the Valley of Livadia, as all Achaia is now called Livadia. The Cities Lilaea, Erineus, &c. in those times stood in it. It was particularly famous for one of the four Dialects of the Greek Tongue, called the Dorick after its own Name; in which Archimedes, Theocritus and Pindar write; and which was in use in the several Countrys and Kingdoms of Lacedaemonia, Argos, Epirus, Ly∣dia, Sicily, Rhodes and Crete. § There was another Doris in Caria in the Lesser Asia, which received its Name from this. Dorisques, Drosica, Doriscum, a Tract in the Pro∣vince of Romania (or Thrace) in Greece, menti∣oned in ancient History to be the place in which Xerxes numbered his vast Army in the Gross, by the quantity of the Ground they stood upon. Dormans, a Town in Champagne in France up∣on the River Marne, betwixt Epernay and Chateau-Tierry; giving Name to an ancient Family of that Province. Dorn. See Tornaw. Dornick. See Tournay. Dornock, Dorno, Durnodunum, a Town in Suther∣land, on the East of Scotland, North of the Fyrth of Murray, and Terbat-Ness. The head City of this County, and the common Residence of the Bishop of Cathnesse, who is under the Archbishop of S. Andrews: it has also a large and a safe Haven, upon a Gulph cal∣led the Fyrth of Dornock. Long. 15. 10. Lat. 58. 10. Doro, Oboca, a River in Ireland. It takes its Origine in the County of Dublin, and passing thence through that of Catherlogh, receives into its Bed some small Rivers, with which it falls into the Irish Sea near the Port of Arcklow. Dorsetshire, Durotriges, is bounded on the North with Somersetshire and Wiltshire; on the West with Devonshire, and some part of Somersetshire; on the East, with Hampshire; and on the South, which is the longest side, by the British Sea: generally fruit∣ful; the North parts full of Woods; from whence it descends by fruitful Hills and pleasant Meadows, in∣termixed one with another, to the very Shoars of the Ocean. The principal City in it is Dorchester. The principal Rivers, the Stower and the Frome. The Ho∣nourable Charles Sackvill is the Sixth of this Family, that has born the Title of Earl of Dorset: he suc∣ceeded his Father in 1667. The Beauforts and the Greys had enjoyed the Title of Marquesses of Dorset before. The last of which was Henry Grey Duke of Suffolk, beheaded in 1553. Dorsten, Dorsta, a City of Westphalia in Germany, upon the River Lype, which falls into the Wesel at Ducat: this City is under the Elector of Cologne, well fortified; but yet it has of late been often taken and retaken. It stands ten Miles from Cologne to the North, and a little less from Munster to the South-West. Dort, Dordracum, sometime called Dordrecht, is the principal Town in the County or Earldom of Holland; seated at the Mouth of the Maes in South-Holland, seven Leagues from Leyden to the South, five from Breda to the North, and three from Rot∣terdam to the South-East. This was the Seat of the Counts of Holland in ancient times, and then of great consideration. In 1421. by a violent Inundation of the Sea, the Vahal, and the Maes, (in which sixty two good Towns were irrecoverably lost) this City, which was before a Continent, was turned into an Island. There perished then one hundred thousand persons, Con tuti li loro beni, with all their Wealth and Goods: and only some little part of the Land, has been since recovered. The City is great, beautiful, rich, potent, and has many gentile Buildings, both pub∣lick and private; but the great Church which is de∣dicated to the Virgin Mary, and was founded in 1363. is exceedingly magnificent. In ancient times it was the Staple of the Rhinish Wines; and of the Corn that came from Guelderland, Cleves and Ju∣liers, which contributed much to the Wealth and Populousness of it; thus far Guicciardin. Also fa∣mous for the Synod here holden against the Remon∣strants or Arminians in 1618. and 1619. When Philip II. King of Spain made his Royal Entry in 1549. they thus expressed the site and glory of this Place; Me Mosa & Ʋvalis cum Linga Merua{que} cingunt, Aeternam Batavae Virginis ecce Fidem. by which is shewn, that she stands upon four Rivers (the Meuse, the Merwe, the Rhine and the Linghe) and was never taken by any Enemy. Dortmund, Termonia, Dormania, a City in the Circle of Westphalia in the County of Mark, or Mar∣kischlandt, upon the River Emser; five German Miles from Dorsten to the South-East, and seven from Munster to the South-West. This City is small, but rich and populous, a Free and Imperial City, one of the Hanse-Towns, notwithstanding the Pretences of the Duke of Brandenburgh, who is Ma∣ster of the Mark, in which it stands. There was a Council celebrated here in the year 1005. by the order of the Emperour St. Henry. Dotecom, a small Town in the Dutchy of Guel∣derland in the Low-Countrys, two Miles from Does∣borck, upon the Issel. It surrendred to the French in 1672. being a place of no Strength. Dou, Doux, Dubis, and Alduadubis, a River of France: it ariseth in Switzerland, from the Moun∣tain of Jura, near Mortay in the Franche County; and running North-East, it watereth Franchimon and Montbeliart; where it turns and runs South-West by Lisle, Clerval, Besanzon and Dole; beneath which it receiveth the Louve, a considerable River from the South; and at Verdun it ends in the Saone, Araris. It is called in the Maps Le Doule. Douay, Duacum, a City of Flanders, upon the River Scarpe, which falls into the Schelde, about one Mile lower; in the Borders of Artois and Flanders, five Leagues from Cambray to the South-West, four from Arras to the North. At first only a Castle; which being almost ruined, Amatus a Bishop repai∣red it in 665. But now a great and a fortified City, and has a fine Magazin well furnished. In 1572. Phi∣lip II. King of Spain made it an University; and opened those Colleges for the English Roman Catho∣licks, which have rendered it more known to this Na∣tion, than any other thing. Taken by the King of
France in 1667. and by the Treaty of Aquisgrane confirmed to him, so that it is still in his Pos∣session. Doue, Dovaeum, Duaeum, a Town in the Duke∣dom of Anjou in France, beyond the Loyre, upon the River Layon, four Leagues from Saumur to the South-West, and seven from Angers to the South-East. Though this is now a small Village, yet it deserves to be taken notice of for an Amphitheatre built here in the times of the Roman Empire, which is still standing, and almost perfect: it contains only sixteen hundred Foot in Compass, and yet is so con∣trived, that above fifteen thousand persons might see their Exercises without incommoding each other: there are here also Vaults and Sewers built under the Earth, and Arched with wonderful Art and Ex∣pence. § Dove, a River in Staffordshire, upon which Tudbury stands. Dover, Dorovernum, Darvernum, DƲBRIS, is a very ancient strong Town, seated in the middle of the Eastern part or Shoar of Kent, upon high Cliffs; twelve Miles from Canterbury to the South-East, and fifty five from London, and seven Leagues distant by Sea from Calais in France. That part of the Town next the Sea had anciently a Wall, some of which is still standing. On the top of a rugged high Cliff or Rock, is a stately and very strong Castle, which may be supposed to have been built by the Romans: how∣ever this place was certainly a Station of theirs, and has ever since been reputed one of the Keys of England, at all times carefully guarded: besides it is one of the Cinque-Ports, and in times past was to set out to the Wars one and twenty Ships. Therefore Phi∣lip King of France said, that Lewis his Son (when called in hither against King John by the Barons) had not one foot of Land in England, if he were not Master of Dover-Castle. It had formerly seven Parish Churches, now two; and it is now (as here∣tofore) most frequented upon the account of its being the shortest passage into France. The Hono∣rable Henry Lord Jarmin was created Baron of Do∣ver in the first year of King James II. But before in Anno 1627. Henry Carey, Viscount Rochford and Baron Hunsden, enjoyed the Title from King Charles I. of Earl of Dover. Dour or Adour, Aturus, a River of Aquitaine, the Southern part of France, or rather three Rivers called by the same Name: the principal of these ri∣seth in Bigorre, out of the Pyrenean Hills, near Ba∣retge; and running North, watereth Tarbe; then turning Westward, it passeth on the North of Aire, St. Sever, and Dax or Acqs; so falleth into the Bay of Biscay at Bayonne, having entertained Gaue de Oleron, Gaue de Pau, and several other Rivers. The Outlet was anciently at le Bocau, six Leagues beneath Bayonne; but by the Industry of Lewis de Foix, an excellent Ingineer and Architect of France, in 1579. its course was altered, as Thuanus saith. The same Gentleman was the Contriver of the Palace in Spain, and the Light-House at the Mouth of the Garronne, called Tour de Cordovan. Dourdan a small Town in the District of Hure∣pois in the Isle of France, upon the River Orge, towards the Frontiers of la Beauce, thirteen Leagues from Pa∣ris, and two or three from Estampes. The Huguenots took and almost ruined it in the years 1562, 1567. It had been often mortgaged, sold, and remitted from one to another, before Lewis XIII. redeemed and reu∣nited it to the Crown in 1610. Dourlens, Doulendium, a Town in Picardy in France, very strongly fortified; on the Borders of Artois, upon the River Asselane, which falls into the British Sea between Crotoy and Estaple; six Leagues from Amiens to the North, and seven from Arras to the South. This Town did heretofore belong to the Earls of Pontieu, and became united to the Crown of France in 1559. Doustre, Dostra, a River of France in the Vi∣comte de Turene, in Limosin. Le Doux. See Dou. Douzi, Duziacum, Duodeciacum, a Castle in the Diocese of Rheims in France, upon the River Cher, betwixt Ivoy and Sedan. Remarkable for two Coun∣cils celebrated at it in the years 871. 874. The first of which deposed and imprisoned Hinmar Bishop of Laon (for adhering to the Papal Interest contrary to the Usage and Liberties of the Gallican Church), who some time after had his Eys put out. Dowglass, a Castle in Cuysdale, in the middle of the Southern part of Scotland, which takes its Name from the River Dowglass, as doth also the Dale or Valley in which it stands. This Castle is seated about six Scotch Miles West of Lanrick, where Dowglass River unites with the Cluyd; fifteen from Glasguo to the South, and thirty five from Edinburgh to the South-West. It is only memorable for its Earls some∣times so very powerful, they were a terror to the Kings of Scotland themselves; there being at one time six Earls of this Family; that is, Dowglas, Angus, Ormond, Wigton, Murray and Morton, as Mr. Cambden reckons them. § There is a Castle of this Name in the Isle of Man. Down, Dunum, a City and Bishoprick in the Pro∣vince of Ʋlster in Ireland, the Bishop of which is un∣der the Archbishop of Armagh. The Bishoprick of Connor has been united to it ever since 1442. The City stands upon the Irish Sea, upon a Peninsula made by the Sea and the Lake of Cone, which affords it an excellent Haven, twenty Miles from Dormore to the East, thirty two from Carrick fergus to the South. The County of Down is bounded on the East by the Irish Sea; on the North by the County of Antrim, and the Lake of Neaugh; on the West by Armagh; and on the South by the County of Louth, from which it is severed by the River Newry. This County, saith Mr. Cambden, is generally very fruitful, where it is not overspread with Woods, and has several safe Har∣bors upon the Seas Down is one of the most an∣cient Towns in Ireland; made more famous by kee∣ping the Bones of S. Patrick, S. Bridget and S. Co∣lumbus, than by the mention which Ptolomy has made of it, by the Name of Dunum; though not in its right place. Downham, a Market Town in the County of Norfolk, in the Hundred of Clackcloss, upon the River Ouse, over which it hath a Bridge. Downton or Duncton, a Market Town in Wilt∣shire; the Capital of its Hundred, situated upon the Salisbury Avon. It returns two Burgesses to the Par∣liament. Drac, Dracus, a River in the Dauphinate in France, which riseth about four Leagues North of Embrun; and running Northward falls into the Isere at Grenoble; bringing with it another small River which comes from La Grace, and falls into the Drac at Viville, four Miles South of Grenoble. Draco or Drago, Acragas or Agragas, a River of Sicily; called Biagio, di Gergenti, di Naro also; and falls into the African Sea, three Miles beneath Ger∣gentum to the East, thirty five West of Terra Nova. Dragone, Draco, a small River in Campagnia in Italy, which riseth in Mount Vesuvius; and washing the City of Nocera, falleth into Sarno, a River which divideth the Principatus Citerior, from the Terra di Lavoro; and endeth in the Bay of Naples, eleven Miles South of Naples. Dragonara, once a Bishops See, now a small Village, 7 Miles from S. Severina in Naples, to the West.
Dracone. See Orontes. Dragonera, Colubraria, or Moncolibre, a small desert Rock or Island between Majorca and Valentia, which has its Names from the Snakes and Serpents that only inhabit it. Draguignan, Draguinianum, Dracenae, one of the best situated Towns in Provence in France, in the Di∣ocese of Frejus; adorned with a Collegiate Church, and divers Religious Houses. Its Arms are observable; being a Dragon with this Motto, Alios nutrio, meos devoro. Drangiana regio, an ancient Province of the Kingdom of Persia, in the most Eastern part thereof, now called Sigistan or Sitsistan. Its principal Cities were Ariaspe and Propthasia. Dravaniza. See the Vistula. The Drave or Dravus, called by the Germans Draw and Trave, by the Hungarians Trab, has its Rise from the Alps in Tyrol: and running Eastward through Carinthia and Stiria, entereth Hungaria at Serinwar, where it receiveth the Muer out of Sti∣ria, and another from the Lake of Balatan in Hun∣gary; so dividing the Lower Hungary from Sclavo∣nia, it passeth to the Bridge of Esseck; where a little lower it falleth into the Danube by two Mouths. Dr. Brown saith, it ariseth in Saltzburglant, and falls into the Danube near Erdoed, the old Tentobrigum, after it hath passed from its Head, about three hundred Miles. About its entrance into Hungary, it receiveth the Mur, and far above this I found it a considerable River, having passed it between Cla∣genfort and Mount Leubell in Carinthia by two long Wooden Bridges, and an Island in the middle between them Dravenna. See Trave. Draun, Drachonis, Duras, a River and Town of Austria; the River falls into the Danube from the South a little beneath Lintz, twenty six Miles West of Vienna; and brings with it several other smaller Rivers. Draunsee, a Lake out of which this River riseth. Drausen, a Lake in Prussia in Poland, near El∣bing and Dantzick, made by the Vistula. Draw. See the Drave. Drayton, a Market Town in the County of Salop in the Hundred of North Bradford upon the River Terne, where it divides this County from Stafford∣shire. The Houses of York and Lancaster fought a Battel here. Drazzi. See Durazzo. Drente, Drentia, one of the three parts of Over-Yssel, a Province of the Ʋnited States of Holland, ly∣ing Northward, and almost all covered with Mar∣shes: the chief Town of which is Coevorden or Coe∣worden. The French possessed themselves of this Territory in 1672. and two years after abandoned it to the Hollanders. Dresden or Dresen, Dresda, the principal Town of Misnia in the Ʋpper Saxony, seated on both sides of the Elbe, five Miles from the Borders of Bohemia, and three above Meissen. This City being in a plea∣sant and delightful place, was in 800. fortified with Walls and Dikes against the Bohemians by Charles the Great. The succeeding Princes have not been less careful of it. So that it is for the strength and magnificence of the Buildings, the best Town in Misnia. The Elbe is here covered with a wonderful Bridge of Stone. The Electors of Saxony have also made this City the place of their Residence, and built here a strong Castle, and a noble Magazine. Dreux, Drocum, Durocasses, Druidensis Pagus, a Town in the Territory of Blasois in Normandy upon the River Blaise, sixteen Miles from Paris to the West. It is seated at the foot of an Hill; a very an∣cient City and Earldom, having an old decaying Castle. Here in 1562. was a sharp Fight between the Hugo∣nots and the Roman Catholicks, in which the Prince of Conde was taken, and nine thousand men of both sides slain. In 1593. Henry le Grand besieged and took this Town in eighteen days. The ancient Druides are supposed to have dwelt in it. Drillae, an ancient people of Cappadocia in the Lesser Asia, towards the Euxine Sea, betwixt Trebi∣sonda and Cerasus in Xenophon's relation, or Colchos in Arian's. They had the reputation of good Sol∣diers. Drillo, Achates, a River of Sicily; it falls into the African Sea, six Miles East of Terra Nova; and has a Town upon it, called by the same Name. Drinawar. See Drino. Drino, a River of Servia, which riseth from the Mountains, that part Servia from Albania; and run∣ning Northward from Novomont by Prisen, a little above Drinawahr, (Drinopolis a Town seated in an Island made by this River) it receiveth the Lim, and passeth into the Save, five German Miles above Al, the old Sirmium. § Drino Bianco, the White Drin, is a River of Albania, which ariseth from the same Mountains with the former, but more East, near Sco∣pia or Ʋschup in Servia; and running Westward, takes in Drino Niero, the Black Drin, which ariseth from two Lakes in Albania; being thus united with the former, and two others from the North, they pass Alessio, and fall into the Bay of Drin (Sinus Drinolius) over against Manfredona in Italy. Drista, Silistria, the principal City in Bulgaria. Drivasto, Triastum, Drivastum, an Episcopal Ci∣ty of Albania, upon the Lake of Scutari, under the Turk. This See was a Suffragan to the Archbishop of Antivari. Droan or Dron, Drahonas, a River in the Bishop∣rick of Treves. Drobafaf, Chromium, the Scythian or Frozen Sea, North-East of Russia, and Nova Zemla. Drogheda, a City in the County of Louth, in the Province of Leinster in Ireland, called by the Irish Drogadagh and Treda; upon the River Boyne, twenty two Miles North of Dublin. It has an excellent and safe Haven: in Mr. Cambden's time well peopled, and much frequented. This Town falling into the hands of the Duke of Ormond in 1649. and stormed soon after by Oliver Cromwell September 11. of the same year; he put all the Garrison (which was about four thousand) to the Sword; and as to the Inhabitants, spared neither Sex, Age, Poor or Rich, but intirely ru∣ined all before him; not regarding the good Service this City had done in the beginning of the War, by preserving the Reliques of the English Nation from the cruelty and rage of the Rebellious Irish. Sir Ar∣thur Aston, the Governour, perished with the Garrison. It being the first place the Tyrant took in Ireland, this cruelty was intended to strike a terror into the others, that he might with the greater facility reduce the Kingdom under his Dominion; and accordingly he had incredible success in all his future attempts. It surrendred to King William in two days after the Fight at the Boyne. Droinholm, a Royal House of Pleasure of the Kings of Sweden, one League from Stockholm. Droitwich, a Borough Town in Worcestershire in the Hundred of Halfshire, upon the Banks of the Salwarp. It returns two Members to the House of Commons, and is a noted place for its Salt-pits. La Drome, Druna, Druma, a River which ariseth in the Confines of Gapencois in Dauphine in France, and having watered Die and Crest, falls into the Rhosne, three Leagues below Valence.
Dronfield, a Market Town in Derbyshire in the hundred of Scarsdale. Drontheim, or Druntheim, Nidrosia, called also Trondhem, was heretofore the Capital of the King∣dom of Norway; made an Archbishops See, and a Metropolis by Pope Eugenius III. It stands on the Western Shoars of Norway, seventy five German Miles from Bergen to the North, and one hundred and ten from Stock-Holm to the North-West, in Long. 28. 02. Lat. 64. 10. Its Latin name comes from the River Nider, upon which it stands. This City is now a very great Mart, and has a large and a safe Harbour, yet lies open without any Fortifications, being in this, more like a great Village than a City: Heretofore much greater; the many fires which have happened in it have lessened it; and besides the Church of S. Olao, which was once the most beautiful Church in all the North, is now buried in its Ashes: it has also a Castle, taken by the Swedes and granted them by a Treaty in 1658. but in 1660. the Danes again recovered it. The Country about, is called the Go∣vernment or Prefecture of Drontheim; granted to the Swedes with the City, but since recovered with it too. This is the largest Prefecture in Norway, reaching from North to South five hundred Miles, and from West to East one hundred. Droses, Jernus, a River of Conaught, in the County of Clare, which falls into the Bay of Shan∣non at Dinghanbeg, Dinga, East of Clare two Miles. Le Drot, Drotius, a River in Aquitaine in France, which ariseth at Montpasier, ten Miles North-West of Cahors; and running West falls into the Garrone, over against Bazas, nine Miles East of Bourdeaux. Druidae, Druides, the Priests of the antient Gauls, compared by Laertius with the Magi, Gymno∣sophistae, and Philosophers, of Persia, India and Greece, for their pretensions to Learning and Piety and Authority over the people: of whose Supersti∣tions they were the Authors, as of their affairs, publick or private, the Arbitrators. The Eugabes of Ammi∣anus Marcellinus, the Saronides of Did. Siculus, and the Semnotheoi of others, were several Orders of these Priests, according as they applyed themselves either to the services of the Altar, or to the Contemplation of the Works of Nature. In the former, they made Sacrifices of Men, till the Emperors Angustus, Tibe∣rius and Claudius, by repeated Interdicts at last broke them of that barbarity. Their other they delivered to the publick in thousands of Verses unwritten, only committed to Memory, and passing the course of Ages by Tradition. Their name of Druides some derive from , because of a particular esteem they had for an Oak. Some from Deru in the Celtick Language, of the same signification. They had a Chief Priest over them, in the nature of a Soveraign Pontiff. And we read, the Gauls were so possessed by them with the belief of the immortality of the soul, that they would lend mony in this world upon con∣dition to be paid in the next. Valer. Max. The Town Dreux in Normandy is supposed to be so called from these Druides. Drummore, Drummoria, a City in the County of Lowth in the Province of Ʋlster in Ireland, up∣on the River Lagang; with a Bishops See under the Archbishop of Armagh. Druses, Druzes, Drusi, a people living in Grots and Caverns about the Mountain Libanus in Asia, and onwards, as far as to the Dead Sea: following in Religion the Institutions of one Isman or Ismael, a Prophet pretended, which allow them to marry with their own Children, or Sisters, or Brothers, and to live in perfect liberty from all such like precepts and ties, as are in use amongst the Jews, Christians; and Ma∣hometans. They Traffick with the French Merchants for Silks: and say, they are descended from the French that went to the Conquest of the Holy Land with Godfrey of Bouillon; being after the loss of Jerusalem in 1187. forced for safety to retire hither, under the command of one of the House of Dreux. Drut, Dara, a River of Carmania in Persia. It falls into the Persian Gulph over against the City of Ormus, having passed between Fafa and Cha∣bon. Duare, a strong Fortress of Dalmatia, upon a Hill, not far from Almissa. Taken from the Turks by the Venetians in 1646. and soon after lost again. In 1652. retaken and demolished. Whereupon the Turks, to hinder the Incursions of the Morlaques out of Croatia, rebuilt it: yet in 1684. the Morlaques forced it and there is now a Venetian Garrison in it. Dublin, Dublinum; in Irish, Balacleigh, the Ca∣pital City of the Kingdom of Ireland in the Province of Leinster, in a County of the same Name, upon the River Leffy, which is the noblest River in all this Kingdom, and maketh a Capacious Haven here, at about twenty Leagues distance from Holyhead in Wales. This City is called EBLANA by Ptole∣my. When or by whom it was first built, is not known; but old it must needs be, by its being men∣tioned by him. Saxo Grammaticus acquaints us, how much it suffered by the Danes; it was afterwards un∣der Edgar King of England, and Harald Harfager King of Norway. In the year 1151. P. Eugenius III. made it an Archbishops See, with the Title and Ju∣risdiction of a Primacy. Henry II. having Conquered Ireland, sent hither from Bristol a Colony: where∣by it began to Flourish more and more, and became the Capital of the Kingdom, the Seat of the Lieu∣tenant, the Courts of Justice, and their Parliaments: strengthened with a Castle on the East side, built by Henry Loundres a Bishop in 1220. and near it there was a Royal Palace built by Henry II. King of England. It has a College for Students, which is an University of it self, founded by Q. Elizabeth in in 1591. This was attempted before by Alexander Bicknor Archbishop of Dublin, who in 1320. ob∣tained from the Pope a Bull for it; but the trouble∣some times that followed, defeated that good design then; at the North Gate is a Bridge of hewen Stone, built by King John. It has a Cathedral of great anti∣quity, Dedicated to S. Patrick, the Apostle of the Irish Nation, and built at several times; in which are a Dean, two Archdeacons, and twenty two Pre∣bendaries: there is another fair Collegiate Church in the City, called Christs Church, built in 1012. and about thirteen Parochial ones. In more ancient times this City was Governed by a Provost; but in 1409. Henry IV. granted them License to choose every year a Mayor, and two Bailiffs, changed into Sheriffs by Edward IV. thus far Cambden. King Charles II. honored them with a Lord Mayor. This City escaping the fury of the Massacre, was besieged by the Parlia∣ment Forces; and by the Duke of Ormond, by the Kings Order, delivered to the English, rather than the Irish Rebels; for they were now united against their King: and when afterwards June 21. 1649. he in∣deavoured to recover it, his Army was broken by a Sally, and totally defeated; and this City continued in their Hands till 1660. It has been extraordina∣rily enlarged in its Buildings in the twenty years last past. The County of Dublin is bounded on the East by the Irish Sea; on the West with the County of Kil∣dare; on the South by the little Territories of O▪ Tooles, and O. Brians; on the North by the County
of Meath, and a small River called Nanny. The Soil is fruitful, as to every thing but Wood; so that they use Sea-Coal, and Turf for their Fewel. It is well Inhabited, Rich, full of excellent Sea-Port Towns. Ducey, a Town of Normandy upon the River Ardee, in the Diocese of Auranches. Ducy, a Town of Normandy betwixt Caen and S. Lo, in the Diocese of Bayeux. Duderstad, Duderstadium, a Town in the Duke∣dom of Brunswick, upon the River Wipper, eight Miles from Cassel to the North-East. This Town, though in the Duchy of Thuringia, has belonged to the Elector of Mentz ever since 1365; and is the Capital of the Territory of Eichfeld. Dudley, a Market Town in Worcestershire, in the hundred of Halfshire. Duero, or Douro, Durius, Doria, a River of Spain, called Douro by the Portuguese: one of the greatest Rivers in that Kingdom, most frequently mentioned by ancient Greek and Latin Writers. The Head of it is in Old Castile, from Mount Idubeda, about five Miles South of Tarragona; running South, it watereth Soria, and Almasun; there bending West, it passeth by Osina, Aranda de Duero, and Rosa; beneath which last it takes in Duratonio, or Stranda de Duero, and Piznerga from the North; which with several others fall into the Duero, two Miles beneath Valladolid; then passing by Toro and Camora, and taking in, from the North, Esla, (which brings the Orbego), so to Miranda de Duero, it en∣tertains Tormes from Salamanca; soon after which it entereth Portugal, a little above Olivenca to the South, and Eluas to the North; where the Ri∣vers that fall into it on both sides, are so small, and many, that it is not worth the mentioning them: turning Westward, this great River passeth by Lemego on the South, to Porta on the North, where he pays his last Tribute to the Atlantick Ocean; and after a Course of ninety Leagues from his rise, as his last be∣nefit, he forms a large, deep, and safe Harbour at Porta. Silius Italicus mentions it in the number of the Golden sanded Rivers. Duerstede, Batavodurum, Durostadium, a Town in Guelderland, upon the Rhine commonly called VVyck; three German Miles from Ʋtrecht to the South East. It belongs now to the Province of Ʋtrecht, and is a part of the Dominions of the United Provinces. Duesme, a Town in the Dukedom of Burgundy in France, upon the River Seine. It gives Name to the Territory of Duesmois, lying towards the Source of the same River. Duisbourgh, Duisburgum, Duysburgh, is a small City in the Dukedom of Cleves; upon the River Roer, which a little lower falls into the Rhine; eight Miles from Cologne North, and three from VVesel South. There was a Council held here in 927. Here∣tofore an Imperial Free City; but now under the Do∣minion of the Elector of Brandenburgh, who Octob. 14. 1655. opened here an University. Gerardus Mer∣cator the great Geographer of his time died here in 1594. Dulcigno, Dolcigno, Olchinum, Olcinum, Ʋlci∣num, a City of Albania, which is a Bishop's See, un∣der the Archbishop of Antivari; with a safe Port on the Venetian Gulph, between Budoa to the North, and Lodrin to the South; twenty four French Miles from Scutari to the West. This City is under the Dominion of the Turks, and reduced to a mean Con∣dition. Dulcinde, a Part of Carmania Deserta, upon the Entrance of the Persian Gulph; one hundred twenty five German Miles South of Ormus. There is a City, River, and Province of this Name. Dulverton, a Market-Town in Somersetshire in the Hundred of VVilliton, upon the River Ex. Dummer-Zee, Dummeria, a great Lake in Ger∣many, between Mounster to the West, Osnaburgh to the South, and Diepholt to the North. The River Hunt runs through it, which falls into the VVesel a little below Bremen. Dun, or Done, a River of Yorkshire. See Don∣caster. § A Town also in the Dukedom of Barrois in Lorrain in France, near the Meuse, betwixt Ste∣nay and Damvilliers. § Another in the Province of la Marche. Duna. See Dwina. Dunawert. See Donawert. Dunbar, Dumbarum, or the Castle of Bar, is a Town in the County of Lothain in Scotland, upon the Eastern Shoars; twenty Scotch Miles North of Berwick, and the same distance East of Edinburgh. Heretofore it had a Castle on a Hill; as it has still a Ha∣ven to the Sea. But this Town is chiefly memorable for a Defeat given to the Covenanters of Scotland, by Oli∣ver Cromwel, Septemb. 23. 1650. when an End was put to that Perjurious, Rebellious, Bloody Faction, who here began the Payment of that Debt they owed to the Divine Justice, for having sold the best and most Holy of all Princes, (Charles the Martyr,) to the English Rebels. For from that Day, Presbytery has been in Bondage, and truckled under the Weight of that horrid Crime; and may she never more lift up her Head to embroil Kingdoms, and persecute the Church. Dunblane, Dumblanum, a City of Scotland, in the County of Menteith, which is a Bishop's See un∣der the Archbishop of S. Andrews. It stands on the River Teith, which a little beneath this and Sterling, falls into the Fyrth of Edinburgh; six Miles North of Sterling, and thirty six West of Edinburgh. Dunbritoun, Britannodunum, Castrum Britonum, a Town in the County of Lenox in Scotland, upon a Fyrth or Bay of the same Name, with a strong Castle; where the River Levin falls into the Fyrth; eight Miles from Glasco to the North-West: Also called Dunbarton; because the Britans held it the longest of any Town in Scotland, against the Picts and Scots. The stron∣gest of all the Castles in Scotland, by Nature; being built on a high, craggy, double-headed Rock, both fortified; and between these two it hath only one Passage on the North, hardly passable without Labour and difficulty by a single Person: on the West of it lies the Levin, on the South the Cluyd, on the East a boggy Marsh, which at every Tide is covered with Water. The Britans made this good against the Scots, till in the Year 756. Eadbert King of Nor∣thumberland, and Oeng King of the Picts, forced it to surrender on a Composition. But it was taken on easier Terms, Jan. 5. 1651. by the English Rebels; Sir Charles Erskin surrendering it to them. Dunbritoun Fyrth, a great Bay in the South-West part of Scotland, upon the Irish Seas, so called from this Castle: it begins at Dunskay, and on the South has Galloway, Carrick, Kile, and Cunning∣ham; on the North Menteith, Lenox, Argile, Kil∣more, and Cantry: (besides several smaller,) it has in it the Island of Arran: many of the biggest Rivers of Scotland fall into it; just against it to the West, it has the North-East parts of Ireland, at a small di∣stance; which are extream fruitful, and peopled by Scots for the most part: there are many safe Havens, and populous Towns upon it; and lastly it lies con∣venient for Trade with the Western Plantations, and all the Southern World. Dundalk, Dunkeranum, a small City in the Pro∣vince of Ʋlster, in Ireland, which is a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Armagh, twenty six Miles
from Armagh to the East, in the County of Louth, and sixteen North from Drogheda; surprised by the Rebels in 1641. Retaken the same year by Sir Henry Tichburn by Storm, (after their Forces had been beaten off from the Siege of Drogheda, upon Sir Si∣mon Harcourts arrival with supplies of Men and Mony) but in 1649. they got it again. The Duke of Schomberg continued with his Army here from Sept. 12. 1689, to Novemb. 8. that he retired into Winter Quarters. There was a Battel in the mean time pre∣sented by King James II; but that General thought not fit to accept it. For he strengthned himself in his Trenches, the more his Army was weakned by the Mortality; which in many Circumstances appeared so strange, as not to find in History its parallel; since an Angel destroyed so many thousand in the Camp of Sennacherib. Dundee, or Dundy, Alectum, Deidonium Alle∣ctum, a City in the North of Scotland, in the County of Angus, upon the North side of the Fyrth of Tay, which is a frequented Harbour, and of great safety, ten Miles North of S. Andrews. This is a very strong Town; and in 1651. when almost all Scotland had yielded after the defeat of Dunbar, presumed still to hold out: General Monk, afterwards Duke of Albemarle, coming up and summoning it, upon their refusal to yield, took it by Storm September 1. of that year, though there were in it eight hundred Soldiers, besides Inhabitants: He put all in Arms to the Sword; and Plundred the Town of its Wealth; which amounted in Silver, Gold, and rich Goods, to a vast summ of mony; being then the richest Town in Scotland, and made yet richer by the Neighbour∣hood, who sent what ever they had that was valuable thither, as to a place of security. Sixty Sail of Ships, which lay then in the Harbour, yielded too: after which Aberdeen, and S. Andrews, which only re∣mained to the Covenanters, yielded upon the first Summons. Dunfermeling, Dunfirmeling, is a Town on the North Shoar of the Fyrth of Edinbrow, seventeen Miles from it to the North-West. Once a famous Monastery, the building and the burial place of Mal∣colm, King of the Scots; afterwards advanced to an Earldom in the behalf of Sir Alexander Seton, who being a wise and a great Statesman, was raised by K. James I. from Baron of Tiv, to be Earl of Dun∣fermeling, and Lord Chancellor of Scotland. But much more famous for the birth of Charles I. (the blessed Martyr for the English Church and Nation) who was born here November 19. 1600. Dunfreis, Dunfreia, a Town in the County of Nithesdale in the South of Scotland, upon the River Nith or Nid, near Solway Fyrth. Dungall, dungalia, a Sea-Port-Town and Ca∣stle, and a County in the North-West part of Ireland, in the Province of Ʋlster, on the South side of the River Esk. The County of Dungall has the Ocean on the West; Lagh Gormely, on the South; and Tome Lagh on the North; a Barbarous and Wild place, as Mr. Cambden describes it: See Tirconnel. Dungannon, Dunganum, the chief Town of the Ʋpper Tyrone, in the Province of Ʋlster in Ireland, near Armagh. Dungarvan, a strong well fortified Town, with a Castle, and Haven, situate on the Southern Shoar of Ireland, in the County of Waterford, in the Pro∣vince of Mounster, thirteen Miles from Waterford to the West. First granted by Henry VI. to Talbot, Earl of Shrewsbury; and afterwards, for conve∣nience, annexed to the Crown of England by Act of Parliament. Dungesby Head, Veruvium Promontorium, the most Northern Cape of all Scotland, which lies in 59. deg. of Latitude; whereas Novantum, the Mule of Galloway, the most Southern, lies in 55. 10. Dunkeld, or Dunkelden, Castrum Caledonium, Dulcheldinum, a City on the Tau, in the County of Perth, ten Miles North of Perth; which was adorned by King David of Scotland, with a Bishops See, un∣der the Archbishop of S. Andrews; supposed to have been the City of the ancient Caledonians. Dunkeran, Donequine, or Doneyne, Juernis, a small Town and Port upon the Gulph of the River Maine, in the County of Desmond in Mounster, in Ireland. Dunkirk, Dunquerque, Dunquerca, called by the Flemmings, Duynskerke; and by the Italians and Spaniards, Doncherca; is a large, strong, well fortified Town, and Sea-Port in Flanders, which has a very noble and strong Castle, lately built: 3 Leagues from Graveline, 5 from Newport, and 6 from Calais. This Town was first fortified by Charles V. It stands on the River Colme, upon the Shoars of the German Ocean. Taken by the French in 1646. but during their Civil Wars, the Spaniards recovered it again. In 1658. it was retaken by the English and French united; chiefly by the valor of the English. Don John of Au∣stria, and all the Spanish Forces, who came to relieve it, being totally routed and defeated, the Town was surrendred to the French; but by them according to Articles put into the Hands of the English: and so it continued till 1662. when it was sold to the French. The present King of France, Lewis XIV. has be∣stowed incredible cost in fortifying it, in inlarging and securing the Haven by Mounds and Forts. Dun-le-Roy, Regiodunum, a Town in Berry, in France, upon the River Auronne: five Miles from Bourges to the South, and nine from la Charite to the South-West. § Another in the Dukedom of Bur∣gundy near Beaujolois. Dunmour, or Dunmore, a Market Town in the County of Essex. The Capital of its Hundred. Dunois, a Territory within the Province of Beauce in France; the Capital whereof is Chateau Dun. It was advanced to the dignity of a Peerdom and Dukedom in 1525. Dunnington, a Market Town in Lincolnshire in the Hundred of Kirton, and the Division of Holland: situated in a waterish Flat. Dunnington-Castle, a Market Town in Leicester∣shire, in the Hundred of Goscote: honoured with a noble Seat belonging to the Earl of Huntingdon. Dunstable, a Market Town in Bedfordshire, in the Hundred of Manshead, upon a Chalky dry Hill. Built by K. Henry I. out of the ruins of the ancient Magsovinium. K. Edward I. caused a noble Column or Cross to be here erected in memory of Eleanor his Queen, whose Corps rested in this place in their journey from Lincolnshire to Westminster Abbey. Dunstaburge, Bebba, a Castle in Northumber∣land, on the Sea Shoar, eighteen Miles South of Ber∣wick, and twenty five North of Newcastle; which belongs to the Duchy of Lancaster: Bede reports that this Castle was taken, and burnt by Penda, King of the Mercians. Roger Hoveden thus de∣scribes it; Bebba is a strong City, not very great, but containing two or three fields; having one hollow entrance into it, and that raised on high by Stairs after a wonderful manner; on the pitch of an Hill is a very fair Church; and Westward on the top, a pleasant clear Fountain, adorned with excellent Workmanship. In our times (saith Mr. Cambden) it is rather a Castle, than a Town, yet so big as that it might contain a small City; nor was it esteemed otherwise, when King William Rufus besieged the Rebellious Moubray, who lurked in it. In the Wars between the House of Lan∣caster and York, it was ruined again. And last of all, the Winds and Seas have exercised their rage
upon it, endeavouring to level it, by driving up the Sea Sand into the hollow parts, and fetching down its once haughty Battlements. Dunstafag, Evonium, a small ruined City in the West of Scotland, in the County of Lorne; which has an Haven over against the Island of Maly, fifty five Miles from Dunblane to the West. This was the Seat of the ancient Kings of the Picts, but now a Village, and yet perhaps in a better state, than when it was a Royal City. Dunster, a Market Town in Somersetshire in the Hundred of Scarhampton, by the Sea side. Dunwich, an ancient Corporation, once a potent City, on the Coast of Suffolk. Foelix the Burgundi∣an, who established the East Angles (then wavering) in the Christian Faith, in 630. placed here a Bishops See; which continued till Bisus the fourth Bishop af∣ter him removed to North Elmham; leaving a suf∣fragan Bishop only at Dunwich; in which times it was very populous, and so strong, that it curbed Robert Earl of Leicester, in his Rebellion against his Prince. In the Reign of Henry II. it had a Mint: William of Newbery calls it Vicus insignis, variis opibus refer∣tus, a Town of good note, well stored with all sorts of Riches. But it is now a poor small Corporation, which bating the honor of sending two Burgesses to the Parliament, has nothing to Consolate it self withal. Time, the Sea, and Men as bad as either, have by de∣grees ruined not only the Town, but the greatest part of the ground it stood upon; and instead of its ancient variety of Riches, there is now an uniform Poverty, and desolation. Durance, Druentius, Durantius, a very rapid Ri∣ver in Provence in France, which infesteth the Coun∣try with frequent Inundations. It ariseth from Mount Genebra, one of the Cottian Alpes, not far from Pignerol in Piedmont; or as others, in the Dauphi∣nate near Brianzon; and passing on, watereth Em∣brun, and Gap; and entring Provence, takes in the Hubaye, the Buech, the Suse; then passing Sisteron, and Manosque, it entertains the Verdon; and a little beneath Cavaillon and Avignon, unites with the Rhosne. It will neither indure Boats nor Bridges, by reason of its great rapidity and swiftness, especially beneath Si∣steron. Durango, Durangum, a City of North America, in the Province of New Biscay; but near the Confines of New Spain, towards the Zacatecas; built at the foot of an Hill; which was made a Bishoprick by the Archbishop of Mexico, in 1620. §. There is a small Town of this name also in the Principality of Biscay in the Kingdom of Old Spain. Durazzo, Durracium, Dyrrachium, Epidamnus, called by the Turks, Drazzi, by the French, Duras; is a very ancient and much celebrated City of Mace∣donia, in the Kingdom of Albania. It has now a strong Castle, and a large Haven; seated on the Eastern Shoar of the Adriatick Sea, upon the River Argentaro or Arzento, North-East of Brindisi or Brundusium in the Kingdom of Naples, from which it is distant one hundred and twenty Miles. Built by the Corcyreans (now called Corfu) in the Year of the World 3327. One hundred and thirty years after Rome, and six hundred twenty one before the Birth of our Saviour. In the Year of the World 3512. being much streightned by its Fugitives, it had re∣course to the Assistance of the Corinthians: but the Corcyreans taking part with those Exiles, the Corin∣thians were beaten; which drew on an Athenian War, and that the Peloponnesian. This City fell first with the rest of Greece under the Power of the Kings of Macedonia; and together with Macedonia was subject to the Romans, who made it a Roman Colony. In the times of the Civil War between Cae∣sar and Pompey, it was the Seat of great Actions: for Pompey chose it, and it was the only prosperous Scene of that Party; and had proved the ruin of Caesar, if Pompey had pursued his first successes with vigor. Not long before, it had given entertainment to Cicero in his Exile; and appears every where favourable to the Republicans. It was also a Roman Colony, but when setled I cannot now find. In the times of Christia∣nity it became an Archbishops See under the Patriarch of Constantinople, as it is still; in the later times of the Greek Empire it had Princes of the Caroline Line of France, from whom it passed to the Venetians; and from them it was taken by Mahomet III. But the Venetians Sacked it in 1554. by their Fleet. Long. 44. 20. Lat. 41. 42. Duren, Dura, Duria, Marcodurum, a City in the Dukedom of Juliers in Germany, upon the River Roer, not two Miles from Gulick to the South, and five from Cologne to the West. This was the ancient Marcodurum, in the opinion of Cluverius, and all the other Geographers; made a Free Imperial City by Charles IV. Emperor of Germany. Charles V. being incensed against John Duke of Cleves, (who had married Mary, the Daughter of William▪ the last Duke of Juliers; and Leagued▪ with the French King Francis I. against him) in 1545. entred the Dukedom of Juliers, and after a sharp Siege took this City and burnt it: it has been reduced into sub∣jection again, and is now under the Duke of New∣bourg, by the Treaty of Faisans in 1659. Three Councils were Celebrated here in the years 761. 775. 779. Durgat, Phrygia, a part of Anatolia or Asia the Less. Durham, Dunehelmum, a City and County Pala∣tine in the North of England. The City is seated up∣on the River Ware, in a Peninsula made by this Ri∣ver, which washeth three sides of it, and gives pas∣sage into it by three Bridges. The ground of it is a natural Hill, which contributes no less than the River to the strength and pleasantness of its situation: also secured by a Wall, and a Castle in the midst of it; the Cathedral (being a Bishops See, under the Arch∣bishop of York) is towards the South side of the City, and of great beauty. This City is yet of no great Antiquity, being built or rather begun by the Monks of Dindisfarn, in 995. before which it was a Wood, and then not cleared without difficulty. In the times of William the Conqueror it was imployed by the Saxons, as a place of Refuge against him; but they were soon forced to betake themselves to Scotland for their greater security. VVilliam the Conqueror being possessed of it, built the Castle for a Curb to these Northern parts, and a security against the Scots. The present Cathedral was began about the same time by VVilliam de Careleph then Bishop of Durham, and finished by his Successor. This City gave great Pro∣tection to the English in 1346, when David Bruce, King of Scotland, harrassed the Nothern parts, whilst Edward III. besieged Calais: but the said Bruce was soon after overthrown in Battel, and taken Priso∣ner at Nevills Cross. In the times of Edward VI. the Bishoprick was dissolved by Act of Parliament, and given to that Prince; but Q. Mary dissolved that Statute, and restored the Bishoprick with all its Fran∣chises. In 1640. in the beginning of the Rebellion, it fell after Newbury Fight into the hands of the Scots; and being left by them the year following, it followed the fate of the War, as the Parties prevailed upon each other. Long. 22. 00. Lat. 54. 57. The County or Bishoprick of Durham, is bounded on the North and West by the River Derwent, which separates it from Northumberland; on the South by the River Tees, which parts it from Westmorland West,
and York to the South; and on the East it has the Sea. The West is full of Mines of Iron; the Valleys are fruitful here also, and on the Eastern side the Coun∣try is very fruitful of Grass, Corn and Sea-Coal. Though all the English Kings were liberal to this Church upon the account of S. Cuthbert; yet Gu∣thrun the Dane was the first that granted this Bi∣shoprick o County to the Church of Durham; which was afterward confirmed by Canutus, another Danish Prince, and by William the Conqueror; ever since which time, it has been accounted a County Pala∣tine. Dr. Nathaniel Crew, the present Bishop of this Diocese, (being the LXX. in number from S. Aida∣nus) was translated from Oxford hither in the year 1674. Duringen. See Thuringia. Durlach, or Dourlach, Durlachum, Budoris, a Ci∣ty in the Marquisate of Baden in Schwaben in Ger∣many, scarce two Miles from the Rhine, to the East, and four from Baden. This is the Capital of the Marquisate of Durlach, and the lower part of the Marquisate of Baden, which bounds it on the South; the Rhine lies on the West; the Dukedom of Wir∣temberg on the East; and the Palatinate of the Rhine on the North. It is subject to its Marquess of the House of Baden, who has some other Territories and Honors in these Parts. Durseley, a Market Town in Gloucestershire in the Hundred of Wotton. Dusseldorp, Dusseldorpium, the chief Town of the Dutchy of Bergh upon the Rhine, five Miles beneath Cologne. This Town was fortified against the Duke of Brandenburg by the Duke of Newburg in 1613. who has since had his Residence here. Duvelandt, the same with Beveland. Duysburg. See Duisburg. Dwina, Duna, Dzwina, a vast River in Muscovy or Russia, which riseth in the Province of Megrina, from two several Heads that unite at VVologda, one of the principal Cities of Russia; and running North-East, passeth by the Lake of Soeclina, beneath which, it receiveth from the East the River Juga; and a little lower the River VVuyma; then turning North-East, it falls into the VVhite Sea by three Mouths; upon the most Eastern of which, stands Arch-Angel, the only frequented Port of Russia. The heads of this Ri∣ver were called before their union, Jagel and Sachana; and after it Dwina. § There is another River of the same Name, which riseth out of a Lake of the same Name, ten Leagues from the Lake of Fronowo, and the Sources of the Nieper; and falls into the Baltick Sea below Riga, saith Olearius. I suppose this is it which the latter▪ Maps call Duna. This River riseth in a Province of Russia called Novogard, near the Lake VVolga, and the Fountains of the River of that Name; and turning Westward, being augmented by some smaller Rivers, it entereth Lithuania at VVi∣tepks; then passing Poloczko, Drima, Duneberg, Kakenheusen, and separating Livonia from Semigal∣lia, it falls into the Gulph or Bay of Livonia (a part of the Baltick Sea) on the South of Riga, by Du∣nemund, a Castle seated on the Mouth of it. The Muscovites call it Dzwina, saith Baudrand. § The Province of Dwina is the greatest and most Nor∣thern of all Russia; heretofore subject to the Duke of Novogard; one hundred Russian Miles in length. It had formerly but one City, called by the same Name, which stands in the middle of it; but since the Passage to Arch-Angel has been discovered, it is become one of the most considerable Provinces in Russia; Arch-Angel being seated in this Province, and the greatest Trade driven on the Dwina. Dyfy. See Dee, a River in VVales. Dynas-Mouthwye, a Market Town in the Coun∣ty of Merioneth in VVales. The Capital of its Hundred. Dyrne. See Tyrnaw. EA. EAdmont or Eamont, a River in the County of Westmorland, which joins with the Lowther by Whinfeld Forrest. Earne or Lough-Earne, Erno, Erdinus, a Lake in Ʋlster; which passing into the Lake of Devenish, a little more West, they both together fall into the Virgivian or Western Ocean, by the Bay of Walley; between Dungal to the North, and Slego to the South. Easingwold, a Market Town in the North-Riding of Yorkshire, in the Hundred of Bulmer. East-Born, a Market Town in the County of Sussex, in Bevensey Rape. East-Breane, Brenia, a Tract in the County of Cavan, in the Province of Ʋlster in Ireland, near the Lough-Earne. Easton-ness, a Promontory on the Coast of Suffolk, which makes the Northern Point of South∣wold▪ Bay: the most Eastern Cape of the whole King∣dom of England. Eaton, Aetonia, Etona, a Town in Buckingham∣shire, in the Hundred of Stock, upon the River Thames, over against Windsor: made famous by a College of the Foundation of King Henry VI. in which there is a Grammar-School of great esteem for the education of the English youth. Eaune, Heldona, Elna, a River of France, com∣monly called Liane. It ariseth in the Confines of Artois; and running through the County of Bologne, falls into the British Sea at Bologne. Eause, Elusa or Elusaberis, a ruined City of France, commonly called Euse and Eusan, in a Ter∣ritory of the same Name, upon the River Gelize; of∣ten mentioned by Sulpitius Severus, Ammianus and Sidonius. It was once an Archbishops See, and the Metropolis of Novempopulonia: but now an obscure Village in Armagnac in Gascogny; five Miles from Condom West. Civtat is built of late towards the Rumes of it. The Archbishops See was translated to Aux hence. Ebersdorp, Eberstorfium, a Town in the Lower Austria in Germany. It stands upon the Danube, two Miles below Vienna; adorned with a Castle, to which the Emperors delight to retire. Eberstein, a County the Circle of Schwa∣ben in Germany, taking its Name from the Castle Eberstein towards the Dukedom of Wirtemberg: They both belong to the Marquess of Baden. Eberwyck, York. Eblaba, Alabanda, an Inland City of Caria (now Aidinelli) in the Lesser Asia, on the South of the River Madre. Long. 52. 28. Lat. 38. 46. It is a Bishops See under the Archbishop of Staurople or San∣cta Croce. Ebro, Iberus, one of the greatest Rivers of Spain, called by the FrenchEbre It ariseth from the Mountains of the Asturia's in old Castile, near the Village and Castle of Mantillas, from two Springs; and watering the North part of Old Castile, the Towns of Frias, Mi∣randa, Logrono and Tudela, (where it takes in the River Arga from the South, and from thence becomes capable to carry a Boat) it soon after enters into, and divides the Kingdom of Arragon; then takes in Biel from the North▪ and Xalon from the South, a
little below Alagon; then saluting Saragoza; it ad∣mits Rio de la Guerva from the South, and Gallego from the North; Aguas, Marcia and Guadalupe come in from the South, as it passes Burgo and Fu∣entes; and at Mequinenca, Segre, (of old Sicoris) with a number of smaller Rivers in its retinue. Al∣gas on the South, and a knot of small Rivolets on the North also come in to pay their Tributes; so wate∣ring the Southern part of Catalonia, a little beneath Tortosa he falls into the Mediterranean Sea, between three small Islands made by his own Sands. This Ri∣ver gave the Name anciently of Iberia to all Spain. Festus Avienus mentions another River Iberus, which is apprehended to be the same with that the Moderns call Rio Tinto. Ebudae, Hebudes, Hebrides, Aebudae, five small Islands to the West of the Kingdom of Scotland, now more commonly thence called the VVestern Isles. They have the honour to constitute a Bishoprick un∣der the Archbishoprick of Glascow. Eburones, Eburonices Aulerici, Eburiaci and E∣burovices, an ancient People of Gallia Celtica, dwel∣ling at and about the modern Eureux in Normandy, and the Diocese of Liege taken in its former Lati∣tude. Ebusus. See Ivica. Ecbatana, the Capital City of the Kingdom of the ancient Medes, apprehended to be the same with the Modern Casbin, or else Tauris of Persia: See Casbin, Hani and Tauris. King Cambyses died here in the year of the World 3532. Parmenion, by the order of Alexander Magnus, was killed in 3725. and the alter Alexander, Hephaestion, buried here in 3728. with so much Funeral Pomp as amounted to twelve thousand Talents. § There was another an∣cient Ecbatana in Phoenicia, towards Mount Car∣mel. Eccleshal, a Market-Town in Staffordshire, in the Hundred of Pirehill. Ecija, Astigi, Astygi, a City of the Kingdom of Andalusia in Spain; called by Pliny, Augusta Firma; upon the River Xenil, over which it hath a Bridge; eight Miles from Cordova to the South, and fourteen from Sevil to the North. This was anciently a Bi∣shops See but now a part of the Diocese of Sevil; and at this time one of the best Cities in Andaluzia: recovered from the Moors in 1239. L'Ecluse. See Sluys. Eda, Baetius, a River in Arabia Foelix, which springing out of the Mountains of Ghazuan [Benge∣bres] watereth Harsan; and a little below Tajef, takes in the River Chaibar: then by passing by Badid, Almortasse, Baisat and Mecca, it falls into the Red Sea at Ziden or Giodda, over against Suaquem in Africa. Edel, Rha. See Wolgha. Eden, the Garden of Paradise, described Gen. 2. & 3. to be planted by the Divine hand at the head of a River, which afterwards breaking into four Cur∣rents produces the Rivers Pison, Geichon, Hiddekel and Euphrates: from whence they conjecture this Garden to have had its place in the Country about Mesopotamia in Asia. Not but that the cir∣cumstances of the Guardian Cherubims, and a Fla∣ming Sword invisible, the Fruit-Trees of Life and Knowledge, the Serpents talking with Humane Voice, and by an easie fallacy trepanning of his Lord into a condition of entailing Curses upon posterity un∣born, &c. have administred apprehensions to the Cu∣rious of this History's being either an Hypothesis of the Writer, or an Allegory. § Eden, Ituna, a River of England, which ariseth from Huseat Movel-Hill in Yorkshire. It passeth Pendragon Castle, Kirby, Ste∣ven, Appleby; and at Hornbey takes in the River Ei∣mot; and entereth Cumberland out of VVestmrland: running Northward, it passeth Corby Castle and VVar∣wick; then turning West, it watereth Carlisse; taking in Petterel and Canda, one above, the other beneath that City; also the Irthing, which falleth by Brampton; and Kirksop, the Boundary of England and Scotland; so falleth by the Bay of Itune or Eden, into the Irish Sea, between Anand Castle in Scotland, and Boulnesse in England. Eder, Adrana, Aeder, a River of Germany, which ariseth in the Ʋpper Hassia; and flowing through the Earldom of VValdeck, watereth Franekenberg, VValdeck; and two Miles above Cassel to the North, falls into the River Fuld. Edernay, Hadrianopolis. See Adrianople. Edessa. See Rhoa. Edgware, a small Market Town in the County of Middlesex, in the Hundred of Gore. Edinburgh, Agneda, Edenburgum, is the Capital City of the Kingdom of Scotland, and Seat of the Kings of that Nation. It stands in the South part of Scotland, in the County of Lothaine; anciently called CASTRƲM ALATƲM; and Edenburroth signifies the same thing; for Aidan in the Welsh is Wing: it stands on a high Ground in an healthful Air, a fruitful Soil, watered by many excellent Springs; in length from East to West a Mile, the breadth something less: the Walls, strong; the pub∣lick and private Buildings, Magnificent: full of Peo∣ple, and has a competent Trade by the advantage of the Port of Leith, not far from it. At the East end is the Royal Palace; by it, a fine Park; and not far off, a strong Castle upon a Rock. As the variety of the Fortune of War changed, this City fell sometimes into the hands of the English, and at others of the Scots, till 960. when the last prevailed by the means of the Danish Irruptions. September 14. 1650. after the Battel of Dunbar, the Castle was delivered into hands of the English, who kept it till the Restitution of Charles II. And June 13. 1689. the Duke of Gourdon surrendred the same to K. William's Forces under Sir John Lanier, upon Conditions for the Gar∣rison only. For as to his own Interest, he submitted himself to K. William's discretion. It lies in Long. 16. 00. Lat. 56. 15. § The Fyrth of Edinburgh, is one of the greatest Bays in Scotland: on the North it has Fife, on the South Sterling and Lothaine: and several of the principal Cities of this Kingdom stand about it, or near to it. Edge-Hill, a place in VVarwickshire near Kyne∣neton, seven Miles South of VVarwick; where on Sunday October 23. 1642. was fought the first Battel between Charles I. and the Parliamentarians under the Earl of Essex. The Earl of Lindsey Commander of the King's Battalia, and General of the Field, was slain, and the Standard taken; but retaken by Sir John Smyth, who after the Fight was made a Knight Banneret. The King had in this first Battel clearly the advantage, and opened his way to Oxford and London, and the next day took Banbury: whereas Essex retreated first to VVarwick, then to Coventry, and left both the Field and the Passes. Edom. See Idumaea. Efeso. See Ephesus. Ega, a River in Spain: it ariseth in Aalva in Biscay, and flowing through the Kingdom of Na∣varr, watereth Stella, and Villa Tuercta; and be∣tween Calahorra and Villafranca, falls on the North into the Ebro. Egates or Aegates, a knot of Islands in the Sici∣lian Sea, over against the Promontory of Drepanum in Sicily, to the West. They are memorable for the Naval Victory obtained here by C. Lutatius Catulus, the Roman Consul, over the Carthaginians: where∣in
seventy of their Vessels being taken and fifty sunk, a Peace (by them desired) was concluded, upon condition, they should quit all their pretensions to the Islands betwixt Italy and Africa: with which the first Punick War ended in the year of Rome 513. i. e. 241. before Christ. See Gotham. Egaean Sea. See Archipelago. Eger and Etlaw. See Agria. Eger, Egra and Oegra, a strong Town in the Kingdom of Bohemia, upon a River of its own Name, towards the Frontiers of Franconia in Germany. It was the Seat of the ancient Narisci, according to Thuanus; and became first a dependent of the Crown of Bohemia by Mortgage in 1315. In the German Wars, often besieged. Those of the Country call it Heb, or Cheb. Egers, Aegiricius, Egericius, commonly called Gers, a River of France in the Ʋpper Gascony; it ariseth in Armagnac, and running Northward, wa∣tereth Aux and Lectoure; so falls into the Garonne over against Agen, twenty five Miles above Bourdeaux. Egesta, or Aegesta and Segesta, an ancient City of the Island of Sicily, near the Promontory of Lily∣baeum: the inhabitants whereof are called Segestani in Pliny. Eggiaford. See Aland. Eghmont, a Town in the Northern parts of Holland, which hath the honour of the Title of an Earldom: two Leagues from Berverwick, and with∣in half a League of the same distance from Almaer. An Abbey of the Benedictines rendered it heretofore very considerable. It gives Name to one of the prin∣cipal Families in Holland. Egli, Thelis, a River of Roussillon in Spain, which riseth from the Pyrenean Hills, and falls after a short Course into the Mediterranean Sea, three French Miles North of Perpignan. Egremont, a Market Town in the County of Cum∣berland in the Hundred of Allerdale, upon the Banks of a River, not far from the Sea, over which it hath two Bridges. Cgrez, Aegritia, a River belonging to the Terri∣tory of the City of Basil, called in the Maps Aegertz: it ariseth from the Hills of Buchisgow, and running North watereth Liechstall, and falls into the Rhine three Miles above Basil: many smaller Rivers fall into it, before it reacheth Leichstall, and one after; but I cannot find their Names. Egypt, Aegyptus, called by the Inhabitants Chi∣bili, by the Arabians, Bardamasser; by the Turks, Misir, (which is very near the Hebrew, Mis∣raim); by the Italians and Spaniards l' Egitto; by the Germans, Egypten; Is the first, the most fruitful, most ancient, most celebrated King∣dom of all Africa: on the North it has the Medi∣terranean Sea; on the East Arabia Deserta, and the Red Sea; on the South Aethiopia; on the West Cy∣rene, and the Deserts of Lybia. The River Nile running the whole length of it, and towards the Me∣diterranean Sea dividing it self into many Branches, is the only cause of its Fertility, by overflowing it every year in the Month of June. It is, saith Cluve∣rius, from the City of Pelusium, to the Cataracts of the Nile, one hundred and fifty Miles: from the same place to Conza in the West, it is one hundred Miles broad; in some places towards the South (as Mr. San∣dys saith) above Grand Cairo, it is for a long Tract consined between barren Mountains, in many scarce four, in few above eight Miles broad. But then he extends it from North to South five hundred and sixty Miles, and in breadth one hundred and forty English Miles at the North end. Long. from 60. d. to 67. South Lat. from 22. to 31. This Country was peopled by Misraim the Son of Chus, the Grandchild of Noah by Ham; and maintained its Liberty under Princes of its own, till God gave them into the hands of Nebu∣chadonosor in the year of the World 3365. five years after the ruine of Jerusalem by the same Prince. Yet that Empire lying far off, and being much shaken by intestine Divisions, they recovered their Liberty again. Cambyses reduced them the second time in the year of the World 3425. Xerxes conquered them about the year 3473. And yet Artaxerxes Ochus was necessi∣tated to reduce them again; for they set up Princes of their own, and beat his Generals: so he went in Per∣son; and having driven their King into Aethiopia, he levelled their strongest Fortifications, and made them so weak and helpless, that they have been in Servi∣tude ever since. This Prince began his Reign in 3587. Reigned twenty three years, and conquered them in 3602. Alexander the Great became their Master next in 3620. to whom they most willingly submitted, out of a detestation of the Persian Go∣vernment. Ptolomy the Son of Lagus began his Reign over them in 3626. and Cleopatra the last of his Posterity, destroyed her self to avoid Captivity, in the year of the World 3920. eighteen years before the Birth of our Saviour. From thence forward they were under the Romans. This wretched Nation cal∣led in at length Haymaria III. of the Saracen Califfs, and by his help cast out the Greek Garrisons about 862. In 1163. another Race succeeded, called the Turkish Kings, or Califfs; which ended in 1245. when the Mamalucks (or Slaves of that Race) depo∣sed their Masters, and erected an Elective Kingdom out of their own Body: the Prince whereof was for many Ages chosen out of a number of Men, who be∣gan in Slavery, and whose Profession was War; they were in some sort the Janizaries of that Age. To∣nombeius II. the last of them in 1517. was forced to submit to the prevailing Valour and Fortune of Sely∣mus, one of the Ottoman Princes, under whom that Nation still groans. And now let any man compare the ancient and present Maps of Egypt, and his Eyes will shew him in one minute, the difference between the ancient and the later Government. The fruitful and populous Land of Egypt, styled by the Romans the Granary of their Empire, that was of old overspred with Cities and Towns, being now almost desolate, and all its ancient Glory, Magnificence, Riches and People, buried in Rubbish and Ruins: Names of Places that have no Inhabitants, or Pictures of Beasts and Antiquities, is almost all that is to be found here. Grandcairo, Alexandria, Rossetta and Damiata, are the only considerable places left of three thousand Towns that Strabo says there were in his time; and of the eighteen thousand that Antiquity beheld in the Ages before. Christianity is almost totally extirpated here, as it is in Barbary: and whereas the ancient Egyptians acquired a mighty reputation over all the East, by their good Literature, which drew the Philo∣sophers of Greece to travel to them; and particularly Plato and Eudoxus, to live amongst them thirteen years; the Egyptians being the famed Inventors of most of the Sciences, expressed after an admirable manner in Hieroglyphieks, which with their Lunar years, their Deities, the long Dynasties of their Kings, their Customs of Polygamy, Government, and Worship, so charming to the Israelites, have been the subjects of the Pens of the Learned in divers Ages; Now an universal Ignorance and Barbarity possesses their Coun∣try. But I must not be long in so short a Work. Ehenheim, Enheimium, a small City in the Ʋp∣per Alsatia upon the River Ergel, which falls by Strasburgh into the Rhine; a little above three Dutch Miles from Strasburgh to the South-West. The Name of the River in the Maps, is Ergers, and of the City, Ober-Hehenheim. This was once an
Imperial Free City, but now under the Dominion of the French, who are repairing the Ruines they made in it, in its Acquisition. Eiala, Helicon. Eichfield, or Eischfelt, Eischfeldia, a District in the Province of Thuringia in Germany, to the South of the Dukedom of Brunsivick, under the Jurisdiction of the Elector of Mentz. The Capital of it is Du∣derstad. Eichtelberg, a Mountain in the Marquisate of Cu∣lemback in Franconia; famous for giving Source to four Rivers in Germany, comprehended by their ini∣tial Letters in the Word MENS; that is, the Mayn, the Eger, the Nab, and the Saal. It divides into di∣vers Portions, some reaching Eastward towards Bohemia, some towards Franconia to the West, the Palatinate and Bavaria to the South, and the Pro∣vinces of Thuringen and Voigtlandt to the North. It abounds particularly with Pine-Trees, as its Name sig∣nifies in the High-German Language. Eie Eifel, a small Territory or District in the Dukedom of Juliers. Eigues, or Aigues, Icarus, Aigarus, Eigarus, a River arising amongst the Mountains of the Dauphi∣nate in France, towards the Territory of Gapansois; thence passing by Nions and S. Tronquet, dischar∣ging it self into the Rhone, about the Borders of the Principality of Orange. Eisleben, Eislebia, a small City in the Upper Saxo∣ny, in the County of Mansfield, upon a small River which falls into the Lake of Susse See; one Mile East of Mansfield, twenty two North-West of Dresden. Luther was born here in 1483. and here died in 1546. Ekelenford, Ekelenfordia, a Town belonging to Denmark, in the Dukedom of Sleswick: It stands five Danish Miles from Flensborg to the South-East, upon a Bay of the Baltick Sea, called Ekrenforder hafen. This Town took its Name from an old rui∣ned Castle near it, and is under the Duke of Holstein Gottorp. Ekesio, Ekesium, a Town in the County of Sma∣land in Sweden, four or five Leagues from the Lake Weler, towards Ostrogothland. Eladasagni, Elbassan, Dassar, Daulia, a City in the West of Macedonia, on the Borders of Albania, upon the River Spirnasse, South of Scampi, (which River falls into the Ioman Sea, between Durazzo to the North, and Purgo to the South:) Elbassan stands sixty English Miles from Durazzo. Elandia, Lampia, a small River in the Morea, not taken notice of in the ancient or later Maps; but it ariseth from a Mountain of the same Name in Arcadia. Elba, Aethalia, Ilva, the Isle of Elbe, an Island in the Mediterranean Sea, between Piombino, in the Dukedom of Florence, and the Isle of Corsica; be∣longing to the Prince of Piombino, but under the Pro∣tection of a Spanish Garrison at Porto Longone; be∣sides which the Grand Duke is possessed of a strong Town in it, called Porto Ferrajo, the Argoiis Por∣tus of the Ancients, but in the Maps Cosmopolis; where∣as indeed (saith Baudrand) there is no such Place as Cosmopolis in that Island. It is forty Miles in Circuit, inhabited by five or six Parishes; and by Virgil applau∣ded for Mines of Steel. Elbe, Albis, is one of the greatest Rivers of Ger∣many; called by the Bohemians Labe, by the Ita∣lians Albi. It ariseth in Bohemia, out of the Moun∣tain Das Risenbirge, that is, the Mount of Giants; in the Borders of Silesia, in the North-East part of that Kingdom, and runs South: First taking in Ʋpawa and Metueze above, and Olitz at Conig; then tur∣ning Westward from the North, it takes in Czidlina; a little further, Gizera; at Melnick, Multaw (which watereth Prague the Capital of Bohemia) and Egers above Letomeritz, where it runs Northwards into Misnia, and passeth by Dresden, and Meissen; then entering Saxony, a little above VVittenberg, it enter∣tains the Elster from the North, and at Dessaw, the Muldau; a little further, the Sala, a great River from the South; then it watereth Magdeburgh, Borgh, and Sandow; and at Werben in the Dukedom of Bran∣denburgh, takes in the Havel, a great River which watereth Berlin and Brandenburgh, the principal Ci∣ties of that Dukedom: At Domitz it has another vast Supply out of Mecklenburgh; so leaving Danneberg on the South, and Thomdam on the North, it entereth Holstein at Ludesborgh, and runs on the South of Hamburgh to Gluckstad, about twelve German Miles; beneath which it falls into the German Ocean. This was the fatal Boundary of the Roman Empire; to which they seldom came, and beyond which they could never fix. Elber, Libya Deserta, a Part of Africa. Elbeuf, Elbovium, Elbodum, a Town in Nor∣mandy, upon the Seine, three or four Leagues below Rouen; adorned with the Title of a Dutchy in 1581. Elbing, Elbinga, Aelveopolis, a City of Prussia, upon the Eastern Mouth of the Vistula, over against Dantsick, near the Lake of Drawsen; ten Polish Miles from Dantsick to the East. This is a very strong, beautiful, rich City; divided into two Parts, the Old and the New. First built in 1239. by the Knights of the Teutonick Order. In 1454. it withdrew from their Subjection, and put it self under the Protection of the King of Poland. In 1492. there was an Uni∣versity opened here by Albertus Duke of Branden∣burgh, the first of that House that was Duke of Prus∣sia. In 1629. it was taken by the Swedes, and again in 1655. but since recovered to the Crown of Poland. The first Occasion of its Trade and Wealth, was the Besieging the Town of Dantsick by Stephen King of Poland; which necessitated the Merchants to remove the Trade to Elbing. Gustavus Adolphus designed to improve it by the same Method; but the best Trade they have at present, is on the Account of its being the Staple for the English Cloth. This City is the Ca∣pital of the Territory of Hockerland; and divers English Families have settled themselves at it. Elbogen. See Malmugen. Elcatif, Leanita, a City and Province in Arabia Foelix, upon the Gulph of Persia, over against the Island of Babarim; from which the Gulph of Persia is by the Arabians called the Sea of Elcatife. Elcur, Cyrrus, Cyrus, a River of Albania in Asia; which ariseth in the Confines of Armenia Major, from the Mountains of Mosch, and flowing through Iberia, takes in the River Iber; then buries it self in the Caspian Sea. Elephantina, Elephantis, a pleasant Island of the River Nile in Aegypt, below the last of its Catarracts, not very far from Aethiopia; the Aegyptians and Ae∣thiopians trading with each other here. It enjoys a perpetual Spring; and according to Tacitus, is ob∣servable for being the utmost Boundary on that Side of the Roman Empire. Elesa, Elusa, an Island upon the Coast of Cilicia. Eleusis, an ancient City of Attica, betwixt Mega∣ra and the Portus Pyraeus. One of the most celebrated in all Greece for the Temple, and the Mysteries of the Goddess Ceres performed here, together with other particular Mysteries, in Honour of Proserpine and Hercules; some of which it was Death to discover; some they exposed, yet at several times, and by Parts: Whence Seneca's Proverb, Eleusina servat quod o∣stendat: Admittingno Persons to the Exercise of the greater ones, under a Noviciatship of five years, with the
Title of Mystae; and then advancing them to the De∣gree of , with a Ceremony of Consecration. The Grand Secret of these Mysteries is thus discovered by Tertullian; Tota in Aditis divinitas, &c. Simu∣lachrum membri virilis revelatur. Thus by Theodo∣ret; Naturae muliebris imago. Eleutherns, the River, now called Bajaria or Habes, according to Cluverius: Others apply it to the Admirati, of the Island of Sicily. See those modern Names. § Also a River of Phoenicia in Sy∣ria, arising from the Mountain Libanus, thence passing by Ituraea and Galilaea, to fall into the Tyrian Sea two Miles from Sarepta, and three from Tyre. The modern Name of this is Valonia. Eleutheropolis, an ancient City of the Tribe of Juda, in Palestine; eight Miles from Hebron to the West, and twenty from Jerusalem by the Way of Gaza. S. Jerom takes the Distances of divers Places from this, as from one of particular Note. Elgin, a small City in the County of Murray in Scotland, upon the River Lossie; three Miles from the Coasts of the German Ocean. It is a Bishops See un∣der the Archbishop of S. Andrews. Elham, or Eltham, a Market-Town in Kent, in Shepway Lath: Honoured heretofore with a Palace Royal; now well inhabited, being pleasantly seated amongst Woods on the Side of a Hill. Elis, A Country of the ancient Peloponnesus, be∣twixt Achaia, Messene and Arcadia; so particular∣ly consecrated in those times to Jupiter, whose Temple and Statue here were numbered amongst the Wonders of the World, that it was looked upon as Sacrilege to attack it: Only, the Lacedemonians, Arcadians and Romans were not so scrupulous to observe the Conceit. Before this Country submitted to the Romans, or was governed by a Magistracy of its own, it had the Honour to be a Kingdom. The Rivers Alpheus and Acheron, the Mountain Peneus, the O∣lympick Games in Honour of Jupiter and Juno, the Cities Elis, Pisa or Olympia, Cyllene, &c. contribu∣ted to spread its Fame in ancient History. Its modern Name is Belvedore. See Belvedore. Ell, or Elle, Elcebus, a Town of Germany, in the lower Alsatia, upon the River Ill; three Leagues from Schlestad, and something more than one from Strasbourgh. Ellesmere, a Market-Town in the County of Sa∣lop, in the Hundred of Pimhill, near the Borders of VVales. The Earl of Bridgwater is Baron of this Place. Elna, Helena, a small City in Catalonia, in the County of Roussillon, heretofore a Bishop's See; upon a small River, two Miles South of Perpignan, and the same from the Mediterranean. The Bishoprick was removed to Perpignan in 1604. by Clement VIII. The Town was taken by the French from the Spaniard in 1640. Very small; called anciently Illiberis; in which was Hellen Castle, where those of Magnentius his Party slew Constans, the Eldest Son of Constan∣tine. The River that falls by it is Tech. Elsass. See Alsatia. Elsenore, Elsenora, by the Danes Helsignor, is a Town in the Island of Zeeland; five German Miles from Copenhagen to the West. It has a large and a safe Haven, near the Mouth of the Sound; and a Ca∣stle to command the Streights of the Sound. Elsingbourgh, Elsingborch, a Town on the oppo∣site Shoar, over against Cronenburgh in Scania; which heretofore was under the Crown of Denmark, but by the Treaty of Roschild, in 1658. resigned to the King of Sweden. It stands three German Miles from Landskroon to the West. Christopher of Bavaria, King of Denmark, died here in 1448. The Danes took it in 1676. but they return'd it to the Swedes again the year after. Eltor, Eilan, or Heilan, Aelana, Aila, Sur, Tau∣rus, a City of Arabia Petraea, upon the Red-Sea, North of Madian, and over against Dacata in Ae∣gypt. It has a Castle on a Rock by it, which always keeps a Turkish Garrison against the Arabians. Elvas, Helva, a City of Portugal, in the Province of Alentejo, called Yelves by them of Castile; it stands upon the River Guadiana, fourteen Miles from Merida to the West, and twenty nine from Sevil to the North. This is a Bishop's See under the Arch∣bishop of Evora; well fortified, and has belonging to it a strong Castle. The Spaniards, in 1659. be∣sieged it to their great loss, being here routed by the Portuguese. Paul IV. in 1555. raised it to the Honor of a Bishoprick. The Cathedral Church was built by the Moors for a Mosque. Elvino, a Fountain near Aquino, a City of the Ter∣ra di Lavoro, in the Kindom of Naples. Elvira, Eliberis, an ancient City of the Kingdom of Granada in Spain; ruined, and its Episcopal See transferred to Granada, the Nova Illiberis, which has risen by its fall. This City is famous in Ecclesiastical History, for a Council assembled at it about the year 305. Two of the Canons thereof being much insisted on in Disputes; the one, forbidding Images; the other, the Marriage of the Clergy. Elwang, Elwanga, Elephaniacum, a small City in the Circle of Schwaben in Germany, upon the River Jagst; in the Confines of Franconia, near the Terri∣tory of Onold; five German Miles from Rotenburgh, upon the Tubar, to the South, and nine from Ʋlm to to the North. The Capital of a Noble Government; the Governor being one of the Princes of the Empire; and it has a Castle near the City, in which he re∣sides. This Territory is called by the Germans, Stife Elwang. Elway, a small River which riseth in Denbighshire in VVales, and falleth into the Cluyd, a little beneath S. Asaph. Ely, Helia, a City and Bishoprck in Cambridge∣shire, in an Island of the Name, surrounded on all sides by Fens and Marshes; yet here was anciently one of the richest Monasteries of England. The See was taken out of that of Lincoln, and constituted by Henry I. in 1109. Hervey, Bishop of Bangor, being the first Bishop of it. The Monastery out of which the Bishoprick sprung, was Founded by Etheldreda, Wife to Egfred King of Northumberland, and was at first a Nunnery. The Danes having ruined this Foundation, Ethelwold, Bishop of VVinchester, re∣founded it, and stock'd it with Monks. The Cathe∣dral was a Work of Time, built by Parts, great and beautiful; though the Town of Ely is not great, nor the Air healthful. The Bishop of this See had here∣tofore Palatine Rights, which were taken off by 27. H. 8. c. 25. But yet the Revenue is great, and the Bishops of it have been in great Esteem, and much employed. The present, is the forty third Bishop of this Diocese. Elymi, an ancient People, that dwelt about the Mountains and high Grounds of the Island of Sicily; remembred in History, upon the Account of their being the Allies of the Carthaginians. Elysii Campi, Elysium, the Poets Paradise; a large and delicious Plain of Baeotia in Greece, cove∣red with Flowers, and every way agreeable to the Plea∣sures of the Senses. Elysii, Helisii, Lysii, the ancient People of the Province of Silesia, in Bohemia; mentioned by Tacitus. Embden, Amasia, Emda, a German City in the Circle of VVestphalia; anciently called Amasia, or Amisia, as Cluverius saith, from the River Ems, (A∣masius,) upon which it standeth, with a large deep
Port defended by a Castle. It is the Capital of East-Friesland, which is from this City often called the Principality of Embden; not great, but strong and well fortified. The Trade or People here are neither of them considerable; the Hollanders having some∣time since possessed themselves of it. It stands fif∣teen Miles from Bremen to the South-West, and se∣ven from Groningen to the North. Emboli, Empoli, Amphipolis, Christopolis, an Archiepiscopal City, in Macedonia, under the Patriarch of Constantinople, upon the Confines of Macedonia and Thrace: Seated upon the Bay and River of Stri∣mon, which did almost surround it; standing in the Con∣fines of these two Countries or Kingdoms; and some∣times ascribed to the one, sometimes to the other. It lies thirty Miles from Philippos to the East, and seven∣ty five from Thessalonica to the East. Now under Bondage to the Turks. Long. 50. 00. Lat. 41. 30. Emeley, Auna, Emelia, a small City in the Coun∣ty of Tipperary, in the Province of Mounster in Ire∣land; in the Confines of the County of Limerick; upon the River Eslason, which falls into the River More or Broadwater: Heretofore great, populous, and a Bishop's See under the Archbishop of Cashel in the same County. This City lies twenty four Miles from Limerick to the East. Emenia, an ancient Name of Thessalia. Emilia, a Province of the antient Italy, lying a∣long the Emiliana via, which denominated it, from Ariminum to Placentia; and comprehending a part of the present Estates of the Pope, the Dukes of Parma, Modena, Mantoua, and Mirandola. Call'd also Flaminia. Emmaus, a Village in the Tribe of Juda, in Pale∣stine, distant from Jerusalem about sixty Furlongs. Luc. 24. 13. At which our Saviour after his Resurre∣ction discovered his Person to two of his Disciples by sitting down to eat with them, and then vanished out of their Sight. It is mentioned by Pliny, upon the Account of some remarkable Fountains there. The Devotion of Christians had advanced it to the Dignity of an Episcopal See, and built it a Monastery; before the Turks converted it into a Village again, much more desolate than before, inhabited by the A∣rabians only. Emmen, Amma, a River of Switzerland, deri∣ving its beginning from the Valley of Lemmethal, and after the reception of some Rivulets, falling into the Aar below Soleurre. Emmerick, or Embrick, Embrica, Emmerica, a large, fair and rich Town in the Dutchy of Cleves, in Germany, upon the Eastern Banks of the Rhine, betwixt Cleves and the Fort of Skein; adorned with a Collegiate Church ever since the year 700. It is in the Possession of the Duke of Brandenburgh. The Hollanders took it from the Spaniards in the year 1600. The French from the Hollanders in 1672. who the year after put it into the Duke of Branden∣burgh's Hands. Empurias, Emporiae, Castrum Aragonense, Ti∣bulae, a strong City in the Western Quarter of the Island of Sardinia, upon the River Termo or Termi, or Aragonese; with a good Port, and a Cittadel, and a Bishop's See, in Conjunction with that of Terra Nova in the same Island. It is more vulgarly now called Castel Aragonese, because it was the first Town the Spaniards of Aragon possessed themselves of, after the grant of Sardinia by Pope Boniface VIII. to James II. King of Aragon, about the Year 1296. Ems, Eems, Amasius, Amisius, Amasia, Amasis, a River of Germany, which riseth in the Diocese of Paderborne, near Wrle, in a very deep Valley, from a slow but plentiful Spring, two Miles and an half from Paderborne to the North; then running Westward, and taking in the VVrle, the Dalke, and the Luter, three small Rivers, it entereth the Bishoprick of Mun∣ster; (having first passed by Retburgh, the Capital of a small Country,) and watereth VVidenbrug, or VVarendorp, and receives the Hessel from Ravens∣berg on the South; so passing Eme and Tillegt, it re∣ceives from the North the VVerse; and a little lower the Aa, which watereth the City of Munster; then turning North it passeth the Rhine, and takes in ano∣ther Aa on the East; so by Linge he proceeds to Mep∣pen, where it admits the Hase a considerable River on the East too; then passing by Landegge on the West, and Nienhus on the East, it entereth East-Friesland at the Fort of Oort; takes in Soste from the East, and by Oldersum and Nendorp, passeth by Emden, (which takes its present, as well as ancient Name from it,) and the Bay of Dullart, into the German Ocean. Enchuysen, Enckuysen, Ancusanum, Enchusa, is a small City belonging to the Ʋnited Provinces, in Holland, in that Part called West-Friesland; which has a large and safe Haven upon the Zuyder Sea, and affords excellent Pilots; not above three Miles from Horn to the East, and eight from Amsterdam to the North: It stands on the Western shoar, at the Entrance of the Zuyder Zee, and was one of the first Towns that revolted and turned out the Spaniards in 1572. It had been burnt in 1279. But rebuilt and qualified with the Privileges of a City by VVilliam Earl of Holland in 1355. Encre, Incra, a River in Picardy in France; with a Fort of the same Name upon it, which falls into the Some at Corvie. Enderen. See Adrianople. Endromit, Adramyttium, a City of the Lesser Asia, in Phrygia; and a Sea-Port upon the Archipe∣lago, over against the Island of Metellino, (Mitilene:) called by Europeans Andramiti, by the Turks Edro∣mit, (as Leunclavius affirms;) and by others S. Di∣mitri. It is a Bishop's See under the Archbishop of Ephesus; and I suppose is that which is called Landi∣metri in the later Maps; seventeen German Miles North of Smyrna. The Bay is called by the same Name; and sometimes extended to all the Sea between this Town and the Island of Metellino; sometimes contracted to that only, which entereth the Shoars of Asia. Hofman confirms my Conjecture; and shews that this City has a Phoenician Name from Bochart: it stands in a rich and fruitful Soil; mentioned by Livy, lib. 37. by Strabo, lib. 13. by S. Paul, Acts xxvii. 2. Long. 55. 00. Lat. 40. 40. Engaddi, or Engedi, an ancient City of the Tribe of Judah, in Palestine, situated in a fruitful Soil for Wine; as the Comparison intimates, Cant. 1. 14. King David had an Opportunity to kill Saul in a Ca∣vern of a Mountain near this Place. Ptolemy and Ste∣phanus mention it. Engern, Angria, the seat of the ancient Angri∣varii, a Town in the Earldom of Ravensberg, in the Province of Westphalia in Germany, seven or eight Leagues from Munster: Famous for the Tomb of Witichindus, a Duke of the Saxons, of high Renown in the time of Carolus M. The Elector of Cologne stiles himself Duke of this Place. Engers, a fair Town and Castle, with a noble Bridge over the Rhine, in the Archbishoprick of Trier in Germany, betwixt Coblentz and Andernach. Engia, or Egina, an Island of the Archipelago towards Europe, at the Mouth of the Gulph of its own Name, (which was the Sinus Saronicus of the Anci∣ents,) to the East of the Province of Sacania in the Morea; and near Athens. The Inhabitants whereof, in former Ages, were in a Condition to dispute with the Athenians for the Soveraignty of the Sea. It is about thirty six Miles in Circuit. The Capital City, Engia;
which hath been the Seat of a Bishop under the Arch∣bishop of Athens, since Christianity; but now no more than a Village, and the whole Island unprovi∣ded of a good Port. In 1537. the Turkish Admiral, Barberousse, took this Island from the Venetians; who retaking it in 1654. ruined all its Fortifications, and abandoned it to the Plunder of their Soldiers. The Relicts of two Famous Temples, the one dedicated to Jupiter, the other to Venus heretofore, are yet visible upon it. England, Anglia, called by the French Angleterre, by the Italians Inghilterra, by the Germans Engel∣landt, by the Spaniards Inglaterra, is the greatest, the most Southern, and the best Part of the Island of Great Britain; called heretofore Albion, Britanni∣ca, and Britannia: Which noble Island is divided in∣to three Parts, England, Wales, and Scotland. Eng∣land has Scotland on the North, the Irish Sea in part, and Wales in part, and then the Irish Sea again on the West; the British Sea on the South, and the German Sea on the East: Between 17. and 22. Deg. of Long. between 50. and 57. of N. Lat. It lies to∣gether with Wales in the Form of a great Triangle, whereof the Southern Shoar is the Base, and Berwick the opposite Angle; from whence to the Lands End, it is accounted three hundred eighty six Miles Long, and two hundred seventy nine Broad; containing in that Compass, about thirty Millions of Acres of Land. It was divided by the Romans into five Parts, by the Saxons into seven Kingdoms, and now into forty one Shires or Counties: In which the Parishes amount to about ten thousand. The Air is very Temperate, both in Winter and Summer, being warmed in the one, and cooled in the other by the Sea-Vapors; the Soil for the most part very fruitful; watered with three hundred twenty five Rivers. The Inhabitants, Valiant and Industrious. And as Nature has given it whatever is absolutely necessary to the Life of Man; so the Natives by their Trade and Commerce, bring in from abroad, what may be had throughout the World, for Convenience, Delight, Magnificence, and Ornament. It has also the best Government, and the best constituted Religion, of any Nation in the World; and as much Learning, Civility, Arts and Trade as any other. Our Fleets excel at Sea, our Foot at Land, those of all other Nations. In short, we want nothing to make us happy, but Gratitude to God, and Union amongst our selves. This Island be∣came first known to the Romans, about fifty years be∣fore the Birth of Christ. Julius Caesar entered it with a Fleet in the Year of the World 3895. and renewed his Attempt the year following; but the Civil Wars breaking out between him and Pomper, the Romans made little Progress here, (though they kept their Ground) till the Reign of Claudius; who entered Britain in Person, and staying not long, his General, Aulus Plautius, carried on the War; so that he took in the greatest part of this Island, now called England, and under him Vespasian learned the Art of War. Di∣dius Avitus succeeded as General, and Nero as Empe∣ror; under whom the Romans were in great Danger of an utter Extirpation from the Britains: But this Storm blowing over, they conquered all they cared for, as far the Fyrths of Galloway and Edinburgh in Scotland; only their ordinary and standing Bounds were between Newcastle and Carlisle. They conti∣nued their Possession till the year of Christ 433. and then withdrew to desend their nearer Dominions on the Continent, against the prevailing barbarous Nor∣thern Nations. In 449. the Saxons were called in to help the Britains against the Picts, (those Nations that had never been subject to the Romans, in the North of Britain.) In 455. Hengist, their General, set up the Kingdom of Kent, and began the Conquest of the British. By the year 819. the Heptarchy, or seven Kingdoms of the Saxons, united in one, under Egbert King of the West-Saxons; which Union re∣ceived its utmost Perfection under Alfrid, about 873. The Danes, who had given Occasion to this Union, pursuing their Depredations, at last conquered the Saxons in 1018. and set up Sweno, a Prince of their own. In 1042. Edward the Confessor restored the Saxon Line, which was broken by William the Con∣queror in 1066. But the Blood was again restored by Henry II. in 1155. Edward I. united Wales, in 1246. K. Henry II. began, and K. John finished the Conquest of Ireland, about the Year 1184. in the Reign of Richard I. his Brother. In the year 1602. James I. K. of Scotland, succeeding Qu Elizabeth, of Blessed Memory, united Scotland to England. And the great Rebellion in 1640. ended in 1660. by the Re∣stitution of Charles, the Merciful and Just. Yet the Miseries that brought it in, the Calamities that atten∣ded it, and the Judgments that have followed it, may be eternal Monitors to English Men, to be Loyal to the King, and stedfast to the Church. Engur, Astelfus, a River of Asia, which springeth from Mount Caucasus; and watering Mengrelia, falls into the Euxine, or Black Sea, between Charus and Hippus. Twenty Miles North of Chobus, another River of the same Country. Engury, Ancyra, a City of Galatia, in the Lesser Asia, upon the River Parthenius, (now Sangari,) which falls into the Black Sea at Cangary. This was the Metropolis of Galatia; yet seated in the Confines of Paphlagonia, on an advanced Ground: And made Famous by a Council here held in 314. and another in 357. Called by the Turks, Enguri, Engouri, Angou∣ri, or Anguri; fifty Miles to the East from Scutari, and sixty from Smyrna to the N. East. It is now consi∣derable, and the Capital of one of the Turkish Pro∣vinces in Asia. Mithridates, the Famous King of Pontus, was overthrown by Pompey near this City-Bajazet the Turk, in the year 1403. was in the same Place taken Prisoner by Tamerlane, the Scythian Con∣queror. Long. 62. 10. Lat. 42. 30. Enham, Aenhamum, a Town in the County of Southampton, in the Hundred of Andover: Of Note, for a Council here congregated of the Bishops of both the Provinces in the Year 1009. under the Reign of King Ethelred. Enkoping, Enecopia, a Town in the Province of Ʋplandia, in the Kingdom of Sweden; near the Lake Meler; five or six Leagues from Ʋpsal. Enna, an ancient City, standing heretofore in the Center of the Island of Sicily; and Famous, both for a Temple dedicated to the Goddess Ceres Ennea, and for the excellentest Springs in all the Island▪ which are applauded by Cicero and Diodorus. The Bellum Servile of Sicily was raised by Syrus Ennus of this Place, and ended with the Reduction of this Place also, under the Conduct of Pimperna. Eno, Aenos, a City of Thrace, called by the Turks, Ygnos; by the Greeks, Eno. It stands on the Archipelago, at the Mouth of the River He∣brus, now Mariza; which runs a little South of Adrianople, and here falls into the Sea over against the Isle of Samandrachi; forty Miles from the new Dardanels to the North, and six∣ty five English Miles from Adrianople South: Is now a Bishop's See, under the Patriarch of Con∣stantinople, Enrichemont. See Boisbelle. Ens, Claudivium, Claudionum, Anisus, is both a River and a City of Austria: the River riseth in the Bishoprick of Saluburgh near Rachstad; and running North-East as far as Newmarckt, it takes in that of Celstal; North-West it meets the Steyr, at Steyr
Castle; and there it turns to the North, and washeth the East Side of the City of Ens; half a German Mile beneath which, it falls into the Danube. Near the City there is a Bridge over the Danube, on the North-West Side. Ensisheim, Ensihemium, a small City in Alsa∣tia, upon the River Ill, two Miles West of New∣enburgh, five Miles North-West from Basil. Once the Capital of the Higher Alsatia, and the Seat of the Parliament, or Chamber of that Province; but now in the hands of the French. Entre-Douro-e-Minho, a Province, the best peopled, and the most delightful of all the Kingdom of Spain: containing in the space of eighteen Leagues in length, and twelve in breadth, six good Port-Towns, above one hundred and thirty Monasteries, and four∣teen hundred Parishes. It hath this Appellation given it from its Situation betwixt the Rivers Douero to the South, and Minho to the North: the Western Ocean binding it to the West, and the Province of Tras-los-Monies to the East. Its Capital is the City Braga. Entrevaux, Intervallium▪ a Town in Provence, upon the River Var and the Frontiers of the County of Nice, about the Mountains; which the Bishop of Glndevs makes the Seat of his Residence. Epaune or Epone, Epaunense, Ponense, Eponense, a Town or Parish in the old Kingdom of Burgandy in France; where there was a Council held in 51 under the Reign of Sigismund, King of Burgundy, after his abju∣ration of Arrianism. The French Writers cannot agree, where to place it more particularly. Ephesus, Eso▪ one of the most ancient and noble Cities of the Lesser Asia; seated upon the River Causter, (Castrus,) in the Province of Ionia; on the Shoars of the Archipelago, North of the Isle of Samos; one of the greatest and most celebrated Ci∣ties of Asia, before it fell into the hands of the depo∣pulating Sarons and Tur▪ who seem to have been designed by Heaven for the Scourges and Destroyers of ancient Cities, or rather of Mankind, there is so much Desolation where ever they have long ruled. This City is so ancient, that it is generally believed to have been built by the Amazons. It stood at first on too low a Ground; and therefore suffering much by Inundations, Lysimachus, one of the Successors of Alexander the Great, removed it into that place where it now is, and called it Arsinoe, by the Name of his Wife; but after his Death, it reassumed its anci∣ent Name. Pliny calls the Temple of Diana here built, Admirationem Graecae Magnificentiae, The Wonder of the Grecian Magnificence: and reckons it amongst the Wonders of the World: this was burnt by Erostratus, to perpetuate the Memory of his Name, that night Alexander the Great was born, in the one hundred and sixth Olympiad, and the three hundred ninety eighth year of Rome, i. e. three hundred fifty six years before Christ. Two hundred and twen∣ty years more afterwards were spent in rebuilding it, with the utmost Magnificence, at the charges of all the Provinces of Asia Minor. Xerxes, though he ruined many of the Asiatick Temples, spared this. The Romans conquered this City under Antiochus King of Syria, an hundred and eighty years before the Birth of our Saviour, and in their first Asiatick War. Nero plundered it; the Goths under Galie∣nus destroyed it. S. Paul first planted the Christian Faith (residing in person three years) here, and wrote one of his Epistles to this Church afterwards, whilst he was at Rome. S. John, the beloved Apostle, lived, and wrote, and in probability died here: to him the great Church was dedicated, that is now a Turkish Mosque. S. Timothy was its first Bishop after S. Paul. The third General Council, consisting of two hundred Prelates, was held here in the year 431. under Theodosius junior, against Nestorius and Pela∣gius. There was a smaller Council here in 198 con∣cerning the Celebration of Easter; in which the Bi∣shops resolving to adhere to the Asiatick Custom, Pope Victor declared to break his Communion with them. Another in 400. held by S. Chrysostom, for the quieting the Disturbances of Asia. Another in 449 by Dioscorus Patriarch of Alexandria, for the confirming the Opinions of Euryches, in which Pop Leo's Legats were rejected: and some others. When this City came first into the hands of the Turks, I cannot assign; but it is certain they call it Asalouc; and that it is a poor desolate Village though with a fine Haven, and an old ruined Castle. This City lies forty Miles from Smyrna to the South; full of the de∣plorable Ruines of its pristine Glory. Long. 55. 45. Lat. 39. 00. All the Inhabitants of this City now are about forty or fifty Families of Turks, without one Christian amongst them: living in a knot at the South Side of the Castle, called Asia Sabuck. The Grott of the seven famous Sleepers is shewn in this City. Epidamnus▪ See Durao. Epiarus. See Malvasia and Ragusa. § An an∣cient City besides, of Argia, in the Peloponnesus, where there was a Temple dedicated to Aesculapius. Epideno, Apidanus, a River of Thessalia, called sometimes Epedonia; it ariseth from Mount Bormio; and washing Pharsalia, (famous for the overthrow of Pompey the Great, by Caesar) falls into the River Onocoro, (Peneus) above Larissa, with a very swift Current. Epirus, a Kingdom in Greece, which was anci∣ently much celebrated; and had first Kings of its own, till the Macedonians subjected it: it is boun∣ded on the North by Macedonia, now Albania; on the East by Thessalia, on the South by Achaia, (now Livadia;) and on the West by the Ionian Sea, or Gulph of Venice. This Province is now sometimes called the Lower Albany. It is most famous for its ancient King Pyrrhus, who invaded Italy, and beat the Romans in the year of the World 3669. two hundred seventy nine years before the Birth of our Saviour. See Florus, lib. 1. cap. 18. This Kingdom was re∣duced to the Macedonian Subjection, by Philip and Alexander the Great; but Pyrrhus not only reco∣vered it, but conquered, and for some time kept Ma∣cedonia. The Romans subdued it next, and Paulus Aemilius laid it desolate: sacking in one day seventy Cities, and captivating an hundred and fifty thousand Epirots, without any Provocation. In the Division of the Empire, this Country fell to the Eastern; and continued so till the taking of Constantinople; after which it had Princes of its own again, till the year 1466. when by the death of George Castriot, com∣monly called Scanderberg, it was reduced under the Dominion of the Turks, under whom it still is; ex∣cepting Corfu, and some other small Islands, which are under the Venetians. Episcopia, Curium, once a City of the Isle of Cy∣prus, now a great Village, which is yet a Bishops See amongst the Greeks: it lies on the South Side of the Island, East of Paphos, and not far from the South-West Cape, in a Bay, called heretofore Curia. Epomeus or Epopeus, a Vulcanoe-Mountain in the midst of the Island of Ischia, in the Thuscan Ocean; so terrible in its Eruptions, accompanied with Inundations and Earthquakes, that we find the Inhabitants have divers times abandoned the Island for safety. It is recorded particularly to have raged under the Consulship of Lucius Marcius and Sextus Julius, under the Reigns of Augustus, Titus and Dio∣clesian, and in the year 1300. Epping, a Market Town in the County of Essex,
in the Hundred of Waltham. The Lord Gray of Wrk has a Seat here. Epsham or Epsom, a Market Town in the County of Surrey, in the Hundred of Copehorn: pleasantly si∣tuated, and much resorted to, for its Medicinal Wa∣ters. Epte, Illa, a River in the Beauvaisis, in the Isle of France. Erasino or Rasino, a small River of the Morea, in carnania, the most North-Eastern Province, near Napoli di Romania: it ariseth out of a Lake, anci∣ently called Stymphalis; and having buried it self under the Earth, ariseth again; and falls at last into the Golfo di Napoli. L'Eraut or l'Erraud, Araurius, Rhauraris, a Ri∣ver of the Province of Languedoc in France, arising from the Mountains of Sevennes, and passing by Ca∣stelnau de Guers, Florensac, &c. to discharge its Tri∣bute to the Mediterranean, having first received into its own Bed some Streams by the way. Erdelia, Erdeliana provincia, Erdely. See Tran∣sylvania. Eresby, a Town in the Division of Lindsey in Lincolnshire, not far from Bullingbrook, giving the Title of Baron to the Earl of Lindsey. Eresma, Areva, a River of Old Castile in Spain▪ it ariseth from Mount Fonfria, in the Borders of New Castile; and passing by Segovia, receiveth the small Rivolet of Clamores, and another at Coca, cal∣led the Valtaia; and a little lower the Cega; then falls into the Duero, over against Tordesillas. Bau∣drand. This River seems to be called Zarpardiel; and another that falls into it from the West, here called Cega, to be the Areva, or Eresma; but in the ancient Maps, that which falls by Segovia, is cal∣led Areva. Eretria, an ancient Episcopal City of the Island of Negropont, now called Rocco. § A second, in the Province of Thessalia. Erfurdt, Erfurt, Erford, Biurgium, Erphordium, Hercinophordia, a City in Thuringia in Germany, the Capital of that Province. It stands upon the River Iera, three Miles from Weimar West, fifteen from Franckfort to the South-West, Long. 31. 00. Lat. 51. 00. Of old called Mervigisburg, from Meroveus the first Christian King of France. There was a Monatery built here by Dagobert, another King of France, in the year 637. (after which it was called Petersberg;) and there is now a famed University▪ founded in 1392. There was a Council held here in 932. for the keeping the Festivals of the Apostles: in 1074. for the promoting Celibacy and Chastity, and the forbidding Concubinage amongst the Clergy, which had no good success. In 1163. it was walled. Ru∣dolphus I▪ extinguished here a great Sedition in 1289. The Church of our Lady here was built in 1351. A Fire almost totally ruined this City in 1417. Since which it has been so nobly rebuilt and improved, that the people ordinarily say, Erford is not a City, but a Country. In 1514. Luther found here Jerom of Prague his Works, and published them. The Castle stands upon a Hill, where there was heretofore a Religious House. Gustavus King of Sweden took it at his coming into Germany: but in 1648. it re∣turned into the obedience of the Bishop of Mentz, by the Treaty of Osnabruck. And because the inha∣bitants refused to submit to the said Bishop, the French assisted him to make himself Master of it in 1664. first having taken it from the Duke of Saxo∣ny; who had yet seventeen of ninety Villages (which did belong to it) assigned to him by the Treaty of Leipsick in 1665. in lieu of his Right and Pre∣tences. Ergel, Heraclea, a ruined City of Caria in the Lesser Asia, between Mount Cadmas to the South, the River Lycus to the East, and the Meander to the West; directly East of Ephesus. Ptolemy placeth it about an hundred English Miles from it. Eridanus, the Po. Erin. Ireland, in Irish. Erissi, Erissus, a Town in the Isle of Lesbia. Erivan or Irivan, a noble City of Armenia, up∣on the Frontiers of Persia. It is built upon a Rock, at whose foot the River Zenguey glides to the North-West, and the Querk boutak, or River of forty foun∣tains, to the South-West; the former being here pas∣sed by a fine Stone Bridge. In a good Air and a fruitful Soil, for Wine especially; adorned with divers Chur∣ches, a magnificent Palace for the Governour, and ve∣ry commodious Caravanseras for Travellers; about one hundred paces from the Old Erivan (which was ruined in the Wars of the Turks and Persians), and kept garrisoned with two thousand men. The Arme∣nians have a Tradition amongst them, that this was the Seat of Paradise, and the habitation of Noah be∣fore and after the Deluge. In the year 1584 the Turks took it, and built it that stately Forres we now see there. The Persians recovered it in 1604. The Turks retook it in 1629. The Persians recovered it again in 1635. It is the Capital of a large adjacent Ter∣ritory. Erlaph, Erlape, a River of the Lower Austria, which falls into the Danube. Erma. See Herma. Erne, Ravius, a Lake and River in the West of Ireland. Erneo. See Irneo. Erpach, Erpachum, a Town and County in Fran∣conia in Germany, under its own Count, between the Rhine, the Mayne and the Necker; having the Ter∣ritory of Geraw or Grawer on the West. This Count hath the privilege of a Seat in the general Diets of the Empire. Erquico, Arquico or Ercoco, Er Adulis, a considerable Town and Port upon the Red Sea, in the Kingdom of Barnagasso in Africa, under the Turks; being a dependent of the Beglerbegship of Suaen. Errif, Errifis, a Province in the Kingdom of Fez in Barbary▪ lying along the Mediterranean Coast, between the Provinces of Habat to the West, and Garet to the East. § And a Mountain called of old Atlas Minor. Erythaea, a small Island, of fame amongst the ancient Greek and Latin Poets, for the Story of King Geryon. But the Geographers have not agreed upon the place of it, whether betwixt Cadis and Spain, as Pliny; or upon the Coast of Portugal amongst the Barlinguas, as Mela and others would have it. Erythraea, an ancient City of Ionia in Asia Minor, to the Sea: adorned since the times of Christianity with the Seat of a Bishop under the Archbishop of Ephesus. And famous in the Ages before, for the Sibylla of its Name; whose Verses not only condemn the multiplicity of Gods, (saying there is but One on∣ly, the Creator of all) but moreover speak so advan∣tageously of the first and second coming of Christ, that some of them, repeated by Eusebius, make an Acrostick upon his name and quality under these words, . Erythraeum Mare. See the Red Sea. Erzerum, a City of the Greater Armenia, upon the Euphrates. It is the Seat of a Beg∣lerbeg, and the most considerable place of Turcoma∣nia; supposed to be the Theodosopolis of the anci∣ents, and otherwise called by Writers Aziris, Arzir, Sinera, Senebra, &c. Esaro, Ezaro, a River of Calabria. Eschanon, Scando, a River of Tourains.
Eschwege, a Town in the Marquisate of Hassia in Germany, upon the River Werra, near the Confines of Thuringen: supposed to have been built by the Emperour Carolus Magnus, and after the ruining of it by the Hunns, to have been rebuilt by▪ the Empe∣rour Henry II. Escualt, See Schelde. Escure, a Province of the Kingdom of Morrocco in Barbary; betwixt the River Hued-la-Abid to the East, the Mountain Verte to the North and West, and the River Tensift, with some parts of the Atlas, to the South. Fruitful in Corn and Pasturage. Escurial, a Village in New Castile, upon the Ri∣ver Guadarna, seven Leagues from Madrid to the West, and twenty four from Toledo to the North; in which Philip II. King of Spain, built a Palace Royal, together with a most Magnificent Monastery, and a Stately Church in honour of S. Laurence, as a grate∣ful Memorial of the Victory obtained against Hen∣ry II. King of France, at the Battel of S. Quintin in Picardy, In 1557. in which he spared no Expence that might contribute to the Magnificence and Ornament of it; insomuch as he is said to have spent twenty Millions of Gold on this Structure. And since that time, the Kings of Spain have been buried in a Noble Chappel here, called the Pantheon, from its being built in imitation of the Pantheon at Rome. The Emperour Charles V. lies interred in it. This Mag∣nificent Fabrick suffered much by Fire in 1671. in which a vast Library perished. Esfagues, Ruspae, a small City in the Kingdom of Tunis; it was a Bishops See, but now ruined. Esino, Aesis, Esis, a River in the Marca Anconi∣tana in Italy. It ariseth from the Appennine, and running East, washeth Jesi; then falls into the Adri∣atick Sea, one Mile North of Ancona. This was once the Northern Boundary of Italy. Eskedale, Eskia, a County in Scotland, bounded by Cumberland on the South, Annandale on the West, Twedale on the North, and Tivedale on the East: it takes its Name from the River Esk, which runs through it, and falls into the Tees. Eskihissar, Laodicea, a City of the Lesser Asia, upon the River Lycus, near its fall into the Meander: built by Antiobus the Son of Stratonica, whose Wife being called Laodicea, gave this Name to the City: now totally ruined, and not inhabited; though once an Archbishops See, who had sixteen Suffragan Bi∣shops under him. The Turkish Name it has, signifies the Old Castle. The Ruines of it shew it to have been a very great City, situate upon six or seven Hills, encompassing a large space of Ground, twenty Miles distant from Coloss to the North-East, and five from Hierapolis. It hath three Theatres of White Marble, as beautiful and intire, as if they were lately built; and a Circus as stately. But then the Town is totally desolate; inhabited by nothing but Wolves, Foxes and Chacals, a Den of Dragons, Snakes and Vipers: nei∣ther hath it the Title of an Archbishops See, (as Seignior Ferraro and others have affirmed): God ha∣ving spit it out of his Mouth, as threatned in the Re∣volation, and made it an Example of his Justice and Veracity. See Mr. Wheeler p. 264. See Lau∣dichia. Esla, Estola, a River of the Kingdom of Leon. It washeth Leon and Benvento; and taking in the Orbi∣co, falls into the Duero, between Samora to the East, and Miranda to the West. Essing, Elsing or Eslingen, Ezelinga, Eslinga, a small Imperial and Free City, in the Dukedom of Wirtemburg in Schwaben in Germany, upon the Ri∣ver Necker; nine Miles from Spier to the South-East, and the same from Ʋlm to the North-West. This is now under the Protection of the Duke of Wirtemburg; ill built, and has suffered much in the late Wars. Esne. See Aisne. Esperies, Eperiae, a strong Town in the County of Sarax, in the Lower Hungary, upon the River Tarcza or Tarkz, towards the Carpathian Mountains and the Frontiers of the Kingdom of Poland. Obtained from the Turks since the present War. Espernay, Sparnacum, Aspreniaoum, a Town up∣on the Marne, in the Province of Champagne in France, betwixt Chalon and Chateau-Thierry. It bath a famous Abbey of the Augustine Fryars stan∣ding in it. Espinal, Spinalium, a small City in the Dukedom of Lorrain upon the Maes, four Leagues from the Confines of Burgundy to the North, and a little less from Remirmont. This Town hath suffered much in the Wars of this Age. Espinoy, a Town in Flanders, betwixt Douay and L'Isle: ennobled with the Title of a Principality, and giving its Name to an Honourable House. Esseck, Mursd, a Town and Castle in Sclavonia, at the Confluence of the Drave and the Danube, where great Actions have been done. The Town stands low, and the Streets are planked with Trees, as Dr. Brown assures us, who hath seen it. Upon one side of the Gate is part of a Roman Inscription, MAELIAN: on the other, a Maids Head of Stone. In or near this place, Constantius defeated Magnen∣tius the Usurper, and Murtherer of Constantine II. in 359. The Town is great and populous, by reason of the Trade and Commerce on the account of the Passage. But not strong, and therefore the Turks have of late bestowed much cost and pains in for∣tifying it. In 1537. Solyman the Magnificent, as∣saulted it without Success. But that which is the great wonder, is the Bridge over the Drave, and the Marshes on both sides: this Bridge is five Miles over, having Rails on both sides, and Towers of Wood at every quarter of a Mile: built by Solyman the Mag∣nificent in 1521. so soon as ever he had taken Bel∣grade: it is so broad, that three Wagons may go a breast, and all built of Oaken Timber. Count Nicholas Serini burnt part of it in 1664. which necessitated the Turks to build that part a little nearer the Danube, because they could not without great charges and difficulty pluck up the remainder of the Trees which the Water had preserved from the Fire. By this Bridge all the Turkish Armies use to pass between Hungary and Constantinople: near here, the unfortunate Lewis King of Hungary in 1526 was defeated, in attempting to stop Solyman's passage into his Kingdom. Count Lesly, Aug. 15. 1685. burnt it the second time, and possessed himself of the Town of Esseck; but the Castle holding out, he blew up their Magazines, plundered the Town, and left it. In 1686. the Turks began to build this Bridge after another way, by driving rows of Trees into the Earth, and filling up the space with Earth, that it might not be so subject to be ruined by Fire: but the Duke of Lorrain, June 15. 1687. put an end to this Work; drove the Turks over the Drave, and in a few days in∣tirely ruined what eight thousand men had been many Months a building. Pursuing his design, and passing the Drave to take Esseck, he found the Prime Visier there posted with all the Forces he could raise very advantageously, with the Danube on the left, a Wood on the right, the Town and Drave behind, and a Morass before him; between which and his Camp, was a Dike twenty foot deep, forty broad, and two Miles long, strengthened with Palisadoes and Redoubts, with sixty thousand men within it, and one hundred Cannon: whereupon the Duke retreated, June 20. and repassed the Drave at Siclos. See Mohatz. Af∣ter the unfortunate taking of Belgrade by the Turks,
October 1690. they set down immediately with an Army of fifteen thousand Men before this Place, but retired without Success. Essedones or Issedones, an ancient People of Scy∣thia, whose Capital Town was Issedon, now called Caracoran. Herodotus says of them, that they used to eat the dead bodies of their Parents, reserving the head to be set in Gold and made the object of their annual Sacrifices. Essekebe, or Esquib, Essequebia, one of the prin∣cipal Rivers of South America. It ariseth in Guiana, near to the Lake of Parime; and running Eastward, to improve its Streams, by the addition of many smaller Rivers, it falls into the North Sea, near Mea∣puer. In Long. 318. The Dutch, who have many Plantations upon it, call it by this name. Essex, Essexia, is a County in the East of En∣gland, inhabited heretofore in part by the Trinoban∣tes: bounded on the North by Suffolk and Cambridge∣shire: on the West by Hartford and Middlesex; on the South by Kent; and on the East by the German Sea: The principal City in it is Colchester. This Country is very fruitful, full of Noblemen and Gen∣tlemens Houses. The principal Rivers, which water it, are the Stour, that divideth it from Suffolk; the Thames from Kent, the Ley from Middlesex, and the Little Stour from Hartfordshire; which besides their fruitful Meadows, and the convenience of Carriage, afford it plenty of Fish: besides these, there is the Ill, the Crouch, the Chelme, the Blackwater and the Colne, which arise and fall within this Country; and many of them are great Rivers. There are ma∣ny smaller ones, whose Names cannot be taken in here. This County gave the Title of Earl to the Families of the Mandeviles, the Bohuns, the Bour∣chiers, Thomas Lord Cromwell, William Lord Parre, before it came to the D'Eureuxe's. Robert d'Eurex, Vis∣count Hereford, General of the Parliaments Army against Charles I. dying Septem. 13. 1646. and his Son Robert an Infant, before the Restitution of Charles II. Arthur Capel, Baron of Hadham, was created Earl of Essex, and Viscount Malden, April 20. 1661. and made Lord Lieutenant in Ireland in 1672. He pe∣rished miserably in the Tower. His Son then an Infant, succeeded him in this Honor. Esslingen. See Esling. Essone, Exona, a small River and Village in the Isle of France. The Town stands five Miles from Paris to the South-West, and one from Corbeile to the West. Estampes, Stampae, a Town and Dutchy in Beausse in France. The Town stands upon a River of the same Name, ten Leagues from Paris to the South, and sixteen from Orleans to the North: mentioned in Georgius Turonensis, Aimonius, and other French Historians. It is placed on the Some, at the Conflu∣ence of another small River, which is sometimes cal∣led l'Yone, and sometimes La riviere d'Estampes. There is a Collegiate Church, and divers Religious Houses standing in it: but the Castle was ruined in 1652. This Town was created first an Earldom in 1327. by Charles IV. King of France. Then a Duke∣dom in 1536. by King Francis I. And has been many times honoured not only with French Synods, but with the Assemblies of the States. The Huguenotts took it by Scalade in 1567. Estaples, Stabulae, Stapulae, a Sea-Port-Town in the County of Boulogne in Picardy; sixteen Miles North of Dieppe, and ten from Calais South. Este, or Est, Ateste, a Town in the Dominion of the State of Venice, mentioned by Pliny and Tacitus, which was once a Bishops See, under the Patriarch of Aquileia. It stands in the District of Padua, upon the little Medoacus, or the River Bachiglione; which washing the Walls of Vicenza and Este, falls into the Venetian Gulph, twelve Miles from Padua to the South. The Dukes of Modena in Italy (of which Il∣lustrious House, Mary, Consort to King James II. is) take their Name from this Place; who were before a great while Dukes of Ferrara, Modena and Regio: Now, only of Modena. See the History of the Fami∣ly of Este written in Italian by Jean Baptist Pigna, and in English by Mr. Crawford. Esteing, an ancient Barony in the Province of Rouergne in France, since advanced to an Earldom. It gives Name to an Honourable Family, that by the concession of Philip the August in the year 1214. as a reward for the noble actions of one of their Ance∣stors, bears the same Coat of Arms with the Crown. Estella, or Stella, a small City in the Kingdom of Navarr, upon the River Ega, where it receives the Vreder; eight Miles from Pampelona to the South, and the same from Calahorra to the North. Built in the year 1094. It is the Capital of the Territory called la Merindada de Estella. Esten, Esthonia, a considerable Province in the North of Livonia; heretofore under the Poles, but now the Swedes. It lies between the Sinus Finnicus, a part of the Baltick Sea to the North; Lettonia, Liefland, to the South; the Bay of Riga to the West; and Ingria a Province of Russia, to the East: the chief City in it, is Revel, the Capital of this Province, which is sometimes called Eastland. Estepa. Astapa, a City or great Town in Anda∣lusia in Spain, seated upon a Hill, in the Confines of the Kingdom of Granada; about twelve Miles from Malaga to the North, and seventeen from Sevil to the South-East. This sprung out of the ruines of Astapa, an old Iberian City, or Phoenician Colony; which being besieged by Marcellus, a Roman Gene∣ral, the Inhabitants burnt themselves with their Wives and Children and all they had, that they might not fall into the hands of the Romans, as Livy saith. Cstoiteland, Estotilandia, a great Tract of Land in the North of America, towards the Actick Circle, and Hudson's Bay, having New France on the South, and James's Bay to the West. This is a part of Ca∣nada; now commonly called New Britain, and Terra Laboratoris. The first of the American Shoars which was discovered; being found by some Friesland Fishers, that were driven hither by a Tempest, al∣most two hundred years before Columbus. In 1390. Nicolas and Antonius Zeni, two Brothers that were Venetian Gentlemen, at the Charges of Zichini King of Friesland, took a view the second time of these Shoars. John Skoluo a Polonian in 146. about eighty six years after the first discovery, sailing past Norway, Greenland and Friesland, and entering into the Streight beyond the Artick Circle, arrived at this Country. Which is Mountainous, overgrown with Woods, full of all manner of wild and savage Beasts, and only known as to the Shoars; but yet the Soil is fruitful, Hofman. Estouteville, a Town in the Ʋpper Normandy in France, advanced to the quality of a Dukedom by King Francis I. in 1538. There is a Noble Family deriving their Name from it. Estremadura, Extremadura, is a Province of the Kingdom of Portugal, at the Mouth of the Tagus, upon the Western Ocean: bounded on the North by Beira, on the West and South it has the Ocean, and on the East the rest of Portugal. The principal City is Lisbon, the Capital of the Kingdom; and as for this Province, it is divided into six Counties, which they call Comarcaes. § There was anciently another Province called La Estremadura de Castilla, because it was Extrema Durii; for on the North it was boun∣ded by the Durius, or Douero, a great River of Spain; on the West it was separated from the Kingdom of
Leon, by the Rivers Heban and Rigamon; from thence it extended by the Rivers Guadarrama, which washeth Madrid and Somosierra, to the Fountains of the River Douero: so that it was one hundred Spa∣nish Leagues in compass, and Segovia was the Capital of this Province: but as Ximines saith, after it was united to Castile, it lost the Name, which in after times was given to others. Etsch, Athesis, a River of Italy, called by the Ita∣lians, Adige; by the Germans, Etch. It springeth out of Mount Brenna, one of the highest of the Alpine Mountains in Tirol; and passing through a Territory of Etschlender, which takes its Name from it, it leaves Meran and Bolsano (considerable Towns) on the East; turning South, it takes in the Rivers Eisock (which falls by Brixen), Neves and Lavi∣sium; then watereth the famous City of Trent, be∣neath which it admits Perzene, and so goes on to Verona, which it divides in its passage; and passing Legnano, Rovigo and Anguilara, it falls into the A∣driatick Sea by Porto di Fossone, in later Maps called Porto di l'Adige; eighteen Miles South of Venice, and three North of the Mouth of the Po. Etna, Aetna, a Mountain in the East of Sicily, which perpetually belcheth out Fire and Smoak: cal∣led by the Italians, il Mongibello; by the French, Le Mont Gibel; by the Arabians, Gibel; that is, the Mountain. It is the greatest as well as the most known Mountain in all Sicily, in the Diocese of Ca∣tanea, nine Miles high, and fifty in compass; and at the opening or Mouth of it at the top, twenty four fur∣longs wide. The South side is planted with Vines, the North overgrown with Woods; on the East from the Top of it to Catanea it is all cultivated, and em∣ployed to one use or another. At some times it ra∣geth more than at others: particularly in 1169. 1329. (when it had not flamed of many years before,) 1408. 1444. 1447. 1536. 1554. 1566. 1579. At which last time it damaged Catanea, and its Fields, more than usual. But the greatest Rage was in 1669, when it sent out four Rivers of melted Earth, Stones and Rocks; which from the top descended down its sides, through the Fields, into the Sea; and there maintained their Torrent a Mile in the Waters, before they were able to tame these raving and furious Sons of Vulcan. Not only the City of Catanea ap∣prehended a sudden and inevitable Ruine, but Men thought the whole Island of Sicily would have been destroyed; and that by degrees the Fire would have melted the whole Rock, upon which the Island is founded: however, it destroyed fifteen Castles or great Houses, and did an inestimable Mischief. Yet the top of this Mountain is often covered with Snow and Ice; and the two most contrary things in Nature seem here to unite, of which Claudian Lib. I. de Rapt. Proserp. Sed quamvis nimio fervens exuberat aestu, Scit nivibus servare fidem, pariterque favillis. Eu, Augum, Augae, La Ville d'Eu, a conside∣rable Town on the Coast of Normandy, upon the Ri∣ver Bresle, near the Confines of Picardy, six Miles North of Dieppe, and about a League from the Sea. Here of old were the Essui, a People of Gaul. It is honoured now with the Title of an Earldom, and with an ancient Abbey, and a College of the Je∣suites. Eubaea. See Negropont. Eucarpia, an ancient Town of Phrygia in Asia Minor, famed for Grapes, in bigness, exceeding those of Canaan. Evenlode, a small River of Oxfordshire. Evershot, a Market Town in Dorsetshire, in l. lerford Hundred. Evesham, or Evesholm, a Market Town in Wer∣cestershire in the Hundred of Bakenhust, with a Bridge over the Avon. It is esteemed next to Wor∣cester the best in the County: contains two or three Parishes, and drives a good Trade; and has the ho∣nour of chusing two Burgesses for the Parliament. Euganei, an ancient People of the Alpes, betwixt the Lake of Coma and the River Etsch; whereof the Sarunetes were a branch, and the most considerable: dwelling about Chiavenne and the Valtolme. Eugubio. See Gubio. Euphrates, though I have discoursed shortly of this River already in the word Aferat, yet because I then wanted some Books that were necessary to give a full account of it, I will here enlarge upon what I there omitted. The first City of Note it washeth, is Baberd; the second Ezrum, so far as it runs West; then it turns South, and passeth by Arzingan and Maaraz, where it takes in Cobaqueb; and over a∣gainst Ʋrpha, it receives a River which comes from Aleppo; so passing Bir, Rasseca, Belis, Chabuca, as far as Alchabar, it takes in from the East Soaid; and a little lower at Waset and Olim, falls into the Tigris: thus our latest Maps describe the Course of this vast River. The Learned Bochartus saith out of Pliny, Lib. 5. Cap. 26. that eighty three Miles beneath Zeug∣ma, at Massicen, the Euphrates is divided; and on the left hand (the East) it goes into Mesopotamia by Selucia, a little beneath which, it entereth the Ti∣gris. Ptolomy Lib. 5. Cap. 18. agrees with Pliny in this: then he mentions another Branch by the Name of , the Kings River, or Cut: which by the Arabians is called Amelic; and by Am∣mianus, Naar-Malcha; which he interprets too the King's River, Lib. 24. which Abidenus saith, was digged by the Order of Nabuchodonozor. Pliny tells us, the reason of this Cut was to prevent the Drow∣ning of Babylon in great Floods. More to the South was a third Branch, which went into the Tigris and Sur, upon which the great Babylon stood by the con∣fession of Ptolomy, though in his Maps it is placed on the second. There was a fourth Branch went to the West, called Kulpa, now Cufa, about the Name of which they are not agreed; but the use of it was to fill a vast Lake on the West of Babylon. Now as to these Branches, the Arabian Geographers agree in these Divisions as still extant. And yet that Branch which went through Babylon, Theodoret saith, was very small, and perhaps now intirely lost. The first and second of the Eastern Branches are represented in our later Maps; and the Western Branch at Cufa; which appear all like Rivers running into the Eu∣phrates, when as indeed they are Branches going out of it. The first is that which the Maps call Zab Major; the second has no Name, but it ought to pass streight to Bagdet; and that which is now the main Stream, seems to have forced its way in a new Channel, after the other was lost and dammed up by Time: the Lakes also to the West which were designed to re∣ceive the Waters in times of great Inundations, are filled up by the Mud and Sand, brought down by the River. However that Branch that runs to Cufa, ne∣ver comes to any Sea, but is lost in the Sands of Arabia; and has turned the fruitful Plains of Baby∣lon into a mere Morass or Bogg, unpassable, unin∣habitable. This is the sum of what Mr. Bochart has related more at large. Both Pliny and Strabo agree, that it yearly overflows as the Nile does, and much about the same time; which Inundation has the same effect, as to the sertility of Mesopotamia, that the over∣flowing of the Nile has upon Egypt. M. Thevenot who crossed it at Bir, saith, it is in Semur not big∣ger
than the Seine at Paris; though its Bed is twice as big. The Waters of it run very slowly, and are Na∣vigable, as far as to the place where it joins the Tigris. Evisse. See Ivica. Evora, Ebora, is a very considerable City in Portu∣gal in Alentejo; a Province of that Kingdom beyond the Tagus, (Taio) twenty Miles from Lisbon to the South-East. Long. 09. 00. Lat. 38. 11. This was anciently a Bishops See under the Archbishop of Me∣rida, and afterward of Compostella. But Pope Paul III. at the desire of John III. King of Portugal in 1540. raised it to the Honor of a Metropolis; and Henry, the first Archbishop, who of a Cardinal became King of Por∣tugal, made it an University. There is a Court of Inquisition kept here. Evora Monte, a small Place five Leagues from the former Evora to the North-East, where the Por∣tuguese gave the Spaniards a great overthrow in 1663. Eure, Ebura, Autura, a River of France, some∣times called Yeure. It ariseth in la Perche, in the Wood Logni: and running Eastward through Beausse, it watereth Chartres; turning Northward, Nogent le Roy, Dreux, Jury, (famous for the Victo∣ry of Henry IV. over the Leaguers in 1590.) Passy, Eureux; at last it entereth the Seine at Ponte de P'arche, ten Miles above Caudebec. The rich and fruitful Valley D'Eure, has its Name from this River, and also Eureux in Normandy; and from one of these three, the Noble FAmily of d'Eureux lately Earls of Essex, now Viscounts of Hereford, take their Names. § Eure, a River in Berry. See Aure. Eureux, Ebroica, Eburonicum, Mediolanum Au∣lrcorum, a City in Ʋpper Normandy, upon the River Iton (which afterwards falls into the Eure), and a Bishops See under the Archbishop of Rouen. Beautified with a great number of Churches and Monasteries: It is a place of good Antiquity, and a delightful Situation: heretofore subject to Counts of its own, who ce∣ded it to King Philip the August in the year 1200. Charles IX. King of France erected it into a Duke∣dom in 1569. See Eure. Euripus, called by the Ancient Latins, Euripus Euboicus and Chalcidicus, by the Italians, Stretto di Negroponte, by the Inhabitants now Egripos, is a Ca∣nal of the Aegean Sea, betwixt the Region of Boeo∣tia in Achaia, and the Island of Negropont; so nar∣row in the narrowest passage, as to be covered with a Draw-Bridge of five Arches. And here, the incon∣stancy of its Flux and Reflux appears the most visi∣bly: that is, whereas for eighteen or nineteen days in every Moon, Winter and Summer, in all Weathers, it regularly ebbs and flows twice in twenty four or twenty five hours with the Ocean and the Gulph of Venice, it most irregularly ebbs and flows for other eleven days in every Moon, 11, 12, 13, 14. times in the same compass of twenty four or twenty five hours. See Negroponte. The Bridge is defended by a Castle built by the Venetians. Europe, Europa, is the least, but most celebrated of the four general parts of the World, as to Arts, Commerce, Religion, Government and War. It was the Prediction of Noah, (the second Founder of Mankind) that Japhet (the Father of the Europe∣ans) should dwell in the Tents of Shem. And al∣though the first Church, and the two first General Monarchies fell to the share of Shem's Posterity; yet the two last and the best and noblest state of the Church, fell to the Japhets; by which that ancient Oracle was fulfilled. At this day whilst the Posteri∣ty of Shem, (the Asiaticks) lie buried in Ignorance, Slavery and Superstition; the Posterity of Japhet is innobled: the chiefest and the best Empires, the best Religion, Learning and Arts adorn the Tents or dwelling of Japhet: whilst the Ships of Chittim afflict Eber and Asher, not only to Trade, but to Ride Sovereigns in their Seas; and afflict them more by the Envy of their Wealth and Riches, than by their Power and Martial Valor, though they have felt that too. Europe, is bounded on the East by Asia, on the North by the Frozen Sea, on the West by the At∣lantick, and on the South by the Mediterranean. The only difficulty is in stating the Eastern Bounds: beginning therefore at the South, where the Bounds are plainer, it is agreed that the Archipelago, the Black Sea or Euxine, the Palus Moeotis, or Eastern Bay of Crim Tartary, (called by the French, la Mer de Zabacche,) the Tanais, now the Don, the Wolga, the Rooswa, the Tofda, and the vast River of Obb, are the truest Bounds on the Eastern side. In those vast Countries of Tartary and Russia, scarce at all known to the Ancients, though the Tanais, the Wolga, (as far as its Course is North and South) and the Obb, are the best and most visible Bounds; yet there is a great distance between the Tanais and the Wolga; and a much greater between the Wolga and the Obb; but between the Rooswa and the Tofda, very little: but in this every Man must be left at liberty. Europe is now divided into the Kingdoms of Great Britain and Ireland, Bohemia, Bulgaria, Denmark, France, Ger∣many, Greece, Holland, or the Low Countries, Hun∣gary, Italy, Moscovy or Russia, Poland, Portugal, Sa∣voy, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Tartary, the Tur∣kish Empire, the State of Venice, and some few con∣siderable Islands depending upon these. In length from Cape S. Vincent in Spain, to the Mouth of the River Obb, one thousand three hundred English Miles, or nine hundred German: from Cape Matapan in the Morea, to the North Cape in Finmark, eight hun∣dred and fifty, or five hundred and fifty German Miles, as Braudand reckons it: lying between 34. and 72. deg. of Lat. and betwixt 9. and 93. or 94. of Long. This Country is called by the Europeans, Europe; by the Turks, Rumeli, and Al-Franck; and by the Geor∣gians, Franckistan. Eurotas. See Iris. § It is also the ancient Name of a River of Thessalia, said by Homer, Strabo and Pliny, to glide upon the Top of the River Peneus (to which it runs) without mixing of Waters. Eurymedon, a River of Pamphylia in Asia Minor, memorable for the Victory obtained by Simon, the Son of Miltiades, over the Persians upon the Banks of it. An. Romae, 284. Euston, a small Town in the County of Suffolk, upon the Banks of the little Ouse, in a fair Champaigne Country. Deserving to be particularly taken notice of for the beautiful Euston-Hall, of the building of the late Earl of Arlington, and the Curiosities that are to be seen about it. In 1672. King Charles II. advanced this place to the Dignity of an Earldom in the Person of the late Duke of Grafton, upon his Marriage with the only Daughter of the said Earl of Arlington. The Euxine Sea, Pontus Euxinus, Axenos, now by the Turks called Cara Denguis, i. e. the Furious Sea, and by others the Black Sea; is encompassed round by Anatolia, Mingrelia, Circassia, the Crim Tartary, and Podolia; with no other out-let than the Bosphorus Thracius, accounting the Palus Moeotis as a Bay or branch of it: so that it seems more pro∣perly a Lake. Yet these great Rivers, the Danube, Nieper, Niester, Phasis, Corax, Sangarius, and many others discharge their floods into it. It is in length from East to West about one hundred eighty eight Leagues: In breadth, at the Western End, from the Bosphorus Thracius to the Nieper, three Degrees: at the Eastern, the half thereof. And is dangerous to navigate: Not so green, nor clear, nor brackish as
the Ocean, by reason of the Influx of those Rivers. And now wholly under the Dominion of the Grand Seignior, without whose leave no Vessel passes upon it. Ewel, a Market Town in the County of Surrey in the Hundred of Copthorn. Ex, Isca, is a River of England: it ariseth in So∣mersetshire, and passing by Winesford, it takes in Dunsbrook River, or Creden from Dulverton on the West; then entering Devonshire, it runs directly South to Tiverton; where it takes in Loman River from the East; at Stcke it takes in Columb on the same side, and a little lower Credy from the West; then incompassing a great part of the North, West, and South of Exeter, a little lower it admits Clyst on the East, and Ken on the West; and so entereth the British Sea by a large Mouth. Exeter, Isca, Isca Dunmoniorum, Exonia, is the principal City of Devonshire; called by the Welsh Caerisk, Caerrudh, and Pencaer, that is, the Prin∣cipal City: Seated on the Eastern Bank of the River Ex, in a barren Soil, upon the Advantage of a small Hill, declining East and West; having a Dike, and a strong Wall for its Safety; in Compass about a Mile and a half, with extended Suburbs. There are in it fifteen Churches; and in the highest Part of the City, near the East Gate, a Castle, which of old was the Seat of the West Saxon Kings, and afterwards of the Earls of Cornwal; and near this, the Cathedral built by King Athelstan, in Honour of S. Peter. Edward the Confessor settled the Bishop's See here, which he re∣moved from Kirton. It fell not into the Hands of the Saxons till four hundred sixty five years after their first coming over, viz. Anno Christi 914. when A∣thelstan banished the Britains, and fortified the City, and built the Cathedral. This City joining with the Rebels in 1640. was taken for the King by Prince Maurice, September 4. 1643. And being Garriso∣ned for the King, was again surrendred to the Parlia∣ment upon Terms, April 13. 1646. The Honoura∣ble John Cecil is Earl of Exeter, and the fifth of his Family; he succeded John Cecil his Father, in 1667. The Title of Marquess of Exeter was heretofore con∣ferred by King Henry VIII. upon Henry Courtney, Earl of Devonshire: And likewise of Duke, by Hen∣ry V. upon Thomas Beaufort, Earl of Dorset; and by Richard II. upon John Holland, Earl of Hun∣tington. The present Bishop of this Diocese, is the forty sixth since the Removal of this See from Kirton, about 1149. The sixty seventh from Aedulphus, who about 905. was made the first (at least Saxon) Bishop of Devonshire. Extremadura. (See Estremadura.) § A Province of the Kingdom of Susa in Africa, near the Atlantick Ocean, and the Mountains of Atlas, in the Southern Borders of Morocco. Extremos, a small Town upon the River Tera (which comes to fall into the Tajo) near Evora and Elvas, in the Province of Alentejo, in the Kingdom of Portugal. Extuca, a Province in the Kingdom of Morocco, in Barbary; extended along the Sea Coast, towards the Mountain Atlas, and the Frontiers of Biledulgeridia. Eychstat. See Aichstadt. Eyder, Eidera, Egidora, a River of Denmark which ariseth above Rendsburgh; and dividing Hol∣stein and Dithmarsh from the Dukedom of Sleswick, falls into the German Ocean at Tonning. This Ri∣ver denominates the Territory of Eyderstede in the said Dutchy. Eye, or Eaye, Insula, a small Corporation in the County of Suffolk, near the Borders of Norfolk; so called, saith Mr Camden, because it is an Island; where are to be seen the Ruins of an old Castle which be∣longed to Robert Mallet, a Norman Baron; and of an ancient Benedictine Abbey, called S. Peter's. This Town has been given in Jointure with the Queens of England. After many other Changes in this Honour, Sir Frederick Cornwallis, (descended lineally from Sir John Cornwallis, Steward of the Houshold to Ed∣ward VI. and Sir Thomas Cornwallis, one of the Privy-Counsellors to Queen Mary, and Comptroller of her House,) was April 20. 1661. made Baron Cornwallis of Eye, by Charles II. to whose Interest and Service being ever entirely addicted, in the worst of Times, he had the Honour to be the second Coronation Baron; to whom succeeded Charles Lord Cornwallis his Son, who dying in 1673. Charles, the second of this Fami∣ly, his Son, succeeded, and is now living. By the Fa∣vour of this Family (as I have heard), this small Cor∣poration obtained its Charter, and the Honour of sen∣ding two Burgesses to the House of Commons: Other∣wise the Place is very small and inconsiderable. It stands twelve Miles from Ipswich to the North, and seventeen from Norwich to the South, and in the Road between those two Places. Eyerlandt. See Aland. Eyndhoven, Endova, is a fine Town in the Ter∣ritory of Kempen, upon the River Bommele; four Leagues from Boisleduc to the South, and almost the same from Helmont to the West. It had a College of Canons, and belonged to the Count de Buren. This is the Capital of that part of Kempen which lies in Brabant, and fell into the Hands of the Hollanders, in 1629. after they had taken Boisleduc, by a Siege of four Months Continuance; and they are still in Posses∣sion of it. Eysenack, Isenachum, a small City in Thuringia, upon the River Nesa; eight Miles from Erford to the West. The River Nesa, a little below it, is taken into the VVerra. The Name of this City is written sometimes nearer the Latin, Isenach. It is under the Dominion of a Prince of the House of Sa∣xony, the Duke of Weimar, with a small Territory belonging thereto. And has the Honour to be both a Dukedom and an University, which last was founded in the Year 1555. F A FAenza, Faventia, a small City of Romandiola, in Italy, upon the River Lamone, (Anemo,) which falls into the Adriatick Sea; three Miles South of the Mouth of the Po; between Imola to the North and Forli to the South; twenty Miles from Ravenna to the West. It is a Bishop's See under the Archbishop of Ravenna; and under the Dominion of the Pope; only famous for Earthen Ware. The French call it Faience. Faience, Faventia, a small City in Provence in France, upon the River Benzon; three Leagues from Grasse to the West, and six from the Mediterranean Sea. The Bishops of Frejus are Lords of it. The French call Faenza in Italy, Faience. Faire-Foreland, Robodigum, the most North-East Country of Ireland, in the County of Antrim, in the Province of Ʋlster. Faire-Isle, a Rock in the Caledonian Sea, be∣tween the Orkneys and Shetland; in which is the Castle Dumo. Fairford, a Market-Town in Gloucestershire, in the Hundred of Brittlesbarrough. Fakenham, a Market-Town in the County of Nor∣folk, in the Hundred of Gallow. Falaise, Fallesia, Falesia, a Town in Normandy,
upon the River Ante, (which falls into the Dive at Morteaux,) seven Leagues from Caen to the South, and four from Argentan to the North-West. The principal Seat and Garrison of the first Dukes of Nor∣mandy. William the Conqueror, Natural Son of Ro∣bert II. Duke of Normandy, was born here. This Place was taken by the English from the French in 1417. There is now a round high Tower stand∣ing in it. Cape Falcon, a Promontory, West of Oran, in Barbary. Falconara, Assinarius, a River of Sicily: It flows by the Town of Noto, and falls into the Ionian Sea, between the Cape of Passaro, (Pachynum,) and the City of Syracuse; ten Miles from the Cape to the North, and twenty five from the City to the South. This River is made famous by the Defeat of the Athe∣nian Forces here by the Syracusans, in the Year of the World 3537. which Victory being gained by the Assistance of the Lacedemonians, they took the Ad∣vantage of it, and at last, in 3546. took Athens, un∣der Lysander. Faleria, Faleris, a ruined City of the Province of Tuscany in Italy, mentioned by the Ancients. The Episcopal See, which it possessed formerly, was trans∣ferred to Civita Castellana, a City built nigh the Ruins of this. Falernus, a Mountain of Campagna di Roma in Italy; famous for the excellent Wines growing upon it, which animated the ancient Poets so often to sing its Praises. Falisci, an ancient People of Hetruria in Italy, who made War a considerable time with the Romans their Neighbours, till reduced by Camillus in the Year of Rome 360. They are said to have come hi∣ther out of Macedonia. The Capital of their Domi∣nions was the ancient Faleria. Falkenburg, or Valkenburg, a small Town in Brabant, upon the River Geule; two Leagues from Maestricht to the East, and four from Aquisgrane. It was under the Dominion of the Hollanders till 1672. when it was taken by the French and dismantled: But in 1678. returned under them again with Mae∣stricht. This Town is called by the French Fau∣quemont; and in Antoninus his Itinerary, Corio∣vallum. Falkland, a small Town in Scotland in the County of Fife; beautified with an ancient Retiring House of their Kings; and very commodious for the Pleasure of Hunting. Fallekoping, or Falcoping, Falcopia, a Town in the Province of Westrogothia in the Kingdom of Swe∣den, five or six Leagues from Scaren. Falmouth, Voluba, a noble Haven on the South of Cornwal, as great as Brundusium in Italy, and as safe: an hundred Ships may ride in it, out of sight each of other; secured by two Castles at its entrance, built by Henry VIII. In 1664. Charles II. Created Charles Lord Barkley, Earl of Falmouth, who was slain at Sea June 2. 1665. George Fitz-Roy, now Duke and Earl of Northumberland, was Created Vi∣count Falmouth, by the same Prince, Octob. 1. 1673. The old Roman Town Voluba, from which it had its name, is now totally ruined and gone; it stood high∣er up into the Land upon the River Valle, over against Tregony. Falster, Falstria, Insula Dianae, an Island in the Baltick Sea, on the South of the Isle of Zeeland, from which it is parted only by a narrow Channel called Groene-Sund. It has one Town call'd Nykoping; and gives name to a good Family in Denmark. Faluga-diabete, a small Island belonging to Sar∣dinia; on the West of that Island. Famagosta, Fama Augusta, called by the French Famagouste, is a very strong City in the Island of Cy∣prus, on the Eastern Shoar; which is a Bishop's See under the Archbishop of Nicosia, and was of old called Arsinoe. This City has a large and a safe Port: And was taken by the Genouese in 1370. By the Ve∣netians about 1470. and by the Turks from the Vene∣tians, in the Year 1571. after a Siege of ten Months. Famar, or Fanar, a Town at the Entrance of the Black Sea, in Thrace; four German Miles North of Constantinople. Famar, Arietis Frons, Criumetopon, the most Southern Cape of the Little or Krim Tartary, Tan∣ricia; which lies an hundred and fifty Miles from Constantinople to the North-East. Famastro, Amastrus, a City upon the Euxine or White Sea, upon the East Side of the River Dolap, fifty Miles from Scutari East, and the same from A∣masia North-West. It grew up out of the Ruins of four neighbouring Cities, to a vast greatness. Fanar, Acheron, a River, and Town of E∣pirus. Fanari-Kiosc, a Royal Pleasure House belonging to the Grand-Seignior, one League Distant from Con∣stantinople and Galata; at the Entrance of the Streights of Constantinople; near the Port of Chalce∣don in Natolia. Built by Solyman II. Vessels arriving upon this Coast by Night are lightned by a Fanal from hence. Fano, Fanum Fortunae, an Episcopal City in the States of the Church, in the Dukedom of Ʋrbino. but not of it; twenty Miles from Ʋrbino to the East, and thirty seven from Ancona to the North. This was the Country of Clement VIII. his Father, a Flo∣rentine, living here as an Exile. The Temple of For∣tune, which the Romans built in Memory of their Vi∣ctory over Asdrubal, the Brother of Hannibal, in the Year of Rome 547. (wherein they slew Asdrubal himself, with 50000 Men) did stand near this City. Fanshere, a River in the Island of Madagascar. Fantin, a small Kingdom in Guiney, in Africa, where the English and Dutch have some Castles. Fanu, an Island near Corfu to the North-West. Fara, Pharan, a City and Mountain in the Sto∣ny Arabia, upon the Red-Sea; twenty Miles from Sues South, and from Eltor North, over against Dacata in Aegypt. Farfar, Fabris, a small River in the State of the Church: It riseth near a Castle called Capo Far∣far; and running to the North-East, it watereth a Monastery of the same Name; then falls into the Tibur. § Farfar, Farfaro, Fer, Orontes, a River of Syria, which ariseth from Mount Libanus; and running Northward, it watereth Apamia and the great Antioch; then falls into the Mediterranean. Farham, a Market-Town in the County of Sou∣thampton. The Capital of its Hundred. Faribo, Helicon, Haliarkmon, one of the most considerable Rivers of Macedonia; which rising out of the Mountains of Albania, and traversing the whole breadth of that Kingdom, from thence falls into the Bay of Thessalonica from the West, thirteen Ger∣man Miles from Thessalonica to the South. Farima, a City of Japan, eighteen Spanish Leagues from Meaco to the West; which is under the King of Japan now, but had heretofore a Prince of its own. Faringdon, a Market-Town in Berkshire. The Capital of its Hundred. Farne, an Island on the Coast of Northumberland, in the German Ocean; two Miles from Bamburg Ca∣stle; where S. Cuthbert built him an Hermitage, in which he took care to see nothing but Heaven, as Bede saith.
Farneto, a Castle in the Dukedom of Florence in Italy, near Orvietto: Whence the Family of the Farnese, with a little Variation, is believed to derive their Name. Farnham, a Market-Town in the County of Surrey. The Capital of its Hundred. Watered by the River Wey; and graced with the Episcopal Seat of the Bishop's of VVinchester. King Alfred made a great Slaughter of the Danes, in a Victory over them, here. Faro, Pharus, a City of Spain, in Algarva, up∣on the Ocean, between Cape S. Vincent to the West, and the Mouth of the Guadiana to the East, near the Cape of S. Mary; seven Miles from Silves to the South-East. Faro di Messina, Fretum Mamertinum, the Streight between Sicily and Italy. Farsa, Pharsalus, a City of Thessalia, where the fate of the Empire of the World was determined, between Cesar and Pompey, by Battel. In some la∣ter Maps called Farsato. Farsi, Persia. Farso, a Town in Carmania, over against the Eastern Cape of Cyprus, 7 German Miles from the Mediterranean Sea; in Asia the Less. Fartach. See Fertach. Fasso, Phasis, a River in Mengrelia. Fatigar, a Kingdom in Africa, which belonged formerly to the King of Ethiopia; between the great Lake of Arpen to the East, the Mountains of Felles to the North, the Kingdom of Olabi to the West, and that of Bara to the South; between 60. and 70. and 10 North Latitude. Favagnana, Aegathos, Aegusa, Aethusa, an Island on the West of Sicily, near Cape Trepano, under the King of Spain; which has a Bay fit to receive the greatest Navies, near to which Luctatius Catulus the Consul gave the Carthaginians their last blow at Sea. Faudoas, a Town and Castle in the Province of Gascoigne in France, adorned with the Title of a Barony, and giving its name to an honorable Fa∣mily. Fayal, one of the Azores in the Atlantick Oce∣an, under the Portuguese: little, but fruitful: having a Town of the same name, with others, in it. Feldkirck, Feldkirkia, a small but well peopled Town in the Province of Tirol in Germany, upon the River Ill, towards the Frontiers of Switzerland. It is also written Widkirch, and carries the honor to be an Earldom. Felin, or Welin, Felinum, a City of Livonia, up∣on the River Felin, in Esthonia, 150 Miles North of Riga; which has a strong Castle in it. In this place William of Furstemburgh, Master of the Teutonick Order, was betrayed by his own Subjects to the King of Sweden, in 1650. who has ever since possessed it. Fella, Carnicum Julium, a Castle in Friuli, but on the Confines of Carniola, under the Venetians. Felles, a Ridge of Mountains in Africa, extend∣ing from the North-East to the South-West, on the North of Egypt. See Fatigar. Fello, Phellos, a City of Lycia, East of the River Xanthus, (or Lycus,) and West of the Chelidonii Scopuli, on the Shoars of Asia the Less. Feltri, Feltria, a City in the Marchia Tarvisina, under the Commonwealth of Venice, upon the Ri∣ver Asona, which soon after falls into the Piave; forty two Italian Miles from Trent to the East. This is a Bishops See, under the Patriarch of Aquileja; and has been under the Venetians ever since 1404. Sometime written Feltre. Femeren, Femerae, Fimeria, a small Island in the Baltick Sea, on the Shoars of Holstein, and Wagria, from which it is distant only four Miles: made fa∣mous by a Naval Victory, obtained by the Danes over the Swedes and Hollanders, in 1645. Fenesia, Psillis, a River of Bithynia, in the Les∣ser Asia. Ferden, Verda, a City of the Lower Saxony, called also Verden, which is the Capital of a Duchy of the same name; and a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Mentz, by the institution of Charles the Great: It stands upon the River Aller, six Miles from Bremen to the East, and twelve from Ham∣burgh to the South: of old a Free Imperial City, af∣terwards subject to its own Bishop; but in the Trea∣ty of Westphalia, it was given to the Swedes, who are still possessed of it: the Bishop of this City im∣braced the Augustane Confession in 1568. The Dukes of Lunenburgh seized it in 1676. but were forced to restore it in 1679. to the Swedes. La Fere, Fara, a strong City upon the River Oyze, in Picardy, in the Tract of Tierache, five Miles from S. Quintin to the South, and 4 from Laon to the North: it stands in a Morass, and was retaken by Hen. IV. after the Spaniards had gained it from the French. La Fere Champenoise, a City of Champaigne in France, between the Seyne to the South, and the Marne to the North, eight Miles from Chalons to the South. § There is another called La Fere en Tar∣denois, in this Province too, in the middle between Melun to the West, and Reimes to the East. Ferentino, or Fiorentino, Ferentinum, a City of Campagnia in Italy, under the Pope, which is a Bi∣shops See, under none but him: It lies forty Italian Miles from Rome to the South, and eight from the Confines of the Kingdom of Naples to the North: a small place built on an Hill. Ferento, Ferentiae, an antient City, ruined, of Hetruria in Italy, near Viterbo and Montefiascone. It had been an Episcopal See, before those of Viter∣bo destroyed it, upon an account of Heresie in 1074. Ferenzuola or Fierenzuola, an Episcopal City in the Capitanata, in the Kingdom of Naples. Adorned with a famous Abbey, and made remarkable in anti∣ent History by the Victory of Sylla over M. Carbo here in the year of Rome 672. Fermanagh, Fermanagensis Comitatus, a Coun∣ty of Ʋlster in Ireland, in which lies Earne, the great∣est Lake in that Kingdom. There is never a City or Town of note in this County; and therefore it need be no further considered. Fermo. See Firmiana. Fernes, Fernae, a City in the County of Wexford in Ireland, with an Episcopal See under the Archbi∣shop of Cashel now, but formerly of Dublin. Feroe Islands. See Foeroe. Ferrandina, a Town in the Kingdom of Naples, in the Basilicate, upon the River Basiento; 18 Miles from the Sea to the West, and 12 from Matera to the South-West: built by Ferdinando, Duke of Ca∣labria, Son of Alphonsus II. King of Naples; and since honored with the Title of a Dukedom. Ferrara, Ferraria, a City of Italy, under the Dominion of the Pope, and the Capital of the Duke∣dom of Ferrara; which under the Family of Este, was so improved and augmented, that it became one of the best Cities of all Italy: made a Bishops See by Pope Vitaliano: 30 Miles from Bologna. It was so small in the time of Theodosius junior, that it was called Ferrariola, the little Ferrara: It stands on the smallest branch of the Po, (Po Morto,) from which there is a cut of six Miles, as far as Francoli∣no Westward, for promoting of Trade; but since 1598, when it came into the Popes hands, this City has been decaying; which the Castle built by Clement
VIII. has not been able to prevent, though that Pope placed there his Image, with this inscription; Ne re∣cedente Pado Ferrariae Fortitudo recederet, Martem Neptuno substituit; that is, Least the recess of the Po should weaken Ferrara, he has brought Mars to supply the want of Neptune. His Holiness was how∣ever mistaken, as the event has shewn; for Neptune and Mercury, tending equally to the wealth and wel∣fare of a City, are much more auspicious Patrons than Mars. There was a League made here against the Protestants in 1586. The Council of Florence was begun here in 1438; (after a declaration of the dissolution of that of Basil made by P. Eugenius IV.) John Paleologus VII. Emperour of Constantinople, with his Patriarch, being personally present An Uni∣versity was settled by Frederick I. in aversion to Bo∣nonia, about 1316. The Dukedom of Ferrara, is a part of Romandiola: bounded by the Peninsula of Rodighnia; (which formerly belonged to this Duke∣dom, but was taken from it by the Venetians in 1500.) on the West, by the Dukedom of Mantona; on the South by Romandiola, properly so called; and on the East by the Adriatick Sea. It was under the Family de Este, from 1336. to 1598. when upon the death of Alphonsus II. without Heirs Males, it was seized by Pope Clement VIII. as Lord of the Fee, against the pretensions of that Branch de Este, which are now Dukes of Mantoua; a Dukedom then a de∣pendent on this of Ferrara. The Tract adjacent, called Ferrarese, assumes its name from it. Ferreri, or the Island of Iron, is the most We∣stern of all the Canary Islands: and more particular∣ly mentioned by Writers for a tree, supplying the In∣habitants with water (whereof there is none elsewhere in all the Island), by a distillation from its branches. Pet. Martyr, le Blanc, Thevet, &c. Ferrete. See Pfirt. Ferriers, Ferraria, a small Town in the Terri∣tory de Gastinois, towards the Confines of Senois; two Leagues from Montargis to the North, and twenty three from Paris to the South; which has a very famous Monastery in it. Ferro, Calycadnus, a River in Cilicia. Fertach, Syagros, Sapphar, Fartachium, a City and Kingdom on the South of Arabia Foelix, which lies about eighty German Miles from Aden to the South, in almost Long. 85. Lat. 15. 24. a hundred and thirty Miles from the entrance of the Red Sea to the South. La Ferte-Aleps, or Alais, a Town in the Isle of France, three Leagues from Estampes to the East, and eight from Paris to the South. As this word La Ferté signifies a Fort or place of Strength, so it frequently occurreth in the Maps of France. La Ferte sur Aube, Firmitas ad Albulam, a Town in Champagne, four Miles from Bar to the South, and twenty from Dijon to the North. La Ferte-Bernard, Firmitas Bernardi, a Town in the Province of Maine in France, upon the River Huisne, ten or twelve Leagues below Mans. It bears the Title of a Barony. La Ferte-Gaucher, a small Town in the Pro∣vince of Brie in France, betwixt Meaux, Sezane, and Provins. La Ferte sur Grosne, a Town in Burgundy, two Leagues from Challon to the South. La Ferte-sous-Iovare, Firmitas Auculphi, or Subter Jotrum, a Town in la Brie Campanoise in France, upon the River Marne, betwixt Chateau-Thierry and Meaux. The Huguenots took it in the Civil Wars of the last Age. La Ferte-Milon, Firmitas Milonis, a Town in the Government of the Isle of France, upon the Ri∣ver Ourc or Oureque, betwixt Meaux, Soissons, and Senlis, in the Dutchy of Valois. It is a good large Town, and suffered very much in the last Age's Ci∣vil Wars. Fervaques, Aquae fervidae, a small Town of Bathes, of warm water, in Lieuvin in Normandy; two miles and an half from Lisieux to the South, and three from Roan to the South-West: it is a very small place. Ferventia, Fons Agri Carrinensis, a Bath in Portugal, in a Village called Cadima, two Miles from the Ocean, and the same distance from Coimbra to the West: this Fountain is mentioned by Pliny. Fescennia, an antient Town of Hetruria in Ita∣ly: the same with the Citta Castellana, says Orte∣lius; with Galeso, says Cluverius, of the Moderns. Noted to a Proverb amongst the old Romans for a sort of jesting wanton Poetry. Feschamp, a Town in Normandy, on the British Sea, four Miles from Le Haure, and the mouth of the Seyne to the North. Fessole or Fiezzole, Fesulae, an antient City in the Dukedom of Florence in Italy, one of the twelve considerable Cities heretofore of Hetruria, being the residence of the Thuscan Augurs; and afterwards a Bishops See. There is a Treatise written by Francis Diaceti, sometimes Bishop here, of the Saints of this City. Fetu, or Foetu, a small Kingdom in Africa, in Guiney, with a City called also Foetu, upon the Coast dell' Or, towards Cape Corso. Feversham, a Market Town in the County of Kent, in Scray Lath, with a good Port for small Ves∣sels. King Stephen, with his Queen, and Eustace his son, were all buried here in an Abbey of that King's foundation. The right Honorable Lewis de Duras enjoys the Title of Earl of this place. Feurs, Forum Segusianum, a Town in the upper Foretz in Lionnois in France, five Leagues from Lion to the West, and six from Rohanne to the North, upon the Loire. Fez, one of the greatest Cities in Africa, but now declining: It is the Capital of a Kingdom of the same name, in the West of Barbary; said to have been built by the Moors in 786. It is divided into three parts: Beleida, a part of Old Fez, which contains four thousand Families; Old Fez, properly so called, in which are eight hundred Families; and New Fez, which has about eight thousand Families. Old Fez, the most Western, lies upon Hills and Val∣leys intermixed; and has fifty Mosques very beauti∣ful, besides six hundred small ones. The New Fez lies in a most pleasant Plain, with a double Wall, very high and strong; and stands near the River Ʋnion, above a Mile from Old Fez. The learned Ortelius tells us, Fez in the Arabick Tongue signifies Gold: that the City Fez is built in the middle of the King∣dom, and the greatest part of it upon Mountains and Hills; so that there is no Plain but in the middle: that the River entereth into the City by two ways on∣ly; and then diffuseth it self into innumerable Bran∣ches and Channels; so that there is scarce a private House that has not a Branch of the River belonging to it; and that the rest of the water passing through the Common Sewers, do cleanse the City. The grea∣test part of the Houses are built of Stone or painted Brick: that each House has a Tower for their diver∣tisement. The great Mosque called Carruen, is half a Mile in compass, with thirty one Gates of vast height. And the Library is said to contain, besides a great number of other books, two thousand Vo∣lumes of Manuscripts in the Arabick Language. The Territory belonging to it extends from the River Burgrage to the River Gnave; and on the North from the River Suba, to the foot of Mount Atlas
South; which is called the Province of Fez, and by the Romans, Volubilis. This Kingdom of Fez was erected by Abdulack in 1212, and long since united to the Kingdom of Morocco. This Kingdom was a part of Mauritania Tingitana, and has for a Centu∣ry of years and more, suffered great and srequent Mu∣tations and Insurrections. They are the greatest Bi∣gots of all that imbrace the Mahometan Faith; and the most bitter and implacable enemies of the Christi∣an Religion; having totally extirpated it in those Regions, where there were once many great and flourishing Churches. The Kingdom of Fez is boun∣ded on the North by the Streights of Gibra tar, and the Mediterranean; on the West by the Atlantick Ocean; on the South by the Kingdom of Morocco, from which it is divided by the River Azamor; and on the East by the Kingdom of Algier: now by rea∣son of their great intestine Wars, much depopulated and ruined. Fezzen, or Fessen, a Province of Biledulgerida in Africa, which is a Desart. Fiano, a Castle in St. Peter's Patrimony in Ita∣ly, upon the Tibur, 15 Miles North of Rome, enno∣bled with the Title of a Dukedom. Fianone, Flanona, Flavona, a Town and Port of the Province of Histria in Italy, upon the Adria∣tick; belonging to the Republick of Venice. It stands advanced upon a high hill. Fidari, Lycormas, a River of Aetolia, which washeth Calidon, now Galata, a Village on the Bay of Thessalonica, on the Archipeiago. Fidonisi, Achillea, an Island in the Euxine Sea: and also a Peninsula called of old Dromos Achillis, at the mouth of the Borysthenes, on the Eastern side. It seems to be the same with Zagori. Fiechtelberg, Suditi & Hercinii Montes, a Ridge of Mountains which incircle Bohemia, and di∣vide it from Franconia to the West; whence spring these great Rivers; 1. Moenus, the Mayn, which en∣tereth the Rhine at Mentz. 2. Sala, the Saal, which falls into the Elb at Bernberg. 3. Egra, the Eger, which falls into the Elb, at Deutmeritz in Bohemia. 4. Nabus, the Nab, which falls into the Danube a∣bove Ratisbone. See Eichtelberg. Fiesco, a City of Caria, called anciently Phusca, in the later Maps Fischio; a little more north than the Isle of Rhodes, and on the Mediterranean Sea. Fife, Fifa, a County in Scotland, between the Fyrth of Tay to the North, that of Edinburg to the South, the German Ocean to the East, and Strathern and Menteith to the West. It is one of the greatest in Scotland, as being eighty four Scotch Miles in cir∣cuit; also one of the most fruitful and best inhabited parts of that Kingdom; full of considerable Towns and Places; the principal of which is S. Andrews, the Metropolitan See of that Kingdom. Figalo, Actium, a most celebrated Promontory of Epirus. See Actium. Figeac, Figeacum, a small City of France in Quercy, a Southern Province of that Kingdom, upon the River Sele, nine Leagues from Caors to the East, twenty eight from Tholouse to the North-East. Figenia, Ephesus, a City of Ionia. Filadelphia, Philadelphia, a City of Lydia, in the Leser Asia, at the foot of Mount Tmoli, upon the River Caystrus, now Chiai, thirty two German Miles East of Smyrna. It is called by the Turks Al∣lachars, or Alla-Scheyr; that is, the City of God: of old an Episcopal See, under Sardus, but now the Metropolis, and in a tolerable Estate under the Turks: being built amongst the Hills and Mountains, it has in all times been much subject to the violence of Earthquakes. This is one of the seven Churches of Asia, mentioned in the Revelations, Long. 57. 41. Lat. 40. 15. There is here now about two hundred Houses of Christians, and four Churches. It preser∣ved it self against the Turks, after all the rest of Asia was conquered, under Orchanes, and the two Morats, till the time of Bajazet I. who began his Reign in 1387, reigned nine years, and then was taken by Ta∣merlane. And as they held out longer, so they sub∣mitted on better terms: God having preserved them, as he promised he would, even from the perfidy and rage of those destroyers. See Revel. 3. 8, 10. Whee∣ler's Travels, p. 265. Fillech, Fillechum, a City of the Upper Hunga∣ry, five German Miles from Agria to the North, and the same from Cassovia to the West. It stands on the Road which leads from Presburg, to the Cities in the Mountains, upon the River Gayen, which falls in∣to the Danube over against Gran, in the County of Zabel. There was here a Castle; and the Town be∣ing a Frontier, was walled and very strong: taken by the Turks in 1560, retaken by the Imperialists in 1593. Again taken by the Bassa of Great Waradin in 1682. And because he and the Tekelites could not agree about it, he dismantled and deserted it. Filippo, Philippi, a City of Macedonia, on the Confines of Thrace; seated on a steep Hill, about five German Miles from the Archipelago to the West, on the Golfo de Contessa; either built or repaired by Philip King of Macedonia, from whom it has its Name. It was afterwards a Roman Colony, and mentioned as such in the Acts of the Apostles. S. Paul preached the Christian Faith here, and wrote one of his Epistles to this Church: also famous for a Battel fought near it between Pompey and Cesar; and ano∣ther between Augustus and Cassius. In the Primitive times it was an Archbishops See, but almost buried in its own Ruines now, and desolate. See Acts 16. 12. Filippopoli, Philippopolis, called by the Turks Fi∣libe, and Presrem, is a City and an Archbishops See in Thrace, upon the River Hebrus, now Meriza; an hundred Miles from Constantinople, ninety from Phi∣lippi to the West. Here was an Arrian Synod held in 349. And here Julian the Apostate was, when he received the news of the Death of Constantius; and thereupon discovered his concealed Apostacy. Frederick Barbarossa I, in 1189, took this and Adrianople from the Turks, which was retaken from the Christians by Amurath in 1359. This City was built by Philip the Roman Emperor, and is now in a flourishing condition; the Seat and Residence of a Turkish Sangiack, or Governor, under the Pacha of Romania. Final, or Finale, Finalium, a strong Town, well fortified, with a Marquisate belonging to it, upon the Coasts of the Sea of Genoua in Italy, betwixt Savona and Albengua. The Marquisate is not above six miles in length, and is bounded at each end with the points of the Mountains. They both belong to the King of Spain, who surprized them in 1602, and caused the last person of the House of Carreto (that for a long time before had been the Proprietors there∣of) to be put to death. Finichia, one of the present Names of Cilicia, a Province of the Lesser Asia next Syria. Finkeley, a Village in the Bishoprick of Durham, in Chester Ward: mentioned in the Councils by the name of Finchala and Fincenhala: there having been a Council held at it in the year 798. by Eanbald Archbishop of York. Finland, Finlandia, Fenni, Finnia, Fionnonia, is a very spatious Country; heretofore a distinct King∣dom, but now subject to the Crown of Sweden, and distinguished with the Title of a Dukedom belonging to the King of Sweden's sons. Bounded on the North
by Desarts or unknown Countries, from which it is separated by the Lake and River Ʋla Tresk: on the West it has the Botner Sea, a Branch of the Baltick; on the South the Bay of Finland, another Branch of it; and on the East, the Dominions of the Great Duke of Muscovy. It contains several very great Pro∣vinces, as Ciania, Tavasthia, Nylandia, Carelia, Sa∣volaxia, and Finland properly so called; which is the most Southern and most noble. Aboa a Town upon the River Aurojoki, over against the Isle of Aland, is the Capital of this Kingdom▪ and the Seat of the Swedish Viceroy. This Kingdom was first conquered to the Crown of Sweden in 1384, by Erick one of their Kings. In 1571, the Muscovites intending a Conquest fell into it with a Savageness and Cruelty hard to be expressed, or believed; but were recalled by an Irruption of the Tartars upon their own Countries. It is called by the Inhabitants and Swedes, Finner; by the Danes, Finder; by the Germans, Fennen; by the Dutch, Finlander. Cluverius saith, it is a considerable part of the King∣dom of Sweden; and that it is fruitful, and affords excellent Pasturage. Finmark, Finmarchia, called by the Inhabitants Taakemarch and Finmark, is a Province of the Kingdom of Norway, on the Western Ocean. The Southern part of it is subject to the Danes; the Nor∣thern to the Swedes. This Country is barren, rocky, covered with dreadful Woods, full of Bears and Wolves, and other ravenous Beasts: the Inhabitants till of late lived in Summer, like the Nomades, wan∣dring from place to place, as the convenience of Wa∣ter and Pasture invited them. The Princes under whom they now are, to reduce them from this va∣grant way of living, granted the Lands to the first Occupant, by which means some parts are improved; but the more barren can be used no other way, and therefore are left still in common. The Inhabitants are a mongrel sort of Christians, extreamly ignorant and barbarous; infamous for Witchcraft, revengeful beyond belief, and as rugged as the Country they in∣habit. Fionda, a small Village on the Shoars of the Me∣diterranean Sea, in the Lesser Asia, in the Confines of Lycia and Pamphylia; which in the Roman times was called Phaselis, and before Pityussa: it lies East of the Chelidonian Rocks, and West of Mount Ma∣sicytus, two hundred and twenty English Miles from the most Western Cape of Cyprus. A Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Myra, now Stramita: but so very small, that little notice is taken of it in the ter Maps. Fionia. See Fuynen. Fionissi, Lyssus, a Town in Creet (Candia), on the Western Shoar; near the most Southern Cape of that Island. Fiore, Ossa, a River of Italy, in the Dominions of the Great Duke of Florence, which falls into the Mediterranean Sea at Telemont, a small Sea-Port be∣longing to Sienna. Fiorenza. See Florence. Firando, a City and Kingdom of Japan, in that part which is called Ximo; to which there belongs an Island of the same Name, on the Western Shoar also. Firi, Maxera, Mazeras, a River of Hyrcania, which falls into the Hyrcanian Sea. Firmiana, Firmanorum Castrum, a small Castle on the Adriatick Sea, in the Marca Anconitana, near the Mouth of the River Tinna: now common∣ly called Fermo; thirty Italian Miles from Ancona to the South, and an Archbishops See. Fischio, Phusca, a Maritim City of Caria, in the Leser Asia, over against the Isle of Rhodes, about eighty four English Miles from Ephesus to the South. In the later Maps, it is placed much more to the East than the Isle of Rhodes. Fishgard, a Market Town in Pembrokeshire▪ in the Principality of Wales, and the Hundred of Ke∣meys. Fismes, Fimae, ad fines, a Town in the Province of Champaigne in France, upon the River Vesle. Two Councils have been assembled at it in the years 881 and 935, which write it, Finibus apud Sanctam Ma∣cram, from a Stone ('tis supposed) that serves as a Boundary, hard by, to the Bishopricks of Rheims, Laon, and Soissons. Flagania. See Paphlagonia. Flaiz, Flaicus, an Isle of France. belonging to Santoigne. Flamborough-head, a noted Promontory in the East Riding of Yorkshire; two Miles from Burling∣ton Bay: so called from the small Town, Flambo∣rough, standing in it. Flanders, Flandria, by the Natives call'd Vlaen∣deren, is the greatest and noblest of those Seventeen Provinces called the Low Countries: Bounded on the East with Hainault and Brabant; on the West with the British Ocean; on the North with the Seas of Zealand; and on the South in part by Artois, and in part by Hainault and Picardy: of which Artois was at first a part, and after five or six descents, re∣united again to it. This Province, saith Ortelius, is most excellent Pasture, especially towards the West. It affords excellent Kine, and warlike Horses; and abounds in Butter, Cheese, and excellent Wheat. The People are much given to Merchandize and Cloath∣ing; their Linnen (having plenty of Flax and Hemp) exceeds all other Countries; and as to Woollen, they having the Wooll from Spain and England, improve it by their industry to a wonder, and then supply all the World with the Product. But in this the zeal of Philip II. King of Spain, has altered the state of things in a great degree. This Province has twenty eight walled Towns or Cities, a thousand one hun∣dred and fifty Villages; besides Forts, Castles, and Noble Mens Houses; and a great number of Abbeys, Priories, Colleges, and Monasteries. It has five Vis∣counties, three Principalities, four Ports, and thirty one Chatellanies. The principal of which in Ortelius his time was Gaunt. This great Province was divided into three Parts; 1. Flanders Flammengant, bound∣ed on the East by the Imperial Flanders, and the Scheld; on the West by the British Seas; on the North by the Seas of Zealand; and on the South with Artois and Flanders Gallicant; the principal City of which was Gaunt. 2. Imperial Flanders, so called, because it was a Fee of the Empire; divided from Brabant, on the East by the River Dender; and from the Gallick Flanders on the West by the Scheld; on the North it has the River Dender, and on the South Hainault; the principal Town of this is Alost, whence it is now commonly called the County of Alost. 3. Flanders Gallicant, so called, because the French Tongue was heretofore most spo∣ken in it. This has Hainault on the East, Artois on the South, the British Sea on the West, and Flanders Flammigant on the North; from which it is parted by the River Leye; the chiefest Town is L'isle, Insula. First united to France by Dagobert one of their Kings; by whom about 621. it was granted to Liderick de Buque, with the Title of Forester. In 864. it was granted to Baldwin I. by the Title of Earl of Flanders, the Sovereignty being reserved to France, whose Homagers these Earls were. This Earldom by the Marriage of Philip Duke of Burgundy with Margaret Daughter of Lewis de Ma∣latin Earl of Flanders in 1369. came into the House
of Burgundy; and so to the House of Austria by the Marriage of Mary Daughter and Heir of Charles the Hardy, to Maximilian Emperor of Germany, in 1476. in which Family it still is. This though the prime Earldom of all Europe, yet was a Homager to the Crown of France; till Charles V. having taken Francis I. his Prisoner in the Battel of Pavy in Italy, by a Treaty at Madrid, infranchised it from that Ser∣vitude. Since the time of Philip II. it has been ex∣treamly curtailed and harassed; many of the Inhabi∣tants flying then into England, not only depopula∣ted, but impoverished it by carrying away its Trade. And the Hollanders Revolting, not only added to this Calamity by a War of forty years continuance, but took from them several Towns in the Northern parts. Of later times, the French have made the same devastations on the Southern, so that not above half Flanders is now left to the Spaniards, and that in a weak and declining condition. Flassans, a small Village in Provence, in the Dio∣cese of Freus: remark'd for giving name to an emi∣nent Poet of that Country in the thirteenth Century; as likewise in the person of Sieur de Flassans, sirna∣med the Knight of the Faith, for his zeal against the Huguenots of Provence in 1562. Flatholm, an Island in the Severn, over against Somersetshire. Flavigni, Flaviniacum, a small Town in the Tract of Auxois in Burgundy, betwixt Dijon and Samur, upon a little River near the antient Alize. There stands an Abbey of the Benedictines in it. La Fleche, a Town in the Province of Anjou in France, upon the Loyre, towards the Frontiers of Maine. Henry le Grand founded a College of Je∣suits there in 1603: whose heart is interred in the same. Flensburg, Flensburgum, a City of the Kingdom of Denmark, on the South of Jutland, upon the Bay of Flens, on the Baltick Sea, in the Dukedom of Sleswick, four German Miles West of the Isle of Alsen, and 6 from Frederichstad to the North-East. It is but small, seated on high Hills with a large Ha∣ven, and a strong Castle. The City is under the King of Denmark; but the Territory which belongs to it, is under the Duke of Holstein Gottorp. Chri∣stian V. King of Denmark was born here in the year 1646. Flerus, a Village in the County of Namur, below Charleroy, near the Sambre; rendered remarkable by the Battel betwixt the French and Dutch Armies, on July 1. 1690. fought upon the Plains thereof, with the Victory to the French. Fleury, or S. Benoît sur Loyre, Floriacum, a small Town which has a noble and an ancient Mona∣stery of the Order of S. Benedict, whose Body lies in∣terred therein: seated upon the Loir, nine Leagues from Orleans to the East. It stands, according to some, in Le Gastinois; to others, in the Dukedom of Orleans; and deserves to be remembred for the sake of Hugo Floriacensis, a Learned Monk of this House, who wrote a loyal and a christian Discourse concern∣ing the Origine of Monarchy, which he dedicated to Henry II. King of England; Published by Baluzius in his fourth Tome of Miscellanies. § There is ano∣ther Fleury in the Dukedom of Burgundy, upon the River Ousche; three Leagues from Dijon to the West: A third in Biere, which has a Priory; and a fourth in the Isle of France. Fliez, Phligadia, a Mountain in Sclavonia. La∣zius placeth it in Liburnia, upon the Adriatick Sea. Flie, Flevo, an Island at the Mouth of the Rhine, which has a fine Haven, and a rich Town. It stands at the entrance of the Zuidersee, near the Texel. The English Fleet under Sir Robert Holms, entred this Port in 1666: burnt one hundred sixty five Sail of Ships, and took and burnt the Town of Schelling, which is the chief of that Island. Flintshire, one of the twelve Shires in Wales; bounded on the North with an Arm of the Irish Sea, which parts it from Cheshire, on the East of it; and on all the other Quarters, by Denbighshire. It is Hilly, but not mountainous; fruitful in Wheat and Barley, but especially Rie: upon the Northern Shoar stands Flint Castle, which gives name to the whole Shire; begun by Henry II. and finished by Edward I. wherein Richard II. renounced the Crown of En∣gland. Whereupon Henry Duke of Lancaster claim∣ed it, and intailed a War on the English Nation, that bid fair for its Ruine. The Title of Earl of Flint belongs to the Prince of Wales. Flix, a strong Castle upon the River Ebro in Ca∣talonia, supposed to be the old Ibera. S. Florentin, a Town of France in Senois, in Champagne. Florence, Florentia, one of the principal Cities of Italy, called by Pliny, Fluentia; by the Italians, Fiorenza; and proverbially epitheted La bella, from its great beauty. The Capital of the Province of Tos∣cany and the Residence of the Great Duke. It was built by Sylla's Soldiers in the Year of Rome 675, se∣venty six years before the Birth of our Saviour, up∣on the River Arno, which passeth through it, and is covered by four stately Bridges within the Walls. It is five, or as others say, seven Miles in compass: pa∣ved with Stone, adorned with large Streets, and state∣ly magnificent Buildings, both publick and private; to the Beauty of which the natural Ingenuity of the Citizens has contributed very much; no place having afforded more excellent Architects, Painters and Carvers, than this, as Schottus observes. It is seated in a gentle and healthful Air, upon a great and a na∣vigable River; surrounded with a delicate Plain, plea∣sant Hills, high Mountains; and abounding in what∣soever is valuable or useful; said to contain above se∣ven hundred thousand Souls. It may justly own Charles the Great for its Founder, who in 902, en∣larged, and new Walled it; adding one hundred and fifty Towers, an hundred Cubits high; from whence∣forward it began to flourish, though it suffered very much from the Factions of the Guelphs and Gibellins, that is, the Imperial and Papal Parties. This City purchased its Liberty of Rodolphus the Emperor about 1285, after which they subjected many of their Neighbours; but were never quiet from Foreign Wars, or Intestine Divisions, till they fell under a second Monarchic Government: in the interim Pope Martin V. advanced the Bishop to an Archbishop, in 1421. Nor is it less remarkable for a Council held here for uniting the Greek and Latin Churches; which began in 1439, and ended in 1442. Nor is the Death of Jerome Savanarola to be forgotten, who was burnt here in 1494, for reproving the Vices of those who love them too well to part with them. It surrendred it self to Charles V. in 1529, who granted it the year following to Alexander de Medi∣ces his Son in Law, with the Title of a Dukedom, under which Family it still is; enlarged in Bounds, but perhaps diminished in Wealth and People. Besides the Council I mention, there have been many other held here, which for brevity I must omit; as also the vast number of excellent Men here born; the noble Library, call'd Bibliotheca Laurentiana, which is one of the best in the whole World for Manuscripts; the excellent Pieces of Architecture, Sculpture and Paint∣ing (of which sort this City shews some Pieces drawn by John Cimabac, who about 1200, began to revive the Art of Painting in Italy, before which this Art was only exercised by Greeks) and many other Rari∣ties
plentifully enough here to be found. It has three Citadels, built by its Dukes at several times. They observe, that the politeness of the Italian Tongue shines in its greatest perfection here, tho not so well pronounced as by the Romans: whence that Country Proverb, La lingua Toscana in bocca Romana. The praise whereof is in great part to be ascrib'd to the fa∣mous Academy della Crusca, Authors of the Italian Vocabulary, established in this City. Long. 34. 03. Lat. 43. 15. Florensac, a Town in Provence, seated on a Ri∣ver, nine Miles from Narbonne to the North-East, and six from Frontignan to the West. Flores, or Isla de Flores, one of the Azores in the Atlantick Ocean, under the Portuguese. Florida, a very large and fruitful Country in the North America; so called because the Spaniards dis∣covered it on Palm Sunday, which in their Language they call Parcua de Flores, in 1512. The English had before this discovered it; Sebastian Cabot, sent by Henry VII. in 1479, to find a way to the East-Indies by the West, being the very first European that landed here. But the Spaniards went further, searched throughly, and took Possession of it for the King of Spain: however, the English have renewed their old Claim, and taken Possession of the more Northern Part by the name of Pensilvania, of which I shall speak in due time. The Inhabitants call Flo∣rida, Jaquasa; it lies parallel with Castile in Spain, and said to be of the same temper both for Air and Soil, but abundantly more fruitful. Bounded on the North-East with Virginia; on the East with Mar del Nort; on the South, and some part of the West with the Bay of Mexico; and on the rest of the West with New Gallicia, and some Countries not yet discovered. It extends from the River of Palms 25 degr. of Lat. to Rio de Secco, in Long. 34. which evidently shews▪ that it is a large Country. The Spaniards have only two Castles in the Southern Parts, S. Matthew, and S. Augustin. It lies in breadth where it is narrowest thirty Miles, and in other parts an hundred: towards the North beyond Florida is Canada. The whole Country is flat; a∣bounds with Rivers, which make it over-moist; but towards the Sea it is more sandy. In 1520, and 1524, Lucas Ʋsquez invaded it to find Men to work in the Mines. In 1528, Pamphilus Narviesius travelled over it. In 1528, Ferdinandus Soto went thither after Peru was conquered, with three hundred Horse, and four hundred Foot, to look for Gold; but find∣ing none returned empty and discontented, bestow∣ing only the Name of Florida upon the Country. In 1549, Charles V. sent some Priests thither to Con∣vert the Natives; but the Natives destroyed them. Under Charles IX. of France, in 1562, Charles Ri∣bald sailed thither, made a League with the Inhabi∣tants, and built Charles Fort, setling a French Colo∣ny. And in 1564. Renatus Laudonerius was kindly treated by the Natives; which the Spaniards obser∣ving, and fearing, they surprised the French, and hanged not only the meaner sort, but many Gentle∣men too. In 1576. Dominic Gurges, a Gascoign, manned out a Ship at his own cost and charge, and retook Charles Fort, repaying the Spaniards in their own kind. The Spaniards (who were then much in the favour of the French) had like to have been too hard for him at his return. The Soil is very fruit∣ful, yields plenty of Sassafras, and may have rich Mines; but the Inhabitants take no pains to find them, and not much to Till the Earth, which yields them two Crops of Maze in each year, one in March, and another in June: this is the natural bread of the Country, by which, and Hunting only, the Natives subsist. Who are of Olive Complexions, great of Stature, go Naked, except what they are more con∣cerned to hide; naturally lovers of War, out of a re∣vengeful and unquiet Temper. Flumica, Crimisa, a River of Calabria Citerior, which falls into the Bay of Taranto, near Capo dell' Alice; four Miles from the Promontory of Santa Maria di Leuca; which is the most South-Eastern Cape of Italy and Europe to the West. The Cape, the Village dell' lo Zeiro, and il Capo dell' Alice, were by the ancient Geographers called Crimisa, as well as the River, though they have now three seve∣ral names. Flushing, Ʋlissinga, Flissinga, is a Maritime Town in the Province of Zeeland in the Low Countries; seated on the Mouth of the Scheld, in the Isle of Wal∣cheren, one League from Middleburgh, upon the most Southern point of that Island. It has a very convenient Haven, and the intire Command of the Scheld; without whose License no Ship can pass up the River to Antwerp. One of the first Towns the Hollander took by surprize from the Spaniards in 1572. by the diligence of Vorst a Seaman, and one Monsieur de Berland, the Bailiff thereof. Then a mean place, of no great strength or consideration; but since fortified by the Hollanders, to the utmost degree of human Art. This, the Briel, and Fort of Ramekins, were, in 1585. put into the hands of Queen Elizabeth, as Cautionary Towns for the re∣payment of such Monies as she should expend in their Protection against the Spaniards: and the famous Sir Philip Sidney was made by her the first Governor of it. But in 1616. King James I. resigned all a∣gain into the hands of the Hollanders. The Prince of Orange is the Proprietor of this Town. It is the key of the Sea of the Low Countries. See Cadiz. § In the Island of Tabago in the Southern America, the Hollanders built a Fortress, and call'd it New Flushing: which the French took and rased in 1677. Fluvian, Clodianus, a River of Catalonia, com∣monly called El Llobregat; it ariseth from the Py∣renean Hills, near Junquera in the borders of France and Rousillon; and falls into the Mediterranean Sea near Empures, or Poret; almost seven Miles from Perpignan to the North, and two from Narbonne to the South. Fochien, or Fokien, a Province in China; bound∣ed on the North by Chekiam, on the West by Kiamsi, on the South by Quamtum, and on the East by the Chinian Ocean: between 24. and 27. deg. of Lati∣tude. It is said to contain eight Cities, whereof Fo∣chen is the chief; forty eight walled Towns, and 509200 Families. Fodway, a City in the Lower Hungary, which was formerly an Archbishops See: stands in view of Co∣locza, a City twelve Miles distant from Buda. Foeroe, Feroae, Provincia Feroensis, Insulae Fa∣renses, by the Inhabitants called Feroier, is a Pro∣vince subject to the King of Denmark as King of Norway; consisting of 17 Islands in the Northern Ocean, which have Norway on the East; Orkney and Scotland on the South-East; Greenland on the West, and Iseland on the North-West; under 62 deg. 10. min. of Lat. separated by deep and rapid Waters; from one Mile long to 24, and from one to eight broad; extending from North to South sixty Miles, in breadth above forty; all cultivated and inhabited. Their Names are Fugloe, Suinoe, Wideroe, Bordoe, Kunoe, Kalsoe, Osteroe, Nolsoe, Stromoe, (which is the largest) Waagoe, Myggeness, Kolster, Hestoe, Sandoe, Skuoe, Slorediemen, and Sudoroe. In Stromoe there is a good Harbor called Thorsehaven; where the general Commerce of the Land is established,
and the King's Contributions kept, under the Prote∣ction of a Fort built by Christian IV. King of Den∣mark. Their Commodities are Skins, Feathers, Tal∣low, Train-Oil, Fish, but especially Stockins; where∣of they export yearly above 60000 pair, in their Trade to Iseland, Norway and Denmark, which they perform without Silver Money, by adjusting their Pri∣ces, and taking Ware for Ware. Here is Angelica, radix Rhodia, plenty of high Grass and wild Cattel; whence the Province bears a wild Sheep for their Arms. These Islands became first inhabited by the Norwegians about the year 868, being governed by their own Chiefs, till reduced to the Obedience of the Kings of Norway in the Eleventh Century: who at the same time erected them into a Bishoprick. For in an Ordinance of Hagen Duke of Norway, son to King Magnus, dated in 1040. relating to this Peo∣ple (which was confirmed to them by Christian IV. King of Denmark, Feb. 4. 1637.) we find Mr. El∣lender mentioned with the Title of Bishop of Feroe. Upon the Reformation, Christian IV. translated this Bishoprick into a Provosship under the Bishops of Bergen; which has since been subjected to those of Copenhagen, upon the removal of the Commerce of Feroe from Bergen thither. There are in all thirty nine Parish Churches, divided into seven Church-Cor∣porations (as they call them) and to each Corporati∣on one Priest of the Faith of the Confession of Aus∣burgh; who besides little Contributions from Com∣municants, receives for Tithes (not the Tenth, but) the fourth part of Corn, Butter, Wool and Fish: and makes out the rest of his Maintenance for himself and Family, by honest Working and Tillage. At Thorsehaven there is a School for the Youth, erected and endowed by Christian III. King of Denmark. They speak the Danish and Norwegian Languages mixt; and are governed according to the Laws of Norway. See Lucas Jacobson Debes, sometime Pro∣vost of Feroe, his Description of the Islands and Inha∣bitants, translated out of Danish, and printed Lond. 1672. Foggia, a small Town in the Capitanata in the Kingdom of Naples, upon the River Cervaro, seven or eight miles from the Adriatick Ocean. There is a famous Custom-house here, call'd La Dogana di Foggia. Fogie, Phocaea, a Town in the Lesser Asia, upon the Archipelago, over against the Isle of Metelino; seated upon the River Lohat (Hermus): called an∣ciently Phociae, and now Fochia, or Foja Nova: a very considerable Place, and made more so by a Naval Victory, obtained here by the Venetians over the Turks, in 1649. Foglia, Isaurus, Pisaurus, a River of Italy: it springeth from the Apennine, and running through the Dukedom of Ʋrbino, falls into the Adriatick Sea at Pesaro. Foix, Fuxum, or Fuxium, a Town in Langue∣doc, upon the River Lauriegne, at the foot of the Py∣renean Hills, from which the adjacent Country is cal∣led the County of Foix: it stands six Leagues from the borders of Spain to the North, and twelve from Tolouse to the South. § Le Comte de Foix, called by the Spaniards, El Contado de foix, is a County in Aquitain in France, which was heretofore a part of Le Conserans, but now contained in Languedoc: there are sixteen Castellanies or Prefectures in it; and the Cities of Pamiers (Apamea), Tarascon, and Foix, from which it has its name. This gives a Title to a Noble Family of France, frequently mentioned in all their Stories. Fokien. See Fochien. Fokingham, a Market Town in Lincolnshire in the Hundred of Aveland. Foligni. See Fuligno. Folkeston, a Market Town in Kent in Shepway▪ Lath. It belongs as a Member to the Port of Dover, containing formerly five Parishes; now reduced to one. Fondi, Fundi, a small City in Terra d Lavoro, a Province of Naples, upon the borders of Campagna di Roma, which is a Bishops See, under the Archbi∣shop of Capua; from whence it stands almost forty English Miles to the North-West, and about fifty five from Rome to the South; in a fruitful Plain, about six miles from the Ionian Sea. There is a Castle in Fondi. It has the honour to be an Earldom, and gives its Name to a Lake in the Vicinage. In the year 1594. the Turks pillaged it. The famous Ad∣miral Barberoasse with some Troops of Pyrates made once a Descent upon it, with a design to steal Julia de Gonzagua, Widow of Vespasian Colonna, one of the finest Women of that Age, to make a Present of her to Solyman the Grand Seignior. And narrowly mis∣sing her, he set fire, in revenge, to the Town. Il Lago di Fondi, is a Lake that lies between the former City, and the Sea; which was heretofore very great and equal to that called the Pomptinae Pa∣ludes, by the Romans; but now reduced to a circuit of about four Miles, as Baudrand saith, who saw it in 1667. Font-Astoruge, Orge, a small River in Provence, commonly called Sorgue, in the County of Vendosme, which falls into the Rhosne above Avignon. Fontain-bleau, Fons-Bellaqueus, or the Fountain of fair Water; is a most delicious Village in the Isle of France, in the Territory de Gastinois, not above one Mile from the Seyne, and fourteen from Paris to the South. In which Francis I. built a most stately royal Country House, much improved by Henry IV. Lewis VII. had before built a Castle here in 1169, and to it this noble House was added by his Successors; in which was born Francis II. in 14. Henry III. in 1551. Lewis XIII. in 1604. Philip the Fair was also born in this Town in 1266. The Conference of Religion at this place May 4. 1600. in the presence of Henry le Grand, King of France, his Chancellors and Secretaries, seven Princes and divers Bishops, betwixt the Sieur du Plessis Mornay and James Davy Bishop of Eureux (afterwards Cardinal of Per∣ron) upon an Accusation made by the latter that Du Plessis had falsified the Fathers in the Citations of his book against the Mass in no less than 500 places, may be mentioned here as one of the most famous Occurrences as to Religion of this Age. The result of it was this, the learned Thuanus and Pithaeus be∣ing Commissioners for ordering of the Dispute on the Roman Catholicks side, and Isaac Casaubon with others (according to the Kings appointment) for the Huguenots. After an Examination of nine Passages that day, it appearing sometimes the Objection was taken for the Answer, sometimes Words omitted and Sentences curtailed and others misapplied, there was no continuing of the Conference longer; for Du Plessis retired into the Country sick, and dyed soon after. In 1679. there was a Peace concluded here, between the Crowns of Sweden and Denmark, by which the Swedes recovered whatever had been taken from them by the Danes. Fontanelle, a Village and Monastery in Norman∣dy, upon the Seyne, twelve Miles from Roan to the East. Fontana Bianca, Naustathmus, a Sea-Port on the Eastern Shoar of Sicily, at the mouth of the River Cacyparis, twelve Miles from Syracuse to the South. Fontarabia, Fons Rapidus, called by the Inha∣bitants Fuenteravia, and sometimes Ondarrivia, and Ondar Ibaya; by the French, Fontarabie; by the Italians, Fontarabia; is a very strong Town in
Guipuscoa in Spain, upon the Shoars of the Bay of Biscay, upon the River Vidosa (Bassages), in the Confines of France and Spain. Built by the Goths in 625. It belonged as is pretended heretofore to France, as part of the Territory of Bayonne, and subject to that Bishop, till Philip II. King of Spain in 1571. caused it to be taken from that Diocese. It is so seated, that at low Water it is easily entered, but at high Water surrounded with the Sea; and so forti∣fied besides, that a few Men may defend it against a vast Army: so that it is the Key of the Kingdom of Spain; and also a convenient Haven. The French have had an Eye upon this place. In 1638. under the Prince of Conde, and the Duke of Espernon, they attempted to reduce it; but were beaten off with great shame and loss, the two Generals mutually bla∣ming each other after the ill success. I have read that Charles V. after he had fortified this place, called it his Pillow, upon which he could securely sleep; and it has proved so. Fontenay, a Town near Auxerre in the Province of Burgundy in France: famous in History for the bloody Battel fought at it betwixt the four Sons of Lewis the Debonnaire in 841, wherein above a hun∣dred thousand men were slain upon the place, with the Victory to the two younger Brothers, Charles the Bald and Lewis, the German. Fontenay le Comte, Fontenacum, Fontenaeum, the chief Town of Poictou, upon the River Vendee, seven Miles North-East of Fochel: it is a fine Town, seated at the foot of an Hill, and made rich by a great Fair kept here. Fonteuralt, Fons Ebraldi, a little Town in An∣jou in France, which has a very much celebrated Nunnery; the Abbess of which is Head of the Order, and governs all the Men of that Order. It stands about one League from the Loyre, and three from Salmur to the North-East. Forcalquier, Forum Neronis, once a City of Gal∣lia Narbonensis, mentioned by Pliny; now a Town in Provence upon the River Laye, which is the Capi∣tal of a County of the same name. It stands upon an Hill, between Sisteron to the South-East, and Apt [Apta Julia] to the North-East; six Miles from the latter, and eleven from Aix to the North. The Title of Earl of this place and the Lands adjacent, is born by the Crown. Forcheim, Forchena, Locoritum, Trutavia, a small City in Franconia, upon the River Rednitz, where it takes in the Wisent to the North; four Miles from Bamberg to the South, under the Bishop of Bamberg. Forcone, Avia, Furconium, once a City of Italy, now a Village in the further Abruzzo, upon the River Pescara, (Aternus) eight Miles from Aquila; to which place the Bishops See was removed, upon the ruin of this ancient City by the Lombards. Fordingbridg, a Market Town in the County of Southampton. The Capital of its Hundred. Fordon, Fordunum, a strong Town in the Coun∣ty of Mern in the North of Scotland; ten Miles from the German Ocean, and fifteen from Aberdeen to the North-East. In this Place John de Fordon, the Author of the Scotichronicon, was born: but it was anciently much more honoured on the account of Palladius, the Apostle of the Scotch, here buried; who was sent by Pope Celestine in 431. to Preach the Christian Faith to this Nation. Fordsham, a Market Town in Cheshire upon the Banks of the River Weever. Fordwich, a Member of the Town and Port of Sandwich in Kent. Forenza, Forentum, a Town in Abruzzo in Italy. Le Foretz, or Foresiens, a Country of France, extended in length from North to South upon the River Loyre, and bounded on the North by Bourbon, on the West by Auvergne; on the East by Beaujo∣lois; and on the South by Velay. It is divided into the Upper Foretz, (in which are Fers, and St. Esti∣enne;) and the Lower, in which is Monbrison the Capital, and Roanne. This is a very fruitful Coun∣ty under the Jurisdiction of Lyon. Forest Noire, or the Black Forest, a large Wood extending from South to North the space of ten or twelve Leagues, as far as to the Neighbourhood of Strasburgh, beginning about Basil. The four Towns, standing at a little distance from the head of it, (viz. Rhinfeld, Lauffembourg, Seckinghen, and Wald∣shust) are hence called the four Forest Towns. La Forest, Sebusiani, or Segusiani Populi, the same with Foretz. La Forest de Biere, Sylva Bierica, the Wood by Fountain-bleau. La Forest de Bondis, Sylva Bugiensis, a Forest on the borders of Savoy. The Forest of Dean, a vast Wood in Glouoester∣shire, which in ancient Times was exceeding dark, and terrible to pass through; between the River Wye and the Severn: it was so great an Harbor for Thieves, that robbed all Passengers, that in the Reign of Henry VI. of England, there were Laws made to restrain them: but (saith Mr. Cambden▪) since the rich Iron Mines were found here, those frightful Woods by degrees became much thinner than before: and the Rebels of 1640. promoted it, by selling the Timber of it to the Hollanders; who returned their kindness by a War, in Ships built of the same. Forflamine, Forum Flaminii, a City of Ʋmbria, ruined by the Lombards in 740. It stood three Miles from Nuceria. Forli, Forum Livii, a City of Romandiola, which is a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Ravenna: It stands in a Plain near the little River Ronco and the foot of the Hills, with a Castle; at the distance of fifteen Miles from Ravenna to the South, between the Cities of Cesena and Faventia; within the Domi∣nions of the Pope. Blondus the Historian was born here. La Formentera, Ophiusa, one of the two Islands which were antiently called Pityusae, in the Medi∣terranean, upon the Coast of Spain, toward Ivica. As desart now, as we read it was in Strabo's time: in∣habited only by a number of wild Asses. Formigue, Formicae, one of the Isles de Hyeres, upon the Coast of Provence, in the Mediterranean Sea. Formipt, Gedrosia, a Province on the East of the Kingdom of Persia, now by others called Send; which is bounded on the East by India, on the South by the Ocean, on the West by Macran, and on the North by the Desart of Segista. Formosa, an Island, by the Spaniards so named from the beauty and fertility of its soil, in the Ori∣ental Ocean, twenty four Leagues from China, to∣wards the Coasts of the Provinces of Fochien and Quantung. Inhabited by about 25000 Chinese, who govern themselves in the manner of a Republick with∣out acknowledging of any King or Sovereign. The Hollanders expell'd the Portuguese hence in 1635, and the Chinese them in 1661. It is a hundred and thirty Leagues in circuit, a hundred and fifty distant from Japan▪ and subject to Earthquakes▪ Called other∣wise Lequeio, Talieukie, and Paccande. Its prin∣cipal Town, is Theovan or Tayoan, at which the Hol∣landers built a Fort with the name of Zeland. There is a Golden Mine found in this Island.
Le Fornaci, one of the Mouths of the River Po, in the Dukedom of Ferrara, about six Miles from the other Mouth: by this the Po di Ariano, dis∣chargeth it self into the Adriatick Sea: it serves also as a Boundary between the Pope and the Venetians, and i more commonly called il Porto di Goro. Fornoue, a small Town in the Parmesan, in Ita∣ly: remembred by the Battel of Charles VIII. King of France, in his return from the Conquest of Naples; at which, with nine thousand men only he got the Victory over an Army of forty thousand of the Confe∣derates July 6. 1495. Forstler, a City in Hassia. See Frislar. Fort de Alinges, a Fort in Savoy, upon the Ri∣ver Drance, two Leagues from the Lake Lemane; which is now forsaken and ruined. Forta-ventura, one of the Azores, West of Ca∣naria. About seventy Leagues in Circuit, but in the middle not above four over. There is a Town in it of the same Name. Forth. See Fryth. Fort-Louis, a Cittadel in the Island of Cayenne, in the South America, at the Mouth of the River Cayenne: Built by the French in 1643. Taken by the Hollanders in 1675. and retaken by the French the year after. Fortoro, Tifernus, a River of Abruzzo: it ariseth out of the Apennine, in the County of Molise, in the Kingdom of Naples, near the City of Boiano; and flowing to the North-West, watereth Lucito, Guar∣dia, Alferes and Iscano; and falls into the Adriatick Sea, between Tremole and Trino, over against the Isle di Tremiti. This River is more usually called Biferno. Fossa, Cremera, a River of Italy, much mentioned in all the ancient Historians, for the ruine of the Fa∣i, a great Roman Family: it springeth out of the Lake of Bacano, in S. Peter's Patrimony; and run∣ning Eastward falls into the Tibur, six Miles above Rome. Fossano, Fossanum, a City of Piedmont, upon the River Stra, which falls into the Po: it lies between Saluces to the North, and Mondovi to the South, fifteen Miles from Alba to the West: built in 1236. and now a Bishops See, founded by Pope Gregory XIII. under the Archbishop of Turin. Fossat, Memphis, the first Name of Grand Cairo, and a small part of it. Fossato, Fossatum, a Field in Romandiola, near Ravenna. Theodoricus King of the Ostrogoths in Italy, (who was honoured by Zeno the Emperour with a Statue and a Triumph in 484) had leave from the Emperour to enter a War with Odoacer then reigning in Italy; and accordingly beat him in this place, about 491. § Fossato, a Town in the States of the Church in the Marchia Anconitana, on the Apennine Hills, near the Confines of the Duke∣dom of Ʋrbine, twelve Miles from Eugubio to the West. Fosse-Werd, a Territory in West-Friesland. Fossigny, or Foucigni, Fociniacus Tractus, a Pro∣vince in the Dukedom of Savoy, at the foot of the Alpes, which is a part of the Dukedom of Geneva, between le Vallys to the East, and the State of Ge∣neva to the West: Heretofore a dependent of the Dauphinate, but now subject to the Duke of Savoy. There are in it thirteen Mandements, or Districts; and the chief Town is Bonville. The Title of a Barony is annexed to it. Fossombruno, Fossombrone, Forum Sempronii, a City in the Dukedom of Ʋrbino, in the State of the Church, which is a Bishops See, under the Arch∣bishop of Ʋrbino: it stands near the River Metro, [Metaurus] which falls into the Adriatick Sea, four Miles from Senogalla, about half a Mile from the place where the old City stood; and is ten Miles from Ʋrbino to the East. It was sold to the Duke of Ʋr∣bino, by Galeatius Malatesta, the Lord of it, for thirteen thousand Florins of Gold, in the time of Pope Sixtus VI. Fossone, Fossae, one of the Mouths of the Ri∣ver Po. Fotheringhay-Castle, a Town and ancient Castle in the County of Northampton, in the Hundred of Willibrook, pleasantly surrounded with the Meadows on all sides. Mary, Queen of Scots, was beheaded here. Foulsham, a Market Town in the County of Nor∣folk, in the Hundred of Eynesford. Fougeres, Fugeria, Fulgerium, a City in Bre∣tagne in France, upon the River Coesnon, towards the Borders of Normandy, eight Miles from Auran∣ches [Abrincae] to the South, and as many from Dole. Heretofore a Place of considerable Strength, but now neglected. It was seized by the English in time of Truce, in 1448. in the Reign of Henry VI. Fowey, a Market Town in the County of Corn∣wall, in the Hundred of Powder, returning two Bur∣gesses to the Parliament. Fraemont, commonly called Pilate's Mount, is a Mountain in Switzerland near Lucerne, having a Spring at the Top of it. Fraga, Fragues, Flavia Gallic, a strong Town in the Kingdom of Arragon, upon the River [Cinca] or Cinga, which falls into the Segne, and with it in∣to the Ebro, in the Borders of Catalonia: it stands three Leagues from Ilerda to the South-West. Near this place Alphonsus VII. King of Arragon, was overthrown and slain by the Moors in 1134. Fraires, Fratres, Nesides, two small Islands on the Coast of Bretagne, called the Brothers, or les Isles de Vannes: they lie between the Mouth of the Loire, and the Calonesus, or Bell-Isle, on the Southern Coast of that Province. Framlingham, a small Market Town in the Coun∣ty of Suffolk, in the Hundred of Looes, upon a Clay∣hill, near the head of the River Ore, called by others Winchel; where was anciently a strong large Castle of Saxon Work, belonging to the Bigots, by the bounty of Henry I. in which Robert Earl of Leicester took his quarters in the Rebellion against King Henry II. To this Castle in 1553. Queen Mary retreated, and by the assistance of the Protestant Gentry of that Coun∣ty, recovered the Crown of England. Frampton, a Market Town in Dorsetshire in the Hundred of Goberton, upon a River which affords plenty of good Fish. Franc, Pagus Francus, is a Jurisdiction, exten∣ding seven Leagues about Bruges, (which exerciseth is Authority without the Walls,) and the fourth Mem∣ber of the Earldom of Flanders: Gant, Bruges and Ipres, being the other three. This Government or College, was erected in 1223. to curb the Insolence, and diminish the Power of the City of Bruges; be∣ing over-troublesome to the Earls of Flanders. France, Francia, Gallia, is at this day one of the mo potent Kingdoms in Europe, and the difficultest to limit and bound; it daily like the Ocean, gaining something from its Neighbours; whose divided strengths, are not equal to her united Forces: but yet I shall give you a general description of its bounds, as it stood about forty years since, and then in part shew what has been since added. On the East it was then bounded by the Alpes, which divide the Dau∣phiné from Piedmont; as also with Savoy, Switzer∣land, Germany, and a part of the Netherlands: on the North with the Netherlands, and the British Seas: on the West with the Aquitain Ocean; on the
South with Spain, from which it is divided by the Pyrenean Hills, and with the Mediterranean. Then accounted in length six hundred and sixty Italian Miles, in breadth five hundred and seventy, the whole circumference being two thousand and forty. In the times of Julius Caesar, it was bounded on the East by the Alpes, and the Rhine, extending to the Mouth of that River, from the Pyrenean Hills; so that it took in the far greatest part of what we now call the Netherlands, with all those of the German Empire which lie West of the Rhine, Switzerland and Savoy. And the great design of the present French King seems to have been the dilating of it again to the same extent: to which purpose he has spared neither Blood nor Treasure, Arts nor Labour: and perhaps if he had not been over-reached by the Jesuits, upon the design of uniting all his Subjects in one Religion by force, he might have succeeded when he was so near his point: for whereas Picardy was heretofore his Northern Province, he has taken in Artois, the greatest part of Flanders, of Hanault and Namur. Of the four Ports that did belong to Flanders, he has two, Graveling and Dunkirk: so that his Dominions extend on the Sea Shoar from Dunkirk to S. Jean de Luz in Spain, without any interruption. On the Eastern side he has possessed himself of the Dukedom of Lorrain, the Earldom of Burgundy, so much of Alsatia as lies on this side of the Rhine; and what his intentions towards the Switzers are, may be gues∣sed at: nor has Savoy passed, especially since the late rupture, without contributing his share to aggran∣dize him. On the South he has gained from Spain, Roussillon: Catalonia hardly missed him: all the World may remember how narrowly the United Pro∣vinces escaped him in 1673. and 1674. He has not only been a gainer in his Wars, but even in times of Peace, by his Courts of Dependences, Forts, and other Methods: So that considering the Weakness and Divi∣sions of his Neighbours, and the great Accessions he has already made; if so many thousands of his Sub∣jects, had not been driven out, or rendred useless to him, who can tell what this great Prince might not have effected before his death? This vast Country or Kingdom has for its principal Rivers, the Loyre, the Rhosne, the Garonne, and the Seine. Called by the Inhabitants and English, France; by the Spaniards, Francia; by the Italians, Franza; Franzam by the Portuguese; Franckrich by the Germans; by the Dutch, Urancryck: by the Poles Francya and Francukazemia; by the Illyrians, Fracgnack; by the Turks, Franza; and by the Indians, Frankistan. All which Names are derived from its present Con∣querors, and Inhabitants, the Franks or French. It is divided into sixty Counties, and these Provinces; the Isle of France, Burgundy, Normandy, Aquitain, Bre∣tagne, Champagne, Languedock, Picardy, Dauphine, Lyonnois and Orleans. To which may be added four more, that are a kind of Conquest. Loraine, the Earldom of Burgundy, (or Franche Compte,) the Conquest of the Netherlands, and Alsatia. This King having added by his Arms, the Comte de Bour∣gogne, both the Alsatia's, the greatest part of Flan∣ders, and Haynault, and Namur, part of Luxemburg, and all Artois; which last is now annexed to Picar∣dy. The Capital of this Kingdom, is Paris. Be∣sides these, he has New France in America, the greatest part of Hispaniola, several Plantations and Colonies in Africa, upon the Coast of Guinea, and some Islands in the North Sea. Thus Baudrand reckons up his Masters Dominions. This Tract of Land was heretofore inhabited by the Gaul, of which I shall give an account in its proper place. See Gallia. The Franks were Originally a German Nation, inha∣biting Franconia; which is still called East France, to distinguish it from this Country. This Nation joining with many other, upon the declining of the Roman Empire, under Pharamond, about 413. ob∣tained that part of Belgium, which contained Zut∣phen, Ʋtrecht, Over-Yssel, both the Friselands, and so much of Holland, as lies on the same side of the Rhine; but whether ever Pharamond crossed the Rhine, is uncertain. However in 420. he became their first King, and formed this Potent Monar∣chy. Clodius his Son in 433. crossed the Rhine, and took Cambray, Tournay, and all Belgium to the River Some: but he dying whilst his Children were young, commended them to Meroveus, who dispossessed them, to make himself King of the Franks, in 441. or thereabouts: Meroveus was the Author of the Me∣rovingian Line, and is by some made the first that seated in Gaul. His Son went further; and took all the Netherlands, Pioardy, Champagne, and the Isle of France, with Paris, which he made the Seat of this Empire. This Race under nineteen Princes conti∣nued to 742. when Pepin Son of Charles Martel, u∣surped upon Chilprick V. Son of Theodorick, and deposed him. The second, or Carolovinian Line, un∣der thirteen Princes, lasted till 977. when Hugh Capet put an end to it, and set up the Third. Charles IV. the fourteenth of this Race, dying in 1328. without Issue, Edward III. of England, claimed that Crown, at Son and Heir of Isabel, the Daughter of King Phi∣lip the Fair, and Sister to the three last Kings. A∣gainst him, Philip de Valois set up a Title by colour of the Salick Law, which had excluded all Females. The whole Reign of this Prince, and John his Son, was double-died in Blood by the English Valour. Charles V. by means of the English Divisions, at last expell'd them. Yet under Charles VI. the English returned with more Vigour and Rage▪ and were un∣der Henry V. in a fair way of reducing France. And he dying young, Henry VI. his Son, was crowned at Paris in 1422. But the Minority at first, and Weakness afterwards of this Prince, gave Charles VII. of France, an opportunity totally to expel the En∣glish the second time about 1449. The House of Valois ended in Henry III. slain before Paris in 1589. to whom succeeded Henry IV. the first of the House of Bourbone, and Grandfather of Lewis XIV. now King of France, who succeeded Lewis XIII. his Fa∣ther in 1642. This is the shortest account I can give of the Bounds and History of this Kingdom; which in the Reign of Charles IX. was reckoned to contain above twenty Millions of people. It has in it (excluding the Conquered Countries) ten Seats of Parliament, fourteen Universities, sixteen Archbishop∣ricks, besides Avignon and Besanzon, one hundred and five Bishopricks, and fifty thousand Parishes. La Baye Francoise, a Name given by the French to a Gulph of Guinea in Africa; and to another in their New France in the North America. § New France, see Canada. The Ise of France, Insula Franciae. One of the first Provinces the French possessed themselves of in Gaul: now bounded on the East with Champagne; on the North with Normandy and Picardy; on the West and on the South with la Beausse and Orle∣ance. A Country not great, when compared with the other Provinces; but yet it has given Name to all the rest, which is not unusual. It is generally so fruitful and delightful, that the Hills are here better than the Valleys in most places of Europe. The Vale of Montmorency, in which Parts stands, has scarce its equal in all the World. This was anciently a part of Belgica Secunda. The principal City of this Pro∣vince is Paris; and there are in it nine other very considerable.
Franché Comte, Burgundiae Comitatus, called by the French, Le Comte de Bourgogne, and sometime the Franche Comte; by the Italians, La Franc Com∣tea; by the Germans, Das Over Burgund, that is, the Higher Burgundy; is now a Province of France, and a part of the Eastern Burgundy, taken more largely. Bounded on the East by Switzerland, and the Diocese of Basil; on the North by Lorrain, and part of Campagne; on the West by the Duke∣dom of Bourgogne, or Burgundy; and on the South by La Bresse, and Beugey. The Capital of it is Dole; and after it came into the hands of the Spaniards, Besanson. The Country, where it is Mountainous, af∣fords excellent Wines; and as to the rest, is full of pleasant and fruitful Valleys, with great plenty of fresh Streams, and delightful Rivolets. This Coun∣try by Rodolph the last King of Burgundy, was given to Conrade II. Emperour of Germany, and ever after esteemed a part of the Empire. In 1101. it was gi∣ven to Otho of Flanders, Son to a Sister of the Em∣perour Conrade; and by the Family of Burgundy, came together with the other Territories belonging to that Family, to the Crown of Spain: in which House it continued, till in 1674. the present King of France got the Possession of it, which was confirmed by the Treaty of Nimmeguen. Franci, the ancient Franks; for whom see Gal∣lia, France and Franconia. The same is the com∣mon appellation of all European Christians among the Turks. Franckendal, Franchendalia, Francodalia, a new and well fortified City of Germany, in the Lower Pa∣latinate, not above one Mile from the Rhine, and four from Heidelberg to the West. Taken by the Spaniards, but restored again in 1652. by the Treaty of Westphalia. It was built by Frederick III. Elector Palatine in 1571. and stands four Miles from Spire to the North. Surrendred to the French in No∣vember 1688. and by them in 1689. quitted and burnt. Franckenlandt. See Franconia. Franckford, Franckfort, Franckfurt, Francofur∣tum, Trajectum Francorum, a great and fine City of Germany. It stands in the Weteraw, towards the Northern Borders of Franconia, upon the Mayn or Mein, [Moenus] over which it has a Bridge, five Miles from the Rhine and Mentz to the East: often called for distinction, Francofurtum ad Moenum: and more anciently Helenopolis, (as appears by an anci∣ent Inscription) till, the French gave it this Name, from Francus a Son of Marcomirus a King of the Franks, that rebuilt it. In very ancient times it was an Imperial and Free City; appointed for the Ele∣ction of the Emperors. Arnulphus was the first Em∣perour elected here in 887. The Mayn which pas∣seth through it, is a great and a Navigable River, ta∣king in many other noble Rivers, till it self falls into the Rhine: which makes this City a fit Centre of Trade for many parts of Germany; and their two great Marts every year contribute very much to the same. This City was called thus before the Reign of Charles the Great, upon the account of the Passage the Franks had here over the Mayn, though it was a City long before under another Name. But the Sub∣urb was called Saxen-hausen, the Dwelling of the Saxons. The Bridge is a splendid and a noble Work, supported by many Arches. This City was also the Seat of the Eastern Franks or Austrasia. In the Sub∣urbs or Saxen-hausen, is S. Bartholomew's Church, built by Pepin King of France. They obtained the removal of the Mart from Mentz (where it was at first) hither, of Frederick II. The greatest part of the Citizens are Lutherans: though Roman Catho∣licks and Calvinists are tolerated. There was a great Council held here of three hundred Bishops under Charles the Great in 797. in which the Religious Worship of Images, and the second Nicene Council (being misunderstood, to ascribe the same Adora∣tion to the Images, as to the Prototypes) were condem∣ned: and since that, several others. Franckfort upon the Oder, Francofurtum ad Ode∣ram, is another German City, in the middle Marqui∣sate of Brandenburg, upon the River Oder; called so, because it pays no Tolls. It is thought by some, to have been built by Simon the second Son of Clodo∣mir Nephew of Simon the First, Duke of the Francks, under Antoninus Pius the Emperour: by others, to have been built in 1253. by Gedinus ab Herzberg, by the Order of John I. Marquess of Brandenburg. This City is famous for an University settled here by Joachim I. Marquess of Brandenburg, in 1506. which Maximilian I. Emperour of Germany, illustrated with many Privileges. It hath also two Marts every year, as well as the other. It stands upon the Borders of Silesia and Lusatia, four German Miles from the Confines of Great Poland to the West; ten from Berlin: heretofore an Imperial Free City, but now exempt, and under the Duke of Brandenburg. Franco-castro, Stratonica, a Town in Macedo∣nia, at the foot of Mount Athos, on the North Shoar of the Bay of Singo, in the Archipelago: which is also called il Golfo de Fasso, and de Monte Santo; by the Latins, Singiticus Sinus. Franco-chorium, Sordisci; that part of Hungary, which lies between the Save, the Danube, and Ze∣guntum, where Sclavonia now is. Francolin, Tulcis, a small River of Catalonia, which falls into the Iberian Sea, near Tarragona. Franconia, by the Germans das Francken, and Franckeudland, is a large Province in Germany, which in the Writers of the middle Age, is called Francia Orientalis, though it be but a small part of it. This is now the first Circle in the Empire, upon the River Mayn; between Misnia and Thuringia to the North; Nortgow, or the Ʋpper Palatinate to the East; Ba∣varia, the Circle of Schwaben, the Bishopricks of Wurtsburg, Bamberg and Aichstad to the South; and Mentz to the West. Wurtsburg is the Capital City of this Circle: the other Cities are Bamberg, Nu∣remberg, Rotenberg, Schweinfurt, Weisemberg and Weinsheim. This Country, anciently inhabited by the Sicambri, in the times of Valentinian the Empe∣rour, having subdued the Alani, took the Name of Franckenland, that is, Freedland. But in after times being perpetually exagitated with the Incursions of the Goths, they resolved to seek a new Habitation; and under Marcomir their King or Duke, settled a∣bout 433. in Friseland, Guelderland, and the ad∣joining Countries: before which (faith my Author) the Name of Franks was scarce known. This Coun∣try is partly Level, and partly Mountainous: yet the Mountains in it are not high, nor is the Soil over∣fruitful, it being Sandy for the most part; yet the Hills produce grateful Wine, especially about Wurts∣burg. Of the Dukes of Franconia, these obtained the Empire; Conradus I. in 912. Conradus II. in 1026. Henry III. in 1039. Henry IV. in 1056. Henry V. in 1108. Besides the Cities before named, Hoffman reckons Coburg, Culembach, Franckfort, Mentz, An∣spack. Franco-ville, a Village in the District of Paris, in the Isle of France. Franeker, Franequera, a small City in Friseland, two Leagues from the Sea, and from Leuwarden, the principal City of that Province: made an Uni∣versity in 1585. Franza-curta, Fran̄cia parva, Little France, a Territory in the States of Venice in Italy, lying about
Brescia: which took this Name from an Establish∣ment of the French in it, towards the end of the eighth Century, after Charles the Great had defeated the Lombards. Frascati, Frascata, Tusculum, a City of Campag∣nia di Roma, under the Dominion of the Pope; seated at the foot of an Hill, as Holstenius proves at large, twelve Miles from Rome to the East; in which were many of the Country Houses of the Roman Princes. It is now a Bishoprick by the Title of Epi∣scopus Tusculanus, which always belongs to one of the six Senior Cardinals. This ancient Roman City being ruined in the time of Pope Celestinus III. Frascati was built in the same place. Towards Rome there is a small Theatre, which seems to have belonged to some private Roman, and not to the City. Near this place is the Tusculanum, or Village which belonged to Cicero, where he wrote his Tusculan Questions. Frascolari, Oanus, a River of Sicily; it falls into the Lybian Sea on the South side of the Island, a little below Camarina. Frat. See Euphrates. Frawenburg, Fravenburgus, a Town in Prussia Regalis, belonging to Poland, upon the Bay of Frish Haff, where it takes in the River Schon; which has also a noble Haven belonging to it, and stands not above three German Miles from Elbing to the South-East. In this place N. Copernicus the great Astro∣nomer and Mathematician (a Canon of the Church of Frawenburg) died in 1543. There is also a Castle and a Cathedral Church, with a College of Canons. Fraxinet, Fraxinetum, a famous Retreat of the Saracens in the ninth and tenth Ages, out of which they made their Incursions to burn and plunder the Country. Some place it in Spain, others in Italy, in Oauphine, in Provence; and with the greatest pro∣bability, in the latter; there being yet a Castle in the Diocese of Frejus near the Gulph of Grimaut, which retains the Name of la Garde du Fraxinet, and Guarda Fraxineti. Frèddano, Egelidus, Frigus, a River in Tuscany, in the Valley of Aretino. Freddo, Acis, a River in Sicily, which ariseth from Mount Aetna, and is received by the Ionian Sea, be∣tween Catana to the South, and Tavormina to the North. This River which ariseth from so warm a Bed as Mount Aetna, is yet so remarkably cold, that its Name is taken from thence; Freddo, in Italian, signifying Cold. Freiburg, Friburgus, is a German City in Bris∣gaw, upon the River Threisem, at the foot of the Mountains, four German Miles from Brisack to the South, and six from Basil; built in 1120. by Albert Duke of Austria. Here was an University opened by Beroaldus Duke of Zeringen, in 1450. It was ta∣ken by the Swedes and French in 1638. And when in 1644. the Spaniards attempted to regain it, they received a great Defeat here. Yet it was afterwards restored to them, and retaken by the French in 1677. and left to them again by the Treaty of Nimmeguen in 1679. Freiburg, Friburgus, a Town and Canton in Switzerland, seven German Miles from Solothurn, or Soleurre (as the French call it) to the South; and three from Berne to the North-East. It was once an Imperial Free City, but in 1481. exempted: the Bi∣shop of Lausanne resides here. It stands upon the River Sana: built by Berchtoldus IV. Duke of Ze∣ringen, twelve years before Bern, in 1179. In such a Site, that whereas all parts towards the North, East and South, are encompassed with steep and craggy Rocks and Mountains; the Western side is defended by a deep Dike, and has a District of three hours ri∣ding annexed to it. Frederick Barbarossa, made it a Free City in 1218. After the death of the Founder, it became subject to the Count of Kyburg. It was sold afterwards to Rodolphus I. Emperour of Germa∣ny, by one of these Counts: it was after this two hundred years under the House of Austria, till about 1403. being much oppressed by the Nobility, this Ci∣ty entred a League with that of Bern, but yet conti∣nued still under the House of Austria, till 1481. when they were admitted into the general League of the Swiss, and made the Tenth Canton. And when many of the Cantons embraced the Reformed Religion, this stuck to the Roman Catholick; they use the Ger∣man and French Tongues, but the former most. Freinwalt, or Fridwalt, Colancorum, a City in Brandenburg; seven Miles from Berlin, upon the con∣fluence of the Fubre, and the Oder to the North-East; twelve from Stetin to the South, and six from Franck∣fort upon the Oder to the North. Freising, Freisingen, Frisinga, Fruxinum, a Ger∣man City in the Ʋpper Bavaria, which is a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Salisburg, near the Ri∣ver Isara, Iser. It was an Imperial Free City, but is now exempt, and under the Jurisdiction of its own Bishop. It stands upon the confluence of the Iser and Mosack, partly in a Plain, and partly on a Hill; four German Miles from Munick to the North, and ten from Ratisbon. Freius, Forum Julium, Forum Voconii, Civitas Forojuliensis, a City of Provence in France, built in a Valley amongst Marshes: half a League from the Mediterranean Sea, thirteen from Toulon to the East, at the mouth of the River Argens. It is a Bishops See under the Archbishop of Aix: and a place of very good Antiquity, as the Amphitheatre, Aqueduct, Sta∣tues, Inscriptions, &c. yet extant, demonstrate. Pope John XXII. was sometime Bishop here. Fresingfield, a Country Town in the County of Suffolk, six Miles from Halsworth to the West, and four from Harlson to the South: Dr. William San∣croft, Archbishop of Canterbury, was born in this Town, and has since erected in it a Free-School. Fremona, a Town in the Kingdom of Aethiopia in Africa, believed to be the Primis Magna or Prem∣nis of the Ancients. Frias, Frigida, a City in Old Castile, in the Val∣ley of Tobalina, upon the River Ebro; called Phrygia in the Roman Martyrology, and by Lactantius. Friburg in Brisgaw, in Switzerland. See Frei∣burg. Fricenti, or Fricento, Aeculanum, Eclanum, Fre∣quentum, a small City in the Province of Principatus Ʋlterior, in the Kingdom of Naples in Italy, which was a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Benevento; but the Bishoprick has for the two last Centuries, been uni∣ted with that of Avellino. This City is sometimes called Fricentum by the later Latin Writers; now almost reduced to a Village. It stands upon the Ri∣ver Tripalto, Tripaltum, at the foot of the Apennine, fifteen Miles from Benevento to the North-East, and twelve from Avellino; in the Possession of the Prince of Venosa. Fridberg, Fridberga, a City of Misnia, in the Ʋpper Saxony, upon the River Mult, towards the Mountains of Bohemia, four German Miles from Meissen [Misna] the Capital of Misnia to the South. This City was besieged with very ill success by the Swedes, in the great German War in 1642. though they were then possessed of all the other Towns in Misnia. Also honoured with the Tombs of the Electors of Saxony. § Fridberg, Frideberga, a small City in Germany, in the Province of Weteraw, which is Imperial and Free. It has its Name from Frederick II. and is as much as Friederichberg; by contraction Fridberg. There belongs to it a Castle
of the same Name, which stands four German Miles from Franckfort to the North. Friedberg, Fredberga, a small Town in Bohemia, in the Dukedom of Jawer Queiss [Quissus] towards the Mountains, in the Borders of Bohemia; eight German Miles from Jawer towards the West, and five from Gorlitz to the North-East. Fridericlis, or Frīderica, a small, but very strong City in Brasil in America, upon the Coast of Paraiba, or La Capitania de Paraiba; which was built by the Dutch, and taken from them by the Por∣tuguese, to whom both this City and Province are now subject. Friderick-Ude, a Fort in Jutland, upon the Streight of Midlefar, built by Frederick III. King of Denmark; taken and ruined by the Swedes in 1658. Fridericksburg, a strong Fort in Germany, by the City of Manheim, upon the union of the Necker and the Rhine, in the Lower Palatinate; so called from Frederick IV. Elector Palatine, who built it in 1610. After this, it was taken and demolished by the Spaniards, and since rebuilt by Charles Lewis E∣lector Palatine: it is scarce three Miles from Heidel∣burg to the West, and as many from Spire to the North. Taken by the French, and afterwards burnt in 1689. § Fridericksburg, the Castle and Royal Pa∣lace of the Kings of Denmark in Zealand, three Miles from Croonenburg to the West, and five from Copenhagen to the South-West: famous for a Con∣gress of the Kings of Denmark and Sweden, in these later times. This was heretofore called the Castle of Ebelholt; and was the Monastery of the Holy Ghost, of which William Parisiensis, who is since Canonized, died Abbat in 1201. Frederick II▪ built this Castle. Christian IV. his Son was born in it April 22. 1577. who very much beautified, and ador∣ned it. § There is also a Fort and Town of the same Name in Guinea, built by the Danes of late. Friderickstad, a small Danish City in South Jutland, in the Dukedom of Sleswick, built by Fre∣derick Duke of Holstein and Sleswick (under whom it is) in 1622. It stands upon the River Eyder, where it takes in the Trenna, two German Miles from Tonning to the East, five from Sleswick, and four from Gottorp West. § There is another City of the same Name in Norway, upon the Baltick Sea, fifty German Miles from Christianstad to the North-West, in the Province of Agerhuis; which is under the King of Denmark. Friesach, Friesacum, Frisakum, Virunum, a small Town in the Ʋpper Carinthia, but under the Juris∣diction of the Archbishop of Saltzburg; seated up∣on the River Matuitz, with a Castle on a Rock not far off. Frigido, Boactus, a River dividing between Ge∣noua, and the Dukedom of Florence. Frignana, Friniana, a Territory in the Dukedom of Modena, at the foot of the Apennine; the chief Town of which is Sestula, towards the Borders of Bologna. Frisch, Narung, an Island of Prussia, at the Mouth of the Vistula. Frischaff, a long Bay in the same place, upon which stand Elbing, Frawenburg, Brawnberg and Koningsperg. Friseland, Frisia, called by the Dutch Uriessandt; by the French, Frise; by the Italians, Frisia; is the Name of three several Countries. 1. Friseland, pro∣perly so called, one of the States of Holland. 2. East Friseland, a Province in Germany. 3. West Frise∣land, properly the North part of the Earldom of Holland: and sometimes there is a fourth added, which is North Friesland, or Jutland. 1. Friseland, Frisia, Urieslandt, Frieslandt, Friseland in Dutch, German, and English, is a Pro∣vince of the Ʋnited Netherlands, heretofore much greater than now; for it reached from the Zuyder Zee on the West, to the Bay of Dollert by Emden on the East; and it was then divided by the River La∣vica, Lawers, into two parts: Frisia cis Lavicana, now Groningen; and Frisia trans Lavicana, now called Friesland: but since that Omland has been taken out of this Province too, which has much les∣sened it, it is now bounded on the South with the Zuyder Zee, and Over-Yssel; on the West and North with the German Sea; and on the East with Gronin∣gen. The principal Towns in it, are Docum, Franc∣ker, Harlingen, Leeuwarden, which is the Capital, and Stavenen. 2. West-Friesland, is a considerable part of the Earldom of Holland, to which it has for some Ages been united; with North-Holland on the South, the Zuyder Zee on the East and North, and the German Ocean on the West: sometime called Kenmar. The principal Cities in it, are Alckmaer, Amsterdam, (the greatest City in the Ʋnited Provinces), Enchuysen, Harlem, and Hoorn. This Country is generally Marshy and Fenny, and unfit for Corn, but very good Pa∣sture: the Air is also foggy and unhealthful, and they want fewel too to rectifie it. Charles the Bald gave these Countries (then almost unpeopled by the Nor∣man Pyracies) to Thierrie, Son of Sigebert, a Prince of Aquitain, with the Title of Earl in 863. from whom proceeded a Race of Princes, seventeen in num∣ber, which successively governed it till 1300. from which time they were subject to the Earls of Hol∣land, and together with Holland came to the House of Austria: with Holland, they revolted from the Spaniards, in 1580. and joined in the League against them. East-Friesland, called by the Germans, Oost-Freeslandt, by the Inhabitants, Oost Frise, is a part of Westphalia, a Province of Germany, which here∣tofore was also called the Earldom of Embden, from a City in it, which though not great, is much cele∣brated. This Earldom is under a Prince of its own now: bounded on the North by the German Ocean, on the East by the Earldom of Oldenburgh, on the South by the Bishoprick of Munster, and on the West it is separated from Groningen, by the Bay of Dollert: it contained heretofore the Earldom of Oldenburgh also. In this Province are three Cities or great Towns, Embden, Aurick, and Norden. The earth is exceeding fruitful, yielding great plenty of Corn, Cattle, Butter and Cheese. Being conquered by Charles the Great, it continued subject to the Empire till 1453. when it was granted by Frederick III. to Ʋlri∣cus, Son of Enno, whose Posterity still enjoy it. The Seat of these Earls, is Aurick. Frisingen, Frisinga, a City of the Ʋpper Bava∣ria, which is a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Salisburgh, near the River Iser, twenty Miles from Landshat to the West. Once an Imperial and Free City, but since exempted, and put under the Dominion of its own Bishop. Frislar, Bogadium, Frislaria, a City in Hassia, up∣on the River Eder, under the Archbishop of Mentz, four Miles from Cassel to the South, and the same from Zigenheim to the North; commonly called Fritzlar. There was a Council celebrated in this City, in 1118. Friul, Friuli, Regio Carnorum, Forum Julii, Car∣nia, called by the French, Frioul; is a Province of Italy, inhabited heretofore by the Carni: it is boun∣ded on the South by the Adriatick Sea, and the Golfo di Triesie; on the West with the Marquisate of Tre∣vigia, and the Earldom of Tyrol; on the North by
Carinthia, and Carniola; and on the East by Carni∣ola and Istria. This Province is under the State of Venice, and has the Title of a Dukedom. The chiefest City in it is Ʋdina; and the Fort of Palma is the place of greatest strength. The Emperors gave this Province heretofore to the Patriarchs of Aquileja. But afterwards the Dukes of Astria and Carinthia took part of it from the Patriarchs: and the States of Venice after many Wars, at last in 1455. forced the Patriarch by a Treaty, to resign the rest to them: the Cities of this Province are Auileja▪ ruined, but under the House of Austria: Pieue di Cadoro, under the Venetians; Cividat di Friuli, under the same; Goritia, under the House of Austria; La Palma and Ʋdina, under the Venetians. Frodlingham, a Market Town in the East Riding of orkshire, in the Hundred of Holderness. Frodsham, a Market Town in Cheshire, in the Hundred of Edisbury. Frome or Fraw, a River in the County of Dor∣set; which rising by Cantmerls in the Borders of So∣mersetshire, washeth Frampton, Dorcester, Woodford, Morlen; and at Wareham falls into Bruksey Haven; taking in this passage many smaller Rivers. Fromeselwood, a Market Town in Somersetshire, in the Hundred of Frome, and upon the River Frome. Fronsac, Franciacum, a Castle in Aquitain, near Bourdeaux, built by Charles the Great, and made the Title of a Dukedom: it stands upon the River Dordogne, Duranius, about five Leagues from Bour∣deaux to the East: called Frontiacum in the Writers of the middle Age. Frontenac, a Cittadel in New France in America, upon the Banks of a Lake of the same Name: built in 1673. to oppose the Incursions of the Salvages. Frontignaud, Forum Domitii, Frontiniacum, a small City in the Lower Languedoc, upon the Lake of Magellone, fifteen Leagues from Narbone to the East, and four from Mompellier to the West, upon the Mediterranean Sea. The Wines of this place are much commended. In 1562. the Huguenots besieged it in vain. Frurnove. See Fornove. Frusilone, or Frusino, Frusio, a City heretofore, now a small Village in Campagnia di Roma, upon the River Cosa, which falls into the Gariliano, Liris, nine Miles from Aatro, the same from Ferentino, and forty eight from Rome to the East: it is now common∣ly called Frosilone. P. Hormisdas was a Native of this place. The Fryth, or Fyrth, or Forth of Edinburgh, called by Ptolemy Boderia, by Tacitus Bodotria, is an Arm of the Sea, that from the East penetrates almost quite through the Kingdom of Scotland, to meet another such Arm from the West, which is called the Fryth of Dunbritain: it receives into its bosom many of the great Rivers of Scotland: on the South it has Lothaine, in which is Edin∣burgh, Linlithgo, Glasco, and Sterling; the principal City of which stands at the Western point of it: upon the North side it has the County of Fife. These two great Bays divide Scotland into two parts, the Southern, and the Northern. Fuenterabia. See Fontarabia. Fuld, Fulden, Fulda, a City of Germany, in Bu∣chaw, or Buchen, a Territory in the Upper Circle of the Rhine, near Hassia; but from this City more frequently called Stift von Fuld, The Territory of the Abbey of Fuld. The City is built in a Plain: there is in it an Abbey of the Order of S. Bennet, one of the noblest in all Europe, which has the Civil Go∣vernment of the City, and Territory about it. This Abbey was built by Pepin King of France, in 784. The Abbot is a Prince, and Primate of all the Abbots of the Empire. It stands twelve Miles from Coburgh to the West, ten from Cassel to the South, and eleven from Wurtsburg. The Territory of Fuld is of a great extent, and is more properly called Buchen: boun∣ded on the North by Hassia, on the East by the County of Henneberg, on the South by Franconia, and on the West by the Ʋpper Hassia. § Fuld, Fulda, a River of Germany, which gives Name both to the City and Territory last mentioned; it ari∣seth in this Territory towards Franconia; and run∣ning Northward, watereth Fuld, and Hurschfeld in Hassia; then entertaining the Eder, he passeth by Cassel; and at Minden in Westphalia, being u∣nited with the Wertz and Verra, they two form the Weser, Visurgis, one of the greatest Rivers in Germany; which dividing the Dukedom of Breme from the Earldom of Oldenburgh, falls into the German Ocean at Carlestad, between Em∣den to the West, and Hamburgh to the North-East. Fuligno, Fullinium, or Fulginium, a small, but pretty City in the Dukedom of Spoleto, seated in a Valley, at the foot of the Apennine, twenty Miles from Perugia to the East, and ten from Assisio: it is divided by the River Tinna, Topino, and is under the Pope. The Inhabitants boast much of the Anti∣quity of it, not without good reason, it being men∣tioned by Strabo, Pliny, Appianus Alexandrinus, and Silius Italicus. This City was rased by those of Peru∣gia, in 1281. for which the Inhabitants of the lat∣ter were excommunicated by the then Pope Mar∣tin II. (otherwise called the IV.): but recovering its former, or a greater beauty, it is now a Bi∣shoprick, much enriched by its Fairs or Marts every year, and their excellent Comfeicts. The Learned Leandro is of opinion, this City is not the ancient Fulginia, but that Forum Flaminii stood in or near the place; which being ruined by the Lombards, the Todi rebuilt it, and called it by this Name; for which he cites several Authorities. Funchal, the chief Town in the Island of Ma∣dera. It is a Bishops See under the Archbishop of Lisbonne. Funf-Kirken. See Quinque Ecclesiae. Fungte, a Kingdom in Africa, in Nubia. Fuoa, Nicii, a City of Egypt; it lies in the E∣gyptian Delta, or Island made by the Branches of the Nle; forty Miles from Grand-Cairo to the South-East, towards Alexandria. Furnes, or Wuerne, Furnae, a City of Flanders Gallicant; not great, but well built, and about a Mile from the Shoars of the Ocean: it has belong∣ing to it a large Jurisdiction, with the Title of a iscounty, a Collegiate Church and an Abbey. It was three times taken by the French, and at last by the Treaty of Aquisgrane given up to them: two Miles from Newport, and three from Dun∣kirk: between which last, and this place, the Spa∣niards were defeated by the English and French, in 1658. Furstemberg, a Town and Principality in the Circle of Schwaben in Germany, giving Name to an Illustrious House; of which the Cardinal of Furstemberg, mention'd under the Word Bonne, is a Member. Fuynen, Hemod n, one of the Orcades. Fuynen, Fionia, an Island belonging to Denmark, in the Baltick Sea, between Jutland to the West, and Zeeland to the East, from both which it is se∣parated only by two narrow Channels; the first called Middlefart, or Middle Passage; the second Die Belt. Ottonia, (Odensee) is the Capital of this Island: Newburgh, or Nuborg, on the East, is well fortified, and has a good Haven. This Island is ten German
Miles in Length from West to East, and eight from North to South in breadth. Now under the King of Denmark; but it suffered very much of late years from the Swedes, who in 1658. took and plundered it. In 1659. the Danes recovered the possession of it, though at the same time they lost much Cannon and Shipping, which they could never retake; and the Inhabitants were as much improverished by this Acci∣dent. It is a fruitful, pleasant, well seated Island, for the Climate it is in. Fynland. See Finland. G A. GAbaca, Thospites, a vast Lake in Armenia, in the Consines of Mesopotamia; made by the River Tigris. Le Gabardan. See Le Gave. Gabii, a People of the Antient Latium, near Neighbours to the Romans, in a Town of their own Name. They became first subjected under the Do∣minion of Rome, in the Reign of Tarquinius Priscus, by a Stratagem of a Son of his, pretending Flight hither from the ill Usages of his Father, and then cut∣ting off the Principal Men amongst them, and betray∣ing the rest to the Romans. Gabin, Gabinium, a Town of Poland, between VValdislaw to the North, and VVarshaw to the South; three Polish Miles from Ploczko to the West, in the Palatinate of Rava; upon the River Bzura. Gad, one of the Tribes of Israel, which had their Portion assigned them by Moses, beyond Jordan; whose Borders to the North were the half Tribe of Manasseh, to the East Arabia, to the South the Tribe of Reuben, and to the West the River Jordan, by which they were separated from the rest of the Tribe of Manasseh and Ephraim. This Country was in the Roman times called Ituraea, and now by the Turks Beuikemane: It is almost equally divided by the River Scheriat Mandour, as it is now called, as Michael Nau (a Jesuit) writes, who surveyed very exactly these Parts. This Country is now under the Turks. Gadara, Gadaris, a Town belonging to the half Tribe of Manasseh, beyond Jordan; afterwards to the Region of Trachonitis: seated upon a Hill by the River Gadara, which falls into the Lake of Gene∣sareth, sometimes called the Lake of Gadara too, as Strabo saith: It is six Miles from Sychopolis to the East, and the same from Tiberias; and is fre∣quently mentioned in the New Testament. Hereto∣fore thought to be invincible: It is certain, Alexander Janaeus, King of the Jews, did not take it under a Siege of ten Months, and then more by Famine than Force; and in Revenge ruined it, but it recovered again. Pompey the Great, in Favour to Demetrius, one of his Freemen, who was a Native of this City, bestowed great Privileges upon it. Philodemus the Epicurean, Meleager, and Menippus that pleasant Philosopher, also Theodorus the Orator, were all of them Natives of this Country. In the Revolt of the Jews under Nero, this City h its Share, and was taken by Vespasian, in the year of Christ 66. upon which the Gadarens submitted the year following. S. Jerom says, the Baths of Gadara were in great E∣steem in his Time. Gademes, Gademessa, a Territory in Africa, in Biledulgeridia, between the Desarts of Fez to the East, and Gurgala to the West; which has a City or great Town of the same Name, near the Head of the River Caspi, Capes. And also a Desart. Gadura, Psycus, a River of Rhodes. Gaetulia, a large Region of Africa, according to the ancient Divisions thereof; now thrown into a part of Bileduigerid and a part of Zaara. See Gesula. The Roman Arms reached as far in Africa, as to this distant Province. Gago, Gagum, a Kingdom in Nigritia, in Afri∣ca, which has a City of the same Name, upon a River falling into the Niger below Tocrut. Great, but thinly inhabited. This Kingdom lies between the Ni∣ger to the North, and Guinea to the South; rich in Mines of Gold, according to some Relations; possessed also by a Prince, who is Sovereign of the Kingdom of Tombuti. Gajazzo, Calathia, Galathia, a City of Compa∣nia in Italy, mentioned by Cicero, as a Colony; it belongs now to the Kingdom of Naples, and is in the Terra di Lavoro, seated on an Hill near the Ri∣ver Volturno (Vulturnus,) almost over against Ca∣serta, at the Distance of four Miles to the North, and eight from Capua to the East: And although a Bishops See under the Archbishop of Capua, yet it is in a declining Condition, and very mean. Gajetta, Gaeta, Cajeta, a City in the Terra di Lavoro, a Province of the Kingdom of Naples, which is well fortified; seated at the Foot of an Hill, in a Peninsula, made by the Sea. It has two Castles, a large Haven, and a Bishop's See under the Archbishop of Capua, but now exempted. Baronius tells us, the Bishopricks of Mola and Mintorni are united with this See. The City of Formium lies not far from it, buried now in Ruines by the Saracens, to which the City of Gajetta succeeded in the Bishoprick. It lies upon the Tyrrhenian Sea, four Miles from Naples, fifty five from Rome, and fourteen from the Pope's Dominions: It has heretofore been subject to great Variety of Fortunes, but has now a strong Spanish Garrison to secure it. This was the Birth Place of Pope Gelasius II. who was therefore called Cajetanus. It is mention'd by Virgil, Aen. 7. The Haven was re∣paired by Antoninus Pius, Spart. Ferdinando King of Arragon, fortified the Castle: Before this, it was Sacked by the French in 1494. who put most of the Inhabitants to the Sword; and returned it the year after. Charles of Bourbon, Constable of France, kill'd at the Siege of Rome in 1527. lies buried in the Cathedral. But it is most famous for its learned Cardinal, Thomas de Via Cajetanus, who died in 1534. and is frequently mentioned in the Story of Hen∣ry VIII. Gaillon, a Castle belonging to the Archbishops of Roan in Normandy; seven Leagues from Roan, two from Vernon, and one from the River Seyne. It stands upon a little Hill, in so agreeable a Place, that the for∣mer Kings of France, (as Francis I. and Charles IX.) have delighted to make some stay at it. Gainsborongh, a large, well built, Market-Town in Lincolnshire, in the Division of Lindsey, and Hun∣dred of Gartree, upon the River Trent. It is me∣morable for the Death of King Swaine, or Sweno, the Dane, here by an unknown Hand stabbed. It drives a considerable Trade, and gives the Title of Earl to the Family of the Noels. Gaino, Gongo, Gannum, a City of Thrace upon the Propontis; three German Miles from Rudisto to the South, and twelve from Gallipoli to the North; about nineteen South from Constantinople by Sea. Gaiola, Euploea, a small Island upon the Coast of Terra di Lavoro, between Naples and Puteoli. Gaivo, Gagecome, a River of Phrygia, in the Lesser Asia. There is also a Town of the same Name.
Galata, Gallita, Calathe, Galata, an Island upon the Coast of Numidia, almost opposite to the Bay of the same Name. It lies over against Sardinia, West of Tunis, East of Algier or Argiers, West of Cape Negro, and is about ten Miles in Circumference. Galata, or Galatta, Chrysoceras, Cornu Byzantii, a noble Suburb on the North of Constantinople, to∣wards the Black Sea, which is strongly fortified to the North. This was first, if not built, yet beauti∣fied by the Genouese. Mr. Wheeler, our Country∣man, thus describes it; Galata is situate (saith he) upon the South side of a considerable steep Hill, setting out into a Promontory on the North side of the Harbour; and comprehending the Suburbs on the East, West, and North sides of it, it may be counted a good large City, and very populous; yet the Circumference of the Wall takes up no great space of ground, but the Houses are thick, and the Streets narrow, and the whole very popu∣lous. On the top of the Hill is a round spired Tower covered with Lead; and on the Walls are some Arms, and modern Inscriptions, which belon∣ged to the Genoese, who before the taking of Con∣stantinople, were Masters of this Place. It is more inhabited by Christians and Jews, than by Turks. Here is the Scale of the Merchants, who have a good Kan covered with Lead, for the Sale of their Woollen Cloaths, and other Merchandize. There are five Religious Houses of the Latin Chri∣stians, established in this Place: Otherwise called Pe∣ra. See Pera. Galati, Galata, once a City, now a Village in Sicily, in the Valley of Demona; twenty Miles from Patti South-West, thirty five from Catania North-West. Galatia, is a Province of the Lesser Asia, called by the ancient Geographers Gallo-Graecia, from the Galls, which are stiled Galatae by the Grecians, (who, after the burning of Rome and laying Italy deso∣late, went thither and possessed it, making a mixture with the Grecians;) and the South Part of it was nam'd Galatia Salutaris. This Province is bounded on the North by Paphlagonia, sometimes taken for a Part of it; on the East by Cappadocia, on the South by Pisidia and Liaconia, on the West by Phrygia Mag∣na, Bithynia, and Asia, properly so taken. The Turks call this Province now Chiangare, under whom it is. The principal Cities are Ancyra, (which is even now in a more flourishing State than any of the rest,) and Pessinus. This Colony of the Galls is said to have settled here under Brennus, A. M. 3671. They were subdued by the Romans, under Cn. Manlius Vulso, in the year of the World 3760. 187 years be∣fore the Birth of our Saviour, but not made a Ro∣man Province till the year 3925. 23 years before Christ. They were converted to Christianity by S. Paul, who honoured them with an Epistle. They did not fall into the Hands of the Mahometans till 1524. when Solyman the Magnificent took Alsbeg, Prince of the Mountains of Armenia, by Treachery; and possessed himself of Cappadocia, Armenia, and Galatia. Galaure, Galabar, a small River in the Dauphi∣nate, which falls into the Rhosne at S. Valerie, six Miles beneath Vienne to the South. Galazo, Galesus, Eurotas, is a River which ariseth from the Appennine, in the Province of Hydruntum, La Terra di Otranto, near Oria; and running West falls into the Bay of Taranto; five Miles South of Taranto; but not taken notice of in our later Maps. Gale, a strong Town and Port in the Island of Zeilan in the East-Indies, which the Hollanders have ravished from the Portuguese; in whosetime it was a flourishing Place, frequented by abundance of Vessels from Japan, China, the Islands of the Sound, Malaca, Bengala, and other Eastern Parts; though the Rocks about the Port render it very dangerous to enter without Pilots. The Portuguese (before they quitted it) and the Siege together, destroyed most of the Principal Buildings; which are yet unbuilt. Galera, Gallera, Gallora, a Village, and a River near Rome. La Galevisse, Ager Valicassi, a Region upon the Marne, a River of France. Galfanacar, Gichehis, a Town in Mauritania. Galgala. See Meroe. § Also a Village in Pale∣stine, in the Tribe of Benjamin, on this side the Ri∣ver Jordan; three Leagues from Jericho. Now inhabited by Arabians, and call'd Galgal by them. A Place heretofore sanctified by a Number of admirable Actions, and defam'd again by as many Idolatries; (S. Jerom in Ose.) The Circumcision of all that had been born in the Wilderness, Joshua ordered to be performed here. Galibes, a Nation of Indians in Guiana, along the River Courbo, towards the North Sea, in Ameri∣ca; bounded by the Rivers Suriname and Marau∣vini to the West, and the River and Island of Cayenne to the East. Other Maps place them in New Anda∣lusia, to the North of the River Orenoque. Galicia, Gallaecia, is a Province of Spain, called by the Natives Galizia, by the Portuguese Galiza, by the French Galice, and by the Italians Galicia; of a large Extent, about fifty Leagues long, and forty broad; and once a Kingdom, but now a Part of the King∣dom of Leon: Bounded on the North and West by the Atlantick Ocean, on the South by Portugal, (but parted from it by the River Douero,) and on the East by Asturia and the Kingdom of Leon. Com∣postella is the Capital of this Province; Orensi, (Au∣ria,) Baiona, Corufia, Lugo, Mondoefiedo, and Tuy, are the other Cities and principal Places. The Groyne or Coronna, is the most famous of its Ports; besides which it has forty others. This Province is Moun∣tainous, enclined to Barrenness, destitute of Water, but abounding with Mines of Silver, Gold, Iron; and well stored with Wood, and good Wines; it hath also great plenty of Cattle, Game and excel∣lent Horses. The Iron they dig out of these Moun∣tains, is thought the best in the World, especially for Edge-Tools: nor are their Seas less stored with Fish. This Country was never Conquered by the Moors, though they at times made some Progress into it; and after in 985. they had repelled Almanassor, with the Loss of 70000 of his Moors, they were never in any danger of Conquest from that Nation. The Gal∣laci or Gallaici of the Ancients, under whom the Amphilochi of Justin, the Celtici of Mela, the Ta∣marices of Strabo, the Lucentii and Lucentes of Pliny and Ptolemy have been interpreted to be com∣prehended, dwelt here. It became an Apannage, with the Title of an Earldom, to the younger Sons of the King of Leon and Castile, after its Union with that Crown. § New Galicia, is a Part of New Spain, in South America, towards the South Sea, called of old Xalisco, and sometimes Guadalajara, from its Capi∣tal City. This is not much unlike that in Spain, as to the Nature of the Soil. The Inhabitants were Cani∣bals, exceeding wild and fierce, when the Spaniards settled there, and not easily reduced from eating Man's Flesh. Galilaea, a very celebrated Part of Asia, on the North of Judaea; at first the Inheritance of four of the Tribes of Israel; Asser, Naphtali, Zabulon and Issachar; the two first of which were intermixed with the Phoenicians and Syrians; and being more Nor∣thern and nearer the Fountain of Jordan, it was called Galilee of the Gentiles, or the Upper Galilee;
and the other the Lower Galilee. This Country was bounded on the North by Syria and Phoenicia, from which two Nations it was divided by Mount Libanus; on the East with the River Jordan, on the South with Samaria, cut off from it by Mount Carmel; and on the West by the Mediterranean Sea. The same was the Scene which our Blessed Saviour chose out of all the Earth, to dignifie with his Presence: in it he was conceived, lived the greatest part of his time, and wrought most of his Miracles. It is now called Belad Elbescara, that is, the Western Country; and is almost desolate, under the Dominion of the Turks. To omit so much of the Story of it as may be learned from the holy Scriptures; this Country was first brought under the Roman Vassalage by Pompey the Great, Anno Mundi 3887. sixty one Years before the Birth of Christ. They were again conquered, not without great Difficulty, by Vespasian and Titus, in the year of Christ 66. In all following Times it fol∣lowed the Fate of the Holy Land, or Palestine. The Country is exceeding fruitful, and in the ancient Times was extreamly populous; full of great and noble Cities; the principal of which were the Tower of Straton or Caesarea, Caphernaum, Tiberias, Cana, Nazareth. The Inhabitants were Men of Courage, neither fearing Death nor Poverty, nor any thing but Slavery, and of that they were infinitely impatient. But Wars, and the ill Government of the Mahometan Princes, which have insulted over them ever since 637. have made it now desolate. Gallas, Gallanes, or Giaques, a people of the Kingdom of Monomotapa, upon the Eastern Coasts of Africa, towards the Indian Ocean; who, in 1537. broke into the Kingdom of Bali, and gained some Conquests over the Abyssines, in the Upper Aethiopia. Ludolphus in his Aethiopick History describes them. Their Country is bounded by the Nile to the West, Abyssinia to the North, and the Kingdom of Mono-Emugi to the East. Gallia, one of the greatest and best known Re∣gions of Europe to the Ancients. I have considered its present State under the Word France; and here I am to say a little of its ancient Bounds and People, be∣fore the Francks or French entered into it. These Nations were at first called Celtae, after that Galli, and by the Grecians Galatae. They possessed all that vast Tract of Land between Ancona in Italy, and the Mouth of the Rhine; from the Western Ocean of Aquitain, to the Adriatick: Which was divided into Gallia Transalpina, and Gallia Cisalpina. 1. Gallia Transalpina was divided by Julius Caesar (who first conquered the greatest part of it,) into four Parts; Provincia Romana, Aquitania, Celtae or Gallia pro∣perly so called, and Belgium: All which he saith had different Tongues, Laws, Manners and Governments. 1. Provincia Romana was then bounded on the North with the Mountains of Gebenna and the River Rhoda∣nus, on the East with the Alpes, on the South with the Mediterranean Sea and the Pyrenean Hills, which di∣vided it from Spain, and on the West with the Garum∣na; the Rhodanus cutting this Province almost in the middle, after it turned to the South, and ceased to be a Boundary. This River is now called the Rhosne. 2. Aquitania, had on the North and East, the Ga∣rumna, now Garonne; on the West the Ocean, on the South Spain and the Pyrenean Hills; and was the least of all the four Parts. 3. Gallia Celtica, was likewise the greatest; bounded on the North with the River Sequana, now Seyne; Matrona, now Marne; and the Mountain Vogesus, now Mont de Vauge, which parted it from Gallia Belgica; on the East it had also the Marne, the Rhine, and Alpes; on the South Provincia Romana, and Aquitania; and on the West the British and Aquitain Ocean. 4. Gallia Belgica, which was the fourth Part, on the North and East had the Rhine, on the South Gallia Celtica, and on the West the British Ocean from the Mouth of the Seyne, to the South of the Rhine. This vast Tract was divided into various Nations or Tribes, which had sent their Colonies into the British Islands, and peopled all these Tracts. Yet such was the Increase, or Restlessness of this People, that at times they broke over all those Bounds which Nature had set about them, and invaded the neighbour Nations. Thus they conquer'd that part of Italy, from them call'd Gal∣lia Cisalpina; being invited over the Alpes by the sweet Wines from thence, about the times of Tarquinius Priscus, in the year of Rome 162. 588 years before Christ; Bellovesus, Son of Ambigatus, King of the Celtae, being their Leader, General, or Prince. Gal∣lia Cisalpina was the Northern Part of Italy, exten∣ding from Arsia, now L'Arsa, a River of Istria, to the Alpes; which bounded the Provincia Romana, in the Gallia Transalpina; and its borders on the North and West were the Alpes, on the South the River Rubicon, or as others say, Aesis, or as Pliny assures us Ancona, and on the East they had the Adriatick Sea. These People were divided into four Potent Nations, viz. 1. The Insubres, which dwelt from the Alpes to the River Arnus, now Arno, which passeth through Flo∣rence. 2. The Cenomani, which lay next the Insubres to the East, and possessed the greatest part of Trevigi∣ana. 3. The Boii, which took up the rest of Trevi∣giana, and the Dukedom of Ferrara, and so much of Romandiola as lies on the North-West side of the Rubicon. 4. The Senones, who passing the Rubicon, inhabited all the rest of Romandiola, and the Duke∣dom of Ʋrbino, to Ancona, according to Pliny. Of all these Italian Galls, the last were the most considerable: These were the Men who under Brennus, took and sacked the City of Rome, in the year of Rome, 364. But in the year 470. of Rome, they were finally con∣quered and extirpated by the Romans. The Boii were conquered by Flaminius, about the year of Rome 529. and being impatient of Servitude, passed over the Alpes into Germany, and possessed them∣selves of Bavaria. Upon which the Insubres, and Cenomani yielded in 431. and became subject to the Romans. The Provincia Romana, was conquered in part by Fulvius Flaccus, in 627. The Remainder in 631. by Cn. Domitius Ahenobarbus; and the three other Provinces by Julius Caesar, between 694. and 697. fifty three years before the Birth of our Saviour. A part of these Galls under Brennus, about 474. made their way through Greece, and settled in Gallo-Graecia, or Galacia, in the Lesser Asia; though it is much more probable this Expedition was immediate∣ly after the taking of Rome. But now to give an exact Account of all the several People contained under this Name, their Laws, Rites, Customs, Governments, and Bounds, would too much exceed the Limits set me in this Work. Gallipoli, Callipolis, a City of Thrace, upon the Bosphorus, called by the Turks Geliboli; which is a Bishop's See under the Archbishop of Heraclea; and the Seat of the Turkish Admiral, or Captain Bassa of his Gallies. It is great, populous, well traded; and has an Haven, a Castle, and a good Magazine well furnished. This Town stands on the West side of the Hellespont, not over against Lampasco, but a little more North; neither walled, nor well built within, the Houses being all of Earth and Timber, and low; the Streets narrow, sometimes covered with Boards to keep off the Heat of the Sun; yet said to be six Miles in Compass, and to have four or five thousand Chri∣stian Inhabitants amongst others. There is little to be seen in it of its ancient Splendor and Elegance: It stands upon a Peninsula, having upon the North and
South, two Bays for Gallies and Boats, of which the Southern seems best for Ships. This City is one hun∣dred and ten Miles South of Constantinople, and five from the Shoars of Asia. Long. 54. 30. Lat. 42. 16. § Gallipoli, Gallipolis, Anxa, a City of the King∣dom of Naples, in the Terra di Otranto; built on a Rock, upon the Western Shoar, in the Bay of Ta∣ranto; thirty six Miles from that City, and in an Island which is only joined to the Continent by a Bridge, supported by huge massy Stones. Small, but well fortified, and populous, with a good Haven, a strong Castle, and good Walls: it is a Bishops See, but his Diocese is bounded by the Walls of the City, and he is under the Archbishop of Taranto. Long. 42. 12. Lat. 39. 58. Galloway, Novantae, Gallovidia. Galdia, is a large County in the South of Scotland, over against Munster in Ireland, from which it is separated by a Channel of only fifteen Scotch Miles in breadth. Bounded on the West with the Sea; on the South with Solway Fyrth, which separates it from Cumber∣land; on the East with Nithesdale, and on the North with Carrick and Kile: it takes its name from the Welsh, who for a long time maintained this County against the Scots and Picts, calling themselves Gaels; and in the Writers of the middle Ages, it is accor∣dingly called Gael-Wallia: the Country is every where swelled into Hills; better for Pasture than Corn, but well supplied with Fish, both from the Sea and Fresh-water-Lakes, of which there are many at the foot of the Hills. The principal River is the Dee, called Dea, by Ptolomy. The principal Town is Wi∣thern, (Candida Casa) which is a Bishops See, and one of the first erected in this Kingdom by Nina a Britain, the Apostle of the Nation of the Picts. Up∣on the Coast of this County, there is a narrow Isth∣mus, call'd the Mule of Galloway: it is the same with the Novantum Chersonesus of the Antients, and lies in 55 d. 10 m. of North Lat. The most Southern point of all Scotland. The Galloper Sand, is a Shallow, ten Leagues from the Mouth of the Thames to the East; upon which the brave Ship, the Prince, was unfortunately run a-ground, and lost, June 4. 1666. Sir George Ayscue the Commander, being taken by the Dutch, (who were then engaged with the English Fleet,) and carried Prisoner into Holland. Gallway, Duaca, Gallica, is a County in the West of Ireland, in the Province of Conaught: bounded on the North by the County of Mayo; on the East by the River Shannon, which parts it from Roscom∣mon, and Kings County; on the South with Clare, and on the West with the Ocean; a Country fruitful both as to Corn and Pasture. Here is the Lake of Corbes, twenty Miles long, and three or four broad. § The principal City is Gallway, Galliva, called by the Irish Gallive; the Capital City of the County of Gallway, and the third in the whole Kingdom of Ireland; situate near the fall of the Lake of Corbes: a neat, strong Place, built almost round, and walled with Stones; it has a Bishop's See, and a delicate and safe Harbor, called the Bay of Gallway, capable of a vast Fleet, and secured on the West, by five Islands. The fertility of the County in which it stands afford∣ing plenty of Goods for Exportation, the Inhabi∣tants of this City, in Mr. Cambden's time, had made great Improvements by their Navigation, and much enriched themselves. This City being so remote from England, and very strong, at first in the Rebellion against King Charles I. stood a kind of Neuter, and would neither admit the Irish, nor the English: but when they saw the Irish were Masters of the greatest part of the Kingdom, it joined with them in their Rebellion: The Pope's Legate made this a kind of Seat of his Government, till about the year 48. he was besieged here by the Irish, who began then to favour the Royal Interest, which he opposed to the utmost; and at last, despairing of all Relief, he sub∣mitted and left the Island. Not long after, this was one of the first Places that paid its Obedience and Respect to the Earl of Ormond the King's Depu∣ty. But it was too late: for in 1651. Ireton having taken Limerick after a long Siege, this Town being immediately attacked by those victorious Forces un∣der the Command of Sir Charles Coot, an Oliverian Captain, and their Harbour filled with Parliament Ships of War, and no hopes of Relief, they yielded themselves to the mercy of the Rebels; who re∣venged the Injuries of a Prince, which they them∣selves had murdered, upon this wealthy, but then wretched City. Thus (saith my Author Dr. Bates) Gallway, the greatest place of Trade in all Ireland, the best fortified, abounding in noble Buildings, Riches, and plenty of Inhabitants, which had had such benefit by their Maritim Commerce, was forced to submit to the Yoke of an Enemy; after she had refused her Assistance to her Lawful Prince, in de∣nying a Supply to the Lieutenant. And as if War alone had not been a sufficient Chastisement; the Plague followed the Sword, and cut off in the space of eighteen Months, twelve thousand of the Inhabi∣tants. The Irish had the Possession of this Place, and held it out for King James II. till the last Sum∣mer, 1691. Galofaro, the same with Charibdis. Gambay, Gambia, a vast River of Africa, in Ni∣gritia, or rather the most Northern Branch of the River Niger; which falls into the Atlantick Ocean, on the North of Cape Verde; and in its passage gives name to the Kingdom of Gambay, on its Southern Bank, not far from its first Division from the River Niger, to the East of the Kingdom of Jalost. Gamelara, Aethusa, an Island of Africa. Gammacorura, a flaming Mountain in the Island of Ternate, amongst the Moluccaes. In the year 1673. it suffered a violent Rupture, out of which it vomited vast quantities of Smoak and Ashes. Ganabara, Januarius, a vast River in Brasil, so called by the Natives: it falls into the Atlantick Oce∣an near St. Sebastian, where it makes a good Harbor. Gand, or Gant, Gandavum, Clarinea, called by the Inhabitants, Ghent; by the French, Gand; by the Germans, Gent; by the Spaniards, Gante; is the Capital of the Earldom of Flanders, upon the River Schelde, which there takes in the Lyse and Lieue: made a Bishop's See under the Archbishop of Mechlin, by Pope Paul IV. in 1559. in the Reign of Philip 2. King of Spain. This is a vast, strong City; and was once as rich and populous, as unquiet and seditious, as any in the Low Countries. Erasmus saith of it in his time, that he did not think there was any one City in Christendom, that could be compared to this for Greatness, Power, Government, and the ingenuity of the Inhabitants. But the Wars and other Calamities which have ever since lain heavy upon this Country, have exhausted both its Wealth and Inhabitants; and brought this City particularly into a very languishing condition. The Strength and Situation of it, have hitherto supported it. It has a Castle built by Charles V. in 1539, who was born here in 1500, and converted an old Abbey, which it had, into a Cathedral Church. And when he built the said Castle, spared not to put to death about thirty of the principal Burghers, proscribe others, confiscate all the publick Buildings, take away their Artillery, Arms and Privileges, and condemn them in a Fine of twelve hundred thousand Crowns, for offering to put themselves under the Protection of Francis I. King
of France, by a Revolt that year; of which Francis generously rejecting their Plot, had as generously ad∣vertised him. In the Reign of Philip II. being inju∣riously treated by the Spaniards, this City was one of the first that expelled the Roman Rites in 1578, and admitted the Prince of Orange in 1579. and ha∣ving cast out the Garrison of Spanish Soldiers, level∣led the Citadel, and fortified the City, though then three German Miles in compass. It maintained its Liberty, till in 1585. seeing the Prince of Orange murthered, and no hopes of succor from the Dutch, it submitted to the Prince of Parma, who rebuilt the Citadel; but the Inhabitants being wasted, the French took it in 1678, in six days, and after resto∣red it to the Spaniards, who are now in possession of it. This City stands at the equal distance of four Leagues from Antiverp, Brussels, and Mechlin. The learned Hostius, Sanderus, and Jodocus Badius, were Natives of it. Its ancient Inhabitants are mention∣ed by Caesar under the name of Gorduni. There are a great many Religious Houses adorning it, and se∣ven Parishes, besides the Cathedral. There is also a strong Castle called the Sas van Ghent or Castle of Gant, four Miles from hence to the North, built by the Spaniards; and taken by the Hollanders in 1644. is still in their Possession. Gandia, a small Town in the Kingdom of Valen∣tia, upon the Coast of the Mediterranean Sea, upon the Bay of Valentia, eight Leagues from Xativa, (Setabis) to the East. It is honoured with the Title of a Dukedom, which belongs to the ancient Fami∣ly of Borgia; and has also a College, which bears the name of an University, of the Foundation of Francis Borgia, a General of the Jesuits, who was lately Canonized, and born here, and was Duke of it. Gangara, A Kingdom in Nigritia in Africa, si∣tuated between the Lake and Kingdom of Borno, the Kingdom of Cassena, and the River Niger. Rich in Gold, and commanded by a King who is absolute. The Capital City bears its own name. Gangarides, an ancient People, whose Name Cur∣tius mentions, towards the Mouth of the Ganges. It is conjectured, they might have their Dwelling in the Country we now call the Kingdom of Bengale. Ganges, the greatest River in the East-India, which divides that Continent into two parts: called Ganga by the Inhabitants, and the Gange by the Eu∣ropeans: it ariseth from Mount Imaus, (Dalanguer) in the Confines of the Great Tartary, in the Province of Kakeres: and running Southward through the Empire of the Great Mogul, it watereth Sirinar, Ho∣lobassa, and Gouro; and is augmented by the Streams of Perselus, Sersily, and Tziotza, and many other Rivers in the Mogui's Kingdom. In the Kingdom of Bengala it is divided into many Branches; and dis∣chargeth it self by five Outlets into the Bay of Ben∣gala, giving its name to a Kingdom in its Passage. It is full of Islands, covered with lovely Indian Trees, which afford Travellers great delight: The Water is esteemed Sacred by the Inhabitants: the Great Mogul will drink no other, because it is lighter than that of any other River: the Europeans boil it before they drink it, to avoid those Fluxes which otherwise it en∣clines them to. This River receiveth from the North-East, and West, an innumerable number of Brooks; and dischargeth it self into the Gulph of Bengala, at the height of 23 deg. or thereabouts. Said by Pliny, to be two Miles where it is narrowest, and five where it is broadest, having Spangles of Gold and precious Stones, mixed with its Sands; yet not therefore the Phison of Genesis, as some mistake; because it springs at the distance of twelve hundred Leagues from the Euphrates. Gangra, an Archiepiscopal City in Paphlagonia, in the Lesser Asia, in the inland Parts; now called Cangria, Castomoni, and by the Turks Kiengara. In this City was a famous Synod of sixteen Bi∣shops celebrated in 324, against Eustathius the Monk, for his condemning the Marriage-State. Dioscorus the Eutychian was banished to this City, by Martian the Emperor in 451. after he had been con∣demned by the Council of Chalcedon; and likewise Timotheus Aelurus, a Monk of that Faction, in 457. by the Emperor Leo; this Monk having been chosen Patriarch of Alexandria. Stephanus saith, there is another City of the same name in Arabia Foelix. Ganhay, a Town of War (by the Chinese there∣fore called a Fort) in the Province of Fochien in China, to the South-East. It is magnificently built, a Town of great Trade, full of People: and particu∣larly remarked for a stately Stone Bridge, 250 paces long. Gani, the Mine or Quarry of Diamonds, near Coulour in Malabar, See Coulour. Ganking, a great and populous City in the Pro∣vince of Nanking in China, with a Territory belong∣ing to, and denominated from, it; having Jurisdicti∣on over five other old Cities. It is the Seat and Go∣vernment of a Viceroy, distinct from the Viceroy of the Province; being the more frequented, by rea∣son the three Provinces of Nanking, Huquang and Kiangsi, abutt upon it. A strong Garrison is kept in its Fort, Haymuen; commanding the Lake of Poy∣ang and the River Kiang. Ganna, the Caspian Sea. Gannat, Gannatum, Gannapum, a Town in the Dukedom of Bourbon in France, towards the borders of Auvergne, upon a small River falling soon after into the Allier. Gaoga, Kauga, or Guoga, a City and Kingdom in Nigritia in Africa, between the Tract of Nubia and the Kingdom of Borno. This Kingdom about two hundred years ago was erected by the prosperous Villany of a Negroe Slave; before which, it was little better than a Desart. Now inhabited by Christians, Mahometans and Pagans. Betwixt 40 and 50 deg. of Long. Lat. 20. 12. Gaoxa, an Island upon the Coast of the Province of Quantung in China. Gap, Vapingum, Appencensium, or Vapincensium Ʋrbs, a City of the Dauphinate in France, which is a Bishop's See, under the Archbishop of Aix; it stands in the Confines of this Principality towards Sa∣voy, two Miles from the Isere, twenty two from Aix, and six from Embrun to the West. It is reasonably great, and defended by a Castle; yet often taken and retaken by the Rom. Catholicks and the Huguenotts in the Wars of the last Century. Farellus sowed his Opinions here. The Bishops enjoy the Title of Earls. It is the Capital of the Territory of Gapensois: and did heretofore belong to the Counts of Forcalquier. Garamal, Garamantes, a People of Libya In∣terior (or Gaetulia) in Africa, about the Eastern part of the Desart of Zaara and the Western of Nu∣bia; of the Generation of the antient Garaman∣tes, who dwelt in the same place. Their chief Set∣tlement is called after themselves, Garama. Garanne, Varenna, an Island in the Bay of Aqui∣taine. Garbe, Isburus, a small River on the South of Sicily. Gard. See Pont du Gard. Garda. See Gardsee. Garde, a City of Greenland, deserted and ruined two hundred years ago. It had been a Bishop's See under the Archbishop of Drontheim in Norway, and stood to the Ocean.
Gardeleben, a small Town in the old Marquisate of Brandenburg, upon the River Meld, seven Miles from Magdeburg to the North. Gardicht, a Town in the Morea, towards the Gulph of Lepanto; supposed to be the antient Cliter. Gardon, Nardo, Vardo, a River of Languedoc, springing from the Mountains of Sevennes and divi∣ding into two Streams. The one passing by Alets, with the name for distinction, of the Gardon d' Alets, joyns the other call'd the Gardon d' Anduze at An∣duze; and afterwards augmented with the Tributes of some small Rivulets, they both fall into the Rhine towards Beaucaire. Gardsee, Benacus, a Lake in Lombardy, called by the Inhabitants, Il Lago di Garda; by the Germans, Gradzee; by the French, Grade: It lies in the State of Venice, between the Territory of Verona to the East, and Brixia to the West; watering on the North the Earldom of Tirol; and from thence is ex∣tended to the Castle of Pescara on the South, the length of thirty Miles: its greatest breadth is ten Miles, as I have often seen (saith Baudrand,) though Strabo seems to think otherwise. It takes its name from Garda, in the Territory of Verona; out of it flows the River Menzo, Mincius, which by Mantoua, falls into the Po. And it abounds with Eels and Carps. See Benacus. Gareligare. See Tripoli. Garet, Gareta, a Province in the Kingdom of Fez, on the Mediterranean Sea, in the Confines of the Kingdom of Argier, from which it is separated by the River Mulvia, as from the Province of Errif by the River Nocor. The Mediterranean bounds it to the North, and the Mountains of the Desarts to the South. The African Writers have divided it into three parts. The first, containing the Towns, Cities, and Territories: the second, the habitable Mountains: the third, the Desarts. Mellila (under the Spani∣ards) Jaffarina, Tezota, &c. are the most conside∣rable places in it. Gargan, a Mountain in the Province of Apulia, in the Kingdom of Naples, nigh to Monte-di-san-Angelo; mentioned by Pliny, Strabo, &c. and the Roman Martyrology upon May 8. Garigliano, Liris, a River of Italy, which here∣tofore divided Latium from Campania. It ariseth in the further Abruzzo, by the Lake of Celano, (Fuci∣nus) above Antina; and passing Southward, water∣eth Sora, Aquino, and Sessa; then falls into the Tyrrenian Sea at Trajeto, eleven Miles South of Gaieta. The Banks of this River were often cover∣ed with the French and Spanish Forces, in the Wars of the Kingdom of Naples, in 1503. Garippo, Gallus, a River of Asia the Less, which springeth from the Coelenian Hills in Phrygia Magna; and washing Pessinunta, falls into Sangiarus, (now Sacario), and Acada; which falls into the Black or Euxine Sea at Cagari. Garnesey, Garnia, Sarnia, an Island belonging to the Crown of England, on the Coast of Normandy. This and Jersey, is all that is left us now of the Duke∣dom of Normandy: it is about thirteen Miles long, and near as broad, where greatest. Garonne, Garumna, called Garona by the Spa∣niards; and Garonna, by the Italians; is one of the great Rivers of France, mentioned by Julius Caesar. Also one of the greatest Rivers which springeth from the Pyrenean Hills: it ariseth in Arena a Spanish Village, in the Borders of the Kingdom of Arragon, not far from Salardun; and running Westward by Bertrant, it turns there North-East by Rieux to To∣louse; above which besides Touche from the West, and several others, it takes in the Ariege from Foix, and Pamier on the East; then running North at Moissac it is improved with a number of River brought in from the East by the Tara; here again turning West, it passeth by Agen; over against which it receives the Giers on the South from Aux; and a little further on the same side Biese from Condom; and on the North (Toninus) Treuyre from Cahors; and a little further the Drot: so leaving Bourdeaux on the South, and taking along the Dordonne from the North, it makes the vast Bay of Garronne; and by the Tower De Cordovan on a small Island, passeth with two mouths into the British Seas. This River was heretofore the boundary of Aquitaine, but now it divides it into two parts. Garro, Gaurus, a Mountain near Naples. Garstang, A Market Town in Lancashire, in the Hundred of Amounderness, near the River Wire. Gurtempe, Vartimpa, a small River of France. Gartz, A Town in the Dukedom of Pomerania in Germany, upon the Oder, three Leagues from Ste∣tin. Formerly well fortified; but in 1638, after its being often taken and retaken in the German Wars, totally demolished. Garza, Mela, a River in the Territory of Brescia, in the Dominion of the States of Venice, in Italy; which washeth the Walls of Brescia on the West, and then falls into the Oglio at Ʋstiano; which conveys it to the Po at Borgo forte, not much above Mantoua. Gascoigne, Vasconia, Novempopulonia, a Province in Aquitaine in France. The Inhabitants write Guas∣coigne; the Italians, Gascogna; the Spanish, Gasco∣na; the English, Gascony. It lies extended between the British Sea to the West, the Garonne to the North and East, and Spain to the South; and was the ancient Aquitania, and afterwards Novempopulo∣nia; that is, the third part properly of the antient Aquitania, in the division of the Emperour Augu∣stus, corrected by Adrian. See Aquitaine. It had this Name from the Gascoignes or Vascones, a Spa∣nish People which setled here, and were Conquered by Theodebert and Theodorick, Kings of France; at last totally subdued by Dagobert, another King of that Nation, (but ascribed by the Chronologers to Aribert a Contemporary King) in 634. This Name is sometimes taken for all Gascony, or the Generalité de Guienne, or de Bourdeaux: divided at present in∣to eleven Parts, Bourdelois, Bazadois, Condomois, Armagnac, Bearn, Gascogne, Basques, Bigorre, Com∣minges, Baionne, and Albret. This Country for a long time belonged to the Crown of England, as Dukes of Aquitaine. It came in 1152. to Henry II. King of England, in the Right of Eleanor his Wife. Though King John was adjudged to have forfeited this and all his other Dominions in France, by the pretended Murther of Arthur; (whereupon the French entered, and in 1203. and 1204. Conquered Main, Angiers, and Normandy, King John's Subjects not well agreeing with him;) yet in 1206. he made one Expedition to Rochel, and took Mount Alban, where∣by he preserved Gascony. And though his Son lost Rochel to the French in 1224. yet in 1225. by his Brother Richard Earl of Cornwal, he reduced the Re∣bellious Gascoignes to Obedience; and in 1242. at∣tempted to recover Poictou, but with no good suc∣cess. In 1259. for a Sum of Money given him by Lewis IX. he resigned Normandy, Main, and Anjou; reserving to himself Gascony, Limosin, and Aquitain; in consideration whereof, he was to have fifty thou∣sands Crowns, and from henceforward they were sti∣led Dukes of Guienne: in the Possession of this the Kings of England continued, till the twenty ninth Year of the Reign of Henry VI. which was the Year of our Lord 1452. when the Weakness of that Prince, and the good Fortune of Charles VII. deprived the English of all their Possessions in France: ever since
which time Gascony has been in the hands of the French. It is observed, as the French change the Letters V and W into G, in the words Galles for Wales and Gascoigne for Vasconia; so particularly the Gas∣coigners interchange the Letters V and B with one another, in giving the same pronunciation to both. Therefore says Joseph Scaliger of them, Foelices po∣puli, quibus bibere est vivere. Gastinois, Vostinum, a Territory in the Isle of France, towards la Beauce; between the Rivers of Estampes, and Vernison to the West; the River Yonne, (which separates it from Senonois on the East,) and the Territory of Puysaie, and Auxerrois to the South. The principal Town is Montargis, thirteen Miles South of Paris. Gath, a City of Palestine, upon the Frontiers of the Tribe of Juda, towards the Syrian Sea, seated on a hill. It was one of the five Satrapies of the Phili∣stines, and the birth place of Goliah. Gattinara, a Town in the Principality of Pied∣mont, advanced to the dignity of an Earldom by the Emperor Charles V. Gatton, an ancient Borough Town in the County of Surrey and the Hundred of Reygate, which elects two Members of Parliament. Roman Coyns have been often digged up here. Le Gave de Oleron, Gabarus Oloronensis, a Ri∣ver of Bearn, which ariseth from the Pyrenean Hills, from two Springs, le Gave de Aspe to the West, and le Gave de Osseau to the East; which unite at the City of Oleron in Bearn; and running Westward be∣neath Sauveterre, it takes in from the South le Gave del Saison, which comes from Mauleon; beneath which it falls into le Gave de Pau, a River of Aqui∣tain, which arising in Bigorre, more East than the former, but out of the Pyrenean Hills also, at a Place called Bains de Barege, and running North-West by Pau in Bearn, as far as Ourtes, turns Westward; and taking in Gave de Oleron, falls into the Adour, less than five Miles beneath Dax, and four above Baionne to the East. Gavot, a small Territory in Vallais, or Wallisser∣landt, one of the Suisse Cantons. Comte de Gaure, a County of France in Aqui∣taine, in Armaignac; between Lomagne, Gimont, and Condom: the principal Town in it is Verdun, four Miles from Tolouse to the North, and about eight from Aux to the East. Gaures, Ghiaours or Ghiabers, a numerous People dispersed about the Indies and the Kingdom of Persia, in the Provinces particularly of Kherman (where stands their principal Temple) and Hyerach, of a different Institution in Religion from all the World besides; following the Scriptures of one Ebrahim zer Ateucht a Prophet (pretended) before the time of Alexander the Great: and as tho they retained something of the old Religion of the Persians, they have such a Vene∣ration for Fire, (especially what the Priest consecrates) that they take the most solemn Oaths before it. The Persian Proverb upon these People, it; A Ghiaber may worship the Fire a hundred years, yet if he falls into it but once, it will certainly burn him. Gazara, Gaza, a City of Palestine in Asia, which belonged anciently to the Tribe of Judah, as appears by the Sacred Scriptures: it was the fifth Satrapy of the Philistines, seated near the Shoars of the Medi∣terranean Sea, on the Confines of Idumaea, towards Egypt; Conquered by Judah, Judg. 1. 18. but not long enjoyed. Made famous by Samson. Pharaoh, King of Egypt, gave it a second Name, Gen. xlvii. 1. Alexander the Great totally ruined it. In the times of the Machabees a new Gaza arose, which in those of Christianity was made a Bishop's See, under the Archbishop of Caesarea. The Grecians finding Gaza signified a Treasury in the Persian Tongue, thought the Persians, under Cambyses, had given it this name. Alexander, the son of Aristobulus, took the New Gaza, and demolished it; but no Alexander could so ruine this City, but it would recover again. Au∣gustus annexed this Gazara and Hippon to Syria; and in the time of Constantine the Great, it was called Constantia, from a Sister of that Prince. The Sara∣cens possessed themselves of it in the year of our Lord 633. three years before they took Jerusalem, by whom it is now called Gaza, Gazara, and Aza. Here our Authors divide as to its present State. Bau∣drand saith it is little, yet divided into two parts, the Upper and Lower; and that it has a Prince of its own (though he is subject to the Turks) called the Emir, or Pacha de Gaza, who is Master of it, and the Neighbouring Country: but Jo. Bunon saith, it is great, and twice as big as Jerusalem. This City had a Port called Majuma. Our Sandys in his Travels, lib. 3. p. 116. saith, it is seated upon a Hill, environ∣ed with Valleys, and those again well nigh inclosed with Hills, most of them planted with all sorts of delicate Fruits; the Buildings mean, both for Form and Matter; the best of rough Stone, arched within, and flat on the top, &c. but none comely or conve∣nient: yet are there footsteps of a better condition; divers simple Roofs being supported by goodly Pillars of Parian Marble, some plain, some curiously carved, and others broken in pieces, to serve for Thresholds, &c. of almost every beggarly Cottage. He tells us also, Baldwin III. King of Jerusalem, having in 1145. expelled the Saracens, he, in 1148. built here a Ca∣stle. That there lives here a Sangiack. That the Port is decayed and unsafe, and of no great benefit to the Inhabitants. There is here one ancient Church, fre∣quented by the Coptic Christians; whether it be great or small, he saith nothing; but very rich it plainly is not. This City was taken from the Kings of Jerusa∣lem, by Salladine, in 1171. This and all Palestine was recovered back to the Christians, by Frederick, Emperor of Germany, in 1228. Retaken by the Turks in 1234. It stands about two Miles from the Sea, and was anciently very Illustrious, as appears by its Ruines, and Marble Tombs, of which there are ma∣ny. The Castle is near the Town, and has four Tow∣ers, at each corner one: it is kept in good order, and has but a small Circuit, and two Iron Gates; hard by it is the Seraglio, for the Bassa's Wives, and not far off are the Ruins of a Roman Castle. The Town is very little, but has a Besestein, (a Market-Place) in good Order, and a pretty large Greek Church. Without the Town are several goodly Mosques, faced with Marble, which I believe (saith Mr. Thevenot) belonged to the Old City. Long. 65. 26. Lat. 31. 45. Gazaria, the Peninsula to the Crim Tartars. Gebel Caph. See the Mountains of the Moon. Gebel Tarif, Calpe, a Mountain in Andalusia, at the entrance of the Streight of Gibraltar, which the Ancients called one of Hercules's Pillars. Gebel Tor, Melani; Mountains in Arabia Pe∣traea, supposed to be the Sinay and Horeb mentioned in the Books of Moses: they are said to extend from Petra Aelana, a City of Arabia, to the Red Sea; at the distance of an hundred and eighty Miles from Je∣rusalem to the South: called by the Arabians now, Gibel Mousa; by the Europeans, (who see them, when they Sail upon the Red Sea) Sinay. See El∣tor, a City from whence they have the name of Gebel Tor. Gebelel Hadich, Herculis Promontorium, Phocra, a Mountain and Promontory, in the Kingdom of Mo∣rocco, now called Cape Cantin, in Lat. 32. 15. Gedrosia. See Formipt.
Geetruydenberg, Gertrudenberga, and S. Ger∣truchii Mons, a City in Holland; small, but well fortified; called by the Inhabitants, Guytrenberg, or Geetruydenberg: it stands in South Holland, two Leagues from Breda to the North, and three from Dort to the South-East, upon the River Dunge. This City takes its name from St. Gertrude, who was a Daughter of Pepin, King of France; and for her great Sanctity in much honor in these Countries. It is (saith Guicciardin) a considerable Place; seated on the South Bank of the Mereuwe, at the equal di∣stance of three Leagues from Dort, Heusden, and Breda: the Possession of it is now in the Prince of Orange; but the Brabantines and Hollanders do both equally pretend to the Right of it. The Hollanders surprized it in 1573; and divers times since it has been taken and retaken. Gehan-Abad, or Jehan-Abad. See Delly. Geichon, Oxus, call'd by the Arabs, Ghaion, Gi∣hon, Tihun; and now commonly Gieihun, or Giei∣houn; is a River of Persia: it ariseth from the Moun∣tains of Badachzan; and running Northward through the borders of Balch, it watereth the Cities of Ter∣mid, Zemum, and Chovarzim: Also sometimes cal∣led Balch. thus Gollius describes in part the Course of this River. Our later Maps make it to arise from the Mountains of Caibocoran, in the Eastern borders of the Kingdom of Persia; to water Candahar, and Belgis on the Eastern Bank; Meder, Thalan, and Badaschian on the Western; at which last it takes in from the East the great River Oboengir, which comes from Balch by Vervalin and Talecan; then, turning Westward, it takes in a River from the South out of the Desarts of Bigul; beneath which it water∣eth the City of Bigul, and so passeth to Bichend; above which it takes in a River from the East out of Zagathay; and beneath it on the same side another, from the Lake of Ʋsbeck, which passeth by Bochara; and another on the South side from Mareuwe; and at Deristan, a great River from the South, called Margab; beneath which it falls into the South-East∣ern Angle of the Caspian Sea, at Zahaspan, by four Mouths saith Gollius, but our Maps take notice of but one. Geila, 1 River of Transylvania; called by Jornan∣des, Gilfil. Geivise, Astacus, a Maritim City of Bithynia, in the Lesser Asia, now ruined; it lies fifteen German Miles South-West of Nicomedia, on the Helespont. Gelas. See Galatia. Gelderland, Sicambri, Geldria, one of the Se∣venteen Provinces in the Low-Countries, which has the Title of a Dukedom; the Seat as all agree, of the Old Sicambri. This Province has on the North Frie∣sland, and the Zuyder Sea; on the East Cleves; on the South the Dukedom of Juliers; and on the West Brabant and Holland: It is a flat level Country, without any Mountains; much beautified with Woods and Forests; abounding with all things, especially Corn, and yet as good for Pasturage and Grazing; so that they fetch lean Cattel from Denmark, and fat them here. Three great Rivers water it, the Maes, the Rhine, and the Wael. Nimeguen in the Territory of Betawe, is the Capital of this Dukedom; besides which it has twenty one walled Cities and Towns, and three hundred Villages. This Country was first granted by Henry III. Emperor of Germany, to Otho of Nassaw, with the Title of Earl, in 1079. Rainold II. the ninth Earl, was Created Duke, by the Emperor Lewis, of Bavaria, in 1339. Arnold XV. in the Descent, sold this Dukedom to Charles Duke of Burgundy, being offended with his lewd Son Adolph: Charles, another Son of this Arnold, left it at his death in 1538. to Charles V. as Heir of the House of Burgundy. This Country in 1577. (all but a very few Towns) revolted from Spain, and joined with the States of Holland; from which time, till this, they have maintained their Liberty; only they were over-run by the French in 1672. But the next year recovered themselves again. The City Gueldres or Geldre (which some will have to be ori∣ginally derived from the Gelduba of Tacitus) took its name from an ancient Castle, seated upon the Ri∣ver Niers, four Miles North of Venlo, and six East of Nimeguen; where the ancient Counts, or Gover∣nors of this Province, chose their Residence; by which means it grew to a fine City; and being in the hands of the Spaniards, was by them so well fortified, that an attempt made upon it by Henry Frederick, Prince of Orange, in 1139. miscarried. The Castle is e∣steem'd almost impregnable. In 1627. the Spaniards of Venloo and Ruremonde attempted to bring the Rhine into the Meuse at this City: But their design did not take effect. § There is also a Fort of this name, built by the Hollanders, on the Coast of Co∣romandel, in the Kingdom of Narfinga, on the Bay of Bengala, in the East-Indies. Geliboli. See Gallipoli. Geluchalat, Mantiana, a Lake in the greater Ar∣menia: Minadoio saith, it is now called Astamar: it receives eight great Rivers, and sends none out of it; and is eight days Journey in compass. Long. 80. Lat. 40. Gelise, Gelisa, a River in Aquitain in France, which washeth the City of Eusse; and falls into the Losse, which falls into the Garonne, five Miles be∣neath Agen to the West. Geloni, an ancient People of Scythia Europaea, Neighbours to the Agathyrsi: described to fleay their Enemies, and make themselves Cloths of their Skins. Mel. Alex. ab Alex. Gemblours, Gemblacum, a Town in Brabant, upon the River Orne, in the Borders of Namur; five Miles from Brussels to the South, four from Charle∣roy to the East, and five from Lovain. This Town has a Monastery in it; and saw a bloody Fight near it, between the Dutch and Spaniards, in 1578. Bau∣drand. Gemen, Arabia Foelix. Gemona, Glemona, a small Town in Friuli, un∣der the State of Venice. Gemunder, a Lake in Austria. Genamani, an Island in the Red Sea, on the Coast of Aethiopia, called Gythites by the Ancients, in Lat. 25. 20. Genep, or Gennep, Gennepium, a fortified, but small Town in the Dutchy of Cleves in Germany, two or three Leagues from Cleves, upon the River Niers, which there falls into the Meuse. It belongs to the Elector of Brandenbourg, tho the Hollanders keep a Garrison in it too; who retrieved it from the Spa∣niards in 1641. Geneva, Civitas Genevensium, Januba, Genabum, Jenoba, is the most Eastern City belonging to the Allobroges, or Savoyards; which together with its Bridge over the Rhosne, is mentioned by Julius Cae∣sar in his Commentaries: It is great, populous, well fortified and built, with a good Cathedral and Arse∣nal: the Capital of the Province of Genevois, and seated at the West end of the Lake of Lemane, on the South side of the Rhosne, in that place where this River comes out of the Lake; seventeen Miles from Lion to the East, and twenty six from Basil to the South, upon the borders of Switzerland: heretofore a very famous Mart, which is long since removed to Lion; and a Bishop's See under the Archbishop of Vienna, and an University founded by the Emperor Charles IV. in 1368. The French call this City
Geneve, the Germans Genff; about nine hundred years since, in an ignorant and an unlearned Age, it was called Gebenna; the Italians call it Geneura. Mercator believes it built in the Year of the World 2994. in the times of Asa King of Judah, by Leman the Father of the Germans: there is no need of pre∣tences, which can never be proved. Caesar's Testimony, and the Roman Inscriptions that are found here, are sufficient proofs of its Antiquity: by the latter, it ap∣pears this was a Roman Colony. It was indeed the last Town Northward in the Provincia Romana, ac∣cording to the ancient Division of Gallia. We should have had more Roman Antiquities than we have too, if this City had not in the course of so many Ages suffered very much from Enemies and Fire. In the Reign of Aurelius Antoninus, it was almost all burnt; which Prince contributed so much to the rebuilding, and bestowed such Privileges on it, that it was called Aurelia for some time from him; but upon his death reassumed its ancient name. In the irruption of the Barbarous Nations into the Roman Empire, it suffer∣ed the same Calamities with other Cities something sooner, as being nearer the Frontiers; but then it met with an early Restorer in Genebald King of Bur∣gundy. About three hundred and fifty years since, it was burnt twice in seven years. It has had the Counts of Geneva, and the Dukes of Savoy at all times the great Pretenders to the Sovereignty over it; and has always defended its Privileges manfully against them. In 1412. when Amadaeus, Duke of Savoy, en∣deavoured to obtain a Title to this City by an exchange, Joannes à Petra Scissa, (then Bishop) and the Inha∣bitants agreed, that if any Person should consent to the Alienation of its Liberty, he should be treated like a Traytor. These and the like Traverses of their Neighbour Princes forced them in 1535. to enter in∣to a League with the Canton of Bearn, which was to last for ever; the change of Religion having then heightned their Neighbours Rage against them. In 1584. having suffered a very sharp Siege and a mise∣rable Famine, by the help of the Canton of Zurich, they prevailed so far as to force the Duke of Savoy and their Bishop to renounce all their Pretences. They reaped no less glory from their defeating the Noctur∣nal Scalado of Charles Emanuel, Duke of Savoy, in 1602. This City rejected the Ch. of Rome in 1535. Whereupon they applied the Revenue of the Bishop∣rick, with the Tithes of the Territory of Gex, to the maintenance of their own Ministry of the Reformati∣on. There has been a Roman Catholick Titular Bishop of Geneva ever since continued, who resides at Anne∣ci; and with other the Titular Beneficiaries within this District, obtain'd a Decree from the Parliament of Dijon (Anno 1687.) to be restored to their an∣cient Possessions▪ But without success, as for any ef∣fect it had upon the Government here: who, though they enter into no Alliance (during the present War) with the Confederate Princes, yet stand upon their Defence against France. The Preaching of Calvin, Beza and Farellus, the retreat of some English Pro∣testants hither during the Reign of Q. Mary, and of others in divers times from several Countries, have distinguished the zeal of this place for the Reformati∣on. The Province of Genevois, which derives its name from it, is bounded by the Provinces of Chablais and Fossigny to the East, the Rhone to the West and in part also to the North, and with Savoy properly so called to the South. There is lately published an exact History of this City, by M. Spon, and therefore I need add no more. § The Lake of Geneva. See Lemane. Genezareth, Genesara, a Lake in Palestine, be∣tween the Tribes of Zabulon to the West, and the half Tribe of Manasseh to the East; also called the Sea of Tiberias, and Galilee: which Lake is entered by the River Jordan at Capernaum, and left at Sy∣thopolis: it is eighteen Miles long, and seven broad: on the Western Shoar stand Capernaum, Tiberias, and Bethsaida; on the Eastern Corasain, and Gersa. The many Miracles our Blessed Saviour wrought up∣on, and about this Lake, have made it famous to all Ages and Nations. Gengen, or Giengen, Rhiusiavia, a small City in Schwaben near the Danube; others say it is Rosen∣field, in the Dukedom of Wirtenburgh, to which this ancient name mentioned by Ptolomy belongs. The City Gengen, lies between Ʋlm and Norlingen, five Miles from each: the second, not above four Miles from Tubingen to the South: but Giengen is not the same Town with Giesingen, but lies about four Miles East of it. Genichisar, Hermaeum, a Cape in Thrace, five Miles from Constantinople to the South-East; called by the Christians Neo Castro, New-Castle. Genoua, Genua, a very ancient and great City in the North of Italy, upon the Tyrrhenian Sea: it lies in the Form of a Theatre, upon the ascent of an Hill, opening its Bosom to the Sea, five or six Miles in compass; so full of stately and regular Buildings, Palaces, Churches, Monasteries, &c. that its prover∣bial Epithet in Italy, is, Genoua la superba; and so very ancient, that its Original is unknown: History makes mention of it above 1800 years ago. It is certain it was destroyed by Mago, one of Hannibal's Commanders, when by the Alpes he entered Italy in the year of Rome 534. about two hundred and six∣teen years before the Birth of our Saviour. Cornelius Servilius, one of the Roman Consuls, ordered the re∣building it, sixteen years after its Desolation. This City in the end of the first Punick War, had greatly shaken Rome it self, as Livy relates, about the year of Rome 515. But being then subdued, and obliged, she continued ever after very faithful. In the fall of the Roman Empire, she had the same fate with her Neighbours; and fell under the Herules, Goths, and Lombards, or the Greek Exarches of Ravenna, as they prevailed one upon the other. In 806. Charles the Great having Conquered the Lombards, made Ade∣mar, his Kinsman, Count of Genoua; who got Cor∣fica from the Saracens, and united it to this City, which has enjoyed that Island ever since. In 935▪ the Saracens took and burnt this City, and carried all her People into Captivity; but the Duke of Venice brought them back, and rebuilt it; though others say the Genoese Fleet met these Infidels in their go∣ing home, and recovered all again after a sharp fight. After this they became in a short time by Navigations, Commerce, and Wars, more famous than ever. Being grown Wealthy, in 1133. Pope Innocent II. made this City an Archbishop's See. They deserved this Favour of the Pope, by the great Services they by their Fleets performed against the Saracens in the Holy War, (which began in the year 1096.); for which in 1101. they obtained of Baldwin III. part of the Sea-Towns that should be taken in Palestine. In the Year 1204. when the Western Christians took Constantinople from the Eastern Emperors, the Ge∣nouese had a great hand in it: Pera was assigned them for that Service, a place near Constantinople: they were then Masters of Lesbos and Chio, and seve∣ral Islands' in those Seas; and Caffa in the Black Sea, in Crim Tartary. But aiming to gain Creet too from the Venetians in 1207. there arose a War between the two States; which, joined with the Genoueses intestine Divisions, at last ruined the Greatness of this: in 1255. they reduced the Venetians to great streights, having taken Chioggia, an Island near the City; but lost all by demanding more than could be granted.
In 1260. the Venetians gained another great Victory over them, taking twenty four Gallies. In 1291. the Venetians took from them Pera and Caffa. In 1293. the Tide of Fortune turned; the Venetians lost all their Fleet to the Genoueses, and another of seventy Ships in 1298. In 1314. the Genouese were beaten by the Venetians, and in 1353. reduced to such Streights, that they were forced to put themselves under the Pro∣tection of the Duke of Milan; after which, though they recover'd to an Ability of Contesting with the Ve∣netians, and beat them in 1401▪ yet the Turks and their own Divisions, at last reduced them to so low an Ebb, that they were not able to set out a Fleet. Between the Years 1174. and 1339. they had four dreadful Ci∣vil Wars, or Broils in the City, which contributed very much to their ruin. In 1452. Sfortia, Duke of Mi∣lan, possess'd himself of this City. In 1563. they were cited to answer for the Expulsion or Banishment of the Marquess of Final, by Ferdinando I. Emperor of Germany. Selim the Grand Signior, Emperor of the Turks, beat their Republick out of the Isle of Chios, in the year 1571. Besides all these Mutations, the French pretend that in 1396. this Republick made o∣ver, by a formal Grant to Charles VI. of France, all the Sovereign Lordship of it, and the States depending▪ which was executed and confirmed again to Charles VII. in 1458. and from this last Date the French had the Sovereignty of the City, till 1528. when Andreas Doria, upon the Advantage of the Imprisonment of Francis I. (taken by the Forces of Charles V. at the Battle of Pavia,) restored his Country to its former Liberty. Since which, this State has had a very great Dependence on the Crown of Spain, by reason of his States in Italy; at all times preferring the Interests of that Kingdom before all others. This so far exaspera∣ted Lewis XIV. (the now French King) that in 1674. he sent a Fleet and Bomb'd Genoua; in which Action the Ducal Palace was burnt, and many other of the noblest in the City, and an incredible mischeif done. In the end he forced them to send their Duke and four Senators to his Court to make their humble Submis∣sions to him. Not that they parted with their Liberty, for they are still a Free State; nor that they had done him any Injury, which they were to acknowledge; but either because their Ancestors had revolted above an hundred years agone, or because his most Christian Majesty would have it so. § The State of Genoua is a Part of Italy, anciently call'd Liguria; lying upon the Tyrrhenian Sea, which bounds it upon the South and West; on the East it has the Dukedom of Florence, and on the North the Dukedoms of Parma in part, and Montisferat in part, its length from East to West is one hundred and forty Miles, its breadth nevertheless very little. Yet that part of it which lies next the Sea is wonderfully fruitful by Nature, and made much more so by the Industry of the Inhabitants; and has so many Villages and fine Buildings, especially towards Genoua, that it may seem to be one continued City. It is go∣verned as a Common-Wealth under a Duke (to con∣tinue but two Years,) and two Senates or Councils. This Republick has under it Corsica and Capraia, two Islands in the Mediterranean Sea; and anciently ma∣ny other. We shall only add to this, the Italian Cen∣sure upon Genoua; Huomini senza Fide, Mare sen∣za Pesce, Monte senza Legno, è Donne senza Ver∣gogna; There are Men without Honesty, a Sea with∣out Fish, Mountains without Wood, and Women without Shame. Nevertheless this State and City have given three or four Popes to the See of Rome, and produced great Persons for all things. Their Aca∣demy settled at Genoua, takes the Title of gli Ador∣mentati. Geni, Melas,  River of the Lesser Armenia, which riseth from the Mountains of Argaeus; and run∣ning Eastward, falls into the Euphrates; when it has passed the whole Province of Armenia Minor. Gentilly, a Village within one League of Paris, upon the River Bievre; mentioned in Ecclesiastical History, for a large Council assembled at it in 767. in the Reign of King Pepin, and in the Presence of the Embassadors of the Emperor Compronimus from the East, touching the Procession of the Holy Spirit and the Ʋse of Images. Genubath. See Guinea. Georgeto, Morgontiacum, a Town of the Further Calabria. Georgia, a great Country in Asia, call'd by the Inhabi∣tants Gurgistan; between the Caspian Sea to the East, and the Euxine to the West; bounded on the North by Circassia, Comania, and the Dominions of the Duke of Muscovy, and on the South by Schirvan, a Province of the Kingdom of Persia: Containing under this Name a Part of Armenia the Greater, and Arme∣nia the Lesser. This Kingdom was heretofore much greater than now; and had Monarchs for its Sovereigns, whose Royal Seat was the City of Cotatis; but lying between the Turks and the Persians, two powerful Neighbours, both of them have diminished the Extent of it. Thus the Turks dispossess'd the Georgian Kings of Erzerum, a City of Armenia; the Persians of some others; and besides, the Kings of it having divi∣ded it into several small Principalities, it is become much less able, than otherwise it would have been, to defend it self against those potent Princes that sur∣round it: The Eastern Parts of it are accordingly Tributary to the King of Persia, the Northern to the Great Duke of Muscovy, and the Western to the Turk. The Parts of this Kingdom are Mengrelia, Guriel, and Imireta, to the West, where the ancient Colchis was: To the North, Abaca; Carthuel (now a Pro∣vince of Persia,) and Gagheti, (Gaguesa) to the East, formerly called Iberia; and Samsche, [Samesa,] to the South towards Armenia. The principal Cities are Cotatis and Teflis. The Georgians are Christians by Profession, but by Practice the worst in the World; especially the Princes and great Men, who will sell their Subjects for Slaves to the Turks and Persians, or ex∣change them for Merchandize: Their Faith is very tolerable; they are of the Greek Church, and till of late never heard of the Church of Rome. In 1624. Pope Ʋrban VIII. sent a Mission of the Theatines thither. Georgia, more properly so called, borders to the East upon Circassia and Muscovy, to the West upon Armenia the Less, to the South upon Armenia the Greater, to the North upon the Euxine Sea, and that Part of Colchis, called Imireta, (which I believe (saith Sir J. Chardin) to be all that Country which the Ancients call Iberia.) It is a Country very full of Woods, and very Mountainous, which yet has in it a great Number of Pleasant Plains; only the middle of Georgia is more even and level than the rest: The Ri∣ver Kur, (Cyrus) runs through the middle of it. This Country is very fruitful in Corn, Herbs, and Fruits; and produces a vast quantity of excellent Wines; but their most Staple Commodity is Silk, of which they have a great quantity, but not half what is reported: The Air is very dry, cold in the Winter, and hot in the Summer. Gerania, an ancient City of Maesia Superior, (now Bulgaria,) towards Thrace and the Mountain Haemus. Gerawer, Geravia, a Territory in the Upper Circle of the Rhine, towards the Confluence of the Mayne and Rhine; between the County of Erpach on the East, Mentz on the North and South, the Palatinate of the Rhine on the West. The principal Places are Geraw, and Darmstad; from which latter this is sometimes by Foreigners called the Landgra∣iat
de Darmstad. The Town of Geraw, which gives this Territory its other Name, lies not above two German Miles from the Rhine, and Oppenheim to the East; upon the River Noir. Gerberoy, a Town in the Isle of France, towards the Borders of Picardy, in the Territory of Beauvoisis, four or five Leagues from Beauvais; at which the English and French fought a Battle in 1434. Gerbes. See Zerbi. Gergenti, Agrigentum, an ancient, and once a most potent and magnificent City of Sicily, mentio∣ned in the Old Greek and Latin Historians very fre∣quently. Built by the Inhabitants of Gela, six hun∣dred years before the Birth of our Saviour, as Thucy∣dides affirms, Lib. 6. and called by the Greeks , by the Latins Agragas, and Acrogas, as well as Agrigentum. It became in time so great as to have ten Miles in Compass, and to contain two hundred thousand Inhabitants; and others say so ma∣ny more, as is incredible, if not impossible. See Laer. Lib. 8. When this City had not stood above forty years, it fell into the Hands of Phalaris, a Cretian, in the 41. Olympiad, about the year of Rome 183. who, being banished his Country, of a private Man became Lord of Sicily, and one of the most noted of all the ancient Tyrants, enjoying this Power six∣teen Years, in which time Perillus invented, and first experimented the Brazen Bull. After this the Car∣thaginians became Masters of it, and after them the Romans. It was not less celebrated upon the Ac∣count of Empedocles the famous Pythagorean Philo∣sopher, who lived in the 44. Olympiad, and was born here, 160 years after the Foundation of this City. Cicero speaks of a Temple and a Statue of Hercules, that this City shew amongst the finest pieces of Anti∣quity. The Horses bred here were of great repute in Greece, much used in their Games; on which occa∣sion it is mentioned by Virgil, Aen. 3. It is now cal∣led by the Inhabitants Gergenti, by the Spaniards Girgenti; and is a Bishop's See under the Archbishop of Palerno now, formerly of Syracusa: Seated be∣tween the Rivers of Arraga, and Naro, upon an Hill, almost in the middle of the Southern Shoar of that Island, in Long. 37. 38. Lat. 36. 10. The Saracens of Sicily were a Plague to it in their times. Gerizim, or Gerizzim, a Mountain of Palestine, near Samaria, over against Mount Ebal, on the other side Jordan; from whence the Decalogue by Joshua's Order was promulgated, and the Israelites blessed by Simeon, Levi, &c. Deut. 27. 12. and 11. 29. 30. The Wells of Jacob, at which our Saviour discoursed the Samaritan Woman, sprang by its Foot. This is the famous Mountain whereon Manasses, (ex∣pelled Jerusalem for marrying the Governour of Samaria's Daughter, a Stranger) built a Temple in Opposition to Solomon's, which began the Schisin be∣twixt the Jews and the Samaritans. Hyrcanus, Ne∣phew of Judas Maccabeus, demolished it two hun∣dred Years after; yet the Samaritans nevertheless continued the Courses of their Prayers and Sacrifices here, even to the Time of the Emperor Justinian. Zeno the Emperor built upon this Mountain a Christian Church; Justinian repaired the same, and erected also a Fortress here to the Insolencies of the Sa∣maritans, of whom Vespasian killed in his time eleven thousand that had retired hither in the Wars of the Jews. Germany, Germania, one of the greatest Coun∣tries in Europe, and the Mother of those Nations which in the fall of the Roman Empire, conquered all the rest. At present bounded on the North by the Baltick Sea, and Jutland; on the East by Hungary, Prussia Superior, and Poland; on the South by the Alpes, which part it from Italy; on the West by France, the Netherlands, the German Ocean, and Switzerland. West-Friseland, Guelderland, Over-Yssel, and Groningen, were heretofore parts of Ger∣many, which belong now to the Ʋnited Provinces. On the other side Cleves, Julters, Liege, the Bi∣shopricks of Cologn, Treves, a great part of the Palati∣nate of the Rhine, and Switzerland, of old belonged to Gaul, and now to France; yet are now (of right) Parts of Germany. The French have taken from it Alsatia. Switzerland some Ages since is Cantoned into small Common. Wealths, which do not acknow∣ledge the Emperor of Germany for their Sovereign. As for Denmark, Poland, and Hungary, they have their distinct Kings, and are by no means Parts of Germany. It is in length from the Borders of the Dukedom of Lorrain, to those of Hungary, an hun∣dred and twenty German Miles; in breadth from the Baltick Sea to the Alpes, which inclose Friuli, an hundred twenty six. This vast Tract of Land is usu∣ally divided into ten Circles, to wit, Franconia, Ba∣varia, Austria, Schwaben (sometimes called Suabia,) the Upper and Lower Circle of the Rhine, Westpha∣lia, the Upper and Lower Saxony, and the Circle of Burgundy; but this last has no Vote in the Diet, nor contributes any thing to the Charges of the Em∣pire. The Emperor of Germany is not only the Head of Germany, but the first Prince in Christen∣dom, in Rank and Order, though not the most powerful. This Country is called by the Inhabitants Teutschlandt or Teitschlandt, by the French Alle∣magne, by the Spaniards Alemasia, by the Italians La Germania or l'Allemagnia, by the Dutch Duyst∣landt, by the Poles Nicmieczka, by the Hungarians Nemes, and by the Greeks Elmagi. In ancient times it was extreamly over-grown with Woods, and full of uncultivated Marshes: There were then no Ci∣ties, no Arts, no Tillage: The Inhabitants were much like the Northern Americans, Immanes Ani∣mis atque Corporibus; of great Growth as to their Bodies, and very barbarous as to their Minds. But great Warriers, and the invincible Enemies of the Ro∣man Empire, which never could subdue them; on the contrary, they at last destroyed that vast Empire, in the time appointed. Julius Caesar was the first of all the Romans, who (building a Bridge over the Rhine) entered this Country; yet with no great Success. Au∣gustus and Tiberius conquered those Nations of Ger∣many, which lay between the Rhine and Italy; but about the year of Christ 200. they too shook off the Roman Yoke; the rest were always free from it. The Rhine and the Danube, were the standing Bounds of the Roman Empire, beyond which it could rarely keep any thing long. That which the Romans could never effect, the Francks under Charles the Great brought to pass, and subdued Germany. This Prince, about 801. was made Emperor of France and Ger∣many. It continued in his Posterity till 929. when Henry I. a Saxon, was elected by the Germans; his Family lasted till 1002. when it fell into the House of Bavaria, in the Person of Henry II. In 1139. Con∣rade III. Duke of Schwaben Succeeded, and all the Emperors following were of that Family, till 1274. After which the Empire for some time had no Head; but changed Families, as others, very frequently; till Albert II. Duke of Austria, in 1439. fixed it in the House of Austria. And all the Emperors ever since have been of that Family; Leopold, the present, be∣ing the eleventh from Albert II. which have succes∣sively swayed this Scepter: This Prince succeeded Fer∣dinand III. in 1657. Under these Princes Germany is become one of the most Civilized, Cultivated, Lear∣ned Countries in the World; full of noble and popu∣lous Cities, and most flourishing Churches. As no Country had suffer'd more than this in the Days of Ig∣norance,
so when Learning had once discussed those Mists in the beginning of the XV. Century, this was one of the first that threw off the second Yoke, and made way for other Nations to do the same. Germersheim, a small City in the lower Palati∣nate, upon the Rhine, in Germany; heretofore Free and Imperial, till by the Emperor Charles IV. given with all its Dependances, to the Prince Elector Pala∣tine. The Emperor Rodolphus I. died here in 1290. It is endeavouring to repair the Sufferings, which half ruined it, of the last German Wars. Germian, Phrygia Major, a Province of the Les∣ser Asia. Also a Mountain there called by the same Name, but of old, Dindymus. Germigny, a Village in the Province of Brie in France, upon the River Marne; where the Bishops of Meaux have a House of Pleasure. S. Lewis in 1253. and Philip le bell in 1319. published Ordinan∣ces from hence. § A second in the Diocese of Or∣leans, near Fleury, upon the Loyre; at which a French Synod was assembled in 843. Gerne, Garryenus. See Yare, a River of England. Geromlea, Achelous, a River of Epirus, which ariseth from Mount Pindus, and running Southward falls into the Ionian Sea: now written Aspri in our later Maps. Gers. See Egers. Gertrudenberg. See Geertruydenberg. Geru, Gerun, Ogyris, Armusia; the same with Ormus, or at least the Island in which Ormus stands. See Ormus, and Hoffman. Gesara. See Krim Tartary. Geschisdag, a River in Mysia, in the Lesser Asia; and also the present Turkish Name of Olympus, or Maesius, a Mountain in the same Province. Gest, Gedrosia, a Province in the East of the King∣dom of Persia, next the Moguls Empire. By others called Circan. Gestie, a City in Parthia, called in ancient times Suphtha. Gestrick, Gestricia, a Province of the Kingdom of Sweden, upon the Botner Sea, to the West of which it lies; bounded on the North by Singia, on the West by Dalecarlia, on the South by Ʋplandia, and on the East by the Botner Sea; and is only famous for its Mines of Iron. Gevals and Copperberg are its most principal Places. Gesula, Gaetulia, a Province of the Kingdom of Marocco in Barbary: bounded by the Provinces of Darha to the East, Marocco to the North, the King∣dom of Sus with the Mountain Laalem to the West, and Tesset to the South: Without any City or walled Town in it: But there are great Villages of 10000 Inhabitants, who are thought to be the ancient∣est People of Africa, and descended from the Gaetuli. The Cheriffs of Fez and Marocco chuse their Gard du Corps out of them, for the Estem they have of their Fidelity and Courage. Getae, an ancient People of Scythia, betwixt Maesia and Dacia, divided on each side the Danube. In the year 505. they sell upon Macedonia and Thrace, defeated the Forces that the Emperor Anastasius sent against them under Sabinianus, Consul, and took a Sum of Money to retire again. Gevals, Gevalia, a Town in the Province of Ge∣strick, in the Kingdom of Sweden, at the Mouth of a River of the same Name; about four Miles from the Confines of Ʋpland to the North, twenty seven German Miles from Stockholm to the North. Gewer, Javarinum, called by the Inhabitants Raab, by the Germans Javarin, Giavarino, is a small, but very strong City; the Capital of a County in the Lower Hungary, and a Bishop's See under the Archbishop of Gran. It stands five Miles from Co∣morra to the West, where the Raab and the Rabnitz fall into the Danube. This City is called Gewer by the Hungarians. Fortified by Ferdinand King of Hungary, in 1550. Taken by the Turks in 1591. after a long Siege: Retaken by Surprize, in the Night, by Count Swartzenburg, and Count Palfi, in 1606. This was at the Beginning of this present War, the most Southern Town the Emperor had in the Lower Hungary. Gex, a Territory and Bailiwick, belonging to the Duke of Savoy hertofore, untill yielded to the King of France by the Treaty of Lyons in 1602. It is of∣ten Comprehended in the Province of Bugey in France; having Bugey on the West, the County of Burgundy on the North; the Teritory of Waad in Bearn on the East, and Savoy on the South; from which last the Rhone, and in part the Lake of Gene∣va seperates it. The Capital Town bears its own Name. Geyl, Julia, a River of Germany, which, as Mercator saith, flows through the Ʋpper Carin∣thia, and falls into the Drave, a little below Villach. Gezaira, that Province in the Kingdom of Algier in Barbary, in which Algier stands; which City too is by the Arabians called Gezaira. Gezan, Zaaram, a City in Arabia the Happy, in the Province of Hagias, upon the North Side of the River Laakic; which passing by Medina, there falls into the Red Sea. This City is also called Algiar. Long. 69. 00. Lat. 26. 00. Gezira, or Gesirat, Zegira or Zigira, a City of Mesopotamia, about twenty Miles North of Nisibin, and sixty from Merdin to the South East. Ghamma, a vast River of the Asiatick Great Tar∣tary, which after a long Course, disburthens it self into the Sea of Kaimachy. Ghazuan, Bengebres, a Mountain in Arabia Foe∣lix, out of which springeth Eda, a River of the same Country; which watereth Mecca, and falls into the Red Sea, over against Suquem in Egypt. Gheneoa, or Gheneboa, a Province of the Kingdom of Tombut, in Nigritia, in Africa, towards the Mouth of the Niger. There is neither a walled City, Town, or Castle standing in it; but the Governor, Magi∣strates, and those of the best Fashion live together in a great Village: it is a plentiful Province for Barley, Rice, Cotton, Cattle, and Fish; and had the Chara∣cter of a distinct Kingdom, till about 1520. conque∣red and reduced into a Province by the King of Tombut. Ghierra D'Adda, a Country of the Milanese. See Adda. Gianea, Blascon, a small Island on the Coast of Provence. Gianich, Nichopolis, a City of the Lesser Arme∣nia, upon the River Ceraunia, which falls into Gen∣sui; thirty five German Miles from Erzerum to the South West, and forty five from Cogni to the North-East. This City was built by Pompey the Great, and is a Bishop's See under the Archbishop of Sebastia. Long. 69. 00. Lat. 42. 25. Gianuti, Dianium, Sinonia, an Island on the Coast of Tuscany. Giavarin. See Gewer. Giazza. See Laizzo. Gibel, Gabalus, a City of Syria, which is a Bishop's See under the Patriarch of Antioch; seated upon the Mediterranean, not far from An∣ticassium, a Mountain of Coelo-Syria; forty Miles from Antardum, and eleven from Laodicea. In the Maps there is a City called Gibeletto, nine Miles South of Tripoli, and ten Miles North of Sidon; which by others is called Gebail, and is the same Place.
Gibeon, a great and Royal City of the Amorites in Canaan, upon an Hill, in the Tribe of Benjamin: Me∣morable for their Stratagem to obtain a League with Joshua, and for Joshua's Defeat afterwards of the five Kings of the Amorites at their Besieging of this Place; when both the Sun and Moon, at Joshua's Command, the first over Gibeon, the other in the Valley of Aja∣lon, stood still to give Light to the Slaughter of the flying Enemy; as this Miracle is quoted (Josh. 10. 13.) out of a lost Book, called Jasher; about the year of the World 2584. Joshua, though he thus protected this City, because of his League, he never∣theless condemned them to the Slavery of hewing of Wood, and drawing of Water for the Tabernacle. And when Saul contrived their total Destruction, his seven Sons (except Mephibosheth) were hanged for an Attonement of their Fathers Fault, 2 Sam. 21. Gibraltar, or Gilbraltar, Calpe, Gibraltaria, a City and Mountain in Andalusia in Spain; seated up on the Mouth of the Mediterranean Sea, where it runs into the Atlantick Ocean, on the North-Eastern Point; over against Zeuta in Barbary, from which it stands four Italian Miles, and the same from the Ruins of Heraclea, eleven from Tangier to the North-East, and sixteen from Cadiz to the South-West. The City is called by the Moors Gibel Tarick, the Mountain of Tarick, from Tarif a Commander of theirs, who was the first that landed here, when the Moors invaded Spain in 711. Small, though very well fortified: it has a large Haven, and a strong Castle, which has always in it a Garrison of one hundred and fifty Souldiers. The City is built upon a Rock in a Peninsula, and the Castle stands on the highest part of the Rock. At the West and East end there are two Forts, or Block-houses, next the Sea, each of which has nine Cannons: notwithstanding, James Heemskirk the Dutch Admiral in 1607. entered this Harbour, and destroyed the Spanish Fleet. This City is called in ancient Coins Calpe, and Colonia Julia Calpa: it grew up out of the Ruins of Heraclea and Carteja, which lies not above one League from it. This and Seuta, or Zeuta, on the opposite Shoar in Africa, were by the Ancients believed to be Hercules his Pillars, beyond which there was no going. This City has also given Name to the Streights of Gibral∣tar, (Fretum Herculeum) which is the only Outlet the Mediterranean has into the Atlantick Ocean: concerning the breadth of which, there is a great Controversie; some reckon it seven French Leagues, others twelve Italian Miles; and twenty for its length; others one German Mile and an half. This is one of the most famous, frequented, and most anciently known Streights in the whole World. § Also a great Town in Castile d'Or, in the South America, in the Province of Venezuela, upon the Banks of the Lake of Maracaibo, and near the great Mountains, called (after the same Name) the Mountains of Gibral∣tar; six Leagues from the River Epines, which dis∣chargeth its Streams into the said Lake. This Town is well built, and drives a Trade with Tobacco, Su∣gar, and Cocao. Gien, a small Town in the Province of Beausse in France, upon the Loyre, which is here covered with a Stone Bridge: twelve Leagues from Orleans, and something below the new Channel of Briare. Some will have it to be the Genabum of Cesar. Giera, Hiera, a small desolate Island near Candia. Gieraci, Hieracium, Locris, Narita, a City of the further Calabria, three Miles from the Shoars of the Ionian Sea, and about one from the Ruins of Lo∣cris, out of which it sprung. A Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Regio, from which it lies twenty seven Miles to the North-East. Giera-petra, Hiera-petra, Hyerpytna, a City of Candia, or Creet, which has a Castle, and an Haven such as it is, and heretofore a Bishops See: it lies on the South side of the Island in the Territory of Sitia, near Mount Malaura, sixteen Miles from Setia to the West: now under the Dominion of the Turks. Giessen, Giessa, a small, but very strong City in Hassia, in Germany, upon the River Lhone, four Leagues from Marpurg to the South: It was of late years made an University, and is the strongest Town in this Province; under the Landtgrave of Darm∣stadt in part, and of Cassel in part. Giffhorn, a Town in the Dutchy of Lunenburg, in the Lower Saxony, upon the River Allere: three or four Leagues from Brusnwick, and a little more from Zell. Gigel, Gigeri, Gigari, Igiti, a City of Africa; heretofore a Bishops See, but now a small Village in the Province of Bugia, in the Kingdom of Algier; twenty seven Miles from Algier to the East, upon the Shoars of the Mediterranean. Taken by the French in 1664. and afterwards deserted. There was another City which Ptolemy calls Colops, and pla∣ceth in the Province of Zeugitania, which is now called Giger. Giglio, Igilium, Iginium, Egilium, a small Moun∣tainous Island in the Tyrrhenian Sea, which has in it one Village and a Castle; and belonged heretofore to the Republick of Sienna, with which it came into the hands of the Duke of Tuscany. It lies about a Mile from the nearest Coast of Italy, between 34. and 35. deg. of Long. in Lat. 41. 55. Gihon, one of the four Rivers springing from the Paradise of Adam and Eve, Gen. 2. 13. Josephus makes it the same with the Nile, others with the A∣raxes. See Nilus. Gilan, Gelae, Gilania, a Province of Persia, upon the South side of the Caspian Sea, which from it is often called the Sea of Gilan. The chief City of this Province is Gilan, and stands upon the River Abi∣sirni, twenty five German Miles from the Caspian Sea: in Long. 90. 13. and Lat. 40. Gilboa, a Chain of Mountains in the Holy Land, extended the length of ten or twelve Leagues, from the City Jezrael to Jordan, along the Tribe of Issachar and the Ʋpper Galilee. Famous in the Jewish History for the encampment, defeat, and death, of King Saul and his three Sons here, in a Battel with the Philistines; and for David's cursing these Mountains with Barrenness for Jonathan's sake. They are al∣most all covered with Stones. Taking their Name, some suppose, from an ancient City Gilboa. As at this time, we are told, of a considerable Town called Gilbus, standing amongst them. Gilead, The Mount properly in the Region of Tra∣chonitis in Palestine, whereat Jacob and Laban passed a Covenant with each other, Gen. 31. But afterwards extended, to express the Cities and Country adjacent, which were given by Moses to the Tribe of Gad, Josh. 13. 25. Gillesland, a Tract in the North parts of the County of Cumberland, from whence the Earl of Carlisle receives the title of Baron Dacre of Gillesland. Gilolo, an Island in the East Indian Ocean, to the west of the Moluccaes, and East of the Terra des Papaous, in 165. deg. of Long. It has four Points of Land shooting forth into the Sea, as many diffe∣rent ways. One about twenty, another fifty Leagues Long. The Capital of it is called Gilolo also. Gindes, a River springing from the Martian Mountains of Armenia, and ending in the Tigris. In which course, it retarding the passage of Cyrus's Army to the Siege of Babylon, he broke it into three hundred and sixty Channels. Gingi, Gingis, a great City in the Promontory of Malabar in the East-Indies, which gives Name to a
Province. This City was heretofore under the King of Bisnagar, but has now a Prince of its own; it is very strong, and has a Castle built upon a Rock. The Province, or Kingdom of Gingi, has Bisnagar to the North, the Gulph of Bengala on the East, the Moun∣tains of Malabar on the West, and the Kingdom of Tanjaour to the South. Gingiro, a Kingdom in the Lower Aethiopia, towards Melincle, Zanguebar, and the Eastern Ocean. Ginopoli, Gemanopolis, Jonopolis, a City of Pa∣phligonia, which is a Bishops See, under the Arch∣bishop of Gangra. It lies upon the Black Sea, ten German Miles West of Carambis, the most Northern Cape of the Lesser Asia. Giordano, Jordan. Giorgiana, Georgia. Giovenazzo, Juvenacium, a Maritim City of A∣pulia Pucetia, (now Terra di Lavoro) upon the Gulph of Venice, between Bari to the North, and Trani to the South; welve Miles from the first, and a little morefrom the latter: In Long. 40. 50. Lat. 41. 12. This is a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Bari. It stands upon an Hill, and is almost incom∣passed with the Sea. Giovenco, Juvencus, Invectus, a River of Italy, in the Kingdom of Naples, which falls into the Lake of Celano, at the foot of the Appennine, forty five Miles West of Rome, in the Province of Abruzzo. Heretofore it passed through the Lake without mix∣ing with it; but whether it passeth into any other River, or is swallowed up by the subterraneous pas∣sages, which carry away the waters of that Lake, Le∣andro has not informed us. Gir, a River of Africa, which rising in Biledulge∣rida, not far from the Atlantick Ocean, runs East∣ward; and passing under several Chains of Hills and Mountains, at last falls into Nile, above the Cata∣racts of Egypt. It is a vast and wonderful River in all things; and deserves a more particular descri∣ption, if the Counties through which it passes, were so known to us, as to enable us to give it. Girgia. See Hyrach. Girigo, Girgium, a City of the Ʋpper Egypt, near the Nile; the Capital of a Province, which takes its Name from this City; betwixt Barbanda and the Sahid. Otherwise written Girgilo. Girmasti, Caicus, a River of the Lesser Asia, which rising by a City of the same Name, washeth Judai, Pergama, Caristo, and Stinga; then falls in∣to the Archipelago, over against the Isle of Metel∣lino. The City of Girmasti was of Old called Hie∣rogerma; and is a Bishops See, under the Archbi∣shop of Cyzioeno; called only Germa in the Councils, being attributed by some to Mysia Minor, by others to Phrygia Minor; it lies between Balichstria to the East, and Pergama to the West. Giro, or Palmacia, Venaria, a small Island on the Eastern Coasts of Genoua. Girona, Gerunda, a City of Catalonia in Spain; built by Gerion, a celebrated Hero, who is said to have lived Anno Mundi 2840. and to have been Con∣temporary with Hely the Judge of Israel. It is a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Tarragona, of a large extent; seated partly upon the descent of a Hill, partly upon a Plain; ennobled with two Bridges, one in the City over the River Oingar, and the other without the City, on the North side, over the River Ter: and besides is very well fortified, and honoured with the Title of a Dukedom. This City lies seven Leagues from the Shoars of the Mediterranean Sea to the West, eight from the Borders of France, fourteen from Perpig∣nan to the South, and sixteen from Barcelona to the North. A Spanish Council was held at it in 517. Gisborn, a Market Town in the West Riding of Yorkshire, in the Hundred of Stancliff. Gisborough, a Market Town in the North Riding of Yorkshire, in the Hundred of Langburgh: situa∣ted in a pleasant Flat, between Mulgrave and the River Tees, and heretofore enriched with an Abbey. This is the first place, where Allum was made in England. Gisors, Caesortium, Caesarotium and Gisorium, an ancient Town in Normandy, mentioned by Antoni∣nus; the Capital of le Vexin Normand, a Territory in this Province, which lies upon the River Epte, six∣teen Leagues from Paris to the West, and ten from Roan to the North-East. It has given the Title of an Earl for many Ages past. About the year 1188. Henry I. King of England, and Philip the August King of France, had an Enterview betwixt this place and Trie, after the news of the taking of Jerusalem by Saladine: wherein they agreed upon a Croisade for the recovery of the Holy Land again, and to lay aside their differences with one another, till they had per∣formed it. Givaudan, or Gevaudan, Gabali, a Territory in Languedoc, the Capital of which is Mende; it lies be∣tween Auvergne to the North, Rovergne to the West, the Lower Languedoc to the South, and Vivarais and Velay to the East. Placed in the Mountains of Se∣vennes, and very subject to Snow, yet not unfruitful; near the sourse of the Allier, the Lot, [Olda] and the Tarn. Mende the principal City, lies twenty five Leagues from Lyon to the South West; and Baignol, the next to Mende in greatness, lies about six Miles South of it. This was the Country of the ancient people, called Gabales. It now gives the Title of Earl to the Bishops of Mende, and was first united to the Crown of France in 1271. being heretofore un∣der its own Counts. The Huguenots ravaged it much in the last Age. Giulap, Chaboras, Chobar, a River and City of Mesopotamia. The River ariseth from Mount Ma∣sius, in the Confines of the Greater Arabia; and run∣ning Southward through Mesopotamia, falls into the River Euphrates, at Al Thabur; which last City, it seems, is by some called Giulap. The River is the same that passeth by Caramit, the Capital of Diar∣beck, or Mesopotamia, and in the latter Maps is cal∣led Soaid: supposed to be the River Chobar, mentio∣ned by Ezekiel the Prophet. See Chaibar. Giulia, Julia, a City of Transylvania, between the Rivers of Sebekeres, and Feyerkeres, upon the Lake Zarkad; seven German Miles South of Great Waradin; upon the Frontiers of Transylvania; in the Hands of the Turk, whose Ancestors conquered it in 1566. Some Authors believe this to be the same place with the Ziridava of the Ancients. Giulich, a Branch of Mount Taurus in Cilicia. Giulick. See Juliers. Giustandil, Acrys, Justiniana Prima, Lychnidus, Tauresium, a City of Macedonia, commonly by the Christians called Locrida; standing on the Confines of Albania, upon the Lake Pelioum, out of which the River riseth, that watereth Albanopoli. This Ci∣ty was the Birth-place of that Great Prince Justinian the Emperour, and from him had the Name of Justi∣niana: even now it is a great and populous City, and an Archbishops See: it stands upon an high Hill, eighty Miles from Durazzo to the East. Glamorganshire, Glamorgania, Morganucia, one of the twelve Counties of Wales, has on the South the Severn Sea, on the East Monmouthshire, on the North Brecknockshire, and on the West Caermarthenshire: the North part being Mountainous, is barren and un∣pleasant: the South side descending by degrees, spreads it self into a fruitful Plain, which is filled with Towns. The principal City of this County is Lan∣daff.
There is in this County one hundred and eighteen Parishes. The Earldom was granted to Ed∣ward Somerset, Lord Herbert of Chepstow, &c. by Charles I. in 1645. the Father of Henry Duke of Beaufort, in which most Loyal and most Noble Fa∣mily it now is. Glan, Clanes, a River in Bavaria, which now falls into the Danube. Glandeves, Glandeva, Glannata, Glannatica, a ruined City in Provence, amongst the Maritime Alpes, near the River Var; giving Name to an Ho∣nourable Family in Province, and formerly dignified with the Title of an Earldom. The continual Inun∣dations of the River Var obliged the Inhabitants to desert it, about eight hundred years ago; who settled at Entrevaux, at the distance of a quarter of a League from it; whether they removed also the Episcopal See of Glandeves, which is a Suffragan to the Archbi∣shop of Ambrun. Glanfordbridge, or Glamford, a Market Town in Lincolnshire, in the Hundred of Yarborough. Glanio, Clanius, Liris, a River in Italy, now fre∣quently called L'Agno. See Agno. Glarys, Calarona, Glarona, a Town in Switzer∣land, which is the Capital of a Canton, seated in a Valley of the same Name, upon the River Sarneff; amongst very high Hills, called Glarnischberg; eighteen Miles from Altorf to the South-East, and as many from Schwits to the North-East. This is so great, populous and strong, that it may compare with most Cities. The Plain upon which it stands, lies by the River Limat, about three German Miles in length, being fensed on three sides by the towring Alpes: having on the South and East the Grisons; on the West the Canton Von Vry, and Schwits; and on the North the River Limat, which parts it from the Gri∣sons. This is one of the lesser Cantons, and the eighth in number. Of old subject to the Monastery of Secon, which had the Tythes, and some certain Rents; but the Inhabitants were otherwise free of all Exactions, Taxes and Tolls; and governed by a Senate chosen out of themselves, by their own Laws and Customs; only the Abbess of the Monastery chose the Senators: and the Emperor was Advocate of the Monastery: which Right being consigned by Fredericus Aenobarbus, to Otho, Palatine of Burgundy, came to the House of Hapspurgh; and by the latter, to Albert, Son of Ro∣dolphus I. who attempting to change these Methods of Government, this Canton in 1351. revolted, and was received into the League of the Cantons; and in 1386. gave the Austrians a fatal overthrow. Zuin∣glius, about 1515. preaching here against the Church of Rome, many of the Inhabitants imbraced the Re∣formed Religion, the rest persisting in the Roman; and so it stands at this day. Glas, Nanaeus, a River in Scotland, the same with Strachnavern. Glascow, Glasquo, Glascum, a City in the West of Scotland, upon the River Cluyd, [Glotta,] sixteen Miles from the Western Shoar. This was very anci∣ently a Bishops See, but discontinued till King Wil∣liam of Scotland, restored it: now an Archbishops See, and an University, which was opened by Turnbull a Bishop, who in 1554. built a College here: and it is now the best place of Trade in this part of Scotland, having a delightful situation, excellent Apples, and a Bridge of eight Arches over the Cluyd. Glastenbury, Glasconia, Avalonia, a very ancient and famous Abbey in the Isle of Avalon, in Sommer∣setshire, upon the River Parret; which is said to have been built, or begun, by Joseph of Arimathea, the Apostle of the Britains, under the Reign of Nero the Emperour and Arviragus King of the Brittains, (according to Gildas), and therefore honoured a∣bove all other places in this Nation. The first small Cell failing, Devi Bishop of S. David's, erected a new one in the same place. But Ina King of the West Saxons, who began his Reign in 689. and reigned thirty eight years, was its lasting and most beautiful Founder; who about 7 8. erected here a very fair and stately Church, in which time it was a kind of School, or Seminary, but managed by Secular Priests. Dunstan brought in the Benedictine Monks, about 970. under these, the place thrived wonderfully, and became a small City, incompassed with a strong Wall of a Mile about, and replenished with stately buil∣dings: they had a Revenue of 3508 l. per annum, when Henry VIII. put an end to all their Greatness. In this place in the Reign of Henry II. between two Pyramids, was found the Tomb of King Arthur, the famous Prince of the Britains; which is a very great Indication of the Antiquity of this Place, if there were no other. The Body lay very deep in the Earth, with an Inscription in Latin upon a Leaden Cross, expressing it was King Arthur, who was there buried in the Island of Avalon: It is certain, the Brittains made this place sometime their Retreat, from the har∣rassment of the Pagan conquering Saxons. Glatz, or Gladscow, Clacium, Glotium, Glatium, a a City of Bohemia, and the Capital of a County of the same Name; seated upon the River Neis, which runs through Silesia; and beneath Guben falls into the Oder, near the Mountains of Fictelberg; twenty one German Miles from Prague to the East, and fif∣teen from Olmutz to the North; it is a small City, built at the foot of an Hill, and has a strong Castle in it. Dubravius saith, it belonged heretofore to Silesia. The chief Town in it, is Haberswerd. Glencarn, Carbantorigum, an Earldom in Nidis∣dale in Scotland, belonging for a long time to the Cu∣ninghams, a great Family in that Nation. Glendelagh, Glendelachum, once a City, now a Village, in the County of Dublin: also once a Bi∣shops See, but now united to the Bishoprick of Dub∣lin. This Name is written Glandeloure, and Glan∣dilage. Glenluz Bay, Clenucensis Sinus, the Bay or Arm of the Sea, which divides Ireland from Galloway in Scotland. Glinbotin, Planina, Scardus, a Mountain in the Eastern Confines of Macedonia, towards Albania, out of which springs the River Drin. Globiokeu, a Town in Lithuania, made famous by a great Defeat of the Moscovites by the Poles in 1661. in which the former lost twelve thousand Men, and all their Cannon and Carriages. Gloneck, a River of Bavaria, near Tyrol. Gloucester, Claudia, & Claudia Castra, Clevum, Glovernum, a very ancient City, in a County of the same Name, in the West of England, called Glevum by Antoninus; being a Roman Colony designed for the curbing the Silures, a Warlike British Clan. It lies on the East side of the Severn; and where it is not secured by that River, has in some places a very strong Wall, and is a neat and populous City; with twelve Parish Churches standing in it, besides the Ca∣thedral: on the South side it had a fine Castle built of square Stone, which is now ruined. Ceaulin, King of the West Saxons, about 570. was the first that conquered it from the Britans. About 878. it fell into the hands of the Danes, who miserably defaced it. Soon after this Aldred, Archbishop of York, built the Cathedral, to which belongs now a Dean, and six Prebends. In this Church Edward II. was buried; and not far from him, Robert the eldest Son of Wil∣liam the Conquerour; two unfortunate Princes. In the Barons Wars under Edward I. and Henry III. it suffered very much. Richard III. sometime Duke of
Gloucester, made this City a County Corporate. Hen∣ry VIII. settled here a Bishops See in 1540. the first Bishop of which was Dr. John Chambers; from whom the present Bishop, is the fourteenth in number. Geo∣fry of Monmouth, had been Bishop of the See before; but it was suppressed in after times, and now again revived. This City falling at first into the hands of the Rebels in our former Troubles, was besieged Aug. 10. 1643. by the Kings Forces: the eighteenth the King came in Person to the Leaguer, but Essex co∣ming up Sept. 10. the Seige was raised: and for ought I can find, it continued in their hands till the Restitution of Charles II. § Gloucestershire, was the chief Seat of the Dobuni: on the West it butteth upon Monmonmouthshire, and Here∣fordshire; on the North upon Worcestershire; on the East upon Warwickshire; and on the South upon Wiltshire, and Somersetshire: from which last, it is parted by the River Avon: a plea∣sant and fruitful Country, stretching in length from North-East to South-West; the Eastern part swells up into Hills, called Cotteswold; the middle part sinks into a fertile Plain, watered by the Severn; the Western side is much covered with Woods. In the times of William of Malmsbury, the Vales in this County were filled with Vineyards, which are now turned into Orchards, and implyed in Cyder, the true and natural English Wine. The Honour or Dukedom which belongs to this County, is annexed to the Royal Family. Henry. the Third Son to Charles the Mar∣tyr was intituled Duke of Gloucester in 1641. Cre∣ated so May 13. 1659. and died September 13. 1660. a Prince of great Hope and Constancy. Glogaw the Greater, Glogavia, Glosgavia, a City of Silesia in Bohemia, upon the River Oder; which is very well fortified, and has a strong Castle: the Ca∣pital of the Dukedom of Glogaw; about two German Miles from the Borders of Poland, and fifteen from Breslaw to the North, and from Sagan to the East seven. This City was taken by the Swedes in 1647. Maly, or Klein Glogaw, the Lesser Glogaw, stands upon the same River, in the Dukedom of Oppelen: four Miles from Oppelen East, ten from Glatz East, and thirty from the Great Glogaw South. Gluckstad, Glustadium, Fanum Fortunae, as the Name imports; a Town in Germany, in the Duke∣dom of Holstein, upon the Elbe, in Stormaria; pla∣ced at the confluence of the Elbe and the Stoer. It was raised and fortified by Christian IV. King of Denmark in 1620. and belongs now to that Crown. It stands six Miles beneath Hamburgh to the West. Gluchsbourg, Glucsburgum, a small Town in Den∣mark, from which the Dukes of Holstein have their Title of Glucksbourg, or Luxbourg. It stands in the East part of the Dukedom of Sleswick, near Flents∣burgh, from which it lies but one German Mile to the East, upon a Bay of the Baltick Sea, towards the Isle of Alsen. Glycynero, Athyras, L'Acqua Dolce, a River of Thrace; which ariseth near Byzia, Bilzier or Visa, a City of Thrace; and running Southward, falls into the Propontis, South of Seliurea; ten German Miles South of Constantinople, and six North of Pe∣rintho. Gnesna, Limiosaleum, Gnesna, a City in the King∣dom of Poland, by the Germans called Gnisen: it is an Archbishops See, in the Palatinate of Kalish, to∣wards the Confines of Germany; and was anciently called Limiosaleum. This was the Royal City of Po∣land▪ and is now the Seat of the Primate of that Nation, and Capital of Polonia Major; but daily de∣caying, having suffered much by Fire in 1613. It lies three Polish Miles North from the River Warta, seven from Kalish, thirty five from Warsaw to the North-West, and thirty from Dantzick to the South-West. Built by Lechus I. King of Poland in a Marshy Ground. The Bishoprick was founded by Mieczilaws, Duke of Poland, in 966. The Bishop of this See executes the Regal Office in the Interregnum of that Kingdom, and summoneth the Diet for the Election of a new King. He has the privilege, from the Roman See, to be a Legatus Natus; and takes upon him to refuse to give precedence to Cardinals. Gnido, Cnidus, Gnidus, a ruined old City of Ca∣ria in the Lesser Asia; seventy Miles from Halicar∣nassus to the East, between Rhodes and Cyprus, upon the Mediterranean Sea. There are here many ruins of ancient Structures, as a Theatre, a Temple, and the like, which shew the Antiquity of it: though now desolate, and its two Havens, which made it once so famous, totally decayed. Goa, Barygasa, Goa, a City of the Hither East-In∣dies, called thus by the Portuguese; but Goemoat by the Natives, that is, the Fruitful well watered Land. It lies in a small Island towards the Mouth of the River Mandova, on the Shoars of the Province of Cuncan, in Long. 104. 15. Lat. 15. 40. on the Western Shoar of the Cape of Malabar. This Island belonged an∣ciently to the King of Decam; but in 1510. was con∣quered by Alfonsus Albuquerque, a Portuguese. Pope Paul I▪ made it an Archbishops See; and it was for a long time after the most celebrated Mart and Ha∣ven in the East-Indies: great, populous, rich and strong, though neither walled nor fortified, only as it had six Forts in the Suburbs. The Portuguese ere∣cted here an University, made it the Seat of the Vice-Roy of the Indies, and improved it as much as was possible. Thus Baudrand. Thevenot assures us, that it has good Walls, with Towers; and of Cannon plen∣ty. The Island produceth Corn, Cattle, Fruit in a∣bundance; and wants not good Water. It is still the Capital of the Portuguese Acquisitions in this re∣mote part of the World; full of Religious Houses and Churches, Monks and Friers; but much lessened as to its Trade, by the growth of the Dutch East-India Company. The Jesuits have five Houses belonging to their Order; and it is pretended, that the Body of S. Thomas the Apostle is preserved in this City. Godalming, A Market Town in the County of Surrey. The Capital of its Hundred. Goes, Goae, Tergoes, a considerable Town in Zealand, seated on that Branch of the Scheld, which is called the Schenk: a great, rich, and populous Town; on the North Shoar of the Isle of Beuelandt, four Miles East of Middleburgh, and almost five from Ʋlilissingen to the North-East. Guicciardin. Goga, Dunga, a small City in India Propria, under the Mogul, in the Kingdom of Guzarat; towards the North Shoar of the Bay of Barigazen, sixty Spa∣nish Leagues from Dabul to the North. Gogna, Agonia, a small River in the Dukedom of Milan; which ariseth near the Lake called il Magi∣ore, in the County of Novarese; and running South∣ward by Novara Mortara, a little above Dorno, takes in from the East the Ditombio; then falls into the P, eight Miles West of Pavia. Gojame, Gojamum, a Kingdom in Africa, in the Higher Aethiopia, near the Sources of the Nile; where it breaks out of the Lake Zembre, or Zaire; and lies on the South of the said Lake, between it and the Mountains: the Capital of it being Zembre, a City which gives Name to the Lake, between Long. 40. and 50. and South Lat. 10. and 20. Golconde, Golconda, a Kingdom in the Hither East-Indies, near the Bay of Bengala; on the North it has the Empire of the Mogul, on the West the Kingdom of Decam, on the South the Kingdom of
Bisnagar, and on the East the Bay of Bengala. This is more frequently called Orixia. It is a great King∣dom; extended by the space of two hundred and sixty French Leagues upon the South Bay; and takes the Name of Golconda from the Capital City, which lies between the River Guenga, and the Mountains of Balagua: a great and noble City, adorned with such a stately Pagod or Temple, for the Indian Worship, as gains the preserence, with some Travellers, before the most admired Ediflces in all Asia; sixty Leagues from the Port of Masilupatam to the North, and fifty from the nearest Coast of the Ocean to the West. The other Cities are Conteripatam, Caregare, Orixa, Masilupatam, Narfingapatam, and Maliapaura, or S. Thomas. This Prince is one of the most powerful in the Indies. It is a pleasant Country to travel in, by reason of the Rice and Corn, and the many lovely Keservatories. The Earth also is rich in Mines of Diamonds. Monsieur Thevenot in his Travels, assures us, that Golconda is only a Castle, where the King of Orixa resides, and that the City is called Bagnagar; a great, populous, rich, well Traded City, in Southern Lat. 17. 10. adorned with many noble Structures, and fine Gardens, though the common People live in low, thatched, ill contrived Hutts. The Castle of Golconda stands two Miles West of Bagnagar, upon a Hill rising like a Sugar-Loa, secured by a Dike which is very deep, and a Wall of Stones three Foot in length and breadth; the Ditches are filled with fair and good Water: besides this Wall, it has five round Towers, with a great many Cannon mounted both on the Wall and Towers, for the defence of the Place. The Prince of this Country is a Mahometan, Tributary to the Great Mogul; he has vast Revenues, being the Proprietor of all the Lands in his Kingdom; and his Tolls yield him a great Sum of Money. Goldhurst, or Goudhurst, à Market Town in the County of Kent, in Scray Lath. Goletta, or Goulette, Calache, a Fort in the King∣dom of Tunis, built by Charles V. in 1535. at the en∣trance of the Bay of Tunis; which was taken by the Turks in 1574. and since enlarged by them with a capacious Port, a Custom-house, two Mosques, and a Prison for Christian Slaves. Golfo di Arabia, Sinus Arabicus, See the Red Sea, famous for the passage of the Children of Israel. That which we call a Bay, or Arm of the Sea, or a Sea restrai∣ned within narrower Bounds, as opposed to the word Ocean, is by the Italians, Spanish, and Portuguese, cal∣led Golfo: so that in their account there is a vast number of Golfoes, or Gulphs: But I will only take notice here of the more remarkable, and to which the word Gulph is commonly added, reserving the rest to their proper places. —di Balsora, Sinus Persicus, the Persian Gulph, which divides Persia from Arabia. —di Lepanto, Sinus Crissaeus sive Corinthi∣acus, is a Bay or Branch of the Adriatick Sea; which entereth on the West side of the Morea; divides it from Livadia, (or Achaia,) a part of Greece; and extends it self to the six Mile Isthmus, which con∣nexes the Morea to the rest of Greece. This has been made exceeding famous by a great Naval Victory the Venetians obtained here against the Turks in 1571. in which the Maritim Forces of that Empire were so broken, that it has not been able to recover the loss to his day. In the year 1687. the Venetians again entered this Gulph, and taking its Dardanels, are be∣come the intire Masters of it. —di Mexico, a vast Bay, which from the North Sea, (or Atlantick Ocean) between Florida, Cuba, Hpaniola, and the Caribbe Islands, insinuates it self, ams a kind of Semicircle, of about twen∣ty degrees from North to South, and near fifty from East to West. In this Bay Jamaica lies upon the North; it has Florida upon the West; New Spain. on the East; and upon the South New Granada. The Continent of America is not here in the narrow∣est part above twenty German Miles; and therefore all that lies South of this Streight, is called South; and the other North America. —di Taranto, Sinus Tarentinus, is all that great Bay at the South end of Italy, which has O∣tranto on the East, the Basuicate on the North, Ca∣labria on the West, and the Island of Sardo almost in the middle of it. —di Venetia, the Venetian Gulph, or A∣driatick Sea, is a great Branch of the Mediterranean; which divides Greece on the East from Italy on the West; at the North end lies the City of Venice, which commands this Sea; and will suffer no other armed Ships upon it (as much as in that State lies) but Merchants, and the Convoys of them. Golle, Galliola, a River in Soissons in the Isle of France. Gollen-berg, Asciburgus, a Mountain in Poland, which is a Branch of the Sarmatian Mountains, in the opinion of Ptolemy. It begins at the Town of Twar∣dozyn, in the Confines of Hungary; and running Northwards towards the River Swarta, and the Mar∣quisate of Brandenburg, ends at the Baltick Sea. This Mountain is called Gollenberg by the Inhabi∣tants, and Tartary by the Poles. Golnow, Golnovia, a small City in Germany, in the Dukedom of Pomerania, upon the River Ihna, which a little lower falls into the Oder, five German Miles North-East of Stetin. This City was built in 1188. And was heretofore a great and rich Place, but of later times it has suffered much by Fire, and War by the Peace of Westphalia it belonged to the King of Sweden; but by the Treaty of S Germain in 1679. it was mortgaged to the Elector of Brandenburg by the Swedes, for fifty thousand Crowns. Golo, Tuolo, a River in the Isle of Corsica. Gouiera, one of the Canary Islands, betwixt Tene∣rissa to the East and the Island of Iron to the West; which is twenty two Leagues in Compass, and has a Town of the same Name, and a large Haven: supposed to be that which the Ancients called Theode. Gomeres, a Tribe of the ancient Bereberes in Africa: See Bereberes. Gomorrha, an unfortunate City of Judaea, con∣sumed, together with four others, by Fire from Hea∣ven, Gen. 19. and the Plains, they stood in, turned into a Dead Sea, about the year of the World 2138. Gonfi, Gomphi, a Town of Thessalia, in the Bor∣ders of Epirus, towards the Springs of the River Pe∣nee, thirty Miles East of Ragusa; it is still called by the ancient Name, but reduced to a Village. Gonga, Gannum, Gans, Gonni, Gonos, a Town in Thrace, in the Province of Corp, upon the Propontis. It lies in the middle between Rodisto to the South, and Constantinople to the North, fifteen Miles from either. It is mentioned in the Councils. Gorch, a Village of the Lower Hungary, upon the River Zarwich; between Alba-Regalis, and Quinque Ecclesiae. Gordium, an ancient City of Phrygia in Asia Mi∣nor, upon the River Sangarius; where was that fa∣mous Gordian Knott, which Alexander cut in two with his Sword, when he could not otherwise untye it. Goree, Goeree and Goure, an Island in the Atlan∣tick Ocean, upon the Coast of Nigritia in Africa, three Leagues distant from Cape de Verde; here∣tofore belonging, as a dependent, to the Kingdom of Ale in Barbary; till taken by the Hollanders, who
built it a Fort, called Nassaw; and in 1677. from the Hollanders, by the French. Goritia, Noreja, Julium Carnicum, Goritia, is a small, but very strong City in the Eastern Border of Friuli, next Carniola, upon the River Lisonzo, or Isonzo, [Sontius] three German Miles from Friuli East, and seventeen from Venice. This is the Capital of a small County of the same Name, and is well feated, over-looking a fair Plain to the South-West. The Emperours Governour of the Country lives in the Castle, who has a Guard allowed him. The Ger∣mans call it Gortz. This City and County fell to Frederick IV. by Inheritance from the last Earl of Gortz, who died in 1473. and ever since it has been in the Possession of the House of Austria. It has been esteemed a part of Carniola, though it be in truth a part of Friuli. Gorkum, Gorichemum, a City or great Town in South Holland, upon the Maes, where it receives the Ling, one Mile more West than the Confluence of the Maes and Wael, three Leagues from Dort to the East, and four from Breda to the North; built in the year 1230. by a Lord of the Territory of Arkel, of which it is the Capital; and very strongly for∣tified. Gorlitz, Gorlitium, a City of the Ʋpper Lusa∣tia, in Germany, which is the Capital of that Country. It is very strong, seated in a Marsh upon the River Nisse, which falls into the Oder, between Gossen and Franckfort, twelve German Miles from Glogaw to the South-West, the same from Dresden to the East, and eighteen from Prague to the North. It was hereto∣fore under the King of Bohemia, but belongs now to the Elector of Saxony. Goro, Sagis, a Haven at one of the Mouths or Out∣lets of the Po. Gory, a principal Town or small City in Gurgi∣stan (or Georgia) in Asia, upon the River Kur, in a Plain betwixt two Mountains; built by a General of the Persian Army, about forty years ago, and de∣fended with a Fortress, in which a hundred natural Persians keep Garrison. It is already grown a rich and plentiful place. Goslar, Goslaria, an Imperial and Free-City, in the Lower Saxony, in Germany, within the Bounds of the Dukedom of Brunswick Wolfenbuttel, in the Fo∣rest of Sellerwalt. Built by Henry the Fowler, and fortified in 1201. The Dukes of Brunswick are its Protectors: it stands on the Confines of the Bishop∣rick of Hildisheim, five Miles from that City to the South East, and seven from Halberstad to the West, upon the River [Gosa] Gostar, which a little lower falls into the River Oakre, [Obater.] Gostynin, Gostinia, a small Town, and a Castel∣lany thereto belonging, in the Palatinate of Rava, in the Great Poland; two Miles from the Vistula, and Ploczko to the South; which has a Castle, tolerably strong. This small Place was made famous by the Imprisonment and Death of Susicius, Great Duke of Muscovy. Gotham, Egates, Aegates, a knot of small Islands in the Mediterranean Sea, over against the Western Point of Sicily, upon the Coast of Africa. Gothardsberg, or S. Gothard, Adula, Summae Alpes, a considerable Branch of the Swiss Alpes, be∣tween the Dutchy of Milan and Switzers, where the Pennine Alpes begin: it lies in part in the Canton of Ʋri, and in part in the Upper League of the Gri∣sons, between Altorff to the North, and the Town of Belinzona (once a Town of the Dutchy of Mi∣lan, now belonging to the Swiss), upon the River Tesino, to the South: the parts of this Mountain are Grispaltsberg, from whence springeth the first Branch of the Rhine; Vogselberg, called by the Italians, il monte Ʋccello, from whence comes the second Branch of the Rhine; Mont Furk, from whence the Rhosne and the Tesino; Mont Grimsel, the Mother of the Aar and Russ, which do both afterwards fall into the Rhine. It is dangerous to pass this Branch of the Alpes without Guides, being ordinarily covered with Snow. Gothen, Gotha, a small City in Thuringia in Ger∣many, built by the Goths; which is now under the Duke of Gotha, a Branch of the House of Saxony, whose Castle is Grimmestein. This place was here∣tofore very strong, but in the time of Ferdinand I. it was destroyed, and in later times rebuilt, and cal∣led Freidenstein. It stands three German Miles from Erford to the West, and four from Eysenach. § The Dukedom of Gotha, is a part of the Ʋpper Saxony, under the Dominion of its own Duke; who is a Branch of the Line of Weymar; and besides this, pos∣sessed of Altenburg in Misnia, Coburg, a part of Hennenberg, in Franconia; and Osterland in the Ʋpper Saxony. Gothebourg, or Gotembourg, a very strong City with an Harbour belonging to it, in the Province of Westrogothia, at the entrance of the Baltick Sea, three German Miles from Bahuys to the South, sixty six from Stockholm to the South-West, and seventeen from Skagen (the most Northern Point of Jutland) to the North-West. In this City Charles IX. King of Sweden died, in 1660. § There is another Town of the same Name in New York (formerly called New Sweden) in America; built by the Swedes, but taken from them by the Hollanders, and taken again from the Hollanders by the English. Gotland, Gothia, the South part of the Kingdom of Sweden, called by the Inhabitants Gutlandt; by the Swedes Gota; by the Germans Gotlandt. It lies between Sweden properly so called, Norway to the North, and the Baltick Sea; from Norway it is again divided by the vast Lake Wener, and the River that issueth out of it. This great space of Land is divided into three parts, or Provinces, West Gota, Ost Gota, and Sod Gota; each of which is again sub∣divided into lesser Provinces. In Ostrogothia, is Ost Gota, Smaland, Oeland, and an Island in the Baltiek Sea, called Gotland. In Sod (or South) Gota, which lies next Denmark, (being separated from it only by the Sound,) are Skone, Haland, and Bleking; which three belonged heretofore to the Danes; but in 1658. by the Treaty of Roschild, were yielded to the Swedes. In Westrogothia, are Daal and Wermeland: the prin∣cipal Cities in these Provinces, are, Calmar, Gotten∣bourg, Bahuys, and Landskroon. This was the Coun∣try of that Nation of the Goths, which contributed so very much to the ruin of the Western Roman Em∣pire, being associated in their Conquests by the Rugii, the Carini, the Sidrones, the Vandali, and others. They began to be taken notice of under Decius the Emperour, in the year of Christ 251. Theodosius conquered them after this, when they had but a little before ruined Valens his Predecessor. A∣laricus took Rome, and laid all Italy desolate in the Reign of Honorius, A. D. 409. after whom, Atul∣phus set up the Kingdom of Wisigoths, or Western Goths, in Aquitania and Narbon in France; which was conquered in 506. or rather removed into Spain; where it continued three hundred years, till Roderi∣cus, the last King of this Race, was overthrown and slain by the Moors and Saracens of Africa. Of all which I shall speak more largely in the proper places. This people had a Bishop, named Theophilus, as∣sisting at the General Council of Nice, under Con∣stantine the Great; and another, Ʋlphilas, who was a famous Arrian. § The Island of Gotland afore∣mentioned, in the Baltick Sea, is about twelve
Leagues long from North to South, and five broad from East to West, and nine Swedish Miles from the Isle of Oeland to the East; with the City Wisburg for its Capital. Gottingen, Dulgibiorum, Dulgumniorum, Muni∣tium, Juliphurdum, Gottinga, Gottengen, a City of the Lower Saxony, in the Dukedom of Brunswick, upon the River Leyne; five German Miles from Lim∣becke on the same River to the South, twelve from Paterborne to the East, and sixteen from Mansfelt to the West: the River upon which it stands, a little beneath Ferden, falls into the Weser, above Bremen to the East, six Miles. Gottorp, a Castle near Sleswick, in the Province of Jutland, in Denmark; which is the ordinary resi∣dence of the Dukes of Holstein, entituled Gottorp from hence, in distinction from the Dukes of Hol∣stein Regalis. Two Branches of the same Family from Christian III. King of Denmark. See Holstein. Gotz. See Emmaus. Goualiar, or Govaleor, a City and Province of the same Name, of the Empire of the Great Mogul in India, on this side the Ganges, to the East of Agra. The former is esteemed one of the most considerable places in the Indies; where the Emperour keeps his Treasure, and confines the Prisoners of State. Goude, Gauda, a Town and Port of Holland upon the Issel, which there receives the River Gou, which last gives Name to this place; in an advantageous situation upon the account of the Sluces; five Leagues from Leyden. It is said to have been built in the year 1272. and afterwards in 1420. to have been quite destroyed by fire. The Town-house is remarked for a good Building. Gouel, a River of the Kingdom of Bengale in the East-Indies, where Diamonds are found. Governo, Acroventum, a Town in the Dutchy of Milan, but under the Dominion of the Republick of Venice, upon the Po, where the River Menzo comes to join it, between Mantoua and Concordia: Memo∣rable for the Enterview at it of Pope Leo, and At∣tila King of the Hunns. Gournay, Gornacum, a Town in the Territory of Bray in Normandy, upon the River Epte, five Leagues from Gisors. § There is another of the same Name in the Isle of France, upon the Frontiers of Picardy and the River Aronde, betwixt Compiegne, Noyen and Clermont en Beauvais. Gozi, Thera, and Island near Candia. Gozo, Gaulos, and by the Inhabitants called Gau∣disch, is a small Island near Malta to the West, at the distance of four Miles only, mentioned by Stra∣bo and Pliny. Now belonging to the Knights of Maltha, who have fortified it with a Castle. § Also an Island in the Sea of Crete near Cape Crio, called Claudia, in the Acts of the Apostles, C. 27. 16. and otherwise by the Ancients, Claudus and Claudos. La Grace, or La Grasse, a City of Provence in France, which is a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Embrun, in the stead of Antipolis, now Antibe: it is seated upon an Hill; and is a fine well built City, with divers Churches and Religious Houses in it; three Leagues from Antibe to the West, seven from Nice to the same quarter, about twenty four from Embrun to the South, and the same from Sisteron to the South▪West. Hadr. Vales. in his Notitia Galliae saith, this City in 1285 belonged to the Bishoprick of Arles, and Antibe was then the Bishops See; but in 1322. this is named, as a Suffragan Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Embrun, in the Itinerary of Gregory XI. And that the See was removed hi∣ther upon the account of the daily Incursions of Py∣rats and Robbers, and upon the slaughter of one of the Bishops of Antibe. For (saith he) Antibe is a Sea-Port, but La Grace is a strong Castle, and more remote from the Sea. Which reason sheweth the weakness of the French Nation at Sea in those times. Gracias a Dios, a Town and Cape of the Pro∣vince of Honduras, in New Spain, in the Northern America; possessed by the Salvages, with the whole Country thereabouts, to the extent of fifty Leagues, living in a Republican way, without any Soveraign King or Prince over them; and when they go to War, making choice of one out of themselves to com∣mand for that present Juncture. The Spaniards ho∣nour them with the Title of los Indios Bravos, for their Gallantry, having been never conquered yet. Gradiska, Gradiscia, a principal Town of the Province of Sclavonia in the Lower Hungary, upon the Save, betwixt Possega and Zagrabia, towards the Borders of Croatia. See Sclavonia. Some will have it to be the true Servitium of the Ancients. § A Fortress likewise in Friuli, in the County of Goritia, upon the River Sisonzo, which belongs to the House of Austria. Grado, Gradus, a City and Island belonging to Friuli, on the Shoars of the Adriatick Sea, or Gulph of Venice; built by the Inhabitants of Aquileja; eight Miles from Venice to the East, and twelve from Aquileja to the South, under the Venetians. The Patriarchs of Aquileja long since removed from thence, and settled here; as they went afterwards from hence to Venice, about two hundred years since. E∣lias one of these Patriarchs in 602. celebrated a Coun∣cil in this place. Grafignana, Caferoniana, a County within the Apennine; the greatest part of which is under the Duke of Modena, the rest belongs to the Republick of Lucca. Graftschaft Mansfeld, Mansfeldiensis Comita∣tus, the County of Mansfield. The word Grafts∣chaft, in the German Town, signifying a County. Grafton, a Road-Town in Northamptonshire, in the Hundred of Cleley; adorned with a Park, and an an∣cient Seat of the Family de Wideville, Earls of Rivers. The Marriage of King Edward IV. with the Lady Grey, which was the first Marriage of any King of England with a Subject from the Conquest, recei∣ved its consummation here. From the year 1490. to Henry VIII. this Seat, bequeathed by Richard (the last of the Male Line of the Rivers), to Thomas Grey, Marquess of Dorset, continued in the Name of the Greys: and then in an exchange for Lands in Lei∣cestershire, became united to the Crown. It is well known for giving the Title of Duke to the late Hen∣ry Fitz Roy, created by King Charles II. his Father, Baron of Sudbury, Viscount Ipswich, and Earl of Euston in 1672. and Duke of Grafton five years after: who dyed of the Wounds he received at the Siege of Cork. Grambusia, Crambusia, a small Island on the Coast of Cilicia. Grampond, a Market and Borough-Town in the County of Cornwall, in the Hundred of Powder: which returns two Members of Parliament. Gran, Strigonium, a City of the Lower Hungary, seated on the South-West side of the River Danube, where the River Gran falls into the Danube. Its Castle is a very fine Pile, built upon the Banks of the Danube, upon a Rock, which is very steep. The City is of a Triangular form. It has two great Towers, one toward Thomasberg, and the other to∣wards the Danube, over against Barkan: between these Towers there is a Wall; which has small Flanks and Redoubts, and a Dike flanked with hewen Stone: at the foot of the Dike there runs a Terrasse, which has strong Pallisadoes, and four great Points, instead
of Ravelins: the other side towards the Danube has nothing but Walls and Pallisadoes; it is very steep on that side, and secured by the River. The Castle stands very high, but there are two Mountains from which it may be battered. This City is divided into two parts, the High and the Low Town, the last commanding the Danube: they are both very strong, and have good Walls. S. Thomas's Hill is also well fortified, because being very near the Town, it would otherwise have commanded it. There are in it ex∣cellent temperate Baths. This City was heretofore the Capital of Hungary, and has many magnificent Buildings in it, as S. Stephens Church, the Archbishops Palace, &c. The Country about it affords excellent Wines; there is plenty of hot Springs; so that the pleasantness of its situation, and the fertility of the Soil easily induced the ancient Kings of Hungary to settle here. The importance of this Place has brought upon it many bloody Sieges. John King of Hungary besieged it without any success, about 1529. Soly∣man the Magnificent took it in 1544. The Count of Mansfield retook it for the Arch-Duke Matthias, in 1595. It was lost again by the Cowardize of the Garrison in 1605. the Governour being accidentally killed. Just over against it stands Barkan, to which there is a Bridge of Boats over the Danube, which to∣gether with Barkan was burnt by the Christians in 1664. In 1683. there was under the Walls of this City, a sharp Engagement between the Turks and Germans; the latter prevailing, and taking the City of Gran also, October 23, after they▪ had beat the Turks from Vienna. July 30. 1685. the Turks again besieged this City, but were forced to retire, Aug. 16. with the loss of all their Cannon and Baggage. It stands six German Miles from Alba Regalis to the East; the same from Buda to the North, and Comora to the South; in a most fruitful and pleasant Plain. Called by the Inhabitants Stegran; by the Germans, Gran; by the Italians, Strigonia. S. Stephen King of Hungary was born here. This City is also an Arch∣bishops See; the Archbishop is perpetual Chancellor of the Kingdom of Hungary, and ought by his place to have the Honour of Crowning the King after he is chosen, being the Prima of that whole Kingdom. § The River Gran riseth in the Carpathian Hills; and passing by Liptsch, Nesol, Konisperg, and Soi∣dign, at Barkan, over against Gran, falls into the Danube. Long. 41. 25. Lat. 47. 45. Grana, a small River in Italy, which falls into the Po, against the Mouth of the Tanaro. Granada, Granata, Granatum, Illiberis, and Reg∣num Oranatense, a Kingdom and a City in Spain. The Kingdom of Granada lies in the South of Spain, upon the Mediterranean Sea, being heretofore the Eastern part of Hispania Boetica. Bounded on the East with the Kingdom of Murcia; on the North and West with that of Andalusia; and on the South with the Mediterranean. It is full of Mountains; the greatest of which is Apuaxara. The Soil was once very fruitful, but now desolate, and consequently in many parts barren. This Kingdom was one of the first the Moors possessed themselves of, and of the last they lost; the Spaniards not recovering it out of their Hands before 1492. Peter Son of Alphonsus, King of Castile, surprised one of their Kings and slew him in 1350. But Ferdinando in the first menti∣oned year was the Prince which God had appointed to put a final period to the Kingdom of the Moors in Spain, by the expulsion of Mahomet Boabdelin, the last King of Granada, Son of Muley Assin. As this raised Spain to that greatness our Fathers saw and feared; so the expulsion of the Posterity of these Moors by Philip II. in 1571. (occasioned by a Rebellion here and in. Andalusia, upon the score of the Inquisition) began the ruin of Spain; the loss of so vast a number of Subjects (many of which though banished as Mahometans, did profess Chri∣stianity in Africa amongst the Moors) having rendered it (together with the American Plantati∣ons) weak and unable to defend it self, or to main∣tain its very distant Dominions. The principal Ci∣ties of this Kingdom are, Granada, Guadix, Baza, Ronda, and Almeria. This Kingdom is twenty five Miles in breadth, twenty three in length, and sixty in circumference. § Granada, Nova Illiberis, the Ca∣pital City of the last mentioned Kingdom (and from whence it had its Name:) is a great and most de∣lightful City as any in Spain; the Air healthful; and it has plenty of excellent Springs; so that the Moors were of opinion, Paradise was at least in that part of the Heavens which influenced this Climate. This Ci∣ty was built out of the Ruins of Illiberis, an old Roman City, in an extended form upon several Hills, (two of which are higher than any of the rest) upon the River Del Oro [Darrum], the River Xe∣nil [Singilis] flowing also not far from it on the South. This City is divided into four parts; the first is Granada, in which is the Cathedral; the se∣cond, Alhambra, beautified with the Palace of the Moorish Kings, which is extreamly Magnificent, and has a delightful Prospect; the third, Alvesia; and the fourth, Antiquerula, which for the multitude of In∣habitants, and beauty of the Buildings, is not inferior to any of the other three: the whole is twelve Miles in compass, inhabited by many excellent Artificers, especially Silk-Weavers. It has also a Bishops See, an University opened by Ferdinando, and a Parliament or Chancellary. This City was built by the Moors, who were expelled out of it, after they had possessed it 778 years, in 1462. It has twelve Gates, and a thousand and thirty Towers. In it lie buried Fer∣dinando and Isabella, Philip I. and Joanna his Queen. On the East there is a Castle built on a Hill of hewen Stone. This City stands thirty six Leagues from Sevil to the East, nineteen from Cordova to the South-East, and twelve from Jan to the South. Long. 17. 10. Lat. 37. 30. New Granada, by the Spaniards styled Nuevo Reyno de Granada, a Kingdom in the South Ameri∣ca, in the large Country of Castile d' Or, whereof it is sometime reckoned as a Province; lying betwixt the Provinces of Popayan, Paria, and S. Martha; a hundred and thirty Leagues in length, in breadth where it is at the largest about thirty, and where the least about twenty. There are Mines of Gold and pre∣cious Stones to enrich it, with large Forests and ex∣cellent Pasturage. It lies so near the Equinoctial, that the difference betwixt Winter and Summer, the Day and Night, is scarce observable. Subject never∣theless to violent Hurricanes, Thunders and Light∣nings. The principal Provinces of it are Bogota and Tunia. The Capital City, S. Fe de Bogota: the other principal Cities and Places under the Spaniards, Trini∣dad, la Palma, Pamplna, Merida, Tunia, Mere∣quita, Vittoria, St. John de los Lanos, &c. It is watered by the great River de la Madalena, and in divers parts inhabited by numbers of Salvages. § There is a Town, Granada, in the Region of Nicaragua in the North America, towards the Gulph of Nicara∣gua and the North Sea; under the Government of Guadimala. § And an Island amongst the Caribbes; named so formerly by the Spaniards, but now under the Dominion of the French: Betwixt La Trinidad, Tabago, and Barbadoes. Grandmont or Geerstberg, Grardi Mons, a small Town in the Earldom of Flanders, upon a Hill, with the River Dender running by its foot: three Leagues from Oudenarde and five from Dendermonde. Built
about the year 1065. by Baldwin V. Earl of Flanders; and often taken by the French. Grane, Grana, an Island belonging to France, in the Bay of Aquitaine. Granea, Echedorus, a River of Macedonia, which falls into the Gulph of Thessalonica; said to have been drunk dry by the Army of Xerxes. It is now called Calico by some, by others Verataser; and runneth near the City of Thessalonica. Grange, a Seigniory in the Province of Berry in France, giving its name to an honorable Family. Granico, Granicus, a River of the Lesser Asia, placed by Strabo in the Lesser Mysia: it springeth from Mount Ida, and bending Northward, falls into the Propontis between Cyzicum to the East, and Lam∣poscus to the West; its Fountains are twenty Stadias from the Springs of Scamander [now Scamandro.] Also at this day called Granico by some, and by others Lazzara. Upon the Banks of it near Cyzicum, was the first Battel between Alexander the Great, and Darius King of the Persians, Anno Romae 420. i. e. 334 years before our Saviour, in which a hundred thousand Persians were slain. See Plutarch and Justin. Granson, Gransonium, a Village in Switzerland, near the Lake of Newenbourg, which has a small Di∣strict belonging to it, subject to the Cantons of Bearn, and Friburg: it lies at the equal distance of 3 Miles from Newenburg to the South, and Friburg to the West. Near this place, the Army of Charles the Har∣dy. Duke of Burgundy, consisting of 50000 Men, was defeated by 5000 Swiss in 1476. and his Camp taken with all his Baggage and Cannon. This unfortunate Prince had but a little before taken this Town from the Swiss; and coming too late to relieve it again, the Swiss upon this defeat of his Army, have ever since enjoyed it. Grantham, a Borough and Market Town of very good account in Lincolnshire, in Kesteven Division, upon the River Witham. The Capital of its Hundred, and priviledged with the right of sending two Bur∣gesses to the Parliament; vulgarly taken notice of for an extraordinary high (and therefore seemingly crooked) Steeple. Granville, Grandisvilla, Magna villa, a strong Sea-Port Town in Normandy, betwixt Coutances and Auranches, seven Leagues from Jarsey to the South, and five from S. Michael to the North: situated in part upon a Rock of difficult access, and part in the Plain. Graro, Masta, a Mountain of Aethiopia, upon the South-East of Egypt. Gras de Passon, Massalioticum, the Mouth or Haven at the Outlet of the River Rhosne, into the Mediterranean Sea. This French Word GRAS, (like the Latin, Gradus, from whence it is derived) being imployed by them, as the other was by the Romans, to signifie a Wharf, Key, or Stairs for the Shipping and Landing Merchandize; and consequently for an Harbour, Haven, or Sea-Port, or the Mouth of a Ri∣ver; it frequently occurs in the Names of such places. Grasse. See La Grace. Grateley, Gratelea. This place is mentioned in the Tomes of the Councils for a Council assembled at it in 928: But whether it be the Village of the name in the County of Southampton and the Hundred of Andover, or another in Barkshire in the Hundred of Reading, it is not clearly seen. Gratiosa, one of the Azores. Gratti, Crathis, a River of the hither Calabria, which ariseth out of the Apennine Hills; and running Northward, takes in Busentium near Cosenza; after∣wards also being swelled by the Cothyle, the Turbido, and some others of less note, it falls into the Gulph of Taranto at Thuris, an ancient but ruined City now called, La torre di Brodogneto. Gratz, or Gretz, Graiacum, Graecium, Graecium Savariae, a very strong City of Stiria, which is the Capital of that Province, and has a Princely Castle in it; the common Residence of the Arch Duke of Gratz, or Stiria, who is of the House of Austria; it stands upon the River Mure, thirteen German Miles from Vienna to the South, five from the Drave, nine from Judenburg to the East; and five Leagues below the confluence of the Mure with the Drave. Graudentz, or Grudzanez, Graudentium, Gru∣dentum, a sweet, well fortified Town, in the Prussia Polonica; or that part, which belongs to the Kingdom of Poland; seated upon the Confluence of the Osse and Vistula; fifteen Polish Miles above Dantzick to the South, and thirty five from Warshaw to the North. It has a Castle, and is under the Poles. Grave, Gravia, Carvo, a strong Town in Bra∣bant, upon the Maes, under the Ʋnited Provinces. Taken by the French in 1672. and after a Siege of three Months left in 1674. It is the Capital of a small District called Kuiclandt by the Dutch; and stands two Leagues from Nimeguen to the South, and four from Bosle-Du to the East, upon the Frontiers of Gelderland. Graveling, Gravelines, Gravelingen, Gravelina, Gravelinga, a strong Sea-Port on the Coast of Flan∣ders, at the Mouth of the River Aa; which ariseth in the County of Bologne; and watering Renty and S. Omar, falls here into the British Sea; three Miles from Calis to the North, and the same from Dunkirk to the South. It was taken by the French in 1644, and again in 1658: ever since which time it has been in their hands. The Castle was first built in 1528. by the Order of the Emperor Charles V. Gravesend, a noted Market Town in the County of Kent, in Aylesford Lath; seated upon a rising Hill, on the banks of the Thames, over against Tilbury Fort in Essex. Gravina, a City in Puglia, in the Kingdom of Naples; which is a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Acerenza; and has the honour to give the Title of a Duke to the Family of Ʋrsina. It stands at the foot of the Apennine, in the Borders of the Basili∣cate; nine Miles from Matera to the North, twenty four from Cirenza to the East, and thirty four from Bari to the West. Gray, Graeum, Graium, Greium, a City in the County of Burgundy, or the Franche Comte; small, but well Peopled; seated on an Hill, upon the River Saone [Arar] which watering Lion, falls beneath it into the Rhosne; in the Borders of the Dukedom of Burgundy, nine Miles from Dijon to the East, and six from Dole to the North: It was well fortified, and had heretofore a strong Castle; but being taken by the French in 1668. and retaken in 1674, the French dismantled it, after which by the Treaty of Nime∣guen, it was in 1678. resigned to them, and they still have it. Grays-Thurrock, a Market Town in the County of Essex, in the Hundred of Chafford. Greece, Graecia, Hellas, a very large Country in Europe; which being taken in its greatest extent, was bounded on the East by the Propontis, and the Aegean Sea, or Archipelago; on the South by the Mediter∣ranean Sea; on the West by the Ionian Sea, or the Gulph of Venice; and on the North by Bulgaria, Servia, and Illyricum: Mount Haemus running be∣tween Greece and these Countries, and ending at the Euxine Sea, which there begins to be a part of its Northern Border. So that it is a kind of Peninsula, surrounded on three sides by the Sea; and only united
to the rest of Europe by the fourth: now almost in∣tirely in the Hands of the Turks, who by the ruine of the Grecian Empire have possessed themselves of this vast, fruitful, populous, and once most Learned and Civil Country; and by their Tyranny, Barbarity, and ill Government, have in about two hundred years almost intirely ruined what was the Work of two thousand to effect. It is called Greece by the English, Das Griechenland by the Germans, and Romelia by the Turks: it contains Thrace, (now Romania,) Macedonia, Achaia, (now Livadia,) the Morea, (Peloponnesus) and the greatest part of the Islands in the Archipelago; Constantinople being the head of this vast Country. This People (saith Cicero) which hath flourished in Fame, Glory, Learning, Arts, Empire, and Military Exercises, possesseth but a small part of Europe: but having by their Ams prevailed over the Asiaticks, they surrounded the Shoars of that Country, with their Cities and Colo∣nies. He might have added, they did the like by Italy, and reduced almost all that which is now the Kingdom of Naples, under their Power, (then called Magna Graecia,) and the best part of Sicily too; and running down beyond Italy, Marseilles in Pro∣vence was one of their Colonies. In Asia the Less they possessed Mysia, Phrygia, Aeolia, Ionia, Doris, Lydia, and Caria; to which Countries they gave the name of Graecia Asiatica. They possessed also most of the Islands of the Mediterranean Sea; and this be∣fore the Rise of the Macedonian Empire, which put the best part of Asia and Egypt into their Hands: nor were they ever Conquered by any Foreign Power (though Xerxes attempted it with an Army of three hundred thousand men), till the Romans subdued them. Constantine the Great fixing the Seat of the Empire amongst them at Constantinople, they regain∣ed their Sovereignty again; and kept it, when Rome and all the Western Empire fell into the Hands of the Barbarous Nations. But at last Constantinople being taken by Mahomet II. in 1453▪ they fell under the most deplorable slavery that is possible to be con∣ceived. Athens and Lacedaemon were two of their great Republicks, Rivals of each others glory. Ma∣cedonia, Epirus, Argos, and Thessalia, had the ho∣nour to be Kingdoms. Corinth▪ Thebes, Megalopo∣lis, Megara, Sicyan, Mycenae, &c. were other of their principal Cities. The Romans gloried to derive a bo∣dy of their Laws from the Governments of Greece, and to learn the Sciences from the Mouths and Wri∣tings of its Philosopers▪ Historians, and Poets. This was also the Country of those Primitive Grand Doctors of Christianity, Origen, Dionysius Areopag. Clemens Alexandr Eusebius, Athanasius, Nazianzen, Basil, Chrysostome, &c. from whom the modern Greek Church pretends to receive those Privileges, Customs, Traditions, Ceremonies, Doctrines and Precepts, which no interest of the Roman See has been able in any measure to alter amongst them to this day. Greenwich, a delicate Village, upon the Thames in Kent; famous of old times for the Murther of Ealpheg, Archbishop of Canterbury, in 1012. But more for a Royal Palace, began by Humry Duke of Gloucester, enlarged by Henry VII. to which his Son Henry VIII▪ added a Castle. This Palace being fallen into ruine, K. Charles 2. began the raising of it again into a noble Structure, but dyed before he had fi∣nished it: so that it is now made a Magazine for Pow∣der. There is a Royal. House, call'd Queen Eliza∣beths. Palace, and a Park about it▪ adjoyning to Green∣wich; who being born here in 1533. hath given it a Title to the utmost love and esteem of all English∣men. And hard by it is Black-Heath, where several Battels have been fought in the Reigns of Richard II. Henry VI. and Henry VII. Grenade, the chief Town of the County of Gaure, in the Government of Guienne in France, upon the Garonne, three Leagues from Tholouse. It was of great note in the thirteenth Century, during the Wars of the Albigeois. Grenoble, Gratianopolis, Acusio, Accusium, Cu∣laro, a City of Dauphine in France, which belonged to the Allobroges; and a Bishops See▪ under the Arch∣bishop of Vienne, and the Capital of the Dauphinate: it stands on the North side of the Isere, where it takes in the Drac, (Dr), from the South; at the foot of an Hill, upon a fruitful Plain; thirteen Leagues from Vienne to the East, and sixteen from Lion to the South-East. This City has its name of Gratia∣nopolis and Grenoble from Gratianus the Emperor, who rebuilt and adorned it. An ancient Inscription here extant saith, Dioclesian and Maximilian repair∣ed two of its Gates, and gave them new names. This City is now also the Seat of the Parliament of this Province. The Bishops take the Title of Princes of Grenoble. Gresivandan, a Valley of Dauphine, lying about the City, and sometimes therefore called by the name of the Province of Grenoble, supposed to have been the Country of the Tricorii of the Antients. It has had particular Counts of its own, who were the Lords of it in former times. Griechisch Weissenburgh. See Belgrade. Grignan, a Town in Provence, towards S. Paul de trois Chasteaux and Montelimar, two or three Leagues from the Rhosne: It has a Collegiate Church, founded in 1512, and a noble Castle; with the Title of an Earldom, since the year 1550: before which it was a Barony. Grimsby Magna, a Market Town in Lincoln∣shire, in the division of Lindsey and the Hundred of Bradley, near the Fall of the Humber into the Oce∣an, in a flat and marshy ground. It has a sine large Church, and heretofore a Castle to secure its Haven, at which time it enjoyed a rich trade. But as the former is decay'd, so the other is almost choak'd up. It is honoured with the Privilege of returning two Members to the House of Commons. East-Grinstead, or Greenstead, a Market Town in the County of Sussex, in Pevensey Rape, which has the honour of electing two Members of Parliament. The Assizes are sometimes kept at it. It is graced with a fair Church, and stands towards the Confines of Surrey. Gripswald, Viritium, Gripiswaldia, a strong City in Pomerania in Germany, half a German Mile from the Baltick Sea, with a very convenient Haven; between Stralsundt to the North, and Wolgast to the East, over against the Isle of Rugen. Heretofore an Imperial and Free City, but afterwards exempted. In 1456. Wartislaus, the ninth Duke of Pomerania, founded here an University. After a very long Siege in 1631. it was taken by the Swedes: in 1678. it was retaken from them by the Duke of Brandenburgh in a few days; but the year following, restored to that Crown by the Treaty of S. German. The Grisons, Canini, Rhaeti, Grisones▪ are a knot of Commonwealths, between the Alpes, the Fountains of the Rhine, and the Inn; [Oenus,] who are more properly called the Alpine Rhaetians, be∣cause they live within the Alpes: on the North and West, they border upon the Swisse and Schwaben∣land; on the East upon Tyrol; on the South upon the State of Venice, and the Dukedom of Milan. The whole Country is Mountainous, and generally barren. This People about 1471. united into one body by a League; and in 1491. they again fixed the former Union, and strengthned it by a perpetual League with the Switzers. These are divided into three parts▪
First, the Grisons properly so called, which the Ger∣mans call Oberpundt, or the Upper League. The Second is the League of the House of God, or Got∣tespundt. And the Third is the League of the Ten Villages, Zehen Gerichtenpundt. Their chief Ci∣ties are Bormio, Chiavenna, Chur, or Choire, Mey∣enfeld, Morbegno and Sondrio. The Rhine begins first to carry a Boat here. Grodno, Grodna, a City of Poland in Lithua∣nia, in the Palatinate of Troki, partly upon an Hill, partly in a Valley; which has a Bridge over the River Niemen, upon which it stands; twenty Ger∣man Miles from Vilna to the South-West, and sixty from Margenburgh to the East. It was built by King Stephen about 1585. In 1655. the Mosco∣vites took, and wretchedly harrassed it. Stephen Ba∣torius, the Founder of it, died here in 1586. The Diets of Poland are often held in this City, and it gives the Title of a Dukedom. Groeningen, Groeninga, one of the Cities belong∣ing to the Ʋnited Provinces; great, populous, rich, very strong, and the Capital of a Province of the same name; having been heretofore the Capital of Friesland. It stands upon the small River Hooren∣ster, where it receives the Damster; honored with a Bishops See, by Pope Paul IV. and with an University, opened here A. D. 1615. It has a strong Castle, which was in vain attacked by the Bishop of Munster in 1672. It stands three French Leagues from Dam to the West, towards Leuwaerden, from which it stands eight Miles to the East. Heretofore a Free Imperial City, but now exempted; and is one of the States united in the Dutch League. § Het Groen∣ingerlandt, the Province belonging to this City, was heretofore a part of Friesland. Its present bounds on the North, are the German Ocean, and the overflown Shallows; on the West Friesland, divided from it by the River Lavica; on the South Overyssel; and on the East East-Friesland, from which it is divided by the vast Lake called Dollert. The principal City is Groeningen. It was of old subject to the Bishop of Ʋtretcht, from whom the City revolted, and put it self under the Duke of Guelderland in 1515. It sub∣mitted also to Charles V. in 1536. and under that Family continued till 1594. when it was taken by the Forces of the Ʋnited Provinces, from the Spa∣niards. This Province enjoys the last Voice in the Assemblies of the States General. Groen-Land, or Green-Land, Gronia, called by the French Terreverte; by the Dutch, Spitsbergen; is a considerable part of the Artick Continent, which lies more North than Island. First discovered by Ericus Rufus, an Islander, in 982. After this it was searched, and inhabited towards the Shoars by the Danes and Norwegians. In 1256. Magnus King of Norway sent a Royal Navy to reduce the Inhabitants, who had refused to pay him Tribute. But from 1379 all Navigation thither was intermitted, and the Inha∣bitants heard of no more. The more Southern parts were again discovered about the end of the last Cen∣tury, by Martin Forbisher an Englishman, George Monk a Dane, and others; yet there can very little be said of it remarkable, but its Harbours, frequent∣ed by the Europeans for Fishing. By several advances in succeeding times, the Land is discovered to deg. 78. of Latitude; whether it be an Island, or a part of the American, or any other Continent, is not known. Hofman saith, the Inhabitants live on Fish and Fowl; whereas most (I might perhaps say all) that have sailed thither, pretend to have found no o∣ther Inhabitants than Wolves, Bears, Foxes, and Deer. Its mo Southern Cape is in deg. 66. of Latitude. It has perpetual day during our Summer, and Night du∣ring our Winter, and three months longer; for their Summer lasts only three months and fourteen days. Grol, Grolle or Groenlo, Grola, is a City belong∣ing to the Ʋnited Provinces in Guelderland, in the District of Zutphen; little, but well fortified; and seated upon the River Slinke. Taken from the Dutch by the Marquess of Spinola in 1605. Again by the Dutch in 1617. By the French in 1672. and again deserted in 1674 This City is in the borders of West∣phalia, and of the Bishoprick of Munster, four Leagues from Zutphen to the East. There is a Tract writ∣ten by Grotius, entituled, Obsidio Grollae. Groneburgh. See Tavasthus. Grosseto, Grossetum, Rosetum, a small City in the State of Siena in Italy, upon the Sea Shoar, which is a Bishops See under the Archbishop of Siena, and has a Castle that is very strong. It stands about three Miles from the River Ombrone to the North-West, near the Lake of Prilis, (now di Castiglione, or di Buriano,) and four from Siena South. This City sprung up out of the ruins of Rusellae, which stood about two Miles from it. Grosso, Ticarius, a River of Corsica, on the South side of the Island. Groswerder, an Island of Prussia, at the Mouth of the Vistula. Grosverner, or le Grand Brenner, that part of the Alpes next Trent. Grotkaw, Grotkavia, a small City of Bohemia in Silesia, the Capital of a Dukedom of the same Name; under the Dominion of the Bishop of Breslaw; from which it is distant seven Miles to the South, and thir∣teen from Prague to the East. The Dukedom of Grotkaw, is a part of the Ʋpper Silesia in Bohemia, which has belonged to the Bishoprick of Breslaw, from the times of Priteslaus Pogarellus, Bishop of that Dio∣cese; who bought it of Bolslaus, Duke of Lignitz, and Brieg, and annexed it for ever to this See. It lies between the Dukedom of Oppelen to the East, Monsterberg to the West, Brieg to the North, and Niessa to the South. Grotkaw, and Niessa, are the principal places in it. La Grotta de Cani, a pestilential Cavern, near the Lake Agnano in Italy, four Leagues from Naples, towards Pozzuoli: call'd likewise the Cavern of Cha∣ron, from the mortal malignity of the Air and Vapours within it. In 1628. Kircher says, he tryed the experi∣ment of letting down a dog into it, which thereupon became as perfectly dead: but taken up, and plunged in the Lake Agnano, he revived again. (to 1. Mund. Subter.) And from this sort of quality, it comes to bear the name of de Cani. La Grotta di Napoli, Crypta Neapolitana, a Read▪cut a-cross the foot of the Mountain Posilipo, twelve foot deep and broad, and half a League long, in the way betwixt Naples and Pozzuoli in Italy, for the convenience of a shorter Passage from the one to the other. It was the work of Lucullus, who em∣poly'd a hundred thousand men about it, and finished it in fifteen days. Grubenhagen, a Castle and Territory in the Low∣er Saxony, in the Dukedom of Brunswick, towards the Mountains; not far from the River Leina; al∣most five Miles from Gottingen to the North, and eight from Goslar to the South-West, twenty seven from Bremen to the South-East. This is the Capi∣tal of a Dukedom, the only City in which is Eimberke, two Miles North of this Castle, which belongs to the Duke of Brunswick Hannover. Gruninghen, a Town in the Principality of Hal∣berstad in the Lower Saxony. Guadajox, Salsum, a River of Andalusia, which at first was called Biboras, or Viboras; but taking in the two small Rivolets, of Tovazo, and Salado, it has the name of Guadajox; and falls into the
Guadalquivir, between Sevil and Cordova. Guadalajara, Guadalaxara, a City in New Spain, which is the Capital of New Gallicia, and is very con∣siderable; being seated upon the River Baranja, and built in 1531, by the Spaniards, under whom it is. This is a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Mexi∣co ever since 1570, (when the See was translated from Compostella hither.) and the Seat of the Parliament, or Courts of Justice, of this Province. It is forty Leagues distant from the South Sea, and eighty from Mexico to the West: standing in a well watered and fruitful Plain. The Province of New Gallicia, cal∣led of old Xalisco, hath the name given it sometimes of Guadalajara from this City. § Guadalajara, a Town in New Castile, the Capital of Algar, upon the River Henares, four Leagues from Henares, [Com∣plutum] to the East, and nine from Madrid: it has been called Carraca. Guadalaviar, Durias, Turia, a River in Valen∣tia in Spain: it ariseth in Arragon, in the Confines of New Castile, near the Head of [Tagus] Tajo; and running Eastward watereth Albarazin, and Tervel; then turning South, it entereth the Kingdom of Va∣lentia; and by the Capital City of it falls into the Bay of Valentia, over against Majorca. Guadalentin, Chrysius, Terebs, a River of Spain; which ariseth in Granada, near Guadix; and watering Baeza, Lorca, and Almacaren, falls into the Medi∣terranean Sea, seven Miles South of Carthagena, in the Kingdom of Murcia. Guadalete, Lethes, a River of Andalusia, which watereth Zahara, Villa Martin, Bornbos, Arcos, and Xeres; and ends in the Bay of Cadiz. Guadaloupe, or Guardeloupe, Aqua Lupiae, an Island in America, which is one of the greatest of the Antilles; and has been in the hands of the French ever since 1627. There are in it many Plantations, or Colonies, and Castles; the Island being sixty Miles in compass, very fruitful in Sugars, and well watered and peopled. It lies in Long. 315. North Lat. 19. 10. to the North-West of Barbadoes, betwixt Dominico and Marigalante. And is the third Island from the Northward of the Caribbes or Antilles. Guadalquivir, Baetis, Tartessus, one of the great∣est Rivers in Spain; called Baetis by Mela; Tartes∣sus by Strabo. And now Guadalquivir, by an Ara∣bick Word, which signifies the great River or Water. It ariseth from Mount Carzorla, in the Forest of Se∣gura in New Castile, in the Confines of Granada and Murcia; six Leagues from Baeza to the North; and being augmented with the River Borosa, it runneth Westward through Andalusia; and a little above An∣dujar, takes in from the North Guadalimar; and be∣neath it, Frio from the South; Guadiel and Herum∣blar from the North; and passing Admuz, with the addition of Arjona and Porcuna, it entereth Cordova; then taking in Cazer, and some other small Rivers, it passeth to Palma; where it receives the Xenil [Sin∣gylis]; and so hasteth to Sevil, Hispalis; beneath which it takes in the Guadimar; and bending Southward, entereth the Ocean, five Leagues beneath Sevil. The Mouth of it is called la Maresma. Heretofore it had another Mouth, but that lying more Southward, is long since stopped up. Beneath Sevil it makes three or four small Islands, not worth any further notice. Guadalquivireio, Saduca, a River of Granada, which falls into the Mediterranean Sea at Malaga. Guadaxenil, more commonly called Xenil. See Guadalquivir, and Xenil. Guadel, a Town and Port upon the Gulph of Or∣mus, in the Province of Kherman in Persia. Guadiana, Anas, a River in Spain, which is one of the greatest; its present Name is compounded of the Arabick Word Guadi, which signifies a River; and Anas, its ancient Name. It ariseth in New Ca∣stile, out of the Fens or Marshes, called Las Lagunas de Guadiana; not above two Miles above the Town, Villa Nueva de los Infantes: being dismissed from these Marshes, and improved by the Boydera, it bu∣ries it self for a League under the Earth; and near Villaharta breaks out again, five Leagues beneath Ca∣latrava; declining Westward, (tho with great wind∣ing) and taking in Bullaque, Estena, Guadaranque; and out of Estremadura, Guadalupo, and Zuja; it watereth Merida; then Badajox, or Badajos, [Pax Augusta,] where it entereth Portugal; and declining to the South, visits Olivenca; and having parted Al∣garvia to the North, from Andalusia on the South, it entereth the Ocean at Ayamente; seventeen Spanish Miles West of Guadalquivir. This River is at present said not to bury it self in the Earth, as is reported here∣tofore, by all the Spaniards who have mentioned it. Baudrand. Guadiaro, Chrysius, Barbesola. See Guadelentin. Others say it is Guadalajora, between Estropona to the North-East, and Castel de la Lucena to the West, just by the Eastern Mouth of the Streights of Gi∣braltar. Guadilbarbar, Rubricacus, a River of the King∣dom of Tunis, in Africa; called Jadog, or Ladog by others: It falls into the Mediterranean Sea. Guadix, Guadicium, Acci, a City in the Kingdom of Granada, which is a Bishops See, under the Arch∣bishop of Sevil. Seated at the Foot of a Mountain, by the River Fardes, or Guadalentia, and the Foun∣tains of Segura; ten Leagues from Jaen to the South-East, nine from Granada to the North-East, and se∣venteen from Almeria to the North. This City was taken from the Moors in 1489, and is now in a de∣clining State, tho once a celebrated Roman Colony. Guaira, a Province of Paraguay, in South Ame∣rica, under the Spaniards; between the South part of Brasil to the East, Parana to the South, and Paraguay Propria to the West; the chief City had heretofore the same Name, but is now ruined. Gualata, a Kingdom of Africa in Nigritia, to∣wards the Atlantick Ocean; it has the Desarts of Zan∣haga on the North, on the East the Kingdom of Tom∣butum, and on the South that of Genchoa. The King of Tombut conquered this Country in 1526; and afterwards return'd it to its own Prince, upon Conditions of his paying Tribute to Tombut. It is but a barren place, affording little Provision, no Bar∣ley, Rice, or Hirse, and plenty only of Dates. The principal City is of the same name: Whither the Bar∣bary Merchants used formerly to traffick for Brass, Silver and Gold: but now the Commerce has passed thence to Gaoga and Tombut. The other chief City in it is Hoden. Gualentzamore, the Caspian Sea. Gualgas, Ganges. Gualida or Beni-Gualida, a rich and fruitful Mountain in the Province of Errif, in the Kingdom of Fez in Africa; inhabited by sixty good Villages, out of which they can draw six thousand effective men, who with the great difficulty of the Avenues are a considerable defence against a Conquest. They pay a small Tribute for the liberty of going to Fez; but otherwise are exempted from Taxes; and by a Privi∣lege confirm'd to them by the Kings of Fez, at eve∣ry new Succession, their Country is an inviolable Asy∣lum for Criminals that retire to it. Guamanga, otherwise called S. Juan de la Vitto∣ria, a City in Peru, which is a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Lima, and the Capital of a Province; in a good Air, a fruitful Soil, (full of Mines of divers Metals) the Seat of a Governour, adorn'd with ma∣ny Convents and Churches well built, sixty Leagues
from Lima. The Spaniards reckon about thirty thousand persons in the Province, that pay Taxes. Guanahani, or St. Salvador, an Island of North America; one of the Lucayes, between Florida and Hispaniola; which has a safe and a large Haven; and was the first spot of American Ground which Colum∣bus discovered on Thursday, October 11. 1492. By him called S. Salvador, because his finding it that day saved his Life; the Spaniards having otherwise resol∣ved to have slain him. In the midst of it there is a Lake, five Leagues in circuit. The Soil is good Pa∣sturage; and it was heretofore well peopled with the Natives, before the Spaniards murdered a great part of them, and carried away the rest to the Terra firma to work in the Mines of Gold. Guancabelica, otherwise known by the Name of El Assiento de Oropesa, are the famous Quick-Sil∣ver Mines in Peru; near the City Oropesa, and nine or ten Leagues from S. Juan de la Vittoria. Out of which they yearly extract about a Million of Pounds in weight of the Metal; and the Sum of forty thousand Ducats thence accrues, besides other Emoluments, to the Treasures of the King of Spain. The Spaniards first discovered them in 1566. Guanser, Zalacus, a Mountain of Mauritania Cae∣sarienfis, now the Kingdom of Algier in Barbary. Guarda, Guardia, a City of Portugal, in the Pro∣vince of Beira, which is a Bishop's See under the Arch∣bishop of Lisbon; between Cauria, Coria, and Li∣mago, fourteen Miles from either, eleven from Viseu. The See was translated hither from the Igadita of the Ancients, which had been a Suffragan to the Arch∣bishop of Braga. Guardau, and Guardafuni, Aromata, a City and Promontory in Aethopia, at the Entrance of the Red-Sea; where the most Eastern Part of the Kingdom of Adel now is; over against Arabia Foelix, and the Isle of Zocotora. This is the most Eastern Cape of all the Continent of Africa. Guardia, Siga, a Town in the Kingdom of Algier. Guardia, Sela, a River on the West of the Morea, now Sellei, over against Zant. Guardia Alferes or Aifenes, Guardia Alferia, an Episcopal City in the County of Molise, in the Kingdom of Naples. The See is a Suffragan to the Archbishop of Benevento. Guardiano, Lotoa, Letoia, an Island in the Ionian Sea, on the South of Candia or Crete. Guargala, a Kingdom in Biledulgerida, between Gademessa to the East, and Tegortina to the West, towards the Mountains of Zahara. Guascogna. See Gascoigne. Guastalla, Guardastallum, Vastalla, Guastalla, a Town upon the Po in Lombardy, in the States of the Duke of Mantoua; at which Pope Paschal II. cele∣brated a Council in 1106. It has the Honor to give the Title of a Duke. Guatimala, a large Government and Province in New Spain. The principal City of which (being of the same Name, S. Jago de Guatimala,) is a Bishop's See under the Archbishop of Mexico. The feat of the Parliament; and in 1628. by Philip IV. made an U∣niversity. This City was built in 1524. in a Valley; near the River Matataia, not far from a burning Mountain, from whence there issued such a Deluge of Fire, Water, and Stones in 1541. as overturned a great part of the Houses in it; thirteen Spanish Leagues from the South Sea, three hundred from Mexico to the South-East. The Government of Guatimala reaches from the Province of Chiapa, as far as to the Streights of Panama; including in that extent the Provinces of Vera-Paz, Soconusco, Guatimala pro∣perly so called (of which S. Jago aforesaid is the Ca∣pital), Honduras, Nicaragua, Costa ricca, and Vera∣gua. In the Indian Language it is Quatuemallac. There is plenty of Corn, Cotton, Maze, and good Pastourage; of Hills, Forrests, and Rivers; but the Air not com∣mended for Healthfulness; and they make Salt with great Difficulty. Guattaro, Battarus, a River in the Isle of Corsica. Guaxaca, a Province in New Spain, in the North America, the Capital whereof is Antequera. It lies betwixt the two North and South Seas, with the Pro∣vinces of Tlascala to the West, and Chiapa to the East; enjoying a healthy Climate, and yielding plenty of Corn, Maze, Cacao, Cochineal, Silk, Fruits, with Mines of Gold, &c. There are about three hundred and fifty Borough Town, and as many Villages, an hundred and sixty Convents, and divers Ecclesiastical Colleges established in it. Ferdinand Cortez made the Conquest of it; to whom the Valley of Guaxaca gave the Title of Marquiss del Valle. Guayaquil, a Sea-Port Town in the North of Peru, upon the Pacifick Ocean, or South Sea; which has a large Haven, and lies over against the Isle of Puna; the River that washeth it is called by the same Name. Gubel-Haman, a Sultany or petty Kingdom in A∣rabia Foelix, towards the Arabian Sea, near Fartach; with a City of the same Name. Guben, a strong Town, well fortified, in the Lower Lusatia in Germany, upon the River Neisse. It is one of the principal Places in the Province of Lusatia. Guber, a Kingdom in Nigritia, in Africa, be∣tween Guiana to the South, the River Niger to the North, and the Lake of Guardia to the East; with a City, its Capital, of the same Name. It is a well peopled Country, and the Kings of it are absolute. Gubio, or Gubbio, Eugubium, a small City in the State of the Church, in the Dukedom of Ʋrbino, which is a Bishop's See under the Archbishop of Ʋrbi∣no, but exempt from his Jurisdiction. It stands at the Foot of the Apennine, near the Fountains of the River Chiasus, in the Confines of the Marquisate of Anconitana; twenty six Miles from Ʋrbino to the South, and sixty from Ancona to the West; called Eugubio in the later Maps. Gucheu, a great City and Territory in the Province of Quangsi in China, extending their Jurisdiction over nine other Cities. It is one of the Keys of the Pro∣vince, and being seated at the Confluence of divers Ri∣vers with the Takiang, has made it self a famous Place for Commerce. Out of the Mountains in this Terri∣tory they draw Vermiglion. Gueguere. See Meroi. Gueiheoi, one of the principal Cities of the Pro∣vince of Honan, in the North-East of the Kingdom of China. Guelderland. See Gelderlandt. Guenga, a River in India, within Ganges, which ariseth in the Kingdom of Decam, towards Mount Gata; and flowing through the Kingdom of Orixia, disburthens it self into the Bay of Bengala. It is cal∣led by the Portuguese, Ganga. Guerande, a City of Brétagne in France, in the Coun∣ty of Nantes, towards the Shoars of the Bay of Aqui∣tain, between the Mouth of the Loyre and Ʋdaine; where are great Works▪ for the making Salt. It stands fourteen Miles from Nantes to the West; and was once called Aula Quiriaca. Guerba, a River of Spain. Gueret, Gueretum, a City of France, in la Marche the Ʋpper (whereof it is the Capital), upon the River Cruse; twelve Leagues from Limoges to the East, and twenty two from Bourbon to the West; others write it Garactum.
Gueser, Seleucia, the same with Bagdat. Guetaria Menosea, a Town in Guipuscoa. Gueta Opta, a City in New Castile, seated in a Plain, twenty Miles from Toledo. Guharan. See Oran, which is the same. Guiana. Guiania, a large Country in South Ame∣rica, sometimes written Guaiana; it is bounded on the East and North by the Atlantick Ocean, or the North Sea; on the West by the Terra Firma, on the South by Brasil and the Lake of Parimao. This Country has, for thirty Years last past, been inhabited by the English, Dutch, and French. The two Na∣tions of the Indians, called Caribes and Galibes, (be∣sides others) possess nevertheless the far greatest part of it; who used to War formerly with Arms all made of Gold, of which this Country afforded such abun∣dance, that the Spaniards at the first gave it the name of El Dorado. Guie. Guetta, Gutta, a River in Burgundy. Guienne Aquitania, (in Pliny Aremorica.) a Pro∣vince, and Dukedom in France; bounded on the North with Xaintoigne, from which it is parted by the River Dordonne; on the South with Gascoigne; on the East with Perigort, and on the West with the A∣quitanick Ocean, from the Pyrenean. Hills to the Ri∣ver of Bourdeaux. This Country is fruitful in Corn and Wine; the first of which is usually transported into Spain, and the latter into the Northern Countries. The People are of a different both Stature and Hu∣mour from the rest of France; which is not much to be wondered at, considering the English Nation for three hundred years together, were possess'd of this Coun∣try See Gascoigne The principal Rivers of it are the Garonne and the Dordonne, which meet at Re∣traicte, and in one Channel fall into the Ocean. The chief Cities are Bourdeaux, Baionne, and Dax or D'Acqs. Guienne is thought to be but a Corruption of Aquitania, which was the Roman Name for it, (then) enlarged to a sar greater Extent. Guilan, or Guilao, the Hyrcanian Sea. Guilford. the Capital Town of the County of Sur∣rey, in the Hundred of Woking, which returns two Members to the House of Commons. It is pleasantly si∣tuated upon the River Wey, containing three Parishes; well frequented, accommodated, and handsom. The Saxon Kings had a Royal Mansion here in whose time it was a Place of greater Extent. The Ruins of a large old Castle, near the River, remain yet to be seen. In the year 1660. King Charles II created Eli∣zabeth Viscountess of Kinelmalky in Ireland, Coun∣tess of this Place for her Life. In 1674. the Title of Earl of Guilford, was granted by the same King, to John Maitland, the late Duke of Lautherdale in Scotland. After whom, the late Lord Francis North received the Title of Baron Guilford, from the same King also. S. Guillain, Gislenopolis, a Town in Hainault, which has a Monastery belonging to it: Taken by the French in 1654. and retaken by the Spaniards in 1656. Guimaranes, Catraleucos, Vimananum, Egita, Araduca, once a City, and frequently mentioned as such; now a small Village in Entre Douero è Minho in Portugal; three Leagues from Braga towards the East. This was the Place where S. Da∣masus, one of the ancient Popes, was born. Guinee, Guinea, a very great Country on the We∣stern Shoars of Africa, which by the Portuguese (the first Discoverers of it) is divided into two Parts, the Upper and the Lower. The Upper Guinee is boun∣ded with Nigritia on the North, the Atlantick O∣cean on the South, and has the Kingdom of Congo on the East, and the Mountains of Leon on the West. It is a very fruitful Country, in Gold, Ivory, Sugar, Cotton, Rice, &c. of a great Extent from East to West, and much frequented by the European Ships. It is divided into three Parts; Guinee, properly so called, which lies in the middle; Malgueta, which lies to the West; and the Kingdom of Beni, which lies to the East. § Guinee, properly so called, is a very large Country in Africa, upon the Shoars of the Ocean; between Malegueta to the West (from which it is separated by the Cape of Palmes) and the Kingdom of Beni to the East, from which it is divi∣ded by the River de la Volta. It is divided into la Co∣ste d'or, (which lies East between the Rivers Asien and la Volta.) and la Coste des Dents, which lies West between the Cape of Palmes and the River Asien, by which it is parted from the former. On the Coste d'or are many Castles belonging to the English, Swedes, Danes, and Hollanders. This Country was discove∣red in 1365. by the French, as is pretended. Bau∣drand. But in the dismal Wars between the English and French, under Charles VI, and VII▪ they were forc'd to omit the Prosecution of this Navigation Hof∣man. It is much more probable, and better attested, that it was discovered in 1452 by Henry Duke of Vis∣co▪ Son of John I. King of Portugal. But then the Spaniards, in 1477. pursued this Discovery, and till 1479 excluded the first Discoverers, who regai∣ning the Trade in the Island of S. George, built he the strong Fort or Town of Mina, in 1486. to se∣cure their Trade there for the future, and command all the rest of this Coast: Which was the first Place built by the Europeans on this Coast. New-Guinee, this Country has not been hitherto so far discovered, as that we know whether it be an Island or a Part of the Continent of the Terra Austra∣lis. It is separated from Terra de Papaous, (which lies East of Ceram and Gilolo in the East-Indies, in 51 deg. of Southern Lat.) by a narrow Straight of the Sea. Guinegat, a small Town in Artois, made famous by a great Defeat of the French Forces, by the Flan∣drians, in 1479. by which Victory Maximilian the Emperor (then married to Mary the Daughter of Charles the Hardy, the last Duke of Burgundy) reco∣vered Tournay out of the Hands of the French, and settled the Low-Countries in the House of Austria. It lies three French Miles from S Omar to the South, the same from Renty to the East, and two from Ayre to the West. Guines, a fine Town, two Miles East of Calais, and the Capital of a County of the same Name; ha∣ving Boulonois on the South and East, Terre d'Oye on the North, and the German Sea or Streights of Calais on the East. This County was of old a Part of Boulonois, and the Town belonged then to Pi∣cardy. King Edward III. of England possessed himself of both in 1351. to whom afterwards they were confirmed by a Treaty in 1360. And in the Reign of Charles VI. of France, lost again to that Crown. Guipuscoa, Ipuscoa, now a Province, but once a Kingdom in Spain. In the middle Times annexed to the Kingdom of Navar, but now separated from it, and united to Biscay: By which it is bounded on the West, on the South it has Aava, on the North the Bay of Biscay, and the Kingdom of Navar on the East. The principal Cities in it are Tolosa, which is the Capital, S. Sebastian, and Fontarabie. It is about thirty six Miles in Compass; anciently peopled by the Cantabri, a hardy and a valiant People. This Coun∣try was wrested from the Crown of Navar in 1079. by Alphonsus I King of Castile, but it was restored again, and continued under that Crown till 1200. when it revolted to Castile again, and ever since it has been united to Biscay.
Guir, Dirus a River of Mauritania. Guise, Guisa, Guisia, a Town in Picardy in France, in the Territory of Tierache, which has a Castle sea∣ted upon the River Oise, in the Confines of Hainault; nine Miles from Cambray to the South, five from la Fere to the North-East, and about seventeen from Amiens to the East. This Town was besieged by the Spaniards, without any Success, in 1650. But that which made it most remarkable, was the Dukes of Guise, who in former times had a very great Hand in all the Affairs of France, from the Reign of Fran∣cis I. to that of Henry IV. This Family was a Branch of the House of Lorrain; advanced by Francis I. in 1528. from Counts or Earls of Guise (which was their Inheritance) to Dukes of the same Place. The first thus raised was Claude, the Son of Renate II. He had eight Sons, of which were Francis Duke of Guise, Claudius Duke of Aumale, and Renatus Marquess of Ellebove. Francis became very famous by his defence of Mets, against Charles V. and his surprizing Calais from the English. He was assassinated in 1553. being the Father of Henry Duke of Guise, and Charles Duke of Mayne, &c. Henry making himself Head of the Holy League against Henry III. of France, was slain in the States of Blois by the Order of that Prince in 1588. and his Elegy is written by the Eloquent M. de Balsac. Charles, the other Brother, took up Arms against Henry III. and continued them against Henry IV. till at last in 1594. he was forced to sub∣mit to that Victorious Prince. Charles the Son of Henry, succeeded his Father in the Dukedom, and was the Father of Henry II. who has been famous of la∣ter Times, being chosen King of Naples, though the Spaniards shortly outed him. Gulick, Juliacum, a City of Germany, mention'd as such by Tacitus and Ammianus, called now by the French Juliers, by the Germans Gulick, by the Ita∣lians Giuliers. It is the Capital of the Dutchy of Ju∣liers; seated upon the River Roer or Roure, which falls into the Maes at Roermande; and has a strong square Castle; often taken and retaken of latter times, till in 1660. it was put by the Spaniards into the Hands of the Duke of Newburg. It lies sixteen Miles from Cologn to the West, seven from Maestricht, and four from Aquisgrane to the North-East. See Juliers. Guns, Sabaria, a River of the Lower Hungary, which riseth in Austria, and falls into the River Rab: The Hungarians call it Benges. Guntz, Guntia, a River in Schwaben, which gives Name to Guntzburg, in the Marquisate of Burgow; fourteen Miles from Kempten to the North, and thirty nine from Auspurg. This River falls into the Danube three Miles below Ʋlm. Guplo, a small Lake in the Palatinate of Brest in Poland. Gurck, Gurcum, a City in Carinthia, which is a Bishop's See under the Archbishop of Saltzburg: It stands upon a River of the same Name, which a little lower falls into the Oleze; six Miles from Villach to the North, and about five from Clagenfurt; a little East of which the River Gurk falls into the Danube. This Bishoprick was instituted by one of the Archbi∣shops of Saltzburg, in 1073. who reserved to himself and his Successors the Election and Investiture of the Bishops of this See, taking the Oath of Fealty from them: But now by Agreement with Ferdinand I. the Emperor chuseth twice together, then the Bishop of Saltzburg the third time, and so by turns, as often as this See becomes vacant; though this Bishop is no Member of the Empire, nor has any Vote in the Diet, as all those which were Founded by the Emperors of Germany have. Gdreigura, or Guregra, an inhabited Mountain towards the Atlas, in the Kindom of Fez in Africa; thirteen Leagues from the City Fez; affording Corn and Cattle in plenty. There are divers large Villages upon it, which stand in no need of Walls or Castles to defend them; the Difficulty of the Avenues is a suf∣ficient Security. Gurgian, the Caspian Sea. Gurgistan. See Georgia. Gustrow, Gustrovium, a small City in the Duke∣dom of Mecklenburg, which is the Seat of a Duke, who has here a very splendid Castle: It stands seven German Miles from Wismar to the East, four from Rostock to the South, three from Dobbertin to the North, and about seven from the Shoars of the Baltick Sea to the South. The Duke of Gustrow has under him Rostock, and the greatest part of the Territory of Walden also; but Gustrow is his principal City. Gutkow or Gutzkow, Gutkovia, is a Town of the Hither Pomerania, upon the River Pene, which a little lower falls into the Gross Haff, and the Baltick Sea. It stands 14 Miles from Gustrow to the East, 3 from Gripswald to the South, and 4 from Wolyast to the South-West. This is the Capital of a Marqui∣sate, which takes its Name from this Town; and lies between the Dukedom of Stetin to the East and the Dominion of Bardt to the West, and the Baltick Sea to the North: To it belongs Gripswald and Gutkow: they are all of them, together with Stetin, under the King of Sweden, who by a Treaty in 1676. regained them from the Duke of Brandenburg, who had seized them in a War a little before. Guy-Clift, a very delightful Cliff, amongst Groves and little Streams, near Warwick; so called from the Famous Guy Earl of Warwick, who retired hither from his Valiant Actions to a Life of Solitude, and built a Chappel in which he was buried. Guydil, the Scotch and Irish. Guzerate, Gedrosia, Guzarata, a Kingdom in the East-Indies, in the Cape of Malabar, to the East of the Kingdom of Decan; which had heretofore Kings of its own, but is now under the Great Mogul; whose Vice∣roy lives in extraordinary State at Amadabat: often also called the Kingdom of Cambaia, from Cambaia its capital City, under which word there is a further Ac∣count of it: I shall here add, that Sultan Mamoet Prince of this Country, dying about 1545. left the Tuition of his Son to one of his great Men; who being envied and hated by his Country-men, and his Prince (though of Age then) not being able to protect him, he in 1565. called in Ecbar, the great Mogul, who took Possession of this Kingdom, and ruined the King and his Tutor together with the discontented Party. It is the pleasantest Province in all Indostan, ever green: Its Sea-Ports are Surat, and Cambaya, which last is the best in the Indies. Gwir, Waga, a River in Wales, which falleth into the Severn at Chepstow, after it hath passed by Monmouth. Gwidh, Vectis, the Isle of Wight. Gwineth, Venedocia, North-Wales. Gyfhorn, Gyfhornia, a Town of Germany, in the Lower Saxony, in the Dukedom of Lunenburg, un∣der the Duke of Zell; three Miles from Brunswick to the North, and five from Zell to the East; upon the River Aller. Gyll, Ansoba, a River of Ireland which falls into the Bay of Gallway in Conaught. Gyngisch, Genadium, Cenadium, a City of the Ʋpper Hungary, called Chanad by the Hungarians, and Gyngisch by the Germans: It is the Head of a County of the same Name; and a Bishop's See under the Archbishop of Colocza: Upon the River Merisch, which passing from the Carpathian Hills quite through Transylvania, and by Lippa, a little lower than this City falls into the Teysse, over against Segedin; from
which this City stands about three Miles to the East: it was in the hands of the Turks till 1676. but is now in the Possession of the Emperour. Gymnosophistae, the ancient Philosophers of India, whose Memory is preserved in History with great ho∣nour: they first taught us the placing of true felicity in Speculation, Sense and Vertue, accompanied with a solid Contempt of Fortune's favours. The Greeks received several Doctrines from them; and particu∣larly the Metampsychosis, to which the Indians to this day, as formerly, are strictly addicted. Of these Philosophers, the Brachmanes made one principal Sect. And some applied themselves to give Counsel to Princes and Magistrates, some to contemplate the Works of Nature in solitary places. H A. HAbas, that part of Aethiopia, which lies next Egypt. See Aethiopia. Habes, Eleutherus, a River on the West of Sicily, which falls into the Tyrrhenian Sea, eight Miles from Palermo. Habaynacht, the great River Indus. Hackdar, Arsenarium, a Promontory of Africa. Hadersleben, a City in South Jutland, in the Dukedom of Sleswick, towards the Baltick Sea, and the Island of Fionia, which has a very large Haven. It lies between Kolding and Apenrad, about four Ger∣man Miles from either; the same distance from Fio∣nia to the West, and seven from Flentsburg to the North. This City was built by John Duke of Hol∣stein; but is now under the King of Denmark, though often taken and lost by the Swedes, in their Wars with the Danes. Frederick III. was born here March 28. 1609. Kadleigh, a Market Town in the County of Suffolk and the Hundred of Cosford, upon the River Breton. Haerlem, Harlemum, the Capital of the Territory of Kenmerlandt in West-Friseland, upon the River [Spara] Putten Vaert; three Miles from Amster∣dam to the West, and four from Alckmar to the South; between the Lake called Haerlem-meer, and the Sea. Made a Bishops See by Pope Paul IV: under the Archbishop of Ʋtrecht, in 1559. but this See was not long-liv'd, the Hollanders revolting soon af∣ter from Spain. As this City was one of the first that ejected the Spaniards, so it was the first that felt the heat of their fury: Frederick Son of the Duke de Alva, being sent with an Army in 1573. to reduce it: which proved a long and b'oody Siege eight Months. This Siege was made the more me∣morable by a Naval Victory obtained by sixty Spa∣nish Ships, over an hundred Dutch ones, which for∣ced the City to surrender: as also by the Cruelty the Spaniards used after they got the Place; putting two thousand Persons to the Sword, under pretence they came from other Towns though they had given their Oath to bear Arms no more: and having in the Siege defaced the Sacred Images, therefore they were put to death, not as Harlemers, but as Sacrilegious Per∣sons. This was the last of the Actions of the Duke of Alva; being soon after recalled. This City was built (as is supposed) by Onelem, a Noble Man, from whom it had its Name. Others say, by the Friselan∣ders, about 506. It is supposed too, that here the Art of Printing was first invented. But whoever founded, or has since improved it, it is now a great, populous, rich, well fortified City, in a healthful Air; which has about it pleasant Meadows, and an adorning Wood. It was in the time of L. Guicciardin, one of the biggest Cities in Holland; making yearly ten and twelve thousand Pieces of Cloth; from which Trade, it may be judged to have had its greatest encrease. Hafern, the Severn. See Severn. Hag, a Town and County in the Empire, in Bavaria. Hague, Haga Comitis, the pleasantest and greatest Village in Christendom; seated within one Mile of the German Ocean; between Leyden to the North, and the Mouth of the Maes to the South; four German Miles from Rotterdam to the West, and seven from Amsterdam to the South West. The usual Residence of the Prince of Orange, and of the Council of the Ʋnited Provinces; in which the Earls of Holland had heretofore a stately Palace. The Dutch call it Graven Hague; the English the Hague; the French La Haye. The Hollanders would never fortifie it, out of a Vanity they have, to be Masters of the No∣blest Village in Christendom: but they have narrow∣ly escaped the paying dear for this Boast; the Town having been in danger of being surprized both by the French and Spaniards. The Hage or Hagh, in the German, signifies an House. Hagenaw, Hagenoia, Hageno, a City in the Lower Alsatia, upon the Rivers [Matra] Moterbrun, and [Sorna] Sorr, united: first walled in 1164. by Fre∣derick Aenobarbus the Emperor; who built here an Imperial Palace, and made it a Free and Imperial City. It is now one of the Imperial Villages: and was heretofore under the Protection of the House of Austria; but by the Peace of Munster, it came un∣der the King of France. In 1675. it was in vain be∣sieged by the Austrian Forces: yet soon after, all its Fortifications were slighted by the French; and thereupon it suffered very much in the last German War. This City stands two Miles West of the Rhine, and four from Strasbourg to the North: and is now repairing. Landtvog von Hagenaw, or the Bailiwick of Hagenaw, is almost included in Alsatia: also called the Prefecture of the Ten Imperial Cities; because there are so many in it; viz. Hagenaw, Colmar, Schel∣strat, Wissemburg, Landaw, the Upper Bhenbeim, Rsheim, Munster in Gregorienthas, Kaisersberg, and Turcheim, with their dependents. Mulhuis in Suntgow, belonged also once to this Bailiwick, which is now one of the Swiss Cantons. This Bailiwick was mortgaged to the Elector Palatine, by Sigis∣mund the Emperour, for fifty thousand Florens. Fer∣dinand I. paid the Debt, and united it to the Domini∣ons of the House of Austria, in 1558. And in 1648. by the Peace of Munster, it was resigned with all its Dependences to the French, who are still possessed of it. Hailbrun, or Hailprun, Heilbron, Alisum, fons Salutis, Hailbruna, a German City in the Circle of Schwaben, upon the River Necker; in the Confines of the Dukedom of Wirtemberg; called by this Name, by reason of the great plenty of Medicinal Springs it has. Made a Free Imperial City, by Frederick II. in 1240. when it was also first walled: it is still a Free City, and lies two Miles from Wimfen to the South, eight from Spire to the East. Here is a Stone Bridge over the Necker. Haimburg. See Haynburgh. Hainault, Hannonia, one of the greatest Provinces in the Low Countries; called by the French Hay∣naut; by the Germans Henegow; by the Spaniards and Italians, Hannonia; taking its Name from a small River. Heretofore much less, than now; containing only the Eastern part of this Province; the Western being a distinct Earldom, by the Name of Valenci∣ennes: but this has for some Ages been annexed to Hainault, and comprehended in it. This Province has on the East Brabant, Namur, and Liege; on the North the Imperial Flanders, or the County of Alost;
on the West Flandria Gallica; and on the South Pi∣cardy. It is watered by the Schelde and the Haisne. First it served under its own Counts or Earls. The last Countess of which, was dispossessed by force, by Philip Duke of Burgundy, in 1438. So it became united to the rest of the Provinces: but the greatest part of it, is now subjected to the French; viz. Va∣lenciennes Maubeuge, Landrecies, Bouchaine, Ques∣noy, Ostervant, and the Territory between the Maes and the Sambre: the City of Monts being An. 1691. taken by the French. Hair, a Desart in Lybia, in the Kingdom of Tar∣ga, on the South side towards Nigritia; one hun∣dred Miles in length; between the Desarts of Igni to the East, and the Kingdom of Zuenzig to the West. Haisne, Hania, a very small River in Hainault, which gives Name to the whole Province: it ariseth near Bincha in this Province; and dividing it into two parts, watereth Monts, takes in Tula, and at Conde falls into the Schelde. Halapia, Mesopotamia. Halar, Halara, a City in Island, on the North side, which is a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Drontheim: it has no Walls, nor any great number of Inhabitants; but stands by the Bay of Skagafird, and is under the King of Denmark as King of Norway. Halberstad, Pheugarum, Haiberstatum, is a Ger∣man City in the Lower Saxony; and a Bishops See, un∣der the Archbishop of Mentz; being substituted in the stead of Salinstad, in 819. The Capital also of a Principality, which has its Name from it: it stands upon the River Hotheim, seven Miles from Magde∣burg to the West, and from Brunswick to the South. Heretofore an Imperial Free Town; but being ex∣empt, it fell under the Dominion of its own Bishop; till by the Treaty of Westphalia or Munster, this Bi∣shoprick was changed into a Principality, and given to the Duke of Brandenburg. The Bishop of this Diocese embraced the Augustane Confession in 1586. The Principality of Halberstad, is a small Ter∣ritory granted by Charles the Great, (who founded it) to the Bishoprick; but now under the Duke of Brandenburg. It is bounded on the North by the Dukedoms of Magdeburg, and Brunswick; on the South by the Principality of Anhault; and lies from East to West about nine German Miles. The Capital of it is Halberstad. Halifax, a Corporation in the County of York, upon the River Cader, seated upon the eep descent of an Hill, and extended from East to West (which of old was called Horton.) It is a very populous, rich Town; having in it eleven Chap els, whereof two are Parishes; and about twelve thousand inhabi∣tants. Placed in a barren Soil: but the Inhabitants have by their Industry in Clothing, and other Manu∣factures so supplied their Defects, that none are richer or better supplied, than they. Charles II and King James II successively added to the Honour of this Place, when they created George Savil Baron of Eyland, Viscount and Marquess of Halifax; who is still living. Halenberg, a part of Mount Kalenberg, which begins in the Lower Austria, at the Danube, and runs to the South as far as the Drave; whereof this branch parts Hungary from Stiria and Carinthia. Halep, or Haleppo. See Aleppo. Halesworth, a Market Town in the County of Suffolk, in the Hundred of Blithing. Hali, Muza, a City in Arabia the Happy, upon the Red Se now called Gezien. Haling, a small Island to the Eastward of Ports∣mouth with a Town of the same Name. Halitz, Haotz, a Town in Poland, in a Territory of the same Name, upon the River Niester (Tyra) in Red Russia, which has a strong Castle. Heretofore a City of great Note, and the Capital of Red Russia, then a Kingdom; the Prince of which was often cal∣led the King of Halitz, and not of Russia; because this Kingdom was divided into many Dukedoms, the Principal of which, was the Duke of Kiovia. Pope Gregory XI. made this an Archbishops See: But in 1414. the Archbishoprick was removed to Lemburg; from which Aalitz stands sixteen Polish Miles to the North-East, and twenty five from Caminieck to the West. It is now in a declining State, and inha∣bited by few. Hall, Hala, Halla, a City in the Ʋpper Saxony, in Misnia; which though little, is in a good condition, and under the Jurisdiction of its own Duke. It stands upon the River [Sala] Saalder, three Ger∣man Miles from Mersburg to the North, ten from Magdeburg to the South, and seventeen from Wit∣temburg to the South-West. It has near it a Castle, called Mauriceburg, which was heretofore the Vil∣lage of Dbredor. In 981. it obtained its Character from Otho II. and took its present Name from four Salt Springs which are in it. Once a Free and Impe∣rial City, but now exempted; and subject to its Duke, who is of the Electoral House of Saxony; therefore called the Duke of Saxony of Hall; who besides the adjacent Country, has almost half Thurin∣gia, and some Places in the Dukedom of Magdeburg. Schwabische Hall, Hall en Suabe, a small Im∣perial Free City in Schwaben, which has been such ever since the year 1360. It is placed in the midst of steep Rocks and Mountains; and had both its Name and Being from those Eleven Salt Springs which rise in it. It is divided by the River [Cocha∣rus] Cochar, into the Upper and Lower Town, which are joined by a Bridge. This City was often taken and retaken in the great Swedish War. It stands in the Dukedom of Wirtemberg, of which it was once a part; six German Miles from Hailbrun to the East, nineteen from Franckfort on the Main, and fifteen from Spire: at almost an equal distance from the Rhine, the Maine, and the Danube. Taken by the Mareschal de Turene in 1645. Hall in Inthall, a German Town in Tyrol, upon the River Inthall, from which it has its Name; two Miles from Inspruck to the East. Hall, or Haut, a small Town in Hainault, in the Confines of Brabant; where is a famous Church de∣dicated to the Virgin Mary, much frequented on the account of an Image of hers, that is admired for doing of Miracles. The Walls were pulled down in 1677. Justus Lipsius has wrote a particular Tract of the Miracles of this Virgo Hallensis, or Image of the Virgin Mary of Hall. Hall, Ernolatia, a Village in the Ʋpper Austria, upon the River Krems; six German Miles from Lintz. [Lentia] to the South. Hallandt, Hallandia, a part of South Gothland; which was heretofore a Province of the Kingdom of Denmark; but now under the King of Sweden, ever since 1645. Bounded on the East and North with Westro-Gothia; on the West with the Baltick Sea; and on the South with Scania. The chief Town in it, is Helmstad. This Province is extended from North to South sixty Miles upon the Baltick Sea, but not above fifteen broad; and was once a Dukedom. Hallaton, a Market Town in Leicestershire, in the Hundred of Gartrey. Halsted, a Market Town in Essex, in the Hun∣dred of Hinckford. Halderstein, a small Seigniory in Switzerland, near Coire. Halydown, or Haledon, a Town in Northumber∣land, upon the River Tine; where Oswald King of Northumberland, invoking Jesus Christ, in 634.
overthrew Edwal King of the Britains, and there∣upon embraced Christianity; sending for Adan the Scot, to teach him and his People, and calling the place Heavenfield. This Field has been since conse∣crated to Victory; the Scots being beaten here by the English in 1331. and again in 1402. if Halydown, and Haledon be the same places, as I suppose they are. Ham, the same with Egypt. Ham, Hamum, a small, but strong City in West∣phalia, upon the River Lippe, in the County of March, in the Confines of the Diocese of Munster; five Ger∣man Miles from Munster to the South, and fourteen from Cologn to the North-East; between Dorsten to West, and Lippestad to the East. This City is un∣der the Duke of Brandenburg, yet a Hanse-Town: taken by the French in 1673. but now return'd un∣der its former Master. Ham, a City in Picardy in France, in Verman∣dois, upon the River Some; four Leagues from S. Quintin to the South-West, and sixteen from A∣miens to the East. Haman, Hama, Emisa, Apamea, a City of Syria, called vulgarly Hems. It is an Archbishops See, un∣der the Patriarch of Antioch, upon the River Oron∣tes, (now called Farfar) between Arethusa to the North, and Laodicea to the South; about forty three Miles from Damascus to the North, eighty from Antioch, and thirty from Aleppo. Our later Maps make Haman and Hemz, two several places. Apa∣mea and Emisa are by Baudrand made several Cities. Vid. Hemz. Hamay, or Haimage, a Town and Monastery in Flanders. Hamburgh, Gambrivii, Hamburgum, Treva, is one of the most celebrated Cities and Sea-Ports of Germany: seated in the Lower Saxony, in the Duke∣dom of Holstein, upon the River Elbe: yet an Impe∣rial Free City, not subject to any Prince, and one of the Principal Hanse-Towns in Germany. Hereto∣fore it was dignified with an Archbishops See; but the Chair was removed to Bremen in 830. by Ansga∣rius the Bishop, with the Consent of Lewis the Em∣perour. This City is placed in the Territory of Stor∣maren; eighteen German Miles from the German Ocean, which yet Tides up to it; fifteen from Bre∣men to the North, ten from Lubeck to the South, and seven from Stade to the East. Very strongly fortified, rich, populous, and in a growing condition. It has its Name from one Hmmion a great Man, its Benefactor Charles the Great erected it against the Danes, in 809▪ Heridagus was the first, Ans∣garius the second and last Archbishop of it. Subject to Albion Prince of the North▪ Elbingers in the be∣ginning: afterwards to Herman Billengen, Son of Otto the First, Duke of the Lower Saxony: and to his Son Benns after him, in whom this Line ended▪ Adolphus Count of Schawenburg, in 1137. governed this City and Holstein, for Lotharius Duke of Saxony. Adolphus III. granted it many and great Privileges for Money  which were confirmed by Frederick Barbarossa the Emperour. In his absence in the East, Henry the Lion ruin'd it; but Adolphus upon his return recovered and rebuilt it: he did not long survive, being slain in Battel in 1203. by Wal∣demarus Duke of Sleswick, Brother of Canutus King of Denmark. Canutus gave this City to Albertus Duke of Orlamand, who sold his Right: which Sale was confirmed by Adolphus the third Duke of Hol∣stein; and ever since the City has been a Free State; though the Dukes of Holstein still pretend a Right and Title to it. Frederick II. in 1579. had a Con∣troversie with it, which was ended by the payment of Money. It embraced the Lutheran Confession, at the first Publication of it; yet it tolerates the Caoi∣nists, and gave shelter to the English in the Reign of Queen Mary, who in 1554. fled hither. In 1686. the present King of Denmark suddenly sat down before it with an Army of thirty thousand Men: but the Winter coming on, and the Neighbour Princes espou∣sing their Cause, and sending them Forces into the City, he was forced to retire: those within, on whom he relied, being discovered, and afterwards Tryed, and Executed. They think themselves obliged hereby to be very jealous of all the motions of that King: to whom they declare their firm Resolutions to main∣tain, to the uttermost, all their Privileges and Immu∣nities whatsoever. There is hardly in the World a finer City, nor a larger and safer Port than this: it is said to have done Homage to Christian III. as Duke of Holstein, in 1604. Hamel, a Town near Corbie, upon a River that falls into the Some in Picardy. Hamelen, Hamala, Hamelia, a City of Germany, in the Lower Saxony, in the Dukedom of Brunswick: between Hildesheim to the East, and Paderborne to the West; upon the (Visurgis) Weser, which parts this Dukedom from Westphalia, and beneath Bremen falls into the German Ocean. It stands twenty Miles from Bremen to the South-East, fourteen from Bruns∣wick to the South-West, twenty six from Hamburgh to the South, and twenty three from Fuld to the North. This City belongs to the Bishop of Hilde∣sheim, and the Earl of Lippe: was heretofore under the Abbot of Fuld, before Albert Duke of Bruns∣wick received it into his Protection, which in time turned from a Protectory, to a Sovereign Jurisdicti∣on, as is usual. It is now under the Duke of Bruns∣wick Hannouer. Near this Place the Austrians re∣ceived a fatal Overthrow from the Suedes and Lu∣nenburgers, at the Castle of Ottendorp, in 1633. Hamiltown, a Castle in the County of Cluyds∣dale, in Scotland, upon the Cluyd or Glotta, above Bothwel; ten English Miles from Glascow to the South, and thirty five from Edenburgh to the West; which gives the Title of a Duke to one of the best Families in Scotland, in whose Possession it is. Hammeren, Hammaria, a City of Norway, which is a Bishops See under the Archbishop of Drontheim; in the Province of Aggerhuis, in the Confines of Dalecarlia, (a Province of Sweden), very small. It stands thirty Swedish Miles from Bergen to the East, and twenty from Anslo, (Ansloga) to the North. This Bishoprick is united to that of Anslo. Hampton-Court, a Noble Country House, be∣longing to the King of England in Middlesex, ten Miles from London, on the Thames: built by Cardinal Woolsey, in the Reign of Henry VIII. who also built White-Hall, the common Residence of our Kings ever since. Hamsa. See Haman. Hanaw, Hanovia▪ a strong Town in Franconia in Germany, upon the River Kinz; which a little lower falls into the Mayne; between Franckfort to the West, and Aschaffenburg to the East; three Miles from either, and ten from Marpurg to the South. This City has suffered very much in the late Swedish and German Wars. Hani, Ecbatana, a great City in the Kingdom of Persia, the Capital of the Medes; and a Regal City, mentioned by Pliny, Strabo, and Ptolemy. Said to be built by Arphaxad; now supposed to be Tauris. See Tauris. Hannonia. See Hainault. Hannover, Hannower, Hannovera, Hanouer, a German City in the Dukedom of Brunswick, in the Territory of Calemberg, upon the River (Leina)
Leine; which falls into the Weser, beneath Ferden, four Miles above Bremen; from which last, Hannover stands sixteen Miles to the South-West, five from Hildesheim to the North-West, and six from Bruns∣wick to the West. Once an Imperial and Free City, but afterwards exempted. Its Prince, who is of the House of Brunswick, possesseth one half of the Dukedom of Brunswick, with the Territory of Ca∣lemberg, and Grubenhagen; and has under him, Hannover, Hamelen, Gottingen, Newstad, and Lim∣beck. This City is very well fortified. The present Duke, John Frederick, is a Roman Catholick, youn∣ger Brother to the Duke of Zell. But the City of Hannover, was one of those which entered the Smal∣caldick League, as appeareth in Sleidan. And there∣fore I suppose the People are generally of the Refor∣med Religion. Hantshire, Hantonia, a County in the West of England; bounded on the South by the British Sea, and the Isle of Wight; on the West by Dorsetshire; on the North by Berkshire; and on the East by Surrey and Sussex. It is a large and fruitful County: the Capital of it, is the City of Winchester; besides which, it has also Southampton, Portsmouth, and Rumsey, very considerable Towns. Haoaxe, Haoaxus, a River of Africa, which spring∣eth out of vast Mountains in the Abissine Empire, in the Confines of the Provinces of Xaoa and Ogga: being augmented with the Streams of Machi, it entereth the Kingdom of Adel, (called by the Portuguese, Zeila;) the Capital of which, Avoa Gurelé, stands upon this River: it is said to be not much less than the Nile; and after a course of six hundred Miles, to discharge it self into the Red Sea; having fertilized the Kingdom of Adel, in the same manner, as the other doth that of Egypt. See Jerome Lobo, a Por∣tuguese, who travelled this Country. Hapsel, Hapselia, a small City in Livonia, in the Province of Estonia, and the Territory of Wick; upon a small Bay of the same name, which is part of the Baltick Sea. Heretofore a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Riga; two Swedish Miles from Leal to the North, and eleven from Revel to the West. It is under the King of Sweden. Harberick Salamboria, a Town in Mesopotamia. Harborcagh, a Market Town in Leicestershire, in the Hundred of Gartrey. Harburg, Harburgum, a strong, but ill peopled Town in the Dukedom of Lunenburgh, upon the Elbe; two German Miles from Hamburgh to the South, and six from Lunenburgh to the West. It has a Castle. Harcourt, a small Town and Castle in Normandy, in the Territory of Eureux; scarce five Miles from thence to the West, and two from Belmont to the North. Philip VI. in the year 1338, erected it in∣to an Earldom, which was bestowed upon the Princes of Lorain; some of whose Family have of late times been famous Commanders in War. Harda, Artiscus, a River of Thrace. Harderwick, Hardebones, Harderwick, a small City in Guelderland, under the United Provinces, in the County of Veleuve; which is a Hanse Town, and an University, opened here in 1648. It stands upon the Shoar of the Zuider Sea, from which it has re∣ceived great damage; but greater from the French, who taking it in 1672, dismantled, and left it in 1673. It lies seven Leagues from Ʋtrecht to the South East, and six from Deventer to the West. First walled with a Brick Wall in 1229. Hardts-Walt, Hartzwald, Melibocum, a Moun∣tain in Thuringia: and a Wood, or Forest, called Sylva Herculis; by Ptolemy, Sylva Semana; by Cae∣sar, Sylva Bacenis. It lies in the South Part of the Dukedom of Brunswick, in the Territory of Gruben∣hagen; between Halberstad to the East, and Gostar to the West: the top of the Mountain is called by the Inhabitants Blokes-barch, between Osterwick, and Werningerod, two Towns in these parts. The Fo∣rest covering the Mountain above mentioned, lies be∣tween the Elbe and Saal to the East, and the Weser to the West. Mercator by a mistake took it for a part of the Hercinian Forest; and placed it between Thuringia and Bohemia. Harfleur, a Castle in the Païs de Caux in Nor∣mandy in France; upon the North Side of the Out∣let of the Seyne; within one Mile of Havre de Grace, and three of Honfleur to the North. Besieged in 1416, by the French; defended by the English, who fru∣strated their Designs; and in a Sea Fight near this place defeated both the French and Genoese Fleets. Soon after which followed the taking of Caen, Falais, Conquest, and Roan it self, by the Victorious En∣glish. Harlegh, a Market Town in the County of Meri∣oneth in Wales, in the Hundred of Ardydury. Harleston, a Market Town in the County of Nor∣folk and the Hundred of Earsham. Harlingen, Harlinga, a City of the United Pro∣vinces in West-Friesland; the next to Leuwarden in order and greatness; strong and hard to be taken, because the adjacent Country may be drowned. It has a very large Haven on the Zuider Sea; and stands in the Territory of Westergoe, three Leagues from Leuwarden to the West. Harlow, a Market Town in the County of Essex. The Capital of its Hundred. Harrie, or Harnland, Harria, a Province of Li∣vonia, upon the Bay of Finland, in the Province of Esthon: the Capital of which is Revel, which with this Province is under the Crown of Sweden. Harsan, a Mountain in the Lower Hungary, four German Miles from the Drave to the North, and the same distance from Mohatz to the West; near which the Dukes of Lorain and Bavaria, defeated an Army of an hundred thousand Turks, August 12, 1687. See Mohatz. Hartfordshire. See Hertfordshire. Hartland, a Market Town in Devonshire. The Capital of its Hundred. Hartlandpoint, Herculis Promontorium, a famous Cape in the Western Part, and Northern Shoar of the County of Devon, near the Confines of Cornwal; which shoots a great way into the Irish Sea, and makes a safe Bay for the Riding of Ships. Hartle Pool, a Market Town in the Bishoprick of Durham in Stockton Ward, upon a neck of Land, that on all sides, except Westward, is surrounded by the Sea. Hartzerode, Hartzeroda, a Castle in the Ʋpper Saxony, in the Principality of Anhault, upon the Ri∣ver Selka; twelve Miles from Northausen to the South-East: where was the Seat or Residence of one of the five Princes of Anhault. Harwich, Harvicum, a Town in Essex, at the Mouth of the Stour, which has a Large, Safe, and Noble Sea-Port; made famous of old by a Naval Vi∣ctory, here obtained against the Danes by the English in 888. This Town is not great (saith Mr. Cambden,) but well peopled; strong both by Art and Nature, (being almost surrounded by the Sea;) and much improved by the Care and Charges of Queen Eliza∣beth; only it wants fresh Water. It is also a Corpo∣ration, and sends two Burgesses to the Parliament. Hasbaigne, Hasbainensis Pagus, called by the In∣habitants Haspengow, is a Territory in the Bishoprick of Leige; extended between Brabant, the Maeze, and the City of Liege. The Capital of which is
S. Trevyen; it reached of old as far as Louvaine, or Loeven, and is frequently mentioned in ancient Hi∣story. Hasbat, Hasbata, a Province of the Kingdom of Fez in Barbary: bounded on the North by the Streights of Gibraltar; on the West by the Atlan∣tick Ocean; by the Mediterranean Sea, and the Pro∣vince of Asgaria to the East: the principal place of which was Tangier, now ruined by the English. See Tangier. Hascora, or Escura, a Province of the Kingdom of Morocco; having Duccala to the North, Morocco to the South, and Tedelsa to the East: the princi∣pal Town of which is Elmadina. Hasel, or Val-Hasal, a Valley and Bailiwick in the Canton of Bearne in Switzerland, abutting Eastward upon the Canton of Ʋnderwaldt, and stretching it self from about the Lake of Brientz as far as to the Source of the River Aar. It yields good Pasturage and Iron-Mines. The Inhabitants hereof about the year 1332. entered into a perpetual Alliance with those of Bearne, and have since been subjected to them. Hasenburgh, Didatrium, a Town in the County of Burgundy. Haslemere, a Market Town in the County of Sur∣rey and the Hundred of Godalming, priviledged with the Election of two Parliament men. Haslingden, a Market Town in Lancashire, in the Hundred of Blackburn. Hassia, Hessen, called by the French Hesse, is a Province of Germany; honored with the Title of a Landtgrave or Marquisate, which is a Provincial Earldom. It lies in the Higher Circle of the Rhine; between Westphalia to the North; Westerwaldt, and Weteraw to the West; Franconia to the South; Thuringe, and the Dukedom of Brunswick to the East. The chief Cities and Towns in it are Cassel, Hirschfeldt, Marpurgh, Smalkalden, and Ziegenheim. Princes of its own have possessed it ever since 1263. It is fruitful in Corn, Pasturage, Woods, Mines, and Game. This Country took its Name from the Hessi, who Conquering the Chatti, its old Inhabitants, changed the old Name. From East to West it ex∣tends it self thirty three German Miles, in length from North to South twenty three. Converted to the Christian Faith by Winifrid, or Boniface, an English Saxon, about 730. Hasnon, a Monastery in Artois. Haspaam, Haspahamum, Aspahamum, or Hispa∣ham, the Royal City of the Kingdom of Persia, in the Province of Hierach; where the Sophy or King of Persia, resides. Very great, rich, populous, and daily growing greater. The King has here a most magnificent Palace: there belong to it three very large Suburbs. Some think the ancient Name was Hecatompylon; others, Aspa. The Kings of Persia have resided here near an hundred years: and that is it that hath given it this great increase. It stands up∣on the River Zenderoud, or Zenderu; which ariseth from the Mountain of Dimavend, and divides this City into two parts; and about five Miles beneath, is swallowed up by the Sands. It lies seventy Ger∣man Miles from Casbin to the South; eighty from Ormus to the North, and a little more from Bagdat to the East. Seated in a Plain, surrounded on all sides, at the distance of about three or four Leagues, with an high Mountain, like an Amphitheatre. Long. 86. 40. Lat. 32. 26. The Province of Hierach, in which it stands, was the ancient Parthia. This City with the Suburbs, is about eight German Miles in compass; and has twelve Gates: whereof there are but nine constantly open; it has about eighteen thou∣sand Houses, and five hundred thousand Inhabitants. The Walls and Bastions are of Brick; but ill built, ill kept, and out of repair; so that they are of no use, to secure the City. Upon the River there is a lovely Stone Bridge. This City was taken and de∣stroyed twice by Tamerlane; and about 1450, suf¦fered much from one of its own Princes. The Mosques, the Bazar, (or Market Place,) the Baths, great Mens Houses and Gardens, are the great Ornaments of it. Some of the great Houses with their Gardens, take up twenty Acres of Ground: these Gardens they adorn with Fountains, Flowers, fine Walks, and delicate Rows of Trees, both for Shades and Fruits. So that the far greatest part of this vast City is taken up by Gardens; and not peopled like ours. I have taken this short Account out of Olearius, (who in 1637, was in this City;) and Thevenot, who travelled this Kingdom since. Hasbengow. See Hasbaigne. Hassio Porto, Heraclea, a Town in the Lesser Asia in Caria; between Miletum, and the Mouth of the Maeander, (now Madre;) thirty Miles from Ephesus to the South. Hastings, Othona, the first of the Cinque Ports, in the County of Sussex; consisting of two Streets, extended in length from North to South; having in each of them a Parish Church: seated between a high Clift to the Seaward, and an Hill to the Land, upon a small Brook on the South side of it; five Miles West of Winchelsey, and near the Eastern Borders of this County. It hath had a great Castle upon the Hill, which commanded it; but this is now ruined, and instead of it stands a Light-House to guide the Sea∣men. This and the other Cinque Ports, its Mem∣bers, was to send the King twenty one Ships: each of which to have twenty one tall Men in it; who were bound to appear upon forty days Summons, and to serve fifteen days at their own Charge: but if the King desired them longer, he was to pay to the Ma∣ster and Constable Six-pence the Day, and to each Mariner three pence. The Harbor here was made by a Pere of Timber; which being destroyed by the ra∣ging Seas in 1578, Queen Elizabeth granted a Con∣tribution for the Repairing of it: but the Money was misimployed, and the Work neglected; so that the Trade and Fishery of this place is since that time much decayed. The Honorable Theophilus Hastings, Earl of Huntingdon, is Baron of Hastings. This Title be∣ing given to Sir William Hastings, his Predecessor, by Edward the Fourth, in the second year of his Reign. This Corporation Elects two Members of Parliament. Hatfield Bishops, a Market Town in Hartford∣shire in the Hundred of Broadwater, upon the River Lea. Adorn'd with a stately Palace, call'd Hatfield House, now in the Possession of the Earls of Salisbu∣ry, but heretofore belonging to the King. Hatfield Broadoke, a Market Town in the Coun∣ty of Essex, and the Hundred of Harlow, upon the River Touridge. Havage. See Meroë. La Havana, or S. Christoval de la Havana, a fa∣mous Sea-Port in the Isle of Cuba, in the Bay of Mexico, in the West-Indies; very great, and fortified to the utmost that Art and Expence can arise to: seated at the North End of the Island, over against the Cape of Florida: being the Harbor to which all the Fleets from Spain direct their Course. Here they unlade their European Merchandises; here they take in the Plate, and other Riches of the Spanish West-Indies, in order to their Transportation into Europe: so that it is one of the most frequented Ports in the West-Indies. Whilst all this Wealth passeth and re∣passeth through it, much of it must stick: so that it is become very rich and populous. The Spaniards have built a strong Castle, and setled here a Governor, and a good Garrison of Spaniards. Yet notwithstand∣ing all this Care and Charge, the Buccaneers a few
years since, with a small number of Ships under Spa∣nish Colours, surprized and plundered this place; and made the Inhabitants pay a vast Ransome to preserve it from being burnt. It lies in Long. 292. 10. Lat. 20. 00. Havant, a Market Town in the County of South∣ampton and the Hundred of Bosmere. Havaspeude, Dacia Alpestris. Havelburgh, Havelburgum, Havelberga, a small City in the Circle of the Lower Saxony, which is a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Maegdeburgh: it stands in Prignitz, a Territory in the Marquisate of Brandenburgh, upon the River Havel, which one Mile lower falls into the Elbe; ten Miles from Maeg∣deburgh to the North, and twelve from Berlin to the West. The Bishops of this Diocese have imbraced the Augustane Confession ever since 1556. Haverford West, a Market Town and Corporation in Pembrokeshire in Wales, which elects one Parlia∣ment man. Haverill, a Market Town in the County of Suf∣folk in the Hundred of Risbridg, not far from the head of the River Stower. Havessen, Cimmeriorum Populi, a Province in Georgia, upon the Caspian Sea, as Ortelius conjectures from the Description of Haiton the Armenian. But not being called by this Name by our later Travellers, it can be no further described here. Havre de Grace, Portus Gratiae, a strong Sea-Port Town in Normandy in France, which has a well fortified Castle, and an excellent Haven. Seated at the Mouth of the Seyne, in the Païs de Caux; eigh∣teen Leagues beneath Roan to the West, fifteen from Caudebec, and almost twenty from Dieppe to the South; upon the Shoars of the British Seas, over a∣gainst Shorham in Sussex. This Town was in 1563. put into the hands of Q. Elizabeth, by the Protestants of France, (then ingaged in War against their King,) as a Cautionary Place: a Peace was soon after conclu∣ded, without any regard taken of that Princess, or her Interest, by those she succoured. And not contented with this, both Parties joyning against the English, then commanded by the Earl of Warwick, besieged the Town; which being surrounded with Enemies without, and wasted by the Plague within, was forced in a short time to surrender to the French. It is now one of the Keys of that Kingdom. Haut-Combe, a Village in the Principality of Sa∣voy, one League distant from Bellay; where there is an Abbey of Cistercians, and a remarkable Fountain, which twice in an hour ebbs and flows. Haut-Riue, Alta-Ripa, a Town in Languedoc, upon the River Auriege [Alburacis;] which ariseth in de Foix, from the Pyrenean Hills, and falls into the Guaronne, four Miles from Tolouse to the South. Haux, Halla. See Hall in Hainault. Hawkeshead, a Market Town in Lancashire and the Hundred of Loynsdale, in a hilly and wooddy Country. Hay, a Market Town in the County of Brecknock in Wales in the Hundred of Talgarth. La Haye, Haga Com. See Hague. Haye du Routol, Haga Brotona, a Village in the Forest of Routal in France. La Haye en Touraine, Haga Turonica, a Town in Touraine, upon the River [Crausia] Creuse; ten Leagues from Tours to the South, in the Confines of Poictou; three Miles from Noyers to the East; where the Creuse falls into the Vienne. This Town gave Birth to des Cartes, the famous modern Philosopher, who died at Stockholm in Sweden, in 1650. And it is besides remark'd with the Title of a Barony. Haysham, A Market Town in the North Riding of Yorkshire in the Hundred of Bulmer. Haynan or Hainan, an Island upon the Coast of the Province of Quangtung in China, abounding with fine Woods, Forests, and Fruits, and Mines of Gold and Silver. Its capital City is Kiuncheu, which with twelve other Cities lying upon the Sea Coast belongs to the Emperor of China, whilst the inland parts re∣main under the possession of the Natives. Upon the Northern Coast of this Island they find much Pearl. Hayne. See Haisne. Haynburgh, by corruption Hamburgh, Comage∣num, a small Town in the Lower Austria, on the Confines of Hungary, upon the Danube; six German Miles from Vienna to the East, and three from Pres∣burg West: near which are the Mountains of Kn∣berg, called heretofore Comagenus Mons. This Town is remarkable for nothing but its Antiquity, having been a Roman Town. Hea, a Province of the Kingdom of Morocco in Barbary, bounded by the River Ecifelmeli to the East, the Mountain Atlas to the South, and the Oce∣an to the North and West. Headon or Heydon, an antient Borough Town in the East Riding of Yorkshire, in the Hundred of Holder∣ness, upon a small River near its fall into the Humber, and a few Miles East of Hull, whose rise has occasi∣oned the decay of this place. It has the Election of two Parliament Men. Hebal or Ebal, a Mountain of Palestine in the Tribe of Ephraim, from whence Joshua pronounced a multitude of Curses upon the Violaters of the Jewish Law: Some make it to be but a part of Mount Gerizim. Hebrides, the same with the Ebudae. Hebron, an antient and famous City of the Holy Land, in the Tribe of Juda, near to which the Patri∣arch Abraham did abide. It was the Capital of the Country of the Philistines: and afterwards taken by Joshua and given to Caleb his General. David, reti∣ring to it after the death of Saul, came to be elected King here and made it his residence seven years, till the taking of Jerusalem. It had the honour to be ad∣vanced to an Episcopal See, when Christianity was re∣established in Palestine; but now almost ruined. Hecatompylis; a Name antiently given to the Cities Thebes, Haspaam, &c. from their having 100 Gates. Heca, a burning Mountain in Island, near the Ci∣ty Schalholt, in the South part of the Isle. The Natives call it, one of the mouths of Hell. It vomits Floods and Rivers of Fire like Aetna and Vesuvius, notwith∣ing its nearness to the Polar Circle. Hegow, Hegovia, a small Territory in the Circle of Schwaben; between the Lake of Zell, or the Zeller Sea to the East; and Schwartzwaldt, or the Black Wood to the West: not above six German Miles in length. In part under the House of Austria, and in part under the Duke of Brandenburgh. Heidelburgh, Edelberga, Budoris, Heidelberga. The chief City of the Palatinate of the Rhine; seated in a Plain at the foot of an Hill upon the River Necker, which is covered here with a woodden Bridge. This is a great, well peopled place; and the usual Residence of the Elector Palatine, who has here a noble and magnificent Castle, built upon an Hill. It stands three Miles from Spires to the North-East, ten from Franck∣fort upon the Main to the South, and twenty from Ʋlm to the North-West. Said to be a Fee of the Bishoprick of Worms; and that it was granted to Lewis Count Palatine, in 1225. by Henry Bishop of VVorms. Robert Count Palatine, afterwards Emperor in 1392. (as Marquardus Freherus saith) much enlarged it; and joined the Village of Berghimb to it, as a Suburb. Rupertus Count Palatine, in 1346. opened here an Uni∣versity, and endowed it with great Privileges. In 1622 this City was taken by the Spaniards, and plundered: and the Noble Library, which the Princes Palatine had collected, was sent to Rome. In the long Swedish War, it was taken, and retaken several times; till at last in 1649. by the Treaty of Munster, it was re∣stored to its former Master. In 1688. October 25.
both the City and Castle were surrendred to the French. This City is supposed to be the Budoris of Ptolemy; and was in ancient times the Seat of the Vangiones. Heiden, Heida, a Town in Holstein. Heidenheim, Ara Flavia, a Town in Schwaben. Hera, Hela, a Town in Prussia Polonica, upon the Bay of Pautzkerwick, almost encompassed by the Baltick Sea: It stands four German Miles from Dantzick to the North; burnt in 1572. by an acci∣dental Fire, but since rebulit. Heilichlandt, Actania, Saxonum Insula, a small Island belonging to the Duke of Holstein; six Miles from the Shoars of Dithmarsh to the West. Here∣tofore four German Miles in Compass: but in 800. a great part of it perished by a Tempest; and in 1300, another part of what was left before, was swallowed up by the Ocean, which in its Rage sometimes casts away Islands like common Vessels. It consists now but of one single Parish. Heilsberg, a Town in the Regal Prussia, upon the River Alle; which has a Castle: Seated in the Territo∣ry of Ermelandt, or Warmerland: The Bishop of which Province resides in it: eight German Miles from Re∣gensperg to the South. Built in 1240. Heis, Hericus, Herue, an Island on the Coast of Poictou, near the Confines of Bretagne. Heitersheim, or Haitersheim, a small Town in the Province of Brisgow in Germany, in which the Grand Prior of the Order of Malta for Germany (who is a Prince of the Empire) ordinarily resides. The Island of S. Helen, is seated in the Atlan∣tick Ocean, in 16 deg. of Southern Lat. Discover'd by Joannes de Nova, a Portuguese, in 1502. on S. Helen's Day. It is thirteen Miles in Compass, and lies at a vast distance from all other Lands; between Africa to the East, and Brasil to the West, nearer the for∣mer. It is mountainous, but fruitful, and abounds with what is useful for the Life of Man, except Wheat. It has four Valleys, and as many Springs towards its North end. For a long time it lay open to the Benefit of all Mankind; but about twenty years since, the English settled a Colony here, which is become exceed∣ing numerous. Helicona, Helicon, a Mountain in Baeotia, (now called Stramulipa,) near Parnassus, if not a Part of it: Sacred to the Muses of old, thence entituled He∣liconides, and much celebrated by the Greek and Latin Poets. In it was the Sepulchre of Orpheus the Fountains of Hippocrene and Aganippe: Near it were the Cities of Thespia, Ascra, and Nissa, now Zagaya. There was also a River in Sicily so called, which is now the Olivero on the North side of that Island: And another in Macedonia, now the Faribo. Heliopolis, an ancient City of the Kingdom of E∣gypt, near Cairo, to the East. It received this Name from a stately Temple there, that was dedicated to the Sun. The Arabians called it, Ain Schemes, i. e. the Eye of the Sun. Now nothing but the Ruines is ex∣tant of it. § There were two other Cities of the same Name in the days of Antiquity; one in Phaenicia, and one in Cilicia, in the Lesser Asia; both of them Episco∣pal Sees: The first under the Patriarch of Constantino∣ple; the second, Antioch. § Also a City of the Ʋp∣per Saxony in the Marquisate of Brandenburg in Ger∣many; built by Charles M. and now called Sotwedel, i. e. the Valley of the Sun. There had been a Statue dedicated to the Sun, and venerated here, in the Pa∣gan Times. Hellespont, the Famous Streights betwixt Europe and Asia, now called the Streights of Gallipoli, or the Dardanelles, and the Arm of S. George. It was here that Xerxes whipt the Sea, and after his Loss of the Battle of Thermopylae, escaped to Abydos, out of a Storm, in a Fishermans Skiff. Helmechtmenich, Gedrosia, a Province of the Kingdom of Persia. Helmesley, a Market Town in the North-Riding of Yorkshire, in the Hundred of Ridal, upon a small River which afterwards falls into the Derwent. Helmont, Helmontium, a Town of Brabant, which has a very ancient Castle; and is the Capital of Kem∣perland under the Ʋnited Provinces: It lies in the middle between Boisleduc to the West, and Roermond to the East; six Miles from the latter, and six from Nimeguen to the South. Helmstad, Helmestadium, Hemopolis, a small and inconsiderable Town in Germany, under the Duke of Brunswick Wolffenbuttel, ever since 1490. having before that been subject to its Abbot. It stands in the Confines of the Dukedom of Brunswick; between Brunswick to the West, and Magdeburg to the East; upon the River Aller: six German Miles from Wolf∣fenbuttel to the East, eleven from Hildesheime to the North-East, and five from Halberstad to the North. Julius Duke of Brunswick opened here an University in 1576. which from him is called Academia Julia. Helmstad, a strong Sea-Port Town in the Province of Hallandt, on the Baltick Sea, towards the Borders of Scannia; which by a Treaty in 1645. was yielded to the Swedes. Helsingford, Helsingfordia, a small City of Nyland (a part of Finland) upon the Shoars of the Bay of Finland; where it receives the River Wanda, over against Revel, in Long. 43. 45 Lat. 60. 10. Helsinglandt, Helsinga, a Province of Sweden; between Dalecarl to the West, Jemplandt and Midle∣pad to the North, and the Baltick Sea to the East: the principal Town of which is Hadswickwalt. Helson, a Borough Town in the County of Corn∣wall, in the Hundred of Kerryer, which elects two Parliament Men. Hemia, Amisus, a City of Paphlagonia, in the Lesser Asia; called Amid and Hemid by the Turks, and Simiso by the Greeks: It is an Archbishop's See, built on the Shoars of the Euxine, an hundred Miles from Sinope to the East; upon the Outlet of the River Casalmach, which comes from Amasia; twenty Ger∣man Miles South of Hemid, or Simiso, as it is called in the Maps. Hemid, or Cara-Hemid, Amida, a City of Meso∣potamia, which now gives Name to that Country, it be∣ing the Capital of it, and is called Diarbeck from this City. It is a great and populous City, the Seat of a Turkish Governor, and of a Christian Archbishop. It stands from Arziri, a City of the Lesser Armenia to the South-East, an hundred and twenty Miles; from Aleppo to the East, sixty. See Caraemit. Long. 78. 15. Lat. 39. 30. Hempsted, a Market-Town in Hartfordshire, in the Hundred of Dacor. Hemz, Emisa, Emessa, a City of Syria, called Haman by the Turks, Kemps by Postellus; which is an Archbishop's See under the Patriarch of Antioch, upon the River Orontes, (which passeth by Antioch,) forty three Miles from Damascus to the North, eighty from Antioch to the East, and about sixty from Pal∣myria to the West. It is a pretty Town, walled with black and white Stone half a Pike high: it had for∣merly a Dike, now filled with Rubbish: It has twenty five Towers, six Gates, and five Churches. The chief Church was built by S. Helen; and was in the Hands of the Chistians till about 160 years agone. On the South it has a Castle, not taken from the Christians without much Bloodshed, and therefore left to be rui∣ned. See M. Thevenot, part 1. pag. 223. and Haman. Henley, a Market-Town in Oxfordshire, in the Hundred of Binfield, upon the River Thames, over
which it has a fair Bridge. This Town drives a great Trade of Malt. § There is another Henly in War∣wickshire, in the Hundred of Barlickway, upon the River Alne, called Henley in Arden for Distinction from the Precedent. Henneberg, an ancient Castle in the Circle of Fran∣conia in Germany, seven Leagues from Schweinfurt, and eight from Fuld, upon a Rock, at the Foot whereof passes the River Strew. This Castle gives Name to one of the most considerable Counties in Ger∣many: which is bounded on the East and North by Thuringia, on the West by Hassia, and on the South by the Diocese of Wurtzburgh; being in length from East to West almost two days Journey. The Emperor Maximilian II. erected it into a Principality, which Title, in 1583. passed into the House of Saxony. Hennebont, Hannebon, Hannebontum, a ancient Town upon the River Blavet, (which falls into the Sea near Port Louis,) in the South of Bretagne in France; four Leagues from the Shoars of the Sea, and three from the said Port; thirty two Miles from Ren∣nes to the South-West, and ten from Vennes to the North-West. Heretofore very strongly fortified, but now neglected. It has a very fair Church. Hensterberg, Cetius, a Mountain of Austria; which begins in the Lower Austria at the Danube, three Miles from Vienna to the West, and running South through Stiria and Carinthia, ends at the Drave; being called in different Countries by various Names. Heppen, Apianum, a Castle in the Bishoprick of Trent. Herac, Petra, a City of Arabia Deserta, called Rabath in the Scriptures. It was in the latter times an Archbishop's See under the Patriarch of Jerusalem, having before been under the Patriarch of Alexandria. It stands in the Confines of Palestine, upon the Brook Zareth. Long. 66. 45. Lat. 30. 20. Heracaian, the same with Kherman. Herachia, Heratia, a small Island in the Archipe∣lago, East of Scinusa, and not far from Heraclea in Thrace. Heraclia, Heraclea, a City in Thrace, called Ʋrbs Herculea in Claudian, Perinthus by Ptolemy, and be∣fore Mygdonia, now frequently Araclea. It is an Archbishop's See under the Patriarch of Constantino∣ple; at the first its Superior, and the Metropolis of Thrace it self; so that the Bishop of Byzantium, was a Suffragan to the Bishop of Heraclea. Severus the Emperor finding the City of Byzantium, (now Con∣stantinople,) in the Hands of Pescennius Niger, his Rival, in 194. besieged it; and having taken it after a Siege of three Years, dismantled, burnt and ruin'd it; and gave all its Lands to the City of Heraclea, which from thenceforth was advanced above Byzan∣tium; and continued so, till Constantine built Constan∣tinople, in the beginning of the IV. Century. The Bi∣shop of Heraclea became by this means superior to the Bishop of Byzantium. But Heraclea is now in a decay∣ing Condition, thus described by Mr. Wheeler. This Town hath a good Harbour, whose Mouth lieth East of it, turning about so, that it maketh a Peninsula. The Town lieth in the Neck of this, having the Sea on one side and the Port on the other; which Port is five Miles in Circumference. There appeared great plenty of Marble Antiquities, broken and scattered about by the unregarding Turks. Amongst the rest, I found one Inscription dedicated to Severus their great Benefactor. A poor Place it is, but an Archbishops See for all that; and the Cathedral one of the best now standing in Turky. In it, Sir Edward Guitts, one of the Embassadors of England, lies buried; who died here before his Return; upon whose Tomb is a Greek Inscription. This City lies 52 Miles from Con∣stantinople to the West, and seventy from Gallipoli to the North-West. Hereor a great many Cities in Greece, Asia, Egypt, and Italy, have born the same Name of Heraclea; but they are all ruined or changed into such distant Names, as that this Place belongs no now to them. Herbauges, Herbadilia, an old ruined City not far from Nantes, in the Confines of Bretagne and Poictou; mentioned in the Lives of the Saints. Herberstein, a Barony in the Province of Carinthia in Germany. Herbipoli. See Wurtaburg. Herborne, Herborna, a small Town in Wester∣walt, in the County of Dillemburgh; which is an U∣niversity, or rather has a College founded in it, by John Count of Dillemburgh, in 1585. It stands four German Miles from Marpurg to the West, and three from Gissen, or Giessen. Herck, Archa, a Town or Castle in the Bishoprick of Leige, in the Confines of Brabant; in the middle between Maestricht to the East, and Lovain to the West. § There is also a River called the Herck, which flowing by Tongren, or Tongres, and this Castle of Herck, falls into the Demer [Demera] one Mile above Bardiest. Herklens, Herculis Castra, a Town of Guel∣derland. Hereford, Herefordia, Ariconium, a City and Bishoprick under the Archbishop of Canterbury, upon the River Wye, on the Borders of South Wales, beyond the Severn; which grew up out of the Ruins of Ariconi∣um, an old Roman Town not far from it. Camden saith▪ of old it was called Ferulega or the Forest. S. Ethelbert King of the East-Angles was slain here by Offa King of the Mercians, who invited him to his Court to Marry his Daughter; and by the malicious Instigation of Quenred his Queen, did this base Act, about 749. After which the East-Angles continued under the Mercians seventy seven Years. The Prince being e∣steemed a Martyr, there was a Church built to his Ho∣nour, and a Bishoprick established in it. In 1055. it was burnt by the Welsh, but soon after rebuilt and fortified: Yet it was very small at the time of the Conquest, not having above an hundred Men within and without. The Normans built here a very strong Castle, (now ruined,) and walled the City. Reinelm the Bishop built part of the Cathedral, in the Reign of Henry I. whose Successors built the rest, and the Close. Its Long. is 20. 24. Lat. 52. 06. The first Bishop was Putta, placed here in 680. Reinelm the XXX. in Order, succeeded in 1107. and sat eight Years. In the year 673. Theodore Archbishop of Canterbury held a Council here. There are six Gates for Entrance into it, and fifteen Watch-Towers. Herefordshire, Silures, by the Welsh called Eri∣nuck, is of an Oval Form. Bounded on the East with Worcestershire and Gloucestershire, on the South with Monmouthshire, on the West with Radnorshire and Brecknock, and on the North with Shropshire. It is a pleasant fruitful County, abounding with all things necessary for the Life of Man: They have a Proverb; that as to the three W's, that is, VVheat, VVool, and VVater, it is equal to any County in England. The VVye, Lug, and Munow, after they have fertilized the various Parts of this County, meet below Monmouth; and pass in one Channel into the Severn, near Chepstow. William Fitz-Osborn was created Earl of Hereford by William the Conqueror, in the first year of his Reign, Anno Christi 1066. Henry de Bohun (descended from the former Earls, in 1199) his Posterity in seven Descents enjoyed it till 1371. Henry of Bullingbrook succeeded (as Duke of Hereford) in the Right of Mary his Wife, Daugh∣ter of Humfrey de Bohun the last Earl of that Family,
in 1398. In 1547. Walter d' Eureux, descended from the Bouchiers and Bohuns, was created Viscount of this County. Leicester d' Eureux the present Possessour is the eighth in this Line; and a Minor. Heren, Carrhae, a City in Mesopotamia, called Heren, or Harran by the Turks: It was a Bishop's See under the Archbishop of Edessa at first; but afterwards it became the Metropolis it self: Seated in the Pro∣vince of Diarbeck, near the River Chabor; forty Miles from Edessa, sixty from Euphrates to the East. The Tartars under Tamberlane, treated this City with great Cruelty: since that it has been in a declining condi∣tion, and now not much inhabited. It is mentioned several times in the Holy Scriptures upon the account of Abraham's sojourning, and burying his Father Terah here, before he went into the Land of Canaan, (Gen. 11. 31. Acts 7. 4.) in which last place it is called Charran in Mesopotamia. And by Pliny, and Ptolemy, Charrae. Its Long. is 73. 20. Lat. 36. 10. Heresbach, a Town in the Diocese of Cleves in Germany. Heri, Aria, a Province in Persia, in Asia; more commonly called Hera or Herat; it has a City and a River of the same Name. This River, in the later Maps called Pulimoilon, riseth out of the Mountains of Cassubi; and washing the Walls of this City on all sides (it standing in an Island) falls into the Lake of Burgian. The City is called Ser-heri; in Long. 100. 13. and Lat 36. 20. Ninety German Miles West of Candahar, one hundred and twenty South-East of the Caspian. The Roses of this Pro∣vince are thought the best in the World. The Pro∣vince of Heri is a part of that of Chorasan; which is one of the most rich, fertile and populous Provinces in all Persia. In the City of Heri are made the best Persian Tapestries: on which, and other accounts, it is much frequented by the Indians, who must pass through it in their way to Persia. See Olearius his Travels. Herit, Adramitae, a Province in Arabia the happy. Herma, or Erma, a City of Galatia, called Ger∣ma, or Therma, by the ancient Geographers; and now sometimes Germaste. It stands in the Confines of Bithynia and Phrygia; upon the River [Sagari∣um] Sacrio; where it falls into the Casilirnach, which falls into the Euxine Sea at Cagani, twenty one German Miles East of Scutari. This City is placed thirty six German Miles East of Bursia. Now an Archbishop's See. Long. 60. 10. Lat. 42. 25. Hermanstad, Cibinium, a City in Transylvania, commonly by the Inhabitants called Seben and Ze∣ben; by the Italians Cibinio; by the Germans Her∣manstad. The Capital of that Dukedom; the Seat of the Prince: a great, populous, strong, well-built City; seated in a Plain upon the River [Cibinium] Cibin, which a little lower falls into the Aluta. The Inhabitants are Saxons: it stands fifteen Miles from Clausemberg to the East, and eight from Alba Julia. A Bishop's See, under the Archbishop of Colocza; though there is now no Bishop of it. The late Duke of Lorrain, of famous Memory, in November 1687. put into this place a Garrison of three thousand Impe∣rialists, by the agreement of Prince Abafti, (then Prince of Transylvania,) to enjoy the same for their Winter Quarters. Hermanstein, or Erenbreitstein, Eremberti lapis, a Castle in the Bishoprick of Trier in Germany, upon the Rhine, near its Confluence with the Moselle, standing on a Rock that is on all sides inaccessible: which makes it one of the strongest in Germany. It sustained a long Siege in the year 1637. and could only at last be taken by Famine. Hermanville, a place near Calais in France. Herndall, Herndalia, a part of Norway on this side the Mountains of Norway; by the Province of Jemplandt; on which depends Nomedale, Hellege∣landt, Frostein, Inder, Heroa, and some others; which, together with it, were yielded to the Swedes in 1645. by the Danes. Herou, Heropolis, a City of Egypt, near the bot∣tom of the Red Sea; ninety miles from Damiata to the South-East, about thirty five English Miles from Sues to the West, and sixty from the next Shoar of the Mediterranean to the South. Mentioned by Pliny and Ptolemy. Its Long. 63. 30. Lat. 29. 50. Herstal, Heristel or Haristal, a Town upon the Maes, near Liege in Westphalia, adorned heretofore with a magnificent Palace, built by Pepin King of France, who resided so frequently at it, that in the French History he is sirnamed Pepin of Heristel. This Palace was afterwards destroyed by the Nor∣mans. Hersteld, a City in the Circle of Westphalia in Ger∣many, upon the River Weser, belonging to the Bi∣shops of Paderborne since the year 1608. The Peo∣ple of Paderborne conspiring once against their Bishop, the Episcopal See was removed from Paderborne hi∣ther, which was re-established at Paderborne again in 799. Charles the Great also resided here some con∣siderable time. Hertford, Durocobriva, a Town in a County of the same name, in the South of England, upon the River Lea or Ligean, as the Saxons called it, which runs through it: In 607. here was a Synod. Now (saith Mr. Cambden) it is not very populous, yet for its Antiquity it deserves-regard. It has given Name to this County, and is reputed the Shire-Town. It has a Castle, built (as some think) by Edward the Elder; enlarged by the Family De Clare, to whom it belonged, as Earls of Hertford, in the times of Henry II. and King Stephen. Afterwards it belonged to the Crown: Edward III. granted it to John of Gaunt his Son, then Earl of Richmond, and after Duke of Lancaster. Hertfordshire, Herfordiae Comitatus, Cattieu∣chlani, hath on the North Cambridgeshire; on the West Bedfordshire, and Buckinghamshire; on the South Middlesex, and on the East Essex: it is very fruitful as to Corn and Pasture; has plenty of Woods, and Groves; and for great Towns and Rivers, it may vye with most Counties in England, considering its bigness. This County had first for Earls or Mar∣quesses, the Family De Clare; who for seven Descents between 1139. and 1314. enjoyed this Title. Being extinguished, Henry VIII. in 1537. created Edward Seymour, Viscount Beauchamp, Earl of Hertford; who afterward in 1551. was made Duke of Sommer∣set, being the fourteenth Earl, and seventh of his Fa∣mily, who hath born this amongst other Titles of Honour. Hertogenraiad, Rodia Ducis, a Town in Hol∣land. Hertzogthumb, in the High Dutch signifies a Dukedom, and is frequently used by them. So Hertzogthumb Bremen, is the Dukedom of Bre∣men. Hertzogthumb Ferden, is the Dukedom of Ferden. Heruli, an ancient People of the Country now called the Dukedom of Meckleburg, in the Lower Sa∣xony, in Germany, towards the Baltick Sea; who established themselves in Italy in the fifth Century, and were of the number of those Barbarians that formed their States upon the ruin of the Roman Empire. Odoacer their King dispossessed Augustulus in the year 476. and having reigned about seventeen years, he was slain by Theodorick King of the Ostro∣goths. The Emperor Justinian granted them Lands
to cultivate: whereupon they not only gave them∣selves entirely to him, but became Christians: and Gethesius their King was baptized in 528. Till this Conversion, their Customs were to offer Men in Sacrifices to their Gods, to kill the sick and aged, to oblige Wives not to survive their Husbands, and to indulge themselves in every voluptuousness. Hervorden, Hervordia, a City in VVestphalia, in the County of Ravensberg; once an Imperial and Free City, governed by its own Magistrates: but in 1647. taken by the Duke of Brandenburg, as Count of Ra∣vensberg, of which this was pretended to be a Mem∣ber. In 1673. it was retaken by the French; and soon after deserted, and restored to that Duke. It stands ten German Miles from Munster to the East, five from Minden. There is in it a Nunnery, the Ab∣bess of which is a Princess of the Empire. Herzegovina, Arcegovina, Chulmia, Zachulmia, Ducatus S. Sabae, a Province in Servia; called by the Turks Caratze-dag-ili, that is, the Black VVood; by the Inhabitants, Herzegovina; by the French Le Duché de Saint Saba. It is the upper part of the Kingdom of Bosnia; lying upon Dalmatia towards the West and South; the principal Town in it, is S. Saba. This was heretofore under Dukes of its own, of the Family of Cossa in Venice. Hesdin, or Hesdin-Fert, Hesdinum, Hedena, a fortified Town in the Borders of Artois; upon the River Chanche [Quantia,] which falls into the Bri∣tish Sea below Staple to the North. Built by the Spaniards in 1554. in the place where the Village of Mesnil formerly stood, as a Fort against the French; who have several times since taken it; till in 1659. by the Pyrenean Treaty it was yielded to them. It is seated in a Morass, eight Miles from Ab∣bevill to the North. Heserwaldt, a Forest in the Dukedom of Cleves. Hesperia, the Name of Spain and Italy amongst some ancient Geographers. Hessen. See Hassia. Hessi, the People of Hessen, or Hassia; which drove out the Chatti, and possessed their Land. Heszgang, the Cataracts of the Danube in Austria, beneath Lentz. Hethy, Ocetis, one of the Isles of Orkney; cal∣led also Hoy. Hetland, the same with Shetland, another of those Isles. Hetruria, a large Country in the ancient division of Italy: lying betwixt the Tyber, the Apennine Mountains, the Tyrrhenian Sea; and separated from Liguria by the River Macra, now Magra. It was like∣wise called Thuscia: The present Toscana, or Pro∣vince of Tuscany, containing the greatest part of it. Heu, Itis, the same with Assin, a small River in Ross, in the North-West part of Scotland. Hexamili, Isthmus Corinthiacus, that Neck of Land which joins the Morea to the rest of Greece; called thus, because it is six Miles over. This Passage has been attempted to be cut through, to make the Morea an Island, by Demetrius, Julius Caesar, Cali∣gula, Nero; and after, by Herodes Atticus, a private Person. These all failing, it was walled against the Turks by a Grecian Emperour in 1413. By the Ve∣netians in 1224. Amurath II. threw down this Wall in 1463. Mahomet II. in 1465. intirely ruined it, though the Venetians had spared neither labour nor charge, to fortifie and strengthen it; making to the Wall one hundred and thirty six Towers, and three Castles. In 1687. the Venetians cast out the Turks again, and are possessed of it. See Morea. Herham, a Market Town in the County of Nor∣thumberland, in Tindale Ward, upon the River Tyne, and the South side of the River Trent. This has been anciently a place of great account. For in the Infancy of the Saxon Church, we read in Bede, it was an Episcopal See, with the Title of Episcopus Ha∣gulstadiensis, in the Person of S. Eata (the fifth Bishop of Landisfarne, and the first of Hexham); to whom afterwards succeeded nine others, till the fury of the Danes discontinued it, and the Jurisdiction was annexed to the See of York. King Henry VIII. removed it from that See, to the County of Northum∣berland, whereby it became annexed to the Bishop∣rick of Durham. The Church here was scarce infe∣riour to any in England, before the Scots pulled a great part of it down. It is fourteen Miles from New∣castle to the East, and hath claimed the privilege of be∣ing a County Palatine. Heydon. See Headen. Heyssant, an Island upon the Coast of Bretagne in France. Hiamuen, a strong Town in the Province of Fo∣kien in China, in a near adjacent Island, to the South of Ganhay; from whence the Merchandises of China are transported into the Indies and the Philippine Islands. It is a considerable Place, as well for its Buildings, as its Commerce; yet the Chinese give it but the Name of a Fort, because it is a Garrison. Hichan, the same with Chios, an Island in the Me∣diterranean. Hickling, a Market Town in the County of Nor∣folk, in the Hundred of Happing. Hidro, a Mountain in Otranto in Italy. Hielmeer, a Lake in Sweden, between the Pro∣vinces of Suderman, and Neritia. Hierapolis, an ancient Archiepiscopal City of Sy∣ria. The See was subject to the Patriarch of Anti∣och. Also called Bambyca. § There was a second in the Province now called Germian, or Phrygia Ma∣jor, in the Lesser Asia: which was likewise an Archi∣episcopal See under the same Patriarch. The Turks call the Ruins of this latter (yet extant) Bam∣boukale. Hieres, Olbia, Area, a small Town upon the Coast of Provence in France, two Leagues from Thoulon; which communicates its Name to those Islands in the Mediterranean, over against it, called the Hieres. This was an ancient Colony of the Peo∣ple of Marseilles, who then gave it the Name of Olbia, from the Happiness of the Soil it stands in; and be∣ing afterwards changed to Area, it thence came to be called Hieres. Charles I. King of Jerusalem and Earl of Provence, purchased it of the Viscounts of Marseilles; being heretofore one of the strongest Garrisons on the Coast of Provence, and the ordinary place of embarquation for the Pilgrims to the Holy Land. It has been adorned with a Collegiate Church ever since 1572. Hiero-Caesarea, an ancient City of Doris in the Lesser Asia, so called in honour of Caesar; before, Hierapolis. Tacitus reckons it amongst the twelve Towns, to which being in a great part all ruined by an Earthquake in one night, Caesar remitted their Tribute, for five years, to recompence their loss. There stood a celebrated Temple here, dedicated by Cyrus to Diana. L'Hiesmois, Oximensis Pagus, a Territory in Normandy, which takes its Name from Hiesmes, a Town in Normandy; sixteen Miles from Caen to the South-East, and eighteen from Mans to the North. Higham-Ferris, a Corporation in the County of Northampton, which has the Election of two Par∣liament-men. The Capital of its Hundred. It stands upon the Eastern banks of the River Nen, with a Bridge over the same, a Free-School, an Alms-house, and anciently a Castle, whose Ruins yet are visible.
Highworth, a Market Town in Wiltshire. The Capital of its Hundred. Hiind, Indus, the great River in the East-Indies. Hildesheim, Ascalingium, Hildesia, Hildeshei∣mum, Brennopolis, a City in the Lower Saxony; which is a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Mentz, erected by S. Lewis the Emperour: it is seated upon the River Innerste, not above two Miles from the Borders of the Dukedom of Brunswick, se∣ven from Zell to the South, and six from Hamelen to the East. The Bishop being the only Roman Ca∣tholick Bishop in all Saxony, is the Protector of it; which is otherwise a Free Imperial City. § The Bishop∣rick of Hildesheim makes a particular District of it self, about ten or twelve Leagues long, between the Dutchies of Brunswick and Lunenbourgh, and the Principality of Halberstad. In which extent, there are divers Towns following the same Religion. Himera, an ancient City of the Island of Sicily, so called from its situation at the Mouth of the River Himera, or the modern fiume ai Termine. Hanni∣bal destroyed it about six hundred forty eight years before the coming of Christ: two years after which, the Carthaginians near its Ruins built another, na∣med Thermae Himerae or Thermae Himerenses, from the Hot Baths that were in the place. This is now called Termine. The Poet Stesichorus was a Native of the ancient Himera. Hinckley, a Market Town in Leicestershire, in the Hundred of Sparkingho. Hindon, a Corporation in VViltshire, in the Hun∣dred of Mere, which elects two Members of the Lower House. Hingham, a Market Town in the County of Nor∣folk, in the Hundred of Forehoe. Hinghoa, a great City of the Province of Fokien in China. The Capital of a Territory of the same Name, commanding one other old City, and divers Towns and Villages. It is beautified with Magnifi∣cent Buildings, and many Triumphant Arches, and Sepulchres. Hippocrene, a celebrated Fountain in Boeotia in Greece, sacred to the Muses amongst the ancient Poets. Hippone, Hippo Regius. See Bonne. Hippopodes, an ancient People, mentioned by Mela, that dwelt about the Scythian Sea; and were fabulously reported to have Horses feet, from nothing but their agility and swiftness in running. Hirpini, an ancient People of Italy amongst the Samnites, so called from their Capital City Hirpinum, which is now a Village, says Leander, by the Name of l' Arpaia. The farther Principate in the King∣dom of Naples was the Seat and Country of this People. Hirschfeld, Herofelda, a small Town in Hassia, upon the River Fuld; which had heretofore a cele∣brated Abbey; and was an Imperial Free-Town, un∣der the Jurisdiction of its own Abbot, together with the Territory in which it stands: but is now under the Land-Grave of Hessen-Cassel, with the Title of a Principality, by the Treaty of Munster. It stands five German Miles from Fuld to the North, and se∣ven from Cassel to the South. Hispahan. See Haspaam. Hispaniola, San Domingo and S. Dominique, a great Island belonging to the North America, called by its Natives Ayti. First discovered by Christopher Columbus in 1492. The Spaniards afterwards gave it this Name; though it is also commonly called La Saint Domingue, from its principal Town. It is seated in the Bay of Mexico; with Cuba and Jamaica to the West; Porto Rico, and the Caribbe Isles to the East; the Atlantick Ocean on the North; and the Bay of Mexico on the South. It extends from 299 to 307. deg. of Long. being one hundred and forty Spanish Leagues from East to West; sixty in breadth; and four hundred in compass; between eighteen and twenty degrees of Northern Latitude. The Spani∣ards have some Colonies at the East end; the French others at the North-West end towards Cuba. The Air is extreme hot in the Morning; but cooler in the Afternoon, by reason of a constant Sea Brize, which then riseth. The Country is always green; af∣fords most excellent Pasture; the Cattle grow wild for want of Owners, they encrease so prodigiously: Herbs, and Carrots in sixteen days become fit to Eat. It affords Ginger and Suger-Canes in vast abundance, and Corn an hundred fold. It has also Mines of Brass, and Iron; some say, of Silver or Gold. When first discovered, extreamly populous; but the Spani∣ards in a few years destroyed three Millions of Na∣tives; so that now there are very few left. The prin∣pal Town is St. Domingo, built by Bartholomew Co∣lumbus, in 1494. and removed in 1502 to the oppo∣site Shoar of the River Ozama. Whilst the Natives were Masters of this Island, it stood divided into di∣vers petty Provinces, each under the obedience of a distinct Cacique or Prince of their own. The Spa∣niards have cast it into five Cantons; viz. Bainora, Cubaho, Cajaba, Cassimu and Guacayatima. San Domingo stands in Cassimu. In 1586. Sir Francis Drake made a Descent here, took Domingo, and kept it a Month, till the Spaniards redeemed it with their money again. Histria, Hystereich, Istria, is a County in Italy; which on the East, West, and South, has the Adriatick Sea; and on the North Friuli. It is full of Woods and Quarries; affords Venice (under which it is) Ma∣terials, both for Ships and Houses; but otherwise not comparable to the rest of Italy in point of Fertility; the Air is besides sickly and unwholsom. The compass of it is about two hundred Miles. This Country was conquered by the Venetians first in 938. and finally subdued in 1190. ever since which, they have been under this State; though they have made several attempts to shake off their Yoak, and regain their ancient Liberty. Hitchin, a Market Town in Hartfordshire. The Capital of its Hundred. Hoaiching, one of the principal Cities in the Pro∣vince of Honan in the Kingdom of China. Hodu, the Persian Gulph. Hoddesdon, a Market Town in Hartfordshire, in the Hundred of Hartford, upon the River Lea. Hoeicheu, a City of the Province of Nanquin, in the South part of it, towards Chekiam; which stands in a Mountainous Country, and has five small Cities under it. Hoencourt, a Town in the Bishoprick of Cambray, near which the French were defeated in 1642. It lies three German Miles from Cambray to the North-West, and a little less from Arras to the South-West. Hoentwiel, a Fortress in Schwaben, in Germany; belonging to the Duke of Wirtembergh; seated upon a Rock between the Rivers Schlichaim and Breym, which both fall into the Necker, one above, the other beneath Rotweil. This Castle is seated less than two German Miles from the Danube to the North; and two Miles and an half from the Fountains of the Necker to the East. It stood seven or eight Sieges against the Imperialists; who in one of these (viz. that in 1641.) spent a whole Summer upon it, and at last could not take it. Hog-Magog-Hilis, a ridge of Hills, two Miles South-Eastward of Cambridge: on the top whereof is seen a Rampier, formerly so strengthened with three Ditches, as to be esteemed almost impregnable.
The same was a Danish Station. Hohenloe, or Holach, Holachius, an Earldom in Franconia, in the Borders of Schwaben, by the River Cochar; between the Marquisate of Anspach, and the Dukedom of Wirtemberg; under its own Count or Earl. Holbech, a Market Town in Lincolnshire, in the Hundred of Ellow. Holland, one of the three parts in the division of the County of Lincoln, which contains the Southern Towns from Lindsey, towards the Sea. Adorned with the Title of an Earldom since the year 1624. When King James I. created Henry Rich, Earl of Holland: whose Grandson Edward Rich, is the present Earl of Warwick and Holland. Holland, Batavia, Hollandia, the principal Pro∣vince of the Ʋnited Netherlands; called by the Spaniards la Olandia; and by all others Holland; because it is a low, Marshy, or Hollow Soil; and much over-spread with Waters. It is great too, and very fruitful: having on the North the Zuider Sea, on the West the German Ocean; on the South Zealand and Brabant; and on the East Ʋtrecht, Guelderland, and a part of the Zuider. About sixty Leagues in Cir∣cuit, therein containing twenty nine walled Towns (be∣sides others heretofore walled, which enjoy the same privileges with those that are) and four hundred Vil∣lages: eighteen of the principal Towns have Seats in the Assemblies of the States General: to wit, Dort, Haerlem, Delft, Leyden, Amsterdam, Goude, Rotter∣dam, Gorcum, Schiedam, Schoonhoven, Briel, Alcmaer, Hoorne, Enchuysen, Edam, Monnikendam, Meden∣blik, and Purmerend. Yet the diameter of this Province may be traversed in six hours. In former times it was more extended towards the East of Ni∣meguen; its District being then a part of Holland. The Batavi a Warlike Nation possessed the greatest part of this Country, in the times of the Roman Em∣pire: who were conquered by Julius Caesar, with the rest of the Galls, of whom this was then thought a part. After the Roman Empire was overthrown in the West, this Province being almost dispeopled by the Inroads of the Norman Pyrats, was given by Charles the Bald to Thierrie or Theodorick, a Prince of A∣quitain, Son of Sigebert, about 863. with the Title of a Count or Earl; his Posterity enjoyed it till 1206. in seventeen Descents; when it passed to the Earls of Hainault; in which Family it continued till 1417. and then it passed by the Surrender of Jaqueline, (Countess of Hainaule and Holland,) to Philip the Good, Duke of Burgundy, and so to the Spaniards. When Philip II. treated this Free People ill, they re∣volted; and in 1572. submitted to VVilliam of Nas∣sau, Prince of Orange; and in 1581. declared King Philip to have forfeited all his Sovereignty: and ha∣ving leagued themselves with their Neighbour States, they defended themselves so well against that Prince, by the assistance of Queen Elizabeth, that at last they forced the Spaniards to acknowledge them a Free State. And though the French King, Lewis XIV. by a sudden Surprize, brought them very low in the year 1672. yet the next year they forced him to withdraw his Garrisons, and recovered every inch of Ground from him. The Prince of Orange, though a Child in Age, out-doing by the blessing of Hea∣ven, the oldest States-men, and the most experienced Generals. In the East-Indies the Hollanders are the Sovereign Governours of the Coast of Coromandel, the Islands of Amboine, Banda, Ternate, Ceylon, and the City of Malaca; part of the Islands of Suma∣tra and Celebes, and divers places upon the Coast of Malabar. § They have also given the Name of New Holland to a Region of the Terra Australis, by them discovered in 1644. to the South of New Guiney and the Moluccaes. To a Territory of Moscovia, near the Streights of VVeigats, by them named the the Streights of Nassaw, upon the North Sea. And lastly to a Country in the North America, upon the Canadian Ocean, betwixt Virginia and New France, South-West of New England and East of the Ir∣quois in Canada. But this latter has been been in the hands of the English since 1665. Holdenby, a Castle belonging to the Crown in Northamptonshire; where King Charles the Martyr was kept a Prisoner by the Parliamentarians, from Feb. 17. 1646. to June 4. 1647. when by Cornet Joyce, one of the Officers of the Rebels, he was car∣ried to Childersley, and thence to Newmarket. Here that afflicted Prince had leisure to compose that ex∣cellent Piece, after his death Printed under the Title of ; which contributed more to the Re-establishment of his Children, and the Revi∣ving his oppressed Honour, than all the Armies and Forces in the World could have done. Holderness, the most South-Eastern Promontory or Cape in Yorkshire, called Ocellum by Ptolemy. It lies North of Saltfleet, a Town in Lincolnshire, and shoots it self forth into the Sea a great way: There are divers Towns in it. King James I. created John Ramsey, Viscount Hardington in Scotland, Earl of this Place, and Baron of Kingston upon Thames, Anno 1620. The late Prince Rupert bore the same Title, by the Creation of King Charles I. in 1643. which is now enjoyed by Conyers D' Arcie, the pre∣sent Earl of Holderness, of the Creation of King Charles II. La Hougst Vast, or Port de la Hogue, Oga, or Ogasti, Vedasti, a Haven, or Sea-Port-Town in the Territory of Coutances in Normandy; ten Miles from Bayeux to the West, and sixteen from Caen to the same. Holstein, Holsatia, that is, as the Name signifies in the German Tongue, the Hollow Stone, or Rock, or rather, a Country overgrown with Woods and Forests, (as Holt signifies in the German Tongue,) is a Dukedom of great extent in the Lower Saxony, in Germany; though often comprehended in the King∣dom of Denmark, because a part of it is subject to that Crown. It was anciently a part of the Cherso∣nesus Cimbrica: bounded on the North by the Duke∣dom of Sleswick, or South-Jutland; on the West with the German Ocean; on the East with the Bal∣tick Sea; and on the South with the Dukedoms of Bremen and Lunenburgh; separated from it by the Elbe. It is divided into four parts; Dithmarsen, Holstein, Stormaren, and VVageron. The principal Cities in it, are Lubeck, and Hamburgh; which are Hanse-Towns, or Imperial Free Cities: besides which, there are Kiel, and Rensburg in Holstein; Krem∣pend, and Gluckstad in Stormaren. Part of this Dukedom is under the King of Denmark, and part of it under the Duke of Holstein. The ancient Inha∣bitants were the Saxons, our Ancestors, who about 449. began the Conquest of Britain, which perhaps were but some Tribes of the Cimbrians. The rest which remained in Germany, were conquered with the Saxons, by Charles the Great; and continued under the Empire till 1114. when Lotharius the Em∣perour gave Holst, (or Holstein, properly so called,) to Adolf of Schaumburgh, with the Title of Earl of Holstein: whose Posterity enjoyed it till 1459. in eleven Descents; when Christiern of Oldenburgh, King of Denmark, Sweden, and Norway, Son of Theodorick Earl of Oldenburgh, and of Hedvigis, (Sister of Henry and Adolph, the two last Earls of Holstein,) succeeded in the Earldom of Holstein. The present Dukes of Holstein are descended from Christiern II. King of Denmark; who died in 1533.
From Christian III. one of his Sons, are descended the Dukes of Holstein Regalis; from Adolph, another Son, are derived the Dukes of Holstein Gottorp. But this Work will not permit me to pursue these Lines any further. Holt, a Market Town in the County of Norfolk. The Capital of its hundred. Holy Island, a small Island upon the Coast of the County of Northumberland, not far from Berwick: in which there is one Town, with a Church and Castle, and a good haven defended by a Block-house. The Air and Soil not very grateful; yet well accommoda∣ted with Fish and Fowl. Its ancient Name was Lin∣disfarne, a famous Episcopal See made by S. Aidan (one of the first Apostles of these parts) in the be∣ginning of Christianity here: which See continued from the Year 637. to 990. under two and twenty Bishops, called the Bishops of Lindisfarne, till the insolencies of the Danes on these Coasts compell'd the religious to remove to Durham. It got the Name of Holy Island from the Sanctity of the Bishops, Monks, and others that retired hither, to enjoy the benefit of its solitude and privacy. Homano, Vomanus, a River of Italy in Abruzzo, a Province of the Kingdom of Naples; which spring∣ing from the Apennine, falls into the Adriatick Sea; between the Pescara, [Aternus] and the Tronto, [Tru∣entus,] which last falls into the same Sea, near Ascoli, North of Homano. Homburgh, a very strong Town in the Territory of Wasgow, in the Palatinate of the Rhine in Germany; which has a Castle built on a steep Hill; not above two French Leagues from Bipont to the North. This Town was taken by the French in 1679. and is still in their Hands. There is another Town of this Name in Hassia; and a Castle in the Dominion or Territory belonging to the City of Basil. Honan, a Province of the Kingdom of China, to∣wards the North-East part: bounded on the North with Xani and Pekim; on the West with Xensi, on the South with Huquam, and on the East with Xan∣tum. The Capital City is Caisung; the other are Queite, Changte, Gueihoei, Hoaiching, Nanyang, and Junging. This Province contains eight great Ci∣ties, an hundred smaller Cities or great Towns, and 589296 Families. There is a City of the same Name with this Province, in the North-West part of it, near the River Croceus; which cuts through the N. of this Province. The Chinese call it, their Garden of pleasure, from its sertility; and say, it lies in the middle of the World. Hondura, a Province of new Spain, of great ex∣tent: bounded on the North and East with the Mar del Zur, and Bay of Hondura; on the South with Ni∣caragua, and on the West Guatimala. It lies two hundred Miles in length from East to West, and an hundred in breadth from North to South; under the Government of the Prefect of Guatimala. The prin∣cipal Cities and Towns in it, are Valadolid, Commaia∣gua, (made a Bishop's See in 1558.) Gracias à Dios, and Tugilho, &c. A very fruitful Province in Maze, Corn, Pasturage, Fruits, and Mines. The Bay of Honduras is a part of the North Sea, with the Province of its own Name to the South, and Incatan to the North. There are divers Islands in it. Honfleur, Juliobona, Honflorium, Honflevius, a City of Normandy, upon the Shoars of the British Sea, upon the Mouth of the Seyne, over against Har∣fleu, three Leagues from Havre de Grace to the South. Honiton or Horniton, a Borough and Market Town in the County of Devon, and the hundred of Axmister, upon the River Otter. It has the honour of electing two Parliament men. Honneau, Hon, a River in Artois. Honnecour. See Hoencourt. S. Honore de Lerin, Lerium, Lerina, a small Island on the Coast of Provence, in which is a very fa∣mous Monastery: it lies two Leagues from Antibe, [Antipoli,] to the South, and five from Freius to the East, towards the Confines of Piedmont. Hoofden, the Streights between Calais and Dover. Hoorne, Horna, a City in North Holland, not great, but very well fortified; it stands in the Con∣fines of West-Friesland, upon the Zuyder Sea, (upon which it has a large and a safe Harbor;) four Leagues from Alcmaer to the East, and six from Amsterdam to the North. Once an Imperial and Free City, but now exempted, and under the Dominion of the States of Holland. First walled in the Year 1426. It had heretofore divers fine Churches and Monasteries in it: And now the privilege of a Voice in the Assemblies of the States General. Hoornens, Hoornsche, Eylandt, an Island in the Mar del Zur, discovered by James le Maire, an In∣habitant of Hoorn, in 1616. It lies twelve hundred German Miles from the Coast of Peru, towards Asia, in Long. 228. Southern Lat. 12. Little, but very fruit∣ful. Horburgh, Argentuaria, a Castle near the City of Colmar, in the Upper Alsatia. See Colmar. Hordogna, a ruined City of Puglia, called by the Romans Erdonia or Ardonia. Horeb, Melani, a Mountain in Arabia Petraea; near which Moses fed the Flocks of Jethro, (his Fa∣ther-in-Law,) and received the Command from the Angel in the burning Bush, to fetch up the Children of Israel out of Egypt: here also Elijah, the Restorer of the Law, heard the Still small Voice. 1. Kings 19. 12. And if this be the same with Sinai, (as S. Jerome asserts,) here was the Promulgation of the Law of Nature, or the Ten Commandments, given to the Israelites. It is thought by some to extend from Pe∣tra, a City of Arabia, to Aelan upon the Red Sea; at the distance of one hundred and eighty Miles from Jerusalem to the South. The Arabians call it Gibel-Mousa, the Mountain of Moses; the Europeans, Sinai. Monsieur Thevenot, who some years since visited all these Places, in his Travels, gives a large Account of these Mountains; and of a great number of Monasteries, Chappels, Hermitages, and Cells pos∣sessed at this day by Greek and Latin Monks: who have here many very delicate Gardens, which besides what is eaten by them, afford a good Revenue; most of the good Fruit that is sold at Grand Cairo, being carried thither from these Gardens, as he observeth. Horiguela, Orcelis, Oriola, a City of Valentia, more commonly called Grihuella; which is a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Valentia: it is small, and not much inhabited; tho seated in a pleasant Valley, at the foot of an Hill; having over it a Castle, built on a Rock, which is honored with the Title of a Dukedom: it stands upon the River Tader, (now Se∣gura) which falls into the Bay of Alcante; six Spanish Leagues South of that City, and three Leagues East of Murcia. Hormiz, Saocoras, a River of Mesopotamia, which falls into the Euphrates; others call it Set. Horn, heretofore Heurn, Horna, a small Town in the Bishoprick of Leige, which has a beautiful Castle: about one League from the Maes and Roermond to the West; six from Maestricht to the North: also the Capital of the Earldom of Horn, within this Dio∣cese; which lies between Guelderland to the East, Bosleduc to the North, and the County of Lootz to the South and West. This was heretofore under Earls of its own; but they being Extinct in the last Cen∣tury, it returned to the Bishops of Leige.
Horne or Cap d' Hoorn, a Cape of the Terra del Fuego in the South America, towards the Streights of Magellan: discovered in 1616 by Le Maire, a Native of Hoorne in Holland: Some Spaniards call it the Cape of S. Salvador. Hornby, a Market Town in Lancashire, in the hun∣dred of Loynsdale, upon the River Lon: Noted for a Castle, call'd Hornby-Castle, the ancient Seat of the Lord Morley and Mounteagle. Horn Castle, a Market Town in Lincolnshire. The Capital of its hundred; upon the River Bane, and in the division of Lindsey. Horndiep, Arnapa, a small River of Holland; which ariseth in Drent, a Territory of Over Yssel; and flowing through Groningen, a little beneath Hun∣sen, falls into the River Reit Diep, after it has wa∣tered the City of Groningen. Horndon on the Hill a Market Town in the Coun∣ty of Essex, in the hundred of Barstable. Horomelt, one of the Names of Greece. Horsham, a Market Town in the County of Sus∣sex, in Bramber Rape. It is a large Borough Town, having the Election of 2 Parliament-men, si∣tuated near S. Leonards Forest. Horti, Hortanum. See Orta. Houdain, Hodanum, a small French City in la Beausse, (or in the Government of the Isle of France, according to others) near Chartres; two Leagues from Dreux to the North-East, and eight from Paris to the West, upon the River Vegre. La Houlme, Holmesia, a small District in Nor∣mandy, between the River Orne, (Olina,) and the Ter∣ritory of le Mans; in which there is no Town of note. Howden, a Market Town in the E. riding of York∣shire, giving Name to a small Territory call'd How∣denshire, near the confluence of the Rivers Ouse and Derwent. Hoy, Dumma, an Island of Scotland, which is one of the Orcades, three Miles from the Island of Mainland; call'd also Hethy. Hoye, Hoya, a small Town in Westphalia, upon the River Weser; two German Miles from Ferden to the South, and from Newburg to the North; the Ca∣pital of the Earldom von Hoye, in Westphalia; which was under Earls of its own, till 1582. when upon the Death of Otto, the last of them, it fell to the Duke of Brunswick Zell. Hudsons Bay, an Arm of the Sea, North of Esto∣iteland, in the North America; discovered by one Hudson an Englishman, in 1612. Hudwicswaldt, a City or Town in the Province of Helsing, in the Kingdom of Sweden, on the Bal∣tick Sea, towards the Province of Middlepad. Huccar, Vero, a River of Spain. Hued, or Hued-il-Barbar, Icer, Serbes, a River in the Kingdom of Algiers, in Africa; which derives its head from the Atlas, and takes so many turnings and returnings amongst the Mountains, that betwixt Bonne and Tunis it comes to be passed twenty five times. At length falls into the Mediterranean Sea. They Fish for Coral upon its Banks. Hued Nijar, Niger, a River of Africa in Aethiopia. Hued el Quiber, Nasabath, a River in the King∣dom of Algier. Huesca, Faventia, Calicula, Vesci, Osca, Escua, a City in the Kingdom of Granada. See Horiguela, which is the same City. § There is another Town of the same Name, in the Kingdom of Arragon, upon the River Ysuela; fourteen Miles from Saragosa to the North-East, and twenty from Lerida to the North-West. This is a Bishops See under the Arch∣bishop of: aragossa, and call'd by the ancients Osca Illergetum. A Council was celebrated at it in 598. Huetca, a Dutchy in New Castile, upon the Con∣fines of the Kingdoms of Granada and Murcia. Hull, Petuaria, Hullum, a Town and River in the East Riding of Yorkshire. The Town is seated upon the West Bank of the River, where it entereth the Humber; twenty six Miles from York to the South-East, and eleven from the Spurn Head, or British Sea to the North-West. Of no great Antiquity; Edward I. purchasing the Ground of the Abbat of Meaux, and built the Town, which thereupon was called Kings-Town. He made the Haven also; gran∣ted the Town a Charter, and divers Liberties; by which means it grew to that it now is; being for state∣ly Houses, strong Forts, well furnished Ships, Mer∣chandize, and plenty of all things, the best in this part of England. The Inhabitants ascribe much al∣so to Michael de la Poole, Duke of Suffolke; who procured them many Privileges, after he was by Ri∣chard II. made Duke of Suffolk. Their gainful Fi∣sheries on the Coast of Iseland, had its share in this growth. Being grown Rich, they Walled the Town, Paved their Streets, raised their chief Magistrates from a Warden to Bailiffs; at last in the Reign of Henry VI. got the Honor of a Mayor, and that the Town should be a County. Charles the Martyr Treasured up here a goodly Magazine for the benefit of his Subjects: but when he came to use it April 23. 1642: he was most unworthily and undutifully excluded by Sir John Hotham; which on the twenty fifth of the same Month was by the Parliament justified: being upon the matter the first act of Hostility against that Holy Prince. Hotham, the Son, was routed April 11. 1643. at Ancaster, by Colonel Cavendish. And both Father and Son came to be Beheaded by their Fellows Rebels: the first in 1644. and the other in 1645. for intending to return to their Allegiance. The River of Hull, riseth by Kilham in the same County; and pas∣sing on the East of Beverley, at the distance of a Mile, falls into the Humber; between Hull and Dri∣pole; being Navigable up to Beverley, and perhaps higher. Hulst, Hulstum, a City in the Low-Countries in Flanders, near Gaunt: small, but very well fortified: the Capital of the Territory of Waes: taken by the Dutch in 1645. and kept by them ever since. It stands five Leagues from Antwerp to the West, and seven from Gaunt to the North-West. Humago, Cissa, an Island near Histria. Humain, Siga, a City of Mauritania in Africa. Humana, a ruined City in the Marca Anconitana. Humber, Abus, one of the principal Rivers of England; or rather an Arm of the Sea, into which many of the Rivers of this part of England empty themselves: on the North it hath Yorkshire, on the South Lincolnshire: out of the first of these it re∣ceives the River of Hull; then the Ouse, (which bring∣eth with it Derwent, the Swale, the Your, the Wharf, the Are, Calder, and the Dun;) then the Trent which divides Nottingham from Lincolnshire; and brings many other with it, as the Darwen, the Mani∣fold, the Stoure, and many others: above Barton it receives the Ankam, out of Lincolnshire: the Mouth by which these Streams enter the German Ocean being almost seven Miles wide. Humble, Homelia, a small River of Hantshire; which rising by Bushwaltham and watering Boteley, forms an Haven, called Humble Haven, on the East of St. Andrew's Castle, over against the Isle of Wight, where it entereth the British Sea. Hungaria, Pannonia inferior, is one of the No∣blest, but most unfortunate Kingdoms, next to Greece, in Europe. The Natives call it Magiar; the Poles, Wegierska; the Germans, Ʋngarn; and the French, Hungary: On the North it is bounded with the Ʋpper Poland, and Red Russia; the Carpathian
Mountains interposing between it and them: on the East with Transylvania and Moldavia; on the West with Stiria, Austria, and Moravia; and on the South with Sclavonia, and Servia. Baudrand (in∣cluding Sclavonia) bounds it on the South with Cro∣atia, Bosnia, and Servia. It extends in length from Presburgh, along the Danube, to the Borders of Tran∣sylvania, the space of three hundred English Miles: and one hundred and ninety of the same in breadth: it takes in all that Tract of Land, that was possessed heretofore by the Jazyges Metanastae, a Sarmatian People; and part of Pannonia Superior, and Inferior. Wonderfully fruitful; yielding Corn and Grass in a∣bundance; the latter exceeding (when at its greatest length) the height of a Man: it abounds so in Cattle, that it is thought alone to be able to serve all Europe with Flesh; and they certainly send yearly into Ger∣many eighty thousand Oxen. They have Deer, Par∣tridges, and Pheasants in such abundance, that any body that will may kill them. They have Mines of Gold, Silver, Tin, Lead, Iron and Copper; store of River, or Fresh-water Fish; and Wines equal in good∣ness to those of Candia. The People are Hardy, Co∣vetous, Warlike; but Slothful and Lazy, not much unlike the Irish. Their best Scholar was St. Jerome. Their best Soldiers, Johannes Huniades, and Matthias Corvinus. The principal Rivers are the Danube, (which divides this Kingdom from end to end,) the Savus, the Dravus, and the Tibiscus: they have one famous Lake, called the Balaton, which is forty Italian Miles in length. The principal Cities are Buda or Offen, Pres∣burgh, Alba-Regalis, and Caschaw. The Hungarians are a Tribe of the Scythians or Tartars, which in the times of Arnulphus, Emperour of Germany, pos∣sessed themselves of Transylvania, and the Ʋpper Hun∣gary; under Lewis IV. Successor to Arnulphus, they passed the Danube; wasted all Germany, Italy, Greece, Sclavonia, and Dacia; till broken by the Forces of Germany, and sweetned by the Christian Religion, (first taught them under King Stephen, about 1016. by Albert, Archbishop of Prague,) they became more quiet, and better civilized. This Stephen began his Reign in 1000. This Race of Kings continued to 1302. in twenty three Descents: when Charles Mar∣tel, (Son of Charles King of Naples, and Mary Daughter to Stephen IV. King of Hungary,) partly by Election, partly by Inheritance and Conquest suc∣ceeded to this Crown: to him succeeded Lewis his Nephew, in 1343. Charles II. (another of his Descen∣dents) in 1383. Sigismund Emperour, King of Bohe∣mia, in the Right of Mary his Wife, (Eldest Daugh∣ter of Lewis) in 1387. Albert of Austria, in the Right of Elizabeth his Wife, (Daughter of Sigis∣mond) in 1438. Ʋladislaus, Son of Albert and Elizabeth, in 1444. Matthias Corvinus, Son of Jo∣hannes Huniades, by Election in 1458. Ʋladislaus II. Son of Cassimir IV. King of Poland and of Eliza∣beth, (Daughter of Albert) in 1491. Lewis II. slain in the Battel of Mohatz, succeeded in 1517. and was slain in 1527. John Sepusio, Vaiwode of Transyl∣vania, chosen upon his Death, succeeded that year; but was outed by Ferdinand, restored by Solyman the Turk, and at last died in 1540. The Hungarians Crowned Stephen his Son, an Infant, in the Cradle: but Solyman, seized the best part of his Kingdom, (un∣der pretence of defending it against Ferdinand of Austria) and Ferdinand the rest; so that ever since this wretched Kingdom has been a Stage of War, be∣tween the Austrian and the Ottoman Families. The former at this time having recovered from the latter, all the Lower Hungary; and all Tameswaer, in the Ʋpper. The Reader may be pleased to know, that all that part of Hungary, which lies on the West and North of the Danube, is called the Lower Hungary: what lies on the East and South, the Ʋpper. This King∣dom is divided into fifty five Counties; three and twenty of which in the beginning of this last War, were in the Hands of the Turks, and the rest in the Empe∣ror's. It has also two Archbishops Sees, Gran [Strigo∣nium,] and Colocza; thirteen Bishopricks; six under the first, and seven under the latter. Hungerford, a Market Town in Berkshire, in the hundred of Kentbury, upon the River Kennet. Hunni, the ancient Inhabitants of the Marshes of the Maeotis; who for the sake of a better Country to live in, invaded Pannonia in great numbers, and thence under Attila their King, who stiled himself the Scourge of God, marched victoriously into Germany, Italy, and France; till Aetius General of the Romans and Meroveus King of France slew 200000 of them in one Battel in 450. Then they retired into Pannonia again, and maintain'd themselves in divers Wars. At length the Hungarians, a Scythian race, appeared about the end of the Reign of Charles the Gross, and expelled them. Huntingdonshire, is bounded on the North by the River Avon, or Afon, which parts it from Lincoln∣shire; on the West by Northamptonshire, on the South by Bedfordshire, and on the East by Cam∣bridgeshire. The North-East parts of it are Fenny; but yield plenty of Grass for feeding of Cattle. The rest is very pleasant, fruitful of Corn, rising into Hills, and shady Groves. The whole indeed was one Forest, till Henry II. in the beginning of his Reign disforested it. The Town of Huntingdon, which gives Name to the County, is seated upon the North side of the River Ouse, somewhat high; and stretcheth out it self in length to the Northward: it has four Churches in it, a fair Bridge of Stone over the River, and near it is the Mount or Plot of an ancient Castle, (now ruined,) built by Edward the Elder, in the Year 917. Which King David of Scotland, (who had this County with the Title of an Earl, from King Stephen of England, for an Augmentation of his Estate,) in the Year 1135. enlarged with new Buildings, and Bulwarks: but Henry II. finding great Inconveniences from it, razed it to the Ground. This was a very considerable Town in the times of Edward the Confessor, and perhaps greater than now. The first Earl of Huntingdon was Waltheof, Created in 1068. two years after the Con∣quest: he being beheaded, Simon de Lyze, (who Married Maud the Daughter of Waltheof) was made Earl in 1075. David Prince of Scotland, her second Husband, was the next Earl in 1108. It continued in this Family of Scotland, till 1219. but it is now in the Family of the Hastings: George Lord Hastings and Hungerford, being by Henry VIII. Created Earl of Huntingdon, in the Year 1529. Theophilus Ha∣stings, the present Earl, succeeded his Father in the Year 1655. and is the seventh Earl of this Noble Family. Huquang, a very large Province in the middle of the Kingdom of China; counted the seventh in num∣ber, but in extent one of the greatest; its greatest length is from North to South: being bounded on the North by Honan; on the East by Nankim, and Kiamsi; on the South by Quamtum; and on the West by Queycheu, and Suchen. It contains fifteen Cities, an hundred and eighteen great Towns, five hundred thirty one thousand six hundred eighty six Families. The greatest City is Vuchang. The great River of Kiam crosseth it, and divides it; and in the middle of this Province it receiveth two other great Rivers, one from the North, and the other from the South; whose Names I cannot assign. And these three Rivers form at their meeting a very consider∣able Lake, between the Cities of Kincheu and Yocheu.
The Chinese call it also Jumichiti, and the Granary of China for its abundance: As to which they have a Proverb, that the Province of Kiangsi may furnish all China with a Breakfast; but Huquang is able entirely to maintain it. Hurepois, Hurepoesium, a District in the Isle of France; between la Beause to the West, la Brie to the East, (from which it is parted by the Seine,) and la Gastinois to the South. This heretofore was a part of la Beause. The Cities in it are Corbeil, Castres, and la Ferté Alais. The Hurons are a People of North America, in the Northern parts of New France, towards a Lake of the same Name. The River Des Hurons ariseth in the West of New France, called also the River of the Otavacks, a People bordering on the Hurons; and runs a great way towards the North-East, till at last it falls into the River of St. Laurence. The Lake des Hurons is very great, and in its extent resembles a Sea; but the Waters are fresh: it is seven hundred Leagues in Compass, as the Inhabitants about it pre∣tend: the Lake of Illinia, and the Upper Lake do both fall into it. Huz, the Country of Job, between Syria and Ara∣bia; now Omps. Husum, a City of Denmark in Jutland; in the South part of the Dukedom of Sleswick, near the Shoars of the German Ocean, and Nort Strand, (an Island so called.) It has a most noble Castle, built by the Duke of Holstein Gothorp, in 1581. under whom it now is. It stands a Gorman Mile and an half from Frederickstad to the North, four from Sles∣wick to the West. Some few years since, it was for∣tified; but the King of Denmark has slighted its Out∣works. Huy, and Hu, Huum, Huyum, Huyonum, a Town of the Low-Countries in the Bishoprick of Liege, in the Territory of Condrotz; between Liege, and Na∣mur; which has a Castle, and a Stone Bridge over the Maez, (which here receives the River Huy, which latter gives Name to it) but ruined. This place was taken by the French in 1675, and its Fortifications ruined. It stands five French Leagues from Liege to the South-West, and thirteen from Brussels to the North-East; adorn'd with a Collegiate Church, and divers others. Hyesmes. See Hiesmois. Hyeres, a Knot of small Islands on the Coast of Narbonne, or Provence, in the Mediterranean Sea. See Hieres. Hymburgh. See Haynburgh. Hymettus, a Mountain of Achaia in Greece, within a League of Athens, and about seven or eight in circumference, yielding plenty of odoriferous Herbs for the making of Honey, which has been always in great esteem. Some call it, Monte-Matto, by a cor∣ruption. There are six Convents of Caloyers or Reli∣gious Greeks planted upon the sides of it. The chief of which, call'd by the Turks Cosbachi, by the Greeks Cyriani, since the Year 1455. (when Mahomet II. took Athens and the Abbot of this House brought the Keys to him) is exempt from all Taxes to the Port, paying a sequine by way of homage. Hythe, one of the Cinqueport Towns in the Coun∣ty of Kent, in Shepway Lath: which Elects two Members of Parliament. Hyrach, Hyrcania, a Province of the Kingdom of Persia; heretofore bounded on the North by the Hyrcanian Sea, on the East by Margiana, on the West by Media, and on the South by Parthia, pro∣perly so called: Now divided into two Provinces, cal∣led Taberistan, Mazenderan. The. Hyreanian Sea, Mare Hyrcanium, takes this ancient well known Name from this Province: but it is no less frequently called, both in Ancient and Mo∣dern Geographers and Historians, the Caspian Sea. This Sea is called by various Names according to the Countries which do border upon it. It was anciently called the Sea of Chosar, from the eldest Son of Th∣garma, a Great Grand-child of Noah, by Japhet. Nubius, in his Geography, calls it the Sea of Tavist∣han; the Arabians Baharcorsum; the Persians Kul∣sum; (as they do also the Persian Gulph.) The Greek and Latin Authors, Mare Hyrcanium, or Mare Ca∣spium; the Persians call it also the Sea of Baku; the Muscovites, Gualenskoi-More. The Ancients gene∣rally thought it had a communication with the Indian Ocean; which is not true: for it has no communica∣tion with any other Sea in the World known; and therefore may most properly be called the Mediter∣ranean Sea: this was known to Aristotle, and Hero∣dotus of old. Its greatest extent is from North to South, (that is, from Astrachan, to Ferabath,) eight deg. of the Equator; or one hundred and twenty German Miles, or four hundred and eighty English Miles: its Breadth from the Province of Chuaresin, to the Mountains of Circassia (or Shirwan,) is six deg. or ninety German Miles, or three hundred and sixty English Miles. The Waters are in the middle as salt as those of any other Sea whatsoever; but it neither Ebbs nor Flows, as all the rest do, which have any Intercourse with the Ocean. It hath in a manner never a safe Harbor upon it: the best is Min∣kischlak, or Manguslave, on the side of the Grand Tartary. The Water is of the same colour with that of other Seas: it has but one Island in it, and that lies towards Persia, called Ensil, which has never an House in it. Thus far Olearius, who Travelled over it in 1636. It is generally very shallow, and flat; therefore in Tempests dangerous to those that Sail upon it: the Persians never trust to it, and rarely go out of sight of the Shoar. This Sea has on the North the Kingdom of Astrachan, and Negaia; on the East Chuaresm; on the South, the Kingdom of Per∣sia; and on the West Georgia: it receives there above an hundred Rivers which fall into it, many of which are very great; as the Wolga, the Araxis or Cyrus, the Keisilosein, the Bustrow, the Aksay, and the Koisu: towards the North, are the Rivers of Jaika, and Jems; towards the South and East the Nios, Oxus, and the Oxentes, which Curtius calls Tanais: Olea∣rius assures us, that in twenty days Travel between Roschot and Schamakap, he crossed above fourscore Rivers great and small. Hyth, a Port in the County of Kent, in Shepway Lath, which has a Castle for its Defence; upon the Streights of Calais, between Dover to the North, and Rie to the South; two Miles from the first, and five from the latter. It elects two Members of Parliament. J A. JAbesh-Gilead, an antient Town of Judaea, in the Territory of Gilead, belonging to the Tribes of Israel. All whose Inhabitants, saving four hundred Young Virgins, were by the Israelites put to the Sword, for not assisting in the War against the Ben∣jamites, Judg. 21. 11. 12. In the Year of the World 2963. Nahash, King of the Ammonites, be∣sieg'd it, and refused to accept of its surrender, other∣wise, than upon the condition of putting out the right eye of every one. In the mean time Saul, com∣ing to their relief, engaged Nahash, defeated him, and raised the Siege. 1 Sam. 11.
Jacatra, a City and Kingdom in the Island of Jaa in the East-Indies. The latter, is subject to the King of Bantam; the other, the same with Ba∣tavia; the Hollanders, under whom it is, having so new-named it. See Batavia. Jacca, an ancient City belonging to the Vascenes, now in the Kingdom of Arragon; supposed to be built by Pompey the Great, but certainly called by this very Name by Ptolemy. It is a Bishops See, un∣der the Archbishop of Saragoza; and stands upon the River Aragona, at the Foot of the Pyrenean Hills; twenty one (Baudrand saith sixteen) Spanish Miles from Saragoza to the North, eight from the Confines of France, and eight from Huesca in Arragon to the North-West. This City is the Capital of the County of Arragon. The Jacobites. Under this Name, says P. Simon, in general we may comprehend all the Monophysites of the East, i. e. such as acknowledge one only Na∣ture (the Humane) in Jesus Christ; in which Lati∣tude the Armenians, Cophtites and Abyssines will be included. But it more particularly denotes a se∣parate Church of Christians in Syria and Mesopota∣mia, consisting of about forty or forty five thousand Families, under a Patriarch of their own, who keeps his Residence at Caramit, and assumes the title of the Patriarch of Antioch, having divers Metropolitans un∣der him. Jacobus Zanzalus, a Syrian, of the sixth Century, dressing up a particular Creed out of the opinions of Eutyches and Dioscorus, was the Founder of this Church, which therefore retains his Christian Name. Amongst other customs and tenents, they deny the Trinity; they circumcise their Children first, then baptize them upon their forehead with a hot Iron; because of the words, Matth. 3. 11. He shall baptize you with the Holy Spirit and with fire. And no endeavours of the Roman See (whose Supre∣macy they disown) have hitherto been sufficient to al∣ter their Principles. Jacamcury, a City of the Hither East-Indies, called of old Sosicurae as Castaldus conjectures. Jacuby, a River of Tartary, which falls into the Caspian Sea, on the Confines of Bochar. Jada, Lade, an Island in the Archipelago. Jader, or Jada, Jadica, Guttalus, a River of Germany, more commonly called the Oder. It falls in the Baltick Sea near Stetin; having watered Si∣lesia, Marchia, and Pomerania, Hoffman placeth it in East Friseland. Others, in the County of Ol∣demburg in the Circle of Westphalia. See Oder. It gives Name to a Town at its fall. Jadog, a River in Africa; called Rubricatus, Ar∣mua, and Ardalia of old: Ladog, and Guadilbar∣ber, as well as Jadog, in later Writers. It falls into the Mediterranean Sea, through the Kingdom of Tunis. Jaen, Giennium, Gienna, Aurigi, Iliturgis, Au∣rinx, Oringe, Oningis, is a City and a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Toledo, ever since 1249, ha∣ving been three years before recovered by Ferdinan∣do out of the Hands of the Moors. It is a great and populous City, in the Kingdom of Andalusia, upon the River Guadalbollon, where it receives that of Su∣sanna; twelve Miles from the Guadalquivir to the South, towards the Borders of Granada; and eighteen from Alcala to the South-East. This City has been heretofore so considerable, as to bear the title of a Kingdom. Jafanapatan, Jaffanapatan, a City on the North of the Island of Ceylan, in the East-Indies: in the Hands of the Dutch, (who have built it a good For∣tress) and the Capital of a Kingdom of the same Name. It lies in Long. 110. 00. Lat. 10. 07. Jaffo, or Jaffa, Joppe, a Maritime City of Pale∣stine, in the Tribe of Dan, upon the Mediterranean Sea, twenty four Miles from Jerusalem; thought to be one of the ancientest in the World, as having been built and so named by Japhet the Son of Noah: Fa∣mous in all ages for the convenience of its Port; at which particularly Hiram King of Tyre his Fleet, la∣den with Cedar and Marble for the building of K. So∣lomon's Temple, discharg'd; and Jonas the Prophet took Ship for Tharsis. St. Peter also here raised Ta∣bitha from the dead, and saw the Vision of the Beasts. This City was ruined by Judas Macchabeus, and af∣terwards by the Emperor Titus. Next the Arabians established themselves in it; from whom the Chri∣stians under Godfrey of Bovillon recovered it, rebuilt the Castle, and made it a strong Garrison; adorning it likewise with the title of an Earldom, and an Epis∣copal See under the Archbishop of Cesarea. In the Year 1188. Saladine overcame and dismantled it. But Richard I. King of England, and S. Lewis King of France successively repair'd it again, till it fell fi∣nally into the hands of the Saracens in 1252. Now it consists of some poor Houses, with a small Fort, garrisoned for the Bassa of Gaza; nothing of its an∣cient Buildings appearing but in their ruins. Jagerndorff, Carnovia, or Karnow, a Town in Silsia in Bohemia, the Capital of a District of the same Name, and heretofore under the Duke of Bran∣denburgh▪ It stands upon the River Oppa, which near Hilschin falls into the Oder; four German Miles from Ratibor, a City of Bohemia, towards the West; and about three from the Confines of Moravia: there is in it a very splendid and magnificent Castle. S. Jago-Cavallero, a small Town in the Island of Hispaniola in America, twenty Leagues from S. Domingo to the East, near a Mountain from whence the rains bring down little pieces of Gold. The In∣habitants trade to San Domingo in Hides and Tal∣low. Jagos, a vagabond Barbarian People of Africa, abounding more especially in the Kingdom of Ansico in the Lower Aethiopia, or according to others, in Congo; without a certain abode, living by robbery and carnage. Parents and Children, 'tis said, have no horrour amongst them, to eat the flesh of one ano∣ther. Jagel, one of the Heads of Dwina. See Dwina. Jagntevo, a City of Servia, built on a Plain a∣mongst the Hills; not above half a Days Journey from Monte-Novo, another City of the same Province. It is pretty considerable, and has some Christians resi∣ding in it, though under the Dominion of the Turks. Jaitza, or Jaicz, Jaitia, Gaitia, Jaycza, a City of Bosnia, towards the Confines of Croatia, upon the River Plena; defended by a strong Castle, which is in the Hands of the Turks, as Calchondylas saith. The Kings or Despotes of Bosnia did heretofore reside here. Jakotyn, a small Town in the Ʋkrain, in the Pa∣latinate of Kiovia, beyond the Nieper, which has a strong Castle. It stands upon the River Supoi, eleven Miles from Kiovia to the East, and about thirteen from the Nieper, into which the Supoi falls, six Miles above Czyrkassy. This Town belongs to the Musco∣vites now. Jala, a Kingdom in the Eastern part of the Island of Ceylan in the East-Indies, with a City of the same Name; little inhabited, by reason the Air is very con∣tagious. Jalea, Elis, a City in the Morea. Jalina, Acherusia, a Lake in Epirus. Jalines, Macaria, a Town in Cyprus, towards its North End.
Ialofes, the People of the Kingdom of Senega, in Nigritia, in Africa, lying betwixt those two bran∣ches of the Niger, the Rivers Senega and Gambay. Their Emperour is called the Grand Jalof, and takes the Style of the Soveraign of thirteen or fourteen King∣doms. The Capital, where he keeps his Court, is Tu∣bacatum: There are no Towns or Cities walled in all this Empire; Tobacco, Hides, Ivory, Gum-arabick, Ambergrease, Wax, Dates, and Maze, are its princi∣pal Commodities. See Senega. La Ielle, Gala, a small River of France, which falls into the Guaronne. Iamagorod, Jama, a strong Castle anciently be∣longing to the Russ, and accounted the Key of that Kingdom; but in 1617, resigned to the Swedes. It is seated on a River called Iamische Reck; three German Miles from Narva, in Livonia. See Nar∣va. Iamaica, a very great Island in North America, first discovered by Columbus, and called thus in Honor of S. James. It was found out by him in his second Voyage to America, whilst he sailed about Cuba. In his third Voyage he suffered Shipwrack upon it; and the Spaniards ungratefully designed to have suffered him to perish, out of pure envy; but he found the Natives more kind than they. Whereupon he landed, and fell to Plant it; building the Town of Metilla; which they deserted soon after, and built Sevil, ten Leagues more West. In 1509, the Natives rebelled against Didacus, the Son of Columbus, but were sub∣dued. In 1590, the Spaniards built S. Jago, and de∣serted Sevil. In 1638, one Jackson, an English Man, with a Fleet of English Privateers, surprized and plun∣dered S. Jago; then left it to the Spaniards again. The time being come when the Spaniards were to pay for their Ingratitude to Columbus, and their Cru∣elty to the Natives, (some Millions of which they had barbarously murdered;) the English, under Penn and Venables, Landed here, about twenty thousand strong, being mostly necessitous Persons, who had been un∣done by our then Tyrant, and the Times, May 3. 1655. The Spaniards unable to resist so great a force, retired into the Woods, and Fastnesses; ho∣ping to retrieve what they thus left, by a Treaty; but it proved otherwise. For part of the English fell to Plant; the rest to Privateer upon the Spaniards, by which they got Wealth: and the Fame of this so in∣creased, that many going over to them, it became in a few years a very powerful Colony; now able alone to manage a War against all the Forces the Spaniards have in the West-Indies. This Island is situate be∣tween seventeen and eighteen degrees of North Lat. within the Tropicks, in the Mare del Nort; one hun∣dred and forty Leagues North of the Main Continent of America, fifteen South from Cuba, twenty West from Hispaniola, and one hundred and forty from Carthagena Nova. It is of an Oval Form; one hun∣dred and seventy Miles long; seventy in breadth; and contains four or five Millions of Acres; Nine hun∣dred thousand of which were Planted in 1675. In the middle there is a lofty Chain of Mountains, which run the whole length of the Isle, from East to West; from which spring plenty of pleasant and useful Ri∣vers, to the great refreshment and convenience of the Inhabitants. It has a very rich fat Soil, black and mixed with Clay, except in the South-West Parts, where it is generally a more loose Earth: it every where answers the Planter's Care and Cost. The Air is always serene and clear; the Earth in her Summer Livery; here being a perpetual Spring. It has fre∣quent Showers of Rain, constant cooling Breezes of Wind from the East: the Dews in the Night quicken the Growth of what is Planted: so that it is the most delightful, temperate, healthful, pleasant Island of all those in the West-Indies: and will be extremely con∣siderable, when it comes to be thorowly Peopled. The principal Towns in it are Port Royal, (built by the English) S. Jago, and Sevilla. The Earl of Inche∣quin, and the Duke of Albemarle, two late Gover∣nours, both of them here died. Iamaistero, or Jamaisoit, a very large County in the West Part of the Island of Nivon, or Niphonia, belonging to Japan; under which are ordinarily com∣puted twelve Provinces, or Kingdoms. Iamama, a City of Arabia Foelix, upon the Ri∣ver Astan; which falls into the Mouth of the Euphra∣tes and Tigris, about thirty German Miles South of Balsera. Jamama stands towards the Borders of Ara∣bia deserta; two hundred and fifty Miles from the Persian Gulph to the West, and seventy German Miles from Balsera to the South-West. Long. 77. 30. Lat. 27. 00. Iamba, a Province under the Great Mogul, to∣wards the River Ganges; between Patna to the East, Naugracut to the North, Lahor to the West, and Ba∣kar to the South; the City of Jamba, from which it takes its Name, stands eighty Miles from Ganges to the East, towards Lahor. Iamby, or Jambis, a Sea-Port Town, and a King∣dom of no great extent, in the Island of Sumatra, towards the Eastern Part of it. The Town stands to∣wards Palimban, within five or six Miles of the Sea, driving a notable Commerce. Iambol, Joannipolis, a City in Bulgaria. Iamboli, Chalcis, Chalcidica Regio, a Province in the North of Macedonia; between Thessalonica, the Arm of the Sea which runs up to it, the Archipe∣lago, and Thrace. The chief Towns of which are, Thessalonica, Amphipolis, and Contessa. Iames Bay, a Bay in Virginia. Iames Town, Jacobipolis, the principal City or Town in Virginia, upon the River Pawhatan, near its fall into the North Sea: begun by the English about 1607, and honoured with this Name from King James I. § Another in the Country of Letrim, in the Province of Connaught in Ireland; so called from King James I. its Founder, upon the Shannon; well Walled, but almost wholly ruined as to its Buildings, in the Wars against King Charles the First, and Se∣cond. Iam-suqueam, or Nanquin, a River of China. Iametz, a strong place in Lorain, yielded to the French King in 1632. It stands upon a little River in the Confines of the Province of Luxemburgh; be∣tween Monmedy to the North, and Damvillers to the South; thirteen Miles from Metz to the West: now dismantled. Iancoma, a Kingdom in the East-Indies, beyond the Ganges, under the King of Pegu: it stands be∣tween the Rivers Mecon to the East, and Menan to the West. Ianeiro, or Rio de Janaira, a River, the same with Ganabara in Brasil; see Ganabara. It gives its Name to a Province, under the Portuguese, in that Country, whereof S. Sebastian is the Capital. Ianiculus mons, a Hill or Mountain beyond the Tiber, in the vicinage of Rome, yielding by its emi∣nence an excellent prospect of that City; and famous in History for the Sepulchre of King Numa Pompilius, the encampment of Porsenna King of Etruria upon it, whil'st he besieg'd Rome; and for the Martyrdom of S. Peter. Now call'd Montorio, because its earth is of the colour of Gold. Ianna, a part of Greece; some say Epirus, others Thessalia. Ianinnina, Cassiope, a City of Epirus. Iannizari, Promontorium Sigeium, a Cape at the entrance of the Streights of Gallipoli, or the Helles∣pont,
in Asia, within half a League whereof the Rivers Scamander and Simois in an United Stream discharge themselves into the Ocean. The Greeks wholly inhabit a plentiful Village upon it, call'd by them, Troyasis or Little Troy; but by the Turks, Giaour-kioy, or the Vil∣lage of Infidels; this being the best Name the Turks give to Christian places, where there are no Mosques. The delightful Country of Troas is mostly discovered from this Cape; and the Island of Tenedos, in the Aegoan Sea, stands at the distance of a League from it. Ianowitz, a small Town in Bohemia; where the Swedes in 1645, gained a great Victory over the Im∣perialists: six German Miles from Prague to the North-West, towards the Confines of Moravia. Iaocheu, a great City in the Province of Kiangsi in China, with a Territory of the same Name whereof it is the Capital, extending its jurisdiction over six other great Towns; and particularly remark'd for good Porcelain Ware. Iantra. See Ischar. Iapan, Japonia, a vast Country in the Eastern Ocean, called by the Inhabitants Niphon; by the Chi∣nians, Gepuen, that is, the East; and from thence by the Europeans Japan. On the West it is bounded by the Sea of China, (which divides it from China,) and the Island or Promontory of Corea. It is supposed to be an Island, one hundred and fifty German Miles in length; seventy in breadth: The Inhabitants are all under one Prince, Heathens, and sworn Enemies of Christianity: which begun to take rooting amongst them by the Preaching of the Portuguese; but was extirpated by Fire, Sword, and the bloodiest Perse∣cution that ever was practised amongst Men. The Dutch, (who Trade here) are secured with the ut∣most Caution, that they may not surprize any part of the Shoar, or build any Fort, or do any other Act whereby they may settle themselves: nor will they permit them to see more of the Country than one small Peninsula; or of the Inhabitants, than those they Trade with; and for a long time they would not permit them to Land, Buy, or Sell, till they had re∣nounced their Christianity. This Island lies sixty Leagues from Cantan, a Province of China to the East; and about three hundred from New Spain, in America: mountainous, and generally barren; but it maintains a vast number of Cattle; yet the Inhabi∣tants do not know how to make either Butter or Cheese. This Island, totally unknown to the An∣cients, was first discovered by Antonio Mota, a Por∣tuguese, in 1542. The Jesuits in 1556, sent S. Francis Xavier to Preach here, who is called therefore the Apostle of Japan: at first they had great success, in∣somuch that in the Year 1587, they pretended to have gained two hundred thousand Converts. But this lasted not long; for about the Year 1622, there began so dreadful a Persecution, as is no where to be met with; and these new Converts having never been well groun∣ded in their new Religion, Apostatized so fast, that in seven years there were very few Christians to be found, and perhaps at this time, none. This Coun∣try lies in 35 degrees of Lat. In Long. betwixt 171. and 188. The air very healthful and generally cold. The Earth affords Gold, Silver, and Pearl; watered by divers Rivers, and Lakes, with good Ports. Some describe it to be a Mass of many Islands, going alto∣gether under the Name of Japan; and that the three most considerable, are Niphonia, Ximo, and Nicoco. The Japonese are jealous, fierce, pompous in their habits and language, sincere in Commerce, and inge∣nious imitators of the Characters and Hyeroglyphicks of the Chinese, from whom they descend. The prin∣cipal City is Meaco, tho the Emperor of late has resi∣ded at Jendo. Iapara, a Kingdom in the North of the Island of Java, in the East-Indies, with a City of the same Name, which has a good Port. Iappenaw, Japodes, a small District in Carniola, under the Emperor. Iaracazes, Canea, two Rocks at the entrance of the Euxme Sea, in the Propontis. Iaretta, Terias, Simethus, the greatest River in the Island of Sicily; it falls into the Sea, three Miles from Catania to the South West. Iarnac, Jarnacum, a small Town in Angoulmois, upon the River Charente, dignified with the Title of an Earldom: between Angoulesme to the East, and Saintes to the West, eight Miles from either; memo∣rable for a Battel here fought in the Year 1569, be∣twixt the Roman Catholicks and Huguenots; in which the old Prince of Condy, who commanded the latter, was slain, by one Montesque (a Captain under the Duke of Anjou, afterwards K Henry III. the head of the Catholicks) tho he offered one hundred thousand Crowns for his Ransom; and the Hugenots defeated, after a bloody Fight of ten hours continuance. Iaromitz, a small Town in Bohemia, upon the Elbe, twelve Miles from Prague to the East. Iaroslaw, a pleasant Town in Red Russia, be∣longing to the Poles, upon the River Sane, with a Castle; forty five Polish Miles from Warsaw to the South, thirty five from Cassovia to the North-East, and twenty from Lemburg to the North-West: near this place the Swedes gave the Poles a fatal overthrow, in 1656. In 1625. it suffered much by Fire. Iaroslaw, a great City in Muscovy, which is the Capital of a Dukedom of the same Name, and has in it a Timber Castle; it is seated upon the Wolga, thir∣ty German Miles South of Wolgda, thirty seven North of Moscho. The Dukedom of Jaroslaw is very great; and lies between that of Wologda to the North, Rostow to the South, and the River Wolga to the East. Go∣verned by a Prince of its own, till John Basilovits, Duke of Russia, Conquered it, and annexed it to his own Dominions. Since that, it has been given to the eldest Son of the Duke of Muscovy, as his Title and Residence. Iarrow, a Town in the Bishoprick of Durham, in Chester Ward; deserving a remark, for being the Birth place of the Venerable Bede. Iarsey, Caesarea, an Island on the Coast of Nor∣mandy, and part of the Dukedom of Normandy; but now annexed to the County of Southampton. This, and Guernsey, being all that is left to the Kings of England, of their great Dominions in France: from the Shoars of which it lies about five Miles to the West, and thirty from those of England to the South. The Inhabitants speak a Norman kind of French. There are in it twelve Parishes; and two Gastles, Montor∣gueil, and Elizabeth. This Island was one of the last that yielded to the prevailing Rebels, not without force, in October 1651. after the Kings return to France from the Battel of Worcester. The same Prince in 1663. sent them a Silver Mace to be born before their Chief Magistrate, as a remembrance of this their fidelity to him in his greatest distress. Iasque, a Principality of the Kingdom of Persia, upon the Borders of the Province of Kherman, ex∣tended along the Sea Coast from thence betwixt the Cape Jasque and Cape Guadel (which two are the most Southern points of Persia) and possessed by three pet∣ty Princes, of whom the chief takes the Style of the Prince of Jasque. This Prince after the Conquest of Ormus by Cha-Abas I. K. of Persia paid a yearly tribute to that Crown: which being remitted in the Reign of Cha-Sephi, his Successor Cha-Abas II. endeavoured by War to compel the Prince of Jasque again to pay the same, but in his attempts was beaten.
Jassy, or Yassi, Jassium, a City of Walachia, cal∣led by the French Jas, upon the River Pruth; thir∣ty Miles from the Confines of the Kingdom of Poland to the South, fifty from Soczow to the East, and a hundred and twenty from Caminieck to the North-East. It is not improbable, this is the Augusta Da∣c: but the later Geographers are very much mista∣ken in placing it in Moldavia, when it belongs to Walachia. The Vaivode, or Prince of these Coun∣tries, for the most part resides here; having suffer∣ed much from the Cossacks of later times, the Turks maintained a strong Garrison in it. The present King of Poland in 1686. marching this way against the Turks and Tartars, possessed himself of it, lea∣ving a Garrison: but before his return, there happen∣ed so great a Fire, that when he came, he was forced to withdraw his Forces, and leave it to the Walachi∣ans to be repaired. Jati, Bathis, a River on the West of Sicily, which falls into the Bay or Gulph of Amar on the North side, twenty five Miles South of Palermo. Java, a great Island in the East-Indian Sea, two hundred Leagues in length, and near fifty in breadth. On the West it has Sumatra; on the East, some other small Isles; on the South the vast Ocean plays full upon it; and on the North it has the Island of Borneo, at the distance of forty five German Miles. It is divided into nine Kingdoms; the greatest of which is the Kingdom of Bantam, and next the King∣dom of Materan. The whole Island produceth great quantities of Spice, and is on that account much fre∣quented by the English and Dutch. The Dutch had heretofore the Fort or City of Batavia in this Island: not contented with this, about 1684. joining with a Son of the King of Bantam, (then in Rebellion against his Father) upon pretence of assisting him, they sei∣zed the City of Bantam, took Possession of the Eng∣lish Factory, and all the Goods belonging to the English, and kept the old King a Prisoner in the Ca∣stle of Bantam. But finding there were several At∣tempts to restore him to his former Possession, in 1686. the young King (by the Advice of the Dutch) removed his Captive Father to Batavia. See Batavia. The principal Cities of this Island are, Balambuan, Bantam, Batavia or Jacatra, Japara, Jortan, Ma∣teran, (once the Capital of the whole) Panarucan Passarvan, Saraboy, and Tuban. The Southern parts were never yet much sought into, and so not much known. It lies between 130 and 140 Long and 5 and 10 of Southern Lat. § There is another Island near this, called the Lesser Java. Jaur, Jauriu, a small River in Languedoc; which riseth near S. Ponthois, and falls into the Orba, near the Castle of Pujols. Javarin, [Jaurinum.] See Gewer, and Raab. Jawer, Jauria, a City of Silesia in Bohemia; small, but indifferently populous, and the Capital of a Duke∣dom; and has also an ancient Castle: it lies not two Miles from Lignitz to the South, and about nine from Breslaw to the West. The Dukedom of Jawer lies between Lusatia to the West, Bohema (properly so called) to the South, the Dukedom of Lignitz to the North, and that of Swyednitz to the East. Jayck, Rhymnus, a River of the Asian Tartary, which falls into the Caspian Sea, between the Rha and Jaxartes: Olearius placeth it in the middle of the North end of that Sea. Jaziges, by Ovid styled Jaziges acres, and by the Writers of the middle Ages Jaziges Metanastes, were an antient People of Sarmatia Europaea; who being almost entirely exterminated thence by Boles∣laüs the Chast, King of Poland, and Lescus, in the years 1264▪ and 1282. retired in great numbers into the Ʋpper Hungary. Jazzo, See Laiazzo. Jberia, an antient Name of the Kingdom of Spain in Pliny and Strabo, taken from the River Iberus (Ebro.) § Likewise of a part of Georgia in Asia, now called Gagheti. See Georgia. Jcaria, a Mountain of Attica in Greece, in the an∣tient Tribe of Aegeus. Jda, a Mountain of Troas in Asia Minor, at the foot of which stood the famous City Troy. Athenae∣us says, nine Rivers derived their Springs from it. Therefore Horace stiles it, Ida undosa. And Diodo∣rus makes it to be the highest in the Neighbourhood of the Hellespont. Hence the Idaeus sinus took its Name, which was otherwise called Andramyttenus sinus and now le Golfe Andramytti. § A Mountain also of the Island of Candia, environed with Forests, and inhabited heretofore by the People, Dactyli Idaei. Jdanhas, Igaeaita, a ruined City in Portugal. Jddle or Iddel, a River in the County of Not∣tingham, upon which Redford is situated, emptying it self Northward into the River Dun. Idafa, a Branch of Mount Imaus. Jdria, a Town in the County of Goritia; incom∣passed with Hills on all sides; and seated upon a Ri∣ver of the same name. Remarkable for the Quick-Silver Mines in it. See Dr. Brown's Travels, p. 82, 83. It stands ten Miles from Goritia to the North-West. Jducal, Atlas Major, a vast Mountain on the South of Barbary in Africa. Jdumaea, Edom, the Country of the Edomites, mentioned frequently in Scripture, was a Kingdom of the antient Canaan, betwixt Judaea properly so called, the Stony Arabia, and the Mediterranean Sea. Its principal Cities, Dinhabah, Avith, Pai, Re∣hoboth. 1 Chron. 1. 43. &c. where see the list of the Kings and Dukes of Edom, before the time of the beginning of the Israelitish Monarchy. David after∣wards conquered and garrisoned it, 2 Sam. 8. 14. But in the Reign of Jehoram King of Judah, the Edomites revolted, and made themselves a King, 2 Chron. 21. 8. 10. and joyned with the Chaldaeans under Nebu∣chadonezar in the Siege of Jerusalem. Hyrcanus in the Ages following made War against them so effe∣ctually, that he caused them to turn Jews. They were of the Descendants of Esau. Jefferkin, Capernaum, a City in Palestine. Jehan-Abad. See Delly. Jempterlandt, Jemptia, a Province in the King∣dom of Sweden; which has Angerman to the East, Middlepad to the South, Helsing to the West, and Norway to the North. It belonged to the King of Denmark till 1645, and then by the Treaty of Broms∣broo, was resigned to the Swedes. There are three Castles, but never a City in it. Jena, a small City in Hassia in Germany, upon the River Saal, over which it has a Bridge, under the Duke of Saxon Weimar; two German Miles from Weimar to the East, nine from Leipsick to the North-East, and three from Naumburg to the South. It has a small University opened here in 1555, by the Dukes of Saxony, and a Monastery of the Dominicans foun∣ded in 1286. The Valley about it yields plenty of Wine. Jende, or Pajende, Jendus, a Lake in the Province of Tavasthia, in Finland. Jendo, Jedo or Yendo, the capital City of the Em∣pire of Japan, in the Island of Niphonia, at which the Emperor, since his leaving Meaco, keeps his Court. A vast and magnificent City, upon the Banks of the River Tonkaw or Toukon, and near a great Gulph yielding variety of Fish. The Palace Royal is a work of state: the Temples and the Palaces of the Nobility attract the admiration of Strangers. There is one Street in it almost four Leagues in length. In 1658.
it suffered by fire to the value, they say, of forty eight millions of Gold. Jengan, a City in Xensy, a Province of the King∣dom of China. It stands in a Mountainous Coun∣try near the Lake of Lieu, and has eighteen smaller Cities depending on it. Jeniscey, Jeniscea, a River in the North of Mus∣covy, which runs more East than that of Obb, and said to be greater: on the East it has a Chain of vast high Mountains, (some of them burn like Aetna;) on the West a fruitful Plain or Level, which it over∣flows every Spring for seven German Miles together, as the Nile does Egypt. This River having watered the Tingoesians and Samoieds, falls into the Sea of Zemla, or Weigats Streight. Jeniza, or Jenizza, a small City in Macedonia, built by the Turks out of the Ruins of Plla, the Birth∣place of Alexander the Great: it stands upon the Bay of Thessalonica, between the Outlets of Beuoda and Castora, (two Rivers,) twenty eight Miles from Aedessa to the East, and the same from Thessalonica to the South▪ The Inhabitants finding here great Ruins, and much Marble, believe it to have been the Palace of Philip King of Macedon. Jenkoping, Jencoping, or Jonekoping, Jonekopia, a small City in Smalland, a Province of the Kingdom of Sweden; it lies between the Lake of Wether to the West, and the Baltick Sea to the East; sixteen Miles from the latter: built all of Wood. Jenupar, a City and Kingdom under the Great Mogul, which is a part of the Hither India, on this side the Ganges: seated upon the River Coul; a hun∣dred and thirty Miles from Delly to the South, and Lahor to the North. Jepes, a Town in the Territory of Toledo in Spain. Jerby, a Market Town in the County of Cumber∣land, in the Division of Allerdale. Jere, Eara, a River near Calais in France. Jerne, Jerna, a River in Gallicia. Jero, Giaros, a small Island, or rather Rock, in the Archipelago. See Joura. Jerico, Hierico, a celebrated City in Palestine; built by the Jebusites, whilst the Children of Israel were in Bondage in the Land of Egypt, with Walls and other Defences to a wonder; all which fell down before the Ark of God, as is recorded in Joshua 6. After this it lay desolate 531 years; and was rebuilt in the Reign of Ahab King of Israel, by Hiel the Bethelite, with the loss of his Eldest and Youngest Sons, according to the Prediction of Joshua, in the year of the World 3117. It stood not above 335 years, before it was ruined by the Chaldeans under Nebuchadnezzar. After the Captivity it recovered again. Herod the Great made it his residence for some time, it having a noble Palace, an Hippodrome, an Amphitheatre, and other stately Buildings. Our Saviour honored it with his Presence and Miracles. About the year of Christ 68. it was taken by the Ro∣mans under Vespasian and Titus. It became after this a Bishops See, and was in some esteem till it fell to the Saracens. In the times of the Holy War, it was again in the hands of Christians, and of great fame; but falling the second time to the Saracens, they entirely ruined i: so that it is now only inhabited by the Arabians, who have here thirty or forty Brick Houses, as M. Thevenot assures us. It is seated in a pleasant and fruitful Plain; twelve Miles West from Jordan, and the same from Jerusalem to the North-East. The Arabians at this day call it Rihha. Mr. Fuller, in his Pisgah Sight, is of opinion, it was well inhabited between the days of Joshua and Ahab, though not walled: he makes the City of Palm▪ Trees where Ehud stabbed Eglon King of Moab, to have been Jerico. The Plain it stands in abounds in Palm-Trees, and is about nine Leagues long, and five broad. Jeroslaw. See Jaroslaw. Jersey. See Jarsey. Ierusalem, Hierosolyma, the capital City of Pa∣lestine, and for a long time of the whole Earth; ta∣ken notice of by Pliny, Strabo, and many of the An∣cients. Called, when the Children of Israel entered Canaan, Jebus; and by that name assigned to the Tribe of Benjamin by Joshua. It was in the hands of the Jebusites till the Reign of David, who took it from them, Anno Mun. 2898, and gave it the name of the City of David. Absolom his Son dispossess'd him again for some time, in 2920. Solomon his Son consecrated here the noblest Temple the Sun ever saw, in 2939. Sheshack, King of Egypt, came up against Rehoboam Son of Solomon, and took and plundered Jerusalem in 2973. In 3117. it was taken by Joas, one of the Kings of Israel, and plundered the second time. Again taken by Pharaoh Necho King of Egypt, in 3339. By Nebuchadnezzar the first time in 3350. The second time in 3360. when the Temple was burnt, and the City totally razed, and destroyed. It lay desolate thus, till the first year of Cyrus; when the Jews returned and began to re∣build it in 3420. About 3500. Nehemiah finished this Work. In 3619. Alexander the Great came up against Jerusalem; and it was delivered to him with∣out resistance, by Jaddus the High Priest. In 3629. Ptolemaeus Lagus took Jerusalem by surprize, and carried many of the Jews into Egypt. In 3780. An∣tiochus, King of Syria, took Jerusalem; slew vast numbers of the Inhabitants, prophaned the Temple; and endeavoured to extirpate the Jewish Religion by a Persecution. In 3805. the Jews, under Jonathan, totally expelled the Syrians; and regained the intire Possession of Jerusalem. In 3880. Pompey the Great entered Jerusalem, saw the Temple, and made Jeru∣salem Tributary. In 3896. Crassus entred and plun∣dred the Temple, contrary to his Faith given. In 3909. Pacorus King of Parthia took and plundered Jerusalem. The next year, Herod began his Reign over the Jews, by the appointment of Antonius: in the latter end of his Reign, and in 3950. our Saviour was born: in 3983. he suffered Death for us, being thirty three years old. In the year of our Lord 69. Titus, after a dreadful Siege, put an end to the Jew∣ish Government; destroyed Jerusalem and the Tem∣ple; which lay desolate till 132. when Adrian rebuilt it, and called it Aelia Capitolina; permitting the Christians to live here, and prohibiting the Jews. In this interval, the Bishop of Caesarea got the Superio∣rity over the Bishop of Jerusalem. In 361. Julian the Apostate, to contradict our Saviour's Prophecy, sent the Jews to repair the Temple of Jerusalem; wherein they and he were disappointed by miraculous Earthquakes, Tempests, and Balls of Fire issuing out of the Foundation. In 636. Omar the Saracen took it after a Siege of two years. In 1099. the Christian Armies under Godfrey retook it from the Saracens, when it had been four hundred sixty three years in their hands. In 1187. Saladine the Saracen recover∣ed it out of the hands of the Christians. In 1228. Frederick the Emperor recovered Jerusalem by a Treaty, without blows; and was crowned at Jerusa∣lem▪ But in 1234 the Templars having perfidiously broken the Peace, the Saracens retook and defaced it, abusing the Sepulchre, which till then had been re∣verenced by all Men but Jews. Ever since this, it has been in the Possession of the Mahometans, as they at times prevailed one upon another. It continu∣ed under the Sultans of Egypt till 1517, when Selim Emperor of the Turks, took it from them; and un∣der
this Family it is at this day; called by the Turks Elkods; that is, the Holy City. It is at this day the principal Place in Palestine; seated (saith Mr. Sandys) on a rocky Mountain, every way to be ascended (ex∣cept a little on the North) with steep Descents, and deep Valleys about it, which do naturally fortifie it: for the most part it is environed with other (not far removed) Mountains, as if placed in the midst of an Amphitheatre. On the East is Mount Olivet, separa∣ted from the City by the Valley of Jehosaphat, which also circleth a part of the North, and affords a passage to the Brook of Kedron: on the South is the Moun∣tain of Scandal, with the Valley of Gehinnon: on the West formerly it was fenced with the Valley and Mountain of Gthon. Mount Sion lay within the City, which stood upon the South side of it: on the East side of this Mountain stood the famous Temple; and between the City and the Temple, the King's Palace. Mount Calvary (which formerly lay without the Ci∣ty to the North-West,) is now well nigh the heart of it; the visiting the Holy Sepulchre being the almost only reason why Jerusalem at this day has any being. The Inhabitants of it are not many; for the most part Monks, and Religious Persons of all Nations; miserably oppressed by the Turks, who seek all op∣portunities to impoverish and injure them. This City stands forty Miles from Joppe, and the Mediterra∣nean Sea; a hundred and sixty from Damascus to the South, three hundred from Grand Cairo to the North-East, and four hundred from Alexandria; commonly believed to have been built by Melchise∣dech, and called Salem from him. It had divers Names of old, expressed in this Distich; Solyma, Lusa, Bethel, Hierosolyma, Jebus, Elia, Ʋrbs sacra, Jerusalem, dicitur, atque Salem. For above eleven hundred years together, this City was the Queen of the East. None ever so sacred, yet none ever hath suffered greater Profanations than it. The Emperor Titus erected a Temple here to Jupiter Capitolinus; and Adrian in derision both of Judaism and Christianity, engraved a Swine upon the Gate of Bethlehem; dedicated a Chappel to Venus upon Mount Calvary, another to Jupiter in the place of our Saviour's Sepulchre, and a third to Adonis in Bethlehem: all which continued till the Reign of Constantine the Great. See Bethlehem and Calvary. The Church of Jerusalem is the Mother of Christen∣dom; sanctified by the Death of Christ, the Descent of the Holy Spirit, the Preachings of the Apostles, a General Council of the Apostles in the year 49 or 50, and the Martyrdom of S. James its first Bishop. The Council of Nice allowed this Church the style and dig∣nity of a Patriarchate, tho at the same time subjecting it in point of Jurisdiction to the Bishops of Caesarea. But in 553. in the fifth General Council, or the second of Constantinople, that Subjection was reversed; and not only the See of Caesarea, but Scythopolis and Be∣rytus, were made subject to this Church. After Chri∣stianity received its Restauration by the Arms of God∣frey of Bouillon, Jerusalem bore the Title of a King∣dom; which continued from the year 1099 to 1187. in the Persons of about eight Christian Kings from the said Godfrey, with possession of the Lands and Rights of a Crown. But Frederick II. and others after, who enjoy'd the Title of Kings of Jerusalem possessed no Land in Palestine. It lies in Long. 69. 30. Lat. 31. 20. according to Mr. Fuller. Others say Long. 69. 00 Lat. 32. 44. Ieselbas, Margiana, a part of the Province of Chorasan, in the Kingdom of Persia. Iesi, Aesium, a City in the Marchia Anconitana, in the Dominions of the Church; which is a Bishops See, immediately under the Pope: it is but small; and stands upon an Hill, by the River Jesi; six Miles from the Confines of the Dukedom of Ʋrbino, twen∣ty three from Ancona to the West. Iesselmeer, or Gislemere, a City and Kingdom under the Great Mogul, lying North of the Kingdom of Guzarat, on this side the Ganges: the City is great; a hundred and twenty Miles from the River Indus to the East, and the same from Guzarat to the North. The Kingdom lies amongst the Mountains. Terra de Iesso, or Yezo, Essonis Terra, a large Country towards China and Japan; discovered by the Hollanders in 1643. It is joyned by some to the North parts of Japan; by others, separated from it by a Streight of fifteen Miles broad. All agree it is of a great extent from East to West. The chiefest City is Matzumay, which is the Capital of a Province of the same name; but no European having yet set∣led here, it is very little known. The later Voyagers have discovered a Streight betwixt Tartary and this Country, which they call the Streights of Jesso. Iesual, another Kingdom belonging to the Great Mogul in the East-Indies, betwixt the Kingdom of Patna with the River Ganges to the West, and that of Ʋdessa with the Mountains to the East. The chief City is Rajapour. Iesupol, a very strong Town and Castle in Po∣dolia in Poland; on the Confines of Pocuock, upon the River Bistris. Ieter, Jatrus, a River of Mysia, in the Lesser Asia. Ietsegen, and Iesten, or Jetsengo, two considera∣ble Territories or Provinces in Japan, in the Island of Niphon, subdivided into divers other Provinces. Jetsegen has the Region of Quanto to the East, and Jetson to the West. The latter is bounded by Ja∣maisoit to the West. Iex, and Jexdi, Hecatompylos, a City of Persia. If, Hypaea, one of the Hyeres. Iglaw, Iglova, Iglavia, Giblova, a City of the Kingdom of Bohemia, but in Moravia, upon the River Iglaw, on the Confines of Bohemia; twenty four German Miles from Prague, and ten from Lentz. This City is reasonably well peopled. Igliaco, Peneius, a River on the West of the Morea. Ihor, a City and Kingdom at the most Southern Point of the Promontory of Malacca, in the East-Indies, over against the Isle of Sumatra; distant lit∣tle more than one degree and a half from the Line, in Long 129. 31. The King is a potent Prince in these parts. The City Ihor is situated upon a River, which falls into the Ocean near the Promontory of Sincapura, where it has a good Port. Iksworth, or Ickworth, a Market Town in the County of Suffolk, in the Hundred of Thingo; re∣taining in its Name, says Mr. Cambden, the memory of the antient Iceni, who dwelt in a part of this County. The remains of a Priory, founded by Gil∣bert Blunt (sometime Lord of the Town), and of a Guildhall, are yet extant. A Pot of Roman Coyns, bearing the Inscriptions of divers Roman Em∣perors, was digged up here not many years since. Ila, Yla, Epidia, one of the Western Isles of Scotland, over against Cantyr, in 56 deg. of Lat. twenty four Miles long, and sixteen broad; plenti∣ful in Wheat, Cattle, and Herds of Deer. The prin∣cipal Towns in it are Kilmany, Dunweg, and Crome; besides which it hath divers Villages. Ilchester, a Market and Borough Town in Somer∣setshire, in the Hundred of Tintinhull, which returns two Burgesses to the House of Commons. It stands upon the River Ill or Yeovel, having heretofore sixteen Parish-Churches, as a place of great Note, Strength, and Antiquity: now reduced to two. The County-Goal is kept here.
Iler, Hilarus, Ilarus, a River of Schwaben, in Germany, which riseth in Tirol; and running North∣ward, watereth Kempten; then falls into the Danube over against Ʋlm. Ilerda, Lerida, Athanagia, a fortified and strong City in Catalonia in Spain; which is a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Tarragona: seated upon the River Segre [Sicoris,] three Leagues above its fall into the Ebro, in the Confines of Arragon. This City is mentioned in Livy as taken by Scipio; and rendred famous for an Encounter near it, between a General of Sertoris and Manilius Proconsul of Gallia; where the latter was defeated with the loss of three Legions of Foot, and 1500 Horse. Ilion. See Troja. Ilfordcomb, a Market Town in Devonshire, in the Hundred of Branton. Ill, Ellus, Hellus, Hellelus, a River of Germany, which ariseth in Suntgow, and passing through Alsa∣tia, watereth Mulhausen, Ensisheim, Colmar, and Strasburg; below which it falls into the Rhine. Illyricum, Illyris, Illyria. In the antient Geogra∣phy of Europe, this Country lay betwixt Pannonia to the North and the Adriatick Sea to the South; di∣vided into two parts, Liburnia and Dalmatia: where∣of the first was subjected to the Romans a little be∣fore the second Punick War, the other (the Eastern part) not till the Reign of Augustus. It is now nigh wholly comprehended under Dalmatia and Sclavo∣nia, under the respective Dominion either of the Ve∣netians or the Turks, except the Republick of Ragu∣sa and some Places more. The Illyricus Sinus is now call'd the Bay of Drin and the Gulph of Venice. Ilmen, a considerable Lake in Russia, towards Li∣vonia, on the South of the City Novogorod; which disburthens it self into the Lake of Lagoda, by a Ri∣ver which passeth on the East of that City called the Wolga. Ilment, Arabius, one of the most considerable Rivers in the Kingdom of Persia: it ariseth from the Mountains of Sibocoran, in the Province of Sigistan; and watering Mut, Gilechi, Racagi, beneath Sistan, it takes in the Sal; beneath Sereng, the Ghir; be∣neath Chicheran, the Ilmentel; and beneath Pasir, falls into the Arabick Ocean, in Long. 106. 30. near Macran to the West. Iltz, or Izilz, Ilza, a small Town in the Palati∣nate of Sandomir, in the Lesser Poland, with a Ca∣stle, which belongs to the Bishop of Cracow. Ilmister, a Market Town in Somersetshire, in the Hundred of Abdick. Imaus, is one of the greatest Mountains, in the Greater Asia: it begins at Mount Taurus, near the Caspian Sea; and running Southward through the whole Continent of Asia, it divides the Asian Tar∣tary into two parts and ends, at the rise of the River Ganges; where it again spreads it self East and West; and becomes a Northern Boundary to the Empire of the Great Mogul, (or Indostan;) having performed a Course of 450 German Miles, and taking various names from the Nations it passeth, as Althai, Bel∣gan, Dalanguer, &c. Imiretta, or Imaretza, a Kingdom in Gurgistan in Asia, stiled by the Turks Pacha Koutchouc, or a Little Principality, is inclosed betwixt the Mountain Caucasus, Mengrelia, the Black Sea, Guriel, and Georgia properly so called. About 120 Miles in length, in breadth 60. Wooddy and mountainous; yet not without its agreeable Valleys and Plains, Mines of Iron, and the Necessaries of Life. Under a Prince of its own, to whom heretofore Mengrelia and Gu∣riel, after their shaking off of the Yoke of the Em∣perors of Constantinople and Trebizond, own'd Sub∣jection: but now together with them, tributary to the Turk, who obliges the King of Imireta every year to send him eighty Children, as a Tribute. There are three Fortresses in this Kingdom; Scander towards the South, and Regia and Scorgia towards the North, near the River Phasis; besides scattered Villages. Its most valuable Commodities are Wine and Swine, which makes it difficult here to observe the Laws of Mahometanism. The Kings pretend to be descended of the race of King David. Imzagor, Claudius, a Mountain in Stiria. Immirenieni, an antient People towards the South of the Kingdom of Persia: of which History relates, that they embraced Christianity in the Reign of the Emperor Anastasius, about the year 500; and at their request had a Bishop sent amongst them. Imola, Cornelia, Forum Cornelii, Imola, a City in the Dominions of the Church, in Romandiola, upon the River Santerno. This is a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Ravenna; of which Alexander▪ VII. was Bishop, when in 1655▪ he was chosen Pope. It is a fine and a populous City; twenty Miles from Bononia to the East, and twenty five from Ra∣venna. Narses is said to have ruined, and the Lom∣bards to have repair'd it. Caesar Borgia made him∣self Master of it in the Pontificate of Alexander the Sixth; from which time it became subject to the Church. Imperiati, a small City in the Kingdom of Chili in America, near a River of the same Name, four Leagues from the South Sea; said to be an Episcopal See, under the Spaniards. Inacho, Apheas, a small River of Epirus; which watereth Larta on the South, and falls into the Bay called the Gulph of Larta. Index. Vid. Indus. India, is taken for a considerable part of Asia, com∣monly called the East-Indies, to distinguish it from America, which is called the West-Indies. It is thought to be the Havilah in the Holy Scriptures: by the Natives, Indostan. Bounded on the North with the Asiatick Tartary, the Mountains of Imaus, and Emodus; on the East with the Kingdom of China, on the South with the Indian Ocean, and on the West with the Kingdom of Persia. This Country consists partly in a vastly extended Continent, partly in Islands, some of which are very great. That upon the Conti∣nent, is divided into three Parts. 1. The Empire of the Great Mogul, or North India; which is a part of India intra Gangem & Indum; and more peculiarly called Indosthan; in this there are thirty five Kingdoms. 2. The Peninsula of Malabar. 3. The India extra Gangem. In the India extra Gangem, are four more considerable Kingdoms; Pegu to the West, Ava to the North, Siam to the South, and Cochinchina to the East; each of which contains many particular or lesser Kingdoms in it. The principal of the Islands are Borneo, Ceylan, Java, Sumatra, Celebes, Min∣dano, Luconia, Hainan, Pakan, Gilolo, the Moluc∣caes, and Philippine Isles. Many of these are so great, as to be divided in many Kingdoms: some of them have never been throughly discovered by the Europe∣an Nations. This Country extendeth in length from deg. 106. to 159. of Long. and from deg. 10. of Southern Latitude, to 44. of Northern. It abounds with Gold and Silver Mines, and all other sorts of Metals, but Copper and Lead; with all sorts of Cat∣tel, but Horses; with all sorts of Corn, but Wheat. So that these and Wines are almost the only things they need from other Nations, towards the Convenience, or indeed Luxury of humane Life; for this is the Store-house of Spice and Jewels, to the whole World. Alexander the Great was the first of the Grecians, who Discovered and Conquered a part of this vast Region; which soon after revolted from his Successors. The
Romans never went so far; but were honoured with some Embassies from them, when they had Po∣tent Princes, as Augustus, Antoninus, and Constan∣tine. After-times wrapped them up in the Clouds again. There was a Trade driven by the way of the Red Sea, between the Persian, Turkish, and Indian Merchants for Spice; yet there was little known of of them, till the Portuguese discovered the way by the Cape of Good Hope, in 1499. and the first Voy∣ages were made hither by them in 1500. and 1502. The principal Rivers are Indus and the Ganges. Amongst the ancient Inhabitants, the Brachmanes and Gymnosophistae for Philosophy, the Gangarides for War, were the most considerable. Alexander the Great carried his Victorious Arms hither in the year of Rome 426. and 427. (where he defeated Porus King of India). And before him, some write, Se∣miramis. There is a Tradition, that St. Tho∣mas preached Christianity here, (whence comes the Church of the Christians of St. Thomas); and that his Body, first found at Meliapour, now lyes inter∣red at Goa in a stately Church built for the pur∣pose by the Order of Emanuel King of Portugal. In the third Century, the Philosopher Pantaenus was sent by Demetrius Bishop of Alexandria to preach to the Indians. Aedesius and Frumentius in the Reign of Constantine the Great, two Laicks travel∣ling into India, voluntarily did the same. The lat∣ter of which, was afterwards by Athanasius consecra∣ted Bishop of India. See Brachmanes, Banjans, Gymnosophistae, and Benares. India extra Gangem, is bounded on the West by the furthest, or most Eastern Branch of the River Ganges; (which is called Antiboli from its spring unto its fall into the Ocean;) on the North, with unknown Countries; on the East with the Kingdom of China, and the Eastern Ocean; and on the South with the same Ocean. In this there are four great Kingdoms, which do not depend on the Great Mo∣gul. See the general Division. The West-Indies, are all those Countries more commonly called America; and the Indies, only by reason of their Wealth and distance. Indigetes. Besides the deified Heroes of the An∣cients, understood by this Name, they used it to de∣note the mixt people of Ampurdan, in the Principa∣lity of Catalonia, in Spain. See Ampurdan. Indostan, or the Empire of the Great Mogul, is bounded on the North by the Asian Tartary, and the Kingdom of Thibet; on the West by the Kingdom of Persia; on the East by the River Cosmin, or Cos∣mite, (by which it is divided from the rest of In∣dia;) on the South with the Bay of Bengala, and the Promontory of Malabar. There are, besides what lies within these bounds, some Kingdoms under this Prince beyond the Ganges towards China: in all he has under him thirty five Kingdoms. His Capital Ci∣ty is Agra. He is of the Race of Tamerlain, the Great Scythian Conquerour; and has been possessed of this Country ever since the year 1473. It is abun∣dantly rich in Gold, Silver, Precious Stones, and Mer∣chandizes. The propriety of almost all the Lands belongs to the Great Mogul: who besides, is heir to the great Lords of his Court and all Officers within his pay. Indre, Ingeris, Ander, Andri, a River of France, which ariseth in the Province of Berry; and watering la Chaster, Château roux, Loches, and taking in the Cher, falls with it into the Loyre; eight Miles beneath Tours to the West. This River in the Writers of the middle Age is called Anger. Indus, one of the greatest, first, and best known Rivers of the East-Indies; called by the Natives Sinde. It springeth out of the highest part of Imaus, (by some called Taurus,) in the Kingdom of Cassimer, in the Empire of the Great Mogul, to∣wards the Confines of the Asian Tartary: and tur∣ning Southward, watering many Provinces or Kingdoms, and taking in the Rivers of Behat, Nilab, Ravée, Coule, and many others, it at last falls into the Arabian or Indian Ocean, by four great Mouths, in the Kingdom of Tatta, between the Kingdoms of Guzarat and Persia. The Name of that Mountain, out of which it springeth, is called Peropasin. It re∣ceives between its Head and its Fall one and twenty Rivers. It had of old seven Mouths; three of which are now stopped. Ingelheim, Ingelenheinum, Ingelhemium, a small Town in the Lower Palatinate, in Germany, two German Miles from Mentz to the West. Charles the Great was born in this place in 732. After this, it was an Imperial and Free-City; but exempted in 1402. by Lewis the Emperour, and now under the Elector Palatine. Near this place S. Lewis, King of France, died in 840. Called Nyder Ingelheim, the Lower or Nether Ingelheim, to distinguish it from another called Over or Ʋpper Ingelheim. In the years 788, 948. and 972. there were great Councils held here. Ingermanlandt, and Ingrie, Ingria, a Province of Sweden; between Moscovy to the East, Livonia to the West, the Lake of Ladoga, and the Bay of Finland: betwixt which two last, the River Nerva serves as a Canal. Heretofore subject to the Russ, (who call it Isera,) before the Swedes took it from them by Conquest. The chief Town is Notteburgh, upon the Lake. Ingoldstad, Ingoldstadium, Aureapolis, a City of Germany, in the Dukedom of Bavaria, which has a Bridge over the Danube. It was at first a Village; but exalted to the dignity and magnitude of a City by Lewis of Bavaria, Emperour of Germany. In 1546. the Protestant Arms proved unsuccessful be∣fore it. Gustavus Adolphus, the Victorious King of Sweden, was not able to take it, when he attempted it in 1632. In 1410. here was an University opened, which has obtained many Privileges and good Endow∣ments from Lewis Duke of Bavaria, and Pope Pius II. It is now under the Duke of Bavaria. This City lies three Miles from Newburgh to the East, and seven from Ratisbone to the West. The houses are almost all of Wood. Inhambane, a Kingdom in the Lower Aethiopia, between Monomotapa to the North, and Caferia to the South. The chief place of which is Tonge. Inhamior, another small Kingdom in the Lower Aethiopia, towards the River Cuama, and the Con∣fines of Monomotapa. Inifa, one of the Names of Mount Imaus. Inneken, Aguntum, a Town in Carinthia. Innerness, a Town in Scotland. Ins, Inn, Oenus, Aenus, a River in Germany, which ariseth in Switzerland, from Mount Moloia (one of the Alpes,) from two Springs, on the Bor∣ders of the Valtoline; and flowing through the Earl∣dom of Tyrol by Inspruck (the Capital of it,) Hull, Schwatz, and Kufstain, it entereth the Dukedom of Bavaria; where being augmented by several other Rivers, it falls into the Danube at Passaw, over against Ilstat. Inspruck, or Insprug, Oenipons, is the Capital City of the County of Tyrol in Germany: little, but neat and populous; built in a fruitful Valley upon the River In, (or Inns,) over which it has a Bridge, and from whence it has its Name; at the foot of the Alpes. It has a neat strong Castle, in which the Dukes of Austria have sometimes resided. Walled by Otho the Great, in 1234. but those Walls are not now
maintained: it is under the Emperour. This City stands twenty Miles from Saltzburgh to the South-West, and eighteen from Trent to the North. Most memorable for the shameful Flight of Charles V. in 1552. when Maurice, (Duke of Saxony,) Albert, (Marquess of Brandenburgh,) and William (Landt∣grave of Hessen,) joining their Forces suddenly, took Auspurg (twenty Miles from hence to the North-West) in four days; thence marching directly for Inspruck, they took in their passage Eresburgh, (which was thought Impregnable;) and put that Prince, with Ferdinando his Brother, (then at In∣spruck,) into such a fright, that they were forced to cross the Alpes in the dead of the night by Torch∣light: many of the Nobility not having so much as an Horse to ride on. The next day these Confederate Princes took the Town, plundered all they found belonging to the Emperour, and Spaniards; but spared the Towns Mens Goods and Houses. This A∣ction put an end to all the Projects of that Prince in Germany; and has established the German Liberty, then in great danger of ruin. In 1689. about Janu∣ary, this City suffered much by the repeated shocks of an Earthquake. Instad, Oenostadium, a Suburb of the City of Passaw, upon the Eastern Bank of the River Inn, where it falls into the Danube. Ioannipoli, Jambol, a City of Bulgaria, which is a Bishops See. Iocelin, Josselinum, a Town in Bretagne in France, upon the River Ouste; which coming from S. Quintin, falls into the River Vilaine, near Redon. It stands sixteen Miles from Rennes to the West, and as many from S. Brieux to the North-West. Ioden, Judaei, the Jews. Igues, Gymnosophistae, a Heathen Sect of Phi∣losophers, of great Antiquity in the East-Indies, still extant. Ioigny, Joviniacum, a City in France, upon the River Yonne, [Icauna,] in Champagne, in the Terri∣tory of Sens; which is built at the foot of an Hill, and has splendid Castle belonging to it: written by some Iviniacum. Ioinville, Joanvilla, a small Town in Champagne in France, upon the River Marne [Matrona;] eight Leagues from Chaumont to the North, eighteen from Chalons to the South-East. Ennobled with the Title of a Principality by Henry II. of France, in 1552. in favour of Francis of Lorrain, Duke of Guise. Iolcos, an ancient Maritime Town in Thessalia, upon the Archipelago, at the foot of the Mountain Pelion, and near the Cities Demetrias and Pagasae. The famous Argonautae were said to embarque here. It has been since called Iaco. Iona, Ibona Hii, an Island on the West of Scot∣land: famous for the Sepulchres of the old Scotch Kings. The chief Town is Sodore, a Bishops See in time past; who had in his Jurisdiction all these We∣stern Isles, and the Isle of Man. This See was ere∣cted in 840. This is the same with Cholmkil, and lies five Miles from Dunstafag to the North-West. Ionia, a fruitful Province of the Lesser Asia, be∣twixt Caria and Aetolia, now called by the Turks Quiscon. Famous in ancient times for many consi∣derable Cities, and Noble Temples standing in it: as also for a Sect of Philosophers, called the Ionian Sect, who were of the Disciples of Thales of Miletus. The Sea betwixt Greece and Sicily, towards Macedonia, Epirus, Achaia, and the Peloponnesus, anciently bore the Name of the Ionian Sea: which Name some de∣rive from Javan the Son of Japhet. Ionne, Joanna, a River, written also Yonne: it ariseth in the Dukedom of Burgundy, from the Mountain called Morvant, near the Castle of Chi∣none; and visiteth the City of Clamesy in Nivergne, and Cretian, where it takes in the Cure; after which, passing on the East of Auxerre, it becomes sufficient for the passage of Boats of some Bulk; and admits the Serine, and Armancione: then passing by Sens, falls into the Seyne at Montreau sur Yonne, seventeen Leagues above Paris. Ionquera, Juncaria, an old Roman Town men∣tioned by Antoninus and Ptolemy. It is in Catalo∣nia, at the foot of the Pyrenean Hills, near the Pas∣sage called Col de Pertus, in the Confines of Rousil∣lon, and France; three Leagues West from the Me∣diterranean Sea, five from Perpignan to the South, and seven from Girona to the North-East. Ionquieres, Juncariae, a Town in Provence in France, upon the Mediterranean Sea; five Leagues from Marseille to the West, and fifteen from Avig∣non to the South. Iortan, Jortanum, a City and Kingdom on the North side of the Island of Java, in the East-Indies. The City has a good frequented Port, betwixt the Streights of Palambuam and Passarvan. Also a River of the same Name. Ios, an Island of the Aegean Sea, to the North of Candia; one of the ancient Sporades. Famous heretofore for the Tomb of Homer, according to Pliny. Iotapata, an ancient City of Palestine: besieged, taken, and ruined by the Emperour Vespasian, at the same time that Josephus the Jewish Historian assisted in its defence; who describes the Siege. Ant. Jud. l. 3. Iouare, or Jouars, Jotrum, an Abbey of the Be∣nedictines, in the Province of Brie in France, in the Diocese of Meaux: where a Council was celebrated in 1130. Iour, Jura, a Mountain which divides France from Switzerland. Ioura or Jero, Gyarus, Giaros, Giara, a small and barren Island of the Archipelago, whether the Romans used relegare their Criminals; i. e. in the sense of the Roman Law, in opposition to deportare, to banish them for a determinate or indeterminate time. Juve∣nal understands the same place in his Aude aliquid brevibus, gyaris, & carcere, &c. There is nothing at this day to be found upon it, but Fishermens Cabbins. Iourdain, Jordan, Jordanes, is the greatest River in the Holy Land, or Palestine; and the most cele∣brated in the Holy Scriptures: called at this day by the Inhabitants Scheriah. It ariseth in the Confines of Coelosyria, from two Fountains, (Jor and Dan,) both at the foot of Mount Libanus; four Miles above Caesarea Philippi: and running Southward, it maketh two Lakes; first that of Meroz, then that of Caper∣naum, called also the Sea of Galilee; and having wa∣tered several of the ancient Cities of the Land of Ca∣naan, (none of which are now extant,) it falls into the Dead Sea, or Lake of Sodom. It is the greatest, or rather the only River in all this Country; the rest being mere Brooks rather than Rivers. About half as broad at Jerico, as the River Seine is at Paris; very rapid, and the Water of it thick; because it passeth through fat Lands, and is very full of Fish; beset on both sides with thick and pleasant Woods. This account is given of it by Monsieur Thevenot, who saw it himself. Famous moreover to all po∣sterity, for the Children of Israel's passing it on dry ground at their entrance into Canaan, and the Pro∣phet Elijah's doing the same in company with Elisha: Our Saviour received Baptism here from the hands
of S. John; near to which particular place, the Christians built a Monastery, that is now in ruins. The Pilgrims delight to bathe in this River fancying the Water sanative from the virtue of that Sacred Contact. It overflows in Summer with the melted Snow from Mount Libanus. But in the Winter runs a low Water: and after its Current into the Dead Sea, it is clear without mixture, for above a League together: issuing thence by a subterraneous Channel into the Mediterranean. Ioyeuse, Gaudiosa, a Town in France, in the Pro∣vince of Vivarais, towards the Borders of Languedoc; honoured by being first a Viscounty, next a Dutchy: and giving Name to a Noble Family. Ipepa, Hypaepa, a City of Lydia, in the Lesser Asia; between Mount Tmolus, and the River Cay∣stro; not far from Thyatira. It is a Bishops See, un∣der the Archbishop of Ephess. Ipre. See Yperen. Iprichia, the same with Africa. Ips, Ipsium, and Ibissa, a Town in Austria. Ipsala, Cypsella, a City in Thrace, by the River Mela: at first a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Trajanopoli, or Zernis; afterwards it became the Metropolis. It lies between this City to the West, twenty nine Miles, and Drusilaba to the North-East twenty six Miles: the River in our latter Maps is cal∣led Larissa; and falls into the Archipelago, over against the Isle of Lembro, just behind that Peninsula which makes the Dardanels straight. Ipswich, Gippo-vicus, the County Town of Suf∣folk, heretofore called Gippwich: seated on the North side of the River Stour, upon the foot of a steep Hill, in somewhat a low Ground: it has a com∣modious Haven, and was heretofore a place of great Trade, with many wealthy Merchants in it, and a vast number of other people; but now decayed as to both. It was also formerly fortified with Trenches and Rampires; the loss of which, is not to be lamen∣ted; the Town being so seated, that it can never be made a place of Defence, the Hills on all sides (but the South, and South-East,) commanding it. It has fourteen Parish Churches, and a great many goodly Houses, the tokens of its former Wealth. In 991. the Danes sacked it, and nine years after repeated their Cruelty upon it. In the Reign of S. Edward, it had eight hundred Burgesses, who paid Custom to the King. There was also a Castle built here by the Normans, which Hugh Bigod, Earl of Norfolk, de∣fended against the Usurper King Stephen; but was forced to surrender at last: the ruins are now lost. Mr. Cambden supposeth it to have been demolished by Henry II. when he did the same by Waleton Castle not far off. Here landed the three thousand Flemings, which the Nobility called in against Hen∣ry II. when his Son rebelled against him. In the late Rebellion, this Town stood clear of all those Ca∣lamities which involved the rest of the Nation. The Bishop of Norwich hath a House here; and the Vis∣count of Hereford another, befitting his degree and quality. The Honourable Henry Fitz-Roy, Duke of Grafton, was created Viscount Ipswich, Aug. 16. 1672. who died of the Wounds that he received in the Service of King William before Cork, Octob. 9. 1690. This Town is also a Corporation, and sends two Bur∣gesses to the Parliament. It has a Free-School, with the convenience of a good Library, and a Ho∣spital. Cardinal Wolsey was born here, and began the building of a stately College, which bears his Name to this day. Ireland, Hibernia, Ivernia, is a great, fruitful, and noble Island on the West of Great Britain: ac∣counted in ancient time for greatness and glory, the third Island of the World; and called then the Lesser Britain. Orpheus, Aristotle, and Claudian, call it Ierna; Juvenal, Mela, Juverna; Diodorus Sicu∣lus, Iris. Others Jovernia, Overnia, and Burnia. The Natives Erin. The Welsh Yuerdon. The En∣glish Ireland. It is three hundred Miles long, and two hundred broad: on the East it has the tempestu∣ous Irish Sea, between it and Great Britain; on the West the Vergivian Ocean, on the North the Deucalidonian Sea, and on the South the Bri∣tish Ocean. Divided into four Provinces, Lein∣ster, Mounster, Ʋlster, and Connaught, which heretofore sustained the Title of as many King∣doms; comprehending in all thirty Counties, four Archbishopricks, and twelve Bishopricks. The Country is full of Woods, Hills, and Bogs. The Soil, rich and fruitful, especially as to Grass; (Pomponius Mela in the times of the Emperour Claudius, gives the very same character of it;) and therefore it has ever abounded in Cattle, which is its most Staple Com∣modity. The principal Rivers are the Shannon, the Sewer, the Barow, the Black-Water, the Shour, the Neure, the Boyne, the Leffy, &c. The Capital City heretofore Armagh, now Dublin. The Air is at all times temperate; but too moist to be at all times pleasant or wholsome. The Romans in all probabi∣lity never had any footing in this Island. This Na∣tion was converted to Christianity in the fifth Centu∣ry by Palladius, and S. Patrick; especially the lat∣ter: who planted not only Religion, but so much Learning too amongst them, that in the next Age the Monks of Ireland were eminent for Holiness and Learning; and Ireland thence called, Insula Sancto∣rum, an Island of Saints. In 694. Egfrid, King of Northumberland, first entered, and destroyed this Na∣tion with Fire and Sword; after this, the Danes, for thirty years together, wasted and destroyed them. After these, the Germans. After them, Edgar, the most powerful King of England, conquered a great part of Ireland. And when by Massacres and other Accidents the Irish were freed from all these Calami∣ties; there ensued Domestick Broils among themselves. In 1155. Henry II. being called in by the Natives, re∣solved on the Conquest of them; whereupon Ri∣chard Strongbow, Earl of Pembroke, began it: in 1172. Henry II. in Person entered Ireland; and taking upon him the Stile of Sovereign Lord of Ire∣land, the States and all the petty Kings submitted to him: and passed over all their Rule and Power, which was confirmed by Pope Hadrian. The Kings of England continued the Title of Lords of Ireland, till the Reign of Henry VIII. who took first upon him the Stile and Title of King of Ireland, in 1541. which was confirmed to Mary his Daughter, by Pope Paul IV. in 1555. The Irish have ever looked upon this Conquest as a Wrong and an Usurpation, which no Act of theirs, nor Time it self could make valid. Hence, when ever England has been imbroiled, they have taken the opportunity of Revolting. In the Reign of Edward I. when that Prince was engaged against the Scots, one Donald O-Neal stiled himself King of Ulster; and in Right of Inheritance, the undoubted Heir of all Ireland. But when in the Reign of Henry VIII. the pretence of Religion was added, first the Earl of Kildare rebelled in 1537. and was presently suppressed, taken, and beheaded, with his five Uncles. In 1539. O-Neal began another Re∣bellion: but so soon as Thomas Earl of Sussex, Lord Lieutenant, came against him with an Army, the Gentleman grew humble, submitted, and was pardo∣ned. He flew out again in 1563. burnt the Cathedral of Armagh, and besieged Dundalk; but with no suc∣cess. In 1565. Sir Henry Sidney, Lord Lieutenant, went against him, and in a Fight broke his Forces: so that flying to the Scots, (whom he had likewise in∣jured)
in 1567. he was assassinated in cold blood, and presently after attained in Parliament, and the Title of O-Neal abolished. The Earl of Desmond was the next, who in 1579. calling in the Spaniards, began another Rebellion, which ended ill for him; the Spaniards being driven out the year after, and this Earl taken and slain in 1583. In 1595. Tir-Oen, who had done great Service against the Earl of Des∣mond, and was highly favoured by Queen Elizabeth, most ungratefully began a Rebellion, the most dan∣gerous of all the other; this Earl having been bred in the Queens Service, and learned Military Dicipline from the English, which he now made use of against them. In 1598. he defeated the English at Black∣water. In 1599. brought the Earl of Essex to con∣descend to a Treaty with him. In 1601. he brought the Spaniards over to his Assistance, who took and garrisoned Kinsale; which was retaken by Sir Charles Blunt, (afterwards Lord Montjoy,) and the Spani∣ards totally driven out: whereupon Tir-Oen submit∣ted, and was brought over by the Lord Lieutenant, to King James I. in 1603. This War lasted eight years; and might have proved fatal to the English, if God had not prevented it. After this I find no general Insurrection of the Irish till 1641. when see∣ing Charles I. engaged in War with the Scots at home, they on a sudden rose up and assassinated two hun∣dred thousand English in a few days, when no body suspected any such thing. This Insurrection began September 3. The Troubles of England gave them some respit; but in 1649. and fifty, Oliver Cromwell began their Chastisement so effectually, that Ireton, and those he left to carry it on, erected mournful Tro∣phies of the Divine Vengeance against them, with no great expence of Time, Blood, or Treasure: it missed but a little, that the Irish Name and Nation had been totally extirpated. Charles II. upon his Resti∣tution in 1660. shewed them more Mercy; restored such as had any pretences of Loyalty to plead for their Estates; and governed them all his time with so much Clemency, that this Nation never was in a better State since they fell under the English, than at the time of the Death of that Good Prince. Irenopolis, an ancient City of Cilicia in Asia Minor. Afterwards called Neronias, and made an Episcopal See, some write, under the Archbishop first of Selencia, then of Anazarbus. Others place an E∣piscopal City of this Name near Babylon, under the Patriarch of Antioch. Iris, Eurotas, a River in the Morea; which washeth Misitra, and falls into the Gulph di Colo∣china on the South side of the Morea. It is now called Vasilipotamo, or Basilipotamo, that is, the Kings River. § Another in Cappadocia, understood by Valerius Flaccus, where he says,—longisque sluens amfractibus, Iris: now called Casalmach. See Casalmach. Irneo, Vindius, Hirmius, a Ledge of Mountains in Spain; commonly called El monte de las Asturas, the Mountain of the Asturas; which is a Branch of the Pyrenean Hills, running out to the West, between the Asturas to the North, and the Kingdom of Leon to the South: the greatest is called Irneo, or Erneo; and also Cueto de Hano, or Ori. Iroquois, a valiant Nation of Indians in New France, in the North America. They have main∣tained divers bloody Wars with the French there, and are the particular Enemies of the Hurons, another sal∣vage people of the same Country. Irus, a Mountain, mentioned by Arrian, upon the Shoars of the River Indus, towards Gedrosia. Is, an ancient Town of Susiana in Asia, eight days journey from Babylon, upon a River of the same Name, which discharges its Streams into the Euphra∣tes. Both remembred by Herodotus and Stephanus. Isauria, a Province, according to the ancient division, of Asia Minor: now thrown into a part of Caramania, and subject to the Turks. Its Capital City was Isau∣ropolis or Isauria, by Ammianus Marcellinus called Claudiopolis; now, Saura. Publius Servilius first reduced this Province under the Dominion of the Ro∣mans, whence he attained the Title of Isauricus. Clau∣dian thus mentions them and him, Indomites curru Servilius egit Isauros. Historians write of their Incursions into the Roman Empire, in the fourth and fifth Centuries. Iscariot, a Village of the Tribe of Ephraim, or as others say, Dan, in Palestine, not far from Sama∣ria to the East. The Birth-place of the traiterous Judas. Ischar, Jatrus, a River of Bulgaria; which riseth out of Mount Hemus, and watering Ternova, a City of that Province, falls into the Danube at Suistefo. It is the third River from the Western Border, and now more usually called Iantra. Ischeboli, or Ischepoli, Scopelus, an Inland City of Thrace; made a Bishops See by Leo the Emperour, under the Archbishop of Adrianople. I suppose it is the same with that which is now called Ipsola. Ischia, Aenaria, Inarime, Pithecusa, an Island on the Coast of the Kingdom of Naples, near the Bay of Puteolum; not above three Miles from the Shoar to the West. Its Circuit is of twenty Miles; of old cal∣led Inarime; and by the Greeks, Pithecusa. It has a City of the same Name, well fortified, with a Castle built on a Rock; in which Ferdinando, King of Na∣ples, found shelter, during the storm brought upon him by Charles VIII. of France; who in 1495. con∣quered this whole Kingdom in a few days. This City is a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Naples; eighteen Miles from Naples to the West. Claudius Nepos, a Frenchman, in 1586. published an exact Map, and Description of this Island; which is inser∣ted into the Description of Italy, published by Anto∣nius Maginus. Iscodar, the Turkish Name of Scutari, or Scodra. Idenstein, a County in Weteraw, a Territory in the Upper Circle of the Rhine; between Hassia to the East, and the Rhine to the West: by some, Isem∣bourg. Isakal, Lein Alschemes, Busiris, Ramesses, a ru∣ined old City in Egypt, within the Delta; the ruins of which are so called. Isenberg, Isidis Mons, a Mountain in Schwaben, near Ausburgh. Isendyck, Isendium, a small but strong Town, upon the Sea Coast in Flanders, over against Bierv∣liet, a Town belonging to the Hollanders. This Town stands upon the Scheld; three French Leagues from Sluys to the East, and something above four from Middleburgh to the South; and was fortified by the Spaniards against the Dutch. Isenach. See Eysenach. Isenghien, Isegemium, a Castle in Flanders, in the Territory of Courtray; which gives the Title of an Earl or Count, to the Family of Vilnia. It is now under the French, two Leagues from Courtray, to∣wards Bruges to the North. Iser, Isara, a River of Germany, in the Duke∣dom of Bavaria. It ariseth in the Borders of the County of Tyrol, three Miles from Inspruck to the West; and flowing to the North through Bavaria, watereth Munick, or Munichen, (the Capital of that Dutchy) and Frisingen; beneath which, the Amber (Ambra) from the West, falls into it at Land∣schut:
and at last it ends in the Danube, over against Derkendorf; six Miles West of Passaw, and the same distance above Straubing to the East. L'Isere, Isara, a River in France, which is cal∣ed Isar by Ptolemy, and Scoras by Polybius: it ari∣seth in the Territory of Tarentaise, near Moutiers, in the Dukedom of Savoy, which it watereth; beneath which, it takes in the Arche from the South; then passeth by Montmelian to Grenoble; over against which, it admits the Drac, from the South; and a∣bove Valence, falls into the Rhosne. It is a rapid Ri∣ver. § There is another of this Name in the Duke∣dom of Bavaria in Germany. Isernia, Aesernia, a City in the Kingdom of Na∣ples, by some called Sernia. It stands in the Pro∣vince of Molise; and is a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Capua; seated four Miles from the River Volturno to the East, and the same from the Confines of the Terra di Lavoro; at the foot of the Apennine; thirty Miles from Capua to the North, and almost twenty from Trivento to the South. It is now in a tolerable good state, and made more fa∣mous by the Birth of St. Peter Celestine, a Pope. Isin, Istnisca, a Village and a River in Bavaria; six Miles from Munichen to the East. Isis, a River of Oxfordshire; at the Confluence of which with the River Thame, stands Dorchester in the same County. Island, Thule, Islandia, is a great Island in the Northern Ocean, called by the Dutch Het Islandt; by the Germans Ynslandt. It lies between Norway to the East, and Greenland to the West; from East to West two hundred French Leagues, and about half so broad. Well peopled, and fruitful towards the Sea-shoar; but the middle is barren, desolate, and very Mountainous. Nddock a Norwegian, first discovered it in 860. and called it Sneeland, that is, the Land of Snow. Flocko, a Pyrate of Norway, af∣terward gave it the Name of Isee-Land; from the great quantity of Ice he found about it. It began to be inhabited by the Norwegians under Ingulphus, so soon as ever it was discovered; that Nation being then dissatisfied with Horald their Prince. It became sub∣ject to Norway in 1260. by doing Homage to that Crown; and in the Right of that Kingdom it belongs to the King of Denmark, who every year sends them a Governour, who resides at the Castle of Bestede, cal∣led otherwise Kronniges-Gard, that is, the Vice-Roys Residence. They were converted to the Christian Faith, by Adebert Bishop of Bremen: Canutus, King of the Vandals, settled Bishops first amongst them, in 1133. one at Hola, another at Schalholt (the two principal Cities) and to each of them annexed a School. They had at first neither Money nor Cities; but lived in Caves, in the sides of Mountains; cove∣red their Huts with Fishes Bones, and eat dried Fish instead of Bread. They speak the ancient Cimbrian Tongue. In 1584 the Bible was Printed in their Language. They have no Cattle, but Horses and Cows; nor any Trees, but Box and Juniper. The Country produceth so great a quantity of sweet Grass, that their Cattle would burst, 'tis said, if they did suffer them to eat it as they would. On the East and West sides of the Isle, there are burning Mountains. The Inhabitants are strong and fierce. It lies between eight and ten degrees of Long and in Lat. 67. one hundred and fifty German Miles from the Shoars of Norway to the West. Their longest day in Summer is twenty four hours without night, and their night in Winter, when the Sun enters into Capricorn, the same without day. The Vulgar believe the Mountain Hecla to be the Prison of damned Souls Mines of Sulphur are found in it, with which the Mer∣chants drive a Traffick. Isle de feu, the Island of Fire, one of the Islands of Cap. Verde, upon the Coast of Africa; so called from a burning Mountain therein. It has a Port defended by a Fort on the North West. The Ille of France, Insula Franciae, is a very great Province; the most celebrated, rich, and popu∣lous of any in that Kingdom. It is bounded on the North by Picardy, on the East by Champagne, on the West by Normandy, and on the South by La Beausse: it contains in it twelve Counties, as le Parisis, la Brie Francoise, l' Hurepois, le Gastinois, le Mantoan, le Vexin Francois, le Beavoisis, le Valois, le Sois∣sonois, &c. The principal City is Paris, the Royal City of this Kingdom. Islas de los Ladrones, or Islas de las Velas, by the French called Isles des Larrons, a mass of little Islands in the Archipelago of St. Lazare, betwixt the Oriental and the Pacifick Oceans, extending from North to South, at the extremity of our Hemi∣sphere, Eastward. Discovered in 1520. by the fa∣mous Magellan. Some, inhabited by a salvage peo∣ple, whose addiction to Thievery occasioned this ge∣neral ill name upon them all, of the Islands of Thieves. Yet the greatest part are barren. They reckon fifteen principal ones. The Air, temperate: but that the Hurricanes from time to time rage with violence. These Salvages are excellent at making of Matts; and they traffick to Tartary in Canoes. Isle Maurice, an Island in the Aethiopick Ocean, to the East of Madagascar: so named by the Hol∣landers in 1598. in honour of Maurice of Nassaw, Prince of Orange: But the Portugueze made the first discovery of it, who called it Ilha do Cerno or Swan-Island; the English also have given the Name of Warwick to its Haven. In 1640. the Hollanders set∣tled upon it, and have built it a Fort. It yields Palm∣trees, Cocao, Ebony, plenty of Fish, and Tortoises of a vast magnitude. § There is another small Island of this Name, near the Coast of Moscovia, to the West of Weigats Streight, discovered by the Hollan∣ders in 1594. in their search for a North Passage to China. Full of Lakes, Ponds, and Marishes. Isles des Papas, du Pape, or des Princes, cal∣led by the Turks Papas-Adasi; by the Greeks, Papa∣donisia, or the Priests Island, (from their being in∣habited by the Religious Caloyers of the Order of S. Basil) lie within four Leagues of Constantinople, betwixt the Sea of Marmora, and the entrance into the Streights of Gallipoli. The Europeans of Constan∣tinople and Pera ordinarily divert themselves at them. Isles des Perles, the Islands of Pearl, are a Shoal of Islands in the South Sea, twelve Leagues from Panama, in South America: to which the abun∣dance of Pearls, heretofore fish'd out of the Sea ad∣jacent, occasioned the giving of this Name. The two principal, are Del Rio and Tararequi. Maze, and odoriferous Trees grow upon them. The Spani∣ards here having made an end of all the Natives, serve themselves of the Negro Slaves of Nicaragua to look after the Fields and the Cattle. Isle des Sacrifices, an Island upon the Coast of the Province of Tlascala in New Spain in America, near the City St. Jean d'Ʋlva: so called, from the cruel Sacrifices of Men, made by the Natives, to their Gods. The Spaniards used for some time to discharge their Merchandises at this place. Islebe. See Eisleben. Issenos, Selinus, Trajanopolis, a City in Cilicia, in the Lesser Asia. Ismar. See Smyrna.
Isne, Issny, Ysna, Viana, a small City in Schwa∣ben, in Germany, in the Territory of Algow, upon the River Arg; which falls into the Lake of Con∣stance; four German Miles from Kempten to the West, the same from Lindaw to the North-East, and eleven from Ʋlm to the South; made an Imperial Free Town by Charles IV. Emperour of Germany. Isnich, Ascania, Palus, Nicaea, Antigonia, a City in Bythinia; famous for the first General Council here held in 325. See Nicaea. Isnigmid, Nicomedia, a ruined City of By∣thinia. Isola, Insula, Aesulum, Aesulae, an Episcopal City in the Province of Calabria Ʋlterior, in the King∣dom of Naples. § This Name is also given to the Ri∣ver Cremera in Tuscany: to an Island of the iber, called in Latin, Libanus almae Veneris: and to a City of Histria, in Latin Alietum. Isonzo, Isontius, Natisco, Sontius, a River of Friuli: it ariseth out of the Carinthian Alpes in Carniola, a Province of Germany; and entering Fri∣uli, a Province of Italy, it watereth the County and City of Goritia, and also Gradiska; where taking in Frigido, Turre, and some other Rivers, it leaveth Aquileja; and falls into the Gulph of Trieste, five Miles South-East of Aquileja: near this River Oda∣cer, who had made himself King of Italy, was slain by Theodorick King of the Goths, in 489. To this Place the Turks came under the Command of Asa-Beg, in 1177. in the time of Mahomet the Great; and overthrew Jeronimo Novello, Count of Verona, a famous Commander of those times; and slew him in Battel, together with his Son, and most of his Commanders; destroying a Party of three thousand Venetians, and setting one hundred Villages on fire. Ispaham. See Haspaam. Ispirite, Sparte, a Village and Mountain in Thrace, upon the Euxine or Black Sea. Issar, Sichem, a ruined Place in Samaria, in the Holy Land. Issedon, an ancient City of Scythia beyond the Mountain Imaus, supposed by some to be the Modern Ciracoram in Tartary; or Synchun, or Suchur, in the Kindom of Tangut, towards the Region of Cathay in China. Issel. See Yssel. Issoire, Isiodorum, a City in Auvergne in France, upon the River Allier, which divides this Province; and falls afterwards into the Loyre; six Leagues from Clermont to the South. This City is called Icciodo∣rum, Issorium, and Icodurum. Issoudun, Exelodunum, Exsoldunum, a strong Town in the Dukedom of Berry in France, in the Diocese of Bourges, upon the little River Thiol, seven or eight Leagues from Burges. A Synod was as∣sembled at it in 1081. Issus. See Laiazzo. Istacar, Istacarta, a City in Persia, one of the most ancient of that Kingdom, and once a Royal Ci∣ty; but now scarce a Village; the City of Xiras ha∣ving sprung out of its Ruines, and overwhelmed it. It stood one Mile from the Araxis, now Ben∣damur. Istthmus Corinthiacus, the Neck of Land be∣twixt the Ionian and Aegean Seas, near Corinth; or betwixt the Gulph of Corinth, and the Gulph of Engia, which connects the Morea with Achaia, and the rest of Greece. The Emperours, Julius Caesar, Caligula, and Nero, in vain attempting to cut a pas∣sage from the Ionian Sea into the Archipelago through it, created the Proverb, Istthmum fodere, for an unsuccessful undertaking. It is six Miles long. There was afterwards built upon it a Wall of the same length, called Hexamilium and Hexamili; which Amurah II. destroyed; the Venetians repaired and fortified; and Mahomet II. again destroyed in 1443. § Istthmus of Panama. See Panama. § Isth∣mus of Suez, an Istthmus betwixt the Mediterranean Sea to the North, and the Red Sea to the South, which joins Egypt to Palestine and Arabia Petraea, seventy Arabian Miles large: taking this Name from the City Suez upon the Banks of the Red Sea. It has been attempted to cut a passage through it from the two Seas, divers times, in vain. Istria. See Histria. Istrig, Sargetia, a River of Walachia; which ariseth in the South part of Transylvania, and falls into the River Marish. In the Bed of this River, Decebalus buried his Treasure, when invaded by the Emperour Trajan. Italia, Latium, Ausonia, Hesperia, Oenotria, Sa∣turnia, is the most celebrated Country in Europe; the Mistris, and Civilizer of all the rest. As she had anciently all those Names I have already expressed; so of later times, the Germans call it Welschlandt, or Wallischlandt; the Danes Ualland; the Turks Talia; the Poles and Sclavonians Uloska. Its an∣cient Bounds extended no further to the North, than the Rivers of Arnus, now Arno; and Aesis, Esino; afterwards it was enlarged by the Conquest of the Senones, to the River Rubicon, now Il Pisatello. All between these Rivers and the Alpes, being then called Gallia Cisalpina. But at this day it is extended to the Alpes, and the River Varus; which parts it from France and Germany to the West and North; on which side also the Adriacick Sea divides it from Dalmatia: on the South the Tyrrhenian, Sicilian, and Ligurian Seas divide it from Africa; on the West the same Sea washeth it; and on the East the lower part of the Adriatick Sea, and the Ionian, which divide it from Greece. This Country lies in the form of a vast Peninsula; and resembles very much the Leg of a Man. It containeth in length from Augusta Praetoria, (now Aoust,) at the foot of the Alpes, unto Otranto, (in the most Eastern Point of the Kingdom of Naples) one thousand and twenty Miles: in breadth from the River Varo, (which parts it from Provence) to the Mouth of the River Arsa in Friuli, where it is broadest, four hundred and ten; about Otranto, where narrowest, it has not above twenty five; and in the middle from the Mouth of Pescara on the Adriatick Sea to that of the Tiber, on the opposite Shoar, is one hundred twenty six Miles: its whole Circuit may be about three thousand four hundred forty eight Miles. The Apennine Hills di∣vide it into two parts: it is a very fruitful, pleasant Country; and towards the North extremely well wa∣tered with Rivers. At first divided into divers Tribes and Nations; which being all united by the Roman Conquests into one Empire, upon the ruin of that, it became again divided into divers Seigniories and Republicks; that are now severally in the hands of the Pope, the King of Spain, the Republick of Ve∣nice, the Dukes of Savoy, Florence, Mantoua, Mode∣na, and Parma; the Common-wealths of Genoua and Lucca, and some other small Principalities; of all which, I shall discourse in their proper places. This Country lies towards the midst of the Temperate Zone: from 28. deg. and an half of Long. to 42. and an half: and from 37. deg. and an half of Lat. to 46. and an half. In every respect so delight∣ful, that divers Writers call it the Garden of Europe. Watered by the Rivers Po, Tanaro, Garigliano, Ar∣no, Reno, Tiber, Volturno, &c. Adorned with a great many magnificent, handsome, well built Cities, divers Universities, and more Bishopricks than any Country in the World besides. Italica, Heraclea, a City of Asia.
Itching, a River of Hantshire, meeting with the River Test at their fall into the Sea, near Southam∣pton. Winchester stands upon its Banks. Ithaca, an Island in the Ionian Sea, near Cepha∣lonica: now called Isola del Compare, and Val de Compare: by the Turks, Phiachi or Theachi. And in Dionysius Africanus, Nericia. This was the Birth∣place of Ʋlysses, as Virgil hath it, Sum patria ex Ithaca comes infoelicis Ʋlyssei. Aen. 3. Iton, Itona, a small River of Normandy, which washeth Eureux; and then falls into the River Eure. Ituraea, the ancient Roman Name of a Region in Palestine, since called Bacar. See Bacar. In the time of our Saviour it was a Tetrarchate under the Government of Philip, Herod's Brother. The Inha∣bitants were a mixture of the Tribes of Gad and Reuben. Itzeho, Itzhoa, a small City in Holstein properly so called, in the very Borders of Stomaria, upon the River Stor; two German Miles from the Eibe and Gluckstadt, towards the South-East. Iuanogrod, a Castle in the County of Ingerman∣land, near Narva; from which it is parted only by the River Plausa. Built and fortified by the Russ; and conquered by the Swedes, together with the Province, in which it stands. Iucatan, or Yucatan, a Peninsula in New Spain, in North America, within the Government of Mexico, running into the North Sea, betwixt the two Gulphs of Mexico and Honduras, above two hundred and fifty Leagues in circuit. Fertile, especially in Cot∣ton; and planted with the Cities, Merida, Salaman∣ca, Valladolid, &c. It was first discovered by Fran∣cis Hernandez of Corduba: and afterwards conquered by Francis Montege, by a War of nine years, in 1536. Iudea. See Palestine. Iudenburg, a City of the Ʋpper Stiria, upon the River Muer, which falls into the Drave, in the Bor∣ders of Hungary; nine Miles above Gratz to the West, and two from the Confines of Carinthia. It is under the House of Austria, and thought to be the ancient Sabatinca Norici. Iudia, Ʋdia, Odiaa, the Capital City of the King∣dom of Siam, in the East-Indies, where the King resides: thirty Leagues from the Indian Ocean, upon the River Menan. In Long. 129. 00. Lat. 15. 00. And is a Place of great Trade. Iudicello, Amananus, a River of Sicily, which ariseth from Mount Aetna; and passing through the City of Catania, falls into the Ionian Sea, after a Course of ten Miles. Ivel, a River of Bedfordshire, falling into the Ouse: upon which stand Biglesworth and Shefford. Ivetot, a Seigniory in the Paix de Caux in Nor∣mandy. Said to have been erected into a Kingdom by King Clotaire I. in satisfaction for the Murder of Gautier Lord of Ivetot, committed in the Church upon a Good Friday by King Clotaire's own hand. Others write, this is a Fable. St. Ives, a Borough and Market Town in the County of Cornwall, in the Hundred of Penwith, which returns two Burgesses to the House of Com∣mons. It has a Haven to the North or Irish Sea. § A Market Town in Huntingtonshire, in the Hun∣dred of Hurstington, upon the River Ouse, over which it hath a fair Stone Bridge. Said to be so called from S. Ivo a Bishop, who about the year 600. prea∣ched Christianity throughout England, and here died. Ivette, Iveta, a small River of France, which falls into the Orbe. Iuhorsky, or Juhora, Jugra, Juhra, a Province in the North of Moscovy, upon the White Sea. It hath a City of the same Name. Ivica, Ebusus, an Island on the East of Spain, be∣longing to Majorca, and seated between it and Spain: only twenty Miles in compass, with a secure Haven on its South side. It affords great plenty of Salt, and has no hurtful Creature in it. The Bishop of Tarragona is the Proprietor of this Isle. It is on all sides incompassed with Rocks, or small Islands, which make the approach to be very dangerous. Iuine, Junna, a small River in Gastinois in France; which arising near the Forest of Orleance, and bending Northward, takes in Estampes and some other small Rivers; and falls into the Seyne at Corbie. Some believe it to be the same with the River Yone; and that it was called Estampes, from the Town of that Name upon it. Ivingo, a Market Town in Buckinghamshire, in the Hundred of Colstow. Iuliers, Juliacum, a City of Germany; menti∣oned by Tacitus and Ammianus Marcellinus; called by the Inhabitants Gulick: See Gulick. § Also the Name of a Dukedom in the Province of Westphalia, between the Rhine to the East, and the Maes to the West; bounded on the North by Ʋpper Guelderland; on the East by the Bishoprick of Cologne; on the South by Eifall, and the Bishoprick of Treves; and on the West by the Dukedom of Limburg. The Ri∣ver Roer divides it into two parts. This from 700. was under Princes of its own, to 1609. when upon the death of John William, the last Duke, there arose a contest between the Duke of Newburg, and Bran∣denburg; which in 1612. broke out into a War; these two Dukes in the end dividing the Dukedom between them; and entering a League for their mu∣tual defence, against who ever should annoy either of them in that which he possessed. The Dukes of Sa∣xony at the same time pretended a Right; which though they never prosecuted, yet they still reserve unto themselves. Iuncto, Tagrus, a Mountain in the Kingdom of Portugal. Iunnan, Junnanum, a great Province in the Kingdom of China, in the South-West Borders to∣wards the East-Indies: on the North it is bounded by the Kingdom of Tibet, and the Province of Su∣chem: on the East it has Queycheu, and Quamsi, (two other Provinces of China;) on the South the Kingdoms of Tunkim, and Cochin-China; and on the West, the Kingdom of Pegu. The Southern parts of this Province have been conquered by the King of Tunkim, and are in his hands. It has its Name from Ynvam, a vast City, seated in Long. 131. 00. Lat. 25. 30. This Province contains two and twenty great Cities, eighty four smaller, and one hundred thirty two thousand nine hundred fifty eight Families. Iunquera. See Jonquera. Iura, a Mountain which divides France from Switzerland, called by the Germans Iurten; by the Swiss Leberberg and Leerberg. It begins at the Rhine near Basil to the North; extends to the Rhosne, and the County of Beugey to the South; having many different Names from the People by which it passeth. That part which begins at the Rhosne, four Miles from Geneva (and lies between the County of Burgundy and Beugey) is called le Credo: after∣wards it is called St. Claude, about the rise of the River Doux; it has the Name of Mont de Joux, in the Borders of Basil, Pierreport, and Botzberg; more South Schafmat; and by the Swiss Leer∣berg.
Iurat, a part of the Mountain Jura, which lies between Burgundy and Switzerland; also called Jurten. Iurea, Eporedia, called Ʋrbs Salassiorum by Ptolemy, and Eporaedio by Antoninus in his Itine∣rary; at this day Jurea by the Inhabitants; Jurée by the French; is a City of Piedmont in Italy; the Capital of the Territory of Canavese, and a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Turin: seated upon the River Doria [Duria] which falls into the Po be∣neath Rivarotta; between Chivas to the West, and Casal to the East; thirty Italian Miles from Turin to the North, and twenty five from Aoust to the South-West. This City has been under the Duke of Savoy, ever since 1313. who has taken care to fortifie it very well: it has also an ancient Castle, and a Stone Bridge over the River Doria. The French took it in 1554. during the Wars of Italy. It has of anci∣ent time given the Title of a Marquess. Iuriogrod. See Derpt. Iustinopolis or Justiniana. See Achrida, Cabo di Istria, and Giustandil. Iutland, Jutia, Cimbrica Chersonesus, is a very great Province of the Kingdom of Denmark; exten∣ded in the form of a vast Peninsula from North to South, and only joined to the Continent at the South end; where Holstein, a part of this Promon∣tory, joins it to Germany; on the West it has the German Ocean, on the North and East the Baltick Sea. It is divided into the Northern and Southern Jutland. The Northern Jutland is divided into four Dioceses, viz. Rypen, Arhusen, Alborch, and Wisborch; this part is under the King of Denmark: the Southern is divided into three, viz. Sleswick, Flensborg, and Hadersleben; this is under the Duke of Sleswick, who is of the Blood Royal of Denmark. Charles Gustavus King of Sweden took Jutland in his late Wars, and thence passed over the Ice into the Neigh∣bouring Islands. It was the Country, most suppose, of the ancient Cimbri. Ixar, a small Town in the Kingdom of Arra∣gon, upon the River Martinium; twelve Miles from Sarragoza to the South; which gives the Title of a Duke. Ixe, a Kingdom on the South of Japan. Iyo, a Province in Japan, in Xicoca; towards the West of it, and the Island Ximoam; which has in it a Town of the same Name. K A. KAchemire, a Kingdom in the Estates of the Great Mogul, along the Mountain Caucasus, towards the Kingdom of Lahor, and the Borders of Indostan; with a City, its Capital, of the same name. The City is all built of Wood, unwalled, traversed by a River over which it has two Bridges, and near a great Lake, four or five Leagues in circuit, falling in∣to the same. The Country affords excellent Pastu∣rage, about thirty Leagues long, and twelve broad. Kaimachites, a Province or Tribe amongst the Asian Tartars, by the great River Ghamma; between Mongal to the North, and the Kingdoms of Thibet, and Tangut. These People give Name to that part of the Ocean, which bordereth upon them. Kalisch, Calisia, a City in the Kingdom of Po∣land; built upon the River Prosna, which a little lower falls into the Warta; five German Miles from the Confines of Silesia, and twelve from Breslaw to the North-East. It is the Capital of a Palatinate in that Kingdom, and suffered very much from the Swedes in the year 1657. Kalmar. See Calmar. Kalmintz, Celemantia, called by Ptolemy the Town of the Quades, is now a Village in Austria; not far from the Fountains of the River Teye, in the Consines of Moravia; thirty Miles (saith Baudrand) from Zuaian, a Town of Moravia to the West. Kalmouchs, a People or Tribe of the Grand Tar∣tary, toward the Coast of the Caspian Sea. Kam, the ancient Name of Egypt. Kamenieck, Camienick, Camenecia, Clepidava, Camenecum, a strong City in the Ʋkraine, in the Kingdom of Poland, which is the Capital of Podolia. The Poles call it, Kaminieck Podelsski. It is a Bi∣shops See, under the Archbishop of Lemberg; and stands upon a Mountain by the River Smotrzyck, which a little lower falls into the Neister: thirty Miles from Lemberg to the South-East, eighty from Warsaw, and one hundred and seventy from Constantinople, to∣wards the Frontiers of Moldavia. The Turks very often attempted this Place without any success: but having suffered much by Fire in 1669. and being thereupon in 1672. besieged by them, it was taken; the Poles being then engaged in a Civil War amongst themselves, and the Town not in a condition to de∣fend it self. The Cossacks under the Command of the Sieur Mohila blocked it up in April 1687. The Polish Army offered to attack it about September following: but upon the Approach of the Ottoman Forces, they were both of them forced to retire: the Polish Army kept it in a manner blocked up by their Encampment in September 1688. About a Month after, they left the Tartars to put a Convoy of Provisions into the Place. In 1689. August 20. the Forces as well of Lithuania as Poland, under the Command of the great General of Poland, setting down before it, began a formal Attack; till on the eighth of September following, being crossed with ill success, they raised the Siege. Kaniow, Kaniovia, a strong Town in Poland, upon the Nieper, where the River Ross falls into it, in the Palatinate of Kiovia. It lies seven German Miles from Czyrcassis to the North West, twenty seven from Kiovia to the South-East, and upon the same side of the River. This Town is one of the strong Places which belongs to the Cossacks. Kanisa, Canisia, a Town of the Lower Hunga∣ry; seated upon the River Sala in the County of Zalad, between the Lake of Balaton, and the Drave; not above one Mile from the Confines of Stiria to the East. This was taken by the Turks in 1600. though the Imperialists did all that was possible to prevent it; the year following the Arch-Duke of Austria, besieged it from the beginning of September, to the end of October, without any success. In 1664. Count Se∣rini besieged it, and had infallibly carried it, if he had been succoured in time. In 1688. June 30. the Count de Budiani blockaded it with a Body of six thousand Hungarians, and two thousand Heydukes: which continued till April 13. 1690. when in pursu∣ance of a Capitulation, that the Emperour had rati∣fied, the Keys of the Gates hanging upon a Chain of Gold were delivered to the Count de Budiani by a Turk, saying, I herewith consign into your hands the strongest Fortress in the Ottoman Empire. The Imperialists found in it great store of large Artil∣lery, taken heretofore from the Christians; and some with old German Inscriptions. Kargapol, Cargapolia, a City in Muscovy, in the Western parts of that Kingdom, near the Lake of Onega; between the Confines of Sweden, and the Dwina: there is a Lake and a River of the same Name belonging to this City. Karkessa, a Town in Arabia Deserta. Karn, Taurn, a Mountain in Carinthia.
Karnwaldt, a Forest in Switzerland. Karopnitze, Orbelus, a Mountain in Macedonia, which is a Spur of Mount Hemus; dividing Macedo∣nia from Thrace. Kassel. See Cassel. Katsbach, Cattus, a River in Silesia, which wash∣eth Lignitz. Kaufbeurn, Kaufbura, a City in the Circle of Schwaben, in Germany, in the Territory of Algow, upon the River Wertach; between the Bishoprick of Ausburg to the East, and the Territory of the Ab∣bat of Kempten; not above sixteen Miles from the Confines of Bavaria to the West, eight from Aus∣burg to the South, and five from Nimmeguen to the East. This Town bought its Liberty of Conrade II. Emperour of Germany, at the price of fifty thou∣sand Crowns; when it had been two hundred years in the Possession of the Barons Uon Hoff; who coming out of France into the Service of Lotharius the Emperour, built it in 1340. It embraced the Reformation in 1624. Kaunberg. See Haynburgh. Keci, Daona, the Capital City of the Kingdom of Tunking in the East-Indies. Kederminster or Kidderminster, a Market Town in Worcestershire, in the Hundred of Halfshire, up∣on the River Stower, over which it has a Bridge: well inhabited and traded for its Stuffs, and beautified with a fair Church. Keisers-Lautern, Caesaropolis, a City in the Palatinate of the Rhine, upon the River Lauter, near the Dukedom of Bipont; six Leagues from Spire to the West, a little less from Worms: called by the French, Caseloutre: it has a Castle, and a Territory or Jurisdiction, belonging to it: which surrendred to the Marquess de Boufflers, the thirtieth of Sep∣tember 1688. Kelaggebar. See Petra. Keldan, Chaldaea, a Province of Asia, in Assyria; towards the Conjunction of the Euphrates and Ty∣gris; often called Babylonia from its Capital City. This Province, which lay all on the West of the Euphrates and Tygris, by the taking of Bagdat, fell under the Dominion of the Turks; whereas before it was under the Persians. The Principal Cities in it are Bagdat, Cufa, and Vaset. It is now called Ye∣rach Arabi, and Kaldar. Kelh or Kill; Kylli, Celbis, a rapid River of Germany; much celebrated for plenty of Fish, and Corn Mills. It washeth Gerhardstein, Kilburgh, and Erang; then falls into the Maes beneath Treves, al∣most over against the Mouth of the Roer, or Rober. This River is called Rapidus Celbis, in Ausonius. Kellen, Trdjana Colonia, once a City, now a Vil∣lage in the Dukedom of Cleves. Keller Ampt, the Territory belonging to the City of Zell, in the Bishoprick of Breme, upon the River Aller. See Zell. Kelnsey, Ocellum, a Promontory in the South of the East Riding of Yorkshire, commonly called Hol∣derness, upon the North side of the Humber, over against Saltfleet in Lincolnshire. See Holderness. Kemach, Camachus, a City of Cilicia, in the Les∣ser Asia, in the Borders of the Lesser Armenia; which was made a Bishops See, under the Patriarch of Con∣stantinople, by Leo the Emperour. Now a mean Village, under the slavery of the Turks. Baudrand writes it Chemach. Kemois, a People in Chochin-China. Kempen or Kampen, a Territory in Brabant; which was of old the Seat of the Toxandri; by the latter Latin Writers called Campinia. It is called by the Flandrians, Het Kempelandt. The greatest part of it lies in the North of the Bishoprick of Liege, towards the Maes, and the District of Bois∣leduc; and contains also the South part of the Coun∣ties of Lootz, and Hoorn; in which are the Towns of Masark, Bering, &c. The lasser part of it lies in the Dukedom of Brabant, in the Territory of Boisle∣duc; between Peeland, Osterwick, and the Kempen in Liege. The only Town of any Note in this part, is Eyndhoven, which is in the Hands of the Hollanders. See Eyndhoven. Kempten, Drusomagus, Campodunum, Campidona, a City of Schwaben in Germany, in the Territory of Algow. It is one of the most ancient Cities of Ger∣many, being mentioned by Ptolemy; and had here∣tofore a Castle called the Burghald, which is now pulled down and ruined. This was the Seat of the old Dukes of Schwaben: amongst which, Hildebrand was of great fame; whose Daughter Hildegard, mar∣rying to Charles the Great, founded here a Monaste∣ry: the Abbat of which, as a Prince of the Empire, was Lord of the City, till the Inhabitants purchased their Liberty of one of them, with a vast sum of Mony: after which, it was annexed to the Empire; and in 1625. obtained a Charter from Frederick III. who gave them an Eagle for their Arms, (one half Gold) with a Crown. Maximilian I. and Charles V. both determined the Controversies between them and their Abbot. It is now governed by a mixture of an Aristocracy and a Democracy; and it embraced the Reformation in 1530. This City is seated upon the River Iler, which falls into the Danube, over against Ʋlm; five German Miles from Memmingen to the South, twelve from Constance to the East, and twelve from Ʋlm to the South. The Monastery founded by Hildegardis, was of the Order of St. Benedict. Ken or Kan, a River of Westmorland, on which Kendall stands; having two Cataracts, descending with a great noise near that place. Kenchester, Ariconium, a desolate Roman Town in Herefordshire, in the Hundred of Grimsworth. Kendal, a Town, Earldom, and Barony in West∣morland; seated upon the West side of the River Ken or Kan, in the South part of that County in a fruitful Valley. The Town is not great, but rich; being a place of Trade, and the Inhabitants very industrious in making Cloaths. It has two fair Stone Bridges over the River, and another of Wood. Also a large Church, to which belong twelve Chappels of Ease: and a Free-School, endowed with Exhibitions for Scholars going thence to Queen's College in Oxon: and seven Halls for so many respective Companies of Tradesmen. John Duke of Bedford, Regent of France, and Brother to Henry V. was by him created Earl of Kendale. John de Foix received the same Title from King Henry VI. Queen Catharine, the sixth Wife to King Henry VIII. was born in a Castle here, whose ruins may yet be seen. The Barony is in the Earl of Pembroke. The Ward, called Kendal Ward, takes its Name from this place. Kenelworth, a large, beautiful, strong Castle in Warwickshire, in the Hundred of Knightlow; which in the Reign of Henry III. stood a Siege of six Months; and being at last surrendred, there was here a Procla∣mation issued out, That all that had born Arms a∣gainst the King, should pay five years Rent of their Land: which was called Dictum de Kenelworth. In the Reign of Queen Elizabeth, it was given to Ro∣bert Dudley, Earl of Leicester; who spent very free∣ly in the Repair of it; so that it was then the second or third Castle of England. Kenet, a River in Wiltshire, running Westward thence through Berkshire, into the Thames, at Rea∣ding, where a fair Bridge covers it. Newbury and Hungerford are both seated upon it. Kenkis, Anchialo, Anohialus, a City of Thrace;
which is an Archbishops See, and has a Haven upon the Mouth of the River Eriginus, upon the Euxine; fifteen Miles from Mesember to the South-East. It is under the Turks, and not expressed in our latest Maps. Kensington, a Town in Middlesex, in the Hun∣dred of Finsbury; of which the Earl of Warwick bears the Title of Baron. Kent, Cantium, is the most South-Eastern County of England: on the North it is bounded by the Thames, which parts it from Essex, on the East and South it has the British Sea; in part on the North, and on the West it has Sussex and Surrey. It is in length from East to West fifty Miles, and from South to North twenty six. Divided into five Lathes (Sutton, Ayles∣ford, Soray, St. Augustine, and Shepway) wherein are four hundred and eight Parishes, and thirty Market Towns. That part which lieth towards the Thames is healthful, but not fruitful: the middle parts are both; the Southern are very fruitful, but not healthful. The Thames, the Medway, the Stower, the Tun and the Rother, besides lesser Streams, water it. Some give this Character of it: The Weald for Wood, East Kent for Corn, Rumney for Meadow; Tenham for an Orchard, Shepey and Reculver for Wheat, Thanet for Barley, and Hedcorn for Capons. This Country was first conquered by Julius Caesar (though not without Resistance) in the years of Rome 696. and 698. fifty three years before the Birth of our Sa∣viour; being forced to a double Expedition against almost this single County. As he began the Conquest of Britain here, so did the Saxons: Hengist erecting the Kingdom of Kent, in the year of Christ 456. se∣ven years after the first arrival of the Saxons. Against the Danes, the Kentish men did also great things; and with much Courage and Patience, repelled those Barbarous People. When William the Conquerour had subdued all the rest of the Nation, he was glad to come to a Composition with the Inhabitants of this County; and to grant them their ancient Liber∣ties and Customs. Whence the Laws of Gavelkind obtain here to this day. This County was also the first that imbraced the Christian Religion, from Au∣gustine the Monk, in the year 568. Accordingly Canterbury is justly the Metropolis of the whole King∣dom of England; as having been the first Fountain from whence the Christian Religion spread it self amongst the Saxons: for as for the British or Welsh, they had imbraced Christianity long before. VVilli∣am the Conquerour in 1067. created Odo, Bishop of Bajeux, (his half Brother) Lord Chief Justice, and Lord Treasurer of England, Earl of Kent. In 1465. Edward IV. created Edmund Grey, Lord Ruthyn, Lord Treasurer of England; which Family still injoys this Honour; Anthony II. the present Earl of Kent, being the eleventh in this Succession. Be∣sides the Sea of Canterbury, this County injoys a second Bishoprick, which is Rochester; and a great many populous rich Towns, fafe Roads, large and se∣cure Harbours for Ships; and whatever else is desi∣rable in Human Life, except a more serene Air. Kerci or Chierche, Cercum, a small Town at the Mouth of the Streights of Caffa, upon the Euxine Sea, belonging to the Precopensian Tartars. Kerez. See Keureuz. Keriog, a River in Shropshire, which falls into the Dee, above Bangor. Kerka or Karka, Titius, a River of Dalmatia; which washeth Sardona, and Sebenico; then falls into the Adriatick Sea, eight German Miles North of Spalatro. Kermen, Germia, a considerable City at this day in Thrace, seated not far from Adrianople; the Turks have here a Sangiack. Kerry, a County in the Province of Munster, on the Vergivian or Western Ocean; between the County of Clare to the North, and the County of Cork to the South, and East; the Capital of which is Ardart. Keschidag, Olympius, a Mountain of Misia in the Lesser Asia. Kesmarckt or Keysermarkt, Caesaropolis, a Town of the Ʋpper Hungary, at the foot of the Carpa∣thian Mountains, towards the Frontiers of the King∣dom of Poland. Keswick, a Market Town in the County of Cum∣berland in the Hundred of Allerdale; near to which, Black Lead is digged up in plenty. It standeth in a Valley environed with Hills, and has been formerly a famous Town for Copper Mines. Kesel or Cassel, Castellum Menapiorum, a Town in Brabant; two Leagues beneath Roermond to the North; between the Maes to the East, and the Peel to the West; seated upon the River Neerse; which a little lower falls into the Maes. Kettering, a Market Town in Northampton∣shire, in the Hundred of Huxton, upon a Rivulet which falls into the Nen: delightfully seated on an Ascent. It has a Sessions-House for the Justices of Peace of the County. Keureuz, Keres, Krais, Chrysius, Cusus, a River of Transylvania, and the Ʋpper Hungary; which ariseth in the Western Borders of Transylvania, near Feltat; and watering Giula, a little above receiv∣eth another Branch, called by the same Name, which passeth by Great Waradin; both which Ri∣vers being united, fall into the Tibiscus, or Tyesse, at Czongrodt, above Segedin. One of these is cal∣led by the Germans, Fekykeres, which goes to Gi∣ula; the other, Sebeskeres: Feky signifying White, and Sebes Black. Kexholm, Kexholmia, a Province of the King∣dom of Sweden in Finland; which was heretofore under the Russ; but conquered by the Swedes in 1617. It is the most South-Eastern part of Fin∣land. The Capital of this Province is Kexholm; seated upon the Banks of the River Voxen, near to the Western Shoar of the Lake of Ladoga; which together with the Castle, (which is very strong) was taken by Monsieur Pont de la Gardie, a French Gen∣tleman, from the Russ in 1580. The year follow∣ing this Gentleman took Narva, and several other strong places for the Swedes, from the Moscovites; and was at last drowned in the River of Narva. Keyserstul, Forum Tiberii, a small Town in Switzerland, upon the Rhine, over which it has a Bridge. It lies in the County of Baden; nine Ger∣man Miles from Basil to the West, and Constance to the East; and belongs to the Bishop of Con∣stance, but is subject to the Canton of Zurick. Kidwelly, a Market Town in Caermarthenshire in VVales. The Capital of its Hundred. Khoemus, Margiana, a Province of the Kingdom of Persia. See Margiana. Kherman, Kermoen, Kermon, or Kirman, Car∣mania, or Caramania, a Province of the Kingdom of Persia; with a City of the same Name. Kiburgh, a Castle in the Canton of Zurich, upon the River Toss; two Miles from Zurich to the East; the Earls of which, were heretofore of great Name. This Castle was purchased by them of Zurich, in 1452. Kiel or Kil, Chilonium, a City in the Dukedom of Holstein, under the Duke of Holstein; upon the Mouth of the River Swentin; having a convenient Port upon the Baltick Sea, much frequented by Merchants Ships: there belongs to it a Castle seated on a Hill; and an University opened here in 1665. The Con∣vention of the States of Holstein, are usually held here.
This City stands nine German Miles from Lubeck to the North, ten from Flensborg to the South; and tho very well fortified, has of late suffered very much from the Swedes. Kiengara. See Gangra. Kienning, a great City of the Province of Fokien in China, and the Capital of a Territory of its own Name, commanding six other Cities. It is adorned with a magnificent Pagod or Temple, and stands up∣on the River Min, over which it has a Bridge. Kil, Gelbis, a River in the Bishoprick of Treves; which falls into the Maes, three Miles beneath Treves; having watered Kilburgh, and some other small Towns. Its Rise is in the Dukedom of Limburgh. Kildare Kaldaria, Kildariensis Comitatus, a Coun∣ty in the Province of Leinster, in the Kingdom of Ireland: which has the County of Dublin on the East, the Kings County on the West, the County of Meath to the North, and that of Catherlach to the South. The principal Town of it is Kildare. This Town was taken by the Duke of Ormond, in the Year 1649, from the Parliament Forces: and retaken in a few Months after by Hewson. The same has the honour to be an Episcopal See under the Archbishop of Dublin. Kile, Covalia, a County in the West of Scotland, upon Dunbritan Fyrth, over against the Isle of Ar∣ran. Kilgarran, a Market Town in Pembrockshire in VVales. The Capital of its Hundred. Kilham, a Market Town in the East Riding of Yorkshire, in the Hundred of Dickering, on the Woulds; yet a good soil for Corn. Kilia Collatia, Insula Achillea, a City of Mysia. Kilkenny, Kilkennia, Oseria, a City of Ireland, in a County of the same Name; in the Province of Leinster, in the Confines of the Province of Mun∣ster: the Seat of the Bishop of Ossory, a Suffragan to the Archbishop of Dublin; and the Capital of the County in which it stands. It is a great and a strong City; placed upon the Banks of the River Nure; ten Miles from Cashel to the North East, fifty five from Dublin to the South West, and twenty eight from Waterford to the North. The most populous, rich, and well traded in-land Town in the whole Kingdom of Ireland; it took its Name from one Canic, who leading here a solitary life, was in great esteem for Holiness amongst the Irish; whence the place was called by them Cell-Canic, quasi Cella Canici, or Ca∣nicks Church. This consists of two parts: the Irish Town, in which is Canic's Church, the Cathedral; and the English, which was built since; it is now the principal part; the former only a Suburb to it. It was walled by K. Talbot, a Noble Man; and the Castle built by the Butlers. This City was the Foun∣tain and Head of the late Irish Rebellion; the very Centre from whence all the Lines of Treason against the King, the Nation, and the Religion of Ireland were drawn; the Seat of their Council or Committee, from whence the Conspirators sent out their Orders. It was also one of the first in the Punishment: for Cromwell having taken Drogheda, marched to Kil∣kenny, and besieged it; and after a short, but sharp Resistance, took it upon Articles in eight days time, in the month of June, 1650. The Committee being fled, before his coming, to Athlone in Conaught, whi∣ther their Calamities followed them. After the Fight of the Boyne, Kilkenny was readily submitted to the Duke of Ormond, (who has a Noble Seat in it) and made the Head-Quarter for the Forces of K. William in this part of the Country. § The County of Kil∣kenny is bounded on the West by the Province of Munster, and County of Tipperary; on the North by Queens Courty; on the East by Catherlach, (cut off from it by the River Boyne;) and on the South by the County of Waterford. The River Nuro divides it from North to South; and afterwards falls into the River Boyne at Rosse. The City of Kilkenny stands almost in the Centre of the County; which the Learned Dr. Bates makes to consist of three parts, whereas Mr. Cambden gives it only two. Killair, the same with Kildare. Killian, Celenius, a River of Scotland. Killaloo, Killala, a small City and Bishops See▪ under the Archbishop of Tuam; in the Province of Conaught, in the County of Mayo; twenty four Miles from Gallway to the North. Kilmalock, Killocia, a small City in the Province of Munster, in the County of Limerick; eighteen Miles from Limerick to the South. This was taken by Hewson in 1650. And gives the title of a Ba∣ron. Kilmar, an Arm of the Sea in Munster, which lies between Dingle and Bantry. Kilmore, Kilmora, a small City in the Province of Ʋister, in the County of Cavan; which is a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Armagh, by the ap∣pointment of Pope Nicholas V. in 1454. It stands upon Ninty, in the Confines of Conaught, and Lein∣ster; thirty two English Miles from Drogheda to the West, and forty one from Armagh to the South-West. The Irish call this City Chilmhor. § Kilmore, a small City in the County of Knapdaile, upon the Bay of Fynn; forty Miles from Dunbritain to the North-West. Kimbolton, a Market Town in Huntingdonshire, in the Hundred of Leightenstone; adorned with a Ca∣stle belonging to the Earl of Manchester, to whom it gives the title of a Baron. Kingchieu, a City of China, and a Province also. See Queicheu. Kings-County, a County of Ireland, in the Pro∣vince of Leinster; bounded on the West by Conaught, and the County of Gallway; on the North by Meath; on the East by Kildare, and on the South by Queens-County. The principal Town in it is Kings-Town, Regiopolis, seated upon the River Esker, which falls into the Boyne; twenty Miles from Athlone to the East, and forty from Dublin to the West. Kingsbridge, a Market Town in Devonshire, in the Hundred of Stanborough. Kingsbury, Kingnesburia, there are of this Name several small Towns or Villages in England: Of which we take notice only, upon the occasion of a Council held at a place, so called, in 851. under the reign of Bertulph King of the Mercians. Kingsclere, a Market Town in the County of Southampton. The Capital of its Hundred. Kingston, a Market Town in Surrey, the Capi∣tal of its Hundred, upon the Thames, over which it has a Bridge: famous heretofore for the Coronation of the Saxon Kings, from whom it received the Name of Kingstown (but before called Moreford;) and al∣so for a Castle belonging to the Clares, Earls of Glou∣cester. The County Assizes are held here. In the Year 838. there was a Council assembled at it under the Reign of Egbert K. of the West-Saxons. This Town is called for distinction Kingston upon Thames: There being § Another Kingston in the East-Riding of York∣shire, at the fall of the Hull into the Humber, called Kingston upon Hull: built by K. Edward I. with a Harbour to it, a Custom-house and Key, two Parish-Churches, together with Walls, Ditches, Forts, Block∣houses and Castles, which render it capable of a strong defence. The same has the honour and privilege to be both a Borough-Town and a County Corporate: giv∣ing the title of Earl to the Right Hon. William Pierre∣pont. See Hull.
Kinsale, Kinsalia, a Town and Port of the Coun∣ty of Cork, in the Province of Munster, on the River Ban, near the Ocean; fifteen Miles from Cork to the South. This Town was seized by D' Aquila, a Spaniard, in 1601, with two thousand Soldiers in fa∣vor of that dangerous Rebel Tir-Oēn: but being pre∣sently besieged by the Lord Montjoy (Lieutenant of Ireland) both by Sea and Land in December; and Tir-Oën, coming up to relieve the Spaniards with six thousand Foot and five hundred Horse, amongst which were two thousand fresh Spaniards who had landed a little before at Berehaven, Baltimore, and Castle-haven, being defeated December 24. by a De∣tachment drawn out of the English Camp; D' Aquila thereupon, January 2. following, surrendered the Town to the English; and was Transported, with the Remainder of his Men, by the English into Spain. The Forces under the Earl of Marleborough, posses∣sed themselves of this Town. Octob. 2. 1690: the next day they took the Old Fort by Storm; (the Governor for King James II. with several other Officers being slain upon the Ramparts.) On the seventeenth fol∣lowing, the New Fort surrendered upon Articles; and the Garrison of about 1200 Men marched out with their Arms and Baggage to be conducted to Li∣merick. Kintzig, Kintia, a small River in Schwaben in Germany; which ariseth in the Dukedom of Wirtem∣berg, in the Black Forest; and running South-West through the Territory of Ortnaw, it watereth Wol∣sach, Hussen, and Offenburgh; then falls into the Rhine at Strasburgh, four Miles South-West of Baden. Kiovia, Kiow, a City of Poland, seated upon the Nieper in the Ʋkrayne; which is the Capital of a County or Palatinate of the same Name; and a Bishop's See, under the Archbishop of Lemburgh; having still a very strong Castle. The Ruins of its Walls shew that it was once a great and a magnificent City; con∣taining eight miles in circuit: which appears also from the Cathedral Church. Towards the North it is yet full of People; but what lies to the South and West has only a Timber Fence. This City was built by Kio, a Russian Prince, in the Year 861. After this it was the Capital of Russia, in which it stands; which then had Princes of its own. And at last it was taken by the Poles. In 1615, it was taken and burnt by the Tartars; and could never since recover that loss. Within these thirty years last past it has suffered very much from the Cossacks and Moscovites. In 1651, the Poles took it from the Cossacks; but they having afterwards recovered it, mortgaged it to the Mosco∣vites; who are in that Right still possessed of it. Its Long. is 61. 20. Lat. 50. 51. This City is called by the Poles, Kiouf, or Kioff; and lies forty Polish Miles from the Borders of Moscovy to the West, seven∣ty from Caminieck to the North-East, and an hun∣dred from Warsaw to the East. § The Palatinate of Kiovia is called Volhinia Inferior, and also the Ʋ∣krayne: it is a part of Red Russia; and lies on both sides of the River Nieper; between Moscovy, the De∣sarts of the Lesser Tartary, Volhinia Superior, the Pa∣latinate of Barlaw, and the Tartars of Orzakow. In 1686, this was yielded to the Russ, to engage them in an Alliance with the Poles against the Crim Tar∣tars. Kiri, Drinus. See Drino. Kirkby or Kirby Lonsdale, a Market Town in the County of Westmorland: The Capital of its Ward, upon the Banks of the River Lon, in a rich and plea∣sant vale called Lonsdale: large, well built, and popu∣lous; having a fair Church and Stone-bridge over the said River. The Name signifies, the Church in the dale or Valley of Lon. § Kirkby Moreside, a Market Town in the North Riding of Yorkshire, in the Hun∣dred of Ridal, upon a small River which after some course falls with others into the Derwent. § Kirkby Stephens, a Market Town in the County of Westmor∣land in East Ward, near the skirts of the Hills, which sever Cumberland from Yorkshire. It has a fair Church; and the Lord Wharton a Seat near it, called Wharton-Hall. Kirkham, a Market Town in Lancashire, in the Hundred of Amounderness, near the mouth of the River Rible. Kirkton, a Market Town in Lincolnshire, in the division of Holland and the Hundred of Corringham; adorned with a fair Church built Cathedral wise, in the form of a Cross, with a broad Steeple in the midst. It stands upon a rising sandy ground. Kirkwall, Carcoviaca, the principal Town in the Isles of Orkney; which has a Castle, and a large Haven. It is seated upon the Island called Mainland, on the North Side of the Island, but towards the Ea∣stern End; and is in subjection to the King of Scot∣land; the Seat of the Bishop of the Northern Isles. Kisdarnoczi, Claudius, a Mountain between Sti∣ria to the West, and the Lower Hungary to the East; which has various Names given by various Na∣tions. Klagenfurt, or Clagenfurt, Claudia, Claudivium, a City of Carinthia. Dr. Brown in his Travels, saith, it is a fair four-square Town; inclosed with a hand∣som Wall; the Rampart is very broad; at each Cor∣ner there is a Bastion, and one in the middle of each Curtain: the Streets straight and uniform, as well as the Works. There is a very fair Piazza, (or Square) in the middle, which was thus adorned by the Luthe∣rans, whilst they held this place; who also erected the Noble Fountain in the Piazza, the Figure of which is represented by this Author. This is the Capital of Stiria at this day; and lies upon a small River a Mile and half N. from the Drave; thirty one from Vienna to the South-West, and seventeen from Aquileja to the North East. Kleckgow, Eremus Helvetiorum, a small Tract by the River Rhine; between Scaphuis to the East, and the Canton of Ʋnderwaldt to the West, in Schwa∣ben, in Germany; but on the very Borders of Swit∣zerland. Klein Glogaw, Glogavia Minor. See Glogaw. Klogher, an Episcopal City in the Province of Ʋlster in Ireland, and the County of Monagham. Knapdaile, Knapdalia, a County in the North of Scotland; between Argile, (separated by an Arm of the Sea) to the East, the Isle of Jurai to the West, Cantyr to the South, Domin and Lorn to the North. Kilmore is the chief Town in it. Knaresborough, a Market Town in the West Ri∣ding of Yorkshire, in the Hundred of Claro, which elects two Members of the House of Commons. It a Castle upon a Rock; and a Well (says Mr. Speed) which petrifies Wood. Knaringen, Grinario, a Roman Town in Schwa∣ben, in the Marquisate of Burgaw, upon the River Carnlach; a Mile from Burgaw to the West, and four from Ʋlm to the same quarter. Knighton, a Market Town in the County of Rad∣nor in Wales; the Capital of its Hundred. Knin, Arduba, a City of Dalmatia. Knockfergus, Carrickfergus, Rupes Fergusii, a City in the County of Antrym, in the Province of Ʋlster; on the British Sea, over against the Isle of Man; seated on the North Side of a fine Bay, which affords it the Convenience of a large safe Haven. This Bay is called by Ptolemy, Vinderius; at present the Bay of Fergus, from a King of these parts; who is said to have led the Scots out of Ireland into Scot∣land,
and afterwards to have been drowned here. This City is more populous, rich, and frequented than any other in this part of the Nation, on the account of the Haven, and the Castle; which being Garrisoned, keeps the Country quiet, and in awe. In the time of the Rebellion of the Irish, it held out against them; and afforded shelter and relief to many thousands which fled to it. When Cromwell came up, it yield∣ed without a Stroke, in 1649. It surrendred to Ge∣neral Schomberg, for want of Ammunition, August 27. 1689, upon Articles, after a Siege of eight or ten Days by Sea and Land. King William landed here, June 14. 1690, at his coming into Ireland. At this day the Trade is going to Belfast, a Town eight Miles more to the South upon the same Haven; and that has put a stop to the Growth of Knockfergus. Knockenhauss, a Town in Livonia, in Leisland, upon the River Duna; which belonged heretofore to Poland, but is at present under the Swedes: it lies sixteen German Miles East from Riga, upon the same River. Knoctoe, that is, the Hill of Axes, a place in the County of Gallway; four Miles from the City of Gall∣way, on the West of Ireland; under which the Noble Girald Fitz-Girald, Earl of Kildare, (and by times, for the space of thirty three years, Lord Deputy of Ireland▪) in 1516, overthrew the greatest Rabble of Rebels that ever was seen together before in Ireland; which had been assembled by William Burk, Obrian, Macnemare, and O. Carral. Knottesford, a Market Town in Cheshire, in the Hundred of Bucklow. Kola, a small Town of Lapland, which stands up∣on a River of the same Name; and has a Haven upon the White Sea. This is under the Dominion of the Russ; much frequented by the Ships of England and Holland. It lies sixty German Miles South-East from the North Cape, ninety five North-West from Arch∣angel, in Long. 57. 30. Lat. 68. 30. Koldinguen, Coldinga, a City of South Jutland, which has a Castle called Arensborch, and a Haven upon the Baltick Sea, over against the Isle of Fiona. Here the Horse and Oxen which are driven into Hol∣stein and Germany, in vast Numbers, pay a Toll to the King of Denmark. Christian III. King of Den∣mark, died here in 1559. Kolom, Columna, a considerable City in the Pro∣vince of Mosco, upon the River Mosco; where it falls into that of Aka or Occa; sixteen Miles to the East from Mosco It has a delightful appearance, by rea∣son of its Towers and Stone Walls, which are not usual in Moscovy. The Duke has here a Governor or Vaiwod. And it is also the See of the only Bishop in this Province. Koloswar. See Clausenburgh. Kom, Komum, a vast City in Persia, in the Pro∣vince of Hierach; in the middle between Hispahan and Casbin. Komare, Komore, Komorra, Comaria, a very strong and well fortified Town in the Lower Hungary; seated on the South point of the Isle of Schut; where the Danube reunites into one Stream; four German Miles from Raab; two from Neuheusel to the South, and five from Gran to the North. This Town was first fortified by Matthias Corvinus, King of Hunga∣ry, in 1472. against the Germans in design, but for them in effect; it having been one of the impregna∣ble Bulwarks of Christendom against the Turks, ever since they took Gran in 1542. It is a great, popu∣lous, rich City, as well as a strong one. By a Line drawn from the Waagh, (that is, the Southern Branch of the Danube,) to the Northern Branch of the Da∣nube, strengthened with four Bastions, the Emperor has much inlarged it. The Emperor kept here always a great Garrison, and a Trusty Governor. After the taking of Raab in 1591. Sinan Bassa, besieged this Town with sixty Ships and a great number of Turks and Tartars; but without any success; to the great slaughter of the Tartars especially. All his Treachery (for he sent five Turks to suborn Baron Brown, the then Governor, to sell the Town under the shew of a Parly,) and Valor too, were here equally baffled: sour of the five Turks having their Heads set upon Spears; and the fifth being sent back to the Bassa, to let him know there were no more Traytors to be bought. The chief strength of it is in a Fort, called the Tertise. Kongel, Congella, a City in Norway, in the Coun∣ty of Babuis, upon the River Trolhet; five Miles a∣bove its outlet, and twelve from Gottenburgh to the North; now under the Swedes. Koningsberg, Mons Regius, Regio-mons, or Re∣giomontum, a City in Prussia Ducalis, whereof it is the Capital, under the Elector of Brandenburgh, upon the River Pregel. Adorned with a Ducal Pa∣lace; and an University, which was sounded by Albert Duke of Prussia in 1544. It is a great and handsome, a trading and an Anseatique City. Koning-gratz, Gradium Reginae, Ragino, Gra∣decium, a City of Bohemia, called also Kralowihrades, and Koningsgrats; which in 1664. was made a Bi∣shops See, under the Archbishop of Prague, by Pope Alexander VII. It is seated upon the Elbe, twelve Miles from Prague to the East, thirty two from Vi∣enna to the North-West, in the prefecture of Gra∣detz. Konitz, Conitia, a Town in Prussia Regia, upon the River Bro, near the Desart of Waldow, in the Confines of the Brandenburgh-Pomerania; eight Polish Miles from Culm to the West. This Town is called by the Poles Choinicke. Koperberg, Cuprimontium, a Free Town of Swe∣den; which has rich, and most useful Mines of Cop∣per; from whence it has its Name. It stands not far from a Lake in the Province of Gestrick; fifty Miles from Gevals, a Town in the same Province to the West, and a little more from the Botner Sea. See Gestrick. Kopizath, Imaus. See Imaus. Koppan, Campona, Copanum, a Town in the Lower Hungary, upon the Danube, mentioned by Antoninus in his Itinerary, which is near Buda; some suppose it the same with this; others Keppel, and o∣thers Theten, two Miles from Buda. Korbaten, Colapiani, the Croates. See Croatia. They are also called Krabaten by the Germans. Kornthaurn, Taurus, a Mountain of Carinthia, between it and Salisburgh; mentioned by Tacitus, Jornandes, Eutropius, and Herodian. Ortelius saith, it is of a vast height; and is called Thaurn, Korn∣thaurn, Krumlechthaurn, and Rhadstratterthaurn. Korsoe, Corsoa, a small City in Denmark, on the Western Shoar of the Island of Zealand; at which Charles Gustavus first Landed in 1658. It stands upon that Arm of the Baltick Sea, which is called Die Belt, over against the Island of Fionia, and the City of Newborg; two English Miles West of Skelsor; and has a Castle belonging to it. Korsum, Korsuma, a Town in the Palatinate of Kovia, upon the River Rosse; built in 1581. by K. Stephen, and memorable for a great Victory obtain∣ed over the Poles by the Cossacks, in 1648. It stands five Polish Miles from Czyrkassy to the West. Kotting, Cotuantii, an ancient People amongst the Grisons; the same perhaps with the Gotthou∣spunt. Kouuno, Couuna, a City in Poland, in the Duke∣dom of Lithuania, upon the River Chronus, or Nie∣men;
where it receives the Vil; in the Confines of Samogitia; eighteen Polish Miles from Vilna to the West, fourteen from Troki, (in which Palatinate it stands,) and forty from Koningsberg to the East. It is written Kowno. Krabaten, Croatia. Krach, Petra. See Petra. Krain. See Carniola. Krainburg, Carrodunum, a small Town in the Lower Bavaria, upon the River Inn; two German Miles above Oetingen, and nine from Munichen to the East. Written also Craiburg. § Krainburg, or Kornburg, Carrodunum, a small Town in the Lower Stiria, upon the River Raab; three German Miles from the Confines of Hungary to the West, towards Gratz six Miles, and twenty four from Krainburg in Carniola to the South-West. This is written Corn∣burg. Kraines, Carni, Taurisci, Japodes, the Inhabitants or People of Carniola. Craiss, Chrysiw. See Keureuz. Kracow. See Cracow. Kraneburg, Burcinacium, Burginatium, a Roman Town, now a Castle only; one German Mile from Cleves to the West. Kranz, Scardus, a Mountain dividing Albania from Macedonia. Kratzer, Vogesus, called by the French Vauge; a Mountain dividing Lorain from Alsatia, and the County of Burgundy; out of it riseth the Mosella, or Maes, which runs North; and the Saone, or Sos∣ne [Arar,] which falls into the Rhosne beneath Lions. Kray, Jena, an arm of the Irish Sea, in the County of Galloway, in Scotland. Krayn, Liburnia, Carinthia. Krems, a City of Austria, Cremsa, Cremisum, seated upon the North side of the Danube, over which it has a Bridge; ten German Miles above Vienna to the West. This Town is walled. Krickieth, a Market Town in Caernarvanshire in Wales, in the Hundred of Esyonid. Krim, or Krimenda, Crimaea, a City of the Les∣ser Tartary, in the Taurick Chersonese, in the Euxine Sea. It stands towards the middle of this Chersonese; between Precop to the North, and Caffa to the South. Very small, and almost reduced to the meanness of a Village; though it gives Name to the whole Nation in which it stands; and is the usual Seat of the Cham. § The Krim Tartars, are a Nation of Europe, boun∣ded with the Borysthenes, [Nieper] to the West: the Psola, and Desna, (two Rivers which fall into the Nieper,) the Donetz, or Lesser Tanais, and in part by the Greater Tanais, to the North: by the last River to the East also, and in part to the South: the rest of their Southern Border is made by the Euxine or Black Sea, into which the Nieper falls. The most Southern part of this Country is the Taurica Cherso∣nesus, anciently filled with Noble Greek Cities, the Principal of which was Theodosia, now Caffa; but this Hord, or Tribe of Tartary, which now possess it, coming out of Asia, have so ruined them, that there are scarce any footsteps left of their ancient Grandeur. These Tartars lead their Lives after the ancient man∣ner; having no fixed Habitations; but driving their Cattle, Wives and Children about from place to place, as Necessity and the Season of the Year require. They have only covered Wagons to preserve them from the injury of the Weather. And they accordingly value themselves upon this Nomadical way of living; as the Protectors of their Cities, and Men of such exalted Virtue, as is not to be confined within any smoaky Walls. In the interim they are extremely proud, ig∣norant, nasty and barbarous. Their Diet is Roots, Cheese, Garlick, and for the most part Horse-flesh; which they eat without Bread, and often raw: Beef and Venison being reserved for their Great Men. They value Brass and Steel, above Gold and Silver They were once Christians, but have since Apostatized to Mahometanism: yet they retain one Article of the Creed firmly, that Christ shall Judge both the quick and the dead, in the day of Judgment. Upon this account they are more favourable to the Christians that live amongst them, than any other Mahometans are. They use their own Tartarian Tongue, inter∣mixed with Arabick and Turkish; and the Chaldean and Arabian Characters. This Prince hath hereto∣fore been able to Arm one hundred and fifty thou∣sand of his own Subjects: and in 1571. pierced as far as the City of Mosco; and set fire on the Suburbs, which taking the City, in the space of four hours, burnt the greatest part of it, (though thirty Miles in com∣pass:) Eight hundred thousand People of all Sexes, and Ages, perishing in this Ruin. After all, the Turk treats this Prince as his Slave; at some times removes, at others Murthers him. In 1686. there was a League between the Russians and the Poles, for the Conquer∣ing this People: but the former have done no great Wonders yet with an Army of three hundred thou∣sand Men. Kriviezne, Haemus, a Mountain of Thrace. Kronningesard, a Castle in the South part of Iseland, at which the Viceroy for the King of Den∣mark resides. Also called Besteda. Kruppa, Carpis, a River of Servia, which falls in∣to the Danube; called now also Crapin. Kudack, or Kudak, a small Town in the Ʋkraine, or Palatinate of Kiovia, on the West of the Nieper, beneath the Confluence of Samara; in 1637. fortified by the Poles, to keep the Cossacks from Pyratizing on the Euxine Sea: but in 1648. taken by the Cossacks. It lies forty Polish Miles beneath Czyrcassy to the South, and the same distance by the River from the Euxine Sea to the North. Kulp, Krup, Culpa, Colapis, a River of Croatia; it ariseth in the Eastern Borders of Carniola, from the Alpes which here end; and watering Metling in that Province, and Carlstat in Croatia, it falls into the Save; two German Miles and an half above Sisegh in Croatia. Kunisberg, or Konisberg, Regismons, a small Town in Stiria, upon Mount Rogel, in the Confines of Car∣niola; four German Miles from Cilley to the East, and eight from Pettaw. Koningsberg, in Prussia, is some∣times thus written. Kur, Cyrus, a River of Georgia; which riseth from Mount Caucasus, near Akalzike, (a Fortress and Town, consisting of about four hundred Houses, upon Mount Caucasus; the Seat of a Bassa; it was built by the Georgians, but is now in the hands of the Turks.) This River falls afterwards into the Cas∣pian Sea. It is much mentioned in ancient Wri∣ters. Kurzitadan, Jerusalem. Kuttenberg, Cutnae, a City of Bohemia; written also Cuttemburg, and called by the Bohemians Hora. It is a small City, seated four Miles from Cazlaw to the North, the same distance from the Elbe to the South, and seven from Prague to the East. Kylan, the same with Gilan. Kyneton, a Market Town in Warwickshire, upon a small River running into the Avon. And another in Herefordshire, pretty large and well built.
L A. LAbach, Loybach, Laubach, Labacum, Naupor∣tus, a City of Carniola, called by the Italians Lubiana. It is seated upon a River of the same Name, which after a short course, falls into the Save. It stands nine German Miles from Trieste to the North-East, and fifteen from Villach a Town of Carinthia to the North-West. Made a Bishops See by Pope Paul II. under the Patriarch of Aquileja in 1468. together with Cita Nova, (a place distant from it about sixteen Miles to the South;) and since this Bishop of Laubach has been exempted from the Jurisdiction of the Patriarch. Dr. Brown who saw it, saith, it is the principal City of Carniola, and a handsom Place, with a Castle seated on an Hill, which overlooks two large Valleys to the North and South; and hath a fair Prospect of many Hills, and Castles; but being com∣manded by another Hill not far from it, it is negle∣cted: tho we find that it hath endured a strong Siege. For whilst the Emperor Frederick was receiving the Crown at Aken, his Brother Albertus and Count Ʋl∣rick took the advantage to besiege it: but it made so good a resistance, that the Emperor had time to raise the Siege, and destroy the Army. Labathlan, Commercium, a Village not above one Mile from Gran, in the Lower Hungary; found out by an Inscription. Labe, the Elbe. See Elbe. Labirinto, Dicte, Dictaeus, a Mountain in Crete, or Candia; which lies in the Eastern part of the Island, and is much celebrated by the ancient Poets, on the account of Jove's being brought up here: now also called Lassiti, and Il Monte di Setia. Labus Athres, a River in the European Scy∣thia. Lacari, Libnius, a River of Ireland. Baudrand makes it the Lisly, which falls into the Irish Sea near Dublin. Lacedaemon. See Misitra. Lacedogna, Aquilonia, Laquedonia, Erdonia, a City of the Kingdom of Naples; called also Cedogna. It is seated at the foot of the Apennine, in a Plain in the Principatus Ʋlterior, in the borders of Puglia; and though half ruined, and that which is standing but meanly inhabited, yet it is a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Conza. Lacerea, Labedus, a City of Ionia, in the Lesser Asia. Lacha, Olympus, a Mountain of Thessalia. Lachish, an antient City of Palestine in the tribe of Juda; memorable for the proud Embassy of Sen∣nacherib, King of Assyria, to Hezekiah King of Ju∣dah sent from hence; and the destruction of 185000 of Sennacherib's Men in one night, by an Angel soon after, 2 Kings 18. 17. and 19. 35. Laconia, the same with the modern Sacania. Lacosichia, Pieria, a pleasant and much celebrated place in Thessalia, in Macedonia; at the entrance of the Gulph of Thessalonica. Ladenburg, or Ladebourg, Ladenburgum, a Town in the Palatinate of the Rhine, upon the River Necker; part of which is under the Bishop of Worms, who resides in the Castle of this Town; and the other part under the Elector Palatine; to whom it was mortgaged by a Bishop of Worms in 1371. It stands two Miles from Heidelburg to the West: and having suffered much in the late Swedish Wars, is now in some degree repaired. Ladi, Cyrrhus, a River of Albania in Asia; sup∣posed to be the same with Cyrus, now called Cur, or El-car, Ser and Chiur, tho by Ptolemy distinguished from it. This River falls into the Caspian Sea, having passed through Georgia. Ladog, Rubricatus, one of the principal Rivers in Barbary; it falls into the Mediterranean Sea, through the Kingdom of Tunis. See Jadog. Ladoga, a vast Lake, which is thought to be the biggest in all Europe; called by the Russ Ladesko Ozero. It lies between Kelholm or Kexholm, a Pro∣vince belonging to the Swedes to the West, and Kar∣gapol a Province of Moscovy to the East: thirty six German Miles long, and twenty broad; abounding with Fish to that degree, that it has enriched Kexholm with the Fishery of Salmons. The Russ are Masters of about a fifth part of it, the rest is possessed by the Swedes: this Lake receives, besides a vast number of Rivers, the Waters of the Lake of Onega; which lies about sixty English Miles from it to the East, and is not much less than it; it transmits all these Waters in∣to the Bay of Finland, by the River of Spasco, a Pas∣sage of about eleven German Miles. Laestrigones, an ancient People of Latium, men∣tioned in Ovid and Horace. Lagenia. See Leinster. Laghi, Laghium, perhaps Laasa, a City of Ara∣bia Foelix, on the South side; nine German Miles from Aden to the East, and twenty five from Cape Babelmandel to the South-East. It is under a Prince of its own, and lies in Long. 81. 05. Lat. 15. 00. Laghlyn, Laglinia, once a City, now a Village in the Province of Leinster, in the County of Cather∣lagh, upon the River Barrow; six English Miles from Catherlagh to the South. The Episcopal See, which it had, is united with that of Fernes. Lagny, Laciniacum, a Town in the Province of Brie in France, upon the Marne, six Leagues from Paris; which hath the honour of the title of an Earl∣dom. There is a Benedictine Abbey in it, said to be founded by S. Foursye a Scotch-man in the seventh Century; and tho the Normans ruined it in the ninth, it found Benefactors again to repair and endow it. In 1142. a Council was celebrated here. In 1590. the Duke of Parma, having first obliged Henry le Grand K. of France to raise the Siege of Paris, took this Town by a sudden assault and laid it in ruins. Lago, Lac, Lagus, a Lake or Collection of Wa∣ters, surrounded on all sides by the Land, to distin∣guish it from a Bay, or Arm of the Sea. There is a vast number of these in all parts of the Earth; serving for Cisterns to preserve Water, and to restrain the Course of Rivers, which would otherwise be too rapid for humane uses. Il Lago Maggiore. See Lang see. Lagos, Lacobriga, a small City in Algarva in Spain, which has a Castle, and a Harbor upon the Ocean. It lies in Long. 09. 00. Lat. 36. 36. five Miles from Cape S. Vincent to the East; and is under the King of Portugal. Lagosta, Lastovo, Ladesta, Ladestris, Lastobon, Landestina, an Island on the Coast of Dalmatia, in the Adriatick Sea; under the States of Venice; near Curzola. Lagune di Venetia, a part of the Adriatick Sea, called Gallicae paludes, Septem maria, Stagna Hadri∣atica; in which the City of Venice stands, built up∣on a great number of Rocks, and small Islands; which are separated one from another by the Waves of the Sea. Lagusta, Celadussa, Celadusa, an Island on the Coast of Dalmatia; near Curzola on the East, five Miles from Ragusa to the West; under the Vene∣tians.
Laholm, a Town of Halland, a Province of Swe∣den; seated upon the Baltick Sea, in the Consines of Scania; seven Swedish Miles from Helmstad to the South, and six from Elsingburg to the North-East. It has a Harbor and a Castle; and was fortified by the Danes, whilst it was in their hands; but notwith∣standing often taken, and retaken in their Wars; till at last the Swedes held it, with the Province in which it stands. Lahor, Lahorium, Bucephala, a City of the East-Indies, which is also called Pengeab. It is seated up∣on the River Ravi; one hundred and eighty Miles from Multan to the East, three hundred and sixty from Agra to the North, in Lat. 31. 50. as M. Theve∣not states it. This River falls into the Indus at Luc∣kar. The name of Pengeab is given to this Province and City by the Moguls who are Lords of it; and signifies in their Tongue the Five Rivers. This was anciently the common Residence of the Moguls, and then in a much more flourishing Condition than now: the Castle, being very strong, and part of the Royal Palace retain their former Beauty; the rest of the no∣ble Structures are much decayed: some Streets, of near a League in length, are falling down, and rui∣nous: yet is this no old Town, having been raised, since the days of Humayon, one of the Moguls, who brought it to be a City of three Leagues in length, in a short time. Yet this Town is full of Mechanicks, and all sorts of Manufactures, made in these Coun∣tries. § The Province of Lahor or Pengeab, is boun∣ded on the North by Cassimer; on the East by the Kingdom of Negercoot; on the South by Jenba, or Genupara; and on the West by Multan; it is one of the largest and most plentiful Provinces in the Mogul's Empire, by reason of the Rivers: yields Rice, Corn, Fruits, and reasonable good Wine in great a∣bundance; and the best Sugars in the Indies: out of which ariseth to the Prince a Revenue of thirty seven Millions and upwards, as the Indians reported to M. Thevenot. Laiazzo, Jazzo, Issus, a City in the most Eastern part of Cilicia, in the Lesser Asia, next Syria; near which Darius the last of the Persian Monarchs was overthrown by Alexander the Great in the Year of Rome 421. as Quintus Curtius shews. Ventidius Bassus, a Roman General, gained a Victory over the Parthians here in the Year of Rome 715. The Em∣perour Severus defeated his Competitor Pescennius Nger here, Anno Chr. 194. and Bajazet II. Empe∣rour of the Turks, was defeated by the Sultan of Egypt in the same place, in 1487. by which, and other losses, this Tyrant was forced to sue to the Sul∣tan for Peace the next year. It is now a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Tarsus; and stands near Mount Amanus, (now called the Mountains of Scan∣deroon,) in the Province of Caramania, under the Dominion of the Turks: it has a convenient Harbor upon the Mediterranean Sea, and is now in a tolera∣ble good Condition. Six German Miles from Antioch to the North, and seventy from Cogni [Iconium] to the South-East, Long. 69 45. Lat. 37. 00. The gulph of Lajazzo, whereon this City stands, receives its name from it. Laimon, Bosphorus Thracicus, the narrow Streight or Sea between the Propontis and the Eu∣xine Sea; upon which the City of Constantinople stands. Laino, Laus, a Town and River in the Hither Ca∣labria, upon the Tyrrhenian Sea. It stands in the Confines of the Principatus, seventy five Miles South of Salerno. Laire, Leria, Sigmas, a River of France in Gas∣cogne, which falls into the Ocean at La Buch; eight Leagues from Bourdeaux to the West; written Leyra also. Lalandt, Lalandia, an Island belonging to Den∣mark in the Baltick Sea, so called from its low situa∣tion. It is eight German Miles long, and five broad; lying on the South of Zelandia, and on the West of Falflria or Falster; from which it is separated by a narrow Passage called Gulburg. The chief Towns in it are Naxkow, Saxkoping, and Nysted; the first, for∣tified. This Island was taken from the Danes by the Swedes in 1657. Lali, Halys, a River of Lydia, in the Lesser Asia, fatal to Croesus. Lalisa, Laodicea, a City of Syria, seated upon the Mediterranean, between Antioch to the North, and Tripoly to the South; which has a large Haven, and is an Archbishops See, under the Patriarch of An∣tioch; but falling into decay and ruin for want of In∣habitants. The Inhabitants call it Lyche, and the Arabs Ladikia. Lamballe, a Town in Bretague, in France, in the Territory of S. Brieux; five Miles from S. Brieux to the East, eight from Dinant to the West, and four from the British Sea to the South. Some have thought it to be the Capital of the Country of the ancient Ambiliates, mentioned by Caesar. It is a fa∣mous Town for making of Parchments. Lambec, a pleasant spruce Town in Provence in France, near the River Durance; four Leagues from Aix, and nine from Avignon to the East. Lambesa, or Lambesca, Lambaesa and Lampaesa ad fluvium Ampasgam, a City of the Kingdom of Constance, in Barbary; near the Mountains of Cala∣mati, on the Confines of Biledulgerida; twenty four Miles from Cirta to the South; it was once a Bishops See. About the Year 240, a Council of 90 Bishops was assembled here against Privatus, the Bishop of this See, upon an accusation of heresie and crimes. Lambeth, a well inhabited large Parish, opposite to the City of Westminster, on the other side of the Thames, in the County of Surrey, the Hundred of Brixton, and the Suburbs of London. Of Note for the Palace and Residence of the Archbishops of Can∣terbury. Canutus, the last King of the Danes, dyed here. And in the Year 1280. there was a Council assembled at this place under John Peacham Archbi∣shop of Canterbury; as also a second under Cardinal Thomas Bourchier, Archbishop of the same See in 1486. Lamborne or Lainborne, a Market Town in Berk∣shire. The Capital of its Hundred. Lambro, Lambrus, a River in the Dukedom of Milan, which ariseth out of the Mountains near Co∣mo, and the Lake of the same name; and running South, watereth Monza, and Marignano; then falls into the Po between Pavia and Placentia, or Piacen∣za, nine Miles above the latter to the West. Lamego, Laconimurgi, Lamaca, Lameca, a City in Portugal, in the Province of Beira, near the Ri∣ver Duero, and an Episcopal See under the Archbi∣shop of Braga. Ptolemy mentions it by the Name of Lama. It is likewise mentioned in the third Council of Carthage. Lameto, Lametus, a River of Calabria Ʋlterior, which rising from the Apennine, falls into the Bay of S. Eufemia, upon the Tyrrhenian Sea, in the same Province. This is the same with Amato. Lamina, Thessalia, a Province of Greece. Lamo, Lamus, a Kingdom in Africa, which takes its Name from a City of Zanguebar, in the Lower Aethiopia; over against the Isle of Mada∣gascar; one degree from the Line to the South; North of Melinde, thirty three Leagues, Baudrand
placeth it North of Melinde, and South of Quiloa: but the Maps, as I have set it. Lamo, Lamus, an inland City of Cilicia, in the Lesser Asia; which is a Bishop's See, under the Arch∣bishop of Sileusia; near Tarso. Lampedosa, Lopadusa, or Lampadousa, in Ptole∣my called Lipadusa, is an Island in the Mediterra∣nean Sea; between the Kingdom of Tanu to the South (on which it depends,) and the Island of Si∣cily to the North; seventy Miles from the nearest Coast of Africa, and one hundred from Malta: it is fifteen Miles in compass, but desolate; there is in it a Chappel dedicated to the Virgin Mary, much esteemed by Seamen: near it the Fleet of Charles V. suffered Shipwrack in 1551. Lampsaco, Lampsacus, a City of the Lesser Asia, in Mysia; much celebrated in all the ancient Geo∣graphers; being supposed to have taken its name from its Beauty or Splendor. It stands at the entrance of the Propontis, over against Gallipoli; five German Miles from the New Dardanels to the North, and a little more from Marmora an Island to the South. The Turks call it Lepseck and Lasipio, the Europeans Lampsaco. It is now in a tolerable good Condition, and the See of an Archbishop. Xerxes King of Per∣sia gave the Revenues of this City to Themistocles the Athenian, in his Banishment, to find him Wine. It consists of about two hundred Houses, inhabited partly by Turks, partly by Christians. It has a very fine Mosque, whose Portico is supported by Red Marble Pillars; the same was formerly a Christian Church, as appears by the Crosses that yet remain on the Capitals of the Pillars. This City has even at this day a great many fine Vineyards, especially on the South-side, fenced in with Pom granate Trees. Whee∣ler, p. 76. In the antient Roman Times, the God Priapus was revered here. In the Year of Christ 364 the Demi-Arrians, in a Council at this City, con∣demned the Forms of Faith that had been published by the Councils of Rimini and Constantinople, con∣firming another made by the Council of Antioch in 341. There was also a second Synod assembled here about the Year 369. Lampura, Selampura, a City of India, beyond Ganges, mentioned by Ptolemy. Lancashire, Lancastria, is a part of that Country which was of old possessed by the Brigantes. This County has Westmorland and Cumberland on the North; Yorkshire on the East; Cheshire on the South; and the Irish Sea on the West. In length from North to South fifty seven Miles, in breadth thirty two: containing twenty six Market Towns, sixty one Parishes, and many Chappels of Ease, equal for the multitude of Inhabitants to Parishes. Wa∣tered with the Rivers Mersey, Rible, Son, (all three running from East to West into the Irish Sea, and the first serving as a Boundary betwixt this County and Cheshire); besides the great Lakes of Merton and Winder, which last divides it from Westmorland. Where the ground is plain and champaign, it yieldeth good store of Wheat and Barley; the foot of the Hills is fitter for Oats. All is tolerably useful and good; except the Mosses or Bogs: which yet afford excellent Turffs for firing. There is also Marle in many places; and in some, Trees are found under Ground, which have lain there many Ages. This County is a Palati∣nate, and has many Royal Privileges belonging to it. In the time of Henry of Bullingbroke, afterwards King of England, (the fourth of that name, and first of Lancaster) the half of the Lands of Bohun Earl of Hereford, Essex, and Northampton, being added to what before belonged to the Honor of this Coun∣ty, (which was then a Dukedom,) it became the richest Patrimony that was in the hand of any one Subject in Christendom: and in that Prince's Person it was annexed to the Crown of England, and never since granted to any Subject whatsoever. Lancaster, Alione, Mediolanum, Lancastria. The Town, which gives name to this County, stands on the South Bank of the River Lunne, or Lone, (from which it is supposed to be denominated five Miles from the Irish Seas, and towards the Northern Bounds of the County. It seems to Mr. Cambden to be the Longovicum of the Romans, which was one of their Military Stations. Not overmuch peopled, and con∣sequently not extraordinarily rich. It has a small, but fair and strong Castle, built on a Hill near the River; and one large fair Parish Church, with a S one Bridge of five Arches over the River Lon. This Town in 1322. was burnt by the Scots, in an inroad they made into England: and although it is thereby removed into a better Situation, yet it may be presumed to be the less at this day for that Calamity. Of the House of Lancaster abovementioned, Henry the Fourth, Fifth, Sixth, and Seventh, inherited the Crown of England. The last of which, marrying Elizabeth Daughter and Heiress to Edward IV. of the House of York, united those two Houses of York and Lancaster, whose competition for the Crown, under the names of the Red and the White Roses, had caused the effu∣sion of more English Blood, than was spent in the Conquest of France. Lancaster stands in the Hun∣dred of Loynsdale, and returns to the Parliament two Burgesses. Long. 20. 48. Lat. 54. 05. Lanceston or Launceston, the County Town of Cornwall, in the Hundred of East, upon the banks of the little River Kensey, not far from its fall into the Tamer: Well inhabited, marketed, and traded. It returns to the House of Commons two Burgesses. Lanciano, or Lansano, Anxanum, the capital Ci∣ty of the hither Abruzzo, in the Kingdom of Naples; and an Archbishop's See, built five Miles from the Adriatick; two from the River Saras, (now il San∣gro,) about eighty from Naples to the North, and a little more from Ancona to the South. This City was raised to the Dignity of an Archbishoprick in 1562, and built, as is supposed, upon the Ruins of the antient Anxanum. Long. 38. 55. Lat. 42. 27. Landaff, Landava, Landuvia, a small City and Bishops See in Glamorganshire in Wales: seated on the North side of the River Taff. over which it has a Bridge; about three Miles from the Irish Sea to the North. The Cathedral and Bishoprick hereof was founded by S. Germanus and Lupus (two Holy French Bishops, who came twice into Britain to ex∣tinguish the Pelagian Heresie) about the Year 522. They preferred Dubricius a holy Man, to this new∣founded See; to whom Meuricke, a British Lord, freely gave all the Land that lies between the Taff and Ele. But this See has since met with others of a contrary temper, who have reduced it to that Po∣verty, that it is scarce able to maintain its Bishop. The present Dr. William Beaw is the LXXVI Bishop, consecrated in 1679. June 22. Many Synodal Con∣stitutions, we find in the Councils, were made and published by the Bishops of this See in antient times. Landaw, Landavia, a City of Germany, in the Lower Alsatia; in the Territory of Wasgow, upon the River Queich; in the Confines of the Palatinate of the Rhine; four Leagues from Spire to the West. Once an Imperial and Free City; but by the Treaty of Munster, yielded to the French, who still have it. L'andramiti, Adramytium, a City of Phrygia, in the Lesser Asia; which is a Bishop's See, under the Archbishop of Ephesus; called by the Europeans Andromiti; by the Turks Endroinit; in which word there is a further account of it.
Landrecy, Landrecium, a City in Hainault; small, but well fortified. It is seated at the Foun∣tain of the River Sambre [Sabis], six Leagues from Valenciennes to the North-East, and two from the Borders of Picardy to the North. This has been made at once famous and miserable, by the frequent Sieges it has suffered of late. But by the Pyrenean Treaty it was put into the hands of the French. The Emperor Charles V. besieged it in 1542. for six months, with fifty thousand Men, and retired from it at last without success. The Lands End, Antivestaeum, Bolerium, Ocri∣num, the most Western Cape or Promontory of Eng∣land; in the County of Cornwal. Landshut, Landshutum, a City of Germany, in the Lower Bavaria, in the Marquisate of Branden∣burg, upon the River Warta; twenty Miles from Frisingen to the East, and thirty from Ratisbon to the South. It is well fortified, and has a Castle seated on or near a Hill. Landskroon, Stephanopolis, Corona, a small City, but very strongly fortified, belonging to the Crown of Sweden; seated in the Province of Scania, upon the North side of the Sound, or entrance into the Baltick Sea. It belonged to the Danes till 1658. when by Treaty it was yielded to the Swedes. It stands eighteen German Miles from Koppenhagen to the North-East, and a little more from Malmoe to the North. Built by Erick the Pomeranean King of Denmark, in 1413. before which time it was cal∣led Sundre Soeby. Near this place Christian V. King of Denmark, received a great defeat from Charles X. King of Sweden, July 24. 1677. The Danes took it from the Swedes in 1676, and restored it to them again in 1679. Landsperg, Lansperga, a Town in Germany, in the New Marquisate of Brandenburg, upon the River Water; six Miles from Custrin to the East, and thir∣teen from Stetin to the South, in the Confines of Poland. Often taken and retaken in the Swedish War. Landsperk, a Town in Germany, in the Duke∣dom of Bavaria; built on a Hill, by the River Leeh [Licus] which parts Schwaben from Bavaria; and falls a little beneath Auspurg into the Danube: above which last place this Town stands five German Miles to the South. Landspurg, Segestica, a City of Sclavonia, the same with Zigea. Landt van Endracht, a part of the Southern Continent; which was accidentally discovered by the Hollanders, in a Voyage to the Molucho Islands, in 1618. called also Concordiae Regio. Land van Pieter Nuitz, another part of the same Continent, found in 1625. by a Dutchman: It is a great Country, of a vast extent from North to South; and is a part of New Holland: but only viewed by the Dutch as yet. Langhac, Langhacum, a small City in Auvergne, seated in a Plain; surrounded almost on all sides by Mountains, near the River Allier, over which it has a Bridge: three Leagues from Fleury to the East, and fifteen from Clermont to the South. Langhe, Langa, a small Province in Italy, on the South of Piedmont, and the Dukedom of Mont∣ferrat; between the Apennine, and the Rivers of Tanaro, Ʋrba, and Stura: extending also to the Confines of the State of Genoua: the City of Alba is the Capital of it. This is a fruitful and well peopled Territory. Lang-landt, an Island belonging to Denmark in the Baltick Sea; between the Isles of Fionia, Zeland, and Haland; seven German Miles in length, and two in breadth: it has sixteen Villages, and a strong Ca∣stle; and from its form is called the Long-Land. Langley Abbey, a Town in Hartfordshire, in the Hundred of Cashio, not far from Watford. Re∣markable for being the Birth-place of Pope Adrian IV. who was sometime surnamed Breakspear. Lango, Cos, Coos, an Island in the Archipelago, called Stinco by the Greeks, and Stanco by the Sail∣ors; so that this name begins to prevail. It lies not above twenty Miles from the Shoars of Asia; of a great length, and about seventy Miles in Circuit: the principal Town in it is Lango, which is a Bishop's See, under the Archbishop of Rhodes. This Island was the native place of Apelles, the Painter; and Hippocrates the great and most ancient Physcian. It was under the Knights of S. John of Jerusalem, now of Malta; but conquered by the Turks from them, under whom it now is. Our Sandys who saw it, saith, it is a delicate Country to behold, lying for the most part level, only towards the East it is not unprofitably Mountainous; from whence fall many Springs, which water the Plains below, and make them extraordinarily fruitful; where grow those Wines valued in all times, Cypress Trees, and Turpentine, with divers other Plants, delightful as well as profita∣ble. In ancient times it was much regarded on the account of a Temple of Aesculapius, to whom this Island was consecrated: in which those who recovered out of any Disease, Registred their Cures, and the Medicines by which they recovered; which Hippocra∣tes abridged, and recommended to Posterity. Langport, a Market Town in Somersetshire, in the Hundred of Pitney, upon a Hill, near the River Parret, in a Moorish Country. Langres, Andromatunum, Lingones, Androma∣dunum Lingonum, an ancient, great, strong and rich City of France; in the Province of Champagne, near the Fountains of the Marne, (one of the principal Rivers of France) six Miles from the Borders of the Dukedom of Burgundy, twenty two from Troyes to the South-East, sixteen from Dijon to the North, and thirty from Monthelyard to the West. This is a Bishop's See, under the Archbishop of Lions: the Bishop is always one of the twelve Peers of France, and a Duke. Near this City Constantine the Great twice overcame the Germans; in one of which Bat∣tels, that Prince slew 60000 of them. The Vandals, in the beginning of the fourth Century, committed great spoils here. Within the Diocese, there are six hundred Parishes contained; and the Territory of Langres, giving source to five or six Rivers, is thought to stand the highest of any in the Kingdom. Divers French Synods have been assembled at it. Lang See, Verbanus Lacus, a Lake in the Duchy of Milan, called by the Italians il Lago Ma∣giore; and by the Germans Langsée. It is extended from North to South 36 Italian Miles, in breadth five. It lies thirty six Miles from Milan to the North-West, and twenty five from Como to the West; and is one of the most considerable Lakes in Italy. Langis, Aturus. See Dour. Languedoc, Volcae, Septumani, Occitania, a Pro∣vince in France, of very large bounds and extent. It is the Western part of that which the Romans called Gallia Narbonensis; afterwards it was called Gallia Gothica, and then the Earldom of Tolouse. Bounded on the East by the Rhosne, (which divides it from Dauphiné, and Provence;) on the South by the County of Rousillon, and the Mediterranean Sea; on the West it is separated from Gascogne, by the Garonne; and on the North it has Quercy, Rovergne, Auvergne, and le Forez. There are in this Province twenty two Dioceses: the principal City in it is To∣louse, which is the Seat of the Parliament of this Ge∣nerality. This is also one of the most Populous,
Rich, Fruitful, and Pleasant Provinces in France. Di∣vided into the Upper and Lower Languedoc, to the East and West; and watered by the Rivers Rhosne, Eraut, Vistre, Tarn, &c. The Goths establish'd a Kingdom here in the fifth Century, (from whom some derive its name, as Languedoc, quasi Landt-Goth) making Tolouse the Capital of the same; which they afterwards extended as far as to the River Loyre. In 778. Charles the Great granted this Province to the Earls of Tolouse: from whom in 1361. K. John finally taking it, united it to the Crown of France. Lauschet, a City of Poland. See Lencicia. Lantaine, Lantana, a River in the Earldom of Burgundy, which falls into the Saone; between Fal∣cougney, and Conflans: upon it stands Luxevil, which is about six Leagues from Langres to the East. Lantriguet. See Treguier. Lanzano. See Lanciano. Lanzerote, or Lanzarotta, Pluitalia, one of the Azores, or Canary Islands, which lies in Long. 4. Lat. 27. 40. The Kingdom of Lao, or Laos, in the East Indies, is bounded by the Kingdoms of Tunquin to the East, Cambaia to the South, Siam and Pegu to the West, and Ava to the North. Of great strength against In∣vasion, from the Mountains surrounding it. Fruit∣ful, temperate, and very healthful; under a King here∣tofore tributary to China, but now absolute, who re∣ceives the Tributes of divers petty Kings as their So∣veraign. It is divided into seven great Provinces, go∣verned by Viceroys; and watered by the Mother of Rivers (as they call it) the River Lao, which spring∣ing from about the high Mountains of the Province of Junnan upon the Frontiers of China, divides into two great Rivers some Leagues from Lao; whereof one passes West by Pegu to the Gulph of Bengale, the other expands it self in divers Branches throughout all Lao, cutting the same in two from North to South. The Capital City is Langione in 18 deg of Lat. The King of Tonquin attempted not long ago to unite this Kingdom with his own, but not with success. It has been a Kingdom since the year 600; before which it was a sort of a Republick; and before that, a Member of the Kingdom of China. Laodicea See Eskihisar, Laudichia, and Lyche. Laon, Laudunum, Lugdunum Clavatum, a City in Picardy in France, which is commonly pronoun∣ced Lan. It is great and very well fortified; and a Bishop's See, under the Archbishop of Rheims. Bau∣drand placeth it in the Isle of France, on a high Hill, but in the borders of Picardy; of which (he saith) it was once a part; ten Miles from Rheims to the North-West, and twenty eight from Paris to the North-East. The Bishop is always one of the twelve Peers of France, and a Duke. The Diocese belonging to this City, is called Laonnois, or Lan∣nois. It is bounded on the North with Tierache, a part of Picardy; on the East by Champagne, and on the South and West with Soissonne: it takes this name from the principal City. Some French Synods have been assembled here. Lapord, Lapurd, Labord, more commonly called Bayonne. See Bayonne. Lapathios, Lapithus, a City at the North end of the Isle of Cyprus, which is yet a Bishop's See, and retains the Greek Rites. It is very ancient, and cal∣led Lapethos by Pliny, and Lapatho by Strabo. Lapithae, an antient People of Thessalia, dwelling in the Country about Larissa, and the Mountain Olympus. Ovid styles them Sylvestres. Virgil as∣cribes to them the Invention of Bridles. Lapland, Lapponia, Lappia, called by the Inha∣bitants Lapmarck; by the Swedes, Sabmienladti; by the Germans, Laplandt; by the Moscovites, Loppi, and by the French, Laponie. It is the most Northern part of Scandinavia, first mentioned by Saxo Grammaticus, about the year of Christ 1190. Bounded on the North with the Frozen Sea, or the North Ocean; on the West with the Kingdom of Norway; on the South with Bothnia and Finia, (two Provinces of Sweden) and on the East by the White Sea. It was heretofore divided into three Kingdoms; and is now at this day divided between three Princes, the Emperor of Moscovy, the King of Sweden, and the King of Denmark, of which the King of Sweden has the greatest share. Johannes Schefferus lately put out a very exact Account of these Countries: towards the North and East it is extreamly Mountain∣ous and barren; but the South is more level, and well watered with Rivers and Lakes. There have been, not long since, found in it, Mines of Brass, Iron, Silver and Lead, besides divers sorts of precious Stones. As this is one of the Hyberborean People, who are buried the greatest part of the year in Snow and Darkness; so they are extreamly Rude, Igno∣rant, Poor, and Barbarous: so fearful, that they will start and be in a fright at the noise of a Leaf: infamous for Witchcraft, and Conjurations; yet Christians in Profession; and so revengeful that they will throw themselves sometimes into a River, to pe∣rish willingly with one they hate in their Arms, if they can but so destroy him. The more Northern are the most barbarous. Lar, Laria, a great and magnificent City in that Province, of the Kingdom of Persia, which gives name to a Kingdom: seated in the Confines of Cara∣mania, upon the River Tisindon; a hundred and se∣venty Miles from Ormus to the North-East: but in the later Maps it is placed only forty German Miles from Ormus, and on the West side of the River. Monsieur Thevenot gives a large Account of this Town in the second part of his Travels, cap 4. to whom I refer the Reader. It lies Long. 93. 40. Lat. 27. 40. Mr. Herbert saith, it consisted of about two thousand Houses, and had had five; but lost three thousand in an Earthquake. It is, as he saith, fa∣mous for nothing but its Castle; built at the North∣end, on an aspiring Mountain, and stored with the Cannon brought from Ormus. § The Kingdom of Lar took its name from the last mentioned City; lying near Ormus, and the entrance of the Persian Gulph. Schah Abbas, King of Persia, annexed this to the rest of his Dominions in the end of the last Century; viz. in 1596. by a Conquest of the Gue∣bres; who were before Masters of it, and were Go∣verned by a Prince of their own, stiled King of Lar; the last of which was slain by the Persians, with all his Progeny, to secure this barren and poor Kingdom to the King of Persia. The Water of this Kingdom is extream bad and unhealthful, as both Herbert and Thevenot agree: the Soil barren and sandy: and they both say also, that in this Kingdom there are a vast number of Jews. But Mr. Herbert saith, That there is neither River nor Rivolet near the City of Lar, by a hundred Miles; and Thevenot, they had nothing but Cistern-Water to drink, which was sub∣ject to Corruption; which seems to confirm Mr. Her∣bert's Report. See Herbert, pag. 52. Thevenot, Part. 2. pag. 131. § Ptolemy mentions an Arabian River, Lar; Now called Om. See Om. Larache, L'Haris, or Arays, Lixa, a Town in the Kingdom of Fez in Africa, in the Province of Asgar, at the mouth of a River of its own name, (call'd by Castaldus, Lusso; by the Italians, Fieume di Larach; in Silius Italicus, Lixus) towards the Atlantick Ocean, between Cape Spartel and Mame∣ra: taken from the Spaniards, by the Moors in No∣vember 1689. after a Siege of three months, mutually
asserted and resisted with extraordinary Bravery. Larad, or Lara, a Town in Old Castile in Spain, upon the River Arlanza, at the foot of the Moun∣tains: remakable in the Spanish History, for giving name to the Family de Lara, which once had seven Sons all Knighted in a day. Laranda, a City of Cappadocia, called by the same name it now has by Ptolemy and Strabo. It is a Bi∣shop's See, under the Archbishop of Iconium; but very small, and ill peopled; and stands fifty Miles from it, towards the Borders of Cilicia, and Mount Taurus Eastward. Laredo, Laredum, a small City, or Sea-Port Town, in the Kingdom of Spain, in the Province of Biscay; which his a large and a safe Harbour, and is the prin∣cipal of the four Sea-Ports: seven Miles from S. An∣dreo to the North, and twelve from Bilbao to the South-West. Near this place the Archbishop of Bour∣deaux defeated the Spanish Fleet in 1639. Larghier, Tarras, a City in the Island of Sardinia. Larignum, a famous old Castle near the Alpes, built of the Wood Larix or Larchtree, in the times of Julius Caesar, who besieged and took it. Yet Vi∣truvius reports, that when Caesar set fire to it, it re∣sisted the Flames. Larina, Larinum, a City of the Kingdom of Na∣ples, in the Capitanata, which is a Bishop's See, un∣der the Archbishop of Benevento; but little and ill peopled, and in the possession (as to the Revenue) of the Prince of Cassal. It lies in the Confines of the County of Molise, near the River Bifernum, for∣ty Miles from Benevento to the North, and four from Tremoli on the Adriatick Sea, to the South. Laris, an ancient City of Idumea, in Palestine; between the latter and Egypt, upon the Shoars of the Mediterranean Sea; in which, William, Archbi∣shop of Tyre reports, Baldwin I. King of Jerusalem died in 1118. Laris, Larissa, a City of Syria, mentioned by Strabo; which is a Bishop's See, under the Archbishop of Apamia, (now Haman,) and stands between it and Epiphania; now inhabited by very few People, being in the hands of the Turks. Larissa, the principal City of Thessalia, a Province of Macedonia, and the Country of Achilles; seated upon the River Peneo; twenty five Miles from the Bay of Thessalonica to the West, twenty five from Pharsalus to the South, and two hundred from Con∣stantinople to the South-West. It is now an Archbi∣shop's See, and one of the most flourishing Cities in Greece, by reason the late Grand Seignior being dis∣gusted with Constantinople, almost twenty years toge∣ther kept his Court here. This City is thus described by the learned Dr. Edward Brown. The City of La∣rissa is pleasantly seated on a rising Ground; in the upper part whereof stands the Grand Seignior's Pa∣lace, upon the North the famous Mountain of Olym∣pus, and on the South a plain Country; inhabited by Christians, Turks and Jews. There is a handsome Stone Bridge over the River, consisting of nine Arch∣es. Extraordinary populous, by reason the Sultan was then there; yet kept in great quiet by the Offi∣cers. I might from him transcribe some Historical Passages concerning this place; but I shall rather re∣mit the Reader to his pleasant Description for further satisfaction. Achilles was sirnamed Larissaeus from this City. It is otherwise called Larsa. The Antients mention more places, less important, of this name; and also a River Larissus, in the Peloponnesus. Larius Lacus, the same with the Lake of Coma. See Coma. Larozo, Ladicus, a Spur of the Pyrenean Hills in the Kingdom of Leon; in the Road which leads from Leon to Compostella. Larone, Laros, a small River in S. Peter's Patri∣mony; which flows out of the Lake of Bracciano, and falls into the Tyrrhenian Sea; about fifteen Miles from Rome to the North West. Larta, one of the Names of Epirus, a Region of Greece. Lartacho, Rhyndacus, Lycus, a River of Mysia in the Lesser Asia; which riseth out of the Laké of Ar∣tynia, at the foot of Mount Olympus; and fails in∣to the Propontis; called by the Turks, Vlabat. Lascaris, a Seigniory near Nice in Provence, up∣on the Confines of France and Italy, giving name to an honorable Family. Lassan-Zée, Lassanensis Lacus, a Lake in the hi∣ther Pomerania, so called from a Town upon it. This Lake is made by the Western Branch of the River Oder, (Der Pfin,) a little above Wolgast, and is extended to the length of some Miles in the Isle of Ʋsedom; then falls by the Oder into the Bal∣tick Sea, over against the Isle of Ruden, in the Bay of Rugen. Latium. The far greatest part of this ancient Re∣gion of Italy is now contained in the Campagna di Roma. At the first it extended only from the Tyber to the Premontorium Circaeum, and its most ancient Inhabitants were called Aborigines. But when the Hernici, the Aequi, the Volsci, and the Ausones uni∣ted under one common Name of Latini, then the bounds of Latium reach'd as far as to the River Liris. For 543 years, we have a Chronological Succession of the Kings of the Latines, till the year of the World 3299 or 3330, that Romulus founded Rome. Latomiae, a Cavern, cut out of a Rock, by the Tyrant Dionysius, near Syracusa, in the Island of Si∣city, about two hundred feet broad and one Stadium long, to serve for a Prison. Cicero reproaches Ver∣res with enclosing divers Roman Citizens therein. It is now called le Togliate. Lavagna, Lavania, Lbonia, a small River and Town in the State of Genoua, upon the Mediterrane∣an Sea; between Chiavari to the West, and Sestri di Levante to the East. The Counts di Flisci are of this place. Laval, or Laval Guion, Vallis Guidonis, a Town in the Province of Maine, upon the River la Mayne, in France, in the Diocese of Mans; giving Name to an honorable Family, and famous for making of Silks. In 1242. a Council was held here. Lavanmynd, Lavemunde or Lavenmind, Ostium Lavanti, Lavanmunda, a City in Germany, with a Castle belonging to it in the Lower Carinthia, and an Episcopal See under the Archbishop of Saltzbourgh, upon the River Lavant; in the Valley Der La∣vanthal, where it falls into the Drave: about two Miles from S. Andre to the South, twelve German Miles from Pettaw to the West: Lavanmynd signi∣fies Lavant's Mouth. Lavaur, Vaurum, or Vaurium, a small City in Languedoc in France; by Pope John XX. in 1317. made a Bishop's See, under the Archbishop of Tolouse, out of which Diocese it was taken. It stands upon the River Agout, in the Upper Languedoc, in the Confines of the Albigeois; five Leagues from Tolouse to the East, and six from Castres to the West. In this Diocese are contained sixty nine Parishes. There have been two French Synods assembled at Lavaur; the first in 1213. against Peter K of Aragon for ta∣king part with the Albigenses; the other in 1368. Laubach. See Labach. Laubenburgh, Lawenburth, Coenoenum, a Town in the Lower Saxony, upon the River Elb; eight German Miles from Hamburgh to the East; which is also the Capital of a Dukedom of the same name. Written sometimes Lawemburgh. It is under the Do∣minion
of its own Duke, who is a Roman Catholick Prince; of the ancient Family of the Dukes of Saxony. This Dukedom lies between the Dukedoms of Lunen∣burgh, Mecklenburgh, and Holstein; the Counties of Ratzburgh, Frantzhagen, Sassenhagen, with many other places towards the Elb, belonging to this Duke and Dukedom. Lauden, Lauda, a Town in Franconia in Germa∣ny, under the Bishop of Wurtsburgh; from which it stands five German Miles to the West; in the borders of the Bishoprick of Mentz, upon the River Tauber. Lauden, Laudonia. See Lothaine. Laudichia, Laodicea, a City in the Lesser Asia. It stood in Galatia, in the Consines of Lycaonia; but is now a small Village, called by the Turks, Ladik; consolated by nothing but a Caravansera (or place for the Lodging of Travellers,) and Baths of warm Waters, now wholly neglected. § There is another City in Asia, called by the same Turkish name; but Lyche, by the Inhabitants. See Lyche. Lavello, Labellum, Lavellum, a City in the Basili∣cate, in the Kingdom of Naples; which is a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Bari; very small, but it has marks of great antiquity. It stands in the limits of the Capitanata; three Miles from the River Ofan∣to. The Bishop's Jurisdiction is no larger than the Walls of the City. Lavenham, a Market Town in the County of Sussex, in the hundred of Babergh, upon the River Breton, and an Eminence; adorn'd with a spatious Church. Lauffenburgh, a small German City upon the Rhine on a Rock, well fortified; under the Domi∣nion of the House of Austria; between Sohafhausen to the East, and Basil to the West, five Miles from either. It was often taken by the French and Swedes in the great War; but by the Treaty of Munster at last restored to the Emperor. There is here a Bridge over the Rhine; and the Town stands on both sides of the River. Laugingen, or Lawgingen, Lavinga, a City in Schwaben in Germany, under the Duke of Newburgh: it has been a Free and Imperial City, but is now ex∣empted. It stands upon the Danube, one Mile above Dilingen, and six beneath Ʋlm to the East. E. Lavington, a Market Town in Wiltshire, in the Hundred of Swanborn. Lavinia, Lavigna, or Citta Lavinia, Lavini∣um, a City of Latium in Italy; built by Aeneas, forty one years after the ruin of Troy; which is now a small Village in Campagna di Roma; 18 Miles from Rome, 10 from the Tyrrhenian Sea, and 42 from Gajetta to the North-West. It is now under the Dominion of the Pope, but inhabited by a very small number of People. Lavino, Labinius, a small River in Bononia, about eight Miles from that City to the West, toward Mode∣na. It falls into the River Samogia; which a little lower ends in the Reno; which falls into the Po, six Miles below Buondeno. Upon the Banks of this River the Triumvirate between Octavianus, (afterwards Augustus) M. Antonius, and Lepidus, was agreed and signed. Lauraguais, Lauriacus Ager, a District in Lan∣guedoc in France; which gives the Title of a Count, and takes its name from a Castle. It lies between the River Ariege, and Agout, within the Mountains: The capital Town of it is Castelnaudari. Lauriol, or Loriol, a considerable Town in Dau∣phine in France, near the River Drome, which soon after falls into the Rhosne, betwixt Valence and Mon∣telimar. It was often taken and retaken by the Ca∣tholicks and Huguenots in the Civil Wars of France, in the last Age. Some suppose it to be the Aria of the Antients. Now fortified. Lausanne, Lausonium, Lausanna, a City in Swit∣zerland; the Capital of the District of le Vault; be∣longing to the Canton of Bearn, ever since 1536. whereas before it was an Imperial and Free City, sub∣ject to none but the Empire. It is also a Bishop's See, under the Archbishop of Besanzon, or Byzants, as the Germans call it; but the Town being possessed by none but Hereticks (as Baudrand saith,) the Bi∣shops have removed their Residence to Friburgh since the year 1532. It stands six German Miles from Ge∣neva to the North-East, and a small distance from the Lake of Lemane to the North. This Lake is some∣times from this City called the Lake of Lausanne. This City, since it, fell under the Dominion of the Canton of Bearn, has been made an University. Lausanitz. See Lusatia. Lautree, a small Town in the Territory of Albigeois, in Languedoc in France two Leagues from Castres, upon a sruitful Hill for Wine. The Castle it formerly had is ruined. Yet it retains the honour of a Viscounty. Lawenburgh. See Laubenburgh. Lawenburg, Lawenburgum, a Town in Pomera∣nia, near the Baltick Sea, under the Duke of Bran∣denburgh; but a Fee of the Kingdom of Poland. It stands in the Territory of Pomerel, upon the River Lobo; eight German Miles from Dantzick to the West, two from the borders of Prussia, and three from the Baltick Sea. The Poles call it Louwenborch. Lauwers, Lavica, Laubacus, a small River in the Dutch Friesland, which parts it from Groningen; and then falls into the German Ocean over against the Isle of Monick Doge. Laxia, Colchis. See Mengrelia. Lazach, a City and Kingdom of Arabia Foelix, under the Turks. Lazi, an antient People of Sarmatia Europaea, dwelling heretofore upon the Banks of the Palus Maeo∣tis, or rather towards the Caspiae Portae, near the Iberi. We read of their Conversion to the Christian Faith about the year 522, when Zatus their King was bap∣tized at Constantinople, the Emperon Justinus stand∣ing his Sponsor. Lazzara. See Granico. Laberberg. See Jura. Leaotung, a Province of the Kingdom of China, subject to the Tartars, since the Year 1630. towards whom it lies. Lea, a River of Hartfordshire, on the Banks whereof Hartford, Ware, Harfield, and Hodsdon are all four situated. The same separates the County of Essex also from Middlesex. Lebuss, Lebusia, a small City, in the Marquisate of Brandenburg; which is a Bishop's See, under the Archbishop of Gnesna; one Mile from Frankfort on the Oder to the North. This Bishoprick was founded by Miecislaus, Duke of Poland, in 965. Sold in 1260. to Otho, Marquess of Brandenburgh, by Boleslaus, Duke of Silesia; and has ever since been in this Fa∣mily. In 1555. this Bishoprick with its Bishop, em∣braced the Augustane Confession. Lecca, Lecci, Lecce, Aletium, the principal Town in the Province of Otranto, in the Kingdom of Na∣ples; which is great, rich, and (next to Naples) the most populous in that Kingdom. It is a Bishop's See, under the Archbishop of Otranto; from which it stands 20 Miles to the South, and 7 from the Shoars of the Adriatick. Called by the later Latin Writers Litium. Leck, Lech, Licus, Lechus, Lycias, a River of Germany; which ariseth in the County of Tirol, in the Confines of the Grisons; and flowing North∣wards between Bavaria and Schwaben, and passing through Ausburgh, falls into the Danube over against Papenheim a little beneath Danawert. The In∣habitants of that of Bavaria, which lay next
this River about Ausburgh, are called by Strabo and Pliny, Licatii; and at this day Lechrainers from this River. Leck, Fossa Corbulonis, a Branch of the Rhine in Holland; which divides from it at Wyke in Ʋ∣trecht; and running Westward in the North part of Holland, beneath Rotterdam, falls into the Maes. Lectoure, or Leictoure, Laictoure, and Letoure, Lactoracum, Lactorium, Lectora, Civitas Lactora∣cium, a City in Gascony in France: which is the Ca∣pital of the County of Armagnac, and a Bishops See under the Archbishop of Aux. It is seated on an Hill, and defended by a strong Castle, upon the River Gers; six Miles from Aux, ten from Tolouse to the South-West, and three from Condom. Ledbury, or Lidbury, a well built Market Town in Herefordshire, in the Hundred of Radlow; standing in a rich Clay Ground, near the Malvern Hills, and much inhabited by Clothiers. Ledesina, Bletisa, a small Town in Leon in Spain, upon the River Tormes; six Leagues from Salamanca to the North-East. Ledung, Dur, a small River of Ireland, in the County of Kerry. Leeberg, or Leerberg. See Jura. Leeder, one of the Islands on the West of Scot∣land. Leeds, a considerable Market Town in the West Riding of Yorkshire, in the Hundred of Skirack, upon the River Are: well inhabited by Clothiers. The Kings of Northumberland had anciently a Pa∣lace Royal here. Leek, a Market Town in Staffordshire, in the Hundred of Totmonslow. Leerpoole, or Leverpoole, a considerable Sea-Port Town, upon the River Irwel, in the South part of the County of Lancaster, towards the Borders of Cheshire; three Miles from the Irish Sea. It is now one of the most thriving Ports; and has a Trade equal to the best Town on the Western Shoar, except Bristol: it sends also two Burgesses to Parlia∣ment. The Pool is commanded by a Castle, built by King John, on the South side; and on the West, upon the River, stands a stately strong Tower. The Mores of Banck Hall at their proper Charge and Industry have much improved and beautified this Town. Leeuwarden, Leovardia, the Capital City of Friesland; which was made a Bishops See by Pope Paul VI. It is great, well built, and strongly forti∣fied; almost two German Miles from the Sea to the South, and seven from Groningen to the West. Leffy, Liffee, Luffee, the noblest River of Ire∣land; upon which Dublin stands. So far, (saith Mr. Cambden) over-powered by the County of Dub∣lin; that though his Spring be but fifteen Miles from his Fall into the Sea, yet to accomplish his Course, he is forced to fetch a very great compass: first running South through S. Patrick's Fields eight Miles, then West five Miles, then North by the Coun∣ty of Kildare ten Miles, North-East five; at last East by the Castle of Knock, and the City of Dublin, into the Irish Sea, ten Miles. This River was without doubt mentioned by Ptolemy; but by the negligence of Transcribers omitted in its proper place; and Libnius put into the same Latitude on the opposite side of Ireland, where there could be no such River. In 1687, towards the beginning of December, there hapned such an Inundation of this River by Rains and Storm, that not only Men, Cattle, and Goods in great quantities were carried away by its rapidity, but the Bridges were broken down, and Dublin so filled with water, that Boats plyed in the Streets: the like never known before, either upon Record, or in the memory of Man. Legnano, a strong Town in the Province of Vero∣nois in Lombardy, in Italy, under the Venetians. In Latin, Liviacum. Leicestershire, Leicestria, one of the inland Coun∣ties of England; bounded on the North by Not∣tingham, on the East by Lincoln and Rutland, on the South by Northampton, and on the West by War∣wickshire and Darby. It abounds in Corn, Pease and Beans, but wants Wood; it has plenty of Coal, and excellent Pasture. The Air is soft and health∣ful. Its shape is Circular; being about 196 Miles in Circumference. Containing twelve Market Towns, and one hundred and ninety two Parishes: in length from East to West about thirty Miles, in breadth twen∣ty five. Watered by the Rivers Stower and Wreak, together with many others of lesser Courses. Leicester, the principal Town of it, (which gives name to the whole,) lies in the middle of the County on the East side of the Stoure, over which it hath two Bridges, in Long. 19. 22. Lat. 53. 04. Ethel∣dred the Mercian, made it a Bishops. See in 680. which continued not long. In 914. Edelfled, a Noble Saxon Lady, rebuilt and strongly walled this Town. At the time of the Conquest it was Great, Rich, and Populous, beautified with a Collegiate Church, an Abbey, and a Castle, which time has ruined. In the Reign of Henry II. it was besieged, taken, and dis∣mantled upon the Rebellion of Robert Crouch its Earl. Richard III. was buried obscurely here; and Cardi∣nal Woolsey. That great, though not good, States∣man, (Robert Dudley) was by Queen Elizabeth Created Earl of Leicester, in 1564. To him in 1618. succeeded by a new Creation, Robert Sidney; Descended from a Sister of his. Philip, the present Earl, is the Grandchild of the last Robert; and suc∣ceeded Robert his Father in 1677. It now contains three Parish Churches, and several good Buildings, with the honour of returning two Burgesses to the House of Commons. Leighton Beaudesect, a large Market Town in Bedfordshire, in the Hundred of Manshead, on the Borders of Buckinghamshire, upon a River running Northward into the Ouse, over which it has a Bridge. Leine, Linius, Lina, a River of the Dukedom of Saxony in Germany, watering Gottingen, Embeck, &c. in the Dukedom of Brunswick, and passing near Hanover and Newstadt to joyn the Aller. See Leyne. Leinster, Lagenia, one of the four Provinces of Ireland; called by the Inhabitants, Leighnigh; by the Welsh, Lein; by the English, Leinster; and in old times Lagen: on the East it has the Irish Sea; on the West Connaught, divided from it by the River Shannon; to the North the Territory of Louth; and to the South the Province of Munster: the form of it is Triangular; its Circumference being about two hundred and seventy Miles: the Air is clear and gentle; the Earth fruitful both as to Grass and Corn: it affordeth plenty of Butter, Cheese and Cattle; and being well watered with Rivers, as the Neure, the Sewer, the Barow, &c. wants neither Fish nor Fowl: but it has not much Wood. Dublin is the Capital of this Province, as well as of the Kingdom. This Pro∣vine contains these Counties; Kilkenny, Caterlogh, Queens-County, Kings-County, Kildare, East-Meath, West-Meath, Wexford and Dublin; to which Wick∣low, and Fernes, in Mr. Speed's time, were intended to be added. Some believe this Province to have been the ancient Seat of the Caucenses, Blanii, Me∣napii, and Brigantes mentioned by Ptolemy. Leirge, See Lergue.
Leiria or Leria, an Episcopal City of the Pro∣vince of Estremadura, in the Kingdom of Portugal, upon a small River, one League from the Sea, below Tomar. The See is a Suffragan to the Archbishop of Lisbon. Leleges, an ancient People of Caria in the Lesser Asia: and others amongst the Locrenses in Achaia, mentioned by Pliny, Strabo, and Virgil. Lem, Lemuris, a River of Italy, in the States of Genoua; which riseth out of the Apennine, and wa∣tereth Gavi, in the Borders of Montisferrat, and Milan; then falls into the River Bormia, in the Dukedom of Milan; which falls into the Tuanara, and ends in the River Po at Basignana; six Italian Miles East of Giaroli. This River is also called Lim, and il Lemo. The Lake of Lemane, Lemanus, a considerable Lake made by the River Rhosne; between Switzer∣land to the North, and Savoy to the South. Called by those who live near it, the Lake of Geneva; by the Germans, das Genfferzee; by the Italians, il∣lago di Genevra: extending from East to West a∣bout nine German Miles; and about two over, where it is broadest: the Rhosne enters it at Noville, and goes out at Geneva, in the most Western end of it. It is surrounded with good Towns; the prin∣cipal (next Geneva,) is Lausanne on the North; by the name of which this Lake is somtime called. Lemburgh, Luwow, Leopolis, a great and popu∣lous City of the Kingdom of Poland; the Capital of Red Russia; which was made an Archbishops See, (instead of Halitz, or Haliotz,) in 1361. by Pope Ʋrban V. It stands amongst the Hills upon the River Peltew, (which with the Bug, falls into the Vistula, a little above Ploczko;) and is very strong: being walled and fortified with two Castles, one within the City, the other without. It was built by Leo Duke of Russia, who flourished about 1280. In 1648, belleged by Chieilneck General of the Cos∣sacks, without any success. In 1672. the Turks took it, and soon lost it; for in 1673. Michael King of Poland died in it. This City stands fifteen Miles from Premislia to the East, a little less from the Carpathian Hills to the North, and about fifty from Warsaw to the South-East. Lemgow, Lemgovia, a small City in the Circle of Westphalia, in the County of Lippe; which was once a Free Imperial City, but now exempt, and under the Count of Lippe. It stands upon the River Begh; five Miles from Minden to the North, and Paderborne to the South; and nine from Lippestad to the North-East. Lemington, a Market Town in the County of Southampton, and the Hundred of Christ Church, by the Seaside. § There is another Lemington, a Parish in Warwickshire, in the Hundred of Knight∣low: remarkable for two Springs, within few Foot of each other, the one Fresh, the other Salt, yet at a great distance from the Ocean, and of different Ope∣rations. Lemnos, an Island in the Archipelago. See Stali∣ment. Lemta, a Town and Desart in Libya (now Zaara) in Africa. Lencicia, or Lanscher, Lancicia, Lancicium, a City of Poland; the Capital of a Palatinate, called by the Poles, Lenczyc, from this City, which they call Lenczyckie. It lies in the Greater Poland, in a Marshy Ground, upon the River Bsura; not above ten Miles from the River Warte, the same distance from Gnesna to the East, and thirty from Warsaw to the West. There belongs to it a Castle built on a Rock; and in 1656. this City suffered much by Fire. Divers Polish Councils have been Celebrated at it. Lendrosia, one of the Islands on the West of Scot∣land. Lenham, a Market Town in the County of Kent, in Aylesford Lath, at the Spring of the River Stewer. Lenox, Lenoxia, Levinia, a County in the North of Scotland, through which the River and Lake of Lomond passeth: on the East it hath the County of Menteith, on the South Cunningham, (cut off by Dunbriton Fyrth,) on the West Argile, and on the North Albania. This County has the Honor of be∣ing a Dukedom; which Title has been born by seve∣ral of the Royal Line of Scotland. The principal Town in it is Dunbritown. Lens, Lentium, Lendum, Lenense Castrum, Ne∣metacum, a small Town in Artois, upon the River Souchets; three Leagues from Arras to the North, and four from Doway to the West. The French besieged this small place in 1647. but by the loss of their General le Gasse, (slain by a shot, whilst he was plucking at a Palisadoe) they were forced to leave it: near this place the French gave the Spani∣ards a great overthrow in 1648. and after possessed themselves of it; to whom the Pyrenaean Treaty confirmed it in 1659. The Town has been fortified; but was some years since slighted and dismantled. Lentini, Leontina, a very ancient City in the Isle of Sicily, in the Valley of Netina on the Ea∣stern Shoar. Heretofore a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Syracuse; whilst Syracuse was the Me∣tropolis of the Island under the Greek Emperors. It is now pretty considerable and populous, but very confusedly built. A place of greater Antiquity than Syracuse, and perhaps than any other City now in the Island. It stands five Miles from the Sea to the West, and ten from Catania to the South-West. Lenza, Nicia, a River of Italy; which springing from the Apennine, runneth North; and parteth the Dukedom of Parma from that of Modena; then falls into the Po at Barsello, eight Miles from Parma to the North. Leominster, or Lemster, a Market and Borough Town in Herefordshire, in the Hundred of Wolphey, upon the River Lug: of chief Note for fine Wheat, Flower, and Wooll. Leon, Legio Germanica, Sublanco, a City of Spain in the Astures; built in the Reign of Nerva the Em∣peror. It is now called by the Inhabitants Leon, or Leone: a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Com∣postella, (so far exempted, that he acknowledgeth no Metropolitan but the Pope;) and the Capital of the Kingdom of Leon, ever since 658. It stands at the bottom of an Hill, by the Fountains of the River Esla; very great, but not much peopled: twelve Miles from the Ocean to the South, and twenty one from Valedolid to the North-West. It was Reco∣vered from the Moors in 722. and is adorned with one of the most beautiful Cathedrals in Spain. § There is another City in New Spain in America, called Leon by the Spaniards, and Nagarando by the Natives, which being the Capital of Nicaragua, (the Province in which it stands,) is sometimes called Leon de Nicaragua. This is a Bishops See, un∣der the Archbishop of Mexico: by a Lake of the same name; about 12 Leagues from the Shoars of the Paci∣fick Ocean, and 18 from New Granada to the East. The Kingdom of Leon and Oviedo, Legionense Regnum, hath on the East the County of Biscay; on the North the main Cantabrian Ocean, on the South Castile, and on the West Gallicia. It has its name from Leon and Oviedo, the two chief Cities in it. This is the most ancient Kingdom in Spain; and began about 717. being more anciently called Astu∣ria, from the Astures, an old People, who possessed it. It is mountainous, and full of Woods, divided
in two by the River Duero; about fifty five Leagues long from North to South, and forty broad. Augu∣stus Caesar was the first Roman that conquered it. The Goths, after five hundred years free possession of it, outed the Romans; and after four hundred more, the Saracens did as much for the Goths: but they (the Saracens) did not long enjoy it; this being the first Kingdom the Christians recovered from them, under the Command of Pelagius, a young Prince of this Nation, about 717. It continued a separate Kingdom, under twenty nine Princes; till in 1228. Ferdin. III. annexed it to Castile (he being married to Beren∣guela, second Sister of Henry King of Castile;) tho in prejudice of Blanch, the eldest Sister, (mar∣ried to Lewis VIII. King of France:) which was afterward in 1267. set right by a Treaty, when Lewis IX. in consideration of a Marriage surrendered all his Right and Title, (as Son of the said Blanch,) to Alphonsus V. King of Leon and Castile. Peter de la Marca, Archbishop of Paris, in his History of Bearn, saith, this Kingdom did not begin so early as the Spaniards pretend; and endeavours to prove it. But this is no place for Controversies. Leon, Leondoul, Leona, a City in Britagne in France, on the North Shoar of that Province; thirty three Leagues from Rennes to the West, ten from Treguier, and eleven from Brest to the North. This is a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Toures: one S. Paul being its most ancient Bishop, about the year 600, the City is often called S. Paul de Leon, from him: it is the Capital of the Territory of Leonnois, well fortified, and has also a Castle, and a safe Harbour upon the British Sea. Heretofore the Seat of the Dukes of Britagne; and the Country of the ancient Osismi or Osismii mentioned by Caesar: whence its Latin Name, besides Leona and Leonum, is Civitas Osismorum. § There is mention made of another Leon in Cappadocia in the Lesser Asia, other∣wise called Vatiza, and thought to be the Poleme∣nium of the Ancients. S. Leonard, a Town in Limosin in France; and another in Nivergne. Lepanto, Naupactus, Aetolia, a Sea-Port in A∣chaia, (now Livadia,) called by the Turks, Enebchti; is seated in that part of Greece, which the Ancients called Aetolia, twelve Miles from Patras: the Italians gave it the name of Lepanto: it is seated not far from the entrance of the Western Bay of Co∣rinth, heretofore so called; but now from this place the Gulph of Lepanto. The City is built on the South side of a towering Mountain, formed like a Cone; on the top of which is a strong Castle, sur∣rounded with four strong Walls, set at some di∣stance one above another; between which the Inha∣bitants have their Houses. The Port is very handsom and beautiful; and may be secured by a Chain, the Mouth of it is so streight; it will hold but a few Ships, and those cannot go out and in at any time, for want of Water. It is seated in a pleasant Country, filled with delightful Gardens, yielding some of the best Wine in Greece; and has on the East side a a fine River, which serves their Mills, then their Gardens, and afterward all the City and Seamen. The Turks have six or seven Mosques in it, the Greeks two Churches, and the Jews three Synagogues. In 1408. it was under the Emperor of Greece; but being too remote (as things then stood) for him to secure it, Emanuel the Emperor, assigned it to the Venetians; who took care to fortifie it, as it is now. In 1475. Mahomet the Great, the same that took Constantinople, having gained Corinth, besieged it with an Army of thirty thousand Men; and after four Months spent before it, was forced to retire with with shame and loss. The Turks having found by this costly experiment the strength of this impor∣tant place, in 1499. made use of another me∣thod: besides a victorious Army, and a potent Fleet, to terrifie them, he imployed Bribes; corrupted Hi∣ronimo Tropo, the Venetian Governour; and by a Treachery altogether unworthy of Bajazet II. (who was here in person,) possessed himself of it. In 1571. Octob. 7. in the Gulph of Lepanto, from five a Clock in the morning till night, was fought the most bloody Sea Battel betwixt the Christian and the Ottoman Fleets, that ever besel the Turks since the beginning of their Empire. There, in the same Gulph, where the Emperor Augustus overthrew Marc An∣thony. The Christians lost eight thousand Men. Of the Turks, five thousand were taken prisoners, and about thirty thousand slain, with Hali Bassaw their Admiral. Of the Turkish Gallies, one hundred and thirty were taken, and above ninety others sunk, burnt, and de∣stroyed. The Generalissimo on the Christians side was Don John of Austria, a Natural Brother to Philip II. King of Spain, accompanied with the Flower of the Italian Nobility. At the same time, nigh twenty thousand Christian Slaves recovered their Liberty. In 1687. the Venetians having in the three preceding years almost beat the Turks out of the rest of the Morea, and resolved to begin this Campagne with the Siege of Patras; their General Morosini, Landed in the Morea near Patras on July 22. not∣withstanding all the opposition of the Serasquier: the 24. he fought, and defeated the Serasquier: and ha∣ving thereupon taken in Patras, and the Dardanell Castle on that side, (so called in imitation of those of the Hellespont) he crossed to the other to Lepanto; and found the Turks making all the haste they could to empty the Place for him; whereupon he entred and took Possession of it for that Republick, without stri∣king one blow. Thus was this important Place lost, as basely as it was gained; and the Cowardize of this Age has revenged the Treachery of the former. It had in it one hundred and twenty Brass Canon: And it is an Archiepiscopal City, tho the Archbishop has used to reside at Larta. The Gulph of Lepanto is formed by the shooting forth of two Promontories into the Ionian Sea, from the Morea and Achaia; called Capo Antirio and Capo Rione. The first of which has the Castle of Patras, the other the Castle of Ro∣melia for its defence. Leprus, Pariedrus, a huge Mountain of a vast height, out of which Araxes, and Euphrates spring. Lera, Igmanus, Sigmanus, a River of Aquitain in France, more commonly called La Leyre; which falls into the small Bay of Buch, eight Miles from Bourdeaux to the South-West, and the same distance from the Mouth of the Guaronne to the South. Leresse. See the Nieper. Lergue, Larga, a River in Gallia Narbonensis. Hoffman. Lericee, a small Town upon the Coasts of the Republick of Genoua in Italy, at the Foot of the Rocks, looking to the Sea. It is taken to be the Portus Erycis of Ptolemy and Antoninus. A fre∣quented place for Embarkations; four or five Miles from Sarzana, and East of Sestri de Levante. There is a Gulph by it, separated by a Neck of Land from the Gulph of Spezza or Speccia. Lerida, Ilerda, a City of Catalonia in Spain, which in the Roman times was the Capital of that part of Spain, they called Tarraconensis. It is now called Leyda by the Inhabitants; and Lerida by the Spa∣niards: a strong place, built upon a rising ground, but declining to the River Segre. Taken from the Moors in 1143. and made a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Tarragona. In 1300. here was an University opened, at which Pope Calixtus III. took
his Degree of Doctor of the Laws: yet it never ac∣quired any great Fame or Repute: of later times it has suffered much from the French, who have made many Attempts upon it. But in 1646. in one of their Attacks they were beaten off, and lost all their Cannon here. This City lies twenty four Spanish Miles from Saragoza to the East; seven from the Ebro North, and twenty nine from Barcelona to the West. Julius Caesar overcame Afranius and Pe∣treius, Pompey's Friends, here. In the year 514. un∣der the Reign of Theodorick King of the Ostrogoths, a Council was celebrated at the same place. Long. 21. 31. Lat. 42. 20. Les, Lerines, two Islands of the Mediterranean Sea, upon the Coast of Provence, at a small distance from each other. Now called severally, S. Honore de Lerin, and Margarita. See those Words. In Ptolemy and Strabo, their Names are Planasia and Lero. In Pliny and Antoninus, Lero and Lerina. Hither, say Tacitus and Suetonius, the Emperor Augustus banished Agrippa. They are commended for Temperature and Fertility. The Saracens of Fraxinetum in the seventh Century much infested them. In 1635. the Spaniards sur∣prized, but were obliged to quit them the year after. To which add, that the Monastery of S. Honore, founded in 375, by Honorius, Archbishop of Arles, has been reckoned to produce twelve Archbishops, twelve Bishops, ten Abbats, four Monks, all Confes∣sors; and one hundred and five Martyrs. It belongs to the Order of S. Benedict. Lerma, a small Town in Old Castile, upon the River Arlanzon; six Leagues from Occa to the South, and twelve from Pincia to the East; which is born, by the Title of a Dukedom, by one of the greatest Families in Spain. Some write it Larema. Leros, an Island in the Archipelago, adorn'd with an Episcopal City of the same Name, and driving a considerable Trade with Aloes. Lers, Lertius, is the Name of two Rivers in Lan∣guedoc in France: the great Lers riseth in the higher Languedoc, and watereth Mirepoix; then falls into the Ariege, and with it soon after into the Garonne. 2. The little Leers ariseth in the same Province; and falls into the Garonne a little beneath Tolose. Les, or Lez, Telis, Ledus, a River which ariseth in Languedoc, three Leagues above Montpellier; and a little beneath the Castle of Latte, about four Miles from the Mediterranean Sea, falls into the Fens of Magulone. Lesdos. See Metelin. Lescar, Lascura, Beneharnum, Benarnensium Ʋrbs, Bearnensium Civitas, Bernanus, a City in the Principality of Bearn, upon the River Le Gave de Pau; one League from Pau to the East, seventeen from Baionne, and five from Olerone to the East. It is a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Aux; and was built in the year 1000. upon the Ruins of the City Bearn, which was ruined by the Normans in 845. The Huguenots in 1569. much endamaged this City. In the Cathedral, the Kings of Navarre lie entombed: but their Tombs also were defaced in the Civil Wars of France. Lesche, Laetia, a small River in the Diocese of Liege, which falls into the Maes a little above Dinant. Lesina, Pharia, an Island on the Coast of Dal∣matia, under the Venetians; thirteen German Miles long, and almost three in breadth; seated about four from Spalato, to the South-West; having a Town of the same Name, in the North-East part of the Island, which is a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Spa∣lato. The Sclavonians call this Isle Huar. Mr. Wheeler in his Travels, pag. 24. saith, it is very high, Rocky and Mountainous; and by computation one hundred Miles in compass. It has a good Haven at the South End, the Town whereof is called by the Name of the Isle: this represents a Theatre, the Figure of which he gives us. It appears very beautiful to those that enter the Port; being built in several degrees one a∣bove another, according to the rising of the ground; having a Cittadel on the top of a steep Rock, backed with exceeding high Mountains, and lying open to the South; but the Harbour is secured by the Rocks against it, &c. It is deep enough for Ships of any Rate; and Bread and Wine are cheap. Their chiefest Trade is the Fishing of Sardelli, which are like An∣chovies: over against it lies Lissa, a small Island. Spalato (saith he) lies from this Town thirty Miles to the North, and Lissa the same distance to the South. § Also a City of the Capitinata in the Kingdom of Naples, near a Lake of its own Name: a Bishops See under the Archbishop of Bene∣vento. Leskeard or Liskerd, a Corporation in the County of Cornwall, in the West Hundred: which has the Election of two Burgesses for the House of Com∣mons. Lesnow, Lesnovia, a small Town in Wolhinia in Poland; fifteen Miles South of Lucka, or Luceoria; where John Cassimir King of Poland, in 1651. de∣feated the Cossacks and Tartars, and slew twenty thousand of them. Lessines, or Lessen, Lessina, a small City in Hainault, upon the River Dender, (Tenera) in the Confines of Flanders; five Leagues from Brussels to the West. Lesteiocori, Lechaeum, the Haven of Corinth, upon the Gulph of Lepanto. Lestoft, or Laystoff, a Market Town in the County of Suffolk, in he Hundred of Lothingland: the most Northern Sea-Town of this County. It drives a Trade of Fishing for Cod in the North Sea, and upon its own Coasts, for Herrings. Lestwithiel, or Listhiel, a Market Town and Corporation in the County of Cornwal, in the Hun∣dred of Powder; which has the Honour of electing two Burgesses for the Parliament. Letchlade, a Market Town in Glocestershire, in the Hundred of Brittles-barrow. Lethe, and Lethes, the ancient Name of the River Guadalete in Spain. Of Fiume di Mangresia (as the Italians call it) in Lydia, in the Lesser Asia. Of two others in Macedonia and Candia. And in the Fictions of the Poets, Lethe makes one of the Rivers of Hell, wherein the pleasures of the World are forgotten. Letines, Lestines or Liptines, Liptinae sive Le∣stinae, an ancient Palace Royal, near Binche in Hai∣nault, in the Diocese of Cambray. There was a Council assembled here in 743. in the Reign of Charlemaigne, who had a part of the Church-Lands, by a Sentence thereof, granted to him, to support his Wars. Letrim, a County of the Province of Conaught in Ireland; between the County of Slego to the North, Roscomon to the West, Longford to the South, and Cavan to the East. It takes its Name from the Castle of Letrim, on the West side of this County: there is besides it no place of any Note. This County is full of Hills, which afford plenty of Grass; and from thence abounds with Cattle above belief. Lettaw, the same with Garnsey. Letten, or Leitland, Litlandia, a considerable part of Livonia; the Western part of which (which is the greatest,) is under the King of Sweden, and the Eastern under the Duke of Moscovy. The princi∣pal City is Riga: on the North it hast Easthonia, on the West the Bay of Riga, on the South Semigallia,
(parted from it by the River Dwina,) and on the East the Dominions of the Duke of Moscovy. Lettere, Letteranum, a small City which is a Bi∣shops See, under the Archbishop of Amalsi, in the Kingdom of Naples: seated in the Hither Principate, upon a Hill; about three Miles from the Tyrrhe∣nian Sea, and the same from the Confines of the Terra di Lavori; fifteen Miles South of Naples. Leucate, Leucata, a small Town in Languedoc, in the Confines of Roussillon; seated upon a Lake of the same name: it had heretofore a Castle, built by Francis I. upon an inaccessable Rock, very strong, which is now destroyed: near this place the Spani∣ards received a great overthrow by the French in 1637. Leuchtemberg, Leuchtemberga, a Castle in Nort∣gow, in the Dukedom of Bavaria; which is the Ca∣pital of a Langravate: seated upon an Hill, near the River and Town of Pfreimbt; one German Mile from the River Nab. The Territory is but small that belongs to it; yet was subject only to its own Land∣grave, till 1646. when the Males of that Family fail∣ing, it fell to the Elector of Bavaria, who still has it. Leucosa, Leucosia, or Licosa, a small Island in the Sea of Tuscany, near a Cape of its own name, called Capo della Licosa. The Ancients have not omitted the mentioning of it. Leuctra, an ancient City of Boeotia in Greece, sup∣posed to be the present Maina by some Geographers: famous in History for the Victory of Epaminon∣das over the Lacedaemonians, in the one hundred and second Olympiad, and the year of Rome 383. Cle∣ombrotus, the Lacedaemonian General, was there slain. Leudrac, Vuldraca, a small River of France, in Autunois, in the Dukedom of Burgundy. Leverano, a Principality in the Terra di Otranto in the Kingdom of Naples, near the City Lecca. Leuvin, a Lake and a Castle in the South part of Scotland, in the County of Fife; this Castle be∣longed to the Dowglasses, Earls of Morton: In it the famous Princess Mary, Queen of Scots, and Dowager of France, was imprisoned by her own Subjects in 1567. There is also a River of the same name, which falls into the Fyrth of Edenburgh, by Wem∣mis Castle. Leutkirchen, or Leutkirch, Ectodurus, a small Im∣perial Free City in Schwaben in Germany, upon the River Eschach; (which a little lower falls into the Iler, which last falls into the Danube at Ʋlm) three German Miles from Memmingen to the South, ten from Ʋlm, and six from the Lake of Constance to the East; in the Territory of Algow. Leutmeritz, Litomerinm, or Litomiersca, a City of Bohemia, called by the Inhabitants Litomiersk; by the Germans, Leutmeritz, and Letomeritz. It stands upon the Elbe, eight Miles from Prague to the North, and ten from Dresdin. This was made a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Prague, by Pope Alexander VII. in 1655. This City is the Capital of one of the Seventeen Praefectures of the Kingdom of Bohemia. Leutomissel or Littomissel, Litomascum, an Epis∣copal City of the Kingdom of Bohemia, in the Prae∣fecture of Chrudim. Leuwentz, a Town in the Government of New∣hausel, but in the County of Gran, in Hungary, upon the River Gran, six Miles from the City Gran to the North. General Souches put the Turks to a Rout here in 1664. Leweck, Levecum, the Capital of the Kingdom of Cambay, in the East-Indies. Lewes, a Town in Sussex, esteemed one of the biggest in that County. In 1263. here was a bloody Battel near this place, between Henry III. and the Ba∣rons; in which the Barons prevailed at last against the King, and forced him to a disadvantageous Peace. This Town is in the South part of the County, upon a Ri∣ver that hath no Name; almost six Miles from the Sea-Shoar to the South, twenty five from Winchel∣sey to the West: containing six Parish Churches The Assizes are commonly kept here. At the Rivers Mouth is New-Haven, some years since made secure for the harbouring of Ships. It returns two Mem∣bers of Parliament, and is the Capital of a Rape. Lewemberg. See Lawenburg and Lemburg. Lewis, Logus, Haraia, a great Island on the West of Scotland; which extends almost from 58 to 59 deg. of Lat. and lies sixty five English Miles di∣rectly West from Row-stoir Assyn, the most Western Cape of Assinshire in Scotland. This is the largest of all the Hebrides; said to be sixty Miles in length, and thirty broad. The Inhabitants of this, and all the other Western Isles, do much resemble the Wild Irish; being rude, uncivilized, and will hardly indure any Government or Law: belonging heretofore to the Kingdom of Norway, they were by Magnus King of that Country, sold to Alexander III. King of Scot∣land; and never thought worth the disciplining. Lewroux, Leroux, Leprosium, a small City in le Berry in France, two Leagues from Bourges to the West. Leybnitz, Savaria, Polybianum, once a City of the Ʋpper Pannonia, now a small Village of Stiria, upon the River Sack; which a little lower falls into Mure; four German Miles from Gratz to the East. Leyden, Lugdunum Batavorum, is a great City in the State of Holland, mentioned by Ptolemy and Antoninus. It is seated upon the old Stream of the Rhine, and is the Capital of Rheinlandt, near the Lake of Harlem; three Leagues from Delft, and se∣ven from Amsterdam, Dort, and Ʋtretcht. Perhaps the most populous and wealthy City in all Holland, next Amsterdam. In the Roman times, the Praetor of the Empire for the Belgick Gaul, resided here with one of the Legions. It is situate in a plain and low Country, and has many Channels of Water pas∣sing through it: so that the City is divided into thirty one Islands, joined by one hundred forty five Bridges each to other: one hundred and four of which, are built with Stone. There lie about it most beautiful Meadows and Gardens; and the Air is reputed the best of all Holland. As this was one of the first Ci∣ties which revolted from the Spaniards in 1572. so it was one of the first also that felt their fury. For they having besieged Harlem in 1573. without suc∣cess, in the year following sat down before Leyden; and had reduced it to great extremity; when the Prince of Orange letting loose upon them the Wa∣ters which the Dams restrained before, by the same Stratagem brought relief to Leyden, and ruin on the Spanish Army: the year following, February 8. 1575. He opened the University there, to reward their Va∣lor, and recompence their losses: to which there has been added an excellent Library, a Physick Garden, and a Hall adorned with many Rarities of Anatomy-Antoninus gives this City the Title of Caput Germa∣norum. Leye, Legia, a River in the Low-Countries, called by the French Lis. It ariseth in Artois, by the Castle of Lisburg; and watering Airen, and S. Venaut, en∣ters Flanders at Stegers; then passeth by Armentiers, Menene, and Cortryck to Gaunt, where it falls into the Schelde. Leyne, Lynius, Leinius, a River in the Lower Saxony, which ariseth in the Territory of Eisfeld or
Eschfeld, near Heiligenstad; and flowing through the Dukedom of Brunswick by Gottingen, Lymbeck and Alfeld, at Saxstede it entertains the Inders: and so by Hannover, and Newstad, falls into the Aler. This River in the old Maps is called Rhum. Leypsick, Lupfurdum, Lipsia, Lypsiae, a City of Germany in Misnia, in the Lower Saxony; which has a celebrated Mart upon the River Pleiss; under the Elector of Saxony; twelve German Miles from Dresden to the West, and sixteen from Magdeburg to the South. It has a Castle called Pleisenburg, and an University opened here by Frederick Marquess of Misnia, in 1409. Upon the Banishment of the fol∣lowers of Jerome of Prague from that City, four thousand Students retiring to this. In 1520. Luther disputed here with Eckius against the Popes Supre∣macy; soon after which, they embraced the Refor∣mation. In 1547. this City (which then belonged to Maurice Duke of Saxony) was besieged by John the Elector of that House, in the Month of January: Maurice (tho a Protestant) having joined with the Empe∣rour against the rest of the Augustane Princes, who had taken Arms for the defence of their Religion and Li∣berty, against Charles V. And although the City was not then taken, yet it was much defaced by the Bat∣tery, and its Suburbs burnt. In 1630. Gustavus A∣dolphus gave the Forces of Ferdinand II. a great de∣feat near this place. In 1642. the Swedes defeated the Forces of Ferdinand III. under the Arch-Duke Leopold, and Piccolomineo; and thereupon the City was forced to yield it self to the Victorious Swedes. It is not great, but rich, by reason of its Mart twice every year; and the great concourse of Students to this University. Leyte, Leyta, Lutis, a River of Austria; which washing the Town Prurck adder Leyta, in the Lower Austria, at Altemburg falls into the Danube; three Hungarian Miles from Presburg to the South, and six from Javarin. Lez, Ledum, Liria, a River of Languedoc; it ari∣seth three Miles above Montpellier, and a little be∣neath falls by the Lake of Maguelone, into the Medi∣terranean Sea. See Les. Lhon. See Lippe. Lhundain, the Welsh Name of London. Lhydaw, the Name of Bretagne, a Province in France, in some of the Writers of the middle Ages. Liacura, Parnassus, a Mountain in Greece, in Achaia. Liamone, Pitanus, or Ticarius, a River in the Isle of Corsica. Liampo, the most Easternly Cape of all the Conti∣nent of China in the East-Indies, taking its Name from a Town, so called, in the Province of Che∣chiara. Lianne, Liana, Elna, a small River in Picardy in France; which ariseth in the Confines of Ar∣tois; and flowing through the County of Bo∣logne, by the Capital City of it, falls into the Bri∣tish Sea. Liasto, Liguidon, a Sea-Port on the East of Sar∣dinia, an Island in the Mediterranean Sea. Libano, Libanus, the greatest and best known Mountain in Syria; which alone produceth the Cedar Tree in that Country. It beginneth between the Confines of Arabia, and Damascus; and ends at the Mediterranian Sea near Tripoli; having run from East to West one hundred and twenty five Miles. It is the oftenest mentioned of any Mountain in the Sa∣cred Scriptures: exceeding high, and very far spread; fruitful and pleasant; and was the Northern Boun∣dary of the Holy Land, and Mother of the River Jordan. Now inhabited by divers Towns and some Cities, amongst which, is the Seat of the Residence of the Patriarch of the Maronites. The Rivers Ro∣chan, Nahar-Rossens, and Nahar-Cardicha spring from it. The Northern part is said to be continu∣ally covered with Snow. It hath Palestine to the South, Mesopotamia to the East, and Armenia to the North, with one foot in Phoenicia, another in Syria and the Mediterranean to the West. Oppo∣site to it, stands a Mountain called Antilibanus, sepa∣rated only by a Valley. See Antilibanus. Libaw, Liba, a Town in the Dukedom of Cur∣land, in the Kingdom of Poland; which has an Ha∣ven on the Baltick Sea; in the Confines of Samogi∣tia; eighteen German Miles from Memel in Prussia; and twenty five from Mittaw, the Capital of Semi∣gallia, to the West. This Town was often taken and retaken in the late Wars between the Swedes and Poles: at last by the Treaty of Olive-Kloster, in 1660. it was restored to the Duke of Curland. Liburnia, a Branch of the ancient Illyricum, now thrown partly into Croatia, and partly into Dalma∣tia. Its principal City was Scardona, now Scardo in Dalmatia. The Lopsi were some of its ancient peo∣ple: to whom, is owing the invention of light Fri∣gats, thence called Naves Liburnicae. Libya, is so considerable a part of Africa in the old Geographies, that the Greeks called all Africa, Lybia. It stood divided into the Exterior and Inte∣rior. The former lay along the Mediterranean, be∣twixt Egypt and Marmorica; or from Egypt South, according to others, along the left Bank of the Nile, as far as to Aethiopia; in which space the Desart of Elfocat, and the Kingdom and Desart of Gaoga (now) are contained. The other ran from the Mountain Atlas, to the River Niger, containing the (now) vast Desart of Zaara. And this latter is Libya, properly so called. Which, together with Libya Marmorica (now Barca), and Libya Cyrenaica, makes up a se∣cond division, that we find in Writers, of Libya. Lichfield, Lichfeldia, a City (which is a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Canterbury) seated in the County of Stafford: twenty four English Miles from Leicester to the West, ten from Stafford to the North-East, and sixteen from Coventry to the North-West. It is a low seated, beautiful, and large City; divided into two parts by a clear Brook, which is crossed by Causeys, with Sluces in them for the Passage of the Water. That part which lies on the South Side of this Water, is the greater by far; and divided into several Streets: and the North Part, though less, has the Cathedral Church, the Close (in∣compassed with a strong Wall) in which are the Pre∣bends Houses, and the Bishops Palace. This has been a Bishops See very long; for in the year of our Lord 606. Oswius King of Northumberland, having conquered the then Pagan Mercians, instituted a Bi∣shoprick, and settled Dwina as Bishop here, to in∣struct them in the Christian Faith: his Successors were in such esteem with the following Kings of Mercia, that they did not only obtain large Posses∣sions for the maintaining the Dignity of this See; but were also reputed the Primates of Mercia, and Arch∣bishops. Ladulph (one of them) had a Pall sent him as such, upon the Golden Solicitations of Offa, King of the Mercians, about 779. Which Dignity lasted not long; for it died with this King and Arch∣bishop Ladulph. A Synod held in 1075. ordaining, that the Bishops Sees for the future should be settled in the greatest Cities; Peter Bishop of Lichfield, re∣moved this to Chester. Robert Lindsey, another of them, removed it to Coventry. Roger Clinton, a third Bishop, but the thirty seventh in Succession, in 1148. began the beautiful Cathedral here, which he dedicated to the Blessed Virgin, and S. Chad; and re∣built
the Castle, which is now intirely ruined. The Ciose, in the old Rebellion, was garrisoned for the King: But the Lord Brook, a zealous Parliamenta∣rian, coming before it, March 2. 1642. (though the General was slain, and so paid dear for his Dis∣loyalty) yet the place was taken by that Party. The twenty second of that Month, the King's Forces re∣turned, and besieged it the second time; and A∣pril 8. after a Defeat of three thousand that came to the Relief of it at Hopton Heath, it was again sur∣rendred to Prince Rupert. How long it continued in the King's Hands I know not; but I find it taken by Storm by the King May 30. 1645. and retaken by Treaty, June 18. in the same year, by Fairfax, after the fatal Battel of Naseby. Its Long. is 21. 20. Lat. 52. 42. Sir Edward Henry Lee, created Baron of Spellesburg, and Viscount Quarendon, was made Earl of Lichfield, June 5. 1674. Lichfield has also the honour to be a County Corporate, and besides the Cathedral, shews three Parish Churches. Lico, Lycus, a River of Phrygia, in the Lesser Asia, which watereth Laodicea, and falls soon after into the Meander. See Laodicea. Licosia, Ledrensis Ʋrbs, the same with Nicosia, the principal City of the Island of Cyprus. Licostomo. See Scotusa. Lida, a small Town which has a strong Castle built upon a Rock, and is the Capital of a Territory in the Palatinate of Vilna, in Lithuania, under the Kingdom of Poland. It stands upon the River Deta, ten Polish Miles from Vilna South, and seven from Novogrod; severely handled by the Moscovites in 1655. Liddesdale, a small County in the South of Scot∣land, in the Borders of England; which takes its Name from a River that runs through it. It is boun∣ded on the North with Tivedale, on the West with Annandale, on the South with Cumberland, and on the East with Northumberland. Lidkioping, Lidkiopinga, a small City in Westro∣gothia, a Province in Sweden, upon the Lake of We∣er, and the River Lid; three Miles from Marystad to the West, forty five from Daleburg, and thirty from Falkop to the North. Liechtenstein, a Principality in the Province of Austria in Germany. There is another Liechten∣stein in the Trentine, in Italy, near Bolzano. Liege, Leodium, a City of Germany, which Lip∣sius calls Leodicum; the Writers of the middle Ages, Legia; the Inhabitants Luyck; the Germans Lut∣tyck: and the French Liege. It is a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Cologne; a great and popu∣lous City, built upon the Maes, and annexed to the Low Countries; yet a German City in the Circle of VVestphalia, and under the Protection of its own Bishop: fifteen Miles from Cologne to the West, five from Aquisgrane, ten from Louvain, and three from Maestricht to the South. It had a very strong Ca∣stle, which was ruined by the French. Though in the Protection of its own Bishop, yet it is a Free Imperial City: and herefore a pleasant Village situate in the Woods and Hills, amongst sweet Springs, which fell down from those Hills; frequently visited by Landebert Bishop of Tongres, who was afterwards slain here by Dodon a Servant of Pepin King of France. The See was first settled at Tongres, from thence removed to Maestricht, and at last by S. Hu∣bartus (one of these Bishops) settled at Liege. It takes this Name from a small River which there falls into the Maes: a vast part of the Ground within its Walls is not built; but imployed in Vineyards, and Orchards; and withal so very fruitful, that it may contend with Sicily. In this City Charles the Great, kept his Christmas in the year 769. Henry IV. died here of Grief in 1197. In the year 1131. Pope Inno∣cent II. crowned the Emperor Lottharius in the Church of S. Lambert here. Henry VI. reduced this City, (then in Rebellion) in 1191. It is supposed by some to be built by Amborix a German Prince, mentioned by Julius Caesar. It suffered much from the Normans; much also from one of the Dukes of Brabant, who in 1212. took it, and suffered it to be plundered six days together: in the fifteenth Century, Charles Duke of Burgimdy, taking advantage of their Disagreement in the Election of a Bishop, grievously afflicted it, (in 1468.) and destroyed a part of it: in this last Age it has been ill treated by its Bishops: and the French taking it by surprize in 1675 the next year after ruined the Castle; so that it is no great wonder, if after all these Calamities, the num∣ber of its Inhabitants are diminished. The Baron D'Elderen, great Dean of the Cathedral, was chosen Bishop and Prince of Liege, by plurality of Votes against the Cardinal of Furstenburgh, August 17. 1688. The Bishoprick of Liege, or Luyck, is a part of the Circle of Westphalia; though annexed to the Spanish Netherlands: its ancient Inhabitants were the Eburones, of old called Tungri also. It is boun∣ded on the East and South, by the Dukedoms of Lim∣burgh, and Luxemburgh; on the West by Brabant, and the Earldom of Namur; and on the North by the Ʋpper Guelderland: Luxemburgh, Namur, and Hainault, have every of them agrandised themselves with the Spoils of this Diocese. The principal City is Liege; the rest are Dinant, S. Trayen, Huy, Maseich, and Tongres: besides these, it contained fifty two Baro∣nies, eighteen walled Towns, and four hundred Vil∣lages; being no less populous, than fruitful. It is thirty one Miles long, and fifteen broad: the Valleys produce plenty of Grass; the Plains, of Corn; the Hills, of Wines; the Mountains have their Quarries of Marble, and Mines of Lead, Iron and Brimstone; and Pit-Coal in abundance. Its Forests affords all sorts of Venison in great plenty: besides the Maes which runs the whole length of this Country, it has fourteen other Rivers; some very considerable; which both inrich the Lands, promote Trade, and afford them a great plenty of Fish: and after all, the Air is very temperate and healthful. Lier, Ledo, a River in the Low-Countries. Liere, Lier, a very strong Town in Brabant, in the District of Antwerp; seated upon the great Ne∣the, which falls two Miles further to the South into the Ruypel. This Town is under the Spaniards, and is a Frontier against the Hollanders; two Miles from Mechelen to the North, six from Brussels to the North-West, and three from Antwerp to the East. Naturally very strong by its Situation, and made much more so by Art. See Lire. Liesse or Notre Dame de Liesse, a small Town in Laonnois County in Picardy, famous for the Devo∣tions there paid to a Chappel of the Virgin Mary. Lieuvin, a District belonging to the City of Li∣sieux in Normandy; which lies between Auge to the West, the Mouth of the Seine to the North, the Territory of Roan to the East, and the Territory d' Ouche to the South. This was the Seat of the Lexovii, a Gaulish Tribe; and is now called Lexo∣viensis Ager, from them. Lignitz, Lignitia, Lignitium, Hegetmatia, a City of Silesia in Bohemia, upon the River Katzbach, (Caus) which falls into the Oder; not two Miles from Jawer to the North, five from Glogaw, and se∣ven from Wratislaw. It was heretofore under a Duke of its own, together with a small Territory be∣longing to it; and has a noble Castle at this day. The Dutchy since 1675. is in the Emperor, as King of Bohemia.
Ligor, Ligorium, a City of the Kingdom of Siam, in the East-Indies, upon the Promontory of Malaca, near the Bay of Siam; in the middle between the City of Judia, (Ʋdia or Odida, the Capital of that Kingdom, to the North) and Malaca to the South; three hundred and eighty Miles from either: it has a good Harbour. Ligorne, Livorno, Ligurnus, Liburnus portus, Leghorn, an ancient and celebrated Sea-Port, menti∣oned by Polybius, Antoninus and Cicero. It is cal∣led by the Italians, Livorno; by the English, Le∣gorne; by the French, Ligourne; seated in the Ter∣ritory of Pisa, on the West of Italy, under the Do∣minion of the Duke of Florence, in a Plain; fifteen Miles from Pisa to the South, ten from the Mouth of the Arno, forty from Piombino to the North, and sixty from Florence to the South-West. There be∣longs to it a large and a safe Haven, very much fre∣quented by Merchants; the Great Duke to secure the Wealth and Trade of it, has built three strong Forts upon it. This City belonged heretofore to the States of Genoua. Cosmus de Medices Duke of Flo∣rence, had it from them in exchange for Serezana; being then a poor despicable Village not much in∣habited, by reason of the unhealthfulness o the Air, corrupted by the Marshes near it. Francis and Fer∣dinando, (two of his Successors) having improved its condition, by making it a Free-Port, at a time when the Genouse had excessively inhansed their Im∣posts upon the Merchants, built the three Forts and walled the Town; and built in it also a Noble Palace for the Governour, and for the Reception of Foreign Ambassadors, with a large Arsenal or Magazin. It has two Havens; the greater is extreamly large, safe, and convenient for Ships of any Burthen: the lesser, called Darsi, is of some use for smaller Ships. See Du Val Voyage d▪ Ital. Liguria, a part of the ancient Gallia Cisalpina in Italy, now contained in the States of Genoua. Liiflandt. See Livonia. Lilers, Lilerium, a Town in Artois, upon the Ri∣ver Navez, seven Leagues from Arras to the North. Lille, L'Isle, Insula, Insulae, a City in Flanders, called by the Inhabitants Lyssel; by the English, Lisle; by the Italians, Lida; is the Capital of Flandria Gal∣lica; a great, strong, populous place, well Traded, upon the River Deuller. Lewis XIV. (the present King of France) took this from the Spaniards in 1667. It lies five Leagues from Ypre to the South, six from Doway, four from the Borders of Artois, and five from Tournay. Built by Baldwin IV. Count of Flanders, in 1007. Baldwin the Pious, his Son, being born here, favoured it very much: and on that account walled it in 1066. and built in it also a mag∣nificent Church, and a delicate Monastery. There is (saith L. Guicciardin) a good Castle in it, and the Ruins of an old one, called Buck; where the Go∣vernours for the ancient French Kings resided, which were then instituted the Forestexs of Flanders. This City was taken and burnt by Philip II. King of France, about 1185. Being rebuilt, it was again ta∣ken and harassed by Philip IV about 1304. Since then it is much increased, (saith the same Author) by the Industry of the Inhabitants, who imploy them∣selves moly in weaving Silks: so that it is raised to be the third City in the Low-Countries after Antiverp and Amslerdam; and frequently called in French, La petit Paris, for its Beauty. The French had it confirmed to them in 1668. by the Treaty of Aix la Chapelle. It is the Head of a large Chattellany, containing divers Villages; and strongly fortified. § Also, a pleasant Town in the County of Venaissin in Provence, five or six Leagues from Avignon, and about the same from Carpentras, in a fruitful Coun∣try; surrounded by the River Sorgue, like an Island, and thence called L'isle. Lille, Illa, a River in Aquitain in France; which ariseth in the Province of Limosin; and flowing through Perigord, watereth Perigeux (Vesima) the Capital of that County, and Mucidan: at Cou∣traz it entertains the Dormia, from Aubeterre; then a little beneath Lisbourne falls into the Dordonne, seven Miles above its conjunction with the Ga∣ronne. Lillebonne, or Islebonne, Islebonna, Juliobona, a Town in the Paix de Caux in Normandy, in the Dio∣cese of Rouen; giving Name to a Branch of the House of Lorrain. In the year 1080. the Bishops of Nor∣mandy were assembled in a Council here, in the pre∣sence of William the Conquerour, King of England, at which the Archbishop of Rouen presided. Lillo, Lilloa, a strong Fort built by the Hollan∣ders upon the Schelde, two Leagues beneath Ant∣werp to the North, one above Santvliet or Sanflit to the South; and four from Bergen op Zoom. At this Fort all Ships that pass up the River to Antwerp, are by the Treaty of Minister to stop. Lima or Ciudad de Los Reyes, Lima, the Capital of the Kingdom of Peru; a beautiful, great, well tra∣ded City; and the See of an Archbishop. Built in 1535. by Francis Pizarro, a Spaniard, in the Valley of Lima, called by Natives Rimac. The Viceroy of Peru resides here; which with other Advantages hath made it very great, rich, populous, and beautiful; though it be all built with Timber, and an open unwalled Town. They compute about five thousand Spani∣ards and forty thousand Negroes in it; a great number of Ecclesiastical Buildings, as Churches, Con∣vents, Colleges, and Hospitals; and a stately Palace Royal, wherein the Vice-Roy keeps his Court. It stands upon a River of the same Name; one Mile from the Pacifick Ocean, two from its own Harbor called Callao de Lima, one hundred and twenty from Cusco, the old Metropolis of this Kingdom, as Jo. Laei saith. It is under the King of Spain, and had an University opened in 1614. Long. 296.40. Lat. 23.30. A dreadful Earthquake Octob. 30. 1687. overthrew most of the Buildings, both publick and private, and buried above a thousand Inhabitants in the Ruins. The Ecclesiasticks of Peru have celebra∣ted two or three Councils here. Lima, Lamia, a River in Portugal, which wash∣eth the Town of Viana de Foiz de Lima, six Leagues from Braga to the West; and then falls into the Ocean. Limagne, Limane, Limania, or Alimania, a small Territory in Auvergne; which for the greatest part is contained in that Province. It is very well wa∣tered, and wonderfully fruitful; being a Plain, upon the River Allier, extending from North to South twelve Miles, near and below Clermont. Limat, Limmat, Limagus, Lindemagus, a River in Switzerland; which ariseth in the County of Sar∣gans, or Sarganzerlandt; and runneth North through the Lake of Riva, and that of Zurich; after which it watereth Zurich, and Baden; and a little lower falls into the Aar, the chief River of Swit∣zerland. Limburg, a Dutchy and Town in the Low-Coun∣tries. The Dutchy, though one of the Seventeen Provinces, is not great. It lies between the Duthcy of Juliers to the East and North, and the Bishoprick of Liege to the West and South. It had heretofore Dukes of its own: but upon the Death of Walrame the Third (by Dr. Heylin called Henry) in 1285. Adolph the next Heir sold it to John Duke of Bra∣bant; who pretended at the same time a Right to
it, as descended from Margaret, Daughter of Henry Duke of Limburgh, in 1172 married to Godfrey III. Duke of Brabant. In 1293 Reinold, Earl of Gel∣ders, set up another Title in the Right of Ermin∣grade his Wife, Daughter of Herman, late Duke of Limburg; but his Forces being defeated, and he ta∣ken Prisoner in the Battel of Worancan, he was for∣ced to refign his Right to John Duke of Brabant, to regain his liberty; and from that time the Dukes of Brabant have peaceably enjoyed it. The Earth is very fruitful as to Wheat and Fewel; it has excellent Mines of Iron, and one of Copperas. It contains one hundred and twenty five Villages, whereof five are walled. Limburg, Limburgum, the principal City of the last mentioned Dukedom, is pleasantly seated upon a Hill by the River Weser, amongst shady Woods; in the Consines of the Bishoprick of Licge; six Leagues from that City to the East, seven from Maestricht, and four from Aquisgrane to the South. It had a very strong Castle, mounted upon a steep Hill, and of a difficult Access. The Hollanders took this City in 1632. but the Spaniards recovered it again. In 1675. the French surprized it; and being forced to leave it in 1677. they destroyed the Castle, which now lies in Rubbish. Lime otherwise called Lime Regis, is a small Town in the Western Borders of the County of Dorset, next Devonshire, in the Hundred of Bridport, upon a steep Hill, and a River of the same Name; which hardly deserves the Name of a Sea-Port, though it is frequented by Fishermen. It hath a Road, suffi∣ciently secured from the violence of the Winds by Rocks and high Trees. It is a Corporation, gover∣ned by a Major, and sends two Burgesses to the Par∣liament: defended by Blake against the Kings Forces in the late Parliamentarian Rebellion to a Wonder, though it has no other Fortifications, than what Na∣ture bestowed upon it. To this Place, Charles II. af∣ter the Battel of VVorcester retired, and was promised passage for France; but deluded by the Master, and forced to seek it elsewhere. The late Duke of Mon∣mouth on June 11. 1685. with about one hundred and twenty Men on Board a single Vessel from Hol∣land surprized this Town, and began a Rebellion a∣gainst King James II. which was of short duration, unfortunate in all its events; and ended in the ruin of that Duke: being beheaded July 15. following, on Tower-Hill, in London. Limen, Palus Moeotis, a Branch or Bay of the Euxine Sea, on the East of the Crim Tartary; cal∣led also Mar de Zabacce, and de Tana, from the Ri∣ver Tanais, which falls into it. Limerick, Limericum, a strong City in the Province of Mounster, (but in the Confines of Connaught) upon the River Shannon: forty five Miles from Kil∣kenny to the West, thirty five from Gallway to the South, and from the main Ocean about sixty; but so accommodated by the River, that Ships of Burden come up to the very Walls. This City is the Capital of a County of the same Name; and a Bi∣shops See, under the Archbishop of Casshel. The Irish call it Loumeagh. It was first conquered from them, by Raimond de Grosse, an English Man: after which one Danewald, an Irish Royolet of Thomond, burnt it. King John built the Castle: the English in after times built an additional Town, and wal∣led it; securing it by Draw-Bridges, and whatever might contribute to the strength of it. What be∣came of this Place in the beginning of the Irish Re∣bellion, I do not find: but when Ireton came before it in 1651. to take it for the Parliamentarians, Hugh O-Neal, a Valiant Irish Man, and a good Comman∣der, being intrusted with the Government of it by the Lord Lieutenant; it made the best defence, and slew more of the Parliamentarians, than any place in Ireland: till after a Siege of three Months, it yiel∣ded upon Articles, when all their Victuals were spent. Having the Consolation of seeing her Conqueror soon swept away by the Plague, which he found here, when he forced the Town. After the Rout at the Boyne, King James's Forces rallied again here; and made a very vigorous defence under the Conduct of Monsieur Boiseleau the Governour: insomuch, that though King William in Person commanded the Siege, which began about the tenth of August 1690. yet his Ar∣my was forced to decamp the one and thirtieth fol∣lowing without success. The next year it surrended upon Articles The County of Limerick is bounded on the North by the Rivers Shannon and Mysker, which part it from Clare and Ormond; on the East it has the County of Tipperary, on the South that of Cork, and on the West that of Kerry. A fertil Country (saith Mr. Camb∣den) and full of people, but able to shew few places of any account. The Western side is Mountainous; the rest Plain. Limino, Lemene, Romatinum, a River of Friuli, which ariseth out of the Carnick Alpes; and wash∣ing Concordia, an old ruined City, twenty seven Miles from Aquileja to the East, falls into the Venetian Gulph. Limoges, Lemovicum urbs, in Ptolemy called Rastiatum, in Ammianus Marcellinus Lemovix, and otherwise Lemovica, Lemovicina, a City which is the Capital of the Province of Limosin in France; and a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Bourges: great and populous; seated amongst Hills, by the River Vienne; twenty Leagues from Angoulesme to thé East, twenty five from Poictiers to the North-East, and forty from Bourdeaux. This City was of old times pillaged by the Goths and Franks. After∣wards by Storm taken by the Black Prince in 1371. who put four thousand of the Inhabitants to the Sword. Adorned now with divers Religious Houses, and has been a Viscounty for many Ages. The Bi∣shops of Aquitaine have celebrated some Councils at it. Limosin, Lemovicensis Provincia, is a Province of France, in the Generalité of Aquitain; which is part of what was possessed by the Lemovices. It is a great and populous Province, but cold and barren, affording little Corn, or Wine, that is good: divided into two parts, the Upper and the Lower: on the North it is bounded by la Marche; on the East by Auvergne; on the South by Cahors; and on the West by Perigort, and Angoumois. Foreigners do sometimes include la Marche in this Province. The principal Cities are Limoges, Tulle, Brive, and Ʋserche. Limoux, Limosium, a City of Languedoc, upon the River Aude, [Atax;] three Leagues from Carcas∣sone to the South, and six from Mirepoix to the East. It is built amongst the Hills, well peopled, and be∣longs to the Diocese of Narbonne. Linceo, and Lincen, Lincestis, a River of Mace∣donia. Linchiang, a City of the Kingdom of China, in the Province of Quamsi; upon the River Can, at the foot of the Mountains: esteemed the eighth City of that Province. Liuck, or Lincken, a Fort in Flanders, in the District of Bourbourg, upon the River Colme, one League from Bourbourg to the North-East, and two from Audomar to the North. Taken by the French in 1676. and still in their Hands. Lincoln, Lincolnia, Lindum, a famous City sea∣ted on the North side of the River Witham, over
which it hath several Bridges; almost in the Centre of the County to which it gives name: large, well built, and populous; extending from the top of a high Hill (where Lindum, the old Roman Town, stood; its Ditches and Rampier being still visible) a great way downwards unto the River. In this Town, the Va∣liant Britain, Vortimer, died in 456: being Poyson∣ed by Rowena, the Daughter of Hengist, and Wife of Vortiger. The Saxons after this ruined Lindum and built Lincoln nearer the River, about the times, when Paulinus first Preached the Christian Faith to them. The Danes destroyed it twice. In the time of Edward the Confessor, here was one thousand and seventy Man∣sions. In the Norman times no City in England was more Rich or Populous, as Will. of Malmsbury ac∣quaints us. Will. the Conqueror thought fit to build here a very strong Castle upon the top of the Hill a∣foresaid to awe the Inhabitants. Remigius, Bishop of Dorchester, near Oxon, at the same time removed the Sea hither, and built the Cathedral above the same Hill. In the Reign of Edward III. it was made a Mart or Staple. King Stephen was overcome and taken Priso∣ner near this City, in 1140. Sept. 5. in a great Battel with Maud the Empress, and afterwards at Bristol laid in Irons. Henry III. had better success here; when it being defended by the Barons against him under Prince Lewis, in 1217. May 19. he took it, forced Lewis to Flee to London, and soon after into France. Mr. Cambden observes, that of fifty Churches standing within an hundred Years of his time, there were only eighteen left. It hath by times gone through all the calamities of Fire, Sword, and Earthquake. Yet a large, populous, and well frequented place still, and enjoying the greatest Diocese of any in the King∣dom; as the Cathedral, there called commonly the Minster, is one of the stateliest Piles perhaps in Chri∣stendom. It hath the privilege also of being a Coun∣ty Corporate, whose Liberties extend about twenty Miles in compass, with the title of the County of the City of Lincoln. Its Long. 22. 52. Lat. 53. 12. Lincolnshire, is bounded on the North by the Humber, and the British Sea; on the East by the same Sea, and part of Norfolk; on the South by Cambridge, Northampton, and Rutlandshire; on the West by Leicester, Nottingham, and Yorkshire. It is a very large County; extending in length from North to South almost sixty Miles, and carrying in some places thirty in breadth; fruitful in Corn and Grass, thick set with Towns, and well watered with Rivers; As the Humber, the Trent (which severs part of it from Nottinghamshire,) the Witham, running a cross it, the Woland and the Nen. The whole is divided into Lindsey to the Northward, which takes up about one half; Holland towards the Sea, South∣ward; and Kesteven, West from thence; which three divisions contain six hundred and thirty Parishes, and thirty five Market Towns. Here is plenty of Fowl and Fish. The old Inhabitans were the Cori∣tani. The present Earl of this County is Edward Lord Clinton; who succeeded in 1667, being the fifth of his Family that has born this Title, and the sixteenth Earl. Edward Fines, Lord Clinton, Lord Admiral, having obtained this Honor from Qu. Eliza∣beth, in 1565: before whose time the same title had passed through several Families by frequent interrup∣tions. Lincopen, Lincopia, Lingacopia, a City of Swe∣den, which is a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Ʋpsal in Ostro-Gothia; between Soderkoping to the East, and Wadtena to the West; twenty eight Ger∣man Miles from Stockholm to the South-West, and almost eight East from the Lake of Veter. Long. 32. 48. Lat. 58. 3. The City is very small and inconside∣rable. We read of a Synod celebrated at it in 1148. under P. Eugenius III. It is also written Lindkee∣ping. Lindaw, Lindavia, Lindavilum, Philyra, a City of Germany, in the Circle of Schwaben, in an Island in the Lake of Constance; joined to the Continent by a Bridge two hundred and ninety Paces long. It is an Imperial and Free City, situate in the borders of Switzerland: eight Miles from Constance to the North-East; and grew up out of the ruins of Aeschach, a place near to it. Very strong both by its Site, and by Art; and therefore it the more easily repelled the Forces of Count Wrangel the Swedish General, who in 1647. besieged it. The beginning of this City was a Monastery, built here by Adelbert Rorbuck, a Kins∣man of Charles the Great, in 810. This occasioned the building of a Village; and the Site being plea∣sant, fruitful, and convenient, it grew up by degrees to a City: at first subject to the Abbess; after that to the Dukes of Schwaben; obtaining its Privileges since from Rudolphus I. Frederick III. and Sigis∣mond. Lindo, Lindus, a Sea-Port Town in the Isle of Rhodes; the Christian Inhabitants of which can bring about twenty good and large Ships into the Grand Seignior's Service. Line, a rivulet in Staffordshire, upon which New∣castle stands; thence commonly called Newcastle up∣on Line, to distinguish it from Newcastle upon Tine. Lindsey, one of the three parts of the County of Lincoln; containing all the Northern parts from the River Witham to the Humber, and from the Ocean to Trent. This was in 1626. by Charles I. made an Earldom; and granted to Robert Bartie, Lord Wil∣loughby of Eresby, Lord Great Chamberlain of Eng∣land; who died in the Bed of Honour at Edge-Hill October 23. 1642. being the King's General in that Battel. The present Earl, Robert Bartie, the third of this Family, succeeded in 1666. Lingen, Lingo, a strong Town in Westphalia, which is the Capital of a County of the same Name; under the Prince of Orange, upon the River Ems; forty five Miles from Munster to the North, and fifty five from Emden to the South. The County, that be∣longs to it, lies in the Bishoprick of Munster; and is very small. It belonged to the Spaniards in the time of Charles V. but is now in the hands of the Prince of Orange. Linlithgo, Linlithquo, Lithquo, Lindum, a Town and a County in the South of Scotland. The Town standeth on the South side of the Fyrth of Edenburgh; twenty two Miles from that City to the West. This Place, as Mr. Cambden saith, is called Lindum by Ptolemy; and it takes its Name from a great Lake in this small County: from which ancient, the present Name is derived. Linosa, an Island of the Mediterranean Sea, up∣on the Coast of Africa, near Maltha. It depends upon the Island of Maltha. Linton, a Market Town in Cambridgeshire, in the Hundred of Chilford. Lintz, Aurelianum, Lentia, called by Aurelian, Lyncia, Lyncium; and by some understood to be the Aredate of Ptolemy; is the Capital City of the Ʋpper Austria; small, but populous; seated upon the Da∣nube, over which it has a Bridge; and in it a magni∣ficent Castle, whither the Emperors of the House of Austria have frequently retired for their Pleasure, and Divertisement. It stands six German Miles from Pas∣saw to the East, and twenty four from Vienna to the West. Dr. Brown gives this account of it. It is not very great, but as neat and handsom a City as most in Germany. There is in it a very great Market∣place, with never a bad House in it: the whole Town is built of a very white free Stone, and the Castle
upon the Hill is of a Modern building, very large; there is also a Bridge over the Danube. The Im∣perial Forces Rendezvouzed here, when Solyman came to Vienna, in 1532. This was also besieged by the Peasants of Austria, in the time of Ferdinand II. They having got a Body together of forty thousand Men, and many pieces of Ordnance; but were stout∣ly repulsed after many Assaults, and at last overcome by Papenheim. The late renowned Duke of Lor∣raine dyed at a Convent near this Lintz. See Lor∣raine. Lintz, Lentium, a small Town upon the Rhine, in the Diocese of Cologn in Westerwaldt; five Miles beneath Coblentz to the North, six from Cologn; in the borders of the Dukedom of Juliers. Lintzgow, Lentinensis Populus, a part of the Dukedom of Bavaria. Lipari, Liparae, a knot of small Islands, being seven in number, belonging to the Kingdom of Sicily: they lie in the Tyrrhenian Sea, about thirty Miles to the North-West of the Island, and the same distance from Calabria to the West. Though they belong to Sicily, yet Charles V. for his convenience attributed them to the Kingdom of Naples: but in 1609. they were restored to Sicily, and at this day are holden by the King of Spain as a part of it. The ancient Poets Epithet them Aeoliae and Vulcaniae, from a fiction of their being the Country of the Gods of those names. The principal is the Island called Lipari, which has an Episcopal City to enable it, under the Metropoliti∣cal jurisdiction of Messina in Sicily. In 1544. Bar∣berousse, the Turkish Admiral, ruined this City; but it was rebuilt again, and a considerable Fortress added to it. Lippa, a City of Transylvania, seated upon the River Marosch, which falls in the Tibiscus at Segedin. It stands five Hungarian Miles from Temeswar to the North, and thirteen from Alba Julia, or Weissen∣burgh, to the South-West. This City was taken in 1595. from the Turks, by the Emperor: Retaken by Assault by General Caraffa with a Body of ten thou∣sand Imperialists on Aug. 19. 1688. And the Castle, into which the Garrison retreated to save themselves, being about two thousand Soldiers, was obliged to Sur∣render upon discretion two days after. There were eighteen pieces of Cannon in it. Lippe, Lippia, a City of Westphalia, more com∣monly called Lipstat. It stands upon the River Lippe, three German Miles from Paderborn to the East; in Marshes, and a bad Air; yet it is a Hanse Town, very great, and the Capital of a County of the same name. It was once too a Free Imperial City: in length of time it became exempt, and fell under the Jurisdiction of the Counts of Lippe, and by one of them was mort∣gaged to the Duke of Cleve for eight thousand Marks of Silver; and never since redeemed; but together with Cleve fell to the Duke of Brandenburgh. Char∣lemaigne assembled the Bishops of Germany here in 780. The County of Lippe is a part of the Circle of Westphalia; between the Bishoprick of Paderborn, the Dukedom of Westphalia, and the County or Earl∣dom of Ravensberg. It is under its own Count, (the principal Town excepted) whose Residence is at Lem∣gow. He has also a part of the Earldom of Schaum∣burgh, not long since granted him by Maurice Landt∣grave of Hassia. The Lippe, Lupias, Luppia, is a River of Ger∣many, mentioned by Strabo and Mela. It ariseth in a Village called Lippsprinck, near Paderborn; and running Westward, watereth Lippe, or Lipstad; se∣parating the Diocese of Munster from the County of Mark; it passeth by Ham, Dorsten, and Wesel into the Rhine; twelve Miles beneath Cologn to the North-West. Lippio, Hyppius, a River of Bithynia, which falls into the Euxine Sea, near Heraclea Ponti. Lipuda, Aretas, a River of Calabria, which fal∣leth by the City of Ʋmbriatico, into the Ionian Sea. Lire, Lira. See Liere above. Only let me add the Elogy given it by L. Guicciardin; Lira, elegans & amoenum Brabantiae oppidum; adeo ut multorum hujus Tractus Nobilium, in otio degentium, à curis & turba jucundissimus sit recessus. Lire is so beau∣tiful and pleasant a Town of Brabant, that many of the Nobility thereof, make it their beloved recess from Cares and Crouds of Men. Lirio, Iris, the same with Casalmach. Lis, Loegia: The same with Leye. Lisbon, Olysippo, Ʋlysippo, (the Spaniards call it Lisboa,) the Capital City of the Kingdom of Portu∣gal, the Royal Seat of their Kings, and an Archbi∣shops See made by P. Boniface IX. It has a large, safe, convenient Harbor; and a Castle built on a Hill by the Taso; on the North side of which River the City stands two Leagues from the Ocean, and six from Cabo di Rocca Sintra. In Long. 11. 00. Lat. 38. 50. According to Dr. Heylyn, in Long. 9. 10. Lat. 38. 30. This City was recovered from the Moors by Alphonsus King of Portugal, in 1147. It is the greatest in all Spain, and every day encreasing. At a Town, called Bethlem, within half a League of it, are to be seen the Tombs of the Kings of Portugal. Of this City the Spaniards have a Proverb, Qui no ha vi∣sto Lisboa, no ha visto cosa boa. He that has not seen Lisbonne, has seen nothing that's good. Lisieux, Lexobii, Lexovium, Neomagus, a City in the Ʋpper Normandy, upon the River Tucca, (or rather Lezon;) which is a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Roan: a great and fine City, seated in a fruitful Country; five Leagues from the Shoars of the British Seas to the East, eighteen from Roan to the West, and ten from Caen to the East. The Country about is from it called the Lieuvin. Caesar in his Commentaries twice mentions the Forces of the ancient People thereof, against the Romans. In 1106. The Ecclesiastiques held a Council here in the presence of Henry I. King of England; and since, others. Lismore, Lismora, a small City in the Province of Munster, in the County of Waterford; which was a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Cashell; but this Bishoprick has been united to that of Water∣ford, since 1363. It stands upon the River More; fifteen Miles from the Vergivian Ocean, and twenty two from Cashell. Lisnia, a strong Fortress in Bosnia, surprized by the Imperialists July 18. 1690. after having in the two precedent Years been thrice attack'd by them in vain. Two hundred Christian Slaves were here free'd. Lison, Casius, a Mountain of Syria, mentioned by Pliny and Ptolemy; lying between Cilicia and Phoenicia, near Antioch and Laodicea. There is ano∣ther Mountain by it, called the Anticasus; and a Country between them called heretofore Casiolis; in which are the Cities of Antiochia, Seleucia, Laodi∣cea, Epiphania, Marathus, Antaradus, and some others; most of which are by the Turks, (now Ma∣sters of this Country) ruined. A Gentleman, who had Travelled over this Country, informing me; that it was little inhabited by any but the Wild Arabs, though prodigiously fruitful; and that he frequently met the ruins of great Cities, buried in their own Rubbish, whose Memorial was perished with them. Lisonzo. See Isonzo. Lissa, an Island belonging to Dalmatia, thirty Miles South of Lesina.
Lissus, a River of Thrace, said by Herodotus to be drunk dry by Xerxes's Army. § This is likewise the ancient Name of the Town Fionissi in Canadia; which Strabo calls Lictus. See Fionissi. And of ano∣ther in Albania, near the Bay of Drin, now called Alessio. Listra, Lystra, a City of Lycaonia, in the Lesser Asia, mentioned in the Acts of the Apostles. It lies forty Miles from Cogni, [Iconium,] to the West; and was once a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Ico∣nium; but is now totally ruined and desolate. Lita, Lete, a City of Macedonia, upon the Gulph of Thessalonica; which is a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Thessalonica; two Miles from it to the South. Lithquo. See Linlithgo. Lithuania, a Province and Grand Dukedom be∣longing to the Kingdom of Poland; called by the In∣habitants, Litwa; by the Germans, Littawen; by the Poles, Litewsky; which was heretofore a part of Sarmatia Europaea. This Country imbraced the Christian Faith, in 1386. Jagellon, Grand Duke of Lithuania, being made King of Poland; and in 1569. this Dukedom was for ever united to the Kingdom of Poland. It is bounded on the East by Moscovy, or great Russia; on the North by the same in part, and by Livonia and Samogitia; on the West by Poland (properly so called) and Mozvia; on the South by Red Russia. The Dukedom of Czernichow did here∣tofore belong to this Province, which is now under the Russ. The principal Cities are Breslaw, Brest, Grodno, Minsko, Mohilow, Noovogrodook, Poloczk, Troki, Wilne, or Vilna, (the Capital) and Witebsk. This is the greatest Province belonging to that King∣dom: being in length from the River of Polet to Dassow two hundred and sixty▪ German Miles; and in breadth (between the Niemen or Memel, and the Nieper) eighty. It is all overspread with Woods, Forests, and Marshes, which since the times of Sigis∣mond I. have yet been very much improved. The Air is exceeding cold, and the Inhabitants as barbarous. Their language is a dialect of the Sclavonick; and their Frontiers have been often desolated by the incur∣sions of the Tartars and Moscovites. Livadia, Lebadia, Creusa, a City of Boeotia, which from this City is now called Livadia. It is seated upon a River, which falls into a Lake of the same name, but was anciently called Cephissus. Mr. Wheeler, who had seen this Place, saith; It is an an∣cient City, and still called by its ancient name; the Greeks pronouncing B as we do the V Consonant. The ancient buildings are yet remaining: we found (saith he) several Inscriptions to the same purpose; it is situate about a pointed Hill, on the top of which is an old Castle, on the N. side of the high Cliffs of a Mountain of a moderate height, which I took to be part of the Helicon, till I found it afterwards parted from it by a Valley; therefore I now take it to be Mount Tilphusium. This City stands fifteen Leagues from Delphis, now Salona, to the East. From this City all that part of Greece, which was anciently called Achaia, is now called Livadia; lying from Ne∣gropont in the East, to the Ionian Sea West: having Thessalia on the North, the Gulph of Lepanto, the Hexamilia, and the Bay of Corinth on the South; in which stand Lepanto, Salona, Livadia, and A∣thens. Livenza, Liquentia, a River in the State of Ve∣nice, which ariseth in the borders of Bellunese; and flowing South, separates the Marquisate of Treviso from Friuli; then falls into the Venetian Gulph, twenty Miles from Venice to the South East. Livonia, called by the Inhabitants Lieland; by the Poles, Inflanty; by the French, Livonie; is a great and cultivated Province of the Kingdom of Po∣land, ever since it was taken from the Knights of the Teutonick Order: but the greatest part of it has since been taken from them by the Swedes. It is bounded on the North by the Bay of Finland; on the West with the Bay of Riga, (both parts of the Baltick Sea;) on the South with Samogithia, and Lituania; and on the East with Ingria and Pleskow, two Provinces belonging to the Russ. It is divided into four Coun∣ties; Esten (Esthonia,) Curland, Semigallen, and Letten. Esten is under the Swede, and also Letten; except a little part towards the East, which the Russ have. Curland and Semigallen, are subject to a Duke, who is a Feudatary of the Crown of Poland: there be∣long to it also Oesel, and Dagho, (two Islands in the Baltick Sea,) which were possessed by the Dane; till in 1645. by a Treaty at Bromsbro, they were yielded to the Swede. The chief Towns in it are Narva, Parnaw, Revel, Riga (the Capital,) Derpt and Wol∣mer. Its length from Narva to Memmel is ninety German Miles: its breadth from the Sea to Dodina, sixty. It produceth Wheat in abundance; which the Dwina and Narva, bring down to Riga and Narva, for Exportation. Its Forests abound with wild Boars, Bears, &c. which come over the Nar∣va, out of Russia. This People being then Barba∣rous, began to imbrace the Christian Faith about 1161. Meinradus became their first Bishop in 1190. The way of Instruction being thought too slow by his Successors, Albertus, (one of them) instituted an Order of Knights to Bang them into Christianity, which were called the Livonian Order; but in time united with the Teutonick in 1237. About 1525. these two Orders were again parted by Albert Duke of Branden∣burgh; and Sigismond, King of Poland, put an end to them in 1587. In 1617. the Swedes became Ma∣sters of this Country. In 1634. the Muscovites ce∣ded all their right to it to Ladislaus K. of Poland; who by the treaty of Stumsdorf, confirmed the Swedes in the possession of as much as they held on the North of the Dwina, for twenty six years: All which was en∣tirely yielded to them in 1660. by the peace of Oliva. Livorno. See Ligorne. Lizaine, Liricinus, a River in Normandy. The Lizard Point, the furthest South-West Point or Cape of the Goon-hilly Downes in Cornwal; which is a tract, pretty large, shooting forth from the main Land into the South Sea. In Latin called, Danmo∣niorum Promontorium. Lizza, Laodicea. Llanbeder, a Market Town in Cardiganshire in Wales, in the Hundred of Moythen. Llandaff, Landava, a small City and a Bishops See in the County of Clamorgan, in South Wales; seated upon the West side of the River Taff; three Miles to the North from the Sea. This Bishoprick was Founded by Germanus and Lupus, two Holy French Bishops, about 522. And Dubricius (a Holy Man) was made the first Bishop; to whom Meuricke, a British Lord, freely gave all the Land that lieth be∣tween the Taff, and the Elei. But one Kitchin, a Bishop about the time of the Reformation, so wasted the Revenue, that it will scarce maintain its Bishop. Dr. William Beaw, the seventy sixth Bishop, is the present Bishop of this See, and was Consecrated June 22. 1679. Its Long. is 16. 52. Lat. 51. 49. Llandilo Vawr, a Market Town in Carmarthen∣shire in Wales, in the Hundred of Cayo. Llanelly, a Market Town in Carmarthenshire in Wales, in the Hundred of Kidwelly. Llangadoc, a Market Town in the County of Ca∣ermarthen, and the Hundred of Perueth. Lleleyda, Ilerda. See Lerida. Llobregat, Clodianus. See Fluvian.
Loanda, a small Island on the Coast of the King∣dom of Congo; in which is the City of St. Paulo, with a large and safe Port, and a strong Castle, under the Dominion of the Portuguese; an hundred and eighty Miles from the Mouth of the River Zaire to the South. This City was once taken by the Dutch, but valiant∣ly retaken by the Portuguese. The Bishop of Angola has his Residence here. Long. 34. 40. South Lat. 9. 10. Loango, Loangum, a City, and a great and pow∣erful Kingdom in the West of the Lower Aethiopia, in Africa; between the Kingdom of Congo to the South, and Bidfara to the North. Written also Lo∣vango and Loanga. The City stands within a League and an half of the Sea. Lobach, Laubachus, a small River which falls into the Sambre. Lobaw, a small Town in Poland, in Prussia Re∣gia; thirteen Miles from Culme to the East▪ in which is a Castle, wherein the Bishop of Culme for the most part resides; who is therefore often called the Bishop of Lobaw. Locarno, by the Germans called Luggar, a Town and Bailiwick in Italy, upon the Lake of Verbanus, (now Magiore;) thirty Miles from Como to the South-East, forty from Novara, and five from the Confines of the Dukedom of Milan. This is now under the Swiss, since the Year 1512. but was heretofore a part of the Duchy of Milan. Lochem, Lochemum, a strong Town in Guelder∣land, under the Hollanders, in the Confines of Over-Yssel and Westphalia; two Leagues from Zutphen to the East. This was taken by the French in 1672. dis∣mantled, and deserted in 1674. Loches, Lochia, a City of France, in the Pro∣vince of Touraine, upon the River Indre, with a For∣tress and a strong Castle, wherein have been kept some Prisoners of State. Charles VII. K. of France made it his ordinary Residence: Lewis XI. added divers apartments to it: seven Leagues from Amboise to the South, and twenty two from Bourges. Locra, a River of Corsica. Locris, in Magna Graecia; see Gieraci, its mo∣dern name. § This was also a Country in Graecia Antiqua, adjoyning to Phocis in Achaia. Loda, Olda▪ See Lot. Lodeves, Glanum, Luteva, Forum Neronis, a City of the Lower Languedoc; which is a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Narbone; being raised to this Honor by Pope John XXII. It stands upon the Ri∣ver Lergue, at the foot of Mount Sevennes, in the borders of Rovergue; twelve Leagues from Narbone to the North; it has heretofore given the title of a Viscount. The Bishops style themselves the Counts of Montbrun, from a Castle in the Neighbourhood of this City. Lodi, Laus Pompeia, a City and Roman Colony setled by Pompeius Strabo, the Father of Pompey the Great. It became a Bishops Sea, under the Archbishop of Milan: and is now a considerable Town in the Dukedom of Milan, well inhabited; and shews many foot-steps of a great Antiquity. Called Lodi Vecchio, and for shorter Pronuntiation, Lodive, that is, Old Lodi: it stands upon the Rivolet Silaro; five Miles from the New Lodi to the West: much ruined by the Inhabitants of Milan, in 1158. Lodi, or New Lodi, is a City in the Dukedom of Milan, upon the River Adda; twenty Miles from Mi∣lan to the West, and the same distance from Cremo∣na, Brixia, and Placentia: built by Frederick the Emperor, in 1204. and being placed in a fruitful Soil, is now great, populous, and well fortified; be∣ing a Frontier towards the State of Venice; and the Capital of the Territory of Lodesane. Lodrino, the same with Drino. Lodro, a Seigniory in the Trentine in Italy. Lodun. See Loudun. Loet, Lo, a River of France near Estampes. Logan, a Town and Bailiwick in Italy, belonging to the Swiss. Logronno, Juliobrigo, an old City of Spain, in the Confines of Castile and Navarre. Loignon, or Lougnon, Ligno, a River in the Franche Comte; which falls by Besanzon into the Saone, at Pontalie; four Miles above Auxonne to the North. Loing, Lupia, a River of France, which riseth in Puysdie, in the borders of Burgundy; and run∣ning North, watereth Chastillon sur Loing, Mon∣targis, and Nemours; then falls into the Seyne at Mo∣ret, four Leagues above Melun to the East. Loiowogrod, Loiovogrodum, a Town in Red Rus∣sia, in the Palatinate of Kiovia, on the West side of the Nieper, where it receives the Sosz. This Place was ennobled by a signal Victory obtained by Janu∣sius Radzivil, a Polander, against the Cossacks, June 31. 1649. Loir, Arula, Laedus, is a River of France; which ariseth in the Province of le Perche, near the Village de Corves; and running into the Territory of Char∣tres in la Beause, watereth Chaudun, Vendosme, le Jude, la Fleche; then falls into the Sartre, a little above Angers: this last, and the Mayenne, fall into the great Loyre, twelve Miles above Nantes, and five be∣neath Angers. Loire, or Loyre, Liger, Ligeris, is one of the greatest, and most celebrated Rivers of France. It hath this name from a Meddow, which it washeth near its Fountain, in the Parish of Eulatia in Velay, at the foot of Mount Grbier de Joux: hence flowing Northward by le Puy, it entereth Foretz, and passeth Feurs; having taken in the Rioutort, Loigno, Anse, and Furan: then passing to Roanne and Bourbon-Lancy, it passeth to Nevers; before which time it has entertained amongst many others, the Lay, the Bre∣binche, the Aroux, and the Besbre, over against Bour∣bon. A little beneath Nevers it admits the Allier out of Bourbon; and passing by la Chayite, Chistillon, Gien, and Chauneuf, it washeth Orleans: then ben∣ding from North-West to South-West, it entereth Vendosme at Blangency; and watereth Blois and Tours. Beneath which from the South it receives the Cher, and the Rideau or Indre, (two great Rivers, but uni∣ted in one before they fall into the Loire) and a little further the Vienne, which brings a great many other Rivers with him: so entering the Dukedom of Anjou, and leaving Saumur upon his Southern Bank, at In∣grande from the North he takes in the Sartre; and hasteth to Nantes; from which to the Sea he beareth Ships of burden. At last he falls into the Bay of Aqui∣tain, with a vast Stream, by a wide and large Chan∣nel, twelve Miles beneath Nantes; after a Course of two hundred French Leagues; one hundred and sixty six of which are Navigable by Boats, and the twelve last by Ships: the Current, rapid. It is said to enter∣tain 1▪12 Rivers in this course. Le Loiret, Ligerula, a River which ariseth near Orleans, and falls into the Loir. It issueth from so plentiful a Spring, that it will presently bear a Boat. Loket, Locta, a City of Bohemia, called by the Germans Ellebogen. It is very strongly fortified, and has a Castle on a Hill, upon the River Eger; in the Confines of Misnia; four Miles from Eger or Heb, another City of Bohemia to the East; eighteen from Prague, and as many from Dresden. Lomaigne, Leomania, a Tract or Country in Aquitain, (or Gascony;) the principal Town of which is Vi de Lomaigne: it lies between the County of Armagnac, Verdun, and the Garonne;
by which it is parted from the County of Agenois. Loman, a River in Devonshire, which falls into the Ex by Tiverton in that County. Lombardy, Lombardia, Longobardia, is a consi∣derable Country in the North of Italy; under which is contained the greatest part of Gallia Cisalpina. It is divided into two, the Higher and the Lower Lom∣bardy. In the Higher, are Piedmont (with what is annexed to it,) the Dukedoms of Milan, and Mon∣tisferat: in the Lower are the Dukedoms of Man∣tua, Modena, and Parma; with the Western parts of the State of Venice, viz. The Territories of Berga∣mo, Brescia, Cremona, Verona, and Vicenza: also the Dukedoms of Ferrara, with the Territory of Bo∣nonia, (or Bologna,) which are in the States of the Church, and now under the Pope. The Italians also divide it into Lombardia di qua dal Po, and Lom∣bardia di la dal Po, i. e. Lombardy on each side the Po. This was that Kingdom of the Lombards (Langobardi or Longobardi) in Italy, which Charles the Great ruined, after he had at Pavie taken Desi∣derius (their last King) Prisoner. The principal Ci∣ty of this Kingdom was Milan. This Kingdom was erected in 578. Isaacson placeth its beginning in 393. with whom Helvicus agrees; Agelmond being their first King; before whom they had Dukes: it continu∣ed so under eleven Princes; that is, in Pannonia, (or Hungary,) not in Italy. They came into Italy in 568. And their Kingdom continued there under twenty one Princes till 774, when Carlous Magnus Dethroned. (as was said) In all, two hundred and six Years. Lombez, Lombaria, or Lumbaria, a small City in Aquitain in France; in the County of Cominges, upon the River Sava; (which falls into the Garonne, four Miles beneath Tolose.) Lombes stands five Leagues from the Garonne to the North, eight from Aux to the South-East, and ten from Tolose to the South-West. Made a Bishops See by Pope John XXII. (who at the same time erected its ancient Abbey into a Cathedral) under the Archbishop of Tolose, in 1317. But little, and not well inhabited. The Albigenses were excommunicated in a Council here. Lombura, the Indus. Lomond, and Lough Lomond, Lomandus, is a great Lake in the South of Scotland, in the County of Lenox; between Menteith to the East, and Ar∣gile to the West. In length from North to South twenty Miles, ten in breadth from East to West in some places, in others three and four. It is only four Miles from Dunbritown to the North, and a little more from its Fyrth; the River Levin empties it into the Fyrth. There is in it sixteen small Islands. Lon, Lone, or Lunne, a River of Lancashire, upon which Lancaster and Hornby are situated, and Kirkby Lonsdale in the County of Westmorland. It ends in the Irish Sea. London, Londinum, Augusta Trinobantum, the Capital City of the Kingdom of England; or rather three Cities united into one: Its length from East to West, from Lime-house to the further end of Mill∣bank in Westminster, coming to 7500 Geometrical pa∣ces, i. e. seven measured Miles and an half, at a thou∣sand paces a Mile: Its breadth, from the further end of Whitechappel-street to St. George's Fields in South∣wark, near three Miles. It is first mentioned by Ta∣citus, afterwards by Ammianus Marcellinus, who calls it Augusta; Stephanus de Ʋrbibus, Lindoni∣um; Bede and Sigebert call it Lindona; the En∣glish, London; the Saxons, Lundain; the French, Londres; the Germans, Londen; and the Italians, Londra. It is a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Canterbury; seated in the County of Middlesex, upon the Thames (a noble navigable River), over which it has a Bridge of nineteen Arches, built with Houses on both sides, and of late enlarged as to the Passage. This is also the Royal City, the Seat of the Kings of England, and has been so for many years. Therefore called the King of Englands Chamber. It is situate in a rich and plentiful Soil; abounding with plenty of all things; and on the gentle ascent of an Hill, on the North Side of the Thames. By whom, or when it was first built, is now unknown. Tacitus saith, that in Nero's time, about the Year of Christ 66, it was Copia Negotiatorum, & Commeatu maxi∣mè celebre. A place of great resort for Commerce, and famous for plenty of provisions. But London was then near a great Calamity: for Boadicia, Queen of the Iceni, being provoked by the Injuries of the Romans, to assemble the Britains, fell first upon Ca∣malodunum, (now Maldon in Essex;) and taking it by surprize that year, put all the Romans to the Sword. Petilius Cerealis, coming up with the ninth Legion, was defeated; and all his Foot put to the Sword too, the Horse hardly escaping. In the Inte∣rim Suetonius, the Roman Propraetor, or Governor. (who was then conquering the Isle of Anglesey) comes up to London; and was at first almost resolved to make it the Seat of War; but finding reasons to al∣ter this Resolve, he marched away to S. Albans: so Boadicia (who was not far off) came up, and put all She found in the Town to the Sword; and soon after treats S. Albans in the same manner: in which three places She destroyed seventy thousand Romans and their Allies. This City soon recovered this Blow, and was afterward as famous as ever. In the Year of Christ 292, it was in danger of being Sack'd by the Franks; if an unexpected Arrival of some Roman Forces had not accidentally preserved it, even when the Franks were actually in Possession of it. Soon after this, Constantine the Great is said to have Walled it. In 313, we find Restitutus, Bishop of London, at the Council of Arles in France, subscribing after Eborius, Bishop of York. Bede is very positive, that it was then an Archbishops See. Mr. Cambden is of opinion, it was delivered up to the Saxons, under Hengist their first King, by Vortigern, about the Year of Christ, 463. Tho this changed the state of things, and rui∣ned Christianity; yet London continued in all this Storm a considerable Mart, or Sea-Port: in 610. S. Paul's Church was built, (or rather rebuilt) and assigned to the Uses of Christianity, by Athelbert, King of Kent. Miletus was made the first Bishop of London, after the Conversion of the Saxons, in 604; the Metropolitick See being removed by Augustin the Monk then from London to Canterbury. About the Year 701, Offa, King of the East-Angles, enlarged and endowed the Church of Westminster: which is since become another City, joined to London. In the Year 854, this City fell into the Hands of the Danes, who Sacked it, and Canterbury; coming then with a Fleet of two hundred and fifty Ships. In 1012, these Barbarians slew the Bishop of London, for not paying them their Tribute; the Year after, Sweno (King of the Danes) took the City, and expelled King Ethelred out of England; but this lasted not long. In the Year 1016, Canutus the Dane took London; and in 1018, was there Crowned King of England. In 1042, there was an end put to this Danish Race; and Edward the Confessor was Crowned King of Eng∣land. In 1064, this Prince died; and Herald usurp∣ing upon Edward Atheling, the Right Heir, William Duke of Normandy entred England, slew him, and in 1066, was Crowned in London. The Fate of Lon∣don has been much the same with that of England ever since; for this Prince in 1078, having built the Tower of London, it became the setled Residence of our Kings from that day forward. William II. in 1099, Wal∣led
the Tower. King John in 1210, Granted this Ci∣ty its first Charter; and Instituted its Major, and Go∣vernment. In 1211, He built London Bridge. In 1217, Lewis of France was besieged in London by Henry III. and forced to leave the Land. In 1378, John Philpot, a Londoner, at his own Cost, and upon his own Authority, put out a Fleet, and cleared the Seas of Pyrats. In 1381, the Country Clowns rising against the Nobility, and one Jack Straw behaving himself insolently towards the King in Smithfield; Sir William Wallworth, the Lord Major, stabbed him, and put an end to that Rebellion; for which Service the Red Dagger was added, as is said, to the Arms of London. In 1392, that Prince seized their Liber∣ties, for resusing to lend him Money. In 1567, the Royal Exchange was built by Sir Thomas Gresham. In succeeding times it throve to that degree, as to have one hundred and thirty three Parishes, accounted with∣in its Walls and Suburbs. In 1665, a Plague swept away one hundred thousand of her Inhabitants. In 1666, a devouring Fire Levelled thirteen thousand of her Houses. The Footsteps of which dismal Calami∣ty, by the Industry of the Citizens, encouraged by their Gracious King Charles II. are not otherwise to be seen, but in a more glorious Restauration. A great multitude of Provincial and National Councils have been celebrated at London in all times. Long. 23. 25. Lat. 51. 34. § Boston in New England is sometimes also called New London. London-Derry, is a Colony of the English, Plan∣ted in the County of Colain, in the North of the Pro∣vince of Ʋlster: in a fruitful Soil, and upon Wa∣ters that afford it great plenty of Fish of all sorts. This in 1612, was made a London Colony; some of the Companies in London bearing the Charge of it; and one Colonel Dockwray (an old experienced Com∣mander of the English) being sent with them to com∣mand, govern, and take care of them. Being thus happily begun, and a great number following the first, in a short time it became the most considerable City in Ʋlster. And being as well carefully Fortified and Garrisoned as Peopled, in the time of the Irish Mas∣sacre, it stood so firm for the English, that no Force or Fraud of the Irish could expel them. The Irish had reduced them to great extremity in 1649, but one Owen Row Oneale in time frustrated their At∣tempts, and relieved the Town, when it was just up∣on the point of being starved into a Complyance. See Derry. Longford, a Town and County in Ireland, in the Province of Leinster. The County has Connaught on the West, Ʋlster on the North, Letrim and Ros∣comen on the West, and Mayo on the South. The Town is small, and stands upon the North Side of the River Long; where it falls into the Lake of Eske. Longland, an Island in the Baltick, taken from the Danes by the Swedes, in 1657. Long Meg and her Daughters, a Trophy in the County of Cumberland, erected at Salkeld, on the River Eden. It consists of seventy seven Stones, each ten foot above ground; but the highest is fifteen foot, and this by the Inhabitants has the Name given it of Long Meg. Longouy, or Longwy, a Town in the Duchy of Lorain, in the Dukedom of Bar, in the Confines of Luxemburg; five Leagues from Montmidy to the East, and the same distance from Luxemburg to the South; lately fortified by the French. Longtown, a Market Town in the County of Cum∣berland, in Eskdale Ward. Longueil, a Town in Normandy near Dieppe, giv∣ing its name to an honorable Family. Longueville, a Town in the Paix de Cauxe in Normandy, which had the honour to be erected from the Title of an Earldom into a Dukedom in 1505. by Lewis XII. K. of France. Loon, Loen, Lon, Los, a River in the Bishoprick of Liege, in the Earldom of Loots; called by these various Names by the Germans, Dutch and French. Lopski, Lopia, a part of Tartary, on the East of Moscovy; beyond the River Ob; which is subject to the Russ, but lies in Asia; between Siberia and Bai∣da; two other Provinces of that vast Empire. Loquabre, or Lockabre, a County in Scotland, cal∣led by Latin Writers Abria, and Loquabria: it lies on the West of Scotland, towards the Hebrides; writ∣ten by the Scots, Loch Quaber; and bounded on the North with the Ocean and the County of Ross; on the East with Murray and Athole; on the South with Perth, Menteith, and Loune, cut off from it by the broad Tay; and on the West with the Ocean. There are some Castles, but never a Town or City of any Note in it. Lorain, Lotharingia, Austrasia, is a Dukedom belonging to Germany; of late seized by the French King, and therefore by Baudrand made a part of France. Bounded on the East with Alsatia, (cut off by the Mountain Vauge, Vogesus, and the Dukedom of Bipont or Westreich, as the Germans call it;) on the South with the County of Burgundy, or the Fran∣che Compté; on the West with the River Maes, which parts it from Champagne; and on the North with Luxemburg, Metz, Verdun, and the Land of Triers. This Country is in length about four days Journey, in breadth three; much overgrown with Woods, very Hilly and Mountainous, being a part of the once vast Forest of Ardenne. It was given by Lotharius, the Emperor, to his second Son Lotharius; and from him took the Name of Lorain, or (as others write it) Lorraigne. This happened about the Year 851. Others say, it took this Name from the Father, and not from the Son, about the Year 843: but all agree, that from Lotharius this County was called by the Germans Lotreich; by the Dutch Lot-reigne; (i. e. the Kingdom of Lot;) and from hence of later times by the Germans Lotthiringen; by the Inhabitants Lorrain; by the French Lorain. The first of these Dukes of Lorain was Charles, right Heir of the Caro∣line Line of France; but excluded, defeated, and taken Prisoner by Hugh Capet. His Advancement was from Otho II. (Emperor of Germany,) about the Year 981; being the Son of Lewis IV. of France, and of Gerbage an Aunt of the said Otho. From this Charles, the present young Duke of Lorain is Lineal∣ly Descended, being the thirty fourth Duke of his Fa∣mily. The French first Possessed themselves of this Dukedom under Lewis XIII, in 1663: It was resto∣red to this Family again by the Pyrenean Treaty, in 1659. In the Year 1674, it was again reassumed by the French. Charles Leopold, the late Duke of fa∣mous memory, being in the mean time employed by the Emperor as his General, won more Honour than he could have done if he had succeeded his Uncle in his rightful Inheritance. This great Prince died on the eighteenth of April, 1690, suddenly, in his forty eighth year, at a Convent near Lintz, in his Journey to Vienna; his renowned Actions and high Merits making him extremely lamented. He Married Elio∣nora Maria of Austria, Dowager of Michael, King of Poland, and Sister to the present Emperor; by whom the Title to this Dukedom continues in the Family to his eldest Son. Lorca, Eliocrata, Ilorcis, a small, but ancient City of the Kingdom of Murcia in Spain: it was in the times of the Goths a Bishops See, under the Archbi∣shop of Toledo. But this See was since removed to Cartagena Nueva. It stands upon the River Guadi∣lentin,
in the Confines of the Kingdom of Granada, ill peopled; twelve Miles from Murcia; in Long 19. 15. Lat. 38. 2. Lorne, Lorna, a County in the North of Scotland, upon the Western Ocean, bounded on the North by Loquabre; on the East by Menteith; on the South by Argyle, and Cantyr; and on the West by the Ver∣givian Ocean: the old Inhabitants of this County were the Epidii, as Cambden acquaints us. Loretto, or Lauretto, Lauretum, a small, and a New City in the Marcha Anconitana, in the Domi∣nions of the Church; made a Bishops See by Pope Sixtus V. in 1586. and in 1591. the Bishoprick of Recanati was for ever united to this new See. It stands upon a long Hill; three Miles from the Shoars of the Adriatick Sea, fifteen from Ancona to the South; very well fortified to preserve it from the In∣cursions of the Turks, and has a Noble Palace. But that which is its greatest, yea, its only Glory, is the Chappel of the Virgin Mary, called La Santa Casa, the Holy House; Pilgrims out of all parts of Europe repairing hither, to perform their Devotions to the Virgin. This place was anciently a desolate Grove, where in the Pagan Times some think there was a Temple of Juno Cuprana. The Chappel, that is so much esteemed, is supposed to be the very Chamber in which the Queen of Heaven was her self Educated; and received the Angel's Salutation. They believe it was brought hither out of Palestine by Angels. All this is proved by the Testimony of Grave Men, and the Memorials of an innumerable number of Miracles, which are believed to have been wrought here. The Reader is not to suppose it was brought from Pale∣stine hither at once: no, it was deposited, after the taking of Ptolomais by the Saracens, first in Dalma∣tia, in the year 1291. Thence the Thieveries of that Nation occasioned her Remove three or four years af∣ter, to a Wood in this Marquisate, and from thence to a Hill; and here two Brothers not agreeing, She at last removed to Loretto: Where (saith Tursellinus) She hath resolved to take up her fixed, and as we hope (if no grievous offence of the Inhabitants or Neighbours prevent it) her eternal Rest: her last Remove (he assures us) was in 1295. And if she has been able to digest all the Italian Sins for almost four hundred years, we may well presume She will re∣move no more; at least not in our Days. Lorgues, Lonas, Leonas, Leonicae, a Town in Pro∣vence, in the Diocese of Frejus, two Leagues from Draguignan, five from Frejus, and fourteen from Aix: situated in a fertile Soil; and adorned with a Collegiate Church of the Foundation of Pope Mar∣tin V. in 1421. together with divers Religious Houses. Lorris, Lauriacum, a Town in the Diocese of An∣gers and the Dukedom of Anjou in France: remark∣ed for a French Synod there assembled in 843. Losere, a Mountain in Languedoc, in which are the Fountains of the River Tarn, that separates Aqui∣tain from Languedoc. This is a Branch of the Se∣vennes; extended towards the Lower Languedoc, six Leagues from Ghave (or Javoux) to the North-West, and eight from Ʋzes to the South-East: mentioned by Sidonius Apollinaris, in his twenty fourth Verse. Losse, a River of Scotland, in the County▪ of Murray, called by Ptolemy, Loxa: it watereth the North part of that County, and falls into the German Ocean beneath Elgin, the Capital of that County. Lot, Le, Olda, Loda, a River in Aquitain in France; which ariseth from the Sevennes, a Moun∣tain in Givaudan, (a County of Languedoc;) and flowing within one Mile of Mende, a City in the County, and soon after augmented by the Truer, and some smaller Rivers; and running Westward through Rovergne, and Querey, (which latter it di∣vides;) it at last watereth Agen, Cassenneil, and Cle∣rac; then falls into the Garonne near Aiguillon, four Leagues beneath Agen. Whereas heretofore this Ri∣ver was passable by Boats only as far as Ville Neuve de Agen; it is of late with vast Expence made Na∣vigable as high as Chaors; (to the inestimable Benefit of this Province) by the present King of France, in 1677. Lothaine, Laudonia, a County in the South of Scotland; bounded on the North by the Fyrth of Edinburgh; on the East by the German Ocean: on the South by Marches, Twedal, and Cluydesdale; and on the West by the County of Sterling. This County is thirty four Scotch Miles in length from East to West: but not above ten broad for the most part. It is the principal County in that Kingdom; Edinburgh standing almost in the middle of it; besides which, it hath Lyth, Dunbar, and Dalkeith. Lotophagi, the ancient People of the Island, now called L'isle des Gerbes, upon the Coast of Africa, under the Spaniards. They are mentioned by divers of the Ancients with applause. Lotreich, or Lothar-reich, Lorain. Loudun, Juliodunum, a City of France, in the County of Poictou; six Leagues from Salmur to the South, ten from Poictiers, and eighteen from Am∣boise to the North-West: from this City the circum∣jacent Country is called le Laudonnois, which King Henry III. erected into a Dutchy; and in the Wri∣ters of the middle Age this City is called also Laus∣dunum. Lovenstein, Lovenstenum, a Castle, or Triangu∣lar Fort in the County of Holland, in the Island of Bommel; at the union of the Vahal, and the Maes, over against Worcum; four Miles from Ʋtrecht to the South, and a little more from Dort to the East. This Fort belongs to the States of Holland, and lies in the Borders of Guelderland. Lough, the Irish word for a Lake. Loughborough, a handsom, pleasant Market Town in Leicestershire, in the Hundred of West Goscote, upon the Banks of the River Stowre, over which it has a Bridge; and near the Forest of Char∣wood, amongst fertile Meadows. Lough Foyle, Logia, a River of Ireland, in the Province of Ʋlster; which by London-Derry falls in∣to the Deucalidonian Ocean, between the County of Derry, and the Isle of Owen; nine Miles from Coldagh to the East. Loughabrin, Loughaber: see Loquabre. Louisiane, a large Country South West of New France in America, lately discovered by the French as far as to the Mouth of the River Colbert, in the South Sea, and so called in honour of their present King Lewis XIV. They report it to enjoy a very fruitful Clime for Wine, Corn, Fruits, Fish, and Fowl. Lowe, East and West, two Market and Borough Towns in the County of Cornwall, in the West Hun∣dred, both upon the South Sea, and both having the Election of two Burgesses for the Parliament. Lowitz, Lovitium, a small, but well built and populous Town of the Greater Poland, upon the River Bsura; in which the Archbishop of Gnesna has a noble and strong Castle, seated in a Marsh, built by Jarowslaws, (one of those Archbishops) in which the rest of his Successors have for the most part resided: it is in the Palatinate of Rava, between Ʋla∣dislaw to the North, and Rava to the South; five Polish Miles from the latter, and six from Ploczko to the South-West.
Le Loup, Lupus, a River in Provence in France. There is another of the same Name in Lionnois, which falls into the Adour. Lourdes, Lorda, a City of France in Bigorre: Louses, Loutosa, a place or Town in the Dio∣cess of Troyes in France. Louth, Lutum, Loutha, a small Town in the Pro∣vince of Leinster, in the County of Louth, upon a River of the same Name; between Dundalk to the North, and Ardrac to the South, seven Miles from either. The County of Louth lies in Leinster, or rather Ʋlster: bounded on the East by the Irish Sea; on the North by Downe; on the West by Armagh, and Monaghan; and on the South by Fingall in Lein∣ster. § There is called by this Name a Market Town also in Lincolnshire, in the Hundred of Loutheask. Louvaine, Louvanium, a great City in Brabant, in the Low Countries; called by the Inhabitants Loe∣ven; by the Spaniards ▪Lobayna; by the Italians Lovanio; and by the French Louvaine. It stands upon the River Dele, (which a little lower falls into the Demer, which last falls into the Schelde at Rupelmondel) four Miles from Mechlen to the South-East, eight from Namur to the North, and the same distance from Antwerp to the South-East. In 1427. there was an University opened here by John Duke of Brabant: others make it to have been Founded by another John Duke of Brabant in 926. The Popes Martin V. and Eugenius IV. granted it great Privileges. It has thriven very well; here being more than twenty Colleges founded by se∣veral Persons for the incouragement and promotion of Learning, very magnificent, and well governed: to which belong the publick Schools, which are very magnificent. This City is four Miles in com∣pass within the Walls; seated in a very fruitful Soil; and has so gentle and pleasant an Air, that Wine is made both within the Walls, and without. It is so very ancient, that its Original is supposed to have been before the Roman Conquest by Julius Caesar: and has been several times enlarged. The Walls, it now has, were built in 1361. There are within these Walls, saith L. Guicciardin, great Meadows, beauti∣ful Vineyards, rare Orchards and Gardens, and all manner of Conveniences; which shews that it is not overstocked with Inhabitants. This Town is still un∣der the Spaniards; and has about it a District, called the Quartier de Louvaine; which is one of the four Jurisdictions of Brabant. The Dukes of Brabant used to take the Title of Earls of Louvain. Long. 26.00. Lat. 50.54. Lovat, Lowa, Chesinus, a River of Russia; which falls into the Lake of Ilmen, on the Borders of Livo∣nia. This Lake disburthens it self into that of Lado∣ga, by a River which passeth on the East of the City Novogorod. Louwenborch. See Lawenburg. Le Louvre, the King of France his Royal Palace in Paris. Lowther, a River of the County of Westmor∣land, joining with the Eamont at Whinfield Forrest; upon the Banks whereof is Lowther-Hall, the Seat of the Family of the Lowthers, who for thirty De∣scents lineally from Father to Son have flourished here. The Park belonging to this Seat, the Parish, and the Bridge over the River, have the same Name. Loylandt, one of the Shetland Islands on the North of Scotland. Lubanskerzee, Lubanius, a Lake in Livonia, on the Confines of Poland, near the Town of Luban; near twenty Miles from Dunenburgh to the North. Lubeck, Lubeca, Lubecum, a Great City in Ger∣many; in the Circle of the Lower Saxony, in the Dukedom of Holstein; which has been a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Bremen, ever since the year 1162. when the Chair was Translated hither from Oldenburgh. It is a celebrated Mart, and one of the principal Hans Towns; upon the River Trave, in the Territory of Wagria; of which it is the Ca∣pital; about three Miles from the Baltick Sea to the South, upon which it has a great, and a safe Harbor. It was at first a very small Town, enlarged to a con∣siderable City, by Adelph, Count of Holstein, under Conrad III. Emperor of Germany. In the year 1209. the Danes being beaten out of it, it was made a Free Imperial City by Frederick II. Seated in the Limits of the Dukedom of Mecklenburg and Lawenburg; ten German Miles from Hamburg to the East, and as many from Wiesmar to the West. In 1238. it hap∣ned to be almost totally consumed by Fire. In 1500. they defended their Liberties by Arms against the King of Denmark; which War broke out again in 1509. when the Suedes took their part. They had the same Privileges confirmed to them by the Emperor Charles the Fifth, at the Diet of Ausburgh, in 1547, which before were granted them by Frederick II. This City embraced the Augustane Confession, in the year 1561. In 1562. they begun a War with the King of Sweden, which lasted till 1570. The Bishoprick is settled in Appenage to the younger Sons of the House of Holstein Gothorp, the Chapter having only an umbrary Election left to them: they are called Dukes of Oytin, from a small Town (four German Miles and an half from Lubeck to the North) where they for the most part reside; which was given these Bi∣shops by Adolph Count of Holstein, before the See was removed from Oldenburg to Lubeck In this Town there was a Peace concluded between the Em∣peror and the King of Denmark, in the year 1629. It is governed in the manner of a Republick, and observes a strict Alliance with Holland. Long.32.45. Lat.54.48. Lubiana, Labachum. See Labach. Lublin, Lublina, a City of the Lesser Poland; the Capital of a Palatinate of the same Name, upon the River Bistricz; twenty four Miles from Warsaw to the South, twelve from Chelm to the West, thirty six from Cracow to the South-East, and seventy from Vilna. It is a neat, spruce, populous City; and has a Castle seated on a Hill. The Palatinate of Lublin is one of the three which constitute the Lesser Po∣land; and lies between Mazovia, Red Russia, and the Palatinate of Landomir. Long.45.00 Lat.51.00. Lublaw, Lubloa, called by the Poles Luboulia, i a Castle belonging to the Ʋpper Hungary; but mort∣gaged to the Crown of Poland in 1412, which has been ever since in their Hands: and being cut off from the County of Cepasz, it is annexed to the Palatinate of Cracow. Lucania, an ancient Province of Italy, now thrown into the Basilicata in part, and part into Ca∣labria; but before, a Member of Magna Graecia. Its Inhabitants made frequent Wars with the Ro∣mans, and in the year of Rome 428. killed Alexan∣der, King of the Epirots, near the River Acheron. The Luccaye Islands, near the Continent of America, in the North Sea, lie betwixt 294. and 304. Deg. of Long. and 21. and 28. of Lat. making a part of the Antilles. The chiefest of them are Lu∣caioneque, Amana, Abacoa, Bimini, Guanahani, Majaguana, Juma, &c. enjoying a temperate Air and a fruitful Soil. Lucca, Luca, Luceria, a City and Republick of Italy, ascribed by Pliny and Strabo to Hetruria, but now in the Dukedom of Florence; and a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Pisa, tho not subject to his Jurisdiction. It is very strongly fortified with eleven Bastions; and very populous. Built by the Thusci, in the Year of the World 3236. thirty nine
years after Rome, in the times of Senacherib, and of Ezekiah King of Judah. Narsetes, the General of the Emperor Justinian, besieged it in the Sixth Cen∣tury. Charles V. left this City under the Govern∣ment of a French Cardinal, who set them at liberty. One of their own, Paulus Giunisius, Ravished this from them; they soon recovered it again. In the year 1390. the City was taken by Galatius, Duke of Milan: but in 1430. they again recovered their Li∣berty, which they have ever since carefully pre∣served; and to that purpose in 1626. made the pre∣sent Fortifications. The Dominions belonging to this State (by the Italians called Il Luchese) are small, not above thirty Miles long, and twenty five broad; lying between the Appennine to the North, the Me∣diterranean Sea to the West, the States of Genoua to the North, and Pisa to the South; its greatest length is from North to South. The Earth brings forth here, Wine, Oil, and Chesnuts in abundance; not so productive of Corn. The Inhabitants have improved every Inch of it to the utmost, by which they have made it very pleasant. The Bishop is im∣mediately subject to the Pope. This City stands ten Miles from Pisa to the North, thirteen from the Sea to the East, and forty five from Florence to the West. Commonly Epitheted, Lucca l'industriosa. The Tomb of Richard King of England (who died here in a journey to Rome) is to be seen in the Church of S. Fridainus. Long. 33. 16. Lat. 42. 50. Luceria. See Nocera. Lucerne, Lucerna, a City and Canton in Switzer∣land. The City stands in Argow, upon the Lake of Lucerne; where the River Russ flows out of it through this place; and is covered by three Bridges, nine German Miles from Bearn to the East, and six from Altorf to the South-West. An Imperial Free City, till the year, 1332, when it was exempted. The Marquess de la Parelle, Lieutenant-General of the Duke of Savoy's Army, recovered it out of the Hands of the French, in Aug. 1690. The Lake of Lucerne, called by the Germans Lucernerzee, is extended twenty four Miles from East to West; and is often called the Waldtstatteuzee, from the four Cities which encompass it, viz. Altorf, Swiss, Stantz, and Lucerne. The Canton of Lucerne, the third of the twelve Swiss Cantons, is Roman Catholick; united to the rest in 1332. and bounded North, West, South, and East by the Cantons of Zurich, Swiss, and Stantz. Lucomerie, Lucomorie, a Province belonging to the Russ; beyond the River Ob in Asia, towards the North Ocean; in which there are no Cities: the People living in Woods, Caves, and desart places. Towards the South of this Province there are Moun∣tains called by the same Name. Lurko. See Lusuc. Luconia. See Lusson. Ludlow, a large, populous, well built, Market and Borough Town in Shropshire, in the Hundred of O∣vers, upon the Banks of the Teme: walled and de∣fended by a Castle built by Roger Earl of Montgo∣mery. It elects two Parliament-Men: and the Court for the Marshes of Wales, first ordained by King Henry VIII. used to be kept here. Lug, Logus, a small River which ariseth in Rad∣norshire; and flowing through the County of Here∣ford, a little beneath the principal City, falls into the Wye at Mordeford; bringing with it the Arrom, the Wadels, the Oney, the Loden, and the Frome. Lugnitz, Vallis Leguntia, a Canton belonging to the Grisons. Lugo, Lucus Augusti, Turris Augusti, Arae Sex∣tianae, a City and Bishops See, in Gallicia in Spain, under the Archbishop of Compostella; upon the River Minho: eighteen Leagues from Compostella to the East, ten from the Shoar of the Ocean South, and thirty from Leon to the West. An ancient Roman City, mentioned by Pliny and Antoninus. This City falling into the Hands of the Moors, was reco∣vered by Alphonsus King of Leon, who died in 756. That which has most contributed to its preservation, is its Hot Baths. Long. 12. 00. Lat. 43. 00. Several small Synods have been anciently assembled at it. § There is another Town called Lugo, about fifteen Miles from Ferrara in Italy; which was almost quite destroyed by the overflowing of the Po, in May, 1688. Luki, Lodusia, a City and Port in Gothland in Sweden. Lulworth Castle, a delightful and noted Castle in Dorsetshire, in the Hundred of Winfrith, with a large Park about it, and enjoying a Prospect into the British Sea. The Kings of England, in their Western Progress, have often honoured it with their presence. Lumasia, the same with Bulgaria. Lumellina, a Territory of Lumello, (a Town in Lombardy, in Italy, in the Dukedom of Milan, in the Territory of Pavia;) twenty Miles from that City to the West towards Casale. Luna, an ancient Roman City in Italy, out of whose Ruins is sprung the present Sarzana. See Sarzana. Lunden, Lundis, Londinum Scanorum, a City of the Kingdom of Sweden; which was the Capital of the Province of Scania; and an Archbishops See, with six Suffragan Bishops under it. These are all in the Kingdom of Denmark, to which this City belong∣ed, till 1658; when it fell into the Hands of the Swedes; who in 1668, opened here an University. It was once much Celebrated; but now in a decli∣ning Condition: eight German Miles from Copenha∣gen to the East, and six from Landscroon to the South-West: commonly called Lund by the Inhabitants. Made a Bishops See in 1065, an Archbishops in 1103: Ill treated by the Swedes in the latter Wars; the Danes receiving a considerable Overthrow near it, December 14. 1676. It is now only a Bishops See: the Archbishop being in 1660, Translated to Copen∣hagen. Long. 41. 00. Lat. 57. 23. Lunenburgh, Luneburgh, Lunaeburgum, Seleno∣burgum, a City of the Lower Saxony in Germany, formerly one of the principal Hanse Towns in the Empire; and the Capital of the Dukedom of Lunen∣burgh. It stands upon the River Ilmenaw; not a∣bove two German Miles from the Elb to the South, ten from Lubeck, seven from Hamburgh to the South-West, and twenty from Bremen to the North-East. Built by Henry the Lyon, in 1190: but the Castle is older than the City an hundred and twenty four years. It took this Name from the Moon; the Image of which was worshiped here, till the Reign of Charles the Great, who took that Idolatry away. It grew up out of the Ruins of Bardwick, a Town within two Miles of the Elb to the South. When it was exempt∣ed from the Empire I do not find; but it is now un∣der the Duke of Lunenburgh, and is one of the strongest, and best fortified Towns of Germany. There was anciently a very famous Monastery in it, of the Order of S. Benedict: which Christian Lewis, Duke of Lunenburgh, in the year 1660. turned in∣to a College. Near it stands a Mountain, called by the Germans, Kalckberg, which affords excellent Chalk; and by it are many Salt Springs, that contribute much to its Wealth: it has one of the noblest Bridges in Eu∣rope, over a Navigable River. The Houses are magnificent; the Inhabitants rich, and numerous. The Dukes of Lunenburgh are of the House of Brunswick. Long. 32. 20. Lat. 53. 34.
The Dukedom of Lunenburgh is a part of the Lower Saxony; bounded on the North by the Earl∣dom of Pinnenburgh, and the Territories of Lubeck and Hamburgh; on the West with the Earldom of Hoy, and the Dukedoms of Bremen and Ferden; on the South with the Dukedom of Brunswick, and the Bishoprick of Hildesheim; on the East with the Dukedom of Mechlenburgh, and the Marquisate of Brandenburgh. It is watered by the Elb, the Aller, the Ilmenaw, (anciently called Lindaw, now com∣monly Die Awe) and the Jetze. The principal Cities and Towns are, (next that which gives its Name) Zell, Danneberg, Harburgh, Winsen, Gif∣horn, Borchdorp, and Walsrade. This Dukedom was first given to one Otho, of the House of Bavaria, by Frederick II. in 1235. which Family is still ex∣tant, and divided into several Branches. Lure, Lurense Monasterium, a Monastery dedica∣ted to S. Martin, in the Franche Comte; upon the River Lougnon, at the Foot of Mount Vauge; thir∣teen Leagues from Besanzon to the North. The Ab∣bat of which has a Sovereignty belonging to his House. Luri, a vast Village in the Isle of Corsica, near the Town of S. Florence. Lusatia, a Province in Germany; called by the Germans, Lausnitz; and by the French, Lusace. It has been annexed both to Misnia, and Bohemia; but in the year 1623. it was granted by Frederick II. to the Elector of Saxony, and confirmed in the year 1637. Bounded on the East by Silesia; on the North by Marchia; on the West by the Ʋppper Saxo∣ny, and Misnia; and on the South by Bohemia. It is watered by the Sprew and Neiss; and has in it six great Towns or Cities; Bauken upon the Sprew, Gor∣litz upon the Neiss, Sittaw, Ramitz, Luben, and Guben. Also divided into two parts; The Upper, which lies towards Bohemia, and Misnia; and the Lower, towards Saxony; which latter was granted to John George the First, by the Elector of Saxony, in the year 1652. The Capital of it is Soraw. Lusignan, Lusignanum, Lucinianum, a Town in Poictou, with a Castle, upon the River Vona; five Leagues from Poictiers to the North-West towards Rochel. In this place there arose a Family, some of which have been Kings of Cyprus and Jerusalem; it is also famous for the noble Castle of Melusine. Luso, or Pluso, Aprusa, a River of Romandiola in Italy; it falls into the Adriatick Sea, near Rimini, between Ravenna and Pesaro. Lusson, Luciona, Lucionum, Luxiona, a small City in Poictou in France; which is yet a Bishops See under the Archbishop of Bourdeaux, Instituted by Pope John XXII. in 1317. who at the same time changed its Benedictine Abbey into a Cathedral. It stands near a Marsh, and has no Walls; two Miles from the Sea, six from Maillezais to the West, twen∣ty four from Poictiers to the West, and five from Rochelle to the North. Cardinal Richelieu was once Bishop of this See. Lusson, Luconia, Lussonia, the principal of the Philippine Islands; frequently called Manile, from the principal City in it; which is a Bishops See, and together with the Island subject to the Spaniards. This Island is said to be a thousand Miles in compass. It lies between Long. 145. and 150. and 14. and 20. South. Lat. Lusuc, Luzuck, Luzko, and Luckolusuc, Luceo∣ria, a great City of Poland, which is a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Gnesna, and the Capital of Wolhynia. It stands upon the River Ster, by a Lake, and has a strong Castle in it; not above seven Polish Miles from the Confines of Russia to the East (twen∣ty five, says Baudrand,) thirty four from Lemburgh to the North-East, and eighty five from Kiovia to the West. There are more Protestants and Jews than Roman Catholicks in this City, as Le Vasseur re∣ports. Luton, a Market Town in Bedfordshire, in the Hundred of Flitt, upon the Borders of Hartford∣shire and Buckinghamshire. Lutterworth, a Market Town in Leicestershire, in the Hundred of Goodlaxton, upon the River Swift, which soon after falls into the Avon; in a good Soil, and beautified with a large Church; whereof the fa∣mous John Wicliff was a Parson, whose Opinions entertained the Sessions of divers Councils at London, Oxford. &c. besides the General Council of Con∣stance. Lutzeilstein, a County in Lorain. Lutzen, Lutza, a small Town in Misnia, a Pro∣vince of the Ʋpper Saxony in Germany; where the Swedes won a signal Victory over the Austrian Forces; but lost Gustavus Adolphus, the bravest Prince they ever had, Nov. 16. 1632. This Town stands upon the River Elster, two German Miles from Maryburg to the North-East, and the same from Leypsick to the West. Lutsko, or Lutscko, the same with Lusuc. Luwow, the same with Lemburgh. Luxemburgh, Luxemburgum, a very strong City, and a Dukedom in the Low Countries. The City is the Capital of that Dukedom. It is seated upon the River Elza, in part on a Hill, the rest on a Plain. Ptolemy calls it Augusta Romanduorum: Guiccar∣din saith, it has a good Situation, a great Compass, strong Fortifications, and convenient Buildings; tho by reason of the many Hazards of War it had gone through, many of its Houses were not only neglect∣ed, but deserted by their Owners. It has a Convent of the Order of S. Francis; Founded in the time of that Saint: in which lies buried John King of Bohe∣mia, Father of Charles IV. Emperor of Germany, slain by the English at the Battel of Cressy, in 1346. This City has continually born the first Brunts of the Wars between the French and the Netherlands. In 1529. Charles V. took it from Francis I. King of France. In 1542. it was taken and sacked by the Duke of Orleans; retaken, and treated in the same manner in the year following. It is at this day in the Hands of the French, who since their late Possession of it have added to its Fortifications. Four Leagues from Thionville to the North, six from Trier or Treves to the South-West, and nineteen from Maier to the North-East. The Dukedom of Luxemburgh, is one of the se∣venteen Provinces of the Low Countries; lying most to the South-East; which was a part of the District, belonging of old to the Treviri: on the East it is bounded by the Bishoprick of Trier, separated by the Mosel: on the North it has the Dukedoms of Lim∣burgh and Namur, with the Bishoprick of Liege; on the West Picardy in part, and Hainault; on the South Lorrain: on the West the Maes, and the Fo∣rest of Ardenne do both close it. That part that lies towarps the West is barren; but abounds in Game, and Venison. That which lies more to the East is fruitful in Corn, Minerals, Quarries of ex∣cellent Stone, and whatever is necessary to the Life of Man. It is in compass about sixty French Leagues. At first a part of the Earldom of Ardenne; dis∣membred from it in the time of Otho the Empe∣ror; made a Dukedom in 1309. (as L. Guicciar∣din avers,) by Henry VII. who had been Count of Luxemburgh, before he was chosen Emperor. Si∣gismond, the last Duke and Emperor, gave it to Eliza∣beth, (Daughter of John Duke of Gorlitz, his Bro∣ther,) to prefer her in Marriage to Anthony Duke
of Burgundy; and with the rest of the Estates of that House, it came to the House of Austria. The French, who have ever lain heavy on this Frontier Country, have ravished from them the Southern parts, and the Cities of Monmedy, and Thionville. The Spaniards possess the Northern, with Bastogne. Luzcko. See Lusuc. Lyche, Laodicea, an ancient Maritime City of Syria, to∣wards the foot of the Mountain Libanus: built by Seleu∣cus, together with Antioch & Apamea; who called those three Cities, the three Sisters. Dionysius Africanus inti∣mates its pleasant situation upon the Sea Coast. It is a different place from Laodicea in Asia Minor. Lycia, an ancient Province of Asia Minor, be∣twixt Caria and Pamphilia; famous for the Moun∣tain Chimaera, and the Cities Patara, Mira, Andri∣aca, &c. A part of it is now contained in Aidinelli, and the rest in Briquia or Manteselli. Lycopolis, the ancient Name of Munia in Egypt; given it, says Diodorus Siculus, from the peoples adora∣tion of Wolves there, in the time of the Egyptian Idolatries. It has sometime been a Bishops See. See Munia. The famous Meletius was Bishop of Lyco∣polis about the year 300. Lydia, an ancient and celebrated Province of Asia Minor, wherein stood the Cities Sardus, Philadel∣phia, Thyatira, &c. It had the honour to be a King∣dom for six hundred seventy five years, till King Croesus in the fifty ninth Olympiad, and the year of of the World 3510. and the year of Rome 210. was overcome by Cyrus; who subjected it to the Persian Empire, as afterwards it fell successively under the Greeks and Romans, and now is under the Turks, by the name of Carasia. The Rivers Hermus (now Sa∣rabat), Pactolus, and Caystrus (now Chiai), added to its ancient fame. A Colony, which this Country transmitted into Italy, settled in the Provinces of Tuscany (the present), as Virgil also remarks. Lyd, A Market Town in the County of Kent, in Shepway Lath: It is a Member of the Cinque Ports. Lym, Moschius, a River of Bulgaria. Baudrand calls it Ibar. Lymbach, Olimachum, a Town in the Lower Hun∣gary, in the Consines of Stiria; not above one Ger∣man Mile from the River Muer, and four from Ca∣nisa to the South West. § There is another called by the same name, four Miles from this to the South. Lyn, Linum Regis, a Sea-Port-Town and Cor∣poration in the County of Norfolk; seated on the Eastern Shoar of the River Ouse, where it falls into the Washes; called by Ptolemy Aestuarium Metaris. It is a large Town, incompassed with a deep Trench, and for the most part walled; divided by two small Rivers, which have about fifteen Bridges over them. Built out of the ruins of another old Town, called Lyn too; but standing in Marsh Land, on the oppo∣site side of the River; chiefly preferred on the ac∣count of the Haven, which is safe and easie of ac∣cess. It was at first called Bishops Lyn; because the ground it stands upon, belonged to the Bishop of Norwich, till the Reign of Henry VIII. It has great Privileges, which it obtained from King John, by siding with him against the Barons: he gave them his own Sword, to be carried before their Mayor; and a gilt Cup, which they still keep. From this place he went in 1216. with a mighty Army, over the Washes, into Lincolnshire; with a design to fight the Barons, (then united against him under Lewis, Dau∣phine of France,) but lost his Treasures and Carri∣ages in the passage, and his Life soon after. Then it was, that he granted them their Charter; and he ex∣piring soon after, and his Son having a necessity to comply with his Barons, for the expulsion of the French, their Liberties were seised, and the Town re∣duced to what it was before. In 1221. a Rebellion breaking out in Lincolnshire, this Prince (Hen∣ry III.) had occasion for their Loyalty, and Valour again: and they gave him such experience of both, that he regranted them their Charter, which they have ever since injoyed. Nor does this place deserve the less commendation for their Loyal Attempt, on the behalf of Charles I. in 1643. though instead of suc∣cess, it involved the Loyal Inhabitants in great Cala∣mities. Charles II. created Sir Horatio Townsend, Ba∣ronet, Baron of Lyn, April 20. 1661. rewarding at once his and their Loyalty by this Honour. It elects two Members of Parliament. Lyons, Lugdunum Segusianorum, is an ancient City in France, called by the Inhabitants, Lyon; by the Germans, Leon; by the English, Lyons; and by the Poles, Lugdun. It is a very great, famous, strong, rich, populous City; an Archbishops See, and the Capital of a Province, called from it Lionnois; seated at the foot of an Hill, upon the confluence of the the Saone and Rhone, (two of the principal Rivers of France,) in the Confines of la Bresse, and le Dauphine; one hundred Leagues from Paris to the South, five from Vienne, thirty six from Avignon, sixty from Turin, (as Baudrand represents the di∣stances) and sixty five from the Mediterranean Sea to the North. The first Colony the Romans settled in this part of France; and built by Munacius Plan∣cus under Augustus, thirty five years before Christ. After this it flourished very much; especially under the Auspicious Reign of Claudius Caesar, who was born here, nine years before the Birth of our Savi∣our, thirty three after the slaughter of Julius Caesar. In the twelfth year of the Reign of Nero, the year of Christ sixty five, it was miserably ruined by Fire; and Nero contributed very freely to the rebuilding of it, as Tacitus tells us in his Annals. In after times no City in the Empire flourished more, both as to Lear∣ning and Commerce. Severus, the Emperor, treated it about 199. with great severity, for adhering to the Party of Albinus against him; burning a great part of the City. Gratianus, the Emperor, was perfidi∣ously murthered in this City, in 384. Majoranus, Ge∣neral to Leo the Emperour, at the request of Sido∣nius Apollinarus, repaired and beautified this City ve∣ry much, about 460. But this was no long-lived splendor; the Goths and Almains soon after prevai∣ling against the Romans in France. In the Reign of Clothaire King of France, about 532. an end being put to the Kingdom of Burgundy, (erected here by the Goths,) this City fell into the Hands of the French. In the Reign of Gunthram, King of Metz, between 565. and 596. this City was again burnt: nor did it suffer less from the Moors about 730. who were called by the remainder of the Goths, against the Franks. About 955. it was given to Conrade I. King of Burgundy. After this, it was for some time subject to the Counts of the Forest, till 1173. The See was founded by S. Potinus, and Irenaeus; the first of which suffered Martyrdom here, about 177. Anno 1079. Pope Gregory VII. is said to have made it an Archbishops See; doubtless it was so long before. Pope Clement V. was crowned here in the presence of Philip (the Fair) King of France, Edward I. of England, and James King of Arragon, in 1305. There have been many Councils held here. The most celebrated, was that in 1245. under Innocent IV. a∣gainst Frederick II. where that Prince was deposed as an Heretick, for Intelligence with the Sultan, and Familiarity with his Women; which produced a de∣structive War in Germany and Italy. There was ano∣ther in 1274. under Pope Gregory X. against the
Greek Church, in which were five hundred Bishops, sixty or seventy Archbishops, and one thousand other Ecclesiasticks, together with the Patriarchs of An∣tioch and Constantinople, &c. Long. 26. 00. Lat. 45. 15. Lyonnois, Lugdunensis Provincia, is a small Pro∣vince in France; having on the East la Bresse, and the Dauphine; on the South and West le Foretz; and on the North le Beaujolois; it has on the East the Rhosne, and extends from it to the West about twelve Leagues, in length about fifteen. Lyons en Forest, Leones, a small Town in Nor∣mandy; incompassed with Woods and Forests, upon the River Orleau; four Leagues from Roan to the East. Lyon en Beausse, a Village in that Province, se∣ven Leagues from Orleans to the North. Lyon sur Loyre, a Village in Orleans, in the Con∣fines of Berry, one League above Sully to the East. Lysmore. See Lismore. M A. MAara, Spelunca Sidoniorum, a Grott or Cave in Palestine, in the Territory of Great Zi∣don, or the Land of the Sidonians, mentioned Josh. 13. 4. In the year 1161. the Christians secured themselves for sometime here against the Sa∣racens. Macandan, a Promontory in Africa, called by the Ancients Arsinarium; now commonly, Cape Verde. Macao, Amacao, Amacum, a City in China, in the Province of Quantum; upon the South part of that Kingdom; in Long. 141. 30. Lat. 23. 00. Built upon a small Island, with two Forts: heretofore un∣der the Portuguese; during which times it was a ce∣lebrated Mart, much frequented, and very rich: but being now in the hands of the Tartars, who have conquered China, it decays a pace; and is much de∣clined from what it was. Macaria, a Lake or Marsh, near Marathon, a Town in Attica; in which a considerable part of the Forces of Xerxes, King of Persia, perished; being beaten by the Grecians both by Sea and Land at the same time; and in their flight forced into this unpas∣sable place by the pursuers. Whence the Proverb, in Macariam abi, for a Curse. § This also was the an∣cient Name of a City in the Island of Cyprus, now become a Village, and called Jalines. The whole Island of Cyprus had the Title of  given it, by the Greeks from its fertility. And the Island of Ma∣czua, in the Gulph of Arabia, has been honoured with the same. Macascar, Macassar, Macasaria, a great Island in the Indian Sea, sometimes called Celebes. Extended from North to South two hundred French Leagues; and one hundred broad: there are in it six King∣doms, Macasar, Cion, Sanguin, Cauripana, Geti∣gan and Supara: the two principal Cities, are Ma∣casar and Bantachia. The South parts are much frequented by the English and Dutch: which latter of late in 1669. have severely treated the King of Macascar; whose Dominions lie in the South of the Island, and comprehend the far greatest part of it. This Island lies between the Molucco's to the East, and Borneo to the West; and is sometimes ascribed to the former. The Line cutteth the Northern part of it. The Inhabitants heretofore went naked; did eat Mans Flesh, and had all the Criminals of the Moluc∣co's sent over to them for that purpose: but they are much civilized. Two young Princes of this Coun∣try, Brothers, that were bred at Siam in the Mahome∣tan Religion, and sent to Paris by the King of Siam to be instructed in Christianity, on October 17. 1687. received Christian Baptism at Paris. It produces plenty Rice, Fruit, Cocao, Cattle, Fish; besides Gold, Ivory, Cotton, &c. The City Macasar stands in the South part, and enjoys the benefit of a good Port. Macclesfield or Maxfield, a large fair Market Town in Cheshire, upon the River Bollin. The Ca∣pital of its Hundred. Adorned with the Title of an Earldom, in the Person of the Right Honourable Charles Gerard. Macchia, a Dutchy in the Capitanata, in the King∣dom of Naples. Macedonia, is a Kingdom of great antiquity and fame in Greece. Anciently bounded by the Adria∣tick Sea to the West; the Aegean Sea to the East, (now called the Archipelago;) the Ʋpper Moesia, a part of Illyricum, (now called Servia, cut off by Mount Sandus) to the North; and on the South it had Epirus, Thessalia, and Achaia. It was then di∣vided into four parts, as Livy saith; under which were twenty six Provinces: and at this day, though Albania, (which was of old a part of it) is dismem∣bred, yet the remainder is divided into four parts by the Turks. 1. Jamboli, of old Macedonia prima, and secunda; which lies East between Thrace and the Bay of Thessalonica. 2. Macedonia, properly so called, lies between Mount Karoponitze to the North, Thessalia to the South, and the Bay of Thessalonica to the East. 3. Comenolitari, the third part, (Ma∣cedonia tertia, and part of Thessalia,) has Macedo∣nia properly so called, on the North; Albania on the West, Thessalia on the South, and the same Bay on the East. 4. Janna, lies yet more South; and is the remainder of that which was anciently called Thessalia: on the North it has Commenolitari, on the West Epirus, on the South Livadia, and on the East the Archipelago and Bay of Negropont. The Reader may observe, that Thessalia is now a part of Macedonia, though anciently not; and Albania which anciently was a part of it, now is a separate Kingdom: both are under the Turks. This Coun∣try, anciently divided into one hundred and fifty Tribes or Nations, (as Pliny saith,) was by Philip and Alexander his Son, reduced first into one great and formidable body: which spread its Conquests not only over all the rest of Greece; but passing the Hellespont, Alexander the Great overthrew the Per∣sian Empire; and became Lord of all those Coun∣tries between the Caspian and Euxine Seas to the North; Mount Imaus to the East; the Persian Sea, Red Sea, the Cataracts of Nile to the South; the Desarts of Lybia, and the Adriatick Sea to the West: which Empire at his death became divided into four great Kingdoms, whereof Macedonia was the least. Philip of Macedon, (the two and twentieth King of the first Race,) began in the year of the World 3155. which ended in Alexander the Great, in 3642. or thereabouts. Cassander extirpated the first Family; and began a second in 3648. which ended in Perseus XI. in that Succession, subdued by the Romans in 3789. But it became not in∣tirely subject, till the Turks first entered this Province under Bajazet their fourth King; who took Nico∣polis, (a Town upon the Bay of Thessalonica,) in 1392. The Conquest thereof was finished by Amu∣rath II. (their sixth King) in 1429. by the Conquest of Thessalonica, and all the other places in this King∣dom, considered without Albania. Now governed by a Turkish Sangiack, under the Beglerbeg of Greece, who has 8000. Crowns the year Revenue; and finds in Peace only one hundred Horse for the defence of
the Country, in times of War four hundred. All the ancient Cities are ruined, except Thessalonica, and Larissa. Macerata, a City in the Dominions of the Pope, in the Marcha Anconitana; which is a Bishops See, un∣der the Archbishop of Fermo: it stands upon a Hill near the River Chiento, and is thought one of the best places in this Marquisate, being therefore chosen for the Residence of the Governour. Built about 410. as Blondus avers, The University was opened here by Pope Nicolas IV. in 1290. restored by Pope Paul III. in 1322. united to this See for ever in 1586. It lies fifteen Miles from Loretto, and the Shoars of the Adriatick Sea to the West. There was a Synod here assembled in 1615. Machere, Machera, or Macheronta, a Castle up∣on the River Jordain, and the Banks of the Dead Sea, in Palestine, five or six Leagues from Jerusalem: where, according to Josephus, S. John Baptist was be∣headed by the order of Herod. Machian, one of the Molucco Isles. Machynleth, a Market Town in the County of Montgomery in Wales, and the Hundred of Ky∣filog. Machlyes, an ancient People, that dwelt near the Magna Syrtes of Africa, mentioned by Aristotle. Maclena, Cydarus, a small River of Thrace, which falls into the Black Sea, a little above Constan∣tinople. Macoco, a vast Kingdom in the middle of Afri∣ca, towards the Ʋpper Aethiopia, and the River Zaire; the Prince of which has ten Kingdoms un∣der him: on the North he has the Kingdom of Mu∣aco, (which is ever in War with him;) to the South-East that of Giringbomb. This Kingdom lies two hundred and seventy Spanish Miles from the Kingdom of Congon to the South. Jerome Lobus mentions it in his History of Ethiopia. Mensol is the Capital City of it. Macran, or Makeran, Caramania, a Province of Persia towards the Indian Ocean, and the Confines of Indostan; which is a part of the ancient Caramania. It has on the North Sigestan, on the South the Indian Ocean, on the West Caramania, (properly so cal∣led,) and on the East Sinda. It is under a Prince of its own, who is a Tributary to the King of Persia. Its principal City is Macran, and its best Port is cal∣led Guadel. Macre, a Gulph of the Mediterranean Sea, be∣twixt Lycia in Asia Minor, and the Island Rhodes: said by some to be the Glaucus Sinus of Caria. Macrobii, the ancient people of the Island of Meroe in Aethiopia, so called from an observation of their living to a great age: Not but that this Name, in the Writings of the old Geographers and Historians, is communicated to the Hyperborei, Ma∣cedonii and others, where the same Longaevity oc∣curred. Macrocephali, an ancient people towards the Bosphorus Thracius, in the account of P. Mela; so named, from an observation, that they had extraordi∣nary long heads. But Stephanus places them near Colchis in the Lesser Asia, and Pliny in the neigh∣bourhood of the City Cherasonda in Cappadocia. Macuf, Mosceus, a River of Persia, which falls into the Bay of Persia. Macyn, India Ʋlterior, one of the Provinces of Asia; called the further Indies, or India beyond Ganges. Maczua, Orine, an Island in the Gulph of Ara∣bia, near Africa; over against the City of Mazzuan, in 17 deg. Lat. In the Maps, called Mazuan, and sometimes Macaria; under the Turks, since 1557. Madagascar, Cerne, Menuthias, Madagascaria, Delphina, a vast Island on the Eastern Coast of A∣frica; called by the Inhabitants, Madecase; by the French, l' Isle de Dauphiné; by the Portuguese, S. Lorenzo; by the English, Madagascar and S. Lau∣rence; by the Arabians, Sarandib. Ptolemy calls it Menuthias; Pliny, Cerne Aethiopica. It is near one hundred Miles from the Coast of Africa to the East; and one of the greatest Islands in the World; exten∣tending from 1 to 25 deg. of Southern Latitude; but its breadth much less; as not exceeding one hundred and thirty English Miles. Discovered by the Portu∣guese in 1506. on S. Laurence's day. There was no Cities in it: the French have of late settled some Co∣lonies on the Southern Shoars. Stephen Flacourt, a Frenchman, has given a large account of this Island. The Inhabitants are large of Stature, exceeding black, Warlike, much addicted to Fishing, great Eaters: Nature has accordingly provided them with plenty of Cattle, Fish, Fowl, Fruits, and what ever is necessary for the life of Man; which they use without Labour or Care, regarding neither Silver nor Gold, nor any thing but Beads and Bracelets for Ornament, Musick and Dancing for their Recreation. And the utmost Number they can tell, is Ten. Herbert. 'Tis also rela∣ted, there is a mixture of Whites amongst them, who being circumcised, and using the Names of Moses, Aaron, Esther and the like, may be thought to de∣scend from the transmigrations of some of the ten lost Tribes of the Jews. About two hundred years ago, the Caliph of Meccha dispatched a Mission of Arabians hither, to teach Arabick and the Alca∣ron; which altogether missed not of its effect. The Northern Provinces are yet unknown to the Europe∣ans. As for Capes, Ports and Roads, Rivers, and fruitful Mountains, Mines of Iron and Steel, Precious Stones and Woods, Madagascar hath them. But no Mines of Brass, Tin, Lead, Silver or Gold: And the Natives are divided into divers Herds and Tribes, un∣der a Chief, like the Tartars. Madaura, an ancient City betwixt Lambesa and Hippo in Barbary: remarkable for being the Birth∣place of Apuleius, thence intiuled Madaurensis. It had the honour heretofore of a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Carthage, and likewise of an Aca∣demy of note, at which S. Austin studied. Maday. See Media. Madera, an Island on the Western Shoar of Afri∣ca; called Madeira by the Portuguese, of old At∣lantica. Discovered by the Portuguese in 1419. and called by this Name from its plenty of Wood. Its length is twenty five Leagues, its Circuit sixty. The principal Town, Funchal. It lies in 32 deg. Lat. and Long. 360. Prodigiously fruitful; especially in Su∣gar, Mather, (a Dying stuff,) and Wines; the slipes whereof were brought from Candy. The Birds at first suffered themselves to be taken up; but have since learned to fear Mankind. It has plenty of Wa∣ter, and all other things needful for the life of Man. Though an Englishman is said to have landed here in 1344. yet the Portuguese were the first that peo∣pled this Island, and still possess it. They found it as one great Wood; and to clear it, they put fire to it, which raged so horribly at first, that they were forced to go to Sea, to avoid its fury. The Ashes contributed exceedingly to the Fertility of it. It is now returned to its natural strength, sufficient to maintain a vast number of Inhabitants. Funchal is an Archbishops See, and the Residence of the Go∣vernour: besides which, they reckon thirty six Pa∣rishes: Some call Madera, from its Fertility and Beau∣ty, the Queen of Islands. Madera, a River in South America, also called Cayane. It ariseth in the Confines of Peru, by the City Argentea; and after a long Course, falls into
the River of Amazons, in the Province of Cayane, in Long. 312. Lat. 02. 12. Maderaspatan, (that is, the Port of Madera,) is a City in the Kingdom of Narsinga; on the Coast of Coromandel, in the Bay of Bengala; which has been some years in the hands of the Hollanders. Mader. See Maeander. Madrid, Madritum, Mantua Carpetanorum, Ma∣dridium in Carpetanis, a great City in Spain, the Royal Seat of the Kings of that Country. It has a noble Palace, and is every day increasing. It stands upon the River Manzanares, (which falls into the Xaraina, at S. Martin; which falls into the Tajo, Tagus, above Toledo) twelve Miles to the North of Toledo. This City, saith Baudrand, has no Walls: some, that have lived there, say, it has a Mud one. It stands in the Kingdom of New Castile, upon the top of an Hill, in a fruitful Country, an healthful Air. The Royal Palace, though not great, is very beautiful & mag∣nificent. The Kings of Spain have resided here, but since the Reign of Philip II. before which time it was accounted only a Village. In 1473. a Council was ce∣lebrated here, to correct the Simony, Debauchery, and Ignorance of the Clergy of this Kingdom, under Pope Paul II. Long. 17. 00. Lat. 40. 40. Madure, a City in the East-Indies, in the Pro∣montory of Malabar; great and populous. Hereto∣fore under the King of Bisnagar; but now, together with the Country in which it stands, subject to a Prince of its own; who is yet a kind of Subject to the King of Bisnagar. It lies between Malabar to the West, and the Gulph of Manar, (which parts Malabar from Ceylon) to the East: he is Sove∣reign of this Coast, and draws a considerable Revenue from it. Maeander, a great River in the Lesser Asia, in the Greater Phrygia. Now commonly called Ma∣dre Mindre, and Bojouc Mindre; that is, the Great Mindre; in opposition to that at Ephesus, which is called the Little Minder. It springeth from a Fountain, called by the ancient Greeks, Alocrene; and runs with so Oblique a Current, as it often seems to be returning back again into it self: making in its passage six hundred Turns, though it is no very long Course it performs. Hence one of the Ancients ob∣serves, it was the only River in the World, which returned almost back to its Fountain. Many of the Poets alluded to it in their Poems. Our Country-Man, Mr. Wheeler, who crossed it, saith; it was there sixteen Fathoms over: they pretended, it was as deep as broad, the Current was exceeding swift: he gives a Figure of it. It falls into the Archipelago, be∣tween Heraclea and Miletus, on the South of E∣phesus. Maelstroom, Ʋmbilicus maris, a Gulph or Whirl. Pit on the Coast of Norway, and Province of Sca∣nea; between the Isles of Luffoot and Weroe. Ma∣ny wonders are told of this place, which in all pro∣bability are not true. Maes, Mosa, a vast River in the Low-Countries; called by the French, la Meuse; and by the Dutch, die Maes: it ariseth in the Mountains of Vauge, (Vogesus) in Champagne in France; ten Leagues from Chaumont en Bassigny to the East: running North through Lorrain and the Dukedom of Bar, it washeth S. Michael, Verdun, Sedain, Charleville, and Maiers; then entering Namur, it washeth Di∣nant and Namur; at which it takes in from the West the Sambre: turning East it entereth the Bishoprick of Liege; and watereth Hoey and Liege, (where it takes in the Oure, Ʋrta, out of Lux∣emburgh on the East) Maestricht, and Maseyck: so passing to Roermond and Venlo, at Lettem in Guelderland he changeth his Course from North-East to North-West; and at Cuyck turns directly West: passing by Grave (a Town of Brabant,) Ratenburgh and Heusden, at Worckum he takes in the Vahal, or Wael, (a Branch of the Rhine) be∣neath the Island of Bommel, made by these two Rivers: so watering Gorcum, Dort, and the Briel, he falls together with the Rhine, into the Ger∣man Ocean: This is a noble, stately Stream; and has upon his Banks many great Cities, and fine Towns. Maeseyck, Masacum, is a City of the Lower Ger∣many, in the Bishoprick of Liege; in the Coun∣ty of Losse, in the Borders of the Ʋpper Guelder∣land; five Leagues beneath Maestricht, three a∣bove Roermond, seven from Liege; and is a conside∣rable Place. Maesland. See Masay. Maestricht, Trajectum ad Mosam, Trajectum superius, is a City of Brabant; upon the Western Bank of the Maes, (which is here covered with a beautiful Stone Bridge, consisting of nine Arches) from whence it has its name, signifying the Passage over the Maes. On the Eastern Bank lies the Wyck, which is a Suburb to this City. The Bishops of Liege, and the Dukes of Brabant, heretofore di∣vided the Jurisdiction of this City between them: but the City was in the hands of the latter, and with that Dutchy passed to the House of Austria; who injoyed it, till 1632. when it was taken by the Hollander. In 1673. it was taken after a sharp Siege by the French. In 1676. the Hollander attem∣pted the reduction of it, without success: in 1678. they recovered it by the Treaty of Nimeguen. It is both walled, and covered with considerable out∣works, after the new Mode: towards the South-East, lies a Hill that riseth gently and overlooks part of the Town, under which is one of the noblest Quarries of Stone in the World: to secure the Town from any disadvantage it might receive from this Hill, the Bastion answering to it, is built very high: there is a Horn-work within Musket shot of it, and the Wyck is rather stronger than the Town. For the distances, see Maeseyck. The Bishops See was removed from hence to Liege, by S Hubert, in 713. Long 27. 12. Lat. 50. 50. Maesta, Mapha, a City in Arabia Foelix. Magadoxo, a City on the East of Africa, in the Kingdom of Zanguebar; which has a strong Castle, and a convenient Port. This City lies four hundred and fifty Miles South, from the Mouth of the Red Sea. In Long. 70 00. Lat. 02. 40. The Portu∣guese have treated it severely. Magareb, the Atlantick Ocean. Magdeburg, Mesujum, Parthenopolis, Magdebur∣gum, a great City and an Archbishops See, the Me∣tropolis of the Lower Saxony, upon the Elbe; the Capital of a Territory of the same name; a Hanse Town, and an Imperial Free City, ever since 940. Which still retains its Freedom and Liberty, though under the Protection of its own Archbishop, and the Elector of Brandenburg; who had the adja∣cent Territory assigned to him, with the Title of a Dukedom, by the Peace of Munster, after the death of the present Administrator or Archbishop. This City imbraced the Reformation in 1567. up∣on which account it has suffered very much since. It lies twelve Miles from Wittenburg to the North-West, a little more from Wolffenbuttel to the East, and nine from Halberstadt to the same. In Long. 33. 53. Lat. 52. 18. commonly called Meyd∣burg, that is, Maids-Town. Ptolemy calls it ; and most believe it to be the Mesuium in Antoninus; but however the present Pile was built by Otho I. Emperour of Germany, at the re∣quest
of Editha his Wife, Daughter of Edmund King of England, about 940. Which Lady was afterwards buried in this City. It was for some time the Seat of the Empire; fortified with Walls, Rampires, Towers, and a deep Trench; so that Charles V. in 1549. could proscribe and spoil its Territories, but not take it. In 1631. it was taken by Du Tilly, the Emperors Gene∣ral; being suddenly surrounded by an Army, when they did not expect it, nor had made those Prepara∣tions requisite, of Men, Victuals, and Ammunition; the want of which last was the principal cause of its being taken by Storm, May 10. after a Siege of great sharpness for fifteen Months: and being set on fire to fright the Inhabitants from the defence of it, the fire prevailed so far above the intentions of the Incendia∣ries, that the whole City was laid wast. The Duke of Saxony retook it in 1636. In 1666. it was again for∣ced, by the Arms of the Duke of Brandenburg, to ac∣cept Augustus Duke of Saxony for its Administrator or Archbishop. The Archbishoprick of Magdeburg, now turned into a Dukedom, is a very small Province of Germa∣ny, in the Lower Saxony. Bounded on the North with the old Marquisate of Brandenburgh; on the East with the middle Marquisate; on the South with Anhault, and Halberstadt; and with the Dukedom of Brunswick on the West. The Capital of it is Mag∣deburg. Magdeburg, a Castle of Germany, in the Upper Circle of the Rhine, in the Bishoprick of Spire; in 1517. sold by Ʋlricus Duke of Wirtemburg, to Phi∣lip Electoral Bishop of Spire. It is also called Ma∣denburg. Magellanica, a Country in South America, of great extent toward that Pole. On the North it has the Countries of Cili, Tacumania, and Paragua; on the South the Streights of Magellan, and le Maire; on the West, the Atlantick; and on the East the Pacifick Ocean. This together with the Streights, took its name from Ferdinando Magalhaens, a Portu∣guese, who in 1520. in the name of the King of Spain discovered it. His Ship came home, but he was slain in the East-Indies: and this was the first Ship that ever Sailed round the Globe of the Earth; which has since been done by Sir Francis Drake, Cavendish, and seve∣ral others. Magellanica is little known, and less in∣habited by any of the European Nations for the pre∣sent. Magi, the Philosophers and Priests of the ancient Persians, famous for their application to the know∣ledge of the Stars, and their introduction of a natural Theology from thence upon the belief of one Supreme Divinity. Their esteem in Persia was so great, that when K. Cambyses went in Person to the War in E∣gypt, he left the Government of his Estates in his ab∣sence to one of these Magi, called Patizithes; who after the sudden death of Cambyses, established by a cheat Smerdis, another Magus, Brother to Patizithes, upon the Throne of the Empire, in the room of Smer∣dis Brother to Cambyses. Magiar, Hungary. Magna-vacca, Caprusia, one of the Mouths of the River Po; which separating from the Branch cal∣led di Volana at Ferrara, falls into the Adriatick Sea at Comachio; between Po di Primaro to the South, and Po di Volana to the North. Magnesia in Lydia, see Manissa. In Caria, see Mangresia. § Also an ancient Province of Macedo∣nia; and a Promontory, now otherwise called Capo Verlichi and Capo di San Georgio. Magog, Persia. Magonza, Moguntia. See Mentz. Magra, Cinyphus, Macres, a River of Africa. Magra, Macra, a River in Italy, which was here∣tofore the boundary of Liguria to the South. It ari∣seth in the Apennine Hills, in the limits of the Duke∣dom of Parma; and running Southward by Pontre∣moli, being augmented with the Verra, Ʋla, and some other, it watereth a Valley called by its own name; and passing through the States of Genoua, a little above Serezana, falls into the Ligurian Sea; sixty five Miles East of Genoua, thirty five North-West of Lucca. Lucan mentions this River in his Se∣cond Book. Magarah, Pharos, a small, but celebrated Island near Alexandria in Egypt. Maguelone, Magalone, an ancient Roman City in the Lower Languedoc; seated in a small Island in the Marshes so called, on the Mediterranean Sea; taken by the Saracens, at their Entrance into France by Aquitain, after their Conquest of Spain, in 730: re∣taken and destroyed by Charles Martel, about 735. or 736. for fear it should fall into the hands of the Saracens again. And it lay in its Ruins till 1075. when its Bishop took some care to revive it, but to small purpose. The Bishops See being removed in 1536. to Montpelier, this Town is almost totally de∣solate. It had formerly Counts of its own to be its Governours. But in 1215. P. Innocent III. invested the temporalities in the Church, because Raymond VI. Earl of Tholouse, then Earl of Maguelone, espoused the cause of the Albigenses. Mahara, Nilus. Maholech, Delta, the Lower part of Egypt, enclo∣sed by the Branches of the Nile. Mahamora, a Fortress upon the Coast of the King∣dom of Fez, upon the River Suba; on the Coast of the Atlantick Ocean, in the Province of Fez; but on the Confines of that of Asgar. In Long. 10. 00. Lat. 33. 10. It has a good Harbor, of great Reception; and has been in the hands of the Portuguese ever since 1614. Mahometa, or Machometa, Adrumetum, a City on the Coast of Africa, mentioned by Pliny, Mela, and Ptolemy. Heretofore a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Carthage: now a strong Town on the Mediterranean, in the Kingdom of Tunis; seated up∣on the next Bay to that of Tunis to the East, which is called the Gulph of Mahometa. This place is also called by the Arabs, Hamammetha. In the Year 394. a Council was held here, the Canons whereof are con∣fused amongst the Body of the Canons of the African Church. Long. 36. 40. Lat. 32. 40. Majaquana, one of the Luccaye Islands, belonging to North America; between Hispaniola to the South and Samana to the North. Maida, a Principality in the further Calabria, in the Kingdom of Naples, near Nicastro. Maidenhead, a Market Town in Berkshire, in the Hundred of Bray. Maidstone, Madus, Vagniacae, is a fair, sweet, po∣pulous Town in the County of Kent, in Aylesford Lath, upon the River Medway, near its head, from which it has this name: There is a fair Stone Bridge built by the Archbishops of Canterbury over this River. Edward VI. Incorporated this Town, and granted it a Mayor; which was taken from them in Queen Ma∣ries time for favouring Wyat's Rebellion in 1554. But Queen Elizabeth restored them to their former State. In ancient times their chief Magistrate was called a Portgreve, from Grave an old German word still used by the Germans in Markgrave, Reingrave, and Landtgrave. Charles I. added another Honor to this Place, when in 1628. he created Elizabeth Finch, (Grandmother to the late Heneage Finch, Earl of Winchelsey, late Lord Chancellor of England) Vis∣countess of Maidstone, and Countess of Winchelsey, with an Entail upon her Heir Males: which Honors
are now possessed by Heneage Her Grandchild, the Se∣cond of this Family. Heneage, late Earl of Nottingham, and Lord Chancellor of England, was another of Her Posterity. This is the Town where the Assizes and Sessions are kept; with which honour, it has that of the Election of two Members of the House of Com∣mons. Maienne. See Mayenne. Majella, Nicates, a Mountain in Abruzzo, a Pro∣vince of the Kingdom of Naples; near the River Pes∣cara [Aternus,] as Holstenius affirms. Maillezais or Mallezais, Malleaca, Malleacum, a small City in Poictou in France; seated in a Morass made by the Rivers Seure Niortoise, (which falls into the Bay of Aquitain) and the Hautize: The an∣cient Earls of Poictou and Dukes of Guyenne chose it for their Residence, and Founded in it an Abbey about the Year 1030. which by P. John XXII. in 1317. was changed into a Bishops See; but being little inha∣bited by reason of the badness of the Air, the Bishop∣rick was suppressed in 1649. and the City of Rochell substituted in its place by Pope Innocent X. It stands nine Leagues from Rochell to the North-East, and five from Niore to the South. Long. 19. 36. Lat. 46. 21. according to the last Maps. Mailly, a Seigniory near Amiens in Picardy, giv∣ing name to an honorable Family of that Province. Maina or Maines. or Braccio di Maina, a City on the South of the Morea, supposed to have been the ancient Leuctra or Tenarus in Laconia; on the East side of the Gulph of Coron; North of Cape Matapan, the most South Cape of the Morea. The Inhabitants are called the Mainotes; and have in this present War contributed very much to the driving the Turks out of the Morea, by serving in great numbers under the Ve∣netians against them. It is said it was a Common∣wealth before: but Coronelli in his late description of the Morea, assures us; it was a Fort built by the Turks upon the Ruins of Cersapolis, to keep these Mainotes under; who being impatient of the Turkish Slavery and extremely Warlike, had betaken themselves to the Rocks and Forests, and would pay no Tribute to the Turks: thereupon the Turks began to build the Fort of Maina: but Querini Captain of the Gulph for the Venetians in 1570. understanding their design, Land∣ed, and by the help of the Mainotes took this Fort, and ruined it entirely; by which means the Mainotes were preserved, and obliged to the Service of this State. Main Amber, a noted strong Rock, nigh to Mounts Bay, in the County of Cornwall; mounted upon others of a lesser size with so equal a ponderation, that it may be stirred, 'tis said, yet not moved out of its place. Maine, le Maine, Cenomanensis Provincia, is a great and fruitful Province in France; the old Inha∣bitants of which were the Cenomani Aulerci; its great∣est extent is from East to West: on the North it is bounded by Normandy, on the West by Bretagne, (This part is called the Lower Maine;) on the South by Anjou, and on the East by Le Perche. (This, the Ʋpper Maine; and of the two, the most fruitful and pleasant.) The Rivers Huisne, Sarte and Mayenne water it. The Principal City in it is Mans, the next Mayenne. Charles, the second Son of Francis Duke of Guise, being made Duke of Maine and after that General of the League against Henry III. and IV. of France, made this Province frequently mentioned in the Histories of France of those times. The Common Proverb of the People of this Province, is, Qu' un Man∣ceau vaut un Norman & demy; One Man of Maine is worth one Norman, and the half of another. Main Land, Pomona, the Principal of the Isles of Orkney; which is twenty two English Miles long; and has a Town called Kirkwall, on the Northern Shoar for its Capital: its greatest extent is from East to West, and its greatest breadth about ten Miles. The Mainotes. See Maina. Maintez, Meintez. See Mentz. Majorca or Mallorca, Balearium insulae, Palma Majorca, an Island in the Mediterranean Sea, on the Eastern Coast of Spain, over against the Kingdom of Valencia; at the distance of about sixty Miles between Minorca to the East, and Yvica to the West; which three Islands constituted the Kingdom of Majorca, so called from this, the greatest of them. Its Circuit is near one hundred and ten Miles: the Principal City is Mallorca, Palma, or Majorca, which is a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Tarragona, and a flourishing University, in which Raymundus Lullius taught, and his tenets are now ex instituto maintained. It is great, strong, and has a Haven belonging to it on the Western shoar of the Island. Long. 24. 40. Lat. 40. 00. The Maps place it in Lat. 38. 26. The Inhabi∣tants of this Island were of old famous Archers, from whence they were called Baleares; at first they went naked: being subdued by the Carthaginians, Anno Mundi 3500. they became more civilized, and served in the Carthaginian Wars against the Romans; till together with Spain they fell under that Republick in the Year of Rome 630. 521 Years before the Birth of our Saviour. The Moors were their next Masters; who crossing out of Africa took Possession of them about the same time they Conquered Spain. Raymund Earl of Barcelone, by the assistance of the Genouese, expelled the Moors in 1102: but the Genouese, as if they had repented this good Deed restored them again. In 1228. they were finally ex elled by James King of Arragon. This Prince in 1230. made James his Son King of Majorca; whose Posterity enjoyed this King∣dom till 1341. when James III. (the fourth King of Majorca) was slain in Battel by Pedro IV. King of Arragon; and ever since these Islands have been an∣nexed to that Kingdom. The Land on all sides to∣wards the Sea is Mountainous and Barren: inwards more Champain and Fruitful; affording sufficient Oil, Corn, Wine, and Fruits, to maintain its Inhabitants, who are estimated to be thirty thousand. Maira, Merula, Macra, a River in Piedmont; which riseth out of the Alpes; and flowing through the Marquisate of Saluzzo, falls into the Po at Panca∣lieri, a small City nine Miles above Turino to the South. Malabar, Malabaria, Dachinabares, a vast Pe∣ninsula, or Promontory of the Hither East-Indies: between the Arabick or Indian Sea to the West, and the Gulph of Bengala or Ganges to the East. Dr. Hey∣lyn bounds it on the North with the River Gangeraco; Baudrand with the Kingdom of Decam; Buno bounde it to the North with the Cape of Darame, ten Miles beneath Goa. Cluverius reckons up these Kingdoms in it; Calicut, Coulete, Cranganor, Cochin, Coulam, and Travancor: of which Calicut is the Supreme, and therefore stiled Samory by them, that is, the Great Emperor, and God on Earth. For its extent Dr. Heylyn gives it three hundred English Miles to the Cape of Co∣mori, (which he supposeth to be the Commaria Ex∣trema of Ptolemy;) and its greatest breadth fifty Miles at the North. Baudrand makes its length one hun∣dred French Leagues; and its breadth ten, or fifteen, which is too little. Cluverius makes it eighty Ger∣man Miles long, and forty five broad. All agree, that it is the most fruitful, populous, and temperate Re∣gion in the whole East-Indies. The Inhabitants are very fierce, savage, and go naked, except what Nature desires to have hidden. They have a hatred of theft. The Women take as many Husbands as they please, contrarily to the custom of the Plurality of Wives a∣mongst the Mahometans. It is also one of the most
ancient Kingdoms; for many Ages subject to one Prince; till about 900, Sarama Parymal being sedu∣ced by the Saracens left his Kingdom, and went and died at Meccha: and having no Children, parcelled out his Kingdom amongst his most faithful Servants. Cananor had a strong Castle in the hands of the Portu∣guese till 1663. when the Dutch expelled them: the Hollanders are also possessed of Cochin and Coulam. The rest is in the Possession of Indian Princes, whose Dominions are very small. Malaca, Malacca, Aurea Chersonesus, a City and Kingdom in the Aurea Chersonesus, or most Southern Promontory of the East-Indies; between Sumatra and Borneo. The City stands on the Western Shoar; in Long. 127. 25. Lat. 03. 40. Subject to the King of Ihor, till the Portuguese in 1511. took it under Al∣phonsus Albuquerque, who made it an Episcopal City: In 1606. the Dutch besieg'd it in vain: but in 1640. the Dutch took it from them after a Siege of six Months. It is a celebrated Mart, has a large Haven, a strong Castle, and a River of the same name with the City; lying a Mile from it to the South-East. The Kingdom or Promontory of Malaca, which takes its name from this City, has the Kingdom of Siam to the North; and on all other sides is surrounded by the Ocean: it extends from one deg. of Northern Lat. to Queda, in six deg. Dr. Heylyn gives it two hundred and seventy English Miles in length: it is not of equal breadth: and being extremely hot and parched by the Sun, not very populous, or fruitful; but very rich by reason of the vast resort of all Nations for Trade. This was a part of the Kingdom of Siam, till 1258; when Parimisera and some other of the Javan Nobility be∣ing oppressed by their own King, fled to Sangesinga Viceroy for the Siamite; who receiving them kindly, was by them perfidiously slain: they erected in Sica∣pura this New Kingdom; which being soon reduced again by the Siamite, they built the Malaca; and got the Trade too from the former. The Moors join∣ing with them, they wholly revolted from Siam, (to whom they had submitted:) therefore that Prince in 1500. sent a Navy of two hundred Ships to reduce them; and thirty thousand Men with four hundred Elephants to attack them by Land: but Tempests and the disorders of his Soldiers made this Expedition miscarry. And in 1511. they fell into the hands of the Portuguese. Malaca, Pangaeus, a Mountain in Thrace, near the City Philippi; at the foot of which runs the River Nestus. Malaga, a City in the Kingdom of Granada in Spain; seated in a Plain on the Shoars of the Medi∣terranean Sea; twenty seven Leagues from Sevil to the South-East, the same from Cadiz to the East, and twenty four from Granada to the South West. It is a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Sevil here∣tosore, now of Granada: a famous Port, much fre∣quented on the account of its Wines; and has the River of Guadalani on the West of it, with two strong Castles, and an excellent Magazine. Taken from the Moors by Ferdinando and Isabella, in 1487. after a very long Siege. In 1661. an Inundation of the Ri∣ver swept away one thousand and sixty Houses, drown∣ed two thousand Men, and made three thousand more unfit for Habitation. It was built by the Phaenicians, and is mentioned by Strabo and Pliny. Long. 16. 02. Lat. 36. 30. According to the Maps, Long. 12. 42. Lat. 36. 09. Malatiah, Melitene, an ancient City in the Con∣fines of the Greater Armenia, upon the Euphrates; seventy Miles from Samosat to the North, and one hundred and fifty from Caesarea to the North-East. It is an Archbishops See. Long. 71. 00. Lat. 40. 32. Ac∣cording to the Maps 39. 52. Les Maidives, Maldivae, called the Naldives by the Natives: there is an incredible number of them, extending in a kind of a streight Line from nine deg. of Northern Lat. to two deg. beyond the Line; and stretching from North-West to South-East, to the South-West of the Cape of Comori or Malabar. They are very fruitful, and populous; under one King, whose Residence is in Male, or Maldiva. Francis Pirard has written a particular Discourse of these Islands; said to be some thousands in number; and to extend three hundred Leagues in length: partly inhabited, partly not; that where the King resides is not above five Miles in compass; whose Revenue principally consists in the fifth part of all the fruits, and in the Confiscation of Wrecks. He assumes the style of Sultan, King of thirteen Provinces and twelve thousand Islands. Maidon, Camalodunum, Camulodunum, a Town in Essex, in the Hundred of Dengy, upon the River Chelmer, on the Sea-shoar, on the South side of that Arm of the Sea called Idumanius, and about seven Miles distant from the Sea; between which and it lie two small Islands called Northey and Osey. This was the Royal City of Cunobelinus a British Prince; who lived in the times of Tiberius and Caligula, to whom one of his Sons fled. Aulus Plautius the Roman Ge∣neral here in the Reign of Claudius fought Caracta∣cus another of his Sons, and slew him in Battel. Clau∣dius coming over into Britain in Person, in the Third Year of his Reign, in the 43 Year of Christ, took this City; and was therefore called BRITANNICƲS. He made it a Roman Colony, planting in it a Regiment of old Soldiers; and ordered Money to be Coined with this Inscription, COL. CAMALODƲN. Cambden saith, from this Money, it is Collected this Expedition was in the twelfth Year of his Reign, fifty two years after the Birth of Christ. Certain it is, this City soon felt the fury of the Britains under Boadicia Qu. of the Iceni; who took and burnt it, and put all the Romans to the Sword, about the Year of Christ sixty three. Yet the Romans rebuilt it, as appears by An∣toninus. Edward the Son of Alfred, a Saxon King, finding it much ruined by the Danes, repaired and fortified it with a Castle. William the Conqueror had here one hundred and eighty Houses in the Tenure of the Burgesses; and eighteen wasted. In Mr. Cam∣bden's time it was a well inhabited Town; consisting of one Street of a Mile in length, built on the ridge of an Hill; and having a convenient Haven. Now not only a Corporation, which sends two Burgesses to Parliament; but also made a Viscounty the thirteenth of Charles II. and given to the late Earl of Essex. The Maleas, are a People which live in the Moun∣tains of Malabar; towards the Confines of Coroman∣del, near the Dominions of the King of Madura. Amongst them there live many Christians of the old Conversion, called the Christians of S. Thomas. Maleg, a River of the Ʋpper Aethiopia, which ariseth in the Kingdom of Damut; and receiving the River Anquet, after a Course of eighty Leagues, falls into the Nile in Nubia, below the Province of Fas∣culon. Malaguette, Mallaguete, or Managuete, the Western part of Guiney in Africa, called by the Dutch, Tand-Cust; by the French, Cote des Graives; about 60 Leagues long, extending from the River Sanguin to the Cape of Palmes, which Cape se∣parates it from Guinea propria. It hath the re∣putation of a considerable place for the Pepper trade. First planted with some Colonies of French, and afterwards by the Portuguese, English, and Dutch. Malemba, a Kingdom of Africa, betwixt the King∣dom of Angola and the Lake of Zembre.
Malespine, a Marquisate and Souereignty in Tusca∣ny, in Italy, near the States of Genoua: The same properly with the ancient principality (or now Duke∣dom) of Massa; belonging formerly to the Family of the Malespini, which since has been incorporated with the House of Cibo. Malfi, Amalphis, or Amalphi, a City in the King∣dom of Naples, in the Hither Principato; honoured with an Archbishops See, and a Dukedom; but little, and not well inhabited. It lies on the North side of the Bay of Salerno; eleven from Salerno to the West, and twenty two from Naples to the South. The Em∣peror Lotharius II. in the War he undertook in the behalf of Pope Innocent II. against Roger K. of Sicily and Anacletus an Antipope, mastered and plundered this City. They pretend that here are the Bones of St. Andrew the Apostle, brought from Judea about the Year 1206; and that the Seaman's Compass was invented here by Flavio Gioïa an Italian, in 1300. P. Nicholas II. celebrated a Council here in 1059. in which the Dukedoms of Puglia and Calabria were confirmed to Robert Guichard, the Valiant Norman, for his Services in the expulsion of the Saracens. Long. 38. 35. Lat. 40. 52. Malines. See Mechelen. Maliapur, Maliapura, a City on the Coast of Coromandel, commonly called St. Thomas, as being the place of the Martyrdom of that Apostle, and an Archiepiscopal City; written also Meliapor: it was taken by the French in 1671. and deserted two years after. Long. 108. 50. Lat. 13. 12. Malling West, a Market Town in the County of Kent, in Aylesford Lath. Mallorca. See Majorca. Malmesbury, Maldunense Caenobium, a Town built on the Western Bank of the River Avon; the Capital of its Hundred; on the Confines of the Coun∣ty of Glocester, in the County of Wiltshire; which took its name and rise from Maidulph a Learned Irish Scot, who being highly admired both for his Piety and Learning, erected here a School and a Monastery; which Adelme his Scholar much improved; becoming after his death the Tutelar Saint of Athelstane King of England, who died in 938. after he had much en∣riched this Monastery by his Princely Donations: this Adelme was the first who taught the Saxons the La∣tin Poetry. No less honor is due to this Place on the score of William of Malmesbury, a Learned Historian for the Times in which he lived; which was about 1143. The Monastery thrived so well, that at the suppression of it by Henry VIII its Revenue was above eight hundred and three pounds the year. Whether its late Philosopher, Thomas Hobbs, has added to the Honor of this Place, by being born here, is left to the Judgment of Posterity. The Town is now a Corpo∣ration, represented by its Burgesses in Parliament; and in a tolerable Condition, by reason of its Clothing Trade. It has six Bridges over the River, being al∣most encircled therewith. A Synod was held at it in 705. or 707. Malmugon, Malmoe, Malmogia, a City in Sca∣nia, in the Kingdom of Sweden; called by the Hol∣landers Elbogon, because it represents the Bent of the Elbow of an Arm. It was built in 1319. and has a safe Harbor over against Coppenhagen, on the Sound. In 1434. here was a strong Castle built by Ericus King of Denmark, the first Encourager of lasting Ar∣chitecture in this Kingdom. In 1658. it first came into the hands of the Swedes: in 1676. the Danes endeavoured the recovery of it by a Siege, but with∣out success; they did the like the year following with the like event. It stands four Danish Miles from Cop∣penhagen to the East. Malpas, a Market Town in Cheshire, in the Hun∣dred of Broxton. Malta, Melita, and Island belonging to Africa, in the Mediterranean Sea; by some taken for the Place where S. Paul suffered Shipwrack in the Year of Christ 58. Its length is twenty Miles, breadth twelve, cir∣cuit about sixty: which is its distance too from Pachy∣no, the most South-Eastern Cape of Sicily; one hun∣dred and ninety from the nearest Coast of Africa. Ta∣ken from the Saracens by Roger the Norman Earl of Sicily, in 1089. And was under the Kings of Sicily, till Charles V. granted it to the Knights of Saint John of Jerusalem, (now called Knights of Malta from it) after they were beaten out of Rhodes, in 1530: that he might the easier protect Sicily from the Incursions of the Moors. In 1566 they began to build the Bourg, or principal City; after Solyman the Magnifi∣cent had in 1565. reduced the greatest part of the old Town into Dust, by a Siege of five Months, ma∣naged by Dragut his General, with the loss of twenty four thousand Men spent to no purpose on this small Island. There are sixty Villages in it, and three Ci∣ties; all seated at the East end, within the distance of eight Miles; which have two large Havens, divided by a Rock: on the Point stands the Castle of S. Hermes, to defend the entrance; against which the Turks spent twenty thousand Cannon Shot, and at last took it to their no great advantage. In the middle of the Eastern Haven stands the Castle of S. Angelo upon a Rock: this and Burgo quelled the fury of the Turks, and pre∣vented their Triumph over Malta. Though the Inha∣bitants exceed not twenty thousand, yet it is not able to supply them with Necessaries: but that the fertil Sicily is so near, from which they have much of their Provisions. They have some fresh-water Fountains; the Rain that falls they reserve in Cisterns; and have always three years Provisions beforehand, kept under ground. The Great Master of the Order of the Knights of Malta at present is Alarame de Vignecourt, chosen in Aug. 1690. The City Malta is a Bishops See under the Archbishop of Palermo in Sicily, and the Residence of the Grand Prior of the Church; also now the Ca∣pital of the Island; which last honour formerly was enjoy'd by Citta Vecchia, another Episcopal City in the middle of Malta. Several small Islands adjacent, (the Principal, are Gozo, Comini, and Farfara) de∣pend upon the Grand Master, as their Soveraign. The illustrious Order of the Knights of this place, is com∣posed of eight Nations, (amongst which England was the sixth in rank) before the Reformation: To each Nation there belongs a Grand Prior: The Per∣sons incorporated are divided into three Estates of Knights, Ecclesiasticks, and Servans des Armes, or Esquires, all vowing celibacy. Some out of both the two first, have been known advanced to the Dignity of Cardinals; and the Sons of Kings and Princes have adorned the rank of the Knights. This Island produ∣ces no Wine, nor Corn; but Cotton, Oates, and deli∣cious Fruits in Plenty. § There is another Island Malta in the Adriatick, belonging to Dalmatia, and called by the Sclavonians Milet, by others Meleda. The Miletaeus Catellus, a Proverb for a Lap-dog, is derived from the little Dogs of this latter place, accor∣ding to Athenaeus. Long. 39. 25. Lat. 34. 40. Malvasia, Epidaurus, an Archiepiscopal City of the Morea, on the Eastern Shoar, in the Province of Tzaconia; near the most South-Eastern Cape called Cape Maleo, built upon a Rock; which advanced po∣sition gives it an agreeable Prospect both by Sea and Land. This Rock is surrounded by the Sea on all sides. being only joined to the Continent by a Tim∣ber Bridge; yet has Nature provided it a fresh and clear Fountain of good Water, sufficient to serve the
City, and their Gardens; it is approachable only on one side, that is, on the South; which is secured by a triple Wall of great strength. In the times of the Greek Idolatry it was famous for a Temple of Escu∣lapius, much frequented. It was ravished from the Greek Emperors by the Venetians and French, about the year 1204. The Emperors recovered it again from William a French Baron, to whom it was gi∣ven by the Latins: but he returning to Venice, free∣ly resigned his Right to that State; whereupon the Venetians sent a powerful Fleet, and regained the Possession of it, which they kept till the year 1537. when they were forced to surrender it to the Turks to purchase a Peace. In the times of the late Wars in Candy, the Venetians took this Town by Storm; plun∣dered, burnt, and then left it, after they had put most of the Inhabitants to the Sword, and carried away the Cannon: The Turks rebuilt it. General Morosini bombarded it in his way to Athens, Sept. 1687. Af∣terwards it was blockaded, then besieged. At last it surrendered to General Cornaro, Sept. 12. 1690. whereby the whole Morea stands now reduced under the Dominion of the States of Venice. They found in it seventy three Pieces of Cannon; and above one hundred and thirty Christian Slaves recovered their Li∣berty. Long. 50. 00. Lat. 38. 30. Mamertini, an ancient People of the Island Sa∣mos, in the Icarian Sea: said afterwards to establish themselves at Messina in Sicily. Whence the Messe∣nii have the Name also of Mamertini, and the Sea adjacent of Fretum Mamertinum. Mamotta. Arabia Foelix. Man, Eubonia, Monaaeda, Monapia, Monavia, Mona, an Island in the Irish Sea; between Lanca∣shire to the East, and Ʋlster to the West. The Welsh call this small place Menow; the Inhabitants Maing; the English Man. It lies in length from North to South thirty Italian Miles; its greatest breadth is fifteen. It has seventeen Parish Churches; brings forth Flax, Hemp, and Corn in plenty; af∣fords more Cattle than they need, especially Sheep; they have no Fewel but Turff. In the middle it swelleth into Hills; from the highest of which (Scea∣full by Name) in a clear day may be seen England, Scotland and Ireland. The chief Town is Russin, seated at the South End of the Island, which has a Garrisoned Castle: it has also a Bishop, who is stiled Sodorensis, and is now under the Archbishop of York. This Island was first possessed by the Britains; after them succeeded the Scots, about the times of Honorius and Arcadius: these were driven out by Cuneda, (Grandfather of Maglocunus) stiled by Gildas, the Dragon of the Islands. Edwin, King of Northum∣berland, Conquered it next for the Saxons, about 618. The Danes being driven out of England by Harold, they were invited Hither by one Godred Cor∣van, who had been entertained in his flight in the Isle of Man. This Dane brought over his Country Men, three times successively invaded it before he could master the Inhabitants: but then prevailing, he became King of Man, soon after the time William of Normandy conquered England. This Race of Kings continued to 1270. about two hundred years: about which time Robert the King of the Scots, (ha∣ving succeeded Alexander, who had purchased the Hebrides of the King of Denmark,) made another Conquest of the Isle of Man, which was one of the last they gained the Possession of. After this sometimes the Scots, sometimes the English were Masters of it: till in 1340. William Montacute, Earl of Salisbury, (descended from Mary the Daughter of Reginald the last King of Man) finally drove out the Scots: and in 1393. sold it to William Scrope; who being beheaded for Treason, Henry IV. granted it to Henry Percy, Earl of Northumberland, about 1400. He likewise forseiting it, this Prince granted it to Sir John Stanley; whose Successor in 1486. was by Henry VII. created Earl of Darby: And in this Fa∣mily it still is. wih the Title of Lord of Man; be∣ing possessed by William Earl of Darby, the Grand∣child of James, who in 1651. was beheaded for his Loyalty to Charles II. After which the Rebels by force reduced the Island under them; it was restored to this Family in 1660. by Charles II. The Lan∣guage here spoken is different from that of all His Majesties other Dominions; being a mixture of Scotch, Irish, Danish and English: but the Southern part nearer to the Scotch, and the Northern to the Irish. The first Bishop of Man is said to have been Amphi∣balus in 360. There are great Chasms in the Succes∣sion till 1203. and again from 1396. In 1505. Hua∣mus became Bishop of it; from whom the present Bishop Dr. Levinz is the fourteenth, and the twenty ninth of those whose Names are Recorded. This Bi∣shop is no Lord of the Parliament of England, (tho presented to the King for his Assent Royal, and to the Archbishop of York for Consecration) by rea∣son he holds immediately, not of the King, but of the Lord of Man, to whom, under the Fief and Sove∣reignty of the King, belongs the Right of Nomi∣nation. Manar, Manaria, a small Island, with a City on it; which is in the Hands of the Hollanders: it lies in the Streight, between the Island of Ceylon and the Coast of Malabar, in the East-Indies; and gives Name to that Streight. Long. 108. 30. Lat. 09. 33. Manceaux, the People of Maine, a Province in France. La Mancha, Lamitanus Ager, a Province in the South of New Castile in Spain: the Seat of the Ore∣tani, an ancient People of Spain, mentioned by Strabo and Pliny. It is divided into La Mancha d' Arragon, and La Mancha Cieca. La Manche, Mare Britannicum, the French Name of the British Sea, lying between France and England. Manchester, Manduessedum, a Town in the Coun∣ty of Warwick, mentioned by Antoninus: now a poor Village, of about fourteen Houses; one Mile from Atherstone to the South, and eight from Coven∣ventry to the North § Manchester, Mancunium, Manucium, a very rich, populous, and beautiful Market-Town, upon the East side of the River Spo∣den; near the Borders of Cheshire, at the South End of the County of Lancaster, in the Hundred of Sal∣ford; in which Thomas Lord de la Ware founded a a College. This was an ancient Roman City; and being ruined in the Saxon and Danish Wars, was re∣built by Edward the Elder, about 920. The College has been since refounded, and confirmed by Queen Elizabeth, and is still in being. There is also a Col∣legiate Church. Charles I. added another Honour to this Place, by creating Henry Montague Earl of Manchester, in 1625. which Honour is now possessed by Edward Montague, his Grand child, the third Earl of this family. Mandignan, Hesperium Cornu, Cape Verde, the most Western Cape of Africa. Mande, Mimatium, a City of Aquitain, in Lan∣guedoc in France; towards the Mountains of Seven∣nes, and the Fountains of the River Lot, [Olda:] which is a Bishop See, under the Archbishop of Alby; called by some Latin Writers Anderitum, and Gaba∣lum: the Capital of the Territory of Givaudan: four Miles from Jaoux, where are are the Ruins of that old City, out of which this we are speaking of sprung; being before only a Village, at the Foot of this Moun∣tain: ten Leagues from S. Flour to the North East,
fourteen from from Rhodez to the East. It stands in a mountainous, but fruitful Soil; and it is ho∣noured with the Bones of S. Privatus, a Martyr. The Bishop enjoys divers great Privileges, together with the Title of an Earl. Mandinga, a Kingdom in Nigritia, in Africa, betwixt the River Niger to the North, and the King∣dom of Malaguette to the South: its Capital City bearing the same Name. Mandou, a City and Kingdom in the Empire of the Great Mogul, in the East Indies. Mandoua, a River in the Kingdom of Decam, which falls by the City of Goa, into the Indian Ocean. See Goa. Mandrerey, a River in the Island of Madegascar: it springs in a Territory of its own Name, and greatned with the Currents of divers other Rivers, discharges it self into the Ocean at the North of the Island, near the Province of Carcanossi. Manfredonia, Sepontum Novum, Manfredonia, a City in the Province called the Capitanato, in the Kingdom of Naples; which is an Archbishops See, and has this Name from Manfredus, King of Na∣ples, (Son of Frederick II. Emperor of Germany) who built it about the year 1256. Not above two Miles from hence, at the Foot of Mount Gargano, are shewn the Ruins of Sepontum, an old ruined Roman Town; the See of which was Translated to Manfredonia. It has a large Haven, a strong Castle; seated twenty five Miles from Nocera to the East, and twenty two from the Mouth of the River Ofanto, (Au∣fidus) to the North. Taken once by the Turks, in the year 1620. and miserably defaced, spoiled and ruined; since in some degree repaired; but the me∣mory of that Calamity has made it little, poor, and not much inhabited. A Provincial Council was as∣sembled at it in 1567. Long. 40. 10. Lat. 41. 40. Mangalor, Mangalora, a City of the King∣dom of Bisnagar, upon the Western Shoar; which has a Castle, and an Harbour upon the Indian Sea; in a Tract called Canara, towards Malabar: Heretofore under the Portuguese. This may possibly be the same, with that the Ancients called Manda∣gara. Long. 105. 00. Lat. 12 30. Mangresia, Magnesia, the Capital City of Caria, a Province in the Lesser Asia, near the River Maean∣der; whence it was called Magnesia ad Maeandrum, to distinguish it from some other Cities of the same Name. Before this it was called Thessaloce and An∣drolitia, as Pliny saith. It stands near Mount Thorax; seventy Miles from Smyrna to the North-East, and twenty six from Ephesus. Themistocles the Athenian died here in Banishment; and Antiochus, King of Sy∣ria, sixty three years before the Birth of our Savour. Long. 57. 00. Lat. 39. 00. Manhate, the same with New Amsterdam, in North America, in New-Holland. Manheim, Manbemium, a Fortress in the Lower Palatinate, where the Rhine and the Necker meet; grown up to a City, whereas before it was only a Village. Frederick IV. Elector Palatine, in 1606. fortified it. In 1622. the Spaniards took and dis∣mantled it. Being restored by the Treaty of Munster to this House, Charles Lewis, the last Elector, resor∣tified it. It stands three German Miles from Spire to the North, and as much from Heydelburgh to the West. It has a very strong Castle, called Friderichs∣bourgh: near it upon the Rhine lies another called Eichelsheim, now ruined; in which John XXIII. Pope was kept two years a Prisoner, after he was de∣posed by the Council of Constance. The French pos∣sessed themselves both of the City and Fortress, Nov. 13. 1688. S. Manehu. See S. Meneboult. Manifold, a River of Staffordshire. Manille, Manilla, the same with Lusson. Maningtree or Manytree, a Market Town in the County of Essex, in the Hundred of Tendring. Manissa, Magnesia, a City of Lydia, in the Lesser Asia, which is a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Smyrna; twenty four Miles from Smyrna to the North West. Now in a tolerable Condition under the Turks; and the Capital of a Province. Manoa el dorado, a Town in South America, in Guiana; upon the Western Shoar of the Lake of Parime; concerning which the Indians report great things, but it was never yet seen by any European. Manosque, Manuesca, a Town in Provence in France, in the Diocese of Sisteron, in a Plain, one League from the River Durance; belonging to the Order of the Knights of Malta, by the Concession the ancient Counts of Forcalquier, who had a Palace in it. Some would have it to be the Bormanicum of Pliny. Others, the ancient Alaunicum or Machao∣villa. There are divers Religious Houses there. Manresa, Manrese, Minorissa, a small City in Catalonia, in Spain, upon the River Cardoner; (which a little lower falls into the Lobregat,) ten Leagues from Barcellona to the North. Once a Bi∣shops See. Mans, Ʋrbs Cenomanorum, Cenomanum, a great, rich, populous City in the Duchy of Maine, in France; of old called Vindinum; seated upon the River Sartre, (where it takes in the Huisne,) ten Leagues from Alenson to the South, sixteen from ours to the North, and the same distance from Vendosine to the North-West. It is a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Tours; the Capital of Le Maine, and heretofore one of the most flourishing Cities of Gallia Celtica. Mansfeldt, an Island in Hudson's Bay, in the Ter∣ra Arctica of America, discovered some time since by the English. Mansfeld, Mansfeldensis Comitatus, is a County or Earldom in the Ʋpper Saxony; in the Landtgra∣vate of Thuring; between the Principality of Anhalt to the North, the Territory of Mersburgh in Misnia to the East, and Thuring, (properly so called) to the East and West. It is now sequestred in the Hands of the Elector of Saxony; but was before un∣der a Count of its own: whose Family being now divided into four Branches, each of them has the Right of Living, Hunting, and Fishing in this Coun∣ty; with that of Patronage, and two thousand Flo∣rins yearly Income; the Government is in the Hands of the Electors, for their security and payments. The chief Town is Mansfeld; which stands nine Miles from Maegdeburgh to the South, and Erfurd to the North; and sixteen from Gottingen to the East. Mansfield, a good, large, well built and inhabited, Market Town in the County of Nottingham, in the Hundred of Broxtow. It stands in the Forest of Sherwood. Mantale, an ancient Castle in the Territory of Vienne, in Dauphine: remarkable upon the account of a Council called, Concilium Monotalense, in 879. for the Election of Boson, King of Provence, Arles, and Burgundy. Mante, Medunta, commonly Epitheted la Jolie, a City or great Town in the Isle of France; which has a Stone-Bridge over the Seyne; in the very Bor∣ders of le vexin: twelve Leagues beneath Paris to the West, and sixteen above Roan, to the South-East. Philip II. King of France died here in 1223. It heretofore enjoyed the Honour of the Title of an Earldom, and had a Cittadel which was destroyed by Henry IV. In 1376. Charles V. King of France; Founded a Monastery of the Celestines in it: besides which, it is adorned with a Collegiate Church.
Mantonea, a City in the Morea, in Arcadia; famous for the Death of Epaminondas, the celebra∣ted Thebean General, in the year of Rome, 391. It lies at the Foot of the Mountain Parthenius; twenty five Miles from Megalopolis to the North, and seven from Misitra, to the North-West. Now called Mandi, or Mundi. Mantoua, Mantua, a very ancient City in Lom∣bardy in Italy; built three hundred years before Rome. It is the Capital of a Dukedom, and a Bi∣shops See under the Patriarch of Aquileja; but exempt from his Jurisdiction ever since 1453. A great and a magnificent City, seated within the Bosom of a Lake of the same Name, (made by the River Men∣zo) which contributes very much to its strength and security. In 1629. it was taken by the German Im∣perial Forces, and miserably impoverished: but soon after restored to its Duke by the Interposition of the French Court. It stands forty five Miles from Modena to the North, twenty from Verona to the South, and forty from Cremona to the East. This was the Country of Virgil, the great Latin Poet; who Celebrates the Fertility of its Fields in his Georg. 2. And of Tasso, the Italian. In the year 1064. the Election of Pope Alexander II. to the See of Rome, was confirmed in a Council here, a∣gainst Honorius II. an Antipope, set up by the Em∣peror Henry IV. The Dukedom of Mantoua, is bounded on the East by that of Ferrara; on the North by the Terri∣tories of Verona, and Brescia; on the West by Cre∣mona, and the Dukedom of Milan: on the South by the Dukedoms of Modena and Mirandola. Said to be equal together with Montisferat, (which be∣longs to this Duke) to the Dukedom of Florence in extent, but not in Revenue; yet it is fruitful, and a∣bounds in Cattle. This Dukedom fell first into the Family of Gonzaga, (which now possesseth it,) in 1328. Lewis I. of this Line then slaying Passavino, the last of the Bonocelsi's, in the Market-Place; and assuming the Government into his own Hands, as Lord of Mantoua. John Francisco, the Fifth of the Line, was made Marquess of Mantoua, by Sigismond the Emperor, in 1433. Frederick II. the ninth of them, was Created Duke by Charles V. in 1530. Charles III. is the eighteenth of this House, and succeeded his Father Charles II. This Dukedom is thirty five Miles from North to South, and fifty from East to West. Manata, the same with la Mancha. Mar, a County in the North-East part of Scot∣land; extending in length from East to West sixty Miles; partly mountainous and barren, partly fruitful: on the North it has Murray and Buchan; on the East the German Ocean; on the South Mern and Angus; and on the West Athole. The River Dee enricheth the South, and the Done the North side of this County; yet is there in it no Town of great Note. Maracaibo, or Marecaye, a City in the Province of Venezuela, in Castile d' Or, in the South A∣merica, upon a vast Lake of the same Name: well built, rich, populous, well traded, and enjoying the Benefit of an excellent Port, wherein the Spani∣ards build their Ships. Maragnan, Marahim, Maranania, an Island on the Coast of Brasil; at the Mouth of the River Mi∣rary, which gives Name to the next Province to it. This was once planted with French; but in 1641. taken by the Hollanders, and since retaken by the Por∣tuguese. There is in it a Town called S. Lewis, with a Castle: and altho but a small Place, yet it is a Bi∣shops See, under the Archbishop of S. Salvador. Long. 332. 40. Southern Lat. 02. 10. § The River Xauxa in Peru is also called El Vio Maragnon. See Xauxa. Marans, a Town upon the River Sicur Nior∣toise, in the pais d' Aulnis, in France, two Leagues from the Sea, and four from Rochelle. It stands in a Marsh, hath a Castle, and been often taken in the Wars by the Roman Catholicks and Huguenots. Marasso, C. Delle Cacca, Haermaeum, the most Western Cape in the Island of Sardinia; lying Long. 32. 10. Lat. 41. 15. Marata, a small Kingdom in North America, placed by Sanson near the New Kingdom of Mexico, and the Vermiglian Ocean. Marathon, Marason, Marathona, an ancient City of Attica in Greece; famous in History for the De∣feat given by Miltiades with his Army of twelve thousand Athenians, to five hundred thousand Per∣sians, in the year of Rome 264. and the third of the seventy second Olympiad. Marca d'Ancona, Picenum, Marchia Anconi∣tana, is a large Province, under the Dominion of the Church in Italy: bounded on the North by the Adri∣atick Sea, on the West with the Dukedom of Ʋrbino, on the South with the Apennine, and on the East with Abruzzo. It has this Name from Ancona, the prin∣cipal City in it. This was formerly the Seat of the Picentes; who for aiding their Allies (the Taren∣tines) against the Romans, were subdued, and made a Roman Province in the year of Rome 485. The City of Ancona being given to Pope Zachary by Luitprandus, King of the Lombards, about the year 741. his Successors in time gained all the rest of this Marquisate to it. This Country is so fruitful, that in the times of the Roman Empire it was called Picenum Annonarium. Marca Hispanica, the Name of Catalonia, in the time of the Emperor Lewis the Debonnaire. Marcha Trevisana, or Trivigiana, Euganei Po∣puli, Marchia Tarvisina, is a large Province of I∣taly, under the State of Venice. Heretofore much greater than now. Bounded on the South at present by the River Athesis, (now Adige,) and the most Northern Branch of the Po, called Fornaces; on the West with the Duchy of Milan; on the East with Friuli, and the Gulph of Venice; and on the North with the Alpes, which divide it from Tirol. In the time of Augustus, called Venetia, from its ancient Inhabitants; and one of his eleven Regions of Italy. The principal Towns and Cities are, Vincentia, Tre∣viso, Padua, Brescia, Verona, Crema, Bergomo. This Marquisate having suffered many Changes was about the year 1390. conquered by the States of Ve∣nice; who are at present in possession of it. Marcana, Marea, Marca, Merca, a small City, in an Island of the same Name, in the Gulph of Ve∣nice; under the State of Ragusa; and not far from the Coast of Dalmatia; which was a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Ragusa. The City is ruined; but the Bishoprick is still in being, and united to that of Trebinga, which is now under the Turks. It lies five Miles from Ragusa; the Island in which it stands, is about four in compass. The Town has not now above three or four Houses. March, the most South-East County of the King∣dom of Scotland; on the East bounded by the Ger∣man Ocean, on the North by Lothaine, on the West by Twedale, and on the South by Tivedale and Northumberland; cut off by the River Tweed; upon the North Bank of which stands Berwick, the last Town of England; and more North, Coldingham, the Colania of Ptolemy. This is written Merch, and Mers. La Marche, Marchia, a Town in the Dukedom of Barrois, in Lorain; in the Borders of Cham∣pagne; about three Leagues from the Fountains of the Maes to the South-East, and five from Mire∣court.
La Marche, or La Marche en Limosin, Marchia, a Province in Aquitain in France, which is great and fruitful. Bounded on the North with Berry, on the East by Auvergne, on the West by Poictou, and on the South by Limosin; to which it is sometime attributed, tho it is a distinct Province. It is divided into the Ʋp∣per and Lower Marche. Geieret is the principal Town in the former, and La Dorat in the other. The Rivers Vienne, Cher, Creuse, Gartempe, &c. derive their Springs from this Province. It gives the Title of an Earldom which was united to the Crown about 1531. Marcianopoli, Marcianopolis, a City of the ancient Mysia, now in Bulgaria, commonly called Preslaw; it had this Name from Marciana, a Sister of Trajan; and and was a Bishops See, but is now an Archbishoprick, and in a flourishing State: twenty Miles from the Euxine Sea, on the Borders of Thrace; by the Turks called old Constantinople. Marck, and Markishlandt, Marchia, by the French called la Mare, a Province of Germany, in the Circle of Westphalia; under the Dominion of the Elector of Brandenburgh, who succeeded to it as Heir to the Duke of Juliers: Bounded on the North by the Bishoprick of Munster, on the East by the Dukedom of Westphalia; on the South and West by the Dukedom of Mons. It hath the Honour of the Title of an Earldom. The chief Town in this Pro∣vince is Ham: it takes its Name from the Castle of Mark, near the said Town of Ham. Marckfeldt, Marckfeldberg, Teracatriae Campi, a Tract of Germany near the Danube; in the Con∣fines of Austria and Moravia, towards Presburgh. Marckpurg, Marcpurgum, Marcopurgum, a City of Germany, in Stiria; upon the Drave; thirteen Miles from Laubach to the North-East, and twenty two from Vienna to the South. Marcomanni, Marcomades, Marcomates, a peo∣ple of the ancient Germany, whom Cluverius places betwixt the Rhine, the Danube, and the Necker; from whence they passed into Bohemia, together with the Sedusii and the Harudes; and made frequent Re∣volts against the Romans. Mardike, a strong Fort in Flanders, built by the Spaniards; about one German Mile from Dunkirk to the West, and two from Gravelin to the East; not far from the Sea Shoar. It was taken by the French in 1645. and 1657. when it was put into the Hands of the English with Dunkirk: with which it was resigned back to the French, who have slighted and ruined it. Marecchia, Ariminus, a River of Romandiola in Italy. It ariseth from the Apennine, not above four Miles from the Fountains of the North-East; and running Northwards, watereth S. Leo, S. Mari∣no, and Rimini: where it buries it self in the A∣driatick Sea. Mareotis, a Canton of the Territory of Alexan∣dria, in Egypt, consisting of divers Villages; so called from the Lake Mareotis, watering it, which has since changed its Name to Lago di Buchiara. Ischyras the great Antagonist of S. Athanasius dwelt in a Village of this Country. Margaias, a People in Brasil. Margarita, an Island of South America, in the North Sea; eight Leagues from the Coast of New Andaluzia, and forty from the Island of S. Trinidada to the West. Long. 314. Lat. 11. First discovered by C. Columbus in 1498. and since mostly frequented on the account of the Pearl Fishery, from whence it has its Name. It is about forty French Leagues in com∣pass; very fruitful, but mountainous; watered by two Rivers, and adorned with the Town of S. Jago de de la Vega, and some Villages. Margarita, Lero, an Island on the Coast of Provence, in the Mediterranean Sea; which, with its Neighbor S. Honorate, being taken by the Spaniards, was recovered by the French, in 1637. Margiana, a large Province of the Ancient Asia, which lay betwixt Bactriana and Hyrcania: now for the most part contained in the Provinces of Khoesme and Charasan in Persia. Margosest, Marcodava, a City of Walachia, upon the River Bardalach, eleven German Miles from Jazi to the South. Marguerite, Margereta, a small River in Soisso∣nois in France. Mariana, a Colony, and a City in the Eastern Part of the Isle of Corsica; which had its Name from Marius, the great Roman Consul; and is a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Genoua. Heretofore very great and populous; seated upon a small River, which runs through it; but now it lies in Ruins; (therefore called Rovine di Mariana;) nothing be∣ing left but the Cathedral Church, which has no Roof neither; the Bishops See being removed to Bastia in 1575. Marib. See Mecca. Mariemberg, Mariae-berga, a Town of Germa∣ny, in the Ʋpper Saxony in Misnia; nine German Miles from Meissen, the Capital of that Province, to the South. This is one of the Mine Towns; seated in the Mountains, near Annaberg, in the Borders of Bohemia: built by Henry Duke of Saxony, in 1519. and still in the Hands of that Family. Marienbourg, a Town in Hainault, in the Low Countries; built by Mary of Austria, Queen of Hungary, and Governant of the Low Countries, in 1542. and strongly fortified against the French; who nevertheless gained the possession of it by the Pyre∣nean Treaty in 1660. and dismantled it. This stands upon the River Aube; eleven French Leagues from Mons to the East, and four from Charlemont to the South-West. Marienburgh, Mariaeburgum, called by the Poles, bork, by the Inhabitants, Margenburgh; is a strong City in Prussia Regalis, whereof it is the Ca∣pital, upon the River Nogat (a Branch of the Vistu∣la;) six German Miles from Dantzick to the North-East, and four from Elbing to the South-West. Heretofore the principal Seat of the Knights of Prus∣sia, who built it, and dedicated it to the Virgin Mary; the Castle, in 1281, the Town in 1302. Casimirus, King of Poland, took this City in 1460. The Swedes in 1625. The Castle was burnt in 1644. and restored to the Poles in 1655. by Treaty. Marienburgh, or Marieburgh, the same with Queen's Town in Ireland. See Queen's County. Mariendal, the same with Mergentheim. Mariestadt, Mariaestadium, a new City in We∣strogothia in Sweden, between the Lakes of Wener and Neter; three German Miles from the former, and six from the latter. Long. 31. 19. Lat. 58. 27. Marigalante, one of the Caribby Islands in South America, under the French: six Leagues from Guadeloupe, and ten or twelve from Dominco. Re∣commended for Fruitfulness. Marignano, Melignanum, Meriganum, a Town in the Duchy of Milan, upon the River Lambro; in the middle between Milan and Lodive, ten Miles from either. Near this the Swiss were beaten by Francis I. in 1515. Marinat, Scardus, a Mountain in Macedonia; it parts Servia, Albania, and Macedonia; and ends at the Euxine Sea, near Saramontin, the Borders of Romania. Drino, and many other Ri∣vers spring from it. In the Maps it is written Ma∣zinai.
Marish, Mariscus, Marus, a River of Transylva∣nia: it ariseth from the Carpathian Hills.; and passeth by Neumark, Radnot, Alba Julia, (or Weis∣senburg) Branksa and Lippa, to Segedin; where it ends in the Tibiscus. This is the principal River of Transylvania. Mariza, Hebrus, a River of Thrace: it ariseth out of Mount Hebrus (which is a Branch of Mount Ma∣rinat,) in the Northern Confines of Macedonia, Ser∣via, and Bulgaria: where they all meet from two Fountains; and running East it watereth Phileba, (or Philippopolis,) Adrianople, and Ploutin; where it receives Copriza; and turning Southward, falls into the Archipelago, over against Lembro. Mark. See Marck. Market-Iew, a Market Town in the County of Cornwal, and the Hundred of Penwith. Marieborow, or Marleburg, Cunetio, an ancient Roman Town; seated upon the River Kenet in Wilt∣shire, in the North-West Bounds towards Barkshire, upon the ascent of an Hill. In this there was a fa∣mous Parliament held for ending the Differences be∣tween the Barons and the King, in the fifty second year of Henry III. A. C. 1267. where were made the Sta∣tutes, called the Statutes of Marleburgh. The Parlia∣ment assembled in a Castle, which this place anciently had, belonging unto John Sans terre (as he was surnamed) afterwards King of England. It is still a Corporation, which sends two Burgesses to the Parlia∣ment: and hath withal the Convenience of Savernake Forest, and Aldburn Chase in its Neighbourhood. Charles I. at his Coronation, added another Honour to this place; by Creating James Lord Ley, (Lord Treasurer) Earl of Marleborow, February, 5. 1625. which was afterwards possessed by William, the fourth Earl of this Family (Grandchild to the first Earl) who succeeded Henry his Nephew, slain in a Sea-Fight against the Dutch, in 1665. The Lord Churchill enjoys this Title at present, by the Creation of King William. Marlow Magna, a Market Town in Buckingham∣shire, in the Hundred of Disborough: probably so called for the Store of Marl or Chalk here dug up. Marmara, Strymon, a River on the South of Macedonia; towards the Borders of Thrace; more usually called Stromona, and also Radnitz, and Iscar: it falls in the Archipelago at Amphipoli. Marmora, Elaphonesus, an Island in the Propon∣tis, on the Coast of Asia; famous for Marble Quar∣ries: it is ten or twelve Leagues in circuit, with a City, the Capital of its own Name; and divers Vil∣lages inhabited by the Religious Caloyers. The adja∣cent Sea is called from hence the Sea of Marmora; which discharges it self on one side into the Pontus Euxinus by the Bosphorus Thracius, and on the other towards the South into the Aegean Sea by the Helle∣spont. The ancient Poet Aristeas adorned this Island with his Nativity. It communicates its Name to the three Neighbouring Islands, Avezia, Coutalli, Gadaro, called in general the Islands of Marmora, They all stand in a good Climate, abounding in Corn, Wine, Cattel, Cotton, and Fruit; inhabited principally by the Religious Greeks, and some Arabians. Ptolemy mentions Marmora by the Name of Proconnesus. Others call it Neuris. Marmorica, the present Kingdom of Barca in A∣frica: it had heretofore for its Bounds Libya Propria to the East, and Cyrenaica to the West. Marne, Matrona, a great River in France; which ariseth in Champaigne near Langres, in a Village called Marmote, in the Confines of the Franche Comte; and running North-West, watereth Langress, Chau∣mont, oynevil, S. Dizier, Chalons, and Meaux; then falls into the Seyne, two Miles above Paris. Maro, A Valley, Marquisate, and Town upon the Confines of the States of Genoua: belonging to the Duke of Savoy. Marocco, is both a City and a Kingdom in Africa, in the West Part of Barbary: the Kingdom of Ma∣rocco is a considerable part of Mauritania Tingitana; extended on the Atlantick Ocean from the River A∣bene, to that of Azamor: on the East it has the Ri∣ver Malava, (which parts it from Tremesen;) on the West the Atlantick Ocean, on the South Mount At∣las, and on the North the Kingdom of Fez. The Country is said to be very fruitful and pleasant; a∣bounding in Cattle, Fruits, Corn, Sugar, Oil, Hony, and whatever is useful to the Life of Man. Divided into seven Provinces; which are Guzzula, Sus, Ma∣rocco, Hea, Hascora, Daccala, and Tedles. The King takes the style of Emperour of Barbary and Marocco, King of Fez, Suz, &c. Hath a great number of Castles in this Kingdom; yet there is one kept by the Portugueze, two Leagues from A∣zamor. Marocco, Marochum, Marochia, Marochium, the principal City, (which gives Name to the whole) called by the Spaniards, Maruccos; by the Italians, Marocho; is supposed to have been the Bocanum Hemerum of Ptolemy; once one of the greatest Cities in the World, and the ancient Capital of this Kingdom. It is seated on the South Side of the Ri∣ver Tansiff; an hundred and sixty Miles to the East, from the Atlantick Ocean, and ninety from the Borders of Fez: heretofore an Archbishops See, very potent; but the Royal Seat being many Ages since removed to Fez, it is hardly a third part of what it was: on the top of the Castle are three Globes of Gold, one hundred and thirty thou∣sand Barbary Ducats weight; which could never be taken away, (as the Inhabitauts pretend) because they are guarded by Spirits. This City stands in a fine Plain, five or six Leagues from the Mountain Atlas, encompassed with very high strong Walls, with twenty four Gates, which may be reckoned to contain one hundred thousand Inhabitants. It has a Fortress, a stately Palace Royal, and Colleges for Professors of the Sciences, with divers Mosques en∣riched with the Spoils of the Christian Churches of Spain. The Inhabitants glory in being Enemies to Christianity. Long. 09. 20. Lat. 29. 30. Marogna, Marognia, Maronea, Ismaros, a City of Thrace; seated at the Mouth of the Ri∣ver Sconenus; three Miles from the Mouth of the River Mariza to the West, and the same distance from Asperosa to the East. Once a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Trajanople; but now be∣come the Archbishops See it self. The Maronites, Maronitae, a particular Church of the Eastern Christians, dwelling principally about the Mountain Libanus in Syria, under a Patriarch of their own, who resides at a Monastery called Eden Canobin on the said Mountain; yet nevertheless there are of them in Tripoli, Zidem, Damascus, Aleppo, and Cyprus. Their Name is diversly derived: as from an Episcopal City of their Country, called Maronia, in S. Jerom: from the holy Monk and Priest S. Ma∣ron, whose Life Theodoret writes, and whose Disciples strenuously defended the Decrees of the Council of Chalcedon against the Eutychians. (This person, the Maronites say, built them a Monastery in the beginning of the Fifth Century.) Also from ano∣ther Maron, an ancient Monothelite. About the year 1180, William Archbishop of Tyre, their Neighbour and Contemporary, says, that they did the King of Jerusalem great Service in the Wars with the Sarazens, and exceeded then the number of forty thousand. Their Patriarch, assisted at the General
Council of Lateran, in 1215. under Pope Innocent the Third: since which, there have been several Em∣bassies and Treaties of Reconciliation betwixt the Roman See and them, under Pope Eugenius IV. in 1445. Pope Paul II. in 1469. Pope Clement VII. in 1526. and 1531. Pope Gregory XIII. in 1577. and 1584. Pope Clement VIII. in 1596. Pope Paul VI. in 1612. Their Patriarch assisted again at the Fifth Council of Lateran in 1516. They speak a mixture of the Syriack and Arabick Languages: but officiate Mass in Syriack only, using the Missal of S. Ephraem Syrus, and the Rites and Customs for the most part of the Greeks, excepting that they consecrate in Bread unlevened. Pope Gregory XIII. Founded a College for their Youth at Rome. Maros. See Marish. Marotto, Misa, a River in the Marquisate of Ancona. Marpnrg, Amasia, Marpurgum, a City of Ger∣many, in the Landtgravate of the Upper Hassia: at the Head of the River Loghne, (which falls into the Rhine, a little above Coblentz) eleven Miles from Franckfort on the Maine, to the North; twelve from Cassel to the North-West, and twenty from Cologne to the South-East. It has a strong Castle built on a Hill; heretofore a Free and an Imperial City, but long since exempted: for some time put under the Dominion of a Prince of its own, now under the Do∣minion of the Landtgrave of Hesse Cassel. Here was an University opened in 1535. which is now in some repute. This City was taken by the Imperialists in 1647. But the Castle holding out, they plun∣dered and deserted it. The Marquess of Baden in this City narrowly escaped Death; his House having seven Cannon at once fired at it. Some would believe it to be the Mattium of Tacitus, and the Mattia∣cus of Ptolemy. Marsal, Marsalium, a small, but strong Town, in the Dukedom of Lorain in France; upon the River Seile, in a Marsh; five Miles from Nancy: which stood a Siege of thirty four days, in 1663. a∣gainst the Forces of Lewis XIV. So strong both by Art and Nature, that it was thought it might have cost many Months to reduce it. Marsala, Lilybaeum, a City in Sicily, seated upon the most Western Promontory of that Island; (which had of old its Name from this City; but is now called il Capo Boco.) Built by the Romans; a magnificent populous Town; and well fortified a∣gainst the Turkish Pirats. It stands fifty Miles from Palermo to the South, twelve from Trapano, and one hundred and sixty from the nearest Coast of Africa. Near this City, the Romans, under Attilius Regulus, gave the Carthaginian Fleet a very great Defeat There is a little River that runs near it, called by the same Name. Long. 36. 03. Lat. 36. 40. Marsan, Marsianus Ager, a small Tract in Gascogne: the principal Town has the same Name; which lies sixteen Miles from Dax to the North-East, and from Bourdeaux to the South. This Territory is watered by the River Midcux, and hath been a Vis∣county above six hundred years. Marsaquivir, a Spanish Port upon the Coast of Barbary, in Africa, near Oran. Marseilles, Massilia, Masalia, Phocais, a City of Provence in France, upon the Shoars of the Medi∣terranean Sea; seventeen Miles to the East of the principal Mouth of the Rhosne, and fifteen West of Toulon. It is a great, rich, populous City; and now in a thriving condition; the Suburbs having been lately added to it. So very ancient, that it is supposed to have been built by the Phoenicians. Justin saith, it was built by the Phocians, in the Times of Tarqui∣nius, King of the Romans; who in their way thithe, contracted an Alliance with the Infant City of Rome; and did great things in their Offensive and Defensive Wars against the Barbarous Galls. That, the Soil of their Country being barren, they were forced to de∣pend more upon Navigation than Agriculture for their Subsistence; and would now and then exercise the (then thought innocent, if not glorious) Trade of Piracy: which led them round about Italy, to the Mouth of the Rhosne: and the pleasantness of the place allured them to go and settle there; where they were kindly treated by the Galls; the King granting them leave to build the City, and marrying his Daugh∣ter to their General. That, these were the great Ci∣vilizers and Instructors of the Galls in Learning, Arts, and Architecture. After this they managed some Wars against the Ligurians: and became formi∣dable to all their Neighbours: having great success, till they interposed in the Quarrel between Caesar and Pompey; being in this more Loyal to that State, than prudent in the estimation of their Forces: for they pretended to interpose between those they were not able to force; and consequently fell a Victim to the Fortunes of Caesar, whose Army left them no∣thing but their Liberty. This Calamity befel them about forty two years before the Birth of our Saviour. They recovered again as great an esteem as ever. Ta∣citus informs us, that in his time it was a place where the Grecian Affability and the Provincial Thrift were rarely mixed. In the Fall of the Roman Empire, this City became a prey to the Goths and Franks: but in what Times I cannot assign. In 1243. after the Goths were expelled, it was put under Counts of its own; and continued so till 1481, when it returned to the Crown of France: during the time it was under these Counts, about 1423. it was taken by Al∣phonsus, King of Arragon. In 1524. it withstood the furious Assaults of Charles Duke of Bourbone. But the height of all its modern Glory was its sustain∣ing the mighty Forces and great Valour of Charles V. in 1536. Since the settling Christianity here, it has ever been a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Vienne formerly, now of Arles. Its first Bishop being said to be S. Lazarus, whom Christ raised from the dead. That which has in all times continued to its conti∣nuance, is, its excellent, safe, large Harbour; and the Fertility of the Soil it stands in; being other∣wise not the best seated for Traffick, there being no Navigable River near it but the Rhosne, which is at some distance. Long. 26. 22. Lat. 42. 18. Marshfield, a Market Town in in Glocestershire, in the Hundred of Thornbury. Marshland, a Tract in the County of Norfolk, nigh Lyn Regis, on the other side of the River Ouse, so called from its being a Marsh. There are seated several Towns in it, which in recompense for the want of fresh Water and their Liableness to the Inunda∣tions of the Sea, enjoy a Soil exceeding fat, and feeding abundance of Cattle. § There is another such Tract in the West Riding of Yorkshire, about fif∣teen Miles in circuit: called also Ditch-Marsh, and excellent for the same use. Marsi, an ancient People of Italy, in the Pro∣vince now called the Further Abruzzo, in the Kingdom of Naples, towards the Patrimony of S. Peter: whose Name is still preserved in a Territory there, called the Dutchy of Marsa. The Marsick War in the year of Rome 663. and their killing of all the Ro∣mans in the City Asculum, together with Q. Servi∣lius Proconsul, and Fronteius, render this People memorable in History. § Also a People of Ger∣mania Antiqua, mentioned by Tacitus: of whom Ortelius fancies, there are some Footsteps remaining in the Village Detmarsen, in the Province of Over-Yssel, in the United Netherlands.
Marsico, Marsicum, a City in the Kingdom of Naples, in the Hither Principate; called New Mar∣sico, to distinguish it from another Town of the same Name in that Province. It is a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Salerno; of little circuit, but well peopled and built; seated upon an Hill, at the Foot of the Apennine; near the Fountains of the River Agri, (which washeth Marsico, Vecchio, and then falls into the Bay of Taranto, in the very Bor∣ders of the Basilicate;) six Miles from the last na∣med Town to the West, and fifty five from Salerno to the North. The old Marsico stands eighteen Miles from the Tyrrhenian Sea; and sensibly decays, being inhabited but by a few. Marsley Hill, a Hill in Herefordshire, whereof Mr. Cambden, and Mr. Speed relate a Story; That, on Saturday, Feb. 7. 1571. about six a Clock in the Evening, it moved with a roaring noise from the place where it stood, and by seven the next Morn∣ing had gone about two hundred Foot, continuing its Travel three days together; That, Kinnaston-Chappel hereupon fell down, with some Trees, Hedges, and Coats for Sheep, and some stood; That, two High-ways were turned about three hundred Foot from their former Paths, the East Parts to the West, and the West to the East; Pasturage being left in the place of Tillage, and Tillage of Pastu∣rage. Marta, Martha, a River ascribed by Antoninus to Hetruria, now in the Dominions of the Church: it ariseth out of the Lake di Bolsena (Lacus Volsi∣niensis;) and running Southward by Tuscanella, (a small City in S. Peter's Patrimony, the Walls of which it washeth) it falls into the Tyrrhenian Sea beneath Cornetto, another City of the same Province; twenty two Miles from Viterbo to the South. There is a Town of the same Name, seated upon this River, where it breaks out of the Lake; twelve Miles from Viterbo. Martaban, Martabanum, a City of the Further East-Indies: on the Shoars of the Bay of Bengala; which has a convenient Port: under the King of Pe∣gua, tho it has had Kings of its own; till of late it was conquered, and very ill used. The Kingdom be∣longing to it lies between that of Pegua to the North, and Ligor, a Promontory of the Kingdom of Siam, to the South. Martegues, or Martigues, Maritima Colonia, a Sea-Port Town in Provence, built in 1239. upon the Lake of Berry, at the distance of one Mile from the Sea, betwixt which and the Lake a Communica∣tion is made by Ditches so surrounding and dividing the Town, as it were into three several small Towns, (called Fonquieres, L'isle and Ferrieres,) which are passed from one to another upon Bridges, that Mar∣tigues hath therefore the Name of the Venise of France. Those Fosses are thought to be Works of the Romans. Martigues also was of old a Viscounty, and now a Principality enjoyed by the House of Ven∣dosme. Martel, Martellum, a small City in the Province of Quercy, near the River Dordogne; seated on a Hill in the Confines of Limosin; six Leagues from Sarlat to the East, and as many from Tulle to the South. Martimos, Marithae, a Ridge of Mountains in the South of Arabia Foelix; not far from the Shoar, and the Fountains of the River Liris; mentioned by Ptolemy. S. Martin, a great Village in the Isle of Rade, in Soisonois in Reims. S. Martin, one of the Antille or Leeward Islands, which was under the French. S. Martin de Re, a Fort in the Isle of Ré; near which the English received a great Defeat from the French, in 1627. Martinique, Mdanina, an Island in the West-Indies, which is one of the Antilla's; forty five Leagues in compass, very fruitful, and well peopled, and well watered by Rivers. It having been in the Hands of the French ever since 1635. The Dutch attempting it in 1674 were repulsed. Long. 315. . Lat. 12 10. Martiopoli. See Marcianopoli. Martpurg. See Marpurg. Martorano, Martoranum, a small City in the Kingdom of Naples, in the Hither Calabria, but in the Borders of the Further Calabria; six Miles from the Shoars of the Tyrrhenian Sea, and fourteen from Cosenza; in a declining state, and inhabited but by a few; tho it is a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Cosenza. The River which runs by it is called il Savuto: it is thought the old Name of this City was Mamertum. Marubeni. See Marogna. Marueccos. See Marocco. Maruege, Maruejols, Marengium, a small City in the Province of Languedoo, in the Territory of Gi∣vaudan; upon the River Colange, towards the Borders of Rouergne: seven Leagues from S. Flour in Au∣vergne to the South; and almost four from Mende (the Capital of Givandan) to the West: some write it Marologium. Maryland, a considerable Country and Colony of the English in the North America, in forty deg. of Latitude. Bounded with Pensylvania, New-England, and New York to the North; with the Atlantick, and De la Ware Bay to the East; the River Potomeck, which divides it from Virginia, to the South; and the Indian Territories to the West. It contains ten Counties. The Capital Town of all is S. Maries, which is well built and provided with a convenient Harbour for Shipping. Masandran, Hyrcania, a Province of the King∣dom of Persia, upon the Caspian Sea (which is call∣ed the Masandran Sea also from this Province, as it was before the Hyrcanian Sea.) There is a City in this Province of the same Name. Masano, Massalia, a River in the Isle of Candy or Crete. Masay, Misauci, Pagus Mosanus, a Canton a∣mongst the Grisons, called by the Inhabitants, Mae∣slandt. Masbate, one of the Philippine Islands; which is under the Spaniards. Mascalate, a City in Arabia Foelix; about six∣ty Miles from the Shoars of the Persian Gulph; which is the Capital of a Kingdom of the same Name. Long. 85. 10. Lat. 24. 10. Mascate, a City, together with a Sovereign Prin∣cipality, on the South-Eastern Shoar of Arabia Foelix, upon the Gulph of Ormus; which has a convenient Haven, and a strong Castle built by the Portuguese, who for a long time were Masters of it, but some few years since were beaten out by the King of Mascate. Long. 94. 00. Lat. 24. 27. Mascon, Matiscona, Matisco, a City of France, in the Dukedom of Burgundy; which is a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Lyon; and has a Territory belonging to it of the same Name. It stands upon a rising ground, upon the River Saone; in the Borders of the Province of Bresse; and it has a Stone Bridge over the Saone. Eleven Miles (saith Bau∣drand) from Lyon to the North, and Challon to the South. Long. 26. 07. Lat. 46. 00. according to the newest Maps.
Le Masconois, is a small Territory in the South part of the Dukedom of Burgundy, to which it is annexed for ever: whereas heretofore it had Counts of its own: it lies between the Territory of Chal∣lon to the North, Beaujolois to the South, La Bresse to the East, and Foretz to the West. Maseyck. See Maeseyck. Masfa, a City in Arabia Foelix, in the inland parts; three hundred Miles from Ormus, and two hundred from Mascate to the West. The same with that which was called of old Maspha, as some think; and now the Capital of a Kingdom of the same Name. Long. 90. 00. Lat. 23. 00. Masham, a Market Town in the North Riding of Yorkshire, in the Hundred of Hangeast, upon the River Youre. Masiers, Maderiacum, a strong City in the Pro∣vince of Champaign; seated upon the East Side of the Maes, which almost surrounds it; about half a League from Charleville to the South-East, four from Sedan to the West, six from Bouillon to the North, and fifteen from Namur to the South. It is now in a thriving state. Masotto, the same with Masano, a River in Candy. Masovie, Mazovia, a Province in the Kingdom of Poland, (the Capital of which is Warsaw) cal∣led by the Poles Mazowskie; by the Germans, Masaw; and by the French Masovie: On the East it has Lithuania, on the North Prussia, on the West the Greater Poland, and on the South the Lesser Po∣land. It is divided into four Palatinates; which have their Names from the Cities of Mazow, Ploczko, Dobrin, and Podlach. This was once a separate and independent Dukedom: which submitted to the Crown of Poland, under Casimir the Great: but continued under its own Duke, till the year 1526. when upon the Death of John and Stanislaus, (the two last Dukes,) it was united, under Sigismond I. King of Poland, to that Kingdom. Massa, or Massa di Carrara, Massa Carraiae, a Town in Italy; between the Dukedom of Florence, and the State of Genoua; great and well peopled; lately adorned with the Title of a Dukedom, it be∣ing also a small Sovereignty: twelve Miles from Sa∣rasana to the South-East; twenty five from Lucca to North-West; and three from the Shoars of the Tyr∣rhenian Sea. Most famous for its excellent Quar∣ries of Marble. Massa di Sorriento, Massa Lubrensis, a City in the Kingdom of Naples, in the Terra di Lavoro; which is a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Sor∣riento; small and not much inhabited. It stands twenty Miles from Naples to the South, on the op∣posite Shoar of the Bay of Naples; and about nine from the Town of Capri to the North-East. Built in 1465. in a place of great height, and natural Strength. Massa, Massa Veternensis, a small City in the Territory of Siena in Italy; within five Miles of the Tyrrhenian Sea; thirty five from Siena to the South-West, and twenty from Piombino to the North-East: made a Bishops See, under the Archbi∣shop of Siena, in the stead of Populonium, (a ruined City on this Shoar, called Porto Barbato;) yet it is very small. Built upon a Hill, under the Dominion of the Duke of Florence. The Dukedom of Massa, is a small Territory be∣tween the States of Genoua to the West, the Duke∣dom of Florence to the North, the States of Lucca to the East, and the Tyrrhenian Sea to the South; un∣der its own Duke, who is of the House of Cibo; whereas before, it was but a Principality. The prin∣cipal places are Massa, and Cararia; which last, though very small, is a Marquisate; and lies five Miles from Sarasana to the South, thirty from Pisa to the North. Massagetae, an ancient Scythian people. Some place them about the Palus Moeotis, and the Euxine Sea. Others towards the Mountain Imaus, and the Country now called Zagathai in Tartary. They dwelt in Tents, and sacrificed to the Sun. Masserano, Massoranum, a small Town in Pied∣mont; upon a Hill, sixteen Miles from Iurea to the East, and eight from Vercelli to the North. This is the Capital of a Principality, under its own Prince, who is under the Protection of the Pope: He has Crevacore and some other places of small impor∣tance. Masulepatan, Musulepatanum, a City and Sea-Port in the Hither East-Indies; on the Shoars of the Bay of Bengala, in the Kingdom of Golconda; which has a convenient Harbour and a Castle; heretofore in the hands of the Portuguese. Mataca, a Bay on the North side of the Island of Cuba, in America: where all the Spanish Galeons, in their return to Spain, touch for Water; and where the Dutch defeated a Fleet of those Galeons, richly laden, in 1627. Mataman, a Kingdom of Africa, to the West of the Aethiopick Ocean, betwixt Caffreria and the Kingdom of Angola; and towards the River Verte. Matan, one of the Philippine Islands, in the East-Indian Ocean; where the famous Magellan, some say, died. It had heretofore Kings of its own, till the Portugueze expelled them. But of late the Natives have expelled the Portugueze. Matane, a Country in Africa, East of the Island of Madagascar; where the French have, some time since, established Colonies. Matapan, Taenarus, the most Southern Cape of all Europe, in the Morea, provided with two good Ports: betwixt which, the Turks in 1570. built a Fortress to bridle the Mainotes, called Castro di Maini. But the Venetians soon after destroyed it, to favour the Mainotes with their Liberty again. Mataya, a Province towards the River of Ama∣zons, in South America; betwixt the Mouth of the Rivers Madera, and Tapaysa, where they both fall in∣to the River of Amazons. Matayone, a Dutchy in the Terra di Lavoro, in the Kingdom of Naples: supposed to be the Magdalo∣num, or the Meta Leonis, of the Ancients. Matera, Mateola, a City in the Province of O∣tranto, in the Kingdom of Naples; in the Borders of the Basilicate, and of the Territory of Bari; upon the River Canapro; seated in a Valley, surrounded on all sides with Mountains. This is a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Bari; and now in a very good state: it stands thirty six Miles from Taranto to the North-West, and twenty five from Bari to the South-West. Long. 40. 45. Lat. 40. 42. Materan, or Materaw, Materanum, a great City on the South Side of the Isle of Iava, in the East-Indies; one hundred Leagues from Bantam to the East. The Capital of a Kingdom of the same Name, of great extent from East to West. And once the Capital City of the whole Island of Iava. Long. 135. 40. Southern Lat. 8. 20. Matharee, or Matheree, a sweet and delicious Seat, two Leagues from Cairo, in Aegypt: concerning which, the Cophtite Christians entertain a Tradition, that the Blessed Virgin with the young Child reposed, for some time, there, in their flight from Herod into this Kingdom. Matin, Mathis, a River of Macedonia, which falls into the Gulph of Venice, near Durazzo.
Matique, Matica, a Province in Florida, towards the Apalatean Hills. Matagia, Messene, a very ancient, but ruined City in the Morea; on the Southern Shoar towards the West. Matzuma, a Country in the Land of Jesso, lately discovered by the Hollanders; between Japan and Tartary; which has a City of the same name. See Jesso. Maudre, Modre, Maldra, a small River in the Isle of France, which ariseth near Montfort, and falls into the Seyne at Mayenne. Maulcon, a Town in Biscay. Mauleon de Soule, Malleo, Mauleosolium, a Town in the Pais des Basques, in France. The Capi∣tal of the Viscounty of Soule. Mauli, a River in Sicily. See il fiume di Ra∣gusa. Mauve. See Mauve. Mauren-Haer, Sogdiana, a Province on the North-East of Persia. Mauriac, Mauriacum, a Mountain in Auvergne. Maurice, Mauritia, a City in Brasil in Pernam∣buck; built by John Maurice, Prince of Nassaw, in 1644. The Capital of the Dutch Plantations in those Countries; afterwards taken by the Portuguese. This City stands upon the River Biberibi, a little above its Mouth; two Spanish Leagues from Olinda to the South: and has a safe Port near Reciff. It was called by the Dutch Mauritzstadt. Maurienne, a Valley or Province of Savoy, ex∣tended from the Alpes to the River Isere on the one side, and from la Tarantaise to Dauphine on the other. Its Capital City is S. Jean de Maurienne, an Episcopal See, upon the River Arche. This Valley has been honoured with the Title of an Earldom a∣bove six Ages since; and some are of opinion, that it anciently was the Seat of the Brannovices mentioned by Caesar. Mauritania, an ancient large Region of Africa, which now lies contained within the Western part of Barbary. They divided it into Caesariensis, Tingi∣tana, and Sitifensis. Mauritania Caesariensis had Getulia to the South, the Mediterranean Sea to the North, Tingitana to the West, and Sitifensis to the East: and is now almost wholly included in the West of the Kingdom of Algiers. Mauritania Tin∣gitania was bounded, on all sides, by the Atlantick and Mediterranean Oceans, together with Caesarien∣sis and Getulia: And in the time of the Emperour Constantine, was called by the Spaniards Mauritania Transfretana. The name of Tingitana came from the City Tingi, now Tangier. Mauritania Sitifensis had for its bounds Numidia to the East, Caesariensis to the West, the Mediterranean to the North, and Gaetulia to the South. And the Eastern part of the present Kingdom of Algiers stands in this Mauritania. Mauritz-Mylandt, Cygnea, an Island in the Ae∣thiopian Sea, upon the Coast of Africa; called Do∣cerne by the Portuguese, who first discovered it. See Isle Maurice. Long. 80. Lat 20. South. Mauritzlandt, a part of America Magellanica, in the Land of Fire; on the South of the Streights of Magellan: most extended to the East of those Streights, and first discovered by the Hollanders in 1616. It had this name from the Prince of Orange, who occasioned the Discovery. Maurothalassa, the Euxine Sea. Maurum, Taurus, a Mountain in Asia. Mauve, Malva, a small River in the Dukedom of Orleance, which falls into the Loyre at Mehun, four Leagues beneath Orleans to the West. Baudrand writes Mauve. St Maws, a Borough and Market Town in the County of Cornwal, in the Hundred of Powder, retur∣ning two Members to the House of Commons. Maxi, Loryma or Laryma, a City of Caria, in the Lesser Asia, over against the Isle of Rhodes; which is a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Rhodes; from whence it stands twenty Miles to the North. Mayence. See Mentz. Mayenne, Meduana, a fine City in the Province of Maine, upon the River Mayne; six Leagues from the Borders of Normandy towards Anjou, twenty Miles from Angiers to the North, the same distance from Dol in Bretagne to the East, and from Rennes to the North-East. This City is honoured with the Title of a Dukedom. Mayn, Meyn, Moenus, a River of Germany; which ariseth from a double Spring in Mount Fich∣telburg, called Meiss-Mayn, (White Mayne,) and Rot-Mayn, (Red Mayn;) which two uniting in one Stream at Culembach, and flowing Westward near Bamberg, it receives the Rednitz, Wareres, Swinefurt, Wurtsburg and Vertheim; then cutting Franconia into two parts, it passeth by Asburg and Franckfort, (augmented with the Saal, Tauber, and some smaller Rivers) into the Rhine; near, but above Mentz. Gustavus Adolphus laid a Bridge of Boats over this River, which has not been-since conti∣nued. See Mentz. La Mayne, Mayenne, or Majene, Meduana, a River of France; which ariseth in the Territory of Seez, in the Borders of Normandy; and flowing South through Maine, watereth the City of Mayenne, La Val, the Castle of Gontier, where it entereth Anjou: and a little above Angiers, being augmented with the Sartre and the Loir, it falls into the great Loire above Nants, twelve Leagues to the East. Mayo, Maii Insula, an Island on the Coast of Africa, in the Atlantick Ocean; one of those that belongs to Cape Verde; and famous for its Salt Works. It is under the Portuguese. Long. 366. 4. Lat. 50. 00. North. Mayo, Majensis Comitatus, a County in the West of Ireland, in the Province of Connaught; bounded on the West by the Ocean, on the South with the County of Gallway, on the East with that of Rosco∣men, and on the North with Slego. It is a fruitful pleasant County, rich in Cattle, Deer, Hawks and Honey: taking its name from Mayo, a small City, and a Bishops See, (in the Roman Provincial called Mageo;) but the Bishoprick is annexed to that of Tuam; and the Jurisdiction assigned to that of Kil∣laley, in the Barony of Tir Auley. There lies in this County a vast Lake called Lough Mesk; in which are two small Islands with strong Forts, belonging to the Family of the Burkes, who raised heretofore great Re∣bellions here. Cambden. Mazagan, Mazaganum, a City or Fort in the Kingdom of Marocco, in the Province of Ducala; with a Harbour upon the Atlantick Ocean, and a very strong Fort, in the hands of the Portuguese, who built it in 1508. and in 1562. defeated a vast Army of Moors, that came to besiege it; eighteen Leagues from Cape Cantin to the North-East. Mazandran. See Masandran. Mazar, Babylon, an ancient City in Egypt. Mazara, a City in the Island of Sicily, on the Southern Shoar near the South-West Cape; which is a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Palermo: it is seated in the Valley or Province of Mazara, at the Mouth of a small River of the same name: it has a large, safe, convenient Haven, and is well fortified: thirty Miles from Trepano to the South, and sixty from Gergenti to the West.
The Province of Mazara, is one of the three into which Sicily stands now divided on the North, West and South. It is surrounded with the Sea; but on the East it has the Valley De Demona, and De Noto, which are the other two Provinces. The prin∣cipal City, is Palermo; the rest are Trepano, Mar∣sella, Mazara, and Gergenti. Mazarino, or Moracini, Mactorium, a Castle in the Valley del Noto, in the Island of Sicily, giving the Title of a Count. Mazarici, Hippici, a Branch of Mount Taurus in Asia. Mazira, an Island in the Red Sea, belonging to Arabia. Mazoure, a Town in the Kingdom of Aegypt, in the lower part of it; near to which, S. Lewis, King of France, gave Battel to the Saracens, and was taken Prisoner by them, in 1250. Mazzo, a small Town in the Valtoline; where the French under the Conduct of the Duke of Ro∣han gained a memorable Victory over the Imperia∣lists in 1635. Mislaw. See Mscislaw. Meaco, Meacum, a vast City in the Kingdom of Japan, in the Island of Niphon; in the Province of Jetseng; called by the Inhabitants Cabucoma. It has a Royal and Princely Palace, in which their Kings for∣merly lived; a fine Haven and a Fort; still very great and populous; yet much diminished, since the Court went to reside at Isdo, one hundred twenty five Miles from this City to the West; and because in the Civil Wars of Japan, the greatest part of it was burnt. Mearon, Mearus, a River of Galicia in Spain. Meath, Media, a County in the Province of Lein∣ster in Ireland, called by the Irish Midh: bounded on the East by the County of Fyngal, and Kildare, (separated by the River Bayne;) on the South by Kildare, and Kings County; on the West by Roscomen and Longford; and on the North by the County of Monaghen. It is divided into two parts, by the names of East and West Meath. An ancient English Pen saith, it is very fruitful and pleasant to the Eye, well watered with Rivers, abounding with Fish, full of Cattle, well supplied with Corn; and that the Woods and Marshes in the Skirts of it make the access so dif∣ficult on all sides, that it is justly called the Cham∣ber of Ireland. In the thirty eighth year of Hen∣ry VIII. this County being thought too big to be governed by one Sheriff, was divided by Act of Par∣liament into two Counties. Meaux, Meldorum urbs, Meledis, Jatinum Melda∣rum, Meldae, Jatinum, a City in the Province of Brie, (of which it is the Capital,) and a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Sens: it is a delicate, populous City, seated upon the Marne, which divides it into two parts: ten Leagues from Paris to the North-East, eighteen from Reims to the South-West, and twenty five from Amiens to the South. In the year 1358. (during the Imprisonment of John King of France), it was sacked and burnt, for complotting with the Parisian Faction against Charles the Dau∣phine, Regent of France, Son of King John. In 1421. the Victorious English took it by Capitulation, after a Siege of three Months: and some private Synods have been assembled at it. Mecca, Mecque, a City in Arabia; which Bellonius in his Observations thinks, was called by the Ancients Petraea; but others, upon better Reasons, suppose it to be their Marraba. It stands upon the River Chai∣bar, in a Valley; ten days Journey from Medina; twice so big as it; and about forty Miles from the Shoars of the Red Sea to the East. Compassed on all Sides by Mountains; the Soil of it is dry and barren: yet much frequented by vast Shoals of Mahometans from all parts every year, which come to celebrate the Memory of that Grand Impostor Mahomet; who in 622. first began to settle his abominable Doctrine, to the ruin of so great a part of mankind. The Ma∣hometans pay so great a respect to this Place, that should any Christian be found in or near it, they would burn him alive. For the rest, the Reader may consult M. Thevenot's Travels. The Mosque stands in the middle of the City, in a descent, with two Towers and a Dome of extraordinary heighth▪ one hundred Gates, and a Window to each; adorned throughout the whole, with Structures, Artifices, and Donations, inestimably fine and rich. See Medina. Mechelen, Malines, Mechlinia, a City in Bra∣bant, made an Archbishops See by Pope Paul IV. It is called by the French Malines, and by the Spani∣ards Malinas. Seated upon the River Dender, in the midst of the Dukedom of Brabant; between Antwerp, Brussels, and Lovain; about four Leagues from each of them. It fell to the Bishop of Liege by Inheritance, as Heir of the Family of Berthold; and in 1328. was sold by him to Reginald Duke of Guelderland, for forty thousand Crowns; who again sold it to Lewis Earl of Flanders; who in 1346. granted it to the Duke of Brabant. Before these times it was an Imperial Free City, but long since exempt. Till 1503. it was the seat of the Great Council, that governed all these Countries; which was then removed to Brussels. Mechoacan, a Province of New Spain in Ame∣rica; between Mexico to the East, and New Galicia to the West; extended eighty Leagues upon the Pa∣cifick Ocean to the South. The City of Mechoacan gives it this name; which is very great, populous, and a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Mexico; forty seven Spanish Leagues from Mexico to the West, and seven from the Lake of Mechoacan to the South. This Word, in the Indian Tongue, signifies the Fishing-Place. Meckleburg, or Mekelbourg, Meckelburgum, Me∣galopolis, a City of Germany, in the Lower Saxony; heretofore a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Breme, and the Capital of the Dukedom of Meckel∣burg; now ruined; nothing remaining but a Castle near the Baltick Sea, one Germany Mile from Wismar to the South, and three from Swerin (which is now the Bishops See) to the North. This in the times of the Vandals and Heruli, was the greatest City in Europe: ruined by removing the Ducal Seat to Wis∣mar; because this Town was too big to be fortified, as Crantius saith. The Dukedom of Meckleburg, is a Province of Germany in the Lower Saxony, of considerable ex∣tent: on the North bounded with the Baltick Sea, on the East by Pomerania, on the West by Holstein and Lawenburg, and on the South by the Marquisate of Brandenburg. It is now under two Princes of the same Family: the Eastern under the Duke of Gu∣strow, and the Western under the Duke of Swerin. The Vandals, Heruli, and Burgundians, were the an∣cient Inhabitants of this Country. The Dukes are descended from Peribislaus, the last King of the He∣ruli; who being conquered by Henry the Lyon, was forced about 1158. to take the Title of Duke, in∣stead of King, as an Homager to the House of Saxony. This Division was made about 1592 upon the Death of John, the last single Duke of this intire Duke∣dom. The Reformation was embraced betimes in this Country. Medelpad, Medelpadia, a Province of Sweden, which is a part of Angerman; between Helsinga to the South, Angerman properly so called, Jemptland to the North, the Baltick Sea to the East, and Dale-Carle to the West.
Medemblick, a Town in West Friesland, (one of the Ʋnited Provinces of the Low-Countries,) sea∣ted upon the Zuyder Sea, upon which it has a large and secure Haven, two Miles and an half from Hoorn, and above eight from Amsterdam to the North. It is in the Maps Medenblick. Media, an ancient and celebrated Kingdom of Asia, betwixt Armenia Major, Hyrcania, the Cas∣pian Sea, Assyria, Susiana, &c. Where are now the Provinces of Schirvan, Gilan, Hyerach, Agemy, and Dilemon in Persia. It was in the beginning subject to the Assyrians, till Arbaces Governour of Media un∣der Sardanapalus, King of Assyria, taking advantage of the loosness of that Prince to cast off the yoak of the Assyrian Empire, established a Second in Media in his own person, Anno Mundi 3178. according to the common Computation, one hundred years before the first Olympiad, and eight hundred seventy six be∣fore the Coming of Christ. This Monarchy of the Medes continued under nine Kings, from Arbaces to Astyages, three hundred and seventeen years: and then Astyages lost his Crown and Throne to Cyrus, Anno Mundi 3495. Anno Romae 195. in the begin∣ning of the fifth Olympiad. The Capital City of the Medes, was Ecbatana. The others, Arsacia (now Casbin,) Cyropolis, &c. As for the name of Media, most agree to derive it from Madai, one of the Sons of Japhet. Medina del Campo, Methymna Campestris, a Town in Old Castile in Spain. Medina Caeli, Ecelesta, Augustobriga, Me∣diolum, Secontia Vetus, Methymna Celia, a small Roman City in Old Castile in Spain; built upon an Hill, near the River Xalon [Salo;] and gives the Title of a Duke to the Family de Corda, one of the Noblest Families in Spain, which pretends a Right to the Crown of that Kingdom. This City stands two Leagues from the Fountains of the River Xalon to the East, thirty one from Madrid to the North-East, and thirty four from Saragoza to the South-West. Medina del rio Seco, Forum Egurrorum, Me∣thymna Sicca, a Town in the Kingdom of Spain. Medina Sidonia, Asindum, Assidonia, a Town in Andaluzia, mentioned by Ptolemy; now made fa∣mous, by giving the Title of a Duke to the Family of Gusman in Spain: it stands upon a Hill, nine Miles from Cadiz to the East, twenty five from Malaga to the West; and was once a Bishops See, as Haubertus avers. Medina Talnabi, that is, the City of the Pro∣phet; a City in Arabia, upon the River Laakic; thirty Miles from the Red Sea to the East, two hun∣dred from Mecca to the North; having a Port up∣on the Red Sea, called Jambi, at the Mouth of the River. Long. 70. 10. Lat. 26. 00. according to our last Maps. This City was of old called Jatrib; by Stephanus, Jatrippa; by Ptolemy, Latrippa; at pre∣sent Metina, Medina. It is seated in a Plain, be∣tween Mount Ohod to the North, and Mount Air to the South. Mahomet, the Grand Impostor, (who was born here in 560.) finding his Country-men not overmuch inclined to imbrace his new Doctrines, fled from hence to Mecca in 617. Having there by his Impostures gathered a great Rabble, and pretending a quarrel against the Jews, (who had a Synagogue in this City,) he attempted to reduce it by force of Arms; unprosperously at first, but with better suc∣cess the second time: thereupon he turned the Jewish Synagogue into the first Mosque for the Exercise of his new Religion. They of Mecca being alarmed with this Conquet, in the next place took up Arms against him, and prevailed: but in the second Battel were defeated and subdued. Therefore he fixed his chief Seat at Mecca, where (or here, as others say,) he died in 631. at sixty three years of Age; ac∣cording to some, at seventy: twenty three of which, he spent in propagating his abominable Doctrines; thirteen at Medina, and ten at Mecca; five of which ten, followed his Conquering Mecca. The Mosque is extremely rich and magnificent, su∣stained by four hundred Pillars, which are charged with above three thousand Lamps of Silver; and Here there is seen the Tomb of Mahomet, which is a Coffin elevated upon Pillars of Black Marble, under a Canopy of Cloath of Silver and Gold, (which the Bassa of Egypt by the Grand Seignior's Order re∣news every year), surrounded with Ballisters, and abundance of Lamps of Silver. The Mediterranean Sea, called by the Romans, Mare Internum; by the French, Italians, and Spa∣niards, with little difference, il Mare Mediterra∣neo; by the Germans, die Mittellendish Meer; by the Dutch, het Meidanichezee; by the Poles, Morze Modkeemie idoce; by the Turks, Ac Denghiz. This is the most celebrated Sea in the whole World, first discovered, and most used by man∣kind. It breaks in from the Atlantick Ocean, be∣tween Spain and Africa, by a Streight of seven Miles broad, as the Ancients report it: on the North it has Europe, on the East Asia, and on the South Africa. Called by various names, as to its parts; that Branch of it between Spain, France and Italy, is called the Tyrrhenian Sea; that between Italy to the West, Greece and Dalmatia to the East, the Adriatick (now the Gulph of Venice,) and the Ionian Sea: that which parts Greece from Asia, to the Dardanells, (formerly called the Aegean Sea,) is now called the Archipelago; that which expands it self between Greece and Asia, as far as Constantinople, is called the Propontis, or Sea of Constantinople: and that much more extended Sea, North of Constantinople, between Europe, to the North and West, Asia to the East, and Anatolia to the South, is called the Euxine or Black Sea. To give an exact account of all the smaller parts of it, would too much exceed my narrow bounds. Medniky, Mednicia, a small City of Poland, in Samogitia, sometimes called Womie; seated near the Fountains of the River Wirwitz. It is the See of the Bishop of Samogitia: founded by Wenceslaus King of Poland, in 1413. fifteen Polish Miles from Memel, and the Shoars of the Baltick Sea to the East; thirty from Riga to the South-West. Medoc, Medulanus, a small Tract in Aquitain; between the Mouth of the Garrone to the North, the Bay of Aquitain to the West, and Bourdeaux to the East. There is not above three or four small Towns in it. The ancient Meduli are understood to have dwelt here. Medway, Vaga, a River of Kent, which riseth in the Weald or Wild, in the South-West part of that County: at Penhurst it receives the Eten out of Sur∣rey; so dividing it self into five Streams, it surrounds Tunbridge; from thence passing North-East, it goes to Maidstone, from thence to Rochester; by which time it is become exceeding great, by the concourse of many Rivers it takes in its short Course. Here he is covered by a Stone Bridge, beneath which, he be∣comes capable of the greatest Ships: and in his Bed the Royal Fleet of England rides in time of Peace. Below Rochester, he forms the Isle of Shepey; one of his Mouths entering the Ocean at Sherness, and the other at Shellness; above eight Miles from each other. In 1667. the Dutch Fleet entered this River June 22. having with their Cannon battered down the Paper Fort of Sherness; where they carried off the Royal Charles, and burnt and spoiled four or five other Ships.
Megalopolis, an ancient City of Arcadia, near the River Alpheus: renowned for the Birth of Polybius, the Noble Grecian Writer of the Roman History. Since Christianity, it hath been an Episcopal See. But this glory, under the Turks, is changed into the condition of a miserable Village. And the Pro∣verb▪ Magna Civitas magna solitudo, was never more verified of it, than now. Megara, a City of Achaia, in ancient times cal-Nisa, or Nissaea: it stands at the North-West Point of the Bay of Corinth, near the Hexamilia or Isth∣mus; two Miles from the Sea Shoar, twenty five from Athens to the West, and the same distance from Corinth to the North East. This was the Birth∣place of Euclid, the Master of the Mathematicks: Lat. 38. 05. (which is the true height of Athens.) Mr. Wheeler, who saw this place, thus describes it. It is situate in a Valley, between the Mountain Ke∣rata North; (which has a Ridge running North∣ward, to join with Mount Cithaeron, at the bottom of the Bay of Corinth, now called Livadostro;) the Mountain Macripaldi to the West towards Corinth; the Mountain of Palaio Bouni South-East, and the Bay of Livadostro North-West. This Plain is reaso∣nably fruitful, twenty Miles in compass. The City was anciently built upon two Rocks. Now one of the Rocks is desolate; the other has about three or four hundred pitiful Cottages, (built one Story high and close together) the Walls of which are the ruins of the former Houses, or a few Faggots covered with Clay: Chimnies they have none, except it be a hole in the top of the House, or the Door. The Turks of themselves abandoned this place, after the redu∣ction of Athens. It is now called Megra. A City, in the beginning, the Capital of a Monarchy under the Reign of twelve Kings. Then a Republick, which maintained divers Wars with the Athenians and others; and also established a Colony in the Island of Sicily. Meghen, a Town in the Dukedom of Brabant, in the Low-Countries, upon the left side of the Meuse, three Leagues from Boisleduc. It gives the Title of an Earldom. Meissen, Misnia, a Territory and City of Ger∣many, in the Ʋpper Saxony; which is a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Magdeburgh; and under the Dominion of its own Bishop: but now in the hands of the Elector of Saxony, as Administrator of the Bi∣shoprick of Misnia. It stands three German Miles from Dresden to the East, nine from Leypsick to the same Quarter, and twelve from Wittemberg to the South, upon the Western Shoar of the River Elbe, over which it hath a fine Wooden Bridge. Built by Henry the Fauikoner, who constituted the Marquess of Misnia in 928. Sigismond, the Emperour, in 1423 granted to its Marquess, (within the Dukedom of Saxony) the Electoral Dignity. Its Bishop was one of them that led the way to the Reformation, by ejecting the Pardon-mongers in 1500. In 1581. the Reformation was settled here, and the Augustane Confession imbraced. This is at this day a great, rich, populous City; and has belong∣ing to it a Castle. Mela, or la Mela, a River in Lombardy, which wash∣eth the Walls of Brescia, and then falls into the O∣glio. Melas, the ancient Name of the Rivers Larissa and Gensui. (See those Names.) As of several others mentioned by the Ancients in Lycia, Arcadia, Myg∣donia, Sicily, Cilicia, and Achaia. Melasso or Melazzo, a Town in the Valley of De∣mona, in the Island of Sicily, near Messina. § Likewise, a City in the Province of Aidinelli, in the Lesser Asia, which was the ancient Mylassa of Caria. This is a Bishops See under the Archbishop of Stauropolis or Santa Croce. Melohited, a general Name for all the Syrian, Coph∣tite or other Oriontal Christians, not being natu∣ral Greeks, who adhere to the Decisions of the Great Council of Chalcodon, and the common Sentiments of the Greek Church. Given them by the opposite Par∣ties, from the Hebrew Word  (a King,) in derision of their being of the Religion of the Empe∣rour, who presided over the said Council. They call themselves the Orthodox: and have translated into the Arabick Language, the Bible, Councils, and Eu∣chologies, with most of the Ecclesiastical Books, of the Grecians. Melcomb Regis, a Corporation in Dorsetshire, in the Hundred of Ʋgscomb, upon the River Wey, where it falls into the Sea; united by a fair Timber Bridge with the Town of Weymouth on the other side of the same River; and together with it, by Act of Parliament in the Reign of Queen Elizabeth, incor∣porated into one Body, governed by one Mayor, with Aldermen, &c. yet they both elect two Burgesses to the Parliament. Meldola, Meldula, a small Town in the Domini∣ons of the Church, in Romandiola, in the Confines of Tuscany; upon the River Bedese, (or Ronco,) which falls beneath Ravenna, into the Ionian Sea; ten Miles from Forli to the South. This is said to be a Mar∣quisate, and a Sovereignty, in the possession of Prince Pamfilio. Melfi, Melphis, Melphia, a City of the Kingdom of Naples in the Basilicate; which is a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Acerenza, or Mateola; but now exempt from the Jurisdiction of its own Arch∣bishop. It is a great and well peopled City, in the Borders of the Capitanate, towards the Mountains, upon the River Melfi, or Molpa; four Miles from the River Ofanto, sixty five from Naples to the East, and almost forty from Manfredonia, South. Mellila, Ryssadirum, a Town in Barbary, sub∣ject to the King of Spain. It lies in the Kingdom of Fez, in the Province of Garet, or Jeyrat; taken by Ferdinand King of Spain, in 1496. who gave order for the fortifying it. It is seated on the Mediterra∣nean Sea, in a fruitful Plain, at the foot of a Moun∣tain; almost forty German Miles from the Mouth of the Streights of Gibraltar to the East; over against Almeria, in Granada. Being besieged by the Moors, Anno 1687. the Garrison slew five hundred of them in one Salley, October 5. whereupon the next day they lest the Town, and drew off. Melinde, Melinda, a Town and Kingdom in Zanguebar, in Africa. The Town is a Sea-Port, for∣tified with a Castle which the Portuguese have ere∣cted. And the Sea adjacent, some take to be the Asperum Mare of Ptolemy. Melito, or Meliton, Miletus, a small City in the Kingdom of Naples, in the further Calabria; which is a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Regio; but exempt from his Jurisdiction. Pope Gregory VII. translated this See from Taurianum, (a ruined Ci∣ty) in 1075. This City is called Melita, by Cicero: it stands between Cosenza to the North, and Regio to the South, forty Miles from either; five from Nocera, and the Tyrrhenian Sea to the East. It has been in a decaying condition a long time; especially since 1638. in which it suffered very much by an Earth∣quake. Melli, Mellum, a Kingdom in Nigritia in Afri∣ca, in which the River Niger is first divided into se∣veral Branches. Bounded on the East by the King∣doms of Mandinga and Malegneta; on the West by the Atlantick Ocean. It has a great and populous City of the same name, where the Court resides▪
thirty days journey from Tombut. And the Kingdom is tributary to that of Tombut, since 1520. Melun, Melodunum, a City of France, in the Province of Brie; in the Borders of Gastinois, in the Generalité of the Isle of France; upon the Seyne, which it covers with two Bridges: four Leagues from Fountainbleau to the South-East, ten from Paris to the South, and three from Corbeil. In this City died Robert King of France, in 1030. and Philip I. in 1109. It hath a Castle, many fine Churches, gives the title of a Viscount, and its name to an honourable family. Memel, or Memmel, Memelium, Memmelbur∣gum, Cleupeda, a Town in the Kingdom of Poland, in the Province of Samogitia; seated upon the Banks of the Baltick Sea; thirty Polish Miles from Koning∣sperg to the North, thirty eight from Riga to the South-West. Baudrand ascribes it to Russia Regalis, and to the County of Sambienfi; and saith, it has a strong Castle, a Lake, and a safe Harbour. This Town was taken by Gustavus Adolphus, King of Swe∣den, in 1628. But restored to the Poles, under whom it now is; almost intirely ruined by Fire in 1678. now rebuilt. Long. 50. 00. Lat. 56. Memel, Chronus, a River which ariseth in Lithu∣ania, about fifteen Polish Miles South of Minski; cal∣led Niemen by the Poles. It watereth Grodno and Kowna; and entering Prussia Regia, is called Russ; and falling at last into the Lake of Memel, by the Town of Memel, entereth the Baltick Sea at Kowna. This River takes in the Vill, which watereth Vilna; and is one of the most considerable Rivers in these parts. Memmingen, Drusomagus, Memminga, an Im∣perial Free City in Schwaben in Germany, upon the River Iler; seven German Miles from Ʋlm to the South, and nine from Ausburg to the North-West. Menan, Menanius, a vast River in the further East-Indies; which ariseth out of the Lake of Chiammay; and passing the Kingdoms of Pegua and Siam, it wa∣tereth Odia, (or Siam, the Capital of that Kingdom) and Anio: then by two great Mouths falls into the Bay of Siam, in Long. 328. Menapii, an ancient People of Gallia Belgica, whose Capital Town was the Modern Kessel in the Dutchy of Brabant. Menaw, the Isle of Man. Mende. See Mande. Mendlesham, a Market Town in the County of Suffolk, in the Hundred of Hartesmere. S. Menehoult, Sancta Menehildis, a strong Town in Champaign; put into the Hands of the Spaniards, by the Prince of Conde, in 1652. and recovered to France in 1653. It is seated in the Territory of Ar∣gonne, (the Capital of which it is) upon the River Aisne, Axona; nine Leagues from Verdun to the South, and six from Bar le Duc to the North-West. It has a Castle of great strength. Baudrand writes this S. Menehould; the Maps S. Manheu. Mengrelia, Colchis, a Province in Asia, in Geor∣gia; towards the North, and the Euxine Sea, which bounds it on the West. Abascia (separated from it by the River Coraz, now called Colours,) lies on the North: Guriel on the South, (cut off by the Phasis, now Rione:) Imaretza and Susan on the East. This Country is well watered, fruitful, under a Prince of its own, descended of the Kings of Georgia. It had a City called Sebastopolis, which is now swallowed up by the Waters. See Archangelus Lambertus, and Sir John Chardin. The first of which lived many years in this Country: the latter has lately published an account of what he saw there. For their Manners, see Georgia. The present Prince of Mengrelia is the eighth of this Family, and Tributary to the Turks: whose Tribute is sixty thousand Ells of Linnen Cloth made here: and this is as much as he can well afford: his Revenue not exceeding 20000 Crowns per ann. much of which is raised from his Subjects, sold for Slaves to the Turks to the number of seven or eight thousand in a year. Which with their perpetual and fierce Wars has so depopulated this Country, that the Prince is not able to bring above four thousand Horse, and three thousand Foot into the Field; and might easily be totally subdued by the Turks, if it were thought worth the while; or possible to keep a ro∣ving People, (who have neither Towns nor Cities,) in subjection, when they are once Conquered. Menteith, Menthitia, a County in the North of Scotland. Bounded on the West by Lenox, and the Lake Lomond; on the North by Albain; on the East by Stratherne; and on the South by Sterling and Lenox. The principal Town in it is Dunblain. The Damnii inhabited in ancient times a part of this County, in the Opinion of Mr. Cambden. Mentz, Meintz, Moguntia, Magontiacum, a City of Germany, of great Antiquity; called by the Inha∣bitants, Mayntz; by the French, Mayence; by the Spaniards and Italians, Magonza. It stands in the Lower Circle of the Rhine; upon the Rhine; six German Miles from Franckfort on the Mayne to the West, eighteen from Treves, and fifteen from Spire to the North. Mentioned by Ptolemy and Tacitus. It has its Name from the River Main or Moin, which falls into the Rhine over against it: The anci∣entest City in that part of Germany; as having been certainly built before the Birth of our Saviour; being a City in the times of Drusus, General to Augustus. (Florus, lib. 4.) In 745. it was made an Archbishops See, instead of Wormes; to which it was a Suffra∣gan See before. It was very severely treated by Fre∣derick Aenobarbus, the Emperor, in 1158. But re∣built and restored by Otho IV. In 1462. it was ta∣ken October 27. by Adolphus Nassaw, its Bishop: and whereas before it was Imperial and Free, it has been ever since subject to its own Archbishops. There was an University opened here in 1482. Others say in 1461. Gustavus Adolphus entred this place in Tri∣umph, December 14. 1631. In 1635. it was retaken from the Swedes: but the next year they again took it, and kept it till the Peace of Munster. It claims also the invention of Printing about 1430. A strong place, and well guarded (saith Dr. Brown;) has ma∣ny Churches and Monasteries, and some fair Build∣ings, especially those of Publick Concern; but the narrowness of the Streets, and many old Houses, take away much from the Beauty of it. It is most ex∣tended towards the River; and that part excels the other also towards the Land, as being more popu∣lous, and better built. It paid to the King of Swe∣den, as a Ransom, above an hundred thousand Dol∣lers; which shews its Wealth. This Prince built a Bridge over the Main here, and another over the Rhine: partly upon Piles of Wood, partly upon Boats; the first of these is taken away, but the latter is continued still. The Archbishop is Arch-Chancellor of the Empire, and the first of the Electoral Col∣lege: in all publick Conventions he sits at the Right Hand of the Emperor; and is the Successor of Boni∣face, an Englishman, who very much promoted the Christian Faith in these parts. This City received a French Garrison in October 1688. Surrendred again to the Consederate Forces Sept. 11. 1689. after a Siege of six or seven Weeks. § The Electorate of Mentz, Moguntina Ditio, called by the Inhabitants, Maint∣zische; by the Germans, das Churfurstenthumb bon Mayntz; is a small Province in the Lower Cir∣cle of the Rhine, under the Dominion of this Arch∣bishop: stretching from East to West, between the
Territories of Weteraw and Westerwalt to the North, and the Lower Palatinate to the South. The bounds cannot be exactly stated; because the Do∣minions belonging to this Bishoprick lye dispersed in Franconia, and the other Circles; and render this Elector the less considerable. Dr. Heylyn observes, that a Bishop of Mentz subscribed in the Council of Colen in 347. So that this Bishoprick was only Re∣founded in 745▪ after the barbarous Nations had ex∣tirpated Christianity here. Dr. Brown saith, the Soil of this Country is fertile; abounds with all sorts of Provisions, and excellent Wines: So that his Revenue will afford him six or seven thousand Crowns a year. Meppen, Meppa, a City in Westphalia, in the Bishoprick of Munster; upon the River Hase, (which falls into the Emes, a little below Lingen,) eleven Miles from Emden to the South, and thirteen from Munster to the North. Merch. See March. Mercia, a great and inland Kingdom in the old Heptarchy of the Saxons in England; which con∣tained Gloucester, Worcester, Hereford, Stafford, Darby, Nottingham, Leicester, Rutland, Lincoln, Huntingdom, Northampton, Warwick, Salop, Oxon, Buckingham, Bedford, and Hartford. Mercoeur, a small Town in the Province of An∣vergne, in France, upon an Ascent, and a Rivulet falling afterwards into the Allier. Charles IX. advan∣ced it to the dignity of a Principality in 1563, and into a Dukedom and Peerage of France in 1569. It gives name to a Family of Honour. Metense, Myndus, a City of Caria, in the Lesser Asia; which is a Bishop's See, under the Archbishop of Stauropolis [Santa Croce.] It is even now the Capital of the Province, and the Seat of a Turkish Governour; 16 German Miles South of Ephesus, upon the Archipelago; and five West of Melasso. From this City, Caria is now called Menteseli by the Turks. Merdin, Marde, a City of Assyria, upon the Ri∣ver Tigris, in the Confines of Mesopotamia; which is now an Archbishop's See in the Province of Diarbeck, in the Confines of the Greater Armenia; twenty Ger∣man Miles from Caramit to the East, and thirty from Nisibin to the North. Long. 76▪ 30. Lat. 36. 10. Mere, a Market Town in Wiltshire. The Capi∣tal of its Hundred. Mergetheim, a Town in Franconia in Germany; made famous by a Defeat of Turin in 1645. It stands upon the River Goliach, in the County of Werthaim; four German Miles from Wurtzburgh to the South-West, and nine from Hailbrun to the North-East. Merhern, the same with Moravia. Merida, Emerita Augusta, a City in Portugal; here∣tofore an Archbishop's See, and the Seat of the Courts of Justice, for the Province of Extremadura; upon the River Guadiana; twelve Miles above Badajox to the East, fourteen from Alcantara to the South-East, and twenty five from Sevil to the North. Now very small, and in a declining condition; only the Spaniards (in whose hands it is,) have bestowed of late years something in Fortifying it against the Por∣tuguese. The Archbishop's See was removed hence in 1124. by Pope Calistus II. to S. Jago di Compo∣stella. In 1230. the Moors were driven from Meri∣da. Some Synods have been assembled here: and some place it in New Castile in Spain. § Also an Episcopal City in the Province of Jucatan, in New Spain in America, towards the Gulph of Mexico. Meridiano, the same with Lambro. Merindol, the Place of the Retreat of the Vaudois, upon the Frontiers of the County of Venaissin in Pro∣vence, which was put to Military Execution by order of Francis I. King of France and the Parliament of Aix, with all its Houses, Castles, and People of the Re∣form'd Religion (then in Rebellion) in 1545. after the tryal, in vain, of other Courses to reduce them. Merionethshire, Mervinia, is one of the twelve Shires in the Principality of Wales; called by the Inhabitants, Uerionethshire: on the North it has Carnarvan and Denbigh, on the East Montgomery, the South Cardigan, (cut off by the River Dowy,) and on the West it is washed by the Irish Sea. Ex∣treamly Mountainous, Barren, unpleasant, and expo∣sed to raging Winds; having nothing of value but Cattel. This was the Seat of the Ordovices, a Bri∣tish Clan. It was not Conquered by the English till the Reign of Edward I. in 1283. In the Reign of Hen. IV. Owen Glendover drew this and all wales into a Combination against that Prince; which might have ended in the loss of Wales, under a less Martial Prince than he. There is in this County no Town of Note. Mern, Mernis, Marnia, a County in the North-East part of Scotland; bounded on the South-East by the German Ocean, on the North-West by the County of Marr, and on the South-West by Angus: the chief Town of which is Fordun. It is little, and lies in the form of a Triangle. Meroe, a very great Island, made by the River Nile in Aethiopia; which has this name from the principal City in the Island. It is now called Gue∣guere; but by the Inhabitants, Neube. Indeed Lo∣bus, a Portugal, (in his History of Aethiopia,) is of Opinion, there is no such Island at all: and saith, the Nile makes never an Island in Aethiopia; and the Ancients were much deceived in placing this pre∣tended Island so far from the Red Sea; therefore he is not pleased with their conceit, who make the Kingom of Goyaume to be Mero: and upon the whole he concludes the distance of the place and dif∣ficulty of access gave occasion to all those fictions of the Ancients concerning this Island; which by them was placed in Lat. 16. 23. Mersburgh, Martinopolis, Mersoburgum, a small City in Misnia in Germany; which is a Bishop's See, under the Archbishop of Magdeburgh; upon the River Saal; three German Miles from Hall to the South, and as many from Leipsick to the West. The Bishop of this Diocese imbraced the Augustane Confession, in 1565. In 1592. John George, Bishop of it, became Elector of Saxony: his Successors have ever since been Administrators of this Bishoprick; being chosen, upon every vacancy, by the Chapter: and in this Right they are possessed of the City of Mersburgh; which was once an Imperial Free Town, but long since exempted. § There is another Mers∣bourgh in Schwaben, upon the Lake of Constance, where the Bishop of Constance resides. Mersey, the Arm of the Sea, into which the River Dee in Wales falls. See Dee. Merton-méer, a great Lake in Lancashire. Mesember, Mesembria, a City of Thrace; ascri∣bed by Ptolemy to Moesia Inferior, and in our latter Maps placed in Bulgaria; on the North side of the great Mountain Hermus, upon the Shores of the Eu∣xine Sea: twenty seven German Miles from Adri∣anople to the North-East, and thirty two from Con∣stantinople to the North-West. It is now an Arch∣bishop's See, and in the hands of the Turks. Mesendin, the Persian Gulph. Mesmes, a Castle and Seigniory in the Diocese of Bazas, in the Lower Guienne, in France, which gives Name to an Honorable Family there. Mesopotamia, a large Country of Asia, enclo∣sed within the Rivers Tigris and Euphrates, and heretofore making a considerable part of the Assyrian Empire. Its principal Cities (now) are Caramit,
(the Capital), Merdin, and Heren. The Arabians call it, Al-Gezira; as the Hebrews did, Aram Naha∣rajim, i. e. the Syria betwixt two Rivers, in confor∣mity to the Greek of Mesopotamia. Vid. Diarbeck. Mesrata, the same with Cairoan. Messapia, a Province of the Antient Italy, where now lies the Terra di Otranto in the Kingdom of Naples. It had a City of its own Name, called after∣wards Messana Apuliae, and now Mesagna. Virgil mentions the antient Inhabitants with the Character of Equum domitor, Neptunia proles. Messene. See Moseniga. Messin. See Metz. Messina, Messana, an ancient and very celebrated City, on the Northern Point of the Isle of Sicily; ten Miles from Reggio in Italy, sixty from Catania to the North, and a hundred and fifty from Palermo to the North-East. It is a great, rich, well traded City; an Archbishop's See; the Capital of the Province of Demona; and the second City in the Island: being five Miles in compass, having an Harbour of great safety, and wonderfully frequented by Merchants. Nobly built, has a Princely Palace, a well furnished Magazine, a noble Metropolitan Church; and great plenty of Silk Weavers. It is of a long figure, with four great Suburbs. The Philosopher Dicaearchus was a Native of this City. Charles V. in 1535▪ spent very much in fortifying it, and built four Castles to that purpose. This City was recovered out of the Hands of the Saracens by Roger the Norman in 1060. The Spaniards provoked it so far, that in 1674. it shook off their Yoke; who were never able to reduce the place again under their Obedience, till March 16. 1678. The Inhabitants pretend to have a Letter, which was Written to them by the Virgin Mary; and certainly they have great reason to value that singular favour. Messo, Bermius, a Mountain lying between Ma∣cedonia, Thessalia, and Epirus; called in the latter Maps Mezova. It stretcheth from North-West to South-East; and ends at the North Point of the Isle of Negropont; and seems to be the same with Mount Pindus, or a part (at least) of it. Mesuna, Medama, a River of the further Calabria; it falls into the Sea about four Miles South of Nico∣tera. Mesapontum, a Town of the ancient Lucania in Italy, now called Torre di Mare. Metelin, Lesbos, Mitylene, an Island in the Ar∣chipelago, on the Coast of the Lesser Asia; six Miles from its Shoars to the South. Now commonly called Mitelino, from its principal City; which is seated on the East side of the Island, and an Archbishop's See. It has two other Cities, which are Bishopricks: that is, Gerema, and Calono. The Circuit of this Island is 140 Miles, its length from North to South 40. It was under the Family of the Catelusii, from 1355. to 1462, when it was taken from Dominico Catelu∣sio, (the last Prince of this Race,) by Mahomet II. Emperor of the Turks. This Family being of a Genouese Extraction, the Island is generally said to have been so long under the States of Genoua. Writ∣ten also Mettelen. It pays eighteen thousand Piastres Tribute to the Turks. Metoro, Metaurus, a River in the Dukedom of Ʋrbino; which ariseth in the Confines of Tuscany, near Borgo S. Sepulchro; and running East, watereth (saith Baudrand) S. Angelo, and Ʋrbino: In the Maps it is placed more South; and watereth Fossom∣brone, (Forum Sempronii) and so falls into the Gulph of Venice; between Fanno to the North, and Sinigaglia to the South. Metramo, or Marro, Metaurus, a small River of Calabria the further; which falls into the Sea, ele∣ven Miles South of Nicotera. Metz, Meta, Metis, Mediomatricum, Divodu∣rum Mediomatricorum, a City, and Bishop's See in the Dukedom of Lorrain, under the Archbishop of Trier, and the Capital of the Territory of Messin. It stands upon the Moselle, where it takes in the Seile, (Sala;) ten Leagues from Nancy to the North, and Verdun to the East, and sixteen from Trier to the South. At first the Capital of the Kingdom of Metz: after this, an Imperial Free City; and being exempt∣ed, it fell in 1552. into the hands of the French. Charles V. the same year with a powerful Army sat down before it; and omitted nothing that Courage or Art could dictate to recover it: but failing in the Attempt, fell out with the World; and soon after resigned all his Dominions to his Son in 1555, and went into a Monastery. Some considerable Councils have been formerly assembled at this place. Meulan, Mulanum, a Town and Fortress upon the Seine; in the Government of the Isle of France; which has a Stone Bridge over the River. It stands nine Leagues above Paris to the West. Henry IV. could not take the Fortress in 1589, tho he made himself Master of the Town. Meun or Mehun, a small Town in the Province of Berry in France, upon the River Yeure, betwixt Bourges and Vierzon: shewing the Ruines of a Castle, heretofore demolished by the English. It has a Col∣legiate Church. § There is another Meun in the same Province, upon the River Inde, betwixt Cha∣teau-roux and Bruzancais: § And a Third in the Pro∣vince of Orleanois, under the right side of the Loyre, betwixt the City Orleans and Baugency. Adorned with a Collegiate Church, and taken heretofore by the Victorious English under the Earl of Salisbury. In Latin, Magdunum. Meurs, Meursia, a small City of the Dukedom of Cleves, though seated in the Bishoprick of Co∣logn; which is an Earldom, and belongs (together with its Territory,) to the Prince of Orange, by the gift of the last Countess in 1600. Yet the Duke of Brandenburgh lays claim to it, as Duke of Cleves. It lies two Miles from Rhineburgh to the South, one from the Rhine to the West, about ten from Cologn to the North-West, and seven from Cleves to the South-West. Meurtre, Mourtre, Murta, Morta, a River of Lorrain; it ariseth from Mount Vauge; and water∣ing Nancy, falls into the Moselle, three Leagues a∣bove Pont Mouson. Meuse, Mosa, the same with the Maes. Mexico, Mexicum, a vast City in the North America; the Capital of New Spain, and of a Pro∣vince of the same name in that Kingdom; the Seat of the Spanish Viceroy of the West-naes, and an Archbishop's See. This City stands upon the North side of a Lake of the same name; in a most pleasant, fruitful, and large Plain, and in great part surround∣ed with the Lake. The Inhabitants pretend it was built in 1322. The Spaniards by the current and thread of their Story, say, it was built in 902. It was many Ages since, the Royal Seat of the Kings of Mexico; had then a great and splendid Palace, called in their Tongue the Tepac; but burnt together with the City, when it was taken by the Spaniards in 1521. by Francis Cortez; who rebuilt the City, and made it the Capital of his Conquests. Its Streets are great, streight, and beautiful; its Churches mag∣nificent, its publick Buildings noble. It has an A∣quaduct three Miles long, and many Monasteries. John de Turre Cremata, our Countryman Mr. Gage, and some others, have given large accounts of this noble City; which is the greatest in America. It has no Walls, Forts, Bastions, nor any Cannon, or Defence whatsoever, beside what the number of its
Inhabitants afford: which is a part of the Spanish Jealousie, for fear a Viceroy should set up for him∣self. In 1527. Pope Clement VII. made it a Bishop's See. In 1547. Paul III. made it an Archbishop's See; in which Year Cortez the Conqueror died. It was made an University in 1551. by Charles V. As it is seated in a very low ground, so it has often suf∣fered very much by Inundations of the Lake, parti∣cularly Septemb. 21. 1629. forty thousand of its In∣habitants were drowned: to prevent this for the fu∣ture, they have with great Charges found out a means to drive part of these Waters other ways. There is no way to the City but over three Causways, on the North, West, and South sides: the latter of which is the longest. Long. 269. 00. Lat. 28. 30. eighty Spanish Leagues from the South Sea, and the same distance from the Shores of the Bay of Mexico. See Golfo di Mexico. There are also two Lakes of Wa∣ter called by the name of this City: one of which is fresh Water, seven Leagues long, six broad: the other is salt Water, forty Leagues in compass. Meydenburg. See Magdeburg. Meylandt, the German Name for Milan. Meyne. See Mayn. § Also a Mineral Spring, much resorted to of late, near the City Arles in Pro∣vence. Mezaal, a pretended Island in Aethiopia. See Meroë. Mezieres, Maderiacum, Meceria, a City of France in Champagne, in the Territory of Retelois; built upon, and almost encompassed with the Maes; and very well fortified besides. It stands not above half a League from Charleville, four beneath Sedan to the West, three from the Confines of Luxemburgh, and sixteen from Reims to the North-East: and hath a Collegiate Church. Mezo, Amyzon, a City of Caria, in the Lesser Asia; still extant; and a Bishop's See, under the Archbishop of Sancta Croce; being seated between Magnesia and Alabanda; thirty Miles from Miletus, (now Melasso) and the same distance from the Shoares of the Archipelago to the East. Mezuma, oppidum novum, a City in the Kingdom of Algïer, in Africa, in the Province of Tenez; be∣tween Algier and Tremesin. Mezzaba, a Province in Biledulgerida in Africa, with a City of the same name, by the great River between Zeb and Tegorarina to the West. Mezzovo, Pindus. Miana, Apamia, or Apamea, a City of Media. Long. 79. 50. Lat. 34. 20. Miary, a River in Brasil, which receives the Ova∣ro Covo, and divers other Rivers; then falls into the Ocean, near the Island of Maragnan, upon the Coast of Brasil. Micoli, an Island of the Aegean Sea, betwixt Ni∣caria to the East, and the Islands Tenon and Andron to the North. One of the Cyclades; called by the Antients Mycone and Myconos. It produces Wine, Cotton, Barley, and abundance of Game: planted with one only Village, which pays a yearly Tribute to the Turks. Middleburgh, Metelli Castrum, Middleburgum, Metelloburgum, a Town in Zealand; the Capital of the Isle of Walcheren; made a Bishop's See, under the Archbishop of Ʋtretcht, in 1559. by Pope Paul IV; the Collegiate Church in 1561 being converted into a Cathedral, and the Revenues of a famous Ab∣bey, that was here, applied to serve for the use of the Bishoprick. It is great, rich, populous, extreme∣ly well fortified, and has been under the Ʋnited Provinces ever since 1574: in which it was taken by their Forces from the Spaniards. The Abbey is now the Town-house. § There is a Town in Flanders, under the Ʋnited Provinces, two German Miles from Bruges to the North; and an Island in the East-Indies, both called by the same name. Middlefart, a Town in the Island of Fuynen, in the Baltick Sea; giving name to the Channel, Mid∣delfart or Middle-Passage, betwixt this Island and Jutland. Middlesex, Middlesexia, Trinobantes, is bound∣ed on the North by Hartfordshire; on the West by Buckingham, (separated by the River Colne;) on the South by Surrey, cut off by the Thames; and on the East by Essex. divided from it by the Lea. It is nineteen English Miles in length, and sixteen in breadth; one of the least Counties in England: but its Fertility and nearness to London, abundantly re∣compenseth this want of Extent. The ancient Bri∣tish Inhabitants were the Trinobantes: afterwards it was a part of the Kingdom of the East-Saxons. White-hall and S. James, the Royal Mansions of the Kings of England, are both in this County: to which may be added Hampton Court, their Coun∣try House of Pleasure: and LONDON the Capital of England, is its Head. The Honorable Charles Sackville Earl of Dorset, is also Earl of Middlesex, by a Creation of Feb. 4. 1674. Which Title was first bestowed by K. James I. in 1622. on Lionel Lord Cranfield, Lord Treasurer of England; whose Son James enjoyed the same; and after him Lionel, Bro∣ther of James, in whom it died. Middleham, a Market Town in the North Riding of Yorkshire, in the Hundred of Hangwest, upon the River Youre. Midhurst, a Corporation in the County of Suf∣folk, in Chichester Rape, which returns two Mem∣bers of Parliament. Midlewich, a Market Town in Cheshire, in the Hundred of Northwich, upon the River Croke, near its fall into the Dane. Midour, Midorius, a River in Gascogne in France; which ariseth in the County of Armagnac; and flow∣eth Westward through Marsan, (the Capital of which it washeth;) then takes in the Douse, and beneath Tartas sixteen Miles from Bourdeaux to the South, falls into the Adour. Mignone, Minio, Magnone, a River of Italy, which ariseth in Sabatina; and flowing through S. Pe∣ter's Patrimony, falls into the Tyrrhenian Sea between Civita Vecchia and Cornetto. Milan, Milano, Mediolanum, by the Germans called Meilandt, one of the greatest and most no∣ble Cities in Italy; built by the Galls in the year of Rome 345. three hundred and fifty seven years before the Birth of our Saviour; others say it was built An∣no Mundi 2488. which is above one thousand years sooner. The Romans first took it in the year of Rome 531. Marcellus their General Triumphing for the Slaughter of Viridomare the Prince of it, and the taking this City. This City however joined with the Carthaginians in the Second Punick War; and was not reduced without the loss of six thousand of her Inhabitants. In the times of Christianity, being con∣verted by S. Barnabas, it became an Archbishop's See, and suffered very much from the Arrian Princes, though in the end it preserved the Catholick Faith. Attila, King of the Huns, took and spoiled this, and several Neighbouring Cities; particularly Florence and Verona in the year of Christ 452. The next that became Masters of it were the Lombards, who possess'd themselves of it about 570. It continued under this Nation till 774. under a Succession of twenty three Princes. Only it is said Aribert, the se∣venteenth King, gave the Duchy of Milan to the Church of Rome. But the Successors of this Prince not agreeing with the Popes, Adrian I. procured
Charles the Great to destroy this Kingdom: who took Desiderius, carried him Prisoner into France, and put an end to the Kingdom of the Lombards, in the year of Christ 774. It continued under this Fa∣mily, and the Emperors of Germany, till 1161: when it took part with Pope Alexander III. against Fre∣derick Barbarossa, and was for it rased to the ground: but it recovered; and outing the Emperors about 1221. became a Republick: and continued so till 1277. when it fell under Otho by the Title of Vis∣conti, but as subject to the Emperors of Germany. John Galeazo, the eighth of these, was made a Duke by Wenceslaus I. Emperor, in 1395. It continued under Dukes, till Lewis XII. in 1501. by the Con∣quest of Lewis, an usurping Duke, got it; Maximili∣an got it from the French in 1513. Francis, a Bro∣ther of this Maximilian, the seventeenth Duke, suc∣ceeded him in 1529. Francis I. King of France, won and lost it again in 1521. And being taken Pri∣soner by the Forces of Charles V. in the Battel of Pavia in 1525, he was forced for his Liberty to re∣nounce all his Pretences to this Duchy: upon the death of Francis Sforze, in 1535. it was by Charles V. united for ever to the Crown of Spain, under which it still is. At this day, after all these Sufferings, it is the greatest and most beautiful City in Lombardy; the most populous too; its Inhabitants being thought to be two hundred thousand Souls. Its Trade is equal to its Greatness; and the Inhabitants very rich. It is seven Miles in compass; has one of the strongest Cit∣tadels in the World, with an University. It stands upon the River Olona, three hundred and twenty five Miles from Rome, one hundred and sixty five from Venice, and two hundred and thirty from Lyons. Long. 31. 30. Lat. 44. 40. In the years 344. and 350, two Councils were here Congregated against the Ar∣rians. In 355. the Arrians carried it against the ad∣verse Party, and sent a great number thereof into Ba∣nishment. In 390. there was another celebrated against Jovinian. In 451. the Doctrine of the Incarnation of the Word, as expressed in the Epistle of Pope Leo to Flavianus Bishop of Constantinople, received the approbation of a Council at this place. In 679. they held another against the Menethelites. And di∣vers since, of inferior note. § The Dukedom of Mi∣lan is a part of Lombardy; bounded on the North by Switzerland, and the Grisons; on the East by the Republick of Venice, and the Dukedom of Placen∣tia; on the South by the States of Genoua; and on the West by Montisferat and Piedmont. The Soil is extreamly fruitful, plain, well watered, very full of People, and consequently well improved. It espe∣cially abounds with Vines and Barley. Heretofore much greater than now: It contained twenty nine Cities, which are now reduced to ten; Alessandria, Bobbio, Como, Cremona, Lodi, Milan, Novara, Pavia, Tortona, and Vigevan. Of the Fate and Hi∣story of this Dukedom, I have spoken in the Descri∣ption of the City: and I need add nothing here, but that it is accounted the richest and noblest Dukedom in Christendom; as Flanders is the noblest Earldom. Milel, Lethon, a River in Africa, in Cyrene. Mileto, Melita. See Melito. Miletus, one of the most considerable antient Cities of Ionia, in the Lesser Asia, with a Port to the Aegean Sea, upon the Frontiers of Caria, and near the River Meander. Founded in the year of the World, according to Eusebius, 2779; and, in the beginning, famous above the rest of Greece for Na∣val Forces. They built the Town Naucratis in E∣gypt, and made War with Sadyatus King of Lydia. Alexander M overcame them, next the Romans. Thales the eldest Philosopher, Anaximander, and Anximenes, were Natives of this City. Milebum, Milevis or Mela, an ancient City in the division of Numidia, in Africa. Aurelius, Arch∣bishop of Carthage, assembled a Council here in 402. There was another in 416. at which S. Augustine assisted. The latter condemned the Principles of Pe∣lagius and Caelestius, touching Grace and Infant-Baptism. Milford Haven, a Celebrated Sea-Port in the County of Pembroke, in South Wales, upon the Irish Sea. Milau, a Territory in Rovergue in France; Ager Aemilianus. Milaud, Milhaud, Millialdum, Amilhanum, a City of France, in the Province of Rovergue; in the Borders of Languedoc; upon the River Tarn, which watering Alby, falls into the Garonne. Its Fortifica∣tions were razed in 1629. This City is seated in Givaudan; seven Leagues from Lodeve to the North, and eight from Rhodez to the North East: hereto∣fore very strong. Mildenhall, a large and populous Market Town in the County of Suffolk, and the Hundred of Lack∣ford, upon the Banks of a River running into the Ouse; adorn'd with a fair Church. Milli, Milliacum, commonly called Milli en Gatinois, is a Town in the Territory of Gastinois, in the Isle of France, upon the Rivulet of Escolle, five Leagues from Melun and twelve from Paris. Milo, Melos, an Island in the Aegean Sea, or the Archipelago; sixty Miles in compass, very fruitful and well peopled; having a City of the same name, which has a large and a safe Haven, defended by three Forts, seated on the South side of the Island; and a Bishop's See, under the Archbishop of Rhodes. It lies in the middle, between Candy and Negropont. First inhabited by the Phoenicians; after by the Greeks, who gave it this name from its abundance of Honey. It was the Country of Diagoras, the first Atheistical Philosopher. It has plenty of delicate spotted Marble, all kinds of Corn and Oil, Pitch and Brimstone; but it wants Wine. Over against it lies a little Island, called Anti-Milo. Milopotomo, Milopotamos, a Castle, and a City which has an Harbor on the North Shore of the Isle of Candy: also a Bishop's See, under the Archbishop of Candia; seated near the Mouth of the River Ar∣cadius; thirty Miles from Candia to the West. This Town and Castle is now in the Hands of the Turks. Milton, a Market Town in the County of Kent, in Scray Lath, not far from the Isse of Shepey. It was a Place of Account in the Reign of Edward the Confessor. Mina, or S. George de Mina, a Castle in Guinee, on the Coast de Or; which is of great strength, and has belonging to it a very large Harbor. This Ca∣stle was first built by the French in 1383. They being forced to leave it, the Portuguese in 1482. built another in the same place; which continued in their Hands till 1637. when the Hollanders took it from them. John II. King of Portugal gave it the name of S. George, after his Conquest of it. § There is also a River called Mina, in the Kingdom of Algier. Mindanao, one of the greatest of the Philippine Islands, and the most Southern: heretofore under the Dominion of the Spaniards, but now revolted from them; it is in length from East to West, four hundred Spanish Miles; in Long. 150. Lat. between 5. and 10. The principal City lies on the South-West side of the Island, and is of the same name. Minden, Minda, a strong City in Westphalia in Germany; which is a Bishop's See, under the Arch∣bishop of Cologn. Also an Imperial and Free City, and a Hanse Town; governed by its own Officers,
tho it is but small. It stands nine German Miles from Osnabruck, (or Osenburgh) to the East; ten from Hanover, and twelve from Ferden to the South; upon the Weser. Made a Bishop's See in 780. by Charles the Great; and it embraced the Augustane Confession in 1582. There is a Principality belong∣ing to it, called Furstenthumb Minden. Mindora, one of the Philippine Islands; about a hundred Leagues in Circuit, with a City and Port of its own name; separated from the Island of Lus∣son by the Streights of Mindora; under the Spa∣niards. It lies in 145 deg. of Long. North-West of Mindanao, South-West of Lucania, and North-East of Paragoa. Minehead, a Corporation in Somersetshire, in the Hundred of Carhampton, by the Sea-side, to which it has a Harbour; electing two Parliament Men. Mingrela, a great Town in the Province of Visapour, in the Kingdom of Decan, in the Hither East-Indies, within half a League of the Sea; much frequented by the Vessels from Japan, Bengale, Zey∣lan, &c. especially Dutch, whose East-India Compa∣ny keeps a Comptoir here. Mingrellia. See Mengrelia. Minibar, India, a Province of Asia. Minho, or Minno, Minius, a River in Spain, which ariseth in Galicia, near the Village called Il Castro de Rey: four Leagues from Mondofiedo: and watering Lugo and Orense, (after it has divided Ga∣licia into two parts) it becomes a boundary between it and Portugal; five Leagues beneath Tuy, it pas∣seth into the Atlantick Ocean, between Bayone and Lima. Minorca, an Island belonging to Spain in the Me∣diterranean Sea; which belonged to the Kingdom of Majorca: about fifty six Miles in compass, and much of the same nature with Majorca: the principal Towns are Citadella, (seated on the West side of the Island) and Porto Mahon a delicate Haven. Minori, Minora, a City in the Principato Citra in the Kingdom of Naples, being a Bishops See under the Archbishop of Amalfi; upon the Gulph of Sa∣lerno. Minturnae, a ruined City of the ancient Campa∣nia, in Latium, in Italy, below the mouth of the Ri∣ver Liris; showing nothing at this day, but the marks of its pristine honour, in the rests of Aqua∣ducts and Amphitheatres. It has been an Episcopal City. Minucciano, a small Town in the Territory of Carfagnano in Italy, under the Republick of Lucca. Mirali, the same with Derbent. Miranda de Douro, a City of Portugal, upon the North side of the River Douro; twelve Leagues from Samora to the West, and from Salamanca to the North West; and six from Braganza to the South. Built in 1312 by Dionysius King of Portugal; and made a Bishops See, under the Archibishop of Bra∣ganza, by Pope Paul III. in 1555. Being a Frontier Town against the Kingdom of Leon, in the Western Confines of which it stands, it is very strongly forti∣fied. Miranda de Ebro, a small City in Old Castile, which has a Castle upon the Ebro, in the Confines of Biscay and Castile; seventeen Miles from Bilbao to the South, thirteen from Burgos to the North-East, and twelve from Logrono to the West. Mirande, a small Town in the County of Ar∣magnac in France, in the Territory of Astarac or Estrac, whereof it is the Capital, upon the River Baise: four or five Leagues from Ausch, and some∣thing more from Tarbes. Mirandola, Mirandula, a small but very strong City in Italy, which has a strong Castle; under its own Duke, who is a Sovereign Prince, with a small Terri∣tory which belongs to it. This City stands twenty, two Miles from Modena to the North, ten from the Po to the South, and twenty seven from Mantoua to the South-East. Lo Stato della Mirandola, is a small Dukedom in the Lower Lombardy; bounded on the North by the Dukedom of Mantoua, on the South by that of Modena. This Dukedom is a Fee of the Duchy of Parma; and together with Concordia, (another small Territory) makes the Patrimony of the Family of the Pici; who obtained it from Matilda, Countess of Par∣ma, in 1102. Ever since which time they have enjoy∣ed it. Mirebeau, Mirabellum, a small City in the Pro∣vince of Poictou in France; built upon an Hill, five Leagues from Poictiers to the North. It is now in a declining Condition; and its Castle demolished; having much suffered in the late Civil Wars. It is the Capital of the Territory of Mirebalais. Mirecourt, Mirecurtium, a City of the Ʋpper Lorain, towards Mount Vauge; seven Leagues from Nancy to the South, and from Toul to the same quar∣ter; thirty six from Dyon to the North-East, six from the Confines of Champagne to the East. It is the Capital of the Territory of Vauge, standing upon the little River Maidon, which falls into the Moselle at Chaligni. Miremont, a Town in the Province of Perigort, in Aquitain in France, upon a small River falling into the Vezere, seven or eight Leagues from Peri∣gueux and Bergerac. Here there is a very long Sub∣terraneous Caverne, call'd la Caverne de Cluseau; in which Altars, Paintings, and rooms are pretended to be discovered, as if the Pagans had sacrificed in this place to the Infernal Gods. Mirepoix, Mirapisca, Mirapicium, Mirapincum, a City of the Ʋpper Languedoc in France, in the County of Foix, upon the River Gers; three Leagues from Foix to the East, and eleven from Tolouse to the South. Made a Bishops See, under the Archbi∣shop of Tolouse, by Pope John XXII. In 1318; hav∣ing been before a part of the Diocese belonging to that Archbishoprick. The Earls of this place, in the War against the Albigenses, for their bravery, obtained the title of Mareschalls of the Faith. Miron, or Hued Icer, Serbes, a River in the King∣dom of Algier. Miscow, an Island in the Gulph of S. Laurence, in the North America, belonging to New France, betwixt that Country and the Island of S. John: small but very fruitful. Missa, Senna, Sena, a River of Italy, which wa∣tereth Ʋrbino, (the Capital of the Dukedom of that name) and falls in the Gulph of Venice; four Miles from Signiglia to the North-West. Called by the latter Geographers il Cesano. Misitra, Lacedaemon, Sparta, is an ancient and most famous City of the Morea; seated upon the Ri∣ver Eurotas, (now called Vafilipotamo;) thirty Miles from Megalopolis to the South, one hundred and twen∣ty from Athens to the South-West, and twenty from the nearest Shoar of the Mediterranean Sea. This was the Old Sparta. Long. 48. 50. Lat. 38. 31. It is situate partly upon a Plain, partly upon the foot of Mount Tayget; which within Cannon Shot closeth it on the North: the River descending from some Hills on the North-West, incompasseth it on the West and South. In ancient times it was (as Polybius saith) forty eight Greek Stades in Circuit, which is six Eng∣lish Miles: but it had a very unhealthful Situation; the Mountain on the North side cutting off the cool∣ing Breezes, and redoubling by Reflection the Violence of the Rays of the Sun, which make it even now
(when there is so few Inhabitants in it) subject to the Plague every Autumn: besides the Mountain renders it weak and undefensible. This City is said to be built about the Year of the World 2997. in the days of the Patriarch Jacob; 1763 Years before the Birth of our Saviour: which account (if it be true) makes Misitra 983 years older than Rome. There was no City in the World that flourished so many Ages as this in Military Glory: it had a considerable share in all those Actions which made the ancient Greeks so famous. It had Kings also the longest of any of the Grecian Cities: for many Ages two at once: and when they took away the Power from them, they pre∣served the name. This City was never brought under the Power of any Stranger; till Philopoemen (a Ma∣cedonian, who died in the Year of the World 3767.) took and abolished Lycurgus his Laws. Which is placed by Helvicus in the Year of the World 3767. one hundred and ninety one Years before the Birth of our Saviour. After this it became so inconsiderable, as to be rarely mentioned: only we are informed the Greek Emperors made it the Appenage of their Elder Sons. Mahomet II. (stiled the Great) was the first of the Turkish Princes, who in 1458. or thereabouts, possessed himself of this City and the Cittadel, built in the latter times on the top of Mount Taygetus. In 1473. the Venetians took the City from the Turks: but not being able to master the Cittadel, they were soon after forced to desert it. In 1687. the Bassa of Misitra Articled with the Victorious Venetians to March away with only what the Garrison could carry. This City is a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Corinth; at this day very small, and little peopled. Misnia, Libonotria, is a Province and Marquisate of Germany, called by the Inhabitants Meissen, or Meissnerlandt. It is a considerable part of the Ʋp∣per Saxony; bounded on the North by the Principa∣lity of Anhalt; on the East by Lusatia; on the South by Bohemia, and Franconia; and on the West by Thuringia. The greatest part is under the Elector of Saxony, who resides at Dresden, the Capital City. The other considerable Places are Leipsick, Meissen, Mers∣burg, Naumburg, and Zwicaro. Misraim, the most ancient name of Egypt. Mistretta, Amestrata, a very ancient Town in Sicily, in the North-West part of the Island; upon the River Alaesum; fourteen Miles from the Tyrrhe∣nian Sea, and fifty five from Palermo to the East. Modbury, a Market Town in Devonshire, in the Hundred of Armington, betwixt the Rivers Arme and Aune. La Mocha, an Island of the South Sea, near the Kingdom of Chili, in America. Modena, Mutina, a City of Lombardy in Italy; the Capital of a Sovereign Dukedom of the same name. Seated in a Plain upon the River Secchia; the great∣est Bed of which runs four Miles more to the West: but it has two Branches; one runs under the Walls, the other through the City of Modena; and a little beneath the City unite and fall into the Panaro. This City lies twenty Miles from Bologna to the North-West, and forty four from Ferrara to the South-West. It is naturally strong by its Situation; forti∣fied too; and has had a Castle added of latter times for its greater security. Ancient Story informs us, this City was a Roman Colony of great Strength and Re∣putation; and that M. Antonius besieged D. Brutus, (the principal Conspirator against Julius Caesar) here: but Hirtius and Pansa, (the two Consuls) coming up, Antonius was forced to raise the Siege: where∣upon followed a bloody Fight, in which both these Consuls were slain, in the Year of Rome 711. In the times of the Goths and Lombards, it was intirely ruined; but rebuilt by the Children of Charles the Great. In 973. here was a Council held for the com∣posing some differences amongst the German Princes. This City is a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Ravenna. Lo Stato di Modena, Mutinensis Ducatus; the Dukedom of Modena is bounded on the North with the Dukedoms of Mantoua and Mirandola; on the East with the Territory of Bologna; on the South with the Dukedom of Tuscany; and the States of Lu∣ca on the West, with the Dukedom of Parma. It ex∣tends from North to South sixty, from East to West forty five Miles: heretofore under the Duke of Ferra∣ra; but the eldest Line of that Family failing in Al∣phonsus II. in 1597, the Dukes of Modena, (who were a younger Branch of the same Family) put in their Claim for the whole Succession; but were opposed by Pope Clement VIII. Whereupon ensued a War, which was ended by a Treaty the next Year; the Pope keeping Ferrara, and the Duke Modena, as a Sove∣reign State. Alphonsus d'Este the present Duke, is the Third of this Line, since the Sovereignty fell into this Family; descended from a Race of Dukes which began in 1452. when the Emperor Frederick III. in favour of Borso d'Este, first erected this State into a Dukedom. Tho this Family is the same with that of Brunswick in Germany, said to be eight hundred years old; yet the noblest Branch it ever produced, is Mary Queen Consort to King James II. This Country is much celebrated for its great fertility. Modica, Motuca, an ancient City of Sicily, upon a River of the same name; ten Miles from Pachino, the most South-East Cape of that Island, and five from the Southern Shoar. It is now in a flourishing State. Modin, an ancient Town of Palestine, upon a Hill, betwixt Emaus and Rhama; famous for being the Country of the Heroical Macchabees. Modon, Methone, a City of the Morea, on the Southern Shoar, in the Province of Belvedore, called Messenia by Strabo, Pliny and others; by the Vene∣tians Modon; by the Turks Mutune. It is now a fine strong City, a frequented Port, and a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Patras: has a strong Castle, a large and safe Haven; about eleven English Miles from Navarino to the South, twenty five from Coron to the West, and sixty two from Cape Matapan to the same quarter. Seated in a fruitful and delightful Country, strong by Nature and Art, and is the com∣mon Residence of the Sangiac of the Morea. In the times of Trajan it suffered very much by a parcel of Illyrian Barbarians, who surprized and slew many of its Inhabitants: which loss that generous Prince re∣paired by his Princely Compassion, and advantageous Privileges granted to it. In 1208. the Genouese ra∣vished it from the Venetians, but did not hold it long. In 1124. it came first into the hands of the Venetians; but was taken from them the year following by the Greek Emperor. In 1204. the Venetians retook it. Bajazet II. in 1498. besieged it with an Army of an hundred and fifty thousand Men; and took it by a kind of surprize, after a stout defence, upon the arrival of a considerable Succour; which drew the Inhabitants from their Posts to their ruin. In 1659. Morosini, the Venetian General, took it; and might have taken Coron too, if he had not been forced to Sail away to the Dardanells, for the security of Candy. The Turks regained this Place in the end of the Candian War. But in 1686. the Venetian Arms again prevailed, to deliver this noble and strong City out of the Hands of the Infidels. They found in it ninety nine pieces of Canon. Modruch, Modrusa, a City in Croatia; eighteen
Miles from Zeng or Segna to the North, and eight from Carlstat to the South-West: Once a Bishops See, un∣der the Archbishop of Zara in Dalmatia. Moen or Mone, an Island in the Baltick, be∣longing to Denmark, and not far from Zeland. Hav∣ing in it a Town called Stege, or Stoke. Moers. See Muers. Moeris, a Lake in the Kingdom of Egypt, seventy two Miles from the ancient Memphis, to the West: said by Mela to be twenty Miles in circumference. Here stood the Labyrinth, so famous in Antiquity, by the descriptions that are given of it in Pliny, Herodotus and Strabo. It contained sixteen, or thirty (some say) several principal quarters of Apartments; full of the Statues of the Gods and Kings of Egypt, together with such numbers of Palaces, Temples, Pyramids, Galleries &c. Contrived one about and within another, that it requi∣red the help of a thread to walk forth. Travellers report, there are yet to be seen three hundred and fifty Cham∣bers, in the fashion of a Labyrinth, in the same place; and that it is now called Castro Caron. Moesel, Mosella, a River in the Dukedom of Lo∣rain, called by the French, la Moselle; by the Ger∣mans, Das Moesel; it ariseth from Mount Vauge, a little above the Village of Bussans, in the Confines of Alsatia and the Franche Comte; and flowing North∣ward through Lorain, watereth Toul; beneath which it takes in the Murthe from Nancy; so goes to Metz, where it takes in the Seylle, another great River from the East; so passeth Thionvillein, and Luxemburgh, to Trier (or Trevès), above which it takes in the Sar; and at Coblentz, falls into the Rhine. Moesia, a Province of the ancient Illyricum, be∣twixt Macedonia, Thracia, and Dacia; called by the Romans, for its fertility, the Granary of Ceres. It was divided into the Ʋpper and Lower Moesia. The first is the same now with the modern Servia, the other with Bulgaria. Moghali, Emodus, a vast Branch of Mount Tau∣rus in Asia; which separates India from Tartary; called by others Dalanguer. See Taurus, and Dalan∣guer. The Empire of the Great Mogul. See Indo∣stan. Mohacz, Mohatz, a Town in the Lower Hunga∣ry, upon the Danube; between the River Sarwiza to the North, and the Drave to the South; four Ger∣man Miles from either, six from Esseck to the North, and nine from Colocza to the South. This otherwise small Place is memorable for two great Battels here fought: the first between Lewis King of Hungary, and Solyman the Magnificent, in 1526: in which that un∣fortunate Prince Lewis, (being about twenty years old) with twenty five thousand Men, fought three hundred thousand Turks: when being over-powered by num∣ber, twenty two thousand of the Christian Army were slain upon the place; five thousand Wagons, eighty great Cannon, six hundred small ones, with all their Tents and Baggage were taken by the Victors; and the King in his flight over the Brook Curass feil into a Quagmire, and was swallowed up: after which Soly∣man took and slew two hundred thousand Hungari∣ans; and got such a footing in this Kingdom, that he could never be expelled. This fatal Battel was fought October 29. The second in some part retrieves the Loss and Infamy of the former. The Duke of Lorain being sent by the Emperor with express Orders to pass the Drave and take Esseck, his Highness July 10. 1687. with great difficulty passed that River, then ex∣tremely swelled with continued Rains: but finding the Prime Visier Encamped at Esseck with an Army of an hundred thousand Men, so strongly, that it was not possible to Attack him in that Post, without the ruin of the Christian Army; he retreated, and repassed the 23 of the same Month: whereupon the 29 the Prime Visier passed that River at Esseck; and upon August 12. there followed a bloody Fight; in which the Turks lost an hundred pieces of Cannon; twelve Mortars; all their Ammunition, Provisions, Tents, Baggage, and Treasure; and about eight thousand Men upon the place of Battel; besides what were drowned in passing the River, which could never be known: after which Victory, General Dunewalt, Sep∣tember 30. found Esseck totally deserted by the Turks, and took Possession of it. Mohilow, Mohilovia, a City of Poland, in the Province of Lithuania, upon the River Nieper; in the Palatinate of Witebsko; ten Polish Miles from Orsa to the South, twenty two from Smolensco to the North-West, and eighteen from Mislaw to the West. It is seated on a Hill, well fortified, full of Inhabi∣tants: the Russ in 1654. took it; but the Poles in 1656. regained the Possession of it. There is a Col∣lege of the Jesuits here. Moienvic, a small Town in the Dutchy of Lorain in France, upon the River Leille, betwixt Marsal and Vic. Taken by Lewis XIII. and ceded by the Treaty of Munster to France in 1648. Its Fortifica∣tions are demolished. Moissac, a Town in the County of Quercy, in Guienne in France, upon the River Tarn, which soon after falls into the Garonne. This Town has been of∣ten taken and retaken, by times, by the Romans, Goths, the Kings of France, Dukes of Aquitaine, Earls of Tolouse and Montfort, in the English Conquests, and the French Civil Wars. It now has a famous large Abbey of the Benedictines, to whom belongs the Lordship of part of the Town, and to the King the other. Moldavia, Pars Moesiae inferioris, is a considera∣ble Region in Europe; which heretofore belonged to the Kingdom of Hungary, and more anciently was a part of Dacia: Called by the Inhabitants, Moldove: Multaus, (or Multauska) by the Poles; and Moldau by the Germans. Bounded on the North by Transyl∣vania, on the West by the Ʋpper Hangary, on the South by the Danube, (which parts it from Servia, and Bulgaria) and on the E. Walachia. The Capital of it is Buchorest. The same Author tells us on the Au∣thority of the Count de Morstein, Lord Treasurer of Poland; that it is of much greater extent than Wala∣chia, though otherwise represented in the Maps. This Country takes its name from a River or Town in it; and extends from East to West ninety French Leagues, from North to South sety. Very fruitful, and has an excellent Air. The Inhabitants are Christian of the Greek Church, under the Patriarch of Constanti∣nople. After Bajazet II. had in 1485 Conquered Bessarabia, the Moldavians set up a Prince of their own Nation; who prevailed against the Tarturs, Turks, and Poles. His Successors have not been equal∣ly Fortunate: For after many bloody contests, in 1620. the Turk got finally the Mastery of the Molda∣vians; and disposed of this Principality to whom he pleased; who paid yearly to the Port, as a Tribute, one hundred and eighty thousand Crowns; besides Presents, and other Exactions; the Turks labouring to impoverish this People what they could to keep them the more under. In 1686. the Poles over-ran all their Country, and took their principal Cities: They therefore since relinquished the Ottoman Interest and voluntarily put themselves under the Pro∣tection of the Emperor. Anno 1688. Mole, a River of the County of Surrey, which runs through Darking, and empties it self into the Thames near Hampton-Court. Molfa, Melphes, a River of the hither Principate, in the Kingdom of Naples; which falls into the Tyr∣rhenian
Sea, twelve Miles from Policastro to the West. It is written sometimes Molpa. Molfctta, Melfictum, a City in the Kingdom of Naples, in the Province of Bari, on the Ionian Sea; between Bari to the South, and Trani to the North; which is a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Bari. It is small but well Peopled; and born by the Family of Spinula, with the Title of a Princi∣pality. Molina, a Town in New Castile, seated in a Plain; between two Mountains; four Leagues from the bor∣ders of Arragon; which has under it a Jurisdiction of seventy five Villages; called, El Sennorio di Molina, the Lordship of Molina; which is thought so consi∣derable, that the King of Spain wears this Title. Molingar, Molingaria, a small City in the Coun∣ty of East Meath, in the Province of Leinster in Ire∣land; which is the Capital of that County: thirty Miles from Dublin to the West. Upon a Lake. Molise, Molisinus Comitatus, a County in the Kingdom of Naples; between Abruzzo to the North, the Capitanate to the East, Terra di Lavoro to the West, and the Principato to the South. It takes its name from a Castle in it. Molossi, an ancient People of the Kingdom of Epi∣rus, in Greece. Molsheim, Molsemium, a small City in the Lower Alsatia, upon the River Breuch; two German Miles from Strasburgh to the West; in which the Chapter of Serasburgh settled, after they were by the Reforma∣tion driven thence. This City was severely treated in 1677: but is now rebuilding. The Molucques, Moluccae, by the Spaniards called las Molucas, are five small Islands towards the Western Shoar of the Isle of Gilolo in the East-Indies; lying near the Line: in Long. 150. deg. called Ter∣nata, Tidor, Machian, Motir, and Bachian. The greatest of them is forty five Miles in Compass. They lie extended from North to South, on both sides the Line; only regardable on the account of the vast quantities of Spice, which are from hence sent over all the World. About the Year of Christ 1013. the Chinian Empire, being then in a flourishing State, first became Masters of these Islands; but not without Blood and Treasure. About sixty years after, they were expelled by the Inhabitants of Malucca; after which succeeded the Persians, mixed with Arabians; and by the latter they were called the Molucca Isles. The ancient Greeks and Romans knew nothing of them, though they had Spices from them, brought by the Indian and Arabian Merchants by the way of the Red Sea. In latter times those were brought by Persia to the Caspian and Euxine Seas; and thence dispersed over Christendom by the Genouese and Ve∣netians. After the Turks prevailed in Asia, the Trade was turned by the way of Grand Cairo, and Alexan∣dria. But after the Portuguese by many discoveries had opened their way to the East-Indies, about 1512. they first arrived in these Islands; and cut off all Trade between the Arabians and them; by which the Sultan of Egypt lost eight hundred thousand Ducats a year. The Spaniards came hither under Ferdinando Magal∣haens, about 1520: whereupon ensued a Contest be∣tween Charles V. and John III. (King of Portugal) concerning the Dominion of these Islands: Charles re∣signed his Right to John for two hundred thousand Ducats. About 1579. the English, under Drake, began to disturb the Portuguese here. About 1599. the Hollanders began to send numerous and strong Fleets into these Seas; by which, (and the great Wars, and Changes which have since happened in Spain and Portuga') they have intirely possessed themselves of these Islands. The Earth is extremely dry and poey, ke a Pumice-stone: it drinks up, not only the Rain as fast as it falls, but all those Springs and Rivers too from the Hills, before they can reach the Sea: and in many places sends out fire and smoak. The Plains are covered with Sand and Shells; so that except Spice, it scarce affords any thing useful to the Life of Man. Mombaza, or Monbaze, Monbaza, Monbaccia, a Kingdom, near the Equinoctial Line, of Zanguebar, in Africa; betwixt the Kingdoms of Queilloa and Me∣linde, of great extent: the King, who gives himself the title of the Emperor of the World, is able to bring into the Field an Army of 80000 Men. The Capital City enjoys the same name, and has a strong Castle built by the Portuguese, and a fine Sea-Port or Haven: It stands an hundred and fifty Leagues from Quiloa to the North, in an Island of about four Leagues Circumference. Long. 65. 00. Southern Lat. 30. 00. Dr. Heylyn placeth it Long. 72. 00. Lat. 4. 50. Fran∣cis Almaida, the Portugal Viceroy of Africa, sack'd and burnt this City in 1505. After which, the Por∣tuguese secured themselves of the Cittadel, till 1631: when the King of Monbaze took it by assault, Mas∣sacred all the Christians, and (from a Christian Con∣vert) turned Turk again to be protected by the Turks. Mommedi, a strong Castle in Lorain. Mompellier, Mons Pessulus, or Pessulanus, a City in the Lower Languedoc in France; which has been a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Narbon ever since the Year 1636: when it was substituted in the place of Maguelone, a ruined City, by Pope Paul III. It stands upon the River Lez upon an Hill; two Leagues from the Mediterranean Sea to the North, and fifteen from Narbon to the East. Sold in 1349. by Sanctius, King of Majorca, (whose Predecessors, and he till then was possessed of it) to Philip de Va∣loise, King of France. It is great, populous, well built; and has an University, particularly famous for the study of Physick. Monaco. See Munchen. Monaco, Menaecium, Herculis Monoecii Portus, corruptly called Mourgues by the Neighborhood; is a small Sea Port Town in the States of Genoua; of great Antiquity, being mentioned by Strabo and Pto∣lemy. It is now very strongly fortified; has a strong Castle built on a Rock, a safe Harbor upon the Me∣diterranean Sea, and a Princely Pallace belonging to the Family of Grimaldi; (the supreme Lords of the Town), though under the Protection of the Crown of France, ever since 1641. This is the Capital of the little principality of Monaco, to which belong only two places more, Rocca Bruna and Menton. It is al∣most surrounded by the County of Nice: but on the East it has the States of Genoua; and at this Town the Maritim Alpes begin. It stands about two Miles from Nizza to the East, and sixty two from Embrun to the South-East. Mon, Mona, Anglesey, an Island and County in Wales. Monaghan, a Town and County in the Province of Ʋlster in Ireland. The County hath on the East of it Armagh; on the North Tyrone; on the South and South-East Cavan, Lowthe, and part of East Meath; and on the West Fermanagh. It contains five Baronies. Monbeliar, Mons Belligardus, a Town and Coun∣ty in the Franche Comte; belonging to the Duke of Wurtenburgh; called by the Germans, Mompelgart, by the French, Montbeliart. The County lies between Suntgow to the East; and the Franche Comte to the West, North, and South: under a Prince of its own. The Town stands at the foot of Mount Vauge, upon the River Alaine; (which a little lower falls into the Doux, Dubis:) and has a Castle in which resides the Count, who is of the Family of Wurtenburgh; but
the out-works of this Castle are destroyed. This Town is forty Miles from Besanzon to the South-East, and thirty three from Basil to the West. Monbrison, Monbrisonium, a City in le Forez, (a Province of France) upon the River Vesie; sixteen Leagues from Lion to the West, and two from the Loyre to the same. Called in the middle Writers Mons Brusonis. Moncastro, the same with Bialogorod. Moncayo, Caunus, a Mountain which lies in the Confines of Arragon and Old Castile; two Leagues from Tarrazona to the South, and six from the E∣bro. Moncenis, Mons Cenisius, Cibenica juga, a Moun∣tain, over which the high Road lies between Piedmont and Savoy. Moncon, Montio, a fortified Town of the King∣dom of Arragon, in Spain, upon an Hill, with the River Cinea running at its foot. Moncontour, Monconturium, a small Town in the Province of Poictou in France, upon the ascent of a Hill, where the River Dive passes, nine or ten Leagues from Poictiers, towards Loudun. It was made remarkable in 1569. by the Victory which the Roman Catbolicks gained over the Huguenots in the Reign of Charles IX; whose Army Royal fought un∣der the Command of Henry Duke of Anjou, afterwards K. Henry III. and that of the Huguenots, under Admi∣ral Coligny. Mondego, Monda, Munda, a River in Portugal; which ariseth near la Guarda, a City of that King∣dom; and flowing Westward, between the Douero to the North and the Tajo (Tagus) to the South, it di∣vides the Province of Beira: and washing the City of Coimbra, seven Leagues lower, falls into the Atlan∣tick Ocean. Mondonnedo, Mindon, Mindonia, Glandomirum, a small City of Galicia, which is a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Compostella; it sprung up out of the ruins of Bretonia, a near City; four Leagues from the Ocean, eight from Lugo to the North, and six from Rivadeo to the West. It is small, and in a de∣caying State: seated in the Mountains; and washed by Valindares and Sexto, two small Rivolets. Long. 9. 25. Lat. 43. 18. Mondi, or Mondevi, Mondovi, and Montdevis, Mons vici, Mons Realis, a strong City in Piedmont in Italy; which has a Noble Castle, and is a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Turin; the second next to Turin, within that principality, for largeness and po∣pulousness. Seated on a Mount or Hill, at the Foot of the Apennine; towards the Borders of the State of Genoua, and of the Dukedom of Montisferat: it had heretosore an University, which is since removed to Turin. It belonged heretofore to the Dukedom of Montisferat; and at the Request of Theodorus II. (Marquess of Montisferat) was made a Bishops See in 1388. Pope Pius V. was Bishop of this place, when he was chosen Pope. It stands two Miles from the Tanaro, fifteen from Cunio to the East, and eighteen from Alba to the South: now under the Duke of Savoy. Charles Emanuel I. Duke of Savoy, was the Founder of the Cathedral here, in which they pretend to preserve a miraculous Image of the Blessed Vir∣gin. Mondidier, Mons desiderii, Mondiderium, a strong and garrisoned Town in the tract of Santerre, in Picardy in France, upon an Hill, betwixt Amiens and Compiegne, near a little River falling into the Auregue. It hath repulsed several attacques of the Spaniards. Monemagt, or Mono-Emugi, Monemagium, a Kingdom in Africa, in the Lower Aethiopia; other∣wise called Nimeamaje: it is a great Kingdom; ex∣tending from the Kingdom of Macoco on the West, to that of Monotapia on the South; the Kingdoms of Monbaza, and Quiloa East; Sofala and Mosambick North. But what Cities or Provinces it has, was never yet discovered by any European. Monervino, Minervium, Minervinum, Mons Orvinus, a City in the Province of Bari, in the King∣dom of Naples; which is a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Bari. Small, ill built, not much peo∣pled, and seated in the Confines of the Basilicate. Monfeltro, or Montefeltro, Feretrum, Mons Fe∣retranus, Leopolis, a City of Ʋmbria, now in the Dukedom of Ʋrbino, and the Capital of a Territory in the same, in the States of the Church; commonly called San Leo: it is a Bishops See, under the Arch∣bishop of Ʋrbino. It stands upon the Skirts of Mount Feretranus, near the River Arimino, in the Confines of Romandiola; twenty Miles from Ʋrbino to the South-West, and fifteen from Arimini to the South: giving name to an honourable Italian Family. This Chair was removed to Pinna, a Town four Miles from it, by Pope Pius V. in 1572. Monferrant, Monferrandum, a City in Auvergne; in a very fruitful Soil; from whence it has the name: It stands upon an Hill about one Mile from Cleremont, two Leagues from the River Allier, and twenty five from Lion; now in a flourishing state, with divers Religious Houses in it: The River Bedat glides by it. § There is another Monferand in the Territory called, le Pais entre les deux mers, that is, betwixt the confluence of the Garonne and the Dordogne. This latter is the first Barony in Guienne. Monferrat. See Montferrat. Monfa, an Island on the Eastern Coast of Africa, over against against Quiloa. In Long. 65. and deg. 8. Southern Lat. Monfort l' Amauri, Montfortium Amalrici, Monfortium Almariae; a small Town in the Territory of Montoran, in the Government of the Isle of France; betwixt Dampiere and Mante, upon an Hill, with a little River gliding at its foot; about ten Leagues from Paris. It carries the name of an honourable Fa∣mily. Mongaguabe, a River in Brasil, in the Prefecture of Paraiba. Mongibello, Mount Aetna; and by allusion any burning Mountain in the Italian use of this Word. Mongul, a Province in the Asiatick Tartary. Monlui, a Mountain in Catalonia. Monlusson, Monlussonium, a City of France, in the Dukedom of Bourbon, in the Confines of Berry, upon the River Cher: four Leagues from the Borders of Auvergne, and thirteen from Moulins to the West. It is ordinarily epitheted la fertile, for its Vineyards and Pasturage. Monnedy, Mons medius, Mons maledictus, a small but very strong City, in the Dukedom of Lux∣emburgh, in the Low Countries, upon the River Chier; seven Leagues from Virdum to the North, and about nine from Luxemburgh to the South-West. It stands upon a Hill, very well Fortified; yet by the negligence of the Spaniards, for want of Ammuni∣tion and sufficient Garrisons, frequently taken by the French. At last in 1657, being taken by then, it was by the Pyrenean Treaty yielded to France. Monmirail, Monmiralium, a Town in the Pro∣vince of Brie, in France, upon an Hill; where glides the River Morin, falling afterwards into the Marne. § Also one of the five ancient Baronies of Perche-Gouet. Monmorency, Monmoreniacum, a Town in the Isle of France, four Leagues from Paris to the South-West; which gives the Title of a Duke to one of the best and most ancient Families of France. From this
Town, the Valley in which it lies, (one of the most fruitful spots of Ground in the whole World) is cal∣led the Valley of Montmorency. Monmorillon, a small Town in the Province of Poictou, in France, upon the River Gartampe, (here covered with a Bridge) and the frontiers of la Maache. Monmouthshire, Monumethia, hath on the North the County of Hereford, on the East Glocester, on the South the Severn, and on the West Glamorgan and Brecknockshires. It is twenty four English Miles from North to South; and nineteen from East to West. Full of Hills, Valleys, Woods and Springs: every where fruitful; abounding in Corn and Cattle; and injoys a temperate, healthful, clear Air. The most ancient Inhabitants were the Silures, Conquered by Julius Frontinus, in the Reign of Vespasian, after a War of about an hundred years continuance, with great loss on the Roman Side: nor was this County won with less difficulty by the English; the Welsh being intire∣ly possessed of it when the Normans conquered Eng∣land: yet being conquered before Wales, it was uni∣ted to the Crown of England in the Reign of Ed∣ward I. and accounted an English County, tho lying on the North of the Severn. Monmouth, which gives Name to this County, stands between the Wye and the Monow; over both which Rivers it has a Bridge: in the North-East Bor∣der of the County; where Monmouth, Hereford, and Glocestershires meet, as it were all in one Center. Three parts of it are secured by these Rivers. On the fourth it has a small Brook called Monnors, which runs through the Town: on the North-East Side, where the Town is most accessible, it has an ancient Castle; (once a place of great Strength and Beauty) in which Henry V. (King of England) thence called Henry of Monmouth, was born. But now ruined, and used as a Farm-House: there are three of the Gates standing, with a part of the ancient Wall: it is still a Corporation governed by a Mayor: This was also the Birth place of Geofry of Monmouth, the Historian. It now gives the Title of Earl to the R. H. Charles Mor∣dant, Created E. of Monmouth by K. W. As before, of a Duke, in the Person of James, the late unfortunate Duke of Monmouth; and it returns two Members to the House of Commons. Long. 17. 36. Lat. 52. 08. Monnow, a River of Monmouthshire, between which and the River Wye stands the Town of Mon∣mouth; falling into the Severn. Mono Emugi, a Kingdom in Africa, see Mone∣magi. There are abundance of Elephants, with Mines of Brass, Silver, and Gold, found in this Kingdom. A part of the Mountains of the Moon is enclosed therewith: and the Subjects traffick more especially for Silk, Cotton, and Amber, with the Kingdoms of Queilloa, Melinde and Monbaze. Betwixt the Estates of the Grand Negus and it, lye some petty principa∣lities, which are ever in Vassalage to the strongest side. Monomotapa, a City and Kingdom in the Southern Aethiopia in Africa, of great extent: which contains in it twenty five other Kingdoms; and reaches from North to South two hundred and fifty Spanish Leagues. Cluverius stretches it from the Aethiopick Ocean to the Red-Sea. Some speak particularly of an Amazo∣nian Kingdom amongst the rest, where the Women go to War and acquit themselves with admirable bravery. The Portuguese call the King of Monomotapa, the Emperor of Gold, from the abundance of that mettal found in Mines and the Rivers of his Dominions. Mo∣nomotapa (the Principal City, which gives Name to this vast and fruitful Empire) lies in Long. 48. 00. Southern Lat. 24. 35. Upon the banks of the River Spiritu Santo, very large, and adorned with a most magnificent Palace Royal. Monopoli, Monopolis, a City in the Province of Bari, in the Kingdom of Naples; which sprung out of the Ruins of Egnatia, an ancient City not far off: a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Bari; but exempt from the Jurisdiction of its Metropolitan. This City tho small, is very splendidly and magnificently built: twenty two Miles from Bari to the East, and twenty five from Taranto to the North. Monosceli, an ancient People of Aethiopia; also called Sciopodes, and mentioned by Pliny. Monreale, Montreali, Mons Regalis, a small Ci∣ty in the Island of Sicily, which is yet an Archbishops See. It stands upon a Hill, about four Miles from Palermo to the South; built by William II. King of Sicily. By Pope Lucius III. adorned with this Archi∣episcopal Chair, in the Year 1182, at the Request of that Prince; who assigned this See a large Revenue, and built a stately Palace for the Archbishops. Mons, Montes, Montes Hannoniae, the Capital City of the Province of Hainault, in the Low Coun∣tries; called by the Dutch Berghen; by the Germans Berg; by the French and English, Mons: Seated upon the River Troville, (which a little lower falls in∣to the Haisne,) in the middle between Douay to the West, and Namur to the East; twelve Miles from ei∣ther; and ten from Brussels to the South-West. It is very strongly seated, because all the Country about it may be drowned: and it is well walled, has three deep Trenches about it, a Castle in it. The publick and private Buildings are very Magnificent: many of them adorned with excellent Fountains. The French be∣sieged it with an Army of thirty thousand Men, in 1678, under the Command of the Duke of Luxem∣burgh; and so strongly retrenched their Army, that they despised any Attempt that could be made upon their Camp; yet the Prince of Orange coming up to the Relief of this City, bravely and resolutely attacked them; and by the Valour chiefly of ten thousand En∣glish, (led on by the brave Lord Ossory), entered the French Camp, with their Swords drawn at high Noon∣day; the French General very hardly escaping. This rich, strong, populous City defended it self against the encroachment of the French, and remained in the hands of the Spaniards, till 1691. when the French besieg'd and took it. The ancient Counts or Earls of Hainault used the title of Earls of Mons. There is a famous Abbey of Chanonesses in it, permitted to marry. Mons en Puelle, a Village and Castle in the Cha∣stellanie of L'isle, in Flanders, betwixt the Cities L'isle and Doway: where Philip le Bel K. of France fought the Flemings, Aug. 18. 1304. and killed of them 25000. Monserat, or Montserrat, Mons Serratus, a Mountain in Catalonia in Spain, upon the River Lo∣bregat; nine Miles from Barcelone to the South-West: very high and steep: in the middle of it is a Mona∣stery famous for the Worship of an Image of the Vir∣gin Mary, which was found here in 880. Monsoreau, a Town in Anjou in France. Monstieres, a City and an Archbishoprick in Ta∣rantaise in Savoy. Mont, a Marquisate in the Ecclesiastick State, subject to the Pope. Montacute, a sharp-pointed Hill in the South parts of Somersetshire, which has the honour to give the title of a Viscount to the R. H. Francis Brown, des∣cended from Anthony Brown created Viscount Monta∣cute in the Reign of Qu. Mary in 1554: which An∣thony was descended from Tho. Montacute Earl of Salisbury, created Lord Montacute and afterwards Marquess Montacute by K. Edw. IV. Montagnia, a considerable City of Natolia, up∣on the Coast of the Sea of Marmora, and the Gulph called heretofore Cianus Sinus; five Leagues from Bursa: accounted to have five or six thousand Inhabi∣tants,
of Turks, Greeks, and Jews; and by the way of the Gulph, entertaining a good Commerce with Constantinople. Montaldo, a small place in Piedmont, subject to the Pope. Mont-alcino, or Monte Alcino, Mons Alcinous, and Mons Alcinus, a small City in the Territory of Siena, under the Great Duke of Tuscany; built upon an Hill; twenty one Miles from Siena to the South-West, and fifty five from Piombino to the North-East. A Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Siena; but exempt from his Jurisdiction. Montalto, Mons Altus, a New City in the Mar∣chia Anconitana. in the States of the Church; under the Dominion of the Pope, upon the River Monocia; twelve Miles from Fermo to the South-West and eight from Ascoli to the North A Bishops See under the Archbishop of Ferme, founded by Pope Sixtus Wwho was born here. § There is another Montalto in the Hither Calabria, in the Kingdom of Naples, which passes for the Ʋffuguim of Livy. A Bishops See under the Archbishop of Cozenza. § Besides a small Town under the Pope in Italy, upon the Confines of Pied∣mont and the Dukedom of Montferrat. Montames, Caliabrum, once a City of Lusita∣nia, and a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Me∣rida: now a considerable Town in the Province of Estremadura in Spain; which has a Castle in the Pos∣session of the Knights of Saint James; six Leagues from Merida. Montargis, Montargium, a pleasant City in le Gastinois, a Province of France; seated upon the River Loing, (which falls into the Seyne) twenty five Leagues from Paris to the South, and eighteen from Orleans to the East. Being besieged by the English in 1418. it was burnt; and rebuilt in the Year 1528. since which time it has been esteemed the Capital of le Gastinois. Montauban, Montalbanus, Mons Aureolus, Mons Albanus, a City of France, in the Province of Quer∣cy in Aquitain, in the Confines of Languedoc; which is a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Tolose, foun∣ded by Pope John XXII. in 1317. upon the River Tarn; eight Leagues from Tolose to the North, nine from Caors to the South, and ten from Agen to the North-East. This is a pleasant, great, rich, populous City: generally built with Brick, and a very strong Place. By the Edict of Nants, (made in 1599, by Henry IV.) this was one of the places put into the Hands of the French Protestants for their Security. They quietly enjoyed it till the Year 1621, when it was in vain attempted to take it from them by a po∣tent Siege. It had a Brick Bridge upon the River; which being much damnified in this Siege, was rebuilt in 1667, with a flanting Inscription in Latin. Montbelliard. See Monbeliar. Montblanc, Mons Albus, a small Town in Cata∣lonia; Honored by being made the Title of a Duke∣dom; it stands upon the River Francolinum, five Leagues from Tarragona to the North. Montbrison. See Monbrison. Monte-Cassino. See Cassin. Monte-Corbino, a City of the Kingdom of Na∣ples in Italy, of good antiquity. It was heretofore a Bishops See under the Archbishop of Benevento: but in 1433, the See became united with that of Vultu∣rara in the same Kingdom. Monte-Falco, a Town in the Province of Om∣bria in Italy, near the City Spoleti. Monte-Fiascone, Mons Physcon, a small City in S. Peter's Patrimony in Italy; made a Bishops See by Pope Ʋrban V. It stands upon the Lake of Bolsena, [Volsinium;] between Viterbio to the East, and Bol∣sena to the West, eight Miles from either of them; and twenty from Corneto to the North. with the Bi∣shoprick of which this is united for ever. The Wines of this place have ever been in great esteem. Monte-Fiore, a Town in the Marcha Anconi∣tana in Italy. Monte-Leone, Mons Leo, Hippo Vibo, a City and Colony of the Brutii, now in the Further Cala∣bria; which was a Bishops See under the Archbishop of Cosenza; but that Chari was removed to Melito, by Pope Gregory VII. This place is in a very good estate: four Miles from the Tyrrhenian Sea, twenty from the Ionian Sea, and about thirty eight from Co∣senza to the South. See Melito. Some imagine, that it was built upon the ruines of the ancient, Vibo Valentia. Montelimar, Mons limarii, a Town in Dauphine in France, upon the River Rubion, and about one League from the Rhosne. It is a large, handsome, well peopled Town, with divers religious Houses in it, and a Cittadel: Frequently taken and retaken in the Wars of Religion in the last Age; but chiefly addicted to the Huguenot Party. Monte Marano, Mons Maranus, a very small City in the Further Principate, in the Kingdom of Na∣ples; which is yet a Bishops See under the Archbishop of Benevento. It stands ten Miles from Avellino to the East. Monte Peloso, Mons Pilosus, Pelosius, Pelusius, &c. a small, but populous City, in the Basilicate, in the Kingdom of Naples; which is a Bishop's See, under the Archbishop of Acerenza, tho exempt from his Jurisdiction. This Bishoprick was instituted by Pope Sixtus IV. in 1643. It stands upon the Bor∣ders of the Dutchy of Bari, betwixt Acerenza and Matera. Montepulciano, Mons Politianus, a City in the Province of Toscana in Italy, towards the States of the Church, and the Lake of Chiano, upon an Hill: It hath the Title of an Episcopal See, and may de∣serve a further Remark for being the Birth-place of the ingenious Angelus Politianus. Monte S. Angelo, a City and Archbishoprick in the Kingdom of Naples. Montereau faut Yonne, Mons Regalis, Monaste∣riolum ad Icaunam, a Town in Champagne; where the Duke of Burgundy (the sworn Enemy of the House of Orleans) was basely murthered, Septem∣ber 10. 1419. It stands seven Leagues from Melun towards Sens, at the conjunction of the River Yonne with the Seine: and had heretofore a Palace Royal to adorn it. Montesia, a Town in the Kingdom of Valentia; which gave Name to an Order of Knights, founded in 1317. (after the abolishing of the Templars) at this Town. Monte-verde, Mons Viridis, a small City in the Further Principate, in the Kingdom of Naples, in the Confines of Terra di Bari; which is a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Consa. This See in 1531. was united with the titular Archbishoprick of Nazareth. It stands upon the River Ofanto; thir∣teen Miles from Consa to the East, and twenty three from Acerenza. Montferrat, Montisferrat, Monferrat, Monfe∣rato, Mons Ferratus, a Province of Italy: Honored with the Title of a Dukedom, in 1570. It is boun∣ded on the East with the Dukedom of Milan; the States of Genoua on the North, with the Territories of Vercelli, Biella, and Canavese; on the West by Piedmont, (cut off from it by the Apennine;) and on the South, the Dukedom of Milan. So very fruit∣full, and well cultivated, (tho it be Hilly) that it is thought to have its Name à Feracitate, from its Fer∣tility. It has been ever since 1535, under the Duke of Mantoua; to whom it came by the Marriage of
Margaret, Sister of Boniface, the last Earl of this Country. Heretofore the Territory of Canavese was a part of it: which by the Treaty in 1631, was to∣gether with the rest of this Dukedom, beyond the Po to the North, granted to the Duke of Savoy. The chief places under the Duke of Mantoua, are Casale, Arqui, Nizza, and Paglia. Under the Duke of Sa∣voy, Turino, Alba, and Verua. Valenza and Bassi∣nia, did together with Mondovi belong to it: but now dismembred, and annexed to the Dukedom of Milan. Montgatz, a Town in the Ʋpper Hungary, in the County of Pereczas; and an Episcopal See here∣ofore under the Greek Church: so strongly fortified with Ditches, and three Castles upon a Hill, where no∣thing can command them, that no Army without ve∣ry great loss is able to approach it. The Princess Ra∣gotski, a Roman Catholick Lady, Wife to Count Teckely, and Relict of the Prince Ragotski (the last of that ancient and noble Family of Batori, which hath furnished Kings to Poland, and Princes to Tran∣silvania) held out this place in the behalf of her Hus∣band against the Emperor in 1687; till after a Block∣ade of seven Months, she was necessitated to surrender; Jan. 25. 1688, upon these Conditions amongst o∣thers; that she should deliver up all the Ensigns of Sovereignty, in her custody, wherewith Count Teckely had been invested by the Turk, as Prince of Hungary; and take the City of Vienna for her Prison, not to remove thence without the Emperor's leave. Montgomery, Mons Gomerici, a small Town in Lisieux in Normandy; the Count of which unfortu∣nately slew Henry II. King of France, with a Launce in a Just, in 1559: who afterwards joining with the Rebels against the Crown, was beheaded more on the score of this old Misfortune, than on the account of that Rebellion. This Town stands two French Leagues and an half from Lisieux to the South, and above three from Argentan to the North. Montgomeryshire, Comitatus Montgomeriensis, one of the Twelve Shires of Wales, called by the Welsh Sire Trefaldwin. Bounded upon the North with Denbigh, on the East with Shropshire, on the South with Radnor and Cardigan, and on the West with Merionethshire. Very Mountainous, but being well watered with Rivers and Springs, nevertheless very fruitful. The ancient Inhabitants were called by the Romans, Ordovices; a valiant and warlike People, hardly subdued in the Reign of Domitian. Nor were they conquered by the English before the Reign of Edward I. This County takes its Name from a Town seated upon a high Hill, in the Eastern Border towards Radnor; between the Severn (which riseth in this County) and the Kemlet: it has been walled; on the North of it stands a fair Castle, which (saith Mr. Speed) is now well repaired. This Town was built by Roger de Montgomery, a Norman Earl; and from him had its Name. Philip Herbert, second Son of Henry Earl of Pembroke, was by James I. in the year 1605, made Earl of Montgomery; which Honor is now possessed by Philip III. who is the fourth Earl of this Family, and succeeded William his half Bro∣ther, in the Year 1674. It returns one member to the House of Commons. Monthelon or Montolon, a Town in the Dukedom of Burgundy, near Autun, which gives name to a fa∣mily of honour. Montignac, Montiniacum, a small Town in the Province of Perigord, in Aquitain in France, upon the River Vezere (here covered with a Bridge, four or five Leagues from Sarlat, and a little more from Peri∣geux. The Castle of it used to be the Seat of the ancient Counts of Perigord; for which reason they commonly surname it, Montignac le Comté. Montigni le Roy, a Town in the County of Bas∣signi, in Champaigne, upon the Meuse, which hath its source near it: in Latin, Montiniacum Regium. Montilli or Monteil. Some apprehend this place to be the same with Montelimar in Dauphine. Some situate it in Languedoc, and others upon the Rhosne. And the reason, there is this notice taken of it, is, a Council Assembled at it in 1208. against the Al∣bigenses: wherein it was resolved, that Raymond VI. Earl of Tolouse (the supporter of their cause) should be cited to appear in Person at Valence, before the Popes Legate, to answer to the disorders objected against him. Mont le Herry, a Town in the Isle of France, upon a Hill, with a Castle built in 1015; and a Chastellaine belonging thereunto: together with the title of an Earldom near Paris, by the banks of a little River; falling soon after into the Orge. In the Year 1465. Jul. 16. Lewis XI. King of France, and Charles Duke of Berry, his Brother, (whom the Dukes of Bretagne and others of the Nobility had set up against King Lewis,) fought a very equal Battel here. Mont de Marsan, Mons Martiani, the Capital Town of a Territory of the same name, in the Pro∣vince of Gascoigne in France, upon the River Midon, where it receives the Douse; in an excellent soil for Corn. The Huguenots were Masters of this Town in 1569. before the Battel of Moncontour: But the Roman Catholick Party forced it soon after. See Marsan. Mont Martre, a Mount near Paris, on the North side; where there is a remarkable Abbey, so called, either from the adoration of Mars or Mercury in ancient times there, as some; or from the Martyr∣dom of S. Dennis and his Companions upon it, as o∣thers say. Montmelian, a strong Castle in Savoy; the only place the Duke had left him by the French in Savoy, in the Year 1630. In vain attempted by the French in 1690; but taken the year after. Montone, Bedesis, a River of Romandiola in Ita∣ly, commonly called il Bedese, or Ronco. It spring∣eth from the Apennine; and running through the Dominions of the Church, watereth Meldola, and some other Castles; then falls into the Gulph of Ve∣nice beneath Ravenna. Montone, Vitis, a River in Italy, which riseth out of the Apennine; and watering Forli, falls into the Gulph of Venice beneath Ravenna. Upon the Banks of this River, five Miles above Ravenna, Lewis XII. (King of France) slew eighteen thousand Spaniards in a set Battel, in 1512. Montpellier. See Mompellier. Montpensier, a small Town in the Lower Au∣vergne in France, upon an Hill, betwixt Aigueperce and Gannat; adorned with the title of a Dukedom and Peerdom, by K. Francis I. in 1538. It had for∣merly a Castle: But this was destroyed in the Reign of Lewis XIII. Lewis X. dyed here in 1226. Montreali. See Monreale, an Archbishops See in Sicily. §. Petra Deserti in Arabia has sometimes gone by this name: and also a Town in Spain, where Alphonsus VI. K. of Spain, established the order of the Knights Templars. Montrevil l' Argille, Monasterium Argille, a strong Town in Picardy, in the County of Ponthieu, seated upon an Hill; two Leagues from Eastaple to the East, upon the River Canche; three from Hesdin to the West, and the same distance from the British Sea. It has a strong Castle belonging to it, and two ancient Abbeys of the Order of S. Benedict for Men and Women. Philip I. K. of France, after his di∣vorce from Queen Berthe his Wife, banish'd her to
this place, where she dyed in the Year 1093. It is also called Montreuil sur le Mer, to distinguish it from § Montreuil-Bellay, a Town in the Province of An∣ou, upon the frontiers of Poictou, at the conjunction of the Touay and the Thon. Montrose, Mons Rosarum, a small Town in the North of Scotland, in the County of Angus; twenty five English Miles from S. Andrews to the North-East; upon the Mouth of a River which there falls in∣to the German Ocean. This place (tho small) de∣serves to be remembred on the account of James Graham Earl of it: who did Wonders for Charles I. in the lowest of his Misfortunes; and suffered Death for Charles II. with the same undaunted Bravery, in 1650. Whose dispersed Limbs by the Order of that Prince were Collected, May 11. 1661, and decently Buried in the Monument of his Ancestors: and the Head of the Marquess of Argile (his bitter Enemy) set up in the same place where his had stood. Mont-Saint-Marie, Mons Sanctae Mariae, a Territory in the Diocese of Soissons in France, other∣wise called Nostre Dame de Tartenois; and mention∣ed by the French Geographers upon the account of two Synods there assembled in 97. and 983. Montserrat, a small Island in the North America, in the Possession of the English; so call'd by the Spa∣niards, from the Mountain of that name near Barce∣lona in Spain: it is about ten Miles long, and nine broad; in 17. Deg. Lat Monza, a small Town in the Milaneze in Italy, upon the River Lambro, towards the Lake of Coma; in a great Plain, ten Miles from Milan. The Empe∣rors heretofore used to receive the Iron Crow here. Mopsuestia, an ancient City of, Caramania, in the Lesser Asia; which has formerly born the honour of a Bishops See, and likewise of an Archbishops un∣der the Patriarch of Antioch. Pliny, Ptolemy, and Strabo mention it. A small Synod was assembled at it in 550. against Theodorus, the Bishop of the place. Now called Malmistra. Morat, Murat or Mourat, Muratum, Moratum, a small Town in Switzerland, in the Canton of Fri∣burgh, and the County of Romont; two Leagues from Friburgh to the North, and three from Bern to the West; called by the Germans, Murten; it stands up∣on a Lake of the same Name. In this place the Swiss first overthrew the Forces of Charles the Hardy, Duke of Burgundy, in 1476. then besieging it. In memory whereof, they, in a Chappel upon the banks of the Lake, advanced this Inscription; Invictissimi atque fortissimi Caroli Ducis Burgundiae Exercitus Muratum obsidens, contra Helvetios pugnans, hi sui Monumentum reliquit, Anno 1476. Morato, Tigris. Morava, Moravus, Morus, Marus, a River in the Kingdom of Bohemia; heretofore called Ma∣rus; ow by the Inhabitants, Morawa; by the Ger∣mans, Marh. It ariseth in the Confines of Bohe∣mia near Altstadt; and bending Southward, water∣eth and divideth the Province of Moravia (which takes its Name from it) and the City of Olmutz; then in Austria falls into the Danube over against Haynburg; five German Miles beneath Vienna, towards Presburg. Morave, Moravus, Margus, Margis, a River of Servia; which ariseth in the Borders of Macedonia, towards the Fountains of Orpheus; and being aug∣mented with many smaller Rivers, falls into the Da∣nube beneath Senderinum, eighty Miles from Belgrade to the East. There is another called by the same Name, which falls into this beneath Nissa: Which last is called Morava in Bulgaria, to distinguish it from the former. Moravia, a well peopled Province in the Kingdom of Bohemia, called by the Inhabitants Morawa; Mo∣rawska Zemia by the Slavonians; Mahren by the Germans; Moravie by the French. It lies between Silesia to the North, and East; Bohemia properly so called to the West; Austria, and Hungary to the South: in the form of a triangle; about forty five Leagues from East to West, and thirty from North to South; under the Emperor as King of Bohemia. This was anciently the Seat of the Quadi, a warlike People, and the Marcomani. It bore the honour, for some time, of the title of a Kingdom; afterwards of a Dukedom, and then a Marquisate. It now makes a part of the Kingdom of Bohemia, and is supposed to take its name from the River Morawi, Morave, or die Mahr, (Morus or Marus,) arising near to Altstadt in Bohemia and joyning with the Danube at Hayn∣bourg in Austria; being the same River with the precedent Morava. The Capital of it is Ol∣mutz; and the other principal Towns are, Brin, Iglaw, and Znaim. It is a fruitful and pleasant Country; ex∣tremely well improved. Morbiban, Morbibanum, a large Haven on the North side of the Lesser Bretagne in France; seven Leagues from Port Lovis to the East, and near Van∣nes. Above thirty small Islands lye in the Gulph of this harbour. The Morduates, a Province in the North-Eastern Parts of the Empire of Russia, towards the River Rha; between the Czeremisses to the East, and Wolodimera to the West. It is a Country of great Extent; and made terrible by its vast unpassable Woods and Fo∣rests. More or Moore, an Episcopal City in the County of Mayo, in Connaught in Ireland. Morea, Peloponnesus, a celebrated, great, and fruitful Peninsula of Greece; of about five hundred and fifty Miles in circuit. Its extent from Corinth in the North-East to Cape Sapienza in the South, is one hundred and fifty Miles: its breadth from Cape di Schilli, to Cape Tornese on the West, one hundred and seventy five. Containing the Provinces of Roma∣nia, Sacania, Belvedore, and Clarentia; and the famous Cities of Corinth, Coron, Clarenza, Patras, Misitra, Nauplia, &c. Its principal Rivers are the Orfea, and the Iris or Basilipotamo. Its Mountains Mynthe, Stymphalis, Pholoe, Lyceus, &c. are men∣tioned in the Writings of the Ancients. This Coun∣try was first intirely conquered by the Macedonians, after the Death of Alexander the Great: then by the Romans, under L. Mummius, about one hundred and forty six years before the Birth of our Saviour; when Corinth, the then Capital of this Province, was intirely ruined. In the later times of the Greek Em∣pire, it had Despotes (or Princes of its own) who were subject to the Emperors of Constantinople; the last of which, Thomas Palaeologus, was driven out of his Dominions by Mahomet II. in 1543. Ever since it has been in the Hands of those Destroyers of Mankind. But in 1685, the Venetians began the Reconquest: and in 1687, were intirely possessed of it (excepting only Malvasia) by a wonderful Revolution. And in September, 1690. they recovered Malvasia also. Moret, Murittum, a Town in the Territory of Gastinois, in the Isle of France, upon the River Loing; adorned with the title of an Earldom. A Synod was held there in 850. Morga, Margus, a River of Bactria, a Province of Persia; which springing from the Mountains of Chorazan, and flowing through the Country called by their Name, falls into the River Obengir, which ends in the Caspian Sea.
Morin, Muera, a River of France, in the Pro∣vince of Le Brie; which watereth Colomiers [Co∣lumbaria] and Cressy; then falls into the Marne beneath Meaux: this is called the Great Morin, to distinguish it from another which falls into the Marne in the same Province, beneath La Ferte sous Jovare to the West of Meaux. Morini, a People of Gallia Antiqua, mentioned by Pliny and Virgil. The latter styles them, Ex∣tremique hominum Morini, &c. It is supposed with greatest probability, that they dwelt in the (now) Dioceses of S. Omer, Boulogne, and Ypres. Morlaix, Morlaeum, Mons relaxus, a City in the Province of Bretagne; upon a River of the same Name, which has a Harbor on the North Shore of that Province. It stands about two Leagues from the British Sea, and forty from Rennes to the West, over, against Plymouth. There is  Fort built to se∣cure the Passage of the River, in an Island of the River. The Town stands upon an Hill, betwixt two Plains, and shows the Ruines of an old Cittadel. Mormandes, Milmandra, a River of France, in Le Berry. Morpeth, a considerable Market and Borough Town in the County of Northumberland, upon the River Wensbeck: The Capital of its Ward; fortified with a Castle; returning two Members of Parliament, and giving the Title of Viscount to the Earl of Carlisle. Mortagne, Moritania, a small Town in the Ter∣ritory of Tournaysis in Flanders, at the Confluence of the Rivers Escaut▪ and Scarpe, towards Valencien∣nes, two or three Leagues from Tournay. It has for∣merly been fortified. § Also a large, handsome, and populous Town in the Ʋpper Perche, in France, towards the borders of Normandy, upon a Stream which there begins to form the River Huisne. This Mortagne is now adorned with a Castle. § There is a third of the Name in the Province of Poictou, to∣wards the Confines of Bretagne, at the reception of the Loing by the River Sere Nantoise. Mortain, Moritonium, Moritolium, a small Town in Normandy, near the River Ardee, towards the Confines of La Mayne, betwixt Auranches and Domfront: which by Henry I. King of England and Duke of Normandy, was given, with the Title of an Earldom, to his Nephew Stephen Blois, after∣wards in 1135. King of England, whose second Son william enjoy'd the same Title in the next Succession. But William died without Issue. This Town by an∣cient Custom, in publick Processions, carries a na∣ked Sword in the place of a Standard. Mortan, Mortana, a River in Lorain. Mortara, or Mortare, Mortaria, Pulchra Sylva, a strong, great, populous Town in the Dukedom of Milan, upon the River Gogna; four Miles from Vigevano to the North-West, ten from Novara to the South-East, and twenty four from Pavia to the West. Anciently called Bella, or Pulchra Sylva, the Beautiful Wood; but upon the great Slaughter of the Lombards, by the Forces of Charles the Great, (when he took Desiderius, their King, Priso∣ner, in 774,) it took the Name of Mortara, which signifies Slaughter, or Death. This Town was taken by the French in 1658. and put under the Duke of Modena. In 1660. it was upon a Peace restored back to the Spaniards. It is the Capital of the Territory of Lumellina. Le Moruan, Morundia, Morvinus tractus, a mountainous Tract or Territory in the Dukedom of Burgundy, of small extent; and its Limits not well known. Mor Verridh, the Welsh name of the Irish Sea. Mosa, the Meuse. See Maes. Mosambich, Mosambica, a City of Zanguebar; on the Eastern Coast of Africa, in an Island near the Continent; at the Mouth of a River of the same name; which there falls into the Aethiopick Ocean▪ To this City belongs a strong Castle, and a safe Har∣bour, all in the Possession of the Portuguese. Long. 63. 40. South. Lat. 14. . Moscow, Moscoua, Moschia, the Capital of the Empire of Moscovy, or Russia; called by she Inhabi∣tants Mosqua; by the European Strangers, Moscow; by the Poles, Moscouf; by the Germans, Moscaw. One of the greatest Cities in Europe; extremely fre∣quented on the score of Trade, and the common Residence of the Great Duke, or Czar of Moscovy. It stands upon a River of the same name; (which a little more to the East falls into the Occa or Aka; which at Novogorod falls into the Wolgh:) one hundred and seventy Miles from the Borders of Lithuania to the East, fifty four Polish Miles from Smolensko, and two hundred and fifty from Belgrade to the North-East. Long 66. 00. Lat. 55. 36. This City is three German Miles in compass; and no doubt (saith Olearius) has been greater; yet in his time it had forty thousand Houses. In general, it looks like a mass of divers Towns, rather than one City. The Streets are broad, but very miry; the Houses generally low, built all of Deal, covered with Bark and sometimes with Flag over the Bark, which makes them extremely subject to be destroyed by Fire. The Houses of some great Lords and rich Merchants are built with Brick and Stone. In 1571. the Crim Tartars made an Inroad and burnt this whole City, except the Castle: in 1611. the Poles burnt it in the same manner. About 1636. the third part of it was burnt by Accident. In 1668. it was almost totally destroyed by Fire. The Castle (or Great Duke's Palace) is fortified with three strong Walls, and a good Ditch; well mounted with Cannon. In the midst of it is a Steeple co∣vered with Copper; there is in it a Stone Palace built for the Prince after the Italian manner: before it is the great Market-Place, well stored with all sorts of Merchandize; and the Traders have their particular Places assigned them. § The Province of Moscow is bounded on the North by Rostow and Susdale; on the East by Rhezan, on the South by Vorotina, and on the West by Bielkia: the Capital of it is Moscow. This Province is very fruitful, well peopled: and the Dukes of it having by Marriages and Wars subdued and brought in all the other, this whole Empire is commonly called by that Name: but I shall represent it under the word Russia. Moselle. See Moesel. Moseniga, Messene, once a famous City of Pelo∣ponnesus; now a small contemptible Village on the South-West part of the Morea, upon the River Pir∣naza: eight German Miles from Coron to the North, six from the Mouth of that River, and thir∣teen from Misitra to the West. Moska, a River which passeth through the City of Moscow: it ariseth in the Province of Tuere; and receiving the Occa near Columna, about a Mile lower falls with it into the Wolga. Olearius. Mosul, Assyria, a Region of Asia, the Seat of the first General Empire. Till of late it was under the King of Persia; but now almost entirely under the Turks. It has this name from Mosul, a City upon the Tygris; thirty five Miles from Amida to the North-East: thought to be Ninive. Motir, Motira, one of the Molucca Islands in the East-Indies, under the Line; betwixt Gilolo to the East, Tidor to the North, Machian to the South, and Celebes to the West. It is in the Posses∣sion of the Hollanders. Motola, Motula, a small City in the Province of Otranto, in the Confines of Bari; which is a Bi∣shop's See, under the Archbishop of Taranto. It stands
at the foot of the Apennine; seven Miles from the Bay of Taranto, thirteen from that City to the North-West, twenty five from Bari to the South-West: and not much better than a Village. La Mothe, a Village and Fortress in Lorain, upon the Borders of Champagne; which endured a Siege of five months; but being at last taken by the French, was dismantled in 1645. Moulins, Molinae, a great City in France; the Capital of Bourbonnois; seated upon the River Allier, which watering Nevers also, falls into the Loir; sixty two Leagues from Paris towards Lion, twelve from Nevers, and twenty from Clermont. This Ci∣ty grew up out of the Ruins of Sylviniacum, an ancient City not far off; and used to be the ordina∣ry Residence of the Princes of Bourbon, who built a Castle in it, where the Kings of France have often taken their Diversion. The Tomb of Henry 2. King of France, is to be seen here. Charles IX. held a great Assembly of the Nobility and Chief men of the Kingdom at this place in 1565; passing at the same time the famous Edict of Moulins. It affords good medicinal Waters, and here the Allier receives the River Daure. Moulon, Molo, a River of France, near Bourges en Berry; which flowing by the Monastery of S. Sulpicius, falls into the Greater Aveyron. Hoffman in Biturix. South Moulton, a Market Town in Devon∣shire. The Capital of its Hundred. Mounster, Momonia, one of the four Provinces of the Kingdom of Ireland. On the North it is se∣parated from Connaught, by the River Shannon; on the East it has Leinster, on the South and West the Vergivian Ocean. It is in length from North to South ninety Miles, in breadth one hundred: di∣vided into six Counties; viz. Limerick, Kerry, Cork, VVaterford, Desmond, and Tipperary. The chief City is Limerick. The rest are Cashell, Cork, Kinsale, and VVaterford. The Irish call this Pro∣vince Mown. The Mountains of the Moon, Montes Lunae, are a Ridge of Mountains which run cross Africa from East to West; separating the Kingdom of Go∣jame to the North, from the Lower Aethiopia to the South. The Ancients supposed the Nile to spring out of these Mountains; which is found to be a mi∣stake: that River rising in a Plain, on the North side of those Mountains. Mountserell, a Market Town in Leicestershire, in the Hundred of Goscote, near the Stower, over which it has a Bridge; and formerly a Castle, that stood upon a steep and craggy Hill; but long since demolished. Mouson, or Mouzon, Mosomum, a City in Cham∣pagne in France, upon the Maes; in the Confines of the Dukedom of Luxemburgh; between Sedan to the North, and Stenay to the South; three Leagues from either, and eleven from Verdune. Often taken and retaken of latter times; and particularly famous for a brave Defence it made against the Imperialists under the Command of Picolomini, one of the great∣est Captains of his time. It was finally recovered out of the hands of the Spaniards in 1653, and is still under that Crown. Two small French Synods were assembled at it in 948. and 995. Mowcop-Hill, a noted Hill in Staffordsh. in the Confines of Cheshire, where Mill-stones are procured. Mozambick. See Mosambick. Mscislaw, Mscislavia, a City in Lithuania, of great strength; seated upon the River Sosz, in the Confines of Moscovy; sixteen Polish Miles from Smo∣lensko to the South, and eighteen from Mohilow to to the East. This Place was besieged in 1386. by Swentoslaus, Duke of Smolensko without any Success. But taken by the Russ some few years since; who in the Reign of Sigismond I. (King of Poland) had re∣ceived a great Deseat under the Walls of it. It has the honour of the Title of a Palatinate. Muer, Mura, Savaria, Darus, a River of Stiria; which ariseth in the Bishoprick of Saltzburgh: and flowing through Stiria, watereth Gratz, (the Capital of this Province) and Judenburgh; and a little be∣neath Kanischa, falls into the Drave in the Lower Hungary. On the Banks of this River Count Serini defeated an Army of the Turks; and slew ten thou∣sand of them, in 1663. Muers, Murocincta, a Town in the Lower Ger∣many, mentioned by Ammianus Marcellinus; now called Moers by the Germans; and Muers by the French: the Capital of an Earldom and a County of the same name; between the Dukedom of Cleves, and the Bishoprick of Cologn; under the Dominion of the Prince of Orange. It lies in the middle between the VVesel to the North, and Neuss or Nuys to the South; nine Miles from Cologn to the North. Muiaco, Muiacum, a Kingdom of great extent in the Higher Aethiopia. Muiacheu, a great City in the Province of Suchuen in China. Mulbach, Miliare, a River of Transylvania. Muldaw, Mulda, a River of Bohemia, called by the Inhabitants Multava. It ariseth in the Borders of Bavaria, five German Miles from Passaw: and flow∣ing North, watereth Budweiss, a City of Bohemia; then taking in the Sazawa and the Miza, it passeth through Prague the Capital of that Kingdom: and three Miles lower falls into the Elbe. Mulgrave, an ancient Castle in the North Riding of Yorkshire, near the Sea, and not far from Whitby: first built by Peter de Mauley in the time of Rich. I. and continued in the line of its Founder for seven Ge∣nerations. Afterwards, through other Families, it came to the Sheffields. Edmund, Lord Sheffield of Butterwick, Lord President of the North, being crea∣ted Earl of Mulgrave by K. Charles I. in 1625. whose Great Grandson by Edmund Earl of Mulgrave is the R. Hon. John Sheffield, the present Earl of Mulgrave. Mulhausen, Mulnhausen, Mulhusia, a City of Ger∣many in Thuringia, at the foot of a Mountain, upon the River Ʋnstrutt; seven German Miles from Erford to the West, and four from Eysenach to the North. It is a fine City; under the Protection of the Elector of Saxony; being otherwise Free and Imperial. Mulhausen, Arialbinum, Atalbinum, Mulhasia, a City in the Upper Alsatia, called by the French Mi∣lause; seated upon the River Hellel. Once an Im∣perial and Free City; but in 1515. leagued with the Swiss, and united to Suntgow. It stands three Leagues from Ferrette to the North, and Basil to the South-West; but heretofore belonged to Alsatia. Mulheim, Limiris, a Town in Saxony in Germany. Mullon, Nauilubio, a River of the Asturia's in Spain; which separates Galicia from the Asturia's, and then falls into the Bay of Biscay. Multan, Multanum, a City of the Hither East-Indies, upon the River Indus; in the middle between Lahor to the East, and Candahar to the West; un∣der the Mogul. Once great and well peopled; but now declining; yet it is the Capital of a Province of the same name. Long. 104. 55. Lat. 31. 05. Multaw, the same with Muldaw. Mulvia, a River of Africa, which springeth from Mount Atlas; and separates the Kingdom of Fez and Telesin, then falls into the Mediterranean Sea. Munch, the Carpathian Mountains. Munchen, Monachum, Monachium, Campodunum, the capital City of Bavaria in Germany; called by the French, Munich; by the Italians, Monaco;
and of old Isinisca. It stands upon the River Isere, (here covered with a Bridge): and has a magnificent Palace belonging to the Elector of Bavaria, which in 1675. suffered something by Fire: five German Miles from Frisingen to the South, fifteen from Ratisbon towards Inspruch, and eight from Ausburg to the East. First walled by Otho, Duke of Bavaria, a∣bout the year 1156. Gustavus Adolphus, King of Sweden, took it in 1632. and being advised to ruine the Ducal Palace, said, he should be sorry to deprive the World of so admirable a Piece. Munda, an ancient Town in the Kingdom of Granada, in Spain; which Mariana admits to be the same with the modern Ronda la Vieja. It was at this Town, that Julius Caesar put a period to the Civil Wars betwixt Pompey and him, by a Victory obtai∣ned over the Sons of Pompey, in the year of Rome 709. Munfia, Apollinis Ʋrbs magna, an ancient City in Egypt, upon the West side of the Nile; one hun∣dred and sixty English Miles South of Grand Cairo: now in a good condition. Munghoa, a City in the Province of Yunnan in China. Munia, Lycopolis, a City on the Western Shoar of the Nile; one hundred and five English Miles South of Grand Cairo: now in a flourishing State. Munick, the same with Munchen. The Muzamudims, a Tribe of the ancient Bere∣beres, in Africa. See Bereberes. Munster, Mimingroda, Monasterium, a City of Westphalia in Germany; called by the French, Mounstre. The Capital of Westphalia; a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Cologne, founded by Charle∣maigne; and a great, rich populous City. It stands upon the River Aa; seven German Miles from Osna∣burg to the South, twenty two from Bremen to∣wards Cologne, (from which it stands eighteen,) and twelve from Paderborne to the West. It has a strong Castle; and was once an Imperial and Free City, but since exempted. Particularly remarkable for the great Calamities it sustained in 1533. when seised by the Anabaptists: who set up here John of Leiden for their King; perpetrating horrid Villanies, under the pretence of Enthusiastick Zeal; and could not be suppressed, till this City had endured a years close Siege. No less famous for a general Peace here trea∣ted in 1648. In 1661. it was taken by Bernard its Bishop, (a man wholly addicted to War and Blood∣shed) after a long Siege: ever since, it has been sub∣ject to the Bishops of this Diocese. The Bishoprick of Munster, called by the Ger∣mans, das Bisthum buon Munster; is a Province in the Circle of Westphalia, in the German Empire; which has its name from its Capital. Bounded on the West with Overyssel, on the North with the Earldoms Embden and Oldenburgh; on the South with the Dukedom of Westphalia, and the County of Marck: on the East by the Bishoprick of Osnaburgh, and the Counties of Diepholt and Ravensperg. Almost an hundred Miles in length from North to South; but not of equal breadth: and divided into thirteen Baili∣wicks. The principal Cities, are Munster, Meppen, Vecht, and Varendorp. It is extremely full of Woods and Marshes: fitter for the production of Cattle, than Habitation of Men. Munster, Monasterium, is a small City in the Valley of S. George, in the Ʋpper Alsatia; upon the River Fach, at the foot of Mount Vauge; five Leagues from Brisach to the West: called im Grego∣rienthall, to distinguish it from the other Cities of the same name. It was an Imperial Free City; but now exempted, and subject to the Crown of France. Munster Eyffel, a Town in the Dukedom of Ju∣liers, upon the River Erst; in the Territory of Eyffel, in the Borders of the Bishoprick of Cologne; six Ger∣man Miles from that City to the South, and seven from Aquisgran to the North-East; under the Duke of Newburgh. Munster Meinfeld, a Town in the Bishoprick of Trier or Treves, upon the Moselle; three German Miles from Coblentz to the North-West: under the Archbishop of Trier. Munsterberg, Munsterberga, a City of Silesia; heretofore subject to its own Duke, with the Terri∣tory belonging to it. This City stands upon the Ri∣ver Olaw; seven German Miles from Vratislaw to the South, and the same distance from Oppeien to the West. The Dukedom of Munsterberg, lies in Bohemia in the Ʋpper Silesia: now in the possession of the Emperour. Bounded by the Dukedom of Grotkaw to the East, that of Schweidnitz to the North, and Bohemia to the West and South. Munsterthal, Vallis Monasterii, a small Territo∣ry in the Canton of Gottespunt, amongst the Grisons. Munzarrum, Taurus, a Mountain in the Losser Ar∣menia. Muradal, or El puerto de Muradal, Saltus Ca∣stulonensis, a passage over the Mountains of Morena, leading to New Castile, Andaluzia, and the Borders of Portugal: where Alphonsus King of Castile with the King of Navarre, obtained so great a Victory over the Moors, as to leave two hundred thousand of them dead upon the place. There was heretofore, nigh to it, a Town called Castulo (now a Village, by the name of Caslona,) which gave it the Latin Name, of Saltus Castulonensis. Murat, a small Town in the Province of Au∣vergne, in France, upon the River Alagnon, at the foot of the Mountains; three or four Leagues from S. Flour: adorned with the Title of a Viscounty. Murrana, Crabra, a River in Italy, which ari∣seth in Campagnia di Roma; and dividing into two Branches, one falls into the Teverone, (two Miles above Rome,) the other runs through Rome into the Tiber. Murcia, a City and a Kingdom in Spain. The Kingdom is very small: lies on the South of New Castile, (to which it is now united) which bounds it on the North. The Kingdom of Valentia on the East, the Kingdom of Granada on the West, and the Mediterranean Sea on the South. It is called a Kingdom, because during its being under the Moors it had distinct Kings for many Ages. The chief Cities in it, are Carthagena, and Murcia, (the Capital of this Kingdom.) It is seated on the River Segura, in a pleasant Plain, in the Confines of the Kingdom of Valentia; three Leagues from Orihuela to the West, six from Carthagena to the North-West, eight from the Mediterranean Sea. Retaken from the Moors in 1265. and being a considerable and pleasant place, injoys the presence of the Bishop of Carthagena, for the most part. Muret, Muretum, a Town in the Province of Gascoigne, in Aquitain in France; upon the Ga∣ronne, two Leagues from Tholouse: near which, Si∣mon, Earl of Monfort, in 1213. obtained a great Vi∣ctory over the Albigeois and Arragonois. Peter (the King of Arragon) being there slain, together with the Earl of Tholouse; and above twenty thou∣sand of their men. § Also a small Town in the Pro∣vince of Limosin, in the same Kingdom. Muro, Muru, a small City in the Basiilicate, in the Kingdom of Naples; which is a Bishops See, un∣der the Archbishop of Cosenza. It is seated at the
foot of the Appenine, in the Confines of the Princi∣pate; twelve Miles from Cosenza to the North-East, and twenty from Acerenza to the West. Murray, Moravia, one of the North-Eastern Shires of the Kingdom of Scotland; of great extent from East to West: on the North it has the German Ocean, and Murray Fyrth; on the East Buchan; on the South Athole and Marr; and on the West Loquaber. It is in length ninety Scotch Miles, and in its greatest breadth thirty. The principal Town is Elgin, which is a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of S. Andrews: but he is stiled Bishop of Murray, not of Elgin. Murray Fyrth, Vara, a great Arm of the Ger∣man Ocean; which pierceth the Eastern Shoar of Scotland. On the North and West it has the County of Ross, and on the South Murray and Buchan. There is no Town of any consideration upon it, except Chaurie. Muscovy. See Russia. Mussidan, a Town in the Province of Perigord in France, upon the River Lille, four or five Leagues from Perigeux: famous in the Civil Wars of Reli∣gion, in the last Age. Mut, Vidua, a River of Ireland. Muya, Mulcha, the Niger, a vast River in A∣frica. Mycone. See Micoli. Mygdonia, a Country of the ancient Macedonia, betwixt the Rivers Strymon (Stronona,) Axius (Vardari,) and the Gulph of Aiomana. Apollonia, Antigonia, Amphipalis, &c. were its principal Cities. § The same name was anciently also given to a Coun∣try in Mesopotamia, lying along the course of the River Mygdonius, which watereth the Walls of the City Nifibin, and thence runs to the Bed of the Tigris. Mycenae, an ancient City of the Peloponnesus, betwixt Argos and Corinth. Otherwise called Agios Adrianos. Mylaen, Mylias, a City of Pamphylia, in the Les∣ser Asia; now ruined. Myra, the ancient name of the City Strumita in Lycia. See Strumita. Myrbach, a small Town in the Ʋpper Alsatia, in Germany; remarkable for a famous Abbey, which before the possession of this Country by the French, had the honour to be an Ecclesiastical Principality, immediately dependent of the Emperour. Myrlaea, Apamia, a City of Bythinia, in the Les∣ser Asia, upon the South Shoar of the Propontis; which is a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Cy∣zicum; and still called by its ancient name. Mysia, a Country of Asia Minor, according to the ancient Geography; divided into the Greater and Lesser Mysia; the former lay betwixt Phrygia, Bythinia, the Aegean Sea, and Mysia the Less; as this latter did be∣twixt Troas and the Hellespont. Now wholly con∣tained in Natolia, and under the Turks. Its princi∣pal ancient Cities, were Pergamus, Trajanopolis, A∣dramyttios, Cyzicus, Lampsacus, &c. N O. NAB, Nabus, a River of Nortgow, which ariseth out of the Mountains of Sultzberg, near the Fountains of the Main; and flowing Northward through Nortgow, or the Ʋpper Palatinate, is in∣creased by several smaller Rivers; at last ends in the Danube, a little above Ratisbone. Nabathaei, an ancient people of the Stony Ara∣bia, descended, in the judgment of Isidore, from Na∣bath the Son of Ismael. Their Country was boun∣ded by Arabia Deserta on the East, Palestine on the South, and Arabia Foelix on the North. Their Ca∣pital City, Petra. Being the same people, who, as Josephus writes, were defeated once in a great Fight by Paulus Gabinius, sometime Governour of Syria. Nadder, a River of Wiltshire, joining with the Willy at Wilton, near Salisbury; and there falling into the Avon. Nadin, a Fortress in the County of Zara, in Dal∣matta; taken from the Venetians by Solyman II. but since retaken by them, and kept. Naerdem, or Narden, Nardenum, a strong Town in Goeland, (whereof it is the Capital,) in Holland; upon the Zuyder Sea; almost four German Miles from Am∣sterdam to the East. In 1572. suprised, and much defaced by the Spaniards. In 1672. it fell into the hands of the French; but being recovered, is now very strongly refortified. Nagaia, the Kingdom of Astracan, in Tartaria Deserta, in the Czar's Dominions. Some describe it to be a Kingdom, or a Hord of Tartars there, di∣stinct from Astracan. Nagera, Nagara, a City in Old Castile, in the Province of Rusconia; by a River of the same name: once a Bishops See, now translated to Calzada; yet honoured with the Title of a Dukedom. This City lies thirty Spanish Leagues from Saragoza to the North-West, and eighteen from Burgos to the North-East. Near it was a Bloody Fight between Peter King of Portugal, and Henry King of Castile, in 1365. in which the latter prevailed; and in memo∣ry of that Victory, instituted the Knights of the Flower de Lys; the French joining with Peter a∣gainst Castile, and being beaten in that Battel. Nagibania, a Town in Transylvania, in which are Mines of Silver: six Miles from Bistirz to the West, in the Borders of the Ʋpper Hungary: called by the Latin Writers, Rivuli Puellarum. Naha, Nava, a River of Germany. Najac, a small Town in the Province of Rovergue, in France, upon the River Aveirou, betwixt Ville Franche, and S. Antonin. It is a famous place for Vicriol; and in the Civil Wars of Religion, it attained to a considerable name. Najara, one of the principal Towns in the Pro∣vince of Rioga, in Old Castile, in Spain; betwixt Lo∣grono and Calahorra: adorned with the Title of a Dukedom. Naim, a small City in Galilee, in Palestine, four Miles from Nazareth to the West, and near Mount Tabor; where our Saviour raised a person from the dead. Now in the condition of a despicable Village, with only some houses of Wild Arabs in it. Namptwich, a Market Town in Cheshire: the second in beauty and largeness, in that County; and of particular note for the White Salt here made in great plenty. It stands upon the Banks of the Wee∣ver, and is the Capital of its Hundred. Namur, Namurcum, Nemetocerna, a great and strong City in the Low-Countries; the Capital of one of the seventeen Provinces; and a Bishops See, un∣der the Archbishop of Cambray, by the Order of Pope Paul IV. This City stands betwixt two Hills, on the West Shoar of the Maes, where it receives the Sambre; nine Leagues from Louvain to the South, ten from Brussels to the East, and seven from Philippeville to the North. Adorned with divers Churches, Monasteries, and handsom Buildings. It has a strong Castle, and was under the Spaniards, till the beginning of the year 1692. that it was taken by the French.
The Earldom of Namur, is a small Province; in∣cluded by the Bishoprick of Liege on the East and South, by Hainault on the West, and Brabant on the North. There are only three places of Note in it; Namur, Charlemont, and Charleroy; besides some good Abbeys, and about one hundred and eighty Villages. It is Mountainous and Barren, but not unprofitable; there being great plenty of Iron and Lead Mines, and Quarries of Marble. We read of its being an Earldom ever since the year 924. It is a∣bout twelve Leagues long, and a little less broad. Nancang, or Nangan, a City in the Province of Quansi in China, almost ruined in the late Wars of the Tartars. Nancy, Nasium, Nancaeum, Nancium, the Capital City of the Dukedom of Lorrain; seated upon the River Meurte, (which falls into the Moselle) five Leagues from Toul to the East, fourteen from Bar le Duc to the same, and ten from Metz to the South. In 1476. Charles Duke of Burgundy was slain in Bat∣tel, by Rene Duke of Lorrain, near this City. In 1587. it was first fortified. In 1633. taken by Lewis XIII. King of France. In 1661. dismantled. But in 1673. the French began to refortifie it; and have since made it very strong. Nancyam, a City in the Province of Chiamsi, in the Kingdom of China. Nandor Alba, Belgrade. Nangazachi, a City of Japan, in the Island of Ximo and the Province of Figyn, with a very convenient Port. Pope Sixtus V. advanced it to the Dignity of an Episcopal See, under the Metropolitan of Goa. But at present it abides without a Bishop. Nanhiung, a City of China, in the Province of Quansi. Nankanga, a City of China, in the Province of Quansi. Nanni, a City in the Province of Chiamsi, in China, at the Confluence of the Rivers Puon and Si, towards the Borders of the Kingdom of Tunquin. Nanning, a City of China, in the Province of Quansi. Nanquin, a great City in the Kingdom of China, upon a Bay, and in a Province of the same name; once the Capital of this Kingdom, and the Seat of the Court, and now vastly great and populous: But its Palace Royal was ruined by the Tartars: One of the most celebrated Ports in the East. The Province of Nanquin, (which was once the greatest in this Kingdom) is bounded on the North by Xantum; on the West by Honan and Huquam; on the South by Chekiam; and on the East by the Chinian Ocean. It contains fourteen great, and an hundred and ten small Cities; one hundred ninety six thousand eight hundred and sixteen Families: Being divided into fourteen Parts, to each of which there belongs a great City. Nansa, Nesna, a River in Biscay in Spain. Nanterre, Nemptodurum, Nemetodurum, a Town in the Isle of France, near the River Seine, betwixt Paris and S. Germain, from the former distant two Leagues. S. Genevieve, the Patroness Saint of Pa∣ris, was born at it. In the year 591. a grand Assem∣bly of the Prelates and Nobility of the Kingdom was held here, about the baptizing of King Clothaire II. Nantes, Corbilum, Nannetes, Nannetum Condo∣vicum, a City in the Ʋpper Bretagne in France; which is a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Tours; also an University, and the Capital of the County of Nantes: seated upon the Loire, where it receives the Ardre, at the soot of some Hills; twelve Leagues from its Mouth to the East; seventeen from Angers, and twenty from Rennes to the South. It has a strong Castle and a Bridge over the Loyre, Some of the ancient Dukes of Bretagne lye entombed in the Cathedral. There are many Churches, and Reli∣gious Houses in it; and one of the 4 Suburbs is walled round. In the year 1342. the English besieged it without success. But in 1355. they took it by sur∣prize. Henry IV. King of France passed the famous Edict, in favour of the Huguenots, called the Edict of Nantes, here in 1598. Divers French Synods have by times been assembled here also. The County of Nantes, is divided by the Loir into two parts: bounded on the East by Anjou, on the South by Poictou, and on the West and North by the British Sea. This retains the name of its most ancient Inhabitants, who were called Nannetes by the Romans. Naples, Neapolis, by the Italians called Napoli, by the Spaniards Napoles, is an ancient, great, rich, populous City: the Capital of a Kingdom in Italy; called by the Turks, Anobolu. It is seated in the Terra di Lavoro, on the Tyrrhenian Sea; one hun∣dred twenty five Miles from Rome to the South-East; in a fruitful pleasant Plain, being very well watered; and has a large safe Harbour, much frequented by the Merchant Ship of all Nations. The Viceroy of this Kingdom does always reside in this City; and has a noble Palace, which belonged to the Kings of Naples. It is also a Bishops See, instituted by Gregory I. ador∣ned with an hundred and ten magnificent Churches, and a vast number of publick and private Buildings of great beauty and expence: so that all considered, it is one of the greatest, richest, and most populous Cities of Italy; containing no less than seven Miles in compass: and besides the Security the Sea gives it, and the Neighbouring Mountains, (which serve instead of Ramparts) it has four strong Castles or Citadels for its security, which were built at several times by Wil∣liam III. a Norman, Charles I. Brother to S. Lewis King of France, Ferdinand King of Aragon, and the Emperour Charles V. In the Metropolitan Church, dedicated to S. Januarius, they preserve the Blood of that Saint in a Glass, congealed; which, they pretend, melts and bubbles, when the Head of the same Saint is brought near it. And in the Church of the Do∣minicans, they show the Crucifix, which you are told spoke these words to S. Thomas Aquinas; Ben de me scripsisti, Thoma, quamnam mercedem habe∣bis? whereunto he made answer, Nullam, domine, praeter teipsum. The Italians give Naples the name of la Gentile, for its beauty and neatness; it attra∣cting all the Nobility of the Kingdom to it. But their Proverb goes further, Ma la gente cativa: tut∣tavia un paradiso habitato da diavoli. The people are bad: it is altogether a Paradise inhabited by Devils. This City is so very ancient, it is reported to be built by Hercules, about the year of the World 2725. in the times of Thola, Judge of Israel. The Chalcidians rebuilt, or inlarged it; and instead of Parthenope, (its old Name) called it , that is, the New Town. The Romans took it from the Samnites about the year of Rome 463. after three or four bloody Wars. Being subjected to that State, the Inhabitants of this City are much celebrated for their Fidelity to Rome; and ever after the Battel of Cannae, would not submit to Hannibal, till he made use of force against them. In the year of Rome 537. (to∣gether with Rome, and the rest of Italy, in the fifth Century) this City became a prey to the Goths, and other Barbarous Nations: amongst them to the Lombards; from whom it passed to Charles the Great. After this, it fell under the Saracens. In 1008. the Normans began under Tancred to enter upon this Stage; whose Children drove out both the Greeks and Saracens, and possessed this City and Kingdom under the Title of Earls of Calabria. in
1216. there was an University opened here by Frede∣rick II. Emperour of Germany. The rest of its Fate depends on the Changes in the Kingdom; except that prodigious Revolution in 1647. when one Ma∣sanello, a poor Fisher Boy, appearing against the Spaniards, (who had over-much oppressed this populous City by their Impositions,) raised such a storm against them, as bid fair for the excluding them for ever out of that Kingdom. In June 1688. Naples suffered extraordinarily by an Earthquake, several days. The Kingdom of Naples, (Nepolitanum Reg∣num) has its name from its principal City; but was at first called the Kingdom of Sicily, as it is still in all the Publick Acts. It is bounded on the West with the Lands of the Church; and on all other sides sur∣rounded with the Mediterranean Sea. Under the first Kings it was divided into four parts: at present into twelve Provinces or Counties: it has about thirty Cities, great and small. Its length from North to South, ninety German Miles; (that is from the River of Tronto to the Cape of Spartivento:) and its breadth from Cape Massa, not far from Naples, to Cape Gar∣gani, (or onte di S. Angelo,) on the Venetian Gulph, thirty. About the year of Christ 1000. this Kingdom was miserably harrased by the Saracens and Greeks, then expelling the Children of Charles the Great. The Normans drove out first the Saracens, and then the Greeks. In 1125. Pope Anacletus II. gave this Kingdom to Roger Earl of Sicily; exclu∣ding the Children of William, his Elder Brother. In 1196▪ another Usurper dispossessed this Line; and called in Henry VI. Emperour of Germany. His Po∣sterity injoyed it till 1261. when Charles Earl of Anjou entered and slew Manfred IV. the last of the German Line. His Posterity injoyed it four Descents more; when Charles IV. in the year 1371. en∣tered and slew Joan Queen of Naples. In the year 1434. Alphonso, King of Arragon, partly by Adoption, and partly by Conquest, got this King∣dom from another Joan, the third of the Caroline Descent. His Posterity injoyed it five Descents; till Ferdinand III. King of Castile and Arragon dis∣possessed them in 1503. In this Family it is at this day; Charles, the present King of Spain, being the sixth from Ferdinando. Napo, a River of the Kingdom of Peru in South America, passing by Avila in the Province of Qui∣ros, to join it self with the River of Amazons. Napoli di Barbaria, a Town near Tripoli in Barbary: called also Lebeda and Lepe. Napoli di Nalvasia. See Malvasia. Napoli di Romania, Nauplia, Anaplia, a City on the Eastern Shoar of the Morea, in the Province of Romania; anciently a Bishops See, under the Archbi∣shop of Corinth; but that City being ruined, it be∣came an Archbishoprick it self. This City stands up∣on the River Inachus; sixty Miles from Misitra to the North-East, fifty five from Athens to the North-West, and thirty six from Corinth to the South. Surrounded on all sides, but the North, with the Sea; its Shoars are so very high and steep, that an Enemy can neither land, nor batter its Walls with their Cannon. On the West it has a large and safe Haven, secured by a Fort built upon a Rock in the midst of its Mouth; and shut up on both sides by two Chains: which from this Fort reach to the Town on the North side, and to another Fort on the Continent to the South. The Mountain of Pa∣lamede on the North commands the Town: in all other points, it is situated as well for Defence as Commerce, equal to any place in Europe. Said to have been built by Nauplius, a Son of Hercules; and to have been one of the most ancient Towns in the Morea. It was first taken from the Greeks by the Venetians and French, in 1205. But it did not long remain in their hands, before it was retaker, with the slaughter of all their Garrison and Gover∣nour. In the thirteenth Century it fell into the hands of Mary d' Erigane, Relict of Peter, Son of Frede∣rick Cornar Piscopia. This Lady not being able to preserve it from the Turks, resigned it to the Vene∣tians in 1383. who fortified it: the Turks however frequently attempted it. Mahomet II. sent Mach∣mut, a Bassa, with a potent Army to reduce it by force; which design miscarried in 1460. After him, Solyman the Magnificent, in 1537. again besieged it; and lost a great part of his Army, to no purpose, before it: but about two years after upon a Treaty, the Venetians surrendred it, to pur∣chase a Peace of him In 1686. the Venetians again came before it with a considerable Fleet and Ar∣my; and having beaten the Serasquier of the Morea, and possessed themselves of Mount Pala∣mede, forced the Town to surrender. It was the ordi∣nary Residence of a Sangiack, and inhabited by a great number of Greeks, with others. Golfo di Napoli, in which this City stands, was of old called Sinus Argolicus. Napolouse, Neapolis, an ancient Town in Pale∣stine, at the foot of the Mountain Gerizim▪ other∣wise called Sichar, Sichem▪ Nabartho and Mrothia. in the year 1120. the Patriarch of Jerusalem assem∣bled a Council at it. It is misplaced, by Eusebius and Epiphanius, near Jericho. Narbarth, a Market Town in Pembrockshire. The Capital of its▪ Hundred. Narbon, Narbo, Narbona, Narbo Martius, Civi∣tas Aracinorum, Colonia Decumanorum, an ancient Roman City in Languedoc, in France; built by the Romans, (as Polybius saith,) in the one hundred and sixtieth Olymp. one hundred and thirty eight years be∣fore the Birth of our Saviour; an Archbishops See, seated upon a Branch of the River Aude, (which was made by the Romans,) and commonly called la Robine; twelve Miles from the Shoars of the Me∣diterranean Sea to the North, ten from Carcassone to the East, and sixteen from Mompellier to the West. Julius Caesar, Crasss and Tiberius, obliged this City with considerable Privileges. The Procon∣suls of Gallia Narbonensis made it their Residence, built a Capitol, an Amphitheatre, Schools, Baths, A∣quaducts, with all the Marks of the Majesty of the Romans, in it. In 435. the Wisigoths▪ besieged and and took it. In the times of the first Kings of France, Tholouse it self was a Suffragan to this Archbishop. In 733. this City was taken by the Moors or Saracens, and much ruined, till Charles Martel recovered it again out of their hands. To prevent this for the future, its Fortifications are carefully kept: which, with the number of its Inhabitants, give it a sufficient secu∣rity. Yet taken by the Black Prince, in an Inroad he made with a small Army from Bourdeaux in 1355. It contains five Parishes; was heretofore governed by its own Viscounts and Dukes; and some write, that Paulus Sergius, the Proconsul converted by S. Paul, was its first Bishop. Several small French Synods have been assembled at it. Narden▪ See Naerden. Nardo, Neritum, a City in the Province of O∣tranto, in the Kingdom of Naples; which is a Bi∣shops See, under the Archbishop of Brindisi; but ex∣empt from his Jurisdiction. Built in a Plain; four Miles from the Bay of Taranto, and nine from Gal∣lipoli to the North. Pope John XXIII. instituted this Bishoprick in 1413. Pope Alexander VII. was Bishop thereof, before his Elevation to the See of Rome. It also gives the Title of a Duke.
Narenta, Naro, a City of Dalmatia, upon a Ri∣ver of the same Name; thirty five Miles from Dol∣cigno to the North, fourteen from Ragusa to the North-East, upon a Bay of the Gulph of Venice of the same Name. Heretofore the Capital of Dalmatia, a great and populous City; but being taken by the Venetians in 987. and deprived of these Advantages, it began to decay: and altho now a Bishops See, un∣der the Archbishop of Ragusa, in a fruitful Plain; yet it is but small to what it has been. Baudrand saith, it is in the Hands of the Turks: but when it came into their Power, or whether it is not since retaken by the Venetians, I know not. Narni, Narnia, a City under the Pope, upon the River Nera; forty Miles from Rome: which is a Bi∣shops See, under the Pope only; and was the Birth∣place of Nerva, the Roman Emperor. Six Miles from Terni also. Pope John XIII. was a Bishop of this See. Narova, a great Lake in New France in America. Narsinga, Caramania. Narsinga, Narsinganum, a City and Kingdom on this side the Ganges, in the East-Indies: subject to the Kingdom of Bisnagar, and sometimes called by the same Name with it. The City is▪ great and popu∣lous, and stands upon a River, thirty five Miles from the City Bisnagar. See Bisnagar. Narsingipatan, a City in the Kingdom of Golconda, in the East-Indies; on the Western Shoar of the Bay of Bengala. Narva, a City of Livonia, upon a River of the same Name; which separates Livonia from the Do∣minion of the Duke of Moscovy: over against which, on the Eastern Bank of the River, lies the Castle of Ivanowgorod: both under the Swedes. The City is very strong; thirty Swedish Miles from Reval to the East, and about one from the Bay of Finland. The Castle was built by the Russ; and being founded on a Rock in the River, was thought Impregnable till taken by the Swedes in 1617. ever since which time they have been possessed of it. Wolmar II. King of Den∣mark is said to have built this City in 1213. John Basilovitz, Duke of Moscovy, took it in 1558. Pontus de la Garde, General of the Swedish Forces, retook it September 6. 1581. Ever since, the Swedes have kept it. About 1654. all the Trade of Moscovy was driven by this Port, by reason of a War between England and Holland; which hindered the Navigation to Arch-Angel. It stands in Lat. 60. 00. The River of Narva riseth out of the Lake of Peipis; and falls into the Gulph of Finland: in a manner as broad as the Elbe, but much swifter: a∣bout half a League above Narva, it falls from a steep Rock, which breaks the Water into small Particles and throws them into the Air; so that when the Sun shines, they form a pleasant kind of Rainbow. But this hin∣ders the bringing Goods by Water to the Town, and inforceth the unlading the Boats above this Cataract. Nasacepha, Selucia, Bagdat. Nasamones, an ancient People of Libya in Afri∣ca, mentioned by Herodotus, Strabo, Pliny, &c. They are diversly placed by them; sometimes near the Atlantick Ocean, sometimes by the Sea of Marmora, and again towards the Syrtes Magna of Barbary. Nascaro Siis, a River in the Further Cala∣bria, in the Kingdom of Naples. Nassaw, Nassovia, a small Town in Weteraw, upon the River Lhone; two Miles from the Rhine to the East; five from Bingen to the North, and twelve from Cologne: under its own Prince. From whence the Family of Nassaw has is Rise. § The Principality of Nassaw, is a Territory in the Upper Circle of the Rhine; which lies partly in Westerwaldt, and partly in Weteraw; between the Dukedom of Westphalia, the Ʋpper Hassia, and the Bishoprick of Trier beyond the Rhine. It was at first a County; but made a Principality by Ferdinand III. in 1653. Adolphus (the Emperor) was of this Family, chosen in 1462. and the Earls of Sarbruck. But the Noblest Branch is that of Orange: in whose Honour, the Dutch have given the Name of Nassaw, to two of their Forts in Foreign Parts: the one in Guinee, the other in the Island Motir amongst the Moluc∣caes: also to a small Island they call Nass Ey∣landt, in the Indian Ocean, belonging to Asia; and to Weigatts Streights, otherwise called the Streights of Nassaw. Nascivan, Naksivan, or Naxivan, Naxuana, a a City of the Greater Armenia, mentioned by Ptole∣my; which is an Archbishops See; at the Foot of Mount Ararat, (or Taurus) between the Caspian Sea, and the Lake of Exsechia, (Lychnitis.) The Archbishop is ever since 1300. chosen out of the Do∣minicans, and confirmed by the Pope. This City is under the Persians; but has been wretchedly haras∣sed by the Turks who, as they prevail over the Per∣sians and the Persians over them, lay each others Mosques in Ruins. Here is a stately Tower, said to be of the Building of Tamerlane. The Armenians pretend that Noah, after the Deluge, dwelt and was buried in this City. It stands about seven Leagues from the River Araxes. Long. 81. 34. Lat. 38. 40. in a fertile Country. The Capital of Armenia, the Seat of a Persian Kan, or Governour. Sir John Chardin saith, they have generally thrown off the Roman Rites; and are returned to their ancient Re∣ligion: tho the Pope, by an Ambassador sent to Persia in 1664. obtained great Favours from that Court for his Followers, by which they are rather damnified than benefited. Naseby, a memorable Town in the County of Northampton, in the Hundred of Guilesborough, not far from Rothwell; near to which the Rivers Avon and Nen derive their Springs; it standing upon a high Ground. But more especially remarkable, for the Battel here fought, June 14. 1645. betwixt the King's and the Parliamentarian Forces. The first commanded by Prince Rupert, the other by their General Fairfax. The King's Forces were totally routed. Natarone, Vulturnus. See Voltorno. Natissa, or Natisone, Natisa, a small River in Friuli; which arising above Aquileja, and washing it, beneath that City is divided into two Branches: both fall into the Ionian Sea near Grado, a City in that Province. This River was once Navigable up to Aquileja, and served that City as a Port; but now, not. Natolia, Asia Minor, is the most Western Part of Asia, of great extent; in the Form of a Peninsula: called by the Turks, (its Masters) Nadulu; and by the French, Natolie. It is bounded on the North by the Euxine, or Black Sea; on the West by the Pro∣pontis, and Archipelago; on the South with the Me∣diterranean Sea; and on the East by Armenia. The principal Cities, at this day, are Amasia, An∣cyra, Cutaige, Cogni, Tocat, Isnich, Bursia, Smyr∣na, and Tarabosan, (or Trapezunt.) It reacheth from Long. 51. to 72. and from Lat. 36. to 45. from the Hellespont to the Euphrates supposed to be six hundred and thirty Miles long; and its breadth two hundred and ten. The Air is very healthful, the Soil as fruitful; before it fell into the Hands of the Turks, it was very populous, Rich, Civil, and Learned; but now in a manner desolate; lamenting the Ruins of four hundred Towns destroyed by Earthquakes, and the Barbarous devouring Turks.
Navagret, Paropamisus, a part of Imaus, a vast Mountain in Asia. Navareins, Navaresium, a City in the Province of Bearn in France; which has a strong Castle: seat∣ed on the River Gave d' Oleron; four Leagues below Oleron to the North, and six from Pa to the West. Navarino, Abarinus, Pylus Messeniaca, a great populous City, on the Western Shoar of the Morea, in the Province of Belvedore; called by the Turks, Iavarin. It stands ten Miles from Modon to the North, and fifteen from Coron to the West. This is one of the most ancient Towns in the Morea; and yet in a flourishing Condition; being seated in the most pleasant and fruitful part of the Morea, and having the best and most convenient Port. According∣ly, whilst it was in the Hands of the Venetians, they built two Castles and a strong Wall to defend it. In 1498. it sustained a surious Siege; and repelled the Ottoman Forces with that Bravery, that they were forced to retire. About two years after, it fell twice in a short time into the Hands of the Turks, through the Consternation of its Inhabitants, after the Turks had taken Mondon: and in their possession it continued till 1686. when the Venetians retook it. Navarre, Navarra, a Kingdom in the North of Spain: bounded on the North by France and the Pyrenean Hills; on the East and South by Arragon; and on the West by old Castile: yet was there a small part of this Kingdom which lay on the North Side of the Mountains on the side of France. The Country, the incompassed with vast barren Mountains, is said to be very fruitful, and tolerably level within. The Kingdom, (one of the first that was set▪ up against the Moors,) began in the person of Garzia Ximenes, in 716. and continued under thirty seven successive Princes of its own, till 1512. when John de Albert, (King of Navarre,) being excommunicated by Pope Julius II. Ferdinando, King of Arragon, ta∣king the advantage of the little affection his Subjects bore to him, seized this Kingdom; and drove the miserable Prince over the Alpes into France. Bau∣drand averrs, that the Spaniards had no Authority from the Pope to usurp this Kingdom; but owns they had a Bull to justifie the keeping of it, which needs no great Debate. Since that time, the Ʋpper Navarre has been under the Crown of Spain: the Lower (which is the least,) in the person of Henry IV. was united to the Crown of France; and by Lewis the Thirteenth, in the year 1620. incorporated for ever into the said Crown. Panipelune, in the Ʋpper, is the Capital of the Kingdom. In the Lower, the principal Town is S. Jean Pie de Port. Naucratis, an ancient City of the Kingdom of Egypt. It stood near the Mouth of the most Western Branch of the Nile, in a Division of its own Name; and was the Birth Place of Athenaeus, the Deipnosphista, who, together with Herodotus, relates divers Customs of its ancient Inhabitants. Naugracut, Naugracum, a Territory under the Great Mogul, in the North Part of Indostan, to∣wards Tartary; which reacheth to Mount Caucasus. It has also a City of the same Name, upon the River Ravée, which afterwards falls into the Lahor, two hundred and twenty Miles from Lahor to the East. Naumburgh, Neoburgum, a City of Misnia, in the Ʋpper Saxony; which is a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Magdeburgh; and once an Imperial Free Town. It stands upon the River Saal, where it receives the River Ʋnstrut. The Bishoprick was Translated to this place from Zeitz, in 1028. This City was in latter times under its own Bishop; now under the Administrator of the Bishoprick of New∣burgh, (who is of the House of Saxony,) with a small District belonging to it; being yielded to the House of Saxony by the Treaty of Passaw, in 1552. It is seated in the Confines of Thuringia; eight German Miles from Erford to the East, and six▪ from Leipsick to the West. The Bishops have been of the Augustane Confession ever since 1564. This City was taken by the United Forces of France and Sweden in 1638. Naxia, Naxus, called Nascia also, Naxos and Strongyle, one of the Cyclades, is an Island in the Archipelago, great, populous, fruitful; eighty four Miles in compass; having a City of the same Name, (which has in it a Greek and a Latin Bishop,) and eighteen Villages. It belonged to the Venetians, and was a Dukedom; but now under the Turks. The Maps call it Nixia. The Ancients dedicated it to Bacchus, for the excellency of its Wines; to whom they built a Temple of Marble, (which also abounds in this Island) upon a Rock, very near the Shoar, joyned by a Stone-Bridge to it; the Foundations whereof, and a Gate about thirty Foot high and fif∣teen broad, remain to be seen to this day. The Ve∣netians enjoyed it from the year 1210. to 1516. when Selim I. made himself the Master of it. It pays six thousand Piasters Tribute to the Turk. There are divers Monasteries of the Greeks and Latins. They find of your Emrods in this Island. But there is no Port or Harbour in any part of its Coasts. Naxio, Acone, a Port in Bithynia, in the Lesser Asia, upon the Euxine Sea; which was the Port to Heraclea Pontica; and stands upon a River called Acone of old. Nazareth, A City of Galilee in Judea, in the Tribe of Zabulon, thirty Leagues distant from Jeru∣salem to the South, upon the ascent of a Mountain. The same, in which Joseph with the young Child and his Mother dwelt, after their return from Egypt, Matth. 2. 21, 23. It is said, the Virgin here in the House of Joachim and Anne (her Parents) conceived, by the Operation of the Power of the Highest; and that she her self also either was born or was conceived in the same place. Helena, the Mother of Constantine the Great, built a stately Church in Nazareth, in Commemoration of these Passages: which the Christian Kings of Jerusalem, after the Conquest, in 1099. erected into an Archiepiscopal See, and adorned with a Chapter of Canons. But this Edifice was so defaced in 1291. by the Sultan of Egypt, who retook the Holy Land and extermi∣nated the Christians thence, that now only some Ruins remain to be seen of it. And for what became of the miraculous Chamber of the Virgin, see Lo∣retto. At this time, the Franciscans have a Mona∣stery and a Church at Nazareth, which Pilgrims vi∣sit: you are shown the rests of the Synagogue, in which our Saviour explicated the Passage of I∣saiah concerning himself; together with the place where Joseph kept his Shop; to whom in the Chappel there is an Altar dedicated, and another to Anne his Spouse. But Nazareth is a poor Village. There is a Titular Archbishop continued by the See of Rome, at the City Barletta, in Apulia Peucetia in Italy: and the Title particularly was born by Pope Ʋrban VIII. before his Elevation to the Pontificate. The Turks call all Christians Nazarenes, from this place: as Christ himself, (Matth. 2. 23.) was called. Nazianze, an ancient City of Cappadocia, in the Lesser Asia; and an Episcopal See heretofore under the Archbishop of Cesarea, which had the Honour to be farther advanced to an Archiepiscopal one, under the Patriarch of Antioch. This was the Birth▪ place of Gregorius Nazianzenus, whose Father had been the Bishop here. Neath, a Market Town in Glamorganshire, in ales; the Capital of its Hundred.
Neaugh, Neaugus, a very great Lake in the Pro∣vince of Ʋlster in Ireland. Nebio, Nebium, Censunum, a ruined Episcopal City in the Island of Corsica. The See was a Suffra∣gan to the Archbishop of Genoua. It stood about the place where the Town Rosoli now is. Nebrisso, or Lebrixo, a Town in the Kingdom of Andaluzia, in Spain; betwixt Sevill and the Mouth of the River Guadalquivir: mentioned by Pliny and Ptolemy. Necastro, Neocastrum, a small City in the Further Calabria; almost ruined by an Earthquake in 1638. Necker, or Neckar, Nicer, Neccarus, Neccanus, Nicerus, a River of Schwaben in Germany, which a∣riseth in Swartzwalt; scarce seven Miles from the Fountains of the Danube; and passing Rotweil, it entereth the Dukedom of Wirtemberg, watereth El∣sing and Hailbrun; and so passing by Heydelburgh, in the Palatinate, falls into the Rhine. Necropolis▪ an ancient City of the Kingdom of Egypt, four Miles from Alexandria; where Cleopatra poisoned her self with Asps. Neda, Nedina, a River of Arcadia in the Morea. Nedham Point, a Fortess in the Barbadoes, which sustained an Attack of four hours continuance made upon it by De Ruyter, the Dutch Admiral; sent with a Squadron of Ships to conquer this Island in 1665. but was repelled. Needham, a Market Town in the County of Suf∣folk, and the Hundred of Bosmere: which drives a Trade in Blew and Broad Cloaths for Russia, Turkey, and other Foreign Parts. Neers, Nabalia, a River of Germany, which a∣ariseth in Juliers, twelve Miles from Juliers; and flowing through the Bishoprick of Cologne, and Gel∣derland, by the Castles of Gelders, a little below Ge∣nep, falls into the Maes: three Leagues above Nime∣guen to the South. Negapatan, a City of Coromandel, in the Hither East Indies; now under the Dutch, formerly under the Portuguese. Negombo, a Town in the Island of Zeilan, in the East-Indies, in the Possession of the Hollanders. Negrepelisse, a small Town in the County of Quercy in Guienne, in France; upon the River Avei∣rou, betwixt Bourniquet and Albias, two or three Leagues from Montauban. Lewis XIII. sent a Gar∣rison of four thousand Men hither in 1621. who were in one night massacred by the Inhabitants, du∣ring the Civil Wars of Religion. Therefore in 1622. the said King besieged it; and taking it, it was laid in Blood and Ashes by the Fire and Sword of the Con∣querors. Negro, Tanager, a River in the Kingdom of Na∣ples: it ariseth near a Lake of the same Name, in the Borders of the Basilicate, but in the hither Princi∣pate; thirteen Miles from Policastro to the East, at the Foot of the Apennine. And flowing North, wa∣tereth Atena; and after it has buried it self for four Miles under ground, comes up again; then falls into the Bay of Amalfi, near Cappachio, twenty Miles from Salerno to the South. Negropont, Euboea, an Island in the Archipelago; of old called by the Poets, Chalcis and Abantis; now by the Turks, Egriponte, or Egribos; and some∣times Euriponte: because the Wonder of the fam'd Euripus, by the natural situation of the Rocks, the Promontories, the Channel, &c. is made here. It lies upon the North of Achaia, (or Livadia) be∣ing separated from it by a narrow Channel: one hun∣dred and twenty Miles from East to West, thirty broad; three hundred in circuit; joyned to the Con∣tinent by a Bridge of Stone built by the Venetians. It is extraordinary fruitful, but little inhabited. The principal Town was called formerly Chalcis, now Ne∣gropont; and stands on the South Side of the Island, at one end of the Bridge: its Walls are two Miles in compass. None but Jews and Turks are suffered to reside within those: the Christians dwell altogether in the Suburbs, the whole of which may be about five thousand, exceeding far in number the o∣ther: and amongst these the Jesuits have a College. There are four Mosques in the Town, of which the principal hath been a Cathedral Church dedicated to S. Mark, and the Seat not only of a Bishop under the Archbishop of Athens, but of an Archbishop. The Town is separated from the Suburbs by a deep Ditch of equal breadth from top to bottom: both stand on a plain level Ground: the Channel between the City and the Continent being not above thirty Paces, and the Bridge being secured by a Tower. This Town and Island was granted to the Venetians by the Latin Emperors of Constantinople, (in consideration of their Services,) about 1204. Though they fortified it to the utmost, yet Mahomet II. took the prin∣cipal City with the loss of forty thousand Men in 1463. or 69. (for I find various Accounts) after he had besieged it with one hundred and twenty thou∣sand Men, thirty days; putting all above twenty years of Age to the Sword; which amounted (when the Siege began) to eighty thousand. In 1660. the Venetians retook it: and relost it. Wherefore the Turks have fortified it with so many new strong Works, that tho the Venetians laid Siege to it with an Army of twenty four thousand Men, commanded by Morosini▪ (then Doge,) which stormed it October 12. 1688; Yet it was left in the Enemies Possession. The most noted Promontories of the Island are the. ancient Caphareus, now called Capo Figera or Capo d'Oro, and the Capo Lithar. Its two Rivers are the Similio and the Cerco. The City Caristo, which the French call Chateau-roux, near Capo Figera, is a Bishops See under the Archbishop of Negropont: and Rocco, betwixt that City and Negropont, another. Here is Cotton in abundance, and Marble, digged out of the Mountain Caristo near the City of the same Name. Negroes, a general Name for all the Black People of Africa; as well those upon the Western Sea-Coasts, and towards Nubia and Abyssinia, as those who dwell on both sides the River Niger. Neiss, Nissa, a River of Bohemia; which arising in Lusatia, flows through Silesia; and a little be∣neath Guben falls into the Odir. Neisse, Nissa, a Town in Silesia, in the Duke∣dom of Grotkaw, upon the River Neiss; two Miles from Grotkaw to the South: in which the Bishop of Wratislaw resides. Hofman makes it a City. Neites, a small River which falls into the Rhine near Anderpach, in the Bishoprick of Trier. Nieva, Nebis, a small River in Entre Douro, a Province of Portugal. Nekrakin, Ormus, an Island in the Persian Gulph. Nemea and Nemeus, a River of the Morea, now called Langia; where Pericles, the Athenian Gene∣ral, defeated the Sicyonii in the year of Rome, 301. § Also a great Forest in the Province of Romania; and an ancient City, Nemaea, in the same made memo∣rable by the Nemaean Games instituted in the fifty first Olympiad in the Honour of Hercules. Nemours, Nemosium, Nemoracum, a great and pleasant Town in the Isle of France in Gastinois, upon the River Loing: made a Dukedom in 1414. by Charles IV. King of France, and then first walled. It stands seventeen Miles from Paris to the South. Neocaesarea. See its Modern Name Tocat Nepi, Nepita, Nepet, a small, but ancient City, which is a Bishops See in S. Peters Patrimony, under the Pope; upon the River il Pozzolo; between Vi∣terbo,
and Rome, six Miles from Sutri to the East. Nera, Nar, a River in the States of the Church in Italy; which springs out of the Apennine, and flow∣ing Westward watereth Narni;; and a little lower falls into the Tiber. Nerac, Neracum, a City in Aquitain, in Gascogne, upon the River Baise; the Capital of the Dukedom de Albret; not two Miles from the Garonne to the South, three from Condom to the North, and four from Agen to the West. It is in a good condition, tho its Walls came to be rased in the last Civil Wars. In 1579. Queen Katharine de Medicis held a Con∣ference with the King of Navarre here, wherein they made a League with the Huguenots, on whose side this Town stood. King Henry IV. resided a consi∣derable time at it; and the ancient Lords of Albret built it a Castle. Nerk, Nericia, a Province in the Kingdom of Sweden; between Westmannia and Sudermannia to the East, and Westrogothia to the West. The Capi∣tal of which is Orebro, by the Lake Hielmer. Nermonster, an Island upon the Coast of Poictou in France. Nero, an ancient Name of the delightful Village of Daphne. Nerva, See Narva. Nervii, an ancient People amongst the Galls, whom Caesar mentions with an Elogium of their Courage and Conduct. They are thought to have dwelt in the (now) Diocese of Cambray. Nese, Nigella, a small Town in the Tract of San∣terre, in Picardy. It stands upon the Rivulet Ignon, which falls in the Somme, two Leagues from Ham, almost betwixt Peronne and Noyon; having the Ho∣nour to be a Marquisate. Charles the Hardy, Duke of Burgundy, took it by Assault in 1472. and be∣cause the Inhabitants had murdered a Herald, sent to summon them, with two Men more in the time of a Truce, he suffered the Execution of the utmost Seve∣rity upon them. Nester Alba, or Neister Alba; a Town in Bessa∣rabia, on the Euxine Sea. Neuf Chastel, Novum Castrum, a Town in the Paix de Caux, in the Dukedom of Normandy, upon the River Arques; eight Leagues from Dieppe to the South-East. Neuf Chastel sur Meuse, a Town of Lorrain, upon the Maes; in the Borders of Champagne; five Leagues from Mirecourt to the West, and seven from Toul to the South. Nevers, Nivernum, a Fine, Great, Rich, Popu∣lous City; a Bishops See under the Archbishop of Sens; and a Dukedom, since the year 1457. when Charles VII. King of France, advanced it to that Dignity: whereas it had been before an Earldom: it has a Bridge over the Loyre, and a Castle, built by its an∣cient Earls: five Leagues from Baris and Lions; twelve from Moulins. John Casimir, King of Po∣land, died in this City, December 16. 1672. Caesar speaks of it in his Commentaries, under the Name of Noviodunum in Aeduis. The Latin Writers variously call it Nivernium, Vadicassium, Noviodunum, Au∣gustonemetum, &c. It is the Capital of the Territory of Nivernois; which is about twenty Leagues long, and broad; lying betwixt Berry, Gastinois, Bourbonnois and Bourgogne: of the latter of which it makes a part, and has other considerable Towns standing in it. Neuf-Marche, Novus Mercatus, a Town in Nor∣mandy, upon the River Eure; by which it is separated from Beauvais. Heretofore very much regarded. Lewis VII. took it after a sharp Siege, in 1151. It was restored to the English in 1154. In 1161. there was a Parliament held in it, under Henry II. King of England, in which the Title of Pope Alexander III. to the Roman Chair was recognized; and Victor, the Antipope, rejected. This Town stands twenty Miles from Roan to the South, and the same distance from Paris to the West. Nevern, a Market Town in Pembrokeshire, in the Hundred of Kemmes. Nevin, a Market Town in Caernarvanshire, in in Wales, the Hundred of Tinllain. Nevis, or Mevis, one of the Leeward Chariby Islands in America, very near to S. Christopher. It is the Residence of the chief Governor of all the Leeward Islands. In Charles-Town (which is the principal Set∣tlement) almost all the Houses of Brick and Stone were levelled by an Earthquake, April 1690. At the same time the Sea left its accustomed Bounds a great part of a Mile; the Earth vomited hot and fetid Wa∣ters; its motion, Pulses, and Openings also all over the Island, being such, as nothing can be more terrible. Neure, a River of Kilkenny, in Ireland, which watereth Ross; then falls into the Sewer, (which se∣parates Leinster from Mounster;) and falls beneath VVaterford into the Ocean. Neusidlersee, Peiso, a Lake between Austria and the Lower Hungary; bteween Raab to the East, and Vienna to the West. Neustria, the Name of a part of the Kingdom of France, in use amongst the Writers of the Times of Charlemaigne and his Son, to denote the Country from the Saosne and the Meuse, to the Loyre and the Ocean: It has been since changed into that of Nor∣mandy, tho the present Dukedom of Normandy makes no more than a part of the ancient Neustria. New Albion, California, an Island on the West of America, in North Lat. 38. discovered by Sir Fran∣cis Drake in 1578. Newark upon Trent, is a fair, rich Town in Nottinghamshire; seated on the East Bank of the Trent, where it divides into two Branches, and makes an Island before the Town; eleven Miles from Not∣tingham to the North, and in the high Road to York: which took its Name from a Castle here built by Alexander Bishop of Lincoln, (in the Reign of Hen∣ry II.) which was seized by King Stephen. King John died in this Town in 1216. Edward VI. incorpora∣ted it, and gave it the Privilege of sending two Bur∣gesses to the Parliament. It suffered a Siege for its Loyalty in 1643, 1644. which was raised by Prince Rupert, March 22. It stood firm to the Royal Interest till May 11. 1646. and then was forced to surrender; the King being in the Hands of the Scots, and all his Forces dissipated. This Town gives the Title of Viscount to the Earl of Kingston: and is the Capital of its Hundred. Newbury, Novum burgum, a Town on the South of Barkshire upon the River Kennet, which at Reading falls into the Thames. Called by Antoninus, Spinae; tho not built now in the same place; a fine, rich, Cloathing Town; seated in a Champain Plain Coun∣try. Made famous by a signal Victory obtained here by Charles I. Septemb. 20. 1643. over the Forces of the Parliament. October 27. 1644. there was a second Fight; in which, tho the King's Forces, (which were much divided) had at first the good Fortune to drive the Enemy out of the Field; yet being overpowered by Numbers and fresh Supplies, they were at last Routed; and the King in great danger of being taken. This Battel, tho short, was the sharpest that was fought in all that War. Charles II. added a great Honor to this Place; when in 1675. he created Charles Fitz-Roy, Duke of Southampton, Earl of Chichester, and Baron of Newbury. New-Castle upon Tine, is a strong, rich, popu∣lous Sea-Port Town in Northumberland, upon
the North Bank of the River Tine; but on the Bor∣ders of Durham; six Miles from the Sea. The River is very deep, the Haven secure and large: the Town stands upon a rising Ground; and has a fair Bridge over the River on the South side, with an Iron Gate upon it, which divides the County of Northumberland from the Bishoprick of Durham; near which stands the Castle, and over against it the Market-Place, and more to the North upon a sleep Hill, the Body of the Town; fenced with Towers and strong Walls. It contains four Parishes; amongst which St. Nicholas's Church, upon the top of the Hill, has the gracefulness of a Cathedral. Ships of good burden come up to the very Bridge: But the Newcastle-fleet commonly stays at Sheales, near the Rivers Mouth. This Town for Wealth and Commerce, by Sea and Land, for all Com∣modities, may well be esteemed the Bristol of the North. Mr. Cambden doth suppose it to have been called Garbosentum by the Romans; afterwards, Monk∣chester; and to have taken the name of Newcastle, when it was rebuilt by Robert, Eldest Son to William the Conqueror; and Newcastle upon Tine, to distin∣guish it from Newcastle under Line. In the Reign of Edward I. a Rich Man being taken Prisoner in the Town by the Scots, after his Ransom began the For∣tifications of it; and the rest of the Inhabitants fini∣shed this Work, which made it both safe and rich. Richard II. made it a Mayor Town. Long. 21. 30. Lat. 57. 34. Thus far Mr. Cambden: The Scots in 1640. seized this strong Town; and thereby began the Calamities of England, which lasted twenty years. In 1644. after a long Siege, the Scots took it the se∣cond time. October 19. Lewis Steward (Duke of Le∣nox,) was created Earl of Newcastle, in 1604. by James I. He dying without Issue, William Caven∣dish Viscount Mansfield, and Baron Ogle, was by Charles I. created Earl of Newcastle in 1627. Mar∣quess of Newcastle, in 1643. and Duke of the same in 1664. by Charles II. to whom succeeded Henry his Son in 1676. The Corporation Elects two mem∣bers of Parliament. Newcastle under Line, a large Market Town in Staffordshire, in the Hundred of Pirehill, upon the rivulet, Line. It is a Borough Town, and hath the honour of electing two Members of the English Par∣liament. New England, a large Country in North Ame∣rica; first discovered by Sebastian Cabot, under En∣glish Colours, in 1497. Entred upon for the English by Mr. Philip Amadas in 1584. It lies in forty and forty one deg. of North Lat. seventy Miles upon the Ocean, which affords it plenty of Harbours. The Air is healthful, but the Weather very uncertain. This Country was first begun to be Planted in 1606. In 1610. one Robinson, an Independent Preacher, struck in with the Design, and much promoted that Planta∣tion. It is well watered with Rivers; has great va∣riety of Wild Fowl, Wild Beasts; Timber in abun∣dance, Flax, Hemp, Corn of all sorts, Furrs, Amber, and Iron; wherewith the Inhabitants drive a gainful Trade with the other English Plantations in America. This Colony is very strong. They have built seven great Towns; the chief of which is Boston; which in 1670. had fifty Sail of Ships belonging to it. They would never submit to any Governour sent from Eng∣land, but lived like a Free State; till a Quo Warran∣to being sent against them in 1683. by K. Charles II. they submitted to Henry Cranfield Esq and in 1686. accepted Sir Edward Andrews as Governour for King James II. The Dukedom of Newenburg, Neoburgum, called by the French Neubourg; is a Tract in Germany in Nortgow, upon the Danube; part of which lies in the Circle of Bavaria, and part in Schwaben. Hereto∣fore a part of the Dukedom of Bavaria; till Maxi∣milian I. granted it to the Children of Rupert, Prince Palatine. This Line ended in 1559. in the Person of Henry; after whom Succeeded Philip Lewis, Duke of Deuxponts, (or Zweybrucken) in which Family it still is. It takes its name from Newburg (Neobur∣gum,) a City in Bavaria upon the Danube; four Leagues from Donawert in Schwaben to the East, three from Ingolstad, and the same distance from Aichstadt to the South. The Duke of Newburg is lately be∣come Elector Palatine, by the Death of Charles the last Elector without Issue. Newenburg, Newburg, Neopyrgum, a small City in Schwaben; in the Dukedom of Wurtsburg, upon the River Entz; in the Borders of the Marquisate of Baden: six German Miles from Stugart to the West, and as much from Spire to the South. Newenburg, Newbourg, Neoburgum, a Town in Brisgow, upon the Rhine; between Brisach to the North, and Basil to the South: heretofore a Free Im∣perial City, but in 1410. exempted; and granted to the House of Austria. Since that, in 1675. it was much damnified, and in part destroyed. Newenstad, Neustad, Neostadium, a City in Au∣stria, which is one of the principal Cities in that Dukedom; built in a Marshy low Ground, upon a small River; six German Miles from Vienna to the North. The Town is of a square Form, with a Pi∣azza in the middle; incompassed with two Walls and a Ditch. The outward Wall is not high; the inward is of no great strength, yet has defeated two Attempts of the Turks against it: in the latter of which, Soly∣man the Magnificent, (in 1529.) Stormed this Town seven times in one day, and was every time repulsed. In this City the Emperor has a Palace of a square building, with four Towers; which may be seen a great way off. There is another City of the same name in Bohemia, in the Dukedom of Oppelen; near the Borders of the Dukedom of Grotkaw, five Miles from Oppelen. There is a third in the Palatinate of the Rhine; four German Miles from Spire to the West, and two from Landaw to the North: once an Im∣perial City, but now exempt. A fourth in the Duke∣dom of Wurtsburg; two Miles from Wimpfen to the East, and a little more from Hailbrun. A fifth in the Dukedom of Brunswick upon the River Leyne, six Miles from Zell to the West; which is under the Duke of Hannover. Newent, a Market Town in Gloucestershire, in the Hundred of Botlow. The New Forest, a Forest in Hampshire, in compass about thirty Miles; in which Richard, the second Son of William the Conqueror was killed by a Deer: William, his third Son, was accidentally slain by Sr. Walter Tyrrel; and Robert Curtoyse, his Grand∣son, was struck into the jaws by the bough of a Tree and dyed. Which fatalities have been the more re∣marked, because, to make this Forest compleat for game, William the Conqueror caused no less than thirty Parish Churches, with many Towns and Villages, to be levelled to the ground. Newhausel, Neoselium, a strong but small Town in the Ʋpper Hungary; called by the Hungarians Owar: it stands upon the River Nitria, two German Miles from the Danube to the North, and eleven from Presburg to the East. It is sented in a Marsh, which is its greatest strength. It has six Bastions made in the form of a Star, and walled up Breast height, a∣bove the Level within; the Dike not broad or deep. The Grand Vister sat down before this Town August 14. 1663. and took it the 27. with the loss of fifteen thousand Men. He immediately endeavoured to strengthen it, by bringing the River to run round: but however July 7. 1685. the Duke of Lorrain sat
down before it; and took it by Storm August 19. fol∣lowing; putting all the Garrison to the Sword. Newmarckt, Novomarchia, a City of Transylva∣nia, called by the Hungarians Masserhely. It stands upon the River Merisch, at the foot of the Carpathian Mountains; thirty five Miles from Clausenburgh to the South-East. In this City the Assemblies of the States of Transylvania are most usually held. New-Market, a Town in the Borders of Suffolk and Cambridgeshire; in a plain, yielding a large pro∣spect; ten Miles from Cambridge to the East. It consists of two Parishes, the one in Suffolk, the other in Cambridgeshire. Famous for Horse Races, and a House belonging to the Kings of England. A Fire in this Town saved the Life of Charles II. by necessi∣tating his return before the time appointed; which prevented the designs of the Rie-House Conspira∣tors. Newnham, a Market Town in Gloucestershire, in the Hundred of Fauseley. Newport, Medena, Novus Portus, a Town in the Isle of Wight; which is the Capital of the Island. Well seated, much frequented, and very populous. It has a small Haven; and is a Corporation, which sends two Burgesses to Parliament, by the Grant of James I. Charles I. honoured it also by Creating Mountjoy Blount, Earl of Newport, in 1628. This Honour is now enjoyed by Henry his Son, who is the third Earl of this Family. Long. 19. 14. Lat. 50. 40. Newport upon the Usk, a considerable Sea-Port Town in the County of Monmouth; seated between the Ebwith and the Ʋsk; with a fair Bridge over the latter; two Miles from the Severn to the North. As the Ʋske discharges it self into the Severn, it makes a good haven, which bears the name of this Town. Newport Pagnel, a Market Town in Buckin∣ghamshire, upon the Ouse; over which it hath two Bridges. The Capital of its Hundred. Newport, in Pembrokeshire, is a considerable Town in the North-West part of that County, upon the Irish Sea; built at the foot of an high Mountain, by the side of the River Neverns. By Martin of Tours, and the procurement of his Posterity, made a Corporation also, returning one member to the English Parliament; in which afterwards they built a Castle for their Habitation. Newport in Shropshire, a handsome Market Town in the Hundred of S. Bradford, South of Drayton; and upon a long plain, adjoyning to Stafford∣shire. Newport, Novus Portus, a strong Sea-Port Town in Flanders, of old called Santhoft, that is, the Sandy Head. It has a competent Haven upon the German Ocean, at the Mouth of the River Yperle; five Leagues from Dunkirk to the East, and three from Ostend to the West. Still in the Hānds of the Spaniards. Near this place Prince Maurice of Nassaw, gave the Spa∣niards a great overthrow, Feb. 25. 1600. Newton, a Market and Borough-town in Lanca∣shire, in the Hundred of Salford, privileged with the Election of two Parliament-men. Newton-Abbot or Newton-Bishops, a Market Town in Devonshire, in the Hundred of Heyter. Newtown, a Market Town in the County of Mont∣gomery in Wales, in the Hundred of Kidriorn. Neyland, a considerable Market Town in the County of Suffolk, in the Hundred of Babergh, up∣on the River Stower. It stands in a rich bottom, and drives the cloathing Trade. Neytracht. See Nitracht. Niancheu, Niancheum, a considerable City in the Province of Chekram in China. Niaren More, the Russian Name of the North Ocean or Frozen Sea; called Mare Scythicum. Nicaragua, a Region in New Spain, in North A∣merica, of great extent; between the North Sea to the East, the South Sea to the West, the Province of Hondura to the North, and La Costa Rica to the South. Also called New Leon, from Leon de Nica∣ragua, the principal City in it: which is a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Mexico; and is intirely in the hands of the Spaniards. In this Region, there is a Lake, one hundred and thirty Leagues long; which ebbs and flows, and discharges it self into the North Sea called the Lake of Nicaragua: The City Leon stands upon it. The riches and fertility in sine of this Province has given it the name, with some, of Maho∣mets Paradise. Nicaphtach, Oxus, a great River in Persia. Nicaria, an Island in the Archipelago, towards Asia; which has Samo to the East, Naxia to the West, Sio to the North, and Patmos to the South. There is a City in it of its own name, formerly a Bishops See under the Archbishop of Rhodes, before the Turks took the Island from the Genouese in the fourteenth Century, and subjected it to the Sangiack of Galli∣poli. It enjoys a good and improvable Soil. The passage betwixt Samo, and it is dangerous. Upon the Eastern Coast therefore, in a very high Tower, they keep a light for a signal to Sailours. The first and eldest names of this Island, says Pausanias, were Ma∣cris, Pergamus, and Icaria. It is about forty Miles in circumference, the length much exceeding the breadth; and anciently it was honoured with a Tau∣ropolion, a famous Temple dedicated to Diana. Nicastro, Nicastrum and Neocastrum, a small City at the foot of the Apennine, in the Further Ca∣labria, in the Kingdom of Naples, within five or six Miles of the Sea. Honored with a Bishops See under the Archbishop of Reggio. Nicaea, a City of Bithynia, which is an Archbishops See; of old called Antigonia, (from its Builder); in Pliny Olbia, and in Stephanus Ancore; and named Nicaea by Lysimachus in honor of his Wife; now cal∣led Isnich, from a neighbouring great Lake, Nichor, and Nichea. This City is particularly famous for the first General Council here held against Arrianism, and touching the time of the celebrating of Easter with some points of Church Discipline, in the Imperial Pa∣lace, by the Command of Constantine the Great, in 325: which had three hundred and eighteen Bishops in it. There was another designed here in 359. for the promoting Arianism; but it was disappointed by an Earthquake, which ruined a great part of the City. There was a second General Council here in 787. con∣sisting of three hundred and fifty Bishops; where Image-Worship was approved; which Charles the Great censured in a Council at Franckford, in 794. consisting of three hundred Bishops. This City was taken by Godfrey de Bovillon in his Passage to Jeru∣salem, in 1097. out of the Hands of the Infidels; by whom it was restored to the Greek Emperor. In 1329. it was besieged by Orchanes II. of the Ottoman Line. Andronicus, the Greek Emperor, coming up to its Re∣lief was wounded, and forced to retire; yet the City held out, and was taken by a Stratagem rather than force the year following. It stands forty four Miles from Nicomedia to the North, twenty five from Pru∣sia to the West; in Long. 57. 30. Lat. 42. 25. Nice, Nicaea, a City in Provence in France; cal∣led also Nizza, Nicia, and Nice de Provence; which is a great, splendid, populous City; and a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Ambrun; seated upon the Shoar of the Mediterranean Sea, furnished with a large Haven, and a Castle; two Miles from the Mouth of the River Var or Varo, and seven from Port Monaco to the West. This City was subject to the Earls of Provence, till 1365; when it was left by Qu Joanna
to Lewis II. Duke of Savoy, with the County belong∣ing to it; it is still subject to that Family; and is the most Western Town in Italy, in the present esteem. Built at first by the Marsilians, in Commemoration of a Victory they had obtained over the Ligurii. Next it became subject to the Kings of Burgundy, and then to the Earls of Provence. Long. 30. 20. Lat. 43. 45. In 1538. Pope Paul III. had an enterview here with Francis I. King of France, and the Emperor Charles V. at which they agreed to a truce of ten years. In 1545. The French and Turks together, (the latter, commanded by their Admiral Barberousse) took the City, but could not take the Castle. It hath besides the Cathedral, three Parishes, one College, and divers religious Houses; and it gives sufficient marks of its antiquity in Inscriptions, ruines, &c. The County of Nizza, whereof it is the Capital, includes the Coun∣ties of Tende and Bueil; together with the four Vi∣cariates of Nice, Barcelonette, Sospello and Pue∣rin. Nice, Nicaea, once a City and a Bishops See in Ma∣cedonia, now a Village; inhabited by Turks and Bul∣garians. Thirty four Miles from Ocrida, (or Giustan∣dil, as the Turks call it) towards Heraclea; its Ruins shew it to have been a vast City. Nichor, Nicaea. Nicomedia, the ancient Capital City of Bithynia, in Asia Minor; called vulgarly Comidia, and by the Turks Ismid, and Isnigimid. It stands upon the as∣cent of a delicious little Hill, (embellish'd with Foun∣tains, Vines, Corn, and Fruits,) towards the Coast of the Propontis, or the Sea of Marmora; upon a Gulph of its own name, about half a League in breadth, convenient for the building of Ships. In ancient times it was one of the most considerable and important Cities of the East. Built by a King of Bithynia of the same name, says Strabo. Hannibal poysoned him∣self here, in the Reign of Prusias King of Bithynia, to avoid his being delivered to the Romans. Constan∣stine the Great dyed in or very near this City; which received the Christian Religion early, and became ho∣noured with divers Martyrdoms. In 358. a violent Earthquake, described particularly by Ammianus Mar∣cellinus, almost entirely ruined it, at a time, when the Emperor Constantius was to celebrate an Arrian Council at it. A number of Greek and Latin Inscri∣ptions appear there yet to be seen: And some relations tell us, it is now inhabited by about thirty thousand People, Greeks, Armenians, Jews and Turks, who have their respective Mosques and Churches, and trade much in Linnen and Silks. Nicoping, Nicopinga, a City of Sweden, which is the Capital of Sudermannia, upon the Shoars of the Baltick Sea; thirteen Miles from Stockholm to the North-West, and seven from Norkop to the South-East. It has an Haven and a Castle; the ancient Seat of the Dukes of this Province, and the Residence of Charles the last Duke, before he was advanced to the Crown of Sweden. Nicoping, a Town of Denmark, in the Isle of Falster; over against Laland; eleven Danish Miles from Copenhagen to the South: in which Christopher II. King of Denmark, died in 1333. A small, but a fine Town. Nicopolis, in the Lesser Armenia. See Gianich. § In Bulgaria, see Nigeboli. § In Epirus, see Pre∣veza. § In Judaesa, the same with Emmaus. Nicosia, Leucosia, Nicosia, a City in the Isle of Cyprus; which is an Archbishops See: strong, popu∣lous, and seated in the midst of the Island. It was the Seat of the Kings of this Island; and after that, of the Venetian Governours; till in 1571. taken by the Turks, whose Governor still Resides in it. This City is three Miles in compass, and stands in a fruitful well watered Plain. Nicotera, a City in the Further Calabria, upon the Tyrrhenian Sea; which is a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Regio: little, and not well inhabited; having suffered very much by an Earthquake in 1638. Long. 40.00 Lat 38. 25. Nicoya, a City and County in Nicaragua in New Spain, in America. Nicsia. See Naxia. Nidrosia, a River of Norway, which falls by Dron∣theim into the Virgivian Ocean: the City Drontheim is called by the same name in Latin Writers. In Lat. 64. 36. Nied Teutsche or Alleman, Nita Germanica, a River which ariseth in the Forest of Loraine; and taking in the Nied Fransois, (Nitam Romanam), which watereth Haudonville, Estangs, and Niedburg; they thus united hast to Bosonville; and there fall into the Seare or Sare, a little above Trier. Niemeca, Germany. Niemen. See Memel. Nienhuis, Nienhusium, a Castle near Paderborn, upon the confluence of the Alme and the Lippe; built by Theodore Furstemberg, (Bishop of Paderborn) for the Residence of his Successors. Nero Claudius, and Charles the Great, had before built Castles in this very place; the first against the Sicambri, the second a∣gainst the Saxons. Nieper, Borysthenes, a River of Poland, very well known to Ptolemy, and the Ancien's: it ariseth in Moscovy, in the Palatinate of Bielki, near Dnieprisco; and flowing Westward, entereth Lithuania, (a Pro∣vince of Poland) watereth Smolensko and Orssa; then turning South, passeth by Mohilow, Rohaozow and Rezozyca; above which last it receives the Berezina from the West, and passeth South-East to Lojoworod; beneath which it takes in the Peripecz, a vast River from the West. So hasteth to Kiovia, above which it admits the Deszna, a vast River from the East; from hence it runs South-East by Risszow, Czyrcassy, and as far as the Rocky Stones; where it turns South-West by the Zaporavia Islands, and falls into the Eu∣xine Sea almost four English Miles East of Bialogrod; a few Miles above its Outlet it takes in the Bog, a vast River from the West. It has seventy five Miles above its Outlets thirteen Cataracts called by the Inhabitants Porowys; which make it impossible to carry any Boat higher up its Stream. The Niester, Tyras, a River of Poland: called also the Turla: it springeth out of a small Lake in Red Russia, nine Polish Miles from Premysle to the East, and four from Lemberg to the South; running East through Pokutie and Podolia, it separates Brac∣law from Walachia; and in Bessarabia falls into the Euxine Sea, sixty Miles from the Mouth of the Danube to the North. Baudrand. But the latter Maps make it not much above twenty English Miles. Nigeboli, Nicopolis, a City built by Trajan, after the Conquest of Decebalus, King of the Dacians, (who was a valiant and wise Prince) at the Confluence of the Isacar and the Danube in Bulgaria. It was at first a Bishoprick; but now an Archbishops See; com∣monly called Nigeboli; but by the Turks, Sciltaro. Ten Hungarian Miles from the Borders of Servia to the East, and three from Silistria to the North. Near this City the Christians received a great Overthrow from the Turks, in 1393; under Sigismund the Em∣peror. Long. 50. 20. Lat. 45. 15. Nigir, Niger, the greatest River of Africa; cal∣led by the Inhabitants Huid Nijar; it ariseth in Aethi∣opia, from a Lake of the same Name; and turning Westward, divides Nigritia into two parts, to the
East and West, the space of eight hundred Leagues. It encreases in the middle of June like the Nile, and overflows the Country. This continues twenty four days; and the decrease the same. After a long Course, and the Reception of many Rivers, (whose Names are unknown to us) it falls into the Atlantick Ocean by six great Outlets; which are all (but one) South of Cape Verde. Nigritia, a large Country of Africa, extended on each side the River Niger which divides it from East to West into two parts; lying and bounded betwixt Guinee to the South, the Atlantick Ocean to the West, and the vast deserts of Zaara to the East and North. The Kingdoms of Borno, Agades, Cano or Ghana, Tombut, Gualata, Guenehoa, Gaoga, and divers others of note and great extent, are contained in this division of Africa. The Inhabitants are the Negroes, above∣mentioned; who make a Trade of selling not only the Prisoners they steal or force from their Neighbors, but even their own Wives and Children, for Slaves, to the Europeans. Nile, Nilus, a vast River in Africa; which ariseth from two Fountains in the higher Aethiopia, in the Abyssins Empire; in a Country called Sacahala, a∣mongst high Mountains; and being enlarged by the Gema, Kelti, and Branti, it passeth through the South part of the Lake of Dambea, to the greatest Cataracts. Before it enters Nubia, it takes in the River Meleg, and afterwards the Tacaze at Jalac; and entering and traversing the Ʋpper Egypt, four Miles beneath Grand Cairo, it divides first into two, and after into more Branches; which anciently made the number of seven, but are now reduced to four; the rest being stopped up by the Sands of the Medi∣terranean Sea, and those brought down by the Ri∣ver; the Mahometan Princes (who have been many Ages Lords of Egypt) taking no care to keep them open. The Eastern Branch falls into the Mediter∣ranean Sea by Damiata, and was of old called Os Pelusiacum. The Western was then named Canopus, and falls into the same Sea below Rosetto. These two make the Delta an Island, which is the richest por∣tion of Land in Egypt. There are two other Outlets between these, but poor in Waters, saith Mr. Sandys. This River is the only cause of the Fertility of Egypt; beginning every year to rise with the Rising Sun, June 17. and swelling sometimes to twenty four Cu∣bits. About the middle of September it begins to decrease: about a Month after they sow their Grounds; and in May reap them. The Cause of this Inundation is now known to be the Rains, which fall in Aethio∣pia for three Months together in their Winter, and the Aegyptian Summer. They of Egypt owe not only their Food, but many of them their Lives to the swel∣lings of this River: insomuch that when five hundred die of the Plague at Grand Cairo the day before, not one dies the day after. These Waters are sweet to the taste, cool and wholsom; and extremely Nutritive both to Plants and Animals. It has plenty of Fish, and too many Crocodiles; some of which live to be thirty foot long; but rarely come so low as Grand Cairo. Mr. Thevenot begins the encrease of the Nile, May 16. or 20. and saith, the Publication is made June 28. or 29. He saith, they give no account of its encrease beyond September 24 tho it often swells to the beginning of October, and gradually abates till the Month of May. He gives also this account of the Head of the Nile, from the Report of an Aethiopian Ambassador he met at Grand Cairo. The Head of Nile is a Well that springs out of the Ground in a large Plain, called Ovembromma, in the Province of Ago; which casts up the Waters very high; the Well being twelve days Journey from Gouthar, the Capital of Aethiopia. These Waters running Northwards, pass by seven Cataracts before they enter into Egypt; and he saith, there are no Mountains near its Head by three weeks journey. If the River doth not rise six∣teen foot, a Famine follows for want of Water: if it swells to twenty four, there is a Dearth; because the Seed time is lost. The Abyssines entitle the Nile, the Father of Rivers. Nimmeghen, Noviomagum, a City of the Low Countries, mentioned by Antoninus in his Itinerary; called now by the Inhabitants Nimeguen; by the French Nimegue; by the Spaniards Nimega. It is the Capital of the Dukedom of Guelderland, under the Ʋnited Provinces; seated upon the Wael, be∣tween the Rhine and the Maez; two Leagues from Arnheim to the South, six from Ʋtrecht to the East, three from Cleves to the West, and twenty from Co∣logn to the same. Anciently a Free Imperial City, but afterwards exempt, and subject to the Dukes of Guel∣derland; being Mortgaged to one of them by Wil∣liam Earl of Holland, who was then chosen Emperor of Germany. About the Year 1585, this City was much inclined to the Interest of the Roman Catholick Religion. In the Year 1589, the Hollanders endea∣voured without any good success to reduce it; when Skenkius (their General) was drowned in the Wael. In the Year 1591, Prince Maurice took it after a sharp Siege. In the Year 1672, it was taken by the French; the only Town in all those Provinces which fought for its Liberty: the year after the French de∣serted it. In 1678, there was a Peace agreed here be∣tween the French and the Spaniards. In the Year 1679, between the Germans and the French. This City is said to have been first built by the Catti, and the Castle by Julian the Apostate, whilst he was in France; Charles the Great built here a Noble Palace; which together with this City was burnt by the Nor∣mans. The Germans prevailing against the Normans, rebuilt the City; and gave it many Privileges; several of the Emperors residing in it, till at last it was mort∣gaged to Otho, Duke of Guelderland; and became the Capital of that Dukedom. Ningive, Ningiva, a City in the Province of Leo∣tunin, in China. Baudrand. Ningque, Ningqua, a City in the Province of Nankin in China. Ninive, Ninus, an ancient and most celebrated City of Assyria; mentioned in the Sacred and Profane Sto∣ries. Built by Ashur, the second Son of Shem, ac∣cording to Josephus, and the vulgar translation of Gen. 10. 11. But Bochartus transposes that verse, and endeavours to prove, that Nimrod was its Foun∣der, going forth out of the Land of Ashur. Others say, Ninus built, or at least augmented it, and gave it his own name. Diodorus Siculus has left us a state∣ly description of it. In the time of Jonas, we read, it was an exceeding great City of three days journey: Jon. 2. 3. that is, in St. Jerom's construction, in cir∣cuit. The Prophets foretold its destruction; which accordingly happened under Merodach and Nebucha∣donosar, Kings of Assyria. It lies now in Ruins. Out of it is sprung a new City, called Mosul, built on the other side of the Tigris, which is under the Turks; an hundred Miles from Bagat to the North. Ninove, Niniva, a small City in Flanders, in the County of Alost; not above two Leagues from Alost to the South; in the middle between Brussels to the East, and Oudenarde to the West. Niort, Noverogus, a Town in Poictou, thirteen Leagues from Rochelle to the North-East. Niphates, the ancient name of that part of the Mountain Taurus, which runs betwixt Armenia and Mesopotamia. Now called Curdo. It gives source to a River of the same name, passing through the same Countries to fall in the Tigris.
Niphonia, or Niphon, a great Island belonging to Japan, the principal Province of that Empire; in which are Jedo and Meaco, the Royal Cities, where the King resides. It is divided into five Territories or Provinces Jamaisoit, Jetsegen, Jesten, Ochio and Quanto: being about sixty Leagues in Circuit. Nisa, Nyssa, a City of Lydia in the Lesser Asia, which is a Bishops See. Long. 59. 10. Lat. 40. 50. Nisibin, Nisibis, the principal City of Mesopota∣mia, of great Antiquity; mentioned by Pliny and Strabo. It is now an Archbishops See; and the Ca∣pital of Diarbeck; under the Turks. It stands upon the River Zaba, which falls into the Tigris, under Mount Taurus; thirty five Miles from the Tigris to the West, fifty from Amida to the South, and seventy five from Taurus to the South-West. In 1338. Sapo∣res, King of Persia, besieg'd it in vain. Nisi, Coron, a City in the Morea. Nisi, Nysa, a City of Armenia the Lesser; and a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Caesarea; from which it stands sixty Miles to the East. Long. 66. 30. Lat. 40. 20. Nisi, Enisis, a small River on the East of Sicily; which falls into the Sea between Messina to the North, and Cap di S. Alescio to the South, by the Town of Scaletta. Nisita, Nesis, an Island in the Tyrrhenian Sea, upon the Coast of the Terra di Lavoro in Italy, three Miles from Pozzuoli. Nismes, Nimes, Nemausium, Volcarum Areco∣micorum Nemausus, a City of France, in the Lower Languedoc; which was a Roman Colony, of great Antiquity; now a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Narbone; in which there is an Amphitheatre, very perfect, and many other Roman Antiquities; it is now in a flourishing State; in the middle between Avignon to the East, and Montpellier to the West; seven Leagues from either. This City was, in the late Civil Wars, one of the Bulwarks of the Huguenots; hath had its Counts and Viscounts; and in ancient times some Synods have been assembled at it. Long 25. 05. Lat. 43. 6. Nisau, Nissa, Nisi, Naisum, one of the principal Cities of Servia; seated upon a River of the same Name, which falls into the Morava; fifteen German Miles from Scopia to the North, and twelve from Giu∣standil to the West, and forty two from Thessalonica to the North-West. On September 24. 1689, the Im∣perialists defeated entirely an Army of forty thousand Turks near this place; and the next day took possession of it without any Opposition. Again, September, 1690, the Turks recovered it from the Imperialists, after a three weeks Attack Nithedale, Nithia, a County in the South of Scotland, near the Borders of England; which has Cluydesdale on the North, Anandale on the East, Solway Fyrth on the South, and Galloway on the West. The River Nyth, which denominates it, runs through it: Its Capital Town is Dunfreis. Nitracht, or Neytracht, Nitria, a City of the Ʋpper Hungary; which is a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Gran; and stands upon a small River of the same Name. Ten German Miles from Pres∣burgh to the East, the same distance from Gran to the North, and five from Newhausel to the same. It is the Capital of a small County of the same Name; and in the Hands of the Emperour, whilst New∣hausel was under the Turks. Nitria, see Nitracht. § Also a Mountain in Egypt, which has been sanctified by the retreat of di∣vers Anchorites. Nirt, the Residence of the Dukes of Curland. Nivata, a City and Province of Japan, in the Island Niphon, and the Region of Quanto. Niuche, Niucanum, a Kingdom in the Asian Tar∣tary; the King of which has lately conquered China. This is called by others Tenduc. Nive, Nivus, a River of France in Aquitain; called by the Inhabitants, Errobi. It ariseth in the Borders of the Kingdom of Navarr; and watering the Town of S. Jean de Pied Port, falls into the Adour, through Bayonne. Nivernois, Ambarri, Nevernensis Comitatus, is a Province in France, of great extent upon the Lorre. It has the Dukedom of Burgundy on the East, that of Bourbone on the South, Berry on the West, and Or∣leance on the North. The Vadicasses were the an∣cient Inhabitants of this Province. Nevers is its Ca∣pital City: the rest of any note are La Charite, Cosne, Clamecy, Decize, and Corbigny. This Province hath the honour of the Title of a Dukedom. Nizza della Paglia, a Town in the Dukedom of Montferrat in Italy, betwixt Ast and Aqui; which hath partaked of the sufferings of the Civil Wars of its Country. Nizza. See Nice. Noailies, a Town in the Province of Limosin, in Aquitain, in France: giving name to a Family of Honour. Nocera, Nuceria, a City of S. Peter's Patrimony, in Italy, of great Antiquity; which is a Bishops See, immediately under the Pope; seated at the Foot of the Apennine, in the Borders of the Marchia Ancc∣nitana, at the Fountains of the River Topino: sixteen Miles from Spoleto to the North, and fifteen from Ca∣merino to the West. Some are of opinion, that this is the same place with that which Livy calls Alpha∣terna. Nocera, a City in the Kingdom of Naples, in the hither Principate; which is a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Salerno; and a Dukedom belonging to the Family of Barberino. Called for distinction from the Precedent, by those of the Country, Nocera di Pagani, because it hath been taken formerly by the Saracens. The ancients in many places speak of it. It stands eight Miles from Salerno to the South-West, and twenty two from Naples to the South. § There is a Town of this Name in Calabria; eight Miles from Amantea to the South, and three from the Tyrrhenian Sea. Noere, Notra, a River of Angoumois in France. Noesenstad Bistritia, the same with Bestercze. Nogar or Nogarol, the Capital Town of the Coun∣ty of Armagnac, in the Ʋpper Gascony, in France; upon the River Modou, below Monlesun. The La∣tin Writers call it Nogariolum and Nugariolum. It has a Collegiate Church, and in the Years 1290. 1303. 1316. there were Synods assembled here. Nogent l'Artaud, a Town in the Province of Champagne in France, upon the Marne; below Chastean Thierri. Nogent le Retrou, Nonigentum Rotrudum, the fairest Village in France; the Capital of the County of La Perche; seated upon the River Huyna. Four∣teen Leagues from Chartres, (the Capital of La Beausse) and honored with the Title of a Dukedom. The En∣glish heretofore took it under the Earl of Salisbury. Charles VII. King of France retook it in 1449. The little River Ronne falls into the Huisne here. Nogent le Roy, a Town in la Beausse in France, upon the Eure, betwixt Dreux and Chartres. Nogent sur seine, a Town in Champaigne, upon the River Seine, which it covers with a Stone Bridge. Nola, a City and Colony in Campania Foelix, (now Terra di Lavoro) in the Kingdom of Naples; which is a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Naples; in a tolerable State, and shews many Footsteps of its great
Antiquity. Hannibal besieged it without any success, in the Year of Rome 540. In or near this City Au∣gustus (the first Roman Emperor) died, Anno Christi, 14. Not less famous for being the Birth-place of S. Pau∣linus, who was afterwards Bishop of it. It stands four∣teen Miles from Naples towards the East, near the Ri∣ver Agno, Clanis. Noli, Naulum, Naulium, a small City in the States of Genoua; which is a Bishops See, under the Arch∣bishop of Genoua. It stands in a Plain, on the Shoars of the Ligurian Sea; but it has no Harbor, as I have often seen, (saith Baudrand.) Once a Free State; now subject to the State of Genoua; from which City it stands thirty one Miles to the West, betwixt Savonna and Albengua. Nombre de Dios, Nomen Dei, Onomatheopolis, a City of Terra firma, a Province upon the Streights of Panama; twenty five Leagues from Panama to the North; which has a noble and safe Harbor, to the North Sea: Built by the Spaniards, but since forsa∣ken, for its unwholsome air. Nomentum or Nomentano, the Capital Town of the ancient Nomentani in Latium, frequently men∣tioned by the Classicks. It hath sometime been a Bishops See, but now is only a Village, in the Duchy of Monte-Rotundo, in the States of the Church. Nomeny, Nomenium, a City or great Town in the Dukedom of Lorain, in the Territory of Messin, upon the River Seile, Salia; five Miles from Nancy to the South, and seven from Marsal to the South-East. Nona, Aenona, a City of Dalmatia, mentioned by Ptolemy; which is now a Bishops See, under the Arch∣bishop of Zara or Zadar; well fortified: ten Miles from Zara to the North. It is under the Venetians, and hath a Port to the Adriatique. The Sclavonians call it Nin. Some admit it to be the Aenona of the ancients. Nonsuch, a Palace Royal in the County of Surrey, not far from Epsham: delightfully situated, and magnificently built by K. Henry VIII. De Noordtshe Bee, Mare Germanicum, the German Ocean. Norcia, Nursia, a small City in the Dominions of the Church; placed by Livy, Pliny, and the rest of the Ancients, in Ʋmbria. It stands amongst the Hills, near the Apennine, by the River Fredda; six Miles from the Marchia Anconitana to the South; between Aquila to the East, and Spoletto to the West; thirteen from either. This was the Country of S. Be∣nedict, the Father of the Western Monks; as also of Sertorius, the great Roman Commander, slain in Spain. It hath been an Episcopal See. Norden, Nordenum, a City in Westphalia in East-Friesland, upon the German Ocean; to which it hath a considerable Port: under the Prince of East-Friesland, sixteen Miles from Embden to the North. Nordlingen, Norlinga, a City of Schwaben, in the Year 1251, made a Free Imperial City: it stands upon the River Eger; four German Miles from La∣wingen to the North, ten from VVerden to the South-West, and from Ingolstad to the West: between the Territories of the Duke of Newburgh, and the Count of Oetingen. Famous by a Defeat of the Swedes in 1634, and a Victory of the Swedes and French in 1645, tho otherwise small, and in a decaying condi∣tion. This place is called by the French, Norlingue; and by the Germans also written Norlinghen. Norfolk, Norfolcia, a County on the Eastern Coast of England. Bounded on the North with the German Ocean; on the East in part by the same O∣cean, in part by Suffolk; on the South by the Rivers of VVaveney and the little Ouse, which part it from Suffolk; on the West with the great Ouse; and to∣wards Lincolnshire with that part of the Nene, which passeth from VVisbich to the Washes. It containeth in length from Yarmouth to VVisbich fifty Miles, in breadth from Thetford to VVells thirty; in circuit about two hundred and forty. The Southern parts, which are Wood Lands, are fruitfull; the Northern or Champain, barren and dry. In the whole are six hundred and sixty Parishes, and thirty one Market Towns; and besides the VVaveney and the Ouse, watered by the Rivers Yare and Thryn. Its Ca∣pital City, Norwich. The largest County next to Yorkshire, in England; and surpassing even Yorkshire in populousness. In the time of the Heptarchy, it was a part of the Kingdom of the East-Angles. The first Earl of Norfolk was Ralph de VVaet, Created in the Year 1075. After whom succeeded the Bigots from 1135, to 1270, in six Descents. In 1313, Tho. de Brotherton, a Son of Edward I. was made Earl of Norfolk: Margaret his Daughter, in 1398, was made Duchess; whose Son Thomas Mowbray, (and his Descendents) continued the Honor to the Year 1461. In 1475, Richard Duke of York was made Duke of Norfolk. In 1483, John Lord Howard was vested with the same Honor, in whose Family it now is. Henry the present Duke of Norfolk being the ninth Duke of this Race. Norimburgh. See Nurenberg. Norin, a fort of Dalmatia, betwixt the River Narenta, and the branch thereof called Norin, which returns into the bed of the Narenta again. Under the Venetians. Norkoping, Norcopia, a small City in Sweden, between two Lakes; five Miles from the Baltick Sea; in the Province of Ostrogothia, by the River Motala: ten Miles from the Lake Veter, East. Normandy, Neustria, Normannia, is a great and fruitful Province in France, which has the Title of a Dukedom. It has this name from the Normans; who, under Rollo their first Duke, setled here in the time of Charles the Simple, King of France. Bound∣ed on the North and West by the British Sea; on the East by Picardy; on the South by le Perche, and le Maine. It lies sixty six Leagues from East to West, and from North to South about thirty; the principal City in it is Roan or Roiien. This Province is divided into twelve Counties; but more usually into the Upper and Lower Normandy: the former containing the Bailywicks of Roiien, Eureux, Caux, and Gisors: the other those of Alenzon, Caen, and Constantin. Its principal Rivers are the Seine, Eure, Risle, Dive, Soule, Ouve, &c. A cold Climate, plentiful in Corn, Cattel, and Fruits; but generally wanting Wine. It yields some Mines of Iron and Brass, together with Medicinal Waters: Is better in∣habited by Gentry, than almost any other Province of France; and reckons above a hundred Cities, and a hundred and fifty great Towns standing in it. Rollo the first Duke, (under whom the Nor∣mans besieged Paris three times) obtained that Ti∣tle in 912. from Charles the Simple, (who gave his Daughter in Marriage to him,) upon condition to hold Normandy in homage to the Crown. Wil∣liam the base Son of Robert (the sixth Duke) Con∣quered England in 1066: by which means it was United to the Crown of England till 1202: when King John was outed of it. Henry V. about 1420. reconquered this Duchy: His Son lost it again about 1450. ever since which time it has been annexed to the Crown of France. De Noort Caep, Rubaea, Rubeae Promontorium, is the most Northern Point of Finmark; and indeed of all Europe. § There is a Cape of the same Name in Guiana, in South America. Nortgow, Nortgovia, a Province of Germany; between Bohemia to the East, the Danube to the
East and South, (which parts it from Bavaria;) Schwaben and Franconia to the West, and Voigt∣land to the North. The Capital of it is Norimburg. This name, in the German Tongue, signifies the North Country. It was the Seat of the antient People, Narisc. North-Allerton, A Market Town in the North-Riding of Yorkshire, near the Stream Wisk, which falls into the Swale. The Capital of its Hundred. Northamptonshire, Northantonia, is seated almost in the midst of England: on the North it is parted from Lincolnshire by the River Weland; on the East from Huntington by the Nene; on the South it has Buckingham and Oxford; and on the West Warwickshire, separated by Watlingstreet, a Roman way. From North to South it is forty six Miles in length; but not full twenty in breadth where broadest. In the whole, there are three hundred twenty six Parish∣es and thirteen Market Towns. The Rivers Nen and VVeland have their rise in this County, together with the Ouse. The Air is temperate; the Soil rich, fruitful, champain; full of People. The chief Town is Northampton, pleasantly seated on the Bank of the River Nen, where two Rivulets from the North and South fall into it; which for its Circuit, Beauty, and Buildings, may be compared with most of the Cities of England. It was burnt by the Danes. In the Wars in King John's time it suffered much from the Barons. Near this City in 1460. Henry VI. was overthrown; and first taken Prisoner by Edward IV. In 1261▪ the Students of Cambridge are said to have removed hither by the King's Warrant, with Inten∣tions to have setled the University here. In the Reign of King Charles II. Sept. 1675. it was totally de∣stroyed by Fire; but by the favour of that gracious Prince, and the chearful Contributions of good Peo∣ple, soon rebuilt. Long. 19. 40. Lat. 52. 36. To omit the more ancient Families; VVilliam, Lord Compton, was created Earl of Northampton, by King James I. in 1618. The present Earl, George, is the fourth of this Noble Family. Northausen, Northusia, an Imperial Free City of Germany, in Thuringia, upon the River Zorge; between Erford to the South, and Halberstad to the North; eight German Miles from either. This City is under the Protection of the Elector of Saxony; and said to have been built by Meroveus I. King of the Franks, in the Year of Christ 447. The North Foreland, Cantium, a Cape of the Isle of Tha in Kent; famous for a Sea Fight be∣tween the English and the Dutch, in 1666. When the brave Duke of Albemarle, with only two Squa∣drons of the English Fleet, maintained a Fight against the whole Dutch Fleet of an hundred Sail, two days together: Prince Rupert coming up in the Evening of the second day, the English fell again (the third) on the Dutch Fleet, and beat them home: which, all things considered, was the most wonderful Naval Fight that ever was fought upon the Ocean. Northumberland, Northumbria, is parted on the South by the Derwent and the Tyne from the Bishop∣rick of Durham: on the East it has the German Ocean; on the North Scotland: on the West Scot∣land and Cumberland: it has the form of a Triangle or Wedge, containing in length from North to South about forty Miles, in breadth where it is the broadest, thirty: in the whole, four hundred and sixty Parishes, and only six Market Towns. The Air is cold and sharp; the Soil barren and rugged, but much im∣proved by the Industry of its Inhabitants; and chiefly towards the Sea, fertile. The Bowels of the Earth are full of Coal Mines, whence a great part of England s supplied with that Fewel. The principal Places in  are Newcastle and Berwick▪ George Fitz-Roy a Natural Son of Charles II. was created Duke of Nor∣thumberland in 1674. Which Title had been once before enjoyed by John Dudley, Earl of Warwick, created Duke of Northumberland by K. Edward VI. in 1551. and beheaded by Q. Mary. After the death of the said John, the Title of Earl of Northum∣berland returned to the Percies: in whose Family, as it had heretofore belong'd to them from the Year 1337, when Henry Piercy, Lord Constable, possessed it under K. Richard II. and was succeeded in it by five of his Name and Family, with little interruption; so it continued till the Year 1670, when Joceline Piercy died at Turin without Issue Male. North-Curry, a Market Town in Somersetshire, upon the River Tone: and the Capital of its Hundred. Northwich, a Market Town in Cheshire, upon the River Dane, which runs into the Weeve: the Ca∣pital of its Hundred. Its Salt-pits render it remark∣able. Norway, Norvegia, Nerigon, Basilia, is a King∣dom of great extent on the North-Western Shoar of Europe; called by the Inhabitants Norricke, and by Contraction Norke; by the Germans, Norwegen. Heretofore esteemed the Western part of Scandina∣via; and called Nerigon, as Cluverius saith: it reaches from the Entrance of the Baltick Sea, to al∣most the North Cape: but not of equal breadth. On the East a long Ridge of Mountains, always covered with Snow, (called Sevones,) separate it from Swe∣den. Barren and Rocky; or overgrown with vast and unpassable Woods. Its length is about one thou∣sand and three hundred English Miles; and two hun∣dred and fifty its breadth. Divided into five Provin∣ces; Aggerhus, Bergensus, Dronthemhus, VVardhus, and Bahus. The Inhabitants traffick abroad with Dryed Fish, Whales Grease, and Timber. Of the same Religion with the Danes; and some of them enclined to Magick, like the Laplanders. The Glama is the only River in this Kingdom that is suf∣ficient to carry Vessels of great burden. In 1646. a discovery was made of a golden Mine, near Opslow; which was quickly exhausted. Bahus was resign∣ed to the King of Sweden in 1658. There depend upon this Kingdom several Islands; as Iseland, Groen∣land, Spitzberg, the Isles of Feroe, and those of Ork∣ney; the latter whereof were resigned to James VI. of Scotland. The principal Cities are Drontheim, and Berghen. This had Kings of its own from very an∣cient times; but in 1326. it was first united to Den∣mark in the Person of Magnus III. In 1376. they became so united, that they were never since sepa∣rated. Norwich, Nordovicum, Norvicum, is a rich, po∣pulous, neat City; in the middle of the County of Norfolk; seated at the confluence of the Venster (or Vensder) and the Yare, over which it hath several Bridges. This City sprung up out of the Ruins of Venta Icenorum, now called Caster, in which not many years since was found a vast number of Ro∣man Urns. When or by whom Norwich was built, is not known: it seems to be a Saxon City; it was certainly the Seat of some of the Kings of the East-Angles. In its Infancy Sueno, a Dane, burnt it in 1004. In the Reign of VVilliam the Conqueror it was besieged, and taken by Famine. Herbert, Bi∣shop of this Diocese, contributed to its growth; by removing the Bishops Chair from Thetford hither, a∣bout 1096. In the seventeenth year of King Ste∣phen's Reign, it was refounded and made a Corpora∣tion. The Castle is thought to have been built in the Reign of Henry II. Taken by the French in the Reign of King John. In the Reign of Edward I. it was walled by the Citizens. Henry IV. in 1403. granted them a Mayor. Afterwards it began to de∣cay,
till Queen Elizabeth sent the Dutch Stuff Wea∣vers (who sled over into England, from the cruel Government of the Duke d'Alva) hither: whereup∣on it grew very populous, and rich. There was great need of this supply: one Kett (a Tanner of VVindham) having almost ruined this City about 1548. in the Reign of Edward VI. The present▪ Bi∣shop of Norwich is the seventy first from Bedwinus of Elmham, the seventy fifth from Foelix, (the first Bishop of the East-Angles) who began the Bishop∣rick in 636. Long. 24. 55. Lat. 52. 40. This Ci∣ty, being about a Mile and a half in length and half as much in breadth, contains twenty Parishes; well walled, with several Turrets, and twelve Gates for Entrance; and so pleasantly intermixt with Houses and Trees, that it looks like an Orchard and a City within each other. It gives the Title of Earl to the Duke of Norfolk; whose Palace, with that of the Bi∣shop, the Cathedral, the Hospital, &c. are the prin∣cipal Ornaments of its Buildings. Noto, Netum, Nea, Nectum, Neetum, a City of Sicily, of great Antiquity; and at this time great, well inhabited, the Capital of the Province called by its name. It is incompassed with high Rocks, and sleep Valleys; being seated on the South side of Ise∣land. Eight Miles from the Sea, fifteen from Pachy▪ no to the South-West, and twenty five from Syracuse to the South. Il Val di Noto, Netina Vallis, the Province in which the last mentioned City stands, is the second Province of Sicily; and lies on the South side of the Island. On the North it has Il Valle di Demona, on the West il Val di Mazara, and on the South the African Sea. Notteberg, Notteburgum, a Town in Ingria in Sweden; seated on an Island in the Lake Ladoga: to∣wards the Confines of Moscovy. Called Oreska by the Russ. A very strong Town by its Situation; yet Gustavus Adolphus, King of Sweden, took it from the Moscovites, in 1614. It takes its name from Nutts. Nottinghamshire, Nottinghamia, is bounded on the North and West by Yorkshire; on the East by Lincolnshire, (divided from it by the Trent;) on the South by Leicestershire, on the West by Darby∣shire. It is in length thirty eight English Miles from North to South; in breadth from East to West not above nineteen; and in Circuit about an hundred and ten, containing 168 Parishes, and nine Market Towns. The Air is good and pleasing; the Soil, rich Sand and Clay: so that for Corn or Grass it may compare with any County of England: it abounds equally with Wood and Coals; and is watered with the Rivers Trent and Iddle, besides several small Streams. This County takes its name from its principal Town, Nottingham, Rhage, a delicate pleasant Town, seated on a high Hill; full of fine Streets, and good Buildings; upon the River Line; towards the South Borders of this County: and about a Mile from the Trent, to the West. Over the Trent and the Line it has two Bridges, besides two others over two Ponds, called the Cheney Bridges. It has three Churches, and a strong and goodly Castle; built on a steep Rock on the West side of the Town. In the Reign of Burthred King of the Mercians, and Aethelred King of the VVest-Saxons, the Danes having got the Possession of this Castle, kept it against three Kings, (united against them) and forced them to a Peace. After this Edward, the Elder, walled the Town: the South part of which was standing in Mr. Cambden's time. The Castle, which is now standing, was rebuilt by VVilliam the Conqueror, to curb the English. Edward IV. repaired it. In 175. it was besieged by Henry II. but could not be taken. In the Ba∣rons Wars it was surprised by Robert de Ferrariis, an Earl; otherwise it was never taken by force, as the same Author observes. Long. 22. 14. Lat. 53. 00. Charles Lord Howard, descended from the House of Norfolk by the Mowbrays (Earls of this County, from 1377. to 1475.) was in 1597. created Earl of Not∣tingham. This Family ending in Charles Lord Howard, the third in that Line; the Honor was con∣ferred May 12. 1681. upon Heneage Lord Finch, Ba∣ron of Daventry, (then Lord Chancellor of England;) and it is now enjoyed by Daniel, Son of the said Heneage. Nova Antequera, a City of New Spain in Ame∣rica, in the Province of Oaxaca; eighty Spanish Leagues from Mexico to the East, seventeen from the North Sea to the South, and seventeen from Vera Cruz. It is little, and not much inhabited; though a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Mexico, ever since 1535. Nova Guinea, a large Country in the Western part of the Pacifick Ocean, which is a part of the Terra Australis: on the East of the Molucco Islands. First discovered by Andrew Ardaneta a Spaniard, in 1528. and then thought to be an Island, but since to be a part of the South Continent. Novara, Novaria, a City of Italy, which in Pliny's time was the Capital of Insubria. It is now a part of the Duchy of Milan; and a Bishop's See, under that Archbishop; the Head of a small Territory, cal∣led by its name. Very strong, and can shew many ancient Roman Inscriptions as Testimonies of its An∣tiquity. It stands twenty five Miles from Milan to the West, and ten from Turin, in a well-watered and fruitful Soil, and upon an Eminence well fortified. Near this, Lewis Sforza Duke of Milan was taken by the French in 1500. But twelve years after, the Swiss gave the French a great Overthrow in this Place, to abate their joy for their former Success. Pe∣ter Lombard, the Master of the Sentences, (and some∣time Bishop of Paris) was a Native of this City; and Pope Innocent XI. Bishop of it, when he was chosen. Novellara, a fine Town in the Lower Lombardy, between the Territories of the Dukes of Mantoua and Modena; subject to a Count of its own, who is of the Family of Gonzaga; ten Miles from Regio to∣wards the North. It has a Castle called Bagnuollo. Novibazar, Novus Mercatus, one of the princi∣pal Cities of Servia; upon the River Orasa; fifty Miles from Nissa to the West. Novigrad, Novigradum, Argyrutum, a Town in Dalmatia, which has a Castle: seated upon a Bay of the same name; twenty Miles from Zara to the East, and twenty five from Sebenico to the North. It be∣longed to the Venetians; but was taken by the Turks in 1646. Novigrad, a small City in the Ʋpper Hungary, which gives name to a County; one German Mile from the Danube, five from Gran to the North-East, and four from Vaccia. It has a Castle which is seated on a Rock; and a Dike thirty four foot deep, cut in the same Rock; which makes it almost inaccessible: yet the Turks took this strong Place, in 1663. Novogorod Velki, Novogardia Magna, a City of Moscovy; called by the Germans Neugarten; which is very great, and an Archbishops See; the Capital of a Principality of the same name: seated in a spaci∣ous Plain upon the River Wolkow, (where it issueth from the Lake of Ilmen) an hundred and five Ger∣man Miles from Mosco to the North-West, forty six from Pleskow to the East, and forty from Narva to the South East. Long. 50. 00. Lat. 58. 23. The River Wolchou or Woldga, (saith Olearius) falls by Notteburgh, and the Gulph of Finland into the Bal∣tick
Sea: this River is the chief cause of the Wealth and Greatness of the City; being Navigable from its Fountains almost to the Baltick: which has made this City the chief for Trade in all the North. Vi∣thold, (Great Duke of Lithuania) was the first, who in 1427. obliged this City to pay a vast Tribute. John Basilowitz Grotsden, Duke of Muscovy, over∣threw an Army raised by this City in 1477. Thereupon he made himself Master of it, and carried thence to Mosco three hundred Wagons loaden with Gold, Sil∣ver, and rich Goods. John Basilowitz, another of their Princes, in 1569. slew two thousand seven hun∣dred and seventy of its Inhabitants, and cast them in∣to the River, upon a bare groundless suspicion; be∣sides a vast number trodden to death by a Party of Horse. This City was taken by the Swedes in 1611. and restored to the Russ in 1634. It hath formerly been so puissant, that it passed for a common Pro∣verb, Who is there that can oppose himself to God, and the great City of Novogrod? They reckon a∣bout seventy Monasteries in it. Its largeness has been set in the parallel with that of Rome: but its Walls are of Wood, and the Buildings mean. Novogorod Nisi, that is, the Lower; is a vast City of Moscovy, seated upon the Wolga, where it takes in the Occa: an hundred German Miles from Mosco to the North-East, and forty from Wologda to the South-East. Novogrod, Novogroda, sirnamed Litawiski, is a City of Lithuania, under the Crown of Poland; the Capital of a Palatinate of the same name; in which the Diet of Lithuania ought by turns with Minsko to be holden. It stands scarce four Polish Miles from the River Niemen or Memel, and twenty from Vilna to the South. Novogrodeck Seviersky, a strong City of Rus∣sia; which has been attributed to Lithuania, when under the Poles; but now it is under the Russ again. It stands upon the River Dezna; seventeen Polish Miles from Czernichou to the North-East, forty six from Kiovia to the same, and the same distance from Smolensko to the South. This is also the Capital of a Palatinate. Noyon, Novomags, Noviodunum, a City in the Isle of France; near the Borders of Picardy (of which it was a part) upon the River Vorse, which two Miles lower falls into the Oise; eight Leagues from Soisons to the South-West, fifteen from Amiens, six from Reims to the West, and twenty two from Paris to the North. It is a Bishops See under the Archbishop of Reims: the Bishop of it is one of the three Earls, and a Peer of France; the Diocese which belongs to it, is called Le Noyonois. bia, a great Tract in the Eastern part of A∣frica and the River Nile: incompassed on the North and We with Mountains: by which it is separated from Egypt to the North; Guoga, Borno, Zanfara, and Biafara to the West; on the East it has the Nie, which parts it from Barnagasso; and on the South Abassinia, or Aethiopia. It lies three hundred French Leagues in length, and not much less in bread; the Capital of it is Dancala; the other Ci∣ties Ca, Guala, Jalac, and Sula. This was the Country of the ancient Nubae or Nubaei, and Nu∣mides. It is rich and fertile enough, towards the Nile. Nuis, or Neus, Novesium, a Town in the Archbi∣shoprick of Cologne, upon the Rhine, in Germany, where that River receives the Ept; adorned with a ColSapnrch. It is ancient, strong, and memo∣rable  resistance it made against Charles the H▪ Duke of Burgundy, who besieged it a whole year. The Emperour Frederick III. granted it great Privileges It was often taken and retaken in the last German Wars. Nuis, or Nuits, a small Town in the Dukedom of Burgundy, upon the River Armanson, betwixt Mombard and Tonnere. Some are of opinion, that it was the Work of the ancient Nuithones, a people of Germany. Tland van Pieter Nuitz, The Land of Peter Nuitz, is a part of New Holland, in the North Ame∣rica, discovered by a Dutch-man of the Name, in 1625. Numantia, an ancient and celebrated City of Spain. It sustained a Siege against an Army of for∣ty thousand Romans, for fourteen years together; and by its Courage and Conduct, did reduce Aemilius Lepidus, and C. Hostilius Mancinus, (the two Ro∣man Consuls, in the year of Rome 617.) to such a dis∣honourable Treaty, that the latter was ordered by the Senate to be delivered to the Enemy by a Herald at Arms, naked, with his hands tied, in indignation at the Conditions of Peace passed by him. But Nu∣mantia refused to take him. Scipio Africanus, after∣wards undertaking the Siege, made himself Master of the place in fifteen Months: and the Inhabitants in despair burnt whatever was most dear to them, even their Wives and Children, and cast themselves naked upon the Swords of the Conquerours. Numidia, the Country in the ancient division of Africa, which is now called Biledulgerid. There was also a Numidia propria. This latter had the ho∣nour to be a Kingdom, famous in the Persons of Ma∣sanissa, who aisted the Romans in the last Punick War; and of his Grandson Jugurtha, taken Prisoner and carried to Rome, after a long War he had main∣tained against the Romans. Nura, Nicia, a River in the Dukedoms of Parma and Placentia. Nuruberg, Nuremberg, Norimberga, Nurimberga, Noricorummons, a great Imperial Free City, in Ger∣many, in Franconia; upon the Confluence of the Regen and Pegen, two German Rivers; seated at the foot of an Hill of the Hyrcinian Forest; and forti∣fied with a Castle, and an Arsenal: Frederick I. made the Capital of Nortgow. It has belonging to it a Tract which lies between the Marquisate of Holach to the West; Culenbach to the North, the Ʋpper Palati∣nate to the East, and the Bishoprick of Aichstad to the South. This City was the Birth-place of Wen∣ceslaus the Emperour, and now in a flourishing con∣dition. It stands nine Miles from Bamberg to the South, fourteen from Ratisbon, thirteen from Wurts∣berg, and nineteen from Amburg to the North. It bought its liberty of its Princes; and has carefully preserved it, ever since 1027. The Emperour Hen∣ry V. ruined it: but Conradus III. Henry VI. and Charles VI. re-established and augmented it. In 1427. it bought the Castle of the Burgrave, which is since imployed as a Granary. It borrowed its form of Go∣vernment (which is Aristocratic,) from Venice. In 1506. it imbraced Luther's Doctrine in his time; but tolerated the Calvinists. In 1649. here was a general Peace concluded amongst the Princes of Germany. Nusco, Nuscum▪ an Episcopal City in the Further Principate in the Kingdom of Naples. The See is a Suffragan to the Archbishop of Salerno. Nyd, a River in Yorkshire, falling into the Ouse: upon which Ripley and Knaresborough are situated. Nyth, a River of Scotland, which flows through Nithisdale or Nythesdale. Nyenburg, Novoburgum, a small City in Westpha∣lia, in the County of Hoyen upon the River Weser; four German Miles above Perden to the South, and eight from Zell to the West. Nylandt, Nylandia, a Province of Finland, up∣on the Bay of Finland; between Carelia to the East, Tavastbia to the North, and Finland (proper∣ly so called) to the West; over against Livonia:
from which it is separated by the Bay. There are but three Towns of Note in it; Borgo, Helsingfors, and Raseborg. Nyms, Nemesa, a small River in the Bishoprick of Trier; which watereth Scheineck and Bitberg, then ends in the Saur. Nyne, Aufona, a River which watering the Town and County of Northampton, and Wisbich; falls into the German Ocean, between Norfolk and Lin∣colnshire. O A. OAkre, Obacer, a River in the Lower Saxony, and Lunenburg; called Ovacra in the middle times. Oanus, See Frascolari. § Stephanus makes men∣tion of an ancient City, Oanus, in Lydia, in Asia the Less. But we have no account thereof at this day. Oasis. The name of two ancient Solitary Recesses, in the Desarts of Barca, in Lybia, in Africa; whi∣ther Eugenius and Macarius, both of them Holy Priests of Antioch, were banished by the Emperour Julian the Apostate: and S. Hilarion retired, to avoid the fury of the Emissaries of the same Prince. The famous Nestorius died in his Banishment there also. Oaxes and Oaxus, a River of the Island of Can∣dia, now called Armiro. Virgil epithets it —rapidum veniemus Oaxem. Other Ancients speak of a City or Town there, of the same name. Obb. See Oby. Obdora, a Province in the North of Moscovy, on the Frozen Sea; between the River Oby to the East, and Petzora to the West. There is never a City or Town of Note in it. The Dutch who have lately discovered its Sea Coasts, have presumed to call it Niew West Frieslandt: but they have not settled any Colonies here, and probably never will. Obeck, Gir, a River of Lybia in Africa. Obengir, Ochus, a River of Persia; which wate∣reth the Provinces of Balach and Tocharestan; the Ci∣ties of Balach, Varvalin, Talecan, Badhascian, Ari∣ander; and then falls into the Gehun or Oxus, above Bichende, bringing with it the Balcan. This River is the North-Eastern Boundary of Persia, towards Tartary. Ober Baden, Thermae Superiores. See Baden. Ober-Wesel, Ficelia, Vosavia, a City in Germa∣ny, upon the Rhine; once an Imperial Free City, but in 1312. it fell into the hands of the Elector of Trier: it lies between Baccharach to the South, and Boppart to the North. S. Werner was here slain by the Jews, in 1287. in the time of Lent. Mammaea, the Mo∣ther of Alexander (the Roman Emperour,) was also assassinated in this place, as the Inhabitants report. Obi Raptum, a River of that part of Aethi∣opia next Egypt; which flowing Eastward toward Quilmancy, watereth the City of Quiloa in Zanguebar; then falls into the Aethiopian Ocean. Obtricht, Obrick, the same with Maesstricht. Oburg, Oburgum, a City in Finland. Oby, Obb, Ovis, Obius, a vast River on the East of Moscovy; which arising out of the Lake of Ka∣taysko, and running Northwards, parts Europe from Asia. Between the Province of Obdura to the West, and the Samoiedes to the East, it falls with a vast Current into the Frozen Sea. It has been sometime called Carambn. Occa, a River which riseth in the Borders of Crim Tartary; and running North-East, watereth Bulgo and Colomna; ten German Miles West of Mosco: and taking in the Cleusma and the Mooxa at Nisi No∣vogorod, falls into the Wolga. Ochums, Tarsuras, a River in Mengrelia; which riseth out of the Mountains of Colchis, and falls into the Euxine Sea. Ochrida. The same with Giustandil. Ochsenfurt, Bosphorus, Ochsenfurtum, a Town or City in Franconia, upon the Maine; in the Bi∣shoprick of VVurtsburg; three Miles from the Capi∣tal City to the South. Ockley, a Town in the County of Surrey; where King Ethelwolf, Son to King Egbert, fought a suc∣cessful Battel against the Danes. Oczakow, Axiace, a City of Podolia, seated at the fall of the Nieper into the Euxine Sea; thirty Miles from Czircassia. Near this City the Poles gave the Tartars a fatal overthrow in 1644. Odensee, Odensche, Otonium, Othonia, Ottonia, a City of Denmark; the Capital of the Island of Fionia, almost in the Centre of it: fourteen Miles from Sleswick to the North, and eighteen from Cop∣penhagen to the West. Built by Harold King of Denmark, and called so in Honour to Otto I. Empe∣rour of Germany: it was made a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Lunden, in 950. S. Kanute, King of Denmark, was slain here in 1086. whose Body was found in 1582. and much honoured. In this City also are Tombs of the Kings of Denmark. In 1257. the Ecclesiasticks assembled a Council here, which had the honour to be confirmed by Pope A∣lexander IV. Oder, Odera, a Town in Silesia, in the Dukedom of Troppaw, in the Borders of Moravia; at the Foun∣tains of the River Oder; four German Miles from Olmutz. Die, Oder, Odera, Suevus, Guttalus Via∣dus, Viadrus, one of the greatest Rivers in Germa∣ny. It ariseth in Silesia, a Province of Bohemia, by a Town of the same name, in the Borders of Mora∣via: and taking with it the Oppa, it watereth Ra∣tisbon, VVratislaw, and the Greater Glogaw in Si∣lesia: then entering Germany, it passeth the Marqui∣sate of Brandenburg, and Franck fort ad Oderam: at Custrin it admits the VVarta; then entering Po∣merania beneath Stetin, it makes a Lake called das Gross Haff, out of which by three Mouths it passeth into the Baltick Sea. L'Oder, Oder, Odera, a small River in Bretagne in France, which watereth Quimper-Corantine, and falls into the Bay of Aquitain. Odernheim, a small Town in the Palatinate of the Rhine; which was once an Imperial and Free Ci∣ty, but since exempt, and now under the Elector Pa∣latine. It stands two Miles from Oppenheim, and the Rhine to the West. Odiaa, the Capital City of the Kingdom of Siam, in the East-Indies. Odiham, a Market Town in Hampshire. The Capital of its Hundred; belonging formerly to the Bishops of VVinchester. The ruins of that old Castle, so strong in the Reign of King John, as with thirteen English to hold out against the Dau∣phine of France and his Army fifteen days, stand near this Town. Odria, Tedanium, a River which divides Croatia from Dalmatia; then falls into the Gulph of Venice. Called also Zermagna. Oeaso, a Promontory in Guipuscoa, in Spain; to∣wards the Cantabrian Ocean, near the Mouth of the River Bidassoa; commonly called the Cape of Fon∣tarabia or Cape Figuier, as the Town Fontarabia hath had anciently the name of Oeasopolis.
Oebalia, the same with the modern Sacania, in the Morea. § Also a City of the ancient Latium, near Tarentum. Oechalia. Divers ancient Cities in Thessalia, Laco∣nia, Arcadia, and Euboea are mentioned by Strabo, Pausanias, and Mela, under this name. But we have now no further knowledge of them. Oedenburg, or Odenburg, Sempronium, a City of the Lower Hungary, called by the Inhabitants So∣pron. It stands upon the Borders of Austria, near the Lake of Newsidlersée; and is very well fortified by the Imperialists, who have a great while pos∣sessed it. Oeland, Oelandia, an Island in the Baltick Sea, belonging to Sweden; on the Coast of the Province of Smaland, over against Calmar; from whence it is separated by the Streights, called Calmard Sund by the Natives. It is sixty nine Miles long from North to South; but scarce twenty over, where it is broadest; the Capital of it is Borckholm. Oenoe, an ancient Town of Attica, in Greece. Oesel, or Eusel, Osilia, an Island in the Baltick Sea, at the Mouth of the Bay of Livonia; which has been under the Swedes ever since 1646. Not above three Miles from the Coast of Curland, and five from Esthonia to the West: its Circuit is eighty. The chief places of Strength, are Arensburg, and Sonneburg; besides which, it has eighteen Parishes. Some think it was of old called Latris. Oestricher Quadi, the People of Austria in Germany. Oestrick. Austria. Oestfrisen, Oostfrisen, East-Friesland. Oeta, a Chain of high Mountains in Thessalia; reaching as far as to the Coast of the Aegean Sea; up∣on the Borders of Achaia, betwixt the Mountain Pindus to the North, and Parnassus to the South; including the Thermopylae towards the East; and now called Bunina. Extremos ad Orientem Montes Oe∣tam vocant, says Livy of them. The Latin Poets frequently quote them, as the first, which, by their height and situation upon the extreme limits of Europe Eastward, behold the rising Sun. Covered in many places with Woods, and fruitful in Hellebore: giving the name of Sinus Oetaeus heretofore to the Gulph, now called the Gulph of Zeyton, upon the Archipelago. Oetmarsen, Marsi veteres, a Tract in Over-Yssel. Oetigiasac, Quinque Ecclesiae. Off, Curia, a City in Voigtland, a Province of the Ʋpper Saxony. L'Offanto, Aufidus, a River of Apulia in Italy, the only River that cuts the Appennine: yet it ri∣seth out of that Mountain in the Further Princi∣pate, six Miles above Conza; and running Eastward, watereth Conza, and Monte Verde; then separating the Basilicate from the Capitanate, (and this last from Terra di Bari,) and watering Canosa with some other small Towns, it falls into the Adriatick Sea; four Miles from Barletta to the West, twenty five from Manfredonia to the South-West. Offen, the same with Buda. Offenburg, Offemburgum, a City in Schwaben in Germany, the Capital of Ortnaw: seated upon the River Kintzig: an Imperial and Free City, but un∣der the Protection of the House of Austria: it stands one Mile from the Rhine, and not full two from Stras∣burg to the East. Offtown, a Town in the County of Suffolk: where Offa, King of the Mercians, in the time of the Saxon Heptarchy, having at an Entertainment trea∣cherously murdered Ethelbert, King of the East-Angles, in 793. erected a Castle, whose Ruins are apparent by the name of Offton-Castle. The name signifies, Offa's Town. Ogle-Castle, a Castle upon the River Pont, near Belsey, in the County of Northumberland: giving the Title of Earl to the Duke of Newcastle, and its name to the VVard it stands in. It did formerly be∣long to the Barons Ogle. Oglio, Ollio, Ollius, a River in the States of Ve∣nice in Italy; it springeth from the Mountains above Edulum, in the Borders of Switzerland, in the Valte∣line; and flowing through Brescia or Brexa, into the Lake de Iseo, it leaves it at Calepio: a little lower separating the Territory of Brescia from that of Cremona, (or the State of Venice from the Duke∣dom of Milan,) and watering part of the Duke∣dom of Mantoua, it falls into the Po at Burgoforte. Oie, a County in Picardy. It is extended from Calais, as far as to Graveling and Dunkirk, and hath a Town in it of the same name. The Spani∣ards, during the Civil Wars of the League, possessed themselves of this County; till by the Treaty of Ver∣vin, in 1598. it was surrendred again to the Crown of France. The English heretosore held it above two Ages. § There is a small Island, Oie, near that of Rè, upon the Coast of Saintonge, in Aquitain. L'Oise, Osesia, Isauria, Oesia, Aesia, a River of France, which ariseth in Picardy, in the Confines of Hainault and Champagne; and washing Guise, La∣fere, and Noyon at Compeigne, it takes in the Aysne, (a bigger River than it self:) so by Pont S. Maxiente, Beaumont, and Pont Oyse, falls into the Seyne six Miles below Paris, towards Roan. Okeham or Oakham, the Capital Town of the County of Rutland; seated in the rich and pleasant Vale of Catmoss, and said to derive its name from the plenty of Oaks growing in its neighbourhood. It has a Castle where the Assises are kept, a Frec∣school, and a Hospital. And by an ancient Privi∣lege belonging to its Royalty, a Nobleman entering on horseback within its Precincts, pays the homage of a Shooe from his Horse. Therefore upon the door of the Shire-Hall, there are many Horse-shooes nai∣led; and over the Judges Seat in the same, one curi∣ously wrought, five foot and a half long, with a breadth proportionable. But this Homage or For∣feiture may be commuted for money. Okehampton, a Borough and Market Town in Devonshire, in the Hundred of Black-Torring: It returns two Members of Parliament. Old, or Ould, Olitis, a River in Quercy in France. Olde, or Oude, Ʋlda, a River in Bretagne. Oldenburg, Oldenburgum, Brannesia, a small Ci∣ty in VVestphalia; the Capital of a County of the same name; seated upon the River Honta; twenty five Miles from Breman to the West, and forty from Embden to the East. Built by Otho the Great; and almost totally ruined by Fire in the year 1676. that very day the Citizens were to have taken the Oath of Allegiance to the King of Den∣mark. The County of Oldemburg, is a small County in the Circle of VVestphalia; between East-Frie∣sland to the West, the Dukedom of Bremen to the East, the Bishoprick of Munster to the South, and the German Ocean to the North. Very fruitful, e∣specially as to Pasture and Cattle; the Air is cold and Foggy. This for a long time was under Counts of its own; who are derived from VVittikin∣dus the last King, and first Duke of the Saxons: VValepart, one of his Nephews, in 850. being the Earl of Oldemburg. This Line continued with some small variation for twenty three or twenty four Descents: and in 1676. failed. Since which, it has been annexed to the Crown of Denmark; that
King being descended of the Eldest Branch of the Earls of Oldenburg. Oldenborg, a Town in Holstein, in the Territory of Wageren; once a Bishops See, but removed long since to Lubeck: it stands not above three Miles from the Baltick Sea, and thirty from Lubeck, to the North. Oldenpo, Oldenpoa, a Tract in Esthonia, in Li∣vonia; between Lettonia to the South; Esthonia, (properly so called) to the West; Alentak to the North, and Moscovy to the East: under the Swedes; the chief Town in it is Tonspat. Oldenzeel, or Oldensel, Odesalia, a strong Town in Overyssel, in the Ʋnited Netherlands; taken and dismantled by the Hollanders in 1626. Oldeslo, Oldensloe, Oldesloa, a Town in Holstein, in Wageren; upon the River Trava, in the Borders of Lavemburg; three German Miles from Lubeck to the West, and five from Hamburgh to the South-East. The King of Denmark erected here a spacious For∣tification in 1688. At which Lubeck was not a little alarm'd. Oleron, Ʋliarus, an Island on the Coast of Aqui∣tain belonging to the Duchy thereof, upon the Shoar of Saintonge; against the Mouth of the River Cha∣rente, two Leagues from the Continent. Six from North to South, two from East to West: strengthened by a very strong Castle on the South Side; and uni∣versally famous for the Sea-Laws, here Published by Richard I. King of England, at his Return from the Holy Land, in the fifth year of his Reign: at which time this Island lay under the Dominion of the Kings of England. This is the same Island with the Olarion of Sidonius Apollinaris, which, he says, yields plenty of Rabbets. Oleron, or Oleron sur le Gave, Oloronensis urbis, Huro, Hurona, Elarona, Loronensium Civitas, a City of Bearn, in the South of France; which is a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Aux. Destroyed by the Normans in the year 1080. and rebuilt by Centulus, (one of the Earls of this Province upon a Branch of the Gave, thence called Le Gave de Oleron; ten Leagues from Tarbes to the West, eighteen from Dax to the South, and twenty four from Pampelona to the North. It stands upon an Eminence, having an old Tower. Olika, Olica, a City in Volhinia, a Province of Poland; five Miles from Lucko to the South-East: which in 1651. sustained a Siege against the Cossacks, and preserved it self out of their Hands. Olinde, Olinda, a Maritim City of Brasil, in A∣merica; the Capital of the Province of Pernambuc. Taken by the Hollanders in 1629. and fortified; but afterwards deserted, and returned under the Crown of Portugal. This City stands upon a Hill, near the Mouth of the River Bibiribe; has a Castle called S. George, and a large Haven. In 1676. it was made a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of S. Salvadore. Olivenza, Evandria, Oliventia, a strong City of Portugal, upon the River Guadiana; three Leagues from Elvas to the South-West, and twelve from Evora to the East. Taken by the Spaniards in 1658. and restored to the Portuguese by the Treaty of Peace at Lisbon, in 1688. Olivero, Oliverio, Helicon, a River on the North of Sicily. The Mount of Olives, Mons Olivetus, a Mount in the Vicinage, to the East of the City Jerusalem, in Palestine; which hath the Valley of Jehosaphat ly∣ing betwixt Jerusalem and it, and the Brook Kedron gliding at its Foot. About two thousand Paces in length; from North to South, and six hundred in heighth, affording a delightful Prospect not only over Jerusalem, but towards the Mountains of Arabia, towards Jordain and the Dead Sea, Hebron and Sa∣maria. It breaks into three Points or little Hills, whereof the lowest to the South is called the Moun∣tain of Scandal, that to the North Mons Viri Galilaei; the other in the midst is the highest. And upon each of these Hills, in the times of the ancient Moabites and Ammonites, stood a Tabernacle of the Idols Ashtaroth, Chamosh, and Melchen, which were ado∣red by Solomon's Concubines. Hither our Saviour re∣tired to pray the Night preceding his Passion, as before often; and from hence he ascended into Heaven, leav∣ing the Print of his Foot upon a Rock, which is shown to Pilgrims to this day. Helena, the Mother of Con∣stantine, built a Noble Church here, whose Ruins are extant; together with others of the Temple of Mo∣loc, the Village Shiloah, the Garden of Gethsemani, and the Sepulchres of the Prophets Haggai and Ze∣chariah, severally scattered up and down the Moun∣tain. The Turks have now two or three small Mosques upon it. It is of a fruitful Mould, yielding Corn, and plenty of Olives according to its Name. Oliveto, a Principality towards the middle of the Basilicata, in the Kingdom of Naples. Olmitz, Olmutz, Olomutium, a small, but neat, strong, populous City; once the Capital of Moravia, a Province in Bohemia; and a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Prague. Taken by the Swedes in 1642. and defended by them against the Emperor, till the Peace of Munster: it stands seven German Miles from Bryn to the South-East, twenty from Vienna to the North, and twenty six from Cracovia to the West, in a fruitful Soil. The Poles call it Olomoniec; the Germans Ulmitz. Olt, Aluta, a River of Transylvania, called by the Germans Alt; flowing Southward through Transyl∣vania, and watering Cronstad, Mergenburg, Foga∣ras, it leaves Hermanstat to the West; and crossing the Mountains of Eysenthorn, and the Western Part of Moldavia, falls into the Danube above Nige∣boli. Olympia, an ancient City of Elis (now the Province of Belvedore) in the Morea; where Jupiter (thence sir∣named Olympius) had a magnificent Temple dedicated to him, which the Oracles therein delivered, and the O∣lympick Games every five years celebrated in his Ho∣nour, rendered immensely rich. Famous moreover for a Statue and Throne of Jupiter, made by Phidias of Gold, Ivory, and Precious Stones with that Art and Grandeur, as to be accounted amongst the VVonders of the Old VVorld. Pausanias delivers a particular Description thereof. Strabo remarks a Fault in the Proportion. The Emperor Caligula would have taken it away, but was diverted from his Enterprize by strange Prodigies, according to the Hi∣stories of Dion, Suetonius, and Josephus. In the same Temple, amongst many other Altars, there was one dedicated to the Ʋnknown Gods: which gave the occasion to the like Inscription at Athens. Olympus, a high Mountain of Thessalia, betwixt the Mountains Pelion and Ossa; well known in the Writings of all Greek and Latin Poets. It is now called Lacha. Om, Lar, a River of Arabia Foelix, which falls in∣to the Gulph of Persia. Ombla, Arjona, a River of Dalmatia, which falls into a Harbour of the same Name; two French Leagues from Raguza to the North. This seems to be the Port belonging to Raguza. Ombria, or l'Ʋmbra, Ʋmbria, was in ancient Times a considerable part of Italy: Bounded on the North by the Adriatick Sea: on the South by the River Nera, Nar; on the West by the Tiber; and on the East by Picenum, the Apennine dividing it.
This, in ancient Inscriptions and Authors epitheted ac∣cording to its several Provinces, Ʋmbria Thuscia, Ʋmbria Sabina, Ʋmbria Crustomina, Ʋmbria Fi∣denata, Senonia, &c. contained the Dukedom of Ʋrbino; a part of the Marchia Anconitana, and of Romandiola; the Dukedom of Spoleto; and the great∣est part of what is now from the ancient name called Ombria; which is bounded on the North with the Dukedom of Ʋrbino, and the Marchia Anconitana; on the West with the Dukedom of Florence; on the South with S. Peters Patrimony, and on the East with Abruzzo: all under the Pope except S. Sepulcro, which belongs to the Duke of Florence: the Capital City of Ombria is Perugia. Ombrone, Ʋmbro, a River of Italy; which ari∣seth ten Miles from Siena to the East, and flowing Southward by Buonconvento, takes in Mersa and Or∣cia: and five Miles beneath Grosseto, falls into the Tyrrhenian Sea; seven from Talamont to the North West. There is a Castle called by the same name at its fall into the Sea. Omland, a part of the Province of Groeninger∣landt, in the Ʋnited Netherlands; well Peopled with Villages and excellent in Pasturage. It did belong heretofore to Friseland. Omme. See Trero. Onega, a vast Lake in Moscovy; between the White Sea to the North, Ladoga (another great Lake) to the West, Kargapolia to the East, and Megrina to the South: It parts the Dominions of the Swedes from the Moscovites to the North and South; and transmits its Waters by the River Suri into Ladoga. The Natives call it Onega Ozero. It is computed to be fifty Leagues in length, eighteen in breadth, and one hundred and twenty in circumference. Onar, a City on the Promontory of Malabar, in the East-Indies; eighteen Spanish Leagues from Goa to the South: which has a strong Castle, a large Haven; heretofore in the hands of the Portuguese; but now subject to the King of Canara, with the Kingdom depending on it, called by the same name. Oneglia, or Oneille, a Valley upon the Borders of the States of Genoua, in Italy, under the Duke of Savoy. It hath the honour to be a Marquisate, and is extremely commended for its Vines, Olives, and Fruits. Onspach, or Anspach, Onoldum, Onspachium, Anspachium, a Town and Castle in Franconia, upon a River of the same name in Franconia; six German Miles from Norimburg to the East, and ten from Bam∣berg. This is the Capital of a Marquisate, belonging to a Prince of the Family of Brandenburg; between the Bishopricks of Bamberg and VVurtsburg to the North, and that of Eichstad to the South. Ophiophagi, an ancient People of Aethiopia, whom the Classicks characterize under this name, because of their Eating of Serpents. Oppelen, Oppolia, a City of Bohemia in Silesia, upon the River Oder; the Capital of a Dukedom. It has an ancient Castle, which together with the Duke∣dom was mortgaged to J. Casimir King of Poland. The City is well fortified; yet taken by the Swedes, and kept till the Peace of Munster. It stands seven German Miles from Ratisbon to the North, nine from VVratislaw, and six from the Borders of Po∣land. The Land of Ophir. When Christopher Colum∣bus first discovered the Island of Hispaniola in Ame∣rica, in 1492. he was confident he had found the Ophir of K. Solomon, to see the vast Mines of Gold there. Peru, and Mexico, have had the same judg∣ment passed upon them; as in Africa, the Kingdoms of Angola, Melinde, and Sofala, together with Car∣thage; and in Asia, Arabia, the Islands of Ormus; Zeylan, Java, Sumatra; the Kingdoms of Pegu, Siam, Bengala and Malaca: But the American Voyages, of all, sound the most improbable, because of the immense distance of that Country from Pale∣stine, and the want of the Compass in those times, which made Men scarce dare to lose the sight of Land. Joktan, of the Posterity of Shem, had two Sons, cal∣led Ophir and Havilah. Gen. 10. 29. Havilah is the name also, in Gen. 2. 11. of a Country, where there is Gold, the Bdellium and the Onyx Stone: which be∣ing the same product with that of the Land of Ophir, (procured by David and Solomon), may signifie the Lands of those two Brothers to compose but one and the same Country, to wit Arabia, variously called by each others name. And Bochartus allows, that the three thousand talents of the Gold of Ophir, prepared by King David, (1 Chron. 29. 4.) were fetched from Arabia. It is true, Josephus says, Solomons Fleet went to the Indies, to a Land called, the Land of Gold, meaning the Chersonesus Aurea (now Malaca:) and S. Jerom, that Ophir of the poterity of Shem gave his name not only to that Chersonesus, but also to the Isles of Java and Sumatra, and the Kingdoms of Siam, Pegu, and Bengala: Whereby, the three years time, said to be spent in the Voyage, may be the better accounted for. But this is no place to controvert opinions. Oppaw, the same with Troppaw. Oppenheim, Oppenhemium, a small German City in the Lower Palatinate of the Rhine; heretofore an Imperial and Free City, but granted to Rupert Prince Elector by Lewis the Emperor in 1402, with its Ter∣ritory. It stands upon a Hill three German Miles from Mentz to the South. Rupertus King of the Romans died here in 1410. The French put a Garri∣son into it in 1688. and have demolished it since. Oppido, Oppidum, a City of the Kingdom of Na∣ples, in the Further Calabria▪ which is a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Regio; seated at the foot of the Apennine, at the Rise of the River Marro; twelve Miles from the Tyrrheniam Sea, thirty from Messina to the North-East, and twenty from Mileto to the South. Cluverius believes it is the old Mamer∣tum. Opus or Opuntum, an ancient City of Boeotia, in Greece, near the Gulph of Negropont. Ptolemy, Stra∣bo, Ovid, &c. mention it. Since the times of Chri∣stianity, there has been an Episcopal See placed in it, under the Archbishop of Athens. Oran, Icosium, Oranum, Orano, a small City in Barbary; called by the Moors Guharan; which has a very strong Castle. Seated upon the Shoars of the Mediterranean Sea, in the Kingdom of Algier. Ta∣ken in 1509. by the Cardinal of Ximenes for the Spaniards, in whose hands it still is. In 1556. the Turks unprofitably besieg'd it. The Spaniards in 1687. sent thither a greater Garrison than it formerly had. A numerous Army of Moors encamped very near it for some months in 1688. and retired without any Action considerable. It has a safe and large Haven; seated over against Cartagena in Spain, and attributed to the Diocese of Toledo there. It has been heretofore called by the name of Quisa. Orange, Auranche, Arausio, Colonia Secundano∣rum, Arausio Cavarum, Arausica Civitas, in Sido∣nius Apollinaris Arausionensis Ʋrbs, a City of Pro∣vence in France; which is a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Arles; and an University; tho of small extent, seated near the River Ligne; three Miles from the Rhosne, and from S. Esprit to the South-East; four from Avignon to the North, and near ten from Montlimart to the South. This City is the Capital of
the Principality of Orange; and (saith Baudrand) under the Prince of Orange; but the Castle strongly built upon an Hill by Prince Maurice of Nassaw, in 1622. (which should have defended it) was destroy∣ed in 1660. There is in it the Ruins of a Roman Amphitheatre; and of a triumphant Arch, without the walls, erected by Caius Marius and Luctatius Ca∣tulus, after their Victory over the Cimbri and Teu∣tones. The Principality of Orange is a very small Ter∣ritory, not exceeding six French Leagues in Circuit: surrounded by the County de Venascin on all sides; and contains besides its Capital fifteen Villages. It has belonged to the Illustrious House of Nassaw, ever since 1559. The Right and Title of it belonging now to K. William, the most Illustrious Prince of Orange. It is of a fertile Soil for Wine, Corn, Saf∣fron and Fruits. The University of Orange was foun∣ded by Raymond V. of the House of Baux, Prince of Orange, in 1365. In 1562. and 1571. during the Civil Wars of Religion, under the Reign of Charles IX. K. of France, this City, addicted to the Protestant Interest, severely suffered by Plunder, and Fire, and Sword. In the Year 441. S. Hilarius Bishop of Arles, presided at a Council here touching the regulation of Ecclesiastical Discipline. In 529. Caesarius Bishop of the same See presided at another, which determi∣ned the controversies about Predestination, Grace and Free-will, according to S. Austin's discourses; having their Cannons afterwards approved by P. Boniface II. In 1228. there was a third celebrated against the Al∣bigenses. Orba, or l' Orba and Ʋrba, Ʋrbs, a River of Li∣guria, which rising from the Apennine, and flowing towards the North, (through the Territory of Ales∣sandria) falls into the Bormia; four Miles from Ales∣sandria: and Bormia falls into the Tenaro, two Miles beneath the same City. § There is a Town and Bay∣liwick in Switzerland, under the Cantons of Bearn and Fribourg, of this name; in Latin Ʋrba, Ʋrbi∣genus. § Also a River of the Province of Languedoc in France; arising from the Mountain les Sevennes, near S. Pons de Tomieres; and passing by Besiers into the Ocean, below Serignan. In Latin, Orbis or Oro∣bris. The French write it l' Orbe. Orbego, Ʋrbicus, a River of the Kingdom of Le∣on; which ariseth from the Mountains of Asturia; and flowing South, takes in the River Asia near Astor∣ga: then falls into the Esla, which by the City of Leon conveys it into the Douro; between Miranda to the West, and Samora to the East: upon the Banks of Orbego, Theodorick (King of Spain) obtained a signal Victory over the Suabians, as Ado Viennen∣sis relates. Orbitelle, a Town upon the Borders of Tuscany in Italy, in the Territory call'd Stato delli Presidii by by the Inhabitants. It is a strong Town; under the Emperor Charles V. it resisted the Turks. In 1646, the French: Anciently the Sienese were Masters of it: but now the Spaniards; as of the whole Territory where it stands. Orbo, Hierus, a River in Corsica. The Orcades, now commonly called the Isles of Orkney, are a Knot of Islands about thirty in num∣ber; lying at the North Point of the Kingdom of Scotland. In Solinus his time not inhabited, but over∣grown with Wood and Weeds; now inhabited; have no Wood, and bear no Corn but Oats and Barley. The Romans are thought to have possessed them first in the days of Hadrian; and to have lost them to the Saxons in the days of Honorius, from those words of Claudian the Poet, —Maduerunt Saxone fuso Orcades.— From these they came into the hands of the Norwegi∣ans, by the Grant of Donald ban, one of the Kings of Scotland. In 1266. they were re-conquered by Alexander King of Scotland. This Title was con∣firmed by Haquin King of Norway, and Robert Bruce King of Scotland, in 1312. In 1498. Christian I. King of Norway matching his Daughter to James VI. of Scotland, renounced all his Right for ever to them; which was Confirmed by the Pope. The Inhabitants being a Colony of Norway, speak the Gothick Tongue. The principal of them is Mainland; in which the Bi∣shop of the Northern Isles keeps his Residence. They have the commendation of being very healthful places. Orchomene and Orchomenus, an ancient City of Boeotia, in Greece; where there was a famous Tem∣ple of old, dedicated to the honour of the Graces. It retains its appellation, amongst the Turks, at this day. § Antiquity tells us of another City, Orchomene, in Arcadia; and likewise calls a River of Thessalia by this name. Orco, Morgus, a River in Piedmont, which falls into the Po at Chivaso, ten Miles beneath Turin. Ore, a River in the County of Suffolk, upon which Orford is situated; and Framlingham near its Head. Orebro, Orebroa, a small City in the Province of Nerke in Sweden. The River of Orellan. The same, with the River of Amazons. Orenoque, Orenochus, a vast River in South Ame∣rica; called Yuyapari: It divides Paria from Guia∣na; and after the reception of many Rivers, falls with a vast mouth into the North Sea; near the Island of S. Trinidada, in deg. 4. of North Latitude. Orense, Auria, Amphilochia, Aquae Calidae, A∣quae Colinae, a City of Gallicia in Spain; upon the River Minho; fourteen Miles from Compostella to the South, and twenty from Braga to the North-East; which is a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Com∣postella; and much Celebrated for its Natural Bathes. Orestae, an ancient People of Macedonia, towards the Adriatique Sea, and the Kingdom of Epirus; mentioned by Lucan with the Epithet of Extremos Orestas. Oresund, the Sound. Orfa, the same with the City Rhoa. Orea, Alpheus, a River in the Morea, which falls into the Ionian Sea, over against the Isle of Strophad. Orford, a Corporation in the County of Suffolk and the Hundred of Plumsgate, between the River Ore on the East, and a small stream on the West; distant from the Sea about two Miles. It elects two members of Parliament, and is remarkable for a Light∣house at the Ness, called Orford Light-house. Sir Rich. Baker reports a Story of a Fish, shaped like a Man, that was taken near this place in the Reign of King Henry II. Orge, Orgia, a small River in the Isle of France. There is another in the Province of Vendosme, more commonly called Sorgue. Oria, Ʋria, a City in the Province of Otranto, in the Kingdom of Naples; which is a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Brindisi: placed at the foot of the Apennine, 16 Miles from Brindisi to the West. Once a considerable City, but now inhabited by few; and has scarce any thing worthy of regard, but an old Castle. Orihuela Oriola, a City in the Kingdom of Va∣lentia; which is a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Valentia. It is seated on the River Segura, five Miles from the Mediterranean Sea, seven from Car∣tagena to the North, and three from Murcia to the East. Oria, Menluscus, a River of Spain; which ariseth in the Confines of Alava, from Mount S. Adrian;
and flowing West through Guipuscoa, washeth Se∣gura, Franea and Tolosa; at Orio falls into the Bay of Biscay, seven Miles from S. Jean de Luz to the West. Oristano, Oristanum, a City of Sardinia, seated on the Western side of that Island; which is an Arch∣bishops See. Heretofore called Arborea and Ʋsellis: In 1639. the French besieg'd it. It denominates the Gulph of Oristano, and is the Capital of a County of the same name. In the latter Maps, written Ori∣stagni. Orixa, a City in the Hither Indies; with a King∣dom on the Eastern Shoar of the Promontory of Ma∣labar, on the Gulph of Bengala; in the Possession of the King of Golconda. Called sometimes the King∣dom of Orixa, and at others of Golconda. Orkney. See Orcades. Orleans, Aurelia, Aurelianum, Genabum in Cae∣sar, a City of France, in a Province of the same name; which is a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Pa∣ris, since the Year 1622. having been before under the Archbishop of Sens. One of the noblest Cities of France; seated on the Loyre, in the midst of this Kingdom: Honored with the Title of a Dukedom, belonging to the second Son of France; and an Uni∣versity sounded by K. Philip le bel. Said to be built by Marcus Aurelius the Emperour, in the Year of Christ 163 and to have had its name from that Prince; Or, as another derives it, Aureliana quasi Ore Lige∣riana, because it is situated towards the mouth of the Loyre (Ligeris), to which it enjoys a convenient and safe Port. It is a delicate City, seated in a fruitful Country, which yields a generous sort of Wine; and planted with a Civil and Ingenuous People. Attila, King of the Hunns, unsuccessfully besieg'd it in 450. Under the Merovignian Line, it was the Seat of a di∣stinct Kingdom for some time. In 1428. being be∣sieged by the English, and in great distress, it was re∣lieved by the Valor of Joane de Arc, that Female Ge∣neral; whom the English afterwards took and burnt for a Witch. Upon the Bridge over the Loyre (which is very large and beautiful, with sixteen Arches,) you have a lively Portraicture in Brass of the Virgin Ma∣ry in a sitting posture, with the dead Body of our Saviour laid a cross her lap. On the right hand at a little distance, there is the then French K. (Charles VII.) upon his Knees praying towards the Virgin. And on the left this Lady of Arc, done all in Man's Armour, in the same posture. She continues to this day in great Veneration amongst the People; and is common∣ly called by the name of Pucelle D'Orleans, the Maid of Orleans. In 1312. the Hall for Reading Law was opened here by Philip le Bel, King of France. In 1551. Hen. II. opened here a Court for the determi∣ning small Cases. This City, especially the Cathedral, suffered very much in the Civil Wars of France. It stands thirty four Leagues from Paris to the South, upon the ascent of an Hill, in the form of a bow, en∣compassed with a Wall of eight Gates and forty Tow∣ers, containing twenty two Parishes, and four Colle∣giate Churches, besides a rich and noble Cathedral. In the Years 511. 533. or 536. 538. 541. 549, there were Councils celebrated here, touching the regulation of Ecclesiastical Discipline. In 645. the opinions of the Monothelites were opposed in a Council; as those of the Manichaeans in 1017, or 1022. in the presence of Robert K. of France and Constance his Queen. In 1411. John Duke of Burgundy, with his adherents, was excommunicated in another Council here: not to mention inseriours. Orleanois, Aurelianensis Ager, is a part of the Presecture of Orleans: bounded on the North with la Beause, on the East by Gastinois, on the West by Blaisois, and on the South by Sologne: from which last it is divided by the Loyre; though some attribute several Villages to it, beyond that River. The Cities of it are Orleans, Baugency, and Chartres. Ormus, Armuzia, Ormuzium, Organa, a small Island on the Coast of Persia; known to the Greeks and Romans; with a City of the same name. This Island is seated at the Mouth of the Persian Gulph, upon the Province of Schiras, over against the Mouth of the Drut; nine Spanish Miles in compass, and twelve from the nearest Shoars of Persia. The City, which was once so potent and rich, fell into the Hands of the Portuguese in 1517: and was re-conquered by the Persians, assisted by the English, April 25. 1622. Whereupon this so famous Mart, presently became desolate and forsaken: so that there is now little of it left but the Castle, that the Portuguese built, which has deluded the Forces of the Turks and Arabians. Out of the ruins of it is sprung up Gambron, on the continent. Long. 91. 20. Lat. 27. 30. This Island wants fresh water. It hath formerly sustain'd the title of a Kingdom. The Tartars call it, Necrokin. The Portuguese were thought to lose six or seven Millions, at the retaking of it by the English and Persian Forces. Ormond, Ormondia. The North part of the County of Tipperary, in the Province of Munster; called by the Irish, Orwowon, that is, the front of Munster. A lean Mountainous barren Country; which gives the Title of a Duke to one of the best and most Loyal Families in that Kingdom: the first of which was James Butler, Created Earl of Ormond by Edward III. James the late Earl, was for his sig∣nal services in the old Rebellion in Ireland in 1643, Created Marquess of Ormond. In 1660. he was by Charles II. made Duke of Ormond in Ireland; and in 1661. in England. Ormokirk, a Market Town in Lancashire, in the Hundred of Darby, not far from Merton Meer. Ornano, a Signory in the Isle of Corsica. Orne, Orna, Olina, a River in Normandy, which watereth Argentan, Caen; and at Estreban falls into the British Sea. Orne, Odorna, a River of Lorrain, which falls in∣to the Moselle, between Mets and Thionville; it has a Town of the same name upon it, between the Mo∣selle and the Maes; but nearest to the last. Hof∣man. Orontes. See Farfar. § The same is also the name of a Mount, near the City Tauris in Persia. Oropus or Orope, an antient City of Attica in Greece: called now Zucamini and Suzamino. Au∣lus Gellius speaks of it. § There was a second in Macedonia, the Birth-place of Seleucus Nicanor. § A third in the Island Euboea, in Aristotle's time, who remembers it. § And Stephanus places a fourth in Syria, called also Telmissus. Orsoi, Orsoium, Orsovium, a small, but strong and an important Town in the Dutchy of Cleves, in Germany, upon the Rhine. Taken for the Hollanders by the Prince of Orange in 1634: and in 1672 by the Duke of Orleans, for the French. Orssa, a strong Town in the Dukedom of Lithu∣ania, in Poland; seated at the Confluence of the Ri∣ver Orsca with the Nieper, eighteen Polish Leagues from Smolensko to the West and twelve from Mohi∣low to the North, towards VVitepski. It is defended by a good Cittadel. Sigismond I. King of Poland, defeated the Muscovites before it in 1514; taking Prisoners four thousand, and leaving dead upon the Place forty thousand. It hath heretofore been in the hands of the Muscovites. Orta or Orti, Hortanum, a small City in the Ec∣clesiastical State, upon the Tiber; near its Confluence with the Nera, and upon an Ascent. It belonged
formerly to the Dukedom of Toscana. Pliny takes occasion to mention it. It is an Episcopal City, thir∣ty four Miles from Rome to the North. Ortonbourg, Ortemburgum, a Town in the Pro∣vince of Carinthia, in Germany, upon the Drave: having the honour to give a Title of a Count of the Empire. Orton, a Market Town in the County of VVest∣morland, in East Ward, amongst the Heaths; much wanting Wood. Ortona, a City of the Hither Abruzzo; and a Bi∣shop's See, under the Archbishop of Trivento; which has a safe Port on the Adriatick; twelve Miles from Trivento North-East, eight from Lanciano to the same, and eleven from Pescara to the South-East. It is now called Ortona à Mare, to distinguish it from Ortona di Marsi, in the same Province. Made a Bishop's See by Pope Pius V. in 1570. The Re∣venue of this Town belongs to the Papacy. Orvieto, Oropitum, Ʋrbiventum, Herbanum, a City of Italy, of great antiquity; called in several Ages by various names. It was heretofore included in the Province of Toscana, now in S. Peter's Patri∣mony; the Capital of a Territory denominated from it, and a Bishop's See; seated upon the River Pelia, (which a little higher takes in the Chiana, and three Miles lower falls into the Tiber;) twenty Miles from Viterbo to the North, sixty from Rome, and thirty from Perugia. Very strong by its Situation; being fenced on all sides by Rocks, and steep Valleys or Precipices. Orwell, a River in the County of Suffolk: upon whose Banks not only Ipswich, but Stow Market and Needham are also situated. Osaro. See Serchio. Osbor, or Olbor, Osborium. The Geographers do not determine whereabouts in Germany it was, that this Place stood. But they omit not to mention it, up∣on the account of a Council there assembled, in the presence of the Emperor Henry IV. which condemn'd the Anti-Pope Honorius II. and confirm'd the Ele∣ction of Pope Alexander II. Oseau, Ossavus, a small River in Bearn. Osenburgh, Osnaburgum, Osnabrugum, Osnabru∣cum, a City of VVestphalia in Germany: which is a Hanse Town, and a Bishop's See, under the Archbi∣shop of Cologn; instituted by Charles the Great in 776. It is seated upon the River Hasa; eight Ger∣man Miles from Munster to the South-East, and fif∣teen from Oldenburgh to the South. Famous for a Peace concluded here between the Emperor and the Crown of Sweden in 1648. This City is under the Dominion of its own Bishop, who keeps his ordina∣ry residence at Patersbourgh: and called sometimes Osnabruck. Not only the Parochial Churches are divided here amongst the Roman Catholicks and Lu∣therans; but the Lutherans also have the Possessi∣on of three Prebends in the very Cathedral, with a Voice (Active) in the Election of Dignitaries. The Roman Catholick Prebendaries have Voices Active and Passive, electing and to be elected. § The Bi∣shoprick of Osenburgh is a Tract of Germany, under the Bishop of this Diocese; by the Order of Charles the Great. Bounded on the West and South with the Bishoprick of Munster; on the East by the Prin∣cipality of Minden, and the County of Ravensperg: from North to South forty Miles, from East to West twenty five. The Bishop of this Diocese is to be a Roman Catholick and a Lutheran by turns; accor∣ding to the Treaty made in this City, in favour of the House of Brunswick. Osero, Absirtum, Absortus, Absorus, Civitas Ausarensis, an Island and City of its name upon the Coast of Dalmatia; under the Venetians. The City is a Bishop's See, under the Archbishop of Zara in Dalmatia. Osinio, Auximum, a City in the Marchia Anco∣nitana in Italy, upon the River Muzo; ten Miles from Ancona to the South. It is a Bishop's See, un∣der no Metropolitan but the Pope; in whose Domi∣nion it is: and in a Consumptive Condition. Lucan calls it Auximon. A Synod was held at it in 1593. Osma. or Osmo, Oxoma, Ʋxama, a ruined Ci∣ty in Old Castile, upon the River Douro; which is yet a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Toledo: eighteen Leagues from Burgos to the South. This City was ruined by the Moors. The Avion and Ʋx∣ero fall both near this City into the Douro. In 1550. there was a small University opened here. Osmanili, Bithynia, a Province in the Lesser Asia. Osnaburgh. See Osenburgh. Osrhoene, Osroene, and Osdroene, an antient Pro∣vince of Mesopotamia in Asia, near Comagena, upon the Euphrates. In the year 197. an early Synod was assembled here, about the Celebration of Easter. Ossa, a Mountain of Thessaly, near the River Pe∣neus and the Mountains Pelion and Olympus; equally with them famous in the Writings of the ancient Poets. Since, otherwise called Monte Casso∣vo and Olira. § Strabo writes of another Mountain, Ossa, in the Peloponnesus; and Ptolomy of a City, so called, in Macedonia. § The River Ossa is the same with the modern Fiore. Osset, an ancient City of Hispania Boetica, now in the Kingdom of Andaluzia, near Sevil, in Spain; with the name of Triana. In the sixth Century there was a flourishing Roman Catholick Church in this City, whose Cause against the Arrians was pretended to be favoured by Miracles. Ossona, Ansa, a small ruined City in Catalonia in Spain; which is yet a Bishop's See, under the Archbishop of Tarragona. Seated in a Plain not far from the River Tera: eight Leagues from Girone to the West, and seventeen from Barcinona to the North: and inhabited by few. Ossery, Osseria, a Tract in the Province of Lein∣ster, in Queens-County; which is both an Earldom and a Bishoprick. The Bishop resides at Kilkenny, being a Suffragan to the Archbishop of Dublin. The Earldom belongs to the Duke of Ormond, and de∣serves a particular regard on that account. Ossuna, Orsona, a small City in Andalusia, thir∣teen Leagues from Sevil to the East; which is a Dukedom. Ostende, Ostenda, a Sea-Port Town in Flanders, seated in a Marsh at the Mouth of the River Geule; well fortified, and still under the King of Spain. It stands three Leagues from Newport to the South-East, and four from Bruges. This Town was besieged from July 5. 1601. to September 22. 1604. by the Spaniards; being then in the Hands of the Hollan∣ders. And at last was taken for want of Ground to defend it, by Albert Archduke of Austria, upon good Articles. Osterlandt, Ositia, a Tract in Misnia; between Thuringia to the West, Voigtland to the South, Leipsick to the North, and Ertzeburgisce to the East. The greatest part of it is under the Duke of Saxony VVeymar; and the chief Town is Altemburgh. Ostia, an ancient City, built by Ancus Martius King of the Romans, upon the Sea of Thuscany, at the Mouth of the Tiber (where it formerly had a fa∣mous Port), in the Ecclesiastical State. It is a Bi∣shop's See, continually attributed to the Dean of the College of Cardinals. S. Monica, the Mother of S. Augustine, died at it. In 1556. the Duke of Alva took it: but the Pope's Forces retook it soon after. It had the Fortune to be destroyed by the Saracens in their times.
Ostioug, a City and Province on the East of Russia. The City stands upon the River Suchana, where it receives the Jug; a hundred and eighty Miles from Wologda to the East, and fifty from the Dwina. Ostrogothia, Ostrogothland, or East Gothland, a Province in the Kingdom of Sweden. Bounded on the North by Sueonia, on the West by Westrogothia, on the South by Smaland, and on the East by the Baltick Sea. The principal Cities are Norkoping, Soderkoping, and Stegeborg. The antient Ostrogathi and Wisigothi had this distinction in their names from their living, the one in Italy, the other on this side the Mountains. Ostrovizza, a Fort in the County of Zara, in Dalmatia; surrounded with delightful Forests, Pa∣sturage, and Springs, in so good an Air withal, as renders its Situation charming. About a hundred years ago the Venetians took it from the Turks and burnt it. And after the latter had again rebuilt it, the Morlaques of Croatia in 1682. set, a second time, fire to it. But in 1683. the Venetians entered upon a setled Possession of it, and secured it with a Garrison. Ostuni, Ostunum, a City of the Province of Otran∣to, in the Kingdom of Naples; which is a Bishop's See, under the Archbishop of Brindisi; towards the Shoars of the Adriatick: sixteen Miles from Brindisi to the West, and twenty two from Taranto to the South-East. Oswestrée, a Market Town in Shropshire. The Capital of its Hundred: near the Borders of Wales. Otford, a Town in the County of Kent, in Sut∣ton Lath, near the River Darent: where Canutus the Dane, in a Battel with King Edmund Ironside, was put to flight with the loss of five thousand Men. It is a Town of good Antiquity. Otley, a Market Town in the West Riding of Yorkshire, in the Hundred of Skirack upon the Ri∣ver Wharfe. Otranto, Hydruntum, Hydrus, a City in the Kingdom of Naples; which is an Archbishop's See, and the Capital of a Province of the same name; on the Shoars of the Adriatick, to which it hath a Port; forty five Miles from Brindisi to the South, twenty four from Gallipoli to the East. This City was taken and miserably ruined by Mahomet II. (Emperor of the Turks) in 1480. But he dying soon after, Al∣phonsus Duke of Calabria, ate down before it; and took it before the Turks were in condition to relieve their Garrison. There is now in it a strong Castle, situated upon a Rock. In 1567, a Provincial Synod was assembled here. La Terra d'Otranto, (the Province which takes its name from the City last mentioned) is bounded on the East, South and West, with the Mediterra∣nean Sea; on the North by Bari, and the Basilicate. This was a part of the ancient Calabria; and has many Greeks living on the South side. The principal Places next Otranto, are Lecca, Brindisi, Gallipoli, Matera, and Taranto. Ottenwalt, Otthoma Sylva, a Forest in the Pa∣latinate of the Rhine; between the Maine and the Necker; which has been under that Elector ever since 1465. It lies in the Confines of Franconia, towards Gerawer and the Earldom of Erpach. Ottercy S. Mary, a Market Town in Devonsh. The Capital of its Hundred. Otthen, Ottonium. See Odensee. Oudenarde, Aldenarda, Aldenardum, a Town in Flanders of great strength; divided by the Scheld into two parts, and strengthened by a Castle called Pamele, which is joyned to the Town by a fair Bridge over the Scheld. It lies five Leagues from Gaunt, and six from Tournay. Taken by the French in 1658. and 1667. Besieged without success by the Spaniards in 1674, but by the Treaty of Nimeguen restored to them in 1679. Some derive its beginning from a Fortress built by the Hunns upon the Schelde in 411. Oudon, Olda, a River in France, in the Province of Anjou. Another in Aquitain, called le Lot more commonly: and a third in Beaujolois. Over-Yssel, Over-Issel, Trans-Issalana, a Province of great extent in the United Netherlands, towards Germany; which was a part of the Bishoprick of Ʋtrecht from the year 1046, and called so because it lay beyond the Issel. It is divided into three parts; the Drente, the Sallant, and the Twente. Bounded on the East by the Bishoprick of Munster; on the North by Friesland and Groningen; on the West and South by the Zuyder Sea, and Guelderland. It was granted from the Bishoprick to Charles V. in 1527. In 1582. it revolted from Spain, and united with the Hollanders. In 1672. it was over-run by the French; who were forced two years after to draw off: so it returned to its former liberty. The principal Places are Deventer, Campen, Zwol, and Coevorden. Ovessant, Ʋxantis Insula, an Island on the West of Britany in France. Oviedo, Ovedum, Ovetum, a City in the King∣dom of Leon in Spain; the Capital of a Territory called les Asturies d'Oviedo; and a Bishop's See, un∣der the Archbishop of Compostella; between the No∣ra and the Nalona. Once the Capital of a Kingdom, begun in the Person of Pelagius in 717. and conti∣nued in his Successors till the year 913, when Orden∣no II. took the style of King of Leon. This City stands five Spanish Leagues from the Shoars of the Ocean to the South, eighteen from Asturia, and six∣teen from Leon, betwixt the Mountains. There was a small University opened here in 1580, which never much improved. In 901. a Council was assembled at this City, under Pope John VIII. which advanced the See to the Dignity of an Archbishoprick. But it has lost again that Dignity since. Oulney, a Market Town in Buckinghamshire, in the Hundred of Newport, upon the River Ouse. Oundle, a Market Town in Northamptonshire, in the Hundred of Polbrooke; pleasantly seated on the Banks of the Nen, over which it has two Bridges. It is beautified with a fair Church, a Free-School, and an Almshouse. L'Ourt or Ourte, Ʋrta, a River of the Low Countries, springing near the Frontiers of the Duke∣dom of Luxembourg, and passing by Offalize, Roche∣fort, Durbui, it receives the Albe with the change of its name into Ʋrt Ourt, and falls into the Maese at Liege. Ourtes or Orthez, Ortesium, a Town in the Canton of Bearn, in Switzerland, upon the Gave de Pau, betwixt Pau and Bayonne. Remarkable for an antient Castle, and a Protestant School. Ousche or L'Ouche, Oscaris, a River of the Duke∣dom of Bourgogne in France, passing by Fleuri and Dijon, and after the Reception of some Rivulets joyn∣ing with the Saosne, near S. Jean de Lone. Ouse, Isis, a River in Glocestersh. which ariseth in the South Border of that Shire, near Toorleton; at Crekelade, it takes in the Churne; at Lechlade, the Colne; and beneath it the Leche. This is properly the Head of the Thames; tho it has not that Name, till its conjunction with the Thame in Oxfordshire. Ouse, Garryenus, a River called Ʋre, and Youre; which parteth the West, from the North-Riding of Yorkshire; watereth the City of York; and then falls into the Wherfe at Cawood Castle. Ouse the Great, ariseth in the County of Hert∣ford, in a place called Dane End above Lutton: and
running North-West, entereth Bedfordshire, and wa∣tereth the principal Town of it: from thence it pas∣seth to Huntington by Ely; above which joyning with the River Granta from Cambridge, and beneath Little Port taking in the Little Ouse (which ariseth at Loppham Ford, in the County of Suffolk; and dividing Suffolk from Norfolk, passeth by Thetford, into the Great Ouse) by Downham and Kings Linn, falls into the German Ocean. This is one of the greatest Rivers of England. Ourque, a Town in Portugal; made famous by a Victory obtained by Alfonso, against five Kings of the Moors, in 1256. Ouste, or L'Aust, Ousta, Austa, a River in Bre∣tagne. It takes its source in the Forest of Laudeac, near Avangour; then passing by Rohan, Jocelin, Malestroit, Pont-Corbin, augmented with the Ars and the Claye, it unites with the Vilaine near Redon. Owar, Ovaria, a Town in the Ʋpper Hungary, upon the River Vag, at the foot of the Mountains which part that Country from Poland. It stands be∣low Transchin. Oxfordshire, Oxoniensis Comitatus, is bounded on the North by Warwick and Northampton; on the East by Buckingham, on the South by Barkshire, and on the West by Gloucestershire. The Air of it is mild, sweet and pleasant; the Earth fruitful both in Corn and Grass, by reason of the great abundance of Rivers and fresh Springs. It is of a triangular Form: forty Miles from North-West to South-East in length, scarce twenty in breadth, and in circumference an hundred and thirty; containing two hundred and eighty Parishes, and fifteen Market Towns. Watered by the Thame and Isis, the Cherwell, the Windrush, and the Evenlode. The Dobani were the old Inha∣bitants of it, during the times of the Romans. It takes its Name from the principal City. See the Na∣tural History of this County, fully and curiously written by the Learned Doctor Robert Plott. Oxford, Oxonium, Oxfordia, Calleva, Rhydicina from the Welsh name Rhidychen, is seated in the Southern Border of the County of Oxford, towards Berkshire: having the Cherwel on the East, and the Isis (or Ouse) on the South. It is a very fair and substantial City, seated in an excellent Air, and en∣joying so delightful a Prospect, that the Country adjacent has thence long ago contracted the Ti∣tle of Bellositum, amongst the Ingenious. One of the noblest and ancientest Universities also in the World. Begun, or rather (after the Desolations it had suffered, in common with the rest of England, under the Saxons and Danes) restored by King Alfred, a Saxon, anno Christi, 806, the great Civilizer of the English Nation: who sending his Son Ethelward hi∣ther, encouraged the Young Nobles to come to it from all Parts. In the time of William the Con∣queror, it was a considerable City: having then seven hundred seventy and four Houses; five hundred of which paid yearly Customs to the King. In this Prince's time Robert d' Oily, a Norman, built the Ca∣stle on the West side of the Town. In 1074, King Stephen closely besieged Maude the Empress, (Daugh∣ter of Henry I. and Mother of Henry II.) in this Ca∣stle. Stephen Langton, Archbishop of Canterbury, celebrated a Council here in 1222. There have in process of time by several Princes and Noble Benefa∣ctors been founded and liberally endowed here, eighteen Colleges and seven Halls; of which Ʋniver∣sity, Baliol and Merton Colleges, were the first en∣dowed in all Europe: of latter times by Sheldon Archbishop of Canterbury, a noble Theatre: and at the Charge of the University, a stately Musaeum was finished in the year 1683. Then the Bodlean Library, (contending with the Vatican it self), the Publick Schools, and Physick Garden are admired by all. By the Charter of K. Edward III. the Mayor of the City stands bound to obey the Orders, and live in Subje∣ction to the Vicechancellour of the Ʋniversity: which, from the time of its Restauration under K. Alfred, has been all along accounted one of the four principal Ʋniversities of Europe; the three other being Paris, Salamanca, and Bologna. Henry VIII. added in the year 1541. the Honor of a Bishop's See. Aubrey de Vere, the present Earl of Oxford, is the twentieth of his Family; which has been honored with this Title ever since the year 1155, (or as others say in 1137.) It is certain he is the first Earl in England. Long. 19. 20. Lat. 52. 01. This City having suffered very much with and for Charles the Martyr, after a Siege from May 2. to June 24. 1646, was surrendred to the Parliamentarians. Oxirynchus, or Oxgrynchus, an ancient Town in the Kingdom of Egypt, mentioned by Evagrius. He says, the Inhabitants were almost all Monks or Nuns; and that it had then twelve Churches, besides the Monasteries. Oyse, Aesia, a River of France, which ariseth in Picardy; and running Southward by Guise, and la Fere, takes in there the Serre; then entering the Isle of France at Compeigne, it takes in the Aysne; and between Clermont and Senlis, passeth to Pont-Oyse; beneath which it falls into the Seyne, eight Leagues below Paris. Ozaca, a great City of the Kingdom of Japan, in the Island of Niphonia; with a splendid Castle be∣longing to the King, built some few years since. The Island is in a very large Bay of the Province of Jet∣sesena. The City stands in the middle of the Island, fifty Leagues from Meaco to the North-East. Ozsurgheti, Ozurietum, the Capital City of the Kingdom of Guriel, in Georgia; where the King of Guriel resides. Ozwieczin, Ozviecinum, a Town in the Lesser Poland, in the Palatinate of Cracovia; upon the Vistula, where it takes in the Sala: scarce three Po∣lish Miles from Silesia, and about seven from Craco∣via to the West. It has a Timber Castle, seated in a Morass: Honored with the Title of a Dukedom. In the year 1654, it returned to the Crown of Poland, after it had for many years been annexed to Silesia. This Town is called by the Germans, Ausch-Wits. P A. PAchacama, a famous, fertile, and pleasant Valley in the Kingdom of Peru, four Leagues from Li∣ma: where stood, in the times of the Yncas or Indian Emperors of Peru, a most magnificent Temple by them built to the honour of the Creator of the Ʋni∣verse, says Garcillasus; not of the Sun, as others misrepresent their Devotion. Its Ruines are yet ap∣parent. This Temple was immensely rich with the Treasures especially hidden in it, when Pizarro be∣came Master of the Country. It is said, himself drew thence above nine hundred thousand Duccates. Pacamores, a People of Peru near the Confluence of the Maranio, and the River of Amazons. Pacca, the Moorish Name of Beja, a City of Portugal. Pactolus, a River of the Lesser Asia, which ari∣seth in Lydia from the Mountain Tmolus, and passeth by the City Sardis into the Hermus (now Sarabat); whence it is also by the Moderns called by the same
Name of Sarabat. The antient Poets often quote its golden Sands. Padeborn, Paderborn, Paderborna, Padeburna, a City of Westphalia; which is a Bishop's See, under the Archbishop of Mentz, by the Institution of Charles the Great, who held a Diet or Parliament here in 777. In 799. Pope Leo III. took refuge in this City. In 999. it happened to be burnt. In 1002. the Empress Cunegonda was crowned at it. Of old an Imperial and Free City; but since exempt, and in the Hands of its own Bishop ever since 1604. It is seated near the Rise of the River Lippe; twelve Miles from Munster to the North-East, and ten from Cassel to the South-West: about two Miles from it lies the Castle of Newhaus, built by Theodore Furstemberg, Bishop of this Se, in the year 1590, for the Residence of the Bishop. Long. 30. 30. Lat. 51. 45. § The Bishop∣rick of Paderborn, is a Tract in the Circle of West∣phalia; bounded on the North by the County of Lipp, on the East by Munster, on the South by Hassia, and on the West by the Dukedom of West∣phalia. It is from North to South forty Miles. The principal Places in it are Paderborn, Brackel and Warburgh. Ferdinand Furstemberg, Bishop of this Diocese, has written a History of it. Padoua, Patavium, a Ciy of Italy, in the States of Venice; upon the Rivers Brenta, and Bachiglione; twenty four Miles from Venice to the West, eighteen from Vicenza, and forty eight from Ferrara to the North. All the ancient Writers agree this City was built by Antenor a Trojan, (particularly Virgil speak∣ing of Antenor says, Hic tamen ille urbem Patavi, sedesque locavit,) soon after the Ruin of Troy: They pretend to shew his Tomb here; upon which there is an Inscription in Gothick Letters, that cannot be equally old. In this City was brought into the World Livy, the great Roman Historian. About the year of Christ 452, it was ruined by Attila, King of the Huns; rebuilt by the Inhabitants of Ravenna. About an hundred years after the Lombards destroyed it, and Charles the Great refounded it. In 1140. it came into the Possession of the Carrarii. In 1221, Fre∣derick II. Emperor opened the University here. In 1403. John Galeatius, Duke of Milan, put an end to this Family; and three years after, the Venetians took it from him. In 1509 it was taken from them by Maximilian I. Emperor of Germany; but being soon after recovered, has ever since continued under that State. It is great and strong, but not very po∣pulous; and a Bishop's See, under the Archbishop of Aquileja. Long. 33. 58. Lat. 44. 54. The Country it stands in is so fruitful, as to give occasion to this Italian Proverb to prefer Padua before either Venice or Bologna, Bologna la grassa, Venetia la guasta, ma Padoa la passa. It is made a strong place by its Castles, Towers, Walls and Ditches. The Palaces and publick Buildings are noble; the Ʋniversity is particularly famous for the Faculty of Physick. It is the Capital of the Territory, called the Padouan; which comprehends Este, Arqua, Poluerara, Castel∣baldo, Montagnana, Mirano, &c. There are two Academies of the Ingenious established in it, under the Titles of gli Recoverati, and gli inflammati. It shews the ruines of a Roman Amphitheatre; And in the year 1350. a Synod was assembled in this City. Padstow▪ a Market Town in the County of Corn∣wall, in the Hundred of Pider, with a Haven to the North Sea. Pagts romley, a Market Town in Stafford∣shire, in the Hundred of Pirehill, upon the River Blithe. Paglion, auon, a small River which washeth the City of Nice in Piedmou; then falls into the Mediterranean Sea. alamos, a Sea-Port Town in Catalonia. The Palatinate of Bavaria. See Bavaria. The Palatinate of the Rhine, Palatinatus Rhe∣ni, Palatinatus Inferior, is a Province of Germany, in the Circle of the Rhine; called by the Germans, Nider Pfaltzische Landt; under the Electoral Prince, who has his Title from it. The Rhine divides it into two unequal parts; on the North it is bound∣ed by the Bishoprick of Ment▪ and in part on the East; the rest of that side is inclosed by Gerawer; on the South it has the Lower Asatia; on the West the Bishoprick of Trier, and the Dukedom of Bipont. This Country is now divided into thirteen Bailywicks. The chief Towns of it are Heydelberg, Manheim, Franckenthall, Oppenheim, Kaisers-Lautern, and Creutznach. These Countries, or at least a part of them, have been enjoyed by the Palatinate Fami∣ly ever since 1195. Palazzulo, Herbessus, a City of Sicily; twenty Miles from Syracuse to the West, and sixteen from Lentini to the South. Palencia, Palantia, Pallantia, Palentia in Va∣cexis, a City of the Kingdom of Leon in Spain, with a Bishop's See heretofore under the Archbishop of To∣ledo, now of Burgos. Mela, Livy, Strabo, &c. of∣ten mention it. In 1388. a Council was celebrated here under Pope Clement VII. It has been in for∣mer times a strong and considerable Plce: but in that part of its Character it is deficient now. Palermo, Panormus, a City in the Valley of Ma∣zara, in the Island of Sicily; which is an Archbishop's See, and the present Metropolis of that Kingdom. It is great, populous, and rich; built by the Phoenici∣ans before the Greeks entered this Island. Under Ro∣ger Earl of Sicily it became the Capital of the Island. It is pleasantly seated on the North-West Shoar, at the mouth of the River Olestis, where it hath a Port: four Miles from Montreal to the North, and fourteen from Messina to the South-West. Baudrand saith, the French beat the Dutch and Spaniards, near this City, June 2. 1676. Palestina, Palaestina, a small, but celebrated and noble Country in Asia; extended from North to South; between Syria to the North, the Desarts of Arabia to the East, the Stony Arabia to the South, and the Mediterranean Sea to the West. This was that spot of Ground allotted by God to his own Peo∣ple the Children of Israel; and divided at first into twelve Tribes. About the time of our Saviour's Birth it was divided into six Provinces. Now commonly called the Holy Land; and in the Hands of the Turks ever since the year 1517. See Jerusalem. Palestrina, Praeneste, Polystephanos, a City of Latium in Italy, of great Antiquity; of a Colony made a Municipium by Augustus. It is in Campagna di Roma, under the Dominion of the Pope; twenty two Miles from Rome to the South-East. Of old it stood upon a high Hill, where the Castle is now: but also built down as far as the Plains. This ancient City was pulled down by Pope Boniface VIII. and re∣built in the Plain, upon the River Vetesis: it is a Bi∣shop's See, which belongs to one of the six Senior Cardinals; and a Dukedom born by the Family of Barberini. Suaresius, a French Man, has published a particular account of it. In the Roman times it had standing in it a Temple, dedicated to Fortune and much resorted to upon the account of Lots: Ma∣ny of the Ruins thereof are yet apparent. Palicenus, a Fountain near the City Catania, in the Island of Sicily; where the Romans sacrificed to the Dii Palisci. Palimban, a City in the Island of Sumatra, in the East-Indies. Palmela, a Town near Suval in Portugal.
Palma la Pova, a strong and fortified City in Friuli in Italy; under the Dominion of the States of Venice; built by them in the Year 1593, in the Con∣fines of their Territories, and those of Austria; eleven Miles from the Shoars of the Venetian Gulph, and fifteen from Goritia to the North-West. Dr. Brown, who saw this place, saith; It is the largest Regular Fortification I have seen: having nine Bastions, bear∣ing the Names of so many noble Venetians. The Ditch is thirty paces broad, twelve deep; and is kept dry, in order to make the place the more healthful; but it may be filled upon occasion. It has three Gates, and about an hundred Cannon, always mounted; and there are many more upon occasion. In the Centre of the Town there is a Well, and over it is fixed a Standard. The Venetians believe this the strongest Fortification in the World. But the Doctor wish∣eth they may never know a Compleat Turkish Army before it, when they are in no good condition to re∣lieve it. Travels, pag. 84, 85. Palma, or la Palma, one of the Canary Islands, in the Atlantick Ocean: twenty six Leagues in com∣pass. Conquered by the Spaniards in 1491, and now well inhabited. The principal Town of it is Santa Cruz de la Palma. There is a Volcanoe▪ Mountain in this Island, which in Nov. 1677. raged with a mighty vehemence, accompanied with Thunder, Earthquakes, and Rivers of Fire. Palma, the same with Zadaon. La Cividad di las Palmas, Palmarum Civitas, the principal City of the Island of Canaria; which has an Harbor on the Atlantick Ocean, and is placed on the East side of the Island. Sometime called Ca∣naria, but Palmas is its true Name; and it is under the Spaniards. Palmyra, an ancient City of Syria, near the Arabia deserta: the Capital heretofore of the King∣dom and Country of the Palmyreni, and the See of an Archbishop. The Emperor Adrian augmented it, and called it Adrianople. Some now give it the name of Amegara; and others, Faid. Palipoli, Celendris, a City of Cilicia, in the Lesser Asia; which is a bishops See, under the Arch∣bishop of Selecia; and has a tolerable Haven. Palos de Moguer, Palus, a small Town in An∣daluzia; at the mouth of the River Odiel, (Luxia) or Tinto, (as Baudrand explains the Latin Name in another place;) upon the Bay of Cadiz; fifteen Leagues from Sevil to the West, and nine from the Mouth of the Guadiana to the East; in a declining State. From this Town Columbus set Sail in 1492, when he went to discover America. Palotta, Paloda, a Town in the Lower Hungary, in the County of Alba Regalis, near the Confines of Austria; and about three Miles from Alba Regalis to the North: which was in the Hands of the Turks till 1687. And then taken by the Imperial Forces, after the Battel of Mohatz. Palus Maeotis, a great Gulph, or Marsh, made by the Euxine Sea, betwixt Europe and Asia; hav∣ing the Crim Tartary on the West, Sarmatia Euro∣paea or Moscovia to the North, and Circassia to the North and East. About six hundred Miles in Circuit, and passable in some places by boats. Now called Limen, the Sea of Zabache, and the Sea of Tana. See Limen. Pamiers, Pamiae, Apamiae, Epaunum, Fredela∣cum, a City in the County de Foix; which is a Bi∣shop's See, under the Archbishop of Tolouse by the Institution of Pope Boniface VIII. having been here∣tofore a part of the Diocese of Tolouse. It stands near the River Ariege; three Leagues from Foix to the North, and nine from Tolouse. A late Bishop of this Diocese has made it much taken notice of, by his op∣posing the present King of France in the Business of the Regalia. The Counts of Carcassone built it an Abbey in the eighth Century, which in 1296. Pope Boniface erected into the aforesaid Bishoprick. This See was at first a Suffragan to the Archiepiscopal Throne of Narbon, till Pope John XXII. made To∣louse an Archbishoprick, and then it became subject to Tolouse. Pope Benedict XII. was a Bishop of Pamiers. Pampelune, or Pamplona, Pampelona, Pompelo, Pompelon, the Capital of the Kingdom of Navarr; supposed to be built by Pompey the Great, or rather perhaps rebuilt, and from him called Pompejopolis. It stands upon the River Arga; called by the Natives in their proper Tongue Iruna, that is, the Good Town; in a fruitful Valley, surrounded on all sides with aspiring Hills and Mountains: twenty French Leagues from Bayonne to the South, and forty from Saragosa to the North. Taken by Charlemaigne in 778. in his Passage into Spain. This was the Seat of the Kings of Navarr, till in the year 1512, it fell in∣to the Hands of the Spaniards. Philip II. built a Cittadel in it, to secure his Possession. It is also a Bishop's See, under the Archbishop of Burgos since the time of Pope Gregory XIII; having been here∣tofore under the Archbishop of Saragoza, by the In∣stitution of Pope John XXII. Some private Synods have been held here. Long. 19. 50. Lat. 43. 58. Pamphylia, a Province of the ancient Asia Mi∣nor, now included in Caraman, and called Settalia: Its principal Cities were heretoore Perga, Aspendus, and Attalia. See Settalia. Panama, a City and Sea-Port in South America, of great Fame and Resort; in the Province called Terra Firma; on the Shoars of the South Sea, sea∣ted in an unhealthful Air. It was built by Petrus Ario, in the year 1515. for the Reception of the Ef∣fects brought from Peru; as Nombre de Dios was on the opposite side of the Isthmus, for those brought from Spain. Soon after honoured with the Birth of a modern Saint, called Rose of Panama; whose San∣ctity was so conspicuous, that the Gnats and Flies in her Cell observed and reverenced it; as Father Oliva (the late General of the Jesuits) informs us in her Life. But alas! this Saint has not been able to pro∣tect the Town from another sort of Flies; for Janu∣ary 25. 1671. it was taken and plundered by the French: and in 1686. by Captain Lawrence a Buc∣caneer. The City, though small, and built of Wood only, is a Bishops See under the Archbishop of Li∣ma; eighteen Leagues from the North-Sea. Long. 294. 30. Lat. 8. 30. § The Isthmus, or Streight of Panama, is a Neck of Land eighteen Leagues over from East to West; by which the Northern and Sou∣thern America are tacked together. Panaro-Scultenna, a River of Italy; which a∣rising from the Apennine, in the Territory of Frig∣nana, in the Dukedom of Modena; and being cal∣led at first Scultenna, (after it has taken in the Dar∣dagna, and some others) takes the Name of Panaro▪ and dividing Modena from Bononia, twelve Miles above Ferrari, falls into the Po. Panarucan, a City in the Isle of Java, in the East-Indies, by the Streights of Balambuan; thirty Miles from Passarvan to the East, and forty five from Balambuan to the North; on the East Side of the Island. It is the Capital of a small Kingdom there. Near it, stands a Sulphureous Mountain, which in 1586. destroyed above ten thousand persons in a Rup∣ture that hapned to it. Pancalieri, Pancalerium, a small City in Pied∣mont, in Italy, upon the Po; nine Miles from Turin to the South. Pandataria. See Sancta Maria.
Pandsia, an ancient City in the Country of the Brutii, in the present Kingdom of Naples, in Italy. Taken by the Romans at the same time with Consen∣tia (Cosenza,) in Calabria, according to Livy: and more especially remarkable for the ruin of Alexander King of Epirus here, into which he was deceived by an Oracle. The Town Castel Franco is supposed to stand now near the remains of this City. Paniza, a River in Bulgaria, which falls into the Euxine Sea; four German Miles North of Me∣sember, and about five from the Borders of Thrace. In Latin Panyasus. Pannonia, a great Country in the ancient Divi∣sion of Europe: comprehended betwixt Illyricum, the Danube, and the Mountains Cethi. It was disposed into two parts, called Prima & secunda Consularis; or the Ʋpper and Lower Pannonia. The prima Con∣sularis, or Ʋpper Pannonia, lay Westward; con∣taining the modern Provinces of Stiria, Carniola, Carinthia, Croatia, VVindisch-Marck, and the grea∣test part of Austria. The other, to the East; where are now Bosnia, Sclavonia, and Hungary; as much as is enclosed betwixt the Danube, the Raab, and the Drave. There was also Pannonia Riparia, and Valeria. The first made a part of the present Sclavonia and Bosnia; the second, of Stiria. This Country first beheld the Roman Arms under Julius Caesar. After him, Tiberius rendered it Tributary; next the Goths, Hunns, and other Barbarians, possessed themselvs of it. Its most celebrated ancient Cities, were Sigesta or Siscia (now Sisseg;) Petavium (Pettaw,) Nau∣portus, (Labach;) Vindobona, (Vienna;) Sirmi∣um, (Sirmish;) Taurum, (VVeissenbourg;) &c. Its ancient Inhabitants were a Nation of the Celtick Gaules. Panorm, Panormus, a Sea-Port in Epirus. Pantiro, the same with Heraclia. Panuco, a City and Province of New Spain in America. The Province lies upon the Gulph of Me∣xico, towards New Biscay, within the Prefecture of Mexico. The City, its Capital, is otherwise called S. Estevan del puerto. Paoking, or Pooking, a City in the Province of Huquam, in the Kingdom of China, at the foot of Mount Lungus. Paola, a Town in the Kingdom of Naples, in the Hither Calabria; where S. Francis de Paola, the Founder of the Order of the Minimes, was born. Paoning, Paoganum, a great City in the Pro∣vince of Suchem, in the Kingdom of China, upon the River Kialing. Paoting, Paotinga, another great City in the Province of Suchem, in the Kingdom of China, upon the River Kialing. Papa, a small, but very strong City of the Lower Hungury, upon the River Marchaltz; in the Coun∣ty of Vesprin; in the middle between Javarin to the North, and Vesprin to the South; scarce three Hungarian Miles from the Turkish Conquests. This Town in the year 1683. with Dotis, Vesprim, and ewentz, yielded to Count Teckely: But after the raising the Siege of Vienna, they returned under the Obedience of the Emperour. Papalopa, a River in New Spain, in the Pro∣vince of Guaxaca; which is called also the River of Alvarad; and is the biggest in that Province. It ari∣seth from the Mountains of Zonoholiuchan; and re∣ceiving Quiyoepec, Huitzilan, Cinantha, Quauhquet-Zpaltpec, , and Teyciyucan, falls into the North Sea. Paphlagonia, an ancient Country or Province of the Lesser Asia, betwixt Galatia and the Euxine Sea, extended along the Coast; now called Flagania, Bolli, and Roni. Its principal Cities, in those days of Antiquity, were Sinope and Theuthrania. Paphos, a celebrated ancient City in the Island of Cyprus, where Venus had a Temple in her honour. It became a Bishops See. in Christian times: but now ruined, under the Tarks; and called Bassa. Papous, or la Tierra dos Papoas, as the Portu∣gueze call it; and Terre des Papous, as the French; is a Country in the Terra Australis; to the East of the Islands Ceram and Gilola in the East-Indies, near the Equinoctial Line; by some, made to be a part of New Guinee; by others, separated from it by a small Streight. The Princes of the neighbouring Islands have the Natives in Esteem for Courage and Fidelity. Pappenheim, a Town in the Circle of Schwaben in Germany, upon the River Altmul; adorned with the Title of a Barony formerly, now an Earldom. It gave its Name and Title to the famous General Pappenheim, in the late German Wars. Para, a City in the North part of Brasil, upon the River of Amazons; under the Dominion of the Por∣tuguese; forty Miles above the fall of that River. Long. 328. Lat. 01. 30. There belongs to this City a Province of the same Name, called Capitania de Para. Paragoja, an Island of the East-Indies, called like∣wise Puloan and Calamianes; between Borneo to the South-West, and Manilla to the North East; an hundred Miles in length, twenty in breadth, and two hundred in circuit. It is one of the Philippine Islands, which was never conquered by the Europe∣ans. Not very fertile, or well peopled. Paraguay, Paraguaia, a vast Country in the South America, the greatest part of which is subject to the Spaniards. Bounded on the East by Brasil; on the South by Magellanica; on the West by Peru, and the Kingdom of Chili. It is divided into seven Counties, which are sruitful in all things, with Mines and Sugars. Not many Spanish Colonies are settled in it; yet it has one Bishop at l' Assumption, and ano∣ther at Buenos Ayres. This Province takes its Name from the River Paraguay; which signifies the River of Feathers. It ariseth from the Lake of Xaraies; and go∣ing South receives the River of Plata and many others; and at last by a vast Mouth falls into the Sea of Magel∣lan. This is one of the greatest Rivers of America. Paraiba, a strong City in Brasil, which has a large Haven, and gives name to a Province, called the Government or Capitania de Paraiba. Not above eight Miles from the North Sea, upon a River of the same name. It was long since inhabited by five hun∣dred Portuguese, besides Slaves and Negroes; and be∣ing unwalled, its best security was the Fort of S. Francis built by the French, and taken by the Portuguese, in 1585. In 1634. both the City and Fort were forced to submit to the Dutch Valour, who new named them Frederickstadt. But the Portu∣guese have at last recovered the Possession of it. These latter have sometimes called the City, Nostra Sennora das Nieves. Parana, a River and Province of Paraguay. The Spaniards have about four Colonies in this Pro∣vince. Paranaiba, Paranayba, a River and a Province on the Consines of Brasil. The River falls in that of the Amazons; on the South Side of which, the Pro∣vince lies. Paray-le-Moineau, Pareium Moniacum, a Town in the Dukedom of Burgogne, in France; in the Territory of Charolois, upon the River Brebin∣che; two Leagues from the Loyre. Pardiac, Pardiniacum, a County in Aquitain in France.
Parenzo, Parentum, Parentium, a small City in Histria, under the Venetians; which is a Bishops See, under the Patriarch of Aquileja. It stands seven Miles from Citta Nuoua, to the South; twenty eight from Gapo di Istria, and eighty from Venice to the East; upon a Peninsula, well sortified, having a con∣venient Haven: But not much inhabited, by reason of the unhealthfulness of the Air. Paria, a Province in the Terra Firma, in South America; near the Shoars of the North Sea, and un∣der the Dominion of the Spaniards; between the River Orinoque to the East, and the Venetola to the West. This is a principal Member of New Anda∣lusia, from hence often called Paria. There are some few Colonies of Spaniards in it, and a Gulph of its Name. Parimao, a Lake in South America, which which bounds the Country of Guiana on the South; under the Line. Some call it Roponouvini. It has not hitherto been fully discovered by the Euro∣peans. Parinacocha, a Province of Peru, towards the Andes, under the Spaniards. Pario, Parium, a City of the Lesser Asia, upon the Propontis; twenty Miles from Lampsaco to the East, and thirty from Cyzicus, now Spinga. It has a large Haven, and is a Bishops See under the Archbi∣shop of Spinga. Paris, Leutetia, Luotetia, Lucetia, Leucotetia, Parisii, and Lutetia Parisiorum, the Capital City of the Kingdom of France; boasted by Baudrand, to be the greatest City of Europe; with a Nemine re∣clamante, no body denying it to be so. This was a celebrated City in the Times of the Roman Empire. Julian the Apostate (whilst he was Caesar only) re∣sided here in the Reign of Constantius: and adorned it with Baths and a Palace. But its greatest Rise was from the Franks: Clodoveus settling the Royal Throne in this City, about the year 458. Julius Cae∣sar is the first that mentions it; it was then very small; being wholly contained in an Island in the Seyne, not exceeding forty Acres, which had then a Wooden Bridge over the River. In this Isle the Cathedral Church now is, and the Palace of the first French Kings. From the times of Clodoveus the first Chri∣stian King, as long as that Race lasted, it grew migh∣tily, and became very considerable. But under the Caroline Line it was very little improved; those Princes not fixing here, or in any other place. In the year 585, it happened to be almost all burnt. In 845, 856, 886, and 890, the Normans, by Sieges and Incursions, did extremely endamage it. In 896, it was very hardly preserved out of the Hands of the Normans, as to the Island; what stood out of the Island was redeemed from Ruin by Money. The Posterity of Hugh Capet on the other side fixed here; and be∣stowed great Sums of Money in enlarging and adorn∣ing this City. Charles the Great, about the year 796, at the Request of Alcuinus, a Saxon, opened an Uni∣versity here; to whose further Grandeur King Lewis the Seventh, and Philip the August, contributed very much. The College of Sorbonne holds the first place therein. In the year 1034, it suffered another Fire; and in 1206, a terrible Inundation of the River Seine. In 1420, Henry V. of England, possessed himself of this City, by marrying Catharine the Daughter of Charles VI. of France. In the year 1422, Henry VI. (Son of this Victorious, but short lived Prince) was crowned King of France in Paris. And again in 1431. After this it remained in the Hands of the English till the year 1435. The Divisions of England under Henry VI. made way for the lss of France. The year 1572 brought great and unparallel'd Infamy and Calamity upon this potent City; 10000 Gentlemen being assassinated within her Walls who came thither upon the Publick Faith to the Celebration of a Marriage) in cold, Blood, and in a time of Peace. In 1588, the Inhabitants became almost as infamous by the Baracades against Henry III where∣by the Life of that Prince was indangered, and he driven out of his Royal Palace by a Seditious Subject, who made himself the Head of a Faction under the Pretence of Preserving the Religion of his Country. In 1589, Henry III. was stabbed by James Clement▪ a Dominican Fryar, under the Walls of Paris; just as he was upon the point of revenging the Insolence of the Baracades. The year 1590 was no less miserable: this City being by a Siege reduced by Henry IV. to so dreadful a Famine, as is scarce any where else to be read of. In the year 1610, the same Streets were stained with the Blood of Henry IV. slain by Rvil∣lac, another Enthusiastick Monk, on the same Pre∣tence that his Predecessor was. In the year 1649, they suffered the Calamities of another Siege; and were forced to comply with the Queen Mother of France by Famine. In the year 1622, at the request of King Lewis XIII. Pope Gregory XV. raised the Bishop of Paris to the Honour of an Archbishop, with three Suffragans under him; the Bishops of Chartres, Meaux, and Orleans. In 1674, the Diguity of a Dukedom and Peerdom was added to the Arch∣bishoprick by the present King Lewis XIV. This great City is seated on the Seyne; forty five Leagues from the British Sea. Long. 23. 20. Lat. 48. 38. Charles V. Emperor (others write Sigismond) used to say, he had seen in France, one Village, Poictiers; one City, Orleans; and one World, Paris. The City-Walls have eight Gates; those of the University, nine. The Houses are computed to about fifty thou∣sand: there is a great number of Hospitals, Ab∣beys, Monasteries, Ecclesiastical Seminaries, Churches, and Palaces; amongst which latter the Louvre obtain the Preeminence, begun by King Philip the August, in 1214; and since by times, gloriously enlarged and adorned by Charles V. Francis I. Henry II. Charles IX. Henry IV. Lewis XIII. and XIV. Many Councils have been celebrated here; whereof the eldest, and one of the most remarkable, is that about the year 362, against the Arrians, held by S. Hilary Bishop of Poictiers. The Territory about this City has the name of Parisis: reaching heretofore as far as to Pontoise one way, and to Claye towards la Brie ano∣ther. And our Author reports, that the Villages and Castles in the space of ten Leagues round, amount to the number of ten thousand. Parita, a Town of New Spain, with an Har∣bour on the South Sea, in the Province of Veragna, which gives Name to the Bay on which it stands. Parma, a River of Lombardy in Italy, which springeth out of the Appennine, in the Borders of the States of Genoua, towards Pontremali; and running North through the Dukedom of Parma, watereth the Capital City of it; and ten Miles lower falls into the Po. Parma, a City and Colony of the Boii, as it is called by Strabo and Pliny; now a Bishops. See, under the Archbishop of Balogna; having been under the Archbishop of Ravenna. It stands upon a River of the same Name, in a fruitful and well watered Coun∣try; ten Miles from the Po to the South, thirty five from Modena to the East, and from Pidcenza to the West. A great, rich, populous City, adorned with a strong Castle, and a Noble Palace; in which the Duke of Parma resides. In the year 1599, there was an University opened here. The Emperor Frederick Barberousse besieged this City two years together without success. It is about three Miles in compass: Has an Academy of the Ingenious settled in it,
called Gli innominati; and in 1602, there was a Sy∣nod assembled here. The Dukedom of Parma, Parmensis Ditio, Lo Stato del Duca di Parma, or il Parmegiano, is a part of Lombardy: bounded on the North and West by the Dukedom of Milan; on the East by that of Mo∣dena, and on the South by the States of Genoua. The Dukedom of Piacenza, the Val di Taro, and the Estates di Busseto are contained in the Estates of this Duke. The principal Cities in it are Parma, Borgo S. Donino, Fiorenzuola, Piaenza, and Briscello. This Dukedom was erected by Pope Paul III. (in in favour of Peter Lewis Farnese his Son, whom the Emperor Charles V. disturbed in the Possession thereof for some time,) in the year 1545. called be∣fore his Elevation Alexander Farnese. Parnassus, a celebrated Mountain in Phocis in A∣chaia, (now Livadia;) consecrated to Apollo, and the Muses; near to Citheron and Helicon. It is now called by the Inhabitants Liacoura: about twelve English Miles from the Gulph of Lepanto to the North; between Leucadia to the East, and Delphi to the West; fifty Miles from Corinth to the North-West. § There has also been in Cappadocia, in Asia Minor, an Episcopal City of this Name. Parnaw, Parnavia, a City in Livonia, subject to the Crown of Sweden, in the Province of Estho∣nia: seated at the Mouth of a River of the same Name, upon the Bay of Riga; fifty five Miles from Revel to the South, and from Riga to the North. The Maps place it twenty German Miles from each of them. It is little, but well fortified; has a Castle, and an Haven: It belonged at first to the Poles; but in the last Century was often taken, and retaken; till 1617, the Swedes finally possessed themselves of it, and have kept it ever since. Long. 46. 00. Lat. 57. 20. There belongs to it a small Territory, or Di∣strict, called by the Poles, Woiewodz two Par∣nawskie; which together with the Town, is now in the Hands of the Swedes. Paropamisus, Paropanisus, and Paropanissadae, a Country and People of the ancient Persia, which lay betwixt Bactriana, Aria, India, and Arachosia. Ptolemy calls them by divers Names, and makes them an extremely savage People. Curtius adds, they had no Communication with other Nations; and that A∣lexander's Army suffered very much in their Country, which was cold and barren. It is placed by Moderns, in part in the Province of Candahar in Persia, and in part in that of Cabul in the East-Indies. § A Moun∣tain in this Country did anciently bear the same Name; which the Writers of Alexander's Life miscall Cau∣casus. Paros, Paro, or Pario, one of the Islands, Cy∣clades, in the Aegean Sea; which hath been in all times of paricular Renown for its White Marble. The An∣cients give it the several Names of Demetrias, Pa∣ctya, Minoa, &c. It was heretofore in the Possession of the Venetians; and a Bishops See under the Arch∣bishop of Rhodes. But in 1470, the Turks became Masters of it. Parret, a River in Somersetshire: the most con∣siderable next to the Avon in the whole County. Bridgewater, South-Petherton and Crokehorn stand upon it; and Longport near it. Parshore, or Pershore, a great Thorough-fare Market Town in Worcestershire, upon the River A∣von, which it covers with a Bridge. The Capital of its Hundred. Enriched heretofore with an Abbey. Parthenai, Partheniacum, a City in Poictou in France, upon the River Tove; in the middle be∣tween Tours to the North, and S. Maxence to the South: six Leagues from each. Parthen, Alisus, a City of Pomerania, to∣wards the Shoars of the Baltick Sea: under the Do∣minion of the Swedes, near the River Bart: two Ger∣man Miles from the Borders of the Dukedom of Mag∣deburg to the East, and four from Gripswald. Partherberg, the German Name of the Apennine Hills in Italy. Parthia, a Kingdom of the Ancient Persia: e∣stablished about the year of Rome, 508; of the World, 3808; two hundred and fifty years before Christ; in the person of Arsaces, from whom all the succeding Kings were called Arsacides; and ended with the Death of Artabanus, King of Parthia, slain by Artaxerxes King of Persia, about two hun∣dred twenty seven years after Christ; when it had enjoyed a Duration of above four hundred years. It rendered it self sometime so puissant, as to dispute the Empire of the East with the Romans. Situated betwixt Hircania, Media, Aria, Carmania, and the Modern Province of Fars, i. e. Persia, properly so called. A Country not at all fruitful; yet nevertheless then inhabited by a fierce, warlike, indefatigable Peo∣ple; particularly famous for a Dexterity in shooting one way, (behind them,) as they fled another. Ptolemy reckons, in his time, in this Kingdom, twenty five Cities; whereof the Capital was Hecatompolis, which is understood to be the Modern Haspaam in the Province of Hierach, Arach, or Erak-Atzem in Persia; as that Province, together with Khoemus and a part of Corasan, are understood to comprehend now the ancient Parthia. Le Partois, Pagus Pertensis, a Tract in the Province of Champagne in France; between Cham∣pagne to the West, and the Dukedom de Bar to the East; towards the River Marne. The principal Town of which is Vitri le Francois. Pas, a Town and Bailywick in the Earldom of Artois, upon the River Authie; which gives Name to one of the ancientest and best Families there. It had heretofore a Castle and a Collegiate Church. The Bailywick is of a considerable Extent, adorned with the Title of a Barony, and united to the Crown of France by the Treaty of the Pirenees. Pas de Calais, Fretum Britannicum, the Streight between Calais and Dover. Passage, a Port Town in Biscay. Passarvan, a City and Port on the East of the Island of Java in the East-Indies, betwixt the Cities Panarucan and Jortan, towards the Cape of Balam∣buam. Heretofore the Capital of a Kingdom of its Name there. Passaw, Patavia, a City of the Lower Bavaria in Germany; which is a Bishops See, under the Arch∣bishop of Saltsburg; of old called Batava Castra. It stands at the Confluence of the Inn, and the Da∣nube; by which it is divided into three pats, called Paslaw, Ilnstat, and Innstat. An Imperial and Free City; but under the Protection of its own Bishop, (whose Revenue is about forty thousand Crowns,) with the Territory about it: which lies between the Dukedom of Bavaria to the West, and the Ʋpper Austria to the East; having the strong Castles of O∣bernberg and Ebersberg standing in it. This City suffered very much by a Fire of late, in 1661, being mostly built of Wood▪ Over against it lies Oberhuis, the Residence of the Bishop. That which makes this City most regardable, is the Peace of Religion here Established by Ferdinand I. Emperor of Germany, in 1552: whereby the free Profession of Lutherainsm in Germany, upon equal Terms with the Roman Catholick Religion, was declared and confirmed. Passava, a Fort in the Province of Laconia, in the Morea; upon the Cape Matapan, near the Banks of the Bay of Colochina: taken and demolished by
General Morosini in 1685, because of a narrow Pas∣sage hard by, where a handful of Men might make head against an Army. Passo di Cane, Climax, a Mountain of Phoeni∣cia, twenty Miles from Tripoli to the South. Pastrana, a Town in Old Castile, upon the River Taio; thirteen Miles from Madrid to the East, and eighteen from Toledo. Honored with the Title of a Dukedom. Pata, a City and Kingdom upon the Borders of Zanguebar in Africa. Les Patagons, Patagones, a People of Magel∣lanica, near the Shoars of the North Sea, towards Brasil. This County was first discovered by F. Ma∣gellane, and yet not much known. Patane, Patana, a City and Kingdom in the Further Indies, under the King of Siam, and near the Kingdom of Malaca: in a healthful and fruitful Clime. The City stands upon the Bay of Siam. Les Patans, a Mahometan People possessing the Mountains about the River Ganges, in the Empire of the Great Mogul. They heretofore dwelt toward the Kingdom of Bengale; whence making a Transplan∣tation of themselves into Delly, they became so pu∣issant there, as to render many Princes and Places tribu∣tary to them. But when the Tartars conquered India, about the year 1401, being no longer able to main∣tain their Power or Residence in the open Country, they took Refuge in the Mountains; fortifying, and abiding in, them ever since. Patay en Beausse, Patavium, a Town in Beausse in France; seated five Leagues from Orleans to the North, towards Chartres; nine to the South. Near this Place the French (under the Command of John Duke of Alanzon) got a great Victory over the English, under Talbot; the Terror of the French Nation. Patera, Patara, or Paterea, a City of Lycia, in the Lesser Asia; once called Arsinoe, as Strabo saith; it stands upon a Hill, at the Mouth of the Ri∣ver Xanthus, (now called Il Scamandro;) eighty Miles from Rhodes to the East: a Bishops See under the Archbishop of Myra: Famous in the person of S. Nicholas, who was both a Bishop and a Native here. Apollo had an Oracle in this City in the Times preceding Christianity; which observed to make its Responses the space of six Months in the year. Pathmos, or Patmos, an Island in the Aegean Sea; of signal Fame for the Banishment of S. John the Evangelist, and his Writing the Book of the Apo∣calypse there. Now called variously by Writers Pal∣mosa and Petina. Patras, Patrae, a City of the Morea, in the Du∣chy of Clarentia, of great Antiquity; called by the Turks Badra, and Balisbadra; that is, the Old Pa∣trae: as Leunclavius expounds their Name. The Ita∣lians used to call it Neopatria. It is an Archbishops See; and now in a flourishing Condition: Seated at the Entrance of the Gulph of Lepanto; about se∣ven hundred Paces from the Shoars of the Gulph of Patras to the East, and ninety from Corinth to the West. Chosen by Augustus for a Station for his Fleets, and on that account much honored by him. Under the latter Greek Emperors it had Dukes of its own; till the year 1408, when the last of them resigned it to the Venetians, not being able to defend it against the Turks. When it came first into the Hands of the Turks I do not find; but Mahomet III. received a great Defeat near this Place, in the year 1602. Doria the Christian Admiral took it from the Turks in 1533. They then soon after recovered it; but in the year 1687, it sell again into the Hands of the Venetians after the Battel of the Dardanells. In the times of ancient Paganism, this City was honored with the Oracles of Mercury and Vesta; and with divers Te∣ples dedicated to Minerva, Cybele, Atys, Jupiter, and Diana, as appears by their  Ruines. The Apostle S. Andrew preached and suffered his Martyrdom here. Its Cittadel stands upon a high Mount, so strong, that in 1450, it held out against Constantius Palaeologus, the Western Emperor, a year. They compute about four or five thousand Inhabitants in this City, Greeks, Turks, and Jews: whereof as the first possess the Cathedral, so the second before the late Conquest had six Mosques, and the other four Synagogues. Near a thousand Churches are said to be contained in the extent of the Archbishops Pro∣vince. And not only the Greeks of the Neighbouring Isles, but the English and French are accustomed to traffick to this Port. S. Peters Patriomony Patrimonium, Sancti Petri, called by the Italians La Provincia del Pa∣trimonio; is a considerable part of the Ecclesiasti∣cal State in Italy; under the Papacy; which was a part of the Old Hetruria. Bounded on the North by Ombria, on the East by Sabina, on the West by the State of Siena, and on the South by the Tyrrhe∣nian Sea. The Capital of this Province is Viterbo; and the other Cities are Aquapendente, Civita Vec∣chia, Civita Castellana, Cornetto, Toscanella, and Orvieto. Pattesi, Patsi, Timethus, a River on the North Side of Sicily. Patti, Pactae, Pacta, a City on the North Shoar of Sicily, at the Fall of the River Pattesi, into the Tyrrhenian Sea; forty eight Milesrom Messina to the West, eighty from Palermo to the North-East, and fifty from Catania to the North. This City was built by Roger, Earl of Sicily, after the Expulsion of the Moors; made a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Messina, by Pope Eugenius III. and now in a good Estate. Pau, Epaunum, Palum, the Capital of the Province of Bearn, in Aquitain in France; seated upon the River Gave, (thence called le Gave de Pau;) four Leagues from Oleron to the East, nine from the Borders of Arragon to the North, and eighteen from Dax to the South-East. Henry IV. King of Navarr was born in the Castle belonging to this City, December 13. 1557. A Castle, of the Foundation of Henry d' Al∣bert, King of Navarre and Prince of Bearn; who in 1519 established also a Parliament here; which Lewis the Thirteenth, King of France, reestablished in 1621, together with the Roman Catholick Religion, that had been thence expelled by the Huguenots in the Civil Wars. Pavia, Ticinum, a City in the Dukedom of Mi∣lan, in Italy, of great Antiquity; called in latter times Papia, Papia Flavia, and now Pavia. It stands up∣on the River Tesino, Tecinum; twenty Leagues from Milan to the South, fifty from Genoua, and thirty four from Piacenza to the West. Built by the Li∣gurians, and thought more Ancient than Milan: At∣tila ruined it, and Odoacer besieged Orestes in it. The Lombards took it, not without great difficulty, under Alboinus their first King, in the Year 569. Af∣ter this it became the Capital of the Kingdom of the Lombards; and continued such, till in the Year 773. Charles the Great took this City, and Desiderius their last King therein. Afterwards it became the Seat of the Kingdom of Italy; to which Otto I put an end in the Year 951. by the Expulsion of Berengarius and his Son. In 1004. it suffered very much by a fire. About the Year 1059, it had a sharp War with the Ci∣ty of Milan. In the Year 1361. here was an Uni∣versity opened by Charles IV. Emperor of Germany, under Galeatius Duke of Milan, under whom this City then was. Francis I▪ of France, in 1525. attempt∣ing
to take it, was defeated by the Spaniards, and himself taken Prisoner. In 1527. it was taken by the French under Lautrech; but soon after returned under the King of Spain, as Duke of Milan: and be∣ing again attempted by the French in 1655. they were the second time defeated by the Spaniards; it conti∣nues under Spain to this day. Next Milan, the best City in that Dukedom; a Principality, and a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Milan; but exempt from the Jurisdiction of that Metropolitan: It has one of the greatest and fairest Stone Bridges in Italy, and many pieces of Antiquity; the Castle amongst them; which was the Royal Palace of the Kings of Lombardy. The body of S. Austin is deposited in a Monastery of Religious here of the order of his name. There have been several Ecclesiastical Councils assembled at this City: Particularly that in 1076 held by the Partisans of the Emperor Henry IV. is remarkable, for its con∣demning Pope Gregory VII. who had excommunica∣ted them before at a Council in Rome. The Ter∣ritory belonging to it is called the Pavese. Pavosan, Pavoasanum, a City in the Island of S. Thomas. Pautzkerwick, the German name of the Bay of Dantzick. La Paz, Pax, a City of Peru, between the Moun∣tains of Brasil to the East, and the Lake Titiaca to the West: which is a Bishops See, under the Archbi∣shop of Lima; situate upon the River Cavane. Pazzi, Pachya, a City of Thrace, which is a Bi∣shops See, under the Archbishop of Heraclia. The Peak in Derbyshire, lyes in the North-west parts of the County amongst the Mountains: And is a famous place as well for its Lead and Quarries, as for the three Caves, whose height, length and depth, with the just tides of water ebbing and flowing from them, and the strange irregularities of the Rocks within, appropriate to them the character of so many Wonders. To which must be added Buxton Wells; where out of the same Rock in the compass of eight or nine yards, arise nine several medicinal Springs, eight warm, the ninth very cold; which at the distance of three hundred foot re∣ceive another hot Spring from a Well, near the Ebul∣lition of another that is cold again. Pedena, Petina, a small City in Histria in Italy; which is a Bishops See, under the Patriarch of Aqui∣leja: and the Head of a Territory of the same name, under the Dominion of the Emperor. Twenty two Miles from Pola to the North, and sixty from Lau∣bach to the South; near the Head of the River Arsa, which divides Italy from Illyricum. Pedeo, Pedaeus, a River on the East of the Isle of Cyprus. Pedir, Pedira, a City in the North of the Island of Sumatra, which has a Haven: under the King of Acem. Peelandt, a Tract in Brabam. Pegian, the Lesser Armenia. Pegu, Peguum, one of the Principal Cities in the Further East-Indies, called by the Inhabitants Bayon; and by the Europeans Pegu. It has a Noble Palace be∣longing to the King of Pegu, which is fortified in the manner of a Castle and stands upon a River of the same name, which falls a little lower into the Bay of Bengala. Long. 126. 05. Lat. 19. 55. The Kingdom of Pegu was once a most Potent Empire in the Further East-Indies, containing twen∣ty six Kingdoms in subordination to it: but now much diminished, having been often ruinated by the Kings of Arracam, Tungking and Siam. Nevertheless a fer∣tile Country, much visited by the Merchants of Eu∣rope. In the Year 1568. the King of Pegu knowing the King of Siam to have two white Elephants, desi∣red by his Embassadors to purchase one of them at any price required; but was refused. He therefore entereth in revenge into Siam with a powerful Army, and takes the Capital City; so that the King of Siam fearing to fall into the hands of his Enemy, poysoned himself: from which time the Kings of Siam have acknowledged the Soveraignty of the Kings of Pegu. This Kingdom belongs now to the King of Ava. The frontiers both of Siam and it suffer the greatest misery by the continual Wars betwixt the two Crowns: it lies between the Kingdom of Tungking to the East, and that of Arracam to the West. Pein, Peina, a Town in Lunenburg; famous for a Fight between Albert Duke of Brandenburg, and Mauricius Duke of Saxony, July 9. 1553. Maurice got the Victory, but died within two days of the Wounds he received. Albert being driven out of Germany, died in 1557. in France, in the XXXV. year of his Age: having lived much longer than was consistent with his Inconstancy and Perfidy, saith Brie∣tius. This Town is seated upon the Weser. Peiseda reca, Peisida, a River in the Asian Tar∣tary, East of the River Ob; whose Fountains are not known, as arising in desolate and unfrequented Coun∣tries: it falls into the Frozen Sea above Nova Zem∣bla. Peking, Pechinum, the principal Province in the Kingdom of China. Bounded on the East by Leao∣tum, and Xantum; on the North by Tartary, and the great Wall; on the West by Xansi, and on the South by Honan. The principal City is, Peking, Pechinum. A vast and populous City; which in 1404. became the Royal City of China, in∣stead of Nanquin. The Inhabitants are innumerable, though it has been often taken and plundered in the late Tartarian War. It is now recovering those los∣ses and ruins under the King of Tartary; who is be∣come the Master of it. The Province of Peking contains eight Capital Cities; one hundred and thirty five lesser Cities; four hundred and eighteen thousand nine hundred eighty nine Families. Petlecas, Aliacmon, Haliacmon, a River in Ma∣cedonia; which falls into the Bay of Thessalonica, over against Thessalonia to the South-West, thirty three English Miles. Called Platamona, Bistrisa, and Ali∣agmo from Aliagmon the name it bears in Clau∣dian. Pelion. See Petras. Pella, an ancient City of Palaestine, in Asia; some∣time dignified with a Bishops See under the Patri∣archs of Jerusalem, who for many years kept their Residence here. § A second in the Kingdom of Ma∣cedonia, made famous by the Births of Philip King of Macedon, and Alexander the Great his Son, thence surnamed Pellaeus. Some call it now Janizza, others Zuchria; It being hitherto extant, and noted for excellent Works in Marble. § The Ancients mention a third in Achaia. Peloponnesus, the ancient name of the Morea, then divided into these eight parts; Achaia properly so called, Arcadia, Argos, Corinthus, Elis, Laconia, Messene, and Sicyonia. See Morea. The famous Peloponnesian War, which lasted from the Year of Rome 323 in the 87th Olympiad to the taking of Athens in the Year 350, rather chose to be named from the People of this Country, who maintain'd it against the Athenians, than from the Athenians their Ene∣mies. Pelorus, Pelorias or Pelorum, the same with Ca∣po di Faro. Pelusium. See Belvais. Pelysz, Pelysia, a Town in the Lower Hungary, which is the Capital of a County of the same Name. It lies fifteen Miles from Vaccia to the South-West,
twenty six from Alba Regalis, and twenty from Bu∣da to the North-East. Pembridge, a Market Town in Herefordshire in the Hundred of Stretford, upon the River Arrow. Penbrokeshire, Penbrochium, one of the Shires in Wales. Bounded on the North by Cardigan, (se∣parated by the Rivers Tyuy, and Keach:) on the East by Caermarthenshire, on the South and West by the Irish Sea. From North to South it is twenty six Miles; from East to West twenty; in Circuit ninety five. This County affords Corn and Cattle in great plenty; and has a mild and pleasant Air. Penbroke, the Town which gives Name to this Shire, is one direct Street; upon a long narrow Point of a Rock in Milford Haven; the Sea every Tide flow∣ing up to the Town-Walls. It has a Castle, though now ruined; and two Parish Churches within the Walls; and is a Corporation, represented in Parliament by one Burgess. The first Earl of Pembroke, was Gil∣bert de Clare, Created in 1138. In 1201. it came into the Family of Martial by Marriage: this Family enjoyed it six Descents; and by Females it continued till the Year 1390. After which it became very un∣steady, till Edward VI. in 1551. Created William Herbert Lord Steward, Earl of Pembroke; whose Posterity still enjoy that Honour in the seventh Des∣cent. Pendennis, a strong Castle in Cornwal. Pene, Suevus, one of the Branches of the Oder in Pomerania. Peneus, a River in the Province of Thessalia, in Macedonia; which greatned with the Rivers Ion, Pat∣tisus, and Apidanus, passes betwixt the Mountains Os∣sa and Olympus to surrender it self into the Bay of Thessalonica, having first watered the pleasant Fields of Tempe. It is now called Salampria. The Fiction of the Metamorphosis of Daphne into a Laurel in this River, gives it a place in the Writings of the Poets. Pengeab, the same with Lahor, a City in the East-Indies. Pengick, Penica, a City in Misnia, upon the Ri∣ver Muldaw; between Altemburg to the West, and Chemnitz to the East, seven German Miles: and the same distance from Leipsick to the South. Peniel, or Penuel, an antient City of the Holy Land, in the Tribe of Reuben, beyond the Brook of Jabbov, at the foot of Mount Libanus, near Tripo∣li, and upon the Frontiers of the Amorites. So cal∣led from Jacob's Vision of an Angel wrestling with him, according to his own Interpretation thereof, that he had seen God face to face, Gen. 32. 30. Gideon broke down the Tower, and slew the Men of this City, because they refused to give his Army Bread. Judg. 8. 8. 17. But Jeroboam rebuilt it. Penk, a River in Staffordshire, near to which stands Penkridge; a Market Town in the Hundred of Cudleston of good Antiquity. Penna, or Civita di Penna, Penna S. Joannis, Pinna in Vestinis, a City in Abruzzo, in the King∣dom of Naples: and a Bishop's See, over which there is no Archbishop who has any Jurisdiction. This is very frequent in Italy. In 1585. a Synod was assem∣bled here. Penna-Fiel, Penna fidelis, a Town in Old Ca∣stile in Spain, near the Duero, six Leagues from Va∣ladolid. It had the honor to give the Title of Duke to Ferdinand the Just, King of Arragon, from the year 1395. to 1412, before his Ascension to the Crown: which Title afterwards was enjoyed by his Son John, who succeeding to the Crown also in 1458. changed this Dutchy into a simple Seigniory; which degradation of it, Philip II. King of Spain in part retrieved again, by making it a Marquisate. Penon de Uelez, a Fortress of the King of Spain, upon the Coast of Barbary; between Tetuan to the North-West, and Alcudia to the North-East; sixty two English Miles from either; over against Malaga in Spain. Penrise, a Market Town in the County of Gla∣morgan in Wales, in the Hundred of Swansey. Penrith, a Market Town in the County of Cum∣berland, in Lethward Wapentake, betwixt the Ri∣vers Eamont on the South, and Lowther on the West: large, well built and peopled: The second Town of note in the County. Penryn, a Market and Borough Town in the County of Cornwal, in the Hundred of Kerryer; which elects two Members of Parliament. Pentapolis, a Region with five Cities standing in it: of which kind Antiquity delivers two especially, that were notified by this name. 1. The Plain of Sodom, Gomorrha, Adama, Seboim and Segor, in the Land of Canaan; being the five Cities consumed by Fire from Heaven, Gen. 19. 2. The Pentapolis Cyrenaica in Libya. See Cairoan. Penzanse, a Market Town in the County of Cornwal, in the Hundred of Penwich. Pera, Peraea, Cornu Byzantii, Chrysoceras, a Ci∣ty of Thrace, or rather a Suburb of Constantinople; from which it is parted only by a narrow Channel. By reason of the frequent and easie Passage between these two Places by Boats, it may well seem a part of that City. The Ambassadors of the Christian Prin∣ces, and the Latin Christians for the most part re∣side in it. The same with Galata, and there more at large described. Le Perche, Comitatus Perticus, a County in France; between la Beausse to the East and South, Normandy to the North, and Leinaine to the West. About eighteen or twenty Leagues in length, and the same almost in breadth. The Rivers Eure, Loirs, Haisne, and Aure derive their Sources from it. Di∣vided into the Ʋpper and Lower Perche, of which the first makes properly the County; the other bears the name of Perche-Gouet, and contains the five an∣tient Baronies of Auton, Monmirail, Alluye, Bazoche, and Brou. The antient Inhabitants in Caesar are cal∣led Aulerci Diablintes. The Capital of it is Nogent le Retrou: besides Mortagne, Bellesme and Montmi∣rail, are considerable Places. Pereaslaw, Pereaslavia, a Town in the Ʋkraine, in the Palatinate of Kiovia, beyond the Nieper: up∣on the River Truhicz (which two Miles lower falls into the Nieper) ten Miles from Kiovia to the North-East. A populous, strong, and fortified Town. Pereczaz, Peregia, a small City in the Upper Hungary; which is the Capital of a County of the same name. Five Miles from the Tibiscus to the North, forty five from Cassovia to the East, and as many from Tokay. This Town and County has all along been in the hands of the Emperor, and never under the Turks. Pergamo, Pergamus, a City of Mysia in the Lesser Asia, upon the River Caicus: now called Per∣gamo and Bargamo. At first a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Ephesus; but that City being ru∣ined by the Turks, it became the Metropolis; and is now it self almost ruined. This was the Royal City of the Attalick Kings; whose Estates were called the Kingdom of Pergamo. A Kingdom founded about the year of Rome 470; and after a duration of a hundred and fifty two years, ended in the Person of Attalus III. dying without Issue in the year of Rome 621, and instituting the Romans his Heirs. This was also the Country of Galen, the celebrated Physician. Thirty five Miles from Smyrna, sixty six from Sardus, and fifty five from Adramytium to the
South-West. One of the Seven Churches mentioned in the Apocalyps. The River divides it, being seated in a Plain, at the foot of a Mountain: in this City Parchment was first invented. Long. 55. 30. Lat. 41. 51. It shews the Ruines of the Palace of the At∣talick Kings, of a Theatre, and an Aquaduct: Peo∣pled by about three thousand Turks, and twelve or fifteen Families of Greeks, to whose use there re∣mains one Church in the room of the Cathedral en∣tirely ruined. Pericop. See Precop. Perigord, Petrocoriensis Provincia, a Province in Aquitain in France, of great extent; between Limosin and Quercy to the East, Angoumois to the North, Agenois to the South, and Saintonge to the West. The principal City is Perigueux, the rest are Sarlat and Bergerac. Some divide it into the Ʋpper Perigord, which is Mountainous; and the Lower, Woody. The one lying along the River Lille, the other towards the Dordogne and the Verzere. It affords many Medicinal Springs, with Mines of Steel and Iron. Perigueux, Petrocorium. Petrigorium, Vesuna Petrocoriorum, the Capital of Perigord, is a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Bourdeaux; seated up∣on the River Lille: twenty Leagues from Bourdeaux to the North-East, and ten from Angoulesme. An antient City, as appears by the Inscriptions, the Ru∣ines of a Temple of Venus, of an Amphitheatre, and other stately Works. Near to it King Pepin the Short obtained a signal Victory over Geofry Duke of Aquitain in 768. Peristasi, Peristacium, a City of Thrace upon the Propontis; which is a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Heraclia; sixteen Miles from Hexi∣mili to the North. In the latter Maps called Pe∣raste. Permaweliky, Permia Magna, a City in the Pro∣vince of Permsky in Russia; between the Dwina to the West, and the Obb to the East; seated upon the River Kama. Permessus, a River of Baeotia, in Greece; springing from the Mountain Helicon, and consecrated amongst the ancient Poets to Apollo and the Muses. Permie, or Permsky, a Principality in the Em∣pire of Moscovia; very marshy and uncultivated; inhabited by a Salvage People with some few Christians, to whom about 1550. Duke John Basilo∣witz granted a Bishop, since changed into an Arch∣bishop residing at Wologda, and taking his Title from Perm or Prems, the capital City of Permsky. Pernambuco, Pernambucum, a City in Brasil; which is the Capital of a Province of the same name, above sixty German Miles long, upon the North Sea; and a Bishops See. Seated upon the River Bi∣biribe, which makes a large Haven. Long. 346. 00. Lat. 9. 15. This was made a Bishops See in 1676, after it was recovered out of the Hands of the Hol∣landers: who in 1629. took it from the Portuguese. Otherwise called Olinde. Pernaw. See Parnaw. Peronne, Perona, a strong City upon the River Somme in Picardy, in the Territory of Sansterre: eight Leagues from Amiens to the East, seven from Cambray to the South, and twenty five from Paris to the North. Often attempted by the Spaniards without any Success. Charles the Simple, King of France, died here in 926. It is one of the Keys of France. Perpignan, Perpignano, Perpinianum, Paperia∣num, a City which is the Capital of Rousillon, (a Pro∣vince of Spain, but Conquered by the French,) up∣on the River Tet, three Leagues from the Sea. It was built in 1068. by Isnard Count of Rousillon: and in 1642. taken by the French. In 1285. Charles the Bold, King of France, died in this Town. In 1604. the Bishop of Elna settled his See here. It stands not above three Miles from the Mediterranean Sea, and ten from Narbon to the South. Peter, King of Ar∣ragon, opened here an University. The Antipope Peter de la Luna, called Benedict XII. celebrated a Council at this City in 1408. Persepolis, a noble City of the antient Kingdom of Persia: built upon the River Rhogomane, as Pto∣lomy calls it, in 91. deg. of Long. or the Araxes, as Strabo and Curtius. It had been the Capital of the Kingdom, adorned with a Palace of Cedar; till taken by Alexander the Great and at the Perswasion of Thais, the Alexandrian Courtesan, burnt in the year of the World 3624. Persia, Persis, one of the most Ancient, Great, and Celebrated Kingdoms of Asia; called by the In∣habitants, Farsistan; and otherwise, the Empire of the Sophy. At this day it is bounded on the North by the Caspian Sea and Mauralnahalria, or Trans-Oxiana: on the East by India Propria, or the Em∣pire of the Great Mogul; on the South by the In∣dian Ocean, and the Persian Gulph; on the West by Arabia Deserta, the Turkish Empire, and Geor∣gia: so that it extends from the River Indus in the East, to the Tygris in the West: that is from 82. degrees of Longitude to 120, (which is thirty eight degrees); and from 23 to 43 degrees of Latitude. The Earth in so vast an extent being very dif∣ferent; but the Air pure and healthful throughout. This vast Kingdom is divided into these Provinces; Fars or Persia, (properly so called,) Kirman, Ma∣keran, Send, Chustusan, Sitsistan, Sablistan, Dilemon, Khoemus, Tabarestan, Gordian, Chorasan, Erack-At∣zem (or Jerack,) Agemy, Kylan (or Gilan,) Candahar, Schirvan, and Aderbeitzan. The Cities are Ardevil, Caspin, Cassian, Com, Erivan, Herat, Hispaham, Lar, Mexat, Schiras, Sitsistan, Schama∣chie, Sauster, and Tauris. It did anciently compre∣hend the Countries of Media, Hyrcania, Margiana, Assyria in part, Susiana, Parthia, Aria, Paropa∣nisus, Chaldaea, Caramania, Drangiana, Persia properly so called, Arachosia and Gedrosia: which were most of them powerful Kingdoms. This Peo∣ple were at first subject to the Assyrians and Medes. In the year of the World 3406. Cyrus vanquishing Astyages, King of the Medes, made Persia the Seat of the General Empire: which continued in this Na∣tion, till it was transferred to the Grecians by Ale∣xander the Great, in the year 3635. In the year of the World 3718. Arsaces, (the Founder of the Parthian Family) assumed the Royal Diadem; which in time expelled the Greeks, and obtained the King∣dom of Persia. This Family continued four hundred and seventy years: succeeded by Artaxerxes a Per∣sian: whose Line after twenty eight Descents ended in Hormisda, vanquished by Haumar the Saracen, in the year 634. It continued under the Saracen Caliphs till the year 1030. when Tangrolipix, a Turk, invaded this Kingdom. This lasted but three Reigns; Cas∣sanes the last of them in 1202. being slain; and Ha∣alon made King of Persia by Occata the Great Cham of Tartary. This Prince exterminated the whole Race of the Caliphs of Bagdat; and his Posterity reigned till 1337. When it also fell under the Tar∣tarian fury, to which it owed its Rise. In 1405. af∣ter almost an hundred years of Confusion, Mirza Charock IV. (Son of Tamerlane) ascended the Throne of Persia: whose Family lasted till the year 1472. Then Ʋsan Cassanes began another Line; which en∣ded in 1505. when Hysmael, (the Founder of the present Line of Persia) began his Reign. Solyman, the present King of Persia, is the Tenth of this Line,
and succeeded in 1666. The principal Commodity of this Country now is Silks; whereof it is reported to produce yearly twenty thousand Bales, at two hundred and sixteen pound weight a Bale. Arabick is the Learned Language there, as Persian (which hath a great mixture of Arabick) and the Turkish, the Vulgar. But the Persians, though Mahometans, dif∣fer as to Religion from the Turks so professedly, in explaining the Alcoran, and in their Saints, and Cere∣monies, that each, as they conquer, destroy the very Churches of one another. The Persian Sea, or Gulph, Persicus Sinus; commonly called Mar de Elcatiff, or de Bassora; is a Branch of the Indian, or Ethiopick Ocean: be∣ginning at Cape Raz, (the most Eastern Cape of A∣rabia, in Long. 96. 45.) and running into the Land to 81. having Persia to the North and East; and A∣rabia and Persia to the South and West. In the most North-West Point, the Euphrates and Tigris fall into it with a vast Current. It receives also the Rivers of Arabia and Persia, which lie near it: but they are not of any consideration, being neither ma∣ny, nor great. Some others have counted the begin∣ning of this Gulph, at the Isle of Ormus and the Streight of Bassora; which will make it much shor∣ter, than the length I have given it. Pertois, Pertensis Ager, a Tract in Champagne in France; between Champagne, (properly so cal∣led,) to the West, the Dukedom de Bar to the East, and the River Marne. Perthe, Perthia, a County in Scotland; which has Angus to the North, Stratherne to the West, Fife to the South, and the German Ocean to the East: divided into two parts by the Fyrth of Tay. It is a small County; and takes it name from Perth, (or S. John's-Town) the Capital of it. One of the prin∣cipal Cities in the North of Scotland, upon the Tay; in which the Kings of Scotland have commonly been crowned. It lies thirty Miles from Edinburg to the North, and twelve from Dunkeld. This Town was totally ruined by an Inundation in 1029. and rebuilt by William King of Scotland, where it now stands. Long. 16. 8. Lat. 58. 00. Peru, Peruvia, Perua, a large Country in South America; affording great plenty of Gold and Silver Mines; and at the Discovery of the New World, the most Potent Kingdom in South America. Its length from North to South is six hundred Spanish Leagues: its breadth in some places ninety, in others less. Bounded on the North by the Prefecture of Popian; on the South by the Kingdom of Chili; on the West by the Pacifick Ocean, (or South Sea;) and on the South it has undiscovered Countries. It is at this day divided into three Provinces; los Reyes, Quito, and los Characas; or, de la Plata. The old Capital was Cusko; the present is Lima. This Kingdom was dis∣covered by the Spaniards in 1529. under Francis Pi∣zarro, a Spaniard. Who finding two Brothers of the Royal Family, (Huascar and Atabalipa, betwixt whom their Father had parted the Kingdom) in disagreement, made use of their divisions to both their ruins: and taking Atabalipa (the last King of Peru,) Prisoner, (who before had surprized his Brother, de∣feated his Forces, put to death all the Princes of the Royal Family, and caused Huascar to be drowned in the River of Andamarca;) after he had extorted a vast Ransom in Wedges of Gold, the perfidious base born Villain hanged him May 1533. contrary to his faith given. What the Spaniards report of the Fertility, Wealth, and Government of this Kingdom, is scarce credible: yet all fell into the Power of Pizarro, an exposed Bastard, and a Hog-driver; who fled from Spain, because he had lost a Hog out of his Herd and durst not return home without it. He afterwards and his Partner in the Discovery, Almagro, quarrelling; they formed their Parties, and made War with one another for some years: at length Pizarro was kil∣led at Lima by Almagro's Party; Almagro came to be taken and executed by Gonzalo Pizarro, the others Brother: And Gonzalo Pizarro, warring against Pe∣dro de la Gasca Vice-Roy for the King of Spain, suffered the same fate to be taken and executed like a Criminal in Guaynanima. So both the Pizarro's and with Almagro lost their lives, the Govern∣ment of all that Country they had conquered for the King of Spain. The ancient Emperours of Peru were called by the Natives, Yncas. They began their Reign about the year 1125. four hundred years before the coming of the Spaniards hither. Garcilassus de la Vega has published a noble History of them. In divers parts and Provinces of their Empire, they had erected Palaces and Temples the richest in Gold and Silver as perhaps ever the Sun beheld. There being so prodigious a quantity of those Mettals here, that in less than fifty years, the King of Spain's fifth part out of only one of the Mines of Potosi, amounted to a∣bove a hundred and eleven Millions weight of pieces of thirteen Reales and a quarter weight a piece. It lies mostly betwixt the Equator and the Tropick of Capricorn. Perugia, Perusia, by the French called Perouse, a City of Hetruria, (now in Ombria) in the States of the Church: a Bishops See, and an University: the Capital of a Tract of the same name; seated upon a Hill near the Tiber: forty Miles from Ʋrbino to the South, sixty one from Rome to the North-East, and thirty from Nocera to the West. This is one of the most ancient Cities of Hetruria. Made famous by the besieging of L. Antonius, (Brother of the Great Antonius) by Augustus, till he was forced to yield by Hunger; so that Perusina fames became a Proverbial Expression. Totila, a King of the Goths, besieged this City seven years before he took it. Narsetes retook and repaired it: The Lombards were the next Masters of it. Charles the Great gave it to the See of Rome. In the Wars betwixt the Guelphs and the Gibelines, it suffered very much: two or three small Synods have been assembled at it. It gives its name to the famous Lake, where Hannibal defeated the Romans under Flaminius, Consul, in the year of Rome 537. P. Paul III. built in it a Castle, which added to the natural strength of the Place; its pleasant Situation, magnificent and spruce Buildings, and the great plenty of all things, have made it one of the most considerable Cities in the Popes Dominions. Pesaro, Pisaurum, a City and Roman Colony in Ʋmbria, of great Antiquity: now a part of the Duke∣dom of Ʋrbino, and a Bishops See under the Arch∣bishop of Ʋrbino: built near the Mouth of the River Foglia (Pisaurus) upon the Shoars of the Adriatick Sea; forty five Miles from Ancona to the West. A fine, great, and populous City; the Seat of the Popes Legat, and of old the Residence of the Dukes of Ʋrbino. Totila did heretofore ruine it, and Belli∣sarius repair it. There is now a Fortress standing for its security. Pescara, Aternum, a City in the Hither Abruz∣zo, in the Kingdom of Naples; of old a Bishops See. Seated at the Mouth of a River of the same name; forty five Miles from Termoli to the North-West, and near an hundred from Ancona to the South. The River, upon which it stands, ariseth out of the Apen∣nine in the same Province; and watereth Aquila, Tocco, and Perugia; then falls into the Adriatick Sea. Pescha, Argiruntum, a City of Liburnia in Dal∣matia; now a Village over against the Island of
Pago, in the Borders of Croatia; on the Shoars of the Adriatick Sea. Peschiera, Piscaria, a small, but strong City in the States of Venice, in the Territory of Verona; upon the Lake di Garda, where the River Menzo flows out of it; fifteen Miles from Verona to the West, and twenty five from Brescia to the East. Pescia, Arnine, a River of Hetruria; which has a great and a populous Town upon it of the same name; in the Territory of Pisa. Twelve Miles from Lucca to the East. The River falls a little lower into the River Arno. Pessinus, an ancient City of Galatia, in the Les∣ser Asia; near the Mountain Ida, and on the Confines of Phrygia; where the Goddess Cybele had heretofore a famous Temple and Statue: which latter being by Attalus King of Pergamus presented to the Romans, in the year of Rome 649. they instituted the Mega∣lesian Games in the honour of the Goddess. It is now a small Town, in the Province of Chiangare, un∣der the Turks. Cybele was thence entituled Pessi∣nuntia. Pest, Pestum, a great Town in the Ʋpper Hun∣gary, seated upon the Danube, over against the Lower Buda. It is a square Town in a pleasant Plain; and gives the beholder from Buda a very de∣lightful Prospect, by reason of its Walls, Towers, and Mosques. The Country about it is called the County of Pest, from this Town. Between it and Buda, there is a fine Bridge of Boats, almost a quarter of a League long, or half an English Mile. In 1541. Solyman the Magnificent took it without Resistance: and though the next year after, it was attempted by a Potent Army under the Marquess of Brandenburgh, a Breach made and a brave Assault given by Vitellius, an Italian; yet the Germans cowardly left the Siege. In the year 1602. whilst the Turks were busie in the Siege of Alba Regalis; the Germans took Pest and the Lower Buda: after which, many sharp Rencoun∣ters passed between the two Garrisons; especially when the River was frozen. In 1604. Jagenreuter (a base Coward) being intrusted with the Govern∣ment of it, without any force or so much as the appearance of an Enemy, upon a bare report the Turks were coming to besiege it, deserted the Town and fled. It continued in the hands of the Turks till 1684. when it was taken by the Duke of Lorrain, and kept all that Summer; but deserted, when he drew off from the Siege of Buda. In 1686. it was retaken; and by the acquisition of Buda, assured to the Imperialists. Pesto, Pesti, Paestum, Posidonia, a City and Colo∣ny of Lucania; and a Bishops See in the Hither Principate, in the Kingdom of Naples; upon a Bay of the same Name, twenty two Miles from Salerno to the South, and three from Capaccio. This City in 930. was taken by the Saracens, and entirely ru∣ined. All its Inhabitants slain, or carried into Cap∣tivity: It never recovered this blow; but the Bishops See was thereupon removed to Capaccio. Petacal, Patala, a City of the Hither Indies, at the Mouth of the River Indus; which is of great Antiquity. Peterborough, Petroburgum, Petuaria, a City in the County of Northampton; seated on the River Aufon or Nen, over which it has a Bridge; in the Borders of Huntington, Cambridge, and Lincoln∣shires; five Miles from Crowland to the West. This place sprung up out of a Monastery here built, and dedicated to S. Peter by Penda the first Christian King of the Mercians, about 546. Wolpher his Successor finished it in 633. In 867. it was destroy∣ed by the Danes. In 960. Ethelwold, Bishop of Win∣chester, began to rebuild it with the assistance of King Edgar and Adulph the Chancellor. In the Reign of William the Conquerour, it was plundered by Herward a Saxon; but it recovered in after∣times. When Henry VIII. dissolved this House, there be∣longed to it a Revenue of one thousand nine hundred seventy and two Pounds the year. This Prince in 1541. founded a Bishoprick in this Monastery; and annexed to it a Dean and six Prebends: John Cham∣bers, the last Abbot, becoming the first Bishop; from whom, the present is the thirteenth. Charles I. of Blessed Memory, added another Honour to this place; when in 1627. he created John Lord Mordant, Baron of Turvy, Earl of Peterborough. In which Family that Honour now is. See the Antiquities of this Church, published by Dr. Patrick. Before it took the name of Peterburgh or Peterbo∣rough from the dedication of its Monastery to S. Pe∣ter, this Town was called Medanshede. Peteril, Petriana, a River in Cumberland; which riseth five Miles from Keswick to the North-East; and by Penreth, and Hesket falls into the Eden above Carlisle. Petersfield, a Market-Town in Hampshire, in the Hundred of Finchdean, priviledged with the Election of two Parliament-Men. The Lady Louisa de Querouaille Dutchess of Portsmouth, bears the Title of Baroness of Petersfield, by the Creation of King Charles II. 1673. Petherton, North and South; two Market-Towns in Somersetshire, the Capitals of their Hun∣dred. The last is situated upon the Bank of the Ri∣ver Parret. Petigliano, Petilianum, a fortified strong Town, in the Borders of the Ecclesiastical State, and the Dukedom of Florence: five Miles from Savona to the East, and thirty from Orbitello. This is the Ca∣pital of a Sovereign County or Earldom; belonging heretofore to the Family of Sforza, but lately pur∣chased by the Great Duke of Tuscany in whose Terri∣tories it lay. Petra, or Petra Deserti, Cyriacopolis, Mons Regalis, a City of the Stony Arabia; which was of old the Capital of the Kingdom of Ammon, and called Rabbah. Taken by King David, in revenge of the Injuries offered to his Embassadours. In the times of Christianity, it became an Archbishops See under the Patriarch of Jerusalem: at this day called by the Arabians, Krach and Kelaggeber. Long. 66. 45. Lat. 30. 20. Petras, Pelius, Pelion, a Mountain in Thessalia-Dicearchus Siculus, (one of the Scholars of Aristo∣tle) found this Mountain to be the highest in Thessa∣lia, by 1250 Paces, as Pliny saith. Petrina, a strong Castle in Croatia; seated upon a River of the same name, which there falls into the Kulp; eight Miles from Zagarab, (or Agram) a Town of Sclavonia. This was once in the Hands of the Turks: but retaken by the Germans, and now in the Possession of the Emperor. Petrikow, or Pietrikow, Paterkau, Peotrkow, and Petrilow, Petricovia, a Town in the Palatinate of Sirackie, in the Greater Poland; two German Miles from the River Pilcza, four from the Confines of the Lesser Poland, and twelve from Sirackz to the East. It is a neat populous Town, seated in a Mo∣rass: often honored with the Diets of Poland; but in 1640. almost entirely burnt down by a Fire. The Kings of Poland had formerly a Palace Royal near it; which also happened to be burnt. There have been, upon several Occasions, Councils of the Clergy celebrated here. Petro-Waradin, Acuminium, Petro Varadinum, a Town in Sclavonia; called by the Inhabitants Petro War; by the Germans, Peter Wardein. It stands
upon the Danube; between the Save and the Drave; six Hungarian Miles from Belgrade to the North-West, and about twelve from Esseck to the South. This Place has been very famous during the present War. The Turks made it their common Passage in∣to the Upper Hungary, after Buda fell into the Hands of the Emperor; and to that end maintained a Bridge of Boats over the Danube. The Revolt and Mutiny against the Prime Visier, after the Battel of Mohatz, of the Turkish Army (whereby that General in 1687. was forced to fly for his life to Belgrade, and afterwards to Constantinople; upon which followed the Desertion of Esseck, Possega, and Walcowar) hap∣pened here. It has been since taken and abandoned by both sides. The Imperialists blew up its Fortifi∣cations in 1688. and the Turks afterwards quite burnt it down. Petschen, the same with Quinque Ecclesiae. Pettaw, Petavium, Petovia, a City and Roman Colony of Pannonia; mentioned by Tacitus and ma∣ny other ancient Historians; now called by the Ger∣mans, Pettaw; and made a part of Stiria; upon the Drave; in the Borders of Sclavonia, under the Do∣minion of the Archbishop of Saltzburgh; whereas it was once a Bishop's See, under the Archbishop of Lorch. It stands nine Miles from Cilley to the North, and as many from Gratz to the North-East, and Ca∣nisca to the West. Petworth, a Market Town in the County of Sus∣sex, in Arundel Rape: pleasantly situated near two Parks, by the River Arun; and further remarkable for a noble Seat belonging formerly to the Earls of Northumberland, now by Marriage to the Duke of Somerset. Petz, the same with Vienna. Petzorcke, Petzora, a Province in the North of Moscovy, towards the Frozen Ocean. The principal Town and River is of the fame name. The River falls into the White Sea, by six great mouths; be∣tween Pustejezero, (a Town and Castle) and Ziem∣noipoias a Ridge of Mountains: which name signifies in the Russ Language, the Girdle of the World. Pevensey, for shortness called vulgarly Pensey, is a Town in the County of Sussex, which denominates a Rape there. But deserving to be mentioned upon another and a higher account: for this was the very Harbour, where William the Conqueror landed from Normandy with his Fleet of 896 Sail. Pezln, See Peneus, a River of Thessalia. Pfaltz, the German name of the Palatinate of the Rhine. Pfaltzbourg, Phalseburgum, a Town in Lorain, in the Borders of the Lower Alsatia; at the foot of Mount Vauge, by the River Zinzel. Which name signifies the Palatinate Castle; having heretofore been under the Palatinate Princes of Velden, of whom it was purchased by the Dukes of Lorain: it is now a Principality, very well fortified by the King of France, in whose hands it is. It stands seven Leagues from Strasburgh, and sixteen from Nancy. Pfeullendorft, a Town in the Circle of Schwaben in Germany. in the Territory of Hegow, upon the Lake of Zell, betwixt Constance and Tubingen. It is an Imperial City. Pfirt or Ferrette, one of the principal Cities in the Province of Suntgaw in Germany, under the King of France. Three Leagues from Mulhausen. Pfortsheim, Phorcena, Phortzemum, a small Ci∣ty in the Marquisate of Baden; upon the River Entz, where it takes in the Nagold. Two Miles from Dur∣lach, seven from Heydelberg to the South, and six from Spire. This belongs now to the Family of Durlach; but was heretofore under the Duke of Wurtembergh. Pharia. See Lesina. haris, an ancient City of Laconia, in the Pelo∣ponnesus: where there stood, in the times of the Heathens, an Oraculous Statue of Mercury, much consulted and admired, together with another of the Goddess Vesta. Pharmacusa, a small Island of the Aegean Sea, to∣wards the Province of Ionia in Asia the Less: now called Fermaco. Julius Caesar here fell into the hands of Pyrates; and Attalus, a King of Perga∣mus, was killed. Pharos, a small Island at the Entrance of the Port of Alexandria in Egypt; about a Mile distant from Alexandria, to which it is now connected by a long Bank. Alexander the Great, not succeeding in his Attempt to build a City here because of the streightness of the Place, thereupon founded Ale∣xandria upon the Continent over against it. But it became afterwards extraordinarily famous by the Light Tower erected upon it in the year of Rome 470. and the 124. Olymp. by Ptolemeus Philadelphus King of Egypt. A Tower of so prodigious a Mass and Structure, of the Contrivance of the great Ar∣chitect Sostratus Cnidius, as to be esteemed one of the Wonders of the World. Ptolemy bestowed eight hundred Talents in the building of it. Statius men∣tions it with the Elogium of Lumina Noctivagae tollit Pharos aemula Lunae. It gave Light into the Sea a very great space: Was dedicated in an Inscription to the Gods, the Conser∣vators of Sailors; and all the like Light Towers since have been called Phari from it. Pharsalus. See Farsa above. Only let it be add∣ed, that this City since Christianity was first a Bishop's See under the Archbishop of Larissa, and afterwards an Archbishop's under the Patriarch of Constanti∣nople. Phaselis. See Fionda. Phasis, a River of the Province of Mengrelia in Georgia; It ariseth from a part of the Mountain Caucasus; and passing by Cotatis, the Capital of the Kingdom of Imiretta, and the City Phasis in Men∣grelia (which is a Bishops See under the Archbishop of Trebisonda), it runs to discharge it self into the Black Sea; where its Mouth is above half a League in breadth, and sixty Fathom depth. Upon this River, Amurath III. his Fleet of Galleys, employed to make a Conquest of the North and East Coasts of the Black Sea, was surprized and defeated by the King of Imi∣retta. Towards the Mouth of it, stand divers agree∣able little Islands, covered with Wood. The princi∣pal of them had a Fortress built upon it by the Turks in 1578: which in 1640. the King of Imiretta, as∣sisted with the Princes of Mengrelia and Guriel, took and demolished; carrying away thence twenty five Pieces of Cannon to Cotatis. The antient Hi∣storians speak of a Temple dedicated to the Goddess Rhea, upon an Island of the Phasis: But we see no remains thereof at this day; as neither of the City Se∣baste, placed at the mouth of the Phasis; by the an∣tient Geographers. In the beginning of this Rivers course it is very impetuous: but having gained the Plain, it runs so smoothly and its Waters are so light, that they swim, its said, above the Euxine for some considerable Space. Now called Fachs and Fasso. Phazzeth, Phasis, the Capital of Mengrelia; a City of great antiquity, mentioned by Pliny and Strabo. It stands upon the Euxine Sea; at the Mouth of a River of the same name; and was heretofore a Bishop's See, under the Archbishop of Trebesonde. Sir John Chardin (who entered this River, and took great pains to find this City) could not find the least remainder or token of the City: he saith the Channel of the River is at its fall into the Sea a Mile and half
broad; and sixty Fathom deep; called by the Turks, Fachs; by the Mengrelians, Rione; and that it ari∣seth out of Mount Caucasus. See Phasis. Pheneum, an ancient City of Arcadia, in the Peloponnesus, at the foot of the Mountain Cyllene: which heretofore disputed the Preheminence with Te∣gea, the Capital of the Country. It stood near a Lake of the same name; the different Qualities where∣of in the Night and in the Day are thus described by Ovid, Metham. 15. Est locus Arcadiae, Pheneum dixere priores, Ambiguis suspectus aquis: has nocte timeto; Nocte nocent potae, sine noxa luce bibuntur. Phictiaid, Picti, the most ancient Inhabitants of Scotland; who lived in that Kingdom, when the Ro∣mans Conquered Britain: and by their Inroads up∣on the Britains, (after the Romans withdrew), oc∣casioned the calling in the Saxons. See Picti. Phidari, Euenus, a River of Aetolia; which ri∣seth out of Mount Callidromus, and pursues its course Southward to the Ionian Sea; which it entereth not far from the Gulph of Corinth, or Lepanto. Philadelphia. See Filadelphia, in Lydia. § The Antients mention a second in Cilicia, a Bishops See under the Archbishop of Seleucia; and a third in Coe∣lesyria, a Bishops See likewise under the Archb. of Bus∣sereth. But there have been Alterations in those Sees in following times. The latter Place, according to S. Je∣rom, should be the same with the Hebrew Rabath, or the modern Petra, in the Stony Arabia. Civtad del Re Philippe, a Town built by the Spaniards in 1585. in South America, purposely to preclude the passage into the Streights of Magellan, from the English and Dutch. Since, ruined by the Indians; and the place called Porto Famine. Philippeville, a Town in Hainault, of great strength: fortified by Mary Queen of Hungary, (Go∣verness of the Low Countries) in 1555, and so na∣med from Philip II. King of Spain: by the Pyre∣nean Treaty in 1660. granted to the French. It stands thirteen Miles from Brussels, seven from Namur, and ten from Mons. The Philippine Islands, Philippinae, called also the Islands of Lusson and les Manilhes from the principal of them, are a knot of Islands belonging to Asia; which took this name from Philip II King of Spain; in whose times, (in 1549.) they were view∣ed, and carefully observed by Ruy Lupo a Spaniard. Some apprehend them to be the Barussae of Ptolemy. In 1564. Michael Lupo, another Spaniard, was sent to people and reduce them. They lie between Chi∣na to the North, and the Molucco Islands to the South; between thirteen and fourteen degr. of Nor∣thern Latitude. The exact number of them is not known; but they are supposed to be above ten thou∣sand: the greatest of them is Manilia, or Luconia. The Spaniards were once Masters of the greatest part of these Islands, and built some considerable Cities in them; but their Affairs growing less prosperous in Europe, and the Dutch East-India Company having ruined their Trade here, many of them have defected from the Spaniards; who have been forced to leave others; so that they do with some difficulty keep their possession in the Island of Manilia, the greatest and most Northern of them, the Seat of the Gover∣nour and a Bishop. These Islands were at first sub∣ject to the King of China; who abandoned them, about 1520. First discovered by Ferdinando Ma∣gellanes, who perished in one of them. The Air of them is very mild and temperate; the Soil is very fruitful, and produceth whatever is needful to the Life of Man. The Names of the principal of them are Mindano, Peragoja, Calamianes, Mindora, Tan∣daja, Cebu (in which Magellanes was slain,) Pinta∣dos, Parraja, Masbat, Sabunra, Matan, Luban, Capul, Abilyo, Banton, Bhol, la Verde, dos Negous, and San Juan. Philippo. See Filippopoli. Philippstadt, Philippopolis, a City in Sweden, in Vermelandia, a County of Gothland: built in the Fens. Twenty five Miles from the Lake of Wener, and the same distance from Carlstad to the South-East. Philippopolis, an ancient City of Phaenicia in Sy∣ria: mentioned in the Ecclesiastical Histories of So∣crates and Sozomen, upon the occasion of a Statue erected there, in the Primitive Times, of our Saviour Jesus Christ; together with the Statue of the Wo∣man he cured of an inveterate Bloody Flux by the touch of his Garment, placed at his Foot: The same Historians relating, that an Herb of an unknown Spe∣cies, of so soveraign a Vertue as to heal all sorts of Dis∣eases, sprung up close by them: and when the Empe∣ror Julian the Apostate in the year 362. commanded them to be broken down, and a Statue of himself to be advanced in their rooms, a Fire from Heaven de∣stroyed Julian's Statue. Philipsbourg, Philippoburgum, a strong Fort or Castle upon the Rhine; which before was called Ʋdenheim. First walled in 1343. by Gebhard Bishop of Spire. And afterwards took its present name from Philip Christopher de Soeteren, Bishop of Spire; who in 1615. refortified it for the defence of that Bi∣shoprick. George Count Palatine of the Rhine, a former Bishop of Spire, had built in this place, in 1513, a noble Castle, (or rather Palace;) which was much improved in 1570, by Marquardus ab Hatstein, another Bishop. Being thus improved and made very considerable, it was reduced by the Swedes in 1634. by Hunger. Surprized by the Spaniards by a Stratagem in 1635. Taken by force by the French in 1644. The French bestowed very much, during the time they were possessed of it, in adding to the Fortifications: but in the year 1676. the Duke of Lorrain retook it, though the French came up with a great Army to relieve it. By the Treaty of Nimeguen in the year 1679, it was consigned to the Bishop of Spire. The French began the present War with the Siege of it, and obliged it to surrender November 1. 1688. This Town stands three Ger∣man Miles from Heydelberg to the South, one from Spire to the North, and three from Durlach. Philips-Norton, a Market Town in Somerset∣shire, in the Hundred of Wello, near the River Froume. The Philistines, a part of the most antient Inha∣bitants of the Land of Canaan, disposed along the Sea Coast, towards the Borders of the Kingdom of Egypt; whose frequent Wars with, and Victories o∣ver the Israelites, their taking and remitting of the Ark, and all their valiant Actions at various times conquering and conquered, with Sampson, David, Saul, Ely, &c. are recorded in the History of the Old Testament. Phocaea. See Fogie. Phocis, an ancient City and Country of Greece, betwixt Baeotia and Aetolia. Honoured heretofore with the Cities Delphos, Anticyra, Cirrha; the Moun∣tain Parnassus, and the River Helicon, situated in this Country. In the Year of Rome 399. and the hundred and sixth Olymp. the Phocenses pillaging the Tem∣ple of Apollo at Delphos, and defeating the Locrenses their Neighbours in a Battel under Philomelus, drew upon themselves the Vengeance of Greece to such a measure, that a Holy War, to punish their Sacrilege, was presently commenced against them: which, tho the Athenians and Lacedaemonians became their Al∣lies,
ended with the total rasure of the City Phocis, in the Year of Rome 408. Olymp. 108. Phortskeim. See Pfortsheim. hrygia, a Country of the Lesser Asia, divided in ancient times into Phrygia Magna or Major, and Phrygia Minor. Phrygia Major lay betwixt Bithy∣nia, Galatia, Pamphylia, Lydia, and Mysia. Its principal Cities were Synnada and Hierapolis. Some∣time called Pacatiana; Now, as it is under the Turks, Germian. The other was famous for the Rivers Xan∣thus and Simois, and the City Troy standing in it: the ancient Troas being in this Phrygia contained by the ge∣neral accounts. This Phrygia had the name also of Hellespontiaca, from its situation upon the Aegean Sea, towards the Hellespont. Piacenza, Placentia, a City of Lombardy, of great Antiquity; called by the French Plaisance. It is a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Bologna; and the Capital of a Dukedom of the same name, which ever since 1557. has been in the Hands of the Dukes of Parma. It is a neat, populous City; said to have twenty five thousand Citizens within its Walls, and to be five Miles in Circuit: full of fine Buildings; and blessed with an ingenuous Race of Men, fit either for Arts or War. One Mile from the Po, forty from Mi∣lan to the East, and thirty five from Parma to the North-East; in a pleasant place, surrounded with fruit∣ful fields, Meadows, and Pastures; having many Channels cut for the watering their Ground, and the bringing in Merchandizes. It has several Salt-Springs, Mines of Iron; plenty of Wine, Oil, Corn; and Fruits of all sorts: the best Cheese in the whole World is made here in great quantity. Nor does it want Woods and Forests for Hunting; so that all things considered, it is one of the pleasantest situated Cities in the World: and thought to have taken its name from thence. It was one of the first Colonies the Romans setled in Gallia Cisalpina against the Gauls. They fortified it so well, that though the Insubres and Boii out of dis∣content Revolted and joined with Hannibal, (who made the Siege of this place one of his first Attempts) yet he was not able to take it. Nor had Asdrubal who followed him any better success: so that Livy informs us, this was one of the twelve Colonies which in the second Punick War saved Rome. In the Year of Rome 553. Amilcar a third Punick General, took this City with the help of the Gauls; and in a great degree ruined it by Fire and Sword. Caelius, a Thus∣can General, not being able to defend it against the Siege of Cinna and Marius, rather than he would be taken, desired his friend Petronius to give him his sword in his heart; who did so, and afterwards exe∣cuted the same to himself. Spurina, a Commander under Vitellius, defended this City with great Gallan∣try against Cecina, (one of Otho's Generals;) who yet at last took and burnt it, Anno Christi 69. In 269. M. Aurelianus received a great overthrow from the Marcomanni near it. In 542. Totilas King of the Goths, took it by a Siege: which reduced them to the necessity of eating Mans Flesh. About 1335. it fell first into the Hands of the Viscounts of Milan. About 1447. they called in the Venetians, and endeavoured to shake off the Dominion of the Milanese: which had like to have ended in their Ruin; the City being taken and sacked, and a most cruel Slaughter made of the Inhabitants. It continued after this under the Dukes of Milan; till together with Milan, it fell into the Hands of Lewis XII. King of France, in 1499. Pope Julius in 1512, got the Possession of it. In 1545. Pope Paul III. Created Lewis (his Natural Son) Duke of this City: who was slain for his Cruelty and wickedness by some Gentlemen hereof; and the place put into the Hands of Charles V. in 1547. Philip II. his Son, ten years after this, granted it to the Duke of Parma; whose Posterity of the House of Farnese enjoy it now. This was the Country of Pope Gregory X. Pope Ʋrban II in 1094, or 95. celebrated a Council here, in which the divorced Em∣press, Wife to Henry III. presented her Complaints. There have been other small Councils held here. The Territory, il Piacentino or il ducato di Ptacenza, has some considerable Towns and Springs in it, with Mines of Iron and Brass. La Piave, Anassus, Plavis, a River of the Mar∣quisate di Treviso in Italy; which springs out of the Carnick Alpes, in the Borders of Germany and Carinthia; near the Fountains of the Drave. And flowing Southward through this Marquisate, to water the Cities of Cadorino, Belluno, and Feltria, it takes in the Bceto, Calore, and the Cordevolio: then falls into the Adriatick Sea, thirteen Miles from Venice to the East. Picardie, Picardia, a Province on the North of France, towards the Low Countries; between Cham∣pagne to the East; Hainault and Artois to the North; the British Sea, and Normandy to the West; and the Isle of France to the South. Heretofore much greater than now; part of it being now taken into the Isle of France (to wit, le Beauvoisis, le Noyonois, le Laonois and le Valois:) there remaining to it le Boulenois, le Ponthieu, le Sansterre, le Vermandois, la Tierache, and l' Amienois. But it has also had some additions made to it by the Conquests in Artois. The Capital of this Province is Amiens. The other good Towns are Abbeville, Boulogne, Calais, Doulens, S. Quin∣tin, la Fere, Guise, Ham, Monstrevil, Perone, and Roye. The Rivers watering it are the Somme, the Oyse, the Authie, the Canche, &c. Piceni and Picentini, two distinct Tribes or Regi∣ons of the ancient People of Italy. The one, contained now in the modern Marcha Anconitana, in the Do∣minions of the Church: the other, the latter, in a part of the Hither Principate in the Kingdom of Naples. Both subjected under the Romans about the year of Rome 480. Pichtland Fyrth, Fretum Picticum, the Streight between the North of Scotland and the Isles of Ork∣ney. Picighitome, Piceleo, a strong Town in the Mi∣lanese in Italy, upon the River Adda, betwixt Cremo∣na and Lodi: where Francis I. King of France re∣mained a Prisoner, after his being taken by the Army of the Emperor Charles V. at the Battel of Pavia. Its Cittadel was heretofore built by one of the Dukes of Milan. Pickering, a Market Town in the North Riding of Yorkshire. The Capital of its Hundred; upon a small River falling into the Derwent: Not far from the Sea. Pico, or Pica, one of the Islands of the Atlan∣tick Ocean, which is one of the Azores; extending twelve Miles from East to West; under the Portu∣guese. Picolmaio, a River of Paragua in South Ameri∣ca; which ariseth in Peru, near the City of La Plata; and falls into the River of the same name after a long Course, and the addition of many smaller Ri∣vers. The Picts, Picti. It is not very certainly con∣cluded, whether this ancient Nation of Barbarians first came into the Isles of Orkney, then Scotland, out of Scythia or out of Denmark. But having by force established themselves in the Counties of Fife and Lo∣thaine, they grew in the descent of time by enter-mar∣riages and contracts with the Scots to make one People with them. And it is supposed, their name comes from their custom of painting their Bodies. See Phi∣ctiaid.
The Picts Wall, Vallum Hadriani, Murus Pi∣cticus, was the most ancient Boundary between Eng∣land and Scotland; begun by Hadrian the Emperour to separate the Picts (or Barbarous Northern Nations) from the Civilized Roman-Britains, in 123. It reach∣ed from Eden in Cumberland to Tine in Northum∣berland: first made only of Turf, supported by Stakes, and strengthened by Pallisadoes. Severus the Empe∣ror repaired it, and made it much stronger in 207. Be∣fore these times, there had been one made in the nar∣rowest part of Scotland; first by Agricola, and after by Lollius Ʋrbicus, under Antonius Pius; but these Countries being not thought worth the keeping, Se∣verus fixed the Bounds finally where Hadrian had at first seled them; and erected this Wall of solid Stone, with Towers at the distance of a Mile from each other, from the Irish to the German Sea eighty Miles in length This Wall was repaired by Carausius, under Dioclesian the Emperor, about 286. Having been ru∣ined by the Picts in several places about 388, it was a∣gain repaired by the Britains, (after the defeat of the Picts) by the assistance of the Romans, about 404. In 406. it was beaten down by the Picts. Aetius (a Roman General) rebuilt it the last time of Brick, a∣bout 430. So left the British to defend it. The Scots ruined it again the next year: after which it was ne∣ver more regarded, but only as a Boundary between the two Nations by Consent. It ran on the North side of the Tine, and the Irthing, two considerable Rivers. The Tract appears at this day in many places in Cumberland, and Northumberland; so many hun∣dred years not having been able to deface intirely that great Roman Work. Pidanemo, Apidanus, a River of Thessalia; it ariseth from Mount Gomphos; and watering Pharsalus and taking in the Enipeus, the Melax, and the Phoe∣nix, falls into the Peneus above Larissa with a very swist Current. Piedmont, Piedmontium, Pedemontium, is a Pro∣vince of Italy, towards France and Switzerland; cal∣led by the French Piedmont; by the Spaniards Pia∣monte; by the Germans Das Pemund; by the Eng∣lish Piedmont; which signifies the foot of the Hills. It has the honour to be stiled a Principality: under the Duke of Savoy; having been of old called Gallia Sub∣alpina. Great, well watered, fruitful, and populous; extended between the Dukedoms of Milan and Mont∣ferrat to the East; the States of Genoua, and the County of Nizza to the South; the Dauphine and Savoy to the West; the Dukedom of Auostor, (Osta) and a small part of Milan to the North. It contains the Marquisate of Saluzzo, the County d' Asti, the Territories of Verellese, Biellese, Albesano, and Pied∣mont (properly so called,) together with a part of the Dukedom of Montferrat. The Capital of this Pro∣vince is Turin, Torino: the other Cities are Asti, Bi∣ela, Jurea, Fossano, Mondovi, Pignerol (under the French), Saluzzo, Susa (lately taken by the French) and Verelli. Under the Lombards this was called the Dukedom of Turin. The History of it belongs properly to Savoy; of which this is but a Province. The Taurini, Salassii, Segusiani, &c. were the ancient Inhabitants thereof in, and before the Roman times. Now the eldest Sons of the Dukes of Savoy are sty∣led Princes of Piedmont. Pienza, Pientia, Corfinianum, a City of Hetru∣ria, now in the Territory of Siena: and a Bishops See (by the Institution of Pope Pius II. in 1462. who was born at it) under the Archbishop of Siena. It is little, but well Peopled; six Miles from Monte Pulciano to the West, ten from the Popes Domini∣ons, and twenty five from Siena to the North-East: under the Duke of Florence. Baudrand in another place states the distance thus; three from Monte Pulciano, and twenty two from Siena. Piergo. See Polina. Pieria and Pierius. By these names in ancient Histories we find mentioned, a River of the Pelopon∣nesus in Achaia. § A sountain in Elis in the same Country. § A Mountain of Thessalia in Macedonia, consecrated to the Muses by the Poets, who there∣fore give them the name of Pierides. § An entire Pro∣vince of the ancient Macedonia, towards the Sinus Thermaicus, and the Borders of Thessaly; the Inha∣bitants whereof were called Pieres. § As likewise a part of Syria, near Cilicia. Pifar, Phiternus, Tifernus, the same with Bifer∣no, a River in the Kingdom of Naples; it ariseth out of the Apennine in the Province of Molise near Boia∣no; and flowing to the South-East, watereth Guar∣dia Alferes, and passeth by Larina: at last by Ter∣mini, (a City of the Capitanata) falls into the Adria∣tick Sea; between il Fortore and Trigno, two other Rivers of that Kingdom. Pignerol, Pinarolo, Pinarolium, a City of Pied∣mont, upon an Hill; which has a strong Castle, upon the River Cluso; at the foot of the Alpes. Twelve Miles from Turin to the North-West, nineteen from Suse to the South, and ten from Saluzes. This City belonged to the Dukedom of Savoy; but was ravish∣ed from that Prince by Cardinal Richelieu in 1630: and by Lewis XIII, United March 31. 1631, to the Crown of France for ever, according to the Articles of the Treaty of Querasque betwixt him and Victor Amadaeus D. of Savoy. There are divers Churches and Religious Houses here: And the Castle is very strong both by art and nature. Pilaca, Ajax, a River of Calabria, which falls into the Ionian Sea. Pilau, Pilaua, a strong Fort or Castle in the Du∣cal Prussia; at the Mouth of the Bay of Koningsperg; three German Miles from that City to the West. Ta∣ken by the Swedes in 1626: but now under the Duke of Brandenburg; and has a very good Harbour be∣longing to it. Pilsen, Pilsenum, a City of Bohemia, upon the River Mies; nine German Miles from Prague to the West, six from the Borders of the Ʋpper Palatinate, and eleven from Eger or Heb. This is a great and strong City: besieged unsuccessfully by the Hussars, but taken by the Count de Mansfeldt in 1118. The Mies below it receives a small River in that form, as makes this place seem to stand in a Peninsula. Pilsno, Pilsna, a City of the Lesser Poland, in the Palatinate of Sandomir, near the Vistula: the Capital of a Territory of the same Name. Pinco, Pincus, a River in the Isle of Candy, or Crete. Pindus, a vast Mountain now called Mezzovo, a∣scribed by Strabo to Macedonia; by Ptolemy to Epi∣rus, (it passing between it and Macedonia;) by o∣thers to Thessalia. It stretcheth from East to West from the Acroceraunian Hills, (now called Capo della Chimera in Albania) to the Thermopylae, now Bocca di Lupo: in the midst of this Course it brancheth out to the South the Parnassus and Helicon; which has occasioned the confounding these three Names. The Enacho and Eas, (two Rivers) spring from this Mountain. Pingiam, a great and rich City of the Province of Xansi, in China; said to be the Capital over thirty others in the same Province. Pingive, a City in the Province of Queicheu, in China. Pingleang, a City in the Province of Xensi, in China; upon the River Kiang, at the Foot of the Mountains.
Pinglo, a great City in the Province of Quamsi, in China, upon the River Li. The Capital over several other Cities. Pinhel, Pinelum, a small, but strong City in the King∣dom of Portugal; in the Confines of the Kingdom of Leon, upon a River of the same Name: four Leagues from the Duero to the South, and six from Guarda. Pisk, Pinscum, a Town in Lithuania, in the Palatinate of Brescia; upon a River of the same Name. Once a very considerable place, and now the Capital of a District called by its Name: but being taken by the Cossacks, they burnt and plundered it: by which Devastation it is reduced into a mean Con∣dition. It stands nineteen Miles from Brescici to the East. Piomba, Helvinum, Matrinas, a River of A∣bruzzo; flowing between the Cities of Adria and Penna, (in the Further Abruzzo,) into the Adriatick Sea. Piombino Piumbinum, a great and strong City in the Territory of Siena in Italy; on the Tyrrhenian Sea: under the Dominion of a Prince of its own, but has a Spanish Garrison for its Protection: It lies in the midst between Orbitello and Ligorne, fifty Miles from either, and from Siena. This City sprung out of the Ruins of Populonium, which stood not far from it. Pir, Orontes. Pirgi, Perga, once an Archbishops See, now a small Village in Pamphylia, in the Lesser Asia. Pirn, a Town in the Province of Messen (Mis∣nia) in the Ʋpper Saxony, in Germany, upon the Elbe: three Leagues from the Borders of Bohemia, near Dresden. Remarkable for a Treaty concluded at it in 1635, betwixt the Elector of Saxony and the Emperor Ferdinand II. As also for the Protection given here in 1628, to the Refugee Protestants of Bohemia and Austria. In 1640, the Army of the King of Sweden took this Town. Pisa, Pisae, a Town of Hetruria, of great An∣tiquity; built by the People of Peloponnesus, as Stra∣bo averrs: now an Archbishops See, upon the River Arno, which divides it, and is covered with three Bridges. Great, but not well peopled. It has an U∣niversity, which was opened here in 1349, and a strong Cittadel. Also once a potent Commonwealth; which recovered Sardinia out of the Hands of the Sa∣racens, mastered Carthage and Majorca, and gave great assistance to the Christians of the East: but be∣ing it self first overpowered by the Florentines, and restored to its former Liberty by Charles VIII. of France, it fell the second time under their Power; and together with Florence subjected to the House of Medices; under whom it now is. This City stands six Miles from the Mouth of the Arno to the East; and forty five from Florence, ten from Lucca to the South, fifteen from Ligorne. In a numerous and splendid Council here held in 1400, Alexander V. was chosen Pope, and the two Anti∣popes, Benedict XIII. and Greg. XII. declared to be Schismaticks and Hereticks, and as such deposed. It is famous for many other noble Councils. One in 1134, under Pope Innocent II. excommunicated the Antipope Anacletus. Another in 1511, acted against the person and Government of Pope Julius II. Whereun∣to add the Treaty in 1664, betwixt Pope Alexan∣der VII. and Lewis XIV. King of France, touching the Estates of Castro and Ronciglione, the Resti∣tution of Avignon and the County of Venaissin into the Hands of the Pope. The Archbishops See was set∣tled by Pope Ʋrban II. Anno Christi 1092. § Pisa is the Name also of an ancient City of Elis, in the Peloponnesus: near to which, the Olympick Games were celebrated in the Honour of Jupiter. Pisano, or the Pisantine, Pisanus Tractus, is a part of Hetruria in Italy; between the States of Flo∣rence, and Siena to the East; the States of Lucca to the North, the Tyrrhenian Sea to the West, and Tus∣cany to the South. Once a Commonwealth, but now under the Duke of Florence. The Capital is Pisa. The other considerable places are Ligorn, and Vol∣terra. Pisatello, Rubicon, a River of Romandiola in Italy; small, but of great Fame; having been the ancient Boundary between Gallia Cispadana and Ita∣ly; and on that account mentioned by many of the ancient Historians. The passing of it by Julius Cae∣sar was the first Act of Hostility against the Com∣monwealth of Rome. It is now called towards its Falls, il Pisatello; at its Rise, Rico; before it reach∣eth the Seas, il Fiumicello di Savignano. This River runs near Cesene and Savignano; and falls into the A∣driatick Sea, ten Miles from Rimini. In this place there was a Marble Inscription erected in 1546, to per∣petuate the memory thereof; yet some Learned Men have rather thought it to be Luso, (a River in the Territory of Rimini), than this which was the anci∣ent Rubicon. Pistoia, Pistoria, a City in the State of Florence; which is a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Flo∣rence; built upon the River Stella, at the Foot of the Apennine: now in a flourishing State. Twenty two Miles from Florence to the North-West. Pope Clement IX. was born in this City. The Italians speaking of it, call it, Pistoria la bene Strutta, The well built Pistoria. The Statues of Pope Leo X. and Clement VII. are erected in one of the principal Churches. Pistres, or Pistes. This place is remarked in the Tomes of the Councils, for a Council assembled at it by Charles le Chauve, King of France, in 863, or 864; called Concilium ad Pistas. But the French Writers diversly situate it; some upon the Seine; some upon the Andele near Pont de l' Arche in Normandy, in the Diocese of Roiien. Pistrina, Philistinae Fossae, one of the Mouths of the Po. Pisuerga, Pisoraca, a River of Spain; which a∣riseth out of the Mountains of Old Castile; and run∣ning South, separates the Kingdom of Leon from that of Old Castile. It admits the Caron, (another of its Boundaries) and the Arlantion; and watering Duennas and Valladolid, falls into the Duero above Simaucas. Pitane, an ancient City of Mysia, in the Lesser Asia, towards the Aegean Sea. A Second, in Troas. A third in Laconia, in the Morea: Whose Names had even perished with them, if not preserved by Pliny, Strabo, Ptolemy, &c. § A River of the Morea, and another in the Island of Corsica (the latter, now called Fiuminale d' Ordano,) did heretofore go by this Name also. Placentia, Placencia, a City of the Kingdom of Leon, in the Province of Extremadura; which is a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Compostella. Built in 1180, by Alphonsus VIII. King of Leon, out of the Ruins of Deobriga, (a City of the Vet∣tones in Lusitania:) and the place where it stands was called The Village of Ambrosio. It is seated in a very fertile Plain, called La Vera de Placentia, upon the River Xexte; twelve Miles from Coria to the East, twenty six from Salamanca to the South, and as many from Merida to the North: and was once honoured with the Title of a Dukedom. § There is another Placentia in Old Castile, amongst the Mountains: secured with a strong Castle, and ho∣noured with a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Toledo.
Plaisance. See Piacenza. Plaisance en Armagnac, a Town of France, in the County expressed in its name, in Aquitain: a se∣cond in Rouergne, in Gascony: and a new Fortress in New France, in North America. Plaitz, Celius. See Hensterberg. Planizza, Inachus, a River on the East of the Morca: which falls into the Mediterranean Sea, near Napoli di Romania. La Plata, Argenteus Fiuvius, a River of South America; called by the Spaniards, El rio de la Pla∣ta; by the Americans Paranaguazu; by the En∣glish and French, The River of Plate. Thought to be one of the greatest Rivers in the whole World. It ariseth in Paragua, above the Lake de Los Xa∣raies; and running a vast Course to the South, and separating Paragua from Chaco, (beneath the City de Buenos Ayres;) It entereth the Sea of Paraguay; by a Mouth of sixty English Miles in breadth, or forty Spanish Leagues. This River was first discovered in 1513, by John Diaz, a Portuguese. La Plata, Argentea, a City in Peru, in the Go∣vernment of Characa, or los Charcas; built by the Spaniards in the Valley of Chuquisaca, upon the River Picolmaio; an Archbishops See, (by the Insti∣tution of Pope Paul V. having before been a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Lima;) and the Capi∣tal of the Province of Characa, otherwise called Pro∣vincia de Rio de la Plata by the Spaniards: one hun∣dred and sixty five Spanish Leagues from Cusco to the South, eighteen from Potosi, and one hundred and ten from the Pacifick Ocean. This is one of the richest, most populous, and best built Cities in Ame∣rica; and stands near the Silver Mines. Platamona, Aliacmon, a River of Macedonia; which ariseth from the Cambuvian Hills; and run∣ning Eastward by Pidna (now Chitro, or Platan), falls into the Gulph of Salonica. It is called Pele∣cas by Sophianus; Platamona by Moletius; Bistrisa by Holstenius; in the latter Maps Aliagmo, and In∣jacovi. Platano, Lycus, a River on the South of Sicily; which falls into the Sea eighteen Miles from Gergenti to the West. Plataeae, an ancient City of Baeotia in Greece: fa∣mous for a Temple in those times, erected in the Ho∣nour of Jupiter Liberator. Near to it, the two Athe∣nian and Lacedaemonian Generals, Pausanias and Aristides, defeated Mardonius General of the Persians in the year of Rome 275, and the seventy fifth Olym∣piad. It was surprized by the Thebans, anno Romae 323: who for their Fact were massacred by the In∣habitants. In 381, the Thebans and the Lacedaemo∣nians together quite ruined it. Platsee, Platzee. See Balaton. Plaven, Plaun, Plava, a City of Voightland, a Province of the Ʋpper Saxony in Germany; or as o∣thers say, in Misnia; seated upon the River Eister; between Zwickaw to the South-East, and Curow or Curen to the North-West; four Miles from the Bor∣ders of Bohemia. Under the Duke of Saxony. Plawe, Plava, a Town in the Dukedom of Mag∣deburg, upon a Lake of the same Name; near the Efflux of the River Elde; six German Miles from Gustrow, and ten from Havetberg to the North. Pleseow, Plescoviensis Ducatus, the most We∣stern Province of Moscovy. Bounded by Ingria to the North, Lithuania to the South, Livonia to the West, and Novogard to the East. It is great, popu∣lous and fruitful: was a Sovereign Dukedom, till John Basilovitz conquered it in 1509. The principal City is Pleskow, Pleskovia; which stands upon the River Veliki; forty Miles from the Confines of Li∣vonia to the East, sixty from the Lake of Ilmen, and forty from Riga to the North-East. This City was betrayed into the Hands of the Russ by the Priests, in 1509, upon a Religious Pretence: who were se∣verely punished for their Treason, by that perfidious, bloody, cruel Tyrant. In 158, it was besieged, and taken by Stephen, King of Poland. Again in 1615, by Gustavus Adolphus, King of Sweden; out of whose Hands the Russ were forced to redeem it, by the Payment of a vast Sum of Money. The Russ call it Pskouwa. Plessis, a Seigniory in the Province of Poictou, in France: giving Name and Origine to an Honourable Family, which produced the late famous Minister of State in that Kingdom, the Cardinal of Richlieu. Plymouth, Plymuthum, a Noble Sea-Port Town in the most Western part of Devonshire, on the South of England. It takes its Name from the River Plyme; between which and the Tainer (a much greater River, and the Western Boundary of Devonshire) this Town is seated; and has one of the largest, safest, and most convenient Havens in the World. It was anciently called Sutton; and (saith Mr. Cambden) of late times was a poor Fishermens Town; but within the compass of a few years be∣come equal to some of the best Cities in England. Fortified both to the Seaward, by a Fort built on St. Nicolas Isle; and to Landward, by two Forts upon the Haven, and a Castle on a Hill; besides which it has a Chain for the Security of the Haven in time of War. Henry IV. granted it a Mayor. From this Town Sir Francis Drake set Sail in 1577; when he went that Voyage in which he sailed round the Ter∣restrial Globe. Out of this Haven the English Fleet was Towed by Ropes (the Winds being contrary), when in 1588, Charles Lord Howard, Admiral of England, went to fight the Spanish invincible Ar∣mado, as they unwisely called it. Charles II. added to the Strength of this Place, by building a stately Cittadel on a Hill near it; and to its Honour, by creating Charles Fitz-Charles, (one of his Natural Sons) Baron of Dartmouth, Viscount Totnes, and Earl of Plymouth, July 9. 1675, who afterward died at Tangier. Ploen, Plona, a small City in the Dukedom of Holstein, in the Province of Wagaren; between a double Lake of the same Name: six German Miles from Lubeck to the North. It has a splendid and noble Castle; which together with the City is under the Dominion of a Prince of the Family of Holstein. Plotzko, Ploczko, or Plosco, Plocum, Ploscum, a small City in the Greater Poland; which is a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Gnesna; the Capital of a Palatinate of the same Name, in the Dukedom of Mazomiekie, or Masovia; to which there belongs a Castle. It is seated upon the Vistula, fourteen Polish Miles from Warsaw to the West. Pludents, a small Seigniory in Tyrol, belonging to the King of Spain. Plusa, Aprusa, a small River in Romandiola, which springeth out of Mount Titam; and running Southward, falls into the Adriatick Sea near Rimin. Also called L' Avesa. Pluviers, Aviarium, a City in the Province of La Beause, upon the River l' Oeuf; ten Leagues from Orleans to the North, and as many from Mon∣targis to the East: it is a spruce City, and by the Writers of the middle Times called Pithuria. Plurs, or Pleure, Plura, an Italian Prefecture, belonging to the Grisons; by the Gift of Maximi∣lian Sforza, Duke of Milan, in 1513. It takes its Name from the chief Town of the same Name; once seated at the Foot of the Alpes, near Chiavenne,
upon the River Maira; (the chief of sundry Villa∣ges, lying in the same bottom;) now nothing but a deep and bottomless Gulph. For on April 26. 1617. a huge Rock falling from the top of the Mountains, overwhelmed it; and killed in the twinkling of an Eye fifteen hundred people; left no sign or ruin of a Town there standing; but in the place thereof, a great Lake of about two Miles in length. Heylyn. There were eight Religious Houses in it; yet scarce one person of all the Town escaped alive. The day before this, a roaring noise was heard from the Mountain. Po, Padus, Eridanus, the greatest River in Italy; which ariseth in Piedmont; and dividing Lombardy into two parts, falls into the Adriatick Sea by many Mouths. Called by the Italians, French, and En∣glish, Po; by the Germans, Paw. Its Head is in Mount Viso, (Vesulus), one of the Cottian Alpes; in the Borders of Dauphiné, in the Marquisate of Saluzzo, from a Spring called Visenda, in the midst of a Meadow; and running East by the Castle of Paisand, it hides it self in the Earth again. So di∣viding Piedmont at Villa Franca, it takes in the Chisone; and at Pancalieri, the Veraita and Ma∣cra; by the addition of which, it becomes capable of bearing a Boat. Then it waters Turin (the Capital of Savoy) where it takes in the Doria: so conti∣nuing his Course to the East by Chivas and Casal, he takes his leave of the Duke of Savoy's Dominions, and entereth Milan: leaving Pavia five, and Milan twenty Miles to the North, it passeth on the South of Piacenza, and the North of Cremona; leaving Par∣ma four Miles to the South, and Mantoua six to the North, he passeth to Fichervolo; where he divides his vastly improved Streams into two great Branches. The Northern watereth the State of Venice, and by five Mouths entereth the Gulph of Venice: the Sou∣thern passeth to Ferrara, and is there subdivided into three other Branches; the most Southern of which, runs within four Miles of Ravenna. This River re∣ceives about thirty Rivers in all from the Alpes, and the Apennine; and being by far the greatest River in Italy, is mightily magnified by the Latin Poets: who would have it no less than the Nile, and the Danube; call it the King of Rivers, and the grea∣test in the World. It must be confessed, that it is a noble Flood; and the only one which has sound a place in Heaven too, or hath the Glory to be made a Constellation. But (saith the Learned Dr. Brown, who saw it) there are many Rivers that exceed it in Greatness. The Names of the most considerable of its Branches, are, il Po grando, il Po di Ariano, il Po di Volana, and il Po di Argenta. Poblet, a Monastery in Catalonia, where the Kings of Arragon were anciently buried. Pocevera, Porcifera, a River in the States of Ge∣noua, which takes its rise from the Appennine; and by a Valley ten Miles long, makes it passage by Ge∣noua into the Ligustick Sea. Pocklington, a Market Town in the East Riding of Yorkshire, and the Hundred of Harthill; upon a small River, falling into the Derwent. Pocutie, Pocutia, a small Tract in the South part of the Kingdom of Poland, called by the Natives Poconk, or Pocouth. It is a part of the Territory of Halitz; between the River Tyra, (now the Nei∣ster,) and the Borders of Transylvania and Wala∣chia: the principal Town is Sniatim upon the Pruth: the rest, Colomey and Martinow. Podgarim, Babylonia, a Province in Asia. Podolia, Bodeni, Budini, Patzinacae Populi, a Province of the Kingdom of Poland; comprehended under the Red Russia, of which it is a part; and sub∣ject to a Palatine of its own. Bounded on the North by Volhinia, on the East by the Palatinate of Braslaw, on the South by Wallachia, and on the West by Russia (properly so called), or the Black Russia. This Country extends Eastward through vast uninhabited Countries, as far as the Euxine Sea. They divide it ordinarily into the Ʋpper Podolia to the West, and the Lower to the East. The people are Russians by their Original; conquered by the Poles, and in the year 1434. admitted to the same Privileges with the rest of Poland, by Ʋladislaus then King of Poland. It is fruitful to a wonder; yet more ac∣commodated to the life of Beasts, than Men. Could it enjoy a steady Peace, it should not need to envy the Fertility of Italy, or any other Country: but be∣ing a Frontier against the Turks and Tartars, and always exposed to their devouring Incursions, it is but meanly inhabited, and not much improved. In the year 1672. it was yielded to the Turks; a part of it has been retrieved since. The principal place is Cami∣nieck, in the Ʋpper Podolia; the rest are Tzudnow, Bratzlaw (in the Lower,) and Orczakow, which last is in the hands of the Tartars. Poictiers, Pictavium, Augustoritum, Pictava, Pictavorum Ʋrbs, a City which is the Capital of the Province of Poictou in France; a Bishops See under the Archbishop of Bourdeaux, and a celebrated Univer∣sity founded by Charles VII. in 1431. It stands up∣on the River Clain, at its Confluence with another small River, which there makes a large Lake; four∣teen Leagues from the Loyre to the South, thirty from Saintes to the North, and thirty five from Bourges to the West. Famous for many Battels sought near it; especially that of the Black Prince, in the year 1356. In which, John King of France was taken Prisoner, together with many Lords, and two thousand Knights and Esquires. Fifty two Lords, one thousand seven hundred Knights and Gentlemen, were slain of the French. Three French Battalions, (the least of which exceeded the English) were in∣tirely routed, and in great part destroyed. In the Reign of Charles VII. King of France, whilest the Victorious English were Masters of the Capital of the Kingdom, the Parliament of Paris for some years sat here. The old Castle by the Gate of S. La∣zare is thought to have been the Work of the Ro∣mans; who built besides an Amphitheatre and other Edisices, yet apparent in their remains. This City contains twenty four Parishes, five Abbeys, and divers Monasteries. The Episcopal See became famous in the Primitive Times by the Person of S. Hilary. Divers Councils have been celebrated at it. In one An∣no 1075. Berengarius appeared; whilst the Doctrine of the Presence, in opposition to his, was received, recognized, and established. Another under Pope Paschal II. excommunicated Philip I. King of France. The Roman Catholicks took Poictiers from the Hu∣guenots, and plundered it in 1562. In 1569. the Huguenots under Admiral Coligny besieged it, but were forced to rise without success. Poictou, Pictaviensis Provincia, is a large Pro∣vince in France; which was a part of Aquitain, whilest under the Romans; and called by the Ita∣lians, Poitu. Its greatest extent is from East to West: being bounded on the East by Touraine, and la Marche; on the North by Anjou, and Bretagne; on the West by the Bay of Aquitain, or the British Sea; and on the South by Saintonge and Angou∣lesme. This Province was pillaged in the fifth Cen∣tury by the Vandals, Huns and Germans. The Ro∣mans in the Reign of the Emperour Honorius, left it to the Wisigoths; whom Clovis the Grand ex∣pelled about the year 510. Then from the time of Charlemaigne, it was under Sovereign Counts of its own, till 1271: when upon a failure of the Line, it
was united to the Crown of France. These Counts had, for about nineteen several Successions, attained the Title of Dukes of Guyenne. Not to omit, the the Descent of the Provinces of Guyenne and Poictou, upon the Crown of England in 1152. by Eleanour, Wise to Henry II. Nor the attempt made in 1242. (though without success) by Richard Earl of Corn∣wall, Brother to King John, to reduce Poictou under the Obedience of England again, after the French pre∣tended K. John had forfeited his Rights by the Death of Arthur. The principal Towns next Poictiers, are Chastelleraud, Thouars, S. Maxient, Fountenay, Lou∣dun, Niort, Parthenay, and Richelieu. Poissy, Pisciacum, a Town in the Isle of France, which has a Stone Bridge over the Seine; six Leagues above Paris to the East. S. Lewis King of France was born here in 1215. The heart of King Philip le Bel was interred in a Church here of his own foun∣dation. It has divers Religious Houses. And in the last Age was more especially famous, upon the ac∣count of a Conference of Religion betwixt the Ro∣man Catholicks and Huguenots from September 4. 1560. to November 25. held in the presence of Charles IX. King of France, and Catherine de Me∣dicis, the Queen Regent; assisted with the Princes of the Blood, a great number of Cardinals, Bishops, Counsellors, and Grandees of the Kingdom, and Lear∣ned Men of both Religions. Beza, as the Head of the Reformed, chiefly managing, and bending his ut∣most force, against the Doctrine of the Presence. Pola, Polia, Julia Pietas, a City and Colony in Istria, mentioned by Strabo and Pliny; still called by the same Name: being one of the strongest Cities in Istria, and a Bishops See under the Patriarch of Aquileja. Seated on a Hill near the Shoars of the Adriatick Sea, upon which it has a large Haven: twenty eight Miles from Parenzo to the South, sixty from Trieste, and an hundred from Ancona to the North. Said to have been built by the Colchi. Now under the States of Venice; but small, and not much inhabited; it having not above seven or eight hundred Inhabitants. The Venetians send a Governour how∣ever to it, who takes the Title of a Count. It has a small Cittadel. In the time of the Roman Empire, this City, as a Free State, dedicated a Statue to Seve∣rus the Emperour: it has several other noble Re∣mains, which speak its Greatness and Antiquity; as Mr. Wheeler acquaints us in his Travels, pag. 5. Long. 37. 00. Lat. 45. 04. Polan, Bollia, a River of Stiria. Polana, Monalus, a River in the North of Sicily; written in Baudrand, Polina. Poland, Polenia, is one of the principal King∣doms in Europe; called by the Natives Poloska; by the Germans, die Polen; by the French, Pologne; by the Spaniards and Italians, Polonia; by the En∣glish, Poland. A part of the old Salmatia Europaea; and has its Name from Pole, which signifies a Plain in the Sclavonian Tongue. Bounded on the North by the Baltick Sea, the Swedish Livonia, and Russia; by the last, and the Desarts of Tartary, on the East; on the South by the Ʋpper Hungary, Transylvania, and Walachia; on the West by Germany. This King∣dom is of a round Figure, two thousand six hundred Miles in compass. The Earth plain, but full of Woods; which do in some degree rectifie the Cold∣ness of the Air. They have no Wine; as for Bar∣ley and Pulse, they have more than they spend. The People are Industrious and Learned; good Souldi∣ers, proud and prodigal. The Christian Faith was first settled in Poland, under Miceslaus, in the year 963. by one Meinardus. The Reformation about 1535. crept into these Countries; but never general∣ly imbraced, nor persecuted. The Greek Church has some footing here too; but the most general, is the Roman Catholick. This vast Kingdom is divided in∣to thirty four Palatinates, most of which I shall men∣tion in their proper places. The principal Cities are Belzko, Braclaw, Braslaw, Briescie, Kaliss, Kami∣niec, Chelmo, Krakow, Elbing, Dantzick, Gnesna, Kiow, Lenzycze, Lwow, Lublin, Lucko, Malbork, Mscislawau, Minsko, Novogrod, Plocko, Pozan, Prze∣misl, Konigsberg, Sendomiers, Siracz, Thorn, Trocko, Warzawa, (commonly called Warsaw, the Capital of Poland), Wilna, Witebsko, and Wlodzimiers. The first Duke of this Kingdom was Lechus, who began his Reign in 694. His Posterity in eleven De∣scents continued till 800. when Priastus was the first elected Duke. In the year 1000. Boleslaus (Son of Mieceslaus) received the Title of King, from Otho III. Emperour of Germany. The present King is the forty sixth Prince, and the thirty second King of Poland; who has had the Honour to be the Preserver of Christendom by the Relief of Vienna, and many other brave Actions. Though this Prince has the Name of a King, and the first Dukes were in truth Kings without the Title; yet at present he is nothing less: being not allowed to make Peace or War, to impose Taxes, make Laws, alienate any of his Demeans; or in short, to do any thing of Impor∣tance, which concerns the Publick, without the con∣sent of the Diet. He does not only swear to do all this; but allows their Disobedience, in case he vio∣lates his Oath: which makes the Subjects the Princes Judges, and this Kingdom a meer Aristocracy; or knot of petty Kingdoms under one Head. Whence the Tartars and Muscovites have reaped great advan∣tages; and the King of Sweden once, with forty thousand men, reduced this Country to the last extre∣mity, which otherwise accounts two hundred thousand men a small Army to be sent into the Field by Poland. Socinianism hath been a prevailing Sect here: it oweth its denomination to the two Socinus's (Lae∣lius and Faustus,) Natives of this Kingdom: who in the last Century, amidst the distractions of people about Religion, revived the ancient assertions of A∣rius, Nestorius, &c. called Heresies, under their own Names. There is besides a general mixture of Ro∣man and Greek Catholicks, Jews, Calvinists, Lutherans, Anabaptists, &c. Polaquie, Polachia, a small Province in the King∣dom of Poland; between Mazovia to the West, Li∣thuania and Polesia to the East. The principal Town of which, is Bielka. Pole, Pola, a Province on the East of Moscovy, to∣wards the River Tanais; between Mordua, Rezania, and the Kingdom of Astracan; in which there is no City or Town of Note. Polesie, Polesia, a Province of Poland, in the great Dukedom of Lithuania; extended from East to West between Red Russia, Volhinia, Mazovia, and the Pa∣latinate of Novogrod. The principal Town is Brescie; twenty five Miles from Lublin, and thirty from War∣saw to the East. This Province is extremely over∣run by Woods, and full of Bogs and Marshes. Policastro, Policastrum, Polaeocastrum, a City in the Kingdom of Naples, in the Hither Principate; on the Shoars of the Tyrrhenian Sea; fifty five Miles from Salerno to the North-East. It is now almost desolate; yet a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Salerno; and gives Name to a Bay, formerly called Sinus Laus. Polignano, Polinianum, Pulinianum, a small Ci∣ty in the Province of Bari, in the Kingdom of Na∣ples; which is a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Bari. Polina, Aous, one of the principal Rivers of Alba∣nia; it ariseth ten Miles above Apollonia, an ancient
City, (now called Pollina;) and falls into the Adri∣atick Sea. Others call it Piergo. Near this River, Philip King of Macedon received a great Overthrow from the Romans; on which account it is mentioned by divers Historians. Polizzi, Politium, a great Town in Sicily; built upon an Hill; six Miles from Nicosia, and twenty from Palermo. Pollina, or Periergo, Apollonia, a City of Mace∣donia, (now in Albania,) upon the Adriatick Sea. Heretofore a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Du∣razzo: but now a Metropolitan See it self. Seated thirty five Miles from Durazzo to the South; and in∣habited by a small number of Men, under the Domi∣nion of the Turks. In this place Octavianus, (after∣wards Augustus) was at his Studies; when Julius Cae∣sar, his Uncle, was Murthered in the Senate. Long. 45. 06. Lat. 40. 19. oloczko, or Polloczki, Poloczka, Polocia, Polo∣tium, a City of Lithuania, in the Kingdom of Po∣land; the Head of a Palatinate, which was once a Dukedom. It stands upon the Dwina, where it re∣ceives the Polotta; having upon each River a Castle: seventy five Polish Miles above Riga to the South-East, and fifty five from Vilna to the North-East. Taken by the Russ in 1563; retaken by Stephen King of Po∣land in 1579. Of later times it changed its Master a∣gain; but is now under the Poles. Pologne. See Poland. Pomeiok, an Indian Town and River in Virginia, upon the North Sea. Pomerania, a Province of Germany, called by the Inhabitants, Pomeren; by the Poles, Pomerska. It lies in the Upper Circle of Saxony; bounded on the North by the Baltick Sea, on the East by Prussia, on the South by the Marquisate of Brandenburgh, and on the West by the Dukedom of Mecklenburgh. Ex∣tended upon the Baltick Sea from East to West two hundred English Miles. A plain and fruitful Coun∣try, yielding great plenty both of Corn and Grass, But∣ter and Cheese, &c. full of People of a vigorous Constitution. This Country in 1295, was given by Mestovius, the last of its Princes, to Primislaus King of Poland; who enjoyed all the Eastern part as far as Prussia, and the River Weyssel or Vistula. The rest continued under Princes of its own, till 1637: when Bugius (the last of them) dying without Heirs Males, this great Country, by the Treaty of Munster, was divided between the Swedes and the Duke of Bran∣denburgh. All that lay on the West of the Oder, and the Dukedom of Stetin, being left to the Swedes; together with Rugen, an Island in the Baltick Sea; and Dam and Golnow, two Towns beyond the Oder. The further or more Eastern Pomerania, and Prussia, was granted to the Duke of Brandenburgh. There is in this vast Country under the Swedes these Cities; Anclam, Gripswald, Stetin, Stralsund, and Wolgast: and under the Brandenburgh, are Camin, Colburgh, and Stratgard. Klein Pommeren, Pomerania Parva, the Little Pomerania, or the Palatinate of Pomerania; is that part of Pomerania, which long since was given to the Crown of Poland; called by the Poles, Woiewodztwo Pomorskie, and for the most part included in Prussia. Bounded on the West by that part of Pomerania which is under the Duke of Brandenburgh; on the North by the Baltick Sea; the River Vistula to the East, by which it is separated from the rest of Prussia; and the greater Poland to the South. The principal City in it is Dantzick. Pommerelle, or the Dukedom of Pommeren, is a part of the Eastern Pomerania, which is under the Duke of Brandenburgh. Bounded on the East by Cassubia, and the Marquisate of Brandenburgh; by the Baltick Sea on the North; the Oder on the West; and the Dukedom of Stetin on the South. The Great Towns in it are Stargart, Camin and Treptow. Pompeiopolis, an ancient City of Cilicia, in Asia Mi∣nor; to which Pompey the Great imparted his name; as Trajan afterward also did, that of Trasanopolis. It has been honoured, since Christianity, with a Bishops See under the Archbishop of Seleucia. But now, become a miserable Town; called, according to some, Palesali. § There was a second in Paphlagonia, which receiv∣ed Pompey's name, after his defeat of Mithridates King of Pontus; having before been called Eupato∣ria. This latter became an Archbishops See under the Patriarch of Constantinople: Now wholly ruined. Pons, a Town of France, in the Province of Sain∣tonge, upon the River Seugne, which falls in the Cha∣rante below Sainctes. It gives its name to a Neigh∣bouring Forest, and likewise to an honourable Fami∣ly of France. In Latin, apud Pontes. Pont à Mouson, Mussipontum, Mussipons, a Town in Lorain, in the Dukedom of Bar, upon the Moselle; five Leagues from Nancy to the North, six from S. Michael, and five from Toul: it has been well fortified; but at present dismantled, and made an Uni∣versity; in which there is a Scotch College of the foun∣dation of Pope Gregory XIII. It gives the Title of a Marquess; hath two Abbeys and divers Churches. Pont de l' Arche, Pons Arcus, Pons Arcuensis, a City in Normandy, in the Bishoprick of Roan; which has a strong Castle, and a Stone Bridge upon the Seine (which here receives the Eure and the Andele) built by Charles the Bald. It stands three Leagues above Roan to the South; and was the first Town, that sur∣rendred it self to Henry IV. after his advancement to the Crown of France. Pont Andemer, or Ponteau-de-Mer, Pons Audo∣mari, a small City in Normandy, upon the River Ril∣le; two Leagues from its Mouth, and ten from Roan to the West: surprised by the Leaguers in 1592. but soon after returned to the King. In 1279, a Council was assembled here. Pont Beauvoisin, Pons Bellovicinus, a Town in Dauphine, upon the River Guyer; here covered with a Bridge, which gives it this name; and separates the Province of Dauphine from Savoy. Pont de Ce, Pontes Caesaris, a Town in the Duke∣dom of Anjou, upon the Loyre; over which it has a very long Bridge: and had once a very strong Castle. One League from Angiers to the South. At this Town the Troops of Lewis XIII. under Mareschal de Crequi defeated those of the Queen Mother (Ma∣ria de Medicis) in 1620. Pont du Gard, Pons Vardonis, or Gardonis, three Bridges built one over the other, over the River Gardon, for the continuing an Aquaduct to Nismes. The lowest having six Arches, the second twelve, and the highest thirty four; a thing of great Antiquity. It stands in the middle between Avignon to the East, and Nismes to the West; four Leagues from the lat∣ter. The Learned Dr. Brown in his Travels, gives the Figure of this wonderful Work; and assures us, that the top of it is one hundred and eighty six Foot above the Water of the River. Pont Eau de Mer, a Town in Normandy, the same with Pont Audemer. Pont l' Eveque, Pons Episcopi, a Town in Nor∣mandy near Caen, upon the River Leson, three Leagues from Lisieux, and two from the Sea. It is noted for good Cheese. Pont-Oise, Pontesium, Pontisara, Aesiae pons, and Pons ad Oesiam, a Town in the Isle of France; which has a Stone-Bridge over the River Oise; and an English Nunnery: six Leagues from Paris to the North-West towards Roan. Taken by the English
in the Year 1417, and recovered by the French in the Year 1442, after a Siege of six weeks. It was also taken and retaken in 1589. successively, by King Henry III. and the Duke of Mayenne. In 1561. in the beginning of the Reign of Charles IX. the Estates of the Kingdom were assembled here. It hath a Castle, with divers Churches and Monasteries; giving the ti∣tle of a Viscount. Situated in the Territory of Vexin Francois, at the Confluence of the Oyse and Seine. Pont Orson, Pons Ʋrsonis, a Town in the Con∣fines of Normandy and Bretagne in France; upon the River Couesnon, which a little lower falls into the British Sea; between Auranches to the East, and Dole to the West; two Leagues from Mount S. Michael. Pont S. Esprit, Pons Sancti Spiritus, a City of France in the Lower Languedoc: which has a Ca∣stle, and a Stone Bridge over the River Rhosne, of an extraordinary structure. Three Leagues from Viviers to the South, and seven from Avignon to the North. Pont S. Maixance, Pons Sanctae Maxentiae, a Town in the Government of the Isle of France, in the Duchy of Valois; upon the Oyse, (here covered with a Bridge): three Leagues from Senlis. Pont-Pool, a Market Town in Monmouthshire, betwixt the Hills; of chief note for Iron Mills. Pontefract or Pomfret, a pleasant, neat, Borough and Market Town in the West Riding of Yorkshire, and the Hundred of Osgodcross: situated upon a stream, a little below the confluence of the Warfe and the Are. Formerly ennobled with a Castle Royal, mounted on an ascent, with Ditches and Bulwarks; which was in the long Rebellion demolished. K. Richard II. af∣ter his resignation of the Crown was murdered in that Castle. The Borough returns two Parliament Men. Pontieu, or Ponthieu, Ponticum, Pontinia, a County in Picardy, which lies towards the Mouth of the Somme; between the Chanche, and the County of Bologne to the North; and the Somme to the South. The chief Towns in it are Abbeville, Monstrevil, Rue, Pont S. Remi, and Cleri. This County was confirm∣ed to the Crown of England, by Eleanor of Castile (Countess of Ponthieu, Daughter to Ferdinand III. King of Castile,) her Marrying to Edward I. King of England: Being afterwards enjoyed by K. Edward II. and III. and never finally re-united to the Crown of France, till the Reign of Charles VII. when the Eng∣lish quite lost their Dominions in that Kingdom. Pontion, or Pont-Yon, Pontigo, an ancient Royal House, belonging to the Kings of France, in the Territory of Parthois in Champaigne; two Leagues from Vitri le Brûlé: where Charles the Bald as∣sembled a Council in 876. Some have mistaken it for Pont sur Jonne, three Leagues from Sens; and for Pontroy or Pongoin in la Perche, upon the Eure. Ponte Mole, Milvius Pons, an ancient Bridge belonging to the City of Rome, over the Tiber. It lies two Miles above the City to the East. Near this Bridge Maxentius was defeated; and in his passage over the River drowned in the Year 312. By which Victory, Constantine the Great obtained the Empire of the World. Pontus, an ancient Kingdom in the Lesser Asia, betwixt Bithynia and Paphlagonia; extended along the Pontus Euxinus or Black Sea: and famous here∣tofore in the Person of Mithridates the Great, its King; who upon the News of the revolt of his Son Pharnaces against him, killed himself in the Year of Rome 691. after a Reign of fifty seven years. Hera∣clea Ponti was its Capital City. The Romans redu∣ced this Kingdom into a Province. Ponza, Pontia, an Island of the Mediterranean, upon the Coast of the Kingdom of Naples: known by the banishment of divers famous Romans to it. Ponzone, a small Town in the Duchy of Mont∣ferrat in Italy. It suffered very much in the Wars; till the Peace at Quieras in 1631. Pool, a Market and Borough Town, and Port, in Dorsetshire, in the Hundred of Cogdean: enclosed on all sides, except Northward, with an out let of the Sea, called Luckford Lake; and admitting an entrance into it by one Gate only. Henry VI. first granted it the pri∣vilege of a Haven, and leave to the Mayor to Wall it. In this Haven, the Sea ebbs and flows four times in twenty four hours. It elects two Parliament Men, and has the honor besides to be a County Corporate. Potremoli, Pontremulium, a Town and Seigni∣ory in Italy, anciently called Apua; at the Foot of the Apennine, in the Eastern Borders of the States of Genoua; fifteen Miles from Genoua to the East, and eleven from Massa to the North. This Town and Seigniory in the Year 1650, was sold by the Spaniards to the Duke of Tuscany; under whom it now is: and has belonging to it a strong Castle. Popayan, Popaiana, a great Province in South America, in the Terra Firma, towards the Mountains; which on the West is bounded by the South Sea, on the South by Peru, on the East by New Granada, and on the North by New Carthagena. Its greatest extent is from North to South. The Capital City of it is Po∣payan; seated near the rise of the River of S. Martha; one hundred and forty Miles from the South Sea to the East. It is a Bishops See, under the Archbishop de Sancta Fé d' Antiquera. The other Cities are Caramanta, Arma, Sancta Anna d' Anzerma, Car∣thagena, Cali, Amaguer, and Agreda. Under the Spaniards. Popfingen, Popfinga, a small City in the Circle of Schwaben in Germany, in the Tract of Riess; up∣on the River Eger. One Mile from Norlingen to the West. An Imperial and Free City. Porentru, Brundusia, a Town in Switzerland; called by the Inhabitants, Brontrut; by the French, Porentru. The Seat of the Bishop of Basil, and sub∣ject to him. It stands in the Borders of Suntgow, and the Higher Alsatia; upon the River Halle; three German Miles from Ferrette, (or Pfirt) to the West, and six from Basil. The Tract in which it stands is called Elsgaw. Pormon, Thermodon, a River of Cappadocia, which falls into the Euxine Sea. Poros, an Island in the Gulph of Corinth, (or d' Engina) between the Morea and Athens: eighteen Miles in compass, and very fruitful and populous. Now under the Venetians. Portalegre, or Porto-Alegre, Portus Alacris, A∣maea, a City in Portugal in the Province of Alentejo, towards the Borders of Extremadura: which is a Bi∣shops See, under the Archbishop of Evora; fourteen Miles from that City, and twenty eight from Lisbon to the East: thirty three from the Atlantick Ocean, East. Well fortified, upon a River; and giving the Title of a Count. Port-au-Prince, a Town upon the South Coast of the Isle of Cuba, in the West-Indies; with a Port, which drives a great Trade in Hides. Port aux Prunes, a Country in the North of the Isle of Madagascar. Il Portatore, Ʋfens, a River in Campagna di Roma, in the States of the Church; which ariseth at a place called Casenoue, two Miles from Sezze, (a Town in the same Province,) and falls into the Tyr∣rhenian Sea, near Terracina; sixty Miles from Na∣ples to the West. Portland, Vindelis, a small Peninsula in Dorset∣shire; which shoots into the British Sea, about nine Miles from North to South. The principal place in it is called Portland Castle, built by Henry VIII. Oppo∣site
to which, towards Weymouth, on the Land side, stands Sandford Castle; and these two together com∣mand all Ships that pass into the road here. This Island belongs to the Church of Winchester, by the Gift of Edward the Confessor. It hath one Church, on the South East side near the Sea; affords Corn in good plenty, and excellent pasture for Sheep: but its Quarries of Stone, of late much used in Building, are its most remarkable Commodity. Charles I. in 1632, Created Richard Lord Weston of Neyland, Lord High Treasurer of England, Earl of Portland: which Title continued in the same Family for three successions in the Persons of Jeremy, Son to Richard; Charles, Son and Heir to Jeremy; and Thomas Weston, Uncle to Charles. Porto, Puerto, ein Port, un Port, a Port, or Ha∣ven, is a part of the Sea, so inclosed and deep, that Ships may safely ride in it; Load and Unload; whe∣ther it be made by Art or Nature. All which vulgar Names in Italian, Spanish, German, French, and English, are derived from the Latin Word Portus, signifying the same thing. Porto, Portus Augusti, Portus Romanus, an Epis∣copal City, which once stood at the Mouth of the Tiber, in the States of the Church; and had a conside∣rable Port to it, built by the Emperor Claudius; then repair'd by Trajan. But both that and the City, for the unwholsomeness of the Air, have been deserted and destroyed; tho giving a title to one of the six Senior Cardinals. Porto, Port à Port, and Cividad de Puerto, Por∣tus Cale, is a great City, and a considerable Mart in the Kingdom of Portugal; at the Mouth of the Dou∣ro, on the North Side of that River: which is a Bi∣shops See, under the Archbishop of Braga; and has a large, safe, and convenient Haven upon the Western Ocean; within one League of which this City is built: eight from Braga to the South, and forty seven from Lisbon to the North. This City took its Name from Cale, a Village near it; and gave the Name of Portu∣gal to the Kingdom (before called Lusitania:) it being one of the first and most frequented Ports of that Kingdom. Long. 11 15. Lat. 41. 10. Porto de Acaxutla, a great and celebrated Port, in New Spain in America; in the Province of Guati∣mala, upon the South Sea; near Sancta Trinidada. Porto Belo, Portus Belus, a new City in South America, upon the Shoars of the North Sea: which has a celebrated Haven, secured by two strong Forts; eighteen Leagues from Panama to the North, in the Province of Terra Firma. This City was taken and plundered by the Buccaniers. Port en Bessin, Portus Bajocensis, a Port in Nor∣mandy, on the British Sea; one League North of Bajeux. Porto Betto, Portus Gazaeorum, Majuma. See Gazara. Porto Bon, Achaeorum Portus, Portus Bonus, a Haven on the Euxine Sea, at the Mouth of the Nie∣per. Porto di Coruna, Portus Brigantius, a large Port in Gallicia in Spain; ten Leagues from Com∣postella to the North. Porto desire, a Port in Magellania; between the River of Plate, and the Terra de Fuogo in South Ame∣rica. It is otherwise called Baya de los Trabaios. The entrance into it is about half a League over: where stand two small Islands. It affords fresh Water. Porto Ercole, or Hercole, Portus Herculis, a Sea-Port in the States of Siena; on the Tyrrhenian Sea; five Miles from Orbitello to the South, and twelve from Talamont to the same. In the Hands of the Spaniards: it has a Fort and a small Haven. Porto di Gorio, Carbonaria, a Haven at the Mouth of the Po; which takes its Latin Name from a black Tower. It is the Southern Branch of the North Branch of that River: in the Dukedom of Fer∣rara, under the Dominion of the Pope: within six Miles of the Borders of the States of Venice to the South. And made by that Branch of the Po, which is called Il Po di Ariano, or the Right Hand Branch. Porto di Gruaro, Portus Romatinus, a Town in Friuli; upon the River Lemene, (Romatinum) under the Venetians: two Miles from Concordia, a ruined City to the North. The Bishop of which re∣sides in this Town: forty Miles from Venice to the East, and twenty five from Aquileja. Porto di Lione, Piraeus, the Port of Athens in A∣chaia, 5 Miles South of the City; joined to it by a dou∣ble Wall, built by Themistocles, in the year of Rome 276; which was ruined by the Victorious Lacedaemo∣nians, in the year of the World 3546, and of Rome 350, after the taking of Athens: being rebuilt, it was after∣wards ruined by Sylla. This Haven would then contain four hundred Ships; and was both as to Peace and War, one of the most frequented Ports in the World. In after-times it took the Name of Port Lione, from a huge Marble Statue of a Lion, of admirable work, placed at the bottom of the Bay in a sitting Posture, but erect upon his fore Feet, ten Foot in height. This Harbor would not hold above thirty or forty of the Ships of our Times, as Mr. Wheeler judged Nor is there any one House or Habitation in this Place, except a Warehouse for the receiving of Merchandise. The true Long. of it is 53. 00. Lat. 38. 05. as Mr. Ver∣non found it. This Port, and Athens it self submit∣ted to the Venetian General Morosim, Sept. 1687. Vid. Athens. It is also called Porto di Setines. Porto Famine. See Civdad del Rè Philippe. Porto Fino, Portus Delphini, a small Town and Port of Italy, about twenty Miles from Genoua to the East; towards the Gulph of Ripallo. Porto Longone, Portus Longus, a large safe Ha∣ven in the Isle of Ilua, or Elve; under the Spaniards, ever since 1577. Fortified by them in 1606. Taken by the French in 1646. Retaken by the Spaniards in 1650. It stands over against Piombine, twelve Miles to the South; fifty four from Ligorne, thirty seven from the Isle of Corsica to the East. Before under the Princes of Piombino. Porto Lovis, Lewis, or Blavet, Portus Ludovici, Blabia, a strong Town in Bretagne in France; at the Mouth of the River Blave: which has a large Ha∣ven. Twelve Leagues from Vannes to the West, and fifteen from Quimper to the East. This Town sprung up out of the ruins of Blavet, an old Town near it. Port Lovis, a new built Town in the Lower Lan∣guedoc, on the Mediterranean Sea, near Mount de Sete. This Haven and Port was made by a vast Ar∣tificial Mount, raised out of the Sea with a mighty expence. It stands two Leagues from Frontignan to the South, and five from Agde to the East. Porto Moriso, Portus Mauritius, a pleasant Town in the State of Genoua; upon the Mediter∣ranean Sea, well Peopled: it stands near Onelia, upon a Hill; in the midst between Savona to the East, and Nizza to the West, thirty six Miles from either: but it has now no Port, as Baudrand assures us on his own knowledge. Il Porto di Paula, Portus Paulae, a Sea-Port in the State of the Church, in Campagna di Roma; near Mount Circello; into which the Lake of Sancta Maria vents it self. Able to contain two thousand Ships: it has every where the marks of a Roman Port, but being neglected fills up with Sand.
Porto de la Paz, Portus Pacis, a Port at the North end of the Island of Hispaniola; where there is of late a French Colony settled. Porto di Primaro, a Town and Port in the Dutchy of Ferrara in Italy, where a branch of the Po, called Po di Primaro, delivers it self into the Gulph of Venice. It has a Tower for its defence. Porto di san Pedro, a Port in South America, towards the Mouth of the Rio Grande, and East of the River Plata: upon the Sea of Paraguay. Porto Ravaglioso, Portus Orestis, a Port in the Province of the further Calabria; in the Kingdom of Naples, upon the Tyrrhenian Sea: at the Mouth of the River Marro, near La Palma. Thirty Miles from Regio to the North, and twenty from Tropea to the South. It is of great Antiquity, but no great use. Porto Ricco, or S. Jean de Porto Ricco, or Pu∣erto Rico, Portus Dives, a City in South America; seated at the North end of an Island of the same name in the North Sea; which is a Bishop's See, under the Archbishop of S. Dominico. Taken and plundered by the English in 1595. and by the Hollanders in 1615. The Island lies eight Leagues from Hispani∣ola to the East, at the entrance of the Gulph of Me∣xico, about a hundred thirty six Leagues from the Continent of America to the South: thirty or thirty five long from East to West, and twenty in breadth. First discovered by Chr. Columbus in 1493; who de∣dicated it to S. John Baptist; and called this Place Porto Ricco, because the greatest Galleons ride in its Port in Safety. The Spaniards began to plant their Colonies here in 1510. They have secured this Port with two strong Castles, beside two little Forts. The whole Island enjoys a temperate Air, a fruitful Soil for Sugar, Ginger, Cassia, and Cattel: but the antient Indian Natives have all been barbarously murdered by the Spaniards. Porto Royal, Portus Regius, a Port of North America, in the Province of Tabasca; in the Con∣fines of Yucoatan, upon the Bay of Mexico: called by the Spaniards, El Puerto Real. § There is another Porto of the same name in the Kingdom of Andalu∣sia, over against the Isle of Cadis; which of old was called Portus Gaditanus. Port Royal in New France, in North America, in the Province of Acadia, was taken by the English, and restored to the French by the Treaty of Breda in 1667. It stands at the bottom of the Bay of France, and has a safe and large Harbour. Port Royal, a Port in Florida, near Virginia. Port Royal, a celebrated Nunnery near Cheureuse in France, six Leagues from Paris. Port Royal, a Port on the South of Jamaica, in the Hands of the English: by whom the Town was built. Which (before the late dreadful Earthquake 1692, ruined the greatest part of it), had in it above one thousand and five hundred Houses; and ex∣tended twelve Miles in length; extremely populous, it being the Scale of Trade in that Island. It is seated at the end of a long point of Land which makes the Harbor, and runs into the Main about twelve Miles; having the Sea on the South, and the Harbor on the North. The Harbor is about three Leagues broad; and in most places so deep, that a Ship of one thousand Tun may lay her sides to the Shoar of the Point; Lead and Unload at pleasure; and it affords good Anchorage all over. For the security of it there is built a very strong Castle, always well Garrisoned with Soldiers; and has sixty pieces of Cannon mounted. Yet this Town stands upon a loose Sand; which af∣fords neither Grass, Stone, fresh Water, Trees, nor any other thing that could encourage the building of a Town, besides the goodness and convenience of the Harbor. Porto Sabione, Edron, a Port on the Gulph of Venice, near Chiosa, (Fossa Clodia) a City in that State; twenty five Miles from Venice. Porto di Salo, Salorius, a Port in Catalonia; four Miles from Tarragona towards Barcinone. Porto Santo, Cerne, one of the Azore Islands; discovered by the Portuguese in 1428, and by them called Ilha de Puerto Santo: Not far from the Ma∣dera; about eight Leagues in Circuit. Porto Seguro, a City, Port, and Prefecture in Brasil in South America, upon the Sea Coast; un∣der the Portuguese. The Prefecture lyes be∣twixt that called los Isleos, and the other of Spiritu Santo. Port Uendres, Portus Veneris, a large Port in the County of Russilion, upon the Mediterranean Sea: in the Borders of Catalonia. Seventeen Miles from Perpignan to the North-East. It has this name from a Temple dedicated to Venus, in the times of Paganism; which stood near it. Porto Uenere, Portus Venerii, Portus Veneris, a Town in the States of Genoua; which has a Haven and a Castle, built by the Genouese in 1113: seated over against the Isle of Palmaria. Sixty Miles from Genoua, and three from the Gulph del Spezza to the East. Porto Uiejo, a Town and Port in Peru in South America, upon the Pacifick Ocean; in the Province, and not far from the City, Quito. Porto Zora, Pisidon, a City of Africa Propria, mentioned by Ptolemy; now called Zora by the Eu∣ropeans, and Zuarat by the Moors. It is a strong Place, which has a large Harbor belonging to it, in the Kingdom of Tunis; one hundred and twenty Miles from Tripoli to the West: taken and plundered by the Knights of Malta not long since. Portsmouth, Portus Magnus, a Town in Hamp∣shire, in the Hundred of Ports down, of great Anti∣quity; called by Ptolemy  the Great Ha∣ven; the Old Town then stood higher up. The New Town is built upon an Island, called Portsey; (which is about fourteen Miles in Circuit, and at a full Tide floats in Salt Water); by a Bridge on the North join∣ed to the Continent. The Town is fortified with a Timber Wall, covered with Earth: on the North-East, near the Gate, it has a Fort; and two Block-Houses at the entry of the Haven; built of hewen Stone, by Edward IV. and Henry VII. To which Qu. Elizabeth added other Works, and a Garrison to watch and de∣fend the Place. The latter Princes have built Store∣houses for all sorts of Naval Provisions, and Docks for the building of Ships. In Mr. Cambdens time it was more resorted to on the account of War, than Com∣merce; and had little other Trade than what arose from the boiling of Salt. But since, its Trade is much encreased. It is grown populous; a good Nur∣sery for Sea-men; and a Corporation, represented by two Burgesses in the Lower House of Parliament. Giv∣ing also the Title of Dutchess to the Lady, Louisa de Querouaille Created by K. Charles II. 1673. Baroness of Petersfield, Countess of Farnham, and Dutchess of Portsmouth. Portugal, Lusitania, Portugallia, a Kingdom on the West of Spain: bounded on the West by the At∣lantick Ocean, on the South by Algarve, (which is annexed to this Kingdom); on the East by Andalusia, Extremadura and Leon; and on the North by Galli∣cia. It lies on the Sea Coast from North to South four hundred Miles; not above one hundred where broad∣est, and eighty in the narrower places; eight hundred and seventy nine in Compass. Divided into five Pro∣vinces, to wit, Entre Douero è Minho, Tra los Mon∣tes, Beira, Estremadura, and Alentejo or Entre Tejo è Guadiana; whereunto was added Algarve, under
Alphonsus III. with the Title of a Kingdom. The principal Rivers are those four expressed in the Names of the Provinces, Douero, Minho, Tajo and Guadi∣ana, which furnish the Kingdom with very convenient Ports. It was anciently called Lusitania, from the the Lusitani its first Inhabitants; and took the pre∣sent Name about the fifth Century, from Poriocale, a celebrated Mart. The Air is generally healthful; the Earth Hilly and Barren, especially as to Corn, which is much of it imported from France. But it yields Wine, Fruits, Fish, Game, Salt, Horses, and Mines. And is so very populous about Spain, espe∣cially towards the Sea, that they reckon more than four hundred Cities, or great privileged Towns; three Archbishopricks, ten Bishopricks, and above four thousand Parishes. This Kingdom is said to be foun∣ded by one Henry Earl of Lorain about 1099. For this Prince having shewn much Gallantry in the Wars against the Moors, was by Alphonsus VI. King of Ca∣stile, rewarded with the Marriage of Teresia (a Natu∣ral Daughter of his,) and a part of this Kingdom, with the Title of an Earl. The Son of this Henry, (Alphonsus I.) having in 1139. in the Battel of O∣brique defeated five Moorish Kings, assumed the Title of King. This Prince assembled the Estates of his King∣dom at Lamego, in the Province of Beira: who there pas∣sed a Law called the Law or Statute of Lamego, for the exclusion of Strangers from the Crown, which remains in full force to this day. His Posterity enjoyed this King∣dom; and very much inlarged it by Victories against the Moors at home, and by the Discovery of several unknown Countries abroad, for seventeen Descents. Amongst which, John I. styled the Father of his Country, succeeded in 1385. tho only the Natural Son of Peter I. the King, save one, immediately preceding his ascension. But Sebastian a young Prince (who suc∣ceeded King John III. in 1557.) perishing in a Battel in Africa, in 1580. and Henry dying soon after, (who was a Church-man, very old when he came to the Crown;) Philip II. King of Spain obtained this Kingdom by force, and a pretended Title in 1584. After whom Philip III. and IV. successively enjoyed it. But in 1640. John Duke of Braganza, who had a better Title, encouraged by the unsupportableness of the Spanish Government to the Portugueze, by an universal Revolt of the people in all parts, ejected the Spaniards and assumed the Kingdom: succeeded in it by two of his Sons; the youngest of which, Peter, is now King of Portugal, and the second of his Name. Porzevera, a River of Italy, which falls into the Sea by Genoua. Posega, or Possega, the Capital City of Sclavonia, upon the River Oriawa; eight Miles from the Save to the North, thirty from Gradisca to the East; it consists of about ten thousand Houses. They are mean and small, after the manner of the Buildings in this Country. It is seated in a very fruitful Earth, which produceth Fruits of all sorts, of a more than ordinary size; and gives its name to a County lying betwixt the Save and the Drave. This Town fell into the Hands of the Turks, under Solyman the Magnificent, about 1544. together with Walpo and Quinque Ecclesiae: and continued so till 1687. when the Turkish Army after the Battel of Mohats revol∣ting from, and mutinying against the Prime Visier their General; the Garrison which was laid in this City to defend it, (of a sudden, no Enemy being near them) deserted, and carried many of the Inha∣bitants with them, and slew others. Whereupon Ge∣neral Dunewalt, (who had then crossed the Drave to besiege Zygeth,) returned and took Possession of it, without force, or any opposition: and immedi∣ately took care to secure it, by raising new Works and Forts. Four hundred Villages depend upon this City. Posnan, Posnam, or Posen, Posnania, a City in the Greater Poland; the Capital of a Palatinate, cal∣led by the same Name; built upon the River War∣ta, amongst the Hills; seven Miles from Gnesna to the West, twenty from Franck fort upon the Oder to the East, and as many from Wratislaw to the North: it is little, yet a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Gnesna; and has an excellent and well built Castle. The Palatinate of Poznanskie, is bounded on the West by the Marquisate of Brandenburg; on the North by the Further Pomerania; on the East by the Palatinate of Kaliski; & on the South by Misnia. Poson. See Presburg. Potenza, Potentia, a City of Italy, ascribed by Ptolemy to Lucania; now seated in the Basilicate, in the Kingdom of Naples; at the foot of the A∣pennine: fifteen Miles from Acerenza to the North-West, and eighteen from Venosa (Venusia) to the South. This is a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Acerenza; and now in a tolerable good condition. Pothereus, a River of the Island of Crete, menti∣oned by ancient Writers, as passing by the City Gor∣tis, or Gortyna, there. Potosi, Potosium, a great City in South America, in the Kingdom of Peru; on the South part of that Country; in a Province called Los Charcas: seated at the foot of a Mountain of the same Name, and divided in two by a Rivulet from a Lake that stands about a quarter of a League off. Eighteen Spanish Leagues from La Plata to the East, eighty from the Pacifick Ocean to the East, one hundred and sixty from Cusco to the South. Mostly regarded on the account of rich Mines of Silver here discovered in 1544. by the Spaniards; who built this City, and call it an Imperial one: which is since become one of the greatest, richest, and most populous Cities in A∣merica: adorned with divers Magnificent Churches and Monasteries; and inhabited by above twenty thousand people, Spaniards, Strangers, Indians, Mou∣lates, &c. almost every one appearing in Gold and Silver. Potton, a Market Town in Bedfordshire, in the Hundred of Bigleswade, bordering upon Cambridgesh. Pouges, a Village in the Province of Nivernois in France, betwixt Nevers and la Charitè; much frequented upon the account of two Medicinal Springs at it, which have long been in great esteem for the curing of the Dropsie. Pouligny, or Poligny, Polichnium, a Castle in the Franche Comté, which was heretofore a place of great strength. It stands seven Leagues from Dole to the South. Poulton, a Market Town in Lancashire, in the Hundred of Amounderness, upon the River Irwell. Powhatan, or James River, the principal River in Virginia, dividing that Country by the middle. It denominates an Indian Kingdom there, in which Captain Smith in his Voyages made large Discoveries. The Capital Town of it was Pomeiok. Powis, or Powisland, a Sovereign Principality, in the former times, in Wales; whereof Mathraval in the County of Montgomery was the Capital. Pozzuoli, or Pozzuolo, Puteoli, Dicaearchia, a City of Italy, in the Province of Campania; built by the Samians; and called Flavia by Vespasian; now in the Terra di Lavoro, (a Province of the Kingdom of Naples) and a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Naples: It stands upon an Hill, by the Shoars of the Tyrrhenian Sea; upon which it has a large and safe Haven, and a Bay of the same name; eight Miles from Naples to the West. There are within the bounds of this City, thirty five natural Baths: which have their different sorts of warm Water, wonderously useful for the Cure of several Diseases. This City was the place, to which the Roman Emperours retrea∣ed (for the most part) for their divertisement and
pleasure: at this day a great, populous, fine City: in which the Spaniards have built a Cittadel. There are very many Roman Antiquitios, and natural Rarities in it, not easily to be found elsewhere: Some Remains particularly of Caligula's Bridge, of three thousand nine hundred Paces, over the Gulph, reaching from Pozzuoli to Bajae; which he proudly passed and re∣passed in triumph. Mr. Sandys in his Travels has largely described others of these. Prague, by the Inhabitants called Prag, Praga, Casurgi, Marobudum, Bubiemum, the Capital City of the Kingdom of Bohemia; an Archbishopric, kin∣stituted by Pope Clement VI. and the Royal City; or rather three Cities within one Wall; which toge∣ther make it undoubtedly the greatest City in Ger∣many. It stands upon the River Muldau, (called by the Inhabitants Vetaue) a large rapid River, cove∣red by a Stone Bridge of sixteen great Arches, seven∣teen hundred foot long, and thirty five broad. This City is divided into three parts; the Old, the New, and the Little City. The Old lies on the East of the Muldau; very populous, full of Buildings; and in this the University was founded by the Emperor Charles IV. about the year 1370. 2. The New is very large; se∣parated from the former by a large Ditch or Trench. 3. The Klein Seitten, or Lesser Prague, for plea∣santness, beauty of Buildings, and fair Palaces, far ex∣ceeds the other two: this lies on the West of the Muldau: in this is the Royal Palace, the Cathedral Church (dedicated to S. Veit) built by S. Wenceslaus Duke of Bohemia, in 923. The Circuit of the City is very great: there are many Hills and void spaces in it; yet it is more populous than Florence, and the Streets larger. Dr. Brown in his Travels, has given an exact account of it. It seems to be a Place of great Antiquity; and to be the Marobudum of Ptolemy. John King of Bohemia took it from Henry Duke of Carinthia, in 1311. The Inhabitants imprisoned Winceslaus their King in 1392. George Podiebrach, the Revenger of the Perfidy of the Coun∣cil of Constance, took it in 1441. The University was opened here by Charles IV. Emperour of Ger∣many, in 1370. which has had above forty thousand Students at once in it; especially in the time of John Hus, about 1409. (whose Doctrines were condemned in a Council, assembled by the Archbishop of Prague here in 1405. according to the German Writers.) But it is most famous for the Defeat of the Protestant Forces near its Walls, Novemb. 8. 1620. by Maxi∣milian Duke of Bavaria; which was after severely re∣venged in the Swedish Wars. And in this City May 26. 1635. a Peace was made between the Emperour and his Protestant Subjects. It lies fifteen German Miles from Budweiss to the North, eighteen from Dresden, and thirty eight from Vienna to the North-East. A Fire endammaged it June 21. 1689. to the value (as they computed it) of two Millions. Long. 36. 38. Lat. 50. 06. Pragoca, Lithoproscopus, a Mountain of Phoeni∣cia; between Tripoli and Botryn. Prasobo, Haemus, a Mountain in Thrace. Prato, a small Town in the Province of Toscana in Italy, upon the River Bisentio: betwixt Florence and Pistoia. Precop, Pericop, Procopias, Procopiana, Taurica Chersonesus, Tartaria Precopensis, Taphrae, a City, and strong Fort in the enterance of the Neck of Crim Tartary: from whence that Peninsula is sometimes called Precopska: and the Tartarian Inhabitants, the Precopensian Tartars. After the Muscovites ob∣tained that great Victory over the Tartars in 1689. (wherein they slew thirty thousand of them, with one of the Han's Sons, upon the place); the Tartars retiring into the Crim, abandoned Pericop to the Conquerours; which is a most important Pass. Premislaw, Premislia, a great and strong City in the Province of Russia, properly so called, in Po∣land: which is a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Lemburgh: standing upon the River San, towards the Borders of Hungary. Presburg, Posonium, Pisonium, Flexum, the Ca∣pital City of that part of Hungary, which remained to the Emperour before his late Conquests; called by the Hungarians Poson; by the Germans Presburg; by the Poles Prespurg. It is seated upon the Da∣nube; eight German Miles from Vienna to the East, and as many from Newheusel and Comora to the North-West; seventy from Raab. The Capital of a County of the same name; between Austria, Mo∣ravia, and the Danube. It has a considerable Castle, built of White Stone, on the top of an Hill, (a state∣ly and beautiful Pile) to preserve it from the Inroads of the Turks. After Gran fell into the Hands of the Turks, the Archbishops See was removed hither: the Assemblies of the States of Hungary, have been of late ever held in this City. After Newheusel in 1662. fell into the Hands of the Turks, it was fortisied: be∣ing then a Frontier. Prince Joseph Archduke of Austria (the present Emperour's eldest Son) was crown'd King of Hungary here, Decemb. 9. 1687. That Clause in the one and thirtieth Article of King An∣drew's Decrees in 1222 (consented to by Ferdinand I.) which makes it lawful for the Subjects to rise up in Arms against their Prince, in the case of his acting con∣trary to Law, being particularly excluded out of the Coronation-Oath by the Consent of the States of that Kingdom: And the Crown thence forward to descend by Inheritance. A Council was celebrated here in 1309. which Pope Clement V. confirmed. Prerustine, a Valley in Piedmont; famous for a defeat of the Savoyards, in 1663. by the Prote∣stants of that Valley, in the defence of their Lives; contrary to the Faith given assaulted by sixteen thou∣sand Horse and Foot; which they forced to a Re∣treat, with the loss of one thousand of the Assailants. Prescot, a Market Town in Lancashire, in the Hundred of Darby. Presteign, a Market Town in the County of Rad∣nor in Wales, in the Hundred of Radnor. Prester Johns Kingdom, the same with Abyssinia in the Ʋpper Aethiopia: But the Origine of this ap∣pellation of it, is not so easily determined: As whether coming from one Johannes Presbyter, a Nestorian, who in 1145. usurped the Crown of Tartary, and might leave his Successors his name. Or, from Pre∣tiosus Johannes, which is the Latin Interpretation of the Title, Belul-Gian, that the Abyssines give their King. Or, from Preste Cham in the Persian Lan∣guage, signifying a Christian Emperour, &c. For we find no agreement either in Travellers, or the Lear∣ned Etymologists, about it. And some moreover attri∣bute this Kingdom not to Aethiopia, but Tartary. Preston, a handsome, large, and populous Bo∣rough in Lancashire, in the Hundred of Amounder∣ness: represented in the Lower House of Parliament by two Burgesses; and honoured with the Court of Chancery, and the Offices of Justice for Lancaster, as a County Palatine. It is seated upon the River Rible, having a fair Stone Bridge over the same. Preveza, Nicopolis, a City of Epirus; called by Ptolemy and others, Cassiopesa. It is seated at the Mouth of the Gulph of Larta, or Prevesa; near the Shoars of the Ionian Sea; between the Islands of Corfu, and Sancta Maura: a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Lepanto. This City took the name of Nicopolis in the time of Augustus Caesar; being built and so called by that Prince, in memory of his Victory obtained at Actium, near it, over Antonius
and Cleopatra, in a Sea Fight. In 1539. the Pope's and King of Spain's Galleys endeavoured to surprize it from the Turks, but failed in the attempt. In 1684. Morosini took it, upon a surrender, for the Venetians. Long. 46. 20. Lat. 39. 25. Principato Citra, Principatus Citerior; the Hither Principate; a Province in the Kingdom of Naples: bounded on the North by the Further Prin∣cipate, and part of Terra di Lavoro; on the West and South by the Tyrrhenian Sea; and on the East by the Principate. It is seventy Miles in length from the South-East to the North West. The Capital of it is Salerno; the other Cities are Amalfi, Nocera, Mar∣sico, Nuovo, and Sarno. A part of the Country of the ancient Picentini, and Lucania, lies contained in this Principate. Principato Oltra, Principatus Ʋlterior; the Further Principate; is a Province of the Kingdom of Naples. Bounded on the East and North by the Ca∣pitinate; the Terra di Lavoro to the West, and the Hither Principate to the South. Benevento is the Capital of it: it has besides Conza, Avellino, Ariano, and Cedogna; in ancient times the greatest part of this Province belonged to the Church. See Benevento. Il principato di Val di Taro, a Valley and small Province of Lombardy in Italy, under the Duke of Parma: through which the River of its own name, Taro, takes its course to the Po. The Towns Campiano and Borgo di Val di Taro stand in this Principate. Pristina, a large City in Bulgaria, situated in the midway between Nissa and Ʋscopia. Taken by the Imperialists in the year 1689. Prochita, or Procida, an Island three Miles in compass, on the Coast of Terra di Lavoro; near the Bay of Naples: which has a fine Castle, and a Monastery. Propontis, the Sea betwixt Asia Minor and Thrace: now called the Sea of Marmora. See Marmora. La Provence, Provincia, one of the Southern Provinces of France. The first part of France which the Romans conquered, and reduced into the form of a Roman Province; from whence it has its Name, (Provincia Romana.) In those times it was boun∣ded on the East by the Maritim Alpes; on the South by the Mediterranean Sea; on the West by the Rhosne; and on the North by the Vocontii, Catu∣riges, and Ebroduntii, three Gallick Tribes or Nati∣ons: within which bounds it contained all these other Tribes; the Cavares, the Salii, Desviates, Albici, Mimeni, and Oxybii. It is now much less than it was then: but still one of the greatest Provinces in France: bounded on the North by the Dauphine; on the East by the Alpes, and the County of Nizza; on the West by Languedoc, cut off by the Rhosne; and on the South by the Mediterranean Sea. From East to West, from the Rhosne to the Var, forty four Leagues: from North to South thirty two: in Circuit one hundred fifty eight; as Honorate de Bouche has shewn in a very exact Description of it, lately pub∣lished. The Capital of this Province is Aix; the other Cities are Antibe, Arles, Avignon, Carpentras, Digne, Dragugnan, Frejus, Grasse, Marseille, Orange, Sisteron, Tarascon, Toulon, Voison. The Rivers Rhosne, Var, Durance, Verdon, Argens, &c. water it. This Province was conquered by the Romans, before Ju∣lius Caesar entered France, upon the complaint of the Marsilians against the Salians. M. Fulvius Flaccus was sent with an Army against them in the year of Rome 627. one hundred twenty three years before the Birth of our Saviour: and the War was ended by Fabius Maximus in 632. It continued under the Romans till the year of Christ 411. when it was gran∣ted to Atholphus (King of the Goths) with Placidia a Sister of the Emperour Honorius, by that Prince. Theodorick expelled this Nation in 462. and brought it under the Ostrogoths, or Goths of Italy: from whom it passed to Theodobert King of Metz, a Frank, about 549. by the Grant of the Emperour Justi∣nian. From these it passed to Rodolph Duke of Bur∣gundy: and in 876. Hugh de Arles obtained this Pro∣vince of Boson King of Burgundy, by the Title of Earl of Provence. It continued under Earls with the changes of Families, till 1481. when Charles Earl of Maine (the last Earl of Provence) gave it to Lewis XI. King of France, his Cousin German; from which time it has been united to the Crown of France. There were in this Province three other small States, not subject de Jure to the Crown of France: as Avignon under the Pope; Nizza under the Duke of Savoy; and Orange under the Prince of Orange. Provins, Provinum, a Town, sometime the Ca∣pital, of la Brie in France, upon the River Vousie; whence the Province-Roses take their denomination. It has been understood by some, to be the Agendi∣cum of the Ancients. Prusa, See Bursa. Besides which, two other an∣cient Episcopal Cities in Bithynia, in the Lesser Asia, have their Names remembred by Strabo, Pliny, and Ptolemy. Said to be now called Cheris and Barech. Prussia, Borussia, Pruthenia, a great and fruitful Province of the Kingdom of Poland: (which is a Dukedom) called by the Inhabitants Prouss; by the Poles Prussy; by the Germans Preussen, and by the Italians Prussia. Bounded on the North by the Baltick Sea; on the West by Pomerania; on the South by Poland and Mazovia; & on the East by Lithuania & Samogitia. This Province was at first under Sovereign Dukes of its own; after that, under the Knights of the Teu∣tonick Order, who in 1228. began a long and bloody War towards the Conquest of it: in 1454. the We∣stern part was lost from that Order, being subdued by the Poles: In 1500. the Grand Master of the Or∣der triumphed over the Moscovites, that had fallen upon Prussia and Lithuania. In 1525. the Eastern part submitted to the Crown of Poland too. Albert Marquess of Brandenburg (the thirty fourth, and last Master of that Order) doing Homage, and ob∣taining from that Crown the Eastern part, with the Title of Duke of Prussia. It stands now divided in∣to two parts, called the Regal and the Ducal Prussia: in the first are Dantzick, Marienburg, Elbing and Thorn: in the second are Koningsberg, and Memel. The Regal Prussia, (Dantzick excepted) was yiel∣ded by a Treaty in 1655. to the Crown of Sweden. The Ducal is under the Duke of Brandenburgh, who farmes the Amber-Fishery along the Coast of the Baltick Sea, in this Province, at eighteen or twenty thousand Crowns a year. Pruth, Porata, Hierasius, a River of Moldavia; which arising in Red Russia, entereth Walachia; and watereth Jaczy, (the Capital of that Province;) and at last falleth into the Danube. Pruym, or Prume, Prumia, a Castle, Town, and Monastery in Germany, of the Order of S. Benedict, in the Forest of Ardenne; built by Pepin King of France, in the year 760. It stands upon a River of the same Name; which falls into the Saar, be∣twixt the Electorate of Trier and the Dutchy of Luxemburgh: seven Leagues to the North from Trier, and six from Limburg to the South. Lotharius the Emperour, Son of Lewis the Debonnaire, resigning the Imperial Dignity, died a Monk in this Monastery, in 855. In 1576. the Territory belonging to the Abbey (which till then had been subject to the ∣bot of this House only) fell under the Elect of Trier; whose Successors are ever since the pectual Administrators of this Jurisdiction, (confirm there∣in
by the Diet at Ratisbone in 1654.) which extends to some Villages about this Monastery. Przemysl, Premislia, a City of the Kingdom of Poland, upon the River san, in Red Russia; which is a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Lemburg, and sixteen Polish Miles from Sandomir to the South, and eighteen from Lemburg to the West. It stands upon an Hill, well peopled, and in a flourishing state. Psylli, an ancient people of Libya in Africa: de∣scribed by Suetonius, Herodotus, Gellius, &c. to have had a particular art at expelling and mortifying of Poisons; whence Augustus Caesar, desiring to pre∣serve Cleopatra for a Triumph, caused these Psylli to suck the Poison out of her: But too late. Ptolemais. See Aca. Ptolemais Cyrenaica, one of the five Cities of the ancient Pentapolis in the Kingdom of Egypt; which was a Bishops See, of great note heretofore in the Person of Synesius, its Bishop; who in 411. as∣sembled a Council at it for the excommunication of Andronicus, Prefect of the Country. The modern Name of it is Tolometa. Ptolemais Ferarum, See Suachen. § The An∣cients mention another Ptolemais, in the Thebais, in Egypt; near the Nile. Puerto. See Porto. Pugan, Puganum, a City in the Province of Queycheu in the Kingdom of China. Puglia. See Terra di Bari, Apulia, and Capitanata. Pulhely, a Market Town in Caernarvanshire in Wales, in the Hundred of Gyslegion. Le Puy, Podium, Anicium, Avicium, Vellavae, Vellaunorum Ʋrbs, a great and populous City in the County of Velay in Languedoc, upon the River Loyr; which is a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Bour∣ges; but exempt from his Jurisdiction; and the Bi∣shop is Earl of Velay. It is the Capital of the Coun∣ty in which it stands; adorned with many Parishes and Religious Houses: twenty two Leagues from Lyon to the North-West, twenty from Clermont to the North, and eighteen from Vienne. In 1130. the Bishops of Aquitain assembled in Council here; con∣demned Anacletus, an Anti-Pope, in favour of the Election of Pope Innocent II. Puy-en Anjou, Podium Andegavense, a Town in Anjou in the Borders of Poictou; three Leagues from Salmur to the South, and eight from Poictiers to the North-East; near the River Thoue. Puy Lawrens, Puteum Laurentii, a small Town in Languedoc, which has been dignified with the Title of a Dukedom; two Leagues from Chartres to the West, and three from Lavaur. Puyg de Cerden, Jugum Carretanorum, a Town in Spain, in the County of Cerdaigna; upon the Ri∣ver Segre, in the Pyrenean Hills, in the Borders of France; fourteen Leagues from Perpignan, and six from Ʋrgel, a City of Catalonia. This Town is the Capital of the County in which it stands; and was lately in the hands of the French; but by the Treaty of Nimeguen, restored to the Spaniards. The French call it Puycerda. Puzzuolo, Puteoli, See Pozzuoli. Py, a small River in the Bishoprick of Reims in France, which falls into the Suippe; and with it into the Aisne at Neufchastel. Pylus. The Ancients mention several Towns and Mountains of this Name. The most eminent of them, now extant, is Navarino in the Morea. See Navarino. The Pyramides of Egypt. These, as it were, ortal Buildings, accounted amongst 7 the Won∣der of the World, stand the distance of about ten Mileom Cairo in Egypt. Pliny says, three hun∣dred seventy thousand men were employed upon the largest of them, twenty years: whose height amoun∣ted to five hundred and twenty foot, the breadth six hundred eighty two square; ascended (being the only open one) by two hundred and eighteen steps, of about three foot deep. Within, Caverns for the reposal of dead Bodies; a Hall, a Chamber, and an empty Tomb made of a single Stone of the like∣ness of Porphyry. Without, before it, as before two others of the chiefest, appear the Rests of certain square Edifices like Temples: and hard by, a vast Pile, representing the Face and Breast of a Woman, twenty six foot high; which Pliny calls Sphynx, because there was then a contrivance to utter Oracles from it. The ancient Egyptians believed, that Pharaoh and Amasis, Kings of Egypt, lay entombed in these Pyra∣mides. The Bases of them, as far as to the sixteenth step upwards, to the North, by time, have been cove∣red with Sand. The Pyrenean Hills, Mons Pyrenaeus, one of the greatest Chains of Mountains in Europe: called by the Spaniards, les Montes Pyreneos; by the French, les Monts Pyrenées; by the Italians, li Monti Pirenei. They lie between France to the North, and Spain to the South; extending from East to West eighty Spa∣nish Leagues; that is, from Port Vendres (in Rousil∣lon, on the Mediterranean Sea), to S. Sebastian on the Bay of Biscay: in various places called by diffe∣rent Names. Pyraeus. See Porto di Lione. QA. QUadalquivirio, See Guadalquivirejo. Quadi, the old Inhabitants of Moravia, and the North of Austria, as far as the Danube: who maintained a perpetual War with the Romans, till the year of Christ 565: when they were conquered first by Lechus Duke of Poland. In the time of the Emperour Valentiman, they advanced as far as to Aquileja: and though the Marcomanni dwelt in Moravia too, yet the Quadi and them were two as distinct people, as the present Moravians and the Trans-Danubian Austrians; which latter possess the Seats of the Quadi. Quancheu, Quangcheu, Quancheum, the Capital City of the Province of Quamsi, in the Kingdom of China; sometime called Jangching and Quangtung; and by Foreigners, Canton. It stands upon the Ri∣ver Ta, which a little lower falls into the Ocean; and affords it a large and safe Harbour, defended by two Castles. It is surrounded with Hills, in Circuit four German Miles. Besieged twelve Months by the Tar∣tars; and a last taken more by fraud, than force; to the great ruin of it, and the slaughter of its In∣habitants in 1650. Long. 140. 30. Lat. 26. 25. ac∣cording to the last and best Maps. Quangan, Quanganum, a City in the Province of Yunnan, in China; in the hands of the King of Tunkim. Quangping, a City of the Province of Pekim in China. Quangsi, one of the principal Cities of the Pro∣vince of Yunnan in China. Quangte, a City in the Province of Nanquin, or Nankim. Quamsi, or Quansi, Quansia, a Province in the King∣dom of China: bounded by Yunnan on the West, Queycheu on the North, Cochin China on the South, Quantum on the East. The Capital of it Queilin. It con∣tains
eleven Cities, ninety nine great Towns; 186719 Families: the last Province which the Tartars Con∣quered. Quanto, a Province in the Isle of Niphon, in the Kingdom of Japan. Quantum, Quangtung, a vast Province in China; bounded on the North by Kiamsi, and Huquam; on the East by Fokien; on the West by Quamsi, and the Kingdom of Tumkim, or Cochin China; and on the South by the Ocean. It contains ten Cities, seventy three great Towns, and 483360 Families. One of the best watered, and most fruitful Provinces in this Kingdom. Quaquacust, la coste des Dents, a part of Guinea in Africa; which extends eight Spanish Leagues in length from East to West. See Guinee, and Coste de dents. Quarentan, Vadicasses, or Carentan; a Sea-Port Town in Normandy; seventeen Leagues from Caen to the West, and eight from Coutances to the North-East. Quars. See Carin. Quebec, the Principal French City in New France in America: taken from the Indians in the Conquest of this part of their Country by French Men, and very strongly fortified. Queda, a City of the East-Indies, upon the Pro∣montory of Malacca, over against Sumatra. Long. 125. 31. Lat. 5. 50. It has an excellent Port, and a very great Trade, being much frequented by the European Merchants and the Capital of a Kingdom of the same name; which was subject to the King of Siam, but has now a Prince of its own. Quedelinburgh, a Town in the Ʋpper Saxony in Germany. Once a Free Imperial Town, but being afterwards exempted, became (together with its Ter∣ritory) subject to its own Abbess, whose House here was of great fame. It lies two German Miles from Halberstad to the South: now (with its Territory) subject to the Duke of Saxony. In the year 1085. Hermannus, elected King of the Romans by the Par∣tisans of Pope Gregory VII. to oppose the Emperor Henry IV. assembled a Council at this Town; in which sentence of Anathema passed upon the Henrycianes, called Heretiques; and the Antipope, Guibertus, set up by the Emperor. There was another in 1103. re∣markable for its giving absolution to Henry, Son of the Emperor Henry IV. for revolting against his Fa∣ther; tho others place this latter sometime to Northau∣sen in Thuringia. Quedenau, a Village in the Dukedom of Prussia in Poland. Of great note amongst the Sea-faring People, for a Church there dedicated to S. James; whither they repair to perform their Vows and Devo∣tions. Queens County, a County in the Province of Leinster in Ireland; called by the Irish, Cunntae Loighsaigh. Bounded by Kildare to the West, Kil∣kenny to the South, and Kings County to the East. The chief Town of which is Queens Town, sixteen Miles from Kildare to the West, and twenty two from Kilkenny to the North Queicheu, Queichea, a Province on the South-West of China; bounded on the North with Suchuen; on the East with Huquam; on the South with Quamsi, and on the West with Yunnan. This Province is ex∣tremely Mountainous: It has eight Cities, ten great Towns, and forty five thousand three hundred and three Families. The Capital City is Queiyan. Queicheu, a City in the Province of Suchuen, in the Kingdom of China, upon the River Kiang; built in a very fruitful and well watered Plain. This is the Capital of twelve Towns. Queilin, a City in the Province of Quamsi in Chi∣na, upon the River Quei. Queilloa, Quiloa, Kiloa, a Kingdom of Zangue∣bar, in Africa; between Mosambique and Melinde; on the Eastern Shoar of Africa: the King of which is a Tributary to the King of Portugal. It has a City of the same name, seated in an Island; which is 1509. was taken by Francis Almaida, the Portugal Vice-Roy of Africa. Long. 63 25. South Lat. 9. 18. This Island, called also Queilloa, hath a strong Cittadel for its defence, together with a famous Port; and is ho∣noured with the Residence of the King. § Some place another, an old City, Queilloa, upon another quarter of it. Queite, Queitum, a City in the Province of Honan in China. Queiyang, a great City in the Province of Quei∣cheu in China. Quercy, Cadurcensis Tractus, is a County in Gui∣enne in Aquitain, in France; great, populous, and fruitful in Corn, Wine, Cattel, &c. Bnded on the North by Limosin; on the East by Auvergne and Ro∣vergne; on the South by Languedoc; and on the West by Agenois and Perigort. The Capital of it is Cahors; the other Towns are Montauban, Figeac, Gordone, and Martel. This was the Country of the ancient Cadurci in Caesar, who furnished the Gauls with twelve thousand Men in their League against the Romans. It became united with the Crown of France in the Reign of Philip the Hardy. Querimba, an Island towards the North-East of Madagascar. Quernfurt, a small Town, which is yet the Ca∣pital of an Earldom of the same name, in the Ʋpper Saxony; in the County of Mansfeld; under the Duke of Saxony ever since 1635: but it belonged before to the Bishop of Magdeburg. Quesnoy, Quercetum, a small but very strong Town in Hainault; three Leagues from Landrecy to the North, two from Valenciennes, and five from Cambray: In the Hands of the French ever since 1654. Queximi, Aphana, an Island in the Gulph of Per∣sia; by others called Quetumi. Quiansy, or Kiangsy, Quiansia, a Province in China, towards the South of that Kingdom; boun∣ded on the East by Chekiam, on the South by Quan∣tum, on the West by Huquam, and on the North by Nankim. The Capital of which is Nanchang. It contains thirteen Cities, sixty seven great Towns, and one hundred thirty six thousand six hundred and twen∣ty nine Families. Quibriche, the same with Bernich in Bar∣bary. Quieras, a strong Town in Piedmont, upon an Hill and the Banks of the River Tanaro: where the famous Treaty betwixt France, Spain, the Empire, Savoy, and Modena was celebrated in 1631. Quimper, Corisopitum, a City in the Province of Britagne, in the Territory of Cornvaile; which is a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Tours; upon the Oder. Three Leagues from the Ocean to the North, ten from Brest, and forty from Rennes. Called commonly also Quimper-Corantine, from Co∣rantinus, the supposed Tutelar Saint of the Dio∣cese: to whom is Dedicated here the Cathedral Church. Quimperlay, a Town in Britagne, upon the River Isotte; two Leagues from the Sea, and ten from Quim∣per to the East. Quinborongh or Queenborough, the chief Town of the Island of Shepey in Kent, in Scray Lath; which hath the honor to be represented by two Burgesses in
the Lower House of Parliament; and to be secured by a Castle Royal. Quinque Ecclesiae, a City of the Lower Hungary; called by the Inhabitants, Otegiazae; by the Germans, Funfkircken; by the Turks, Petscheu; by the French, Cinq Eglises. It stands in the County of Baran, upon the River Keoriz, not far from the Drave: six Ger∣man Miles from the Danube, twenty three from Bel∣grade to the North-West, fourteen from Alba Rega∣lis, twelve from Buda to the South. It has this name from five noble Churches which were heretofore in this City. Stephen King of Hungary established the Bi∣shoprick here, (in 1009,) under the Archbishop of Gran. Solyman the Magnificent took it with great difficulty, in 1543: and died in it after, whilst his Ar∣my lay before Sigeth, in 1566. Count Serin II. burnt it and the Bridge of Esseck in 1664. Having been sur∣prised and plundered by the Croatian Army, in 1685. the year following after the taking of Buda, it was surrendered without resistance to the Imperialists. The Turkish Governor saying; Now the old Hen was es∣caped out of their Hands, the Chickens would follow her. Long. 42. 08. Lat. 46. 09. Quinsay, Kingsai, Kingsa, or Kangcheu, and Quisay, a vast City in the Province of Chequin; which in 1300. was the Capital, and Royal City of China, the Residence of the Emperors: said then to be ten Leagues in length, five broad, and thirty in Circuit; containing about a Million of Families: to have twelve hundred and sixty Stone Bridges, a Lake in the midst of it about thirty Miles in circumference, four hun∣dred and seventy Gates, with a Wall thirty Leagues in compass of that breadth at the top, that twelve Horse∣men might Ride a breast without any inconvenience upon it. This City stands upon the River Cientang, about sorty Leagues from the Eastern Ocean. Some confound it with Peking. The Cham of Tartary is said to keep a Garrison in it of thirty thousand Men. S. Quintin, Quintinum, a City in the Province of Picardy in France; which is the Capital of Ver∣mandois; and sprung up out of the ruins of Augusta Veromanduorum, a Roman Town. Famous for a great defeat of the French Forces; upon which it was yield∣ed to the Earl of Pembroke, who besieged it in 1557. But the getting of this Town was the loss of Calais: the Garrison of which was drawn out by King Philip to manage this Siege; two years after, the French recovered S. Quintin by a Treaty, and kept Calais too. It stands upon the River Somme; six Leagues from Perronne to the East, and seven from Cambray to the South. Quir, a part of the unknown Terra Australis; discovered by a Spaniard of the Name, but unculti∣vated as yet by Europeans. Quiscon, or Quiscun, Ionia, a Province of the Lesser Asia. Quiso, Cissa, a River of the Colchi; which falls into the Euxine Sea; seventy six Miles South of the Mouth of the Phasos; now called il Fazo. Quiess, Quissus, a River of Bohemia, in the Lower Silesia; which in the Borders of Lusatia falls into the Borber, near Sagan; seven German Miles from Glo∣gaw to the West. Quiteva, or Quieteva, a City and Kingdom in Africa, on the South of Aethiopia; heretofore a part of the Kingdom of Monotapia; towards Zangue∣bar. Quito, a Province of Peru, in South America, in the North part of that Kingdom: between the Pro∣vince of Quixo to the East, and the Pacifick Ocean to the West; eighty Leagues long, and thirty five broad. It had at first Kings of its own; but before the arrival of the Spaniards, was Conquered by the King of Peru; and together with it, fell under the Dominion of Spain. El Quito, the Capital City of the Province called by its name; a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Lima; in a fruitful Valley, at the foot of a Mountain called Volcano Pinta; near Machangara, and Machan∣gavilla, two Rivers almost under the Line. It is like∣wise called S. Francisco del Quito. Two hundred and fifty Spanish Leagues from Lima to the North, and six from the Pacifick Ocean to the East. In 1586. there was an University opened here. The Government of Quito, is a considerable part of South America; and one of the three principal Pro∣vinces of the Kingdom of Peru; on the North it is bounded with Popian; on the East with the Rivers of Pulumaio, and Amazons; on the South with the rest of Peru, and on the West with the Pacifick Ocean. The Andes divide it into two parts; besides Quito, it contains Canela, Quixos, and the South and middle Popian; with some other Territories of small Note. This is a fruitful, populous, and well watered Pro∣vince. Quivira, a Province in North America; between New Mexico, Mount Sual, and Florida; which was never Conquered by any of the European Nations, nor indeed throughly Discovered. It affords good pastu∣rage along the Sea Coast. Quixos, or los Quixos, Quixorum Provincia, la Province in the North of Peru; between Quito to the West, and Canela to the East; first Discovered in 1557. by the Spaniards, who have only four Colonies in it. R A. RAab, Jaurinum. See Gewer: Raab, or le Rab, Arrabo, a River of Hun∣gary; which ariseth in the Lower Stiria, near Gratz: and running Eastward through the Lower Hungary, by the Counties of Salawar and Gewer, it entertains the Lausnitz, the Binca, and the Guntz; and wa∣tering S. Gothard, and Kerment, beneath Sarvar it divides into two Branches: the right Hand Branch is called Rabnitz, the other Rab: these two make the Isle of Rab, seven German Miles in length. At Rab or Javarin, they reunite into one Stream again; and fall into the Danube. This River is particularly me∣morable for a great Defeat of the Turkish Forces, by the French and Germans, in 1664. upon the Banks of it near Kerment. See Ricaut's State of the Otto∣man Empire, pag. 207. Rabasteins, Rapistanium, a Town in the Ʋpper Languedoc in the Diocese of Alby, in France, upon the River Tarn: whose Coat of Arms is, three Turneps suitable to the Derivation of its Name from both the French and Latin, Rave, and Rapa, a Turnep. Rabath, Oppidum Novum, a City in the Kingdom of Fez; sixty two Miles from Tangier, and seventy four from Fez. Rabath. See Petra. Racanella, Cylistarnus, a River of the Hither Ca∣labria, in the Kingdom of Naples; which flowing by Cosano, falls into the Bay of Taranto. Rachelburgh. See Ratzburgh. Rackelspurg, Polentium, Raceburgum, a City of Germany, in the Lower Stiria; upon the River Mu∣er; under the Emperor, as Archduke of Austria; four German Miles from the Borders of Hungary to the West, and six from Gratz to the East. This City
is a Roman Town, ascribed by Antoninus to the Ʋp∣per Pannonia. Radicofani, a Castle and Seigniory in Tuscany, be∣tween Stena and Rome. Radini, the same with Strymon; a River which parts Thrace and Macedonia. Radnorshire. Radnoria, one of the twelve Shires in the Principality of Wales: Bounded on the North by Monmouth; on the East by Shropshire and Here∣fordshire; on the South by Brecknock, cut off by the Rivers of Clarwen and Wye; the Western point falls upon Cardiganshire. Its form is Triangular; the sides almost equal; the whole Circumference be∣ing about ninety Miles. The Air is sharp, the Soil barren. The Silures were the ancient Inhabitants of this County. The Town of Radnor, which gives name to it, was by the Romans called Magi, or Mag∣nos: pleasantly seated under an Hill, which bears up∣on his top a large and strong Castle; from whose Bul∣warks there is a Trench drawn along the West of the Town▪ on which has stood a Stone Wall: it is repre∣sented by one Burgess in the English Parliament. Its Long. is 17. 00. Lat. 52. 45. John Roberts, Lord Roberts of Truro, was by Charles II. July 23. 1679. Created Viscount Bodmyn, and Earl of Radnor: the first Earl of this County. This County proved fatal to Vortiger, (the last Monarch of the British Blood) here slain by Lightning: and to Llewellin, (the last Prince of the British Race) in 1282, found hid in the vast Mountains of this County, and slain by one Adam Francton: his Head being Crowned with Ivy, was set upon the Tower of London; in whom the British Race of Princes ended. Radom, a Town in the Lesser Poland, in the Pa∣latinate of Sendomir; which is the Capital of a Di∣strict of the same name. Twenty Polish Miles from Warsaw to the South, and fifteen from Sendomir to the North. Raglins, Ricina, an Island on the North of Ire∣land, on the Coast of the County of Antrim; which has a Castle; sometimes reckoned amongst the He∣brides, though it lies but eight Miles from the Con∣tinent. Ragusa, Ragusium, Epidaurus, Rhanzium, a City of Dalmatia; which is an Archbishops See, and a Free State; called by the Sclavonians Dubrounich; by the Italians, Ragusi. It stands in the Confines of Alba∣nia, on the Shoars of the Adriatick Sea, to which it has a Port: at the foot of a Mountain, called by the Greeks, Lau; upon a Rock: in so disadvantageous a situation, that the Turks by rouling down great Stones from the Mountain might have overwhelmed it and so have become absolute Masters of it, if they had ever desired to be so. This City is about a Mile in com∣pass: has large Suburbs beside; populous, rich, well Traded, and Fortified. About a League from it lies the Harbour of Santa Cruz of great Capacity; secu∣red by the Island of Lacroma. The City out of which this sprung, was called Epidaurus, from its Founders; six Miles more to the East: where the place of its ru∣ins is called Ragusi Vecchio, the Old Ragusa. It did pay a Tribute of twelve thousand five hundred Hunga∣rian Duckats to the Grand Seignior; but had seve∣ral Privileges in recompence by way of Trade; and ten Colonies in Servia, Bulgaria, and Thrace be∣sides; so that this was no hard Condition. Yet in 1686. they sent Ambassadors to the Emperor, and de∣sired to be received into his Protection. About the Year 1634. and in 1667. this City suffered much by an Earthquake. The Territory of Ragusano belong∣ing to it is about a hundred Miles in length, from the North-East to the South-West: but not above twen∣ty five Miles broad: having only two or three Towns more in it. Granted to this City by Stephen King of Bosnia, in 1333. Long. 42. 52. Lat. 42. 50. The Senate of this Republick is constituted of sixty Sena∣tors, under one Rector or Duke; of whom and of their liberty they are so exceeding jealous, that our Accounts tell us, they change him every month; not suffering the wearing of a Sword, or a Mans lying from his own house, without advising the Senate; nor open∣ing the City Gates above three or four hours in the day in Summer; and in the Winter, the half thereof: and for strangers, especially Turks, they secure them all the Night in their Lodgings. They fear the Turks, hate the Venetians; honour the Pope, Emperor and King of Spain; and pay tribute to all. Il fume di Ragusa, Hirminius, a River on the South of Sicily; so called from a Town it washeth: it falls into the African Sea; between Camerino to the West, and Cape Passaro to the East; sometimes called il Mauli. Raithe, a desart near the Mountain Sinai, in the Stony Arabia; or as others place it, in the Kingdom of Egypt: much visited and inhabited by the religious Anchorites of the 13th Century. Rain, Raina, a strong Town in the Dukedom of Bavaria, in the Borders of Schwaben; at the Con∣fluence of the Lech, and the Danube; two German Miles from Donawert to the East, and a little more from Newburgh. Often taken, and retaken in the Swedish War; and now rebuilding. § There is another Town of the same name in Stirïa; in the Borders of Carniola, and Croatia, upon the Save; twenty five Miles from Cilley to the East, and twenty two from Metling to the North. Rakouick, Raconicum, a City of Germany, near the River Miza; seven German Miles from Prague to the West, thirteen from Egra, and seven from Litomi∣erske, or Leutmeritz. Rama, or Ramia, the name of the Kingdom of Bosnia, in the Royal Title of the Kings of Hungary; which has been used by them ever since 1138: when Bela Caecus, King of Hungary, Possessed that King∣dom, or at least a part of it. There is still a River in that Kingdom of this name; which falls into the Na∣renta, and gives the same name to a small Territory as it passeth. Rama, or Ramatha, a City of the Tribe of Ephraim, afterwards a part of Samaria; now called Ramola by the Turks. It stands ten Miles from Joppe to the East, and thirty from Jerusalem: almost entirely ruined. Ramoth, or Ramath-Mispeh (as it is written Josh, 13. 26.) was one of the three Cities of Refuge, ap∣pointed by Moses in the Case of accidental Manslaying, Deut. 4. 43. It belonged to the Tribe of Gad; stand∣ing near the Mountain, and in the Territory of Gilead; in the Region of Trachonites in Palestine, as the Ro∣mans named that Country. Rampano, Biandyna, a Town formerly, now only a Castle on the South of the Morea; at the Mouth of the River of Eurotas. It gives name to a Bay former∣ly called Sinus Laconicus, now the Gulph de Castel Rampano, on the East of Cape Malio. Ramsey, Limnos, a small Island in the Irish Sea; called by the Welsh, Lymen. It lies upon the Coast of South Wales, three Miles from St. Davids. §. Also, a Market Town in Huntingdonshire, in the Hundred of Hurstington, towards Cambridgeshire: near a meer of its own name, and another called Whi∣tlesey, each affording plenty of Fish and Fowl, toge∣ther with the Rivers watering them. It stands amongst the rich grounds of the Fens; and had heretofore an Abbey of vast wealth to boast of, till its dissolution by King Henry VIII. Ranals, Ocetis, one of the Isles of Orkney, ten Miles from the Coast of Scotland.
Rangnitz, Ragnitia, a City in the Kingdom of Poland, in the Ducal Prussia; upon the River Russe, in the Borders of Samogithia; sixteen Polish Miles from Komingsberg to the East. Under the Elector of Brandenburgh. Raolconda, a City in the Kingdom of Golconde in the Hither East-Indies, on this side the Bay of Ben∣gala; five days journey from the City Golconde. Raon, a River of Germany, which falls into the left Branch of the Moselle. Raperswyl, Rapersvilla, a Town in Switzerland, which has a very ancient Castle; on the Lake of Zu∣rich, between it and the Upper Lake; five German Miles from Zurich to the North-East. So seated that it is only approachable by a Timber Bridge: and hav∣ing been taken in 1458. by the Swiss, (though often attempted) could never be recovered out of their Hands. Rapin, Rapidus, a small River in Lorain. Rapin, a Town and Earldom in Germany of the same name; eight Miles from Havelberg to the East, and nine from Berlin to the North. Rapoe, Rapa, once a City, now a Village, in the Province of Ʋlster in the County of Dungal: which is a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Armagh; but united to that of Derry; from which it stands twelve Miles to the West, forty from Dungal, and forty five from Armagh to the South-West. Rapolla, Rapalla, or Rapello, a small ill-peopled City in the Basilicate, in the Kingdom of Naples; twenty Miles from Conza to the East. It was ancient∣ly a Bishops See; but in 1528. Pope Clement VII. united this See to that of Melfi for ever. § There is another Town, and a Bay, upon the Coast of Genoua of this name. Raschit, the same with Rosetto. Rascia, the same with Servia, a large Province under the Turk; or rather a part of that Province, as others say; which takes its name from a River that passeth through this District into Moravia. The prin∣cipal Towns of it are Belgrade, Semendria, and Co∣lumbach. Brietius, (cited by Baudrand,) saith, this was once a distinct Kingdom. I am sure the Rascians have suffered very much in the present War: and when the Turk in 1687. deserted Possega, they put some thou∣sands of these Rascians to the Sword, for resusing to go with them; and Plundred all the rest. These were the ancient Scordisci. Raseborg, Raseburgum, a small City in Finland, under the Swedes, in the Province of Nyland: which has a large Haven on the Bay of Finland; and seated on the Borders of South-Finland. Rasen Market, a Market Town in Lincolnshire, in the Hundred of Walshcroft: so called for its distin∣ction from three other Rasens in the same Hundred, which have not the privilege to be Market Towns. Rasino, Erasmus, a River on the East of the Mo∣rea, which falls into the Inacho; and with it into the Bay di Napoli Romania. Rathal Alhaga, Arabia Petraea; the Stony Ara∣bia. Ratibor, Ratibora, Ratisboria, a small but spruce City in Silefia in Bohemia; which is the Capital of a Dukedom, upon the Oder. Four German Miles from Karnow to the East, seven from the Borders of the Lesser Poland, and the same distance from Oppolen to the South. This place was Mortgaged to Casimir King of Poland. Ratispon, Ratisbon, Augusta Tiberii, Ratispona, Ratisbona, Castra Regina, Reginum, Rhaetobonna, Rhetopolis, a City of Germany, (called by the Inhabi∣tants, Regenspurgh) in the Circle of Bavaria; and a Bishop's See, under the Archbishop of Saltzburgh. It was first a Roman City or Colony, built by Tiberius Caesar: afterwards the Seat of the Kings of Bavaria; and after that of the Dukes of the same Title. Fre∣derick I. made it a Free Imperial City. Henry the Lyon proscribed and degraded it; and put it under the Dominion of Otho Wittelspach, Duke of Bavaria. It stands upon the Danube, (which is here covered by a Stone Bridge, built by Hen V. in 1135) at the Con∣fluence of the River Regen; fifteen Miles from Mu∣nick to the North, seventeen above Passaw to the West, and sixteen from Ausburgh to the North-East. Said to have been Converted to the Christian Faith by Lucius Cyrenaeus, a Disciple of S. Paul, in 69. The Bishoprick was Instituted by Charles the Great; who held a Council in this City in 792. There have been many German Diets held here; which for brevity I must omit. This City has embraced the Augustane Confes∣sion. Long. 34. 18. Lat. 49. 00. Ratzburgh, Ratzemburg, or Ratzebourg, Race∣burgum, a City of Germany, in the Lower Circle of Saxony; which is a Bishops See, under the Archbi∣shop of Breme. It is little, and subject as to the Ci∣ty, to the Duke of Meckelburgh; but the Castle is in the Hands of the Duke of Lawemburgh. Before the Peace of Westphalia, in 1648. they were both sub∣ject to the Bishop: by that Treaty they were thus set∣tled, and made a Principality. This City embraced the Augustane Confession in 1566. by the procure∣ment of Christopher the thirtieth Bishop of this See; who was of the Family of Meckelburgh. It stands up∣on a Lake of the same name; three Miles from Lu∣beck to the South, four from Lawemburgh, and six from Swerin to the West. Rava, a City of Poland, which is the Capital of a Palatinate of the same name: seated upon a River called Rava too; eleven Polish Miles from Plocko to the South, and fifteen from Warsaw to the West. The houses are all of Wood. It has a Fortress. Ravello, Rebellum, Ravellum, a City in the Fur∣ther Principato, in the Kingdom of Naples; which is a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Salerno. But in 1086. freed from his Jurisdiction by Pope Victor III. In 1603. the Bishoprick of Scala was for ever united to this; from which it stands only two Miles, and ten from Salerno to the West. Ravenglass, a Market Town in the County of Cum∣berland, in the division of Allerdale; encompassed on three parts of it by the Sea, and the two Rivers, betwixt which it stands. Ravenna, a City of Romandiola in Italy, of great antiquity; which is an Archbishops See, and the Capi∣tal of that Province. It stands on a marshy Ground; forty five Miles from Bononia to the East, thirty from Rimini, forty two from Ferrara; near the Shoars of the Adriatick Sea, upon which it had a great Harbor; now filled up with Sand. Built by the Sabins, as Pliny saith; as others, by the Ʋmbrians about four hundred and ten years after the Flood A. M. 1766. In the latter times of the Roman Empire under Honorius, it became the Seat of the Emperors: fortified with new and strong Walls for that purpose. Augustus had be∣fore made it the Station of his Fleets, on the Adria∣tick Sea; and made a noble Haven here, which may be supposed to have contributed something to its growth and this change. Theodorick, King of the Goths, in 493. took it after a Siege of three years; and made it the Seat of his Kingdom. In 539. Beli∣sarius, General under Justinian the Emperor, reco∣vered it to the Empire. In 569. it became the Seat of the Exarchs, or Vice-Roys of Italy, under the Con∣stantinopolitan Emperours. In 725. it was Sacked by Luitprandus, King of Lombardy, upon the Em∣perors Edict against Images; but recovered by the Exarch, by the assistance of the Pope and the Vene∣tians, two years after. In 752. Aristulphus, King of
the Lombards, took it from the Greeks; and drove out the Exarchs. In 774. Charles the Great took it from the Lombards, and gave it to the Church of Rome. This City maintained a War against the Venetians, in 1140. In 1441. the Venetians took it and kept it till 1509: when it was forced from them by a League of the Emperor, King of France, Pope, the Duke of Milan, and a joynt War of all these Princes upon them. But the Pope salling out with the French King, Lewis XII. lost the City to him again and an Army of sixteen thousand Men in 1512: they were soon after sorced to desert it. The Archbishops See was founded by Valentinian the Emperor, about 425: and never subject to the Pope till 684: when the Pope after a great contest obtained this point from Constan∣tinus Pogonatus, (Emperor of Greece), who was a great admirer of the Sanctity of Benedict II. and with respect to that, subjected this See to Rome. There was a Council held here in 901. which confirmed all the proceedings of a Council at Rome under Pope John IX for the cassating of Pope Stephen VI. his Acts against the memory of Pope Formosus. And another in 967, in the presence of Pope John XIII. and the Emperor Otho I. touching the reformation of Ecclesiastical Discipline; with divers others, of the same subject. The City is now in a declining condi∣tion, and decays sensibly. Long. 34. 53. Lat. 43. 54. Ravensberg, Ravensberga, a small Town which gives name to an Earldom in the Circle of Westphalia. It stands upon an Hill; eighteen Miles from Osnaburgh to the South, thirty two from Paderborne to the North, and thirty from Munster to the East. The Earldom of Ravensberg, is a small Territory between the Bishopricks of Minden and Osnaburgh, to the North and West; that of Munster to the South, and the County of Lippe to the East. The Capital of which is Bifeld. This was subject to the Dukes of Juliers; and now under the Duke of Brandenburgh, in their Right. Ravensburgh, a small German City, in the Circle of Schwaben, in Algow, upon the River Schuss: six Miles from Constance to the East, and three from Lindaw to the North: an Imperial Free City. It is sometimes written Ravenspurg; and is of great an∣tiquity. Ravestein, a Town upon the Maes, in the Duke∣dom of Brabant, in the Borders of Guelderland; four Leagues from Bosleduc. Which belongs, with its Territory, to the Duke of Newburgh; but in the cu∣stody of the Ʋnited Netherlands. The Cittadel, that did stand here in the times of the Dukes of Cleves, its former Masters, was demolished by the Articles of a Treaty passed betwixt William Duke of Cleves and Ju∣liers, and the Emperor Charles V. Rayleigh, a Market Town in the County of Essex, in the Hundred of Rochford. Re, Rea, Reacus, an Island on the Coast of Sain∣tonge in Aquitain, near the Pais d' Aunis, in the Diocese of the Bishop of Rochelle: three Leagues from Rochelle to the West. The principal Town of it is S. Martin; once a place of great strength: near which the English received a great defeat from the French, in 1627: whilst they attempted the Relief of Rochelle. There is now a considerable Fort standing, to secure it: a high Watch-Tower upon the Coast, built by Lewis XIV. called la Tour des Baleines, to lighten the road, and prevent the dangers of the Shel∣fes adjacent, of that name. It yields vast plenty of Wine yearly. Rea, a Stream in Shropshire. Reading, the best Town in Berkshire; seated up∣on the Thames, where it receives the Kennet, with several Bridges over those two Rivers: which had an∣ciently a Castle, and a noble Church, both ruined in Mr. Cambden's time. The Danes about 845. made this place the Seat of their Rapines; and were hardly expelled by Aethelwolph, King of Mercia. Being Garrisoned for the King in the beginning of the late Troubles, it was taken by the Earl of Essex, April 26. 1643, after a Siege of ten days: and was ever after a great vexation to the City of Oxford, then the Kings Head Quatters. The County Assizes usually are here kept. It is a well inhabited Town, contains three Parishes: the Capital of its Hundred, and a Cor∣poration besides represented by two Members in the House of Commons. Recanati, Recinetum, Recina Nova, a City in the Marchia Anconitana in Italy, which has sprung out of the ruines of the ancient Helvia Recina; and whose See was united with that of Loretto in 1591. Recif, a strong Fort in Brasil; called by the Portu∣guese, Reciffa; it stands near the City of Olinda, in the Province of Pernambuck: for some time in the Hands of the Hollanders, till the Portuguese in 1654. retook it. Reculver, a Sea Town in the County of Kent, in Augustine Lath, some Miles North of Conterbury. Deserving to be particularly taken notice of for the Pa∣lace and Residence of Ethelbert, the first Christian Saxon King of Kent, here, in former times. The high Spire of the Church makes a good Sea mark. The Red Sea, Mare Rubrum, Erythroeum, Aza∣nium, & Arabicus Sinus; is a Branch of the Indian, or Aethiopian Ocean; which parts Arabia from A∣frica and Egypt; running from North to South above twelve hundred Miles. The Arabians call this Sea, Buhriel Calzem, (the Sea of Calzem,) from a City of that name: towards the North it is not above eight or nine Miles over, as Mr. Thevenot observes; who Travelled on its Shoars five days. It is narrow and full of Rocks; therefore dangerous to Sailers: for which and other reasons, now not much frequented, since the way to the Indies was discovered by the O∣cean. This Sea will be famous to all Ages, upon the account of the Children of Israels passing it on dry Ground; when they went up out of Egypt. Redford East, a Market Town in Nottingham∣shire, in the Hundred of Northclay, upon the River Iddel. Rednitz, Radiantia, a River of Franconia; which ariseth in Nortgow, in the Borders of the Upper Pala∣tinate, near Weissenburgh; and besides some smaller Rivers beneath Norimburgh, it receives the Pegnitz; and a little beneath Bamberg falls into the Mayn or Meyn. Rees, Reesium, a small City, formerly well forti∣fied; in the Dukedom of Cleves, upon the Rhine; and Garrisoned by the Hollanders, tho it belonged to the Duke of Brandenburgh. Being taken by the French in 1672, in 1674. it was restored to that Duke, but dismantled by the French: it stands three German Miles from Wesel to the North, and the same distance from Cleve to the East. Regen, Reginus, a River in Germany, which ariseth in Nortgow, in the Borders of Bohemia; and flowing through the Upper Palatinate falls in∣to the Danube at Ratisbon in Bavaria; which City is from this River sometimes called Regi∣num. Regenspurg, the same with Ratisbon. Reggio, Regium Lepidi, a City in the Dukedom of Modena; which is a Bishops See, once under the Archbishop of Ravenna; but now under the Archbi∣shop of Bononia. It stands between Parma to the West, and Modena to the East; fifteen Miles from either: The Capital of a Dukedom, now possessed by the Duke of Modena; and the second City of note in the estate of that Duke: being great and strong, ac∣companied
with a good Cittadel. The Goths and o∣ther Barbarians ruined it divers times. But Charles the Great repair'd it. Reggio, or Regge, Rhegium Julium, or Rigio, a City of the Further Calabria, in the Kingdom of Na∣ples; called d' Rijo by the Spaniards; which is an Archbishops See, upon the Shoars of the Streights of Sicily, at the most Southern point of Italy, in a fruit∣ful Plain. Built by the Chalcidians in the year of the World 3279. eighty two years after Rome: it flourish∣ed many years in the condition of a free State; till at last it fell into the Hands of the Sicilian Tyrant Dio∣nysius, after a Siege of eleven Months. This Prince began his Reign in the year of Rome 360. and Reign∣ed thirty eight years; but I cannot assign the year of this Action. The City lay little regarded from that time, till Julius Caesar rebuilt it; and made it a Ro∣man Colony, calling it Rhegium Julium: after which it is frequently mentioned in the Latin Historians. At this day it is very considerable, though it has been se∣veral times surprized and Plundered by the Mahome∣tans; particularly in 1552. Long. 40. 12. Lat. 37. 05. Regillus, a Lake in the Territory of the ancient Tusculum, in Latium; now in the Campagna di Ro∣ma, in the States of the Church, by the name of Ca∣stiglione; betwixt the City Tivoli, and la Cava deli' Aglio. The Victory of Aulus Posthumius over King Tarquin, the last King of the Romans, after the depo∣sition of him, was obtained near this Lake. Reims, Remi, Durocortorum Civitas, Remensis Civitas, Duricortora Remorum, is a very ancient, great, fine, populous City of France, in the Province of Champagne; and an Archbishops See, a Dukedom, and an University; which latter was Instituted by the Car∣dinal of Guise, in the Reign and by the permission of Henry II. King of France. The Archbishop is always the first Duke and Peer of France: claims the Right of Anointing the King: accordingly the Holy Ampoul or Viol of Oil, (which an Angel brought from Heaven at the Coronation of the first Christian King of France,) is ever kept in the Abbey of S. Remy here. This City stands upon the River Vesle; in the midst of an agree∣able plain: thirteen Leagues from Soissons to the East, twenty four from Verdun, ten from Chalons to the South-West, and five from the Marne to the North; adorned with four Abbeys, a great number of Col∣legiate and Parochial Churches, Religious and Ecclesi∣astical Houses. Pope Sylvester II. was sometime Arch∣bishop of this Church. Pope Ʋrban II. a Canon. Pope Adrian IV. an Archdeacon; and P. Adrian V. Archdeacon and Chancellor. Pope Leo XI. held a Council here in Person, in 1049, against the Vices of the times. Pope Calixtus II. did the same in 1119, in which the Emperor Henry was excommunicated. Pope Innocent II. the same in 1131: and Pope Eu∣genius III. accompanied with S. Bernard, in 1148. In 1595. a part of a Roman Triumphal Arch, bear∣ing a Tablet of Romulus and Remus fed by a Wolf; and in 1677. two more parts of the same, one repre∣senting the Story of Leda, the other the year with all its Months and Seasons, were digged out of the ground here, and esteemed as famous Monuments of Antiquity. But whether first erected by Julius Caesar, or Augustus, or Julian the Apostate, the Learned make but uncertain Conjectures. The Territory of this City is called Rmois. Reinfrew, a City of Scotland, in the County of Cuningham; upon the Irish Sea, or Dunbri∣tan Fyrth; not above five Miles from Glascow to the West. Reinsbourg, a Village one League distant from Leyden in Holland: celebrated formerly for an Ab∣bey of Benedictine Dames, successively founded by two Earls of Holland and two noble Ladies; who all lye interred in the Church: where there is besides a number of stately Tombs of the Counts and Coun∣tesses and others of the old Nobility of Holland. Remirmont, Romaricus Mons, a Town in Lo∣rain; at the foot of Mount Vauge, upon the Mo∣selle; five Miles from Fontenay to the East, and eleven from Colmar to the West: in which is a no∣ble Nunnery. Los Remolinos, Tarraconensis Juga, a Mountain in Arragon. Remorantin, Romorantin, a Town in Sologne in France. Rendlesham, an ancient Town in the County of Suffolk, and the Hundred of Looes, upon the River Deben: in which the first Christian King of the East Angles, Redwald, kept his Court. Renelle, Ranula, Marronel, a small River in Nor∣mandy; which falls into the Seyne to the West of Roan. Rennes, Renes, Ʋrbs Rhedonum, Condate, Rhe∣dones, Redonae, Condate Redonum, the Capital City of the Dukedom of Britagne in France; and a Bi∣shops See, under the Archbishop of Tours: The Seat of the Parliament of the Province by the establishment of K. Henry II. It stands upon the River Vilaine, which divides it in two; twenty two Leagues from Nantes to the North, and the same distance from An∣gers to the South-West. A place of great antiquity, being mentioned by Caesar and Ptolemy. The ancient Dukes of Britagne made it their Residence. About the years 1069 and 1263. there were two French Councils assembled here. It hath divers Churches, and Religious and Ecclesiastical Houses. Renty, Rentica, a Town in Artois; heretofore of great strength; which in 1554. repelled the Forces of Henry II. King of France; but in 1638. was ruined. It lies five Leagues from Bologne to the East, and four from Aras, upon the River Aa; which falls into the British Sea below Graveling, in Flanders. The late Baron de Renty, so famous for his application to the actions of piety, and his family, originally derive their name from hence. La Reole, Regula, a Town of France, upon the Garonne, in the Province of Guyenne: adorned with a good Monastery. Repeham, a Market Town in the County of Nor∣folk, in the Hundred of Eynesford. Rerone, Rero, a small River in Lombardy, in the States of Venice; which watereth Vicenza, and then falls into the Lesser Malamoco. Reschet, a City of Persia, called by the Ara∣bians, Husum; the Capital of the Province of Ki∣lania. Rescow, Rescovia, a City of Moscovy, near the Borders of Lithuania, and the Fountains of the Ri∣ver Wolga: forty Miles from Tuver to the North-West, and fifty from Bielka to the East. The Capital of a Dukedom of the same name; and has two Ca∣stles: the Russ call it Rshewa. Retel, Retelium, a City of Champagne in France, upon the River Aisne: the Capital of Retelois. Eight Leagues from Reims, and ten from Sedan to the West. Near this place the Spaniards received a great Defeat from the French in 1650, under the Mareschal de Tu∣rene. But in 1652. this Town was put into the Hands of the Spaniards by the Prince of Condy: and three years after was retaken by the French. It is honored with the Title of a Dukedom. Retelois, Retelensis Ager, is a Territory in the Northern Parts of Champagne; which was heretofore a Dukedom. It lies between the Aisne, the Bishop∣rick
of Liege, and the Dukedom of Luxemburgh; the chief Towns of which are Retel, Meziers, Charl∣ville, and Donchery. Retz, Radesia, a Dutchy in the County of Nantes in Bretagne in France; in the Borders of Poictou, at the Mouth of the River Loyre; the chief Town of which is Machecou, ten Leagues from Nantes to the North-West. Reel, Revalia, a great City and Sea-Port in Li∣vonia; called by the Russ, Roliva. The Capital of the Province of Esthonia. It stands upon the Bay of Finland; thirty three German Miles from Narva to the West, and thirty seven from Riga to the North. This City was an Hanse Town, and a Bishops See, un∣der the Archbishop of Riga; subject to the Crown of Poland till 1558: when being affrighted with the Threats of the Russ, it was forced to fly to Christian III. King of Denmark for Protection. (Having been built by Waldemar or Walmar II. King of Denmark, in 1223.) This Prince not willing to engage in a War in his old Age, refused their proffered submission. But the next year Erick King of Sweden accepted it: whereupon in 1563, there followed a sharp War be∣tween him and the City of Lubeck. In 1569, the Swedes receiving a great Defeat, a Peace was made at Stetin in 1570. Magnus Duke of Holstein being imployed by the Russ in the same year, laid close Siege to Revel, but with no success. In 1577, the Rusi did likewise attempt it, with the same success. So that ever since it has been in the Hands of the Swedes. This City, as Olearius saith, was built in 1230. Sold to∣gether with Narva and Wesemberg by Walmar III. King of Denmark, in 1347, to Gosvin d' Eck, (Great Master of the Order of Livonia) for nineteen thousand Marks of Silver. About 1477, it began to be a place of great Trade; by reason of its very excellent Haven, and convenient Situation for the Trade of Russia: and being thereupon grown great, rich, and insolent, it broke with the other Hanse Towns in 1550. But the Russ taking Narva in 1558, and settling the Sta∣ple there, and threatning Revel with a Siege, they submitted to Sweden; who have abated some of their Privileges, to secure their Obedience. Yet is it still a place of great Commerce, and enjoying many Privi∣leges: fortified after the modern way, and hath a Ca∣stle upon a Rock. The Religion professed is the Augustane Confession. The Government, democra∣tical, in the likeness of the Customs of Lubeck. Long. 48. 30. Lat. 50. 25. In others Lat. 60. 07. § Revel, a Town in the Ʋpper Languedoc in France, in the Diocese of Lavaur: called anciently Bastida Vauri, and Rebellus by K. Philip le Bel, who caused it to be Walled. Reutlingen, Reutlinga, a small City in the Pro∣vince of Schwaben in Germany; within the Borders of the Dukedom of Wirtemburgh; made an Imperial Free Town in 1215, or as others say in 1240. It is of a square Form, built in a Plain; upon the River Echez, (which a League beneath it falls into the Necker) at the Foot of Mount Alchameck; one Mile from Stutgard, ten from Ʋlm, and five from Tubin∣ghen. Under the Protection of the Duke of Wirtem∣burgh. Reux, Rodium, a Town in Hainault; two Leagues from Monts to the East. Reygate, a large Market and Borough Town in the County of Surrey. It stands in the Vale or Dale, cal∣led Holmes Dale; where Fullers Earth is digged up in abundance. Showing the ruins of an ancient Ca∣stle; and under ground a long Vault, with a spacious room at the end of it; said to be the secret Chamber in which the Barons met in Council in their War a∣gainst K. John. The Danes fought several unsuc∣cessful Battels near this Town. It is the Capital of its Hundred, and a Corporation represented in the Lower House of Parliament by two Burgesses. Reyme, the present Name of Capernaum in Pale∣stine. Los Reyos. See Lima. Rezan, the Capital City of a Dukedom in Mos∣covy; which was heretofore a Sovereign Principality of great extent. It stands thirty six Miles from Mosco to the South-East, and twelve from the Fountains of the Tanais arising within this Dukedom. It is an Epis∣copal City. The Province of Rezan lies between the Don and Occa; having on the West Moscovy, which is divided from it by the River Aka. It is the most fruitful Province in this Kingdom: besides the chief City, (which lies upon the Occa) it has Corsira and Tulla, upon a River of the same Name. Olearius. Rha. See Wolga. Rhade, Rhaeda, an inland City of Arabia Foelix. Long. 83. 20. Lat. 14. 15. Rhaiadergwy, a Market Town in the County of Radnor in Wales. The Capital of its Hundred. Rhamnus, an ancient Town of Attica in Greece: Famous in its time for a Temple dedicated to the Goddess Nemesis; and an admirable Statue therein of her, made either by Phidias or Agoracritus a Scholar to Phidias. She therefore gained the Title of Rham∣nusa. Rheine, Rhenus, a vast River in Germany, which is one of the greatest in Europe. Called by the Ger∣mans, das Rhyn; by the French, le Rheine; by the Poles, Rhen; and by the Spaniard, Rhin. Next the Danube, the greatest River in Germany. It spring∣eth out of the Alpes in the Western Borders of Swit∣zerland, and the Northern of the Grisons, (near the Fountains of the Rhosne, the Aar, and the Tesino) from two Fountains; the Northern of which is called Vorder Rhyn, the Further Rheine; the Southern, Hinder Rhyn, and lies more South. These being uni∣ted into one Stream near Chur, it passeth into the Lake of Constance; and separating Schwaben from Switzerland, watereth Constance, and Schafhausen; then taking in the Aar, it passeth to Basil; and be∣tween Alsatia and Brisgow, by a Northern Course it runs to Newburgh, Brisach, and Strasbourgh: then taking in the Ill, it watereth Stolhoffen, Philipsburgh, and Spire; beneath which it admits the Necker at Manheim; and so proceeds to Wormes and Oppen∣heim. At Ments it is covered by a Bridge of Boats; and beneath it takes the Mayne, a great River: so by Ingelheim, hasteth to Trier; beneath which the Lohn and the Moselle come in at Coblentz, where there is another Bridge of Boats: so dividing the Dukedom of Monts from the Bishoprick of Cologne, it watereth Bonne, Cologne, and Duseldorp: at Duisdrop in the Dukedom of Cleves, the Roure; at Wesel, the Lippe comes in to augment his Stream: soon after in Guel∣derland, this Torrent grows too great for one Chan∣nel; and divides into two Branches, and forms the Island of Schenken. The lest or Southern Branch is called the Wael; which by Nimeguen, and Bom∣mel goes to Worcum; above which the Maez out of Brabant comes in; at Dort it divides again, and forms the Isle of Yssel. The Northern Branch goes by Arnhem, Ʋtrecht, and Newport to Roterdam, and Vlaerding; where it unites with the Southern Branch; and both fall into the British Sea by the Briel. Above Arnhem there is another Branch, de∣rived from the North Branch of the first Division: which by Doesburg▪ Zutphan, Deventer, Hatten and Campen, falls into the Zuyder Sea: this last Branch is called by the Dutch the Yssel. There can be nothing greater said of this River, than that it was for many Ages the Boundary of the Roman Empire. Rheineberg, or Rhimbrg, Rhenoberga, a City
in the Bishoprick of Cologne; in the Borders of the Dukedom of Cleves, upon the Rhine; which is lit∣tle, but very strong. Taken from the Spaniards by the Hollanders, in 1633: and continued under them till 1672; when it was taken by the French, and restored to the Elector of Cologne, the proper Own∣er. It stands two German Miles from Wesel to the South, and three from Guelders to the East. Rheinfelden, or Rheinsfeld, is a small, but strong City of Germany: in the Province of Schwaben; which has a Bridge upon the Rheine; under the House of Austria. It lies about two Miles above Basil to the East. Often taken in the Swedish War, and suffered very much in 1678, by the French. Once a Free Imperial City; but in 1410. granted by Lewis of Bavaria, to the Archduke of Austria. Also the more famous for a Defeat of the Imperialists; and the taking of John de Wert, by the Duke Bernard Waymor, in 1638. Rheinsfeld, a strong Castle upon the Rheine; above S. Gewer; in the County of Caltimeliboch, un∣der the Landtgrave of Hesse. Built by one Dieter, a Count of this Country, in 1245: between Coblentz to the North, and Bingen to the South, in the Bor∣ders of the Bishoprick of Trier. Rhene, Rhenia, Rhenica, Rhenis, one of the I∣slands called plurally  by the Greeks, and by Ma∣riners corruptly Sdille. See Delos. At a distance it seems to make one Island with Delos: in the Aegean Sea, amongst the Cyclades. Retimo, Rhetimo, Rhitymna, a City in the Isle of Candy or Creet, mentioned by Ptolemy; and called at this day by the Greeks, Rytimni. It is a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Candia; has a large Harbor at the North end of the Island; and now strongly fortified. Taken from the Venetians, by the Turks, in 1646, under whom it is now; also the Capital of a County of the same name in that Island. Rhiphaei Montes, the Mountains in the Province of Petzorcke, in the North of Moscovy: running to∣wards Obdora and the River Oby, upon the Borders of the Asiatick Tartary: and called by the Russ, Ziem∣noipoias, that is, the Girdle of the World in their Language. Rhoa, Edessa, a City of Mesopotamia, menti∣oned by all the ancient Geographers; famous for the Story of King Abgarus: very great, and an Archbishops See, under the Patriarch of Antioch. It has had anciently many other Names; at this day it is the Capital of Diarbeck, (or Mesopotamia) under the Turk. It stands in the middle between Aleppo to the West, and Amida to the East. In the times of the Holy War it had Counts; but falling into the Hands of the Mahometans again, they have reduced it into the State in which it now is. Thus described by Mr. Thevenot, who saw it. This City is about two hours march in circuit; the Walls are fair; and pretty entire, and form a Square; within there is hardly any thing but Ruins to be seen, and yet it is very populous: on the South Side is a Castle upon an Hill, with large and deep Ditches, tho they are cut in the Rock: this Castle is of a large circumference; has little within it, but Ruins; and some pitiful old broken Guns. Long. 72 30 Lat. 37. 30. Rhodes, Rhodus, a celebrated Island in the Medi∣terranean Sea; upon the Coast of the Lesser Asia, near its South-West Point; over against Caria: ha∣ving Cyprus to the East, Egypt to the South, and Candia to the West. Of old it had very many names; and is now called by the most remarkable of them. About an hundred and thirty Miles in compass; or as others say, an hundred and ten. The principal Place in it is Rhodes: an Archbishop's See; seated upon an insensible Ascent of a Hill, near the North-East part of the Island; and environed with divers other little Hills, full of Springs and Fruits: it sprung out of the Ruins of Jalissi, an ancient City near it. It has a delicate Harbor to the East and North; form'd by two strong Moles approaching each other demi∣circularly, so as to leave a Passage betwixt them for no more than a single Vessel: and of old much fa∣med for a vast Coloss, (or Statue of Brass of the Sun) made by Chares, a Lydian, a Scholar of Lysippus of Sicyon; seventy Cubits high: which stood a-stride over the Mouth of this Harbor, upon two Rocks; so that the Ships failed between his Legs; and this was then thought one of the seven Wonders of the World. The Brass of this Statue in 654, (one thou∣sand four hundred and sixty one years after it was built), when Muhavia the Saracen Sultan of Egypt had conquered the Island, was carried to Alexandria in Egypt by the Saracens, upon the backs of se∣venty two Camels: having, it is said, been thrown down in an Earthquake: which verifies the Predi∣ction of the Oracle long before, That Rhodes should be lost, when that Colossus broke. This Island is seated twenty Miles from the nearest Coast of Asia to the South; one hundred and thirty four from Crete or Candy to the North-East; and five hundred from Constantinople to the South: of a most fertile Soil, and so serene and pleasant an Air, that as the Ancients dedicated both it and the Colossus to the Sun, because not a day passes without the full displaying of his beams here; so many of the chief Romans chose it for the place of their Retreat. First peopled by Do∣danim, the Son of Javan (Grandchild of Japhet), before he peopled Greece. After these, the Empire of this Island passed to the Phaenicians; who made the Inhabitants so very expert in Navigation, that for some Ages they gave Law to the World, and were Sovereigns of the Sea: their Constitutions and Judg∣ments in Affairs concerning the Sea being withal so just, as to become incorporated afterwards into the Roman Pandects. Their fear of the Macedonians made them sue to the Romans for Protection; whom they served very effectually to the Ruin of the for∣mer: after which they helped on the Ruin of Antio∣chus; and withstood the flattering Fortune of Mi∣thridates King of Pontus, till at last the Roman Greatness became undisputable by this small Island; and under Vespasian they were made a Roman Pro∣vince. It continued under the Greek Empire, (to which it fell in the Division) till 652: when it was conquered by Muhavia, the Saracen Sultan of Egypt. It returned under the Greeks again during the Civil Wars of the Saracens; and in 1124. was taken by the Venetians. The Greeks recovered it under John Ducas, about 1227. About 1283. it fell together with the Lesser Asia, under the Turks. In 1310. the Knights of S. John of Jerusalem (when Jerusalem and all the Holy Land was lost from the Christians) retook it, after a Siege of four years under Fulk Villares, Great Master of that Order. The Turks, 'ere it could be re-fortified, again besieged it: in which Conjuncture, Amadaeus IV. Duke of Savoy bravely succoured it; and to eternalize the Memory of his Victory, changed the Eagles, the Arms of his Predecessors; into the Silver Cross of the Order of the Knights; with these four Letters F. E. R. T. to signifie, Fortitudo Ejus Rhodum Tenuit. After this it was one of the Bulwarks of Christendom against the Turks. Mahomet II. the Great, attempted the Reduction of it in 1457. Again in 1480, with 100000 Men, and the greatest Art and Obstinacy ima¦ginable for 3 Months, but without Success: in comme∣moration whereof, Peter d'Aubusson, the then Grand Master, built the Church of S. Maria della Victoria; with a Chappel to the Honour of S. Pantaleon here;
it being upon his day that the Turks in their last As∣sault were defeated. Nor had Solyman II. the Magnifi∣cent, had any better Success in 1522; if he had not met one Andrea Amarato a discontented Traitor, a Portuguese; (discontented at the Elevation of another to the dignity of Grand Master before him) within the place; who was Chancellor of the Order, and betray∣ed their Counsels to that Prince: who yet spent six Months before it, and lost an infinite number of Men. And Amarato, his Treason being (before the Surrender) discovered, had his Head cut off on Oct. 30. Mr. Knolls in his Turkish History, p. 391, has well described the Situation of the principal City in this Island. Bellonius saith, it was seated in a Plain; fenced with double Walls, thirteen Towers, and five Bastions; of great Strength and Beauty. The Turks have to this day so great a Veneration for the Valor of those Knights of S. John of Jerusalem, that they preserve (saith he) their Houses as they left them; with all the Arms, Paintings, Statues and In∣scriptions; and the Walls of the City are put into the same state they were before the Siege. From hence these Knights passed to Sicily; and in 1530. obtain∣ed from Charles V. the Isle of Malta. Two small Bays accompany the Harbour on the North and South sides. The former is lock'd up by a Mole, which enters into the Sea above 300 Paces; bearing a Fort, called The Tower of S. Nicholas; built by the Order in 1464, and worthy of remembrance, for its withstanding the repeated furious Assaults of the Turks in the Siege in 1480. Long. 58. 00. Lat. 37. 50. Rhodope. See Rulla. Rhoetia: This ancient Country, which some de∣nominate the Western Illyricum, was of that extent, as to comprehend a part of what we now call the Circles of Schwaben, Bavaria, and Austria in Ger∣many; the Country of the Grisons, and something of Switzerland. Of which the Grisons, who are more properly called the Alpine Rhoetians, are the only People at this day retaining the memory of its Name: where, as one remarks of their Country, you have Mountains of Pride and Valleys of Misery. See Grisons. Rhosne, Rodanus, one of the most celebrated Ri∣vers in France; called by the Germans Der Rogen; by the Fronch, Rhosne. It ariseth from a double Spring, in Mount de la Fourch; in the Borders of Switzerland; two German Miles from the Springs of the Rhein. And running Westward through Val∣lais (or Wallisserland), it divides that Tract; water∣ing Sion, or Sitten, and Martinach, (the principal Places in it;) then entering the Lake of Lemane, it divides Savoy from Switzerland: five Leagues be∣neath Geneva (saith Baudrand), it burieth it self for some time in the Earth, as I have often seen. Then turning South, and dividing Savoy from Bugey, at Bellay it becomes great enough to bear a Boat; then turning West, and dividing Dauphiné from Bugey, at la Bresse it entertains the Ain; at Lyons it is covered by a Bridge of Stone, and improved by the Addition of the Saone, (a great River;) here turn∣ing South, it parts Lyonnis from Dauphiné; watereth Vienne and Condrieu; divides the Viverais from Dauphiné, and salutes Andasse: at S. Vallier, (over against Tournon) receives the Isere above Valence; beneath it the Erico, the Drome, and the Ardosche; at S. Esprit it is again covered by a noble Stone Bridge: so dividing Languedoc from Provence, and encreased by the Sorgue, it watereth Avignon, where there is a third Bridge: then receiving in the Du∣rance, and the Gardon, and watering Beaucaire, at Arles it divides into two Branches. The Western Branch divides into two more; at last it falls into the Mediterrantan Sea by five Mouths: each of which has its proper Name; to wit, Gras du Midi, Gras de Paulet, Gras d' Enfer, Grand Gras, and Gras de Passon. Some adding thereto, Gras Neuf. Which Word Gras is understood to be taken from Antoni∣nus's Gradus, where he speaks of the Entrance of the Rhosne into the Ocean. But there is no Town built upon any of them, of any note, beneath Arles; which stands about eight Miles into the Land. This is a rapid River. Rian, Abravanus, a Lake and River in the South-West of Galloway in Scotland; of which Cambden saith, that they are exceeding full of Herrings and Stone-Fishes. Richelieu, Richelaeum, a City in the Province of Poictou; built by the Cardinal of that Name, who was born here in 1585; and for some time under Lewis XIII. of France, governed that Kingdom as he pleased. Amongst other of his Actions, he built or rebuilt at least this place, to perpetuate the Memo∣ry of his Name and Family; and procured it to be honoured with the Title of a Dukedom. It stands four Miles from London to the East, five from Mire∣beau, and one from Tours to the North-West. Now in a flourishing State. Richensée, Verbigenus, a Lake in the Canton of Argow in Switzerland. Richmond, a Town and County in Yorkshire; ly∣ing on the North West of that County, towards Lan∣cashire; which bounds it on the West. It is a mountainous and desolate Place; yet produceth Grass in reasonable quantity. This County took its Name from Richmond; a Town built by Alane, Earl of Bretagne in France (the first Earl of this County, after the Conquest; Nephew to William the Conque∣ror;) upon the River Swale, over which it hath a Stone Bridge: thirty two Miles from York to the North-West, and twenty from the Sea to the South-West. The Town is indifferently well frequented, and populous. It was anciently walled, and fortified with a Castle by the said Alane, for the greater secu∣rity of these Parts against the English: the Gates are still standing, but in the midst of the Town; its Si∣tuation being shifted. Before it was thus rebuilt, it was called Gilling. Oswy, King of Northumberland, was basely murthered here in 659; ever after reputed a Martyr. It is now a Corporation, represented by two Burgesses in the House of Commons; and con∣taining two Parish Churches; in the Hundred of Gil∣lingwest. Long. 18. 15. Lat. 55. 17. This Earl∣dom continued in that Family till 1171: when it came to Geofrey Plantagenet, the fourth Son of K. Henry II. (by the Marriage of Constance, Daughter of Conan, Duke of Bretagne.) In 1230. Peter de Dreux, was Earl of Richmond; one of whose Descen∣dents (John de Montford) was created Duke of Richmond in 1330, the sixteenth Earl, and first Duke: to whom in 1342. succeeded John of Gaunt, after∣wards Duke of Lancaster. The twenty second Earl of Richmond was Henry VII. King of England. The twenty third was Henry Fitz-Roy, a Natural Son of Henry VIII. The twenty fourth was Lewis Duke of Lenox, created Earl of Richmond by King James I. in 1613, and Duke of the same in 1623. Which Fa∣mily ended in Charles, the fourth of that Line, who died without Issue, Ambassador in Denmark, in 1672. In 1675, Charles Lenox was created Duke of Richmond by Charles the Second, his Natural Fa∣ther by the Dutchess of Portsmouth. Richmont, a Place in Saintonge in France. Richmond, a Town in Surrey, upon the Thames; between Kingston and London; heretofore called Shene, but by Henry VII named Richmond. There is an ancient Palace, or Royal House in it, belonging to the Kings of England; in which Edward III. died
in 1377. Henry the Seventh rebuilt this Pile twice; it being burnt in his Reign; and afterwards he died here, April 22. 1409. Also Queen Elizabeth of blessed Memory, left this World in this place, March 24. 1602. And before her Ann, Daughter to the Emperor Charles V. and Wife to King Richard II; esteemed a very beautiful Lady. The Civil Wars in the Reign of King Charles I. left some of its effects upon this Palace. This Town stands pleasantly and healthfully, upon an easie Ascent; fair, large, well built, and well inhabited; in the Hundred of King∣ston. Rickmansworth, a Market Town in Hartford∣shire, in the Hundred of Cashio, near the River Coln. Ries, or Riez, Rejus, Rejensis Civitas, Albecum Rejorum Apollinarium, Colonia Rejorum, Civitas Regiensium, Rogium, a City in Provence in France; which is a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Aix; from which it stands twelve Miles to the North-East, and six from Davignan to the North-West; eight from Sisteron to the South: little, but populous; built on a Hill by the River Auvestre, which falls into the Verdon. S. Hilary Bishop of Arles presided at a Council here in 439: in which Armentarius Bishop of Ambrun, ordained by two Bishops only without the Authority of the Metropolitan, was therefore re∣duced to the quality of a Chorepiscopus. In 1285. when Charles II. King of France was a Prisoner in the hands of the Arragonese, another Council here assembled passed a Canon to command publick Pray∣ers to be made for his Deliverance. Rieti, Reate, a City in the Ecclesiastical State in Italy, in the Province of Ʋmbria; which is a Bishops See, immediately under the Pope; upon the River Velino, in the Borders of the Kingdom of Naples; between Aquila to the East, and Narni West: twen∣ty eight Miles from each, and forty from Rome to the South. Tho this City stands in a bad and un∣healthful Air, yet it is populous, in a thriving State; and of great Antiquity, being mentioned by Strabo, Ptolemy, and Pliny. Rieux, Ruesium, Rivi, a small City in the Upper Languedoc; which is a Bishops See, under the Arch∣bishop of Tolouse; upon the Garonne (where it takes in the Rize), in the Borders of Gascony: seven Leagues from Tolouse to the South, eight from de Foix to the South-West, and eight from Lyons to the South-East. Made a Bishops See by Pope John XXII. in 1318, having been heretofore inclosed in the Diocese of Tolouse. § There is a Seigniory in Bretagne, called also Rieux, which gives name to a Family of Honor there. Riga, Rigen, a City of Livonia; called by the Inhabitants Riig: one of the Hanse Towns, great, strong, rich, and populous; being the Capital of Li∣vonia, and an Archbishops See. It has a large and safe Haven at the Mouth of the River Duna, (where it enters the Baltick Sea;) seven German Miles from Mittaw to the North, twenty nine from Revel to the South, and forty eight from Vilna; in the Borders of Curland. Built by Albert the Third, Bishop of Livonia, in 1196: others say in the year 1186, by one Bertold an Abbot. In the year 1215, it was made an Archbishops See by Pope Innocent III. and the Metropolitan of all Livonia, Prussia, and Curland. A great while the Seat of the Masters of the Knights of the short Sword in Livonia, and afterwards of the Grand Master of the Teutonick Order in Prussia; who divided the Sovereignty and Administration of Justice with the Archbishop in this City, till the Re∣formation, which excluded both of them. In the year 1561, it willingly submitted to the Crown of Poland. In the year 1605. it was in vain besieged by Charles IX. King of Sweden; nor had he better success in the second Siege, in 1609. Charles Gusta∣vus Adolphus, his Son, in the year 1621, took it; and ever since the Swedes have possessed it: neither were the Moscovites, sitting down before it some years ago, able to take it. It is seated in a spatious, pleasant, fruitful Valley; a quarter of a League over; fortified to Land with six Regular Bastions, Counter∣scarps, Palisadoes, and Half-Moons by the Swedes in the year 1633. Its Traffick with the English, Dutch, Germans, and Moscovites, is so great, that it has almost as many Ships as Houses; and so abounding with Provisions, that an Ox may be bought for three Crowns. Their Religion is the strict Lutheran, and no other allowed: they speak both the Curland and Sclavonian Tongue; tho they generally understand the High Dutch too; their Publick Acts and Statutes being expedited in that letter Language. Thus far Olearius. Long. 47. 57. Lat. 57. 35. Rigi, Volerius, a River in the Island of Corsica. Rignano, Arinianum, a Town belonging to the Falisci, an ancient People of Hetruria; which is now only a Castle, in S. Peters Patrimony, on an Hill; one Mile from the Tiber, and twenty one from Rome to the North. It is honored with the Title of a Dukedom, tho there are but few Inhabitants in it. Rille, Risela, a small River in Normandy; which arising by Seez, and flowing North, watereth Aigle, Rugles, Lyre; and at Beaumont le Roger, takes in the Charante; and separating Lisieux from the Coun∣ty of Roanois, falls into the Seyne, above Honfleur; three Leagues to the East. Rimini, Ariminum, a City in Romandiola; which is a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Ravenna. It is a neat, populous City; in a fruitful Plain, upon the Shoars of the Adriatick Sea; at the Mouth of the River Mareochia (Ariminus;) over which it has a Bridge, built with great Art, by Augustus Caesar: but the Haven is almost choaked with Sand. This City stands between Bononia to the West, and Ancona to the East; twenty five Miles from Ravenna to the North-East, and a little more from Ʋrbino to the North. The Via Flaminia made by the old Romans with so much Expence, ended at the Bridge of this City: and the Aemilian began here, which went to Piacenza. The Inhabitants were very faithful to the Romans, under the Distresses brought upon them by the Victorious Arms of Hannibal, in the second Pu∣nick War. The taking it by Julius Caesar, was the first Act of the Civil War between him and Pompey. Being destroyed by the Dalmatians, it was rebuilt by Dioclesian. In the times of Justin it sustained a Siege from the Goths. In the year 359, here was a famous Arrian Council, of above four hundred Bi∣shops, held under Constantius the Emperor; who found means to gain a general Subscription to the , and the Arrian Opinions, even from those who were not Arrians. In after times it was subject to the Family of Malatesta; who adorned it with no∣ble and magnificent Palaces. Before this it had been subject to the Lombards and Franks. The first of the Malatesta's obtained it from Otho the Third, in the year 1002. This Family is no more mentioned till the year 1348, which is on another occasion too. The same continued till about the year 1522: when Pandulfus, the last of this House, being hardly laid at by Pope Alexander VI. sold it to the Venetians: out of whose Hands Pope Julius II. recovered it the last mentioned year. In the year 1527. it was again surprised by Pandulphus; whilst Pope Clement was besieged by the Forces of Charles V. But this Pos∣session was short, and Pandulphus dying in great Poverty at Ferrara, that noble Family (which had produced so many learned Men, and good Generals)
was extinct. The Church has ever since enjoyed this City: it has many remains of Roman Antiquity; and amongst them a rare Triumphal Arch, built in Honor of Augustus: beside the Ruins of a sine The∣atre. Long. 35. 37. Lat. 43. 51. Ringwood, a Market Town in Hampshire, upon the River Avon. The Capital of its Hundred. Rio Grande, a vast and rapid River in Castile d'Or in South America; made by the Conjunction of Rio Cauca or Rio grande de Santa Martha, (which ariseth in the Province of Popayan in the Terra sir∣ma: with the Rio grande de la Madalena, which springs out of the new Kingdom of Granada) ha∣ving this name given it by the Spaniards, because they discovered the mouth of it upon S. Magdalen's Day: as the other, that of Santa Martha, from its flowing along the Province of the same name These two Rivers unite in one Channel near the City Tene∣riffa in the Province of S. Martha; falling after∣wards into the North Sea. § Also a Government in Brasil. Rioga, Rivogia, a Province in Spain, which was a part of Navarre, but now annexed to Old Castile: it is divided from Alava, by the Douro; and lies be∣tween Old Castile and Navarre. The principal Towns of which are Calzada, Legrono, Najara, and Belo∣rado. Riom, Riomum, Ricomagum, a City in the Low∣er Auvergne in France; two Leagues from Clermont to the North: in a flourishing State. The Capital of Auvergne: adorned with a College of Oratorians of the Foundation of Lewis XIV. an antient Abbey built in the beginning of the seventh Century, two Hospitals, and divers Churches and religious Commu∣nities. Genebrard, and Sirmondus the learned Jesuit, were produced by this Place. Ripa de Transona, a small but elegant City in the Marquisate of Ancona; under the Pope: and a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Fermo. It stands five Miles from the Shoars of the Adriatick Sea, the same from the Borders of the Kingdom of Naples, and ten from Fermo. Pope Pius V. made it a Bishops See in 1571. Ripaille, a Town in Savoy, upon the Lake of Geneva. Ripen, Ripa, a City in the Kingdom of Denmark, in South Jutland; which is a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Lunden: and has a convenient Harbor upon the German Ocean, at the Mouth of the River Nipsick; and a Fortress; five Miles from Hadersleben to the West, and eight from Flensburgh to the South-West. This Bishoprick was founded by Bala∣tand King of Denmark, in 950. Christopher I. King of Denmark, died here in 1259. The City was taken by the Swedes in 1645: but since recover∣ed by the Danes. Ripley, a Market Town in the West Riding of Yorkshire, in the Hundred of Claro, upon the River Nyd. Rippon, Rhidogunum, a Town in Yorkshire in the West Riding, in the Hundred of Claro, of good Antiquity; near the Youre, over which it has a Bridge. Adorned with a Collegiate Church, with three lofty Spires; and antiently with a stately Monastery built by Wilfride Archbishop of York, till the Danes de∣stroy'd it with the Town. Yet Odo Archbishop of Canterbury repaired it again, and translated the Re∣liques of the holy Founder to Canterbury. There is a narrow hole in a Vault under ground in the Church, called S. Wilfride's Needle. It is one of the best Towns in the County, well inhabited, and of note particularly for making good Spurs. Having the Privilege to be a Corporation also, represented by two Members in the House of Commons. Risano, Formio, a River of Carniola; the upper part of which is called by the Germans, Alben; the lower by the Italians, Risano. It springeth out of the Alpes from Mount Ocra, in Carniola; towards the Lake of Lugea, or Czirknitzerzee; and flowing Westward through Istria, falls by the Bay of Trieste into the Adriatick Sea; six Miles from Trieste, and two North of Capo di Istria. Risano, Rhizana, a City of Dalmatia, mention∣ed by Ptolemy, Pliny, and Polybius: which is a Bi∣shops See, under the Archbishop of Raguza; under the Dominion of the Turks: and accordingly much depopulated and ruined. It stands forty Miles from Raguza towards Scodra; from which, thirty. Long. 45. 15. Lat. 42. 00. Risborough, a Market Town in Buckinghamshire, in the Hundred of Aylesbury. Risenbergh, a Mountain in the Eastern parts of Bohemia, out of which the Elbe springeth. Rivadava, or Rivadeo, a City of Gallicia in Spain, called by the French, Rivedieu: it stands upon the Bay of Biscay, in the Borders of Asturia; at the bottom of an Hill, and the Mouth of the River Na∣vius; which affords it the convenience of a Port: fourteen Spanish Leagues from Oviedo to the West, and four from Mondonedo. Rivera di Genoua, Liguria Littorea, is a Coun∣try in Italy: bounded on the West by the Maritime Alpes, (by which it is divided from France;) on the East by the River Magra, (by which it is divided from Hetruria, or Tuscany;) on the North by the Apennine; and on the South by the Mediterranean Sea, here called the Ligurian Sea. In the middle of it stands the City of Genoua, which divides it into the Eastern and Western. This is now under the States of Genoua; by whom a great part of the Western Division is destinated more to pleasure than profit: the rich Genoueses having filled it with Country-Hou∣ses, where they spend the pleasant time of the Sum∣mer and Autumn in noble Palaces, and delightful Gardens. The Eastern Division supplies them with as much Wine as they need, and an extraordinary plenty of good Oil. The principal Place in the We∣stern is Aranza; once an inconsiderable Village; lately a Place of great Trade and Wealth, having sixty Sail of Ships trading into all parts of the World: but their Shipping is now declining. The principal Place in the Eastern, is Sarazana; a Town of great strength. Rivoli, Rivolium, a small Town in Piedmont, called by the French, Rivoles. It stands upon the River Doria; eight Miles from Turin to the West: and has one of the most sumptuous Castles in Pied∣mont. Roan, Rotomagus, the Capital City of Normandy: called by the French, Rouen; by Caesar, and the other ancient Historians, Ʋrbs Velocassium. It is an Arch∣bishops See, and the Seat of the Parliament of Nor∣mandy. Great, rich, populous, well built, in all re∣spects one of the best Cities in France; and thought by some to be the greatest, next to Paris. It stands upon the Seyne; (which affords it a noble Harbor, and a great Trade) at the foot of an Hill; twelve Miles above Dieppe, and twenty eight beneath Paris: with a Bridge upon the Seyne, for the convenience of a Land Trade. It has an old Castle called the Pa∣lace, in which the Dukes of Normandy kept their Court; and is about seven Miles in compass, having (besides what lies within the Walls) six very great Suburbs; and containing in the whole thirty five Pa∣rishes, with thirty four Monasteries for Men and Wo∣men. The Castle on S. Catharines Hill is now in∣tirely ruined. This City is said by Vitalis, lib. 5. to be built by Julius Caesar. Valesius proves it one of
the most ancient Cities of France; and that in the times of Theodosius the Great, it was esteemed as a City of the highest rank. Taken by the Normans in 889, and assigned to Rollo (first Duke of Nor∣mandy) in 912, when Rollo became a Christian. It continued under his Posterity fourteen Descents. In 1019. it suffered very much by fire. Taken from John King of England, by Philip the August, King of France, in 1204; after it had been in the Hands of the Normans three hundred and sixteen years. This City continued under the French till 1418: When the English under Henry V. retook it, after a bloody Siege. Charles VII. of France recovered it to that Crown in 1449. In the times of the late Civil Wars of France, it was taken and sacked by the Hugonots in 1562: but recovered after the Battel of Dreux, and plundered by the Royal Party; Anthony of Bourbon, the King of Navarre, being slain before it. It fell after this into the Hands of the Leaguers. Hen∣ry IV. besieged it in 1593. but was prevented from taking it by the Prince of Parma; though in the year following it willingly submitted to him, after he had imbraced the Roman Catholick Religion. The Parliament in this City was instituted by Philip the Fair, in 1286. Established by Lewis XII. in 1499. and re-established by Francis I. in 1515. Pope Cle∣ment VI. was sometime Archbishop of the See: Pope Martin IV. and Gregory XI. Archdeacons. There have been divers provincial Councils here assembled. Particularly in 1074. one against the Concubinage of the Clergy. Roane, or Rovane, Rhodumna, an ancient Town in France, in the Dukedom of Bourbonne, and the County of Foretz, upon the River Loyre, (where it becomes first capable to bear a Boat:) Very great and populous, tho not walled. It stands twelve Leagues from Lyons to the South-West, and eighteen from Moulins. The Territory belonging to it, is called le Roanez or Roannois; and has the Honor of being a Dukedom, by the Creation of King Charles IX. Rober, Erubris, a River in Lorain, which falls by Trier into the Moselle. Robil, Robel, Rebellio, a City or Town in the Dukedom of Mecklenburgh; in the Lower Saxony, by the Lake of Muritz, in the Borders of Branden∣burgh: two German Miles from Var, and seven from Gustro. Robogh, a Village in the County of Tyron; upon the Sea Shoar against Scotland, in the Province of Ʋl∣ster; which has preserved the memory of the Rho∣bogdii, (an old Irish Clan,) that possessed the Coun∣ties of Antrim, Colran, and Tyrone, in this Province; from whom that Cape now called the Fair Foreland; by the English, was then called Rhobodium; being in the County of Antrim, scarce fifteen Miles South of the nearest Shoar of Scotland. Rocca Nova, a Town in the Terra di Otranto, in the Kingdom of Naples; honoured with the Title of a Dukedom. Rocca Romana, a Town in the Terra di Lavoro in the Kingdom of Naples, near Alifa: honored with the Title of a Principality. Rochdale, a Market Town in Lancashire, in the Hundred of Salford, upon the River Roche; in a Dale or Vale; which together compound its name. La Roche, Rupes, a Town in the Territory of Genevois, in Savoy; five or six Leagues from Gene∣va, little less from Anneci, and one from the River Arve: at the foot of the Mountains. It hath a Col∣legiate Church, and two Religious Houses. Roche-chouart, a Seigniory in the Province of Poictou, towards the Borders of Angoumois; giving name to a Family of Honour. La Roche-En-Ardenne, a fortified Town in the Dukedom of Luxemburgh in the Low Countries, up∣on the River Ʋrt; twelve Leagues from Luxem∣burgh and nine from Liege. Honour'd with the Ti∣tle of an Earldom. Rochefort, a Town and Port at the Mouth of the Charante, in the Pais d'Aunis in France: Heretofore no more than a Village; but now become a Maga∣zine, enlarged with divers Buildings; and more daily. La Roche-sur-Yon, Rupes ad Yonem, a Town in the Lower Poictou in France, towards Lusson; upon the River Yon, which after joyns with the Lay. Ho∣noured some Ages since with the Title of a Princi∣pality; which is enjoyed by the House of Bourbon. Rochelle, Portus Santonum, Rupella, Rupella San∣tonum, Rupella, a City and famous Port of France, upon the Bay of Aquitain; the Capital of le Pais d'Aunis, and a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Bourdeaux. Seven Leagues from Brouges to the North, two from the Isle of Re, and thirty from the Mouth of the Loyre to the South-East. It takes its name from the Rock on which it stands; supposed to be built about the Sixth Century (because not mentioned before) against the Incursions of the Nor∣mans. At first it had Princes of its own. After this it was under the English from the times of Henry II. who possessed it as Duke of Anjou. And that Prince granted this City its first Charter and Privileges, which were confirmed by Richard and John his Sons. King John Landed here in 1206. when he went to the Siege of Mountauban; and after, in 1213. In 1224. it was taken from the English by Lewis VIII. King of France; but recovered the next year, and conti∣nued under the English till 1453. And then finally taken by Charles VII. In the beginning of the Ci∣vil Wars of France, this Town fell under the power of the Hugonots: who very much improved its Fortifications. It was their principal place of refuge, under Charles IX. After the Massacre of Paris it was besieged by all the Forces of France; defended it self to a wonder; and at last forced that Prince to a Peace in 1573. It continued after this in their hands till 1628. and then was taken by Hunger; (in order to which, the Ocean was bridled with a prodigious Bank, begun in 1627. and carried the length of 747. toises;) the English having twice unsuccessfully attempted to relieve it. After the taking of it, Lewis XIII. King of France, visited it in person; re-established the Roman Catholick Religion, destroy'd its Fortificati∣ons, (saving two Towers built heretofore by Charles the Fifth, for the Defence of the Port); and took a∣way its former Privileges. In 1649. it first became a Bishoprick; the Chair being removed hither from Mallezais, a small Place in Poictou, by Pope Inno∣cent X. at the request of Lewis XIV. Long. 19. 25. Lat. 45. 56. Rochester, Rossa, Durobius, Dorobrevis, Rutupiae, a City in the County of Kent; and a Bishops See, un∣der the Archbishop of Canterbury; upon the Med∣way; over which it has a stately Stone Bridge, one of the fairest in England; five Miles from the Thames, twenty five from Canterbury to the East, and Lon∣don to the West. This was a Roman Town, or ra∣ther Castle, as William of Malmsbury stiles it: much enlarged to the East, West, and South. In 676. it was ruined by Aetheldred King of the Mer∣cians; and after this, several times by the Danes. Aethelbert King of Kent erected here a sumptuous Church; and caused one Justus to be made the first Bishop of it in 604. Gundulphus the Norman, about 1080. rebuilt this Church, and brought in Monks; which are since changed into a Dean and six Preben∣daries. It has a Castle built by William the Con∣queror
which in the Reign of William Rufus, (and twice after in the Barons Wars) has been besieged. Dr. Sprat, the present Bishop, is the eighty third of this Diocese. Charles II. added an Honor to this Place; when he created Henry Viscount Wilmot of Athlone in Ireland, Baron of Alderbury in the Coun∣ty of Oxon, and Earl of Rochester, December 13. 1652. Whose Son, John Wilmot, succeeded him in 1659. Which Family failing, Laurence Hide, (se∣cond Son to Sir Edward Hide, Earl of Clarendon, and Lord Chancellor of England) was by the same Prince created Earl of Rochester, November 29. 1682. But before these, it gave the Title of Viscount to Sir Robert Carr, created Anno 1611. by K. James I. Viscount Rochester, and afterwards Earl of Somerset. Rochford, a Market Town in the County of Es∣sex. The Capital of its Hundred. Rochitzerbergh, Claudius, a Mountain in Stiria, called by various names. Rockingham, a Market Town in Northampton∣shire, in the Hundred of Corby, upon the River We∣land: giving the Title of Baron to the Right Ho∣norable Edward Watson Lord Rockingham, to whom belongs the Castle here; which hath lost its strength long since. Rocroy, Rupes Regia, a strong Town in Cham∣pagne, in Retelois; in the Borders of Hainault; twelve Leagues from Retel to the North, four from Mariebourgh to the South. Near this Place the Spaniards received a great Defeat from the French, under the Duke D'Anguien May 19. 1643. six days after the death of Lewis XIII. King of France. But afterward the Spaniards took this Town, under the Prince of Conde's Conduct, in 1653. It is since re∣turned under the Crown of France. Rodaun, Erodanus, a River in Prussia in Poland; which riseth out of a Lake twenty five Miles above Dantzick; and falling into the Vistula not much above this City, a little beneath it enters the Baltick Sea. Roden, a small River in Shropshire. Rodez, or Rhodes, Segodunum, Rhuteni, Rute∣nae, Segodunum Retunorum, a City of Aquitain; the Capital of the County of Rovergne, and a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Bourges: The Bishop takes the Title of an Earl: a great and beautiful City, seated upon the River Veronium; fifteen Leagues from Mende to the West, thirty two from Narbone to the North, and twenty two from Cahors to the East. A very ancient City, and mentioned by Julius Caesar. The Goths, Saracens, and Franks successive∣ly ruined it in their times. It served heretofore un∣der its own Counts: till it became united with the Crown of France in the Person of Henry IV. Roding, a Stream in the County of Essex. Rodosto, Redcestum, a City of Thrace; which is a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Heraclea: it stands upon the Propontis, twenty Miles from He∣raclea to the South; at the foot of an Hill by a Bay of the same name, which affords it a convenient and very large Haven: so that it is now a Place of considerable Trade, and reasonably populous. Pliny calls this City Resiston. It is beautified with many great Mosques, some Grecian Churches, and two Sy∣nagogues: and much frequented by the Merchants of Romania, the Sea of Marmora, and the Black Sea. Roer, Rura, in Trithemius Rera, Adrana, a Ri∣ver of Germany; called by the French, Roure. It ariseth in Eifel, in the Dukedom of Juliers; and wa∣tering Juliers and Linnich, at Roermonde it falls into the Maes. Roermonde, Ruremunda, a City of the Low Countries, in the Province of Guelderland: called by the French, Ruremonde. It stands upon a River of the same name, and the Maes; having the first to the South of it, the second to the West: three Leagues from Venlo to the South, twelve from Liege to the North, Cologne to the West, and Wesel to the East. Made a Bishops See by Pope Paul IV. under the Arch∣bishop of Mechlin in 1559, (he changing its Collegi∣ate Church into a Cathedral); and was an Hanse Town till 1635: when it fell into the Hands of the Hollan∣ders, from whom it is since recovered by the Spa∣niards. In 1665. it suffered much by a Fire. Rohaczow, Rohaczovia, a considerable Town; the Capital of a Territory of the same name in Lithu∣ania; upon the Nieper, where it takes in the O∣drucz; twenty Polish Miles from Mohilow to the South, and forty from Kiovia to the North. Roham-Thaura, Antitaurus, a Mountain in the Lesser Armenia; which lies to the North of the Great Taurus; between the Euphrates and the Arsanius: separated from the said great Mountain, and therefore by the Ancients called Antitaurus. In the Valleys beneath it stands the City of Comdna, now called Ta∣bachasa. Roia, Rodium, a City of France, in the Province of Picardy; upon the River Auvergne, in the Terri∣tory of Santerre; four Leagues from Noyon to the West, nine from Amiens, and seven from Compeigne to the North. A small City, but populous. Roll-rich-stones, a Monument of vast unwrought Stones, circularly set, near Ensham in Oxfordshire: supposed to have been erected in Commemoration of some great Victory in ancient Times. Rom, one of the Names of the Lesser Asia. Rom, Roma, a small Island in the Baltick Sea; upon the Coast of the Dukedom of Sleswick, about two English Miles from the Shoar: under the King of Denmark. Romagna, Romandiola, a great Province in Italy, in the States of the Church: of old called Aemi∣lia Regio. Bounded on the West by Bononia, on the North by the Dukedom of Ferrara, on the South by the Dukedom of Ʋrbino, and on the East by the Adriatick Sea: a small part of it towards the Appen∣nine is subject to the Duke of Florence, and there∣fore called Romandiola Florentina: The rest (which is the far greatest part) is under the Pope, as a Tem∣poral Prince. The principal Places in it are, Raven∣na, (the Capital), Faenza, Imola, Forli, Bertinoro, Rimini, Cervia, Cesena, Sarsina, and some others. Romania, the same with Thrace. Romania, Argia, the Eastern Province of the Morea; the Capital of which is Napoli di Romania. The other Places are of small importance. Romans, Romantium, Romanis, a spruce fine City in Dauphine in France; seated in a pleasant Plain upon the River Iseure; over which it has a Bridge; four Leagues from Valence to the South-East, toward Grenoble ten Miles, and the same distance from Vi∣enne to the South. It is thought to represent Jeru∣salem in its Situation and Figure; insomuch that in 1520. there was a Building added to it, made in the fashion of the Holy Sepulchre that stands upon Mount Calvary; Francis I. King of France himself laying the first Stone: And also a Convent founded, under the Name of the House of Mount Calvary; now in the possession of the Recollects, but first given to the Religious of the Order of S. Francis. The Hugue∣nots sacked and ruined this City in 1562. It has been often taken and retaken in the Civil Wars. Rome, Roma, the Capital City of Italy, once the Sovereign and Mistriss of the whole World; the more immediate Capital now of Campagna di Roma. The Emperour Commodus desired to fasten his own Name upon it, by calling it Commodiana; as a Go∣thish
King, called it Gothia; and other Princes the like: But the Name of Rome still has been always preserved by it. This City is seated upon the Tyber; twelve Miles above its fall into the Tyrrhenian Sea to the North-East; one hundred and twenty from Na∣ples to the North; three hundred from Genoua to South; one hundred thirty five from Ancona, and one hundred and forty from Florence. Long. 36. 30. Lat. 40. 40. Though there are great Controversies concerning the Time and the Founder of it, yet the most received opinion is, that it was built by Romu∣lus and Remus; in the first year of the seventh O∣lympiad, Anno Mundi 3198. seven hundred and fifty years before the Birth of our Saviour. Its Foundati∣ons were small and obscure; and not above two Miles in compass; with four Gates, inclosing only the Capitoline and Palatine Mountains. It continued under seven Princes two hundred forty five years: when Sextus, the Son of Tarquinius, ravishing Lucretia a Roman Lady, it so incensed them, that thereupon they not only dethroned Tarquinius; but for many Ages they would not endure the Name, much less the Au∣thority of a King; but lived under Temporary ac∣countable Magistrates, Consuls; two together, yearly e∣lected; with Praetors, Tribunes, Quaestors, Censors, Praefects, and other Magistrates under them. And when extream necessity required it, they created a temporary Dictator with Supreme Authority over all. At this time their Empire was not above fifteen Miles in length: and this Change greatly hazarded the Ruin of the Insant City. In the year of Rome 365. (during the Consular Government), it was ta∣ken by Brennus King or General of the Gaules; and all but the Capitol burnt down to the ground: yet it continued a Free State, though sorely shaken by Hannibal about the year five hundred thirty se∣ven; and by their own Domestick Broils under Ma∣rius and Sylla, between the years 665. and 672. But, the fatal time being come, Julius Caesar (in the year of Rome 705.) by the Battel of Pharsalia, put an end to that Commonwealth, forty six years before the Birth of our Saviour: making himself to be de∣clared Perpetual Dictator and Emperour; and the Name of the Commonwealth of Rome to be changed into, the Roman Empire. And though the Civil Wars broke out again to the great hazard, not only of their Empire, but Being; yet Augustus, in the Battel of Actium, put a happy Period to them, in 721. and prepared the World to receive the Prince of Peace, by an Universal Peace. He was born under this Prince in the year of Rome 753. and of the World 3950. The times that followed were fatal to Rome; which double dyed her Purple in the Blood of Holy Men, who endeavoured to reduce her from the Vassalage of Doemons to the Knowledge and Service of the True God. To these an end was put by Conslantine the Great, by the Defeat of Maxentius under the Walls of Rome, in the year of Christ, 312. of Rome 1064. This great Prince laid soon after the founda∣tion of the Ruin of Rome, by removing the Seat of the Empire to Byzantium or Constantinople, in the year of Christ 330. which afterwards brought on the Division of the Empire, into the Eastern and Western. Alaricus King of the Goths in 410. (of Rome 1162.) took and spoiled this City. Gensericus, the Vandal, followed him; and in 455. took it the second time. Odoacer took it in 465. Ricimere in 472. Totila in 547. So that in the space of one hundred thirty seven years, it was taken and spoiled by these Barba∣rous Nations four times. In 580. it was besieged by the Lombards; and preserved by the Emperours Forces, which were sent to relieve it. Leo IV. in 593. bestowed something in the repair of it. Rome was now recovered by the Eastern Emperours. Ju∣stinian by Narses his General in Italy, having slain Totila in 553. and three years after, by the taking of Capua, having put an happy end to the Gothick War in Italy. This City continued under those Princes, till 726. when under Gregory II. Italy (by the pro∣curement of that Pope) revolted, because Leo the Emperour had by an Edict prohibited the Worship of Images. The Lombards were very instrumental in this Change. Neither could they and the Popes long agree: but Aistulphus in 753. besieged Rome; and Pope Stephen III. (obtaining no relief from the Emperour against the Lombards) sends for Pepin King of France; who came and delivered him for that time. Desiderius the next King of the Lombards got Rome by a Stratagem in 770. and using his Power tyrannically, Charles the Great (in 774.) was called in; who put an end to the Kingdom of the Lombards, and made the Western Empire once more considerable. The Lombards and these French Princes in order to oblige the Popes by the Ties of Gratitude to them, had at several times bestowed several Territories upon the See of Rome. Charles the Great reserved to him∣self and his Successors the Approbation of the future Popes; which was confirmed by a Council held at Rome, in 773. This in after-times embroiled the Popes and the Western Emperours, as much as ever the Eastern and the Lombards were. For Charles the Great being crowned at Rome in 800. his Posterity had frequent quarrels with the Popes, (the Clergy and City of Rome) about the Elections of the Popes. The first Invasion was made by Stephen VI. about 817. under Lewis the Gentle; who is pretended to have granted away that Right of electing the Pope, which had been acknowledged in Charles the Great. In 819. Paschal I. a Roman, was chosen Pope against the Will of this Prince. But in 823. Lothaire co∣ming to Rome to receive the Crown, put this Pope to purge himself by Oath; and slew many of the Nobility, for setting him up against the Emperours Will: for which that See bore him no kindness. Gregory IV. in 833. finding Pepin his Son in rebellion against him, and pretending to reconcile them, when he came into Germany, he took part with his Son against the Father; and Pope-like, threatned to ex∣communicate the Emperour, if he did not resign the Empire to his Son: which Treachery of his, in 839: was severely revenged by Lothaire the Emperour, by taking many Places from him in Italy. In 839. the Saracens sorely distressed the Papacy; which necessi∣tated the Pope to have recourse to the Emperour for Protection, and he had it: In this Invasion, the Saracens wasted the Suburbs of Rome, as they did in 846. which occasioned the building of the Castle of S. Angelo by Pope Sergius II. The Empire being translated from the Franks to the Germans, in the Person of Ar∣nulph (a Natural Son of Carloman;) against him Formosus crowns Guido a Rival, in 891. And in 893. sendeth for Arnulph to come and free Rome from the oppressions of this Guido. Arnulph comes into Italy, and in 906. took Rome. A Schism being about this time in the Church of Rome, there was little done by the Popes, till Berengarius (growing Potent in Italy) necessitated them to seek to Otho I. who being crowned at Rome, in 962. a Council there held in 964. acknowledged the same Right in him, that had been in Charles the Great. Gregory VII. on this account begins a quarrel with Henry IV. Empe∣rour; sets up Anti-Emperours, and excommunicates the Emperour, in 1076. whereupon that Prince thus provoked, besieged Rome in 1081. took it in 1084. and burnt it: and soon after, this Turbulent Pope died in Banishment in great misery. In 1242. Pope
Gregory IX. (having excommunicated Frederick II. Emperour, for refusing to give the See of Sardinia to Rome;) and proclaiming a Croysade against the Emperour; that Prince defeated his Army: and fol∣lowing his blow, took Ravenna, Siena, and Faenza (with divers of the Cardinals,) and reduced the See of Rome to a mean condition. Innocent IV. insolent∣ly renews the Excommunication against the Empe∣rour in 1242. Whereupon arose the famous Facti∣ons of the Guelphs for the Pope, and the Gibelines for the Emperour; which made Italy extremely mi∣serable for some Ages. During part of which times, in 1305. Pope Clement V. removed the See to Avig∣non in France; where it continued to 1376. upon which arose a Schism between the Popes of Rome and Avignon; not ended, till the Council of Constance; which begun in 1414. In 1408. Ladislaus King of Naples took Rome, and laid its Walls in the dust. In 1494. Charles VIII. of France took Rome. In 1526. Cardinal Pompeius Columna; and in 1527. the Forces of Charles V. took and sacked Rome. Philip II. besieged it, and had certainly taken it, if the Pope had not complyed about 1557. Yet after all these Changes and Calamities, this City at this day is said to be fifteen Miles in compass; very populous; and full of magnificent Buildings, as well Ancient as Modern. They reckon in it above three hundred thousand Souls: besides eight thousand Jews, who are enclosed in a particular quarter by themselves; and obliged every Saturday to hear a Christian Sermon. Houses and Palaces twenty two thousand; Parishes ninety two: forty one National Churches; sixty four Religious Houses for Men; above forty for Women; thirty Hospitals; one hundred and six Societies of Pe∣nitents; and divers Colleges. It hath eighteen Gates; three hundred and sixty Towers flanking the Walls; six Bridges over the Tiber; three principal Fountains; and eight Obelisks remaining out of about forty five, it formerly had, rehearsed in the Writings of Anti∣quaries. The Church of S. Peter, (in which the Body of that Apostle is deposited) built within and without of Marble, in the Figure of a Cross; near one hun∣dred Toises long, sixty six broad in the Branches; with a Dome fifty five Toises high, a Portail twenty four, erected in 1612. by Pope Paul V. to a Portico of the same largness; together with all its Riches, Paintings, Columns, Statues, Altars and Galleries; sur∣passes the greatest Idea that the mind can well form of Beauty and Grandeur. Then the Library in the Vatican Palace obtains the pre-eminence of all other Li∣braries in the World. Anciently this City Walls were 50 Miles in compass; with seven hundred and forty Towers in them; and thirty Gates, leading to, and de∣nominating as many broad High-ways, which were paved and adorned with wonderful Magnificence: where the Rests of Tombs yet appear; it being by the Law of the Twelve Tables (in Ʋrbe ne sepe∣lito, neve urito) forbidden to bury in the City. It had anciently eight Bridges; of which Pons Sublicius built by the King Ancus Marcius, and repaired by Aemilius Lepidus, where Horatius Ccles sustained the Effort of the Thuscanes who would have re-esta∣blished the deposed Tarquinius upon the Throne; and where afterwards the Emperour Heliogabalus was precipitated into the Tiber, is ruined. But Pons Mil∣vius, without the City, is no less remarkable, for the Victory there obtained by Constantine the Great over Maxentius, and the drowning of that Tyrant in the Tiber also. It had anciently eighteen Fountains; eight hundred Baths; an unknown number of Sta∣tues, Columns, Colossusses, Obelisks; (the Columns of Trajan and Antoninus are still standing;) and Temples for no less than thirty thousand Gods, by the accounts that Varro and others make of the Gods of the Ro∣mans. The Censors have sometimes sold the Com∣mon Sink to Gardiners for six hundred thousand Crowns. The number of Inhabitants in Tiberius's time was computed to sixteen hundred thousand, two hundred ninety and one: In Augustus's, much more. Their Army, under the Emperours, ordinarily con∣sisted of two hundred thousand Foot, and forty thou∣sand Horse: their Fleets, of fifteen hundred Galleys, and two thousand Ships. There were one hundred and sixty Granaries in their Empire: And in fine the Empire it self had for its Bounds to the East, Eu∣phrates, the Mountain Taurus, and Armenia; to the South, Aethiopia; to the North, the Danube; and to the West, the Atlantick Ocean. For the Coun∣cils that have been celebrated here since Christianity, by Popes and Anti-Popes against one another, against the Schismaticks and Hereticks (so called) of all Ages, and against Emperours and Princes, or the Abuses committed and occasioned by them and any of them; it is not for this place to rehearse so vast a number: Themselves have sometimes proved the greatest Abuse. Of late, the Prosecution of Dr. Michael Molinos, (Author of the Doctrine of Quietism,) and his pretended Abjuration, Septemb. 3. 1687. may be adjudged one of the most remarkable Occurrences that has for many years happened in Rome: of which See the Supplement to Dr. Bur∣net's Letters. After Pope Innocent XI. the Election fell upon Cardinal Ottoboni, a Venetian, October 6. 1689. who took the Name of Alexander VIII. Af∣ter him, upon Cardinal Pignatelli: who is called Inno∣cent XII. Rome, Roma, a small Island in the Kingdom of Congo, in the River Zaire; twenty Leagues from its Fall into the Ocean; in which there was some few years since a French Colony. Romechi, the Turkish Name of Greece. Le Romois, the Territory of the City of Roan; beyond the Seyne, in Normandy. Romont, Rotundus Mons, a small County in the Province of Vaac or Vaud; which was under the Duke of Savoy, but now a part of the Canton of Freiburg. Roncevaux, a Town in Navarre, where the French received a great Defeat under Charlemagne in 792. Ronches, Aronches, Arunci, once a City of Lu∣sitania; now a small, but strong Town in the Pro∣vince of Extremadura; between the Rivers of Ca∣ja and Elva; three Leagues from Albuquerque to the West. Ronciglione, Roncilio, a Town in S Peter's Pa∣trimony; the Capital of a Territory of the same Name, seated upon the River Fatiscus: thirty Miles from Rome, and ten from Viterbo; heretofore under the Dukes of Parma, but now under the Pope; and the Territory belonging to it, is called Lo Stato di Ronciglione. Ronda, Arunda, an ancient City in Spain; cal∣led also Ronda la Vieja; in the Kingdom of Gra∣nada in the Borders of Andalusia, upon the River Guadiaro; not far from the Goza and the Guadal∣qua Virejo; twelve Leagues from Gibralter to the North, and thirteen from Malaga to the West; it has a Castle, and is the Capital of a Territory; and in a thriving State. Long. 15. 00. Lat. 36. 10. Roni, Paphlagonia, a Province in the Lesser Asia. Roschild, Roschilda, a City in the Island of Ze∣land, in the Baltick Sea, under the King of Denmark; which is a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Lun∣den; and ennobled by the Bones of the Kings of
Denmark here buried. Often mentioned also on the account of a Peace here concluded between the Danes and Swedes in 1658. It stands four German Miles from Koppenhagen to the West, and seventy five from Kroonburg to the South-East. The Bishop∣rick was founded by Sweno King of Denmark, in 1012. Roscomen, Roscomenum, a Town and County in the Province of Conaught. The County is bounded on the North by the Curlew Mountains, dividing it from Slego; on the East by the River Shannon, dividing it from the Counties of Lotrim, Longford, West-Meath, and Kings County; on the South by Kings County and Galloway; and on the West by the River Suck, which parts it from Galloway and Mayo. It is of a considerable length; viz. sixty English Miles from North to South, but not above nineteen where broa∣dest; the Soil is level and extremely fruitful; so that it abounds with Grass and Corn, produced by very little Husbandry. Roscomen, the principal Town (which gives name to it,) stands upon the River Suck; towards the Western Border, but near the middle of the County; twelve Miles from Ath∣lone to the North-West, and thirty three from Galway to the North-East. Rosas, Rhoda, Rhode, Rodopolis, once a City, now only a Castle, and a small Town in the County of Roussillon in Catalonia in Spain; which has a large Harbour on the Mediterranean Sea; very strongly and well fortified: taken by the French in 1645. but restored by the Pyrenean Treaty to Spain. It stands ten Spanish Leagues from Perpignan to the South. This place was first fortified by Charles V. before which, it was only a Monastery; though in the time of the Romans, it had been one of the most consi∣derable Cities in Spain; supposed to have been built by the Rhodians, before the Romans were Masters of this Kingdom; and from them to have taken this name. Rosetto, Metelis, a City of Egypt; called by the Turks Raschit; by the Italians Rosetto: it stands with a Port upon the Mediterranean Sea, upon the Mouth of that Branch of the Nile, which was ancient∣ly called Canopicum; now one of the principal Ci∣ties of that Kingdom. Monsieur Thevenot, who tra∣velled from Alexandria hither, tells us, that it is sixty short Miles. This City, saith he, was anciently called Canopus; it lies five Miles up the River from the Sea; and is next to Cairo, one of the best Cities in Egypt; and still encreasing; being a place of great Traffick, very pleasant, surrounded by lovely Gardens, and full of well-built tall Houses; and in which there is great plenty of Victuals very cheap; but in the Months of July and August, they have none but Ci∣stern-waters to drink. Many pieces of ancient Money have been found in the Sand betwixt Alexandria and this City. The Country about it yields Sugar-Canes in plenty. Long. 60. 45. Lat. 31. 6. Roseveque, a small Town in Flanders; famous for a Battel, which Charles V. won against the Re∣bellious Gante-men; of whom were slain forty thou∣sand, and their General Philip d' Artevill taken and hanged. Rosieme, Rosima, a City in Poland; the Capital of Samogithia, upon the River Dubissa; twelve Polish Miles from Corona to the North, thirty from Riga to the South, and twenty seven from Vilna to the West; this place is little and ill peopled. Bau∣drand writes Rosienie. Ros, Russia, a County in the North of Scotland; bounded on the North by Naverina and Sutherland, on the South by Murray and Abria, on the East by the German, and on the West by the Irish Sea. Charles I. was Earl of this County in the Life of his Father. Rossano, Roscianum, Ruscianum, a City in the Hi∣ther Calabria, in the Kingdom of Naples; which is an Archbishops See, and a Principality; built upon a Rock, incompassed on all sides by Rocks; and seated scarce three Miles from the Shoars of the Bay of Taranto; sixteen from Bisignano to the East; thirty five from Cosenza to the South-East, and twelve from Thurium to the South; which last, being an old City, was formerly the Bishops See. This Place is great, well peopled, and was the Birth-place of Pope John VII. Rosse, Rossa, a Town anciently in the Province of Mounster in the County of Cork; and a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Cashell; it stands upon the British Channel, at the Mouth of a small River cal∣led Fin; thirty Miles from Cork to the South-West, and twenty two from Kinsale to the West. The Bi∣shops See in 1618. was united to that of Cork; the Town being reduced to a meer Village. § There is a Market Town of this name in Herefordshire, in the the Hundred of Greytree, upon the River Wyc. Rossetto. See Rosetto. Rossillon, Ruscinonensis Comitatus, a County of Catalonia, called by the French Roussillon, by the Spa∣niards Rossillon: bounded on the East by the Medi∣terranean Sea, on the North by Languedoc, on the West by Ceretania, and on the South by Catalonia: The Capital of it is Perpignan. There are besides in it Leucate, Villa Franca, Rodes, Ena, and some o∣ther Places of note; it extending from East to West eighteen Spanish Leagues. This Country was anciently a part of Gallia Narbonensis; annexed to Spain in the Times of the Goths: had then Earls, which were Sovereign Princes of it; and on the Death of Gerard the last of them, under Alphonsus II. ad∣ded to Arragon. By James I. annexed to the King∣dom of Majorca; and recovered back again to that Crown by Pedro IV. By King John II. sold to Lewis XI. of France, in 1462. and by Charles VIII. of France, returned back freely to Ferdinando, on condition he should not obstruct his Conquest of the Kingdom of Naples in 1493. It continued under that Crown till 1659. when Lewis XIII. retook it by his Arms. and had the Possession confirmed by the Pyre∣nean Treaty. There are three considerable Rivers wa∣tering it, the Tet, the Tech, and the Egli. Rostock, Rostocium, Rostochium, Raciburgum, Rhodopolis, Rosarum or Rosarium Ʋrbs, a City in the Lower Saxony upon the Baltick Sea; in the Duke∣dom of Meckleburg in Germany: which is a Free Imperial City, and has an Harbour made by the River Warna, on which it stands eight Miles from Wisemar to the East, and eleven from Stralsundt to the West. It is under the Protection of the Dukes of Meckle∣burg, by whose Ancestors it was built about 329. and walled by another about 1160. Its Ancient Name was Rostzoch or Rotzoch, which signifies a Miry Ground. Ericus King of Denmark conquered this Territory about 1286. Christopher III. his Successor in 1322. restored it to the Duke of Meckleburg. Waldemarus IV. granted this City and its Territory to Albert Duke of Meckleburg, in 1360. A∣bert another Duke in 1416. founded an Uni∣versity here, which was opened three years after. It is about five Miles in compass, and almost equal to Lubeck. A Sedition arising in this City in 1573. a∣gainst the Duke, he entred it in Arms, and treated the Senate with great severity. In 1629. it was with the whole Dutchy of Mecklenburg taken by the Imperialists: out of whose hands it was recovered by the Swedes, Octob. 16. 1631. Long. 34. 20. Lat. 54 20.
Rostow, Rostovia, a great City in Russia; which is the Capital of a Dukedom of the same Name, and an Archbishops See. It stands upon the River Coto∣rea, having a Fortress of Wood: twenty six Miles from the Wolga to the South, and thirty four from Mosco to the West. The Dukes of this Province were next Novograd in the greatest Esteem of any in this Kingdom; till John Basilovitz, in 1565. totally extirpated the Family; and since that time it has been given to the second Son of the Czars. Rotenburg, Rotenburgum, a City of Franconia in Germany, upon the River Tauber; nie German Miles from Norimburg to the West, and a little more from Wurtsburg to the South. Made a Free Imperial City by Frederick Lin 1163. There is another Town of the same name in Schwaben, upon the Neckar: one Mile from Tubingen to the West, which is under the Emperor. Roterdam, Roterdamum, a great, strong, rich, po∣lous City; the Capitalos the Province of Schielandt, and one of the most celebrated Sea-Ports in Holland. It stands on the North side of the middle Branch of the Rhine; four German Miles and an half from the Sea, and eight from Amsterdam to the South-West. Trithemius saith, it was built in 89. by Ratherius the twentieth King of the Franks. Erasmus, the great Restorer of Learning, was born in this City. They have taken care to preserve the memory of it by an Inscription let upon the House; and placed his Statue on the Bridge besides: which was erected in 1564 and very injuriously treated by the Spani∣ards in 1572. The greatest convenience of this Town is. that Ships of great Burthen are taken into the middle of many of the Streets without difficulty; their Channels being deep and large. It was small, when the Spaniards were ejected; and therefore not mentioned as to the time of its conjunction with the States. Rother, a River which ariseth in Sussex; and passing between it and Kent, falls into the British Sea at Rie. Apledore in Kent is seated upon it: And Oxey-Isle, encompassed with it. Rotherham, a Market Town in the West Riding of Yorkshire, and the Hundred of Strafford; upon the River Dun, over which it hath a fine Stone Bridge. Of note, for giving Name and Birth to Themas of Ro∣theram, Archbishop of York, one of the Founders of Lincoln College in Oxon: who expressed his kindness to this Town by founding likewise a Col∣lege in it; with three Schools for Grammar, Wri∣ting and Musick. Rothsaye, a Castle in an Island in Dunbritton Fyrth or Bay on the West of Scotland; which has annexed to it the Title of a Dukedom; and belonged heretofore to the Prince, or Eldest Son of the King of Scotland. It is said, the Royal Family of the Steu∣arts came at first from this Castle; which was their most ancient Seat. Rothwell, or Rowell, a Market Town in Northam∣ptoshire. The Capital of its Hundred. Rota, Ebora, a Castle in Andalusia, upon the Bay of Cadiz; at the Mouth of the River Quadalquivir; three Leagues from Cadiz to the North; mentioned by Strabo, Mela and Stephanus, as one of the Cities in that part of Spain. Rotta, Rutuba, a small River in Liguria in Italy; which riseth out of the Appennine; and flowing through the County of Nizza, and dividing it from the States of Genoua, falls into the Mediterranean Sea at Vintimiglia. Rotwyl, or Rotweil, Rubea villa, Rotevilla, a small, but Imperial and Free City in Schwaben in Germany; upon the Necker, under Mount Abenow; from which it stands three Leagues to the South, ten from Brisach to the East, and six from Schafhouse to the North. In this City Conrad III. Duke of Schwaben, in 1147. instituted a Chamber of Justice for that whole Dutchy. It has its Name from Rott a Ger∣man word, which signifies a Troop; built at first on the opposite side of the Necker; and removed to the place it now stands in, upon the account of frequent Inundations. In 1643. it was taken by the French. Monsieur Guebrande, the French General, died in the City soon after of the Wounds he had received in the Siege; by the Treaty of Munster it was restored to its former state, and is united now with the Swiss Cantons for its Preservation. Roucy, a Town of France in Champagne, upon the River Aisne: giving its Name and the Title of Earl to an Honourable and Ancient Family there. Rouen. See Roan. Rovergue, Rutenensis Provincia, a Province in France, under the Generalite of Gascony: bounded on the South by Languedoc, on the East by Givau∣dan, on the North by Auvergne, and on the West by Quercy; the Capital City of it, is Rodez; Ville Franche de Rovergue, is another principal place. Caesar and Lucan mention its old Inhabitants by the Name of Rutheni. The Riches of it consist in Cat∣tel and Wooll, Mines of Iron, Brass, Allum, Brim∣stone, &c. It is watered by the Tarn, the Lot, the Aveiron, &c. Rovigo, Rhodigium, a small City in Italy; here∣tofore under the Dukes of Ferrara, but now under the Republick of Venice; and the Residence of the Bishop of Adria; from which it stands twenty Miles to the West, and twenty five from Ferrara to the North, the same from Padoua to the South. The Learned Caelius Rhodiginus was a Native of this Ci∣ty. It is the Capital of Rovigno, a small Province in Lombardy, surrounded by the River Adige: which was anciently a part of Romandiola; but in 1500. in the disorders of Italy seized by the Venetians. Rousillon. See Rosillon. Roxburg, Marchenium or Marchidun, a strong Castle, both by its Situation and Art; seated upon the Twede, (where it receives the Trefe) almost twen∣ty English Miles from Berwick to the West. James II. of Scotland, a rince of great Virtue and Goodness, was slain at the Siege of this Place by one of his own Cannon, which accidentally broke in firing it against the Castle, in 1459. The next year the Castle was surrendred to the Scots; who intirely ruined it, in revenge of the Death of their Prince; so that it can searce now be seen where it stod. Royan, Royanum, a Town in Saintonge, at the Mouth of the Garonne; heretofore strongly fortified. Royaumont, an Abbey in the Government of the Isle of France, eight Leagues from Paris, towards the River Oise: which in 149. suffered much by Thunder and Lightning. Roye, a considerable Town in Picardy: adorned with a Collegiate Church, and some Religious Houses: upon one of the Sources of the Moreuil. It gives Name to an Honourable Family also. Royston, a Market Town, divided betwixt Cam∣bridgeshire and Hartfordshire: at the bottom of an Hill, in the Hundred of Odsey. Rubicon. See Pisatello, the Modern Name. Rudolfswerd, Rudolphi-verda, a new and very strong City in the Borders of Carniola, upon the Ri∣ver Gurk; three Miles from the Save to the South, six from Cell, and five from Carolstadt to the West. Ruffach, Rubeacum, a small City in the Ʋpper Al∣satia, in the Territory of Mundat, upon the River Rottback: once an Imperial and Free City: but ta∣ken by Turene, in 1675. after a great Defeat of the
Imperialists; and now under the Bishop of Strasburg. It is one of the ancientest Towns in Alsatia; and was for the rare fertility of its Soil, (for five hun∣dred years) the Seat of some of the Roman Nobility. Conradus Pellicanus was born in this City. It stands three Miles from Brisach to the West, and two from Mulhuse to the North. Ruffec, Rufeacum, Roffiacum, a small Town in the Diocese of Poictiers five or six Leagues from An∣goulesme, in France: pleasantly situated; and honor'd with the Title of a Marquisate. Pope Clement V. be∣fore his elevation to the Pontificate presided at a Coun∣cil here in 1304. There have been others celebrated at it in other times. Rugby, a Market Town in Warwickshire, in the Hundred of Knightlow, upon the River Avon. Rugen, Rugenlandt, Rugia, an Island in the Bal∣tick Sea, upon the Coast of Pomerania; which has the Title of a Principality; about seven German Miles square; but the Sea breaks in and covers a considera∣ble part of the middle of it from the West, and al∣most divides it into several Islands. This was caused by an Outragious Tempest in 1309. A part of this Island at the same time, which lay to the South-East as far as the Isle of Ruden (then conjoyned with this,) was torn away; and sunk so deep into the bottom of the Sea, that the greatest Ships may Sail over it: what remains, affords Corn and Cattle in great plenty; serv∣ing as a granary to the parts adjacent. The best Town in it is Bergen: the others of note are Sogart, Hick, and Bingst. This Island is able to Arm about seven thousand Men in case of necessity. About 1066. it was subject to Buthen, Son of Godescalck King of the Heruli. Christopher II. King of Denmark, in 1322. subjected it to that Crown. VVratislaus IV. Duke of Pomcrania, in 1325. becoming Heir of it, by the death of VVizlaus the last Prince, drove out the Danes and became Master of it: after this the Danes regained the Possession of it. Erick King of Denmark in 1438. resigned it the second time to the Duke of Pomerania; and under them it was in 1630. when Gustavus Adolphus began the German War with the Conquest of this Island. By the Treaty of Mun∣ster in 1648. it was confirmed to the Swedes. In 1678, the Danes attempting to recover it out of the Hands of the Swedes, received at first a great over∣throw; but in a second attempt in the same year pre∣vailed; and kept the Island till the Peace of S. Ger∣mane, in 1679; by which it was restored to the Swedes, who now have it. The Christian Faith was first Preached in it by the Monks of Corby in Saxony; in 875. They built a Chappel here for the Service of God, which was after abused to the Pagan Idolatry; till VVaidemarus a Dane, (about 1161) destroyed the Idol they Worshipped, and thereupon they be∣came generally Christians. Rugoso, the same with Rubicon. See Pisatello. Rulia, Rhodope, one of the greatest and best known Mountains in Thrace; out of which the River Hebrus ariseth: it stretcheth from West to East, at this day little Inhabited; the Turks call it Rulia, that is the Queen of Mountains; the Italians Argentario, the Greeks Basilissa; it divides Thrace, and ends at the City of Apoloma. Rumelia. See Greece. Rumford, a Market Town in the County of Essex, in the Hundred of Havering. Rumney, a Market Town and Corporation in the County of Kent in Sheway Lath, which returns two Members of Parliament. § Also a River in Monmouth∣shire, falling into the Severn. Rumsey, a Market Town in Hampshire, in the Hundred of Kingsomborn, upon the River Test. Rupel, Rupera, Rupela, a small River in the Dukedom of Brabant; made by the Demera Dila, Senna and Neth; which falls into the Scheld at, Rupelmonde, Rupelmunda, a Town and ancient Castle in Brabant; which has its name from the last mentioned River; between the Scheld and Ru∣pel; two Miles from Antwerp to the South. Mercator the great Geographer was born in this Town, in 1512. Ruremond. See Roermond. Russ, Ʋrsa, a River in Switzerland, which ari∣seth from the Alpes and Mount S. Godard; and run∣ning Northward by Altorff and the Lake of Lucern, watereth the City of Lucern; and being improved by some smaller Rivers, finally buries it self in Aa. Russe, Rusna, a River of the Ducal Prussia, which has been call'd Chronus. It ariseth in Lithuania. where it is called Niemen; and entertaining the Se∣zara, and Vilia, it watereth the Southern parts of Samogitia: after which it takes the name of Russe; and at last ends in the Bay of Memel by five Out-lets; having watered Grodno and Kowna, two considerable Cities of Poland in his Progress. Russia, a vast Country in the North-East part of Europe; called by the Inhabitants Rusz; by the Ger∣mans Russandt; by the English Russia and Muscovy; by the Poles Moskwa and Russenlandt; by the Turks Russ; to the Ancients, known by no other name than that of Sarmatia Europaea: It is bounded on the North by the frozen Ocean; on the East it is se∣parated from the Asiatick Tartars, by the Rivers of Obb and Jaickz; on the South it is divided from the Crim Tartars by the Tanais Minor, or the Do∣netz, as it is now called; on the West the Nieper and Narva divide it from Poland. Its length from North to South is three hundred and eighty German Miles; its breadth from East to West three hundred of the same. So that it is by far the greatest Kingdom in Christendom; if it were equally Civiliz'd, Fertil, and Peopled, as it is not. For the dispatch of Business and the Management of Affairs, it is divided into forty Provinces; the names of which, (and of about thirty three Cities, that are to be found in it) would take more room than this small Work will allow. This Nation in 861. made an Invasion into Greece; and besieged Michael the Emperor in Constantinople, but could not take it. The Captives they carried home with them, and made them partakers of a greater bles∣sing by teaching them the Christian Religion; which was after this in 866. promoted by Bsiius the Em∣peror. In 944. they made a second attempt upon Constantinople, which miscarried also. In 980. Ʋio∣domir Duke of Russia, (Marrying Anna Daughter to Basilius Emperor of Greece,) embraced the Christian Religion, and settled it intirely in this Country: from whence it comes to pass, that they embrace the Te∣nets, Rites, and Ceremonies of the Greek Church; and have the utmost Aversion for the Latin Church and Service. About 1058. Boleslaus King of Poland Conquered Russia; which was reduced to obedience after a Revolt by another Boleslaus in 1123. In after∣times they had frequent Wars with the Poles; who prevailed so far as about 1342 they intirely Conquer∣ed the red Russia; the Nobility of which, (in 1434) were received into the same state with the Nobility of Poland; allowing them at the same time the Ex∣ercise of the Greek Religion, which they from their first Conversion to this day follow. They are as well by Interest as Conquest united to that Crown; and never to be separated from it, but by another Con∣quest. About 1205. the black Russia (now called Muscovy) was Invaded by Batton Son of Ghangius King of the Tartars, who lived to the North-East of this Country: they oppressed this Nation for many Ages, and so harrassed them, that no account can be given of the times, when the Reigns of their Princes
began or ended. John XI. was the first who began to enfranchise these Countries from the Servitude of the Tartars, which they had so long groaned under. John Basilovitz the 4th. of this Race (who began his Reign very young) in 1540. ended it by the Conquest of the Tartars and all the petty Princes, which had till then reigned in several parts of this Empire. This was the cruellest Tyrant that any Age has produced; and died as wretchedly as he lived, in 1584. Foedor Juanovits his Son succeeded him at the Age of twen∣ty two years; he was a perfect natural Fool. There was another Brother called Demetrius of nine years of Age, which had more sense. But Boris (who ma∣naged all this under Foedor) caused Demetrius to be Murthered. In 1597. Foedor dying suddenly without Children, Boris was Elected; and soon after Deposed, in favour of a Counterfeit Demetrius brought in by the Poles: after which followed nothing but Calami∣ties and Confusions; till in 1615. (or as others say in 1612) one Michael Fedrovizt, Son of Foedor Nikitis (a Kinsman far removed, of John Basilovitz) was chosen by the Body of this Nation Emperor of Muscovy. This Prince settled this vast Empire; go∣verned it with more Justice, Clemency, Prudence and Piety than all his Predecessors had used; and at last died in great Honor July 12. 1645. To him Suc∣ceeded Alexius his Son. The two Princes, which some few years since ascended the Throne together, are of the same Race. Red Russia, is a Province under the Crown of Po∣land; sometimes called the Proper Russia and Roxo∣lania; it lies extended towards the South, between Poland (properly so called) and Muscovy. This con∣tains the Palatinates of Russia (properly so called,) Podolia, Volhinia, Belza, Braslaw, Kiovia, and the Territory of Chelm: being that part of Russia, which (as I said before) was Conquered by the Poles; and by Casimir II. in 1342. united for ever to Poland. White Russia, is a very confiderable Province un∣der the Crown of Poland; and so called, because it was of old a part of Muscovy or Russia: it is divi∣ded into six Palatinates; which are Novogrod, Miscislaw, Witebsko, Minskie, Polokie, and Smo∣lenskie. This last Palatinate has been recovered in latter times by the Russ, and is not now under the Poles. Russia, properly so called, Russi, Rutheni, is a Province of Poland, and a part of Red Russia; which has Poland on the West, Volhinia and Podolia on the East, the Territories of Culm and Belsia on the North, and the Carpathian Hills, (dividing it from Hungary and Transylvania) to the South: the Capital of it is Lemburgh. Some give this Province the name of Black Russia. Rustan, Rustanus Ager, a small Territory in the Province of Bigorre in Aquitain in France; near the River Arroux and S. Severe. Ruthen, a Market Town in Denbyshire in Wales. The Capital of its Hundred. Rutlandshire, Rutlandia, is the least of all the Counties of England. Bounded on the North by Lincolnshire, on the East and South by Northam∣ptonshire, (divided from it by the River Weland) and on the West by Leicestershire: its greatest length is from North to South, not full twelve Miles; from East to West hardly nine; and its circumference about forty. The Air is temperate, serene and healthful; the Soil rich, and fruitful in Corn and Pasturage, es∣pecially about the Vale of Catmoss. Woods and pleasant Springs are plentiful enough; (of the latter, the Weland and the Wash are the principal:) so that it wants nothing. This County was a part of the Lands possessed by the Coritani, before the Roman Conquest: and was Conquered by P. Ostorius, in the Reign of Claudian the Emperor. Afterwards it made a part of the Kingdom of Mercia; and now is in the Diocese of Peterborough. There are but forty eight Parishes, and two Market-Towns in it. Okeham being the Shire Town, and Ʋppingham the other. In 1390. Ed∣ward Plantagenet, eldest Son of Edmund Duke of York; In 1326, Richard, second Brother of the said Edward; and in 1450. Edmund Plantagenet. se∣cond Son of Richard Duke of York; (all of the Royal Family) successively were Earls of this County. But in 1525. Thomas Mannors, Lord Roos of Hamlake, Tresbut, and Belvoir (Descended by the Lady Ann his Mother, from the said Richard, Duke of York) was Created Earl of Rutland, by Henry VIII. in 1325. whose Posterity enjoy this Honor to this day. John the twelfth of this Family, succeeding John his Father, in the year 1679. Rutuli, an ancient People of Latium in Italy. Ardea was their Capital City. Ruvo, Rubi, a City in the Province of Bari, in the Kingdom of Naples; which is a Bishops See, un∣der the Archbishop of Bari; a small, but spruce and populous City: about seventeen Miles from Bari to the West. Horace mentions it in his Satyrs; Inde Ru∣bos fessi pervenimus, &c. Rye, a member of the Cinque Ports, upon the edge of the County of Sussex, towards Kent, in Hastings Rape; situated at the fall of the Rother into the Sea; where it hath a convenient Haven, especially for a ready passage to Diepe in Normandy. It returns two Mem∣bers to the Lower House of Parliament. The Fisher∣men take excellent Herrings here. S A. SAada, a City in the Happy Arabia, perhaps of old called Sabatha: it stands in the inland parts of that Country; three hundred Miles from Aden to the North. If it is Sabatha, its Long. is 76. 00. Lat. 16. 56. Saal, Sala, a River in Germany, called by the French, Sale. It ariseth in Franconia; over against the Nab and the Mayn; and flowing through Thu∣ringia, it watereth Saalfeld and Jena; then entering Misnia, and passing by Naumburgh, Mersburgh, and Hall, (and being in this passage swelled by many smal∣ler Rivers) it falls at last into the Elbe; beneath Bern∣burgh, in the Ʋpper Saxony; four Miles from Mag∣deburgh to the South. Saan, Savaria, a River of Stiria. Saare. See Sare. Saba, supposed to be the same with Meroe in Aethiopia. §. One of the Charibye Islands in Ameri∣ca, under the Hollanders, and near S. Christophers, is likewise called by this name. Sabaro, Sybaris, a River in Calabria, in the Kingdom of Naples; others call it Cochile; and say it falls into the Bay of Taranto, near Morano. Sabaria, a Town of the ancient Pannonia in Hungary, the native place of S. Martin of Tours. It is not certainly known where it is: some con∣jecturing it to be one place, and some another. Sabini, an ancient People of Latium, in Italy; whose memory is still preserved in the name of a Pro∣vince, now in the States of the Church, called Terra Sabina; which contains a part of the Territory here∣tofore belonging to them; the Capital whereof was Cures. There is a Monastery in this Territory ho∣noured with a Bishop's See, under the Title of the Bishop of Sabina: and in the years 1590. 1593. 1595. &c. Synodal Constitutions were published by
the (then) Bishops, bearing the same. It is sufficient∣ly known, how the first Romans under Romulus pro∣cured themselves Wives from this People, their Neigh∣bours. Sabionetta, Sabuloneta, a strong Town in Lom∣bardy, which has a strong Castle Garrisoned by Spa∣niards. It is the Capital of a Sovereign Dukedom; belonging heretofore to the Caraffa's, and now to the Gusman's, a Spanish Family; between the Dukedom of Mantoua to the East, and the Territory of Cre∣mena to the West; twenty five Miles East of Cremo∣na, and fifteen North of Parma. Sablé, Sabolium, a small City in the Province of Maine, upon the River Sarte; ten Leagues from An∣gers to the North, and from Mans to the South. Sablestan, Sablistania, an inland Province in the Kingdom of Persia; towards the East, in the Moun∣tains; between Chorazan to the North, and Khermon, (or Caramania) to the South. The Cities of which are Zarans, Bost, and Nebesaet. Sacae, an ancient People of Scythia, betwixt the Mountain Imaus, and the Sarmatian Alani; repre∣sented by Dionysius Africanus and others, as a wild and cruel Nation. Sacania, Laconia, the most Southern Province in the Morea; containing that part which was ancient∣ly under the Lacedemonians, and Argia. The Capi∣tal of which is Misitra. Sacay, Sacaia, a City in Japan. Sacca, Siacca, Saxa, Xacca, a City on the South Shoar of Sicily, in the Valley of Mazara; called by the Ancients, Thermae Selinuntiae. It stands at the foot of a Mountain; and has an Harbour, twenty two Miles from Mazara to the East, and forty from Gergenty. Cluverius saith, it has an ancient Castle; which is now carefully upheld and repaired. A Synod was held here in 1579. Sachsen. See Saxony. Sadodela, Edus, a River of Liguria in Italy, now in the States of Genoua; which falls into the Porce∣vera. Saffay, Savus, a small River of Barbary; which falls into the Mediterranean Sea, in the Kingdom of Argier; between Accharara and Metafus. Sagabria. See Zagabria. Sagan, Saganum, a City in Silesia, in the King∣dom of Bohemia; the Capital of a Dukedom of the same name; called by the Germans, Zeigan. It stands upon the Bober, (where it receives the Queiss) seven German Miles from Glogaw to the West, and six from Crossen to the North. Now in the Hands of the Em∣peror, as King of Bohemia; whose Predecessors in 1548. redeemed to out of the Hands of the Elector of Saxony; to whom it was Mortgaged together with its Dukedom. Sagone, a ruined City in the Island of Corsica; which is yet a Bishop's See, under the Archbishop of Pisa in Italy: the Bishop keeping Residence at a neighbouring Town. Sagriano, Sagra, a small River in the Farther Calabria. Saguenay, a River, Town, and Province in New France. The River discharges it self into the Gulph of S. Lawrence. Saguntum, a noble and famous City of the ancient Spain; whose memory is recorded with honour for their fidelity to their Allies the Romans; when Han∣nibal desieg'd them nine months together in the year of Rome 535. Chusing, rather than betray the one, or fall into the Hands of the other, in one vast fire made in the middle of the City to destroy themselves, their Wives and Children, with every thing that was dear and valuable to them. Hannibal razed the place. Which fact of his became the Subject of the second Punick War. Flor. 2. 6. Sahid, Delta, an Island made by the divided Branches of the Nile, and the Mediterranean Sea; which is the best part of the Lower Egypt. See Delta. Saille, or Haute-Saille, Alta Sylva, a Monastery of the Cistercian Order in the Pais de Vauge, in the Dukedom of Lorain: first established about the year 1140. in the midst of a great high Forest: and there∣fore called Saille by a corruption of the word Silva. Saint, Santo, Santa, Sainct, Is a VVord fre∣quently put before the Names of Places, since Chri∣stianity prevailed in the VVorld: of which those that are omitted under their proper Names are as followeth. S. Agatha di Gotti, Agatha, or Fanum Sanctae Agathae, Agathopolis, a City in the Kingdom of Naples, in the Further Principate; which is a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Benevento; nine Miles from Telese to the South, and fourteen from Capua and Benevento. S. Aignan or Agnan, a Town of the Dukedom of Berry, in France; which stands at the reception of the River Saudre by the Cher: adorned with the Title of a Dukedom and Peerdom now, of an Earl∣dom before; and so called in honour of a Bishop of Orleans of this name, its tutelar, whose reliques they preserve here. Its more ancient name was Ha∣gand. S. Alyre, a Town and Abbey in the Province of Auvergne in France, near Clermont; by which the River Tiretaine passes. S. Amand, Elno, a Town in the Earldom of Flanders, and Confines of Hainault; in the Hands of the French, and heretofore very strong, but now dismantled. It stands upon the River Scharpe, (which a little Lower falls into the Schelde) four Leagues from Tournay to the South, and three from Valen∣ciennes. The Lands lying between the Scharpe and the Schelde, are from this place called the Isles de St. Amand; but its greatest glory is a celebrated Mo∣nastery, Abbatia S. Amandi Elnonensis, where the Saint of that name dyed. This Town was taken by the French in 1667. The Forest, beginning upon the Frontiers of Flanders and extending nigh to Va∣lenciennes in Hainault, hath the name also of the Fo∣rest of S. Amand. S. Amour, a small Town in the County of Bur∣gundy, in France, and the Diocese of Lyons. Hono∣red of late with a Collegiate Church. S. Andero, Andreapolis Antiqua, Flavionavia, a Town and Port in the Principality of Biscay in Spain: lately advanced to the Dignity of a Bishop's See. Some place it in the Asturias. S. Andiol, a Town in the Province of Vivaretz in France, upon the Rhosne; adorned with divers Ec∣clesiastical and Religious Houses, and a College of the Barnabites. Its ancient name in Latin was, Gento, Gentibo, Gentibus. This of S. Andiol, and Fanum S. Andeoli, descended upon it by the Martyrdom of S. Andeolus, a Graecian Subdeacon here, in the Reign of the Emperor Severus, about the year 190: who with others had been sent to serve the Gauls by S. Polycarp from the East. It hath the Latin name also of Viva∣riense Monasterium, being under the Bishop of Vi∣viers. S. Andre, or Fort de Saint Andre, a strong Cit∣tadel in the Dutchy of Guelderland in the Low Coun∣tries; situated betwixt the Maze and the VVael, about two Leagues from Bosteduc. Built in 1599. by An∣drew Cardinal of Austria; and the year after taken by the Dutch, who remain the Masters of it. Only in 1672. the French gained it, and soon after ruined and abandoned it. § A Town near Buda in Hun∣gary, supposed by Bonfinius to be the Quarta de∣cima
legio Germanica of Ptolemy, bears this name also. Capo di S. Andrea, a Promontory of the Island Cyprus; the same which Pliny calls Dinaretum. Capo S. Andrea, a Promontory of the Pelopon∣nesus, in Achaia: the same with the ancient Antir∣rhium of Ptolemy and Pliny. S. Andres, Lavantum, Flavia, a City of Ger∣many, in the Lower Carinthia; which is a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Saltzburgh. It stands upon the River Lavant, or Lavanthal, (which two Miles Lower falls into the Drave) from which it has its Latin Name; and it is under the Archbishop of Saltzburgh. This City stands seven Miles from Inden∣burgh, and eleven from Clagenfurt to the East to∣ward Marpurg. The Bishoprick was instituted by Eberhard, Bishop of Saltzburgh, in 1221. who re∣served to himself and his Successors the Right of Elect∣ing, Investing, and Swearing the Bishops of it: There∣fore they were not numbred amongst the Bishops of the Empire, nor had any Voice or Place in the Diet. S. Angelo, Angelopolis, a City in the Capi∣tanato; which is small, but strong; five Miles from Manfredonia, and four from the Adriatick Sea. S. Angelo de Lombardi, Fanum S. Angeli Lon∣gobardorum, Angelopolis, a small City in the further Principate; and a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Cosenza; from which it stands eight Miles towards Benevento. S. Angelo in Vado, Fanum S. Angeli in Vado, Tiphernum Metaurum, a small City in the Dukedom of Ʋrbino, in the States of the Church; made a Bishops See in 1635. by Pope Ʋrban VIII. S. Antonin, a Town in Rovergne in France; situated at the Confluence of the Aveirou and Bonnete, and encompassed with high Mountains. The Hu∣guenots fortified it in the late Civil Wars. But it was taken from them in 1622. S. Aubin, Fanum Sancti Albini, a Town in Bre∣tagne in France; five Leagues from Rennes to the North, and as many from the Borders of Normandy to the South; upon the River Covesnon. Made fa∣mous to all Ages by a Victory here obtained by Lewis de Fremoville, (General for Charles VIII. King of France) against the Duke of Bretagne, and his Con∣federates; in 1488. S. Augustine, the most Eastern Cape of Africa. § Likewise a Promontory in the Government of Per∣nambuco in Brasil, in South America; upon which the Portuguese have built a Fortress, once taken by the Hollanders, but retaken by the Portuguese. In Latin, Caput Sancti Augustini. § A Town and Port in Florida, in North America, was formerly called by this name too; before the Spaniards took, and new∣named it S. Matthew. S. Bartholomew, one of the Charibye Islands in the North Sea, in America: furnished with a good haven, and yielding the Indian Bread in plenty. S. Basil, an Abbey in the Province of Cham∣pagne, three Leagues from Reims in France; near Verzi: in which the Council of Reims of the year 991 or 92. (commonly so called) was assembled; that installed Gerbert in the Archiepiscopal See of Reims, who became afterwards Pope by the name of Sylvester II. S. Baume, a famous Rock and Town near S. Maximin in Provence; upon a Mountain, three Leagues high and ten in extent; betwixt Aix, Mar∣seille and Thoulon. This Rock is imagined to be the grotto, where S. Mary Magdalen abode many years; whence Petrarch in verse, and many others of the ingenious, have made elaborate Descriptions of it. Her body is said to be there yet preserved. S. Bennet in the Holme, a Village in the Coun∣ty of Norfolk and the Hundred of Tunsted; not far from Hickling: receiving its name, and probably its beginning from an ancient Abbey so called, of the Foundation of K Canutus the Dane. An Abbey, af∣terwards fortified like a Castle with Walls and Bul∣warks by the Monks: one of which betrayed it to VVilliam the Conqueror. And tho since decayed and empoverished, yet the Title of Lord Abbot of S. Ben∣net is said to remain to this day to the Bishops of Norwich. S. Borendon, an Island on the West of the Ca∣naries; supposed to be unacessible by reason of the Clouds, which perpetually obscure its Coast. S. Brieu, or S. Brieux, Briocum, Fanum S. Bri∣oci, a City in Bretagne in France, on its Northern Coast; which is a Bishops See under the Archbishop of Tours, founded or re-established about the year 844. by one of the Dukes of Bretagne, in the time of Charles the Bald K. of France. The ancient Bi∣ducesii, mentioned by Ptolemy, it is believed, dwelt in this place. It stands betwixt the Rivers Trieu and Arguenon (of which Ptolemy makes also mention) in a pleasant fruitful plain, at the foot of a Rock; well built, peopled and fortified; and having a good Harbor on the British Sea in half a League of it, with divers Religious Houses: twenty Miles from Rennes to the North-West. There was a Synod held at it in 1233. S. Catherine, an Island in the North Sea, upon the Coast of the Province of Honduras in New Spain in America: twenty Leagues distant from the Conti∣nent. Formerly under the Spaniards; but the Eng∣lish have twice dispossessed them, and new named the place the Island of Providence. It hath a con∣venient Port and a Cittadel. § Also a Monastery at the foot of the Mountain Horeb (or Sinai) near the Mountain of S. Catherine, (which makes a part of Sinai) in the Stony Arabia. The Repository of the Re∣licks of a Saint of the same name; which are pretended to have been brought by Angels hither from Alexan∣dria in Egypt, after the martyrdom of her there. The Archbishop of Mount Sinai, who acknowledges no Patriarch, resides at this Monastery. One of the Greek Emperors built it for the use of the Caloyers of the Order of S. Basil: and the Ottoman Port sa∣vours it with great privileges. S. Christopher, one of the Caribbe Islands on the Coast of America: in North Lat. 17. 25. Seventy five Miles in Circuit; by the Natives heretofore called Ay ay, and Liamaiga. This Island is planted by French and English. Desnambuck for the French, and Sir Thomas Warner for the English, taking Possession of it the same day, in 1625. by mutual agreement of the two Nations. In 1629. Don Frederick de Toledo had Orders from the Spaniards to force the English and French out of it, with a Navy of twenty four great Ships. The French retired for a time; but the English eluded this Storm, by an Accommodation: and the French returning soon after, resetled here. The English being constantly and plentifully supplied from London, are in the better Condition: The French were a long time too much neglected by their Countrymen; which contributed very much to the forcing them then to submit to the hard usage of the Spaniards. The English are more in number than the French: The French to Counterbalance this have four Forts, and the English but two. One of which commands the great Haven, the other a Descent not far from Pointe de Sable: and to prevent differences between the two Nations, each of them have a Guard
upon the Frontiers of their Divisions, which is re∣newed every day. It is one of the most delightful Islands in the World; swelling in the midst into high Mountains, which afford upon the Descents several Stages, planted one above the other: the higher Plan∣tations enjoying the pleasure of the prospect of the lower. All made more lovely by rows of Trees al∣ways Green, and fair Houses covered with glazed Slate. The Soil is light and sandy; apt to produce all sorts of Fruits; as Sugar, Tabacco, Cotton, Ginger, Indico, and the like: it wants not Springs, and some hot Wa∣ters sit for natural Baths. This Island was discovered by Christopher Columbus, the finder out of the New World; and either called by this Name to preserve the Memory of his own, or because the Island at a distance seems to represent the usual Picture of S. Christopher upon a Giants Shoulders. The English have so in∣creased, that they have sent Colonies from thence to Barbuda, Monserrat, Antego, and Barbadoes. The French have built a Town of good bigness, called le Basse-Terre, by the English Back-starr; and a Col∣lege of Jesuits. The Houses of Back starr are of Brick, Free-Stone, and Timber; well inhabited by Tradesmen and Merchants: But in a great measure destroyed by an Earthquake, April 1690. the Earth opening in many places nine foot. The English have taken all this Island to themselves, in this War, June and July 1690; under the Command of Capt. Codrington, Capt. Wright, and Sir Tim. Thorn∣hill. S. Claude, Fanum Sti. Claudii, a Town in the Franche Cempte in Burgundy, fortified: in the Bor∣ders of la Bresse; formerly called S. Oyen de Joux: it has a very celebrated Monastery; five Leagues from Geneva to the West, three from the Rhosne: from this Town the Mountain de Joux is sometime called S. Claude. S. Clou, Fanum Sancti Clodoaldi, a remarkable Town in the Isle of France; on the Seyne, over which it has a Stone Bridge; and a magnificent Palace be∣longing to the Dukes of Orleans. It stands upon an Hill two Leagues below Paris to the West. Hen. III. King of France died in this Town, in 1589. of the Wounds he received from a Fryar. It has lately been honored with the Title of a Dukedom, which is an∣nexed to the Bishoprick of Paris. S. Croce, Stauropolis, an Inland City of Caria, in the Lesser Asia; which is an Archbishops See, who has a very large Jurisdiction; there being under him twenty seven Suffragan Bishops. Sancta Crux, a Town upon the North Coast of the Island of Cuba, in America. Sancta Cruz, a small but strong City in the King∣dom of Susa, upon the Atlantick Ocean; built by the Portuguese in 1536. but since taken by the King of Susa, under whom it is. It is also called Cap d' A∣guer. Sancta Cruz de la Sierra, a small City in the Kingdom of Peru; a Bishops See, under the Arch∣bishop of la Plata; from which it stands one hundred Spanish Leagues to the East. S. Davids, Menevia, a City and Bishoprick in the extreme corner of Pembrokeshire, in Wales; upon the Irish Sea; and the Promontorium Octapitarum of the ancients, the same that is now called S. Davids Head. Often heretofore spoiled and ruined by the Danes, Norwegians, and other Pyrates. The Cathe∣dral now standing was the work of Peter the 49th Bishop of S. Davids, in 1176. who dedicated it by the joynt names of S. Andrew and S. David: this lat∣ter person being the Founder of the See. For he, in the time of the Saxons fury, under King Arthur, being Archbishop of Caerleon upon Ʋsk, translated the Archiepiscopal See of Caerleon to Menew, the ancient name of this City, (whence the Bishops style themselves Episcopi Menevenses:) so that Menew be∣came an Archbishoprick; and had seven Suffragans under it at S. Augustines coming into England: it afterward continued so for twenty six Successions: till Sampson, an Archbishop of it, in the time of a plague transferred the Pall and Dignity to Dole in Brittany. Whereby his Successors at S. Davids lost their Name of Archbishops. Yet Bernard, B. of S. Davids, in 1115. was the first that submitted himself to the See of Can∣terbury. This Diocese contains the whole Counties of Pembroke, Cardigan, Caermarthen, Radnor, Breck∣nock; with some small parts of Monmouth, Hereford, Montgomery, and Glamorganshires. S. Dizier, a strong Town in Champagne in France, upon the River Marne; in the Borders of the Dukedom de la Barr: six Leagues from Bar le Duc to the North-East, and forty two from Paris to the East. The Capital of the Territory of Valage, betwixt Joinville and Chalon. Besieged and taken by Charles V. in 1544: and after restored to France by the Peace of Crespy. S. Domingo de la Calcada, a small Town in Old Castile in Spain, near Najara. S. Donato, Forum Appium, a Town in the Cam∣pagnia di Roma in Italy. S. Eustacia, one of the Leeward Islands in the West-Indies, otherwise called the Carribys. It was planted by the French: but taken from them by the English under Sir Tim. Thornhill, and Capt. Wright, July 1690. A very small Island, with one only Fort is capable of about eighty Men. Near to S. Chri∣stophers. S. Fe, Fanum Sanctae Fidei, a Town in Grana∣da, upon the River Xenil; built by K. Ferdinando, in 1491. in a Plain; two Leagues from Granada to the West. S. Fé, a City i South America in Paragua, in the Province of la Plata; two hundred and for∣ty Miles from the City de Buenos Ayres to the North. S. Fe de Bogota, a City of South America, in the Kingdom of New Granada; the Capital of which it is, and an Archbishops See. It stands upon the River Pati, by the Lake Guaravita; at the foot of a Mountain called Bogota, (from which it has its Name:) a vast distance from the Sea every way. S. Fiorenza, Fanum Sancti Florentii, a Town on the North Coast of the Island of Corsica, under the Genouese, with a Port and considerable Fortifica∣tions. Understood by some to be the Canelata of Ptolemy. S. Flour, Floriopolis, Fanum Sancti Flori, a City in the Ʋpper Auvergne; built on an high Hill, commonly called la Planese; and a Bishops See, un∣der the Archbishop of Bourges, ever since 1317. (be∣ing then Founded by P. John XXII.) upon the River Ladir. Twenty Leagues from Clermont to the South, and eight from le Puy to the West. Some take it to be the Indiacum of the ancients. S. For, a Town in Aquitain, upon the River Dordogne; in the Province of Agenois, in the Borders of Perigort; four Leagues from Bergerac to the West. S. Foy, a Town in the Province of Guyenne in France, upon the Dordogne, betwixt Bergerao and Libourne. Taken by the Protestants in 1563. S. Gall, Fanum Sancti Galli, a Town in Swit∣zerland; which has a famous and rich Benedictine Abbey, of greater Antiquity, and much greater ex∣tent and jurisdiction than the Town; being able to
levy above six thousand Men of its own Subjects. The Abbot is a Prince of the Empire, since the year 1226. It stands in the Territory of Torgow, betwixt the Can∣tons of Zurich and Appenzel, and the Diocese of Con∣stance; and is one of the principal Cantons: one Mile from the Lake of Constance, and four from Lin∣daw to the West. Heretofore an Imperial and Free City, but now exempt. The Abbey owes its Beginning either to an Irish or Scotch Devote of the name; who preach'd in the 7th Century the Gospel in divers Places in Switzerland, especially in the Territory of Torgaw: where having refused an Offer of the Bishoprick of Constance made to him, he retired at length to his Solitudes in this place; which became the Seat of an Abbey from him: enriched since vastly by the Dona∣tions of the Kings of France, and the Emperors. The City stands upon an Eminence; not great, but well built; and much traded for its fine Linnen Works, called Galles or Gawse from it. Betwixt the Abbey and the City there is a common Gate, fastned by the Burgesses on the one side and the Abbot on the other. The City antiently did depend in many things upon the Abbey, as having received its total rise from it: but at present, they each enjoy their separate Sove∣reignties. S. Galmier, a small Town in the County of Fo∣retz, in the Government of Lionnois: remarked for a Fountain of Allum-Water there. S. Georgio de Mina, Arx Sancti Georgii, a Castle upon the Coste d'Or in Guinee, in Africa: be∣twixt the Cape of three Points and Cape Corso; which has a Town built by the Portuguese in 1481, and a large and safe Port or Haven; within a few years past taken by the Dutch. S. Germain on Laye, Fanum Sancti Germani in Laya, a Town and Royal Castle in the Isle of France; seated upon an high Hill by the Seine: ha∣ving two magnificent Palaces: one new, of the foun∣dation of Henry le Grand; the other ancient, built by Charles V; continued under the English in the time of their French Conquests, and repaired by Fran∣cis I. King of France: whither the Kings of France frequently retire. The Court of K. James II. of En∣gland and Qu. Mary his Consort is kept here. It is four Leagues from Paris to the West. Henry II. King of France, was born here in 1518. Charles IX. in 1550. Lewis XIV. (now King of France) in 1638, who has added divers great Ornaments to i. And it is no less famous for a Peaco made here in 1679, between the Kings of France and Sweden, and the Elector of Brandenburgh. S. Germain Lembrum, a small City in Auvergne, near the River Allier; in the Tract de Lembrun; two Leagues from Issoire; eight from Clermont to the South, and the same from S. Flour to the North-East. S. Germains, a Corporation in the County of Cornwal in East Hundred; represented by two Bur∣gesses in the House of Commons. S. Gewer, S. Gower, Fanum. Sancti Goari, a Town upon the Rhine; in the County of Catzenel∣lobogen; in the Borders of the Bishoprick of Trier; four Miles above Coblentz to the South: which be∣longs to the Landgrave of Hassia Rhinefeld. S. Gilles, a Town in the Lower Languedoc in France, one League from the Rhosne, betwixt Beau∣caire and Arles, upon a Rivulet. In Latin, Fanum Sancti Aegidii, and Palatium Gothorum in some Au∣thors. It has been taken for the Anatolia of Pliny, and likewise for the Heraclea of the same Pliny and Antoninus. The Huguenots gave the Roman Catho∣licks a Defeat near it in 1562. S. Gothard, Adula, the highest part of the Alpes; between the Switzers and the Dukedom of Milan. The French call it S. Godard. § Also an Abbey of the Lower Hungary, upon the River Raab and the Fron∣tiers of Stiria, two Miles from Kerment: betwixt which and Kerment the Turks receiv'd a bloody De∣feat in 1664. S. Hubert, a City and Bishoprick in the Dukedom of Luxembourgh. S. Jago, a City of Africa, in an Island of the same Name; well fortified, and made a Bishops See by the Portuguese, under whom it is: taken and plundered by Sir Francis Drake in 1585. This is one of the Islands of Cape Verde. About forty five Leagues long, ten broad, and ninety five or a hun∣dred in Circumference. It produces great quantities of Salt. S. Jago, a City on the South Shoar of the Isle of Cuba, which has a safe Port; and is a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of S. Domingo. S. Jago de Compostella. See Compostella. S. Jago de Chili, Fanum Sancti Jacobi, a City in South America, at the foot of the Mountain Andes; built by the Spaniards, by the River Maipus; fif∣teen Leagues from the South Sea. Made a Bishops See under the Archbishop of la Plata. It is the Capital of the Kingdom of Chili. S. Jago del Estero, the capital City of Tucuma∣nia, a Country in South America; seated upon the River Estero: a hundred and seventy Leagues from Potosi: which is a Bishop's See, under the Dominion of the Spaniards. S. Jago de Guatimala, a City of New Spain in North America; which is a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Mexico. S. Jean de Angely, or D'Angery, Angeracum, Ageriacum, Engeriacum, fanum S. Johannis Ange∣riaci, a celebrated Town in Saintonge in France; upon the River Boutonne; two Leagues from the Borders of Poictou, and seven from Saintes to the North. Heretofore very strongly fortified; and in 1562. desended against the Huguenots: who taking it in a second Attempt, encreased its strength by adding more regular Fortifications to it. In 156. it sur∣rendred to Charles IX. by a Siege of two Months, with his loss of ten thousand Men before it: but fall∣ing into the hands of the Huguenots again in 1620. Lewis XIII. dismantled it in 1621, after he had by sorce of Arms and a Siege taken it from them. S. Jean de l'Aune or Losne, Fanum S. Johan∣nis Laudonensis, Laudona, a Town in Burgundy, in France; upon the Saosne, betwixt Auxone and Belle∣garde. Famous for repulsing an Army of the Impe∣rialists in 1636. S. Jean de Leon, a Town in Burgundy upon the Soane. S. Jean de Luz, Fanum Sancti Johannis Luisii, or Luisium: a Town of Aquitain in France, in the Pais des Basques, and the Territory of Labour, with a Port upon the Ocean, at the Fall of the River Ʋr∣dacuri into it: two Miles from the Borders of Spain. Lewis XIV. now King of France, was Married in this Town in 1660. S. Jean de Maurienne, Fanum Sancti Johannis Mauriensis, a very considerable, but unwalled, open City in Savoy; upon the River Arco, in the Valley de Maurienne, (which is a County); three Leagues from the Borders of the Dauphiné to the South, and ten from Grenoble to the East. This is a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Vienne. And the Ca∣thedral shews the Tombs of divers of the Dukes of Savoy. S. Jean Pie de Port, Fanum S Johannis Pede-Portuensis, a very strong Town in the Lower Na∣varr; in the Mountains, upon the River Nive, which falls into the Adoure; eight Leagues from Baionne to
the South: This Town is yet in the Hands of the K. of France, as King of Navarr. S. Johns Point, Isamnium, one of the most Ea∣stern Points of Ireland: in the Province of Ʋlster, in the County of Downe. S. Johnston, Fanum Sancti Johannis ad Tavum, the same with Perth. S. Juan de Puerto Rico, Fanum Sancti Jo∣hannis de Portu divite, a City of North America; in an Island of the same Name, in the North Sea. It stands on the North side of the Island; has a safe Port and Castle; and is a Bishops See, under the Arch∣bishop of St. Domingo. Taken by the English in 1599; and being plundered, left to the Spaniards. S. Juan de Vlva, Fanum Sancti Johannis de Ʋlva, a triangular Fort in a small Island in the North Sea; on the Coast of New Spain, over against the Port of Vera Cruz; erected by the Spaniards for its security and defence. It stands eighty Miles from Mexico to the East. Vera Cruz was at first called by this Name; but the Spaniards changed it of latter years. S. Ives, a Market Town and Corporation in the County of Cornwall, in the Hundred of Penwith: having a Haven upon the Irish Sea, and the Election of two Parliament Men. § There is a second S. Ives in Huntingtonshire, in the Hundred of Hurstington; upon the River Ouse, with a fair Stone Bridge over it; which is a Market Town of good Antiquity. Said to have received this name from a holy Bishop, Ivo, who laboured in the Conversion of the Sa∣xons about the year 600, and died here. But his Body was removed afterwards to Ramsey Abbey. S. Lawrence, a great River of New France, in North America; taking its Source towards the Lake des Hurons, and running from West to East, falling into the North Sea over against Newfound Land: making a great Bay or Gulph there, called the Gulph of S. Lawrence. See Canada. S. Leo, Fanum Sancti Leonis. The same with Monfeltro. S. Leonhart, a Town in the Lower Carinthia, in the Valley of Lavanthal; near the River Lavant, in the Borders of Stiria; two Miles from S. André, a City of Carinthia. This Town is under the Bishop of Bamberg. S. Licer, or S. Lizier. See Conserans. S. Lucar de Barameda, Fanum Sancti Lucae Luciferi, a City in Andaluzia in Spain; called by the French, S. Lurques. Some will have it to be the Lux Dubia of Strabo. It has three Castles; and a large and safe Port at the Mouth of the River Gua∣dalquivir, upon the Atlantick Ocean. S. Lucia, or Alouzia, one of the Charibye Islands in America; under the French. S. Macaire, a Town in the Province of Guyenne in France, upon the Garonne: ten Leagues from Bourdeaux, and thirty from the Ocean; which rises no further than to this Town. S. Maixent, a Town in the Province of Poictou in France, upon the River Seure Niortoise; which hath an antient Abbey: noted for a Council held at it against Berengarius in 1073 and another in 1075. The Emperor Lewis the Debonnaire repair'd this Abbey in his time. S. Malo, Maclovipolis, Aletha, Maclovia, Ma∣clopolis, Maclovium, a City in Bretagne in France; which is a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Tous; seated in a small Island called S. Aron, but very little removed from the Continent; to which it is joined by a Bridge. It grew up out of the Ruins of Aletha. Though its Circuit is not great, yet it is well peopled, rich, strong; and by reason of the goodness of the Haven much frequented. It stands four Leagues from Dole to the South-West, and four∣teen from Rennes to the North. Fortified and well Garrisoned, in consideration that its great im∣portance renders it one of the Keys of the King∣dom. James Cartier, the French Discoverer of Ca∣nada in America, was a Native of this City. A Sy∣nod was held here in 1618. S. Mango, a Town in the `Hither Principate, in the Kingdom of Naples in Italy: bearing the Ti∣tle of a Principality. S. Marco, Argentanum, Fanum Sancti Marci, a small City in the Kingdom of Naples, in the Hither Calabria; which is a Bishops See, under the Archbi∣shop of Cosenza; but exempt from his Jurisdiction. It stands ten Miles from the Tyrrhenian Sea, and six∣teen from Cosenza to the North. § There is a Town of this name in the Island of Sicily: the same with the Calacta of the Antients. S. Margarita, Gorgon, an Island of the Tyrrhe∣nian Sea, under the Grand Duke of Tuscany: betwixt the Province of Toscana and the Island of Corsica. Called also by the Italians La Gorgona. S. Marie, an Island in the Aethiopick Ocean, towards the Bay of Anthongil and the Eastern Coast of the Island of Madagascar: at the distance of two Leagues from the latter; where the French have planted ten or twelve Villages. It is eighteen Leagues in length, three in breadth; fruitful in Rice, Sugar, Gums, Tobacco, Fruits, and Cattel: White Coral and Ambergrease are found here. The Climate con∣tinually rainy. The Natives repute themselves to be of the Line of Abraham; calling the Island in their Language, The Island of Abraham. Les Saintes Maries, Delphicum Tem∣plum, a small Town at the Mouth of the Rhosne in Provence, in France: Honoured heretofore with a Temple built by the Marseillians, in honour of Apollo Delphicus: and said to be the Place, where the Vessel came safe a-shoar, with Lazarus, St. Mary Magdalen, Mary the Mother of James, and others, which the Jews exposed to Sea to the mercy of the Winds and Storms, without Sails or Oars. And that the Bodies of the St. Maries were found hidden here in 1448. S. Maria di Leuca, a City and Bishops See in the Terra di Otranto in the Kingdom of Naples. Sancta Maria, Pandataria, an Island in the Tyr∣rhenian Sea; upon the Coast of Terra di Lavoro (a Province of the Kingdom of Naples), thirty Miles from Puteoli. It is small, desolate, and uncultiva∣ted. Agrippina, the Mother of Caligula the Roman Emperor, was banished into this wretched Place by Tiberius the Emperor; according to the Roman Custom. S. Maria de Finis terre, Artabarnm, a Pro∣montory in Gallicia, which is the most North-Western Cape of Spain; called by the Spaniards, El Cabo de Finis terre; by the French, Le Cap de Fine terre. It has the name of S. Mary also from a near Town, which stands ten Leagues from Compostella to the West. S. Marino, Marinum, Mons Titanus, Fanum Sanctae Mariae, Acer Mons, a City in the Dukedom of Ʋrbino, in Romandiola; scarce four Leagues from the River Rimini, twenty two from Pesaro to the West, and five from S. Leo to the South-East: which is the Capital of a small Republick. (Republi∣chetta, the Italians call it) of the same name: esta∣blished in the year 600, and containing about six thousand People: who bought the Fortress of Pen∣narosta in the year 1000; the Castle of Casolo in 1170; and in 1463 received four other Castles with the Town of Piagge by Donation, from Pope Pius II. This City stands upon a high Hill, well fortified; un∣der
the Government of two Military Officers, whom they change in every year twice. § There is like∣wise in the Montouan and the Modenese, in Italy, two Towns of this name; each adorned with the Title of an Earldom: a Fortress in the Pro∣vince of Toscana near Florence, and a little Principa∣lity in S. Peters Patrimony. § Not to omit the Island, S. Marino de Vaz, near the Cape of Good Hope, upon the Coast of Africa: so called by the Portuguese: an uninhabited Place, almost wholly covered with Mountains. Nor the Charriby Island in America; which first the Spaniards possessed, and was afterwards divided betwixt the French and Dutch. Sancta Martha, Fanum Sanctae Marthae, a City in the Terra Firma, (a Province of South America) on the Shoar of the North Sea; which has an Haven, and a Castle in the Hands of the Spaniards: Also a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of S. Fé de Bogota. It has been taken and plundered both by the English and Hollanders; and therefore not much peopled. Yet it is the capital City of S. Martha, a Province in Castile D'or in South America, of the same name. The Province abounds in Oranges, Citrons, Pome∣granates, Vines, Maze, Mines of Gold, Pretious Stones, &c. Partly under the Spaniards, and partly under a Race of unconquered Natives; who with Kings of their own make vigorous opposi∣tion to the Spaniards. It hath some Mountains in it covered with Snow, though the Maritime Parts are hot. The City stands with a large Port upon the North Sea; honoured with the Residence of the Go∣vernour of the Province. In 1595. Sir Francis Drake set fire to it. In 1630. the General of the Dutch West India Company took it: but the Spaniards ransomed it again. The French have had their turns likewise of pillaging of this City. § The Mountain, Sierras Nevadas, in Castile D'or, passes also by this name. Sancta Maura, Leucadia, Leucas, Neritum, an Island in the Ionian Sea, on the Coast of Epirus; to which it is joined by a Timber Bridge; nine Miles from Cephalonia. It has a City of the same Name; very strong, seated on the East side, in the middle of the Channel; where it is a League over. This Town is a mere Nest of Pyrats: which though they live in the Turkish Territories, are yet by their own Masters persecuted for this infamous Trade: the Bassa of the Morea making a Voyage thither to burn their Galliots, as Mr. Wheeler acquaints us. There belongs to it an Aquaduct, which now serves instead of a Bridge, to those that go on Foot to this Place. It is not at the top above a Yard broad, and about a Mile long; and so very high, that if two should meet upon it, their Lives would be endangered; there being no Stairs, and scarce room to pass. This City has a∣bout six thousand Inhabitants, Greeks, Christians, and Turks. It is also a Bishops See, under the Arch∣bishop of Lepanto. The Island was under the State of Venice, till Mahomet II. took it from them. In 1684. the Venetians under Morosini retook it. It is fruit ul in Corn, Oranges, Limons, and Almonds; its Pasturage very good; and though about forty Miles in compass, yet has it not above thirty poor Villages, inhabited by such as Till the Ground, and Fish. So that the Bishop has apparently a small Re∣venue. S. Maximin, a Town of Provence, in the Dio∣cese of Aix; in which Charles II. King of France, in the thirteenth Century, founded a famous Monaste∣ry of the Dominicans. It was also adorned with a College in 1476. The common Opinion, as to its antient Name, speaks it to be Villa Lata. S. Menehould, Fanum Sancti Menehildis, a Town in Champagne, in the Territory of Argonne, (the Capital of which it is) upon the River Aisne; nine Leagues from Chaalons to the East, and the same distance from Virdun: it has a strong Castle built on an Hill: taken twice within the compass of a few years. S. Michael, the chief Town in Barbadoes, at the bottom of Carlile Bay, in the South part of the Island; which has an Harbour able to secure five hun∣dred Vessels at once. This Town is long, containing several Streets, and beautified by many well-built Houses. Also very populous; being the Seat of the Governour, (or his Deputy) and of the Courts of Justice for the whole Island; the Scale of their Trade, where most of the Merchants and Factors have their Houses and Store-Houses; from whence the Inhabi∣tants are supplied with the English Commodities, by way of Exchange; yet is the Town liable to be float∣ed by the Spring Tides, and by that means made un∣healthful. For its defence it has two strong Forts, with a Platform in the middle; which command the Road, and are well stored with Cannon. Mount S. Michel, Mons Sancti Michaelis in periculo Maris, a Town built with great art upon an inaccessible Rock in the Sea; between Bretagne and Normandy; whence came the first Institution of the Knights of the Order of S. Michel. It belongs to Normandy, and is seated at the Mouth of the River Lers; at a low Water it may be approached by Land; besides the Castle, it has an Abbey and a Church built by Aubert (Bishop of Auranches) in 706, in the Reign of Childebert, King of France. The Rock had been chosen for a Retreat by Hermites in the times foregoing. This Town stands four Leagues from Auranches to the West, and the same distance from S. Malo to the East. The Sand here is good for making of Salt. § In Mounts Bay in the County of Cornwal, there is of this name a Hill, cal∣led S. Michael's Mount; separated by a sandy Plain from the Main Land; but at Ebb water accessible on foot. This Mount riseth to a good heighth, and bears an old Fort upon the top of it. Ilha de S. Miguel, one of the Tercera Islands in the Atlantick Ocean, under the Portugueze; be∣twixt Tercera to the North and S. Maria to the South. The principal Settlements in it are S. Anto∣nio; Villa Franca, and Punta del gada. § The Ve∣netians are Masters of an Island of the same name upon the Coast of Dalmatia, near Zara, in the Adri∣atick; which they call, Isold di san Michele: others, Ʋgliana. § There is a third, Isla de S. Miguel, in the East Indian Ocean; betwixt Calamianes or Pa∣ragoia to the North, and Borneo to the South. S. Miguel, Fanum Sancti Michelis, Michaelo∣polis, a City of South America, in the Kingdom of Peru, and Presecture of Quitoa; seated in the Val∣ley of Piura; twelve Miles from the South Sea. The first Colony the Spaniards setled in this Province. The Indians used to call it Chila. There is a Town of the same Name in New Spain, in the Province of Guatimala; at the Mouth of the River Lempa; six∣ty Miles from Guatimala to the East. Another in New Granada. A fourth called S. Miguel del Este∣ro, in Tucumania; twenty eight Leagues from San Jago del Estero; which is a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of la Plata. S. Mihel, a City in Lorain, upon the Maes; in the Dukedom of Bar; between Toul to the South, and Verdun to the North. S. Miniato al Tedesco, Miniatum Teutonis, a City of Hetruria, in the Dukedom of Florence; built upon an Hill by the River Arno; between Flo∣rence
to the East, and Pisa to the West; twenty Miles from either. Heretofore a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Florence. S. Morris, a Town in the County of Vallesia. S. Neots, or S. Needs, a Market Town in the County of Huntingd. in the Hundred of Toseland: Deriving its Name from a learned Monk of Glasten∣bury, called Neotus; whose Body being translated hi∣ther from S. Neots or Neotstoke in Cornwall, the Palace of Earl Elfride in this Town was in honour thereof converted into a Monastery. S. Nicolas, Fanum Sancti Nicolai, a pleasant Town upon the Meurte in Lorain; two Leagues a∣bove Nancy to the South; much addicted to the Ho∣nour of S. Nicolas Bishop of Myra, whose Reliques it reserves. § There is another Town of the same Name in Flanders, three Miles from Antwerp to∣ward Gant; from which it stands five Miles. S. Nicolas, a City of Moscovy, upon the White Sea; on the Western Shoar of the River Dwina, over against Archangel, from which it stands ten German Miles to the North-West. A Place of so considera∣ble a Trade, that the White Sea is from it frequently called the Bay of S. Nicolas; into which the Dwina falls. S. Omers, Audomarensis Ʋrbs, a City in Artois; heretofore called the Abbey of Sithieu; upon the Ri∣ver Aa, which beneath Gravelin falls into the British Sea; eight Miles from Bologne to the East, three from Arras to the North, six from Dunkirk to the South-East, and five from Gravelin to the East. It has this Name from Audomarus, a holy Bishop, who died here in 695. Made a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Cambray, (in 1559.) in the stead of Terouanne, a ruined City, which stands three Miles from it to the North. Fulco, Abbot of S. Bartin, began to wall it about the year 880. Baldwin II. Earl of Flanders, perfected that Work in 902 There was a Council held here in 1099, under Robert Earl of Flanders; and another in 1583. About 1595, Philip II. King of Spain, sounded here a College for English Jesuits, to which he gave a good Annui∣ty. That House has since purchased Watton Cloister; a pleasant Place belonging before to the Benedictines, two Leagues from S. Omers; which is worth five hundred pounds a year. In 1639, the French besie∣ged this Place without any good success▪ But in 1677, the Spanish Forces being much weakened af∣ter the Battel of Cassel, they took it; and by the Treaty of Nimeguen in 1678, it was yielded to them. Long. 23. 22. Lat. 50. 47. It is a handsome, large City, strongly sortified; near a great Lake, with the River and a Marsh on one side of it, and a Castle and Fosses on the other. S. Palais, Fanum S. Palatii, the capital Town of the Lower Navarre, under the French: situated upon the River Bidouss, near Grammont. S. Papoul, Fanum Papuli, a small City in Lan∣guedoc; which is a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Tolouse, by the Institution of Pope John XXII: who changed its antient Monastery, that had been sounded about the end of the eighteenth Contury, into a Cathedral in the year 1317. Five Leagues from Carcassone to the South-West, and nine from Tolouse. S. Paul de Leon. See Leon, or Leondoul. S. Paul de Trois Chasteaux, Augusta Trica∣stinorum, Sancti Pauli Tricastinorum Civitas, an ancient City; ascribed by Pliny to Gallia Narbonen∣sis, now in the Dauphine; and a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Arles. but formerly of Vienne. It is a flourishing Town, built upon an advanced Cliff; one Mile from the Rhosne; four from Montelimart to the South, and from Oranges to the North. The Huguenots had the possession of it near fifty years in the last Age, till 1599. It is the Capital of the Territory, called Tricastin; which preserves the name of the antient People, Tricastini, mentioned by Pto∣lemy. S. Pierre le Moutier, Monasterium Sancti Pe∣tri, a Town in the Province of Nivernois; in which the Law-Courts of that Province are fixed. It stands between Nevers to the North, and Moulins to the South; seven Leagues from either. S. Pons de Tomiers, Tomeria or Pontiopolis, Sancti Pontii Tomeriarum Ʋrbs, a City of Langue∣doc; which is a Bishops See under the Archbishop of Narbonne; from whence it stands eight Leagues to the North, and a little more from Alby to the North-West. It is a small City, seated amongst the Moun∣tains, not much peopled; and honored with this Bishops See by Pope John XXII. in 1318: who at the same time changed its Benedictine Abbey, that had been founded in the year 936. by Raymond, sir∣named Pons (Pontius) Earl of Tolouse, into a Cathe∣dral: The Bishop is Lord of the Place. S. Quintin, Augusta Nova Veromanduorum, Quinctinopolis, Samarobrina, Quintini Fanum, a Ci∣ty of Picardy upon the River Somme (or rather be∣tween it and the Oyse); which sprung out of a Ro∣man Town called Augusta Nova, &c. two Miles from this Place. It stands six Leagues from Peronne to the North-East, and seven from Cambray to the South. Taken by the Spaniards in 1557, after a great De∣feat of the French Forces upon S. Quintin's day, Aug. 10: and restored by the Treaty of Cambray, in 1559. The French sometimes write it S. Quentin. It is the Capital of the County of Vermandois in Picardy; hath been honoured with the Sessions of French Synods in the yeares 1235. 1237. and 1271. and now contains divers Monasteries and Churches, besides a Collegiate Church. S. Semi, a small Town in Provence, four Leagues from Arles: adorned with a Collegiate Church of the Foundation of Pope John XXII. about the year 1330. Its antient Name was Glanum. There are Urns, Medals, and Inscriptions frequently discovered here, which prove its Antiquity, And near it, a triumphal Arch, with a stately Mausoleum illu∣strated with Trophies, is observed with admiration. S. Semo, Fanum S. Remuli or Remigii, a Sea-Town upon the Coasts of Genoua in Italy: in a fruitful Country for Oranges, Citrons, and Olives. Santa Saba, so called by the Italians; or the Province of Arcegovina; lies between Dalmatia, Bos∣sinia, and the Quarter of Montenegro; seventy Miles long, thirty broad; inhabited by about fifty thousand Families, of which the Turks make not the tenth part. Castlenovo stands in this Province. The Inhabitants were very forward to put themselves under the Pro∣tection of the Venetians, in 1688. S. Salvador, Soteropolis, the Capital City of the Kingdom of Congo in Africa; seated one hundred and forty Miles to the East from the Ocean, and sixty from the River Zaire to the South. The Inhabitants call it Banza; but the devout Portuguese gave it this Name. S. Salvador, Soteropolis, a City in South Ameri∣ca; which is the Capital of Brasil, an Archbishops See; the Seat of the Vice-Roy, and of the Courts of Justice for that Kingdom. It stands on the Eastern Shoar of Brasil; has a capacious Harbor on the Ocean; strongly fortified; and defended by three Forts; yet the Hollanders took this City in 1624. The year fol∣lowing, the Portuguese recovered it, and are at this day in the Possession of it. The Archbishops See was erected in 1676, by Pope Innocent XI.
San Salvao, a ll City in North America, in the Province of Guaiala; called by the Natives Cuzcatlan. It stands orty Miles from S. Jago to the North-East, by a small Lake. S. Sebastian, Fanum Sancti Sebasliani, a City of great strength, seated at the foot of an Hill, on the Shoars of the Ocean; at the Mouth of the River Orio, in the Province of Guipusca in Spain; not above three Leagues from the Borders of Gallicia to the West, twelve from Bayonne to the West, and the same distance from Pampelona to the North. S. Sehastian, a City in Brasil in America; which is a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of S. Salva∣dor; and the Capital of a Province; it has also a large Haven secured by two Forts: in the Hands of the Portuguese. S. Sever, Severopolis, a City of France; which is the Capital of Gascoigne, properly so called; upon the River Adour; six Miles beneath Aire to the West, eight above Dax to the East, and twenty three from Bourdeaux to the South. San Severo, a small City in the Kingdom of Na∣ples; which is a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Manfredonia; but exempt from his Jurisdiction. It stands in the Capitanate in a Plain; eleven Miles from the Adriatick Sea to the South, and twenty four from Manfredonia to the West. This Bishoprick was set∣led here by Pope Gregory XIII. it being a flourishing populous City. S. Severina, Siberina, a City in the further Ca∣labria in the Kingdom of Naples; which is but small, yet an Archbishops See. It stands upon a steep Rock by the River Neeto; ten Miles from the Ionian Sea, twelve from Crotone, and forty from Cosenza. San Severino, Septempeda, a City in the Mar∣quisate of Anconitana; which is a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Fermo. It is small, tho of great Antiquity. In 543. Septempeda, the Roman Town, was burnt by the Goths. In 1498. there was a Castle built, which in time, and by degrees, produced this City: in 1598, first made a Bishops See by Pope Six∣tus the Fifth. It is built by the River Potenza; six Leagues from Tolentino to the West, and sixteen from Macerata to the South-West. S. Simon, a Town in the County of Vermandois in Picardy▪ upon the River Somme, betwixt S. Quen∣tin and Ham; Honoured with the Title of a Duke∣dom, and giving name to an antient Family there. S. Thierry, an Abbey near Reims, in the Pro∣vince of Champaigne: founded about the year 525; and after being ruined by the Saracens, repair'd again in the ninth Century. A Council was held at it in 953. S. Thomaso, Melange, a City of the hither East-Indies, called by the Natives Maliapur. It is a City of Coromandel, on the Bay of Bengala; two hundred Miles from the Island of Zeilan or Ceilan to the North. This Town which has been a long time in the Hands of the Portuguese, had the Name of S. Tho∣mas given it by them. In 1671. the French took it: but two Years after they were forced to leave it, and the Portuguese recovered their Possession. S. Thomas, is an Island of a considerable bigness in the Atlantick Ocean; said to be thirty Spanish Leagues in compass, or one hundred and thirty En∣glish Miles round. It was found by the Portuguese the twenty third of December (being S. Thomas's day) and therefore so called, in 1405. When they thus found it, it was one continued Forest, never before inhabited by men. The Portuguese have tamed those (till then) untouched Forests, and since well peopled it: The Negroes live longer, and thrive better than their Masters; some of which have died here at an hundred and ten years of Age. The Air is excessive hot; so that no Wheat will come to any perfectior▪ nor any Stone-Fruit, Sugar Canes thrive excessively; forty Ship Loads have been brought from thence in one Year. In the midst there is a Mountain, always shadowed with Clouds, and covered with Trees, which occasions those Dews which nourish the Sugar Canes in the hottest Seasons. The principal City is called Pavoasan, or S. Thomas, built of Wood; yet adorn∣ed with the Title of a Bishops See, and a strong Cit∣tadel; and makes about seven hundred Portuguese Families. This Island was taken by the Hollanders in 1599, and abandoned: and again in 1641. But then the Portuguese having used all fair means to recover it the second time in vain, they entered it with their Swords; and by sorce of Arms recovered what was their just Right. This Island lies exactly under the Line, in Long. 27. one hundred and eighty Miles from the Coast of Africa, in nigh a Circular Figure. S. Trinidad de Buenos Ayres, Fanum Sanctae Trinitatis, a City of South America, in the Province of Paragua; and a Bishops See under the Archbishop of La Plata; the Seat of the Courts of Justice of La Plata; a celebrated Sea-Port, and Emporium, seated on the South side of the River of Plate, where it en∣ters the Ocean. The Spaniards (under whom it is) have added Buenos Ayres, Good Air, to its Name, to shew its greatest Excellence. S. Tropez, Fanum Sancti Torpetis, a small but very strong City of Provence in France: which has a Sea-Port or Haven upon the Mediterranean Sea; five Leagues from Frejus or Fregiu to the South, and twelve from Toulon to the East. S. Truyen, or S. Tron, as the French call it; Fanum Sancti Trudonis; a Town in the Bishoprick of Leige, in the Borders of Brabant; the Capital of the County of Hasbain or Haspengow; five German Miles from Maestricht to the West, and from Liege to the East. It was walled, but dismantled in 1673. S. Venant, Fanum Sancti Venantii, a Town in Artois in the Low Countries; seated upon the River Lise, two Leagues from Arras: formerly a Place of great strength; but now neglected by the French, who have possessed it ever since 1659. S. Veit, Candocilla, Fanum Sancti Viti, a City of Carinthia; at the Conjunction of the Wiltz, and the Glac; two German Miles from Glagenfurt toward Girkaw; built in a very fruitful Valley. S. Veit am-Flaum, Fanum Sancti Viti Fomo∣niensis, a strong Town in Carniola; which has a Ca∣stle and an Haven on the Gulph of Venice; in the Borders of Croatia; in subjection to the Emperor. Saintes, or Sainctes, Mediolanum Santonum, Santona, Santones, Ʋrbs Santonica, a City in Aqui∣tain: the Capital of the Province of Saintonge, and a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Bourdeaux. It stands upon the River Charente; twenty Leagues from Bourdeaux to the North, eleven from Rochelle to the South-East. Great, but not equally rich and populous. This City was in the times of the Romans built upon an Hill; where there appears the Ruins of a Roman Theatre, and many other Antiquities: this first Pile being ruined by the Goths, Franks, and other Barbarous Nations; the present was built near∣er the River, and in a lower Ground. In the times of the Civil Wars of France in the last Age, this Ci∣ty had also a great share; the Hugonots for a long time being Masters of it. It hath now divers religi∣ous Houses. In 563. a Council here deposed Emeri∣tus Bishop of the Place, for having entered upon the See by the Regal Authority, against the Consent of the Metropolitan and the Bishops of the Province: which Decree drew upon the Authors of it a fevere Prsecution from the Crown.
Saintonge, or Xaintonge, Santonia, a great and fruitful Province of France: bounded on the North by Poictou, on the East by Angoumois, on the South by the Garonne, (which separates it from Guienne,) and on the West by the Bay of Aquitain. This was the Seat of the Santones, an ancient Nation of the Galls: its Capital is Saintes: the other Cities of Note are Brouges, S. Jean de Angely, and Taillebourg. The Rivers Garonne; Charante, Seudre, &c. water it. They make great quantities of Salt in this Province. The Romans had their Colonies in it: who often deride the short Cloaks or Gowns worn by the ancient Gauls here; as Martial, Gallia Santonico vestit te Bardocucullo: Cercopithecorum penula nuper erat. The same habit towards the Sea Coasts, is in use with the common People to this day. This Province fell to the Crown of England, together with Gascoigne, Guienne, &c. by the Marriage of Eleanor of Guienne with K. Henry II. of England. Sala, the same with Saal. Salado, Salsum, a River of Spain: in Anddlusia, called Guadajox; which between Sivil and Corduba falls into the Guadalquivir. Salamanca, Salmantica, a City in Spain; called Ʋrbs Vettonum by Ptolemy, and perhaps the same with Polybius his Elmantica; it stands in the King∣dom of Leon, upon the River Tormes; a Bishops See under the Archbishop of Compostella; and an Uni∣versity, founded by Alfonsus IX. King of Leon, in the year 1200, which is one of the most considerable in that Kingdom, adorned with noble Schools and a large Library. About ten Leagues from Zamora to the South, fourteen from the Borders of Portugal to the East, and two and twenty from Valladolid to the South-West: upon several Hills, in a very unequal Si∣tuation; of a small circuit, ill built, worse repaired: most of the Houses being falling down; and besides its Churches, Monasteries, and Colleges, has no∣thing that deserves Regard. Long. 14. 45. Lat. 41. 15. Salamis, Salamine, an ancient Archiepiscopal Ci∣ty in the Island of Cyprus: which boasted of the ho∣nour of having its Church founded by the Apostle S. Barnabas; whose Body was discovered to lye here, in 485. It afterwards took the name of il Porto Co∣stanzo or Constantia. The Philosopher Anaxarchus suffered in this City the pounding to death in a mortar, by the order of Nicocreon King of Cyprus, with a singular constancy. It is now utterly ruined. Salamis, an Island. See Coluri. Saandra, Salandrilla, or Aalandra, a River in the Basilicate in the Kingdom of Naples; passing by Risetto (and thence called also Piume di Rosetto) to the gulph of Taranto. Salawar, Zalawar, or Zalad, a County in the Lower Hungary, upon the Borders of Stiria: with the Drave to the South, and the County of Vesprin to the North. Kanisa stands in this County▪ upon the River Sala. But the Capital Town of it bears the same name of Salawar. Sale, Sala, a City ascribed in ancient time by Pto∣lemy to Mauritania Tingitana; seated at the Mouth of a River of the same Name; on the Shoars of the Kingdom of Fez, on the Atlantick Ocean. A place of great Trade, and has a noble Habor; but it is an infamous Nest of Pirat. It was heretofore a Com∣mon-Wealth; now under the King of Fez, who is Master of the Castle. It stands one hundred Miles from Fez to the West, and Tangier to the South. Almanesor one of the Moorish Kings much beautified it, and was after buried in it. The Spaniards took it in 1287; who lost it in ten days again: in 1632. King Charles I. sent a Fleet against this City; which blocked it up by Sea, whilst the King of Morocco be∣sieged it by Land; and by this means brought it un∣der: the Works being levelled and those Rogues Exe∣cuted; for which King Charles had three hundred Christian Captives sent him as a Recompence, a Reward worthy of that Holy King. Long. 6. 40. Lat. 33. 50. Sale, the same with Saal. Sale, Sala, a River in Quercy, a Province of France. Sale, Sala, a Province of the Kingdom of Bos∣nia. Salefica, Saleucia, a City in Cilicia, in the Lesser Asia; which is a Bishops See, under the Patriarch of Antioch. It stands seventy Miles from Tarsus to the West, and twelve from the Shoars of the Mediterra∣nean Sea to the North: called by Niger, Seleschia. Long. 64. Lat. 38. 40. Salentini, the ancient Inhabitants of Terra di Otranto, in the Kingdom of Naples; in the Roman times. Salerno, Salernum, Salerna, a City in the King∣dom of Naples, which was a Roman City and Colo∣ny; called by Strabo and Livy, Ʋrbs Picentinorum. Now an Archbishops See, a Principality, and the Capi∣tal of the Hither Principato. It stands upon the Ri∣ver Busanola; upon the Shoars of the Tyrrhenian Sea, upon which it has a Bay called by its own Name, and a safe and large Haven; twenty four Miles from Naples to the South-East, and thirty from Beneven∣to to the South. Long. 38. 44. Lat. 40. 33. This Archbishoprick was founded by Pope Boniface VII. in 974. The Body of S. Matthew the Apostle is said to be in this Place. Pope Gregory VII. died here in 1085. It has a Castle and many Antiquities, which are the Remainders of the Roman Works. When Naples had distinct Kings, the Title of this place belonged to the eldest Son of that Kingdom. In the years 1615. and 1579. there were two small Councils held at it. Salettes, a Carthusian Nunnery of great note and quality, upon the frontiers of Dauphine in France; toward la Bresse. Salfed, an Abbey in Thuringia in Germany. Salii, an ancient People of Provence in France: who, as we find in Strabo, Mela, &c. extended them∣selves from about Aix as far as to Nice. § There was another Nation of the Salii, in the Tract now called Sallant from them, in Overyssel in the Low Countries. Saline, Didyme, one of the Liparee Islands, be∣longing to Sicily; twelve Miles in circuit, and fruit∣ful in Allum. Near this place the Dutch received a great Defeat from the French at Sea, in 1676. Bau∣drand. The Italians call it Didimo. Salino, Suinus, a River in the Kingdom of Na∣ples; which springeth out of the Aphine; and in∣ning through the Further Abruzzo, watering Penn, (a City of that Province) and Pescara, falls into the Gulph of Venice. Salingstede, Salinstadium, a Town in Franco∣nia upon the Maine; four Miles above Franck fort to the East. By Charles the Great made a Bishap's See; but in 780, this Chair was removed to Hail∣bune. It was then a very great City: since become subject to the Bishop of Mentz. Salins, Salinae, a strong City in the Franche Comté, upon the River Forica; eight Loagues from Dole to the East, and fifty eight from Geneva to the North. It is seated in a fruitful Valley (betwixt two Mountains) called Scoding; which has been the rea∣son, why this City in the Latin Writers of the mid∣dle
Ages is called Scdingum; there belong to it two Castles and several Salt-Springs, which are boiled up to an excellent white Salt. This City was taken by the French in 1668, and again in 1674: ever since which last Date, it has continued in their Hands, by the peace of Nimeguen. It hath four Parishes and divers reli∣gious Houses. Sall, Sala, a Town in Westmannia in Sweden; between Ʋpland and Nericia; five Swedish Miles from Ʋpsal to the W. which has been much celebrated on the account of some silver Mines it had heretofore. Sallant, Sallandia, that is, the Land of the Salii; a considerable part of the Province of Overyssel; and one of the three parts of that Province; to∣wards the Yssel and Zuider Sea: in which are the Towns of Deventer, Zwol, Campen and Steenwick. Salisbury. See Sarisbury. Salme, Salmona, a small Town in Lorain; the Capital of a Territory, called the Principality of Salme; which ever since 1460, has belonged to a Branch of the Family of the Rhine-graves. It lies in the Bor∣ders of Alsatia, within Mount Vauge; twenty Miles from Nancy to the East. Salnich, Celidnus, a River which in Pliny's time was the Southern Boundary of Macedonia: it falls into the Adriatick Sea, on the North side of the Crosfo della Valona in the Kingdom of Albania; over against Ot ranto in Italy. Salo. See Xalon. Salon, Salum, a Town in Provence in France, betwixt Aix and Arles; which hath the honour of a Collegiate Church, and divers religious Houses. Being the more remarkable also for giving birth to the two famous Michael and Caesar Nostradamus's. Salona, a City of Dalmatia; formerly a place of great Esteem, and a Bishops See, under the Arch∣bishop of Spalatro. The Emperor Dioclesian re∣treated hither, after his resignation of the Empire. It espoused Caesar's interest in the Civil Wars betwixt him and Pompey: and, when besieg'd by Octavius, it repulsed all his attempts with the greatest obstinacy and bravery. That old City being ruined by the Sclavo∣nians, lies now in its Ruins; near which the Vene∣tians have built a Castle, at the Mouth of a River, both of the same Name; five Miles from Spalatro to the North. This Castle is in the Hands of the Venetians. Salonichi. See Thessalonica. Salses, or Sausses, Salsulae, a strong Castle in the County of Rousillon; built on an Hill by a Lake of the same Name, in the Borders of Languedoc: four Leagues from Perpignan to the North, and two from the Mediterranean Sea West. This Castle was built by the Spaniards against the Inroads of the Castle of Leucate; but taken by the French in 1640, and con∣firm'd to them by the Treaty of the Pyrenees. The derivation of its name is taken from the Salt-Springs near it. Saltfleet, a Market Town in Lincolnshire, in the Hundred of Loutheaske, upon the Sea: much fre∣quented in the Summer Season for its good Fish. Salwarp, a River in Worcestershire, falling into the Severn. Droitwich and Bromesgrove stand upon the Banks of it. Saltzburg, Juvavia, Salisburgum, Poedicum, Ha∣driana, a great City in the Circle of Bavaria in Ger∣many; which is an Archbishops See, upon the Ri∣ver Saltzor; and has a very strong Castle, built on an advanced ground, under the Dominion of its own Archbishop; together with a very large Terri∣tory called the Bishoprick of Saltzburg. This City stands nineteen Miles from Inspruck to the North-East, seventeen from Munchen to the East, and thir∣teen from Ilstadt to the South. Historians do ge∣nerally believe, that it was at first the Capital of No∣ricum; in which the ancient Geographers place it. Made an Archbishops See, in the year 798, in the times of Charles the Great; having before been a Bishop's See, in the fifth Century: but the Goths sack∣ing the City, and destroying the Christians, the suc∣cession to that See suffered an interruption nigh two Ages. It was also for some time an Imperial and Free City, but since exempted. In 1195. the Emperour Henry VI. reduced it into ashes: but being reedified, it carries the name at present one of the best and strongest Cities in Germany. Made lately an University too, by an Archbishop of it, under the Regency of the Benedictines; and adorned with a new Cathedral, in 1628 which passes for one of the most magnificent Piles in Christendom. The Archbishoprick of Saltzburg, Salisburgensis Ditio, is a Province in the Circle of Bavaria in Ger∣many; between Carinthia and Stiria to the East, the lower Bavaria, and the Earldom of Tirol to the West; Austria to the North, and the Bishoprick of Brixen and Carinthia to the South. The Bishoprick of Chiemzee is incorporated with this Archbishoprick. The Archbishop besides is a Prince of the Empire, and a Legatus Natus from the Roman See in Germany. Saltzor, Saltzach, Juvavius, a River of Germa∣ny which ariseth from Mount Taurus in the Earldom of Tirol; and washing Saltzburg (which has its Name from this River,) falls into the Inns between Oetingen and Branaw; below Burehausen, a Town of Bavaria. Les Salvages, two barren and desert Islands to∣ward the Coast of Africa, of the number of the Ca∣naries: only they swarm with Fowl. Saluces, Saluzzes, or Saluzzo, a Marquisate in Piedmont, at the Foot of the Alpes; heretofore a Fife of Dauphine, and annexed to France; but gran∣ted by Henry IV. to Charles Emanuel Duke of Savoy in exchange for la Bresse, Beugey, (and some others on this side the Alpes) about the year 1601. It is bounded by Piedmont on the North and East; by the Dauphine on the West; and by the County of Nizza on the South. The River Po owes its head to Mount Viso in this Marquisate; and the strong Fortress of Carmagnole is one of its dependencies. It takes its Name from Saluzzo, Salutiae, the principal Town: which ever since the year 1511, has been a Bishop's See under the Archbishop of Turin. It stands upon an Hill at the Foot of the Alpes; about one Mile from the Po, ten from Fossano to the West, and twen∣ty four from Turin to the South; secured by a strong Castle, and adorned with a most magnificent Cathedral. This City was anciently called Augusta Vagiennorum. Samachonitis, or Semechonitis, the Lake of Me∣roz: made by the River Jordan in Palestine, on the North of the Sea of Galilee. About sixty Greek Stadia in length, and thirty in breadth. In the Winter, swelled with the Snow from the Mountain Libanus. Samandria. See Spenderobi. Samarchand, Samarchanda, Marchanda, a vast City in the Asiatick Tartary; one hundred Miles be∣yond the River Oxus; the Capital of that Kingdom, and the Royal City of that great Prince Tamberlaine, who stiled himself Flagellum Dei, the Scourge of God: who about the year 1402, took Bajazet the Emperor of the Turks his Prisoner, and died in the year 1406. This Prince bestowed his utmost care in adorning, beautifying, and enlarging this City: built in it a very strong Castle, and instituted an University. But in what state it now is, is not easily known. Samaria, a City of Palestine, mentioned by Pto∣lemy and Strabo, as well as by the Sacred Writers. It was seated upon a Mountain in the Tribe of Ephraim; built by Omri King of Israel, as is recorded 1 Kings 16. (about the year of the World 3112, or as others
319.) and becoming from thenceforward the Royal City of that Kingdom, it became one of the greatest, strongest, and most populous, as well as most beauti∣ful Cities of the East. Benhadad, King of Syria, be∣sieg'd it first, about 3146. with a vast Army; and reduced it to great Extremities: it was then delivered by a Miracle. Salmanazar, King of Assyria, was the next that attempted it, and took it after a Siege of three years in 3314. He carried the Israelites into Captivi∣ty, and peopled it with a new Colony, composed of divers Nations and Religions; who were the impla∣cable Enemies of the Jewish Nation; especially after the building of a Temple in Samaria (after the man∣ner of that of Jerusalem) about the times of Nehe∣miah, by one of the Sons of Joida the High Priest; who had married a Daughter of Sanballat (the Ho∣ronite, Governour of Samaria under Darius King of Persia), for whom his Father-in-law built a Temple on Mount Gerizim. Hyrcanius the High Priest of the Jews about the year of the World 3941. took, and intirely ruined this City; which lay desolate, till Herod the Great rebuilt it about 4033. and called it  in Honour of Augustus. The Temple of Samaria was standing in our Saviour's time, as appears in S. John's Gospel: after our Saviour's Passion, this City received the Christian Faith, by the Preaching of Philip the Evangelist, about the year of Christ 35. Simon the Father of Heresie, was one of these new Converts, and the Founder of the Gnosticks. About 42. Herod Agrippa obtained this City as an Addition to his Kingdom from Caligula. In the first ruin of the Jewish Nation, (under Vespasian) this Nation and City had no great share of the Calamity; because I suppose, they sided with the Romans in this first Revolution against the Jews. But in the second, un∣der Adrian the Emperour, they acted otherwise; and about the year of Christ 135. were, together with the Jews, extirpated by the Arms of that Prince. This City has ever since lain buried in its Ruins; though there are some few remainders of the Samaritan Na∣tion to this day in Palestine and Grand Cairo, where they keep their Synagogues and their ancient Sacri∣fices: Especially at Sichem, now called Naplouse, in Palestine; (the residence of their High Priest, who pretends to be of the Race of Aaron.) But following Laws and Rites, different from those of the Penta∣teuch, they have nevertheless the esteem of He∣reticks amongst the Jews. The Samaritans of Mount Gerizim were mortal enemies to the ancient Christians there, till the Emperour Justianian took and burnt their King Julian, and curbed them from time to time by very severe Edicts. See Gerizim. It stood thirty five Miles from Jerusalem to the North. Long. 66. 40. Lat. 31. 30. or as Mr. Fuller saith. Long. 69. 10. Lat. 32. 30. Sambales, the little Islands near the Peninsula of Jucatan in New Spain, in America; where good Amber-Greese is fished up with great dexterity by the Indians. Sambas, Sambasum, a City on the North side of the Island of Borneo in the East-Indies, which has an Harbour upon the Ocean; though it lies thirty Miles from the Shoar up into the Land. Sambia, a Province of Prussia, called by the Poles Szamlandt; one of those twelve Counties, into which Prussia was divided by Venodotius (one of its Princes) in 733. § Also a Bishops See under the Arch∣bishop of Gsna, whose Seat was at Coningsperg; but now united with the Bishoprick of Ermeland or Warmerland. It lies between the Bay of Curland to the North, the River Pregel to the South; and was a part of the Circle of Natingen; now under the Duke of Brandenburg. Sambre, Sabis, Saba, a River of the Low-Coun∣tries; which aiseth in Picardy; and soon after en∣tring Hainault, divides it; watring Landrecy, Berla∣mont, and Maubeuge. It passeth by Charleroy to Namur, the Capital of the Province; and there falls into the Maes. Samnites, an ancient and powerful people of Italy: who inhabited the Countries now contained in the Terra di Lavoro, the Capitanata, the Abruzzo, the Dukedom of Benevento, &c. and made War with the Romans a long time before they could be entirely reduced. Samo, Samos, Parthenia, Cyparissa, an Island be∣longing to the Lesser Asia, in the Ionian Sea, near Ionia; as being but five Miles from the nearest Shoar of Ephesus, and sixty from Chius, (now Sio) to the South. It is about eighty in compass. It has a City on the East side, which is a Bishops See under the Archbishop of Ephesus; so poor, that it will scarce find its Bishop Bread: yet is this Island so fruitful, that almost nothing can be planted, which the Earth will not bring to maturity. The Wines of it are excee∣ding pleasant; but for want of a Trade and encou∣ragement, the Inhabitants plant little more than they use. The Inhabitants were so powerful in ancient times, that they managed a prosperous War against the Ephesians; and afterwards against the Athenians and Milesians, about the year of Rome 313. and the eighty fourth Olympiad: till Pericles about the year of the World 3510. reduced them. Upon his depar∣ture, they reassumed their Liberty; and forced him to besiege their City nine Months before he could take it; to invent the Battering Ram, and several other Engines for that purpose; and even after this, they sustained some other Wars. Their greatest Glory was Pythagoras, the Father of Philosophy. Juno was their principal Patroness and Goddess, in whose honour there was a famous Temple erected by them. This Island once so powerful, rich and populous, is by the Turks (who are Masters of it) reduced to that mean and depopulated condition, that a few Pyrates dare land and plunder it as they please. So that ever since 1676. no Turk durst venture to live upon it, lest he should be carried into Captivity by these Rovers; as four of them were then by Monsieur Crevellier, a famous Privateer. Samogithia, a Province of the Kingdom of Po∣land; called by the Inhabitants Samodzka-Zem∣bla; by the Poles Samudska-Ziemia; by the Ger∣mans Samaiten, by the French Samogitie. It is a very large Province; bounded on the North by Curland, on the East by Lithuania, on the South by Prussia Ducalis, and on the West by the Baltick Sea; its length from East to West is thirty five Ger∣man Miles, but not of equal breadth. The principal Towns in it are Midniky (or Womie), Kowno and Rossienie; which last, is the Capital of this Pro∣vince. It was anciently divided into twelve Coun∣ties, now into three; and overspread with dark thick Woods. Yet it is a Bishoprick under the Archbishop of Gnesna, the Bishop having his Residence at Womie; and this Province is very often included in Lithu∣ania largely taken; the Fortunes of which it has al∣ways followed. Samoiede, or Samoyedes, Samoieda, a Pro∣vince in the North-East of Muscovy, upon the Frozen Sea; lying on both sides of the River Obb, which is subject to the Czars; but in such manner, that the People are almost free. This is a part of the Ancient Scythia or Sarmatia; and had this Name given them by the Russ, which signifies Self-Eaters: it being their Custom to eat Mans Flesh, even that of their nearest Relations, (mixed with Venison) to this day. They have no Cities, yet they are no wandring Na∣tion: their Cabbins or Huts are built one half above,
and the other beneath the Earth; with an hole at the top, which serves both, for a Door and a Chimney; the Snow rising sometimes the depth of a Pike above the Earth: they have also Passages under the ground, to go from Caban to Caban at such times; for six Months of the year they have a perpetual Night, and the rest perpetual Day. They have neither Wooll nor Corn; their Food is Fish dried in the Wind and Sun, Honey and Venison; their Cloaths are the Skins of Beasts dressed with the Plair on; and sewed with the Nerves of Beasts, instead of Thread; which by mix∣ing various Colours, they will so diversifie, as to re∣present Forest Works and Flowers as they please. They are low o Stature; have large flat Faces, small Eys, short Legs, and wear their Hair very long. Till of late they were Pagan Idolaters. When the Dutch in 1595. discovered these Coasts, there were great numbers of Idols upon the Shoar; of which they would not suffer the Hollanders to carry any one a∣way; they have been since converted to Christianity, and baptized by one Uadimer (a Bishop), who was sent to them by the Russ. Olarius. Samosata, the Capital City of the ancient Coma∣gena in Syria: which since the times of Christianity, hath been a Bishops See under the Archbishop of E∣dessa. A noted place for giving Birth to Lucian, and Paulus Samosatnus the condemned Patriarch of Antioch. Now called Schems. San, Sanus, a River of Poland, which arising from the Carpathian Mountains in the Borders of Hungary; and running through Red Russia by Prze∣mislaw, and Jaroslaw, two Cities of that Province; and being by this time augmented by some other Rivers, entreth the Lesser Poland; and at Sendomir falls into the Vistula. Sana, Sanaa, the Capital City of the Happy A∣rabia, equal to Damascus; and being seated upon a Mountain, said to enjoy a very temperate Air. It stands fifty Miles from the Red Sea. Hoffman sup∣poseth it to be the same with Pliny's Saphar. Sanbich, or Sanabach, a Market Town in Che∣shire, in the Hundred of Northwich, upon the River Welock. Sancerre, Sacrum Cereris, Sacro-Caesarinum, a Town in the Dukedom of Berry in France, upon the Loyre. It stands on an advanced ground, fortified heretofore with a Castle and other Works; till it was taken from the Huguenots in 1573. by Famine, and demolished. Sandeez, Sandecium, a City of the Lesser Poland, in the Palatinate of Cracovia; upon the River Du∣naick, towards the Mountains; ten Polish Miles from Cracow to the South. It stands at the foot of the Carpathian Hills; well fortified, and the Capital of the Territory in which it stands. Sandham, a Town in the South-East parts of the Isle of Wight, upon a Bay of its own name: fortified with a Castle. Sando, Sandum, a City in Japan, on the North side of the Island of Niphonia. Sandwich, Rutupiae, is now a small Corporation on the Eastern Coast of Kent; above eight Miles from Dover to the North, and the same distance from Canterbury to the East. This Town sprung up out of the Rus of Rutupiae, an old Roman City; which falling into decay under the Saxons, was intirely ru∣ined by the Danes. Sandwich (the Daughter) also felt the fury of the Danes; but she got up again, and in the Norman tes was one of the Cinque Ports. Lewis Dauphine of France, burnt it in 1217. Ed∣ward III. recovered it from Christ-Church in Canter∣bury; (to which it had been given by Canutus the Dane, when he was crowned King of England, by ex∣change,) and reunited it to the Crown of England. In the Reign of Henry VI. it was burnt by the French. But its greatest Calamity, was the sinking of a great Ship belonging to Pope Paul IV. in the very entry of the Haven, which proved an incurable Mischief. The Dutch in some degree contributed to the Consolation of these Misfortunes, by settling a Trade of Bay-ma∣king in it. Charles II. honoured it, by creating Ed∣ward, Baron Montague of S. Neots, Viscount Hin∣chinbrook and Earl of Sandwich, July 12. 1660. who was slain in a Sea-Fight, May 28. 1672. and succee∣ded by Edward his eldest Son. Sangari, Sangarius, Angarius, a River of the Lesser Asia, which arising out of the Mountain Din∣dymus, and flowing through the Greater Phrygia falls into the Euxine Sea in Bithynia. Now called also Zagari, Sacari, and Acada: its out-let is thirty seven Italian Miles West of Nicomedia, and sixty two East of Heraclea, as Strabo saith. Sanglayes, the Chinese of the Philippine Islands. Sangro, Sarus, Sagrus, a River and a Castle in Abruzzo, in the Kingdom of Naples. Sanguesa, Oppidum Suessitanorum, Sangossa, a small City in the Kingdom of Navarr, upon the River Aragon; thirteen Spanish Leagues from Calahorra, (a City of Old Castile to the East;) and eight from Pampelune to the North-East. It was a Roman Town. Sanguinara, Alesus, a small River in S. Peter's Patrimony, in the States of the Church in Italy; which arising near the Lake di Bracciano, and run∣ning South, falls into the Tyrrhenian Sea; twenty Miles from Rome toward Civita Vecchia. Santen, Santae, Castra Vetera, Trajana Colonia, Xanthus, Santena, a small Town of great Antiquity, in the Dukedom of Cleve; not far from the Rhine; two German Miles from the Wesel to the West, Ni∣meguen to the East, and Gelders to the North. This was the Birth-place of S. Norbert, the Founder of the Order of the Praemonstratenslan Monks. Santerini, an Island of the Archipelago towards Europe; sixty Miles from Candia, and about thirty in Circumference. Called by the Ancients Thera, Philatera, and Calistus. By Italians, Santa Irene; whence come Sainterini and Santerini. It hath the name besides of Gozi. Inhabited by Latin and Greek Christians, each under their respective Bishop: but the former are far the most numerous. It af∣fords no Springs nor Rivers, nor Corn, and not much Wine: being a dry parched Soil, troubled with Subterraneous Mines of Sulphur, which sometimes break out into Flames, and cast up Stones into the Air with wonderful violence. Barley, Hirse, Melons and Cucumbers, are its ordinary product; and Linnen its Manufacture: for Water, it depends upon the Rain. The principal Castles in it, are S. Nicholas, Scaro, Pir∣go, and Crotiri. Santerno, Vatrenus, a River in Tuscany in Italy; which springing out of the Apennine, and flowing Northwards by Imola, falls into the Po beneath Ar∣genta; twenty Miles above Ravenna to the West. Santerre, Sanguitersa, a Tract in Picardy in France; between Vermandois to the East, and Ami∣ens to the West; in which are the Towns of Peronne, Roye, Neste, and Mont de Dier. Santo, Xanthus, a City and River in Phrygia, in the Lesser Asia; it ariseth from Mount Ida, and washing the famous City of Troy, falls into the Ar∣chipelago. Called also by the Europeans, Il Scaman∣dro; as it was Scamander by the Ancients. Sanctors, the same with Santerre. ahia de os los Santos, Sinus omnium Sanctorum, a Gulph in Brasil in South America: which gives name to a Government or Province there,
called Capitania de la bahia de todos los Sants; betwixt the Province of the Isles (Capitania dos Ilheos), and that of Seregippe del Roy. The Capital of All Saints is S. Salvador: under the Portugueze. Santuliet, or Sanflit, Sanflita, a small, but strong Town in Brabant, upon the Schelde; between Antwerp to the South, and Bergen op Zoome to the North, three Leagues. Soane, Savo, a small River in Campania di Ro∣ma, in Italy; which flowing through the Terra di Lavoro, (a Province of the Kingdom of Naples) falls into the Tyrrhenian Sea, between Sinuessa a ru∣ined City, and Volturno. Saosne, or Saone, Arar, Savona, Sangona, a great River in France; called by the Italians, Sona; it ariseth out of Mount Vauge in Lorain, near Dornay; about twelve Miles from the Fountains of the Mo∣selle to the North-West; or as Baudrand saith, within five; and running Southward, through the upper part of Franché Comté, it watereth Gray; and be∣neath it, takes in the Loughon, (a great River) from the East. So it passeth by Auxone to Verdun; above which the Doule (a great River) comes in from the East. So passing by Challon, Tornus, Mascon, and Ville Franche, it entreth and divideth the City of Lyons; and soon after falls into the Rhosne, which conveys it into the Mediterranean Sea. Some de∣rive its Latin Name Sangona, from the Blood of the Christians, colouring its Waters at Lyons in the Mas∣sacre that was committed upon them there in the Reign of Marcus Aurelius, the Emperour. Sapienza, an Island over against the City Modon in the Morea: which gives the name of the Sea of Sapienza to that part of the Mediterranean, which watereth its Coasts. It was anciently called Spagia or Sphragia. The Corsaires of Barbary lye in Am∣buscade behind this Island for Vessels, that come from the Gulph of Venice, or the Coast of Sicily. Sara, a City of Armenia Major; and another of Illyricum; remembred in the ancient Geogra∣phies. Sarabat, Hermus, a River of the Lesser Asia; which ariseth in the Greater Phrygia; and receiving the Rivers anciently called Crya, Hillus, and Pactolus, falls into the Bay of Smyrna. The Saracens. Some, deriving the original of this people from Hagar and Ismael, call them Haga∣renes and Ismaelites. Others make them to be de∣scended from Cham; and that they were the Inhabi∣tants of the ancient Saraca in Arabia, (mentioned by Ptolemy;) and of the Country whereof that City was the Capital. It is certain, they were an Arabian people: and withal, that their Name in Arabick sig∣nifies Robbers, according to the common practice of their lives; which they first began to discover in the fifth Century. Attaining in the course of time to such an universal puissance, as to over-run Syria, Persia, Palestine, Egypt; part of Sicily, Italy, France, and most of the Islands of the Mediterranean, under Kings of their own; and to withstand the united For∣ces of Christendom in the eleventh and twelfth Ages: till the Turks, the Caliphs of Egypt, and the Sophyes of Persia, breaking severally into their Estates; the very name of Saracen became abolished, only as it is sometimes now applied to Mahometans; because the Saracens were Mahometans. Saragora, Cesar Augusta, Ʋrbs Edetanorum, Salduba, the Capital City of the Kingdom of Ara∣gon in Spain; called by the Inhabitants, Zaragosa; by the Italians, Saragoza, It is an Archbishops See, of the Creation of Pope John XXII. the Seat of the Courts of Justice for that Kingdom, of an Inqui∣sition and an University. It stands upon the River Ebro, which is here covered with a Bridge; a little above the Confluence of the Guerva, and beneath that of the Xaleon. Nonius might justly say of it; If the fertility of the Soil, the pleasantness of its Site, the beauty and elegance of the Buildings of this City be duely considered; there can nothing be desired towards the improvement of it, which is wanting. The Houses are for the most part of Brick, the Streets large and open; so that for use and beauty, it is equal to the best City in Spain. It has a strong Wall, four Gates, a great number of Towers, one Cittadel, seventeen great Churches, four∣teen Monasteries, and about three Miles in Circuit: the Air is very clear and healthful, but inclining to too much heat. It is a City of great Antiquity; having been a Roman Colony, and in those times one of the principal Cities in Spain. In 381. there was a Council celebrated here; in which Priscillianus was condemned, who had a great number of followers in Spain. There were also other Councils held here in 516. 592. and 691. Prudentius, (one of the ancientest Christian Latin Poets) was a Native of this place, who flourished in the fourth Century. This City was re∣covered out of the hands of the Moors in 1118. The Archbishops See was renewed in 1318. It stands for∣ty two Spanish Miles from Valencia to the North, twenty six from Pampelune; and thirty eight from the Shoars of the Mediterranean. Long. 20. 10. Lat. 42. 30. Saragossa. See Syracusa. Sarbruck, or Sarbrucken, Sarrae Pons, a Town of Germany, upon the River Sar; in the Borders of the Dukedom of Lorain, over against S. Jean. Three German Miles from Deux-Pontz, and nine from Metz to the East. Heretofore an Imperial and Free City of Germany; but fell afterwards under the Duke of Lorain, and now in the hands of the French; al∣though not great, yet it is a fine Town; of great antiquity; being mentioned by Antoninus in his Itinerary. Sarcelle, Rusicibar, an ancient Town of Mauri∣tania Caesariensis; mentioned by Ptolemy, and An∣toninus; and now in the Kingdom of Argier in Bar∣bary. Twenty eight Miles from the Capital of that Kingdom to the West. It is a considerable Town; has a large Haven on the Mediterranean Sea, and a Castle. Sarch, Assyria, a Province of Asia, under the Turks. See Assyria. Sardinia, Sandalioris, Ichnusa, a great Island in the Mediterranean Sea; called by the Inhabitants, Sardenna; by the Spaniards, Sardegna; and by o∣ther Nations, Sardinia. In length from North to South one hundred and seventy Miles; in breadth from East to West ninety; in circuit five hundred. It has eleven Harbours, ninety four Watch-Towers to preserve it from the Turkish Pirats; and in the Roman times it had forty two Cities: (in the former Ages of Christianity eighteen Episcopal ones) which are now reduced to eight. The first Nation that be∣came Masters of it, were the Carthaginians; from whom it was taken by the Romans, in the first Pu∣nick War, about the year of Rome 493. two hundred fifty seven years before the Birth of our Saviour. In the Fall of the Roman Empire, it fell into the hands of the Saracens; who in the seventh and eighth Cen∣tury possessed most of the Islands in the Mediterra∣nean Sea. In 809. Pepin; Father of Charles the Great, recovered this Island out of their hands; which after this was the subject of a long War be∣tween the States of Genoua and Pisa; till at last Pope Boniface VIII. granted it to James II. King of Ar∣ragon, about 1296. who after many Wars obtained the quiet possession of it in 1326. (or as Hoffman
saith, in 1409). Ever since, it has been in that Family; Frederick II. has also given it the Title of a Kingdom. The Soil is very fruitful; but the Air equally unhealthful, or pestilential rather; insomuch that the Common-wealth and the Emperours of the Romans banished such persons to this Island, as they desired to have dead without Sword or Poyson. The Rivers Cedro and Tirso divide it into two parts, called the Cape de Lugodori and Cap de Cagliari: for its sertility, it was called the Nurse of Rome by Valeri∣us Maximus; yet those parts of the Island to the North and East are mountainous and barren. The rest are Algher, Castel Aragonese, Bosa, Ostagni, Terra Nova, Sacer and Iglesias. A Vice-Roy for the King of Spain governs this Island. Sardica. See Sofia. Sardis, the ancient Metropolis of Lydia in the Lesser Asia. Not to speak of its being the Capital of the Kingdom of the famous Gyges, Cyrus we find took it in the fifty ninth Olympiad, and with it sub∣mitted all Lydia to his Empire. In the sixty ninth Olympiad, about the year of Rome 250. Aristagoras with twenty Athenian Ships took and burnt it. Af∣ter this, it was rebuilt; and passed under the Empire of the Greeks. In the year of Rome 540. Antiochus conquered it. In S. John the Apostle's time it re∣ceived Christianity; but for its inconstancy therein, became one of the Subjects of his Revelations; and now utterly ruined. It was a Bishops See. Sarduni, Planasia, an Island on the Coast of Pro∣vence, in the Mediterranean Sea. Sare, Sarvus, a River of the Low-Countries: called Sara by Venantius Fortunatus; by the Ger∣mans, die Saare; by the French, Sare; it ariseth in Mount Vauge, in the Borders of Lorain and Alsa∣tia; near the Town of Salme: and running North∣ward, it watereth Sareck, Serwerdon, S. Jean, Sars∣berg: and a little above Trier from the South-East falls into the Moselle. Sarepta, an ancient City of Phoenicia, in Syria: which was a Bishops See under the Archbishop of Tyre: Now called Sarafends or Saphet. The Pro∣phet Elias miraculously augmented the Widows Oyl, and raised her dead Son to life at this place, ac∣cording to the History of the Old Testament. Sargasso, or Mar do Sargasso, is that part of the Ocean, which lies betwixt the Islands of Cape Verde, the Canaries, and the Continent of Africa: so called by the Portugueze. Sargathia, the Asiatick Tartary, a vast Country in Asia. Sarisbury, or Salisbury, or New Sarum, Saris∣beria, Sorviodunum, Sarviodunum, Severia, is the principal City of Wiltshire: seated in the North-West part of that County, near the Borders of Hampshire and Dorsetshire; upon the Rivers of Wil∣ley, and Alan, united into one Stream; and falling presently into the Avon in such sort, as that most of the Streets of this City have a Stream commodiously running through the midst of them. This was anci∣ently a Roman Town, by the name of Sorbiodunum: seated on a high Hill, and therefore destitute of Wa∣ter. Kinrick (King of the West Saxons) was the first of that Race who possessed it, after a Defeat of the Britains in 553. Canutus the Dane much da∣maged it by Fire, in 1003. In the Reign of Willi∣am the Conquerour it recovered, after Herman Bi∣shop of Shirburn had removed the See hither; whose next Successor Osman built the Cathedral. William the Conquerour summoned hither all the States of England, to take an Oath of Allegiance to him. Since those times the City is removed Northward, and come down into the Plains nearer the Avon. Here there was a second Cathedral begun by Richard Poore, Bishop of this See, in 1218. Finished by Bridport the third Bishop from Poore, in 1258. which is one of the greatest and most beautiful Churches in En∣gland. Having twelve Gates, fifty two Windows, three hundred sixty five Pillars great and small, an∣swering to the Months, Weeks, and Days of the year. The glory of this Diocese was the most Learned and Industrious Bishop John Jewel; consecrated Jan. 21. 1559. died Sept. 23. 1571. In 1153. Patrick d'Eu∣reux was created Earl of Salisbury, and his Son William succeeded in that Honour. In 197. Wil∣liam Long-espee, (a Natural Son to Henry II. by the beautiful Rsamond) marrying Ella, the Daughter of William d' Eureux, had this Honour. In 1333. William d' Montacute, King of Man, became the fifth Earl; whose Male Line in four Descents enjoyed the Honour till the year 1428. when it passed to Ri∣chard Nevil, who married Eleanor, the Daughter of Thomas Montacute, Lord Chancellour. In 1472. George Duke of Clarence, (second Brother to Ed∣ward IV.) had it in Marriage with Isabel, Daughter of Richard Nevil, the second Earl of that Line. In 1477. Edward (eldest Son of Richard III.) married Ann, the second Daughter of the said Richard; and had this Honour. In 1514. Margaret Daughter of George Duke of Clarence, was by Henry VIII. crea∣ted Countess of Salisbury. In 1605. Robert Lord Cecil, was by James I. created Earl of Salisbury: in which Line it still is. Sarlat, Sarlatum, a City of Aquitain in France, in the Province of Perigort; which is a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Bourdeaux. It stands upon a River of the same Name; one League from the Dordonne, (betwixt the Dordogne and the Vezere, as it were in an Island;) eight from Perigueux to the South-East, and thirty from Bourdeaux to the North-East. Made a Bishops See, by Pope John XXII. in 1317. by the change of its ancient Benedictine Ab∣bey into a Cathedral; having before been a part of the Diocese of Perigueux. It is so strongly situated, as to withstand two Sieges in the Civil Wars in 1652. Sarmatia, and Sauromatia. This vast Region, in ancient Geography, was divided into Sarmatia Asiatica, Europaea, and Germanica. Sarmatia Asia∣tica, lay properly towards the Borders of Europe and Asia; with the Northern Ocean to the North, the Pontus Euxinus to the South, Scythia to the East, and Sarmatia Europaea to the West: now contained in the Northern Muscovia, in the Provinces of Samoyeda, Duina, Permski, Lucomeria, &c. Sar∣matia Europea had for Bounds, both the other Sar∣matia's, with the Euxine Sea; making now Russia. And Sarmatia Germanica took up the greatest part of the present Kingdom of Poland: being divided from the European Sarmatia, by the Nieper to the East; from the Borders of Germany by the Vistula to the West; from Dacia by the Neister and the Carpa∣thian Mountains to the South, with the Baltick Sea and the Gulph of Finland to the North. Sarnagans, Sarnagan, Sargans, Serlandt, a Town and County in Switzerland, subject to the seven Se∣nior Cantons. The ancient Sarunetes dwelt here. Sarno, Sarnum, a River and a City in the Hither Principato in the Kingdom of Naples; which is a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Salerno; and a Dukedom belonging to the House of the Barberini. It is seated partly in a Plain, partly on an Hill; and has a very ancient Castle belonging to the said Family: its distance from Salerno, is thirteen Miles to the North, eight from Nola to the South, and five from Nocera. This City stands in the Bor∣ders of the Terra di Lavoro, near the Fountains of the River Sarno; which divides that Province from the Principato, and then falls into the Bay of Naples;
five Miles from Castel' à Mare to the North. Saronieus sinus, the Gulph of Engia. See Engia. Sarsina, a City in the States of the Church in Italy, upon the River Savio; which is a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Ravenna; small, and almost desolate. It stands in Romandiola, in the Borders of the Dukedoms of Florence, and Ʋrbino; twenty four Miles from Rimini to the West. The ancient Poet Plautus was a Native of it. There was a Synod held here in 1592. Sartre, Sarta, a River of France, which ariseth in the Borders of Normandy, (which it separates from le Perche) and running South, watereth Alen∣son: then entring Maine, and passing Mans, (the Capital of it) the Huy comes in. So passing into Anjou, the small Loire falls into it from the East a∣bove Angers; a little beneath that City, they fall in∣he Mayenne; which last falls into the great Loire at Ingrande, twelve Leagues above Nantes. It is written by Baudrand, Sarte. Sarum old, a Corporation in Wiltshire in the Hundred of Alderbury: honoured with the Election of two Members of Parliament. Sarwicze, or Zarwiza, Ʋrpanius, a River of the Lower Hungary; which ariseth near Wesprin, or Weisbrun; and running South-East, according to our later Maps, passeth through the North end of the Lake of Balaton: then through Alba Regalis: so by Dombe, Simathorn, and Sarhadel, it passeth beneath Pataseck into the Danube, five German Miles below Colocza. Sarzana, Luna Nova, Sergianum, Serezana, a Ci∣ty of Hetruria in Italy; in the Borders of the States of Genoua, towards Lucca; near the Mouth of the Kiver Magra, and under the States of Genoua; which is a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Pisa, but exempt from his Jurisdiction. This City sprung up out of the Ruins of Luna, an ancient Roman City; seated three Miles from it to the South: the Bishoprick of which was by Pope Ni∣cholas V. removed to Sarzana in 1450. It is defen∣ded by a Ditch and a Wall, with an ancient Castle, slanked with sour Towers: upon an adjoining Hill, is a Fort called Sarzanella, which wholly commands Sarzana. Built by Castruccio, who made himself Master of the City of Lucca: after his death, it pas∣sed to Charles VI. of France, from him to the Dukes of Milan, and so to the Florentines: from whom Charles VIII. of France recovered it; whose Gover∣nour sold it to the Genouese. It lies thirty four Miles from Lucca to the North-West, and almost sixty from Genoua to the South-East. Sas, Sacae, a Tribe, or Horde, of the Asiatick Tartars; within the Mountain Iamus: now called Chazalgita. Sas van Gant, Gandavensis Ager, a strong Fort built by the Spaniards, four Leagues from Gant to the North; and taken by the Hollanders in 1644. who still have it. Sassari, Sassaris, Piubium, Turris Libysonis nova, a City in the North part of the Island of Sardinia, cal∣led by the Inhabitants Sacer. It is a great and plea∣sant City, but not strong; seated in a Plain, and de∣fended by a Castle: it sprung up out of the Ruins of Turritana, an old Roman Town, twelve Miles from it to the South. In 1441. Pope Eugenius IV. remo∣ved the Archbishops See, from Turritana, to Sas∣sari; it stands eighty five Italian Miles from Calori to the North-West. Sassenage, a Village in Dauphine in France, at the foot of the Alpes, near the Confluence of the Isere and the Drac: remarked for some Curiosities in the Caverns of a Rock there. Sassuolo, Saxulum, a Town in the Dukedom of Modena in Italy; ten Miles from Modena to the South, which has a very strong Castle. Called by the French, Sassevil. Sassum, Sasima, a City of Cappadocia, mention∣ed by Antoninus; which is a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Cesarea; between it to the North, and Tyana to the South thirty two Miles; two hundred from Ancyra to the East. S. Gregory Nazianzen was Bishop of this See: who contributed (under Theodosius the Great) so very much to the Establishing the Ca∣tholick Religion, then oppressed by Arianism, both by his Learning and Piety. Satalia, Attalia, a Maritim City in Pamphylia, a Pro∣vince in Asia Minor, mentioned by Ptolemy; It is an Archbishops See, and the Metropolis of that Province: by the Turks called Satalyah, by the Italians Satalia. Built by Attalus (a King) at the Mouth of the River Cestrum or Cataractus; on the East-side of Mount Masicytus, to the North of the Isle of Cyprus, upon a Bay of the same Name. The Turks are at this day careful to repair the Fortifications of it and the Castle, in which their Governour resides; having a good Ha∣ven, and being frequented by the European Merchants: But notwithstanding all their care it fell into the hands of the Pirats, in the beginning of this Century; who treated it very severely, Long. 60. 50. Lat. 38. 56. The present City stands a few Miles more to the East than the old Attalia; which was nearer the Mountains, and farther from the River to the West: whereas the present stands at the very mouth of the River. The Ancients preferr'd Health before Riches, and built on high grounds: the latter Ages preferring Trade and the convenience of water, have generally removed their dwellings nearer the great Rivers and Sea shoars. Satarchae, an ancient Warlike People of the Scy∣thia Europaea: mentioned by Solinus, and described to have despised the use of Gold and Silver. Satcama, a Kingdom in Japan, on the South-side of the Island Ximoa; which has a City of the same Name. Satriano, a ruin'd City in the Basilicate, in the Kingdom of Naples, in the Borders of the Hither Principate; which has yet left its Name to the River Cecinum, now called il Cacino and di Satriano. Sava, a great City in Persia, built in a barren Plain; within sight of Mount Alouvent; two Miles in compass, well Wall'd, thinly peopled, and for want of Inhabitants much decayed. It was built by the Sa∣racens, as the Persians report; and since rebuilt by them. Long. 85. 00. Lat. 35. 50. See Sir John Char∣din's Travels. Pag. 386. Savatopoli, Sebastopolis, Dioscurias, Giganaeum, an ancient City of the Province of Mengrelia in Asia: upon the Euxine Sea. Saude, Salda, a River of France, which falls into the Marne. The Save, Savus, a great River, placed by Pto∣lemy in Pannonia; now called by the Germans Die Saw, by the French and English the Save. It ariseth out of the Julian Aspes, in the Ʋpper Carniola; scarce three German Miles from Volzana to the North: and flowing Eastward through Carniola, watereth Craineburg; where it is a considerable River, though not far from its Head. It watereth Labach, Cilley, and Raia. Then entring Sclavonia, (which it divides from Croatia, Bosnia, and Servia;) and passing by Zagrab, Graditzka, Possega, (at four Hungarian Miles distance to the South) to Belgrade, it there falls into the Danube; after a Course of about three hun∣dred Miles, as Dr. Brown saith: it has several consider∣able Islands made by its Stream; in some of which the Romans had considerable Towns; particularly in Sisseck near Zagabria. The Waters of the Danube
appear white, and troubled: those of the Save on the contrary are black and more clear: This and the Drave inclose between them that most fruitful Coun∣try called Sclavonia. Saverne, or Zabern, Tabernae Alsatiae, a Town in Alsatia; called by the Germans Elsas Zabern, and by the French Saverne; under the Bishop of Stras∣burg, and his usual Residence. Antoninus mentions this Place in his Itinerary: It is a strong and populous City; had heretofore a very strong Castle, which is now demolished; and it is seated upon the River Sorr, near the Borders of Lorain: four Miles from Stras∣burg to the West, and from Hagenaw towards Nancy. The Lutherans were defeated before this Town in 1525. by Anthony Duke of Loraine. It yields very good Wine. § There is a second, Saverne, in the Palatinate of the Rhine in Germany, upon the River Erlbach: called by the Natives Berg Zabern, to di∣stinguish it from Rhein Zabern; a Town in the same Province, situated at the Confluence of the Rhine and the Erlbach. Savigliano, Savilianum, a great Town in Pied∣mont, upon the River Magra; under the Duke of Savoy: between Fossano to the East and Saluzzo to the West, five Miles from either. Savio, Isapis, Sapis, a River of Italy; which springeth out of the Apennine, in the Florentine Romandiola, twelve Miles from Sarsina; and flow∣ing through Romandia properly so called, washeth Sarsina and Sesena; and falls into the Adriatick Sea five Miles from Cervia to the West. Sauldre, Sodera, a River of France, mentioned by Venantius Fortunatus; which ariseth in Berry, and flowing through Sologne and Blaisois, (four Leagues beneath Romorentin) falls into the Cher. Sault, Saltus, a Castle and a County in France. The Castle is seated in the Borders of the Dauphine and Vendosmois; seven Leagues from Carpentras to the East, and four from Apte in Provence to the North; from this Castle the adjacent Country is called the Comte de Sault. Saumont, Saluas Mons, a Town in the Diocese of Paris in France. Saumur, Salmurium, a City of France, which has been called Truncum: it is seated in Anjou upon the River Loyre, over which it has a long Stone Bridge; eight Leagues from Angiers to the East. The Tuede a small River falls near it into the Loyre. It is a pleasant City upon an Hill; having a strong Castle, and not built above six hundred years since. This, whilst the Protestant Religion was suffered in France, was imployed by them as an University. The Oratorians have now a College at it. It has been anciently honoured with four or five Synods. Taken from the Huguenots in 1684. An Image of the B. Virgin there now is said to do Miracles. Sauna, Sapina, a River of Romandiola. Saunoi, Salonensis Ager, a Territory between the Seile, and the Nita, in the Diocese of Metz in France. Savolax, Savolaxia, a County in Sweden in Finland; between Kekholm to the East and Ta∣vasthia to the West, Carelia to the South, and Muscovy to the North: in which there is no place of note. Savona, Savo, Saona, a City of Liguria; called by the Inhabitants Sana, by the Spaniards Saona. It is seated in the States of Genoua; and is a Bishops See under the Archbishop of Milan; very populous, defended by two strong Castles, with five Gates, and divers fine Churches: the second City of note in the States of Genoua. The Popes Gregory VII. Julius II. and Sixtus IV. were all its Natives. It had a very convenient Harbor, (which the Genouese have design∣edly ruin'd;) and stands in the Bay delle Spetie, which makes the best Harbour in all the Mediterranean. This Port of Savona was ruined by the States, because the French demanded it to make it a Magazine for Salt: Andrew Doria had before begun this Work, by sinking two great Vessels in the Mouth of it loaded with Earth: and since, they have walled it up with Masons Work to make it for ever useless. This City stands twenty five Miles from Genoua to the West, and from Albenga to the East. Savonnieres, an ancient Town, one League from Toul in Loraine: where in the year 859. in the Reign of Charles the Bald K. of France, and P. Nicholas I, a Provincial Council was celebrated, called by the name of Concilium ad Saponarias. Saur, Sura, a Village, and a River which falls into the Moselle. See Sour. Saura, Isauria, a City in the Lesser Asia; which is a Bishop's See, under the Archbishop of Iconium; and stands in South Galathia near Psidia. Saustia, Sebastia, an Episcopal City in Cappadocia in the Lesser Asia. Long 67. 30. Lat. 42. 30. Savoy, Allobroges, Sapandia, Sabaudia, a cele∣brated Sovereign Dukedom in Europe; called by the Natives Savoy, by the Germans Saffoy, by the Spa∣niards Saboya. It was of old a part of Gallia Nar∣bonensis; and the North part of the Country posses∣sed by the Allobroges: on the North bounded by Val∣lais, (or Wallisserlandt), Switzerland, and Gex; on the West by Beugey, separated from it by the Rhosne; on the South by Dauphine; on the East by Piedmont and the Dukedom of Milan; a part of it reaching be∣yond the Alpes. The whole is covered by vast high Hills and Mountains: and as it is thereby made health∣ful, so it is generally barren; the Valleys excepted. There are some Mines in it, and a great deal of game. Divided ordinarily into six parts; viz. Savoy properly so called, Genevois, Maurienne, Tarantaise, Fossigm; and Chablais. The Inhabitants are dull of apprehen∣sion, and no great Soldiers: the chief City, Geneva, is a Free State: the best under the Duke of Savoy is Chambery or Cameraci. The Conquest of this Coun∣try for the Romans was begun by Cn. Domitius Ahe∣nobarbus, in the Year of Rome 631: one hundred and nineteen Years before the Birth of our Saviour. Nero first made it a Roman Province. At the fall of the Roman Empire, it became a part of the Kingdom of Burgundy; and under Rodolph the last King was united to Germany. In the year 999, Berald of Sa∣xony fled hither and settled; whose Son (Humbert) was by Conradus Salicus made Earl of Maurence, a Town in this Country, in the year 1027. From this beginning by Conquests and Marriages, this Family became so considerable, that Sigismond the Emperour Created Amadee (the eighth in the Line,) Duke of Savoy, in the year 1397. (or as others, in the year 1416.) Victor Amadee II. (the present Duke of Sa∣voy) succeeded Charles Emanuel his Father, in the year 1675: being then a Child of nine years of Age; the thirtieth in this Line, and of the Roman Catholick Religion; his usual Residence is at Turin in Pied∣mont: where he declared War against France Jun. 4. 1690; in Conjunction with the Confederate Princes. But has since lost a considerable part of his Domi∣nions. Sauve, or Saulve, Salvia, a Town and Viguerye or Provostship in Languedoc; in the Diocese of Nismes, upon the River Vidourle; adorned with an Abbey of the Benedictines since the year 1020. Saw, the Save. Sax-mundesham, a Market Town in the County of Suffolk, in the Hundred of Plumesgate: upon a small River, not far from the Sea.
Saxony, Saxonia, by the Germans called Sachsen, in the several Ages that are past since the Roman Em∣pire, has had very different Bounds: but the Brevity of this Work will admit only of its present State. To take it in its largest Acceptation, it contains two of the Circles of the German Empire; called the Ʋpper and the Lower Circles of Saxony: the Lower Saxony contains the Dukedoms of Brunswick, Luneburg, Magdeburg, Breme, Mecklenburg, Holsatia and Lauenburg; the Principalities of Ferden, and Halber∣stad, and the Bishoprick of Hildesheim: which Coun∣tries lie between Westphalia to the West, the Ʋpper Saxony to the East and South, and Jutland and the Baltick Sea to the North; all described in their pro∣per Places. The Ʋpper Circle of Saxony contains the Marquisate of Brandenburg, Pomerania, Thuringia, Misnia, the Dukedom of Saxony properly so called, the Principality of Anhault: Bounded on the East by Lusatia and Poland; on the North by the Baltick Sea; on the West by the Lower Saxony; and on the South by Franconia and Bohemia. The Electo∣rate of Saxony is a Province of Germany, in the Ʋp∣per Circle of Saxony: bounded on the East by Lu∣satia; on the North by the Marquisate of Branden∣burg, and the Principality of Anhault; on the West by the Dukedoms of Brunswick and Hassia, and on the South by Franconia and Bohemia. The principal Town of it is Witteburg. This Electoral Prince has the sixth Place amongst the Electors, and his Resi∣dence at Dresden. In the year 1652. John George I. Elector of Saxony, divided this Duchy between his four Sons. The Ancient Inhabitants were the Lom∣bards: As these and the Franks went South upon their Conquests made in the Roman Empire, so the Saxons followed them; and took Possession of their Ancient Seats as far as the Rhine. They were with great dif∣ficulty Conquered by Charles the Great, about the year 785. after thirty years of War with them. Witti∣kindus their last King being made by Charles the Great the first Duke of Saxony, upon his embracing the Christian Faith. From him are descended all the Kings of France, since Hugh Capet; the Kings of Denmark, of the House of Oldenburg; the Dukes of Burgundy and Savoy; the Marquesses of Montisferat, and many other Noble and Illustrious Families of lesser Note; so that this Person seems to have inherited A∣braham's Blessing as to this. This Dukedom is still in the same Family: tho there was an Interruption of two hundred years, beginning in the year 1180. and ending in the year 1423. To this Illustrious House, Germany in a great degree owes the Reformation; which begun by Luther here but for John Frederick (the thirtieth Duke) had been stifled in its Rise. John George III. the present Elector is the thirty seventh Duke from Wittikindus: and the twelfth since the Restitution of the Line. The Richest as well as the most Ancient of the Princes in the Electoral College next the Emperor. He also is by Birth-Right Great-Marshal or Gentleman of the Horse in the Empire; and by Religion of the Augustane Confession. The principal Branches of the House of Saxony, are those of Saxe-Hall, Saxe-Mersbourg, Saxe-Naumburg, Saxe-Weymar, Saxe-Eysenach, and Saxe-Gotha. The Saxon-Heptarchy. The ancient Brittains under Vortiger, in their Wars with the Picts and Scots, calling unto their assistance (after the Roman Forces were totally withdrawn) the Saxons and Angles out of Germany about the year 428, or as others 449: These Saxons under Hengist, their General, not only completed the Work they came for by chasing away the Northern Invaders; but made themselves in time Masters of the Country of the Britains too; sup∣pressing the names of the Provinces and People that had been before assigned by the Romans, and dividing their own Conquests into the seven Kingdoms of Kent, the South Saxons, West Saxons, East Saxons, East Angles, Mercia and Northumberland. The first of which, Kent, was set up by Hengist in 455. contain∣ing the County of Kent. That of the South Saxons contained Sussex and Surrey; and began in the Person of Aella, who arrived in Britain a little before the death of Hengist in 488. The Kingdom of the West Saxons took in Cornwal, Devonshire, Somersetshire, Dorsetshire, Wiltshire, Berkshire, and Hampshire: commencing about the year 519. in the Person of K. Cerdicus. The Kingdom of the East Saxons ad∣vanced next, about the year 527. under K Erchen∣weme; taking in Middlesex, Essex, and part of Hart∣fordshire. Towards 547, Ida, Governour of Nor∣thumberland under the King of Kent, set up for him∣self; and extended his Kingdom over Yorkshire, Lan∣cashire, Durham, Westmorland, Cumberland, and Northumberland; with the Southern parts of Scot∣land, as far as to Edinburgh. About 575. Ʋffa, King of the East-Angles, established a Kingdom in Norfolk, Suffolk, and Cambridgshire. And lastly towards 580. began the great and inland Kingdom of Mercia, under K. Cridda, whose extent is already ex∣pressed under the word Mercia. This Heptarchy by the successes of Egbert the 18th. King of the West Saxons, (who had followed abroad the Wars of Charles the Great, and began his Reign about the year 801.) united in one Monarchy under him, by the year 819. Whereupon the name of Heptarchy was suppressed; and K. Egbert by a special Edict, with the concurrence of the states of the whole Realm convened at Win∣chester in 819, ordained, that the Kingdom and Country should be called Anglelond or Englelond, (whence England) by reason himself was descended from the Angles: So Egbert was the first King of England. Scafato, the lower part of the River Sarno in Italy. Scagen, Scagense Promontorium, the most Nor∣thern Cape of Jutland; in fifty eight degrees of Lati∣tude over against Gottenburg in Sweden; ten Danish Miles from Alberg to the North-East, and from Got∣tenburg to the West. There is a Village near this Cape called Skune. Scala, Scalis, a City in the Kingdom of Naples, in the Hither Principato; which is a Bishop's See un∣der the Archbishop of Amalfi; but this Bishoprick is united for ever to that of Ravello, from which it stands one Mile, and two from Amalfi: it is very small and has not above one hundred and fifty Houses; standing on an Hill at the Foot of Mount Cama; and hereto∣fore from that called Cama. Scala Marmorea, Amycli, Daphne, a Port of Bithynia in the Lesser Asia; upon the Thracian Bos∣phorus or Streights of Constantinople, beyond Chal∣cedon to the North: now also sometimes called La∣mia. Scalambri, or Scaramis, Caucana, a ruin'd City and Port on the South of Sicily; near Cape Passaro, the most Eastern Point. Scalona, Ascalon, a City in the Holy Land, on the Mediterranean Sea; between Azotus to the North, and Gaza to the South eighteen Miles. It was one of the Regal Cities of the Philistines: after this it was a Bishop's See, under the Patriarch of Jerusalem: now reduced to a poor Village, and a few Cottages, as Leunclavius saith: and the See is united to that of Bethleem. Scamandro, Scamander, a small River in Phry∣gia in the Lesser Asia; mentioned by Homer. It falls into the Archipelago near Cape Janisary; at the very entrance of the Hellespont, North of the New Dar∣danells. The River ariseth out of Mount Ida, and has but a short Course.
Scandalor, Pamphylia, a Province in the Lesser Asia. Scanderone, Alexandria, a City of Syria; call'd by the Italians Alexandretta; heretofore a Bishop's See, and a celebrated Sea-Port; at the Mouth of the River Belum (now Soldrat,) upon the Bay of Laiazzo (Issicum;) fifty Miles from Aleppo to the West, twen∣ty five from the Consines of Cilicia to the East. The beginning of it is owing to a Castle, built by Alex∣ander the Great for a retreat, whilst he besieged Tyre, at the distance of four or five Miles from Tyre, upon the same Coast, to the South. A Castle which Alexander called by his own name: but time and cor∣ruption first changed it to Scandalion, and now to Scanderoon. Pompey destroy'd it in his Conquest of Phoenicia. And in 1116. Baldwin I. King of Je∣rusalem, whilest be besieg'd Tyre as Alexander had done before, rebuilt it: from which time it became a strong place, an honourable Government, and a safe retreat to the Christians, during their possessions in the Holy Land. Now (saith Baudrand) there is scarce any mention of it remaining; except a few Cottages for the use of the Merchants, and a Stone-House for the Captain of the Janisaries; who col∣lects the Grand Seigniors Customs. But I have been informed by some Masters of Ships that have been there, that this Place of late years is much im∣proved by the Trade the English and Dutch drive in it. Long. 68. 00. Lat. 38. 10. Scandinavia, a vast Peninsula in the North of Europe; containing the Kingdoms of Sweden, Nor∣way, and Lapland. Scandia, or South Gothland, by some Geographers is represented as the Southern part of it; and Lapland the most Northern. Scania. See Schonen. Scarborough, a strong Town in the North Riding of Yorkshire, and the Hundred of Pickering; not ve∣ry large, but well built and inhabited; standing to the Sea, with a convenient Port for Trade; upon a craggy, steep, and almost inaccessible Rock, which the Sea washes on all sides but the West, where the passage is narrow, yet hath a strong Wall to se∣cure it. This Rock upon the top of it presents us with a fair Plain of sixty Acres of ground, a Castle Royal garrisoned, and a Spring of fresh Water. For∣merly a high stately Tower stood upon it, which served as a Landmark to Ships at Sea: but this in the last Civil Wars was demolished. Scarborough besides is made a noted place by its Spaw, and the Herring Fishery upon its Coasts: Between which and Whitby to the North lies the Bay of Robin Hood, the famous Robber in the Reign of K. Rich. 1. It hath the ho∣nour to be a Corporation also, represented by two Burgesses in the House of Commons. Scardo, Scardona, a City ascribed by Ptolemy to Liburnia, (now in Dalmatia:) and a Bishop's See, under the Archbishop of Spalato ever since 1120: called by the Sclavonians Scardin. It is now but small; lies upon the Adriatick Sea, near the Lake of Prochlian, at the Mouth of the River Titius; and has a small Castle on an Hill, in the Hands of the Turks. This Place was taken by the Venetians, and ruined in the year 1570. After this, the Turks repossessed it, and were re-expelled by the Venetians in 1647. In 1683. the Morlaques of Croatia drove the Turks away from it and garrisoned it. Baudrand placeth it thirty five Miles from Zana to the East, and nine from Sibenico to the North: and saith the Vene∣tians bought it of the Wayvode of Bosnia, in the year 1411. for five thousand Duckats of Gold. Scardonia, an Island of Dalmatia, mentioned in the Writings of the ancients: but now unknown. Scaren, Scara, a small City of Westrogethia, a Province of Sweden; which is a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Ʋpsal; and heretofore the Seat of the Kings of Gothland, but now in a declining Condition: it stands ten Miles from the Lake of Venner to the South, and twenty from Falcop to the North. Scarlino, Scapris vel Scabris, a Town in Italy; in the Territory of Siena, and Principality of Piom∣bino; ten Miles from Massa to the South. Before which was slain the famous Strozzi (Prior of Capoua,) in the French Quarrel. Scarpanto, Carpathus, an Island near Rhodes, be∣twixt that and Candia, in the Archipelago; towards the Coast of the Lesser Asia, belonging to the Turks. It had heretofore four considerable Cities, which are now reduced to one of the same name with it self; but half ruined. The former Knights of Rhodes (or Malta, as they are now called) fortified it so, as to reap great advantages by it, both over the Sultans of Egypt and the Turks; its situation rendring it consi∣derable in relation to Egypt and Syria. The present Inhabitants generally follow the Greek rites. The Mountains have been thought to contain Mines of Gold and Silver: but none have hitherto undertook to open them. The Soil yields plenty of Wine and Fruits: and here are delicate Patridges. Scarpe, Scarpa, a River in Artoise; it ariseth three Leagues above Arras; and watering it and Douay, and dividing Hainault from Flanders, falls into the Schelde near Mortagne, a great Town in Flanders; six Leagues above Tournay to the South-West. Scarsdale, a Dale or Valley in Derbyshire, encom∣passed with Rocks and Mountains, according to the sense of the word Scare in the Saxon Language, sig∣nifying a Craggy Rock. It contains one of the parts, into which the County is divided. Chesterfield stands in it. And K. Charles I. did it the honour to make an Earldom of it in the Person of Francis Leak, Lord Deyncourt of Sutton, created Earl of Scarsdale in 1645. which Title descended to his Son Nicholas, and now is enjoyed by his Grandson the R. H. Robert Leake. Scatono, a small Town in the Province of Toscana in Italy, near a Lake. Noted upon the account of certain stones found thereabouts, which do not Cal∣cine by fire. Scenitae, see the Bedovins of Arabia. Schaffhausen, Probatopolis, Scaphusia, Schafusia, a City of Switzerland; called by the French Schaf∣house; the Capital of one of the Cantons. It stands upon the Rhine four Miles beneath Constance to the West, two beneath the Lake of Zell, (or das Zeller see, as the Germans call it) six from Basil, and four from Zurich to the North. This is a new City, and took its Rise from an Abbey of Renediclins; built here by Eberhard Count of Nellenburg, in the Reign of the Emperour Henry III. about 1052. About 1090. here was also a Nunnery built. The Abbats and the City not agreeing, it was made an Imperial and Free City. Sold by Lewis of Bavaria to Frederick Duke of Austria, about 1330. It continued under that House eighty five years. In 1351. the Inhabitants of this City besieged Zurich, though against their Wills: in 1372. it was almost destroyed by Fire. John Duke of Austria being proscribed for withdrawing Pope John XXII. from the Council of Constance, during the War which ensued, this City returned to the Em∣pire; and by their Money obtained great Privileges from the Emperor. The better to assure these Liber∣ties, in 1424. it joined in the League with Zurich and S. Gall: and in 1454. renewed this League with these, and took in the other Cantons. In 1501. they join'd in the perpetual League. About 1529. they em∣braced the Reformation; and burnt a vast Statue, which was called the Great God of Schafhouse. Long. 30. 25. Lat. 47. 25.
Schalholt, Schalholtum, a City in Iseland; which is a Bishops See, and the University of that I∣sland. Scham, Damascus, a City of Syria. Schelling, Schellinga, an Island and Sea-Port Town upon the Coast of Holland and Friseland; of about twelve Miles over; and the same distance from Harlingen, a City of West Friseland to the West. The principal Town in it is of the same Name: taken and burnt by the English the Seventh of August 1666. together with one hundred and fifty Sail of Ships, most of them richly laden: the Town is by some cal∣led Bandaris, and said to consist of one thousand Houses. That Squadron of Ships which performed this Action, was Commanded by Sir Robert Holmes. Schelde, Scaldis, one of the most noted Rivers in the Low Countries; mentioned by Caesar, Pliny and others of the Ancients. Called by the Hollanders the Schelde; by the French L' Escaut; and by the Spanish Schelda. This River ariseth in Picardy in Vermandois near Chastelet; four French Miles from S. Quintin to the North-West; and flowing North, it watereth Cambray; then entering Hainault, it pas∣seth on the East of Bouchain to Valencienne; and being augmented by many lesser Streams, becomes there first Navigable by Boats: then taking in the Huisne above Conde from the West, and the Scarpe beneath S. Amand, it divides Tornay (or Dornick) and Oudenaerde; and hasteth to Gant, where it is augmented by the Lys: hither also the Tides of the Ocean reach: from hence it goes to Dendermonde, where it takes in the Dendre, and a little lower the Rupele; and separating Brabant from Flanders, it washeth the Walls of Antwerp; and forms for it a noble, large, and safe Harbour: three German Miles lower, it divides into two vast Branches at S. Villier: That to the South separating Flanders from Zeeland by Ʋlissing falls into the Ocean, being here called the Honte: The other parting the Islands of Zeeland, falls into the Ocean between Walcheren to the South, and Schouen to the North; retaining its first name to its fall. Schening, a Town in the Province of South Goth∣land in Sweden: in which a Council was held in 1247. by a Legate from the Pope. Schenken-schans, Schenk, or the Fort of Schenk, Munimentum Schenckii, a strong Fort in the Duke∣dom of Cleve, in the Borders of Guelderland; in a small District call'd S' Gravenwert, (where the Rhine divides it self into two Branches, and the Wael begins;) one German Mile from Emmerick to the West, and from Cleve to the North: which has this name from the Builder of it, Martin Schenkius. It was taken from the Hollanders, in 1635. by the Spaniards: they retook it the next year, after a Siege of eleven months. In 1672. it was taken by the French in two days. In 1674. it was consigned to the Duke of Brandenburg, and in 1679. by him Mortgaged to the Ʋnited Provinces, who are now Masters of it. Schesburg, Sandava, a City in Transylvania, up∣on the River Cochel; between Clausenburg to the East and Cronstad to the West. The Inhabitants call it Se∣geswar; the Germans Schesburg. Schetland, Armoda, Aemoda, Amodae, Schetlan∣dia, an Island or knot of small Islands lying to the North-East of the Orcades; over against Bergen in Norway; but at a considerable distance from it. un∣der the King of Scotland: by Mr. Cambden supposed to be the Thule of the Ancients: these Islands are al∣so call'd Hetland, and lie sixty nine Miles beyond the Orcades. Schiampua, the same with Chiampana. Schiatti, one of the Islands of the Archipelago, separated from the Cape Magnesia (now Verlichi) in Macedonia, by a Channel not above a League over; It is furnished with several safe Harbours, which give the Christian Corsaires too much encouragement to infest it. The Principal of them is  or S. George, which is attended with a Town o the same name, showing the ruines of a splendid Place in ancient times. Schiavoni, Sclavi, the Sclaves or Sclavonians, which Inhabit Dalmatia; from them called Schiavo∣nia. Schiras, or Scherazz, Schirasium, a great City in the Kingdom of Persia, in the Province of Fars (or Persia properly so called) upon the River Bendimir; two hundred Miles from Ormus to the North, two hundred and fifty from Hispahan to the South. This City sprung out of the ruins of Persepolis, about nine Miles in compass; the Country about it producing excellent Wine. It is largely described by Monsieur Thevenot in his Travels, Part. II. pag. 124. He saith it is the Capital of Persia; seated in a pleasant and fertil Plain extending from North to South; and in∣compassed with lovely Cypress Trees and Gardens: the City is but two hours walk, has no Walls, nor any other defence but a scurvy Dike. It has a College in which Theology, Philosophy, and Physick are taught; and about five hundred Students. Lat. 29. 40. Mr. Herbert saith, the Plain it stands in, is twen∣ty Miles long, and six broad; encompassed with great Hills; under one of which this City is placed. And others tell us, it hath a hundred thousand houses: believing it may be the Marasium of the Ancients. Schirwan. See Servan. Schlesien, the same with Silesia. Schlestadt, Selestadium, a City of Germany in the Lower Alsatia, upon the River Ill; in the Terri∣tory of Hagenaw; four German Miles from Brisach to the South-West, a little further from Colmar to the North, and the same distance from Strasburgh. Heretofore an Imperial and Free City; but now un∣der the French by the Westphalian Treaty; who in 1673. dismantled it; and two years after began to re∣fortifie it: it is now a very strong place. Schenberg, a Part of the Carpathian Hills; the same with that which Latin Writers call Cetius; and the Germans Kalenberg, Dewsberg, and Heritzberg; varying its name in the different Countries it passeth through. Schiro, Scyros, an Island in the Archipelago; cal∣led by the Greeks, Schiros; by the Italians, Schiro; by the French, Squire. It is eighty Miles in Circuit, fruitful and populous: forty from Negropont to the North, and seventy from Macedonia to the East; West of Scio. It has a small City called Skiro; which is a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Athens, and four other small Villages. The City has a Port to the South-West; in subjection to the Turks. Called also, San Georgio di Sciro. Schonen, Sconia, Scania, a Province of Sweden; called by the Inhabitants Schaane, by the Swedes Skone, by the Germans Skonen. It lies upon the Bal∣tick Sea over against Zeeland, from which it is divi∣ded by the Sownd: it has the Sea on all sides but the North; being almost an Island; on the North it is bounded by Haland and Westrogothia; and it is its self the principal part of South Gothland. This Coun∣ty was sold to Magnus King of Sweden, in 1330: by John Duke of Holstein, for seventy thousand Marks of Silver; Christopher II. King of Denmark having Mortgaged it before to these Dukes. Waldemarus King of Denmark redeemed it from the Swedes in 1341: but in 1658. the Swedes recovered the Posses∣sion of it by the Treaty of Roschild. This Country
was Converted to the Christian Faith, by Othingar, (a Bishop) about 980. The principal places in it are, Lunden, Landskroon, Matmuyen and Helsingborg. Schoonehoven or Schonaw, a Town in the South of Holland, upon the River Leck, with a capacious Port; where they take amongst other Fish a great num∣ber of Salmons. Agnian 2. Bishop of S. Asaph in Wales in 1268, a Dominican, was a Native of this Town. Schorndorff, Schorndorfium, a small City, well fortified, in the Dukedom of Wurtemberg in Germa∣ny; upon the River Remms (which gives name to the District in which this City stands:) four Ger∣man Miles from Stutgard to the East, and six from Hailbrune to the North-East. It has a Castle; and obtained its Charter from Frederick II. in 1230. In 1647. it was taken by the French; but after resto∣red to the Duke of Wurtemberg, under whom it now is. Schowen, or Schouwen, Scaldia, an Island of Zeeland, (one of the Ʋnited Provinces,) near the East Mouth of the Schelde: heretofore much greater than now. There are three places of Note in it, Zi∣riczee, Brouwers, and Bommene. It is six French Leagues long from East to West, and above two broad. So near in former times to North Beveland, another Island of Zeland, that the Inhabitants of each could discourse from them with another. But the passage has been mightily since inlarged by tem∣pests. Schut, Cituorum Insula, a great Island in the Lower Hungary, made by the River Danube; called by the Hungarians, Chalokewz; by the Germans, Schut. It extends from Presburgh to the North-West, to Co∣mora East, nine German Miles: about four broad, and in circuit twenty four. It has three hundred Vil∣lages: its principal place is Comorza; beneath which the Danube again unites in one Stream. It is won∣derfully fruitful, well peopled, and watered; afford∣ing good Gardens, Warrens, and Pasturage; and was the cause of the present War between the Emperour and the Turks. The latter demanding it to be put in∣to his Hands about 1682. (or 1683.) and the Empe∣rour denying it (as he could not part with it without exposing all his other Dominions to their Ravage,) Thereupon the Turks besieged Vienna. This Island, called the Great Schut, has another very near it, which is accounted a part of it by the name of Little Schut. Schwaben, Suevia, a great Province or Circle in Germany; called by the Germans, die Schwaben; by the French, Souabe; by the Italians, Suevia; by the Poles, Szwabska. Bounded by Bavaria on the East; the Rhine dividing it from Alsatia on the West; Swit∣zerland to the South, and Franconia to the North. It had heretofore Dukes of great Name and Power: but now divided into several lesser Territories under several Princes; the chief of which are the Dukedom of Wurtemburgh, the Bishopricks of Ausburgh and Constance; the Marquisates of Baden, Schwartzwalt, Burgow, and Ortnaw; the Principalities of Furstem∣berg, and Zollern; the Counties of Ettingen, and Hohenburgh; the Territories belonging to the Abbat of Kempten and Algow. There are also in it many Imperial and Free Cities; the Capital City of this Cir∣cle being Ʋlm. The others are Augsburgh, Kempen, Constantz, Hailbrun, Hall en Souabe, Lindaw, Mem∣ningen, Nordlingen, Stugard, Tubingen, and Ʋber∣lingen. Schwauberg, the present name of the Norick-Alpes. Schwartwatter. See Vecht. Schwartzwaldt, Martina Sylva, Bacenis, the Black Wood or Forest; a Province in the Circle of Schwaben, in Germany; towards Mount Abenow, and the Fountains of the Danube and Necker; between the Dukedom of Wurtemburgh to the East, and Bris∣gow to the West: it lies extended from North to South, from the Marquisate of Baden to the Cities of Seckingen, Rheinfelde, and Ortnaw. This Country is a part of the vast Hercynian Forest; which in an∣cient times run through the whole Body of Germany, (and perhaps through Moscovy) and ended at the Fro∣zen Ocean, or White Sea. Schwartz-Zee, the German name of the Euxine▪ or Black Sea. Schwartzembourg, a County in the Province of Thuringia in Germany. And a Town and Bailywick under the Cantons of Bearne and Fribourg in Swit∣zerland. Schweidnitz, Suvidnia, a City of Silesia, upon the River Westritz; thirty Miles from Wratislaw to the West, twenty five from Lignitz to the South, and twelve from the Borders of Bohemia. It is the Ca∣pital of a Dukedom of the same name; and a very strong place: yet taken and retaken several times in the great Swedish War. Near this City the Swedes defeated Albert Duke of Brandenburgh, in the year 1642: by which Victory they made themselves Ma∣sters of the greatest part of Silesia. Schweinfurt, Schuinfurtum, a City in Franconia in Germany, upon the Mayn; within the Dominions of the Bishop of Wurtzburgh; almost seven German Miles from Bamberg to the West, and five from Wurtz∣burgh to the South-East. It belonged formerly to the Counts of Heneburgh; till Henry II. Emperour dis∣possessed them, and gave this City, (with the Title of Marquisate) to one Otho; which Family ending in 1112, the City returned to the Empire: now an Im∣perial and Free City, and a place of great strength; yet taken by the Swedes in the German War. Schwerin, the chief Town in Mechlenburgh, upon a Lake; eighteen Miles from Hamburgh to the East, and five from the Baltick Sea to the South. The usual Residence of one of the Dukes of Mechlenburgh; in the Lower Saxony. Sciglio, Scyllaeum, a Town and Promontory on the Coast of Calabria, in the Kingdom of Naples; near Regge to the North. The famous Rock Scylla lies upon this Coast, in the Streights of Messina. Scillo, or Scilla, Scylla, a famous Rock on the a∣foresaid Shoar; nineteen Miles from Messina in Sicily the North-East; upon the Channel which parts Sicily from Italy, at the West end of it. The Water within its Caverns makes a noise like the barking of Dogs: whence, probably came the ancient fiction of a Scylla becoming half a Rock, and half a Dog. Scio. See Chio. Sciocco, Togisonus, a small River in the Territory of Padoua in Italy. Sclavonia, the Southern Province of the Lower Hungary; called by the Italians, Schiavonia; by the Germans, die Sclavinien; by the Poles, Slovienska Ziemia. The middle Ages under this Name compre∣hended Illyricum, Dalmatia, Croatia, Bosnia, and this which is now called Sclavonia: On the North it has the Drave, (a great River which parts it from the Lower Hungary;) on the East the Danube; on the South the Save; (which divides it from Croatia, Bosnia, and Servia;) and on the West Carniola and Stiria. The length of it from the Town of Kopra∣nitz in the West, to the fall of the Drave into the Danube in the East, is fifty German Miles: its breadth from the Drave to the Save twelve. This Country was first possessed by the Pannonians; after that by the Goths about 386; who were Conquered by the Sclaves about 550. About 1200. these People be∣came Tributaries to the Kings of Hungary. About
1544. this Country was first subdued by Solyman the Magnificent. In 1687. after the Battel of Mohats, the Turkish Army mutining against the Prime Vizier, all this Country except Gradisca, submitted to the Emperor: the Turks deserting it without any blows. The German̄s upon their return were very well plea∣sed with the Fertility of it. The Chief Towns in it are Gradisca, Esseck, and Possega, which is the Capi∣tal City. The Inhabitants are great lovers of War; and pray for nothing more earnestly, than that they may die with their Arms in their Hands. Scodra, a City of Illyricum; attributed by Livy and Ptolemy to Dalmatia; and in those times the Seat of the Kings of Illyricum. Now the Capital City of Albania; and a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Antivari: great and populous; it stands upon the River Boiana, (Barbana;) twenty four Miles from the Adriatick Sea, and eighty from Ragusa to the North East. Twice besieged by the Turks, under Ma∣homet II. without success; and in 1478. resigned to them for a Peace, by the Venetians. The Inhabitants call it Scadar; the Turks, Iscodar; and the Italians, Scutari. The Lake Labeatis, out of which the Boi∣ana Springs, takes the name now of the Lake of Scli∣tari. Long. 44. 20. Lat. 42. 24. Scone, Scona, a celebrated Abbey in the County of Perth; upon the Tay; three Miles from S. John∣ston to the North West; in which the Kings of Scot∣land for many Ages were Crowned. Scopia, Scapi, a City of the Ʋpper Moesia, and the Capital of Dardania, in the Borders of Macedo∣nia in the times of Ptolemy; now called Scopia by the Italians, and Ʋschub by the Turks. It is a great po∣pulous City in Servia; an Archbishop's See, and the Seat of the Sangiack of Servia; feated in a fruitful Plain, upon the River Vardar, over which it has a Stone Bridge of twelve Arches; one hundred Miles from Thessalonica to the North-West, ten from So∣phia to the West, and about the same distance from Giustandil to the South. The River upon which it stands falls into the Bay of Thessalonica. Scotland, Scotia, is the second Kingdom in Great Britain; called by the French, l' Escosse; by the Ita∣lians, Scotia; by the Germans, Schottlandt. On the East it is bounded by the German Ocean; on the North by the Deucalidonian Sea, and the Isles of Orkney; on the West by the Vergivian Ocean, and the Irish Sea; on the South by the River Tweed, the Cheviot Hills, and the adjacent Tract to Solway Sands; whereby it is separated from England. Sol∣way Fyrth lies in deg. 56. of Latitude; and the most Northern point lies in 60 30. by which it should be three hundred and fifteen English Miles in length. Po∣lydore Virgil reckons four hundred and eighty: its breadth is no where above sixty; and its form Trian∣gular; with many great Inlets and Arms of the Ocean, which indent both the Eastern and Western sides of it. The Soil especially towards the North, is gene∣rally barren; affords little Timber, and no Fruit Trees. The Southern parts are more fruitful; the Air in both sharp and cold. It is divided into two parts, (the Southern and the Northern) by Dunbri∣tain and Edenburgh Fyrth. The South part called the Low-Lands, is fuller of Cities and great Towns; the People are more rich and better civilized; as not only Inhabiting a better Country, but driving a Trade at Sea. The Northern or High-Lands, are more bar∣ren and poor; the Inhabitants accordingly patient of want and hunger, and very temperate in their Diet; without which Virtues they could not subsist. South Scotland is divided into twenty one; North Scotland into thirteen Counties. For the Ecclesiastical Govern∣ment they have two Archbishops: S. Andrews, who has eight; and Glascow, who has three Suffragan Bishops under him. In the times of the Romans, this Country was called Caledonia and Albania; the Peo∣ple, Picts, from their custom of Painting their Bo∣dies. The Romans never extended their Conquests beyond the South of Scotland, because they thought the Northern and barrener parts not worth their pains. The remaining Inhabitants, (after the withdrawing of the Roman Garrisons from the Northern parts of Bri∣tain,) became very troublesome to the Britains; and forced them to call in the Saxons about 449: who Conquered the South parts of Scotland, and possess it to this day. The Scots or Irish about the same time entered the Western parts of Scotland; and by degrees united first with the Picts or Highlanders; by their assistance Conquered the Saxons, and gained the Sovereignty of that whole Kingdom. But there be∣ing no Letters here, the Story of these times is very dark; which has occasioned great Controversies con∣cerning the time of the Scots coming out of Ireland. About 839 the Picts were intirely subdued by Ken∣neth II. first sole King of all Scotland. This Line continued under twenty three Princes, to 1285. When Alexander III. dying without Issue, there began a tedious and bloody contest about the Succession; which was referred to Edward I. of England, who adjudged the Crown to John Baliol, an Englishman. He Rebelling against his Benefactor, was defeated by that Prince; who following his blow made himself Master of Scotland, and kept it to his death. In 1307. Robert Bruce, the other Competitor, overthrew the English; established himself King of Scotland, and Reigned till 1332: when the Kingdom divided again between Edward Baltol, and David Bruce; which latter prevailed at first against his Competitor; but fell under the power of the English, where he was many years a Prisoner. In 1371. Rob. II. Surnamed Steward, descended from the eldest Daughter of David Bruce, succeeded. In 1602. James VI. (the ninth in this Line;) succeeded after Queen Elizabeth to the Crown of England; as Descended both by Fa∣ther and Mother, from Margaret the eldest Daughter of Henry VII. King of England; the whole Line of Henry VIII. being extinguished. The Christian Reli∣gion was Planted here by different Persons, and at se∣veral times. The Saxon Scots were Converted by Ai∣dan, the first Bishop of Lindisferne, about 635. The South-Eastern by Nimas, Bishop of Candida Casa, (or White Herne) about 555. The Highlanders, (or Northern Picts) by Palladius, a Deacon of Rome, about 435. The Bishops of Scotland were always subject to the Archbishop of York, till 1478: when on the pretence of the frequent Wars between them and England, their two Archbishops Sees were ere∣cted; and they became a separate Church from that of England. Scotusa, Scotussa, a small City in Thessalia; which is a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Larissa; near to which it stands. Scutari or Scutaret, Chrysopolis, Dianae fanum, a Town upon the Propontis in the Lesser Asia, over against Constantinople: believed by some to be sprung out of the ruins of the ancient Chalcedon. Scylla. See Scillo. Scythia, The vast Region anciently understood by this name, was divided into Scythia Europaea, and Asiatica. 1. Scythia Europaea was the Country of the Nomades, Basilidae, &c. lying along the Bory∣sthenes towards the Euxine Sea, and the Palus Mae∣otis making on that side a part of Sarmatia Eu∣ropaea; and now contained properly in the Lesser Tartary. But besides this, betwixt Moecia, Dacia, Thrace, and the Danube there lay Scythia Europaea Pontica: where we have now the East quarters of Bul∣garia, and the Territories of Dobrzin, and Bessara∣bia. Of which the Scythians possessed themselves in the fifth Century. 2. Scythia Asiatica was subdivi∣ded
into Citerior and Ʋlterior, the Hither and Fur∣ther Seythia by the Mountain Imaus. And distribu∣ted accordingly betwixt the Sarmatae and Persae to the West, India to the South, the Tartarian Oce∣an and the Hyperborei to the North. The antient Alani, Sacae, and Jaxartae were some of its Native Barbarians. This Scythia now lies comprehended in the Desart and great Tartary. The Manners of the old Scy∣thians and modern Tartars being much-what the same. Scythopolis, the ancient Roman name of Beth∣shan in Palestine, upon the Lake of Genezareth: which Pliny and Ptolemy misplace in Coelesyria. See Bethshan. Scrikfinner, Scritophinis, a People in Scandina∣via; between Norway to the North, and Lapland to the East. These People are said to Cloath them∣selves with the Skins of Beasts, like the Samoiedes; as is usual with all these Hyperborean Nations. Sdille, See Delos. Sdrin, Sdringa, Stridonium, a City of Dalmatia; the Birth place of S. Jerome, (the most Learned of the Latin Fathers;) ruined by the Goths: but after∣wards rebuilt, and in some degree Peopled. Others place it upon the Confluence of the Mure and the Danube; fifteen Miles beneath Rakelspurg in Stiria. Seafull, a high Hill in the middle of the Island of Man; in the Irish Sea: which affords the Beholder a Prospect of three Kingdoms at once, England to the East, Scotland to the North, and Ireland to the West. Sebaste, Sebastia, Sebastopolis. See Samaria, Suvas, Saustia and Savatapoli. Sebenico, Sebenicum, Sicum, a small City, very well fortified, in Dalmatia; upon the Shoars of the Adriatick Sea: and a Bishops See, under the Arch∣bishop of Spalato; under the Venetians ever since 1412. having before been a Maritim City of Croatia. It has a Castle and Fort built upon a Rock: which are Places of great strength, and have four times humbled the Ottoman Forces, and preserved this im∣portant Place under that State. It lies at the Mouth of the River Kerka, or Kirka; thirty eight Miles from Zara to the East, and three hundred from Venice. Made a Bishops See by Pope Boniface VIII. The ru∣ins of the ancient Sicum of Ptolemy appear at some distance from this City. Sebourg, a Castle and Seigniory in the Province of Hainault, in the Low Countries: three Leagues from Valenoiennes and near Bavay. It has the ho∣nour of the Title of a Viscounty. Secchia, Gabellus, a River of Italy; which spring∣eth from the Apennine, in the Borders of Carfagnana; between Tuscany and the Apennine: running North∣ward, and dividing the Dutchy of Modena from that of Reggio, in some Places it watereth Sassuola: lea∣ving Modena to the East, and Cappi to the West, it falls into the Po at S. Benedicts Abbey, in the Duchy of Mantoua; five Italian Miles from Mirandola to the North West. Sechy, a Market Town in the County of Norfolk, in the Hundred of Frebridge. Seckaw, Secovia, Secovium, a small Castle in Stiria; which is a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Saltzburgh; erected in 1219 by Pope Honorius III. and Eberbard, Archbishop of Saltzburgh. It stands upon the River Gayl, a little above its fall into the Mure; not above four German Miles from the Bor∣ders of Austria to the South, and twenty from Saltz∣burgh to the East. The Archbishop has the Electi∣on and Consecration of this Bishop; gives him his Investiture, takes an Oath of Fealty from him: and he has no Place nor Voice in the Diet of Germany. Sedan, Sedanum, a City in Champagne, in France, upon the Maes; with a very strong Castle. Anciently in the Propriety of the Bishop of Reims; by whom it was exchanged with the Crown, for Cormicy. Afterwards it had particular Lords of the Families of Braquemont, and Marcan; and in the Family of Turene was made a Principality. In 1642. this little Principality was forced to submit to the Crown of France. It stands sixteen Leagues above Namur to the South, and from Verdun to the North; in the Frontiers of Champagne and Luxemburgh. See, Seva, Segia, a small River in Normandy; six Miles from Auranches to the West. Seelandt, Selandia, Codadonia, a great Island in the Baltick; belonging to the Crown of Denmark: separated from Scania to the North by the Sound on the South it has the Baltick Sea. It is sixteen Ger∣man Miles in length, twelve in breadth; a very fruit∣ful and pleasant spot of ground. The Capital of it is Coppenhagen, the Royal City of Denmark. The rest are Helsinore, Cronenburgh, and Fridericksburgh; and besides these it has three hundred and Forty Pa∣rishes. Séez, Sagiensis Ʋrbs, Sagium, Sajorum Civitas, Ʋrbs Seluniorum, a City in Normandy in France; which is a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Roan. It stands near the Fountains of the River Orne; thirty six Leagues from Paris to the West, eleven from Lisieux to the South, and five from Alenzon to the East. Seged, or Segedin, Segedunum, a City of the Up∣per Hungary, seated upon the Tibiscus; where it re∣ceives the Merish, (a great River out of Transylva∣nia, in the County of Bodroch;) twenty six Ger∣man Miles from Buda to the South-East, and fifteen from Colocza. Taken by the Turks in 1552. The Imperialists plundred it in 1685: and took it from the Turks without resistance, after they were possessed of Buda. Segeswar, Segethusa, Sandava, Singidava, Sege∣suaria, a City of Transylvania; called by the Ger∣mans Schezpurg: it is seated partly on the side of an Hill, partly in a Valley upon the River Cochel, which after falls into the Merish; ten German Miles from Hermanstadt (or Zeben) to the North, and fourteen from Kronstadt or Brassaw to the West: near the foot of the Carpathian Hills. Under the Prince of Transylvania. Segewoldt, Segevoldia, a City in Livonia, upon the River Teyder; five Swedish Miles from the Bay of Riga to the East, and seven from Riga to the South-East. Segna, Senia, a City placed by Pliny in Libur∣nia, (now in Croatia) and a Bishops See under the Archbishop of Spalato. It stands upon the Shoars of the Adriatick Sea, at the bottom of a Mountain; thirty five Miles from Nona to the South-West, and fifty from the Borders of Italy to the East. This City belongs to the Kingdom of Hungary, and is under the Emperor: it has an old Castle, a very strong Fort built on a steep Hill, and a Harbour up∣on the Gulph of Venice. Segni, Signia, Ʋrbs Volscorum, a City of great Antiquity, in the States of the Church in Campagna di Roma; under the Dominion of the Pope: giving the Title of a Duke to the Family of Sfortia. It stands on the top of a Mountain, called by its own name (La Montagna de Segni:) thirty two Miles from Rome to the East, and twelve from Preneste to the South. In this Place Organs were first invent∣ed, and Pope Vitalianus was born. The Popes Inno∣cent III. Gregory IX. and Alexander IV. were all of the House of the Counts of Segni. For this Place was an Earldom before a Dukedom. Segorve, or Segorvia, Segorbia, Segobriga, a Ci∣ty of the Kingdom of Valentia; upon the River Mor∣vedre, which a little lower falls into the Mediterra∣nean
Sea: it is a Bishops See under the Archbishop of Valentia; small, and not well Peopled. Eight Miles from Valentia to the North-West, and twelve from Tervel to the South-East. Segovia, Ʋrbs Arcevacorum in Pliny; Segubia in Ptolemy; Segobia in the Councils; is a City in New Castile in Spain, which is a Bishops See under the Archbishop of Toledo. A celebrated Place, well Peo∣pled and Rich, by reason of a great Cloathing Trade driven in it: And besides very large Suburbs, it has a Castle called El Alcaser. By the City, on the North∣side, flows a small River called Eresma. It stands at the foot of an Hill in a pleasant Plain; has a noble Aquaduct, supported by a hundred and seventy seven Arches, in double Rows, which reach from one Hill to another; built by the Emperor Trajane. This City is twenty Spanish Leagues from Toledo to the North. Long. 16. 30. Lat. 41. 15. Segovia La Nueva, a City in the Island of Ma∣nilia; (one of the Philippines under the Spaniards,) on the East side of the Island; and a Bishops See. Segre, Sicoris, a River in Catalonia, which ari∣seth in the County of Cerdagne; at the foot of the Pyrenean Hills, in the Borders of France; and wa∣tering Livia, Cerdagne, and Ʋrgel, receives the No∣guera Pallaresa, and the Noguera Rogercana: the first at Camarasa, the second above Lerida; beneath it comes in the Cinca (a great River) above Mequi∣nenca; below which this River Segre unites with the Ebro, nine Miles above Garcia to the West. Segura, Serabis, Sorabis, a River of Spain, which ariseth in New Castile from a Mountain of the same name; and flowing through the Kingdom of Murcia, falls into the Bay of Alicant; having watered Cara∣vacca, Murcia, and Orihuela. Sehusen, Senohusium, a City of Brandenburgh. Seididag. See Agion Oros. La Seille, Sala, Salia, a River of Lorain; which ariseth out of the Lake de Lindre; and flowing North-West watereth Dieuze, Nomeny and Going: and at Metz falls into the Moselle. La Seine, Seyne, Sequana, one of the principal Rivers of France; which ariseth in the Dukedom of Burgundy, in a mountainous place near the Castle of Chanceaux; two Leagues from a Town called Seine, and six from Dijon to the North. Being augmented by some smaller Rivers, it watereth Chastillion, Bar sur Seine, Troye, Pont sur Seine, (above which the Aube comes in; and beneath it the Yonne and the Loing:) so it hasteth by Melun to Corbeil. The Marne comes in a little above Paris, the Glory of this River: and beneath that City, above Poissy, the Oise, the Epte; and in Normandy the Eure, and the Andelle above Roan, the Capital of Normandy. At Caudebec in Normandy it forms a great Arm of the Sea; which admits the Tides of the Ocean thirty Leagues into the Land; gives passage to a Ship of great Burthen as high as Roan, and smaller Ships as high as Paris. Selby, a large Market Town in the West-Riding of Yorkshire and the Hundred of Barkston, upon the River Ouse. Remarkable for being the Birth-place of K. Henry I. Selemne, the name in Pausanias of a River of the Peloponnesus; gliding by Patras, in the Province of Clarentia. Seleschia, Seleucia, a City of Cilicia; which is an Archbishops See under the Patriarch of Antioch; twelve Miles from the Mediterranean Sea to the North. Long. 64. 00. Lat. 38. 40. The Antients gave it the Titles of Seleucia Olbia, Seleucia Hiriae, and Seleucia Aspera: which latter might be occasion∣ed by the many Mountains in this Country. Gregory Nazianzen calls it Seleucia S. Theclae, because it was famous for the Sepulchre of that Martyr. In the year, 359. the Arrians assembled a Council of a hundred and sixty Bishops here▪ to which S. Hilary Bishop of Poictiers came, being at that time an Exile in Phry∣gia. Seleucajelbor, Seleucia Pieria, a City of Syria; built by Seleucus Son of Antiochus King of Syria, near the Mouth of the River Orontes; ten Miles from Antioch: which is a Bishops See, under the Patriarch of Antioch. Seleucia Aspera, the same with Seleschia. Seleucia ad Tigrim, the same with Bachad. Seleucia Pieria, the same with Seleucajelbor. Seleucia ad Belum, the same with Divortigi. Seleucia Pisidiae, this is an antient City of Pisi∣dia in the Lesser Asia, upon the Confines of Pam∣phylia; in which S. Paul established the Christian Faith. A Bishops See under the Archbishop of An∣tioch. Now under the Turks, called Caragar, Cara∣sazar; and by others Celestria. Selivrea, or Selibria, Selymbria, Selybria, a City of Thrace upon the Propontis, of great An∣tiquity; being mentioned by Pliny and Ptolemy. It was at first a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Heraclea; but now the Metropolis it self. Great and populous, tho without Walls: it has a good Har∣bour too. This City stands twenty five Miles from Constantinople to the West; also called Selombria. Selo. See Silaro. Seilsey-Isle, a Peninsula, commonly so called, near Chichester in the County of Sussex. Assigned about the Year 711. by Edilwach, King of the South Saxons, to Wilfride Archb. of York for his Seat; who being banished his Country by the King of Northum∣berland, came thence to preach to the South Saxons. Cedwal, King of the West Saxons, having Conquer∣ed the Kingdom of the South Saxons, built a Mona∣stery here, and made it a Bishops See: which conti∣nued in the same place above three hundred years, with the Title of the Bishops of Selsey; till Bishop Stigard in 1070 removed the See to Chichester. Its chiefest Note now is, that it yields plenty of excellent Lob∣sters and Cockles. Semigallen, Semigallia, a Province of Livonia in the Kingdom of Poland; which signifies in their Tongue, The End of the Earth. Bounded on the North by Livonia properly so called, cut off by the Dwina; on the South by Samogithia, on the West by Curland, and on the East by the Palatinate of Ploczko. The principal Town is Mittaw the usual Residence of the Dukes of Curland, under whom this Province is. Semender. See Spenderobi. Semnitz, one of the Names of the Carpathian Hills. Sempach, a Town in Switzerland, under the Pro∣tection of the Canton of Lucerne. Semur en Auxois, Semurium, a small City in the Dukedom of Burgundy, upon the River Arman∣son; ten Leagues from Autun to the North, eleven from Dijon to the West, and twenty two from Troye to the South. Semur en Briennois, a Town in the Dukedom of Burgundy, in the Territory of Autun; one League from the Loyre to the East, and three beneath Ro∣anne to the North. Sendomir, Sendomira, a City in Poland; the Capital of a Palatinate of the same name in the Lesser Poland; built upon an Hill by the Vistula, (where it receives the Sanum) twenty eight Polish Miles from Crakow to the East, and thirty two above Warsaw to the South. This Town was taken by the Swedes, in 1655; and retaken next year by the Poles.
Seuef, a Town in the Dukedom of Brabant in the Low Countries: made remarkable by a Battel be∣twixt the French under the Prince of Conde: and the Spaniards joyned with the Dutch, in 1674. in which the former carried the Victory. It stands upon the Borders of Hainault and Namur. Senega, a great River in Africa; called by the Portuguese Zanaga, by the Natives Ouedec. One of the principal Branches of the Niger, and the most Northern; (which was called Darat or Daradus,) and falls into the Atlantick Ocean by Cape Verde, (where there is a French Colony:) Upon its Banks stand the Cities of Genehoa, Tombutum, and some others; its course is from East to West, between the Kingdoms of Genehoa and Jalofarum. Senez, or Senes, Civitas Sanitiensium, Sanesio, Sa∣nitio, Sanitium, a small Clity of Provence; and a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Ambrun; from which it stands fourteen Leagues to the South, and eight from Sisteron to the North-East. Now reduced almost to a Village. The See is removed to Castellane, a Town upon the Verdon two Miles South from Senez. And the Chapter of the Cathedral of the Order of S. Austin was secularized by Pope Innocent X. in 1647. It stands amongst the Mountains of Provence: belie∣ved by some to be the Sanitium of Ptolemy. Il Senese, Senensis Ager, a Territory in Italy, called by the Inhabitants Il Sanese; by the French le Sienois: it is a considerable part of Tuscany towards the South; between Florence and Pisa to the North and West; the Tyrrhenian Sea to the South, and the States of the Church to the East: Heretofore a Com∣monwealth and a Free State; but has been subject above a hundred years to the Duke of Florence. The Maremma di Siena is divided between the Prince di Piombino (under the Protection of the Spaniards,) and the Stato di Presidii; in which is Orbitello and Tellamont, immediately under the Spaniards, though they be parts of the Senese. The Capital of this Pro∣vince is Siena. The other Cities are Monte Alciano, Colle, Pienza, Soana, Chiusi, Massa, Rosetto, and Piombino; and the Island on this Coast belonged also to this State. Senga, or Cinoa, Cinga, a River in the Kingdom of Aragon; which ariseth from the Pyrenean Hills above Biela: and flowing South watereth Ainsa, Bal∣bastro, Moncon and Fraga: at Mequinenca falls into the Segre, and with it into the Ebro; having in this course entertained the Essera, the Guaticalema, and Ysuela, and some other Rivers. Senigaglia, Senogallia, Sena Gallica, a small, but handsome and strong City upon the Coast of the Gulph of Venice, in the Dukedom di Ʋrbino in Ita∣ly; belonging formerly to the Dukes of Ʋrbino and the Family of the Malatesti, now to the Papacy. It has a Port, at the Fall of the River Nigola into the Gulph; and a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Ʋrbino. In 1627. a Synod was held at it. The Se∣nones, a Tribe of the ancient Gauls, establishing themselves in the Country hereabouts, gave it this name of Senogallia. Asdrubal received a Defeat be∣fore it; whose name is retained by a neighbouring Mountain, called The Mountain of Asdrubal. Senio, Senna, a River of Ʋmbria in Italy. Senlis, Augustomagus, Silvanectum, Sylviacum, a small City in the Isle of France; which is a Bishops See under the Archbishop of Reims, and the Capital of its County. Seated upon the River Nonette, ten Leagues from Paris to the North: it has this Name, Sylvanectum, because it is surrounded with Wood from the Forest de Rets. The County or Bailliage de Senlis lies between the Isle of France, Le Valois, the Oyse, and the Aysne. The principal Towns in it being Senlis and Compeigne. Senlis contains seven Parishes and two Collegiate Churches. The Leaguers in the Civil Wars besieged it, and were here engaged by the Kings Party. There have been divers French Synods assembled at it. Senne, or Zenne, Senna, a small River of the Low Countries; which arising in Hainault, and slowing through the Dutchy of Brabant, watereth Brussels and Mechlen; then falls into the Rupel. Senno, Siris, a River in the Basilicate, a Province of the Kingdom of Naples; which watereth Agro∣mento, and then falls into the Bay of Taranto; fif∣teen Miles from Torre di Mare to the South. It had once a City upon its Banks called Siris too; but now intirely ruined: its Rubbish scarce appearing, three Miles above its Out-let. Senonois, Senonensis Ager, a Tract in France; annexed to the Generalité of Champagne; which is a part of the Possessions of the old Senones, and has this Name from Sens its capital City. Sens, Senones, Agendicum Senonum, a great Ci∣ty of France, called by the Italians Sans: so very antient, that it is thought older than Rome; and an Archbishops See. Built in a beautiful Plain upon the River Yonne, which has over it there a Stone Bridge. It is also the Capital of Senonois, in the Prefecture of Champagne; though ill attributed by some to Bur∣gundy. A beautiful City, twenty six Leagues from Paris to the South-East, and the same from Orleans to the North-East. Made famous heretofore by the Conquests of the Senones, (a Tribe of the Gauls) its old Inhabitants in Italy and Greece: who in the former took Rome, and built Siena and Senogaglia with other Places to this day retaining their Memory in the Names they gave them. Robert, King of France, took this City out of the hands of its Counts in 1005. It is plentifully watered by Rivulets from all Parts: adorned with a noble Metropolitan Church, six Abbeys, and divers Ecclesiastical and Religious Houses. The Archbishops take the Title of Primates of Gaul and Germany. Several French Councils have been celebrated here. The Territory of Senonois reaches about sixteen or seventeen Leagues in length, and eight in breadth. The learned Petrus Abaelar∣dus suffered the Condemnation of one of those Coun∣cils in 1140. in the presence of K Lewis le Jeune and S. Bernard: from which he appealed to the Pope. Senguino, Arymagdus, a River of Cilicia, in the Lesser Asia; which springeth out of Mount Taurus, and falls into the Mediterranean Sea; between the Cities of Anemora and Arsinoë. Sentino, Sentinus, a small River in the Marchia Anconitana; which running by Sentina (once a con∣siderable Town, but now only a Castle in the Duke∣dom of Ʋrbino; in a pleasant Valley, fifteen Miles from Eugubio; the Town being ruined by the Lom∣bards;) falls into the Esino. Sephoris, an antient City of Palestine in Galilee, four Miles from Nazareth, towards Mount Carmel; upon a little Hill in the midst of a Plain. Herod made it the principal Place for Strength in all Galilee, for the greater security of his Tetrarchy. Joachim and Ann, the Father and Mother of the B. Virgin, were Natives and Inhabitants of it; in the place of whose House a Christian Church in the Primitive Times was erected, as appears by the remaining Ruines. There is a very large Fountain near it, called com∣monly by the same name of the Fountain of Sephoris; by which the Christian Armies often assembled in the times of the Kings of Jerusalem. From Sephoris, some write, that Joachim and Ann removed to Na∣zareth, and thence to Jerusalem. It has been since called Dio-Cesarea; but now lies in Ruines.
Ser, Cyrrhus, a River of Albania, a Province or Kingdom of Greece. Seraio, Seraium, a City of Bosnia, upon the Ri∣ver Migliazka, in the Lower Bosnia. It is great and strong; the Capital of that Kingdom; being some few Miles from the Borders of Servia, and about thirty from the Save to the South, and about hinety from Belgrade to the South-West. Seram, a River of Bugey in France, in the Ter∣ritory of Valromey: passing under the Bridge of Soy into the Sererin, and thence near Rochefore into the Rhosne. Serchio, Aesaris, Auser, Sarculus, a River of Italy; which ariseth out of the Apennine in Tusca∣ny, in the Borders of the Dukedom of Modena; and flowing through Carfagnana and the States of Luca, not far from the Capital City of that State, entertain∣eth the Osaro: and entring the Dukedom of Florence, falls into the Tyrrhenian Sea; five Miles North of the Mouth of the River Arno. Sere, Sara, a River of France in Touraine: Ano∣ther in the Low Countries, which falls into the Oyse. Seregippe del Rey, a City in Brasil in South America; built on an Hill near the Mouth of the River Potigipeda, on the Eastern Coast: the Capital of a Province of the same name, between Pernam∣buc to the North, and the Province of All Saints, to the South: both City and Province being subject to the King of Portugal. Sereth, Tiarantus, a River of Moldavia, which falls into the Danube, near Galacz or Axiopolis. Serica, a great Region of the ancient Asia; be∣twixt China to the East, and the Mountain Imaus to the West: famous heretofore for Manufactures in Silk. Its Cities were Issedon, Serica, Ottorocorra, Piada, &c. The Inhabitants are known in Antiqui∣ty by the name of Seres. This Country at present lies contained in the Kingdoms of Niuche, Tangut, &c. in the Asiatick Tartary, to which some add Cathay. As some include it in the ancient Scythia Asiatica, others make them separate. The Occhar∣dus (now Tartar) is a River of Serica. Serio, Serius, a River in Lombardy in the States of Venice; which springeth out of the Mountains in the Borders of the Grisons: and flowing South by Bergamo and Crema, falls into the Adda above Pici∣glione; a great Town in the Dukedom of Milan; five Miles from the Borders of the Dukedom of Parma. Sermoneto, Sulmo, Sermineta, a Town in Cam∣pagua di Roma, in the States of the Church; which gives the Title of a Duke to the Family of Cajetan. It stands twenty eight Miles from Rome to the South, and seventeen from Terracina to the North-East. Serpa, a Town in the Kingdom of Portugal, to∣wards the Borders of Andalusia, near the River Gua∣diana: upon an Eminence, with a Castle for its se∣curity. It hath an unfruitful Country about it. Serphino, or Serfinus, Seriphus, an Island in the Archipelago towards Europe: full of Rocks, about thirty Miles in Circuit, betwixt the Islands of Ferme∣ma or Thermia, and Sifano. The Romans used to banish Criminals to it. Serrano, a small uninhabited Island in the North-Sea in America, betwixt Jamaica and the Region of Nicaragua in New Spain: to which the Misfortunes of a Spaniard, called Serrano, who was Shipwrack'd upon it in the time of Charles V, and detained all alone some years there, for want of a Vessel to take him up again, have fastned his own name. Serres, or Seres, Serrae, a City of Macedonia; mentioned in Niceta, Cedrenus, and the latter Greek Writers; by Leunclavius now called Seres. It is now a considerable and well peopled Place; advan∣ced to the Honour of an Archbishops See, in the place of Amphipolis: between which, Thessalonica and Philippi, it stands upon an Hill; our latter Maps place it thirty four Miles from Amphipolis to the South-East, sixty from Thessalonica to the North-East, and thirty from Contessa to the North-West. Servan, or Schirwan, Servania, Atropatia, a Province in the North West of the Kingdom of Persia, towards the Borders of Georgia and the Turkish Em∣pire; the Northern Bounds of which are the Caspian Sea. It has many great Cities: and is one of the most Fruitful and Populous Provinces in that Kingdom; though it has suffered much in latter times by the Depredations of the Turks. The Cities of it are Tau∣ris, Schamachie, Servan, Ardebeil and Ba. This Country makes a part of the ancient Media. Servia, a Province of the Turkish Empire, called by them Zirfia. It is of great extent. Bounded on the West by Croatia, (or rather Bosnia and Dalma∣tia,) and in part by Sclavonia; on the North by the Danube, which separates it from the Ʋpper Hungary and Moldavia; on the East by Bulgaria; and on the South by Macedonia, Albania, and Dalmatia. The chief Towns and Cities in it are Belgrade, Pris∣ren, Novibazar, Procupie, Semander, and Scopia, which was anciently the Capital. In the times of the Romans this was called Moesia Superior, esteemed a part of Thrace, and the most barbarous Nation the Romans had subdued; which was done by Marcus Licinius Crassus in the times of Augustus Caesar. In the fall of the Roman Empire, the Servi (a Branch of the Sclaves) became Masters of this Country, and gave it the name of Servia. About 1000. it was conquered by the Emperors of Constantinople; but suffered to continue under their own Princes as Homa∣gers to the Empire. Amurath I. was the first of the Ottoman Princes, who invaded this Country: He took Nissa about 1374. after which they maintained a Bloody War with some Intermissions, till 1460: when they finally submitted to Mahomet the Great, and ever after esteemed a Province of that Empire. The Christian Faith was first setled here by Cyril and Methodius, between 860. and 890. Methodius taking care to give them the Bible in the Sclavonian Tongue; together with the Divine Offices; which they hold in high esteem to this day. The Country is very fruit∣ful and rich; has Mines of Gold and Silver, especi∣ally about Zerbenick. Herzegovina and Rascia, are the two principal Parts of it. Sessanne, Sesanna, a small City in La Brie, a Province of France, in the Borders of Champagne: 13 Leagues from Troyes to the North, and 24 from Paris to the East; of late years it suffered much by fire, but now rebuilding. Some have written it Sezania. Sesans, or Sezans, Cincomagus, an ancient Ro∣man Town in Dauphine; two Leagues from Brian∣zon to the East, at the foot of the Cottian Alpes. La Sesia, Sesites, a River of Lombardy, which springeth out of the Pennine Alpes: and flowing be∣tween the Dukedom of Milan, and the Principality of Piedmont, watereth Varallo, Romagnano and Ver∣celli; then falls into the Po, six Miles below Casale. Sessa, Suessa, Aurunca, an ancient City in Italy, in the Terra di Lavoro in the Kingdom of Naples; which is a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Ca∣pua; from which it stands sixteen Miles to the West, and twenty from Gaeta to the East; in a ve∣ry fruitful soil for Wine and Corn. Honored with the Title of a Dukedom. Sesto, Sestos, Sestus, a Town and Fortress upon the Coast of Romania in Europe, on this side the Hellespont, opposite to Abydos in Asia on the other. These two Fortresses guard the Passage of the Archi∣pelago into the Sea of Marmora. See Abydos.
Sestula, the chief Town of the Territory of Frig∣nana, in the Dukedom of Modena in Italy; towards the Borders of the Bolognese. Sestri, the name of two Towns in the States of Genoua in Italy, to the East and West of the City Genoua. Setia, a City in the Isle of Candy, called by the Greeks Sitia; which (though very small) is a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Candy. It stands on a Peninsula, on the East side of the Island; under the Turks. Sethie, Dicte, an Island on the East of Candy, thought by the Pagans to have been the place where Jove was Nursed. Now also called Lassiti, and il Monte di Setia. Setines, the vulgar Name of Athens by a Cor∣ruption of . See Athens. Settalia, Pamphylia, a Province in the Lesser Asia, upon the Mediterranean Sea; between Cilicia to the East, and Lycia to the West Settle, a Market Town in the West Riding of Yorkshire, in the Hundred of Staincliff, upon the River Rible. Sevenoke, a Market Town in the County of Kent in Sutton Lath: which hath a Hospital and a Free-School founded in 1418. by William Sevenoke, a Lord Mayor of London. Les Sevennes, Cemmenus, Gebenna, a Mountain in France; which runs a Course of thirty Leagues: between Rovergne and Givaudan (two Provinces of France) to the West, the Switzers and le Velay to to the East. These Mountains begin near the Foun∣tains of the Loyre, in the Province of Vivarais; and are extended as far as Rovergue, and the Borders of the Lower Languedoc. Towards Paris they are very fruit∣ful, and well inhabited. The rest is more barren; and besides the Rivers which spring from it, and its be∣ing a Boundary, of no great advantage. Seven-waldt, Seven-walden, Baduhennae Lucus, a Forest in Friseland. Severino, Acmonia, a City built by Severus the Roman Emperor, upon the Danube; near Trajanus his Bridge: twelve German Miles from Temeswaer to the North-East. Severne, Sabrina, one of the noblest Rivers of England; which ariseth in the County of Montgo∣mery in Wales, near Plynllimon Hill, and flows at first East, as far as Llandois: then turning North-East, it watereth New-town; and (leaving Montgomery to the East) passeth by Welsh-Pool to the borders of Shrop∣shire: taking in the Tanot before it entereth that Coun∣ty. So passeth South-West to Shrewsbury, and Wor∣cester; beneath which the Temde, and at Tewkesbury the Avon come in: passing to Glocester, it becomes by that time very great, and beneath that City it has ne∣ver a Bridge over it. So parting Monmouthshire to to the North from Gloucestershire to the South, it en∣tereth the Irish Sea; by a vast and stately Mouth, li∣ker an Arm of the Sea than a part of a River; fifteen English Miles broad; between Nash-point in Glamor∣ganshire, and Lintow in Devonshire. Sevilla de Oro, a deserted Town in the North part of the Island of Jamaica; which has a good Har∣bor upon the Gulph of Mexico, but little frequented by the English. The Spaniards were the Founders of it. Seville, Hispalis, Ispalis, and Hispalis ad Baetim, a City of Spain; called by the Spaniards Sevilla; great, rich, and populous; the Capital of the Lower Andalusia, and an Archbishop's See; seated upon the River Guadalquivir, upon which it has a frequented Harbor. There belongs also to it an University, a Court of Inquisition, an old Castle (called Alcaser) and a large Suburb called Triana. It is one of the ancientest Cities in Spain; ascribed to Hercules as its Founder, which shews it to be a Phoenician City. The Moors conquered it in the year of Christ 713, and held it five hundred thirty four years. In 1248 it was reco∣vered by Ferdinando, out of the hands of the Moors, after a siege of sixteen Months: since that time two of the Kings of Castile were born here, viz. Ferdinand IV. and Henry II. Ferdinand III. died here in 1252, Alphonsus X. in 1284. When the Spaniards took it from the Moors, there belonged to it a very populous Territory (being seated in a very fruitful Plain;) but by the Banishment of the Moors, it is become almost desolate. Long. 14. 30. Lat. 37. 25. The West-In∣dian Fleets for the most part land their Merchandise at this City: the Form of whose situation is almost round. The Metropolitan Church passes for the largest in all Spain: You see a great number of Colleges, Chappels, and Religious Houses besides; with Palaces, Grand Places, and Fountains adorning them; whose Streams, by an Aquaduct, are fetched the space of five or six Leagues from the City. In the years 590, and 619, two noted Councils were celebrated here. Isi∣dore Bishop of Sevil rendered both the See and the City famous in his time. The Spaniards proverbially say, Qui no ha visto Sevilla, no ha visto Maravilla: He that hath not seen Sevill, hath not seen a Wonder. § Near this Sevill, in the same Andalusia, stood the ancient City of Italica; whence the Poet Silius, its Native (as many write) was denominated Italicus: and which had the honour of giving Birth to three Ro∣man Emperors, Trajan, Adrian, and Theodosius senior. The place of its ruines now is known by the Name of Sevilla la Vieja, or Old Sevill. La Seure, Separa, a double River in Poictou, in France. 1. La Seure Nantois, watereth Mortagne in Poictou, and Nantes in Bretagne; then falls into the Loyre. 2. La Seure Niortois, ariseth above S. Maix∣ant; and watering Niort, Mallezais, and Marans, falls into the Bay of Aquitain. Sewer, Surius, Suirius, a River which ariseth in the County of Tipperary, in the Borders of Leinster, in Ireland; and watering Casshel, Caryck, and Wa∣terford, falls into the Boyne, on the South of Ireland; and with it into the Ocean. Seyde, Sidon, by the Germans called Said, is a City of Phoenicia, in Syria, upon the Shores of the Mediterranean; North of Tyre; about a League di∣stant from the remains of the ancient Sidon, Sister to Tyre in the Scripture, for its Sins and the Punishments of them. A populous City, full of Merchants and Artisans of all Nations; driving a great Trade in Cot∣ton and Silk. The Franciscans, Capuchins and Jesu∣its have each their Chappels; the Turks seven or eight Mosques; and the Jews one Synagogue here. The Ma∣ronites of Mount Libanus, and the Armenian Greeks enjoy the like Liberties. Without the City, appear ma∣ny Gardens of Oranges, Citrons, Tamarines, Palm-trees, and the Fig-trees of Adam; (so called, because bearing a Leaf of the length of six foot and the breadth of two, Adam (it is supposed) covered his nakedness with them.) It hath two small Fortresses; but so far ruined, as to remain indefensible. The Turks keep a a Sangi∣ack here, under the Bassaw of Damascus; a Cady, or Judge, and an Aga of the Janizaries. The French, a Consul. All which Officers are handsomely lodged: the rest of the Houses are ill built. The Harbor for∣merly was capable of receiving many and great Ves∣sels: but is now choaked with Sand to that degree, as to admit only of Skiffs; whilst Ships lye in the road behind the Rocks for Shelter. In the Christian times it was a Bishop's See under the Archbishop of Tyre. The Eutychians held Council here of twenty four Bishops, in 512, under the protection of the Emperour Ana∣stasius. In 1260, the Tartars became Masters of it:
from whom the Turks obtain'd it about one hundred and fifty years since. There is now a Caemetery upon a part of the Mountain Antilibanus, in the place where the Old Sidon stood, for the use of the Christi∣ans of Seyde. And the Maronites have a poor Chap∣pel by it. Seyne. See Seine. Sezza, Setia, a City of Campagna di Roma in I∣taly, of good Antiquity; mentioned by Martial. It is said to have sometime been a Bishop's See, though not now. Du Val places an Epispocal City of the same name in the Terra di Lavoro, in the Kingdom of Naples. Sfacchia, Leuci, a Range of Mountains in the Territory of Cydonia, on the West side of the Island of Candy; which gave name to the Sfacciotes: who signalized themselves by their valiant resistance against the Turks, when they endeavoured the ravishing that Island from the Seigniory of Venice, of late years. Shaftsbury, Septonia, a Town upon the Stoure, in the North-East Borders of Dorsetshire, towards Wiltshire: seated in the form of a Bow on an high Hill; which affords it a serene Air, and a large de∣lightful Prospect, but deprives it very much of Wa∣ter. In the times of the Norman Conquest it had one hundred and four Houses; and after this ten Parish Chur∣ches, now three; with about 500 Houses, built of the Freestone of its own Hill. Some write King Canu∣tus the Dane died here. This Town was built by King Alfred, in 880; as Mr. Cambden proves from an old Inscription, mentioned in William of Malmesbury. In 1672, Charles II. created Anthony Ashley Cooper, (then Lord Chancellor of England) Earl of Shafts∣bury; who died in Holland, and his Son succeeded him in this Honour. Shannon, Shennyn, or Shennonon, Senus, Sinejus, a River in Ireland, which is one of the principal in that Kingdom. It ariseth in the County of Roscomon, in the Province of Connaught, out of Mount Slew∣nern; and flowing Southward through Letrim, forms a vast Lake (called Myne, Eske and Ree,) towards the North end of which, on the East side, stands Le∣trim; in the middle, Longford; towards the South, Ardagh; on the West side, Elphem and Roscomon; and at some distance from the Lake to the South, Ath∣lone. Beneath which comes in from the West the Logh, (a vast River) from three other Lakes more to the West, (called Garoch, Mesks, and Ben-Carble;) on the East it receives the Anney: so passing by Ban∣nogh and Clonfort, to the Lake of Derg, at Kiloe it leaves that Lake, and passeth to Limerick, where it turns full West; and between Munster to the South, and Connaught to the North enters the Vergivian Ocean by a Mouth five Miles wide; between Cape Leane and Cape Sanan, having in this Course separated Leinster and Munster from Connaught. Shap, a large Village in the County of Westmor∣land, in Westward, near the River Lowther: in which, in the Reign of Henry I, Thomas, Son of Jospatrick, founded an Abbey; and the same was the only Abbey in this County. There is near this Town a noted Well, which ebbs and flows often in a day: and a perfect Bow of vast Stones, some nine foot high and fourteen thick, pitch'd at equal distances from each other for for the space of a Mile. Sheale, a Town in the Bishoprick of Durham, in Chester-ward, upon the Mouth of the River Tine. The Newcastle Coal-Fleet takes its Cargo here. Sheffield, a large well-built Market-town in the West riding of Yorkshire, in the hundred of Straf∣ford, upon the River Dun; of particular note for I∣ron Wares, even in Chaucer's time, who describes a Person with a Sheffield VVhittle by his side. It shews the ruines of one of the five Castles, formerly seated upon the same▪ River Dun, in the compass of ten Miles. Corn especially is much bought up here, for the supply of some parts of Derby and Nottingham▪shires, as well as Yorkshire. Shefford, a Market Town in Bedfordshire, in the Hundred of Clifton, situated between two Rivulets, which below it join to fall in one Stream into the A∣von. Sheppey, Shepey, Toliapis, an Island on the East∣ern Coast of Kent; at the Mouth of the Thames and Medway. Separated by the River Medway from Kent, and on all other sides surrounded with the Sea. About eight Miles long and six broad. Fruitful in Pasturage, and well watered, especially on the South, by Ri∣vers. The Danes, Earl Goodwin, his Sons, and their Adherents, much harassed it in former times. Queens∣borough is its chief Town: it hath several other Towns besides, and hath been honoured with the Title of an Earldom, in the Lady Dacres, Countess of She∣pey. Shepton-Mallet, or Malley, a large Market Town in Somersetshire, in the hundred of VVhi∣ston. Shipton, a Market Town in VVorcestershire, in the hundred of Oswalderston, upon the River Stower. It stands in a slip of the County, taken off from VVar∣wickshire. Shirburne, Clarus Fons, a Town and Castle in the North-West of Dorsetshire; on the Borders of Somersetshire, upon a River of the same Name; which afterwards falls into the Parret: the Capital of its Hundred. Built on the side of an Hill, in a fruit∣ful and pleasant Country; and much increased in the number of its Inhabitants and its Wealth, by the Cloathing Trade. In 704. a Bishop's See was erected here; translated afterwards to Sunning, and thence to Salisbury. The Family of the Digbys, Earls of Bri∣stol, are Barons of Shirburne. § Also a Market Town in the West riding of Yorkshire, in the Hun∣dred of Barkstow, upon a small stream falling into the VVarfe and the Ouse at the place of their Conjunction. This Town is noted for the Stone-quarries near it: well inhabited, and provided with a Free-School. Shoreham, a Market Town in the County of Sus∣sex, in Bramber Rape, by the Sea side. Shrewsbury, Salopia, the principal City in Shrop∣shire, is seated upon the Severne; on the top of an Hill of Red Earth, in the middle of that County. The River runs almost round the Town, and is covered by two lovely Bridges. Roger of Montgomery, in the Reign of VVilliam the Conqueror, built on the North side of it a strong Castle, which added much to its strength; he founded a stately Abbey in it, whose remains are extant still. It was then a very considera∣ble Place. Nor is it (after so many Ages) sunk in its Wealth, Riches, or People: but still a goodly City, and the Centre of the Trade between VVales and Eng∣land. Near this City, in 1463, was a sharp Battel fought between Henry IV. and Henry Percie Earl of Northumberland; on the behalf of Edward Morti∣mer (Earl of March) as the right Heir of the Crown of England, after Richard II. In 1067, Roger de Montgomery, Earl of Arundel, was by the Conque∣ror created Earl of Shrewsbury. His Posterity enjoy∣ed it till 1102, in three descents, and then were dive∣sted of it. In 1442, John Talbot, Marshal of France, a Person of great Worth and Conduct, (and the ter∣ror of France) was by Henry VI, made Earl of this City; which Honour is enjoyed by his Posterity to this day. Charles Talbot, the twelfth of this Line, succe∣ding in 1667. Shrewsbury contains now five Parish Churches: denominates a Lath; is encompassed with a strong Wall, with a Bulwark that ranges from the Castle to the Severn; and is represented in
the lower House of Parliament by two Burgesses. First supposed to have taken its rise from the ruines of the ancient Ʋriconium, which stood not far from it. Shropshire, Salopia, is bounded on the North by the County Palatine of Chester; on the East by Staf∣fordshire; on the South by Worcester, Hereford, and Radnorshires; on the West by Montgomery and Den∣bigh. Its length from North to South is thirty four, its breadth from East to West twenty five, and the cir∣cuit about one hundred thirty four English Miles: wherein lye one hundred and seventy Parishes, and fif∣teen Market Towns. The Air of it is gentle and healthful, the Soil rich and fruitful; abounding in Wheat, Barley, Pit-Coals, Iron and Wood. The Se∣verne (which is the second River of England) divides this County almost in the middle; receiving into it the Camlet, the Morda, the Mele, the Roddon, the Terne, the VVorse, and some others: on the South it has the Temde, which receives the Bradfield, Onke, Omey, Quenny, Stradbrook, Corve, Ledwich and Rea; all which, and some other Rivers, water and enrich the South part of this County; so that it may very well be one of the most fruitful and best peopled Counties in England. The Principal City is Shrewsbury. Siam, a City and Kingdom beyond the Ganges, in the Further East Indies. The Kingdom is boun∣ded on the North by the Kingdoms of Pegu and Ava; on the East, Cambaya, Lao, Jancoma and Tangu: on the South, the Bay of its own Name; and on the West by the Bay of Bengale: making by this form of its situation a Demicircle of about four hundred and fif∣ty Leagues. Some assign it a far greater extent, and bound it by Pegu and Lao on the North; the Chinian and Indian Oceans to the East and West; with the Kingdom of Malaca to the South: And this way it makes a great Peninsula. It is certain, the King of Siam keeps several other Kingdoms and Principalities tributary to him; and his Country being blessed with a good Air, a fertile Soil, Mines of Lead, Tin, Silver and Gold (tho of a base Alloy,) with store of Ivory; and being visited continually by Vessels from Japan, China, Cochinchina, Tonquin, the Sound and the Phi∣lippine Islands; from all parts of the Hither East Indies, and from Arabia, Persia, and the Kingdoms of Europe; it affords the enjoyment of every thing almost that is valuable. Whilst the Sun is in the Nor∣thern Signs, from March to September, the Fields are generally overflown by the Rivers, which much con∣tributes to the fertility of them: for the Ear of the Rice mounts above the height of the Waters. The King of Siam was Master heretofore of Malaca; see Malaca. Of late, himself became a Tributary to the King of Pegu; see Pegu. But he is very absolute o∣ver, and served with the profoundest Adoration by, his own Subjects. The English, French and Dutch have each their Factories in this Kingdom. The Portuguese and Armenians, Moors and Chinese, settle here in great Numbers: being allowed dwellings in the City Siam, by a Favour not made common to all Nations. Siam, the City, stands in an Island that is formed by the River Menan: surpassing, in the richness of its Temples, most of the proudest Cities in the Indies; and its Pa∣lace Royal, where the King resides, built by the River side, is of an extent sufficient to denominate a City of it self. In 1634, the Dutch built themselves a House in Siam, whichis one of the best, belonging to their Company in these Indies. Siangyang, Siangyanum, a City in the Province of Huquam, in the Kingdom of China. The Capi∣tal over six other Cities. Siara, a small City in Brasil, upon the North Sea, which is the Capital of a Province; has a large safe Ha∣ven and a Castle; but not very populous. Under the Portuguese. , a Kingdom under the Great Mogul, in the East-Indies; towards the Fountains of Ganges, and Mount Caucasus; betwixt Naugracut and Pitane. Siben, Sabiona, now a Castle only, but formerly a City in the County of Tirol, and a Bishop's See. It is seated upon the River Eysock; ten Miles from Brixia (whither the Brishoprick is removed) to the South-West. Siberia, a Province of great extent, under the Crown of Muscovy; towards the river Obb, in the Desart Tartary; between the Provinces of Condora, Legomoria, and Permia. Some few years since first discovered; all covered with uninhabited Woods, Mar∣shes, and desolate Countries; having only a few Inha∣bitants, which have a particular Language of their own, and not the use of Bread. The Moscovites have of late built the Cities Tobolsk, upon the River Yim and Siber on the Obb here, and united both in one Arch∣bishoprick. At the former the Vice Duke, under the Grand Duke of Moscovy, resides; he commands over both Siberia and Samoyeda. They have also set up Churches in divers places, for the Moscovian Christi∣ans. Sicambri, a People of the ancient Germany; pla∣ced, by most, about the (now) Province of Guelder∣land in the Ʋnited Netherlands, betwixt the Maes and the Rhine. By others, upon the banks of the Mayne. Strabo calls them Sugambri; Ptolemy, Syn∣ganbri. The Bructeri were a part of their Depen∣dents. Sichem, an ancient City of the Territory of Sama∣ria, in Palestine; in the Tribe of Ephraim. The same which S. John calls Sychar, John 4. 5. standing near the Well, where our Saviour discoursed the Sama∣ritan Woman. It is mentioned in Abraham's time for the place of his abode, Gen. 12 6. Afterwards for the Sepulchre of Joseph, and the Inheritance of his chil∣dren, Josh. 24. 32. For the Election of Rehoboam King of Israel, here, by all Israel, 2 Chron. 10. 1. and upon other Occasions. Now called Naplouse, Neapolas▪ and New Samaria. The High Priest of the present Samaritans resides at it. Sicily, Sicilia, Sicelia, Trinacria, Sicania, Tri∣quetra, a very great Island in the Mediterranean Sea, at the South West point of Italy. Thought by some Ancients to join originally with Italy, as part of the con∣tinent, and to have been separated from it by the stormy Powers of the Ocean. It lies in the form of a vast Tri∣angle (from whence some of its names are derived;) having three great Capes (Pelorum) now Faro, to the North-East towards Italy; Pachynus (now Passa∣ro) towards the Morea, and the South-East; and Lilybaeum (now Cape Coco) to the West. Threehun∣dred and eighty Miles from the Morea, one hundred from Africa, one hundred and seventy from Sardinia, and from Italy a Mile and a half. Its North side is two hundred fifty five Miles; its Southern one hundred and ninety; and the Western one hundred fifty five, as Cluverius saith, who measured the whole Island. It is now divided into three Counties, Val di Domoni to the North, Val di Noto to the South, and Val di Maza∣ra to the West. The ancient Cities of greatest power, were Syracusa (now Syragosa) Panormus, Palermo, Messina, and Messana; of which the two last re∣tain their former Dignity. The other Cities are Ger∣genti▪ Calatagirone, Catania, Cefalu, Trapano, Ma∣zara, Monreal, Noto, Patti, Sacca, and Terra Nova. It is wonderfully fruitful as to Corn and Wine; there∣fore called by Cato, The Granary of the Common-VVealth, and Nurse of the People of Rome. Abounds also with Cattle, Sheep, Honey, Wine and Oyl. In ancient times it had seventy three Free Cities: in the time of the second Punick War it had sixty six. We have only Fabulous accounts who were the first Inha∣bitants: but certainly the: Phoenicians have been here,
and were expelled by the Greeks; who not well agree∣ing amongst themselves, drew over the Carthaginians to their common ruine. The Romans followed not long after; and in the year of Rome 494, (two hun∣dred and fifty six years before the birth of our Saviour) made themselves Masters of it; it being the first Pro∣vince they possessed out of the Bounds of Italy. In the mean time Dionysius, Agathocles, Hiero, and Peri∣cles advanced themselves to an Absolute Tyranny here, by the use they made of their Victories. It continued under the Romans till the Reign of Justinian: then the Vandals under Gensericus, (in 439. and 440.) for some time became Masters of it, who were expelled by Bellisarius in 535. Having been miserably spoil∣ed by the Emperor Constans, in 669. it fell into the Hands of the Saracens; who plundered it, as they did several times after, and left it. Leandro Alberti faith, that in the Division of the Empire between Charles the Great, and Nicephorus Emperor of the East, (about 800.) Sicily, Calabria, and Apulia fell to the Emperor of Constantinople: and that it continued under them till the times of Nicephorus Thomas. However we find the Saracens (in 910.) after a great Naval Victory, became Masters of Cala∣bria, Apulia, and Sicily. Leandro placeth this in 914: and saith, the Greeks had part of Sicily still. In 1035. the Saracens were still possessed of part of Si∣cily: but as Leander saith, they and the Greeks too were expelled by the Normans, in the times of Mi∣chael Caliphates (who reigned but one year, about 1041. and 1042) by Gulielmus Ferebatus; [and not by Tancred, as say others.] To this William succeeded, (as Counts of Calabria) Roger I. by the Pope created King of Sicily; he having taken the Pope Prisoner in the year 1139, William II. Willi∣am III. and Tancred, a Bastard, opposed by Pope Ce∣lestine III: who preferred Costanza, (a Daughter of Roger II. an ancient Lady, a Nun) and married her to Henry, Son of Frederick Barbarossa, and made him King of Sicily; to whom succeeded Fre∣derick II. his Son. Then followed Manfredus, his Natural Son; but the Pope set up Charles Duke of Anjou against him in 1263. In 1281. upon Easter∣day, in time of Vespers, (whence the name came of the Sicilian Vespers) the French were all massacred by the Sicilians, by the Order of Peter III. King of Arragon, who had married the Daughter of Manfred. During this Interval, this Crown had been offered to Richard, Earl of Cornwal; (Brother to Henry III. King of England) and he refused it. From thence∣forward it became inseparably united to the Kingdom of Naples, and has ever since had the same fate to this day, being governed by a Vice-Roy, who resides at Palermo the present capital City of it. Hoffman saith, the Saracens were possessed of Palermo; had their Admiral, (or General) there, from 827. to 1070: when they were finally expelled by the Nor∣mans, to whom Pope Nicolas granted this Island on that condition, in 1058. So that the Normans might perhaps expell the Greeks in 1042. and the Saracens in 1070. The Inhabitants forced the Spaniards in the year 1647. to recall all their Taxes. This Island enjoyeth three Archbishops Sees, Palermo, Messina, and Monreale; about six or seven Bishops Sees, and one University, Catania. Aetna is a known Moun∣tain here. Sicyon, an ancient ruined City of the Peloponne∣sus; of sufficient note in its time. The Turks have built Vasilica upon the Ruins of it. Sida, Side, a Maritime City of Pamphylia, in the Lesser Asia; upon the Mediterranean and the Borders of Isauria. Honoured formerly with an Archbishops See. In 385. a Council was celebrated at it under Amphilochius Bishop of Iconium. Now in a condition of ruine; and called diversly Scandalor, Candelohora, and Chirisonda. Sidon. See Seyde. Sidmouth, a Market and Sea-Town in Devonshire, in the Hundred of Budley; of good account, before its Port was choaked up with Sand. Siena, Sena, Saena, Senae, a City of Hetruria in I∣taly, of great antiquity; and a Roman Colony. Seated in the Borders of the Dukedom of Florence; thirty two Miles from that City to the South, and an hundred and seven from Rome to the North. This City; as Poly∣bius saith in his second Book, was built by the Gauls in the year of Rome 396. A. M. 3730. after the taking of Rome by Brennus, and from the Senones, (one of their tribes) took this Name. In the fall of the Roman Empire, it suffered very much from the Barbarous Nations; and is said to have been rebuilt by Charles Martel. The Inhabitants purchased their freedom of Rodolphus the Emperor, and managed the same with various succes∣ses till 1555: when it was taken by the Spaniard, and sold to the Duke of Florence in 1558. under whom it still is. In 1459. it was made an Archbishop's See under Pope Pius II. It was a flourishing University in 1386. but when founded is not known to me. Seve∣ral Popes (Alexander III. Pius II. Pius III. Alexan∣der VII.) and great Men have been Natives of this place: its greatest glory is S. Catherine of Siena, a Domini∣can, who persuaded Pope Gregory IX. to leave Avig∣non. She died in 1380. Canonized by Pope Pius II. in 1461. Sierra-Liona, a chain of Mountains upon the Frontiers of Nigritia and Guinee, in Africa; there∣fore placed sometimes in the one and sometimes in the other, by Writers. It gives name to the River Sier∣ra-Liona, and to a large African Kingdom, whither the English, French, Dutch and Porteguese traffick for Ivory, Ambergrease, Pepper, Crystal, Coral, pieces of Gold, &c. The English, for the security of their Commerce, built themselves a Fort upon the River Sierra-Liona; which in 1664 was lost to the Dutch. In 1607 the King of this Country with his Family and others received Christian Baptism of Father Barreira a Portuguese Jesuit of the Mission. The Portuguese cal∣led him Dom Philippe de Lion, in allusion to the name of his Kingdom. The present King is also a Christian; tho the greatest part of the People, Heathens. His Kingdom extends from Cape Verga to Cape Tagrin, and hath its name from the noise of the Sea against the Rocks, and the thunder from the Mountains of it re∣sembling the roaring of a Lion. Sierras-Nevadas, a Chain of Mountains in Ca∣stile d'Or, in South America; extended the space of forty Leagues, and accounted two in height: being, tho near the Line, in the hottest seasons always covered on the top with Snow; as it is intimated in its Name. Siga, a City of Mauritania Caesariensis in Afri∣ca, with a Port upon the Mediterranean, in the King∣dom of Algiers. It is an ancient City, and in Chri∣stian times has been a Bishop's See. Now called Hu∣main. A River of its own name, Siga, falls into the Me∣diterranean here. Sigan, a City of the Province of Xensi in China; which is the Capital over thirty five other Cities. Sige, and Sigeium Promontorium, an ancient E∣piscopal City of Troas, in Asia minor: ruined. For the Promontory see Janizzari. Sigeth, Salinae, Metuharis, a strong Town (the Head of a County of the same Name) in the lower Hungary, seated in a Marsh made by the River Alme; two Hungarian Miles from the Drave, seven from Al∣ba Regalis to the South, and five from Quinque Ec∣clesiae to the West. It has a very strong Castle, forti∣fied with three Ditches and as many Walls: which, ad∣ded to the situation of it, make it very considerable.
Solyman the Magnificent ended his Life at Quinque Ec∣clesiae during the Siege of this place; which was yielded to the Turks September 7. 1566, after a Defence that wanted nothing but Success to have rendered it the most celebrated that has happened: Nicolas Esdrin, Count of Serini, (Governour of it) being slain in the last Sally, which he made at the head of his remaining Forces. It is now in the Emperor's hands by re-con∣quest: surrendred January 15, 1688. The Imperia∣lists found therein eighty five pieces of Cannon § There is another Town of the same Name in the Ʋpper Hun∣gary; near the Fountains of the Tibiscus, in the Prin∣cipality of Transylvania. Sign, a Venetian Garrison in Dalmatia, besieged by the Turks twenty four days, in 1687: and re∣lieved by the Forces of the Republick under General Cornaro. Silaro, Silarus, a River in the Kingdom of Naples, in former times the Boundary of Lucania; and now often called il Selo, and il Silaro. It ariseth in the Hi∣ther Principate from the Apennine; and falls into the Bay of Salerno, eighteen Miles from that City to the East. Il Sile, Silis, a River in the States of Venice; which watereth the City of Treviso, and then falls into the Adriatick Sea. Silesia, a great Province in the Kingdom of Bo∣hemia; called by the Inhabitants, Slisko; by the Poles, Slusko; by the Germans, Schlesien. Bounded on the East by Poland; on the North by the Marquisate of Brandenburgh; on the West with Lusatia and Bohe∣mia, properly so called; on the South with Moravia, and the Ʋpper Hungary. It was for eight hundred and sixty years a part of Poland: and revolted from that Crown under Ʋladislaus Loch, King of Poland, in 1327. In the fifteenth Century, this Country ge∣nerally imbraced the Doctrines of John Hus: which were tolerated by Rhodolphus II. in 1609. It had at first several Princes of Royal and Sovereign Jurisdictions in their several Principalities; which together with the Piastean Family, ended in the Person of George Wil∣liam, in 1675: whereupon that Country returned en∣tirely to the Emperor, as King of Bohemia; having been above three hundred years ago united to the King∣dom of Bohemia. The Principal Cities and Towns in this Province are, Brieg, Crossen, Glogaw, Grotkaw, Jawer, Lignitz, Monsterberg, Olss, Troppaw, Oppelen, Ratibor, Sagan, Schweidnitz, Volaw, and Breslaw, which is the Capital City of this Country. It is divided into the Ʋpper and Lower Silesia. The Isles of Silly, Silurum Insulae, Casiterides, a knot of Islands in the Vergivian Ocean; to the West of the Land's end of Cornwal; an hundred and twen∣ty Miles South of the Coast in Ireland, sixty from the Land's end, and an hundred and forty from Cape S. Mahe in Britagne. The French call them the Sorlin∣gues. They are and ever have been under the Crown of England: in all above an hundred and forty five; all clad with Grass or green Moss. The greatest of them is S. Mary, which has a Town and Harbor of the same Name. Where Queen Elizabeth, in 1593, built a Castle to defend it from the Spaniards; and fixed a Garrison in it. King Athelstane was the first of the Saxon Kings that conquered them. See Cambden. Simmeren, a Town and County in the Palatinate of the Rhine in Germany. The Town hath a Castle belonging to it. Simois, a small River of Troas in Phrygia, in the Lesser Asia. It arileth out of Mount Ida, and joining with the Scamander, falls into the Archipelago toge∣ther with it near Cape Janizari, at the entrance into the Streights of Gallipoli. Sin, Sina, a City in the Kingdom of China, in the Province of Choquang; seated at the foot of a Moun∣tain. § Also a Desart, betwixt the Mountains Elim and Sinai, in Arabia: whither the Israelites, in their March, came the fifteenth day after their departure from Egypt; and murmuring for hunger, were relieved by an extraordinary Rain of Quails and Manna, Exod. 16. 4. 13. Sinai, a part of the Mountain Horeb, upon the Coast of the Red Sea, in the Stony Arabia: separated by a large Valley from the Mountain of S. Catherine. It hath at some distance from its foot a Spring of good Water: and upon the top two Grotto's in Rocks, at this day said to be the place where Moses received the Ta¦bles of the Law, and where he passed his forty days fast. It is now wholly covered with a Multitude of Chappels, Convents, Cells and Gardens; possessed by some La∣tin, amongst a crowd of Greek Christians, who, e∣ver since the third Century, have been planting their solitary Settlements here: So that in the former Chri∣stian times, this Mountain with Horeb had as many Chappels upon it as employed fourteen thousand Her∣mits to serve them; but the Turks have reduced that number since. The Israelites lay encamped a whole year about this Mountain. Singara, an ancient City in Mesopotamia, near a Mountain of the same Name; now said to be called A∣talis. It saw a severe Battel betwixt the Armies of the Emperour Constantius and Sapores II. King of Persia, in 349. Singen, two Villages upon Rocks, almost inacces∣sible, within a quarter of a Mile from one another in the Dukedom of Wirtemburgh, in Schwaben in Ger∣many: near the Castle of Hoentwiel. Sinopi, Sinope, a celebrated City of Paphlagonia, in the Lesser Asia, upon the Euxine Sea; which is a Bishop's See, under the Archbishop of Amisum. Seat∣ed upon a small River of the same Name, having two Harbors. Built by Macritius, a Coan, about the year of Rome 125: and fell not into the Romans hands, till they had conquered Mithridates, who had a Palace here. After this it became a Colony. In later times subject to its own Bishop, from whom it was ravished by the Turks, who call it Sinabe: It has had yet the good for∣tune to preserve it self in a tolerable State under those devouring Enemies of Mankind. Long. 64. 00. Lat. 45. 00. Valerius Flaccus intimates its ancient Splen∣dor, where he says, Assyrios complexa sinus stat opima Sinope. Diogenes the Cynick Philosopher, was its Native. Sinuessa, an antient Roman Colony in the Cam∣pagna di Roma in Italy: which Ptolemy calls Soessa, and Livy Synope. It became afterwards a Bishop's See. but is now ruined; and Rocca di Mondragone is built in the place of it. Baronius refers the Council in 30, that was held in the affair of P. Marcellinus, to this City. Sion, Sèdunum, a City ascribed by Pliny to Gal∣lia Narbonensis; now the Capital of Valais; and called by the Germans, Sitten. It is a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Moutiers en Tarontaise; in a pleasant Plain, having only one Hill on the East side; on which stand three Castles; in one of them the Bishop resides. There is a small River runs by it, called Sitta, which after falls into the Rhosne. It stands fifteen Miles from Bearne to the South, and fif∣ty five from Geneva to the East. The Bishop is the Sovereign of the City, Earl of Valais, and a Prince of the Empire: who for his security is Leagued with the Seven Catholick Cantons of the Swiss; the Pre∣tensions of the Duke of Savoy to his Country having formerly occasioned long and bloody Wars. The See did reside at Martigny in Chablais, till the ruine of that Place; and then it came to be translated hither. Charles the Great, about the year 802, bestowed these great Privileges upon this See. Sion, a Mountain and Cittadel in the ancient Je∣rusalem, on which a part of that City was built. The
Knights of the Teutonick Order bore the name here∣tofore, of the Order of our Lady of Mount Sion. Sior, Siorium, a City in Asia; the Capital of the Province of Semgad and Kingdom of Corea, a Tri∣butary Prince to the Kingdom of China. It is seat∣ed sixty Leagues from the Southern Borders of that Kingdom, upon a great River: as Henry Hamel van Gorcum a Dutchman saith, who lately published his Travels in this Kingdom. This Kingdom lies to the North-East of China; in a great Peninsula, toward Japan, and the Streights of Anian. Sipbntum, an old Roman Town in the Province called Capuanata, in the Kingdom of Naples: whose Ruines yet appear at the soot of Mount Gargano, two Miles from Manfredonia. It had the honour to be made an Archbishop's See: but being by the Saracens in the eighth Century, Earthquakes, and other Misfortunes, destroyed; the See was removed to Manfredonia. The Antients mention it under the several names of Sypus, Sepius, Sepus, Sipontum, and Sepuntum. The Gulph upon the Adriatick Sea near to it, took and retains its name. Sirad, Sirackz, Siradia, a City in the Greater Poland, which is the Capital of a Palatinate of the same name. It stands upon the River Warta; six Miles from Vielun to the North, twenty from Breslo to the East, and forty five from Warsaw to the West. Sirmish, Sirmich or Zirmach, Sirmis, Sermium, Sirmium, a City of the Lower Panno∣nia, in which Probus the Emperor was born. Now called Szreim by the Natives, and Sirmish by the Germans: a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Colocza; and the Capital of a County, called by its Name, in Sclavonia. It lies between the Danube to the East, the Save to the South, Walcowar to the North, and Possega to the South. This City stands fourteen German Miles from Belgrade to the West, about two from the Save to the North, and from Esseck to the South, at the soot of Mount Almus. Now by the Turks reduced to a mere Village; for∣merly famous for two Arian Councils held under Constantius the Emperor; one in 351. the other in 357. Socrat. l. 2. c. 25. Long. 43. 05. Lat. 45. 24. Photinus was then Bishop of the Place, whom they deposed for a Sabellian. In one, they omitted the Word Consubstantial; in the other, they forbad both the Word and the Thing. Le Siron, Sirio, Serio, a River of Aquitain in France. Situs, or Sidrocapsa, a City of Macedonia, fa∣mous for its Silver Mines: and a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Thessalonica; from which it stands fifty five Miles to the East, towards Mount Athos. Called in the latter Maps, Sidrocapse; but by Leun∣clavius, Sirus. Sisseg, Siscia, an ancient City of Pannonia; and a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Colocza. Now a Village in Croatia, with a Monastery seated upon the Save, and the Colaps; in the Borders of Sclavo∣nia: two Miles from Zagrab, (or Agram,) which has robbed it of the Bishops See. Under the Em∣peror. Sisteron, Segstero, Segesteriorum Ʋrbs, Sistari∣ca, an ancient City of Gallia Nabonensis; now a Bishops See in the Province of Provence in France: great and populous: built upon the River Durance, (where it receives the Buech) in the Borders of Dau∣phiné: twenty four Leagues from Orange to the East, twenty six from Grenoble to the South, and from Marseilles to the North-East. Sittaw, or Zitaw, Setuja, a City of Germany in Lusatia. Sitten. See Sion, a City in Valais. Sittia, Cytaeum, a City at the North-end of the Isle of Candy, called Setia (and Sitia;) which is a Bishops See: small, but very strong: seated in a Pe∣ninsula, and for the most part surrounded by the See: it has a noble, large, safe Haven; the Capital of a County, and one of the four Cities of that Island; but in Slavery under the Turks. Siucheu, a Territory in the Province of Nanquin in China. Sixenne, a Village upon the Borders of the Kingdom of Arragon in Spain: famous for a Priory of the Order of S. John of Jerusalem, sounded about the year 1188. by Queen Sancha of Castile, Wise to Alphonsus II. King of Arragon, sirnamed the Chaste: who after the Death of her Husband, took the Habit her self in this House, and divers Princesses with her. She endowed it with large Revenues, and a very considerable Jurisdiction: to the Benefices and Cures whereof the Prioress at this day nominates, and hath a Voice and Seat in the Provincial Chapter of Arra∣gon. The House is walled like a Fortress, with a Noble Palace in it, for the Residence of the Prio∣ress; who attains to her Dignity, by the Election of the Religious. They bear the name also of the La∣dies of Malta; as owing Fidelity and Obedience by Oath to the Great Master of the Knights of Malta: from which, though they substracted about the year 1470. to put themselves immediately under the Pope; Yet in 1569. they returned again to it, fearing o∣therwise to fall under the Spiritual Jurisdiction of the Bishop of Lerida. The persons admitted must make proof of their quality, as Ladies. They wear a large Cross in white Silk upon their Breasts; and in time of Office, bear in their hands a Silver Scepter, as the Badges of their Order. Skeningrave, a small Sea-Town in the North Riding of Yorkshire; West from Mulgrave Castle. The Seal-Fish appear in great Shoals about the Rocks here. Skipton, a Market Town in the West Riding of Yorkshire, in the Hundred of Staincliff, and the Tract of Craven: upon a Stream, falling into the River Are. Skofde, Skofda, a small City in Westrogothia in Sweden. Skye, Skia, an Island on the West of Scotland; fifty Miles in length from East to West. It lies about three Miles from the Shoars of Rosse to the West; and has never a Town or City of Note. Sladitza, Osmus, a River of Bulgaria. The Sleeve, the Sea between France and En∣gland: or the Streights of Calais. Slawkow, Slaukovia, a City in Bohemia in Mo∣ravia; called by the Germans Austerlitz: it stands five Miles from Olmitz to the South. Sleaford, a large, well inhabited Market Town in Lincolnshire, in the Hundred of Flaxwell; near the Head of a Stream of its own name, falling into the Witham. It shews the ruined Walls of a Castle, which it had in former times. Slego, Slegum, a Town and County in Conaught in Ireland, on the Western Shoar. Sleswick, Slesvicum, a City of Denmark; here∣tofore called Hedeba and Slietory. It is a Bishops See under the Archbishop of Lunden, and the Capital of a Dutchy of the same Name: seated upon the River Sleie, (which falls into the Baltick Sea) four German Miles from the Mouth of that River to the West; between Flensburg to the North, and Rens∣burg to the South; sixteen Miles from Lubeck and Hamburg to the North. Its Bishoprick was instituted in 948. by Harald Blatland; and extinguished in 1556. by Frederick II. King of Denmark. Once an Imperial and Free City, but now exempt and un∣der
the Duke of Holstein Gotthorp. Long. 32. 45. Lat. 54. 55. The Dukedom of Sleswick, Slesvicensis Duca∣tus, is a part of the Cimbrica Chersonesus; some∣times called South Jutland. On the East it is boun∣ded by the Baltick Sea, on the South by Holstein, on the West by the German Ocean, and on the North by Jutland. John Buno denies it to be any part of Holstein or Germany: but saith, it is a Fife of the Crown of Denmark. Lotharius the Emperor created Canutus (Duke of S'eswick) King of the Van∣dals, in 1130. Christian Son of Theodorick Oldem∣burg (King of Denmark) united this and Holstein to the Crown of Denmark, in 1566. Christian IV. granted it to the Duke of Holstein, in 1589. but as a Feudatary and Subject of the Crown of Denmark. By the Treaty of Roschild, in 1658. this Dukedom was declared a Sovereign State by the Procurement of the Swedes: the Affairs of Denmark requiring then a Compliance with the Demands of that Victorious Nation. But the Crown of Denmark taking the ad∣vantage of better times, forced this Duke to become a Subject of Denmark again; by a Treaty made at Flensburg, in 1675. which last Treaty has been en∣deavoured to be rescinded, and that of Roschild confir∣med by the Swedes, and other of the Northern Princes. Slonim, Slonima, a small City in Lithuania, in the Palatinate of Novogrod; eight Polish Miles from that City to the South, upon the River Sezura. Sluczk, Slucum, a Town in Lithuania, honoured with the Title of a Dukedom: great and populous, but for the most part built only of Timber, upon a River of its own name. It stands in the Palatinate of No∣vogrod, fifteen Polish Miles North from the Borders of Polesia. Constantine Duke of Ostrog, (in the Reign of Sigismund I King of Poland) defeated three great Armies of the Tartars, in a Fight of three days con∣tinuance near this place. Sluys, Slusa, Clausulae, a small, but very strong Town in Elanders; about one League from the O∣cean, four from Midleburg to the South-East, and three from Bruges. Taken by the Dutch in 1604. from the Spaniards; and ever since in their hands. Smaland, Smalandia, a County of Gothland un∣der the Swedes; between Westrogothia to the West, Bleking to the South, the Baltick Sea to the East, and Ostrogothia to the North. The principal Places in it are Calmar, Jonckoping and Wexsio. Smalkalde, Smalcalda, a City in Franconia in Germany, in the County of Henneneberg, under the Duke of Hess-Cassel: not above one German Mile from the River Werra, four from Isenach, and six from Erford to the North-West. Particularly regar∣dable on the account of a League made and confirmed here by the Protestant Princes, in the years succes∣sively, 1530. 1531. 1535. and 1537. against Charles V. Wherein, besides thirty Lutheran Cities which had embraced the Confession of Ausbourgh, the Kings of Sweden and Denmark, the Dukes of Brunswick, Po∣merania and Wirtembourgh, the young Marquess of Brandenbourgh, the Elector of Saxony, Landt∣grave of Hesse and other Princes, by times, engaged: and whereas the Pope had convocated (what they desired) a free Council at Mantoua, these in their Assembly in 1537. (whereat Luther and Melancthon assisted), answered. They would never consent to a Council out of Germany. In 1547. Charles V. dissi∣pated all the Forces of this League in one Campaign; taking the Elector of Saxony, and the Landtgrave of Hesse Prisoners. But in 1552. having recruited them∣selves again, they obliged Charles V. to conclude the Peace of Passaw, whereby Lütheranism was authori∣tatively established in Germany. Smolensko, Smolentum, one of the principal Ci∣ties of Poland, and the Capital of a Palatinate. It stands upon the Borysthenes in White Russia in Li∣thuania, near the Borders of Muscovy. Great and very strong, surrounded by a Wall eight Cubits broad at the top, strengthened by fifty two great Towers, and a very strong Castle. It contains about eight thousand Houses and was once much greater: subject at first to a Russian Duke, who was the Sovereign of it; but conquered by Vitondus Duke of Lithuania, in 1403. Casimirus II. King of Poland subjected it to that Crown, in 1452. The Russ took it in 1514. The Poles after many other fruitless attempts, recove∣red it again under Sigismund III. in 1611. after a Siege of two years. The Russ besieged it in 1616. and in 1633. to their great loss: Being the last time, after a years besieging of it, defeated by Ʋladislaus IV. King of Poland; who obtained from the Pope the settle∣ment of a Bishops See in it. In 1654. it was taken by them, October 13. under whom it now is: and by a Treaty in 1656. yielded to the Russ. It lies one hun∣dred and fifty Polish Miles from Vilna to the East, and the same distance from Kiovia to the North. Smyrna, a City of Ionia in the Lesser Asia, of great Antiquity, as laying claim to the Birth of Ho∣mer. The Turks call it Ismyrna. It is an Archbi∣shops See; great, rich, and populous; the Seat of a Turkish Sangiack: built partly on an Hill, partly in a Plain, in the form of an Amphiathere; upon the River Mele: having a large and secure Haven, upon a Gulph of the Archipelago, to which it gives name: very much frequented by the English and Dutch Merchants; to whom alone the present Greatness and Wealth of it is owing. The ancient Greeks and Per∣sians went often to War about it. Taken by the Ve∣netians, in 1344. from the Turks; and not retaken till 1428. This was one of the Seven Churches menti∣oned in the Revelations; and almost the only one that is in a tolerable condition. See Mr. Wheeler's Travels, pag. 240. Long. 55. 30. Lat. 39. 28. An Earthquake and a Fire conspired the same day to do mischief to this City, June 13. 1688. They reckon in it, besides the Northern Merchants, about sixteen thousand Turks, fifteen thousand Greeks, eight thou∣sand Armenians, six or seven thousand Jews. The Turks have fifteen Mosques for their Religion; the Jews seven Synagogues; the Latin Christians three Churches; the Greeks two; and the Armenians one. There is a Convent of French Capuchines; with some French Jesuits, and Italian Cordelieres. Each fo∣reign Nation keeps a Consul here for Commerce: which consists in Persian Silks, Turkey Leather, Ca∣melets, Tapistry, &c. Some curious Ruins of its an∣cient Magnificent Buildings are yet extant; of which, and of its Noble Statues, many have been thence transported by the English. It was heretofore much greater than now. The Summer Season would be in∣supportably hot, but for a refreshing Air from the Sea, which rises ordinarily about ten in the Morning, and blows till Night. Provisions are cheap in it. The Turks govern it, not by a Bassa, but a Cady, a Civil Officer; who uses the Christians obligir gly. Snath, a Market Town in the West Riding of Yorkshire, in the Hundred of Osgodcross: adjoined by the Tract of Marshland. Snetham, or Snetsham, a Market Town in the County of Norfolk, and the Hundred of Smethden: seated upon a Rivulet, not far from the Sea. Soana, Suana, a small City in the Territory of Siena; which is a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Siena. It stands upon a very high Hill, near the River La Flore; in the Borders of the States of the Chürch; forty eight Miles from Siena to the North-East. In a declining State, and wasted almost to a Village. Long. 34. 46. Lat. 42. 11. Pope Gre∣gory
VII. was born here. In 1626. a Synod was held here also. Sobrarbe, a Tract in Arragon towards the Pyre∣nean Hills, and Catalonia. Honoured formerly with the Title of a Kingdom. Soconusco, a Province in New Spain, in South America, lying along the Pacifick Ocean. Soczow. See Suchzow. Sodom, the Capital of the five miserable Cities of the Plain, in Palestine; called in one name Penta∣polis: whose destruction by Fire from Heaven, (ac∣cording to the History of the Old Testament, Gen. 19) or by an Earthquake vomiting forth a Lake of Sub∣terraneous Sulphur and Brimstone, according to Stra∣bo, (who advances the number of these Cities to thirteen,) became a Proverb to the World. Sodore, Sodera, an ancient decayed City, in the Island of Cholmkill, on the West of Scotland; and a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Glasco: in which place, there are interred forty eight Kings of Scotland, four Kings of Ireland, and eight Kings of Norway. The Abbey here was built by S. Columbus, the Great Apostle of the Northern Nations; and from this place, the Bishop of the Isle of Man is stiled So∣dorensis in Latin. Soest, Susatum, a City in the Circle of Westpha∣lia in Germany, in the County of Mark; called by the French Soust. Once an Imperial Free City, but now subject to the Elector of Brandenburg, as Earl of Mark: Taken by the French in 1673. and after∣wards deserted. This City, in more ancient times was granted by Frederick I. to the Archbishop of Co∣logne; but being too much oppressed by them, it put it self under the Protection of the Counts of Mark: and this in time turned to a Sovereignty; but it has some remains of its ancient Liberty. It stands seven German Miles from Paderborne West; and Munster South; and four from Ham to the East. Sofala, Zofala, a Kingdom in the Lower Aethi∣opia in Africa, in the Country of Cafraria; towards the Ethiopick Ocean; in an Island in the Mouth of the River Zambez, in the Borders of Zanguebaria; which takes its name from Sofala, a strong City un∣der the Portuguese; one hundred and fifty Miles from Zanguebar, and three hundred and forty from Mo∣sambique. Fifty Miles West of this City, there are rich Mines of Gold, called the Mines of Manica, from which the Portuguese raise a vast Revenue. Some have therefore believed Sophala to be the Ophir of King Solomon; confirming their conjecture by the Septuagint's Translation of Ophir into , which by an ordinary change of r into l, makes Zo∣pheila or Sofala; together with this, that the people of Sofala pretend to prove from their own Books, that the Jews in Solomon's time voyaged to those Coasts from three year to three year, to buy Gold: and the Country shews several Buildings and ancient Inscriptions in unknown Characters, which must be understood to be the Works of Strangers. See Ophir. The Portuguese call the King of Monomotapa the Emperour of Gold, from these and other Mines in his Dominions. For Sofala is contained in Monomo∣tapa. Sofia, Sophia, the Capital City of Bulgaria, cal∣led by the Turks Triadizza; which is an Archbishops See, anciently called Sardica; seated upon the River Boiana; at an equal distance from the Borders of Thrace East, Servia West, and Macedonia South; being now a great populous City, and the Seat of the Turkish Governour: but it has no Walls, nor other Fortifications; Hoffman calls the River, Cia∣brum. In this place was the greatest General Coun∣cil of the Ancients held that ever met, in 347. In which, the Nicene Council by the Arts of Constan∣tius was condemned. It stands three hundred Miles from Constantinople to the West, one hundred from Thessalonica to the North, and two hundred and fifty from Belgrade to the South, in the Road to Con∣stantinople. Long. 51. 00. Lat. 42. 43. Sogdiana, a large Region of the ancient Asia: be∣twixt the Two Scythia's, Margiana, Bactriana, and the Caspian Sea: now answering to the Province of Mawralnaher, or Maurenhaer in the Asiatick Tar∣tary; North-East of Persia. Soisons, Suessiones, Suessia, Civitas Augusta Sues∣sionum, an ancient Roman City in the Isle of France; which is a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Reims; and the Capital of a County called Le Soissonnois. A great, fine, strong City; seated upon the River Aisne, which divides it; five Leagues from the Confines of Picardy; eleven from Reims to the West, and twenty two from Paris. Pepin was first proclaimed King of France in this City, in 752. Sois∣sonnois the District belonging to it, was hereto∣fore a part of Picardy: it lies between Reims to the East, Picardy to the North, Valois to the West, and Le Brie to the South. It took this name from the Suessones, an old Gallick Tribe, which inhabited it before the Roman Conquest. Honoured for many Ages with the Title of an Earldom. The City hath six Abbeys in it, besides Churches and divers Ecclesi∣astical and Religious Houses. In 853. a Council was assembled at it in the presence of Charles the Bald, King of France. Solane, Solana, a small River in Aquitain in France; which in the Province of Limosine falls in∣to the Courezze by the City of Tulle. Solao, Salaca, a Province of the Higher Aethi∣opia, near the River Tacaz; between the Kingdom of Bagamidra to the South, and the Province of Ar∣bagela to the North. Soldin, the same with Seleusia Pieria, a City of Syria. Soleurre, Salodurum, Salodorum, a City of Swit∣zerland; which is the Capital of a Canton called by its name. The Natives call it Soleurre, the Germans Solothurn, the Italians Soloduro: It stands upon the River Arola; seven Miles from Basil to the South, and from Friburg to the North; and five from Berne to the same. The Canton is the eleventh in the number; small, and Roman Catholick. Solfarin, a small Seigniory or Lordship in Man∣toua. Solms, Solmia, a County in Germany, which has its Name from a ruined Town on the River Lohne. It lies extended from North to South, part in Wester∣waldt, and part in Weteraw; between Hassia to the East, and Treves to the West; under its own Count, whose Residence is in the Castle of Bruns∣feld. Soloe, or Soli, the Birth-place of the ancient Greek Poet Aratus. This City is a Bishops See under the Archbishop of Seleucia. It stands in Cilicia, in Asia Minor; and took for some time the name of Pompeiopolis, from its re-establishment by Pompey the Great. Pliny mentions it upon the account of a Foun∣tain it anciently had of an extraordinary quality. Now called Palesoli. Sologne, Solonia, Sicalonia, a small Province un∣der the Prefecture of Orleans: by Latin Writers also called Secalonia, Sigalonia, Siligonta and Sabulonia, being a Sandy Country; & particularly fruitful in Wheat and Rice. It lies between the Provinces of Orleans, Berry, and Blaisois; but its proper Limits are lost. The principal Town in it, is Romorentin; eight Leagues from Bois South, and fourteen from Bourges North.
The Islands of Solomon, a Mass of great Islands in the Pacifick Sea, towards New Zelandt: discove∣red by Alvarez Mendoza in 1567. but little frequen∣ted by the Europeans. The names of some of them, are S. George, S. Mark, S. Nicholas, S. Anne, S. Ca∣therine, the Three Maries, S. James, S. Christopher, S. Jerome, &c. Solothurn. See Soleure. Solpe, a City and Bishop's See in the Province cal∣led Capitanota. in the Kingdom of Naples. Solsona, a City in Catalonia in Spain: which is a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Tarragona; made such in 1593. by Pope Clement VIII. It stands upon the River Cordoner, at the foot of the Mountains; about three Leagues from Cardona to the North. A small ill peopled Place, though it has been fortified by the French. Soltwedel, Heliopolis, Solvedelia, a City in the ancient Marquisate of Brandenburg, upon the River Jetz; eight German Miles from Ʋlcan to the East, and ten from Havelburg. The Inhabitants report, it was built by Charles the Great; after he had de∣stroyed a Statue of the Sun, which was worshipped in this Place. Solwey Fryth, Ituna, an Arm of the Irish Sea, which parts England from Scotland. Somersetshire, Belgae, Durotriges, Somersetia, is a rich, populous, and fruitful County in the West of England. Bounded on the North by the Severne Sea, and Glocestershire cut off by the Severne; on East by Wiltshire, on the South by Dorsetshire, and part of Devonshire; on the West by Devon∣shire and the Irish Sea. It contains in length from East to West fifty Miles, in breadth for∣ty, in circuit two hundred and four; wherein lie three hundred eighty five Parishes, and thirty Market Towns. The Air is mild and gentle in the Summer: the Roads are extremely miry and deep in the Winter; which is recompenced by the Fertility of the Soil, yielding Corn and Grass in great plenty; nor is it de∣stitute of Mines of Lead. Whence comes the usual Proverb here, What is worse for the Rider, is best for the Abider. These Mines are found particularly in Mendip-Hills. It has also a Rock called S. Vin¦cent's Rock; where are found great plenty of Dia∣monds, equal to those of India in their Lustre; but not in hardness. It has three Noble Cities, Bristol, Bath, and Wells: all which are discoursed of in their proper places. The Rivers Parret, Tor, Tone, Frome and others water it, besides the Severne's Mouth. The first Earl of this County was William de Mohun, crea∣ted in 1138. The second, Willam Long-Espee, Base Son to Henry II. in 1197. The third, Reginald de Mohun, in 1296. The fourth, John de Beauford, in 1396. In which Family it continued till 1471. in six Descents. The tenth was Edmond (third Son of Henry VI.) in 1496. The eleventh, Henry Fitz Roy a Base Son of Henry VIII. The twelfth, Edward Seymor, (Lord Protector of Edward VI.) created Duke in 1546. beheaded in 1552. The thirteenth, was William Carre in 1614. The fourteenth, Wil∣liam Seymor, Marquess of Hartford; restored to his Great-Grand father's Title of Duke of Somerset, by Charles II. in 1660. since which time, there have been five Descents in this Family. Somerton, a Market Town in Somersetshire. The Capital of its Hundred: of great consideration heretosore, when it is said to have given Name to its County. Somme, or Some, Phrudis, Somona, Samara, a River in Picardy in France; which ariseth in a place called Fon Somme in Vermandois; two Leagues from S. Quintin to the West; and running West, watereth Han, Peronne, Corbie, Amiens, Abbeville and S. Va∣lery, where it falls into the British Sea, twelve French Leagues South of Boulogne, over against Rye in Sussex; having divided Picardy into two parts. Sommiers, Sommeria, a small City in the Lower Languedoc, upon the River Vidole; four Leagues from Mompellier to the South-East, and the same di∣stance from Nismes. Once a fortified City. Songo, a City of the Kingdom of Madingua, in the division of Nigritia, in Africa. Sonneburg, one of the chief Towns in the Island of Oesel in the Baltick Sea. Sonnemberg, a Town in the Marquisate of Bran∣denburgh in Germany, near Poland, to the East. Sor, or Soro, a River in the Kingdom of Portu∣gal, which divides Alentejo from Extremadura; and falls into the Taio at Salvaterra▪ nine Miles above Lisbone. Sora, a City of Latium, upon the River Garig∣liano; now a Bishops See in the Kingdom of Naples, in the Terra di Lavoro; which is under no Archbi∣shop. It has a splendid Castle: honoured with the Title of a Dukedom, belonging to the Family di Boncompagno; and slands fifty five Miles from Rome to the East, and ten from the Lake di Celano (Fuci∣nus) to the South. § This is also the name of a City in the Island of Scelandt, in the Baltick Sea, be∣longing to Denmark: which has an University in it, founded by Frederick II. and re-established by Chri∣stian IV. Kings of Denmark. Soracte, a Mountain in the Dukedom of Tuscany in Italy: consecrated to Apollo in the Heathen Ages there. It is now called Monte di S. Silvestre. Soratoff, Soratovia, a City in the Kingdom of Astracan, upon the Wolga; in the middle between Casan to the North, and Astracan to the South: Lat. 52. 12. in a great Plain. The Inhabitants are all Mus∣covites. See Olearius, Pag. 162. Soraw, Sorava, a small City in Lusatia; the Capital of the Lower part of that Province, and under the Elector of Saxony. It stands in the Borders of Silesia; two German Miles from Sagan to the West, and five from Crossen to the South; often taken and retaken in the Swedish War. Sorge, Sorgue, Orge, Sorge, Sulga, Sulgas, a Ri∣ver of Gallia Narbonensis; which ariseth in the Coun∣ty of Vendosmois in Provence, and falls into the Rhosne above Avignon, but very near it; at a Town called Pont-Sorge. Soria, Syria. Soria, Numantia Nova, Soria, a City of New Castile; not above one League beneath the Ruins of the ancient and celebrated Numantia: seated in the Mountains, well peopled, and having belonging to it a very large Jurisdiction. It stands twelve Leagues from Baubula to the South-West, and eight from Ta∣razona to the North-West. Soritae, an ancient people, mentioned by Pliny, as neighbouring upon India; and living altogether upon Fish. Sorlings. See Silly-Islands. Sorrento, Sorriento, Surrentum, Surentum, a City in the Kingdom of Naples; which is an Achbishops See in the Terra di Lavoro, on the Bay of the Hi∣ther Principato; twenty four Miles from Naples to the South. It is seated in a fruitful Plain; and though very ancient, (being mentioned by Pliny and Livy) yet in a good Estate. Long. 38. 20. Lat. 40 33. Sosteropolis, Soteropolis, a ruined small City, which stood near Nicomedia in Bithynia, in Asia Minor: where according to Zoneras, died Constan∣tine the Great of Poyson. Soubiac, or Sublac, a small Town in Campagna di Roma, in the Dominions of the Pope. It stands
upon the River Teverone: and is noted for an Abbey of the Order of S. Benedict, who did himself choose a Retreat here. Souilly, or Seulley, a Town in the Dukedom de Bar in Lorain. Soul, Sous, a Kingdom in the East part of Bile∣dulgerid in Africa; under the King of Marocco. Soule, a Territory in the Pais des Basques in France: Honoured with the Title of a Viscounty. The chief Town in it, is Mauleon de Soule. Soumel, a Town in the Kingdom of Bengale, in the Empire of the Great Mogul, towards the Ganges. The Sound. See Sund. Sour. See Tyre. Soure, Sura, a River in the Dukedom of Luxem∣burg; called by the Germans▪ Saur, by the French Soure. It ariseth near Bastoigne; eight Leagues from Luxemburg; and being increased with some smaller Rivers, watereth Dietkirch: beneath which, it re∣ceivs the Ʋr from Viande to the North; then passeth to Echternach and Wasser-bilch; where it falls into the Moselle two Leagues above Trier to the South. Souri, a Province of Turcomania, in the Lesser Asia. Sourie, the same with Zurich. Souriquois, a Tribe of the unconquered Sal∣vages of New France, in North America. Souristan, the same with Syria. Sousos, a people of Nigritia in Africa. Souster, Susa, the Capital of Chusistan in the Kingdom of Persia; one hundred and eighty Miles from Bagdad to the East; now in a flourishing State. Southampton, Clausentum, Antonia, Magnus Portus, Trisantonum Portus, a small City in the County of Hamshire, seated on the West side of the River Anton, or Hampton, (which comes from Win∣chester, and here falls into the great Bay of South∣hampton;) ten Miles from Winchester to the South. This was a Roman Fort called Clausentum, and ruined by the Danes in 980. Also plundered and burnt by the French under Edward III. and rebuilt in the Reign of Richard. It is a strong, rich, populous, well traded City; fenced with a double Ditch, strong Walls, and many Turrets; for the Defence of the Haven, it has a strong Castle built by Richard II. The Haven is capable of Ships of good Burthen, up to the Key: and lies opposite to Jernsey, Garnsey, and Normandy. There are now five Parish Churches in this City. Henry VI. granted it a Mayor, and made it a County, in 1067. Beauvois of Southampton (that ce∣lebrated Warriour) was its first Secular Earl, in 1538. (The Bishops of Winchester being before reputed to be Earls of Southampton; and so styled in the Statutes of the Garter made by Henry VIII.) Willam Fitz Wil∣liam Lord Admiral, in 1547. Thomas Wriothsley (Lord Chancellour) was created the third Earl by Edward VI. to whom succeeded three of his Poste∣rity. The last died in 1667. In 1675. Charles II. created Charles Fits Roy (eldest Son to the Duchess of Cleaveland) Baron of Newbery, Earl of Chicester, and Duke of Southampton. Southwark, a large Borough in the County of Surrey, and the Hundred of Brixton; opposite to London, on the other side of the Thames; and under the Jurisdiction of the Lord Mayor of London; yet enjoying several ancient Privileges peculiarly to it self, and represented in the Lower House of Parliament by its own Burgesses. In the number of Inhabitants and Buildings, it exceeds most Cities; notwithstanding its Losses by many great Fires. S. Thomas's Hospital, founded by the Citizens of London, stands here. Southwell, a Market Town in Nottinghamshire, in the Hundred of Thurgarton, of good Antiquity: upon a Rivulet, falling not far off into the Tren: Adorned with a Collegiate Church. Southwould, Sowold or Swold, a small Corpora∣tion and Sea-Port Town in the County of Suffolk; famous for the many Rendezvouzes of the English Fleets, when ever we have had any Wars with the Hollanders: especially for two great Naval Victories obtained against them in the Bay of this Town; the first, June 3, 1663. the second, May 28. 1672. Both under the Conduct of King James II. as Lord Admi∣ral of England, under his Brother Charles II. of Bles∣sed and Pious Memory. It is a strong and pleasant Town in the Hundred of Blithing, upon a Cliff; with the Sea to the East, the River Blithe (over which there is a Draw-Bridge) to the West, and a Bay of its own name to the South, called Swold's Bay; made by the shooting forth chiefly of Easton Ness, the most Eastern Point of England. The Cliff hath several Pieces of Ordinance, planted up∣on it. Sowe, the River upon which Stafford is situ∣ated. Sowtham, a Market Town in Warwickshire, in the Hundred of Knightlow. Spa, a small Town in the Bishoprick of Liege, in the Low Countries; famed for its Medicinal Mine∣ral Waters. Spahan. See Hispaam. Spain, Hispania, is one of the most considerable Kingdoms in Europe, called heretofore Hesperia and Iberia. It is separated from France towards the North-East by the Pyrenean Hills; on all other sides surrounded by the Mediterranean Sea, the Streights of Gibraltar, and the Atlantick Ocean: so that it lies in the form of a vast Peninsula, joined to France by a Neck of eighty Spanish Leagues over. Called by the Natives La Espanna, by the French L'Espagne, by the Italians La Spagna, by the English Spain, by the Poles Hispanska, by the Germans Spanien, and by the Dutch Spangien. Its greatest length from East to West is one hundred and ninety German Miles; or five hundred Italian. Its circuit two thou∣sand four hundred and eighty Italian Miles; taking in the Creeks and Windings of the Seas and Moun∣tains, it is two thousand eight hundred and sixteen Miles; the least of which Computations, is four hun∣dred and sixty Miles greater than France was forty years agone. The ancient Geographers with one con∣sent affirm, That it abounded with whatsoever the Ambition or Needs of Men required; full of Men and Horses; all over replenished with Mines of Gold, Silver, Brass, Iron, and Lead, (white and black;) had Corn, Wine, and Oyl in abundance: in short, so extremely fruitful, that if any place for want of Water was less useful, yet even there Hemp and Flax thrived very well. It was in those days the West-Indies of the World, and like them the Store-House of the ancient Treasures. The Ancients divi∣ded it into three great parts; called by them Tarra∣conensis, Baetica, and Lusitania. First, Hispania Tarraconensis was the greatest of the three, and the most Eastern. On the East bounded by the Pyrenean Hills; on the North by the Bay of Biscay; on the West by the Atlantick Ocean, and Lusitania; on the South by the Mediterranean Sea, and Baetica. Secondly, Hispania Baetica was the most Southern part; bounded on the East and South by the for∣mer in part, and by the Ocean; on the West and North by the same Ocean and Lusitania. Thirdly, Hi∣spania Lusitanica was the most Western part; exten∣ded upon the Ocean between Hispania Tarraconensis, and Hispania Baetica. The very ancient History of
this Country is either fabulous or lost. The Phoeni∣cians may justly be supposed to have been the first Civilizers of it, and the Founders of the most ancient Cities, as Diodorus Siculus and Strabo affirm. After these (who settled mostly in Baetica) the Grecians followed; who from Marseille sent many Colonies into Hispania Tarraconensis. The Carthaginians were the next; who about forty years after they were by the Romans dispossessed of Sicily, Sardinia, and Corsica, (in the end of the first Punick War about the year of Rome 512;) by the Isle of Gades (which was theirs before) entered Spain; and in less than twenty years (under Amilcar, Asdrubal and Hanni∣bal, the Son of Amilcar) destroyed Saguntum; built New Carthage; conquered all the Nations of this Country, as far the Pyrenean Hills, and the Mediter∣ranean Sea; and might easily have subdued the rest; but that Hannibal chose rather to revenge the Injuries of his Country, and ruin Rome by an Invasion of Ita∣ly. The Jealousie of the Carthaginians ruined his Designs in Italy; and the Roman Fortunes prevailed in Spain too, under Cornelius Scipio, about the year of Rome 545. The People having been broken by the Carthaginians, submitted the more willingly and easily to the Romans; and continued under them till about the year of Christ 400, when Gundericus (King of the Vandals) first conquered them. The Goths followed these; and in 418, set up a Kingdom; which in time extirpated the Vandals, or drove them over the Sea into Africa. This Kingdom continued under thirty one Princes, till 724; when the Moors came in, and after a Fight of seven Days continuance prevailed against the Goths, and forced Spain. They brought over fifty thousand Families of Moors and Jews; and so fixed themselves here, that though they were in a short time cantoned into a small Kingdom; and the Spaniards with the remainders of the Goths (who had secured themselves in the Mountains and other places of difficult access) by the help of the French, made a gainful and prevailing War upon them; yet they could not be intirely subdued before 1492▪ In after times it is hard to say, whether the good Fortunes or ill Government of the Spaniards have contributed most to the ruin of this once most potent Kingdom. For first Ferdinando and Isabella in 1492, expelled out of Spain one hundred and seven∣ty thousand Families of the Jews. Philip II. in 1610. expelled nine hundred thousand Moors. And America being found in the mean time, the numbers of Spaniards that passed thither is unknown. Philip I. succeeded in 1504: The first Prince of the House of Austria, who reigned in Spain. Charles V. his Son in 1516. Philip II. in 1556. Philip III. in 1598. Philip IV. in 1621. Charles II. the present King be∣gan his Reign in September 1665, being then an In∣fant. This Kingdom is now divided into fifteen Kingdoms or Provinces, viz. 1. Navarre. 2. Biscay. 3. Guipuscòa. 4. Leon and Oviedo. 5. Gallicia. 6. Cor∣duba. 7. Granada. 8. Murcia. 9. Toledo. 10. Castile. 11. Portugal. 12. Valentia. 13. Catalonia. 14. The Kingdom of Majorca. 15. And the Kingd. of Arragon. Which are at this day all reduced under three Crowns or Governments, Castile, Portugal, and Arragon. The Religion professed is strict Roman Catholick; especial∣ly since the introducing the Inquisition by Pedro Gon∣sales de Mendoza, Archbishop of Toledo, in 1478. The Christian Faith was taught this Nation very early by S. James, or more probably by S. Paul. Aria∣nisin entered with the Goths, and continued till 588. They never heard of the Roman Rites till after 1083: when a Frenchman being made Archbishop of Toledo, endeavoured the Introduction of that Service; and was at first opposed in it by all the other Prelates and People. It had been well for Spain, if it had never been received: seeing it has cost that Nation so many of its People; no less than three thousand Families having been destroyed by the Inquisition in one Dio∣cese in three years: not to mention the loss of the United Netherlands, and the ruin of Flanders. The Cities of Spain are too numerous to be here inser∣ted. New Spain, Hispania Nova, is a considerable Country in North America; called by the Spaniards la Nueva Espanna, and sometimes el Mexico, from its Capital City. It contains all that space of Land be∣tween the North and the South Sea, that lies between the Terra Firma (or Streight of Panama) to the East, and Florida to the West; which by the Indians was called Anahuac; that is, The Land by the Water. It extends from fifteen deg. of Latitude to twenty six exclusively; in breadth six hundred Italian Miles, in length twelve hundred. The Air is very temperate (tho situate wholly in the Torrid Zone) by reason of the frequent Showers which fall in June, July, and August; (their hottest Months in the year) and also by reason of the Sea Breezes. It is abundantly inriched with inexhaustible Mines of Gold, Silver, Brass and Iron: has great plenty of Coco-Nuts, Cochineel, Wheat, Barley, Oranges, Limons, Figs, Cherries, Ap∣ples, and Pears, Cattle and Fowl: but it has few Grapes, and no Wine. Their Seed time is in April or May; their Harvest in October: in the Low Coun∣tries they sow in October, and reap in May. This Kingdom had Kings of its own, from 1332, to 1520: about two years before which, Francis Cortez, a Spa∣niard, entered it with eleven Ships, and five hundred and fifty Men; by help of which he sacked the Town of Pontonchon, defeated by his Cannon and Horse for∣ty thousand naked Indians, (who came to revenge this Injury;) and in 1531, took the City of Mexico, Aug. 13. and put an end to the Indian Empire. The Provinces of this vast Kingdom, are 1. Panuco. 2. Mechuacan. 3. Mexicana. 4 Tlascala. 5. Guaxaca. And the 6. Jucatan. Governed by a Viceroy under the King of Spain; who from this Accession to his European Dominions uses the Royal Stile of Hispani∣arum Rex. Spalatro, Salo, Salona nova, Spalatum, Palati∣um Dioclesiani, a City of Dalmatia; called by the Italians, Spalato; by the Sclavonians, Spla. It is very strong, rich, and populous; and an Archbishops See, seated upon the Adriatick; (upon which it has a large and safe Haven) thirty five Miles from Sebeni∣co. Long. 40. 54. Lat. 44. 00. This City grew up out of the Ruins of Salona; which stood four Miles more to the North. And in 1420, destroyed an Ar∣my of the Turks, which was sent against it. The Learn∣ed Mr. Wheeler in his Travels, pag. 15. has given a large account of the Site of this City; and a little lower, pag. 19. of the City of Salona, the Mother of Spalato. The Emperour Dioclesian was a Native of Salona: who building himself a Palace in this place, (whence the name Spalatro might be occasioned by an easie corruption,) the other, (Salona) grew by time neglected. It is commanded by a Fortress, upon an Hill, without the Gate; in which the Venetians keep the lesser Garrison, because they make sure of the For∣tress of Clissa, by which the passage lies out of Turky to Spalatro. The Walls of Dioclesian's Palace you have yet standing; and the little Temple, which he built in the middle of it, has become the Cathedral Church. It is situated in a fruitful Country. Spalding, a Market Town in the division of Hol∣land, in Lincolnshire; and the Hundred of Ellow; upon the Weland. Well built and traded; though not far from the Washes. Spandow, Spandava, a City in the Marquisate of Brandenburgh, upon the River Havel (where it enter∣tains
the Sprehe:) two Miles beneath Berlin to the West, and about six from Brandenburgh to the East; well fortified; yet taken by Gustavus Adolphus, in 1631. Sparta. See Misitra. Spenderobi, Spenderobis, Spenderovia, a City of Servia; called by the Turks, Semender; by the Hungarians, Sendrew, or Zendrew, and Zendrin; by the Italians, Sandria. It is a Bishops See; thought to be Ptolemy's Singidunum: and stands about six German Miles from Belgrade to the East upon the Danube, fourteen from Temesware to the South. The Turkish Governour of Servia resides for the most part in this City. Taken in this War by the Imperialists amidst their other Conquests in Hungary: and reta∣ken by the Turks by storm, Sept. 1690. Spilby, a Market Town in Lincolnsh. in the Hun∣dred of Bulling brook. Spinola, a Seignory in the Neighbourhood of Montferrat, the Milany, and the States of Genoua, in Italy: Honoured with the Title of a Marqui∣sate. Spire, Spira, Nemetes, Noviomagus, Nemetus, a City of Germany; called by the Germans, Speyr; by the French, Spire; by the Italians, Spira. It is a Free and Imperial City, in the Upper Circle of the Rhine: in the Diocese of Spire, but not subject to the Bishop. This great, rich, populous City is Free; but under the Protection of the Elector Palatine, and the Bishop under the Archbishop of Mentz. It stands in the middle between Strasburgh to the South, and Mentz to the North; fifty German Miles from ei∣ther, and fifteen from Heidelberg to the North-West. The Imperial Chamber (which was first instituted at Franckfort in 1495, by Maximilian I.) In 1530, was by Charles V. removed to Spire; and has been ever since in this City. Of old called Nemetum; and in 1082. being so far by its (then) Bishop enlarged, as to inclose the Village of Spire neighbouring upon it, took the Name of Spire. The Cathedral was built in 1011, by Conrade the Emperour; in which are the Tombs of eight of the German Emperours; to wit, Conrade II. (who gave the Town of Brunch∣sol, and all the Territory of Brutingow to this Bishop∣rick about the year 1030;) Henry III. his Son (who finished the Cathedral, begun by his Father;) Henry IV. Henry V. Philip, Rodolph I. Adolp of Nassaw▪ and Albert I. The Emperours which granted Privileges to this City were, Charles IV▪ Rodolphus I. Albert, Lewis, Wenceslaus, Frederick III. and Maximi∣lian II. Near it Philip the Suabian, beat Oho▪ the Saxon, in 1202. In a Diet here held in 1526, the Peace of Religion was first established; which when it was endeavoured to be Repealed in a second Diet here held in 1529, several of the German Princes Prote∣sted against the Repeal, and were thence called Pro∣testants. Jesses the first Bishop was present in the Council of Cologne, in 346. This City was taken by Gustavus Adolphus; who demolished all its Out∣works, because he was not willing to spare so many Men out of his Army, as were necessary for a Garri∣son to it: by which the Germans the more easily re∣covered it in 1635. It received a French Garrison in Sept. 1688, who have demolished it since. The Im∣perial Chamber consists of fifteen Counsellors, (eight Roman Catholicks, and seven Protestants;) two Pre∣sidents, (a Roman Catholick, and a Protestant;) and the Bishop as the Principal Judge. In 1675. the Ele∣ctor of Treves succeeded to the Bishoprick. Spiritu Sancto, Spiritus Sanctus; a small City; which is the Capital of a Prefecture in Brasil, under the Portuguese. Sixty Spanish Leagues from the Ri∣ver Januario to the North, and fifty from Porto Se∣guro to the South. §. There is a River in the King∣dom of Monomotapa, in Africa, which discharges it∣self into the Aethiopick Ocean at Cabo de S. Nicolo, of this name: called by the Portuguese, Rio de lo Spi∣ritu Santo. Spirlinga, a small Town in Sicily; which was the only place in that Island, innocent of that bloody and infamous Conspiracy, called the Sicilian Vespers. Spirnazza, Panyasus, a River of Macedonia; which falls into the Adriatick Sea, between Duraz∣zo, and the River Aspro, (which last falls into the same Sea,) twenty five Miles from Durazzo to the North▪ Some call it Aspro Spirnazza: others Spir∣nazza, Arzenza. Spitsberg, an University in Brandenburgh, foun∣ded in 1544. Spitsberg, Spitzberga, Regio Arctica, or the Sharp Mountains, as the Name signifies; is a large Country, and a part of the Artick Continent: be∣tween Nova Zembla to the East, and Greenland to the West; which are yet not near it by three hun∣dred Miles. It was called thus by the Dutch, upon their discovering it in 1596. the English call it New-Land: others Spigelberg. It extends to deg. 80. of North Latitude. Whether it be an Island, or joyn∣ed to any Continent, is unknown to the Europeans: extreme cold, without one Village in it; only some parts are frequented by the Dutch, who Fish for Whales; and find some two hundred foot long. Here are a great number of Bears, (black and white) Foxes, and Sea-Geese. Split, the same with Spalatro. Splugen, Splugue, Speluca, the highest Mountain amongst the Grisons; a part of the Rhetian Alpes; upon which there was once a strong Castle, near the Lower Branch of the Rhine, about eight Miles from Clven to the North. Spoleti, Spoletum, Spoletium, is a City in the States of the Church in Italy: called Spoleto, and Spo∣lete: the Capital of a Dukedom of the same Name. It stands in the Province of Ʋmbria, or Ombria; part∣ly on an Hill, partly in a Valley upon the River Tes∣sino; thirteen Miles from Fuligno to the North-East, forty five from Rome to the North, and sixty two from Ancona to the South. It is a Bishops See, im∣mediatly under the Pope; and a City of great Anti∣quity: having defended it self very well against Han∣nibal in the second Punick War. In 1234▪ here was a Council held under Pope Gregory IX. for the Reco∣very of the Holy Land. The same year, the Bishop's See was translated hither from Spollo. In seven hun∣dred and forty, it was besieged by Luitprandus, King of the Lombards; and reduced to great Extremities. In 1155, Frederick Barberossa, took, plundered, and burnt it, for violating his Ambassadors and cor∣rupting his Coin. In 1583, here was a Synod held by its Bishop. It shows some stately Ruines of an Am∣phitheatre, a Temple and a Palace of the Kings of the Goths, who made it their Residence. Il Ducato di Spoleto, Spoletanus Ducatus, is a very large Province of Italy; called of old Ʋmbria, of latter times Ombria: And a Dukedom, from the time that Longinus (the Greek Exarch of Ravenna, after the recalling Narses) instituted Dukes for the Government of this Province. The Lombards made a Conquest of it, under Alboinus, (one of their Kings) in 571. But they left it under Dukes still; one of which in 740, joyning with Pope Gregary, and rebel∣ling against his Master Luitprandus, drew a War up∣on the Province. In 876. Charles the Bald (one of the Caroline Princes) made Guido, a Descendent of Charles the Great, Duke of Spoleto; whose Poste∣rity in thirteen Descents enjoyed it to 1198. How, or when, this Province fell under the Pope I know
not; but it bore the Title of a Dukedom under them, till 1440: when it reassumed its ancient Name of Ombria. See Leander Albertus. Sponheim, Sponheimensis Comitatus, a County in the Palatinate of the Rhine; between the Moselle and the Naw (which last falls into the Rhine) four German Miles beneath Mentz. The fourth part of it is under the Marquess of Baden; the rest has been under the Electors Palatine, ever since 1416: when it came to that Family by the Marriage of Isabella (Heiress of it) with Robert Elector Palatine. The principal places in it are Creutznach, Simmeren, and Birkenfeld. Sporades, the scattered Islands towards Candia, in the Archipelago: so called in opposition to the Cy∣clades, which lye together in the form of a Circle. The Romans, Saracens, and the Corsairs, with the pre∣sent Masters the Turks of them, by their several de∣vastations have reduced these once flourishing retreats into a poor condition. There are always some Greeks upon them. Sprche, Sprewe, Spra, la Sprehe, Spreha, a Ri∣ver in Germany, which ariseth in the Borders of Bo∣hemia; and flowing through Lusatia, watereth Baut∣zen, Cotitz, and Luben; then entering Branden∣burgh, falls by Berlin into the Havel at Spandow; which last ends in the Elbe at Havelburg. Sprotaw, Sproavia, a City of Silesia, in the Dukedom of Glogaw; upon a River of the same Name, which falls into the Bober. Four Miles from Glogaw to the West. Spurnhead, Ocelli, a Cape or Promontory in York∣shire, at the Mouth of the Humber. Squillaci, Scyllctim, Scillaceum, a small City of great Antiquity; called by Ptolemy, Scilacium; Pliny, Scylaceum: and a Bishops See, under the Arch∣bishop of Reggio; in the Futher Calabria, in the Kingdom of Naples; to which there belongs a Bay, upon the Ionian Sea, called Golfo di Squillaei. This City stands sixty five Miles from Regio to the North-East, fifty five from Rossano to the South: and has not above three hundred Houses in it. Long. 40. 12. Lat. 37. 48. It was an Athenian Colony; and one of the most considerable Cities belonging to the Bru∣tii in Magna Graecia. Staden, Statio, Stada, a City in the Lower Saxo∣ny, in the Dukedom of Bremen, near the Elbe; an∣ciently a Free Imperial City, and a Hanse Town; but now subject to the Duke of Breme. It stands upon a small River, called Svinge; (which a little lower falls into the Elbe) seven German Miles from Ham∣burgh to the West, and twelve from Bremen to the North. A very strong Town. Taken in 1676, by the Duke of Brunswick. In 1680, it was restored by the Treaty concluded at Zell to the Swedes; un∣der whom it was before put by the Treaty of Mun∣ster. Staffanger, Stavandria, Stafangria, Stavangria, a City of Norway; which is a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Drontheim; and has a large safe Har∣bor upon the German Ocean. It stands in the Pre∣fecture of Bergen; ninety Miles from Bergen to the South, and sixty from the Baltick Sea. Long. 27. 45. Lat. 61. 15. Staffarda, a Town not far from Saluzzes in Pied∣mont; made remarkable by the Battel between the Duke of Savoy's Army, and the French, on the eigh∣teenth of August 1690▪ in which the former retired with loss. Staffordshire, Staffordia, Cornavi, a County in the middle of England. Bounded on the North by Cheshire and Darbyshire, (where a Stone shews the point in which these three Countries meet;) on the East by Darbyshire, cut off by the Dowe and Trent; on the South by Warwickshire and Worcestershire; and on the West by Shropshire. It represents a Lo∣zenge in its form: its length being forty four Miles from North to South, and its breadth twenty seven; the whole Circumference one hundred and forty seven: containing one hundred and thirty Parishes, and eight Market Towns. For Springs, Brooks and Rivers, be∣sides the Trent, it hath the Dove (which partly sepa∣rates it from Derbyshire;) the Churner, the Blithe, the Line, the Tea, the Sowe, the Penk, the Mani∣fold, and several others; over which are reckoned in all twenty four Stone-bridges. Here is plenty of Lime, Marble, Timber, Stone for building, and game; with some Alabaster, and Salt-springs. The Air is good, and very healthful; cold, especially towards the North; in which part the Earth also is barren. The middle is more level, but full of Woods. The South is fruit∣ful, producing Corn, and Grass in abundance, Coals, and Mines of Iron. And so great formerly was the number of Parks and Warrens in this County, that most Gentlemens Seats were attended by both. This County takes its name from Stafford, the principal Town in it; anciently called Betheny. Built by Ed∣ward the Elder. Incorporated by King John: on the East and South walled. Trenched by its own Ba∣rons, the other two sides being secured by a Lake of Water: the River Sowe runs on the East and West of the Town, and is covered with a Bridge. It hath two Parish Churches, a Free-school, and many good Buildings. Edward VI. confirmed and enlarged their Charter. Its Long is 18. 40. Lat. 53. 20. In the year 1357, one Ralph was created the first Earl of Stafford; whose Posterity in twelve Descents enjoyed that Honor to the year 1639: when it was finally extinguished in the Person of Henry Stafford. In 1640, Charles I. revived this Honour by conferring it upon Sir William Howard, Knight of the Bath, second Son of Thomas Earl of Arundel and Surrey; who was then married to one of the Daughters of the last Earl of Stafford. He was Beheaded Dec. 7. 1680. in the Reign of K. Charles II. But the Title revived under K. James II. in Henry his Son, the present Earl of Stafford. See the Natural History of this County, written by Dr. Robert Plot, with the same extraordinary Art and Elaborateness which is peculiar to him. Stagira▪ an ancient (Town, famous for being the Na∣tive place of the Philosopher Aristotle, thence entituled Stagirita) in the Kingdom of Macedonia; called af∣terwards Liba Nova by some, and yet said to be ex∣tant. Stagno, Stagnum; a small City in Dalmatia; and a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Raguza; from which it stands thirty Miles to the North, upon the Adriatick: which affords it the Convenience of an Harbour. This Town belongs to the Republick of Ragusa. Stainmore-Hill, an exceeding Stony Hill, (as the Northern use of the word Stain signifies) in the County of Westmorland: Remarkable for a Stone-Cross, said anciently to have been erected for a Boun∣dary betwixt the Kingdoms of England and Scotland; upon a Peace concluded betwixt William the Conque∣ror, and Malcholm King of Scotland. The Arms of England were displayed upon the South-side of it, and those of Scotland on the North. Stalemura, Anemurium, a City in Cilicia, upon the Mediterranean Sea; called by others Anemra: a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Seleucia: be∣tween Antioch to the West, and Celendris (now Pa∣lapoly) to the East: about forty four Miles from Cape Cormachiti, in the North of the Isle of Cyprus to the North. Mela placeth it in the Borders of Pamphylia and Cilicia. Long. 65. 10. Lat. 36. 50.
Stalimene, Lemnos, a considerable Island in the Archipelago; called by the Inhabitants, Stilemnos. It is one hundred and sixty Miles in compass. At first under the Venetians; but since conquered by Mahomet II. Fifty Miles from Agionoros, or the Coast of Macedonia to the East. It hath a considerable City of its own name: produces good Wine, and is well Cultivated. Famous for a Red Earth, called from it Terra Lemnia, and Sigillata; by which the Ottoman Port reaps a considerable revenue. Stamboli, the Turkish Name of Constanti∣nople. Stametz, Stametia, a small City in Gothland, a Province of Sweden; which is a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Ʋpsal; but now become a poor Village. Stampalia, a considerable Island in the Archipe∣lago, towards the Sea of Scarpanto: called anciently Astypalaea, and placed by Strabo in the number of the Sporades. It hath a City of its own name now, as before; when a Temple of great fame throughout Greece adorned it, which was consecrated to the ho∣nour of Apollo. The principal Church is dedica∣ted to S. George; and served with the Greek rites, under the spiritual jurisdiction of the Bishop of Si∣phanto, who some part of the year resides at it. To the City belongs a Castle for its security, planted up∣on a Mountain: upon the Frontispiece of which the Arms of Venice, France, and Thuscany appear dis∣played. This City is the sole settlement in the Island; being, tho of a fruitful Soil, much in want of fresh Water. Stanes, a large, well inhabited, and frequented Market Town in Hartfordshire, in the Hundred of Branghing, with a Bridge over a River, leading into Surrey. Stanford, Stamford, Durobrivae, a Town of Lincolnshire, in Kesteven division, of good Antiqui∣ty: upon the River VVelland, on the Borders of Northampton, and Rutland (with a part in each: but the chiefest in Lincolnshire) which is great and well peopled; having about seven Parish Churches, and se∣veral Bridges over the River; being expanded on both its sides. The Roman High Dike, or Way, leadeth to the North from this Town. The Houses are built of Free-stone; the Streets fair and large, and begirt with a Wall. It hath the honour to be a Corporation, re∣presented in the lower House of Parliament by two Burgesses. And in its Neighbourhood, stands a state∣ly Seat and Park of the Earl of Exeter, called Bur∣leigh House. In the Reign of Edward III. part of the Students of Oxford, (upon a quarrel between the Southern and Northern Men) settled for some time in this Town; who erected a College here (its Ruins are yet remaining,) and would not return to Oxford till compelled by a Proclamation: whence arose that Statute of the University, enjoyning every one by Oath at the taking of Batchelors Degree, not to pro∣fess Philosophy at Stamford. In 1628, Henry Lord Grey of Grooby, was created Earl of Stamford; and succeeded by Thomas his Grandchild in 1673. Stanhope, Stainthorp, or Staindrop, a Market Town in the Bishoprick of Durham, in Darlington Wapentake: upon a rivulet, running into the Tees. Market-Stanton, a Market Town in Lincoln∣shire in the Hundred of Gartree. Stargard, Ʋrbs Vetus, a City of Holstein. Long. 33. 10. Lat. 55. 06. Stargart, Stargardia, a City of Germany, in the Further Pomerania (the Capital of which it is) upon the River Ihna; under the Elector of Brandenburgh; five German Miles from Stetin to the East. It is a Hanse Town, but not well peopled. Long. 37. 40. Lat. 53. 23. Staten-Eylandt, a small Rocky Island, discover∣ed by the Dutch in 1594. to the East of Weigat's Streights, near that Coast of Moscovy, called by them New Holland. Not above one League long, and two in Circuit. Some pieces of fine clear Chrystal were found about the Rocks. The Dutch gave it this Name to signifie an Island of their States. Stavelo. Stable, Stabulum, a Monastery in the Diocese of Ʋtrecht; between the Archbishoprick of Triers, and the Low-Countries; three German Miles from Limburgh to the South. There belongs to the Abbat a Territory; which lies between the Bishop∣rick of Leige, and the Dukedom of Limburgh and Luxemburgh. Stavern, Stavera, a small City of Friseland, un∣der the United Provinces in Westergow, upon the Zuyder Zee; four German Miles from Enchusen to the North, and six from Vollenhove to the South-West. It is a Sea-Port Town, included in the Hanse League: of old the Seat of the Kings of Frise∣land. Steenberg, Stenoberga, a City in the Dukedom of Brabant, under the Dutch; and belonging parti∣cularly to the Prince of Orange. Steenwick, Stenovicum, a Town in Over-Yssel, in the Ʋnited Netherlands; upon the River Aa, in the Borders of West Friseland: seventeen Miles from Zwol to the North, and seven from the Zuyder Zee to the East. Taken by Alexander Farnese Duke of Parma by Scalade; and by the French in 1672; but deserted soon after. Stegeborg, Stegeburgum, a small City in the Pro∣vince of Ostrogothia; with a Port or Harbour on the Baltick Sea, under the King of Sweden: sixteen Miles from Norcoping to the East. Stella, a Mountain in Galatia, in the Lesser Asia; near the City of Ancyra; called by the Turks, Alma∣dag. This is very remarkable for the Defeat of two great Princes in their times; Mithridates, who was here overthrown by Pompey the Great, sixty three years before the Birth of our Saviour: and Bajazet I. (Emperor of the Turks) here beaten and taken with his Son Musa, by Tamerlane the Great, in 1397. Which Victory, if it had been followed by a vigorous Attack from all the Christian Princes united, might (by the Blessing of God) have put an end to the Ot∣toman Family then. Stenay, Stenaeum, Stenacum, a strong City in the Dukedom of Lorain; sometimes called Stathenay. It lies in the Dukedom of Bar upon the Maes: seven Leagues from Verdun to the North, and six from Se∣dan to the South. Taken by the French in 1654, and kept by them ever since; now annexed to Cham∣pagne. Sterling, Sterling, a Town and County in Scot∣land, sometimes called Striveling: on the North it has Mentith and Fife, on the South the Cluyd, on the East Lothian, and on the West Lenox. It takes its Name from Sterling, a Town upon Dunbritoun Fryth. This Town was so strong, that the Victorious English durst not attempt it after their Victory at Dunbar. But it was taken afterwards by General Monk in 1654. Stetin, Stetinum, the Capital City of the Duke∣dom of Pomerania, in Germany; called by the Ger∣mans, Szcecin. It stands upon the Oder, over which it has a Bridge; and is divided by it into two equal parts: eight Miles from the Baltick Sea to the South, four from the Confines of Brandenburgh, and forty four from Dantzick to the South-West. This City grew up after the Ruin of Vineta (in the Isle of Ʋse∣dom, ten Miles more to the North-West) from a small Village, to that greatness it now enjoys, by becoming the Seat of the Dukes of Pomerania; who lived here
many Ages in a Castle of an elegant and noble Stru∣cture. Otho (the Father of Barnimius I. Founder of the Line of Stetin) removed hither in 1345. This Family continued the Possession of it till 1630; when Gustavus Adolphus coming before it with an Army, obtained an admission partly by force, and partly by the terror of his Arms: Bogislaus, the last of that Line, dying soon after. The Right of the Succession undoubtedly belonged to the Duke of Brandenburgh: but the Swedes being in Possession, got their Right confirmed by the Treaty of Munster, and kept this Ci∣ty till the year 1677. When the Duke of Branden∣burgh, coming before it with a powerful Army, after a tedious Siege took it. In 1679, by the Treaty of S. Germaine, it was restored to the Swedes; who are still in Possession of this very strong place. See Po∣merania. It had been before attempted by the Impe∣rial and Brandenburgh Forces united, in 1659: and baffled the designs of those great Princes. Olearius. Long. 38. 45. Lat. 53. 27. Stevenedge, a Market Town in Hartfordshire in the Hundred of Broadwater. Steyning or Stening, a Market Town and Bo∣rough in the County of Sussex, in Bramber Rape: Having the privilege of the Election of two Parlia∣ment Men. Steyr, Asturis, a City of Austria, four Miles from Lintz to the South. Stift, Ditio, a word in the German Tongue; which signifies a Dominion, Country, or Territory; and frequently joyned with the Names of places: as Stift von Luick, the Dominion of Liege. Stiria, a Province of Germany; stiled by the In∣habitants, die Steyer or Steyer-marck; which was a part of the Old Noricum, (or Ʋpper Pannonia) to∣wards the Muer, and the Drave. It is bounded on the East by Hungary; on the North by Austria; on the West by the Diocese of Saltzburgh, and Carin∣thia; and on the South by Carniola. The Capital of it is Gratz; the other Cities, Cilley, Kermend, Marc∣purg, Petaw, Pruckam Muer, and Rakelspurg. Ca∣nisa belongs also to this Province; and reckoned to the Lower Hungary. The Quadi were the old Inha∣bitants of this Country; who being driven out by the Romans, the Country was called Valeria in Honor of a Daughter of Dioclesian, so called. It was at first a Marquisate: and by Frederick Barbarossa, the Em∣peror, changed into a Dukedom. In length one hun∣dred and ten Miles, in breadth sixty: for the most part barren, being covered with the Spurs and Bran∣ches of the Alpes; and rich in nothing but Minerals. Ottacar (the last Duke of this Province) sold it to Leo∣pold the Fifth, Archduke of Austria; who bought it with a part of that vast Ransom he extorted from Ri∣chard I. King of England, about the year 1193. Tho it has been since granted to some younger Brothers of that Family, yet it is now returned to the Emperor; and not likely to be any more dismembred from the rest of the Hereditary Countries. As to the Fertility of it, Hoffman differs from Dr. Heylin; who saith, in Iron Mines it excels all the European Countries, and wants nothing that is useful; it abounding with Wine, Corn, Cattle, and Salt. Stirone, Sisterio, a small River of Lombardy, in the Dukedom of Parma; which watering Burgo di S. Domino, falls into the Taro; four Miles above its fall into the Po. Stives, Thebae, a City once of great Renown, but now a poor Village in Greece; fifty Miles from A∣thens to the North; Sophianus calls it Thiva. The Turks abandoned it after the taking of Athens, to col∣lect their Strength into one Body at Negropont. Where∣upon General Morosini in 1687, possessed himself of it. But finding it of little use to keep, he razed the Fortifications, which were in great part ruined before; and abandoned it also. See Thebae. Stocksbridge, a Market Town and Borough in the County of Southampton, and the Hundred of Kingom∣bom, upon the River Test. Represented by two Bur∣gesses in the House of Commons. Stockholm, Holmia, is a very great City, and the Capital of the Kingdom of Sweden; standing in the Province of Ʋpland, in the Borders of Sudermania: Heretofore a place of small consideration; but having for the two last Ages enjoyed the Residence of the Kings of Sweden, and they having also much enlarged that Kingdom by their Conquests in Poland, Germa∣ny, and Moscovy, it is now become a celebrated Mart, rich, and populous. It has a Royal Castle, a large and safe Port, upon the disembogure of the Lake Meler; secured by Forts, and from the weather so pro∣tected by Rocks, that the greatest Vessels may ride in the midst of it without anchor or cable. It has a conve∣nient Situation, (but being placed amongst many Rocks just by it, the prospect of it is not very taking) upon six small Islands, joyned by Bridges of Wood to each other: the best Peopled, is called Stockholm, which denominates the City; also two large Suburbs, one on the North, and the other on the South. Tho it is a place of no strength, yet Christian, King of Denmark, could not take it, when he besieged it in 1518. It stands eight Swedish Leagues from Ʋpsal to the South, five from the Baltick Sea to the West, and eighty from Dantzick and Copenhagen. Long. 43. 00. Lat. 60. 30. Gustavus Adolphus and Charles Gustavus, surnamed Augustus, Kings of Sweden, lye interred in a Church of this City: But the rest of the Kings lie at Ʋpsal and other places. Stockport or Stopford, a Market Town in Che∣shire, in the Hundred of Macclesfield, upon the Ri∣ver Mersey. Stockton, a Market Town in the Bishoprick of Durham. The Capital of a Ward. Stoecades, Ligustides, the Islands Hyeres in the Mediterranean Sea, upon the Coast of Provence: in which the Knights of Malta, after their loss of Rhodes, entertained thoughts of settling by the permission of the King of France. The Monks had got footing upon them in Cassian's time. There was a Cistercian Monastery standing in the time of P. Innocent III. The Ancients mention the principal of them by the names of Hispa, Prote, Pomponiana, Phenice, Stu∣rium, &c. which now are called Teste de Can, Ri∣baudas, Ribaudon, Langoustier, &c. This last seem to express their other ancient Name of Ligustides, See Hieres. Stoel-Weissemburg. See Alba Regalis. Stokesley, a Market Town in the North-Riding of Yorkshire, in the Hundred of Langbark: well wa∣tered with fresh Streams, Stolhoffen, Stolhoffa, a City or fortified Town in Schwaben in Germany; upon the Rhine, in the Mar∣quisate of Baden; two German Miles from Hage∣now to the East, and three from Strasburg South-East. Stolpe, Stolpa, a Town seated upon a River of the same Name in the Further Pomerania; three Ger∣man Miles from Lawenburg in Pomerania to the West, thirteen from Colberg to the East. It has an ancient Castle; subject to the Duke of Branden∣burgh. Stone, a Market Town in Staffordshire, in the Hundred of Pirehill, upon the Trent. Stonehenge, Mons Ambrosii, a very venerable and ancient Monument in Whiltshire, six Miles from Salisbury: consisting of three Crowns, or Ranks of
huge unwrought Stones, one within another: some of which are twenty eight Foot high, and seven broad; upon the tops there are others laid cross and fra∣med into them. Upon a large plain, scarce affor∣ding any other Stones at all in the circumferences of some Miles. Mr. Cambden supposes the Art of the Ancients in making Stone of Sand and unctuous Ce∣ment, was employed in this. Work: Because these Stones seem too vast a load for Carriages. Stormaren, Stormaria, a Province of Holstein; bounded on the North by Holstein properly so cal∣led; on the East by Waggaren and Lavemburg; and on the West and South by Bremen and Lunenburg; cut off by the Elbe. Partly subject to the King of Denmark, and partly to the Duke of Holstein, Got∣thorp. The principal Places in it are Gluckstad, Crem∣pen and Pinnenberg, which are under the King of Denmark. Under the Duke are Elmeshorn, Stein∣horst, Barmsted and Reinhorst: Hamburg, though subject to neither of these Princes, is reckoned within the Bounds of this Province by John Bunon. Stow on the Wold, a Market Town in Gloucester∣shire, in the Hundred of Slaughter. § Another in the County of Suffolk; the Capital of its Hundred, upon the River Orwell: large and beautifully built, with a spacious lofty Church; And driving a great Trade in Stuffs. Straelsund, Sundis, a small, but very strong Ci∣ty in the Hither Pomerania, upon the Shoars of the Baltick Sea; which has an Harbor over against the Isle of Rugen: another towards Gripswald and Pome∣rania, and a third looking toward Dumgarten, and the Dukedom of Meckelburg; being built in a Trian∣gle. It stands sive German Miles from Gripswald to the North, ten from Anclam, and about four from the Isle of Rugen; secured by Marshes, the Sea, and three well fortified Banks. Now one of the Hanse Towns, but formerly a Free Imperial City, and a fre∣quented Mart. Built by the Danes, in 1211: and be∣ing besieged by Count Wallestein for the Emperor, (who had subdued all the rest of Pomerania) this small place in 1629, called Gustavus Adolphus into Germa∣ny; who rescued it out of the Hands of the Imperia∣lists, and became the Master of it; which was con∣firmed by the Peace of Munster. In 1678, the Duke of Brandenburgh took and burnt this Town, not leaving out of above two thousand Houses, five hun∣dred unruined by his Bombs and Fireworks. He took it upon a Capitulation: and the next year after, by the Treaty at S. Germains, it was resigned to the Swedes again. Stramulipa, Boeotia, Attica, a part of Greece, the Capital of which is Thebes: it lies over against the Isle of Negropont. Strasburg, Argentoratum, the Capital City of Alsatia in Germany, called by the Italians Argenti∣na: It is a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Mentz. And for many Ages a Free and Imperial Ci∣ty; seated upon the River Ill, (where it falls into the Breuch) one Mile from the Rhine, over which it has a Timber-Bridge of vast length. Eight German Miles from Brisach to the North, twelve from Spire, four∣teen from Basil, and twenty from Nancy and Metz. So very ancient, that it is said to be built in the year of the World 1955: thirty three years before the Birth of Abraham: which tho it may be true, yet cannot be proved. Tacitus and Caesar call it Tribocorum and Tribcum: Ptolemy, Argentoratum: other Latin Writers Argentina, and Strasburgum. It is mentioned by Ammianus Marcellinus, as a Place which the Slaughter of the Barbarians (by Julian the Apostate) had made famous. The Victory here mentioned was in the year of Christ 357. In which, Julian over∣threw six Barbarous Kings of the Germans; and took Chodonomar (the chief of them) Prisoner. In the year 378, Gratianus the Emperor gave the Germans ano∣ther great Overthrow near this City. Attila King of the Hunns, took and wasted this City about the year 451. Childerick King of the Franks, possessed himself of it in the year 478. S. Amand became the first Bi∣shop of this City in the year 643. Henry II. Empe∣ror rebuilt this City in the year 1004. The Cathe∣dral was built in the year 1207. In the year 1332, it suffered very much by intestine Divisions, between the Nobility and Populacy. In 1522, the Reforma∣tion was first Preached; and in 1529, it was embra∣ced. Whereupon the year following, this City entred a League with the Reformed Cantons for her Defence. In 1538, here was an University opened by the Senate, at the perswasion of Jacobus Sturmius, a learned Man, who flourished that time in the City: which in 1566, was confirmed by Maximilian I. But in Sep∣tember 29. 1681, the present King of France, having before possessed himself of all the rest of Alsatia, sud∣denly surprized this important Place (in a time of Peace when no Body suspected it) and put an end to the Liberty of this great City. Long. 29. 26. Lat. 48. 25. Hoffman. Stratford-stony, a Market Town in Buckingham∣shire, in the Hundred of Newport; in Watling-street Road, a Military High-way of the Romans, crossing all the Country. This Town boasts to be the Lucto∣durum of the Romans; and the place at which K. Ed∣ward the Elder, whilst he fortified Towcester, obstru∣cted the passage of the Danes. K. Edward I. for a memorial of his Queen Eleanor, whose Corps rested here in their journey from Lincolnshire to London, a∣dorned it with a Beautiful Cross. §. Another in War∣wickshire, in the Hundred of Barlickway, upon the River Avon: over which it hath a large and fair Stone Bridge, with two Parish Churches: And is well inha∣bited. Strathern, Strathernia, a County in the South of Scotland; between Albany and Athole to the North, Perth to the East, and Menteith to the West and South. Aberneath is the Capital of it. Strath-Navern, the most North-Western Coun∣ty in Scotland; bounded on the North and West by the Ocean, on the South by Southerland, and on the East by Caithness. It is all over run with Woods; filled with Mountains desolate and cold, and of small profit or regard. Stratton, a Market Town in the County of Corn∣wall. The Capital of its Hundred. Straubingen, Augusta Acilia, Serviodurum, Strau∣binga, a City of Bavaria in Germany; which has a Bridge upon the Danube; six German Miles beneath Ratisbone to the East, and eleven from Presburg to the West. Strel, Sargetia, a River of Walachia, called Istrig by the Germans; in which Decebalus hid his Trea∣sures, when he was attacked by Trajan: it falls into the Marell, a River of Transylvania. Strenges, or Strengenes, Strengesia, a City of Sweden in the Province of Sudermania; which is a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Ʋpsal; eight Swedish Miles on the Lake of Meler from Stockholm to the West, and three from Torsil to the East. Church-Stretton, a Market Town in Shropshire, in the Hundred of Munslow. Stridon, or Strigna, the same with Sdrin. Strigonic, Gran. Strivali, or Strophadi, Strophades, two small Islands in the Ionian Sea, South of Zante, and about thirty Miles from the Western Coast of the Morea. The largest, not above three or four Miles in Circuit.
But extraordinary fertile in rasins and good fruits. Full of Springs. The Caloyers or Grecian Monks are the only People inhabiting it: whose Convent is built in the manner of a Fortress, with a Terrast of Canon for their security against the Corsaires of Barbary. But seldom either the Corsaires or the Turks come here for any thing but water. Stromboli, Strongyle, one of the Lipari Islands in the Tyrrhenian Sea, on the North of Sicily: which casts forth flames of Sulphure in fome places continu∣ally; whilest others produce Fruits and Cotton in plenty. It is ten Miles in circuit, and made memora∣ble amongst the Ancients by the Story of Aeolus. Stromona, Strymon, a River of Thrace, which springs from a part of the Mountain Haemus; and se∣parating Thrace from Macedonia, falls into the Ar∣chipelago, at the Gulph of Contessa. In the Summer Season the Cranes frequent it so notably, as to take the name of Strymoniae aves from it. In the Winter they fly hence to the warm Nile: as Lucan says, Deseritur Strymon, tepido committere Nilo Bistonias consuetus aves. Strongoli, Strongylum, a small City in the King∣dom of Naples in the Hither Calabria; which is a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Santa Severi∣na; and a Principality. Placed on a high Hill; three Miles from the Ionian Sea to the West, eight from its Metropolis to the South-East, and thirteen from Cortona to the North: some believe it was of old cal∣led Macallum. Strongyle. See Stromboli. Strophades. See Strivali. Stroud, a Market Town in Gloucestershire, in the Hundred of Bisley, upon the Banks of a River of its own name, over which it hath a Bridge. This River hath the Virtue of giving the tincture of Scarlet. Ma∣ny fulling Mills stand upon it for that use. The Town is well built, generally of Stone. Struden, the Cataracts or precipitate Fall of the Danube in Austria, beneath Lintz; the Germans call it Seuvressel. Strumita, Myra, a City of Lycia; placed by Stra∣bo in the Inland Parts, near the River Lemyrus, about two Miles from the Shoar; formerly a Bishops See, now the Metropolis; having thirty six Suffragan Bi∣shops under its Archbishop. Long. 59. 40. Lat. 38. 25. Stugart, Stugardia, Stugartia, a City of Schwa∣ben in Germany; the Capital of the Dukedom of Wur∣temburg, and the Seat of the Dukes. It has a fine and a noble Castle: stands upon the River Necker; one German Mile from Esling to the West, and four from Tubingen to the North. Stulingen, a Town and Landgravate in the Cir∣cle of Schwaben in Germany. La Stura, Stura, two Rivers in Lombardy. The first in the Dukedom of Montisferat, which falls into the Po at Pontestura, four Miles beneath Casal. The second riseth in Savoy, and running South, falls into the Po three Miles beneath Turin from the West. Sturbridge, a Market Town in Worcestershire, and the Hundred of Halfshire, upon the River Stower, over which it hath a Bridge: It is situated in a Flatt. There is a Free-school, and a Library here. Sturminster-Newton, a Market Town in Dor∣setshire, in the Hundred of Brownsell. It stands up∣on, and hath a fair Stone-bridge over, the River Stower: showing the rests of an ancient Castle hard by, in which the Kings of the West-Saxons kept their Re∣sidence. Stymphalis, a Mountain, Town, and Lake of the Peloponnesus in Arcadia; called anciently by this name: Now, Monte Poglisi, Vulsi and Longanico. Styx, a Fountain springing from the Lake of Phe∣neus, at the foot of the Mountain Nonacris, in the Peloponnesus in Areadia: which the fictions contra∣cted by its contagious qualities, amongst the Poets, have made known to all. Suabia, Schwaben. Suachen, Ptolemais, a celebrated Port of the high∣er Aethiopia, upon the Red Sea; in the Hands of the Turks. Long. 66. 00 Lat. 16. 26. According to the latter Maps, Long. 68. 15. Lat. 19. 27. It is written Suaquem in these Maps. Suani, an ancient People, remaining to this day a∣bout the Mountain Caucasus in Asia, to the East of Mengrelia. They are mentioned in Strabo. And now, the most civilized of all the Inhabitants of that Mountain. A hardy valiant People, good Soldiers, and pretending to the name of Christians. Succadana, a City in the Island of Borneo in the East-Indies. Sucheu, Sucheum, a City of China in the Province of Queycheu. Sucheu, a City of China in the Province of Nan∣kim. Suching, a City of China in the Province of Quam∣si: now under the King of Tunkim. Suchuen, a large Province in the Kingdom of Chi∣na; lying towards the South-West Borders of that Kingdom, upon India and the Kingdom of Thibet. Bounded on the North by Xensi, on the East by Hu∣quam, on the South by Queycheu, and on the West by the Further East-Indies: the principal City of it is Chingtu. It contains eight great Cities, one hundred twenty four small Cities, and four hundred sixty four thousand one hundred twenty eight Families. The Ri∣ver Kiang divides it in two. It suffered very much in the last Wars with the Tartars. Suchzow, Suczova, a City of Moldavia, (or as Baudrand saith in Walachia) upon the River Stretch; in the Borders of Transylvania; fifty Miles from Jassy to the West. Always kept by a strong Garrison of the Turks, in whose Hands it has been for some Ages. Suda, Amphimalia, a Sea-Port Town at the North End of the Isle of Candy; which has a strong Castle, and a good Harbor. Sudbury, Colonia; That is, The South Town: supposed to have had this name in opposition to Nor∣wich (or the North Town) and to have been in an∣cient time the Capital or County Town. It is feated upon the River Stour, in the Borders of Essex, in the County of Suffolk: with a fair Bridge over the Stour, leading into Essex; and three Parish Churches. A Mayor Town, rich, and populous, by reason of a considerable Clothing Trade here driven; especially in Sayes; about fifteen Miles from Ipswich to the West, and forty from London to the North: represented by two Burgesses in Parliament. The Honourable Hen∣ry Fitz-Roy late Duke of Grafton was Baron of Sudbury. Sudermanland, Sudermannia, a County in the Kingdom of Sweden; called by the Natives Soder∣manland. Bounded on the North by Westmannia and Ʋpsall; on the South by the Baltick Sea. It has the Honor to be a Dukedom of great Esteem, being born by the Royal Family of that Kingdom. The principal Places in it are Nicoping, Stregnes and Trosa. Suelli, Suellis; a very small City in the Isle of Sar∣dinia; and a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Cagliari; from which it stands fifteen Miles: reduced almost to a Village.
Sueonie, Suevonia, a considerable part of the Kingdom of Sweden; between Lapland to the North; the Baltick Sea, and Bay of Botnen to the East; Go∣thia to the South, and Norway to the West. It con∣tains ten Counties. The Capital of it is the Royal City of Stockholm. Sues, Suez, Arsinoe, Cleopatris, Posidium, is a City or Sea-Port Town of Egypt, in the bottom of the Red Sea: containing about two hundred Houses, and has a pretty Harbour; but so shallow, that a Ship cannot enter it, nor a Galley till half unloaded: but the Road is safe. It has a Baraque rail'd with Timber, Palissadoes, thirteen Culverins; and as many Cannons for its security. It has a Greek Church, an old ruin'd Castle and some indifferent Houses. When the Ships or Galleys come in, it is pretty Populous: at other times, almost desolate. Thevenot, Part I. pag. 176. Long. 63. 20. Lat. 29. 10. The Aethiopian Mer∣chants with Spices, Pearl, Amber, Musk, precious Stones, and other rarities out of India rendesvouz here: Whence they transport them upon Camels to Cairo and Alexandria, and there sell them to the Venetians and other Christian Merchants. The Country, envi∣roning this City, is a sandy Desart; which forces the Inhabitants to seek their Provisions elsewhere, and their water at two Leagues distance. The Isthmus betwixt the Mediterranean and the Red Sea, separa∣ting Egypt from Arabia, receiveth the name of the Isthmus of Suez from this Port. Suevi, the ancient Inhabitants of the present Cir∣cle of Schwaben in Germany: who in conjunction with the Vandals and the Alani, about the year 406, en∣tred and pillaged divers Provinces of the Gauls: thence in 409 passing into Spain, settled into a Kingdom in Galicia and Portugal, under Hermericus their first King; who died about 440; and was succeeded by eight other Kings: till about the year 585. Leuvigil∣dus, King of the VVisegoths, conquered and united their Estates of the Suevi to his own. Suffolk, Suffolcia, is bounded on the E. by the Ger∣man Sea; on the N. by the Waveney, and the little Ouse (which rise in the middle of its bounds: the first run∣ning East, and the second West, divide it from Norfolk:) on the West by Cambridgeshire; and on the South by Essex, severed from it by the Stoure. It lies in the form of a Crescent: The length from East to West about forty five Miles; the breadth thirty; the whole circumference of it is about one hundred and forty, containing five hundred and seventy five Pa∣rishes, and thirty Market Towns: the Air mild and healthful; the Soil rich, level, and fruitful; such as yields abundance of Corn of all sorts, Pease, Hemp, Pasturage, and Wood. The more inland part is commonly called High Suffolk, or the VVoodlands. This County reckons nigh fifty Parks in it. The Orwell, Ore, Blithe, Deben, and Breton, contribute their streams for the watering of it with the three former Rivers its Boundaries. The ancient Iceni, (a British tribe) and afterwards the East-Angles possessed it in the several times of the Romans, and the Saxon Hep∣tarchy. The principal places in it are Ipswich, Bury, and Sudbury. The Marquesses or Earls of this Coun∣ty, were Robert de Ʋfford or Clifford in 1335. VVil∣liam his Son in 1369. Michael de la Pole (Lord Chan∣cellor) Created Earl in 1379. VVilliam de la Pole (the IV. in this Line) was made Duke of Suffolk by Henry VI. Edmond the VIII. in this Line, was the last of that name; Beheaded by Henry VIII. about 1510. In 1513, Charles Brandon (Viscount Lisle) was Created Duke of Suffolk: who by Mary second Sister of Henry VIII. had Henry Brandon; who died a Child. In 1551, Henry Grey Marquess of Dorset, having married Francis Daughter of Charles Brandon, was made Duke of Suffolk: he was Beheaded in the Reign of Queen Mary, in 1553. This was the last Duke of Suffolk. In 1603. King James I. Created Thomas Lord Howard of VValden Earl of Suffolk; to whom James Lord Howard the III. of this Line succeeded in 1640. Sugen, Sugenum, a City formerly part of the Pro∣vince of Quamsi, and belonging to China; now un∣der the King of Tunkin, who has fortified it very strongly. Sulmona, or Solmona, Sulmo, a City of great An∣tiquity in the Province of Abruzzo; in the Kingdom of Naples; upon the River Sangro (Sarus.) Eight Miles from the Borders of Abruzzo to the East, al∣most seventy from Naples to the North, and near ninety from Rome to the East. It is a Bishops See under the Archbishop of Theatino; and a principality belonging to the House of Borghese. The Birth-place of Ovid the Latin Poet: who tells us its distance from Rome, and praises it for its Streams, in Sulmo mihi Patria est, gelidis Ʋberrimus undis;Millia qui novies distat ab Ʋrbe decem. Sultzbach, Sultsbachium, a small Town in Nort∣gow, in the Ʋpper Palatinate of the Rhine; one Mile distance from Amberg to the South-East: which gives the Title of a Prince to some Branches of the Palatine Family. Sumatra, a vast Island in the East-Indies to the South-West of the Promontory of Malaccia; from which it is separated only by a narrow streight; as also by another from the Isle of Java to the South. It ex∣tends from North-West to South-East, one hundred and eighty five German Miles; or nine hundred and ten English; and is two hundred and ten broad in the middle. There are several Kingdoms in this I∣sland, which ordinarily go to war with one another. The principal of which are Achem, Camper, Jamby, Menanchabo, Pacem, Palimban, and Pedir: The principal City in the whole Island and Kingdom is A∣chem, towards the North; the King whereof possesses one half of the Island. The Coast upon the streights of the Sund is under the obedience of the King of Bantam. Some parts are covered with Wood and Mountains: amongst which latter, one in the middle of the Island casts forth flames by intervals. It is di∣vided by the Equator into almost two equal parts; the Air is very hot and unhealthful; the Soil will produce little Grain but Rice and Millet. It yieldeth Ginger, Pepper, Camphir, Agarick and Cassia in great abun∣dance, Wax and Hony, Silks and Cottons; rich Mines of Tin, Iron and Sulphur; and such quantity of Gold, that some conceive it to be Solomons Ophir; and some the Taprobane of the ancients. The Inhabitants are for the most part Pagans; except the Sea Coast, where Mahometanism has got some footing. It has a vast number of Rivers and Marshes; which with the Woods do much promote the unwholsomeness of the Air. The Hollanders enjoy four or five Fortresses in it, and are become more powerful than some of the Kings. The Portuguese traffick to it; but it is, when the others will permit them; for they have no estab∣lishments here. Sie Sund, Sundae Fretum, Sundicum fretum, a streight between the Baltick Sea, and the German Ocean; call'd by the Dutch Ore Sunn; by the Eng∣lish the Sound. It stretcheth fifty Miles from North-West to South-East; about fifteen at its greatest breadth: but between Elsingburg and Cronenburg not above three over: which necessitates all Ships that pass to and fro to pay a Toll to the King of Den∣mark;
he being able otherwise by the Cannon of his Castles to shut up the Passage. §. This name is at∣tributed also to the Streights, betwixt the Islands of Java and Sumatra in the East-Indies. The Dutch call it, Straet Van Sunda: and Latin Writers, Sundae fretum. The Island of the Sund or Souud, compre∣hend in the Portugueses's accounts who gave them this name, all those Islands in the Indian Ocean, which lye beyond the Promontory of Malaca: some near, some under the Equinoctial. Commonly divided into the Islands of the Sund to the East, and to the West. Of the former, Gilolo, Banda, Flores, Ma∣casar, and the Moluccaes, are the Principal. Of the other, Borneo, Java, and Sumatra. Sundenberg, or Sunderbourg, a Town and Duchy in the Isle of Alsen near Iutland. Sunderland, Sunderlandia, a small Island at the Mouth of the River VVere, in the North-East part of the Bishoprick of Durham, in Esington Ward: once a part of the Continent; but rent off by the violence of the Sea; from whence it has the name of Sunder∣land. A place of no great note, only for its Sea-Coal Trade, till it was made the Title of an Earldom by Charles I. who in 1627, Created Emanuel Lord Scrope of Bolton, President of the North, Earl of Sunderland. He dying Childless, Henry Lord Spen∣ser, of VVormleighton, (in 1643.) was Created Earl of Sunderland, and slain the eighth of June the same year in the first Battel of Newbery. To whom suc∣eeded Robert his Son, sometime Principal Secretary of State, and President of the Council to King James II. Sungkiang, a trading and populous City in the Province of Nanking in China. The Capital over two others. Suntgaw, or Sundgow, Suntgovia, a Province of Germany, now under the King of France, by the Peace of Munster. Bounded on the North by Alsatia; on the East by the Rhine, and the Canton of Basil; (which last is sometimes included under this name;) on the South by the Dominions of the Bishop of Ba∣sil; and on the West by the Franche Comté. The Principal Places in it are Befort, Mulhausen, Ferre∣te, (whence it hath the name also of the County of Ferrete) and Huningue. The last has been lately fortified by the King of France. Sura, an ancient Episcopal City of Syria, near the Euphrates. The See is a Suffragan to the Archbishop of Hierapolis. §. Plutarch remembers us of a Town of this name in Lycia, in the Lesser Asia: famed for Oracles in ancient times delivered there. Betwixt Phellus and Strumita. Surate, Surata, a very famous City of the Hither Indies, in the Kingdom of Guzarat, upon the Bay of Cambaya: under the Dominion of the great Mo∣gul; which has a convenient Port or Haven, much frequented by the European and Armenian Mer∣chants for Diamonds, Pearls, Ambergrease, Musk, Civet, Spices, and Indian Stuffs; procured from di∣vers parts, and here laid up in Mazagines. It lies (saith Monsieur Thevenot) 21. deg. and some minutes from the Line: and was then designed to be Fortified with a Brick instead of its ancient Earthen Wall; which had not been able to preserve it from the depredations of a Raja. In the time of the Monson or Fair (kept in the Spring Quarter) it is exceeding full of People; not meanly furnished at others; nor are those Inhabi∣tants less considerable on the account of their Wealth, than Number. The English and Dutch have their Factories here: it is the Staple of the English Trade in the East-Indies. It has a Castle at the South end of the Town, upon the River; which is square, flank'd at each corner by a large Tower, The Ditches on three sides are filled with Sea Water; on the West the River runs; and there are many Cannon mounted in it. The Governor commands over all the adjacent Provinces, and keeps the train and equipage of a Prince. For the rest you may consult Thevenot Part III. pag. 15. Surina, a Province of South America, between the confluence of the River Cayana, and that of the Amazons. Surrey, Suria, is separated on the North from Buckingham and Middlesex by the great River Thames; on the East it is bounded by Kent, on the South by Sussex and Hampshire, and on the West by Hampshire and Barkshire. In length thirty four Miles, in breadth about twenty two; in circumference one hundred and twelve; including one hundred and forty Parishes, with eight Market Towns. The Air is sweet and pleasant; the Soil, especially in the verges of the County fruitful; the middle Parts being some∣what hard to cultivate. Whence the People are used to say, their County is like a Course piece of Cloth with a fine List. Besides the Thames, here is the VVay, the Mole, and the Wandle, (whose head springs from Croydon,) all emptying themselves in the Thames. It has many Noble and Princely Houses; but few Towns or Places of any considerable greatness: the Principal Town in it being Kingston upon Thames. The Regni an old British Tribe were the first Inha∣bitants of this County. In the times of the Saxon Heptarchy, it was a part of the Kingdom of the South Saxons. The first Earl of it was VVill. de VVarren, Created by VVilliam the Conqueror in 1067. VVil∣liam (the third of this Line) succeeded in 1135. who was followed by VVilliam de Blois Son of King Stephen, first Husband of Isabel de VVarren in 1148. and by Hameline Plantagenet, base Son of George Earl of Anjou, half Brother to Edward III. second Husband of the said Isabel in 1163. His Posterity en∣joyed it in four descents till 1347: when the Male Line failing, Richard Fitz Alan Lord Treasurer was Earl of Surrey. In 1398. Thomas Holland was Earl of Kent and Duke of Surrey; afterwards Beheaded. Thomas Fitz Alan (Son of the former Richard) died Earl of Surrey in 1414. In 1451, John Lord Mow∣bray was Created Earl of VVarren and Surrey, and after Duke of Norfolk. In 1475. Richard (a second Son of Edward IV.) was the thirteenth Earl of Sur∣rey. In 1483. Thomas L. Howard L. Treasurer, after Duke of Norfolk was Created Earl of Surrey; in which Family it is at this day. Surunga, a City and Kingdom in Japan in the Island of Niphon. Sus, Susa or Susum, a Kingdom in Biledulgerida in Africa; so called from a River of the same Name. It is bounded on the North by the Kingdom of Moroc∣co; on the East by Darha; on the South by Tesseta; and on the West by the Atlantick Ocean. Divided in∣to seven Provinces; the principal Cities in it are Taru∣dant (the Regal City) Teseut, and Sancta Cruz. This is a pleasant, rich, fruitful Kingdom; yields Wine, Grain, Fruits, Pasturage, Indico, Alum, &c. has a great Quantity of Gold, which is a perpetual cause of War amongst them: and many Castles and Villa∣ges, well fortified by the Natives, since the Portuguese abandoned this Country in the last Century. Now subject to the Kingdom of Fez; tho it has been a di∣stinct Kingdom; and the Inhabitants are for the most part Mahometans, and some of the best Soldiers in Africa. Susa, one of the principal Cities in the Principality of Piedmont, upon the Doria, at the foot of the Cottian Alps, which separate Piedmons from Dau∣phine; and the Capital of a Marquisae of its own Name: belonging to the Duke of Savoy; but taken by
the French Forces under Monsieur Cattinat, Novem∣ber 1690. Nineteen Miles from Pignerol. The French call it Suse. This City shews an Inscription upon a Triumphal Arch, from which Learned Men conclude, that the Emperor Augustus erected his Trophy hereabouts for the Conquest of the Alpine Na∣tions, in the year of Rome 740; fourteen Years before our Saviour. For tho others place that Trophy about the Foot of le Col de Tende or the Maritime Alpes, near Nice and Monaco, from a part of the words Gentes Alpinae Devictae, seen there upon a Fragment of a stone: yet these two Opinions are reconcilable, by supposing that Augustus set up this Trophy at the foot of both the Maritime and Cottian Alpes for the greater glory. § Susa was also the Capital of the an∣cient Country Susiana in Asia; at the entrance of a spacious Plain, which the River Choaspes watered. The Kings of Persia used to pass the Spring at it. Darius repaired it, says Pliny. Alexander the Great took it. It is now in a flourishing state, if the same Souster. See Souster. Susdal, Susdalia, a City of Muscovy; the Capi∣tal of a Province of the same Name, and a Bishop's See under the Archbishop of Rostow. It stands eighty Miles from Moscow to the South-East, and one hun∣dred and thirty from Novogorod Nisi to the North-West. Susiana, an ancient Country of Asia; betwixt Syria, Persia and Chaldaea: whereof Susa was the Capital City, and Melitene one considerable Province. It had the honour to be a Kingdom: which, after the death of Abradatus King of Susiana, submitted to the power of Cyrus. Sussex, Sussexia, one of the Southern Counties of England: Bounded on the North by Surrey and Kent; on the East by Kent; on the South by the British Sea; and on the West by Hampshire. Its Length from East to West is sixty Miles; the broadest part from North to South not above twenty; and its Circumference about one hundred and fifty: wherein are contained one hundred and twelve Parishes, with eighteen Market Towns. The Air is good; but sub∣ject to great Fogs and Mists out of the neighbour Sea; which recompenceth this Inconvenience with plenty of Fish and Fowl. There are few Harbors upon this Coast: the Soil is rich and fruitful, but the Roads miry and unpleasant: the Middle of the Coun∣try has excellent Meadows; the Sea-coasts are Hilly, but afford plenty of Corn and Grass: the North-side full of Woods and Groves. The principal River is Arun. The chief City in it is Chichester, which is a Bishop's See: the next to it, Lewes. The Regni were the ancient Inhabitants of this County: who were subdued by Aulus Plautius in the reign of Claudi∣us the Roman Emperor. In 478, Ella erected here the Kingdom of the South-Saxons, from whence this County has its Name, The first Earl of it was Wil∣liam de Albeney Earl of Arundel, who married Ade∣lizia, the Relict of Henry I, in 1178. He was suc∣ceeded by VVilliam his Son: it continued in this Fa∣mily for five Descents. In 1243, John Plantagenet, Earl of Surrey, succeeded. In 1305, John, a Son of the former, followed. In 1529, Robert Ratcliffe was Created, by Henry VIII, Earl of Sussex; whose Po∣sterity enjoyed this Honor six Descents. In 1644, Thomas Lord Savil was Created the fourteenth Earl of Sussex; whose Son succeeded, and in him that Family ended. This Honor, in 1674, was conferred upon Thomas Leonard Lord Dacres, (who married Anne Fitz-Roy, eldest Daughter to the Duchess of Cleav∣land) by Charles II. Sutherland, Sutherlandia, a County in the North of Scotland. Bounded on the North by Caithness and Strathnavern; on the West by Assint, on the South by Ros, and on the East by the German Ocean. The principal Town in it is Dornock. Sutri, Sutrium, Colonia Julia Sutrina, a City in the States of the Church in S. Peters Patrimony, up∣on the River Pozzolo: which is a Bishops See, but for ever united to the See of Nepi; from whence it stands four Miles to the West, and twenty four from Rome to the South-West. It is little and incompassed with Rocks on all sides. Livy says of it, that Camillus, when it had revolted against the Romans, went with an Army to reduce it. In the year of Christ 1046. the Emperor Henry III. assembled a Council here, which deposed Pope Gregory VI. (who had intruded into the Roman See in 1044.) and elected Constantine II. in his stead. In 1059. another Council confirm'd Pope Nicholas II. his Election to the See, and deposed the Antipope to him, Benedict, before Bishop of Veletri. Sutton-Cofield, a Market Town in Warwick∣shire, in the Hundred of Hemlingford. Suvas, Sebastopolis, a City of Cappadocia in A∣sia; which is a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Sebastia: now a very considerable Place, and the Seat of a Turkish Governor: about fifty Miles from Ama∣sia to the North-East. Long. 67. 30. Lat. 42. 30. Swafham, a Market Town in the County of Nor∣folk, in the Hundred of S. Greneho. Swansey, a Market Town in Glamorganshire in Wales; the Capital of its Hundred. Swarteness, Iccium, a Cape in Picardy, so called by the Dutch; four Leagues from Calais to the West, and six from the Coast of Kent. The English call it Blackness. Swarte Sluys, a small City in Over-Yssel, one of the United Provinces of the Low-Countries. Sweden, Suecia, one of the Northern Kingdoms of Europe; called by the Inhabitants Swerie, Swe∣denrick, and Sweriesryke: by the Germans Schwe∣den; by the French Suede; by the Poles Szwecya, and Szwedzka Ziemia; by the Italians La Suetia, by the Spaniards La Suecia. It is a great and po∣pulous Kingdom; contains the greatest part of that which was of old called Scandinavia; for some time united to the Crown of Denmark: and has been a separate and distinct Kingdom, only since 1525. Bounded on the North by Lapland, Norway, and the Frozen Ocean; on the East by Muscovy or great Russia; on the South by the Baltick Sea; and on the West by Denmark and Norway. The principal Parts of it are, first, Gothia; second, Sweden properly so called; third Norland; fourth Finland; fifth Ingria; sixth Livonia; all which are subdivided into thirty four Counties. They are again subdivided into Hae∣radlis like our Hundreds. It has seventeen Cities; the Capital of all Stockholm. The Air of this whole Kingdom is very cold; clear or foggy as it lies nearer or remoter from the Seas, Lakes, and Marshes; and for the most part more temperate and pure than that of Norway. In length from Stockholm to the Bor∣ders of Lapland one thousand Italian Miles; in breadth twenty days Journey on Horseback: so that with all its Appendages it is thought nine hundred Miles greater than France and Italy put together. It hath one Forest, betwixt Jenkoping and Elsimbourg, thirty Leagues long; with plenty of Rivers, Lakes, Marshes, Rocks and Mountains: so that the soil is more fertile than that of any other of the Northern Kingdoms: which enables them to transport great quantities of Malt and Barley; Brass, Lead, Steel, Copper, Iron, Hides of Goats, Bucks, Oxen, rich Furrs, Deals and Oaks for Buildings. They have some Silver in their Mines; in the Woods Tar and Honey; and vast quantities of Sea and Fresh-water Fish. The People are strong and healthful, hospitable and civil; live sometimes to a hundred and forty years of Age.
So industrious, that a Beggar is not to be seen amongst them. Of latter times they have shewn the World they are good Soldiers, and capable of Learning too. This was the Country of the Goths; who in the fourth Century pulled up the Roman Empire in the West, and let in the other Barbarous Nations; who still possess it. This People were never subject to the Ro∣mans: but have been under Kingly Government from the first Peopling of the Country. We have a pretty certain Catalogue of these Kings from the times of Charles the Great to Magnus IV. King of Norway and Sweden: (amongst these, Olaus II. first took the name of King of Sweden: his Predecessors were called Kings of Ʋpsal, after their capital City:) who in 1363. was succeeded by Albert Duke of Mecklen∣burg in prejudice of Haquin King of Denmark and Norway; after whom succeeded Margaret the Semi∣ramis of the North, (Queen of Denmark, Sweden, and Norway,) in 1387. She united all these King∣doms into one by an Act of State. In 1411. Erick IV. Duke of Pomeren succeeded as her Adopted Son in all these Kingdoms. After this the Kingdom be∣came Elective and Unsteady: till in 1523. (or 25) Gustavus Ericus was chosen King; who expelled the Danes, and put an end to that Union. He died in 1560. In 1611. Gustavus Adolphus the Great attain∣ed the Succession in this Line; who was killed in the Battel at Lutzen in Misnia in Germany in 1632. To him succeeded his Daughter, the most famous and ad∣mired Christina; who of her own voluntary motion, and pleasure, by declaration in form of Law, with the consent of the States, i. e. truly Abdicated the Crown to her Counsin Charles Gustavus in 1654. and lately died at Rome. Charles the present King of Sweden is the ninth in this Line; and succeeded Charles II. his Fa∣ther, in 1660. This People was converted to the Christian Faith by Ansgarus Bishop of Bremen about 816. Lotharius the Emperor procured the settle∣ment of Bishops in these Northern Countries in 1133. They received the Reformation under Gustavus I. in 1525; and have ever since stuck to the Augustane Confession: which they preserved in Germany too, when it was (about 1630.) in great danger to have been over-powered by the Prosperity of the House of Austria. They have also planted a New Sweden, in New America, not far from Virginia. Swerin, Suerinum, a City of Germany; which is a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Breme; in the Lower Saxony. Heretofore subject to its own Bishop and the Duke of Mecklenburgh: but now in∣tirely under that Duke by the Treaty of Munster. It stands upon a Lake of the same name; seven Ger∣man Miles from Gustrow to the West, and three from Wismar to the South. This City received with its Bishop the Augustane Confession, in 1530. In 1631. taken by Gustavus Adolphus; and was under the Swedes till the Peace of Munster. The Bishoprick was Founded by Frederick I. Emperor of Ger∣many. Swernicke, a considerable City and Pass upon the River Trina, near the Confines of Bosnia. Taken by the Imperialists October 15. 1688. Swilly, a Lake in the County of Derry in Ire∣land. Swindon, a Market Town in Wiltshire, in the Hundred of Kinwarston. Swine, a River or Bay in Pomerania, the same with the Oder; the Germans write Schwine. Switzerland, Helvetia, is a large Country in Europe: which of ancient Times was esteemed a part of France or Gallia; in the middle times, of Germa∣ny; and for three of the last Centuries has been a Free and Independent Country; governed by its own Magistrates. It is called by the Germans Schwitzer∣land; by thē French Suisse; by some of the Natives Eyatgnosts-Schafft, that is, the United Lands; by the Italians l' Elvetia; by the Spaniards Helveciae; by the Poles Szwayzarska: On the North it is bounded by the Rhine, which separates it from Ger∣many; on the East by the Lake di Idro or Brescia, and the same River which divides it from Germany and the Grisons; on the South by the Lake Lemane, Walisserland, and the Dukedom of Milan; on the West by the Frenche Comté. The Country is for the most part over-spread with Lakes and Moun∣tains: yet not barren; the tops of these Hills being full of Grass, and the bottoms surrounded with rich Meadows and fruitful Pastures. It yields Corn and Wine, but not sufficient for its Inhabitants. In length two hundred and forty Miles, in breadth one hun∣dred and eighty. The Inhabitants are Honest, Fru∣gal, Industrious, great Lovers of Liberty, good Sol∣diers, Lovers of Impartiality and Justice. About the time of Julius Caesar's Conquering Gaul, fifty six years before the Birth of our Saviour; these People being oppressed with too great a number of People, to the number of three Millions six hundred and eight thousand made an Irruption into Gaul; burning all their own Towns before they left them. But Julius Caesar gave them such warm Entertainment in Gaul, that they were forced to beg his leave to return; two Millions of them having perished in this War. From henceforward they were subject to the Romans; till in the Reigns of Honorius and Valentinian II. they were conquered by the Burgundians, and Germans. A part of this Country about 635. was given to Sige∣bert Earl of Habspurg, the Founder of the House of Austria: though that Dukedom fell not into the hands of this Family, till the times of Rodolph the Fortunate, about 1376. He being the twentieth in this Line, and elected Emperor of Germany in 1273; in 1282. created Albert his Son Duke of Austria. The rest of this Country was given by Rodolph (the last King of Burgundy) to Conrade II. Emperor of Germany, in 1032. From henceforward they were esteemed a part of Germany. But being unjustly handled by Albert Duke of Austria in 1308, they Re∣volted and Leagued against him; that is, the Can∣tons of Switz, Ʋnderwalt, and Ʋri; (He was after∣wards killed in a Battel with them:) which League they made perpetual in the year 1315. In 1332. Lu∣cerne; in 1351. Zurich; in 1352. Glaris; the same year Zug and Berne two Free States; in 1481. Fri∣burg, Basil and Solothurine; in 1501. Schafhausen; and in 1513. Appenzil were added to the former; which thirteen Cantons make up that knot of Com∣monwealths, now called the Switz: and their Liberty in the year 1649. was intirely fixed by the Treaty of Munster. These Cantons in the year 1663. made a League with Lewis XIV. King of France for sixty years. They were converted to the Christian Faith by one Lucius, about the year of Christ 177. At the Reformation Zuinglius began here to Preach before Luther; and had that success, that the Cantons of Zurich, Berne, Basil and Schafhausen, followed his Doctrine; and held a Synod at Basil for the Establish∣ment of it in 1530. The Cantons of Glaris and Ap∣penzil are mixed of both Religions; the rest persist∣ed in the Communion of the Church of Rome; and have been more addicted to her Interest, than their Ancestors were before the Reformation. The Roman Catholick Cantons assemble ordinarily at Lucerne: the Reformed, at Aran. The General Assemblies of the whole Cantons are wont to be held at Baden. These Cantons have each their different Laws, independent of one another; and are governed in the nature of so many distinct Republick.
Swol, Navalia, a strong Town or City in Over-Yssel, (one of the Provinces of the Ʋnited Nether∣lands) seated on the Yssel; three German Miles almost above its fall into the Zuyder Zee, ten from Nimeguen to the North, and two from Swarte Sluys to the South. It has double Ditches and Ramparts: thought the strongest Town in this Province: so that the States always retire hither in time of great necessity. Guicciardin. Syena, an antient and noble City of the Thebais, in the Ʋpper Egypt: in the Borders of Aethiopia, and upon the Banks of the Nile. The utmost Boun∣dary of the Turkish Empire on that side now, as it was heretofore of the Roman. One of the principal Cataracts of the Nile falls near it, amongst the Rocks, with great Noise and Violence. The Mountains here∣abouts produce the Granite Stone, called therefore Sy∣enites after the name of this City: of which the antient Aegyptians made their Tombs, Columns, Obe∣lisks and Pyramids to eternalize the memory of their Great Men. It is an Archbishop's See: sheweth ma∣ny noble Edifices, and Tombs with Epitaphs in La∣tin and the Egyptian Languages. But of a greater cir∣cuit in former times. The modern Name by some is put Asna; others, Zema, and Asuan. Sygaros, an Island, mentioned by Pliny in the Gulph of Arabia. Symplegades, Cyane, two Rocks or small Islands in the Canal of the Black Sea, or the Streights of Constantinople: so near to each other, that the antient Poets said they dash'd together. Synnada, an ancient City in Phrygia Magna, in the Lesser Asia: in which Eusebius places a Council in 265, that did declare, Baptism by Hereticks to be null. Syracusa, once the noblest and most potent City in the Island of Sicily, on the East side of that Island. Built by Archias a Corinthian, in the year of the World 1190; above seven hundred years before the Birth of our Saviour; in the days of Ʋzziah King of Judah. In after-times it became the greatest and the most celebrated City the Greeks possessed in any part of the World. Strabo saith, its Circuit in his time was an hundred and eighty Greek Stadia's; that is, twenty two English Miles and an half. Livy in his twenty fifth Book saith, the spoil of it was almost e∣qual to that of Carthage; wherein Plutarch agrees with him. Famous it is for a great Defeat of the Athenians under its Walls; in the year of the World 3536. of Rome 339. It fell under the power of the Romans in the year of the World 3738. of Rome 541. two hundred and ten years before the Birth of our Saviour; when it was intirely ruined by Marcel∣lus, the Roman General. It had a triple Wall, two Ports, three Fortresses; three famous Temples (be∣sides others) of Jupiter, Diana, and Minerva: an admirable Statue of Apollo, an Amphitheatre, a Pa∣lace of Hiero's Building, and divers other noble pub∣lick Works. The Mathematician Archimedes (its Na∣tive) retarded more the taking of it by Marcellus with his Art, than the Citizens and Garrison by their Arms and Sallies. And at last in the Conquest, was killed, unknown. Theocritus the Poet, and Epicharmus the Philosopher, were its Natives also. It recovered again; and in Tullies times had three Walls, three Castles, a Marble Gate; and could raise twelve thousand Horse, and four hundred Ships. In the year of Christ 884. the Sarazens took it, and razed it to the ground; and it never recovered since. For whereas before it was an Archbishops See, and the Metropolis of the Island; it is now but a Bishops See under the Archbishop of Montereale; small, and not mighty populous; called by the Inhabitants, Siragoza, or Syragosa. Mr. San∣dys, (who saw it) saith, it stands now in an Island, called Ortygia; having a strong Castle well fortified; and is it self strongly walled, having two noble Ha∣vens; kept by a Garrison of two hundred Spaniards, and three hundred Towns men. The Buildings are ancient; the Inhabitants grave. It stands in a Marsh, which makes it less healthful, though it affords the City a great plenty of all things. The Cathedral Church of S. Luke that is there now, was heretofore the Temple of Diana. Long. 39. 24. Lat. 36. 24. Syria, a vast Country in the Greater Asia; called by the Jews Aram or Charam. When it is largely taken, it contains Phoenicia, Palestine, (or the Ho∣ly Land) and Syria properly so called. In the latter Acceptation it is bounded to the North by Cilicia, and the lesser Armenia; on the East by Mesopota∣mia, (divided from it by the Euphrates, and Arabia Deserta;) on the South it has Palestine and Phoeni∣cia; and on the West the Mediterranean Sea. Now called by the Inhabitants Souristan, by the French Sourie, by the Italians Soria. Its length from North to South four hundred; from East to West it is in breadth two hundred Italian Miles. In very ancient Times Damascus was the capital City: in the middle times Antioch; now Aleppo. This Country is by Na∣ture extremely Fruitful; and once as Populous, but now almost desolate. As to the Story of it, N. Da∣mascenus mentions one Adadus slain by David King of Israel; after whom there followed a Succession of Kings, thirteen in number: the last of which (Rezin) was conquered by Tiglath Phileser King of Assyria, and beheaded in Damascus about the year of the World 3213. After this they were subject to the Kings of Assyria, Media and Persia, till after the Death of Alexander the Great. Seleucus Nicanor began another Kingdom here, about the year of the World 3644; whose Posterity and Successors to the number of twenty one, or twenty five, (of which Antiochus XII. was the last) Reigned, till Pompey the Great made a perfect Conquest of all Syrià for the Romans in the year of the World 4650, sixty two years before the Birth of our Saviour. It continued under the Romans till the year of Christ 636. (or as others 34.) when it was conquered by Haumer the third Calyph of the Saracens. About the year of Christ 1075. Melech and Ducat began a Turkish Kingdom: which in the year 1262, after a Descent of nine Kings, was destroyed by Haalon the Tartar. Next it fell into the Hands of the Mamalucks of E∣gypt; under whom it continued till the year 1515: and then was conquered by Selim, Emperor of the Turks: under whom it is at this day, most wretch∣edly harassed and desolated. Syrtes, two dangerous sandy Gulphs in the Me∣diterranean Sea, upon the Coast of Barbary in Afri∣ca: called antiently, Syrtes magna & parva: now, the Gulph de Sidra, and de Capes. In one name, the Shoals of Barbary. The first lies betwixt the King∣doms of Tripoli and Barca, the other betwixt Tri∣poli and Tunis. TA. TA, a River on the South of China, in the Pro∣vinces of Quansey and Quantam. Tabago, the Tobacco Island, in the West-Indies, in the North Sea: Possessed by the Dutch: com∣monly also called Niew Walcheren. It lies eight Miles from la Trinidad to the North-East, and nine∣ty South of Barbadoes: having eighteen small Rivers, and many sase Harbours: about nine Dutch Miles
long, and three broad; very fruitful, and full of all Necessaries. About forty years since, the Dutch be∣gan to plant it. In 1673. the English, under Sir To∣bias Bridges took and plundered it; carried away four hundred Prisoners. and as many Negroes. In 1677. the French (being desirous to drive the Dutch out of it) sent the Comte d' Estrée with ten Ships: which entered Klips Bay, and for several days ingaged a Fleet of eight Dutch Ships there lying under the Command of James Binckes, a Dutchman: who so well defended the Island, that though the French pretended they destroyed the Fort the Dutch had built; yet they were forced to draw off, and leave the Dutch Masters of the Place. Long. 316. Lat. 10. 30. The whole Plantation of this Island is Tobacco, after its name. Tabarestan, Tabarestania, a Province of Persia, toward the Caspian Sea; containing a great part of the ancient Hyrcania. The Caspian Sea is sometimes from this Province called the Sea of Tabarestan. Aste∣rabath its Capital City. Tabarque, Tabraca, an ancient City in the King∣dom of Tunis in Africa, upon the Mediterranean Sea, betwixt Hippo and Ʋtica, It hath had the ho∣nour in the times of Christianity there, to be a Bishops See; but now, only considerable for its Port. Pliny, Claudian, and Stephanus mention it. Tabasco, Tabasca, a Town and Province in New Spain, in North America. The Province lies between the Bay of Mexico to the North, and the Province of Chiapa to the South: extended from East to West forty six Spanish Leagues. The principal City in it was by the Indians called Tabasco; but the Spaniards call it Nuestra Sennora de la Vitoria, our Lady of Victory; because Cortez, the Spanish General, gave the Mexicans an irrecoverable Defeat near this Place. Tabenna, an Island of the Thebais, in the King∣dom of Egypt; near the City Syene. Inhabited for∣merly by the Monks, entituled Tabenniosiae from it; in whose times, Tabennis, was a small Town standing here. Tabor, Taborium, a Town in Bohemia, upon the River Lauznicz; twenty Miles from Budwess, and forty five from Prague. The Hussites made this Place the Seat of their War, and fortified it: and from thence for twenty years ruined the Imperial and Hereditary Countries; called thereupon Taborites. Tacara, a small Kingdom on the Coast of Gui∣nea, in Africa. Tacaze, Tacasus, Astaboras, a vast River in the Higher Aethiopia; which ariseth in the Kingdom of Angote; chiefly from three Fountains; and runs West sometime between Dagana and Hoga. Then bending North through the Kingdom of Tigre, it watereth the Desart of Oldeba; and joyns the River Mareb or Marebo. Being much improved, it passeth through the Kingdom of Dengin; and at Jalack falls into the Nile in the Kingdom of Nubia, from the East. Tachiali, Antiochia Maeandri, a City of Caria, in the Lesser Asia; which was a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Ephesus; from which it stands se∣venty Miles to the East, upon the Meander; and thirty seven from Bursia to the South. Latitus Bi∣shop of this See, subscribed to the Council of Chalce∣don. Long. 58.00. Lat. 39. 30. Tadcaster, a Market Town in the West Riding of Yorkshire: which hath a large Stone Bridge over the River Warfe; and Lime-Stone digged up in its Neighbourhood in Plenty. Tadouslack, Tadussacum, a Town in New France, upon the Bay of S. Laurence: where it receives the River Saguen; a hundred Miles from Quebec to the South-East. Taenarus. See Matapan. Taff, Rhatostathybius, a small River in Glamor∣ganshire in Wales; which watering and giving name to Landaff, falls into the Irish Sea near the Borders of Monmouthshire. Taflete, Tafleta, a Kingdom in Biledulgerida in Africa; between Segellomessa to the East, and Dar∣ba to the West: bounded with the Kingdom of Mo∣rocco to the North. The Capital City is of the same name. A populous and plentiful City, fortified with a Castle; of great Trade for Indico, Silks, and Maro∣quines: but the Country elsewhere is extreme Sandy, hot and desert. About 1660. the King of this place, after many Victories, conquered Morocco and Fez; and kept them for some time. This is supposed to have been a part of the ancient Numidia. Tagaste, is now a desolate Village in the Pro∣vince of Constantine, in the Kingdom of Algiers in Barbary: which heretofore was a Bishops See, and famous for giving Birth to S. Augustine. Tagat, a fruitful Mountain, two Leagues from the City Fez, to the East; in the Kingdom of Fez in Barbary: about two Leagues in length. Covered with Pines on one side, and affording Land for Til∣lage on the other. Taicheu, Taicheum, a City in the Province of Che∣kiam in China. It stands upon a Mountain, and is the Capital over five other Cities. Tajima, a Town and Province in the North part of Niphon. Taillebourg, a Town in the Province of Xain∣tonge in France, upon the River Charante: at which S. Louis King of France in 1242. defeated the Male∣contents of his Kingdom, that were risen in Arms a¦gainst him. Tajo, Tagus, one of the most celebrated Rivers of Spain. It ariseth from two Fountains in New Castile, but in the Borders of Arragon; at the foot of Mount Vallezillo. And running North, it takes in the Molina: then turning South-West, it passeth by Pa∣strana to Aronjues: where it admits the Tajuna, with a knot of other Rivers from Madrid and He∣nares: turning more Westerly, it salutes Toledo; takes in beneath it the Gaudarrama, and the Alberch; visits Talavera, and Puente de Archobisbo, where it is covered by a Bridge; beneath Almaraz it receives the Guadalupo. So passing by Alcantara, it entereth the Kingdom of Portugal at Perdigaon; and recei∣ving the Rio Monsul, and a vast number of small Brooks in that Kingdom, it forms the vast Haven of Lisbon; and on the South side of that City passeth into the Atlantick Ocean: having from its Fountains run one hundred and ten Spanish Leagues, and being at its Mouth two Spanish Leagues broad. There is no River in Spain more frequently mentioned than this, especially on the account of its Golden Sand, by the Poets. Taiping, a City of the Province of Nankim, up∣on the River Kiang in China. There is another of Quantum: which is now under the King of Tumkim. Taitung, a strong City in the Province of Xamsi in China. It is the third of Note there, and drives a great Trade. Tajuna, Tagonius, a River of New Castile; which falls into the Tajo. Taiyven, the Capital City of the Province of Xansi in China, near the River Truen. Talabo, or Talaro, Pitanus, a River in Corsica. Talamone, a Town and Port to the Tyrrehenian Sea, in the Estate called Degli Presidii, upon the Bor∣ders of the Dukedom of Tuscany, in Italy. Belong∣ing to the Spaniards.
Talavera, Ebara, Libora, a Town in New Ca∣stile, upon the Tajo. See Tajo. Tala, a very fruitful Island in the Caspian Sea, according to Pliny, (who calls it Tazata) and other Ancients: But we have no Modern Account of it. Tamaga, Tamaa and Tambro, a River of Spain: which ariseth in Gallicia, above Mone Roy; and run∣ning South through the Province of Entre Douro è minbo, falls into the Douro; six Spanish Leagues above Porto to the East. Tamar, Tamaris, a River in the East of Corn∣wal, which divides that County from Devonshire. It ariseth in Devonshire, near the Irish Sea; and running South, watereth Bridgrule, Telco, Tamer∣ten, (which has its name from this River) Beyton, Lawhitton, Cal-Stock: and having received amongst others the Foy, at Plimouth it entereth the British Sea; forming there a Noble and Capacious Haven. See Cambden. Tamaraca, a City and Island upon the Coast of Brasil in South America, under the Portuguese: making one of the fourteen Governments or Pro∣vinces of Brasil. Tamaro, Thamarus, a small River in the Princi∣pato, in the Kingdom of Naples: which rising from the Appennine, a little above Benevento, falls into the Calore. Tamasso, Tamassus, a Town in the Island of Cy∣prus, towards Famagosta. Of great Repute for its Tin-Mines. Taming, Taminga, a City in the Province of Pe∣kim in China. Tampan, the Mouth of the Rhosne. Tamul, a petty Kingdom contained in Bisnagar, in the Hither East-Indies. Tamworth, a Borough and Market Town in the Borders of Staffordshire and Warwickshire, at the Confluence of the Tame and the Auker: whereof one washeth that part of the Town, which stands in Staf∣fordshire; and the other that in Warwickshire. It hath a strong (though small) Castle for its defence: is beautified with a large Church; and in the Lower House of Parliament represented by two Burgesses. Tanagra, an ancient City of Boeotia (now Stra∣mulipa) in Greece, near the River Asopus: Called Orops by Aristotle, and Gephyra in Stephanus. A∣thenaeus mentions, Cetus Tanagranus, as a Proverb for a vast Whale, because one of a prodigious Mag∣nitude was cast up here. It is a Bishops See under the Archbishop of Athens, the same with the Anatoria of some Moderns. Tanais, a River of Crim Tartary, which divides Europe from Asia. Called by the Neighbouring Na∣tions, Don; by the Italians, Tana. It ariseth in the Province of Rezan, in Moscovy (eleven hundred Miles from Moscow) from the Lake Iuvanouvo Lezicro, which is five hundred Wrests broad; and flowing with a very Oblique Course through the Coun∣tries possessed by the Precopensian, or Crim Tar∣tars; not far from the Wolga falls into the Lake of Moeotis; near a City called from it Tanais, now ru∣ined. This City was once taken by the Russ; but now in the hands of the Turks. The River divides it into two parts, and affords it the convenience of an Haven; though now not much frequented. Long. 60. 40. Lat. 48. 09. Tanaro, Tanarus, a Navigable River of Lombar∣dy; which ariseth in Piedmont, in the Borders of the States of Genoua from the Apennine: and run∣ning North-East, watereth Mondovi, Alba, Asti, and Alexandria, in the Dukedom of Milan: it falls into the Po at Bassignano; between Casal to the North, and Voghera to the South▪ Tandaya, one of the Philippine Islands. Tandra, an Island of the Euxine Sea, at the Mouth of the Borysthenes. Taneaxima, a small Island belonging to Japan. Tanes, Tanitioum Ostium, one of the Eastern Mouths of the Nile. This gave name to Tunis, now Tanes, a desolate Village in Egypt at this time; but formerly one of the greatest, richest, and strongest Cities of Egypt; a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Damietta. The Calyphs rebuilt it, after it had been some Ages desolate; but it soon returned to its former State. Tangier, Tingi, Tingis, one of the oldest Cities of Africa, in the Province of Hasbat, in the Kingdom of Fez. Built by Antaeus a Phoenician, as the Learned Sir John Marsham proves from Procopius, who men∣tions an ancient Pillar with this Inscription in the Phoenician Tongue; We are fled from Joshua the Son of Nun, a Robber; whereupon he placeth the building of it in Joshua's time, and saith it is undoubt∣edly a very ancient Phoenician Colony. It stands at the Mouth of the Streights of Gibraltar, towards the Atlantick Ocean; and was anciently an Archbi∣shops See, and an University. The Goths possessed it after the Romans, and annexed it to the Government of Ceuta. In 1471. Alphonsus King of Portugal made himself Master of it. From which time it con∣tinued in the possession of that Crown, till in 1662. it was put by the Portuguese into the hands of the En∣glish. Charles II. having bestowed immense charges upon the Haven and Out-Works of it, (after it had prosperously repelled several Attacks of the Moors in 1663, 1664. and in 1682;) in 1683. by the Lord Dartmouh, that Prince ordered all the Forts and Works to be blown up; the Mole to be slighted; and withdrew the Garrison into England; finding the benefit not equal to the charge of keeping it. Long. 6. 30. Lat. 35. 56. Tangermund, Tangermunda, a Town in the Old Marquisate of Brandenburg; upon the Elbe, where it takes in the River Tanger: seven German Miles from Magdeburgh to the North, toward Havel∣burgh. Heretofore a very strong and considerable place. The Emperour Charles IV. kept his Court there: but in the Swedish War it was often taken, and suffered so very much, that it is become very in∣considerable now. Tangu, Tangum, a Kingdom in the Further East-Indies, by the River Menan; which has a City of the same name, and was formerly subject to the King of Pegu. Tangut, Tangutum, a Kingdom in the Asian Tartary, towards China and the East-Indies. The Capital City of it, is Tangu. Tanjaor, a City and Kingdom in Coromandel, in the East-Indies; formerly subject to the King of Bisnagar; but has now a Prince of its own; who is a Tributary to the former. It lies sixty Miles from the Coast of Coromandel to the West. Tanor, a small Kingdom in the Hither East-In∣dies, in the Promontory of Malabar: which hath a City of the same name, five Leagues from Calecut to the South. The King resides at a Palace one League from the City, and preservs a strict Alliance with the Portuguese. Taormina, a City of Sicily. Tapaysa, or Tapy, a great River of South Ame∣rica: which riseth in the Borders of Brasil; and af∣ter having given name to a Province, falls into the River of Amasons in Guiana. Tapiaw, a Town in the Ducal Prussia in the Kingdom of Poland. Taprobane▪ See Zeilan. Tapsus, an ancient City in the Province of By∣zacena, now in the Kingdom of Tunis, in Barbary▪
Caesar besieged it, to oblige Scipio to a Battel: and after his Defeat of Scipio, it surrendred to the Con∣querour. Tapua guazu, a Province of South America in Paragua; near the Lake of Xaray, in the Borders of Brasil. Tapues, a people of Brasil, in the Prefecture of Santo Spirito. Tara, Taras, a small River in the Province of O∣tranto, in the Kingdom of Naples: which arising from the Apennine near Massafra, falls into the Gulph of Taranto, by the City of Taranto; which has its name from this River. Taragale, a City in the Region of Darha in Biledul∣gerid, in Africa; near the City of Darha: fortified with a Castle and a considerable Garrison, for the security of the Mint, which the Emperour of Marocco keeps here. The Jews have about four hundred Families in it. The Country adjacent affords plenty of Corn, Pasturage, and Dates. Taranto, Tarentum, Ʋrbs Salentinorum, a City in the Province of Otranto, in the Kingdom of Na∣ples; called at this day Tarente by the French Built by a Band of Lacedemonian Bastards, and made the Capital of the ancient Magna Graecia; who ha∣ving no Inheritance at home, were sent hither to seek their fortunes, in the year of the World 3242. forty five years after the building of Rome. It became a famous Common-Wealth. Its ancient Inhabitants, the Tarentini, solicited Pyrrhus's Descent into Italy to make War with the Romans. In the year of Rome 481. Milo, a Citizen of it, betrayed it to the Romans. In the second Punick War it received Hannibal. And in the year of Rome 545. was recovered out of his hands again by Quintus Fabius Maximus. In 631. it was made a Roman Colony. In 1194. Hen∣ry IV. gave it to VVilliam, (the Son of Tancred) Prince of Taranto; when he had caused him to be castrated, to prevent any Posterity. It is now an Archbishops See; small, but strong, and well peopled; has a Castle garrisoned with Spaniards. The Haven was once very good, but spoiled by great Stones sunk in the Mouth of it; so that none but small Ships can enter it. This City has also still the Honour of the Title of a Principality. It stands upon a Peninsula, on a Bay of its own Name, at the Mouth of the River Tara. Some derive the Name of the Tarantulae (whose Venom is cured only by violent dancing) from it. In 1614. a Synod was held here by its Arch∣bishop. Long. 41. 30. Lat. 39. 58. Tarara, Cemmenus, a Mountain near Lyons in France; more commonly called les Sevennes. Tarascon, Tarasco, an ancient Roman Town in Provence in France, upon the Rhosne, four Leagues beneath Avignon to the South, and three from Arles. It is great and populous, and has two strong Castles, a Collegiate Church, with divers Ecclesiastical and Re∣ligious Houses. The Reliques of S. Martha are said to be preserved here. Tarazona, Turiaso, an ancient Roman City, in the Kingdom of Arragon in Spain; which is a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Sarragosa; upon the River Queois; four Leagues from Tudela to the North-West, and ten from Bilbao to the North. This City was recovered from the Moors by Alphonsus VIII. in 1010. And is chiefly commended for the rare tem∣per of its Steel. Long. 19. 02. Lat. 42. 50. Tarbes, Tarba, Turba, Castrum Bigorrae, a City of Aquitam, in the County of Bigorre, whereof it is the Capital: seated in a pleasant Plain, upon the River Adour; well peopled, and has a Castle called Bigorre, which gave name to this County. It is also a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Aux; from which this City stands nine Miles to the North-West, and six from Pau to the East. Tarczal, Carpates, the Carpathian Hills, which divide Hungary and Transylvania, from Poland. Tardenois, Tardanensis Comitatus, a County in the Isle of France; between the Marne to the South, and the Vesle to the North: its true Bounds are now lost. Tardera, Alba, Tholobi, a River in Catalonia: which falls into the Mediterranean Sea at Blanes; nine Miles from Barcinone to the North. Tarentaise, Tarentesia, a Tract or Valley in the Dukedom of Savoy, between the Alpes and the Duke∣dom of Aouste to the East; Hossano to the North; Savoy (properly so called) to the West; and the Valley di Moriana to the South. This was the Seat of the ancient Centrones. The principal place in it, Montiers. It is one of the three principal Provin∣ces of the Dukedom of Savoy, but very Mountainous and Barren. Targa, a Kingdom, Desart, City, and Lake in A∣frica; in Zaara, between the Desart of Lempta to the East, Zuenziga to the West, Biledulgerida to the Noh▪ and Nigritia to the South. Targovisto, Targovistum, Targoviscum, Tergovi∣stus, Tiriscum, a great City, which is the Capital of Moldavia, and the Seat of their Princes. The Na∣tives call it Ternisch. It stands in the Borders of Wa∣lachia, up the River Jaloniza; sixty Miles from Ni∣geboli to the North, and a little more from Cron∣stad, or (Brassaw) in Transylvania to the South, in a Marsh. Heretofore, together with Moldavia, under the King of Hungary. And now returned un∣der that Crown again. See Moldavia. Tariffa, a City of Spain in Andalusia, near the Streights of Gibraltar: once a great and strong place, but now almost ruined: inhabited by a few, though it has a Castle and an Haven. It was recove∣red from the Moors in 1292. And Octob. 28. 1340. the Moors received a great Defeat near this place: which stands four Leagues from Algezira to the West, and six from the Coast of Barbary to the North. Tarne, or le Tar, Tarnis, a River of Aquitain in France: which springeth from Mount Losere in Gi∣vaudan; and being improved by some lesser Streams, watereth Millaud; then entering Languedoc, it visi∣teth Montauban, where it is covered by a lovely Stone Bridge: and a little beneath Moissac, falls in∣to the Garonne; five Leagues above Agen. The pre∣sent King of France, has with great expence of late years made this River Navigable by Boats. Taro, or Tarro, Tarus, a River of Lombardy in Italy; which ariseth from the Apennine, in the Bor∣ders of the States of Genoua: and running through a Valley of its own name, (and through the Duke∣dom of Parma) falls thirteen Miles below Cremona into the Po. Upon the Banks of this River, Charles VIII. of France, in 1495. defeated all the Forces of Italy assembled hither to stop him from going out of Italy. Tarpeya, a Lake in the Kingdom of Peru in South America, near the City Potosi: springing from a large Fountain in the middle of itself. Tarragona, Tarraco, a City of Spain; which in ancient time gave name to that part of Spain called Hispania Tarraconensis. It was built by the Scipio's: others say, before the Roman Conquest: Eratosthe∣nes having mentioned it in the year of the World 2780. The Scipio's much enlarged it: and therefore Pliny and Solinus make them the Founders. Mela saith, it was in his time the richest Maritim City on the Eastern Coast of Spain. It was certainly a great
Metropolis, and had fourteen lesser Cities under it. The Moors ruined the Roman City; and rebuilt that which now stands; walling it for the greater security. It is now an Archbishops See, and an University foun∣ded by Cardinal Gasparo de Cervantes, (Archbishop of this See) in the Reign of Philip II. It stands at the Mouth of the River Tulcis, now el Fracoli; which affords it a small Haven on the Mediterranean Sea: thirteen Spanish Leagues from Tortosa, and fifteen from Barcelone. In a decaying condition. Long. 22. 53. Lat. 41. 58. In 1242. a Synod was held here to oppose the progress of the Doctrines of the Vaudois. Tarsus, Tarsos, the Metropolitan City of Cilicia, in the Lesser Asia: upon the River Cydenum, which divides it into two equal parts. It took divers names from the Roman Emperours. At this day it is called by the Inhabitants, Terassa; by the Turks, Terfis; by the Italians, Tarso. Now an Archbi∣shops See; six Miles from the Shoars of the Mediter∣ranean. Pope Clement IX. bore the Title of this See, before his Election to the Pontificate. Long. 66. 14. Lat. 38. 56. This City deservs a particular venera∣tion from all Christians; because S. Paul, the Great Apostle of the Gentiles, was born in it; and by that means pleaded its privilege to avoid some ill usages he had otherwise suffered. This is also the Tarshish, whither Jonas desired to pass, when he took Ship at Joppe, (Joh. 1. 3.): which the following part of his Story hath made so memorable. Lyra and S. Anselme interpret the Tharsis of King Solomon, whither his Fleet went to buy precious Merchandises for the Temple, of this place also. But others reject their opinion; and we have no Concord amongst the Learned upon that question. See Ophir. Tartar, Occhardus, a River of Serica, (a part of the Asiatick Tartary) from which that Nation took its name of Tartaria. The Country is bounded on the West by Mount Imaus, and on the East by Chi∣na: now thought to be called Suchur. There is a City upon it, of the same name. Tartaro, Tartarus, Atrianus, a River in the States of Venice; which ariseth in the Territory of Verona; and flowing East, watereth Adria, an ancient City: then one part of it falls into that Branch of the Po, called il Fuosa; and the other into the River A∣dige. Tartary, Tartaria, Scythae, is divided common∣ly into the Great and Asiatick, the Lesser and European Tartary. For this latter, see Krim Tarta∣ry, Chersonesus Taurica, and Precop. The Asiatick Tartary is the far greatest Country in all Asia: cal∣led by the Poles, Tartarcka. Bounded on the North by the Frozen Ocean, on the East by the same Sea, and China; on the South by China, India, Persia, and the Caspian Sea; on the West by Russia. The North Eastern Bounds upon Japan and China are utterly unknown. It is not certain, but that Asia and America may there meet; or at most may be divided by a narrow Channel, which could never yet be discovered. This Country extends from the Mouth of the Nieper, to the Cape of Tabin North-East, one thousand German Miles: and from the Mouth of the River Obb to the Wall of China South-East, fifteen hundred of the same Miles: perhaps it is much grea∣ter towards the North and East. It is divided into Tartary properly so called, Tartaria Deserta, Zaga∣thai, Cathay, and Turquestan: these, containing ma∣ny Kingdoms: some of which, as to the names of them, are as yet unknown to us. The people are the most Barbarous of Mankind; Bloody, Fierce, and Brutish. The Country appears Barren, Desolate, Un∣cultivated; without Cities, settled Inhabitants, Agri∣culture, and fixed Limits. The Princes are absolute Masters of their respective People; which live in Hoards, wandring with their Wives and Children in covered Waggons, from place to place; with their Cattle, (their only Wealth,) as necessity and the season of the year require. This course of life has in a great degree fitted them for War. Accordingly, when ever they have broken in upon the Civilized World, they have proved in every Age the Scourges of God. In this last Age, one of these Princes broke in upon Chi∣na; and in a few years conquered it. Tarudante, Tarodantum, Torodantum, the Capi∣tal City of Suz. Heretofore subject to the King of Morocco, but has now a Prince of its own. It is great and populous; about fifty Miles from the At∣lantick Ocean, and three hundred from Morocco to the South. Tasso, Thassos, Thalassia, Chryse, an Island of the Archipelago, one League distant from the Continent of Romania in the Morea, and about seven or eight in Circumference: divided betwixt Plains and Moun∣tains, which afford good Wine and Marble. The Phoenicians anciently planted a Colony here, who built the City now standing; which is in a tolerable condition, but far different from its pristine Splen∣dour. Tatta, a Kingdom in the East-Indies, under the Great Mogul; separated from Persia to the West, by the River Indus; and bounded to the North by Buckor, to the East by the Kingdom of Jesselmeere, and to the South by the Indian Sea. The Capital City is of the same Name; near the Indus. Long. 102. Lat. 26. 45. Tattershal, a Market Town in Lincolnshire, in the Hundred of Gartree, and the Division of Lind∣sey: near the Influx of the River Bane into the Witham. Tavasthus, Tavastia, a Town and County in the Kingdom of Sweden in Finmarck; called also Ta∣vastland. Bounded on the East by Savolaxia, on the South by Niland, on the West by Finmarck, (properly so called) and on the North by the Bot∣ner Sea. Tavasthus, the principal Town in it, was called Gronenberg; and stands in a Marsh: well for∣tified against the Russ: ninety Miles from Aboa to the East. Birger Jarel built a Castle in 1250. to awe the Inhabitants, Tauber, Tuberius, a River in Franconia; which ariseth near Rotenburgh, nine Miles from Norim∣burgh to the West; and by Onspach, Papenheim, and Aichstat falls into the Danube below Ingolstad, and above Regensperg. Taverna, Taberna, Trischene, a decayed City in the Further Calabria, in the Kingdom of Naples; which was a Bishops See under the Archbishop of Rhe∣gio; but having lost that Dignity, is now a member of the Diocese of Catanzaro. Teubemberg, a Town in Hungary; at which Mahomet I. in 1400. beat the Hungarians. Tavestock, a Market Town and Borough in De∣vonshire, upon the River Tave: the Capital of its Hundred. In the Lower House of Parliament repre∣sented by two Burgesses. Tavira, or Tavila, a City of Algarve in Spain, upon the Atlantick Ocean; between the Mouth of the Guadiana to the East, and Faro to the West; five Leagues from either. It is under the King of Portugal: has a large Haven at the Mouth of the River Xilaon, and a Castle for its security. Taurica Chersonesus, the Peninsula dividing Eu∣rope and Asia; upon Il Mare Maggiore, and the Sea of Zabache: from East to West twenty four Miles long, fifteen broad; filled heretofore
with Noble Greek Cities. Upon the Eastern side of it, stands Caffa, (which was the ancient Theodo∣sia) under the Turks. In the entrance of the Neck of it, Precop; under the Tartars: from whence the whole Peninsula is sometimes called Precopsca; and the In∣habitants, the Precopensian Tartars. It makes the most Southern part of the Krim Tartary. Tauris, Ecbatana, Tabresium, Tauresium, Ti∣granana, a great City of the Kingdom of Persia, called by the Inhabitants Tebris. It stands in the Province of Aderbuitzan; eleven hundred Miles from Constan∣tinople to the East, and twenty five German Miles from the Caspian Sea to the South. Founded, (as the Persians all agree) in the one hundred and sixty fifth year of the Hegyra, in the year of Christ 786. In 849. it was ruined by an Earthquake. In 1490. the Princes of the Race of Sheitb-Sephi, removed to this City from Ardevil. In 1514. Selim, Emperour of the Turks, took it upon Articles, two years after the Kings of Persia removed to Casbin. In the time of Solyman the Magnificent, the City rebelled; assassi∣nated the Turkish Governour, and Garrison; which was severely revenged by Ibrahim, (General of that Prince) in 1548. In the Reign of Amurath, it re∣belled again; and was again taken and sacked by the Turks in 1585. In 1603. Abas, King of Persia, took it by Stratagem: ever since which, it has been under the Persians. The Learned Minadoi, (in his Histo∣ry of the Turkish and Persian War, pag. 311.) thus describes it. It is seated (saith he) on the North side of Mount Orontes; having Persia to the East, the Caspian Mountains to the West, and the Caspian Sea to the North: in a fruitful Plain; in a cold, snowy, healthful Air; abounding with all things need∣ful for the Life of Man; enriched by great Caravans of Merchants, which pass to and fro through it; so populous, that it maintains two hundred thousand Inhabitants; yet without any Walls or Bastions, or the least defence against an Enemy: The Houses are low and mean: the Gardens, Fountains, Basars and Mosques, Magnificent and Sumptuous. Sir John Char∣din, who saw this City, agrees with him: and adds, that a small River (called Spingicha,) runs across through it; and another called Agi, on the North side. Long. 88. 00. Lat. 41. 19. Sir John Chardin estimated the Inhabitants to be five hundred and fifty thousand: so much has a long Peace improved it since Minadoi's time. It extends its Commerce over Per∣sia, Turkey, Tartary, Moscovy, and the Biack Sea; consisting much in Cottons, Silks, Chagrines, Bro∣cades, &c. which fills it well with Strangers. The Mosques are reckoned to two hundred and fifty; where∣of some have been Christian Churches. The Capu∣chines had a convenient House built in this City in 1668. Without the City to the South, appear the Ruins of the Palace of the ancient Kings of Persia: and to the East, the like of a Castle, which was the Royal Seat of Chosroes. The Geographers generally affirm, Tauris stands in the place of the ancient Ec∣batana. It is governed by a Beglerbeg, of great power and consideration in the Kingdom of Persia. Taurn, Alpes Noricae, a branch of the Alpes in Carinthia. Taurus, the greatest Mountain in all Asia; so called, as Eustathius saith, from its Magnitude. It begins at the East or Chinian Ocean; and traverseth the whole body of Asia, as far as the Sea of Pamphy∣lia in the Lesser Asia; dividing Asia into the Nor∣thern and Southern, and assuming various Names in different Places. Yet the particular Name of Taurus belongs most properly to that Branch of this Moun∣tain, which divides Pamphylia and Cilicia from the Lesser Armenia. Sir John Chardin who crossed that part of this Mountain, (called Caucasus) saith; that it is the highest Mountain, and the most difficult to pass over that ever he beheld: full of Rocks and dis∣mal Precipices. The top of it (eight Leagues broad), cover'd with Snow and not inhabited: yet the sides are prodigious fruitful; afford Honey, Wheat, Gums, Wines, and Fruits in vast quantities. The Inhabitants are a good natur'd sort of Christians, In Tartary this Mountain is called Imaus. In this long course it separates many Potent Nations one from another. Herbert (our Country-man) saith; that it is fifty English Miles over, and fifteen hundred long. Taxiala, a great City of India, mentioned by Strabo and Philostratus, as the Residence of the an∣cient King Phraortes. But we have now no know∣ledge of it; unless, the same with Cambaia. Taw, a River in Devonshire, upon which Barn∣staple stands. Tay, Tavus, is a great River in Scotland; which arising from Mount Grampus, and flowing East helps to divide that Kingdom into two parts; the Nor∣thern and the Southern. Its Fountains are in Al∣bany. It passeth through Athole and Perth, wa∣tering Dunkeld and Aberneth; and between Angus to the North, and Fife to the South, by a vast Arm of the Sea falls into the German Sea; almost twenty English Miles North of St. Andrews. Taygetus, a Mountain of the Province of Laco∣nia in the Peloponnesus: consecrated in Pagan times to Castor and Pollux. Standing in the neighbour∣hood of Sparta, (now Misitra); and being broken once by an Earthquake, it did much mischief to that City. Tearus, a River of Thrace, salling into the He∣brus: so admired by Darius, the Son of Hystaspes, for its Water according to Herodotus; that he erected a Colom in its honor. Teane, a River in Staffordshire, upon which Checkley is situated. Tebesca, an ancient City in the Kingdom of Tunis in Africa: which was a Bishops See, under the Arch∣bishop of Carthage. Tech, Ter, Illybiris, Thicis, Tichis, a small River in the County of Roussillon; which springeth out of the Pyrenean Hills in the Borders of Cerdanna; wa∣tereth Arles and Cerdanna; then falls into the Me∣diterranean Sea, twelve Miles from the Mouth of the Egli to the South. Tectosagae, an ancient People of Gallia Narbo∣nensis; whose Capital City was the modern Tolose. They made an incursion into Germany, and there established themselves, near the Hyrcinian Forest. Tedles, Tedlesia, a Province in the Kingdom of Morocco: Its chief City is Tofza. Tees, Athesis, Tuasis, a River which parts Eng∣land from Scotland: It ariseth in Twedale; there∣fore called the Tweed no less frequently; and run∣ning Eastward, and being augmented by the Cale at Rydam, it becomes a boundary; at Tiltmouth takes in the Bromyshe out of Northumberland; and on the South side of Barwick, entereth the German Ocean. Teflis, Artaxata, Arxata, Tephlis, Zogocara, the Capital City of Georgia; in the Province of Car∣duel, upon the River Khur, or Cyrus. Anciently one of the greatest Cities of the East; but being taken and ill handled by the Turks, it consists of very few Inhabitants; under the King of Persia. (Baudrand). Sir John Chardin who saw it some few years since, contrariwise assures us it is one of the fairest, though not the biggest Cities in Persia; at the bottom of a Mountain, upon the River Cur; incompassed on all sides, but the South, (where the River secureth it) with a strong and beautiful Wall; and has about fourteen Christian Churches, served by Armenians and
Georgians; together with a large Castle guarded by Natural Persians only. The Bishops See or Pa∣lace is near the Cathedral Church. It has in the mean time not one Mosque, (except a small one lately built in the Castle;) because the Christians will not endure it, and the Persians are too wise to exasperate their Frontier People; who can with ease call in the Turks to revenge the Injuries of their Religion. It is well Peopled, full of Strangers, who resort thither on the ac∣count of Trade. Twice in the hands of the Turks, in the Reigns of Ishmael II, and Solyman his Son. The latter took this and Tauris about 1548. The Persian Tables place it, Long. 83. 00. Lat. 43. 05. The Congregation at Rome de propaganda fide, keeping a Mission of Capuchins in Georgia, (who understand Physick and by that means render themselves very acceptable to the Country;) their Praefect resides here. It is the Seat of the Viceroy of Georgia. Tefza, a City in the Province of Tedles in the King∣dom of Morocco; built on an high Hill by the River Derna. Tegan, Teganum, a City in the Province of Hu∣quam in China. The Capital over five Cities. Tegaza, a Desart in Nigritia in Africa. Tegaea, an antient City of Arcadia in the Pelo∣ponnesus; which was a Bishops See under the Arch∣bishop of Corinth. Tegeste, a Peninsula in Florida, in North A∣merica. Tegorarin, a City and Territory in Biledulgerid in Africa. Teissa, or Tiissa, Tibiscus, the Theysse, a River of the Ʋpper Hungary; which ariseth in the Carpa∣thian Mountains; and floweth through Transylvania hither, to pay its Tribute to the Danube. Segedin stands upon it. The Hungarians use to say, It is two parts Water and the third Fish. Tejum, an ancient City of Paphlagonia in the Les∣ser Asia: remarkable by being the Birth-place of A∣nacreon the Poet, who died of a Grape-stone sticking in his Throat. Telepte, an Ancient City of the Province of By∣zacena, in the Kingdom of Tunis in Barbary. It was a Bishops See, particularly remarkable in the per∣son of Donatus; who, in 418, celebrated a Council at it against the Pelagians. Now in slavery to the Moors. Telessia, a City of the ancient Samnium in Italy; (now in the Province called Terra di Lavoro, in the Kingdom of Naples.) It became a Bishops See under the Archbishop of Benevento, and was adorned with the Title of a Dukedom. But since 1612, the See has been transserred from hence. Telgen, Telga, a City in Sudermannia in Sweden, four Miles from Stockholm, to the North-West. Temesen, Temesena, a Province in the Kingdom of Fez. Temeswaer, Temesuaria, a Town in the Ʋpper Hungary; which is the Capital of a County of the same Name. A great and strong place, seated upon the River Temes (whence it has its Name:) five Leagues from Lippa, towards the Borders of Transylvania; and about ten from Belgrade. The Turks twice at∣tempted it before they took it, (in 1552) from the Transylvanians: upon which they bestowed great costs in the fortifying of it, and esteem it invincible; as indeed it is the strongest Place they have left them. The County of Temeswaer is bounded on the North by Chaunad and Transylvania,; on the West by the Tibiscus, on the South by the Danube, and on the East by Moldavia. Temiam, Temiamum, a Kingdom in Nigritia in Africa: bounded on the North by the Kingdom of Gangara, on the West by that of Bito, on the South by the River Niger, and on the East by the Desart of Sert or Seu. The principal City of which is Temican. Tempe, a sweet Valley in the Province of Thessa∣lia, in Macedonia, watered by the River Peneo. The Poets have rendered it famous to all Ages. It lies betwixt the Mountains Olympus and Ossa. And some place the ancient City Lycosthome in it, which was a Bishops See under the Archbishop of Larissa. Temruck, or Tomaruchi, Tyrambe, Tyrambis, a City of Crim Tartary in Asia; sixteen Miles from the Cimmerian Bosphorus to the East, and ten from the Lake of Corocondam to the North. Tenbury, a Market Town in Worcestershire, up∣on the Edge of Shropshire, and the Banks of the Ri∣ver Tent: in the hundred of Doddington. Tende, Tenda, a Town in the County of Nizza, in the Appenine, near the Borders of the States of Ge∣noua: eighteen Miles from Alba to the North, and twenty five from Fossano South: which has a Moun∣tain near it, called Le col de Tende; and a very strong Castle. This was a Sovereign State, under Counts of its own; but now subject to the Duke of Savoy. Tenduc, Tenducum, a City and Kingdom of the Asian Tartary. Bounded on the North by the Great Tartary, on the East by Jupia, on the West by the Kingdom of Tangut, and on the South by China. This Prince has within a little more than forty years last past, Conquered the Kingdom of China; and is one of the greatest Princes in the World. His Domi∣nions extending from Cochin China to the River Obb, North-West and South-East. There is lately pub∣lished a short Account of these Tartars, in two Let∣ters written by a Chinian Jesuit, who travelled with this King into Tartary. Tenedos, a small Island of sixteen Miles in Com∣pass: five from the Shores of Asia, twenty five from the Island Metelino to the North in the Archipelago, and eighteen from the Dardanels to the South: cal∣led by the Turks Bosh Adasi, the Barren Island: yet it affords excellent Muscadine Wine; Plenty of Game: and is well situated to bridle the Streights of Gallipoli: It has a City, two Castles, and an Harbor for small Vessels: and being taken by the Venetians (with whom the Genouese disputed the possession of it a long time), was betrayed to the Turks by their Go∣vernor. In the time of Troy, which stood within two Leagues of it, this Island was consecrated to Apollo; and the Graecian Navy, seigning a Despair to take that City, retired hither to disguise their design. It became since Christianity, a Bishop's See under the Archbishop of Mitelene. The Promontorium Sigaeum, or Cape Janizzari, lies near it. Teneriffa, one of the Canary or Azores Islands in the Atlantick Ocean; over against Mauritania in Barbary; called by the Natives Theneriffe. It is about forty eight Spanish Leagues in Circumference. Fruit∣ful, populous, rich, and has been subject to the Spa∣niards ever since 1496. The Ancients called this Nivaria; (as is supposed), because the top of its Point or Peak, which is thought the highest in the World, and very sharp, is rarely without Snow. This Peak is said to be fifteen Miles high: and may be seen one hundred and twenty English Miles at Sea. The principal Towns in it are Laguna and S. Croce. To which belongs an excellent Haven. Blake and English Admiral, April 20, in 1657, (notwithstanding a Ca∣stle, seven Forts, sixteen great Galeons, all well man'd and provided with Cannon and Ammunition, which threatned his inevitable Ruine) entred this Harbor: and in six hours time beat the Spaniards out of their Ships and Forts too. He put the English in possession of the vast Treasure of a West India Fleet: which they plundered; and burnt all those Spanish Ships they found. This Island is no less remarkable for having
been made the first Meridian by many of the latter Geographers. § The Spaniards have given the same Name to a Town in the Province called Terra firma, in South America: standing near the Confluence of the Rivers S. Magdalena and S. Martha. Tenez, a City and Kingdom towards the Coasts of the Mediterranean, and West of the Kingdom of Algiers; in Barbary. Tengchieu, a City in the Province of Xantum in China; which stands upon the Chiman Ocean on the Bay of Nanquin; and is very strongly fortified. Long. 149. 00. Lat. 37. 00. Teno, Tenos, Tine, an Island in the Archipelago, under the Venetians; who have been Masters of it above these three hundred years. It is a Latin Bishops See; and but few Greeks live here. In Pagan times it was famous for a Temple consecrated to Neptune. It pro∣duceth Wine, Figs, and Silk. Hath a Fortress and a City of its own Name, Teno: but Hydrusia and O∣phiusa were the first and ancientest Names of this Island. Tenterden, a Market Town in the County of Kent, in Scray Lath. Tentyra, an Island and City in the Nile, in the Kingdom of Egypt: mentioned by Juvenal. Teos, an Ancient City of Ionia in the Lesser Asia: which was a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of E∣phesus. Ter. See Tech. Teramo, Aprutium, a City of the Further A∣bruzzo, in the Kingdom of Naples; which is a Bi∣shops See. Terassa, the same with Tarsus. Terbestan, the Caspian See. Tercera, Tertiaria or Tertia, the principal of the Azores Islands: twenty five Miles from East to West, but not of equal breadth: about sixteen Leagues in circuit: surrounded with Rocks which render it difficult of Access. It lies forty Leagues from Teneriffe to the East. The chief City of this and all the Azores, is Angara; which is a Bishops See, and with Fort San Felippe under the Portuguese. From this Island the Azores are sometimes called the Tercera Isles. It is much subject to Farthquakes: and has a Fountain particularly remarkable for a virtue to petrifie Wood. Tergowisch. See Targovisto. Terki, Terchium, the principal City of Circassia, in Asia: in a well watered Plain; about one German Mile from the Caspian Sea to the West, sixty from A∣stracan to the South, and thirty six from Derbent to the North-West, Long. 76. 30. Lat. 45. 05. This City being some years since put into the hands of the Duke of Moscovy, has of late been carefully fortified as a Frontier against the Persians on that side. Olea∣rius assures us it stands in Lat. 43. 23, in a Plain which bounds the sight upon the River Temenski; which issueth out of the Lake of Bustro, and facilitates the Correspondence between the Town and the Caspian Sea. The Town is fortified with Rampiers and Bastions of Earth; and has a Garrison of two thousand Russ, paid by the Great Duke. Terlee, a famous Abbey for Women of the Or∣der of S. Bernard, in the State of Holland: founded by the ancient Earls of Holland: a League and a half off Leyden; but broken and ruined since the Re∣formation there. Termini, or Termuli, Termulae, Buca, a City in the Capitanata in the Kingdom of Naples; which is a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Benevento: and stands upon the Adriatick Sea, at the Mouth of the River Tiferno, in the Borders of the Hither A∣bruzzo: thirty Miles from Lanciano to the East. § Also a Town in the Island of Sicily, upon a River of its own Name: risen out of the Ruines of the ancient City Himera; and called in Latin Writers Terminus Himeriorum. The River Termine bad the same anci∣ent Name with the City. Terna, Torna, a River which runs through Artois, and falls into the Canche at Hesdin. Ternate, Ternata, the chief of the sive Molucco Islands. Now in the Hands of the Hollanders; tho it has a King of its own, who resides in the Town of Malay: the Dutch have some Ports in this Island, to secure its Possession. There are two ports belonging to it. The Island Tider lies within one League of it. Terni, Interamna, an ancient Latin Colony, and a City of Ombra, in the States of the Church in Italy; which is a Bishops See, immediately under the Pope. It stands in a Plain upon the River Nare; twelve Miles from Spoleto to the South in the Road to Ancona; and has many rare Antiquities to shew. Ternois, Ternensis Pagus, a small Tract in Ar∣tois, in the County of S. Paul; which takes its Name from Terna. Ternova, Ternobum, a City of Bulgaria; men∣tioned by Gregoras and Calchondylas: now the Resi∣dence of the Turkish Sangiack, and anciently the Seat of the Despote. It stands upon the River Jan∣tra or Ischar; near Mount Hemus, in the Borders of Thrace upon an Hill; and was heretofore very strong, but now neglected. Thirty German Miles from Adrianople to the North-West, and twenty five from Sophia to the North-East. Terovanné, Tarvanna, Ternana, Civitas Mori∣norum, a City of Artois, in the Low-Countries; which was a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Reims, upon the River Leye; but being recovered out of the hands of the French by Charles V. in 1553. intirely ruined and never rebuilt. The Morini were its ancient Inhabitants. And we may observe, the year of its destruction by Charles V, is expressed in the Chronogram of these two Words, DeLetI MorInI. It stood six leagues from Bologne to the East, and two from S. Omers to the South. This Diocese was divided into three, viz. into that of Bo∣logne, S. Omers and Ypres. Terra Arctica, or the Artick Continent, com∣prehends New Denmark, Estoiteland, Hudsons-bay, Greenland, Spitzberg; and the undiscovered Regions beyond, or towards the Arctick Circle. —Australis, a vast Country towards the Antarctick Circle: discovered in 1503, by a French∣man of Honsleur in Normandy; who in a Voyage to the East-Indies, was driven upon the Eastern Coasts of it; and remaining for some time there, sound it to be cantoned into a number of petty Kingdoms; indifferently peopled: yielding several sorts of Roots for Dying, unknown in Europe; with wild Beasts, Fowl, Fish, &c. He calls it in the declaration of his Voyage, the South Indies. In 1615, James le Maure, a Native of Amsterdam, made a Discovery of another part of it, to the East of the Streights of his own Name: which he called Statenlandt: the same time that he discovered his own Streights and Mauritz∣landt. —di Bari, Apulia Peucetia, Barensis Ager, a Province of the Kingdom of Naples. Bounded on the North and East by the Adriatick Sea; on the West by Capitanata, cut off by the River Ofanto; on the South by the Basilicate and Otranto. This is a considerable part of that which the Ancients call A∣pulia Peucetia. The principal places in it are Andria, Bari, Bitonto, Conversano, Gravina, Molfetta, Ru∣vo, Trani and Biseglia. The French call it the Pro∣vince de Bar. —Firma, a Province of New Spain, in South America; upon the Isthmus of Panama.
—del Fuego, an Island betwixt the Streights of Magellan and le Mair; in the uttermost parts of South America. —di Lavoro, Terra Laboris, is a Province of the Kingdom of Naples, upon the Tyrrhenian Sea. Bounded on the North by Abruzzo, on the East by the Hither Principato, and on the West by the Sea. It is extremely fruitful; watered by the Garigliano and Volturno; and has the Happiness of Naples for its Capital. The other principal Places and Cities are Ischia, Gaeta, Caiazzo, Capua, Nola, Pozzuolo, So∣ra, Sorrento and Venafro. This Province contains a part of Campania Foelix, and of the ancient La∣tium. —d' Otranto, Japygia, Jesso, Messapia, Calabria; Hydruntina, Santa, Terra. See Otran∣to, &c. Terracina, Tarracina, Anxur, an ancient City in the States of the Church in Italy, in the Province of Campania di Roma, in the Borders of the King∣dom of Naples, at the Mouth of the River called il Portatore (Ʋfens,) upon the Tyrrhenian Sea. It has a Castle; but is a place of no Strength, by reason of a Mountain which commands it: It has a Harbor too; but of little use; the City being almost deserted by reason of the unhealthfulness of the Air. Sixty Miles from Rome to the West, and Naples to the East. A Bishops See immediately under the Pope. Long. 32. 2. Lat. 41. 18. Terrain, Terin, Tara, a small River in the Isle of France, which watereth Beauvais: then falls into the Oise, a little above Creil in Beanvais. Terring, a Market Town in the County of Sussex, in Bramber Rape; not far from the Sea. Terne, a River in Shropshire, upon which Dray∣ton is situated. It is a Boundary between that County and Staffordshire. Terskoy Leporie, Tersa Leporia, the most East∣ern part of Lapland: under the Russ; between the Frozen and the White Sea, and that part of Lapland which is under the Swedes. It is a desolate Country; has neither Towns nor Villages, though some Inha∣bitants. Tervel, Tiar, Julia, Turulium, Turia, Terulum, a City of the Kingdom of Arragon, upon the River Turia; where it takes in the Alhambra; twenty four Leagues from Tortosa, and ten from Valencia. It is a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Tarra∣goza. Teschin, Teschena, a small City in Silesia in Bohe∣mia; called by the Inhabitants Tessin, by the Germans Teschin. It is the Capital of a Dukedom; upon the River Oelss, upon the Confines of Moravia; seven Miles from Ratibor to the South. The Dukedom of Teschin lies at the head of the Vistula: between the Lesser Poland to the East; Hungary to the South, Moravia to the West, and the Dukedom of Ratibor to the North. Tesino, Tuinus, Ticinus, a celebrated River in Lombardy; which ariserh out of Mont de S. Godard, one of the Alpes; and flowing through the Lake cal∣led il Lago Maggiore, (Verbanus) towards the South, entereth the Dukedom of Milan: washeth the Walls of Pavia; then four Miles lower falls into the Po; preserving the clearness and perspicuity of the Stream four Miles further in that thick and troubled River, as Ferrarius faith. Test, a River in Hampshire, which joins with the Itching at their common fall into the Ocean, near Southampton. Whitechurch, Stocksbridge, and Rum∣sey are all three situated upon it. Tet, the same with Egli. Tetrapolis, a Territory with four remarkable Ci∣ties in it, in the ancient Syria; viz. Antioch, Seleucia, Apamea, and Laodicea; therefore called Sisters to one another. Tetuan, Teteguina, Tetuanum, a strong City which is a petty Republick in the North part of the Kingdom of Fez; twenty five Miles from the Mouth of the Streights of Gibraltar, and forty from Fez to the North. Il Tevere. See Tiber. Teverone, Anio, a River of Italy; which ariseth in Campania di Roma, three Miles above Trevi; and dividing the Ancient Latium from Sabina, falls into the Tiber, three Miles North of Rome. Teutones, the Ancient Germans: from whom Germany took the Name of Teutschlandt. They su∣stained a long War with the Romans, and remained in the end the Invincible Enemies of that Empire. Lu∣can distinguisheth the Cantabri and them by their long and short Arms; Cantaber exiguis aut longis Teutonus armis. Teutschlandt, Terra Teutonica, one of the anci∣ent Names of Germany. Tewksbury, a Market Town and Borrough in Worcestershire: the Capital of its Hundred; repre∣sented in the lower Huse of Parliament by two Bur∣gesses. The North Avon falls into the Severne here. It is watered with two Rivulets besides. In the year 1471, at this place was fought a memorable Bat∣tel betwixt the Houses of Lancaster and York, by King Henry VI, and his successor Edward IV; in which the former suffered an entire Defeat; and Ed∣ward the young Prince (only Son to King Henry VI.) was slain. Texel, Texelia, a small Island at the Mouth of the Zuyder Zee; which has a strong Castle and a good Harbor on its South side. The usual place where the Dutch Fleet rendezvouz in times of War. Near it the Illustrious General Monk (afterwards Duke of Albemarle) beat the Dutch Fleet, July 31. 1653; slew their famous Admiral Van Trump; burnt and sunk twenty six of their Men of War, with the loss of only two small English Ships; and drove the rest in∣to the Texel. Which being seen by the People from the Shore, prevented the usual Ceremony of a Thanks∣giving for being beaten. Teyder-Aa, Teydera, a River of Livonia in Lit∣land; which watereth Adzal and Wolmer, then falls into the Bay of Livonia. Teysterbandt, Testerbantum, a small County in the Dukedom of Cleves: towards the Maes, the Wael and the Rhine: in the North of Cleves, and on the Southern Border of Guelderland: which has been uni∣ted to Cleves seven hundred years. Thabor, a celebrated Mountain in Galilee, in Pale∣stine: six Miles from Nazareth to the East; near the Plain of Esdrelon and the Valley of Iesreel; ha∣ving the Brook of Endor springing from its foot. Josephus gives it the Height of thirty Greek Stadia; and the Plain upon the top of it, the compass of two thousand five hundred Paces; where the Wind blows very to hard and cold in the hottest Seasons. Here our Saviour honoured S. Peter, James and John with the View of his glorious Transfiguration: in memory whereof Helena, the Mother of Constantine the Great, built upon the place a stately Church with three small Chapppels, representing the three Tabernacles in S. Peter's Wish: which Chappels now are almost bu∣ried under the Ruines of the Church; saving one Al∣tar, used sometimes for Mass by the Religious of Na∣zareth. Alexander Jannaeus, King of Judah, who began his Reign one hundred and three years before Christ, built a Fortress upon this Mountain; which probably continued till the time of our Saviour; and
was the same with that, taken by Composition in the year after Christ 82, by Vespasian; when the Church and Chappels were demolished. These latter were re∣established in 1099, by Godfrey of Bouillon; and divided betwixt the Greek Calcyers and the Bene∣dictine Monks; under a Bishop, a Suffragan to the Pa∣triarch of Jerusalem. In 1187, Saladine took the Mountain and ruined its Works. In 1253, the Chri∣stians retook it; and Pope Alexander gave it to the Templars. But in 1290, it was finally lost from the Christians to the Sultan of Egypt. It stands in a round conical figure; with its sides to the West and South, full of Shrubs and Greens. Thamar, Rha, the same with Wolgha. Thame, a Market Town in Oxfordshire, upon the Borders of Buckinghamshire; which takes its Name from the River Thame (one of the Fountains of the Thames, joining with the Isis at Dorchester;) whose Branches almost encompass it, and are here covered with a Bridge leading into Buckinghamshire. It is the Capital of its hundred; and enjoys the Benefit of a Free-School, and a Hospital, founded by the Lord Williams of Thame. Thames, Thamesis, Tamesis, Jamissa, the prin∣cipal River of England. Which has this Name from the Thame and Isis, two smaller Rivers, its Foun∣tains. The first of these arises in Buckinghamshire: the second in VViltshire. The second is far the great∣er; receives the VVindrush and the Evenclods before it arrives at Oxford; beneath that City, the Charwell a noble Flood; and at Dorchester it takes the Thame. Then sporting it self with vast turns, it watereth VVal∣lingford, Reading, and Henly: dividing Buckingham∣shire from Surrey, it watereth VVindsor: so passeth to Stanes in Middlesex: above which it takes in the Colne; and watering Hampton-Court, Kingston, Brentford and Chelsey; it gently glides between West∣minster and London on the North, and Southwark on the South; where it is covered by one of the noblest Bridges in the World. More to the East it receives the Lea out of Essex; & being now able to bear vast Ships, it hasteth by Graves End into the German Ocean; be∣tween Essex to the North, and Kent to the South. Thanet, Tantos, Thanatos & Athanatos in Solinus, a small Island on the Eastern Coast of Kent; surrounded on the South by the Sea; and on the West by the River Stoure, here called the Yenlade: about eight Miles long, and four broad. In this Island the Saxons first land∣ed; and also S. Augustine the Monk. In 1628, Ni∣colas Lord Tufton was created Earl of Thanet by Charles I. Richard the fifth of this Family, suc∣ceeded in 1680. Thaurn, Taurus. Thaxted, a Market Town in the County of Essex, in the hundred of Dunmow. Theaco, Ithaca, an Island in the Ionian Sea, be∣twixt Cephalonia, Sancta Maura, and the Curzolari; under the Venetians. The Italians call it Val di Compare. It reckons about fifteen thousand Inha∣bitants; a great part, banished persons from Zante, Cephalonia, and Corfu. It hath a spacious and safe Haven; but no City or good Town; only some Villages: and it pretends to shew the ruins of Pene∣lope's House; supposing Ʋlysses to have been a Native of this Ithaca. Thebe, Thebae, two celebrated Cities in Antiquity; in Egypt and Greece. That in Egypt received its ruin from Cornelius Gallus, Governour of Egypt. But the marks of its former Opulence, the number of its Inhabitants, its Conquests, the tribute and imposts it paid to the King, and to the Temples, remained en∣graved in Egyptian Characters upon Obelisks in Ger∣manicus's time; who visited (as Tacitus says) the ruins of this City in his Travels. It contained one hundred and forty Stadia in Circuit, one hundred Gates; and according to those Obelisks, seven hundred thousand fighting Men. See Diospolis▪ § The other in Beotia in Greece, hath ever pretended to challenge the an∣cient Cadmus for its Founder, about the year of the World 2620: nigh one thousand four hundred years before the coming of Christ. During which Inter∣val, it was first adorned with the Title of a King∣dom. Next changed into a Republick of great Pu∣issance; which maintained War against both the A∣thenians and Lacedaemonians; and over the latter gained a signal Victory by the conduct of their Ge∣neral Epaminnds, at the Battel of Leuctra: when both h and Cleombrotus General of the Lacedaemo∣nians were slain. Philip K. of Macedon, Conquered this City, and Garrisoned it with Macedoians: whose yoak they regretted, till they revol ed, upon the death of that King And refusing to submit to his Son Alexander; He by orce reconquering them, entire∣ly uined this City (saving the single House of the Poet Pindar) and divided the Lands amongst his Soldiers, bout the year of Rome 419. and the CXI. Olympaid. Cassander, the Son of Antipater King of Macedonia, twenty years after, rebuilt it: and his work is parly standing at this day in the quality of a Village, under the Turks; but before those desroyers of Mankind possess'd it, it was the See of an Archbishop. See Stives. Thebes. See Stives. Theobalds, a Palace Royal of the Kings of Eng∣land in Hfordshire, in the Hundred of Hartford; not ar rom Hodsdon on the Lea, and less from Wal∣tham Abbey in Essex. It is delightfully situated amongst Groves and Springs. Sir William Cecil, Lord Treasurer of England, built it; and Robert Lord Cecil his Son, (of the same office to K. Jam I) much beautified it. Theoskeposti, the Grotto in the Island of Patmos in the Archipelago, wherein S. John is said to have written his Apocalypse. Thermia, Ferma, and Ferminea (as the Ita∣lians call it,) Polyaegas, an Island in the Archipela∣go towards Europe; which hath a considerable City of its own name, and a Castle: and a Spring of hot mineral Waters, not far from the Sea; from whence it took the name of Thermia. Thermodon, the same with Pormon. §. The An∣cients frequently mention a River in Scythia Europaea in the Country of the Amazons, of this name also. Thermopylae, a Streight or narrow passage at the great Mountain Oeta, and the Gulph of Zyton, in the extreme Borders of the Province of Thessalia in Macedonia; leading into Phocis in Achaia: Now called Bocca di Lupo, or the Wolf's mouth. Of great fame in Antiquity, for being maintained by Leonidas, General of the Lacedaemonians with three or four hun∣dred Men, against a vast Army of the Persians under Xerxes. Thespia, an ancient City of Boeotia in Greece, near the Mountain Helicon. It has been a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Athens. But, as it lies now under the Tyranny of the Turks, a poor Vil∣lage. Thessalia, a very considerable Province of Ma∣cedonia toward the South. Bounded on the South by Achaia, (now Livadia); on the West by Epirus; on the North by Macedonia properly so called; and by the Archipelago and the Bay of Thessalonica to the East. The Capital City of which is Larissa: now called Comenolitari by Castaldus, and by Brietius Janna: under the Turks. It had in the beginning Kings of its own. Next, it became subject to the Macedonians and Romans. It had Marquesses of its
own, in the latter part of the times of the Greek Emperors: Bonifacius being made Marquess of Thes∣salia, in 1210: whose Posterity possessed it till about 1380. When Amurath Conquered the greatest part of this Country, and his Posterity still enjoy it. It is incompassed by the Olympus, Pindus, Ossa, and Oeta; (four great Mountains:) its Inhabitants were in the ancient Times so famous for their Chivalry, that Philip of Macedon sought and obtained the Do∣minion of it chiefly on that account. Very fruitful, reasonably well Peopled, and for the most part inhabi∣ted by Christians. Thessalonica, a great Maritim City of Macedo∣nia; the Metropolis of that ancient Kingdom, cal∣led of old Thermae, now Salonichi. It has had the for∣tune to keep up something of its ancient Greatness and Wealth: still an Archbishops See, and a popu∣lous City; defended by ancient Walls and a Castle; and blessed with a large safe Haven. The greatest part of its Inhabitants are Jews. It stands at the foot of an Hill, upon a small River, at the bottom of a Bay called by its own name: two hundred and twenty Miles from Durazzo to the East, three hundred and fifty from Constantinople to the South-West, and two hundred and thirty from Athens to the North. Long. 47. 50. Lat. 42. 10. S. Paul Converted it to the Christian Faith, and wrote two Epistles to it a∣bout the year of Christ 52. Timothy was sent by S. Paul to instruct and confirm them in the same Faith. In 390. Theodosius the Great slew seven thou∣sand of its Inhabitants for a Tumult. In 895. It was taken and sacked by the Saracens: In 1423. it was sold to the Venetians. In 1431. Amurath II. took it from them. In the year 1688. the Vene∣tians bombarded it, till the Inhabitants submitted to the Contributions demanded of them. Thetford, Sitomagum, Sciani, a small but very ancient Roman Town in the County of Norfolk: up∣on the little Ouse; in the Borders of the County of Suffolk. Twenty Miles from Norwich to the South-West, seventeen from Ely to the East, and eight from Bury to the North. This ancient Town was sacked by Sweno the Dane, in 1004. and suffered more from them in 1010. About 1047. the Bishops See of the East-Angles was removed hither from Elmham. He∣rebert, the next Bishop, removed in 1067. to Nor∣wich. The Conqueror in his Survey sound two hundred Houses soon after empty: ever since it has been decaying: yet it is a Corporation, sends two Burgesses to Parliament, and gave the Title of a Vis∣count to the Right Honourable Henry Bennet Earl of Arlington. The Lent Assizes for the County are usually kept here. Thiano, a ruined City in the Province called Terra di Lavoro in the Kingdom of Naples: which had a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Benevento. Thibet, Thibetum, a Kingdom in the Asiatick Tartary; between Tartary, (properly so called,) and the Desart Tartary to the North, Indosthan to the South, Tangut to the East, and Mawaralnatharia to the West. Of which there is little known but the Name. Some make it the same with, others a part of, Turquestan. Thienen, Atheniensis Legio, Tenae, and Tillemon∣tium, is a Town of Brabant: called by the French Tillemont; upon the small Rivolet Geet, (which be∣neath Hallen falls into the Demere,) about six Leagues from Namur to the North, and a little more from Brussels to the East. Now a great Town: and for∣merly of great Import and Trade; as appears by this, that her Walls have been thrice inlarged. In the late Wars (saith Guicciardin) between the French, Liegeois and Low Countries, it has been much wa∣sted; and in part desolated, though the Inhabitants enjoy great Privileges. In 1578. this Place was ceded to Don John of Austria. In 1635. taken by the French. Thionville, Divodurum, Theodonis Villa, a City in the Dukedom of Luxemburgh; called by the Germans, Diedenhoven. It is a small, but very strong Place, and stands upon the Moselle: four Leagues from Mets to the North, nine from Trier to the South-West, and about eleven from Montmedi to the East. This Place was much beloved and fre∣quented by Charles the Great, as Eginhard saith. He ordinarily assembled the Nobility and Clergy of his Estates here: and particularly in 806, when he part∣ed his Kingdom amongst his three Sons. In 835. a Council at this City deposed the Archbishop of Rheims, as Author of an attempt against the Person of Lewis the Debonaire K. of France; whom the said Archbishop and his Adherents had deprived of Royal Dignity. In 844. Charles the Bald assisted at another Council here. In the latter Times it was often ta∣ken by the French: who ever since 1644. have in∣tirely possessed it; the Peace of the Pyrenees con∣firming it to them. Thorax, a Mountain near the City Manissa in Ly∣dia, in the Lesser Asia. The Christians of S. Thomas, an ancient Church of the Eastern Christians about Goa, Melia∣pour, Cranganoor, &c. in the Hither East-Indies: Which claiming its Establishment from the Apostle S. Thomas (whose Body is pretended to be preserved at Goa,) keeps it self at an entire Independency from the Laws and Rites of both the Roman and Greek Churches: whose several Founders (it says) were the Heads of the Churches of their own Foundations; but no more; and so S. Thomas was the Head of Theirs. In 1546. Dom Juan Albuquerque a Franciscan, Arch∣bishop of Goa, erected a College at Cranganoor, for the conversion of these Christians to the Church of Rome. In 1587. the Jesuits established another, one League from Cranganoor. And in 1559. Me∣neses, Archbishop of Goa and Primate of the East, was employed in a grand Mission hither to promote the same Conversion. But the Christians of S. Tho∣mas will not, by all the endeavours that are used, be induced to forsake the ancient Customs of their Fore∣fathers. They use the Chaldee language in their Of∣fices. Acknowledge the Patriarch of Babylon for their Chief. Practise their own Ceremonies; and in mat∣ters of Faith are Nestorians. Thongcaster, an ancient Town in the division of Lindsey in Lincolnshire: upon the side of a Hill. Owing its rise to a Castle, said to be built here with the permission of Vortiger the British Prince by Hen∣gist the Saxon, after his Victory over the Picts and Scots. Thorn, Torunium, a City of Prussia Regalis, upon the Vistula; four Polish Miles from Culm, twenty two from Dantzick to the South, and twenty nine from Warsaw to the North-West. This was once an Imperial and Free City, under the protection of the Teutonick Order, whom some make the Founders of it in 1234: but in 1454. it put it self into the Hands of the Poles, who have granted it great Privileges. Nicolas Copernicus, the great Astronomer, was a Na∣tive of this Place. Albert King of Poland, died here in 1501. In 1645. there was a Conference here between the Lutherans, Calvinists, and Roman Catholicks; which had no success. In 1655. this Place was taken by the Swedes: retaken by the Poles in 1658. by a Siege of six Months. Thornbury, a Market Town in Gloucestershire. The Capital of its Hundred. Thorne, a Market Town in the West Riding of Yorkshire, in the Hundred of Strafford.
Thorney-Ie, a small Island, to the East of Ports∣mouth, in Hampshire. Thou, a Castle in Champagne; giving name to the ancient and Honourable Family de Thou, which produced the Historian, Jacobus Augustus Thuanus in the last Century; born in 1553. made Counsellor of State to Henry IV. of France and Commissioner, at the Conference of Fontainbleau in 1600; he compo∣sed a noble History of his times from 1543. to 1608. in one hundred thirty eight Books in Latin, and dyed May 17 1617. in great Honor. Thovars, Duracium, a City of Poictou in France, upon the River Tove: six Leagues beneath Salmur to the South, towards Rochelle, and the Confines of Anjou. It gives the Title of a Duke: and was lately beautified by a magnificent Castle, built by the Duke de Tremolle. Thoura, Aremone, or Emmone, Armenia the Less in Asia. Thrace, Thracia, Pieria, Odrysia, is a great Pro∣vince of Greece, called by the Italians, Romania; by the Greeks, Rumelie; and by the Turks, Icella. Bounded on the South by the Archipelago; on the East by the Propontis, and the Black Sea; on the North by Bulgaria, and on the West by Macedonia. The Principal Cities in it are Constantinople, Gallipoli, Adrianople, Philippopoli, Selivrée, and Trajanopoli: two of which are the Royal Cities of the Turkish Em∣pire. The Mariza or Hebrus is its principal River. Rhodope, Orbelus, and Haemus its most famous Moun∣tains. Abdera, Cypsella, and Perinthus, some of its ancient Cities. The Thrausi, mentioned by Livy for a custom of making rejoycings for deaths and mourn∣ings for births, were some of its ancient Inhabitants. This Province is twenty days Journey in length, from East to West; and seven broad. Its Soil not fruit∣ful, nor its Air pleasant. Corn and Fruits by reason of the sharpness of the Air, ripening slowly and yield∣ing meanly. The Story of this Country is already de∣livered in Constantinople and Adrianople. Thrapston, a Market-Town in Northamptonshire, in the Hundred of Navisford, upon the Eastern Banks of the River Nen. Thrasymene, a Lake in Hetruria (now in Om∣bria) in the States of the Church: upon the Borders of the Dukedom of Thuscany, seven Miles from Pe∣rugia. Hannibal obtained a Victory over Flaminius, a Consul, at this Lake. It is now called the Lake of Perugia, di Castiglione, and di Passignano. The Three Churches in Turcomannia or Arme∣nia Major, are three famous Monasteries, near to one another, three Leagues from the City Erivan, upon the Borders of Persia: where the Patriarch of the Armenian Christians, attended by his Archbishops and Bishops living in Community, resides under the protection of the King of Persia. They are much vi∣sited by the Caravans that pass that way; receive for their maintenance yearly, a small rent of every Chri∣stian of the age of 15. and are allowed by the King of Persia, steeples and ornaments to their Churches. One of these Monasteries is a Nunnery for Women. The Turks call the place, Eguriasin. Thrusk or Thirsk, a Market Town and Borough in the North Riding of Yorkshire, and the Hundred of Budforth. It had antiently a strong Castle for its security; and now is represented in Parliament by two Burgesses. Thryn, a River in the County of Norfolk. Thule, is commonly understood to be Iseland in the Northern Ocean, or Schetland. Thur, or Dur, Durus, a River of Switzer∣land: which ariseth in the Valley of S John: and watering Durgow, falls into the Rhine; two Miles above Eglisow in the Canton of Zurick. Plantinus saith, it falls into the Rhine at Schellenburgh. Thuringia, a Province of Germany; called by the Natives, Thuringen, and Duringen. It lies in the Upper Circle of Saxony, between Misnia to the East, Anhault and Brunswick to the North, the Lower Hassia to the West, and Franconia and Henneberg to the South. The Capital is Erfurt, under the Arch∣bishop of Mentz. In the times of the Clodovean Kings of France, this Province had Kings of its own; but now divided amongst many Princes. Lewis the first Landgrave of Thuringe, (who died in 1055.) was a Descendent of Charles the Great, and thought to be the Son of Charles Duke of Lorain, (Brother of Lewis IV. Brother of S. Lewis V. who died in 1215.) In 1423. it became united with the Duke∣dom of Saxony, as it now is. It is invironed with woody Mountains: within, plain, pleasant, and fruit∣ful in Corn: has some Mines of Gold and Silver, and rich Pits of Salt; so that it wants nothing but Wine. About one hundred and twenty Miles square: but so populous, that it has twelve Earldoms, one hundred and forty four Cities, as many Market Towns, one hundred and fifty Castles, and two thousand Vil∣lages. Tibarent, an ancient People, mentioned by Stra∣bo and Pliny, towards the Euxine Sea, and Cappado∣cia in the Lesser Asia. Neighbours to the Chalybes. Tiber, Tiberis, is one of the most noted Rivers of Italy; in the most ancient Times called Albula. In those of the Roman Empire, it separated Hetruria from Umbria, Sabina, and Latium. At this day, called by the Italians, Tevere; by the French, le Ti∣bre. It ariseth from Falterona, (one of the Apen∣nine Hills) near Monte Corvaio, (a Village in the Dukedom of Florence; in the Borders of the Eccle∣siastical State, and of Romandiola, twelve Miles from Sarsina to the South:) Running South it watereth Santo Sepulchro, and beneath it takes in the Cherso∣ne: then entering the States of the Church in Om∣bria, it takes in the Nicone, Carpina, and Reggia: and watering Perugia, beneath it admits the Chiascio, Nestore, Paglia, and Nera: Passing into S. Peter's Patri∣mony, it is augmented by the Treggia, Aia, Farfa, and the Teverone: then it passeth through Rome; divides the Patrimony from Campania di Roma; and at Ostia falls into the Tyrrhenian Sea, one hundred Miles from its Fountains. It had heretofore two Months. The Southern is now stopped, with the Porto or Ha∣ven, which the Emperours made with vast ex∣pence: The Northern Branch is not maintained without a considerable expence by the Pope at this day. Tiberias, an ancient City of Galilee, in Palestine; upon the Western Shoar of the Sea of its own name, otherwise called the Lake of Genezareth. Herod gave them both this name to flatter the Roman Em∣perour Tiberius. Tickhall, a Market Town in the West Riding of Yorkshire, in the Hundred of Strafford. Ticou, Ticum, a City in the Island of Sumatra, on the West side; one hundred and eighty Miles from Malaca. Long. 125. almost. It has a large Haven; subject to the King of Achem. Tideswal, a Market Town in Derbyshire, in the Hundred of High Peak. Tidor, one of the Molucco Islands. Tienlique, a small Kingdom included in Bisna∣gar, in the East-Indies. Tierache, Teoracia, Tirascia, a Tract in Picar∣dy in France; between Hainault to the North, Champagne to the East, Vermandois to the West, and Laonnois to the South. The Chief Towns
of which are, la Fere, Guise, Marle, and la Cha∣pelle. Tiferno, Tifernus, Phitrnus, a River in the King∣dom of Naples, now called il Biferno also. It ari∣seth in the County of Molise, from the Apennine, near Bojano: and flowing Eastward watereth Guar∣dia Alferes: and at Termini, a City in the Capita∣nato, falls into the Adriatick Sea. Tigre, a Kingdom of Abyssinia in the Ʋpper Ae∣thiopia, of great extent. It includes seventeen Pro∣vinces; some, with the Titles of Kingdoms. Banna∣gasso lyes upon the North side of it, next to E∣gypt. Tigris, a celebrated River in Asia; now called by the Asiaticks, Tigil: One of the most rapid Ri∣vers in the World, from whence it has this Name. It ariseth from the Gordian Mountains, in the Great∣er Armenia; above the Lake of Arethusa, through which it flows towards the South: separating Meso∣potamia from Assyria. In which passage it washeth Majafarequin, Manuscute, Merdin, Mosul or Nine∣ve, and Bagdat. Beneath which at Wasset, it falls into the Euphrates; having received some Branches of that River above Bagdat into its Sreams Monsieur Thevenot, who sailed upon it, observes that it is very crooked, full of Islands and Banks of Stone. The Emperour Trajan designed a Canal to joyn the Eu∣phrates with it; till he found the bed of the Eu∣phrates much higher than that of the Tigris; so that his Canal might render the Euphrates unnavi∣gable. This is the Hiddekel of Gen. 2. 14. Tiibury, Tilaburgum, a Town on the Thames in Essex: famous for the Residence of S. Chad, Bishop of the East-Angles, when about 630. he Converted and Baptized that Nation. Also for an Encampment here made by Qu. Elizabeths Order, in 1588. when the Spanish Armado was expected. Tilemont, the same with Thienen. Tileusont, a Town in Brabant: Pillaged by the French and Hollanders, in 1635. Timavo, Timavus, a River of Friuli; which a∣rising from nine Fountains, falls presently into the Adriatick Sea, with a great Stream; between Thieste to the East, and the Mouth of Isonzo to the West; after a Course of about three Miles. Timerais, Theodemerensis Ager, a Tract in France; which was a part of la Beausse and Char∣tres: now taken into the Isle of France. It lies be∣tween Normandy, Chartres, and la Perche: but its Bounds are lost. The Capital of it is Neufchastel. Eighteen Leagues from Paris to the West, and twen∣ty from Orleans to the North. Tine, Tinia, a City of Bosnia, by the Natives called Kerka: upon a River of the last Name: which is a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Spalato. It is little, and ill peopled, being under the Turkish Sla∣very. Twenty five Miles from Sebenico to the North, and thirty five from Spalato. Tine or Tyne, the River. See Tinmouth. Tingmouth, a very small, naked, and defenceless Town upon the British Sea, Eastward of Torbay in Devonshire, in the Hundred of Exmister; burnt, (with some Vessels in the Port) by a Detachment out of the French Fleet, July 26. 1690; two days after the Anchorage of that Fleet in Torbay; whi∣ther they came from the fight at Beachy July 22. and ailed away Aug. the 4th. and 5th. following: being with their Gallies about one hundred and fif∣teen Sail. Tingoeses, a Tribe or Hoard of Tartars towards the River Obb, in the Asiatick Tartary: subject to the Moscovites. Tinmouth, Tunnocellum, Tinomuthum, a consi∣derable Sea-Port and Castle: in the Borders of Nor∣thumberland, and the Bishoprick of Durham: upon the River Tyne, which divides these two Counties, and here falls into the German Sea, having passed by New∣castle, called from it, New-Castle upon Tine. In the Reign of William II. Robert Mowbray, (Earl of Nor∣thumberland) trusting too much to the strength of this Castle, was taken Prisoner by that Prince after a sharp Siege. Tipasa, an ancient City of Mauritania Caesarien∣sis, in Barbary▪ which was a Bishops See, made par∣ticularly famous in the year 484. (when Cyrola a great Patriarch of the Arrians, was its Bishop) by Hunnericus King of the Vandals his cutting out the Tongues of all the Inhabitants, that would not turn Arrians; and the miracle thereupon said to ensue. It is now but a Village, near Algiers. Called Saza. Tipora, a City and Kingdom in the Further East-Indies: Bounded by Pegu and Arracan to the North and West. Tipperary, a County in the Province of Munster, in Ireland; called by the Irish, Cuntae Thobruidea∣rum; by the English, the County of Tipperary; that is, the Holy Cross. Bounded on the East by Kil∣kenny; on the West by Limerick; on the South by Waterford and Cork; and on the North by Gallway, cut off from it by the Shannon. The Principal Places in it are Cashel, Caryck, Clonmel, Emeley, and Castelan. It is one of the Titles, (as a great part of it is the Possession) of the Duke of Or∣mond. Tirconnel, or Tyrconnele, Conalia, a Castle and County in the Province of Ʋister in Ireland. Bound∣ed on the South, West, and North, by the Vergivian Ocean: and on the East by Tyrone and Colrane. Also called the County of Dunghall. The Country is Champain, and full of Harbours. It extends from North-East to South-West, above eighty English Miles; almost thirty five broad. So that it seems to be one of the greatest Counties in Ireland. But it has no considerable Place in it, except Dunghall, the River Dirgh, and the Lake of Foyle, separating it from the rest of Ʋlster. Tiretaine, a River in the Province of Auvergne in France. Tirol, Tirolis, Teriolium, is the most Southern Province of Germany; called by the Natives, Tyrol. Bounded on the North by the Dukedom of Bavaria, on the East by the Bishoprick of Saltzburg, on the South by the States of Venice, and on the West by the Grisons and Swiss. It took this name from an ancient, but ruined City, upon the River Adige or Etsch: which, with the Inne, water this County: and from this last it is sometimes called Etschelandt. The Tridentine Alpes divide it also into almost equal parts. The chief Places in it, are Inspruck, and Inthal. This County fell to Albert and Leopold Dukes of Au∣stria by Inheritance, in 1366: and is still in that Fa∣mily. It is accounted the greatest County in Eu∣rope: though Mountainous, yet it abounds in Mines and Game. There is also in it Trent, (famous for the late Council) Bixen, and a Place of great Trade called Bolzan. Tisindon, Andanius, Bagrada, a River in Persia; which falls into the Persian Gulph, over against the Isle of Ormus. The latter Maps place it more to the South than Ormus. Tivedale, Teviotia, a County in the South of Scot∣land, in the Borders of England; between Twedal and Marche to the North, Northumberland to the South, and Annandale to the West. The principal Places in it are Jedburgh, and Roxburgh.
Tiverton, a Market Town and Borough, repre∣sented in Parliament by two Burgesses, at the fall of the River Leman into the Ex. The Capital of its Hundred in Devonshire. Tivoli, Tibur, an ancient City in the States of the Church, in Campagna di Roma, upon the River Teverone; eighteen Miles from Rome to the East. It is a Bishops See, under the Pope. Honoured with a noble Palace and Gardens, belonging to the Cardinal de Este. A Synod was held at it in 1636. The Si∣bylla, called Tiburtina from this City, is supposed to have possessed a Vault amongst the neighbouring Rocks in the Teverone, which discover some remains of a small Oratory. Tivy, Tuerobius, a River of Wales; which at Cardigan falls into the Irish Sea, between the Coun∣ties of Cardigan and Pembroke. Tlafcala, a City and Province in New Spain in America. Called likewise los Angeles. Tmolus. See Tomalitze. Toam, Tuam, Tuama, a City of the County of Clare in Conaught, in Ireland; call'd also Towmond; which in ancient times was the Capital of that Pro∣vince; but now reduced to a mere Village. It is an Archbishops See still, and gives the Title of an Earl. Twenty two Miles from Gallway to the South. Tobolsk, Tobolium, the Capital City of Siberia, a Province of Russia: Built of late by the Mosco∣vites, upon a River of its own Name, and the Yr∣tim; which latter falls with a rapid Stream into the Obb. Tocat, Tochata, the Capital City of Cappadocia; an Archbishops See, and the Residence of the Turkish Governour; called of old Neocaesarea. It is great, strong, and populous, upon the River Casal: forty five German Miles from Trebisonde to the South-West. Long. 63. 28. Lat. 43. 58. The Province is now cal∣led by this Name. Todi, Tuder, Tudertum, a City of Ombria, in the Dutchy of Spoleto, upon the Tiber; twenty Miles from Perugia to the North, and the same distance from Narnia to the South: a Bishops See, and a City of great Antiquity. Pope Martin I. was its Na∣tive. Tokay, Tokaeum, a City of the Ʋpper Hungary: at the Confluence of the Bodroch and the Tibiscus, in an Island; and thereupon subject to be overflow'd: It is withal a strong Place; has a very strong Castle, and in a fruitful Country, which produceth an excel∣lent sort of Wine. Thirty Miles from Cassovia to the South, and as many from Agria to the East. Being taken by the Turks, it was recovered by the Imperialists in 1564. In 1682. it submitted to Teke∣ly. In 1685. it was retaken by the Imperial Forces. This City was granted to Bethlehem Gabor, Prince of Transylvania, by Ferdinand II▪ in 1620. Toledo, Toletum, Toletum in Carpetanis, a City of Castile in Spain; which was the Capital of His∣pania Tarraconensis, and the Seat of the Gothick Kings. In 705. taken by the Moors, and one of their Royal Cities; till retaken by Alphonsus VI. King of Ca∣stile, in 1085 After which it became the Capital of New Castile, the Seat of the Courts of Law; had the Archbishops See, and Primacy of Spain restored to it. This Archbishop has nineteen Suffragan Bishops: esteemed one of the greatest, and richest Prelates in Christendom. It stands on a Rock, in a pleasant Valley, in the middle of Spain, upon the Tajo (Ta∣gus) with a Castle; and is one of the strongest, no∣blest, and most pleasant Cities in Spain: but in a de∣clining condition, and not inhabited by above eight thousand Souls. It has twenty seven Parishes, thirty eight Monasteries, and a noble Water-work made by the Order of Philip II. in 1565. Charles V. built a Palace in this City. Twelve Miles from Madrid to the South. Long. 16. 40. Lat. 40. 02. Many of the Kings of Spain have been born in this City; twenty four Councils and Synods are reckoned to have been Cele∣brated at it. The first, and one of the most remark∣able, in 400. or 447▪ by the order of P. Leo, proceed∣ed against the Doctrins of the Priscillianists. Tolen, a Town in Zeeland, in the Ʋnited Ne∣therlands. Tolentino, Tolentinum, a City in the Marcia Anconitana, in the States of the Church; which is a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Fermo, by the Institution of Pope Sixtus V. in 1586. Since which, it hath been united with the See of Macerata in the same Province. It is little, but indifferently popu∣lous; upon the River Chienti. Ten Miles from Ma∣cerata to the North-West, towards Camerino fif∣teen. Tolne, Tolna, a City in the Lower Hungary, a little beneath Colocza, upon the Danube; six Hunga∣rian Miles from Simathorne to the East, and the same distance from Esseck to the North. In the Emperours Hands. Tolosa, Tolosetta, Tolosa, a Town in Spain, in the Province of Guipuscoa; at the foot of the Pyre∣nean Hills, upon the River Orio: four Leagues from S. Sebastian to the East. A Place of good Conside∣ration. Tolose, Tholouse, Tolosa, Tolosatium, Tolosa Te∣ctosagum, a City of Aquitain of great Antiquity; the Capital of the Province of Languedoc in France, the Seat of the Parliament, an Archbishops See, and an University. It stands upon the Garonne, over which it has a beautiful Stone-bridge: eight Leagues from Montauban to the South, eleven from Aux to the East, and twenty two from Narbonne to the West. This Archbishoprick was taken out of that of Narbonne by Pope John XXII. in 1317. The University Foun∣ded in 809. The second of note in that Kingdom. The Parliament was opened here in 1302. in the time of Philip le bel; and re-established by Cha. VII. King of France. Near this City it is supposed the dreadful Battel was fought between Attila, (King of the Huns) and Aetius, the Roman Lieutenant, in the Year of Christ 451: in which there perished five hundred thousand Men; and Aetius, the Victor. This City and Province being recovered out of the Hands of the Moors by Charles Martel, Charles the Great in 779. granted it to one Thursin, with the Title of an Earl. It continued under Earls for eighteen Des∣cents, (who particularly were famous for assisting the Albigenses in their Wars;) till 1270. when it was reunited to the Crown of France. The present King of France had taken up a design to make a Channel for Boats from this City to the Lake of Maguelone: that so it might be a kind of Centre of Trade, between the Mediterranean and the Ocean; but with what success I know not. In the year 1119. Pope Calix∣tus II. presided at a Council at this City. Besides, which it hath been honor'd with divers other Councils. The Tectosagi were its ancient Inhabitants. Tomalitze, Tmolus, a Mountain in Lidia, in the Lesser Asia; which yields Wine and Saffron. The Ri∣ver Pactolus flows from it. Tomar, Nabantia, Tacubis, a Town in Portugal; in the Province of Extremadura, upon the River Na∣baon; two Leagues from the Tajo. Tombut, Tombutum, a Kingdom in Nigritia in Africa, upon the River Snega; between the Kingdom of Agad to the East; Mandinga to the South; Geneboa and Gualata to the West; and the Desert of Zanhaga to the North. It takes its Name from a City so called, which stands four hundred
hundred French Leagues from Morocco to the South. Tonderen, Tundera, a City in the Dukedom of Sleswick, under the Duke of Holstein Gotthorp; one German Mile from the German Ocean, and four from Ripen to the South. Tone, a River in Somersetshire: upon which Taunton, Wellington, Wivercomb, and North Curry, are all situated. Tongres, Tungri, Aduatuca Tungrorum, Aduaca, Atuacutum, a very great City in the Itinerary of An∣toninus; now a Town in the Bishoprick of Leige; called by the Germans, Tongren: it stands upon the River lceker, four Leagues from Liege, and three from Maestricht. Attila ruined it, and the Normans after him. It had anciently a Bishops See; which was transferred to Maestricht, and thence to Liege. Tonningen, Toninga, a small City in the Duke∣dom of Sleswick; upon the River Erder; in the Bor∣ders of Ditmarsh. Six Miles from Sleswick: Under the Duke of Holstein Gotthorp. Topazus, an Island in the Red-Sea, about forty Miles from the Continent; where the Topaz or Chry∣solite Stone is found in plenty. It takes its name from its product. Pliny mentions a Topaz of this place, four Cubits long; of which Ptolemy Philadel∣phus K. of Egypt made the Statue of his Queen Ar∣sinoe. Topino, Tinia, a River of Italy, which ariseth near Nocera, from the Apennine; and flowing through Ombria, watereth Fuligno; taking in il Clinno: then falls into the Chiascio, and with it into the Tiber, four Miles from Perugia. Tor. See Eltor. Tor, a River in Somersetshire. Glassenbury is si∣tuated upon it. Toralea or Torre, Turritana, an old Roman Town in the Island of Sardinia; which became the See of an Archbishop. But it hath lost that Dignity since the year 1441. when Pope Eugenius IV. removed the See to Sessari, twelve Miles from it to the North. Torcello, Torcellum, a City in the States of Ve∣nice; which is a Bishops See, under the Patriarch of Venice: in an Island five Miles North of Venice, and not much inhabited by reason of the badness of the Air. This See was brought hither from Altino, in 635, which the Huns had ruined. In 1582, and 1628. Synods were held here. Torgaw, Torgavia, a City of Misnia, in the Dukedom of Saxony, upon the Elbe: seven Ger∣man Miles from Meissen to the North, five from Witteberg, and six from Leipsick, Commended much for excellent Beer. Tormes, Tormis, a River in the Kingdom of Leon in Spain: arising in a Village called Tormellas, near the Mountain del Varco de Avila: and flowing North and North-West, washeth Alva de Tormes, Salamanca, and Ledesma: after a Course of twenty six Leagues, and the Reception of fourteen small Ri∣vers, it falls into the Douro, beneath Miranda de Douro. Tornaw, Torne, Torna, a County and City in the Ʋpper Hungary; called by the Germans, Dorn. The City stands four Miles from Cassovia to the West. Tornburg, Torda, a Town in the principality of Transylvania. Le Tornaisis, Tornacensis Ager, a small Terri∣tory in the Earldom of Flanders; between Hainault to the East, and Lille to the West; by the Schelde. It is a part of the Gallick Flanders: and has this Name from Tournay, its principal City. In the Hands of the French ever sine 1667. Torne, Torna, a City in Sweden, in the Province of Bothinia; at the bottom of the Botner Sea, upon which it has a large and frequented Haven. From its Site sometime called Torne Lapmark, being near Lapland. Tornus, Tornu, Tinurtium, Trenorchium, a Town in the Dukedom of Burgundy; which has a ce∣lebrated Abbey. Six Leagues from Mascon to the North, and five from Challon to the South. In 944. and 1109. Councils were held in this Abbey. Toro, Octodurum, Taurum, a City of Leon in Spain, upon the Douro: little, and dayly decays: being not walled, nor much inhabited. It stands be∣tween Zamora to the East, and Valadolid to the West eight Spanish Leagues. Near this Place the Spaniards overthrew the Portuguese in 1476. John II. King of Castile was born here in 1405. Torreglia, a Sovereign Marquisate, between the Dutchy of Milan and the States of Genoua. Torrington, a Market Town in Devonshire, in the Hundred of Tremington, upon the River Tow∣ridge. Honor'd with the Title of an Earldom first in the Person of the late Duke of Albemarle. Torsil, Torsilia, a small City in Sudermania, in Sweden; eleven Swedish Miles from Stockholm, to the West. Torso, Thyrsus, a River of Sardinia. Torto, Hiemera, a River of Sicily. Tortona, Dertona, Terdona, Tertona, Tordona, a City of Lombardy; in the Dukedom of Milan, upon the River Scrivia. A Bishops See, under the Arch∣bishop of Milan. Frederick Aenobarbus, Emperor of Germany, sacked this Place: which though rebuilt by the Milanese, yet never recovered its ancient great∣ness. In 1642. it was taken by the French: recovered the next year by the Spaniard; who in 1654. built a strong Castle in it, for its defence. It is the Capi∣tal of il Tortonese, which lies between the Apennine and the Po: Having Pavia on the East, and the States of Genoua on the West and South: from which the City of Tortona lies eight Miles to the North, ten from Alessandria, twenty five from Pa∣via, and forty five from Placenza. In 1595. a Sy∣nod was held here. Tortosa, Dertosa, Dertusa, Dertossa, a City of Catalonia, of great Antiquity: a Principality, and a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Tarragona. It stands upon the Ebro; three Leagues from its Mouth, fifteen from Tarragona to the South-West, and from Ilerda to the South. Small, but Strong. In 1649. it was taken by the French. In 1652. returned un∣der the Spaniards. It has a strong Castle, and a large Haven; but not much frequented, as appears by the decay of the Town. In 1429, a Council was celebra∣ted here. Tortosa, Antaradus, Orthosia, Constantia, a Ci∣ty of Phoenicia, upon the Mediterranean Sea; which was a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Tyre; be∣tween, Balanca to the North thirty four Miles, and Tripoli to the South twenty eight. Now almost intire∣ly deserted, and ruined by the Turks. Tosa, Athiso, a River of Milan, which ariseth from S. Gothard's Mount: and flowing South, watereth Ocella and Vogogna; then burieth it self in the Lake called il Lago Maggiore, or Long-See. Toscana, Hetruria, Thuscia, Tuscia, a very con∣siderable Province of Italy; containing the greatest part of the ancient Hetruria. Bounded on the North by the Apennine; on the West by the River Magra, and the Tyrrhenian Sea; on the South and East by the Tyber, the Clain, and the Marta. It contains that space which made up the States of Florence, Sie∣na, Pisa, and Lucca: but so that this last is still a Free State; whereas the three former are subject to
the Duke of Florence: on which account this Coun∣try is frequently called the Dukedom of Florence. The Capital of it is Florence. For the History see Florence, &c. This Country was conquered by the Romans in the year of Rome 455. Toscanella, Tuscia, Tuscania, Tyrrhenia, Salum∣brona, an antient and considerable City heretofore, in the Dukedom of its own name, in Italy: which was a Bishops See; and gave all these Popes to the Church of Rome, Eutichianus, Paschal I. Leo I. John I. Lucius III. Leo VI. Boniface VI. and Paul III. It had been besieged sixteen times. Now, entirely ruined; and its See united with Viterbo. Totness, a Corporation in Devonshire, in the Hundred of Colridge, upon the River Dart: six Miles from the Fall thereof into the Ocean. It had the ho∣nour to be an Earldom in the Person of George Lord Carew of Clopton, (Son of Dr. George Carew, Dean of Windsor and Archdeacon of Totness) created Earl of Totness by K. Charles I. in 1625: who dying with∣out Issue, K. Charles II. advanced this Place from an Earldom to a Viscounty, in favour of his Son Charles Fitz-Charles, Earl of Plymouth. Toul, Tullum, a City of Lorain, upon the Mo∣selle; five Leagues from Nancey to the West, six from Bar le Duc, and twelve from Mets to the South. Made an Imperial and Free City by Henry I. But in 1652, fell into the Hands of the French. It is also a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Trier. Charles the Bald, King of France, celebrated a Coun∣cil here in 859. In 1515. and 1615. other Synods were held at this City. Toulon, Tolonium, Tolenium, Taurentium, Telo, a City of Provence in France; called by the Italians Tolone. It is a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Arles: well fortified, populous, inriched by a large and safe Harbour, and a great naval Magazine; being the station for the Mediterranean Fleets of France. It stands ten Leagues from Marseilles to the East: and in an improving condition. Henry IV. King of France walled it, and added two Moles to the Port. Toupinambous, Tupinimbae, Toropinambartii, Indians of Brasil in South America. Touque, Tolca, a River of Normandy; which wa∣tereth Lisieux, and Pont l' Evesque; and then falls into the British Sea. Touraine, Turonia, Turones, a Province in France, in the Generalité of Orleans; which is divided by the Loyre, and honored with the Title of a Dukedom: Little, (about thirty Leagues long and broad;) but very fruitful, and well watered with the Loyre, Cher, Indre, Indrois, Vienne, &c. therefore called the Garden of France. On the North it is bounded by La Maine; on the West by Anjou and Poictou; on the South by the last, and le Berry; and on the East by Blaisois. The principal Places are Tours, Amboise, Chinon, and Loches. Tournay, Tornacum, a City of Gallia Celtica; now in Flanders, and called by the Natives, Dornick. It is a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Cam∣bray, ever since 1559, having before been under the Archbishop of Reims; and in more antient times (a∣bout 623.) united with the See of Noyon; which continued till the year 1147. or 48. when Pope Eu∣genius III. at the Prayer of S. Bernard made it a sepa∣rate Bishoprick. This City stands upon the Schelde; nine Leagues from Cambray to the North, and ten from Gant to the South: in the middle between Donay and Oudenard; also between Valencienne and Courtray, in the Borders of Hainault. It is a very strong Place, and has a noble Castle, said to have been anciently built by the English. It belonged to the Crown of France till 1521, taken by Charles V. In 1667. it was retaken by the French; and has been ever since in their Hands, by the Peace at Aix la Cha∣pelle: Antoninus mentions it in his Itinerary. It hath besides the Cathedral ten Parishes, ten Abbeys, and divers Religious Houses. In 1520. and 1643. Synods were assembled here. There is a Territory belonging to it, called by its Name. Tournon, Turnonium, Taurodunum, a Town in the Province of Vivaretz in France, upon the Rhone: adorned with the Title of an Earldom; a Collegiate Church, a College of the Jesuits, and some Religious Houses. Tours, Turonm Caesarodumn, Turones, Turo∣nium, a great City in France; the Capital of Tou∣raine, and an Archbishops See. It stands upon the River Loyre, which is there covered by a very long beautiful Stone Bridge. On the other side it is washed by the Cher toward the South. So that it stands between the two Rivers; almost twen∣ty four Leagues from Orleans to the West, eighteen from Poictiers to the North, and from Mans to the South. A Place of great Beauty. Clotild, King of France, died here in 537. And Carloman in 85. Near this Place Charles Martell overthrew an Army of four hundred thousand Sarazens; three hundred seventy five thousand of which perished in that Battel, in 726; the Germans and Lombards joyning with the Francks. Pope Alexander III. with Lewis VII. King of France, called le Jenue, seventeen Cardinals, a hundred and twenty four Bishops, and four hun∣dred and fourteen Abbots, celebrated a Council here in 1153. against the Emperor. The Protestants of France were first called Hugonots in this City. Touvre, Tolvera, a famous Fountain and River in France, in the Dukedom of Angoumois; which falls into the Charente, near Angoulesine. Towcester, a Market Town in Northamptonshire. The Capital of its Hundred; in a Valley; upon the Banks of a small River running into the Ouse. Mr. Cambden understands it to be the antient Tripontium; to which, three Bridges over so many streams of this River cutting through the Roman Port-way, (which shews it self often betwixt this Place and Stony Strat∣ford,) assigned that Name. In the year 917. the Danes besieged this Town in vain. It is adorned with a fair Church. The Tower of Babel. The Prospects to the North and South of the Ruines of this famous Fabrick, taken upon the Place by Petro della Valle, are engra∣ved by Kircher (to whom he presented them) in his Book, Turris Babel, written purposely upon them. They are believed to be the Ruins of Babel, by the constant Tradition of the Country thereabouts; con∣firmed by their situation in the Plains of Shinar in Chaldaea; the same Place; and by their Construction in the most solid parts with Burnt-brick and Slime, the same Matter with Babel, expressed in Gen. xi. 2. 3. The Basis of them approaches nigh to a Square; con∣taining in circuit about 1150 Paces; and the height terminates almost every where in Pyramidal Points. First built by the general concurrence of the Fami∣lies of the Sons of Noah under Nimrod, (whether for an Asylum against a second Deluge, or a Me∣morial of the former, and of their Names to continue after their separation into several Parts, none know;) according to Chronologers, about the hundred and seventieth year after the Flood of Noah. Whereof the Greek and Latin Poets, after many Ages coming to a confused sense, they embellished the Story with Fictions of Giants scaling Heaven, upon Mountains laid upon Mountains. It seems, the Undertaking was so displeasing (by the History of Genesis) to God; that to stop it he broke the one common universal Speech of the Builders, into all the jarring and dis∣consonant Languages of Mankind at this day.
The Tower of Leander, a square Fortress upon a Rock, in the midst of the Hellespont; betwixt the Point of the Seraglio at Constantinople, and Scutari on the other side in Asia. Yielding a charming Pro∣spect of the City, and Country about, Constantinople. The Turks guard it with several Pieces of Canon: cal∣ling it in their Language, Khescalasi, the Castle of the Young Maid, (as the Europeans do the Tower of Leander); in allusion to the story of Hero and Him; tho it stands in a quite different place, than where Le∣ander by the Relation did swim. Towridge, a River in Devonshire; upon which Torrington, Bediford, and Hatherley, are all situa∣ted. Trabisonda, Trapezus, a great City on the Eu∣xine Sea, in the Lesser Asia; which is the Capital of Cappadocia. Called by the Inhabitants Trabosan; by the French, Trebisonde; by the Italians, Trabi∣sonda, and Trebisonda. An Archbishops See, the Seat of a Turkish Governour, and has a large safe Ha∣ven. In 1204. Alexis Comnenus established a King∣dom, over Cappadocia Paphlagonia, Pontus, and other Provinces, with the Title of the Kingdom of Trebi∣zonde from this its Capital City. It continued un∣der Princes of its own (of the Family of Lascara) from 1261. to 1460: when taken by Mahomet II. Emperor of the Turks. In 1616. this City was sack∣ed by the Cossacks. It is built at the Foot of an Hill. Long. 71. 06. Lat. 44. 03. Traerback, a Town upon the Moselle, in the County of Spanheim, eighteen Miles from Luxem∣burgh, between Trier and Coblentz. The King of France's erecting a new Fort over against this Place in 1687, occasioned a great Dispute in the Imperial Diets, whether it was not a Violation of the twenty years Truce: tho he erected it upon the Grounds, re-united to his Crown. Tragonara. The same with Dragonara. Trajanopoli, Trajanopolis, a City of Thrace, which is an Archbishops See; upon the River Hebro, or Mariza; eleven German Miles beneath Adrianople to the South. Now very small, and not much inha∣bited. Trajanopolis. See Islenos. § There was ano∣ther ancient City of this Name in the Island of Sicily. An Archbishops See, in the time of Pope Gregory the Great. The Greeks called it Draginae. Trajeto, Trajectum, an Episcopal City in the Terra di Lavaro, in the Kingdom of Naples. Tralles, an ancient City of Lydia in the Lesser Asia: which was a Bishops See under the Archbishop of Ephesus, or Sardis. Entirely now ruined. Trani, Tranium, Trana, a City in the Province di Bari, in the Kingdom of Naples; which is great and populous; the See of an Archbishop. It stands in a fruitful Soil, upon the Adriatick Sea; and had heretosore a great Haven, which is now stopped with Sand. Frederick II. built a strong Castle in it to de∣fend it against the Saracens. In 1589. a Provincial Council was held here. Long. 40. 39. Lat. 41. 15. Transchin, a County in the Ʋpper Hungary, upon the River Vag: betwixt Silesia to the North, Moravia to the South, Turocz to the West, and Neytracht to the East. Its capital Town bears the same name. Tranfissalane. See Over-Yssel. Transylvania, Septemcastrensis, Erdelia, a Pro∣vince of the Ʋpper Hungary; called by the Natives, Erdely; by the Germans, Sievenburgh; by the Dutch, Sevenburgh; by the Poles, Siedmigrodka; by the Sclavonians, Gradikaziemia; by the Turks, Ertel; and by the Italians, Transylvania. Bounded on the North by Red Russia, a Province of Poland; on the East by Walachia and Moldavia; on the South by the latter, and Hungary; on the West by the Ʋpper Hungary. The principal Places in it are Hermanstadt, Alba Julia, (or Weissenburgh) Clau∣senburgh, Bistriz, (or Besterze) Schiesburgh or Se∣geswar, Medwisch or Megies, and Croonstadt or Breslaw. Separated from its Neighbours by the Car∣pathian Hills, which encompass it. Its length from East to West is sixty eight French Leagues, its breadth sixty two. It affords great plenty of Corn, Wine, Cattel; not destitute of Mines of Gold, Sil∣ver, and Salt. This Prince is able to raise about twen∣ty thousand Men for War. After the Saxons, who cultivated this Country very much, the Romans were Masters of it in the time of Trajan. The Religion prosessed (ever since 1561.) is the Augustane Con∣fession; but mixed with Calvinists, Socinians, and some that follow the Greek Rites, and some Turks. This Principality was separated from Hungary, by John King of Hungary, in 1541. In 1571. Stephen Battori, Prince of Transylvania and afterwards King of Poland, endeavoured in vain the re-establishment of the Roman Catholick Religion. Christopher Bat∣tori his Brother and Successor, founded a College of Jesuits at Clausenbourgh: but dying in 1583. Sigis∣mond, Son to Christopher and Successor, was con∣strained to disperse it in 1588. Others reckon its Princes from John Hunadies, made Vaivode hereof by Ʋladislaus IV. Michael Abafti, (the twenty third Prince from John Huniades, who succeeded John Kemeni in 1661,) by a solemn Act given at Hermanstadt, May 9. 1688, with the full con∣sent of the States of Transylvania, made an entire submission of this Country to the Emperor, and the King of Hungary, to endure for ever. Which till then was tributary to, and had its Prince (after his Election by the States) confirmed by, the Grand Seignor. Accordingly he received Imperial Garrisons into all the principal Places. The said Prince dying April 1690, the States in a general Assembly resolved firmly to adhere to the Interests of the Emperor, and the young Prince, Son to the deceased, (he being confirmed by the Emperor in the Succession) against all the Pretences of Count Teckely, or the Ottoman Port, according to the Ten or of the said Treaty: And thus they remain intirely incorporated with the Crown of Hungary, under the Protection of the Empe∣rour. Trapano, or Trapani, Drepanum, a City in Sici∣ly, in the Valley of Mazara; which is a celebrated Mart, and has a large and safe Harbor on the Western Shoar of that Island. Twenty two Miles from the Cape di Coco, (or the most Western Point) to the North-East, and fifty five from Palermo to the South-West. The Rock or petty Island of Colombara stands very near it, to the South; fortified with a strong Cittadel. This City is built at the foot of the Mountain Eryx (now Trapano); near the Ruines of the antient City Eryx (which yet appear and are called Trapano Vecchio, the old Trapano); in the figure of a Sickle, according to the signification of its name in Greek, and that of Ovid, Quique locus curvae nomina falcis habet. The Coral, fished up here, is good. Trau, Tragurium, a small City and Port in Dal∣matia, called by the Sclaves Troghir. Strong and well peopled; and a Bishops See, under the Archbi∣shop of Spalato. It stands in a small Island of the same Name: but joined to the Continent by a Bridge seventy Miles from Zara, and twelve from Sa∣lona. Subject to the Venetians ever since 1420. Travanor, Travancorum, a City and Kingdom in the Province of Mallabar in the East-Indies; six∣ty Miles from Comorin to the North, and fifty from
Coulan to the South; subject to the King of Coulan. Travaux, Sinus Laborum, a Bay upon the Coast of America Magellanica, near Porto Desire: the Spaniards call it Boia de los Marabaios: others the White Bay, and S. George's Bay: Trave, Treva, a River of Holstein, in the Pro∣vince of Wagaren; which watereth Ploen, Segeberg, Oldesloh, Reinfelde, Lubeck, and Travemond; and separating Holstein from Mecklenburg, falls into the Baltick Sea; between Tavemond and Dassow. Trebia, a River of Lombardy, which ariseth in the States of Genoua, fifteen Miles from that City: and watering Bobio (a City in the Dukedom of Mi∣lan) a little above Piacenza, falls into the Po. The Romans being overthrown by Hannibal, upon the Banks of this River, were most of them in their flight drowned in it. Trebigna, Tribulium, a small but very ancient City of Dalmatia; which is a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Ragusa: from which it stands sixteen Miles to the East upon the River Trebinska: subject to the Turks. Trebula, an antient City of the Terra Sabina, in the States of the Church, in Italy. It has a Castle, and a great repute for Cheese. Some Inscriptions and the Ruins of a Theatre, yet extant, speak its Conside∣rableness in former times. Tregaron, a Market Town in Caerdiganshire, in the Hundred of Pennarth. Tregoney, a Corporation in the County of Corn∣wall, in the Hundred of Powder: represented in the Lower House of Parliament by two Burgesses. Treguier, Trecorium, Trecora, a City of Bretagne in France, called by the Inhabitants Lantriguet. It stands upon the North Shoar; and is a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Tours. Having an excellent Port, nine Miles from S. Brien to the West, and thirty from Reims. The Bishop is also the Temporal Lord of it, with the Title of a Count. It was often exposed to the spoils of the Saxons, Danes and Nor∣mans. Tremissen, Tremesin, Tremisa, a Town and King∣dom in Mauritania Caesariensis, in Barbary. Tremita, an Island upon the Coast of the King∣dom of Naples, in the Gulph of Venice; which communicates its name to some others about it, called the Islands of Tremits. It is one of the Diomedeae of the Antients: and now adorned with a Monastery. Tremituge, Tremithus, Tremethus, a City of the Islands of Cyprus: which was anciently a Bi∣shops See; Sporidion, a famous Bishop of it, assisting at the first Council of Nice. It is now reduced to a poor Town. Trent, Trenta, one of the principal Rivers in England. It ariseth in the County of Stafford, near Mowcop Hill, towards Cheshire: and flowing South receives the Saw from Stafford: in the Borders of that County, the Tame from the South, and the Done from the North: and entering Nottingham∣shire, salutes its Capital at a small distance after at Newark. So dividing this Shire from Lincolnshire, this and the River Dun, form the Isle of Axholme; and they being united, both fall into the Humber at Ankeborough. Trent, Trento, Tridentum, a City in the Borders of the County of Tirol, betwixt Italy and Germany; call'd by the Germans, Trient. The Capital of a Territory called the Tridentine, amongst the Alpes: which thence are also called the Tridentine Alpes. It is a small City and a Bishops See, under the Patriarch of Aquileja: well peopled; seated in a fruitful Valley upon the River Adige, in the midst of aspiring Moun∣tains. Once an Imperial and Free City; now exempt and subject to its own Bishop, as to its Revenue; but as to the Sovereignty, to the Emperor, as Count, of Tirol. Eighteen Miles from Inspruck to the South and about eight from Verona. It has divers Churches, one College of Jesuites, and a great number of reli∣gious and ecclesiastical Houses. But most celebrated on the account of a Council begun here by Pope Paul III. December 15. 1445: who dying in 1549. it was continued under Julius III: in 1551. He also dying in 1555. and a War broken out in Germany, it was not resumed by Pius IV. till 1562; and by him ended, Decemb. 4. 1563. Maurice (Elector of Sa∣xony) with Albert (Marquess of Brandenburgh) and William (Landtgrave of Hesse), having suddenly ta∣ken Ausbourgh in 1552. and threatned Trent, obliged Pope Julius III. to suspend the session of it for that time. Trepassez, Sinus Mortuorum, a Bay in New∣found Land, in North America. Trero, Trerus, a River of Campania di Roma, which watereth Salvaterra; and falls into the Gari∣gliano beneath Ponte Corvo, in the Borders of the King∣dom of Naples. Some call it Omme. Tresen, Tresa, a small City with an Haven upon the Baltick Sea, in the Province of Sudermannia in Swe∣den; seven Miles from Stockholm to the North-West. Tresmes, Trama, a River and Monastery in Cham∣pagne in France, in the Borders of La Brie; three Leagues from Meaux to the North. Trevico, Trivicus, a City in the further Princi∣pate, in the Kingdom of Naples: A Bishops See, un∣der the Arch-Bishop of Benevento. Horace mentions it. It is likewise called Vico della Baronia. Trevigiana. See Marchia Trevisana. Treviso, or Trevigi, Tarvisium, Taurisium, a Ci∣ty in the Marquisate of Trevigiana, or Trevisana, to which it gives its name: in the States of Venice, up∣on the River Sile; which is a Bishops See, under the Patriarch of Aquileja. A great and strong City, sur∣rounded on all sides by Water, and thereby of the more difficult access. Brought under the States of Venice in 1336. In 1509, taken by Maximilian the Emperour, and shortly after restored to them. It stands eighteen Miles from Venice to the South-West. Trevoux, Trevoltium, the Capital Town of the Principality of Dombes in France: adorned with a Col∣legiate Church. Triadzzia, Sardica, an ancient City of Thrace. Triballi, an ancient People of Moesia Inferior, now Bulgaria. Tribur, an ancient Royal Palace betwixt May∣ence and Oppenheim, beyond the Rhine in Germany: where divers Councils have been celebrated. Tricaraco, Tricarium, a City in the Basilicate, in the Kingdom of Naples. Tricastin, a Territory in Dauphine in France: the Capital of it is S. Paul de trois Chasteaux. Trier, Treviri, Augusta Trevirorum, a City of Germany; called by the French Treves; by the Ita∣lians Treveri; by the Germans Trier. It is an Arch∣bishops See, whose Bishop is one of the eight Electors of the Empire; and his Suffragans, Metz, Toul, and Verdun; three Subjects of the King of France. A great and an ancient City, seated upon the Moselle, over which it has a Stone-Bridge; thirteen Leagues from Metz to the South-East, seventeen German Miles from Cologne to the South, and from Mentz to the West. Said to be built fourteen hundred and ninety six years before the Birth of Christ: and so to be the most ancient City in Europe. Made a Roman Colony in the times of Augustus; and afterwards the richest and most famous City in Gallia Belgica: the Metropolis of the Treviri. About the times of Con∣stantine, it was for a long time the Seat of the We∣stern
Emperors; resembling Rome in all its magni∣ficent publick Buildings, as much as was possible. In the year of Christ 456, it was taken and ruined by the Huns, and other barbarous Nations in their Pas∣sage into Italy. But after this it recovered. In the year 1472, there was an University opened here. In the year 1568, it was taken by its Bishop; and ceased to be a Free and Imperial City. In the year 1632, it was put into the Hands of the French, to preserve it from the Swedes, as was pretended: they kept it till the year 1645. In 1675, it was again recovered out of the Hands of the French; who had seized upon it the second time not long before. In 1688, the French put another Garrison into it. Long. 28. 06. Lat. 49. 50. This City hath four Collegiate. Churches, five Parishes, and two Abbeys. The Tunique of our Sa∣viour is pretended to be preserved here; but they very rarely offer to expose it to view; and never since 1648. after the Peace of Westphalia. In 386. A Council was held here in the business of the Priscillia∣nists, by the order of Maximus. In 1148. Pope Eugenius III. assisted in Person at another. The Electorate of Trier, is bounded on the North by Lifall, the Bishoprick of Cologne and Westro∣walt; on the East by Weteraw, on the South by Lorain; and on the West by Luxemburgh; it is of great extent from East to West, but very narrow from North to South. The principal Cities and Pla∣ces in it are, Trier, Coblents, Boppart, Oberwesel and Hermanstein. It is watered both by the Mo∣selle, and Rhine; and affords all things needful for the Life of Man in great plenty. The Inhabitants of this Diocese are called by the Germans Trie∣rishe. Trieste, Tergeste, Tergestum, a City of Istria, called by the Germans Triesten. A small but a strong and populous Place; and a Bishops See under the Pa∣triarch of Aquilesa; has a large but unsafe Harbour upon the Adriatick; at the bottom of a Bay called Trieste too. This City was taken from the Venetians, in the year 1507, by the Emperor; and has been e∣ver since in his Possession It stands thirty Miles from Aquileja to the East, and fifty from Pola to the North. Long. 36. 24. Lat. 45. 40. Il Trigno, Trinius, a River in the Kingdom of Naples; which springeth out of the Apennine, in the County of Molise; and watering Trivento, falls through the Hither Abruzzo into the Adriatick Sea; near il Guasto; sixteen Miles from Lanciano to the East. Trin, Trino, Tridinum, a Town in the Dukedom of Montferrat, a small distance from the Po to the North; seven Miles from Casal to the West; and thirty four from Turin to the East: which in 1630, was yielded by the Duke of Mantoua to the Duke of Savoy. Tring, a Market Town in Hartfordshire, in the Hundred of Dacor. La Trinidad, Trinitatis Insula, one of the Ca∣ribby Islands in America: planted with Sugar. Trinquimale, a City in the Island of Ceylan. Triodos or Throhodos, a Mountain in the Island of Cyprus: so called by the Greeks. Tripoli di Soria, Tripolis; a City in Syria; called by the Turks Tarabolos-scham: In 1289, taken and intirely ruined by the Saracens: and after rebuilt by the Franks; in a fruitful Plain, with a strong Ca∣stle seated upon a Rock. This place is now in a good condition; having about two thousand Houses, and a very convenient Harbor on the Mediterranean Sea. It stands twenty German Miles from Damascus to the North, and a little more from Famagousta to the South. In the time of the Holy War it had Counts of its own; from 1109, to 1288. Now the Seat of a Turkish Sangiack. Long. 63. 30. Lat. 34. 20. See Monsieur Thevenot's Travels, Part I. p. 221. Tripoli, Tripolis, Neapolis, Leptis, or Tripoly of Barbary, is a great City on the Mediterranean Sea in Barbary; which is the Capital of a Kingdom of the same name; has a large Port and a strong Castle; but extremely infamous for its Piracies. Heretofore a part of the Kingdom of Tunis. In 1510, it was taken by the Spaniards: eighteen years after it was granted to the Knights of Malta; who in 1551, were expelled again by the Moors. Since that it is govern∣ed like a Commonwealth: Having a considerable Ter∣ritory belonging to it, betwixt Tunis and the Ocean; but very few Towns, Sanson supposes it to be the an∣cient Oea. It lies over against the Isle of Malta. Long. 42. 00. Lat. 41. 40. §. There is another Tripoli in Barbary, upon the Mediterranean, with the Title of Tripoli Vecchio or the Old Tripoli; which stand∣ing in an ill air, has almost lost its Inhabitants. §. A third in the Lesser Asia, upon the Euxine Sea. Trivento, Triventum, Triventinum, a small Ci∣ty of the Kingdom of Naples, in the County of Mo∣lise, upon the River Trigno; which is a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Benevento; and stands in the Borders of Abruzzo, upon the Adriatick Sea, seventeen Miles from Boiano to the North. Troesen, an ancient City of the Peloponnesus: which preserved their Alliances with the Athenians with great Honor; and since the times of Christiani∣ty, became a Bishops See under the Archbishop of Co∣rinth. Gastaldus calls it now Pleda. Troglodytae, an obscure People of Aethiopia, from whom the Sinus Troglodyticus there anciently receiv∣ed its denomination; having the Caverns of its Rocks (adjacent) possessed by them. Whence all subterrane∣ous dwellers in Rocks, Caves, and Cabbins in India, Africa, &c. were called Troglyditae. Troia, Ilium, a City of Phrygia in the Lesser Asia; upon the Coast of the Aegean Sea; made famous by its Ruin, and a ten years War, about the year of the World 2870. in the Reign of its King Priamus. It stood upon the River Xanthus, near Mount Ida; three Miles from the Archipelago, thirty two German Miles from Smyrna to the North, and from Constantinople to the South. Said to have been built about the year of the World 2574. Whereby this City and Kingdom lasted not above two hundred and ninety six years. Some Marble ruins of it are yet visible. Mahomet IV. used the Columnes he found amongst them, in the building of a great Mosque. § There was another City of the same Name, (Troas Alexandri) built by Ale∣xander the Great, some Miles from this: which in the beginning of Christianity was a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Cyziqua; but that too is now rui∣ned. Long 54. 25. Lat. 41. 15. Troja, a small City of the Kingdom of Naples, in the Capitinato upon the River Chilaro: which is a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Benevento, and a Principality; it stands at the Foot of the Apennine; twenty five Miles from Benevento to the East, and a little more from Manfredona. Built in 1008, by the Greeks. In 1195 and 1115. Councils were assembled at this City. Trois Chasteaux, Augusta Tricastinorum, Trie∣ves, the same with S. Paul; a City in the Dauphine. Troki, Troka, Troccum, a City of Lithuania, a Province of Poland; which is the Capital of a Pala∣tinate of the same Name. It stands upon the River Bressa, in a Marsh of difficult access; defended by a strong Castle. This City was built by Gediminius Great Duke of Lithuania, in 1321: taken by the Russ, and burnt in 1655. It stands four Polish Miles from Vina to the West.
Trolhette, a River in Westrogothia in Sden, which washeth Babuse; then by the Lake of Wonner, passeth into the Baltick Sea. Tronto, Truentum, a River which ariseth out of the Apennine in the Province of Abruzzo; and flow∣ing through the Marcha Anconitana, is augmented by the Leia; and watering Ascoli, and separating the Popes Dominions from the Kingdom of Naples, falls into the Adriatick Sea at Porto di Ascoli. Tropea, Tropaea, Tropas, Tropia, Postropaea; a Ci∣ty of the Kingdom of Naples in the Further Cala∣bria: and a Bishops See under the Archbishop of Reggio. Troppaw, Oppavia, a City of Silesia, called by the Bohemians, Oppaw. It stands upon the River Oppa, which falls into the Oder near Hilschin! and is the Capital of a Dukedom of its own Name, and has an ancient Castle. Three German Miles from Ratibor to the West, and nine from Oppelen to the South. This City and Dukedom was formerly a part of Moravia. Trossi, Trosaeum. In the years 909. 921. 924. and 927. Councils were assembled here. But the French Geographers describe it be no other Character, than a place in the Diocese of Soissons. Trowbridge, a Market Town in Wiltshire, in the Hundred of Melksham, near the Avon. Troyes, Trecasses, Trevae, Augustobona, Augusto∣mana, Treca, Tricassis, Tricassium, Augusta Tri∣cassinorum, a great City, which is the Capital of Champagne in France: and a Bishops See under the Archbishop of Sens. It stands upon the Seyne; thir∣ty four Leagues from Paris to the North-East, and twenty from Chalon to the South. Long. 25. 15. Lat. 48. 08. Pope Ʋrban IV. was a Native of this place. It hath six Parishes, two Collegiate Churches, (besides the Cathedral); an Abbey, a College of the Oratorians, and divers Ecclesiastical and Religious Houses. A Council was held here in 867. by the Order of Pope Nicholas I. In 878. Pope John VIII. crowned King Lewis le Begu: and in 1107. Pope Paschal II. celebrated a Council at this City. There have been also many others. Trughillo, or Truxillo, Turris Julia, a small Ci∣ty in the Province of Extremadura in Spain: seated on a Hill in a Plain, and fortified by an ancient strong Castle, which has stately Buildings annexed to it. It stands eleven Miles from Merida to the South-East. Francisco Pizarro, the Conquerour of Peru, was a Native of this place. § There is another Town of the same Name in New Spain, in the Province of Hon∣duras; which has a Port on the Bay of Mexico. Ta∣ken by the Hollanders, and sacked in 1633. But re∣paired since. § A third in Peru. Trullus, the great Hall of the Imperial Palace at Constantinople, in the times of the ancient Greek Em∣perours: which took this name from its being arched in the form (Trullae) of a Cup. Here in the year 680. was celebrated the sixth General Council, or the third of Constantinople, under the Emperour Constan∣tinus Pogonatus, against the Monothelites. And in 692. or 707. Another, called the second in Trullo and , or Synodus Quina Sexta; consisting of one hundred forty seven Bishops, under the Emperour Justinian II. which undertook to supply the defects of the fifth and sixth General Councils, as to Points of Discipline, by one hundred and two new Canons. But neither the Western Church received those Canons, neither all the Patriarchal Churches of the East. Tschelminar, a Mass of some of the noblest Re∣mains of Antiquitie in the Kingdom of Persia: near the City Schiras, in the Province of Farsistan. Be∣ing great Pillars, Canals, Idols, Sepulchres in Rocks, Rests of Edifices, and bas relievo's above two thou∣sand. They may be a part probably of the Ruins of the ancient Persepolis. This Name, which the Turks give to the place, signifies in their Language the Forty Pillars. Truro, a Market Town and Corporation in the County of Cornwal, and the Hundred of Powder: honoured with the Election of two Parliament Men. It is seated betwixt two Streams, that run into Fal∣mouth Haven: and gives the Title of a Baron to the Right Honourable Charles Bodvile Roberts, Earl of Radnor. Tubingen, Tubinga, a pleasant City in the Duke∣dom of Wurtemburg, in the Circle of Schwaben, upon the Necker: four German Miles from Sougard to the South, and twelve from Ʋlm to the West. Anto∣nius Caracalla, who was Emperour about the year of Christ 213. had a Palace in this City. In 1342. it was sold to Verick Duke of Wurtemberg by its Count: and in 1477. there was an University opened here by Eberard le Barbe, Count of VVurtemburg. Tucho, a City in the Province of Queiche, in China. Tucuman, Tucumania, a Province in Paragua in South America; between the River of Plate to the East, the Mountains and Kingdom of Chili to the West; the Capital of which, is S. Miguel de Estero. It is three hundred Leagues broad, two hundred long; and has eight small Spanish Cities in it. Tudbury, or Tutbury, a Market Town in Staf∣fordshire, in the Hundred of Olow; upon the River Dove. Tudela, Tatela, a City and Government in the Kingdom of Navarre, upon the River Ebro; where it receives the Queiles, and is covered with a Bridge: four Leagues from Tarragona, and fifteen from Sar∣ragoza to the South-West. Long. 19. 15. Lat. 43. 00. Tuitz or Duitz, Titium, a Town opposite to Co∣logue, on the other side of the Rhine, in Germany: formerly joined to it by a Bridge, which no less than the Town challenged Constantine the Great for its Founder. This Town is famous for a Monastery; in which in the twelfth Century, an Hostia is pretended to have remain'd unburnt in the midst of a Fire. Tulles, Tuelle, Tutela, Tutella, a City of Limosin in France, upon the River Courrez; the Capital of the Lower Limosin, and a Bishops See, under the Arch∣bishop of Bourges, by the Appointment of Pope John XXII. in the year 1318. It lies two and twenty Miles from Clermont to the West, and fourteen from Limoges to the South. Long. 22. 59. Lat. 45. 20. The Bishops are Lords and Viscounts of the City. Tulujas, Tulugiae, a Castle in the County of Rou∣sillon in Catalonia, one League from Perpignan: at which, in 1050. the Council, called Concilium Tulu∣giense, was celebrated. Tun, a River in the County of Kent, falling into the Medway. Tunbridge stands upon it. Tunbridge, a Market Town in the County of Kent, in Aylesford Lath, upon the River Tun. Much noted for its Mineral Wells. Tunchang, a City in the Province of Xanton in the Kingdom of China; upon the River Inn, in the Borders of Pechin. Tunis, Tunes; Tunetum, a City and Sea-Port on the Coast of Barbary, upon the Mediterranean Sea; now called by the Natives Tune; by the Spaniards Tunez; by the Italians Tunisi. It is great, strong, and populous; about five Miles in compass: con∣taining three hundred Mosques (besides the grand one, which is a Noble Structure); twelve Christian Chappels, eight Synagogues of the Jews, twenty four Cells for Hermites, one hundred and fifty Hott-Houses, eighty six Schools, nine Colleges maintained upon
the Publick Expence, sixty four Hospitals, and about ten thousand Families. The Venetians, Genouese, and others drive a great Trade with it. It has two Walls, a Palace Royal, a Magazine of Merchandises, a spacious Haven, and Prisons for Christian Slaves too well known. Seated in a Plain by the Lake Barba∣sueco; nine Leagues from the Ruines of Carthage, and from the Shoars of the Mediterranean Sea; eigh∣teen from Goletta: at the bottom of a Bay, to the West of the most Western Cape of Sicily. Not far from this place, Regulus the Roman Consul was de∣feated, and taken by the Carthaginians. In the Times of Christianity it was a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Carthage. In the year 1270, unsuc∣cessfully besieged by Lewis IX. King of France. In the year 1535. taken by Charles V. In 1570. it re∣turned under its former Kings; who being since ex∣tinct, it is governed like a Common-wealth, under the Protection of the Turk; but very infamous for Pyracies. Long. 34. 53. Lat. 32. 10. The Country about it yields Olives, Fruits, Grain and Pasturage very well. The Kingdom of Tunquin, or Tonquin, Tun∣chinum, is bounded on the East and North by that of China; on the South by Cochinchina, and by the great Bay; on the West by the Kingdom of Brama. The Capital City of it is Kecio. The King of this City is also Master of a part of the Province of Quan∣sio. He formerly paid Tribute to the Emperour of China: Now, Homage only by an Ambassadour, by an Establishment in 1667. Of late years the Christian Religion has been preached with good success, (as is said) by the Missionaries of the Church of Rome. A Kingdom of great power, and nigh as large as France: situated in 20 deg. of Lat. and 145. Long. Mostly under the Torrid Zone: yet very fruitful, and healthful; and watered with above fifty Rivers. Cochin China was formerly a Province of it; now a Kingdom tributary to it. It is said to con∣tain about twenty thousand Towns and Cities. The Sect of the Chinese Philosopher, Confusius, obtains much amongst the Tonquinese. It became a separate Kingdom about seven hundred years ago: Before which, it depended as a Province, upon the Empire of China. Turcomania, Armenia Major, a vast Country in the Lesser Asia: of old called Armenia. It lies between Georgia to the North, the rest of the Lesser Asia to the West, Persia to the East, and Diarbeck to the South. This was the first Country the Turks posses∣sed, after they came out of Tartary, (being most probably descended from the Scythians, that lay be∣twixt the Euxine and Caspian Seas); under Tan∣grolipix, about the year of Christ 1037. But the pre∣sent Line was begun by Osman or Ottoman, about the year 1290: who was a Husbandman, or com∣mon Labourer; and by his Valour raised this Family. Bursa in Bithynia was the first Seat of their Empire, afterwards Adrianople, and then Constantinople. So∣lyman the present Emperour of the Turks, is the one and twentieth of this Line, set up by the Army a∣gainst Mahomet IV. his Brother, out of a Discontent at his Misfortunes in the present War against the Chri∣stians, November 9. 1687. Turenne, Turena, a Town in Limosin, two Leagues from Courez, and four from Tulles. Turin, Turino, Augusta Taurinorum, Tauriana, Taurinum, the Capital City of Piedmont in Lom∣bardy: called by the Italians Torino, by the French Turin. It is an Archbishops See, and the Seat of the Duke of Savoy; in a very fruitful and pleasant well watered Plain, twenty Miles from the Alpes; upon the River Po, where it receives the Doria. Adorned with a strong and beautiful Castle, built by Emanuel Phil∣bert, Duke of Savoy, in 1565. It has also an Uni∣versity, opened here by Pope Benedict XIII. in 1405. and the Courts of Justice for that Province are held in it. The City is very strong, and grows greater and more splendid; yet in the year 1640. it was taken by the French. Long. 29. 30. Lat. 43 50. The di∣spute betwixt the Bishops of Vienne and Arles for the Primacy, was heard, but not definitively decided, by an ancient Council held here in 397. or 401. The Empire of the Turks, containeth from East to West, accounting from the Western Borders of the Kingdom of Algiers to the City Balsara upon the Persian Gulph, the space of at least eight hundred Leagues. From North to South, that is, from Caffa in the Taurica Chersonesus, or rather from the City Tanais near the Lake of Moeotis to Aden on the Mouth of the Red Sea and the Streights of Babelman∣del, 7 hundred other Leagues: which together make an Empire of the greatest Extent of any Seignior or Sovereign in these parts of the World; and there∣fore the Emperor thereof bears the Title of the Grand Seignior. He hath in Asia, Natolia, Syria, Turco∣mannia, Diarbech, and the three Arabia's. In Afri∣ca, he hath the Kingdoms of Barca and Egypt; and the States of Algiers, Tunis, and Tripoli are under his Protection. In Europe, his Dominion extends over Romelia, Macedonia, Albania, Thrace, most of the Islands of the Archipelago, Sclavonia, Servia, Cro∣atia, Bulgaria, and part of Hungary; except what this present War hath dismembred from them; when the Princes of Transylvania, Moldavia, and Wala∣chia paid him also Tribute: as the Republick of Ragusa also did: and even the Crim Tartars recognize his Protection. In the whole, before the present War there were twenty five Governments in this Empire. To wit, Cairo in Egypt, for Africa. Aleppo, Cara∣mit, Natolia, Cogni, Chars, Damascus, Van, Mosul, Suvas, Bagdet, Erzerum, Trebizonde, Tripoli, &c. in Asia. In Europe, Caffa, Candia, Cyprus, Romelia, Bosnia, Temeswaer, and Buda. The beginning of this Empire was laid in the Greater Armenia, about the year 1037. In 1290. the Ottoman Line took its rise: (See Turcomania:) whose Power over the Subject is come to be completely Absolute, Arbitrary, Despotical, Tyrannical. They pray by the Alcoran, and govern by the Sword. Turquestan. Some make this and the Kingdom of Thibet in the Asiatick Tartary, to be the same Country. Others describe it as a Province betwixt the Great Tartary, and the Empire of the Mogul. Tuver, Tavera, a City of Moscovy. Tuxford, a Market Town in Nottinghamshire, in the Hundred of Southclay: called commonly Tux∣ford upon Clay, from the quality of the Soil it stands in. Tuy, Tude, Tyde, a City of Gallicia in Spain, up∣on the River Minho; six Leagues from its Mouth to the East, twelve from Compostella, and seventeen Bracara. It is a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Compostella; but a small City. Tweede, Tuaesis, Vedra, Tueda, a River which divides Scotland from England; and falls into the German Ocean at Barwick. Giving name to Twee∣dale, a County in Scotland. Tyana, an ancient City of Cappadocia in the Lesser Asia, at the foot of the Mountain Taurus: famous for being the Birth-place of the Philosopher Apollo∣nius, called Tyanaeus from it. It became in the Chri∣stian times, an Archbishops See: and in 365. a Coun∣cil of the Oriental Bishops was celebrated at it. Tyndaro, Tyndarus, a Town in the Island of Si∣cily, in the Valley of Demone towards Petti: which was formerly a Bishops See under the Archbishop of Syracusa. But as Syracusa has been since redu∣ced
to a Bishoprick; so has Tyndaro from a City become a Town. Tyrconel. See Tirconel. Tyre, Tyrus, one of the most ancient and cele∣brated Cities of Palestine: supposed to be older than the coming of the Children of Israel out of Egypt: but certainly at the latest built in the year of the World▪ 2693. two hundred and forty years before So∣lomon's Temple, which is the account of Josephus. It flourished, and had the Trade of the whole Medi∣terranean Sea: sent and settled its Colonies on all its Coasts; as far as the Western Ocean, yea, as Britain; and amongst the rest, founded Carthage. But when Jerusalem fell, Tyre kept her company. For Nebu∣chadnezzar took and burnt this City, in the eighteenth year of his Reign, Anno Mundi 3371. the year before he took Jerusalem. Alexander the Great took and ruined it the second time, after a Siege of seven Months, in the year of the World 3618. Yet it recovered a∣gain; and was in great repute during the Roman Empire; and was an Archbishops See, in the times of Christianity, under the Patriarch of Antioch, and af∣terwards of Jerusalem. Adrian the Emperour ha∣ving made it the Metropolis of Phoenicia. About the year of Christ, 641. after the Saracens had by a Siege of three years forced Caesarea to submit to them, they became Masters of this City without resistance: Da∣mascus, Antioch and Jerusalem being taken before. Together with Jerusalem, it returned under Christian Princes again, about the year 1099. In 1111. the the Saracens in vain attempted the▪ Recovery of it: but in 1123. it was taken by them. The Christians regained it, and kept it till the year 1259. when the Tartars took it. In 1263. the Venetians retook it. In 1292. the Saracens finally prevailed, and drove the Western Christians out of Syria. This is now called Sour by the Turks; and has some lovely Antiquities, as Thevenot saith, but no Inhabitants. Long. 67. Lat. 33. 20. In the year 335. a Council here as∣sembled by the order of Constantine the Great, con∣demned Athanasius, deprived him of his Bishoprick of Alexandria, and banished him from that City. In 448. Ibas Bishop of Edessa, accused of Nestorianism, was acquitted by a Council at Tyre: and in 518. there was a third celebrated here. Tyrnaw, Tirnavia, a small City in the Ʋpper Hungary, in the County of Transchin, upon a River of its own name: called by the Germans, Durn or Dyrne; which has always been under the Empe∣rour, and is the common Residence of the Bishop of Gran, being seated in his Diocese; nine Miles from Comora to the North, eight from Presburgh to the East, and sixteen from Vienna. Tyrone, Tyronensis Comitatus, the County of Tir-Oen, or as the Irish call it of Thioroghain, is in the Province of Ʋlster in the Kingdom of Ire∣land; between the County of Antrim to the East, London-Derry to the North and West, and Ferma∣nach and Armagh to the South. There is no Town or City of any Note in this County; which hereto∣fore extended further to the West, than now it doth: a part of it being taken into the County of London-Derry. Tzaconia, the same with Laconia, a Province of the Morea. Tzebona, a strong Town in Bohemia. Tzorlich, or Tzurulium, or Ciarlo, a City of Thrace, which is a Bishops See; almost in the middle between Constantinople and Adrianople. Tzuconi, a Kingdom of Japan. V A. VAbres, Vabrae, Vabra, Vabrincum, Castrum Va∣brense, Vabrium, a small City in Rovergue in France upon the River Dourdan; at the foot of an Hill; three Leagues from Rhodez to the South, and four from the Borders of Languedoc. Made a Bi∣shops See in 1317. under the Archbishop of Bourges, by Pope John XXII. who converted its Benedictine Abbey into a Cathedral. The Bishops enjoy the Title of Earls of Vabres. Long. 23. 40. Lat. 33. 00. Vaferine, or Vanferine, a River of France; which ariseth from the Valley of Chesieri in Bugey, and separates the Territory of Michaille in that Province from Savoy: then passeth by Bellegarde into the Rhone. Vag, Vagus, a River of the Ʋpper Hungary; which ariseth from the Carpathian Hills, in the Borders of Poland; and running North-West, watereth Trens∣chin, Freistadel, Leopolstadt, Schinta, and Sche∣liz. Between Comora, and Presburgh, falls from the North into the Danube. Whilst Newheusel was in the hands of the Turks, this was the Boundary on that side between the two Empires. Vai, Sabatium Vadum, Vada Sabatia, a Sea-Port on the Coast of Genoua; five Miles from Savona to the North-West. Vaison, Vasio, Forum Vocontiorum, a City in Provence, in the County of Venaissin: upon the River Louveze, and the ascent of a Hill; four French Leagues from Orange to the North-East, and ten from Avignon to the same. It is a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Avignon. In 337. a Council here assem∣bled in the Reign of the Emperor Constantius, received and added to the Gloria Petri, the Verse following, Sicut erat in principio, &c. In 442. and 529. we read of other Councils here. Val des Choux, a Priory in the Dukedom of Bur∣gundy, and the Diocese of Langres, near Chastillon; founded in 1197. It belongs to the Benedictines. Val des Ecoliers, an Abbey in the Diocese of Langres in France: founded in 1212. by some Pa∣risian Doctors, for their retirement; whose example drew the Scholars of the Ʋniversity of Paris in such numbers to the same life, that their House was cal∣led the Scholars Valley; and became the Head of a New Order. Valckembourg, a Town in the Dutchy of Lim∣burgh, in the Low-Countries, two Leagues from Maestricht. Taken by the French in 1676. and re∣stored to the Spaniards in 1679. by the Treaty of Nimeguen. The French call it Fanquemont. § Also a small Town in the State of Holland, one League from Leyden: which has been adorned with the Title of an Earldom. Valdiva, a small City in the Kingdom of Chili in South America; which has a large and safe Haven on the Pacifick Ocean; under the Dominion of the Spa∣niards, though it has been often ruined by the Indi∣ans. It stands seventy five Leagues from Imperiali to the South; written sometimes Baldiva. Valence, Valentia, Julia Valentia, Segalaunorum Ʋrbs, a City of Gallia Narbonensis, in Ptolemy; now called Valenza by the Italians. It is a neat, po∣pulous, great City in the Dauphiné; and a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Vienne, upon the River Rhosne; eleven Leagues from its Metropolis to the South. This Bishoprick was for ever united to that of
Dye, in 1275. The Bishops take the Title of Earls of Valence. In 1452. there was an University opened here. The River Isere closeth it on the North, and the Rhosne on the West. It is the Capital of the Dukedom of Valentinois: hath a Cittadel, an Abbey, and a Collegiate Church, (besides the Cathedral) with a great number of Religious Houses. And an∣ciently was a Roman Colony. In 374. 584. and 855. Councils were assembled at this City. In 890. Lewis Son of Bozon, was confirmed King of Arles by the Bishops here met for the purpose. There have been more Councils in after times held in the same place. § Also a Town in the Province of Guyenne, near the Garonne. Valenchiennes, Valenciennes, Vallencenae, Va∣lentianae, Valentinianae, a City of Hainault, upon the Schelde; where it receives the Ronel, which divides it. A great, strong, spruce place; two Leagues from Quesnoy to the North, five from Tournay to the South, and from Cambray to the West. Henry VII. Empe∣rour of Germany, was a Native of it; and Baldwin, and Henry, Emperors of Constantinople. In 1656. the French besieged it under the Mareschals Turenne and la Ferte: But Don John of Austria, assisted with the Prince of Conde, raised the Siege and took the latter Prisoner. In 1667. it was taken by the French, under whom it now is. They have since added to its Fortifications. It was made an University in 1475. Valencia, Valentia, Valentia Constetinorum, a Ci∣ty and Kingdom in Spain. The City is called by the Italians, Valenza; and stands about a Mile from the Mediterranean Sea; forty nine Leagues from Barci∣none to the North-West, from Toledo to the East, and Saragoza to the South. Built by Junius Brutus, a Roman, in the year of Rome 616. Rescued out of the hands of the Moors, by Roderic Bivar el Cid, in the year 1025. Taken by them again, and recovered the second time by James I. King of Arragon, in 1236. Made a Bishops See in 1492. by Pope Alex∣ander VI. In Pliny's time it was a great, noble, ele∣gant City; walled, with five Bridges over the River Guadalaviar: and now the best peopled in all Spain, except Lishon and Madrid. An University; the Ca∣pital of a Kingdom, and the Seat of its Courts of Ju∣stice, and a Vice-Roy. It has given to the See of Rome two Popes, Calistus II. and Alexander VI. The Spaniards proverbially call it, Valencia la Hermosa, the Beautiful. Long. 25. 15. Lat. 39. 55. The Kingdom of Valencia, lies upon the Medi∣teranean Sea. Bounded on the East by Catalonia, and that Sea; on the West by New Castile; and by the Kingdom of Murcia to the South. The chief Cities in it, are Valencia, Segorve, Orighuella, Xati∣va, Elche, and Alicante. Watered by the Ebro, the Mervedre, the Guadalquivir, and the Xucar▪ so that it enjoys at once the most fruitful Soil, and the most pleasant and temperate Air of all Spain; much like that of Naples. Their Silk and Wooll are the best in the World. Their Sheep were first brought thither from Cotswald in England, in 1465. by the imprudent Courtesie of Edward IV. In short, the Plenty, Delicacies, and Pleasantness of this Kingdom, has esseminated its Inhabitants, and made them less able to defend it. The ancient Edetani and Conte∣stani dwelt here. It became a distinct Moorish King∣dom in 1214. Submitted to Arragon in 1228. Fi∣nally conquered by them in 1238. Philip II. banish∣ed out of it twenty two thousand Families of the Moors. Valeneia d' Alcantara, a strong Town in the Province of Extremadura in Spain, but in the Bor∣ders of Portugal, upon the River Savar; eight Leagues from Alcantara to the West. Taken by the Portu∣guese; and restored to the Spaniard by the Treaty of Peace in 1668. Valencia di Minho, a strong Town upon the River Minho, in the Kingdom of Portugal: which has resisted the repeated Attacks of the Spaniards. Valenza, Valentia, Forum Fulvii, or Valentinum, a strong Town in the Dukedom of Milan, but in the Borders of Montferrat. Built upon an Hill by the Po, ten Miles from Casal to the East, and seven from Alessandria to the North. It was attempted by the French in 1635. and in 1656. with great loss: they took it in 1657. The Spaniards were defeated in 1658. in their design of recovering it: but gained it by the Treaty of Peace the next year at the Pyre∣nees, and are still in possession of it. Valentinois, a Territory in Dauphine, of which Valence is the Capital. It is divided into the Ʋpper and Lower Valentinois: The Upper extends from the River Isere to the Droume; the other from the Droume to the County of Venaissin. Formerly un∣der its own Counts. It became united with Dau∣phine and the Crown of France in the time of Tewis XI. King of France. Lewis XII. advanced it to the quality of a Dukedom. Valette, Valetta, a new, very strong, fine, popu∣lous City, in the Isle of Malta. Built by Jean de Valette, a French Man, (Master of the Knights of Malta) in the year 1566. after the Turkish Siege; on the North side of the Island, upon a Mountain called Sceb Erras: having an excellent Port. The Master of that Order has resided in that City ever since the year 1571. The Castle belonging to it is called S. Elmo. La Valette, or Villebois, a Town in the Duke∣dom of Angousmois in France. Valiza, Rhodope, a Mountain in Thrace; called by the Inhabitants, Rulla. It divides Thrace into two parts; extending from East to West; and gives Birth to the River Hebrus, and some others. Valladolid, Pintia, Vallisolitum, Vallisoletum, a City of Old Castile in Spain: great, elegant, and po∣pulous; upon the River Piznerga, a little above its fall into the Douro; in the Borders of the Kingdom of Leon; (of which it was a part.) Sixteen Spa∣nish Leagues from Burgos to the South-West, and twenty from Salamanca to the North-East. This City was built by the Goths, in the year of Christ 625. Made a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Toledo, in the year 159. Christopher Columbus, the first Discoverer of America, died here in the year 1506. It was for some time the Seat of the Kings of Castile; and now an University of great esteem. In this place, Philip II. King of Spain, by the perswasion of Mr. Par∣sons, (a known English Jesuit), erected a Seminary for the English in 1589. the very year after the Spa∣nish Armado had miscarried. Philip IV. built a Magnificent Palace in it. In 1322. a Council was as∣sembled here. Long. 15. 40. Lat. 42. 10. § There are two New Cities of the same Name in America; one in New Spain, in the Province of Honduras; which is a Bishops See under the Archbishop of Me∣xico, since the year 1558. The other in Peru. Le Vallais, or Valais, Valesia. See VVallisser∣landt. Valle, 1. di Demona, Demonae Vallis. 2. Valle di Mazara. 3. Valle di Noto, Vallis Neaetina, are the three Provinces into which the Island of Sicily is now divided. The Valley of Iehosaphat, a Valley betwixt the City Jerusalem, and the Mount of Olives in Palestine; to the East: which lying two hundred and fifty paces lower than the City to that quarter, serves as a Fosse to it. Its length from North to South comes to
about two thousand paces. The name, some derive from the Sepulchre of K. Jehosaphat, anciently built upon it. Some, from a pretension that God will judge Mankind in this place; because of the signifi∣cation of the word Jehosaphat in Hebrew, (Gods Judgment;) and an expression in Joel, 3. 12. Where v. 14. the same Valley is also called the Valley of de∣cision; elsewhere in Scripture, the Valley of Kedron, from the Brook of that name, which traverses the middle of it; and the Kings Valley, from Solomons Garden, at the foot of the Mount of Scandal, a part of the Mount of Olives. Upon this Valley, at pre∣sent, is pretended to be shown the Sepulchers of King Jehosaphat, Absalom, the Prophet Zaehariah, and S. James Bishop of Jerusalem, all cut in Rocks▪ The Sepulcher of the Virgin Mary, in a Church, built by Helena in 326. Where are also the Tombs of Joachim and Ann, (the Parents of the Virgin;) Si∣meon and Levi; and that famous Queen Melisende, in the eleventh Century, who was the Daughter, Wife, and Mother of Baldwin II. Foulk, and Baldwin III. three successive Kings of Jerusalem. The Armenians, Jacobites, and Abyssines have their several Altars and Apartments in this Church; which stands upon this Valley, at the foot of the Mountain Viri Galilaei, another part of the Mount of Olives. Vallona, a large Town in Albania, recovered out of the Hands of the Turks by the Forces of the Republick of Venice, Sept. 18. 1690. There were in it one hundred and thirty Pieces of Cannon. Valois, Vlesti, a Duchy in the Isle of France; between it, and Picardy, and Champagne; upon the River Oyse. The chief Town of which is Crepi en Valois. All the Kings of France from Philip IV. to Francis I. (that is, from 1328, to 1515) were from hence surnamed de Valois. Valombre, a Benedictine Abbey in the Florentine, in Italy. Valpo, a River, Town, and County in Solavania; between Esseck and Belgrade; all in the Hands of the Emperor. This River falls into the Danube, three German Miles below Esseck to the South. Valtelina, Vallis Telina, Volturena, a small Tract belonging to the Grisons, at the Foot of the Alpes; through which the River Adda runs. It belonged to the Dukedom of Milan; and was granted to the Gri∣sons, by Francis I. in the year 1516. The Spaniards have thereupon all along pretended a Right to it, and in 1620, seized upon it; more for the convenien of a passage between Tirol and Milan, than for the va∣lue of the place▪ though it is a most fruitful spot of Ground: but the French, the Pope, and the Vene∣tians interposing, and a War insuing, the Grisons at last recovered the Possession of it. This Valley ex∣tends from East to West sixty Miles: on the North it is bounded by the Grisons, on the South by the States of Venice, on the East by Tirl, and to the West by Milan. There are four considerable Towns in it, Morbegno, Sondrio, Tirano, and Bormio. It made a part of the ancient Rheia, and was then in∣habited by the Vennonees. Van, a Fortress of the Turks, upon the Frontiers of Persia, in Armenia; which is little, but very strong: and stands upon a Lake of the same Name, betwixt Mar di Bchu and the Tigris; which some call the Sea of Van, and the Sea of Armenia, because its Waters are salt. Learned Men take it for the an∣cient Artemita. It stands two hundred and fifty Miles from the Caspian Sea to the West. Long. 78. 40. Lat. 40. 30. Vandali, an ancient People upon the Coasts of the Baltick Sea, in Germany: who in the fifth Century, in conjunction with the Alani and others, made Invasions into Gaul and Spain. In Gaul, they lost Godegesil their King, and twenty thousand Men in one Battel, in the year 405, before the Alani could advance to their relief. In the other, they Conquer∣ed the Kingdom of the Suevi, defeated the Roman Forces in Boetica, called a part of the Country Van∣dalitia (now Andaluzia) after their own name; thence passed into Africa; and established a Kingdom there in the Person of their General Gensericus: to whom succeeded five others in the same honor; till Bellisarius with the Emperor Justinians Forces took their last King Gelimer (an Usurper upon the Right of Hilderic, Kinsman to Justinian) Prisoner; and brought him to Constantinople, in 533. These Kings were Arrians, and severe Persecutors of the contrary Faith. Vannes, or Vennes, Venetia, Dariorigum, Vene∣tiae, Dariorigum Venetorum, a City of the Lesser Bre∣tagne in France: the Seat of the ancient Veneti, who were hardly conquered by Julius▪ Caesar in a Sea-Fight. It is now a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Tours; and is a fine, populous City, by the Bay de Morbihan, with a Castle, which was anciently the Palace of the Dukes of Bretagne, and divers Churches; two Leagues from the Sea, and twenty six from Ren∣nes to the North-West. Long. 17. 28. Lat. 47. 15. In 465. a Council was celebrated here. Var, Varus, a River of Italy, which ariseth in the Maritim Alpes, in the County of Nizza; and flowing South, receives the Vaire, Tince, Vesubee, and Esteron; and at Nizza, (or Nice) falls into the Mediterranean Sea; after it has for many Miles divi∣ded Provence from the County of Nizza; it is therefore accounted the Boundary between France and Italy; though the French have some places on the South of this River, and the Duke of Savoy on the North of it. Varcevo, Collentum, a City of Dalmatia; between Zara to the West, and Scardona to the East; under the Venetians. Varna, Dionysiopolis, Barna, Tiberiopolis, Odes∣sus, Vrna, a City of Bulgaria; which is an Archbi∣shops See, and has a Port upon the Euxine Sea; at the Mouth of the River Zyra, now Varna. It stands between this River to the North, the Sea to the East, and the Lke of Devina to the South. Still a place tolerably well peopled: seven German Miles from Msember, and the Borders of Thrace to the North. Most taken notice of upon the account of a great Defeat the Christians received here, under Ʋladisla∣us, King of Hungary, November 11. 1444. Long. 54. 20. Lat. 44. 15. Il Varo, the same with Var. Vasento, Casuentum, a River of Calabria, in the Kingdom of Naples; which flowing by Cosnza, falls into the Grati. In the Bed of this River, Alaricus King of the Goths, was buried, as Jornandes faith: who was one of those Batarous Princes that sacked Rome. Vasiligred, a City in the Dukedom of the little Novogorod in Moscovy; upon the River Wolg, where it receives the Sure. Vasiliptamo, urous, a River of the Mora. Vasserburgh, a Town in avaria, where the Duke keeps his principal Treasures. It stands upon the Ri∣ver Inn, which almost incompasseth it; seven Miles from Munchen to the East. Vatzen or Veizen, Vai, a City in the lower Hungary upon the Danube: and a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Gran. Vauluse, quasi Vallis Clausa, a Fountain in the Valleys of the County of Avignon in Provence, at the foot of a Mountain: famous for the frequent resort of the Learned Poet Petrarch thither, about the year 1300: who honoreth it with the Title of the Queen
of Founiains. Some old remaining ruins upon the place are commonly to this day called, Petrarch's house. This Fountain forms the River Sourges (Sul∣ga) very near its head; assisted by the influx of a number of other little sources; from the same Moun∣tain. Vaud. See Waad. Vaudrevange, Valdersinga, a Town in Lorain, upon the River Saar; ten Miles from Mets to the East, and from Thionville: which suffered much in the late German War, but since rebuilt. About a Mile from this place was built a very strong Fort, cal∣led Saar Lovis. Vauge, Vogesus, Vosagus, a celebrated Mountain in France; which extends from North to South, be∣tween Lorain, Alsatia, and the Franche Comte; (in which it is called Mont des Faucilles;) out of it a∣rise the Moselle, and the Saone, or Sosne. There is a small Territory near it, which by the French is called le Pais de Vauge; and by the Germans, Was∣gow; a part of the Dukedom of Lorain. Vauge. See Wasgow. Le Vault, Romana Ditio, a District belonging to the Canton of Bearn, in Switzerland; betwixt the Lake of Lemane, and the Mountain Jura. Lau∣sanne is its Capital City. Formerly under the Duke of Savoy. The French call it Vaux, and Pais de Vaux. La Vaur. See Lavaur. Vaux, a small Territory near Orleans. Vbeda, a great, populous City, in the Eastern Part of Andalusia in Spain: towards the Borders of New Castile; one League from the River Guadalqui∣vir to the North, and six from Jaen or Gaën to the South-East. This City was recovered from the Moors, September 29. 1234, by Ferdinando King of Castile: and besides a strong Castle, has a very advantageous Stiuation. Long. 17. 30. Lat. 38. 30. Vberlinghen, Ʋberlinga, a small but Imperial and Free City, in the Circle of Schwaben; upon the Lake of Constance towards the North, two Miles from Constance. Made an Imperial City in 1267: often taken, and retaken in the Swedish War. Vbii, an ancient People, who dwelt about the (now) Archbishoprick of Cologne, and Dutchy of Ju∣liers, in the Circle of Westphalia in Germany: the memory of their name being still preserved in a place there, called Ʋbich. Vchter-See, Lacus Moratensis, a Lake of Swit∣zerland, called also Murtensee by the Germans. The River Broye flows through it, and falls into the Lake called Newenburghsee. Vdenheim, the same with Philipsbourg. Vdiaa, the Capital City of the Kingdom of Siam, in the East-Indies. Vdine, Ʋtinum, a City in Friuli, called by the Germans Weyden. The Capital of that Province, and the Seat of the Patriarch of Aquileja, since the de∣clension of that last City into ruin; of old a Bishops See. Brought under the subjection of the States of Venice in 1420: and built on the River Torre; twen∣ty Miles from the Adriatick Sea to the North, eleven from Palma, twenty from Goritia to the West, and eight from Friuli. Long. 35. 28. Lat 45. 46. Vecht, Vidrus, Vider, a River of Westphalia in Germany, mentioned by Tacitus and Ptolemy: it ariseth five German Miles from Munster to the South-West; and being augmented by the Aa, the Din∣chel, and the Regge, falls into the Zuyder Zee, in Over-Yssel eight Miles from Zwol to the North, where it is called Swarte Water. Veglia, Vegia, a Venetian Island upon the Coast of Dalmatia, in the Adriatick. The Sclavonians call it Kirk. Veii and Vejentes, an ancient People and City of Etruria, near Rome. Famous in the time of Romu∣lus, who himself made War with them. But much more by the Victory they obtained over the three hun∣dred and twelve Fabii (being the whole Family, ex∣cept one Youth not of age to bear Arms, who was left at home) at the River Cremera in Thuscany, by an Ambuscade, in the year of Rome 177. Of which Ovid, Ʋna Dies Fabios ad bellum miserat omnes: Ad bellum missos perdidit una Dies. See Cremera. The Dictator M. Furius Camillus took and totally destroyed this City, in the year of Rome 318. But it first endured a ten years Siege. The tenths of its spoils were dedicated to Apollo Pythius by the Conquerors; who had taken Oathes from the Sol∣diers, never to rise from before the place untaken. Velay, Velauni, a County in the Sevennes in Lan∣guedoc in France, betwixt Auvergne, Vivaretz, Gi∣vaudan, and Foretz. The Capital City of it is Puy. It was anciently the Country of the Velauni. Sepa∣rated into two parts by the Mountains Mezeres, Per∣tuis, and Meigal; which are covered with Woods: therefore called Velay beyond the Woods, and Velay on this side of them. Veletri, or Veltri, Veletrae, a most ancient City, and Colony in Campania di Roma; taken by Ancus Mar∣tius King of the Romans. Now a Bishops See, but uni∣ted to that of Ostia, and under the Pope. It is a pleasant spruce City; twenty Miles from Rome to the East. Veleuve, a County in the Province of Guelder∣land, in the Ʋnited Netherlands: Harderwick is a principal City in it. Venafro, Venafrum, a City in the Province di Lavoro, in the Kingdom of Naples, of great Anti∣quity: a Principality, and a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Capua. Twenty two Miles from Capua to the North. Long. 37. 58. Lat. 41. 35. Venaissin, or Venaisse, Vindasanus, Vindaucensis, Venascinu, Comitatus, a County in Provence in France; between the Dauphiné to the North, the Durance to the South, the Rhosne to the West, and Provence to the East. In 1348, given by Jona Qu. of Naples, and Countess of Provence, to Clement VI. Pope of Rome; and still, together with Avignon, subject to the Pope. The now Capital of it, is Car∣pentras: Vaison, and Cavailon in it are considerable Towns. Avignon is not in this County, (as is be∣lieved) tho it stands near it. Vence, or Vanze, Vensiensis Ʋrbs, Vincium, Vin∣tium, Ventium, Vidantiorum and Vinciensium Ʋrbs, a City of Provence; which is a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Ambrun, for some time united for∣merly with the See of la Grace, but again separated. Two Leagues from Antibes to the North, and from the River Varo to the West: made very conspicuous in the World, by the Learned Writings of one of its late Bishops. The Inscriptions about it prove its hav∣ing been a Roman Colony. It gives the Title of a Ba∣ron; betwixt whom, and the Bishop, the temporal Ju∣risdiction of it is divided. Long. 29. 15. Lat. 42.50. Vencheu, a City in the Province of Chequin in China. Vendosme, Vindinum, Vindocinum, a City in the Province of la Beause in France, upon the River Loyre; nine Leagues from Chasteaudun to the West, and Amboise to the North, and seven from Blois. This is the Capital of a Dukedom, between la Perche to the North, Blois to the East, Touraine to the South, and Mans to the West. The Dukedom is given to the Younger Sons of the Crown of France very frequent∣ly.
It hath an ancient Castle, a College of the Orato∣rians, and some Religious Houses. Vendres, Rubensis Lacus, a Lake in Languedoc in France. Venice, Venetia, one of the noblest Cities, and Free States of Italy; called by the Inhabitants, Vene∣tia, and Vinegia; by the Poles Wenecya; by the Greeks, , by the French, Venise; by the Ger∣mans, Venedig; by the Georgians, Venedich; and by the Turks, Venedick. It is the Capital also of a mighty Common wealth, and a Mart, or Sea-Port; as much frequented by the Merchants of all Nations, as most other in the World. Begun by the Inhabitants of Padoua, about the year of Christ 421, upon the Rocks of the Adriatick Sea, out of a terror of the Goths and other barbarous Nations: which then like an impetuous and irresistible Torrent over run Italy. The Senate of Padoua, as Masters of the Islands of the Lagune, to this purpose proclaimed by their three Consuls the ssame year, Rialto (a Port belonging to them there) to be an Asylum for all that would retire to it. Attila after this overthrowing and ruining A∣quileja, the Inhabitants of that City fled to Venice too in the year 453. Whereby both Rialto, and the neighbouring Islands, became Peopled; receiving for their Governours, Consuls, or Tribunes, (which Cassiodorus calls Maritimorum Tribunos) sent to them from the Senate of Padoua: till in time every Island chose itself a particular Tribune yearly, and every Tri∣bune became in the nature of a petty Sovereign. And thus for nigh the first three hundred years, they were neither one and the same City, or Republick; but a consederation of many neighbouring Islands united together, by common interest, for their security against the Barbarians of Italy. In the year 697, the Tribunes of the twelve principal Islands by per∣mission from the Emperor (as Sovereign of all the Country) and the Pope, which was procured to su∣persede the pretensions of Padoua to these Islands, set up the first Duke: and since that time this City hath encreased to that degree, that it has filled all the seven∣ty two Islands about it; which, as every Island ancient∣ly had its separate Pastor as well as Tribune, are be∣come so many Parishes, each having its peculiar Church. From the year 697. to 1172. or 1177. the Dukes or Doges governed with an absolute authority; and caused their Brothers or Children to be elected often∣times their Colleagues, and their Successors. The third Doge was assassinated by the People for his Tyranny: whereupon ensued an Interregnum of five years; in which the State was committed to certain Officers, e∣very new year changed and elected. Then they desi∣red to have a Doge again: And from 697. to 1177. they had about thirty four or thirty six Sovereign Do∣ges. In 1172. the Election of the Doge by the voices of all the People was abolished; and a Sovereign in∣dependent Counsel appointed for that use, consisting of two hundred and forty Citizens, chosen indifferent∣ly out of the Gentry, Citizens, and Artizns: But withal they Created twelve Tribunes, with power to oppose the Doges Ordinances, in case they appeared unjust. This fom of Government continued one hundred and eleven years: And in 1280. the Coun∣cil was fixed upon a number of certain Families and their descendents, expressed in publick Register; with an utter exclusion of other Persons and Families, of all States and Qualities whatsoever. Which last form, time hath improved with many additions. The Sword is now carried not before, but behind the Doge; and the publick Coins represent him in Du∣cal Habits, upon his Knees before S. Mark, (who is the Symbol of the Republick;) two no small intimations of his inferiority to it. It is lawful for the Senate to de∣pose him (otherwise his Dignity is for life) in case of extreme old age and sickness, rendring him uncapable of business: as they did Francisco Foscarini, at the age of 84. after his Dogate had been always happy to them. The Families of the twelve Tribunes who set up the first Doge in 697, are all preserved to this day; and obtain the first rank in the Venetian Nobility, with the Title of the twelve Electoral Houses Most of the Princes of Italy, and not them only, but Hen. III. and Henry le Grand, Kings of France, have desired to be received into the Body of the Nobility of this State: For which, others, who purchase their Nobili∣ty, ordinarily pay one hundred thousand Duckats. In the year 1177. the Emperor Frederick Barbarossa and Pope Alexander III. were reconciled in a Coun∣cil here: but the common story of the Pope's putting his foot upon the Emperor's Neck is rejected and re∣futed by Baronius. In the year 1451, the Bishop of this City had the Title of a Patriarch given him: who writes, Divina Miseratione Venetiarum Patriarcha, without the addition of Sanctae sedis Apostolicae gra∣tia; and is nominated by the Senate. Aquitela is another Patriarchate within the Dominions of this State: who, though that City belongs to the House of Austria, find means to keep the Patriarchate con∣stantly full, against the interposition of any Person by the Emperour. The Body of S. Mark, brought hi∣ther from Alexandria, is said to be preserv'd in the NOble Church of his name in this City. Here are accounted one hundred and forty Palaces, one hun∣dred and thirty Monasteries for Men and Women, one hundred and sixty five Marble Statues, twenty five brass, sixty seven Parishes, eighteen Hospitals, and in∣numerable other Testimonies of Riches and Gran∣deur. The several Islands are said to be joyned toge∣ther by five hundred Bridges; the greatest of which called il ponte di Rio Alto, was built of Istrian Stone, in 1591. The Arsenal for their Gallies is the most celebrated, and their Harbor the most large and safe in the World. This City is the Mistress and Sovereign of the Adriatick Sea; once the Mistress of the Morea, Cyprus, Candy, the Negropont, almost all the Islands of the Archipelago up to Constantinople, Thessalonica, most of the other Sea-Port Towns of Greece, Smyrna, and many others in Asia; which have been ravished from her, by the prevailing fortunes of the Ottoman House. She is now no less gloriously strugling to regain what she dearly sold, if the Turk had at all va∣lued human Blood. But of all these places I have discoursed in the Accounts I have given of them. She stands two hundred and sixty Miles from Rome to the North, two hundred and eighty from Vienna South, one hundred from Ravenna North, fifteen from Mi∣lan East. Upon Ascension-Day, the Doge accompa∣nied with the whole College, and Ambassadours of Crown'd Heads, performs a Ceremony yearly at Port Lido, which is peculiarly remarkable in this City, of marrying the Adriatick Sea; which is done by throw∣ing out of his Buccintoro (a most rich and pompous Galley for the purpose, wherein he rides in triumph) a Gold Ring into the Sea, with these words; Despon∣samus te, Mare, in signum veri & perpetui dominii. This Ceremony was first instituted by Pope Alexan∣der III. towards the end of the twelfth Century; as a solemn Declaration of the Sovereignty over the Adriatick, which the Republick had acquired by their Arms. Zebastiano Zani was the Doge at that time. To him Pope Alexander delivered a Ring, saying; Take this Ring, and upon this day in every year to come give one to the Sea, as to your lawful Spouse, to the end that all posterity may know, that the Sea by the right of Arms belongs to you. The Venetians had done great Services to Pope Alexan∣der, against the Emperor Frederick Barbarossa; and particularly by their Victory at Sea over Otho, Son
to that Emperor; which induced the Pope to create this Ceremony in their honour: not pretending to grant from the Roman See, what that See never had; but declaring and recognizing solemnly an ancient right in the possession of this State. Therefore when Pope Julius II. asked Donati, the Venetian Ambas∣sador in Raillery, to show the Titles of this right; it was thought ingeniously answered by him; If your Holiness pleases to look out the original of Constan∣tine's Donation to P. Sylvester, you will find the grant of the Adriatick Sea to the Venetians. Their Generals over the Gulph,) of whom they show in their Records, an uninterrupted Succession from 1230,) are the most ancient Marine Officers of the Republick. But the precise time of their Creation first was lost amongst the Records in a fire that year. A Vene∣tian Historian calls this gulph, Reipublicae domum, the house in which the Republick was born. Its mouth betwixt the Cape of Otranto and that of E∣questa near Vallona, extends the space of fifty or fif∣ty five Miles. See Golfo di Venetia. The particular part of it in which the City Venice stands, was anciently called Gallicae Paludes, Septem Maria, Sagna Hadria∣tica: Now Lagune di Venetia. See Lagune. The Venetians date the beginning of their Republick not from the Election of the first Doge in 697. but, to represent its Age greater, from the day of the Procla∣mation of Rialto an Asylum, in March 25, An▪ Dom. 421: and they think it renders them more August, to compute their beginning from the same Epocha, as to the Month and Day, with that of the Incarnation of Christ, and (according to some opinions) the Crea∣tion of the World. They have in their present Consti∣tution a Grand Council of the Nobility, a Senato, a College of Twenty six who give Audience to Ambas∣sadors and report their Demands to the Senate, a Council of Ten; and a Triumvirate (monthly chosen by, and out of, the Ten) of three Inquisitors of State; whose Authority is so absolute, as to extend to the ta∣king away of the Life of the Doge no less than the meanest Artisan, without acquainting the Senate, pro∣vided they all three agree in the Sentence. And no Ecclesiasticks, tho Nobles, are suffered admittance into the Councils or Offices of the State, to prevent the Policies of the Church of Rome; whose long in∣terdict upon the Republick in the last age cannot be forgotten▪ Long. 34. 30. Lat. 45. 00. The State of Uenice, called by the Italians, Lo Stato della Republica di Venetia, or il Dominio Ve∣neto, is a considerable Territory in Italy. Bounded to the North by the Valteline, and the County of Ti∣rol and Carinthia, from all which it is separated by the Alpes; on the West it has Milan; on the South Mantoua and the States of the Church; on the East the Adriatick Sea, (now commonly called the Gulph of Venice) and Carniola. Very fruitful and strange∣ly full of People: it extends from East to West two hundred and forty Miles, from North to South one hundred. Besides Venice, it contains in Italy Belluno, Bergamo, Brescia, Crema, Felre, Friuli, Capo d▪ Istria, Legnago, Palma, Pola, Rovigo, Serravalle, Trevigi, Verona, Vicenza, and Ʋdine. And besides all these Territories in Italy, this State possesseth a great part of Dalmatia, Cefalonia, Corfou, Zant, and ma∣ny other Islands. In 1687. and since, with the three preceding years, by her Victorious Arms and Gods blessing, she has recovered from the Turks all the Mo∣rea; and all Livadia, or Aehaia. Uenlo, Venloa, a very strong Hanse Town, in the Ʋpper Guelderland, not much Peopled; Seated upon the Maes, in the Borders of the Dukedom of Juliers, under the Spaniards; four Leagues from Roermond to the North, and a little more from Guelders North-West. Uennes, the same with Vannos. Uenosa, Venusia, Venusium, a City of the King∣dom of Naples▪ in the Basilicat; which is a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Acerenza; seated in a fruitful Plain at the foot of the Apennine: and hono∣red of old with the Birth of Horace the Latin Poet; at present with the Title of a Principality belonging to the Family di Ludovisia. This City is placed be∣tween Naples to the West and Taranto to the East; seventy five Miles from either, and fifteen from Ace∣renza to the North. In 1589 and 1614. Synods were assembled here. Long. 39. 51. Lat. 40. 57. Ʋera Cruz, Vera Crux, a City in New Spain, in the Province of Tlascala, upon the Bay of Mexico; eighty Leagues from Mexico to the East, and seventy from the South Sea. A place of great Trade, being the Port to Mexico: but not walled, nor seated in a healthful Air▪ especially from about April to Novem∣ber, because it rains almost continually all that time: only it has for its defence a Castle built on a Rock: and from November to April again, the Wind and the Sun tempering each other, without rain, make the place pleasant. Ueragua, a Province of New Spain in South A∣merica: included in the Government of Guati∣mala. Uera Paz, a Province in the Government of Gua∣timala in New Spain, in South America; upon the Borders of the Provinces of Guatimala, properly so called, and Honduras. The Capital City bears the same name; and is a Bishops See, under the Archbi∣shop of Mexico. This Province abounds with spa∣cious Forests and Mountains, which the Spaniards are dayly levelling to improve the Air and the Soil. Upon the Eastern Coast of it lies the Golfo Dolce, or sweet water-gulph; by which Adventurers have sometime sought a passage to the Pacifick Sea in vain. Uerberie, Vermria, a Royal House belonging to the Kings of France, in the Dutchy of Valois, and the Diocese of Soissons, upon the River Oise; where there have been four Councils celebrated. Uercelli, (as the French write) Verceile, Vercellae, a City of Piedmont of great Antiquity; which is a Bi∣shops See under the Archbishop of Milan. It stands upon the River Sesia, in the Borders of the Duke of Milan; and has a District called by its own name be∣longing to it, betwixt Montferrat, the Milanese and Ivrée: ten Miles from Casal to the North, and from Novara to the West: thirty five from Milan East, and from Turin West. It is a very strong Place; hath a Castle, a Cittadel, a famous Hospital, and handsome Churches; often taken and retaken in the late Wars; and particularly in 1638 by the Spaniards, who by the Pyrenean peace returned it, as it is now, under the Duke of Savoy. In the time of the ancient Romans, it flourished. Since, it hath been a Repub∣lick; next under the Duke of Milan; then Savoy. In 1050. P. Leo XIX. celebrated a Council at it a∣gainst Berengarius, Archdeacon of Angers: who was cited, but did not appear to the same. Uerdun, Verduna, Veroduna, Verodunum, Vir∣dunium, Vereduna, a City of Gallia Belgica, men∣tioned by Antoninus: now in the Dukedom of Lo∣rain, but separated from it by the French: under whom it has been ever since 1552, when Henry II. took it. A Bishops See under the Archbishop of Trier; great, strong, and well Peopled; seated upon the Maes, which forms several small Islands here; fifteen Leagues from Chaalons to the East, twelve from Metz and thirteen from Tulle to the North. Some of its former Bishops have been Counts of Verdun and Princes of the Empire. §. There is a Territory and Town of the same name in the Province of Gas∣coigne:
Another Town in the County of Foix in A∣quitain; and another County in Bourgogne. Der Uere, Veria, a small but strong City in the Province of Zealand, in the Isle of Walcheren: which has an Harbour; one League from Middleburg to the East. It belongs to the Prince of Orange. Uerma, a City and Kingdom in the Terra Firma of the East-Indies, beyond the Ganges: affording pre∣cious Stones. Uermandois, Veromanduensis Ager, a County in Picardy; which is an ancient Earldom; between Tie∣rache to the East, Le Santerre to the West, Cam∣bray to the North, and the Isle of France to the South: the Capital is S. Quentin. It took its name from Vermand, (Augusta Veromanduorum) a ruined Roman Town, which stood anciently in this County. And was its Capital. There now stands an Abbey in the place of it. The ancient Veromandui dwelt here. Uermelandia, a Province of Sweden. Uermio, a Streight near New Mexico. Uerneuil, Vernolium, a City in the Ʋpper Nor∣mandy, upon the River Aure, in the Borders of la Percbe: sometimes called Vernevil au Perche; eight Leagues from Dreux to the West, and seven from Seez and Eureux to the South. Famous for the o∣verthrow the English gave the French in 1424: where four thousand five hundred French were slain upon the place: and the Earl of Narbone being taken, was hanged for assisting at the Massacre of John Duke of Burgundy. Uernon, Vernonium, a City of Normandy upon the Seyne, in the Diocese of Eureux: over which it had a Bridge of Stone, now ruined: ten Leagues from Roan South, seven from Eureux East, and from Gi∣sors West: It had heretofore also a Palace Royal (Pa∣latium Vernis), which in 755. and 844. was the Seat of two Councils. Ueroli. See Veruli. Ueron, a small Town near Sens in Champaigne, in France: remarked for a Fountain of such a na∣ture, as to petrifie the mire and moss through which it runs. Uerona, a City of Lombardy, which is great and famous; called by the Germans Dietrichs Bern. It is a Bishops See under the Patriach of Aquileja; and the Capital of a Province of its own name, called the Veronois: It stands upon the River Adige, over which it has four Bridges, and three Castles: thirty five Miles from Trent South, twenty two from Mintoua North, and sixty from Ferrara. Built by the Gauls, in the year of Rome 469. two hundred eighty two years before the Birth of Christ. In the Civil Wars of Rome, made a Roman Colony. In 490. it was taken by Theodoricus: who here overthrew ∣doacer King of the Heruli, and took the name of Ve∣ronensis. In 901. Berengarius took it by bribing the Garrison. In 1212, it was put under the House of Este: after this the Family of the Scaligers were Lords of it seventy years, and after them the Dukes of Milan. In 1403. the Venetians obtained it from the Dutchess of Milan. In 1509. Maximilian the Emperor took it; but in 1516. it was restored to them: and is now the best City in a their Domini∣ons except Venice. Catullus the Poet was Born here. Martial gives it the Epithet of Magna in Catullus's, and his time: Tantum Magna suo debet Veron Catullo, Quantum para suo Mantua Virgilio. Its antient irque and Amphitheatre, and many o∣ther noble Monuments, remain yet extant▪ Pope Lucius III. dyed here. In 1542. and 1589. Synods were assembled at this City. Long. 33. 10. Lat. 44. 35. Uerrua, a strong fortified Town in Piedmont, in the County of Asta, upon the Banks of the Po, and the Borders of the Dukedom of Montferrat: sixteen Miles from Turin, towards Casale: upon an advan∣ced ground. In the Wars betwixt Piedmont and Fer∣rara, a Sculpture was made upon the Gate of the Castle, of a bunch of Grapes hanging over the head of a Swine, and he in vain opening his mouth to catch it; with this Inscription, Quando questo porco pigliara l'Ʋva, Il Marquese di Montferrato pigliara Verrua. When this Hog shall catch the Grapes, The Mar∣quess of Montferrat shall take Verrua. In the year 1625. The Spaniards besieg'd this Town under the Duke of Feria. And to deride their attempt too in the same manner, the Inhabitants put the name of the Duke of Feria in the place of the Marquess thus; Quando questo porco pigliara l'Ʋva Il Duca di Feria Pigliara Verrua. Accordingly, the Spaniards miscarried. Uersacgli, the Turkish name of Pisidia, a Pro∣vince of the Lesser Asia. Uersailles, Versaliae, a Town in the Isle of France, where the present King of France has built a most Noble Palace since 1661; upon an eminence, in the middle of an excellent Valley for hunting; where before in the Reign of Lewis III. stood only an old indifferent Castle, which was made the rendezvouze of parties of Hunters, as they took or left the field. In 1678. Lewis XIV. rebuilt this Castle, with the greatest Magnificence. Many curious Buildings and noble Works have, at several times, been added for grandeur. He makes this place his continual Re∣sidence; and the Town of Versailles, now accompa∣nying the Pallace, wholly oweth its beginning to him. It stands four Leagues from Paris to the East, and two from S.▪ Clou. Uervin, Vervins, Verbinum, a small Town in Picardy, in the County of Tierache; scarce four Leagues from the Borders of Champagne, sixteen from Reims North, and four from Marle South: often mention∣ed on the account of a Peace here made between Henry IV. of France, and Philip II. of Spain, May 2. 1598. Uerlam, Verolamium, an ancient Roman City and Colony; mentioned by Tacitus and Ptolemy; in Hartfondshire; the Royal City of Cassibellanus a British Prince, contemporary with Julius Caesar; by whom this City was taken fifty two years be∣fore the Birth of our Saviour, in his second Expedi∣tion into Britain. In the year of Christ 66. it was taken and intirely ruined by Boadicia, Queen of the Iceni; and all the Romans put to the Sword: yet it recovered again, and flourished as long as the Ro∣mans continued in Britain; and under Dioclesian had one famous Martyr called Albanus. In 429▪ there was a British Synod held here by S. German, Bishop of Auxerre in France, against the Pelagi∣ans. Soon after, it fell into the Hands of the Saxons. I suppose about 465. Retaken by Ʋthe Pendragon; who began his Reign in 498. and Reigned eighteen years. Again retaken by the Sa∣xons, and intirely ruined. In 975. Offa King of the Mercians built (on the other side the little River Ver, which washed the Walls of it) a good∣ly Monastery in Honour of S. Alban; which after
became a great Town. K. James I. revived the Me∣mory of this place: when he made Sir Francis Ba∣con, then Lord Chancellour of England, Lord Ve∣rulam, in 1620: who dying without Issue, the Title failed; but he yet honors the place by lying buried in a little Church near it. Veruli, or Veroli, Verulum, a City in Campania di Roma, under the Dominion of the Pope; which is a Bishops See, and now in a tolerable condition: upon the River Cosa: forty eight Miles from Rome to the South, and from Capua to the North; sixty from Pescara West. Vesere. See Weser. Vesle, Vidula, a River of Champagne; which ari∣seth three Leagues from Chaalons to the East, and wa∣tering Reims falls into the Aisne. Vesoul, Vesulum, a small but neat City in the Franche Comté: nine Leagues from Besanzon, and thirteen from Beaucaire West. Now in the Possessi∣on of the French. Vesprin, Vesprinum, Vesprimium, a City of the Lower Hungary; called by the Inhabitants Ves∣prim, by the Germans Weisbrun. It is a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Gran. The Capital of a County of the same name, strong and popu∣lous, and defended by a Castle: Seated on the Ri∣ver Sarwize, eleven German Miles from Gran South, and five from Alba Regalis West. This has been in the hands of the Emperour ever since 1565. Vesulus, one of the Cottian Alpes; betwixt Dauphine to the West, and Piedmont to the East. Now called Mont viso. The River Po derives its head from it. Vesuvius, a Vulcanoe in the Terra di La∣voro, in the Kingdom of Naples; eight Miles from the City Naples: near the Castle of Somma: from which last place the Italians give it the name of il Monte di Somma. The particular times of its overflowing with stormes of fire are all recorded in History, since our Saviour and the Reign of Au∣gustus. viz. in the years 81. 243. 421. 985. 973. 983. 1036. 1038. 1138. 1139. 1430. 1500. 1631 1660. 1682. Where the Intervals sometimes con∣tinue two or three hundred years; at others, not above one, two, and ten. In its last rupture in 1682. Aug. 14. it covered the whole Dukedom of Massa (adjacent) with ashes of a nauseous odour, and set on fire the wood of Otajano. The twentieth, it caused an Earthquake of three hours continuance, which reached to Naples. The twenty second, it cast forth floods of smoak, ashes, coals, attended with a roaring noise, Flames, Earthquake, and Thunder; the Flames ran from it unextinguished, in the midst of vast storms of Rain; filling Naples with Ashes. And on the 24th. it ended in a cloud of white ashes. Before the Reign of Augustus, we read of its ruptures five times. The Elder Pliny was suffocated, as he searched the causes thereof up∣on the place. Veteravie. See Weteraw. Veuxin, Vexin, Velocasses, a Territory in Nor∣mandy; betwixt the Rivers Apte and Ardelle; the Capital of which was Roan, but now Gisors. §. There is another in the Isle of France of the same name, between the Oyse and the Apte; the Capi∣tal of which is Pontoise. This for distinction is called Vexin Francois, and the other Vexin Nor∣mand. §. There is a City of the same name in Gothland, in the Kingdom of Sweden. Vezelay, Veseliacum, Vizeliacum, a City in the Dukedom of Burgundy in Auxerre, upon the River Curez; in the Borders of Nivernois: ten Leagues from Auxerre to the South, eighteen from Ne∣vers to the South-East, and five from Corbie in Picardy; to which Province this City is now added. P. Eugenius III. celebrated a Council here in 1145. for the recovery of the Holy Land. Vgenti, Ʋgento, Ʋxentum, a small City in the Province of Otranto, in the Kingdom of Naples: twenty Miles from Otranto to the North-West, and eleven from Gallipoli to the East. Long. 42. 28. Lat. 39. 56. Vgogh, Ʋgoza, a County, in the Ʋpper Hungary; towards the Tibiscus, and the Borders of Transylvania. The Capital of it is a Castle of the same name. Two German Miles from Zatmar to the East, and a little more from the Tibiscus W. Viana, a City in Navarre, upon the River E∣bro; thirteen Leagues from Pampelune, and seven from Calahorra in Castile to the South-West. Built by Sancius King of Navarre, in 1219. In 1423. made a Principality by Charles III. and ever after given to the Prince of Navarre as his Title. Viatka, a City, River, and Province in Mus∣covy; one hundred and twenty Miles from Cazan to the North. Viburg, Viburgum, a City in Sweden; the Capital of Carelia; and a Bishops See under the Archbishop of Riga: one hundred and sixty Miles from Narva to the North, upon the Bay of Fin∣land; on which it has a Haven and a strong Ca∣stle. The Muscovites have several times in vain as∣saulted it. Vicenza, or Vincenza, Vicentia, Vicetia, Vin∣centia, a City in the States of Venice in Lombar∣dy; which is a Bishops See under the Patriarch of Aquileja: a great, strong City, under the Repub∣lick of Venice, upon the River Bachiglione: Eigh∣teen Miles from Padoua, thirty from Verona East and from Feltria South. Taken by Maximilian, in 1509. Long. 33. 40. Lat. 44. 50. It was inha∣bited anciently by the Euganei. The Gauls were Benefactors to it. The Romans and the Lombards possessed it; each in the times of their Power. It fell to the Venetians, not till after great revolu∣tions and divers Wars. The pleasantness of its situ∣ation gives it the Title, of the Garden of Venice. It is the Capital of the Territory of the Vincen∣tine. In 1583. and 1623. Synods were assembled here. Vich, Vicus, Aquae Voconiae, Ausa Nova, Cor∣bio, a small City in Catalonia; which is a Bishops See under the Archbishop of Tarragona. Seated upon the River Tera, twelve Leagues from Bar∣cellone to the North, and nine from Girone to the West. In 1627. a Synod was held at this City. Vichy, a Village in the Dukedom of Bourbonne in France; of great fame for some Springs of Medicinal Mineral Waters. Vico della Baronia, Vicus, a small City of the Kingdom of Naples, in the Further Principato; which is a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Be∣nevento; it stands at the foot of the Apennine, thir∣teen Miles from Conza to the North. Vico di Sorrento, Vicus Aequensis, a small Ci∣ty in the Kingdom of Naples, in the Province di La∣voro; which is a Bishops See under the Archbishop of Sorrento. Built by Charles II. King of Naples, in 1300. four Miles from Sorrento, and eighteen from Naples to the South. Victoria, Victoria, Vellica, Vitoria, a City in the Province of Alava, in the Borders of Biscay. Six∣teen Leagues from Pampelon to the West, twelve from Bilbao, and twelve from Burgos to the South-East.
Built in 1180. and now in a thriving condi∣tion. Vidin, Widin, Bydena, Viminiacum, a City of Servia: which is an Archbishops See, and the Seat of the Turkish Governour. It stands upon the Danube, (where it receives the Lon) 9 German Miles from the Borders of Thrace to the West, and fifteen from Nissa to the North. Taken by the Imperialists after a defeat of 10000 Turks that were posted near it, Octob. 1689. Retaken by the Turks in 4 days Sept. 1690. Vieliluki, Vieliluchia, Vielkolucha, a strong City upon the River Lovat, in the Dukedom of Rscow, in the Borders of Lithuania in Moscovy: 30 Polish Miles from Witepska to the North; and 16 from the Lake of Illmen to the South. Taken by Stephen, King of Poland, Decemb. 16. 1580. Vienna, Vienna; Ala Flaviana, Juliòbona, Vin∣dobona, the Capital City of Austria, and Seat of the Emperors of Germany; called by the Inhabitants Wien, by the French Vienne, by the Turks Beetz or Weetz, by the Poles Wieden. It is one of the greatest, most populous, strong, and rich Cities in Germany: seated on the South side of the Danube; o∣ver which it has a Bridge, (where it receives a small River called the Wien; from whence it has its pre∣sent Name.) Also a Bishops See, under the Archbi∣shop of Saltzburg. Made an Imperial City by Frede∣rick II. in 1236: But this Privilege lasted only four Years. Hofman saith, it is the noblest City on the Da∣nube, both as to the Beauty, Magnificence of its Buil∣dings, and the abundance of all things useful to the Life of Man. Taken in 1485. by Matthius Corvinus, King of Hungary. Besieged by the Turks in 1529. September 15. under Solyman II. with an Army of 200000 Men: but his Cannon being sunk or disor∣dered by the Governour of Presbourgh in their way up the Danube after two general Assaülts in vain, and the News of the March of the Emperor Charles V. to its relief, he raised the Siege, October 15. Again they besieged it in 1532. and 1543. And when in 1683, it was reduced in a fourth Siege to great Extremities; it was relieved by John III. King of Poland, September 10; (the Anniversary whereof is religiously here observed) after it had been violently battered from July 14. by an Army of 100000 Turks; who lost all their Tents, Baggage, Cannon and Mor∣tars, (to the number of 180 Pieces, whereof some were marked with the Arms of the Emperors Ferdinand I. and Rodulph II.) Victual, and Ammunition; the Stan∣dard of the Ottoman Empire, engraved with these words, There is no other God but one God, and Ma∣homet is his Prophet; their Reputation abroad, and their Courage at home, by this Defeat; which has made them contemptible, unfortunate, and miserable ever since. The Crescent and the Star, (the Ottoman Arms) till this, had continued engraved upon the highest tip of the Tower of S. Stephens Church, from the year 1529: when the Citizens placed them there for an acknowledgment to Solyman II. who, during his Siege, totally exempted that Cathedral from Bat∣tery. But no such regard to it having been observed by the Turks in the last Siege, a Cross was immediately advanced in the place of the Crescent. This City has been the Seat of the Emperors of Germany ever since 1438. Frederick II. founded an University in it, in 1237. which Albert III. Archduke of Austria reesta∣blished in 1365. In 1267. a Council was celebrated here. The Scotch College was a principal, and state∣ly Building of this City, before its destruction in the last Siege. It is fortified with 12 Bastions. The Lear∣ned Dr. Edward Brown, in his Travels, has excellently described the present State of it; and to him I remit the Reader. It stands 26 German Miles from Lintz to the East, 6 from the Borders of Hungary, 50 from Cracow, 34 from Buda. Long. 39. 10. Lat. 48. 22. Vienne, Vienna, a most antient City of Gallia Narbonensis: in the Roman times, the Metropolis of the Allobroges; and then a great and Royal City. Called, by Pomponius Mela, Vienna Allobrogum. Now an Archbishops See; seated in the Dauphine up∣on the Rhosne, (where it entertains the Gera) over which it had a Bridge, (now half ruined); at the foot of an Hill; 13 Leagues from Grenoble to the West, 5 from Lyons to the South, and 11 from Valence. Pope Calixtus II. was an Archbishop of this City. It is the Capital of the Territory of Viennois; which lying be∣twixt the Rhosne and Isere, is called the Island of the Allobroges. This City in the Roman Coins, Inscriptions and Histories, is called the Illustrious, Adorned, Strong, Beautiful, Fruitful Colony of Vienna. Claudius, the Emperor, chose several of its Citizens into the Ro∣man Senate. Hither Pilate and Archelaus the Son of Herod the Great were banished. Valentinian the Younger was here murdered by Arbogastes a trai∣terous Courtier, in 392. In the fifth Century it be∣came the Seat of the Kings of Burgundy: that King∣dom beginning about 408. In 504. Gundabond, one of these Kings, took it by a Siege, and slew Godigi∣silas his Brother, who defended it against him. In 532. there was an end put to this Kingdom by Clo∣thaire King of France. In 855. it became the Seat of a second French Burgundian Kingdom; which en∣ded in 1032. And this City passed to the Emperors of Germany. In 1100. it was seized by one Guine, by the Title of Earl or Dauphine of Vienne: and continued in this Line till 1342, when it was again united to the Crown of France. Also regardable on the account of a Council held here, in 1311. by Pope Clement V. assisted with the Patriarchs of Alexan∣dria and Antioch, and 300 Bishops; in the presence of Philip le bel King of France. This Council ren∣dered the Feast of Corpus Christi, before instituted by Pope Ʋrban IV. of universal observance. In 1119. Pope Gelasius II. held also a Council here. Another in 1112. excommunicated the Emperor Henry V. and declared the Treaty betwixt Pope Paschal II. and him, touching Investitures, null. In 892. the Legate of Pope Formosus celebrated a Council in the same place; where there have been divers others. Long. 26. 00. Lat. 45. 28. Vienne, Vigenna, Vigenne, a River of France, which ariseth in Limosin: and watering Limoges, en∣tereth La Marche: passeth into Poictou, and three Leagues above Saumur to the East, falls into the Loyre. Vieste, Viesta, Apeneste, a City in the Capitana∣to, a Province of the Kingdom of Naples: which is a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Manfredonia; and stands at the foot of Mount Gargani, ▪upon the Adriatick Sea; 25 Miles from Manfredonia to the South-East. Built out of the Ruins of Marinum, an antient Roman City; which was honoured with a Bi∣shops See, and mentioned by Pliny. Vietri, a Town and Dutchy in the Kingdom of Naples, near Salerno. Vigazolo, Vigisole, Togisonus, a Lake in the Ter∣ritory of Padoua in Lombardy. Vigenne, Vincenna, a River of Burgundy. Vigevano, Viglebanum, Vergeminum, a small City with a strong Castle in the Dukedom of Milan: in 1530. made a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Milan; from which it stands 20 Miles to the West, and 12 from Novara, upon the River Tecino. There is a small County belonging to it of the same name. Vignori, Vangionis Rivus, a Town in Champagne. Vihitz, Vihitza, a City of Croatia, also called Bigion, upon a small Lake made by the River Wana; 45 Miles from Segna or Zeng to the East; and from
Zara ro the North: formerly the Capital of Croatia, and a Hanse Town. Uikesland, a Tract in Esthonia in Livonia; be∣tween Reval and Pernaw; upon the Baltick Sea: under the Swedes. Uilaine, Vindana, Herius, Vicennonia, Vidana, a River of Bretagne in France, which watering Ren∣nes, the Capital of that Province, falls into the Bri∣tish Sea, between Nantes and Vannes. Uilla de Chiesa, Villa Ecclesiae, a City on the South side of the Island of Sardinia; which is a Bi∣shops See, ever since the year 1513. but little, and not much inhabited. Uilach, Cacorum, Villachum, a City of the Ʋp∣per Carinthia, upon the Drave, (where it receives the Geyla) in the Dominions of the Bishop of Bam∣berg; eighteen Miles from Clagonfurt to the West, and forty six from Ʋdine to the North. Uilla Franca, a Town in Piedmont, in the Coun∣ty of Nizza; with a large Port on the Mediterranean Sea. Built in 1295. by Charles II. King of Naples: five Miles from Nizza to the West, and from Mo∣naco to the same. Near this place the French defeat∣ed Prosper Colonna, in 1516. Uille Franche de Conflent, Villa Franca Con∣sluentum, a City of Rousillon; in the Mountains, up∣on the River Thetis, at the soot of the Pyren; ten Leagues from Perpignan to the West. Uille Franche de Rovergue, a great City of Aquitain; in the Province of Rovergue, upon the River Veronium: eight Leagues from Rhodes to the West, and from Caors to the East. §. There is ano∣ther Town of this name in the Territory of Beau∣jolois. Uillemur, a Town in Languedoc. Uillena, Bigerra, once a City of the Bastitana's; mentioned by Livy, Ptolemy, and some others. Now a Town in the Kingdom of Murcia, in the Borders of Valencia; twelve Leagues from Murcia to the North. As appears by several ancient Inscriptions there found. Uilne, Vilna, a City in the Kingdom of Poland; called by the Inhabitants, Wilenski; by the Poles, Wyl∣na; by the Germans, Wilde, and Wildaw; by the French, Vilne, and Vilna. It is a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Gnesna, and the Capital of Lithu∣ania. Built in 1305. by Gedemin, (Great Duke of Lithuania) and since become a very great City. Ill handled by the Russ, in 1655. when they took it. The Swedes have since regained, and rebuilt it. In 1579. there was an University opened here by King Stephen. It stands upon a River of the same name: one hun∣dred and thirty Polish Miles from Cracow to the South-East, and forty eight from Riga to the South. Long. 49. 50. Lat. 55. 10. Uilss, Quintanica, a River of Bavaria. Uimen, Vinemagum, Vimesium, a Tract in Pi∣cardy; between Normandy to the South, the Mouth of the Somme to the North, and the British Sea to the West. Uimory, a Village in the Province of Gastinois in France; one League from Montargis: where the Duke of Guise obtained a Victory over the Foreign Forces that came to the succor of the Huguenots, in 1587. Uinay, the same with Vence. Uincennes, a famous Palace and Castle Royal, near Paris; to the East: surrounded with a large Park, which Philip the August K. of France walled in 1183. There was a Castle standing there at that time. Philip de Va∣lois in 1327. demolish'd that old Castle; and laid the foundations of a new one in the same place. K. John carried on the Work, and Charles V. (born here in 1338) brought it to perfection. In 1614. The Qu. Regent of France, Maria de Medicis, adorned it with a Gallery; and 1660. Lewis XIV. established both the Palace and Castle in their present State. Three of the Kings of France have died here. Lewis X. in 1316. Henry V. K. of England and by Conquest of France, in 1422. Charles IX. in 1574. The Chappel of the Castle received its Foundation from Charles V. in 1379. In this Chappel, the body of Card. Mazarine (dying here in 1661) rested, till in the year 1684▪ it was removed to the Church of the College of his own name at Paris; and his heart given to the Theatines. The Castle now serves for a Prison of State; and Persons of great note have often found their Tombs in it. Uindish Marck, Vindorum Marchia, a part of the Dukedom of Carniola; between Croatia to the East, Czirknitzerzee to the West, and the Save to the North. The principal places of which are Met∣ling, Rudelswerd, and Ribnick. Uinoxberg. See Bergue S. Vinoch, a City of Flanders. Taken by the French in 1646. Retaken by the Spaniards in 1658. Uintuniglia, Albintiminium, Albintemelium, Vin∣timilium, a City of Liguria, in the States of Genoua; which is a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Milan; fifteen Miles from Nizza to the West. Uipao, Frigius, a River of Carniola; called by the Germans, Wipach; by the Italians, Vipao. It ariseth out of the Alpes, in the Borders of Carniola, near the Castle of Wipach: and flowing through the Dukedom of Goritia, between it and Gratz, falls into the Isonzo. Upon the Banks of this River, Theodosius the Great o∣verthrew Eugenius the Usurper, in 394. Uique. See Vich. Uire, Viria, a City in the Lower Normandy, of good esteem, upon a River of the same name; twelve Leagues from Caen to the North-West, and a little more from Coutance to the East. Uirginia, a Country in North America. Bounded on the South by Carolina, on the East by the Vergi∣vian Ocean, on the North by Maryland; on the West by Mountains, and a vast Tract of undiscovered Lands. First discovered by Sabastian Cabot, a Portuguese, in an English Ship, in 1497. Viewed by Sir Fran. Drake; called Virginia by Sir Walter Rawleigh, in Honour of Qu. Elizabeth, in 1584. First planted in 1607. by Sir John Popham. The Air is pleasant and wholsome, except in the Lowlands and Marshes. Subject to vio∣lent changes, especially when the North-West Winds blow: which coming from Mountains, always covered with Snow, are violently cold. It abounds with all things useful to the Life of Man, except Wine and Oil. The chief Town where the Governour Resides is James Town: and the whole is divided into nineteen Coun∣ties. Uirton, Virtonium, a small City in the Dukedom of Luxemburgh, in the Borders of Lorain: five Leagues from Luxemburgh to the West, and four from Arlon to the South; under the Spaniards. Uisapour, or Visiapour, Visapora, the Capital City of the Kingdom of Decan, in the Hither East Indies; one hundred and seventy eight English Miles from Goa to the North-East, and something more from Masuli∣patan to the North-West. Taken by the Great Mogul in 1687. Decan is sometimes called the Kingdom of Visapour from this City. Uisbui, a Town in Gothland. Uistre, Vitreus, a small River in the Territory of Nismes in Languedoc. Uistula, one of the greatest Rivers of Poland: which in ancient times was the boundary between Germany and Sarmatia. Called anciently by Pliny, Vistullus; Ptolemy, Istula; Pomponius Mela, Visula; Ammia∣nus Marcellinus, Bistula; now by the Sclavonians, Weissel; and by the Poles, Wissa. It springeth out of the Carpathian Hills, in the Ʋpper Silesia, in the Borders of Hungary; flowing E and being augmented with the Sala,
watereth Crakow; then taking in the Duneck, the Ni∣da, the Wislaca; and turning North, the Vieprez, and the Pilecka; and watering Cerk, and Warsaw; it admits the Bg and Bsura, above Plociko from the East. Beneath it washeth Doberzin, Thorn, Culm, New∣enburgh. At Marienwerder divides into two Branches. The Eastern passeth by Margenburgh, and Elbing, in∣to the Bay of Dantzick: the Western subdivides into two other Branches. The most Western of which goes by Dantzick into the same Bay, and so into the Baltick Sea: being at its full one of the noblest Streams in the World; but so shallow, that a great Ship cannot come up to the City. Uitefleu, Vitefleur, Guitefledu, Vitefloda, a River near Calais in France. Uiterbo, Viterbium, a City in S. Peter's Patrimo∣ny: which is a Bishops See, immediately under the Pope: great and populous: at the foot of an Hill: 40 Miles from Rome to the North-West, and from Civita Vecchia to the North. Platina saith, it was of old called Vulonia. Four Popes lye interred in the Cathedral. In 1614. and 1624. the Bishop of it held 2 Synods here. It is the Capital of the Province. Uitre, or Vitry le Francois, Victoriacum Franci∣cum, a Town in Champagne in la Perche, upon the Marne: 7 Leagues from Chaalons towards Diziers. King Francis I. built it, and honoured it with his Name; to distinguish it from Vitri le Brulè hard by, which was heretofore a considerable Castle. Uitstock, a Town in Brandenbourgh: where the Swedes and Saxons got a great Victory over the Im∣perialists, in 1636. Uivaretz, Vioariensis Tractus, a Province in Lan∣guedoc, called also Vivarais. Bounded on the East by the Rhosne, (which parts it from the Dauphiné:) on the North by Forez, and Velay: on the West by Givaudan; and on the South by the Lower Langue∣doc (separated by the River Ardeche), and Ʋsez. The Capital City of it is Viviers; the rest are Annonay, Aubenas, Privas, and Tournon. A part of it is moun∣tainous, and much exceeded in Fertility by the Plains that lye along the Rhosne. About 22 Leagues long, and 17 broad. Divided into the Upper and Lower Vivaretz, by the River Erieu. Uiviers, Vivario, Vivarium, Vivario Albiensium, the Capital City of Vivaretz: which is a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Vienne; and stands upon a steep Hill, upon the Rhosne; 4 Leagues from S. Esprit to the North, and 5 from Valence to the South. The Maps place it 12. It is risen out of the Ruines of Abs (Alba Helviorum); which being destroyed by the bar∣barous Nations in 430, its See was translated hither. There are divers Churches adorning this City. Uize, Byzia, an inland City of Thrace, upon a Ri∣ver of the same name, in the Borders of Bulgaria: 50 Miles from Haraclea to the North. Now an Ar. Bishops See, and the Seat of one of the Sangiacks of Romania. Uizzegrad, or Plindenbourgh, Visegradia, a small but strong City in Hungary: upon a Hill, near the Da∣nube; 3 Miles from Gran, and 8 from Buda. It was one of the Country Palaces of the Kings of Hungary: and has a Castle, which Matthias Corvinus, K. of Hungary, very much beautified. Lewis, K. of Hungary, died here in 1382. The Germans call it Plindenburg. Ukraine, Ʋkrania, Ʋcrania, Okraina, a Province of Red Russia in Poland: so called, because it is the Marches between Poland, Moscovy, and the lesser Tar∣tary: and no less frequently called the Palatinate of Kiovia. It is divided into two parts by the Nieper. The Cossacks inhabit this vast Country; which are in part under the Poles, in part under the Russ. The Industry of the latter Kings has filled it with Villages, Castles, Towns, and Forts; at this day very much cultivated. That part to the East of the Nieper is under the Russ. For the Boundaries see Kiovia. Ula Trek, Ʋln, a Lake in Sweden, in the Pro∣vince of Bothnia. Uladislaw, Ʋladislavia, a small City in the greater Poland: the Capital of the Province of Cujavie, and a Bishops See under the Ar. Bishop of Gnesira; called by the Poles, Wladissaw. It stands upon the Vistula: be∣tween Posko to the North-West, and Thorn to the South-East; 5 Polrsh Miles from either. Made a Bi∣shops See in 1173. Ulie, Flevo, Flevum, an Island at the mouth of the Rhine in Holland; 3 Leagues from the Shoars of Frise∣land: where the Dutch Fleets use to rendezvous, when they go upon any Expedition. Ulles-Water, a Lake upon the Borders of Cum∣berland and Westmorland, which yields great plenty of Fish. Ulm, Ʋlma, a City of Germany, in the Circle of Schwaben, whereof it is the Capital: called by the French, Oulme; great, strong, rich, and populous. It stands upon the Danube, and the Iler; 12 German Miles from Tubingen, and 24 from Strasbourgh, 10 from Ausbourgh. In the Titles of the middle Age, it is called Hulma; in the more ancient Alcimoenis. Not walled before 1300. Charles the Great gave it to the Ab∣bey of Richenow by Constance: and being redeemed from this Servitude, in 1346. Lewis of Bavaria made it a Free City. It embraced the Reformation in 1529. In 1552. it suffered much from the Protestant Princes; yet to this day it perseveres in the Augustane Confes∣sion. Allowing to the Roman Catholicks 2 Churches; but excluding them from their Secret Council. Long. 32. 00. Lat. 48. 16. Ultzen, a Town in the Dutchy of Lunenbourgh in the Lower Saxony: upon the River Ilmenaw or Die Aw: 5 German Miles from the City Lunenbourgh to the South, and the same distance from Dannebergh to the West. Ulstet, Ʋltonia, the most Northern of the four Pro∣vinces of the Kingdom of Ireland: called by the Irish, Cui Gully; by the English, Ulster; by the Welsh, Wltw; bounded on the North by the Ocean, on the West by Canought and the Ocean, on the South by Lein∣ster, and on the East by the Irish Sea. In length from North to South 100 Miles; in breadth from East to West 130; in circumference 420. Tho it lies so far to the North; yet it is not subject to any extremity of Weather; the various Winds cooling it in Summer, and frequent Rains mollifying the sharpness of the Air in Winter. The Soil is fruitful in Corn and Grass; affords great plenty of Timber and Fruit Trees. It abounds with Lakes and Rivers, which are well stored with Fish and Fowles, and of sufficient depth for carrying Boats and Vessels. It wants not excellent Harbours on the Sea and Ocean. This Province contains these Counties; Dunghall, or Tyrconnel, Upper Tyrone, Nether Tyrone, Fermanagh, Cavan, Monaghan, Colrane, or London-Derry, Antrim, Downe, Armagh, and Louth. The Ca∣pital City is Armagh or Armath. The rest are London-Derry, Dunghall, Downe, and Knockfergus. Ulverstoit, a Market Town in Lancashire, in the Hundred of Loynsdale, upon a Stream falling into an Arm of the Sea near Leversand. Umbriatico, Ʋmbraticum, Brustacia, a City in the Hither Calabria, in the Kingdom of Naples: a Bi∣shops See, under the Archbishop of Sancta Severina; from which it stands 10 Miles to the North. Umbrone. See Ombrone. Umegiunaibe, a City of the Province of Cuzt, in the Kingd. of Fez in Barbary: betwixt the Rivers Esa∣cha and Mulvia. Underwaldt, Sylvania, Sylvaniensis and Ʋnder∣valdensis Pagus, a Canton in Switzerland, the Capi∣tal of which is Stantz. On the North it is divided from
Schwitz by the Lake of Lucerne; on the East it has the Canton of Ʋri; on the South that of Berne, and and on the West Lucerne. This is one of the lesser Can∣tons. The Inhabitants profess the Roman Catholick Re∣ligion. A Wood or Forrest called Kernwalt (the Oak Forrest) divides this Canton in the midst, and from thence it has its Name. This Canton began to free it self about 1260. First admitted into the general League, in 1307: from thenceforward they have had the sixth place in the Roll or List of the Cantons. Unghwar, Ʋngaria, a small City in the Upper Hungary; which is the Capital of a County of the same name, at the Foot of the Carpathian Hills. This City stands upon the River Ʋngh, in the Borders of Red Russia: 6 Hungarian Miles from Cassovia to the East, and from Zatmar to the North. Has been al∣ways in the Hands of the Christian Princes: It joyned with Teckeley; and was retaken by the Emperor, in the year 1685; yet situated naturally strong. Some Hungarian Historians derive the Name of their Coun∣try from this City, or its River. Unna, an Hanse Town in the County of Mark in Westphalia in Germany; which was a considerable City, but now very small, and subject to the Duke of Brandenburg. Ten Miles from Dartmund to the East, and from the Borders of Munster to the South. Uoidanar, Atrax, one of the principal Cities of Thessaly, upon the River Atrax; 30 Miles from La∣rissa to the West. Uoigtlandt, Voigtlandia, Voigtia, a Province of Germany, in the Upper Saxony and Misnia: for the most part under the Elector of Saxony. It lies be∣tween Bohemia to the East, and Franconia to the West. The principal Places in which, are Swickaw, Plauwen, and Gratz. Uolcano, in the Italian and Spanish Tongues, sig∣nifies a Burning Mountain. Of which sort there are in several places of the World about twenty. Uolfembuttel, Wolfembutel, a City of Germany, in the Dukedom of Brunswisk. Uolga. See Wolga. Uolhinia Superior, a part of Red Russia; called also the Palatinate of Luceoria. Bounded with Russia, (properly so called) to the West; Podolia to the South, the Palatinate of Brescia to the North, and Kiovia to the East. The Capital of it is Lusuck. Uolhinia Inferior. See the Palatinate of Kiovia. Uolo, a Town and Fortress upon the Gulph of its own Name, and the Coast of the Province of Thessa∣lia, in Macedonia: North of the Island of Negre∣pont. It is the same place with the Pagasae of the An∣tients, and the same Gulph with their Sinus Pagasicus. The Turks made a Magazine of it, both for Amunition and Provision. It hath a sure and spacious Port. In the year 1655. Morosini, resolving to seize the Turkish Magazine, stormed the Town and Fortress, till he made himself Master of both; he put on board his Fleet twenty seven Canons, and above four Millions of Pounds weight of Bisket. Burnt the Magazine, Houses, and Mosques; and levelled the Walls to the ground. Uolcei, an antient People of Latium, in Italy; who resisted the Roman Power very much, to their own loss. T. Sicinius, Consul, defeated them in the year of Rome 257. Q. Capitolinus beat them again in 316. A. Postloumius Tubertus, Dictator, triumphed over them in 325. And Camillus constrained them to submit in 365. Their Country now makes a part of Campagna di Roma. Uolterra, Volaterra, Volaterrae, one of the most antientest Cities in Italy, in Hetruria; in the Territory of Pisa, upon a Mountain; and a Bishops See under the Archbishop of Florence; from whence it stands 34 Miles to the South. In 1578. and 1590. Synods were celebrated here. The Soil about it yields abun∣dance of Mineral Waters. There are divers antient Sta∣tues yet remaining in this City. Lon. 33. 40. Lat. 42. 46. Uoltorno, Vulturnus, a River in the Kingdom of Naples: it springeth out of the Apennine in the Bor∣ders of the hither Abruzzo; and flowing South through the Province di Lavoro, near Venafro and Alii be∣neath Tolesi, it receives the Sabato; and watering Ca∣pua, falls into the Tyrrhenian Sea, 20 Miles North of Naples. Uoltutiraria, Vulturaria, a small City in the Capi∣tanata, in the Kingdom of Naples: a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Benevento; from which it stands 24 Miles to the North. Uoville, a Town in Poictiers in France: where Clovis, King of France, gained a great Victory over Alarick, King of the Goths; whom he slew with his own hands, in the year of Christ 507. Uoutenai, a place near Auxerre in Burgundy; where Charles (surnamed the Bald) got a great Vi∣ctory over Lothaire, in the year of Christ 841. Uplandia, a Province in the Kingdom of Sweden; (the Capital of it is Ʋpsal); in which stands Stock∣holm, the Royal City of that Kingdom. Bounded on the North with Gestricia, on the East by the Baltick Sea, on the South by the Sudermannia, and on the West by Westmannia. Very fruitful and well cultivated. Uppingham, a well built neat Market Town in the County of Rutland, and the Hundred of Martinsley: situated upon an Hill; and accommodated with a Free-School and an Hospital. Upsal, Ʋpsalia, is the Capital City in the King∣dom of Sweden, in the Province of Ʋpland; in 1148. made an Archbishops See by Pope Eugenius III. It stands upon the River Sala, (which falls into the Lake of Ekolen) seven Swedish Miles from Stockholm to the North. Long. 44. 15. Lat. 60. 05. It was for many Ages the Seat of the Kings of Gothland; and to this day the Kings of Sweden are crown'd there, in memory of its antient Glory. It is also an University: defended by a strong Castle built near it on a Rock. In the Cathedral you see the Tombs of many of the Kings of Sweden; who bore the Style of Kings of Ʋpsal in former times. And here in 1654. the fa∣mous Christiana Queen of Sweden resigned her Royal Diadem. See Sweden. Upsu. See Alaschehir. Upton, a Market Town in Worcestershire. The Capital of its Hundred; upon the Severn, in the South of the County. It is well built, and an antient Ro∣man Town. Ur, an antient City of Chaldaea. The place of the Birth and Death of Haran, Abraham's Brother, Gen. xi. 28. Uraha, a Gulph upon the Coast of the Terra firma, in South America: together with a Province of the same Name. Uraniburg, or Ʋranisbourgh, Ʋraniburgum, a splendid Castle, and Observatory, in the Island of Huen, near Coppenhagen in the Sound; betwixt See∣land and the Province of Schonen; built by Tycho Brahe, a Danish Baron; the celebrated Astronomer, in 1575. But since, having been neglected, is ruined. Urba, the same with Orba. Urbanea, Ʋrbinia, a small new City in the Duke∣dom of Ʋrbino, under the Pope: made a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Ʋrbino, by Pope Ʋr∣ban VIII. in 1635. who, from an ordinary Village, adorned it to this Dignity, enlarged its Buildings, and left it his Name. It stands 7 Miles from Ʋrbino to the North-West. Urbinio, Ʋrbinium, is a City of Ʋmbria, in the States of the Church; which is an Archbishops See, and the Capital of the Dukedom of that Name. A great and flourishing City, seated near the Fountains of
the River La Foglia: 20 Miles from the Adriatick Sea to the North-West, 7 from the Ʋrbanea, and 25 from Rimini. Made an Archbishops See in 1563. Il ducato di Urbino, is that part of Ʋmbria which lies beyond the Apennine. Bounded on the North by the Adriatick Sea and Romandiola; on the East by the Marchia Anconitana, on the South by Ombria, and on the West by the Dukedom of Flo∣rence. This Country was under Sovereign Dukes; first of the Family of Feltria, and after of Roborea: the last of which having no Male Issue, in 1631. re∣signed his Dominions in his life time to Pope Ʋrban VIII. to prevent any Quarrels about it after his Death: and ever since it has been united to the Papacy. Rec∣koned to contain 3 Ports, 7 or 8 Castles, and nigh 350 Towns, beside the Cities. The Cities of it are Cagli, Gubio, Fossombrone, Pesaro, Senigaglia, Ʋrbanea, and Ʋrbino; which last is the Capital City. Urgel, Orgelium, Ʋrgella, Ʋrgela, Orgia, a City of Catalonia in the County of Ceretania: at the foot of the Pyrenean Hills. A Bishops See, under the Arch∣bishop of Tarragona, upon the River Segre; 5 Leagues from the Borders of France to the South, 28 from Barcinone, and 9 from Perpignan. It had Counts of great Power under the second Line of the Kings of Ar∣ragon. In 1580. and 1633. we find Synods assembled here. The Tract in which it stands, is from it called the Plain of Ʋrgel. Uri, Ʋriensis Pagus, one of the Senior Cantons of Suitzerland, at the foot of the Mountains; exten∣ded along the Banks of the River Russ. And one of the first, that leagued against Albert Duke of Austria, in 1308. It's altogether Roman Catholick: and Alforf, the Capital City. Urla, Clazomenae, a City of the lesser Asia: which is a Bishops See under the Archbishop of Smyrna. It stands upon the Archipelago, between Smyrna to the East, and Chio to the West. Long. 55. 15. Lat. 39. 30. The Seamen call it Uourla. Usbeck, the same with Zagathay in Tartary. Uscopia, a great, and heretofore very populous City; situated about 30 German Miles from Nissa, and at the like distance from Thessalonique, the Capital of Macedonia. The Imperialists burnt it in 1689. It was secured only with an old Wall. Userch, a Town in Limosin in France. Usiza, or Ʋsciza, an open, rich, and populous Ci∣ty, about 20 Leagues from Belgrade, upon the Fron∣tiers of Bosnia: having a strong Castle. Taken and plundered by a Party of Rascians in 1688. In the Em∣peror's hands. Usk, a Market Town in Monmouthshire. The Capital of its Hundred. Upon a River of its own Name, over which it hath a Bridge. Well built, large, and fortified formerly with a Castle, now in Ruines. The antient Burrium of Antoninus is suppos'd to have stood here. In the Vicinage of it, the Duke of Beau∣fort possesses a noble Seat, called Ragland Castle. The River Ʋske discharges it self into the Severn near New∣port in this County. Albeargavenny is situated upon upon this River, at the influx of the Kaveny into it. Utica. See Biserta, its modern Name. Utoxeter, a Market Town in Staffordshire, in the Hundred of Totmonslow, upon the River Dove. Utrecht, Antonia, Trajectum Inferius, Ʋtrice∣sium, Ʋltrajectum, Antonina Civitas, Civitas Ʋtri∣censium, a great, strong, populous City in the Ʋnited Netherlands; the Capital of one of their seven States. It stands upon the North Branch of the Rhine; at the distance of about 5 English Miles to the North; but united to it by a Navigable Channel. Twenty three Leagues from Cologne, 5 German Miles from Am∣sterdam to the South, and 6 from Roterdam to the East. The Original of it is unknown: but it is sup∣posed to be a Roman Work, and built in or before the times of Nero about 186. Being ruined by the Barbarous Nations, Dagobert, King of France, re∣built and refortified it, about 642. So that the second Pile became much more famous than the former, Willibrodus (the Apostle of the Frisons) being sent by Pope Sergius in 696. with the Title of an Arch∣bishop; and Pepin, King of France, having, in 692, taken Ʋtrecht from Radbold the Pagan Duke of Frizeland; he assigned this City to Willibrode: and gave him the Territories, thus reckoned up by An∣tonius Mattheus, in his Books de Nobi itate. The Lekk, the Uechten, all the Lands which lay upon their Banks, and the Territory of Teistervant; which included a great part of Guelders, Bommel, Tiel, the Betouw, Culemborch, Viane, Asperen, Bure, Heus∣den, Neuctom, the Veluwe, and Ysestein. In 700. Radbold attempting in vain the recovering this City, submitted: So Willibrode, and Boniface his Successor, peaceably enjoyed this vast Diocese: which was confir∣med to them, and their Privileges enlarged by Charles the Great. In after times it became a Free Imperial City of Germany. Several of the Emperors resided, and some died here: amongst whom are reckoned Conrad II. in 1039. and Henricus V. in 1122. So jealous they were of their Privileges, that they would not suffer any of their Bishops Officers to have any share in the Government of the City: nor would they suffer the Bishop to enter the Town with more Men than they allowed him, or to stay in it above five or eight days. They maintained this Liberty, (though it was sorely envied and laid at by John Count of Holland, in 1297. and by William Count of Holland in 1324.) till in 1527. the Bishop of Ʋtrecht passed over his Right to Charles V. who being a Potent Prince, easily reduc'd this City under his Obedience, built it a Castle, and in 1546. kept in it a Chapter of the Order of the Golden Fleece. It had then 4 Collegiate Chur∣ches, divers Abbeys and Ecclesiastical Houses. But in 1577. they, with the rest of Holland, revolted from the Spaniards. In 1559. it had been advanced to an Archbishoprick by Pope Paul IV. and nine Suffragan Bishops assigned to this See, which was one of the oc∣casions of the Revolt. In 1636. it was made an Uni∣versity: and in 1672. it fell for a short time into the hands of the French, but is since returned to its for∣mer liberty; the Learned Dr. Brown has given a short account of the present State of this City in his Travels, Pag. 101. Long. 26. 26. Lat. 52. 10. The State of Ʋtretcht, Sticht van Utretcht, is the fifth of the Ʋnited Provinces. Bounded South, West, and North with Holland; and on the East by Guelderland. Besides its Capital, it has Wick, the (Seat of the Bishops), Duerstede, Rhenen, Amers∣ford, and Monfort (which are fortified strong places;) and about sixty great Villages. Uulxin, the same with Veuxin. Uxbridge, a large Market Town in the Coun. of Mid∣dlesex, in the Hundr. of Elt horn upon the River Coln. Uzerche, Ʋsarcha, Ʋsarchia, a Town in the Lower Limosin, in Aquitain in France; upon the River Vezere: adorned with an Abbey and a Castle. The Abbot is Lord of the Town. Uzes, Ʋcetia, Ʋtica, Ʋzetia, Castrum Ʋseti∣cense, a City of the Lower Languedoc in France, up∣on the River Eisent: which is a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Narbonne; and honored with the Title of a Dukedom by King Charles VI. after it had born the Titles first of both a Barony and a Viscounty. The Bishop enjoys the Honor to be a Count; and joynt Lord of the place with the King: Therefore it hath three Castles, for the King, the Duke, and the Bishop. A rich, populous, and well traded City. John de S. Gelais its Bishop in the last Age, embraced
the Reformed Religion, and married an Abbess: 'tis said he abjured it again before his death, and was bu∣ried in the Abbey of S. Maixant. In 1635. there was a Synod held here. It stands 3 Leagues from Nismes to the North, and 6 from Avignon to the West. Long. 25. 10. Lat. 43. 36. Vzeste, a Castle in the Territory of Bazadois, in Guyenne in France; betwixt Bourdeaux and Bazas. Remarkable for the Tomb of Pope Clement V. some∣time Archbishop of Bourdeaux: who was born at Villandrand, a Village one League from this Castle; died at the Castle of Roque-Maure, two Leagues from Avignon, in 1314; and was interred here in 1316. WA. WAad, Vaudum, a Territory in Switzerland, called by the French Le Pais de Vaud: which was a part of the Dutchy of Savoy, till 1536. and now subject to the Canton of Berne. It is bounded on the South by the Lake of Lemane; on the West by Gex, and the Franche Comte; on the East by Berne; on the North in part by Berne, and in part by Friburgh. The Capital of it is Lausanne. The other good Towns are Avenches, or (Wpurg) Yverdon, Mouldon, and Nyon. It is sometimes writ∣ten Vault. Wadstein, a Town in the Province of Ostrogothia in Sweden. Die Wael, Helium, Vahalis, Vacalos, the middle Branch of the Rhine: which divides from it at Schenc∣ken, (a Fort beneath Emmeren); and watering Nim∣meguen, Tiel, and Bommel, falls into the Maes above Gorcum, a City of Holland. Waga, Vagus, a River in Scandia. Wageren, Wagria, or Wagerlandt, a small Ter∣ritory in Holland towards the Baltick Sea; between Lubeck to the South, and Kel to the North. The Cities of it are Lubeck, Oldesto, Poen, Segeberg, and Oldenburg; which are divided between the King of Denmark, the Dukes of Holstein, and the Bishop of Lubeck. Wainfleet, or Waynfleet, a Market Town in Lin∣colnshire, in the division of Lindsey, and the Hundred of Chandleshow; upon a Wash, in a fenny gound, which empties it self into the Sea, not far from hence. Made famous by giving Name and Birth to William of Waynfleet, Bishop of Winchester; the Founder of Magdalen College in Oxon, and of a Free-School in this Town. Wakefield, a Market Town in the West Riding of Yorkshire, in the Hundred of Agbridge, upon the Ri∣ver Calder; here covered with a fair Stone Bridge, which King Edward IV. adorned with a ely Chap∣pel. It is a large Town, well built of Stone, of good Antiquity; and drives the Cloathing Trade. Walachia, Valachia, a considerable Province of the Kingdom of Hungary; called by the Germans Walachey, by the Turks Iakia, and by the Poles Wolochy. It is a part of the antient Dacia; and stands now divided into the Provinces of Walachia and Moldavia: of the latter I have spoken in its pro∣per place. The former is bounded on the North by the Kingdom of Poland and Red-Russia; on the East by Bessarabia; on the South by Bulgaria, (sepa∣rated from it by the Danube) and by Moldavia; which last also bounds it to the West. It is much less than the Maps commonly make it: also commonly mispla∣ced, and set where Moldavia should stand. The Hi∣story of it is delivered in Moldavia. To which I shall only add here; that after Mahomet IV. Emperor of the Turks, was deposed, and Solyman, his Brother, set up in his stead; and that the Duke of Lorain had seized Transylvania; the Prince and States of Wala∣chia, in 1687. and 88. rendered themselves under the Emperor's Protection, upon condition; That the Suc∣cession in the Government of that Principality shall be continued to the Heirs Male of the present Prince, and the States be preserved in the Possession of their just Rights and Privileges; paying to the Emperor the Annual Tribute of 50000 Crowns. This Country extends from East to West 90 French Leagues: from North to South 50; in form Triangular. The Plains would be very fruitful, if they were well cultivated; but being little peopled, much ravaged by the Turks and Tartars, and lying in common, they are over-run with Weeds; for here is little or no Wood. The Mountains have rich Mines, but they are as much neg∣lected: their Religion is that of the Greek Church. The present Valvode is Matthis George Gista; set up in 1658. by the late Sultan of the Turks. Walcheten, Valacria, one of the Islands at the Mouth of the Schelde, which compose the Province of Zeland in the Ʋnited Netherlands. Its Capital City is Middleburgh. New Walcheren, the same with Tabago. Waldeck, Valdecum, a County in Hassia; between Westphalia to the West, Hassia to the East and South, and Paderborne to the North; under a Count of its own: yielding Wine, Corn, and several sorts of Mines. The principal places in it are Curback and Waldeck; which last stands upon the Eder; 5 German Miles from Cassel to the West, and 7 from Marpurg to the North. Walden, a Market Town in the County of Essex, in the Hundred of Ʋttlesford, upon an Eminence: likewise called Saffron-Walden, from its situation a∣mongst pleasant and profitable Fields of Saffron. Walderswick, a Sea Town in the County of Saf∣folk, and the Hundred of Blithing, near Southwould∣bay; adorned with a remarkable high and fair Church. Waldhust, Valdhusta, a small City in the Pro∣vince of Schwaben in Germany, upon the Rhine, in the Territory of Kegow; 7 German Miles from Ba∣sil to the East, 5 from Schafhouse, and 2 from La∣fenburgh. Under the Emperor. Wales, Vallia, is a Principality on the West of England. Bounded on the West and North by the Irish Sea; on the East by Cheshire, Shrapshire, He∣refordshire, and Monmouthshire; (this latter being; a long time a part of it) and on the South by the Se∣vern Sea. It contains twelve Shires; Pembroke, Caermarden, Glamorgan, Brecknock, Radnor, Car∣digan, Mountgomery, Merioneth, Denbigh, Flint, Caernarvon, and Anglesey. After many and those most bloody Wars, this Principality was finally united for ever to the Crown of England by Edward I. in 1284. Prince Edward, his eldest Son, made Prince of Wales: which Title to the Heir apparent of Eng∣land still belongs. The rest of its description is gi∣ven in the proper places. Wallingford, a Market Town and Corporation in Berkshire, in the Hundred of Moreton, upon the Ri∣ver Thames, here covered with a Bridge: a famous place both in the Roman and Saxon times. It is the antient Guallena; the Seat of the Attrebatii, a Bri∣tish Tribe; and under the West-Saxons was the Ca∣pital Town of these parts: being adorned with 12 Parish Churches, a Castle of great strength, and Walls which were a Mile in circuit. The Tracts and Ruines of those Walls yet appear, and part of the Castle: together with one Church: which declension from its pristine State was occasioned by a Plague in 1348. It retains the Honor of the Election of two
Members to represent it in the lower House of Par∣liament. Wallisserlandt, Valinsa, Vallesia, a great Canton in Switzerland; called by the French Vallais, or Vallays; by the Germans Wallisserlandt; by the Italians Vallesia. It extends from East to West; be∣tween the Canton of Schwitz to the North and East, the Dukedom of Milan and Aouste to the South, and Savoy to the West. The Capital of it is Sytten or Syon: and the other principal Cities are Martigny and S. Maurice. This Canton was united for ever to the rest in the general League, in 1533. Its ex∣tent from East to West is almost 100 Miles, its breadth between 15 and 30. The Religion here pro∣fessed is the Roman Catholick; for the maintenance of which, the Bishop (who is their Prince) combined with the 7 Popish Cantons, in 1572. It is a pleasant fruitful Valley, abounding with Saffron, Corn, Wine, and delicate Fruits; enriched with Meadows and ex∣cellent Pastures; surrounded every way with craggy and unpassable Rocks and Mountains, which afford but one entrance into it, and that defended by two Gates and a Castle. These Mountains are at all times covered with Ice and Snow; not to be passed by an Army, nor easily by a single Person. The Walloons, the People of the Earldomes of Flanders and Artois, in the Low Countries, are com∣monly called by this Name. Walsall, a Market Town in Staffordshire, in the Hundred of Oow; upon the top of a high Hill. Walsham North, a Market Town in the County of Norfolk, in the Hundred of Blowfield. Walsingham, a Market Town in the County of Norfolk, in the Hundred of N. Grenehoe: Noted formerly for the Concourse of Pilgrims to two Wells, called to this day the Virgin Mary's Wells, and to the Chappel near them. There was also formerly a Col∣lege of Canons at this Town: And the good Saf∣fron, it used to yield, was no small addition to its Name. Waltham-Abbey, a Market Town in the County of Essex; of great fame formerly for the Abbey it carries in its Name. The Capital of its Hundred. § Another in the County of Southampton, for distin∣ction called Waltham Bishops. The Capital of its Hundred also. Wana, Vana, a River of Croatia, which watereth Vihitz: and then falls into the Save above Gradiska, in the Borders of Friuli. Wandesworth, a Town in the County of Surrey, in the Hundred of Brixton, upon the River Wandle. Some numbers of French Protestants have setled here. Wandesdike, a large Trench, or Dyke, in Wilt∣shire: Supposed by Mr. Cambden to be made by the West-Saxons, for a Boundary to their Kingdom against the Mercians. It lies in the midst of the County, ex∣tended many Miles from East to West: and saw many Battles fought betwixt those two Kingdoms. Wang, a small River in the County of Suffolk; which rieth in Westhall, and running East, watereth the Town of Wangford: then falls into the Blithe, a little above Southwould. Wantage, a Market, and Thorough-fare Town, in Berkshire; in the Hundred of Wanting. Waradin, Varadinum, a great strong City of the Upper Hungary; called by its Inhabitants Warad, by the Germans, Gross-Wardein, to distinguish it from Petro Waradin in Sclavonia. It stands upon the Ri∣ver Kerez, in the Borders of Transylvania; (to which Principality of latter times it belonged); and is a Bishops See under the Archbishop of Colocza: defended by a strong Castle. In 1660. it was taken by the Turks; be∣fore which the Crim Tartars took it in 1242. In 1290. Ladislans, K. of Hungary built the Cathedral Church. It was besieged by a puissant Army of the Turks, in 1598. which miscarried. But in 1660. they took it by surprise in a time of Peace. On the East the Castle stands, on the North the River runs; it has a Wall with Ramparts, after the modern way; flanked with 5 Royal Bastions, and a good regular Dike, which may be filled upon occasion by the River Water: within there is another inclosure of 5 Bastions and a high Wall, which may serve instead of a Cittadel. This City stands 22 Miles from Giula to the North, 80 from Weissem∣burg to the West, and 100 from Buda to the East. Lately recovered by the Imperialists from the Turks, after a long Blockade and Siege. The Capital of a County of its own name. Longit. 44. 56. Latit. 47. 08. Warasdin, Variana, Varsdinum, a City of Sti∣ria. Warburgh, an Imperial and Hanseatique City, in the Circle of Westphalia, in Germany. Warczkovie more, the Russian Name of the Bal∣tick Sea. Wardhus, Vardhusia, the North part of the King∣dom of Norway. Bounded on the North by the fro∣zen Sea, on the East by the Russ Lapland, on the West by Drontheim, and on the South by the Swedish Lap∣land. It has only one Town of its own Name, and a few Villages of no value. Under the King of Denmark. Ware, a Market Town in Hartfordshire, in the Hundred of Branghing, upon the River Lea: from whence a Channel of the New River Water is cut for serving of London. Warfe, a River in Yorkshire, falling into the Are below Pontefract; and into the Ouse below York. Ot∣ley, Wetherby, and Tadcaster stand upon it. Warham, a Market Town and Corporation in Dor∣setshire: in the Hundred of Winfrith: situated at the fall of the Rivers Frome and Biddle into Luckford Lake: to which it hath a Harbour, defended formerly by a strong Wall and a Castle. But as the two latter have found their Ruins in the Wars of this Kingdom; so the other is choaked up. The Corporation retains the Honour of the Election of two Members to repre∣sent it in Parliament. Warmerlandt, Warmia, a Province of Prussia, called by the Inhabitants Ermelandt. Bounded almost every way by the Ducal Prussia; the Capital of it is Heilsbergh, in which the Bishop of this Province re∣sides: which stands 8 German Miles from Regensperg to the South. Warminster, a Market Town in Wiltshire, the Capital of its Hundred; seated at the Spring of the Ri∣ver Willybourn or Willy; and heretofore of very great note: being the antient Verlucio. Warrington, Khigodunum, a Town in Lanca∣shire in the Borders of Cheshire; upon the River Mersey, over which it hath a fair stone Bridg leading into the last mentioned County: in the Hundred of Darby. Here the Scotch Army under Duke Hamil∣ton was defeated by the Parliamentarians, in the year 1648. Warsaw, VVarsovia, the Capital City of the Kingdom of Poland: called by the Poles VVarswa, by the Germans Warschaw, by the French Var∣sovie. It is the chief City of Mazovia; upon the Vistula. Twenty four Miles from Lenczycze, or Lanschet, thirty three from Gnesna, and fifty from Lemburg. Taken by the Swedes in the year 1665. after a great Victory; the year following the Poles retook it; and it is now under its own Prince. A great and populous City, being as it were near the Centre of that Kingdom; has enjoyed the Resi∣dence of their Kings and the Courts of Justice, ever since the Reign of Sigismond III. who built here a Royal Palace for his Successors. There has also
been added a great pile of Buildings, now called the New City. Long. 43. 20. Lat. 52. 25. Warte, Varta, a River of Poland; which arising out of the Lesser Poland, and entring the Greater, washeth Siracks and Posnan; and taking in the Obra, the Notesik, and the Prosna, beneath Landsperg in the Marquisate of Brandenburg, falls into the Oder near Custrin. Warwick, Varvicum, Praesidium Verovicum, the Shire-Town of the County of Warwick, is seated on the West-side of the River Avon (over which it has a Stone Bridge) in the middle of the County. Called by the Welsh, Caer Guarvic and Caer Leon; by the Romans, Praesidium; which signifies the same thing with the Brittish Name. It stands upon a steep and craggy Rock mounted on high, not easily approached; hath two Parish Churches, a handsom Market-House of Freestone, an indowed Hospital: the Assizes and Sessions for the County are kept at it; and it was fortified with Walls and Ditches, and towards the South-VVest it had a strong Castle. Ethelsled (a Mercian Queen) rebuilt it in the year 911. In the year 1076, Henry de Newburg was created Earl of Warwick by William the Conqueror. This Family lasted five Descents; and in the year 1242, John Mar∣shal was the seventh Earl, in the Right of Margery, Sister and Heir of Thomas the last Earl. John de Placetis, her second Husband, was the eighth in 1243, William Maudit the ninth in 1263. William Beau∣champ Son of Isabel (Sister and Heir of William Maudit) in 1268. This Family continued five De∣scents: amongst which Henry Beauchamp the Favou∣rite of King Henry VI, who crowned him King of the Isle of VVight, received this Place with the advanced Title of Duke; which vanished after him. And in the year 1449, Richard Nevil (who married Anne Sister of Henry Beauchamp, the former Earl and Duke of VVarwick) succeeded (in the Title of Earl.) In 1471, George Duke of Clarence, Brother to Edward IV, by the Marriage of Anne Daughter of Richard Ne∣vil, was the eighteenth; succeeded by Edward Plan∣tagenet his Son in 1471. In 1547, John Dudley: and in 1562, Ambrose his Son, descended from the Lady Margaret, Daughter of Richard Beauchamp Earl of VVarwick. In 1618, Robert Lord Rich of Leeze was created the twenty second Earl of VVar∣wick by James I. Charles, great Grandson to Robert, died without Issue: whereupon Robert Rich Earl of Holland, his Cousin Germain, succeeded in the Earl∣dom of VVarwick; and left both the Titles of War∣wick and Holland united to Edward the present Earl, the twenty seventh, and the sixth of this Family. Warwick returns two Parliament Men, and stands in the Hundred of Kington. Warwickshire, Varvicensis Comitatus, is bounded on the North by Staffordshire, on the East by Leicester and Northamptonshires, on the South by Oxford and Gloucester, and on the VVest by the County of Wor∣cester. In length from North to South thirty three Miles, in breadth twenty five; the whole Circumfe∣rence one hundred and thirty five; containing one hundred and fifty eight Parishes, and fifteen Market Towns. As it is seated well near in the heart of Eng∣land, so the Air and Soil are of the best; the River Avon divides it in the middle. VVhat lies South of that River is divided between fruitful Corn-Fields and lovely Meadows; which from Edg-hill present the Viewer with a Plain equal to that of Jordan. That which lies North is VVood Land. The Cornavii were the old, the Mercians the later Masters of this County. There have been three great Battels sought in it: One in the year 749, wherein Cuthred King of the West Saxons slew Ethelbald King of the Mercians at Seckington near Tamworth. The second in the year 1468, at Edgcote; in which the then Earl of Warwick defeated Edward IV, and took him Prisoner. The third in the year 1642, at Edg-hill; in which Charles I, overthrew the Parliament Forces under the Earl of Essex. The Principal Town in this Shire is Coventry. Wasgow, Vasgovia, Vogesus Tractus, a Tract in Lorrain, called by the French Le Pais de Vauge; which takes its Name from a Mountain. It lies be∣tween the Dukedoms of Lorain and Bipont, and the Palatinate of the Rhine; and it is a part of Ger∣many. Wash, A Stream in the County of Rutland. Wassi, or Vassi, Vasseum, a Town in the Lower Champagne in France, upon the Marn, in the Dio∣cess of Chalons; well situated, in a fruitful Soil. A Rencounter betwixt the Duke of Guise and the Hu∣guenots at this Town, in the Reign of Charles IX, gave an occasion to the ensuing Civil VVais of Re∣ligion in this Kingdom. Watchet, a Market Town in Somersetshire, in the Hundred of Williton; by the Sea-side. Waterford, Vaterfordia, Mapiana, a Town and County in the Province of Munster on the South of Ireland. The Town is called by the Irish Phurt∣lairge. The Capital of its County, and next Dublin the greatest place in that Kingdom: having a very large and safe Haven, under the Protection of a strong Fort, called Duncannon Fort; and conveniently seat∣ed for a Trade with any part of the World. Built by the Norwegians in a bad Air and a barren Soil, at the Mouth of the River Shour. Ever since it came into the hands of the English, it has continued very loyal to this Crown; and has on that score obtained many signal Privileges from it. In the year 1649, they for∣ced Oliver Cromwel to draw off, when he was Master of the greatest part of Ireland; yet when resistance was in vain it surrendred, August 20. 1650, on good terms. As also to King William, both Town and Fort, July 25 and 26, 1690, without a stroke. The County of Waterford, is bounded on the East by Wexford, on the North by Tipperary, on the VVest by Cork, and on the South by the Sea: the Sewer enclosing it on the North and East, and the More on the VVest. The North parts of it are over∣spread with a Ridge of Mountains called Slewboyne. It is from East to VVest twenty seven Irish Miles, from North to South fifteen. The principal places in it are Waterford and Lismore. Watford, a Market Town in Hartfordshire, in the Hundred of Chashio, near the River Coln. Watlington, a Market Town in Oxfordshire, in the Hundred of Pirton. Watton, a Market Town in the County of Nor∣folk, in the Hundred of Weyland. Waveney, a River in the County of Suffolk, di∣viding that County from Norfolk. Beckles and Bun∣gay are situated upon the Banks of it. Webley, a Market Town and Corporation in He∣refordshire, in the Hundred of Stretford. Repre∣sented in Parliament by its two Burgesses. Weever, a River watering the middle parts of Cheshire: upon which Nantwich and Fordsham are situated. Weigats Streight, a Bay upon the South of Nova Zembla; flowing from VVest to East; and discovered by the Hollanders under one of this Name in 1594: through which they in vain sought a North Passage to the East Indies by China, not being able to sail further for Ice. They discovered to the East and VVest of this Streight, Staten Eylandt and Mau∣ritz Eylandt, in the same Voyage; whereon they found Rocks, Lakes, Ponds, Swans, Hawks, and VVild Ducks.
Weill, Ʋuila, a City in the Dukedom of Wurtem∣burg: which is a free Imperial City by the Constitu∣tion of Frederick II: it stands upon the River Wurm; two Miles from Stutgard to the VVest, and Spire to the South; and three from Tubingen to the North. Hofman. § Another in Switzerland, belonging to the Canton of S. Gall. Weimar, Weinmar, Vimaria, a City of Thuringia in Germany, upon the River Ilm; three German Miles from Erford to the East, and five from Naum∣burg; which was the Seat of Otho Emperor of Germany. Now under a Duke of the House of Saxony. Weismar, Weismaria, one of the Hanse Towns of Germany, in the Dukedom of Mecklenburgh; which has a Harbor on the Baltick Sea, and a new strong Castle. It stands between Rostock to the East, and Lubeck to the VVest; seven German Miles from either. Built about the year 1240, by a Count of Swerin. In 1262, it was almost entirely ruined by Fire. In 1266, the Duke of Mecklenburg gave it great Privileges to encourage the rebuilding of it; which procured the building it with Stone. By the Peace of Munster it was assigned to the Swedes; but being taken by the Danes in 1679, tho by the Treaty in 1679 they were to restore it; yet that Crown has not performed that Article. Weissell, See Vistula. Weissemburg, Weissemburgum, a City of Bava∣ria, in the Territory of Aichstadt, near the Fountains of Rednitz; four German Miles from Donawert to the North, seven from Norimberg, and five from Newburg. This is a Free Imperial City. Weissemburg, a City of Alsatia in the Territory of Wasgow; towards the Borders of the Palatinate of the Rhine: called Cron Weisemburg, to distinguish it from the former: which is a Town in Alsatia of old called Sebusium. It stands upon the River Luter; four German Miles from Hagenaw to the North, and six from Strasburg. Dagobert King of France built here a celebrated Monastery, in the year 623; which, in the year 1496, was changed into a College. By the Peace of Munster, this place was granted to France; and in the Wars in 1673, it suffered very much from the Germans, but is now rebuilding. This City is the Capital of a Territory called die Prebstey von Weissemburg, the Prefecture of Weissemburg; which in the year 1540, was united for ever to the Bishoprick of Spire. Lauterburg was the usual Seat of the Presi∣dent of this District; but is now under the French King too. Weissenburg, Alba Julia, a City in Transylvania; called by the Hungarians, Gyvla Fejervar. It is a Roman Colony setled in the times of Marcus Aurelius Antoninus (from whose Mother it had its Latin Name;) and a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Colocza. It stands upon the River Ompay; which a little lower falls into the Marish, in a fruitful Plain; between Clausenburg to the North-West, and Hermanstad to the South, seven German Miles from either. The u∣sual Residence of the Prince of Transylvania. It has been much greater than now it is; and affords rare Roman Medals, Coins and Inscriptions; the evi∣dent Symptoms of its Antiquity and Grandeur. Gar∣risoned for the Emperor in 1687. Long. 47. 00. Lat. 46. 05. Weland, a River in Northamptonshire, upon which Rockingham stands. Welch-poole, a Market Town in the County of Montgomery, in Wales: in the Hundred of Ystrad March. Welika-reca, Turuntus, the same with Narva, a River of Moscovy. Welles, Belgae, Wellae, Theorodunum, Fontes, Fontanensis Ecclesia, a City of Somersetshire: so called from the VVells and plentiful Springs which bubble up in it: for fair Buildings it exceeds all other Towns in that County. It hath an Episcopal Palace, fortified with Walls and a Mote like a Castle; a goodly Church, and a College; founded by Ina a Saxon King in honor of S. Andrew; which was enlarged by King Kinewolph, in the year 766. The Cathedral Church has a Dean, a Chaunter, a Chancellor, three Arch∣deacons, twenty seven Prebends, and nineteen Canons. There was a Bishoprick founded here, in the year 905, by Edward the Elder: which about the year 1088 was united to Bath. In the year 1193, the Bishop∣rick of Glastenbury being also united to these two Sees, the Revenues of the Church of wells were divi∣ded between the Dean and the Chapter: which were much impaired in the Reign of Edward VI. Wellingborough, a Market Town in Northampton∣shire, in the Hundred of Huxlon, upon an ascent; large and well frequented, accommodated with a Free School, and adorned with a handsom Church. Wellington, a Market Town in Somersetshire in the Hundred of Milverton, upon the River Tone, § Another in Shropshire, in the Hundred of S. Bradford. Wem, a Market Town in the North of Shropshire, in the Hundred of N. Bradford, upon the River Ro∣der: honoured with the Title of a Barony by King James II, in the Person of the late Lord Chancellor Jeffreys. Wendover, a Market Town and Corporation in Buckinghamshire, in the Hundred of Aylesbury: ha∣ving the honour of the Election of two Parliament Men. Wenlock Magna, a Market Town and Corpora∣tion in Shropshire, the Capital of its Hundred: re∣presented in the lower House of Parliament by two Burgesses. Were, Vera, a River which runs through the Bishoprick of Durham; and watering the Capital City, where it makes a Peninsula and hath three Bridges covering it, falls at Sunderland into the Ger∣man Ocean. Werne, or Wuerne, the same with Furnes. Wernow, Chalusus, a City of Germany, near Rostock. Wersaw. See Warsaw. Wert, the same with Donawert. Werthaim, a County in Franconia, in Germany. Wesel, Aliso, Vesalia, a strong City in the Duke∣dom of Cleve; and an Hanse Town, which has a Ca∣stle belonging to it. It stands upon the Rhine, at the confluence of the Lippe; twelve German Miles from Cologne North, and five from Dorsten to the VVest. Taken by the Hollanders from the Spaniards in 1629. From them by the French, in 1672, and in the year 1674, it was left to the Duke of Brandenburg, after it had been dismantled by the French. Rudolphus I, Emperor of Germany, granted this City to Theodo∣rick VIII, Earl of Cleve. Weser, or the Little Weser, Visurgis, a small River which ariseth in the Dukedom of Limburgh, in the Borders of Juliers; and watering Limburgh, falls into the Maes above Liege. Weser, Visurgis, a great River of Germany: which ariseth in Franconia, in the Territory of Coburg near Eisfeldt: and flowing through Thuringe near Smalcald, receives the Ness below Eysenack▪ and in Hess the Fuld. Turning to the North between Brun∣swick and Westphalia, it takes in the Dymel; and wa∣ters Corby, Hammel, Minden, Cities of Westphalia: beneath Ferden admits the Alder, and salutes Breme, takes in the Wemma and the Honte; and beneath Carle∣stadt, lls into the German Ocean.
Wesho, Vexio, a City of Sweden in the Province of Smalland: which is a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Ʋpsal: called also Vexsioe and Vex∣sieu. Thirty five Miles from the Lake of Weter South, and from the Baltick Sea West. Westbury, a Market Town and Corporation in Wiltshire, upon the River Broke, falling into the Avon: the Capital of its Hundred, and honoured with the Election of two Parliament Men. Westerwaldt, Bacenis, Buronia, a part of the Her∣cynian Forest; called also Hartzwaldt. It makes the South parts of the Dukedoms of Brunswick and Thuringe, in the Lower Saxony; others say, it lies by Schelde near Cologne. Westerwick, Vestrovicum, a Sea-Port City in the Province of Smalland, on the Baltick Sea in Swe∣den; fifty five Miles from Calmar to the North. West Froson. See Friseland. Westmannia, Vestmania, or Westmanland, a Province of Sweden; between Ʋpland to the East, Gestricia to the North, Sudermannia to the South, and Nericia to the West. The Cities of it, are Aro∣sen and Arbosen. Westminster, Westmonasterium, once a Suburb, seated a Mile from the City of London, and called Thorney: now a great and populous City; by its Buildings conjoined to London; so that it seems to be a part of it; but is indeed a distinct City, having its peculiar and proper Magistrates, and Privileges. In the times of the Romans, there stood here a Temple of Apollo; which in the Reign of Antoninus Pius, was subverted by an Earthquake. Out of the Ruins of it, Segebert (King of Kent) built a Church in honour of S. Peter, about the year 655. About the year 701. Offa King of the East Angles, inlarged this old Church; which being destroyed by the Danes a∣bout the year 854, S. Dunstane Archbishop of Can∣terbury, re-edified it about 970. Edward the Con∣fessor, in the year 1061. made great additions to this Fabrick. In the year 1221. Henry III. pulled down this Saxon Building; and in the same place erected that great and noble Pile, now standing; and put it into the hands of the Monks: to which Henry VII. added the Chappel called by his Name. In the years 1066, and 1226. Councils were celebrated here. At the Reformation, instead of the Monks, was placed here a Dean, twelve Prebends and a Bishop; which last is since suppressed. In this Church is usually performed the Coronation; it likewise contains the Bones of a vast number of the Kings of England, and was the Mother of Westminster; which from it, as from a Centre, has spread it self every way: Especially after West∣minster-Hall became the fixed place for the Courts of Justice, (built by William Rufus, in the year 1099. Rebuilt by Richard II. as Mr. Camden observes); and Whitehall, the Royal Palace of our Kings, about the year 1512. Westmorland, Damnii, Vestmaria, Westmorlan∣dia, (one of the Northern Counties of England) took this Name from its situation, and the great num∣ber of Moors in it. On the North and West, it is bounded by Cumberland; on the South by Lanca∣shire; and on the East by Yorkshire. From North to South it is thirty Miles, from East to West twenty four, in circumference one hundred and twelve. Containing twenty six Parishes, and eight Market Towns. The Air is sharp and piercing; healthful: the Soil barren, and not easily improved: two ridges of high Hills crossing it as far as Cumberland. Yet the Southern parts contain many fruitful Valleys, Mea∣dows, Arable and Pasture Grounds: The Rivers E∣den, Ken, Lon and Eamon watering them: besides two noted Lakes, the Ʋlleswater and Windermeer: the last bordering upon Cheshire, the other upon Cumberland and Westmorland. The ancient Inhabi∣tants were the Brigantes: who in the Saxon Heptar∣chy, constituted a part of the great Kingdom of Nor∣thumberland. The first Earl of this County, was Ralph Nevil, Lord of Raby, E. Marshall; in 1398 created Earl of Westmorland by King Richard II. This Fa∣mily in six Descents continued, till the year 1584. it failed in the death of Charles Nevil. In 1624. this Honour was revived in Francis Fane, created Earl of Westmorland, and Baron of Burghersh, by James I. as a descendent from the Nevils; whose Posterity still enjoy it. Westphalia, a great Circle or Province in Germa∣ny; called by the Germans die Wephalen. It lies between the Lower Saxony to the East, and the Low-Countries to the West; bounded on the North by the German Sea, on the East by the Dukedom of Breme, Ferden, Lunenburg and Brunswick; on the West by the Ʋnited Netherlands; on the South by the Dukedom of Guelderland, the Bishoprick of Co∣logne, VVesterwaldt and Hassia. It contains the Bi∣shopricks of Munster, Paderborne and Osnaburg; the Dukedoms of Cleve and Berg; the Principality of Min∣den; the Counties of Oldenburg, Mark, Hoye, Diep∣holt, Ravensberg, Lingen, Lippe, Benthem and Scaum∣burg; East Friseland, and the Dukedom of West∣phalia. The capital City of this Circle is Munster. The Dukedom of Westphalia is bounded on the North by the Bishopricks of Munster and Pader∣borne; on the West by the County of Mark; on the South by Wester-waldt and Hassia; on the East by the County of Waldeck. The principal places in it, are, Arensberg, Cleve, Dussel-dorp, Embden, Eme∣rick, Ham, Lipstad, Minden, Munster, Oldenburg, Osnabruck, Paderborne, Soest, Dortmund and Wesel. Besides what is above expressed, this Circle in∣cludes the Dukedoms of Juliers and Guelderland; the Bishoprick of Leige, and the States of Ʋtrecht; but this last has been separated from it, ever since 1548. Westram, a Market Town in the County of Kent, in Sutton Lath, upon the River Darent. Westrick, Westrych, Westryck, Austrasia, Lotha∣ringia, (taken in its largest extent) contained Bra∣bant, Hainault, Liege, Namur, Luxemburg, Juliers, Epfall, Wasgow, Imperial Flanders, and Lorain. And under the first Race of the Kings of France, it con∣tained also Schwaben, Bavaria, Thuringia, a great part of Saxony, and some Provinces of France. But the Name is only now applied to Lorain. Weteraw, Veteravia, Vederovia, a Province in the Ʋpper Circle of the Rhine: between the Ʋpper Hassia to the East, Westerwaldt to the North, the Rhine to the West, and Mentz to the South. The principal Places in it are Dietz and Hamar. Wetherby, a Market Town in the West Riding of Yorkshire, in the Hund▪ of Claro, upon the River Warfe. Wetsch, the same with Vienna. Wexford, a County in the South of the Kingdom of Ireland, called by the Irish Loghagarm. It is the South part of the Province of Lemster. Boun∣ded on the North by the County of Waterford, (cut off by the River Barrow.) It takes its Name from a great Sea-Port Town, on the South side of the Ri∣ver Shemalyn, not far from the South-Eastern Point of Ireland: fifty two Miles South of Sweden, and about twenty East of Waterford. Weymouth, a Market Town and Corporation in Dorsetshire, in the Hundred of Ʋgscomb, at the Fall of the River Wey into the Ocean: joined to Melcomb Regis, on the other side of the same River, by a fair Timber Bridge; since the Incorporation of both Towns by Act of Parliament in Queen Elizabeth's time into one Body. Yet each is distinctly represented by its Burgesses in the House of Commons: and Weymouth
has the Honour to give the Title of a Viscount to the Right Honourable Thomas Thynne. Weymar. See Weimar. Whitby, a Market and Sea-Port Town in the North Riding of Yorkshire, at the Fall of the River Esk into the Ocean. It hath many Vessels belonging to it, a Bridge over the River, a Custom-House; and here∣tofore an Abbey of great fame, in the Person particu∣larly of S. Hilda, an ancient Abbess of it. Whitchurch, a Market Town in Shropshhire, in the Hundred of N. Bradford, towards Cheshire. § Also a Corporation in Hantshire, in the Hundred of Evinger, upon the River Test: having the Ele∣ction of two Members of the House of Commons. Whitehaven, a Market Town in the County of Cumberland, in the Division of Allerdale; upon a Creek of the Sea, which affords it a convenient and well frequented Harbour. It stands at the North end of a Rock of hard White Stone; and trades prin∣cipally in Coals and Salt. Whithern, Candida Casa, Lucopibia, the White-House, a Town or small City in Galloway in Scot∣land: upon the Irish Sea, over against the Isle of Man: and a Bishops See under the Archbishop of Glasco. The place where Ninia (or Ninian, a ho∣ly Britan, the Apostle of the South Picts) in the Reign of Theodosius the younger built a Church: which after the number of Christians were increased, became a Bishops See. It is one of the ancientest Towns (being mentioned by Ptolemy), as well as Bi∣shopricks in Scotland. Long. 16. 30. Lat. 56. 30. Wiburg, Viburgium, a City in the Province of North Jutland, in the Kingdom of Denmark: which is a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Lunden. It stands in the middle of that Promontory; at an equal distance from the German and Baltick Seas; eight German Miles from Alburg to the South. This Bi∣shops See was founded by Sweno King of Denmark, in 1065. Long. 30. 58. Lat. 58. 08. There is a Town of the same Name in Livonia. Wickham, a Market Town in Buckinghamshire, in the Hundred of Burnham, upon a Stream falling into the Thames: in a low and fruitful Vale. It hath the honour to be a Corporation, represented by two Burgesses in the Lower House of Parliament. Writ∣ten also Chipping-VViccomb. The Assizes for the County, are commonly kept here: being a large fair Town. § Also a Town in the County of Suffolk▪ in the Hundred of VVilford, upon the Deben: in which the Archdeacon of Suffolk keeps his Courts for the Eastern part of that County. This Town has lost its Market to Woodbridge, in its neighbourhood. Wickware, a Market Town in Gloucestershire, in the Hundred of Grombaldash. Widen, Widin. See Vidin. Wieprz, Aprus, a River which falls into the Vi∣stula, in the Borders of Poland and Silesia. Wigan, a Market Town and Corporation in Lan∣cashire, in the Hundred of Darby, upon the River Dowles: of note for good Coal. The Corporation elects two Parliament men. Wiflisburg, or Wiefelbourg, Aventicum, an an∣cient City of Switzerland. The Capital of the Can∣ton of Wiipurgergow; once a great City, and a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Besanzon; but now only a Town in the Borders of the Canton of Friburg, called by the French Avenches. It stands upon the River Broye: one German Mile from Fri∣burg, three from Berne, and four from Lausanne to the North. This Bishoprick was removed to Lau∣sanne, in 1076. This Canton is a part of the Can∣ton of Berne: bounded on the East by the Aar, and Argop; on the South by the Alpes, and the Lake of Lemane, and on the West and North by Mount Jura or Jurten. Wight, Victus, Vectis, Vecta, an Island on the South of England, belonging to the County of South∣hampton. In length twenty Miles, in breadth twelve, in circumference sixty. About three from Hurst Castle; of an oval form, ending with two Penin∣sula's to the East and West: And by nature secured with Rocks, especially Southward. It contains thirty six Parishes, and three Market Towns. Its Air health∣ful and pleasant: the Soil very fruitful: affords a good quantity of Corn for Exportation, and Cattle and Game in abundance: its Meadows and Wooll are excellent. In short, it wants nothing needful to the Life of Man. The principal place in it, is New∣port: and Cowes, for a Harbour. Vespasian was the first that subjected this Island to the Romans under Claudius Caesar. Cerdick King of the West Saxons became the next Master of it, in 530. After him, Wolfer, King of the Mercians: from whom it passed to Edelwalch King of the South Saxons by gift: Coedwalla King of the West Saxons, at last recon∣quered it. Henry VI. crowned Henry de Beauchamp Earl of Warwick, (his Favourite) King of Wight: but this Title soon vanished with his Life, two years after. Richard Widevil, Earl of Rivers, (his Suc∣cessor) had it from Edward IV. with the Title of Lord of Wight. Sir Reginald Bray took it from Henry VII. in Fee Farm, at the Rent of three hun∣dred Marks. Wighton, a Market Town in the East Riding of Yorkshire, in the Hundred of Harthill. Wilde, the same with Vilne. Wilia, Vilia, a River of Poland; which arising in the Palatinate of Breslaw, watereth Vilne; and beneath Cown falls into the Chrone. Wilkomirz, Wilkmer, Vilcomtria, a Town in the Ducal Prussia, upon the River Swet: eight Polish Miles from Vilne, and seven from Trock. Willy, or Willibourn, a River in Wiltshire; which joins with the Nadder at Wilton, near Salisbury; and afterwards falls into the Avon. Werminster is situated at the Spring of it. Wiltshire, Wiltonia, is bounded on the North by Gloucester; on the East by Berksshire, on the South by Dorset and Hampshire, and upon the West by Somerset and Gloucester. From North to South thirty nine Miles; from East to West twenty nine, in circumference one hundred thirty nine: containing three hundred and four Parishes, and twenty three Market Towns; amongst which, Wilton, its ancient Capital, gives Name to it. The Air very sweet, tem∣perate, healthful; the Soil fertile. The North parts swell into fruitful and pleasant Hills, diversisied with plea∣sant Rivers, and large Woods. The South are more level; and watered with the Wily, Adder, and Avon: the Isis, Kennet, and Deveril. The middle is com∣monly called Salisbury Plains, by reason of its great evenness; which feeds vast numbers of excel∣lent Sheep. This Country was the Seat of the Belgae. They being reduced by Vespasian, it became after∣ward a part of the Kingdom of the West Saxons. The principal City is Salisbury. William Lord Scrope (Lord Treasurer) was the first Earl of this County in the year 1397. James Butler Earl of Ormond, a∣nother Lord Treasurer, in 1448. John Stafford (se∣cond Son of Humphrey Duke of Buckingham) was the third Earl in 1469. who had two Successors of the same Name. Thomas Bullen, Father of the La∣dy Anne Bullen, (Mother of Queen Elizabeth), the sixth Earl in 1529. In 1550. William Paulet, afterwards Marquess of Winchester, was created Earl of Wiltshire, by King Edward VI. whose Posterity
in the fifth Descent, now enjoy this Honour. Wilton, a Market Town in Wiltshire, (to which it gives Name) betwixt the Rivers Willy by the North, and Adder or Nadder to the South. It was anci∣ently the Capital City of the County; a Bishops See, and the Residence of several Bishops, before the Tran∣slation of the See to Salisbury. The loss whereof was a great occasion of the decay of this place. It only retains the honour of being by two Members repre∣sented in Parliament. The Sheriffs keep their month∣ly Courts here, and the Knights of the Shire are usually elected at it. Wimpfen, Wimpina, Vimpina, a City of Ger∣many; in the Circle of Schwaben, upon the Necker; where it receives the River Jaxt; two German Miles from Hailbrune to the North, and five from Heidelburg to the East. This, though small, is an Imperial Free City. Wincaunton, a Market Town in Somersetshire, in the Hundred of Norton Ferris, upon the side of a Hill. Winchcomb, a Market Town in Gloucestershire, in the Hundred of Kistgate. Winchelsey, a Sea-Port Town in the East part of Sussex, where it adjoins to Kent; in Hastings Rape; upon an Inlet of the Sea, in the neighbourhood of Rye. A Member of the Cinque Ports: once a strong and a beautiful Town, walled: having eighteen Pa∣rish Churches: but by the recess of the Ocean, now much decayed; and the Haven choaked up. In the year 1250. the greatest part of this Town was destroy∣ed by the Sea. It consists now but of one Parish. In 1628. Charles I. created Elizabeth Finch, Viscount Maidstone, Countess of Winchelsey: to which Ho∣nour Thomas her Son, succeeded in 1633. and Hen∣neage her Grandchild in 1639. Winchester, Venta Belgarum, Vintonia, Winto∣nia, a City of Hampshire; which is a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Canterbury: upon the Ri∣ver Itching: fifteen Miles from the British Sea to the North. It stands pleasantly▪ in a Vale, betwixt two Hills; adorned with five Parish Churches; a Noble Cathedral, dedicated to the Trinity; in which the Bones of divers of the Saxon Kings and Queens, with two of the Danish Line of Kings, and two of the Norman, rest. A fine Hall for the Assizes and Sessions, where King Arthur's Round Table hangs as a Monument of Anti∣quity: a College for the Education of Youth, built and endowed by Will. of Wickham, (the Founder of New College Oxon,) for a Seminary to the same College; a Hospital, an Episcopal Palace, and a strong Castle upon a Hill. The Welsh call this ancient City at this day Caer Cruent: (that is, the White City: be∣cause it stands upon a Chalk); and the Latin Wri∣ters, Wintonia. In the Roman times it was one of the principal Cities of Britain. In the Saxons days twice consumed and rebuilt; being made the Seat of the West Saxon Kings: which Family at last prevailed against all the rest. The Bishops See was founded here in 660. by Kingil the first Christian King of the West Saxons. It felt the fury of the Danes. In the Norman times it kept up its Head: but in the Reign of King Stephen it was sacked in the Wars betwixt the Empress Mand and him. Edward III. to revive it, made it the Mart for VVool and Cloth. In our days, saith Mr. Camden, it is about a Mile and a half in com∣pass; reasonably well peopled. The ancient Bishops of this See were reputed Earls of Southampton; and pass by that Style in the New Statutes of the Gar∣ter made by King Henry VIII. The present Bishop Dr. Mew, is the seventy third Bishop. The first Earl of Winchester, was Saer de Quinsey in 1207. The second Roger de Quinsey in 1219. who died in 1264. The third Hugh de Spencer, created in 1322. and beheaded in 1326. The fourth Lewis de Bruges in 1472. In 1551. VVilliam Pawlet, Earl of VViltshire, was created Marquess of VVinchester: whose Posterity in the sixth Descent now enjoy it. In the years 855. 975. 1021. 1070. 1076. 1129. 1142. English Councils were celebrated in this City. The second, under S. Dunstan. The sixth, in relation to King Stephen's Usurpation of the Lands of the Church. Windaw, Vinda, Vindavia, a City of Curland; called by the Poles Kiess, and by the Germans Win∣daw and Winda. It has an Harbor at the Mouth of the River VVeta, upon the Baltick Sea: fif∣teen Polish Miles from Memel to the North, and thirty from Riga to the West. Winder, or VVimander Meer, a Lake dividing a part of Lancashire from the County of VVestmor∣land; and extending about ten Miles in length, and three or four in breadth: full of Fish; with a clear pebbly bottom. Windham, a Market Town in the County of Nor∣folk, in the Hundred of Forehoe. Windrush, a River in Oxfordshire, upon which VVitney stands; and Burford near it. Windsor, Vindesorium, a Castle upon the South side of the Thames in Berkshire; upon an high Hill: which rising by gentle degrees, affords at the top a pleasant Prospect. This Place was granted by Ed∣ward the Confessor to the Monks of Westminster: and soon after by William the Conqueror recovered back to the Crown, by an exchange for Wokendune and Ferings. In this pleasant Place was Edw. III. born: who afterward built that Noble Castle, which has since been the delightful Retreat of the Kings of England, from the Cares of Government and the Crowds of Men. In the same place that Victorious Prince instituted the most Noble Order of the GAR∣TER. The Ceremony whereof hath been usually since celebrated here upon S. George's Day. Out of the Castle sprung the Town: and that in Buckingham∣shire, (not in Barkshire;) it being on the North side of the River, and joined to the Castle by a Tim∣ber Bridge. In the Church of this Castle lie buried two of our Kings of the most distant Fortunes and Tempers, Henry VIII. and Charles the Martyr. The Town is a Corporation, in the Hundred of Ripple∣more; and elects two Burgesses to represent it in Parliament. Winnicza, a strong City in the Palatinate of Ki∣ovia in Poland, upon the River Bug: ten Miles a∣bove Braslaw to the North. Taken by the Cossacks, in 1560. Winshaim, Vintshaemum, a City in Franconia in Germany, upon the River Aisch: small, but an Im∣perial and Free City. Built in the year of Christ 525. by Windegast, a Duke. Seven German Miles from Norimburgh to the West, and from Wurtsburgh to the North-East. Winslow, a Market Town in Buckinghamshire, in the Hundred of Colstow. Wipach. See Vipao. Wiprefurt, a small Town in Hainault, in the Dukedom of Mons, upon the Rhine: not far from Cologne. Wirksworth, a Market-Town in Derbyshire. The Capital of its Hundred: of great note for Works in Lead. Wirland, Viria, a Province of Livonia, upon the Bay of Finland. The Capital of which is Wissem∣burgh. Baudrand writes Witland. Wirtemberg, Wittembergensis Ducatus, a Duke∣dom in Schwaben in Germany. Bounded on the East
and South by Schwaben, on the North by the Palati∣nate of the Rhine, on the West by Swartswaldt and the Marquisate of Baden. The principal Places in it are, Stutgard, Tubingen, and Schorndorf. It takes this Name from an antient Castle upon the Neck∣er; near Esling; and is under a Duke of its own. The first of which Family was Eberhard I. who mar∣ried Agnes, Daughter of Berthold, Duke of Zerin∣gen, in 1240. And the Descendents of this Line still enjoy this Honor. Wisbich, a Market Town in Cambridgeshire. The Capital of its Hundred. Wisbuy, Visbua, a small City in Gothland, (an Island in the Baltick Sea) which has a fine Harbor. Once a great and populous Place, but now decaying. It stands 9 Swedish Miles from the Isle of Oeland to the East, and 13 from Westerwick in Smaland. Wistock, a small Town in the Marquisate of Brandenburgh, in the Border of Meckleburgh, upon the River Dorss: made remarkable by the Victory obtained by the Swedes over the Imperialists in 1636. Wite Zee, Granduicus Sinus; the White Sea, or Bay of S. Nicolas. Witepski, Vitepska, Vitebscum, a City of Poland. The Capital of a Palatinate of the same Name in Li∣thuania, upon the River Dwina; where it receives the Widzba: 12 Polish Miles from the Borders of Moscovy, 16 from Ploczko, and 25 from Smolensko to the North-West. Often taken by the Russ; but now under the Poles: and was once a Sovereign State. Witham, a River running cross Lincolnshire: up∣on which Lincoln and Grantham are situated. At Sleaford, the River of the same name with that Town, falls into it. At Tattershall, the Bane; and at Bo∣ston, it gives up all its Streams to the Ocean. Witney, a Market Town in Oxfordshire, The Capital of its Hundred: upon the River Windrush. Accommodated with a Free School and a Library. Its principal Trade lies in Blankets and Ruggs. Whadistaw, one of the chief Towns of Cujava, a Province of Poland. Wittemberg, Calaecia, Lucoraea Viteberga, Wit∣temberga: the Capital City of the Dukedom of Sax∣ony: seated upon the Elbe; in a large Plain, which is every where commanded by the Cannon of the Castle; with a Marsh to the North, and a Canal of the Elbe to the East: Fortified with strong Ramparts, Walls, and Bastions; in almost a square Figure, but more long than broad. Nine German Miles from Leipsick to the North, 14 from Dresden to the South West, and 10 from Magdeburgh. In 1502. there was an University opened here by Frederick III. Elector of Saxony. In 1517. Luther began to Preach the Re∣formation in this City. In 1520. he in this Place burnt the Popes Bull, and Decrees. In 1546. he was Buried in this City. This strong City was then the only place which held out for the Elector; who was in the hands of the Emperor Charles V. In 1547. it was surrendered to that Prince, who for some years after made it his Prison for such as would not comply with him. Wivescomb, a Market Town in Somersetshire, in the Hundred of North Curry, upon the River Tone. Wlodzimiercz, Vlodimeria, a City of Volhinia in Poland, upon the River Lug: a little above its fall in∣to the Bug: 12 Polish Miles from Lusuck, and 21 from Lemburgh to the North-East. Wobourn, a Market Town in Bedfordshire, in the Hundred of Manshead. Woerden, Voerda, a strong Town upon the Rhine; 10 Miles from Ʋtrecht to the West, and 18 from Leyden. Built in 1160. by Godfrey Bishop of Ʋ∣trecht, to keep that Potent City in awe. They ac∣cordingly resented, and never gave over their pursuit, till in 1288. they persuaded Herman Van Woerden, (the Bishops Governor) to put the Place into their Hands. In 1672. it suffered much from the French. Wolaw, Volavia, a City of Silesia, in the King∣dom of Bohemia; which is the Capital of a Duke∣dom; and stands upon the Oder. Seven Miles from Breslaw to the North, and Glogaw to the South; and five from Lignitz North-East. Wolcmarck, Volcmarchia, a City of Carinthia, upon the Drave: 25 Miles beneath Clagenfurt to the East. Wolga, Rha, one of the greatest Rivers, not on∣ly of Russia. but of Europe: called by the Tartars, Edel; by the Armenians, Thamar. It ariseth in the Province of Resckow, towards the Borders of Lithu∣ania near the Lake of Wronow: and falls first into the Lake of Wolgo. Then flowing East it watereth Tweer, Gorodna, Jerislow, and Novogorod Nisi. (where it receives the Occa, a vast River, from Mos∣cow:) so passing North to Wasiligorod and Casan, it turns East to Samara, and South to Soratof. A lit∣tle above the ruins of Zaresgorod, it detaches a small River to the North, and beneath it 7 more; which all fall into the first. So passing to Astrachan, be∣neath that City it falls with four Mouths into the Caspian Sea. The learned Olearius has given an ex∣act Map of this River, from the entrance of the Occa to its fall into the Caspian Sea. Wolgast, Volgasta, a City of the Hither Pomera∣nia; which is the Capital of that Province, at the Mouth of the Oder: five Miles from the Shoars of the Baltick Sea, and 14 from Anclam. It is strength∣ened with a noble Castle, which was the Seat of the Dukes of Wolgast. In 1630. this City was taken by the Swedes. In 1675. retaken by the Duke of Bran∣denburgh: and in 1679. restored to the Swedes by Treaty. Wolkowiska, Volkoviska, a City of Poland, in the Palatinate of Novogrod; near the River Ross in Lithuania: 45 Miles from Bielsko to the North-East, and 55 from Novogrod to the West. Woller, a Market Town in the County of Nor∣thumberland, in Glendale ward, on the side of a Hill; near the River Till, falling Northward into the Tweede. Wolmer, Volmaria, a small City in Livonia in Litland, upon the River Teyder: 9 German Miles from Felin to the South, and 15 from Riga to the South-East. Near this Wolmer, the King of Denmark gave the Livonians a great Defeat in 1218. Wolodimer, Velodomiria, a City of Moscovy, which is the Capital of a Dukedom of the same Name: upon the River Clesma: between Moscow to the South-West, and Novogrod Nisi to the North-East, forty five German Miles from either. Anciently the Capital of Black Russia, and the Seat of the Dukes of Russia. Wologda, a great strong City, which is the Capi∣tal of a Dukedom of the same Name, upon the Ri∣ver Dwina: ninety Miles from Jerislow to the North, and fifty from Novogrod Nisi to the North West. Wolverhampton, a Market Town in Stafford∣shire, in the Hundred of Seisdon, upon a Hill: en∣riched formerly with an Abbey. Its Gollegiate Church is annexed to the Deanry of VVindsor. Wolwich, or Woolwich, a Market Town in the County of Kent, in Sutton Lath, upon the Thames: where it hath a Dock for the Royal Navy of En∣gland. Womie. See Medniky. Woodbridge, a Market Town in the County of Suffolk, in the Hundred of Looes: upon the River
Deben, and the side of a Sandy Hill. Provided with four or five Docks for building of Ships. It is a large and well frequented Town: hath a fair Church with Monuments in it; and many Ships of Burthen belong∣ing to its Inhabitants. The Deben twelve Miles be∣low it falls into the Sea. Woodstock, a Market Town and Corporation in Oxfordshire, in the Hundred of Wotton: represen∣ted in Parliament by two Burgesses. It stands plea∣santly upon an Ascent, near a small River, and a large Park enclosed with a VVall. The ancient Royal House, called VVoodstock Bower, built by King Hen∣ry I. Enlarged by Henry II. Honoured with the Birth of Edward the Black Prince, and famous for the Death of the fair Rosamond (admired by Hen∣ry II.) in the Labyrinth adjoining, stood in this Park till its destruction in the long Civil Wars. Worcestershire, Vigornia, is bounded on the North by Staffordshire: on the East by Warwickshire and Oxfordshire; on the South by Gloucestershire; and on the West by Herefordshire and Shropshire. A rich and populous County in the form of a Trian∣gle, extending from North to South 32 Miles, from North to West 28, in Circumference 220: inclosing 152 Parishes, and 11 Market Towns. The Air is ve∣ry gentle and temperate, the Soil fruitful, and equal in goodness to the best in England. Watered by the Severne, Stoure, Salwarpe, Arrow, Feck, and Avon: which all meet in one noble Southern Point of this County at Tewksbury. Here are many excellent Salt-Pits in this County. The most antient Inhabitants were the Cornavii, subdued by the Romans in the Reign of Claudius Cesar. After it became a part of the Mercian Kingdom. Worcester. Branonium, Vigornia, Brannogenium, Brangoniae, the Capital City of this County: called by the Welsh, Caer Vrangon; by Ninius, Caer Guor∣con. It is seated on the Eastern Bank of the Severn, (over which it hath a fair Stone Bridge with a Tower;) and from it was walled in the form of a Triangle, and thought to have been built by the Romans a∣gainst the Silures. In 1041. it was burnt down by Hardy Canute King of Denmark. In 1113. burnt the second time by accident. The Cathedral Church was begun by Sexwolfe, in 680. In which Prince Arthur (the eldest Son of Henry VII.) lies buried in a plain black jet Tomb; and King John in a white one. This Town suffered much for its Loyalty to Charles I. and Charles II. Especially in 1651: when after the fatal Battel under her Wall▪ Sept. 3. she fell into the Hands of the enraged Tyrant, Oliver Crom∣well. Long. 18. 10. Lat. 52. 32. Boselius was set∣led as a Bishop here by Etheldred, King of the Mer∣cians, in 679. The first Earl of Worcester, was Ʋrsus de Abot: Created by William the Conqueror in 1087. The second VValeran de Beaumont, in 1144. The third Thomas Percy, Lord Admiral, in 1397. The fourth Richard Beauchamp, in 1420. The fifth John Tiptoft, Lord Treasurer, and Lord Constable, in 1449. Succeeded by Edward his Son, in 1477. who died in 1485. The seventh Charles Somerset, Lord Herbert, (Natural Son of Henry Beau∣fort the eighth Duke of Somerset, who was be∣headed under King Edward IV.) Created Earl by Hen∣ry VII. in 1414. in which Family it now is. Henry the 7th in this Line, for his great Virtue and Loyalty, by Charles II. was created Duke of Beaufort, in 1682. Au∣gustine the Monk celebrated a Council in this City, as we learn from Bede. Worksop, a Market Town in Nottinghamshire, in the Hundred of Bassetlaw, and the Forest of Sherwood. Noted for excellent Liquorish. Worm, Warmus, a River in the Dukedom of Lim∣burg. Worms, Worbacia, Borbetomagus, Borbitoma∣gus Vangionum, a City in Germany, within the Bounds of the Lower Palatinate: which is a Free and Im∣perial City, but not populous. It stands upon the VVestern Bank of the Rhine: seven German Miles above Mentz, and six beneath Spiers. An ancient Roman City, called Bormetomagus Vangionum. It is supposed to have been a Colony of Ments, after it became subject to the Romans: ruined by Attila, King of the Huns, and rebuilt by Clovis King of France. It was in the beginning of Christianity an Archbishops See: but in 729. Pepin King of France, took away its Metropolitan; and made it only a Bi∣shops See, under the Archbishop of Ments. Henry II, Emperour of Germany, forced Otho, (Son of Con∣rad, the Duke of this Country) to retire to Brussels: so it became a Free City. Frederick II. Charles IV. Maximilian I. and Ferdinand I. in their times added to its Privileges. There was a Council held here in 1078. in which Gregory VII. Pope was deposed for Adultery and Necromancy, by the Partizans his Enemies of the Emperour Henry IV. A Famous Diet also in 1521. in which Luther defended his Doctrine before the States of the Empire. Long. 30. 03. Lat. 49. 33. This City is still by the Italians called Bormio. The French demolished it in 1689. Worotin, Vorotinum, a City of Moscovy: the Capi∣tal of a Dukedom of the same Name. It stands up∣on the Occa in the Borders of Lithuania: sixty six Miles from Moscou, to the South. Wotton-Basset, a Market Town in Wiltshire, in the Hundred of Kingsbridge: so called for distincti∣on from Wotton-Ʋnder-Edge in Gloucester-shire; The Capital of its Hundred. Wreak, a River in Leicestershire; Melton-Mow∣bray stands upon it. Wrexham, a Market Town in Denbighshire, in the Hundred of Bromfield. Wrotham, a Market Town in the County of Kent, in Aylesford Lath. Wucziden, Viminiacium, Viminacium, a Town in the Province of Servia upon the Danube fifteen Miles from Belgrade to the East. Wutingen, a Town in the Lower Circle of the Rhine in Germany, under the Elector of Cologne. At which the Duke of Brabant, and the People of Cologne, formerly fought a famous Battel. Wurtzburgh, Herbipolis, the Capital City of Fran∣conia, in Germany: and a Bishops See under the Archbishop of Ments, since the year 791; when Bo∣nifacius Archbishop of Ments advanced it to that Dig∣nity. It stands upon the Mayne, on the North Bank; and has a strong Castle on the other side of the River, called Marienburgh. Also a small University, founded together with a large Hospital by one of its Bishops who died in 1617. The Capital of a great Territory and Diocese, belonging to its Bishop; who is a rich and potent Prelate, and a Duke of Fran∣conia, since the times of Charles the Great: in to∣ken whereof his Grand Mareschal always assists with a Sword of State at his Master's Mass. His Diocese ex∣tending from North to South fifteen German Miles: and besides this City containing, Ochsenfurt, Gemund and Koningshoven. This City is fifteen Miles from Francfort and nineteen from Mentz to the East. The Italians call it Herbipoli. It is built in a fruitful Plain; incompassed with Hills, filled with Vineyards, pleasant Gardens, and flowry Meadows. It has a Stone Bridge over the River. The Territory was granted to this See by Charles the Great. Long. 31. 50. Lat. 49. 44. Wurzen, a Town in the Ʋpper Saxony, in Ger∣many; in the Province of Misnia, upon the River Muldaw: two miles from Leipsick to the East. Un∣der
the Bishop of Meissen; but now in the hands of the Elector of Saxony, as Administrator of that Bi∣shoprick. It belonged heretofore to the Counts of its own Name. Wye, Vaga, a River in South Wales; which falls into the Severn at Chepstow in Monmouthshire. §. Also a Market Town in the County of Kent in Scray Lath. X A. XA, the same with Geichon. Xacca. See Sacca. Xagua, a Bay upon the Southern Coast of the Island of Cuba in America: containing above six Leagues in Circuit, with a small Island in the middle, which affords excellent Water. It is entered by a deep Canal; which is made naturally safe by Rocks on each side, about a Cannon shot in length, and narrow. The French call it le Grand Port; as being one of the best and most commodious, in America. Xalisco, Xalisca, a Province of New Spain in America: the same with that the Spaniards call New Galicia. Xalon, Salo, a River of Spain, which ariseth in old Castile: and watering Medina celi, entreth Arra∣gon: in which Kingdom it takes in the Maungles, Xi∣loa, Deca and Hyvela; and watering Huerta, Ca∣lataiud, Riela and Placenza, falls into the Ebro: four Leagues above Sarragoza. Xansi, Xansia, a Province in the North of China, which is the second of that Kingdom. Bounded on the North by that famous Wall, which parts China from Tartary; on the East by Pekim; on the West by Xensi; and on the South by Honan. The Capital of it is Taiyven. It contains five great Cities, one hundred and ninety two small; and five hundred eighty nine thousand six hundred fifty nine Fami∣lies. Xanthi, an Ancient valiant People of Asia; men∣tioned by Herodotus: who being reduced to the last Extremity in a siege by Harpagus, Cyrus's General; fired their Cittadel, with their Wives, Servants, Goods, &c. enclosed; and exposed themselves to present Death (rather than Captivity) upon the Swords of the Enemy. Xanto, Xanthus, the same with Scamandro. Xantoigne. See Saintonge. Xantum, Xantonia, Xantung, a Province on the North of China. Bounded on the North and East by the Bay of Nanchim, on the West by Pekim, and on the South by Nankim; the Capital of it is Ci∣nan. It contains six great, ninety two small Cities; seven hundred seventy thousand five hundred and fifty five Families; and is one of the most fruitful Provin∣ces in that vast Kingdom. Xaocheu, Xaocheum, a City in the Province of Quantum, in China. Xaoching, Xaochinga, a City in the Province of Chekiam in China, upon the River Chey. Xaoun, Xaoum, a City in the Province of Fokien in China, upon the River Zuyen. The Capital over three other Cities. Xativa, Setebis, Xativa, a small City in the Kingdom of Valentia: called by the French Chativa. Seven Miles from Valentia to the South, and two be∣yond the Xucar to the same Quarter. Xauxa, a vast River in Peru, in America; cal∣led also el Rio Maragnon; it ariseth out of the Lake Chincacocha; one hundred and twenty Miles from Lima to the North. And falls into the River of A∣mazons. Xecien, Xecienum, a City in the Province of Quei∣chieu in China. Xeuil, Singilis, a River of Spain; which ariseth in the Kingdom of Granada; and watering Loxa, en∣tereth Andalusia; falls into the Quadalquiver, be∣neath Cordova, eight Leagues to the West. Xenfi, Xensia, a Province in the North of China. Bounded on the North by Tartary, the Chinian Wall, and the River Croceus; on the East by Xansi, on the South by Suchen, and on the West by the Kingdom of Thibet. The Capital of it is Sigan. It contains eight great and one hundred and seven small Cities▪ nine∣teen Castles, and three hundred thirty one thousand and fifty one Families. Xeres de la Frontera, Asta Reg, Asia, Cea∣reana, Xera, a City in the Kingdom of Andla, in Spain, of great Circuit: planted in a fruitful Country, yet not much peopled. Near this City was the last Battel fought between Roderick (the last Go∣thish King of Spain) and the Moors, November 11, in the year 71; the loss of it put the Infidels in pos∣session of Spain. Which they kept till the year 1462, when they were finally subdued. It stands upon a small River, four Miles from the Quadalquir to the East, something less from the Bay of Cadiz North, and about seven from the City of Cadi▪ Xeres de Guadiana, a small City in the Kingdom of Andalusia, upon the Guadiana; seven Miles from its Mouth North. Xeres de Bedaiox, or Los Cavalleros, a small City in the Kingdom of Leon in Extremadura. It lies seven Miles from Badajox to the South, twelve from Marida to the South-West, and twenty from Sevil to the North-VVest. There is also a Town in New Spain of this Name. Xerte, Xerta, a River in the Kingdom of Leon, in the Province of Extremadura; which watereth Placentia, then falls into the River Alagon, which falls into the Tajo above Alcantara. This River is not expressed in the later Maps. Xicli, Motichanus, a River▪ of Sicily, which falls into the Sea on the South side of that Island; near a Town of that Name, in Valle di Noto. Xicoco, an Island of Japan; represented to con∣tain four Kingdoms. Xilaon, a small River of Algarve in Spain; which falls into the Atlantick Ocean, at Tavira, a City of that Province. Xiloca, Bilbilis, a River of Spain, in the Kingdom of Arragon; which watereth Daroca, and then falls into the Xalon against Calataiud. Ximo, one of the three principal Islands of Japan; represented to contain nine Kingdoms. Nangazachi, A∣rima and Bungo are some of the considerable Cities in it. Xincheu, Xincheum, a City of the Province of Huquam, in the Kingdom of China. Xiria, Pholoe, a Mountain of Arcadia, in the Morea Xca, or Xaoa, a Kingdom in Aethiopia, near the Fountains of the Nile towards Zanguebar; part of which is under the Abissines, and the rest ravished from them by the Gala's, a barbarous Neighbour Nation. Xucar, Sucro, a River of Spain, which springs out of the same Mountain with the Tajo, in the Borders of Arragon; and running South watereth Cuenca, Alar∣con; and receiving the Gabriel, Algarra and Suls, falls into the Mediterranean Sea, in the Kingdom of Valentia; over against Yvia, a small Island. Xuicheu, a City in the Province of Quansi, in China. Xuncking, a City in the Province of Suchuen, in China. Xunte, or Xuntien, Xunta, a City in the Province of Pekim in China.
Y A YAcohdal, a Royal House of Pleasure belonging to the Kings of Sweden, one League and a half from Stockholm, in the Province of Ʋpland. Yamato, a small Province in Japan. Yamaxiro, Yamaium, a Kingdom in Japan, to∣wards the Bay of Noaco. The Capital of which is Meaco, a vast City. Yancheu, Yancheum, a City in the Province of Nankim in China. Yarmouth, Gariannonum, a great, rich, and a ve∣ry populous Sea-Port Town in the County of Nor∣folk; on the Borders of Suffolk, at the Mouth of the River Yare; from which it hath its Name. This Ri∣ver riseth in Norfolk near Hingham; and running East, watereth Norwich; a little above which, it takes in the Cringle; and at it the Winder; becoming na∣vigable by these accessions, it hasteth by Bucknam-Ferry to Burg, where it takes in the Waveny, (ano∣ther navigable River) from Beccles; a little above Yarmouth, the Thyrn; all which Rivers form here a convenient Harbour on the German Ocean. This was a Roman Town. Cerdick the first King of the West Saxons, landed first in this place, about the year 507. And not fir ding it worth his while to settle, went to Sea again, and founded the VVest Saxon Kingdom. Between this and the Conquerours times, this Town was rebuilt by the Saxons. In Edward the Confessor's times, it had seventy Burgesses; about 1340. the Inhabitants walled it. Henry II. gave it the first Charter. After this, they had a VVar with the Town of Lowestoft: between which two, there was a quarrel which has lasted to our times. In the year 1652. there being a VVar with the Hollanders and the Merchants of London oppressing them in the Her∣ring Trade, they began to send Ships to Legorne in Italy, and by degrees inlarged their Trade to all parts; so that it became one of the best traded Towns on the East of England: and the Key of this Coast. But the two following Dutch VVars fell heavy on them to their great loss. In the year 1684. Charles II. made this a Mayor Town not long before his death. It has but one Church, (though a very large one) founded by Herbert the first Bishop of Norwich, in the Reign of VVilliam Rufus. Charles II. advanced the Honour of this place; when in the year 1673. he created William Paston, Viscount Yarmouth; and in the year 1679. Earl of Yarmouth: whose Son now enjoys that Title. The Corporation returns two Parliament Men. § There is another Yarmouth, upon the North VVest Coast of the Islè of VVight; in the Hundred of VV. Medine: well built, with Free Stone: for∣tified with a Castle, and VVorks. The second Town of Note, next to Newport, in that Island. Yarum, a Market Town in the North Riding of Yorkshire, in the Hundred of Langbarg; upon the River Tees, here covered with a fair Stone Bridge. Yaxley, a Market Town in Huntingdonshire, in the Hundred of Normancross. Yencheu, a City in the Province of Xanton in China. Yenne, Etanna, a Town of France; upon the Rosne. Yeovil, a Market Town in Semersetshire, in the Hundred of Stone, upon a River of its own name. Yer, or Jerre, Edera, a small River of France: which falls into the Seyne in la Brie: Five Miles a∣bove Paris to the East. Yesd, Yesda, a great City in the Province of Ai∣rach, in the Kingdom of Persia; one hundred and thirty Miles from Hispahan to the East. Yglesias. See Villa de Chiesa. Ygnos, the same with Eno. Yla. See Ila. Yocheu, a City in the Province of Huquam in China. Yonne, Icauna, Jauna, Junna, a River of France; which ariseth in the Dukedom of Burgundy near Au∣tun, from the Mountains de Morvant: and pas∣sing by Clamecy in Nivernois, receives the Cure. So passeth to Auxerre, where it is first Navigable. Then admitting the Serine and the Armancione, it falls be∣low Sens into the Seyne: Seventeen Leagues above Paris, and seven above Melun to the East. York, Eboracum, Eburacum, Brigantium, the Capital City of Yorkshire; and an Archbishops See; in the North Riding. Called by the British Caer Effroc, by Ninius Caer Ebrauc, by the English York. Seated upon the River Ver or Ʋre; which is since by the Saxons called Ouse, from Ouseburne, a small River that falls into it. It is in Honour, Wealth, and Great∣ness the second City of England: and the far great∣est not only in that Shire, but in all the North. Hav∣ing thirty Parish Churches, besides the Cathedral; and governed by a Lord Mayor, like London. A plea∣sant, well built, strong, and beautiful City: and the most ancient Archbishops See in this Island. The Ʋre or Ouse, having with a gentle stream entered it from the North-West, divides it into two unequal parts; united by a Stone-Bridge. The West part (tho much less peopled) is incompassed with a sair Wall; the other which is greater, more populous and close built, is fortified also with strong Walls with Turrets upon them, and a muddy Dike. Herein William the Conqueror built a strong Castle, now ruined by time: on the North-East side of this part stands the Cathedral Church dedicated to S. Peter; which is a stately and a venerable Fabrick. This City was built by the Ro∣mans, about the times of Hadrian the Emperour; and had the honour of a Roman Colony bestowed on it in the Reign of Severus, who died in his Palace here, in the year of Christ 210. In the year 306, Fla∣vius Valerius Constantius, Surnamed Clorus, (the Virtuous Father of Constantine the Great) ended his life in this City. Constantine his Son, took upon him here the Government of his Fathers share of the Em∣pire; who became afterwards the first Christian Em∣perour, the deliverer of the Church, and the Estab∣lisher and Exalter of the Cross. In the times that fol∣lowed, (though she had the Honour to be an Archbi∣shops See; and Eborius Bishop of this City in the year 313. subscribed to the Council of Arles, before Restitutus Bishop of London; yet) the Barbarous Na∣tions in the next Century breaking in upon the Ro∣man Empire; this City suffered from the Picts and Saxons all the miseries of VVar. So that about the year 627. when Paulinus was to Baptize Edwin King of Northumberland, they were forced to build a little Oratory of VVood for that purpose; all the ancient Churches being entirely ruined. Hereupon that Prince began the building of the present Cathedral, which was finished by his Successor Oswald. From this time forward, this Church and City began to revive and flourish again. The Archbishops had under them not only all the North of England, but all the Kingdom of Scotland, till 1471 (or as others, 74) In 740,
Egbert, Archbishop of York, opened here a noble Li∣brary; which a contemporary Historian calls the Ca∣binet of all liberal Arts: from whence Alcuinus the Preceptor of Charles the Great, and Founder of the University of Paris, borrowed those Lights which have since glittered there. About 867, the Danes had so weakened this City the second time, that Os∣bright and Ella, Kings of Northumberland, brake easily through its VValls: and fought the Danes in the City; where both these valiant Princes were slain, and the Danes remained Masters of it. It was recovered again out of the Hands of the Danes, by King Athel∣stane in 928: and was a City of sixteen hundred and twenty eight Mansions, in the Reigns of Edward the the Confessor, and William the Conqueror. In 1069, (the fourth year of the Conqueror's Reign) Sweno the Dane, and Edgar Atheling the lawful Prince of Eng∣land, with the Scots, attacking this place; the Nor∣mans siring the Suburbs, the City took fire too: and the Enemy entring at the same time, Fire and Sword almost destroyed it. Those few Citizens which esca∣ped were made a Sacrifice to the Jealousie of William the Conqueror. In the Reign of King Stephen, Eg∣berts Library, the Cathedral, and a great part of the City was burnt by a casual Fire. Nor was the Ca∣thedral rebuilt before the Reign of Edward I. At which time the Citizens also rebuilt the Walls of the City. Richard II. made it a County incorporate by it self: Annexing a small Territory to it on the West side, in which the Archbishops of York enjoy the Rights of Palatines. Richard III. began the Repair of the Castle, which ended with his short Reign. Henry VIII. erected here a Court of Chancery for the North; not much unlike the Parliaments of France: which lasted till the War in 1640, put a period to it. Charles I. retired hither in 1641: when the Tumults of London forced him from thence. This City stood firmly to him, and had certainly restored him to his rightful Do∣minion and Authority, had not the Scots broke their Faith, and entred England the second time in 1644: who joyning with Manchester and Fairfax, besieged this City with three Armies. Prince Rupert came up and relieved it July 31. But the Kings Forces being defeated at Marstonmoor soon after, July 16. this Loyal City was delivered up to the Parliament upon Honorable Terms: and ill kept by the prosperous Re∣bels. Long. 22 25. Lat. 54. 10. Cambden. Yorkshire, Eboracensis Comitatus, the far greatest County of England. Divided for Civil Affairs into three Ridings, or smaller Counties. Bounded on the North by the Bishoprick of Durham, cut off by the River Tees; on the West by Lancashire and West∣moreland; on the South by Cheshire, Darbyshire, Nottingham, and Lincolnshire, cut off by the Hum∣ber: On the whole Eastern side it is beaten by the German Sea. In length from North to South near seventy Miles, in breadth eighty, in compass three hundred and eight; inclosing five hundred and sixty three Parishes, and forty nine Market Towns; with many Chappels of Ease, as large and populous as Parishes. The East-riding is comprehended betwixt the River Derwent and the Sea; being the least. The North-riding extends as far as Westmorland; and the West-riding (which is the largest) is bounded by the two other Ridings to the North; the Counties of Derby and Nottingham, with Cheshire to the South; Lincolnshire to the East, and Lancashire to the West. The Air is generally temperate, the Earth fruitful: Affords besides Corn and Grass, excellent Mines of Coal and Lead, and Quarries of Stone. Be∣side the Tees and Humber, (its mentioned boundaries), and the Dun, which separates a part of it from Lin∣colnshire: Her is the Swale, Youre, Nyd, Warfe, Are, Calder, Derwent, all falling into the Ouse at or below York; and the Hull, falling into the Humber at Hull. The ancient Inhabitants of it were the Brigan∣tes; who were conquered by the Romans with great difficulty, about the year 57. in the Reign of Nero. About the year 547. Ina Conquered this County; and began the Kingdom of Northumberland, of which this was a part. After the Conquest, the first and only Earl of York (which we find upon Record) is Otho of Bavaria, in 1190. In 1385. Edmund of Langley, (fifth Son of Edward III. Earl of Cambridge) was Created Duke of York. In 1401. Edward his Son. In 1415. Richard his Grandchild succeeded in this Du∣chy. In 1474. Richard of Shrewsbury, second Son of Edward IV. had this Title. In 1495. Henry (se∣cond Son of Henry VII. who was after King of Eng∣land) had it. In 1604. Charles second Son of King James I. In 1643. James, second Son of Charles I. was Created Duke of York So that the three last Dukes of York, have been afterwards Kings of En∣gland. Youre, a River in Yorkshire, falling into the Ouse at York. Rippon and Boroughbridge stand upon it. Yperen, or Ypres, Hyprae, a City in the Earldom of Flanders; which is a Bishops See, under the Arch∣bishop of Mechlin, by the Institution of P. Paul IV. It is very strong, and has a new Cittadel. Taken by the French, March 26. in 1678, and still in their Hands. This City stands in a fruitful Plain, upon a River of the same Name; six Leagues from Newport to the South, five from Courtray towards Calais, and thirteen from Gand or Gaunt. Yssel, Isala, Aliso, Isla, Fossa Drusiana, a River in the Low Countries, believed to be a Branch of the Rhine; but indeed a Cut made by Drusius a Ro∣man Prince and General under Augustus the Empe∣ror. It parts from the North Branch of the Rhine above Arnham; and bearing North, watereth Does∣burg, Zutphen, Deventer, Zwol, Campen; and par∣ting the Velewe from Over-Yssel, falls into the Zuyder Zee. It took this Name from a smaller River, called Alt-Yssel, the Old Yssel: which arising near Heyden in Cleve, watereth Schermbeeck▪ Ringeberg, Weert, Ysselburg, Aenholt (taking in the Aa,) Burg, Dote∣kom; and at Doesburg, falls into this Cut or Branch of the Rhine. Yvica. See Ivica. Yvoix, a small but strong Town in the Dukedom of Luxemburgh, upon the River Chiers: four Leagues from Montmedi to the West, twelve from Luxem∣burgh, and two from Sedan to the East. Taken and dismantled by the French in 1552. Refortified by the Spaniards, and retaken by the French; recovered by the Spaniards in 1637. And I believe returned under the French again. Yupi, a Kingdom in the Asiatick Tartary: East of the Kingdom of Niuche. Z A. ZAara, or Saara, a vast Desert in Africa; extend∣ing from East to West; between Biledulgeri∣da to the North, Nigritia to the South, Nubia to the East, and the Atlantick Ocean to the West. The Seat of the ancient Getuli and Garamantes. Modern Geo∣graphers have discovered some Towns, Lakes and Ri∣ver
there, which give names to the respective desarts about them. Berdoa and Zuenziga are of this number. But generally Sands, Scorpions, and Monsters; Lions, Tigers, and Ostriches, take up the Habitations of these Desarts. Mar de Zabacche, the same with Limen or the Palus Moeotis. Zaberen Elsas, Zabera, Tabernae, a City of the Lower Alsatia, upon the River Sorr; four German Miles from Strasburg to the West: Called by the French, Saverne. The usual Residence of the Bishop of Strasburg, whilst that City was in the Hands of the Protestants. Zabes, a City of Transylvania, upon the River Merish; six Miles from Weissemburg to the South, and twenty nine from Hermstadt to the West. Called by the Natives Zas Zebes also, and by the Germans Millembach. Some suppose it to be the Zeugma of the Ancients. Zacatecas, or los Zacatecas, a Province in New Spain; betwixt New, Biscay, and New Galicia, in South America. Zaconia, Laconia, a Province in the Mo∣rea. Zacynthus. See Zante. Zadaon, Calipus, a considerable River in Portu∣gal, called also Zadan. It ariseth in the Borders of Algarve; and running North, watereth Alvalada, Garcia de Minjuno, and Alcaser; and at Setuval, six Leagues South of the Tajo, falls into the Atlantick Ocean. Zaflan, a Lake in the Ʋpper Aethiopia, with a Town of the same name; under the Abyssines former∣ly: but ravished from them by the Galla's or Gala's, a neighbour Nation. Zagathai, Zagataia, a considerable Country be∣tween the Kingdoms of Thibet to the East, Persia to the South, and the Caspian Sea to the West; in Tar∣tary, in Asia. Called also Ʋsbech. Zagaya, one of the modern names of the Moun∣tain Helicon. Zagrabia, Sisopa, Zagabria, Soroga, Vicus Itali∣cus. A City in Sclavonia, which is a Bishops See, un∣der the Archbishop of Colocza; and the Head of a County of its own Name. A place of great strength and well peopled. It is near the Borders of Croatia; forty five Miles from Vihitz to the North, fifteen from Gradisca to the West, and eleven from Cilley to the South-East; upon the North side of the Drave. This City and County has ever been in the Hands of the Germans, who call it Agram. The Bishops of it have the care of all Sclavonia. Zagrus, the Mountain dividing the ancient Me∣dia from Assyria, in Asia: through which, some pre∣tend that Semiramis pierced a passage into Media, which bore the name anciently of Zagripylae, or the Streights of Zagrus; and the Mountain itself, of Se∣miramis. Zaire, Zairus, a vast and a celebrated River of Africa, in the Ʋpper Aethiopia: which ariseth out of a great Lake of the same name: and flowing West∣ward, watereth the Kingdoms of Cosange, Macoco, Congo, and in part that of Loangi. At last falls into the Atlantick Ocean by a Mouth, twenty eight Miles broad, in five degrees of Southern Latitude. This Ri∣ver is not navigable above eighty Miles upward from its Mouth; by reason of its Cataracts. It has been formerly thought, that the Nile derives its source from the Lake Zaire: But Thevenot, and Jeremy Lobo a Portugueze, who lived twelve years in this Country, have undecelved us with their better accounts. Zalderane, a spacious Plain near the City Tauris, in Persia; towards the Borders of Armenia: beyond the Euphrates: made remarkable by the Battel fought upon it, Aug. 26. 1514. betwixt Ismael K. of Persia and Selim. I. Emperor of the Turks. Zama, an ancient City of Africa, which is the mo∣dern Zamora in the Kingdom of Algiers. Called in an inscription yet extant in it, Colonia Aelia Hadria∣na Augusta Zama Regia. Hannibal received a great defeat from Scipio at this City. Juba King of Mau∣ritania chose it for the Capital of his Kingdom. In the ancient Christian times here, it had the honour of a Bishops See. Pliny mentions an excellent Fountain near it of the same name. Zambeze, a great River of Aethiopia, in Africa; which springeth from a Lake of its own name (but called also Sachat), upon the Borders of the Empires of Monomotapa and Abyssinia: And after the rece∣ption of many Rivers into its bed, divides itself to∣wards its Mouth into four great Branches; inclosing divers large and fruitful Islands: so falls into the Aethio∣pick Ocean, upon the Consines of Sofala and Mosam∣bick. Some confound the Lake, Zambeze, with that of Zaire. Zamora, a City in the Kingdom of Leon, upon the River Douro; which is a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Compostella; so made by P. Calixtus II. in the Reign of Alphonsus VI. in 1119. Nine Leagues from Miranda to the East, and fourteen from Vali∣dolid to the West. See also Zama. Zamoski, Zamoscium, a City in Red Russia; in the Kingdom of Poland; upon a fine Plain, near the River Weper: Built by a Grand Chancellour of Poland, of the name of Zamoski; fourteen Polish Miles from Luxemburgh to the North. It is a place of great strength, and baffled an Attempt of the Cossacks upon it, in 1651. Zanaga. See Senga. Zancle, an ancient City of the Island of Sicily: whose destruction by Anaxilaus, a King of the Rhe∣genses in Italy, makes it mentioned in History and Antiquity. Ovid expresses the whole Island by its name, in saying; ——Zancle quoque juncta fuisse Dicitur Italiae. Some suppose Messina now stands in the place of it. Zanfara, a City and Kingdom of Nigritia in A∣frica. Zanguebar, Zanguebaria, a great Region in the Lower Aethiopia, in Africa. It has this Name from the Arabians, over against whose Country it lies: (signifying Negroes or Blacks:) upon the Aethiopian Ocean, on the Eastern Shoar of Africa. It extends from North to South; from five degrees of Northern, to eighteen degrees of Southern Latitude: but of small breadth. The Kingdoms of Mombaza, Melin∣da, Mosambick, Lamo, Queilloa, and many others of less note are contained in it: full of Forests and Marshes, which create a pestilent Air, and an unfruitful Soil. Zanhaga, a Region and Desert upon the Atlan∣tick Ocean in Africa. North of the Kingdom of Tombutum, or Tombotu, in Lybia; under the Tropick of Cancer: South of Marocco. Zante, Zacynthus, a great Island in the Ionian Sea, under the States of Venice. Twenty four Miles long, sixteen broad, and sixty in circuit. It lies twelve Miles from Cefalonia to the South, and the same from the Morea to the West. It contains forty eight Ca∣stles, fifty▪ Villages, and one City of the same Name with the Island: which is a Bishops See under the Archbishop of Corfu: has an excellent Harbor on the
East side, defended by a strong Castle upon an high Hill, and a Garrison of Roman Catholicks; but the Inhabitants are for the most part of the Greek Church. Mr. Wheeler saith, it is not above thirty Miles in cir∣cuit; but one of the most fruitful and pleasant places he ever saw. Lat 36. 30. It produces Wine, Corn, and Oyl with great abundance: Robert Guichard the Valiant Norman, Duke of Puglia, dyed here in his Voyage to the Holy Land. The chief Commodity is the Curran-Trade, which bears the Charge of the Venetian Fleet or Armada. The City, and indeed the whole Island is very populous; subject to Earth∣quakes, which forceth them to build low. The Jews have three Synagogues; the Dominicans and other Re∣ligious, three Monasteries: the Episcopal See of Cepha∣lonia and Zante is the same, (the two Islands making but one Diocese:) the City Zante may contain twen∣ty or twenty five thousand Inhabitants: There is only one River in the Island, whose Communication with the Sea makes it Salt; and one plentiful spring of sweet water: But the great number of its Jacynths gives occasion to some to derive its Name from them. See Mr. Wheeler, pag. 39. Zanzibar, an Island of the Aethiopick Ocean, in Africa. Zaquismael, Susiana, a Province of Asia. Zara, Jadera, an ancient Roman City and Port in Dalmatia; called by the Sclavonians, Zadar. It is an Archbishops See, upon the Adriatick. One hun∣dred and eighty Miles from Venice to the East, one hundred from Pola, and forty from Sebenico. It be∣longed anciently to the Kingdom of Hungary; and was sold to the Venetians, with the little Islands its dependencies, in 1409, by Ladislaus King of Hunga∣ry and Naples, for an hundred thousand Duckats. Be∣sides the strength of its situation, (being encompassed with the Sea and only communicating with the Con∣tinent by a Draw-Bridge, defended by six Bastions;) the Venetians have bestowed much in artificial Forti∣fications. Long. 39. 23. Lat. 44. 43. Zarnata, a Town in the Province of Tzaconia in the Morea: upon an agreeable eminence, in a Figure almost Circular: rendered both by art and nature, a place of great consideration. The Turkish Garrison consisted of six hundred Men, when it Capitulated with General Morosini, in 1685. But the Aga, who commanded, in fear of his head passed over to the Ve∣netian Territories. Zarmisogethusa, or Zarmis, the Capital City of the ancient Kingdom of Dacia: in the Reign of Decebalus. Trajan caused it to be called, after his Conquest of Dacia, Ʋlpia Trajana: There is an an∣cient Inscription, which writes; Colonia Ʋlpia Tra∣jana Augusia Dacia Zarmis: wherein both its ancient names are preserved. Zatmar, Zatmarium, a strong City amongst the Mountains in the Ʋpper Hungary, upon the River Sa∣mos, near the Borders of Transylvania; ten German Miles from Great Waradin to the North, and fourteen from Tockay to the East. This is the Capital of a County of the same name; and has ever been in the Hands of the Emperor as King of Hungary: only in 1680. Teckley took it. Zator, Zatoria, a Town in the Palatinate of Cra∣cow, in Poland; upon the Vistula, where the Skawda falls into it: which is the Capital of a Dukedom. Six Polish Miles from Cracow to the West, in the Borders of Silesia. Zayolha, or Zavolha, a Hord of Tartars in the desert Tartary; towards the Obb and the North Sea. Zea. This Island, of the Archipelago, is Moun∣tainous on the North and South Coasts: on the East, it has a secure and large Harbour. In the midst of it, a City of its own name, which is a Bishops See of the Greek Church: the Bishop divides his Residence betwixt this Island and Thermia. It produces good Wine, and trades much in Silk. Anciently adorned with four Cities, and thence called Tetrapolis. See Cea. Zeb, Zebum, Zebes, a Town and Region in Bi∣ledulgerid, in Africa. Zecaro, a River of Portugal. Zeelandt. See Seelandt. Zeila, a City in the Kingdom of Adel in Africa, at the Mouth of the Red Sea: seated upon the Outlet of a River of the same Name: which affords it the con∣venience of a good Harbor. It stands over against Aden. Long. 75. 00. Lat. 10. 35. Zeilan, Ophir, Taprobana, a great Island in the East-Indies, to the East of the Cape of Malabar; cal∣led also Ceylan and Ceylam by the Spaniards, by the Inhabitants Tenarisin. It is of an Oval Form; six hundred and fifty Miles in circuit: contains nine King∣doms. The principal of which is the Kingdom of Candy, seated in the middle of the Island. This place produceth Spice in great abundance, which has drawn the Dutch to settle here. They have possessed them∣selves of Columbo and Negombo, which belonged be∣fore to the Portuguese. There is lately published an exact Account of this Island in English, by a Person who lived there many years. Zeitz, Zitia, a small City in Misnia, in the Ʋpper Saxony, upon the River Elster: four Ger∣man Miles from Altenburg, and five from Leyp∣sick. Heretofore a Bishops See; now removed to Naumburg; under the Bishop of which Diocese it is. Zela, or Ziela, an ancient City of Cappadocia, in the Lesser Asia: famous in the Wars of Caesar, for his sudden Victory here over Pharnacs K. of Pontus, Son of Mithridates the Great. It became since Christianity a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Amasia; and now said to retain its name, tho not its honour, un∣der the Turks. The Veni, Vidi, Vici of Caesar, in his Letter to the Senate, understands the Victory here. Zelandia, Zelandt, is a small Province of the Ʋ∣nited Netherlands; heretofore an Earldom. It con∣sists of five Islands at the Mouth of the Schelde; which are Walcheren, Zud Bevelandt, Nort Beve∣landt, Schowen, and Duvelandt. These Islands have been much greater than now: being in part drowned by several great Inundations; especially in 1304, and 1509. They lie between Holland to the North, Bra∣bant to the East, Flanders to the South, and the German Sea to the West. The Capital of this State is Middleburgh. The rest are Flushing, Ziriczee, Goes, and Tolen. There are about one hundred and two Villages in it. New Zelandt, is a part of the South Continent; discovered by the Hollanders, in 1654: extending from North to South. But whether it be not an Island, is not yet certainly known. Zelbecdibes, the Greater Armenia. Zelia, an ancient City of Troas in Mysia, in Asia the less: it stood near Cyzicus; upon an eminence; surrounded with Plains and Mountains. Zell, Cella, a small City in the Dukedom of Lu∣nenburgh, upon the River Aller: six German Miles from Brunswick, seven from Hildisheim to the North, and five from Newstadt to the East. It is a strong place; and has a Noble Castle, which is the Seat of a Duke. Zell Hammerspach, Cella, a small City in Schwa∣ben, upon the River Nagolt; which is a free Imperial City, under the Protection of the House of Austria; five Miles from Stutgard to the West.
Nova Zembla, a Northern Region first discovered by the Hollanders in 1594. in their search for a passage to the East-Indies by China: separated from Moscovy by those Streights, they then called We gats Streights. In 1596. Aug. 29. they Landed upon the North Coast of it; and were there detained, whilst their Vessels lay engaged in Ice, to June 29. 1597. under continual night from Novemb. 4. to the beginning of February: excessive cold, and in a desart quarter of the Country: where three of their Seamen were devoured by Wild Bears and Wolves. It is an inhabited Country: But whether an Island of the Frozen Sea, or joyned to the Great Tartary Eastward, none have discovered. Zemblin, a Town and County of the Ʋpper Hun∣gary. Zembra, a Lake and River in Monomoapa, in A∣frica. Zemonico, a Fortress in Dalmatia, seven Miles from Zara: lost to the Turks from the Venetians in 1573: but taken and dismantled by the Venetians in 1647. And the Turks in vain attempted to reestablish themselves in it in 1682. Zenne. See Senne. Zenopolis, a City of the ancient Pamphylia, in Ajia Minor: which was a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Seleucia; and mentioned in the first General Council at Constantinople. The Emperour Zeno enlarged, and gave his name to it. Zerbi, Zetta, a small Island on the Coast of Barbary, near the Shoars of the Kingdom of Tri∣poli. Zerynthus, a City and famous Cave in the Island of Samothracia, in the Archipelago, in the ancient times: Lycophron calls the latter, Antrum Canis. And Ovid expresses the whole Island by the City saying Inde levi vento Zerynthia littora nacta, &c. Zeugitana, a Country of the ancient Africa, upon the Coast of the Mediterranean, near Numidia: in∣cluded now in the Kingdom of Algiers. Zeugma, an ancient City of Syria: which became in Christian times a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Hierapolis. Alexander M. built a famous Bridge over the Euphrates here. § Another in the ancient Dacia. Zibit, Saba, Zibitum, a City in the Happy Ara∣bia; the Capital of a Kingdom, and a great City: seated near the Gulph of Arabia; one hundred and eighty Miles from Aden to the West, and two hundred from the Mouth of the Gulph to the same. The Turks not long since took it. But the King of it has since recovered it out of their Hands. There is a River in this Kingdom of the same name. Long. 76.00. Lat. 16.56. Zidem, Ziden, Acila, Ocelis, a Port Town upon the Red Sea, the nearest to Mecca. It stands on the North side of the River Eda or Chaibar: twenty German Miles from Mecca to the South-West. A place of great Antiquity, and anciently had a very good Trade; being the usual Port, as Pliny saith, from whence the Ships went which sailed into the East-Indies. Ziegenhaim, Zigenhaemum, a small City in the Lower Hassia, under the Landtgrave of Hess-Cassel; seven Miles from Cassel to the South, four from Frislar, and six from Fuld. The Capital of a County. Zimbao, a Town and Fortress in Monotapia. Zina, Pamphylia, a Province of the Lesser A∣sia. Zinara, a deserted Island in the Archipelago, be∣twixt Amorgo and Levita; with Charuffa to the West of it: yet showing the ruines of Habitations. Zinganes, Indian Pyrates, in the Empire of the Great Mogul. The Zinhagiens. See Bereberes. Zirfia, the Turkish Name of Servia. Ziriczee, a considerable Town in the Island of Schowen: belonging to the State of Zeeland, in the United Netherlands: Built by the Flemings in 1304. The Spaniards possessed themselves of it in 1575. But were soon expelled again. Zirifdin or Amansifirdin, a City of the Happy A∣rabia: understood to be the Acarman or Carman, by some the Omana, of the ancients. Zitrachan, Albania, a Province of Asia. Zittaw, Zitavia, a City of Germany in the Ʋp∣per Lusatia, upon the River Neiss: in the Borders of Bohemia, under the Elector of Saxony; four Miles above Gorlitz to the South. Built or Fortified by Wenceslaus King of Bohemia, in 155. Ziz, a Chain of Mountains in the Province of Cuzt, in the Kingdom of Fez in Africa, to the South. Rich in Mines, but inhabited by such as make little profit of them. Znaim, or Znoymo, Znoimum, a City of Mora∣via upon the River Teye; in the Borders of Austria; seven German Miles from Brune to the South, and ten from Vienna to the South-West. Taken by the Swedes in 1645; and frequently by others, in the German Wars. Zoaro, Pisidon, a Town in Barbary, upon the Coast of Tripoli; with a convenient Port. Taken in 1552. by the Knights of Malta by surprize. Zocoroph, the Gulph of Arabia. Zocotora, or Socotora, and Socotarg, Diosorias, Dioscoridis Insula, Ogyris, a Town and Island upon the Coast of Zanguebar in Africa. Mountainous, hot, dry, and barren: its principal product is Dates, Aloes, and Frankincense. The People appear to be originally Arabians, by their Customs, Habits, and Language. The only City in it is of the same name with the Island. Zoest, the same with Soest. Zofala, the same with Sofala. Zofingen, a great Town or City in Argow in Swit∣zerland, under the Canton of Bearn: subject anciently to the Counts of Spitzbergh, who had a Cittadel near it; their Arms being still born by this City. But in 1285. it accepted of the protection of the Emperor Rodolph I. and in 1295, was by Siege reduced entirely under the obedience of Albert his Son. In 1396. a Fire totally consumed it. Again being rebuilt, it ob∣tained divers privileges of the Princes of the House of Austria. In 1412. it fell together with all the Coun∣try of Argow, as now, under the Canton of Bearn. And 1528. embraced the Reformation. Zolnoch, Zolnochium, a City of the Ʋpper Hun∣gary; which is the Capital of a County of the same Name; upon the Tibiscus. Forty German Miles from Waradin to the West, and sixty from Buda to the East. Taken by the Turks in 1552. and retaken by the Imperialists in October 1685. Zorandra, the place in the Mountain Taurus, upon the Confines of Armenia and Mesopotamia, in Asia: at which the Ancients supposed the River Tigris to bury it self under ground for some Leagues, and af∣terwards to rise again. But we have no such Modern account of the course of that River. Zorlich, Tzurulum, a City of Thrace, which is a Bishops See; between Constantinople and Hadria∣nople. Zoser, an ancient City and Promontory of Atti∣ca in Greece: betwixt the Piraeus of Athens, and the Island Zea. Much adicted to the VVorship
of the Goddesses Latona and Diana in Pagan times. Zubal, Zubu, or Zebu, one of the Philippine I∣slands: to which the Spaniards gave the name of los Pintados: because the Natives had, at the time of the discovery of it, their Faces painted with divers co∣lours. Zuenziga, a small Kingdom in Africa, in Zaara: on the East of the Kingdom of Zanhaga, and South of that of Morocco: with a City, and Desert, of its name. Zues, the same with Sues. Zug, Tougium, Tugium, a City and Canton in Switzerland; it consists all of Roman Catholicks, and is very small. Bounded on the North by Zurich, on the East and South by Schwitz, and on the West by Lucerne. The City stands one Mile from the Lake of Lucerne to the East, and eighteen from Zurich to the South. A free Imperial City till the year 1352. when it entred the League with the other Cantons. Zurich, Tigurum, the Capital City of a Canton of the same Name in Switzerland; very great and popu∣lous. Divided into two parts by the River Limat, when it leaves the Lake of Zurich. It stands between Schafhouse to the North, and Lucerne to the South, twenty five Miles from each; eleven from the Rhine, and forty five from Soleurre. Made a Free Imperial City by Frederick II. in 1218. and Leagued with the Cantons 1351. So Ancient, as to be mentioned by Caesar in his Commentaries, who subjected it to the Romans. In the year of Christ 300. it was burnt by the Germans, and rebuilt by Dioclefian. In the year 883. Charles the Gross Walled it. It embraced the Re∣formation in 1521. Long. 30. 20. Lat. 46: 58: § The Canton of Zurich is the first of the thirteen in order. Bounded by Bearne and Lucerne to the West, Schaf∣house to the North, Zug and Schwitz on the South, and Appenzel to the East; it consists of none but Pro∣testants. Zuricher Zee, Lacus Tigurinus, a Lake in the Canton of Zurich; twenty five Miles long from East to West, and five broad. Zutphen, Zutphania, a City of Guelderland; be∣longing to the United Provinces, upon the Yisel, where it takes in the Berkel; one German Mile from De∣venter to the South, and from Doesburg to the North. A place of great strength. Taken by the French in 1672. dismantled and deserted by them two years af∣ter. The Dutch took it from the Spaniards, in the year 1586. when Sir Philip Sidney was slain. De Zuyder Zee, a great Bay between Friseland to the East, Guelderland to the South, and Holland to the West. There goes a Creek from it up to Am∣sterdam. Zweybrucken, Bipontium, a City of Germany; called by the French Deuxponts, and by the Germans Zweybucken. It stands upon the River Schwolbe in Wasgow; in the Borders of the Palatinate of the Rhine; ten German Miles from Worms to the West, and a little more from Strasburg to the North; and is the Capital of a Sovereign Dukedom in Alsatia, upon which the King of Sweden has some pretensions. It suffered very much in the last German and French War. Zwickaw, Cygnea, Zuikavia, a small City in Misnia in the Ʋpper Saxony, upon the River Mul∣daw: four German Miles from Altenburg, and ten from Leypsick. In the Province of Voigtlandt, at the foot of the Vandalick Mountains; near the source of the Mayne. It belongs to the Elector of Saxony; and in the VVars of Charles the Great, had divers Encampments about it to its great damage. It was a Free Imperial City, till surprised by Fre∣derick Marquess of Misnia, in 1308. Zwol, Zvolla, a City of Over-yssel, upon the River Aa, not far from the Yssel: which was a Free Imperial City and an Hanse Town, but now exempt. Eight Miles from the Mouth of the Yssel to the South, and eighteen from Deventer to the North. A strong place till the French took it in 1672: and dismantled it in 1674. Zigeth. V. Sigeth. FINIS.
To the Reader. AMong some Faults which have escaped the Press, which the Reader is desired to forgive and correct, as not being many nor considerable, this Oversight of the Printer is too gross not to be minded. P. 5. Col. 2. the two last Lines of the Description of AFRICA are annexed to the account of Afra, viz. And stands divided into Egypt, Barbary, Biledulgerid or Numidia, Zaara or Libya, Nigritia and Aethiopia.
A Table of the Longitudes and Latitudes of many of the most considerable Places. In which the first Meridian is Paris. Published by Philip de la Hire, Regius Professor of the Mathematicks at Paris, in a Book Stiled Tabularum Astronomicarum Pars prima. Printed at Paris in 1687.   Long. Lat.     H. M. S.   D. M.   ABheville 0 2 12 W 50 5 1/2 Agra 5 24 00 E 28 30   Albiga 0 3 12 W 43 44   Alenson 0 9 30 W 48 29   Aleppo 2 46 00 E 36 15   Alexandria 2 9 00 E 30 58   Amiens 0 0 12 W 49 53 46 Amsterdam 0 10 10 E 52 21 1/2 Ancona 0 47 40 E 43 54   Angers 0 12 15 W 47 27   Antibe 0 19 11 E 43 34 12 Antwerp 0 08 30 E 51 10 0 Aix Prov. 0 12 25 E 43 31   Arles 0 8 20 E 43 34   Auxerre 0 4 20 E 47 35   Athens 1 33 0 E 37 40   Arras 0 1 40 E 50 18 25 Avignon 0 9 5 E 43 51 0 Ausburg 0 35 30 E 48 24 0 Autun 0 7 40 W 46 48 0 Bajeux 0 12 10 E 49 16 Barcelone 0 4 00 W 41 26   Basil 0 22 40 E 47 40   Batavia 6 34 27 E 6 15 A Bayonne 0 15 15 W 43 29 35 Beauvais 0 1 12 W 49 24 0 Bengala 6 12 0 E 21 5 0 Bergamo 0 30 35 E 45 43 0 Besanzon 0 16 40 E 47 18   Bourges 0 0 14 E 47 4 38 Blois 0 4 45 W 47 35 0 Bologne 0 3 0 W 50 44 0 Bononia 0 38 0 E 44 30 20 Brandenburg 0 46 0 E 52 16 0 Brunswick 0 37 0 E 52 15 0 Brest 0 27 36 W 48 22 50 Bruxelles 0 8 30 E 50 48 0 Buda 1 11 30 E 47 46 0 Burdeaux 0 11 30 W 44 50 20 Challon 0 11 00 E 46 45 0 Caen 0 11 00 W 49 10 35 Caors 0 54 45 W 44 30 00 Calais 0 2 10 W 50 56 50 Caniboia 6 51 00 E 11 20 00 Cambray 0 4 12 E 50 11 30 Chambery 0 16 15 E 45 39 15 Candia 1 46 0 E 34 40 00 Cape of Good Hope 1 10 0 E 34 15 00 Cape Verde 1 18 0 W 14 43 00 Chartres 0 3 15 W 48 30 00 Cherbury 0 16 0 W 49 38 10 Chaloons 0 9 40 E 48 56 00 Cayonna 3 35 00 W 4 56 20 Cayro Egypt 2 12 00 E 29 50 00 Clermont 0 3 00 E 45 51 15 Cologne 0 20 00 E 50 50 00 Compostella 0 48 00 W 42 58 00 Constance in Normandy 0 15 45 W 49 6 30 Constantino∣ple 1 58 0 E 41 6 00 Copenhagen 0 41 41 E 55 40 35 Cracow 1 12 0 E 50 10 00 Cusco 5 4 0 W 12 25 A. Dantzick 1 7 0 E 54 22 20 Diep 0 4 45 W 49 56 40 Dijon 0 11 20 E 47 20 00 Dublin 0 38 00 W 53 11 00 Dunkerk 0 0 3 E 51 1 30 Eureux 0 4 50 W 49 0 00 Edenburgh 0 20 20 W 55 47 00 Fez 0 33 00 W 33 10 00 Ferrara 0 39 3 E 44 54 15 La Fleche 0 9 52 W 47 41 40 Florence 0 38 30 E 43 41 00 Francfort 0 24 40 E 50 4 00 Gadalupe 4 15 15 W 16 20   Gades 0 38 50 W 36 16   Gand 0 6 0 E 51 1   Geneva 0 17 20 E 46 22   Genoua 0 30 00 E 44 27   Goa 4 46 00 E 15 30   Goesa 0 6 48 E 51 30   Grenoble 0 15 0 E 45 16   Hamburgh 0 33 00 E 53 41   Haver de Grace 0 8 40 W 49 36 00 Heidelburgh 0 27 00 E 49 20   Insula Ferro 1 22 00 W 28 05 0
Kebec 4 49 00 W 47 00 0 Laon 0 5 20 E 49 31 40 Limoges 0 4 45 W 45 45 00 Leige 0 15 00 E 50 40 00 Leisieux 0 8 30 W 49 8 0 Lima 5 33 0 W 12 20 A. Lingones 0 13 0 E 47 45   Lisbone 0 52 0 W 38 40   Lypsick 0 44 0 E 51 19 15 London 0 8 ½ W 51 32 0 Lyons 0 11 ⅓ E 45 45 20 Macao 7 35 0 E 22 13 00 Maestricht 0 14 10 E 50 50   Malaga 6 31 20 E 2 42 6 Le Mans 0 8 50 W 50 3 30 Mantua 0 35 0 E 45 11   Martinica 4 14 45 W 14 44   Marseilles 0 12 30 E 43 19 45 Madrid 0 22 0 W 40 10   Milan 0 29 15 E 46 20   Meaux 0 2 15 E 48 56 ½ Malta 0 51 0 E 35 40   Messina 0 55 45 E 38 21   Metz 0 17 0 E 49 14   Mexico 7 10 0 W 20 10   Moulins 0 4 15 E 46 26 ⅔ Munich 0 38 10 E 48 58   Moscow 2 38 0 E 55 18   Mompellier 0 6 10 E 43 36 40 Modena 0 36 26 E 44 38 50 Namur 0 11 50 E 50 25 0 Nancy 0 18 20 E 48 39   Nantes 0 15 30 W 47 13 0 Narbonne 0 0 0 * 43 15 30 Naples 0 54 0 E 41 5 00 Nevers 0 3 0 E 46 54 0 Nurenburgh 0 40 10 E 49 29 ½ Olinda, Brasil 2 28 0 W 7 48 A. Orleans 0 1 45 W 47 53 56 Ormus 3 58 0 E 27 30   Oxford 0 13 40 W 51 46   Pau 0 10 0 W 43 10   Parma 0 33 50 E 44 44 50 Paris, Obs. 0 0 0 * 48 50   Padua 0 36 4 E 45 31   Pekin 7 42 32 E 40 0 0 Poictiers 0 7 25 W 46 34 30 Prague 0 49 30 E 50 4 30 Raguza 1 5 12 E 42 33 00 Ratisbonne 0 40 8 E 48 59   Rennes 0 17 0 W 48 3 0 Reims 0 7 12 E 49 12 30 Rhodes 2 2 40 E 36 22 0 Rome 0 42 0 E 41 51 0 Roterdam 0 8 40 E 51 55   Roan 0 4 56 W 49 27 30 Rochelle 0 14 25 W 46 10 15 Rodez 0 0 45 W 44 10 0 St. Maloes 0 18 00 W 48 38 20 Saumur 0 10 5 W 47 14 15 Sedan 0 11 20 E 49 46 0 Sens 0 3 40 E 48 4 0 Cape Settee 0 5 30 E 43 23 30 Siam 6 34 15 E 14 10 0 Siracusa 0 52 20 E 37 4 0 Spahan 4 14 0 E 36 14 0 Stockholm 1 5 0 E 59 30 0 Strasburgh 0 23 0 E 48 32   Turin 0 23 40 E 44 0 0 Toledo 0 28 0 W 39 46   Toulon 0 14 22 E 43 6 ⅔ Tolasa 0 6 40 W 43 30   Troyes 0 7 10 E 48 8   Tubingen 0 28 0 E 48 34   Tours 0 6 40 W 47 23   Valence 0 11 25 W 44 53   Vennes 0 19 35 W 47 36   Venice 0 40 40 E 45 33   Vienne 0 11 30 E 45 28 ½ Vienna Aust. 1 0 0 E 48 22   Utrecht 0 11 20 E 52 05   Uraniburg 0 42 10 E 55 54 5 Urbine 0 43 34 E 43 53 0 Warsaw 1 17 00 E 52 14  
AN ADVERTISEMENT Concerning the INDEX. FOR the shortning this Index as much as was possible, I have intirely, 1. Omitted all those Latin Names which are formed from the Vulgar, and differ from them in little or nothing but their Termination. 2. The greatest part of the ancient Latin Names which are now in common use. 3. Most of those Latin Names which have the four first Letters of the Vulgar Names. In all which cases the Reader shall find the Word he seeks in the body of the Book in its proper place. After almost every Name there is a Letter placed, which shews the Reader what it is: as, C. City. F. Fort or Castle. I. Island. K. Kingdom. L. Lake. M. Mountain. O. Town. P. Province, and Port. R. River. T. Territory. Where any of these Letters are doubled there are several Places of the same Name. The Latin Names are in the Roman Letter, and the Vulgar in the Itali∣an; and those that are in the English Letter, belong to England, Scot∣land, or Ireland.
AN INDEX OF THE Ancient and Latin Names Mention'd in this DICTIONARY. ACR AAda, Le Aade. r. Aara, Aar. r. Aballaba, Apppleby. o. Abantis, Negropont. c. Abarinus, Navarino. c. Abassinia, Aethiopia. k. Abbatis Viila, Abbeville. c. Abbatiscella, Appenzel. . Abravanus, Rain. l. Abria, Loquabre. . Abella, Avella. c. Abellinum, Avellino. c. Abrincae, Auranches. c. Abula, Avila. c. Vilches. o. Abus, The Humber. r. Abusina, Abensperg. Abydus, Abutich, c. Abydus, Aidos. f. Abyla, Almina. m. Acaeorum Pontus, Porto Bon. p. Acc, Guadix. r. Accipitrum Insulae, Azores. c. Acedum, Ceneda. c. Acesta, Barbaria. o. Achada, Achonrey. c. Achaia, Livadia. p. Achates, Drillo. r. Achelous, Geromelea. r. Acheron, Campagnano, Verlichi. r. Acheron, Fana, Savnto, r. Acherontia, Acerenza. c. Acherusia, Jalina. l. Achridus, Giustandil. c. Acila, Zidem. c. Acis, Fredo. r. Acicthus, Bigi, Carabis. r. Acmona, Severino. c. Acon, Acre. c. Acragas, Draco. Acris, Giustandil. c. Acroceraunium, Capo della Lenguet∣t. r. Actania, Heilichlandt. i. Actium, Figalo, a Cape. Acula, Aquapendente. c. Acuminium, Petrowaradin. c. Acusio, Grenoble, c. —Colonia, Ancone. c. Ada, Aden. r. Addua, Adde. r. Adjaclum, Ajazzo. c. Adramyttium, Andramati, aliàs Ex∣dromit, aliàs Landramiti. Adrana, Eder. r. —Roer. r. Adria, Atri. c. Adrumentum, Mahometa. c. Adrianopolis, Adrianepoli. c. Adriaticum Mare, The Gulph of Ve∣nice. Aduaaca, Tongres. c. Adula, S. Gothards, or Gotherds∣berg. m. Aeusus, Ivica, i. Aedui, Autunois. r. Aegates, Gotham. Aegathos, Favagnana. i. Aegaeum Mare, The Archipelago. Aegesta, Barbra. Aegircius, Egrs, Gers. r. Aegritia, Egrez. r. Aeglesburgus, Alesbury. o. Aelana, Eltor. c. Aemilia, Romagnia. p. Aemoda, Romagnia. p. Aemilia, Schetland. Aemonia, Laubach. c. Aenaria, Ischia. i. Aenos, Eno. c. Aenus, Inn. r. Aenona, Nona. c. Aeria, Vaison. c. Aera, Aerea, Air, Ayr. c. Aesars, Serchio. r. Aesernia, Jernia. Aesia, Oyse. r. Aesis, Esino. r. Aesfium, Essisi. c. Aetna, Etna. m. Agatha, Agathopolis, Maguelone. c. —S. Agati de Goti. c. Agendicum, Sens. c. Aginum, Agen. c. Agenois. r. Agneda, Edenburg. c. Agras, Draco. r. Agrigentum, Gergenti. c. Agrippina Colonia, Cologne. c. Aila, Eltor. c. Ala Flaviana, Vienna. c. Ala Narsica, Aichstadt. c. Alata Castra, Edenburgh. Alaunius, Avon. r. Alavinus, Avon. r. Alavand, Eblata. c. Alba, Tardera. r. Alba, Aube. r. c. Alba, Aelvas. c. Alba Graeca, Belgrade, Griecks Weis∣senburgh. c. Alba Julia, Weissemburg. c. Alba Longa, Albano Palazzulo. Alba Maritima, Zarra. r. —Marsorum, Albi. c. Alba Regalis, Stel-Weissenburg. c. Alba Pompeia, Alba. c. Albania, Albany, Scotland. k. Albintiminium, Vintimiglia. c. Albis, Elb. r. Albula, Tiber. r. Alcimaenis, Ulm. c. Aldenardum, Odenarde. o. Alecta, Alet. c. Alectum, Dundee. o. Alesia, Alais. c.
Aleium, Lecca. c. Alex, Alessio. r. Alexandria, Alessandria. c. Alexandria, Scanderone. c. Alexandria of Aegypt. c. Aliacmon, Pelecas. r. Alione, Lancaster. o. Aliso, Wesel. c. Alisus, Parthen. c. Alonae, Alicant. c. Alpinus, Alpon Vecchio. r. Allobroges, Dauphiné, Savoy, c. Alisuntia, Als, Alsitz. r. Alpheus, Orfea. r. Alpheus, Darvon. r. Aluta, Olt. r. Alvernia, Auvergne. p. Amaga vel Amagria, Ammah, Dra∣ker. i. Amasia, Marpurg. c. Amasia, Emden. c. Amasius, Ems. r. Amacum, Macao. c. Amastrus, Famastro. c. Amanus, Judicel. o. r. Amalphis, Malphi. c. Ambacia, Ambois. o. Ambari, Nivernois. p. Ambavariti, Brabant. p. Ambianum, Amiens. c. Amaea, Porta Legre. c. Amestrata, Mistretta. o. Amestris, Semastro. c. Amida, Amidaea, Caramit, Hemid. c. Amilhanum, Milaud. c. Amphipolis, Emboli. c. Ampsaga, Collo. r. Amicli, Scala Marmorea. c. Amizon, Mezo. c. Anas, Guadiana. r. Anasus, La Piave. r. Anatolia, Asta the Less. Anaxanum, Lanciano. Anazarbus, Ac-Sarai Ain-Zarba. c. Anchialus, Achelo. r. Ancira, Engury. c. Andanius, Tisindon, r. Anderitum, Mande. c. Andegavum, Angers. c. Ander, Indre. r. Andomatunum, Langres. c. Anemo, Lamone. r. Anemurium, Stalemura. c. Angeracum, S. Jean de Angoli. o. Angianum. —Angia. Enghien. c. Anglia, England. k. Anicium, Le Puy. c. Anio, Teverone. r. Anisus, Ens. c. Annobi, Baar. Ansa, Ossona. c. Antaradus, Tortosa. c. Antiochia Maeandri, Tachiali. c. Antissiodorum, Auxerre. c. Anti-Taurus, Roham-Thaura. m. Antardus, Tortesa. c. Antona Australis, Southampton. o —Borealis, Northampton. o. Antonia. Utrecht. p. Anxur, Terracina. c. Aous, Aeas, Polina. r. Apamaea, Haman, Hems. c. Apamia, Pamiers. c. Apeneste, Vieste. c. Aphana, Queximi. i. Aphas, Apheas, Inacho. r. Apidanus, Pidanemo. r. Apidanus, Epideno. . Aprutium, Teramo. c. Aprutium, Abruzzo. p. Apsarus, Arcani. r. Apta Julia, Apt. c. Apua, Pontremoli. c. Apulia, La Puglia. p. Apulia Daunia, La Puglia Piana. p. Aqur, Baden. c. Aquae Augustae, Acqs, Dax. c. Apulia Peuc: tia, Terra di Bari. p. Aquae alidae, Aigues Caldes. c. Aquae Fervidae, Fervaques. c. Aquae Helvetiorum, Ober-Baden. c. Aquae Sextiae, Aix. c. Aquae Statelliae, Aqui. c. Aquinum, Buda, c. Aquisganum, Aix la Chapelle, A∣quigrane. c. Arapotes, Buhiera. l. Arar, Saosne. r. Arauris, l' Erault. r. Arausio, Orange. c. Arca, Hereck. c. Arcennum, Bracciano. c. Araxis, Achlar. r. —Colactz. c. Aretas, Lipuda. r. Aretium, Arezzo. c. Aremorica, Bretagne. p. Arenacum, Arnheim. c. Areva, Eresma. r. Argenes, Orne. r. Argentanum, S. Marco, Argen∣tina. c. Argentoratum, Strasburg. c. Argiruntum, Peschia. c. Argyrutum, Novigrad. c. Aria, Heri. p. Aria, Aire. c. Aricenium, Hereford. c. Arietis frons, Famar. cape. Ariminum, Rimini. c. Ariminus, Marrechia. r. Arinianum, Rinano. o. Ariona, Ombla. r. Armenia, Aladuli, Turcomania. p. Armoda, Schetland. i. Armorica, Bretagne. p. Armuzia, Ormus. c. Arnapa, Horndiep. r. Arrabo, Raab. r. Arola, Aar, Ayr. r. Aromata, Guardafu. c. Arsacia, Casbin. c. Arsicua, Brin. c. Arsinarium, Mecanda, cape Verde. Arsinoe, Sues. c. Artaxata, Teflis. c. Artabarum, Santa Maria de finis terre. cap. Artalbinum, Basil. c. Artemita, Van. f. Artigi, Alhama. c. Arvernae, Clermont. c. Arvis, Bialogrod. c. Arula, Loir. Loyr. r. Arunci, Ronches. c. Arunda, Ronda. c. Arvonia, Caernarvan. c. Arimaydus, Seguino. r. Asaphopolis, Asaph. c. Ascalingium, Hildesheim. c. Ascalon, Scalona. c. Asciburgus, Gollenberg. m. Ascrivium, Cattare. c. Asculum, Ascoli. c. Asta, Xres. c. Astacus, Geivise. c. Astelphus. Engur. r. Astigl, Astygi, Ecij. c. Asindum, Medina, Sidonia. o. Assinnarius, Falconaria. r. Atax, L' Aude. r. Aternum, Aternus, Pescara. r. &c. Ateste, Este. o. Athanasia, Lerida. c. Athenae, Athens, Sentines. c. Atheniensis Legio, Thienen. o. Athenopolis, Antibe. c. Athesis, Etsch. r. Athesis, Tees. r. Athiras, Glycynero. r. Athiso, Tosa. r. Athos, Agion-Oros. c. Athyras, Glycynero. r. Atlantia, Colojero. i. Atlas, Erif, Aiducal. m. Atrax, Voidanar. c. Atrebatum, Arras. c. Atrianus, Tartaro. r. Atropatia, Servan. p. Attalia, Satalia. c. Atuacutum, Tongres. o. Atura, Eure. r. Aturum, Aire. c. Aturus, Adour, Dour. r. Avalonia, Glastenbury. o. Audomarum, S. Omers. Avens, Carresi. r. Aventicum, Wislisburg. c. Aufidus, Offanto. r. Augae, Eu. o. Augaea; Auge. . Augusta Acilia, Straubingen. c. —Bracarum, Braga. c. —Emerita, Merida. c. —Firma, Ecita. c. —Praetoria, Aouste. c. —Rauracorum, Augst. c. —Romanduor, Luxemberg. c. —Taurinorum, Turin. c. —Tiberi, Ratispon. c. —Trevirorum, Trier. c. —Tricastnorum, S. Paul. c. —Trinobantum, London. c. —Vagiennorum, Saluces. c. —Veromanduorum, Vermand. S. Quintin. c. —Vindelicorum, Ausburg. c. Augustobona, Troyes. c. Augustodunum, Autun. c. Augustomagus, Senlis. c. Augustoritum, Poctiers, Limoges. c. Avia, Forcone. o. Aviarium, Pluvers. c. Avinus, Avin, r. Aulerci Cenomani, Le Maine. p. —Dablintes, Le Perche. p. —Eburovices, d' Eureux. p. Auna, Emeley. c. Aurea Chersonesus, Malaca. c. Aureapolis, Ingoldstadt. c. Aureatum, Alchstadt. c. Aurelia, Lintz. c. Aurelia, Orleance. c. Aurelia Allobrogum, Geneva. c.
Auria, Orense. c. Aurigi, Aurinx. c. Arigi, S. Jean. c. Auser, Serchio. r. Aastrasia, Lorain, Westrick. p. Austria, Racuska. p. Autricum, Chartres. c. Autura, Eure. r. Auximum, Osimo. c. Axiace, Oczakow, c. Axona, Aisn. r. Azania, Adel. k. B A Babylon, Bagdat. c. Babylon, Cairo. c. Bacenis Sylva, Westerwaldt, Hartz∣waldt. c. Bactria, Orasan. p. Baduhennae Lucus, Seven-waldt, Coeworden. c. Bacueen. f. Baetis, Guadalquivir. r. Bacuntius, Bosevetha. r. Baetius, Eda. r. Baetulo, Bedelona, Beses. Bagrada, Tisindon. r. Bajocae, Bajeux c. Baiocensis, Tractus, Bessin. Baleares, Mayorca. c. Balticus Sinus, the Baltick Sea, Germ. De Belt. Barcino, Barelone. c. Basiana, Posega. c. Bsilia, Norway. k. Basti, Baza. c. Batava, Passaw. c. Batavi, Holland. p. Batavodurum, Deurstede. o. Bathis, Javi. r. Bathonia, Fath. c. Bavacum Picardiae, Beanvais in Pi∣cardy. c. —Wallonense, Beauvais in Halnault. o. Baujovicum, Beaujeu. o. Bebba, Dunstaburg. c. Bedesis, Montone. r. Belgae, Wells. c. Somerset∣shire. Belgium, the Low Countries. Bellojovlum, Beaujeu. o. Bellomariscus, Beaumaris. p. Bellomontium, Beaumont. o. Bellositum, Oxford. o. Bellovacum, Beauvais. o. Belsia, Beause. p. Benacus, Lago di Garda, Gardsee. l. Bengebres, Ghazuan. m. Berenice, Bernish. c. Bermius, Messo. m. Bernia, Ireland. Beroa, Berthoea, Aleppo. c. Besidia, Bisignano. c. Biandina, Rampano. o. Bibracte, Autune. c. Bicurgium, Erfurdt. c. Bigerra, Villena. c. Bigerrones, La Bigorre. p. Bilbilis, Xiloa. c. Bipontium, Deux-ponts, Zuibruc∣ken. c. Bisontio, Besanzon. c. Bistricia, Bestercze, Nosenstadt. c. Bithynia, Biscangial, Chiutale. c. Biturix, Biturigiae, Bourges. c. Blesae, Blois. o. Beliterae, Besiers. c. Boactus, Frigido. r. Bocanum, Maroccho. Bochanium, Bouchain. o. Bodeni, Podolia. p. Boderia, see Bodotria. Bodincomagus, Casale. c. Bodobriga, Bopart. o. Bedotria, Edenburg-Firth. Boetia, Stramulipa. p. Bogadium, Fristar. c. Boiatum, Bayonne. c. Bojodurum, Passaw. c. Bonium, Bangor. o. Bosphorus, Ohsenfurt. c. Bostra, Busseth. c. Bormetomagus, Worms. c. Borysthenes, Nieper. r. Bovianum, Boiano. c. Bounsonia, Boens. o. Bracara, Bracara, Braga. c. Bracenum, Bracciano. c. Brancsia, Oldenburg. c. Branonium, Worcester. c. Brassovia, Croastadt. c. Bravum, Burgos. c. Bremium, Berwick. c. Brennoburgum, Brandenburg. c. Brannopolis, Hildesheim. c. Brigantes, Yorkshire. Brigantia, Braganza. c. Brigantum, Compostella. c. Briocum, S. Brieu. c. Britannia, Britain, England. k. Britannia minor, Bretague. p. Britannodumum, Dunbritoun. o. Brivas, Brive, Bironde. c. Brivates, Brest. o. Brixia, Brescia. c. Brundusium, Brindisi. c. Brundusia, Porentru. c. Bruttii, Calabria. p. Bryganium, Bracciano. c. Buca, Termini. c. Budoris, Durlach. c. Burgundiae Comitatus, French-Comté. p. Bullonium, Bouillon. o. Busiris, Asakal. c. Butreae, Besiers. c. Bythinia, Chiutale, Bescangial. p. Byzantium, Constantinople. c. Byzia, Vize. c. C A Cabalicus Ager, Chablais. p. Cabeilio, Cavailon. c. Cabillonlum, Challon. c. Cacelina, Chalcedon. c. Cacorum, Villach. c. Cadavus, Cavado, r. Cadomus, Caen. c. Cadurcensis Tractus, Quercy. p. Cadurcum, Cahors. c. Caelio-Briga, Braganza. c. Caenus, L'Arc. r. Caeretanorum Emp. S. Svra. c. Caeretanus, Eri. r. Caesarea magna, Caisar. c. Caesarea, Jersey. i. Caesar-Augusta, Saragoza. c. Caesariana, Xerxes de la frontera. c. Caesarodunum, Tours. c. Caesaro-Lutra, Keisers Lautern. c. Caesaromagus, Beauvais. c. Caesaropolls, Keisers Lautern. c. Caesortium, Gisors. o. Caferoniana, Grafignana. c. Caicus, Girmasti. r. Cajeta, Gaeta, Gaiette. c. Calabria, Terra d'Otranto. p. Calaguris, Calahorra. c. Calaetla, Wittemburg. c. Calatia, Cajazzo. c. Calaris, Cagliari. c. Calarona, Garon. r. Calathia, Cajazzo. c. Calcaria, Tadcaster. o. Calciata, Calzada. c. Cale, Calle, Cagli. c. Cale, Porto. c. Caledonia, Scotland. k. Calenum, Carniola. c. Cales, Calvi. c. Caletae, Caux. p. Caletum, Calais, Cales. c. c. Caleva, Calleva, Oxford. c. Caliabrum, Montanjes. c. Callipolls, Gallipoli. c. Calipus, Zadaon. r. Calidobecum, Caudebec. c. Calicadnus, Ferro. r. Calonesus, Belle-Isle. g. Calonis, Cleves. r. Calpe, Gibalter. c. Calvomontium, Chaumont. c. Camachus, Kemach. c. Camalodunum, Maldon. o. Cama, Scala. c. Camberlum, Chambery. c. Cambodunum, Kempten. c. Camboritum, Cambridge. Cambus, Kamp. r. Cameracum, Cambray. Caminecum sive Camenecla, Ka∣minieck. o. Campania, Champagne. p. Campania Foelix, Terra di Lavoro, Campagna di Roma. p. p. —Camp, Kampen. c. Campodunum, Kempen. c. Camulodunum, Maldon, Al∣mondsbury. o. Canapicium, Canavese. p. Cangria, see Gangria. p. Candida Casa, Whithern. c. Canopus, Rostto. c. Cantabri, Guipuscoa. p. Cantium, Kent. Cantuaria, Canterbury. c. Capernaum, Jefferkin. o. Cappadocia, Tocat. p. Caput Aquaeum, Cappacio. . Caprea, Capri. i. Caprasia, Magna Vacca. o. Caralis, Cragliari. c. Carabogdiana, Moldavia. p. Carbonaria, Porto Gori. o. Canbantobrigum, Glencarn. p. Carcoviaca, Kirkwall. o. Caracca, Henares. r. Caramania, Macran. p. Carambice, Obb. r. Caranthonus, Charente. r. Carentani, Stiria & Carinthia. Carentonium, Charenton. o. Carentelus, Charente. r.
Carethna, Cariniala Vallis, Bab∣liza. o. Caria, Aidinelli, Menteseli. p. Caris, Cher. r. Carleolum, Carlile. c. Carmania, Kherman. p. Carni, Priuli. p. Carnicum, Julium, Fella. c. Carnovia, Jagerndof. o. Carnovium, Stella. c. Carnutum, Chartres. c. Carpanthus, Scarpanto. i. Carpentoracte, Carpentras. c. Carraca, Guadaljara. c. Carrhae, Heren. c. Carrio, Carrion. r. Carrodonum, Crakow, Lemburg. c. c. Cassiope, Janinnia. c. Cassiterides, Silley Isles. Casius, Lison. m. Castra Ulpia, Cleves. c. Castellodunum, Chasteadun. c. Castellum Cattorum, Cassel. c. Castellum Menapiorum, Kessel. c. Castellum Morinorum, Cassel. o. Castrum, Castro. c. Castrum Alatum, Edemburg. Castrum Albiensium, Castres. Castrum Caledonium, Dundellt. Castrum Britonum, Dun-Bri∣ton. c. Castrum Heraldi, Castelleraut. c. Castulo, Caslona. c. Casuentum, Vasento. r. Catalaunum, Chaalons. c. Catraleucos, Guimaranes. o. Caturiges, Gapenzois. r. Caucasiae Portae, Derbent. c. Caunus, Monaco. m. Caunus, Caco. m. Moncay. o. Cauria, Coria. c. Cavum, Caffa. c. Celbis, Kelh, or Kil. r. Cene Atlantica, Madera. i. Celenius, Killian. r. Celendris, Palipoli. c. Celia, Cylley. c. Celidann, Salnich. r. Celiobriga, Barellos. c. Cella, Zell. c. Celsona, Solsona. c. Celtae the Gauls. k. Celtiberi, Spain. k. Cemmenus, Sevennes. m. Cenimagni, Iceni. Cenomanum, Mans c. Cenomanensis Provincia, Le Maine. Centrones, the Diocess de Grand. Centum cellae, Civita Vcchia. c. Cephalenia, Cefalonia. i. Cetetic, Cardigan. p. Ceretania, Cerdagne. p. Cerne, Madagafear. i. Cerufa, Livadia. c. Cestria, Chester, West-Chester. c. Cetius, Hensterberg. m. Cetobrigae, Setuval. c. Chaboras, Giulap. r. Chalcis, Jamboli. p. Chalcis, Negropont. i. Chaldaea, Curidstan. p. Chalusius, Trave. r. Chalybs, Cabe. r. Cheyles. Chrento, Charenton. o. Chios, Chio. i. Chestocovia, Czenstokow. c. Chilonium, Kill. c. Chorsa, Chars. c. Christopolis, Emboli. c. Chromium, Drobasaf, the White Sea. Chronus, Memel. r. Chrysius, Guadalentin. r. Chrysius, Keureuz. r. Chrysius, Kerez. r. Chrysocera, Galata. o. Chrysorrhoas, Agele. r. Cibinum, Hermanstadt. c. Cilicia, Caraman, Finchia. p. Cimbrica Chersonsus, Denmark, and Jutland. r. k. Cing, Cinca, Senga. r. Cisla, Quiso. r. Cissa, Humago. i. Cituorum Insula, Schut. i. Civaro, Chambery. c. Clanes, Glan. r. Clansus, Agno. r. Clarana, Glaris. o. Clarinea, Gant. c. Claromons, Clermont. c. Clatium, Glaez. c. Claudia, sive Claudiocetria, Glou∣cester. o. Claudia, Claudivum, Clagenfurt. c. Claudia, Gozo. i. Claromentum, Clermont. c. Clania, Calahorris. c. Claudiopolis, Clausemburg. c. Claudivum, Ens. r. Claudius, Imzagr, & Kisdarnoc∣zi. m. Clausentum, Southampton. c. Cleopatris, Sues. c. Clevum, Gloucester. c. Clivia, Cleves. c. Clodia Fossa, Chioza c. Clochora, Clogher. c. Clodianus, Fluvian, Llobregat. r. Clora, Cluyd. r. Clusium, Chiusi. c. Clusius, Chiese. r. Codanonia, Zeelandt. i. Coenoenum, Lawenburg. o. Coetus, Coisnon. r. Colancorum, Birlin. c. Colancorum, Freinwaldt. c. Colchi, Mengrelia. p. Colchis, Calpurt. c. Colapis, Kulp. r. Colippo, S. Sebastian. o. Collemum, Varceva. c. Colocia, Colocza. c. Colonia, Colchester. c. Colonia, Taxara. c. Colonia Allobrogum, Geneva. c. Colonia Argentina, Colmar. c. Colonia Agrippina, Cloge. c. Coloswaria, Clausenburg. c. Columbaria, Colmar. c. Columbralia, Combraile. c. Columna, Kolm. c. Comagenum, Haynburg. o. Compendium, Compeigne. c. Complutum, Alcala. c. Compsa, Conza. c. Concha, Cuenca. c. Concia, Miranda. c. Condata, Condeum, Condé. o. Condate, Rennes. c. Condivincum, Nntes. c. Confluentes, Coblents. c. Conimbrica, Coimbra. c. Conovium, Aberconway. o. Consentia, Cosenza. c. Consorani, Couserans. t. Constantia, Tortosa. c. Constantia Castra, Coutances. c. Constantinensis Ager, Le Coutan∣tin. p. Convenae, Le Comte de Cominge. t. Convenae, S. Bertrand. c. Convennos, Sheppey. i. Conventri, Coventry. c. Coos, Lango. i. Cora, La Cure. r. Corabra, Maurana. r. Corax, Algier. c. Corbilum, Nantes. c. Corbilium, Corbeil. o. o. Corcyra, Corfu. i. Corcyra Nigra, Crzola i. Confinianum, Pienza, Pientia. c. Coriovallum Falkenburg. o. Corinum, Cornovium, Cirenche∣ster. c. Corisopitum, Cornovaile & Quim∣per. c. c. Cornavli, Wortester-shire, Corn∣wall, Warwick, and Staf∣fordshire. Cornelia, Imola Whimpfen. c. Cornubia, Cornwall p. Cornu Byzantil, Galata. o. Corona, Croonstadt. c. Corona, Coron. c. Coronia, Landskroone, Brassaw. c. Coos, Lango. i. Corfinium, Ptenza. c. Corinium, Cirencester. o. Corteniacum, Courtenay. c. Cortracum, Courtray, Cortryck. c. Cosa, Casano. c. Cossium, Bazas. c. Covalia, Kile. t. Crabra Marana, Marrana. f. Crathris, Gratti. r. Credonium, Craon. c. Cremera, Fossa. r. Creta, Candida. i. Crimisa, Flumia. r. Crissus, Kerez. r. Crossa, Creuse. r. Crotalus, il Corace. r. Croton, Crotone. . Crustuminum, Conea. r. Cularo, Grenoble. c. Cunetio, Kennet. r. Cunetio, Matleborow. c. Cupersanum, Conversano. c. Cuprimontium, Kopersberg. o. Curia, Off. c. Curia, Chur, Coire, Coira, c. Curia, Curow. c. Curia, Corte. c. Curiosolitae, Quimper. t. Curium, Episcopia. c. Curretia, Courreze. r. Cusus, Kerez. r. Cydarus, Maclena. r. Cydonia, Canea. c. Cygnea, Zwikaw. c. Cylistarnus, Racanello. r. Cyrene, Cairoan. c. Cyrenaica, Barbary. p. Cypsella, Ipsala. c.
Cythera, Cerigo. i. Cytaum, Sita. c. Cyrus, Elcur or Kur. r. Cyrrhus, Ser. r. Czernihovia, Zernikow. c. D A Dabrone, Aven-more. l. Damasia, Ausburg. c. Damnil, Cluydsdale, and Men∣teith. p. p. Damnonium, the Lyzard-point. Danubius, the Danube. r. Danmonii, Cornwal and Devon∣shire. p. p. Dania, Denmark k. Daniscum, Dantsick. c. Danum, Doncaster. o. Danus, Dun, or Don. r. Daona, Keccio. c. Daphne, Scala Marmorea. c. Dara, Drut. r. Dardanla, the South part of Servia: Dariorigum, Vannes. c. Darvernum, Dover, and Canter∣bury▪ o. Daii Urbs, Dax. c. Daventria, Deventer. c. Daulia, Eldasagni. c. Daunia, Capitanato. p. Dea, Dee. r. Dea, Die. c. Decetia, Decize. c. Deidonium, Alectum, Dundee. o. Delta, Maholet, Sahid. i. Delminium, Damnio, Dumno. c. Delphinatus, Danphiné. p. Demetrias, Dimitrado. c. Deobriga, Miranda de Ebro. c. Deppa, Depa, Diepe. c. Dertona, Tortona. c. Dertosa, Tortosa. c. Derventio, Darwent. r. Deva, Dee r. Deva, Westchester. c. Devana, Aberdeen. c. Dia, Die. c. Dianae Oraculum, Curiale. o. Diabete, Faluga. l. Diablites, or Diablintres, le Per∣che. p. Dicte, Sethie. i. Didymotychos, Dimotuc. c. Dienensis Comitatus, le Diois. p. Dimola, Dimel. r. Dinia, Digne. c. Diodori Insula, Babel Mandel. Dionysiopolis, Varna. c. Dioscoridis Insula, Zocotora. l. Dithmarsia, Dithmarsen. p. Diva, Dee. r. Divionum, Dijon. c. Divona, Caors. t. Divodurum, Thionville, Metz. c. Divona, Cabors. c. Dobuni, Gloucestershire. c. Dolcea, Cataro. c. Dola, Dole and Dole. c. c. Dominicopolis, S. Domingo. c. Domiiopolis, Domezopli. c. Dorcina, Dorchester. o. Donum Dei, Dundee. o. Dordomana, Deizer. c. Dordonia, Dordogne. r. Dordracum, Dordrectum, Dur∣drechtum, Dort. c. Dorovernia, Canterbury. c. Dorovernum, Dover. o. Dostra, Daustre. r. Doveona, Deveona, Cahors. c. Doulendinum, Doulens. o. Draconis, Draun. r. Dracus, Drac. r. Dragumatina, Travemund. c. Drasomagus, Ausburg. c. Drepanum, Trapano. c. Drillo, Drino. r. Drocum, Dreux. c. Druentia, Durance. r. Druides, le Comte de Dreux. p. Druma, le Drome. r. Druna, Druma, Drome. r. Drusiana Fossa, Niemeyssel. r. Drusiburgum, Dosburg. o. Drusomagus, Memmingen. c. Drusomagus, Kempen. c. Drymon, Drino. r. Duacum, Kilmacough. c. —Doway. c. Dubis, Dou or Doux. r. Dubris, Dover. o. Duellium, Hobentweil. f. Dumbarum, Dunbar. o. Dumna, Hoy. i. Dunga, Dabul. c. Dunelmum, Durham. c. Dunkeranum, Dundalk. c. Dunquerca, Dunkirk. o. Dunrodunum, Dornock. c. Dunum, Chasteaudun. o. Dunum, Downe. c. Durachium, Thovars. c. Duranius, Dordogne. r. Duria, la Doria. r. Durias, Guadalquivir. r. Durias, Traun. r. Durius, Duero, Douro. r. Durobius, Durobrevis, Rochester. c. Durobrivae, Stanford. o. Durocasses, Druidensis Pagus, Dreux. o. Durocortorum Civitas, Reims. c. Duronovaria, Dorchester. o. Durosladium, wick. o. Durostorum, Silistria. c. Durotriges, Dorsetshire, and So∣merset-shire. Durovernum, Canterbury. Durius, Thur. Dyrrachium, Durazzo. c. Dyrus, Guir. r. Dysporum, Duysburg. c. E A Eagus, Logh Eagh, a Lake. Eara, Jere. r. Eblana, Dublin. c. Ebodia, Aldernay. i. Ebora, Evora. c. Ebora, Rota. i. Eboracum, York. c. Ebrodunum, Ambrune. c. Ebrodunum, Brin. c. Ebrocae, Eureux. c. Ebroicum, Eureux. c. Ebudae, The Western Ises. Eburum, Olmutz. c. Ebusus, Yvica. i. Ebura, Eure. r. Ecae, Troja c. Ecbatana, Tauris. c. Ecelesta, Medina Celi. o. Echedorus, Granea. r. Ectodurum, Leutkirchen. c. Edelberga, Heidelburgh. c. Edera, Yer. r. Edessa, Rhoa. c. Edus, Sadodela. r. Egesta, Barbara. c. Egidona, Eyder. r. Egiricius, le Gers. r. Egolisma, Angoulesme. c. Egra, Eger. r. Egra, Heb, Eger. c. Eidera, Eyder. r. Eistadium, Aichstadt. c. Elana, Aila. c. Elaphonefus, Marmora. i. Elaver, Allier. r. Elborga, Talavera. c. Elbovium, Elbeuf. o. Electa, Alet. c. Electriades Insulae, Shetland Isles. Elephaniacum, Elwang. c. Eleutherus, Habes. r. Eleutherus, Bajara. r. Eliberis, Granada. c. Elis, Belvedere. p. Ellocrata, Lorca. c. Elna, Lianne, Eaune. r. Elno, St. Amand. o. Elorona, Oleron. i. Elorum, Abyso. r. Elorum, Atelari. r. Elusa, Euse, Eause. c. Eluva, . Asaph. c. Elyma, Palimita. c. Elys, Ely. o. Ella, Lille. r. Ellis, Jalea. o. Ellus, Ill. r. Embda, Embden. c. Emelia, Eminely. c. Emerita, Merida. c. Emisa, Haman, Hems. c. Emisarium, Desaguadero. r. Emmaus, Gotza, Nicopol. c. Endova, Eyndhoven. c. Engeriacum, St. Jean de Angeli. c. Engolisma, Angoulesme. c. Enhemium, Ebenheim. c. Ensis, Nisi. r. Entella, Lavagna. r. Epaunum, Pau. c. Ephesus, Efeso. c. Epidamnus, Durazzo. c. Epidaurus, Debronca. c. Epidaurus, Malvasia. c. Epidaurus, Raguza. c. Eporeda, Jurea. c. Erasinus, Rasino. r. Erdelia, Transylvania. p. Eretaenus, Reron. r. Eriboea, Croida. c. Eridanus, Po. r. Eridanus, Rodaun. r. Erigonus, Vistrizza. r. Erineus, la Miranda. r. Ernodunum, Issoudun. c. Erubris, Rober. r. Erythiae, Barlinguas. i. Erythraeum Mare, the Red Sa. Eryx, Trapano Veceio. c.
Escernia, Iscernia, or Sergna. c. Escua, Huesca. c. Esia, l' Oyse. r. Eslul, Setz. c. Eslhonia, Esten. p. Estola, Esa. r. Esula, Isela. c. Esuris, Faro. c. Xeres de Guadiana. f. Etruria, Toscana. p. Evandria, Olivenza. c. Euboea, Negropont. i. Eubonia, Man. i. Evenus, Phidari. r. Fidari. Eugubium, Gubio. c. Euneno, l' Aa Boulognois. r. Euphrates, Aferat. r. Euptea, Gaila. i. Euratus, Galazo. r. Eurotas, I'is, Vasilipotamo, Basili∣potamo. r. Eurydemon, Zacuth. r. Euopolis, Bogazar. c. Extremadura, Esremadura. c. Eydera, Eyder. r. Ezerus, Eero. c. F A Fabris, Farar. r. Fabrianum, Bremen. c. Falconis mons, Faqemont. o. Falesia, Fallesia, Falaise. c. Fama Augusta, Famagost. c. Fanum Canici▪ Kilkenny. c. —Fortunae, Fano. c. —S. Agathae, S. Agtha. c. —S. Albani. S. Albans. o. —S. Albini, S. Aubin. c. —S. Andreae, S. Andrews c. —S. Andre. c. —S. Autonini, S. Antonin. c. —S. Audomari, S. Omer. c. —S. Botolphi▪ Boston. o. —S. Clodoaldi, S. Clo. o. —S. Desiderii, S. Dizier. c. —S. Dionysii, S. Denis. c. —S. Fidei, S. F. o. —S. Gisleii, S. Ghislain. o. —S. Jacobi. Sanjago. c. —S▪ Jannis, S. Jean. c. —S. Leonis, S. Leo. c. —S. Maclovii, S. Malo. c. —S. Menehildis, S. Meneould. c. —S. Michelis, S. Miguel. c. —S. Pontii, S. Pant. c. —S. Spiritus, S. Esprit. c. —S. St. phani, S. Estienn. c. —S. Vity, S. Viet. c. Fara, la Vere. c. Farria, Heyliglandt. i. Fauciniacus Tractus, Fossigny. Faventia, Faenza. c. Felsina, Bologna, Boloia. c. Ferreta, Pfirt. c. Ficclia, Over-ssel. c. Ficocle, Cervia. c. Fionia, Fuinen. i. Firmitas ad Albulam, Ferte sur Aube. Firmum, Fermo. c. Flavia, Gallica, Fraga. o. Flaviana Ala, Vienna. c. Flaviobriga, Bilbo. c. Flavium Brigantum, Betazs. c. Flevo, the  lie or Fi. i. Flevum, the Velht. r. Flexia, la Flecht. c. Flexum, Altenburg. o. Flissinga, Flushing. o. Floriacum, Fleury. o. Floripolis, S. Flour. o. Florentia, Florence. c. Foburgum, Woburg. o. Fociniacus Tractus, Fosigni. p. Fons Agri Carriensis, Ferventia. o. Fons Bellaques, Fontainbleau. o. Fons Clarus, Sherborn. o. Fons Eraldi, Fonteuralt. o. Fons Rapidus, Fontarabie. o. Fontes, Wells. c. Fontenacum, Fontenay le Comte de Forcalquier. p. Forensis Provincia, le Forez. p. Formicae, Formigne, i. Formio, Risano. r. Forum Aleni, Ferrara. —Claudii, Oriolo. c. —Claudii, Montiers en Taran∣taise. c. —Cornelii, Imola, Jumola. c. —Diuguntorum, Cema. c. —Domitii, Frontignan. c. —Flaminii, Forflamine. c. —Flaminii, Fuligno. c. —Fulvii, Valenza. c. —Juum, Frejus. c. —Julii, riuli. p. —Livli, Forli. c. —Neronis, Forcalquier. c. —Sebusianorum, Bourg. c. —Segusianum, Feurs. o. —Sempronii, Fossombruno. c. —Tiberii, Keyserstul. o. —Vecontiorum, Naisn. c. Fosa Clodia, Chiosa. c. —Corbulonis, the Leck. r. —Drusii, the New Yssel. r. —Mauriana, le Galjon. l. —Merovei, la Merwe. r. Fossae, Fossone. r. Fosanum, Fossano. r. Fosatum, Fassato. . Fosiniacus Tractus, le Fosigny. p. Francia Orientalis, Franconia. c. Franciacum, Frnsa. ca. Francosurtum ad Mnum, Franc∣fort on the Main. —ad Oderam, Francfort on the Oder. Fratres Nessides, Fraires i. i. Fredelatum, Ramiers. c. Frento, il Forture. r. Frequentum, Fricenti. c. Fretum Britannicum, Pas de Ca∣lais the Sleeve. Fretum Mamertinum. Fao. Frigida, Frias. c. Frigidus, Freddano. r. —Vipao. r. Friniana, rignana. t. Frusio, Frufilione. c. Fruxinum, Freising. c. Fugeria, Fulgerium, Fogerts. c. Fulginium, Foligno. c. Fulinium, Fulginium, Fuigo. c. Fundanus, Fondi. l. c. Furarium, S. Estienne de Furens. o. Furnae, Frnes, Wuerne. c. Fuxum, Foix. o. G A Gabali, Givadan. r. Gabalum, Javox Mande. c. Gabalus, Gibel. c. Gabarus, Gave. r. r. Gabellus, Secchia. r. Gades, Cadis, Cadiz. c. Gadiva, Aherfraw. o. Gaitia, Jatza, Jaycza, a City of Bosnia. Gaium, Pays de Gez. Gala, Jalle. r. Galaber, Galaure. r. Galatia, Changar. p. Gallesium, Gallse. c. Galleva, Wallingford. o. Gallia, France. k. Galliola, Golle. r. Galliva, Gallway. c. Gallo▪ Ligures, Va Provence. p. Gallovidia, Galloway. p. Gallus, Garrippo. r. Gambivii, Hamburg. c. Gandavum, Gand, Gent, Ghendt. c. Ganea, Jaracazes. Gangaa, Bach. c. Ganges, Ganga, Gang▪ r. Gangra. c. Gannum, Gonga. o. Ganodurum, Zurach, Laufembure. o. Garbosentum, New-Castle. c. Gardus, le Guerdon. r. Gariannonum, Yarmouth. Burg▪ Casle. Garites, le Pays de Gourt. p. Garrocell, Mont Geneure. p. Garryenus, the Dse, or Yare. r. Garumna, Garronne. r. Gastinesium, le Gastinois. p. Gastinetum, le Gastine. p. Gavanodurum, Saltzburgh. c. Gavarus, Gaure. r. Gaudiosa, Joyeuse. o. Gaurus, Garro. m. Gaura, le Comte de Gaure. p. Gaza. c. Gebenna, les Sevennes. m. Gedanum, sive Gdanum, Dant∣zick c. Gedrosia, Formipt, Send. p. Gela, Alicata. Terranova. c. Gelbis, Kitl, Kill. r. Gelisa, Gelise. r. Gelria, Geldeland, Gallis, Gel∣dres. p. Gemblacum, Gemblours. c. Genabium, Gien. c. Genadium, Gyngich. c. Genuni, North-Wales, Genusus, Vaiussa. Arzenza. r▪ Gesocribate, Brest. o. Geravia, Gerawer. . Gerbogi, Clermont, Moulins. c. Gericus, le Gers. r. Germanopolis, Ginopoli. c. Germia, Kermen. c. S. Gertrudis mons, Berga D. Ger∣trudis, Gertruydenberg. c. Gerunda, Girona. c. Geruntia, Cerenza. c. Gesia, le Pays de Gex. t. Gessoriacum, Boulogne sur me. c. Gemum, Gien. c.
Giennum, Jaen, Gaen. c. Giesaeca, Geseke. c. Gihlova, Iglaw. c. Gimoesium, le Gimoux. p. Gippovicus, Ipswich. o. Giro, le Giron. r. Girunna, la Gironde. r. Gislenopolis, S. Guilain. o. Gisorium, Gisors. o. Gissa, Giessen, Gissen. c. Glacium, Glatz. c. Glandata, Glandeves. c. Glandomirum, Mondonnedo. c. Glanum, Lodeves, S. Reims. c. Glarona, Glaris. a Canton. Glasconia, Glastenbury. c. Glascum, Glasco. c. Glatium, Glatz. c. Glessaria, Noot-Strand. i. Glevum, Gloucester. c. Glota, Cluyd. r. Glovernia, Gloucester. c. Gobannium, Abergaveny. o. Goricomium, Gorichemium, Gor∣cum. c. Gosa, Goslar. r. Goslaria, Goslar. c. Gracium, Gratz. c. Graium, Gray. c. Grandipratum, Grandpre. o. Granduicus Sinus, the white Sea. Gransonium, Granson. o. Granta, Cambridge. o. Granus, the Gran. r. Grassa, Grasse. c. Gratianopolis, Grenoble. c. Gravisca, Corneto. c. Guadix, Acci. c. Guatimala, S. Jago c. Guttalus, Jader, Oder. r. Guelpherbytum, Wolfembuttel. c. Gythites, Genamani. i. H A Habus, Humber. r. Hadria, Adria. c. Hadria, Atri, Atria. c. Hadrianopolis, Adrianople, Eder∣nay, Endrem. c. Hafuia, Copenhagen. c. Haga Comitis, the Hague, Gallis la Haye. o. Hallae, Nostre-Dame de Haulx, Gal∣lis; Hall, Germanis. Halys, Castlimar. r. Hama, Haman, Hems. c. Hammona, Ham. c. Hania, Haisne. r. Hanmarchia, Hanherret. pr. Hannonia, Hainault. p. Haphnia, Copenhagen. c. Haradium Reginae, Koningsgretz. c. Havelia, Havel. r. Haemus, Balkan, Costegnazo. m. Hebrus, Mariza. r. Hectodurum, Leutkirck. c. Hedena, Hezdin. o. Hedua, Autun. c. Heideba, Sleswick. c. Heldona, Eaune. r. Helena, Elna. c. Helenopolis, Franckfort on the Mayne. Helia, Ely. c. Heilelius, Ill. r. Helicon, Eiala, Faribo. m. Helicon, Faribo. r. Heliopolis, Balbeck. c. Heliopolis, Soltwedel. c. Helium, the Wael. r. Helsingora, Elsinore. c. Helva, Elvas. c. Helvetia, Switzerland. Helvil, le Vivaris. r. Helvinum; il Salinello. r. Hemodes, Shetland Isles. Henius, Haisne. r. Heraclea, Ergel. c. Heraclea, Hassio Porto. o. Herbanum, Oriveto. c. Herbessus, Palazzulo. Herbipolis, Wurtzburgh. c. Hercinli Montes, Fiechtelburgh. m. Herculeum Fretum, the Sreight of Gibraltar. Herculia, Buda. c. Herculis Promontorium, Hart∣land Poynt. Herculis Portus, Porto Ercole. Hercynia Sylva, Schwartz waldt, Olden-waldt, Wester-walat, &c. Herius, Vindana, Vilane. r. r. Hermastis, Cori. o. Hermeum, Geniscar. cap. Hermiones, Bohemia, Silesia and Moravia. Hermonassa, Beligrard. c. Hermonassa, Bialogrod. c. Hermus, Sarabat. r. Heropolis, Herou. c. Hesperia, Bernich. c. Hesperium Cornu, Binege, Cape-Verde. Hetruria, Tuscany, Toscana. p. Hexi, Veltz, Magala. c. Hexamilium, Hexamili. Hiemera, Torto. r. Hiera, Giera. i. Hieracium, Gieraci. c. Hiera petra, Giera-petra. c. Hierasus, Pruth. r. Hierogerma, Girmasti. c. r. Hierus, Orbo. r. Hilaria, Iler. r. Himelia, l' Aia. r. Himera, il Salso. r. Himera, Termine. r. Hipparis, Camarana. r. Hippo, Monte Leone. c. Hippon, Bona, Bone. c. Hirmius, Irneo, m. Hirminius, Ragusa, Mauli. r. Hirpini, the Further Principato. Hippovibio, Monte-Leone. c. Hispalis, Seville. c. Hispania, Spain. k. Hispellum, Spello. c. Histria, Istria. p. Holmia, Stockholm. c. Honflorium, Honfleur. c. Hordacha, Herdach. r. Hortanum, Orta. c. Hostunium, Ostuni. c. Huena, Ween. i. Hyampolis, Jampoli. c. Hydaspes, Rowey. r. Hydruntum, Otranto. c. Hylius, il Triunti. r. Hypanis, le Bog. r. Hyperborei montes, Cameni Poias, Stolp. m. Hyppius, Lippio. r. Hyprae, Ypren, Ipre. c. Hypsa, il Belici. r. Hyrcania, Hyrach Diargument, Ta∣beristan. p. J A Jabadii Insula, Java. i. Jacobipolis, Sanjago. c. Jactum, Grana. r. Jada, Jader. r. Jader, Salona, Solin. r. Jader, l' Oder. r. Jadera, Zara. c. Jama, Jama Gorod. c. Jamassa, Thames. r. Janasum, Compostella. c. Japidia, Carniola. p. Japodes, Jappenaw. t. Japygia, Terra d' Otranto. p. Jaresius Ager, le. Jarez. t. Jarmutthum, Yarmouth. o. Jatrippa, Midina Alnabi. c. Jatrus, Albis, Ischar. r. Javarinum, sive Jaurinum, Raab, Gewer. c. Jauria, Jawer. c. Jaurus, Jaur. r. Jaxartes, Seihun. r. Jazyes, Hougary. k. Iban, Van. c. Ibera, Tortosa. c. Flix. c. Iberia, Spain. k. Iberus, Ebro. r. Rio Tinto. r. Icauna, Yonne. r. Iccius Portus, Calais. o. Iceni, Suffolk and Norfolk. Iciodorum, Issoire. c. Iconium, Cogni. p. Icosium, Oran. c. Iculisma, Angoulesme. c. Idanis, l' Ain, Ains, Dains. r. Idubeda, El Rio de Millas, r. Jecor, Jecker. r. Jedum, Jedo, Yedo. c. Jemptia, Jemptland. p. Jerna, Ireland. Jernus, Droses, Kilmar. r. Igillum, Giglio. i. Ilarus, Iler. r. Ilcinum, Montalcino. c. Ilerda, Lerida. c. Ilingae, Lignitz. c. Iliturgis, Jaen. c. Illa, Epte. r. Illa, Lille. r. Illiberis, le Tech. r. Illiberis, Granada. c. Elvie. o. Illiberis, Elna. c. Illicitanus Pontus, Alcante. c. Ilorci, Lorca. c. Imelaca, Emeley. c. Inachus, Planizza. r. Inacho. Inarime, Ischia. i. Incra, Encre. r. Indus, Diul. r. Ingaevones, Jutland. p. Ingeris, Ind. r. Ingria, Ingermanland. p. Insubres, il Ducato di Milan. Insula, Eye. o. Insula, Isola. c.
Insula, Lille. c. Intermana, Terni. c. Interamna, Ponte Corvo. o. Interamnensis Provincia, le Pays entre Sambre & Meuse. Interamnia, Teramo. c. Interamnis Portugallia, Entre Dou∣ro è Minho. p. Intervallium, Entrevaux. o. Joanna, Jannina. c. Joannipolis, Jambol. c. Joanvilla, Joinville. o. Joauna, Jonne, Yonne. r. Jonia, Quiscon. p. Jordanis, Schierah. r. Jovernia, Ireland. k. Joviniacum, Joigny. c. Jovis Villa, Joinville. o. Ipra, Ipres, Ypren. c. Ipuscoa, Guipuscoa. p. Iris, Casalmach. r. Iris, Lirio. r. Isala, vel Issula, Yssel. r. Isamnium, S. John's Poynt. Isapis, Savio. r. Isara, l' Isere. r. Isara, Iser. r. Isauria, Oyse, Oise. r. Isauria, Saura. p. c. Isaurus, Donato, la Foglia. r. Isburus, Garbe. r. Isca Damnoniorum, sive Exonia, Er. r. Isca, Cxeter. c. and Caerleon. Isca Silurum, Leskard. c. Iscalis, Alchester. o. Ischiopolis, Tripoli of Siria. c. Isenacum, Eysenach. c. Isthmus Corinthiacus, Hexamili. Isidorum, Issoire. c. Isontius, Lisonzo. r. Issus, Laiazzo. c. Ister, the Danube. r. Isurium, Aldeburgh. o. Itanus, Paleo Castro. c. Itona, Iton. r. Ituna, Eden, Solway Fyrth. r. Iturea, Bacar. p. Iturissa, Sanguesa. c. Ivernia, Ireland. k. Ivernis, Dunkeran. o. Julia, Borgo di S. Domino. c. Julia, Geyl. r. Julia, Giula. c. Juliacum, Gulick. Leige. c. Julia Caesarea, Algiers. Julinum, Wollin. c. Juliobona, Honfleur. o. Juliobona, Vienna. c. Juliobriga, Porto de Santonna. o. Juliodunum, Loudun. c. Juliomagus, Angers. c. Julium Carnicum, Goritia. c. Junna, Juine. r. Jura, Joux. m. Jurus, Jaur. r. Justiniana Prima, Giusiandil, Acri∣da. c. Justiniana Secunda, Prisren. c. Justinopolis, Cabo di Istria. c. Juvavia, Saltzburgh. c. Juvavius, Saltzach. r. Juvantius, Tordino, or Trontino. r. Juvencus, Giovenco. r. Juveniacum, Govenzzo. c. Juvenacium, Giovezzano c. Juverna, Ireland. k. L A Labacum, Laubach. c. Labarus, Lambro. r. Labeatis Lacus, Scutari Ponta. l. Laberus, Kildare. c. Labinus, Lavino. r. Laboris terra, la Terra di Lava∣ro. p. Labro, Legorne. c. Lacedaemon, Misitra. c. Laciburgum, Rostoc. c. Laconia, Sacania. p. Lacobriga, Lagos. c. Lactodurum, Fedford. c. Lactoracum, Lectoure. c. Ladeni, Lathaine, Merck, and Tivedale. Legania, Leinster. p. Lagnus, the Bay of Lubeck. Lamia, Lima. r. Lampia, Elandia. r. Lanuvium, Civita Indovina. c. Laodicaea, Eskihissar. c. Loagia, la Forest aux loges. Laona, Killaloe. c. Lapurdensis Tractus, le pays de La∣bourd. Lapurdum, Baione. c. Laquedonia, Cedogna. c. Lar, Om. r. Larema, Lerma. o. Larius, Como, Cumerzee. l. Larius, Laris, Larc. r. Laros, l' Arone or Larone. r. Lascura, Lescar. c. Latium, Campagnia di Roma. p. Latobrigii, Brisgaw. p. Latone, Dorote. c. Latrippa, Medina Talnabi. c. Lavantum, S. Andre. c. Laudonia, Lothaine. p. Laudum, Lodi. c. Laudunum, Laon. c. Lauriacus Ager, le Lauraguais. t. Laurentum, S. Lorenzo. c. Laurentum, Loreto. c. Lauriacum, Lorch. Laurona, Logronno. c. Laus, Coro. r. Laino. r. Laus Pompeja, Lodi. c. Lausdunum, Loudun. c. Laedus, Loir. Leanita, Elcatis. c. p. Lecca, the Leck. r. Lechaeum, Lesteiocori, p. Ledesia, Léeds. o. Ledrensis Urbs, Nicosia. o. Ledum, Lez. r. Legla, Leye. r. Leige. c. Legio Germanica, Leon. c. Leinius, Leyne. r. Lemnos, Stalimene. i. Lemovicum Urbs, Limoges. c. Lentia, Lintz. c. Leobriga, Lemburgh. c. Leoburgum, Lawenburgh. c. Leocata, Licata. c. Leodium, Liege. c. Leogus, Lowis. i. Leomania, Lomaigne. p. Leona, Leondoul. c. Leonicae, Lorgues. c. Leonis Monasterium, Lemster. ▪ Leontina, Lentini. c. Leopolis, Lemburgh. c. Leopolis, San Leo. Leovardia, Leeuwarden. c. Leptis, Tripoli of Barbary. c. Leprosium, Levroux. c. Lerina, S. Honore. i. Lerra, Couesnon. r. Lertius, Lers. r. Lesbos, Metelin, Metylene. i. Lesura, Leser. r. Leta, Leto Morte. r. Lethes, el Lima. r. Lethes, Bedlar, Guadalett. r. Letia, Lesche. r. Lettaranum, Lettere. c. Leucadia, S. Maura. i. Leuci, Sfacchia. r. Leucobria, Whithern. c. Leucosia, Nicosia. c. Leucorea, Wittenberg. c. Leuctra, Maina. c. Levina, Lenox. p. Levinus, Levin. r. Lexovium, Lsitux. c. Libonius, Leffy, Liffee, r. Liburnia, Croatia. p. Liburnia, Libourne, a c. of France in the Territory of Bourdeaux. Liburnus, Legorn. c. Libya Deserta, Elber. Licus, the Lech. r. Liger, Ligeris, Loyre. r. Ligerula, le Loyret. r. Ligno, Loignon. r. Liguidon, Liasto. o. Liguia, Evola. r. Liguria, the States of Genona. Lila, Lile, Rissel. c. Lilybaeum, Marsala. c. Limagus, Limat. r. Limania, Limagne. t. Limnos, Ramsey. i. Limonum, Poictiers. c. Limosium, Limoux. c. Lindemagus, Limat. r. Lindum, Linlitgo. p. Lindum, Lincolnia, Lincoln. c. Lingones, Langres. c. Linienus, Rother. r. Linum, Lynne. o. Liria, Lez. r. Liris, Garigliano. r. Litomerium, Leutmeritz. c. Liquentia, Livenza. r. Lobodunum, Laudenburgh. o. Locanus, il Proteriato. r. Lochia, Loches. c. Locoritum, Forcheim. c. Locra, il Capitello. r. Locrida, Giustandil. c. Locris, Gieraci. c. Locta, Loket, Ellebogen. c. Lodunum, Loudun. c. Logana, Lohne, Loe. r. Logia, Lough Foyle. r. Logus, Lug. r. Lombaria, Lombes. c. Lomundus, Loch Lomond. l. Londinum, Londinium, Londoniae, Augusta Trinobantum, London. c. Londinum Scanorum, Lundun in Schonen. c.
Longobardia, Lombardy. k. Longovicum, Lancaster. c. Lopadusa, Lampedosa. i. Lorda, Lourdes. c. Lotharinga, Loraint. p. or Westrick. Lovanium, Loevea, Louvain. c. Lous, Piergo, Polina. r. Loutosa, Louses. o. Loxa, Losse. r. Lubrensis Urbs, Massa. c. Luceoria, Lusuck, Luck. c. Luceria Nocera d lli Pagani. c. Lucieri Fanum, S. Lucar. o. Luciliburgum, Luxemburgh. c. Luciona, Luzon. c. Lucophibia, Witherne. c. Lucore, Wittenberg. c. Lucronium, Longonno. c. Lucus Asturum; Oviedo. c. Lucus Augusti, Lugo. c. Lugdunum Batavorum, Leyden. c. —Convenarum, S. Bertrand. c. —Segusianorum, Lyon. c. Lugidunum, Glogaw. c. Lugnvallum, Carlile. c. Luisium, S. Jean de Luz. c. Luna Nova, Sarzana. c. Lunae Montes, Gibel Caph. m. Lunda, Lundis, Lunden. c. c. Lupariae; Loviers. c. Lupfurdum, Meissen. c. Lupia, Loing. r. Lupias, Lippe. r. Luppia, Lipadt. c. Lupus, le Loup. r. Lusitania, Portugal. k. Lutetia, Paris. c. Luteva, Lodeves. c. Lutis, Leyta. r. Lutomagus, Monstreuil. c. Lutra, the Lawter. r. Lutra, Keisers Lautern. c. Lutum, South. r. Luxiona, Lusson. c. Lycaonia, Cogni. r. Lycastrum, ocastelli. o. Lycia, Briquïa. p. Lycia, le Lez. r. Lycias, the Leck. r. Lychnidus, Giuslandil. c. Lycopolis, Munia. c. Lycormas, Fdary. r. Lycus, il Platano. r. Lydia, Carsia. p. Lydius, Castoro r. Lynius, le Leyne. r. Lyra, Lire, Liere. o. Lyris, see Liris. r. Lyssus, inissi. o. M A Macaria, Julines. o. Macaria, Mazua. i. Macedonia, Jamboli, Comenolitani, Janna. p. Macella, Strongoli. c. Maceriae, Mezieres. c. Machora, Traina. c. Machlinia, Mechlin. c. Maclovia, Maclovipolis. S. Malo, c. Macra, Magra. r. Maderiacum, Meziers. c. Madoce, Aden. c. Madritum, Madrid. o. Madus, Maidstone. o. Maeander, Mindre. r. Maeatae, Northumberland. Magalona, Maguelone. c. Magi, Radnor. o. Magna Graecia; Calabria. p. Magnesia, Mangresia. c. Magnesia, Manissa. c. Magnopolis, Mecklenburg. c. Magnus Portus, Southampton, and Portsmouth. c. Magontiacum, Ments. c. Magrada, Uramed. r. Maidra, Mandre. r. Malduense Coenobium, Malmes∣bury, o. Maleos, Le Mul. i. Malmogia, Malmoe, Elleboge. c. Malva, Manve. r. Malava, Mulvya. r. Malobodium, Maubeuge. o. Mameridum, Martorano. c. Mammilla, Zeez. c. Manapia, Wexford. c. Mancunlum, Manduessum, Man∣chester. o. Manliana, Magliano. c. Mansuetinum, Baboliza. o. Mansus Verduni, Le mas de ver∣dun. c. Mantiana, Geluchelat. l. Man ua Carpetanorum, Madrid. c. Manuasca, Manosque. c. Maracanda, Badascian, Samar∣cand. c. Marchenium, Roxburow. o. Marchia, Merche. p. Marchia, Mark Markish-landt. p. Marcodurum, Duren. c. Marcomanui, Bohemia. k. Marcopolis, San Marco. c. Marcovada, Margnsest. c. Maria, Marotis, Buhira. l. Maridunum, Caermarthen. o. Margus, Morgab. r. Marionis Urbs, Luneburg c. Marionis Altera, Lubeck. c. Marisus, Merisch. r. Marithae, Martimos. m. Marobudum, Prague. c. Martinopos, Tours. c. —Mersburgh. c. Masacum, Maestych. o. Massalioicum, Gras de Passon. Massilia, Marseille. c. Masta, Graro. m. Marcola, Matera. c. Mathis, Matin. r. Matisco, Mascon. c. Matium, Candia. c. Matrinus, Piomba. r. Matrona, Le Marne. r. Mattiacum, Marpurg. c. Mauritania, Barbary. c. Maxera, Mazeras, Firi. r. Machlinia, Mechelen. p. Medama, Rossarno. o. Medama, il Metramo, Mesuna. r. Meden, Newport. o. Media, Servan, Shirvan. p. Media, Meath. Mediolanum, Munster. c. Mediolanum, Milan. c. Mediolanum, Lancaster. o. Mediolanum Santonum, Saintes. c. Mediolum, Medina Celi. c. Medoacus Major, La Brenta. ——Minor. il Bachillone. r. Meduana, Mayenne. r. &c. Meduacus, Medway. r. Medulanus, Medoc. r. Medunra, Mante. c. Megalopolis, Meckleburgh. c. Megies, Mydwisch. c. in Transylv. Mela, Garza r. Melani, Gibel Tor, Gibel Monsa. m. Melas, Gensui. r. Mauroneri. Meldae, Meaux. c. Melfictum, Molfeta. c. Melibocum, Hartswaldt. m. Melignanum, Mgiano. o. Melita, Malta. i. Melocabus, Coburg. c. Melocacus, Cobury. o. Melodunum, Melun. c. Melos, Milo. i. Melphes, Molpa. r. Melphis, Melfi. c. Melfa. r. Menapii, Kesel. o. Menehildis fanum. S. Menehoud. c. Menevia, S. Davids. o. Menlascus, Donoslein, Oria. r. Menoba, Guadiamar. r. Menosgada, Eger, Heb. r. Menuthias, Madgascar. i. Memphis, Cairo, Alcairo. c. Meroie, Galgala. i. Mervinia, Merionethshire. Merovel Fosa, the Merewe. r. Merula, la Maira, Meira. r. Messapia, Terra a' Otranto. p. Mesopotomia, Diarbech. p. Messana, Messina. c. Messapia, Terra a' Otranto. i. Messenia, Methone, Modon. c. Messene, Moseniga. c. Messuium, Magdeburg. c. Metaurus, Metramo, Metro, Mar∣ro. r. Metae, Metz. c. Metells, Rosetto. c. Metelliburgu, Middleburg. c. Methymna, Medina Alnabi. c. Middelsurtum, Milbar. o. Midia, Meath. p. Midorius, Midonx. r. Miletus, Melito. c. Mimantium, Mande. c. Mimenus, Niemen. r. Mincius, il Menzo. r. Minervium, Monemagi. c. Minio, il Mingone. r. Minius, Minho. r. Mirabellum, Mirebeau. c. Mirapisca, Mirepoix. c. Mirecurtium, Mirecourt. c. Misa, Marotto. r. Misnia, Meissen. c. Missina, p. Moenus, the Mayne. r. Moesia superior, Servia. p. Moesia inferior, Bulgaria. p. Moguntia, Mentz. c. Molinae, Moulins. c. Molo▪ Moulon. r. Mona, Anglesey. i. Mona, Monapia, Monavia, Man. i. Monachium, Munich, Munchen, i. Monaius, Polina. r.
Monasterium, Munster. p. c. —Mounster. p. Mons Albanus, Montauban, Montal∣bano. c. —Alcuinus, Montalcio. c. —Altus, Montalto. c. —Belligardus, Monbelliard. c. —Vici, Mondovi. c. —Ferettanus, Monseltro. c. —Ferratus, Monferrat. p. —Medius, Monmedi. c. —Limarii, Montelimar. c. —Lunae, Bed. m. —Pessulus; Mompellier. c. —Physcon, Monte Fiascone. c. —Regalis, Monreale. c. —Relaxus, Morlaix. c. —Serratus, Monserrat. m. —Serratus, Monserrat. i. Montes, Mons. c. Montilium Ademari, Montelimar. c. Mopsuestia, Malmistra. c. Moratensis Lacus, Uchtersée, Mur∣tensee, Murat. l. Moravus, Marh. r. Morave. r. Morgontiacum, Georgeto. o. Morgus, Orco. r. Morundia, Le Morvant. t. Mosa, the Maes, Meuse. r. Moscus, Mosca. r. Mosomum, Mouson. r. Motuca, Modica. c. Motycanus, il Sicli. r. Mulda, Multaw. r. Munitium, Gottingen. c. Mura, the Muer, Mure. r. Murocincta, Muers, Moers. o. Mursa, Esseck. o. Mursia, Muers. c. Mussipontum, Pont a Mouson. o. Mutina, Modena. c. Muttovia, Mittaw. c. Myndus, Metense. c. Myra, Stramita. c. N A Nabalia, Neerse. r. Nabantia, Tomar. o. Nabathaea, Beraab. p. Nabius, Miranda. r. Nabus, Nab. r. Naebis, el Neiva. r. Naeomagus, Nions. o. Naevia, Porto Maggiore. o. Naisus, Nissa. c. Nanaeus, Navern. r. Nanigeris, Zeilan. i. Nannentes, Nantes. c. Nantuates, Pays de Vaud. t. Naparis, Sereth, Dniester. r. Nar, Nera. r. Narbo, Narbonne. c. Narda, Naerden. o. Narisci, Nrtgow. t. Narita, Gieracia. Naro, Narenta. c. Natosie, Asia the Less. Naduli. t. Nava, Nw. r. Navalia, Zoul. o. and Nettuno. o. Navilubio, El Mullon. r. Naulum, Noli. c. Naupactus, Lepanto. c. Naupila, Napoli di Romanie. c. Nauportus, Laubach. c. Naustathmus, Fontana Bianca. o. Navus, the Naw r. Naxuana, Nascivan. c. Naxus, Naxia, Nacsia. i. Nea, Nota. p. Neapolis, Naples. c. Neapolis, Tripoli. c. Neapolis Macedoniae, Christopol. c. Neapolis Peloponnesiaca, Napoli di Malvasia. c. —Sardiniae, Napoli. c. Neapolis Austriae, Newstat. c. Nebis, Neiva. t. Nebrodes, Madonia. m. Necium Allobrogum, Annecy. c. Neda, Longarola. r. Nedus, le Nay. r. Neetina Vallis, il Valle di Noto. p. Neetum, Noto. c. Nemausium, Nismes. c. Nemesia, Nyms. r. Nemetum, Nemetes, Spire. c. Nemetocerna, Arras. c. Nemorensis Vallis, il Valle di De∣mona. p. Nemosium, Nemours. o. Nemus, Nemi. o. Nentidava, Besteraze. Nosenstadt. c. Neoburgum, Naumburg. c. Neoburgum, Newburg. c. Neoburgum, Newbery. o. Neo Caesarea, Tocato. c. Necomiensis Eacus, Newenburger∣zée. l. Neocomium, Neuschastel, Newen∣burg. o. Neodunum, Dol. c. Neoforum, Newmarkt. o. Neoforum, Neusmarché. o. Neomagus sive Noviomagus, Nim∣meguen. c. Neomagus, Spire. c. Neopyrgum, Newburgh, Newed∣burg. c. Neopurgum, Naumberg. c. Neosellum, Newhausel. c. Neostadium, Neustadt. c. Nepet, Pozzolo. c. Neracum, Nerae. c. Nericia, Nerk. p. Nerigon, Norway. k. Neritum, S. Maura. i. Neritum, Nardo. c. Nerolinga, Norlingen. c. Nerva, El Nervio. r. Nervii, Haynault. p. Nerusi, Vence. c. Nester. Nieper. r. Netina Vallis, Notto. p. Neustria, Westrick. p. Neustria, Normandy. p. Nicaea, Nice de Provence. c. Nicaea, Isnich. c. Nicastrum, Necastro. c. Nicer, the Necker, Necre. r. Nicia, Lenza. r. Nicia, Nura. r. Nicia, Fuoa. c. Nicomedia, Isnigmid. c. Nicopia, Nykioping. c. Nicopolis, Gianich. c. Nicopolis, Nigeboli. c. Nicopolis, Prevesa. p. Nidrosia, Drontheim, Trunhim, Trunten. c. Ninus, Niniva, Nineve. c. Nissa, Nisan. c. Nita, Nied. r. Nithia, Nichisdale. p. Nitiobriges, l' Agenois. t. Nitria, Neytracht. c. Nivaria, Tenerissa. i. Nivernum, Nevers. c. Nivernensis, Provincia Nivernois. p. Nivesdum, Lire, Liere. c. Nivus, le Nive, Errobi. r. Noarus, the Sav. r. Noas, Sithnizo. r. Noedonum, Leondoal, or Dol. c. Neomagus, Lisieux. c. Nomen Dei, Nombre de Dios. c. Nonigentum, Nogent. o. Nora, Nura. c. Norba Caesarea, Alcantara. c. Nordovicum, Norwick. c. Norici, Norway. p. Noreja, Goritia. c. Noricum, Austria, Stiria, Carin∣thia, Carniola, Saltzburg, and part of Bavaria. Notra, Noere. r. Novantae, Galloway. p. Novempopulonia, Gascoigne. p. Noverogus, Niort. o. Noviodunum, Noyon. c. Noviodunum, Nevers. c. Noviomagus, Noyon. c. Noviomagus, Nimmegen. c. Noviomum, Noyon. c. Novostadium, Newstadt. c. Novum Castrum, Newcastle. c. c. Novum Mercatum, New-Mar∣ket. t. Novus Portus, Newport. t. Nuceria, Nocera. c. Numantia, Soria, Garay. c. Numidia, Barbary. k. Nursia, Norcia. c. Nyssa, Nisa. c. O A Oanus, Frascolari. r. Oaxes, Armiro. r. Obacer, Oakre. r. Oboca, Doro. r. Awenmore. r. Obrincus, Mossele. r. Obris, Orbe. r. Obtricum, Maestricht. c. Occitania, Languedoc. p. Occhardus, Tartar. r. Ocelis, Ziden, Zibet. c. Ocellum, Holderness, Spurn∣head, Cape. Ocetis, Hoy, Hethy, South Ranals. Ochus, Obengir. r. Ocinarius, il Savuto. r. Ocrinum, the Lands-end, a Cape. Ocriculum, Ocricoli. o. Octavium, Cordunna. c. Octodurum, Toro. c. Odera, Oder. r. r. Odessus, Varna. c. Lemano. c. Odia, Odia, Udi. c. Odielis, Odiel. r. Odora, Orne. r. Ocaso, S. Sebastian, Capt.
Oeaso, Aiso. c. Oeni: ons, Inspruck c. Oeni Provincia, Inthall. p. Oeno stadium, Instadt. c. Oenus, Inn. r. Carnero. r. Oesia, Oise. r. Olandia, Oeland. i. Olbia, Nicaea. c. Olchinum, Olcinium, Dulcigno, Dol∣cigno. c. Olda, Le Lot. r. Olfinum, Elpen. c. Glimachum, Lymbach. o. Olina, Le Orne. r. Olisippo, Lisbon. c. Olitis, Old. r. Olivula, Villa Franca. o. Ollius, l'Oglio. r. Olomutium, Olmitz. c. Oluna, Tolder. r. Olympia, Belvedere. c. Olympus, Caloieron Oros. m. Olympus, Lacha. m. Onsus, Ens. r. Oningis, Oringe Jaen, c. Onoldum, Onoldum, Onspach. o. Oppavaviensis Ducatus, Tropaw. Oppolia, Oppelen. c. Orba, El Rio de la Guerva. r. Orbio, l' Orbieu. r. Orcades, the Isles of Orkney. Orcelis, Orihuela. c. Ordovices, Montgomery, Den∣bigh, and Flintshire. Oresta, Adrianople. c. Oresunda Fretum, the Sound. Oretani, La Manch. p. Orgella, Orgelium, Orgia, Urgel. c. Orine, Muzua. i. Orge, Sorgue. r. Orgus, Orco. r. Orontes, Dracone, Farfar. r. Oropitum, Orvieto. c. Orovernia, Ireland. Orsona, Ossuna. c. Orthosia, Tortosa. c. Osca, Huesca. c. Osilia, Oesel, Eusel. i. Ositia, Osterlandt. p. Osmus, Sladitza. r. Ossa, Fiore. r. Otonlum, Odensée. c. Ottadini, Northumberland. p. Ovetum, Oviedo. c. Ousta, L'Ouste. r. Oxama, Osma. c. Oximensis Pagus, Hiesmois. t. Oximum, Hiesmes. o. Oxonium, Oxford. c. Oxus, Deistan, Geichon, r. Ozecarus, Zezares. r. PA Pahulensis Pagus, Le Pays de Pen∣le. t. Pacta, Patti. c. Pactius, Oava. r. Pactolus, Sarabat. r. Pactya, Pazzi. c. Padus, Po. r. Paestum, Pest, Pesto, Pesti. c. Pagus Francus, Franc. t. Palaeo-castrum, Policastro. c. Palantia, Palencia. c. Palatium Dioclesian, Spalatro. c. Palia, Paglia. r. Palma, Malorca. c. Palmatia, Venaria, Giro. i. Palum, Pau. c. Palus Meotis, Limen, Zabre, Ta∣na. p, Pamphylia, Carama, Setalia. Pandataria, S. Maria. i. Panis, Peene. r. Pannonia, Austria, Stiria, Sclavo∣nia, and the Lower Hungary. Panormus, Palermo. c. Panyasus, Spirnazza. r. Paphlagonia, Roni, Bolli, Flagia∣na. p. Papa, Pavia. c. Parastaba, Peretslaw. c. Parisii, The East Riding of York∣shire. Parisii, Paris. c. Parnassus, Liacoura, Parnasso. m. Paropanassiadae, Cabl, or Sable∣stan. p Paropamisus, Calchistan. m. Paros, Paris, Paro, i. Paropasmus, Navagrot. m. Parthenius, Sangari. r. Parthenope, Betente, i. Parthenope, Naples. c. Parthenopolis, Magdeburg. c: Parthia, Galania. p. Pastovia, Padstow. o. Patara, Patera. c. Patavia, Passaw. c. Patavium, Padova. c. Pathissus, Tibiscus. r. Pathmos, La Palmosa. i. Patrae, Patras. c. Patruissa, Brassaw, or Clausem∣burg. c. Paulon, il Paglion. r. Pausino, Buzanich. r. Pax, La Paz. c. Pax, Augusta, Badajox. c. Pax Julia, Beja. c. Paopolis, Wurtzburg. c. Pedemontium, Piedmont. p. Pedenatum, Pezenas. Pedicull, Ostuni. c. Peiso, Newsidleriee. l. Pelius, Pelion, Petras. m. Peloponnesus, Morea. p. Pelorum, Capo di Faro, Cape. Pelusium, Belbais, Belbes. c. Peneus, Salampria. r. Penica, Pengick. c. Perga, Pirgi. c. Pergamus, Pergamo, Bergamo. c. Perinthus, Heraclea. c. Persia, Fars, K. Farsistan. k. Persicus Sinus, Elcatif. Perticus Ager, Le Perche. p. Perusia, Perugia. c. Pestum, Pesth. c. Petavium, Petovio, Petaw. c. Petina, Pedena, Pettaw. c. Petra, Herac. c. Petropolis, Petriburgus, Peterbo∣rough. c. Petrocorensis Provincia, Peri∣gord. p. Petrocorium, Perigneux. r. Petrovaradinum, Peterwardein. c. Petuaria, Beverley, Hull. o. o. Phabiranum, Bremen. c. Phaeacia, Corfu. l. Pharan, Fara. c. Pharia, Lesina. i. Pharsalus, Farsa. c. Phasiana, Terra Nova. c. Phasis, Fasso, Fazo. r. Phaselis, Fionda. o. Phellos, Fello. c. Pheugarum urbs, Halberstadt. c. Philadelphia, Filadelphia. c. Philetum, Groningen. c. Philippi, Philippo. c. Philippopolis, Filibe, Filippopoli. c. Philippopolis, Philippsville. o. Phiscon, Fiascone. m. Phiternus, Biferno. r. Phylgadia, Flicz. m. Phocaea, Fogie, ochia. c. Phrigida, Frias. c. Phrudis, Bresselle. r. Phrygia, Dargut-lil. p. Phusca, Fischio, Fiesco. c. Phycocle, Cervia. c. Picenum, Marcha Anconitana. p. Pictaviensis Provincia, Poictou. p. Pictavium, Poictiers. c. Pinarolium, Pignerol. c. Pindus, Mezzovo. m. Pintia, Valladolid. c. Piraeus, Porto di Lione. p. Pisaurum, Pesaro. c. Pisaurus, Foglia. r. Piscaria, Peschiera. c. Pisciacum, Poissy. t. Pisidia, Versacgli, Versacgeli. p. Pisidion, Porto Zora, Zurat. c. Pistoraca, La Pisuerga. r. Pituerum, Pluviers. c. Placenta, Piacenza. c. Placentia, Piacenza. c. Plavis, Piave. r. Plubium, Sassari. c. Plumbinum, Piombino. o. Podium, Le Puy. c. Polonia, Poland. k. Polybianum, Leybnitz. o. Pomona, Mainland. l. Pompelon, Pampelune. c. Pons Arcus, Pont de l'Arche. c. —Audomari, Pont Audemar. c. —Caesaris, Pont de Ce. o. —Fractus, Pontefract, Pom∣fret. o. —Poledranus, Bentivolio, a Castle. —S. Spiritus, Pont Esprit. c. —Saravii, Sarbruck. o. —Trajani, Alcantara. c. —Ursonis, Pont Orson. o. Pontana, Drogheda. c. Pontesium, Pont-Oise. o. Ponticum, Ponthieu. p. Pontipolis, S. Pons. c. Pontus, Genech. p. Porata, Pruth. r. Portus Augusti, Porto. c. —Baocensis, Port en Bessin. p. —Belus, Porto Belo. —Brigantinus, Porto di Co∣runa. p. —Cale, Porto. p.
—orcagiae, Cork Haven. —Desideratus, le Port desiré. p. —Dives, Porto Ricco. p. —Garianorum, Yarmouth. p. —Gori, il Porto di Gori. p. —Gratiae, Havre de Grace. p. —Gruarii, Porto Gruaro. p. —Herculis, Porto Ercole. p. —Iccius, Calice. o. —Longus, Porto Longone. p. —Ludovici, Porto Lovis. p. —Magnus, Southampton. —Magnus, Portsmouth. —Mauritius, Porto Moriso. p. —Monoeci, Monaco. o. —Orestis, Porto Ravaglioso. p. —Ostium, Portsmouth. p. —Pacis, Porto de la Paz. p. —Paulae, il Porto di Paula. p. —Regius, il Porto Royal. p. —Regius, Port Royal. p. —Romantinus, Porto di Gru∣aro. —Saloius, Porto di Salo. p. —Santonum, Rochelle. c. —Veneris, Port endres. p. —Veneris, Porto Venere. p. Portugallia, Portugal. k. Posidium, Sues. c. Posonium, Presburg. c. Postonia, Adelspurg. o. Potentia, Potenza. c. r. Pontremulium, Pontremoli. o. t. Pontus Euxinus, the Black Sea. —Alacris, Portalegre. c. Praeneste, Palestrina. c. Praesidium, Warwick, c. Praetoria Augusta, Cronstat. c. Precopia, Praecops. c. Privernum, Piperno. o. Probatopolis, Schaffhausen. c. Proconnesus, Marmora. i. Procopiana Villa, Procupie. c. Propontis, il mare di Marmora. Prostropaea, Trpaea. c. Prusa, Bursa, Barech. c. Ptolemais, Aca, Acre. c. Puteoli, Pozzuoli. c. QUA. Quadi, Moravia, Bohemia, and Au∣stria. Quantia, la Chanche. r. Quercetum, Quesnoy. o. Quercopolis, Aichstadt. c. Quinctiopolis, S. Quintin. c. Quinque Ecclesiae, Funff-kircken. c. Quintanica, Vils. r. Quissus, the Quiesse. r. Quiza, Oran. c. RA Rabath, Petra. c. Raceburgum. Rackelspurg. c. Raceburgum, Ratzburg. c. Raconicum, Raconick. c. Radacophanum, Radicophani. o. Radesia, Retz. r. Radiantia, Reduitz. r. Radinga, Reding o. Ramua, Ramekins. f. Ranula, Renelle. r. Rapa, Rapoe. o. Raptus, Oby. r. Ratiastum, Limoges. c. —Angoulesme. c. Ratisbona, Regenspurg, Ratisbone. c. Ravius, Erne, Trouvis. r. Rauraci, Basil. c. Rea, Re. i. Reate, Reati. c. Reatina Palus, Lago di Rieti. l. Rebellium, Ravello. c. Recinetum, Ricanati. c. Redae pagus, Le Comte de Razes. t. Redaestum, Rodosto. c. Rodones, Rennes. c. Reesium, Reés. c. Regalis Villa, Realville. c. Regenses, Riez. c. Reginae Gradecium, Koningsgretz. c. Reginus, Regen. r. Regiomons, Koningberg. c. Regium Lepidi, Reggio. c. Regium, Rees c. Regiopolis, Kingstown. o. Regni, Sussex, Surrey, Hant∣shire. Reii, Ries. c. Remi, Reims. c. Resisto, Rodosto. c. Rha, Wolga, Edel, Thamar. r. Rhaetia, les Grisons. Rhage, Leicester. c. Rhange, Nottingham. c. Rhatomagus, Monstreuil. c. Rhatostathybius, Taff. r. Rhauraris, Erault. r. Rhebas, Ribas. r. Rhedones, Rennes. c. Rhegium Julium, Regio. c. Rhenus, the Rhine. r. Rhenoberga, Rhinberg. c. Rhigodunum, Rippon. o. Rhigodunum, Warrington. o. Rhitymna, Retimo. c. Rhiusiavia, Giengen. c. Rhizana, Risano. c. Rhobodium, Fairforeland, Rhoda, Rsas, a Castle. Rhodanus, the Rhosne. r. Rhodigium, Rovigo. c. Rhodope, Valiza, Rulla. m. Rhodopolis, Rostock. c. Rhodumna, Roane. o. Rhodus, Rhodes. i. Rhotomagus, Roan, Roven. c. Rhuspina, Sous. c. Rhusuccor, Algiers. c. Rhutupiae, Sandwich. o. Rheutenensis Provincia, Rovergue. p Rhymnus, Jayck. r. Ricina, Raglius. i. Ricomagum, Riom. c. Riparia, La Riviere. t. Ripavia, Rivadavia. c. Riselia, Rille. r. Rivi, Rieux. c. Rium, Rye. o. Rivogia, Rioja. p. Roboretum, London-Derry. c. Rocianum, Rossano. c. Rodium, Roie. c. Roffa, unde adj. Roffensis, Roche∣ster. c. Roia, Roye. c. Roma, Rome. c. Roma, Rom. i. Romandiola, Romagne. p. Romaricus Mons, Remiremont. o. Romatinum, Lemene. r. Romorentinum, Romorentin. c. Rosarum Urbs, Rostock. c. Rosburgum, Roxburg. o. Rosetum, Grosseto. c. Rossium, Rosse. c. Rostrum Nemaviae, Memmingen. c. Rotanus, Tavignani. r. Rotomagus, Roan, Roven. c. Rotundus Mons, Romont. c. Roxolania, Red Russia. p. Rubea, the Nort Caep. Cap. Rubeacum, Ruffach. c. Rubi, Rube. c. Rubicon, il Pisatello. r. Rubo, Dwina, Duna. r. Rubricatus, Lobregat. r. Rubricatus, Jadog, Guadilbarbar. Rubrum Mare, the Red Sea. Ruconia, Rioja. p. Ruesium, Rieux. c. Ruesium, Le Pay. c. Rugia, Rugen. i. Rugua, Rue. c. Rumelia, Greece. Rupella, Rochelle. c. Rupes Regia, Roroy. o. Rura, Roer, Roure. r. Ruramunda, Roermonde. c. Ruscino, Le Tet. r. Ruscine, Roussillon. f. Ruscurum, Algiers. c. Rusicibar, Sarcelle. o. Rusna, Russe. r. Rutenensis Provincia, Rovergue, p. Ruteni, Rodez, Rodes. c. Ruteni, the Russ, Muscovy. k. Rutuba, Rotta. r. Rutupiae, Richborow, Sand∣wick, Ribchester. SA Saade. c. Saba, Meroë. i. Saba, Sabis, Sambre. r. Sabaria, Guns, Guntz. r. Sabatia, Bracciano. t. Sabatium, Vada, Vad. p. Sabatus, il Savuto. r. Sabatus, Sabato. r. Sabaudia, Savoy. p. Sabina, Sabina. p. Sabis, Sambre. r. Sabolium, Sable. c. Sabrina, Severne. r. Sabuloneta, Sabionetta. o. Sacri Capilli, Hallifax. o. Sacrum Promontorium, Le Cap de S. Vincent. Saduca, Guadalquivireja. r. Saena, Siena. c. Sagis, Gorio, Porto di magna Vacca. Sagium, Seez. c. Sagra, Alaro, r. Salopia, Shrewsbury, o. or Shropshire. pr. Sagrus, Sangro. r. Saguntia, Gisgonza. o. Sala, Saal. r. la Seille. r.
Sala, Salé. c. Sala, Seile. r. Sala, Yssel, Issel. r. Salacia, Alcazar. c. Salamis, Colouri, S. Brousia. i. Salamis, il porto Constanzo. c. Salapia, Salpe. c. Salassi, Val a' Aouste. r. Salda, Saude, r. Saldae, Bugia. c. Salduba, Guadalquivirejo. r. Salduba, Sarragoza. c. Salentini, Parte della Terra d' O∣tranto. p. Salera, Saudre. r. Salia, Sella. r. Salia, Selle. r. Salinae Vagiennorum, Saluzo. c. Salisburgum, Saltzburg. c. Salmona, Salm. r. Salmurium, Saumur. c. Salo, Xalon. r. Salodorius Pagus, Soleurre. p. Salodorum, Solothurn. c. Salopia, Shrewsbury, Shrop∣shire. c. t. Salsum, Guadajox, Salobral. r. Salvatoris Fanum, San Salvador. c. Salutiae, Saluzzo. c. Samandria, Zenderow, Semendre. c. Somarobriva, S. Quintin. —Amiens. c. Sambia, Szamland. p. Sambroca, Ter, Tech. r. Sanctio, l' Ubaye. r. Sandava, Segeswar. c. Sandomira, Sendomir. c. Sanguitersa, Santerre. p. Sangarius, Sangari, Zagari, Aca∣da. r, Sangossa, Sanguesa. c. Sanitium, Sanisium, Senez. c. Santones, Xaints. c. Santonia, Saintogne. p. Sapina, Sauna. r. Sapi, il Savio. r. Sarabris, Toro. c. Saraepons, Sarbruck. o. Saravus, Saure. r. Sarcinium, San Truyen. o. Sardica, Sofia, Sophia, Triadizza. c. Sardinia. i. Sargetia, Istrig. r. Sarisburia, Sarisbury. c. Sarmatia, Tartary. Sarnia, Garnsey. i. Sarta, la Sarte. r. Sarum, Sarisburia, Salisbury. c. Sarus, il Sangro. r. Sasima, Sasum. o. Savaria, Muer. r. Savaria, Guntz. r. Savaria, Leybnitz, Gratz. c. c. Savona, Saoan. c. Savo, Saone. r. Savus, le Sez. r. Savus, the Sav. r. Savus, Saffay. r. Saxulum, Sassulo. o. Scaldi, Schelde, Escaut. r. Scandava, Schesburg, Segiswar. o. Scandinavia, Norway, Sweden and Lapland. Scania, Schonen. i. Scaphusia, Schaffhausen. c. & pr. Scapris, Scabris, Scarlino. o. Scardus, Marinat, Maranai. m. Scarpa, ila, Scarpe. r. Schutia, Schut. i. Scoras, l'Isere. r. Scordisi, Rascia. t. Scultenna, il Panaro. r. Scupi, Scopia, Uschub. c. Scyllaceum, Sciletium, Squillaci. c. Scyros, Schiro. i. Schylla, Scilla, Sciglio, a Rock. Scythia, Tartary. Sebastia, Saustia. c. Sebastianopolis, S. Sebastian. c. Sebastopolis, Suvas. c. Sebetus, il Fornello. r. Sebusiani, la Bresse, Lyonnois & le Forez. Sebusium, Weisemburg. o. Secerrae, San. Saloni. o. Secontia, Siguenza. c. Secovia, Segovia. c. Sedelocus, Saulieu. o. Seduni, Haut Valais. t. Sedunum, Sion, Sitten. c. Segedunum, Segedin. c. Segesta, Barbara. c. Segesterorum Urbs, Sesteron. o. Segeswaria, Schespurg. c, in Tran∣sylvania. Segethusa, Cronstadt. c. Segianum, Sarzana. c. Segobriga, Segorve. c. Segodunum, Rodez. c. Segodunum, Nurenburg. c. Segorbia, Segorve. c. Seguana, Seine, Seyne. r. Segubia, Segovia. c. Seguntia, Siguenza. c. Segusiana, Lyonnois. t. Segusii, Gerawer. p. Segusium, Susa. c. Segustero, Sisteron. c. Sela, Guardia. r. Selampura, Lampura. c. Selandia, Seelandt, Zeelandt. i. Selenoburgus, Lunenburg. c. Seleucia ferrea, Caragar. c. —Pieria, Seleuche Jelber. —Mesopotamiae, Bachud, Bag∣dat, Bagdet. c. —Ad Belum, Divertegi, and Salefica. Selibria, Selymbria, Selivrea. c. Selinus, Islenos. c. Selymbria, Selieure. c. Sempronium, Oedenburg, Sopron. c. Semurium, Semur. c. Sena, Saena, Siena. c. Senega, Zanaga, Ovedec. r. Senna, Senio, r. Senia, Zeng. r. Senomagnus, S. Paul de trois Cha∣steauz. c. Senones, Sens. c. Sentica, Zamora. c. Sentii, le Diocesse de Digne. Senus, Scena, Sacana, Shannon. r. Separa, Seure. r. Septae, Ceuta. c. Septem Castrensis, Transylvania, p. Septempeda, San. Sevirino. c. Septimancae, Simancas. o. Septumani, Languedoc. p. Septonia, Shaftsbury. o. Sequana, la Seyne. r. Sequani, le Franche Comté. p. Serabis, Segura. r. Serbes, Miron, Hued Icer. r. Serezana, Sarzana. c. Seria, Xeres de Guadiana. c. Serius, Caramoran. Kiang. r. Serrae, Seres. c. Servania, Schirwan. p. Servesta, Zerbest. c. Serviodurum, Straubingen. c. Serus, Puon. r. Sesmarus, le Semoy. r. Sesselium, Seissel. o. Sessites, la Sesia. r. Sessui, Seez. c. Sestus, the Europe Dardanel. i. Setabis, Xativa, Gativa. c. Setela, Deemouth. r. Seva, See. r. Severopolis, San Severo. c. Siberna, Sibernia, S. Severina. c. Sicambri, Franconia. p. Sicambri, Guelderland. p. Sicania, Sicily, Sicilia. i. Sicoris, Segre. r. Siga, Humain, Aresgol. c. Siga, Sieg, la Sige. r. Sigetum, Sigeth. c. Signia, Segni. c. Silarus, Selo, Silaro. r. Silva, Silves. c. Silva Ducl, Hertoghenbosch, Bose∣duc. o. Silvanectum, Senlis. c. Silures, Hereford, Radnor, Breck∣nock, Monmouth and Gla∣morganshires. Silurum Insulae, the Silly's. Simaethus, Jaretta. r. Simyra, Erzerum. c. Sinarum Imperium, China. Singidunum, Zenderow. c. Singilia, Antiquera. c. Singilis, Xenil. r. Sinus Balticus, the Baltick Sea, Germ. De Belt. Sinus Tarentinus, Golfo di Taranto. Sipontum, Siponto, Manfredonia. Siris, Senno. r. Sirmium, Sirmish, Szreim. c. Sisca Legionis, Caer Leon. c. Siscia, Sisseg. c. Sissum, Seissel. c. Sisterio, Stirone. r. Sitomagum, Thetford. o. Slonima, Slonim. c. Sobanus, Menan. r. Sodera, Sodora. c. o. Sodera, Sauldre. r. Soderani, Berlin. c. Sogdiana, Mawralnaber. p. Solana, Solane. r. Solis Vallis, Soltwedel. o. Solma, Solms. f. t. Solodurum, Soleurre. c. Solonia, Sologne. t. Somona, la Somme. r. Sontius, Isonzo. r. Sophia, Sofia, Triadizza. c. Soppia, Suippe. r. Sorabi, Misnia. p.
Sorabis, Segura. r. Sordisci, Part of Hungary. Sorviodunum, Did Sarisbury. Sossius, Marsala. r. Soteropolis, S. Salvador. c. Soia, Ayre, a City of France. Sparta, Misitra. c. Spedia, Spetia. c. Spenderobis, Semender. c. Sperchius, Agriomela. r. Spinae, Newbery. o. Spiritus Sanctus, S. Esprit. Sraberus, Segura. r. Stagna Volcarum, Maguelone. Staliocanus Portus, Leondou. Stampae, Estampes. c. Stapulae, Estaples. o. Stauronesum, Creutznach. c. Stella, Estella. c. Stephanodunum, Dunstafag. o. Stephanopolis, Brassaw, Kronstadt and Landskroon. Stoarius, Stoer. c. Stoecades, Hyeres. i. Strateburgum, Strasburg. c. Stratonica, Franco Castro. o. Stridonium, Sdrin. c. Strigonium, Gran. c. Strongyle, Stromboli. i. Strymoa, Marmora, Stromona. r. Suana, Soana, or la Flore. c. Suardones, the Hither Pomerania. Subcinum, Belforte. o. Subsylvania, Underwalden. t. Sucro, Xucar. r. Suditi Montes, Fitchtelberg. m. Suecia, Sweden. k. Suessa, Sessa. c. Suessiones, Soissons. c. Suevia, Schwaben. p. Suevus, Oder. r. Suillus, Logh Suilly. l. Suinus, Salino. r. Suiia, Schwitz, Swiss, a Canton. Sulga, Sorgue. r. Sulmo, Sermoneto. c. Sunda, the Sound. Sundis, Stralsund. c. Supia, Suippe. r. Sur, Eltor. c. Sura, Saur, Sour. r. Surrentum, Sorrento, Sorriento. Surin, Sewer. r. Susatum, Soest, Soust. c. Suvidnia, Schweidniz. c. Sylva Arduenna, Achterwaldt. —Bacenis, Semana, Harts∣waldt, Swartswaldt. Sylva-Ducis, Hertogenbosch, Gallis Bois-le-Duc. c. Sylvanectum, Senlis c. Sylvania, Underwaldt. Syria, Souristan. p. T A Tabaci Insula, Tabago. i. Taberna, Taverna. c. Tabernae Alsaticae, Elsas Zabern, Saverne. c. Tabresium, Tauris. c. Tacubis, Tomar. o. Tader, Segura. r. Taenarium, Cape Matapan. Texali, Buquan. p. Tagonus, Tajuna. r. Tagus, Tajo, Tage. r. Taliafates, dit Eyffel. . Taliates, Dallendorff. c. Tamara, Tamer. r. Tamesis, Thames. r. Tamiata, Tamiatis, Tamiathi, Da∣miata. c. Tana, Tayne. r. Tanager, Negro. r. Tanais, Don, Tana. r. Tanais, Azack, Asoph. c. Tanodunum, Tounton. o. Tanesos, Thanet. i. Taphre, Precop. c. Taprobana, Zeilan i. Tara, Terrain. r. Taras, Tara. r. Tarentesia, Moutiers. c. Tarentum, Taranto. c. Tarracina, Terracina. c. Tarraco, Tarragona. c. Tartessus, Tariffa. c. Tartessus, Guadalquivir. r. Tarvanna, Terouane. c. Tarvisium, Treviso. c. Tasta, Acqs, Dax. c. Tauredunum, Tournon. o. Taurentium, Toulon. c. Tauresium, Giulandil. c. Tauresium, Tauris, Tebris. c. Taurianum, Palma. c. Taurica Chersonesus, Krim-Tar∣tary. p. Taurinum, Turio, Torino. c. Taurisium, Treviso. c. Tauromenium, Tavormina. c. Taurum, Toro. c. Taurunum, Belgrade. c. Taurus. m. Taurus, Carthestan, Kornthourn, Thaurn. m. Taurus, Eltor. c. Tavus, Tay. r. Teanum, Tiano. c. Tedanium, Oria, Zermagna. r. Tela, la Thile. r. Telesia, Telese. c. Telis, Egli. r. Tellina Vallis, the Valteline. t. Telo, Toulon. c. Telonius, Turano. r. Tencteri, Marck, Westphalia. Tenera, Dender. r. Denre. Teneramunda, Dendermonde. Tenae, Thienen. o. Teoracia, Tierache. t. Tephlis, Teflis. c. Tergeste, Trieste. c. Terias, Jaretta. r. Teriolium, Tirol. p. Termonia, Dortmund. c. Termulae, Termini. c. Terna, Ternois. r. Teruensis Pagus, Ternois. Tersa Leporia, Terskoy, Leporie. p. Tertia, Tercera. i. Tertona, Tortona. c. Tervanna, Terovanne. c. Terulum, Tervel. c. Teuderium, Paderborn. c. Teviotia, Tividale. p. Teutones, Germany. Thelis, Egli. r. Thebae, Stives. c. Theoci Curia, Tewksury. o. Theodemirensis Ager, Thimerais. t. Theodonis Villa, Thionville. c. Theodosia, Caffa. c. Theorodunum, Wells. c. Thera, Gozi. i. Thermae, Termine, and Bath. c. Thermae Superiores, Oberdaden. c. —Salinuntiae, Sacca. c. Thermidava, Dagno. c. Thessalia, Thessaly. p. Thessalonica. c. Solonichi. Thicis, Ter. r. Tech. Thinus, Tyn. r. Thoeda, Tove. r. Thracia, Romania. p. Thule, Iseland, Shetland. i. Thurium, Sibari. c. Thuscia, Tuscany, Florence. t. Thyamus, Calama. r. Tiberiopolis, Varna. c. Tibur, Tivoli. c. Ticarius, Grosso, Bozzo or Ficari. r. Tichis, Ter, Tech. r. Ticinum, Pavia. c. Ticinus, Tecino, Tesino. r. Tifernus, Biferno, Tiferno. r. Tigurum, Zurich. c. Tilavempus, Tajamento, Taglia∣mento. r. Tingis, Tangier. c. Tioia, Topino. r. Tinurtium, Tornus. o. Tiracia, Tierache. t. Tirolis, Tirol. p. Titius, Kerka. r. Tmolus, Tomalize. m. Tortium, Touars. c. Togisonus, Sciocco. r. —Vigazolo. l. Tokaum, Tokay. c. Tolca, Tonque. r. Toletum, Toledo. c. Toliapis, Shepey. i. Tolosa, Tolose, Toulouse. c. Tormis, Tormes. r. Tornacum, Tournay. c. Tornus, Torne. r. Torpatum, Derpt. c. Tortunum, Thorn. c. Toxandri, Kempen. t. Tragurium, Trau, Troghir, and Traou. c. Trajana Colonia, Kellen. o. Trajani Pons, Alcantara. c. Trajanus Portus, Civita Vecchia. Trajectum, Trajetto. c. —Francorum, Franckfort. c. —Inferius sive Ultrajectum, Utrecht. c. —Superius vel ad Mosam, Maestricht. c. Trama, Tresmes. r. Tranium, Trani. c. Transalpina Gallia, Lombardy. Trans-Issalana, Over-Yssel. p. —Oxiana, Mawralnaher. —Tagana, Alentejo. p. Trapezus, Trebisonda. c. Trasimenus, il Lago di Perugia. l. Trecasses, Trecae, Troyes. c. Trecasses, Champagne. p.
Trecorium, Lantriguet, Treguier. c. Tremonia, Dortmund. c. Treva, Trave, r. Travemond. o. Treviri, Trier, Germanis, Treves, Gallis. c. Trevoltium, Trevoux. c. Tribocci, Alsatia. p. Tribulum, Trebigna. c. Tricasses, Champagne. p. —Troyes. c. Tricorium, Galumbatz. o. Tridentum, Trent. c. Tridinum, Trin, Trino. o. Trinacria, Sicily. i. Trinitas, Trinidad. i. c. Trinobantes, Essex, Middlesex. Trisantonum Portus, Southam∣pton. c. Trivicum, Trevico. c. Trosulum, Monte-Fiascone. c. Truentus, Tronto. r. Truncum, Saumur. c. Trundhemum, Drontheim. c. Trutava, Forcheim. c. Tuasis, Twede. r. Tuama, Toam. c. Tuasis, Ts. r. Tuberum, Rotenburg. c. Tuder, Todi. c. Tueda, Twede. r. Tuerovius, Tavy. r. Tuesis, Berwick. c. Tugensis Pagus, Zug. Tulcis, Francoli. r. Tullum, Toul. c. Tunnocellum, Tinemouth. o. Tuntobriga, Braganza. c. Tundera, Tonderen. c. Tungri, Tongren. c. Tuola, Golo. r. Turia, Fossa. r. Turias, Guadalaviar. r. Turiaso, Tarazona. c. Turigum, Zurich. c. Turingia, Thuringe. p. Tuinus, Tecino. r. Turris Julia, Trughilo. c. Turritana, Sassani. c. Turobia, Alcantara. c. Turones, Toures. c. Turonia, Touraine p. Turulium, Turvel. Tutela, Tulle. c. —Tudela. c. Tyde, Tuy. c. Tyrambe, Temeruc. c. Tyras, Nester. r. Tyras, Bialogrod. c. Tzuzulum, Zorlick. c. V A Vabrae Vabres. c. Vacca, la Vouga. r. Vaccia, Vatzen. c. Vacomagi, Rosse. p. Vadanus Mons, Vaudemont. o. Vadicasses, Nivernois. p. Vadicassum, Nevers. c. Vaga, Medway. r. Vagieni▪ Marquisat de Saluces. Vagniacae, Maidstone. o. Vagorium, Seez. c. Vagria, Wageren. p. Vagus, Vag, Wag. r. Vahalis, Wael. r. Ovahl. Valavia, Velai. p. Valdanus, Walpo. r. Valdecum, Waldeck. c. Valdemontium, Vaudemont. o. Valderfinga, Vaudrevange, Walder∣ingen. c. Valgentia, Valence. o. Valenza. c. k. Valentia, Valenciennes. c. Valentiniani, Munimentum, Man∣heim. c. Vallesia, Valais, Wallisserlandt. Valesium, Valois. t. Vallisoletum, Valladolid. c. Vallis Telina, le Valteline. t. Vana, Wana. t. Vandalitia, Andaluzia. k. Vangena, Wangen. c. Vangiones, the lower Palatinate. Vangiones, Worms. c. Vapingum, Gap. c. Vara, Murray Fyrth. Varadinum, Waradin. c. Vardhusia, Wardhus. p. Vardus, Guerdon. r. Varena, Garanne. i. Vargiones, Baar. p. Varmia, Emeland, Warmer Land. p. Varta, the Warte. r. Varus, Var, Varro. r. Vasates, Bazas. c. Vascones, Gasconge. p. Vasgovia, Vauge, Wasgwo. p. Vasio, Vaison. c. Vastinum, Gassinois. p. Varenus, Santerno. r. Vaudum, Waad. t. Vaurum, Vaur, Lavaur. c. Ucetia, Vzes. c. Vecta, Vecht. o. Vectis, Wight. i. Vedasus, Bidasso. r. Vedra, Were. r. Veii, Scrofano. o. Velauni, le Velai. p. Vella, Pisciota. c. Velicer, Aa. r. Velitrae, Veletri. c. Velocasses, le Vexin. p. Venda, Wenden. c. Venedocia, North-Wales. p. Veneris Portus, le Port Vendres. Venerius, Wener. r. Venetia, Venice. c. Venetia, Vannes. c. Vensiensis Urbs, Vence. c. Venta Belgarum, Winchester. p. Venta Icenorum, Caster. o. —Silurum, Caerwent. o. Venusia, Venosa. c. Verbanus, il Lago Maggiore. l. Verbinum, Vervins. o. Verda, Ferden. c. Verda, Dona-wert. c. Veresis, l'Osa. r. Veria, la Vere. r. Veria s Campoveria, Ter▪ Vere. c. Vermelandia, Wermerland. p. Vernolium, Verneuil. c. Veronium, Vernon. c. Verodunum, Verdun. c. Verolamium, S. Albans. o. Veromandui Urbs, Vermand. c. Verovicum, Warwick. o. Vertia, Donawert. c. Vesalia, Wesel. c. Vesalia superior, Ober-wesel. c. Vescontio, Besanzon. c. Vesprium, Vesprin, Weisbrun. c. Vesulum, Vesoul. c. Vesuna, Perigeux. c. Veteravia, Weteraw. p. Uens, il Portatore. r. Vian, Weissenborn. c. Vibantanarum, Bar in Podolia. Vibovalentia, Monte Leone. c. Viburgum, Wibourgh. c. Viceliacum, Vezelay. c. Vecenonia, Vilaine. r. Victoria, Abernethy. c. Vidana, Vilaine. r. Vider, Vecht. r. Vidua, Drodagh, or Dirg. r. Viducasses, Bessin. t. Vienna, Wien. c. Vienno, Vienne. c. Vigenna, Vienne. r. Vigelibanum, Vigevano. c. Vigorina, Worcester. c. Vimaria, Weimar. c. Vincium, Vence. c. Vinda, Wenden. c. Vindalicus, Vindelicus, la Nasqu. r. Vindana, Vannes. c. Vindascinus Comitatus, Venaisin. Vindelis, Portland. o. Vinderius, the Bay of Knockfer∣gus. Vindinum, Mans. c. Vindobona, Vienna in Austria. Vindocinum, Vendosme. c. Vintimilium, Vintimiglia. c. Vintium, Vence. c. Virdo. Wertacb. r. Viria, Virc. c. r. Viria, Witland. r. Virodunum, Verdun. c. Vistula, Wesel. r. Visundo, Besanzon. c. Visurgis, Visera, Wser. r. Vitis, il Montone. r. Viturus, Bidourle. r. Vivario, Viviers. c. Uladislavia, Waldislaw. c. Ulcinum, Dulcigno. c. Uliarius, Oleron. i. Vlissinga, Flushing. c. Ultonia, Vlster. p. Ultrajectum, Utrecht. c. Ulysippo, Lisbone. c. Umber, Humber. r. Umbria, Ombria. p. Umbro, Ombrone. r. Ungaria, Unghwar. c. Voerda, Woerden. c. Vogesus, Vauge, Wasgow. m. Vogasica, Wasgow. m. Volaterra, Volterra. c. Volcae, Languedoc. p. Voliba, Voluba, Falmouth. t. Volcinli, Bolsena. o. Voltumna, Boutonne. r. Volubilis, Fez. c. Vomia, Midnick. c. Vorganium, Treguier. c. Vormacia, Worms. c. Vosavia, Ober-Wesel. c. Urania, Uri. p. Vratislavia, Breslaw, c. Urba, l' Orbe. r.
Urbevetum, Orvieto. c. Urbicus, Orbego. c. Urbio, l' Orbieu. r. Urbs, Orba, Urba. r. —Borbo. r. —Vetus, Oldenburgh. c. —Vetus, Orvieto. c. —Vetus, Civita Vecchia. c. Urcinum, Ajazzo. c. Uria, Oria. c. Urium, Tinto. r. Urpanus, Valpon. r. Ursi Mons, Orcimont. p. Utica, Biserta. c. Utinum, Udine. c. Utriculum, Otricoli. c. Vulturnus, Volterno. r. Uxama, Osma. c. Uxanns, Ouessant. i. Uxentum, Ugento. c. Uzetia, Uzes. c. W I Walachria, Walcheren. i. Wellae, inde adj. Wellensis, Wells. c. Wibigginum, Wigan▪ o. Wintonia, Winchester. c. X A Xanthus, Scamandro, Santo, Siribi. r. Xera, Xeres. c. Y E Yesda, Airach. c. Z A Zabesus Millenbach. c. in Transylv∣nia. Zacus, Zack. r. Zacynthus, Zante. i. Zaladiensis Comitatus, Salawar. Zancle, Messana, Messina. c. Zegira, Gezira. c. Zogacara, Teflis. c. Zyragas, Varne. r. FINIS.
Books Printed for, and Sold by Charles Brome at the Gun at the West-End of S. Pauls. BIshop Ken's Manual of Prayers for the use of the Scholars of Winchester College, and all other Devout Christians. Price 1 s. —Exposition on the Church Catechism, or the Practice of Divine Love. Price 6 d. —Directions for Prayer, for the use of Families. Price 1 d. —Pastoral Letter. Price 1 d. —Letter about the French Protestants. Price 1 d. —Prayers for the use of all Persons who come to the Baths for Cure, before which is prefixed a Cut of the City of Bath, and all the Baths there; and may be Bound up with the Manual for Winton Scholars. Price 6 d. The Present State of the Ottoman Empire, with twenty four Cuts, by Sir Paul Rycaut. Price 5 s. The Alliance of Divine Offices, exhibiting all the Liturgies of the Church of England since the Reformation, by Sir Hamon L'Estrange. Price 8 s. The Poems of Horace, Englished by Alexander Brome. Several Songs and Poems by Alexander Brome. The Reformed Monastery, or the Love of Jesus, in two Parts. Price 1 s. 6 d. All Sir Roger L'Estrange's Tracts in Quarto. All Bishop Lloyd's Tracts against Popery, Quarto: and his Sermons. —Historical account of Church-Government, as it was in Britain and Ireland when they first received the Christian Religion. Tully's Offices, in three Books, Translated by Sir Roger L'Estrange. Several Colloquies of Erasmus against Popery, Translated by Sir Roger L'Estrange.
