B501 12021202 52616
VERA EFFIGIES EXCELLENTISSIMI PRINCIPIS CAROLI MAG. BRITAN: FRAN. & HIBERNIAE. HAEREDIS. Viuat ô Viuat Princeps CAROLINUS, et Orbi. Imperet, in̄umeris decorans sua sêcla Triumphis. Flourish braue Prince, out shine thy Glorious Name. Triumphant Laurels ever Crowne thy Fame.
CAROLUS inter Reges ut Lilium inter Flores VEROLAM. LINCO LONDON. YORK. A ROMAN A SAXON A DANE A NO CHRONICLE OF THE KINGS OF ENGLAND From the Time of the ROMANS Goverment unto the Raigne of our Soveraigne LORD KING CHARLES. Containing all Passages of State & Church, With all other Observations proper for a CHRONICLE. Faithfully Collected out of Authours Ancient and Moderne; & digested into a new Method. By Sr R. Baker, Knight. LONDON, Printed for Daniel Frere, and are to be sold at his Shop, at the Red Bull in Little Brittaine. 1643.
To the High and Mighty Prince CHARLES, Prince of Wales, and Duke of Cornewall: Eldest Sonne of our Soveraigne Lord, CHARLES, King of Great Britaine, France, and IRELAND. SIR, THE Dedication of Chronicles hath in all times been thought worthy of the greatest Princes: Gulielmus Gemiticen∣sis writ a Chronicle of the Dukes of Normandy, and Dedicated it to Willi∣am the Conquerour. Thomas Walsing∣ham writ a Chronicle of the Kings of England, and De∣dicated it to King Henry the sixth: And of late time, Sir Francis Bacon, Viscount Saint Albans, and Lord Chancellour of England, writ a History of the Reigne of King Henry the seventh, and Dedicated it to Your Royall Grand-Father of blessed memory, King Iames: For indeed, as nothing makes Princes more Illustrious then Learning; So no Learning makes them more Ju∣dicious then History; Other Learning may fill their mindes with knowledge; This onely with Judgement: And seeing it is Judgement that must sit as President o∣ver all their Actions, it is fit that History should sit as President over all their Studies. History gives an An∣tedate to Time; and brings Experience without gray haires: Other Knowledges make You but see Quod antepedes est; History is the true perspective Glasse, that will make You see things afarre off: And though it
make not men to become Prophets, yet it makes their conjectures to be little lesse then Oracles But most Illustrious Prince, there accrues to your Highnesse, by this Chronicle, a greater benefit then all this; For if it were an Excitation of great force to vertue, to have it said, Et Pater Aeneas & Avunculus excitet Hector; of how great Force must it needes be, when You shall reade the Noble Acts of so many your worthy Proge∣nitors; Some Eternized for their valourous Atchieve∣ments in Warre: Some for their prudent government in Peace: Some Renowned for Mercy, some for Justice: And although the Example of your Royall Father be not amongst them, yet it may be sufficient that while you have the Acts of others upon Record, you have his under View, by which he seemes to say unto you, Disce Puer virtutem exme, verumque laborem; Fortunam ex a∣liis. And if in any of your Progenitors, there appeare, as it were Maculae in Orbe Lunae, will it not invite you to a higher Orbe, that Your Actions may shine with the clearer Beames? and then how happy will the eyes be, that shall see you sitting in your Throne? For my selfe, I should account it happinesse enough, that I have lived to see the dayes of your Illustrious Father; if it were not a great unhappines to see them overcast with clouds; & yet when these clouds shal be dispel'd, will it not make him shine with the greater Splendor? And this as old as I am, I doubt not to live my selfe to see, and having once seene it, shal then willingly say my Nunc Dimittis, and lave the joy of your glorious times for another Age: In the meane time prostrating my self humbly at your feet; and wishing to your Highnesse, as Diphobus did to Aeneas;—I Decus, I Nostrum, Melioribus utere Fatis. Your most humble and most devoted Servant, RICHARD BAKER.
An Epistle to the READER. THis Booke, I suppose will no sooner come abroad; but the que∣stion will be asked, why any man would take so superfluous a Labour, to write that which hath been written by so many; by some so copiously, by some so elegantly, that nothing can be ad∣ded: To which Objection, I confesse my selfe unable to make a better Answer then by President: For when many excellent men had written the Story of the Roman Emperours, both accurately and elo∣quently; yet Suetonius Tranquillus comming after them, wanted not his part of Commendation. For though he added nothing in the matter or substance, yet be altered much in the forme and disposition, distinguishing that into Classes and Chapters, which the former had delivered in one continued Narration: as being both lesse tedious to the Reader, like a way marked out by Miles; and more plain∣ly Informing, where Distinction tooke away confusion. Besides, many have Writ∣ten the Reignes of our English Kings, copiously indeed, but so superfluously, that much may justly be pared away; Some againe Elegantly indeed, but so succinctly, that much as justly may be added: And this, if I have endevoured to doe, I can∣not be blamed; If done it, I deserve acceptance. Againe, where many have writ∣ten the Reignes of some of our Kings, excellently as in the way of History, yet I may say they have not done it so well in the way of Chronicle; For whilst they in∣sist wholly upon matters of State, they wholly omit meaner Accidents, which yet are Materials as proper for a Chronicle, as the other. For my selfe, if in some places I be found to set downe whole passages, as they are already set downe by others, and may seeme rather to transcribe then to write; yet this I suppose may be ex∣cused, as being all of one common stocke; and no matter from whence the water comes, so it come cleane to the Readers use. Lastly, for the Worke it selfe; I dare be bold to say, that it hath beene Collected out of Authours both Ancient and Mo∣derne, with so great care and diligence, that if all other Chronicles should be lost, yet this onely would be sufficient to informe Posterity of all passages memorable or worthy to be knowne; which of any other generall Chronicle, cannot perhaps be said. RICHARD BAKER.
A CATALOGVE OF VVRITERS, BOTH ANCIENT AND MODERNE, Out of whom this CHRONICLE hath beene Collected. 1 GIldas Britannicus, surna∣med the Wise, was the first writer of our Eng∣lish Nation; who a∣mongst other his Workes; writ a Treatise De Excidio Britanniae, He was borne in the year 493. and dyed in the yeare 580. 2 Nennius a Monke of Bangor, writ the Story of Britaine, and lived about the yeare 620. 3 Venerable Bede, a Saxon and a Priest, writ the Ecclesiasticall Story of the Eng∣lish Nation, from the comming in of Ju∣lius Caesar, to the yeare 733. about which time he dyed. 4 Ethelwardus, a writer next to Bede the most ancient, writ a generall Chronicle from the Creation to the end of King Ed∣gar. 5 Radulphus de Diceto, who lived about the yeare 685. 6 Segebert King of the East Angles, writ an Institution of Lawes, in his later dayes became a Monke, and was slaine by Penda King of the Mercians, in the yeare 652. 7 Cymbertus Bishop of Lindsey, in the kingdome of Mercia, writ the Annals of that Country, & lived about the yeare 730 8 Daniel Wentanus a Bishop, writ the History of his Province: and the Acts of the South Saxons, and dyed in the yeare 746. 9 Asserius Menevensis, borne in Pem∣brokeshire, Bishop of Salisbury, writ the Story of Britaine, and the Acts of King Alphred, and lived about the yeare 890. 10 Alphredus the great, King of the An∣gles, ourth sonne of King Ethelwolph; writ, besides many other workes, a Col∣lection of Chronicles, and dyed at Win∣chester in the yeare 901. 11 Osbernus a Benedictine Monke, writ the life of the Arch-bishop Dunstan, and other workes: and lived about the yeare 1020. 12 Colmanus Anglicus, writ a Chroni∣cle and a Catalogue of the English Kings, and lived about the yeare 1040. in the time of King Harold the first. 13 Gulielmus Gemeticensis, a Norman and a Monke, writ the lives of the Dukes of Normandy, to William the Conque∣ror, to whom he Dedicated his Worke: and after enlarged it to the death of King Henry the first, in the yeare 1135. at which time he lived. 14 Marianus Scotus a Monke, writ An∣nals
from the beginning of the world to his own time, and dyed in the yeare 1086. 15 Alphredus a Priest of Beverly, writ a History, from the first Originall of the Britaines to his owne time, and lived a∣bout the yeare 1087. in the time of Wil∣liam the Conquerour. 16 Veremundus a Spaniard, and a Priest, but who lived much in Scotland, writ the Antiquities of the Scottish Nation, and lived about the yeare 1090. 17 Lucianus a Monke, and an English wri∣ter, and lived in the first times of the Normans. 18 Ingulphus Abbot of Croyland, writ from the yeare 664. to the yeare 1066. and lived in the time of William the Conque∣rour, whose Secretary he had beene. 19 Turgotus an Englishman, first Deane of Durham, and afterward Bishop of Saint Andrewes in Scotland, writ a History of the Kings of Scotland, also Chronicles of Durham, Annals of his own time, and the life of King Malcolm, and lived in the yeare 1098. in the time of King William Rufus. 20 Glielmus Pictaviensis, writ a Trea∣tise of the Life of William the Conque∣rour. 21 Gualterus Mappaeus, writ a Booke, De Nugis Curialium, and lived about the Conquerours time. 22 William of Malmesbury, a Benedi∣ctine Monke, writ a History of the Eng∣lish Nation, from the first comming of the Saxons into Britaine, to his owne time, which Worke he Dedicated to Ro∣bert Duke of Glocester, base Sonne of King Henry the First, and lived to the first yeares of King Henry the Second. 23 Florentius Bravonius, a Monke of Worcester, compiled a Chronicle from the Creation, to the yeare 1118. in which yeare he dyed; his Worke was continued by another Monke to the yeare 1163. 24 Eadmerus a Monke of Canterbury, writ the lives of William the Conque∣rour, William Rufus, and King Hen∣ry the First, in whose time he lived. 25 Raradocus borne in Wales, writ the Acts of the Britaine Kings, from Cad∣wallader to his owne time, and lived in the time of King Stephen. 26 Gervasius Dorobernensis, a Bene∣dictine Monke, writ a History of the Eng∣lish Nation, & lived about the yeare 1120 27 Johannes Fiberius commonly called De Bever, writ short Annals of the English Nation, and lived about the yeare 1110. in the time of King Henry the first. 28 Henry, Arch-deacon of Huntington, writ a History of the Kings of England, to the Reigne of King Stephen, in whose time he lived. 29 Geoffrey of Monmouth, a Benedictine Monke, and afterward Bishop of Asaph, writ a History of the Britaines, and was the first that makes mention of Brute and of Merlins Prophecies, for which he is much taxed by divers Authours of his owne time; and after; he lived about the yeare 1150. in the time of King Ste∣phen. 30 William of Newborough, borne at the beginning of King Stephens Reigne, writ a History of the English Nation, and bitterly inveighes against Geoffrey of Monmouth, as a Deviser of Fables. 31 Sylvester Gyraldus, borne in Wales, and thereof called Cambrensis; after long travaile abroad was called home, and made Secretary to King Henry the Se∣cond; and after was sent Tutour to his Sonne John into Ireland; he writ the History of that Nation very exquisitely; also an Itinerarium of Wales and Bri∣taine; the Life of Henry the Second; the Acts of King John, and a Chronicle of the English Nation, and lived about the yeare 1190. in the times of King Ri∣chard the First, and King John. 32 John of Hagulstad, a Towne in the North, a Benedictine Monke in Durham, writ the most memorable things, from the ninth yeare of King Henry the Second, to the first yeare of King Richard the first, in whose time he lived, about the yeare 1190. 33 Roger Hoveden, a Priest of Oxford, writ the Annals of the Kings of Eng∣land, and the memorable passages under the Romans, Picts, Saxons, Danes, and Normans; he lived in the time of King Richard the first, and dyed in the time of King John. 34 Johannes Tilberiensis, a secular Priest, writ a History of the English Nation; and lived in the time of King Richard the first. 35 Richardus Canonicus, travelled with King Richard the first into Palestine; and writ of his Iourney and Acts there.
36 Aluredus Rivallensis, or de Rivallis, a Cistersian Monke, in the Diocesse of Yorke, writ the Life of Edward King of England, and David King of Scots, and dyed in the yeare 1166. 37 Simon Dunelmensis, a Benedictine Monke, writ a History of the English Nation, from the death of Venerable Bede, to the yeare 1164. and lived in the time of King Henry the second. 38 John de Oxenford, first Deane of Sa∣lisbury, and after Bishop of Norwich, writ the British History, and continued it to his own time; wherin he agreeth much with Geoffry of Monmouth; and lived about the yeare 1174. in the tim of King Henry the second. 39 Johannes Sarisberiensis, writ an ex∣cellent Book De Nugis Curialium; and lived about the yeare 1182. in the time of King Henry the second. 40 Gulielmus Parvus, a Canon Regular in the Province of Yorke, writ a Histo∣ry of the Norman Kings; and lied about the year 1216. in the time of King John. 41 Johannes Campobellus, a Scotch man writte the History of the Scots, from the first Originall of the Nation to his owne time: and lived in the yeare 1260. 42 John Breton an Englishman, Bishop of Hereford, writ a Booke De Juribus An∣glicanis, and lived in the yeare 1270. in the time of King Henry the third. 43 Thomas Wyke an Englishman, a Canon Regular of Osney neere Oxford, writ a short History from the commng in of William the Conquerour to his owne time, and lived in the yeare 1290. in the time of King Edward the first. 44 Thomas Langford an Englishman, a Dominican Fryer of Chemsford in Es∣sex, writ an Universall Chronicle, from the beginning of the world to his owne time, and lived in the yeare 1320. in the time of King Edward the second. 45 Radulphus de Rizeto an Englishman, writ a Chronicle of the English Nation, and lived about the yeare 1210. in the time of King John. 46 Robertus Montensis, a benedictine Monke, writ a Chronicle from the yeare 1112. to the yeare 1210. at which time he lived. 47 Johannes Burgensis an Englishman, a benedictine Monke, writ Annals of the English Nation. 48 Thomas Spotey an Englishman, a benedictine Fryer of Canterbury, writ the Chronicles of Canterbury, and li∣ved about the time of King Edward the second. 49 Matthaeus Westmonasteriensis, called Florilegus, for collecting Flores Histo∣riarum, chiefly of Briaine, containing from the beginning of the world to the yeare 1307. about which time he lived. 50 Ranulphus Higden, a benedictine Monke of Chester, writ a Booke which he called Polychronicon, containing from the beginning of the world to the sixteenth yeare of King Edward the third in whose time he lived. 51 Matthew Paris, a benedictine Monke of Saint Albans, writ a History, chiefly Ecclesiasticall, of the English Nation, from William the Conquerour, to the last yeare of King Henry the third, and li∣ved about the time of King Edward the third. 52 William Pachenton an Englishman, writ a History of the English Nation, and lived about the tim of King Edward the third. 53 Bartholmeus Anglicus, a Franciscan Fryer, writ a Booke Intituled De Pro∣prietatibus rerum, and a Chronicle of the Scots, and lived in the yeare 1360. in the time of King Edward the third. 54 Nicholas Trivet, borne in Norfolke, of a worshipfull Family, became a Domi∣dican Fryer, writ many excellent workes in Divinity and Philosophy; also An∣nals of the English Kings, from King Stephen, to King Edward the second, and lived in the yeare 1307. in the time of King Edward the third. 55. Alexander Essebiensis Pryor of a Mo∣nastery of Regular Canons, writ divers learned workes, amongst other an Epitome of the British History: and lived in the yeare 1360. in the time of King Edward the third. 56 John Froyssart borne in the Low Coun∣tries, writ a Chronicle in the French tongue, containing seventy foure yeares; Namely, beginning with King Edward the third, and nding with King Henry the fourth, in whose time he lived; whose Chronicle, Sir John Bourchier knight translated into English, and John Sley∣den a French man hath lately contract∣ed into an Epitome.
57 Thomas de la Moore, borne in Glo∣cestershire, in the time of King Edward the first, by whom as having twenty pounds land, holden by knights service, he was made a Knight, and afterward being very inward with King Edward the second, writ a History of his life and death. 58 Thomas Rodbourne an Englishman, and a Bishop, writ a Chronicle of his Na∣tion, and lived in the yeare 1412. in the time of King Henry the fourth. 59 John Trevisa borne in Glocestershire, a Priest, translated Polychronicon into English, adding to it an Eighth Book, In∣tituled De Memorabilibus eorum tem∣porum, containing from the yeare 1342. to the yeare 1460. He writ also of the Acts of King Arthur, and Descriptions both of Britaine and Ireland, and lived in the time of King Edward the fourth. 60 John Harding a Gentleman of a good Family in the North, writ a Chronicle in verse, of the Kings of England, to the Reigne of King Edward the fourth; whrein he alldgeth many Records, which he had got in Scotland, that testifie the Scottish Kings submissions to the Kings of England he lived in the yeare 1448. in the time of King Henry the sixth. 61 John Capgrave, borne in Kent, an Hermit Fryer, writ many learned workes in Divinity, and a Catalogue of the Eng∣lish Saints, and lived in the yeare. 1464. in the time of King Edward the fourth. 62 John Lydgate, Monke of Saint Ed∣mundsbury in Suffolke, writ divers workes in verse, and some in prose: as the lives of King Edward, and King E∣thelstan, of the round Table of King Ar∣thur, and lived in the yeare 1470. in the time of King Edward the fourth. 63 John Weathamstead, Abbot of Saint Albans, in his worke of English Affaires, accuseth Geoffrey of Monmouth, of meere Fabulousnesse, and lived about the yeare 1440. 64 Gulielmus Elphinston a Scotchman, Bishop of Aberdene, writ the Antiqui∣tis of Scotland, and the Statutes of Councells, and lived in the yeare 1480. in the time of James the third King of Scotland. 65 George Buchanan a Scotchman, writ the story of Scotland from Fergusius, to Queene Mary, in whose time he lived. 66 William Caxton an Englishman, writ a Chronicle to the three and twenty∣eth yeare of King Edward the Fourth, which he cals Fructus Temporum: also a Description of Britaine, the life of Saint Edward, and the History of King Ar∣thur, and lived in the yeare 1484. 67 Thomas Walsingham borne in Nor∣folke, a Benedictine Monke of Saint Al∣bans, writ two Histories; One shorter, the other larger; the first beginning from the yeare 1273. and continued to the yeare 1423. The other, beginning at the com∣ming in of the Normans, and continu∣ed to the beginning of King Henry the sixth, to whom he Dedicated his worke. 68 Robert Fabian a Sheriffe of London, writ a Concordance of Histories, from Brute the first King of the Britaines, to the last yeare of King Henry the second; and another worke from King Richard the first, to King Henry the seventh, in whose time he lived. 69 Sir Thomas Moore borne in London, Lord Chancellour of England; besides many other learned workes, writ the Life of King Richard the third; and dyed for denying the Kings Supremacy, in the Reigne of King Henry the Eight, in the yeare 1535. 70 Hector Boethius a Scotchman, writ a Catalogue and History of the Kings of Scotland: also a Description of that king∣dome, and lived in the yeare 1526. in the time of James the fifth, King of Scot∣land. 71 Polydor Virgill, an Italian, but made here in England Arch-deacon of Wells; amongst other his learned workes, writ the History of England, from its first begin∣ning, to the thirtyeth yeare of King Hen∣ry the Eighth, to whom he Dedicated his Worke. 72 Edward Hall a Lawyer, writ a Chroni∣cle which he cals the Union of the two Ro∣ses, the Red and the White, containing from the beginning of King Henry the fourth, to the last yeare of King Henry the eighth, and dyed in the yeare 1547. 73 John Leland, a Londoner, amongst di∣vers other workes, writ a Booke of the An∣tiquity of Britaine, and of the famous men and Bishops in it, and lived in the yeare 1546. in the time of King Henry the Eighth. 74 John Rogers, first a Papist, and after∣ward
a Protestant, amongst other his lear∣ned workes writ a History from the begin∣ning of the world; and lived most in Ger∣many, in the yeare 1548. in the time of King Edward the sixth. 75 Philip Commines, a knight of Flan∣ders, writ the lives of Lewis & Charles the Eighth, Kings of France, wherein he handles many passages betweene them and the Kings of England their contempora∣ries. Of the Moderne, These: 76 Richard Grafton a Citizen of Lon∣don, writ a Chronicle from the beginning of the world, to the beginning of the Reign of Queene Elizabeth, in whose time he lived. 77 Raphaell Holinshed, a Minister, writ a large Chronicle, from the Conquest to the yeare 1577. and was continued by others, to the yeare 1586. 78 Doctor Goodwin Bishop of Hereford, writ the Lives of King Henry the eight, King Edward the sixth, and Queen Ma∣ry, & lived in the time of Qu. Elizabeth 79 Doctor Heyward writ the History of the first Kings, William the Conquerour, William Rufus, and Henry the first, al∣so the Reigne of King Henry the fourth, and Edward the sixth, and lived to the time of King James. 80 Samuel Daniel writ a Chronicle of the Kings of England, to the end of King Edward the third, and is continued by John Trussell to the beginning of King Henry the seventh. 81 Sir Francis Bacon Viscount, Viscount S. Albans, hath written a History of the Reigne of King Henry the seventh, in a most elegant stile, and lived in the time of King James. 82 John Fox writ three large Volumes of the Acts and Monuments of the Church; particularly treating of the English Mar∣tyrs in the Reignes of King Henry the eighth, and Queene Mary, and lived in the time of Queene Elizabeth. 83 Thomas Cowper, Bishop of Winche∣ster, writ Chronicle Notes of all Nations, specially of England, from the beginning of the world to his owne time, and lived in the time of Queene Elizabeth. 84 William Camden King at Armes, writ the life of Queene Elizabeth, and a Description of Britaine, and lived in the time of King James. 85 William Martin Esquire, writ the Reignes of the Kings of England, from William the Conquerour, to the end of King Henry the eighth: to which was af∣terward added the Reignes of King Ed∣ward the sixth, Queen Mary, and Queen Elizabeth. 86 Francis Biondi an Italian Gentleman, and of the Privy Chamber to King Charles, hath written in the Italian tongue, the Civill Warres between the two Houses of Lancaster and Yorke, from King Richard the second, to King Henry the seventh: Translated elegantly into English by Henry Earle of Monmouth, now living. 87 Henry Isaacson a Londoner, hath written a Chronology of all kingdoms, from the beginning of the world to the yeare 1630. being the fifth yeare of King Charles his Reigne. 88 Nicholas Harpsefield Arch-deacon of Canterbury, hath written a Chronicle of all the Bishops of England, to which Ed∣mund Campian the Iesuite, made an Addition. 89 John Stow Citizen of London, writ a Chronicle from Brute to the end of Qu. Elizabeth, and is continued to this pre∣sent time, being the 18. yeare of King Charles, by Edmund Howes a Lon∣doner. 90 John Speed a Londoner, writ the Sto∣ry of Britaine, from the first beginning to the yeare 1605. being the second yeare of King James. 91 William Abington Esquire, hath writ∣ten the Reign of King Edward the fourth in a very fine stile, and is yet living. 92 Thomas Fuller Batchelour of Divini∣ty, and Prebendary of Sarum, hath writ∣ten the Holy Warre in very fine language, wherein he relates the Acts of our Kings of England in the Holy Land, and is now living. 93 Andre du Chesne, a Frenchman, Geo∣grapher to the King of France, hath writ∣ten the History of England, Scotland & Ireland, from their first beginnings, to the seventeenth yeare of our present Sove∣raigne Lord King Charles. The end of the Catalogue of Authors.
A CHRONICLE OF THE KINGS OF ENGLAND from the time of the Romans Government, unto the Raigne of King CHARLES. Of the first knowne times of this Island. ALthough we begin the Aera of our Computation from William called the Conquerour, as though he were the first King of our English Nation: Yet before him; were many other excellent Kings; and their Acts perhaps as worthy to bee knowne, if they could be knowne. But seeing after ages can know nothing of former times but what is Recorded by writing: It hath followed that as the first Writers were Poets: So the first writings have been Fictions; and nothing is delivered to Posterity of the most ancient times, but very Fables: Such as is the story of Albina (of whom they say, this Island was called Al∣bion: though others say, ab albis rupibus, of the white cliffes) that shee should be the eldest of the two and thirty daughters of Dioclesian King of Syria, (such as ne∣ver was) who being marryed to two and thirty Kings, in one night killed all their husbands: for which fact, they were put in a shippe, themselves alone without any Pylo, so to try their adventure, and by chance arrived in this Island, of whom Gy∣ants were begotten. And if you like not of this; then have you the story of Albion the sonne of Neptune, of whom the Island tooke its name. But when these are ex∣ploded; there followes another with great Attestation, and yet as very a Fable as these; namely the story of the Trojan Brute, (of whom the Island they say, was called Britaine: though many other causes are given of the name:) as likewise the story of Brutes cosin Corinaeus, (of whom they say, the Country of Cornwall had its name, to whom it was given, for overcomming the Giant Gogmagog:) and that Brute having three sonnes, Lectrine, Albanact, and Camber; he gave at his death to his eldest sonne Locrine, all the land on this side Humber, and called it Logria; to his second sonne Albanact, all the land beyond Humber, of whom it was called Albania, (now Scotland:) and to his youngest sonne Camber, all the land beyond the river of Severne, of whom it was called Cambria, (now Wales:) with other such stuffe, which may please children, but not riper Judgements; and were first broached by Geoffry Arch∣deacon
of Monmouth: for which all the Writers of his time cryed shame upon him; and yet can scarce keepe many at this day, from giving credit to his Fictions. And when we are once gotten out of Fables, and come to some truth; yet that truth is delivered in such slender draughts, and such broken pieces, that very small benefit can be gotten by the knowing it, and was not till the time of Iulius Caesar, a thousand yeares after the Fable of Brute: at which time, the Island was yet but in manner of a Village, being without Walls, as having no shipping, (which are in∣deed the true Wals of an Island) but onely certaine small vessels, made of boards and wicker. And as they had no ships, for defence without: So neither had they any Forts, for defence within: scarce any houses but such as were made of stakes and boughes of trees fastned together; Neither was it yet come to be a Kingdome, but was Governed by a number of petty Rulers: So as Kent onely had in it (as Caesar calleth them) foure Kings; Cingetorix, Carvilius, Taximagulus, and Segonax: which division, as it made the Britaines the more easie to be conquered, so it made the Romans the longer in conquering. For if they had beene one united body, one or two battailes might have made a conquest of the whole, where being thus divi∣ded, there was need to be as many battailes as there were divisions; So as it was ma∣ny yeares, before the Romanes could conquer the whole Island; even from the time of Iulius Caesar, to the time of the Emperour Domitian; not much lesse then two hundred yeares. It is true, after Caesars first comming, the Island grew sensible of this defect of their division, and thereupon by consent of a great part, made choyce of Cassibelan, King of the Trinovants, who had his seate at Verulam, to be Generall of their warres; which made indeed some little stoppe to the Romanes proceedings, but after the losse of a battaile or two, they fell againe into a relapse of their former defect, and thought it better to secure every one his owne, by his owne meanes, then by a generall power, to hazard all at once; whereby it came afterward to be true: Dum singuli pugnant, universi vincuntur. Yet before the Coutry could bee wholly Conquered; at first by reason of the Nations valour, seeking to keepe themselves free, and afterward by reason of the insolency of the garrison souldiers, that sought to make them slaves, many great oppositions were made, amongst which the most memorable was that of Voadicia, a certaine Queene of the Country, who having beene by the Romane souldiers herselfe abused, and her daughters ravished, used meanes to levy an Army of six score thousand men, whom she led herselfe into the field, and set upon the Romanes in their chiefe townes, which were London, Verulam, and Camalodunum (now Malden in Essex;) of whom she flew above seventy thousand: but then in a second battaile, had fourescore thousand of her owne Army slaine, after which defeate, for avoyding of slavery, she poysoned herselfe. This Island for a long time, was so much esteemed of the Romanes, that their Emperors sometimes came hither in person; as first the Emperor Adrian, in the yeare 124. who made a great wall of earth betweene England and Scotland, and ha∣ving set the Country in order, returned. After him sometime, Severus the Empe∣ror in the yeare 212. came over into Britine to represse the Incurions of the Picts and Scots, by whom in a battaile neere Yorke, he was wounded and thereof dyed, or as others say, he dyed of age and sicknesse. Afterward in the yeare 305. Constanti∣us the Emperor came into Britaine, and ended his life at Yorke, making that City fa∣mous for the death and buriall of two great Emperors; and yet more famous for the honor done to Constantine the Great, sonne of Constantius, who in that City was first saluted Emperor. But notwithstanding the great estimation the Romanes a long time made of this Island, yet at last, after five hundred yeares they had kept it in subjection, they voluntarily left it: the charge of keeping it, being greater, then the benefit; for to keepe it in subjection, they maintained no fewer than fourescore thousand souldiers in pay, and when warres grew amongst themselves at home, they could no longer spare so many abroad, but recalled them home: but then, though they left Britaine, yet they left not the Britaines, but carried them, at least, a great part of them away with them; of whom the most were slaine in their service, and the rest planted in that part of France, which of them was afterward, and is to this
day called Britaine. And now one would thinke, the Island should be in good case, being freed from them that kept them in subjection, but it proved to bee in worse case being at liberty, then it was before in servitude, for being deprived of their ablest men, and at the same time, their King Lucius happening to dye without issue, they were left as a few loose sticks without the bond of a Governour: which the Picts and Scots observing, thought now was the time to make the Country their owne, and thereupon made invasions upon it with all their Forces. Whereupon the Britaines having none left of their Native Kings to succeed; and knowing they could ill manage the Body of an Army without a Head: they make choyce of Vor∣tigerne Earle of Cornwall, one extracted from the British Line; and he, whether so advised by his Cabinet Counsellor, the Propheticall Merlin, or as finding his owne strength too weake to make resistance; implores first ayde of the Romanes, and they making answer, they had businesse enough to do of their owne, and lea∣ving them to themselves, he then fled to the Saxons for ayde; a warlike people of Germany, and who had greater swarmes then their hives would well hold. And here we may plainly see how dangerous a thing it is for a Nation, to call in strangers to their ayd, and especially in any great number; for though they come at first but mercenaries, yet once admitted, and finding their owne strength, they soone grow Masters, as here it proved with the Saxons. But before we speake further of the comming in of the Saxons, who were at that time Infidels, and brought with them their two Idols, Woden and Frya, (whereof two of our weeke dayes, Wednesday and Friday, take their names; it will be fit to say something of the state of the Christian Church in this Island. First then, it is recorded, that in the yeare 63. what time Arviragus raigned here, Ioseph of Arim∣thea (who buried the body of Christ) came into this Island, and laid the foundation of the Christian Faith in the Westerne parts, at a place called then Hvalon; now Glastenbury; and that there came with him, Mary Magdalen, Lazarus, and Martha: and more then this, that Simon Zelotes one of the Apostles suffered martyrdome here in Britaine: and more then this, that both St. Peter and St. Paul came into this Island and Preached the Gospell; all which and more to this purpose, is Recorded by Authors of good Account: though it be hard believing, That persons, and specially women of so great age, as these must needes be at this time, should take so long a journey. But howsoever it was, certaine it is, that the doctrine of Christianity was about this time planted in this Island, though it made afterwards but small progresse, and that with some persecution; as in which time, St. Alban suffered martyrdome at Verulam, and at Liechfield shortly after, no fewer then a thousand. After this, in the yeare 180 what time Lucius was King of this Island, Eleutherius then Bishop of Rome, sent Fa∣ganus and Damianus to him: upon whose preaching, the Temples of the Heathenish Flamins and Arch-flamins (one and thirty in number) were converted to so many Bi∣shops Sees; whereof London, Yorke, and Caerleyn (now St. Davids) were made the Metropolitans of the Province. And there is a Table remaining at this day, in the Parish Church of St. Peter on Cornhill London, which recordeth; that the Founda∣tion thereof was laid by this King Lucius, and that this Church was the Cathe∣dral to that Archbishops See. In the yeare 359. a Councel was holden at Ariminum in Italie; where foure hundred Westerne Bishops were Assembled, whereof three went out of Britaine, and gave their voyces against the Arian Heresie. After this, about the yeare 420. rose up in this Island, one Pelagius a Monke, brought up in the Monastery of Bangor in Wales, who spread the poyson of his Heresie, first in this his Native Countrey, and afterward all the world over. And these had beene the chiefe passages in matters Ecclesiasticall within this Island, when the Saxons were called in, about the yeare 450. And now under the Conduct of two brothers, Hengist and Horsa, came over nine thousand Saxons with their wives and children, to aist the Britaines aginst the Scots, and were appointed the Isle of Thanet to Inhabit. With which assistance the Britaines give their enemies battaile, and overcome them: So as they accounted the Saxons as Angels sent from heaven, and then allowed them Kent also fo their
Inhabiting. Not long after Hengist obtained of King Vortigern the property of so much ground, as he could enclose with a Buls Hide: which cutting into thongs, hee there built the Castle, Facti de nomine, called Thong Castle. And now having built it he invites Vrtigern to a Feast, where falling in love with Rowena, the beauti∣full daughter of Hengist, and marrying her, it put Hengist into such a height of bold∣nesse, that he began to aspire, sending for greater Forces to come over to him; as meaning to transplant himselfe hither, and to make this Island his Inheritance: which the British Lords perceiving, and not able to weane their King from his new wife, and her father Hengist, they Depose him; and in his place set up his sonne Vortimer, a true lover of his Country: who presently in a pitcht battaile neere unto Aylesford in Kent, set upon the Saxons; where Catigern the brother of Vorimer, and Hrs, of Hengist, in single ight hand to hand slew each other. In which place Catigern was buried, and a Monument in memory of him Erected, the stones whereof at this day are standing in a great Plaine in the Parish of Aylesford; which instead of Catigern, is corruptly called Kits-Cotyhouse. Another the like Monument was erected for Hors, though now defaced; remembred onely by the Towne where it stood, called Horstead. Three other battailes after this were fought betweene the Britaines and the Saxons: one at Craford; another at Weppeds-fleete; the third upon Colmore: in which last, the Britaines got so great a victory, that the Saxons were cleane driven out of Kent, and in Thanet also not suffered also to rest; so as shortly after, Hengist with his Saxons departed the Kingdome, as being now out of hope to make his Fortune in this Island. But while Vortimer was ths intentive for his Countries li∣berty; Rowena the former Kings wife, being daughter to Hengist, was as intentive to bring it into servitude; which knowing she could not do as long as Vortimer lived, she used meanes by poyson, to take away his life, after he had beene King the space of foure yeeres, and then by the witchcraft of faire words, so enchanted the Bri∣tish Nobility, that her husband Vortigern was againe established in the Kingdome; which was no sooner don, but Hengist, (relying upon his sonne Vortigerns love) with a mighty Army attempts to returne againe into the Island; when being re∣sisted, he makes a shew, as if hee desired nothing but to fetch away his daughter Rowena, and to have a friendly conference for continuance of amity: which moti∣on seeming reasonable, a place and time of conference was appointed: the time upon the first of May; the place upon the Plaine of Ambrii, now called Salisbury; whither the plaine meaning Britaines came unarmed, according to agreement; but the fraudulent Saxons under their long Cassocks had short skeynes hidden, with which, upon a watch-word given, they set upon the Britaines, and of their unar∣med Nobility slew three, some say five hundred, & took the King himselfe prisoner, whom they would not release, till they were put in possession of these foure Counties, Kent, Sussex, Suffolke, and Norfolke. Whereupon Vortigern, whether fearing a second Deposing, or whether so advised by his Cabinet Counsailour the Prophe∣ticall Merlin, betooke him into Wales, and there built him a strong Castle for his safeguard; while the Saxons comming daily in great swarmes into the Land, had at this time overrunne all; if Aurelius Ambrosius a Romane borne, but affected to the British Nation, had not landed at Tones in Devonshire, to whom resorted great troopes of Britaines. His first expedition was against Vortigern, (as the first cause of the Britaines misery) whose Castle he besieged; and whether by wilde fire, or by fire from Heaven, both he and his Castle, and all that were in it were burnt to ashes. To this Ambrosius is ascribed the admirable Monument in Wiltshire, now called Stonehge, in the place where the Briaines had beene treacherously laugh∣tered and interred; and of whom the Towne of Ambersbury beares its name. After this he set upon the Saxons, and in many batrailes discomited them; till at last fal∣ling sicke in the City of Winchester, a Saxon, in shew a Britain, and in habit a Physi∣tian, was sent unto him, who instead of Physick, ministred poyson, whereof he died, in the yeare 497. after he had raigned two and thirty yeares. After Ambrosius, succeeded Uter, (some say his brother, others, a Britaine) called Pendragon, of his Royall Banner borne ever before him; wherein was portrayed a
Dragon with a golden Head, as in our English Camps, it is at this day borne for the Imperiall standard. And he also in many battailes discomfited the Saxons, till after eighteene yeares Raigne he came to his end by treachery; dying by poyson put into a Well, whereof he usually dranke; in the yeare 515. After him succeeded his sonne Arthur, begotten of the faire Lady Igren, wife of the Duke of Cornwall, to whose bed the Art of Merlin brought him in the likenesse of her husband; and hee in telve set battailes discomfited the Saxons; but in one most memorable in which giding himselfe with his sword called Callibourne, he flew upon his Enemies, and with his owne hand slew eight hundred of them; which is but one of his wonderfull deedes, whereof there are so many reported, that hee might well be reckoned amongst the Fabulous, if there were not now true to give them credit. Amongst other his Acts, he Insti∣tuted the Order of Knights of the Round Table, to the end there might be no que∣stion about Precedence, and to teach Heroicall minds, nor to stand upon place, but Merit. But this great Prince, for all his great valour, was at last in a battaile woun∣ded, whereof he died, in the yeare 542. after he had raigned six and twenty yeares. After King Arthur succeeded his cosin Constantine; & after his three yeares raigne, Aurelius Conanus the Nephew of King Arthur; whose Raigne is so uncertaine, that some say, he raigned onely two, some, three yeares, some againe thirty, and some three and thirty. After Conanus succeeded Vortiporus, who after many victories a∣gainst the Saxons, and foure yeares Raigne, died. After whom succeeded Malgo Co∣nanus, and Raigned six yeares. After him Careticus, who setting upon the Saxons and beaten, led into the Towne of Chichester, whereupon the Saxons catching certaine Sparrowes and fastning fire to their feete, let them fly into the Towne, where light∣ing upon traw, and other matter apt to take fire, the whole City in short space was burnt; and thereupon Careticus flying, secured himselfe amongst the Mountaines of Wales, where he dyed, after he had unprosperously Raigned three yeares: and from that time forth, the Britaines lost their whole Kingdome in the East part of the Island, and were confined in the West by the rivers Severne and Dee. After Careti∣cus succeeded Cadwan, who Raigned two and twenty yeares. After him his sonne Cadwallo, who Raigned eight and forty yeares, and then died; whose body was bu∣ried in St. Martins Church neere Ludgate, and his Image of brasse placed upon the same gate, for a terrour to the Saxons. In his time, the doctrine of Mahomet began to spread it selfe all the Easterne world over. After Cadwallo succeeded his sonne Cadwalladar; in whose time so great a Famine, and afterward Mortality hapned, continuing eleven yeares, that the Land became in a manner desolate: in so much, that the King and many of his Lords were driven to forsake their native Coun∣try, and Cadwalladar himselfe went to his cousin Alan King of little Britaine in France. At which time the Saxons taking advantage of his absence, came over in swarmes, and dispossessed the forlorne Britaines of all they had, and divided the Land amongst themselves. Whereupon Cadwalladar, obtaining assistance of his cou∣sin Alan, was comming over to restraine their insolencies; when making prayers to God for good successe, an Angell appeared to him, or at least to his seeming hee heard a voyce, that forbad him the enterprise, declaring that it was not Gods will, the Britaines should rule this Land any longer, and therefore bade him hie him to Rome, and receive of Pope Sergius the habit of Religion, wherein he should die and rest in peace. Which accordingly he did: and in him ended the blood of the British Kings; in the yeare 689. So as Britaine now, was no longer Britine; but a Colony of the Saxons. And now is time to speake of the Heptarchy of the Saxons; so much spoken of, by all Writers and to shew by what degrees the Britaies lost, and the Saxons got the whole possession of this Island: for this Heptarchie or division of this Island into seven Kingdomes, came not in all at once, nor yet in an equall partition, but some good distance of time, one after another, and as the Invadour had strength to expell the Natives.
The first Kingdome being of Kent. THe first Kingdome of the Saxons began by Hengist, in the yeare 455. con∣taining all Kent, and continued 372. yeares, during the raignes of seventeene Kings, of whom as many as performed any memorable Act, shall be re∣membred, and for the rest, it will be no losse to passe them over in silence. Of these seventeene Kings, Ethelbert being the fifth, was the first Saxon Christian King of this Island, converted by Austin the Monke, whom Pope Gregory sent hither to that purpose, with forty others, in the yeare 595. to whom King Ethelbert gave his chiefe City of Canterbury, and his owne Royall Palace there, made since the Ca∣thedrall of that See; withdrawing himselfe to Reulver in the Isle of Thanet, where he erected a Palace for himselfe and his successors. He gave him also an old Tem∣ple, standing without the East wall of the City, which he honoured with the name of St. Paneras, and then added a Monastery to it, and Dedicated it to St. Peter and Paul, appointing it to be the place for the Kentish Kings Sepulchers. But in regard of Austin the procurer, both Panras, Peter, and Paul were soone forgotten, and it was; and is to this day, called St. Austines: which Abbey St. Austin enriched with divers Reliques which he brought with him from Rome; amongst which was a part of Christs seamelesse Coate, and of Aarons Rodde. This King after his owne con∣version, converted also Sebert King of the East Angles, and assisted him in the buil∣ding of the Cathedrall Church o St. Paul London; as also the Church of St. Peter, on the West of London, then called Thorny: and himselfe at Rochester built the Ca∣thedrall Church there, which he Dedicated to the Apostle St. Andrew; and dying, when he had Raigned six and fifty yeares, was buried at Canterbury. And thus by this first Saxon Kingdome, was all Kent lopped off from the Britaines Dominion; and this was their first impairing, and this happened in the Raigne of Ambrosius be∣fore spoken of. The sixth King of Kent was Ethelbald; who at first an Apostata, was afterwards converted, and built a Chappell within the Monastery of St. Peter and Paul at Canterbury. The seventh King was Ercombert, a vertuous and religious Prince, who first commanded the observing of Lent; and in his daies, the Archbi∣shop Honorius divided Kent into Parishes. The eighth King was Egbert, who obtai∣ned the kingdome by murthering his Nephews: whose sister the Lady Dompnena, founded the Abbey of Minster in Kent. The eleventh King was Withred, who foun∣ded the Priory of St. Merton at Dover. The last was Baldred, who overcome by Egbert King of the West Saxons, left Kent a Province to that Kingdome, in the yeare 827. The second Kingdome being of the South Saxons. THe second Kingdome of the Heptarchie, was of the South Saxons, and be∣gan by Ella, in the yeare 488. containing Sussex and Surrey, and continued 113 yeares, during the raigne of five Kings onely, of whom Cissa being the second founded the City of Chichester, and raigned as some say threescore and six∣teene yeares. And then Berthan being the last King, was overcome by Ine King of the West Saxons, and his Country became a Province to that Kingdome, in the yeare 601. and thus as Kent before, so now Sussex and Surrey were lopped off from the Britaines Dominion: and this was a second impairing, which also happened in the Raigne of the British King Ambrosius.
The third Kingdome being of the West Saxons. THe third Kingdome of the Heptarchie, was of the West Saxons, and began by Cerdic, in the yeare 519. containing Cornwall, Devonshire, Dorseshire, So∣mersetshire, Wiltshire, Hampshire, and Barkeshire, and continued 561. yeares, during the Raignes of nineteene Kings, of whom this Cerdic was the first: in whose time, Porth a Saxon landed in the West, at a place from him called afterward Portesmouth, and ayded Cerdic in his conquest. And this happened in the Raigne of King Arthur: and as Kent, Sussex, and Surrey before, so now these seven other shires were lopped off from the Britaines Dominion: and this was a third impai∣ring. The sixth King of the West Saxons was Kingills, who was the first Christi∣an King of this kingdome, converted by Berynus an Italian Divine, to whom hee gave the City of Dorchester, neere to Oxford; who therein erected his Episcopall See. The seventh King was Kenwald, who at first an Apostata was afterward con∣verted, and founded the Cathedrall of Winchester, and the Abbey of Mamesbery; whose wife Segburg also built a house of devotion in the Isle of Sheppey, wherein herselfe became a Nunne, and was afterward elected Abbesse of Ely. The eleventh King was Ine, who ordained many good lawes, which are yet extant in the Saxon tongue, and are translated into Latin, by the learned Master William Lam∣bert. This King built a Colledge at Wells bearing the name of St. Andrews, which af∣terward King Kenulph made an Episcopall See. He also in most stately manner new built the Abbey of Glastenbery; and out of his devotion to the See of Rome, he injoyned every one of his Subjects, that possessed in his house of any one kinde of goods to the value of nineteene pence, to pay yearely upon Lammas day, one pen∣ny to the Pope; which at first was contributed under the name of the Kings Almes, but afterward was paid by the name of Peter pence. At last hee went to Rome, and there tooke upon him the habit of Religion, and therein died. His wife also became a veyled Nunne, and afterward was made Abbesse of Barking neere London. The thirteenth King was Cuthred, who first permitted the bodies of the dead to be buried within the walls of their Cities, which before were used to bee buried in the fields. The foureteenth was Sigebert, who for his cruelty and exacti∣ons, was by his subjects forced to fly into the woods to hide himselfe, where by a swinherd hee was slaine. The fifteenth was Kenwolph, who founded the Cathe∣drall Church of St. Andrews at Wells, and was afterward slaine by Kynoard, whom he had banished. The sixteenth King was Brithrick, whose Queene Ethelburg, ha∣ving prepared a poyson for another, the King chanced to tast it, and thereof died. In feare of which chance the Queene fled into France; where Charles the then King for her excellent beauty, offered her the choyce of himselfe or his sonne in marriage: but she out of her lustfull humour choosing the son, was thereupon de∣bard of both, and thrust into a Monastery, where committing adultery, she was dri∣ven from thence, and ended her life in great misery. For her sake the West Saxons ordained a Law, that no Kings wife should hereafter have the Title or Majesty of a Queene, which for many yeares after was severely executed. The fourth Kingdome being of the East Saxons. THe fourth Kingdom of the Heptarchy was of the East Saxons, & began by Erchenwyn, in the yeare 527. containing Essex and Middlesex, and continued 281 years, during the Raignes of foureteene Kings; of whom the third was Sebert, who first built the Cathedrall of St. Paul London, which had formerly beene the Temple of Diana: He likewise Founded the Church of St. Peter in the West of London, at a place called Thorny, where some time stood the Temple of Apollo, which being overthrowne by an Earthquake, King Lucius new built for the service of God; & that againe being decayed, this King restored to a greater beauty, & with
his Queene Athelgarda was there buried. The ninth King was Sebba, who after thirty yeares peaceable Raigne relinquished the Crowne, & tooke upon him a Re∣ligious habit, in the Monastery of St. Paul London; where dying, his body was In∣tumbed in a Coffin of gray Marble, the cover coaped, and as yet standeth in the North wall of the Chancell of the same Church. The twelveth was Offa, famous for the beauty of his countenance, who both enlarged with buildings, and enrich∣ed with lands the Church of Westminster, and after eight yeares Raigne went to Rome, and was there shorne a Monke, and in that habit died. The fourteenth was Suthred, whom Egbert King of the West Saxons subdued, and made his Kingdome a Province to his owne. And thus besides the former Shires, these two also were lopped off from the Britaines Dominion, and this was a fourth impairing. The fifth Kingdome being of Northumberland. THe fifth Kingdome was of Northumberland, and began by Ella and Ida, in the yeare 547. Containing Yorkeshire, Durham, Lancashire, Westmerland, Cumberland, and Northumberland, and continued 379. yeares, during the Raignes of three and twenty Kings, of whom nothing is recorded of these two first, but that they builded the Castle of Bamburg. The seventh King was Ethel∣fryd, who at Caerlegion (now Westchester) made a slaughter of twelve hundred Christian Monkes, and was himselfe afterward slaine, by Redwald King of the East Angles. The thirteenth King was Osred, whose wife Cutburga, out of a loathing wearinesse of wedlocke, sued out a divorce from her husband, and built a Nunnery at Winburne in Dorsetshire, where in a Religious habit she ended her life. The six∣teenth King was Cednulph, who after eight yeares Raigne, left his Royall robes, and put on the habit of a Monke, in the Isle of Lindesfern or Holy Island. Unto this King the Venerable Bde, a Saxon and a Priest in the Monastery of Peter and Paul at Werimouth neere to Durham, Dedicate his worke of the English History, which hee continued from the first entrance of the Saxons into this Island, to the yeare 731. containing after his owne account 285. yeares. The seventeenth King was Egbert, who after twenty yeares Raigne forsooke the world also, and shore himselfe a Monke; whose-brother being Archbishop of Yorke, erected a notable Library there, and stored it with an infinite number of learned bookes. The last King was Oswald, after whom this Kingdome yeelded to the protection of Egbert King of the West Saxons, who was now in the yeare 926. become absolute Monarch of the whole Island. And thus by the erection of this fifth Kingdome, were the six Nor∣therne shires lopped off from the Britaines Dominion, and this was a fifth impai∣ring. The sixth Kingdome being of Mercia. THe sixth Kingdome was of Mercia, and began in Crida, in the yeare 522. containing Huntington, Rutland, Lincolne, Nottingham, Warwickshire, Leycester, Northampton, Derbyshire, Oxfordshire, Cheshire, Shropshire, Glostershire, Stafford∣shire, Buckinghamshire, Bedfordshire, and Hartfordshire, and continued 202. yeares, du∣ring the Raignes of twenty Kings; eight of whom in a continued succession kept the Imperiall Crowne of the Heptarchie: for though other Raigned as Kings in their owne Territories, yet among them ever one was the supreme head of the rest, and was called King of Engle-lond, till Egbert the West Saxon brought them all into one. The fifth of these Kings of Mercia was Penda, who was the first Christian King of the Mercians, and laid the Foundation of a faire Church at Medeshamstead, now called Peterborough. The seventh King was Ethelred, who Raigned thirty yeares, nd then gave over the Crowne, and became a Monke in the Monastery of Bradney in Lincolnshire, where in the yeare 716. he died. The eighth King was Ken∣red,
who after foure yeares raigne went to Rome, where he tooke upon him the ha∣bit of a Monke, and after other foure yeares dyed. The tenth King was Ethelbald, who at first was given to much lasciviousnesse of life, but being reprehended for it by Boniface Archbishop of Ments, was so farre converted that he Founded the Mo∣nastery of Crowland, driving in mighty piles of Oake into that Marish ground, where he laid a great and goodly building of stone; and after two and forty years Raigne was slaine in a battaile by Cuthred King of the West Saxons. The eleventh King was Offa, who greatly enlarged his Dominions; raigned nine and thirty yeares, and Founded the Monastery of St. Albans. The thirteenth King was Kenwolph, who raigned two and twenty yeares, and Founded the Monastery of Winchcombe in the County of Glocester, where his body was interred. The eighteenth King was Withlafe, who overcome by Egbert King of the West Saxons, held his Country af∣terward as his substitute and Tributary, acknowledging Egbert as now the sole Monarch of this Island. And by erection of this Mercian Kingdome, were seven∣teene shires moe lopped off from the Britaines Dominion, and was a sixth and a great impairing, so as now they were driven into a narrow roome. The seventh Kingdome being of the East Angles. THe seventh Kingdome was of the East Angles, and began by Uffa, in the yeare 575. containing Suffolke, Norfolke, Cambridgeshire, and the Isle of Ely, and continued 353. yeares, during the raigne of fifteene Kings, of whom the fifth was Sigebert, who first brought the light of the Gospell into his Dominions, and built a Schoole for education of youth, but whether at Oxford or Cambridge, is left a Quaere; and after three yeares Raigne shore himselfe a Monke in the Abbey of Cumbreburg, which himselfe had built: but being afterward violently drawne from thence by his Subjects the East Angles, to resist the Mercian King Penda, and refusing to use any other weapon but onely a white wand, was in a battaile by him slaine. The seventh King was Anna, who after thirteene yeares raigne, was also slaine by Penda the Mercian King. This King Anna was memorable chiely for the holinesse of his children, of whom his sonne Erkenwald was Bishop of London, and built the Abbey of Barking neere London. His eldest daughter Etheldrid was twice married, and yet continued a Virgin still, and at last became a Nunne, and is remembred to posterity by the name of St. Audrie. His second daughter named Sexburg, his third named Ethelburg, his fourth (a Naturall daughter) named Withburg: all entred in∣to Monasteries, and are Canonized all for Saints. The foureteenth King was Ethel∣bert, a learned and religious Prince, who being invited by Offa the Mercian King to marry Elfrid his daughter, came for that purpose to Offa's Court, then seated at Sut∣ton Walleys in the County of Hereford, and there by him was cruelly murthered. In whose memoriall notwithstanding, hee afterward built a faire Church at Hereford, the Cathedrall of that See, as though he could expiate a murther of the living, by a Monument to the dead, and were not rather a Monument of his owne impiety. The fifteenth King was Edmund, who assaulted by the Danes for his possessions, was more assaulted for his profession: for continuing constant in his Christian Faith, those Pagans first beat him with bats, then scourged him with whippes, nd lastly bound him to a stake, and with their arrowes shot him to death; whose body was buried at the Towne where Sigebert the East Anglian King, one of his Predecessors, had built a Church, and where afterward (in honour of him) was built another most spatious, of a wonderfull frame of Timber, and the name of the Towne upon the occasion of his buriall there, called to this day St. Edmunds bury. This Church and place, Suenus the Danish King burnt to ashes: but when his sonne Canutus had gotten possession of the English Crowne, terrified with a Vision of the seeming St. Edmund; in a religious devotion to expiate his Fathers sacriledge, hee built it anew most sumptuously, and offered his owne Crowne upon the Martyrs Tombe. After the death of this Edmund, the East Angles Country was possest by the Danes, and so
continued the space of fifty yeares, untill that Edmund surnamed the Elder, expelled those Danes, and made that Kingdome a Province to the West Saxons. By that which hath beene said, it plainely appeares, by what degrees the Britaines lost, and the Saxons got the whole possession of this Island. For after that Vortigern in the yeare 455. had called in the Saxons, every Britaine King that succeeded him, lost some part or other of it to the Saxon, till at last in the yeare 689. Cdwllader the last Britaine King lost all; and then the Saxon Kings striving amongst them∣selves for soveraignty, they still gained one upon another, till at last in the yeare 818 Egbert King of the West Saxons reduced them all under his subjection, and then cau∣sed all the South of the Island to bee called England, according to the Angles of whom himselfe came; after whom they were no longer properly called Saxon Kings, but Kings of England, and so continued till the Danes, in the yeare 1017. made an interruption; of whose succession now comes the time to speake. Of the Saxons that Raigned sole Kings of this Island, and may properly be called English Kings. EGbert the eighteenth King of the West Saxons, is now become the first of the Kings of England, in whose time the Danes began first to infest the Land; as thinking they might do as much against the Saxons, as the Saxons had done against the Britaines; but though they made divers Invasions, and did great spoyle, yet they were still repelled. This King raigned six and thirty yeares, and dying in the yeare 836. was buried at Winchester. Of his issue, his daughter Edith was made Governesse of a Monastery of Ladies, by her planted in a place which the King her brother had given her, called Pollesworth, situate in Arden, in the North part of the County of Warwicke, where shee died and was burid, and the place in memory of her called St Edyths of Pollesworth. To Egbert succeeded his sonne Ethelwolph, who in his youth was so addicted to a Religious life, that he was first made Deacon, and after Bishop of Winchester; but his father dying, he was intreated by his people to take upon him the Crowne, and by Pope Gregory the fourth, was to that end absolved of his Vow. His raigne was infested with many and great Invasions of the Danes, to whom notwithstanding hee gave incredible overthrowes. In the time of his Raigne, remembring his former Religious profession, he ordained that riches and lands due to holy Church, should be free from all Tribute or Regall services, and in great devotion went himselfe to Rome, where he lived a yeare; confirmed the grant of Peter pence, and agreed be∣side to pay yearely to Rome three hundred Markes. Returning home through France, and being a Widower, he there marryed Iudith, the beautifull daughter of Charles the Bald then Emperor; in honour of whom, in his owne Court, hee ever placed her in a chaire of Estate, with all other Majesticall complements of a Qene, contrary to the Law of the West Saxons formerly made; which so much dis∣pleased his Lords, that for it they were ready to Depose him; but howsoever hee lived not long after, having Raigned one and twenty yeares. His yongest sonne Neoto, was much addicted to learning, and was one of the first Divinity Readers in the University of Oxford, and Founded a Monastery in Cornwall, which of him was called Neotestock; and being dead his body was Interred in the County of Hun∣tington, at a place then called Arnulphsbury, and afterward, in regard of his Inter∣ment, St. Neotes, and now St. Nedes. This King was famous, for having foure sons, who all of them were Kings of this Land successively. First after him Raigned his eldest sonne Ethelbald, in the yeare 857. who to his eternall shame, tooke to wife Iudith his fathers widdow, Raigned but two yeares and dying, was buried at Shirborn in Dorsetshire, at that time the Episcopal See. From this Iudith, married afterward to the Earle of Flanders, after divers descents, came Maude the wife of William the Conqueror, from whom are descended all our Kings ever since.
Next to the eldest Raigned the second sonne Ethelbert, all whose Raigne, which was onely five yeares, was perpetually disquieted with Invasions of the Danes, which yet were at last repelled. He died in the yeare 866. and was buried at Shir∣borne in Dorsetshire. Next to the second Raigned his third sonne Ethelred, whose Raigne was more dis∣quieted with the Danes then any others before: for they Invading the Land, under the leading of Hungar, and Hubba, spoyled all the Country as they went, not sparing Religious places; amongst other, the goodly Monasteries of Bradney, Crowland, Peter∣borough, Ely, and Huntington, they laid levell with the ground: the Monkes and Nunnes they murthered or ravished; at which time a rare example of Chastity and Fortitude was seene in the Nunnes of Coldingham. For to avoyd the babarous pollutions of these Pagans, they deformed themselves by cutting off their upper lips and noses. Nine battailes in one yeare this King fought with the Danes, in most o them victorious; but at last received a wound whereof he died, and was buried in the Church at Winborne in Dorsetshire. Next to the third Raigned his fourth son Alfred, in whose time came over grea∣ter swarmes of Danes then ever before, and had now got footing in the North, the West, & South parts of this Island, leaving this King nothing of all his great Monar∣chy, but only Somerset, Hampton, and Wiltshire; and not these neither altogether free, so as he was forced sometimes to flie into the Fennes and Marish grounds to secure himselfe, where he lived by Fishing and Fowling, and hunting of wilde beasts, till at last learning policy from adversity, and gathering courage from misery, hee ven∣tured in the habit of a common Minstrell, to enter the Danes Campe; where ha∣ving viewed the manner of their Encamping, and observed their security, he retur∣ned backe, shewing his Lords in what condition he found them: whereupon setting upon them at unawares, he not onely made of them a great slaughter, but brought upon them a greater terrour: for presently upon this the Danes sue for Peace, and deliver Hostages for performance of these Conditions; that their King should re∣ceive Baptisme, and their great Army depart quietly out of the Land. But though upon this agreement they departed for the present into France, yet the yeare follow∣ing they returned with greater Forces, forraging all parts of the Countrey in most cruell manner, though still encountred by this Valorous Prince, till hee ended his life in the yeare 901. after he had Raigned nine and twenty yeares. The vertues of this King, if they were not incredible, they were at least admirable, whereof these may be instances. The day and night containing foure and twenty houres, he designed equally to three speciall uses, observing them by the burning of a Taper set in his Chappell; (there being at that time, no other way of distinguishing them) Eight houres he spent in Contemplation, Reading and Prayers: Eight in provision for himselfe, his Health and Recreation: and the other eight in the Affaires of the Common-wealth and State. His Kingdome likewise he divided into Shires, Hun∣dreds and Tythings; ordaining that no man might remove out of his Hundred without security: by which course he so suppressed Theeves and Robbers, which had formerly encreased by the long warres, that it is said a boy or girle might open∣ly carry a bag of gold or silver, and carry it safely all the Country over. Besids his great Piety, he was also learned; and s farre as it may be a commendation in a Prince, a skilfull Musitian and an excellent Poet. All former Lawes hee caused to be survayed, and made choyce of the best, which hee translated into the English tongue; as also the Pastorall of St. Gregorie, the History of Bede, and Boetius his con∣solation of Philosophie; the Psalmes of David likewise he began to translate, but died before he could finish it. And so great a love he had to learning, that he made a Law, that all Freemen of the Kingdome, possessing two Hides of land, should bring up their sonnes in learning, till they were fifteene yeares of age at least, that so they might be trained to know God, to be men of understanding, and to live happily. His buildings were many, both for Gods service and for other publike use: as at Edlingsey a Monastery, at Winchester a new Minster, and at Shaftesbry a house of Nunnes; whereof he made his daughter Ethelgeda the Abbesse; but his
Foundation of the University of Oxford, exceeded all the rest: which he began in the yeare 895. and to furnish it with able Scholars, drew thither out of France, Grimbaldus and Scotus, and out of Wales, Asser, (who wrote his life) whose Le∣ctures he honoured often with his owne presence. And for a stocke of Frugality, he made a Survey of the Kingdome; and had all the particulars of his Estate, re∣gistred in a Booke; which he kept in his Treasury at Winchester. He Raigned se∣ven and twenty yeares, and dying was buryed in the Cathedrall Church of Saint Peter at Winchester, though removed afterward, into the Church of the new Mona∣stery, without the North-gate of the City called Hyde. His Wife Elsewith, Foun∣ded a Monastery of Nunnes at Winchester, and was there buryed. Their second daughter Ethelgeda, tooke upon her the Vow of Virginity; and by her Fathers ap∣pointment was made a Nunne of Shaftesbery, in the County of Dorset, in the Mo∣nastery ounded there by him, who is also accounted the Founder of the Towne it selfe. King Alfred being deceased, his sonne Edward (called Edward the Elder) suc∣ceeded: not so learned as his Father; but in Valour his Equall, and Superiour in Fortune. For, first, he overcame his Cousin Ethelwald, who aspired to the Crowne; then the Danes, whose chiefe leader he lew in battaile; lastly the Welsh; but these last, more by humility shewed to their Prince Leolyn, then by force of Ames. But yet he must not have all the glory of his time; some must be impar∣ted to his sister Elflede; who being marryed to Ethelred Earle of Mercia, had by him a daughter, but with so grievous panes in her travaile, that ever after she re∣fused the nuptiall bed of her Husband, saying, it was a foolish pleasure, that brought with it so excessive paines. And thereupon after her husbands death, made choyce to follow the warres; assisting her brother both against the Welsh, and against the Danes, whom she brought to be at her disposing. Dying she was buryed at Gloce∣ster, in the Monastery of Saint Peter, which her Husband and her selfe had built. King Edwrd himselfe, after foure and twenty yeares Raigne, deceased at Faring∣don in Barkshire, in the yeare 924. and was buryed in the new Monastery of Win∣chester, which his Father began, and himselfe wholly finished: having had by his three Wives, six Sonnes and nine Daughters, of whom his eldest sonne Athel∣stan succeeded him in the kingdome, whom his Grandfather King Alfred had with his owne hands Knighted in an extraordinary manner; putting upon him a pur∣ple Robe, and girding him with a girdle wrought with Pearle. His second sonne Elfred, he so loved, that he caused him to be Crowned King with himselfe, which yet he enjoyed but a short time, being taken away by death. His third sonne Els∣ward, presently upon his Fathers death, dyed himselfe also. His fourth son Ed∣wyn, was by his brother Athelstan, out of jealousie of state, put into a little Pinnace, without either Tackle or Oares, accompanyed onely with one Page; with griefe whereof, the young Prince leaped into the Sea and drowned himselfe. His fifth, and sixth sonnes, Edmund, and Edred, came in succession to be Kings of England. Of his Daughters, the eldest Edytha, was marryed to Sithricke the Danish King of Northumberland, and he deceasing, she entred into a Monastery, which she began at Tamworth in Warwickshire, and there dyed. His second daughter Elflede, tooke upon her the vow of Virginity, in the Monastery of Ramsey, in the County of South∣hampton, where she dyed and was interred. His third daughter Eguina, was first marryed to Charles the Simple, King of France, and after his decease, to Herbert, Eale of Vermandois. His fourth daughter Ethelhild, became a Nunne in the Mo∣nastery of Wilton, which was sometime the head Towne, giving name to the whole County of Wilshire, and anciently called Ellandon. That we may see in those first times of Religion, when there was leat knowledge, there was most de∣votion. His fifth daughter Edhold, was marryed to Hugh, surnamed the Great, Earle of Paris, and Constable of France. And Edgith his sixth daughter, to Otho, the Emperour of the West, urnamed the Great. His seventh daughter Elgina, was marryed to a Duke of Italy. His ninth Edgina, to Lewis Prince of Aquitaine in France.
After the death of King Edward, his eldest sonne Athelstan succeeded, and was Crowned at Kingstone upon Thames, in the County of Surrey, by Athelmu Arch∣bishop of Canterbury, in the yeare 924. The beginning of whose Raigne, was mo∣lested with the Treason of one Elfrid a Nobleman, who being apprehended and sent to Rome to purge himselfe, and there denying the Act upon his Oath, fell suddenly downe, and within three dayes dyed, to the eternall errour of all per∣jured persons. Presently upon this, another dysaster befell King Athelstan, for having caused his brother Edwyns death, (as before is shewed) chiefly pro∣cured by his Cupbearers suggestions: It hapned not long after, that his Cup∣bearer, in his service at a Festivall, stumbling with one foote, and recovering him∣selfe with the other, and saying merrily, See how one brother helpes another; His words put the King in remembrance of his Brother, whose death he had caused, and with remorse thereof, not onely caused his Cup-bearer to be put to death, but did also seven yeare penance: and built the two Monasteries of Middleton, and Mi∣chelnesse, in the County of Dorset, in expiation of his offence. This King ordai∣ned many good Lawes; and those to binde as well the Clergy, as the Laity; a∣mongst which, one was the Attachment of Felons, that stole aove twelve pence, and were above twelve yeares old. Of this King, there is one Act related, that may seeme ridiculous; another that may seeme miraculous; For what more ridicu∣lous, then that, going to visit the Tombe of Saint Iohn of Beverley, and having nothing else of worth to offer, he offered his knife in devotion to the Saint? Yet the miraclous is more apparent: For going to encounter the Danes, and praying to God for good successe, he prayed withall, that God would shew some signe of his rightfull cause, and thereupon striking with his sword, he strucke it an ell deepe into a hard stone, which stood so cloven a long time after. But whether this be true or no, this certainly is true, that he obtained many great victories against the Danes, against the Scots, against the Irsh, and against the Welsh, whose Princes he brought to be his Tributaries, entring Covenant at Herefrd, to pay him yearely twenty pound weight of gold, three hundred of silver, and five and twenty hun∣dred head of Cattell, besides a certaine number of Hawkes and Hounds. Lastly, he joyned Northumberland to the rest of his Monarchy, and enlarged his Domini∣ons beyond any of his Predecessours, which made all Neighbouring Princes to seeke his friendship, and to gratify him with rare presents, as Hugh King of France sent him the sword of Constantine the Great, in the hilt whereof, was one of the nayles that fastned Christ to his Crosse; He sent him also the speare of Charles the Grea, reputed to be the same that pierced Christs side; as also part of the Crosse whereon Christ suffered, and a piece of the Thorny Crowne put upon his head. Likewise Otho the Emperour, who had marryed his sister, sent him a vessell of pre∣tious stones, artificially made, wherein were seene Landskips with Vines, Corne, and Men, all of them seeming so artificially to move, as if they were growing, and alive. Likewise the King of Norway sent him a goodly Ship, with a gilt Stene, purple ayles, and the decke garnished all with gold. Of these accounted Holy Reliques, King Athelstan gave part to the Abbey of Saint Swithin in Winchester, and the rest to the Monastery of Mamesbury, whereof Adelm was the Founder, and his Tutelar Saint. He new built the Monasteries of Wilton, Michelnesse, and Middleton; Founded Saint Germans in Cornwall, Saint Petrocus at Bodmyn, and the Priory of Pilton; new walled and beautifyed the City of Exceter, and enriched either with Jewels or Lands, every speciall Abbey of the Land. But the chiefest of his workes for the service of God, and good of his Subjects, was the Translati∣on of the Bible into the Saxon Tongue, which was then the Mother tongue of the Land. He Raigned fifteen yeares, Dyed at Glocestr, and was buryed at Mames∣bery, in the yeare 940. having never beene marryed. After the death of Athelstan, his brother Edmund, the fifth sonne of his Father succeeded; and was Crowned at Kingstone upon Thames; but no sooner was the Crowne set upon his head, but the Danes were upon his backe; and in Northumber∣land made Insurrections, whom yet he not onely repressed in that part; but tooke
from them the Townes of Lincolne, Leycester, Darby, Stafford and Nottingham; com∣pelling them withall to receive Baptisme, and to become his Subjects, so as the Country was wholly his as farre as Humber. Cumberland also, which had beene an entire Kingdome of it selfe, and was now ayded by Leolyn King of South-wales, he utterly wasted, and gave it to Malcolme King of Scots, to hold of him by Feal∣ty. After his returning home, he et himselfe to ordaine Lawes for the good of his People; which Master Lambert hath since translaed into Latine. But after all his noble Acts both in Warre and Peace, he came at last to a lamentable end; for at his Manour of Pucklekerks, in the County of Glocester, interposing himselfe to part a fray betweene two of his servants, he was thrust through the body, and so wounded that he dyed, and was buryed at Glastenbury, after he had Raigned five yeares and seven moneths, leaving behinde him two young Sonnes, Edwyn, and Edgar. King Edmund dying, his brother Edred, in the minority of his Nephewes, was Crowned at Kingstone upon Thames, by Otho Arch-bishop of Canterbury, in the yeare 946. Not as Protector; (It seemes that kinde of Authority was not yet come in use) but as King himselfe, though with purpose to resigne, when the right Heire should come of age, which at this time needed not, for while the right Heire was scarce yet fourteene yeares old, he resigned to him the Kingdome, by resigning his life to Nature, after he had twice repressed the rebelling Northumbrians, and twice forgiven their rebelling, which yet was not a simple Rebellion; for they had sent for Anlafe the Dane out of Ireland, and made him their King; which place for foure yeares he held; and then weary of his government, they thrust him out and take one Hericus to be their King, whom not long after they put downe also; and then partly allured by the lenity of King Edred; and partly forced by his Armes; they submit themselves to him, and aske forgivenesse; to whom he, as a mercifull Prince, giants an Act of Oblivion, and received them againe into protection. This Prince was so devout and humble, that he submitted his body to be chastised at the will of Dunstan Abbot of Glastenbury, and committed all his Treasure and Jewels to his custody. The stately Abbey of Mich at Abington neare Oxford, built by King Inas, but destroyed by the Danes, he newly re-edified; endowing it with revenues and Lands, the Charters whereof he confirmed with seales of Gold. He ordained Saint Germans in Cornwall, to be a Bishops See, which there continued, till by Ca∣nutus it was annexed to the Episcopall See of Kyrton in Devonshire; Both which Sees were afterward by King Edward the Confessor, translated to the City of Exce∣ter. He left behinde him two Sonnes, Elfred, and Bertfred, and was buryed in the old Minster, without the City of Winchester; whose bones with other Kings, are to this day preserved in a gilt Coffer, fixed upon the wall, in the South side of the Quire. After Edred, not any of his sonnes, but his Nephew Edwyn, the eldest sonne of King Edmund succeeded, and was annoynted and Crowned at Kingston upon Thames, by Otho Arch-bishop of Canterbury, in the yeare 955. This Prince, though scarce fourteene yeares old, and in age but a childe, yet was able to commit sinne as a man; For upon the very day of his Coronation, and in sight of his Lords, as they sate in Counsell, he shamefully abused a Lady of great Estate, and his neare kinswoman, and to mend the matter, shortly after slew her Husband, the more freely to injoy his incestuous pleasure. And whether for this infamous fact, or for thrusting the Monkes out of the Monasteries of Mamesbury, and Glastenbury, and placing marryed Priests in their roomes, as also for banishing Dunstan the holy Ab∣bot of Glastenbury out of the Realme, a great part of his Subjects hearts was so tur∣ned against him, that the Mercians and Northumbrians revolted, and swore Fealty to his younger brother Edgar, with griefe whereof, after foure yeares Raigne, he ended his life, and was buryed in the Church of the New Abbey of Hyde, at Win∣chester. After Edwyn, succeeded his younger brother Edgar, at the age of sixteene yeares; but his Coronation, when, and where, and by whom, so uncertaine, that some say
he was Crowned at Kingston upon Thames, by Otho Arch-bishop of Canterbury, in the first yeare of his Raigne, others say, not till the twelfth, and William of Mames∣bery, not till the thirtyeth: Another Chronicle saith, in his eleventh yeare; and that in the City of Bathe, by the hands of Dunstan Arch-bishop of Canterbury. This King, by reason of the tranquillity of his Raigne, was surnamed the Peaceable; for as he was something inclined to the Danes, so the Danes never offered to stirre in all his time; and as for the Saxons, they acknowledged him their sole Sove∣raigne, without division of Provinces or Titles. His Acts were, some Vertuous, some Politick, some Just, some Pious, and yet all these not without some mix∣ture of vice. To represse dunkennesse, which the Danes had brought in; he mae a Law, Ordaining a size, by certaine pinnes in the pot, with penalty to any, that should presume to drinke deeper then the marke. It was a Politicke device which he used for the destruction of Wolves, that in his dayes did great annoyance to the Land. For, the tribute imposed on the Princes of Wales, by King Athelstan, he wholly remitted, appointing in lieu thereof a certaine number of Wolves yearely to be paid; whereof the Prince of North-wales, for his part was to pay three hun∣dred; which continued for three yeares space: and in the fourth yeare, there was not a Wolfe to be found; and so the tribute ceased. He had in his Navy Royall, three thousand and sixe hundred ships, which he divided into three parts, appoin∣ting every one of them to a severall Quarter, to scowre the Seas, and to secure the Coasts from Pirats: and left his Officers might be carelesse, or corrupted; he would himselfe in person saile about all the Coasts of his Kingdome every Sum∣mer. It was a notable Act of Justice, that in his Circuits, and Progresses through the Country, he would take speciall account of the demeanour of his Lords; and specially for his Judges; whom he severely punished, if he fonnd them Delinquents. Warres he had none in all his Raigne, onely towards his end, the Welshmen moved some rebellion; against whom he went with a mighty Army, and chastised the Authours; but when his Souldiers had gotten great spoyles, and made prey upon the innocent Countrey people; he commanded them to restore it all backe againe; which, if it made some few English angry, it made the whole Country of the Welsh well pleased, and sound forth his praises. His Pious Acts were, that he built and prepared seven and forty Monasteries, and meant to have made them up fifty, but was prevented by death. But now his mixture of Vice marred all; e∣specially being a Vice opposite to all those Vertues, which was Lasciviousnesse. For first, he deflowred a sacred Nunne, called Wolfchild; on whom yet he begot a Saint, the chast Edyth. After her, another Virgin, called Ethelflede, for her excel∣lent beauty surnamed the White, on whom he begot his eldest Sonne Edward; for which Fact he did seven yeares penance, enjoyned him by the Arch-bishop Dun∣stan. After this he chanced to heare of a Virgin, Daughter to a Westerne Duke, exceedingly praysed for her beauty, and comming to Andover, commanded her to his Bed. But the Mother, tender of her Daughters honour, brought in the darke her mayd to him; who in the morning, making hast to rise, and the King not suf∣fering her to depart, she told him what great worke she had to doe; and how she should incurre her Ladies displeasure, if it were not done; by which words, the King perceiving the deceit, turned it to a jest, but so well liked her company, that he kept himselfe true to her ever after, till he marryed. But now his marriage it selfe happened by a greater vice then any of these; For hearing of the admirable beauty of Elrida, the onely daughter of Ordganus Duke of Devonshire, Founder of Tavestocke Abbey in that Country, he sent his great Favorite Earle Ethelwold, (who could well judge of beauty) to try the truth thereof; with Commission, that if he found her such as Fame reported, he should seise her for him, and he would make her his Queene. The young Earle, upon sight of the lady, was so surprized with her love, that he began to wooe her for himselfe, and got her Fa∣thers good will, so as the King would give his consent. Hereupon the Earle post∣ed to the King, relating to him, that the Mayd was faire indeed, but nothing an∣swerable to the Fame that went of her: yet desired the King that he might marry
her, as being her Fathers heire, thereby to raise his Fortunes. The King consen∣ted, and the marriage was solemnized. Soone after, the fame of her beauty be∣gan to spread more then before, so as the King much doubting that he had beene abused, meant to try the truth himselfe, and thereupon taking occasion of hunting in the Dukes Parke, came to his house: whose comming Ethelwold suspecting, ac∣quainted his wife with the wrong he had done both her, and the King, and there∣fore to prevent the Kings displeasure, intreated her by all the perswasions he could use, to cloathe her selfe in such attire, as might be least fit to set her forth; but she considering that now was the time, to make the most of her beauty, and longing to be a Queene; would not be accessary to her owne wrong, but decked her selfe in her richest Ornaments; which so improved her beauty, that the King at her first sight was strucke with admiration, and meant to be revenged of his persidious Favourite; yet dissembling his passion, till he could take him at advantage, he then with a Javelin ran him through; and having thereby made the faire Elfrid a Wi∣dow, tooke her to be his Wife. This King founded the Monastery of Ramsey in Hamshire, Raigned sixteene yeares, Lived seven and thirty, and with great Fu∣nrall pompe was buryed in the Abbey of Glastenbury. He had children by his first wife Ethelfleda, one sonne named Edward; and by his second wife Elfrid, two sons, one named Edmund, who dyed young, the other Ethelred. He had also one na∣turall Daughter, named Edgyth, by a Lady named Wolfchild, the daughter of Wol∣holme, the sonne of Birding, the sonne of Nesting; which two latter beare in their names, the memory of their Fortunes; the last of them being found in an Eagles nest, by King Alfred as he was a hunting. This Edgyth built the Monastery and Church of Saint Dennis at Wilton, and was there buryed. After the death of King Edgar, succeeded his sonne Edward, but not without some opposition, for Queene Elfrid combined with divers of the Lords, to make her Sonne Ethelred King, saying that Prince Edward was illegitimate; on the other side, the Arch-bishop Dunstan, and the Monkes stood for Edward, abetting his Ti∣tle as being lawfully borne; but while the Counsell was assembled to argue their Rights, the Arch-bishop came in with his Banner and Crosse, and not staying for debating De Iure, De Facto presented Prince Edward for their lawfull King, and the Assembly consisting most of Clergy men, drew the approbation of the rest; and thereupon Prince Edward was admitted, being but twelve yeares of age, and was Crowned King at Kingstone upon Thames, by Arch-bishop Dunstan, in the yeare 975. In the beginning of his Raigne, it fell into debate whether marryed Priests were to be allowed to live in Monasteries upon the revenues of the Church. The Mercian Duke Alferus, favouring the cause of the marryed Priests, destroy∣ed the Monasteries in his Province, cast out the Monkes, and restored againe the ancient revenues to the Priests and their wives. On the other side, Edelwyn Duke of the East Angles, and Brithnoth Earle of Essex, who stood for the Monkes, cast marryed Priests out of their Provinces. The matter being debated in a Councell at Westminster, the Monkes cause was like to have the foyle, till it was referred to the Rood, placed on the Refectory wall, where the Counsell sate. For to this gréat Oracle, Saint Dunstan desired them devoutly to pray, and to give diligent eare for an Answer; when suddenly a voyce was heard to say, God forbid it should be so, God forbid it should be so. This was thought authority sufficient, to suppresse the Priests, till they perswading the people, that this was but a cunning practise of the Monkes, in placing behind the wall, a man of their owne, who through a Trunke uttered these words in the mouth of the Rood, whereupon another Assem∣bly was appointed at Cleve in Wiltshire, whither repaired the Prelates, with most of all the Lords and Gentlemen of the Kingdome. The Synod being set, and the matter at the heighth of discussing, it happened that the Joysts of the roome, where the Synod was held, suddenly brake, and the floore with all the people thereon, fell downe, whereof many were hurt, and some slaine. Onely the Arch-bishop Dunstan then President, and mouth for the Monkes, remained unhurt; which whether it were done by practise, or were miraculous, it served the Monkes turne
for justifying their cause; and marryed Priests were thereupon discarded. It were infinite and indeed ridiculous, to speake of all the Miracles reported to be done by this Saint Dunstan, which may be fit for a Legend, but not for a Chronicle. But now a most lamentable dysaster, comes to be remembred: For King Edward, hunting one time in the Island of Purbacke: not farre from Corfe Castle; where his mother in Law Queene Elfrid, with his brother Prince Ethelred, were then resi∣ding, he out of his love to both, would needs himselfe alone goe visit them; where the cruell woman, out of ambition to bring her owne Sonne to the Crowne, cau∣sed one to runne him into the backe with a knife, as he was drinking a cup of Wine on horse backe at his departing, who feeling himselfe hurt, set spurres to his horse, thinking thereby to get to his company, but the wound being mortall, and he fain∣ting thorow losse of much blood, fell from his Horse; but one foote being intangled in the stirrup, he was thereby rufully dragged up and downe, through Woods, and Lands: And lastly left dead at Corfes gate; for which untimely death, he was ever after called by he name of Edward the Martyr. He Raigned onely three yeares and ix moneths, and was Buryed first at Winchester, without all Funerall pompe; but after three yeares, by Duke Alferus removed, and with great solemnity interred in the Minster of Shaftsbury. Queene Elfrid, to expiate this her bloody fact, built the two Monasteries of Almesbery, and Worwell, in the Counties of Wilshire, and Southampton, in which latter, with great repentance, she lived till her death. After the death of Edward the Martyr, dying at the age of sixteene yeares, his halfe brother Ethelred, at the age of twelve yeares, in the yeare 979. was Crow∣ned King at Kingston upon Thames, by Dunstan Arch-bishop of Canterbury, though much against his will; which King, by reason of his backwardnesse in Action, was commonly called the Unready. Before whose time, for two and twenty yeares past; the Danes had lived as quiet Inmates with the English, but whether weary of so long doing nothing, or finding now opportunity of doing something, in the second yeare of this King, they begin to stirre, and inviting from home more for∣ces, who in seven Ships arrived upon the Coast of Kent, they spoyled all the Coun∣try, specially the Isle of Thanet, and continued this course of forraging the King∣dome, sometimes in one part, and sometimes in another, for eleven yeares toge∣ther: till at last in the yeare 991. the King, by advice of his Lords, of whom Siri∣cius, the now Arch-bishop of Canterbury was chiefe, was contented to pay them ten thousand pounds, upon condition they should quietly depart the Realme. This served the turne for the present, but was so farre from satisfying them, that it did but give them the greater appetite: for the yeare following they came againe, and that with a greater Fleet then before, against whom the King prepared a compe∣tent Navy, and committed it to Elfricke, Earle of Mercia, but he proving treache∣rous (as indeed all other for the most part did, whom the King imployed against the Danes, as with whom they were allyanced in blood) the Dans so prevailed that for the next Composition, they had sixteene thousand pounds given them, and a yeare after, twenty thousand; and so every yeare more and more, till it came at last to forty thousand: by which meanes, the Land was emptyed of all Coyne, and the English were brought so low, that they were faine to Till, and Eare the Ground, whilest the Danes sate idle, and ate the fruite of their labours; abusing the Wives and Daughters of their Hosts where they lay, and yet i every place, for every feare, were called Lord-Danes; (which afterward became a word of derision, when one would signifie a lazy Lubber.) In this distressed state, the King at last bethought himselfe of a course: He sent forth a secret Commission, into every City within his Dominions, that at an appointed time, they should massacre all the Danes that were amongst them; The day was the thirteenth of November, being the Festivall of Saint Bricius, in the yeare 1002. His command was accordingly performed, and with such rigour, that in Oxford the Danes for refuge tooke into the Church of Saint Frideswyde, as into a Sanctuary, when the English, neither regarding Place nor Person, set the Church on site, wherein ma∣ny of the Danes were burnt, and the Library thereof utterly defaced. And who
would not now thinke, but that England by this Fact had cleane shaken off the Danish yoke for ever? yet it proved cleane otherwise: For the newes of this mas∣sacre, adding a new edge of revenge, to the old edge of ambition: made the Danes sharper set against the English, then ever they had beene before; so as the yeare following, their King Sweyne, with a mighty Navy, entred the Country, razed, and levelled with the ground the City of Exceter, all along from the East Gate to the West; against whom the King levyed an Army, and made Generall over it, the Earle Edricke, his great Favourite; whom he had created Duke of Mercia; and given him his Daughter Edgyth in marriage; yet all this great favour could not keepe him from being treacherous, for being sent Embassadour to the Danes, to mediate for Peace, he revealed to them the weaknesse of the Land, and trea∣cherously disswaded them from consenting to any Truce. Upon this King Ethel∣red gave order, that every three hundred and ten Hydes of Land should build a Ship, and every eight Hydes, finde a compleat Armour furnished, yet all this great preparation came to nothing, but onely to make a shew. After this, the King seeing no end of their invasions, nor promise kept upon any composition; (for three Danish Princes, with a great Fleet, were now newly arrived) He intended to adventure once for all, and to commit his cause to God, by the fortune of a Battaile. To which end he secretly gathered a mightily Power, and comming un∣looked for, when the Enemy was unprepared, he had certainely given an end to the Quarrell, if the wicked Edricke had not disswaded him from fighting, and put him into a causelesse feare, by forged tales. After this, the Danes forraged many Countryes; burnt Oxford, Theford, and Cambridge: and lastly entred Wiltshire, which was the seventh shire in number, they had laid waste like a Wildernesse. The yeare after, they make a new Expedition, and besiege Canterbury; which by treason of a Church-man they wonne, tooke Alphegus the Arch-bishop, and flew nine hundred Monkes, and men of Religion, besides many Citizens, without all mercy; for they Tythed the people, slaying all by nines, and reserving onely the tenth to live; so that of all the Monkes in the Towne, there were but foure saved, and of the Lay people, foure thousand eight hundred, by which account Master Lambert collecteth, that there dyed in this Massacre, three and forty thousand, and two hundred persons. The Arch-bishop Alphegus, for that he refused to charge his Tenants with three thousand pounds to pay for his ransome, they most cruelly stoned to death at Greenwich. Turkillus the leader of these murtherers, tooke into his possession all Norfolke and Suffolke, over whom he tyrannized in most savage manner; the rest compounding with the English for eight thousand pounds, quiet∣ly for a while sojourned among them. The yeare following came King Sweyne a∣gaine, and with a great Navy arrived in the mouth of Humber, and landed at Gains∣borough, to whom the Northumbrians, and the people of Lindsey, yeelded them∣selves; So that now over all the North from Watlingstreete, he Raigned sole King, and exacted pledges of them for their further obedience. From the North he pas∣sed into the South, subduing all before him, till he came to London, where he was so valiantly encountred by the Londoners, that he was glad to retire, in which re∣tyring notwithstanding he entred Bathe; where Ethelmore Earle of Devonshire, with his Westerne people, submitted himselfe to him. Yet after this, betweene him and the English was strucke a fierce battaile, which had beene with good successe, if the treachery of some in turning to the Danes, had not hindered it. After this the Danes proceeded on victoriously, and had gotten most part of the Land, and even London also by submission: whereupon the unfortunate King Ethelred sending his Wife Emma, with her two sonnes, Edward and Alfred, to her Brother, Duke of Normandy, himselfe also the Winter following passed thither, leaving the Danes Lording it in his Realme. Sweyne now as an absolute King, extorted from the En∣glish both Victuals, and Pay for his Souldiers; and demanding such a Composi∣tion for preserving of Saint Edmunds Monastery in Suffolke, as the Inhabitants were not able, and therefore refused to pay; he thereupon threatned spoyle, both to the Place, and to the Martyrs bones there interred, when suddenly, in the middest of
his jollity (saith Hoveden) he cryed out, that he was strucke by Saint Edmund with a sword, being then in the midst of his Lords: and no man seeing from whose hand it came, and so with great horrour and torment, three dayes afer; upon the third of February, he ended his life at Thetford, or (as others say) at Gaynsborough. And now who would not thinke, but this was a faire opportunity offered to the English, to free themselves wholly from the Danish yoke? but when all was don, either crossed by treachery, or frustrated by misfortune, nothing prospered. I is true, upon this occasion of Sweynes death, King Ethelred returned out of Nor∣mandy, but at his comming, Canutus the sonne o Sweyne, had gotten the peopl of Lindsey to be at his devotion, and to find him both Horse and Men against their owne King; so as Ethelred was now to encounter as well his owne Subjects as the Danes, which he did so valiantly, that he made Canutus glad to returne into Den∣marke, as utterly hopelesse of any good to be done in England. And now one would certainely thinke the Danes had beene removed, Roote and Branch, out of England, and never like to trouble the Land any more; and indeed there was all the appearance of probability for it that could be. But it is a true saying, That which will be, shall be, let all be done that can be. For now Turkill the Dane, who had before revolted to King Ethelred, growing sensible of his fault, which was this, or no way to be redeemed; and tender of his Countrymens case, which was now or never to be helpt; with nine of his Ships sailed into Denmarke, and first excusing himselfe to Canutus for his former defection, as though he had done it of purpose, to learne all advantages against the English, which now he could disco∣ver to him, he so prevailed with Canutus once againe to try his fortune, that with a Navy of two hundred Ships he set saile for England, and landed at Sandwich, where he gave the English a great overthrow, and passed victoriously through the Counties of Dorset, Somerset, and Wilts. When (Ethelred lying dangerously sicke at Cossam) the managing of the Warre was committed to Prince Edmund his sonne, who preparing to give the Danes battaile, had suddenly notice given him, that his Brother in Law Edricke, meant to betray him into his Enemies hands, which made him suspend his proceeding; and Edricke perceiving his designe to be discovered, cast off the masque, and with forty of the Kings ships fled openly to the Enemy; and thereupon, all the West Countries submitted themselves unto Canutus. By this time King Ethelred having recovered his sicknesse, prepared to goe on with the Battaile, which his sonne Edmund had intended, but his Forces being assembled, he likewise had suddenly notice given him, that his Subjects meant to betray him to the Danes. Hereupon he withdrew himselfe to London, as the place in which he most confided; where falling into a relapse of his former sicknes, he ended his unfortunate dayes, in the yeare 1016. when he had Raigned 37. yeares; and was buried in the Cathedrall Church of Saint Paul, whose bones as yet remaine in the North wall of the Chancell, in a chest of gray Marble; adjoyning to that of Sebba King of the East Saxons. He had by his two Wives, eight Sonnes, and foure Daughters; of whom, his youngest named Goda, was marryed to one Walter de Maigne, a Nobleman of Normandy; by whom she had a sonne named Rodolph, which Rodolph had a sonne named Harold, created afterward by King William the Conquerour, Baron of Sudeley, in the County of Glocester, and Ancestor to the Ba∣rons of that place succeeding, and of the Lord Chandowes of Sudeley now being. Ethelred being dead, his third sonne Edmund called Ironside (of his ability in en∣during labour) but the eldest living at his fathers death, succeeded, and was Crow∣ned at Kingston upon Thames, by Levingus Archbishop of Canterbury, in the yeare 1016. A great part of the English both feared and favoured, and indeed out of feare favoured Canutus; especially the Clergy, who at Southampton ordained him their King, and sware Feaalty to him: but the Londoners stood firme to Prince Ed∣mund, and were the principall authors of his Election. Canutus before the death of King Ethelred, had besieged the City, and now with a large Trench encompassed it: but the new King Edmund comming on, raised the siege, and made Canutus flie to the Isle of Sheppey, where having stayed the winter, the Spring following, he assayled
the West of England, and at Penham in Dorseshire, a battaile was fought, and the Danes discomfitted. After this, in Worcstershire at a place called Sherostan, another battaile was fought, where the Danes were like againe to be discomfited, but the trai∣terous Edrick perceiving it, he cut off the head of a souldier like unto King Edmnd both in haire and countenance, and shaking his bloody sword, with the gasping head, cried to the Army of the English, Fly ye wretches flie, & get away, for your King is slain; behold, here is his head: but King Edmund having notice of this treacherous strata∣gem, hasted to shew himself where he might best be seen: whose sight so encouraged his men, that they had gotten that day a finall Victory, if night had not prevented them. Duke Edrick excused his fact, as being mistaken in the countenance of the man, and desirous to save the blood of the English; upon which false colour hee was received into favour againe. After this, Canutus secretly in the night brake up his Campe, and marched towards London, which in a sort was still besieged by the Danish ships: but King Edmund hearing of his departure, followed him, and with small adoe removed the siege, and in Triumphant manner entred the City. After this, neere unto Otford in Kent, was another great battaile fought, in which Canutus lost foure thousand five hundred men, and King Edmund onely six hundred; the rest of the Danes saving themselves by light; whom if King Edmund had purued, it is thought that day had ended the warres betweene these two Nations for ever. But the ever traiterous Edrick, kept King Edmund from pursuing them, by telling him of Ambushes and other dangers: So as Canutu had leisure to passe over into Essex, but thither also King Edmund followed him; where at Ashdone three miles from Saffron Walden, another battaile was fought, in which he Danes being at the point to be overthrowne, the traiterous Edrick with all his Forces revoulted to their side, by which treachery the English lost the day. There died of King Edmunds Nobility, Duke Alfred, Duke Goodwyn, Duke Athelward, Duke Athelwyn, Earle Urchill, Codnoth Bishop of Lincolne, Woolsey Abbot of Ramsey, with many other. The remembrance of which battaile is retained to this day, by certaine small hils there remaining, whence have beene digged the bones of men, Armour, and horsebridles. After this; at Dereherst neere to the river Severn, another battaile was ready to be fought; when suddenly a certaine Captaine steps forth, and for saving of blood ued great per∣swasions, that either they should try the matter by single Combat, or else divide the Kingdome betwixt them. Upon this the Combat is agreed on, and the two Princes entering into a small Island called Alney, adjoyning to the City of Glocester, in com∣pleat Armour assayled each other, at first on horsebacke, and after on foote: when Canutus having received a dangerous wound, and finding himselfe overmatched in strength, desired a Compromise, and with a loud voyce used these words. What necessity should move us most Valiant Prince, for obtaining of a Title to endanger our lives? were it not better to lay malice aside, and condescend to a loving agree∣ment? let us therefore become sworne brothers, and divide the Kingdome between us. This motion was by King Edmund accepted, and thus was the Kingdome divi∣ded betweene these two Princes; Edmund enjoying that part which lies upon the coast of France, and Canutus the rest. But now Duke Edrick hath his last and grea∣test Act of treachery to play: for King Edmund being retired to a place for natures ncessity, he thurst from under the draught a sharpe speare into his body, and then cutting off his head, presented it to Canutus, with these fawning words, All hayle, thou sole Monarch now of England, for here behold the head of thy Copartner, which for thy sake I have adventured to cut off. Canutus though ambitious enough of soveraign∣ty, yet abahed at so disloyall a fact, replyed and vowed, that in reward of that ser∣vice his own head should bee advanced above all the Peeres of his Kingdom, which soone after he performed; for by his command the false Edricks head was cut off, and placed upon the highest gate in London. The death of this King in this man∣ner, some say was acted at Oxford; other, that he died of naturall sicknesse in Lon∣don, but howsoever he came to his death, his Raigne was but onely seven months, & his body was buried at Glastenury, neere to his Grandfather King Edgar. This King Edmund had by his wife Algyt, two sonnes; the eldest named Edward, surnamed
the Outlaw, because he lived out of England in Hungary as a banished man, for feare of King Canutus: but when his Uncle King Edward the Confessor, had obtained the Crowne, he was recalled, and honourably entertained till he died. He married Aga∣tha, sister to Queene Sophia, wife to Salomon King of Hungarie, and daughter to the Emperour Henry the second; by whom he had Edgar surnamed Atheling, the right Heire of the English Crowne, though he never enjoyed it. King Edmund had also two daughters, Margaret and Christian, of whom the younger became a Veyled Nunne at Ramsey in Hampshire; the elder Margaret, after sole Heire to the Saxon Mo∣narchie, married Malcolme the third King of Scotland, from which Princely bed in a lineall Descent, our High and Mighty Monarch King Iames the first, doth in his most Royall person, unite the Britaines, Saxons, Normans, and Scottish Imperiall Crownes in one. Of the first Danish King in England. CAnutus being possest of halfe the Kingdome by composition with King Ed∣mund, now after his death seised upon the whole, and to prevent all further question, he called a Councell of the English Nobility, wherein it was pro∣pounded, whether in the agreement betwixt Edmnd and him, any claime of Title to the Crowne had beene reserved for King Edmunds brethren or sonnes: to which (not daring to say otherwise) they absolutely answered no, and thereupon tooke all of them the Oath of Allegeance to Canutus. Being thus cleered of all Opposites he prepared with great solemnity for his Coronation, which was performed at Lon∣don, by the hands of Levingus surnamed Elstane, Archbishop of Canterbury, in the yeare 1017. being the first Dane that Raigned Monarch of England. But Canutus not thinking himselfe sufficiently safe, as long as any that might pretend, were in the peoples eye, caused first Edwyn the sonne of King Ethelred, and brother of Ed∣mund, to abjure the Realme, who was yet afterward recalled, and treacherously murthered by his owne men, and his body buried at Tavestock in Devonshire. Next were the two sonnes of Edmund Ironside, Edward and Edmund, whom to the end the people might not see him shed the blood of Innocents, he sent to his halfe brother King of Sweden to be made away. Then remained Edward and Alfred, the sonnes of King Ethelred, and them their mother Queene Emma had sent away before to her brother the Duke of Normandie, there to be in safety: so as none of the Royall blood was now left in the land, to give Canutus any feare of competition. After this, he tooke to wife the vertuous Lady Emma, the Relict of King Ethelred, by which match he procured to himselfe three great benefits: one that hee wonne the love of the people by marrying a Lady whom they so entirely loved; another, that he got the Alliance of the Duke of Normandi, a neighbouing Prince of great power; the third, that by marrying the mother, hee secured himselfe against the sons: as likewise Queene Emma was not unwillingly perswaded to the match, upon agreement to make her issue, if he had any by her, to inherit the Crowne of England. And to winne the love of the people more, hee caused great numbers of his Danes, who pestered the Country, to return home, bestowing amongst them for their satis∣faction foure score and two thousand pounds. And to winne the love of the peo∣ple yet more, he now set himselfe to the making of good lawes in a Parliament at Oxford, whereof, for a Patterne of those times, some that concerne Religion, may not unfitly be here related. First, for the celebration of divine Service, it was or∣dained, that all Ceremonies tending to the encrease of reverence & devotion should bee used as need required. Secondly, that upon the Sabbath day, all publike Faires, Markets, Synods, Huntings, and all secular actions should be forborne, unlesse some urgent necessity should require it. Thirdly, that every Christian should thrice in the yeare receive the blessed Sacrament of the Lords Supper. Fourthly, that if a Mi∣nister of the Altar killed a man, or committed any notorious crime, he should bee deprived both of his Order and Dignity. Fifthly, tht a married woman convict
of adultery, should have her nose and eares cut off. Sixthly, That a widow marrying within a twelvemonth after her husbands decease, should lose her Joynture. These and many other good lawes were made, whereby the kingdome remained during all his time, in a most peaceable state and government. In the third yeare of his Raign, he heard how the Vandales taking advantage of his absence, had entred Denmarke, and annoyed his subjects; whereupon with a great Army of English hee passed over the Seas, and gave them battaile, but with ill successe the first day; when preparing for the next dayes battaile, the Earle Goodwyn who was Generall of the English, se∣cretly in the dead of the night, set upon the Vandals Campe, & with a great slaugh∣ter of their souldiers, made their two Princes Ulfus and Anlave, to flie the field. In the morning it was told Canutus, that the English were fled, for that their station was left, and not a man of them to be found, which did not a little trouble his pa∣tience: but he going in person to see the truth, found the great overthrow the Eng∣lish had given, for which service ever after, hee held the English, and especially the Earle Goodwyn in great estimation. After this, returning home hee made a prospe∣rous Expedition against Malcolme King of Scots; and at last, in the fifteenth yeare of his Raigne, wearied with the honourable troubles of the world, and out of devo∣tion, he tooke a Journey to Rome, to visit the Sepulchre of St. Peter and Paul, from whence he writ to the Bishops and Nobility of England, that they should carefully administer Justice, and never seeke to advance his profit by any undue wayes, or with the detriment of any man. At his returne frō Rome, he built in Essex the Church of Ashdone, where he got the victory against King Edmund; in Norfolke, the Abbey of St. Benets, which Saint he greatly reverenced; and in Suffolke the Monastery of St. Edmund, which Saint he deadly feared. To the Church of Winchester hee gave many rich Jewels, whereof one was a Crosse, valued to be worth as much as the whole Revenue of England amounted to in one yeare. To Coventry he gave the arme of the great St. Austin, which he bought at Pavia in his returne from Rome, for which he payd an hundred Talents of silver and one of gold. One strange Act is recorded, which he did for convincing his fawning flatterers, who used to tell him that his power were more then humane. For being one time at Southampton, he com∣manded that his chaire of State should be set on the shoare when the Sea began to flow, and then sitting downe there in the presence of his many attendants, he spake thus to that Element: I charge thee that thou presume not to enter my Land, nor wet these Robes of thy Lord that are about me. But the Sea giving no heede to his command, but keeping on his usuall course of Tyde, first wet his skirts, and after his thighes, whereupon suddenly rising, he thus spake in the hearing of them all. Let all the worlds Inhabitants know, that vaine and weake is the power of their Kings; and that none is worthy of the name of King, but he that keepes both heaven and earth and sea in obedience. After which time he would never uffer the Crowne to be set upon his head, but presently Crowned therewith the Picture of Christ on the Crosse at Winchester: from which example arose perhaps the custome, to hang up the Armour of Worthy men in Churches, as Offerings consecrated to him who is the Lord of battaile. When he had Raigned nineteene yeares, he deceased at Shaf∣tebery in the County of Dorset, the twelfth of November, in the yeare 1035. and was buried in the Church of the old Monastery at Winchester, which being after new built, his bones with many other English Saxon Kings, were taken up, and are preserved in gilt Coffrs, fixed upon the wals of the Quire in that Cathedrall Church. He had by his two wives, three sonnes, Sweyne, and Harold by his first wife Alfgive; and Hardicnute by his second wife Queene Emma, and two daughters, of whom the eldest, called Guinhilda, was married to the Romane Emperour Henry the third, who being accused of adultery, and none found to defend her cause, at last an English Page adventured to maintaine her Innocency against a mighty Gy∣antlike-Combatant; who in fight, at one blow cutting the sinewes of his adversa∣ries legge, with another he felled him to the ground, and then with his sword taking his head from his shoulders, redeemed both the Empresses life and honour. But the Empresse after this hard usage forsooke her husbands bed, and tooke upon her the
Veyle of a Nun, in the Towne of Burges in Flanders, where she devoutly spent the rst of her life. Of the second Danish King in England. KIng Canutus dying left his Kingdome of Norway, to his eldest Son Sweyn, and his Kingdome of England, to his youngest Sonne Hardiknte, whom he had by his wife Emma, but he being at the time of his Fathers death in Denmarke, Harold his elder Brother, by a former wife, taking advan∣tage of his absence, layes claime to the Crowne. For determining of which Right, the Lords assembled at Oxford, where Queene Emma pleaded for her sonne Har∣diknute, urging the Covenant of Cantus at their marriage, and his last Will at his death; as also Earle Goodwyn of Kent did the like, being left Guardian of her Chil∣dren, and keeper of his last Will. But Harolds presence, together with the favour of the Londoners, Danes, and Northumbrians, so wrought with the Lords, that the absent Hardiknute was neglected, and Harold was Proclaimed and Crowned King at Oxford, by lnothus Arch-bishop of Canterbury, in the yeare 1036. Harold having now attained the Crowne, was not so jealous of his Brother Har∣diknute, as of his mother in Law Queene Emma, and her Sonnes by King Ethelre who were beyond Sea, and therefore how to secure himselfe against these, was his first care. For effecting whereof, he framed a Letter, as written by Queene Em∣ma, to her two Sonnes Edward and Alfred; instigating them to attempt the Crown usurped by Harold, against their Right: to which letter, comming first to the hands of Alfred, he suspecting no fraud, returned Answer, that he would shortly come over, and follow her Counsaile. And thereupon with a small Fleet, and some few souldiers, lent him by Baldwyn Earle of Flaunders, he tooke the Sea for England, where comming to shoare, Earle Goodwyn met him, and bound himselfe by Oath to be his guide to his Mother Queene Emma, but being wrought firme for Harold, he led him and his company a contrary way, and lodged them at Guilford, making knowne to King Harold what he had done, who presently committed them all to slaughter, sparing onely every tenth man, for service or sale. Prince Alfred him∣selfe he sent Prisoner to the Isle of Ely, where having his eyes inhumanely put out, in griefe and torment he ended his life. Some adde a more horrible kind of cruelty, as that his belly was opened, and one end of his bowels drawne out, and fastned to a stake, his body pricked with Needles, or Poignards, and forced about, till all his Entrailes were extracted. This done, he then set upon Queene Emma, con∣fiscated her Goods, and banished her the Realme. And now further to secure him∣selfe, he kept the Seas with sixteene Danish Ships, to the maintenance whereof, he charged the English with great payments; by which, if he procured the safety of his Person, he certainly procured the hatred of his Subjects. This King for his swiftnesse in running was called Harefoot; but though by his swiftnesse he out∣runne his Brother for the Kingdome, yet could he not runne so fast, but that death quickely overtooke him; For having Raigned onely foure yeares and some moneths, he dyed at Oxford and was buryed at Westminster; having never had Wife or Children. Of the third and last Danish King in England. KIng Harold being dead, the Lords to make amends for their former neg∣lect, send now for Hardiknute, and offer him their Allegeance, who ac∣cepteth their offer, and thereupon taking Sea, arrived upon the Coast of Kent, the sixth day after he had set saile out of Denmarke; and with great pompe conveyed to London, was there Crowned King by Elnothus Arch-bishop of Canterbury, in the yeare 1040. His first Act, was to be revenged of his deceased
brother Harold, whose body he caused to be digged up, and throwne into the Thames, where it remained till a Fisherman found it, and buryed it in the Church yard of Saint Clement without Temple Barre, commonly called Saint Clement Danes, because it was the burying place of the Danes, as some write. But towards his Mo∣ther, and halfe Brother Prince Edwrd, he shewed true naturall affection, inviting them both to returne into England; where he received them with all the honour, that from a Sonne or Brother could be expected. But now, as the King Harold, for his swiftnesse in running was surnamed Hare∣fooe; So this King for his intemperance in dyet, might have been surnamed Swines-mouth, or Boccdi Porco; for his Tables were spread every day foure times, and furnished with all kindes of curious dishes, as delighting in nothing but Gor∣mandizing and Swilling; and as for managing the State, he committed it wholly to his Mother Qeene Emma, and to the politicke Earle of Kent, Godwyn; who finding this weaknesse in the King, began to thinke himselfe of aspiring and to make the better way for it, he sought by all meanes to alien the Subjects hearts from the Prince, amongst other courses, he caused him to lay heavy Taxes upon them; onely for Ship-money to pay his Danes, amounting to two and thirty thousand pounds: which was so offensive to the people, that the Citizens of Worcester slew two of his Officers, Thursta and Fedax, that came to Collect it. But this King had soone the reward of his Intemperance; For in a Solemne Assembly and Ban∣quet at Lambeth, Revelling and Carowsing, he suddenly fell downe without speech, or breath, after he had Raigned only two yeares, and was buryed at Winchester. His death was so welcome to his Subjects, that the day of his death, is to this day com∣monly celebrated with open pastimes in the street, and is called Hocks-tide, signifying scorning or contempt, which fell upon the Danes by his death. For with him end∣ed the Raigne of the Danes in England; after they had miserably afflicted the king∣dome, for the space of two hundred and forty yeares, though in Regall Govern∣ment, but onely six and twenty. Of English Kings againe, and first of Edward the Confessour. KIng Hardiknute dying without issue, as having never beene marryed, and the Danish line cleane extinguished, Edward, for his Piety called the Confes∣sour, halfe Brother to the deceased Hardiknute, and sonne to King Ethelred by his Wife Queene Emma, was by a generall consent admitted King of England, and was Crowned at Winchester by Edsyne Arch-bishop of Canterbury, on Easter day, in the yeare 1042. being then of the age of forty yeares. He was borne at Islip, neare to Oxford, and after his Fathers death, for safety sent into France, to the Duke of Normandy his Mothers Brother, from whence he now came, to take upon him the Crowne of England. His Acts for gaining the Peoples love, were first, the remitting the yearely tribute of forty thousand pounds, gathered by the name of Danegilt, which had beene imposed by his Father, and for forty yeares together paid out of all mens Lands, but onely the Clergy; and then, from the di∣vers Lawes of the Mercians, West Saxons, Danes, and Northumbrians, he selected the best, and made of them one Body certaine, and written in Latine, being in a sort the Fountaine of those which at this day we tearme the Common Lawes, though the formes of pleading, and processe therein, were afterward brought in by the Con∣querour. The Raigne of this King was very peaceable: Onely in his sixth yeare, the Danish Pirates entred the Port of Sandwich; which with all the Sea-coast of Essex they spoyled, and then in Flanders made merchandise of their prey. As like∣wise the Irish, with thirty ships entred Severne, and with the assistance of Griffyth King of Southwales, burnt or lew all in their way, till at last, Reese the brother of Griffyth was slaine at Blenden, and his head presented to King Edward at Glocester. His Domesticall troubles were onely by Earle Gdwyn and his sonnes; who yet af∣ter many contestations and affronts, were reconciled, and Godwyn received againe
into as great favour as before. But though King Edward forgave his Treasons, yet the Divine Providence did not; for soone after, as he sate at Table with the King, on Easter Munday, he was suddenly strucken with death, and on the Thursday fol∣lowing dyed, and was buryed at Winchester. Some make his death more exem∣plar; as that justifying himselfe for Prince Alfreds death, he should pray to God, that if he were any way guilty of it, he might never swallow downe one morsell of bread, and thereupon by the just Judgement of God, was choaked by the first morsell he offered to eate. In this Kings time, such abundance of snow fell in Ianuary, continuing till the middle of March following, that almost all Cattell and Fowle perished, and there∣withall an excessive dearth followed. Two Acts are related of this King, that seeme nothing correspondent to the ge∣nerall opinion had of his Vertue, one concerning his Mother, the other touching his Wife. That concerning his Mother Queen Emma was this, that because after King Ethelreds death, she marryed the Danish King Canutus, and seemed to favour her issue by him, more then her issue by King Ethelred, therefore he dispossest her of all her Goods; and committed her to custody, in the Abbey of Worwell; and more then this, so farre hearkned to an aspersion cast upon her, of unchaste familiarity with Alwyne Bishop of Winchester, that for her Purgation, she was faine to passe the tryall of Fire Ordeall, which was in this manner; nine Plow-shares red hot wee laid in unequall distance, which she must passe bare-foote and blindfold; and if she passed them unhurt, then she was judged Innocent, if otherwise, Guilty. And this tryall she passed, and came off fairely, to the great astonishment of all behol∣ders. The other touching his Wife was this; He had marryed Editha the beau∣tifull, and indeed vertuous daughter of the Earle Godwyn, and because he had ta∣ken displeasure against the Father, he would shew no kindnesse to the daughter; he had made her his wife, but conversed not with her as his wife, onely at board, bu not at Bed, or if at bed, no otherwise then David with Abishagh, and yet was con∣tent to heare her accused of Incontinency, whereof if she were guilty, he could not be innocent. So as, what the vertues were, for which after his death, he should be reputed a Saint, doth not easily appeare. It seemes he was chaste, but not without injury to his wife; Pious, but not without ungratefulnesse to his Mother; Just in his present Government, but not without neglect of Posterity; for through his want of providence in that point, he left the Crowne to so doubtfull succession, that soone after his decease it was translated out of English into French, and the Kingdome made servile to a fourth forraine Nation. One Ability he had which raised him above the pitch of ordinary Kings, and yet at this day is ordinary with Kings, that by his onely touching and laying his hand upon it, he cured a Disease, which from his Curing, is called The Kings Evill. His Mother Queene Emma, in memory of the nine Plow-shares she had passed in her Tryall, gave nine Manors to the Minster of Winchester, and himselfe remembring the wrong he had done her, bestowed on the same place, the Island of Portland in Dorsetshire, being about seven miles in compasse. He made also of a little Monastery in the West of London by the River of Thames, a most beautifull Church, (called of the place Westminster) where he provided for his owne Sepulchre, and another Dedicated to Saint Mar∣garet, standing without the Abbey. This of Westminster he endowed with many rich revenues, and confirmed his Charters under his broad Seale, being the first of the Kings of England, who used that large and stately Impression in their Charters and Patents. He Founded also the Colledge of Saint Mary Otterey in Devonshire, and gave unto it the Village of Otereg, and removed the Bishops See from Criding¦ton to Exceter, as to a place of farre more Dignity: and when he had Raigned the space of three and twenty yeares and six moneths, he ended his life, the fourth of Ianuary, in that roome of his Palace at Westminster, which is now called the Paynted Chamber, in the yeare 1066. and was buryed in the Church at Westminster, which he had builded.
Of Harold the second English King after the Danes. KIng Edward the Confessour, being himselfe without issue, had in his life time, sent into Hungary for his Nephew Edward called the Outlaw, the sonne of Edmund Ironside; with a purpose to designe him his Successour in the Crowne, but he dying soone after his comming into England, King Edward then gave his Sonne Edgar the name of Atheling; as to say; Prince Edgar meaning to designe him for his Successour, but being prevented by death, before the successour was fully established, and Edgar Atheling, though he had right, yet being young, and not of power to make good his Right, Harold the sonne of Earle Goodwyn steps into the Throne, and never standing upon ceremonies, set himselfe the Crowne upon his owne head, wherein, though as a violater of holy Rites, he offended the Clergy, yet not any either of Clergy or Layity, durst oppose him, as being at that time the most martiall man in the Kingdome; and such a one, as the state of the Realme stood at that time in need of, and besides his owne worthinesse had the assistance of Edwyn and Marchar, the two great Earles of Yorkeshire and Chester, whose sister Algyth he had marryed. It is true withall, that King Edward had appointed the Crowne after his owne decease, sometimes to William Duke of Normandy, sometimes to Edgar Atheling, and sometimes to this Harold, so as he was Crowned by Aldred Arch-bishop of Yorke, as not comming in by intrusion or wrong, but by the appointment of King Edward, though that appointment of King Edwad, was rather to make him Regent, during the minority of Edgar, then to make him absolute King, but howsoever, being once in the Throne, he was then able to make his owne Title, and to make Prince Edgar some amends, he created him Earle of Oxford, which was indeed to use him like a Childe, take away a Je∣well, and please him with an Apple. Yet Harold having once gotten into the Throne, he crryed himselfe with great Valour and Justice, for the time he sate in it, which was but very short, as being indeed but tottering from the very beginning, and that chiefly by meanes of his owne Brother Tostayne, who by diverting his Forces to suppresse a Rebellion, made him of lesse force to resist an invasion. But now that we have shewed how Harold entred the Throne, we must forbeare to shew how he was cast out, till we come to him that cast him out, who because he was not onely of another Family, but of another Nation, we must necessarily take the beginning from a deeper roote, and indeed, seeing in him, we shall joyne our Island to the Continent, which is a larger world: Our Kings hereafter, will afford a larger Extent for matter of Discourse then heretofore they have done.
THE LIFE OF KING WILLIAM THE FIRST, CALLED THE CONQVEROUR. His Parentage and Descent. THere were six Dukes of Normandie in France, in a direct line succeeding from father to sonne. The first was Rol∣lo, who of a private man in Denmarke, comming forth with the exuberancy of his Nation, wrested by force of Armes from Charles the Simple King of France, to bee made Duke of Normandy. The second was William his sonne, called Long Espee, or Long Sword. The third was Richard his sonne, called the Hardie, who had Richard, and a daughter called Emma, married to Ethelred King of England, father of Edward the Confessor. The fourth was Richard the second his sonne, called the Good. The fifth was Richard the third his sonne, who by a first wife had three sonnes, Richard, Robert and William, and by a second, two other sonnes, William Earle of Argues, and Mager, Archbishop of Roan. So as Richard his eldest sonne by his first wife suc∣ceeded him by the name of Richard the fourth, and dying without issue, the Duke∣dome descended to Robert his second sonne by his first wife; which Robert was fa∣ther to our William the Conquerour, of whom it is thus recorded: that riding one time abroad, he happened to passe by a company of Country Maides that were a dancing, where staying a while to looke upon them, he was so taken with the hand∣somnesse and gracefull carriage of one of them whose name was Arlotte, a Skinners daughter, (from whence as some thinke our word Harlot comes) that affection commanding him, and authority her, he caused her that night to be brought to his bed; where being together, what was done or said betweene them is no matter for History to record, though some Historians have recorded both; making her not so modest as was fit for a Maide: onely tenne monthes after, it appeared that at this time our Duke William was begotten; who proving a man of extraordinary spirit, we may attribute it to the heate of affection in which he was begotten. His succeeding in the Dukedome, notwithstanding his Bastardie. IT appeares by many examples, that Bastardie in those dayes was no barre to succession, till a law was afterward made to make it a barre. It brought some disgrace where the mother was meane, but no impediment where the father was Noble; and even his Bastardie seemed to have some allay, if it be true (as some write) that his father tooke the said Arlotte afterward to be his wife, and yet perhaps he had not the Dukedome so much by succession, as by gift. For when hee was a∣bout
nine yeares old, his father calling his Nobility together, caused them to swear Allegeance to this base sonne of his, and to take him for their Liege Lord after his decease. Neither was this in those dayes infrequent, for Princes to conferre their Principalities after their owne deceases upon whom they pleased; counting it as lawfull to appoint successours after them, as substitutes under them; even in our time and Kingdome, the Duke of Northumberland prevailed with King Edward the sixth, to exclude his two sisters, Mary and Elizabeth, and to appoint the Lady Iane Grey, daughter of the Duke of Suffolke, to succeed him. His Education and Tuition in his minoritie. HIs father having declared and appointed him to be his Successour, went soone after (whether out of devotion, or to do Penance for procuring his brothers death, whereof he was suspected) into the Holy Land, in which Journey he died, having left the tuition of his young sonne to his two brothers, and the Guardian∣ship to the King of France, in whose Court for a time he was brought up. A strange confidence, to commit the tuition of a sonne that was base, to Pretenders that were legiiate, and to a King of France, who aimed at nothing more, then to reannexe this Dukedome to his Crowne. But it seemes his confidence was grounded upon the proximitie of blood in his brothers, and upon the merits of his owne service for∣merly done to the King of France; which though it proved well enough with him, yet is not to betaken into example to follow. His Troubles in his minoritie. FIrst, Roger de Tresny, who derived his Pedegree directly from Rollo, and had won much honour by his valour in the warres, (notwithstanding the Oath of Alle∣geance he had formerly taken) takes exception to his Bastardy, and invites Compli∣ces to assist him in recovering the Dukedome to  legitimate Race: a fale pretext if the Fate of Duke William had not beene against it; who though hee were himselfe but young, and could not do much in his owne person, yet the Divine Providence raised him up friends that supplied him with Assistance, and particularly Roger de Beamont, by whose valour this Roger de Tresny, with his two brothers, was defeated and slaine. After Roger de Tresy, William de Arques his Unckle layes claime to the Dutchy, and assisted by the King of France comes to a battaile, but by the valour of Count Gyfford, the Dukes Generall, was likewise defeated: and these were trou∣bls before he arrived to seventeene yeares of age. After this, one Guy Earle of Bur∣goigne, Grandchild to Richard the second, Duke of Normandy, grew sensible also of his Right to the Dukedome, and joyning with Viscount Neele, and the Earle of Besin, two powerfull Normans, conspired Duke Williams death, and had effected it, if a certaine Foole about him, had not stolne away in the night, to the place where the Duke was, and never left knocking and crying at the gate, till he was admitted to his presence, willing him to flye for his life instantly, or he would be murthered. The Duke considering that being related by a Foole, it was like to be the more palpable, and that there might be danger in staying, none in going, rode instantly away, all alone, toward Falaise, his principall Castle, but missing his way, he happned to passe where a Gentleman was standing at his doore, of whom he asked the way, and was by him, as knowing him, directed; which he had no sooner done, but the conspiratours came presently inquiring if such a one had not passed that way, which the Gentleman affirmed, and undertooke to be their guide to overtake him, but leading them of purpose a contrary way, the Duke by this meanes, came safely to Flise; and from thence journeyes to the King of France, complaining of his injries; and imploring his ayd, as one that wa is ho∣mager, and committed to his care by his ervant his Father. The King of France moved with his distrese, and remembrance of his Fathers meris, though he wish∣d he was lesse then he was, yet he o ayded him, that he made him greater then he
was; for himselfe in person, suffering much in the Battaile, procured him the Victo∣ry. By which we may see that folly, and fortune, and even Enemies themselves are all assistants to the Destinies; or to say better, indeed to the divine Providence. Many other affronts were offered him, some by meaner Princes; some afterward by the King of France himselfe, who was now growne jealous of his Greatnesse; all which he encountred with such dexterity, that made his Bastardy, as it were become Legitimate, and Vertue her selfe to grow proud of his person. His Carriage afterwards in Peace. BY this time he was come to the age of two and twenty yeares, and where all this while he had shewed himselfe a valiant Generall in Warre, he now began to shew himselfe a provident Governor in Peace, composing and ordering his state, wherein he so carryed himselfe, that as his Subjects did both feare and love him, so his Neighbouring Princes did both feare and hate him, or if not hate him, at least emulate him. His Incitements for Invading of England. HE was now growne about fifty yeares old: an Age that might well have ar∣rested all ambitious thoughts in him, but who can thinke himselfe too old for a Kingdome; when Galba for attaining the Romane Empire, was contented to buckle on Armour, being fourescore yeares old? The Dke in his time of peace came over into England to visite his cousin King Edward, who besides his Princely entertainment, made him at that time (as some thinke) a promise to leave him his Successour in the Kingdome; & Harold after this, going over to the Duk in Norman∣dy, for procuring some friends of his to be released, the better to effect it, tooke his solemne Oath to assist him for obtaining the Kingdome. So as having the word of Edward, and the oath of Harold, he had now sufficient obligations to expect it. But hearing of the death of King Edward, and that Harold was Crowned King, he thought himselfe not more forgotten by Edward, then wronged by Harold; and therefore sent messengers to him to put him in mind of K. Edwards Pomise, and his owne Oath: but Harold puffed up with the conceit of being a King, as though that very name were enough to expiate all breach of Oathes, and that nothing could binde him, who had now the fetters in his owne hand; returned onely sleight an∣swers, that his Oath was forced, and voyd in it selfe, as being made without con∣sent of the Kingdome. Whereupon the Duke thus sleighted by Harold, endevours to make him an honest man by force, assuring himselfe, he should find him the wea∣ker Enemy, for finding him a perjured Friend. The Reasons that facilitated his Conquest of England. DUke William incensed with Harolds answers, acquaints his Nobility with his purpose, who with some adoe consented to ayd him, as likewise many other great Lords of France, but specially Baldwyn Earle of Flanders, whose daughter he had marryed; and who being at that time Guardian of the young King of France, procured ayde from him also; and to make the Enterprise the more successefull, Pope Alexander the second sent him a Banner with an Agnus of Gold, and one o the haires of Saint Peter. So as the preparation of the Duke, both by Sea and Land was very great, having three hundred saile of ships, and as some write, 890 and as one Norman, above a thousand, and as Cemeticensis, three thousand: and though Harold had likewise provided a warlike Fleet to encounter him, yet it was at tha time unfortunately diverted another way; for Taustaye his Brother, being then in rebellion in the North, and Harold Harfager: King of Norway, at the same time in∣vading those parts, and perhaps upon a bruite, that the Dukes Fleet was not yet ready to come forth, removed both his Fleet and Army thither: where though he
got the Victory at Stamford, with the death both of his Brother Toustayne, and of the King of Noway, yet it made way for the Duke to land quietly, and he entred the Kingdome, as one may enter a house, when the doores are all left open. By this meanes King Harlds shipping, (the best wall of defence to an Island) was ut∣terly frustrate: and as for his Land Forces, they were by his Battaile at Stamford, exceedingly both weakned and impaired; yet hearing that Duke William was lan∣ded at Pemsey, not farre from Hastings in Sussex, he repaired thither with all speed, and gathering together his broken Forces, and encreasing them by all the meanes he could, made himselfe ready to give the Duke Battaile. Duke William in the meane time, as soone as he had landed his men, sent his ships presently away, that there might be no thinking of any thing, but either Death or Victory. And then going himselfe on land, it is said, his foot slipped, and he fell downe; which some that stood by, taking for an ill signe, No (saith he) I have by this, taken possessi∣on of this Land. And indeed Presages are but as Animus ejus qui praesagit, as in this Dukes fall it afterwards fell out. Many wayes of composition, betweene Duke William, and King Harold were propounded, yet Harold would hearken to none, as nothing doubting of successe, and perhaps thinking it a disgrace, to capitulate for that, which was now his owne: and when one of his Brothers called Gyrth, being lesse interessed, and therefore clearer sighted, intreated him to consider what a fearefull thing it was to breake an Oath, which he so solemnely had sworne: Ha∣rold seemed to conceive, that nothing which he did, being a private man, could be of force to binde him now being a Prince; and so on the fourteenth day of Octo∣ber, being Saturday, in the yeare 1066. (which day he liked the better, because it was his Birth-day, hoping, that the day of his Birth would not so much degene∣rate, to prove the day of his death, though even this also bred no good blood to the Action, for the Souldiers of Harold, thinking thereby to honour their Kings Birth-day, spent the night before in revelling and drinking, where the Souldiers of the Duke, out of consideration of their next dayes worke, spent the night in quietnesse and devotion) they joyned battaile, (the Kentish-men being placed in the Fore-front, as by an ancient custome is their due, and King Harold with his Londoners, leading the maine Battaile) where though their Armies were not much unequall in number, (for they were each of them neare about threescore thouand men) yet there was great oddes in the expertnesse of their Souldiers, and more in the advantage of their weapons: for, the Duke had with him all the flowre of France and Flanders, where King Harold had lost his best men, in his late Battaile: and for advantage of weapons, the Normans had long Bowes and Arrowes, which of the English at that time, were not at all in use: what mervaile then that the Nor∣mans got the Victory, though King Harold losing his life, yet lost no Reputation; and though the English Souldiers shewed no lesse valour, in being Conquered, then the Normans did in Conquering. One circumstance may not be omitted, that King arold as an expert Generall, had ordered his men in so firme a Body, that no force of the Normans could disorder their Rankes, till Duke William used a Stratagem, commanding his men to retire, and to counterfeit flight; by which he drew the English on, upon a hollow ground, covered with earth, whereinto many of them fell, and perished, and besides into an ambush of his Horsemen, which unexpect∣edly fell upon them, and cut them in pieces. Withall, there seemes one great er∣rour to have beene committed (at least, if it were an errour, and not rather a ne∣cesity) that there was not a supplementall Army provided; (as his Brother Gyrth would have had it) which might have come on if the first had failed, and would have beene of great advantage against a wearyed Army. But when Sic visum est superis, all humane force is weake and cannot withstand, all humane Providence is unprovided, and cannot prevent. The body of Harold at his Mother Thyrace suite was recovered, and lyes buryed in Waltham Abbey, which he had begunne to build, at least to repaire. But here Gyraldus Cambrensis tels a strange story, that Ha∣rold was not slaine in the Battaile, but onely wounded and lost his left eye, and then escaped by flight to Chester, where he afterwards led a holy Anchorets life.
How Duke William proceeded after his victory at Hastings. AS his Valour wonne him the Victory, so his Victory wonne him a Crowne; that now of an old Duke, he was suddenly become a young King: and indeed, nothing so much renues life, and makes the yeares in a manner young againe: as addition of Honour, specially when it is the fruite of merit. First therefore, ha∣ving given publicke thankes to God for his happy successe, he led his Army to∣wards London, not the direct way (perhaps doubting some new Encounter) but coasting about through part of Kent, through Sussex, Surrey, Hampshire and Barke∣shire, where at Wallingford he passed over the Thames; and then through Oxfordshire, Buckinghamshire, and Hartfordshire, untill he came to Barkehamstead, where there came unto him Aldred Arch-bishop of Yorke, Woolstan Bishop of Worcester, Willfere, Bishop of Hereford, and many other Prelates, accompanyed with Edgar Atheling, with Earle Edwyn and Marhar, Brothers, and men of the greatest sway in the Kingdome, and many others of the Nobility. It is true, upon the defeate at Hastings, Earle Edwyn and Marchar, had a purpose to set up Edgar Atheling, as next Heire of the Royall blood; and Grand-childe to Edmund ronside, and so be∣loved of the people, that he was called their Darling: but considering his young yeares, and other inabilities, but specially finding the mindes of the Bishops, (who at that time bore all the sway) to be otherwise inclined, they desisted from that course, and thus the Duke, without any opposition, comming to London, was re∣ceived by Bishops, and Lords and all, with great joy, though small gladnesse, and if he had not their hearts, yet he had their knees, for in most humble manner they submitted themselves to him, acknowledging him for their Soveraigne Lord, and upon Christmas-day after, he was Crowned at Westminster by Aldred Arch-bishop of Yorke, the Arch-bishop of Canterbury Stigand, not being admitted to doe that office, for some defect in his Investiture; and perhaps for some aspersion in his manners. How he rewarded his followers.: THough he hath had the name of Conquerour, yet he used not the King∣dome as gotten by Conquest, for he tooke no mans living from him, nor di∣spossessed any of their goods, but such onely, whose demerit made unworthy to hold them; as appeares by his Act to one Warren a Norman, to whom he had gi∣ven the Castle of Sherborne in Norfolke; for when Sherborne, who was owner of it, acquainted the King, that the Castle was his; and that he had never borne Armes against him; he presently commanded Warren, to deliver it quietly up unto him Onely vacancies of Offices, and filling up the places of those who were slaine or fled, were the present meanes he made use of, for preferring his Followers. One speciall preferment we cannot omit, that where one Herlowyn a Nobleman in Nor∣mandy, had marryed his Mother Arlette, and had by her a Sonne named Hugh Lu∣pus, he gave to the said Hugh, the Earledome of Chester, to hold of him as freely by his sword, as himselfe held England by his Crowne, by vertue of which Grant, the said Hugh ordained under him foure Barons, Nigell he made Baron of Halton: Malbanke, Baron of Nantwich: Eustace Baron of Mawpase; and Vernon, Baron of Shipbrooke: Such an Honour, as no Subject before or since, ever enjoyed the like. What meanes he used for securing himselfe in the Kingdome: BEsides the Oath of Fealty, which he tooke of all his Lords both Spirituall and Temporall, at his Coronation; in Lent following, going into Normandy, he tooke along with him the greatest part of the great men of the Kingdome, of whom, Edwyn and Marchar, the two Earles of Northumberland and Mercia, Stigand
Arch-bishop of Canterbury, Edgar Atheling, Waltheoff sonne to Syward formerly Earle of Northumberland, and Agelnothus Abbot of Glastenbury were the chiefe; leaving the care of the Kingdome in his absence to Odo Bishop of Bayeux, his Bro∣ther by the Mother; and to William Fits Osburne, whom he had made Earle of He∣reford. And to abate the greatnesse of the Prelates, which at that time was growne in a manner unlimited, he ordained that from thenceforth, they should not com∣mand with any Temporall Authority whatsoever. And because the common peo∣ple are no lesse to be feared for their number, then the Nobility for their greatnesse, he first tooke from them all their Armour, to the end, that leaving them without stings, they might afterward be but Droanes. And because there is seldome any danger from singular numbers, but all the danger riseth from plurality: therefore to prevent conspiracies and combinations, which are commonly contrived in the night, he commanded that in all Townes and Villages, a Bell should be rung at eight a clocke in the Evening, and that in every house they should then put out their Fire and Lights (which was called Couure Feu) and goe to Bed. And for more security he erected Castles in the most doubtfull places of the Kingdome. One at Yorke, another at Lincolne, a third at Nottingham, (at that time called Snottingham) and a fourth at Hastings, where he first Landed. By these meanes the Kingdome was quiet all the time of his being away in Normandy, saving onely that Edrick the Forester, in the County of Hereford, calling in to his ayde the Kings of Wales, made some small disturbance. And indeed all the States of the Kingdome might in his very person finde something to make them apt to tolerate his Government. For first, the People might thinke themselves in a sort advanced, being now made members of a greater Body; when the Dukedome of Normandy should come to be annexed to the Kingdome of England; and by experience of his good Governe∣ment being a Duke, they might well hope, he would not governe worse being made a King. And the Nobility might be well content, as having a King of their former Kings choosing, and though a Stranger, yet no Alien, as having in him many veines of the same blood, and therefore likely also to have some venes of the same goodnesse, of their good King Edward. But specially the Clergy could not chuse but be content, as having a King who came commended to them, by a commending as strong as a commanding, the Popes Benediction. What Troubles or Insurrections were during his Raigne. BUt the Body of a State being more obnoxious to crudities and ill humours, then the state of a Naturall body; It is impossible to continue long without distem∣pers; notwithstanding any preservatives that can be applyed. And therefore in the second yeare of his Raigne, brake forth the discontentment of Edgar Etheling, justly the first, as having most cause, being the next of the late Royall blood, and therefore most apt to be sensible of servitude; who taking along with him his mo∣ther Agatha, and his two Sisters, Margaret and Christine; stole secretly away to Sea, with intention to passe into Hungary, the Country where he was borne; but by contary winds was cast upon the Coast of Scotland, where the King Malcolme, not onely most kindly entertained him, but for a stricter bond of kindnesse, tooke his Sistr Margaret to Wife, by whom he had many Children, out of which, in the second Generation after, a match was found, by which in the person of King Henry the second, the Saxn and Norman blood were conjoyned, the union where∣of continues in the race of our Kings of England to this day. Not long after to Ed∣gar in Scotland, came the two great Earles, Edwyn and Marchar, brothers to Aga∣tha the late King Harolds Wife; also Hereward, Gospatrick, and Syward, with many other Lords; and shortly after Stigand and Aldred Arch-bishops, with divers of the Clergy. And these Lords being together in Scotland, did but watch opportu∣nity, to recover that, which for want of taking opportunity they had lost; And assisted by the Scots, they invaded the North parts, spoyling the Country, and kil∣ling many for the fault they had themselves committed, but all they could do, was but to forrage the Country, and so returne.
After this, in the third yeare of his Raigne, the two sonnes of Swayne King of Denmarke, Harold and Canutus, with a Fleet of 240. ships, entered Humber, and inva∣ded the North parts, with whom the English Lords in Scotland joyned, and orra∣ged all the Country, till they came neere to Yorke. When the Normans that were in the Towne, to save the City, set fire on the suburbs; but the fire not so contented, by assistance of a violent winde, tooke hold of the City it selfe, burning a great part of it, and which perhaps was more worth then the City, a Library of excellent Bookes, and the Normans that were left in defence of the City, to the number of three thousand, were all slaine. King William hearing hereof was so much incensed, that with all speed he raised an Army, and entred Northumberland, wasting the Country that already lay wast; and yet for all his great rage, was contented with a great summe of money, to purchase the Danes departure. By these devastations in many Shires of the Kingdome, but especially in Northumberland, so great a Dearth and Famine followed, that men were glad to eate horses and dogges, cats and rats, and what ele is most abhorrent to nature; and betweene Yorke and Durham, the space of 60. miles, for nine yeares together, there was so utter desolation, as that nei∣ther any house was left standing, nor any ground tilled. Many other insurrections there were in his Raigne; as at Exceter, at Oxford, in the Isle of Ely, and many times by the Scots in the Northerne parts; but all these were easily supprest, for they were but scattered Forces; Et dum singuli pugnant, universi vincuntur; whereas if they had united themselves into an Army, they might perhaps have made it a Warre, which now were little more then Routs and Riots. Yet some write, that King William granted Cumberland to Malcolme King of Scots, to hold from him conditionally, that the Scots should not attempt any thing prejudiciall to the Crowne of England, for which Grant King Malcolme did him Homage. The greatest and last was an Insurrection raised in Normandie, by his sonne Robert, the more dangerous because unnatural, for by the instigation and assistance of Phi∣lip King of France, (emulous now of K. Williams greatnesse) he entred Normandie, & claimed it as in his owne right. His father indeede had made him a promise of it long before, but Robert impatient of delay, as counting so long staying to bee little better then disinheriting, endeavoured by strong hand to wrest it from his father. But his father King William hearing hereof, with a strong Army passeth over into Normandie, where in a battaile meeting hand to hand with his sonne, was by him unhorsed, and hurt in the arme: but his sonne perceiving him by his voyce to bee his father, suddenly leapes off his horse, takes up his father, casts himselfe downe at his feete, and humbly intreats his pardon; which as a father he easily grants, em∣braceth his sonne, and ever after, the sonne from the father had fatherly love, and the father from the sonne a filiall obedience. But though his father did thus par∣don him, yet it seemes there is a Nemesis, or to say better, a Divine Providence, that did not pardon him; for after this, it is observed he never prospered in any thing hee undertooke. It cannot perhaps be discovered, whether the Kings severity begat his subjects Insurrections, or his subjects Insurrections the Kings severity; but which of them soever was the mother, it is certaine they were nurses each of them to o∣ther. His aptnesse to forget Injuries. CErtainly there is no such goodnesse of nature, as aptnesse to be reconciled; of which vertue it seemes King William had a large proportion, for he seldome re∣membred injuries after submission. Edric the first that rebelled against him, he pla∣ced in Office neere about him. Gospatric who had beene a factious man, and a plot∣ter of conspiracies against him, he made Earle of Glocester, and trusted him with ma∣naging a War against Malcolme King of Scots. Eustace Earle of Boleyne, who in the Kings absence in Normandy attempted to seise upon Dover Castle, he received after∣ward into great favour and respect. The Earles Marchar & Syward, with Wolnoth the brother of Harold, a little before his death, he released out of prison. Edgar, who as
next heire to the Saxon Kings, had often attempted by Armes to recover his right, he not onely after twice defection pardoned, but gave him also allowance as a Prince: It is said twenty shillings a day, or rather a pound weight of silver, and other large livings besides; so as Edgar finding the sweetnesse of safety, and the pleasures of a Country life, spent the rest of his dayes (which were many) retired from Court, neither envying nor being envyed. Only Waltheoff Earle of Northumberland, and Northamton, of all the English Nobility was put to death in all the time of this Kings Raigne; and not he neither, till hee had twice falsified his Oath of Allege∣ance. Of new Acquests to this Kingdome, by this Kings meanes. IN the thirteenth yeare of his Raigne, he subdued Wales, and made it tributary to him, as before in the seaventh yeare of his Raigne, he brought Malcolme King of Scots to do him Homage, and thereupon to give him Hostages; that if England made him greater then he was before, a King of a Duke; he no lesse made Eng∣land greater then it was before, three Kingdomes in one. Of his Exactions and courses for raysing of money. AS his Taxations were many in number, so they were various in kinde, not al∣wayes bringing in money directly, but sometimes obliquely saving it. The first taxe he laid upon his subjects was in the first yeare of his Raigne, after his re∣turne out of Normandie; a grievous taxe all writers say, but none what taxe it was. In the third yeare of his Raigne he ransacked all Monasteries, and all the gold and silver of either Chalices or Shrines, he tooke to his owne use. Likewise he Sessed all Bishops and Abbots what number of souldiers they should finde to serve him in his warres: also the strangers which he maintained in Pay, he dipsersed into Religi∣ous houses, and some also among the Nobility to bee maintained at their charge. Many other taxations he made, but last of all in the eighteenth yeare of his Raigne, by the advise of Roger Earle of Hertford, he caused the whole Realme to be descri∣bed in a Censuall Roll, (whereof hee tooke a President from King Alfred) so as there was not one Hyde of Land, but both the yearely rent, and the owner thereof was therein set downe: How many Ploughlands, what Pastures, Fennes or Marishes, what Woods, Farmes, and Tenements were in every Shire, and what every one was worth: Also how many Villaines every man had; what Beasts, what Cattell, what Fes, what other goods, what rent or commodity his Possessions did yeeld. This booke was called the Roll of Winton, because it was kept in the City of Win∣chester. By the English it was called Doomesday booke, either by reason of the ge∣nerality thereof, or else corruptly, instead of Domu Dei booke, for that it was laid in the Church of Winchester, in a place called Domu Dei. According to this Roll taxa∣tions were imposed; sometimes two shillings, and at this time six shillings upon e∣very Hyde of Land, (a Hyde containing as some account it, twenty Acres, bu as Master Lambert proveth, a hundred Acres.) In all those Lands which he gave to any man, hee reserved Dominion in chiefe to himselfe, as also a yearely rent, and likewise a Fine whensoever the Tenant did alien or dye. These were bound to him by Oath of Fealty and Homage, and if any died, his heire being within age, the King received the profits of his Lands, and had the custody and disposing of the heires body, untill his age of one and twenty yeares. To be short, his greedinesse of money was so great, that he spared not his owne brother Odo, but found accusati∣ons against him to the end he might seise upon his Treasure; which was infinite great, and which he had gathered in hope to buy the Papacy. Onely one kinde of profit he forbare to meddle with, that is, Vacancies of Abbeys and Bishopricks, which he alwayes reserved for the Successours: but then he tooke another course of farre greater profit, for he compelled all men to make new Fines at his pleasure, for confirmation of any Grant or Priviledges formerly granted by any Prince of the
Realme: by which devise he got into his possession, the greatest part of all the ri∣ches of the Land, as well of the Clergie, as of the Laity. And one particular may not be omitted that is reported of him, which was this: The Monkes of Ely to pur∣chase their peace, agreed to give him seven hundred Markes, when comming to pay it, there wanted a Groat in the weight, (for in those dayes greater summes were not payd by tale, but by weight) which the King understanding, denied them all com∣position for Peace, untill with much suite he was intreated to accept of a thousand Markes more. Of his Lawes and Ordinances, and Courts of Iustice erected by him. ALthough at his Coronation he had taken an Oath to observe the Lawes of King Edward then in use, yet afterwards (perhaps counting his Coronation Oath but a matter of course) he abrogated many, and in their stead brought in the Lawes of Normandie; commanding them to be written in French, and also that all Causes should be Pleaded, and all matters of Forme dispatched in French; upon a pretense to dignifie the French tongue, but with a purpose to intrappe men through ignorance of the language, as indeed it did: or perhaps to make the Normans lan∣guage predominant in the Kingdome as he had made their persons; which yet hee was so farre from effecting, that there is not so much as any footsteps remaining of the Norman language in the English tongue. Formes of Judgement, and trials by Fire and Water, called Ordeal, formerly used, were in short time after the Conquest disused, and in the end utterly abrogated by the Pope, as derived from Paganisme. That of Combat continued longer, but of no ordinary use: and all actions both cri∣minall and reall, began now to be wholly adjudged by the Verdict of twelve men, according to the custome of Normandie, where the like Forme is used, and called by the name of Enquest, with the same cautions for the Jurours, as it is here continued to this day; though by the Lawes of Ethelred it appeares, that the triall by twelve men was in use long before his time. And where before the Bishop and the Alder∣man were the absolute Judges to determine all businesse in every Shire, and the Bi∣shop, in many Cases, shared in the benefit of the Mulcts with the King; now hee confined the Clergie within the Privince of their owne Ecclesiasticall Jurisdicti∣on, to deale onely in businesse concerning rule of soules, according to the Canons and Lawes Episcopall. And where the Causes of the Kingdome were before de∣termined in every Shire, and by a Law of King Edward, all matters in question were upon speciall penalty decided in their Gemote, or Conventicle held monethly in e∣very Hundred: Now he ordained that foure times in the yeare, for certaine daies, the same businesses should be determined in such place as he would appoint, where he constituted Judges to attend for that purpose. Also he Decreed there should be Sheriffes in every Shire, and Justices of Peace for punishment of Malefactors. Final∣ly he ordained his Councell of State, his Chancery, his Exchequer, (Scaccarium cor∣ruptly called so, of the word Statarium, or rather of the Boord or Table where the Officers sate;) also his Courts of Justice, which alwayes removed with his Court. These places he furnished with Officers, and assigned foure Termes in the yeare for determining controversies among the people. The place of these Courts was Westminster, where King William Rufus afterward built a stately Palace. Now for his provisionary Revenues, the Kings Tenants who held Lands of the Crowne, payd him no money at all, but onely Corne and other victuals; and a just note of the quality and quantity of every mans ratement, was taken through out all the Shires of the Kingdome, and levyed ever certaine, for maintenance of the Kings house. Onely the Kentish men procured the continuance of their ancient Lawes by a trick; for King William riding towards Dover, at Swnscombe two miles from Gravesend, the Kentish men met him, but in the forme of a moving wood, by reason of the great boughes they had cut and carried in their hands, and compassing the King a∣bout, they onely made suite for the continuan of their Lawes, which the King without any great scruple granted, and glad he was so ridde of them. A strange con∣ceite
in the Kentish men, to hazard themselves more, for the preserving a simple Cu∣stome; then for preserving the Liberty of themselves and their Country: But such is the violence of conceit, till it be mastered by time, or rather so very a Changeling is Humane Reason, that what they then cut downe great Woods to defend, they have since beene content to see abolished, without cutting downe so much as a twigge. But one Law especially he made, extreamely distastefull to all the Gen∣try of the Land: for where before they might at their pleasure hunt and take Deere which they found abroad in the Woods; Now it was Ordained, under a great penalty, no lesse then putting out their eyes; that none should presume to kill or take any of them, as reserving them onely for his owne delight. And in∣deed so great delight he tooke in that kinde of sport, that he depopulated a great part of Hamshire, the space of thirty miles, where there had beene (saith Caron) six and twenty Townes, and fourescore Religious Houses, and made it a Habitati∣on for such kind of Beasts; which was then, and to this day is called the New-Forest. But the lamentable dysasters that have happened to this Kings Issue, doe plainely shew, that there is a power, that observes all our Actions, and which we may know to be Memorem Fandi atque Nefandi. But in the first yeare of this Kings Raign, he granted to the City of London, their first Charter and Liberties, in as large forme, as they enjoyed them in the time of King Edward the Confessor, which he granted at the suite of William a Norman, Bishop of London; in gratefull remem∣brance whereof, the Lord Major and Aldermen, upon the solemne dayes of their resort to Pauls, doe still use to walke to the Gravestone, where this Bishop lies in∣terred. Also this King was the first, that brought the Jewes to inhabite here in England, as likewise he made a Law, that whosoever forced a woman, should lose his genitals: and in his time, long Bowes came first into use in England, which as they were the weapons with which France under this King Conquered England: so they were the weapons with which England under after-Kings, Conquered Frace; as if it were not enough for us to beate them, if we did not beate them with their owne weapons. This King also appointed a Constable of Dover Ca∣stle, and a Lord Warden of the Cinque-Ports, with Immunities as they are at this day. Affaires of the Church in his Raigne. IN the twelfth yeare of his Raigne, Lanfranke Arch-bishop of Canterbury, held a Synod at London, where amongst other things, he removed Bishops Sees, from small Townes to great Cities, as from Silliway to Chichester; from Kyrton to Exce∣ter; from Wells to Bathe; from Shirborne to Salisbury; from Dorchester to Lincolne; and from Lichfield to Chester; and from thence againe to Coventry; and not long before, the Bishopricke of Lindafferne, otherwise called Holy Land, upon the ri∣ver Tweede, had beene translated to Durham. In the sixth yeare of his Raigne, a controversie arising betweene the two Arch-bishops of Canterbury and Yorke, they appealed to Rome, and the Pope remitted it to the King and Bishops of England. Hereupon a Synod is holden at Windsor, where sentence was given on Lanfranks then Arch-bishop of Canterburies side: that in matters of Religion, the Arch-bishop of Yoke, should ever be subject to the Arch-bishop of Canterbury: Onely at Rome it was decreed, for matter of Title, that the See of Yorke should be stiled Primas Angliae, and the See of Canterbury, Primas totius Angliae, as it is at this day. And as the Arch-bishop of Yorke oweth obedience to the Arch-bishop of Canterbury; So all the Bishops of Scotland owe obedience to the Arch-bishop of Yorke, as to the Primate of Scotland. But as this King tooke downe the Prelates in Temporalties, for he ordained they should exercise no Temporall Authority at all; So in Spiritualties, he rather raised them, as may be seene by a passage betweene Aldred Arch-bishop of York, and the King: for at a time, upon the repulse of a certaine suite, the Arch-bishop in great discontentment offered to depart, when the King, in awe of his displeasure, stayed
him, fell downe at his feet, desired pardon, and promised to grant his suite. The King all this while being downe at the Arch-bishops feet the Noblemen that were present, put him in mind that he should cause the King to arise, Nay (saith the Arch-bishop) let him alone, let him find what it is to anger Saint Peter. And as by this story, we see the insulting pride of a Prelate in those dayes: So by ano∣ther, we may see the equivocating false-hood of a Prelate at that time; For St∣gand Arch-bishop of Canterbury would often sweare, he had not one penny upon the Earth, when under the Earth it was afterward found he had hidden great Trea∣sure. Also it is memorable, but scarce credible of another Bishop, who being accused of Simony, and denying i, the Cardinall before whom he was to An∣swer, told him, that a Bishopricke was the gift of the Holy Ghost, and therefore to buy a Bishopricke, was against the Holy Ghost, and thereupon bid him say, Glo∣ry be to the Father, and to the Sonne, and to the Holy Ghast; which the Bishop beginning, and oft essaying, could never say, [and to the Holy Ghost] but said it plainely when he was put out of his Bishopricke. And yet was not the Church in that Age so barren of Vertue, but that it afforded some good Bishops, as William Bishop of Durham, Founder of University Colledge in Oxford, but specially Bi∣shop Woolstan; whom, upon Lanfrankes reporting, to be insufficient for the place, for want of Learning, the King commanded to put off his Pontificall Robes, and to leave his Bishopricke: when suddenly out of a divine Inspiration, Woolstan an∣swered: A better then you, O King, bestowed these Robes upon me, and to him I will restore them. And therewithall going to Saint Edwards Shrine, who had made him a Bishop, and putting off his Robes, he strucke his Staffe upon Saint Ed∣wards Monument, which stucke so fast in the stone of it, that by no strength it could be drawne forth, till he drew it forth himselfe: which so terrifyed both Lanfranke and the King, that they intreated him to take his Robes againe, and keepe his Bi∣shopricke. Also Oswald Bishop of Salisbury, who devised a Forme of Prayers to be daily used in his Church, and was used afterwards in other Churches, from whence proceeded the common saying of Secundum usum Sarum. In this Kings time was Berengarius, who denyed the true body of Christ to be in the Sacrament; Al∣so in his time, Pope Gregory the seventh, removed marryed Priests from execu∣ting Divine Service, whereof great troubles arose in England. Workes of Piety, by him, and others in his time. THis King Founded the Abbey of Baltell in Sussex, where he overcame Harold; the Abbey of Selby in Yorkeshire; and a third neere London, called Saint Savi∣ours. He founded also the Priory of Saint Nicholas at Exceter; and gave great priviledges to Saint Martins le Grand in London; which Church was founded be∣fore the Conquest, by Ingelricus and Emardus his Brother, Cousins to King Ed∣ward the Confessour. These were this Kings workes of Piety in England, but in Normandy he Founded also an Abbey at Caen: where his Wife Maude built like∣wise a Monastery of Nunnes. He gave also to the Church of Saint Stephens in Caen, two Manors in Dorsetshire, one Mannor in Devonshire, another in Essex, much Land in Barkeshire, some in Norfolke, a Mansion house in Woodstreete; London, with many Advowsons of Churches, and even he gave his Crowne and Regall Ornaments to the said Church, being of his owne Foundation, for the redempti∣on whereof, his Sonne Henry gave the Manour of Brydeton in Dorsetshire. In this Kings time, Robert, sonne to Hyldebert Laie, Founded the Priory of Ponfraite; Henry Earle Ferrers Founded a Priory within his Castle at Tutbury; Alwyn Chylde, a Citizen of London, Founded the Monastery of Saint Saviours at Bermondsey in Southwarke, and gave to the Monkes there divers Rents in London: Also in this Kings time, Mauric Bishop of London, after the firing of the former Church of Saint Paul in London, began the Foundation of the new Church, a worke so admi∣rable, that many thought it would never have beene finished. Towards the buil∣ding of the East end whereof, the King gave the choyce stones of his Castle, at
the West end of the City, upon the banke of the River Thames; which Castle ha∣ving beene at that time fired, in place thereof Edward Kilwarby Arch-bishop of Canterbury, did afterwards Found a Monastery of Blacke-fryers. The King also gave the Manor of Storford to the same Maurice, and to his Successours in that See; after whose decease, Richard his next Successour, bestowed all the Rents of his Bishopricke, to advance the building of this Church, maintaining himselfe by his private Patrimony; and yet all he could doe, made no great shew, but the finish∣ing of the worke was left to many other succeeding Bishops. In the fifteenth yeare of this Kings Raigne, William Bishop of Durham, Founded University Colledge in Oxford: Also one Gylbert a Norman Lord, Founded the Abbey of Merton in Sur∣rey, seven miles from London; and Thomas Arch-bishop of Yorke, first builded the Minster of Yorke. In this Kings sixteenth yeare, his Brother Duke Robert, being sent against the Scots, builded a Fort, where at this day standeth New Castle up∣on Tyne: but the Towne and Walls wre builded afterward by King Iohn. Also in this Kings time, Ledes Castle in Kent was builded by Creveken, and the Castle of Oxford, by Robert d' Oylie: two Noble men that came into England with him. Osmond Bishop of Salisbury built the new Church there; Also Waring Earle of Shrewesbury, built two Abbeyes, one in the Suburbs of Shrewesbury, and another at Wenlocke. Casualties happening in his time. IN the twentyeth yeare of his Raigne, so great a fire happened in London, that from the West-gate to the East-gate, it consumed Houses and Churches all the way, and amongst the rest the Church of Saint Paul, the most grievous fire that ever happened in that City. Also this yeare, by reason of distemperature of wea∣ther, there insued a Famine: and afterwards a miserable mortality of Men and Cattell. Also this yeare in the Province of Wales, upon the Sea shoare, was found the body of Gawen, sisters sonne to Arthur, the great King of the Britaines: repor∣ted to be foureteene foot in length. Also in this Kings time, a great Lord itting at a Feast, was set upon by Mice, and though he were removed from Land to Sea, and from Sea againe to Land, yet the Mice still followed him, and at last devou∣red him. Of his Wife and Children. HE had to Wie, and her onely; Mathilde or Maude, Daughter to Baldwyn Earle of Flanders. She was Crowned Queene of England, the second yeare of his Raigne: the seventeenth yeare of his Raigne, she dyed; a Woman onely memo∣rable for this, that nothing memorable is Recorded of her, but that she built a Nunnery at Caen in Normandy, where she lies Buryed. By her he had foure sonnes and fiv daughters. His Sonnes were, Robert, Richard, William, and Henry: of whom Robert the eldest, called Court-cayse, of his short thighes, or Court-hose, of his short Breeches, or Courtois, of his courteous behaviour: (for so many are the Comments upon his name) succeeded his Father in the Dutchy of Normandy. Richard his second Sonne, was kild by mis-fortune, hunting in the New-Forest. William his third Sonne, called Rufus, succeeded his Father in the Kingdome of England. Henry his youngest Sonne called Beauclerke, for his Learning, had by his Fathers Will, five thousand pounds in money, and the inheritance also of his Mo∣ther. His Daughters were Cicelie, Cnstance, Adela, Margaret, and Elenor, of whom Cicelie was Abbesse of Caen in Normandy. Constance was marryed to Alan Earle of Britaine. Adela to Stephen Earle of Blois. Margaret affianced to Harold King of Eng∣land, but never marryed, and dyed young. Elenor, betroathed to Alphonsus King of Gallitia, but desiring to dye a Virgin, she had her wish, spending her time so much in Prayer, that with continuall kneeling, her knees were brawned.
Of his Personage and Conditions. HE was but meane of stature, yet bigge of body, and therewithall so strong, that few were able to draw his Bow: growing in yeares, he was bald before; his beard alwayes shaven, after the manner of the Normans; and where in his young∣er time, he was much given to that infirmity of Youth, which grows out of strength of Youth, Incontinency: after he was once marryed, whether out of satiety, or out of Grace, he was never knowne to offend in that kind. Of so perfit health, that he was never sicke, till that sicknesse whereof he dyed. Of a sterne counte∣nance, yet of an affable nature: In warre, as expert as valiant: In Peace, as pro∣vident as prudent: and in all his Enterprises, as Fortunate, as Bold and Hardy. Much given to Hunting and Feasting, wherein he was no lesse pleasant then mag∣nificent. He made no great proficience in Learning; as having had his education in the licentiousnesse of the French Court: yet he favoured learned men; and drew out of Italy, Lanfranke, Anselme, Durand, Traherne, and divers others, famous at that time for Learning and Piety. Very devout he was, and alwayes held the Clergy in exceeding great Reverence: And this is one speciall honour attributed unto him, that from him we beginne the Computation of our Kings of Eng∣land. His Places of Residence. HIs Christmas he commonly kept at Glocester; his Easter at Wichester; and his Whisontide at Westminster; and once in the yeare, at one of these places would be new Crowned; as though by often putting on his Crowne, he thought to make it sit the easier upon his head. And for the houses which the Kings of England had in those dayes in London; I finde that at Westminster was a Palace, the ancient ha∣bitation of the Kings of England, from the time of Edward the Confessour: which in the Raigne of King Henry the Eight, was by casuall fire burnt downe to the ground. A very large and stately Palace this was, and in that Age, for building incomparable. The Remaines whereof, are the Chamber of assembling the High Court of Parliament, and the next unto it, wherein anciently they were wont to beginne the Parliament, called Saint Edwards painted Chamber, because the Tra∣dition holdeth, that the said King Edward dyed in it. Adjoyning unto this, is the White-hall, wherein at this day the Court of Requests is kept; Beneath this is the Great Hall, where Courts of Justice are now kept: This Hall which we now have, was built by King Richard the second, out of the Ground; as appeareth by his Armes engraven in the stone worke: (when he had plucked downe the old Hall, built before by William Rufus) and made it his owne habitation. But the aforesaid Palace, after it was burnt downe in anno 152. lay desolate, and King Henry the Eighth shortly after translated the Kings seat, to a house not farre off, built by Car∣dinall Woolsey and is called White-Hall. The Tower of London also was anci∣ently used by the Kings of England to lodge in. Other Houses they anciently had; one where Bridewell now standeth, out of the ruines whereof, the now Bridewell was built. Another called the Tower Royall, now the Kings Wardrobe. Another in Bucklers-bury, called Sernes Tower. Another where now the Popes-head Ta∣verne is, over against the Old Exchange; and oftentimes they made use of Baynards Castle. But these are all long since demolished, that we may see Palaces and places have their Faes and periods as well as men. His Death and Buriall. TOwards the end of his Raigne, he appointed his two sonnes Robert and Henry with joynt authority, Governors of Normandy: These went together, to visit the King of France, lying at Constance, where entertaining the time with variety of
sports; Henry played with Lewis the Daulphin of France at Chesse, and winning much money of him, Lewis grew so cholericke, that he threw the Chess-men at Henries face; calling him the sonne of a Bastard: and thereupon Henry strucke Lew∣is with the Chess-board, and had presently slaine him, if his Brother Robert had not stept in, and stayed him. Upon this the King of France invades Normandy, and drawes Robert, King Williams eldest sonne, to joyne with him against his Fa∣ther: but King William comming presently over with an Army, was soone recon∣ciled to his Sonne, yet being corpulent and in yeares, was by this meanes much distempered in Body, and so retyred to Roan, where he stayed, as not being well in health. The French King hearing of his sicknesse, scoffingly said, that he lay in Childe-bed of his great belly. Which so incensed King William, that he swore by Gods Resurrection and his Brightnesse, (his usuall Oath) that assoone as he should be Churched of that Childe, he would offer a thousand Lights in France; and indeed he performed it; for he entred France in Armes, and et many Townes and Corne-fields on fire, in which he was so violent, that by reason of his travaile and the unreasonable heate, being in the moneth of August, it brought upon him a relapse of his sicknesse, and withall, leaping on horse-backe over a ditch, his fat belly did beare so hard upon the pommell of his saddle, that he tooke a rupture in his inner parts; whereupon returning to Roan, his sicknesse so encreased, that in short time he dyed; and that which is scarce credible, yet Recorded for certaine, the very same day he dyed at Roan, his death was knowne at Rome, a thousand miles off. In all the time of his sicknesse, he retained to the very last, his memo∣ry and speech: and shewed many demonstrations of Devotion, and true contri∣tion, specially for his severity used towards the English. And thus he who was a Conquerour of men, was conquered himselfe by death; the ninth day of Septem∣ber, when he had Raigned twenty yeares, and neare eleven moneths, in the three∣score and fourth yeare of his age: I may well say, he was conquered by Death; seeing death used him more despitefully then ever he living used any whom he had conquered: For no sooner was the breath out of his body, but his attendants purloyning what they could lay hands on, forsooke him and fled: leaving his bo∣dy almost naked upon the Ground. Afterwards, William Arch-bishop of Roan, commanded his body should be conveyed to Caen, but his command was little re∣garded: till at last, one Hrlewyne, a Country Knight, at his owne charges caused his body to be Embalmed, and conveyed thither; where the Abbot and Monkes meeting the Corps, suddenly in the middest of their solemnities, a violent fire brake out in the Towne, with the fright whereof, every man left the place; and thus was his body the second time left forlorne. In the end a few Monkes retur∣ned and accompanyed the Herse to the Abbey Church; but when the Divine Office was ended, and the body ready to be laid in the Grave, one Anselme Fits Arthur, stood up, and claimed that Ground to have beene the Floore of his Fathers house, which King William had violently wrested from him; and thereupon charged them, as they would answer it before the dreadfull face of God, not to cover his Body with the Earth of his Inheritance. Whereupon after some pause, agreement was made with him, and three pound was payed in hand for the Ground broken up, and a hundred pounds more afterward for the Ground it selfe, payed him by Henry the Kings youngest Sonne, who onely of all his Sonnes was present at the Funerall. And yet this was not all, but when his Body was to be put in the Earth, it happened that the Sepulchre of Stone which stood within the Gave, was hewne somewhat too strait for his fat belly, so as they were faine to presse it downe with some violence, with which, whether his bowels burst, or whether some Excrements were forced out of their naturall passage; such an intolerable stinke proceeded from him, that none were able to endure it, but made all the hast they could to be gone. And yet neither was this the last of his miseries: For in the yeare, 1562. when Castillion tooke the City of Caen, certaine dissolute Soul∣diers opened his Tombe, and not finding the Treasure they expected, threw forth his bones with great derision: whereof some were afterward brought into England.
So that if we consider his many troubles in life, and after his death, we may well thinke, that notwithstanding all his greatnesse, a very meane man would hardly be perswaded to change fortunes with him. Men of Note in his time. MEn of Learning in his time, were but rare in this Island, yet some there were, particularly Marianus Scotus, a Historiographer, and Alpheredus a Monke o Beverley, a Writer also of Historicall Argument. And as for Men of Valour, they are not to be expected in a time of Servitude, but as if all the English Valour were now remaining in the Kentish men, they onely made resistance, when all other Countries had submitted.
THE RAIGNE OF KING WILLIAM THE SECOND. KING William the Second called Rufus, second Son to William the Conquerour, appointed Successor by his Fathers Will; was upon the fifth of October, in the yeare 1087. by Lanfranke Arch∣bishop of Canterbury, Crowned at Westminster King of England. Wherein his Father seemes to have followed the Example of Iacob, who gave to his younger sonne Ioseph, the Land which he had taken with his Sword and his Bow: for with his sword and his Bow, had King William gotten the Land of England; and therefore might justly bestow it on which of his Sonnes he pleased. And be∣sides, there was cause enough, why he should shew this Sonne of his some extra∣ordinary favour, seeing in the Rebellion of his brother Robert, yet he stood firme∣ly for his Father; and in his quarrell incurred no small hazard of his life, as where∣in he received divers wounds: and perhaps also, his Father thought the rough dis∣position of this sonne, fitter to bridle the insurrections of the English, then the soft∣ly disposition of his sonne Robert. But though he have thus quietly gotten the Crowne, he must not looke to hold it so; and indeed at his very beginning is assaulted with two troubles in one: for both his Brother Robert prepares to recover it from him, and the Lords of the King∣dome combine with Robert to assist him in it. The first mover of this trouble was Odo Bishop of Bayeux, his Unckle, who finding himselfe not to beare the sway he expected, and specially for an old grudge he bore to Lanfranke, Arch-bishop of Canterbury, as by whose means, in the former Kings time he had bin imprisoned (the Arch-bishop telling him, that though he might not imprison a Bishop, yet he might imprison an Earle of Kent, as this Odo was made not long before) he drawes ma∣ny other Bishops and Temporall Lords to joyne with him in behalfe of Duke Ro∣bert, against the King: but though the storme were violent for a while, yet it soon passed over; that indeed of his Lords, with more difficulty: but that of his bro∣ther Robert with more cost: For it was at last agreed, that Rufus should pay him three thousand markes a yeare, during his life, and leave him the Kingdome after his owne decease. But there was difficulty in repressing his Rebell Lords, by rea∣son of their spreading themselves abroad in many quarters. For Odo fortifyed him∣selfe in Kent; Roger Montgomery, Earle of Shrewsbury, in Norfolke, Suffolke, and Cambridgeshire; Hugh de Grandmenill, in Leycestershire, and Northamptonshire; Ro∣bert
Mowbray Earle of Northumberland, possest himselfe of Bristow; William Bishop of Durham, of the North parts of the Realme; and divers other of the Clergy, and Nobility, fortify themselves in Herefordshire, Shropshire, Worcestershire, and all the Countries adjoyning to Wales, thinking by this meanes to distract the King that he should not know where to beginne, nor whither to turne him. But this course, as it made it hard to represse them suddenly, so it made it easie to represse them at leisure; for being thus divided, they were but as single stickes, that are easily broken; where if they had united themselves, as into a Faggot, they might have made a strength of farre greater resistance. But the King having Lanfranke Arch-bishop of Canterbury, and Woolstan Bishop of Worcester, firme of his side: partly by their Authority and love amongst the people; but chiefely by his owne promises, to restore their ancient Lawes, and to allow them liberty of hunting in his Forests, he so firmely wonne the hearts of all unto him; that some of the Re∣bell Lords he reconciled with faire words, as Robert Montgomery; (a principall sinew of the Faction) some againe he mastered by strong hand, and Odo the chiefe Engineere of all the worke, he besieged in the Castle of Rochester, tooke him Pri∣soner, and forced him to abjure the Realme. And thus this great Rebellion was suppressed: In which it is observable, that though so many hot bloods were up, yet there was but little blood spilt. A happy rebellion for the English; for the Rebell Lords and Bishops being all Normans, the King had none to trust to, but the English, whom for their faithfulnesse to him in this service, he ever after re∣spected more then he had done befoe. After this storme was over in the South, there ariseth another in the North; For now Malcolme King of Scots, thinking it a fit time to doe some feates when King William was troubled at home; invades Northumberland, and having burnt and spoyled the Country, returnes home laden with booties. Which King William hearing, he takes his brother Robert along with him, and with a mighty Army en∣ters Scotland, brings Malcolme to acknowledge his ancient homage: and upon Faith given, returnes to London. After this, Duke Robert finding his brother King William, not to keep his promise, in paying his Pension, complaines to the King of France, and with his ayde, assaults and takes some Townes, which he before had delivered in pawne for money to his brother King William; who hearing of it, hastens into Normandy with an Army, and by the mediation of money takes off the King of France, and makes his brother, being left destitute of assistance, to aske him pardon: a wise and mercifull course in King William; for to buy his peace with the King of France, did cost him but money, where to have purchased it by Warre, must besides money, have cost the lives of many. After this Malcolme, King of Scots, came in kindnesse to visit King William at Glocester: but the King not vouchsafing so much as to see him, put him into so great an indignation, that returning home, he makes ready an Army, invades Northumberland, making great spoyle and getting great spoyles, but by Robert Mowbray, the Kings Lieute∣nant there, was taken in ambush, and together with his eldest sonne Edward, de∣feated and slaine. This King Malcolme was a most valiant Prince, as may appeare by an Act of his of an extraordinary straine; for hearing of a conspiracy plotted to murther him, whereof one was Authour, whose name is not recorded, he dissem∣bled the knowing it, till being abroad one day a hunting, he tooke the fellow a∣part from the company, and being alone, said unto him: Here now is a fit time and place, to doe that manfully, which you have intended to doe treacherously; draw your weapon, and if you kill me, none being present, you can incurre no danger: with which speech of the King, the fellow was so daunted, that present∣ly he fell downe at his feet, confessed his fault, humbly asked forgivenesse, and be∣ing granted him, was ever after serviceable and faithfull to him. The death of King Malcolme and his Sonne, was so grievous, and so grievously taken of Mar∣garet his Queene, the sister of Edgar Atheling, that she made it her Prayer, and had it granted, not to over-live them, and so, within three dayes after dyed: a wo∣man as full of vertues all her life, as at this time of sorrowes; whom yet I should
not breake order to mention, but for one pious Act of hers, in causing a most bar∣barous custome of Scotland to be abrogated, that when a man marryed, his Lord should lye the first night with his Bride. Which custome by her indevour was al∣tered to a payment in money. After these troubles were ended in the North, a new trouble ariseth in the West; for now the Welsh men hearing of King Williams distractions, enter upon the En∣glish borders, making spoyle and havocke of men and Townes: whom King Wil∣liam went with an Army to encounter, but could doe no good upon them, till he was faine to returne to London, and provide him a stronger Army. About this time also Robert Mowbray Earle of Northumberland, by whom Malcolme King of Scots was in King Williams service formerly slaine, finding his service not reward∣ed as he expected, enters into Conspiracy against the King; but the King being informed of the practise, seiseth suddenly upon many of his Complces, and him∣selfe, after many devises and shifts for flight, is taken and put in prison, in the Ca∣stle of Windsor. After this, King William to take a further revenge of the Welsh, and to make an absolute conquest of that unquiet people, with a farre greater Army then ever before, enters Wales, and thinkes with new devices of Castles and Forts, utterly to subdue them, but they defending themselves, with their Woods, and Mountainous passages, tyre and weary out the King and his Army, so as he leaves the businesse to two Hughes, one, Earle of Salop, the other of Chester, who first invaded and tooke Anglesey, (their Island of refuge) where they used all kinde of cruelty, pulling out of eyes, and cutting off hands and noses: in prosecuting of which businesse, Hugh Earle of Salop was slaine, but Hugh Earle of Chester, en∣tred Wales, and in the end, with the slaughter of Rees, the last King of Wales, made an absolute Conquest of the Country. For after this, though they often rebelled, yet they were in a true subjection. And these for the most part, were all the trou∣bles of his Raigne: where we may observe, that none of them did ever overtake him, but still he met them, and from none of them he ever fled, but was still the pursuer, and yet so many as might well have taken away all the comfort of a Crowne, and have made him willing to change his Diadem for a paire of Beades, but that Ambition, though sometimes weary, yet never tyes. His Exactions and Courses for raising of money. IN the second yeare of his Raigne, Lanfranke Arch-bishop of Canterbury dyed, who had kept the kingdome and King in some good Order, but assoone as he was dead, the King, as though he were then got loose, ranged without reines, in all licentiousnesse: preying especially upon the Clergy, as amongst whom he found the richest Booties. When Bishoprickes or Abbeyes were vacant, it was familiar with him to seise them into his owne hands, as this of Lanfranke, he kept to his owne use foure yeares together, and longer would have kept it, if a sicknesse of his Body had not healed this disease of his minde: For finding himselfe in some hazard of death, he then conferred the Arch-bishopricke of Canterbury upon An∣selme, and the Bishopricke of Lincolne, upon Robert Bloet, two eminent men of that time; but assoone as hee was well againe, it repented him of that he had done, and was not quiet, till hee had drawne from the said Bloet, five thousand pounds, and from Anselme also good summes of money. For he re∣pented not more in time of sicknesse for the evill he had done in health, then being in health, he repented him of the good he had done in sicknesse; that it may in a manner be said, there was nothing made him sicke but health, and nothing made him be in health but sicknesse. But this preying upon the Clergy was growne into such a custome with him, that he kept in his hands at one time, three Bishoprickes, Canterbury, Winchester, and Salisbury; and twelve Abbeys; all which he let out to Farme, and received the profits: and from this King, the use is said to have risen first in England, that the Kings succeeding had the Temporalties of Bishops Sees, as long as they remained voyd. Having agreed to pay the King of France a great
summe of money, he raised it in this manner; He caused twenty thousand men to be levied, under pretence for his warres in Normandy; but when they were ready to be shipped, it was signified to them from the King, that whosoever would pay tenne shillings towards the levying of Souldiers in Normandy, should be excused from going, and stay at home; which was so plausible an offer to the Army, that scarce a man was found that accepted not the condition. When Duke Robert went into the Holy Land he pawned his Dtchy of Normandy to his Brother King Wil∣liam for 6666. pounds, or as some write, for 12600. which money King William tooke up part by a grievous Imposition: so that Bishops melted their Plate, and the Temporall Lords spoyled their Tenants for the payment thereof: and part by loane; but chiefely of Religious persons. He sold the Abbey of Glastenbury to Thurstan for five hundred pounds; and when he built Westminster Hall, he made that an oc∣casion to lay a heavie taxe upon the people, who grudged at it, as done of pur∣pose. He usually sold all Spirituall preferments, to them would give most; and tooke Fines of Priests for Fornication: as also he tooke money of Jewes, to cause such of them as were converted, to renounce Christianity, and returne to Judaisme, as making more benefit by their Unbeliefe then by their Conversion. He caused divers of the Nobility to pay grievous Fines for transgressing his Laws, though the fault were never so small. He set forth a Proclamation that none should goe out of the Realme without his Licence, by which he drew much money from many; for either they must tarry at home and live discontented, or else content him for giving them leave to goe abroad. And from thence the Custome or Law of Ne exeas Reg∣no, seemes to have taken its beginning: for Precedents of servitude are sure to live, where Precedents of Liberty are commonly still-borne. These were his wayes for raising of money, wherein Promoters and Informers were his darling servants; and the most officious of all was Ralph Bishop of Durham, of whom he would often say, there was not such another man in the world to serve a Kings turne. And yet he was not so greedy of lucre but that he did some Acts that may serve for ex∣amples: as one time, an Abbey being vacant, two Monkes of the Covent came suiters to him for the place, offering great summes, and each of them out-bidding the other; whereupon the King looking about, and espying another Monk stan∣ding not farre off, asked him what he would give for the place? Who answering, he neither had any thing to give, nor would give any thing if he had it: Well (said the King) thou hast spoken honestly, thou art fitter to be Abbot then either of these; and so bestowed the place upon him gratis. Of his Magnanimity. VVOrd was brought him as he sate at dinner, that his City of Mans in Nor∣mandy was besieged, and in great danger to be taken, if not presently re∣lieved: whereupon the King asked which way Mans lay; and then caused Masons presently to take downe the Wall, to make him passage the next way, and so rode instantly towards the Sea. His Lords about him, advising him to stay till his peo∣ple were ready: No (saith he) but such as love me I know will follow me. And being come on Shipboard, and the weather growing very tempestuous, he was advised by the Master of his Ship, to stay for some calmer season: No (saith he) Feare nothing, I never yet heard of any King that was drowned. And thereby comming to Mans nexpected, he presently dispersed the Besiegers, and tooke Helias Count de la Flesche, who had been Authour of the tumult, Prisoner; who vaun∣ting to the King, and saying, Now indeed you have taken me by a wile; but if I were at liberty againe, you should finde me to doe other manner of feats: at which the King laughing; Well then (saith he) go your wayes and doe your worst, and let us see what feats you will do. Being reconciled to his Brother Robert, he assisted him to recover the Fort of Mount Saint Michael, which their Brother Henry did forcibly hold in Normandy: during which siege, straggling one time alone upon the shoare, he was set upon by three horsmen, who assaulted him so fiercely, that they
drove him from his saddle, and his saddle from his horse; but he taking up his saddle, and withall drawing out his sword, defended himselfe till rescue came: and being afterward blamed for being so obstinate to save his saddle, he answered: It would have angred me at the very heart, that the knaves should have bragged they had wonne the saddle from me. Of his justnesse in keeping his word. THis vertue specially was commended in him, and he would often say, that even God himselfe was obliged by his word. But if we observe the course of his life, we shall finde that howsoever he might keepe his word in small matters, yet cer∣tainly not in great For he kept not his word with his Brother Robert, to whom he promised to leave the Kingdome of England after his decease, but performed it not. Nor he kept not his word with his subjects, for in the rebellion of the Nor∣man Lords, he promised the English, if they would now stick to him, they should have their ancient Lawes restored, and be allowed liberty to hunt in his Forests; which promise he either kept not at all, or at least soone brake. Nor he kept not his word with God himselfe; for being sick at Glocester, and in some hazard of his life, he made a solemne vow, that if he recovered, he would leade a new life, and give over all his disorderly courses: but being recovered, he grew more disor∣derly then he was before that if denomination be made from the greatest actions, it cannot be truly said that he was just of his word; but such is the priviledge of Princes over their subjects, that if they make a promise it must be beleeved; and if they breake it, it must not be questioned. Of his Incontinencie. MUch is spoken of his lascivious life in generall, but nothing in particular: for neither is mentioned any violence he ever offered to any; nor is any woman named to have beene his Concubine, and Princes Concubines are seldome con∣cealed. It is true he was never married, and of a strong constitution of body, and so probable he might be inclining to that vice; but probabilities are not alwayes con∣cluding, and therfore whether it be a true accusation, or but a slander, it may well be doubted: only one base son of his is spoken of, called Bertrannus, whom he advanced in honour, and matched in a Noble Family. But why should we more look for par∣ticulars of his Incontinency, then of his Prodigality? for he was taxed no lesse for being Prodigall, then for being Incontinent; and yet of his Prodigality there is not so much as one instance recorded, unlesse we take this for an instance; that when his Chamberlaine brought him a paire of hose, which because they were new, he asked what they cost? And being told they cost three shillings, in a great chafe he threw them away; asking him, If he thought a paire of hose of three shillings, to be fit for a King to weare? Get thee gone (saith he) and let me have a paire of a Marke. His Chamberlaine went, and bringng him another paire scarce so good as the former, and telling him they cost a Marke; I marry (saith the King) these are something like, and was better satisfied with hearing what they cost, then with seeing what they were worth: and yet was this no imputation to his wisdome, for to say the truth, it is no defect of wisdome in a King to be igno∣rant what his cloaths are worth. Of his wavering in Religion. HE appointed a disputation to be held betweene Christians and Jewes, and be∣fore the day came, the Jewes brought the King a Present, to the end they might have an indifferent hearing; The King took the Present, encouraging them to quit themselves like men: and swore by Saint Lukes face (his usuall oath) that if they prevailed in Disputation, he would himselfe turne Jew, and be of their Reli∣gion.
A young Jew on a time was converted to the Christian Faith, whose Fa∣ther being much troubled at it, presented the King sixty Markes, intreating him to make his sonne to returne to his Judaisme; whereupon the King sent for his sonne, commanding him without more adoe to returne to the Religion of his Nation. But the young man answered, he wondred his Majesty would use such words; for be∣ing a Christian, he should rather perswade him to Christianity: with which an∣swer the King was so confounded, that he commanded the yog man to get hm out of his sight. But his Father finding the King could doe no good upon his sonne, required his money againe; Nay (saith the King) I have taken paines enough for it, and yet that you may see how kindly I will deale, you shall have one halfe; and the other halfe you cannot in conscience deny me. There were fifty Gentle∣men accused for hunting and killing the Kings Deere, which they denied, and were therefore condemned to the triall of fire; which by Gods mercifull judgement they passed through untouched: the King hearing it, and deceived of the confiscation he expected, is said in a great chafe to say; How happens this? Is God a just Judge in suffering it? Now a murraine take him that beleeves it. It seemes also he doubted of many points of Religion, then in credit. For he would often protet, that he beleeved not that Saints could profit any man in Gods sight, and therefore neither would he, nor any other that were wise (as he affirmed) make Intercession either to Peter, or to any other for helpe. Affaires of the Church in his time. THe King claimed the Investiture of Bishops to be his right, and forbad Ap∣peales and Intercourse to Rome; (for no Appeales had ever beene used till An∣selme in this Kings Reigne appealed to the Pope) upon whose complaint the Pope was about to Excommunicate the King, but having a little before Excommunica∣ted the Emperour Henry the fourth (the first Christian Prince with Soveraigne authorty, that was ever Excommunicate by any Pope) he forbore at that time to doe it, lest by making Excommunication common, he should make it be slighted. At this time great contention arose betweene the King and the Arch-Bishop An∣selme: and Anslme not yeelding to the King in any point prejudiciall to the Popes authority; nor the King yeelding to Anselme in any point prejudiciall to his owne Prerogative; (which were points indeed Incompatible) the contention continued long and hot, and the hotter, because there were at that time two Popes on foote at once: one elected by the Conclave, called Urbanus the second; another set up by the Emperour, called Clement the third: for Anselme held with Urban, the King with Clement: and thus not agreeing in a third, it was impossible they should agree be∣tween themselves; and this contention, though palliated with pretentions, somtimes of one side, sometimes of another, yet brake out againe, and was renewed both in this Kings time, and in the times of many Kings after. Anselme often threathing his going to Rome, the King told him plainely he would not thrust him out of the Realme, but if he would goe without his leave, he would then keepe him out du∣ring his pleasure; and besides, he should carry nothing out of the Realme wih him: yet Anselme ventured it, and the King performed it; for William Warlewast was sent to rifle him in his passage at Sea of all he had, neither was he suffered to returne as long as the King lived; during all which time, the King tooke the profits of his Archbishoprick to his owne use. It may not be amisse to shew a passage here con∣cerning the first cause of contention betweene the King and Anselme, which some say was this; The King required a thousand Markes of him for having preferred him to that See: which Anselme refused to give, as judging it no lesse Simony to give after the preferment then before: but yet afterward offering five hundred pounds, the King refused to accept it, as being worth (he said) five times as much: whereupon Anselme told him, Your Grace may have me, and all that is mine, to serve your turne in a friendly manner; but in the way of servitude and bondage, you shall never have me nor mine: Which words so angred the King, that they
could never after be reconciled. In this Kings Reigne Pope Urbane exhorted all Christian Princes to joyne together for recovery of Ierusalem and the Holy Land: and by the solliciting of Peter an Hermite, there assembled for that enterprise, un∣der the conduct of Godefry of Bulloigne, to the number of three hundred thou∣sand men; amongst whom was Robert Duke of Normandy, who so valiantly carried himselfe in the action, that after Ierusalem was won, the Kingdome of it (as some write) was offered to him: but he looking more after the Kingdome of England, and therefore refusing it; It is observed he never prospered all his life after. In this Kings Reigne, although he had no command in Ireland, yet their Bishop of Dublin was sent over to Anselme Arch-bishop of Canterbury, to be Consecrated by him; and the Citizens of Waterford also desiring to have a Bishop, procured Murcherdach, King of Ireland, to write to Anselme, to give his consent. Also in this Kings dayes, the Pope forbad the marriage of Priests. Workes of piety of this King, or by other in his time. THis King gave to the Monkes of Southwarke, the Church of Saint Saviour of Bemondsey, and Bermondsey it selfe; he also Founded at Yorke the Hospitall of Saint Leonards: He gave the Church of Saint Peter in the City of Bathe to be a Bishops See. Hugh Earle of Chester, in this Kings dayes builded the Abbey of Chester: Oswald Bishop of Salisbury, Founded the Cathedrall Church of Salisbury: Remigius Bishop of Dorchester, to the end his Bishoprick might be removed to Lin∣colne; beganne to build the Cathedrall Church of Lincolne; and Lanfrank Arch-Bishop of Canterbury builded two Hospitals without the City; the one of Saint Iohn, the other at Harbaldowne, repaired Christs Church, and caused five and twen∣ty Manors to be restored to that See, which had unjustly beene withholden. He re∣paired also the Abbey of Saint Albans, and the Church of Rochester, where for foure secular Priests, he placed to the number of fifty Monkes. In the sixth yeare of this Kings Reigne, William Warren the first Earle of Surrey, and Gundred his wife, Founded the Abbey of Lewis in Sussex: and Warren Earle of Shrewsbury built two Abbeys, one in the Suburbs of Shrewsbury, the other at Wenlock. In his twelfth yeare, Robert Losaunge, Bishop of Thetford, removed his See from Thetford to Norwich, and founded there a faire Monastery. His buildings and Structures. THis King enlarged the Tower of London, and compassed it with new wals: he also built the great Hall at Westminster, being 270. foote in length, and 74. in breadth; but thinking it too little, he intended to have built another Hall which should have stretched from the Thames to the Kings streete. He repaired the City and Castle of Carlile, which had beene wasted by the Danes two hundred yeares before, and because it had but few Inhabitants, he brought a Colony thither out of the Southerne parts. He finished New-Castle upon Tyne, and many other Ca∣stles he erected or repaired upon the borders of Scotland; many also upon the fron∣tires, and within the very breast of Wales. Casualties happening in his Reigne. IN the fourth yeare of his Reigne, on Saint Lukes day, above six hundred houses in London were throwne downe with tempest; and the roofe of Saint Mary Bow Church in Cheape, was so raised, that in the fall six of the beames being 27. foote long, were driven so deepe into the ground: (the streets being not then paved with stone) that not above foure foote remained in sight, and yet stood in such ranke and order as the workmen had placed them upon the Church. Also in this Kings Reigne all the Lands in Kent, sometimes belonging to Earle Godwin, were by breaking in of the Sea covered with Sands, and are called Godwins Sands to this day. In his
eleventh yeare, at a Towne called Finchamstead in the County of Barkshire, a Well cast out bloud, as before it had done water: and after by the space of fifteene dayes, great flames of fire were seene in sundry places and at sundry times. Of his Personage and Condition. HE was but meane of stature, thick and square bodied, his belly swelling some∣what round, his face was red, his haie deepe yellow, whereof he was called Rufus; his forehead foure square like a window; his eyes spotted, and not one like another; his speech unpleasant, and not easily uttered, specially when he was mo∣ved with anger. Concerning the qualities of his minde, they may best be knowne by looking upon the actions of his life; in which we shall finde he was never more assured, then when he was least sure, never lesse dejected, then when in most extre∣mity; being like a Cube, that which way soever he fell, he was still upon his bot∣tome. For his delights to passe the time, there was none in more request with him then hunting, a delight hereditary to him, which was the cause that as his Father had begunne the great new Forest, so he enlarged it to a farre greater extent. Other delights of his we finde not any, unlesse we shall reckon his warres for delights: for though they were oftentimes forced upon him, when he could not avoyd them; yet sometimes he entred into them when he needed not, but for his pleasure. And in generall, it may be said that one of his greatest vertues, was that which is one of the greatest vertues, Magnanimity; and his worst vice, was that which was the worst of vices, Irreligion. Presages that preceded his Death. AT Finchamstead in Barkshire, neare unto Abington, a spring cast up liquor for the space of fifteene dayes, in substance and colour like to bloud. The night be∣fore the King was kild, a certaine Monk dream'd, that he saw the King gnaw the Image of Christ crucified with his teeth; and that as he was about to bite away the legges of the same Image, Christ with his feete spurned him downe to the ground: and that as he lay on the earth, there came out of his mouth a flame of fire, with abundance of smoake. This being related to the King by Robert Fits Mam∣mon, he made a jest of it, saying; This Monke would faine have something for his Dreame: Goe, give him a hundred shillings; but bid him looke that he dreame more auspitious Dreames hereafter. Also the same night, the King himselfe dream'd that the veines of his armes were broken, and that the bloud issued out in great a∣bundance: and many other like passages there were, by which it seemes he had friends somewhere, as well as Iulius Caesar, that did all they could to give him war∣ning: but that as Caesars, so his Malus Genius would not suffer him to take it. Of his Death and Buriall. KIng William having kept his Christmas at Glocester, his Easter at Winchester, his Whitsontide at Westminster, notwithstanding forewarned by many signes of some great dysaster towards him, would needs the day after Lammas, goe a hunting in the New Forest; yet something resenting the many presages, he stayed within all the forenoone: about dinner time, an Artificer came and brought him sixe Crosse-bow Arrowes, very strong and sharpe; whereof foure he kept himselfe, and the other two he delivered to Sir Walter Tyrell, a Knight of Normandy his Bow-bearer; saying, Here Tyrell, take you two, for you know how to shoot them to purpose: and so having at dinner drunke more liberally then his custome, as it were in contempt of Presages, out he rides into the new Forest, where Sir Walter Tyrell shooting at a Deere, the arrow glanced against a tree, or as some write, gra∣zed upon the back of the Deere, and flying forward, hit the King upon the breast; with which he instantly fell downe dead. Thus it is delivered by a common con∣sent
of all; onely one Sugerius, a writer that lived at that time, and was a fami∣liar acquaintance of the said Tyrels; against the current of all Writers, affirmes that he had often heard the said Sir Walter sweare that he was not in the Forest with the King all that day. I have beene the longer upon this point, because a more pregnant example of Gods judgement remaines not any where upon Record. For not onely this King at this time, but before this, a brother of his named Richard, a young Prince of great hope; and also a Nephew of his, the sonne of his brother Robert, came all in this place to violent deaths: that although King William the Foun∣der of the Forest, escaped the punishment in his owne person, yet it was doubled and trebled upon him in his issue. Thus died King William Rufs, in he three and fortieth yeare of his age, and twelfth and some moneths of his Reigne. His body was drawne in a Colliers Cart with one Horse to the City of Winchester, where the day following it was buried in the Cathedrall Church of Saint Swithen, and was laid there in the Quire under a Marble stone, till afterward it was translated, and laid by King Canutus bones. Men of Note i his time. FOr men of valour, he must stand alone by himselfe: for men of learning, there was Lanfranke, a Lombard, but Bishop of Canterbury: also Robert a Lorayne, who Epitomized the Chronicle of Marianus Scotus: also Turgotus an English man, Deane of Durham, who wrote the Annals of his owne time, and divers other works: but especially Osmund Bishop of Salisbury, who composed the ordinary Of∣fice, or book of Prayer.
THE RAIGNE OF KING HENRY THE FIRST. Of his comming to the Crowne. ALthough Henry came not to the Crowne, as his Brother Wil∣liam did, by the gift of his Father, yet he came to it by the Prophesie of his Father: For, when his Father made his Will, and divided all his Estate in Land be∣tweene his two eldest Sonnes, giving to Henry his youngest onely a portion in money, with which division he perceived him to be much discontented; he said unto him, Content thy selfe Harry, for the time will come, that thy turne shall be served as well as theirs. And now the time was come that his prediction was accomplished; for on the fifth of August, in the yeare 1100. he was Crowned King of England, at Westminster, by Maurice Bishop of London, (as Deane of all the Bishops of England, and therefore might doe it with∣out any prejudice to the Arch-bishop of Canterbury, though he had beene present, who was indeed at this time in Exile.) But though it appeares fuisse in Fatis, to be decreed by the Divine Providence that it should be so, yet it would not have been so, if his owne endevours had not beene concurring. And therefore being in the New Forest, when his Brother King William was killed, he never stayed to com∣plement the Dysaster, but rode presently to Winchester, and there, not without some opposition of the keepers, seisd upon his Brothers Treasure, as knowing treasure to be the meanes for getting of Friends, and Friends the meanes for getting the Crowne; and having now gotten the first meanes, he made use of it for the scond, and both of them together brought him to this he is. Yet withall there were circumstances in his owne Person that conduced to it; his Brother was borne, when their Father was but a Duke, he, when he was a King; Robert was a For∣rainer, being borne in Normandy, himselfe a Native, borne at Selby in Yorkeshire; and it was not the least circumstance, that he was called Beauclerke, as to say, a good Scholar, having beene bred in Cambridge; not perhaps that his learning was so great, but that it was great, either in respect of that age, which had but little; or in respect of his Brothers, who had none at all: and the People having beene oppressed before, by the ill Government of two Kings, that were illiterate; could not chuse but be glad to come under the Government of a King hat was Learned. And though his Brother Robert, as being the Elder, had right unto it, yet he as out of sight was out of minde, and perhaps neglected, as being himselfe negligent; withall it was given out, that he was chosen King of Hierusalem, and therefore no looking for him to come home; and to give force to all these reasons, Henry New∣borough Earle of Warwicke was a principall urtherer.
His course for establishing himselfe in the Kingdome. IT is a hard matter to keepe that safely, which is unjustly gotten; and therefore he tooke all possible care to overcome that hardnesse: which he effected by these meanes; First, he called Anselme Arch-bishop of Canterbury home from Exile; placed William Gyfford a learned man, in the Bishopricke of Winchester; and Mona∣steries that had beene long vacant, he furnished with good Abbots. And because it is no lesse pleasing to the People, to have bad instruments punished, then the good to be advanced, he cast Ralph Bishop of Durham, (a principall cause of their late oppressions) into prison: then mitigated the rigour of the new Lawes; and pro∣mised restitution of the old. And that there might be no abuse in measures, he or∣dained a measure, made by the length of his owne Arme, which is called a Yard. He restored to his Subjects the use of Lights and Fire in the night, which before had beene forbidden after eight a clocke at night. He acquited the People from the Taxe of Danegelt, and from all other unjust payments, which had beene imposed upon them by the two former Kings. He gave free liberty to the Nobility and Gentry of the Realme, to inclose Parkes for Deere, and Warrens for Coneyes; and such like game. And because he knew Scotland might be an ill Neighbour to him, if not tyed by some Bond, and none so sure as the Bond of Alliance, he therefore takes Matild sister of the present King Edgar to be his Wife. His Troubles during his Raigne. RAlph Bishop of Durham, the late King Williams great Instrument for Exactions, that had by this King beene committed to the Tower, made an escape, and pas∣sing over to Duke Robert in Normandy; incenseth him, not to suffer himselfe to be baffled by a younger Brother; as for his Brother William, there was some rea∣son, because his Father had given him the Kingdome by his Will, but what could Henry pretend, who had his Portion given him in money? Besides, it was an a∣greement with his Brother William, with consent of all the Lords of the Relme, that the Surviver of them should succeed. With such like instigations, and with∣all assuring him, there were many in England would take his part; he easily per∣swaded the Duke to that, from which he could hardly have disswaded him; who thereupon with a convenient Army, puts to Sea, and lands at Portsmouth, while Henry waited for his comming about Hastings; and being landed there, much peo∣ple resorted to him, that it was like to have beene a bloody businesse; but by me∣diation of Friends, working upon the flexible nature of Duke Robert, it was brought at last to this agreement, that King Henry should pay to Duke Robert, three thousand markes yearely, and Duke Robert should succeed him in the kingdome, if he sur∣vived. And thus, this cloud, that threatned so great a storme, brought with it, ather Sunshine and faire weather: for now, to his possession of the Kingdome, there was added a right, and he might now justifie his being a King, without any scan∣dall or usurpation. After this, another little cloud arose, but was soone disper∣sed: For Robert de Belesme Earle of Shrewsbury, a rash young man of disposition, but more through discontentment, though discontented for nothing, but that ha∣ving a great Estate, he was not a King as well as some others, fortifyed the Towne of Shrewsbury, and the Castle of Bridgenorth, and got many Welshmen to assist him, but the King comming with a mighty Army, so terrifyed the Welsh, that they aban∣doned the Earle, and left him a prey to the King in his person, and more in his E∣state, for the King seised his Estate into his hands, but for his Person he onely ba∣nisht it the Realme. For as yet, the shedding of blood and putting to death, though for great Treasonable practises, was not much in use; Policy of State was not yet growne to that heighth of severity. The like attempt, and upon the like occasi∣on, was made by William Earle of Mortaigne in Normandy, and of Cornwall in Eng∣land, Unckle to the King, onely for denying him the Earledome of Kent, which because he could not obtaine, he entred into Treasonable practises, by which he
lost the Earledomes he had before. But these troubles were but as the labour of a Woman that is safely delivered; painefull for a time, but ending in joy: and indeed for the most part this King had the fortune to be a gainer by his losses. After this, Duke Robert came in kindnesse into England, to visit his Brother Henry; where he was so well pleased with his entertainment, that in re∣quitall thereof, and to doe a favour to the Queene, that was his God-daughter; he released to King Henry, the three thousand markes, which he was yearely to pay him. But returning into Normandy, and considering better what he had done, he so repented him, that he spared not to give out, that his Brother had directly cou∣sened him. Which comming to King Henryes eare, so incensed him, that he pre∣sently sent over a mighty Army, which forraged the Country, and wonne many Townes and Cities, and soone after went over himselfe; where he so prevailed, that he left Duke Robert but onely Roan in all Normandy to put his head in, and this done, returnes into England. And now Duke Robert beginnes to be sensible of his owne weaknesse, and therefore comes over into England to try the uermost of his Brothers good nature; himselfe had sent him a Tunne of Wine to refresh him withall, when in a siege he was ready to perish for want of water: and it cannot be, but that gratefulnesse and naturall affection, meeting together, must needes worke something in the minde of a Brother. Thus resolved, he presents himselfe to the King, referring both his Dukedome and himselfe, and all differences and debates to his will and pleasure. But whether incensed with the scandalous words, Duke Robert had given out of him, or whether aspiring to joyne Normandy to England, as his Father had done before; King Henry scarce vouchsafed to heare him speake, at least vouchsafed not to make him any answer, but in a sullen man∣ner turned away, and so left him: which scornefull usage put the Duke into such indignation, that he resolved to set his whole state at stake, and either to redeeme his disgrace, or to forfeit his life. So returning into Normandy, he useth all his force in raising of Forces, but King Henry suspecting his intentions, and not using to give Insurrections time to ripen, came upon him so suddenly with a mighty Ar∣my, that he drew him to a battell before he was halfe ready to fight. Yet desire of revenge so animated the Duke, and the Duke his Souldiers, that never battell was more fiercely fought, and the Normans seemed at first to have the better, till King Henry shewing himselfe in the Army, put such courage into his Souldiers, that they quickly made good the advantage they had in number, and King Henry ob∣tained a compleate victory, both in slaughter of men, (of whom there wer slaine above ten thousand) and in taking of prisoners, (to the number of foure hun∣dred) amongst whom, besides divers other Great ones, as the Earle of Mortaigne, William Crispine, and William Ferreis, was Duke Robert himselfe, whom the King, (having first taken order for all things, in his new State of Normandy) brought over with him into England, and committed him to the Castle of Cardyffe in Wales, where he remained a prisoner till he dyed, used for a time with reasonable liberty for Recreation, till attempting to make an escpe, it was thought fit to put out his eyes; which though it encreased his misery, yet it shortned not his life, for he li∣ved many yeares after, in all, from the time of his first imprisonment, sixe and twenty. And thus this great Duke, who in his birth was the joy of Nature, in his life was the scorne of Fortune; and it is not unworthy the observing, that the English wonne Normandy, the very same day forty yeare, the Normans had wonne England. Such Revolutions of fortune there are in kingdomes, and so unstable is the state of all worldly Greatnesse. And now is King Henry as great as ever his Father was, and as Greatnesse draws envy, as much envyed as ever his Father was; and as Envy makes Enemies, as much opposed as ever his Father was: for now Fulke Earle of Angio, and Baldwyne Earle of Flanders, upon small occasions, and Lewis the grosse King of France, upon none, but such as envy suggested, seeking to place William, Sonne to Duke Robert, in his Right to Normandy, assaulted the Kings Dominions, per∣haps to try whether Greatnesse had not made him unwieldy; but King Henry, to
shew that Greatnesse had made him more Active, went over into Normandy with a mighty Army, and at Nice encountred the French King, where a bloody Battell was fought, with exceeding valour on both sides, but at last King Henry repelled the French King, and recovered Nice, and after many other conflicts betweene them, with variety of Fortune, at lst the King made peace with the Earle of Angiou; confirmed by a marriage of the Earles Daughter with his Sonne William and upon this also the two Kings grow to a peace, in which William, Son to King Henry, being about seventeene yeares of age, was invested into the Dutchy of Normandy, doing homage for the same to the King of France: From whence it was afterward a Custome, that the King of Englands eldest Sonne (as long as Nor∣mandy remained in their hands) was made alwayes Duke of Normandy. After this, Charles Earle of Flanders, being slaine at Bruxels by a conspiracy of his owne people, and leaving no issue behind hm, Lewis King of France invested Wil∣liam, Sonne to Dke Robert, in the Earledome of Flanders, as descended from Eale Baldwyn, whose Daughter Maude was wife to King William the first, and Grandmother to this William: so as William now having gotten this steppe of ad∣vancment, seekes to goe on, and to recover Normandy, and was thereof, by as∣sistce of the King of France, in a faire possibility, when in a certaine light con∣lct, receiving a wound in his hand, the thread of his faire possibility was upon a suddaine cut off, and of that light wound, he shortly after dyed. King Henry now in perfect peace abroad, was not without some little disquie∣tings at home, and marching thorow Powis-land in South Wales, to represse some Insurrections of the Welsh, he came to certaine Straights, where his maine Army could not passe, in which place the King was smitten with an Arrow full upon the breast, whereat he swore by our Lords death (his usuall Oath) that it was no Welsh arme, had shot that Arrow, yet in this distesse, for a thousand head of Cat∣tell, he had the passage left open, and came safely off. And these were his trou∣bles of Armes, both at home and abroad, during all his Raigne. His Taxations and wayes for raising of money. TOwards the marriage of his Daughter Maude with the Emperour, he obtained at his first Parliament at Salisbury, three shillings upon every Hide of Land, throughout the kingdome; which was afterward drawne to a custome, to receive ayde from the Subjects, whensoever the King gave his eldest Daughter in marri∣age. Besides this he had no more in all his Raigne, but onely one supply for his Warres in France; but he kept Bishoprickes and Abbeyes voyd in his hands, and that of Canterbury five yeares together. By an Act of Parliament, or rather by a Synod of Bishops holden at London, he was authorised to punish marriage, and incontinency of Priests; which the Bishops afterwards repented, for he suffered Priests to have Wives for Fines, or rather tooke Fines of them whether they had wives or no, bcause they might have them if they would. Punishments which before his time were mutilation of Member, he made Pecuniary. And the Pro∣visions of his house, which were used to be paid in kind, were in his time rated at certaine prizes, and received in money. By this Chapter and the next before, it appeares there were in this Kings dayes, but few troubles at home, nor but few Taxations; whereo the one may be thought to be cause of the other, the first per∣haps of the second, but certainely the second of the first. Lawes first instituted in his tme. HE first instituted the forme of the High Court of Parliament: for before his time, onely certaine of the Nobility, and Prelates of the Realme were called to consultation, about the most important affaires of State, but he caused the Com∣mons also to be assembled, by Knights and Burgesses of their owne appointment, and made the Court to consist of three parts, the Nobility, the Clergy, and the
Common people, representing the whole body of the Realme, and appointed them to sit in severall Chambers, the King, the Bishops, and Lords of the Realme in one Chamber, and the Commons in another, to conferre together by them∣elves. Other Orders of that Court he Ordained, as they are in use at this day. The first Councell of this sort was held at Salisbury, on the 19. day of Aprill, in the 16. yeare of his Raigne. He forbad the wearing of long haire; which at that time was frequent, after the manner of the French. He commanded Robbers upon the High way, to be hanged without redemption: of whom a famous one at that time was one Dunne, and of him, the place where he most used, by reason of the great Woods thereabouts, is to this day called Dunstable, where the King built the Bo¦rough as now it standeth. Counterfeiters of money he punished with pulling out their eyes, or cutting off their privy members, a punishment both lesse then death, and greater. Affaires of the Church in his time. AT his first comming to the Crowne, he fobore his claime to the Investitres of Bishops, but after he had beene King some time, he claimed that both to invest Bishops, and to allow, or hinder appeales to Rome, belonged to him. In these, Anselme Archbishop of Canterbury opposed him, affirming that both of them belonged to the Pope. The contention at last was brought to the Pope, to whom King Henry sent William Warlewast, elect Bishop of Exceter, who saying to the Pope, that his Master would not, for the Crowne of his Realme, lose the Autho∣rity of Investing his Prelates, the Pope started up and answered, Neither will I lose the disposing of Spirituall Promotions in England, for the Kings head that weareth the Crowne; before God (said he) I avow it. So the contention grew long and hot, and many messengers were sent to and fro about it, the conclusion was (which proved no conclusion) that the King should receive homage of Bishops elect; but should not Invest them by Staffe and Ring: to which the King said nohing for the present, but forbore not to doe it ever the lesse: for five yeares after the death of Anselme, Ralph Bishop of Rochester, was by the King made Arch-bishop of Can∣terbury, and notwithstanding all former Decrees, and Threatnings of the Pope, he received his Investiture of the King. About this time a Canon was made a∣gainst the Marriage of Priests, to which purpose Iohannes Cremensis, a Priest Cardinall, by the Kings licence came into England, and held a solemne Synod at Lon∣don, where inveighing sharpely against it, affirming it to be no better then profest Adultery, he was himselfe the night following, taken in bed with a common har∣lot. Even Anselme himselfe, the most earnest enforcer of single life, dyed not, it seemes, a Virgin, for else he would never in his Writings make such lamentation for the losse thereof. Anselme about this time dying, Rodulph succeeded in the See of Canterbury, and Thomas dying, Thurstine succeeded in the Arch-bishopricke of Yorke: betweene which two Prelates, there arose great contention; Rodulph would not consecrate Thurstine, unlesse he would professe obedience; Thurstine was con∣tent to embrace his benediction, but professe obedience he would not: In this con∣tention the King takes part with Rodulph, the Pope with Thurstine: after many passages in the businesse, upon the Popes threatning to Excommunicate the King, Thurstine entred upon his Bishopricke, and the King connived. In the tenth yeare of his Raigne, the Abbey of Ely was made a Bishops See, and Cambridgeshire was appointed for the Diocesse thereof, which because it belonged before to the Ju∣risdiction of Lincolne, the King gave the Bishop of Lincolne, in recompence there∣of, the Manor of Spalding. This King also created a Bishopricke at Carlile, and endowed it with many Honours. In his time, the Order of the Templars beganne, and in the 27. yeare of his Raigne, the Grey Fryers, by procurement of the King, came first into England, and had their first house builded at Canterbury. I may here have leave to tell two stories of Church-men, for refreshing of the Reader: Guy∣mond the Kings Chaplaine, observing that unworthy men for the most part were
advanced to the best dignities of the Church, as he celebrated Divine Service be∣fore him, and was to read thee words out of Saint Iames, [It rained not upon the Earth, III yeares and VI moneths] he read it thus; It rained not upon the Earth, one, one, one yeares, and five one moneths. The King observed his rea∣ding, and afterwards blamed him for it, but Guymond answered, that he did it of purpose, for that such Readers were soonest preferred by his Majesty. The King smiled, and in short time after, preerred him to the Government of Saint Frides∣wids in Oxford. The other is this, Thomas Arch-bishop of Yorke falling sicke, his Physitians told him, that nothing would doe him good, but to company with a woman; to whom he answered that the Remedy was worse then the diseae, and so dyed a Virgin. This King granted to the Church of Canterbury, and to Willi∣am and his successours, the Custody, and Constable-ship of the Castle of Rochester for ever. Workes of Piety done by this King, or by others in his time. THis King Founded and erected the Priory of Dunstable, the Abbey of Circester, the Abbey of Reading, and the Abbey of Shirborne. He also new builded the Castle of Windsor, with a Colledge there: He made also the Navigable River, be∣tweene Torkesay and Lincolne, a worke of great charge, but greater use. His Wife Queene Maude, passing over the River of Lue, was somewhat endangered, where∣upon she caused two stone-Bridges to be built, one at the head of the Towne of Stratford, the other over another Streame there, called Channel-bridge, and paved the way betweene them with Gravell. She gave also certaine Manors, and a Mill called Wyggon Mill, for repairing the same Bridges and Way. These were the first stone-Bridges that were made in England, and because they were Arched o∣ver like a bow, the Towne of Stratford was afterward called Bow. This Queene also founded the Priory of the Holy Trinity, now called Christs Church, within the East Gate of London called Aldgate; and an Hospitall of Saint Giles in the Field, without the West part of the City. In this Kings time Iordan Brifet Baron, Founded the House of Saint Iohn of Hierusalem, neare to Smithfield, in London, and gave 14. Acres of ground, lying in the field next to Clerkenwell, to build thereupon a House of Nunnes, wherein he with Myrioll his Wife were buryed in the Chap∣ter house. Robert Fitsham, who came out of Normandy with the Conquerour, Founded anew the Church of Teukesbury, and was there buryed. Herbert Bishop of Norwich, Founded the Cathedrall Church there. The Priory and Hospitall of Saint Bartholomew in Smithfield, was Founded by a Minstrell of the Kings, named Reior who became first Prior there. Before this time Smithfield was a Laystall of all ordure and filth, and the place where Felons were put to Execution. Hugh La∣cy Founded the Monastery of Saint Iohn at Lanthony, neare to Glocester. Iuga Bay∣nard, Lady of little Dunmow, Founded the Church there, and gave to maintaine it, halfe a Hide of Land. This Lady Iuga was late Wife to Baynard, that first built Baynards Castle in London. Eud the Kings Sewer, Founded the Monastery of Saint Iohn at Colchester, of blacke Chanons, and those were the first of that Order in England. Simon Earle of Northampton, and Mande his Wife, Founded the Monastery of Saint Andrew in Northhampton. In the seventh yeare of this Kings Raigne, the first Chanons entred into the Church of our Lady in South∣warke, called Saint Mary Overey; Founded by William Pountlarge knight, and Wil∣liam Dancyes, Normans. Robert the first Earle of Glocester, the Kings base Sonne, builded the Castles of Bristow and Cardyffe, with the Priory of Saint Iames in Bri∣stow: And his Sonne Earle William began the Abbey of Kensham. Geoffrey Clin∣ton, Treasurer, and Chamberlaine to the King, Founded the Priory at Kenelworth, of Regular Chanons. Henry Earle of Warwicke, and Margaret his Wife, Founded the Colledge of Saint Mar, in the Towne of Warwicke; and Roger de Belemond his Sonne, and Ellyne his wife, translated the same Colledge into the Castle of War∣wicke, in the yeare 1123. Roger Bishop of Salisbury built the Devises in Wiltshire;
the Castles also of Mamesbury and Shirborne. He repaired the Castle of Salisbury, and environed it with a wall; he also built the stately Church of Salisbury: desti∣ned to a longer life then any of his other workes. Ralph, Bishop of Durham, began to build the Castle of Norham, upon the banke of the River of Tweed. In the 32. yeare of this Kings Raigne, the Priory of Norton in Cheshire, was founded by one William, the sonne of Nychel, and the Abbey of Cumbermere in the same Shire. The Colledge of Secular Chanons also in the Castle of Leycester, and the Abbey with∣out the North gate of the same Towne, called Saint Mary de Prato. Also in this Kings Raigne, was Founded the Monastery of Plimpton in Devonshire, with the Cathedrall Church of Exetr; the Priory of Merton, the Hospitall of Kepar, the Pri∣ory of Oseney neare Oxford by Robert de Oylye Knight: and the Hospitall of Saint Crosse neare Winchester by Henry Blois Bishop there: also Robert Earle of Ferrers Founded the Abbey of Merivall: and indeed so many in his time were built, that one would thinke the Inhabitants of England to be all Carpenters and Masons, that were able to finish so many great buildings in so short a time as this Kings Raigne. Casualties happening in his time. IN this Kings dayes all the foure Elements were guilty of doing much mischiefe, but chiefely the water: For King Henry returning into England after his conquest of Normandy, left his sonne William with his sister Mary Countesse of Perche; Richard his sonne by a Concubine; the Earle of Chester with his wife Lucie, the Kings Neece by his sister Adela, and other Lords and Ladies, and passengers to the num∣ber of 180. to follow after him: who taking Shipping (and he best Ship the King had) whether by carelesnesse, or drunkennesse of the Saylours, were all drowned. The Prince indeed was got into the Ship-boate, and out of danger; but hearing the lamentable cries of his sister, compassion wrought so in him, that he turned a∣bout his boate to take her in, which over-charged with the multitude, over-turned, and they all perished: none escaped but onely one Saylour, who had been a Butcher, who by swimming all night upon the Mast, came safe to Land. An accident not more grievous then exemplary; for amongst other conclusions, from hence we may gather, that no state is so uncertaine as prosperity; no fall so sudden as into ad∣versity; and that the rule [He that stands, let him take heed he fall not] cannot al∣wayes be observed, because a man happens sometimes to fall before it is possible for him to take heed. Another great mischiefe was in this Kings dayes wrought by the water; for by the breaking in of the Sea, a great part of Flanders was drow∣ned: whereupon a great number of Flemmings being Suiters to King Henry for some place to inhabit; he assigned them a part in Wal neare the Sea, called Pembroke∣shire, where they have inhabited to this day: the King by this one action, working two good effects, both shewing compassion to distressed strangers, and putting a bri∣dle upon unquiet Natives. But the water had another way to doe mischiefe as much by defect, as this was by excesse; for upon the tenth of October, the River of Medway many miles together did so faile of water, that in the midst of the Channell, the smallest vessels could not passe: and the same day also in the Thames, betweene the Tower of London and the Bridge, men waded over on foote for the space of two dayes: also at another time the River of Trent at Notingham was dryed up a whole day. Now for the Earth, though naturally it be without motion, yet it moves some∣times when it is to do mischiefe, specially being assisted by the Aire; as in this Kings dayes, it moved with so great a violence that many buildings were shaken downe, and Malmesbery saith, that the house wherein he sate, was lifted up with a double remove, and at the third time setled againe in the proper place. Also in divers pla∣ces it yeelded forth a hideous noyse, and cast forth flames at certaine rifts many dayes together, which neither by water, nor by any other meanes could be sup∣pressed. But yet the active Element of Fire was busiest of all, for first Chichester with the principall Monastery was burnt downe to the ground: From West-cheape
in London to Aldgate, a long tract of buildings was consumed with fire: Worcester also and Rochester, even in the Kings presence; then Winchester, Bathe, Glocester, Lincolne, Peterborough, and other places, did also partake of this calamity, that there could be n charging the fire with any partiality: and to speake of one for∣raine casualty, because a strange one. In Lombardy this yeare was an Earthquake that continued forty dayes, and removed a Towne from the place where it stood, a great way off. Of his Wives and Children. AT his first comming to the Crowne, he married Matild or Maude, sister to Ed∣gar then King of Scotland, and daughter to Malcolme by Margaret the sister of Edgar Etheling. This Matild, if she were not a veyled Nun, she was at least brought up in a Nunnery, and thereby growne so averse from marriage, that when the mo∣tion was first made her to marry with King Henry, she utterly refused it, as resol∣ved though perhaps not vowed, to die a Virgin; till at last importuned, and even forced by the authority of her brother, she rather yeelded then consented; for she did it with so ill a will, that it is said she prayed, if ever she had issue by the marri∣age, that it might not prosper: and indeed it prospered but untowardly, as will be seene in the sequell. But though she made this imprecation before she knew what it was to be a Mother, yet when she came to be a Mother, she shewed her selfe no lesse loving and tender of her children, then loyall and obsequious to her husband. And to make amends for this seeming impiety towards her children, there is a story related of her reall piety towards the poor: for a brother of hers comming one mor∣ning to visit her in her chamber, found her sitting amongst a company of Lazar peo∣ple, washing and dressing their ulcers and sores; and then kissing them afterward when she had done: who wondring at it, & saying to her, How could she think the King should like to kisse that mouth, which had kissed such filthy ulcerous people? she answered; she had a greater King to kisse, who she knew would like her never the worse for it. By this Queen Matild, King Henry, according to some Writers, had foure children; but as the received opinon is, onely two, a sonne named William, and a daughter called Mawde; of whom the sonne at foureteene yeares old had fealty sworne to him by the Nobility of Shrewsbury: at seventeene married the daughter of Flke Earle of Anjou: and at eighteene was unfortunately drowned, as hath beene shewed. The daughter lived to be an Empresse, and afterwards a Dutchesse; but could never come to be a Queene, though borne to a Kingdome; as shall be shewed hereafter. She survived her second husband seventeene yeares, living a Widow, and at Ran in Normandy died, and was buried there in the Ab∣bey of Bec; though there be  Tradition that she was buried at Reading, in the Ab∣bey there beside her Father: but t appeares to have beene a custome in those dayes, for great personages to have their Monuments erected in divers places. After the death of this Queene Matild, who died at Westminster, in the eighteenth yeare of his Raigne, King Henry married Adeza, the daughter of Godfry Duke of Lor∣raine; who though she were a beautiful and accomplisht Lady, yet had he never any isse by her. When she was to be Crowned, Ralph Arch-bishop of Canter∣bury, who was to doe the office, came to King Henry, sitting Crowned in his chaire of State, asking him who had set the Crowne upon his head? the King an∣swering, he had now forgotten, it was so long since. Well (said the Arch-bishop) whosoever did it, did me wrong, to whom it belonged; and as long as you hold it thus, I will doe no office at this Coronation. Then (saith the King) doe what you thinke good: whereupon the Arch-bishop tooke the Crowne off from the Kings head; and after, at the peoples intreaty, set it on againe, and then proceeded to Crowne the Queene. By Concubines King Henry had many children; it is said seven sonnes, and as many daughters: of whom, some perished in the great Ship-wrack; of the rest, two of the sonnes, Reynold and Robert, were made Earles: Rey∣nold of Cornwall, Robert of Glocester, and was a great assister of his sister Mawde, in
her troubles with King Stephen, who after many acts of valour performed by him, in the twelfth yeare of King Stephen, died, and was buried at Bristow. The daughters were all married to Princes and Noble men of England and France, from whom are descended many worthy Families: particularly one of those daughters by Ane C∣bet, was married to Fits-herbert, Lord Chamberlaine to the King from which Fits-erbert, our Family (absit ividia verbo) is by Females descended; passing by the naes of Cummin, Chenduit, Brimpton, Stokes, Foxcote, Dyneley, and so to Bker. Of his Incontinency. OF this enough hath beene said, in saying he had so many children basely be∣gotten: but if comparison be mad betweene his brother ufus and him, it may be said, that howsoever they might be equall in loosenesse of life; yet in that loosenesse, William Rufus was the baser, and King Henry the more Noble; for King Henry had certaine selected Concubines, to whom he kept hmselfe constant; where King William tooke onely such as he found: constant to the pleasure, but not to the persons. His course for establishing the succession in Mawde and her issue. HE married his onely daughter Mawde, being but sixe yeares old, to the Empe∣rour Heny the fourth; but he leaving her a Widow without issue he married her againe to Gffrey Plantagenet, sonne to Fulke Duke of Anjo: not the greatest Prince that was a Suitour for her; but the fittest Prince for King Henries turne: for Anjou was neighbouring upon Normandy, a great security to it, if a friend; and as great a danger, if an enemy. And having thus placed her in marri, h now considers how to establish her succession in the Crowne of England whereuon he cals his Nobility together, and amongst them Dvid King o Scots, and causeth them to give their Oaths of Allegeance to her and her issue: and a thinking e could never mae her succession ure enough, he causeth his Lords the yeare ter againe to tak the like Oath, and after that a third time also; as conceiving that being doubled and trebled, it would make the tye of Allegeance the stronger: wherein nothing pleased him so much, as that Stephen, Earle of loi, was the first man that tooke the Oath, because he was knowne to be, at least known he might be, a Pretender. But the King should have considered that Nll fides Regi and therefore no Oath, though never so often iterated, sufficient to warrant loyalty in persons so deeply interessed, as Stephen was: yet providence could doe no more, and the King was well satisfied with it; especially when hee saw his daughter a mother of two sonnes: for this, though it gave him not assuance, yet it gae him assured hope to have the Crowne perpetuated in his Posteity. Of Ireland in his time. THe King of England as yet had nothing to doe with Ireland, the  was governed by its owne Kings: and the people of both Nations  they were neghbours, yet divided by a rough Sea, but little quaited; but now beganne entercourse to be more frequented: and Murcdh, chfe King of the Irish, bore such awfull respect to King Henry, that he would doe nothing but by his counsell, and with his good liking. Whom King Henry used as his Vicegerent in his absence. HE was absent sometimes in Normandy, three or foure yeares together; during which times, he committed commonly the care of the Realme to Roger Bi∣shop of alisbury, a politick Prelate; and one as fit to be the second in government, as King Henry to be the first.
His persge ad conditions. HE was a person tall and strong, ad breasted, his limbes well kni, and fully furnished with lesh; his face well fshioned, his colour cleare, his eyes large and faire, his eye-browes large and thick, his hair black, and omewhat thin to∣wards his forehead; his countenance pleasan, specially when h was disposed to mirth. A private man, vilified, and thought to have but little in him: but come to the Crowne, never any man shewed more excellent abilities: so true is the say∣ing, Magistratus indicat virum. His naturall affection in a direct line was strong; in an oblique, but weake; for no man ever loved children more, no a brother le. Though a King in act, yet he alwayes aced not a King; but in bals somems the part of a common Souldier, though with more then common valou s at a ba∣tell in France, where he so farre hazarded himselfe, that though he lost not his life, yet he lost his bloud. Of his death and buriall. A Discontent of minde upon some differences between him and his sonne in law, the Earle of Anjo, brought upon him a distemper, which encreased by eating, against his Physitins advise, of a Lmprey; a meate alwayes plsng  him but never agreeing with him; cast him into a aver, which in few aye put a pid to his life: So ceraine it is, that one intemperate action is enoh to overthrow the temperance of a whole life; as of this King Henry it is said th he seldome did ea but when he was hungry, never did drink but when he was thirst yet this but one yeelding to his sensuall appetite, made hm forfe all benefit of his former abstinence: though some write he too his dth by the fll off his hrs. He died upon the first of Dember at night, in he yere 1135. when he had Raigned five and thirty yeares, lived threescore and seven. His bowels, braines, and eyes, were buied at Roan in Nomandy where he died: the rest of i body was stuffed with Salt, wrapped in Oxe hides, and brought over in England, and with honorable Exequies, buried in the Monastery of eding which himselfe had Founded. His Physitin that ooke out his braines, with the intolerable stinch shortly after died. In this King Henry ended the line of the Nrmans, as touching the Heies Males; and then cme in the Frech, by the title of Heires generall. Men of nte in his time. MEn of learning in his time were many first, Stephen Harding a Benedictine Monke, who was Founder of the Cistercian Orde Then Anselme, Arch-bi∣shop of Cterbury, who beides his activenesse in matters of State, writ many great and learned bookes. Then Waltr Cl, Arch-deacon of Oxford, who delivered a History written in the British tongue, from Brute to Cadwallader, to Geoffry of Mon∣h to translat, and added forty yeares of his owne ime. Also  a Mon of Wcster, who writ D rebs Gestis Anglorum. Also Edmrs, a Mk of Cterbury, who sides othr wks, writ the History of his owne tme, under the two Willis and Hy the first.
THE RAIGNE OF KING STEPHEN. AFter the decease of King Henry, presently steps upon the Stage of Royalty, Stephen Earle of Boleyne, Sonne to Stephen Earle of loys, by Adela, Daughter of King William the Conqour; and though there were two other before him, Made the Em∣presse, and Theobald his elder Brother, She in a substantiall right, He in a colourable, yet taking advantage of being Pri Occ∣pans, the first Invader, (as being quickly here after King Henries death, where the other stayed lingring about other Affires) he solicits all the Or∣ders o the Realme, Bishops, and Lords, and People, to receive him for their So∣verine: wherein besides his owne large promises, what great matters he would do for them all, he had the assistance also of Henry his Brother, Bishop of Winchestr nd the Popes Legate, and of Roger, Bishop of Salisbury, his great friend: ( the most powerfull men at that time in the State) who partly by force of Reasons, but more indeed by force then Reasons, procure the State to accept him for their King; and so upon Saint Stephns day, in Anno 1135. he was Crowned at Westminster, in presence of but three Bishops, few of the Nobility, and not one Abbot, by Willi∣am Arch-bishop of Canterbury, with great solemnity. That which put  scruple in mens minds, and made them averse at first, from consenting to Stephe, was the Oath they had taken to receive King Henries Daughr Maude to be their Qeen, after his decease; but the weight of this scruple was something abated, when it was urged, that no Precedent could be shewed, that ever the Crowne had beene set upon a Womans head. And Roger, Bishop of Salisbury, brought another Reason, be∣cause they had taken that Oath but upon condition, that the King shoul not marry he out of the Realme without their consents, and the King having brokn the con∣dition, was just cause to nullifie their Obligation: to which was added, th the Oath having beene exacted by Authority, which is a ind of forcing, it might have the Plea of Per mins, and therefore void. And yet more then all these, Hgh Bigt, sometime Stewd to King Henry, immediately after his decease, came o∣ve into England, and tooke a voluntary Oath before divers Lords of the Land, that he was present a little before King Henries death, when he adopted and chose his Nephew Stephen to be his Successour, because his Daughter Md had gre∣vously at that tim displeased him. But howsoever their breach of Oath was thus palliaed; it is certaine that many of them, as well Bishops as other Lords, came afterward to an evill end at least o many calamities before their end. VVhat course he tooke to establish himselfe in the Kingdome. IT is a true saying,  rebs opti servat Imperium, quibu patur; and this was Stephens course, he got the kingdome by Proises, and he establisht it by
Performances; he pleased the People with easing them of Taxes and Impositions; He pleased the Clergy with forbearing to keepe Bishoprickes and Abbeyes Va∣cant, and with exempting them from the Authority of the Temporall Magistrate; He pleased the Nobility with allowing them to build Castle upon their owne Lands; He pleased the Geny with giving them liberty to hunt the Kings Deere in their owne Woods; and besides with advancing many of them in Honours: and for his Brother Theobald, who being the elder, was before him in pretence to the Crowne, he pleased him with a grant to pay him two thousand Markes a yeare; and then to strengthen himselfe abroad no lesse then at home, he marryed his Son Estace to Constance a Daughter of Lewis King of France, which alliance alone might be thought a sufficient security against all Opposition. And yet one thing more, which establisht him more then these, at least these the more for this, that he had seise upon King enries tresure, which amounted to a hundred thousand pound, beside Plate and ewels of inestimable value, which he spet no  vaine riot, but imployed to his best advantage, both in procuring of Friends, and in levying of Souldiers out of Britany and Flanders. Of his Troubles in his Raigne. THere may wel be made a Chapter of the troubles of his Raign, seeing his whole Raign was in a manner but one continued trouble, at leat no longer intermissiō, then as to give him breath against new encounters; til at last, when he grew towards his lst, he rather left to be in trouble, then was at quiet, being forced to make his ad∣versary his Here; and to leave his Crown to him that had sought his life. For he was no sooner set in his Chaire of State, but he was presently disquieted and made to rise, by the provocation of David King of Scots, who solicited by some Lords of England, but chiefly by Made the Empresse (whose Right he had sworne to de∣fend) with a mighty Army entred Nrthumberland, tooke Carlile, and Newcastle, and was proceeding further, till King Stephen with a greater Army comming a∣gainst him, yet rather bought his Peace then wonne it; for to recover Newcastle out of his hands, he was faine to let King David hold Cumberland, and his Sonne Henry the Earledome of Huntington, as their Inheritance; for which, the Father would not for his, as being engaged, but the Sonne for his, as being free, did Ho∣mage to King Stephen. No sooner was this trouble over, but he was presently under another; for be∣ing faine somewhat ill at ease it was bruited abroad that he was dead; which o distracted mens mindes, that every one thought it wisdome to shift for himselfe; and the Great Lords made a contrary use of Castles, to that which King Stephen intended, when he gave liberty to build them; for the King intended them for his owne defence against his Enemies, and they made use of them in their owne de∣fence against the King; for now Hugh Bigt Earle of Norfolke possesseth himselfe of Nrwich, Baldwyn Rivers of Oxford, and Robert Quesqurius of other Castles. In these difficulties King Stephen, though he could not in person be in all places at onc, yet in care he was and there most, where was most danger; imploying others against the rest: Against Baldwyn he went himselfe, whom, driven before out of Oxford, and gotten to the Isle of Wight, the King foowed and drove him al∣so from thence, aud at last into Exile. And now England afforded him once againe to take a little breath, but then Nor∣mandy presently begins with him afresh: For now Goffrey Pltagenet Duke of An∣jou, in right of Maude his Wife, enters upon his Townes there, and eees to get possession of the Country; when King Stephen passeth over with an Army, and ar∣ests his proceeding: and after some small defeates of his Enemies, brings the matter at last to a pecuniary Composition: He to pay the Duke five thousand Markes a yeare, and the Duke to relinquish his claime to Normandy. This done, he returnes into England, where new Commotions are attending him For the Lords in his absence, resenting his breach of Promises, upon which they had a∣mitted
him to the Crowne, make use every one of their Castles, and stand upon their Guard: The Lord Talbot held Hereford; Earle Robert Mads Brother, Bristow; William Lovell, the Castle of Cary; Paganell, the Castle of Ludlw; William Moun, the Castle of Dunster; Robert Nicholor of Lincolne, the Castle of Warham; Eustace the Sonne of Iohn, the Castle of Melton; William the Sonne of Alan, the Castle of Shrewsbury; and withall David King of Scots, never regarding his former agree∣ment, enters Northumberland with an Army, committing so great cruelty, in ra∣vishing of Maydes, murthering of Infants, slaughtering of Priests, even at the Al∣tar, that never any barbarous Nation committed greater. Thus the kingdome from the one end to the other was in Combustion, that if the King had had as ma∣ny hands as Briareus, there would have beene worke enough for them all. Yet all this dismayed not the King, but as having learned this Lesson, Tu ne cede malis, sed contra audentior ito, growes the more in confidence, the lesse he was in assurance; and as if danger were the fuell of Courage, the more erected in himselfe, the lesse he was upheld by others; and so, venturing what his Rebels at home would doe in his absence, he passeth himselfe in person against David King of Scots; as being the most dangerous, and therefore the first to be repressed: but finding it hard to draw him to a Battell, and impossible without a battell to doe any good upon him; he leaves the care of that quarrell to Thurstine Arch-bishop of Yorke, and returnes himselfe home, if it may be called home, where he scarce had a safe place to put his head in. But though many Lords were Rebellious against him, yet some there were stucke firmely to him, by whose Assistance and his owne industry, partly by inticements, partly by inforcements, he reduced most of them to Obedience, and all of them to Submission; when in the meane time Thurstine Arch-bishop of Yorke; and in his sicknesse, Ralph Bishop of Durham, assisted with William Earle of Aumerle, William Piperell of Nottingham, and Hubert de Lacy, fought a memo∣rable Battell against David King of Scots; wherein though King David himselfe, and his Sonne Henry performed wonderfull Acts of Prowesse, yet the English got the Victory, with the slaughter of eleven thousand Scots in the Fight, besides ma∣ny other slaine in the flight; where of the English none of account were slaine, but onely a Brother of Hubert Lacyes, and some small number of Common Souldiers. This Victory infinitely pleased and comforted King Stephen, who not long after to make an absolute suppression of the Scots, passeth againe with an Army, and inforceth King David to demand a Peace, delivering his Sonne Henry into King Stephens hands for a pledge; and comming homeward, by the way he besieged Ludlow, one of Rebels nests, where Prince Henry of Scotland had beene taken Pri∣soner, if King Stephen in his owne person had not rescued him. After this, once againe the King got a little breathing time, but it was but to prepare him for greater Encounters: For now Maud the Empresse her selfe in per∣son comes into play; in whom the Oath before taken was to have its tryall; for till now, though never so really intended, yet it could not actually be performed; for how could they receive her for Queene, who came not in place to be received? but now that she came in person, now was the time of tryall, how the Oath would worke; and worke it did indeed with many, and that strongly; For Maude com∣ming into England, with Robert Earle of Glocester her Brother; was most joyfully received at Arundell Castle, by William de Aubigny, who had marryed Adeliza the Queene Dowager of the late King Henry, and had the said Castle and County assigned her for her Dower. King Stephen having intelligence hereof, commeth to Arundell Castell wih an Army, and besiegeth it; but either diverted by ill counsell, or else finding the Castle to be inexpugnable, he left the siege, and suffe∣red the Empresse to passe to Bristow. The King hearing, that Raulph Earle of Chester, Sonne in law to Robert Earle of Glocester, had possest himselfe of the City of Lincolne, thither he goeth with an Army and besiegeth it: thither also came the said Earle of Chester, and Robert Earle of Glocester to raise his siege; at which time, a most fierce battell was fought betweene them, upon Candlemas day; where∣in it is memorable what wonders of valour King Stephen performed; For, when
all his men about him were either fled or slaine; yet he kept the field himselfe alone: no man daring to come neare him: Horrentibus inimicis incomparabilem ictuum ejus im∣manitatem, saith Hoveden: yet over-mastered at last by multitude, he was taken prisoner, and brought to Maude the Empresse; who sent him to be kept in safe cu∣stody in the Castle of Brisow, where he remained till All-hollantide after. And now the Empresse having gotten King Stephen into her hands, she takes her journey to London; received in all places, as she went, peaceably, and at London joyfully; where Queene Matild made humble suite uno her, for the liberty of King Stephen her husband; and that he might but be allowed to live a private life: the Londoners also made suite to have the Lawes of King Edward restored; but the Empresse not onely rejected both their suites, but returned them answers in harsh and insulting language; Indeed most unseasonably; and which gave a stop to the current of all her fortunes: for Queene Matild finding thereby, how high the Empresse pulses did beate; sent presently to her Sonne Eustace, being then in Kent, to raise Forces with all speed, with whom, the Londoners, as much discontented as she, doe after∣wards joyne; and Heny Bishop of Winchester, as much discontented as either of them, fortifies his Castles at Waltham and Farnham; and specially Winchester, where he stayes himsele, attending upon what Coast the next wind of the Em∣presse would blow. Of all these things the Empresse had intelligence, and there∣upon secretly in the night she fled to Oxford, sending streight charge, to have King Stephen more narrowly watched, more hardly used; put (as some write) into fet∣ters; and fed with very bare and poore Commons; withall she sends to her Un∣kle David Kings of Scots, to come unto her with all speed possible, who comming accordingly, they fall into consultation what is first to be done; the lot fals upon Winchester, as being their greatest adversary, now, no lesse in apparence then in power: so Winchester they besiege; which Queene Matild hearing, she with her Sonne Eustace and the Londoners, come presently to the succour, where a fierce battell being fought, the end was, that the party of Queene Matild prevailed, and the Empresse to make her escape, was faine to be laid upon a Horse backe in man∣ner of a dead Corps, and so conveyed to Glocester; while Earle Robert her brother disdaining to flie, was taken Prisoner, whom Queene Matild caused to be used the more hardly, in retaliation of the hard usage which the Empresse before had shewed to King Stephen. Things standing in these termes, propositions were made by the Lords for pacification, but such were the high spirits of the Empresse, and her bro∣ther Robert, that no conditions would please them, unlesse the Empresse might enjoy the Crowne. But after long debate, whether by agreement betweene them∣selves, or by connivence of the keepers, both King Stephen and Earle Robert got to be at liberty. When the first thing King Stephen did, was to looke out the Em∣presse, to requite the kindnesse she had shewed him in prison; and hearing her to be at Oxford, he layes siege to the Towne, and brings the Empresse to such di∣stresse, that she had no way to free her selfe but by flight; and no way to flee but with manifest danger, yet she effected it by this devise: It was in the Winter sea∣son, when frost and snow covered all the ground over; she therefore clad her selfe, and her foure servants that were with her in white cloathes, which being of the colour of Snow, made her passe the Watches without being discerned, and by this meanes came safe to her friends at Wallingford. Yet Mamesbury who lived at that time, confesseth he could never learne certainely by what meanes she made her e∣scape. But howsoever she escaped this present danger; yet it left such an impres∣sion of feare upon her, that she never after had any mind to appeare upon this stage of Warre, but left the prosecution of it to her Sonne Henry, who was now about sixteene yeares of age, and being forward of his age, and able to beare Armes was by his great Unkle David King of Scots, Knighted, to make him more for∣ward. It was now the ninth yeare of King Stephens Raigne, when Ralph Earle of Che∣ster, keeping possession of the City of Lincolne, was in the night time assaulted by the King; but the Earle perceiving the Kings Forces to be but small, suddenly is∣sued
forth, and repelled the King with the slaughter of fourescore of his men. Yet two yeares after this, the Earle was reconciled to the King, and came of his owne accord to waite upon him, when perfidiously he was detained by the King; and not set at liberty, till he had surrendred into the Kings hands all the Castles that were in his possession; which though it brought the King some present benefit, yet it wrought him a greater future losse; for it lost him his credite with all men, and no man afterward would trust his word. Now was Duke Henry come to the age of nineteene yeares, and was in possessi∣on of the Dukedome of Anjou, by the death of his Father Geoffrey Plantagenet; and not long after this, he marryed Eleanor the Daughter and Heire of William Duke of Guyen, by whom he had that Dutchy, and also the Earledome of Poicton: Nor∣mandy he had by his Mother; but more by the peoples inclination. So as being possest now of foure great Principalities, this greatnesse of Estate added to the greatnesse of his spirit, made him aspiring to recover his Right in England; and o∣ver he comes, bringing with him but small Forces, but promising himselfe great, from the people of this kingdome: and many indeed resorted to him; with whom he fell presently, and besieged Marleborough; but by the Kings greater Forces was repelled. After this, their Armies continued in the field still; rather watching advantages to be doing, then doing any thing; sometimes advancing when no Enemy was neare, and then retiring when the Enemy came; till at last it was like to come to a set Battell, when suddenly Eustace King Stephens onely Sonne unfortunately dy∣ed: Unfortunately for himselfe, but fortunately for the kingdome; For now King Stephen being left destitute of issue to succeed, was the more easily drawne to con∣ditions of Peace, as likewise the Empresse Maude, having lately lost her Brother Robert Earle of Glocester, and Miles Earle of Hereford, (her two best Champions) was no lesse willing of Peace then he; which being furthered by the Lords of both sides, was at last concluded upon these conditions, that Stephen should hold the kingdome of England during his life, and adopt Duke Henry as his Heire to succeed him. And this agreement thus made, and in a Parliament at Winchester confirmed, Duke Henry ever after accounted King Stephen no lesse then a Father, and King Stephen, Duke Henry no lesse then a Sonne: and well he might, if it be true which some write, that the Empresse, when a Battell was to be fought betweene King Stephen and her Sonne, went privily to him, asking him how he could find in his heart to fight against him that was his owne Sonne? could he forget the familia∣rity he had with her in her firt Widow-hood? But this was no matter for the Writers of that time to deliver: It touched too neare the interest of Princes then in being: and Princes must not be touched while they live, nor when they are dead neither with uncertainties, as this could be no other: But howsoever it was, cer∣taine it is, that after this Agreement betweene King Stephen and Duke Henry, they continued in mutuall love and concord, as long after as they lived. But what became of Maude the Empresse at this time? For, that she was alive, and lived many yeares after this agreement betweene King Stephen and her Sonne Henry, all Writers agree; and to say that she consented to the Agreement, without a∣ny provision made for her selfe, is to make her too much a Woman; a very weake vessell: and to say there might be provision made, though it be not Recorded, is to make all Writers defective in a great excesse. And besides, being so stirring a woman as she was, that upon a suddaine she should be so quiet, as not to deserve to have one word spoken of her, in all the long time she lived after, (being no lesse then twelve or thirteene yeares) is as strange as the rest. And if she placed her con∣tentment so wholly in her Sonne, that in regard of him, she regarded not her selfe at all; It deserves at least the Encomium of such a motherly love as is very unusuall, and not alwayes safe. Whatsoever it was, I must be faine to leave it as a Gordian knot, which no Writer helpes me to unty.
Of his Taxations, and wayes for raising of money. OF Taxations in his time, there is no mention made; for Taxations indeed, are properly drawne from a body of State when it is entire, where the State all this Kings time was altogether in Fractions. But what he wanted in Taxations, he supplyed with Confiscations, which by reason of the many revoltings of men of all sorts, could not chuse but fill his Coffers; every Rebellion being in nature of a Purchase to him, for whatsoever became of the Persons, their Lands and Goods were sure to be his. And if it happened at any time, that Confiscations came in but slowly, he had then devises to hasten their pace, for upon light sug∣gestions (not so much oftentimes as just suspitions) he would call men into que∣stion, and seise upon their good, as in the case particularly of Ralph Bishop of Sa∣lisbury; and it may not be unpleasing to heare from what beginning this Bishop grew to such a height of greatnesse; which was thus; In the time of King William Rufus, he was a poore Priest, serving a Cure in a village neare to Can in Norman∣dy, when the Kings younger Brother Henry chanced to passe that way, and to make some stay in the said Village; who being desirous to heare a Masse, this Roger being Curate, was the man to say it; which he dispatched with such celerity, that the Souldiers (who commonly love not long Masses) commended him for it, telling their Lord, that there could not a fitter Priest be found for men of warre then he. Whereupon Henry appointed him to follow him, and when he came to be King, preferred him to many great places, and at last to be Chancellour of England, and Bishop of Salisbury. You have heard his rising, now heare his fall; When King Stephen came to the Crowne, he held this man in as great account as his Predeces∣sour King Henry had done, and perhaps in greater; For being a great begger of Suites, the King would say of him, If this man will never give over asking, neither shall I ever give over giving. Yet this great Prelate fell first through Pride into Envy, and then through Envy into Ruine. For King Stephen having given liberty to build Castles, this man did so frre exceed all others in magnificence (for he builded the Castles of Salisbury, the Vyes, Sherburne, Mamesbury and Newarke, to which there were no Structures comparable in the kingdome) that the Lords out of envy put it into the Kings head, that these Castles of his were built thus magni∣ficently for entertainment of Made the Empresse: which so possessed the King, or he would be thought to be so possessed, that taking this for a just cause, he seised them all into his hands, and forty thousand Markes besides, which he had in mo∣ney: and not cotented with this, he tooke the like course also with Alexander Bi∣shop of Lincolne, onely because he was his Nephew and of his neare kindred. An∣other way he had for gaining of money: For in the first yeare of his Raigne, ha∣ving given liberty to hunt in his Forests, be afterward at Oxford caused many to be impleaded for using that liberty; a tricke which perhaps he learned from hun∣ting, First to give men leave to doe a thing, and then to Fine them for having done it. But this is the priviledge of Princes, that their leave must be interpreted by him that gives it, and not by him that takes it. Lawes and Ordinances in his time. HE gave licence to the City of Norwich to have Coroners and Bayliffes, before which time, they had onely a Sergeant for the King to keepe Courts; and af∣ter this, in the 37. yeare of King Henry the third, they had license to inclose the Towne with Ditches. Affaires of the Church in his time. VPon the Kings seising into his hands, the Bishop of Salisburies Castles, and Goods, complaint was made, and a Synod called by the Bishop of Winche∣ster
the Popes Legate, to right the Bishop, where the King was cited to appeare; who sending to know the cause, Answer was made, that it was to answer for his imprisoning of Bishops, and depriving them of their Goods, which being a Chri∣stian King he ought not to doe. The King replies by his Lawyer, Alveric de Ver, that he had not arrested the Bishop of Salisbury as a Bishop, but as his Servant, that was to make him accompt of his imployment. To this the Bishop answereth, that he was never Servant or Accomptant to the King: and many Allegations and Pro∣bations were urged to and fro, but in conclusion the Synod brake up, and nothing was done. The Bishops durst not Excommunicate the King without the Popes pri∣vity; so in the end they fell from Authority to Submission; and in the Kings Cham∣ber fell downe at his Feet, beseeching him he would pity the Church; and not suffer dissention to be betweene the Kingdome and the Priest-hood. And this was no small magnanimity in the King, that he was able to pull downe the high sto∣machs of the Prelates in that time. In the eighth yeare of his Raigne a Synod was held in London by Henry Bishop of Winchester, where it was decreed, that who∣soever should lay violent hands upon any Clergy man, should not be absolved but by the Pope himselfe: and from this time forward, Clergy men were exempt from the secular power. In the tenth yeare of his Raigne, by the soliciting of Saint Ber∣nard, many tooke upon them the Crosse, for a supply to the Holy Land; amongst whom, some English Lords also. Workes of piety done by him, or by others in his time. HE Founded the Abbeys of Cogshall in Essex; of Furneys in Lancashire; of Hur∣guilers and Feversham in Kent; at Heigham in Kent, a House of blacke Nunnes; also an house for Nunnes at Carew: His Queene Matild builded the Hospitall of Saint Katherines by the Tower of London: A knight called Sir William of Mount Fit∣chet, Founded the Abbey of Stratford Langthorne, within foure miles of London; William of Ypre Founded Boxeley Abbey in Kent; Robert Earle of Ferrers, Founded the Abbey of Merivall in Warwickshire; and in the same Shire, Robert Earle of Glo∣cester, the Abbey of Nonne Eaten. Also by others were Founded the Abbeys of Tiltey; of Rievall; of Newborough and Beeland; of Garedon in Lycestershire; of Kirkstead in Yorkeshire: and divers others in other places, so that more Abbeys were erected in his dayes, then had beene within the space of a hundred yeares before. Of his Wife and Children. HE marryed, by his Unkle King Henries meanes, Matild, Daughter and Heire of Eustace Earle of Boleyne, a Woman made for the proportion of both For∣tunes: In adversity not dejected; in prosperity not elated: while her Husband was at liberty, a Woman; during his durance, as it were a Man; Acting his part for him when he was restrained from acting it himselfe; not looking that Fortune should fall into her lappe, but industrious to procure it. By this Queene, he had onely one Sonne named Eustace, a Prince more then of hope, for he lived to the blossoming of much Valour, though it came not to maturity, as being cut off at eighteene yeares of age, some say, by drowning, and some by a stranger accident. But strange Relations must not alwayes be rejected, for though many of them be forged, yet some no doubt are true; and who knowes but it may be of this kind, which some Writers relate of the death of this Prince: that being at the Abbey of Bury in Norfolke, and denyed some money he required to have had; he present∣ly in a rage went forth, and set fire on the Cornefields belonging to the Abbey, but afterwards sitting downe to dinner, at the first morsell of bread he put into his mouth, he fell into a fit of madnesse, and in that fit dyed? Certainely, the Per∣sons of Princes are for more observation then ordinary people; and as they make Examples, so they are sometimes made Examples. This Prince Eustace was so
beloved of his father, that he had a purpose to have joyned him King with him∣selfe, but that the Pope upon the Bishops complaining to him of it, diverted him from it. Howsoever being dead, he was buried in Feversham Abbey, where his mo∣ther was buried a little before. Other legitimate issue King Stephen had none, but by a Concubine he had a sonne named William, whom he made Earle of Norfolke, which honour was confirmed upon him, by a speciall Article, in the agreement made betweene King Stephen and Duke Henry: Onely a French Chronicle speakes of another sonne of his, named Gervase, made Abbot of Westminster, and that hee died in the yeare 1160. and was there buried. Of his Personage and Conditions. HE was tall of stature, of great strength, and of an excellent good complexion. Concerning the qualities of his minde, there was apparent in him a just mixture of valour and prudence; for if he had not had both, hee could never have held out with such weake friends as he did, against such potent adversaries as he had. And specially it must be confest, he was of an excellent temper for a souldier, seeing he never kild any enemy in cold blood, as Anthonie did Cicero; nor any friend in hot blood, as Alexander did Clitus. What he would have beene in Peace, we are left to Judge by onely a Patterne, the short time betweene his agreement with Duke Hery and his death: which seeing he spent in travelling to all parts of the Realme, and seeking to stich up the breaches which the violence of Warre had made; we may well thinke, that if his life had beene continued, he would have given as good Proofes of his Justice in Peace, as he had done of his Valour in Warre. For of his extraordinary good nature we have a sufficient example in one Action of his, which was this: Duke Henry being on a time, in some straights for money, sent to his Mother Maude the Empresse, desiring her to furnish him, but she answered, that she was in as great straights her selfe, and therefore could not do it; then he sent to his Unkle Earle Robert to furnish him, and he answered, he had little enough to serve his owne turne, and therefore could not doe it; at last he sent to King Sephen, and he though an Adversary, and standing in termes of op∣position, yet sent presently and supplyed him with it. He was withall a great op∣pugner of Superstition, which made him on a time to ride into Lincolne with his Crowne upon his head, onely to breake the people of a superstitious opinion they held, that no King could enter into that City in such manner, but that some great dysaster would fall upon him. One speciall Vertue may be noted in him, that he was not noted for any speciall vice, whereof if there had beene any in him, Writers certainly would not have beene silent. Of his death and buriall. AS a Fish cannot live out of Water, no more was it in the Destiny of this King, to live out of trouble; as oone as he came to enjoy quietnesse, he left to en∣joy life, no more time left him betweene his Agreement with Duke Henry and his Death, but onely so much as might reasonably serve him to take his last leave of all his Friends; For it was but from Ianuary to October; and the last Friend he tooke leave of, was Theodoricke Earle of Flanders, whom he met at Dover, and as soone as he had dismissed him, he was suddenly taken with the Iliake Passion, and with an old disease of the Emeraulds: and dyed in the Monastery there, the five and twentyeth of October, in the yeare 1154. when he had Raigned almost nine∣teene yeares, Lived nine and forty; and was Buryed in the Abbey of Feversham, which he had Founded.
Men of note in his time. OF Clergy men, there was Thurstine Arch-bishop of Yorke, and Henry Bishop of Winchester the Kings Brother, also William, another Arch-bishop of Yorke, whom we may finde in the Calender of Saints, as likewise Saint Bernard who lived in this time, though not of this Country, and if we may reckon strangers, there lived at this time, Peter Lombard, Master of the Sentences; Peter Comester, writer of the Ecclesiasticall Story; and Gratian, Compiler of the Canon Law, all three Brothers, and all three Bastards; also Avicen, Averroes, Mesues, and Rabbi Sa∣lomon were in this time famous. Of military men, there was Ranulph Earle of Che∣ster; Reynold Earle of Cornwall; Robert Earle of Leycester; Hugh Bigot, Earle of Nor∣folke, but specially Robert Earle of Glocester, the Kings base Sonne, whose praises, if any desire to heare sounded out to the full, let him read William of Malmesbury, who writ the History of those times, of purpose to be his Trumpet. Of the Writers of our Nation, there was this William of Malmesbury, Henry Huntington, Simon Du∣nelmensis, William Revellensis, and Geoffrey of Monmouth, Bishop of Saint Asaph in Wales. Also Hugo Carthusianus, a Burgundian, but made Bishop of Lincolne here in England.
THE LIFE and RAIGNE OF KING HENRY THE SECOND. KING Stephen being dead, Henry Duke of Anjou, by his Fa∣ther Geoffry Plantagenet, succeeded him in the Kingdome of En∣gland by agreement; whom he preceded by right, as being Sonne and Heire of Mawde, sole daughter and Heire of King Henry the first; and was crowned at Westminster, by Thebald Arch-Bishop of Canterbury, on the seventeenth of December, in the yeare 1155. and was now a greater Prince then any of his Ancestours had beene before: and indeed, the Kingdome of England, the Dukedome of Normandy, and the Dukedome of Anjou in his owne right; and in the right of his wife Queen Eleanor, the Duchy of uyen, and the Earl∣dome of Poictou bing all united in his person, made him a Dominion of a larger ex∣tent then any King Christian had at that time. He was borne at Ments in Normandy, in the yeare 1132. a great joy to his Father Geoffry, Duke of Anjou; a greater to his Mother Mawde the Empresse; but so great to his Grandfather King Henry the first, that it seemed to make amends for his sonne William, whom unfortunately he had lost before by Shipwrack. The yeares of his childhood were spent at home under the care of his Parents: at nine yeares old or there abouts, he was brought by his Unkle Robert Earle of Glocester into England, and placed at Bristow, where under the tuition of one Matthew his Schoolemaster, to instruct him in learning, he remained foure yeares, after which time he was sent into Scotland, to his great Unkle David King of Scots, with whom he remained about two yeares, initiated by him in the Principles of State, but chiefely of his owne estate: and being now about fifteene yeares of age, was by him Knighted, and though scarce yet ripe for Armes, yet as a fruit gathered before its time, was mellowed under the discipline of his Unkle Robert, one of the best Souldiers of that time. And now the Duke his Father not able any longer to en∣dure his absence, sent with great instance to have him sent over to him; for satis∣fying of whose longing, Earle Robert provided him of passage, and conducted him himselfe to the Sea side, where he tooke his last farewell of him. Being come into Anjou, his Father, perhaps over-joyed with his presence, not long after died, leaving him in present possession of that Dukedome, being now about nineteene yeares of age: when shortly after he married Eleanor, late the wife of Lewis King of France, but now divorced. A yeare or two after he came againe into England, where after some velitations with King Stephen, they were at last reconciled, and
his succession to the Crowne of England, ratified by Act of Parliament. Not long after he went againe into France, and presently fell to besiege a Castle which was detained from him by the French King: in the time of which siege, newes was brought him of King Stephens death; which one would have thought should have made him hasten his journey into England; yet he resolved not to stirre till he had wonne the Caste: which resolution of his being knowne to the Defendants, they surrendred the Castle; but yet no sooner, but that it was sixe weekes after before he came into England, when he was now about the age of three and twenty yeares. His first Acts after he came to the Crowne. He beganne his Raigne as Solomon would have begunne it, if he had beene in his place: for, first he made choyce of wise and discreet men to be his Consel∣lours: then he banished out of the Realme all strangers, and especially Flemmings, with whom the Kingdome swarmed; as of whom King Stephen had made use in his warres, amongst whom was William of Ypres, lately before made Earle of Kent. Castles which by King Stephens allowance had beene built, he caused to be demolished, (of which there were said to be eleven hundred and fifteene) as being rather Nurseries of rebellion to the subject, then of any safety to the Prince. He appointed the most able men of that profession, to reforme abuses of the Lawes, which disorder of the wars had brought in: He banished many Lords, who a∣gainst their Oath had assisted King Stephen against him; as thinking that men onc perjured, would never be faithfull: and to the end he might be the lesse pressing up∣on the people with Taxations, he resumed all such Lands belonging to the Crown, which had any way beene aliened or usurped; as thinking it better to displease a few then many: and many other things he did, which in a disjoynted State were no lesse profitable and expedient, then requisite and necessary. His Troubles during his Raigne. HE had no Competitors, nor Pretenders with him for the Crowne; and therfore his troubles at first were not in Capite, strooke not at the roote, as K. Stephens did: but were onely some certaine niblings at inferiour parts; till at last he brought them himselfe into his own bowels. For what was the trouble in his first yeare with the Welsh, but as an exercise rather to keep him in motion, then that it needed to disquiet his rest? for though they were mutinous for a time, while they looked upon their owne Bucklers; their Woods and Mountainous passages: yet as soone as K. Henry did but shew his sword amongst them, they were soone reduced to obedi∣ence for the present, and to a greater awfulnesse for the future. It is true, Henry Earle of Essex that bore the Kings Standard, was so assaulted by the Welsh, that he let the Standard fall to the ground, which encouraged the Welsh, and put the English in some feare, as supposing the King had beene slaine; but this was soone frustrated to the Welsh, and punished afterward in the Eale, by condemning him to be shorne a Monke, and put into the Abbey of Reading, and had his lands seised into the Kings hands. And what was his trouble with Malcolme King of Scots, but a worke of his owne beginning? for if he would have suffered him to enjoy that which was justly his owne, Cumberland and Huntingtonshire, by the grant of King Stephen, and Northumberland, by the gift of his Mother Maude the Empresse; he might have staied quietly at home, and needed not at all to have stired his foote; but he could not endure there should be such parings off from the body of his Kingdome: and therefore went with an Army into the North, where he wonne not, but tooke Northumberland from him, with the City of Carlill, and the Castles of Newcastle and Bamberg: and meerely out of gratefulnesse, in remembrance of the many cortesies done him before, by David King of Scots; he left him the County of Huntingon, but yet with condition to owe fealy, and to doe homage
to him for it. And what was his trouble with his brother Geoffrey, but a Bird of his owne hatching? For his Father Geoffrey, Duke of Anjou, had three sonnes, Henry, Geoffrey, and William; and dying he left his Dukedome of Anjou to his eldest son Henry, but to hold no longer then till he should come to be King of England, and then to deliver it up to his second sonne Geoffrey: and he made his Lords to sweare, not to suffer his body to be buried, untill his sonne Henry had taken his Oath to doe it; which Oath Henry afterward, in reverence to his Fathers body, did take: but as he tooke it unwillingly, so he willingly brake it, and sent presently to Adrian the then Pope, for a Dispensation of his Oath: which granted, he enters Anjou with an Army, and takes from his brother Geoffrey, being little able to make resistance, not onely the Dukedome of Anjou, but some other Cities also, which his Father had absolutely given him for his maintenance: yet out of brotherly kindnesse was content to allow him a Pension of a thousand pounds a yeare: which brotherly kindnesse was so unkindly taken by his brother Geoffrey, that it brake his heart; and within a short time after died. And thus these troubles begun by Henry himselfe, were soone ended; but now a trouble is comming on, begun by Lewis King of France, and this is like to stick long∣er by him. For King Lewis not having yet digested King Henries marriage with his divorced wife Eleanor, seekes all opportunities to expresse his spleene, by doing him displeasure; and a fit opportunity was now offered: for there fell out a difference betweene Raymond Earle of Saint Giles, and Henry King of England, about the Earledome of Tholouse, which Raymond possest, and Henry claimed: in this diffe∣rence, King Lewis takes part with Raymond, as pretending it to be the juster side. Hereupon are great forces provided on both sides, and it was like to have come to a dangerous battell; but that by mediation of friends, a Peace was made; and to make the Peace the firmer, a marriage was concluded betweene Henry, King Hen∣ries eldest sonne, scarce yet seven yeares of age; and Margaret, daughter of King Lewis, not past three: who was delivered to King Henry to bring up till fit yeares for consummation. This was then thought a strong linke to hold them in friend∣ship, but it proved afterward a cause to make the greater breach: and indeed when a sonne is once matched into a Family, the Father must never looke from thence afterward to have a good wish; seeing the daughter thus matched can have no ad∣vancement, but by the advancement of her husband; and he none, at least, none so wll, as by the ruine of his Father: yet this brake not out till some yeares af∣ter. It was now about the eighteenth yeere of King Henries Raigne, and his sonne Henry growne to be seventeene yeares of age when it came into the Kings minde to have his sonne Henry crowned King, and Raigne with himselfe in his owne time; partly out of indulgence to his sonne, but chiefely, as having found by his owne experience, that Oaths for succession are commonly eluded: but Oaths for present Allegeance, as being Verba de Praesenti, can have no evasion: and pleasing himselfe with this conceit, he acquaints his Lords with his purpose, and causeth his sonne Henry to be crowned King by the hands of Roger Arch-bishop of Yorke; and all the Lords to sweare Allegeance to him: at the Feast of which solemnity, King Henry to honour his sonne, would needs carry up the first dish to his Table; whereupon the Arch-bishop Roger standing by, and saying merrily to the new King: What an honour is this to you, to have such a waiter at your Table? Why (saith he) what great matter is it for him that was but the sonne of a Duke, to doe service to me, that am the sonne of a King and Queene? Which the old King hearing, beganne to repent him, now it was too late of that he had done. For indeed the honour which by Gods commandement, children are to doe to their Parents; is by such making them their equals, in a manner abolished; at least it gives them stomachs to take more upon them then is fit. But King Henry passed it over, and meant to set the best side outward. And now King Lewis tooke displeasure that his daughter was not crowned as well as her husband, and therefore to satisfie him in that point, King Henry sendeth his sonne Henry and his wife Margaret into England and causeth them both to be
crowned by Walter Arch-bishop of Roan: and shortly after, the young King Henry and his wife goe backe to King Lewis her Father, and by him with great joy, and variety of sports were entertained. In the time of their being there, King Lewis partly out of his old spleene to King Henry, and partly to make his sonne in law more absolure; fals oftentimes into conference with him, and finding his hot spirit to be fit tinder for such fire, tels him, it was a shame he should suffer himselfe to be made a stale; have the title of a King, and not the authority: and that as long as he stood in such termes, that which seemed an honour, was indeed a disgrace. With which words of King Lewis, the young King Henry was set afloate, and from that time forward, stucke not openly to oppose his Father: whereof his Father ha∣ving intelligence, sent messengers to King Lewis, desiring him from the King their Master, to be a meanes to bring his sonne to more moderation. But King Lewis hearing the Embassadours name their Master King, with an angry countenance said unto them; What mean you by this to call him King, who hath passed his King∣dome over to his son? and with this answer sent them away. To this evill, another worse was added: that Queene Eleanor his wife enraged with jealousie of her hus∣bands Concubines, both incenseth her sonne Henry, and perswadeth also two other of her sonnes, Richard and Geoffrey, to joyne against their Father; telling them, it would be better for them that their brother should prevaile, who could not chuse but allow them better maintenance, then their Father did. With these per∣swasions they passe over into Normandy, and joyne with their brother Henry; who emboldned by their assistance, growes now more insolent then he was before; that when messengers were sent to him from his Father, requiring him to lay downe his Armes, and to come lovingly to him: he proudly made answer, that his Fa∣ther must not looke he would lay downe his Armes, unlesse himselfe first would lay downe his authority, and resigne the Kingdome. And now Lewis King of France, calling together the great Lords of his Kingdome, and with them William King of Scots, Hugh Earle of Chester, Roger Mowbray, Hugh Pigot, and other of his sonnes party; they all take their Oaths to assist the young King Henry with all their power; and thereupon all in one day, the French invade Normandy, Aquitaine and Britaine; the King of Scots Northumberland; and King Lewis the City of Vernoill, which he brought to that distresse, that it was agreed by the Inhabitants, if it were not succoured within three dayes, then to surrender it. King Henry hearing of this agreement, promiseth to succour them by that day. But here King Lewis useth a trick, gets that by fraud, which he could not doe by force; for he sends to King Henry, that if he were willing to have peace with his sonnes, he should meet him at a place appointed, at such a time, and he doubted not to effect it. King Henry glad of such an offer, and with that gladnesse perhaps blinded, and not suspecting any deceit, promiseth to meete; and comming to the place at the day, which was the day he should have succoured Vernoill, he stayed there all day looking for King Lewis comming; who instead of comming, sent word to Vernoill, that King Henry was defeated; and therefore their hope of succour was in vaine: whereupon the Citizens thinking it to be so indeed, because he came not according to his promise, surrendred the Towne: which King Lewis finding himselfe unable to hold, set it on fire, and so departed. But King Henry when he perceived the fraud, followed him with his Army, and tooke a bloody revenge of his fraud, with the slaughter of ma∣ny of his men. At the same time also King Henries forces encountred Hugh Earle of Chester, and Robert Fulger, who had taken Dole in Britaine, tooke them prisoners, and brought them to King Henry: and about the same time likewise in England, Robert Earle of Leycester thinking to surprise Raynold Earle of Cornwall, and Richard Lacy, King Henries Generals, at unawares, was himselfe by them overthrowne, and the Towne of Leycester taken; which onely the site of the place defended from being battered to the ground. Robert Earle of Leycester being thus defeated passeth over into France, and being supplied by King Lewis with greater forces then before, is together with Hugh Bigot sent backe into England, to draw the Countrey to Hen∣ry the sonnes party; who at first assault take Norwich: and then setting downe be∣fore
Bury, they are in a great battell, by Richard Lacy, and other of King Henries Captaines, overthrowne with the slaughter of tenne thousand men, and as many taken prisoners; amongst whom Earle Robert himselfe. Yet were not Roger Maw∣bray and Hugh Bigot so daunted with this overthrow, but that together with David the King of Scos brother, they gather new forces, and invade Northumberland and Yorkshire, when Robert Scoccee, Ralph Granula, William Vesci, and Barnard Bayliol (of whom Baynards Castle in London, first tooke the name) Knights of those parts, as∣emble together, and fighting a great battell with them, overthrew them, and tooke the King of Scos prisoner, with many others. Yet is not Hugh Bigot daunted with this neither, but gathers new forces, and takes Norwich; and Robert Ferris, Notting∣ham: the newes whereof, when King Henry the sonne heard, he recovered new spi∣rits, and obtaining new assistance from King Lewis, prepares himselfe afresh for warre: which King Henry the Father hearing, returnes speedily into England; and to appease Saint Thomas Beckets Ghost, goes to visit his Tombe, and there askes him forgivenesse. This done, he goes into Suffolke, and at Framingham Castle, which belonged to Hugh Bigot, stayes with his Army, when suddenly moved, by what instinct, no man knowes (unlesse the appeasing of Saint Thomas Ghost did worke it) both Hugh Bigot delivers up his Castle into King Henries hands, and like∣wise Roger Mawbray, Robert Ferris, and many others of that party, come voluntari∣ly in, and submit themselves to the Kings mercy. Hereupon King Henry returnes to London, about which time he committed his wife Queene Eleanor to prison, for her practises against him. In the meane time, King Lewis understanding that Nor∣mandy was but weakly guarded, together with his sonne the young King Henry, and Philip Earle of Flaunders; he besiegeth Roan, which the Kings forces valiantly de∣fended, till he came himselfe in person; and thereupon King Lewis despairing of any good to be doe, sends messengers to King Henry for a truce, and appointed a day to meete at Gysors, where he doubted not to make a reconcilement betweene his sons and him; K. Henry agreed willingly, but of the meeting nothing was done: It seemes it was but one of King Lewis his old tricks to come fairely off. After this truce made with King Lewis, King Henry hearing that his son Richard had in the meane time possest himselfe of a great part of the Province of Poicto; goes thither with an Army, where Richard at last, after some hesitation, as doubt∣ing his forces, submits himselfe to his Father, and askes his pardon; which his Fa∣ther as freely grants, as if he had never committed any fault; and thereupon King Henry imployes him to King Lewis and his brother Henry, to perswade them to peace: who wearied now with the warres, were easily drawne, and so reconcilia∣tion on all parts is made; and to confirme the reconciliation betweene the two Kings, Henry and Lewis, his daughter Adela is affianced to King Henries sonne Richard, as Earle of Aquitaine, and because the Lady was but young, she was com∣mitted to the care of King Henry, till she should be fit for marriage. Upon this King Henry sets Robert Earle of Leycester, and Hugh Earle of Chester, giving hosta∣ges and oath for their Allegeance, at liberty; and William also King of Scots, paying a certaine mulct; for which he delivered in pawne the strong Castles of Berwick, Roxborough, and Sterling to King Henry, and was fined also to lose the County of Huntington, and never to receive any Rebels into his protection. These things done, the King with his sonnes returnes into England, where with all joy∣fulnesse they were received. It was now the yeare 1179. when King Lewis beganne againe to grow discontented with King Henry, because his daughter was not yet married to his sonne Richard, as was agreed: but King Henry making him promise to have them married within a few dayes, gave him satisfaction; though indeed he meant nothing lesse, for it was thought he kept her for himselfe, as with whom he had before that time, had unlawfull familiarity. The yeare after was memora∣ble for nothing, or for nothing so much as the death of the young King Henry, who died then; whose Widow Margaret returning into France, was afterward married to Bela King of Hungary. Now King Henries sonne Richard, no longer enduring to have his marriage delayed, which his Father often promised, but would never
suffer to be performed; fals into his old fit of discontentment: wherein though he cannot perhaps be justified, yet he may justly be excused, for to be kept from a wife at that time of his age, for which a wife was most proper; and especially having beene affianced so long before, which could not chuse but make his appetite the sharper: must needs be, if not a just cause, at least a strong provocation to make him doe as he did: Howsoever, from this fit of discontentment, he fals into a relaps of Rebellion, and infecting with it his brother Iohn, and a great part of his Fathers Adherents; they all take part with Philip (now after the decease of Lewis) King of France, who willing to make use of their assistance, before the streame of filiall awfulnesse should returne into the naturall Channell, takes them along with him, and besiegeth the City of Ments, in which King Henry at that time was himselfe in person; who apprehending the danger, and then resenting the mischiefe of falling into his enemies hands, gets him secretly out of the City, leaving it to defend it selfe, till he should returne with greater forces: but hearing afterward that the Towne was taken, he fell into so great a distraction of minde, that it made him break out into these blasphemous words; I shall never hereafter love God any more, that hath suffered a City so deare unto me, to be taken from me: but he quickly re∣collected himselfe, and repented him that he had spoken the words. Indeed Ments was the City in which he was borne, that to have this City taken from him, was as much as to have his Birth-right taken from him; and to say the truth, after he had lost this City, he scarce seemed to be alive; not onely because he shortly after died, but because the state of Majesty which had all his life accompanied him, after this forsooke him: for now he was faine to begge peace of his enemies, who often be∣fore had begged it of him: now he was glad to yeeld to conditions, which no force before could have wrested from him. It is memorable and worth observing, that when these two Kings had meeting betweene Turwyn and Arras, for recon∣cilement of differences; there suddenly happened a Thunderbolt to light just be∣tweene them, with so terrible a cracke, that it forced them for that time to breake off their conference: and afterward at another meeting, the like accident of Thun∣der happened againe, which so amazed King Henry, that he had fallen off his horse, if he had not beene supported by those about him; which could be nothing but drops let fall of the Divine anger, and manifest presages of his future dysasters. And thus this great Princes troubles, which beganne in little ones, and were conti∣nued in great ones, ended at last in so great a trouble, that it ended his life, and left him an example of desolation, notwithstanding all his greatnesse; forsaken of his friends, forsaken of his wife, forsaken of his children; and (if he were not him∣selfe when he blasphemed for the losse of Ments) forsaken of himselfe; which might be exemplar in this King, if it were not the common Epilogue of all great∣nesse. Of his Acquest of Ireland. RObert Fits-stephen was the first of all Englishmen, after the Conquest, that en∣tred Ireland, the first day of May, in the yeare 1170. with 390. men: and there took Werford, in the behalfe of Deruntius, sonne of Marcherdach, called Mac Murg, King of Leymster. In September following, Richard Earle of Chepstow, surnamed Strong-bow, sayled into Ireland with twelve hundred men, where he tooke Water∣ford and Dublin; and married Eeve, the daughter of Deruntius, as he was promi∣sed. From these beginnings, King Henry being then at rest from all Hostile Armes, both at home and abroad, takes into his consideration the Kingdome of Ireland, as a Kingdome which oftentimes afforded assistance to the French; and therefore purposing with himselfe by all meanes to subdue it: he provides a mighty Army, and in the Winter season saileth thither, taking Shipping at Pembroke, and landing neare to Waterford: where entring into consultation what course was fittest to be taken in the enterprise, suddenly of their owne accord, the Princes of the Countrey came in, and submitted themselves unto him, onely Rdrick King of Connacht stood
out; who being the greatest, thought to make himselfe the onely King of that Na∣tion: but King Henry forbearing him for the present, who kept himselfe in his fast∣nesses of Bogges and Woods, and was not to be followed in the Winter season: takes his journey to Dublin, the chiefe City of the Countrey; and there calling the Princes and Bishops of the Nation together, requires their consent to have him and his heires to be their King: which they affirming they could not doe without the Popes authority; to whom, at their first conversion to the Christian Religion, they had submitted themselves; the King sent presently to Adrian the then Pope an English man, requiring his assent; which upon divers good considerations he granted: and hereupon the King built him a stately Palace in the City of Dublin; and having thus without bloud possest himselfe of the Kingdome, the Spring fol∣lowing he returnes joyfully into England. About foure yeares after Rodorick also sends his Chancellour to King Henry, to offer his submission, with a tribute to be paid of every tenne beasts, one sufficient. After this, in the one and thirtieth yeare of his Raigne, he sent his sonne Iohn to be the Governour there. His Taxations, and wayes for raising of money. TAxations in his time, was chiefely once; when he tooke Escuage of English∣men, towards his warres in France, which amounted to 12400. pounds: but confiscations were many, because many Rebellions, and every Rebellion was as good as a Mine. Also vacancies of Bishopricks and Abbeys, kept in his hands, sometimes many at once; no time without some. He resumed also all Lands which had either beene sold or given from the Crowne by his Predecessours: but a principall cause that made him plentifull in money, was his Parcimony; as when he was injoyned for a Penance, to build three Abbeys, he performed it, by chan∣ging Secular Priests into Regular Chanons, onely to spare cost. And it was not the least cause of alienating his sonnes from him; that he allowed them not main∣tenance answerable to their calling. And it could be nothing but Parcimony while he lived, which brought it to passe, that when he died, there were found in his Cof∣fers, nine hundred thousand pounds besides Plate and Jewels. Lawes and Ordinances in his time. IN the beginning of his Raign, he refined and reformed the Lawes of the Realm; making them more tolerable & more profitable to his people then they were be∣fore. In the one and twentieth year of his Raign, he divided his whole kingdom into six several Circuits; appointing in every Circuit three Judges, who twice every year should ride together, to heare and determine Causes between man and man: as it is at this day, though altered in the number of the Judges, and in the Shires of Cir∣cuit. In this Kings dayes the number of Jewes all England over was great: yet, wheresoever they dwelt, they might not bury any of their dead any where but in London; which being a great inconvenience to bring dead bodies oftentimes from farre remote places, the King gave them liberty of buriall in the severall places where they lived. It was in this Kings dayes also ordained that Clergy-men offen∣ding in hunting the Kings Deere, should be punishable by the Civill Magistrate, according to the Lawes of the Land; which order was afterward taken with them for any offence whatsoever they committed. Though it be not a Law, yet it is an Ordinance which was first brought in by this King, that the Lions should be kept in the Tower of London. Affaires of the Church in his tim. THis Kings Raigne is famous for the contention of a Subject with the Prince, and though it may be thought no equall match, yet in this Example we shall find it hard to judge which of them had the victory. But before we come to speak
of the Contention, it is fit to say something of the Man, and of the Quarrell. The man was Thomas Becket, borne in London, his Father, one Gilbert Becket, his Mo∣ther an outlandish Woman, of the Country of Syria. His first rising was under Theobald Archbishop of Canterbury, who taking a liking to him, (as one saith, no man knew for what) made him first Arch-deacon of Canterbury, and then used meanes to have him be the Princes Tutor, after that to be Chancellour of England, and after the decease of the said Theobald, was himselfe made Arch-bishop of Can∣terbury in his place. One memorable thing he did at his comming to be Arch-bishop, he surrendred his place of being Chancellour, as not thinking it fit to sit at the Helme of the Common-wealth, and of the Church, both at once. But now began the Contention betweene the King and him: the difference was, the King would have it ordained that Clergy men who were malefactors, should be tryed before the Secular Magistrate as Lay men were: This Becket opposed, saying, it was against the liberty of the Church, and therefore against the honour of God. Many Bishops stood with the King, some few with Becket the Contention grew long, and with the length still hotter, till at last Becket was content to assent to the Ordinance with this clause, Salvo Ordine suo: the King liked not the Clause, as being a deluding of the Ordinance: He required an absolute assent, without any clause of Reservation. At last, after many debatings and demurres, the Arch-bi∣shop yeelds to this also, and subscribes the Ordinance, and sets his hand unto it. But going homewards, it is said, his Crosse-bearer and some other about him, bla∣med him for that he had done, but whether moved with their words, or other∣wise upon second thoughts, the next day when they met againe, he openly re∣pented his former deed, retracts his subscription, and sends to the Pope for ab∣solution of his fault: which the Pope not onely granted, but encouraged him to persist in the course he had begunne. It may be thought a Fable, yet is related by divers good Authours, that one time during this Contention, certaine fellows cut off the Arch-bishops horses taile; after which fact, all their Children were borne with tailes like horses; and that this continued long in their Posterity, though now long since ceased, and perhaps their Families too. But King Henry finding there was no prevailing with Becket by faire meanes, beginnes to deale more roughly with him, and first makes use of Authority upon his Temporalties; and withall a censure was spoken of to be intended against his person; which Becket understand∣ing, thought it his best course to flee the Realme, and thereupon passing under the name of Dereman, he passeth over Sea, and there, two yeares by the Pope, and five by the King of France, was maintained as it were of Almes: in which misery, nothing vexed him so much, as that King Henry sent all his kindred, Men and Wo∣men, old and young into Banishment after him. And now King Henry finding that Becket stood much upon his Legatine Power, sent messengers to the Pope, de∣siring him to take that power from him, and to conferre it upon his Arch-bishop of Yorke, but the Pope answered, he would not doe so, but was content the King himselfe should be his Legate, and sent him Letters to that purpose, which King Henry tooke in such scorne, that he threw away the Letters, and sent them present∣ly backe to him againe. In this meane time, the King of France prevailed with King Henry to afford Becket a conference, hoping to bring them to some Agreement, where being to∣gether, King Henry alledged before the King of France, that he required nothing of Becket, but his assent to an Ordinance, to which in his Grandfather King Hen∣ries the first time, all the Bishops of the Realme, and the Arch-bishop of Canter∣bury that then was did give their Assent; yet this moved not Becket at all, but he continued his former Tenet, it was against the honour of God, and therefore de∣sired to be excused. See now (saith King Henry) the perversenesse of this man, all that agrees not with his owne humour, is presently against the honour of God. While these things were thus a working, Becket had gotten him more friends at Rome, and by their meanes prevailed with the Pope, to give him power to inter∣dict some Bishops in England that had done him wrong, and the Pope spared no
to threaten Excommunication to King Henry himselfe, if he restored not Becket to his Dignity. But whether awed with his threatning, or wonne by the King of Frances importunity, or else perhaps relenting in himselfe, he was contented at last that Becket should returne home, and enjoy his Bishopricke; who being come to Canterbury, the Bishops whom he had indicted, for Crowning the young King Henry, (which he said, was his right to have done) made humble suite unto him, to be released of the censure. Which, when the Arch-bishop would not grant, but with certaine cautions and exceptions, the Bishops discontented went over to the King, complaining of the hard measure that was offered them by the Arch-bishop: whereat the King being much moved, Shall I never (saith he) be at quiet for this Priest? If I had any about me that loved me, they would find some way or other to ridde me of this trouble. Whereupon foure knights standing by that heard the King make this complaint, namely Reynold Fits-urse, or Bereson, Hugh Morvyll, William Tracy, and Richard Britton, thinking they should doe an accepta∣ble service to the King, went shortly after into England, and going to Canterbury, found the Arch-bishop then at Church, when upon the steps there, they strucke him upon the head with their swords and slew him the thirtieth day of December, in the yeare 1172. Afterward, with much adoe, by King Henries meanes they were pardoned by the Pope, onely enjoyned Penance, to goe on Plgrimage to Ierusalem, as some write; but others more probably, that the King abhorred them ever after; and that within three yeares they all dyed miserably. You have heard his persecution, and (as some would have it called) his Martyrdome: now heare the honours that have beene done him, and the visitations to his Tombe. And first King Henry himselfe comming to Canterbury, as soone as he came within sight of Beckets Church, lighting off his horse, and putting off his hose and shooes he went barefoot to his Tombe, and for a further penance suffered himselfe to be beaten with rods, by every Monke of the Cloyster. A few yeares after, King Lewis of France comes into England of purpose to visite the Shrine of Saint Thomas, where having paid his Vowes, he makes Oblations with many rich Presents. The like many Princes since that time have done; and many Miracles are reported to have beene done at his Tombe, which yet may be unbeleeved without unbeliefe, and with Faith enough. Another difference in this Kings dayes, was betweene the two Arch-bishops of England, about the jurisdiction of Canterbury over Yorke, which being referred to the Pope, he gave judgement on Canterburies side. Also in this Kings dayes there was a Schisme in the Church of Rome, two Popes up at once, of whom Alexander the third was one; which Schisme continued the space of almost twenty yeares. Also in this Kings dayes, one Nicholas Breakespeare, borne at Saint Albans, or as others write, at Langley in Hartfordshire, being a bondman of that Abbey, and therefore not allowed to be a Monke there, went beyond Sea, where he so profited in Learning, that the Pope made him first Bishop of Alba, and afterward Cardinall, and sent Legate to the Norwayes, where he reduced that na∣tion from Paganisme to Christianity, and returning backe to Rome, was chosen Pope, by the Name of Adrian the fourth, and dyed being choaked with a Fly in his drinke. In his dayes also, Heraclius Patriarch of Hierusalem, came to King Hen∣ry, desiring ayde for the Holy Land, but not so much of money as of men; and not so much of men neither, as of a good Generall, as himselfe was; to whom King Henry answered, that though he were willing to undertake it, yet his unquiet State at home would not suffer him; with which answer the Patriarch moved, said, Thinke not Great King, that Pretences will excuse you before God, but take this from me, that as you forsake Gods cause now, so he hereafter will forsake you in your greatest need. But (saith the King) if I should be absent out of my kingdome, my own Sonnes would be ready to rise up against me in my absence; to which the Patriarch replyed, No marvaile, for from the Devill they came, and to the De∣vill they shall and so departed. Also in this Kings dayes there came into Eng∣land, thirty Germans, Men and Women, calling themselves Publicans, who de∣nyed Matrimony, and the Sacraments of Baptisme, and of the Lords Supper, with
other Articles, who being obstinate, and not to be reclaimed, the King comman∣ded they should be marked with a hot iron in the forehead, and be whipped, which punishment they tooke patiently, their Captaine (called Gerard) going before them singing, Blessed are ye when men hate you. After they were whipped, they were thrust out of doores in the Winter, where they dyed with cold and hunger, no man daing to relieve them. This King after his conquest of Ireland, imposed the tribute of Peter pence upon that kingdome, namely, that every house in Ireland should yearely pay a penny to Saint Peter. Workes of piety done by him, or by others in his time. THis King Founded the Church of Bristow, which King Henry the eighth after∣ward erected into a Cathedrall: He also Founded the Priories of Dver; of Stoneley; and of Basinwerke; and the Castle of Rudlan: and beganne the Stone Bridge over the Thames at London. He caused also the Castle of Warwicke to be builded. Maude the Empresse his Mother, Founded the Abbey of Bordesly. In his time also Hugh Mortimer Founded Wigmore Abbey, Richard Lucye the Kings Chiefe Justice laid the Foundation of the Coventuall Church, in the honour of Saint Thomas, in a place which is called Westwood, otherwise Leses, in the Terri∣tory of Rochester, in the new Parish of Southfleete. He also builded the Castle of Anger in Essex. Robert Harding a Burgesse of Bristow, to whom King Henry gave the Barony of Barkeley; builded the Monastery of Saint Augustines in Bristow. In the tenth yeare of his Raigne, London Bridge was new made of Timber, by Peter of Cole-church a Priest. Robert de Boscue Earle of Leycester, Founded the monastery of Gerendon, of Monkes; and of Leycester, called Saint Mary de Prate, of Chanons Regular, and his Wife Amicia, Daughter of Ralph Montford, Founded Eaton, of Nunnes. In the two and twentyeth yeare of his Raigne, after the Foundation of Saint Mary Overeyes Church in Southwarke, the Stone bridge over the Thames at London, beganne to be Founded, towards which a Cardinall, and the Arch-bi∣shop of Canterbury gave a thousand Markes. Aldred Bishop of Worcester Founded a Monastery at Glocester of Benedictine Monkes. Casualties that happened in his time. IN the Eleventh yeare of this Kings Raigne, on the six and twentyeth day of Ia∣nuary, was so great an Earth-quake in Ely, Norfolke, and Suffolke, that it over∣threw them that stood upon their feet, and made the Bells to ring in the Steeples. In the seventeenth yeare of his Raigne, there was seene at Saint Osythes in Essex, a Dragon of marveilous bignesse, which by moving, burned houses, and the whole City of Canterbury was the same yeare almost burnt. In the eighteenth yeare of his Raigne, the Church of Norwich with the houses thereto belonging was burnt, and the Monkes dispersed. At Andover, a Priest praying before the Altar, was slaine with Thunder. Likewise one Clerke and his Brother was burnt to death with Lightning. In the three and twentyeth yeare, a showre of Blood Rained in the Isle of Wight two houres together. In the foure and twentyeth yeare, the City of Yorke was burnt, and on Christmas day, in the Territory of Derlington, in the Bishopricke of Durham the Earth lifted up it selfe in the manner of an high Tower, and so remained unmoveable from morning till evening, and then fell with so hor∣rible a noyse that it frighted the Inhabitants thereabouts, and the earth swallowing it up, made there a deepe pit, which is seene at this day: for a Testimony where∣of Leyland saith, he saw the Pits there, commonly called Hell-kettles. Also in the same yeare, on the tenth day of Aprill, the Church of Saint Andrewes in Rochester was consumed with fire. In the eight and twentyeth yeare of his Raigne, Barne∣well, with the Priory, neare unto Cambridge was burnt. In the thirtyeth yeare, the Abbey of Glastenbury was burnt with the Church of Saint Iulian. In the yeare 1180. a great Earthquake threw downe many buildings, amongst which the Ca∣thedrall
Church of Lincolne was rent in peeces the five and twentieth of Aprill: And on the twentieth of October, the Cathedrall Church of Chichester, and all the whole City was burnt. This yeare also, neare unto Orford in Suffolke, cer∣taine Fishers tooke in their Nets a Fish, having the shape of a Man in all points, which Fish was kept by Bartholomew de Glanvile in the Castle of Orford sixe mo∣neths and more; he spake not a word; all manner of meates he did gladly eate, but most greedily raw Fish, when he had pressed out the juyce; oftentimes he was brought to Church, but never shewed any signe of adoration: at length, be∣ing not well looked to, he stole to the Sea, and never was seene after. In the yeare 1188. on the twentieth of September, the Towne of Beverley with the Church of Saint Iohn there was burnt. And in this Kings time the bones of King Arthur, and his Wife Guynevour, were found in the Vale of Avalon, under an hollow Oake, fifteene foote under ground; the haire of the said Guynevour being then whole and of fresh colour; but as soone as it was touched, it fell to powder, as Fabian relateth. Of his Wife and Children. HE married Eleanor Daughter and heire of William Duke of Guien, late Wife of Lewis the seventh, King of France, but then divorced, but for what cause divor∣ced is diversly related; some say King Lewis carryed her with him into the Holy Land, where she carryed her selfe not very holily, but led a licentious life, and which is the worst kind of licentiousnesse, in carnall familiarity with a Turke; which King Lewis though knowing, yet dissembled, till comming home, he then waived that cause, as which he could not bring without disgrace to himselfe, and made use of their nearenesse in blood, as being Cousins in the fourth degree, which was allowed by the Pope, as a cause sufficient to divorce them, though he had at that time two Daughters by her. Being thus divorced, Duke Henry mar∣ries her, with whom it was never knowne, but she led a modest and sober life, a sufficient proofe, that the former Report was but a slander. By this Queene Eleanor he had five Sonnes, William, Henry, Richard, Geoffry, and Iohn; and three Daughters, Maude, marryed to Henry Duke of Saxony; Eleanor, marryed to Alphonso the Eighth of that name, King of Castile; and Iane or Ioane, mar∣ryed to William King of Sicilie. Of his Sonnes, William dyed young. Henry borne the second yeare of his Raigne, was Crowned King with his Father, in the eighteenth yeare, and dyed the nine and twentyeth yeare, and was buryed at Roan; marryed to Margaret, Daughter of Lewis King of France, but left no issue. Ri∣chard, borne at Oxford, in the fourth yeare of his Fathers Raigne, and succeeded him in the kingdome. Geoffrey, borne the fifth yeare of his Fathers Raigne, mar∣ryed Constance, Daughter and Heire of Conan, Earle of Little Britaine, in the foure∣teenth yeare, and in the two and thirtieth yeare dyed; leaving by his Wife Con∣stance, two Daughters, and a Posthumus Sonne named Arthur. Iohn, his young∣est, called Iohn without Land, because he had no Land assigned him in his Fa∣thers time; borne the twelfth yeare of his Fathers Raigne, and succeeded his Brother Richard in the kingdome. And this may be reckoned a peculiar honour to this King, that of his five Sonnes, three of them lived to be Kings; and of his three Daughters, two of them to be Queenes. Concubines he had many, but two more famous then the rest; and one of these two, more famous then the o∣ther: and this was Rosamond, Daughter of Walter Lord Clifford; whom he kept at Woodstocke, in lodgings so cunningly contrived that no stranger could find the way in, yet Queene Eleanor did, being guided by a thread: so much is the eye of jealousie quicker in finding out, then the eye of care is in hiding. What the Queen did to Rosamond when she came in to her, is uncertaine, but this is certaine, that Rosamond lived but a short time after, and lyes buryed at the Nunnery of God∣stw neare to Oxford. By this Rosamond King Henry had two Sonnes, William called Long-Sword; who was Earle of Salisbury in right of his Wife Ela, Daughter
and Heire of William Earle of that Country, and had by her much issue, whose posterity continued a long time: And a second Sonne named Geoffrey, who was first Bishop of Lincolne, and afterward Arch-bishop of Yorke, and after five yeares banishment in his Brother King Iohns time, dyed in the yeare 1213. The other famous Concubine of this King Henry, was the Wife of Ralph Blewet a knight; by whom he had a Sonne named Morgan, who was Provost of Beverley, and being to be elected Bishop of Durham, went to Rome for a dispensation, because being a Bastard, he was else uncapable: But the Pope refuing to grant it, unlesse he would passe as the Sonne of Blewet, he absolutely answered, he would for no cause in the world deny his Father; and chose rather to lose the Dignity of the Place, then of his Blood, as being the Sonne, though but the base Sonne, of a King. Of his personage and conditions. HE was somewhat red of face, and broad breasted; short of body, and there∣withall fat, which made him use much Exercise, and little Meate. He was commonly called Henry Shortmantell, because he was the first that brought the use of short Cloakes out of Anjou into England. Concerning endowments of mind, he was of a Spirit in the highest degree Generous; which made him of∣ten say, that all the World sufficed not to a Couragious heart. He had the Re∣putation of a wise Prince all the Christian World over; which made him of∣ten say, that all the World sufficed not to a Couragious heart. He had the Re∣putation of a wise Prince all the Christian World over; which made Alphonsus King of Castile, and Garsyas King of Navarre, referre a difference that was be∣tweene them, to his Arbitrament: who so judiciousy determined the Cause, that he gave contentment to both Parties; a harder matter then to cut Cloath even by a thread. His Custome was to be alwayes in Action; for which cause, if he had no Reall Warres, he would have Faigned: and would transport Forces ei∣ther into Normandy or Britaine, and goe with them himselfe, whereby he was al∣wayes prepared of an Army: and made it a Schooling to his Souldiers, and to himselfe an Exercise. To his Children he was both indulgent and hard: for out of indulgence he caused his Son Henry to be Crowned King in his owne time; and out of hardnesse he caused his younger Sonnes to Rebell against him. He was rather Superstitious, then not Religious; which he shewed more by his car∣riage toward Becket being dead then while he lived. His Incontinency was not so much that he used other Women besides his Wife, but that he used the affianced Wife of his owne Son: And it was commonly thought, he had a meaning to be divorced from his Wife Queene Eleanor, and to take the said Adela to be his Wife. Yet generally to speake of him, he was an excellent Prince; and if in some particulars he were defective, it must be considered he was a Man. Of his death and buriall. HE was not well at ease before, but when the King of France sent him a List of those that had conspired against him, and that he found the first man in the Lyst to be his Son Iohn, he then fell suddenly into a fit of Fainting, which so en∣creased upon him, that within foure dayes after he ended his life: So strong a Corrosive is Griefe of mind, when it meetes with a Body weakned before with sicknesse. He dyed in Normandy, in the yeare 1189. when he had lived threescore and one yeares; Raigned neare five and thirty: and was buryed at Founteverard in France. the manner of whose buriall was thus: He was Cloathed in his Royall Robes, his Crowne upon his head, white Gloves upon his hands, Bootes of Gold upon his legges, Gilt Spurres at his heeles, a great rich Ring upon his finger, his Scepter in his hand, his Sword by his side, and his face uncovered and all bare. As he was carrying to be Buryed, his Sonne Richard in great haste ranne to see him, who no sooner was come neare the Body, but suddenly at his Nostrils he fell a bleeding afresh; which though it were in Prince Richard no good signe of Innocency, yet
his breaking presently into bitter teares upon the seeing it, was a good signe of Repentance. It may not be unseasonable to speake in this place of a thing which all Writers speake of, that in the Family of the Earles of Anjou, of whom this King Henry came, there was once a Princesse a great Enchantresse, who being on a time enforced to take the blessed Eucharist, she suddenly flew out at the Church window, and was never seene after: From this Woman these latter Earles of Anjou were descended, which perhaps made the Patriarch Heraclius say, of this King Henries Children, that from the Devill they came, and to the Devill they would. But Writers perhaps had beene more compleat, if they had left this Story out of their Writings. Men of note in his time. OF Clergy men, there was Theobald Arch-bishop of Canterbury, Hugh Bishop of Lincolne; Richard Bishop of Winchester; Geoffrey of Ely; Robert of Bathe; Aldred of Worcester; all Learned Men, and of great integrity of life. Of Mili∣tary Men, there was Robert Earle of Leycester; Reynold Earle of Cornwall; Hugh Bigot, Robert Ferrys, Richard Lacy, Roger Mowbray, Ralph Fulger, Ranulph Gra∣nula, William Vsei, nd Baynard Baylioll; Men of great atchievements in Warre, and of no lesse abilities in Peace.
THE LIFE and RAIGNE OF KING RICHARD THE FIRST. Of his comming to the Crowne, and of his Coronation. KING Richard, the first of that name, after his Fathers Fune∣rall, went to Roan, where he setled the state of that Province; and from thence came into England, where he was Crowned King at Westminster, by the hands of Baldwin Arch-bishop of Canterbury, the third day of September, in the yeare 1189. And herein this Prince is more beholding to Writers then any of his Predecessors: for in speaking of their Crowning, they content themselves with telling where, and by whom they were Crow∣ned: but of this Prince, they deliver the manner of his Crowning, in the full am∣plitude of all circumstances; which perhaps is not unfit to doe, for satisfaction of such as are never like to see a Coronation; and it was in this manner. First, the Arch-bishops of Canterbury, Roan, Tryer, and Dublin, with all the other Bishops, Ab∣bots, and Cleargy, apparelled in rich Copes, and having the Crosse, holy Water, and Censers carried before them; came to fetch him at the doore of his Privie-Chamber; and there receiving him, they led him to the Church of Westminster, till they came before the high Altar, with a solemne Procession. In the middle of the Bishops and Clergy, went foure Barons, bearing Candlesticks with Tapers; after whom came Geoffrey de Lucie, bearing the Cap of Maintenance, and Iohn Marshall next to him, bearing a massive paire of Spurres of Gold; then followed William Marshall Earle of Striguill, alias Pembroke, who bare the Royall Scepter, in the toppe whereof was set a Crosse of Gold; and William de Patricke Earle of Salisbury going next him, bare the Warder or Rodde, having on the toppe thereof a Dove. Then came three other Earles, David, brother to the King of Scots, the Earle of Huntington, Iohn the Kings brother, Earle of Mortaigne, and Robert Earle of Leycester, each of them bearing a Sword upright in his hand, with the scabberds righly adorned with Gold. The Earle of Mortaigne went in the midst betwixt the other two; after them followed sixe Earles and Barons, bearing a Checker Table, upon the which were set the Kings Scotchens of Armes and then followed William Mandevill Earle of Albemarle, bearing a Crowne of Gold a great heighth before the King, who followed having the Bishop of Durham on the right hand, and Reynold Bishop of Bathe on the left; over whom a Canopy was borne: and in this order he came into the Church at Westminster, where before the high Altar, in the presence
of the Clergy and the people, laying his hand upon the holy Evangelists, and the reliques of certaine Saints, he took a solemne Oath that he should observe peace, honour and reverence to Almighty God, to his Church, and to his Ministers, all the dayes of his life: also that he should exercise upright justice to the people com∣mitted to his charge, and that he should abrogate and disanull all evill Lawes and wrongfull customes, if any were to be found in the precinct of his Realme; and maintaine those that were good and laudable. This done, he put off all his gar∣ments from his middle upwards, but onely his shirt, which was open on the shoul∣drs, that he might be annoynted. Then the Arch-bishop of Canterbury annoynted him in three places; on the head, on the shoulders, and on the right arme; with Pray∣ers in such case accustomed. After this, he covered his head with a linnen cloath hallowed, and set his Cap thereon; and then after he had put on his Royall Gar∣ments, and his uppermost Robe, the Arch-bishop delivered him the Sword, with which he should beate downe the enemies of the Church: which done, two Earles put his Shooes upon his feete, and having his Mantle put on him, the Arch-bishop forbad him on the behalfe of Almighty God, not to presume to take upon him this Dignity, except he faithfully meant to performe those things which he had there sworne to performe; whereunto the King made answer, that by Gods grace he would prforme them. Then the King tooke the Crowne beside the Al∣tar, and delivered it to the Arch-bishop, which he set upon the Kings head, delive∣ring to him the Scepter to hold in his right hand, and the Rod Royall in his left hand: and thus being Crowned, he was brought backe by the Bishops and Barons, with the Crosse and Candlesticks, and three Swords, passing forth before him unto his Seate. When the Bishop that sang the Masse, came to the Offertory, the two Bishops that brought him to the Church, led him to the Altar, and brought him backe againe. The Masse ended, he was brought with solemne Procession into his Chamber: and this was the manner of this Kings Coronation. But at this solem∣nity there fell out a very dysastrous accident: For this Prince not favouring the Iewes, as his Father had done; had given a strict charge, that no Iew should be admitted to be a spectator of the solemnity: yet certaine Iewes, as though it had beene the Crowning of their King Herod, would needs be pressing in; and being put backe by Officers set of purpose, it grew to a brabble, and from words to blowes, so as many Iees were hurt, and some slaine: and thereupon a rumour was suddenly spread abroad, that the King had commanded to have all the Iewes de∣stroyed. Whereupon it is incredible what rifling there was of Iewes houses, and what cutting of their throats: and though the King signified by publike Declaration, that he was highly displeased with that which was done, yet there was no staying the fury of the multitude till the next day; so often it fals out, that great solemnities are waited on with great dysasters; or rather indeed, as being connaturall, they can hardly be asunder. Of his first Acts after he was Crowned. HE beganne with his Mother Queene Eleanor, whom upon her Husbands dis∣pleasure, having been kept in Prison sixteen yeares; he not onely set at liberty, but set in as great authority, as if she had beene left the Regent of the kingdom. The next he gratifies, was his brother Iohn; to whom he made appeare, how much the bounty of a Brother was better then the handnesse of a Father. For he confer∣red upon him, in England, the Earledomes of Cornwall, Dorset, Somerset, Notting∣ham, Darby, and Leycester; and by the marriage of Isabel, daughter and heire to the Earle of Glocester, he had that Earledome also; as likewise the Castles of Marle∣borough, and Lutgarsall, the Honours of Wallingford, Tichill, and Eye, to the value of 4000. Markes a yeare: an estate so great, as were able to put a very moderate mind into the humour of aspiring, of which Princes should have care. Concerning his affianced Lady Adela, it may be thought strange, that having desired her so infi∣nitely when he could not have her, now that he might have her, he cared not for
her: but the cause was knowne, and in every mans mouth; that she was now but his Fathers leavings: yet he would not send her home but very rich in Jewels, to make amends, if it might be, for the losse of her Virginity: though this was some∣thing hard on his part, when the Father had taken all the pleasure, that the sonne should afterward pay all the charges. But by this at least he made a quiet way for his marriage now concluded; and shortly after to be consummated in Sicilie with Berengaria the daughter of Garsyas King of Navarre. And now his minde is whol∣ly set upon his long intended voyage to the Holy Land, for which he thinkes not the treasure left by his Father, to be sufficient, which yet amounted to nine hun∣dred thousand pounds: but forecasting with himselfe the great charge it must needs be, to carry an Army so long a journey, he seekes to enlarge his provision of money by all the means he can devise. Not long before, Hugh Pudsey had been advanced to the Bishopricke of Durham; and now for a great summe of money he sold him the Earledome: and then said merrily amongst his Lords, Doe yee not thinke me a cunning man, that of an old Bishop can make a young Earle? From the Londoners also he drained great summes of money, and made them recompence in Franchi∣ses and Liberties, which they had not before. He made also greatsales: to the the King of Scots, he sold the Castles of Berwick and Roxborough, for ten thou∣sand pounds: to Godfryde Lucie, Bishop of Winchester, the Manors of Weregrave and Ments: to the Abbot of Saint Edmundsbery, the Manor of Mildhall, for one thousand Markes of silver: to the Bishop of Durham, the Manor of Sadborough; and when it was marvelled that he would part with such things, he answered, that in this case he would sell his City of London, if he could finde a Chapman. But the worst way of all was, that pretending to have lost his Signet, he made a new; and made Proclamation, that whosoever would safely enjoy what under the for∣mer Signet was granted, should come to have it confirmed by the new; whereby he raised great summes of money to himselfe, but greater of discontentment in his subjects. By these, and such like meanes he quickly furnished himselfe with money: and now it remained onely to consider, to whose care he should commit the government of the Kingdome in his absence; and after deliberation, he made choyce for the North parts, of Hugh Bishop of Durham; joyning in Commissi∣on with him, Hugh Baldulph, and William Brunell: and for the South parts, he ap∣points William Longshampe Bishop of Ely, and Chancellour of England, and for his greater strength, causeth the Pope to make a Legat of all England and Scotland: and for Normandy, and Aquitaine, Robert Earle of Leycester; all men eminent for prudence and uprightnesse, and which is most of all, for loyalty: and indeed to make a man fit for such imployment, all these vertues must concurre. As for his brother Iohn, he knew very well his aspiring minde, and therefore would have tied him to live in Normandy, and not to come into England till his returne; but that their Mother Queene Eleanor interceded, and passed her word for him: and that nothing might be left unprovided for, he appointed his Nephew Arthur, the sonne of his brother Geoffrey Duke of Britaine to be his Successor, if himselfe should faile. And now, Undique convenere, vocat jam carbasus auras: every man is ready to take Ship∣ping, and no stay now but for a Wind; onely some say that King Richard before his departing, calling his Lords and Knights unto him, and swearing them to be true; gave to overy of them a blew riband to be knowne by; from whence the first occa∣sion of the Order of the Garter is thought to beginne. Of his journey into the Holy Land. KING Richard having prepared an Army of thirty thousand foote, and five thousand horse, and having appointed to meete Philip King of France in Si∣cilie, at the latter end of Iune, in the yeare 1190. sets forward himselfe by Land to Marseillis, and there stayes till his Ships should come about; but his Navy be∣ing driven by tempest to other parts, and the King weary of long staying, after sixe weekes, he hireth shipping for himselfe and his company, and passeth for∣ward
to Messana in Sicilie, where arrived also the King of France; and not long after, his owne Navy. In this Iland the King William now lately dead, had married Iane, King Richards sister; from whom Tancred the present King with-held her Dower: and therefore though he shewed King Richard faire coun∣tenance, yet he dealt secretly with the Messanians to use all meanes to get him gone; whereupon the Messanians taking a small occasion, set suddenly upon the English, and thrust them out of their Towne: with which King Richard justly offended, who had his Campe without the Towne, prepares himselfe to revenge the affront; when Tancred sending to him, to signifie that the affront was offered without his know∣ledge, and much against his liking, so pacified him, that for the present he re∣mained satisfied; but understanding afterward, that the Messanians did but waite their opportunity till the Spring, when King Richard should be going: he resenting their intention, staies ot their leisure, but assaulting the Towne with fire and sword, in one dayes labour takes it, and had made great slaughter in it, if King Richard had not beene moved to compassion with the Messanians teares, but chiefely with King Tancreds offers; both to pay his sister Iane her Dower, and to marry his daugh∣ter to King Richards Nephew Arthur, Duke of Britaine, and to give a good part of the Portion in hand. But King Philip was not well pleased with these conditions, yet he breakes not out into open dissention, till more fuell was afterward cast upon the fire of his anger. In the Spring King Philip sayles with his Army to Ptolemais o∣therwise called Acon) which the Christians had long besieged, and with them he joynes: while King Richard taking his sister Iane, and Berengaria the young daugh∣ter of the King of Navarre with him in 190. Ships, and 50. Galleys, puts to Sea for the Holy Land, but is by tempest cast upon the Coast of Cyprus; where the I∣landers seeking to hinder his landing, he sets upon them with his forces; and in∣vading the Iland, easily subdues, and brings it under his subjection; and the King of the Coutrey being taken prisoner, and intreating King Richard not to put him in bonds of Iron, King Richard gives him his word, and keeps it, but puts him in bonds of Silver. In this Iland he solemnizeth his marriage with Berengaria, and then leaving Richard de Canvile, and Robert de Turnham, his Lieutenants in Cyprus; he passeth on to Ptolemais, which City was defended by Saladine, and had beene besieged now two yeares: when the enemy seeing and fearing the encrease of the Christian forces, propounds conditions, upon which accepted, they deliver it up in August, the yeare 1192. At the taking of this Towne there fell out an accident, seeming an honour to King Richard for the present, but proving a disgrace, at least a great trouble and charge to him afterward. For Leopold Duke of Austria had first set up his Co∣lours upon the wall, which King Richard caused to be throwne downe, and his owne to be set up; but this was no place to stand a quarrelling, it came not to the reckoning till some time after. When Ptolemais was taken, Saladine fearing the Christians further proceeding, dismantles all the best Townes that were neare it: as Porphyria, Caesarea, Ascalon, Gaza; but of Ioppa King Richard takes a care, and placeth in it a Colony of Christians. For Ioppa is a City of Palestine, that was built before the Floud; and hath belonging to it a Haven of great convenience. And now the King of France, though valiant enough himselfe, yet thinking his owne great acts to be obscured by greater of King Richards; he beganne, besides his old hating him, now to envie him. For indeed emulation when it is in Vertue, makes the stronger knot of love and affection: but when it is in Glory, it makes a separation, and turnes into the passion of envie and malice; and so did it with King Philip, who pretending the aire of the Countrey did not agree with his body; but was indeed because the aire of King Richards Glory did not agree with his minde; obtained King Richards consent to returne home, swearing first solemnly, not to molest his Territories in his absence. But this fell out for the present enterprise most unsasonably: For the departure of the King of France, though it diminished not much the strength; (for he left Od, Duke of Burgundy in his place) yet it dimini∣shed much the shew of assistance: and indeed Saladine, who was at this time in
termes of surrendring Ierusalem; when he saw the King of Franc departed; as knowing there must needs be a conclusion, where there was a beginning, doubted not but the rest would follow soone after, and thereupon stied his hands; and grew more confident then he was before. At this time Guy of Luignan was possest of the City of Tyre, and with it, of the right of the Kingdome of Ierusalem: with him King Richard makes an exchange, that Gy should have the Iland of Cyprus which King Richard had wonne, and King Richard should have the kingdome of Ierusalem, to which Guy had a right: and upon this Title the Kings of England, were stiled Kings of Ierusalem a long time after: as likewise the posterity of the said Guy hath by this exchange held the kingdome of Cyprus to this day. Now was King Richard more hot upon taking Ierusalem then ever before, and had certnely taken it, but that by ill counsell diverted, because the Winter drew on: and indeed by the drawing backe of Odo Duke of Burgundie, who envied that King Richard should have the honour of taking it, he removed for that season to Askalon; after which time, the Enemy growing stronger, and the Christians weaker; all opportu∣nity of taking it was utterly lost, and they could never come to the like againe. And shortly after King Richard was advertised of the King of France his invading Normandy, contrary to his oath at his departure; which forced King Richard, much to his griefe, to conclude a peace with Saladine, and that upon conditions not very honourable for the Christians; and himselfe presently to retune home: and so sending his wife Berengaria, and his sister Iane, with a great part of his Army into Sicilie, and from thence into England: he passeth himselfe with some few in his company, by the way of Thrace, and was by tempest brought into Dalmaiae; from whence being to passe through Germany, and particularly through Duke Leopolds Countrey of Austria: he remembring the old grudge, changed his apparell, and travelling sometimes afoote, and sometimes on horsebacke, he used all meanes pos∣sible to keepe himselfe from being knowne: but destiny is not to be avoyded, for as soone as he came to Vienna, partly by his tongue, and partly by his expenses, it was presently found he was an Englishman, and withall some great man; and by and by a rumour was spread, that it was Richard King of England: who finding himselfe to be discovered, and no meanes possible to escape, he puts off his disguise, putting on his Princely apparell, and avowes himselfe: which Duke Leopold under∣standing, sent presently to have him apprehended; but King Richard refusing to yeeld himselfe to any, but to the Duke himselfe; the Duke himselfe came and led hi to his owne Palace honourably enough, but yet strongly guarded: whereof as soone as Henry the Emperour heard, he sent with great instance to Duke Leopold to send King Richard over to him, under pretence of safer custody, but with a pur∣pose indeed to be a sharer in his Ransome. And the Duke though well knowing his meaning, yet knowing withall that it was not safe for him to deny the Empe∣rour, he sent him over to him; who soone after put him into a prison he had, cal∣led Trivallis, into which no man was ever knowne to be put that escaped with life, though done perhaps to him, but in terrorem, to draw the better Ransome from him. That with which King Richard was charged, beside the wrong done to Leo∣pold, in throwing downe his Colours at Ptolemais, was the death of Conrade Duke of Tyre, whom they pretended King Richard had murthered; wherein though King Richard made his innocency appeare by the testimony of Limbeldus, who confes∣sed himselfe to have beene the author of the Marquesses death; yet the pretence served to detaine him in prison; and in prison indeed they kept him, till his Ran∣some was agreed upon and paid: which being a hundred thousand pounds, foure∣score thousand was paid in hand: whereof two parts to the Emperour, a third part to Duke Leopold: and for the rest, hostages given to the number of fifty; of whom the Bishop of Roan was one: though the hostages afterward were delivered with∣out paying the rest: for Henry the Emperour dying shortly after, his Successour had the conscience not to take it, as knowing it had beene unjustly exacted: and indeed the accidents that befell both the Emperour and the Duke Leopld, were evident demonstrations of the injustice they had done; for the Emperour shortly after
died; and the Duke Leopold, in a Tilting for solemnity of his Birth-day, fell off his horse, and so broke his leg, that to save his life, he was faine to have his leg cut off. And now after fifteen months imprisonment, King Richard is released, and returnes into England foure yeares elder then he went out; and thus ended his journey to the Holy Land. Yet one memorable accident happening to him in the Holy Land, may not be omitted; that going one day a Hawking about Ioppa, finding himselfe weary, he laid him downe upon the ground to sleepe; when suddenly certaine Turkes came upon him to take him; but he awakened with their noyse, rieth up, gets a horsebacke, and drawing out his sword, assaults the Turkes, who faign∣ing to flie, drew the King into an Ambush where many Turkes lay; who had cer∣tainly taken him if they had knowne his person: but one of the Kings ser∣van, called William de Patrellis, crying out in the Saracene tongue, that he was the King; they presently lay hold upon him, and let the King escape. Troubles in his Dominions in his absence. KING Richard at his going out of England, had so well setled the Govern∣ment of the Kingdome, that might well have kept it in good order during all the time of his absence; but disorders are weeds which no foresight can hinder from growing, having so many hands to water them: where occasions of distast are no sooner offered, then taken; and otentimes taken before they be offered, as was here to be seene. For King Richard had left in chiefe place of authority, Wil∣liam Longshampe, Bishop of Ely; a man who so carried himselfe, that although the things he did, were justifiable; yet the pride with which he did them was unsuffe∣rble: seldome riding abroad without five hundred, some say a thousand in his traine; not for safety, but for state: and though there were other left in authority besides himselfe, yet his power was so predominant, that he made of them but Ci∣phers, and ruled all as he list himselfe. This insolency of governing was soone distasted by many, and specially by Iohn the Kings brother, who counting the great∣nesse of his Birth an equall match at least with any substitute greatnes, affronted the Bishop in the managing of affaires, in such sort, that while some adhered to the one, and some to the other; the Kingdome in the meane time was in danger to be rent asunder, till at last the Bishop finding himselfe too weake, or at least fearing that he was so; but rather indeed deposed from his authority by the Kings Letters, and the Arch-bishop of Roan put in his place, thought it best for him to flie the Reale: wherupon for his greater safety, disguising himselfe in womans apparell, and carry∣ing a Webbe of Cloath under his arme, hee sought in this manner to take Ship∣ping and passe the Sea. But being discovered and knowne, the women in revenge of the abuse done to their cloathes, in making them his instruments of fraude; fell upon him, and so beat him, that it might have beaten humility into him for ever af∣ter. This disgrace made him glad to get him into Normandy, his native Countrey, where to little purpose he wooed King Richard and Queene Eleanor for reparation. But this was but a sport in comparison of the mischiefes done in Normandy by Philip King of France: for first he invades Normandy, where he takes many Towns, and amongst others Gysorts, and drawes the Kings brother Iohn to combine with him, promising to assist him in winning the Kingdome of England, and to have his sister Adela, whom King Richard had repudiated to be his wife; with which pro∣mise Duke Iohn had beene ensnared, if his Mother Queene Eleanor had not dis∣swaded him. But in England Duke Iohn tooke upon him as King, perswading the people that his brother King Richard was not living; and indeed it was easie to remove, the knowing him to be a prisoner, to the affirming him to be dead; but such was the faithfulnesse of the Arch-bishop of Roan, and other the Princes of the Realme to King Richard, that they opposed Duke Iohn, and frustrated all his practi∣ses: and the Bishop of Ely had told him plainely, that though King Richard were dead, yet the succession in the kingdome belonged not to him, but to Arthur Duke of Britaine, sonne of Geoffrey his elder brother. And in these termes King Richard found his State when he returned from the Holy Land.
His Acts and Troubles after his returning from the Holy Land. AT his comming home from the Holy Land, the first thing he did; was to give his Lords and people thankes for their faithfulnesse to him in his absence, and then for their readinesse in supplying him for his Ransome. But as for his brother Iohn in whom ungratefulnesse seemed to strive with ambition, which should be the greater in him; he depriveth him of all those great possessions he had given him: some adoe he had to make sound certaine peeces which he had corrupted, as the Castles of Marleborough, Lancaster, and a Fortresse at Saint Michaels Mount in Cornwall; but chiefely the Castles of Nottingham and Tichill, which stood so firm∣ly for Duke Iohn, that they were not reduced to obedience without some bloud, and much expense. But hs greatest trouble was with Philip King of France, in whom was so ingraffed a spleene against King Richard, that he seemed to be never well but when he was working him some ill. Now therefore King Richard to make it appeare he had not left the Holy War for nothing (having first obtained in Parlia∣ment a Subsidy towards his charges, & caused himselfe to be new Crowned at Win∣chester, lest the people through his long absence might have forgotten they had a King) he departs with a hundred Ships into Normandy; but it was withall, upon this occasion: sitting one day at dinner, in his litle Hal (as it was called) news was brought him, that King Philip had besieged Vernoull, with which he was somoved, that he swore a great oath, he would not turne his face till he were revenged: whereupon he caused the wall right before him to be presently beaten downe, that so he might passe forward without turning his face; and thus in haste he goes to Vernoull, whither he was no sooner come, but the King of France made as great haste to be gone, not without some losse, and more disgrace. Here his brother Iohn submits himselfe to him, and with great shew of penitence intreats his pardon, which he readily gran∣ted; saying onely, I wish you may as well remember your fault, as I shall forget it. The King of France having left Vernoull, enters Turonia, and neare to Vindoci∣num pitcheth his Tents; thither King Richard followes him, and with his comming so affrighted him, that leaving bagge and baggage, Munition, Tents, and Treasure to a marvellous valew, he gets him gone, and glad hee was so rid of King Richard. After this a Truce was agreed upon for a yeare, which each of them longed till it were expired, as having no pleasure but in troubling one another. In this time there was a trouble at home, though not to the King, yet to the kingdome: for Ro∣bin Hood accompanied with one little Iohn, and a hundred stout fellowes more, molested all passengers upon the High-way; of whom it is said, that he was of Noble bloud, at least made Noble, no lesse then an Earle, for some deserving ser∣vices: but having wasted his estate in riotous courses, very penury forced him to take this course; in which yet it may be said he was honestly dishonest, for he sel∣dome hurt any man, never any woman, spared the poore, and onely made prey of the rich: till the King setting forth a Proclamation to have him apprehended, it hapned he fell sicke at a certaine Nunnery in Yorkshire, called Birckleys; and desi∣ring there to be let bloud, was betraid, and made bleed to death. Such another trouble, though not to the King, yet to the kingdome, fell out by reason of the Jewes: and first at the Towne of Linne in Norfolke, upon this occasion: A Jew being turned Christian, was persecuted by those of his Nation, and assaulted in the streete; who thereupon flying to a Church hard by, was thither also followed, and the Church assaulted; which the people of the Towne seeing, in succour of the new Christian they fell upon the Jewes, of whom they slew a great number, and after pillaged their houses. By this example the like assaults were made upon the Jews at Stamford; and after that at Lincolne; and lastly at Yorke, where infi∣nite numbers of Jewes were massacred; and some of them blocked up in the Ca∣stle, cut the throats of their wives and children, and cast them over the wals upon the Christians heads, and then burnt both the Castle and themselves: neither could this sedition be staied, till the King sent his Chancellour, the Bishop of Ely, with
force of Armes, to punish the offenders. His last trouble was a punishment of co∣vetousnesse, for one Guydomer having found a great treasure in the Kings Domini∣ons, and or feare of King Richard, flying to a Towne of the King of France for his safegard; was pursued by the King, but the Towne denying him entrance, and he thereupon going about the wals to finde the fittest place for assaulting it, one Bertram de Gurdon, or as others call him, Peter Basile, shot at him with a Crosse∣bow, and hit him on the arme, of which wound he died within fore dayes after, and so ended all his troubles. Of his Taxations, and wayes for raising of money. OF Taxations properly so called, there were never fewer in any Kings Raigne: but of wayes to draw money from the subject, never more. It is true, the first money raised for his journey, was all out of his owne estate, by selling or pawning of Lands; but when at his comming backe, he resumed the Lands into his hands agane, without paying backe the money he had received; this if it may not have the name, yet certainely it had the venome of a bitter Taxation. Likewise the feigning to have lost his Seale, & then enjoyning them to have their Grants confir∣med by a new; though it went not in the number, yet it had the weight of a heavy Taxation where it lighted. Afterward, the money raised for his Ransome, was not so properly a Taxation, as a Contribution: or if a Taxation for him, yet not by him; which was done in his absence, by the subjects themselves: and indeed no Taxations are commonly so pinching, as those which are imposed upon the subject by the subject, and such was this; for to raise money for his Ransome, ther was imposed upon every Knights Fee, 20. s. of all Lay-mens Revenues, the fourth part; and the fourth part of all the Revenues of the Clergy, with a tenth of their goods. Also the Chalices and Treasure of all Churches were taken to make up the sum. Afterward, this onely was a plaine Taxation, and granted in Parliament; that of every Plough-land through England, he should have two shillings, and of the Monkes Citeaux, all their Wooll of that yeare: And one more greater then this; and was this yeare imposed towards his warres in Normandy; that every Hide of Land, as much as to say, every hundred Acres of Land, should pay five shillings; which computed without deductions, will rise to a summe that will seeme in∣credible. Lawes and Ordinances in his time. HIs Ordinances were chiefely for the Meridian of London: for where before his time the City was governed by Portgraves, this King granted them to be go∣verned by two Sheriffes and a Major, as now it is; and to give the first of these Magistrates the honour to be remembred, the names of the Sheriffes were Henry Cornhill, and Richard Reyner; and the name of the first Lord Major, was Henry Fits-Allwyn, who continued Major during his life, which was foure and twenty yeares. And now beganne the City first to receive the forme and state of a Common∣wealth, and to be divided into Fellowships and Corporations, as at this day they are: and this Franchise was granted in the yeare 1189. the first year of King Richard the first. Affaires of the Church in his time. THe Church within his owne Dominions was quiet all his time, no contestati∣on with the Pope, no alterations amongst the Bishops, no difference betweene the Clergy and the Laity, or the Clergy amongst themselves; they all seemed to lie asleepe, till they were afterwards awakened, in the time of the succeeding King. But abroad, in his time, there was an addition of three Orders of Devotion; the Order of the Augustine Friers, called Friers Mendicants, begunne by William of
Paris; then the Order of Friers Minors begunne by Saint Francis; and lastly the Orders of Friers Preachers begunne by Saint Dominick, though not confirmed till the first yeare of Pope Honorius. Workes of Piety in his time. VVOrkes of Piety are for the most part workes of plenty; penury may in∣wardly have good wishes, but outwardly it can expresse but little: and in∣deed all parts of the kingdome, all sorts of people were drawne so dry; by the two great occasions of his Journey and his Ransome, and afterward by other Taxati∣ons, that the richest men had enough to doe to maintaine themselves, without be∣ing at the charge to make provision for others. All workes of Piety were now for the service of the Holy Land, and therefore it may well passe, if not for a worke of Devotion, at least worthy to be remembred; that William Bishop of Ely buil∣ded the outer wall of the Tower of London, and caused a deepe ditch to be made about it, with an intention the River of Thames should have surrounded it, though it could not be effected. Onely Hubert Walter, who at one time was Arch-bishop of Canterbury, the Popes Legat, Lord Chancellour, Lord Chiefe Justice, and the immediate Governour under the King, both in Wales and England, Founded a Mo∣nastery at West Derham in Norfolke, where he was borne: begunne another at Wol∣verhampton, and finished a Collegiate Church at Lambeth. Of his Wif and Children. IN his Infancy he was contracted to a daughter of Raymond Earle of Barcelone, after that affianced to Adela, or Alice, daughter of Lewis King of France, yet married to neither of them; but he married Berengaria daughter of Garsias King of Navarre, whom his Mother Queene Eleanor brought unto him into Sicilie, from whence passing into Cyprus, their marriage was there solemnised: afterward, go∣ing forward to the Holy Land, he carried her and his sister Iane Queene of Sicilie along with him, where they remained till his returne home; and then sent them to passe to Sicilie, and from thence into England: but that ever she came into Eng∣land, no mention is made, neither what became of her after she parted from King Richard at the Holy Land. But children certainely he had none, either by his wife, or by any Concubine, unlesse we reckon as a Priest in Normandy did; who told King Richard, he had three daughters: and the King marvelling who they should be, seeing he knew of none he had; yes (saith the Priest) you have three daughters, Pride, Covetousnesse, and Lechery; which the King taking merrily, called to the company about him, and said; I am told by a Priest here, that I have three daughters, and I desire you to be witnesses how I would have them be∣stowed: my daughter Pride, upon the Templars and Hospitallers: my daughter Covetousnesse, upon the Monks of the Cistercian Order: and my daughter Lechery, upon the Clergy. Casualties happening in his time. IN his time the Towne of Mawling in Kent, with the Nunnery, was consumed with fire, and in his time the bones of Arthur the famous King of Britaine were found at Glastenbury in an old Sepulchre, about which stood two Pillars, in which letters were written but could not be read; Upon the Sepulchre was a crosse of Lead, whereon was written, Here lyth the Noble King of Britaine Arthur. Also in this Kings dayes for three or foure yeares together, there raigned so great a dearth, that a Quarter of Wheate was sold for 18. shillings 8. pence, and then followed so great a mortality of men, that scarce the living sufficed to bury the dead.
Of his Personage and Conditions. HE was tall of stature, and well proportioned, faire and comely of face, of haire bright abourne, of long armes, and nimble in all his joynts, his thighes and legs of due proportion, and answerable to the other parts of his body. To speake of his morall parts, his Vices for the most part, were but onely upon suspition: Incontinency in him much spoken of, nothing proved; but his Vertues were appa∣rent, for in all his actions he shewed himselfe Valiant, (from whence he had the appellation or surname of Caer de Lyon) wise, liberall, mercifull, just, and which is most of all, Religious; a Prince borne for the good of Christendome; if a Barre in his Nativity had not hindred it. The remorse for his undutifulneesse towards his Father, was living in him till he dyed: for at his death he remembred it with bewailing, and desired to be Buryed as neare him as might be, perhaps as think∣ing they should meete the sooner, that he might aske him forgivenesse in another world. Of his Death and Buriall. HE dyed of a wound with an Arrow in his Arme, which neglected at first, and suffered to wrankle, or as others say, ill handled by an unskilfull Chirurgeon, in foure dayes brought him to his End. But his Charity deserves to have it remem∣bred, that finding himselfe past hope of Recovery, he caused the Party that had wounded him to be brought before him, who being asked what moved him to doe this Fact? answered, that King Richard had killed his Father and two of his Bro∣thers with his owne hand, and therefor would doe it, if it were to doe againe. Up∣on this Insolent answer, every one looked the King should have censured him to some terrible punishment, when contrary to all their expectations in a high degree of Charity, he not onely freely forgave him, but gave a speciall charge he should be set at liberty, and that no man should dare to doe him the least hurt: comman∣ding besides to give him a hundred shillings for his paines. An Act that well shew∣ed he had beene at the Holy Land, or rather indeed that he was going to it. He dyed the sixth day of Aprill in the yeare 1199. when he had lived 44. yeares, Raign∣ed nine, and about nine moneths, and had his Body Buryed at Founteverard, by his Father; his heart at Roan, in remembrance of the hearty love that City had al∣wayes borne him; and his bowels at Chalons, for a disgrace of their unfaithfulnesse; others say at Carlile in England. Of Men of Note in his time. IN his time were famous Baldwyn Archbishop of Cnterbury, who followed King Richard into the Holy Land, and dyed there; Hubert that succeeded him; Hugh Bi∣shop of Lincolne; William Bishop of Ely, a man equally famous and infamous; al∣so Baldwyn Archbishop of Canterbury, a learned Writer in Divinity; Daniel Mor∣ley a great Mathematician, Iohn de Herham, and Richard de Herham, two notable Hi∣storians; Guilielmus Stephonides a Monke of Canterbury, who wrote much in the praise of Arch-bishop Becket; also one Richard Divisiensis, Nicholas Walkington, and Robert de Bello Foco, an excellent Philosopher. Of Martiall men, Robert Earle of Leycester; Ranulph de Fulgers; two of the Bdolphs, Hugh and Henry; three Willi∣ams, Marshall, Brunll and Mandevill, with two Roberts, Rosse, and Svevile.
THE RAIGNE OF KING IOHN. KING Richard being dead, the right of Succession remained in Arthur, Sonne of Geoffrey Plantagent elder Brother to Earle Iohn, but Iohn as thinking the title of Arthur but a Criticisme in State, and not for every ones capacity, at least in common sense not so plaine as his owne, who was the sonne of a King, and the Brother to a King, ascends into the Throne as confi∣dently as if he had no competitor: Onely Hubert Arch-bishop of Canterbury went before, and made an Oration in his behalfe, wherein seeking to doe him a courtesie, he did him indeed a wrong; for waiving his Right of Succession, he insisted wholly upon their Right of Election; where∣of would follow, that as they brought him in, so they might cast him out; of which errour when he was told, he said, he did it of purpose to make King Iohn the more carefull of his Government, by making him sensible upon what an unsure ground his Regality stood: King Iohn resented it, but seeing it to serve his turne for the present, he tooke it not ill, as knowing that his turne once served, he could afterward be his owne carver of what title he pleased; and so upon Ascension day in the yeare 1199. he was Crowned King at Westminster, with more solemnity then joy; many presaging by their countenances, and more in their mindes, that all would not long be well. It cannot be denyed, but that in morall circumstan∣ces Earle Iohn had the advantage of his Nephew Arthur; for he was a Man of yeares fit to Governe, Arthur but a Childe, not above thirteene yeares old; he a Native, at least alwayes bred up in the Kingdome, Arthur a Forrainer, and had never beene here; He well knowne both to the Nobility and the People, Arthur a stranger to both, as one they had never eene; and besides to these morall ad∣vantages, he had now added one from the Politickes, that he had gotten Posses∣sion; (of more force in the practicall part then all the former) and withall a grea∣ter then all these, if it be true which some write, that his Brother King Richard had assigned him his Successour after his decease. But yet knowing the Title at last would come to be tryed in a Court, where the Sword must be Judge; he imploy∣eth all his endevours to get this Judge to be his friend, and by all meanes possible to strengthen himselfe with Armes; and thereupon going to Chinon and Roan, he seiseth upon the Treasure which his Brother had left in those parts, and with it, gets Friends and Souldiers, the Armour of Armes. And indeed all he could have done himselfe would have done him no good, if he had not had the helpe of able Assistants, who yet assisted him no lesse for their owne ends then for his; and these were chiefly his Mother Queene Eleanor, who knew if her Grand-sonne Arthur should be King, that then his Mother Constantia would rule all; at least during his Minority, and thereby her selfe put from the Stage of all Authority; and the Arch-bishop
Hubert, who also knew that if Arthur should come to Raigne, that then the Anjouyn and French should have all the best Offices, and the English wholly be neglected, as it was in the time of King William the Conquerour. And yet a greater Friend then both these, for comming to Roan, he used meanes that Walter the Arch-bishop in the Cathedrall Church with great pompe girt him with the Ducall sword of Normandy, and Crowned him with a Coronet of Golden Roses, he taking his Oath for Faithfull Administration in that Dukedome, and they their Oath for being his Loyall Subjects. Of his troubles in contestation with his Nephew Arthur. THough King Iohn had entred upon Normandy, and made that Province sure unto him, yet the Province of Anjou stood firme for Arthur, in observance of their love to his Father their former Prince: which also King Iohn soone after in∣vading, reduceth by Force of Armes to his Obedience. And now Constantia the Mother of Prince Arthur, finding King Iohn too powerfull an adversary, and no likelihood for her party, to be able long to stand out against him without further assistance, conceives it her best way to have recourse to the King of France, and thereupon commits her Sonne Arthur to his Tuition: who seemed to receive him with the tendernesse of a Father, and promiseth to assist him with his uttermost Forces, in the recovery of his Right both in France and England. Here we may observe upon what hinge the affection of the Kings of France was used to turne. For in King Henry the seconds time, King Lewis of France was so great a Friend to his Sonne Richard, that by all meanes he would helpe him to get the kingdome from his Father; Afterward when Richard was King, then Philip King of France, was so great a Friend to Iohn, that by all meanes he would helpe him to get the king∣dome from his Brother; and now that Iohn is come to be King, he is presently growne so great a Friend of Arthur, that by all meanes he will helpe him to get the kingdome from his Unkle; and no doubt, if Arthur should ever have come to be King, he would have beene as ready to helpe any other to get the kingdome from him: by which it appeares, that it was not the Persons of the Men they either hated or loved, but that they were alwaies jealous of their growing too great; and indeed this ballancing of States keepes Princes affections alwayes in suspense, and never suffers the Glasse of their Love or Hate, to make a true Reflection. A∣bout this time William King of Scots came to London to visit King Iohn, and there did homage to him for his kingdome of Scotland, though some say, but onely for the Counties of Northumberland and Cumberland, but being required ayde a∣gainst the French, he excused himselfe, saying, he could not doe it without consent of his kingdome, and so returned home. And now Philip King of France having undertaken the protection of the young Prince Arthur, with a mighty Army enters Normandy, takes many of the best Townes, and pursuing his Victories, enters the Province of Anjou also, and re∣covers it from King Iohn, which he the yeare before had gotten from Prince Ar∣thur. Upon this King Iohn makes a Journey into Normandy, accusing King Phi∣lip for breaking the Truce, which formerly he had made with King Richard for five yeares; but when he should come to make his Accusation good by Armes, he falleth to Treaties, and obtaineth a new Truce for fifty dayes: with which new Truce, Baldwyn Earle of Flanders, who had professed himselfe of that side, was not well pleased; and thereupon commeth to King Iohn to Roan, and entring a new League with him, they there consult how to proceed, when the fifty dayes should be expired. This consultation the King of France understood; and there∣upon both sides prepare for warre, but at the end of the Truce, both sides seemed to relent, and divers meetings were had for Treaties of Peace, and in conclusion, King Iohn more desirous of Peace then was for his Honour, agreed to these Conditions; that his Nice Blanch, Daughter of Alphonsus King of Castile by his Sister Eleanor, should marry with Lewis King Philips Sonne, who should have with
her in Dower, besides thirty thousand Markes in money, all those Cities, except onely Angiers, which the French before that time had taken, which were many and very great: and his Peace thus made, he returnes into England with great joy, but was not with like joy received of the English Lords, who counted themselves dishonoured, in the dishonourable Conditions he had made; and Baldwyn Earle of Flanders also, when he saw the poore spiits of King Iohn, to descend to such base Conditions; left his Party, and entring League with the King of France, dispo∣sed himselfe for the Holy Warre. But King Iohn having now gotten a Vacation, and a time of ease, which agreed much better with his nature then Warre, sets his minde wholly upon pleasures; and for maintaining his pleasures, upon seeking after profit, which he pursues by all manner of injustice, under the name of Prerogative; and with such violence, that when his Brother Geoffrey Arch-bishop of Yorke, in the dutifulnesse of a Coun∣sellour, advised him not to take such unlawfull courses, he most unworthily tooke from him all he had, and it was a yeares worke for all the Arch-bishops friends to pacify his anger. In the necke of this injustice, he commits another, he procures a divorce from his Wife Avis, the Daughter of Robert Earle of Glocester, onely for being of kinne to him in the third degree, and by advice of the King of France, marries Isabell Daughter and Heire of the Earle of Angoulesme, Affianced before to Hugh le Brun Earle of March; and shortly after brings her with him into Eng∣land, where he and she together, are both Crowned at Canterbury. And here the Earles and Barons of the Realme, being all summoned to attend the King into France at Whitsontide following; they all by a generall consent send him word, that unlesse he would restore them their Rights and Liberties, they would doe him no service out of the kingdome. But what it was that made the Lords more violent in pressing their Demands at this time then before, no Writers of these times doe sufficiently deliver: Onely some of them speake scatteringly of certaine oppressi∣ons (besides the generall Grievance for Exactions) lately offered to some of the Lords, one to the Earle of Chester, whom he would have banished, onely for ad∣vising him to leave his cruelty and incontinency: Another, a pursuite in Love to a Daughter of Robert Fits-Water, called Maude the Faire, who not consenting to the Kings lust, a messenger was sent to give her poyson in a potched Egge, where∣of she dyed: And a third, offered to William de Brawse and his Lady, for a rash word spoken; for when the King sent to have de Brawses Sonne delivered him for a pledge, the Lady answered, We shall doe well indeed to commit our Sonne to his keeping, who kept so well his owne Nephew Prince Arthur. This rash word cost de Brawse his Country, and his Lady and their Son their lives, both of them being famished to death in Prison. For, though these directly were but particular Grievances, yet reflectingly they were generall, what one suffered all might; but whether any of these, or all of these together, were Ingredients to make a Com∣pound of violence in the Lords at this time, or whatsoever was the true cause, this was plainely the effect, that unlesse the King would restore their liberties, they would not follow him out of the kingdome. But notwithstanding this refusall of his Lords, he passeth over with his Queene into Normandy, and from thence to Pa∣ris, where the King of France receives them with all complements of Love and a∣mity. But now Hugh Earle of March, resenting the injury done him by King Iohn; in taking away his affianced Wife, joynes with Prince Arthur, and the King of France also, for all his faire shew of amity lately made, joynes with them, as having sometime before marryed his youngest Daughter to Prince Arthur, and these with their Forces joyned, invade first the Turones, and then the Anjovins: of which Province Queene Eleanor the Kings Mother was left Regent, who there∣upon betakes her selfe to Mirabell the strongest Towne of those parts, and sends to her Sonne King Iohn, acquainting him with the danger she was in, aud requiring his speedy succour. When in the meane time Prince Arthur takes the City, and in it his Grand-mother Queene Eleaor, whom he used with greater reverence and respect then she expected. But King Iohn at the hearing hereof, was so moved,
calling the French King ungratefull and perfidious for succouring Prince Arthur, contrary to his League, that studyng presently the Art of Revenge, he fell upon a stratagem, of all other the most prudent against an Enemy: For a Surprise in Warre is like to an Apoplexy in the Body, which strikes without giving warning for defence: And this Stratagemme at this time King Iohn put in practise, for tra∣velling night & day with indefatigable labor, he came upon his enemies before they were aware, and setting upon them unprovided, it was rather an execution then a battell; and they who remained unslaine were taken prisoners, amongst whom Prince Arthur himelfe, who committed presently to the custody of Robert de Veypont in Ro∣an, lived not long after whether it were that attempting to make escape, he fell down from the wals of his Prison, and was drowned in the River Seyne, as some say; or whether it were, that through anguish of minde he fell sicke and dyed, as others say; or whether indeed he wre made away by King Iohn, as the common fame went; Certaine it is, that he survived his imprisonment but a very few dayes. But though he were gone, yet his sister Eleanor, a preceding Competitor to King Iohn, was still remaining: Her therefore, at this time also King Iohn seiseth upon, and commits her in safe custody to Bristow Castle, where, after she had lived long, she dyed. Of his Troubles after the death of his Nephew Arthur. KIng Iohn being now freed from his Competitor, one would thinke he should have ended all his troubles, but like a Hydraes head, they rather multiplyed upon him: For they who had beene so ready to assist Prince Arthur in his life, were now as ready to revenge his death. And first, Constance his Mother comes to King Philip, with open exclamations against King Iohn, accusing him with the murther of her Sonne, and with all the instance of Teares and Intreaties, solicites him to revenge it. Hereupon King Philip summons King Iohn to appeare at a day, and because he appeared not according to the tenure of his Homage, it was decreed against him, that he had forfeited all the property of his Estate in France, and thereupon King Philip with mighty Forces invades his Territories, takes ma∣ny Townes of principall consequence, while King Iohn lived idle at Ran, no more regarding it then if it had not at all concerned him; and when some of his Lords seemed to marvell what he meant to suffer the French to rob him of such goodly Cities: You say true indeed, (saith he) for it is but Robbery, and within a few dayes you shall see, I will make him to restore them backe with usuy. In this slighting humour he returnes into England, where he lookes not after the le∣vying of Souldiers, or the raising of an Army, as this case required, but continues his old course for raising of money, accusing sometimes one of his Lords, some∣times another, as  it wre their fault that he had lost these Townes in France and upon  made many of them pay great summes of money, which brought  into hatred at home, but into contempt abroad; for the King of  nstanding his unworthy courses, proceeds more violently in his Invasins , getting Falai, Damfrnt, and all the good Townes of Normandy, but onely Roan, and at last, though Ran was a Towne strongly for∣tifyed with Walls, and more strongly with the faithfull hearts of the Inhabiants, yet finding no hope of succour from King Iohn, it was forced for want of Victu∣als to submit it selfe to the King of France, whose example all the other Cities fol∣lowed; and so all Normandy returned to the subjection of the French, after three hundred and sixteene yeares that Roll the Dane had first possest it. It was now the yeare 1205. and the fourth of King Iohns Raigne, about which time, the two props of his Estate, or rather indeed, the two Bridles of his intemperancy, dyed, his Mother Queene Eleanor, whose vertues had oftentimes qualifyed the vices of her Sonne; and Hubert Arch-bishop of Canterbury, who repented him at his death of nothing more, then that he had beene an Instrument of bringing him to the Crowne.
And now King Iohn being a Substantive of himselfe, hath a devise in his head to make his subjects as willing to give him money as he was to have it: for know∣ing the great discontentment they all had for his losses in France; he gives it out, that he would presently rais an Army, for recovery of those losses, if he might have money to goe about it: whereupon, never was money given with more alacri∣ty; and as soone as he had it, he instantly went to Portesmouth, and there took Ship∣ping before it was possible for his Lords and others to be in readinesse to accompa∣ny him; and sayling forward some certaine Leagues into the Sea, upon a sudden he returnes backe againe, and then laies the fault upon his Lords, that had not fol∣lowed him; and for this backwardnesse of theirs, imposed afterwards great Fines upon them; by which meanes he got money no lesse by pretence of his not go∣ing, then he had done before by pretence of his going. About this time died Geoffrey Fits-Peter Justitiar of England, who while he lived kept the King in some awe, in so much, as hearing he was dead, he swore by the feete of God, that now at length he was King of England; and with great rejoycing said to some Lords about him: Now when this man comes into Hell, let him salute the Arch-Bishop Hubert, whom certainely he shall finde there. But Philip, King of France, inten∣ding to leave the English nothing on that side the Sea, invadeth Chinon, and takes it; and in it the valiant Captaine Roger Lacie, which had given a period to King Philips victories, had not Guido the husband of Constantia Prince Arthurs Mother revolted to King Iohn; who with his assistance once againe leavies an Army, be∣siegeth Mount Auban, a Castle thought impregnable, and within fifteene dayes takes it, which Charles the Great could not get with his seven yeares siege: where so great a number of French Lords were taken prisoners, that King Iohn sent a Ca∣talogue of their names into England, for a memoriall of so great a victory. After this, he taketh the strong Towne of Angiers, and utterly defaceth it; for which af∣terward he was sorry, as being the Towne where he was borne. But now when the two Kings were ready to meete, and to give battell, intercession was made by friends of both sides, and thereupon a Peace concluded for two yeares: and King Iohn returned into England. King Iohn being returned, performes no lesse worthy acts at home, then he had done in France: for first he invades the Borders of Scotland, and brings Alexander King of Scots to doe him homage; and then understanding many of the Irish to be revolted, he passeth over to Dublin, and reduceth them to his obedience; and then placing Iohn Bishop of Norwich Governour there, he returnes into England; where passing through Wales, he subdueth certaine Rebels there, and takes eight and twenty children of the best Families, for pledges of their future loyalty; but not long after, hearing they grew mutinous and rebelled againe, he was so incensed, that he would not goe to dinner till he had seene those twenty eight children to be all hanged before his face: so inconsiderate a thing is the desire of revenge, that it makes no difference betweene innocency and guiltinesse; though indeed a thing oftentimes must be done for example, which considered in it selfe, would be for∣borne. And it was the yeare 1214. and the fourteenth of K. Iohns Raign, when he going to Angiers, strongly repaires it; and the Province of Poictou revolted to him; which Lewis King Philips sonne understanding, comes upon them with a mighty Army, and using much severity upon the Authors of the revolt, takes prisoners, Rey∣nold Earle of Boleigne, and William Earle of Salisbury, with many others of King Iohns Captaines, and defeateth his whole Army: whereof when King Iohn was certified, he grew in a manner desperate, and as a man dejected, makes a new Truce upon any conditions with the King of France, and returnes into England; where he findes a worse businesse ready to entertaine him: for the Lords of the Realme having often required their ancient Rights and Liberties; and finding nothing but delusions, endure no longer to be abused; but meeting at Saint Edmundsbery, they there conferre how they may finde a remedy to redresse this evill; and at lat concluded to goe to the King themselves in person, and make their Demands;
whereof a Charter was produced, that had beene formerly granted in King Henry the firsts time: whereupon comming to the King after Christmas, lying then in the New Temple, and acquainting him with their Demands; he gives them this faire Answer, that within a few dayes he would give them satisfaction; and causeth the Bishops of Canterbury and Ely, with William Marshall, Earle of Glocester, to passe their words for him, that it should be performed. But the King meaning nothing lesse then to doe as he said, fals presently a leavying of Souldiers; which the Lords understanding, they also doe the like; and going to the Bishop of Canterbury, de∣liver him a Copy of their Demands, and require the Kings Answer. But the Bishop shewing it to the King, and humbly intreating him to give the Lords a satisfactory Answer: he swore a great Oath, they might as well demand the Kingdome, and that he would die before he would yeeld to any such demands. Whereupon the Lords (knowing now what they were to trust to) fall to besiege Northampton, and after that, Redford, which is yeelded to them; and withall they are sent to by the Londoners, to signifie their readinesse to joyne with them. At this time the King was at Windsor providing an Army, but hearing the Londoners were joyned with the Lords, he thought it no good way to proceed by force, but rather by fraud; and thereupon sends to the Lords, that if they would come to him to Windsor, he would grant their demands. The Lords comming thither, but in a Military manner, (for they durst not trust his word) the King saluted them all kindly, and promised to give them satisfaction in all they demanded; and so in a Meadow betweene Wind∣sor and Stanes, called Running-meade, he freely consented to confirme their former Liberties; and was content some grave Personages should be chosen to see it per∣formed. But the next day, when it should be done, he gets him gone to South-ham∣pton, and from thence to the Ile of Wight; where advising with his Councell, what in this case was fittest to be done: It was concluded he should send to the Pope, to acquaint him with this mutiny of the Lords, and to require his help: while the King in the meane time lived skulking up and downe in corners, that no man might know where to find him; or which is worse (as some write) roving about and practising Piracy. And now the Lords beginne to suspect fraud, when shortly after the Kings Messengers, who were Walter and Iohn, Bishops of Worcester and Norwich, returne with the Popes Decree; which was, that the Kings Grant to the Lords should be void: with this Decree, the King after three moneths that he had staied in the Ile of Wight, comming backe to Windsor, acquaints the Lords; but they accusing the Messengers for false informing the Pope, and the Pope also for making a Decree without hearing both sides, betake them to Armes, and sweare by the holy Altar to be revenged for this Iudification and injurious dealing. The King finding the Lords nothing moved with the Popes Decree, sends againe unto him, to acquaint him with it: who mightily incensed to have his Decree so sleighted, adjudgeth them all to be held as enemies of Religion; and gives power to Peter Bishop of Winchester, and to the Abbot of Reading to Excommunicate them. In the meane time the King had sent the Bishop of Worcester, Chancellour of England, and others with his Seale, to hire Souldiers from the parts beyond the Seas; who returned shortly after, bringing along with him out of Poicto and Glasconie, Savery de Malcon, Geoffrey and Oliver Btvile, brothers; & under their conduct so great a rabble, that with these Forces, within halfe a yeare the King had gotten all the Castles of the Barons, to the borders of Scotland. And now he divides his Army, committing part of it to his brother William, Earle of Salisbury, and others, to set upon London; and with the other part he goes himselfe into Yorkshire, where most of the Lords had Possessions, which in most cruell manner he destroyeth with fire and sword. The Lords being thus on all sides distressed, resolve upon a course, neither honourable nor safe; yet such as necessity made seeme both: they send to Philip King of France, requiring him to send over his sonne Lewis to their aide, and promising they would submit themselves to be governed by him, and take him for their Soveraigne. To this mo∣tion of the Lords, King Philip was as forward as themselves; which King Iohn understanding, sends againe to the Pope, requiring him to use his authority to stay
the King of France from comming. But King Philip, though much regarding the request of the Pope, yet nothing so much as the acquest of England; with all speed provides an Army, and with a fleete of sixe hundred sayle sends over his sonne Lewis; who passing into England, landeth at Sandwich, whither many of the Lords and others resort unto him; and giving Oaths of Allegeance, joyne them∣selves with him. King Iohn at this time was at Dover, but not daring to stay there for feare of the enemy, he commits the Castle to Hubert Burgh; and goeth himselfe to Canterbury, and from thence to Winchester in manner of a flight; which Prince Lewis understanding, goeth straight to London, and by a plausible Oration makes that City sure unto him: and thither come to him the King of Scots with an Army of choyce Souldiers, as also the Earles, Warren, Arundel, Salisbury, with many others. And now Prince Lewis passeth all the Countrey over without resistance, but not without infinite outrages committed by his Souldiers, which it was not in him to hinder: and then comming to Norwich, he takes that City easily, but Dover cost him a longer siege, as being defended by the valiant and loyall Captaine Hubert Burgh. In this meane while King Iohn finding his enemies imployed in these diffi∣cult sieges; sends about and gathers a rabble of all raskall people to him, and with them runneth over all the Countrey, spoyling and killing in most barbarous man∣ner; and now was the kingdome made the Stage of all miseries of rapine and cruelty: two Armies in it on foote at once, each of them seeking to prey upon the other, and both of them upon the Countrey. But the King comming to Wall∣poole in Norfolke, where the Washes were to be passed over, he sendeth one to search where the Foord was passable, and there himselfe with some few passed over, but the multitude, with all the cariages, passing without orde, they cared not where, were all drowned; with which dysaster, the King through anguish of minde fell into a Feaver, whereof within a few dayes he died. And here was an end of all the trou∣bles of this King: In whom it is observable, that loving his case so well as he did, he should runne voluntarily into such troubles, especially at home, upon so small occasions as he did; but it should seeme there is no greater hinderance to men for accomplishing their will, then their owne wilfulnesse. Of his Taxations. TO speake of his Taxations, it may not unproperly be said that it was but one continued Taxation all his Raigne through; yet to divide it into parts: his first was the Taxation of three shillings upon every Plough-land through the king∣dom, to pay the thirty thousand Markes, for his Neece Blanches Portion; and to mend this Taxation, he seiseth upon all the Temporalties of his brother Geoffrey Arch-bishop of Yorke, for opposing it; and for a continuation, he makes a progresse shortly after into all the North parts, where he exacts great Fines of offenders in his Forests. Very shortly after solicited by the Popes Legate, he grants a Subsidy of the fortieth part of al his subjects Revenues for one year, to succor the Holy Land. Short∣ly after this, he chargeth his Earls and Barons with the losses he sustained in France; & thereupon Fines them to pay the seventh part of all their goods: neither spared he the Church, or the Commons in this Imposition. Before this year is ended another Leay is made at a Parliament in Oxford, wherein is granted two Markes and a halfe of every knights Fee, for Military aide; neither are the Clergy exempted from paying their part: and before another yeare is out, another Imposition is laid of the thirteenth part of all movables and other goods, both of the Clergy and Laity. It may be reckoned amongst his Taxations, that when the Monkes of Can∣terbury had displeased him about the election of their Arch-bishop, he seised upon all their goods, and converted them to his owne use: and presently after this, upon the like displeasure, he deputes many Bishopricks, Abbeys, and Priories into the hands of Lay-men, and confiscates all their Revenues. To these may be added that he tooke eleven thousand Markes of Silver of the King of Scots for granting him Peace. Adde to these also great summes of money exacted and gathered from
the Iewes, among whom there was one that would not be ransomed, till the King caused every day one of his great teeth to be pulled out by the space of seven dayes, and then he was content to give the King tenne thousand Markes of Silver, that no more might be pulled out. Adde to these, that at his returne out of Ireland, he summoned all the Prelates of the kingdome to appeare before him; of whom he extorted for their redemption, the summe of an hundred thousand pounds Ster∣ling. Adde lastly to these, that at his returne out of Wales, he exacts of every knight that attended him not in that expedition, two Markes. Of his Lawes and Ordinances. HE was the first that appointed the Formes of Civill Government in London and other Cities, endowing them also with their greatest Franchises. The first that caused Sterling money to be here Coyned; The first that ordained the Ho∣nourable Ceremonies in Creation of Earles; The first that setled the Rates and Measures for Wine, Bread, Cloath, and such other necessaries of Commerce The first that planted English Lawes and Officers in Ireland; The first that enlarged the Royall stile with Lord of Ireland, and both annexed that kingdome, and fastned Wales to the Crowne of England. Affaires of the Church in his time. AFter the death of Hubert Arch-bishop of Canterbury, the Monkes of th Co∣vent secretly in the night Elected one Reginold their sub-prior to succeed him; and caused him to goe to Rome for confirmation: but afterward doubting how the King would take it, being done without his knowledge, they crave leave of the King to chuse a fit man, the King is content to allow them the Election, but re∣quires himselfe to have the Nomination, and thereupon commends unto hem Iohn Grey Bishop of Norwich, whom he specially favoured, and accordingly the Monkes Elect him. But the matter being afterward referred to the Pope, which of these two Elections should stand good, after many Allegations of both sides, the Pope to shew himselfe indifferent to both, disallowes them both, and nominates a third man, one Stephen Lancthon, Cardinall of Saint Chrysogone, an Englishman borne, and a man of great learning. The Monkes admit him, but the King op∣poseth it: and now, as it were, a Prize began to be played between the two Swords, the Spirituall and the Temporall: but he that used the Spirituall Sword, proved so much the better Fencer, that he disarmed the other, and tooke away his temporall Sword from him. It is true, in the first Venue, the King gave the Pope as good as he brought; for as the Pope threatned the King to excommunicate him, and to interdict the kingdome; So the King threatned the Pope to nullifie his Authority, and to banish Clergy men out of the Realme. In the second Venue, as the Pope acted as much as he had threatned; (for he interdicted the ingdome) So the King performed as much as he had spoken; (for he drove the Monkes ou of their Cloy∣ster) yet at last when Pandlphus the Popes Legat came into England, and made appeare to the King in what great dngers he stood; First of the King of France, by Invasion; and then of his owne Subjects, by Rebellion; for both which, there was no other helpe but Reconcilement with the Pope; he so touched him to the quicke, that he made him leave his great words, and fall to asking forgivenesse. So as taking off the Crowne from his head, he laid it downe at Pandlphus fete, to be disposed of, as the Pope should please. And Pandulphus stucke not to ke up his Crowne, and to keepe it three or foure dayes in his hands before he restored it; and did not then neither, but upon condition that he nd his Successours shold hold the kingdome of the See of Rome, at the annuall tribute of  thousand Markes. And all those three or foure dayes, in which Pandulphus kept the Crowne, it might be truely said, the kingdome was without a King. And upon this, no doubt it was that Peter an Herte in a Propheticall Rapture had given out some time be∣fore,
that by Ascsion day, there should be no King of England. Which though in some sort it was true, yet in some sort it was not true, and it was in the Prerogative of the King to make his owne interpretation: And so it cost the poore Hermite and his Sonne their lives, and they remaine as a pillar of Salt, to make men take heed of Ludere cum Sanctis; and of playing the Critickes in matters of State. But by this meanes the kingdome was released of the Interdiction, which had continued sixe yeares, three moneths, and foureteene dayes: During all which time, there was no publique Exercise of Religion; no Churches open; no Eccle∣siasticall Sacraments administred but onely to them that were in danger of death, and baptisme to children; all that dyed were buryed like dogges, in ditches and corners, but onely such as had purchased or procured licence from the Pope. In this Kings Raigne, Saint Dominicke continued his Preaching ten yeares toge∣ther, against the Albigenses. Also in his time Saint Francis renounced the world; and when a Priest to whom he offered it, would not take his money, he cast it a∣way and entred into a Vow of perpetuall Poverty. Also in this Kings time, was held the Lteran Councell, under Pope Innocent the Third, in which was esta∣blished the Popes power over Princes, and in matters of Faith, Auricular confes∣sion, and Transubstantiation. Of his Irreligion. I Need not relate a Speech of his, though very unchristian, that having beene a little before reconciled to the Pope, and then taking an overthrow in France, in great anger he cryed out, that nothing had prospered with him since the time he was reconciled to God and the Pope. Nor another speech of his, which though spoken merrily, was in good earnest very irreligious, that being on a time a hunting at the opening of a fat Bucke, he said: See how this Deere hath prospered, and how fat he is, and yet I dare sweare he never heard Masse. It is sufficient to relate one act of his, (if it be true which some write) that being in some distresse, he ent Thomas Hardington, and Ralph Fits Nichols, knights, in Embassage to Mir∣mmalim King of Africke and Mrcco, with offer of his kingdome to him, upon condition he would come and aide him; and that if he prevailed, he would him∣selfe become a Mahometan and renounce the Christian Faith. Though some there be that ay, All thee were but false Criminations charged upon him by Monkes that did not love him. But though we believe not these things of him; yet to suffer his kingdome to stand Interdicted so many yeares together, upon so small occasion as he did, was certainely no good signe of Religion in him. Yet one Act he did, wherein he shewed a respect to Religion, by the honour he did to a Religious man: For Hugh Bishop of Lincolne lying very sicke, he not onely went to visit him, but being dead, was one of the three Kings, (the other two were, William King of Scotland and the King of Southwales) that carryed his Herse upon their shoulders, till they delivered it to the Peeres, and the Peeres af∣terward to the Arch-bishops and Bishops to carry it ino the Quire. Workes of piety done by him, or by others in his time. YEt did this King leave more Workes of Piety behinde him, then all his Sub∣jects that were in his time. For he Founded the Abbey of Bowley in the New Forest in Hampshire: also an Abbey of blacke Monkes in the City of Winchester, and the Monastery of Farendn, and the Monastery of Hales Owen in Shropshire: he reedified odsto and Wrxell, and enlarged the Chappell of Knarisborough. Now for his Subjects, onely Richard Prior of Bermonsey builded an House against the wall of the said house of Beronsey, called the Almary or Hospitall of Converts and Children, in honour of Saint Thomas. In this Kings time Saint Mary Overeyes in Southwke was begun to be builded, and the Stone Bridge over the Thames, was
by the Merchants of London finished. Also Hubert Arch-bishop of Canterbury, Founded a Monastery at West Derham in Norfolke, which upon the dissolution came to the family of the Derhams, who hold it to this day. Of his Lawes and Ordinances. IN this Kings time, five and thirty of the most substantiall Citizens of London, were chosen out, and called the Counsell of the City, and the King gave the City liberty to alter their Major and Sheriffes every yeare, which before continu∣ed during life. He caused the Lawes of England to be executed in Ireland, and money to be Coyned there, according to the weight of English money. Of his Wives and Children. KING Iohn lived to have three Wives: His first was Alice Daughter of Hu∣bert Earle of Morton, who left him a Widower without issue. His second was Isabell Daughter and Heire of Robert Earle of Glcster, by whom no issue nei∣ther, divorced from her by reason of Consanguiniy in the third degree. His third Wife was Isabel Daughter and Heire of Aymer Earle of Angoulese, Affianced be∣fore to Hugh le Brun, Earle of March: By this Wife he had two Sonnes, Henry and Richard, and three Daughters, Ioane, Eleanor, and Isabell: Henry succeeded him in the kingdome; Richard was Earle of Cornwall, and Crowned King of the Romans, and had issue Henry and Iohn, that dyed without issue: also Edward Earle of Cornwall, and others. Ioane his eldest Daughter marryed to Alexander the se∣cond King of Scots, dyed without issue: Eleanor the second Daughter (marryed to Simon Earle of Leycester) had issue Henry, Simon, Almaricke, Guy, Richard, and Eleanor. Henry slaine without issue. Simon Earle of Bigorre, and ancestour to a Fa∣mily of the Mountfords in France. Almaricke, first a Priest, after a knight. Guy Earle of Angleria in Italy, and Progenitour of the Mountfords in Thuscany, and of the Earles of the Campo Bacchi in the kingdome of Naples. Richard remaining privily in England, and changing his name from Mountford to Wellesborne, was ancestour of the Wellesburnes in England. Eleanor borne in England, brought up in France, marryed into Wales, to Prince Lewin a Griffith. Isabel his youngest Daughter, marryed to the Emperour Fredericke the second, had issue, Henry appointed to be King of Sicilie, and Margaret Wife of Albret Lantgrave of Thurine. She dyed in Childbed, after she had beene Empresse sixe yeares. He had also two naturall Sonnes, Geoffrey Fits Roy, and Richard, that marryed the Daughter and Heire of Fulbert de Dover, (who built Childham Castle) had issue by her, of whom some Families of good account are descended. Also one base Daughter named Ioane, marryed to Lewin Prince of Wales. Of his Personage and Conditions. HE was of Stature indifferent tall, and something fat, of a sowre and angry countenance, and concerning his conditions, it may be said, that his Nature and his Fortune did not well agree: For naturally h loved his ese, yet his Fortune was to be ever in Action. He won more of his Enemies by surprises then by Bat∣tels, which shewes he had more of Lightning in him then of Thunder. He was never so true of his word as when he threatned, because he meant alwayes as cru∣elly as he spake, not alwayes as gratiously; and he that would have knowne what it was he never meant to performe, must have looked upon his promises. He was neither fit for Prosperity nor Adversity: For Prosperity made him insolent, and Adversity dejected; a meane Fortune would have suited best with him. He was all that he was by Fits: Sometimes doing nothing without deliberation and sometimes doing all upon a sudden; Sometimes very Religious, and sometimes scarce a Christian. His insatiablenesse of money was not so much as that no man
knew what he did with it, gotten with much noyse, but spent in silence. He was but intemperate in his best temper, but when distempered with sicknesse, most of all, as appeared at his last, when being in a Feaver he would needs be eating of raw Peaches, and drinking of sweete Ale. If we looke upon his workes we must needes thinke him a worthy Prince, but if upon his Actions, nothing lesse: For his Workes of Piety were very many, as hath beene shewed before, but as for his Actions, he neither came to the Crowne by Justice, nor held it with Honour, nor left it in Peace. Yet having had many good parts in him, and especially ha∣ving his Royall posterity continued to this day, we can doe no lesse then honour his memory. Casualties that happened in his time. ONe Casualty we might count dysastrous, if it had not had relation to our selves: for Hugh de Bones comming to aide King Iohn with threescore thou∣sand out of Britany and Flanders, by misfortune at Sea were all Drowned, to whom the King had granted Norfolk and Suffolk for the people he brought with him to In∣habit. In this Kings time were great thunders and lightnings, and showers with hail∣stones as big as Goose-Egges. Fishes of strange shape were taken in England, armed with helmets and shields, and were like unto armed knights, saving that they were farre greater in proportion. About Maidestone in Kent a certaine Monster was found strucken with the Lightning, which Monster had a head like an Asse, a belly like a man, and all other parts farre differing from any other Creature. Of his death and buriall. VVHen Prince Lewis of France was come into England, and was received by the Lords and by the Londoners, King Iohn with an Army went into the North parts, and comming to Wallpoole, where he was to passe over the Washes, he sent one to search where the water was passable, and there himselfe with some few passeth over, but the multitude with all his Carriages and Treasure passing without Order, they cared not where, were all Drowned. With the griefe of which dysaster, and perhaps distempered in his body before, he fell into a Fea∣ver and was let blood; but keeping an ill dyet, (as indeed he never kept good) eating greene Peaches, and drinking sweete Ale, he fell into a loosenesse, and grew presently so weake, that there was much adoe to get him to Newarke where soone after he dyed. Though indeed it be diversly related; Caxton saith, he was poy∣soned at Swisheads Abbey by a Monke of that Covent; the manner and cause this: The King being there, and hearing it spoken how cheape Corne was, should say, he would ere long make it dearer, and make a penny loae be sold for a shilling. At this speech the Monke tooke such indignation, that he went and put the poyson of a Toade into a cup of Wine, and brought it to the King, telling him there was such a cup of Wine as he had never drunke in all his life, and therewithall tooke the assay of it himselfe, which made the King to drinke the more boldly of it; but finding himselfe presently very ill upon it, he asked for the Monke, and when it was told him that he was falne downe dead; then (saith the King) God have mercy upon me, I doubted as much. Others say, the poyson was given in a dish of Peares. But the Physitian that dis-bowelled his body, found no signe of poyson in it, and therefore not likely to be true; but howsoever the manner of his death be uncertaine, yet this is certaine, that at this time and place he dyed, on the 19. day of October, in the yeare 1216. when he had Raigned seventeene yeares and sixe moneths; Lived one and fifty: He was buryed, his bowels at Croxton Abbey, his body at Worcester under the High Altar, wrapped in a Monkes Cowle, which the superstition of that time accounted Sacred, and a defensative against all evill Spirits.
Of the prises of things in his time. NEitheir is this unfit to be recorded in Chronicles, to the end comparison may be made betweene the time past and the present: as in the time of King Henry the second, a Quarter of Wheae was sold for twelve pence; a Quarter of Beanes or Oates for a groat. Neitheir is the price of Silver it selfe much lesse altered, for an ounce of Silver was then valued but at twenty pence; which is now valued at least at five shillings. Whereof Philosophers must tell the reason, for seeing scar∣city makes things deare, why should not plenty make them cheape? Of Men of speciall Note in his time. IN Military matters there were many famous men in his time, as Robert Fits-Roger, and Richard Mount-Fitchet, with many others; but chiefely two, whose Acts make them specially memorable: the one was Hubert Burgh, whom K. Iohn had left Governour of Dover Castle, of whom it is related, that when Prince Lewis of France came to take the Towne, and found it difficult to be taken by force; he sent to Hubert, whose brother Thomas he had taken prisoner a little before; that unless he would surrender the Castle, he should presently see his brother Thomas be put to death with exquisite torments before his eyes: but this threatning moved not Hubert at all, who more regarded his owne loyalty, then his brothers life: then Prince Lewis sent againe, offering him a great summe of money; but neither did this move, but he kept his loyalty as inexpugnable as his Castle. The other was Robert Fits-Water, of whom it is related, that King Iohn being with an Army in France, one of his knights in a great bravery would needs make a challenge to any of the French Campe, that durst encounter him in a Combat, when presently comes forth this Robert Fits-Water; and in the encounter, threw horse and man downe to the ground: whereof when King Iohn heard, By Gods tooth (saith he) he were a King indeed that had such a Champion; whereupon some that stood by, saying to him, He is Sir, a servant of your owne, it is Robert Fits-Water, whom you have banished. Whereupon his sentence of banishment was presently reversed, and the King received him, as he well deserved, into speciall favour. In matter of Literature also there lived many famous men in the Kings Raigne; as Geoffrey Vine∣saufe, Simon Fraxinus, alias Ash, Adam Dorensis, Iohn de Oxford, Colman sirnamed The wise Richard Canonicus, William Peregrine, Alane Tewksbery, Gervasius Dorober∣nensis, Iohn Hanwill, Nigell Worker, Gilbert Holland, Benet de Peterborough William Parvus a Monke of Newburgh, Roger Hoveden, Hubert Walter, Arch-Bishop of Canterbury, Alexander Theologus, Gervasius Tilberiensis, Gyraldus Cambrensis, Iohan∣nes Devonius, Walter Mapis, Radulphus de Diceto, Gilbert Legley, Mauricius Morganius, Iohn de Fordeham, William Leycester, Ioceline Brakeland, Roger of Crowland, Hugh White, alias Candidus, who wrote an History intituled Historia Petroburgensis; Iohn de Saint Omer, Adam Barking, Iohn Gray an Historigrapher, and Bishop of Norwich; Walter of Coventry, Radulphus Niger, and lastly, Simon Thurvay, who for his pride in Learning, but more for his blasphemies against Moses and Christ, be∣came at last so utterly ignorant, that hardly he could read a letter of the booke.
THE LIFE and RAIGNE OF KING HENRY THE THIRD. Of his comming to the Crowne, and of Acts done in his Minority. KING Iohn being dead, his eldest soone Henry was next to succeed: who being but nine yeares old, though he were capa∣ble of having his Right, yet he was scarce cpable of under∣standing his Right: especially there being another at that tim, to whom a great part of the Kingdome had sworne Allege∣ance. But those Lords who had beene constant to the Father, notwithstanding his faults, were more tender of the son, who was altogether innocent, and whose gracious aspect gave no small hope of a better disposition. Amongst all which Lords, there was none of eminent in worthinesse, none so neare him in Alliance, as William Marshall Earle of Pembroke, who had married his Aunt; and he drawing the rest of the Lords to∣gether, with a solemne Oration in behalfe of the young Prince, so confirmed them, and so ordered the matter, that on the twenty eight day of October, in the yeare 1216. he was Crowned at Glocester, by Peter Bishop of Winchester, and Ioceline Bi∣shop of Bathe, in the presence of Guallo the Popes Legat, and many Lords and Bi∣shops: and the said William Earle of Pembroke, by a generall consent, assigned Pro∣tector of the Realme during the Kings Minority. In which place, the first thing he did, was to give notice of the new Kings Coronation to all the Countries round about; and proclaime pardon to all offenders, that within a time limited should come and submit themselves to him. In the meane time Prince Lewis of France, who at his first hearing of King Iohns death, thought himselfe then sure of injoying the Kingdome quietly, and that he should need to feare no more opposi∣tion; now that he heares of the new Kings Crowning, and that so solemnly, and with so unanimous a consent, he begins to thinke himselfe in worse case then be∣fore; and to grow jealous of the English Lords that had adhered to him, what they would doe in this new world. And indeed a conflict was already growne in their minds, which of the two Obligations should be the greater; either that of their Oath to Prince Lewis, or that of their Allegeance to King Henry. They could not but think it extreme ungratfulnes to forsake Prince Lewis, whom they had them∣selves invited to come: and they could not but thinke it extreme undutifulnesse to stand out in opposition against K. Henry, their naturall Soveraigne: and that which added no small weight to this scale, was a discovery lately made by the Viscount
Melun a French Lord at the time of his death, who confessed as a matter of consci∣ence, that Prince Lewis had , if once he got th kingdome, utterly to extir∣pate all the English Nobility and to admit  but Fnch to any place of digni∣ty. But whether any of these reasons, or any other  their motives; certaine it is, that many of them, of who were princip, the Earles of Arndll, Warren, Salisbury, and William, the eldest sonne of the Protectour, shrunke from Prince Lewis, and went to King Henry, as thinking no Obligation so great as Allegeance: and many againe continued constant to Prince Lewis, as thinking no Obligation so great as an Oath. And now Prince Lewis to cast the Dice of Fortune, before his enemies, though they had gotte them a Head, should gather to a head, and draw more fors together; staying imself a Londo,  his Lieuenant with an Ar∣my of twenty thousand, to take in as many Townes as they could; and many they tooke with small opposition: but comming to Lincolne, where though they had the Towne it selfe, yet the Castle stood o and ad beene defended by a Noble Lady a whole yeare before; they found such resistance, that their proceeding was there arrested; for thither came presently Wiia the Proectur with hs sonn William, the Bishops of Winchester, alisury, and ester; te arles of alisbury, Ferrers and Albemarle, William de Albinet, William de Cantilupe, Falcasius, Thomas Basset, Robert Vipon, Bren de Lise, Gefrey Lacie, and many other Barons, with all the power of the young King: who with wonderfull violence assault the City; at which time it was propounded by the French, to sally forth, and give them battell; but conceiving their Army to be greater then indeed it was (for the English had set double Ensignes to every Company, which made a shew of twice as many as they were) they forbare that course, and kept them selves within the Towne; by which meanes being cooped up and straitned i place, so as they cou  make use of their Forces as otherwise they might; the were in conclusion , and all the principall men of the English that had adhered to Prince  were taken prisoners: as namely, Sa Earle o Winchester, Henry de ohun  of Hereford, Gilbert de Gant, lately made Earle of Lincolne by Prince Lewis;  Fiwater, Richard Mount-fihet, William Mawbry, William Beauchamp, Willi Maude, Oliver Harcourt, Roger de Cressy, William de Colvil, William de Ro, Robert de Ropey, alph Chendui Barons; besides foure hundred knights or men at Armes. Onely the Earle of Perch their Generall, being compassed about, and willed to render him∣selfe, swore he would never become prisoner to any English: and thereupon was runne thorow the sight of his Helmet into the braines, and instantly died. This was a maine blow to Prnce Lis, and th last of his battels in England; and be∣cause the City was very rich in Merchandise, the English in derision called it Lewis Faire. But Prince Lewis was not yet discouraged, for he had sent to King Philip his Father, to send him new supplies out of France; and new supplies were indeed sent: but Hubert de Bugh, Governour of Dver, being as vigilant as he was valiant, watched their comming, and in a Sea-fight defeated them all, of whom but few escaped: and now this blow at Sea was so much greater then that at Land; that where that made him onely doubt, this made him despaire, at leas made him mal∣leable, and fit to be wrought upon by composition; whereupon it was at last con∣cluded, that Prince Lewis should have fifteene thousand Markes for the charges he had beene at, and abjure his claime to any interest in the kingdome; and withall to worke his Father for restitution of such Provinces in France as appertained to this Crowne: and that when himselfe should be King, he should resigne them in a peace∣able manner. On the other part, King Henry takes his Oath; and for him the Le∣gat Guallo and the Protectour, to restore unto the Barons of the Realme, and other his subjects, all their Rights and Priviledges; for which the discord beganne be∣tweene the late King and his people. After this Prince Lewis is honourably atten∣ded to Dover, and departs out of England about Michaelmas, above two yeares after his first arrivall. And now the kingdome is come to unity within it selfe, one King and one peo∣ple; and for a yeare or two there was little to be done, onely some few there were,
whom the corruption of the times had engendred; and who being borne in a storme, could not live in a calme: of whom the principall were the Earle of Albe∣marle, Robert de Vipount, Foulke de Brent, Brian de Lisle and Hugh de Baylil; who bustling about, got possession of some Castles: with what intention, all men knew; but with what hope of effecting their intention, no man could imagine: for being but a handfull of men to the body of the Realme; they were easily suppressed; and either brought to acknowledge their faults, or else punished for not acknowledg∣ing them. It was now the fourth yeare of King Henries Raigne, at which time William Earle of Pembroke, Protectour of the Realme, died, and was buried in the new Temple at London: in whose place came the Bishop of Winchester; and now was the King the second time Crowned, and had granted him by Parliament for Ecage, two Markes of silver of every knights Fee, for the affaires of the king∣dome, and recovery of his Transmarine Dominions, which is now designed: and Mallon de Savery, the Poictoin, with William Long-sword Earle of Salisbury, sent over to try the affections of that people; whom they finde for the most part in∣clinable to the obedience of this Crowne: but the King of France being required peaceably to deliver them; made answer, that having gotten them by the sword, by the sword he would hold them. But now the King being come to some yeares of understanding, was in a Parliament holden at London, put in minde by the Arch∣bishop of Canterbury, of the Oath he had taken for confirmation of the Liberties of the kingdome, which though oppugned by some (and spcially by William Brewer, and Hubert de Burgh, whom the King had now made his chiefe Justiciar) as having beene an Act of constraint: yet the King then againe ratified, and twelve knights or other Legat men of every Shire, by Writs were charged to examine what the Lawes and Liberties were which the kingdome injoyed under his Grand∣father; and that they should returne them by a certaine day: and here the King by Parliament resumeth into his hands such Alienations as had beene made by his Ancestors of any Crowne Land. The next yeare after, another Parliament is held at Westminster, wherein is required the fiftieth part of all the movables, both of the Clergy and Laity, for the recovery of those parts in France, with-held from the Crowne by Lewis now King, contrary to his Oath and promise made here in Eng∣land at his departure; which, though it concerned the Honour and Dignity of the kingdome, and the estates of most of the Nobility; yet would it not be yeelded to, but upon confirmation of their Liberties, which in the end was obtained, in the same words and forme as King Iohn had granted them in the two Charters be∣fore: and twelve knights are chosen in every Shire, to dispart the old Forests from the new, and the new to be laid open and ploughed, and improved to the great com∣fort and benfit of the subject; and two yeares they were accordingly injoyed. Of his Acts after he came to be of age. IT was now the tenth yeare of King Henries Raigne, and being about nineteene yeares of age, he claimed to take the government of the kingdome into his own hands, and no longer to be under a Protectour; and now will presently appeare the difference betweene a Prince that is ruled by good Counsell, and a Prince that will doe all of himselfe, and take no advise. For the ten yeares hee was ruled by a Protectour, were all passed, as it were in a calme, without noyse or clamour; but as soone as he tooke upon him the government himselfe, there grew presently stormes and tumults; no quietnesse either to the subject or himselfe: nothing but grievances all the long time of his Raigne. For at the Parliament now holden at Oxford, as soone as he was Crowned againe, he presently cancels and annuls the Charter of the Forests, as granted in his Nonage; and therefore he not bound to observe it: and then not using any longer the Seale which the Protectour had used, he makes a new; and causeth a Proclamation to be made, that whosoever would enjoy any benefit of Grants under his Seale, should come and have them signed by his new Seale; by which course he drew much mony from many: and this was
the first grievance. Shortly after, he commits the keeping of Barkehamstead Ca∣stle to one Walleran a Duchman, which Castle belonged to his Brother Richard Earle of Cornewall: but when Earle Richard required to have the possession as o right he ought, it was then plotted by Hubet Burgh Chiefe Justice, and the Kings chiefe Counsellor, to commit him to prison, which the Earle understanding, o at least suspecting, flies presntly to Mrleborough, where he finds William Earle Mar∣shall his vowed friend, with whom he hasens to Stamford, and there meees with the Earles of Chester, Glocester, Warren, Hereford, Ferrers, Warwicke, and diver o∣ther Barons; who all confederate together, and send to the King hat unlesse he re∣store the Castle to his brother, and o them the Liberties of Forests which he had lately cancelled at Oxford, they would seeke to recover them by the sword. Here, upon King Henry to pacifi his brother not onely renders the Castle to him but gives him besides all that his Mother had in Dower and also great possessions which the Earle of Britaine, and th Earle of Bleigne lately deceased had in England; but to the Petition of the Lords he makes a dilatory answer and this was another grievance. Not long after King Henry is perswaded by Hugh e Brun, Earle of March, who had married his Mother, to make a journey into France, for recovery of his right there but the Earle perswaded it for ends of his owne; which to have discovered, had beene no way to come them e must therefore ay some co∣lours upon his worke, and it was colour enough that the action would be of great benefit to the King, if it might succeed and the likelihood of succeeding was most apparent, by reason of the great inclinaion of the people to King Henry; and their great aversnesse from King Lewis. Upon these colours, King Henry underta∣king the action, raiseth great summes of money from the Clergy and from the Londoners for redemption of their Liberties and takes the hird part of all the goods of the Iewes but when he returned home a yeare after, without having done any thing but spent his treasure and his time and that which was moe worth then both these, the lives of many Noble men and others: this was another grievance. And now King Henry bringing many Pctins over with him, who had served him in his warres he was to reward them ere; which he could not doe, but by displacing and spoyle of his Officers. First therefore he calleth Ralph Bretton Treasurer of his Chamber to account, and grievously Fnes him for de∣frauding him in his Office: Then likewise is Hubert de Burgh Chiefe Justiciar, and his Chiefe Counsellour called to account, for such Treasure as passed his Office, who being further charged with crimes of Treason, flies to the Church of Merton for sanctuary; from whence, when the King commanded him to be drawne out by violence, the Bishop of London hearing of it, commanded him to be returned back to sanctuary, upon paine of Excommunication: but the King commanding him to be kept from sustenance, hunger at last enforced him to render himselfe to the Kings mercy: all his goods, which were very great, confiscate. Also Walter Bishop of Carlile is thrust out of his Office of Treasure, and William Rodon knight, from his place of Mashall of the Kings house, and all the chiefe Counsellours, Bishops, Earles, and Barons of the kingdome are removed, as distrusted and onely stran∣gers preferred to their roomes: of which course, Peter de Rupibus a Poictouin, Bi∣shop of Winchester, and one Peter de Rivalis, the Kings speciall Favorite, were said to be the Authors: and this was another grievance. The King was now about eight or nine and twenty yeares old, and a Consultation was had for a fit wife for him. There was propounded a sister of Alexander King of Scots, but it was not thought fit the King should marry the younger sister, when Hubert de Burgh had married the elder: he therefore takes one of his owne choosing, and marries Elea∣nor, daughter to Raymond Earle of Province; by which match he neither had Por∣tion by his Wife, nor strength of Alliance by friends; or if any were, it was all made vaine by distance: onely he had by her a number of poore kindred, who to his great cost, lay hanging upon him; yet was the marriage solemnised with as great charge as if he had beene to have Mountaines with her: and this was another grievance. And now is the score of these grievances called upon to be paid, for
the Lords could no longer endure so many indignities, to see themselves fleighted, and onely strangers advanced; as Foulke de Brent who held the Earledomes of Nottingham, Oxford, Bedford, and Bckingham, and others the like: and to see their persons exposed to danger, and their estates to ruine; for which no remedy could be but onely the Kings confirming their Charter of Liberties: wherein it is strange to observe upon what different grounds the King and the Lords went: It seemes the King thought, that to confirme that Charter, were to make himselfe to be lesse then a King; and the Lords thought, that as long as it was denied, they were no better then slaves and as the King could endure no diminution, so the Lords could endure no slavery; but the King might keep his owne with sitting still, the Lords could not recover their owne but by motion: and seeing their strength must be in their number, by commotion; hereupon they confederate together, and of this confedencie, Richard now Earle Marshall, upon the death of his bro∣ther William, is chiefe; who repaire to the King, and boldly shew him his er∣rour, and requires satisfaction. Hereupon the King sends presently over for whole Legions of Poictuins, and withall summons a Parliament at Oxford, whither the Lords refuse to come after this a Parliament is called at Westminster, whither like∣wise they refuse to come, unlesse the King would remove the Bishop of Winchster, and the Poictouins from the Court; and more then this, they send him word, that unlesse he did this; they would expell both himselfe and his evill Counsellours out of the Land, & create a new King. Upon this threatning, Pledges are required of the Nobility for securing of their Allegeance, and Writs a reent out to all who hold by knights service, to repaire to the King at Glocester by a certaine day; which the Earle Marshall and his associates refusing, the King without the udgement of hi Court and their Prs, causeth them to be Proclaimed Out-lawes, seiseth upon all their Lands, which he gives to his Poictouins; and directs out Writs to attach their bodies wheresoever in the kingdome. But now of these confederate Lords, the Bishop of Winchester wonne the Earles of Chester and Lincolne with a thousand Markes; and the King had so pleased his brother the Earle of Cornwall, that he likewise left them: whereupon they withdrew them into Wales, and confederate with Lilin Prince of Wales whither also came Hubert de Burgh, escaped out of pri∣son, and joynes with them; taking intermutuall Oaths, that no one without other should make their accord. Hereupon the King goeth himselfe in person into Wales, where not prevailing, he returnes to Glocester, imployes new forces of strangers, but all without successe. At last a Frier is imployed to perswade the Earle Marshall to submit himselfe to the King, but all in vaine; till at length a traine is laid to draw him over into Ireland, to defend his state there, being seised upon by the King; where by treachery circumvented he lost his life. Yet the King disavowes the sen∣ding of any such Commission into Ireland, protesting he never knew thereof; and laies the fault upon his Officers: an easie way for Princes, never to be found in any fault. After two yeares affliction, a Parliament is assembled at VVestminster, wherein the Bishops admonish the King by his Fathers example, to be at unity with his people, and to remove from him strangers, and to governe the kingdome by Natives of the Realme; and by the Lawes: otherwise they would proceed by Ecclesiasticall censure, both against his Counsellours and himselfe. The King see∣ing no way to subsist but by temporising, consents to call home those Lords out of VVales; restores them to their places and possessions; removes all strangers from about him, and cals his new officers to account. Hereupon the Bishop of VVinchester, Peter de Rivalis, and Stephen Seagrave take sanctuary; but afterward by mediation they obtained with great Fines their Liberty, dearly paying for their two years greatnes. After this a Parliament is againe called, which the King would have to be kept in the Tower, whither the Lords refusing to come, another place of more freedome is appointed; in which Parliament, order is taken for removing all Sheriffes from their places, upon complaint of corruption: and here the King displaceth his Steward, and offers to take from the Bishop of Chichester then
Chancellour, the great Seale, which he refuseth to deliver, as having received it by the common councell of the kingdome; and now Per de Rivali, ad Stphen Sea∣grave, are received againe into grace: by which may appeare the viciitude of for∣tune in Princes favours. After this, in the one and twntieth year of is Raigne, another Parliament is held at London; where the King requires the thirteenth part of all the moveables as well of the Clergy as Laity; which being directly oppo∣sed, the King promiseth by oath, never more to injure the Nobility, so they would but relieve him at that present: After foure dayes consultation, he King pomising to use onely the counsell of his naturall Subjects, and protesting against the Revo∣cation lately propounded and freely granting the inviolable obsevation of their Liberties, under paine of Excommunication, a Subsidy is granted him; bu so, that foure knights be appointed in every Shie to receive and deliver the same,  to some Abbey or Castle, where it may be safly kep, that if the King aile in prfor∣mance of his Grants, it may be restored to the Counrey from whence it was col∣lected: And now the King, to make a shew of true reconciliation for his part, sud∣denly causeth the Earles, VVarren and , with Iohn Pits Geoffrey to be swrn his Counsellours, yet was neither of the points either for removing of strangers, or for disposing the money observed afterward by the King for the money he made bold to take at his pleasure; and for strangers, they were so farre from re∣moving, that they were drawne nearer to him: for now VVilliam Valentine; Unkle to the Queen, is growne the most inward man with him, and nothing done but by his counsell; also the Earle of Province, the young Queenes Father, a poore Prince, hath a good share of the money that was collected: and Simon de Montford, a French man borne, is entertained by the King, and preferred scretly in marriage to Eleanor the Kings sister, Widow of VVilliam Earle of Pembroke, the great Mar∣shall, and is made Earle of Leycester, by right of his Mother Avice, daughter of Blanchman, Earle of Leycester: which courses so incense the Nobility, that it put them out into a new commotion; and Richard the Kings brother becomes one of the party whom the other Lords make their spokesman to the King, to aggravate his breach of promise, and to acquaint him with all the disorders of the kingdome; with whose remonstrance the King is so moved, that after he had tried the Londoners, and found them also to partake with the Lords, he cals a Parliament a London, whither the Lords come armed for their own safety: where after long debating, the King taking his Oath to referre the matter to certaine grave men of the kingdome; Article are drawne, sealed, and publikely set up to the view of all, with the seales of the Legat, and divers great men: but before it came to be effected, the Earle of Cornwall, by the working of Simon Montford, hath his edge rebated, and is brought to be unwilling to meddle in the matter any more; which the other Lords seeing, they also grow cold, and so for that time it rested, and no more was done in it. And now is the Kings turne to play his part, in using his authority, which he failes not to doe to the uttermost: for upon a small-occasion he causeth the gates of Gilbert now Earle of Pembroke (the third sonne of VVilliam the great Marshall) to be shut against him at VVinchester, whereupon the Earle retires into the North. Also Simon Norman, Master of the Kings Seale, and his greatest Favorite, is thrown out with disgrace, and his brother Geoffrey a knight Templar, is put out of the Counsell; both of them for not yeelding to passe a Grant from the King, made unto Thomas Earle of Flanders, the Queenes Unkle, of foure pence upon every sack of Wooll. And now that load enough is laid upon those of the Laity, comes a new load to be laid upon the Clergy; for the Pope nothing dainty to make use of the power he had in the King, sends over three hundred Romans, requiing to have the first Benefices that should be vacant, bestowed upon them: which seemed so unreasonable a request, and to the Clergy of England so dammageable, that it made Edmund Arch-bishop of Canterbury to give over all, and betake himselfe to a voluntary Exile in the Abbey of Pontiniac in France; yet to shew his respect to the Pope, gave him eght hundred Markes before his departure. And to lay more weight upon the Clergy, great summes are also required of them for maintenance
of the Popes warre against the Emperour: which though the Clergy opposed, and shewed many good reasons of their opposition both to the King and the Legat, yet by promises or threatnings, they were won or forced to yeeld unto it. And now comes the Earle of March, and once againe solicits the King to make another jour∣ney into France, which being yeelded to by the King, and assented to in Parliament, an aide presently was demanded towards it: but this demand was not onely oppo∣sed, but all the Kings Taxations and aides before granted, were now repeated; and thereupon an absolute deniall to grant any more. Upon this, the King comes to the Parliament himselfe in person; earnestly, and indeed, humbly craving their aide for this once: but all prevailed not, they had made a vow to the contrary: and the King is driven to get what he could of particular men, of whom partly by gift, and partly by oane, he gets so much, that he carries over with him thirty Barrels of Sterling money. This expedition had no better successe then the former, for after a whole yeares stay, the King was driven to make a dishonourable Truce with the King of France, and returne home. At his returne he puts the Iewes to another redemption, and the Londoners to another exaction; and to helpe on his charge, his wives mother, the Countesse of Provence comes now to visit him; who bringing her daughter Zanchia with her, a marriage is solemnised betweene her and Richard Earle of Cornwall, whose wife was lately dead, and he returned from the Holy warres. The old Countesse at her returne, is presented with many rich gifts, ha∣ving besides received an Annuall Pension of foure thousand Markes out of Eng∣land, for five yeares past; in consideration of a pact made, that King Henry after her decease should have the Earledome of Provence: but shortly after her returne, she disappoints him of that, and bestowes it upon her youngest daugher Beatrix, married to Charles the French Kings brother; who was after King of Naples and Sicilie so as this Countesse lived to see all her foure daughters Queenes: Richard Earle of Cornwall comming after to be elected King of the Romans. Upon thse profusions, a consultation is had for new supplies, and no way thought so fit as by Parliament; hereupon a Parliament is againe assembled at Westminster, whithr the King comes againe himselfe in person, urging his necessities, yet nothing woud be granted without the assurance of reformation and due execution of the Lawes. And here they desire to have it ordained that foure of the most grave and discreet Peeres should be chosen as conservatours of the kingdome, and sworne of the Kings Councell, both to see Justice administred, and the treasure issued; and these, or two of them at least, should ever attend about the King. Also that the Lord Chiefe Justiciar, and the Lord Chancellour, should be chosen by the generall voy∣ces of the States assembled, or else be one of the number of those foure. Besides they propound, that there might be two Justices of the Benches, two Barons of the Exchequer, and oe Justice for the Iewes, and those likewise to be chosen by Parliament. But while these things were in debating, comes one Martin, a new Legat from the Pope, with a larger Commission then ever any before, to exact upon the State; but at the same time, Letters comming from the Emperour Fredericke, to intreat that the Pope might have no more supplies out of England; the Popes Man∣date is rejected, and his Agent Martin disgracefully sent home. This businesse took up so much time, that nothing else was done in this Parliament; but onely an aide granted to the King for the marriage of his daughter to Alexander King of Scots, twenty shillings of every knights Fee; and that with much adoe, and repetition of his former aides. The Winter following he assembles another Parliament, wherein he moves for an ayde upon a designe he had upon Wales, and to pay his debts, which were ur∣ged to be so great that he could not appare out of his Chamber for the infinite clamour of such, to whom he owed for his Wine, Waxe, and other necessaries of house: but they all to his face, refused to grant him any thing: whereup∣on other violent courses are taken, an ancient quarrell is found out against the City of London, for which they are commanded to pay fifteene thousand Markes, and Passeleve the Clerk is imployed, with others, in a most peremptory commission,
to inquire of all such Lands as had beene inforested, and either to fine the occupy∣ers thereof at their pleasure, or else to take it from them and sell the same to others; wherein such rigour was used, that multitudes of people were undone. But now to shew the King the estate of his kingdome, and the oppressions of Popes, inqui∣ry was made of the Revenues which the Romans and Italians had in England: which were found to be annually sixty thousand Markes; being more then the yearely Re∣venues of the Crowne: which so moved the King that he caused the same to be notifyed, with all other Exactions, to the Generall Councell now Assembled at Lyons; and this (with the ill usage of his Agent Martin) so vexed the Pope, that he is said to have uttered these words: It is time to make an end with the Em∣perour, that we may crush these petty Kings, for the Dragon once appeased or destroyed, these lesser Snakes will soone be trodden downe. But upon the Popes rejecting the consideration of these grievances of England, and despiing the Kings message (who he said, began to Frederize) it was absolutely here ordained, un∣der great penalty, that no contribution of money should be given to the Pope by any Subject of England: and the King for a time assents unto it, but being of an irresolute and wavering nature, and afraid of threats, he soone gave over what he undertooke, so as the Pope continued his former rapine; and though he had pro∣mised never to send any more Legats into England, ye sent he other Ministers un∣der the title of Clerkes, that had as great power as Legats, and effected as much. And now, for the other part of the State, new occasions also of complaint were offered: Peter of Savoy Earle of Richmond, comes into England, bringing with him certain Maides to be marryed to young Noble men of this Countrey, the Kings Wards, of whom Edmund Earle of Lincolne hath one, and Richard de Burgh another, and the same yeare three of the Kings Brothers by the Mother, Guy de Lusignan, William de Valence, and Athelmar Clerke, are sent over to be provided of Estates in England: also Thomas of Savoy (sometimes Earle of Flanders by Right of his Wife) comes with his sister Beatrix, Countesse of Provence the Queenes Mother, who are againe Feasted and Gifted; for which the King is tax∣ed the next Parliament in Candlemas Terme, and besides sharply reprehended for his breach of Promise, having Vowed and Declared by his Charter never more to injure the State in that kinde; also for his violent taking up of provision, of Waxe, Silke, Roabes, and specially of Wine, contrary to the will of the sellers, and many other grievances they complaine of; all which the King patiently heares, in hope to obtaine his desire, but yet nothing is effected, and the Parliament being Prorogued till Midsummer following, and the King growing more obdurate then before, it afterward brake up in discontent. But the Parliament not supplying him, he is advised to furnish his wants with sale of his Plate, and Jewels of the Crowne, being told, that though they were sold, yet they would revert againe unto him; and having with great losse received money for them, he askes who had bought them: Answer is made, the City of London. That City (said he) is an inexhaustible Gulph: If Octavius Treasure were to be sold, they surely would buy it. And now to vexe them, he appoints a Faire to be kept at Westminster, for∣bidding under great penalty, all exercise of Merchandise within London, for fif∣teene dayes, and all other Fayres in England, and namely that of Ely: but this Novelty came to nothing; the Inconvenience of the place, as it was then, and the foulenesse of the weather, brought more affliction then benefit to the Traders. That Christmas also he requires Newyeares gifts of the Londoners, and shortly after writes unto them his Letters imperiously deprecatory to ayde him with money, and thereby gets of them twenty thousand pounds, for which the next yeare after he craves pardon of them. And notwithstanding his continuall taking up all Provi∣sions for his House, yet he lessens his House-keeping in no honourable manner. And then seeing he could get nothing of the States together, he calls unto him, or writes to every Nobleman apart, declaring his poverty; and how he was bound by Charter in a debt of thirty thousand pound to those of Burdeaux and his Gas∣coynes,
(who otherwise would not have suffered him to depart home) at his last being in France: but faling herein of Temporall Lords, he addresseth his Letters to the Prelates, of whom he findes as little reliefe; by much importunity and his owne presence, he got of the Abbot of Ramsey a hundred pound, but the Abbot of Borough had the face to deny him, though the King told him, it was more Almes to give money to him, then to a Begger that went from doore to doore. The Ab∣bot of Saint Albons yet was more kind, and gave him threescore Markes. To such lownesse did the necessity of this indigent King (through his profusion) bring him. The Iewes ever exposed to his will, feele the weight of these his wants; One Abraham, found a Delinquent, redeemes himselfe for seven hundred Markes, and Aaron another Iew protests, the King had since his last being in France taken from him at times thirty thousand Markes of Silver, besides 200. Markes of Gold given to the Queene. But now the Lords assemble againe at London, and presse him with his promise made unto them, that the Chiefe Justiciar, Chancellour and Treasurer, should be appointed by the Generall Councell of the kingdome, but by the absence of Richard Earle of Cornwall, (which was thought to be done of purpose) they re∣turne frustrate of their desire. And now the Bishopricke of Winchester falling void, the King sends presently to the Monkes of the Cathedrall Church; to Elect his Bro∣ther Athelmar; and because he would not be denyed, he goes thither himselfe in person, and there enters the Chapter house as a Bishop or Prior, gets up into the Presidents Chaire, beginnes a Sermon, and takes his Text, Iustice and Peace have kissed each other; and thereupon useth these words: To me and other Kings who are to governe the people, belongs the rigour of Judgement and Justice; to you who are men of quiet and Religion, Peace and Tranquillity; and this day I heare you have (for your owne good) beene favourable to my request; with many such like words: whereby the Monkes finding the earnestnesse of his desire, held it in vaine to deny him, and Athelmar is Elected; but with this reservation, if the Pope allow it. Shortly after followes the memorable Case of Sir Henry de Bathe, a Ju∣sticiar of the kingdome, and a speciall Counsellour to the King who by corrup∣tion had attained to a mighty Estate, and is said, in one Circuit to have gotten two hundred pound land per annum; He is accused by Sir Philip Drcy of falsehood in the Kings Court; and the King is so incensed against him, that in the Parliament at this time holden in London, Proclamation is made, that whosoever had any Action or Complaint against Henry de Bathe should come and be heard. One of his fellow Justiciars accused him of acquiting a malefactor for a bribe. The King seeing Henry de Bathes friends to be many and strong breakes out into rage, pro∣testing, that whosoever would kill Henry de Bathe should be acquited for the deed. But afterward by intercession of the Earle of Cornwall, and the Bishop of London; the King becomes pacifyed, and Sir Henry is released, paying two thousand Markes; and after is restored to his former place and favour. The King keeping his Christ∣mas at Yorke, the marriage is solemnized betweene Alexander King of Scots, and Margaret his Daughter: to the Feast of which solemnity it is said the Arch-bihop gave sixe hundred fat Oxen, which were all spent at one meale: and besides, the Feast cost him foure thousand Markes. About this time, the Pope solicits King Henry to undertake the Crosse, and so doth Alphonsus King of Castile, offering to accompany him in person, to rescue the King of France, who was now held Prisoner by the Souldan. And because a ran∣some collected for him in France was by tempest cast away at Sea, the Captive King offers to restore Normandy to the King of England, so he would come to his rescue. Upon this solicitation of the Pope, and the grant of a tenth of the Cler∣gy and Laity for three yeares to come; the King undertakes the Crosse, rather, it seemes, to get the money, then with any purpose to performe the Journey: which had it beene collected (saith Paris) would have amounted to six hun∣dred thousand pounds, to the utter impoverishing of the kingdome. And now the King by Proclamation cals the Londoners to Westminster, and there causeth the
Bishops of Worcester and Chichester to declare his Intentions, and to exhort the peo∣ple to undertake the Crosse and attend him: but few are moved by their perswasi∣ons, onely three knights of small note, whom thereupon the King in open view, imbraceth, kisseth, and cals his Brethren; checking the Londoners as ignoble Mercenaries: and there himselfe takes his Oath for performing it, and to set forth upon Midsummer day next. In taking his Oath, he layes his right hand on his Breast, according to the manner of a Priest; and after on the Booke, and kist it as a Layman. About this Tenth (granted by the Pope, but not by the People) a Par∣liament is called at London, where the Bishops are first dealt withall, (as being a worke of Piety) and they absolutely refuse it; then the Temporall Lords are set upon, and they answer as the Bishops: which put the King into so great a rage, that he drove out all that were in his Chamber, as he had beene madde. Then he als to perswade them apart, sending first for the Bishop of Ely, and deales with him in all kind manner, recounting the many favours he had done him. The Bi∣shop replies, Disswading him from the Journey by the Example of the King of France; and to that purpose useth many good reasons; which the King hearing, in great passion commanded his servants to thrust him out of doore, perceiving by this what was to be expected of the rest; and thereupon fals upon his former vio∣lent courses; and first the City of London is compelled to the Contribution of a thousand Markes: and the Gascoyners being upon revolt, unlesse speedy succour be sent them; generall Musters are made, and commandement given, that who∣soever could dispend thirteene pounds per annum, should furnish out a Horseman. This occasions another Parliament, wherein it seemes, the State beganne wisely to consider that all their oppositions did no good, the Kings turne must be served one way or other; therefore they agreed to relieve him rather by the usuall way, then force him to those extravagant courses which he tooke; but yet so, as the Reformation of the Government, and the ratification of their Lawes and Liber∣ties, might once againe be solemnely confirmed. And after fifteene dayes consul∣tation, to satisfie the Kings desire for his holy Expedition, a Tenth is granted by the Clergy, and Scutage, three Markes of every knights Fee by the Laity; and thereupon those often confirmed Charters are againe ratifyed, and that in the most solemne and Ceremoniall manner, that State and Religion could possibly de∣vise. The King with all the Great Nobility of England, all the Bishops in their reverent Ornaments with burning Candles in their hands, assemble to heare the terrible sentence of Excommunication against the infringers of the same. And at the lighting of those Candles the King having received one in his hand, gives it to a Prelate that stood by, saying: It becomes not me, being no Priest, to hold this Candle, my heart shall be a greater Testimony; and withall laid his hand spread upon his Breast all the time the sentence was read; which was thus Pro∣nounced, Authoritate Dei Omnipotentis, &c. Which done, he caused the Charter of King Iohn his Father, granted by his free consent, to be openly read. In the end, having throwne away their Candles, which lay smoaking on the ground, they cry∣ed out, So let them who incurre this sentence be extinct, and have no better sa∣vour then these snuffes: and the King with a loud voyce said, As God helpe me, I will, as I am a Man, a Christian, a Knight, a King Crowned and annoynted, in∣violably observe all these things: and therewithall the Bels rung out, and the peo∣ple shouted for Joy. Yet was not all so quieted by this Grant, but that there were grievances still, whereof the first fals upon his Brother Richard Earle of Cornwall: for the King ha∣ving seven and twenty yeares before given him the Province of Gscogne, now that he had a Sonne of his owne, he would take it from his Brother, and give it to his Sonne; and the Earle refusing to deliver his Charter, it is plotted to imprison him, but he escaping out of Burdeaux, comes over into England. The King to win the Nobility of Gascogne to turne to him, promiseth them thirty thousand Markes, which they accept, so as he binde himself by his Oath and Charter to performe it. This strictnesse of theirs the King takes in ill part, and thereupon sends Sim
Montford Earle of Leycester, a sterne man, to be their Governour, who with his insolent Government, so discontents them, that after three yeares suffering, they send the Arch-bishop of Burdeaux, with other great men, to complaine of his In∣solencies; whereupon Montford is sent for, and because the Lords tooke part with him, the King takes part with the Gascoyners; which Montford tooke so ill, that he upbraides the King with breaking his Promise: to whom the King in great rage replyed, that no promise was to be kept with an unworthy Traytor: at which word Montford riseth up, protesting that he lyed; and were he not Protected by his Royall Dignity, he would make him repent those words. The King com∣mands his Servants to lay hold on bim, but the Lords would not permit it. Yet after this great affront to the King, is Montford sent over againe into Gascogne, though with a more limited Authority, and shortly after the King with a Fleete of three hundred Ships goes thither himselfe, and soone composeth all differences in the Country. But now the King of Spaine pretends a title to Aquitaine, and to take him off, King Henry sends to treate of a marriage betweene Prince Edward and his Sister Eleanor, which being accepted by the King of Spaine, the Marriage is solemnized at Burgos, where the King of Spaine knights the Prince, and quits his claime to Aquitaine for him and his Successours for ever: and King Henry invests the Prince and his Wife in it, and gives unto him besides, Ireland, Wales, Bristow, Stamford, and Grantham; and from hence it came that ever after this, the Kings eldest Sonne was immediately upon his Birth Prince of Wales, and Earle of Chester. After this King Henry prepares to returne home, and well he might, having spent in this and his former Journeyes into those parts, the summe of seven and twenty hundred thousand pounds: More then all the Lands if they had beene sold were worth; which when the King was told, he desired there might be no words made of it for his credite. And now being to returne, he is desirous with the King of Frances leave, to passe thorow France; and comming to Paris with a thousand Horse, where he stayed eight dayes, is there most Royally Feasted by the King of France; and he as royally Feasts the King of France againe. But it is the Londoners and the Iewes that are like to pay for all. For comming home about Christmas, when the Lon∣doners presented him with a hundred pounds in money, and afterwards with two hundred pounds in Plate: it was so sleighted, and so ill taken, that a hole was pre∣sently found in their coate, for an escape of a Prisoner, which cost them three thou∣sand Markes: Yet was not this enough, but he takes good Fleeces from the Iews, and then lets them out to Farme to his Brother Richard, for a great summe of mo∣ney, and he to make what more of them he could. Yet after all this he complaines of his Debts, which he saith are at least three hundred thousand Markes, which must needes be the heavyer to him, because he had diminished his own meanes, by the allowance of fifteene thousand Markes per annum to his Sonne the Prince. The onely hope is in the Parliament, but a Parliament being called, they fall presently upon their old Grievances, complai∣ning upon the King for breach of Charters, and renuing their Claime, to have the Chiefe Justiciar, the Chancellour and Treasurer, to be chosen by themselves: so nothing was done for the King at this time, and the Parliament being prorogued till Michaelmas after, as little then, by reason many of the Peeres came not, as not being summoned according to the tenour of Magna Charta. And now while the King was using meanes to winde himselfe out of Debt, there happened occasi∣ons to put him further in; For now Thomas Earle of Savoy, the Queenes Brother, being at warre with the City of Thuryn, must be supplyed with money towards it by the King of England: Now the Elect Bishop of Toledo the King of Spaines Bro∣ther, comes into England, and must be sumptuously Feasted, and have great gifts presented him: Now Eleanor the Princes Wife, arrives with a multitude of Spa∣niards, and must all be entertained at the Kings charge, and have no small presents given them at their departure: Now comes Rustandus from the Pope, with power to Collect the Tenth of the Clergy, for the Popes use and the Kings, and to ab∣solve
him from his Oath of the Holy warre, so he would come to destroy Manfred Sonne to the Emperour Fredericke, now in possession of the kingdome of Sicilie, and Apulia. And this man likewise hath great gifts bestowed upon him, besides a rich Prebend in Yorke. But the Pope by too much seeking his profit, loseth credit and all, for the Clergy sleights him, and will give him nothing: and when he would have borrowed of the Earle of Cornwall five hundred Markes, the Earle an∣swered, he liked not to lend his money to one, upon whom he could not Distraine. But King Henries greatest charge, was his purchasing a kingdome for his Sonne Edmund; for now comes the Bishop of Bnonia from the Pope, with a Ring of Investiture to Prince Edmund, in the kingdome of Sicilie, which he pretends to be at his disposing; and King Henry takes it in so good earnest, that after this he cals his Sonne Edmund by no other name then King of Sicilie. But all this was done by the Pope, but to angle away King Henries money, as indeed upon this hope, he had drawne the King into the engagement of a hundred and fifty thou∣sand Markes; for to draw the King on, it was given out that the Pope had dele∣ted all Manfreds Forces, and was thereby in possession of the kingdome, when the truth was, that Manfred had defeated the Popes Forces, and was thereby him∣selfe established in the kingdome. The yeare 1275. the King keepes his Christmas at Winchester, where new Grie∣vances arise. The Merchants of Gascogny, having their Wines taken from them by the Kings Officers without satisfaction; complaine to their Lord the Prince, he to his Father, and his Father having beene informed before-hand by his Offi∣cers, that their clamour was unjust, as relying upon the Princes favour; he falls into a great rage with the Prince, and breakes out into these words: See! now my Blood and my owne Bowels impugne me: but afterwards pacified, he gives or∣der the injuries should be redressed. And now the Princes Followers themselves come to be a Grievance, who relying upon their Master commit many outrages, and spoyle and wrong men at their pleasure, and the Prince himselfe is not alto∣gether free, of whom it is said, that meeting a young man travailing by the way, he caused one of his eares to be cut off, and one of his eyes to be put out: and ma∣ny such prankes plaid by him and his Followers in Wales, made the Welsh breake out into open Rebellion, which the Prince would faine have suppressed, but there was no money to be had towards the doing it. And now the King fals to shifts, he comes into the Chequer himselfe, and there layes penalties upon Sheriffes, that returne not their moneys in due time; then he fals upon measures of Wine and Ale, upon Bushels and Weights, and something he gets; but London is his best Cheqer, and every yeare commonly he hath one quarrell or other to the Londoners, and they are sure to pay. And now fals out an accident, seeming of great honour, but cer∣tainely of no profit to the kingdome. Richard Earle of Cornwall the Kings Brother is Elected King of the Romans, for although Alphonsus King of Spaine the great Mathematician were his Competitour, yet Earle Richards money wrought more then his Learning, and the Arch-bishop of Cllen comes over to fetch him, and Crowned he is at Aquisgrane. This Earle of Cornwall is reported able to dispend a hundred Markes a day, or ten yeares, besides his Revenues in England. But now, as a man that payes deare for an Office, lookes that his Office should pay him a∣gaine: So Earle Richard having given infinitely to compasse this Advancement, looked to helpe himselfe againe by the Place; and this, and the desire he had to revenge himselfe upon those tha had opposed his Election made him take such vi∣olent courses that he came soone to be dispossessed, forsaken, and forced to returne into England a poorer King, then he went out an Earle. Acts done in the cntention betweene the King and his Barons. NOw King Henry very proud to have his younger sonne a King as well as his brother, cals a Parliament, wherein he brings forth his sonne Edmund, clad in Sicilian habit, and els the Parliment, that for advancing this sonne of his to the
kingdome of Sicilie, he had bound himselfe under covenant of losing his king∣dome in the summe of an hundred and forty thousand Markes, and hoped they would not thinke much to aide him with money for so great an advancement: but the Parliament stood firme to their usuall condition of Margna Charta; so as that might be confirmed, they were content to give two and fifty thousand Marks, but this gave the King no satisfaction. The yeare after, another Parliament is hol∣den at London, wherein upon the Kings pressing them againe for meanes to pay his debts to the Pope; the Lords tell him plainely, they will not yeeld to give him any thing for any such purpose; and give their reasons, and withall repeate their owne grievances, his breach of promise, the insolencie of his brothers, and spe∣cially William de Valence, who had given the lie to the Earle of Leycester, and no right done him in it; and many such things, which the King hearing, and not able to deny, humbles himselfe, and tels them how he had often by ill counsell beene seduced; but promiseth by his Oath which he tooke on the Tombe of Saint Ed∣ward, to reforme all those errours. But the Lords not well knowing how to deale in this businesse, as being divided betweene a desire to satisfie the King, and a desire to be satisfied themselves; and knowing withall the variablenesse of the Kings na∣ture, they get the Parliament to be adjourned to Saint Barnabies day, and then to assemble at Oxford. In which meane time, the Earles Glocester, Leycester, Hereford, the Earle Marshall Bigod, Spenser, and other great men confederate, and provide by Armes to effect their desire: and here is the foundation laid of those bloudy wars that ensued betweene King Henry and his Barons. And now the King being put to his shifts for money, gets the Abbot of Westminster to put his Seale and that of his Covent to a Deed Obligatory, as a surety for two hundred Markes; making ac∣count, that by his example, others would be drawne to doe the like: but his trusty servant Simon Passeleve being imployed to other Monasteries, and telling them a∣mongst other reasons to perswade them, that the King was Lord of all they had, they onely answered; they acknowledged indeed the King to be Lord of all they had, but yet so, as to defend, not to destroy the same: and this was all he could get of them. The Prince also in no lesse want then his Father, is driven to mor∣gage his Towne of Stamford, Brahan, and many other things, to William de Va∣lence, a Poictouin, wherby appeared the disorder of the time, when the Prince was in want, and strangers had such plenty. And now is the Parliament assembled at Ox∣ford, whither the Lords come attended with large traines: and here they beginne with the expostulation of the former Liberties, requiring that the Chiefe Justiciar, the Chancellour and Treasurer may be ordained by publike choyce; and that the twenty foure Conservaours of the kingdome may be confirmed, twelve by the election of the Lords, and twelve by the King, with whatsoever else made for their imagined security. The King seeing their strength, and in what manner they required these things; sweares solemnly againe to the confirmation of them, and causeth the Prince to take the same Oath. But the Lords left not here, the Kings brethren, the Poictouins, and other strangers must presently be removed; and this also, though with some little opposition, was at last concluded: and thereupon the Kings brethren and their followers are despoyled of all their fortunes, and x∣iled by proscription under the Kings owne hand, directed to the Earles of Hereford and Surrey. But now sicknesse and mortality happening to many great ones, it is imputed to poysons, supposed to have beene prepared by those strangers proscri∣bed; the Earle of Glocester in a sicknesse, suddenly lost his haire, his teeth, his nailes; and his brother hardly escaped death: which made many to suspect their nearest servants, and their Cookes: Walter Scoynie the Earle Steward, is strictly examined, committed to prison, and afterward without confession, is upon pre∣sumptions onely executed at Winchester: Elias a converted Iew, is said to have confessed, that in his house the poyson was confected; but it was when he was a Iew, and not a Christian. Every man that had received any wrong by those stran∣gers, now put up their complaints, and are heard. Guydo de chfort a Poictouin, to whom the King had given the Castle of Rochester, is banished, and all his goods
confiscate. William Bussey, Steward to William de Valence, is committed to the Tower of London, and most reproachfully used. Richard Gray, whom the Lords had made Captaine of Dover Castle, is set to intercept whatsoever the Poictouins convaied that way out of England; and much treasure of theirs, and of the elect of Winche∣ster is by him taken, besides great summes committed to the new Temple are found out, and seised for the King. And now the new Chiefe Justiciar Hugh Bigod, brother to the Earle Marshall, (chosen this last Parliament by publike voyce) procures that foure knights in every Shire should inquire of the oppressions of the poore, done by great men; and cer∣tifie the same, that redresse might be made. Also order was taken against corrupt∣ing of justice; when yet notwithstanding this pretended care of the publike, it is noted by the Writers and Records of that time, how the Lords were themselves but as otidem tyranni, enforcing the services of the Kings tenants that dwelt neare them. But to make their cause the more popular, it was rumored that the King stood upon it, that his necessity must be supplied out of the estates of his people, whether they would or no: which the King hearing, sends forth Proclamation, de∣claring how certaine malitious persons had falsely and seditiously reported, that he meant unlawfully to charge his subjects, and subvert the Lawes and Liberties of the kingdome; and by these false suggestions, averted the hearts of his people from him: and therefore desires them not to give credit to such perurbers: for that he was ready to defend all Rights and Customes due unto them: and that they might rest of this secured, he caused his Letters to be made Patents. But now Montford Glocester, and Spenser, inforce the King to call a Parliament at London, where they get the authority of the twenty foure to be estated wholly upon themselves, and they alone to dispose of the custody of the Castles, and other businesses of the kingdom: and here they bind the King to lose to them their Legall obedience when∣soever he infringed his Charter. At this time intelligence was given to the Lords, that Richard King of the Romns had a purpose to come into England; and the Lords suspecting he would come with power to aide the King his brother, take or∣der for guarding the Ports, with intent to hinder his landing: but finding his traine to be but small, accompanied onely with his Queene, two German Earles, and eight knights: upon his promise to take their propounded Oath, they admit him to land; but would nether permit the King (who came thither to meee him) nor himselfe to enter into Dover Castle. At Canterbury they bring him into the Chapter house, where the Earle of Glocester standing forth in the midst, cals out the Earle, not by the name of King, but Richard Earle of Cornwall; who in reverent manner com∣ming forth, taketh his Oath in these words. Heare all men, that I Richard Earle of Cornwall, doe here sweare upon the holy Evangelists, that I shall be faithfull and diligent to reforme with you the Kingdome of England, and e an effectuall Coadju∣tor to expell all Rebels and disturbers of the same; and this Oath will inviolably ob∣serve, under paine of losing all the Land I have in England: so helpe me God. But though this Earle came home but weake and poore, yet upon his returne the King takes heart, and seeks all meanes to vindicate his power: and first sends messen∣gers secretly to Rome, to be Absolved from his enforced Oath; and to have the more assurance from the King of France, he makes an absolute resignation of all his Right to the Dutchy of Normandy, and the Earledomes of Anjou, Poictou, Tourene, and Maine: in regard whereof, the King of France gives him three hun∣dred thousand pounds (some say Crownes) o Anjouin money; and grans him to enjoy all Guyen, beyond the River Garone, all the Countrey of Xanoigne to the River of Charente, the Countrey of Limousin and Quercy, for him and his succes∣sors, doing their homage to the Crowne of France, as Duke of Aquitie. And now was the King of France made Arbiter of the difference betweene King Henry and his Barons, who gives sentence against the Barons concerning the Provisions at Ox∣ford; but of their side concerning King Iohns Charter: by which nice distintion, though he did but leave the matter as he found it: (for those Provisions, as the Lords pretended, were grounded upon that Charter) yet did his sentence draw
many away from the party of the Barons, amongst whom was Henry sonne to the Earle of Cornwall, Roger Clifford, Roger de Leisbourne, Haimo Lestrange, and many others. But the Earle of Leycester, notwithstanding this revolt, recovers the Town and Castle of Glocester; constraines the Citizens to pay a thousand pounds for their redemption; goes with an Army to Worcester, possesseth him of the Castle, thence to Shrewsbery, and so comes about to the Ile of Ely, subdues the same, and growes exceeding powerfull. The King doubting his approach to London, fals to treat of a Peace, and a Peace is concluded upon these conditions; that all the Castles of the King should be delivered to the keeping of the Barons; the Provisions of Ox∣ford should inviolably be kept; all strangers by a certaine time should avoid the kingdome, except onely such as were licensed to stay. The Prince had fortified Windsor Castle; but Leycester comming to besiege it, he treats with him for Peace, which is refused, and the Castle is rendred to him. The King at this time, to win time, convokes another Parliament at London, wher∣in he won many Lords to take his part; as namely the Prince Richard his brother, Henry his son, William Valence, with the rest of his brothers lately returned, and with them the King marcheth to Oxford, whither divers Lords of Scotland repaire to him; as Iohn Commin, Iohn Baylioll, Lords of Galloway, Robert Bruce, and others: also many Barons of the North; Glifford, Percey, Basset, and others. From Oxford he goes to Northampton, where he tooke prisoners, Simon Montford the younger, with foureteene other principall men; thence to Nottingham, making spoyles of such possessions as pertained to the Barons in those parts. And now the Kings side growes strong, which the Earles of Leycester and Glocester seeing, they write to the King, protesting their loyalty, and how they opposed onely such as were enemies to him and the kingdome, and had belied them. The King returnes answer, that themselves were the perturbers of him and his State, and sought his and the kingdomes destruction; and therefore defies them. The Prince likewise and the Earle of Cornwall send letters of defiance to them. Yet the Barons continue to mediate a Peace, and send the Bishops of London and Worcester, with offer of thir∣ty thousand Markes to the King, for the dammages done in these warres, so as the Statutes of Oxford may be observed; but this offer is not accepted. The Earle seeing no remedy, but it must be put to a day; takes his time to be earlier ready then was expected, and supplies his want of strength with policie, placing on the one side of a hill neare Lewis, where the battell was fought, certaine Ensignes with∣out men, in such sort, as they might seeme a farre off, to be Squadrons of succours to second those he brought to the encounter, whom he caused all to weare white Crosses, both for their owne notice, and the signification of his cause, which he would have to be thought for justice. Here the fortune of the day was his, the King, the Prince, the Earle of Cornwall, and his sonne Henry, the Earles of Arun∣dell and Hereford, with all the Scottish Lords, are taken prisoners; the Eale War∣ren, William de Valence, Guy de Lusignan, the Kings brothers, with Hugh Bigod Earle Marshall, save themselves by flight: five thousand (some say twenty thou∣sand) others are slaine in the battell. A yeare and a halfe is Simon Montford in pos∣session of his prisoners, carrying the King about with him to countenance his acti∣ons, till he had gotten all the strongest Castles in the kingdome. And now comes Erinnys and sets debabte betweene the two great Earles of Leycester and Glocester, about their Dividend: Leycester is taxed to doe more for his owne particular then the common good; his sonnes also presuming upon his great∣nesse, grew insolent: whereupon Glocester discontented, forsakes that side, and be∣takes him to the Prince; who lately escaping out of the Castle of Hereford, had gotten a power about him to try the fortune of another battell. The revolt of this Earle being great in it selfe, was greater by its example; for now many others revolted likewise: and the Earle of Leycester seeing the improvement of the Prin∣ces forces, who was now with his Army about Worcester, though he aw his owne disadvantage, yet imbattels in a Plaine neare Evsham to encounter him, and noting the manner of the approach of the Princes Army, said o those about him; These
men come bravely on, they learne it not of themselves, but of me; and seeing himselfe likely to be beet, and overlaid with multitude, he advised his friends, Hugh Spenser, Ralph Basset, and others, to shift for themselves; which when they refused to doe, then (saith he) let us commend our soules to God, for our bodies are theirs: and so undertaking the maine weight of the battell, perished under it and with him are slaine, his sonne Henry, eleven Barons, with many thousands of common Souldiers. And thus ended Montford the great Earle of Leycester, highly honoured in his life, and more highly should have beene after his death, if the peo∣ple might have had their will, who talkt of Miracles enough to have made him a Saint. And now is King Henry by this victory of his sonne, at liberty; who together repaire to Winchester, where a Parliament is convoked, and all who adhered to the Earle Montford are disinherited, and their estates conferred on others, at the Kings pleasure; the Londoners also have their Liberties taken from them. But though the death of Montford gave a great wound to the party of the Barons, yet it was not mortall, at least not mortal presently, for there remained reliques that kept it alive a good while after. Simon and Guy de Montford, sons of the Earle of Leycester, and other of the Barons, take and defend the Ile of Ely: the Castle of Killingworth held out halfe a yeare, till their victuals failed; and then yeelded upon conditions to have their lives and goods saved: and many others there were, resolute and desperate persons, strongly knit and fastned together, though now shortly upon dissolving. For after the Parliament at Westminster, the King with an Army going against them, and being at Northampton, Simon and Guy de Montford submit themselves to him: but when the Earle of Glocester opposed the restoring them to their estates, they were faine to flie the kingdome, and make their fortunes in other Countries, as indeed they did; the younger in Italy, the elder in France, where they were Propa∣tours of two great Families. Their mother was banisht shortly after the battell of Evesham, a Lady of eminent note, as being the daughter and sister of a King; and yet of more note for her patient bearing of adversity, or rather for her making a benefit of adversity; for by this meanes she betooke her selfe to the veile of piety, and died a Nunne at Montarges in France. Three yeares after this, the disinherited Barons held out, till at length, condi∣tions of render are propounded; but here the Councell are divided in opinion: Mortimer and others stated in the possessions of the disinherited, are against re∣storation; alleadging, it were injustice to take from them the rewards of their ser∣vice. Glocester, and the twelve ordained to deale for the peace of the State, are ear∣nest for restoration; alleadging, it were hard measure to grant them their lives, & not their livelihoods: but not prevailing, in great discontentment Glocester retires from Court, sends messengers to warne the King to remove strangers from his counsell; and observe the Provisions at Oxford, as he promised at Evesham: otherwise that he should not marvell if himselfe did what he thought fit. Hereupon Iohn de War∣ren, Earle of Surrey, and William de Valentia are sent to the Earle of Glocester: who though they could not perswade him to submit to the King; yet thus much they got of him under his hand and seale, that he would never beare Armes against the King or his sonne Edward, but onely defend himselfe, and pursue Roger Mortimer and his other enemies. And now a Parliament is convoked at Bury, wherein many demands are made by the King and the Legat, and all for money from the Clergy; but all denied, that nothing but denials are done in this Parliament. After this, the Legat imployes Solicitours to perswade the disinherited Lords which held the Ile of Ely, to returne to the faith and unity of the Church, and to the peace of the King, according to the forme propounded at Coventry: to which the Lords make answer, that they never opposed the unity of the Church but the varice of Church-men that were put in authority; and that they never opposed the King, but for the good of the kingdome: and then required that the Provisions of Ox∣ford might be observed, and pledges be given them for their security. Hereupon the yeare after, the King prepares a mighty Army, and Prince Edward with bridges
entring the Ile of Ely, shuts them up so, that he constraines them at last to yeeld; also the Earle of Glocester comming to London with an Army, is by the Legat once againe perswaded to render himselfe to the King, and upon forfeiture of twelve thousand Markes if ever he should raise any commotion againe, is reconciled. Now remaines Lewilin and the Welsh, to be chastened for aiding of Simon Montford; but the King going against them with an Army, they give him two and thirty thou∣sand pounds Sterling, and so make their peace. And here was an end of the first warres betweene the Kings of England and their Barons. The next yeare after the Popes Legat Ottobon signes with the Croysado both the Kings sonnes, Edward and Edmund, the Earle of Glocester, and divers Noble men induced to undertake the Holy warre, by the sollicitation of him and the King of France: who nothwith∣standing his former calamities endured in that action, would once again adventure it: and because Prince Edward wanted meanes to furnish himselfe out, the King of France lends him thirty thousand Markes upon a morgage of Gascoyne. And now whilst this preparation is in hand, King Henry labours to establish the peace of the kingdome, and to reforme the excesses which the warre had bred; and the same yeare assembles his last Parliament at Marleborough, where the Statutes of that title were enacted. Neare two yeeres it seemes to have beene after the under∣taking the Crosse before Prince Edward set forth; but then taking his wife Eleanor with him, though young with childe, he set forward; and in the voyage, when many of his people seemed desirous to leave him and returne home, he is said to have strucken his breast, and sworne; that if all his followers forsooke him, he would yet enter Acon, or Ptolemais; though but onely with his horse-keeper Fowin. Shortly after Richard King of the Romans died, and the yeare following King Henry. Of his Taxations, and wayes for raising of money. NEver sonne was more like a Father in any thing, then King Henry was like his Father King Iohn, in this point, for raising of money; for he trode directly in all his steps, if he added not something of his owne. King Iohn had great Sub∣sidies granted him by Parliament, for any great action he undertooke, so had King Henry. King Iohn resumed the lands aliened from the Crowne, so did King Henry. King Iohn made benefit of the vacancie of Bishopricks and Abbeys, so did King Henry. K. Iohn took great Fines of many for crimes not proved, but onely supposed, so did King Henry. King Iohn made benefit of a new Seale, so did King Henry. King Iohn extorted great summes from the Iewes, so did King Henry. And one way more he had to get money, which perhaps his Father had not, and that was by begging, as he told the Abbot of Borough; It was more Almes to give money to him, then to the Begger that went from doore to doore. Indeed Taxations in this Kings Raigne may be reckoned amongst his Annuall Revenues, for scarce any yeare passed without a Parliament, and seldome any Parliament without a Taxe; or if any sometimes without, it was then cause of the greater Taxation some o∣ther way; as when he tooke of the Londoners for having aided the Barons, twenty thousand Markes. Of his Lawes and Ordinances. IN this Kings Raigne were ratified and confirmed the two great Charters of Mag∣na Chara, and Charta de Foresta: also in his time were enacted the Statutes cal∣led of Merton, of Oxford, and of Marleborough. Also stealing of cattell, which before was but Pecuniary, he made capitall: and the first that suffered for the same, was one of Dunstable; who having stollen twelve Oxen from the Inhabitants of Colne, and being pursued to Redburne, was by a Bailiffe of Saint Albons, according to the Kings Proclamation, condemned and beheaded. And it may seeme strange that in these times so much bloud should be shed in the field, and none upon the
scaffold; for till the twenty sixth yeare of this King, that one William Marisc, the sonne of Geoffrey Marisc, a Noble man of Ireland, being condemned for Piracie and Treason, was hanged, beheaded, and quartered; there is no example of that kinde of punishment to be found in our Histories. Particularly in this Kings Raigne was made that Statute, by which the Ward and marriage of the heires of Barons within age, is given to the King. Also in this Kings Raigne the Pleas of the Crowne were pleaded in the Tower of London. All Weares in the Thames are in this Kings time ordained to be pluck'd up and destroyed. Also the Citizens of London are allowed by Charter, to passe Toll-free through all England, and to have free Warren about London, also to have and use a common Seale. Also it was ordained that no Sheriffe of London should continue in his office longer then one yeare, which they did before for many. In the five and twentieth yeare of this King were Aldermen first chosen within the City of London, which then had the rule of the City, and of the Wards of the same, and were then yearely changed, as now the Sheriffes are. It was in this Kings time allowed to the City of London, to present their Major to the Barons of the Exchequer to be sworne, which before was to be presented to the King, wheresoever he were. In his time the clause No obstante (brought in first by the Pope) was taken up by the King in his grants and writings. Also in this Kings time, William Bishop of Salisbury, first caused that cu∣stome to be received for a Law, whereby the Tenants of every Lordship are bound to owe their suite to the Lords Court, of whom they hold their Tenements. Affaires of the Church in his time. AFfaires of the Church for matter of Doctrine, were never more quiet then in this Kings Raigne; for now all Heresies accounted of the time, especially the Albigenses were in a manner suppressed by the Armes of the King of France, not without the Vote of the King of England, who forbore to make warre upon him in tendernesse to this service; but for matter of manners, they were never more turbulent: for now Abbeys were fleeced, Sanctuaries violated, Clergy-men outra∣ged, Bishops themselves not spared; and all for greedinesse of money, or for re∣venge. Ottobone the Popes Legat here in England, lying at the Abbey of Oseney, there happened a difference betweene his servants and the Schollers of Oxford; in which contention, a brother of his was slaine, and the Legat himselfe faine to fly into the Steeple for safegard of his life: whereupon afterward being gotten from thence by the Kings safe conduct, he thundred out curses against the Schollers, and interdicted the University, so as the Colledges grew desolate, and the Students were dispersed abroad into other places, for the space of halfe a yeare: till the Monkes of Oseney, and the Regent Masters of Oxford were faine to goe bare-foote and bare-head through London, as farre as Durham house, where the Legat lay; and there upon their humble submission, and great mens intercession, they were absol∣ved, and the University restored to its former estate. But of this Ottobone, it may not be impertinent to relate a little further; that going afterward out of England, he came by degrees, after the death of Innocent the fifth, to be Pope of Rome him∣selfe, by the name of Adrian the fifth, and died within fifty dayes after his electi∣on. Amongst affaires of the Church, may be reckoned the Ulcers of any mem∣ber of the Church: such a one as in this Kings time brake out most loathsome; for one procuring five wounds to be made in his body, in resemblance to the five wounds in Christs body, tooke upon him to be Christ, and had gotten a Woman, that tooke upon her to be the Virgin Mary; who continuing obstinate in their mad∣nesse, were adjudged to be immured and shut up betweene two wals, to the end (no doubt) the contagion of their filthinesse should spread no further. In this Kings time, a little novelty was first brought in by Pope Innocent the fourth, who ordai∣ned that Cardinals should weare red Hats: something perhaps for mystery, and something for distictnion.
Workes of piety done by him, or by others in his time. THis King caused a chest of Gold to be made for laying up the Reliques of King Edward the Confessour, in the Church of Westminster. Hee builded a Church for converted Iewes in London: also an Hospitall at Oxford, for passengers and diseased persons: also the new Coventuall Church and the Chappell of our Lady at Westminster, whereof hee laid himselfe the first stone: also the houe of Black-Friers in Canterbury. In his time, Ela Countesse of Salisbury, founded the Abbey of Lacok in Wiltshire; Richard Earle of Cornwall, founded Hayles a Monaste∣ry of Cistersian Monkes neare to Winchcombe in Glocestershire: Reginold de Moun, Earle of Somerset, and Lord of Dunster, founded the Abbey of Newham in Devon∣shire: Ranulph the third Earle of Chester, and Lord of little Britaine, builded the Castles of Chartley, Bestone, and the Abbey of Dela Cresse: Sir Iohn Mansell the Kings Chaplaine, founded a house of Regular Chanons neare to Rumney in Kent: William de Albineto Earle of Arundell, founded the Priory of Wimondham: William Brunc, a Citizen of London, and Rosia his wife, founded the Hospitall of our Lady without Bishopsgate in London: And Isabel Countesse of Arundell, founded the Nun∣nery of Marran neare to Linne. Friers Minors first arrived at Dover, nine in num∣ber, whereof five remained at Canterbury, and there builded the first Covent of Friers Minors that ever was in England: the other foure came to London, who en∣creasing in number, had a place assigned them in Saint Nicholas Shambles; which Iohn Iwyn, Mercer of London, appropriated to the use of the said Friers, and became himselfe a Lay brother. Also in this Kings time the new worke of Saint Pauls Church in London was begunne. If it were piety in the Iew, who falling into a Privie upon a Saterday, would not be taken out that day, because it was the Iewes Sabbath: It was as much piety in the Earle of Glocester, that would not suffer him to be taken out the next day, because it was the Christian Sabbath; and when the third day he was taken out dead, whose piety was the greater? A strange acci∣dent upon an act of piety, is related in this Kings time; which if true, is a Miracle, if not true, is yet a Legend, and not unworthy to be read: that in a time of dearth, one man in a certaine Parish, who allowed poore people to relieve themselves with taking Corne upon his ground, had at Harvest a plentifull crop; where others that denied them, had their Corne all blasted, and nothing worth. In this Kings time also, Hugh Balsamus, Bishop of Ely, founded Saint Peters Colledge in Cam∣bridge. Hubert de Burgh Earle of Kent, was buried in the Church of the Friers Preachers in London, to which Church he gave his Palace at Westminster, which af∣terward the Arch-bishop of Yorke bought, and made it his Inne; since commonly called Yorke place, now White-Hall. Casualties happening in his time. AT one time there fell no Raine in England, from the first of March to the Assum∣ption of our Lady; and at another time there fell so much Raine, that Holland and Holdernes in Lincolneshire were over-flowed and drowned. In the seventeenth yeare of his Raign, were seene five Suns at one time together; after which followed so great a Dearth, that people were constrained to eate horse flesh, and barkes of Trees: and in London twenty thousand were starved for want of foode. Also in his time the Church of Saint Mildred in Canterbury, and a great part of the City was burnt. Also the Towne of New-Castle upon Tine was burnt, Bridge and all. And though it may seeme no fit place to tell it, yet here or no where it must be told; that in this Kings time there was sent by the King of France, the first Elephant that ever was seene in England.
Of his Wife and Children. HE marryed Eleanor, the second of the five Daughters of Raymond Earle of Provence, who lived his Wife thirty seven yeares, his Widow nineteene, dy∣ed a Nun at Aimesbury, and was buryed in her Monastery. By her, he had sixe Sonnes, and three Daughters: of his Sonnes, the foure youngest dyed young, and were buryed, three of them at Westminster, and the fourth in the New Temple by Fleetstreet. His eldest Sonne Edward, surnamed Longshanke, of his tall and slender body, succeeded him in the kingdome. His second Sonne Edmund, surnamed Crouch-backe, of bowing in his backe, (as some say) but more likely of wearing the signe of the Crosse, (anciently called a Crouch) upon his backe, which was usually worne of such as had vowed voyages to Hierusalem, as he had done. He was invested Titular King of Sicilie and Apulia, and created Earle of Lancaster; on whose person originally the great contention of Lancaster and Yorke was Founded. He had two Wives, the first was Avelin. Daughter and Heire of William Earle of Albemarle, by whom he left no issue. The second was Queene Blanch, Daughter of Robert Earle of Artois, (Brother of Saint Lewis King of France) Widow of Henry of Champaigne King of Navarre: by her he had issue three Sonnes, and one Daughter. His eldest Sonne Thomas, who after his Father was Earle of Lanca∣ster, and having marryed Alice, Daughter and Heire of Henry Lacie Earle of Lin∣colne, was beheaded at Pomfret without issue. His second sonne Henry Lord of Monmouth, who after his Brothers death was Earle of Lancaster, and Father of Henry the first Duke of Lancaster: his third Sonne Iohn; who dyed unmarryed. His Daughter Mary marryed to Henry Lord Percy, Mother of Henry the first Earle of Northumberland. This Edmund dyed at Bay in Gascoyne, in the yeare 1296. when he had lived fifty yeares, whose body halfe a yeare after his death was brought over into England and entombed at Westminster. Of King Henries three Daugh∣ter, the eldest Margaret was marryed to Alexander the third, King of Scotland, by whom she had issue, two Sonnes, Alexander and David; who dyed both before their Father, without issue, and one Daughter Margart Queene of Norway, Wife of King Erike, and Mother of Margaret the Heire of Scotland and Norway, that dyed un∣marryed. The second Daughter of King Henry was Beatrice, borne at Burdeaux, marryed to Iohn the first Duke of Britaine, and had issue by him, Arthur Duke of Britaine, Iohn Earle of Richmont, Peter; and Blanch marryed to Philip Sonne of Robert Earle of Artois, Eleanor a Nunne at Aimesbury, and Mary marryed to Guy Earle of S. Paul she deceased in Britaine, and was buryed at London, in the Quire of the Gray Fryers within Newgate. The third Daughter of King Henry, named Katherine, dyed young, and lies buryed at Westminster, in the space betweene the Chappels of King Edward and Saint Benet. Of his Personage and Conditions. HE was of stature but meane, yet of a well compacted body, and very strong: one of his eyelids hanging downe, and almost covering the blacke of his Eye: For his inward endowments, it may be said, he was wiser for a man, then for a Prince; for he knew better how to governe his life then his Subjects. He was rather Pious then Devout, as taking more pleasure in hearing Masses then Sermons, as he said to the King of France, He had rather see his Friend once, then heare from him often. His minde seemed not to stand firme upon its Basis, for e∣very sudden accident put him into passion. He was neither constant in his love, nor in his hate; for he never had so great a Favorite whom he cast not into dis∣grace, nor so great an Enemy whom he received not into favour. An example of both which qualities was seene in his carriage towards Hubert de Burgh, who was for a time his greatest Favourite, yet cast out afterward in miserable disgrace, and then no man held in greater hared, yet received afterward into grace againe. And
it is memorable to heare with what crimes this Hubert was charged at his Arraign∣ment; and pecially one: That to disswade a great Lady from marriage with the King, he had said, the King was a squint-eyed Foole, and a kinde of Leper, de∣ceitfull, perjued, more faint-hearted then a Woman, and utterly unfit for any Noble Ladies company. For which, and other crimes laid to his charge in the Kings Bench, where the King himselfe was present; he was adjudged to have his Lands confiscate, and to be deprived of his title of Earle; yet after all this, was restored to his estate againe, and suffered to live in quiet. He was more desirous of money then of honour, for else he would never have sold his Right to the two great Dukedomes of Normandy and Anjou to the King of France for a Summe of money. Yet he was more desirous of honour then of quietnesse, for else he would never have contended so long with his Barons about their Charter of Liberty, which was upon the matter, but a point of Honour. His most eminent vertue, and that which made him the more eminent, as being rare in Princes, was his Conti∣nency; for there is nothing read, either of any bae children he had, or of any Concubine he kept. Of his Death and Buriall. THough he had lived a troublesome life, yet he dyed a quiet death; for he had etled Peace in his kingdome, and in his Conscience. For being at Saint Ed∣mundsbury, and finding himselfe not well at ease, he made the more hast to Lon∣don; where calling before him his Lords, and specially Gilbert de Clare, Earle of Glocester; he exhorted them to be true and faithfull to his Sonne Prince Edward, who was at that time farre from home, and therefore had the more need of their care, which consisted chiefly in their agreement one with another. And then, his sicknesse encreasing, he yeelded up his Soule to God, on the sixteenth day of No∣vember, in the yeare 1272. when he had lived threescore and five yeares, Raigned five and fifty, and was buryed at Westminster, which he had newly Builded. Of Men of note in his time. OF Martial men famous in his time there were many, but three specially who ob∣scured the rest: The first was William Marshall Earle of Pembroke, memorable for the great care he had of King Henry in his minority, and more memorable for the lit∣tle care, that Destiny had of his Posterity; for leaving five Sonnes behind him, they all lived to be Earles successively, yet all dyed without issue: So as the great name and numerous Family of the Marshals came wholly to be extinct in that Genera∣tion. The second was Richard de Clare Earle of Glocester, who in a Battaile against Baldwyn de Gisnes, a valiant Fleming, imployed by King Henry, himselfe alone en∣countred twelve of his Enemies, and having his Horse slaine under him, he pitcht one of them by the legge out of the saddle, and leapt into it himselfe, and conti∣nued the fight without giving ground, till his Army came to rescue him. An Act that may seeme fitter to be placed amongst the Fictions of knights Errant, then in a true Narration. The third was Simon Montford, a man of so audacious a spirit, that he gave King Henry the lye to his face, and that in presence of all his Lords; and of whom it seemes, the King stood in no small feare: for passing one time up∣on the Thames, and suddenly taken with a terrible storme of Thunder and Light∣ning, he commanded to be set ashore at the next Staires, which happened to be at Durham House, where Montford then lay, who comming downe to meet the King, and perceiving him somewhat frighted with the Thunder, said unto him, Your Majsty need not feare the Thunder, the danger is now past: No Montford (said the King) I feare not the Thunder so much as I doe thee. Of men famous for Sanctity of life, there were likewise many in his time, but three more eminent then the rest, Edmund Arch-bishop of Canterbury, Richard Bishop of Chichester, and Thomas Arch-deacon of Hereford; All three either Canonized, or at least
thought worthy to be Canonized for Saints. To these may be added Robert Gross∣head Bishop of Lincolne, who Translated the Testaments of the twelve Patriarchs, out of Greeke into Latine; which through envy of the Jewes never came to the knowledge of Saint Hierome, wherein are many Prophesies of our Saviour Christ. Of men famous for learning there were likewise many in his time; of whom, some left workes behinde them for testimonies of their knowledge in divers kindes, as Alexander Hales a Fryer Minor, who wrote many Treatises in Divinity; Ralp Coggeshall, who wrote the Appendix to the Chronicle of Ralph Niger; Randulph Earle of Chester, the third and last of that name, who compiled a Booke of the Lawes of England; Henry Bracton, who wrote the Booke commonly called by his name, De Consuetudinibus Anglicanis: and besides these, Hugh Kirkestead, Ri∣chard of Ely, Peter Henham, Iohn Gyles, and Nicholas Fernham, excellent Phy∣sitians; Richard surnamed Theologus, and Robert Bacon, two notable Divines; Ste∣phen Langthon, Richard Fisaker, Simon Stokes, Iohn of Kent, William Shirwood, Mi∣chael Blaunpaine, Iohn Godard, Vincent of Coventry, Albericke Veer, Richard Wich, Iohn Basing, Roger Waltham, William Seningham, and others.
THE LIFE and RAIGNE OF KING EDWARD THE FIRST. Surnamed of WINCHESTER. Of his comming to the Crowne, AS soone as King Henry was dead and buryed, the great Lords of the Land caused his eldest Sonne Prince Edward to be proclaimed King: and assembling at the New Temple in London, they there tooke order for the quiet Governing of the kingdome, till he should come home. For at this time he was absent in the Holy Land; and had beene there a∣bove a yeare when his Father dyed. But we cannot bring him home without telling what he did, and what he suffered in all that time, and in his returne; for at his first comming thither, he rescued the great City of Acon, from being urrendred to the Souldan; after which, out of envy to his Valour, one Anzazim a desperate Saracen, who had often beene employed to him from their Generall, being one time, upon pre∣tence of some secret message, admitted alone into his Chamber, with a poysoned knife gave him three wounds in the Body, two in the Arme, and one neare the arme∣pit, which were thought to be mortall, and had perhaps beene mortall, if out of unspeakeable love, the Lady Eleanor his Wife had not suckt out the poyson of his wounds with her mouth, and thereby effected a cure, which otherwise had beene incurable: and it is no wonder, that love should doe wonders, which is it selfe a wonder. And now being disappointed of Aides that were promised to be sent him, and leaving Garrisons in fit places for defence of the Country, he with his Wife Eleanor takes his journey homewards, and first passing by Sicilie, was there most kindly received by Charles King of that Island, where he first heard of his Fathers death; which he tooke more heavily farre, then he had taken the death of his young Sonne Henry, whereof he had heard a little before; at which when King Charles marvailed, he answered, that other Sonnes might be had, but no∣ther Father could never be had. From hence he passeth through Italy, where much honour is done him both by the Pope and other Princes; and then descends into Burgoigne, where by the Earle of Chalboun, a stout man at Armes, he is challenged at a Turneament, with a pretence to solemnize his presence, but with a purpose indeed to disgrace his person; and though Prince Edward in many respects might
justly have refused it, yet the noblenesse of his mind would not suffer him to passe by any occasion of shewing his valour and in this  as he made it appeare, that ame had beene no  the report it mae of hi. And here a great part of his English Nobility met ; from whence he passeth in∣to France, where the King Philip his eare Cou (as being Sister Sonnes) en∣tertaines him with great solemnity: and graceth his solemnity with so much cour∣tesie, that it wonne Prince Edward volntarily to do him homage for the Territo∣ries he held in France; & this voluntarines in Prince Edward, won the King of France againe to grant quietly unto him, all the Lands in France that belonged to him; and so these two great Kings by reciprocall courtesie effected that, which thei Prede∣cessours by force could never effect. From her , passeth through Auitaine, and having there taken homage of his Subjects, and set all things in order, he set Saile and arrived in England, above a yeare after the death of his Father: a long time for plotting of mischiefe, and a strong temptation to plotters of mischiefe; if all the causes of quietnesse had not concurred: but such was the worthinesse of Prince Edwards person, and such the undoubtednesse of his Title, that as there could be no Competitour, so there would be no Oppugner And indeed the Divine Pro∣vidence had shewed a speciall care over him from his Child-hood! whereof one or two Examples will not be unfit to be related. One was this, that being yet but young, and playing one time at Chesse with a Friend, in the midst of his game, without any apparent occasion, he removed himselfe from the place where he sate, when suddenly there fell from the roofe of the house a great stone, which if he had stayed in the place but never so little had beaten out his braines. Another Ex∣ample of the Divine Providence over him, (though it happened afterwards) was this: Having prepared a great Fleete of Ships for a journey into Flanders, and be∣ing at Winchelsey, where the Ships were to meete; it happened that riding about the Harbour, his Horse frighted with the noyse of a Windmill, which the wind drove violently about, skrambled up and leapt over the Mudwall of the Towne, so as neither the King nor the Horse was to be seene, but every one judged the King could not chuse but be throwne and killed; yet such was the Divine Provi∣dence over him, that the Horse lighted upon his feet, and the King keeping the Saddle returned safe. And under the wing of this Divine Providence, he had now passed all the dangers of his tedious Journey; and being safely come to London, was on the fifteenth day of August in the yeare 1274. Crowned at Westminster, to∣gether with his Wife Queene Eleanor, by Robert Kilwarby Arch-bishop of Canter∣bury: where five hundred great Horses were let loose, for any that could take them; and yet the outward solemnity was not more great, then the inward joy was univer∣sall, every man rejoycing, not onely at a change, which of it selfe is pleasing, but at a change so much for the better, as this was like to be. Of his Acts done after he was Crowned. THe Acts of this King after he was Crowned, may not unfitly be divided into five parts: His Acts with his Temporall Lords; His Acts with his Clergy; Then with Wales; Then his Acts with Scotland; And lastly with France. And first, concerning his Lords, he gave them good contentment in the beginning of his Raigne, by enlarging their liberties, and granting them easier Lawes, for which purpose he called a Parliament, wherein were made the Statutes called of Westmin∣ster the first, so as he had no difference with them, till toward the end of his Raigne, as shall be shewed hereafter. In the next place, concerning his Acts with his Cler∣gy, he began with them betimes; for having lived to be of good age, three or foure and thirty yeares old, in his Fathers Raigne, he observed in that time, that their power was too predominant, and therefore thought fit to clip their wings; at least to keepe them from farther growing: which he did by these meanes: First, in the sixth yeare of his Raigne, he deprived many chiefe Monasteries of their Li∣berties, and tooke from the Abbot and Covent of Westminster, the Returne of
Writs granted them by the Charter of his Father, King Henry the third. The next yeare after he got to be enacted the Statute of Mortmaine, to hinder the encrease of their Temporall Possessions. In the second Statute of Westminster, he defalked the Jurisdiction of Ecclesiasticall Judges; and growing more upon them, he re∣quired the moity of all their Goods, as well Temporall as Spirituall, for one yeare. Then cals he a Parliament of his Nobles at Salisbury, without admission of any Church-men in it: And it is worth the noting, that Marchian his Trea∣surer, acquainting him that in Churches and Religious houses, there was much treasure to be had, if it might be taken; he made no scruple of it, but caused it to be taken and brought into his Exchequer. But finding his Prelates not well con∣tented with it, to please them againe, he bids them aske something of him, where∣in they should see how much he favoured them. And they asking of him to re∣peale the Statute of Mortmaine, that had beene made so much to their hinderance; He answered, that this was a Statute made by the whole body of the Realme, and therefore was not in his power, who was but one Member of that Body, to undoe that which all the Members together had done; and perhaps whatsoever they should have asked else, he would have had an answer to redeeme his Offer. And thus much concerning his Clergy. In the next place are the Welsh, who had themselves begun with the King: For their Prince Leolyn being summoned to attend at his Coronation, refused to come; and afterward at more leisure, being required to come and doe his Homage, he stood upon termes of safe conduct, pretending doubt to be used, as his Father Gryf∣fin had beene; who upon hard usage in the Tower, seeking to make escape, fell from the Walls and brake his necke. But indeed it was alwayes a Custome with this Nation, at every change of Princes in England, to try conclusions, hoping at one time or other to have a day of it, and to change their yoke of bondage into li∣berty; for which they were never better Provided then now; especially (which is the greatest matter in Warre) having a Valiant Prince to be their Leader. But there happened an accident which tooke off their edge at this time: For the Lady Eleanor, a Daughter of the late Earle Simon Montford, whom Prince Leolyn ex∣treamely loved, being passing out of France into Wales, was by the way upon the Sea taken by English ships, and brought to King Edward, and for the love of her, Prince Leolyn was content to submit himselfe to any conditions: which besides subjection of his State, was to pay fifty thousand pounds Sterling, and a thousand pounds per annum during his life; and upon these conditions the marriage with his beloved Lady was granted him, and was solemnized here in England, whereat the King and Queene were themselves present. Three yeares Leolyn continued loyall, and within bounds of obedience, in which time David, one of his Brothers, stay∣ing here in England, and found by the King to be of a stirring Spirit, was much ho∣noured by him; Knighted, and matched to a rich Widow, Daughter of the Earle of Darby, and had given him by the King besides, the Castle of Denbigh, with a thousand pounds per annum: though (as it was afterwards found) he lived here but in the nature of a spy: For when Prince Leolyns Lady was afterward dead, and that he (contrary to his Conditions formerly made) brake out into rebellion, then goes his Brother David to him, notwithstanding all these Favours of the King: and they together enter the English Borders: Surprise the Castles of Flynt and Rut∣land, with the person of the Lord Clifford, sent Justiciar into those parts: and in a great Battaile overthrew the Earles of Northumberland and Surrey, with the slaugh∣ter of Sir William Lyndsey, Sir Richard Tanny, and many others. King Edward ad∣vertised of this Revolt and overthrow, being then at the Vyzes in Wiltshire, pre∣pares an Army to represse it; but before his setting forth, goes privately to his Mo∣ther Queene Eleanor, lying at the Nunnery of Aimesbury, with whom whilest he conferred, there was one brought into the Chamber, who faigned himselfe (be∣ing blinde) to have received his sight at the Tombe of King Henry the third: A∣soone as the King saw the man, he remembred he had seene him before, and knew him to be a most notorious lying Villaine, and wished his Mother in no case to be∣leeve
him: but his mother, who much rejoyced to heare of this Miracle, for the glory of her husband, finding her sonne unwilling that his Father should be a Saint, grew suddenly into such a rage against him, that she commanded him to avoid her Chamber: which the King obeyes; and going forth, meetes with a Clergy man, to whom he tels the story of this Impostour, and merrily said; He knew the justice of his Father to be such, that he would rather pull out the eyes (being whole) of such a wicked wretch, then restore them to their sight. In this meane time the Arch-bishop of Canterbury had gone of himselfe to Prince Leolin, and had labou∣red to bring him and his brother David to a re-submission, but could effect nothing; for besides other reasons that swayed Prince Leolin, the conceit of a Prophesie of Merlin, that he should shortly be Crowned with the Diadem of Brute, so over∣weighed him, that he had no care for peace, and shortly after no head: for after the Earle of Pembroke had taken Bere Castle, which was the seat of Prince Leolin, he was himself slain in battell; and his head cut off by a common Souldier, was sent to King Edw. who caused the same to be Crowned with Ivie, and to be set upon the Tower of London; And this was the end of Leolin, the last of the Welsh Princes, betraied (as some write) by the men of Buelth. Not long after his brother David also is taken in Wales, and judged in England to an ignominious death: First, drawn at a horse taile about the City of Shrewsbury, then beheaded, the trunke of his body divided, his heart and bowels burnt, his head sent to accompany his brothers on the Tower of London, his foure quarters to foure Cities, Bristow, Northpton, York, and Winchester: A manifold execution, and the first shewed in that kind to this kingdome, in the per∣son of the son of a Prince, or any other Noble man that we reade of in our History. It is perhaps something which some here observe, that at the sealing of this con∣quest, King Edward lost his eldest son Alphonsus, of the age of twelve years, (a Prince of great hope) and had onely left to succeed him, his sonne Edward lately borne at Carnarvan, and the first of the English, intituled Prince of Wales, but no Prince worthy of either Wales or England. And thus came Wales to be united to the Crowne of England, in the eleventh yeare of this King Edwards Raigne; who thereupon established the government thereof, according to the Lawes of England, as may be seene by the Statute of Rutland, in the twelfth yeare of his Raigne. The worke of Wales being setled, King Edward passeth over into France, upon notice of the death of Philip the Hardy, to renew and confirme such conditions as his state in those parts required, with the new King Philip the fourth, intituled the Faire; to whom he doth homage for Aquitaine, having before quitted his claime to Normandy for ever. After three yeares and a halfe being away in France, he returns into England; and now in the next place comes the businesse with Scotland, and will hold him woke at times as long as he lives, and his sonne after him. Alexan∣der the third, King of Scots, as he was running his horse, fell horse and man to the ground, and brake his necke, and died immediately by reason whereof (he lea∣ving no issue, but onely a daughter of his daughter Margaret, who died also soone after) there fell out presently great contention about succession. Ten Competitors pretend title, namely, Erick King of Norway, Florence Earle of Holland, Robert Bruce Earle of Anandale, Iohn de Baylioll Lord of Galloway, Iohn de Hastings Lord of Abergeveny, Iohn Cummin Lord of Badenaw, Patrick de Dunbarre Earle of March, Iohn de Vescie, Nicholas de Suls, William de Rosse; all or most of them decending from David Earle of Huntington, younger brother to William King of Scots, and great Unkle to the late King Alexander. This title King Edward takes upon him to decide, pretending a Right of Superiority from his Ancestours over that kingdome and proving it by authority of old Chronicles, as Marianus Scotus, William of Malms∣bury, Roger de Hoveden, Henry of Huntington, Ralph de Luceto, and others; which though the Scottish Lords who swaied the Interregnum opposed, yet are they con∣strained for avoyding of further inconveniences, to make him Arbiter thereof, and the tenne Competitours bound to stand to his award. Two are especially found, betweene whom the ight lay, Iohn de Baylioll Lord of Galloway, and Robert Brce; the one descending from an elder daughter, the other from a sonne of a younger
daughter of Alan, who had married the eldest daughter of this David brother to King William. The controversie held long, twelve of either kingdome learned in the Lawes, are elected to debate the same at Berwick; all the best Civilians in the Universities of France are solicited to give their opinions; all which brought forth rather doubts then resolutions: whereupon King Edward the better to sway this businesse by his presence, takes a journey Northward; where being come as farre as Lincolnshire, he lost his beloved wife Queene Eleanor: and thereupon going backe to see her Funerall performed at Westminster: that done, he returnes present∣ly to his Scottish businesse. And now sixe yeares were passed since the death of King Alexander, and yet nothing concluded in this controversie; whereupon King Edward deals privately with Bruce, (who had the weaker Title, but the more friends) and promiseth him, if he would sweare fealty and homage to the Crowne of England, he would Invest him in that of Scotland. But Bruce answers, he was not so dsirous to rule, as thereby to infringe the liberties of his Countrey. Whereupon with the like offer he sets upon Baylioll, who having better right, but lesse love of the people, and more greedy of a kingdome then honour, accepts the condition; and there∣upon is Crowned King at Scone, hath fealty done him by all the chiefe Nobility, except Bruce: comes to New-Castle upon Tyne, where King Edward then lay; and there, with many of his Nobles, sweares fealty, and doth homage to him, as his Soveraigne Lord. Which act done to secure him, overthrew him: for being little beloved before, hereby he became lesse: such as stood for Bruce, and others of the Nobility (tender of the preservation of their Countries liberty) took stomach a∣gainst him; and not onely for this, but shortly after for his injustice in the case of the Earle of Fife, one of the sixe Governours in the time on the Interregnum, who had beene slaine by the Family of Alberneth; the brother of which Earle prose∣cuting Law before King Baylioll, in his high Court of Parliament, and having no right done him (King Baylioll giving judgement of the side of the Alberneths) he ap∣peales to the Court of the King of England: whereupon King Baylioll is summo∣ned, appeares, sits with King Edward in his Parliament till his cause was to be heard, and then is cited by an Officer to arise, and to stand in the place appointed for plea∣ding; then he craves to answer by a Procuratour, but is denied, and thereupon de∣scends to the ordinary place, and defends his cause himselfe: which indignity (as he tooke it) so incenseth him, that he returnes home with a breastfull charged with indignation; meditates revenge, renues the ancient league with France, confirmes it with marriage of his sonne Edward, to a daughter of Charles brother to King Phi∣lip, glad in regard of late offences taken against the King of England, to embrace the same; which done, Baylioll defies King Edward, renounceth his Allegeance, as unlawfully done, being not in his power, without consent of the State, to doe any such Act. Hereupon brake out that mortall dissension betweene the two Nations, which consumed more Christian bloud, and continued longer then ever quarrell we reade of did, between any two people in the world. For he that beganne it, could not end it, but it lasted almost three hundred yeares, and was never throughly abo∣lished, till the late blessed union wrought by him in whom Wisdome and Vertue, Right and Power concurred all to make it firme. And now the fatall Chaire in which the Kings of Scotland used to be Inaugurated, seemes to recover its secret operation, according to antient Prophesie: that whither soever that Chaire should be removed, the kingdome should be removed with it; and this Chaire King Ed∣ward caused to be brought out of Scotland to Westminster, and to be placed there amongst the Monuments, where it still continues. But now King Baylioll being summoned to appeare at New-Castle, and refusing to come; King Edward enters Scotland with an Army, consisting of foure thousand horse, and thirty thousand foot, besides five hundred horse, and one thousand foote of the Bishop of Durham. Ber∣wicke is first wonne, with the slaughter of fifteene thousand Scots; (our Writers say more) and after that, the Castles of Dunbarre, Roxborough, Edinbough, Sterlig, and Saint Iohns Towne; and now King Balioll sues for Peace, submits himselfe, takes againe his Oath of Fealty to King Edward, as his Soveraigne Lord: which done,
a Parliament for Scotland is held at Berwicke, where the Nobility likewise did Ho∣mage to him, confirming the same by their Charter, under their hands and seales: onely William Dowglasse refuseth; content rather to endure the misery of a Prison, then yeeld to the subjection of the King of England. But King Baylioll, notwith∣standing his submission, is sent prisoner into England after his foure yeares Raigne in Scotland; and King Edward returnes home, leaving Iohn Warren Earle of Sussex and Surrey, Warden of all Scotland; Hugh Cressingham Treasurer, and Ormesloy Chiefe Justice, with Commission to take in his name, the Homages and Fealties of all such as held Lands of that Crowne. But this continued not long, for King Ed∣ward being absent in France, the Scots fell upon the Officers he had left; slew Sir Hugh Cressingham with sixe thousand English, recovered many Castles, and regained the towne of Berwick, and all by the animation and conduct of one William Walleys, a poore private Gentleman, (though Nobly descended) who seeing his Countrey without a Head, and thereby without a Heart (all the great men, either in captivity or subjection assembles certaine of as poore and desperate estate as himselfe, and leads them to attempt upon whatsoever advantages they could finde to annoy the English, and having therein good successe, it so encreased both his courage and company, that he afterward came to be the generall Guardian of the whole king∣dome; and was in possibility to have absolutely redeemed his Countrey from the subjection of the English, if the speedy comming of King Edward had not preven∣ted him. For now King Edward, to bring his worke neare together, removes his Exchequer and Courts of Justice to Yorke, where they continued above sixe yeares; and thither he cals a Parliament, requiring all his subjects that held of him by knights service, to be ready at Roxborough by a peremptory day: where there assem∣ble three thousand men at Armes on barded horses, and foure thousand other ar∣med men on horse without bards, with an Army of foote answerable, consisting most of Welsh and Irish, besides five hundred men at Armes out of Gascoyne; and with this power he makes his second expedition into Scotland: the Earles of Here∣ford and Norfolke, with the Earle of Lincolne, led his Vauntgard at the famous bat∣tell of Fonkirke, where the shouts of the Scots were so great, that King Edwards horse frighted withall, cast him off, and brake two of his ribs; which notwithstan∣ding he gets up againe, goes on, and gets the victory; wherein are reported to be slaine two hundred knights, and forty thousand foot of the Scots: but William Walleys with some few, escaped to make more work. And here againe that kingdome might seeme as if quite overthrowne. Most of the estates of the Earles and Barons of Scotland (with their titles) that had stood out, were bestowed on the English; and a Parliament is called at Saint Andrewes, where all the great men of that kingdome, except onely Walleys, once againe sweare Fealty to the King of England. It seemes swearing of Fealty was with the Scots but a Ceremony without substance, as good as nothing: for this is now the third time they swore Fealty to King Edward; yet all did not serve to make them loyall: for not long after, comes the newes of a new King made and Crowned in Scotland: Robert Bruce Earle of Carrick, sonne to that Bruce who was competitour with Baylioll, escaping out of England, becomes Head to the confused Body of that kingdome: and perceiving Iohn Cummyn (who had a title himselfe) to goe about to bewray his intentions to King Edward; he finding him at Dunfrayes, sets upon him, and murthers him in the Church. Whereof as soone as King Edward heard, he sends Aymer de Valence, Earle of Pembroke, and the Lords Clifford and Percie, with a strong power to revenge the death of Cummyn, and to relieve his Wardens of Scotland; who upon Bruces revolt, were all retired to Berwicke, whilst himselfe prepares an Army to follow: wherein to be the more nobly attended, he caused Proclamation to be made, that whosoever ought by their Paternall succession, or otherwise had meanes of their owne for service, should repaire to Westminster, at the Feast of Pentecost, to receive the Order of knighthood, and a Military Ornament out of the Kings Wardrobe. Hereupon three hundred young Gentlemen, all the sonnes of Earles, Barons, and knights, assemble at the day appointed, and receive Purples, silkes, Sindons, Scarffes, wrought with
Gold or Silver, according to every mans Estate. For which traine (because the Kings House was too little, by reason a part of it had beene lately burnt) roome is made, and the Apple-trees cut downe at the new Temple for their Tents, where they attire themselves, and keepe their Vigile. The Prince (whom the King then likewise knighted, and gave him the Dutchy of Aquitaine, kept his Vigile with his Traine at Westminster, and the next day girds these three hundred knights, with the Military Belt, in such manner as he himselfe had received it. Which done, the King before them all makes a Vow, that alive or dead, he would revenge the death of Cummyn upon Bruce, and the perjured Scots: Adjuring his Sonne and all the Nobles about him, upon their Fealty, that if he dyed in this Journey, they should carry his Corps with them about Scotland, and not suffer it to be interred, till they had vanquished the Usurper, and absolutely brought the Country to Subjection. The Prince and all the Nobles promise upon their Faith, to imploy their uttermost power to performe his Vow: and herewithall he sets forth with a potent Army, presently after Whitsontide, and makes his last Expedition into Scotland, in the foure and thirtieth yeare of his Raigne. The Earle of Pembroke, with that power sent before, and aid of the Scottish par∣ty, had before the King arrived in Scotland, defeated in a battaile neare Saint Iohns Towne, the whole Army of the new King, and narrowly missed the taking of his Person, but he escaping in disguise, and sheltring himselfe in obscure places, was reserved for greater Battailes, his Brothers Nigell, Bruce, and shortly after, Thomas and Alexander a Priest, were taken and Executed after the manner of Traytors at Berwicke. And now King Edward had done for Fighting, all was now for Exe∣cutions, and indeed his desire of Revenge made him inexorable, and vow to spare none of what degree soever. The Earle of Atholl, (though of Royall blood, and allyed unto him) was sent to London, where all his preferment was, to have a high∣er paire of Gallowes then the rest. The Wife of Robert Bruce, taken by the Lord Rosse, is sent Prisoner to London, and his Daughter to a Monastery in Lindsey. The Countesse of Boughan, who had beene ayding at Bruces Coronation, is put into a woodden Cage, and hung out upon the walls of Berwicke for people to gaze on. But though Bruces party was thus dejected, and himselfe at this time appeared not, but shifted privily from place to place, in a distressed manner, (attended onely with two Noble Gentlemen, who neeer forsooke him in his misfortunes, the Earle of Lenox and Gilbert Hay) yet gives he not over, but gathers new Forces, with which he suddenly assailes the Earle of Pembroke at unawares, gives him a great defeate, and within three dayes after chaseth the Earle of Glocester into the Ca∣stle of Aire, where he besieged him, till by the Kings Forces he was driven againe to his former retire. Whereupon King Edward, who had spent his Winter at Car∣lile, in Iuly following with a fresh Army enters Scotland himselfe, but falling into a Dysentery or Bloody-flix, at Borough upon the Sands he ended his life: and thus ended King Edwards troubles with Scotland, but not Englands troubles, which are more to come, then yet are past. But though this businesse of Scotland never left King Edward till his dying day, yet it had been upon him but as an Ague, sometimes putting him into violent heats, and sometimes leaving him in a quiet temper, with such a vicissitude, that when he had quietnesse with Scotland, he had troubles with France, whereof the time is now to speake. It is well knowne, that Philip King of France, Father of the present King, and Edward King of England were neare Cousins, the Sonnes of two Sisters; and it hath beene shewed before at King Edwards returning from the Holy Land, and passing through France, what extraordinary kindnesse and mutuall courtesie passed betweene them, that one would have thought neither they no theirs should ever have falne out: and perhaps never should, if they had beene private men, and not Princes. For private men may easily continue Friends, as having none to con∣sider but themselves; but Princes hardly, as having besides themselves, their Sub∣jects to consider. And though they be the Subjects oftentimes that make the Quar∣rell, yet they are the Princes that must maintaine it. And besides, betweene Prin∣ces
there can never be but jealousies, and where jealousies are, every trifle makes a quarrell. And this was the case of these two Kings, certaine of the King of Eng∣lands Subjects, had upon the Coast of Normandy done spoyle to some Subjects of the King of France: and this difference of the Subjects made a difference betweene the Kings, while each of them standing in defence of his owne, fall out themselves; and for a beginning the King of France summons King Edward, as owing homage to that Crowne, to appeare and answer it in his Court. And King Edward, though voluntarily before he had done it in a way of Courtesie, yet being now impetiously commanded, he refuseth it: upon which refusall, all his Territories in France are condemned to be forfaited, and an Army is presently sent to seise upon the same, led by Charles de Valois, and Arnold de Neele, Constable of France. Burdeaux; with divers other Peecs of importance, are taken from him. And now King Edward well knowing what danger it was to have so powerfull an Adversary; endevours first to strengthen himselfe with Friends abroad, seekes to match his Sonne Ed∣ward with a Daughter of Guy Earle of Flanders: Marries one of his Daughters to the Dke of Barr, who pretended Title to Champaigne; another to Iohn Duke of Braant; sends fifteene thousand pounds Sterling to Adolph de Nassaw the Empe∣rour, for recovery of certaine Lands which he claimed in France; and with all these and many other conining Princes, he sets upon the King of France, and then sends over his Brother Edmund Earle of Lancaster, the Earles of Lincolne and Rich∣mond, with eight and twenty Banners, seven hundred men at Armes, and a Navy of three hundred and sixty Saile. In the meane time the King of France, having had intelligence of the intended alliance betweene King Edward, and Guy Earle of Flanders, sends for the said Earle (as if knowing nothing thereof) to come with his Wie and Daughter to make merry with him at Paris: where instead of Feasting him, he makes him Prisoner, and takes from him his Daughter, in regard he sought (being his Vassall) to match her with his capitall Enemy. The Earle excuseth it the best he could, and by much mediation is released himselfe, but not his Daugh∣ter; whereupon the Earle, presuming upon aide from King Edward, takes Armes, and defies the King of France; who thereupon comes with an Army of sixty thou∣sand against him: which caused King Edward, with all speed possible to relieve this distressed Earle; and so leaving the Government of the kingdome in his absence, to the Bishop of London, the Earle of Warwicke, and the Lords Reynold, Grey, and Clifford; with five hundred Saile, and eighteene thousand men at Armes, he pas∣seth over into France, but finding the Country distracted into many popular Facti∣ons, and the King of France daily getting upon them, (having already won Lisle, Doway, Courtray, Burges and Dam) and the Emperour Adolph failing to send him aide as he had promised, he fell into great perplexity: and having stayed the whole Winter at Gaunt, where by reason of many outrages committed by his Souldiers, he was so affronted by the Gauntois, that his owne person was not without some danger; He thereupon in the Spring of the yeare, concludes a Truce with the King of France for two yeares, takes his sister Margaret to Wife, and affianceth the Daughter of the same King to his Sonne Prince Edward, and so returnes into Eng∣land: And these were all the troubles King Edward had with France. But now must something be spoken of troubles with his Lords at home, where∣of this was the beginning: In a Parliament at Salisbury, the five and twentieth yeare of his Raigne, the King requires certaine of his Lords to goe to the Warres in Gascoyne; which needed a present supply by reason of the death of his Brother Edmund: but the Lords make all their excuses, every man for himselfe: Where∣upon the King in great rage threatned, they should either goe, or he would give their Lands to others that should. Upon this Humfrey Bohun Earle of Hereford, High Constable, and Roger Bigod Earle of Norfolke, Marshall of England, make their Declaration, that if the King went in Peron they would attend him; otherwise not. Which answer offended the King more, and being urged againe, the Earle Marshall protested he would willingly goe thither with the King, and march before him in the Vauntguard, as by right of inheritance he ought to doe; But the King
told him plainely, he should goe with any other, though he we not himselfe in Person I am not so bound (saith the Earle) neither will I take tt journey with∣out you. The King swore by God, Sir Earle, you shall either goe or h And I sweare by the same Oath (said the Earle) I will neither goe no hang and so without leave departs. Shortly after the two Earles assemble many Noble men, and other their Friends, to the number of thirty Banneres, so as they were fifteen hundred men at Armes, well appointed, and stood upon their Gud The King like a prudent Prince, who knew his times, prosecues them not as then, b lets the matter passe, in regard that his businesse called him presently into Flanders; when being ready to take ship, the Arch-bishops, Bishops, Earles, Barons, and the Commons send him a Roll of the Grievances of his Subjects, concerning his Taxes, Subsidies, and other Impositions, with his seeking to force their services by unlawfull courses: to which the King sends answer, that he could not atr a∣ny thing without the advice of his Councell, who were not now about him, and therefore required them, seeing they would not attend him in his Journey, (which they absolutely refused to doe, though he went in Person, unlesse he had gone in∣to France or Scotland) that they would yet doe nothing in his absence, prejudii∣all to the peace of the kingdome; and that at his returne, he would set all things in good order to their contentment. But having taken his Journey, and being held there with long delayes, to his exceeding great expenses, he was forced to send o∣ver for more supply of Treasure; and thereupon gave order for a Parliament to be held at Yorke by the Prince, and (because of his Minority, for he was then but sixteene yeares of age) by such as had the manage of the kingdome in his absence: and to the end he would not be disappointed of aide, he condescends to all such Ar∣ticles as were demanded, concerning the great Charter: Promising from thence∣forth never to charge his Subjects otherwise then by their consents in Parliament, and to pardon all such as had denyed to attend him in this Journey. After this, in the 27. yeare of his Raigne, a Parliament is called at Westminster, wherein the pro∣mised Confirmation of the two Charters, and the allowance of what disafforesta∣tion had heretofore beene made, was earnestly urged, and in the end with much adoe Granted; and that with omission of the Clause, Salva Iure Coronae nostr: which the King laboured to have inserted, but the people by no meanes would a∣gree, and the perambulation of the Forests of England was then committed to three Bishops, three Earles, and three Barons. But some yeares after, in the two and thirtieth yeare of his Raigne, King Edward begunne to shew his resentment of the stubborne behaviour of his Nobles towards him in times past; and so terrifies Ro∣ger Bigod, Earle Marshall, that to recover his favor the Earle made him his Heire in Possession; (though he had a Brother of his owne living) reserving onely to him∣selfe a thousand pounds per annum, during his life. Of others likewise he go great summes for the same offence; The Earle of Hereford escaped his fine by death. But the Arch-bishop of Canterbury, (whom he accused to have disturbed his Peace in his absence) he sends over to Pope Clement the fifth, (who succeeded Bonifac) that he might be crusht with a double power. This Pope was Native of Burdeaux, and o the more regardfull of the Kings desire; and the King the more confident of his favour; which to entertaine and encrease, King Edward sends him a whole furnish of all vessels for his Chamber of cleane Gold: which great gift so wroght with the Pope, that he untied the King from the Covenant made with his Subjects concerning their Charters, confirmed unto them by his last three Acts of Parli∣ment, and absolved him from his Oath: A safe time for Princes, when they might¦tye themselves in any obligation to their Subjects, and afterward for a bribe to the Pope be untyed againe. His Taxations, and wayes for raising of money. IF Taxations may suffer degrees of comparison, it may not unfily be said of these three last Kings, that King Iohn was in the Positive; his Sonne Henry the third
in the Comparative: and this King Edward in the Superlative. For not onely he farre exceded th two former, but he hath left a spell to all that come after, for ever comming neare him: but then under the name of Taxations, wee must include the wayes he tooke for raising of profit. But first in the way of Parliament. In the first yeare of his Raigne, was granted him a tenth of the Clergy for two years, besides a fifteenth of them and the Temporalty. In his fifth yeare, a twentieth of their goods towards the Welsh warres. In his seventh, the old money was called in, and new coyned, in regard it had beene much defced by the Iewes; for which 297. were at one time executed in London: and this brought in profit of no small va∣lue. In his eleventh yeare, he had a thirtieth of the Temporalty, and a twentieth of the Clergy, for his warres in Wales. In the thirteenth, Escuage, forty shillings of every knights Fee. In his foureteenth yeare, he had a thousand Markes of cer∣taine Merchants Fined for false weights. In his nineteenth, the eleventh part of all movables of the Clergy, and shortly after a tenth for sixe yeares. In his twen∣tieth, William Marchyan then Lord Treasurer of England, perceiving great riches to be in Churches and religious houses, put it so into the Kings head, that they were all brought into the Kings Treasury. In the eighth yeare of his Raigne, he sent ou his Writ Quo Warrant, to examine by what title men held their lands; which brought him in much money, till Iohn Earle of Warren, being called to shew his title, drew out an old rusty Sword, and then said, He held his land by that, and by that would hold it to death; which though it made the King desist from his Project, yet he obtained at that time a fifteenth part of the Clergy. In his seventeenth yeare he Fined all his Judges for corruption: Sir Ralph Higham Chiefe Justice of the high∣er Bench, in seven thousand Markes: Sir Iohn Loveton Justice of the lower Bench, in three thousand Markes: Sir William Brompton, in sixe thousand Markes: Sir Sl∣mon Rochester, in foure thousand Markes: Sir Richard Boyland, in foure thousand: Sir Walter Hopton, in two thousand: Sir William Saham, in three thousand: Robert Lith∣bury Master of the Rolls, in one thousand: Roger Leycester, in one thousand: Hey Bray Escheatour, and Judge for the Iewes, in one thousand: but Sir Adam Stratt chiefe Baron of the Exchequer, in foure and thirty thousand: and Thomas Wayland (found the greatest Delinquent, and of the greatest substance) had all his goods, and whole estate confiscated to the King; and himselfe banished out of the king∣dome. In his eighteenth yeare he banished the Iewes; of whom there was at that time above fifteen thousand in the kingdom, who had but all their goods confiscate leaving them onely meanes to beare their charges in going away. In his foure and twentieth yeare, he commanded a new Subsidy to be levied up∣on all sarplers of Wooll going out of England: as likewise with Fels and Hides. In his five and twentieth yeare, he cals a Parliament at Saint Edmundsbery, where is granted the eighth part of the goods of good Townes, and of other people the twelfth. As for the Clergy, they desire to be excused, and refuse to contribute, in regard of their many late paiments; as in the two and twentieth yeare of his Raigne, they paied the moty of their goods: and in his three and twentieth yeare, he seied into his hands, all Priories aliens and their goods: besides he had a loane of the Clergy, which amounted to an hundred thousand pounds: but notwithstan∣ding upon this refusall of the Clergy, the King puts all Clergy men out of his protection, whereby they were to have no Justice in any of his Courts; (a straine of State beyond any of his Predecessours) which so amazed them, that in the end, the Arch-bishop of Yorke, with the Bishops of Durham, Ely, Salisbury, and Lincolne, yeelded to lay downe in their Churches, the fifth part of all their goods towards the maintenance of the Kings warres; whereby they appeased his wrath, and wer received into grace. But the Arch-bishop of Canterbury, by whose animation the rest stood out, had all his goods seised on, and all the Monasteries within his Dio∣cese, taken into the Kings hands, and Wardens appointed to minister onely neces∣saries to the Monkes, conveting the rest to the Kings use: at length by much suite, and Abbots and Priests, giving the fourth part of their goods, redeeme themselves, and the Kings favour. In the sixe and twentieth yeare of his Raigne, at a Parli∣ament
holden at Yorke, is granted him the ninth penny of the goods of the Tem∣poralty: the tenth penny of the Clergy of the Diocese of Canterbury, and of Yorke the fifth: and in this yeare also he raised the Imposition upon every sack of Wooll, from a noble to forty shillings. In his two and thirtieth yeare he sends out a new Writ of Inquisition, called Traile-baston, for intruders on other mens lands; who to oppresse the right owner, would make over their land to great men; for Batte∣rers hired to beate men, for breakers of Peace, for Ravishers, Incendiaries, Murthe∣rers, Fighters, false Assisours, and other such Malefactours: which Inquisition was so strictly executed, and such Fines taken, that it brought in exceeding much treasure to the King. As likewise did another Commission at the same time, sent forth to examine the behaviour of Officers, and Ministers of Justice; wherein many were found Delinquents, and paid dearly for it. At this time also he called his Lords to account for their stubbornnesse some yeares before, in denying to attend him into Flanders; which brought him in profit answerable to their greatnesse that were cal∣led. After all this, in his foure and thirtieth yeare, there is granted him the thirti∣eth penny of both Clergy and Laity, and the twentieth of all Merchants towards his journey into Scotland. And this may be sufficient to shew his Taxations to have beene in the Superlative degree. And yet besides these, he had no small be∣nefit by Silver Mines, which in his time were found in Devonshire. Of his Lawes and Ordinances. IN the first yeare of his Raine were made the Statutes called of Westminster the first. In his twelfth yeare were made the Statutes of Acton Burnell. In the foure∣teenth yeare of his Raigne were made the Statutes called Additamenta Glocestriae. He ordained such men to be Sheriffes in every County, as were of the same Coun∣ty where they were to be Sheriffes. He ordained that Iewes should weare a Cogni∣sance upon their upper Garment whereby to be knowne, and restrained their ex∣cessive taking of Usury. In his time was also Enacted the Statute of Mortmaine. In his twelfth yeare, in the Quindenes of Saint Michael, the Justices Itinerants be∣ganne to goe their generall Circuits. In his time new pleces of money were coy∣ned, and halfe pence of Silver came to be in use, which were before of base me∣tall. In his time, three men for rescuing a prisoner, arrested by an Officer, had their right hands cut off by the wrists. In his time all Iewes were banished out of the Realme. This King by Proclamation prohibited the burning of Sea-coale in London and the Suburbs, for avoiding the noysome smoake. In his eleventh yeare the Bakers of London were first drawne upon Hurdles, by Henry Waleys Major; and Corne was then first sold by weight. In this Kings time the title of Baron which had before beene promiscuous to men of estate, was first confined to such onely as by the King were called to have voice in Parliament. Affaires of the Church in his time. IN his time, at a Synod holden at Reading by the Arch-bishop of Cnterbury, it was ordained according to the Constitutions of the Generall Councell, that no Ecclesiasticall person should have more then one Benefice, to which belonged the Cure of soules: and that every person promoted to any Ecclesiasticall Living, should take the Order of Priesthood within one yeare after. In his time lived and died Pope Boniface the 8. of whom his Predecessour had Prophesied: Ascendes ut Vulpes, Regnabis ut Leo, Morieris ut Canis. Workes of Piety done by him, or by others in his time. THis King Founded the Abbey of the Vale Royall in Cheshire, of the Cisteaux Order. In his time Iohn Baylioll King of Scots, builded Baylioll Colledge in Oxford: also in his time, Walter Marton Lord Chancellour of England, and after
Bishop of Rochester, Founded Marton Colledge in Oxford, who was drowned pas∣sing over the water at Rochester, being at that time no Bridge there, as now there is. In his time was finished the new worke of the Church of Westminster, which had bene threescore and sixe yeares in building. In his time was laid the Foundation of the Black-Friers besides Ludgate, and of Baynards Castle: also in his time, his second wife Queene Margaret beganne to build the Quire of the Gray-Friers in London. In his time was begunne to be made the great Conduit in London, standing against the Church called Acres in Cheape. In his time Henry Walleys, Major of Lon∣don, caused the Tonne upon Cornhill, to be a Prison for night-walkers: and also builded a house called the Stocks, for a Market of fish and flesh, in the midst of the City. In this Kings time, Edmund Earle of Leycester, the Kings brother, Founded the Minories, a Nunnery without Aldgate. This King builded the Castle of Flint in Wales, and the Castle of Beaumaris in the Ile of Anglesey, and the Castle of Car∣narvan by Snowdon. Also in this Kings time, Iohn Peckham Arch-bishop of Can∣terbury, Founded a Colledge of Canons at Wingham in Kent. Casualties happening in his time. IN the second yeare of this Kings Raigne, there happened the greatest rot of Sheepe in England that ever was knowne, which continued five and twenty years; and came (as was thought) by one infected Sheepe of incredible greatnesse, brought out of Spaine by a French Merchant into Northumberland. In the fifteenth yeare of this Kings Raigne, Wheate was sold for tenne Groats a Quarter; where the next yeare after there was so great a Dearth, that it was sold for eighteene pence the Bushell. In the seventeenth yeare of his Raigne, there fell so much raine, that Wheate was raised from three pence the Bushell, to sixteene pence; and so encrea∣sed yearely, till at last it was sold for twenty shillings the Quarter. And this yeare the City of Carlile, and the Abbey with all the houses belonging to the Friers Mi∣nors, was consumed with fire. In his one and twentieth yeare, a great part of the Towne of Cambridge, with the Church of our Lady, was also burnt. In the seven and twentieth yeare of his Raigne, his Palace at Westminster, and the Monastery adjoyning, were consumed with fire. The Monastery of Glocester also was burnt to the ground. In this yeare also, an Act of Common Counsell, by consent of the King, was made concerning victuals; a fat Cocke to be sold for three halfe pence, two Pullets for three halfe pence, a fat Capon for two pence halfe penny, a Goose foure pence, a Mallard three halfe pence, a Partridge three halfe pence, a Pheasant foure pence, a Hearon sixe pence, a Plover one penny, a Swanne three shillings,  Crane twelve pence, two-Woodcocks three halfe pence, a fat Lambe from Christ∣mas to Shrovetide, sixteene pence; and all the yeare after for foure pence. Of his Wives and Children. HE had two Wives, his first was Eleanor, daughter to Ferdinand the third King of Spaine; and was married to him at Bres in Spaine: who having lived with him sixe and thirty years, in a journey with him towards Scotland, at Herdeby in Lin∣colneshire she died; in whose memory, and as Monuments of her vertue, and his af∣fection, King Edward caused Crosses with her Statue to be erected in all chiefe pla∣ces, where her Corps in carrying to Westminster, rested: as at Stamford, Dunstable, Saint Albons, Waltham, Cheapside; and lastly, at the place called Charing Crosse: she was buried in Westminster, at the feete of King Henry the third, under a faire Marble Tombe, adorned with her Portraiture of Copper guilt. By this wife, King Edward had foure sonnes and nine daughters; his eldest sonne, Iohn; his second, Henry; his third, Alphonsus; died all young in their Fathers time: his fourth sonne, Ed∣ward, called of Carnarva, because borne there, succeeded him in the kingdome. Of his daughters, the eldest named Eleanor, was first married by Proxie to Alphonsus, King of Arragon; but he dying before the marriage solemnied, she was afterward
married at Bristow, to Henry Earle of Barry in France; by whom she had issue, sons and daughters. Ioane the second daughter of King Edward and Queene Eleanor, borne at Acon in the Holy Land, was married to Gylbert Clare called the Red Earle of Glocester and Hereford; by whom she had issue, sonnes and daughters. She survived her husband, and was re-married to the Lord Ralph Monthermere, Father to Margaret the mother of Thomas Montacute, Earle of Salisbury; from whom the now Vicount Montacue is descended. Margaret the third daughter of King Edward and Queene Eleanor, was married to Iohn Duke of Brabant. Berenger and Alice, their fourth and fifth daughters, dying young and unmarried. Mary their sixth daughter, at tenne yeares of her age, was made a Nunne in the Monastery of Amesbury in Wiltshire, at the instance of Queene Eleanor her Grandmother, who lived there. Elizabeth their seventh daughter, was first married to Iohn Earle of Holland, Zeland, and Lord of Freezeland; he dying within two yeares, she was afterward married to Hum∣phrey Bohun Earle of Hereford and Essex, Lord of Breknok, and High Constable of England; by whom she had issue, sonnes and daughters. Beatrice and Blanch, their eighth and ninth daughters, died young and unmarried. King Edwards second Wife was Margaret, eldest daughter of Philip King of France, called the Hardy, and sister to Philip called the Faire; at eighteene yeares old she was married to King Edward, being above threescore; yet at the unequall yeares she had issue by him, two sonnes and a daughter: their eldest sonne was borne at a little Village in Yorkshire called Brotherton, and was thereof called Thomas of Brotherton: he was created Earle of Norfolke, and Earle Marshall of England, after Roger Bigod, who died without issue. Their second sonne Edmund, was borne at Woodstocke in Ox∣fordshire, and of the place was so called: he was created Earle of Kent, and married Margaret daughter of Iohn, and sister of sole Heire of Thomas Lord Wakes of Ly∣dell in the County of Northampton; by whom he had issue two sonnes and one daughter: his sonnes Edmund and Iohn, died without issue; his daughter Ioane, for her beauty called the Faire maid of Kent, was married first to William Montacute Earle of Salisbury, and from him divorced; was re-married to Sir Thomas Holland, in her Right Earle of Kent, and by her, Father of Thomas and Iohn Holland, Duke of Surrey, and Earle of Huntington: and lastly, she was the Wife of Edward of Wood∣stocke, the blacke Prince of Wales; and by him Mother of King Richard the second. This Earle Edmund was beheaded at Winchester, in the fourth yeare of King Edward his Nephew. Eleanor, the daughter of King Edward by his second Wife Margaret, died in her childhood. Of his personage and conditions. HE was tall of stature, higher then ordinary men by head and shoulders, and thereof called Longshanke; of a swarthy complection, strong of body, but leane; of a comely favour; his eyes in his anger, sparkling like fire; the haire of his head black and curled. Concerning his conditions, as he was in warre peace∣full; so in Peace he was warlike, delighting specially in that kinde of hunting, which is to kill Stagges or other wilde beasts with Speares. In continencie of life, he was equall to his Father; in acts of valour, farre beyond him. He had in him the two wisdomes, not often found in any, single; both together, seldome or never: An ability of judgement in himselfe, and a readinesse to heare the judgement of o∣thers. He seemed to be a great observer of opportunity (a great point of wisdome in any, in Princes greatest) and that he could beare an injury long, without seeking to revenge it; as appeared by his carriage towards the Earle Roger Bigod, whom when he saw his time, he called to account for an affront he had offered him diers yeares before. He was not easily provoked into passion, but once in passion, not easi∣ly appeased, as was seene by his dealing with the Scots; towards whom he shewed at first patience, and at last severity. If he be censured for his many Taxations, he may be justified by his well bestowing them; for never Prince laid out his money to more honour of himselfe, or good of his kingdome. His greatest unfortunatenesse
was in his greatest blessing; for of foure sonnes which he had by his Wife Queen Eleanor, three of them died in his owne life time, who were worthy to have out-lived him; and the fourth out-lived him, who was worthy never to have beene borne. Of his death and buriall. IN his last expedition into Scotland, being at Carlile, he fell sicke; and lying in his death-bed, he sent for his sonne Edward: to whom, besides many admonitions to Piety; he commanded three things specially: that he should carry his bones about with him through Scotland till he had subdued it: that he should send his heart into the Holy Land, with sevenscore knights to that warre, and the two and thirty thou∣sand pounds he had provided for that purpose; and that he should never recall Gaveston from banishment: and soon after of a dysentery or Bloudy-Flix, he died at Borough upon the Sands, the seventh of Iuly, in the yeare 1307. when he had Raigned foure and thirty yeares and seven moneths, lived threescore and eight yeares: Be∣ing dead, his Corps was brought to Waltham Abbey, and there kept the space of six∣teene weekes, and after, on Simon and Iudes day buried at Westminster. Men of Note in his time. OF Martiall men there were many, these specially: Iohn Earle of Warren, who opposed the Kings Inquisition by Quo Warranto: and Roger Bigod, who gave the King an affront to his face. Of learned men also many, specially these; Iohn Breton bishop of Hereford, who compiled a book of the Lawes of England, called l Breton: Thomas Spot a Chronographer: Iohn Eversden a writer of Annals, and of this Kings Raigne: Gregory Cairugent a Monke of Glocester, and a writer also of Annals. Iohn Peckham a Franciscan Frier, made Arch-bishop of Canterbury, who writ many excellent workes: Iohn Read an Historiographer: Thomas Bungey a Frier Minor, an excellent Mathematician: Roger Bacon a Franciscan Frier, an excellent Philosopher and Mathematician: Robert Kilwarby Arch-bishop of Canterbury, and after made a Cardinall: also Ralph Baldock Bishop of London, who writ a Chronicle of England in the Latine tongue: but above them all, though of another Countrey, Thomas A∣quinas, borne of a Noble Family, whose workes are too famous to be spoken of; who going to the Councell holden at Lyons by Pope Gregory the tenth, died by the way.
THE LIFE and RAIGNE OF KING EDWARD THE SECOND. Of his Acts before, and at his Coronation. EDward of Carnarvan, eldest Sonne of King Edward the first, succeeded him in the kingdome; and never did Prince come to a Crowne with more applause of Nobility and People; and there was good cause for it: For he had beene trained up in all good courses for Piety and Learning; he had seene the Government of his Father, from whose Example he could not but have learned many good Lessons; he had been initiated in the wayes of State, having beene left Gover∣nour of the Realme, and presiding in Parliament in his Fa∣thers absence; and he was now three and twenty yeares old, a fit age for bearing the weight of a Scepter; and yet for all these advantages, there wanted not feares of him in the mindes of many, who could not but remember what prankes he had played not long before; how he had broken the Bishop of Chesters Parke, and in most disorderly manner had killed his Deere, for which both himselfe had beene committed to Prison, and his Friend Pierce Gaveston banished the Realme: and if he did such things being but Prince, what might not be feared of him comming to be King? For seldome doth advancement in honour alter men to the better; to the worse often, and commonly then, when it is joyned with an Authority that sets them above controlement. Neither yet was their feare more out of what they had seene, then out of what they saw; for where he should have endevoured to accomplish the charge his Father had given him in his death-bed, he seemed to intend nothing lesse: nothing more then wholly to breake it; for he presently called home Pierce Gaveston from banishment; and the two and thirty thousand pounds, which his Father had specially appointed for the Holy Warre; either all or the most of it he betowed upon Gaveston: and for carrying his Fathers bones with him about Scotland; it had beene well if he had suffered them quietly to be laid at rest in England; for after the Corps had beene kept above ground, sixteene weekes in the Abbey of Waltham, and that the Bishop of Chester, Walter Langton, the then Lord Treasurer, and Executor of his Fathers Will, was busie in prepa∣ring for his Funerals; he sent the Constable of the Tower to arrest him, and im∣prison him at Wallingford, seising upon all his Goods, and giving them to Gaveston; and all for old grudges. And (that which seemed a high straine of incongruity)
before he had seene performed his Fathers Funerals, which was not till the 27. of October following; he entred into Treatie of his owne Nuptials, forgoing over to Boleigne, on the two and twentieth of Ianuary, he marryed Isabell, the Daughter of Philip the Faire, King of France: which Marriage was honoured with the pre∣sence of foure Kings, the King of France himselfe, the King of Navrre his Sonne, the King of the Romans, and the King of Sicilie: and three Queenes besides the Bride, Mary Queene of France, Margaret the Dowager Queene of England, and the Queene of Navarre: and yet did Gavestn exceed them all in bravery. This was observed by the Lords of England: and thereupon when his Queene and he came afterward to be Crowned, they went unto him, signifying what a hainous transgression of his Fathers will it was to call home Gveston; and seeing the charge was no lesse given to them then to him, if he did not performe it they would; and therefore unlesse he would remove Gaveston from the Court and kingdome, they would hinder his Coronation from proceeding: which strooke such a dampe to Prince Edwards spirits, to thinke what a disgrace it would be to him; if so many of his great Friends being present, Charles of Valois, the King of Frances Brother, the Dukes of Britaine and Brabant, the Count of Luxenburg, who was afterward Em∣peror, the Duke of Savoy, the two Dutchesses of Brabant & Artois, with many other Princes and great Ladies, if now his Coronation should be called in question, that he solemnly swore he would do what they desired in the next Parliament, so they would be quiet now; and thereupon, on the 24. day of February, in the yeare 1307. his Queene and he were both Crowned at Westminster, by the hands of Henry Bishop of Winchester, by Commission from Robert Arch-bishop of Canterbury, being then in Exile, and out of the kingdome: At which solemnity there was so great a presse of People, that Sir Iohn Blackwell knight was crowded to death. And now in the very Act of his Coronation, there was given another provocation to the Lords against Gaveston: for the King had appointed him to carry the Crowne of Saint Edward before him, (the greatest honour could be done to a Subject) which ad∣ded to the other honours the King had done him, (for he had made him Earle of Cornewall, Lord of Man, and Lord Chamberlaine) so incensed the Lords, that they entred into consultation, how to suppresse this violence of the Kings affecti∣on; which shortly after they put in execution. Portion in money King Edward had none with his Wife: but the King of France gave him the Dutchy of Guyenne, which he had seised upon before, as confiscate to him: and thereupon King Ed∣ward did him Homage for that Dutchy, and for the County of Ponthieu. Of his difference with his Lords about Gaveston. VVE shall have here no Quinquennium Neronis, no such five yeares, as Nero afforded in the beginning of his Raigne; but this King at his first en∣trance will shew what he is, and what he will continue to be as long as he lives; for though he tooke some great and grave men to be of his Councell, yet (as ap∣peared afterward) he did it rather to the end they should be pliant to him, then that he had any meaning to apply himselfe to them; For let them say what they would, Gaveston must be the Oracle; all the Kings actions were but Gavestons im∣pressions: And now Gaveston presently after the Coronation, to let the world be a witnesse of his worthinesse, and that the King had not bestowed his Favours up∣on him without cause; caused to be published a Turneament at Wallingford: whither came all the great Lords of the kingdome, as Thomas Earle of Lancaster, Humfrey Earle of Hereford, Aymer Earle of Pembroke, and Iohn Earle of Warren, with many others, all Valiant men at Armes; yet none had the honour of the day like to Gave∣ston. And thus farre he did well, if he could have stayed here, if having gotten true glory, he had not falne into vaine-glory: For the Lords envyed him not so much for his advancement in Honours, as they hated him for his insolency in Manners: for in a scornefull pride he would be casting scoffes upon them all, cal∣ling Thomas Earle of Lancaster the Stage Player, the Earle of Lincolne Bursten∣belly;
imer de Valence Earle of Pembroke, Ioseph the Iew; and Guy Earle of War∣wicke, the blacke Dogge of Arderne; which scoffes together with his other inso∣lencies, drew such a party upon him, that in the next Parliament, the whole assem∣bly obtaines of the King to draw Articles of their grievances: of which the chiefe were, that the great Charter of Magna Charta should be observed that all stran∣gers should be banished the Court and kingdome; that the businesse of the State should be treated of by the Counsell of the Clergy and the Nobles; and that the King should not begin any warre, nor goe out of the kingdome without consent of Parliament. Which Articles, though seeming harsh to the King, yet for avoy∣ding of further inconvenience, he yeelds unto them; and specially to the banih∣ment of his Minion Gaveston, as hoping that would excuse him for all the rest; and Robert of Winchelsey, Arch-bishop of Canterbury, lately called home from Exile, pronounceth Excommunication against all such as should oppose the Articles. Hereupon Gaveston is sent away into Ireland, where he lived awhile, not as a banisht man, but as Lieutenant rather of the Country, and indeed not unworthily; for in the time of his being there, he is said to have made a Journey into the Moun∣taines of Dublin, and to have broken and subdued the Rebels there; built New Ca∣stle in the Kerns Country, repaired the Castle of Kevyn, and passed up to Munster, and Thoumond: performing every where much service with great valour and wor∣thinesse, that if he had stayed there but a while longer, he might perhaps by his desorts in Ireland, have redeemed his defects in England: but the King impatient of his absence, and asking advice what meanes might be used to recall him; It was told him, that if he could but match him with the Earle of Glocesters sister, a man of such greatnesse, and so greatly beloved of the people, for his sake certaine∣ly no man would grudge at his comming home. Hereupon the King sends for Gaveston, and makes up the match betweene them, and marryed they were at Bar∣kamstead; but this did no good. For Gaveston still working upon the King in such manner, that he scarce left him meanes to sustaine himselfe, and as little to main∣taine the Queene; nothing being done but as Gaveston would have it; put the Lords into a new discontentment; who thereupon went againe to the King, and told him plainly, that unlesse he would put Gaveston out of the Court and kingdome, they would rise up in Armes against him as a perjured King. This put the King into a great strait: Loath he was to leave Gaveston, and fearefull he was to provoke the Lords; in the end, his feare prevailing over his love, he was content he should be Banished, and in such sort Banished, that if ever he returned, or were found in the kingdome, he should be held, and proceeded against as an Enemy of the State. So once againe is Gaveston sent packing out of the kingdome, and goes into France, but found no safe Harbouring there: For the King of France hearing of it, gave strait charge, if he were found in his Dominions to apprehend him: Then he pas∣seth into Flanders, but is there no saer then in France: After waving about, and finding no place to rest in safety, he returnes secretly into England, relying upon the Kings Love, and the Duke of Glocesters Favour. The King receives him as an Angell sent from Heaven, and to be out of the Lords Eye, goes a Journey to Yorke, taking Gaveston along with him, and there thinkes to be in quiet; but the Lords hearing of it follow him thither, chusing for their Generall, Thomas Earle of Lancaster, a man possest of five Earledomes, Lancaster, Leycester, Ferrers, Lin∣colne, and Salisbury, besides the Liberty of Pickering, and the Honour of Coker∣more, and other Lands in Wales; and there was not a man of the whole Nobility that was not of the Party, but onely Gilbert Earle of Glocester, the Kings Sisters Sonne; These Lords sent to the King, either to deliver Gaveston into their hands, or at least to send him peremptorily out of the kingdome. But the King led by ill Counsell, and little regarding the Lords Message, takes Gaveston with him to New-Castle upon Tine, thence to Tynmouth, where the Queene then lay, who (though great with Childe, and entreating the King with teares to stay with her) yet such was his desire to see Gaveston put into some place of security, that hearing of the Lords approaching, he tooke a Ship, and passed with Gaveston to Scarborough, and
leaving him there in a strong Castle, not easie to be wonne, he went himselfe into Warwickshire; perhaps that the Lords might see he had not Gaveston with him. But the Lords hearing where Gaveston was, assaulted the Castle with such violence, that Gaveston seeing no meanes to escape, was content to render himselfe; requesting onely, that he might but once be allowed to see the Kings face; and the King hea∣ring he was taken, desired as much: to which the Earle of Pembroke consented; and taking Gaveston into his custody, promised upon Forteiture of all he had, to have him forth-comming: but desiring to be with his Wife that night, who lay not farre off, at Dedington h delivers him to his Servants to carry to Wallingford; From whom, as they passed by Warwicke, the Earle of that place hearing of it, tooke him forcibly from his keepers, and brought him to his owne Castle. Where after long deliberation, whether it were wisedome to suffer Gaveston to speake with the King or no; It was at last concluded to take of his head; which at a place there∣by, called Blacklow, was presently put in execution. His Corps was carryed to Oxford, and kept there two yeares, till the King caused it to be brought to Long∣ley, and there builded a Monastery of purpose, where his Soule should be prayed for. This Gaveston was the Sonne of a Gentleman of France, who had done good ser∣vice for King Edward the first, in France; and for his sake this Sonne of his was taken and brought up with the Prince: a man of excellent parts of body, and of no lesse Endowments of minde; Valiant and Witty; to which if we might adde Ver∣tuous, he had beene compleate; Though the Lords (whether they had heard so, or whether they said it to weane the King from him) told the King that his Father was a Traitor to the King of France, and for the same was executed; and that his Mother was burnt for a Witch; and that this Gaveston was banished out of France for consenting to his Mothers Witch-craft; and that he had now bewitched the King himselfe. But why should the Lords be so violent against Gaveston? might not the King place his Affection where he pleased? Might he not make his owne choyce of what companion he liked? No doubt he might; and fit he should: but yet in this case, the Lords had great cause to doe as they did; both in regard of the King, of themselves, and of the Common-wealth. It is true, if the Valour of Gaveston could as well have made the King Valiant, as his riot made him riotous; there might some good have come of their extraordinary conjunction: but seeing Vertues are but personall, Vices onely are communicative; it now made the King not onely more Vicious then otherwise he would have beene, but Vicious, where otherwise he would not have beene; and therefore great cause in regard of the King, to remove Gaveston from his company; and no lesse in regard of the Lords themselves; For Gavestons advancing was their debasing; his greatnesse with the King made them but Cyphers: but in regard of the Common-wealth, most cause of all; For while the King was altogether ruled by Gaveston, and Gaveston him∣selfe was altogether irregular; the Common-wealth could have but little hope of Justice, but was sure to suffer as long as Gaveston was suffered. And this may be sufficient to justifie the Lords, that it be not interpreted to be Rebellion, which was indeed but Providence. Of his Troubles with Scotland. ANd now we have seene two of the charges of his Fathers Will broken by the King, and punished in him; the two and thirty thousand pounds appointed for the Holy Warre, bestowed upon Gaveston, and the King for it punished him∣selfe with want; Gaveston called home from banishment, and the King for it pu∣nished with the losse of his Subjects love. It remaines to see how well he performed the third charge of his Fathers Will, for subduing of Scotland. It was now the sixth yeare after the death of his Father King Edward, and Robert Bruce now gotten to be King of Scotland, had stayed all this while to see how this new King Edward would prove: and when he found by the courses he held, that he was like to
prove a good easie Enemy; he thereupon tooke heart, and began to stirre, and in a very short time had brought almost all Scotland under his obedience; and finding no opposition he entred the English Borders, tooke and burnt Townes; that now King Edward, unlesse he would sit still, and suffer Bruce to come and pull his Crown from his head, he could not chuse but doe something to stop his proceeding. Here∣upon he prepares an Army, but like himselfe, fitter for a Court then for a Campe: Many men, and great Bravery; but readie to take spoiles, then to make spoile: and accordingly they sped; For going to raise the siege at Strveling, defended for King Edward, by the valiant knight Philip Mowbray; the Kings Army consist∣ing of a hundred thousand, was defeated and overthrowne by the Scots Army, con∣sisting of scarce thirty thousand: So true is that saying of an ancient Souldier; There is more hope of an Army where the General is a Lion, though the Souldiers be but Sheepe; then of an Army where the Generall is a Sheepe, though the Souldi∣ers be Lions. But indeed the Scots, besides Valour, used Policy: For having in their owne Army none but Foot, no Horse at all, they had made Trenches in the Ground three foot deepe, covering them with Twigges and Hurdles, where the English Horsemen were to passe, who Floundring in those Trenches, were killed no lesse by their owne Fellowes then by the Enemy. In this Battell, called of Ban∣nocks borough, were slaine the Lord Mawle, the Lord Clifford, the Lord Tiptoft, the Lord William Marshall, Sir Giles, Doctor Argenton, and seven hundred Knights and Squires, specially Gylbert Earle of Glocester, who had shewed much Valour that day; and whom the Scots would willingly have kept for ransome; if they had knowne him; but he had forgotten to put on his Coate of Armes, whereby to be knowne. The slaughter of common Souldiers was certainely great, though per∣haps not so great as Hector Boetius speakes of, who saith they were fifty thousand. There were taken Prisoners, Humfrey de Bohun Earle of Hereford, Iohn Seagrave, Iohn Claveringham, William Latimer, and Sir Roger Northbrooke, bearer of the Kings shield; the King himselfe with the Bishops, the Earles of Hartford and Pem∣broke, and Hugh Spenser, saved themselves by flight; Humfrey de Bohun Earle of Hereford, was afterward released in exchange for Bruces Wife, who had beene long kept a Prisoner in England. After this, many English fell away to the Scots, and all the North parts from Carlile to Yorke, came under their Subjection; and the English grew so faint-hearted, and into such contempt, that three Scots durst venture upon a hundred English, when a hundred English durst scarce encounter with three Scots. And what can be thought the cause of this great dysaster to this King, but the want of his Fathers blessing for not performing the charge he gave him dying, which is commonly accompanyed with the want of a higher blessing, without which a Vacat is set upon the labours of men, that makes them all frustrate? But Bruce, not satisfied with his Acquests in England, sends his Brother Edward into Ireland also; who so farre prevailed, that many Irish came in unto him, and in the end Crowned him King of a great part of that Island, and so continued the space of three yeares; till the Primat of Armagh, and the Lord Brinningham, Ju∣sticiar of Ireland, gathering Forces together opposed him, and in a Battaile taking him Prisoner, at Dundalke cut off his head, with the slaughter of many thousands of the Scots besides. With which the Scots are so incensed, that they invade a∣gaine the English Borders, forraging as farre as Yorke; whereupon a Parliament is assembled at London, wherein an ayde is granted of Armed men to goe against them; London sets forth two hundred, Canterbury forty, Saint Albons ten, and so proportionably for all Cities and Boroughs, whereby a great Army was levyed; which comming to Yorke, through mutiny, emulation, and other impediments, was soone dissolved, and returned backe without effecting any thing. Not long after the Towne of Berwicke was betrayed to the Scots, through the treason of Peter Spalding the Governour, and other Englishmen; whom the King of Scots to make them an Example, caused to be hanged for being Traitors to their Country. King Edward hearing of the surrendring of Berwicke, raiseth an Army, and beleaguers it; but the Scots to divert his Forces, enter upon England by other wayes, and were
like to have surprised the person of the Queene, lying then neare orke. The siege of Brwicke is notwithstanding eagerly continued, and the King in great possibili∣ty to have regained the Towne, had not the Earle of Lancaster with his follwers withdrawne himselfe upon discontent, hearing the King say he would give the keeping thereof to Hugh Spenr the younger, who was now grown a speciall favou∣rite of the Kings, and therefr not to be enured by the Earle. In the mean  the Scots wonne the Castles of , and Midord; so as they possessed the greater part of all Northmberland, burning all before them,  they came to pon, which Towne they spoyled and carrying there three dayes, they received  thousand Markes to save the Towne from burning, as they had done the Townes of Norhallerton, Borugh-bridg and others. In their returning backe, they  Knaresborough, and Shipton in Cven; and all other afore them, carrying into ∣land a marvellous number of Cattell, besides prisoners, men and women The ∣shire men thus grievously endammaged, gather together to the number of ten thou∣sand: and at the Towne of Mitton, tenne miles from Yorke, encounter the Sco where they lost three thousand of their men, and were defeated which bttell, be∣cause of the many Spirituall men that were in it, was called the white battell. Whereof when the King heard he left the siege of Bewicke, to follow the Scots, but they returned another way. The yeare following, King Edward once againe with a great Army entred Scotland; but the Scots having destroyed all afore, the King oppressed with famine was forced to reurne whom the Scots followed, and in a place of the Forest of Blackmore, se upon him that he hardly escaped; where were taken Iohn Earle of Britaine, and the Lord of Silac, the French Kings Em∣bassadour, and many others. After this, King Edward finding the Scots either too strong, or too wily for him, made a Truce with them for two yeares, some say for thirteene. And this was the successe of this unfortunate King in his warres with Scotland. Of his trbles at home. BUt his troubles abroad were not so grievous as those at home; or rather, they were those at home that made his troubles abroad so grievous; for though the Lords having made an end of Gaveston, and cut off his head, thought they had made an end of their need to beare Armes, and had cut off the head of all their discontents; yet as if Gaveston had beene a Phoenix, as it were out of his ashes an∣other Phoenix riseth presently up, and puts the Lords to as much trouble as ever Gaveston did. For now the younger Spenser upon a sudden growes as great a Favorite of the Kings as ever Gaveston was: and indeed in all points just such another, equall to him in goodlinesse of personage, in favour of the King, and in abusing the Lords, for though they were the Lords themselves that brought him at first in to be the Kings Chamberlaine, the rather (as was thought) because he was one whom the King did not love: yet being once in the place, he so wonne upon the King by dili∣gent service, and by complying with the Kings humour; that he brought the King at last to comply with his humour, and nothing must be done but as Spenser would have it. It seemes it was the Kings nature, that he could not be without a bosome friend; one or other to be an Alter idem: and to seeke to remove such a one from him, was to seek to remove him from him selfe as impossible a thing as to alter na∣ture; yet the Lords being more sensible of their owne grievance, to be insulted on by a Favourite, then of the Kings grievance to be affronted by his subjects, are more intentive to worke their owne ends then the Kings: and therefore to remove Spen∣ser and his Father from the King, which they knew was a worke not to be done but by strong hand; they continue their Armes, and confderting together, they send to the King, peremptorily requiring the confirmation and execution of the Articles formerly granted; threatning withall, that unlesse he presently performe the same, they would constraine him to it by force of Armes: and thereupon assemble strong forces about Dunstable, where the King hen lay. The great Prelates of the king∣dome,
with the Earle of Glocester, labour to appease them, and with two Cardinals sent lately by the Pope to reforme these disorders: they repaire to Saint Albns, and desire conference with the Lords, who receive them very peaceably; but the Let∣ters which the Pope had written to them, they refuse to receive, saying, they were men of the Sword, and cared not for reading of Letters; that there were many wrthy and learned men in the kingdome, whose counsell they would use, and not strangers, who knew not the cause of their commotion: so the Cardinals with this answer returned to London. But the Prelates of England o labour the businesse, that the Lords were content to yeeld up to the King such horses, treasure, and jewels, as they had taken of Pierce Gaveston at New-Castle, so as the King would grant their Petitions; and thereupon Iohn Sandall Treasurer of the kingdome, and Ingelard Warle keeper of the Wardrobe, are sent to Saint Albons to receive those things at their hands. Shortly after a Parliament is called at London, wherein the King complaines of the great contempt was had of him by the Barons, their rising in Armes, their ta∣king and murthering Pierce Gaveston, and such other affronts. Whereunto with one accord they answer, that they had not offended therein, but rather merited his love and favour; having taken Armes, not for any contempt of his royall person, but to destroy the publike enemy of the kingdome, which otherwise would never have beene done. Which stout resolution of theirs, the Queene with the Prelates and the Earle of Glocester seeing, they seeke by all meanes to qualifie their heate; and at length so prevailed with them, that they humble themselves to the King, and crave pardon for that they had done, which they obtained; and the King receives them into grace, as his loyall subjects: grants them their Articles and particular pardons by his Charter, for their Indemnity concerning the death of Gaveston: and for the greater shew of true reconcilement, Guy de Beauchamp Earle of Warwicke, is made of the Kings Counsell, though shortly after he ended his life, not without suspition of poyson; as being a man much envied by such as possest the King. The King kept his Christmas at Clipston, and his Easter at Clarendon: and they seemed to be all good friends, but this reconcilement of the King with his Barons, was but as the covering of fire with ashes, every little wind that blew, made it breake out into flames afresh; & the time being so unsetled as it was, it was impossible but such winds would continually be blowing. It was such a wind blew, when the great Earle of Lancaster had his wife (a Lady who had lived with him alwayes in good fame) taken out of his house at Canford in Dorsetshire by one Richard Saint Martin a deformed lame Dwarfe, who challenged her to be his wife, and that he had lien with her before the Earle married her and this wind was made to blow the stronger, by the Ladies owne confession; for upon examination, she voluntarily averred, it was all true: and thereupon the ogly fellow in her right claimed the two Earledomes of Lincolne and Slisbury, which he durst not have done if he had not beene back'd with great Abettours: and it was not without aspersion upon the King himselfe. It was another such wind blew, when at the Feast of Pentecost, at dinner in the open Hall at Westminster; a woman fantastically disguised, entred on horsebacke, and riding about the Table, delivered the King a Letter, wherein was signified the great neg∣lect he shewed of such as had done him and his Father noble services, taxing him for advancing men of unworthy parts, and such other complaints; which Letter read, and the woman departed, put the King into a great rage; they who guarded the doore being sharply reprehended for suffering her to enter in such manner, answe∣red, It was the fashion of the Kings house in times of Festivals, to keepe out none that came as this woman did, to make sport. Search being made for the woman, she is found and examined who set her on; she confessed a knight gave her money to doe it; the knight is found, and upon examination, boldly answered, he did it for the Kings honour, and to no other end; and thereupon escaped without further trouble. It was such another wind blew, when a knight was taken passing by Pom∣fret, with Letters sealed with the Kings Seale, directed to the King of Scots, about murthering the Earle of Lancaster; which messenger is executed, his head set upon
the top of the Castle, and the Letters reserved to witnesse the intended plot. Which whether it were fained, or true, the report thereof reflected upon the King, and made many to take the Earles part. It was such another wind blew, when a fana∣tick fellow, one Iohn Pdras, a Tanners sonne of Exeter, gave forth, that himselfe was th tre Edward, eldest sonne of the late King Edward the first, and by a false Nurse was changed in his Cradle, and that the now King Edward was a Carters son, and laid in his place: but this wind was soone blowne over, when at his death, be∣ing drawne and hanged, he confessed he had a Familiar Spirit in his house in the like∣nesse of a Cat, that assured him he should be King of England, and that he had ser∣ved the said Spirit three yeares before to bring his purpose about. But most of all, it was such a wind blew, when a Baron named William Brewis, having wasted his estate, offers to sell unto divers men, a part of his inheritance called Powis. Humphrey  Earle of Hereford, obtaines leave of the King to buy it, & bargains for it. The two Ro∣ger Mrtimers, Unkle and Nephew, great men likewise in those parts, not understan∣ding, it seemes, any thing of the former bargaine, contract also for the same Land with the said Sir William Brewis. Hugh Spenser the younger, hearing of this sale, and the land adjoyning to part of his, obtaines a more speciall leave of the King, being now his Chamberlaine, and buyes it out of their hands. The Earle of Her∣ford complaines hereof to the Earle of Lancaster: who thereupon at Sherbourne en∣ters into a new confederation with divers Barons there assembled, taking their Oaths intermutually, to live and die together in maintaining the right of the king∣dome; and to procure the banishment of the two Spensr, father and sonne, whom they now held to be the great seducers of the King, and oppressours of the State, disposing of all things in Court at their pleasure, and suffering nothing to be obtained but by their meanes: and under this pretence they take Armes, and comming ar∣med to Saint Albons, they send to the King, being then at London, the Bishops of London, Salisbury, Hereford, and Chichester, (who were there assembled to consul for peace) requiring him as he tendred the quet of the Realme, to rid his Court of those Traitours, the Spensers, condemned in many Articles of high treason by the communalty of th Land; and withall to grant his Letters Patents of pardon and indemnity both to them and all such as tooke part with them. The King returnes answer, that Hugh Spenser the father was now beyond the Seas, imployed in his businesse, and his sonne was guarding the Cinque-ports according to his office; and that it was against Law of Custome they should be banished without being heard: and withall swore, he would never violate the Oath made at his Coronation, by granting Letters of pardon to such notorious offenders, who contemned his per∣son, disturbed the kingdome, and violated the royall Majesty. Which answer so exasperated the Lords, that presently they approached to London, and lodged in the Suburbs, till they had leave of the King to enter into the City, where they perem∣ptorily urge their demands: to which at length by mediation of the Queene, and the chiefe Prelates, the King is wrought to condescend, nd by his Edict, published in Westminster Hall, by the Earle of Hereford, the Spensers are banished the king∣dome. Hugh the father hearing it, keepes beyond the Seas, but the sonne secretly hides himselfe in England, expecting the turne of a better season. And indeed shortly after, the Arch-bishop of Canterbury in a Councell holden at London, pronoun∣ceth the banishment of the Spensers to have beene erronious; and thereupon the E∣dict is revoked, and the Spensers are called home, and se in as great authority as they were before. But the Lords having thus obtained their desire, with the Kings Letters of indemnity returne home, but yet not with such security as to give over the provision for their owne defence. Not long after there fell ou an unexpected accident, that suddenly wrought the Lords confusion. The Queene making her progresse towards Canterbury, intended to lodge in the Castle of Leedes, belonging to the Lord Badlesmer, (who had beene long the Kings Steward, but now tooke part with the Lords) and sending her Marshall to make ready for her and her traine; they who kept the Castle told him plainely, that neither the Queene, nor any else should enter there without Letters from their Lord. The Queene her selfe goes to
the Castle, and receives the like answer; whereupon she is driven to take such lodging otherwhere as could be provided. Of which indignity she complaines to the King; who tooke it so to heart, that presently with a power of armed men out of London, he laies siege to the Castle, takes it, hangs the keeper Thomas Cepepper, sends the wife and children of the Lord Badlesmer to the Tower, and seiseth upon all his goods and treasure. And having this power about him, and warmed with successe and the instigation of the Queene, suddenly directs his course to Chihester, where he keepes his Christmas, and there provides for an Army against the Ba∣rons: whereof many (seeing the Kings power encreasing) lef their Associats, and yeeld themselves to his mercie: amongst whom were the two Roger Morirs, men of great might and meanes; the Lord Hugh Audely, the Lord Mrice Barkely, and others: who notwithstanding, contrary to their expectation, were sent to di∣vers Prisons. The Earles of Lancaster and Hereford seeing this sudden change, with∣drew themselves and their companies from about Glocester, towards the North-parts: whom the King followes with his Army; wherin were the Earles of Athll & Angus; and at Burton upon Trent, where they had made a head, discomfited their forces, and put them to flight. In the meane time the Earle of Lancaster had sent into Lanca∣shire a knight of his, named Robert Holland, (one whom he had brought up of naught) to raise more forces amongst his Tenants; but he hearing of this flight of his Lords, goes with his forces to take the Kings part; which so dismaies the Earle, that he beganne now to thinke of suing to the King for grace; but being in the way, at a Towne called Borough-bridge, was there set upon by Sir Simon Warde Sheriffe of Yorke, and Sir Andrew Harkeley Constable of Carlile, who utterly de∣feat his forces: In which fight was slaine the Earle of Hereford, (who fighting va∣liantly upon a Bridge, was by a Varlet skulking under the Bridge, thrust with a Speare into the fundament) Sir Roger Benefield, Sir William Sulland and others; there was taken the Earle of Lancaster, Sir Roger Clifford, Sir Iohn Mwbray, Sir Roger Tuckets, Sir William Fits-Williams, with divers other, and were led to Yorke. This field was fought the fifteenth day of March, in the yeare 1320. It was not long f∣ter that Sir Hugh Daniell, Sir Bartholomew de Baddelsmer were taken. Three dayes after the Earle of Lancaster is brought to Pomfret, where the King sitting himselfe in judgement with Edmund Earle of Kent his brother, the Earle of Pemke, the Earle Warren, Hugh Spencer, lately created Earle of Winchester, and others; sentence of death is given against him, to be drawne, hanged, and beheaded as a Traitor. The two first punishments are pardoned, in regard he was of Royall bloud: onely be∣headed he was the same day without the Towne of Pomfret, before his owne Ca∣stle. To speake of the Miracles said to be done by him after his death, might be fit for a Legend, but not for a Chronicle, and therefore I omit them. By the like judgement were condemned, the Lord Roger Clifford the Lord Warren Lisle, the Lord William Tuchet, Thomas Maudit, Henry Bradburne, Willim Fits-Williams, Willi∣am Lord Cheyney, Thomas Lord Mwbray, Ioceline Lord Danill, all which were exe∣cuted at Yorke. Shortly after, the Lord Henry Teyes is taken, drawne, hanged, and quarterd at London; the Lord Aldenham at Windsor; the Lords Baddlesmere and Ash∣burton at Canterbury: at Cardiffe in Wales, Sir William Flemming; at Bristow, Si Henry Womington; and Sir Henry Montford Bannerets; at Glocester, the Lord Clifford and Sir William Elminbridge, principall men in principall places, to spread the more e∣rour over the kingdome: all their estates and inheritances are confiscated, and ny new men advanced by the same. And this is the first bloud of Nobility that ever was shed in this manner in England since William the Conquerour. But not long after, the King in a calmer humour, beganne to have a sense o the Earle of Lancasters execution, which he discovered upon this occasion: some bou him making earnest suite for a Pardon to one of the Earles followers; and preng the King hard to it, he fell into a great pssion, excliming ginst them as unjus and wicked Counsellours, who would urge him to save the life of a notorious V∣let, and would not speake one word for his neare kinsman, the Earle of Lancaste: who (said he had) he lived, might have beene useull to me, and the whole king∣dome;
but this fellow the longer he lives, the more mischiefe he will doe, and therefore by the soule of God, he should die the death he had deserved. Sir Andrew Harkeley, who was the man that tooke the Earle of Lancaster prisoner, being advan∣ced for his service to the Earledome of Carlile, enjoyed his honour but a while; for the next yeare after, either thrust out into discontent by the Spensers, envying his high preferment, or combining with the Scots, upon hope of a great match, (as he was accused) he is degraded of all his honours; drawne, hanged, and quartered at Londn for Treason. But now the King of France summons King Edward to come and doe his homage for Gascoyne; and he not comming, all his Territories in France are adjudged to be forfeited, and many places of importance are seied on by the French. Hereupon a Parliament is called, and it is by common consent of all a∣greed, that the King should not goe in person himselfe, in regard of the distraction of the times, but should send some speciall man to excuse his appearance; where∣upon Edmund Earle of Kent the Kings brother is sent, but to little effect. Then it is thought fit the Queene should goe, and indeed the Queene went; but what was the cause of her going, there is amongst Writers great variance: some say she was sent by the King to accommodate this businesse, which she negotiated so well, as that all quarrels were ended, upon condition the King should give to his sonne Edward, the Dutchie of Aquitaine, with the Earledome of Ponthieu, and send him over to doe his homage for them; which after many consultations the King is wrought to yeeld unto; and the Prince is sent with the Bishop of Exeter and o∣thers to the Court of France accordingly: but others say she went out of discon∣tent, to complaine to her brother the King of France, for wrongs offered her by the Spensers, who had so alienated the Kings minde from her, that he would scarce come where she was, nor allow her fit maintenance for her calling. But whatso∣ever was the cause of her going there appeared no cause of her staying, but that she had gotten into her company, Roger Mortimer Lord of Wigmre, a gallant young Gentleman whom she specially favoured, lately escaped out of the Tower of Lon∣don, by giving his keepers (as was said) a sleeping drinke. And withall, the Bishop of Exeter perceiving some plots to be in hand, and their close consultations made without him, withdrawes himselfe secretly, and discovers to the King what he ob∣served in their courses. Whereupon the King sends presently for the Qu and Prince, and solicits the King of France to hasten their return; which when he saw was negle∣cted and delaied, he caused them openly to be proclaimed enemies to the king∣dome, banished them and all their adherents out of the Land: and withall causeth all the Ports to be strongly kept; and sends three Admirals to attend in severall Coasts to hinder their landing. It was not without suspition, that as the King for love of the Spensers, had his minde alienated from loving the Queen; so the Queen for love of Mrtimer, had her minde alienated from loving the King, and therefore having him with her, cred not how long she staied. However it was, when the Queene heard of the Kings Proclamation, she knew there was no returning for her into England without some good assistance: whereupon soliciting her brother the King of France, he aided her with men and money (say some: but others, that he refusing to aide her, as being wrought under hand by the Spensers against her; she left the French Court, and went into Heynault, to the Earle of that Countrey, who upon a contract betweene her sonne Prince Edward and Philippa the Earles daugh∣ter ided her with a competent Army, under the conduct of his brothe Iohn: and with them and her beloved Mortimer, she tooke shipping and landed at Orwell, a Port neare unto Harwich in Suffolke: where presently came to her the Earle Mar∣shall, Henry Earle of Leycester, and Henry Earle of Lancaster with the wry neck, cal∣led Trtcll, with many other Lords and Bishops. The King at this time being at London, and hearing of the Queenes landing with such forces, and chiefely how all the Realme ranne flocking to her, was uddenly strucken into a great amazement; and though he had his great Counsellours the Spensers about him, yet now he found what little good thir counsel could do him: and indeed in this case, what should he, or what could he do? To stay in London was apparent danger, for he plainely saw the
Londners to be more inclining to take the Queenes part then his; and to goe from London to any other place was as unsafe, all places being possest eithe with certaine Enemies or uncertaine Friends at last the Isle of Lundy is thought of, a place plen∣tifull of provision abounding with Conies, Fish and Fowle, and the Island of hard accesse, as having but one place in it where it could be entred, and that so narrow, that a few might easily keepe out many; upon this place he resolves and taking with him the Earle of Glocester, the Spensers, and Robert aldcke, with some fe others, he akes shipping, but by contrary windes is driven backe, and raine through Tempests to land in Wales, and there in the Abbey of Neth in  kept himselfe close. In the meane time the Queene was come to Oxford where Adm Bishop of Hereford Preaching tooke for his Text, Caput meum dol, and thereupon inferred, that the kingdome being now deadly sicke of its head, it was fit to remove that head, and put a sounder in the place. At this time also, th Ldners to shew their love to the Queene, seised upon Walter Stapletn the good Bishop of Exceter and Lord Treasurer of England, left Governor the by the King, and with great despight beheaded him, as also divers others, onely because they favoured the King. In the meane time, the Queene went from Oxford to Glocester, and from thence to Bristow, where Hugh Spncer the Father was, a man of fouescore and ten yeares old, who is there taken, and without examination or Judgement, in most cruell manner Executed, having his heart pulled out of his bo∣dy being yet alive, and his body left hanging upon the Gallowes. After this the Queene stayed at Hreford the space of a moneth and then dividing her Army, she sends one part of it, under the Conduct of Henry Earle of Lancaster, and Ryce a Powell a Clerke, o find out the King: and this Ryce being a Welshan, and know∣ing th Country well, brought the Earle to the Monastery of Nth where the King was, whom they there take together with Spenser the Sonne, Rober Baldcke, and Simon of Reading. The King is by the Bishop of Hereford committed to the custo∣dy of the Earle of Leycester: where all that Winter he was used no worse then was fit for a captive King. But Edmund Earle of Arundell, Iohn Daniel, and Thm Micheldens, at the instance of Mortimer, are all three beheaded. Presently after is Hugh Spenser the younger, who was now Earle of Glocester, drawne, hanged and quareed, his head sent up to be set upon London Bridge, and his foure quarters bestowed in severall Cities. The like is done with Simon of Reading, but Robert Baldocke is committed to New-Gate, against whom, when no just cause of death could be found, there was used so much cruelty in his imprisonment, that he short∣ly after dyed. Presently after Christmas a Parliament is called, wherein it is agreed to depose the King, and set up his Sonne; which he hearing refused it, unlesse his Father would freely resigne; whereupon are appointed three Bishops, two Earles, two Abbots, foure Barons, and of every City a Burgesse, to goe to the King; (in cu∣stody then at Kenelworth) The Bishops were, Iohn of Sratford Bishop of Winche∣ster, Adam Torleton Bishop of Hereford, and Henry Bishop of Lincolne. But the Bi∣shops of Winchester and Lincolne, getting to the King before the rest came, perswade the King to resigne his Crowne to his eldest Sonne; cratily promising him he should have as good maintenance afterward, as ever he had when he was King. And contrarily threatning him, that if he did it not, the people would exclude both him and his Sonne too, and mke a King of another Race. By these promi∣ses and threatnings, the meeke King is drawne to yeeld to the Bishops moon; but when afterward the Bishop of Hereford, and the other Commissioners came, and were sate in a place appointed to take his Resignation, the King comming forth amongst them in mourning Robes, upon a sudden fell downe in a swound in whom the Earle of Leycester, and the Bishop of Winchester, had much ado to reco∣ver life; but then the Bishop of Hereford rising up, delivered the cause of their comming, as the other Bishops before had done. To which he King answered, that as he much grieved his People should be so hardned against him as utterly to reject him; so it was some comfort unto him, that they would yet receive his Son
to be their Soveraigne. After this, Thomas Blunt knight, Steward of the Kings house, brake the Staffe of his Office; and William Trssell Speaker of the Parli∣ment, in name of the whole kingdome, pronounced a Forme of Renouncing all Allegeance to Edward of Carnarvan. Here Caxton writes, that from the time of this Kings Deposing, which was in December, to the time of his Sonnes Crowning, which was not till Candlemas following, all Pleas of the Kings Bench were stayed, and all Prisoners, arrested by Sheriffes, commanded to be set at liberty; which seemes to have little probability, seeing his Sonne Edward presently upon his De∣posing was received for King: But howsoever so great a Dowre was then assigned to Queene Isabel, that scarce a third part of the Revenues of the Crowne is let for the new King and his Wife: And to the late King is allowed a hundred Markes  moneth for his maintenance; with which he lived with his Cousin the Earle of Leycester, in good plenty and contentment for a time; onely this grieved hm most of all (he said) that the Queene his Wife would never be gotten to come to see him: For he swore most devoutly that from the time he first saw her face, he could never like of any other Woman. By which it may appeare, that neither Gaveston no the Spensers had so debauched him, as to make him false to his bed, or to be disloy∣all to his Queene. But the Queene being hardned against him, and conceiving he had too great Liberty under the Earle of Leycester, by advise of her pestilent Coun∣sellour, Adam Torleton Bishop of Hereford, appoints Thomas Gorney, and Io Matrevers knights, to take him from the Earle into their owne Custody, and to carry him whither they thought good; who thereupon take him from Kenelwrth, and carry him first to Corfe Castle, and from thence to Bristow, where they shut him in the Castle; till upon knowledge of a Plot laid to get him out, and send him beyond Sea, they tooke him in the night and carryed him to Brkeley Castle, where by the way they abused him most inhumanely, as Sir Thomas de la More a knight of Glocestershire in his Life relateth: For to the end he should not be knowne, they shaved his Head and Beard, and that in most beastly manner; for they took him from his Horse and set him upon a Hillocke, and then taking puddle water out of a Ditch thereby, they went to wash him, his Barber telling him that cold water must serve for this time: whereat the miserable King looking sternely upon him, said, That whether they would or no, he would have warme water to wash him: and therewithall to make good his word, he presently shed forth a showre of teares. Never was King turned ou of a kingdome in such a manner; Many king∣domes have beene lost by the chance of Warre, but this kingdome was lost before any Dice were cast; no blow strucke, no Battell fought; done forcibly, and yet without force; violently, and yet with consent; both parties agreed, yet nei∣ther pleased; for the King was not pleased to leave his kingdome, and the Queene was not pleased to leave him his life; it was not safe to leave him a part, by which he might afterward recover the whole; and therefore this was the marke now aimed at, having taken away his kingdome openly, how they might take away his life secretly; be the Authours of it, and not be seene in it; but this must be the Contents of a Chapter hereafter. Of his Taxations. BY this King it appeares, there is something else besides the grievance of Taxa∣tions, that alienates the mindes of English Subjects from their King; for never were fewer Taxations then in this Kings time, yet never were the Subjects minds more alienated from their King, then they were from him. Before his Coronati∣on, in a Parliament holde at Westminster, ere was granted him a fifteenth of the Clergy, and a twentieth of the Temporalty. In his fifth yeare in a Parliament at Ldon, was granted him a fifteenth of the Temporalty. In his fifteenth yeare was granted the sixth peny of temporall mens Goods, through England, Ireland, and Wales, towards his Warre with Scotland. And more then these we reade not of: but then at the defeate of the Earle of Lancaster, there were Confiscations that sup∣plyed
the place of Taxations, by which (as one saith) he became the richest King that had beene since the Conquest. Of his Lawes and Ordinances. HE Ordained that the moneyes of his Father, though counted base by the Peo∣ple, should be currant. In the eight yeare of his Raigne, by reason of a dearh which raised the price of all Victuals, it was Ordained by Parliament, that an Oxe fatted with grasse, should be sold for fifteene shillings; fatted with Corne, for twen∣ty; the best Cow for twelve shillings; a fat Hogge of two yeares old, three shl∣lings foure pence; a fat Sheepe shorne, foureteene pence, with the Fleece, twenty pence; a fat Goose for two pence halfe-penny; a fat Capon two pence; a fat Hen a penny; foure Pigeons a penny; whosoever sold for more, should forfait their Ware to the King. But after these Rates imposed, all kinde of Victuals grew so scarce, that provision could hardly be made for the Kings house; where∣upon shortly after, the Order was revoked, and Market Folkes permitted to make the best of their Wares. In this Kings time an Ordinance was made against knights Templars, accused of Heresie and other crimes, and they were all apprehended, and committed to divers Prisons. The like was done by all the Kings of Chri∣stendome, at one instant, being condemned in a Generall Counsell at Vienna. In the 14. yeare of his Raigne, on the 15. of October, the Clerkes of the Exchequer went towards Yorke with the Booke called Domus Dei, and other Records and Pro∣vision that laded one and twenty Carts, but within halfe a yeare they were brought backe againe. Affaires of the Church in his time. IN the 17. yeare of his Raign the Bishop of Hereford was arrested accused of High Treason, for aiding the Kings enemies in their late rebellion; but he refued to an∣swer, (being a consecrated Bishop) without leave of the Arch-bishop of Canter∣bury, whose Suffragan he was, (and who he said was his direct Judge, next the Pope) or without the consent of his fellow Bishops: who then all arose, and hum∣bly craved the Kings Clemency in his behalfe; but finding the King implacable, they tooke him away from the Barre, and delivered him to the custody o the Arch-bishop of Canterbury: shortly after, he was againe taken and convented as before, which the Clergy understanding, the Arch-bishops, Canterbury, Yorke, and Dublin, with tenne other Bishops, all with their Crosses erected, went to the place of Judgement, and againe tooke him away with them; charging all men, upon paine of Excommunication, to forbeare to lay violent hands upon him; with which audacious Act, the King was so much displeased, that he presently com∣manded inquiry to be made ex Officio Iudicis, concerning those Objections against the Bishop; wherein he was found guilty, though absent, and had all his Goods and Possessions seised into the Kings hands. In this Kings time the Crowchet Fry∣ers came first into England. In his time, Pope Iohn the two and twentieth, first Instituted the Feast of Corpus Christi; begunne before by Urban the fourth. Workes of piety done by him, or by others in his time. THis King founded Oriall Colledge, and Saint Mary Hall in Oxford: He buil∣ded  Church of Fryers at his Manour of Langley, where the soule of Gaveston, should b prayed for. In this Kings twentieth yeare, Richard Rothing Sheriffe of London blded the Parish Church of Garlickhithe in London. Ralph Baldocke Bishop of London gave two thousand Markes to the building of the new Worke of the Chappell, on the South side of Pauls Church: And left much more by his Testa∣ment.
Casualties. IN the eighth yeare of this Kings Raigne, was so great a dearh, that Horses and Dogges were eaten, and Theeves in prison pluckt in peeces those that were new∣ly brought in amongst them, and eate them halfe alive; which continuing three yeares, brought in the end such a pestilence, that the living scarce sufficed to bury the dead. In the fourth yeare of his Raigne, the Church of Middleton in Dorset∣shire, with all the Monuments, was consumed with Lightning, the Monkes being at Mattins. In this Kings time, digging the Foundation of a worke about Pauls, were found more then a hundred heads of Oxen and kine, which confirmed the o∣pinion, that of old time it had beene the Temple of Iupiter, and that there was the Sacrifice of Beasts. Of his Wife and Children. HE marryed Isabel Daughter of Philip the Faire, King of France, she being but twelve yeares of age; who lived his Wife twenty yeares, his Widdow thirty, and dying at threescore and three yeares old, at Rysings neare London, was buried in the midst of the Gray Fryers Quire in London. By her he had issue two Sons and two Daughters: his eldest Sonne named Edward of Windsor, because borne there, succeeded him in the kingdome. His second Sonne named Iohn of Eltham, be∣cause borne there, was at twelve yeares old created Earle of Cornwall: he dyed in Scotland, in the flowre of his Youth, unmarryed. His eldest Daughter Ioane, be∣ing a childe, was marryed in the fourth yeare of King Edward her Brother, to D∣vid Prince of Scotland, Sonne to King Robert Bruce, at seven yeares old, who com∣ming afterward into England to visit her Brother, dyed here, and was buryed at the Gray Fryers in London. His second Daughter Eleanor, was marryed to Reginold the second Earle of Gelder, with a portion of fifteene thousand pounds, and had issue by him two Sonnes, who were Earles successively. Of his Personage and Conditions. HE was faire of body, and of great strength, but given much to drinke, which made him oftentimes bewray his owne Secrets; For his other conditions, his greatest fault was, that he loved but one, for if his love had beene divided, it could not have beene so violent. He was extreame in nothing but in loving; and though love moderated, be the best of affections, yet the extremity of it is the worst of pas∣sions. He was rather unfortunate then unhappy; seeing unfortunatenesse is in the Event, unhappinesse in the Cause; and if his fortune had beene to love good men, his owne goodnesse would have made him happy. Two Vertues were eminent in him above all his Predecessours, Continence, and Abstinence: So continent that he left no base issue behind him; So abstinent, that he tooke no base courses for rai∣sing of money. They who despised him being alive, so much honoured him be∣ing dead, that they could have found in their hearts to make him a Saint. Of his Death and Buriall. MAny wayes were attempted to take away his life: First, they vexed him in his dyet, allowing him nothing he could well endure to eate, but this succeeded not. Then they lodged him in a chamber over carion and dead carkasses, enough to have poysoned him; and indeed he told a workman at his window, he never en∣dured so great a misery in all his life, but neither did this succeed: Then they at∣tempted it by Poysons, but whether by the strength of his constitution, or by the Divine Providence, neither did this succeed. At last the pestilent Achitphel, the Bishop of Hereford, devised a Letter to his keepers, blaming them for giving him
too much liberty, and for not doing the service which was expected from them: and in the end of his Letter wrote this line, Edwardum Octidere lite timere bonum est: Craftily contriving it in this doubtfull sense, that both the keepers might find sufficient warrant, and himselfe might find sufficient excuse. The keepers guessing at his meaning, tooke it in the worst sense, and accordingly put it in execuion; they tooke him in his bed, and casting heavy bolsters upon him, and pressing them hard downe, stifled him; and not content with that, they heated an iron red hot, and through a pipe thrust it up into his Fondament, that no markes of violence might be seene; but though none were seene, yet some were heard; For when the Fact was in doing, he was heard to roare and cry all the Castle over. Gourney and Ma∣trevers, his murtherers, looking for reward, had the reward of murtherers: For the Queene and Bishop Torleton disavowing the command, threatned to question them for the Kings death: whereupon they fled beyond Sea; and Gourney after three yeares being taken in France, and sent into England, was in the way upon the Sea behead∣ed. Matrevers flying into Germany, had the grace to repent, but lived ever after mi∣serably. Thus dyed this King in the yeare 1327. more then halfe a yeare after his deposing; when he had Raigned almost 19. yeares, lived 43. His body was crry∣ed to Glocester, and there without any Funerall Pompe buryed in the Monastery of Saint Peter, by the Benedictine Fryers. Of Men of note in his time. IN this Kings time, of Martiall men were many, whose Acts have beene spoken of in the late Kings life. Of Learned men, also many, as Iohn Duns the great Logician, called Doctor Subtilis, borne in Northumberland, at Emildune a Village three miles distant from Alwike; though both the Scots and the Irish challenge him for theis. Robert Walsingham a Carmelite Fryer, who wrote divers Treatises. Robert Baston borne in Nottingham-shire, a Carmelite Fryer of Scarborough, whom King Edward tooke with him into Scotland, to write some Remembrances of his victories; but being taken by the Scots was constrained by Robert Bruce to write Remembrances of his overthrowes. William Rishanger, a Monke of Saint Albans, an Historiographer; Ralph Baldocke Bishop of London, who wrote a History inti∣tuled Historia Anglica; Iohn Walsingham, a Carmelite Fryer, who wrote divers Trea∣tises; Nicholas de Lyra a Jew by birth, who wrote many excellent Treatises in Di∣vinity; William Ockam a Fryer Minor, who wrote divers Treatises, and namely a∣gainst Iohn Duns, and also against Pope Iohn the 23. in favour of the Emperour Lewis of Bavaria; Thomas Haselwood, a Canon of Leedes in Kent, who wrote a Chro∣nicle, called Chronicon compendiarium; Robert Perscrutator, borne in Yorkeshire, a blacke Fryer and a Philosopher, or rather a Magician; and lastly, though not least worthy to be remembred, Iohn Mandevile, the great Travellour, a Doctor of Physicke, and a Knight.
THE LIFE and RAIGNE OF KING EDWARD THE THIRD. Of his comming to the Crowne, and Acts done in his minority. EDward of Windsor, eldest sonne of King Edward the second, by Order of Parliament, upon his Fathers Resignation, was pro∣claimed King of England, on the five and twentieth day of Ia∣nuary, in the yeare 1327. and because he had not yet received the Order of knighthood, he was by Henry Earle of Lancaster git solemnly with the Sword; and on the first day of February fol∣lowing, was Crowned at Westminster by Walter Reginolds Arch∣bishop of Canterbury: and thereupon a generall Pardon is Proclaimed, which hath since beene used as a Custome with all the succeeding Kings: that at their first comming to the Crowne, a Generall Pardon is alwayes granted. And because the King was under age, scarce fifteene yeares old (though Froyssard saith he was then Eighteene) there were twelve appointed Governours of him and the kingdome namely the Arch-bishops of Canterbury and Yorke, the Bishops of Winchester, Here∣ford, and Worcester; Thomas of Brotherton, Earle Marshall, Edmund Earle of Kent, the Kings Unkles; Iohn Earle Warren, Thomas Lord Wake, Henry Lord Percie, Oli∣ver Lord Ingham, and Iohn Lord Rosse: but though these were appointed and bore the name, yet the Queen and Roger Mortimer tooke all the authority to themselves. The first action that was undertaken, was an expedition against the Scots; for Ro∣bert Bruce, though now old and sickly, and (as was said) Leprous: yet considering the youth of the new King, and the distractions of the kingdome, thought it now a it time to doe some good upon England: and entring the English borders with an Army, sent defiance to King Edward: whereupon an Army is raised, and the Hey∣nalders (whom the Queen had brought over) are joyned with the English; but a variance falling out betweene the two Nations, made the action not successefull. For the Kings Army encountring the Scots at Stanhope Parke in Weridall in the Bi∣shopricke of Durham, though three times as many as the Scots, as being thirty thou∣sand; yet through this variance, but more through treason of some great men, suffered them all to escape their hands, and the Scots returned home in safety, the English with dishonour: and after this, the English seeing the Heynaulders could doe them no good, sent them away to their owne Countrey. In King Edwards second yeare, his marriage with Philippa of Heynault is solemnised, (a dispensation being first gotten, because of their nearenesse in bloud) and a Parliament is holden at
Northampton, where the King made three Earles: Iohn of Eltham his brother, Earle of Cornwall; Roger Mortimer, Earle of March, and Iames Butler of Ireland, Earle of Ormond: and in this Parliament a dishonourable peace is concluded with the Scots, and confirmed by a match betweene David Bruce Prince of Scotland, being but se∣ven yeares old, and Ioane sister to King Edward, not so old; at which time, by the secret working of Queene Isabell, Roger Mortimer and Sir Iames Dowglasse; the King surrenders by his Charter, all his title of Soveraignty to the Kingdome of Scotland, restores divers Deeds and Instruments of their former Homages and Fe∣alties, with the famous Evidence called Ragmans Roll, and many ancient Jewels and Monuments, amongst which was the blacke Crosse of Scotland; and besides, any English man is prohibited to hold lands in Scotland, unlesse he were a dweller there. In consideration whereof King Bruce was to pay thirty thousand Markes, and to renounce his claime to the Counties of Cumberland and Northumberland, and any other place possessed by him in England. This was no good beginning, and yet worse followed after. For another Parliament being holden at Winchester, Edmund Earle of Kent, the Kings Unkle, is there accused, and condemned upon his con∣fession, for intending to restore his brother, the late King Edward; an intention onely without any fact; yet condemned he was, and brought to the Scaffold, but generally, so beloved of the people, that he stood on the Scaffold from one a clocke till five, before any executioner could be found that would doe the of∣fice, till at last a silly wretch of the Marshalsey was gotten to cut off his head. But the Authors of his death escaped not long themselves, for in the third yeare of the Kings Raigne, another Parliament is holden at Nottingham, wherein the Queen hath all her great Joynture taken from her, and is put to her Pension of a thousand pounds a yeare, and her selfe confined to a Castle, where she remained the rest of her dayes, no fewer then thirty yeares, a time long enough to finde that her being the daughter of a King, the sister of a King, the wife of a King, and the mother of a King, were glorious titles, but all not worth the liberty of a meane estate; and as for Mortimer, (lying then in the Castle of Nottingham) and lately created Earle of the Marches of Wales) he was seised on in this manner; the King taking with him William Montacute, Robert Holland, and others, goe secretly one night by Torch∣light, through a privie way under ground, till they came to the Queenes Chamber, where leaving the King without, they entred, and found the Queene with Mortimer, ready to goe to bed: then laying hands on him, they led him forth, after whom the Queene followed, crying, Bel fits, el fits, ayes pitie du gentil Mortimer; good son good sonne, take pity upon the gentle Mortimer, suspecting that her sonne had beene amongst them: this course was taken to apprehend him for avoyding of tumult, he having no fewer then ninescore knights and Gentlemen, besides other meaner ser∣vants continually about him. But thus seised on, he is committed presently to the Tower, accused of divers great crimes, whereof these were chiefe; that he had pro∣cured the late Kings death; that he had beene the author of the Scots safe escaping at Stanhope Parke, corrupted with the gift of thirty thousand pounds; that he had procured the late marriage and Peace with Scotland, so dishonourable to the King and kingdome; that he had beene too familiar with the Queene, as by whom she was thought to be with child: of which Articles he is found guilty, and condemned; and thereupon is drawne and hanged on the common Gallowes at the Elmes, now called Tiburne, where his body remained two dayes as an opprobrious spectacle for all beholders. After these businesses in England, there comes a new businesse upon him from the King in France: for about this time Philippe le Bel, King of France, the Queens brother dying without issue, the right of succession to the Crowne is devolved up∣on the Heire to Charles a former King, wherein are competitours Philip Duke de Valois, and Edward King of England; Edward is the nearer in bloud, bu drawes his Pedegree by a Female: Philippe, the further off, but descending by all Males; and because the Law Salique excluding Females, was conceived as well to exclude all descendants by Females, therefore is Philips title preferred before King Edwards,
and Philip is received and crowned King of France: to which preferment of his, Robert d' Arthois a Peere of great power, gave no small furtherance. And now as soone as Philip was Invested in the Crowne, he summons King Edward to come and doe his Homage for the Dutchy of Guyenne, and his other lands in France, held of that Crowne, according to the custome; which though it were some prejudice to King Edwards claime afterward, yet in regard his kingdome of England was scarce well setled, and himselfe but young, he was contented to doe; and thereupon the sixth of Iune, in the yeare 1329. King Edward in a Crimson Velvet gowne imbroi∣dered with Leopards, with his Crowne on his head, his Sword by his side, and golden Spurres on his heeles; presents himselfe in the body of the Cathedrall Church of Amyens before King Philip, sitting in his Chaire of Estate, in a Velve Gowne of a Violet colour imbroydered with Flowers de lys of Gold, his Crowne on his head, and his Scepter in his hand, with all his Princes and Peeres about him. The Viscount Melun Chamberlaine of France, first commands King Edward to pu off his Crowne, his Sword, and his Spurres, and to kneele downe, which he did, on a Crimson Velvet Cushion before King Philip; and then the Viscount putting both his hands together betweene the hands of the King of France, pronounced the words of the Homage, which were these: You become Liegeman to my Ma∣ster here present, as Duke of Aquitaine and Peere of France, and you promise to beare faith and loyalty unto him; Say yea: and King Edward said yea, and kissed the King of France in the mouth, as Lord of the Fee. The like Homage also he did for the Earldome of Ponthieu. But this act of submission left a rancour in King Edwards heart, which afterwards brake so out, that it had beene good for France  had never beene exacted. This done, King Edward returnes home, and there finds a new busines with Scot∣land, upon this occasion. Edward Baylioll, sonne to Iohn Baylioll (sometimes King of Scotland) two and thirty yeares after his fathers deposition, beganne now to shew himselfe, attempting the recovery of that Crowne; and comming out of Frace, where he had all that while remained; and getting aide under-hand in Englad, with them he suddenly assailes those who had the government of Scotland, during the Nonage of the young King David, (being at that time with the King of Frace) and in a battell overcame them, with the slaugher of many Noble men, and thou∣sands of the common people; and thereupon was immediatly Crowned King of Scotland at Scone. But notwithstanding this great defeat, King Baylioll was for∣ced to retire him into England to get more aide of King Edward: who now shewes himselfe in the action, joynes with Baylioll against his brother in Law, King David; goes in person with a strong Army to recover Berwicke, which after three moneths siege, being valiantly defended by the Lord Seton, was taken in; and the Army of the Scots which came to the rescue thereof, at Hallidowne-hill, utterly defeated: where were slaine seven Earles, ninety knights and Bannerets, foure hundred Esquires, and about two and thirty thousand common Souldiers, as our Writers report; as theirs, but foureteene thousand: and with this effusion of bloud is Baylioll returned to his miserable kingdome, and to hold good correspondence with the King of England hereafter, doth him Homage for his Realme of Scotland, and the Ilands adjacent. But though he had a kingdome, yet he had not quietnesse, for many of the Scots ai∣ded by the French, made warre upon him divers yeares after; during all which time, King David with his wife remained in France. If any man marvell why King Ed∣ward would aide Bailioll against King David, who had married his sister; he may consider that Alliances, how neare soever, weigh but light in the Scales of State. About this time the Ile of Man is conquered by William Montacute, Earle of Slisbury; for which service King Edward gave him the Title of King of Man.
Of his Acts after he came of age. ANd now Robert of Arthois banished out of France, comes into England, whom King Edward makes Earle of Richmond, and of his Counsell. This Robert per∣swades King Edward to make warre upon France, to which Crowne (he said) he had more right then he that held it; with whose perswasions, King Edward is at last resolved to undertake the enterprise: and to furnish himselfe of Noble Chiefe∣taines, he at one time in a Parliament at Westminster, the eighth yeare of his Raign, creates sixe Earles, Henry of Lancaster he made Earle Drby, William Montacute he made Earle of Salisbury, Hugh Audeley Earle of Glocester, William Clinton Earle of Huntington, and Robert Clifford or Ufford Earle of Suffolke; also twenty knights, of whom Thomas de la Moore, who writ the life of the Kings Father, was one: withall he enters League of amity with many Princes abroad, with the Dukes and Erles of Gelders, Iulyers, Cleves, Heynault, and Brabant, and with the Arch-bishop of Co∣len, and Valeran his brother: as on the other side, the King of France got to take his part the Bishop of Liege, Iohn King of Bohemia, Earle of Luxemburg, Henry Count Palatine, Aubert Bishop of Mets, Otho Duke of Austria, Ame Earle of Geneva, with many other Princes and Captaines out of Germany, Spaine, and other Countries. King Edward thus resolved in himselfe, and furnished with friends abroad, goes over into Flanders with his Queene and children, makes his residence at Antwerp, where by perswasion of the Flemings he takes upon him the Stile, Title, and Armes of the King of France; for by this they accounted themselves disobliged of the Bond of twenty hundred thousand crownes, which they had entred into, never to beare Armes against the King of France; and hereupon the League was established be∣tweene them and King Edward. And now King Edward for a beginning to put his claime in execution, sets upon Cambray, and enters France by the way of Verman∣dois and Thierach; on the other side King Philip seiseth on the Dutchy of Guienne, and sends thither the Conte d' Eu, Constable of France, with the Earles of Foix and Ar∣migniack. At last both Armies came so neare together, that a fight was appointed the Friday after; but upon better consideration, the English thought it no discretion to give battell to an Army so much greater then their owne, if they could avoid it; and the French thought it as little discretion for them to hazard the person of their Prince within his owne kingdome; and perhaps were not a little moved with the warning given them by Robert King of Sicilie, a great Astronomer, that he fore-saw by the Starres, some great misfortune to threaten the French, if they should that day fight with the Englih, King Edward being present: and thus both Armies having their severall reasons to decline the battell, they parted without doing any thing; onely an accident happened scarce worth remembring, yet must be remembred. A Hare starting out before the head of the French Army, caused a great shout to be made; whereupon, they who saw not the Hare, but onely heard the shout, suppo∣sing it to be the onset to the battell, disposed themselves to fight, and foureteene Gentlemen for encouragements sake, as the custome is, were knighted; called af∣terward in merriment, knights of the Hare. But now King Edward must a little looke home, and therefore leaving the Queen in Brabant, he passeth himselfe into England about Candlemas, having beene in Bra∣bant about a yeare; and landing at the Tower about midnight, and finding t un∣guarded, was so much displeased, that he presently sends for the Major of ondon, commanding him to bring before him the Chancellour and Treasurer, with Sir Iohn Saint Paul, Michael Watch, Philp Thorpe, Henry Stratford, Clergy men, (who it seemes were Officers for his Receipts) and Iohn Sconer Justice of the Bench; all which, except the Chancellour, were apprehended and committed to prison; as were afterward in like manner divers Officers of Justice, and Accomptants, upon inquiry made of their unjust proceeding. During the Kings abode in England, William Montacute Earle of Salisbury, and Robert Ufford Earle of Suffolke, let in Flanders to oppose the French, having performed divers great eploits, were a last
in an encounter about Lise, so overlaid by multitude, as they were both taken, and sent prisoners to Paris. Besides, about this time two accidents happened that were thought would be great rubs in King Edwards proceeding; one, that his Wives Father, William Earle of Haynult, dying, and leaving his sonne to succeed, this son left his brother King Edward, and fell to take part with the King of France: the other, that the Duke of Normandy, thinking himselfe as strong as ever William Du of Normandy was that conquered England, he saw no reason but he might con∣quer it as well as that William; and thereupon makes preparation by Sea and Land to attempt the enterprise: but these were but vapours that never came to be winds, at least brought no stormes: for Iohn Earle of Haynault had quickly enough of the King of France, and was soone after reconciled to his brother King Edward; and the Duke of Normandy went no further then preparations: for indeed King Edwd prosecuted his courses against France with such heate, that all the neighbouring Princes seeing a fire kindled so neare their owne borders, were glad to looke o themselves at home. But now to impeach the King of Englands returne into Frace King Philip had provided a mighty Navie in the Haven of Sluce, consisting of tw hundred saile of Ships (besides many Gallies) and two thousand armed men in th Port ready to encounter him upon his landing: whereof King Edward being adveti∣sed, prepares the like number of Ships, and sets out to Sea upon Midsommer Eve; is m the morrow after with a Navy likewise from the North parts, conducted by Sir ∣bert Morley; and encounters his enemy who lay to intercept him with such force and courage, and such advantage of Wind and Sun, that he utterly defeated their whole Navy, took and sunke all their Ships, slew thirty thousand men, and landed with as great glory, as such a victory (the greatest that ever before was gotten by the E∣glish at Sea) could yeeld, though King Edward himselfe was there wounded with an Arrow in the thigh. Most of the French, rather then to endure the Arrowes of the English, or be taken, desperately leapt into the Sea; whereupon the French Kings Jester, set on to give him notice of this overthrow, (which being so ill newes, no else would willingly impart unto him) said, and oftentimes repeated it in the Kings hearing; Cowardly English men, Dastardly English men, faint-hearted Englis men the King at length asked him why for that (said he) they durst not leap out of their Ships into the Sea, as our brave French men did. By which speech the King apprehend a notion of this overthrow: which the French attribute to Nichol ∣chet, one of their chiefe Commanders, who had armed his Ships with men of base condition (content with small pay) and refused Gentlemen and sufficient Souldiers, in regard they required greater wages: And indeed it often happens that the avarice of Commanders is the occasion of great defeats. By this victory King Edward gained a free entrance into Flanders, and present∣ly went and besieged Tournay with an Army of five and fifty thousand, but was so valiantly encountred by the Duke of Burgundy and the Earle of Armigniack, that they routed his Army, and slew foure thousand upon the place; which so enraged King Edward, that two dayes after he sent a Challenge to King Philip to meete him in  single combate, or with an hundred against as many, before the wals of Tourn. King Philip answers, that his Challenge being made to Philip de Valois, withou mention of King, he tooke it not to be to him, who was truly King of France but he wished him to remember the Homage he had done him at Amiens, and the wrong he did to the Christian world by his troublesome courses to hinder him from his voyage intended to the Holy Land. Besides this answer in writing he sends to him by word of mouth; that by his Challenge he hazarded nothing of his owne, but exposed onely the Dominion of another, which was against all rea∣son: but if he would set his kingdome of England, though much meaner, agai his of France, he would then accept the Challenge, and meete him in the field  single combate. But this King Edward would not hearken to for as he was valiant to make the Challenge, so he was circumspect to looke to the conditions. But here upon he continues his siege of Trnay; to the reliefe whereof King Philip sends all the forces he could possibly make by himselfe o his friends; and after the siege
had continued three moneths, partly by mediation of Robert King of Sicilie, but chiefely by the Lady Iane of Valois, sister to King Philip, and mother of King Ed∣wards wife (who had vowed her selfe a Nunne; but to doe this good office, tra∣velled from one to another) a Truce was concluded for a yeare, and both their Ar∣mies are dissolved. After this, K. Edward returning into England, was advertised how the Scots after many other places gained, had besieged the Castle of Striveling; for reliefe where∣of, the King makes all the haste he can; and yet before he could come, it was by force of battery, compelled to render it selfe upon conditions. Then King Edward being at Berwicke, passeth to New-Castle upon Tyne, where he staies a moneth waiting for his provision that was to come by Sea; but that being driven into other parts by tempest, he makes a Truce with the Scots for three or foure moneths, and then returnes home. In the time of this Truce; the Scots send to King David, to come and governe the kingdome in his owne person; who thereupon taking his leave of the King of France, with whom he had remained seven yeares, he with his wife Ioane, King Edwards sister, returnes into Scotland; where after he had beene most honourably received by the Prince of Ornay, and the other Lords and Barons of the Kingdome, as soone as the Truce was ended, with a strong Army enters Nor∣thumberland, passing on to New-Castle upon Tyne, where he plants his Campe. Of this Castle, Iohn Nevile was left governour by King Edward, who sending out certaine companies, tooke the Earle Murray prisoner, and with the slaughter of di∣vers of his men, and rich booties, returned backe to his Castle; which so incen∣sed King David, that he assaulted the Castle as a man enraged, but finding it too strong for his taking, he then passed into the Province of Durham, where he used all kinds of cruelty, first upon the Countrey, and then upon the City, killing men, women and children, Clergy, and others; burning and destroying houses and Churches, and utterly defacing it. From thence he passeth on to the Castle of Sa∣lisbury, which Castle belonged to William Mountacute Earle of Salisbury in right of his wife; but himselfe being then prisoner in France, onely his Countesse, and one William Mountacute a Cousin of his, was in the Castle. This William perceiving the Scottish horse to be so over-charged with pillage, that they were scarce able to goe; issues out of the Castle with forty horse, sets upon them, kils two hundred, and takes sixe score, whom he brings with their rich pillage, into the Castle. King Da∣vid soone after with his whole Army arrived, but hearing of King Edwards com∣ming (who certified of these things, made all the haste he could) he retires him∣selfe from thence; and King Edward finding him gone before he came, yet would needs goe in and visit the Countesse: of whom, as soone as he saw her, he was so enamoured, that he laid more battery to her chastity, then King David had done to her Castle; but finding it inexpugnable, after a day and a night he left it, and fol∣lowed after the Scots, with whom for three dayes together he had many skirmishes, till at last a Truce was concluded for two yeares; and amongst other conditions, William Earle of Salisbury, prisoner with the King of France, was set at liberty in exchange for the Earle Murray, prisoner with the King of England. About this time another difference fell out betweene the Kings of France and England. Iohn Earle of Montford laid claime to the Dutchy of Britaine, but in the quarrell was taken prisoner by the King of France: his Lady sends to King Edward for succour; which King Edward grants upon condition that a marriage be made betweene his daughter Mary and the Earle of Montfords sonne; which being agreed on, he sends over to her aide, first, Walter de Manny a valiant knight, and afterward Robert d' Arthois: but whilest his Army was preparing, King Edward was informed by Edward Baylioll, the pretended King of Scotland, and Governour of Berwicke, that the Scots had not kept the conditions of the Truce; whereupon King Edward drawes a great Army to Berwicke, with a purpose to doe great matters, but nothing was done, for a new Truce was againe concluded for two yeares. By this time Robert d' Arthois had made ready his Army, and taking with him the Countesse of Montford, the Earles of Pembroke, Salisbury, and Suffolke, and many other Barons;
after great tempests and encounters at Sea lands safely at last neare to Vannes, which was held by the French, and laying ege to the City, with the assistance of Walter de Manny, who came unto him, after many assaults, at last he tooke it, to the great joy of the Countesse of Montford, though she held it not long; for certaine resolute French knights assaulted it soone after, and recovered it from the English. In which action many Lords were slaine or wounded, and particularly Robert de Arhois himselfe; who passing over into England, for the better curing of his wounds, soone after died, and was buried in Pauls Church in Lndon. And now King Edward himselfe with a strong Army passeth over into Britaine, and plants his Campe before the City of Vannes, where was like to have beene a cruell battell; but in the instant, there came from Pope Clment the sixth, two Cardinals, the Bi∣shops of Preneste and Thusculum; who upon certaine conditions concluded a Peace; amongst other conditions, this was one; that the City of Vannes should be delive∣red to ing Philip, and thereupon Iohn Earle of Montford should be set at liberty, but yet with this charge, not to goe into Britaine: which promise notwithstanding, he kept not, but went presently and besieged a Towe in Britaine, though he were forced to retire, and died shortly after. But the Truce cracked hus, as it were, by Montford, was afterward absolutely broken by King Edward though he charged the breach of it upon K. Philip, and King Philip upon him. But howsoever broken it was; and Henry of Lancaster Earle of Derby, with divers other Earles and Barons, is sent into France, who won many Townes in Gascoyne and in the Counties of Perigort and Tholose, and then went to winter at Burdeaux. And afterward, in May following, pursuing his victories, he wonne many mor Townes; and amongst others, the great Towne of Reoll. After this againe, he tooke Montpesat, Maurore, Villefranche, and many other Townes; and at last the great City of Angolesme, and then came to winter againe at Burdeaux. Of his Acts together with the Prince. KING Philip informed of so many great losses, assembles a mighty Army, no lesse then a hundred thousand men, with which he recovers Miremont, and Villefranche, and then proceeded to besiege Angoulesme, whom the Earle of Derby having not forces sufficient to encounter, King Edward (leaving for Wardens of England in his absence, the Lords Percie and Nevill) goeth himselfe in person with an Army (as Froyssard saith) of fourescore thousand men at Armes, and ten thou∣sand Archers, besides those out of Wales and Ireland; taking with him his sonne, the Prince of Wales, and Duke of Guyenne, being then but of the age of fifteene yeares. It may be thought preposterous in King Edward, to put his sonne to be a Souldier before he was come to be a man; but it seemes he had a longing to try his sonnes valour in the bud, and perhaps was loath to omit any thing that might give any countenance to this battell, in which the two kingdomes were laid as it were at stake; but howsoever, taking him along with him, and almost all the Lords of his kingdome, he takes Shipping, and lands at Normandy, where at the first setting his foote on ground, he tooke such a fall, that the bloud gushed out at his nose; which the Barons tooke for an ill signe, but the King tooke it for a good: saying, it was a signe that the Land desired to have him: and in deede he presently tooke the Townes of Harsteur, Moulbourg, Carenton, and Saint Lo, and afterward the City of Can it selfe; and from thence passed to the County of Eureux, saccaged and pillaged it, as also the City of Gisors, Vernon, Meulan, and Boulebourse to the City of Poyssy. King Philip all this while staied about Paris, as looking for King Edward to give him battell there; and for that purpose had planted his Campe neare to Saint Ger∣mans; but King Edward deceived him: for going from Poyssy, he passed into Picar∣die and Ponthie, where he tooke and burned many Townes and Castles: and then passed the River of , though not without danger: for King Philip had sent thi∣ther Gundemar de Fay with a thousand horse, and sixe thousand foote, to stop his pas∣sage: King Edward notwithstanding resolves to passe, or perish, and plungeth fore∣m
into the River; crying out, They who love me, will follow me at which voyce,  man strove who should be foremost, and so the shoare was presently gained by the English. Gunemar astonished with this bold adventure, astonisheth his peo∣ with his fearfull countenance: so that the English encountring the French all in , put them to flight. King Philip enraged with this dishonour, resolves to  it; and presently provokes King Edward to a battell. King Edward had  camped in a Village called Cressy, his Army consisted of thirty thousand  hich he divided into three battalions: the first was led by the young Prince , with whom were joyned the Earle of Warwicke, Geoffrey of Harecourt,  Hollad, Ricard Stafford, Iohn Chandoes, Robert Nevile, and many other  and Gentlemen, to the number of eight hundred men at Armes, two thou∣, and a thousand Welsh. In the second were the Earles of Northam∣ nd of , the Lords Rosse, Basset, and others, to the number of eight hun∣ Armes, and twelve hundred Archers. In the third the King was him∣ hving about him seven hundred men at Armes, and three thousand Archers.  battels thus ordered, mounted on a white Hobby, he rode from ranke to ranke  em; encouraging every man that day to have regard to his right and ho∣ The French Kings Army was farre greater, consisting of above sixty thou∣ well armed; whereof the chiefe were Charles Duke of Alanson  Iohn of Luxembourg King of Bohemia, Charles de Blois the Kings  Duke of Lorraine, the Earles of Flanders, Nevers, Sancerre; of Ba∣ and Gentlemen, about three thousand. The Vauntguard he commits to his rother the Count de Alanson, the Reere to the Earle of Savoy, the maine bat∣tell e lead himselfe; his heate out of confidence of victory was so great, that  permitted time for a little counsell what was fit to be done. The old King  advised that the Army should take some repast, and that the Infantry cisting of Geoueses (which were above fifteene thousand Crossebowes, and  men should make the first Front, and the Cavallery to follow; which was a∣greed on. But the Count of Alanson, contrary to this order, tooke it ill that the  were in the first ranke, and in fury caused them to change place; which  discontentment, that it irritated them more against the Leader, then the ; besides there fell at the instant, such a showre of raine, as dissolved their , and made their Bowes of little use; and at the breaking up of the showre, the  full in the face of the French (dazling their sight) and on the backe of the , as if all made for them. K. Edward who had gotten to a Windmill, beholding  a Sentinell, the countenance of the Enemy, and discovering the disturbance  by the change of place; instantly sends to charge that part, without giving  to re-accommodate themselves; whereupon the discontented Genese  which the Cont de Alanson perceiving, he comes on with the horse, and  age cries out, On, on, Let us make way upon the bellies of these Genoueses,  but hinder us: and instantly pricks on with a full careere through the midst , followed by the Earles of Lorraine and Savoy, and never staies till he came  the English battell, where the Prince was; the fight grew hot and doubtfull,  as the Commanders about the Prince send to King Edward to come up with his power to aide him. The King askes the messengers whether his son were  hurt: who answering, no; but that he was like to be over-laid: Well then ( he King) returne, and tell them who sent you, that so long as my sonne is a∣ they send no more to me what ever happen; for I will that the honour of this  his. And so being left to try for themselves, they wrought it out with the  the rather by reason the French King having his horse slaine under him, and  danger to be trodden to death, had he not been recovered by the Lord Beau∣ s to the great discouragement of his people, withdrawne out of the field:  noce being once taken by the English, the day was soone after theirs, and  victory they ever had yet against the French, and so bloudy, as there is  made of any one prisoner taken in the battell, but all laine out-right; nely ome few troopes that held together, saved themselves by retiring to places
neare adjoyning. The French King himselfe with  small company, got to Bray in the night, and approaching the walls, and the Gurd asking him who goes there? he answered, the Fortune of Frc. By i voyce e was knowne, and thereupon received into the Towne, with the teares and lamentaions of his people. The number of the slaine are certified to be thirty thousand: the chiefe whereof, were Charles de Alnsn, Iohn Duke of , alph Earle of Lorraine, Lwis Earle of Flers, Iques Dalphin de , Soe to Ibrt, (who after gave Daulphin to the Crowne of France) the Earl of Scrre, Hrcourt, and many other Earles, Barons, and Gentlemen, to the number of fiftee hundred. This memorable Victory happened upon the Sturday after Bartl day, in the yeare 1346. The next day, earely in the morning, being Sunday, he sn out 300. Lances, and 2000. Archers to discover what was becom of t  who found great Troopes comming from Abbel, Saint , ad Bu∣voyes, (ignorant of what had happened  by the Arch-Bishop of R, and the Priour of France: whom they likewise defeated, and slew sven thou∣sand. But this was not all th Victories that fell to King Edward that yeare, there was another of no lesse importance gotten in Engld, by the Queene and hi peopl at home against the Scots; who being set on by the French, to divert the wa there entred upon this kingdome wit hreescoe thousand men, (as our Writers report) assuring himselfe of successe, in regard (as he supposed) the mae stregth there∣of was now gone into France; but e found it otherwise For the Lords of the North, as Gylbert de Umfrevile, the Earl of Ang, Henry Perc, Ralph Nevile, William Dycot, with the Arch-bishop of Yorke, the Bishop of Duram, and o∣thers of the Clergy, gathered so great Forces, and so well ordered them, by the animation of the Queene, (who was there in person) as fighting a great Battaile at Nevils Crosse in the Bishopricke of Durha, they utterly defeaed this great Ar∣my, tooke David their King Prisoner, with the Earles of Fif, Menteth, Murry, Sutherland, the Lord Dowglas, the Arch-bishop of Saint Andrewes, and others; and put to the sword fifteene thousand Scts. This Victory also fell upon a Satur∣day, sixe weekes after that of Cressy. He that tooke King David Prisoner, wa one Iohn Cplnd, an Esquire of Northumberland, whom King Edward rewarded with five hundred pounds land a yeare, and made him a Bannert. And as if all concurred to make this yeare Triumphant, the Aides sent to the Countesse of Montford in Britaine, led by Thomas Dagworth a Valiant knight, overthrew and tooke Prisoner, Charles de Blois, Pretender to that Dutchy, and with him Mounsi∣ur la Vall, the Lords Rochford, Beaanoyre, Loicue; with many other Barons, Knights, and Esquires: Where were slaine the Lord De la Vall, Father to him that was taken, Viscount Rohan, Mounsieur de Chastea Bryan, de alestroit, de Quin∣tin, de Dyrevll, besides many other knights and Esquires, to the number of se∣ven hundred. And now King Edward without medling with the great Cities of Amiens and Abbevile, marcheth on directly, and sits downe before Callice, a Town of more importance for England, and the Gate to all the rest: Wherein Iohn d Vienne Marshall of France, and the Lord de Andreghn, (a great man in his time) commanded. All that Winter King Edward lay without any molestation by the French King, who was busied at home in his owne State about raising of money; where∣with supplyed at last, he raiseth an Army and approacheth Callice, but findes no way open to come to relieve it. The King of England was both Master of the Ha∣ven, and possest all other wayes that were passable; and the Flemings his friends had besieged Aire; to oppose whom, Iohn Duke of Normandy is sent for out of Guyenne: who departing leaves Henry of Lancaster Earle of Derby, Master of the Field, and e having an Army consisting of twelve hundred men at Armes, two thousand Archers, and three thousand other Foot, takes in most of the Townes of Xaintoigne, and Poict, and in the end besieged and sacked Pityer, and then re∣turnes to Brdeax, with more illage then his people could well beare: Thus the
prosper every here, and the French suffer. During this siege of Callie, (n  some tin King Edw first used Gunnes) the Fleming send to King  to make a marriage betweene his Daughter Isabell and their Lord the ; to which the King consented, but the Duke of Brnt gets  of , o make the match for a Daughter of his The Flemings presse  Lord with te match of England; but he absolutely refuseh it, saying h  never marry a Daughter of him, that had killed his Father, though he would  lf his kingdome. This answer so incensed the Flemigs, that they  Lord in Prison, till with long durance he at last consented; and there  Eward and his Queene, with their Daughter Isll, come over to  there the young Earle is affaned to her; but returning afterrds  as e found opportunity, he went to King Philip, and eft ; and marryed afterwards a Daughter of the  this whi he siege of Callice was continued; and King Philip  come to relieve it; sollicits King Edward to appoint some place  would meee him. But King Edward returnes answer, that if he  owne way to come thither to him, there he should finde him, but  be would not pa having laine there so long to his great lour and  bing now so neare the point of gaining the place Two anals  the Pope, to mediate a Peace, but could effect nothing, so as the  ws forced to breake up his Army and retire to Paris, leaving Cllice  the Besieger: which when the Towne understood, they sent to de∣ granted, and therein received this finall answer, that ixe of the chiefe Burgesses should be sent to the King, bare-headed, bare-footed, in their shirts,  their neckes the keyes of the Towne and Castle in their hands,  thelves to the Kings will; the rest he was content to take to mercy.  condition, and much difficulty who should be those sixe: but  up, and out of love to his Country offering himselfe to be one, the sixe  made p; for now by his example every one strove to be of the  who presenting themselves before the King, he commanded them instantly  to death. Great supplication was made by his Lords for their lives, but  would not be drawne to alter his sentence, till the Queene, great with  on her knees, and with teares obtained pardon for them; which done,  them to be cloathed, and besides a good repast, gives to every one of them  Nobles a pece. But though the King in this sentence shewed severity,  Act before he had shewed mercy; For when Victuals began to faile in , and all unusefull persons, as old men, women, and children, were put  Gates; he forced them not backe againe as he might have done, there∣  sooner to consume their store; but suffered them to passe through his Ary  them to eate, and two pence a piece to all of them. And thus was that strong  of Callice gotten, the third day of August, in the yeare 1347. after eleven  siege, and continued afterward in possession of the English two hundred . All the Inhabitants are turned out, but onely one Priest, and two  to informe of the Orders of the Towne: and a Colony of English, a∣mogst which seven and thirty good Families out of London is sent to inhabit it  and Queene enter the Towne triumphantly, and make their abode there,  Queene was brought a bed of her Daughter Margaret. The King made  of the Town Aymey of Pavia a Lombard, whom he had brought up from , and then with his Queene returnes into England; at which time the  Electours send to signifie that they had chosen him King of the Romans, but  refuseth to accept it, as being an honour out of his way, and scarce com∣ his State at home. fter this Trs were made by mediation, from one time to another, for the  wo yeares, in which time, Geoffrey de Charmy Captaine of Saint Omer,  Aymery of Pvia, whom King Edward had left Governour of Callice, to  for twenty thousand Crownes: which King Edward hearing of, sent to
Amery, and charged him with this perfidiousnesse; whepon Ayy comes to the King, and humbly desiring pardon, promiseth to hndl the  so as shall be o the Kings advantage, and thereupon i sen backe to Callice. The King, the ight before the time of agreement arrives with three unded men at , and  hundred Archers:  de Charmy  likewise the  ght from Saint Omers with his Forces, and sent a hundred mn before with the Crownes to : the men are let in at a Posterne Gate the crownes received, nd assured to be all weight: which done, the Gates of the Towne are opened, and out marches the King before day, to encounter  de Charmy; who perceiving himselfe betrayed, defended imselfe the best he could, and put King Edward to a hard bickering, who for that e would not b  person, put hiself and the Prince under the Colours of the Lord  beaen wne on is knees by  hom he fought hand to hand) and ye recoved, and  pri∣soner. Charmy was likewise taken, and all his Fo defeated. Kig dward the night after (which was the first of the New-yeare) feasted with the Prisoners, and gave ibont in honour of his valou,  Chaplet of Pearle, which himselfe wore on his head, (for a New-yeares gift) forgave him his ransome, and set him at liberty. But the English not long after, in the like practise, had better successe, and got the Castle of Guysnes, (a piece of great importance ner Callice,) for a summe of money, given to one Beaconry a French n. Of which Csle, when the French King demanded restitution in regard of the Truc, King Edwar returnes answer, that for things bought and sold betweene their people, there was no ex∣ception, and so held it. About this time Philip King of France dyed, leaving his Sonne Iohn to succeed him; in the beginning of whose Raigne, Humber Pince of Dlphin, dying with∣out issue, made him his Heire, and therupon Charles King Ioh Sonne, was crea∣ted the first Daulphin of France: from whence it grew to be a Custome, that the King of France his Heire should alwayes be called Daulphin of France. About this time also the Duke of Lancaster was to perfome a combat, upon a challenge, with a Prince of Bhmia, but when they were entred the Lists, and had taken their Oathes, King Iohn interposed, and made them Friends. And now when after ma∣ny meanes of mediation, no Peace could be concluded betweene the two Kings; the Prince of Wales being now growne a man, is appointed by Parliament, to goe into Gascoyne with a thousand men at Armes, two thousand Archers, and a great number of Welshmen; and in Iune following he sets forth with three hundred Saile, attended with the Earles of Warwick, Suffolke, Salisbury, and Oxford, the Lord Chands, the Lord Iames Adeley, Sir obert Knolles, Sir Francis Hall, with many others. About Michaelma following the King himselfe passeth over to Callice, with another Army, taking with him two of his Sonnes, Linll of Antwerpe, now Earle of Ulster i Right of his Wife, and Iohn of Gant, Earle of Richmond. There met him at Callice of mercenaries out of Germany, Flanders and Brabant, a thousand men at Armes, so that his Army consisted of three thousand men at Armes, and two thousand Archers on horse-backe, besides Archers on foot. The City of London sent three hundred men at Armes, and five hundred Archers, all in one li∣very, at their owne charge; but all this great Army effected nothing at that time, by reason the King of France would not be drawne to any Encounter, and had so disfurnished the Country of all provisions, that the King of England was forced to returne. King Edward solicited by the King of Navarre to aide him against the King of France, sends over the Due of Lancaster with foure thousand men at Armes, who winnes many Townes and the Prince enters Gyenne, passeth o∣ver Langndc to Tholouse, Narbonne, Burges, without any Encounter, sackes, spoyles and destroyes where he goes, and loaden with booties returnes to Burdeaux. The French King thus assaulted on all ides, gathers all the power he possibly could, and first makes against his Eemies in Ndy, recovers many of his lost Townes, and was likely to have there prevaile, but that he was drawne of force to oppose
fresh Invader, the Prince of Wales, who was come up into Tourayne, against  he brings his whole Army, consisting of above threescore thousand: where∣ the Prince, whose Forces were not likely to be able to encounter him (being  for one) was advised to retire againe to Burdeaux. But the French King, to pre∣ve this course, followes; and within two leagues of Poyctiers, hath him at a  advantage: at which instant, two Cardinals came from the Pope to mediate  Pece. But the French King supposing he had his enemy now in his mercy, would accept of no other conditions, but that the Prince should deliver him foure Hosta∣ge, nd s vanquished, render himselfe and his Army to his discretion. The Prince wa content to restore unto him what he had gained upon him, but without prju∣ of his honour, wherein he said he stood accomptable to his Father, and to his Cutry. But the French King would abate nothing of his demands, as making himslf sure of victory; and thereupon was instantly ready to set upon the Princ:  seeing himselfe reduced to this straight, takes what advantage he could of th , and providently got the benefit of Vines, Shrubs, and Bushes, on that part  like to be assailed, to impester and intangle the French horse, which he saw  ome furiously upon him. The successe answered his expectation, for the  of his enemies upon their first assault were so wrapt and encombred  he Vines, that his Archers galled and annoyed them at their pleasure. For  Freh King, to give the honour of the day to his Cavallery, imployed them onely without his Infantery; so as they being disordered and put to rout, his whol Army came utterly to be defeated. In this battell were taken prisoners, King Iohn himselfe, with his yongest sonne Philip, by Dennis de Morbecque a knight of Arhis; Iaques de Bourbon, Conte de Ponthieu; the Arch-bishop of Sens; Iohn de Arthis; Conte de En; Charles de Arthois; his brother Count de Longueville; Iohn de , Count de Tankarvile; the Counts of Vendosme, Vademont, Estampes, Salbourg,  and La Roche; also Iohn de Ceintre, accounted (as Froissard saith) the  night of France, with many other Lords, besides two thousand Knights and Genlemen; in so much, as the Conquerours holding it not safe to retaine so many, le ny of them goe. The French, who can give best account of their owne losses, por there died in the battell, a thousand seven hundred Gentlemen, amongst which were fifty two Bannerets: the most eminent, Peter de Bourbon, the Duke of Aths Constable of France, Iehan de Clermont Marshall; Geoffrey de Charmy, High Chamberlain; the Bishop of Chalons, the Lords of Landas, of Pons, and of Cham∣y. There escaped from this battell, three of the French Kings sons, (for he brought them all thither) Charles Prince Daulphin; Louys after Duke of Anjou; and Iohn Duke of Bry all great actours in the time following. The special great men of the English i th fight, were the Earles of Warwicke, Suffolke, Salisbury, Oxford, Stafford; the Lord Cobham, Spenser, Barkeley, Basset: of Gascoynes, Le Capital de Beuff; the Lords, Pumyer, Chaumont, and others. The Lord Iames Andeley wonne honour both by his valour, and his bounty; for having vowed to be foremost in this fight, he peformed his word, and sealed it with many wounds: for which the Prince ha∣ving rewarded him with the gift of five hundred Markes Fee-simple in England, he pesently gave it to foure of his Esquires; whereupon the Prince demanding whe∣ther he accepted not his gift? he answered, that these men had deserved the same as well s himselfe, and had more neede of it; with which reply the Prince was so well pleased, that he gave him five hundred Markes more in the same kinde. A rare example, where desert in the Subject, and reward in the Prince, strive which should be the greater. And now, though King Iohn had the misfortune to fall into the hands of his enemy, yet he had the happinesse to fall into the hands of a Noble enemy; for Prince Edw. used him with such respect and observance, that he could not find much dference betweene his captivity and liberty. After the battell, which was fought the inenth day of September, in the yeare 1357. Prince Edward leads King Iohn and the captive Lords to Burdeux, where he retaines them till the spring following; but  present newes of his victory to his Father: who thereupon causeth a ge∣nerall
Thanksgiving all England over eight dayes together: and in May following; King Iohn rather comming over with the Prince, then brought over by him, is lodged at the Savo; a Palace belonging to Henry Duke of Lancaster, and the fairest at that time about London. And King Edward, as though he thought it honour enough to have one King his prisoner at once, at the suite of his sister Queene Iane, he sets her Husband David King of Scots at liberty, after he had beene priso∣ner in England eleven yeares, but not without paying a Ransome, which was a hun-thousand Markes, to be paid in ten yeares. After this, by mediation of Cardinals sent by the Pope, a Truce for two yeares is concluded betweene the two kingdomes of France and England, and in the time of this Truce, Articles of Peace betweene the two Kings are propounded King Edward requires the Dutchies of Norm and Gyenn, the Counties of Poicto, Turaine, Mayne, and Anjo with all their ppureances as large as King Richard the first held them, and many other Provinces besides, and to hold them all with∣out Homage or any other service; to which Articles, King Iohn (weary of impri∣sonment) assents and seales, but the  nd Councell of France utterly reject it: whereupon King Edward in great displesure resolves to make an end of this worke with the sword, and to take possession of the kingdome of France; and lea∣ving his younger sonne Thomas Goveour of his kingdome at home, with a Fleet of leven hundred saile, and taking all the great Lords of the Realme with him, he passeth over to Callice, dividing his Army into three battels, whereof one he com∣mits to the Prince of Wales, another to the Duke of Lancaster, and the hird he leads himselfe and first marching through  where he takes in many Townes, he plants his sige afterward before ; but having spent there sixe or seven weekes without effecting any thing, he asseth thence, and takes in the Cities of Sens & Nevers; the Dutchy of, Brgoyne redeemes it self from spoil with paying two hun∣dred thousand Floens of gold: then he marcheth up to aris, and plants his Camp within two small Leagues of the Tow, where e honoured 400. Esquires and Gentlemen with the Order of knighthood: but when Sir Walter de Manny had made a Bravado before the Gates of the City, and the King saw that the Daulphin would by no provocations be drawne out to battell; he raiseth his siege, and re∣turnes into Briaine to refresh his Army; from thence he marcheth towards Charres with a purpose to besiege that City, and though great offers were made him by the French, and Commissioners from the Pope solicited him with all earnestnesse to ac∣cept them, yet neither they, nor the Duke of Lancasters perswasions could prevaile with him, till a terrible torme of haile with thunder and lightning fell upon his Army, which so terrified him, being a warning as it were from Heauen, that he pre∣sently vowed to make Peace with the French King upon any reasonable conditions, as shortly after he did at a Treaty of Britigny neare to Chartres, upon these Articles: that the Fiefs of Thouars and Belleville, the Dutchy of Guyenne, comprising Gascoyne, Poictou, Sanogne, Limosin, Perigort, Quercie, Rhodes, Angoulesme, and Rochell, toge∣ther with the Counties of Guysnes and Callice, and some other places, with the Ho∣mages of the Lords within those Territories should be to the King of England, who besides was to have three Millions of crownes of gold whereof sixe hundred thousand in hand, foure hundred thousand the yeae following, and the rest in two yeares after: and for this the King of England, and his sonne the Prince of Wales, for them and their successours for ever, should renounce all their right pretended to the Cowne of France; the Dutchy of Normandy, the Countries of Touraine, An∣jou, Mayne, the Homage and Soveraignty of Britaine, and the Earledome of Flan∣ders; and within three weekes King Iohn to be rendred at Callice at the charge of the King of England, except the expenses of his house. For assurance of which ac∣cord, should be given into his hand five and twenty of the greatest Dukes and Lords of France for Hostages. The Scots not to be aided by the French King, nor the Flemmings by the English. This accord and finall Peace signed by both Kings, was ratified by their two eldest sonnes, Edward and Charles, and sworne unto by the Nobility of both kingdomes. The Hostages are delivered to King Edward, who
brought them into England; and thereupon King Iohn is honourably conducted to Callice, after he had remained prisoner in England neare about five yeares: but being come to Callice, he was detained there above three moneths, till the money which he was to pay in hand, could be provided; and for providing the rest he was put to hard shifts; being faine to give the Iewes leave to dwell in France for twenty yeares, paying twelve Florins a man at the entry, and sixe every yeare after. At this time the Prince by dispensation marries the Countesse of Kent, daughter to Edmund, brother to Edward the second, and his Father investing him with the Dutchy of A∣quitaine, he was now Prince of Wales, Duke of Aquitaine, Duke of Cornwall, and Earle of Chester and Kent: and not long after, with the Princesse his wife, he passeth over into France, and keepes his Court at Burdeaux. This was now the yeare 1362. and the fiftieth yeare of King Edwards age, wherein for a Iubilee, he shewes himselfe extraordinarily gracious to his peopl, freely pardoning many offences, relesing prisoners, revoking exiles; with many o∣ther expressions of his love and bounty. The yeare following was famous for three Kings comming into England: Iohn King of France, Peter King of Cyprus, and Dvid King of Scots. The King of Cyprus came to solicite King Edward to joyne with other Princes in the Holy Warre, but receives onely royall entertain∣ment and excuses. The King of Scots came for businesse and visitation, but why the King of France came, is not so certaine, whether it were about taking order for his Hostages, or to satisfie King Edward for breach of some Articles, or else for love to the Countesse of Salisbury; or perhaps out of a desire to let England see his Majesty, being at liberty, which had beene darkened before by the cloud of captivity; but whatsoever the cause of his comming was, the cause of his staying (at least, of longer staying then he meant) was a mortall sicknesse, whereof (having lien all the Winter at the Savoy) in March or Aprill following, he died; and his bo∣dy convaied over into France, was buried at Saint Donis with his Ancestours. The Prince of Wales was now growne famous all the Christian world over, and the man to whom all wronged Princes seemed to appeale, and to flie for succour: for which end there came at this time to his Court, Iames King of Majorque, and hap∣pened to come at a time when the Princesse lay in; and thereupon he and Richard King of Navarre were taken to be Godfathers to his sonne Richard. For the like assistance also, there came at the same time to him, Peter King of Castile, driven out of his kingdome by the French, in favour to Peter King of Aragon: and Prince Edward, partly out of charity, to succour a distressed Prince, and partly out of po∣licy, to keepe his Souldiers in exercise; undertakes the enterprise, and was so pros∣perous in it, that with one battell, (having but thirty thousand against a hundred thousand) hee put King Peter in possession of his kingdome, though he was ill rewarded for his labour: for the ungratefull King would not so much as pay his Souldiers. An unfortunate journey for the Prince, for though he came back with victory, yet he brought backe with him such an indisposition of body, that he was never throughly well after: not perhaps by poyson, nor given him by his brother the Duke of Lancaster, though both were suspected; but there were causes of di∣stempering him enough besides, the Countrey, the season, the action it selfe; and it may be more marvelled that his Souldiers came home so well, then that he came so ill; but howsoever, being now returned, there was presently to his indisposition of body, added discontentment of minde: for not having meanes to pay his Souldiers, which forced him to winke at that which he could not chuse but see, and seeing, grieve at, how they preyed upon the Countrey, and thereupon how the Countrey murmured against him: and now to stop this murmuring, his Chancellour, the Bi∣shop of Rhodes, devised a new Imposition, of leavying a Frank for every Chimney, and this to continue for five yeares, to pay the Princes debts: but this Imposition made the murmuring the more; for though some part of his Dominions, as the Poictins, Xaingtonois, and Lymosins in a sort consented to it, yet the Count of Ar∣mignick, the Count of Comminges, the Viscount of Carmayn, and many others so much distasted it, that they complained thereof to the King of France, as to their
Supreme Lord; who upon examination finding their complaint to be just, he there∣upon, by advise of his Councell, Summons Prince Edward to appeare in person, to answer the complaint: whereunto Prince Edw. made answere, that if he must needs appeare, he would bring threescore thousand men in Armes to appeare with him; and had certainely brought his Army that Summer against Paris, if he had not fal∣len into Symptomes of a Dropsie, which (Walsingham saith) was wrought by En∣chantments. But upon this answer of the Prince, King Charles sends defiance to King Edward; who thereupon prepares Armes both by Sea and Land to oppose him. The French enter upon the Territoris of the Prince, and defeate divers of his Troopes; in revenge whereof, Iohn Chandos the Princes Lieutenant, assaults Terrieres in the Province of Tholouse, and takes it. The Count of Perigourd a∣saults Royanville, in Query, and puts all the English to the sword; in revenge where∣of, Iames Audeley Senechall of Poicton, assaults the City of Brosse, and takes it. In the meane time Robert Knols, by some called Robin, and by others, Arnould, or Reynold Knoll, had drawne Perducas de Albert to the party of the English; and there∣upon wen and encamped before the Fort of Darcell in Quercy, which Iohn Chan∣dos understanding, went also and joyned with him in the Siege; but finding they could doe no good there, they removed, and Besieged the City of Damme: and when they could doe no good there neither, they marched forward, tooke the Fort of Froyus, Rochevaudour, and Villefranche; and that done, returned to the Prince at Angoulesme. At the same time, the Earles of Cambridge, and Pembroke, having spent nine weekes at the Siege of Bordeille, at last tooke it; but other Captaines of the English did yet more, for they scaled Belleperche in the Province of Bourbon, where the Mother of the Duke of Bourbon, and of the Queene of France was, and take her prisoner. About this time, Philippa Queene of England, King Edwards Wife died, and was buried at Westminster; but this hindred not the proceeding of the English in France; the Earle of Pembroke enters Anjou, where he takes many Townes: the Duke of Lancaster doth the like about Callice, and marching forward, plants his Campe before Harfleur, with a purpose to burne the King of France his Navy, but being watched by the Count Saint Poll, was forced to forbeare that designe; and so passing other wayes, and spoyling all the places where he passed, he returned to Callice. Winter now was drawing on, and Iohn Chandos, desiring to recover the Abby of Saint Silvin in Poictou, which not long before had beene betraied to the French; was in the enterprise discovered, and being assaulted by greater forces, was slaine in the place, to the great griefe of the Prince of Wales, and of the English Lords: but dying without issue, his estate, which amounted to foure hundred thousand Franks, came to the Prince. At this time, the Dukes of Anjou and Berry, with two great Armies enter upon the Territories of the Prince of Wales; whereof the Prince advertised, assembles Forces to oppose them: but when the newes was brought him of the taking of Limouges, he was so much troubled at it, by reason of the Bishop of that place was his Gossip, and one in whom he specially had affiance; that he resolved to recover it at any price, and not to spare a man that had any hand in the rendring it up: and thereupon taking it by force, he commanded to sacke and pillage it, and would not be staied by the cries of the people, casting themselves downe at his feete; till passing through the Towne, he perceived three French Cap∣taines, who themselves alone had withstood the assault of his victorious Army, and moved with the consideration of their valour, he then abated his anger; and for their sakes, granted mercy to all the Inhabitants. So much is vertue even in an enemy, respected by generous minds. In the meane time, David King of Scots di∣ed without issue; and Robert Stuart his Nephew succeeded him in the kingdome, and was Crowned at Scone. At this time Robert Knolls with a great Army is sent into France, where making many attempts, with valour enough, but with little successe; he was comming home, though with no gaine, yet with no losse: till Ber∣trand de Gueschlyn assaulting him, slew the most part of his men; and so this great Army on a sudden came to nothing. It seemes Knolls his action was the lesse succes∣fully,
by reason some young Lords that wen with him, sconing to e  his command, as being but a new man, and risen fro a low estate; were refractory to hi directions: And indeed what can a Generall do, if he have not as well reputation of person, as of place? And now the Prince of Wales, his eldest sonne Edward dying  Bude, the  with his wife, and his other sonne Richard, come over into England, at whi time the vallant knight Walter de Mny died at Londn, and was buried in the Monastery of the Chartreux which he had builded; leaving one onely daughter; married to Iohn Earle of Pembroke. This Earle of Pembroke was soone after sent Goernour into Aquitane, but set upon by the way by Spaniards in favour of the Frch; was by them taken prisoner, and carried with other into Spain who be∣ing chained together, as the manner is; one Evans a Welsh Fugitive who gave selfe out for the right Heire of Wales; cam unto him foolishly playing upon him with scornfull language, as though to insult over another mans misery, could sle for a codiall to mitigate his owne. And now upon the taking of this Earle, the Princes Dominions in France are either taken away, or all away faster then they ere gotten; Gueschly enters Poictou, and takes Montmrillon, Chauvigny, Luss, and Motontir: straight after followes the Countrey of Aulnys, of Xaintoigne, and the rest of Poicou; then Saint Maxen, Neele, Aulny; then Benaon, Marant, Surgrs, ; and at last they came to Thouars, where the most part of the Lords of Poi∣co, that held with the Prince, were assembled; at which time King Edward with the Prce, the Duke of Lancaster, and all the great Lords of England, set forward to their succour, but being driven back by tempest, never came to give them assi∣stance, so as Thouars yeelded upon composition. Yet did this preparation of the King stand him in nine thousand Markes; that it may be truly said, it cost him more now to lose Townes, then it had cost him before to win them so great oddes there is betweene the Spring and Fall of Fortune. After this, the Duke of Lancaster is sent over with another great Army, who passed up into many parts of the Country, but King Charles resolved to hazard no battell; saying, They were but clouds, and would soone passe away; yet so watched him, that what with light skirmishes, and what with skarcity of victuals, his forces were so diminished, that of thirty thou∣sand which went out of Callice, there scarce retunred six thousand home: which made King Edward say of this King Charles, that he did him more mischiefe sitting still, then his Predecessours had done with all their stirring. And now by this time all Poictou is lost, and all Aquitaine also, but onely Burdeaux and Bayon: when the Arch-bishop of Roan and others, are sent from Pope Gregory the eleventh, to medi∣ate a Peace betweene the two Kings; but each of them standing upon high termes of conditions, nothing could be effected but Truce upon Truce, for two or three yeares together. In which time Edward Prince of Wales died, and with him we may say, the Fortune of England; being a Prince so full of vertues, that he left no place for any vice; and if he had lived in the Heroicke times, might well have beene numbed amongst the nine Worthies. His body was buried at Canterbury, where his Monument standeth. King Edward in his seven and fortieth yeare calleth a Parliament at Wstminster, which lasted but eight dayes; and to which were Sum∣moned by Writ, of Clergy men onely foure Bishops, and five Abbots. Of King Edwards Acts after the death of the Prince. IN the time of the Princes sicknesse, King Edwrd cals a Parliament at Westmin∣ster; in which, when demands were made for supply of the King, demands were presently made for redresse of grievances for the subjects. It was required that the Duke of Lancaster, the Lord Latymer then Lord Chamberlaine, Dame Alice Pierce the Kings Concubine, and one Sir Richard Sturry might be removed from Court. And this was so vehemently urged by their Speaker, Sir Peter la Moore, that the King, rather then not to be supplied, gave way unto it; and thereupon all these persons are presently put from Court: but the Prince soone after dying, they
are all recalled to Court againe, and restored to their former places. About this time exmplary justice was done upon Sir Iohn Minsterworth knight, who was drawne, hanged, and quartered at Tiburne, for Treason, by him commit∣ted, in defrauding Souldiers of their wages. Thi was now the fftieth yeare of King Edwds Raigne, and he for another Iu∣bilee, gras another generall pardon to his subjects onely William Wicham Bishop of Winchester is excepted, being lately, by procurement of the Duke of Lancaster, fallen into the Kings displeasure and forbidd to come to the Parliament. This Parliament was called the good Parliament ough it wrought ill effects; for Sir. Peter de la Mare, at the suite of Alice Pierce, is committed to perpetuall imprison∣ment at Notingham, though within two years after, by importunate suite of friends; he regained his liberty. This Alice Pierce presuming upon the Kings favour, grew so insolent, that she entermedled with Courts of Justice, and other Offices, where he herselfe would fit, to countenance her Causes. And now the Duke of Lancast is come to have the Regencie, and to manage all the affaires of the kingdome; but King Edward to prevent the mischiefes, when by disordering the succession might grow in the kingdome, providently settled the same in Parliament upon Richard of Burdeaux; reating him first Earle of Chester and Cornwall, and then Prince of Wales, and caused all the Lords of the Realme to tale an Oath, to accept him for their King, as his lawfull Heire, when himselfe should be dead. In this meane time a Trea∣ty was had about a marriage betweene this Prince Richard, and Mry a daughter of Charles King of France: and an offer was made to King Edward, to leave him foure∣teene hundred Townes, and three thousand fortresses in Aqitaine, upon condition he would render Callice and all that he held in Picardy; but before any thing could be concluded, King Edward died. Of his Taxations. IN the eighth yeare of his Raigne, in a Parliament holden at London, there was granted him a fifteenth of the Temporalty, a twentieth of the Cities and Boroughs, and a tenth of the Clergy. In his tenth yeare, in a Parliament at North∣ampton, is granted a tenth penny of Cities and Boroughs, a fifteenth of others, and a tenth of the Clergy. Also all such treasure as was committed to Churches through England for the Holy Warre, is taken out for the Kings use, towards his warres with France. The next yeare after, all the goods of three orders of Monks, Lomards, Cluniakes, and Cistercians; are likewise seised into the Kings hands: and the like Subsidy as before granted at Nottingham. In his twelfth yeare (and as some write, in absence of the King) in a Parliament at Northampton, is granted by the Laity, one halfe of their Wooll, but of the Clergy the whole. The next yeare after a fifteenth was likewise paid in Wooll by the Commonalty. In his foure∣teenth yeare, in a Parliament at London, is granted him for Custom of every sacke of Wooll forty shillings, for every three hundred Wooll Fells forty shil for every Last of Leather forty shillings; and of other Merchandises according to the rate: the same to endure from that Easter to the Whitsontide twelve moneth after. Besides, there was granted of Citizens and Burgesses, a ninth part of goods; of forraine Merchants and others, a fifteenth; of Husbandmen, the ninth Sheafe, the ninth Fleece, the ninth Lamb for two years; also another tenth of the Clergy: and for his present supply, he had Loanes of divers persons; and the City of London lent twnty thousand Markes. For the grant of which mighty Subsidy, the King (be∣sides his Pardon to divers kinds of offendours) remits all Amerciaments for trans∣gressions in his Forests, Reliefs and Scurage, to the first time of his going into Flan∣ders, besides all aides for the marriage of his sonnes and daughters during his Raigne; pardoning and remitting all ancient debts and rrrages, both of his Fer∣mors and others, till the tenth yeare of his Raigne; and likewise confirmes the great Charter of Magna Chartae: In his eighteenth yeare, in a Parliament at London, a tenth was granted by the Clergy, and a fifteenth by the Laity Besides a Com∣mission
is sent into every Shire to inquire of mens abilities, and all of five pounds to tenne of Lay Fee, were appointed to finde an Archer on horsebacke; of twenty five, a Demilaunce; and so ratably above. There had formerly been made a certaine coyne of Gold called the Floren, of base alloy, for the Kings benefit, towards his warres in France, but this was now called in and Nobles of finer metall coyned, to the great contentment of the people. In his nine and twentieth yeare, he hath by Parliament granted unto him fifty shillings upon every sack of Wooll, for six years next ensuing; by which Imposition, it was thought, the King might dispend a thousd Markes Sterling a day, the vent of Wooll was so great in that time. But that which exceeded all his Taxations, was the Ransome he had in his foure and thirtieth yeare, of the King of France, three millions of crownes of Gold. In his twelveth yeare, he had taken from the Priors Aliens, their houses, lands, and tene∣ments, for the maintenance of his French warres, which he kept twenty yeares in his  and then restored them againe. In his six and thirtieth year was greater twen∣ty sixe shillings eight pence, for transportation of every sacke of Wooll for three yeare. In the five and fortieth yeare of his Raigne, in a Parliament at Westminster, the lergy granted him fifty thousand pounds to be paid the same yeare, and the Laiy as much; which was leved by setting a certaine rate of five pounds fifteene shillings upon every Parish, which were found in the 37 Shires to be eight thou∣sand and sixe hundred; and so came in the whole to fifty thousand one hundred eighty one pounds and eight pence: but the 181. li. was abated to the Shires of Suf∣folk and Devonshire, in regard of their poverty. In his eight and fortieth yeare, in a Parliament, is granted him a tenth of the Clergy, & a fifteenth of the Laity. In his fiftih year, a Subsidy of a new nature was demanded by the young Prince Richard, whom (being bu eleven years of age) the Duke of Lancaster had brought into the Parliament of purpose to make the demand; to have two tenths to be paid in one yeare, or twelve pence in the pound of all Merchandises sold, for one yeare; and one pound of silver for every knights Fee, and of every Fire-house, one penny: but instead of this Subsidy, after much altercation, there was granted another of as new a nature as this; that every person, man and woman, within the kingdome, above the age of foureteene yeares, should pay foure pence, (those who lived of Almes onely excepted) the Clergy to pay twelve pence of every Parson Beneficed, and of all other religious persons foure pence; a mighty aide, and such as was ne∣ver granted to any King of England before. Of his Lawes and Ordinances. HE instituted the Order of the Garter, upon what cause is not certaine; the common opinion is, that a Garter of his owne queene, or (as some say) of the Lady Ioane Countesse of Salisbury, slipping off in a Dance, King Edward stooped and tooke it up; whereat some of his Lords that were present, smiling, as at an amorous action; he seriously said, it should not be long ere Soveraigne honour should be done to that Garter; whereupon he afterward added the French Morto, Honi soit qui maly pense; therein checking his Lords sinister suspition. Some con∣jecture that he instituted the Order of the Garter, for that in a battell wherein he was victorious, he had given the word Garter, for the word or signe: and some againe are of opinion, that the institution of this Order is more ancient, and be∣gunne by King Richard the first, but that this King Edward adorned it, and brought it into splendour. The number of the knights of this Order is twenty sixe, where∣of the King himselfe is alwayes one, and president; and their Feast yearely cele∣brated at Windsor on Saint Georges day, the Tutelar Saint of that Order. The lawes of the Order are many, whereof there is a booke of purpose. In the five and thir∣tieth yeare of his Raigne, he was earnestly Petitioned by a Parliament then hol∣en, that the great Charter of Liberties, and the Charter of Forests might be duly observed; and that the great Officers of the kingdome should (as in former times) be elected by Parliament: to which Petition, though the King at first stood stiffe
upon his owne Election and Prerogative; yet at last (in regard to have his present turne served, (as himselfe after confessed) he yeelded, that such Officers should re∣ceive an Oath in Parliament, to doe justice to all men in their Offices: and there∣upon a Statute was made and confirmed with the Kings Seale, both for that and many other Grants of his to his Subjects which notwithstanding were for the most part shortly after revoked. This King also causeth all Pleas,  were before in Frenh, to be made in English, that the Subject might understand the course of the Law. Also in his time an Act was passed for Purveyours, that nothing should be taken up but for ready money, upon strict punishment. In the next Parliment holden the seven and thir∣tieth yeare of his Raigne, certaine Smpuary Lawes were ordained, both for ap∣parell and diet; appointing every degree of men, the stuffe and habits they should weare, prohibiting the weaing of gold and silver, silkes and rich furres to all, bu eminent persons. The labrer and husbandman  ppointed but one  day and what meates he should . Also in his time, at the instance of the Looners an Act was made that no common Whore should weae any Hood, except striped with divers colours; nor Furres, but Garments reversed the wrong side outward. This King also was the first that created Dukes of whom Henry of Bllingbroke,  of Lancaster, created Duke of Lancaster, in the seven and twentieth yeare of his Raigne was the first. But afterward he erected Cornwall also into a Dutchy, and conferred it upon the Prince: after which time, the Kings eldest sonne used alwayes to be Prince of Wales, Duke of Cornwall, and Earle of Chester. This King altered monies, and abated them in weight, & yet made them to passe according to the former value. Before his time, there were no other peeces but Nobles and halfe Nobles, with the small peeces of Silver, called Sterlings; but w Groats of foure pence, and halfe Groats of two pence, equivalent to the Sterling money, are coyned; which in∣haunsed the prises of things, that rise or fll, according to the plenty or scarcity of coyne; which made Servants and Labourers to rise their wages accordingly. Whereupon a Statute was made in the Parliament now held at Westminster, to re∣duce the same to the former rate. Also an Act was made in this Kings time, that all Weares, Mils, and other stoppages of Rivers, hindering the passage of Boats, Lighters, and other Vessels, should be removed; which though it were most com∣modious to the kingdome, yet it tooke little effect, by reason of bribing and cor∣rupting Lords and great men, who regarded more their owne private, then the publike benefit. In a Parliament holden the tenth yeare of his Raigne, it was en∣acted that no Wooll growing within the Realme should be transported, but that it should be made in Cloath in England. Peter-pence are forbidden by the King, to be paid any more to Rome. The cstome of washing poore mens feete on Maun∣dy-Thursday, thought to have beene first brought in by this King. Affaires of the Church in his time. KING Edward upon some displeasure had imprisoned divers Clergy men; whereupon Iohn Stratford Arch-bishop of Canterbury writes him a Letter, charging him with violation of the Rights of the Church, and with the breach of Magna Charta; and after much good counsell given him, threatens, that if he amend not these disorders, he must and will exercise his Ecclesiasticall authoritie, and proceed to Excommunication of his Officers, though not of himselfe, Queen, or children. The King answers, and sends his Letter to the Bishop of London; charging the Arch-bishop to be the cse of all this disturbance, having beene the man that first set him upon the warre with France; assuring him he should want no money, and now had beene the hinderance, that monies given him by Parlia∣ment, were not duly levied: and after many remonstrances to such purpose, con∣cludes, that if he desisted not from his rellions obstinacie, he would use his Tem∣porall authority, and prooceed  as against a Rebell. But this difference betweene them was not long after, upon the Arch-bishops submission, reconciled.
And indeed the great account which this King made of Clergy men, may appeare by his imploying almost none but Clergy men in all his Offices of account Simon gham Arch-bishop of Canterbury, was Chancellour of England; William Wickam Arch-deacon of Lincolne, keeper of the Privy Seale; David Willer Parson of Somer∣, Master of the Rolles; ten Beneficed Priests, Civilians, Masters of the Chan∣cery; William Mulse Deane of Saint Martins le Grand, chiefe Chamberlaine of the , Receiver and keeper of the Kings Treasure and Jewels Willam Ay Arch-deacon of Northampton, Chancellour of the Exchequer William Diht  of Saint Marins, Clerke of the Privy Seale Richard Chesterfield Pebnd  Stephens Treasurer of the Kings house; Henry Snatc Parson of  of the Kings Wardrobe; Iohn Nwham Parson of Feny-staon, one of the  of the Exchquer; Iohn ouseby Parson of , Surveyor and  of the Kings workes; Thomas Brittingham Parson of Asby, Treasurer  King, for the parts of Guisnes, and the Marches of Callice, Iohn Troys a Priest,  of Ireland. the seventeenth yeare of his Raigne, in a Parliament holden at Westinster,  is made of the great inconvenience that came by the Popes Collation of Benefices in England, conferring them upon Strangers who understood not the ; and therefore not fit to be Pastours over a Flocke they could not feed: and hereupon Sir Iohn Shordich is sent to Pope Clement the sixth, to require him to foeare such Collations, and to signifie his consent therein: but this Message was  welcome to the Pope, that the Messenger came backe, unheard, at least un∣answered and the King taking his silence for consent or perhaps not much ca∣ring whether he consented or no; proceeded to a Prohibition of all such Colla∣tions within his Realme, on paine of Imprisonment, or death, to whomsoever should in time to come, present or admit any such person, who by the Pope were so preferred to the prejudice of the Kings Prerogative. These were disturbances in matter of Discipline; but towards the end of his Raigne, there fell a disturbance in matter of Doctrine, for a certaine Divine, named Iohn Wickliffe, inveighed in his  and other Acts in the Schooles, against the abuses of Churchmen, Monks, and other religious Orders; and had by his Doctrine wonne many Disciples unto him, (who after were called Lollards) professing poverty, going bare-foot, and poorely clad in Ruet; amongst other his Doctrines, he taught that neither King r other secular Lord, could give any thing n perpetuity unto Church-men; and th Temporall Lords, if they needed, might lawfully take the Goods of Religious Persons to relieve them in their necessities, by the example of William Rufus, and others. This man, the Duke of Lancaster, and Sir Henry Percy Marshall, much fa∣vour and cherish, extolling him for his learning and integrity of life; which made him so farre to presume, that daily in one Church or other, he published his Opi∣nions; whereupon at length he is cited to answer before the Arch-bishop, the Bishop of London and others in auls. At the day appointed, the Duke of Lanca∣ster and the Lord Marshall goe to conduct him; when they were come to our La∣dies Chappell, the Duke and Barons with the Bishops sitting downe, Iohn Wick∣liffe was by the Lord Marshall willed to sit downe, in regard (he said) the man had much to answer, and needed a convenient seat. The Bishop of London told him; It was against all Law and Reason, that he who was there ited before his  should sit. Hereupon contumelious words arose betweene the Lord Mhall and the Biop; the Duke takes the Marshals part, and sharpely repre∣hended the Bishop; the Bishop returnes the like to the Duke; who in a gre rage  he would pull downe the pride of him, and of all the Bishops of Egland and whispering in his eare, told him he had rather pull him out of the Church by  of the head, then to suffer such indignities; which words, the Londoers over-hearing, swore with a loud voyce, they would rather lose their lives the suffer eir Bishop to be thus injuriously used. Their fuy was the more against the Duke, for that the day before in the Parliament (whereof he was President) it was  in the Kings name, that from thenceforth hre should be no more a
Major of London, but a Captaine appointed for the Government of the City, and that the Lord Marshall of England should arrest Offenders within the Liberties, as in other places. The morrow after the Citizens assembling to consult of this businesse, it happened the Lord Fits-water, and Guid Bryan, came into the City; which the People seeing, furiously ranne upon them, and were like to beate them downe for comming at that time. The Lord Fits-water protested, he came to no other end, but to offer his service to the City, being by inheritance their Standard bearer, and was to take injuries offered to them, as to himselfe; and therefore willed them to looke to their defence. Whereupon they presntly take Armes, assaile the Marshals Inne, breke open the Gaes, brought foth a Prisoner in his Gives, and set him at liberty, but found  the Lord  with th Duke, was that day to dine with one Iohn de . Tn this furious multitude ranne to assaile the Savy; which a knight of the Duk ing, hates to the plac where his Lord dined, and acquain him with this  in the Cy. The Duke up∣on hearing it, leapes from the Table so hastily, that he hurt bot his shinnes on the fowrme; and with Sir Henry ercy alone takes boate, and goes to, Kennington neare Lambeh, where the Princesse with the young Prince lay: to whom he complaines of this Riot, and the violence offered him. In the mene time the multitude com∣ming to the Savoy, a Priest inquisitive to know the businesse, was answered, they went to take the Duke, and the Lord Marshall, and compell them to deliver Sir Peter de la Mar, unjustly kept in Prison. The Priest replyed, tht Sir Peter was a Traytor to the King, and worthy to be hnged. At which words they all cryed out, This is Percy, This is the Traytor of England, his speech bewrayes him, though his Apprell be disguised, and presently they rn upon him, and wounded him to death. The Bishop of London hearing of this outrage, leaves his dinner, hastes to the Savy, admonisheth them of the holy time being Lent; assuring them all should be fairely ended for the good of the City with whose perswasions they were some∣what pacified; but yet they tooke the Dukes Armes, and hung hem up reversed, in signe of Treason, in all the principall strees of the City. Upo the Princesses ad∣vice, the chiefe Citizens send to the sick King, to excuse this tumult; saying, it was not in their power to suppresse it, the Commonalty being in commotion, upon an information that their Liberties should be taken from them by Parliament. The King told them, it never was in his thought to infringe their liberties, but he rather desired to enlarge them. But this affrnt of the Citizens would not downe with the Duke, till he had pulled downe som of the Principall of them; for he caused the Major and Aldermen to e displaced, and other put in their roomes: a revenge he had better beene without, for he never had the love of the City after: and to want their love is a kind of banishment. Wickliffe himselfe, censured by the Bishops to abjure his Opinions, chose rather to leave his Country then his Doctrine, and going over into Bohemia, was there much honoured while he lived, and hath beene more since he dyed; at least, a great part of his Doctrine continues in veneration a∣mongst that people to this day. Workes of piety done by him, or by others in his time. HIs workes of Piety were great and many, as the Founding of East Minster, an Abbey (of the Cistea Order) neare the Tower. An Abbey for Nunnes at Drtford in Kent. The Kings Hall in Cambridge for poore Schollers. An Hospitall for the poore at Callice. He conferred upon the University of Oxford, where he had himselfe beene trained up, under the learned Walter Burley, the chiefe rule of the City, subordinating the Major and Citizens to the Chancellour of the University. He Built Saint Stephens Chappel at Westminster, with the endowment of 300. pound per annum. He augmented the Chappell at Windsore, and made provisions there for Church-men, and foure and twenty poore knights. These were his publicke workes; But besides these, his private Buildings were, the Castle of Windsore, which he re-edified and enlarged, the Castle at Quinborough, Fortifications at
and other places. His Queen Philippa founded Queens Colledge in Oxford:  Countesse of Pembroke, the Colledge called Pembroke Hall in Cambridge. In this Kings tme Sir Iohn Poultney Major of London, built the Colledge in London cal∣d  Lwrence Poulty, and little Alholloes, a Parish Church in Thames street, d also the Carmelite Friers Church in Cventry. Henry Earle of Lancaster and , ounded the new Hospitall by the Castle of Leycester, wherein a hundred  impotent people were provided for with all things necessary. William Elsing Merc of London, made a new Hospitall of an old house of Nunnes by Cripple∣g, and placing Chanons Regular there, he became the first Prior thereof. Walter  Bishop of Exeter, Founded Exeter Colledge, and Hart Hall in Oxford. William Beman Bishop of Norwich, builded Trinity Hall in Cambridge. Simon  Arch-bishop of Canterbury, Founded Canterbury Colledge in Oxford. William  Treasurer of England, Founded the Monastery of Edendon; the religious brethren whereof were called Bnhommes. Sir Walter de Manny, borne in Cambray, purchased a piece of ground called Spittle Croft, containing thireene Acres, with∣ou the barres of West Smithfield, and caused the same to be enclosed, where he built a Chappell, and after Founded the same to be a house of Charter-house Monkes. Humphrey Bohun Earle of Hereford and Essex, re-edified the Augustine Friers Church in London, and was buried in the Quire there In the two and thirtieth yeare of this Kings Raigne, Iohn Stody Major of London, gave unto the Vintners of London all the Quadrant where the Vintners Hall now standeth, with the Te∣nements round abou, from the lane to this day called Studis lane where are Foun∣ded thireene houses for thirteene poore people, which are there kept of charity. Also in this Kings time Sir Iohn Cobham Founded the Colledge of Cobham in Kent. Ihn Lvekin foure times Major of London, builded at Kingston upon Thames, where he was borne, a Chappell called Magdalens, to the which he joyned an Hospitall, wherein was a Master, two Priests, and certaine poore men: and for that the Parish Church of Saint Michael by Crooked-lane, where he dwelled, was a very homely thing, and the ground thereabout a filthy plot, by reason of the Burchers in East∣cheape, who made the same their lay-stall; he on the same ground builded the faire new Parish Church of Saint Michael now standing, and was buried there in the middle of the Quire, under a faire Tombe of stone. He also Founded a Colledge to the same Church, neare thereunto adjoyning. Iohn Barnes Major of London, gave a Chest with three locks, and a thousand Markes to be lent to young men, upon secrity, so that it passed not one hundred Markes; and for the occupying thereof, if he were learned, to say at his pleasure, De Profundis, for the soule of Iohn Barnes; if he were not learned, to say Pater Noster: but howsoever the mo∣ney is lent, the Chest at this day standeth in the Chamber of London, without mo∣ney or pdges. Thomas of Woodstocke, the youngest sonne of King Edward, Foun∣ded a Colledge at Playsi in Essex, where in his life he had providd a sumptuous Tombe, where he was first laid, but translated afterward to Westminster. Casualties happening in his time. IN the the two and twentieth yeare of his Raigne, a contagious Pestilence arose in the East and South parts of the world, and spread it selfe over all Christen∣dome; and comming at last into England, it so wasted the people, that scarce the tenth person of all sorts was left alive. There died in London (some say in Nr∣wich) betweene the first of Ianuary, and the first of Iuly, 57374. persons. In Yar∣mouth, in oe yeare, 7052. men and women: before which time, the Parsonage there was worth 700. Markes a yeare, and afterwards was carce worth forty pounds a yeare. This Plague beganne in London about Alhollanide, in the yeare 1348. and continued till the yeare 1357. here it was observed, that those who were borne after the beginning of this mortality, had but twenty eight teeth, where before hey had two and thirty. In the twelveth yeare of his Raigne, a sudden undation of water, at New-castle upon Tyne, bare downe a pice of the Towne
wll, and sixe pearches in length, neare to a place called Walkenew; where a hun∣dred and twenty men and women were drowned. In the five and thiieth yeare of his Raigne, another Pestilence hppned in England, which was called the se∣cond Pestilence, in which died Henry Duke of Lacaster, also Reginld Lord Cha, and Walter Fits-warren, two famous men; and five Bishops, of Wrcester, of Lon∣don, of Ely, of Lincolne, and of Chichster. In this Kings time, a Frost lasted from the midst of September, to the moneth of Aprill. In the fourth yeare of his Raigne, a solemne Justing or Turnament was holden at London in Chpside, bewixt the great Crosse and the great Conduit,  Sper-la which lasted three dayes; where the Queen Philippa, with many Ladies, fell from a Stage, set up for them to behold the Justing; and though they were not hurt at all, yet the King threaed to p∣nish the Carpenters for their negligence, till the Quene inated pardon for them upon her knees: as indeed she was alwayes ready to doe all good offices of mercie to all people. In the eleventh yeare of his Raigne was so great plenty, that a quar∣ter of Wheate was sold at London for two shillings, a fat Oxe for a Noble, a fat Sheepe for sixe pence, and sixe Pigeons for a penny, a fa Goose for two pence, and a Pigge for a penny, and other things after that rate. Of his Wife and Children. HE married Philippa, the daughter of William Earle of Haynault at Yorke; a match made up in haste by Queene Isabell his mother, for her owne ends, although a better could never have beene made upon deliberation for King Edwards ends: for though her Parentage were not great, and her portion less; yet she made amends for both, in vertue; for never King had a better Wife. By her King Edward had seven sonnes and five daughters: his eldest sonne Edward Prince of Wales, and com∣monly called the Blacke Prince, (but why so called uncertaine for to say, of his dreadfull acts, as Spede saith, hath little probability) was borne at Woodstocke, in the third yeare of his Fathers Raigne; he married Ioane, the daughter of Edmund Earle of Kent, brother by the Fathers side to King Edward the second. She had beene twice married before; first to the valiant Earle of Salisbury, from whom she was divorced: next to the Lord Thomas Holland; after whose decease, this Prince passionatly loving her, married her: by her he had issue two sonnes, Edward the eldest, borne at Angoulesme, who died at seven yeaes of age; and Richard borne at Burdeaux, who after his Father, was Prince of Wales, and after his Grandfather King of England. This Prince had also naturall issue, Sir Iohn Sounder, and Ro∣ger Clarendon Knights; the latter being attainted in the Raign of King Henry the fourth, is thought to have eene Ancestour to the house of Smiths in Essex. He di∣ed at Canterbury, in the sixe and fortieth yeare of his age; and of his Fathe Raigne, the nine and fortieth, and was buried at Christs Church there. His second sonne William was borne at Hatfield, in Hertfordshire, who deceased in his childhood, and was buried at Yorke. His third sonne Lyonell was borne at Antwerpe, in the twelveth yeare of his Fathers Raigne; he married first Elizabeth, the daughter and Heire of William Burgh, Earle of Ulster in Ireland; in whoe Right he was first created Earle of Ulster: and because he had with her the honour of Clare, in the County of To∣mond; he was in a Parliament, created Duke of Clarence, as it were of the Coun∣trey about the Towne and Honour of Clare; from which Dutchy, the name of Clarentieux (being the title of the King of Armes, for the South parts of England) is derived. This Duke had issue by her one onely daughter, named Philippa after∣ward wife of Edmund Mortimer, Earle of March; mother of Earle Roger, Father of Anne Countesse of Cambridge, the mother of Richard Duke of Yorke, Father of King Edward the fourth. The second marriage of this Duke was at Millaine in Lombardy, with the Lady Vilanta, daughter of Gleac the second Duke thereof; but through intemperance he lived not long fter. King Edwards fourth sonne na∣med Iohn, was borne at Gat, in the foureteenth yeare of his Fathers Raigne; he had three wives, the first was lnch, daughter and Coheire, and in the end the sole
Heire of Henry Duke of Lancaster, sonne of Edmund, sirnamed Crouch back; by whom he had issue, Henry of Bullingbrooke Earle of Derby, after Duke of Hereford, and lastly King of England, named Henry the fourth, who first placed the Crowne in the house of Lancaster. By her also Iohn of Gaunt had two daughters, Philip wife of Iohn the first, King of Portugall; and Elizabeth married first to Iohn Hol∣land, Earle of Huntington, and after him, to Sir Iohn Cornwall, Baron of Fanhope. Iohn of Gaunts second wife was Constance, the eldest daughter of Peter King of Ca∣stile and Leon, in whose Right, for the time he intitled himselfe King of both those Realmes: by her he had issue one onely daughter named Katherine, married to Hen∣ry the third, sonne of King Iohn, in possession before, and in her Right after King of both the said Realmes. Iohn of Gaunts third wife was Katherine, the Widow of Sir Hugh Swinford, a knight of Lincolnshire, eldest daughter and Coheire of Payn Roet, a Gascoyne, called Gen King of Armes for that Countrey; his younger daughter being married to Sir Geoffrey Chawcer, our Laureat Poet. By her he had issue born before matrimony, and made legitimate afterward by Parliament, in the twen∣tieth yeare of King Richard the second; Iohn Earle of Somerset, Thomas Duke of Exeter, Henry Bishop of Winchester, and Cardinall, and Ioane (who was first marri∣ed to Robert Ferrers Baron of Wemme, and Ousley, in the Counties of Salop and Warwicke) and secondly, to Ralph Nevill, the first Earle of Westmerland. She and all her brethren were sirnamed Beaufort, of a Castle which the Duke had in France, where they were all borne; and in regard thereof, bare the Portcullis of a Castle for the Cognisance of their Family. This Duke in the thirteenth yeare of his Ne∣phew King Richard was created Duke of Aquitaine, but in his sixteenth yeare he was called home, and this title re-called; and the third yeare after, in the sixtieth of his age, he died at Ely house in Holbourne, and lieth honourably Entombed in the Quire of Saint Paul. King Edwards fifth sonne Edmund, sirnamed of Langley, was first in the yeare 1362. created Earle of Cambridge, and afterward in the yeare 1386. made Duke of Yorke; he married Isabell, daughter and Coheire to Peter, King of Castile and Leon: his sonne Richard Plantagenet Duke of Yorke, tooke to wife Anne Mortimer, Heire of the foresaid Lyonell, elder brother to Edmund of Langley. King Edwards sixth sonne William, sirnamed of Windsor, where he was borne, died young, and is buried at Westminster. King Edwards youngest sonne Thomas, sirnamed of Woodstocke, where he was borne, was first Earle of Buckingham, and after made Duke of Glocester by his Nephew King Richard the second. He was a man of va∣lour and wisdome, but the King surmizing him to be a too severe observer of his doings; consulted with Thomas Mowbray, Duke of Norfolke, how to make him away: whom Mowbray unawares surprising, convaied secretly to Callice, where he was strangled the twentieth yeare of King Richards Raigne. He had issue one sonne, Humphrey Earle of Buckingham, who died at Chester of the Pestilence, in the yeare 1400. and two daughters, Anne married first to Edmund Earle of Stafford, by whom she had Humphrey Duke of Buckingham; secondly to William Bourchier Earle of Ewe, by whom she had Henry Earle of Essex, and Ioane married to Gylbert Lord Tal∣bot, and hd issue by him a daughter, who died young. Of King Edwards daugh∣ters, the eldest named Isabell, was married at Windsor to Ingelram of Guysnes, Lord of Cocy, Earle of Soysons, and after Arch-duke of Austria; created also by King Edward, Earle of Bedford: by whom she was mother of two daughters; Mary married to Henry Duke of Barre, and Philip married to Robert de Vere Earle of Oxford, Duke of Ireland, and Marquesse of Dublyn. This Robert in the height of his fortunes forsooke his Lady Philip, and married one Lancerona a Joyners dagh∣ter (as was said) which came with King Richard the seconds wife ou of Bohemia; and being for abusing the Kings eare, driven out of the Land by the Lords, he died at London in extreame poverty in the yeare 1392. Isabell his wives mother, was bu∣ried in the Church of Friers Minorites neare Aldgate in London. King Edwards se∣cond daughter Ioane was married by Proxie to Alphonsus, King of Castile and Leon but passing into Spaine, died by the way; and King Alphonsus met her, instead of consummating his Espousall, to solemnise her Funerall. His third daughter Blanch
died young. His fourth named Mary, was married to Iohn Montford Duke of Britaine. His youngest named Margaret, borne in Callice, was the first wife of Iohn de Hastings, Earle of Pembroke, but died without issue. Of his Personage and Conditions. HE was of stature indifferent tall, of sparkling eyes, of a comely and manly countenance, in his later time something bald; and concerning his conditions, no man was more gentle, where there was submission; where opposition, no man more sterne. He was a Prince no lesse of his passions, then of his people; for he was never so loving, as to be fond; nor ever so angry, as to be inexorable: but this must be understood of the time while he was a man, for in his old age, when he came to be a childe againe, he was Prince of neither. He was no lesse fortunate then valiant; and his fortunatenes was the greater by a kind of Antiperistatis, as comming betweene two unfortunate Princes; Successour to one, and Predecessour to ano∣ther. He was of so warlike a disposition, that his very sports were warlike; for no delights were so frequent with him as Justs and Tournaments. To shew his de∣votion, one example may be sufficient, for when neither Cardinals nor Counsel∣lours could move him to make peace with France, a tempest from Heaven did it; to which may be added, that he never wanne great battell, of which he wanne many, but he presently gave the glory of it to God by publike Thanksgiving. He out-lived the best wife, and the best sonne that ever King had; and to say the truth, he out-lived the best of himselfe, for his later years were not answerable to his former. Of his Death and Buriall. KING Edward besides his being old, and worne with the labours of warre, had other causes that hastened his end: his griefe for the losse of so worthy a sonne, dead but tenne moneths before; his griefe for the losse of all benefit of his conquests in France, of all which he had little now left, but onely Callice: and op∣pressed thus in body and minde, he was drawing his last breath, when his Concu∣bine Alice Pierce packing away what she could catch, even to the Rings of his fin∣gers, left him; and by her example, other of his attendants, seasing on what they could come by, shift away; and all his Counsellours and others forsooke him, when he most needed them, leaving his Chamber quite empty; which a poore Priest in the house seeing, he approaches to the Kings Bed-side, and finding him yet brea∣thing, cals upon him to remember his Saviour, and to aske mercie for his offences, which none about him before would doe: but now moved by the voyce of this Priest, he shewes all signes of contrition, and at his last breath expresses the name of Jesus. Thus died this victorious King at his Manor at Sheene, (now Richmond) the one and twentieth day of Iune, in the yeare 1377. in the sixty fourth yeare of his age, having Raigned fifty yeares, foure moneths, and odde dayes. His body was conveyed from Sheene by his foure sonnes and other Lords, and solemnly interred within Westminster Church, where he hath his Monument, and whereit is said, the sword he used in battell, is yet to be seene, being eight pound in weight, and seven foote in length. Of Men of Note in his time. MArtiall men were never more plentifull then in this Kings Raigne: whetr it were that the Starres have an influence to produce such men at one time more then another: or whether it were that Regis ad exempl, the Kings example made his subjects like himselfe: or lastly, that his continuall exercise of Armes put them as it were into a mould of fortitude. The first of this kinde, is worthily Edward the Blacke Prince, and so worthily the first, that Longe erit  primo quisque secundus erit. Next him is Henry Earle of Lancaster, the Princes right hand, in all his great at∣evements:
then William the valiant Earle of Salisbury, then Iohn Eure, Ancestor to  Lord Eures that now liveth; then follow the Lord Iohn Chandos, Sir Iames Aude∣, Sir Walter de Manny, Sir Robert Knolls, then Sir Iohn Hawkewood born in Essex; who ough not much honoured at home, having been a Taylour, yet in forrain parts, and ecially in Italy so famous, that his Statue was erected in publike, for a Monument  testifie his valour to posterity. And here must not be forgotten, Robert Venile night, a Norfolke man; who when the Scots and English were ready to give battell,  certaine stout Champion of great stature, commonly called Tournboll, comming  of the Scots Army, and challenging any English man to meete him in a single combate; this Robert Venile accepteth the challenge, and marching towards the Champion, and meeting by the way a certaine blacke Mastiffe Dogge which wai∣ed on the Champion, he suddenly with his sword cut him off at the loynes, and afterwards did more to the Champion himselfe, cutting his head from off his shoul∣ders. And as there was this great plenty of Martiall men, so there was no lesse plenty of learned men; Iohn Baconthorpe borne in Norfolke, a Carmelite Frier, who wrote divers excellent Treatises in Divinity; Nicholas Trivet born also in Norfolk: a black Frier, who wrote two Histories, and a book of Annals: Richard Stradley, born in the Marches of Wales, a Monk and a Divine, who wrote divers excellent Treatises of the Scriptures: William Herbert a Welshman, and a Frier Minor, who wrote many good Treatises in Divinity: Tho. Walleis a Dominican Frier, and a writer of many excellent books: Iohn Eversden a Monk of Bury in Suffolk, an Historiographer: Walter Burley a Doctor of Divinity, brought up in Martin Colledge in Oxford, who wrote divers excellent Treatises in Naturall and Morall Philosophy, which remaine in estimati∣on to this day; and who for the great fame of his learning, had the honour to be one of the Instructours of Edward the blacke Prince: Roger of Chester, a Monke of that City, and an Historiographer: Iohn Burgh a Monke, who wrote a History, and also divers Homilies: Richard Aungervill Bishop of Durham, and Lord Chancel∣lour of England, borne in Suffolke: Walter Heminford, an Historiographer: Richard Chichester a Monke of Westminster, who wrote an excellent Chronicle from the yeare 449. to the yeare 1348. Richard Rolle, alias Hampole, who writ many excellent Treatises in Divinity: Robert Holcot a blacke Frier, borne in Northampton, a lear∣ned Schooleman, and wrote many bookes in Arguments of Divinity: Thomas Brad∣wardin, borne neare Chichester in Sussex, Arch-bishop of Canterbury, and who wrote against the Pelagians, and for his depth of learning, had the Title of Doctor Pro∣fundu: Richard Fits Ralph, Arch-bishop of Armagh in Ireland, a learned writer: William Grysant, named Anglicus, a notable Physitian, whose son came to be Pope, and was called Urbane the fifth: Iohn Killingworth an excellent Philosopher, Astro∣nomer, and Physitian: Ranulph Higden a Monke of Chester, an Historiographer: Bar∣tholomew Glanvile, descended of those Glanviles that were sometimes Earles of Suf∣folke: Simon Islip Arch-bishop of Canterbury, and Founder of Canterbury Colledge in Oxford, who wrote many Treatises: Matthew Westmonasteriensis, who wrote the booke called Flores Historiarum: William Fleete an Hermit, who wrote sundry Trea∣tises, exhorting England to repentance: Henry Knighton, who wrote a History Inti∣tuled De gestis Anglorum: and lastly two other, worthy perhaps to have beene pla∣ced first; Iohn Mandevill the great Travellour, a Doctor of Physicke, and a knight, who died at Liege, in the yeare 1372. and Sir Geoffrey Chawcer, the Homer of our Na∣tion; and who found as sweete a Muse in the Groves of Woodstocke, as the Antients did upon the banks of Helicon.
THE REIGNE OF KING RICHARD THE SECOND. RICHARD, called of Burdeaux, because born there, the onely Sonne of Edward the black Prince, was by his Grandfather in his life-time declared to be his Heire and lawfull Successour; and accordingly after his death was crowned King of England, at West∣minster, the sixteenth day of Iuly, in the yerre 1377. by Simon Subury Archbishop of Canterbury: And for the more solemnity of his Coronation, he then mde nine Knights, and created foure Earles: Thomas of Woodstock, King Edward the Thirds youngest Sonne, was created Earle of Buckingham and Northampton; Thomas Mowbray, younger brother of Iohn L. Mowbray, Earle of Nottingham; Gifford Angoulesme a Gascoigne, was made Earle of Huntington; and Henry Percy sonne of Henry L. Percy, was created Earle of Northumberland. At the time of the Coronation, the Duke of Lncaster, by the name of Iohn King of Castile and Leon, and Duke of Lancaster, put in his claim as Earle of Leicester, to have the place of Earle Marshall of England; as Duke of Lan∣caster, to carry the sword called Curtana; as Earle of Lincolne, to be Carver that day; all which to be executed by himselfe, or by his sufficient Deputy; which, with the fees thereunto belonging, were confirmed unto him. As likewise, divers others made their claimes: Robert de Veere, Erle of Oxford, to have the office of Chamber∣laine, and to powre out water for the King to wsh: Iohn Wiltshire Citizen of Lon∣don, by reason of a Moyitie of the Manour of Heydon, holden in Sergeantie, claimed to hold a Towell for the King to wipe with when he went to meat: Thomas Beau∣champe Earle of Warwick, to beare the third Sword before the King; and also to exercise the office of Pantler: Sir Iohn Argentine, by reason of his Manour of Wi∣mondtey in the County of Hartford, to serve the King at his Cup: William L. Fur∣nivall, for his Manour of Fernham, to support the Kings right arme when he held the Royall Scepter: Anne late wife of Iohn de Hastings Earle of Pemrooke, or hi Manour of Ashele in Norfolke, to have the Office of Naperer; which she was admitted to doe by her Deputy Sr. Thomas Blunt: Richard Earle of Arundell, for his Manour of B. in Kent, was admitted to be chiefe Butler: The L. Major of London, to attend in his owne person, as chiefe Cup-waiter: Sir Iohn Dimmock, for his Manour of Scrivelbie; and Sir Baldwin Frevile, for his Castle of Tamworth, in the County of Warwick, contended for the Office of being the Kings Champion; but adjudged to Dimmock: William de Latimer, and Iohn the sonne and heire of Iohn Mowbray of Axholm, joyntly petitioned to have the Office of Almoner; but adjudged to Lati∣mer: Richard Lion, as Tenant of the Manour of L. held by the service of making wafers for the King at his Coronation, was thereunto admitted: The Barons of the Cinque-Ports were admitted to beare the Kings Canopy, upon foure staves of silver, over the Kings head; and also to sit at meat in the Hall, at the highest Table on the Kings right hand: Iohn Fitz-Iohn, by reason of his Manour of S. in Norfolk, was admitted to be chiefe Lardeer: Richard Herring, for the Manour of C. in the County of Surry, claimed to be Usher of the Kings Chamber; but because that claim did no way concern the Coronation, he was left to pursue his Right some other time.
The Coronation it selfe was performed with great solemnity: After a Sermon, the King tooke his Oath; and then the Archbishop blessed the King; which done, he tore ff his garments, and strippped him into his shirt; then he annoynted his hand, head, breast, shoulders, and the joynts of his armes, with the scred Oyle; and after certaine Prayers, he then cldd him, first with the Coat of S. dward, and after with his Mantle: after which, the Archbishop delivered him the Sword, saying, Accipe Gladium; with which two Earles gyrded him: Then he gave him Bracelets, saying Accipe Armillas: After this, he put upon him an upper vesture called a Pall, saying Accipe Pallium: In the meane time, while the Archbishop blessed the Crowne, he to whose Office it pertained, put spurres on his heeles; after the Crown was blessed, the Archbishop set it on his Head, saying, Coronet te Deu: then he delivered him a Ring, saying, Accipe Anlum: Immediately herewith came the L. Furivall, by virtue of his Office, offering him a red Glove; which the Arch B. blessed, and putting it on his hand, gave him the Scepter, saying, Accipe Sceprum: and after that, in his other hand, delivered him a Rod, on the top whereof stood a Dove, saying, Accipe Virgam Virtuti; and then blessed the King, saying, Benedicat te De: which done, the King kissed the Bishops and Abbots, by whom he was afterward led to his seat: and so ended the solemnity. The tender yeares of the King, being but eleven yeeres of age, required a Pro∣tector: but being perhaps thought dangerous to commit that Authority to onely one, who might rather seeke to get it for himselfe, then to keep it for another, It was thought fit to commit it to many; and thereupon Iohn Duke of Lancaster, Ed∣md Earle of Cambridge, the Kings Unkles; with some other Lords and Bishops, were joyned in Commission to manage the State; and Guishard de Angoulesme ap¦pointed to be his Schoole-master. And now the Kings Minority made forreigne Princes conceive, that this would be a time of advantage for any that had quar∣rell to England: which the French and Scots tooke presently hold of; For, the French came now, and burnt the Town of Rye; and soone after, entring the Isle of Wight, burnt divers Townes there; and though they were repelled from the Castle by the valiant Sir Hugh Tyrrell Captaine thereof, yet they constrained the men of the Isle to give them a thousand Markes, to spare the residue of their houses and goods: and departing thence, they set on land where they saw advantage, burning sundry Towns neere to the shoare; as Portsmouth, Dertmoth, and Plimmouth: and then sayling towards Dover, they burnt Hastings, assaulted Winchelsey; but being valiantly defended by the Abbot of Battell, were forced to retire: After this, they landed not far from the Abby of Lewis, at a place called Rottington; where the Prior of Lewis, with Sir Thomas Cheyny, and Sir Iohn Fllesly, encountring them, were over∣throwne, and taken Prisoners. And no lesse then the French, were the Scots also now busie; for comming one morning by stealth, they wonne the Castle of Barwick; but shortly after, upon knowledge thereof had, they were driven out againe by the Earles of Northumberland and Nottingham; and all the Scot they found in it, ex∣cept Alexander Ramsey their Captaine, put to the sword. About Michaelmas, a Par∣liament was held at Westminster, wherein Alice Pierc, the late Kings Concubine, was banished the Realms, and all her goods confiscate; and two Tenths of the Clergie, and two Fifteenths of the Temporalty were granted; but so, as that two Citizens of London, William Walworth, and Iohn Philpot, should receive and keepe it, to see it bestowed for defence of the Realme. In this time, Sir Hugh Calverley, Deputy of Callis, burnt six and twenty French ships in the Haven of Bulloigne: and at the same time a great Navy is set out, under the guiding of the Earle of Buckigham, the Duke of Britaine, the Lord Ltimer, Sir Robert Knolls and others, with a purpose to inter∣cept the Spanish Fleet; but through Tempest were twice driven back: when in the mean time, one Mercer a Scottish Pyrate, came to Scrborough, tooke there divers ships, and committed many outrages: and no order being taken to repell him, a Citizen of Ldo nmed Iohn Philpot, at his own charges set forth a Fleet, and in his own person encountring them, tooke the said Mercer, and all his ships: and re∣turning home, in stead of being rewarded for his service, he was called in question
for presuming to raise a Navy, without advice of the Kings Councell: but he gave uch reasons for that he had done, that not onely he came off then wih credit, but lives in reputation for it to this day. Indeed Reasons of State, though they may se∣cretly be censured, yet they must not openly be controlled, for this were to bring Authority into contempt, and in stead of Errors to bring in Confusion; but yet when wrongs be offered that are publick, every particular person seemes to have an interest in taking revenge; and though it may be no manners not to stay the States leisure, yet it can be no offence to doe their worke for them. Many actions passed at this time with the French and Scots, some prosperous, and some adverse: The Scots burne Roxborough; this was adverse: but the Earle of Northumberland entring Scotland with ten thousand men, spoyleth the Lands of the Earle of March, the chief Incendiary, this was prosperous: but when the Northern men would needs make a Road into Scotland, and were encountred by the Scots, and put to flight, this was adverse. Anon after Midsomer, the Duke of Lancaster, with the Earles of Bucking∣ham, Warwick, Stafford, and others of the Nobility, with a strong Power toke the Sea, and landing in Britaine, besieged the Towne of S. Malo, but finding strong opposition, is forced to raise his Siege, and returne home: this was adverse. And now againe, the Scots by night entred secretly into the Castle of Berwick, and slew Sir Robert Baynton, that was Constable there: this also was adverse: But when the Earle of Northumberland, being advertised therof, came with a Power, assauted the Castle, and after two daye defence recovered it againe; this was prosperous. Wil∣liam Montacute Erle of Salisbury, the Kings Lieutenant in Callis, forrageth the Country round about, and furnisheth Callis with Booties of French cattell: Sir Hugh Calverley and Sir Thomas Percy made Admiralls put to Sea and take divers ships laden with merchandise, and one shp of warre: Sir Iohn Hleston, Captaine of Chierbourg in France, issuing forth, assaults a Fortresse of the French, which was the storehouse of their Provision, and with much valour takes it: these were prosper∣ous: But when Sir Iohn Clerke, lying in Garison in a Castle in Britaine, where la many Engsh ships in the Haven, ad hee ships let upon by the French, where though he shewed incredible valor in the action, yet the ships were taken, and him∣selfe slaine: this was adverse. Also in the third yeere of this Kings Reigne, Sir Iohn Arundell, Sir Hugh Calverley, Sir Thomas Percie, Sir William Elmham, Sir Thomas Ba∣nister, and many other Knights, went to Sea, with a purpose to passe over into Bri∣taine; but were so beaten back wth Tempest, that divers of their ships were ast away; and Sir Iohn Arundell, Sir Thomas Banister, Sir Nicolas Trumpingon, Sir Tho∣mas Dale, and above a thousand others were all drowned; onely Sir Thomas Percie, Sir Hugh Calverley, Sir William Elmham, and certaine others escaped. It may not be imperinent to note here the sumptuousnesse of those times; for this Sir Iohn Arundell was then said in his Furniture to have two and fifty new sutes of apparell of cloath of Gold and Tissue, all lost at Sea. This yeere also, there being found inconvenience in having many Governors of the King and Kingdome, it was by Parliament decreed, Tht the Lord Thomas Beauchampe, Earle of Warwick should himself alone hold the place of Protector. About this time Sir Iohn Annesley Knight accused Thomas Katrington Esquire, for betraying the Fortresse of St. Saviour to the French: which Katrington denying at the suit of Annesly a solemne combat is per∣mitted to be between them; at which combat the King and all the great Lords were present: the Esquire Katrington was a man of a mighty statue, the Knight Annesley a little man yet through the justnesse of his cause, after a long fight, the Knight prevailed, and Katrington, the day after the combat dyed. In the begin∣ning of the fourth yeere of this King, Thomas of Woodstock Earle of Buckingham, the Kings Unkle, with divers Earles and Lords, and an Army of seven or eight thou∣sand, was sent into France, to aide the Duke of Britaine; but the King of France at that time dying, the Duke of Britain grew to have peace with the new King; where∣upon the Earle of Buckingham came home againe, without doing much, but making of Knights, and forraging the Country. In this time the French and Spanish Gal∣lies did much mischiefe on the Coast of England: they burnt Rye, Hstigs, ad
Portsmouth; and at last, enting the River of Thames, they came up to Gravesend, where they burnt most part of the Towne, and taking many Prisoners and Booties returned into France. At this time also, there fell out an Accident of great distur∣bance to the Realme; for the Commons rose in divers parts, beginning at Depford in Kent: and the cause of their Rising grew (as was thought) through the rude be∣haviour of a Collector of the Poll-money, who comming into the house of one Iohn Tyler, and demanding Pollmony of his wife for a daughter of hers, and she say∣ing that her daughter was not of that age to pay, the rude fellow said, he would pre∣sently see whether that were so, or no, and thereupon forceably turned up her clothes; whereat the mother making an outcry, her husband being at work hard by, and hearing the noyse, came in with his lathing-staffe in his hand, with which he gave the Collector such a blow on the head, that his braines flew out, and he pre∣sently dyed. Upon this, at the complaint of Tyler amongst his neighbours, and withall, a factious Clergie-man, one Iohn ll, taking occasion hereat to rip up the ground of this Misgovernment, and telling the people, that this difference of mens Estates, where some are Potentates, and some are Bondmen, was against Christian liberty, taking for his Theame, When Adam delv'd and Eve span, who was then  Gentleman? he so incensed them, that the Commons in divers parts drew together; and whether beginning in Kent, or otherwise in Essex, they drew at last into their fa∣ction the Commons of Sssex, Hartfordshire, Cambridgshire, Suffolk, Norfolk, and other Shires; and arresting all such as passed, made them sweare to be true to K. Richard, and to the Commons, and never to receive any King that should be called Iohn; which they did for the envy they bore to Iohn Duke of Lancaster. Thus their num∣ber still increased, that by that time they were come as farre as Black-heath, they were esteemed to be a Hundred Thousand. The first thing they did when they came to London, was to send for one Richard Lyon, a grave Citizen, who had been Tylers Master, and his head they struck off, and carried it upon a pole, in Triumph before them: The next day they goe to the Savoy, the Duke of Lacasters house, which they set on fire, burning all his rich Furniture, breaking in pieces all his Plae and Jewels, and throwing them into the Thames, saying, They were men of justice, and would not like Robbers enrich themselves with any mans goods: and when one of their fellowes was espyed to thrust a faire silver piece into his bosome, they tooke him, and cast both him and the piece into the fire: Two and thirty of them were got into the Dukes Wine-Cellar, where they stayed drinking so long, till the raftes of the house, on fire, fell upon them, and so covered them, that not able to get out, they were heard cry seven dayes after, and then perished. From the Savoy they went to the Temple, where they burnt the Lawyers lodgings, with their bookes and writings, and all they could lay hand on: Also the House of St. Iohns by Smith∣field they set on fire, so that it burned for the space of seven dayes together. After this they came to the Tower, where the King was then lodged; and though he had at that time sixe hundred armed men, and as many Archers about him, yet he durst not but suffer them to enter; where they abused the Kings mother, offering to kisse her, in such rude manner, that she fell into a swound: and finding in the place Simon Thybold Archbishop of Canterbury and Lord Chancellour; and Sr. Robert Hales also Lord Treasurer; they led them to the Towerhill, and there in most cruell manner struck off their head, as also of divers others: Neither spared they sacred places; for breaking into the Church of the Augustine Fryers, they drew forth thirteene Flemmings, and beheaded them in the open streets; as also seventeen other, out of other Churche. Yet after all these outrages, the King proclaimed Pardon to all such as would lay down Armes, and goe quietly home; which the Essex-men did, but the Kentish-men continued still, with their Captaine Wat Tylr: to whom when the King sent Sir Iohn Newton to understand what his meaning was; Wat Tyler, of∣fended because he came on horse-back, told him, it became him to light from his horse in his presence; ad therewith drew out his dagger to strike him: the King perceiving his Knight to be in danger, bade him alight from his horse: but when this would not pacifie him, the Major of London, William Walworth, by the Kings ap∣pointment
rode to him and arrested him, and gave him such a blow on the head, that he astonied him; and then other of the Kings servants drew their swords, and thrust him through in divers parts of his body, so as he died there in the place. When the Commons saw this, they cryed out, Our Captain is slain, let us revenge it. Here the King, though very young, not above fifteen yeeres of age, yet had the courage to ride unto them, telling them, that now their Leader was dead, he would be their Leader himselfe; and if they would follow him into the fields, they should have whatsoever they desired. In the meane time, the Lord Major Walworth had gone into the City, and raised a Thousand armed men, and meeting Sir Robert Knolls by chance, got him to be their Leader; who comming into the fields where the Re∣bels were, so daunted them, that throwing downe their weapons, they cryed for mercy: that it was a wonderfull thing to see how suddenly Fear overtook Presump∣tion; for scarce their words of Insolency were out of their mouths, when they fell to words of most servile submission: And as strange an alteration in those about the King, to see how suddenly Boldnes surprized Feare; for scarce they left trembling at the sight of the Rebels, when suddenly upon sight of this Ayde their fingers itch∣ed to be setting pon them, but that the King would not suffer it, because some a∣mongst them were there by compulsion, and to set upon them thus mingled, might as well be the death of the innocent, as of the guilty. But to pacifie them the more, the King caused his Charter of Manumission to be sent unto them; which yet stayed them not from committing outrages at S. Albans, and cancelling the antient Char∣ters of the Abbots and Monks there. Besides, the Sedition was more generall, then that the appeasing it in one place could be finall; for at the same time there were ga∣thered together in Suffolk to the number of Fifty thousand, by the setting on of one Iohn Wraw a lewd Priest: and these fell to destroying the houses of Lawyers speci∣allly; and Sir Iohn Cavendish L. Chiefe Justice of England, they beheaded, and set his head upon the Pillory in St. Edmundsbury. The like commotion of the Commons was at the same time also in Cambridgeshire, in the Isle of Ely, and in Norfolke, under the guiding of one Iohn Littester a Dyer: and to countenance their proceeding the more, they had a purpose to have brought William Vfford Earle of Suffolke into their fellowship; but he, advertised of their intention, suddenly rose from suppr, and got him away: but many other Lords and Knights they compelled to be sworne to them, and to ride with them; as the Lord Scales, the Lord Morley, Sir Iohn Brewi, Sir Stephen Hales, & Sr. Robert Salle, who not enduring their insolencies, had his braines dasht out by a Country Clowne that was his Bondman: The rest terrified by this example, were glad to carry themselves submissively to their Chieftaine Iohn Lit∣ester, who named himselfe King of the Commons, and counted it a preferment for any to serve him at his Table, in taking the assay of his meates and drinkes, with kneeling humbly before him, as he sate at meat. And now these fellowes, upon a cnsultation, send two choycemen, namely, the L. Morle and Sir Iohn Brewi, with three of their chiefe Commons, to the King, for their Charter of Manumission and Enfranchising: who being on their way, at Itchingham not farre from New market, they met with Henry Spenser Bishop of Norwich; and he examining them if there were any of the Rebels in their company, and hearing that thre of the chiefe were there present, he presently caused their heads to be struck off; and then pursuing on to∣wards Northwalsham in Norfolke, where the Commons stayed for Answer from the King; by that time he came thither, where he had at first but eight Launces, and a small number of Archers in his company, his number was so increased, that it came to be a compleat Army, with which he set upon the Rebels, discomfited them, and tooke Iohn Littester and their other Chieftains, whom he caused all to be executed; and by this meanes the Country was quieted. After this, the Major of London ate in Judgment upon Offenders; where many were found culpable, and lost their heads; amongst other, Iack Straw, Iohn Kirkeby, Alane Tredder, and Iohn Sterlng, who gloried that he was the man had slaine the Archbishop. Also Sir Robert Tresilian Chiefe Justice, was appointed to sit in Judgement against the Offenders; before whom above fifteen hundred were found guilty, and in sundry places put to
death: amongst others, Iohn Ball Priest, their Incendiary; of whom it is not imper∣tinent to relate a letter he wrote to the Rebell-rabble of Essex; by which we may see how fit an Oratour he was for such an Auditory, and what strength of perswasion there was in Non-sence: Iohn Sheepe St. Mary Priest of Yorke, and now of Colchester, greeteth well Iohn Namelesse, and Iohn the Miller, and Iohn Carter; and biddeth them that they beware of guile in Borough, and stand together in Gods name: and biddeth Piers Plowman goe to his work, and chastise well Hob the robber, and take with you Iohn Trewman and all his fellowes, and no moe. Iohn the miller ye ground small, small, small; the Kings Sonne of Heaven shall pay for all. Beware or ye be woe: Know your friend from your foe: Have enough, and say Ho; and doe well and better: Flee sinne, and seeke peace, and hold you therein: and so biddeth Iohn Trewman and all his fellowes. Neither is it impertinent to declare the Confession of Iack Straw at his execution: When we were assembled (said he) upon Blackheath, and had sent to the K. to cme to us, our purpose was to have slaine all Knights and Gentlemen that should be a∣bout him: and as for the King, we would have kept him amongst us, to the end the people might more boldly have repaired to us; and when we had gotten pow∣er enough, we would have slaine all Noblemen, and specially the Knights of the Rhodes; and lastly we would have killed the King, and all men of possessions, with Bishops, Monkes, Parsons of Churches; onely Friers Mendicants we would have spared, for administration of the Sacraments: Then we would have devised Laws according to which the people should have lived; for we would have created Kings, as Wat Tyler in Kent, and other in other Countries: and the same evening that Wat Tyler was killed, we were determined to set fire in foure corners of the City, and to have divided the spoyle amongst us: and this was our purpose, as God may helpe me now at my last end.] For his service done in this seditious bu∣sinesse, the King knighted the Major William Walworth, and gave him a hundred pounds a yeere in Fee; also he knighted five Aldermen his brethren, girding them abou the waste with the girdle of knighthood, which was the manner of Gradu∣ating in those dayes: And to doe the City it selfe honour, he granted there should be a Dagger added to the Armes of the City; for till this time the City bore onely the Crosse without the Dagger. And now all parts being quiet, the King by Proclamation revoked and made void his former Charters of Infranchising the Bondmen of the Realme; and that they should stand in the same condition they were before. In the time of this sedition, the Duke of Lancaster had been sent into Scotland, to keep the Scots quiet; who so carried the matter, that before the Scots heard of the Sedition, a Truce was conclu∣ded for two or three yeeres. But the Duke comming back to Berwick, was denied by the Captaine Sir Matthew Redman, to enter the Towne, because of a Comman∣dement given him by the Earle of Northumberland, L. Warden of the Marches, not to suffer any person to enter the same; which the King indeed had appointed to be done, forgetting the Duke of Lancaster that was then in Scotland: but howsoever, this bred such a spleen in the Duke against the Earle, that at his comming home, he laid many things to the Earles charge, and the Earle as stoutly answered his objecti∣ons: and so farre it proceeded, that both of them came to the Parliament which was then beginning, with great numbers of Armed men, and themselves in Armour, to the great terrour of the people: but the King, wisely taking the matter into his owne hands, made them friends. At which time, the Lady Anne, Sister to the Em∣perour Winceslus, and affianced wife to the King, was come to Callis; whereupon the Parliament was Prorogued: the Lady was brought to London, joyned in mariage to the King, and Crowned Queene at Westminster by the Archbishop of Canterbury, with great solemnity. After the Mariage, the Parliament began againe; in which William Vfford Earle of Suffolke being chosen by the Knights of the Shires to deliver in behalfe of the Commonwealth certaine matters concerning the same, the very day and houre in which he should have done the businesse, as he went up the
staires towards the upper House, he suddenly fell down and dyed, having been merry and well before, to all mens judgements. About this time the Lord Scroope was deposed from the Chancellourship, for refusing to seale some Grants which the King had made: and the King receiving the great Seale at his hands, kept it a cer∣taine time, and sealed with it such Grants and Writings as he pleased; till at length it was delivered to Robert Braybrooke Bishop of London, who was made Lord Chan∣cellour. Henry Spenser Bishop of Norwich, had lately with the Kings leave raised an Army, and was gone into France, in behalfe of Pope Vrban, against the Anti-pope Clement; and entring first into Fladers, he tooke and sacked many Townes; at last besieged Ypres; till by an Army of French (greater then was thought could have been raised in France) he was forced to raise his siege: and then passing divers places, he came to Greling; from whence he writ to King Richard, that if ever he meant to try bat∣tell with the French, now was the time. The King was at that time at Dayntrie in Northmptonshire; and being at supper when the word was brought him, he in∣stantly rose from the Table, got to horse-back, and rode in Post with such speed that he came to St. Albans about midnight; where making no stay, but while he borrow∣ed the Abbots Gelding, he hasted forth till he came to Westminster, as though he had meant never to rest till he had given battell to the French-men: but after he had taken councell of his pillow, his minde was altered, and h thought it better to im∣ploy some other, then to goe himselfe: so the Duke of Lancaster is thought the fittest man; but he protracted the time so long in making preparation, tht before he could be gone, the Bishop was come away: And this indeed is the condition of many, to spend so much time in preparing, that they utterly lose all opportunity of acting; like to men that are putting on their cloathes so long, till it be time to put them off againe. Shortly after, a Truce was concluded between Frace and Eng∣land, to endure till the Feast of St. Michael, which should be in the yeere 1384. Of Acts done after He came of Age. THe Scots in this meane time had made Roades into England, and taken and burnt divers Townes upon the Borders: whereupon the Duke of Lancaster, with his Brother the Earle of Buckingham, is sent with a mighty Army to represse them; but having entred Scotland, and not able to draw the Scots to a Battell, they onely burnt certaine Townes, and then returned. About this time an Irish Frier, of the Order of the Carmelites, charged the Duke of Lancaster with heynous crimes as that he intended to destroy the King, and u∣srpe the Crowne; shewing the time, the place, and other circumstances of the whole plot. But the Duke called to his Answer, so cleered himselfe, a least gave such colours of cleering, that the Accuser was committed to the custody of Iohn Holland the kings halfe-brother, till a day appointed for further tryall: The niht before which day, the said Lord Holland and Sir Henry Greene are said to have come to this Frier, and putting a cord about his neck, tyed the other end about his privy mem∣bers; and after hanging him up from the ground, laid a stone upon his belly, with the weight whereof his very back-bone burst asunder; thereby putting him to a most tormenting death: An act not more inhumane then unadvised; for though it took away the Accuser, yet it made the Accusation more suspitious. At this time, though a Truce had been made with the Scots, yet they would not be quiet, but entred and wonne the Castle of Barwick, whereof the Earle of Nor∣thumberland was Captaine, but had committed the keeping of it to another; for which being blamed, he went against them with an Army, but took an easier course, for with the summe of two thousand markes he bought them out, and had the Castle surrended into his hands againe. The king upon some new displeasure, being now incensed against the Duke of Lancaster, had a purpose to have him arrested, and ar∣raigned of certaine points of Treason, before Sir Robert Tresilian Chiefe Justice,
though he ought to be tryed by his Peeres: but the Duke having intimation hereof got him to his Castle of Pomfret, and stood upon his guard; till the Kings mother, (notwithstanding her indisposition of body, by reason of her corpulency) riding to and fro betwixt them, pacified the King, and made them friends. In the ninth yeere of K. Richards Reigne, the French-king sent the Admirall of France into Scotland, with a Thousand men of Armes, besides Crosse-bowes and o∣thers, to ayde the Scots against the English; with which ayde the Scots encouraged, enter the English Borders: whereof K. Richard advertised, himselfe with a mighty Army enters Scotland; and comming to Edingborough, and finding all the people fled he set fire on the houses, burnt the Church of S. Giles, onely Holy-Rood-house was spared at the Duke of Lancasters suit, in remembrance of friendship he had formerly received in that house. The Scots by no meanes could be drawn to any Battell; bu to divert the Kings Army, they entred Cumberland, and besieged Carlile, whereby the valour of Sir Lewis Clifford and Sir Thomas Musgrave they were repelled; and hearing of the Kings Army comming towards them, and fearing to be inclosed, they drew back into Scotland, and the King returned into England. But in this meane while, the English of Callis tooke many prizes of French ships at Sea, and many Boo∣ties also by land; at one time foure thousand sheep, and three hundred head of great Cattell. This yeere the King called a Parliament at Westminster, where he created two Dukes, one Marquesse, and five Earles: Edmund of Langly Earle of Cambridge, the Kings Unkle, was created Duke of Yorke: Thomas of Woodstock Earle of Buck∣ingham, his other Unkle, Duke of Glocester: Robert Veere Earle of Oxford, was made Marquesse of Dublin: Henry of Bullingbrooke sonne of Iohn of Gaunt, was created Earle of Darby: Edward Plantagenet sonne to the Duke of Yorke, was made Earle of Rutland: Michael de la Poole Chancellour of England, was created Earle of Suffolke: and Thomas Mowbray Earle of Nottingham, was made Earle Marshall. Also by a∣thority of this Parliament, Roger Mortimer Earle of March, sonne and heire of Ed∣mund Mortimer, and of the Lady Philip eldest daughter and heire to Lionell Duke of Clarence third sonne to king Edward the Third, was established heire apparent to the Crowne of the Realme, and shortly after so Proclaimed: but going into Ireland to his Lordship of Vlster, was there by the wilde Irish slaine. This Roger Earle of March had issue, Edmund, Roger, Anne, Alice, and Eleanor; which Eleanor was made a Nun: The two sonnes dyed without issue: Anne his eldest daughter, was maried to Richard Earle of Cambridge, sonne to Edmund of Langley; which Richard had issue by the said Anne, a sonne called Richard, that was after Duke of York, and father to king Edward the Fourth; also a daughter named Isabel, maried to the Lord Bourchier. Also this yeere Henry of Bullingbrooke Earle of Darby, maried the daughter and heire of Humfry Bohun Earle of Hereford; in whose Right he was after made Duke of Hereford. This yeere also K. Richard holding his Christmas at Eltham, Leo king of Armenia came thither to him; who in feare to have his kingdome conquered by the Turkes, was come into Christendome to seeke for ayde: but his chiefe Errand into England was, to have procured a Peace between the two kings of England and Frane; but their spleenes were so great against one another, that it was not in the physick of hi Power to cure them. At this time, the Duke of Lancaster, taking with him his wife the Lady Constnce, and a daughter he had by her named Katherine, and two other daughters which he had by his former wife, failed into Spaine: he was attended in his journy with the Lord Lucie, the Lord Talbot, the Lord Basset, Willoughby, Fitzwater, Poyings, Br∣ston, and many other Lords and knights, to the number of fifteen hundred men of Armes; whereof a thousand at the least were knights and Esquires. The king at his taking leave gave him a Crowne of Gold, and commanded he should be called king of Spaine: and the Queen likewise gave another Crown of Gold to the Dutchee. He landed first at Brest, and freed that Castle from the French: from thence he sai∣led, and arrived at the Groyne in Spaine, where he remained a moneth; and then went to Compostella, where he stayed a while: In which time, his Constable Sir Iohn
Holld wonne divers Townes. At Monson, the king of Portingale, and the Duke of Lcaster met; where a mariage was concluded between the said king of Portingale and the Lady Philip daughter to the Duke which mariage shortly after was con∣summated, and the Lady sent into Portingale honorably accompanied. The Duke continued at Copostella all the winter: At March the king of Portingale and he en∣ed the Confines of Castile, where they tooke many Townes; and passing over the River of Dure, entred into the Country De Campo: But the Spaniards not willing to come to a Battell, but meaning to weary them out with delayes; the English not used o such hot aire, fell daily into many diseases: which the Duke seeing, accor∣ded o a Truce. There dyed in this action, the Lord Fizwater, Sir Richard Burley  night of the Garter, the Lord Poynings, and Sir Henry Percy Cosin-german to the Ele of Northumberland, also the Lord Talbot; and in all, twelve great Lords four∣score nights, two hundred Esquires, and of the meaner sort above five hundred. When the Army was broken up, the Duke of Lancaster, and the Dutchese his wife went into Portingale; and after some stay there, they sailed to Bayon, in the Mar∣ches of Gascoigne, where he rested a long time after: In which meane while, there were offers made for a Mariage to be had, betweene the Duke of Berry, Unkle to the Frch king, and the Lady Kaherine, daughter to the Duke of Lancaster: which the king of Spaine understanding, he began to doubt, least if that mariage went for∣ward, it might turne to his disadvantage; and thereupon by earnest suit, at length concuded a peace with the Duke of Lancaster, on this wise, That his eldest sonne Hery should marry the the Lady Katherine, the Duke of Lancasters daughter, and be intituled Prince of Austurgs; and in consideration of this mariage, and that all claimes should cease, which the Duke in right of his wife might challenge or pre∣tend It was agreed, that the said Duke should receive yeerely the summe of Ten thousnd marks, during the lives of him and his Dutchesse; and to have in hand the summe of two hundred thousand Nobles. At this time, the French had a purpose to invade England, with no lesse a hope then to make a Conquest: and to that end, they prepared a mighty Navy; so as in the moneth of September, there were numbred about Sluis, Dam, and Blakerk, 187 ships, besides those which were rigged in Britaine by the Constable, who had caused an inclosure of a Field to be made of Timber, that when they were landed in Egland, they might therewith inclose their field, and so lodge at more surety: but it so fortuned, that the Lord William Beauchampe Captaine of Callis, tooke two of their ships, whereof one was laden with a piece of the said Inclosure; and after that, nother ship, laden with Guns, Gunpowder, and other Instruments of warre; and after that againe, two ships more, laden with parcels of the said Inclosure, which K. ichard caused to be reared and set up about Winchelsey Towne: at last the fore∣said Army came into Flanders, and arrived at Sluis; where, after some stay, they were so distressed for victuals, that in the end of November, they were glad to be gone, and returne into France. At this time, in a Parliament, Robert Veere Earle of Oxford and Marques of Dublin, was created Duke of Ireland; and Michael de la Poole, a Merchants son, had lately be∣fore been created E. of Suffolk, and made Chancellor of England. And now begins K. Richard to enter, I may say, upon the confines of his Destiny: His gracing of undeserving men, and disgracing of men deserving, if they were not the causes, they were at least the occasions of his owne disgracing, and destruction in the end. He was now come to be of full age to doe all himselfe; which was indeed to be of full age to undoe himselfe: for the faults of his younger yeeres might have the excuse to be but Errors; but the faults of the age he was now at, were perempory against him, and admitted no defence. And to hasten the pace of his destiny the faster, the ill Counsell which before was but whispered in his eare, was now scarce forborne to be given him aloud: It is told him, that he is under tuition no longer, and there∣fore not to be controll'd, as in former times he had been; That to be crost of his will by his subjects, was to be their subject; It is no Soveraignty, if it be not absolute. At the instigation of which Counsell, the king in a Parliament now assembled, fell
to expostulate with his Lords, asking them what yeeres they thought him to be  who answering, that he was somewhat more then one and twenty; Well, then (sa he) I am out of Wardship, and therefore looke to injoy my kingdome as freely,  your selves at the like yeeres enjoy your Patrimonies. But his flattering Favori should have remembred, that though the king may not be controlled, where he ca command; yet he may be opposed, where he can but demand; as now indeed he wa for when he came to demand a Subsidy towards his warres, he was answered, That he needed no subsidie from his Subjects, if he would but call in the debts which th Chancellour owed him: and if he were so tender of him, that he could not finde i his heart to doe it himselfe, they would doe that work for him: and thereupo charged him with such crimes, that all his goods were confiscate, and himselfe ad∣judged to dye, if the king so pleased: though some write, his sentence was onely to pay a Fine of twenty thousand markes, and a thousand pounds yeerly beside. Upo this provocation, the opposite side seek present revenge: It is devised, that the Duke of Glocester as principall, and other Lords that crossed the kings courses, should be invited to a Supper in London, and there be murthered. In the execu∣on of which plot, the former Lord Major, Sir Nicolas Brember, had a speciall hand but the present Major Richrd Exton, moved to it by the king, would by no mean consent; and thereupon the plot proceeded not. But for all these harsh straines, and many such other that passed this Parliament, a Subsidie was at length granted to the king, of halfe a Tenth, and halfe a Fifteenth; but with condition, that  should not be issued but by order from the Lords, and the Earle of Arundll was ap∣pointed to receive it. But before this time, both Houses had directly agreed, that unlesse the Chancellour were removed, they would meddle no further in the P∣liament. The king advertised hereof, sent to the Commons, that they should se unto Eltham (where he then lay) forty of their House, to declare their mindes  him: but upon conference of both Houses, it was agreed, that the Duke of Glo∣str, and Thomas Arundell Bishop of Ely, should in the name of the Parliament goe unto him: who comming to the king, declared, That by an old Statute, the king once a yeere might lawfully summon his Court of Parliament, for reformation of all corruptions and enormities within the Realme: and further declared, That by an old Ordinance also it was Enacted, That if the king should absent himself 40 dayes not being sick, the Houses might lawfully break up, and returne home. At this the king is said to say, Well, we perceive our people goe about to rise against us, and therefore we thinke we cannot doe better then to aske ayd of our Cosin the king of France, and rather submit us to him then to our own Subjects. To which the Lord answered, They wondred at this opinion of his Majesty, seeing the French king was the antient Enemy of the kingdome; and he might remember what mischiefes were brought upon the Realme in king Iohns time, by such a course. By these and the like perswasions, the king was induced to come to the Parliament: and soon after, Iohn Fortham Bishop of Durham is discharged of his Office of Lord Treasurer; and in his place was appointd Ioh Gilber Bishop of Hereford, a Frier of the order of Preachers: also Michael de la Ple Earle of Suffolke, is discharged of his Office of Chancellour; and Thomas Arudell Bishop of Ely, by consent of Parliament, placed in his roome. Also by Order of Parliament, thirteen Lords were chosen to have oversight, under the king, of the wole government of the Realme: of which thirteen, there were three of the New-Officers named; as the Bishop of Ely Lord Chancellour, the Bishop of Hereford Lord Treasurer, and Nicolas Abbot of Wl∣tham Lord keeper of the Privy Seale: The other ten were, William Archbishop of Cterbury, Alexander Archbishop of York, Edmund of Lngley Duke of York, Thoma Duke of Glocester, William Bishop of Winchester, Thomas Bishop of Exeter, Richrd Earle of Arundell, Richard Lord Scrpe, and Iohn Lord Devereux. But this parti∣cipation of the Government being found inconvenient, held not long. Also in this Parliament, it was granted, that Robert de Veere, lately created Duke of Ireland, should have & receive to his own use 30000. markes, which the French-men were to give for the heires of he Lord Charles de Blys: but it was granted upon his
condition That before the next Easter he should passe over into Ireland, to recover such lands as the King had there given him: so desirous the Lords and Commons were to have him removed from the Kings presence. But though the King gave way to this torrent of the Parliament for the present, yet as soone as the Parliament was dissolved, he dissolved also all that had been done, either against the Lord Chan∣cellour, or against the Duke of Ireland, or against Alexander Nevil Archbishop of York; and received them into more favour then ever he had done before. In his Tenth yeere, about the Beginning of March, Richard Earle of Arundell appointed Admirall, and Thomas Mowbray Earle of Nottingham, the Earle of Devon∣shire, and the Bishop of Norwich, went to Sea, with a warlike power of men and rmes, to watch for the Fleet of Flanders, that was ready to come from Rochell with wines; and meeting with them, they set upon them: and tooke of them, to the number of a hundred Vessels, all fraught with wines; so as wine grew so plentifull, that it was sold for thirteen shillings foure pence the Tonne; and the best and choy∣sest for twenty shillings. Besides this, they landed in Flanders, where they relieved and fortified Brest, and demolished two Forts which the Enemy had built against it. But this happy service of the Earle of Arundell; the Duke of Ireland, the Earle of Suffolke, Sir Simon Burley, and Sir Richard Sturrey, who continued still about the King, seemed rather to envy, then to commend; insomuch that when the Earle of Nottingham, that had ever been the Kings play fellow, and of equall age to him, came to the Court, he was neither received by the Duke of Ireland with any good wel∣come, nor by the King with any good countenance: and therefore indeed, not by the King with any good Countenance, because not by the Duke of Ireland with any good Welcome. About this time; the Duke of Ireland sought to be divorced from his lawfull wife, daughter to the Lady Isabel, one of king Edward the third's daughters; and took to wife one Lancerona a Vintners daughter of Bohemia, one of the Queenes maids: at which indignity, the Duke of Glocester, that was unkle to the Lady thus forsaken, tooke great displeasure; which the Duke of Ireland understanding, studied how by some meanes he might dispatch the Duke of Glocester out of the way. Easter was now past, the time appointed for the D. of Irelands going over into Ireland; when the King, with a shew to bring him to the waters side, went with him into Wales, and in his company, Michael de la Poole Earl of Suffolke, Robert Tresilian L. Chie Justice, and divers others; who there consulted how they might dipatch the Duke of Glo∣cester, the Earles of Arundel, Warwick, Drby, Nottingham, with divers others of that Faction: but when the King had remained in those parts a good while, he re∣turned, and brought back the Duke of Ireland with him; and so his voyage into Ireld was cleane forgotten. About the same time, Robert Tresilian Chiefe Justice came to Coventry, where he Indicted two thousand persons. The King and the Queene came to Groby; and thither came by his Commandement the Justices of the Reme, Robert Belknap Lord Chiefe Justice of the Common Pleas, Iohn Holt, Rger Fulthorpe, and William Borough, knights: to whom it was propounded, to anwer to these Questions following: First, Whether the New Statute and Commission made in the last Parliament, were against the kings Prerogative, or no? To which they all answered, It was. Secondly, How they ought to be punished, that procured the said Statute and Commission to be made? They answered with one assent, that they deserved death, except the king would pardon them. Thirdly, How they ought to be punished who moved the King to consent to the making of the said Statute and Commission? They answered, They ought to lose their lives, unlesse the King would pardon them. Fourthly, How they ought to be punished, that comelled the king to the ma∣king of that Statute? They answered, They ought to suffer as Traitours. Fiftly, Whether the king might cause the Parliament to proceed upon Articles by him limited, before they proceeded to any other? They answered, That in this the king hould over-rule; and if any presumed to doe contrary, he was to be punished as a Traitour.
Sixthly, Whether the king might not at his pleasure disolve the Parliament, and command the Lords and Commons to depart? They all answered, He might. Seventhly, Whether the Lords and Commons might, without the kings will, impeach Officers and Justices upon their offences, in Parliament, or no? It was answered, They might not; and he that attempted contrary, was to suffer as a Trai∣tour? Eightly, How he is to be punished, who moved in the Parliament, that the Statute wherein Edward the Second was indicted in Parliament, might be sent for; by i∣spection of which Statute, that present Statute was deised? It was answered, That as well he that moved it, as he that brought the  into the House, were to be punished as Traitours? Ninthly, Whether the Judgement given in Parliament against Michael de la Pole were erronious and revocable? They answered, It was erronious and revocable and that if the Judgement were now to be given, the Justices would not give the same. In witnesse of the Premises, the Justices aforesaid, to these Presents have set their Seales; in the presence of Alexander Archbishop of Yorke, Robt Arcbishop of Dublin, Iohn Bishop of Durham, Thomas Bishop of Chester, Iohn Bishop of ngr, Robert Duke of Ireland, Michael Earle of Suffolk, Iohn Ripon Clerk, and Iohn Blake. At this time the Londoners incurred much obloquie; For, having before beene pardoned by the king of some crime aid to their charge, they were now ready to comply with the king in his desires; and thereupon being impannelled, they indicted some Lords of many crimes informed against them. But not onely the Justices a∣foresaid, but all other Justices and Sheriffes of the Realme were called at this time to Nottingham: the chiefe cause was, to understand what power of men they could assure the king of, to serve him against the Lords: and further, that where he mean shortly to call a Parliament, they should so use the matter, that no knight or Bur∣gesse should be chosen, but such as the King and his Councell should name. To which the Sheriffes made answer, that it lay not in their power to assemble any forces against the Lords, who were so well beloved: And as for choosing knights and Burgesses, the Commons would undoubtedly look to enjoy their antient liberties, and could not be hinered. But yet the king and the Duke of Ireland sent into all parts of the Realme, to raise men in this quarrell against the Lords: Whereof the Duke of Glocester being advertised, he came secretly to Conference with the Earles of Arundell, Warwick, and Darby; who upon consultation, determined to talke with the king, with their Forces about them: and the king, on the other part, tooke ad∣vice how he might apprehend them apart; and thereupon, sent the Earle of Nor∣thumberland and others to the Castle of Rygate, to take the Earle of Arundell, who lay there at that time: but howsoever it fortuned, they faed of their purpose. After this, he sent others to apprehend him: but he being warned by a messenger from the Duke of Glocester, conveyed himselfe away by night; and by morning was come to Haringey-Parke, where he found the Duke of Glocester and the Earle of Warwick, with a great power of men about them. The king hearing of this As∣sembly at Harigey-Parke, called his Councell, to heare their opinions what was fit to be done: Some were of opinion, that the king should assemble his friends, and joyning them with the Londoners, give them battell; the chiefest of this minde was the Archbishop of York: Others thought best, the king should seeke to appease the Lords with faire promises, till a fitter opportunity to suppresse them. But the king not yet resolved what course to take, caused onely order to be taken, that no Citizen of Londn should sell to the Duke of Glocester, the Earle of Arundell, or to any other of the Lords, any armour or furniture of warre, under a great paine. But for all this, the Lords proceeded in their course, and sent the Arcbishop of Canterbury, the Lord Iohn Lovell, the Lord Cobham, and the Lord Iohn Devereux, requiring to have delivered to them such as were about the king, that were Traitours and Seducers
both of him and the Realme: and further to declare, that their Assembling was for the honour and wealth both of him and the kingdome. The Duke of Ireland, the Earle of Suffolk, and two or three other about the king, perwadd him to offer Cal∣l to the king of France, to have his assistance against the Lords. Withall, the king seat to the Major of London, requiring to know how many able men the City could make? To which the Major answered, that he thought it could make Fifty thou∣sand men at an houres warning. Well then (said the king) goe and prove what will be done. But when the Major went about it, he was answered, They would never fight against the kings friends, and defenders of the Realme. At the same time, the Earle of Northumberland said to the king: Sir, there is no doubt but these Lords have alwaies been, and still are your true and faithfull subjects, though now distemper'd by certaine persons about you, that seeke to oppresse them: therefore my advice is, that you send to them, to come before your presence in some publick place; and I verily believe, they will shew such reasons of their doings, that you will hold them excused. The Archbishop of Canterbury, and the Bishop of Ely Lord Chancellour, and other of the Bishops there present, approved all of the Earles advice: where∣upon the king sent the Archbshop of Canterbury, and the Bishop of Ely to the Lords, requiring them to come to him to Westminster, on Sunday then next following: which, upon oath given by the Archbishop and the Chancellour, that no fraud nor evill practice should be used against them, they were content to doe. But when the Lords were ready to come at the day appointed, they heard of an Ambush laid to intrap them at the Mewes, and thereupon stayed, so as they came not at the time appointed: Whereupon, the king asking why they came not according to their promise? It was answered, because hee kept not his promise, there being an Ambush of a Thousand armed men laid to surpize them at the Mewes. The king hearing this was astonied, and swore he knew of no such thing, and com∣manded presently the place should be searched, but it was true; an ambush was laid, but not at the Mewes, but in a place aout Westminster, where Sir Thomas Tryvet and Sir Nicholas Brember had assembled them. This one action might have made the king sensible of his favorites abusing his authority; but that where affection makes the construction, all things are taken in a good sense; or was it perhaps they had a VVarrant dormant, to prosecute the kings ends without the kings knowledge? Yet the Lords after this, receiving a safe conduct from the king, came to Westminster; of whose comming when the king heard, hee apparelled himselfe in his royall-Robes, and with his Scepter in his hand, came into the great Hall; before whom, the Lords upon their knees presented themselves, the king bidding them welcome, and taking each of them by the hand; Then the lord Chancellor making a speech, wherein he blamed them for raysing of Armes, and requiring to know the cause; they answered, They had done it for the good of the King and kingdome, and to take away the Trators about the King. Upon this the king himself spake, asking him whether they thought to compel him by strong hand? have not I (saith he) sufficiēt men to beat you down? truly in this behalf I make no more account of you then of the basest skullion in my kytchin; yet after these great words, he lift up the Duke of Glocester, who all this while was kneeling, and commanded the rest also to rise, and then led them courteously to his chamber, where they sate and dranke together: And finally it was concluded they should all meete againe, as well these Lords, as those they accu∣sed, at the next Parliament; which the king promised to call speedily, and each par∣ty to receive there according to Justice, and in the meane time all parties to be in the kings protection. But when the Favorite Lords heard this, they told the king plain∣ly, they neither durst nor would put themselves to the hazard of such a meeting, and therfore the Duke of Ireland and the rest of that faction left the Court to bee out of the way: But the king not enduring their absnce, applted Thomas Mollineux Constable of he castle of Chester, to rayse an Army, and to safe-conduct the duke of Ireland to him; But ey being come as far as Radcoat-bridge, were encounred by the Earle of Darby; and the Duke of Ireland, not dring to joyne battell with him, fled; and being to passe a River, cast away his gantlets and sword (to bee the more
nimble) and giving his horse the spur, leapt into the river, and so escaped; that when these things were afterwards found, it was verily thought hee had been drowned, till news came he was got into Holland, where being no very welcome guest, hee went from thence into the Bishoprick of Vtricht, and after two or three yeeres scambling about in manner of a fugitive, at Lovaine in Brabant he ended his life. A man of ma∣ny good parts, and worthy enough of his Princes favor, if with that favor he had not grown proud, and in that pride, injurious and insulting over others no lesse deserving then himselfe. Hee was valiant enough against any man but the Earle of Drby, and of him indeede both the Genius of the Duke of Ireland, and of King Richard himselfe seemed to stand in feare, for neither of them durst meet him in the field, though encouraged to it by those about them. About this time the Duke of Suffolke doubting some plots laid to surprize him, fled over to Cllis in disguise, shaving his beard, and counterfeiting himselfe a Poul∣terer, to sell certain foule which hee had gotten; but being come to Callis, was by the Lord William Beauchampe, Deputy of the Town, sent back into England, whom the King notwithstanding permited to goe at large, to make it be thought hee was more afraid then hurt, more suspicious then he needed By this time the Lords hd gotten matter enough against the King, at least to justifie their Armes, and thereup∣on with an Army of forty thousand men, they came to London, where after some de∣bate, they were received; and then the Duke of Gloucester, the Earles of Darby and Nottingham went to the King in the Tower; to whom, after humble salutations, they shewed the Letter which he had written to the Duke of Ireland, to levy an Ar∣my for their destruction: likewise the Letters which the French King had written to him, conteining a safe conduct for him to come into France, there to doe Acts to his own dishonor and the kingdoms. This done, upon the Kings promise that he would come the next day to Westmin∣ster to treate further of these matters, the Lords departed, only the Earles of Not∣tingham and Darby, at the Kings instance, stayed all night; but before the King went to bed, his minde was cleane altered for keeping his promise to meete the Lords the next day at Westminster: which the Lords understanding, they sent peremptorily to him, that if he came not according to his promise, they would choose another king, that should hearken to the faithfull Counsell of his Lords. This touched the king so to the quick, that the next morning he went and met the Lords; who there decla∣red to him, how much it concerned the good of the kingdome, that those Traitours so often spoken of, should be removed from the Court: To which, the king, though much against his will, yet at last condiscended. And thereupon presently Alexan∣der Nevil Archbishop of York, and Thomas Rushoke Bishop of Chichester, and Confes∣sour to the king, were expelled the Court; who not willing to come to after-reckon∣ings, fled no man knew whither. They expelled also Iohn Fourdham Bishop of Dur∣ham, Lord Treasurer; the Lord Zouch of Haringworth, the Lord Burvell, the Lord Beaumont, Albery de Veere, Baldwin de Bereford, Richard Adderbury, Iohn Worth, Tho∣mas Clifford, and Iohn Lovel, knights: but constreined to put in Sureties to appeare at the next Parliament. Also certaine Ladies were expelled the Court; as the Lady Poynings, the Lady Mouling, and others; bound to appeare at the next Parliament. There were also arrested, and committed to severall Prisons, Sir Symon Burley, Wil∣liam Elmham, Iohn Beauchamp Steward of the kings house, Sir Iohn Salisbery, Sir Thomas Trivet, Sir Iames Berneys, Sir Nicolas Dagworth, and Sir Nicolas Brember, knights. Also Richard Clifford, Iohn Lincolne, Richard Mitford, the kings Chaplains; Nicolas Sclake Deane of the kings Chappell, and Iohn Blake a Lawyer. Shortly after, the Parliament began, (called afterward, The Parliament that wrought wonders:) On the first day whereof, were arrested as they sate in their places, all the Justices (but onely Sir William Skipwith:) as Sir Roger Fulthorpe, Sir Robert Belknappe, Sir Iohn Cary, Sir Iohn Holt, Sir William Brooke, and Iohn Alacon the kings Serjeant at Law; and were all sent to the Tower, for doing contrary to an Agreement made the last Parliament. Also in the beginning of this Parliament, Robert Veere Duke of Irelnd, Alexander Nevill Archbishop of York, Michael de la
Poole Earle of Suffolke, and Sir Robert Tresilian Lord Chiefe Justice of England, were openly called to answer Thomas of Woodstock Duke of Glocester, Richard Earle of Arundell, Henry Earle of Darby, and Thomas Earle of Nottingham, upon certaine Ar∣ticles of high Treason: and because none of them appeared, It was ordained by whole consent of Parliament, they should be banished for ever, and all their land and goods eized into the Kings hands (their intailed lands onely excepted.) Short∣ly after, the Lord Chief Justice Robert Tresilian, was found in an Apothecaries house in Westminster; where being taken, he was brought to the Duke of Glocester, who caused him the same day to be had to the Tower, and from thence drawne to Ty∣burne, and there hanged. On the morrow after, Sir Nicolas Brember was brought to his Answer; who being found guilty, was beheaded with an Axe which him∣selfe had caused to be made for beheading of others. After this, Sir Iohn Salisbery, and Sir Iames Berneys, lusty young men, were drawne and hanged; as also Iohn Bechamp L. Steward of the Kings house, Iohn Blake Esquire: and lastly, Sir Symon Burley, sonne to the great Sir Iohn Burley Knight of the Garter, was beheaded on Tower-hill; whose death the King tooke more heavily and more heynously then all the rest. Also all the Justices were condemned to dye; but by the Queenes inter∣cession, they were onely banished the Realme, and all their lands and goods con∣fiscate, onely a small portion of money was assigned them for their sustentation. Finally, in this Parliament, an Oath was required and obteined of the King, that he should stand unto, and abide such Rule and Order as the Lords should take: and this Oath was required also of all the Inhabitants of the Realme. In the later end of the Kings eleventh yeere, the Earle of Arundell was sent to Sea, with a great Navy of ships and men of warre; with whom went the Earles of Not∣tingham and Devonshire, Sir Thhmas Percy, the Lord Clifford, the Lord Camoi, Sir William Elmham, and divers other Knights, to ayde the Duke of Britaine against the king of France: but before they came, the Duke of Britaine was reconciled to the king of France; and so needing not their ayde, all this great Fleet returned with doing nothing. And it was indeed a yeere of doing nothing, unlesse we reckon some petty Inroades of the Scots: and that Sir Thomas Tryvet dyed with a fall off his horse: and that Sir Iohn Holland, the Kings brother by the mother, was made Earle of Huntington: and that there was Contention in Oxford, between the Northerne and the Southerne Scholars; which was pacified by the Duke of Glocester. In his twelveth yeere, Commissioners were appointed to meet at Balingham, be∣twixt Calli and Bulloigne, to treat of a Peace betweene the Realmes of England, France, and Scotland: and after long debating, a Truce was at last concluded, to begin at Midsomer next, and to last three yeeres. But now the king, to shew his plenary authority of being at full age, removed the Archbishop of York from be∣ing Lord Chancellor, and put in his place William Wickham Bishop of Winchester: also he removed the Bishop of Hereford from being Treasurer, and put another in his place: The Earle of Arundell likewise, unto whom the Government of the Par∣liament was committed, and the Admiralty of the Sea; was removed, and the Earle of Huntington put in his roome. About this time, the Lord Iohn Hastings Earle of Pembrooke, as he was practising to learne to Just, was stricken about the Privy parts, by a knight called Sir Iohn St. Iohn; of which hurt he soone after dyed. In whose Family, it is memorable, that for many Generations together, no sonne ever saw his father, (the father being alwaies dead, before the sonne was borne.) The Originall of this Family was from Hastings the Dane, who in the Reigne of K. Alured, long before the Conquest, about the yeere 890. came with Rollo jto England. But howsoever, in this Iohn Hastings ended the then Honorable Titles of the Hastings; for this man dying without issue, his Inheritances were dispersed to divers persons: The Honour of Pembrooke came to Francis at Court, by the kings Gift: the Baronies of Hastings and Welford came to Reynold Gray of Ruthin: the Barony of Aburgveny was granted to William Bea∣hamp of Bedford. About this time, Iohn Duke of Lancaster was created Duke of Aquitaine, recei¦ving
at the Kings hands the Rod and the Cap, as Investitures of that Dutchy. Also the Duke of York's sonne and heire was created Earle of Richmond. In his thirteenth yeere, a Royall Justs was Proclaimed to be holden within Smith∣field in London, to begin on Sunday next after the Feast of S. Michael: which being published, not onely in England, but in Scotland, in Almaigne, in Flanders, in Bra∣bant, and in France; many strangers came hither; amongst others, Valeran Earle of S. Poll, that had maried king Richards Sister; and William the young Earle of Oster∣vant, sonne to Albert de Bavere Earl of Hollond and Heynoult. At the day ppointed there issued forth of the Tower, about three a clock in the afternoone, sixty Cour∣sers apparrelled for the Justs; and upon every one an Esquire of Honour, riding a soft pace: After them, came forth foure and thirty Ladies of Honour, (Froyssard saith, threescore) mounted on Palfries, and every Lady led a knight with a chaine of Gold: These knights being on the Kings part, had their armour and apparell garnished with white Hearts, and Crownes of Gold abo their necks; and so they came riding through the streets of London, unto Smithfield: The Justs lasted divers dayes; all which time the King and Queen lay at the Bishops Palace by Pauls Church, and kept open house for all Commers. In his Fifteenth yeere, the Duke of Lancaster went into France, having in his traine a thousand horse; and met the king of France at Aiens, to treat of a Peace between the two kingdomes: but after long debate, a Truce onely was concluded for a yeere. About this time also, the King required the Londoners to lend him a Thousnd pounds: which they refused o doe; and not onely so, but they abused an Italian Merchant, for offering to lend it. This moved the King to some indignation: to which was added the complaint of a Ryot committed by the Citizens, against the servants of the Bishops of Salibury L. Treasurer; for that, where one of the Bishops servants, named Walter Roman, had taken a horse-loafe out a Bakers basket, as he passed in the streets, and ran with it into his Lords house; the Citizens thereupon assaulted the house, and would not be quieted, till the Major and Aldermen were faine to come, and with much adoe appeased them. Upon complaint hereof, ur∣ged against the Citizens, by the Bishop of Salisbury L. Treasurer, and Thomas A∣rundell Archbishop of York L. Chancellour, the Major and Aldermen, and divers other substantiall Citizens are arrested: the Major is committed to the Castle of Windsor, and the other to other Castles; the liberties of the City are seized into the Kings hands, and the authority of the Major utterly ceased; the king appointing a Warden to governe the City, first Sir Edmund Derligrug, and afterward Sir Bald∣win Radington; till at length, by speciall suit of the Duke of Glocester, the king was contented to come to London, to so great joy of the Citizens, that they received him with foure hundred on horse-back, clad all in one livery, and presented the king and Queene with many rich gifts: yet all gave not satisfaction, to have their liberties restored, till they afterwards paid Ten thousand pounds. This it is to pro∣voke a Lyon: It may be fortune enough to us, if by any meanes we can but keepe him quiet; for if once we provoke him to lay his paw upon us, it will be hard getting from him, and not be torne in pieces. In his Sixteenth yeere, the Dukes of Lancster and Glocester are once againe sent into France, to treat of a Peace: but when they could not agree with the French-Commissioners upon Articles proponded, there was onely a Truce concluded for foure yeeres; though perhaps a further Agreement had then been made, but that the king of France fell newly againe into his old fit of Frensie, which called away the French Commissioners from further Treaty. In his Eighteenth yeere, a Proclamation was set forth, That all Irish men should avoyd this Realme, and returne home: The occasion was, because so many Irish were come over, that Irelad in a manner was left unpeopled: in so much, that where K. Edward the Third had received from thence yeerely the summe of Thirty thou∣sand pounds, the king now laid forth as much to repell Rebels. Whereupon at Mi∣chaelmas K. Richard went himself into Ireland, attended with the Duke of Glocester,
the Earles of March, Nottingham, and Rutland, the Lord Thomas Percy L. Steward, and divers others of the English Nobility; to whom came in the Great Oeale king of Meth, Bryan of Thomond king of Thomond, Arthur Macmur king of Leymster, and Cnhur king of Cheveney and Darpe: and there K. Richard stayed all that winter, and after Christmas called a Parliament; at which time also, the Duke of Yorke Lord Warden of England, in the Kings name called a Parliament at Westminster: to the which was sent forth of Ireland the Duke of Glocester, that he might declare to the Commons the Kings great occasions for supply of money: whose words so farre prevailed, that a whole Tenth was granted by the Clergie, and a Fifteenth by the Laytie. In his Twentieth yeere was the famous Enterview between the two Kings of England and France: There was set up for K. Richard a rich Pavilion, a little be∣yond Guysnes, within the English pale; and another the like for the French King, on this side Arde: The distance betwixt the two Tents was beset on either side with Knights armed with thei swords in their hands, foure hundred French on one side, and foure hundred English on the other: The two Kings before their meeting, took a solemne Oath, for assurance of their faithfull and true meaning, to observe the sa∣cred Lawes of Amity one toward another, in this Enterview. After the two Kings were come together, it was accorded, that in the same place where they met, there should be builded at both their costs, a Chappell, for a perpetuall memory, which should be called, The Chappell of our Lady of Peace. On Simon and Iudes day, the kings talked together of Articles concerning the Peace; and having conclu∣ded them, they received either of them an Oath, upon the holy Evangelists, to ob∣serve and keepe them. This done, the French king brought his daughter Isabel, and delivered her to K. Richard, who shortly after at Callis maried her, and upon the 17. of January following, she was Crowned Queen at Westminster. A Match of great honour, but of little conveniency, and lesse profit; for the Lady being but eight yeeres of age, there could be no hope of issue a long time, which was K. Richards greatest want; and as little supply of his wants otherwise, her Portion perhaps scarce paying the charges of his journey to fetch her, which cost him three hundred thousand markes. The Duke of Lancaster, in the thirteenth yeere of K. Richards Reigne, had been created Duke of Aquitaine: but when the Gascoigners would not receive him, shewing reasons why that Dukedome ought not to be separated from the Crown of England, his Grant was revoked, and so it remained still in Demesne of the Crown. At this time, in a Parliament, the Duke of Lancaster caused to be legitimated, the issue he had by Katherine Swinford, before he maried her; of whom, Thomas Beaufort was created Earle of Sommerset. This yeere also, the king receiviug the money back, which had been lent to the Duke of Britaine, upon Brest, delivered up the Towne unto him; and thereupon, the English souldiers that were there in Garrison, were all discharged and sent home; who, at a Feast which the king kept at Westminster, comming in companies together into the Hall; as soone as the king had dined, and was entring into his Chamber, the Duke of Glocester asked him, if he did marke those men that stood in such troops in the Hall: Yes marry (said the king) who were they? They were (said the Duke) those souldiers, who by your rendring up of Brest have been sent home, and now must either starve or steale; and therewithall, very unadvisedly in words, taxed the king with unadvisednes of his deed: To whom the king in great anger reply'd, Why Unkle, doe you thinke me either a Merchant, or a Foole, to sell my land? By S. Iohn Baptist, no: But could I refuse to render the Town, when tender was made of the money lent upon it? Indeed nothing could more discover the Duke of Glocesters, either weaknesse, if he knew not that Brest was but onely a Morgage; or injustice, if knowing it, he would have had the king, though the money were ten∣dred, to have kept it still: but such is the course of many, to take part with the Po∣liticks against the Ethicks; work their ends by doing unjustly, when doing justly ought to be their chiefest end. How-ever it was, the multiplying of words about
this matter, kindled in the King such a displeasure against the Duke, that it could never afterward be quenched, but by his blood. And first he complained to his o∣ther two Unkles, the Dukes of Lncaster and Yorke, of his undutifull behaviour to∣wards him; who told the King, Their brother perhaps might let fall some unad∣vised words, but they knew his heart to be true and faithfull. Yet doubting how far the King might presse upon them to answer for their brothers faithfulnes, they re∣tired from Court: which gave the Dkes enemies time to incense the King farther against him. It happened, that the Duke of Glocester had with him one day at his house, the Abbot of S. Albans, that was his Godfather, and the Prior of Westmin∣ster: and after dinner falling in talke with them, amongst other communications the Duke required the Prior to tell truth, whether he had any Vision the night be∣fore? To which the Prior was loath, at first, to make a direct Answer; but at last, being earnestly requested, as well by the Abbot as the Duke, he confessed that he had a Vision indeed, which was, that the Realme of England should be destroyed through the Misgovernance of K. Richard. By the Virgin Mary (said the Abbot) I had the very same Vision. Whereupon the Duke presently disclosed to them all the secrets of his minde, and by their devices contrived an assembly of divers great Lords of the Realme, to meet at Arundell-Castle that day Fortnight at which time he appointed to be there himselfe, with the Earles of Drby, Arundell, Marshll, and Wrwick; also the Archbishop of Canterbury, the Abbot of S. Albans, the Prior of Westminster, with divers others: And accordingly all these met at Arundell Castle, at the day appointed: where receiving first the Sacrament, by the hands of the Archbishop of Canterbury, to be assistant each to other, in all such matters as they should determine; They resolved to seize upon K. Richard, and upon the Dukes of Lancaster and York, and commit them to Prison; and all the other Lords of the Kings Councell, they determined should be drawne and hanged. But the Earle Marshall, that was Deputy of Calli, and had maried the Earle of Arundels daughter, discovered all their Counsell to the King; who thereupon, by a plot devised by his Councell, tooke his brother the Earle of Huntington with him, and rising from supper, rode that night to the Duke of Glocesters house at Plashey in Essex. When the King came thither, the Duke was a-bed; but informed of it, cast his cloake about his shoulders, and came down, bidding the Kings Grace, with all reverence, welcome. The King courteously requested him to goe and make him ready, for that he must needs ride with him a little way, to conferre of some busines. The Duke presently made him ready and came downe; and as soone as the King and his Company was gone a little way from the house, and the Duke with him, the Earle Marshall arrested the Duke, as he had been appointed to doe by the King; who immediately was sent to Callis, where, after some time, he was dispatched of his life, either strangled, or else smo∣thered with pillowes, as some write. At the very same time was the Earle of A∣rundell apprehended, by the Earles of Rutland and Kent: the Earle of Warwick also, when the King had invited him to dinner, and shewed him very good countenance, was taken and arrested in the place: As likewise at the same time were apprehen∣ded, and committed to the Tower, the Lord Iohn Cobham, and Sir Iohn Chyny. Shortly after, the King procured them to be indicted at Nottingham, suborning such as should appeale them in Parliament; namely, Edward Earle of Rutland, Thom Mowbray Earle Marshall, Thoms Holland Earle of Kent, Iohn Holland Earle of Hun∣tington, Thomas Beaufort Earle of Somerset, Iohn Montacute Earle of Salisbury, Tho∣mas L. Spenser, and the Lord William Scroope L. Chamberlaine: and in the meane time, the King sent for a Power of Cheshi men, to keep Watch and Ward about his person. On the 17. of September, a Parliament began at Westminster; wherein the King complained as well of many things done by the Lords in his Minority, as also of the hard dealing which they had used towards the Queen, who was three houres at one time on her knees, before the Earle of Arundell, for one of her Esquires, named Iohn Calverley, who neverthelesse had his head smitten from his shoulders; and all the answer she could get, was this: Madame, pray for your selfe and your Husband,
and let this suit alone. Those that set forth the Kings grievances in this Parliament, were Iohn Bushie, William Bagot, and Thomas Greene. The cause of asembling the Parliament was shewed, that the King had called it for reformation of divers trans∣gressions against the Peace of his Land, by the Duke of Glocester, the Earles of A∣rundell, Warwick, and others. Then Sir Iohn Bushie, Speaker of the Parliament, made request on behalfe of the Commonalty, that they might be punished according to their deservings; and specially the Archbishop of Canterbury who then ate next the king, whom he accused of high Treason. When the Archbishop began to an∣swer, Sir Iohn Bushie besought the king that he might not be admitted to answer, lest by his great wit and cunning he might lead men away to believe him. And here Sir Iohn Bushie in all his talke did not attribute to the king Titles of honour due and ccustomed, but such as were fitter for the Majestie of God then for any Earthly Prince. And when the Archbishop was constrained to keepe silence, Sir Iohn Bushie proceeded; requiring on the behalfe of the Commons, that the Charters of Pardon, granted to the Duke of Glocester, and the Earles of Arundell and Warwick, should be revoked. The king for his part protested that they were drawne from him by com∣pulsion, and therefore besought them to deliver their opinions, what they thought thereof: whereupon, the Bishops first gave their sentence, that the said Pardons were revocable, and might be called in; but pretending a scrupulosity, as if they might not with safe consciences be present where Judgement of Blood should passe, they appointed a Lay-man to be their Prolocutor for that turne. The Temporall Lords likewise gave their sentence, that the Pardons were revocable: onely the Judges and Lawyers were not of this opinion. But howsoever, the Archbishop of Cnterbury is hereupon condemned to perpetuall Exile, and appointed to avoyd the Realme within sixe weekes. Also the Earle of Arundell is by the Duke of Lacaster who sate that day as High Steward, condemned of Treason, and on the Tower∣hill beheaded. There went to see the execution, divers Lords; amongst whom was the Earle of Nottingham, that had maried his daughter, and the Earle of Kent, that was his daughters sonne: to whom, at the place of his execution he said, Truly it would have beseemed you rather to bee absent, then here at this businesse; but the time will come ere long, that as many shall marvell at your mis∣fortune, as they doe now at mine. After his death, a Fame went, that his head was grown to his body againe: whereupon, the tenth day after his buriall, his body, by the kings appointment was taken up, and then found to be a Fable. After this, the Lord Thomas Beauchamp Earle of Warwick was brought forth, and charged with the like Treasons; but by the intercession of the Duke of Lancaster and other Lords, after confession of his fault, was only confin'd into the Isle of Man. Likewise the lord Cobha, and Sir Iohn Cheyny were onely banished, or (as Fabian saith) condemned to perpetuall Prison. The Parliament after this was held at Shewsbery; where, for the love the king bore to the Gentlemen and Commons of the Shie of Chester, he caused it to be Ordained, that from thenceforth it should be called and known by the name of the Principality of Chester; and herewith intitled himselfe Prince of Ch∣ster. At this Parliament also, called the Great Parliament, He created five Dukes, and  Dutchesse; one Marquesse, and foure Earles. The Earle of Darby was created Duke of Hereford; the Earle of Nottingham, Duke of Norfolke; the Earle of Rtland Dke of Abemarle; the Earle of Kent, Duke of Surrey; the Earle of , Duke of Exceter; and the Lady Margaret Marshall Countesse of Norfolke, was created Dutchesse of Norfolke: The Earle of Somerset was created Marquesse Dorse; the Lord Spenser was made Earle of Glocester; the Lord Nevill, Earle of Westerld; the Lord Scrpe, Earle of Wiltshire; and the Lord Thomas Percy L. Steward of the king house, was made Earle of Worcester: and for the better maintenance of their este, he divided amongst them a great part of those lands that belonged to the Duke of Glocester, the Earles of Arudell and Warwick. Also in this Parliament, the Judges gave their opinions, That when Articles are propounded by the king to be handled in Parliament, if other Articles be handled before those be first determined, that it is Treason in them that doe it. And in this Parliament, the king brought it so ∣bout,
that he obtained the whole power of the Parliament to be conferred upon certaine persons, namely, Iohn Duke of Lancaster, Edmund Duke of Yorke, Edm Duke of Amerle, Thomas Duke of Surrey, Iohn Duke of Exceter, Iohn Marquee Dorset, Roger Earle of March, Iohn Earle of Salisbury, and divers others; or to any seven or eight of them: and these, by virtue of this Grant, proceeded to conclude upon many things, which concerned generally the knowledge of the whole Parlia∣ment, to the great prejudice of the State, and a dangerous example in time to come. A Generall Pardon was also granted for all offences, to all the Kings subjects, but only to Fifty, whose names he would not expresse, but reserved them to his own know∣ledge, that when any of the Nobility offended him, he might at his pleasure name him to be one of the number excepted, and so keepe them still within his danger. And for the more strengthening the Acts of this Parliament, the King purchased the Popes Buls, containing grievous censures and curses to them that should break them. And now the heads of the opposite Faction having lost their heads, and all things as well setled as could be desired, the King was secure, as thinking himselfe safe; and he had indeed been safe, if Time and Fortune were not Actours in Revenge, as well as men; or rather, if a superiour Power did not interpose, whose wayes are as secret as himselfe is invisible. It now fell out, (though Witers differ what it was fell out) for some write, that Thoms Mowbray accused the Duke of Hereford; others, that Henry Duke of Herefod accused Thomas Mowbry Duke of Norfolke, for speaking words sounding highly to the Kings dishonour: to which the Duke of Norfolk being called to answer, charged the Duke of Hereford before the King, that he lyed falsly. Whereupon a Combat was agreed upon between them: The King labored to make them friends; but not prevailing, he gave way to proceed in Combat, and the place to be at Coventry: where at the day and houre appointed, the Duke of Hereford, mounted on a white Couse, brded with green nd blew Velvet, imbroidered sumptuously with Swans and Antelops of Goldsmiths worke, approached the Lists; Of whom the Mar∣shall, being the Duke of Surry, demanding who he was? he answered, I am Henry of Lcaster, Duke of Hereford, that am come hither to doe my endeavour against Thomas Mowbray Duke of Norfolke, as a Traitour, untrue to God, the King, his Realme, and me: Then incontinently he swore upon the holy Evangelists, that his quarrell was true and just, and thereupon required to enter the Lists, where in  Chaire of green Velvet he sate downe and reposed himselfe. Then came the Duke of Nrflke, his horse barded with Crimson velvet, imbroidered richly with Lyons of Silver, and Mulbery trees; and when he had taken his oath before the Constable the Duke of Amerle, that his quarrell was just, he entred the Lists, and sate him down in his Chaire of Crimson velvet, curtained about with white and red Damask. Then the Marshall viewed their speares, to see that they were of equall lengh; and then the Heralds proclaimed, on the Kings behalfe, they should mount on horse∣bck, and addresse themselves to the Combat. But when they were set forward, and had their Speares in their Rests, the King cast down his Warder, and the Heralds cryed, Stay, Stay. Then the king caused their Speares to be aken from them, and deliberated with his Councell, what was it to be done in so weighty a cause. After two long houres, it was at last concluded, that Henry Duke of Hereford should with∣in fifen dayes depart out of the Realme, and not returne before ten yeeres were expired, upon paine of death; And that Thomas Mowbray Duke of Norfolke, should likewise avoyd the Realme, and never to returne into England, upon the like paine. It is observable, that this Censure was passed against the Duke of Norfolke, the very same day Twelve-moneth, in which he had taken order to put the Duke of Glocester to death at Calli, whereof he was then Governour. When these Judgements were once read, the king called before him both the Dukes, and made them sweare, that the one should never come in place where the other was. After this, the Duke of Nrfolke went into Almi, and from thence to Venice, where after some time he dyed with sorrow. The Duke of Hereford, at the taking his leave of the king, had foure yeeres of his Banishment released; nd then went to Callis, and from thence to
aris, where, of the French king he was so kindly received, that by his favour he had obtained in mariage the onely daughter of the Duke of Berry, Unkle to the French king, if King Richard by messengers had not hindered him. It was a Custome in those dayes, to punish the delinquencies of Great men by banishment out of the Realme; a Custome not more grievous to the Subject, then dangerous to the Prince; for by this course, they had meanes to worke so closely in their mines of Revenge, that the Fabrick of a Kingdome was in danger to be blown up, before their working could be perceived. An example whereof was never more plainly seen then at this time, in the Archbishop of Canterbury, and the Duke of Hereford: For they in their Banishment meeting often together, and aggravating the Grievances of king Richards Government, fell at last to consult by what meanes he might best be removed, seeing there was no hope he could ever be reclaimed. In the time of their consultation about it, Iohn Duke of Lancaster, father to the Duke of Hereford, dyed, at Ely house in Holborne: And as if Fortune herselfe meant to doe their worke for them, Sollicitations came from many parts of England, to move the Duke of Hereford to come now & take the Government upon him, wherein they would be ready to assist him. The Duke heated before by the Archbishops insti∣gation, and now set on fire by this sollicitation, gives Fortune no leisure to alter her minde, by delaying the time, but without further deliberation prepares to be going: and taking with him the Archbishop, the Lord Cobham, Sir Thomas Erpington, and Sir Thoms Ramston Knights; Iohn Norbury, Robert Waterton, and Francis Coynt E∣squires, and about some threescore other persons, as many as he could readily get; in three ships which the Duke of Britaine lent him, he put to Sea; where hovering about the Coast a while, to marke the countenance of the shores, he landed at last, about the beginning of July, at Ravenspurre in Yorkeshire: which no sooner was knowne, but there repaired to him, the Lords, Willoughby, Rosse: Darcie, and Beau∣mont; and shortly after, at Doncaster, the Earle of Northumberland, and his sonne Sir Hery Percy, with the Earle of Westmerland, and great numbers of the Gentry and common sort; of whom, though some had invited him to come to take the Go∣verment of the Realme upon him, yet he forbore to pretend that for any cause of his comming, but made a solemne Protestation, that he came onely to take possession of the Inheritances descended upon him from his father, which king Richard most unjustly, and contrary to his promise, had seized into his hands: for this was a Rea∣son had no objection: the other he reserved, till his Power should not need to re∣gard Objections. And indeed, no snow-ball ever gathered greatnesse so fast by rol∣ling, as his Forces, increased by marching forward; for by that time he came to Berk∣ly, he had got a mighty Army; and within three dayes after, all the Kings Castles in those parts were surrendred to him. The Duke of Yorke, left Governour of the Kingdome, used his best meanes to raise Forces to resist him, but found few willing to beare Armes against him: whereupon, and perhaps hearing withall that the Dukes comming was but onely to take possession of his Inheritance, he thought good to goe to Berkly to him, to have there some communication about it. At Berk∣ly, at that time, was arrested the Bishop of Norwich, Sir William Elmham, and Sir Walter Burli knights; Laurence Drew, and Iohn Golofer Esquires. From Berkly the two Dukes went forward towards Bristow; where in the Castle were the Lord Wil∣liam Scroope Earle of Wiltshire and Treasurer of England, Sir Henry Greene, and Sir Henry Bushye; who were taken, and brought forth bound before the Duke of Lan∣caster, and the day after arraigned before the Constable and Marshall, found guilty of Treason for misgoverning the King and the Realme, and presently had their heads smitten off. Sir Iohn Russell also was taken there; but he feigning himselfe to be our of his wits, escaped for that time. All this while K. Richard was in Ireland, where he performed Acts in repressing the Rebels there, not unworthy of him; and having with him amongst other of the Great Lords, the Duke of Lancasters sonne Henry, he there for his towardlinesse in service, Knighted him by which it appeared that he had no great feare of he Father, when he graced the Sonne; and indeed he needed not have feared him i his owne
absence out of England had not given him advantage. Six weekes were now passe after the Dukes arrivall in England; in all which time king Richard had no notice it, by reason the windes were contrary to come orth of England: But as soon as  heard it, and in what hostile manner he proceeded, he then determined to returne instantly into England; and had done it, but that the Duke of Aumerle his princip Counsellor (whether out of a good meaning, but grounded upon errors, or ou of an ill meaning, but shadowed with colours) by all meanes perswaded him to stay so long till things fitting for his journy might be made ready. It was king Richards ill luck to hearken to this Counsell: but yet he presently sent the Earle of Salisbury in∣to England, to provide him an Army out of Wales and Chshire, against his own com∣ming, which he promised faithfully should be within sixe dayes at the most. The Earle landed at Coway in Wales, and had soon gotten to the number of Forty Thou∣sand men: but the sixe dayes passed, and no newes of the King: which made the souldiers suspect that he was dead, and thereupon were ready to disband; but at the Earle of Salisburies perswasion, they were contented to stay for some dayes longer; and when the King came not in that time neither, they then would stay no longer, but departed and went home. At length, about eighteen dayes after that the King had sent away the Earle of Salisbury, he tooke shipping, together with the Dukes of Amerle, Exceter, and Surrey, and diver other of the Nobility; with the Bishops of London, Lincolne, and Carlile; and landed at Barklowly in Wales. He had about him some Chshire men, and was at first in no great doubt of prevailing: but when he heard that all the Castles from the borders of Scotland unto Bristow, were deli∣vered to the Duke of Lancaster, and that the gratest part of the Nobility and Com∣mons tooke part with him, and specially that his principall Counsellors had lost their heads at Brist; then, solvuntur frigore membra, he fell so utterly to despaire, that calling his Army together, he licensed every man to be gone, and to shift for him∣selfe. The souldiers besought him to be of good cheere, swearing they would stand with him to the death: But this encouraged him not at all; so as the next night he stole from his Army, and with the Dukes of Exceter and Surry, the Bishop of Car∣lile, Sir Stephen Scroope, and some halfe a score others, he got him to the Castle of Coay, where he found the Earle of Salisbury, determining there to stay, till he might see the world at some better stay. Here the Earle of Worcester Steward of the Kings house, broke his white staffe, and without delay went to the Duke of Lanca∣ster; who understanding that k. Richard was returned out of Ireland, he left the Duke of York at Bristow, and came back with his Power to Berkly, and from thence the next day came to Glocester, then to Rosse, after to Hereford, where came to him the Bishop of Hereford and Sir Edmund Mortimer: on the Sunday following he went to Lyster, and there the Lord Charleton came to him: from thence he went to Ludlow, and the next day to Shrewsbery, and thither came to him Sir Robert Leigh nd Sir Iohn Leigh, and many other, being sent from Chester, to offer their service; thither also came to him the Lord Scales, and the Lord ardolphe, forth of Ireland: From Shrewsbery he went to Chester, and from thence sent for his sonne and heire, and likewise for the Duke of Glocesters sonne and heire (whom K. Richard had left in cu∣stody in Ireland) with all speed to come into England; but the Duke of Glocesters son through misfortune perished at Sea, or as some write, dyed of the plague; the sor∣row whereof caused, shortly after, his mothers death. After this, the Duke sent the Earle of Northumberland to the king; who upon safe-conduct comming to him, de∣clared, that if it might please his Grace to undertake, that there should be a Parlia∣ment assembled, in which Justice might be had, and herewith pardon the Duke of Lancaster of all things wherein he had offended, the Duke would be ready to come to him on his knees, and as an humble subject obey him in all dutifull services. Yet upon this conference with the Earle, some say, the king required onely, that him∣selfe and eight more, whom he would name, might have honorable allowance, with the assurance of a private quiet life, and that then he would resigne his Crown; and that upon the Earles Oath that this should be performed, the king agreed to go with the Earle to meet the Duke: but after foure miles riding, coming to the place
where they had laid an Ambush, the King was enclosed, and constrained to goe with he Earle to Rutland, where they dined, and from thence to Flint, to bed. The  had very few of his friends about him, but onely the Earle of Salisbury, the ishop of Carlile, the Lord Scroope, Sir Nicolas Ferehye, and Iames D'Arthois a Gas∣gne, who still wore a white Heart, the Cognisance of his Master K. Richard, and neither for Promises nor Threats would be drawne to leave it off. The King being in the Castle of Flint, and Duke Henry with his Army approa∣ching neere the Towne, the Archbishop of Canterbury, with the Duke of Aumerle ad the Earle of Worcester, went before to the King; whom the King spying from the walls where he stood, went downe to meet, and finding they did their due re∣verence to him on their knees, he tooke them up, and taking the Archbishop aside, nked with him a good while; and as it was reported, the Archbishop willed him to be of good comfort, for he should be assured not to have any hurt as touching his person. After this, the Duke of Lancaster came to the Castle himselfe, all-armed; and being within the first gate, he there stayed, till the King, accompanied with the Bishp of Carlile, and Earle of Salisbury, and Sir Stephen Scroope, who bore the sword before him, came forth, and sate down in a place prepared for him. As soone as the Duke saw him, he came towards him, bowing his knee; and comming forward, did so the second time, and the third, till the king tooke him by the hand, and lift him up, saying, Deere Cousin, you are welcome. The Duke humbly thanking him, sd My Soveraigne Lord and king, the cause of my comming at this present, is (your Honour saved) to have restitution of my Person, my Lands and Heritage: Whereto the king answered: Deere Cousin, I am ready to accomplish your will, so that you may enjoy all that is yours without exception. After this, comming forth of the Castle, the king called for wine; and after they had drunke, they moued on horse-back, and rode to Chester, the next day to Nantwych, then to New∣cstle, from thence to Stafford, and then to Lichfield, and there rested Sunday: after that, they rode forward, and lodged first at Coventry, then at Dayntree, then at Nrhmpton, next day at Dunstable, then at S. Albans, and so came to London: In all which journy they suffered not the king to change his apparell, but made him rie still in one suit of raiment, and that but a simple one, though he in his time was xeding sumptuous in apparell, having one Coate which was valued at Thirty Thousand markes: And in this ort he was brought the next way to Westminster, and from thence the next day had to the Tower, and committed to safe Custodie. After this, a Parliament was called by the Duke of Lancaster, but in the name of . Richard; in which many heinous points of Misgovernment were laid to his charge, and were ingrossed up in three and thirty Articles, the chiefe whereof were these: That he had wastefully spent the Treasure of the Realme. That without Law or Iustice, he had caused the Duke of Glocester, and the Earle of Arundell to be put to death. That he had borrowed great summes of money, and given his Letters Patents to repay thesame, and yet not one Penny ever paid. That he had said, The Laws of the Realme were in his head, and in his breast: by reason of which fantasticall opinion, he destroyed Noble-men, and impoverished the Commons. That he changed Knights and Burgesses of the Parliament at his pleasure. That most tyrannously he said, that the lives and goods of all his subiects were in his hands and at his disposition. That whereas divers Lords were by the Court of Parliament appointed to treat of mat∣ters concerning the state of the Kingdome; they being busied about the same Commission, e wt about to appeach them of high Treason. That by force and threats, he enforced the Iudges of the Realme, at Shrewsbery, to con∣discend to his way, for the destruction of divers of the Lords. That he caused his fathers own brother, the Duke of Glocester, without Law to be at∣tached and sent to Callis, and there without reason secretly murthered. That notwithstanding the Earle of Arundell at his Arraignment pleaded his Charter of Pardon, yet he could not be heard, but was shamefully and suddenly put to death.
That he ssembld certaine Lacashire and Cshire men, to mke warre upon his Lord and suffered them to rob and spoyle, without prohibition. That though he had made Proclamation that the Lords were not attached for any cri of Treason, yet afteward in the Parliament he laid Treason to their charge. That notwitstanding his Pardon granted to thm, he enforced divers of the Lords par∣takrs to be againe intolerably Fined, to their utter undoing. That without the ssent of the Peeres, he caried the Iewels and Plate of this Kingdom into Ireland. Upon these, and some other Articles, he was by Parliament adjudged to be de∣posed from all Kingly Honour, and Princely Government. And thereupon, the King being advised by his owne servants, rather voluntarily to resigne the Crowne, then by compulsion to be forced to it; on the Monday before the nine and entieth day of September, in the yeere 1399. he made a solmne Resignation, befre diver Lords and others, sent to him for that purpose: and an Insumet of hi Rsigna∣tion being made, he would needs read it before them all himselfe, and then subscri∣bed it; and withall, made it his suit, that t Duke of Lancster might be his Suc∣cessor, and King after him; and for a signe of his desire hereof, he tooke his Signe Ring of Gold from his finger, and put it upon the Duke of Lancasters; that never man who had used a Kingdome with such violence, gave it over with such patience, or rather such willingnes, that he seemed rather to affect it, then that he was any way forced to it. This Resignation of K. Richard being shewed to the Parliament, both Houses gave their assent; and then Cmmissioners were appointed to pronounce openly the sentence of his deposing, which was done by the Bishop of Assaph, and all Allegiance renounced to him. And now it is easie to be observed, what a wonderfull concurrene of fortunes, in behalfe of the Duke of Lancaster, and against K. Rihard, happened together, whereof if any one had been missing, he had never been turned ut of his Throne in such manner as he was: For first, if it had not happened that K. Richard had been in Ireland at the time when the Duke began his attempt, it had or been possi∣sible for him to compass his designe as he did: And then, if King Richard being in Ireland, he had not by misfortune of weather been kept sixe weekes from hearing of the Dukes arrivall, he had not given him so large a time for raising of Forces, and o more easily might have resisted him: Or after K. Richard heard of the Dukes ar∣rivall, if he had followed the Earle of Salisbury, and not stayed so many dayes longer then he promised, he had found an Army ready to receive im, sufficient at least to have given a stop to the Dukes proceedings: Or when at last he came over, and found his Army to faile him, if withall his own courage had not failed him, but that he had manfully put it to the hazard of a Battell, as his souldiers themselves would have had him to doe, he could not chuse but have made a better end of his busines then now he did. But when all is done, there is no warding he blowes of Fortune; or to say better, No resisting the Decree of Heaven: but seeing that Decree is an Abyssus to us, and may perhaps but be conditionall; we shall manifestly be Traitors to our selves, if we use not our uttermost endeavours to divert it: That it may truly be said, King Richard lost his Crown, more by his own Treason, then by the Trea∣son of any other. Of his Taxations. IN his second yeere, in a Parliament held at Glocester: was granted to be paid by the Merchants, upon every sack of wooll a Mark, for this present yeere; and for every pounds worth of wares, brought from beyond Sea, and sold here, sixe pence of the Buyer. In his Third yeere, in a Parliament of Westminster, a Subsidie was granted to be levied of the Great men of the Realm, to the end the Commons might be spared: The Dukes of Lancaster and Britain paid 20 marks; every Earl 6 marns; Bishops and Abbots with Miter, as much: every Monk, three shillings foure pence: also every Justice, Sheriffe, Knight, Esquire, Parson and Vicar, were charged after a certaine
rate; but no Commons of the Layitie. Also this yeere, in another Parliament, was granted a Tenth by the Clergie, and a Fifteenth by the Laytie; but with this con∣dition, That from thenceforth, which was in March, 1380. till the Feast of S. Mi∣chael, which should be in the yeere 1381. there should be no more Parliaments: but yet was not observed. In his Fourth yeere, in a Parliament at Northampton, a new kinde of Subsidie was granted; of every Priest Secular or Regular, sixe shillings eight pence; and as much of every Nunne; and of every man or woman, maried or not maried, being sixteen yeeres of age, (beggers onely excepted) foure pence. In his Fifth yeere, a Subsidie was granted by the Merchants, of certaine Cu∣stomes of their wools which they bought and sold, called a Maletot, to endure for foure yeeres. In his Seventh yeere was granted him one Moyity of a Fifteenth by the Laytie; and shortly after, a Moyitie of a Tenth by the Clergie. In his Ninth yeere, halfe of a Tenth, and halfe of a Fifteenth by the Laytie. In his Eleventh yeere, there was granted him a Tenth of the Clergie, and a Fifteenth of the Laytie. In hi Twelveth yeere, at a Parliament, was granted of every Sack of wooll, forty shillings; whereof, ten shillings to be applyed presently to the Kings use; the other thirty to remaine in the hands of Treasurers, towards the charges of warres, if any should happen. Also there was a Subsidie granted, of sixe pence in the pound; whereof foure pence to the use last mentioned; the other two pence to be at the kings pleasure. In his Fifteenth yeere, at a Parliament, was granted a Tenth of the Clergie, and a Fifteenth of the Laytie, towards the charges of Ioh Duke of Lacaster, sent into France. In his Eighteenth yeere, a Tenth was granted by the Clergie, and a Fifteenth by the Laytie, towards his own journey into Ireland. In his Twentieth yeere, the Clergie granted him a Tenth, to be paid that yeere. In his one and twentieth yeere, upon pretence of having ayded the Duke of Glocester, and the Earles of Arundell and Warwick against him, he caused blanke Charters to be made, which he compelled both Citizens and Gentlemen in the Country to seale, whereby he might charge them afterward to pay whatsoever he required. In his two and twentieth yeere, a Fifteenth and a halfe was granted; and for the Customes of wools, fifty shillings upon every Sack, of Englishmen borne, and three pounds of Strangers. Of Lawes and Ordinances in his time. IN his second yeere, in a Parliament at Glocester, it was enacted, That Merchant-strangers might buy and sell in Grosse, or by Retaile, within this Realme. In his Third yeere, in a Parliament at Westminster, It was Ordained, that the Privi∣ledges and Immunities of the Abby of Westminster should remaine inviolate; but with this Proviso, against those that tooke Sanctuary with pupose to defraud their Creditours, That their lands and goods should be lyable to their debts. In his Sixth yeere, a Parliament was holden, in which the Major of London, upon suggestion that the Fishmongers used great deceit in uttering of their Fish, obtained to have it Enacted, That from thenceforth, none of that Company, nor of the Vintners, Grocers, Butchers, or other that sold any provision of Victuals, should be admitted Major of the City: but in the Parliament next following, were restored to their li∣berty againe, saving that they might not keepe Courts among themselves, but that all transgressions of their Customes should be tryed at the Majors Court. In his Eleventh yeere, K. Richard created Iohn Beauchamp of Holt, Baron of Kedermister, by his Letters Patents; the first that was so made; for before this time, Barons were alwayes made by calling them to Parliaments by the Kings Writ. Affaires of the Church in his time. IN the second yeere of this Kings Reigne, there came messengers from the new-elected Pope Vrban, to require the Kings ayd against such Cardinals as he named Schismticks, that had elected another Pope, whom they named Clemnt: which
Cardinalls sent messengers likewie to crave his ayd for them, but through perswa∣sion of the Archbishop of Canterbury, Vrbans request was granted, and Clement re∣jected. In his fourth year, Iohn Wickliffe set forth his opinion touching the Sacra∣ment of the Altar, denying the doctrine of Transubstantiation, in such sort, as the Church of Rome did then teach. In his sixth year, Henry Spencer Bishop of Nowih received Bulls from Pope Vrbn, to grant all priviledges of the Crusado to all such as would come over and assist him against the Anti-Pope Clement; which being de∣bated in Parliament, It was after much opposition, agreed that it should go for∣ward; and thereupon, the Bishop not only gathered much money from such as would contribute to the expedition, but drew many great Captaines to go them∣selves in person; as namely, Sir Hugh Calverley, sir William Farington, the Lord Henry Beaut, sir William Elmham, sir Thoas Tryvet, and divers others. The money raised by contribution, came to 25000 Franks, and the Army to 3000 Horse, and 15000 Foot; with which Forces, the Bishop passing over into Flan∣ders, wonne the Towns of Graveling, Dunkirke, and Newport; but at last encoun∣tred by a mighty Army of the French, he was put to the worse, and returned into England. In the twelveth yeare of this Kings Reigne, an Act was made that none should passe the Seas to purchase promotions or provisions (as they tearmed them) in any Church or Churches. Also in this yeare Thomas late Earle of Lancaster, by rea∣son of miracles reported to be done by him, was Canonized for a Saint. At this time also, the Wickliffs mervelously increased, Preaching against Pilgrimages and Images, whose greatest opposer was the Bishop of Norwich. In his thirteenth yeare, Procla∣mation was made, that all Beneficed men abiding in the Court of Rome, should return into England by a certain day, under pain of forfeiting their Benefices; and all other not Beneficed, under a certain pain likewise. Also about this time a Statute was made, that no Ecclesiasticall person should possesse Manours, Houses, Lands, Revenues, or Rents whatsoever at the hands of the Feoffee, without the Kings Li∣cence, and the chiefe Lords. In his eighteenth yeare, the Wickliffs were persecuted, and excommunication pronounced against them by the Archbishop of Canterbury. In this Schisme of the two Popes, the French Clergy wrote in behalfe of Clement their Pope, and sent it into England; the Clergy of England on the contrary, wrote in behalfe of Pope Vrban, and so nothing was agreed. Works of Piety in his time. IN the 20th yeare of this Kings Reign, William Bteman Bishop of Norwich buil∣ded Trinitie Hall in Cambridge. In the third year of his Reign, Iohn Philpot Major of Lodon, gave to the Citie certain Tenements, for the which the Chamberlain pay∣eth yearly to thirteen poore people, to every of them seven pence the week for ever; and as any of those thirteen persons dyeth, the Major appointeth one to succeed, and the Recorder another. In the one and twentieth yeare of his Reign, King Ri∣chard caused the great Hall at Westminster to be repaired, both the Walls, Windows, and Roofe. In his time, Si Archbishop of Canterbury, slain by the Rebels upon Tower hill, built the West-gate of Canterbury, and from thence to the North-gate, commonly called the long wall. Thomas Fits-Ala or Arundell, being Bishop of Ely, built the great Gatehouse of Ely house in Holborne; and being after Bishop of Can∣terbury, he built a faire spire steeple at the West-end of his Church there, called to this day, Arundell steeple, and bestowed a tuneable ring of five Bells upon the same. Of Casualties happening in his time. IN his third yeare, so great a mortality afflicted the North parts of England, that the Country became almost desolate. In his sixt yeare, on the 24 day of May, there happened so great an earthquake, or (as some write) a watershake, that it made Ships in the Havens to beat one against the other. In Iuly, in the year 1389. whilest the King was at Sheene; there swarmed in his Court such multitudes of Flyes and
Gnats, skirmishing with one another; that in the end they were swept away with brooms by heaps, and bushels were filled with them. In his twelveth yeare, in March, first there were terrible Windes; afterward followed a great mortality, and after that a great dearth; that a bushel of wheat was sold for thirteen pence, which was then thought a great price; for the years before it was sold for six pence, and Wooll was sold for two shillings a stone. In his fourteenth year, on Christmas day, a Dolphin was taken at London-bridge, being ten foot long, and a monstrous grown fish. Ind his eighteenth year, an Exhalation, in likenesse of fire appeared in the night in many places of England; which when a man went alone, went as he went, and stayed as he stayed; sometimes like a wheele, sometimes like a Barrell, sometimes like a timberlogge; but when many went together, it appeared to be far off. Also in a Parliament time, ther was a certain Image of waxe made by Necro∣mancie (as was sayd) which at an houre appointed, uttered these words: The Head shall be cut off; the Head shall be lift up aloft; the feet shall be lift up a∣bove the Head: and then spake no more. This happened in the Parliament, called the Marvellous Parliament, not long before the Parliament that wrought wonders. In his one and thirtieth yeare, a River not far from Bedford, suddenly ceased his course, so as the channell remained dry by the space of three miles; which was judged to signifie, the Revolting of the Subjects from their naturall Prince. In his two and twentieth yeare, almost through all England, old Bay-trees withered, and afterwards grew green againe; which was supposed to import some strange event. About the yeare 1380. the making of Gunnes was found by a Ger∣mae, which may well be reckoned amongst casualties, seeing it was found by casu∣alty; for this Germane having beaten Brimstone in a morter to powder, and covered it with a stone; it happened, that as he struck fire, a sparke chanced to fall into the powder; which caused such a flame out of the morter, that it raised the stone a great heigth; which after he perceived, he made a Pipe of iron, and tempered the pow∣der with some other ingredients, and so finished that deadly Engine. The first that used it, were the Venetians against the inhabitans of Geneva. Of his Wives. KING Richard in his time had two Wives; the first was Anne Daughter to the Emperour Charles the Fourth, and Sister to the Emperour Wenceslaus; who lived his wife ten years, and dyed without issue at Sheene in Surry, in the year 1392; whose death King Richard tooke so heavily, that he caused the buildings of that Pallace to be thrown down and defaced, as though to revenge himselfe upon the place, could ease his minde, and mitigate his sorrow. His second Wife was Isabel Daughter to Charles the Sixth King of France; She was married to him at eight years of age, and therefore never co-habited. After King Richards death she was sent home, and married afterwards to Charles Son and heire to the Duke of Orleance. Of his Personage and conditions. HE was the goodliest personage of all the Kings that had been since the conquest; tall of stature, of streight and strong limbes, faire and amiable of countenance; and such a one as might well be the Son of a most beautifull mother. Concerning his Conditions, there was more to be blamed in his Education, than in his Nature; for there appeared in him many good inclinations, which would have grown to be abilities, if they had not been perverted by corrupt flatterers in his youth. He was of a credulous disposition, apt to believe, and therfore easie to be abused. His greatest transgression was, that he went with his friends ultra aras, where he should have gone but us{que} ad aras. His greatest imbecilitie, that he could not distinguish between a flat∣terer and a friend. He seemed to have in him both a French nature and an English; vio∣lent at the first apprehension, calm upon deliberation; He never shewed himself more worthy of the Government, than when he was deposed as unworthy to Governe;
for it appeared, that his Regality was not so deare unto him, as a private quiet lif which if he might have enjoyed, he would never have complained that Fortune had done him wrong. Of his Death and Buriall. KIng Richard, shortly after his Resignation, was conveyed to the Castle of Leeds in Kent, and from thence to Pomfret; where the common fame is, that he was served with costly meat, like a King, but not suffered once to touch it, and so dyed of forced famine. But Thomas Walsingham referreth it altogether to a voluntary pi∣ning of himselfe, through grief of his misfortunes. But one Writer, well acquainted with king Richards doings, saith, that king Henry sitting one day at his Table, said sighing, Have I no faithfull friend that will deliver me of him who will be my death This speech was specially noted by one Sir Piers of Exon; who presently, with eight persons in his company, went to Pomfret, commanding the Esquire that tooke the Assay before king Richard, to doe so no more, saying, Let him eat now, for he shall not eat long. King Richard sitting down to dinner, was served without Assay; whereat marvelling, he demanded of his Esquire, why he did not his duty? Sir (said he) I am otherwise commanded by Sir Piers of Exon, who is newly come from king Henry. When king Richard heard that word, he tooke the Carving knife in his hand, and stroke the Squire on the head, saying, The Devill take Henry of Lancaster and thee together: And with that word, Sir Piers entred the Chamber, with eight armed men, every of them having a Bill in his hand. King Richard per∣ceiving this, put the Table from him, and stepping to the foremost man, wrung the bill out of his hands, and slew foure of those that thus came to assaile him; but in conclusion, was felled with a stroke of a Poll-axe, which Sir Piers gave him upon the head, with which blow he fell down dead though it be scarce credible, that  man upon his bare word, and without shewing any warrant, should be admitted to doe such a fact. Sir Piers having thus slaine him, wept bitterly: a poore amends for so heynous a trespasse. King Richard thus dead, his body was embalmed, and covered with Lead, all save the face, and then brought to London, where it lay at Pauls three dayes together, that all men might behold it, to see he was dead: The corps was after had to Langley in Buckinghamshire, and there buried in the Church of the Friers Preachers: but afterward, by k. Henry the Fift, it was removed to West∣minster, and there honorably entombed, with Queen Anne his wife; and that beau∣tifull picture of a King, sitting crowned in a Chaire of State, at the upper end of the Quire in S. Peters at Westminster, is said to be of him: although the Scots untruly write, that he escaped out of Prison, and led a solitary and vertuous life in Scotland, and there dyed, and is buried (as they hold) in the Black-Friers at Sterling. He lived three and thirty yeares, Reigned two and twenty and three moneths. Men of Note in this Kings time. MEn of Valour in his time were so many, that to reckon them all, would be a hard taske; and to leave out any, would be an injury: yet to give an instance in one, we may take Iohn of Gaunt Duke of Lancater, whose valour was no lesse seen abroad then at home: In France, in Germany, in Spaine; in all which places he left Trophies of his Victories. But of learned men, we may name these: William Thorne an Augustine Frier of Canterbury, an Historiographer: Adam Merimouth, a Canon of Pauls Church in London, who wrote two Historicall Treatises; one intitled Chronicon 40. annoru; another, Chrnicon 60. nnorum. William Packington some∣time Secretary to the Black Prince, an excellent Historiographer: William Badbye a Carmelite Frier, Bishop of Worcester, and Confessour to the Duke of Lancaster: Iohn ourg, Chancellour of the University of Cambridge: William Scade, a Monke of Buckast Abby in Devonshire: Iohn Thrisbye Archbishop of Yorke, Lord Chan∣cellour of England, and a Cardinall: Willim Berton Chancellour of Oxford, an Ad∣versary
to Wickliffe: Philip Repington Abbot of Leicester, a Defender of Wickliffe: Walter Brit, a Scholar of Wickliffs, a writer both in Divinity and other Arguments: Iohn Sharpe, a great adversary to Wickliffe, who wrote many Treatises: Peter Pateshall, a great favourer of Wickliffe: Marcell Ingelno, an excellent Divine, one of the first Teachers in the University of Heydelberg: Richard Withee a learned Priest, and an earnest follower of Wickliffe: Iohn Swasham Bishop of Bangor, a great adversary to the Wickliffs: Adam Eston, a great Linguist, and a Cardinall: Iohn Trevise, a Cornish man, and a secular Priest, who translated the Bible, Bar∣tholmew, De Proprietatibus Rerum; Polichronicon of Ranulph Higden, and divers o∣ther Treatises: Iohn Moone, an English man, but a Student in Paris; who compiled in the French tongue, The Romant of the Rose; translated into English by Geoffry Chwcer, and divers others.
THE REIGNE OF KING HENRY THE FOURTH. Of his comming to the Crowne. AFter the Resignation of King Richard, and the sentence of his De∣posing openly read in Parliament; Henry Duke of Lancaster riseth up from his seat; and first, making the Signe of the Crosse upon his forehead and breast, he said: In the name of the Father, the Sonne, and the Holy Ghost: I Henry of Lancaster claime the Crown of England, as descended by right line from King Henry the Third. And having thus spoken, he sate downe againe. Upon this, the Archbishop conferred with the Lords; and having heard their opinions, he urned to the Commons, asking them, if they would joyne with the Lords, in choosing Henry of Lancaster for their King: who all with one voyce cryed, Yea, Yea: where∣upon going to the Duke, he bowed his knee, and taking him by the hand, led him to the Royall seat; and then began a Sermon, taking for his Text, out of the first Booke of the Kings, cap. 9. Vir dominabitur in populo: wherein he declared what a happinesse it is to a Nation to have a King of wisedome and valour, and shewed the Duke of Lacaster to be such a one; and as much the defects in both, of the late king Richard. The Sermon ended, the king thanked them all for his Elction; and testified unto them, that he meant not to take advantage against any mans estate, a comming in by Conquest; but that every one should freely enjoy his own, as in times of lawfull succession. And now a time was appointed for his Coronation; and accor∣dingly, upon the 13th day of October following, the very day wherein the yeere be∣fore he had been banished, he was Crowned at Westminster, by the Archbishop of Canterbury, with all Rites and Ceremonies accustmed. At his Coronation, he was anoynted with an Oyle which a Religious man had given to Henry, the first Duke of Lancaster, together with this Prophre, That the kings anoynted with this oyle, should be the Champions of the Church. This oyle comming to the hands of king Richard, as he was looking amongst his Jewels, going then into Ireland, he was de∣sirous to be anoynted with it, but that the Archbishop of Canterbury told him, it was not lawfull to be anoynted twice: whereupon putting it up againe, at his comming afterwards to Flit, the Archbishop got it of him, and kept it till he Coronation of king Henry, who was the first king of the Realme that was anoynted with it. The day before the Coronation, the king in the Tower made one and orty, some say but twelve, knights of the Bathe, whereof foure were his owne sonnes, Henry Thomas, Ioh, and Humfry, all then alive; and with thm, hree Earles, ad five
rons. Upon the Feast-day, many claimed Offices, as belonging to their Tenures, o which, upon shewing their Right, they were admitted. And now the King ade divers new Officers: The Earle of Northumberland he made Constable of Eng∣nd; the Earle of Westmerland was made Lord Marshall; Sir Iohn Serle, Chancellor; ohn Newbery Esquire, Treasurer; and Sir Richrd Clifford was made Lord Keeper of he Privy Seale: The Lord Henry his eldest sonne, being then about thirteen yeers f age, was created Prince of Wals, Duke of Cornwall, and Earle of Chester, and oone after also Duke of Aquitaine: and the Crowne was by Parliament Eailed o King Henry, and the heires of his body lawfully begotten. After this a Parliament was holden, in which the Acts made in the Eleventh yeere of King Richard were revived, and the Acts made in his one and twentieth yeere were wholly repealed; and they who by that Parliament were attainted, were re∣tored to their Lands and Honours: whereupon Richard Earle of Warwick was de∣ivered out of Prison, and the Earle of Arundells sonne recovered his Inheritance; nd many other also that were banished, or imprisoned by King Richard, were then ully restored to their liberty and estates. Also the King gave to the Earle of West∣erland the County of Richmond; and to the Earle of Northumberland the Isle of Mn, to be holden of him by bearing the sword wherewith he entred into England. And now was the time for shewing of Spleens: Sir Iohn Bagot then Prisoner in the Tower, accused the Earle of Amerle for speaking words against the Duke of Lan∣cster, now King: also the Lord Fitzwater accused him for the death of the Duke of Glocester: the Lord Mrley appealed the Earle of Salisbury of Treason: and one Hall accused the Duke of Exceter, for conspiring the death of Iohn of Gaunt the Kings father: But King Henry having entred the Throne in a storme, was willing now to have a Calme; and therefore laying aside the ones Accusations, he accepted of the others Excuses, and received the Duke of Amerle, and the Duke of Exceter into as much favour, as if they had never been accused: And to qualifie the hard opinion which forraigne Princes might conceive of King Richards Deposing, He sent Ambassadours into divers Countries, to make it knowne, by what Title, and by what favour of the People he came to the King∣dome. To the Court of Rome he sent Iohn Trenevant Bishop of Hereford, Sir Iohn Cheyny Knight, and Iohn Cheyny Esquire: Into France he sent Walter Sherlow Bishop of Durham, and Thomas Percy Earle of Worcester: Into Spaine he sent Iohn Trevor Bishop of Assaph, and Sir William Parre: and into Germany he sent the Bishop of Bangor, and certaine others. Most of these Princes seemed either not to regard what was done, or were easily perswaded that all was done well: onely Charles King of France was so distemper'd with this indignity offered to his sonne in Law K. Richard, that by violence of his Passion, he fell into his old pangues of Frensie; but some∣what recovered, he resolved to revenge it; wherein many Lords of France shewed themselves forward, but specially the Earle of S. Paul, who had maried K. Richards halfe-sister: yet having prepared an Army in readinesse, when afterward they heard of King Richards death, they dissolved it againe, as considering the time was then past. The Aquitaines also, and specially the Citizens of Burdeaux, as being the place where K. Richard was born, were mightily incensed: but Sir Robert Knolls Lieutenant of Guyen, and afterwards Thomas Percy Earle of Worcester, being sent to them by the King, so perswaded them, that with much adoe they continued in obedience. It was about this time, moved in Parliament, what should be done with King Richard (for he was not as yet murthered:) Whereupon, the Bishop of Carlile,  learned man and wise, and who had never given allowance to the Deposing of King Richard; now that he was in a place of freedome of speech, he rose up, and said: My Lords, The matter now propounded is of marvellous weight and conse∣quence; wherein there are two points chiefly to be considered: the first, Whe∣ther King Richard be sufficiently put out of his Throne: the second, Whether the Duke of Lancaster be lawfully taken in. For the first, how can that be sufficiently done, when there is no Power sufficient to doe it? The Parliament cannot, for
of the Parliament the King is the Head; and can the Body put down the He You will say, But the Head may bow it selfe downe; and so may the King esign It is true; but what force is in that which is done by force? and who knowes  that King Richards Resignation was no other. But suppose he be sufficiently ou yet how comes the Duke of Lancaster to be lawfully in? If you say, by Conuest, you speak Treason; for what Conquest without Arms? ad can a subjct take Ar against his lawfull Soveraigne, and not be Treason? If you say, by Elction of  State, you speake not reason; for what power hath the State to Elct, while any  living that hath right to succeed? but such a Succsor is not the Earle of Lancaster, as descended from Edmund Crouchback, the elder sonne of King Henry the Third, though put by the Crowne for deformity of his body; For who knowes not the falsenesse of this allegation? seeing it is a thing notorious, that this Edmund was neither the elder brother, nor yet crooke-backr, (though called so for some other reason) but a goodly personage, and without any deformity. And your selves cannot forget a thing so lately done; who it was, that in the fourth yeere of Kg Richard was declared by Parliament to be Heire to the Crowne, in case K.  should dye without issue. But why then is not that claime made? because, Sil leges inter arma; what disputing of Titles against the streame of Power? B howsoever, it is extreame injustice, the King Richard should be condemned, with∣out being heard, or once allowed to make his defence. And now, my Lords, I have spoken thus at this time, that you may consider of it before it be too late; for as yet it is in your power to undoe that justly, which you have unjustly done. Much to this purpose was the Bishops speech; but to as little purpose as if he had gone about to call back Yesterday: The matter was too farre gone; and scarce a person there present, that had not a hope of either a private or a publick benefi by that which was done. Yet against this speech of the Bishop there was neither Pro∣testing nor Excepting; It passed in the House as but one mans opinion: And as for the King, it was neither fit he should use much severity against any Member of that Parliament which had so lately shewed so much indulgence towards him; nor in∣deed safe, to be too hot in his Punishment, when he was yet scarce warme in his Go∣vernment. Yet for a warning to use their liberty of speech with more moderation hereafter, the Bishop was arrested by the Marshall, and committed to Prison in the Abby of S. Albans, but afterward without further censure se at liberty; till upon a conspiracy of the Lords, wherein he was a Party, he was condemned to dye, though through extremity of griefe he prevented execution. But as for King Richard, and Edmund Mortimer Earle of March, enough was spoken by the Bishop in both their behalfes, to undoe them both: and indeed, K. Richard was soone after made away; the Earle secured himselfe by retiring farre off, to his Lordship of Wigmore: avoyding the danger of Contention, by not entring the Lists of Aspiring: But although the Divine Providence, for causes hidden from humane knowledge, gave way at this time to the advancement of the younger, the House of Lancaster; yet in the third Generation after, the elder, the House of Clarence recovered its Right, in K. Edwa the Fourth; that we may know, it is but staying the leisure of Heaven, for every one to have his Right, either in Person, or by Proxie. But whether incited by this speech of the Bishop, or otherwise out of the ranur of envy is some, and malice in others; it was not long after, before there grew in the mindes of many both Lords and other, a malignant inclination towards King Henry; and came first to be a Conspiracie in the house of the Abbot of Westminster. This Abbot was a kinde of Booke-statesman, but better read in the Politicks of Aristotle then of Solomon; who remembring some words of King Henry, which he had spoken long before, when he was but Earle of Darby; That Princes had too little, and Re∣ligious men too much: and fearing, lest being now king, he should reduce his words into act, he thought it better to use preventing Physick before-hand, then to stad to the hazard of a curing afterward: and thereupon invited to his house the dis∣contented Lords s namely, Iohn Holland Duke of Exceter, Thomas Holland hi brothers sonne, Duke of Surry, Edward Duke of Amerle, Iohn Montacute Earle of
Slisbury, Hugh Spenser Earle of Glocester, Iohn Bishop of Carlile, Sir Thomas Blunt, and Malin one of King Richards Chappell: who after dinner conferring together, and communicationg their spleenes against King Henry one with another; they re∣solved at last, both to take away the Kings life, and of the way how to doe it. The device was this: They would publish a solemne Justs to beolden at Oxford, at a day appointed, and invite the King to honor it with his presence; and there, in the time of acting the Justs, when all mens intentions should be otherwise busied, they would have him be murthered. This device was resolved on; Oaths for secrecy were tken; and Indentures sextipartite for performing conditions agreed upon between them, sealed and delivered: The Justs are proclaimed; the King is invited, and pro∣miseth to come; secrecie of all hands kept most firmly to the very day: But though all other kept counsell, yet Fortune would not, but she discovered all; For it for∣tuned, that as the Duke of Aumerle was riding to the Lords at Oxford, against the day appointed, he tooke it in his way to goe visit his father the Duke of Yorke; and having in his bosome the Indenture of Confederacy, his father, as they sate at din∣ner, chanced to spy it, and asked what it was? to whom his sonne answering, It was nothing that any way concerned him; By S. George, saith his father, but I will see it: and there withall snatching it from him, read it; and finding the Contents, and reviling his sonne for being now the second time a Traitour, before to King Richard, and now to King Henry, he commanded his horses to be instantly made ready, and with all the speed he could make, rode to Windsor, where the King then lay: but the younger yeeres of his sonne out-rid him, and came to the Court be∣fore him; where locking the Gates, and taking the keyes from the Poter, preten∣ding some speciall reason, he went up to the King, and falling on his knees, sked his Pardon. The king demanding, for what offence? he then discovered the whole Plot: which he had scarce done, when his father came rapping at the Court-gates, and comming to the king, shewed him the Indenture of Confederacy which he hd taken from his sonne. This, though i amazed the king, yet it informed him of the truth of the matter, whereof he was before doubtfull; and thereupon layes aside his journey to see the Justings of others in jest, and takes care that he be not justled in earnest out of his Throne himselfe. In the meane time, the confederate Lords being ready at Oxford, and hearing nothing of the Duke of Aumerle, nor seeing any preparation for the kings comming, were certainly perswaded that their Treason ws discovered: Whereupon falling into consideration of the case they were in, they found there was no place left for them of Mercy, and therfore were to stand upon their Guard, and provide the best they could for their safety: To which pur∣pose, the first thing they did was to apparell Magdalen in Princely robes, a man as like to king Richard in countenance and pesonage, as one man lightly can be to an∣other; and to give forth that he was king Richard escaped out of Prison, thereby to countenance their proceedings: The next thing was to dispatch mesenger to the king of France, and require his assistance. This done, they set forward in Battell-array towards Windsor, against king Henry; but finding him gone to London before they came, they then deliberate what course to take: Some advised to set K. Richard at liberty, before their counterfeit Richard should be discovered: Others hought best to follow the king to London, and set upon him unprovided, and befoe he had gthered Forces. In this division of Advises, when they could not doe both, they did neither; but as men amazed, mached on, though they knew not well whther, till they came to Colbrooke; by which time the king had gathered an Army of twenty thousand, and was marching towards them: but they not thinking so well of their cse, that they durst put it to the tryall of a battell; or perhaps staying for ayde out of France; withdrew themselves back to Sunnings neere to Reading, where the young Queen lay to whom their comming gave some flashes of comfort, but quenched before they were throughly kindled: and from thence they march to Cicester; where the Duke of Surry and the Earle of Salisbury oke up their lodging in one Inne; the Duke of Exceter and the Earle of Glocester in anoth: And now a strange Accident, beyond the reach of all consultation, gave a period to their Designe;
for who would thinke that a private company durst oppose those Lords having their Army so neere them? yet the Bailiffe of the Towne, upon intelligence (no doubt) that these Lords were up in Arme against the King, taking with him a company of Townsmen, in the night assaulted the Inne where the Duke of Surry and the Earle of Salisury lay; who thus assaulted, made shift to defend themselve till three a clock in the afternoone; but then, being in danger to be taken, a Priest, one of their company, set divers houses in the Towne on fie, thinking thereby to divert the Assailants from prosecuting the Lords, to save their houses: but this in∣flamed them the more; and so hotly they pursued their asault, that they wounded the Duke and the Earle to death; who dying that night; their heads were stricken off, and sent up to London. With them also were taken, Sir Bennet Shelley, Sir Barnard Brocas, Sir Thomas Blunt, and eight and twenty other Lords, Knights and Gentle∣men; who were sent to Oxford, where the King then lay, and there were put to exe∣cution. The Duke of Exceter in the other Inne, hearing of this assault, fled out of the backside towards the Campe, intending to bring the whole Army to the rescue but the souldiers having heard a clamour, and seeing fire in the Towne, supposing the King had been come with all his Forces, out of a sodaine feare dispersed them selves and fled; which the Duke seeing, he also, with Sir Iohn Shelley, fled into Essex, where wandring and lurking in secret places, he was at last apprehended as he sate at supper in a friends house, and led to Plashey, and there shortly after beheaded; the place, where by his counsell and countenance, the Duke of Glocester formerly had been apprehended: that we may observe, how the Divine Providence, in revenging of injuries, takes notice, and makes use of the very circumstance of place where the injuries are one. The Earle of Glocester fled towards Wales, but was taken, and beheaded at Bristow. Magdalen the counterfeit king Richard, was apprehended and brought to the Tower, and afterward hanged and quartered; with Mr. Fereby, an∣other of king Richards Chaplaines. Divers other Lords, and Knights, and Gentle∣men, and a great number of meane persons, were in other places put to death; that so much Noble blood, at one time, and for one cause, hath scarce been heard or read of. The Abbot of Westminster, in whose house the Plot was contrived, hearing of these misfortunes, as he was going between the Monastery and his Mansion, fell sud∣denly into a Palsie, and shortly after, without speech, ended his life. About this time also, a strange peece of Treason is reported to have been practised against the kings life: that there was found in his bed-cloaths an Iron with three sharpe pikes standing upright; that when the king should have layd him downe, he might have thrust himselfe upon them. But seeing there is no farther mention of inquiring after it; it seemes to have been but an idle rumour not worth beleeving. But now that the hot English blood was well allayed, the Welch blood springs up as hot: For now, Owen Glendour an Esquire of Wales, brought up at the Innes of Court in London; partly out of a desire to revenge a wrong done him (as he con∣ceived) in a suit for lands in controversie between the Lord Grey of Ruthin and him, but chiefly out of an humour of aspiring, endeavored to draw the Welchmen to a generall defection, telling them, That the English being at variance amongst them∣selves, now was the time to shake off their yoake, and to resume their owne antient Lawes and Customes. To whose perswasions the Welchmen hearkening, made him their king and Captaine; and he having gotten a competent Army, sets first upon his old Adversry eyold Lord Grey of Ruthin, and takes him Prisoner; yet with promie of Releasement, if he would marry his daughte; which offer, though the Lord Grey at first not onely refused, but scorned, yet out of necessity at last he was contented to accept; when notwithstanding, his deceitfull father in Law trifled out the time of his enlargement, till he dyed. But the Welchmen growing confident upon this successe, breake into the borders of Herefordshire, making spoyle and prey of the Country as freely as if they had leave to doe it; for indeed none opposed them but onely the Lord Ednd Mortimer, who had formerly withdrawne himselfe to his Castle at Wigmore; an he having assembled the Forces of the Country, and joyning bttell with them, was taken Prisoner, and then fettered, and cast into a deepe and
vile Dungeon. It was thought if Glendour had as well known how to use his victory, as to get it; he might at this time have put the English yoak into a great hazrd to be shaken off: but he having killed a thousand of the English, thought he had done for that time, and so giving over the pursuit, retired. The inhumanity of the Welsh women was here memorable, who fell upon the dead carkasses of the English, first stripping them, and then cutting off their privie parts, and noses; whereof the oe they thrust into their mouthes, the other they pressed between their buttock. Many noble men, specially his kinsmen the Percies, sollicited King Henry to deliver Mortimer; but the King was deafe of that eare, he could rather have wished both him and his two Sisters in heaven, for then he should be free from conceal'd com∣petitours. These affronts were at this time suffered in the Welch, because the King was now employed in a more dangerous service with the Scots; for they taking advantage of the distraction in the kingdome (as it was alwayes their custome to do) had made an In-rode into the County of Northumberland, and suddeny one night set upon the Castle of Werke; tooke and spoiled it, and then returned. In revenge wherof, the English invaded and spoiled certain Islands of the Orknys: Then the Scots set forth a Fleet, under the conduct of Sir Robert Logon; but before he came to any action, he was encountred, and the greatest part of his Fleet taken. But these were but such affronts, as often happen between troublesome neighbours; for all this while the Peace was still in being between the Nations, but at last it brake out into an open warre upon this occasion: Robert King of Scots had offered to match his Son David with a Dughter of Geoge Earle of Dunbarre, and had received money of him in part of her portion; and afterward would neither suffer the March to proceed, nor yet pay back the money; but married his Son to a Daughter of Archibold Earle of Dglasse: Upon which indignity, George of Dunbarre flyes into England to king Henry; and with his ayd makes divers incursions into Scoland: Whereupon Rober king of Scots sent to king Henry, that if he would have the Truce between them to continue, he should deliver to him George of Dunbarre. King Henry answered, that he had given him a safe conduct, and could not now recall it with his Honor; but as for continuing the Truce, king Robert might do in that what he thought best Upon this answer, the king of Scots presently proclaimed warre against him; But king Henry as ready in that matter as he, stayed not for king Roberts invading of England; but himselfe with a puissant Army invaded Scotland, burning Castles, and Cities, and not sparing Churches, and Religious Houses. About the end of Sep∣tember, he besieged the Castle of Maydens in Edenbourgh, where Prince David, and the Earle Dowglasse were: At which time, Robert Duke of Albanye, who in the king of Scots sicknesse managed the businesse, sent an Herald to king Henry, protesting upon his honor, that if he would stay but six dayes, he would give him battell. K. Henry rewarded the Herald, and stayed; but six times six dayes passed, but neither Duke of Albany, nor any other for him appeared. And now winter came on, Vi∣ctualls grew scant, and which was worst, a mortality began in the Englsh Campe; For which causes, king Henry removed his Siege, and retuned it England. As soone as he was gone, sir Patrick Hebborne a Scottishman, having a good opinion of his valour, thought to do great matters; and with a competent Army of the men of Lgh-deane, he invaded Northumberland, making great spoile, and loading his Souldiers with prey, and prisoners; but in the Retreit, marching loosely and licentious∣ly, was set upon by the Earle of Northumberland Vice-warden, at a Towne called Neshye; where Hebborne himselfe, and all the floure of Lugh-deane were flaine; sir Iohn and William Cockburne, sir William Busse, Iohn and Thomas Hablington Esqires and a multitude of common Souldiers taken prisoners. On the Englsh part few slin and none of any ranke or quality: In revenge whereof, Archibold Dowglasse with an Army of twenty thousand entred Northumberland; but at a place called Homldon, were encountred by the English, under the leading of Henry Lord Percye, sirnamed Hospue, and George Earle of March, who put them to light; and after the slauh∣ter of ten thousand of them, tooke five hundred prisoners; whereof the chieft
were Mordack Earle of Fife, (sonne of the Generall, who in the fight lost one of his eyes) Thomas Earle of Murrey, Robert Earle of Agus, the Earls of Atholl and Menli and amongst the slaine, were Sir Iohn Swinton, Sir Adam Gourdon, Sir Iohn Leviston, Sir Alexander Ramsey, and three and twenty other knights. In this meane time, Glendour of Wales had solicited the king of France for ayde, who sent him twelve hundred men of quality, but the windes were so contrary, that they lost twelve of their ships, and the rest returned home. The English, de∣riding this ill successe of the French, so exasperated the French-king, that present∣ly after he sent twelve thousand, who landed safely, and joyned with the Welch; but as soone as they heard of the English armies approach, whether mistrusting their own strength, or suspecting the Welch-mens faithfullnesse, they ran to their ships and disgracefully went home. King Henry's Ambassadors lately sent into Britaine to fetch the Lady Iane de Na∣varre Dutchesse of Britiane, the relict of Iohn de Montford sirnamed the Conquerour with whom the king by Procurators had contracted Matrimony; in the beginning of February returned with her in safety: The king met her at Winchester, where the seventh of February the marriage was solemnized. About this time some affronts were offered by the French: Valerian Earle of S. Paul, with seventeene hundred men, landed in the Isle of Wight, where hee burnt two Villages and some few Cottages; but hearing the people of the Island to have assembled, hee made haste to his ships, and returned home. Also Iohn Earle of Clermont (the heire of Bourbon) won from the English the Castles of S. Peter, S. Mary, and the New-Castle: The Lord de la Brett, won the Castle of Calin; places of great consequence to the English. And now to make k. Henry sensible that a Crown can hardly ever sit easie upon the head, if it be not set on right at first; a new Conspiracy is hatching against him: The Percies, Earls of Northumberland and Worcester, with Henry Hotspur, began about thi time to fall off from king Henry; their reason was, First, because the king at their request refused to redeeme their kinsman Mortimer from Glendours slavery; and then because he denied them the benefit of such prisoners as they had taken of the Scots, at Homildon or Nshye: whereupon they went of themselves, and procured Mortimer's delivery, and then entred into a League offensive and defensive with Glendour, and by their Proxies, in the house of the Arch-deacon of Bangor, they agreed upon a Tripartite Indenture under their hands and seales, to divide the kingdome into three parts; whereby all England from Sever and Trent, South and Eastward, was assigned for the portion of the Earle of March: All Wales and the Lands beyond Se∣ver VVestward, were assigned to Owen Glendour: And all the remainder of land from Trent Northward, to bee the portion of the Lord Percy. In this, as Glendour perswaded them, they thought they should accomplish a Prophesie; as though king Henry were the Mouldwarp cursed of Gods own mouth; & they three were the Lyon the Dragon and the Wolfe which should divide the Land among them. In this meane time king Henry, not acquainted with this Conspiracy, caused a Proclama∣tion to bee made, intimating that the Earle of March had voluntarily caused himself to bee taken prisoner, to the end, the Rebels having him in their custody, might pretend some colour for their Conspiracy; and therefore hee had small reason to take care for his deliverance. Hereupon the Percies assisted with a company of Scots, and drawing to their party the Earle of Stafford, and Richard Scroope Arch∣bishop of Yorke and many other, purposed to joyne with the Captain of the Welch, but first they framed certaine Articles against the king, and sent them to him in writing. That hee had falsified his Oath given at his landing, swearing that he came but only to recover his Inheritance, and would not meddle with the King, or with the Crowne. That most trayterously hee had taken Armes against his Sove∣raigne Lord, Imprisoned him, and then most barbarouusly caused him to be mur∣thered. That ever since the death of king ichard, he had unjustly kept the Crown from his kinsman Edmund Mrtimer Earl of March, to whom of right it belonged. That upon no occasion, hee had imposed divers Taxes upon the people. That by
his Letters hee procured Burgesses and Knights of the Parliament to bee chosen; for which causes and many other, they defyed him, and vowed his destruction, and the restoring of the Earle of March to his right. King Henry could not but know that all these Articles against him were true, yet seeing the knowing it hindred him not from seeking to get the Crowne when hee had it not; it could lesse hinder him from seeking to keep it now that he had it; and if he were able, being a private man, to get it from a King, he was likely to bee more able, being now a king, to keepe it from privat men; and as for any objections that Conscience could make, he had enough to answere them all: For, if his Title were good against king Richard, by his Re∣signation, it was as good against Mortimer by his swearing Allegiance; and upon these grounds, with a minde as confident as if all cyrcumstances were of his side, he raysed an Army, and marched towards the Lords, taking care they might by no meanes joyne with the Welch; and about Shrewsbury, on Saturday S. Mary Magda∣lens Eve, hee encountred them, in which fight though the Scots and Henry Hotspur shewed much valour, yet the victory rested on the kings side; Hotspur himselfe was slayne, the Earle of Worcester was taken prisoner, together with Sir Richard Ver∣non, Sir Theobald Trussel, the Baron of Kinderton; and the rest fled. On the kings part (besides the Earle of Stafford, who had that morning revolted from the Con∣spirators) were slaine Sir Hugh Sherley, Sir Iohn Clifton Sir Iohn Cockayn, Sir Ni∣cholas Gausell, Sir Walter Blunt, Sir Iohn Calverley, Sir Iohn Massie of Puddingtr, Sir Hugh Mortimer and Sir Robert Gausell, all which had beene but that morning dubbed knights, with Sir Thomas Wendsley, who died afterwards of his wounds; of common Souldiers about sixteene hundred, but of the Conspirators above six thousand, whereof 36 the king slew with his own hand, but was once unhorsed by Dowglasse, who in his presence slew Sir Walter Blunt, with divers others, that day in all things attired like to the king; for which exployt, Dowglasse (being after by the fall of his horse taken prisoner) was by the kings command, carefully attended, and without Ransom set at liberty: In this batttell, the young Prince Henry, though wounded in the face with an Arrow, yet was not wounded in his courage, but conti∣nued fighting still. After this victory the king caused publique thanks to bee given to God, and then caused the Earle of Worcester to bee beheaded, and many others of that Rebellion to bee drawne hanged and quartered, and their heads placed on Lon∣don Bridge: And then the king sent his sonne Henry Prince of Wales, with his whole Army into that Country; but before his comming, Owen Glendour was abandoned by all his Company, and lurking in the woods was there famished; many of his as∣sociats were taken and put to death. Whilest the Prince was in Wales, Henry Percy Earle of Northumberland, of his own accord, came and submitted himselfe to the king, protesting his innocency, a not being once acquainted with any intent of Treason and Rebellion; whose excuse the king received for the present with gen∣tle language, the rather for that hee had the possession of Barwick Castle and o∣ther places of strength in his power, but yet he wiped not off the score of his misde∣meanors out of his minde. And now with the fourth yeere of his Reigne ended all the great Troubles of this k. Henry the fourth: those that follow are but such accidents as are frequent in all times both abroad and at home. The Britans under the leading of the Lord of Castiles, spoyled the Towne of Plimouth; In revenge whereof, the Western-men, under the command of William Wilford, set forth  Fleete, which arriving in Britaine, tooke forty ships laden with Oyle and Wines, and burnt forty more. Againe the French landed a thousand men in the Isle of Wight where they got together a great booty of Cattell, but the Islanders comming upon them tooke away their booty, and made many of them leave their Carkases for a booty to the sland. Yet the French would not leave so, but a while after, as having gotten new spirits, they cast Anchor before the Isle of Wight, and require no lesse then to have the Island in∣to their possession, but a resolute answere of the Islanders frighted them away, and made them glad they were gone. Soone after this the Duke of Orleance, brother to the French king, in a vaunting stile, sent a challenge to king Henry to meete him
in the field, each of them to have a hundred in his Company; to which the king an∣swered, That for his own valour it had sufficiently been tryed, and for this challenge of the Dukes, neither the Person nor the Cause were worthy of his undertaking. Upon this refusall of the kings, divers taunts and jeeres were bandied beweene them, till at last the Duke, in great passion, falls upon Vergie a Towne in Guyen, but after three moneths assaulting it, being valiantly defended by Sir Robert Anfield and three hundred Englishmen, he was glad to give over with losse, and returne into France. Presently upon this, the Admirall of Britaine, accompanied with the Lord du Castile, and thirty saile of ships, attempted to land at Dertmouth in Devon∣shire, but were repelled, and the Lord du Castile, and two of his brothers, and foure hundred of his men were slaine, besides two hundred taken Prisoners; of whom, the Lord Baquevile Marshall of Britaine, was one. After this, five hundred men of armes, five hundred Crosse-bowes, and a thousand Flemmings, under the conduct of the Earle of S. Paul, laid siege to the Castle of Mark, three leagues frm Cllice; but first by Sir Philip Hall Captaine of Callice, and after by Sir Richard Aston Lieutenant of the English pale, they were forced to retire and flye: The Earle of S. Paul esca∣ped to S. Omers, but left many of his men of quality behind him, and more taken Prisoners. After this, Thomas Duke of Clarence, the Kings second sonne, and the Earle of Kent, with competent Forces entred the Haven of Sluce, where they burnt foure ships riding at anchour, and then returned to the reliefe of Callis, besieged at that time by the French; and in the way tooke three Carricks of Gnoua richly la∣den, and brought them into the Chamber of Rye. And these were the troubles of this King abroad: But now at home, the Reliques of the former Northerne Re∣bellion began to revive; for now, Henry Percy Earle of Northumberland, Richard Scroope Archbishop of Yorke, Thomas Mowbray Earle Marshall, the Lords, Hastings, Fawconbridge, and Bardolfe, with divers others, conspired, at a time appointed, to meet upon Yorkswould-Downes, and there to bid defiance to king Henry. Articles of Grievances were framed, and set up in all publick places, which drew multitudes to be partakers of the enterprize. But now, Ralph Nevill Earle of Westmeland, with the Lord Iohn the Kings third sonne, the Lords Henry Fitz-Hughes, Ralph Evers, and Robert Vmphrevile, make head against them; and comming into a Plaine in the For∣rests of Galltree, they sate down right against the Archbishop and his Forces, which were twenty thousand; and Westmerland perceiving the Enemies forces to be farre more than theirs, he used this policie: he sent to the Archbishop, demanding the reason why he would raise Forces against the king? who answering, that his Armes were not against the king, but for his owne defence, whom the king, upon the in∣stigation of Sycophants, had threatned; withall he sent him a scrowle of their grie∣vances, which Westmerland read, and seemed to approve, and thereupon desired a conference with him: The Archbishop more credulous then wise, perswaded the Earle Marshall to goe with him to the place appointed to conferre: the Articles are read and allowed of; and thereupon Westmerland seeming to commiserate the soul∣diers having beene in armour all day, and weary, wished the Archbishop to ac∣quaint his Party, as he would his, with this their mutuall agreement; and so shaking hands, in most Courtly friendship dranke unto him; whereupon the souldiers were willed to disband, and repaire home: which they had no sooner done, but a Trop of horse, which in a colourable manner had made a shew to depart, wheeled about, and afterwards returned; and being come in ight, the Earle of Westmerland arrested both the Arcbishop and the Earle Marshall, and brought them both Prisoners to the king at Pofret; who passing from thence to York, the Prisoners likewise were car∣ried thither, and the next day both of them beheaded. At Durham, the Lords Ha∣stings and Fwconbridge, with two knights, were executed. Northumberland, with the Lord Bardolfe, fled first to Barwick, and after into Scotland, where they were entertained by David Lord Flemming: whereupon the king gave summons to the Castle of Barwick, which at first they refused to obey, but upon the planting and discharging of a Piece, they presently yeelded without composition: and here William Greystock, Henry Baynton, and Iohn Blinknsop, knights, and five other were
presently put to execution, and many others committed to severall Prisons. About this time, Iames sonne and heire of Robert king of Scotland, a childe of nine yeares old, attended by the Earle of Orkney, as he was sailing into France, was taken by cer∣taine Mariners of Norfolk, who brought him to the King at Windsor, the 30. of March, 1408. and the King sent them to the Tower of London. Northumberland and Bardolfe, after they had been in Wales, France, and Flanders, to raise a Power against King Henry, returned back into Scotland, and after a yeere with a great Power of Scots entred England, and came into Yorkshire, making great spoyle and waste as they passed: but Sir Thomas Rokesby Sheriffe of Yorke, levying the forces of the County, upon Bramham-moore gave them battell; in which Nor∣thumberland was slaine, Bardolfe taken, but wounded to death, and the rest put to flight. About this time also, Sir Robert Vmphrevile Vice-admirall of England, with ten men of warre entred Scotland, burnt their Gallyt, and many other ships over against Lieth, and brought away with him fourteen tall ships laden with corne and other staple commodities, which at his returne he sent into the Markets round a∣bout, and thereby brought down the prizes of all things, and purchased to himselfe the name of Mend-market. The Prince had been a Student In Queenes Colledge in Oxford, under the tuition of his Unkle Henry Beaufort, Chancellor of that University, afterwards Bishop of Lincole and Winchester, and lastly made a Cardinall, by the title of Eusebius. From Oxford, the Prince was called to Court, and the Lord Thomas Percy Earle of Worcester was made his Governour: but comming afterward to be at his owne disposing, whe∣ther being by nature valorous, and not yet well stayed by time and experience; o whether incited by ill companions, and emboldened by the opinion of his owne greatnesse; he ranne into many courses so unworthy of a Prince, that it was much doubted what he would prove when he came to be Prince. Once, it is said, he lay in wait for the Receivers of his fathers Rents, and in the person of a Thiefe set upon them and robbed them. Another time, when one of his companions was arraigned for felony before the Lord Chiefe Justice, he went to the Kings Bench barre, and offered to take the Prisoner away by force; but being withstood by the Lord Chiefe Justice, he stepped to him, and struck him over the face: whereat the Judge nothing abashed, rose up and told him, that he did not this affront to him, but to the King his father, in whose place he sate; and therefore to make him know his fault, he commanded him to be committed to the Fleete. You would have wondred to see how calme the Prince was in his own cause, who in the cause of his companion had been so violent: for he quietly obeyed the Judges sentence, and suffered himselfe to be led to Prison. This passage was not a little pleasing to the King, to thinke that he had a Judge of such courage, and a Sonne of such submission: but yet for these and such other pranks, he removed him from being President of the Councell, and placed in it his third sonne Iohn. This made the Prince so sensible of his fathers dis∣pleasure, that he thought it necessary to seek by al means to recover his ood opinion; which he endeavored to doe by a way as strange as that by which he lost it: for, at∣tiring himselfe in a garment of blew Sattin, wrought all with Eylet-holes of black silke, at every hole the needle hanging by which it was sowed, and about his arme a thing in fashion of a hounds collar, studded with SS. of gold, he came to the Court at Westminster: to whom, the King (though not well in health) caused him∣selfe, in a Chaire, to be brought into his Privy Chamber; where, in presence of but three of foure of his Privy Councell, he demanded of the Prince the cause of his un∣wonted habit and comming? who answered, That being not onely his subject but his sonne, and a sonne so tenderly alwayes regarded by him, he were worthy of a thousand deaths, if he should intend or but imagine the least offence to his sacred Majestie, and therefore had fitted himselfe to be made a sacrifice; and therewithall reached his dagger, holding it by the point to his father, For (said he) I desire not to live longer, than I may be thought to be, what I am and shall ever be, Your faith∣full and obedient Vassall. With this or the like Answer, the King was so moved, that he fell upon his sonnes neck, and with many teares imbracing him, confessed
that his ears had been too open to receive reports against him, and promising faith∣fully, that from thenceforth no reports should cause any disaffection towards him The king about this time, made his Son Iohn Duke of Bedford, and his Son Humphe Duke of Glocester; he made also sir Thomas Beauford Earle of Dorset, and the Earle of Arundel he created Duke of Yorke. The rest of king Henries dayes, from this time forward, being scarce a year, was free from all trouble both abroad and at home; unlesse perhaps he might be troubled in minde: for having shed so much English and Noblebloud; for expiation where∣of, or else to the end he might joyne Valour and Devotion in one action together, which hitherto he but used singly; he tooke upon him the Crusado, and at a Coun∣cell in White-Friars, order was taken, and great preparation was made for his jour∣ney to Ierusalem: But it was otherwise Decreed in Heaven; and yet not so other∣wise, but that he ended his life in Ierusalem, as shall be shewed hereafter. Of his Taxations. IN the very begining of his Reigne, it might passe instead of a Taxation, that he found in king Richards Coffers, in money and jewells, to the value of seven hun∣dred thousand pounds. In his fourth yeare, an extraordinary Subsidie was gran∣ted him; Twenty shillings of every knights Fee, and of every one that had twenty shillings a yeare in land, twelve pence and upward, according to that rate; and of every one that had twenty pounds in goods, twelve pence, and upward according to that rate; but with this caution and protestation, that it should not hereafter be drawn for a President, and that no Record thereof should be made. In his sixth yeare, the Clergie granted to the king a Tenth. In his seventh yeare, the Clergie granted a Tenth and a halfe, and the Commons two Fifteens. In a Parliament holden the ninth yeare of his Reigne, the king moved to have allowed him in every yeare wherein there was no Parliament kept a Tenth of the Clergy, and a Fifteenth of the Layity; to which demands the Bishops assented, but the Commons would not. In his seventh yeare, a Parliament began which lasted almost a whole yeare, in which a Subsidie was at last granted; so sharpe, that even Priests and Friers who lived of Alms, were forced every one to pay a noble. Of Lawes and Ordinances made in his time. IN this kings dayes, burning and execution by fire for controversies in Religion was first put in practise. Also in the first yeare of his Reigne an Act was made, that no person of what de∣gree soever, should after that day alleadge for his excuse, any constraint or coacting of his Prince for doing of any unlawfull act; and that such excuse after that day, should stand him in no stead. Also an Act was made, that no Lord, nor other, might give any Liveries to any but their houshold and meniall servants. In his twelveth yeare, the king caused a new coyne of Nobles to be made, which was of lesse value than the old Noble, by foure pence. Also that all Rypiers, and other Fishers from any of the Sea-coasts, should sell their fish in Cornhill and Cheapside themselves, and not to Fishmongers that would buy it to sell againe. Also this king instituted the Dutchie Court, which he did in honor of the House of Lancaster; to the end, the Lands belonging to that Dutchie, might in all follow∣ing times be distinguisht and known from the Lands of the Crown. In his sixt year, the king called a Parliament at Coventry, and sent Processe to the Sheriffes, that they should chuse no knights nor Burgesses, that had any knowledge in the Lawes of the Realm; by reason whereof, it was called the Lay-mens Parliament. In his seventh yeare, the Major of London for preservation of fish; obtained, that all Weres which
stood between London and seven miles beyond Kingstone; as also, such as stood be∣tweene London and Gravesend, should be pulled up and taken away. Affaires of the Church in his time. BY reason of discord between Iohn of Gaunt, and Wickham Bishop of Winchester; the Bishop either in durance, could not, or in feare durst not come to the Par∣liament House, at a time when the King required a supply of money; but the Cler∣gie unanimously affirming, that without their brother, the Bishop of Winchesters presence, they neither can nor will consult of any thing he is presently sent for, and by the King secured. After this, the King called a Parliament at Coventry, and sent Processe to the Sheriffs that they should chuse no knights or Burgesses that were Lawyers, and was therefore called the Laymens Parliament: And shortly after an∣other Parliament was called, and named the unlearned Parliament, either for the unlearnednesse of the persons, or for their malice to learned men; In which the Commons presented a Petition to the King and the upper House; desiring that the king might have the Temporall Possessions of the Bishops and Clergie; the value whereof, they pretended wou'd be sufficient maintenance for a hundred and fifty Earls, one thousand five hundred knights, six thousand two hundred Esquires, and a hundred Hospitals for maymed Souldiers. They craved likewise, that Clerks convict should not be delivered to the Bishops prison; and that the Statute made in the second yeare of the king against Lollards, might be Repealed. But the king de∣nied their Petition; and in Person commanded them from thenceforth, not to pre∣sume to trouble their brains about any such businesse, for he was resolved to leave the Church in as good state as he found it. In the twelveth yeare of his Reigne, certain learned men in Oxford, and other places, in their Sermons maintained the opinions of Wickliffe; but the Bishops and Doctors of the University, inhibited and condemned them. In his time was a great Schisme in the Church, by reason of two Anti-Popes; but afterwards in an assembly of Cardinalls and Bishops, a third man was elected, named Alexander the fifth, who had been trained up at Oxford. Works of Piety in his time. KING Henry Fownded a Colledge at Battlefield in Shropshire, where he over∣came the Lord Henry Percy. In his third yeare, the Conduit upon Cornhill was begun to be built. Also in his time Sir Robert Knolls made the Stone bridge of Ro∣chester in Kent; and founded in the Town of Pomfret a Colledge, and an Hospitall; he also re-edified the body of the White-Friers Church in Fleetstreet, where he was afterward buried: Which Church was first founded by the Ancestours of the Lord Grey of Codnor. In the eighth yeare of his Reigne, Richard Whittington Major of London, erected a house or Church in London, to be a house of Prayer, and named it after his own name, Whittington Colledge; with lodgings, and weekly allowance for divers poore people. He also builded the Gate of London, called Newgate, in the yeare 1420, which was before a most loathsome prison: He builded also more than halfe of St. Bartholmews Hospitall in West-Smithfield, and the beautifull Library in the Gray Friars in London now called Christs Hospitall: He also builded a great part of the east end of Guildhall, and a Chappell adjoyning to it, with a Library of stone, for the custodie of the Records of the Citie. But he that exceeded all at this time in works of Piety, was William Wickham Bishop of Winchester; his first worke was the building of a Chappell at Tychfield, where his Father, Mother, and Sister Perrt was buried: Next, he founded at Southwick in Hampshire, neere the Towne of Wickham, the place of his birth, as a supplement to the Priorie of Soutwicke; a Chauntry, with allowance for five Priests for ever: He bestowed twenty thousand marks in repairing the houses belonging to the Bishopricke; he discharged out f Prison in all places of his Diocesse, all such poore prisoners as lay in execution for debt, under twenty pounds: he amended all the high-wayes from Winchester to
London, on both sides the River. After all this, on he fifth of March 1379, he be∣gan to lay the foundation of that magnificent Structure in Oxford, called New-Col∣ledge, and in person layd the first stone thereof; in which place before, there stood Naetius-Colledge, built by Alver, at Ntius intreaty; and for the affinity of the name, came to be called New-Colledge. In the yeare 1387, on the 26 of March, he like∣wise in person layd the first stone of the like foundation in Winchester, and dedica the same, as that other in Oxford, to the memory of the Virgin Mary. The Grocer in London purchased their Hall in Cuyhope Lane for 320 marks; and then layd th foundation thereof on the tenth of May. King Henry founded the Colledge of F∣ringhey in Northamptoshire; to which King Hery the fifth gave land of the Prio∣ries of Monkes Aliens, by him suppressed. Iohn Gower the famous Poet, new builded a great part of St. Mary Overyes Church in Southrke, where he lyes buried. In the second yeare of this king, a new mar∣ket in the Poultry, called the Stocks, was builded for the free sale of Forreign Fish∣mongers and Butchers. In his twelveth yeare, the Guildhall of London was begun to be new Edified; and of a little Cottage, made a goodly house, as now it is. Casualties happening in his time. IN his third yeare, in the Moneth of March, appeared a Blazing-starre; first be∣twixt the East and the North, and then sending forth fiery beams towards the North; foreshewing perhaps the effusion of bloud that followed after, in Wales and Northumberland. In the same yeare, at Danbury in Essex, the Devill appeared in likenesse of a Gray-Frier; who entring the Church, put the people in great fear, and the same houre, with a tempest of Whirlewinde and Thunder, the top of the steeple was broken down, and halfe the Chancell scattered abroad. In his seventh yere, such abundance of water brake suddenly over the Banks in Kent, that it drow∣ned Cattell without number. Also this yeare, the Town of Reystone in Hartford∣shire was burnt. In his ninth yeare was so sharpe a winter, and such abundanc of snow; continuing December, Ianuary, February, and March, that almost all small Birds died through hunger. Of his Wives and Children. HE had two Wives, the first was Mary, one of the Daughters and heirs of Hm∣phrey de Boun Earle of Hereford, Essex, and Northampton; she died before he cme to the Crowne, in the yeare 1394. His second Wife was Ioane, Daughter to Charles the first king of Navarre, she being the widdow of Iohn de Montford surna∣med Streay, or the Conquerour, Duke of Brittaine; who dyed without any issue by king Henry, at Havering in Essex, the yeare 1437, in the fifteenth yeare of king Henry the sixth, and lyeth buried by her husband at Canterbury. He had foure Sons and two Daughters; Of his Sons, Henry his eldest was Prince of Wales, and after his Father, king of England. His second Son was Thomas Duke of Clarence, and Stew∣ard of England; who was slaine at Beaufort in Anjo, and dyed without issue. His third Son was Iohn Duke of Bedford; he married first with Anne Daughter to Iohn Duke of Burgundie; and secondly with Iacoba Daughter of Peter of Luxenbourgh, Earle of St. Paul, but dyed also without issue. His fourth Son was Humphry; by his brother king Henry the fifth created Duke of Gloucester, and was generally cal∣led the good Duke; he had two Wives, but dyed without issue, in the yeare 1446, and was buried at St. Albans; though the vulgar opinion be, that he lyes buried in St. Pauls Church. Of king Henry the fourths Daughters; Blanch the elder was married to Lewis Barbatus, Palatine of the Rhene, and Prince Elector: Philippe his younger Daughter, was married to Iohn king of Denmarke, and Norway.
Of his Personage and Conditions. COncerning his Body; he was of a middle stature, slender limbes, but well pro∣portioned. Concerning his Minde; of a serious and solid disposition, and one that stood more upon his own legges than any of his Predecessors had done: in cases of difficulty, not refusing, but not needing the advice of others; which might con∣firme, but not better his own. He was neither merry nor sad, but both: best pleas'd when he was opposed, because this was like to doe him good, by sharpening his in∣vention: most angry when he was flattered, because this was sure to doe him hurt, by dulling his judgement. No man ever more loved, nor lesse doted upon a wife, than he: a good husband, but not uxorious; that if there be reines to that Passion, we may know he had them. It may be thought, he affected the Crown, not so much out of Ambition as out of Compassion, because the oppresions of his Country he could not so well helpe being a Subject, as a King; for otherwise we may truly say, he was a loser by the Crowne, being not so great for a King, as he was before for a Subject: The Crowne rather was a gainer by him, which hath ever since been the richer for his wearing it. We may thinke he was either weary of his life, or longing for death; for why else would he take upon him the Crusado, having been told by a skilful Southsayer, that he should dye in Ierusalem? but it seemes, he did not be∣lieve him. Of his Death and Buriall. IN the fortysixth yeare of his Age, having Peace both at home and abroad, and being of too active a spirit to be idle, he tooke upon him the Crusado, and great provision was made for his journey to Ierusalem: but alas, his journey to Ierusalem required no such provision; for being at his prayers at S. Edwards shrine, he was suddenly taken with an Apoplexie, and thereupon removed to the Abbot of West∣minsters house; where recovering his senses, and finding himselfe in a strange place, he asked what place it was? and being told that he was in the Abbots house, in a Chamber called Ierusalem: Well then (said he) Lord have mercy upon me, for this is the Ierusalem where a Southsayer told me I should dye. And here he dyed indeed, on the 20. day of March, in the yeare 1413. when he had lived sixe and forty yeares, Reigned thirteen and a halfe. It is worth remembring, that all the time of his sick∣nesse, his will was to have his Crowne set upon his bolster by him; and one of his fits being so strong upon him, that all men thought him directly dead; the Prince comming in, tooke away the Crowne: when suddenly the king recovering his sen∣ses, missed his Crown; and asking for it, was told, the Prince had taken it: where∣upon the Prince being called, came back with the Crown, and kneeling down, said: Sir, to all our judgements, and to all our griefes, you seemed directly dead, and therefore I tooke the Crown as being my Right: but seeing to all our comforts, you live, I here deliver it much more joyfully than I tooke it, and pray God you may long live to weare it your selfe. Well (saith the king sighing) what right I had to it, God knowes. But (saith the Prince) if you dye king, my sword shall maiteine it to be my Right against all Opposers. Well (saith the king) I referre all to God: but I charge thee on my Blessing, that thou administer the Lawes indifferently, avoyd Flatterers, deferre not to do Justice, nor be sparing of Mercy: And then turning a∣bout, said, God blesse thee, and have mercy on me: and with those words, gave up the Ghost. His body with all Funerall pomp was conveyed to Canterbury, and there solemnly buried. Of men of Note in his time. OF men of Valour in his time, of whom there was great store, I shall need to say no more than what hath already been said in the body of the story: onely I cannot but remember Sir Robert Kolls, who borne of meane parentage, made him∣selfe famous over all Christendome; and dying at a Manour of his in Norfolk, was
brought to London, and buried in the Church of the White Fies in London, which himselfe had re-edified. But for men of learning, I must set in the first place, Wil∣liam Wickham, a man of no learning, yet well worhy t hold the place: In relating of whose life, I must have leave to expatiate a little. His fathers name was Iohn Long, or as some say, Perot; but as Campian proveth, Wickham; and not from the place of his dwelling, though he was Parish-Clerke of Wickham in Hampshire, where he taught children to write: in which quality his sonne William proved so excellent, that Nicolas Wooddall, Constable of Winchester Castle, tooke him from his faher, nd kept him at Schoole, first at Winchester, afterward at Oxford, till himselfe being made Surveyor-generall of the Kings works, he sent for this William to serve him as his Clerke; who in short time grew so expert in that imployment, that Adam Torleto Bshop of Wincheter, commended him to the King, who imployed him presently in surveying his Fortifications at Dover, and Quinborough Castles, and afterward made him Surveyor of his Buildings at Windsor Castle, and his houses of Henley and East-Hamstead. And here first, Envy rose up against him; for having caused to be engra∣ven on the stone of a wall in Windsor Castle, these words; This made William VVikham: some that envyed his rising, complained to the King of this insolencie, as arrogating to himselfe, that excellent piece of Building to de done at his charge: but VVickham called before the King about it, made answer, that his meaning wa not, neither by any indfferent construction could it import, that VVickham made that buiding, but that the same building made VVikham, as being a meanes of the Kings great favour towards him. This answer pacified the King, who tooke him daily more and more into his favour; and being now entred into the Ministery, was first made Parson of S. Martins in the Fields, then Minister of S. Martins le Grand. ferwards Archdeacon of Lincolne, Provost of VVells, and Rector of Manyhens in Devoshire; so as at one time he had in his hands so many Ecclesiasticall livings, that the value of them, in the Kings bookes, amounted to eight hundred seventy sixe pounds thirteen shillings: besides which, he was honored with many Temporall places of great profit and respect, as to be his principall Secretary, Keeper of the Privy Seale, Master of the Wards and Liveries, Treasurer of the Kings Revenues in France, and some other Offices. After which, the Bishoprick of VVinchester falling voyd, meanes was made to the King to bestow that place upon him: And here, the cond time, did Envy rise up against him, informing the King that he was a man of little or no learning, and no way sit for such a dignity: whereupon the King made stay of granting it: but when VVickham came before the King, and old him, that what he wanted in personall learning, he would supply with being a Founder of learning; This so satisfied the King, that he bestowed the place upon him. After this, he was made Lord Treasurer of England: and here the third time did Envy rise up against him; for the King requiring of his subjects a supply of money, It was answered, that he needed no other supply, than to call his Treasurer to accompt: This blow struck deepe upon the Bishop; for he was presently charged to give ac∣compt for eleven hundred ninety six thousand pounds; and whilst he was busie in preparing his account, all his Temporalties, upon importunity of Iohn of Gaunt. were seized into the Kings hands, and given to the Prince of VVales, and himself upon paine of the Kings displeasure, commanded not to come within twenty miles of the Court. In this case, he dismisseth his traine, and sendeth copies abroad of his accompt, if it might be received; but was hindred by the working of Iohn of Gaunt against him. Upon this ground (as was thought) Queen Philip wife to K. Edward the Third, upon her death-bed, by way of Confession, told VVikham, that Iohn of Gaunt was not the lawfull issue of king Edward, but a supposititious Son; for when she was brought to bed at Gaut, of a Daughter, knowing how desirous the King was to have a Son; she exchanged that daughter, with a Dutch woman, for a Boy whereof she had been delivered about the same time with the Queen. Thus much she confessed, and withall made the Bishop sweare, that if the said Iohn and Gaunt should at any time, either directly, or indirectly attempt the Crown; or that right∣fully, through want of issue, it should devolve unto him; that then he should disco∣ver
this matter, and make it known unto the King, and Councell. Afterward the Queen being dead, and the Bishop finding Iohn of Gaunt, as he thought, too much aspiring, he secretly told him this relation, and this adjuration of his supposed mo∣ther, advising him not to seeke higher than a private state; for else he was bound by oath to make it known to all the World: Thus far the Bishop did well; but when he saw the Son of Iohn of Gaunt not only aspiring, but possessed of the Crown, why did he not then discover it, and joyn at least with the Bishop of Calile, in op∣posing it? Certainly, we may know, that either the whole relation was but a Fable, or that Wickham was a Temporizer, or that Iohn of Gaunt was a most patient man, to suffer the affront of such an indignity, with lsse than the death of him that did it. But howsoever it was, it is certain, the Duke bore a mortall grudge to the Bi∣shop; who had no way to withstand such an enemy, but by making Alice Pierce his friend: by whose means, after two years, he was restored to all his livings; and af∣terward K. Edward being dead, and Alice Pierce banished; by the means of a greater friend than Alice Pierce (his full ourse) he obteined in the second year of k. Rich∣ard, a generall pardon under the Great Seale of England; and from that time for∣ward enjoyed a quiet life, and dyed in the fourth yeare of this King Henry the fourth, being then of the age of above 80 years, and lieth buried in the Church of St. Swi∣then in VVinchester, in a monument of his own making in his life time; leaving for his heire Thomas Perrot, the son of his sister Agnes, married to VVilliam Perrot. Another great example of the volubility of Fortune, in Professors of learning, was Roger VValden, who dyed in the ninth yeare of this King: he was at first a poor Scholler in Oxford; and the first step of his rising, was to be a Chaplain in the Col∣ledge there of St. Maries; from thence by degrees he got to be Dean of Yorke; and after this, a high step, to be Treasurer of England; and yet a higher after that, upn the banishment of Thomas Arundell, to be Archbishop of Canterbury: But bein now at the top, he came down again, for in this kings time, Thomas Arundell beig restored to the Archbishopricke, VValden was not only put out of hat place,  was called to accompt for the Treasureship: and though he shewed hi quietus est, yet all his Temporalties were seized, and his person imprisoned, till by the media∣tion of the now Archbishop Arundell, he was made Treasurer of Calice, and after promoted to be Bshop of London. The next place after these, is justly due to Geoffry Chucer, and Iohn Gower, two famous Poets in this time, and the Fathers of English Poets in all the times after: Chacer dyed in the fourth yeare of this king, and lyeth buried at VVestminster: Gower, in this kings ninth yeare, and was buried in St. Mary Overys Church in South∣warke. And now come others to be remembred, who lived and died in this kings time: Hugh Legate, born in Hartfordshire, a Monke of St. Albons, who wrote Scho∣lies upon Boetius de Consolatione. Nicholas Gorham, born also in Hartfordshire, a Dominick Frier, and the French kings Confessor, though an Englishman. VValte Disse, so called of a Town in Norfolke where he was borne, Confessor to the Duke of Lancaster. Lawrence Holbeck, a Monke of Ramsey, who wrote an Hebrew Di∣ctionary. Iohn Cotton Archbishop of Armagh: Richrd Scroope, brother to William Scroope Lord Treasurer of England, made Archbishop of Yorke; and writing an in∣vective against King Henry, lost his head. William Thorpe, an earnest follower of Iohn Wickliffe, for which he was committed to Saltwood Castle, where he dyed. Stephen Patrington, born in Yorkshire, and Robert Mascall a Carmelite Frier of Lud∣low; both of them Confessors to king Henry the fifth. Boston a Monke of the Ab∣bey of Burie in Suffolke; who wrote a Catalogue of all the Writers of the Church, and other Treatises. Iohn Purvey, who was convented for teaching Doctrine con∣rary to the Church of Rome, and compelled to recant. Thomas Rudburne Bishop of S. Davids, who wrote a Chronicle. Nicolas Riston, who considering the strife be∣tween the then Anti-popes, wrote a booke, De tollendo schismate. Robert Wansham a Monke in Daretshire, who wrote a booke in verse, Of the Originall and signification of Words. Robert Wimbledon an excellent Preacher, as apparth by the Sermon he made upo this Text, Redde rationem Villicatiois tuae.
THE REIGNE OF KING HENRY THE FIFTH. HENRY of Monmouth (so called from the place in Wales, where he was born) eldest Son of King Henry the fourth, succeeded his Fa∣ther in the kingdom of England, to whom the Lords of the Realm swore Homage and Allegiance, before he was yet Crowned; an honor never done before to any of his Predecessors: and after∣wards, on the ninth of Aprill, in the yeare 1412, he was Crow∣ned at Westminster, by Thomas Arundell Archbishop of Canterbury; with all Ries and Solemnities in such case accustomed: And as the Scripture speaks of Saul, that assoone as Samuel had annointed him King, he had a new heart given him, and he became another man than he was before. So was it with this king Henry; for presently after his Coronation, he called before him all his old Companions, who had been frtres in malo with him; strictly charging them, not to preume to come within ten miles of his Court, untill such time as they had given good proofe of their amendment in manners; and least any of them should pretend want of maintenance to be any cause of their taking ill courses, he gave to every one of them a competent meanes whereby to subsist. And knowing (as he did) the fashion of the Scots and Welch; that in times of change they would commonly take advatage, to make In∣roades upon the Borders; he therefore cased Forts and Bulwarks in fit places to be erected, and placed Garrisons in them, for preventing or repelling any such incu∣sions. Immediately after this, he called a Parliament, where a Subsidie was gran∣ted without asking: and in this Parlament the Commons began to harp upon their old string, of taking away the Temporalties of the Clergie; and the Bishops fearing how it might take in the kings ears, thought it best to divert him, by striking upon another string, which they knew would be more pleasing to him; which was, to shew him the great right he had to the Crown of France. And hereupon Chicheley Archbishop of Cnterbury, in a long narration, deduced the kings Right from Is∣bel Daughter to Philip the fourth, married to king Edward the second; from whom it discended by direct line to his Majesty, and no hinderance of enjoying it, bu pre∣tension of the Salque laws; which (said he) was neither according to the law of God, nor yet intended at first to that Nation; and though his Predecessors, by reason of other incumbrances forbore to prosecute their Claime, yet he being free from all such incumbrances, had no lesse power, than right to do it. This indeed struck up∣on the right string of the kings inclination; for as he affected nothing more than true glory, so in nothing more than in Warlike actions. Hereupon, nothing was
now thought of, but the Conquest of France. First thereore he begins to alter in his Arms the bearing of Semy-de-Luces, and quarters the three Flower Deluces, as the Kings of Frace then bare them; and that he might not be thought to steale ad∣vantage, but to do it fairly, he sent Embassadours to Charles the sixth then king of France, requiring in peaceable manner, the surrender of the Crown of Frace; which if he would yeeld unto, then King Henry would take to Wife his Daughter Katherine; but if he refused to do it, then King Henry would with fire and sword enforce it from him, or lose his life. The Ambassador sent, were the Duke of Exe∣ter, the Archbishop of Dublin, the Lord Gray, the Lord High Admirall, and the Bishop of Norwich, with five hundred horse: who comming to the Court of Fance, were at first received and feasted, with all the honor and shew of kindnes that ght be; but assoone as their message was delivered, and that it was knowne what they cme about, the copy of their entertainment was altered, and they were sent a∣way with as little complement, as they wer before received with honor; only told, that the king would speedily make Answer to the King their Master, by his owne Ambassadors: and speedily indeed he did it; for the Earle of Vendosme, William Btier Archbishop of Bourges, Peter Fresnel Bishop of Lyseax, with others, were arrived in England, assoone almost as the Eglish were returned But being come, the Archbishop of Bourges made a long Oration in the praise of Peace, concluding with the tender of the Lady Ktherie, and 50000 Crowns with her in Dower, besides some Towns of no great importance: To which King Hy, by the Arch∣bishop of Caterbury made Answer; That these offers were trifles, and that without yeelding to his demands, he would never desist from that he intended: and with this Answer, the French Ambassadors were dismissed. It is sayd, that about this time, the Dlphi (who in the King of France his sicknes, managed the State) sent to King Henry a Tonne of Tennis Balls, in derision of his youth, as fitter to play with them, then to manage Arm; which king Hery tooke in such scorne, that he promised with an oath, it should not be long ere he would tosse such iron blls amongst them, that the best armes in France should not be able to hold a Racket to rture thm. And now all things are prepared and in a readines for the kings journey into France, his men shipped, and himselfe ready to go on shipbrd; when sodainly a Treason was discovered against his Person, plotted by Richard Earle of Cambridge, Hy Lord Scroope of Masham, Lord Treasurer, and Thomas Grey Earle of Nthuber∣ld, and plotted and procured by the French Agents. These being apprehded, and upon examination confessing the Treason, and the money (which was sayd to be a Million of Gold) by them for that end received; were all of them immediately put to death. From this Richard Earle of Cambridge, second Sonne of Edmund of Lgle, did Richard afterward Duke of Yorke claime and recover the Crown from the Lacastrian Family. This execution done, and the winde blowing faire, king Henry weighs Anchor; and with a Fleet of 1200 Sayle, (Grafton saith, but 140 ships) but Enguerant saith, 1600, attended with six thousand spears, and 24000 Foo, besides Engineers and labourers; he puts to Sea, and on our Lady Eve lan∣deth at Caux; where he made Proclamation, that no man upon paine of death, should robbe any Church, or offer violence to any that were found narmed; and from thence passing on, he besieged Harlew; which when no succour came within certain dayes agreed upon, the Town was surrendred and sacked. Of this Towne he made the Duke of Exeter Captain, who left there for his Lievetenant, Sir Iohn Flstoffe, with a Garrison of 1500 men. It is said that when king Henry entred Hrlew, he passed along the streets bare foot, untill he came to the Church of St. Martin; where, with great devotion, he gave most humble thanks to God, for this his first atchieved Enterprize. From thence he marched forward, and comming to the River of Soame, he found all the Bridges broken; whereupon he passed on to the bridge of Sr. Maxenae, where 30000 French appearing, he pitcht his Campe, expecting to be fought with; and the more to encourage his men, he gave the r∣der of knighthood to Iohn Lord Ferrers of Groby, Reynold Graystocke, Percy Temps, Christopher Morisby, Thomas Pickering, William Huddleston, Henry Mortimer, Ioh
Hosbalton, Philip Hall, but not perceiving the Frech to have any minde to figh he marched by the Town of Ayens to Bows, and there stayed two dayes, expecing battell, and from thence marched to Corby; where the Peasants of the Counry, with certain men of Arms sent from the Dolphi, charged the right wing of the Eng∣lish, which was led by Hugh Stafford Lord Borchier, and wonne away his Standard, but was recovered againe by Iohn Bromeley of Bromeley, a Commander in the Lo Staffords Regiment, who with his own hand slew him that had taken the Colo and then taking them up, displayed the same; with sight whereof, the English were so encouraged, that they presently roted the Frech, and put them to flight: which valiant exploit, the Lord Stafford recompenced, by giving to Bromeley an Aity of fifty pounds a yeare out of his lands in Staffordshire. After this, the king mar∣ched towards Callice, so strictly observing his Proclamation against Church robbing that when one was complained of for having taken a silver Pyxe ut of a Church, he not only caused the same to be restored, but the souldier also to be hanged: which point of Discipline, both ept the re from offending in that kinde, and drew the people of the Country, under hand to relieve his men with all things necessary. The French king hearing that king Hery had passed the River of Same; by advice of his Councell (who yet were divided in opinion) sent Montjoy the French king at Arms to defye king Henry, and to let him know he should be fought with; which king Henr, though his Army was much infected with Feavers, whereof the Earl of Stafford, the Bishop of Norwich, the Lords Molines and Burnell, were lately dead yet he willingly heard, and rewarded the Herald for his meage: and first having cleered a passage over a bridge, where of necessity he was to passe, on the 22 of October he passed over with his Army: At which time the Duke of York that led the Rereward, had discovered the Enemy to come on pace, whereof he sent word to the king; who thereupon made a stand, and appointing his Officers what course to hold, and encouraging his Souldiers, they all attended when the battell should begin. The French Army was divided into three battels; in the first were placed eight thousand men at Arms, foure thousand Archers, and fifteen hundred Crosse-bowes, the wings consisting of two thousand two hundred men at Arms; this battaile, was led by the Constable of France himselfe, the Dukes of Orleance and Bourbon, the Earles of Ewe, Richmond, and Vadosme, the Lord Dempier, the Lord Admirall of France, the Marshall Bouciquale, and others. The middle Battaile, wherein were more men at Arms, was commanded by the Dukes of Barre, and A∣lso, and by the Earles of Vmon, Salings, Blamont Grantpee, and Rusey. In the Rereward, wee all the remainder of the French forces, guided by the Earles of Mrle, Dampmartin, Faucobridge, and the Lord Lorey, Captaine of Ardy. The Frenchmen thus ordered, being six times, some say ten times as many as the English, (who were not above nine thousand) thought of nothing, but of the booty they should get: In the meane time king Henry having made choice of a piece of groud halfe fened on his back with the Village, wherein they had rested the night before, on both sides having strong hedges and ditches, begun there to order his battell; but first he appointed an ambush of two hundred Archers, which upon a watch∣word given, should discharge their whole flight upon the flanke of the Enemies horse: The Vauntguard consisting of Archers only, was conducted by the Duke of Yorke; who out of an heroicke courage made sue for that place, with whom were joyned the Lords Beaumont, Willoughby, and Fhope. The maine Battaile was led by the king himselfe, which consisted of Bill-men, and some Bow-men; with him were the Duke of Glocester his Brother, the Earle Marshall, Oxford, and Sufflke. The Rereward was led by Thomas Duke of Exeter, the kings Uncle, consisting of all sorts of weapons; the horsemen as wings guarded the companies on both sides. The king to prevent the fury of the French Cavallery, by the direction of the Duke of Yorke, appointed divers stakes studded with iron at both ends, of six foot long, to be pitched behinde the Archers, and appointed Pyoners to attend to remove them, as they should be directed: These things thus ordered, publique Prayers were humbly made, and the on-set was presently given by the French horsemen; where∣upon
Sir Walter Orpington, according to direction, caused the Bow-men behind the dges, to let flie their arrowes; which so galled the French horses, that either they cast their Riders, or through their unrulinesse so opened their Ranks, that the right wing of the English horse had way to come in upon the French foot; & withall, the French horse disorderly retiring, they were miserably troden down & disranked by their own company. Upon which, the King with his Main-battell came on with such , that himselfe in person charged the Duke of Alason, by whom he was well neere unhorsed; but afterward, having first slaine two of the Dukes men, he chged the Duke againe, and with his sword beat him from his horse; whom the Kings Guard, notwithstanding the King cryed out to the contrary, slew outright: and with his fall, the maine-battell of the French first gave ground, then turned their backs, and lastly cast away their weapons and fled. But then certaine of the French-horsemen that first ran away, led on by Robert Bondile and the Captain of Agincourt, meaning to wipe away the blot of running away from souldiers, by fighting with boyes, set upon the Pages and Laundresses that were left in the Campe; who gave such a lamentable shreeke, that king Henry verily thought some fresh forces had been come: whereupon he caused all the arrowes that were sticking in the field, to be ghered, and the stakes to be plucked up, and made ready to be againe used; a∣mongst which the Duke of Yorks body was found, miserably hacked and defaced: the fight whereof, together with danger of a second Charge, made king Henry give oder, the Prisoners should be all slaine, except onely some principall men, whom e caused to be bound back to back, and so left. For which fact, though done in cold blood, yet the King could not justly be taxed with cruelty, seeing the number of the prisoners was more than of his own souldiers; and nothing could give assurance of safety, but their slaughter. But all was not yet done: for the Earles of Marle and Fcobridge, with sixe hundred men at Armes, who had stood still all day, began now to stir, and gave a brave Charge upon King Henries Army: but being but few, and their horses galled with the stakes, they had onely the honour to dye bravely; and indeed, they slew more of the English, than the whole Army had done before. And now at last, the King being satisfied by the Scouts, that no Enemy was more to be seen, he asked what the place was called? and being told, Agincourt; Well then (said he) this shall be from henceforth called the Battell of Agincourt: and presently he csed the whole Army, in their array as they were, to give God thankes; causing the Clergie there present, to sing the Psalme of David, In exitu Israel de Aegypto; and made Proclamation, that every one, at the verse, Non nobis Domine, sed nomini tu d gloriam, should kneele downe, and the horse-men bow their bodies: and then singing Te Deum and other holy Hymnes, they marched to the Enemies Camp, where the souldiers had liberty given them to take the spoyle. A great Victory no doubt, but yet a Victory by which the English gained not one foote of ground in France, more then they had before; and which oshelet attributeth not so much to the valour of the English, as to the indiscretion of the French, who had so streightned the vantguard of their Army, and pent them up so close together, that they had not roome to draw out their swords; so true is that saying, Quos Deus vult perdere, dementat. The next day after the Battayle French Heuld came to aske leave to bury their dead, and had it; and the English He∣ralds, appointed to make search, made returne that there were slayn of the French above ten thousand, whereof a hundred twenty six were of the Nobility bearing ; of Knights and Gentlemen of Coat-Armour, seven thousand eight hundred seventy foure, whereof five hundred were knighed the night before the Battell: & of common souldiers, about sixteen hundred. Amongst the slain of the Nobility, were Charles le Brets High Constable, Iaques of Chatillon Admir, the great Master of France, the Master of the Crossebowes, the Dukes o ason, Bra∣, and Barre; the Earles of Nevers, Marle, Vaudemont, Beaumont, Graee, Rousey, Fuconbridge, Fys, and Lestreuck: There was taken Prisoners, Charles Duke of Or∣leance, Iohn Duke of Bourbon, the Lords Danvert, Fosseux, Humiers, Roy, Cwn, court, Noll, Bonciqualt; to the number in all of fifteen hundred. On the English
part were slaine, Edward Duke of York, and the Earle of Suffolk, and not full six hundred in all; but (saith Cxtn) not above six and twenty in all; and Paulu Aemilius saith, besides the two Lords, onely two Knights, and but ten private soul∣diers in all: a Miracle rather then a Victory. But not onely K. Henry was the death of the French Lords before-named, in the field with his sword; but of another great Prince, at home, with his Victory; for Lewis the Dolphin, eldest sonne of Chrles the sixth, king of France, presently upon it, without any other cause apparent, fell sick and dyed. Yet king Hery, to make his enemies the better contented with their overthrow, and to take away the envy of his Victory; at his returne into England with his Prisoners, which was on the sixt of November following, he presently gave straight order, that no Ballad or Song should be made or sung, more then of Thanks∣giving to God for his happy Victory and safe Returne; but without words of either disgracing the Frech, or extolling the English. At his entrance into London, the City presented him with a thousand pounds, and two Basons of Gold worth five hundred pounds more. The bodies of the Duke of Yorke and the Earle of Suffolke were brought into England, and the Dukes buried at Fodringhey in Northamptonshire, the Earles at New-Elm in Oxfordshire. About this time, the Emperour Sigismond Cosin-german to king Henry, having been first in France, came accompanid with the Archbishop of Rhemes, Ambassador from the French king, into England; for whom there were thirty great ships sent from the King to waft him over: but approaching to land at Dover, the Duke of Glocester, with a company of Gentlemen, having their swords drawn, sept up to the knees in water, saying to him, That if he came as the Kings friend, he should be welcome; but if as claiming any jurisdiction, they would resist him: whereupon the Emperour renounceth all Imperiall Authority; and is thereupon admitted to land, and received with as much honour as could be done him; and afterward, to∣gether with Albert Dke of Holland, who was lately likewise arrived at Winchester, is elected Companion of the Order of the Garter, and sae in their Cells at the so∣lemnity of the Feast. A principall cause of the Emperors comming, was to mediate a Peace between England and France; wherein he had brought king Henry to a good degree of inclination; till newes came of the besieging of Harflew by the French, and of the Earle of Armiiacks setting upon the Duke of Exceter, being Governour there: and then he presently grew so averse from Peace, that he would hearken no more to any Treaty of it; Not that he misliked they should treat of Peace with their swords in their hands, as all wise men would doe; but that to treat of Peace, and in the time of the Treaty to do acts of Hostility, was an affront to all honesty, and not to be tolerated with any patience. And now the Earle of Arminiack having set downe before the Towne, the Vice-Admirall of France brought up the whole Navy of the French, with intent whilst the Earle should assaile it by land, to have entred the Towne by the waters side: but of this purpose, the valour and diligence of the Duke of Exceer prevented them. Aoone as king Henry had intelligence hereof, he would presently have gone him∣self; but being disswaded by the Emperor, he sent his brother the Duke of Bedford, with the Earles of March, Oxford, Huntington, Warwick, Arundell, Salisbury, De∣shire, and divers others, with two hundred Saile, to the rescue of Harflew; who upon the Feast of the Assumption of our Lady, came to the mouth of the River Seyne: whereupon, Norbo the French Admirall set forward, and got the mouth of the Haven: and here began a Fight, which was resolutely maintained on both sides, untill the English having sunke five hundred Vessels one and other of the French, and taken three great Carricks of Genoua, wonne the harbour, and at last, though with some opposition made by their Gallies, relieved Harlew, and made the Earle of Arminiack glad to raise his Siege. Upon the news hereof, the Emperor de∣sisted from mediating any further for Peace with France; and entring into a League defensive and offensive with king Henry, wherein onely the Pope was excepted, on the 19 of October he departed towards Germany, whom king Henry accompanied to Callis; whither the Duke of Burgundy came, to confirme the League concluded
on before by the Earle of Warwick and him, concerning Flanders and Arthois only. In the meane time the French had hyred divers Carracks and other great ships of the Genoaes and Italians, which joyning with the french-fleete, lay at the mouth of the River of Seyne, under the command of Iaques Bastard of Bourbon, to hinder all succors from comming to Harlew; but Iohn Earle of Huntington (sonne to the Duke of Exeter beheaded at Cicester) being sent to soure the coasts, encountred with him, and after a long fight tooke him Prisoner, and three of his great Carricks, with all the money for the halfe yeers pay of the fleete, and sinking three other of his Carricks, and dispersing the rest, cleered the mouth of the River and then returned to the king at Southampton. And now upon the twenty third of July, in the ourth yeere of his Reigne, the king himselfe, with the Dukes of Clarence and Gloucester, the Earles of Huntington, Warwick, Devoshire, Salisbury, Suffolke and Somerset, the Lords Rosse, Willoughby, Fits-hugh, Clynton, Scroope, Matrevers, Bourcher, Ferrers of Groby, Ferrers of Chartley, Fahope, Grey of Codnor, Sir Gilbert Vmphre∣vile, Sir Gylbert Talbot, and an Army consisting of twenty five thousand five hun∣dred twenty eight fighting men, besides a thousand Artificers and Pyoners, tooke shipping at Portsmouth, and upon the first of August landed in Normandy neere to the Castle of Tonque, which hee presently besieged, and upon the ninth of August had it yeelded to him, at which time the Earle of Salisbury tooke the Castle of Al∣bervilliers which the king gave him, to him and his heires, being the first land given by the king in France. At the winning of Tonque, the king made eight and twenty Knights; and from thence marched with his Army to Caen; where to prevent the Citizens from sally∣ing out, he cast up a Mount; and then making many assaults, but finding them to doe little good, he caused his Pyoners to undermine the walls: which being done, upon the fourth of September he offered the Besieged their lives, if they would sub∣mit: which they refusing, he thereupon made a shew of a generall assault, whilst many of his men entred the City under the foundation, of whom the Duke of Cla∣rence with his Company was the first: and they comming upon the backs of those that defended the walls, easily overcame them; and then the whole Army entred without resistance. The next day, the King caused all the principall men of the Towne to come before him at their Senate house; where some of them, for their stubborne refusing the grace he had offered them, were adjudged to death, and the rest fined: the spoyl of the Town was distributed amongst the souldiers. The Captaine of the Castle stood out a while; but being advertised that the king had sworne to shew no mercy, if he did not surrender; he gave twelve Hostages, that if it were not relieved before the twentieth of September, he would then give it up; which not comming, he performed: and so the king had possession both of Cen and the Castle. And now Charles the new Dolphin, being but seventeene yeeres of age and bare of money, had got into his possession all the jewels, plate and money of the Queen his mother; which so incensed her against him, that to doe him a spight, she pla∣ced the Duke of Burgundy in chiefe authority about the king, who by reason of his infirmity was uable himselfe to manage the State; and the Duke having now the sword in his hands, meant first o represse the growing boldnesse of the Dolphyn, and afterward to repell the common Enemy: and the Dolphyn likewise, envying the Dukes advancement above him, meant first to take down his swelling greatnes, and afterward to fall upon the forreigne adversary; and thus while private respects were preferred before publique, whilest the Duke and the Dolphyn had their first intentions against one another, not looking afte king Henry, but in the se∣cond place, after their owne turnes served, an easie way was left for king Henries proceedings, and hee went on at his pleasure with small opposition. Hee sent the Duke of Clarence, who tooke in the City of Bayeux, as likewise the Duke of Glo∣cester the City of Lysex; whilst himselfe remayning still at Caen, put out of the city the natives that were impotent or yong infants to the number of fifteen hundred, & in their places put English people, and finding a great masse of money and plate, de∣posited
by the Citizens in the Castle, e caused the same, upon proofe, to bee re∣spectively delivered to the right owners upon condition they would acknowledge him for their Soveraigne; which moderate and just dealing wonne him more hearts then the force of his Armes had wonne him knees, specially with the Normans, who are easier to bee drawn with gentlenesse and love, then forced by violence and com∣pulsion. From hence the king marched the first of October to Corfye Castle, which within three dayes yeelded. The fourth of October he came to Argenton, which not relieved by a day agreed upon, was likewise surrendred. The Towne of Aln∣son endured eight daies siege, but in the end did as other their neighbour Townes had done. From Alanson the Earle of Slisbury was sent to Faleys, to view the strength thereof, whom the king presently followed, where the besieged conclu∣ded, if it were not relieved before the second of January, then to yeelde up the Towne: No reliefe comming, the Towne was yeelded up, and soone after upon the like termes, the Castle. From hence the king returned to Caen, to put in exe∣cution a Proclamation he had formerly made; That if the inhabitants of Normandy that were fled, returned not by a day assigned, hee would then grant their Lands to his souldiers: and thereupon he gave to the duke of Clarence during life, the Vicoun∣ties of Age, Orer and Poni, with all the Lands of those that were not returned according to the Proclamation. All the Lent the king lay at Bayeux, whilest his Navy still kept the Seas, and daily tooke many French ships, but upon the sixteenth of July such a Tempest took them, that they were driven to fall in with Southampton; and yet, with all their diligence, could not so save themselves, but that two Ballin∣gers, and two great Carricks laden with merchandize, were in the very Haven drowned. In the meane time the Earle of VVarwick and the Lord Talbot besieged the strong Castle of Dmfront: The Duke of Clrence tooke Courtn and Burney; and many other being taken, as Chabois, Bechelouyn, Hrcourt, Fantgernon, Cre∣enr, Anvyllers, Bgles, in all of them he placed Captaines and Garrisons, and particularly in Fresy, Sir Robert Brent, lately made Viscount. The Duke of Glo∣cester also, with the Earle of March, and the Lord of Codnor, tooke in all the Isle of Costtie, except Chereburg, and then returned to the king, but was sent back to take in that City also: which after some time, when no reliefe came, was, toge∣ther with the Castle, likewise surrendred; although by this time the Duke of Bur∣gdi and the Dolphyn, by mediation of the Pope, were reconciled, and began to joyne thei Forces to make resistance. And now the Duke of Exeter the kings Uncle, with a supply of fifteene thousand men out of England, came to the king, who presently took in the City of Eureux; and the Earle of Ryme, the strong Caste of Milly le Vesco. The next thing attempted, was the siege of Ro, a Citie strongly fortified, both with walls and diches, and to which there was no convenient passage, but by the Citie of Lovie; to this Citie therefore he first layes iege, which when no reliefe came within a time agreed on, was surrendred; and yet there was another impe∣diment to be removed, a stone-bridge, which hindred the approach to Roan, being exceeding strongly guarded: For this, King Henry devised floats of wicke, cove∣red with bests hides, by which the Duke of Clrence with his quarter passed the Ri∣ver, nd then laid siege to the Towne on hat side; and for the other side, he had other devises made with hogsheads and pipes, fastned to irrepoles and Barges, with which he passed his men over at pleasure; and in the meane time he caused divers of his Souldiers that could swimme, to make shew of passing the River three miles off another way; with which the French-men being deluded, drew all their forces thi∣ther, nd by this meanes the Fort being left unfurnished of sufficient guard, was presently forced to surrender, and the Souldiers were taken to the Kings grace; The bridge being thus gained, the Duke of Exeter was sent, and with him Windsor the Herald, to summon the Citizens to surrender the Towne; who not only gave proud answers, but also made a sallye forth, though with the losse of thirty of their men. Upon this obstinacie of theirs, the King presently orders his siege; his own quarter was the Chrteux, the Duke of Clarnce at St. Gervays, the Duke of Exeter
at Port St. Dennis, and every great Commander had his quarter assigned, so as the Citie was begirt round, and a great chaine of iron set upon piles, and a strong wooden bridge for passage from one Campe to the other, was made over the River. At this time the Earle of Kilmayne with sixteen hundred Irish came to the King, and had their quarter assigned them, who behaved themselves with great valour: The Kings Cosen Germane the King of Portugall, sent likewise a Navie of Ships to the mouth of the River of Seyne, which stopped all passage of succour to Roan; many policies and practices were used against the Citie, but none prevailed, till famine for∣ced it; for there being in Roan 210000 persons at the begining of the Siege, and the Siege continuing long, it grew to that extremity, that the Citizens dranke no thing but vinegar and water, and had little to eate, but Rats and Mice, Cats and dogs, and such like: Great numbers of the poorer sort were thrust out of the Citie, who not suffered to passe the English Army, miserably perished; onely pon Christmas-day, in honor of Christs birth, the King relieved and suffered to passe as many as were at first put out, but not others that were put out the second time, but suffered them to perish. In this distresse, a Parley is required by the Citizens; who notwithstanding their misery, yet stood upon such high termes, that nothing was concluded, only a truce for eight dayes was granted them; the eight dayes ended, and nothing yet agreed upon amongst themselves, they crave one day longer, and neither in that day could any thing be agreed on; then they crave four dayes more, in which the multitude and common people so pressed the Magistrates and Governours of the Citie, that on the fourth day, being about the nineteenth of Ianuary, the Citie was surrendred, and the Inhabitants themselves, and all their goods were yielded to the Kings mercy; the Duke of Exeter was appointed to take possession, who accordingly entred with his Souldiers. The next day after, being Friday the twentieth of Ianuary, the King himselfe made his entry, with four Dukes, ten Earles, eight Bishops, sixteen Barons, and others, and was by the Clergie conducted to our Lady Church; where after publique thanksgiving, he tooke Homage and fealty of the Burgesses and Inhabi∣tants; making Proclamation, that all that would come and acknowledge him to be their Soveraigne, should enjoy the benefit of his Protection, and retaine their pos∣sessions, whereupon many came in, and many Townes were surrendred. In this time of the Kings lying at Roan, the Earle of Salisbury tooke in Hunflew, Munster de Villiers, Ewe, and Newcastle; the Duke of Clarence tooke Vernon, and Naunt; and the Earle of Warwicke la Roche Guyon. And now the Duke of Burgundie seeing the great successes of King Henry, could thinke of no better way for his own safety, then to make a reconciliation betweene the two Kings; to which end, Ambassadors are sent to procure their meeting; at which time, King Henry for their service already performed, and in hope of more herefter, made the valiant Gascoigne Captaine le Beuff, Earle of Longuevyle, Sir Iohn Gra Earle of Tnkevyle, and the Lord Borcher Earle of E. Upon the lst of My, King Henry accompanied with the Dukes of Clarence, Glocester, and Exe∣ter, his Uncle Beaufort, the Bishop of Winchester, with the Earles of March, and Salisbry, and a thousand men at Armes, entred the place appointed for the meet∣ing of the two Kings. The French Queene (her Husband being taken with hi ) with the Duke of Burgigne, and the Earle of St. Paul, and a company of Ladies amongst whom, as a bait to entangle the Kings affection, was the kings Dughter, the beautifull Lady Katherine; with whose sight, though the King was marvellously taken, yet he made no shew thereof, till other things should be agreed upon; but the Dolphin having made means to the Duke of Burgoigne to hinder all agreement, nothing was effected; whereupon at their parting, the King told the Duke, that he would have both the Lady, and all his other Demands, or else drive the King of France out of his kingdome, and him out of his Dukedome: Upon thi, the Duke thought it best to agree with the Dolphin, and upon the sixth of Iuly, Articles of their reconcilement are signed and sealed; In the meane time, the Eale of Longvyle surprized the Towne of Ponthoyse, but had scarce beene able to
make good the surprize, if the Duke of Clarence had not coe to his ucur;  thence the Duke marched to Paris, and there stayed two dayes, but peceivi no shew of sallye to be made, he returned to Ponthyse, whither the King himselfe came; and from thence marching on, tooke in the Castle of Vanyon Villeirs; and on the last of August, the Castles of Gysors, and Galyard, and Dumall; so that now all Normandy (Mout St. Michael only excepted) was reduced to the possession of the King of England, which had beene wrongfully detained from him, ever since the yeare 1207. The Dolphin all this while, though having outwardly made a reconcilement with the Duke of Burgoigne, yet inwardly bearing a spleene against him, intended no∣thing so much as his destruction; which to eect, he procured a meeting betweene the Duke and him, and all the Peers of the Realm at Mountstrew; where the Duke though humbling himselfe in reverence to the Dolphin on his knee, was most bar∣barously murthered; which act, was so much the lesse to be pitied in the Duke, by how much he in the like kinde, upon the like enterview, had caused Lewis the Duke of Orleance to be murthered. But though this barbarous act might justly incens Philip Earle of Carolois the Duke of Burgoiges heire to seeke revenge; yet as a wise and and politicke Prince, he forbore for the present to make shew of choller or distemperature, and considering with himselfe, that difference betweene the Dolphin and him, would but give King Hery the greater advantage, he en∣deavoured to propose an overture of peace betweene the two Kings; And to that end Ambassadors are sent from the King of France, and the yong Duke of Burgoig, whom the King kindly entertained, but seemed to intimate unto them, that hee could give no great credit to their propositions, unlesse the Lady Katherine would joyne in them, whose innocence he knew would never abuse him. Whilest these things are in agitation, the Earle of Salisbury tooke in Fresy, and the Earls Mar∣shall and Huntington entred into Mayn, who approaching Ments, were encountred by the forces of the Dolphin, whereof they slew five thousand, and tooke two hundred prisoners; for which, newes being brought to Roan, whither King Henry was come to solemnize the Feast of Christs Birth, thanksgiving to God were pub∣lickly made; and in the instant thereof, arrived other Ambassadors from the King and Queene of France, and a letter from the Lady Katherine to King Henry, was secretly by the Bishop of Arrs delivered; The conclusion of all was, that the king of England should speed himselfe to Troyes, there to be Espoused to the Lady Kahe∣rine, and to have assurance of the Crowne of France, after the decease of the pre∣sent king Charles: Whereupon, with a Guard of fifteen thousand choice Souldiers, accompanied with the Duke of Clarece and Glocester, the Earls of Warwicke, Salis∣bury, Huntington, Logevile, Tankervile and Ewe; the king of England came to Troyes in Champaign, upon the eighteenth day of May, where he was met by the Duke of Burgoign, and divers of the French Nobility, who attended him to the Pallace, where the Queen with her Daughters, the Dutchesse of Burgoigne, and the Lady Ka∣therine gave him Princely entertainment; and after some intercourse of complement between the Princes and the Ladies, K. Henry tendred to the Lady Katherine a Ring of great value, which she (not without some blushing) received; and afterward, up∣on the twentieth day of May, she was affianced to him in St. Peters Church, and on the third of Iune following, the marriage was solemnized; and therewithall king Henry was published to be the only Regent of the Realme, and Heire apparent to the Crown of France; the Articles whereof, with all convenient expedition were Proclaimed both in England and in France, and the two kings, and all their Nobles, and other Subjects of account, were sworne to observe them; and in particular the Duke of Burgoigne. And thus was the Salique Law violated, and the heire Male put by his Sucession in the Crowne, which the Genius of France will not long endure, a while it must; and therefore the maine endeavour of both kings now is, to keep him down, whom they had put downe; and thereupon, on the fourth day of Iune, king Henry with the French king, Iames king of Scots, who was newly arrived, the Duke of Bur∣goige
the Prince of Orenge, one and twenty Earles, five and forty Barons, with many Knights and Gentlemen, and an Army consisting of French, English, Scotish, Irish, and Dutch, to the number of six hundred thousand, marched towards the Dol∣phin; and upon the seventh day, laid siege to the Towne of Ses, which sided with the Dolphin, which after foure dayes siege was yielded up. From thence they re∣moved, having the Duke of Bedford in their company, who was newly come out of Eglad, with large supplies of men and money to Monst, which was taken by Escalado, onely the Castle held out still; during the siege whereof, king Henry cre∣ed an Officer of Armes, to be king of Heralds over the Englishmen, and intitled him Garter; whom he sent with offers of mercy to the Castle, but was by the Cap∣taine thereof reproachfully upbraided: for punishment of which his presumption,  Gibbet was erected, and in view of Mounsieur Guitry the said Captaine, twelve of his friends were executed: whereupon those of the Castle treated for peace; but the king, in eight dayes together, would not grant so much as a parley so that after six weekes siege, they were enforced (their lives saved) simply to yield. From thence the king marched to Melun upon Sein, and besieged it the thirtieth of Iuly; the Captaine whereof was Barbason a Gascoigne, no lesse politick than valiant, who countermined some, and stopt other Mines made by the English, and foght hand to hand in the Barriers with king Henry; yet at last, through Famine and Pestilence was forced to yeild; but being suspected to have had a hand in the murther of the Duke of Burgoigne, he was sent prisoner to Paris; and presently thereupon, both the kings with their Queens, the Duke of Burgoigne and his Dutchesse, with a Roy∣all Traine came thither; where the French king was lodged in the House of S. Paul, and the king of England in the Castle of Lovre. And here the three States of France anew under their hands and Seals in most athenticke manner Ratified the former Articles of king Henries Succession in the Crowne of France; the Instruments whereof were delivered to the king of England, who sent them to be kept in his Treasury at Westminster. And now King Henry began to exercise his Regency, and as a badge of his Au∣thority; he caused a new Coyne which was called a Salute, to be made, whereon the Armes of France and England were quarterly stamped; he placed and displaced divers Officers, and appointed the Duke of Exeter with five hundred men, to the Guard of Paris: He awarded out Processe against the Dolphin, to appeare at the Marble-Table at Paris, which he not obeying, Sentence was denounced against him, as guilty of the murther of the Duke of Burgoigne; and by the sentence of the Parliament, he was banished the Realme. After this, the King making Thomas Duke of Clarence his Lievetenant Generall of Frace and Normandy; on the 6th of Ianuary, with his beloved Queen Katherine he left Pari, and went to Amyens, and from thence to Calli, and thence landing at Do∣ver, came to Canterbury, and afterward through Lodo to Westminster; where the Queene upon St. Matthews day, the fourth of Februry was Crowned; the King of Scots sitting at dinner in his State, but on the left hand of the Queen, the Archbishop of Caterbury, and the Kings Uncle the Bishop of Winchester being on the right hand, All were served with covered messes of silver, but all the Feast was Fish, in obser∣vation of the Lent season. After this, the king tooke his Progresse through the Land, hearing the com∣plaints of his poore Subjects, and taking order for the administring of Justice to high and low; and then met the Queen at Leicester, where they kept their Easter. In the meane time, the Duke of Clarence making a Road into Ajo, came to the Citie of Ampers, where he knighted Sir William Rosse, Sir Henry Gdard, Sir Row∣lad Vyder, Sir Thomas Beauford his naturall Son; and returning home laden with prey, was advertised that the Duke of Alanson intended to intercept his passage; whereupon, he sent the Scout-master, Andrew Fogosa  Lombard, to discover the face of the Enemy; who being corrupted, brought report that their number was but small, and those but ill ordered, that if he presently charged, there could be no resistance. The Dukes credulity caused him to draw all his horses together, and
leaving his bowes and bill behinde which were his chiefst strength, with his  only he makes towards the Enemy; but the Traitor leading to a straight, where by his appointment an ambush was layd, tha the Duke could neither retreat, nor flee; he soone perceived the Treachery, but finding no remedy, he manfully set sp to his horse, and charged upon the Enemy; but over-layd with multitude, and wea∣ried with fight, was himselfe, with the Earle of Takervile, the Lord Rosse, the Eale of Angus, Sir Iohn , and Sir Iohn Vered, and above two thousand English slaine; The Earls of Serset, Suffolke and Pearch, Sir Iohn Berkly, Sir Ralph Ne∣vill, Sir Willi Bwes, and 60 Gentlemen were taken prisoners: The body of the Duke of Clrence, was by Sir Iohn Beauford his base Son, (the D. dying without other issue) convey'd to England, and buried at Canterbury besides his Father: and this disaster happened upon aster-Eve. The King was at Beverley when he heard of his brothers death, and presently thereupon, dispatched away Edmund Earle of Mr∣tgne into Nordy, making hi Lievtenant thereof; and then calls his high Court of Parliament to Westminster, requiring ayd by money to revenge his br∣thers death, which was readily granted; and the king thus provided, sent his bro∣ther the Duke of Bedford with an Army to Clli, consisting of foure thousand men at Arms, and foure and twenty thousand Archers, whom about the middle of May he followeth himselfe, and safly ariving at Clli, hasted to relieve Charters, which the Dolphin with seven thousand men had besieged; but hearing of the kings com∣ming, was retired to Tours. The king of Scots, with the Duke of Glocester, about the eighth of Iuly besieged Dreux; which agreed, if it were not relieved by the twen∣tieth of that moneth, then to surrender it; no reliefe comming, it was surrendred. The king pursud the Dolphin from place to place, but could not overtake him, but in the way, surprized the Towne of Bwgcy, where all that craved it, he ooke to mercy, as likewise he did at Rogemot; from thence he went to Orleance, and from thence to Vigne St. To, and from thence to Paris; where having fitted himselfe with supplies, he went and sate downe before Menixe in Brye, which after some opposition, he also tooke; and thereby had possession of all the Fortresses in the Isle of France, in , in rye, and in Champaigne. Upon St. Nicholas day, in the yeare 1422, Queen Katherine was brought to bed of a Son at Windsor, who was by the Duke of Bedford, and Henry Bishop of Winche∣ster, and the Countesse of Holland Christned by the name of Henry; whereof, when the king had notice, out of a Propheticke rapture he sayd; Good Lord, I Henry of Monmouth shall small time Reigne and much get, and Henry borne at Windsor, shall long time Reigne and lose all, but Gods will be done. About this time the Dolphin layd siege to Cosney, which the king was intentive to relieve, as being a Town of the Duke of Burgoignes; and therefore tendredit more than if it had beene hi owne; and making over-hasty journeys, he over-heat himselfe with travell; and comming to Slys, found himselfe so ill at ease, that he was forced to remaine there, and to send his brother the Duke of Bedford to prose∣cute his designe, which the Duke performed, and the Dolphin upon his approach, retired into Berry; whereof, in mockage he was after called the king of Berry. But the kings Feaver and fl increasing, he was removed to Boys de Vincens; where growing worse and worse, within a few dayes he dyed. But somewhat before his departure, he had made his Brother the Duke of Bedford Lievetenant Generall of Nordy, and Regent of the kingdome of France, and his Brother the Duke of Glo∣cester, he had made Protector of England, and of his Sons Person: Exhorting all to be true and faithfull to the Duke of urgoge, to be at unitie amongst themselves, to be loyall to their young Prince, to be serviceable to his dearly beloved Queene, to hold ad preserve what he by his valour, and Gods assistance had wonne; and never to conclude contract of amitie with the Dolphin, or Duke of Alanson, untill they had submitted themselves to the kings Grac. And so giving God thanks for all his favors and blessings bestowed upon him, in the midst of saying a Psalme of David, he departed this life; who might justly have prayed God with David, Take me ot away in the midst of my dayes, for he dyed about the age of five or six and thirty years,
which in Davids account is the midst of the number of the dayes of mans life: but though he dyed in the midst of his dayes, yet he dyed in the fulnesse of his Glory; and of whom it may he said,—Iam{que} arce potitus, Ridet anheltes dur ad fastig montis. When he had Reigned nine yeares and five moneths. Of his Taxations. IN his first yeere an incredible sum of money was given him by the Clergy, to di∣ert him from a motion propounded to take away their Temporalties. And in the same yeere a Subsidie was granted him both by the Clergy and the Laity. In his fourth yeere was granted him, towards his warres in France, two whole Tenths of the Clergy, and a fifteenth of the Laity; which being farre too short to defray his great charge, he was forced to pawne his Crowne to the Bishop of Beauford his Un∣cle for a great sum of money, as also certain Jewels to the Lord Major of London, for ten thousand markes. In his ninth yeere in a Parliament at Weminster, for revenge of the Duke of Clarence death, two tenths of the Clergy, and one fifteenth by the Laity, which because the haste of the businesse could not stay the usuall course of collection, the Bishop of Winchester brought in presently twenty thousand pounds, to receive it againe when the Subsidie should be gathered. The same yeere also, the Duke of Bedford in the kings absence called a Parliament, wherein was granted towards his warres, one fifteenth to be paid in such money as was at that time cur∣rent. These are all the Subsidies that were given him, notwithstanding his many and great atchievements, by which it appeares what great matters a moderate Prince may doe, and yet not grieve his subjects with Taxations. Of Lawes and Ordinances made by him, or in his ime. HE ordained the king of Heralds over the English, which is called Grter. In his ninth yeare, in a Parliament holden at Westminster, It was ordained, that no man should offer Gold in payment, unlesse it were weight; and thereupon were appointed ballances and weights. An act made in the thirteenth yeare of king Richard the Second, which disabled the Alien Religious to enjoy any Bnefices within England, was in the beginning of this kings Reigne put in execution: and further, this king excluded also the French from all preferments Ecclesiasticall; and those Priors Aliens Conventuall, who had institution and induction, were bound to put in security, not to disclose or cause to be disclosed, the Counsell and secres of the Realme. Affaires of the Church in his tie. IN the beginning of his Reigne, the Wickliffs increased greatly, of whom Sir Iohn Oldcastle was a Chiefe; who by mariage of a kinswoman of the Lord Cobham of Cling in Kent, obtained that Title: This knight, being very valorous, and in great favour with the king, was in a Synod at London accused for maintaining of Wickliff doctrine: whereof the king being informed, sent for him, and instantly dealt with him to submit himselfe to the censure of the Church: But Sir Iohn Old∣castle told the King, that he owed his subjection onely to his Majestie; and as for o∣thers, he would stand for the truth against them, to the uttermost of his life. Upon this, he was served by Processe, to appeare in the Archbishops Court; and not ap∣peaing, was condemned of Contumacy, and afterwards in a Synod at Rochester, was by the Archbishop pronounced to be an Heretick; who then enacted that De∣cree, That the Holy Scriptures ought not to be translated into the English tongue: But marke the judgement that fell upon his owne tongue, whoe rootes and blade shortly after (as is recorded) grew so bigge in his mouth and throat, that he could neither speake, nor swallow downe meat, but in horrour lay languishing, till at last ved by famine, he so dyed. In the meane time, Sir Iohn Oldcastle wrote his Be∣liefe,
and presented it himselfe to the King; which the King would in no wise re∣ceive, but suffered him, in his presence, and Privy chamber, to be summoned; who appearing before the Archbishop, after divers examinations, he was condemned of Heresie, and committed to the Tower of London, from whence shortly after he e∣scaped, and got into Wales. The king, by his Proclamation, promised a thousand Marks to any that should bring him in: but so much was his doctrine generally fa∣voured, that the kings offer was not much regarded, but he continued foure yeares after undiscovered: At last he was taken in the borders of Wales, within a Lordship belonging to the Lord Powes, who brought him to London, before the Duke of Bed∣ford Regent of the Realme; where in the end he was condemned, and finally was drawn from the Tower to S. Giles field, and there hanged in a chaine by the middle, and after consumed with fire, the gallowes and all. At the time of his first con∣viction, foure yeares before, it was rumour'd, that twenty thousand men in armes were assembled in S. Giles field: whereupon, the king, at midnight, himselfe in per∣son went thither, where he found many indeed, who upon examination confessed, that they came to meet their Captaine Sir Iohn Oldcastle, but without any intent against the king: yet was Sir Roger Acto, and eight and twenty others of them apprehended, and executed in Smithfield; and all the Prisons in and about London were filled with them. In his third yeare, the order of Church service throughout England, was changed from the use of Pauls to the use of Slisbury, to the great disliking of many in those dayes. In his fourth yeare, a Councell was holden at Constance, whither he sent Ambas∣sadors, the Earle of Warwick, the Bishops of Salisbury, Bath, and Hereford; the Abbot of Westminster, and the Prior of Worcester: In which Councell it was de∣creed, that England should have the title of the English Nation, and should be ac∣counted one of the five principall Nations in ranke before Spaine; which often be∣fore had been moved, but never granted till then. And herein were all Wickliffs positions condemned: also Iohn Husse, and Hierome of Prague (notwithstanding the Emperours safe-conduct) were both of them burned. In this Councell, the Schisme of Anti-popes, which had continued the space of nine and twenty yeares, was reformed: eedict the 13. had been elected by the Spaniard; Gregory the 1. by the French; Iohn the 24. by the Italians: And now in this Councell, begun in February 1414, and continued above three yeaes; wherein were assembled, be∣sides the Emperour, the Pope, and the Palsgrave of Rime, foure Patriarks, twenty seven Cardinals, seven and forty Archbishops, one hundred and threescore Bishop, Princes and Barons with their attendants, above thirty thousand; The foresaid e∣lected Popes were all put down, or else resigned; and in the place, as legitimate Pope, was elected Otho Lolona, by the name of Marti the fifth. In this yeare also, fell out an Accident, which shews the strict observance of Ec∣clesiasticall censures in those dayes. The wives of the Lord Strange, and Sir Iohn Trussell of Warington in Cheshire, striving for place at a Sermon in S. Dunsts Church in the East, their husbands being present, fell themselves to striving in their wives behalf, and great part-taking there was on both sides, some slaine, and many wounded: The delinquents were committed to the Counter, the Church suspen∣ded, and upon examination, the Lord Strange being found guilty, was by the Arch∣bishop of Canterbury adjudged to this Penance, which was accordingly performed: The Parson of S. Dunsts went before, after whom followed all the Lords servants in their shirts; after them went the Lord himselfe, bare-headed, with a waxe taper in his hand; then followed the Lady, bare-footed; and then last came the Arch∣deacon Reynold Rood: in which order they went from Pauls where the sentence was given, to S. Dunsts Church; where at the rehallowing thereof, the Lady filled all the Vessels with water, and according to the sentence, offered to the Altaran or∣nament of the value of ten pounds; and the Lord, a Pixe of silver, of five pounds A Penance, no doubt, which the Lord and the Lady would have redemed with a great deale of money, if the discipline of the Church had in those dayes allowed
it: but it seemes, the commutation of Penance was not as yet come in use. In his ninth yeare, in a Parliament at Leicester, a hundred and ten Priories alient were suppressed, because they spoke ill of his Conquests in France; and their posses∣sions were given to the King: but by him, and King Henry the sixth, were afterward given to other Monasteries, and Colledges o learned men. Works of Piety by him, or others in his time. THis King re-edified his Royall Manour, which was then called Sheene, now Richmond, and founded two Monasteries not farre from it; the one of Carthu∣sians, which he named Bethelem; the other of Religious men and women of the Or∣der of S. Bridget, which he named Syon: He also founded the Brotherhood of Saint Giles without Cripplegate in London. In the second yeare of his Reigne, Moore∣gate neere to Colemanstreet was first made, by Thomas Fawkener Major of London, who caused also the ditches of the City to be cleansed, and a common Privy that was on the Moore without the wall, to be taken downe, and another to be made within the City upon Wallbrooke, into the which brooke he caused the water of the City to be turned by grates of iron in divers places. In his sixth yeare, Wil∣liam of Sevenoak Major of London, founded in the Town of Sevenoak a Free schoole and thirteen Almshouses. This man was found at Sevenoak in Kent, anew-borne in∣fant of unknown Parents, but by charitable people was Christned and brought up, bound prentise in London, and came at last to be Major of the City. Also Robert Chicely Major of London gave liberally to the Almshouses founded by his brother Henry Chichey Archbishop of Canterbury, at Higham-Ferrers in Northamptonshire, where they were born. But Henry Chicheley the Archbishop founded two Colledges in Oxford; one called Bernard Colledge, renewed by Sir Thomas White, and named S. Iohns Colledge; the other called All-Soules, which continueth at this day as he left it. Also Iohn Kempe Archbishop of Canterbur, converted the Parish-Church of Wye in Kent where he was borne, into a Colledge of Secular Priests. Casualties happening in his time. IN the fift yeere of his Reigne a great part of the City of Norwich was burnt, with all the house of the Friers Preachers, and two fryers of that Order. In his third yeere, on the feast of the Purification, seaven Dolphins came up the River of Thmes, whereof foure were taken. Of his Wife and issue. HE married Catherine the daughter of king Charles the sixth of France, who was his Queene two yeeres and about three moneths, married at Troyes in Champaigne the third day of June 1420. and afterward February the foureteenth crowned at Westminster: Shee surviving king Henry, was re-married to Owen Teu∣ an Esquire of Wales, who pretended to be discended from Cadwallade the antien king of Wales, though some write him to be the sonne of a Brewer, whose mean∣nesse of estate was recompensed by the delicacy of his personage; so absolute in all the lineaments of his body, that the only contemplation of it might well make her forget all other circumstances; by him she had three sonnes, Edmond, Isper, and Owen, and a daughter that lived but a while. Her sonne Owen tooke the habit of Religion at Westminster, the other two were by king Henry the sixt (their halfe bro∣ther) advanced in honor: Edmond was created Earle of Richmond, and marrying the sole heyre of Iohn Beaufort Duke of Somerset, was Father, by her, unto Henry the saventh, king of England, the only heyre of the house of Lancaster. Iasper her second sonne was first created Earle of Pembroke, and after Duke of Bedford, but dyed without lawfull issue. This Queen, either for devotion or her owne safety, oke into the Monastery of Bermodsey in Southwarke, who dying the second o
January 1436. she was buried in our Ladies Chappell within St. Peters Church at VVestminster, whose corps taken up in the Reigne of king Henry the saventh, her Grand-childe (when he laid the foundation of that admirable structure) and her Coffin placed by king Henry her husbands Tombe, hath ever since so remained, and never since re-buried, where it standeth (the cover being loose) to bee seene and handled of any that will. By her king Henry had only one son, named Henry, who succeeded him in the Kingdom. Of his Personage and Conditions. HE was tall of stature, leane of body, and his bones small but strongly made, somewhat long necked, black haired, and very beautifull of face, swift in run∣ing, so as hee with two of his Lords, without bow or other engine, would take a wilde Buck or Doe in a large Parke: Hee delighted in songs and musicall Instru∣ments, insomuch that in his Chappell amongst his private prayers, he used certaine Psalmes of Dvid, translated into English meeter by Iohn Lydgate Monke of Bury. And indeed it may be truly said of him as was said of Aenaes: Quo justior alter; Nec pitate fuit, nec bello major & ari, for he seldom fought baell where he got not the victory, and never got victory whereof he gave not the glory to God, with pub∣lique Thanksgiving. He was a better man, a King then a Subject; for till then he was not in his right Orbe, and therfore no mervaile if he were somthing exorbitant. He was of a mercifull disposition, but not to the prejudice of wisedom; as think∣ing wise cruelty to be better then foolish pitty. He was no lesse politick then valian, for he never fought battell, nor wonne Town, wherein hee prevailed not asmuch by stratagem as by force. He was so temperate in his dyet, and so free from vain-glory, that we may truly say, he had something in him of Caesar which Alexander the Gre had not, that he would not bee drunke; and somhing of Alexander the Great, which Caesar had not, that he would not be flattered. He was indeede a great af∣fector of Glory, but not of glory the blst of mens mouthes, but of the Glory that fills the sailes of Time. He dyed of full yeeres, though not full of yeeres: if he had lived longer he might have gone over the same againe, but could not have gone further. If his love were great to Military men, it was not small to Clergy men, insomuch as by many he was called the Prince of Priests. Of his Death and Buriall. SOme say he was poysoned, which Polydore Virgill saith was much suspected: The Scots write that he died of the disease called St. Ficre, which is a Palsie and a Crampe: Eguerant saith that he died of St. Anthonies fire: But Peter Basset E∣squire, who at the time of his death was his Chamberlaine, affirmeth that hee died of a Pleurisie, which at that time was a sicknesse strange and but little known. Being dead his body was embalmed and closed in lead; and laid in a Chariot-Royall richly apparelled in cloath of Gold, was conveyed from Boys de Vinnes to Paris, and so to Roa, to Abevyle, to Cllys, to Dver, and from thence through London to West∣minster, where it was interred next beneath King Edward the Confessor; upon whose Tombe Queene Katherine caused a Royall picture to be layed, covered all o∣ver with silver plate gilt, but the head thereof altogether of massie silver; all which at that Abbies suppression were sacrilegiously broken off and transferred to po∣phaner uses. Hee dyed the last day of August, in the yeere one thousand foure hun∣dred twenty two, when he had reigned nine yeeres and five Moneths, lived eight and thirty yeeres. Of men of Note in his time. MEN of valour in his time were so frequent, that we may know it to be a true saying, Regis ad exemplu; and men of learning likewise in such numbers, that
we may know the Prince to have been their Patron. First Alayn de Lyn, a Carme∣lite Frier in that Towne, who wrote many Treatises; Then Thomas Otterborne a Franciscan frier who wrote an History of England; Then Iohn Seguerd, who kept a Schoole in Norwich, and wrote sundry Treatises, reproving as well the Monkes and Priests as Poets for writing of filthy verses. Robert Ros a Carmelite frier in Nor∣wich; who writing many Treatises, yet said nothing against the Wickleists. Richard Cyster borne o Nofolke, a man of great holinesse of life, favoring (though secretly) the doctrine of VVickliff; William Wallis a Black frier in Li, who made a booke of Moralizations upon Ovids Metamorphosis William Taylor a Priest and a Master of Art in Oxford, a stedfast follower of Wickliffes doctrine, and burnt for the same at Smithfield in London the last yeere of this ings reigne. Bartholomew Florarius, called so of a Treatise which he wrote called Florarium, who writ also another Trea∣tise of Abstinence, wherein he reproveth the corrupt manners of the Clergie, and the pofession of the Friers Menicants. Als Titus Livi de Fo Lvisis an Itlian born, but seeing he as rsiant here, and wote the life of this King, it is not un∣fit to make mention of him in this place: also many others.
THE REIGNE OF KING HENRY THE SIXTH. THere had beene a Race of Princes, of which for three generations together, it might be rightly sayd; Pulcherrima proles; Magna∣nimi Heroes nati melioribus Annis. For King Edward the Third had many Sons, not inferior in valour to the many Sons of King Pris, not excepting his valiant Son Hector, having so equall a match for him, as Edward the blacke Prince, who wanted but an Homer, to have been an Achilles. Then Iohn of Gun like∣wise had divers Sons, men as valorous as any that Age afforded. Then Henry the Fourth had foure Sons, o so heroicall disposition all, that you might know them all to be his Sons, only King Hery the Fifth to be his eldest. And now that in him the heroicall nature was come to the height, it degenerated againe in King Henry the Sixth, which must needs be attributed to the mothers side; who though in her selfe she were a Princesse of a noble spirit, yet being the issue of a crazie father, what marvell, if she proved the mother of a crazie issue! and yet even this issue of hers, a Prince no doubt, of excellent parts in their kinde, though not of parts kindly for a Princ; in a private man praise-worthy enough, but the sword of a King required a harder mettall than the soft temper of King Henry the sixth was made of: and in him we may see the fulfilling of the Text; Vae genti cujus Rex est puer; Woe to that Nation whose King is a Childe; for he was not above eight moneths old, when he succeeded his father in the Kingdome; although that Text perhaps is not meant so much of a child in years, for which there may be helps by good Protectors; as of a childe in abilities of ruling, whereof, though possibly there may, yet probably there can be no sufficient supply, of which, in this King we have a pregnant example; for as long as he continued a childe in yeares, so long his Kingdomes were kept flourishing by the Providence of his carefull Uncles; but assoone as he left being a Childe in years, and yet continued a childe in ability of Ruling, then presently began all things I pejus ruere, & retro sublapsa referri, all things went to wracke both in France and England. And thus much was necessary to be sayd by way of a Preface to that great fall as it were of Nilus, in King Henry the Sixth. Henry called of Windsor, because borne there, the only childe of King Henry the Fifth, as yet scarce nine moneths old, succeeded his Father, and was Proclaimed King of England on the last of August, in the yeare 1422; by reason of whose in∣fancie, King Henry his Father had before by his Will appointed, and now the Lords by their consent confirmed, the Regency of France to Iohn Duke of Bedford, the Government of England, to Humphry Duke of Glocester, the Guard of his Person to Thomas Duke of Exeter, and Hnry Beauford Bishop of Winchester, and Lord
Chancellor, wherein it was wisely provided that one man should not rule all, lest it should prove a spurre to aspiring; and withall stay them from envying one another, when many were alike placed in the highest forme of authoriy: and indeed they all carried themselves so uprightly and carefully in their places, that it well appeared the trust reposed in them by the dying King, had made a strong impression of love and loyalty towards his Son. The Duke of Bedford Regent of France, was to keepe that by the sword, which King Henry the Fifth by his sword had gotten, wherein he had many and great as∣sistants, specially the two terrours of France, Thomas Montacute Earle of Salisbury, and Iohn Lord Talbot; and amongst the French themselves, the Duke of Burgoigne, a friend no lesse powerfull, than firme unto him. The Dolphin also (now crowned king at Poytiers, and called Charles the seventh of France, his father being newly dead, within little more than a moneth after king Henry) had likewise great assis∣tants, the Duke of Alanson, and many other Peers of France, and of the Scos many, and some perhaps of the English that tooke part with him; by meanes whereof, the game of Fortune was a long time played betweene them with great variety. The first act of the Duke of Bedfords Regency, was an Oration which he made to the French in Paris, which wrought this good effect; that king Henry is Proclaimed king of England and of France, and such French Lords as were present did their Ho∣mages, and tooke their oathes to be true unto him. The first act of hostility was performed by the new king of France, who sends the Lord Granvile to Pont Meulan, who surprized it, putting all the English Souldiers to the sword; but the Regent sending thither Thomas Montacute Earle of Salisbury, so strongly beleaguered it, that the Lord Granvile not only surrendred it, but swore allegiance (though he kept it not) to the king of England, From thence the Earle marched to Seyne, which hee tooke by assault, and put all the Souldiers (except the Captain Sir William Maryn) to the sword. At this time the Regent, the Duke of Burgoigne, Iohn Duke of Brittaine, and his brother in law the Earle of Rchmond, (who revolted afterward to the new king of France, and was by him made Constable of France) met at Amyens; and there not only renewed the old League, but further enlarged it; to be offensive and defen∣sive respectively: and to make the friendship the more firme, the Regent married Anne the Sister of the Duke of Burgoigne at Troys. In this meane time the Parisians taking advantage of the Regents absence, conspired to have let in the new king in∣to Paris; but the day before the night appointed for his admission, the Regent with his power entred, apprehended the Conspirators, and put them to publicke execu∣tion. That done, he furnished all the Forts and places of strength with English∣men, and sent Sir Iohn Falstaffe, who tooke in Pacye, and Coursay, two strong Ca∣stles; whil'st himselfe with his forces tooke in Trayels, and Bry upon Seyne. The Constable of France the meane while with the new kings forces, layd siege to Cravant in Burgoigne; but the Regent sent thither the Earle of Salisbury, who set upon the French, and after a long fight, putting them to flight, slew about 1800 knights and gentlemen of note and three thousand common Souldiers, Scots, and French, tooke prisoners the Constable himselfe, the Earle of Ventadour, Sir Alex∣der Alerdyn, Sir Lewis Ferignye, and two and twenty hundred Gentlemen. Of the English part, were slaine Sir Iohn Gray, Sir William Hall, Sir Gilbert Halsall, Richard p Maddocke, and one and twenty hundred Souldiers. From thence the Erle led his forces to Montaguillon, and sate downe before it, which after five moneths Siege he took, whil'st the Duke of Suffolke took in the two strong Castles of Cowcye, and le Roche. Whil'st these things are done in France; in England the Protectour Ransomed and inlarged the young king of Scots, Iames the first; (who by the space of eigh∣teene yeares had been kept a Prisoner) which he did out of opinion, tht he might withdraw the Scots out of France, taking Homge and fealty of him for the Crown of Scotland, in these words; I ames Seward, King of Scot, shall be true and faith∣full to you Lord Henry, King of England and France, the Superiour Lord of Scotland
and to you I make my fidelitie for the sayd Kingdome, which I hold and claime of you, and shall do you service for the same, so God me helpe, and these holy Evangelists; and there∣withall, with consent of all the Nobility, the Protector gave him to Wife, Iane Daughter to the deceased Duke of Somerset, and Cosen Germane to the King, with a large Dowry, and married them at St. Mary-Overys in Southwarke; yet all this cur∣tesie could not keep him afterward from being unfaithfull, and unthankfull. And now the Protector sent over to the Regent ten thousand wel furnished Soul∣diers, with which fresh succour he wonne many Townes and places of strength; which the French seeing, and finding themselves too weak by plaine force to with∣stand the English, they sought by subtilty to compasse their ends; and first, they worke upon the inconstancie of the Duke of Brittaine, and his brother Arthur, by King Henry the fifth created Earle of Yewry, whom by gifts and promises they sub∣orned, perfidiously to deliver over into their possession, the Castles of Crotoye, and Yerney; but the English before the French Garrisons were setled, fell upon Cro∣toye and recovered it; and that done, the Regent besieged Yerney, and by secret mining, and violent Batteries so shooke the Walls, that they agreed to yeild it up, if not relieved by a certaine time: whereupon the Duke of Alason, with sixteene thousand French came to the rescue, but perceiving the English to be prepared to receive them, he wheeled about to Veroyle, and swore to the Townsmen that hee had put the Regent to flight, and rescued Yerney; which they believing, rendrd up Vernoyle to him: but the Regent followed him thither, when by the encourage∣ment of some fresh Companies of Scots come to his succour, he came to a battell in the field, where the English, with the losse of two thousand one hundred common Souldiers, and two of the Nobility, the Lord Dudley, and the Lord Charleton; got the honor of the day, and slew of their enemies, five Earles, two Viscounts, twenty Ba∣rons, and above seven thousand other of the French, besides two thousand seven hundred Scots lately arrived, and tooke Prisoners the Duke of Alanson himselfe, the Lord of Herys, and divers other French, and Sir Iohn Tourull, and two hun∣dred Gentlemen, besides common Souldiers. This battell was fought the eight and twentieth day of August, in the yeare 144, and thereupon Vernoyle was pre∣sently redelivered. After this, the Earle of Salisbury with ten thousand men, ta∣keth in the strong Towne of Mts, the Towne of St. Susan, the Fort S. Ber∣nard, and others; from thence he went to Ajou, where he performed such he∣roicke Acts, that his very name grew terrible in all France; as for instance, the new High-Constable perfidious Richmond, with forty thousand men layd Siege to the good Town of St. Iames in Benyo, the Garrison whereof consisted but of six hundred English, who being driven to some extremity, sallied forth, crying Sant George, a Salisbury; which word of Salisbury so frighted the French, thinking hee had been come to rescue them, that casting away their weapons, they ran all away, saving some few that yielded themselves prisoners, leaving all their Tents, fourteen Peeces of Ordnance, forty Barrels of Powder, three hundred Pipes of Wine, much Armour, and some treasure behinde them. After which, other Castles, as that of Beamt, of Vicount, Tenney, Gilly, Osce, Rusey, Vasicke, and many more were taken in by Sir Iohn Mongomery, and Sir Iohn Falstaffe; so as once againe the French are glad to betake themselves to their old course of fraud; they compounded with a Gascoigne Captaine for delivery of Alson to them; whereof the Regent having notice, he sent the Lord Willoughby, and Sir Iohn Falstaffe to prevent it, who en∣countering with Charles de Villiers, that with two hundred horse, and three hundred foot, was come to the place appointed for entry, tooke and slew them all, except some few horse, which saved themselves by flying. After which, the Earle of Salis∣bury tooke in and demolished above forty Castles and strong Piles, for which there was publique thanksgiving to God in London. Whil'st these things were done in France, an unkinde variance fell out betweene the Protector, and his brother the Bishop of Winchester, Lord Chancellor: for ap∣peasing whereof, the Regent having substituted the Earle of Warwick Lievtenant Generall in his absence, came into England, where in a Parliament he compounded
all differences between them: in honour whereof, king Henry kept a solemne feast; at which time the Regent dubbed the King knight, not yet above foure yeares old; and then the King presently invested with that dignity many of his servants: and Edmund Mortimer the last Earle of March, at this time dying, his Inheritance de∣scended to Richard Plantagenet sonne and heire to Richard Earle of Cambridge be∣headed at Southampton, who was now created Duke of York, & was afterward father to king Edward the fouh: and at this time also, Iohn Mowbray sonne and heire to Thomas Mowbray Duke of Norfolk, banished before by king Richard the second, was restored to the Title of Duke of Norfolk. And now, all things peaceably setled in England, the Regent, with the Bishop of Winchester, returned into France; where, at the intercession of the Duke of Burgoigne, the Duke of Alanson was ransomed, for two hundred thousand Crownes: and the Bishop of Winchester returned to Callice, where he was invested with the dignity and Hat of a Cardinall, which his brother the Regent put upon his head. About this time, the Duke of Glocester, Protector, tooke some blemish in his ho∣nour, by marying another mans wife, Iqueline Countesse of Haynoult, Holland and Zealand, who was maried before to Iohn Duke of Brabant yet living, and had lived with him ten moneths as his lawfull wife, but at that time upon some discontent gone from him, intending to be divorced: at which injury offered to the Duke of Brabat, the Duke of Burgoigne, being his Cosin, tooke so great offence, that first by friendly letters he admonished the Duke of Glocester of it, and that not prevailing, they grew to termes of challenge, and a Combat between them was appointed; but in the meane time, the Lady betrayed, was caried to the Duke of Burgoigne, who conveyed her to Gaunt; from whence, by friendship of a Burgonian knight, in mans apparell she escaped into Holland, and there made a defensive warre against her hus∣band the Duke of Brabant, and the Duke of Burgoigne. To her ayd, the Duke of Glocester sent the Lord Fitzwater, with a Power of a thousand men: but she being discomfited by the Duke of Brabant, and the Pope also pronouncing the first mari∣age legall, the Duke of Glocester deserted her, and then tooke for a second wife Eleanor daughter of the Lord Cobham of Sterborough, his old mistresse: and the Lady Iaqueline, after the death of Iohn Duke of Brabant, maried a meane Gentle∣man; whom the Duke of Burgoigne imprisoned, and brought herselfe to live in much trouble. And now in France, the Constable with forty thousand men besieged the Town of S. Iames de Benuron; and having made a breach fit for assault, whilst his Captaines stood streining of courtesie, which of them should first enter, Sir Nicolas Burdet with all his forces sallied forth, crying aloud, A Salisbury, a Suffolk; whose names struck such a terrour into the besiegers, that they stood like men amazed, of whom six hundred were slaine, two hundred drowned in the ditches, fifty taken prisoners, with eighteen Standards, and the Constable was glad to quit the place, and give over the Siege. At the same time also, the Earle of Warwick and the L. Scales, with seven thousand besieged Ponterson many weekes together; but Povsion waxing scant, the Lord Scales with three thousand men went a forraging into the Enemies Country; and in his returne with plenty of provision, was encountred with six thousand French, of whom he slew many hundreds, tooke above a thousand prisoners, and then retur∣ned safe into the Campe. About this time also, Sir Iohn Falstaffe besieged the strong Towne of Gravile, which after twelve dayes, offered to render it selfe by a day, if it were not relieved. The offer was taken, and Pledges delivered: but before the day came, they within he Towne had victualled and manned the place, and thereupon neglecting their Pledges, refused to render the Castle according to agreement: whereupon the Pledges were brought before the sight of them within the Castle, and there openly put to death. And now a conspiracy of the Clergie and Magistrates in Maunts so prevailed, that the Marshals of France with five hundred men, about midnight came to the Town∣walls;
where the Guard of the English, by those that seemed their friends, were sud∣denly massaced, and setting open the Gates, made way for the Enemy to enter: whereupon, the Alarum given, the Earle of Suffolk with the surviving English withdrew to the Castle, wherein they were sharply assayled by the French, who yet had more minde to ransack houses, and to make good cheere: whereof the Lord Tlbot having intelligence by Captaine Goffe, whom he had sent to discover the state of the French, he secretly gave notice to the Earle of Suffolk, who thereupon sallied forth of the Castle at a time when the Lord Tlbot was ready with his Troopes, and on both sides crying, St. George, a Tlbot, they fell upon the carelesse French, who lost foure hundred of their best men, the rest were all taken, the Town re-gained, and the Conspiratours, thirty Citizens, twenty Priests, and fifteen Friers, condemned and put to execution. Whilst these things went on prosperously in France, a great disaster fell out in England; for the right Noble Thomas Beauford (sonne of Iohn of Gut, and Katherine Swiford) Duke of Exeter, and Guardian of the King, makes king Henry his heire, and at East-Greenwich in Kent ended his life; whose place was presently supplyed by the Earle of Warwick, and the Earles place in France, by the Earle of Salisbury; who thereupon with five thousand men came to Orleace, and besieged the City, and won from the French the great fort. But here happened another great disaster: for from an high tower in this fort, the Besiegers observed the passages of the Townsmen; when the Noble Earle of Salisbury, intending to informe himselfe of the state of the Towne, unfortunately looking out at a window of the fort, with Sir Th Grgrave; a great shot from the Town striking the barres of the window, the splin∣ters thereof were driven into his head and face; of which wounds, within eight dayes he died. This was now a second weakning to the English party: but in his place the Earle of Suffolk succeeded; to whom the Regent sendeth Sir Iohn Fals with fresh supplies, whom the Lord de la Brets, nine thousand strong, endeavours to intercept: but Sir Iohn resolving to abide the charge, placeth his cariages behind, the horse next, and the foot before, lining his bowes with bill-men, and pitching stakes behind the Archers, who having discharged their first volley, retired behind the stakes: on which the French, forgetting their former defeats by that course, ran and goared their horses; by which their Vaward being disordered, the Battaile made a stand: which Sir Iohn perceiving, cryeth out, St. George! Theyie! at which words they fled indeed, and lost two thousand five hundred of their men, with the Lords de la Brets, and William Steward; eleven hundred were taken Priso∣ners: with whom, and a rich booty, they came to the Campe before Orleance. Hereof the besieged having notice, they offered to submit themselves to the Duke of Burgigne, who was contented to receive them, so as the Regent would consent: But the Regent consented not; and therefore in the meane time, the besieged made meanes to the Duke of Also, who furnished the Towne with fresh Forces and Provision; which put such spirits into the Citizens, that they made a sally out, slew six hundred English, and adventured upon the Bastile, where the Lord Tlbot com∣manded, who repelled them with great slaughter of their men; but yet the next day the Earle of Suffolk gave over his siege, and dispersed his Army into their Gar∣risons. And now the wheele of Fortune began to turn to the French against the English, which once set a going, was not easie to be stayed. And first, the Duke of Also tooke by assault the Towne of Iargeux, and in it the Earle of Suffolk and one of his brothers, and slew Sir Alexander Pole another of his brothers, and many other Pri∣soners in cold blood, by reason of a contention amongst the French, to whom the Prisoners should belong. Presently upon this, nother great blow was given the English: for the Lords Talbot, Scale, and Hungerford, going to fotifie the Town of S. Meu, were encountred by the said Duke of Alson, and Arthur of Britaine, with three and twenty thousand men: with whom the English Lords interchanged some blowes; but oppressed with multitude, were all three taken prisoners, all sore wounded, twelve hundred of their company slaine, and the rest hardly escaping
to Me, where they fortified themselves the best they could against future assaults. These were great blowes given to the English fortune in France; Salisbury slaine, and now Talbot taken prisoner: which though they made her a little to totter, yet there must be greater blowes given before she will fall. And indeed, these disasters were seconded by the perfidous surrender of many Townes and strong Holds to the French king; who now encouraged by these successes, marcheth into Champaigne, where by composition he tooke Troyes the chiefe City of that Province; Chaltos re∣belleth, and enforceth their Captaine to yield it up: by whose example the Citizens of Rhemes doe the like, where the French king is anew Proclaimed, and with ac∣customed ceremonies Anointed and Crowned; whereupon many Townes submit themselves to him, and revolt from the English. Upon this, the Duke of Bedford (to make the French know, that all the English strength consisted not in onely Sa∣lisbury and Talbot) with ten thousand English, besides Normans, marched out of Pais, and sent letters of defiance to the French king, affirming, that deceitfully and by unjust meanes he had stolne many Cities and places of importance belonging to the Crown of England; which he was come to justifie by battell, if he would ap∣point a time and place. To which the King of France making a slight answer, the Regent marcheth apace towards him, and as fast the King of France marcheth away: The Regent followed him, but could not overtake him, till he came neere Selys: there both the Armies encamped and embattelled, yet only some light skirmishes ped between them; and a night or two after, the French king fled with his Army to Bry: which the Duke thinking to be but a plot to draw him further off from Pa∣ris, of whose fidelity he had no great assurance, followed him no further, but re∣turned thither. At which time, the Regents brother the Cardinall, having prepared forces to assist Pope Martin in Bohemia, the Regent borrowed them of him for a pre∣sent expedition, and with them marched into Champaigne, where he found the French king encamped upon the Mount Pihall; whose number being twice as many as the Regents, yet by no provocations could he be drawn to battell, but secretly fled to Crispis; whereupon the Regent also returned to Paris. Whilst these things are done in France, In England, upon St. Leonards day the 6. of November 1429, King Henry not yet eight yeers old, was with great solemnity Crowned at Westminster: at whose Coronation were made six and thirty Knights of the Bathe, and after the solemnity, a feast; and if any man desire to know so much Cookery, hee may read in Fabian, all the dishes of meate that were served at that feast. About this time, in France, a strange Impostor ariseth; a maid called la Pucelle, taking upon her to be sent from God, for the good of France, and to expell the English: and some good indeed she did; for by her subtle working, the King was re∣ceived into Champaigne, and many Townes were rendred to him; whil'st the Lord Lnguevile tooke by surprize the Castle of Aumarle, and slew all the English that were in it. But all these were but petty acquests to the king of France: there is a knot of friendship between the Dukes of Bedford and Burgoigne, which must be bro∣ken, or he will never be able to compasse his designes. He therefore labours by all meanes possible to disunite them; wherein he so little prevailed, that the Duke of Burgige acquaints the Regent with all the practises; who thereupon, with many thanks, exhorteth him to continue fime, of which he should never have cause to repent him: And because Normandy was a principall part of the English strength in France, he goeth thither, and by many reasons perswades them, as their Ancestors had alwayes been, to be faithfull to the Crown of England. In this time of the Regents absence from Paris, the King of France drew all his forces thither, using all meanes possible, by Escalado, Battery, and burning the gates, to enter the City; but was so withstood by the vigilancy of the Citizens, that he was glad to sound Retreat, leaving his slaine and maimed souldiers behind him, all but the Pucelle, who being hurt in the legge, and almost stifled with myre in the ditch, was by a servant of the Duke of Alanson drawne up, and conveyed after the King to Berry, who by the way received the submission of the Inhabitants of Ligye.
Some other services were performed on both sides, by the Duke of Suffolk and Sir Thomas Kyriell, for the English; by the Bastard of Orleance and Sir Stephe le Hye, for the French; but of no great importance: till at last, the Pucelle (who a little before had caused an English Captaines head to be cut off, because he would not humble himselfe to her upon his knee) was by Sir Iohn of Luzemburgh taken, and presented to the Duke of Burgoigne, who sent her to the Regent, and he to the Bishop of the Diocesse, who judicially proceeding against her as a Sorceresse, and deceiver of the King and his subjects, she was (after many delayes of promise to discover se∣cret practises, and lastly of her feigning to bee with childe) publickly burnt at Roan. And now, the Regent finding how much the Crowning of the French king had furthered his designes, he made account the like effect would follow the Crowning of King Henry in France: whereupon he is sent for to come over; and comming to Paris, was, by his Uncle the Bishop of Winchester and Cardinall of Eusebius, not yet above nine yeares old, with all usuall ceremonies Crowned King of France, re∣ceiving the oaths of Homage and Fealty of all the French Nobility that were present, and of all the Inhabitants of Paris, and of the places adjacent. Upon this, Pope Eugenius laboured a Reconcilement between the two Kings, but could effect nothing, but onely a Truce for six yeeres: which agreed upon, King Henry reurn into England, and landeth at Dover, the eleventh of February. But the six-yeares Truce was scarce openly Proclaimed, when the French had cunningly possessed themselves of divers Castles and places of strength, justifying their actions, affirm∣ing That what was politickly obtained without blowes, was no infringement of the Truce: and afterwards they perfidiously conveyed two hundred men into the Castle of Roan, with intent to have surprized it; but being discovered, they were all taken, and either ransomed, or put to execution. Upon this, the Regent (whose wife, the Sister of the Duke of Burgoige, being lately dead, and he maried againe to Iaquelin the Earle of S. Pauls daughter, with whom he went over into England) returned againe to Paris; to whom the Lord Talbot, having now paid his ransome, commeth, bringing with him seven hundred tryed souldiers; and with them the Regent takes the field, where the French Army lay; but the French slun away in the dark, as not daring to abide the hazard of a battell. About this time, the Duke of Bourbon, taken at the battell of Agincourt, after eighteen yeares imprisonment, paying eighteen thousand pounds for his Ransome, the same day he was enlarged, dyed at London. And now a very great effect was produced out of a very small cause: There had been sparks of unkindnesse between the two great Dukes of Bedford and Burgoig, which brake out into a flame upon this occasion: A time and place was appointed, where they should meet to compound some differences that were between them; The place agreed upon, was St. Omers, a Town in Burgoigne: When the time came, they stood upon this nice point, Which of them should first come to the place; as thinking that he which did so, should thereby acknowledge himselfe to be the mea∣ner person. The Duke of Bedford thought he had no reason to doe it, seeing he was Regent of France, and therefore superiour to any subject in the Kingdome: And the Duke of Burgoigne thought he had no reason to doe it, seeing it was to be done in his own Dominions, where he was himselfe the Soveraigne Lord. Upon this nice point they parted without meeting; and the unkindnesse grew afterward to so great hatred, that the Duke of Burgoigne chose rather to be friends with him tht had murthered his father, than ever to have any more commerce with the Duke of Bedford. Thus was one great branch of assistance lopt off from the English, which had been a great meanes before to make it flourish: and it was not so much, that the assistace was taken from the English, as that it was added to the French; for after this, the Duke of Burgoige brought more assistance to the new king of France, than ever he had done before to the King of England. By which we may see, when the Divine Providence hath a worke to effect, what slight occasions it oftentimes takes to effect the worke.
Great blowes had been given before in France, to the English fortune by the ene∣mie, but now a blow was given to it by Destiny, which made the Enemyes blowes the more incurable; for now the wise, valiant, faithfull Regent of France, Duke of ford, Anjou, and Alansn, Earle of Mayne, Harcourt, Drieux, Richmond, and Car∣lile, and Viscount Bemont; upon the fourteenth of September 1435, ended his life at Pris, which was in a manner the ending the life of the English fortune in France: all former blowes had beene upon inferior members, but this was a blow upon the head, and therefore mortall, and indeed the English fortune in France, never  lied up its head, but very weakely. He was buried in our Ladies Church at , whereat the Nobility of Normandy much repined, who would have had thei owne Territory honored with his Sepulchre: yet see the levity of these men, who a few years after, in the Reigne of Lewis the Son of Charles, would have had his Monument to have beene demolished, as being dishonorable, such an Arch ene∣mie to France, should be Interred in the Metropolitan Citie of that Province: But  answered, God forbid, I should give way to so dishonorable an act, to disquiet his dead bones, who living would have disquieted us all, and it savours of too much basenesse to insult upon a dead Lyon. But yet in these disasters, there might have beene some reparation by a good Suc∣ceor, had not Envy and Ambition bred disturbance; the Duke of Somerset desired the Succession, but the Duke of Yorke obtained it; which bred such an envy in the Duke of Somerset towards him, that he laboured nothing so much as to crosse his designes, and was a means to hinder the Duke of Yorkes going to his charge so long, th the Prisians had time to thinke of freeing themselves from the English servi∣de; and thereupon the Citie after it had remained seventeen yeares in the posses∣ o the English, yeilds to the Constable, and upon composition expels all the Eng∣lish; and which was worse, many other Towns followed this example of Paris, for what Town would not willingly do as Paris did, the epitome as it were of all France? and which they stick not to call Le Monde de Paris, as though there were upon earth no ohr world but Paris. Even the Normans, who had alwaies been most firm to the English, y had run the ame course, if the Lord Talbot had not kept them in awe, with the laughter of five thousand of them that way inclined. And now after thes great losses, we must be content to play smaller game, cast at Castles and Forts, and some small Towns, like the strugling of dying men, doing acts of life, till there be no more life remaining; And this was now our case in France. The new Re∣gent with eight thousand Souldiers arrived at Harflw, and from thence marcheth to , where he wonne the reputation of justice and uprightnesse, notwithstand∣ing all the calumniations of the Duke of Somerset: when the revolted Duke of  pretending title to the Town of Callis, approacheth it with an Army of forty thousand men, takes the poore stile of Oy, and slaughters and hangs many of the fendants. The xards besieged the Castle of St. Mark, tooke it, and demolished it from thence they begirt Callis with a iege, but were repelled: Then the Duke of Brgoige sent the Lord Croy to besiege the Castle of Guysnes but were repelled thr also: In the meane time Pembroke the Herald brought a defiance to the Duke of urgoigne from the Duke of Glocester the Protector, that he would give him bat∣tell if he would abide it; to whom the Duke of Burgoigne answered, he should be  to finde him where he now was: Whereupon he calleth a Councell, and whilst they are debating what is best to be done, the Calliciens make a sallye, take the Ba∣ which they had builded, by force, and slew eight score of the Burgoigians, which so terrified them, that they upbraid the Duke of Burgoigne, and make both him, nd the Lord Croy to quit their quarters, and in such haste to be gone, that they left  reat part of their best Ordnance, and all their Provision for the reliefe and helpe of the besieged; and it seemes they had reason so to do, for the next day being the sven and twentieth of Iuly, the Duke of Glocester landed at Callis, with five and twenty thousand good fighting men, who finding the enemy recolled, forraged all the Countrey thereabout, and for the space of sixe weekes arrowed all th parts of Flders, Arthol, and Hainault; and then returning by St. Omers, Arde, and Gses, arrived at Callis.
And now we must look a little home, for the D. of Yorke returning into Egln findes the Castle of Roksborough beieged by the King of Scots, with thirty thusand men; but he hearing of the Earle of Northumberlands appoch, and the Dukes re∣turne, incontinently fled. And now againe to France, where the Towne of Hr∣flew was sold to the French, but the Duke of Somerset, and the Lord Talbot besetting it both by sea and land; though the Earle of Ewe, and the Bastard of Orleance and Bourbon, wih foure thousand men came to relieve it, yet upon composition, it was surrendred. And here we may have leave to speake of a private matter; for about this time the Dutchesse of Bedford married Sir Richard Woodvile, a gallant young Gentleman, but of small meanes, which though it offended her friends, yet it seems offended not God, who made her mother of many children by him; and amongst the rest, of the Lady Elizabeth, afterwards married to King Edward the fourth. Also about this time Iames King of Scots, who before had beene eighteene years Prisoner in England, and afterward released, with a wife of a noble house, a great Dowre, and many honorable Presents, yet proved ungratefull, was murthered in his bed-cham∣ber by night, whose murtherers being found out, were cruelly tortured. And now againe to France; when the Duke of Burgoigne could neither by force nor po∣licie take Cllice, he attempted a ridiculous practise, to cut a ditch that should drow both the Town and Country; but after much labour and expence, his designe like a vapour vanished into ayre. The Lord Talbot besieged Tankervile, and after foure moneths siege, hath it rendred to him: In revenge whereof, the French King in his owne person layes siege to Monstreau; which whil'st the Duke of Yorke was provi∣ding to rescue, he was discharged of his office, done of purpose by his enemies, to lay a blot upon him: A lamentable thing in a State, when private envy shall be suffered to undermine the publique safety; and by this meanes Sir Thomas Grard had the more opportunity to sell the Towne, for which, if he were a gainer in money, he was yet a loser in reputation, and hated both of French and English, in much dis∣content dyed. Arthur Constable of France, and Iohn Duke of Alanson besieged the Towne of Aurances, but were with dishonor repelled by the Lord Talbot: After this, Le Hyre sent Letters to them, that he had a promise from divers Burgers of Ro to let them in at any time appointed, against which time they came to Rze, within foure leagues of Roan; but the Lord Talbot having notice hereof, marched covertly to Roa, and from thence before day to Ryze, where he surprizeth the French, takes the Lord Fountaines, Sir Allan Geron, and many others, and with a rich booty re∣turneth to Roan. The sixt day of November, in the sixteenth year of the Kings Reign, the Earle of Warwicke having oftentimes been aboord, and still beaten back by tem∣pest, landed at Harflw with a thousand fresh Souldiers, and from thence came to Roa; but in the meane time the Duke of Burgoigne seeing no new Regent yet come, besiegth the Towne of Croy, to the reliefe whereof, the new Regent now come, sent the Lord Talbot with five thousand men, whose approach the Duke not enduring, retired to Abevyle, leaving onely foure hundred, with whom hee had manned the style by him there erected, which was soone gained, and all the soul∣diers either taken or slaine. And here the valiant Talbot sent word to the Duke, that if he would save his Countrey from vastation, he should come to a battell; but the Duke not liking the match, conveighs himselfe to Ayes: Twenty dayes to∣gether did the Lord Talbo with fire and sword passe through Piccardie, and Arthos without opposition, and then returned: Sir Thm Kyriell seized upon the Dukes Carriages and Ordnance; and having left in Crotoy victuall enough for six hundred men for a whole yeare, he brought the rest to the Earle of Warwicke. And now Henry Earle of Mortaige, Son to Edmund Duke of Somerset, arrived with two hun∣dred Archers, and three hundred Spears, took the Castle of St. Ayo, wherein were three hundred Scots and French; the Scots he flew all, and hanged the French, be∣cause they had sworn fealty to England, and broke it; he tooke likewise the Castle of Algarche, and by means of an ambush, taketh the Lord Camerois, comming to the rescue thereof. On the other side, the Towns of Neux in Brye, and Susan were sold
and delivered to the French by the treacherous Burgers. In Iune, the Earle of Hun∣tingt with two thousand Archers, and foure thousand Speares was sent into Gas∣coigne, whither the Earle of Danois was lately come to buy Towns and Castles, but the Earle of Huntington upon his comming thither, changed all the Captains and Of∣ficers, whereby he prevented all such bargains; and so farre had bribery spread it selfe at this time, that even in Normandy, the English Captaines ad but small confi∣dence in the Natives, and not much in some of their owne Nation; whereupon Sir Richard Wodvile, Sir William Chamberlaine, and sir William Peo were sent thither to stop the current of that corruption. At this time, the Councell of France procured a reconcilement between the king and the Dolphin, who had beene long in jealousies and dissention; which if t had not beene done, the kingdome had beene torne with Factions, and never beene able to subsist. And now in a great frost and snow, the English under the conduct of Sir Iohn Clifford, having covered their Armour with white shirts, and their heads with white Alm skulls, came to Ponthois by night, and undiscovered past the ditches, scaled the walls, slew the Guards, and tooke the Towne; but this good lucke was accom∣panied with a bad of more importance, for presently upon it, the Earle of Warwicke dyed in the Castle of Roan, and conveyed into England, was buried in his Castle of Wrwicke. To reduce Pontois, the French King in person layeth siege unto it; when Richard Duke of Yorke being the second time made Regent, having with him the Earle of Oxford, aud the Earle of Ewe, levyes a power to raise the Siege; and arriving there, sends word to the King, that the next morning he would give him battell; but the King liked not his bidding, but leaving his Ordnance, at mid∣night stole away to Poyssy; thither also the Regent followes him, but with no provo∣cations could draw him to fight. About this time, a treaty for Peace between the two Kings is appointed to be held at Callis, by the mediation of the Dutchesse of Burgoigne, a Portugall Lady; Com∣missioners meet of both sides, but nothing concluded, only the Duke of Orleance who had been prisoner to the English five and twenty years, is by the Dutchesse me∣dation, ransomed with three hundred thousand Crowns of the Duke of Burgoignes money. The Lord Willoughby besiegeth Deepe, which the Dolphin with sixteene thousand men commeth to raise; and there young Talbot is taken prisoner, with Sir Ioh Peto, and sir Iohn Repley, but are shortly after redeemed by exchange. And now another weakning happened to the English party, the Earle of St. Paul forsakes them, and is reconciled to the King of France. The English lay siege to Tartus, for the raysing whereof, the French King marcheth thither with 60000 men, re∣lieveth the Towne, and then marcheth to Saveryne, which he taketh in, and in it, Sir Iohn Rampston; after which, he tooke in Arques, but then the English cutting off all convoyes of victualls from comming to him, he is forced to returne; after whose departure, the English recover all that he had taken; and to boot, take his Lietenant prisoner, slaying or hanging all his Souldiers. In this meane while the Lord Talbot taketh in Conquet, and driveth the Bastard of Orleance from the siege of Gaglird; but the French in the Castle of Cornhill detained many English prisoners for redeeming of whom, Sir Francis the Aragonist used this stratagem; he apparel∣led halfe a dozen lusty fellowes like Peasants carrying baskets with corne and victu∣alls, and sends them to the Castle, while he with his company lyes in ambush, in a Valley neere the Castle; the six unsuspected are admitted, and comming to the Captaines chamber, seize upon him, and withall give the signe to the ambush, who comming readily on, entred the Castle, put the Souldiers to the sword, set the pri∣soners at liberty, burnt downe the Castle, and with the booty and Captaine of the Castle, returned to Roan. Whil'st these alternations passed in France, a more unnaturall passed in Engand, the Uncle riseth against the Nephew, the Nephew against the Uncle; The Duke of Glocester Articles against the Cardinall, charging him with affecting Prehemi∣nence, to the derogation of the Kings Prerogative, and contempt of his Lawes;
which Articles are delivered to the King, and by him to his Councell, who being most of the Clergie, durst not meddle in them, for offending he Cardinall. On the other side, the Cardinall finding nothing whereof directly to accuse the Duke of Glocester himselfe, accuseth his or her selfe, the Lady Eleanor Cotham he Dukes wife, of Treason, for attempting by sorcery and witchcraft the death of the King, and advancement of her husband to the Crown: for which, though acquied of the Treason, she is adjudged to open Penance, namely, to goe with a wax taper in her hand, hoodlesse (save a kerchiffe) through London, divers dayes together, and after to remaine in perpetuall imprisonment in the Isle of Man. The crime objected a∣gainst her, was procuring Thomas Southwell, Iohn Hunne Priests, Roger Bollingbrock a supposed Necromancer, and Margery Iourdan called the Witch of Eye in Suffolke to devise a picture of waxe in proportion of the king, in such sort by sorcery, that as the picture consumed, so the kings body should consume: for which they were all condemned; the witch was burnt in Smithfield; Bollingbrooke was hanged, constantly affirming upon his death, that neither the Dutchesse, nor any other from her did e∣ver require more of him, than onely to know by his art, how long the king should live: Iohn Hunne had his pardon; and Southwell dyed the night before he shoud have been executed. About this time, the Countesse of Cominges being dead, the king of France and the Earle of Arminiack are Competitors for the Inheritance: The Earle takes pos∣session; but fearing the King of France his greatnesse, makes offer of his daughter in mariage to the King of England, with a large portion in money, and besides, to de∣liver full possession of all such Townes and Castles as were by him or his Ancestors detained in Aquitaine, and had been formerly by the Progenitors of the King of England, conquered. The Ambassadors for this businesse, were by King Henry gra∣ciously heard, and honorably returned: after whom were sent Sir Edward Hall, Sir Robert Rose and others, to conclude all things, and the young Lady is by Proxy af∣fianced to king Henry. But the king of France not liking the proceeding of the match, sendeh the Dolphin with a puissant Army, who tooke the Earle, with his youngest sonne, and both his daughters, aud gained the Counties of Arminiack, Louverne, Rouergue, Moulessenois, with the Cities of Severe and Cadeack, chasing the Bastard of Arminiack out of he Country; by meanes whereof, the mariage was then deferred, and left in suspense. In this distraction of Christendome, many Princes, the kings of Spaine, Denmark, and Hungary, became Mediators for a Peace between the two kings of France and England: Ambassadors of both sides are sent, many meetings were had, many mo∣tions made, but in conclusion, onely a Truce for eighteen moneths is agreed upon. In the meane time, the Earle of Suffolk one of the Commissioners for the Peace, takes upon him beyond his Commssion, and without acquainting his fellowes, to treat of a mariage between the king of England, and a kinswoman of the king of France, Neece to the French Queene, daughter to Raynr Duke of Anjou, stiling himelfe king of Sicilie and Naples: In which businesse he was so intentive, that it brought an aspersion upon him of being bribed: but howsoever, an Enterview betwixt the two kings is appointed, without any warrant of king Henries part, to be between Charter and Roan. The Commissioners returne; the Earle of Suffolk sets forth the beauty of the proposed Bride, and the great benefits that would redound to the kingdome by this match. The king was easily induced to credit the relation; but divers of the kings Councell, especially the Duke of Glocester, opposed it; partly for the meannesse of the match, her father being onely a Titular Prince, and withall but poore, unable to give any portion at all; and partly, for the wrong which should hereby be offered to the Duke of Arminiacks daughter, to whom the king had been in solemne manner publickly affianced. But Reasons could not prevaile against fa∣vour: the Earle of Suffolks affirmation must not be undervalued. And hereupon, a new creation of Lords first made; (Iohn Beaufort Earle of Somerset, made Duke of Somerset; Iohn Lord Talbot made Earle of Shrewsbury; Iohn Holland Earle of Hun∣tington, made Duke of Exeter; Humfry Earle of Stafford, made Duke of Buckingham;
Henry  Earle of Warwick, made Duke of Warwick; Edmund Beaufot Earle of Dorset, made Marquesse Dorset; and William de la Poole Earle of Suffolke, made Marquesse of Suffolke:) this new Marquesse honorably accompanied, is sent into Frace to fetch the Lady Margaret the proposed Bride; who shortly after is ma∣ried at Southwick in Hampshire, and crowned Queen of England at Westminster, on the 30 day of May 1444, in the three and twentieth yeare of king Henries Reigne. And now in stead of benefits by this mariage, there presently followed great incon∣veniences: for first, in exchange of her person, the Dutchy of Anjou, the City of , with the whole County of Mayne, (the best props of the Dutchy of Nor∣mandy) are agreed to be surrendred into the hands of the French: and then the Duke of Arminiack, to revenge the injury offred to his daughter, is a meanes to ex∣pell the English ut of all Aquitaine. At this time, the Duke of Somersets spleen against the Duke of Yorke, not onely is revived, but is growne stronger; for the Duke of Yorke, who was now after the death of the Earle of Warwick, made the second time Regent of France, is so un∣dermined by him, through assistance of the new Marquesse of Suffolke, who bore now all the sway with the King and Queen; that not onely he supplanted him in his place, but planted himselfe in it, to the great heart-burning of the Duke of York and his friends; but he wisely dissembled his anger, and for the present passed it ove. And now is no man in grace, but the new Marquesse of Suffolk; all favours from the King and Queene must passe by him, and the extent of his power over-racheth all the Councell: He gets of the King the wardship of the body and lands of the Coun∣tesse of Warwick, and of the Lady Margaret, sole daughter and heire of Iohn Duke of Somerset, afterward mother to king Henry the seventh. And now, the kings weaknesse in judgement growes every day more apparent then other, whil'st go∣verned by no counsell, but of his Queen; and she by no counsell but her owne will, and the new Marquesse of Suffolke. King Henry is himself the least part of the king, and serves but to countenance the devices of others, whereof he little understands the drifts; and which, proving ill, the blame must be his; if well, the benefit and ho∣nour, others. For by instigation of the Queene, he suffers the Duke of Glocester, for his care of the Common-wealth called the good Duke, to be excluded not onely from Command, but from the Counsell-Table; and permits Informers, st on by the Marquesse of Suffolke, the Duke of Buckingham, the Cardinall Bishop of Win∣chester, and the Archbishop of Yorke, to come aganst him; who lay to his charge, that he had caused divers persons to be executed contrary to Law: wherein though he justified himselfe, yet no justification would be heard; but to avoyd tumultuary part-taking, it was concluded, he should be privately convicted and condemned: and to this end, a Parliament by the procurement of his enemies, unwitting to the king, is called at Bury; to which the Duke of Glocester resorting, is, on the second day of the Session, by the Lord Beamont L. High Constable (abetted by the Duke of Buckingham) arrested and put in Ward, all his followers sequestred from him, whereof two and thirty are committed to severall prisons; and the next day after his imprisonment, he is found in his bed, murthered; yet shewed the same day, as though he had dyed of an Imposthume; though all that saw his body, saw plainly that he dyed of a violent and unnaturall cause: some say, strangled; some, that a hot spit was put up at his fundament; and some, that he was stifled between two feather∣beds. His corps the same day was conveyed to St. Albans, and there buried. Five of his meniall servants, Sir Roger Chamberlaine knight, Middleton, Herbert, Arizis, Esquires, and Iohn Needham Gentleman, were condemned to be hanged, drawne, and quartered; and hanged they were at Tiburne, let downe quick, stript naked, marked with a knife to be quartered; but then the Marquesse of Suffolk, to make a shew as though he had no hand in the businesse, brought their Pardon, and deli∣vered it at the place of Execution, and so their lives were saved. It is no unmemo∣rable thing which Sir Thomas Moore writes of the pregnancy of this Duke of Gloce∣ster: It happened, the King comming one time in Progresse to St. Albans, a Begger borne blinde, as he said, at the Shrine of St. Alban obtained his sight: which miracle
being noised in the Towne, the Duke of Glocester being there with the King, d∣sired to see him, whom being brought unto him, he asked if he were borne blinde, who told him, yes truly; and can you now see (saith the Earle) yes I thanke God, and St. Albon, saith the begger; then tell me saith the Earl, what colour is my gown? the begger readily told him the colour; and what colour saith the Earle is such a mans gown? the begger likewise told him presently, and so of divers others. Then saith the Earle, go you counterfeit knave, if you had been borne blinde, and could ne∣ver see till now, how come you so suddenly to know this difference of colours? and thereupon, instead of an Almes, caused him to be set in the Stocks. But in the death of this Duke, the Queene who had a speciall hand in it, was either not so intelligent, or no so provident as she might have beene; for as long as he had lived, his Primogeniture would have kept backe the Duke of Yorkes claime to the Crown, being but discended from the fifth Sonne of Edward the third, where this Duke Humphrey was discended from the fourth. And here were the first seeds sowne be∣tweene the two houses of Lacaster, whose badge was the Red-rose, and Yorke, whose badge was the White-rose. And now upon the death of this Duke of Glo∣cester, the Duke of York began amongst his familiars privily to whisper his right and title to the Crown; but so politickly carried his intent, that all things were provided to further his project, before his purpose was any whit discovered. And in this time the rich Cardinall and Bishop of Winchester dyes, who lying on his death bed, as Doctor Iohn Baker his privie Counsellor and his Chaplain writeth, used such like words; why should I dye, saith he, having so much riches? If the whole Realme would save my life, I am able either by policy to get it, or by money to buy it: Fie, will not death be hired? will money do nothing? and other words to such purpose. But he being dead, there succeeded in his Bishopricke a more deserving Prelate; William Walee, called so of the place in Lincolneshire where he was borne, though his name was Patterne, of the worshipfull family whereof hee was descended. And now to the end the Marquesse of Suffolke might not come behinde them in dignity, whom he went before in power, he is about this time made Duke of Suffolke. In France about this time a victory was gotten, which proved no better than an overthrow; Before the Truce was expired, Sir Francis Surens an Aragonois, a man thought worthy to be admitted into the honorable Order of the arter; taking advantage of the security of the French Garrisons, suddenly surprizeth a Frontier Towne called Fougiers, belonging to the Duke of Brittaine; the Duke advertiseth the French King thereof, who by his Ambassadors complaines both to the King of England, and to the Duke of Somerset then Regent in France: Answer was made, it was the fault of the Aragonois, who did it without warrant from either the King, or the Councell; neverthelesse Commissioners are appointed to meet at Louviers, to treate of some course for satisfaction; but in the time of the Treaty, newes is brought to the Regent, that the French by a stratagem of a Carter that with a load of Hey comming over the Draw-bridge, caused the Axletree to breake; and whil'st the Porter was ready to helpe the Carter, the Porters braines were beaten out, the Towne of Ardes surprized, and the Lord Fawcobridg Captaine thereof was taken prisoner. Restitution being required by the English, answer is made them in their owne language, it was done without warrant from either the French King, or any of his Councell, so it was but one for another; and from thence forward the Truce is broken of both sides, and all things grow worse and worse. The French King by composition taketh Louviers, Gerbury, and Veroyle, whil'st the Regent stands demur∣ring what were best to be done; If he command, not obeyed, If he counsell, not followed, as it happens to men once blemished in Reputation, to have an ill con∣struction made of all their actions; by which means the French go on without re∣sistance, get Conce, Guisard, Gatiard, St. Loe, Festampe, and many other pieces in Normandy; upon notice whereof, Maulesson in Guyen surrenders to the Earle of Foi, and by their example the City of Ron it selfe takes composition to surrender, where the E. of Shrwsbury, and the Lord Butler, heire to the E. of Ormond, were kept
pledges till it was performed. It is true, succours were provided to be sent out of England, under the conduct of the Duke of Yorke; but a Rebellion happening in Ireland, which was thought of more importance to be speedily suppressed, diverted him and his forces thither, where not only he suppressed the Rebels, but so wonne the hearts of that people, that it was no small furtherance to his proceedings after∣ward. A fresh supply indeed of fifeene hundred men, under the command of sir Thoms Kyriell is sent over; but what could a handfull of men do against such multi∣tudes as opposed them? for he marching with the rest of the Army towards Baugeux, was encountred by the Earle of Clermont, with seven thousand French and Scots, whom yet at first he made to recoyle, till the Constable of France with foure hun∣dred men at Armes, and eight hundred Archers came to the rescue, and then fresh men comming upon them that were already tyred, the English lost three thousand and above seven hundred, besides divers that were taken prisoners. After this losse of men, followes presently a losse of Towns; Harflew is assaulted, and though vali∣antly for a while defended by Sir Robert Curson, yet surrendred at last upon com∣position: Then the French King with an Army royall besiegeth Caen in Normandy, a Towne belonging to the Duke of Yorke, defended in his absence by his Lievte∣nant Sir David Hall; but the Duke of Somerset being Regent, in commiseration of his Dutchesse being in the Towne, notwithstanding the sout opposition of Sir Da∣vid Hall, surrenders it upon composition to the French; whereof Sir David giving notice to the Duke of Yorke, it bred such a deadly quarrell between the two Dukes, that they were never after throughly reconciled. And thus is all Normandy recove∣red from the English, after it had been in their possession a hundred years; and fi∣nally, all France is reduced to the obedience of Charles the French King. And now hereafter there will be little to do abroad, but there will be the more to do at home, and more bloud will be shed in England by civill dissentions, then was shed before in all the Wars of France. This losse of Normandy and other parts in France, is imputed much to the Duke of Somerset, at that time Regent; but the Duke of Suffolke must beare a great part of the blame, partly for having beene the cause of the surrender of Anjou and Mayne, and the chiefe procurer of the Duke of Glocesters death, and partly for having wilfully wasted the Kings treasure, and been a meanes to remove the ablest men from the Councell Boord; of all which asper∣sions the Queen takes notice, and knowing how far they trenched upon the Dukes destruction, and her own; She so wrought, that the Parliament assembled at the Black-Friers, is adjourned to Leicester, and from thence to Westminster; but though all means were used to stop these accusations against the Duke, yet the lower House would not be taken off, but exhibited their Bill of Grievances against him: That he had traiterously incited the Bastard of Orleance, the Lord Presigny and others to levy warre against the King, to the end that thereby the King might be destroyed; and his Son Iohn, who had married Margaret Daughter and sole Heire of Ion Duke of Soset, whose title to the Crowne the sayd Duke had often declared, in case king Henry should dye without issue, might come to be King; That through his treache∣ry the French King had gotten possession of the Dutchie of Normandy, and had ta∣ken prisoners the valiant Earle of Shrewsbury, the Lord Fawcbridge and others: but to these accustions, he peremptorily affirmed himselfe not guilty, so much as in thought. Then were further allegations made against him, that being with others sent Ambassador into France, he had transcended his Commission, and without pri∣vity of his fellow Commissioners, had presumed to promise the surrender of Anjou, and the delivery of the County of Mauts to Duke Rayner, which accordingly was erformed, to the great dishonour of the King, and detriment of the Crowne; That he had traiterously acquainted the French King with all the affaires of State, and passages of secrecie, by which the enemy, was throughly instructed in all the designes of the King and Councell: That he had received rewards from the French king, to divert and disappoint all succours sent to the kings friends in France. Up∣on these and divers other accusations brought against him, to bleare the peopes eyes, he is committed to the Tower; but the Parliament was no sooner dissolved,
but he was set at liberty; which so incensed the common people, that they made an Insurrection; and under the leading of a desperate fellow, styling himselfe Blew∣beard, they committed many outrages; but by the diligence of the Gentlemen of the Country, the Captain was apprehended, and the Rebellion ceased. And now another Parlament is called, where great care is taken in chusing of Burgesses, presu∣ming thereby to stop any further proceeding against the Duke of Suffolke; but his personall appearance at the Parliament gave such a generall distaste to the House, though he came in the company of the king and Queene, that they forbore not to begin the Assembly, with Petitioning the king, for punishment to be inflicted upon such as had plotted or consented to the resignation of Ajo, and Mayne, whereof by name they instanced in the Duke of Suffolke, Iohn Bishop of Salisbury, Sir Iame Fynes, Lord Say and others. This Petition was seconded by the Lords of the up∣per House: whereupon, to give some satisfaction to the Houses, the Lord Say Lord Treasurer, is sequestred from his place, the Dukes Officers are all discarded, and himselfe formally banished for five yeares, but with an intent after the multitude had put out of minde their hatred against him, to have revoked him: but God did otherwise dispose of him, for when he was shipped in Suffolke, with intent to have passed over into France; he was met by an Englishman of War, taken and carried to Dover sands, and there had his head chopt off, on the side of the long-boate, which together with the body was left there on the sands, as a pledge of some sa∣tisfaction for the death of Duke Hphry. Whilst these things are done in England, the Duke of Yorke in Ireland began to make his way to the Crowne, as descended from Philippe daughter and heire of George Duke of Clarence, elder brother to Iohn of Gaunt, great Grandfather to the present king Henry the sixth. And for a beginning, it is privately whispered, that king Hnry was of a weake capacity, and easily abused; the Queene of a malignant spirit, and bloudily ambitious, the Privie Councell, if wise enough, yet not honest enough, regarding more their private profit, then the publique good, that through their delinquencies all Frce was lost, and that God would not blesse the usurped possession of king Hery: with these suggestions the Kentishmen seemed to be ta∣ken; which being observed by an instrument of the Duke of Yorke, called Mortimer, he takes his time, and tells the multitude, that if they will be ruled by him, he will put them in a course to worke a generall Reformation, and free them for ever from those insupportable burthens of taxations, so often, upon every slight occasion obtru∣ded upon them. These promises of Reformation and freedome from impositions, so wrought with the people, that they drew to a head; and make Mortimer, otherwise Iacke Cade their leader, who stiling himselfe Captaine Mend-all, marcheth with no great number, but those well ordered, to Blck-heath, where betweene Eltha and Greenwich, he lay by the space of a moneth, exercising his men, and sending for whom he pleased, and for what he pleased: Then he presents to the Parliament the complaints of the Common: That the Queenes favorites share amongst them the Revenews of the Crowne, whereby the king is enforced for the supportation of his present estate to taxe and burthen the Commons, to their utter undoing, and to the generall impoverishment of the kingdome: That the Commons have their com∣modities daily taken from them, for the purveyance of the kings Houshold, for which they are not payd, nor any assurance for payment thereof given, but onely Court promises: That upon the apprehension of any man for treason or felony, the kings meniall servants, before conviction, bgge the goods and lands of the im∣peached; whereupon indirect and unlawfull proceedings are used by subornation of witnesses, embracery of jurors, and great mens letters to the Judges; whereby Ju∣stice is perverted, and the innocent after attainted, if not executed, yet at least im∣prisoned to their undoing: That the Commons have no legall proceedings in their Law-suits, so as the rightfull owners of Inheritance, dare not (if opposed by any Courtier) maintaine their Titles, or attempt the recovery of their interest, how just so ever: That the kings Collectors and other Accomptants are much troubled in passing their Accompts, by new extorted Fees, and by being enforced to procure
a late invented Writ of Quorum nomina for allowance of the Barons of the Cinque-Ports, and their suing out their Quietu at their own charge, without allowance from the King: That the Bayliffs of Sheriffes under colour of the green waxe out of the Exchequer, doe levy greater summes than are by the Record justifiable, yet maintained; That they cannot have the freedome of electing knights and Burges∣ses for the Parliament; but by letters from the Favorites of the Court, to their friends and Retainers, the Knights and Burgesses are commonly chosen: That they are too much troubled with too often comming to attend the generall Sessions, being en∣forced in many places to make five dayes journey to the place where they are kept. These and some other, were the complaints of the Commons; but the Captaine for his owne particular (after protestation made to live and dye in the quarrell of the King) required, that his Majesty would be pleased to receive again into favor, the truly noble Prince the Duke of Yorke, and with him the Right Honorable the Dukes of Exeter, Buckingham, and Norfolke, and the ancient Noblemen of the Realm; by the undue practises of Suffolke, and his complices, commanded from his presence, and that all their opposites might be banished the Court, and put from their Offices: That there might be a generall amotion of corrupt Officers, an abolition of the Greene waxe, and other instruments of Extortion out of the Exchequer; a qualification of the rigour of proceeding in the Kings-Bench; an inhibition of une∣quall purveyance of provision for the Kings houshold, and a present execution of the Promoters, Slegge, Crmer, Isell, and East, whom he pretended by wrongfull information to have abused the king, and wronged his Subjects. These Petitions are sent from the Lower-House to the Upper, and from thence committed to the Lords of the Kings Privy Councell, who having examined the particulars, explode them as frivilous, and the Authors thereof to be presumptuous Rebels. Where∣upon the king is solicited by his Privy Councell, to prosecute them by force rather than intreary; which advise is seconded by the Queene as conceiving they secretly aymed at her: and hereupon the king drawes his Forces to Greenwich, and appoin∣teth divers Lords to assaile the Rebels; but the Lords could get no followers to fight against them who sought only for reformation of abuses; and for punishment of such Traitors as the Lord Say the kings Chamberlane was: whereupon the Lord Say is presently committed to the Tower, the king and Queene retire to London, from whence within two dayes, the king being now fifteen thousand strong, mar∣cheh in Person towards Captain Mend-all, who politickly withdraweth his forces into Sevenake wood; upon notice wherof, the king retireth again to London, but the Queen longing for dispatch, send the two Staffords, Sir Humphrey, and William, with many hot-spurs of the Court to follow the Rebels, who were soone cooled; for they found Captain Mend-all in good order, ready to receive them, and in the first encounter, slew Sir Humphry, and afterwards his brother, and put all the rest to flight; the k. Forces being at Blackeath, could neither by threats nor intreaties be gotten to go to the rescue, but rather wished the Queen and her favorites in the Staffords case, or that the Duke of Yorke were in England, to ayd his Cosen Mortimer, (now first acknowledged to be of his kindred) and many of them stole away to the Rebels, whose number from Sussex and Surrey daily encreased, whom yet their Captain re∣straineth from forraging or taking away any thing by force, and so returneth againe to Blackeath, where the kings Army lay the night before, but was now fallen down to Greenwich. And now the Archbishop of Canterbury, and the Duke of Bucking∣ham are sent to expostulate with the Rebels about their demands; to whom Iacke Cade gave very good language, but directly affirming no cessation from Arms, un∣lesse the king in Person would heare the grievances of the Subject, and passe his Princely word for reformation of their wrongs. This resolution of his made known to the king, who was not sure of his own Souldiers faith, made him march presently away to Killingworth Castle in Warwickeshire, where he fortified himselfe, as expe∣cting a siege, having left the Lord Scales onely to Guard the Tower. Iacke Cade taking advantage of the kings departure, commeth to Southrke, where hee quarters his men, streightly charging them to commit no outrage, nor do wrong
o any; which was duly oberved. The next morning e marcheth to London-bridge, where he caused his men to cut the ropes of the Drawbridge, no resistance being made against him; and so in good order marcheth up by London∣stone, upon which he strooke his sword, saying, Now is Mortimer Lord of London. The Major of London, Sir Thomas Chalton, standing upon the threshold of his doore bade him take heed he attempted nothing against the quiet of the City: To whom e made answer, Let the world take notice of our honest intention by our actions. And indeed this orderly cariage of himselfe and his company, wonne him a good o∣pinion amongst the common sort of people: And now assming to himselfe the place of Chiefe, he sendeth o his letters of safeconduct, to such whom he pleased to make use of: amongst other, he wrote this letter to Thomas Cok Draper of London. By this our writing ensealed, we grant, that Thomas Cock of London Draper, shall safely come into our presence, and avoyd from us againe at his pleasure, with all other persons comming in his company. Subscribed thus: His Majesties loyall Subject, Iohn Mortimer, Captaine Mend-all. Upon Cocks admission, he had private conference with three other that came with him; to whom, at their departure, he gave these instructions in writing: You shall charge all Lombards and Merchant-strangers, Genona's, Venetians, Florentines, and others, this day to draw themselves together, and to ordaine for us the Captain, twelve Harnesse compleat of the best fashion, foure and twenty Brigandies, twelve Battell-axes, twelve Glaves, sixe horses with saddle and bridle compleatly furnished, and a thousand maks in ready money: and if they shall faile herein, we shall strike off the heads of as many as we can get. But they failed not, but sent him what he had demanded: who thereupon the next morning, being the third of Iuly, returnes to London; and pre∣sently sends to the Lord Scales, to bring his Prisoner the Lord Say to the Guildhall, whither he had called the Lord Major with his brethren; before whom he caused the Lord Say to be arraigned, who craving to be tryed by his Peeres, was forth∣with taken from his keeper, caried to the Standard in Cheap, and there had his head chopt off, which being pitched upon a Pike, was borne before him to Mile-end, whi∣ther he went to have conference with the Rebels of Essex; and by the way meeting with Sir Iames Cromer High-sheriffe of Kent, who had lately maried the Lord Sayes daughter, he caused his head also to be strucken off, and caried likewise before him in deision. The next morning he came againe to London; where, after publick execution done upon some of his fellowes, and particularly upon a petty Capaine of his, named Paris, that had done things contrary to his Proclamation; upon a displeasure taken against Alderman Malpas, he sent and seized upon all his wares and goods, and fined Alderman Horne in five hundred marks: whereupon, the Citi∣zens finding him to grow every day more insolent than other, they send to the Lord Scales for assistance, who sendeth Matthew Gough an old souldier to them, with some forces and furnitures out of the Tower; who presently make a stand at the Bridge, where Cade notwithstanding forceth his passage, and then began to set fire on houses where many aged and impotent people miserably perished; Captaine Bough Alder∣man, Sutton and Robert Hayson, valiantly fighting, were slaine: yet upon a fresh supply, the Londoners recovered the bridge againe, and drove the Rebels beyond the Stoope in South-warke; at which time, both sides being weary, agreed of a Truce, till the next day. After the Retreat, Cade finding he had lost many of his best men, was driven for supply, to set at liberty all the Prisoners in Southwarke, aswell Felons as Debtors: when now his company entring into consideration of their danger, and of the desperate services their Captaine had brought them to, began to discover by their countenances their willingnesse to leave this course: whereof the Archbishop of Canterbury having notice, he with the Bishop of Winchester came from the Tower by water to Southwarke, and there shewed the Kings Generall-Pardon under the Great Seal of England; which was so welcome to the Rebells, that without taking leave of their Captaine, they withdrew themselves that night to their severall habitations. Iack Cade with some few followers bent his
journey to Quinborough Castle, where being denyed entrance, he disguised himselfe, and privily fled: but upon Proclamation, with promise of a thousand markes to any that should bring him dead or alive; he was afterward, by one Alexander Eden Gentleman, attached; and making resistance, in a Garden at Hothfield in Sussex, was there slaine; his body was brought to London, beheaded and quartered, his head set upon London bridge, his quarters dispersed in divers places in Kent. Upon the news whereof, the King sends Commissioners into Kent, to enquire of the abettours of this Rebellion: whither he followeth himselfe in person, and though five hun∣dred were found guilty, yet eight onely were executed. Though London were the chiefe stage of this Rebelion, yet other Countries were not free; especially Wilshire, for the Rebels there, upon the nine and twentieth day of June, drew William Askot Bishop of Salisbury, from the High Altar, where he was saying Masse in Edington Church, to the top of the hill; and there in his Priestly roabes, most inhumanely mur∣thered him. This Insurrection was not unknown to the King of France, who taking advan∣tage thereof, seizeth upon all places which the English had in France, leaving them nothing but only Callice, and the Castles of Hames and Guisnes; and this was the issue of the Duke of Somersets Regency in France: whereupon comming into England, at a Pliament holden at Westminster, the sixth of November, in the nine and twenti∣eth yeer of the Kings rigne, he was put under Arrest; upon notice whereof, the Commons of London despoiled his house at Blackfriers, and ceased not, till Procla∣mation was made to inhibite them: for disobeying whereof, there was one man be∣headed, at the Standard in Cheape. At this time, the Duke of Yorke, under pretence of comming to the Parliament, comes out of Ireland; and at London had private conference with Iohn Duke of Norfolk, Richard Earle of Salisbury, the Earle of Devonshire and other his assured friends; where it was resolved, to keep the chiefe purpose, (the claime to the Crown) secret; and onely to make shew, that his endeavours were but to remove ill Counsellours from the King; of whom they instanced in the Duke of Somerset as chiefe; and hereof, the Duke sent divers letters to the King, complaining of the wrongs the Duke of Somerset had done him, but withall making Protestation of his own loyalty. To which the King maketh answer, that he would take his complaints in∣to consideration; but somewhat blames him for the death of the Bishop of Chester, by his means suspected to be slaughtered, and for dangerous speeches uttered by his ser∣vants, tending to Rebellion: concluding, that notwithstanding any thing said or done to the contrary, he took and esteemed him a faithfull subject, and a loving kins∣man. But the Duke of York, not herewith satisfied, departeth into Wales, and there levih men, making his colour for the good of the Common wealth: and the re∣removing of bad Counsellours. The King advertised hereof, presently raiseth an Army; and with the Duke of Somerset (now enlarged) marcheth towards Wales: while the Duke of Yorke, having notice which way the King came, by another way marcheth toward London; but being told, the Londoners would not admit him en∣trance; he passed the river Thames at Knightbridge, marched into Kent, and en∣camped at Burnt-heath. The King in his pursuite, came to Blacke-heathe, and there pitched his Tents, from whence he sent the Bishops of Winche∣ster and Ely, the Lord Rivers, and Richard Andrews Keeper of the Privy Seale, to know the cause of this commotion, and to make offer of reconcilement, if the Dukes Demands were not unreasonable. The Duke made Answer, that nothing was intended against the Kings person, his Crown or Dignity: All that was sought, was to remove ill Counsellours from about the King, but especially Edmund Duke of Somerset; whom if the King would be pleased to commit toward, till his legall tryall might be had in Parliament, he would then not onely dismisse his army, but come unto his presence as a loyall subject. Hereupon the Duke of Somerset is com∣mitted to prison: The Duke of Yorke dismisseth his army, and commeth in person to the King: in whose presence, (contrary to his expectation) he found the Duke of Somerset, which so moved him, that he could not hold, but presently charged him
with Treason: which the Duke of Somerset, not onely denieth, but  are the Duke of Yorke, to have conspired he kings death, and the usupation of the Crown: whereupon, the king removeth to London, the Duke o Yorke as a prisoner ryding before him, and the Duke of Somerset at liberty, which was not a little mer∣vailed at by many. And now the king calleth a Councell at Westminster, where the two Dukes are earnest in accusing each other; but while the Counsell are debating of the matter, there comes a flash of lightning out of France, which diverted them; for the Earl of Kendall, and the L'Espar, cme Embassadours from Burdeaux, offering their obedience to the Crown of England, if they might but be assured to be de∣fended by it: but withall, at the same time there came a report, that Edward Earle of March, sonne and heire to the Duke of Yorke, with a great power was marching to∣wards London. Here was matter for a double consultation: and for this latter, it was resolved on, that the Duke of York, should in the presence of the king and his Nobi∣lity, at the high Altar in Paul, take his Oath of submission and Allegiance to king Henry: which he accordingly did, and then had liberty to depart to his Castle of Wigmore. And for the former, the Earle of Shrewsbury with about three thou∣sand men was sent into Gascoigne, who ariving in the Isle of Madre, passed forth with his power, and took Frosack and other pieces, but having received in the night in∣structions from Burdeaux of certaine conspiratours, he makes all the speed he can thi∣ther; and was entred the Town before the French had notice of his comming: so that many of them were slaine by the Lord L'Espar in their beds. Shortly after there arrived, the Earle of Shrewsbury's sonne, Sir Ioh Talbot, with the bastard of So∣merset, and two and twenty hundred men, by whose means Burdeaux is well manned with English: in which time the Earle was not idle, but went from place to place, to receive the offered submission of all places where he came: and having taken Chatil∣lo, he strongly fortified it, whereupon the Frech king raiseth an army, and be∣siegeth Chatillon, to the rescue whereof, the Earle maketh all possible speed with eight hundred horse, appointing the Earle of Kendall, and the Lord L'Espar to fol∣low with the foot: In his way he surprized a Tower the French had taken, and put all within it to the sword; and meeting five hundred French men, that had been for∣raging; many of them he slew, and the rest he chased to their Campe. Upon whose approach, the French left the siege, and retyred to a place which they had formerly fortified; whither the Earle followeth them, and resolutely chargeth them so home, that he got the entry of the Campe: where being shot through the thigh with an Harquebuse, and his horse slaine under him; his sonne desirous to relieve his father, lost his own life, and therein was accompanied with his bastard brother Henry Talbot, Sir Edward Hall, and thirty other Gentlemen of name. The Lord No∣lius with threesco other were taken prisoners, the rest fled to Burdeaux, but in the way a thousand of them were slaine. And thus on the last day of July, in the yeer 1453. at Chatillo, the most valourous Earle of Shrewsbury, the first of that name; after foure and twenty yeers service beyond the seas, ended his life, and was buried at Roa in Normandie; with this Inscription upon his Tombe: Here lyeth the right Noble knight Iohn Talbot Earle of Shrewsbury, Weshford, Waterford, and Va∣lence, Lord Talbot of Goodrich and Orchenfield, Lord Strange of Blackmere, Lord Ver∣don of Acto, Lord Cromwell of Winkfield, Lord Lovetft of Worsoppe, Lord Furni∣vall of Shffield, knight of the Noble Orders of St. George, St. Michael, and the gol∣den fleece, great Marshall to King Henry the sixth, of his Realme of France. The Earle of Kendall, the Lords Montserat, Rosaine and Dgledas entred the Castle of Chatillon, and made it good against the French the space of ten dayes; but then ha∣ving no hope of succour, they delivered it, upon composition to have liberty to de∣part to Burdeaux: and now the Gascoigs were as ready to open their gates to the French, as they were before to the English; by means whereof, in short time, the French recovered againe all Gascoige except Burdeaux, and that also at length, up∣on condition that both garrisons and inhabitants with all their substance, might safely depart for England or Callice, and that the Lords L'Espar and Durant, with thirty others, upon paine of death should never after be found in the Territories of France.
At this time upon St. Bartholomews day, an ancient custome being, that the Ma∣jor of London, and the Sheriffs should be present in giving prizes to the best wrestlers; It hppened that at the wrestling place neere Moore-fields, the Prior of S. Iohns was there to see the sports, when a servant of his, not brooking the disgrace to be foyled before his Master, against the custome of the place would have wrestled againe, which the Major denyed, whereupon the Prior fetcht Bowmen from Clarkell, to resist the Major, and some slaughter was committed; the Majors Cap was shot through with an Arrow, he neverthelesse would have had the spot goe on, bu no wrestlers came, yet the Major Sr. Iohn Norman told his brethren, he would stay awhile, to make tryall of the Citizens respect towards him: which he had no sooner said, but the Citizens with Banners displayed came in great numbers to him, and fetcht him home in great triumph. Upon the neck of this, began the quarrell in Holborne, be∣tween the Gentlemen of the Inns of Chancery and some Citizens, in appeasing whereof, the Queens Atturney and three more were slaine. And now the Duke of Yorke, by all means laboureth to stirre up the hatred of the Commons against the Duke of Somerset, repeating often, what dishonour England sustained by Somersets giving up the strong Towns of Normandy, and how he abu∣seth the Kings and Queens favour to his own gaine, and the Commons grievance, then he addresseth himselfe to those of the Nobility that could not well brook his too much commanding over the Kings and Queens affection: amongst others he fasteneth upon the two Nevils, both Richards, the father and the sonne, the one Earle of Salisbury, the other of Warwick; with whom he deales so effectually, that an indissoluble knot of friendship is knit betwixt them; by whose assistance, (the King lying dangerously sick at Claringdon) the Duke of Somerset is arrested in the Queens great Chamber, and sent to the Tower; and in a Parliament now convoked, appeched of Treason, and many heynous crymes objected against him: whereup∣on, the King though weake is brought to London, of purpose to dissolve the Parlia∣ment, and that disolved, the Duke of Somerset is presently set at liberty againe, and not only so, but is made Captaine of Callice and Guysnes, the onely remainder the English had in France. Upon this, the Duke of Yorke and his party, with a great power march towards London: against whom, the King attended with the Duke of Somerset, the Duke of Buckingham and his sonne, both named Humfry, Henry Earle of Northumberland, Iames Earle of Wiltshire, Iasper Earle of Pembrooke, and two thou∣snd men, marcheth forwards; at S. Albans both armies meet: the Duke in the morning send a letter to the King, protesting his fidelity and synderity; onely he desires, the Duke of Somerset may be delivered, to stand or fall by the Judgement of his Peers; and this he would have, or dye in the pursuite. The King for answer, Commands him to disband, and submit to his mercy; and not expect, that he will deliver any in his Army, who have shewed their loves in standing to him. Herewith the Duke acquaints his friends, who hereupon fall every one to his quarter: The Earle of Warwick fell upon the Lord Cliffords quarter, where the Duke of Somerset, hsting to the rescue, was slaine, and with him the Earle of Northumberland, Hum∣fry Earle of Stafford, the Lord Clifford, and about five thousand others, besides ma∣ny that were hurt; the King himselfe shot in the neck with an arrow; the Duke of Bckingham and the Lord Scales, in the faces; the Earle of Dorset so hurt, that he was faine to be carryed home in a Cart: The Kings army had been increased after his comming forth, to eight thousand; but now they are all dispersed or slaine, and the King unguarded, is left in a poore thatcht house; whither, to be freed from the danger of arrows, he had withdrawn himselfe. The Duke of Yorke having notice where the King was, goes with Wawick and Salisbury, who all three upon their knees present themselves before him, making humble petition to him, for pardon of what was past: and now, seeing the common Enemy was slaine, they had what they aymed at. To whom the King throughly affrighted, said: Let there be no more killing then, and I will doe what you will have me. This first battell of S. Albans was fought upon the three & twentieth day of May, in the three & thirtieth year of King Henries raigne. The bodies of the Duke of Somerset, the Earle of Northumberland
and the Lord Glifford, were buried in the Chappell there. And now the Duke of York, in the kings name, commands a surcease from rther hostility: and in all re∣verent manner conveyeth the king to London; where they keep the feast of Pente∣cost together; at which time, a Parliament is summoned to begin at Westminster, the ninth day of July; and therein it is enacted, that the Duke of Glocester should be declred publikely a loyall Subject, and that none should misreport or dispute the actions of the Duke of Yorke, or of any in his company; and moreover, the Duke of Yorke is mde Protector of the kings Person, and of the Realme, the Earle of Sali∣bury is made Lord Chancellor, and the Earle of Warwicke Captain of Callis, wherein they all carried themselves with unblameable demeanour. In this meane time, the Queene not well pleased with these proceedings, sekes all mens to incite the Lords of her party, and they as much seeke to incite her to make opposition; she puts the Duke of Buckingham in minde that these Traitours had slaine his hopefull Son at S. Albans; she tells the now Duke of Somerset, that by them his deare Father lost his life: And they againe put the Queen in minde of the unsufferable indignity done to her, in making her Husband only a king in name, setting a Tutor over him, as though he were a childe, whil'st the Duke of Yorke and his complices manage all: Upon which incitation, all the enemies of the Yorkshire Faction are assembled by the Queene at Greenwich; where it is debated of some course to be taken for restoring the king to his former libery and Government; at length it is concluded, that the duke of Yorke should be commaded to give over his place of Protectorship, for that the king was of yeares and discretion sufficient to Rule of himselfe without a Guardian, and the Earle of Salisbury to surrender his place of being Lord Chancellor, for that the great Seal was never delivered him, see∣ing that which was now used, was made since the kings restraint, and therefore not sufficient; to which conclusion of theirs, the king easie to be wrought upon, yields his cosent, and thereupon they are both discharged from their Offices, and sum∣moned to appeare at the Councell Table at Grenwich; but the Lords were wiser than to put themselves into their hands, and therefore make answer, that none had power to displace them, nor to command their appearance in any place, but in Par∣liament, and so they continued about Londn, placing and displacing whom they pleased, nd by their triumvirat authority, tooke Iohn Holland Earle of Exeter out of Sanctuary, and sent him prisoner to Pofet Castle. These proceedings gave occasion to the licentious multitude to raise commotions, and the Prentices of Lon∣don upon a very slight occasion, fall upon out-landish Merchants, rifle and robbe their houses; and the Major assembling a company of substantiall Citizens to sup∣presse them, the Ring-leader of the disorder flyes to Sanctuary; Commissioners are sent to enquire and punish the offence, but when the Major and Commissioners were set, tydings came that the Commons were up in Arms; whereupon the Com∣missioners left the busines to be proceeded in by the Major, who so discreetly orde∣red the matter, that many of the offenders were punished, some by death, others by fine, and all things were quieted and appeased. At this time the French having little to do against the English in France, would needs be doing something against them in England: They set out two Fleets, one under the conduct of William Lord Pomyers, the other of Sir Peter Bressy; the Lord fell pon Fulney in the West-Country, the knight upon Sdwich in Kent, where some hurt they did, but not of importance to countervaile their Voyage. And now the Queen finding the little respect the Londoners bore to her party or the kings, perswades the king, as for his health and recreation, to make a Progresse into Warwickeshire, which he did, by the way hunting and hawking, and the Queen making show of minding nothing but pastimes; and this she did, with a purpose the easier to entrap the three Lords, of Yorke, Salisbury, and Warwicke, to whom shee writ most loving letters, earnestly inviting them to be at Coventry by an houre ap∣pointed; which they, not doubting any fraud, intended to have done, but hearing by the way of the mischiefe plotted against them, they caused their Retinue to goe on-ward the way to the Court, as though themselves were comming after; but they
provided otherwise for their safety, the duke of Yorke with a Groome and a Page getting him to Wigmore Castle, the Eale of Salisbury to his Castle of Middleham in the North, and the Earle of Warwicke to the Sea side, and so to Callis; but before they parted, they agreed upon an Alphabet, by which they might have entercourse of letters, yet their intentions kept undiscovered. The king unwitting of this mischiefe intended against the duke of Yorke and his friends, returneth to London, where he calleth a Councell; and therein of his owne accord desireth that some course might be invented for a perfect reconcilement of all parties; promising upon his salvation (an asseveration not usull with him) so to entertaine the duke of Yorke and his friend, that all discontents should be removed, and a perfect amity on all parts stablished: to which end messengers are dispatched to the duke of Yorke, and all other of his party, commanding them upon urgent af∣fairs of the Realm, and upon Royall promise of safe conduct, to repaire to his Court at London, at a day appointed. The duke of Yorke accordingly came, and with 400 men well apparelled, lodged at his house called Baynards Castle; Te Earle of S∣lisbury with 500 men, lodged likewise at his house called the Herbour; The duke of Exeter (lately released) and the Duke of Somerset with 800 men, were lodged within Temple-Barre; The Earle of Northumberland, the Lord Egremont, and the Lord Clifford, with 1500 men, were lodged in Holborne; The Earle of Warwicke with 600 in red jackets with ragged staves embroydered behinde and before, were lodged at the Gray Friers in London. Upon the seventeenth of March the King and the Queen came to London, and were lodged at the Bishops Pallace; the Major ha∣ving five hundred well appointed men in readinesse, rode with a competent num∣ber all day long round the Citie, for preservation of the Kings Peace: The Lords lodging within the Citie, held their Councell at Black-Friers; the other, at the Chapterhouse at Westminster: Between both, the Reverend Archbishop of Canter∣bry, the Son of Henry Bourchier Earle of Essex, with some other of the most able Prelates interceded so, that by their mediation it was at last concluded, that all wrongs and misdemeanours on every side should e forgotten and forgiven, that each side should be friends to the other, and both be obedient to the commands of the king. Besides this in generall, there were some particular Articles to be perfor∣med by the Duke of Yorke, the Earles of Salisbury, and Warwicke, which afterward was ratified under the great Seale of England, the 24 day of March, in the 36 yeare of the Reigne of king Henry the Sixth. Upon the publication whereof, a solemne Procession was made in Pauls Church, at which the king was present with his Crwn on his head; before him, hand in hand went the Duke of Somerset, and the Earle of Salisbury, the Duke of Exeter, and the Earle of Warwicke, and so one of the one, and another of the other part, till they were all Marshalled; behinde the king came the Queen, the Duke of Yorke leading her by the hand, who in going made shew of favorable countenance towards him: Divine Service ended, they returne to the Court, in all outward appearance truly reconciled; but all was dissembled, as will presently appeare; for presently upon this, an affray fell out betweene a servant of the Earle of Warwicke, and a Courtier, who in the encounter is dangerously woun∣ded, the Earles man flyeth; the kings servants seeing their fellow hurt, and the of∣fender escaped, watch the Earles comming from the Councell Table, and assaile him; many are hurt, but the Earle getteth a Wherry, and so escapes to London; the Queen incontinently commands the Earle to be committed to the Tower, but hee foreseeing the danger, posts to Yorkshire, where he acquaints the Duke of Yorke, and his father the Earle of Salisbury of all the occurrence, with the palpable discovery of the Queens canker'd disposition, advising them to stand upon their Guard, and to provide against the approaching storme. Himselfe speeds to Callis, and being then Lord Admirall, takes with him all the kings ships that were in readinesse, and scou∣ring the Seas, meets with five great Carricks, three of Genoa, and two of Spaine; and after two dayes fight, takes two of them, with which hee returned to Callis where he unloaded their fraight, and found it worth ten thousand pounds in Staple commodities, besides the Ships and Prisoners.
In the meane time, the Earle of Salisbury with about five thousand men marcheth through Lancshire, to passe that way to the king, with a purpose to acquaint him with the affront offered to his Son, and the inveterate malice discovered in the Queen against him: The Queene with the Dukes of Buckingham and Somrset, hearing of his comming, gave order to the Lord Audley to use means to apprehend him; who thereupon levyeth ten thousand men in Cheshire and Shropshire, and with them about a mile from Drayton, in a plaine called Bloreheath he attended the Earle, there being but a small brooke of no great depth between them. Early in the morning the Earle made a seeming Retreat, which the Lord Talbot observing, presently causeth his Troops to passe the River, but before they could be reduced againe into order, the Earle with his whole strength falls upon them, and with the slaughter of the Lord Audley, and most of them that had passed the River, he discomfited the rest, and slew about 24. hundred of them; Sir Iohn and sir Thomas Nevill knights the Earl Sons were sorely wounded, who with Sir Thomas Harrington travelling into the North Country, were apprehended and sent as Prisoners towards Chester, but upon a message from the Marchmen were presently released. And now the Duke of Yorke thinking fit no longer to conceale his designe, make preparation to take the Field, the Earls of Salisbury and Warwick do the like; and amongst others of approved valour, whom the Earle of Warwicke had brought from Callis with him, were two principall noted men, Iohn Blunt, and Andrew Trolloppe. Likewise the King, with the Dukes of Somerset, and Exeter, drawes his Forces to Worcester, from whence Richard Beauchamp Bishop of Salisbury, is sent to offer the Yorkists a full and generall Pardon, if they would lay down Arms, and become loy∣all Subjects. Whereunto they answered, that there was no trust to the Kings Par∣dons, as long as the Queen had a Predominant power; but if they might have assu∣rance of safety, they would expresse their loyalty, and humbly render themselves at his service. Hereupon the King advanceth neerer, and approaching the Lords Ar∣mie, caused Proclamation to be made, that whosoever would abandon the Duke of Yorke, should be received to mercy, and have Pardon. Upon this, the night fol∣lowing, Andrew Trolloppe, with all the Callicians submit to the King, and by him are all the counsells of the Duke of Yorke discovered; which so much discouraged him, that he with his young Son, the Earle of Rutland, fled first into Wales, and then into Ireland: The Earles of March, Salisbury, and Warwicke got into Devonshire, where by the means of Iohn Dynhm Esquire (the same man that afterward by king Henry the Seventh was made Lord Treasurer of England) they were shipt from Exmouth, to Gernsey, and so to Callis. All the common souldiers the king Pardons, onely makes exemplary punishment of some few Captains, sends the Dutchesse of Yorke, and her two younger children, to the Dutchesse of Buckingham her Sister to be afely kept; and then having spoiled the Town and Castle of Ludlow, he dismist his Ar∣mie. And now a Parliament is called at Coventry, wherein the Duke of Yorke, Ed∣ward Earle of March his Son, Richard Earle of Salisbury, Richard arle of Warwicke Iohn Lord Clifford, and many other the confederates of the Duke of York, are con∣vict of Treason, and all their lands and goods seized on to the kings use. Henry D. of Somerset by the Queens means is made Captain of Callis, whither comming to take possession, he was, by reason of Ordnance shot at him from Rice-banke forced to Retire; which the Queen hearing, was so incensed, that in great passion she gave order to make ready all the kings Ships lying at Sandwich, to give assistance to the Duke of Somerset: but the forementioned Iohn Dynham, out of love to the Earle of March, boorded those ships in the harbour, and tooke the Lord Rivers designed Admirall for that service, and carried both him and the Ships to Callice, from whence the Earle sayled to Ireland, to the Duke of Yorke, who having conferred and con∣cluded what course to take, he returned to Callice, the new Admirall the Duke of Exeter not daring to stop his course. Sir Simon Montford was appointed o guard the Cinque Ports, having divers ships under his command to barre the Earle of War∣wicks entrance; but the Earle by his espyalls having perfect intelligence of all pas∣sages, fell sodainly upon Sir Simon before his ships were ready, tooke him prisoner,
ransackt the Town of Sandwich, & carried his prisoner and the ships to Callice: By the way he understood how much the kentishmen desired his return and longed for his comming; whereupon he came the second time to Sandwich, to whom presently resor∣ted the Lord Cobham and very many Gentlemen of the Country: so as now his ar∣my was five and twenty thousand strong; with which he marched towards London, against whom the Lord Scales was appointed to goe, and with some convenient troopes to assure London: but the Major directly refused to admit him; whereup∣on he resorted to the Tower, from whence afterwards he did the Londoners no small displeasure. The Earle of Warwick having notice, that his father the Earle of Salisbury was upon march to meet him: passeth over his men; and without im∣peachment, joyned with him and his friends neer Exeter. The King with the Dukes of Somerset and Buckingham with a great Army march∣eth towards them, and neer to the Town of Northampton both Armies meet: The Earle of March with the advice of the Earle of Warwick prepares for the fight: The Queen (the King more intentive to devotion then fighting) did the like, the fight continued about two houres, wherein were slaine of both sides above en thousand men; but upon the fall of Humfry Duke of Buckingham, the Kings side was dis∣comfited, and Iohn Talbot Earle of Shrewsbury, Thomas L. Egremont, Iohn L. Beau∣mont and some other of account were slaine: The Queen with the Duke of Somer∣st, taking with them the young Prince, fled to the Bishoprick of Durham: The King himselfe was taken, and as a prisoner conveyed to London: where the Tower is yeelded to the Earle of Warwick; The Lord Scales in disguised apparell endea∣vouring to escape, is taken by the water-men, and by them beheaded, and his Corpes carelesly left upon the sands. Thomas Thorpe one of the Barons of the Exchequer, in the habit of a Monke, his Crown shorne, purposing to flie to the Queen, is taken and committed prisoner to the Tower, and after by the Commons beheaded at Highgate. The Duke of Yorke being advertised of this good successe, leaveth Ireland and posts to London, where in the kings name he summoneth a Parliament, which being assem∣bled, he in the presence of the Lords in the upper House, placeth himselfe in the Im∣periall Seate, and with great boldnesse layes open his rightfull claime to the Crowne of England, as being the Sonne and heire of Anne daughter and heire of Roger Morti∣mer Earle of March, Sonne and heire of Philip the sole daughter and heire of Lyonel Duke of Clarence, the third sonne of Edward the third, and elder brother of Iohn of Gaunt Duke of Lancaster, Father of the usurper Henry the Fourth, Grandfather to Henry the Fifth, who was Father to him that at this time untruly stileth himselfe king Henry the sixth. And after relating the many miseries that had befallen the Realme since the time of this Usurpation, he concluded, that he would not expect nor desire possession of the Crown, except his discent were undisputable, and his title without exception. This being a businesse of importance, required deliberati∣on: but in conclusion, the Duke having before hand prepared the Lords Spirituall; and few of the Nobility being present, that were not of his part, the Burgesses were easily perswaded: and it was generally resolved, and enacted accordingly, that king Henry during his life, should reteine the name and honour of a king; that the Duke of Yorke should be Proclaimed heire apparent to the Crown, and Protectour of the kings Person, his lands and dominions; and that if at any time, any of king Henries friends, allies or favourites, in his behalfe should attempt the disalling of this Act, that then the Duke should have present possession of the Crown. It is not unwor∣thy the noting, that while the Earle of March was declaring his title in the upper house, it happened in the nether house, that a Crowne which hung in the middle of the house, to garnish a branch to set lights upon, without touch or winde, fell sud∣denly down: as likewise at the same time, fell down the Crown which stood on the top of Dover Castle: a signe as some thought, that the Crowne of the Realme should be changed. Assoone as the Parliament was dissolved; the Duke dispatch∣eth letters into Scotland; requiring in the kings name, the Queen, the Dukes of Somerset and Exeter, and all other of the Nobility, that remained in that kingdome, with all speed to repaire to his presence in London: but they had other worke in
hand; for having goten together of English and Scots, to the number of eighteen thousand, they came maching into England against whom went the Duke of Yorke, with his younger sonne the Earle of Rutland, and the Earle of Salisbury, (leaving the king in the custody of the Duke of Norfolke and the Earle of Warwick;) and approa∣ching neer the Quens Amy, he was certified by his scuts, that the Enemie farre exceeded his power, both in number and in all warlike preparation, (he not having in his Army above five thousand men) and thereupon the Earle of Salisbury advised him to retye, and to attend the comming of the Earle of March, who was gone into Wales to raise the March men; but the pride of his former victory made him deale to all Counsell of declining the battell; and so hastened on by his destiny, from Sndll Castle he marched on to Wakefield greene; where the Lord Clifford on the one side, and the Earle of Wiltshire on the other were placed in ambuscado; The Duke of Yorke supposing that the Duke of Somerset who led the battell, had no more forces then what were with him, undauntedly marcheth towards him: but being en∣tred within their danger, the ambushes on both sides brake out upon him, and slew him, with three thousand of his men, the rest fled; the Earle of Salisbury is taken prisoner; and harmlesse Rutland, not above twelve yeers old, who came thither but to see fashions, is made a sacrifice for his Fathers transgression, who kneeling upon his knees, with tears begging life, is unmercifully stabbed to the heart by the Lord Clifford, in part of revenge (as he swore) of his Fathers death; and the Queen most unwomanly in cold blood, caused the Earle of Salisbury, and as many as were taken prisoners, to be beheaded at Pmfret Castle, and to have their heads placed on poles about the walls of Yorke. Thus dyed Richard Plantagenet Duke of Yorke, who had taken to wife Cicely daughter of Ralph Nevyll, the first Earle of Westmerland, by whom he had issue, eight sonnes and foure daughters; his eldest sonne Henry dyed young, his second son Edward was afterward king of England; his third Edmund Earle of Rutland, was slaine with his father Iohn, Thomas and William died young, his seventh sonne George, was after Duke of Clarence, his youngest sonne Richard, sirnamed Crouchbck, ws after king of England. Anne his eldest daughter was married to Hen∣ry Holland Duke of Exeter, his second daughter Elizabeth was married to Iohn de la Pole Earle of Suffolk, his third Margaret to Charles Duke of Burgoigne, his fourth Vrsula dyed young. This Duke being dead, had his head crowned with a paper Crown, together with many circumstances of disgracing him: but this act of spight was fully afterwards recompensed upon their heads that did it. The Earle of March hearing of his fathers death, laboured now so much the more earnestly, in that he laboured for himselfe; and parting from Shrewsbury, whose In∣habitants were most firme unto him, he increased his army to the number of three and twenty thousand, and presently took the field; and having advertisment, that Iasper Earle of Pembrooke, with the Earle of Ormond and Wiltshire followed after him with a great power of Welsh and Irish: he suddenly marcheth back againe, and in a plaine neer Mortimers Crosse, on Candlemas day in the morning gave them bat∣tell, wherewith the slaughter of three thousand and eight hundred, he put the Earles to flight. Owen Tewther who had married Queen Catherine, Mother to king Henry the sixth, and divers Welsh Gentlemen were taken, and at Hereford beheaded. Be∣fore the battell, it is said, the Sunne appeared to the Earle of March like three sunnes, and suddenly it joyned all together in one; for which cause, some imagine, that he gave the sunne in its full brightnes, for his badge or Cognisance. The Queen in the mean time encouraged by the death of the Duke of Yorke, with a power of Northern men marcheth towards London: but when her souldiers were once South of Trent, as if that river were the utmost limit of their good behaviour, they fell to forrage the Country in most babarous manner: Approaching S. Albans, they were advertised that the Duke of Norfolke and the Earle of Warwick were ready to give them battell; whereupon the Queens Vaward hasteth to passe through St. Albs; but being not suffered to passe, they encountred with their Enemies in the field called Barnard heath; who perceiving the maine battaile to stand still, and not to move; which was done by the treachery of Lovelace, who with the kentish men
had the leading of it; they soone made the Southerne men to turne their backs and fy; upon whose flight, the rest in doubt of each others well meaning, shifted away; and the Lords about the King perceiving the danger, withdrew themselves: Only the Lord Bnvile coming in a complementall manner to the King, and saying it grieved him to leave his Majesty, but that necessity for safeguard of his life, enforced it was importuned, and Sir Thoas Kyriell a knight of Kent likewise, by the king to stay; he passing his Royall word, that their stay should bee no danger to them; upon which promise they stayed, but to their cost: for the Queen hearing that the Commos had beheaded Baron Thope at High-gate; he in revenge thereof, caused both their heads to be stricken off at S. Albs: so as there were slaughtered at this battaile the full number of three and twenty hundred, but no man of name, but one∣ly Sir Iohn Grey, who the same day was made knight, with twelve other at the village of Colney. And now the King was advised, to send one Thoms Hoe, (tha had been a Bar∣rister) to the Victors, to tell them; that he would gladly come to them, if with con∣veyance it might be done: whereupon the Earle of Northumberland, appointed di∣vers Lords to attend him to the L. Clffords Tent, where the Queen and the young Prince met to their great joy: but it was now observed, as it were in the destiny of King Hery, that although he were a most Piousman, yet no enterprise of warre did ever prosper, where he was present; that we may know the prosperity of the world to be no inseparable companion to men of Piety. At the Queens request, the king honored with knighthood thirty gentlemen, who the day before had fought against the part where he was; the Prince likewise was by him dubbed knight, and then they went to the Abby, where they were received with Anthems, and withall an humble petition, to be protected from the outrage of the loose souldiers which was promised, and Proclamation made to that purpose, but to small purpose; for the Northern men said, It was their bargaine to have all the spoyle in every place, after they had passed Trent: and so they robbed and spoiled whatsoever they could come at. The Londners hearing of this disorder, were resolved, seeing there was no more assurance in the Kings promise, to keep the Northern men out of their gates; insomuch that when they were sent to, to send over to the Campe certaine Cart∣loads of Lenton provision; which the Major accordingly provided: the Commons rose about Cripplegate, and by strong hand kept the Carts from going out of the City. Hereupon, the Major sends the Recorder to the Kings Counsell and withall intreats the Dutchesse of Bedford, and the Lady Scole, to intercede for hm to the Queen; and to excuse his not using force, considering how dangerous it might be in these doubtfull times, to stirre their fury, that would not easily be alayed. It was well advised to send women to intreate a woman, for by this means they pre∣vailed, that some of the Lords of the Counsell, with a guard of foure hundred good souldiers, were appointed to goe for London, to enquire and certifie of these things: when suddenly news was brought, that the Earle of March with a great Ary was marching towards them: for the Earle of VVarwicke having gathered together his scattered troops, and joyned with the Earle of March, they hasted towards Lodon, and were joyfully received upon the eight and twentieth day of February, and upon Sunday, the second of March, the Earle of Warwick mustred all his army in S. Iohn's field, and having cast them into a ring, read unto them the agreement of the last Pli∣ament, and then demanded, whether they would have King Henry to raign still who all cryed, no, no: then he asked them, whether they would have the Earle of March eldest sonne of the Duke of Yorke (by that Parliament proclaimed King) to raigne over them? who with a great clamor cryed, yea, yea Then went there certaine Cap∣taines, and others of the Citty, to the Earle of March at Baynards Castle, to acquaint him with wat was passed; who at first seemed to excuse himselfe, a unable to exe∣ce so grea a charge: but animated by the Archbishop of Canterbury, the Bishops of London, and Exeter, and the Earle of VVarwick, he at last consented to take it up∣on him; and thereupon, the next morning he wept in Procession at Pauls, and offe∣red there, and after Te Deum sung, he was in great state conveyed to VVestminster,
and there in the great Hall, seated in the Kings seat, with the Scepter of St. Edwd in his hand; and then again the people, of whom there was a great concourse, were aloud demanded, if they would acknowledge him to be their King? to which with great willingnesse they all cried, yea, yea. Then taking homage of divers Noble∣men there present, he was with Procession and great solemnity conveyed to the Abbey, and placed in the Quie as King, whil'st Te Deum was singing: That done, he offered at St. Edards Shrine, and then returned by water to Pauls, and was lodged in the Bishops Pallace, and upon the fouth of March he was generally Pro∣claimed King, by the name of Edward the Forh. And here in the course of all Writers, ends the Reigne of King Hery the Sixth; that it may be truly sayd, never any came to be King so soone fter his birth, nor left to be King so long before his death; for he came to be King at eight months old, and he left to be King, living twelve years after. There was indeed in that space of time, a certaine Vicissitude, sometimes a King, and sometimes no King; the passages wher of must be related in the following Kings Reigne. Of hi Taxatios. IN the first yeare of his Reigne, a Parliament was holden at London, where the Queen Mother, with the young king in her lap came and sate amongst the Lords; and there was then granted a Subsidie of five Nobles upon every sacke of wooll that should passe out of the Land, for three years, but if carried out by Merchant stran∣gers, then to pay three and forty shillings for every sacke. In the third year of his Reigne, a Parliament was holden at Westminster, wherein was granted a Subsidie of twelve pence in the pound of all Merchandize comming in, or passing out of the Realme, and three shillings of a Tonne of Wine, for the terme of three years. In his sixth year in a Parliament at Wesinster was granted a Subsidie, of every Tonne of Wine three shillings and of other Merchandize except Wooll, Fell, and Cloth, twelve pence in the pound: Also of every Parish through the Realme (except Ci∣ties and Boroughes) the Benefice being in value ten Markes; Tenne of tht Parish shall pay sixe shillings eight pence; and of every Benefice of the value of ten pounds, ten Parishioners should pay thirteen shillings foure pece, and so rateably of every Benefice, from the lowest to the highest. And for the Inhabitants of Cities and Bo∣roughes, every man being worth twenty shillings above his housholdstuffe, and the apparell of him and his wife, should pay foure pence, and so after that rate to the richest. Of Lwes and Ordiances in his time. IN this kings time, the Lord Major of Lond first began to go by water o Lodo, where before they used to go by land. Also in this Kings Reigne the Art of Prin∣ting wa first found at Mogce in Germay, by a knight called Iohn Cuttenberghe, and brought into England by William Caxton of Lodon Mercer, who first practised the same in the Abbey at Westminster, in the yeare 1471. In the 23 yeare of his Reigne, in a Parliament then holden, it was Enacted, that when Wheat was sod for six shillings eight pence the quarter, Rye for foe shillings, and Barley for three shillings; It should be lawfull for any man to carry the sayd kindes of Corn, into the parts beyond the Sea without license, so it were not to the kings enemies or Rebel; which Act was afterward confirmed by king Edward the Fourth. Affaes of the Church in his time. A Great Schisme was in the Church in this kings time by reason of Anti-popes; for remedy whereof, a Councell is called at Costace, to which the Emperors of Constantiople and Trabiznd send their Ambaadors. In this Councell Ioh the three and twentieth is convented, condemned, deposed, and imprisoned: Gr∣gory the twelveth, and Benedict the thirteenth are deprived, and Otho Colonn, by
the name of Martin the fifth, is chosen Pope. During these confusions in the We∣sterne Church, the Christians in the Easterne Church are utterly ruinated: The Emperor smothered to death in a prease of people, and the great City of Constan∣tinople wonne by the Turke, made ever since the seate of his Empire. In the six and thirtieth yeare of this king, Reynold Peacocke Bishop of Chichester, who had la∣boured many yeares in Translating the holy Scripture into English, was accused and convicted, for holding and publishing certaine opinions at that time held Hereticall; which at last, openly at Pauls Crosse he revoked; That he had held there was no ne∣cessity to believe that Christ descended into Hell; also, no necessity to believe in the communion of Saints, or that the Universall Church cannot erre in matters of Faith, or that it is necessary to believe and hold whatsoever a Generall Councell shall determine: Also that he had held, that spirituall persons ought to have no Temporall Possessions, and that personall Tythes were not due by Gods Law: these Points he openly renounced, but was notwithstanding deprived of his Bi∣shopricke; only a certaine Pension was assigned him to live on in an Abbey, where soone after he dyed. Workes of Piety done by him, or others in his time. THe King himselfe Founded two famous Colledges, the one in Cambridge, to our Lady and St. Nichols, called the Colledge Royall, or the kings Colledge; the other of Eate besides Windsor, called of our blessed Lady; to the maintenance whereof, he gave 3400 pounds by yeare. In the 28 year of his Reigne, his Queen Margaret began the Foundation of Queens Colledge in Cambridge. In the time of his Reigne also, Henry Chicheley Archbishop of Canterbury Founded two Colledges in Oxford; one called All-Soules Colledge, the other Bernard Colledge. In his time also, Hmpry Duke of Glocester (but others say, Thomas Kempe Archbishop of Ca∣terry) built the Divinity School in Oxford; also the sayd Archbishop built Pauls-Crosse in forme as now it standeth; and William Wynflete Bishop of VVinchester, and Lord Chancellor of England Founded Mary Magdalen Colledge in Oxford. In his seventeenth yeare, Ralph Lord Cromwell, builded the Colledge of Tatshall in Lin∣clshire. Also this yeare, VVilliam stfield Major of London, caused to be builded at his own charge the Water-Conduict in Fleetstreet. In his ninth year, Iohn VVells Major of London, caused the Condict commonly called the Standard in Cheape, to be builded. In his first yeare, the West Gate of London, sometime called Cham∣berlaine gate, and now Newgate, was begun to be new builded by the Executors of Sir Richard VVhittington Lord Major of London. In his fifth yeare, Iohn Reynwell Major of London, gave certaine lands to the Citie of London, for which th Citie is bound to pay for ever, all Fifeens that shall be granted to the King, (so as it passe ot three Fifteens in one year) for three Wards in London; namely, Dowgte-Ward, Billigsgate-Ward, and Aldgate. Also this yeare, the Tower at the Drawbridge of Lodon was begun by the same Major. In his foure and twentieth yeare, Simon Eyre Lord Major of Lndon builded the Leaden-Hall in Lodo, to be a Storehose for Graine and Fewell for the poore of the Citie, and faire Chappell at the East end of the same, leaving in stocke a thousand pounds, which aterward King Edward the Fourth borrowed and never paid it again. Also in this kings time, William de la Poole Duke of Suffolke, and Alice his wife, Daughter to Thomas Chcer, Son of Geoffry Chawcer the famous Poet; translated and encreased the Mannour place of Ewelme in Oxfordshire, and builded new the Parish Church of Ewelme, and an Ho∣spitall or Almeshouse for two Priests, and thirteene poore men, to which he gave three Manours, Ramruge in Hampshire, Coocke in Wiltshire, and Mesh in Buc∣kinghmshire: They also founded the Hospitall of Donington Castle. Of Casualtie happening in his time. In his Fifth yeare was o unseasonable weather, that it rained almost continually, from Easter to Michaelmasse. In his seventh yeare, the eight of November, the
Duke of Norfolke was like to have been drowned passing through London-Bridge, hi Barge being set upon the piles, overwhelmed, so that thirty persons were drowned, and the Duke with others that escaped, were fain to be drawn up with ropes. In his 18 year, all the Lyons in the Tower dyed: Also this year, the 18 day of Iuly, the Postern-Gates of London by Est-Smithfield against the Tower of London, sanke by night more than seven foot into the earth. In his two and twentieth year, on Newyears day, neer unto Bedford, a very deep water, which ran betwixt the Towns o Swelstone and Harleswood, stood suddenly still, and divided it selfe, so that by the spce of three miles the bottome remained dry; which wonder, many thought to signifie the division of the people, and falling away from the king, which happened shortly after. In the three and thirtieth year of his Reign, besides a great Blazing Starre, there happened a strange sight, a monstrous Cock came out of the Sea, and in the presence of a multitude of people at Portland, made a hideous crowing three times, each time turning about clapping his wings, and beckning toward the North, the South, and the West; as also many prodigious births. In his six and thirtieth year, in a little Town in Bedfordshire, it rained bloud, wherof the red drops appeared in sheets hung out to dry. Of his Wife and issue. HE married Margaret Daughter of Rayner Duke of Anjou, and Tiular king of Ierusalem, Sicilie, and Arragon; by whom he had small Portion, and little strength of Alliance; yet might have been a good match, if they could have chan∣ged conditions with one another, that he might have had her active and stirring spi∣rit, and she his softly and milde disposition; She was his wife six and twenty years, and after her husbands depulsion from the Regall Throne, his Forces being van∣quished at the Battell of Tewkesberry, in a poore Religious house, where she had fled for safety of her life, was taken prisoner and carried captive to London, where shee remained in durance, till Duke Rayner her Father purchased her liberty, unto whom she returned, and lastly dyed in her native Country. By her, king Henry had issue only one Son named Edwrd, who when the day was lost at Twkesberry, sought to escape by flight, but being taken, was brought into the presence of king Edward; whose rsolute answers provoked king Edward so much, that he dashed him on the mouth with his Gantlet, and then Richard the Crouchback ran him into the heart with his Dagger; his body wa buried amongst the poore persons there slain, in the Monasticall Church of the Black-Friers in Tewkesberry. Of his Death and Buriall. UPon King Edwards recovering the Crown, he was committed to the Tower; where the 21 of May, in the yeare 147, he was murthered by the bloudy hand of ichard Duke of Glocester: the day after he was brought to Pauls Church in an open Coffin bare-faced, where he bled; thence carried to the Black-Friers, where e lso bled; from thence in a Boat to Chersey Abbey, without Priest or Clerk, orch or taper, saying or singing, and there buried; but afterwards at the appointment of King Edward, was removed to Windsor, and there interred, and a fair Monument made ovr him. Of his Personage and Conditions. HEe was tall of statue, spare and slender of body, of a comely countenance, and all parts well proportioned. For endowments of his minde, he had virtues e∣nough to make him a Saint, but not to make him a God, as kings are said to be gods; for of that commanding power there being two parts, Parcere subjectis & debellare u∣perbos; he wanted the latter. He was not sensible of that which the world calls Ho∣nour, accounting the greatest honour to consist in humility; His greatest imperfe∣ction
was, that he had in him too much of the Logge, and too little of the Storke; for he would not move, but as he was moved, and had rather be devoured, than he would devoure. He was not so stupid, not to know prosperity from adversity; but he was so devout, to thinke nothing adversitie, which was not a hinderance to Devotion: He was fitter for a Priest than a King, and for a sacrifice than a Priest; and he could not choose but dye a Martyr, who all his life had beene a Confessor. He had one immunity peculiar to himself, that no man could ever be revenged of him, seeing he never offered any man injury. By being innocent as a Dove, hee kept his Crown upon his head so long; but if he had been wise as a Serpent, he might have kept it on longer. But all this is not sufficient, if we expresse not in particular his se∣verall virtues: So modest, that when in a Christmas, a shew of women was presen∣ted before him with their breasts layd out, he presently departed; saying, fie, fie for shame, forsooth you be to blame. So pittifull, that when he saw the quarter of a Traytor over Cripplegate, he caused it to be taken down; saying, I will not have any Christian so cruelly handled for my sake. So free from swearing, that he never used other oath, but forsooth, and verily: So patient, that to one who strooke him when he was taken prisoner; he onely sayd, forsooth you wrong yourselfe more than me, to strike the Lords annointed: So devout, that on principall Holy-dayes he used to weare sackcloth next his skinne: Once for all, let his Confeor be heard speak, who in ten years confession never found that he had done or sayd any thing, for which he might justly be injoyned Pennance. For which causes, King Henry the Seventh would have procured him to be Cannonized for a Saint, but that he was prevented by death or perhaps because the charge would have been too great, the Canonization of a king being much more costly than of a private person. Of men of Note in his time. THere were men of valour in this Kings Reigne, of extraordinary eminencie; as first, Iohn Duke of Bedford Regent of France, whom when a French Lord upbraided, that his sword was of lead; he made him answer, and made him feel that it was of steele. Next him was Thomas Montacute Earle of Salisbury, whose very name was a sufficient charme to daunt a whole French Army. Then the next was Iohn Lord Talbot, so great a terror to the French, that when the women would still their children from crying, they would use to say, Talbot comes. Then was Richard Nevill Earle of Warwicke, so much greater than a king; as that which makes, is grea∣ter than that it makes, and such a one was he. Many other besides these, not much inferior to these; that we may truly say, there never was a more heroicall King of England than Henry the Fifth; nor ever a King of England that had more heroicall Subjects, than Henry the Sixth. And though Arms and Letters seem to be of diffe∣rent conditions, yet they commonly grow up and flourish together; as in this kings Reigne, were Iohn Leland sirnamed the Elder, who wrote divers Treatises for in∣struction of Gramarians: William White a Priest of Kent, professing the Doctrine of Wickliffe, for which he suffered Martyrdome by fire: Alexander Carpenter, who wrote a booke called Destructorium vitiorum, against the Prelates of that time: Pe∣ter Basset Esquire of the Privy Chamber to king Henry the Fifth, whose life he wrote: Iohn Pole a Priest, who wrote the life of St. Walhorayle an English woman: Also, Thoms Walden, alias Netter, who wrote divers Treatises against the Wickliffifts: Pe∣er Clerke a Student in Oxford, and a defender of Wickliffes doctrine; for which he fled, and was put to death beyond Sea: Thomas Walsingham born in Norfolk a diligen Historiographer: Thomas Ringstead the younger, an excellent Preacher, who wrote divers Treatises: Thomas Rudborn a Monke of Winchester, and an Historiographer: Peter Pyne an earnest professor of Wickliffes doctrine, for which he fled into be∣: Nicholas Vpton a Civilian, who wrote of Heraldry, of colours in Armory, and of the duty of Chivalry: Iohn Capgrve born in Kent, an Augustine Frier, who wrote many excellent Treatises, particularly the Legend of English Saints: Hum∣phry Duke of Glocester, Protector of the Realm, well learned in Astrologie, whereof
he wrote a speciall Treatise, intiued Tabula Directionum: Iohn Whethamstead, other∣wise called Frmentariu, Abbot of St. Albns, who wrote divers Treatises; and amongst others, a booke of the Records of things happening whiles he was Abbot, which book Holinshead had seen, and in some passages of his time followed: Roger Oly accused of Treason, for practising with the Lady Elnor Cobham by sorcery to make the king away; and therof condemned, and dyed for it: he wrote one Trea∣tise intituled Contra lgi superstitiones; and another, De sua Innocentia: Henry Walsingham a Carmelite Frier o Norwich, who wrote sundry Treatises in Divinity: Iohn Lidgate  Monke of Bury, who had travelled France and Italy to learne langua∣ges, and wrote many workes in Poetry: Thomas Beckington Bishop of Bath, who wrote against the Law Salique of France: Michael Trigurie born in Cornwll, whom for his excellent learning king Henry the Fifth made Governor of the Universitie of Can in Normandy, after he had conquered it: Reynold Peacocke Bishop of Chichester, who wrote many Treatises touching Christian Religion: Robert Fleming, who wrote a Dctionary in Greeke d Latine, and a worke in verse of sundry kindes: Nicholas Mntacute an Historiographer: Iohn Stow a Monke of Norwich, and Doctor of Di∣vinity in Oxfrd: Nichl Bugeie, born in a Town of Norfolke, of that name, who wrote an History called Adtines Chronicorum: Robert alscke, who wrote a booke De e Militri: Thomas Dd a Carmelite Frier of Mrleborough, who wrote the life of Alphred king of the West-Saxons: Robert Ble, irnamed the Elder, Recor∣der of London, who gathered a Chronicle of the Customs, Laws, Foundations, Chan∣ges, Offices, Orders, and publique Assemblies of the Citie of London, with other matters touching the perfect discription of the same Citie; he wrote other workes also touching the state of the same Citie, and the Acts of King Edward the third.
THE REIGNE OF KING EDWARD THE FOURTH. EDWARD Earle of March, born at Roane in Normandy, sonne and heire of Richard Plantagenet Duke of Yorke, slaine in the battell at Wakefield, succeded his Father in the Right, but exceeded him in the possession of the Crown of England; and that by virtue of an act of Parliament lately made; wherein the said Duke of York not only was declared heire apparent to the Crown, and appoin∣ted Protector of the King and Kingdome; but it was further en∣acted, that if King Henry, or any in his behalfe, should attempt the disanulling of this Act; that then the said Duke or his heire should have the present Possession: which because his friends attempted to doe, therefore justly doth Edward Earle of March his sonne, by virtue of this act, take possession of the Crown; and is Proclaimed king of England, by the name of Edward the fourth, through the City of London, on the fifth day of March in the yeer 1460. But before he could have leasure to be Crow∣ned, he was forced once againe to try his fortune in the field by battell: For King Henry in the North was raising a new army; against whom King Edward, upon the twelveth of March, marched with his forces from London, and by easie journeyes came to Pomfret Castle, from whence the Lord Fitzwater was sent to guard the pas∣sage at Ferribridge, to stop the Enemies approach that way; King Henry likewise ad∣vanceth forward, sending his power, under the conduct of the Duke of Somerset, the Earle of Northumberland and the Lord Clifford, whilest himselfe with his Queen and Sonne stay at Yorke. The Lord Clifford very early on Palm sunday, with a troop of Northern men, fals upon those that guarded Fetribridge, and defeated them with the slaughter of the Lord Fitzwater and the bastard of Salisbury. The Earle of Warwicke hearing of this defeate, comes posting to King Edwards Cmpe, and in his presence killing his horse, Proested his resolution to stand with him to the Death. Upon his Resolution of the Earles, the King made presently Proclamation, that all who were afraid to sight, should at their pleasure depart; but to those that would stay, he promised good reward, adding withall, that if any that stayed, should after turn his back or flee, then he that should kill him, should have double pay. After this, he gave order to the Lord Fawconbridge, and Sir Walter Blunt, to leade on the Vawrd; who in their march about Dandingdale, encountred with the Lord Clif∣ford; (who formerly in cold blood had slaughtered the young Earle of Rutland) and
he being stricken into the throate with an arrow (some say) without a head; and presently dying: the Lord Nevill Sonne and heire of the Earle of Westmerland was also slaine, with most of their companies, and the rest put to flight. The next day likewise (the Duke of Norfolke being dangerously sick, to whom that place was as∣signed) Fconbridge and Blunt continue the leading of the Vaunt-guard; and on Palm-sunday, by break of day, they came to a plaine field between Towton & Saxto, from whence they made a full survey of king Henries Army, and certified king Ed∣ward, that the Enemy was threescore thousand strong; where his Army was but forty thousand and six hundred: whereupon a second Proclamation was made through the Campe, that no quarter should be kept, nor prisoner taken. The Armies being both in sight, the Lord Fauconbridge gave direction to the Archers (upon a signall by him given) to shoote every man a flight-arrow (for that purpose provided) and then to fall back three strides, and stand. The Northern men in the mean time plyed their bowes, till all their sheaves were empty; but their arrowes fell short of the Enemy by threescore yards, and not onely did no hurt to the Enemy, but did hurt to themselves; for their arrows being spent, and comming to hand-blows, their own arrows sticking in the ground, galled their shins, and pierced their feet. Ten houres the battell continued doubtfull; till the Earle of Northumberland being slaine, with the Lord, Beaumont, Gray, Dacres, and Wells, Sir Iohn Nevill, Andrew Tollop, and many other knights and Esquires; the Earles of Exeter and Somerset fled, leaving the Conquest to King Edward, but the bloodiest that ever England felt, for there fell that day six and thirty thousand seven hundred threescore and sixteen persons, no prisoner being taken but the Earle of Devonshire. The battell ended, K. Edward hastes to York, where he caused the heads of his father and other friends, to be taken down and buried with their bodies, setting in their places the heads of the Earle of Devonshire, and three other, there at that time executed. The Earle of Somerset ac∣quainting King Henry with this overthrow, perswades him, with his Queen and Son, to flie to Barwick; where leaving the Duke of Somerset, they flie further for succour to the King of Scots, who comforteth them with promise of reliefe, but maketh a sure bargaine; for in lieu of a pension to be allowed King Henry during his abode there, the Towne and Castle of Barwick were delivered to him. Queen Margaret and her Sonne are sent into France, who obtained of Lewis the Eleveth her Cosin, that all of King Edwards friends were prohibited Stay or Traffick in the French kings Dominions: but all King Henries friends might live there freely. After this, king Edward comes to London; and upon his entrance to the Tower, makes foure and twenty knights, and the next day foure more; and upon the 28 day of Iune, in the yeare 1461. he rode from the Twer to Westminster, and was there Crowned in the Abby-Church. Shortly after, a Parliament is summoned, which began at Westminster the fourth of November; In which, all Acts of king Henry the Sixth, prejudiciall to king Edwards Title, are repealed: and therein, Iohn Earle of Oxford, a valiant and wise man, (he who in a former Parliament had disputed the question concerning the precedency of Temporall and Spirituall Barons; a bold attempt in those dayes; and by force of whose Arguments, Judgement was given for the Lords Temporall) with his Sonne Aubry de Veer, Sir Thomas Tiddingham knight, William Tyrrell & Walter Montgomery Esquires, were, without answer, convicted of Treason, and beheaded. And to en∣courage others to well-deserving, king Edward at this time advanced many in ho∣nour: his brother George he created Duke of Clarence; his brother Richard, Duke of Glocester; Iohn Lord Nevill brother to the Earle of Warwicke, he made first Vis∣count, then Marquesse Montacue; Henry Bourchier brother to the Archbishop of Canterbury, is made Earle of Essex; and William Lord Fauconbridge, Earle of Kent. And now their new honours are presently put into imploiment; the Earls of Essex & Kent, accompaneid with the Lords Audeley and Clinton, Sir Iohn Howard, Sir Richard Walgrave and others, to the number of ten thousand, are appointed to scowre the Seas, who landing in Britaine, took the town of Conque, and the Isle of Ree, and then returned. At this time Henry Duke of Somerset, Ralph Percy and divers others
came in, and humbly submitted themselves to king Edwards mercy; who protested his propension of freely pardoning them, and as many other that would submit themselves as they did. All this time King Henry was in Scotland, and Queen Margaret in France; where she obtained of the French King, a company of five hundred men; with whom she sayled towards Newcastle, and landed at Tinmouth, but suddenly againe returned, and was herselfe by tempest beaten to Barwick, but her company was driven on the shore before Bamburg Castle; where they set their Ships on fire, and fled to an Islnd called Holy Island, but were so assayled there by the bastard Ogle and Iohn Manners Esqure, that many of them were slaine, and almost foure hundred taken prisoners, onely their Coronell Peter Bressie hppened upon a Fisherman, who brought him to wick to Queen Margaret, and by her was made Captaine of the Castle of Alne∣wick, which he with his French-men kept, till they were resced. Shortly after Queen Margaret having gotten together a great company of Scots, and other of her friends bringing her husband with her, and leaving her Sonne at Barwick, en∣tred Northumberland, tooke the Castle of Bamburg, made Captaine thereof Sir Ralph Grey; and then came forward to the Bishopprick of Durham: whither resor∣ted to her the lately Reconciled, and now againe revolted Duke of Somerset; Sir Ralph Percy and divers others, who altogether made a competent army. King Edward hearing hereof, makes preparation both by sea and land; and first he sends Viscount Montacute with some Companies into Northumberland; whom he in person follow∣eth with his whole power: The Viscount marcheth towards king Henry, and by the way encountreth the Lord Hungerford at Hegley-moore; but he, with Lord Basse, up∣on the first charge, ran away, leaving Sir Ralph Darcy alone with his own Regiment, who there valiantly fighting, dyed. After this the Viscount understanding that king Henry was encamped in Levels plaine, neer the river of Dowell in Hexamshire, march∣eth thither by night, and set upon him in his Campe, whose charge the Northern men receive with a desperate resolution, but were in the end with great slaughter overcome. Henry Beaufort Duke of Somerset, the Lords Basse, Molins, Hungerford, Wenworth, Hussey and Sir Iohn Finderne knight, with many others are taken priso∣ners: king Henry himselfe by the swiftnes of his horse escaped, but very hardly; for one of his Hench-men that followed him was taken, who had on his head king Henries Helmet, or as some say, his high Cap of Estate, called Abacot, garnished with two rich Crowns, which was presented to king Edward at Yorke the fourth of May. The Duke of Somerset was beheaded presently at Exam; the other Lords and knights were had to Newcastle, and there, after a little respite, were likewise put to death. Besides these, divers others, to the number of five and twenty, were executed at Yorke and in other places. This Duke of Somerset was never married, but had a na∣turall Sonne named Charles Somerset, who was afterward created Earle of VVorcester. Sir Humfry Nevill, and VVilliam Tailbois calling himself Earle of Kyme, Sir Ralph Grey and Richard Tunstall with divers others that escaped from this battell, hid them∣selves in secret places; but yet not so closely, but that they were espied and taken The Earle of Kyme was apprehended in Riddesdale, and brought to Newcastle, and there beheaded, Sir Humfry Nevill was taken in Holdernesse, and at York lost his head. After this battell, called Exam-field, king Edward came to the City of Durham, and sent from thence into Northumberland, the Earle of VVarwick, the Lord Montacute, the Lords Fawconbridge and Scroope, to recover such Castles as his Enemies there held; which they effected; and taking in the Castle of Dunstanburg, they found in it Iohn Gois servant to the Duke of Somerset, who was brought to Yorke and there be∣headed: and taking in the Castle of Bamburg, they found in it Sir Ralph Grey, whom because he had sworn to be true to king Edward, and was now revolted to king Hen∣ry they degraded from his Order of knight-hood at Doncaster, by cutting of his gil Spurs, renting his Coate of Arms, and breaking his sword over his head, and then beheaded him. In this mean time, king Henry (upon what occasion, no man knows; but onely led by the left hand of destiny) ventring in disguise to come into England, and shif∣ting
from place to place, was at length discovered, and taken by one Cntlow, or as others say, by Thomas Talbot sonne to Sir Edward Talbot of Bashall, who deceived him being at his dinner at VVaddington Hall in Lincolnshire, and brought him towards London, with his legs tyed under the horse belly; in whose company were also taken Doctor Haning Deane of VVindsor, D. Bdle, and one Ellrton, whom the Earle of VVarwicke met by the way, nd brought them all to the Tower of London; whils the distressed Queen with her sonne once again is driven to fly for shelter into France; whither the new Duke of Somerse and his brother Iohn sayled also, where they li∣ved in great misery; and the Earle of Pembrke went from Country to Country lit∣tle better then a Vagabond. At this time, king Edward, to reward his followers, distributeth the Lands and Pos∣sessions of those that held with king Henry amongst them, but first made Proclama∣tion that whosoever of the contrary faction would come in and submit, should be received to grace and restored to their Patrimonies. In the fourth year of king Edward, in Michaelmas Tearm were made eight Serje∣ants at Law, Thomas Young, Nicholas Geney, Richard Neale, Thomas Brian, Richard Pi∣got, Ioh Catesby and Guy Fairfax; who held their feast in the Bishop of Elyes place in Holborn, where the Lord Grey of Ruthin then Lord Treasurer of England, was placed before the Lord Major of London, being invited to the feast, which gave such a distaste to the Major, that he presently departed with the Aldermen and Sheriff, without tasting of their feast: and it was Registred to be a president in time to come. And now king Edward no lesse intentive to perform the Office of a king in peace, then he had been before of a Captaine in warr, considering with himselfe that se∣ditious and civill dissensions must needs breed disorders in a state, and that disorders bred by troubled times, are not like troubled waters, that will in time settle of them∣selves and recover cleernesse; but are rather like weeds, which once springing up and let alone, will in time over run the whole grond where they grow: He like a good Gardener seeks to weed them out before they grow too rank, and endeavours to make a generall reformation of abuses; and to that end in Michaelmas Term in the second yeare of his Reigne, Three daies together he sate publikely with his Judges in Westminster-hall on the Kings Bench, to acquaint himselfe with the Orders of that Court, and to observe what needed Reformation in it, either at Bench or t Barre: as likewise he ordered the officers of his Exchequer, to take more moderate Fees; and to be more intentive to the benefit of the Subject, than to their own unjust gaine: He also daily frequented the Councell Table; which he furnished for the most part, with such as were gracious amongst the Citizens, whom he im∣ployes about references and businesses of private consequence; whilest mysteries o State were intimated only to such whom he selected to be of his more private Cabi∣net Counsaile; by whom, he being now of the age of three and twenty years, w ad∣vised that it was now time to provide for posterity, by taking a wife, and to provide also for the present time, by taking a fit wife, which they conceived to be no where so fitly found as in France; both thereby to bury old grudges between the two Nati∣ons, and also to avert assistance from Queen Mrgret, the onely disturber of the State; and this being concluded, it onely remained to make choice of a fit man for that imployment, for which none was thought so fit as Richard Nevill Earle of War∣wick; he therefore is presently sent into Frace, to treate of a Marriage to be had between king Edward and the Lady Bon, daughter to Lewis Duke of Savoy, and Si∣ster to the Lady Carlote then Queen of Frace: a Lady, no lesse for beauty and vir∣tuous qualities, then for Nobility of blood, worthy to be a Queen. The Proposi∣tion is in Frace readily embraced, and willingly assented unto on all parts. But in the mean time king Edward being hunting in Witchwood Forrest besides Stonystrat∣ford; he chanced to come to the Manour of Grafton, where the Dutchesse of Bed∣ford then lay, and where her daughter by Sir Richard Woodvile, the Lady Elizabeth Gry widdow of Sir Iohn Gry of Grvy, slaine at the last battell of St. Albans; be∣came a suitour to him for some lands which her usband had given her in Joynture;
with whose beauty and grcefull behaviour, king Edward was so taken, that hee presently became a Suitor to her; and when he could not obtaine his suit by termes of wanton love, he was forced to seke it by terms of Marriage. And here we may well thinke there was no small cflct in King Edwards minde, between the two great commanders, Love and Honor, which of them should bee most potent; Honor put him in minde, that it was against his Law to take to wife a meaner person than himselfe; but Love would take no notice of any difference of degrees, but tooke it for his Prerogative to make all persons equall; Honour peswaded him that it stood him much upon to make good the Ambassage, in which he had sent the Earle of Warwicke to a great Prince; but Love perswadd him that it stood him more upon, to make good the Ambassage sent to himself from a greater Prince: In conclusion, it appeared to be true which one observes, Improbe mor quid non mortalia pectora cogis? what is it that love will not make a man to do? Whether it be, that love brings upon the minde a forgetfulnesse of all circum∣stances but such as tend to its own satisfaction; or whether it be that love is amongst passions, as oyle amongst liquors, which will alwayes be supreme and at the top; Honour may be honoured, but love will be obeyed: And therefore king Edward, though he knew no Superior upon Earth, yet he obeys the summons of Love; and upon the first day of May, marries the sayd Lady Gray at Grafton; the first of our kings since the Conquest that married his Subject: At which marriage none was present but the Dutchesse of Bedford, the Priest, two Gentlewoman, & a yong man to helpe the Priest at Masse: the yeare after, with great solemnity she was Crowned Queen at Westminster. It is not unworthy the relating the Speech which king Ed¦ward had with his Mother, who sought to crosse this mach: Where you say (saith he) that she is a widdow, and hath already children; by Gods blessed Lady, I am a Batchelour, and have some too, and so each of us hath a proofe, that ne∣ther of us is like to be barren; And as for your objection of Bigamy, (for his mother had charged him with being contracted to the Lady Elizabeth Lucie) Let the Bishop (saith he) lay it to my charge when I come to take Orders, for I under∣stand it is forbidden a Priest, but I never wist it was forbidden a Prince. Upon this marriage, the Queens Father was created Earle Rivers, and made High-Consta∣ble of England; her brother the Lord Anthony, was married to the sole Heire of the Lord Scales, and by her had that Barony; her Son sir Thomas Gray was created Mar∣quesse Dorset, and married Cicelie, heire to the Lord Bonvile. It may be thought a hppy fortune for this Lady to be thus marched; but let all things be considered, and the miseries accruing to her by it, will be found equivalent, if not over-weighing all the benefits: For first, by this match she drew upon her selfe the envy of many, and was cause that her Husband fled the Realm, and her selfe in his absence glad to take Sanctuary, and in that place to be delivered of a Prince, in a most unprincely mnner. After which, surviving her husband, she lived to see her two Sonnes most cruelly murthered; and for a conclusion of all, she lived to see her selfe confined to the Monastery of Berdmondsey in Southwarke, and all her goods confiscate by her own Son in Law. And nw the Earle of Warwicke at his return, found that knot tyed in England, which he had laboured to tye in France: His Ambassage frustrated, the Lady Bona deluded, the king of France abused, and himselfe made a stale, and the disgracefull instrument of all this; which although he resented in a high degree, yet he had not been a Courtier so long, but in that time he had sufficiently learned the Art of dis∣sembling; he passed it over lightly for the present, but yet carried it in his minde till a fit opportunity; and thereupon procures leave to retire himselfe to his Castle of Warwicke. King Edward in the meane time, having just cause to suspect hee had made the French his enemies, seeks to make other Princes his friends: He enters into a League with Iohn king of Aragon; to whom he sent for a Present a score of Cotsall Ews, and ive Rams, a small Present in shew, but great in the event; for it proved of more benefit to Spain, and of more detriment to England than could at first sight have been
imagined. And to secure himselfe at home, he tooke truce with the king of Scots for fifteen years. And where he had married before his two Sisters, Anne the eldest to Henry Holland Earle of Exeter; and Elizabeth to Iohn de la Poole Duke of Suf∣folke; he now matched Margaret his third Sister, to Charles Duke of Burgoigne; which proved a greater assistance to him, than that which he had lost in France. By this time the Earle of Warwickes spleen began so to swell within him, that hee could no longer containe it; and having with much adoe drawne to his party his two brothers, the Archbishop of Yorke, and the Marquesse Montacute; he seek also to draw in the kings two brothers, the Duke of Clarence, and the Duke of Glocester; but he found Glocester so reserved, that he durst not close with him; the Duke of Clarence he found more open, and to him he addresseth himselfe, complaining of the disgrace he had sustained by the king, in his employment into France, and other wrongs: to whom the Duke presently made answer, in as great complaint of his brothers unkindnesse to himself; saying, he had married his Wives brother Anthony to the heire of the Lord Scales, and her Son Thomas to the heire of the Lord Bovile, but could finde no match of preferment for him being his own brother: And upon this agreement in complaints, they agree to joyne against king Edward; and to make the knot the firmer, the Duke of Clarence takes to wife Isabel the Earle o Warwicks Daughter, and with her hath assured unto him halfe of the Lands the El held in right of his Wife, the Lady Anne, Daughter of Richard Beauchamp Earle of Wrwicke deceased. Upon this marriage, the Earle of Warwicke discovered to hi what hitherto he had concealed; concerning his project for the restoring of k. Hnry; to which Clarence gave approbation, with promise to assist him in it to his uttermo. At this time, Sir Thomas Cooke late Major of London, was by one Hawkins appea∣ched of Treason, for the which he was sent to the Tower, and his place in Londo seized by the Lord Rivers. The case was this; the sayd Hawkins came to Sir Tho∣mas, requesting him to lend a thousand Marks upon good surety; who answered, he would first know for whom it should be, and for what intent; and understanding it should be for the use of Queen Margaret, he refused to lend a penny. The matter rested two or three years, till the sayd Hawkins was layd in the Tower, and brought to the Brake, called the Duke of Exeters Daughter; by means of which paine, hee confessed amongst other things, the motion he had made to Sir Thomas Cook, and accused himselfe so farre, that hee was put death. Sir Thomas Cooke lying in the Tower from Whitsuntide till Michaelmas, had his place in Essex named Gyddihall, spoyled, his Deere in his Parke destroyed; and though arraigned upon life and death, he were acquitted of the Indictment; yet could not be delivered till he had payd eight thousand pounds to the king, and eight hundred to the Queen. And now the Earle of VVarwicke sendeth to his brothers the Arcbbishop and the Marquesse, to prepare all things ready to set on foot the intended revolt from king Edward, and to procure some rebellious commotion in the North, whil'st he and his new Son in law would provide to goe forward with the worke; which they accor∣dingly did in Yorkeshire, an occasion being taken for the breach of an ancient cu∣stome there, to give to the poore people of St. Leonards in the City of Yorke, certain quantities of Corn and Grain. This commotion the Archbishop and the Marqusse underhand fomented; yet to colour the matter, the Marquesse opposed the Rebels, and cut off the head of Robert Huldorne their Captain; but his head being cut off, the Rebels got them other Captains; Henry, Son and heir to the Lord Fizhugh, and sir Henry Nevill Son to the Lord Latimer; the one the Nephw, the other  Cozen-germane to the Earle of VVarwicke, with whom they joyne the valiant Cap∣taine Sir Iohn Conyers: These when they could not enter Yorke, came marching to∣wards London, all the way exclaiming against king Edward as an unjust Prince, and an usurper. King Edward hearing of this commotion, sends Sir VVilliam Herbert, whom of a meane Gentleman, two years before, he had made Earle of Pembrooke, and his brother sir Richard Herbert, together with the Lord Stafford of Southwick to sup∣presse the Rebels; and they with an Army of seven thousand, most Welchmen, march towards them; but the Lord Stafford being put from his Inne where he used
o lodge, by the Earle of Pebrooke, tooke such a distaste at it, that he withdrew his Arches, and gave over the businesse; yet the Earle of Pembooke though thus for∣en, with his own Regiment encountred the Rebels, slew Sir Henry Nevill, and divers others when being upon the point of victory, one Iohn Clappa a servant of the Erle of VVarwicke, comming in with five hundred rascally fellows, and cry∣ing aloud, a Wrwicke, a Warwicke; the Welchmen supposing the Earle had beene , turned presently their backs and fled; five thousand of them were slain, the Ele of Pembrke himselfe, and his much lamented brother Sir Richard Herbert, a most goodly personage, were taken prisoners, brought to Banbury, where both o th, with ten other Gentlemen were put to death. And now the Northampton∣shire men joyning with the Rebels, in this fury, made them a Captain named Robert Hillad, but they named him Robin of Riddesdale, & suddenly came to Grafton, where they tooke the Earle Rivers father to the Queen, and his sonne Sir Iohn Woodvile; brought them to Northampton, and there without Judgement beheaded them. King Edward advertised of these mischances, wrote to the Sheriffs of Somerset-shire and Dv-shire to apprehend the Lord Stafford of Southwick, (who had treacherously saken the Earle of Pembrooke) and if they could take him, to put him to death; who being soon after found in a Village within Brentmarsh, was brought to Bridge∣aer, and there beheaded. After this battell fought at Hedgecote, commonly called Bbury field, the Northern men resorted to Warwick, where the Earl with great joy received them; and hearing that king Edward with a great army was comming thi∣ther, he sent for his sonne in Law the Duke of Clarece, with all speed to repaire to him; who joyning together, and using means cunningly, by having some conication of Peace, to make the king secure, and to take little heed of him∣self they took advantage of his security, and in the dead of night set on his Campe, and killing the watch, before the king was aware, at a place called Wolney foure miles from Barwick, they took him prisoner in his bed, and presently conveyed him to Middleham Castle in Yorkeshire, to be there in safe custody with the Archbishop of Yorke. And now they had the Prey in their hand, if they had as well looked to kep it, as they had done to get it: but king Edward, whether bribing his Keepers, or otherwise winning them by faire promises, got so much liberty, sometimes for his rereation to goe a hunting; by which he caused Sir William Stanley, Sir Thomas of  and divers of his friends, at a certaine time to meet him, who took him from hi Keepers, and set him againe at liberty: whil'st the Earle of Warwicke nothing doubting his brother the Archbishops care in safe keeping him, & thinking the brunt of the warres to be now past, dismist his Army, and intended only to finde out King Henry who was kept a prisoner, but few men knew where. King Edward being now at liberty, posteth to York, and from thence to Lanca∣e; where his Chamberlaine the Lord Hastings had raised some forces, with which he marcheth to London, aud is there joyfully received: The Earle of Warwick likewise sends to his friends, and makes preparation for a new army; whil'st in the men time, by mediation of divers Lords, an enterview in VVestminster-hall is a∣greed upon; and solemn Oath taken on both sides for safety, between King Edward, the Duke of Clarence, and the Earle of Warwicke; but each party standing strict∣ly upon terms tending to their own ends; they parted as great Enemies as they met: and so from thence the K. went to Canterbury, the Duke and the E. to Lincolne: whi∣ther they had preappointed their forces to repaire, under the Conduct of Sir Robert Wl, Son & heir of the L. Wels, a man of great valour and experience in the wars: K. Erd, to take off so able a man from the Earles part, sends for his Father the L. Wels to come unto him; who taking with him, his Son in Law Sir Thomas Dymock, and comming to attend the Kings pleasure, was told by his friends how wonderfully the King was incensed against them: whereupon for their safety, they take Sanctuary at Westmister. But upon the Kings Princely word, they come unto him, who com∣mndeth the Lord Wells to write to his Sonne, to desist from adhering to the Eale of Warwicke, which the Lord Wells accordingly did: but Sir Robert Wells notwith∣snding his Fathers letters, continuing firme to he Earle still, so much incensed
King Edward, that he caused both his Father and Sir  Dymock to be beheded. He supposed perhaps, that the Lord Wlls was himself underhand a friend to the Earl, and had not dealt sincerely with him, in procuring his Sonne to leave that party. But now Sir Robert Wells seeing the King draw neer to Stamford, where he had pitched his Tents, and hearing of his Fathers beheading, was much distracted what to doe: to decline bttell with the King, he thought would shew too much feare; and o give him battell before the Erle of Warwicke were come with his forces, would shew too much boldnesse; But his Veines were so filled with a desire of revengi his Fathers death, that he thought he could never shew boldnesse enough; and thereupon encountring with the Kings Army, farre greater hen his own, opprest with multitude was taken prisoner, together with Sir Thomas de Ld and divers o∣thers; who presently in the place were put to execution: as soone as Sir Robert Wll was taken, the Lincolneshir men to make themselves the lighter to run away, threw off their Coates, for which cause, this battell was afterward called Lse-oate-field, in which, it is reported, were slaine above ten thousand men. The Earle of Warwick  of this Deeate, and not having present  raise an army sufficient to oppose king Edward when he could by no means dr the Lord Stanley to his party, he determined to sayle into Frc, and hyring ships at Dartmouth in Devire, he with his sonne in Law the Duke of Clarence,  their wives, took to Sea; and thinking to land at Cllie, of which Town he hims was Captaine, he was by the Lord Vcleere a Gascoigne, whom he had left his De∣puty there, repelled; and with so great inhumanity, that the Dutchesse of Clar who was then in labour, was faine to be delivered in the ship, (all the courtesie  th distresse shewed, was only to send a flaggon or two of wine,) which fact of V∣cleeres when king Edward heard of, he was so well pleased with it, that he present∣ly sent him a Patent to be Captaine of the Town himself: and the Duke of  for the same service, sent unto him Philip de Comies (who hath written the Histo∣ry of these times) with a grant of one thousand Crowns pension during his life. Ne∣ver man was beter paid for one act of disembling; for the truth was, Prae  exclsit for, it was out of his love, that he suffered him not to enter the Town, for he knew there were many great ones in it so addicted to king Edward, and so ma∣liciously bent against the Earle, that if he or any of his company should have come, they would in all likelihood have done them some mischiefe: And hereof he made a good proofe soon after: for when the Earle took to sea again, the Lord  sent him word, he should take heed where he landed; for that the Duke of  lay in waite to take him; which advertisement did the Earle more good, then the keeping him out of Callice did him hurt. The Earle upon this advertisement, ∣ded at Depe in Noradie, whereof when king Lewis heard, he sent and invited him to come to his Court at Amboi, where he received him with no lesse honour, than f he had been a king. In the mean time king Eard made enquiry for all such as were ayders to the Earle of Warwick of whom some were apprehended as guilty, some fled to Sanctuary, and some submitted to the kings mercy; as Iohn Marquesse Mo∣cute, whom he courteously received. Queen Margare, who at this time sojourned with Duke Rayner her father, hearing of the Earle of Warwicks arrivall, with her Son Prince Edward, came to Ambois, and with her also came Iasper Earle of Pembrooke, and Iohn Earl of Oxford, lately escaped out of prison and fled into France; between whom a new Combination is made; and for a foundation of firme amiie, king Heries sonne Prince Edward, marries Anne the Earle of Warwicks second daughter: after which marriage, the Duke of Clarence and the Earles took a solemn Oath, never to leave the warre till either king Henry or his sonnne Prince Edward were restored to the Crown But notwithstanding this Oath, this marriage put new thoughts into the Duke of Clarence his minde, casting with himselfe that the issue of it could be no lesse then the utter extirpation of the house of Yorke: whereupon, making faire shew still to his Father in Law the Earle of Warwicke, he underhand fals off, and se∣cretly gives advertisement to his brother king Edward of all their proceedings. And now the Earle of VVarwicke having been six months in France; in this time he had
from the king of France, both ships, and men, and money, and receiving  out of England, that many Lords and others were ready to adventue their lives in his quarell, if he would come, (for the people generally held him in such , that they thought the Sunne was taken from the world, when he was  and this in great part for his gret Hospiality, who it is said, used to spend spam a breakfst) he with the Earles of Oxford and Pembrooke took to ; and though the Duke of Brgoigne had a Fle at sea, to inercept him; ye his Fleet be∣g by empest scattered, and king Edwrd rusting to that Flee, having provided no other the Earle had a quiet passage to land at Darmouth in Devonshire, whee being landed, he made Proclamation in king Hery the sixh name, that all good Subjct should prepre to fight against king Edward, who contrary to Right had usurpe he Crown: Upon which Proclamation, it is scarce to be believed, how m∣ny thonds of men resorted to him; with which foces, he made towars Lodon: upon notice of whose approach, on the Sunday next after  day, one Do∣ctor Gddard a Chaplaine of Hi, preaching at Paul Cross, did so st foth his Earles pious intention, that many of his auditory were moved to favour the Earle: pro∣ceeding: insomuch, that the Mrquesse Montacue, who had in king Edwards behlf,  six thousand men about London, found them all inclinable to goe with him  the Earle of VVarwick, and accordingly wnt and joyned with him. King Ed∣rd hring of the great flocking of people to the Earle, sent forth letters into all parts of the Realme for raysing an army; but few came, and those few, with no great good will: which when he perceived, he began to doubt his case; and thereupon copanied with the Duke of Glocester his brother, the L. Hastings his Chamber∣, (who having married the Earle of VVarwick sister, yet cotinued ever true to  Edward) and the Lord Scales brother to the Queen; he departed into Licol∣shire, and cmming to Lyn, he found there an English Ship, and two Huls of Holland ready to make sayle: whereupon he, with the forenamed Lords, and about seven or  hundred persons entred the Ship, having no provision with him but only the apparell they wore; and so bare of money, that he was faine to reward the Master of  Ship with one of his Garments: and thus making course towards the Duke of  Country, they were presently chased by eight great Ships of Easterlings, opn Enemies both to England and France; which drove him before a Towne in the Country called Alquemare, belonging to the Duke of Burgoigne: where by chnce, the Lord Grunture Governour of that Country, at that time was, who defen∣ded them from the Easterlings, and brought them to the Hge in Holland, where they had all things ministred to them, by order from the Duke of Burgoigne. At this time, upon news of the Earle of VVarwick approach, Queen Elizbeth fosaketh the Tower, and secretly taketh sanctuary at VVestminster, where in great pnury forsaken of all her friends, she was brought a bed of a sonne called Edward, who like a poore mans childe was Christened; the Godfathers being the Abbot and Pyr of Westminster, and the Lady Scroope Godmother. And now the Earle of Warwicke entring the Tower, removes king Hery out of his hold of durance, whee he had been almost nine years, into his own lodging, where he was served according to his Estate; which the Eare did more congratulate, then te king himselfe. Upon this sixth day of October, king Henry accompanied with he Archbishop of Yorke, the Pryor of S. Iohns, the Bishop of London, the Duke of Clrence, the Earle of Warwicke and other Noblemen, apparelled in a long gown of lew Velvet, was conducted through London, o the Bishops Palace where he rested ill the thirteenth of hat moneth, on which day he went in solemne proces∣ bout Paul Church, wearing his Imperiall Crown; the Earle of War∣ick bearing up his trayne; and the Earle o Oxford the sword before him. The next day, in all usuall places about London, king Edward was Proclaimed an Usurper,  all his partakers Traytors to God and the king; whereof Iohn Lord Tipof Earle of Worcester, as a partaker with king Edward, was made the first example. Thi Lord had been Lievtenant for King Edard in Ireland, where having done something  which he fled, he was afterward found on the top of a high Tree, in the Forres
of VVbridge, in the County of  nd being there taken, was brought to Lodo, Attained, and  the Tower hill, and afer buried at the Black∣fryrs. About this time happen  to be related: Sir Willi Hkesford knight one of  Jusis t the Lw who dwelt at Annoy in Dvosire, a man of grea , and ving no sone, he Lord Fitzare, Si Io Seger, and Sir Willi  mrried his dughte, and were his heires This mn grew into such  deg of Melancholy tht one  he called to him the Keeper of hi Par, chging him  ngligence, in suffering his Deere to be stoln: and thereupon commnded him, hat if he met any man in his circuit in the night∣time, that would not stand or  he shold not spar to kill him whatsoever he were The knight having th lad hi foundtion, and meaning to end his dole∣full dayes; in  certaine darke night sely conveyd himselfe out of his house, nd walked alone in his Pr. The Keeper in hi night-walk ering one stirring, and comming towads him, asked, who was there? but no answer being made, he willed him to stand which when he would not doe, the Keeper shot and klled him, and comming to see who he was, fod him to be hi Master. On the twentieth dy of , a Prliment is held at VVestmister, wherein King Edward and all his prtak re ttained of high Treason, and al their Lands and Goods seized on to King  use. Gege Pltgene Duke of Clarence, is by authority of this Parliament, adjudged heire to Richard Duke of Yorke his father, and that Dutchy setled upon him and his heires, notwithstanding the Primogeni∣ture of Edward: upon him also wa entailed the Crown of England, in case heires males of the body of King Hery filed. Iasper Earle of Pembrooke, and Iohn Earle of Oxford, are fully restored o their Lands nd Honour and VVawick and Clrence are made Governours of the King and kingdome To this Parliament came the Mrquesse Montacute, ecusing himselfe, that or eare of deah he had taken King Edwards part, which excuse was accepted. Quen Margaret i sent for into France, but by reason of contrary windes was kept back all that Winter. About this time, Iasper Earle of Pembrooke going into VVales to view his lands in Pembrookeshire, found there the Lord Henry, borne of Margaret the onely daughter and heire of Ioh the first Duke of Somrset, not being then full ten years of age, kept in manner like a captive, but honourably brought up by the Lady Herbert; him he brings with him to Lodo, and pesents him to King Henry; whom when the Kig had a good while beheld, he said to the Lords about him: Loe, this is he, to whom both we and our adversaries, leaving the possession of all things, shall hereafter give place. Which if it be true, It shews a very Propheticall Spirit to have been in King Henry; that could so long before foretell a thing so unlikely to happen: for this was he, that was afterward King Hry the Seventh, before whom at that time there were many lives in being, of boh the hous of Yorke and Lncaster. Shortly after this, by the Duke of Burgoignes means, King Edward is furnished with eighteen tall ships, two thousand Dutchmen, and fifty thousand florens of gold; and thus furnished, he took to Sea, and landed at Ravenspurre in Yorkeshire, where he found but cold entertainment; neverthelesse he made a wary march to Yorke, where likewise he found no great expression of welcome, so as he was forced to change his pretence, swearing deeply and receiving the Sacrament upon it, that he came not to disturbe King Henry, but only to recover his own inheritance; and for the more shew thereof, wearing an Estrich feather, Prince Edwards livery; which ro∣position seemed so easonable, that many who resisted him before, were as ready to assist him now: and if he be blamed for breaking his Oath; it must be considered, It was Regi causa, to recover his Kingdome, which perhaps was the Inheritance he meant, when he took his Oath, that he intended nothing, but to recover his Inhe∣ritance: and so he brake not his Oath neither. From Yorke he marched towards Wakefild and Sendall, leaving the Castle of Pomfret upon his left hand where the Marquesse Montacute with his Army lay, but did not offer to stop him: From Wake∣field he came to Docaster, and from thence to Nottingham, where there came to
him Sir William Parre and Sir Iames Harrington with six hundred men; also Sir Tho∣mas Burgh and Thomas Montgomery with their aydes, who caused him to make Pro∣clamation in his own name: affirming hey would serve no man but a King. From Nottingham he came to Leicester, where three thousand able men, and well armed came unto him: From Leicester he came before the wals of Coventry; into which City the Earle of Warwick had withdrawn himselfe, keeping himselfe close therein, with his people, being about six or seven thousand men; three dayes together king Edward provoked him to come forth to battell; but he stayed for more forces, and would not doe it: whereupon King Edward marched forward to Warwicke eight miles from Coventry, thinking thither at least he should have drawne the Earle of VVarwicke, but neither would that doe it: Indeed the Earle looked for the comming of the Duke of Clarence, with twelve thousand men to joyn with him, but that ex∣pectation proved vaine, for the Duke was now fully reconciled to his Brother King Edward, and brought all his forces to joyn with him; onely he sought to make amity between King Edward and the Earle: but though King Edward offered generall Pardon, and other faire conditions; yet none would please the Earle, without re∣storing of King Henry. But now to repaire the defection of the Duke of Clarence, there came to the Earle of VVarwick at Coventry; the Earle of Oxford, the Duke of Exceter, and the Marquesse Montacute, by whose comming that side was not a little strengthened; yet all this ayde would not make the Earle of VVarwick to come to battell: whereupon King Edward marched forward towards London: Both sides seek to make London their friend; the Earle of VVarwicke sends to his brother the Archbishop of York to labour in it; who thereupon caused king Henry to mount on hseback, and to ride from Pals through Cheape down Walbrooke, supposing that this shewing of the king, would have allured the Citizens to assist him: but this de∣vice prevailed little, brought not in above seven or eight thousand men, a small pro∣portion to withstand king Edward; and when the Archbishop of York saw this back∣wardnes in the Citizens, or rather indeed an inclination to king Edward, he secretly sent to him, to receive him into grace; which upon Promise to continue faithfull hereafter, he obtained. The eleventh of April in the year 1471, and the eleventh of his Reigne, king Edward made his entry into the City of London, ryding first to Pauls Church, and from thence to the Bishops Palace, where the Archbishop of York pre∣sented himselfe unto him, and having king Henry by the hand, delivered him to king Edwrd (six moneths after his readeption of the Crown) and then king Edward being seized of his person, went from Pauls to Westminster, and there gave God most hear∣ty thanks for his safe return. The reasons alleadged hereby Philip Comines for the Citizens receiving of king Edward, seeme scarce worthy of so good an Authour: one cause (saith he) was, because king Edward being extreamly indebted in the City, if they had not received him, they should have lost their debt; another, because he had won the love of many Citizens wives, who importuned their husbands to re∣ceive him. The Earle of Warwicke having intelligence that king Edward was received into Lodon, and king Henry delivered into his hands; marched out and encamped at St. Alban, and after some refreshing of his Army, removed towards Barnet, and in a large plaine there, called Gldmore heath, pitched his Campe; which king Edward hearing, on Easter Eve the thirteenth of April, he marched forth, and came that evening to Barnet, where he would not suffer a man of his Army to stay in the town, but commanded them all to the field, and lodged with his Army more neer to the Enemy then he was aware, by reason of a Myst, (raised some say, by one Bungey a Conjurer) which made it so darke, that it could not be well observed where they were encamped. In taking his ground, he caused his people to keep as much ience as was possible, thereby to keep the enemy from knowing of their approach Great Artillery they had on both parts, but the Earle more then the King; and therefore in the night time, they shot from his Campe almost continually, but did little hurt, because they still overshot them, as lying neerer then was conceived. On Easter-day, arly in the Morning, both Armies are ordered for battaile; The Earle of War∣wick
appointed the Command of the Right wing, which consisted of Horse, to his brother the Marquesse Montacute, and the Earle of Oxford; The Left wing consisting likewise of horse, was led by himselfe and the Duke of Exceter; and the main Battell consisting of Bills and Bows, was conducted by the Duke of Somerset. On the kings part, the Vaward was commanded by the Duke of Glocester; the battell (in which was king Henry) was led by king Edward himself; and the Lord Hstings brought on the Reere. After exhortations for encouragement of their Suldiers, the fight began; which with great valour was maintained by the space of six hours, without any ap∣parent disadvantage on either side; onely the Earles Vaward, by the valiancy of the Earle of Oxford, seemed somewhat to over-match the kings; which made sme fly∣ing towards London to carry news, that the Earle of Warwick had wonne the field; and he had perhaps done so indeed, but for a strange misfortune which happened to the Earle of Oxford and his men; for they having a Starre with streams on their li∣veries, as king Edwards men had the Sunne, the Earle of Warwicks men, by reason of the Myst, not well discerning the badges so like, shot at he Earle of Oxfords men, that were on their part: whereupon the Earle of Oxford cryed, Treason! and fled with eight hundred men. At length after great slaughter made on both side, king Edward having the greater number of men, (as some write, though other say the con∣trary) caused a new power of fresh men (which he had kept of purpos) to come on: which the Earle of Warwick observing, being a man of an invincible courage, no∣thing dismaied, rushed into the midst of his enemies, where he adventured so arre, that amongst the preasse he was stricken down and slaine. (Though some write, that the Earle seeing the desperate estate of his Army, leapt on a horse to fly; and com∣ming to a Wood where was no passage, one of king Edwards men came to him, kil∣led him, and spoyled him to the naked skin.) The Marquesse Montacute, thinking to succour his brother, lost likewise his life, and left the Victory to king Edward. On both sids were slaine, as Hall saith, ten thousand at the least; Fabian saith, but fifteen hudred, but then he means onely of the kings side. Upon the kings part were slaine the Lord Cromwell, the Lord Say, the Lord Montjoyes Sonne and heire, Sir Humfry Borchier sonne and heire to the Lord Berners, and divers other knights and gentlemen. On the Earls part were slaine, the Earle himselfe, the Marquss Montacute, and three and twenty knights, of whom Sir William Tyrrell was one. The Duke of Somerset, and the Earle of Oxford fled into VVales, to Iasper Earle of Pembroke. The Duke of Exceter being strucken down, and so wounded that he was left for dead, amongst other the dead bodies, because he was not kown; but com∣ming to himselfe, he got up, and escaped to VVestminster, and there took Sanctuary. The dead bodies of the Earle and Marquesse were brought to London in a Coffin, and by the space of three dayes lay open-faced in the Cathedrall Church of St. Paul, and then buried with their Ancestours, in the Priory of Bissam. This Earle of VVarwick was Richard Nevill, sonne and heire of Richard Nevill Earle of Salisbury, who married the daughter of Richard Beauchamp the sixth Earle of Warwick, and in her right was Earle of Warwick, in his own, of Salibury: he was also Lord Monthermer, great Cham∣berlaine, and high Admirall of England, Lord Warden of the North Marches to∣wards Scotland, and high Steward of the Dutchy of Lacaster: he had issue two Daughters, Isabell married to George Duke of Clarence; and Ann, rst mar∣ried to Prince Edward king Henry the sixths Sonne, and after to Richard Duke of Glo∣cester. Wee may here observe a Constellation of disastrous influences, concurring all to the overthrow of this great Warwicke; whereof, if any one had been missing, the wheele of his fortune had perhaps not turned: For if the City of Yorke had not too credulously believed king Edwards Oath, not to dsturbe king Henry; or if the Marquesse Motacute had stopped (as he might) his passage at Pomfret; or if the Duke of Clarence had not at the very point of the battell at St. Albans, deserted his party and joyned with king Edwards or if Quen Margaret had not by tempest been kept from comming into Eglad in time; or if the Londoners had not been re∣trograde and deceived his expectation, he had never perhaps been overthrown as
he was: But Fata viam invenient; destiny will finde waies that were never thought of, will make way where it findes none; and that which is ordained in heaven, shall be effected by means of which Earth can take no notice. Queen Margaret, when it was too late, accompanied with Iohn Longstrother Pri∣or of Saint Iohns, and the Lord Wenlock, with divers Knights and Esquires tooke shipping at Harflew, the foure and twentieth of March, but by tempest was kept back till the thirteenth of April; and then with her sonne Prince Edward, shee landed at Weymouth, and from thence went to an Abby hard by called Ceern, and then to Bewly in Hampshire, whither there came unto her Edmund Duke of Somerset, and Thomas Courtney Earle of Devonshire, with divers others; amongst whom, it is re∣solved once more to try their fortune in the field; but then the Queen would have had her sonne Prince Edward to be sent into France, there to remaine in safety, till the next battell were tryed; but they being of a contrary minde, and specially the Duke of Somerset, shee at length consented, though afterward she repented it. From Bewly she with her sonne and the Earle of Somerset passeth on to Bristow, intending with what power they could raise in Glocestershire, to march into Wales, to joyn with Isper Earle of Pembrooke, who was there making preparation of more forces. King Eward hearing of these things, resolves to crosse this Conjunction, and followes Queen Margaret with a great Power so close, that neere Tewkesbury in Glocestershire he overtakes her forces, who resolutely turn and make head against him; where So∣merset, on the Queens part, leading the Vaunt-guard, performed the part of a valiant Commander; but finding his souldiers throgh wearines begin to faint, and that the Lord Wenlock, who had the conduct of the battaile on the Queens part, moved no, the rode unto him, and upbrayding him with cowardise or treachery, never staid, but with his Pollaxe beat out his brains; and now before he could bring in his men to the rescue, their Vaward was routed, and Iohn Earle of Devonshire, with above three thousand of the Queens part were slaine: The Queen her selfe, Iohn Beaufort the Duke of Somersets brother, the Prior of Saint Iohns, Sir Gervis Clifton and divers others were taken prisoners; all which except the Queen, were the next day behea∣ded. At which time Sir Richard Crofts presented to king Edward king Henries Son Edward, whom he had taken prisoner; to whom king Edward at first shewed no un∣courteous countenance; but demanding of him, how he durst so presumptuously enter into his Realm with Arms? and he answering, though truly, yet unseasonably, To recover my Fathers Kingdome and Heritage; King Edward with his hand thrust him from him, or (as some say) strooke him with his Gantlet, and then presently George Duke of Clarence, Richard Duke of Glocester, Thomas Grey Marquesse Dorset, and William Lord Hastings standing by, fell upon him in the plac, and murdred him. His body was homely interred with other ordinary Corpses, in the Church of the Monastery of the Black-fryers in Tewkesbury. After the Victory thus obtained, king Edward repaired to the Abbey Church of Tewkesbury, to give God thankes for his good successe; and finding there a great number of his enemies, that were fled thither to save themselves, he gave them all free Pardon; onely Edmuud Duke of Somerset,  Longstrother Pryor of Saint Iohns, Sir Thomas Tressham, Sir Gervi Clifton and divers other Knights and Esquires, who were apprehended there, and brought be∣fore the Duke of Glocester, sitting that day as Constable of England, and the Duke of Norfolk as Marshall, were all arraigned, condemned and judged to Dye, and accor∣dingly upon the Tuesday being the seventh of May, they were all, and twelve other knights more, on a Scaffold set up in the middle of the Town, beheaded, but not dis∣membred and permitted to be buried. The same day Queen Margaret was found in a poore house of Religion, not farre from thence, into which she was fled for safeguard of her life; but she was after brought to London, and there kept a Prisoner, till her Father ransomed her with great summes of money. This was the last pitcht battell that was fought in England, in king Edward the fourths dayes, which happened on the fourth of May, being Saturday, in the Eleventh yeere of his reigne, and in the yeere of our Lord 1471. King Edward being assured, that as long as any partakers of king Henry lived and
were at liberty, he should never be free from plots against his life; sent Roger Vaugha, a Gentleman much reckoned of in his own Country, to entrape Iasper Earle of Pembrooke, who had escaped from the last encounter: but he having notice of the plot before, prevented it by striking off Vaughans head. After these great Clouds were thus dispersed, there arose a little Cloud, which gave the Realme, at least the City of London no small disquiet. For now, Thomas bastard Faconbridge, who had been imployed by the Earle of Warwick to scowre the Seas, hearing of these defeats; having enriched himselfe by Piracy, gathered together an Army of seventeen thousand men, and comming to London, impriously comman∣ded admission into the City, and releasement of King Henry out of prison: but being denyed entrance, and hearing that king Edward with a great power was comming towards him, he brings up his shipping to Saint Katherines, and taking with him his most desperate men, with them he marcheth to Kingston-bridge, but finding that bridge broken down, and all the places of passage guarded, he withdrew his forces into Saint Georges field, from whence he prepared to assault the City of London; for the effecting whereof, he landed all his ship Ordinance, and planted them all alongst the Banks-side, with which he battered down many houses, and much annoyed the City; but the Citizens on the other side, lodged their great Artillery against their Adversaries, with which they so galled them, that they durst not abide in any plae alongst the water side, but were driven even from their own Ordinance: Then he appointed his men to set fire on the bridge, and withall caused three thousand to passe over the Thames, and some of them to assault Aldgate, and some Bishopsgate, but were in all places, by the industry of the Citizens repelled, and chiefely by Robert Basset and Ralph Iocelyne Aldermen: Upon this he retyred to Black-heath and there encamped by the space of three dayes; but then hearing that king Edward was com∣mming with a great Army, he got him to his ship, but the rest fled some one way, some another. The one and twentieth of May, the king comming to London, thank∣ed the Citizens for their pains and care, and dubbed the Major, the Recorde Vrse∣wicke, and Bsset and Iocelyne Aldermen, Knights. And now the time was come for king Henry to be delivered out of all his troubles; for the bloody Duke of Glocester entring the Tower, where he found king Henry, nothing at all troubled with all his Crosses, struck him into the heart with his Dagger and there slew him. And now we have had within the space of half a yeer, one Parliament Proclaming king Edward an Usurper, and king Henry a lawfull king; and another Proclaming king Edward a lawfull king, & king Henry an Usurper: that we may know in humane affairs, there is nothing certaine, but uncertainty; nothing stable, but instability. King Edward presently after the interment of king Henry, drawes his forces to∣wards andwich in Kent, where some of the followers of Fuconbridge, to the number of eight or nine hundred, had in the Castle there strongly fortified themselves, but upon their asking Pardon and submitting themselves to the king, with promise to be faith∣full Subjects ever after, they had their Pardon granted them, and then they delivered up both Castle and Ships to the number of thirteen, to the kings use. But how this Composition was observed, may be imagined; when Fauconbridge who was com∣prised in the same Pardon, was afterward taken and executed at Southampton Spi∣cing and Quintine the Captaines that affailed Aldgate and Bishopsgate, and were in Sandwich Castle, at the surrender thereof; were presently beheaded at Canterbury, and their heads placed on poles, upon those gates: and by a Commission of Oyre and Teminer, many both in Essex and Kent, were arraigned and condemned for this Re∣bellion, and more fined. And now king Edward, desiring to be secured from all suspected persons, sent the Archbishop of Yorke, brother to the Earle of Warwick, over to Guisnes, there to be kept in safe custody; and there he remained a long time, till at length by friend∣ship he was delivered, and shortly after dyed. Likewise Iohn Earle of Oxford, who after Barnet Field yeelded himselfe to king Edward, had his life pardoned; but yet was set over sea to the Castle of Hmmes, where for the space of twelve years he
was shut up in strong prison, and narrowly looked too. As for the Earles of Pem∣brooke and Richmond, who were fled out of the Realme, to the Duke of Britaine, king Edward sent to the Duke, requiring to have them delivered up unto him, upon pro∣mise of great rewards; to which the Duke made answer, that he could no with his honour deliver them up, whom he had taken into his Protection; but that for king Edwards sake, he would take such care of them, that he should need to take no care for them; and to that end, he sequestred their own servants from them, and ap∣pointed Britaines to attend upon them. It was now the thirteenth year of king Edwards reigne; in which a Parliament was called at Westminster: wherein all acts formerly made by him, are confirmed or revived; and all their Lands and Goods confiscated, that had taken part against him and were fled and all their lands and goods restored to such as had taken part with him. King Edward being destin'd to be alwayes in troubles; now that he had quiet∣nesse at home, was drawn into new broyles abroad; for the Duke of Burgoigne at this time having warres with France, thought he could no way make a better har∣vest to himselfe, then by sowing seeds of dissention between France and England; and to this end, he sends Ambassadours to king Edward, to sollicite him to set on foot his Title to the Crown of France; making great offers, with Protestation to assist him in it, both with Purse and Person. This proposition being seriously deba∣ted by the Kings Privy Counsell, is at last approved of, as being both lawfull and behovefull, for the honour of the King, and good of the kingdome. Onely means to beare the charges of the warre, were wanting; to supply which by a Parliamentary course, would ask too much time: a new course therefore is devised, to procure mony from the Subject by way of Benevolence; and this course was taken. About this time, Henry Holland Duke of Exceter and Earle of Huntington, dis-in∣herited by Act of Parliament, in the fourth yeer of this King, (though he had marri∣ed King Edwards Sister; yet grew to so great misery, that passing over into Flanders, he was there forced all ragged and bare-foot to beg his bread:) was found dead, and stript naked, between Dover and Callice: but how he came to his death, no enquiry could bring to light. Provision for this French expedition being throughly made; and order taken for the quiet government of the kingdome in his absence, and the stop of incursions, if any by the Scots should be made: King Edward with an Army of fifteen hundred men at arms, all of the Nobility and Gentry, fifteen thousand Archers on horseback, eight thousand Common souldiers, and three thousand Pioners, came down to Dover; whither the Duke of Burgoigne had sent five hundred flat bottom'd boates, to tran∣sport the Horse to Callice; yet for all that helpe, it was two and twenty dayes before the kings forces were all past over. Before the kings departure from Dover, (to the end he might not seem to surprize him) he sent an Herauld named Garter, a Norman by birth, with a letter of Defiance to the French king, (so well written, saith Co∣s, that he thought it not of any English mans enditing; as though Englishmen could not endite aswell as the French) Requiring him to yeeld unto him the Crown of Fce, his unquestionable Inheritance; which if he should dare to deny, e  then endeavor to recover it by the Sword. This letter the French king read & thereupon withdrawing himselfe, caused the Herauld to be brought to his presence to whom in private he gave this answer: That the Duke of Burgoigne and the Earle of Saint Paul the Constable, (by whose instigation, he knew the king of Egland was drawn to this Designe) would but delude him, for that they were Dissembler nd Impostors; and therfore said, It would conduce more to the honor of the king of  to continue in League with him, though an old Adversary; then to hazard th fortune of the warres, upon the promised assistance of new-come Decivers nd so commend me (saith he) to the king thy Master, and say what I have told he; and then with an honourable reward of three hundred Crowns, dismist him: The Herauld promised to doe all that in him lay, and (beyond his Commission) shew∣d the French king wayes, (by working upon the Lords Howard and Stanley) by
which he might enter into a Treaty for Peace, which he doubted not, would sort to a good Conclusion. The French king glad to her it, gave the Herauld, besides the other reward,  piece of Crimson Velvet of thirty yards long; and withall sent to king E∣ward the goodliest Horse he had in his Stable, as also an Ae, a Wolph, and a wild ore, beats at that time rare in England: and then the Herauld returning to Callice, de∣livered to king Edward the French kings nswer. And now to make good the French kings aegation to the Herauld; the Duke o Burgoigne, who had promised in the word of a Prince, to bring to Callice by this time, two thousand Launces and foure thousand Seradiots or ight hose, failed to come: whereupon the Lord Scales is by king Eward sent to the Dke, to put him in minde of his promise, and to haten his comming with his promised forces: But the jour∣ney was to little purpose; onely it occasioned the Duke with a small roop of horse to come to he king, formally to excuse himselfe for having been so backward; but the cause (he said) was, for that having been imbroiled in the siege of Nz, he could not depart thence without infinite disgrace, if neither composition nor submission were enforced; which now notwithstnding because he would not too much tre∣spasse upon his patence, he was enforced to doe, by the obtnacy of the besieged: but promised to supply all defects, both with his presence and power, and that speedi∣ly. The Constable likewise by his letter perswades the king of England to pro∣ceede in the action, and not to doubt both from the Duke and himself, to be suffici∣ently every way accommodated. King Edward thus encouraged, passeth on, but in his way found no performance of promises, either on the Dukes or Constables part; for the Duke did not accommo∣date the souldiers at their comming to Pero, with victuals or lodging in such man∣ner as was requisite and expected; and the Constable in stead of surrendring up Sain  according to agreement, made a saly out upon such as were sent from the king of Eglad to take possession, and plaid upon them with his great Ordinance; whereupon k. Edard began to suspect the truth of the French k. description of the Dukes and Constables conditions; and from thence forward stood upon his own guard, and gave no further credit to their Protestation; which the Duke of Burgoige resenting, pretended occasions for the hasting forward his forces & promising speedy return together with them, taketh his leave and departeth, which did not a little in∣creae the kings suspition. The French king having intelligence of the Duke of Burgoignes departure, fore∣casting the danger, if they should unite their forces; resolved with himselfe, to  what might be done to mediate a Peace in the Dukes absence; and yet so to , that if it took not effect, he might disclaime the knowledge of the overture: where∣upon he privately dispatcheth a messenger, in hew an Herauld; but was indeed fellow of no oice or estimation, and not known to any of the Kings household, but to Villiers the Master of the Horse, who only was acquainted with the plot and par∣ty. This counterfeit Pursuivant at Arm, with a coate made of a Trumpets Banne∣towle, addressed himselfe to the king of Eglad, and upon admission to his pesence, insinuates the French Kings desire, which was, to have Commissioners on both parts assigned, to conferre of the means to reconcile the differences between the two Kings; or at least to conclude a cessation from arms fo some time: And so well this Messenger delivered his errand, that it was credited, and the kings request grantd; and thereupon letters of safe conduct, are sent of both sides, for such Commissioners as to this purpose should meet at Ayes. For king Edward, came the Lord Hod, Sir Athoy Setleger, and Doctor Moron, after made Lord Chancelour of Eglad. For king Lewis, came the Admirall of France, the Lord Saint Piers, and Heberg ∣shop of Ereux. After long Conference, Articles of Peace were concluded on o this effect: That the French king should pay presently to the king of Eglad, three∣score and fifteen thousand Crowns, and from thence forth, annually, fifty thousnd Crowns, during the life of king Edward: That within one yeare, the French king should send for the Lady  the king of Englands daughter, and joyn her in marriage to the Dolphin: That the Lord Howrd, and Sir Iohn Cheyney Master of the
Horse, should remaine in hostage there, till the English army had quitted France, and  generall peace for nine yeer; wherein the Dukes of Burgoigne and Britte, are cluded, if they will accept thereof: This Conclusion was the more easily compas∣sed, by the king of France his following the Herauld Counsell; fo he distributed sixteen thousand Crowns amongst king Edwards Counsellours and Favorites; two thousand Crowns to the Lord Hastings the kings Chamberlaine, and to the Lord , Sir Iohn Cheyny, Sir Anthony Sentleger, and Mogomery, the residue; besides great store of Plate and Jewels, distributed amongst inferiour Officers of the Court. The Duke of Glocester onely opposed this accord, as not suiting with his designe; Neverthelesse it proceeded, and notce thereof is presently sent to the Duke of ; who thereupon onely with fifteen horse, comes posting to the English Campe, whom king Edward perswades to enter into the peace, according to the reservation; but he in a great chafe, reproacheth king Edward for entring into it him∣selfe; saying, that his predecessours had by many brave exploits gotten fame and re∣ptation upon the French; and now he had brought his souldiers onely to shew them the Country, and returne as they came; adding withall, that to make it ap∣pee he was able without helpe of the English to subsist of himselfe he utterly dis∣clmed any benefit by that Truce, untill three months after the English were re∣ned to their own Country; and so in a great snuffe returned home. For the better Confirmation of what wa agreed upon between the two kings, an  is desired; but before the same is eectuaed, the French king sends to the Engsh army an hundred Tonne of Gascoigne wine, to be drunke out amongst the prive ouldiers, and therewithall, free licence for Commanders and Gentlemen to recreate themselves in Amyes, where they were lovingly entertained by the Burgers of the Town, by the kings expresse command. The place of enterview of these two  is agreed on to be at Picquency, a Town three miles distant from Ames, seated in  ottome, through which the river of Some runneth, over which a strong bridge was but, and in the midst thereof a grae made overthwart with artes, no wider  than a man might well thrust in his arme; covered with boardes overhead to avoid the rainfoure of the Bed-chamber on both sides, are appointed to search the room, to prevent traps of instrumen of treachery: and being by them certified that ll as was cleere, the kings advance themselves. King Edward being come in sight of the place, made a stand; being told, that the circumstance of comming frt to th place, was a matter of great disparagement in point of State: but the French king oe regarding substnce then circumstance, gave the king of England the advan∣ to come at hi pleasure, and went first to the barre appointed for conference,  thee did attend king Edwards leasure. He had in his Company, Iohn Duke of , with his brother the Cardinall, and eight hundred mn at Arms. King Ed∣ hd with him, his brother the Duke of Clarence, the Earle of Northumberland, he Lords Chamberlaine and Chancellour, and at his backe his whole Army in bt∣e. The kings lovingly salute each other, and complements of courtesie reipro∣ which finished, They with their Noblemen there present, take all heir  upon the holy Evangelists, in all to their ower, to observe the Articles o  agred on. After which, In private the French king imporues king Ed∣, that the Duke of Brittaine might be left out of these Articles: but after much  to that purpose, king Edward gave his resolute answer that if king Lewis  the frendship of Englnd, he should not molest the Duke of Brittaine for hat he was resolved, at any time to come in person to relieve him if he were distu∣ed: King Edward pretended the many kindnesse he had formely recived of the Duke of Brittaine: but it was conceived, that the desire of compassing the Eales o  and Pembrooke, now in the Duke of Brittaines Country, were the greatest  of his standing o irmely for him. The money to be payd to king Edrd  the Articles, is accordingly payd; and thereupon the French Hostages are deli∣vered, and the Englis Army reres to Callice, and from thenc is transported into  and then the English Hostages are likewise delivered. This Peace was  o be made only by the holy Ghost; because on the day of meeing, a white Dove
came and sate upon the king of Englands Tent: though the Dukes of Glocester and Burgoige thought it was made by no good spirit. King Edward being returned into England, had his minde running still upon the dange that might grow from the Earle of Richmond: he therefore dispatched D. Stillington and two other his Ambassadors to the Duke of Briaine, to send him over to him, under this subtle pretence, that he meant to match him in mariage with the Lady Cicill his younger daughter; and withall, sent also no small store of Angels to speake for him: which so prevailed with the Duke, that he delivered the Earle o Richmond to the Ambassadors, who conducted him thence to Saint Malo, where whil'st they stayed for a winde, the young Earle, by the cunning plotting of Peter Landoi the Dukes Treasurer (more out of scorne that he was not gratified by the English Ambassadour to the proportion of his place, than for any love to the Earle) escapes into Sanctuary; from whence neither prayers nor promises could get him cut: Neverthelesse, upon Peter Landois his promise he should be safely kept there, the Ambassadors departed, and returned home, acquainted K. Edward with the Duke of Bgoigs courtesie in delivering him, and their own negligence in suffer∣ing him to escape, onely making amends with the promise of Peter Landois; which might be to K. Edward some contentment, but was no satisfaction. At Christmas following, being the sixteenth yeere of his Reigne, he created his eldest sonne Edward, Prince of Wales, Duke of Corwall, and Earle of Chester: his second sonne he made Duke of Yorke; giving the order of knighthood to the sonne and heire of the Earle of Licole, and many others. He created also foure and twenty knights of the Bath, whereof Brian Chiefe Justice, and Littleton a Judge of the Common Pleas, were two. About this time, there were two examples of severity seene; not unworthy the relating, if but onely to make us see how dangerous a thing it is Ludere cum sancti, to speake words that may be taken as reflecting upon the king. The first was of one Walter Walker, a wealthy Citizen, dwelling at the signe of the Crown in Cheapside: This man one day when his childe cryed, bid him be quiet, and he would make him heire of the Crowne: which words being subject to interpretation, he was called in question about them, arraigned, condemned, and put to death. The other was of Thomas Burdet of Arrow in Warwickeshire Esquire: It happened that K. Edward hunted in his Parke, he being from home; and there killed a white Buck, whereof Mr. Burde made speciall account: so as comming home, and finding that Buck killed, he wished it hornes and all in his belly that had counselled the king to kill it: and because none counselled the King to kill it but himselfe; it was thought those words were not spoken without a malignant reflecting upon the King: and thereupon Burdet was arraigned and condemned, drawne to Tiburne, and there be∣headed: though Mrkh then Chiefe Justice, chose rather to lose his place, than assent to the Judgement. And now began ambition to boyle in Richard Duke of Glocester; whereof the first heate fell upon his brother the Duke of Clarence, how to rid him out of the way; to which end, he seeks to raise Jealousies in King Edwards head against him, telling him, that some of Clarece his followers were Sorceres and Necromancers, and had given forth speeches, that one whose name begun with G. should disinherit his Children and get the Crown: and for a colour of this suggestion, one of the Duke of Clarce his servants, who came with him out of Ireland, from Dublin, where the Duke was born; is in his Masters absence, by the procurement underhand of the Duke of Glocester, indicted, rraigned, condemned and executed at Tyburne for a Conjurer, and all within the space of two dayes: and the Duke of Glocester, to make shew that he had no hand in this fellows death, set on the Duke of Clarence to complaine of it to King Edward; and in the mean time finds matter, at least colour of matter, to make him be committed to the Tower; nd then againe, to make shew he had no hand in his imprisonment, bids him be of good cheere, for it should not be long ere he would see him released: and he kept his word; for not long after, by his procure∣ment, he was drowned in a But of Malmesey, (and this was his releasement) and
then laid in his bed, to make the people believe that he died of discontent; whose death, King Edward though perhaps consenting to it, so much resented, that after∣wards when he was sued unto for any mans Pardon, he would ighing break out in∣to such words: Oh unfortunate brother for whose life not one man would open his mouth. Being dead, he was buried at Tewkesbury in Glocestershire, by the body of his Dutchesse, who great with childe, dyed of Poyson a little before. It was now the two and twentieth yeere of King Edwards Reigne, when Iames King of Scotland sent Ambassadors to treate of a Mariage between his eldest sonne Iames Duke of Rothsay, and Cicely king Edwards second daughter. This overture for a March, was by the king and his Councell readily imbraced, and a great part of the Portion was delivered to the Scots, with this Proviso, That if the mariage di not proceed, the Provost and Merchants of Edenbourgh should be bound to repy it againe. But the Scotish king, who had other fantasies in his head, and would take counsell of none but his owne will, and diverted also perhaps by the king of France; not onely dallyed the proceeding in the mach, but affronted those of the Nobility tht perswaded him to it; in so much that his Brother the Duke of Albany was en∣forced to abandon the Country, and to flie for refuge into England: by whom king Edward being informed of king Iames his fickle disposition, was so much in∣censed, that under the conduct of the Duke of Glocester, accompanied with the Duke of Albany, he sent an Army of twenty thousand against Scotland; who in their way took in Barwick, and besieged the Castle; which being resolutely defended by the Earle Bothwell, the Duke left the Lord Stanley to continue the siege, whil'st he, wih the rest of the Army, marched towards Edenbourgh; where within the Castle of Maydens, king Iames had immur'd himselfe. But the Nobility of Scotland, see∣ing the danger they were in, endeavoured by humble submission, to procure a peace, at least a cessation from war; which with much importunity they obtained, upon these Conditions: That full satisfaction should be presently given, for all dammages su∣stained by the late incursions: That the Duke of Albany should be fully restored to grace and place, with an abolition of all discontents between his brother king Iames and him: That the Castle of Barwicke, (which had been now out of the Possession of the English, one and twenty yeers) should immediately be surrendred into the Generals hands; and from thence no reduction of that or the Town attempted: That all such summes of money as upon the proposition of the marriage, had been delive∣red, should be repaid. All which, except the first Article, were accordingly p∣formed. When this busines with Scotland was indifferently accomodated; King Edward receivs intelligence from his Ambassadour-Leidger in France, that the French King not only denied the payment of the annuall Tribute of fifty thousand crowns, agreed upon and sworn to upon the ratification of the late concluded Peace; but had also married the Dolphin of France to the Lady Margaret, daughter of Maxi∣milln Sonne of the Emperour; which so much incensed K. Edward, that he resolves to revenge it; and by the advise of his Counsell, open warre was presently Procla∣med against France: but whil'st King Edward is making preparation, and intentive to the busines, he is attached by the hand of death; and upon the ninth of April, in the yeer 1483, at Westminster ended this mortall life. Of his Taxations. IN his second yeer, he sent his Privy Seale through England, to move men to give him a certaine summe of money towards resisting the Scots, whch was granted and given liberaly. In his seventh yeer, in a Parliament at Westminster, were su∣med all manner of gifts, which the King had given, from the first day he tooke pos∣session of the Realm, to that time. In his eighth yeer, at a Parliament, were grantd two Fifteens and a Demy. In his thirteenth yeer, a Parliament was holden, where∣in, a Subidie was granted; and the yeer following, towards warre to be undertaken in France, a new way of raysing money is devised, called a Benevolence, by which
great summes of money were gotten of the Subject: and it is not unworthy the re∣lating, what an old rich Widdow at this time did; whom King Edward, amonsto∣thers having called before him, merrily asked, what she would willingly give him to∣wards his great charges? By my troth (quoth shee) for thy lovely countenance, thou shalt have even twenty pounds. The King looking scarce for half that summe, thanked her, and lovingly kist her; which so wrought with the old widdow, that she presently swore, he should have twenty pound more; and payd it willingly. No long before his death, he was by ill Counsellours put upon a distastefull course for raysing of mony; which was, by fining men for delinquencies against Penall Statures by which course some money was gathered; but before it came to full execution, he dying, that also dyed with him. Of his Lawes and Ordinances. IN his fourth yeer, he newly devised the Coyne both of Gold and Silver, as a this day it is; the Gold, he named Royals and Nobles; the Silver, Groats and  Groats: the new Groate weighing scantly three pence; and the Noble of six shil∣lings eight pence, appointed to goe for eight shillings foure pence. In his fifth yeer, it was Proclamed in England, that the Beakes or Pykes of Shooes and Bootes, should not passe two Inches, upon paine of Cursing by the Clergie, and forfeiting twenty shillings, to be paid one noble to the King, another to the Cordwayners of London, and the third to the Chamber of London; and for other Countries and Towns the like order was taken. Before this time, and since the yeer 1382. the Pykes of Shooes and Bootes were of such length, that they were faine to be tyed up to the Knees with chaines of Silver and gilt, or at least with silken laces. Affaires of the Church in his time. IN this Kings time, the Jubile which was before but every fiftieth yeer, was by Pope Six the fourth, brought to be every five and twenty yeer. Also, where before this time, the Scottish Bishops had no Metropolitane, but the Bishop of Yorke was Metropolitane and Primate of Scotland; now in this Kings time, Pope Six ap∣pointed the Bishop of Saint Andrews to be Metropolitane of Scotland, who had twelve Bishops under his obedience. Of Workes of Piety done in his time. THIS King laid the foundation of the new Chappell at Windso, and his Queen Elizabeth founded the Queens Colledge in Cambridge, and endowed it with large Possessions. About his fifteenth yeere, Doctor Woodlarke Provost of Kings Colledge in Cambridge, Founded Katherine-hall there. In his seventeenth yeer, the Wall of the City of London, from Cripplegate to Bishopsgate, was builded at the char∣ges of the Citizens, also Bishopsgate it selfe was new built by the Merchants  of the Styliard. Also in this yeere dyed Sir Iohn Crosby Knight, late Major of Lon∣don; who gave to the repairing of the Parish-Church of St. Helens in Bishopsgatestreet, where he was buried, 500 Marks: to the repairing of the parish Church of Hewrth in Middlesex, forty pounds: to the repairing of London-wall, an hundred pounds: to the repairing of Rochester-bridge, ten pounds: to the Wardens and Commo∣nalty of the Grocers in London, two large Pots of silver chased halfe gilt, and other Legacies. About this time also, Richard Rawson one of the Sheriffs of London, caused an house to be builded in the Church-yard of St. Mary Hospitalll without Bishops∣gate, where the Major and Aldermen use to sit and heare the Sermons in Easter∣holy-daies. In his nineteenth yeere, William Tailour Major of London, gave to the City certaine Tenements; for the which the City is bound to pay for ever, at every Fifteene granted to the King, for all such as shall dwell in Cordwainers-street-ward, sessed at twelve-pence apiece, or under. And about the same time, one Thomas
Sheriffe of London, builded at his own costs the great Conduit in Chepside. In his three and twentieth yeere, Edmund Shaw Goldsmith, who had been Major of London, at his own costs re-edified Cripplegate in London, which gate in old time had been a Prison. Of Casualties happening in his time. IN his third yeare, the Minster of Yorke, and the Steeple of Christs Church in Nor∣wich were burnt. In his seventeenth yeere, so great a Pestilence reigned in Eng∣land, that it swept away more people in foure moneths, than the Warres had done in fifteen yeeres past. Also in his nineteenth yeere was another Peslence; which beginning in the later end of September, continued till the beginning of November twelve-moneth following; in which space of time innumerable people dyed. Of his wife and issue. KIng Edward had been contracted to Eleanor daughter of Iohn Talbot Earle of Shrewsbury, maried after to Sir Thomas Butler Baron of Sdely: but he maried Elizabeth the widdow of Sir Iohn Grey, daughter of Richard Woodvile by his wife Iaqueline Dutchesse of Bedford: she lived his wife eighteene yeeres and eleven moneths; by whom he had three sonnes and seven daughters. Edward his eldest sonne, borne in the Sanctuary at Westminster: Richard his second sonne, borne at Shrewsbury: George his third sonne, borne also at Shrewsbury, but dyed a childe. Elizabeth his eldest daughter, promised in mariage to Charles Dolphin of France; but maried afterward to King Henry th Seventh: Cicely his second daughter, pro∣mised in mariage to Iames Duke of othsay, Prince of Scotland; but was maried af∣terward to Iohn Viscount Wells, whom she outlived, and was againe re-maried, but by neither husband had any issue: she lyeth buried at Quarena in the Isle of Wight. Anne his third daughter was maried to Thomas Howard Duke of Norfolke, Earle Mar∣shall, and High Treasurer of England; by whom she had two sonnes, both dying without issue: she lyeth buried at Framingham in Norfolk. Bridget his fourth daugh∣ter, borne at Eltham in Kent, became a Nunne in the Nunnery of Dartford in Kent, which king Edward had founded. Mary his fifth daughter, was promised in mariage to the King of Denmarke, but dyed in the Tower of Greenwich, before it could be solemnized: she lyeth buried at Windsor. Margaret his sixth daughter, dyed an In∣fant. Katherine his seventh daughter, was maried to William Courtney Earle of De∣voshire; to whom she bare Lord Henry, who by King Henry the eighth was cre∣ated Marquesse of Exeter. Concubines he had many, but three specially; and would use to say, that he had three Concubines, who in their severall properties excelled: One, the merriest; an∣other, the wyliest; the third, the holyest harlot in his Realme; as one whom no man could lightly get out of the Church to any place, unlesse it were to his bed; The other two were greater personages than are sit to be named: but the merriest was Shores wife; in whom therefore he tooke speciall pleasure: This woman was borne in London, worshipfully descended. and well maried: but when the King had abused her, anon her husband (as he was an honest man, and did know his good, not pre∣suming to touch a Kings Concubine) left her up to him altogether. By these he had naturall issue; Arthur sirnamed Plantagenet, (whose mother, as is supposed, was the Lady Elizabeth Lucy) created Viscount Lisle, by King Henry the Eight, at Bridewell in London: And Elizabeth, who was maried to Sir Thomas Lumley knight; to whom she bare Richard, afterward Lord Lumley, from whom the late Lord Lumley did descend. Of his Personage and Conditions. HE was (saith Comines) the goodliest Personage that ever mine eyes beheld; ex∣ceeding tall of statue, faire of complexion, and of most Princely presence:
and we may truly say, he was of full age before he came to one and twenty; for being but eighteen yeeres old when his Father dyed, he sued out his livery presently: so as he began the race of his forne just like Augustus Caesar, each of them at the same age succeeding an Ancestour after a violent death; and each of them left to set on a roofe, where but onely a fotion was laid before. For his conditions, he was of an erected composure both of body nd minde, but something sagging on the Fleshes side; and never any man that did marry for Love, did so little love Mari∣age; for he tooke as much pleasure in other mens wives as in his owne. He was ne∣ver more confident, than when he was in danger; nor ever more doubtfull, than when he was sure. Of the foure Cardinall virtues, Fornde and Prudence were in him naturally; Temperance d Justice, but to serve his turne. He was politick even to irreligion; for to compasse his ends, he would not stick to sweare what he never meant. Yet he was Religious beyond Policy; for before Battailes, he used to make his Prayers to God; after Victories, to give him Thanks. He was farre from being proud, yet very ambitious; and could use familiarity, and yet retaine Majestie. He was a great Briber; and wha he could not get by force, he would by Rewards; as much as what he could not get by Battery, he would by Mines. H was too credulous of Reports, which made him be in errour, sometimes to the hrt of himselfe, oftentimes of others. He had made the White Rose to flourish as long as Henry the Fourth made the Red, if he had not made it change colour with too much blood. He had been fortunate in his children, if he had not been unfortunate in a brother: but he was well enough served, that would thinke a Wolfe could e∣ver be a good Shepheard. He had an excellent art in improving his favours; for he could doe as much with a small courtesie, as other men with a great benefit: And that which was more, he could make advantage of disadvantages; for he got the love of the Londoners by owing them money; and the good will of the Citizens by lying with their wives. Of his Death and Buriall. WHether it began from his minde, being extreamely troubled with the injuri∣ous dealing of he King of France; or from his body, by intemperance of dyet, to which he was much given; he fell into a sicknesse, (some say a Catarche, some a Feaver) but into a sicknesse whereof he dyed. In the time of which sicknesse, & at the very point of his death, Sir Thomas Moore makes him to make a speech to his Lords; which I might thinke to be the speech of a sick man, if it were not so sound, and of a weake man, if it were not so long: but it seemes, Sir Thomas Moore delivers rather what was fit for him to say, than what he sayd; the Contents being onely, to exhort his Lords, whom he knew to be at variance, to be in love and concord a∣mongst themselves; for that, the welfare of his children, whom he must now leave to their care, could not otherwise be preserved but by their agreement. And having spoken to this purpose as much as his weaknes would suffer him, he found himselfe sleepy; and turning on one side, he fell into his long sleep, the ninth of April, in the yeere 1483. when he had lived one and forty yeeres, Reigned two and twenty and one moeth; and was buried at Windsor, in the new Chappell, whose foundation himselfe had laid. Of men of Note in his time. MEN of valour in his time were many, but himselfe the chiefest, the rest may be observed in reading his story. For men of letters, we may have leave at this time to speake of some strangers, having been men of extraordinary fame; as Io∣hānes de Monte Regi, Purbachiu and Blchinu, all great Astronomers; Ludovicus Pontanus, Paulus Castrensis, and Athonius Rossellanus, all great Lawyers; Servisanus, Savaarola, and Barzizius, all great Phisitians; Bessarion and Cusanus, both great Cardinalls; Argyrpole, Philelphus, Datus, Leonardus Aretinus, and Poggius, all great
men in humane litrature. And of our own Countrimen; Iohn Harding an Equire, borne in the North parts, who wrote a Chronicle in English verse, and among oher speciall points therein touched, hath gathered all the Submissions and Homages made by the Scottish kings, even from the dayes of King Athelstan: whereby it may evidey appeare, how the Scottish kingdome, even in manner, from the first Esta∣blishng thereof here in Britaine, hath been appertaining unto the kings of Eng∣land, and holden of them as their chiefe and superiour Lords. Iulian Bemes, a Gentle∣woman of excellent gifts, who wrote certaine Treatises of Hawking and Hunting; also a book of the Lwes of Armes, and knowledge pertaining to Heralds. Iohn Forscue a Judge, and Chancellour of England, who wrote divers Treatises concer∣ning the Law and Politick Government. Rochus a Charterhouse-Monk born in London, who wrote divers Epigrams. Walter Hnt a Carmelite Fryer, who for his excellent learning, was sent from the whole body of the Realme, to the Generall Counsell hld fir at Ferrra, and after at Florence, by Pope Egenius the fourth; where e amngs others disuted with the Greekes i defence of the Order and Ceremo∣es o the Latine Church. William Caxton, who wrote a Chronicle called Fructu Temporum, and an Appendix unto Trevisa besides divers other bookes and translati∣ons. Iohn Milverton, a Carmelit Frier of Bristow, and provinciall of his Order, who because he defended such of his Order as preached against endowments of the Church with Temporall possessions, was committed to prison in the Castle of Saint Angel in Rome, where he continued three yeers. David Morgan a Welshman, who wrote of the Antiquities of Wales, and a description of the Country. Iohn Tiptoft, a nobleman born, who wrote divers Treatises, but lost of his head in the yeer 1471. Robert Huggon born in Norfolk, who wrote certaine vaine Prophesies. Thomas Norto born in Bristow, an Alchymist Scoga a learned Gentleman, and a Student for a time in Oxford; who for his plesant wit and merry conceits, was called to Court. But most worthy of all to be remembred, Thomas Littleton a reverend Judge of the Common Ples, who brought a great part of the Law into a Method, whic lay before confu∣sedly dispersed; and his book called Littletons Tenures.
THE REIGNE OF KING EDWARD THE FIFTH. KING Edward the Fourth being dead, his eldest Sonne Edw, scarce yet eleven yee old, succeeded in the kingdome, but not in the Crown; for he was Proclaimed king, but never Crowned: and indeed it may not so properly be called the Reigne of Ed he fifth, as the Tyranny of Richard the Third; for from the time of king Edward death, though not in Name, yet in effect he not onely ruled as king, but raged as a Tyrant. Prince Edwa when his Father dyed, was at Ludlow in Wales, where he had lived some time before, the better by his presence, to keep the Welsh in awe; He had about him of his Mo∣thers kindred many; but Sir Anthony Woodvile, the Earle Rivers his Uncle, was ap∣pointed his chiefe Counsellour and directour. The Duke of Glocester was at this time in the North, but had word presently sent him, from the Lord Hastings Lord Chamberlaine, of his brother king Edwards death; who acquainted him withall, that by his Will, he had committed the young king, his Queen and other children, to his care and government; and thereupon putting him in minde,  necessary it was for him speedly to repir to London: But the Duke of Gloceer needed no spurre to set him forward, who was already in a full cariere; for he had long before projected in his minde, how he might come to attaine the Crown; and now hee thought the way was made him. For as it is said, the very night in which king Ed∣ward dyed, one Misselbrooke, long ere morning, came in great haste to the house of one Potter dwelling in Red-crosse-streete without Cripplegate; where he shewed un∣to Potter, that king Edward was departed: to whom Potter answered, By my troth man, then will my Master the Duke of Glocester be king: what cause he had so to thinke, is hard to say; but surely it is not likely he spake it of nought. And now the young king was comming up to London with a strong guard; partly to make a first expression of his greatnesse, and partly to oppose any disorders that might be offered. But the Duke of Glocester finding this proceeding like to be a rub in his way, at least not fit for his designes, he presently fals to undermining; writes most loving letters to the Queen, protesting all humble and faithfull service to the king and her, but withall perswading her, that this great guard about the king might be presently dismissed; which did but minister matter of suspition, and would be apt to breed new jealousies in them who were now throughly reconciled. The Queen of a nature easie to be wrought upon, gives credit to his glozing letters; and there∣upon
sends in all haste to her Sonne, and to her brother the Lord Riers; requiring them by all meanes, for some causes to her known, to dismisse their gd, (not enoning by whose advice she writ them; which if she had done, they would ne∣ver have done) but now upon her letters, they presently did; and came forward with oly a sober company. And now is Glocesters first work  but he know∣ing that the worke yet behinde was too great to be done by himselfe one, gets the Dke of Buckingham and the Lord Hastings; two of the greatest men of power at that time in the kingdome, to joyn with him in opinion, that it was not fit he  kindred should be so wholly about the king; and others of better blood and drt, to be estranged from him; and therefore by all means, fi o endeavour to emove them: to which the Duke of Buckingham is easily wrought, upon a pro∣mise to have the Earledome of Hartford conferred upon him: and the Lord Hasting not hardly, upon a hope by this means to cut off many, whom in king Edwards daies  ustly offended. And now another great worke was done; It remaines in  place, to put it in execution, which was presently this efected: The  king had been at Northampton, and from thence was gone to Stonystratford,  the two Dukes of Glocester and Buckingham arived; but pretending the Town to be too little for the entertainment of their Compnies, they went back to thampton, and alighted at the same Ine where the Earle Ryver had taken up hs lodging for that night, intending the next morning early to overtake the king. Upon this their accidentall meeting, great shews of courtesie passed between them; and supper ended, the Dukes pretending wearines, retire to their lodgings, the Earle to his; but the Dukes being entred into their Chambers, enter into consultation  their private friends, in which they spent a great part of the night, and then secretly get the keyes of the Inne gates, suffering none to passe either in or out; whereof the Earle having notice by his Host, though he suspected the worst, yet setting a good countenance upon the matter, and trusting to his own Innocency, he boldy went to the Duke of Glocesters Chamber, where he found the Duke of Buck∣ingham and the rest closely set in counsell; with whom he expostulates the reason of this cose, to imprison him in his Inne against his will? bt they in stead of answer, cmmand presently to lay hands on him, charging him with many crimes, whereof themselves were onely guilty: And then taking order for his safe imprisonment, they speedily took horse, and came to Stonistratford, at such time as the king was taking horse, whom in all reverent manner they saluted: but presently in the kings presence, a quarrell is pickt against the Lord Richard Grey, the kings halfe brother: The Duke of Buckingham making relation to the king, that he and the Marquesse his brother, with the Earle Rivers the Queens brother, had endeavoured and almost efected to draw to themselves the whole mannaging the affaires of the kingdom, and to set variance between the Peeres of the Realme: and particularly, that the Ld Marquesse without any warrant, had taken out of the Tower of London both Treasure and Armour, to a great quantity; but to what purpose, though they were ignorant, yet there was just cause to suspect it was to no good end: And therefore it was thought expedient by the advise of the Nobility, to attach him at Northamp∣, to have him forth-comming to make his answer for these and many other his ev-bld actions; The king unable to sound the depth of these plots, mildly aid  him: What my brother Marquesse hath done, I cannot say; but for my Uncle  Brother here, I dare answer, that they are innocent of any unlawfull practises  against me or you. Oh (saith the Duke of Buckingham) that hath been their , to keep their treachery from your races knowledge: and thereupon n∣any in the kings presence, they arrested the Lord Richard, Sir Thomas Vanghan, Sir Richard Hall, and brought the king and all his company back to Northampton, ping away al his old servants, and placing in their room creatures of their own, whom they had power to command. At which ealing, the young king wept, but it  nothing; and to colour the matter, the Duke of Glocester at dinner, sent a dish from his own table to the Lord Rivers, bidding him e of good cheer, for all  should be well: but the Lord Rivers thanking the Duke, prayed the Messen∣ger
to carry it to the Lord Richard, with the same message for his comfort, as one to whom such adversity was strange; but as for himselfe, he had all his dayes been ac∣quainted with it, and therefore could the better beare it. But for all this comfor∣table courtesie of the Duke of Glocester, he sent the Lord Rivers, and the Lord Ri∣chard, with Sir Thomas Vag into the North Country, into divers places to pri∣son, and afterward to Pofres, where in Conclusion they were all beheaded. And now the Duke of Glocester having thus gotten the custody of the King, set forwards toward London, giving out by the way, that the Marquesse and the Queens kindred had plotted the destruction of the king, and of all the antient Nobility of the Realme, and to alter the Government of the Commonwealth; and that they were onely imprisoned to be brought to their tryall according to Law: and the better to settle these suggestions in the apprehension of the Vulgar, they brought along with them divers Carts laden with Armour, (of their own providing) with Dryfats and great Chests, wherein they reported to be treasure for the payment of souldiers; with which they so possest the common-people, that all was believed for truth which was thus rumored: But the finest devise of all was, to have five of the Duke of Glocesters instruments manacled and pinioned like Traytors; and these in every place where the King lodged to be dispersed and given out to be men of great birth, drawn into this vile plot of Treason by the Queens brother; who must seem to be penitent for their offence, and to confesse their own guilt: and this devise continued acting till the king came to Lndon, where their visards were pull'd off, and the disguise was soon discovered. The Queen in the mean time having intelligence of these dolefull accidents, and fearing there were worse to follow, with her second Son and five Dughters takes Sanctuary at Westminster: and the young king hearing of these things, with tears and sighes expressed his griefe; but the Dukes making Protestation of their fidelity, and care of his safety, seemed onely to mervaile why he should be melancholy. At this time a messenger came from the Lord Chamberlaine, to the Archbishop of Yorke Lord Chancellour of England, to signifie to him, that there was no feare of any thing, for that he assured him all should be well. Well (quoth the Archbishop) be it as well as it will; I assure him, It will never be so well as we have seen it. And thereupon, presently after the messengers departure, he calleth up his servants (be∣ing then in the night) and taking the great Seale with him, came before day to the Queen, whom he found sitting alone aloe on the Rushes, all desolate and dismaied; whom he comforted the best he could, auring her that if they Crowned any king but her Sonne whom they had with them, he would presently after Crown his brother whom she had with her; and therewithall delivering to her the great Seale, departed: but soon after, bethinking himselfe better, he thought he had done too rashly, to deliver the great Seale to the Queen; and therefore sent for it againe, and had it delivered him; yet shortly after reproved for delivering it, by the Counsell Table, he had it taken from him, which was then delivered to Doctor Russell Bishop of Lincolne, the most learned man of that time. And now th Duke of Glocester so respectively carries himselfe towards the King, with so much shew of care and faithfulnes, that by a generall consent of the Coun∣sell he is appointed and established Protectour of the king and kingdome; and by this means he hath the king in his custody: It remains now how to get his brother the Duke of Yorke, for without having both, he were as good (as to his purpose) have neither: and to effect this, he makes the Effect to become a Cause: for where by his undue dealing he had made the king Melancholy, he now makes that Melancho∣ly a cause to require his brothers company to make him merry; and therefore wishes some course may be taken, either by perswasion or otherwise, to procure the Queen to send the Duke of Yorke to keep his brother the king company: Here the Arch∣bishop of Yorke the Lord Cardinall, the man thought most fit to be sent in this im∣ployment, riseth up and faith, He would doe his best endeavour to perswade her; but if he could not, he then thought it was not to be attempted against her will, for that it would turn to the high displeasure of God, if the priviledge of that holy
place should now be broken, which had so many yeers inviolably been kept, which  Kings and Popes so good had granted, so many had confirmed; and which ho∣ly ground was more then five hundred yeers agoe, by Saint Peter in his own person, acompanid with great numbers of Angels, by night so specially hallowed and de∣dicated to God; and for proof whereof, there is yet in the Abby Saint Peters Cope  shew: that from that time hitherward, there never was so undevo a King that durst violate the sacred place, nor so holy a Bishop that durst presume to Consecrate it  and therefore (saith he) God forbid, that any man for any earthly thing, should enterprise to breake the immunity and liberty of that sacred Sanctuary; and I trust wh Gods grace, we shall not need it, at least my endeavours shall not be wanting; if the Mothrs dread and womanish feare be not the let. Womanish feare, nay wo∣manish frowardnes (quoth the Duke of Buckingham) for I dare take it upon my Soule, she well knoweth there is no need of any feare, either for her sonne or for herselfe and prosecuting his discourse, declareth at large, that as there was no just  for the Queen to keep her Sonne, so there was great cause for them to require him; and that for breach of Sanctuary in this case there could be none; for that he had often heard of Sanctuary men, but never heard of Sanctuary children. And to this purpose having spoken much, It was all assented to by the Lords that were present, and with this Instruction is the Archbishop (upon whom the Queen specially relyed) sent unto her; who after humble salutations, acquaints her with his message, ear∣nely perswading her not to oppose the Lord Protectours request, and giving her many reasons, first that she ought not, and then that she could not keep him in San∣ctuary: she answered all his reasons, though with great mildenesse, yet with great earnestnes; so as the Archbishop finding little hope to prevaile with her by perswa∣sion, turns the tenour of his speech another way; telling her plainly, that if she did not consent to send her Sonne, he doubted some sharper course would speedly be taken. This warning sank so deep into the Queens minde, that after a little pausing, taking her Sonne by the hand, she said, My Lord Archbishop, here he is, for my own part I will never deliver him; but if you will needs have him, Take him, and at your hands I will require him; and therewith weeping bitterly, Deer childe (saith she) let me kisse thee before we part, God knows whether ever we shall meet againe; and so the childe weeping as fast as she, went along with the Archbishop to the Star∣chamber, where the Lord Protectour and other Lords had staid all the while look∣ing for his comming back: and as soone as he was entred the roome, the Protectour spying the childe, riseth up and embraceth him saying, Deere Nephew, Now wel∣come with all my heart: next to my Soveraigne Lord your brother, nothing gives me so much contentment as your Presence: and we may believe him, he spake as he thought; for now he had the prey which he so much desired. A few dayes after, pretending to have them lodged in a place of more security, untill the distempers of the Commonwealth might better be quieted; he caused them in great pompe and state to be conveyed through London to the Tower, there at pleasure to remaine, till the time of Coronation; whereof there was great shew of preparation made. But now the great work is to be done; the Princes are to be made away: and how to have it done, Hoc opus, hic labor est: there must be potent Instruments; and none so potent as the Duke of Buckingham; and he, by a match to be concluded betwixt their children, and an equall partition of the Treasure of the Realme betwixt them two; not onely is drawne to condiscend, but is most forward to contrive and plot stratagems to effect it. The first rub in the way was the Lord Hastings; who being sound so firm to his old Masters King Edwards sons, that nothing could remove him, it was fit to remove him out of the way; which was done in this manner: All the Lords of the Privy Councell, in the Protectors name, are convoked to the Tower; where itting preparations for the Coronation of the young King are proposed, un∣till the Protectour came in; who taking his chaire, very affably saluted them, mer∣rily jesting with some, and more than ordinarily plesant with them all: when after a little talke, he said to the Bishop of Ely; My Lord, I heare you have very good Strawberries at your Garden in Holborne; I pray let us have a messe of them. Most
gladly (said the Bishop) and presently sent for some: and then the Protectour rising up, prayed the Lords to spare his absence a little; and so departed. Within the spce of an houre he returned; but so changed in countenance, and with such inward per∣turbations, which with sighings and other passionate gestures he expressed so, that it made them all to mervaile. After long silence (the better to prepare them to the more attention) he confusedly interrogates What they deserved that neariously had prctised his destruction? This unexpected interrogation strooke such amae∣ment amongst the Lords, that they all sate gazing on one another, and were, as t were, stricken dumbe: At length the Lord Hastings, by Buckinghams instigatio, as one presuming of his intimacy with the Protector, boldly answered, That they de∣served the punishment of Traytors; which all the rest by their silence approved: whereat the Protectour riseth up, and with a sterne looke upon the Lord Hastings, replyed: Why it is the old sorceresse my brothers widow, and her partner that com∣mon Strumpet Iane Shore, that have by incantation conspired to beeave me of my life; and though by Gods grace I have escaped the end of their malice, yet see the mischiefe they have done me; for behold (and then he bared his left arme to the el∣bow, and shewed it) how they have caused this deare limbe of mine to wither, an grow uselesse; and so should all my body have been served, if they might have had their will a little longer. Those to whom the Queenes religious courses were not unknown, ad who knew his withered arme to have been such from his birth, at gazing one upon another, not knowing what to thinke or say; untill the Lord Hastings, thinking thereby to leave all blame upon the Queen, and excuse his Para∣mour Mistris Shore, (whom ever since the death of King Edward, he had entertained for his bed-fellow, and had but that morning parted from her) with a sober looke submissely said, If the Queene have conspired—: which word was no sooner cut of the Lord Hastings mouth, when the Protectour clapping his hand upon the boord, and frowningly looking upon him, said: Tellest thou me of If & And? I tell thee, They, and none but they have done it; and thou thy selfe art partaker of the villany. Who I my Lord, quoth he? yea Thou traytor, quoth the Protectour; and therewith, upon a watch-word given, those prepared before for that purpose, in the outer Chamber, cryed, Treason, Treason! when presently a great number of men in arm came rushing in as it were to guard the Protectour; one of which with a Pollax strook a maine blow at the Lord Stnley and wounded him on the head; and had slain him outright, if he had not avoided the stroake by slipping backward, and falling down to the ground. Forthwith the Protectour arrested the Lord Hastings of high Treason; and wisht him to make haste to be Confessed, for he swore by S. Paul (his usuall Oath) that he would not touch bread nor drinke till his head were off. It booted no to ask, why? for he knew the Protectours actions were not to be exami∣ned. So he was led forth unto the Greene before the Chappell within the Tower, where his head was laid downe upon a long logge of Tymber, and there strucken off. His body afterward with his head were interred at VVindsor, beside the body of King Edward. In this mans death we may see how inevitable the blowes of Destiny are: for the very night before his death, the Lord Stanley sent a secret messenger to him at midnight, in all the haste, to acquaint him with a Dreame hee had, in which hee thought that a Bore with his tusks so goared them both by the heads, that the blood ran about their shoulders: and for-as-much as the Protectour gave the Bore for his Cognisance, this Dreame made so fearefull an impression in his heart, that he was throughly resolved to stay no longer; and had made his horse ready, requiring the Lord Hastings to goe with him, and that presently, to be out of danger, before it should be day. But the Lord Hastings answered the messenger: Good Lord! lean∣eth your Master so much to such trifles, to put such faith in dreames, which either his owne feare fantaieth, or else doe rise in the nights rest, by reason of the dayes thoughts: Goe back therefore to thy Master, and commend me to him, and pray him to be merry, and have no feare; for I assure him, I am as sure of the man he wo∣eth of, as of my own hand. The man he meant, was one Catesby, well learned in the Lawes of the Land; who by his favour was growne into good authority in Leicester∣shire,
where the Lord Hastings Estate lay. Of this man he mde himselfe so sure, hat he thought nothing could be plotted against him, which he would not presently re∣veale unto him. But this man deceived him; and was growne so inward with the Protectour, that being set by the Protectour to draw him to be a party in his de∣signes, and finding he could not doe it, was himselfe the first mover to rid him out of the way. Another warning the Lord Hastings had: the same morning in which he was beheaded, his horse twice or thrice stumbled with him, almost to falling; which though it often happen to such to whom no mischance is toward, yet hath it of old beene observed as a token foregoing some great misfortune. Also at the Tower-wharfe, neere to the place where his head soone after was strucken off, he met with one Hastings a Pursuivant of his own name; to whom he said: Ah Ha∣stings, dost thou remember I met thee here once with a heavy heart! Yea my Lord, saith he, I remember it well; and God be thanked, that time is past. In faith, man, said the Lord Hastings, I never stood in so great dread of my life, as I did when thou and I met here: and loe how the world is changed! now stand my Enemies in the danger, as thou mayest hap to heare hereafter; (for the Enemies he meant were the Lord Rivers, and other of the Queens kindred, who that very day were beheaded at Pomfret) and I never so merry, nor in so good surety as now I am. That we may know, there is not a greater Omen or signe of ill fortune, than to pre∣sume of good. And indeed, such is the uncertainty of our estate in this life, that we seldome know when we are in a Tempest at Sea, nor when we are in a Calm on shore; thinking ourselves oftentimes most safe, when we are most in danger; and often∣times to be in danger, when we are most safe: He onely is in the true Haven, that can say as Christ teacheth us, Thy will be done in Earth as it is in Heaven. But this Lord being thus put to death; the Lord Protectour, to colour the matter, immediately after dinner, in all haste sent for many substantiall Citizens; at whose comming, himselfe with the Duke of Buckingham stood harnessed in old rusty Bri∣gandines, to make a shew they were forced by the sudden danger to take such as they could first come by: and withall, a Herald of Armes is sent with a Proclama∣tion in the Kings name, signifying, that the Lord Hastings with some others had conspired the same day to have slaine the Lord Protector and the Duke of Bucking∣ham, as they sate in Counsell; and after to have taken upon them to rule the King ad Kingdome at their own pleasures. Now was this Proclamation made within two houres after the Lord Hastings was beheaded; and was so curiously indited, and so so faire written in Parchment, and withall so long, that every childe might perceive it was prepared before: which made one that was Schoolemaster of Pauls, standing by when the Proclamation was read, to say, Here is a gay goodly Cast, foule cast away for haste: To whom a Merchant answered, It was written by Prophesie. And now by and by, as it were in revenge of her offence, the Protectour sent the Sheriffs of Lodo into the house of Shores wife, and spoyled her of all her goods, above the value of three thousand markes; and then conveying her through London to the Tower, there left her Prisoner: where he laid to her charge, that she went about to bewitch him, and was of counsell with the Lord Hastings to destroy him. In con∣clusion, she was laid into Ludgate, and by the Bishop of London put to open Penance for incontinency; going before the Crosse in Procession, upon a Sunday, with a Taper in her hand: in which, although she were out of all array, save her kitle only; yet went she so faire and lovely, and withall so womanly and demurely, that mny who hated her course of life, yet pittied her course usage, and were not a little grie∣ved to see her misery. And indeed, this may be said in her behalfe: that being in extraordinary favour with King Edward, yet she never used it to the hurt of any, but to the reliefe of many: and was ever a Mediatour, an Oppressour never. Now it was so contrived by the Protectour, that the very day in which he Lord Hastings was beheaded at London, and about the very same houre, there were be∣headed at Pomfret, the Lord Rivers and the other Lords and Knights that were ta∣ken from the King at Northampton and Stonistratford; which was done in the pre∣sence, and by the order of Sir Richard Ratcliffe knight, whose service the Prote∣ctour
specially used in that businesse; who bringing them to the Scaffold, and not suffering them to declare their innocency, lest their words might have inclined men to hate the Protectour, caused them hastily without Judgement or Order of Processe to be beheaded. When these were thus rid out of the way, then thought the Protectour that now was the time to put himselfe in possession of the Crown: but all the study was, by what means this matter being so heinus in it selfe, might be broken to the people, in such wise, as that it might be well taken: for which purpose, It was thought fit to call to this Counsell Edd Sh knight the then Major of London; who upon pro∣mise of advancement, should frame the peoples inclination to it. And because Spi∣rituall men are best hearkened to for matters of Conscience, some of them were used also; amongst whom, choice was made of Iohn Shaw Clerk, brother to the Major; Fryer Penker, Provinciall of the Order of the Augustine Fryers: both great Pa∣chers, both of more learning then vertue, of more fame then learning. These two were appointed to preach, the one at Pauls Crosse, the other at the Spittle, in praise of the Protectour: Penker in his Sermon so lost his voice, that he was saine to leave off and come downe in the midst: Shaw by his Sermon lost his reputation, and soon after his life, for he never after durst come abroad, for very shame of the world. But now was all the labour and study, to finde out some convenient pretext, for which the people should be content to have the Prince deposed, and the Protectour be received for King; to which purpose many things were devised; the cheife was to alleadge bastardy either in King Edward himselfe, or in his children, or in both To ay bastardy to King Edward, sounded openly to the reproach of the Protectours own Mother, who was Mother to them both; he would therefore that point should more favourably be handled: but the other point concerning the bastardy of his children, he would have enforced to the uttermost: The ground whereof was, that King Edward had been formerly contracted to the Lady Elizabeth Lucie, by whom he had a childe; though the said Lady, having been examined about it, confessed plainly, they were never assured. Yet upon this pretext, Doctor Shaw taking for his Text, Bastard Plants shall take no deep roote; in his Sermon declared, that King Edward was never lawfully married to the Queen, but was before God, husband to the Lady Eli∣zabeth Lucie, and so his children bastards. And besides that, neither King Edward himselfe, nor the Duke of Clarence were reckoned very sure for the children of the noble Duke Richard, as those that by their favours more resembled other known men; but the Lord Protectour (saith he) is the fathers own figure his own counte∣nance, the very print of his visage, the plaine expresse likenes of that noble Duke. Now, It was before devised, that just at the speaking of these words, the Protectour should have come, to the end that thse words meeting with his presence, might be taken among the hearers, as though the Holy Ghost had put them in the Preachers moth, and so should move the poeple even then to cry, King Richard, King Richard that it might be after said, he was specially chosen by God, and in a manner by Mira∣cle: but this devise failed; for whither by the Protectours slacknes in comming, or the Doctors haste in Preaching, he had passed those words, and was gone to cleane another matter, before the Protectour came; so as afterward seeing him come, he was aine to leave the matter, he had in hand, and out of all order and frame begin to repeate those words againe: This is the very noble Prince, the Fathers own figure, his own countenance, the very print of his visage, the plaine expresse likenes of that noble Duke. While these words were in speaking, the Proetour accompa∣nied with the Duke of Buckingham, passed through the people into the place where the Doctors sit; and there sate to heare the Sermon: but the people were o farre from crying King Richard, that they cryed shame on the Preacher, for abusing his sacred function with so shamefull a Sermon. The Tuesday following this Sermon, the Duke of Buckingham with divers Lords and Knights came to the Guildhall in London; and there before the Major and whole assembly of Citizens, made a very solemne and long Oration, wherein he recited many grievances of the late King Edwards Government, his many unnecessary Taxa∣tions
and unjust severities; thereby to bring his children into hatred: and then re∣embred them of the late Sermon made at Pauls Crosse, by a learned Doctor; who cleerly shewed the bastardy of King Edwards children; and that Richard Duke of Glocester was the onely rightfull and indubitate heire to the Crowne of England: which the Lords of the Kingdome having taken into their consideration, had there∣upon agreed to accept him for their King; and now himselfe was come to acquaint them with it, and to require their consents. Which Oration ended, all men stood wondring at the motion, but no man offered to speak a word. At which the Duke marvelling, as supposing the Major had prepared them before; he asked the Major privately, what this silence meant? who answered, that perhaps they had not heard or understood what it was he said. Whereupon the Duke with a more adible voice repeated the same matter againe, in a more earnest and plain expression; yet neither did that move them to shew any inclination to the motion. Then the Duke whispering with the Major, It was thought, that the Citizens being used to have such motions made them by their Recorder, they would better it from him; and thereupon the Recorder is commanded to move them in it: but the Recorder (cal∣led Fitzwilliams) being an honest man and newly come to his place; repeated one∣ly as neer as he could the words of the Duke, but added nothing of his own; so as neither did this move the people to breake their silence. At last, the Duke seeing their resolved ullennesse, told them plainly, that all the Nobility and Commons of the Realme were agreed to choose the Protectour for their King, as the true and un∣doubted heire; so as he needed not to have moved them to it, but onely for the great respect they all bare to this honourable City; and therefore required them plainly to speak their mindes, whether they would joyn with them in this choice or no. At this, certaine servants of the Dukes, and other of their procuring, standing at the lower end of the Hall, cast up their Caps, and cryed aloud, King Richard, King Richard; whereat, though the whole multitude of Citizens marvelled what they meant; yet the Duke taking advantage of it, as of an unanimous conset: A good∣ly cry (saith he) and thanked them all for their universall approbation; promising he would acquaint the Protectour with the great love they shewed toward him: and then requiring the Major and chiefe Citizens to meet him the next morning at Bay∣nards Castle, where the Protectour then lay; there to joyn with him, in Petitioning the Protectour to accept of this their freely profered subjection; he tooke his leave and so departed. The next morning according to appointment, they all meet at Baynards Castle; where the Duke of Buckingham sends up word to the . Protector, th himself with the L. Major & his Brethren, were come to present a Supplication to him, concerning a busines of great importance: but the Protectour though (preacquainted with all passages, yet made it strange what their Supplication should be; and answered, that though he suspected nothing which the Duke of Buckingham presented to him; yet he desired at least some some slight inimation to what it might tend. To this it was answered, that the busines they came about was to be made known to himself in Person; and therefore humbly besought him of admission in his presence: Upon this, as if not yet well assured of their well meaning towards him; he appeares unto them in an upper Gallery, making semblance as though he would prevent all dan∣ger, by standing something aloofe and in his Fort: To whom the Duke of Bucking∣, in behalfe of the Major and Nobility there present; in most respective and re∣erent manner makes reqest, that his Grace would pardon what he should deliver to him: and much circumstance he used, before he would discover their cause of omming: but though long first, yet at last, he told it: That in respect of the ur∣gent necssties of the Common-wealth, they all humbly intreated him to take upon him the Government of the Kingdome, as in his own Right, to whom they all ten∣dred their Allegiance. At which words, the Protectour starting back, as if he had heard something most unpleasing to him, passionately answered: I little thought, good Cozen, that you of all men would have moved me to a matter which of all things in the world I most decline: Farre be it from to accept of that, which with∣out
apparent wrong to my deare deceased brothers sweet children, and my own up∣right Conscience, I cannot well approve of. And then being about to proceede in his premeditated diimulation; the Duke in a seeming abrupt passion, kneeling up∣on his knee, sayd; Your Grace was pleased to give me free liberty to deliver unto you, in the name of this worthy assembly, the tender of their tifull obedience to you: but I must further adde, that it is unanimously resolved on, that your late brother King Edwards children, as being generally known to be Illegitimate, shall never be admitted to the Crown of England; and therefore if your Grace shall nei∣ther regard your selfe, nor us so much, as to accept it, we are directly determined to conferre it upon some other of the House of Lcaster, that will be more sensible of his own and our good. These words wrought so powerfully upon the Prote∣ctours passions; that with some change of Countenance, and not without a seeming reluctation, he said; Since I perceive the whole Realme is so resolved, by no mean to admit my deer Nephews, being but children, to Reigne over you; and seeing the Right of succession belongs justly to me, as the indubiate Heire of Richard Plan∣tagenet Duke of Yorke, my Illustrious Father: Wee are contented to condiscend to your importunities, and to accept of the Royall Government of the Kingdome, and will to the uttermost of my power endeavour to procure and maintain the wel∣fare thereof. And having so said, he came downe from his Gallery, and very for∣mally saluted them all: which so pleased the giddy multitude, that presently they fell to acclamations, Long live King Richard our dread Soveraigne Lord and then every man departed.
THE REIGNE OF KING RICHARD THE THIRD. IT was now the eighteenth day of Iune, in the yeer 1483. when Richard Duke of Glocester tooke upon him the Crown: so as the imaginary Raigne of Edward the fifth, continued but just tenne weeks. The next day, King Richard with a great train went to Westminster-hall, and placed himselfe in the Court of the Kings Bench, saying, he would take the Crown upon him in that place where the King himselfe sitteth and ministreth the Law; because he considered that it is the chiefest duty of a King to administer the Laws: And here to get the love of the people by a feigned clemency; he sent for one Fogge out of Sanctuary, who for feare of his displeasure was fled thither; and there in the fight of all the people, caused him to kisse his hand. After his return home, he tooke to wife the Lady Anne, youngest daughter of the great Warwicke, and the relict of Prince Edward, sonne of Henry the sixth; though hee could not be ignorant, that he had been the Author both of her husbands and  death. But womens affections are Eccentrick to common apprehension; whereof the two Poles are Passion and Inconstancy. Against his Coronation he had sent for five thousand men out of the North; and these being come under the leading of Robin of Riddesdale, upon the fourth of Iu∣ly together with his new bride, he went from Baynards Castle to the Tower by wa∣, where he created Edward his Sonne a childe of ten yeers old, Prince of Wales  Lord Howard Duke of Norfolke, his Sonne Sir Thomas Howard Earle of Surry  Lord Berckley Earle of Nottingham, Francis Lord Lovell Viscount Lovell,  Chamberlane, and the Lord Stanley (who had been committed prioner to the ower, in regard his Sonne the Lord Strange was reported to have levied forces ) not only that day was released out of prison, but was made Lord  of his Househould. The Archbishop of Yorke was likewise then delive∣red; but Morton Bshop of Ely (as one that could not be drawne to the disinheriting of  Edwards children) was committed to the Duke of Buckingham, who sent him to his Castle of Brecknock in Wales, there to be in custody. The same night were made seventeen knights of the Bath, Edmund the Duke of Suffolkes sonne, George
Gray the Earle of Kents sonne, Willia the Lord Zouches sonne, Henry Aburga Christopher Willoughby, Henry Babington, Thomas Arundell, Thomas Boleigne, Gerv Clifton, William ay, Edmund Bedingfield, William Enderly, Thomas Lewku, Thm of Vrmond, Iohn Bromne, and William Berckley. The next day, being the fifth o Iuly, the King rode through the City of London to VVestminster, being accompanied with the Dukes of Norfolk, Buckingham, and Suffolk; the Earles of Northubrland, Arundell, Kent, Surrey, VVilshire, Huntington, Nottinghm, Warwick, and Lincol the Viscounts Liste and Lovell; the Lords Stanley, Adely, Dcres, Peers of Chartley, Powis, Scroope of psale, Scroope of Bolton, Gray of Codner, Grey, of Wilton, Sturton, Cobham, Morley, Burgeveny, Zouch, Ferrers of Croby, Wells, Lumley, Matrvers, Her∣bert and Beckham, and fourescore Knights. On the morrow, being the sixth of Iuly, the King with Queene Ane his wife, came downe out of the White-Hall, into the Great Hall at Westminster, and went directly to the Kings Bench; and from thence, going upon Ray-cloath, bare-footed, went unto St. Edwards shrine, all his Nobility going with him, every Lord in his degree. The Bishop of Rochester bore the Crosse before the Cardinall: Then followed the Earle of Huntington, beng a paire of gilt-spurres, signifying Knighthood: Then followed the Earle of ∣ford, bearing St. Edwards stafe, for a Relique: After him came the Earle of ∣thumberland bare-headed, with the pointlsse sword naked in his hand, signifying Mercy: The Lord Stanley bare the Mace of the Constableship: The Earle of Ken bare the second sword, on the right hand of the King, naked, with a point; which signifyed Justice to the Temporalty: The Lord Lovell bore the third sword on the Kings left hand, with a point; which signifyed Justice to the Clergie: The Duke of Suffolk followed with the Scepter in his hand, which signified Peace: The Earle of Lincolne bore the Ball and Crosse, which signified Monarchy: The Earle of Srry bore the fourth sword before the King, in a rich scabbard; which is called the swd of Estate: Then went three together; in the midst went Gartar king of Armes, in his rich Coat; and on his right hand went the Major of London, earing a Mace; and on his left hand went the Gentleman-Usher of the Privy Chamber: Then followed the Duke of Norfolk, bearing the kings Crown between his hands: Then followed king Richard in his roabes of Purple-velvet, and over his head a Canopy, bore by foure Barons of the Cinque-Ports; and on each side of the king went a Bishop on one side, the Bishop of Bath; on the other, of Durham: Then followed the Duke of Buckingham, bearing the kings traine, with a white staffe in his hand, signifying the office of High Steward of England. Then followed the Queenes traine, before whom was borne the Scepter, the Ivory rod, with the Dove, (signifying innocency) and the Crown: herselfe apparelled in roabes like the kings, under a rich Canopy, at every corner thereof a bell of gold: On her head she wore a circlet, set full of pre¦cious stones, the Countesse of Richmond bearing her traine; the Dutchesses of Nor∣folk and Suffolk in their Coronets, attending; with twenty Ladies of Estate most richly attired. In this order they passed the Palace into the Abbey: and going up to the High Altar, there shifted their roabes; and having other roabes open in divers places from the middle upward, were both of them Anoynted and Crowned: and then after the Sacrament received, (having the host divided betwixt them) they both offered at St. Edwards shrine; where the king left St. Edwards Crowne, where∣with he had been Crowned, and put on his owne: and this done, in the same order and state as they came, they returned to Westminster-hall, and there held a most Princely feast: at the second course whereof, there came into the Hall Sir Robert Dymock the kings Champion, making Proclamation, that whosoever would say th king Richard was not lawfull king of England, he was there ready to prove it against him; and thereupon threw down his Gantlet: and then all the Hall cryed, king Richard, king Richard. And thus with some other Ceremonies, the Coronation ended; and the king and Queen returned to their lodgings. Presently after this, king Richard sent a solemne Ambassage to Lewis king of France, to conclude a Leage and Amity with him: but the French king so ab∣horred him and his cruelty, that hee would not so much as see, or heare his
bssadors; but sent them away with shame, in disgrace of their Master. At this tme, with his Queen, he made a Progresse of Glocester, under colour to  of his old Honour; but indeed, to be out of the way, having a speciall  to be acted: for though he had satisfied his Ambition, by depriving his  Nephews of their livelihoods; yet it satisfied not his Feare, if he deprived  also of their lives. For effecting whereof, his old friend the Duke of Buck∣ was no fit instrument; it must be one of a baser metall: and to finde out  henceded not goe farre; For upon inquiry, he was told of two that lay  it Chamber to him; Sir Thomas and Sir Iames Tyrrell two brothers, like , not more neere in blood, than different in conditions; of equall  of personage both, but not of equall goodnesse of minde; Sir Thomas  of in honest and sober disposition; but Sir Iames of a turbulent spirit, and one  after preferment, would not stick to make a fortune out of any villany.  told of this man, as he was sitting at the close-stoole, he presently roe and  to him: where being met, the mach is soon made up between them; for he  Sir Iames more ready to undertake the work, than he was himselfe to set him  it. It onely remained, to procure him free passage to the place where the  was to be done: for King Richard had formerly sent a trusty Privado of his,  Iohn Greene, to Sir Robert Brackenbury then Lieutenant of the Tower; think∣, having been raised by him, would not have refused to doe the deed him∣selfe, but when he heard how averse he was from it, Good Lord (saith he) whom  man trust? Once he saw plainly, that whilst he was Lieutenant, there was  to effect it. To remove therefore this Rub, he sends his Letters Man∣ to Brckenbury, to deliver presently the keyes of the Tower to Sir Iames : who being now Lieutenant for the time, and having the two innocent  under his custodie; gets two other, as very villaines as himselfe; the one , the other Iames Dighton his horse-keeper, a bigge sturdy knave: and  makes his under-agents; who comming into the childrens chamber in the , (for they were suffered to have none about them, but one Black-Will, or  ghter, a bloody rascall) they suddenly lapped them up in their cloaths,  down by force the featherbed and pillowes hard unto their mouths, so , that their breath failing, they gave up their innocent soule; to God:  when the murherers perceived, first by their strugling with the paines of , and then by their long lying still, to be throughly dead; they laid their bo∣dies out upon the bed, and then fetched Sir Iames to see them; who presently caused their bodies to be buried under the staires, under a heap of stones: from whence they were afterward removed to a place of Christian buriall, by a Priest of Sir Robert ; who dying within a few dayes after, and none knowing the place but , was cause that it hath not been known to this day; and gave occasion after∣ward the Imposture of Perkin Warbeck, in King Henry the Seventh's Raign. Some , that king Richard caused their bodies to be taken up, and closed them in lead, and then to be put in a Cossin full of holes, hooked at the ends with Iron; and so  a place called the Black Deepes, at the Thames mouth, to be sure they should  rise up, not be seen againe. And now see the Divine revenge upon the actors  cerable murther: Miles Forrest, at St. Martins le Grand, peece-meale rot∣ away: Dighton lived at Callice a long time after; but detested of all men, dyed  misery: Sir Iames Tyrrell was beheaded afterward on the Tower-hill for  and king Richard himselfe, after this abhominable fact done, never had  minde; troubled with fearfull dreames, and would sometimes in the night  of his bed, and run about the Chamber in great fright, as if all the Furies of  were hanging about him: that it was verefied in him, ltrix Tisiphone vocat  seva sororum. Conderacies in evill are seldome long-lived, and commonly end in a reciprocall : and so was it now with king Richard and the Duke of Buckingham: They had confederated together to the destruction of many; and now their confe∣deracy dissolves in both their ruines: but what the cause was of their dissolving, is
not so certaine: whether it were that the Duke thought not himselfe so well rewar∣ded, as his great services had deserved; or whether it were, that King Richard thought not himselfe absolute King, as long as the Duke, by whose means he came to be King, was in such a height of greatnesse; or whether it were (as was rather thought) that the Duke being a man ambitious and of an aspiring spirit; though he had himselfe been the means to bring King Richard to the Crown; yet when the Crown was put upon his head, so envied at it, that he turned his head another way, s not enduring the sight; and for the same case, was willing not to have been pre∣sent at the Coronation, pretending sicknes in excuse of his absence; but that King Richard sent him a sharpe Message, requiring him to come or he would fetch him: whereupon the Duke went, but with so ill a minde, that he bore it in minde ever af∣ter. Whatsoever it was, certaine it is, that presently after the Coronation, there grew great jealousies between them; and the Duke retired himselfe to his Castle at Breck∣nock, where he had the Bishop of Ely in custody. And here we may observe the unsearchable depth of the divine Providence; the bottome whereof, the soundest judgement of Man can never sound, as working effects by contrary causes: for where King Richard had committed the Bishop to the Duke, as to one that would have a most watchfull eye over him; This which the King did for the Bishops grea∣ter punishment, proved a means afterward of the Bishops greater advancement, and a means at the present of King Richards ruine. For the Duke being retyred home, and having his head so full of thoughts, that of necessity it required ent; for his own recreation, would sometimes fall in talke with the Bishop; with whose dis∣course (as he was a man of great wit and solid judgement) the Duke was so taken, tha he grew to delight in nothing more then to be conferring with him. One time it happened, that the Duke had opened his minde something freely to him; and the Bishop following him in his own way, and cunningly working upon that humour of the Duke, which he found most working in the Duke; which he conceived to grow out of envy to king Richard: he said to this purpose; My Lord, you know I followed first the part of king Henry the sixth, and if I could have had my wish, his Sonne should have had the Crown, and not king Edward: But after that God had ordained king Edward to Reigne; I was never so mad, that I would with a dead man strive against the quick. And so was I to king Edward also a faithfull Chaplaine, and glad would have been that his childe had succeeded him: How be it, if the s∣cret Judgement of God have otherwise provided; I purpose not to labour to set up that which God pulleth down. And as for the Lord Protectour, and now King; and even there he left: saying, he had already meddled too much with the world; and would from that day meddle with his Books and his Beads, and no further. Then longed the Duke exceedingly to heare what he would have said; because he ended with the king, and there suddenly stopped: and thereupon intreated him to be bold to say whatsoever he thought; whereof he faithfully promised there should never come hurt, and peradventure more good then he would thinke; and withall, that himselfe intended to use his secret Counsell; which (he said) was the only cause for the which he had procured of the king to have him in his custody. The Bishop humbly thanked him, and said: In good faith my Lord, I love not to talke much of Princes, as a thing not all out of perill, though the word be without fault, for so much as it shall not be taken as the party meant it, but as it pleaseth the Prince to construe it. And ever I thinke on Aesops Tale, that when the Lyon had proclaimed on paine of death, that no horned beast should abide in a certaine Wood; one that had in his forehead a bunch of flesh, fled away a geart pace: the Fox that saw him run so fast, asked him whither he made all that haste? who answered, in faith I neither wot nor reck, so I were once hence, because of the Proclaimation made of horned beasts: why foole, (quoth the Fox) thou mayest abide well enough, the Lyon meant it not by thee, for it is no horn that is in thy head: No mary (quoth he) that wote I well enough; but what if he call it a horne, where am I then? The Duke laughed at the Tale, and said; My Lord, I warrant you, neither the Lyon not the Bore shall picke any matter at any thing here spoken; for it shall never come neere
their eare. Then said the Bishop, In good faith Sir, if it did, the thing I was about to say, taken as well as a fore God I meant it, could deserve but thank; and yet taken as I ween it would, might happen to turne me to little good, and you to lese. Then longed the Duke much more, to heare what it was: whereupon the Bishop said, My Lord, as for the late Protectour, sith he is now king in Possession, I purpose not to dispute his title; but for the weale of the Realme, I could wish he had in him those excellent virtues which God hath planted in the person of your Grace: and there left again. The Duke somewhat marvelling at his sudden pause, said, My L. I cannot but note your sudden stopping in your speech, so as your words come not to any direct sentence, whereby I may have knowledge, eithr what your inward intent is now toward the king, or what your affection is toward me: I therefore intreate you to use no more such obscurity, but plainly to disclose your minde unto me, who upon mine honor will be as secret in the case, as the deafe and dumb person is to the singer, or the Tree to the Hunter. The Bp. then upon confidence of the D. promise, said my Lord, I plainly perceive, the kingdome being in the case as it is, under such a King as now we have, must needs decay and be brought to confusion; but one hope I have, that when I consider and daily behold your noble Personage, your Justice, your ardent love towards your Country, and in like manner the great love of your Country to∣wards you; I must needs thinke this Realme fortunate, that hath such a Prince in store, meet and apt to be a Governour; in whose person consisteth the very undoub∣ted Image of true honour. And then taxing the present king with many cruelties and oppressions, he concluded, saying: And now my Lord, if either you love God, your Linage, or your native Country, you must your self take upon you the Crown and Imperiall Diadem of this Realme; but if your selfe will refuse to take it upon you, I then adjure you, by the faith you owe to God, and by the love you beare to your native Country, to devise some way, how the Realme may by your Princely po∣licy be reduced to some convenient Regiment, under some good governour by you to be appointed: And if you could devise to set up againe the Linage of Lan∣cster; or advance the eldest daughter of King Edward to some puissant Prince: not onely the new Crowned king should little enjoy the glory of his dignity, but all Ci∣vill Warre should cease, and Peace and Profit should againe flourish. When the Bishop had ended his saying, the Duke sighed, and spake not of a good while; which sore abashed the Bishop, and made him change colour: which the Duke per∣ceiving, he said; Be not afrayd my Lord, all promises shall be kept: so for that time they parted. The next day, the Duke sent for the Bishop, and having rehearsed unto him the Communication had between them the day before, he went on and said: My Lord of Ely, since I perceive your true heart and sincere affection toward me; I will now discover unto you, all that hath passed my own imaginations. After I had found the dissimulation and falsenesse of king Richard, and speci∣ally after I was informed of the murther of the two young Princes, to which (God be my Judge) I never condiscended; I so much abhorred the sight, and much more the company of him, that I could no longer abide in his Court; but feigning a cause to depart, I tooke my leave of him (he thinking nothing lesse, then that I was displeased) and so returned to Brecknok to you; but in that returning, whether it were by inspiration, or els through some melancholike disposition, I had divers imaginations how to deprive this unnaturall and bloody Butcher of his Royall seat and dignity. First I fantasied, that if I list to take upon me the Crown, Now was the time, when this Tyrant was abhorred and detested of all men; and knowing not of any that could pretend Title before me: In this imagination I rest∣ed two dayes at Tewkesbury; in my journey from thence, I mused and thought, that it was not best nor convenient to take upon me as a Conquerour, for then I was sure that all men and specially the Nobility would oppose me; but at last there sprung up a branch in my head, which I surely thought would have brought forth faire flowers, but they turned indeed to dry weeds: For I suddenly remembred that the Lord Edmund Duke of Somerset, my Grandfather, was with king Henry the ixth, in two or three degrees of Iohn of Gaunt Duke of Lancster; so that I thought
certainely, my Mother being eldest Daughter to Duke Edmund, that I was next heire to king Hnry the sixth, of the House of Lancster: This Title pleased well such as I made of my Counsell, and much more it elevaed my ambitious intent; but while I was in a maze, whether I were best suddenly to set this title open amongs the Common people, or else keep it secret a while, see what chaned: As I ode be∣tween Worcester and Bridgenorth, I met with the Lady Margaret Countesse of Rich∣mond, now wife to the Lord Stanley, who is the daughter and sole heire to Iohn Duke of Somerst my Grandfathers elder brother (which was as cleane out of my minde, as if I had never seen her) so that she and her sonne the Earle of Richmond hve both of them Titles before mine, and then I cleerly saw how I was deceived: weupon I determined, utterly to relinquish all such fantasticall imaginations concerning the obtayning the Crown my selfe and found there could be no better way to settle it in a true establishment, then that the Earle of Richmond, very heire of the house of Lancaster; should take to wife the Lady Elizabeth, eldest Daughter to king Edward, the very heir of the house of York; that so the two Roses may be united in one: & now (saith the Duke) I have told you my very minde. When the Duke had said this, the Bishop was not a little glad, for this was the marke he had himselfe aymed at: and thereupon, after some complements of extolling his device, he said: Since by your Graces incomparable wisdome, this noble conjunction is now moved; It is in the next place necessary to consider, what friends we shall first make privy of this inten∣tion. By my truth (quoth the Duke) we will begin with the Countesse of Richmond the Earles Mother; who knoweth where he is, either in captivity or at large in Brit∣taine. And thus was the foundation laid of a league, by these two great men; by which the death of the two young Princes was fully revenged: and it was not talk of onely, but presently put in execution; for now is Reynold Bray imployed by the Bishop, to his Mistresse the Dutchesse of Richmond; Doctor Lewis the Dutchesses Phisitian was imployed by her to the Queen Elizabeth; Hugh Conway and Thom Rme were imployed to the Earle of Richmond; to acquaint them, but in most se∣cret manner, with the intended plot, and to procure their promises to the propoun∣ded marriage; which was no hard matter, to make them all willing to their own wi∣shes. This done, Instruments are imployed, to draw in parties to the confede∣racy; Bray by his credit drew in Sir Gyles Danbey, Sir Iohn Cheyney, Richard Guild∣ford, Thomas Rme and others; Vrswick likewise drew in Hugh Conway, Thomas Cole∣pepper, Thomas Roper with some others; Doctor Lewis drew in Edward Courtney and his brother Peter Bishop of Exceter. It is memorable, that Thomas Conway being sen most part by Sea, and Thoma Rme most part by Land; yet came to the Eale of Richmond in Brittaine, within the space of little more then an houre; upon whose information of the plot, the Earle acquaints the Duke of Brittaine with it, who, though by Hutton King Richards Ambassadour, he had by many great offers been sollicited to detaine him in prison; yet he both readily promised and really perfor∣med both his advice and ayde to the Earles proceedings. In this meane time Bishop Morto, not without asking the Dukes leave, though without obtaining it, secretly in disguise, gets him into his Isle of Ely; and there having done the Earle good Of∣fices by procuring of friends, he thence passeth into Brittaine to him; from whence he returned no more, till afterward the Earle being king, sent for him home and made him Archbishop of Canterbury. But though all these things were carried closely, and Oath taken by all for secre∣sie, yet came it to King Richards knowledge; who notwithstanding dissembling it, sends for the Duke of Buckingham to come unto him; and he putting off his comming with pretended excuses, is at last peremptorily sent for to come upon his Allegiance: when he returned this resolute answer, that he owed no Allegiance to such a perjur'd inhumane Butcher of his owne Flesh and Blood: and so from that time, preparation for Arms is made on both sides. The Duke had gotten a good power of Welshmen; and the Marquesse Dorset having gotten out of Sanctuary, was labouring in Yorkeshire to raise forces; the like did the two ourtneys in Devonshire and Cornwall, and Guilford and Rme in Kent. King Richrd setting forward with
forces; the Duke of Buckingham doth the like, intending at Glocester to have  Severn, and so to have joyned with the two Courtneys; but such abundance o aine at that time fell, that the Severn was broken out, and impossible to be passed ; which the Welshme seeing, and taking it for an ill signe, they secretly slpt a∣way: so as the Duke let well neer alone, without either Page or so much as a Foot∣m; repaired to the house of one Humfry Bannister neere to Shresbury; who ha∣ving been raised by him, and his father before him; he thought himselfe safe under his roofe: But Bannister, upon Proclamation made by king Richard, that whosoever could apprehend the Duke, should have a thousand pound for his labour; like an un∣gratefull and perfidious wretch, discovered him to Iohn Milton High Sheriffe of , who took him in a pilled black Cloak, as h was walking in an Orchard behinde the house; and carried him to Shrewsbury, where king Richard then lay; nd there without Arraignment or Legall proceeding, was in the Market place be∣headed. Whether Bannister received the Proclaimed reward from the hand of the King, is uncertaine; but certaine it is, that he received the reward of a Villaine from the hand of Divine Justice; for himselfe was afterward hanged for man-slaugh∣ter, his eldest daughter was deflowred by one of his Carters, or as some say, strucken with a foule Leprosie; his eldest Sonne in a desperate Lunacy murthered himselfe, and was ound to have done so, by the Coroners inquest; and his younger Sonne in a small puddle was strangled and drowned. Upon this disaster of the Duke of Buckingham, his complices shifted for them∣selves; sme taking Sanctuary, some keeping themselves in unknown places, but many convayed themselves into Brittaine to the Earle of Richmond of whom the Marquesse Dorset, Iohn Lord Wells, the Bishop of Exceter and his brother Sir Ioh , Sir Edward Woodvile brother to Queen Elizabeth, Sir Robert Willoughby Sir Giles Dabeney, Sir Thomas Arundell, Sir Iohn Cheyney and his two brethren, Sir Wil∣lia Brckly, Sir William Brandon and his brother Thomas, Sir Richard Edgecombe, Hol∣lowell and Poynings Captaines, were the chiefe. Whil'st these things are in doing, king Richard receives intelligence from Hutton his Ambassadour leiger in Britaine; that the Duke not onely refuseth to restaine the Earle of Richmond, but intendeth also to give him assistance: whereupon the king oke present order for preparing his Navy to stop the Earles landing in any Port of England. Upon the twelveth day o October in the yeer 1484. The Earle of Richmond with forty Ships, and five thousand waged Brittain tooks, to sea; but that Evening, by tempest of weather, his whole Fleet was dispersed, so as only the Ship wherein the Earle himselfe was, with one little Barke, was driven upon the Coast of Cornwll; where discovering upon the shore great store of Armed Souldiers to resist his land∣ing; he hoysed sayle, and returning toward France, arrived in Normandy; from whence sending Messengers to Charles the Eighth King of France, he was by him not onely kindely invited to come to his Court, but was ayded also with good smmes of money to beare his charges. After this, the Earle returning into Brit∣tie, received there the news of the Duke of Buckinghams death, and the dispring of the Confederates forces; with which though he was at first much troubled, yet was he as much comforted afterward, when he saw the Marquesse Dorset and those other Lords and Captaines come unto him: soon after whose comming, upon Christ∣sse day before the high Altar in the great Church of Rheims, the Earle of Richmod gave Oath, to marry the Lady Elzabeth, as soone as he should be quietly eled in the Government of England: and thereupon all the Lords and Knights there present, did him homage, and in the same place, each to other Religiously Vowed, taking the Sacrament upon it; never to cease prosecuting warre against king Ri∣chard, till either his Deposition or Destruction. King Richard being informed of these things, makes diligent enquiry after all such as might be suspected to be favourers of Richmonds association; of whom Sir George Brown, and Sir Roger Clifford with foure other Gentlemen are apprehended and excuted at London: Sir Thomas Sentlge, whom mrried Anne the Duke of Exce∣trs widdow, this kings own sister, and Thomas Rame Esquire were executed at Ex∣ceter.
Thomas Marquesse Dorset, and all such as were with the Earle of Richd, were at a Parliament then holden attinted of Treason, and all their Good ad Lands seized on to the kings use: Besides these, a poore Gentleman called Cllig∣bor, for making a small ryme of thee of his wicked Consellours; the Lord Lll, Sir Robert Ratcliffe, and Sir William Catesby: which ryme was thus framed:  Cat, the Rat, and vell the Dog; rule all Engla under a og: was put to deat, nd his body divided into foure quarter. At this time, a Truce is conclded betwixt England and Scland, for three years and for a seling a firmer Amity between the two kingdomes, a marriage it treated of between the Duke of Rothsay, eldest Sonne to the king of Scots; and the La∣dy Anne de la Poole, daughter to Iohn Duke of Suffolk, by Anne sister to king Rihard, which sister he so much favoured, that after the death of his own sonne, who dyed some time before; e caused Iohn Earle of Lincolne, her sonne and his Nephew, to be proclaimed Heire apparent to the Crown of England. And now King Richard, to take away the Root of his feare, once againe sent Am∣badors to the Duke of Britaine, with orde (besides the great gifts they caried with them) to make offer, that king Richard should yeerly pay and answer the Duke of all the Revenues and Profits of all lands and possessions as well belonging to the Earle of Richmond, as of any other Nobleman or Gentleman that were in his com∣pany; if he after that time would keep them in continuall prison, and restraine the from liberty. But the Duke of Britine being at that time fallen into such infirmity, that the Ambassadors could have no audience; they addressed themselves to eter Landois, the Dukes chief Treasurer: and he taken with this golden hook, faithfully promised to satisfie their Request; and had done so indeed, but that B. Morto, sojour∣ning then in Flders, had by his friends Intelligence of his purpose, and presently informed the E. thereof. The E. was then at Vae who, upon the Bps. information, taking with him only five servants, as though he went but to visit some friend; when he was five miles forward on his way, suddenly turned into a Wood adjoyning; and there changing apparell with one of his servants, followed after as their attendant; and never rested, till by wayes unknown he came to his company abiding at Angir: yet was not his departure so secret nor so sudden, but that Peter Landois had notice of it; who sending Posts after him, was so neer overtaking him, that he was scarce entred one houre into Franc, when the Posts arrived at the Conines, and then durst goe no further. In the mean time, Sir Edward Woodvile and Captaine Py∣nings, who with their companies were left behinde in Vannes, had been in danger of Peter Lndis his malice; but that the Duke being informed by the Chancellour of their case, not only protected them, but furnished them with all necessaries for their journey to the Earle: and was so incensed against Ldois for this action of his, that for this and some other over-bold preumptions, he was afterward hanged. The Earle having passed this danger in Britaine, and being arrived in France, ad∣dresseth himselfe to the French king, imploring his ayde; and hath it promised and performed: and in this time Iohn Vere Earle of Oxford, who had long time been kept prisoner in the Castle of Hammes, so farre prevailed with Iames Blunt Captaine of the Fortresse, and Sir Iohn Fortescue Porter of the Town of Callice; that not onely they suffered him to be at liberty, but accompanied him also to the Earle of Richm, to whom Captain Blunt gave assurance that the Fortresse remained wholly at his de∣votion. At this time also there resorted to the Earle, divers young Gentlemen that were Students in the University of Paris, profering him their service; amongst whom was Richard Fox, at that time famous for his learning; with whom after∣ward the Earle advised in all his affaires, made him one of his most Privy Counsell, and at last Bishop of Winchester. But now king Richard having been disappointed of his designe in Britaine, hath another way in his head, to disapoint the Earle of Richmond of his marriage with the Daughter of Queen Elizabeth: and to this end, he sent to the Queen (being still in Sanctuary) divers messengers, who should first excuse and purge him of all things formerly attempted and done against her; and then should largely promise promo∣tions
innumerable, not onely to her selfe, but also to her sonne Lord Thomas Mar∣quesse Dret by ore of which promises, the messengers so prevailed with her, hat no onely she began o relent, but  was content to submit her selfe wholly to th king pleasure. And thereupon putting in oblivion the murther of her inno∣ Children, the butchering of her own Brother and Sonne, the infamy of her oyll Huand, the aspersion of Adultey cast upon her selfe, the imputation of Ba∣stardy laid to her Dahter forgetting also her Oah made to the Earle of Richmonds Mothr; seduced by flatering words, she first delivered into king Richards hands her ive Daughters, and after sent letters to the Marquesse her Sonne, being then at Pari wit the Earle of Richmond; willing him by any means to leave the Earle, and with all speed to repaire into England where for him were provided great Honours and Promotions: Assuring him further, that all offences on both parts were forgot∣en nd forgiven; and both he and she incorporated in the kings favour. If we wonder at this credulity in the Queen, we may conceive she was moved with the  motives of Feare and hope; she feared (no doubt) that if she denyed the king request, he would presently take some sharpe course both against her and her Dhtrs; and she hoped that if she yeelded to his request, he would undoub∣ely performe his promise, seeing it was as easie for him to keep it as to breake it. But now king Richards purpose being to marry one of his brother king Edwards daughters: there was one impediment which directly hindred it; that he had a wife living; and how to be rid of her, that he might not bring new aspersions upon hiselfe, he could not well tell; yet this he resolved, that be rid of her he would by some way or other: but before he would use extremity, he would first try milder wayes; and first he absteyned both from her bed and company, and complained to divers of her barrennesse; which comming to her are, he hoped might cause her o dye with griefe: And when this device failed, he then caused a rumour to be sd among the people, that she was suddenly dead; hoping the very conceite thereof would kill her: when this device also failed, (for the Queen hearing of it, and mistrustring the worst, with a most sorrowfull countenance came unto him, demanding what she had done, that he should judge her worthy to dye? who an∣swered with faire words, bidding her be of good cheere, for (to his knowledge) she should have no other cause:) he then made sure worke; for within few dayes after, whether by poyson or by what other eans, it is not certainly known, she departed this life; and with all solemnity, not without some formall tears of king Richard, was interred in St. Peters Church at Westminster. King Richard now by his wives death, having made himself way to marry another;  all the alluring means he can devise, to win the love of the Lady Elizabeth his , but meaning at last to purchase his desire by Rape, if he could not other∣wise and had perhaps done it, but that the storms threatned from beyond the seas, growing every day more strong then other, forced him to prorouge the execution of his desires, and look to the prevention of his present danger. The Lord Stanley is commanded presently to levy forces for the kingsayde, as he will justifie his inte∣grity to him; but yet is not permitted to goe down into the Country, untill he had left George Lord Strange his eldest Son, as a Pledge of his Loyalty, behinde him. And now king Richard being informed (though the information was craftily subor∣ned by his Enemies) that the Earle of Richmond was out of hope of any great assi∣stance from France; dischargeth the ships which he had appointed to guard the seas, d likewise all the souldiers; onely order is given for diligent watching of the Beacons. At this time, one Morga Kidwelly, a Student at the Innes of Court, with great ha∣d of his life, passed over to the Earle; Informing him, that King Richard by all means laboured to match himself with the Lady Elizabeth: which so wrought with the Earle, that he saw there was no lingring: and the more, being by him further informed, that Ric ap Thomas and Iohn Savage, two powerfull men in their Coun∣res, were ready with great forces to assist him: Whereupon not having above
two thousand Mercenaries, and but indifferent shipping to convay him over: a∣bout the middle of August he put to sea, and by the advice of the said Kidwelly, stee∣red his course for Wales, and on the seventee day after his departure from Har∣flew, arrived at Milford Haven; and there landing his fores without trouble or im∣peachment, from thence mhed peacably  Hereford, where by the Inhabitants he was joyfully received. Here he receiveth news by Captaine Arnold Butler, that the Earle of Pembrooke with all hi reti, was upon the way to joyne with him; also thither came to him Rchard Griffith and Iohn Morgan, with a band of brave Welsh men; and the same day, Sir Giber Tlbo with all the Earle of Shewsburys Tenants, (being about two thousand well appointed men) came unto him: with these he marched towards Shrewsbury; at which time word is brought him, that Sir Robert Herbert and Rice ap Thomas, were ready with a great power to stoppe his passage: which somewhat troubled him, that his friends so suddenly should revolt: but it was but a trick of Rce ap Tho to make his bargaine the surer: for soon after, Rice ap Thomas meets him, and offers him his service, so as the Earle will pledge his faith to performe his promise formerly made; which was, that having once obtained the Crown, he would make Rice sole Governour of Wales: which was now assented to, and afterward performed At this time the Lord Stley with five thousand men, had taken up his lodging at the Town of Leicester; but hearing of the Earles march that way, he let Leicester and went to Addet, not daring to shew himselfe openly for the Earle; for feare the King should put his Sonne the Lord Strange to death, whom he had left an Hostage with him. All this time King Richard lay at Nottigham, and was as it were fatally taken with a spirit of security, hearing that the Earle had but small assistance either from France or in England; and therefore slighting him as little able to doe any great matter: but when he heard that part of his own forces was revolted to him, then he began to looke about him, and sends present direction to the Duke of Norfolke, the Earles of Northumberland and Surry, with Sir Thomas Brackenbury Lievetenant of the Tower, with all speed to bring their forces to him at Lutterworth, from whence upon their arrivall, hearing that the Earle was encamped at Lichfield: he mar∣cheth thitherward: At which time, Sir Walter Hungerford and some others, with∣drew themselves from King Richards part: and Sir Iohn Savage, Sir Bryan Staford, and Sir Simon Digby, with their severall Forces, joyned with the Earle. King Richard tooke the advantage of a large Plaine neere Bosworth, adjoyning to a Hill called Anne Beame; where he encamped: And observing by his Adversaries manner of approach, that they meant to give him battell; He the next morning put his Forces in order: The Vauntguard was led by the Duke of Norfolk, which con∣sisted of one thousand two hundred Bow-men, flanked with two hundred Cuyras∣siers, under the conduct of the Earle of Surrey: The Battaile King Richard led him∣selfe, which consisted of a thousand Bill-men, empaled with two thousand Pikes: The Reereward was led by Sir Thomas Brackebury, consisting of two thousand mingled weapons, with two wings of Horsemen, containing fifteen hundred, all of them cast into square maniples; expecting the Lord Staley's comming with two thousand, most of them Horsemen: But the Lord Stanley caried himselfe so warily, that he might neither give cause of suspition to the King, nor yet cause of disadvantage to the Earle: that when, early in the morning, the Earle sent unto him, de∣siring his preset repaire; he answered, that he must looke for no ayde from him, till the Battailes should be joyned; and therefore advised him, with all possible speed to give the Onset. This Answer somewhat staggered the Earle, because his number did but little exceed one halfe of the Kings: Yet to make the best shew he could by the advice of his Counsell of War, he made his Vaward open and thin; of which Iohn Earle of Oxford had the leading: The Earle himselfe led the Battaile: Sir Gil∣bert Talbot commanding the Right wing, and Sir Iohn Savage the left: whose soul∣diers being all alike clad in white Coates and hoods of Frize; by the reflection of the Sun upon them, made them appeare in the view of their Enemies, double the num∣ber. The Reereward was governed by the Earle of Pembrooke, which consisted most
of orse, and some Pikes and Black bills. King Richard to incourage his souldiers, made a solemne speech unto them: but alas! what hope cold he have to put them in heart, whose hearts he had lost? or to rise alacrity in others, who had none in himselfe? For now the remembrance of his fore-passed villanies, and specially a fearfull dreame he had the night before, (wherein it seemed to him he saw divers I∣mages like Devils, which pulled and haled him, not suffering him to take any rest or quiet) so damped his spirits, that although he set a good face upon the matter, yet he cold not choose but have a presaging feare that the date o hi dayes was not farre from expiring. The Earle of Richmond on the other side, having a cleere consci∣ence in himself, and speaking to men that followed him for love had the easier means o give them encouragement: which he did with so cheerfull a countenance; as though already he had gotten the victory. After their military exhorations ended, King Richard commanded to give the onset. Between both Armies, there was a∣great Marsh; which the Earle left on his right-hand, that it might be a defence for his souldiers on that side; and besides by so doing, he had the Sunne at his back, and in the faces of the enemy. When king Richard saw that the Earles company wa paed this Marish, he commanded with all speed to set upon them. Then were the Arrows let fly on both sides, and those spent, they came to hand-strokes; at which encounter comes in the the Lord Stanley, and joyns with the Earle. The Earle of Oxford in the mean time, fearing lest his company should be compassed in with the multitude of his enemies, gave charge in every ranke, that no man should goe a∣bove ten foot from the Standard: whereupon they knit themselves together, and ceased a while from fighting: which the Enemy seeing, and mistrusting some fraud, they also paused and left striking. But then the Erle of Oxford, having brought all his Band together, set on the Enemy afresh; which the Enemy perceiving, they placed their men slender and thinne before, but thick and broad behinde; and resolutely againe began he Fight. While these two Vantgurds were thus con∣tending, King Richard was informed, that the Earle of Richmond with a small ∣ber was not farre off: whereupon he presently makes towards him; and being of an invincible courage, whereof he was now to give the last proofe, he made so fu∣rious an assault, that first with his own hands he slew Sir William Brandon, who bore the Earles Standard; next, he unhorst and overthrew Sir Iohn Cheyny, a strong and stout man at Armes; and then assaulted the Earle of Richmond himself, who (hough no man would have thought it, yet) for all the Kings fury, held him off at his Laun∣ces point, till Sir William Stanley came in with three thousand freshmen; and then opprest with multitude, King Richard is there slaine. It is said, that when the Battell was at the point to be lost, a swift horse was bought unto him, with which he might have saved himselfe by flight: but out of his undaunted courage he refused it, saying He would that day make an end of all Battells, or else lose his life. In this Battell, Hery Earle of Northumberland, who led King Richards Reereward, never struck stroke; as likewise many other, who followed King Richard more for Feare than Love: and so King Richard who had deceived many in his time, was at this time deceived by many: which was not unforeseen by some, who caused a Rhyme to be set upon the Duke of Norfolks gate the night before the Battell; which was this: Iack of Norfolke be not too bold, For Dickon thy Master is bought and sold. Yet notwithstanding this warning, the noble Duke continued firme to king Richard; and more considering what he was towards him, then what towards o∣thers; followed him to the last, and in his quarrell lost his life. This Iohn Howard was the sonne of Sir Robert Howard knight, and Margaret eldest daughter of Thomas bray Duke of Norfolke, in whoe right he was created Duke of Norfolke by king Richard the Third, in he yeere 1483. having been made a Baron before by king Edward the Fourth. The whole number slain in thi battell on kin Rchrds par was not above a thousand persons; whereof of the Nobility, besides the Duke of Norfolke, only Walter Lord Ferrers of Chartley, Sir Richard Ratliffe, and Sir Robert rakenbury Lievtenant of the Tower, and not many Gentlemen more. Sir William
Catesby, one of the chiefe Counsellours of king Richard, with divers others, were two dayes after beheaded at Leicester. Amongst those that ran away, were Franci Viscount Lovell, Hufry Stafford, and Thomas Stafford his brother, who took San∣ctuary in Saint Iohns at Glocester. Of Captives and Prisoners there were great num∣ber. Henry Earle of Northumberland, who though on king Richards side, intermited not in the battell; was incontinently taken into favour, and made of the Counsell; But Thomas Howard Earle of Srry, though he submitted himselfe, yet as having been specially familiar with king Richard, was committed to the Tower; where he re∣mained a long time: but at last was delivered and highly promoted. On the Earle of Richmonds part were slaine scarce a hundred persons; (some say, but ten) of whom the principall was Sir William Brandon, the Earles Standard-bearer. This battell was fought at Rodmer, neer Bosworth in Leicestershire, the two and twentieth day of August, in the yeer 1485. having continued little above two houres. Pre∣sently after the battell, the Earle knighted in the field, Sir Gilbert Talbot, Sir Iohn Mortimer, Sir William Willoughby, Sir Rice ap Thomas, Sir Robert Poynts, Sir Humfry Stanley, Sir Iohn Turbervile, Sir Hugh Pershall, Sir R. Edgecombe, Sir Iohn Bykenill, and Sir Edmund Carew: and then kneeling down, he rendred to Almighty God his hearty Thankes for the victory he had obtained; and commanded all the hurt and maimed persons to be cured: whereat the people rejoycing, clapped their hands and cryed, king Henry, king Henry: which good will and gladnesse of the people when the Lord Staley saw, he tooke the Crown of king Richard, which was found amongst the spoiles in the field, and set it on the Earles head, as though he had been elected King by the voice of the people. It may not be forgotten, that when king Richard was come to Bosworth, he sent to the Lord Stanley to come presently to his presence; which if he refused to doe, he swore by Christs Passion, that he would strike off his sonnes head before he dined: whereto the Lord Stanley answered, That if he did so, he had more sonnes alive, and he might doe his pleasure; but to come to him, he was not then determined. Which answer when king Richard heard, he commanded the Lord Strange immediately to be beheaded; but being at the ve∣ry time when both Armies were in sight of each other; his Lords perswaded him, it was now time to fight, and not to put to Execution: and so the Lord Strang escaped. Of his Taxations. WEE must not looke for Taxations in kinde, in this kings reigne; for he drew from his Subjects not money so much as blood; and the money he drew was most by blood, which drew on confiscation: whereof, let never any Prince make a president: for where Taxations properly doe but Tondere, thee did De∣gluere. Yet in his second yeere, he called a Parliament, wherein besides the great confiscations of those that were then attainted, he imposed upon the people a great Tax, which what it was, is not Recorded. Of his Lawes and Ordinances. HAving gotten the Crowne by Pestilent courses, he sought to Establish i by wholsome Laws: for in no Kings reigne were better Laws made, then in the reign of this man. Amongst other of his Laws, It was enacted, that from thence forth, the Commonalty of the Realme should in no wise be charged by any imposition called a Benevolence, nor any such like charge; and that such exactions called a Be∣nevolence, before this time taken, shall be taken for no example to make any such like charge hereafter; but shall be damned and annulled for ever. Many other good Laws were by him made; that we may say, he took the wayes of being a good King, if he had come to be King by wayes that had been good.
Affaires of the Church in his time. IN his time, the troubles of the Temporalty kept the Clergie at quiet; and though there were complayning in the streets, there was none in the Church. On∣ly hores wife might complaine, why shee should doe Penance for offending lightly against onely the seventh Commandement; and king Richard doe none for offending heavily against all the ten; but that perhaps he had gotten some good fel∣low to be his Confessour. Workes of Piety done by him. AS bad as this King was, yet some good workes he did: he founded a Colledge at Middleham beyond Yorke; and a Collegiate Chauntry in London, neere unto the Tower, called our Lady of Barking: He endowed the Queens Colledge in Cam∣ge, with five hundred Marks of yeerly revenue; and disforested the great field of Whitchwood, which king Edward his brother had inclosed for Deere. Of Casualties happening in his time. IN his second year, at the time when the Duke of Buckingham meant to passe with his Army over Severn; so great an inundation was of waer, that men were drowned in their beds, houses were overturned, children were carried about the fields swimming in Cradles, beasts were drowned on hills: which rage of water con∣tied ten dayes; and is to this day in the Countries thereabout, called the great water, or the Duke of Buckingham water. Of his wife and issue. HEE marryed Anne the second Daughter of Richard Nevill the great Earle of Warwicke, being the widdow of Edward Prince of Wales, the Sonne of king Hey the sixth: she lived his Wife to the last yeer of his reigne; and then to make way for another, was brought to her end, and layd a rest in the Abbey of Westmin∣ster: by her he had onely one Sonne, born at Middleham neer Richmond in the Coun∣ty of Yorke; at foure yeers old, created Earle of Salisbury by his Uncle king Edward the fourth; at ten yeers old, created Prince of Wales by his Father king Richard, but dyed soon after. Of his Personage and Conditions. THere never was in any man a greater uniformity of Body and Minde then was in him; both of them equally deformed. Of Body he was but low, crooke-backt, hook-shouldred, splay-footed, and goggle-eyed, his face little and round, his complexion swarsie, his left arm from his birth dry and withered: born a monster in nature, with all his teeth, with haire on his head, and nailes on his fingers and toes. And just such were the quaties of his minde: One quality he had in ordinary, which was, to look fawngly when he plotted, sternly when he executed. Those vices which in other men are Passions, in him were Habits: and his cruelty was not upon occasion, but naturall. If at any time he shewed any virtue, it was but pre∣tence; the truth of his minde was onely lying and falsehood. He was full of cou∣rage and yet not valiant; valour consisting not only in doing, but as well in suffer∣ing, which he could not abide. He was politick and yet not wise, Policie looking but to the middle, wisdome to the end: which he did, and did not. And it was not so much ambition that made him desire the Crown, as cruelty, that it might be in his power to kill at his pleasure: and to say the truth, he was scarce of the num∣ber of men who consist of flesh and blood, being nothing but blood. One Miracle
wee may say hee did; which was, that he made the truth of History to exceed the fiction of Poetry, being a greater Harpy than those that were feigned. He would faine have been accounted a good King, but for his life he could not be a good Man; and it is an impossible thing to be one without the other. He left no isue behinde him: and it had been pitty he should, at least in his own Image; One such Monster was enough for many Ages. Of his Death and Buriall. BEing slaine in the Battell at Bosworth, as before is related; his body was left naked and desoyled to the very skin, not so much as a cout left about him to cover his privy parts: and taken up, was trussed behinde a Pursuivant at Armes, one Blach Senglyer or White-boare; his head and armes hanging on one side of the horse, and his leggs on the other; and all besprinkled with mire and dirt, he was brought to the Gray-Friers Church within the Towne of Leicester, and there for some time lay a miserable spectacle; and afterward, with small Funerall-pompe, was there interred. But after this, King Hery the Seventh caused a Tombe to be made, and set up over the place where he was buried, with a picture of Alablaster representing his person; which at the suppression of that Monastery was utterly defaced: Since when, his Grave overgrowne with nettles and weeds, is not to be found; onely the Stone∣chest wherein his Corps lay, is now made a drinking-trough for horses, at a common Inne in Leicester, and reteineth the onely memory of this Monarchs greatnes. But his body (as is reported) was caried out of the City, and contemptuously bestowed under the end of Bow-bridge, which giveth passage over a branch of Stowre, upon the West side of the Towne. Upon this bridge (the like report runneth) stood a stone of some heigth; against which king Richard, as hee passed owards Bosworth, by chance strook his spurre: and against the same stone, as he was brought back, hang∣ing by the horse side, his head was dashed and broken; as a Wise-woman (forsooth) had fore-told; who before his going to battell, being asked of his successe, said, that where his spurre strooke, his head should be broken. But these are but Repo He had lived seven and thirty yeeres, Reigned two, and two moneths. Of men of Note in his time. OF men of Note for wickednesse and villany, enough have been mentioned i the body of the Story: and for men of Valour and Learning, they will fitte be placed in a better Kings Reigne.
THE REIGNE OF KING HENRY THE SEVENTH. HENRY Earle of Richmond, borne in Pembrooke-Castle, sonne to Edmund Earle of Richmond, by his wife Margaret, sole daughter of Iohn Duke of Somerset, which Iohn was sonne of Iohn Earle of Somerset, sonne of Iohn of Gaunt Duke of Lancaster, by his third wife Katherine Swinford; and by this descent, Heire of the House of Lancaster: having wonne the Battell at Bosworth, against King Richard; is by publick acclamations saluted King of England, on the 22 day of August, in the yeere 1485. and this was his first Title. And now to take away a Root of danger; before his departure from Leicester, he sent Sir Robert Willougby to the Castle of Sheriffehaton in the County of Yorke, for Edward Planta∣geet Earle of Warwick, sonne and heire to George Duke of Clarence, being then of the age of fifteen yeeres, whom King Richard had there kept a prisoner all his time; who was thence conveyed to London, and shut up in the Tower to be kept in safe custodie. In the same Castle also, King Richard had left residing the Lady Elizabeth eldest daughter to King Edward the Fourth: and her now King Henry appoints honorably attended to be brought up to London, and to be delivered to the Queene her mother. This done, he tooke his journey towards London; where at his ap∣proaching neere the City, Thomas Hill the Major, Thomas Brittaine and Richard Chester Sheriffs, with other principall Citizens, met him at Shore-ditch, and in great state brought him to the Cathedrall Church of St. Paul, where he offered three Stan∣dards: in the one was the Image of St. George; in another was a red fiery Dragon, beaten upon white and greene Sarcenet; in the third was painted a dun Cow, upon yellow Tarterne. After Prayers said, he departed to the Bishops Palace, and there sojourned a season: And in the time of his stay here, he advised with his Councell, and appointed a day for solemnizing his mariage with the Lady Elizabeth: before which time notwithstanding, he went by water to Westminster, and was there with great solemnity Anointed and Crowned King of England, by the whole consent as well of the Commons as of the Nobility, by the name of Henry the Se∣venth, on the thirtieth day of October, in the yeere 1485: and this was his second Title. And even this was revealed to Cadwalloder last King of the Britaines, seven udred ninety and seven yeeres past; That his off-spring should Raigne and bae Dominion in this Realme againe.
On the seventeenth day of November following, he called his High Court of Par∣liament; where, at the first sitting, two scruples appeaed: One concerning te Burgesses; for that many had been returned Burgesses and knights of Shires, who by a Parliament in king Richards time, stood Attainted still: and it was thought in∣conguous, for men to make Law, who were themselves out-lawed: For remedy whereof, an Act was presently passed for their restoring; and then they were ad∣mitted to sit in the House. The other concerning the King himselfe, who had been Attainted by king Richard: but for this, It was resolvd by all the Judges in the Chquer Chamber, that the possession of the Crowne takes away all defects; yet for Honours sake, all Records of hi Attainder were taken off the File. And so these scruples thus removed, the Parliament bga; wherein were Attainted, first Richard late Duke of Glocester, calling himselfe Richard the Third: Then, his Assistants at the Battell of Bosworth: Iohn late Duke of Norfolk, Thomas Earle of Surrey, Francis Viscount Lovell, Walter Devereux late Lord Ferrers, Iohn Lord Zouch, Rober Ha∣rington, Richard Chaleto Richar Ratliffe William Berley of Weley, Robert Middle∣ton, Iames Haringto obert Brcenby, Tomas Pilkington, Waler Hoton, Willi∣am Catesby, Roger Wke, William Sapcoe, Humfry Stafford, William Clerke of Wen∣lock, Geoffry St. Germaine, Richard Watkins, Herauld at Armes, Richard Revell, Tho∣mas Puler, Iohn Welsh, Iohn Kenall lte Secretary to the late king Richard, Iohn Buck, Andrew Rat, and William Brampton of Burford. But notwithstanding this Attainder, divers of the persons aforesaid, were afterwards not only by King Heny pardoned, but restored also to their lands and livings. As likewise he caused Pro∣clamation to be made, that whosoever would submit themselves, and take Oath to be true subjects, should have their Pardon: whereupon many came out of Sanctu∣aries and other places; who submitting themselves, were received to mercy. And now King Henry conidering that aena & Praemio Respublica contineuy; after Punishing for Offence, he proceeds to Rewarding for Service: and first, Iasper Earle of Pembrooke his Unkle, he created Duke of Bedford: Thomas Lord Stanley he created Earle of Darb: the Lord Chendow of Britaine, his speciall friend, he made Earle of Bathe: Sir Giles Daubeny was made Lord Dawbeney: Sir Robert Willoughby was made Lord Brooke: and Edward Stafford eldest sonne to Henry late Duke of Buckingham, he restored to his Dignity and Possessions. Besides, in this Parliament, an Act was made, for seing the Crowne upon the person of king Henry and the heires of his Body successively for ever. And then with all speed he sent and redeemed the Marquesse Dorset, and Sir Iohn Bourchier, whom he had left Hostages in France for money: and called home Morton Bishop of Ely, and Richard Fox; making Morton Archbishop of Canterbury, and Fox Lord Keeper of the Privy Sole, and Bishop of Winchester. Besides these, he made also of his Privy Counsell, Iasper Duke of Bedford, Iohn Earle of Oxford, Thomas Stanley Earle of Darby, Iohn Bishop of Ely, Sir William Stanley Lord Chamberlaine of his Houshold; Sir Robert Willoughby Lord Brooke, Lord Steward of his Houshold; Giles Lord Dawbeny; Iohn Lord Dynm, after made Lord Treasurer of England; Sir Reginold Bray, Sir Iohn Cheyny, Sir Richard Guildford, Sir Richard Tunstall, Sir Richard Edgecombe, Sir Thomas Lovell, Sir Edmund Pynings, Sir Iohn Risley, with some other. These things thus done: as well in performance of his Oath, as to make his Crown sit the surer on his head; on the eighteenth day of Ianuary, he proceeded to the solemnizing his marriage with the Lady Elizabeth; which gave him a third title: And indeed this conjunction made a wreath of three so indissoluble, that no age since hath ever questioned it: and it is fixt upon a Tree planted so happily by the waters side, and hath at this day so many flourishing branches, that there is good hope it will continue as long as the world continues. And now whether King Henry doubted any suddaine attempt upon his person, or whether he did it to follow the example of France: in the very beginning of his reigne, he ordained a band of tall personable men to be attending upon him, which was called the Kings guard; which no King before, and all Kings since, have alwaies used: But though he provided a guard for defence of his own body; yet for the bo∣d
of his people he could provide none; for at this time a sicknesse (of the symp∣e called the sweating sicknesse) seized so violently upon them, that within a ort time many thousands perished; particularly in London, two Majors successive∣y and six Aldermen within eight dayes dyed: and for this: sicknesse no Physick af∣fded any cure; till at last, this remedy was found: if a man were taken with the sweat in the day time, that then he should presently lye downe in his cloathes, and so lye still the whole foure and twenty houres: if he were taken in the night, then e should not rise out of his bed for the space of foure and twenty houres; not pro∣voking sweat, nor yet eating or drinking at all, at least but very moderately. In  sicknes there was one good circumstance; that though it were violent, yet it lasted not long: for beginning about the one and twentieth of September, it cleered p before the end of October following. And now all things being set in good order in the South parts there ariseth a little some in the North, but was soon dispersed. For King Henry making a journey ino the North parts, to shew himselfe there where he had not yet been; and where  respect to King Richard might have left some opposites: at his comming to Licolne was certified that the Lord Lovell and Humfry Stafford were gone out of Snctuary in Colchester; but whither, no man knew. The King therefore not much regarding it, went forward to York; and being come thither, it was then plainly told him, that the Lord Lovell with a strong power was at hand, and would presently in∣vade the City. This made the King in a great streight; for neither had he any Army rdy; no if he had men, had he any weapons or Munition or them. Yet in this streight, he commanded the Duke of Bedford with three thousand men to et out a∣gnst him, but so ill armed, that their armours for the most part were but of tanned lther; who being come neere the Campe of the Rebels, caused Proclamation to be made, that whosoever would submit themselves as loyall Subjects, should have their Pardons, and be received into grace: which Proclamation so prevailed, that i made the Lord Lovell secretly in the night to flye away; and then the Army left without a head, submitted themselves to the Kings mercy. The Lord Lovell fled into Lancashire; and there for a time lurked with Sir Thomas Broughton, a man powerfull in those parts. Humfry Stafford took Sanctuary in a village called Culnhm two miles from Abington: but the Sanctuary being judged by the Justices of the Kings Bench, to be no lawfull defence for Traytors; he was taken from thence by force, and convayed to the Tower, afterward to Tyburne, and there hanged. His brother Thomas was pardoed, because it was thought, he was drawn in by his bro∣ther Humfry. In this yeere, Iohn Persivall the Major of London's Carver, waiting at his Table, was chosen one of the Sheriffs of London, only by Sir Iohn Collet's, then Major, drink∣ing to him in a cup of Wine, (as the custome is, to drinke to him whom he lit to name Sheriffe) and forthwith the said Persivall sate downe at the Majors Table, nd covered his head, and was afterward Major himselfe. At this time a mean instrument attemped a great worke; by which we may see, how farre imagination may out-goe reason: One Richard Symond a Priest, a man of base birth though some learning; had a scholler of baser birth, the Sonne of a Shoe∣maker, (some say a Baker) named Lambert Symnell; but of a pregnant wit, and comely personage: Him he gives out to be Edward Earle of Warwicke, lately (as was sayd) escaped out of prison; Both of them being of like yeers and stature: with this Scholler of his, he sailes into Ireland; and so sets forth the matter: that not on∣ly the Lord Thomas Fitz-Gerard Earle of Kildare, and Deputy of Ireland; but many other of the Nobilty gave credit to his words; and as those that affected the house of Yorke, were ready to take his part; and even already saluted the young Symnell King. Withall they sent into Flanders to the Lady Margaret, sister to the late King Edward, and widdow of harles Duke of Burgoigne, requiring ayde and assistance from her. This Lady being of the house of Yorke, bore an inward grudge aginst King Henry, being of the house of Lancaster; and herefore though she well under∣stood it was but a coloured matter, yet was willing to take advantage of it: and
thereupon promised her assistance. King Henry being advertised of these things, advised with his Counsell; by whom it was agreed, that two things presently should be doe. First, to grant  Pardon to any that would submit themselves, for any offence whatsoever, though it were for High Treason; the next, that the Earle of Warwicke should be openly shewed abroad in the City, and other publike places; whereby, the report spread abroad of his being in Irelnd, might appeare plainly to be false. Withall, the Queen Elizabeth, widdow of King Edward the fourth, and Mother to the present Queen, was adjudged to forfeit all her Lands and Possessions, and to live confined in the Abbey of Bermondsey in Southwarke; where in grea pen∣sivenes, within a few yeers she died. But for what cause this severity was used a∣gainst this Queen, is not altogether certaine: To say, (as was commonly said) that it was for rendring her selfe and her daughters into the hands of king Richrd, were manifest injustice, to punish her for doing a thing out of feare, which else she should have been compelled to doe by force: and to say (as some also have said) that it was for giving aide underhand to Perki, were a manifest unlikelihood, tha she should aide a Counterfeit against her own Sonne in Law: we must therefore content our selves with knowing the bare colourable pretext, and leave the true reason as a secret of State. But this shewing abroad of the true Earle of Warwicke, though it satisfied some, yet not all: for some gave out that it was but a trick of the King, and not the true Warwicke. At least the Earle of Lincolne, sonne to Iohn de l Poole Duke of Suffolke, and Elizabeth sister to king Edward the fourth, would not omit to take the advantage, though he knew that Symnell was but a Counterfeit. And thereupon, assoone as he Parliament was dissolved, he fled secretly into Fln∣ders, to his Aunt the Lady Margaret Dtchesse of Burgoigne; between whom it was concluded, that he and the Lord Lvell should goe into Ireland, and there attend upon the Counterfeit Warwicke, and honour him as king and with the power of the Irishmen bring him into England: but it was concluded withall, that if their actions succeeded then the Counterfei Warwicke should be deposed, and the true be delivered out of prison, and anoynted King. And to this purpose, the Earle of Lincol, by the aide of the Lady Margaret, had gotten together two thousand Almaines, with one Martin Swart a valiant and expert Captaine to be their leader. With this power, the Earle sayled into Ireland, and at the City of Dublin, caused young Lambert the Counterfeit Warwicke, in most solemne manner, first to be Proclaimed, and after to be Crowned king of Egland: and then with a great number of beggerly and unar∣med Irishmen, under the Conduct of the Lord Thomas Gerardine Earle of Kildre, they sayled into England, and landed at a place called the Pile of Fowdray, not farre from Lancaster; hoping there by the meanes of Sir Thomas Broughton, a powerfull man in that Country, to have their Army both furnished and increased. King Henry hearing that the Earle of Lincolne was landed at Lancaster, assembled a great Army, Conducted by the Duke of Bedford, and the Earle of Oxford; and with these he marched to Nottingham, and there by a little wood called Bowres, he pitched his field; whither there came unto him, the Lord George Talbot Earle of Shrewsbury, he Lord Strange, Sir Iohn Cheyney, and divers other Knights and Gentlemen. In which mean time, the Earle of Lincolne being entred into Yorkeshire, passed quietly on his journy, without doing spoile or hurt unto any; trusting thereby to have won the people to come to his aide: but when he perceived few or none to resort unto him, he then determined to venture a battell with the Army he had already; and thereupon tooke his way from Yorke to Newarke upon Trent. King Henry under∣standing which way he took, came the night before the battell to Newarke; and go∣ing three miles further, neer to a little Village called Stoke, there waited the approach of the Earle of Lincolne; So the next day they joyned battell; where after a long fight, of at the least three houres; though the Almaines, and specially their Captaine Martin Swart behaved themselves most valiantly; yet their Irsh, being in a manner but naked men, were at last overthrown, foure thousand slaine, and the rest put o flght; but not one of their Capaines; for the Earle of Lincolne, the Lord Lvell, Sir Thomas Broughton, Martin Swart, and the Lord Gerardine were all found dead in the
very place where they had stood fighting; that though they lost the battell, yet they wonne the reputation of hardy and stout souldiers. Onely of the Lord Lovell, some report, that attempting to save himselfe by flight; in passing over the river of Trent, was drowned. On the kings part, though some were slaine, yet not any mn of note. This battell was fought on a Saturday (observed as alwayes fortunate to king Henry) being the sixteenth of Iune, in the second year of king Henries reigne. The young Lambert, and his Master Simond the Priest, were both taken; and both had their lives saved: Lambert, because but a Childe; Smond, becuse a Priest: yet Symod was kept in prison, Lambert was taken into the kings kitchin, to turn the spit in the turne of his fortune, and at last made one of the kings Faukners. In the beginning of his third yeer, king Henry having been in Yorkeshire, to settle the mndes of that people: about the midst of August, came to Newcastle upon Tine, and from thence sent Ambassadours into Scotland, Richard Fox lately before made Bishop of Exceter, and Sir Richard Edgecombe Comptroller of his House, to conclude a Peace or Truce with Iames king of Scots: A Peace, by reason of the peoples back∣wardnes, could not be obtained: but a Truce was concluded for the term of seven yeers; with a promise from the king, that it should be renued before the first seven yeers should be expired. At this time, Ambassadours came from the king of France to king Henry; who declared, that their Master king Charles was now at warre with Francis Duke of Bri∣taie, for that he succoured the Duke of Orleance and other Rebels against the Realme of France; and therefore requested, that for the old familiarity that had been between them, he would either aist him, or not assist the Duke, but stand Neter. King Hery answered, that having received courteies from them both, he would doe his uttermost endeavour to make them friends: and to that end, as soon as the French Ambassadours were departed, he sent Christopher Vrswick his Chaplain over into France; who should first goe to the French king, and after to the Duke of Britaine, to mediate a Peace between them. In the time of Vrswicks Ambassage, king Henry caused his Wife the Lady Eliza∣beth to be Crowned Queen, on Sait Katherines day in November, with all solemni∣ty; and at the same time delivered the Lord Thomas Marquesse Dorset out of the Tower, and received him againe into his former favour. Vrswick travelled between the two Princes, to procure a Peace; but they, though making a shew to incline to Peace, yet prepared for warre, and offers on neither side would be accepted. In which time, Edward Lord Woodile Uncle to the Queen, made suite to the king, for leave to goe over with a power of men, in aide of the Duke of Britaine; which sue, though the king denied, yet the Lord Woodvile would venture it; and with a power of oure hundred able men, got secretly over, and joyned with the Britaines against the French. This the French king took ill at king Henries hand; but being informed that it was against the kings will, he seemed satified: and a Peace was concluded between Fre and England, to endure for twelve months. But in conclusion, king Henry finding that the French king dealt not rally with him, but only held him on with pretences he called his high Court of Parliamen, requiring their advice what was fit to be done: where it was conuded, that the Duke of Britaine should be aided; and to that end great ummes of money were by Parliament granted. This Determination of the Parliament, king Henry signifies to the French king, hoping, it would have wrought him to some terms of Peace But the king of France little regarding it, proceeded on in his violent coures against the Britaines; so as at last, on he eight and twentieth day of Iuly, the Britaines gave battell to the French, neer to a Town called ; having ap∣parelled seventeen hundred of the Britai, in Co with ed rosse after the Eng∣lish fashion, to make the Frenchmen believe hey were all English, although in eed they had no more English than the foure hundred of the Lord Woodvile. But no∣withstanding this device, the Victory fell to the French; so that all the Englishmen almost were slaine, with the Lord Woodvile himselfe; besides six thousand Britaines The Duke of Orleance and the Prince of Orange, who were there on the Britains
part, were taken Prisoners. The French lost twelve hundred men; and amongst other that valiant Italian Captaine Iames Glet. This news being brought into England, caused king Hy to make haste to send forth his Army: and thereupon, the Lord Brooke, with Sir Iohn Cheyny, Sir Iohn Middleton, Sir Ralph Hilton, Sir Richard Corbet, Sir Thomas Leighton, Sir Richard Lacon, & Sir Edmund Corall, are sent over with all speed into Britaine; having with them eight thousand men, to aide the Duke of Britaine against the French. But while this warre was thus set forward, the Duke of Britaine died; leaving in effect, one only Daughter, the Lady Ae (for the other being the younger, died soon after) and then the chiefe Rulers of Britaine falling at dissention amongst themselves, lit∣tle regarded the defence of the Country: whereupon the English returned home, within five moneths after their setting forth: and the French king getting the up∣per hand of the Britaines, and marying the Lady Anne sole daughter of the Duke of Britaine, incorporated that Dutchy to the Crown of France. In the last Parliament, a Subsidie was granted, for the furnishing out an Army into Britaine; and it was agreed, that every man should be taxed after the rate of his substance, to pay the tenth penny of his goods: which Taxe the most part of Yorkeshire and the Bishoprick of Durh refused to pay: whereof the Collectours complained to Hery E. of Northumberland, President of the North parts. The E. sig∣nifies it to the King; and the K. commands him to levy the same, by distresse or other∣wise (without sparing of any) as he should think most meet. The rude multitude, hea∣ring of this Command from the King, with great violence set upon the Earle, by the exciting of a simple fellow named Iohn a Chamber; and alledging all the fault to be in the Earle, as chiefe authour of the Taxe; they cruelly murthered both him and divers of his houshold servants. And to make good their seditious fact, they assem∣bled a great number, and made one Sir Iohn Egremond their Captaine: Declaring, that in defence of their liberties, they would bid the King battell. In this bravery they stood, as long as none opposed them: but when Thomas Earle of Surry appea∣red with an Army, though they skirmished a while, yet they were soon discomfi∣ted, and their Ring-leader Iohn a Chamber was taken, and at Yorke on a Gibbet set upon a square paire of Gallows, like an arch Traytour was hanged, and many of his Complices on a lower Gallows; the innocent people for the most part Pardoned. But Sir Iohn Egremond fled into Flanders, to the Lady Margaret Dutchesse of Bur∣gundie; the common and sure refuge for all Rebels against King Henry. After this, the king appointed Sir Richard Tustll to gather the Subsidie, and would not spare the paiment of a penny. This year, notwithstanding this Taxe, the king borrowed of every Alderman of London two hundred pounds, and of the Chamber nine thou∣sand eighty two pounds seventeen shillings and foure pence, which was paid again at the time with great thankfulnesse; which he did at a time he needed no, to the end perhaps he might doe it another time, when he needed. At this time, Iames the third, king of Scotland, having by some errors of Govern∣ment incurred the hatred of his Nobility and people; laboured with king Henry, as also with the Pope, and the king of France, to make an Accord between him and his people, who had compelled Prince Iames his Sonne, to be the Titular head of those Armes which they assumed against him. The kings accordingly interposed their mediations by Ambassadours; but could receive no other but this outragious answer, That there was no talking of Peace, unlesse he would resigne his Crowne. Which answer the kings protested against, declaring by their Ambassadors, that they thought it a common injury done to themselves, and that the Example was not suffer∣able, for Subjects to lift their hands against their Soveraigne. Hereupon it came to a Battell, at Bnnocks-borne by Strivelin: where king Iames, rashly beginning the fight, before his whole Forces were come, was (notwithstanding the contrary com∣mandement of the Prince his sonne) slaine in the Mill of that field, whither he fled, after the Battell ended. About this time, a Difference fell out which grew to a Warre, between the Em∣perour Frederick, and some Townes of his in Flanders, especially Gaunt and Bruges:
In this warre, the Lord Ravenstein a principall person about Maximilian, not onely forsooke the Emperour and his sonne Maximilian his Lord, (corrupted as was thought from France) but made himselfe head of the popular party, seizing upon the Towns of Ipre and Sluce: and not this onely, but forthwith sent to the Lord de Cordes Governour for the French king in Picardie, to ayde him against some Towns in Flanders: To which the Lord de Cordes, willing of any occasion to set foot in Flanders, was easily drawne. But king Henry not liking to have the French so neere his English pale, sent over the Lord Morley with a thousand men, who should joyne with the L. Dawbeney then Deputy of Callice, to resist them. Amongst other acts by them performed, this was chiefe; That the Lord Dawbeney, with the Lord Morley, Sir Iames Tyrrell Captaine of Guisns, Sir Henry Willoughby, Sir Gilbert Talbot, and Sir Humfry Talbot Marshall of Callice, and others to the number of two thousand, issued secretly one night out of Callice, and came to Newport, and from thence to Dixe; where the Lord Dawbeney commanded all men to send back their horss: whch the Lord Morley onely refusing to doe, was cause that he onely of all the Cap∣taines was sline with a Gun: for the rest, after their arrowes discharged, fell pro∣strate to the ground; by which meanes the Enemies Ordnance overshot them, klling onely the Lord Morley that was on horse-back. Here they slew of the Enemy, to the number of eight thousand; of the English part was slaine the Lord Morley, and not above a hundred more. This Victory so enriched the English, that they who went forth in cloath, came home in silke; and they who went out on foot, returned back on horse-back. Upon this Defeat, the Lord de Cordes lying at Ypre with twenty thousand men, and thinking to be revenged, besieged the Town of Newport; and so strongly assaulted it, that one day his men entred, and set up his Banner upon a Tower of the Towne: when suddenly a Barke arriving with onely fourescore resh English archers, so terrified them, thinking their number to be farre greater, that the French were glad to leave their Banner behinde them, and give over the assault; and the night following, the Lord de Cordes (who so much longed for Callice, that he would commonly say, he could be content to lie seven yeeres in Hell, so that Callice were in the possssion of the French) brake up his siege, and returned to Helding with as much shame, as the English to Callice with honour. A little before this tme, Francis Duke of Britaine dying, left onely one daughter, the Lady Anne, affianced to Maximilian King of the Romans; and in so solemne a manner, that she taking upon her to be the Bride, and being laid in her bed, was contented to permit Maximilians Deputy, in presence of many Noble witnesses, as well men as women, to put his legge, stript naked to the knee, between the spousall sheets; accounting that Ceremony to amount to a Consummation. The King of France likewise had been contracted to the Lady Margaret daughter to the foresaid Maximilian, and had received her to that end: Yet all this notwithstanding, out of a violent desire to joyne the Dutchy of Britaine to the Crowne of Frce, he disanulled and made void both the Contracts. But to the end he might doe it with∣out opposition of the King of England, he sent Ambassadors, the Lord Francis of Lzemburg, Charles Marignane, and Robert Gaguine, to King Henry; partly to con∣clude a Peace, but chiefly to procure king Heries good will to make voyd the foresaid contracts: to which though king Henry was not willing to give consent, yet he consented willingly to have a Treaty for Peace: and to that end, sent over Thoas Earle of Ormond, and Thomas Goldenston Prior of Christs Church in Canter∣bury, to the French King about it. But during this Treaty, and before conditions of Peace could be agreed on, the French King had gotten into his possssion the Lady Anne of Britaine, and solemnly maried her. Which under-hand dealing so incensed King Henry, that he presently called his High Court of Parliament, and there de∣clared the just cause he had of War with France, desiring their Benevolence towards the charge thereof; which was as readily granted as desired, and great summes of money were soon collected. In the yeere 1491, being the sixth yeere of the Kings Reigne, on the sixth of April, the Nobility of the Realme assembled in the Cathedrall Church of St. Paul
in London; where also was the Major and Aldermen, and principall Citizens in their liveries: to whom D. Morton Lord Chancellour made an Oration; declaring from his owne letters, that the King of Spaine had wonne the great and rich City and Country of Granado from the Moores, which had been in their possession above seven hundred yeeres: and having in places of their superstition, built Churches to the honour of Christ, was thereupon intituled the Catholick King. For joy whereof, Te Dem was sung with great solemnity. In the moneth of May was holden a solemne Justing, at the kings Palace of Sheee, now called Richmond, which continued the space of a moneth; sometimes within the Palace, and sometimes without, upon the green before the gate; in which Justs, Sir Iames Parker running against a Gentleman named Hugh Vaughan, by reason of a faulty Helmet, was strucken into the mouth at the first course; so that his tongue was borne to the hinder part of his head, in such sort that he dyed presently upon the place. And now Maximilian having received back his daughter from the king of France, was so displeased, that he presently sent an Ambassadour, one Iames Contibald to king Henry, requiring him to take his part in a warre against the French king; towards which he promised to provide ten thousand men, with pay for two years: king Henry consented to it; and having povided himselfe of a puissant Army, on the sixth day of October, sayled to Callice; but sending his Almoner Christopher rswike, and Sir Iohn Resley to Maximilian, requiring his promised forces; they found him altoge∣ther unprovided of either men or money: which brought king Henry into a great streight what he should doe: To proceede in the warre with his own forces alone, would be ull of hazard; To return home without doing any thing, would bring an imputation upon him amongst his Subjects; as though he had used the pretence of war, but as a trick to get money: at last, he resolved to doe something; and thereupon, went and besieged Boloigne, having in his Army of chiefe Lords, Iasper Duke of Bedford, his Lieutenant Generall, Thomas Marquesse Dorset, the Earles of Arundell, Oxford, Suffolke, Shrewsbury, Darby, Ket, Devonshire and Ormond, sundry Barons, as Dwbeney, Aburgayny, De la Ware, Zouch, Hastings, Cobham and others. During his siege of Boloigne, (in which there were but few slaine, and no man of note, but Sir Iohn Savage, who riding to take view at what place the town might best be assaulted, was set upon by certaine French men, and by them slaine) King Henry was secretly dealt with by the Lord Cordes Governour of Heynault, on the king of France's behalf, to accept of certaine conditions of Peace. Who thereupon sent Richard Fox Bi¦shop of Exceter, and Giles Lord Dawbeney to conclude them; which amongst other Articles were, That king Henry without quitting his claime to France, should for a Peace to continue during the two kings lives, receive in present of Charles king of France, for his charges in that warre, seven hundred forty and five thousand Doc∣kets, which in English money amounts to one hundred eighty six thousand two hundred and fifty pounds; and five and twenty thousand crowns yeerly, towards the expenses he had been at before in aiding the Britaines; which (by the English, called Tribute) was duly paid, during all the Kings Reigne, and also to king Hen∣ry his Sonne afterward, longer then it could continue upon any computation of charges. There were also assigned by the French king unto all king Henries prin∣cipall Counsellours, great pensions, besides rich gifts for the present. Which whe∣ther the king did permit, to save his own purse from Rewards, or to communicate the envy of a businesse that was displeasing to his people, was diversly interpreted: for certainly, the King had no great fancy to own this Peace; and therefore a little before it was concluded, he had underhand procured some of his best Captaines and Men of Warre, to advise him to a Peace under their hands, in an earnest manner, in the nature of a Supplication, that he might have it shew for justifying himselfe, and to give some allay to the discontentments of many, who had sold and engaged their Estates, upon the hopes of the warre. After the Peace thus concluded, he went to Callice, where he stayed some time, and the seventeenth of December following came to Westminster, where he kept his Christmasse.
Soon after his return, he elected into the order of the Garter, Alphosus Duke of Calabri, Sonne and Heire to Ferdinand King of Naples: to whom Christopher Vrs∣wicke the kings Almoner, was sent to Naples to carry it; which as soon as Alphonsus had received, he apparelled himselfe presently in the Habit, before a great assembly, indeed to shew what favour he was in with the king of England. There had been disturbance in the Realme before, by a Counterfeit Sonne of the Duke of Clarence; but that device had two maine imperfections: One, that the true Sonne of the Duke was forh-comming, and to be shewed openly for convincing the false; the other, that though the counterfeit had been the true, yet he could have laid no claim to the Crown, as long as any Daughters of King Edward the fourth were living: Now therefore a device is found, by which those imperfections were both of them amended: for now a Counterfeit was set on foot, who pretended to be Richard the younger Sonne of king Edward the fourth; so that neither any other could be produced to convince him of being false, nor any Daughters of King Ed∣ward could hinder his Right for claiming the Crown. This device was first forged by Margaret Dutchesse of Burgundie; a woman that could never be quiet in her minde, as long as king Henry was quiet in his kingdome; and by this device she ho∣ped, if not to put him cleane out of his seat, yet foulely at least to disturbe him in it; and this was the purpose of the Plt: but by what instrument it was acted, by what abetours fomented, and what issue the device had, are worhy all to be related. The Dutchesse having formerly given out, that Richard the younger Sonne of king Edward, was not murthred, but in compassion spared, and sent secretly a way to seek his fortune; and having after long search gotten at last a fit Boy to personate a Prince; keeps him seretly a good time with her; in which time she so throughly in∣structed him in all Circumstances, and he afterward put them so gracefully in pra∣ctice, that even those who had seen and known the young Prince while he lived, could hardly perceive but that this was he. It is true, though he were not King Edwards Sonne, yet he was his Godsonne; and might perhaps have in him some base blood of the house of Yorke. This Perkin Warbeck, (for so was the youths name, called Perkin, as a diminutive of Peter) when he so perfectly had learned his lesson, that he was fit to come upon the Stage; she sent him into Portingall, that comming from a strange Country, it might be thought, he had been driven to wander from one Country to another, for safeguard of his life, at least that she of all other might not be suspected. From Portingal she caused him to passe into Ireland, where the house of Yorke was specially respected, in regard of the great love which Richard Duke of Yorke, Father of King Edward the fourth, had wonne amongst them: by reason whereof, this Perkin as esteemed his Grand-childe, was well entertained by them, and held in great estimation. He had not been long in Ireland, when the French king sent for him; for being at that time at variance with King Henry, hee thought he might make good use of Perkin, as a pretender against King Henry for the Crown. Perkin being come to Paris, was entertained in a Princely fashion; and for his more honour, had a guard assigned him, over which the Lord Congreshall was Captaine. He had not been long at Paris, when there resorted to him Sir George Nevill bastard, Sir Iohn Taylour, Richard Robinson, and about a hundred other English: Amongst the rest, one Stephen Fryon, that had been King Henries Secre∣tary for the French Tongue; but discontented, fled, and became a chiefe Instrument in all Perkins proceedings. But this float of Perkins lasted not long; for as soon as Peace was concluded between the two Kings; the King of France dismissed Perkin and would keep him no longer. Then passed he secretly to his first foundresse, the Lady Margaret; who at his first comming, made a shew of suspecting him to be a Counterfeit. But causing him in great assemblies to be brought before her, as though she had never seen him before; and finding him to answer directly to all questions she put unto him: she openly professed, that she was now satisfied, and thought him verily to be her true Nephew; and thereupon assigned a gurd of thir∣y persons, cloathed in Murrey and Blew, and calld him the White Rose of England. Upon report hereof, many in England were inclined to take his part; and Sir Robert
Clifford and Robert Bareley were sent into Flanders, to acquaint the Dutchesse with the peoples respect to Perkin: and indeed Sir Robert Clifford, upon sight and confe∣rence with him, wrote letters into England, wherein he affirmed, that he knew him to be true Sonne of king Edward, by his face, and other Lineaments of his body. King Henry hearing of these things, sent certaine espials into Flanders, that should feigne themselves to have fled to Perkin; and by that means the better search out who were of the Conspiracy with him. Whose name being returned to the King, he caused them o be apprehended and brought to his Presence; the chiefe of whom were Iohn Rtcliffe Lord Fitzwater, Sir Simon Montford, and Sir Thomas Thy knights, William Dawbeney, Robert Ratcliffe, Thomas Cressenor, and Thomas Astwod, also certaine Priests, as William Richford D. of Divinity, Thomas Boyns, D. William Sutton, William Worseley Dean of Pauls, Robert Layborne, and Richard Lesley, of whom, some hearing of it, fled to Sanctuary, ohers were taken and condemed, as Sir Simon Montford, Robert Ratcliffe, and William Dawbeney, who were all three beheded. The Lord Fitzwater pardoned of life, was conveyed to Calice, and there laid in hold; where seeking to make escape by corrupting his Keeper, hee lost his head. Shortly after, Sir Robert Clifford returning out o Flanders (not as some think, sent a spye from the beginning; but rather now at last either discerning the fraude, or wo by rewards) and submitted himselfe to the kings mercy: discovering unto him, as farre as he knew, all that were either open or secret abettours of the Conspiracy; a∣mongst whom he accused Sir William Stanley Lord Chamberlaine: his accusation was this that in Conference between them, Sir William had said, that if he certain∣ly knew; that the young man named Perkin were the Sonne of king Edward the fourth, he would never fight nor beare Armes against him. These words being considered of, by the Judges, seemed to expresse a tickle hold of Loyalty; for who could tell how soon he might be perswaded that he knew it? and upon the mat∣ter, was to be Loyall to king Henry, but for want of better; and withall it strook up∣on a string which had alwaies sounded harsh in king Henries ears, as preferring the Title of Yorke before that of Lancaster. Sir William being hereupon ar∣raigned; whether trusting to the greatnesse of his favours, or the smalnes of his fault, denied little of that wherewith he was charged, and upon confession was adjudged to dye; and accordingly on the sixteenth day of February was brought to the Tower-hill, and there beheaded: after whose death, Giles Lord Dawbeny was made L. hamberlaine. This was that Sir William Stanley, who came in to rescue the Earle of Richmond, when he was in danger of his life; who set the Crowne upon his head, and was the cause of his being saluted King: And could it enter into his breast, to put him to death, that had saved his life, and done him so many great ser∣vices besides? But it may be said, It was not the Earle of Richmond that did it, but the King of England; for certainly, in many cases, a King is not at liberty to shew mercy, so much as a private man may. Though there be that affirme, the cause of his death was not words onely, but reall acts, as giving ayde to Perkin under-hand by money. And yet it seemes, there was some conflict in the minde of King Henry, what he should doe in this case; for he stayed six weekes after his Accusation, before before he brought him to his Arraignment. How-ever it was, the Summer follow∣ing, the King went in Progresse to Latham, to the Earle of Darby, who had maied his mother, and was brother to Sir William Stanley: perhaps to congratulate his own safety; perhaps to condole with him his brothers death; but certainly to keepe the Earle from conceiving any sinister opinion of him: For to thinke that Sir Wil∣liam's suing to be Earle of Chester, (an Honour appointed to the kings sonne) or his great wealth (for he left in his Castle at Holt, in ready money forty thousand markes, beside Plate and Jewells) were causes that procured or set forward his death; are considerations very unworthy of so just a Prince, against a Servant of so great de∣serving. But in this meane while, Perkin having gotten a Power of idle loose fellows, took to Sea, intending to lnd in Kent; where though he were repelled, yet some of his Souldiers would needs venture to goe on Land; of whom a hundred and sixty per∣sons
were taken Prisoners, whereof five were Captaines; Mortford, Corbet, White∣bolt, Qutyn and Gemyne: These hundred and sixty persons were brought to London, rayled in ropes, like horses drawing in a Cart, who upon their Araigne∣ment, confessing their offence, were executed, some at London, and some in Towns adjoyning to the sea-coast. Perkin finding no entertainment in Kent, sayled into Ire∣land, and having stayed there a while, and finding them also, being a naked people, to bee no competent assistants for him, from thence he sayled into Scotland, where he so moved the King of Scots with his fayre words and colourable pretexts (made no doubt before by the Dutcesse of Burgoigne) that hee received him in great state, and caused him to bee called the Duke of Yorke: and to perswade the World that hee thought him so indeede, hee gave to him in marriage the Lady Katherine Gourdon, daghter to Alexander Earle Huntley, his own neer kinswoman; and soone after, in Perkins quarrell, entred with a puissant Army into England; making Proclamation, that whosoever would come in and ayde the true Duke of Yorke, should bee spared; but none comming in, he then used all kinde of cruelty, and the whole County of Northuberland was in a manner wasted: whereat Perkin, at his returne, expres∣sed much griefe, saying It grieved him to the heart to see such havock made of his people: To whom the King answered, Alas, Alas, you take care for them, who for any thing that appeares are none of yours; for not one of the Countrey came in to his succour. King Henry incensed with this bold attempt of the king of Scots, cal∣led his High Court of Parliament, acquainting them with the necessity hee had of a present warre to revenge this indignity offered him by the Scots, and thereupon re∣quiring their ayde by money, had a subsidie of sixscore thousand pounds readily granted him; and then in all haste a puissant Army is provided, and under the con∣duct of the Lord Dawbeney sent into Scotland, but before hee arrived there hee was suddenly called back, by reason of a commotion begun at Cornwall, for payment of the Subsidie lately granted, which though it were not great, yet they grudged to pay it. The Ring-leaders of this commotion were Thomas Flammock, a gentleman lened in the Lawes, and Michael Ioseph a Smith; who laying the blame of this exaction upon Iohn Morton Archbishop of Canterbury, and Sir Reynold Bray, as being chiefe of the Kings Councell, exhorted the people to take armes; and having asem∣bled an Army, they went to Taunton, where they slew the Provost Pery, one of the Commissioners for the Subsidie, and from thence came to Wells, intending to goe to London where the King then lay, who having revoked the Lord Dawbeney, appoin∣ted Thomas Howard Earle of Surrey (after the death of the Lord Dinham, made Lord Treasurer of England) to have an eye to the Scots, and if they made invasion, to resist them. In the meane time Iames Twychet Lord Audley confederated himselfe with the Rebells of Cornwall, and tooke upon him to bee their Leader, who from Wlls went to Salisbury, and from thence to Winchester, and so to Kent, hoping there o have had great ayde, but found none; for the Earle of Kent, the Lord of Abur∣g, Iohn Brook Lord Cobham, Sir Edmond Poynings, Syr Richard Guildford, Sir Thas Bourchier, Iohn Peachy and William Scott were ready in Armes to resist them; whereupon the Rebels brought their Army to Black-heath, foure miles distant from Lndn, and there in a plaine on the top of a hill encamped themselves; whereof when the King had knowledge, hee presently sent Iohn Earle of Oxford, Henry Bou∣ier Earle of Essex, Edmond de la Poole Earle of Suffolke, Sir Riceap Thomas and Sir Hfry Stanley to inviron the hill on all sides, that so all hope of flight might hee ta∣kn from them; and then set forward himselfe, and encamped in St. George fields, where for encouragement he made divers Bannarets. The next day he sent the Lord Dawbeney to set upon the Rebels early in the morning, who first got the bridge at Debford Strand, though strongly defended by the Rebels Archers, whose arrowes were eported to bee a full cloath-yard in length; but notwithstanding the Lord  comming in with his Company, and the Earles assayling them on every side, they were soone overcome: In which conflict were slaine of the Rebels a∣bove  thousand; taken prisoners a very great number, many of whom the King pdoned, but of the chiefe Authors none: for the Lord Audley was drawne from
Newgate to Tower-hill, in a coate of his owne Armes paynted upon paper, re∣versed and all torne; and there, on the foure and twentieth day of Iune was behea∣ded. Thomas Flammock and Michael Ioseph were hanged drawn & quartered, and their heads and quarters pitched upon stakes, set up in London and other places. Of the Kings Army were slaine not above three hundred. It is memorble with what comfort Ioseph the black-smith cheered up himselfe at his going to execution, saying that yet he hoped by this that his name and memory should be everlasting: so deere even to vulgar spirits is perpetuety of Name, though joyned with infamy, what is it then to Noble spirits, when it is joyned with Glory? In the meane time the king of Scots taking advantage of these troubles in England, invaded the Frontiers, forraged the Bishoprick of Durham, and at last besieged the castle of Norham, whereof Richard Fox then Bishop of Durham was owner; who thereupon sent presently to the Earle of Surrey, acquainting him with this Invasion: Whereupon the Earle, taking with him Ralph Earle of Westmerland, Thomas Lord Barnes, Ralph Lord Nevill, George Lord Strange, and many other Lords and knights, and an Army of little lesse then twenty thousand men, besides a Navy, whereof the Lord Brooke was Admirall; set forward against the Scots, and not only forced the Scots to raise their siege of Norham Castle, but followed them also into Scotland, where he overthrew and defaced, the Castle at Cawdestraynes, the Tower of Hee∣hall, the Tower of Edington, the Tower of Fulden, and at last by composition tooke the strong Castle of Hayton, and rased it to the ground. At the Earles being at Hay∣ton, the King of Scots sent to him Marchemont and another Herald, requiring him, at his election, either to fight with him with their whole Armies, or else they two to fight in single combat; upon condition, that if the victory fell to the Scotish king, the Earle should deliver for his Ransome the Towne of Barwick: Whereunto the Earle made answer, that the Town of Barwick was the King his Masters, and there∣fore not for him to dispose of; but for his offer of single combat, he willingly accep∣ted it, and thought himselfe highly honored by such a match: But King Iames of Scotland had no meaning to performe either one or other, but privily in the night fled back into Scotland; and then the Earle returned to Barwick. In the meane time, one Peter Hyals a man of great learning and policie, was sent Ambassadour to the King of Scots, from the King of Spaine, to mediate a Peace between the two kings of of England and Scotland; who finding the King of Scots conformable to his motion, found after the King of England (who was never averse from Peace upon honourable Conditions) no lesse enclining to it: and so a Truce was concluded for certaine yeeres; upon conditition, that Perkin Warbeck should be sent out of the Scotish Dominions. About this time, the Lord of Camphyre and others sent from Philip Archduke of Austria and Duke of Burgundy, came to king Henry for a conclusion of Amity, and to procure the English merchans resort againe to his Country: for king Henry some time before, upon displeasure with the Flemings, but specially with the Lady Margaret, for abetting Perkin Warbeck; not onely had banished all Flemish wares and merchandizes out of his Dominions, but had also restrained all English mer∣chants from having any traffick in any of their Territories, causing the Mart for all English commodities to be kept at Callice: but now, upon this invitation, and ha∣ving found it had been a great hinderance to his owne Merchant-adventurers, and thereupon some insurrections had risen, he willingly condiscended to their Request; and so the English resorted againe into the Archdukes Dominions, and were re∣ceived into Antwerp with generall Procession; so glad was that Towne of the Eng∣glish-mens returne. In this eleventh yeere of the Kings Reigne, dyed Cicely Dutchesse of Yorke, mo∣ther to king Edward the fourth, at her Castle of Berkhamstead, being of extreme age; who had lived to see three Princes of her body Crowned, and foure Murthered: she was buried at Fdrigam by her Husband. Shortly after the Truce concluded between England and Scotland, Perkin War∣beck was commanded to depart out of the Scotish Dominions: who thereupon with
his wife and familie, sayled into Ireland: where understanding that the Cornish-men were ready to renue the warre againe, he thought best not to let psse so faire an occasion; and thereupon, having with him foure small ships, and not above six-score men, he sailed into Cornwall, and there landed in the moneth of September, and came to a Town called Bodmyn; where with faire words and large promises, he so prevailed with the people, that he had gotten to him above three thousand per∣sons to take his part; and then made Proclamations in the name of King Richard the Fourth, as sonne to King Edward the Fourth: and by the advice of his three Counsellors, Iohn Heron a bankrupt Mercer, Richard Skelton a Tailour, and Iohn Astley a Scrivener, determined to attempt first the winning of Exceter; which with great violence he assaulted, and the Townsmen with as great valiantnes defended: whereof when the King heard, he sent the Lord Dawbeny to their rescue: but before he came, the Lord Edward Courtney Earle of Devonshire, and the valiant Lord Wil∣liam his sonne, accompanied with Sir Edmund Carew, Sir Thomas Trenchard, Sir William Courtney Sir Thomas Fulford, Sir Iohn Halwell, Sir Iohn Croker, Walter Court∣ey, Peter Edgecombe, William St. Maure with others came to their ayde: upon whose comming, Perkin left the siege, and retired to Taunton; where he mustered his men, as though he meant to prepare for battell: but finding his number to be much diminished, (fo of six thousand which he had at Exceter, many were fled from him, when they saw no Great ones to take his part) he began to distrust his case; and heing withall, that the king with a great Power was at hand: about midnight, with threescore horse-men in his company, he departed in post from Taunton, and tooke Sanctuary in a Town called Beauly neere to Southampton. When king Henry herd that Perkin was fled, he sent after him to the Sea-side, to stop his passage and apprehend him: But the messengers that were sent, when they came to St. Michaels , though they found not Perkin, yet there they found his wife the Lady Ka∣therine Gourdon, whom they presently brought to the king; a beautifull young La∣dy: to whom, in honour of her birth, and commiseration of her beauty, the king allowed a competent maintenance, which she enjoyed during the kings life, and mny yeeres after. king Henry being come to Exceter, stayed there a few dayes, a∣bout examination of the Rebellion, and execution of the chiefe Offendours: of whom there being a great multitude, and all of them craving pardon, the king cau∣sed them all to be assembled in the Church-yard of St. Peter, where they all appeared bar-headed in their shirts, and halters about their necks: whom the king viewing out of a window made for the purpose; after he had paused a while, made a speech unto them, exhorting them to obedience; and then, in hope they would afterward be dutifull Subjects, he pardoned them all: whereat they made a great shout, crying , God save king Henry! though some of them afterward, like ungratefull wretches, fell into new Rebellions. All this whie Perkin was in Sanctuary: and the King thinking himselfe in danger as long as he was in safety, set a Guard about the place, to keepe him for escaping; whereby Perkin was so restrained, that at last hee submitted himselfe to the kings mercy, and was thereupon sent to the Tower to b there in sfe custodie. This doe, king Henry appointed Thomas Lord Drcy, Sir Amys Pawle, and Robert Sher∣b Deane of Pauls to be Commissioners, for maing enquiry of the Offenders,  for assessing their Fines; which they did with great severity to some, with great mildnesse to others, to all with equity. was now the fourteenth yeer of the kings Reigne, when one Sebastian bato,  Gea's Sonne, born t Biston, perswaded the king to man and victua a ship at Bristow, o search for  stand, which (he said) he knew to be replenished with rich Commodities; who setting forth with three other small shps of London merchants, returned home two yeer after, when he had made a large discovery westward, and would have gone to , if the Mariners had not forced him to return: a like∣wise si years before, one Christoper Columbus a Spanyard, made the first discovery of America. Perkin being in the Tower and carefully guarded, yet found me s to escape; and
fled to the Priory of Sheen neer Richmond; where discovering himselfe to the Pryor of that Monastery, he begged of him for Gods sake, to get the kings Pardon fo his life; which the Prior effected: but then was Perkin brought to the Court at Westminster, and was one day set fettered in a paire of Stocks before Westminster∣hall, and there stood a whole day; the next day he was set upon a like Scaffold in Cheape-side, and there standing the whole day also, hethen read openly his confessi∣on, wrtten with his own hand; wherein he declared his Parentage and the place of his Birth, and all the passages of his Life, and by what means he was drawn to make this attempt. After this, he was committed againe to the Tower, and care taken, he should be better looked to than he was before. But all the care notwithstanding, once againe Perkin attempted to escape, and drawing into a Confederacy with him the young Earle of Warwicke; by faire words and large promises so corrupted his keepers, Stragwish, Blwet, Astwood and long Roger, servants to Sir Iohn Digbie Lieu∣tenant of the Tower, that they intended to have slaine their Master, and set Perki and the Earle of Warwicke at liberty. But this practice was soone discovered, o that Perki and Iohn a Water, sometime Major of Corke in Ireland, one of Perkis chiefe founders, were on the sixteenth day of November arraigned at Westminster and condemned, and both of them on the two and twentieth day were drawn to Ty∣burne and there hanged; where Perki tooke it upon his death, that the Confession he had formerly made, was true: soon after also Blewet and Astwood, two of the Lieu∣tenants men, were in the same place executed. On the one and twentieth day of the same month, Edward Plantagemet Earle of Warwicke was arraigned at Westminster, be∣fore the Earle of Oxford, then High Steward of England; not for consenting to breake Prison, but for conspiring with Perkin to raise Sedition and destroy the king; and upon his Confession, had Judgement, and on the eight and twentieth day of the same month, in the yeer 1499. was brought to the Scaffold on the Tower-hill, and there beheaded. This Earle of Warwick was the eldest Sonne of the Duke of Clarence, and was the last Heire male of the name of Plantagenet, and had been kept in the Tower from his very Inancy out of all company of Men and fight of Beasts; so as he scarcely knew a Hen from a Goose, nor one beast from another; and there∣fore could never know how to practice his escape of himselfe, but by Perkis sub∣tlety: for which cause the king favoured him so farre, that he was not buried in the Tower, but at Bissam by his Ancestours. And thus ended the designes of Perki Warbeck, which had troubled both the Kingdome and the King, the space of seven or eight yeers, a great part of the Kings Raigne. But in the time of Perkis being in the Tower, another like practice was set on foot; for an Augustie Frier called Patrick, in the County of Suffolk, having a Scholler named Ralph Wilford a Cordwayners Sonne, he caused him to take upon him to be the Earle of Warwicke, lately by great chance gotten out of the Tower; and they going together into ; when the Frier perceived some light credit to be given to him, he then stuck not to declare it openly in the Pulpit, desiring all men to assist him. But this practice was soone discovered, and both the Mr. and the Scholler were apprehended & attainted; the Scholler Wilford was hanged on Shrovetuesdy at S. Thomas Waterings, and the Frier was condemned to perpetuall Prison: for at that time so much reverence was attributed to holy Orders; that a Priest, though e had commited Treason against the king, yet had hs life spared. And this practe was some cause to exasperate the king against the Earle of Warwicke, who though innocent in himselfe, yet was nocent in pretenders: and besides; king Ferdinand of Spaie, with whom at this time there was a Treaty for marriage of his Daughter to Prince Arthur, had written to the king in plaine terms, that he saw no assurance of his Sonnes succession, as long a the Earle of Warwicke lived: and thus all things un∣fortunately concurred to bring this innocent Prince to his end. In the fifteenth yeer of his Reigne, partly to avoide the danger of the Plague, then raigning in England; but chiefely to conferre with the Duke of Burgoigne about ma∣ny important businesses: the King and Queen sayled over to Callice; where at an enterview between him and the Duke, at Saint Peters Church without Callice, the
Duke offered to hold the kings sturrup at his alighting, which the king by no meanes would permit; but descending from horse-back, they embraced wih great affecti∣on; nd after Communication had between them, the King and Queen in the end o Iu returned into England. In his seventeenth yeer wo great Marriages were solemnized: the Lady  of Spaine was sent by her Father king Ferdiad, with a puissant, Army of Sps into Egland; where she arrived at Plimouth, the second day of October; and on the fourteenth of November after was esposed openly to Prince Arhur, both beng clad in white; He of the age of fteen yeers, shee of eighteen: at night they were laid together in one Bed, where they lay as Man and Wife all that night: when oning appeared, the Prince (as his servants about him reported) called for drinke, which before time he had not used to doe; whereof one of his Chambrlaines sking  the cause he answered merrily, saying, I have been this night in the middest o Spa, which is a hot Country, and hat make me so dry: though some write, tha  grave Matron was laid in bed between them, to hinder actuall Consummati∣on Te Ladies portion was two hundred thousand Duckets; her joynture, the  part of the Principality of Wales, Cornwall and Chster. At this Marriage was gr solemnity and Royall Justings; during which time, there came into London  Earle, a Bishop, and divers other noble personages sent from the king of Scots  conclusion of a Mariage, (before treated of, between the Lady Margaret the  eldest daughter, and him; where the Earle by Proxie, in the name of king Iames  Maser, affied and contracted the said Ladie, which Contract was published at  Crosse the day of the Conversion of Saint Paul; for joy whereof, Te Deum , and great fires were made through the City of London; and if such joy wee made when the match was made, what joy should be made now at the issue of the match, when by the Union of those persons is made an Union of these king∣domes; and England and Scotland are but one great Britaine? The Ladies portion was ten thousand pounds, her joynture two thousand pounds a yeer, after king Iames his death; and in present one thousand. When this match was first propounded at the Connsell Table, some Lords opposed it; objecting, that by this means the Crown of England might happen to come to the Scottish Nation. To which King Hery answered, what if it should? It would not be an accession of England to Scolad, but of Scotland to England: and this answer of the kings passed for an Oracle, nd so the match proceeded, and in August following was Consummate at Edibrgh, conducted thither in great State by the Earle of Northumberland. Prince Arthur after his marriage, was sent againe into Wales, to keep that Coun∣ty in good order; to whom were appointed for Counsellours, Sir Richard Poole, hi insman and chiefe Chamberlaine, Sir Henry Vernon, Sir Richard Crofs, Sir David , Sir William Vdall, Sir Thomas Englefield, Sir Peter Newton, Iohn Walleston,  Marton, and Doctor William Smith President of his Counsell: but within five moneths after his marriage, at his Castle of Ludlow he deceased, and with great soleity was buried in the Cathedrall Church at Worcester. His Brother Henry Due of Yorke, was stayed from the title of Prince of Wales, the space of halfe a yeer, till to women it might appeare, whether the Lady Katherine, the Relict of Prince Ar∣ were with childe, or no. The towardlines in learning of this Prince Arthur is vey memorable; who dying before the age of sixteen yeers, was said to have read o∣ver al or most of the Latine Authours, besides many other. And now Prince Arthur being dead, and the Lady Katherine of Spaine left a young widdow; King Henry loath to part with her dowry, but chiefely being desirous  continue the Alliance with Spaine: prevailed with his other Sonne Prince Hen∣ry, though with some reluctation, such as could be in those years (for he was scarce welv years of age) to be contracted with the Princesse Katherine his brohrs wid∣dow; for which marriage, a dispensation by advice of the most learned men at that  in Christendome, was by Pope Iulius the second granted, and on the five and twentieth day of Iune, in the Bishop of Salisburys house in Fleet-street, th marriage was solemnized.
A little before this time,  Earle of Sffolke, Son to Iohn Duke of Suffolke and Lady Elizbt Sister o king Edward the ourth, had in his fury kill'd a mean person and was thereupon Idighted of Murther; for which, although he had the kings Pardon, yet because he was brought to th Kings-bench-brr, and there arraigned; he took it for so great  his honour, that in great rage he fled into Flanders to his Aun the Lad Mgaret; where having stayed a while, when his pssion was over, he returnd againe. ut after the marriage between Prince Arthur and the Lady , wther it were that in that solemnity he had run himselfe in debt; or  he were rawn to doe so by the Lady Margare, he passed over the second time, with his bother Richard, into Flnder. This put the king into some doubt of his intention whereupon he hath recourse to his usu∣all course in such cases, and Sir  Captaine of Hamme Castle, to feigne himselfe one of that Conspiracy, theby to learn the depth of their intenti∣ons: And to take away all suspion of his imployment; he first Sunday of Novem∣ber, he caused the said Earle and Sir Robert Crson with five others to be accursed o∣penly at Pauls Crosse, as Enemies to him and his Realme. In conclusion, Sir Robert Curson acquainted the king with divers of that faction; amongst whom, Willia Lord Courtey, and Willia de la Poole, brother to the foresaid Earle of Suffolke, who were taken but upon suspition, yet held long in prison: but Sir Iames Tyrrell (the same that had murthered the two young Princes in the Tower) and Sir Io Windham, who were proved to be Traytor, were accordingly attainted, and on the sixth day of May at the Tower-hill beheaded. Whereof when the Earle heard, despairing now of any good successe, he wandred about all Germany and Frc, where finding no succour, he submitted himselfe at last to Philip Duke of Austria, by whom afterward he was delivered to king Henry, by this occasion: Ferdiad king of Aragon, by his Wife Isabella Queen of Cstile, had onely two Daughters, the eldest whereof named Ioae, was married to this Philip Duke of Austria; the youn∣ger, named Katherine, to Arthur Prince of England: and now Queen Isabella being lately dead, by whose death the kingdome of Castile descended in Right of his Wife, to this Duke Philip; they were sayling out of Germany into Spine to take possession of the kingdome; but by tempest and contrary windes were driven upon the coast of England, and landed at VVeymouth in Dorsetshire; where desiring to re∣fresh themselves a little on shore, they were invited by Sir Thomas Trechad (a principall knight of that Country) to his house, who presently sent word to the king of their arrivall. King Henry glad to have his Court honoured by so great a Prince, and perhaps upon hope of a courtesie from him, which afterward he obtained: ent presently the Earle of Arundell to waite upon him, till himselfe might follow; and the Earle went to him in great magnificence, with a gallant troope of three hundred Horse, and for more State came to him by Torch-light. Upon whose Mege, though king Philip had many resons of haste on his journey; yet not to give king Hery distaste, and withall to give his Queen the comfort of seeing the Lady Ka∣therine her Sister; he went upon speed to the king at VVindsor, while his Queen followed by easie journeys. After great magnificence of entertainment, king Hen∣y taking a fit opportunity, and drawing the king of Castile into a roome, where they two onely were private; and laying his hand civilly upon his arme, said unto him; Sir, you have been saved upon my Coast: I hope you will not suffer me to wrack upon yours. The king of Castile asking him, what he meant by that speech? I mean it (saith the king) by that haire-brain'd fellow the Earle of Suffolke; who being my subject, is protected in your Country, and begins to play the foole when all others are weary of it. The king of Casile answered; I had thought, Sir, your felicity had been above those thoughts; but if it trouble you, I will banish him: king Henry replyed, that his desire was to have him delivered to him: with this, the king of Castile a little confused said, That can I not doe with my honour: Well then (said the king) the matter is at an end: at last the king of Castile, who held king Henry in great estimation, composing his countenance, said, Sir you shall have him; but upon your Honour, you shall not take his life: I promise it upon mine Honour,
said King Henry: and he kept his promise; for he was not put to death during all his Reigne; but yet he tooke such order, that in the Reigne of his Sonne K. Henry the Eighth, he had his head cut off. During the king of Castiles being here, a Treaty was concluded, and beares date at Windsor; which the Flemings terme Intercursus malus, for that the Free fishing of the Dutch upon the Coasts and Seas of England, granted in the Treaty of Vndecimo, was not by this Treaty confirmed, as all other Articles were. And now, when king Henry had received the king of Castile into the Fraternity of the Garter, and had his Sonne Prince Henry admitted to the order of the Golden fleece; and that the Earle of Suffolk was brought over and committed to the Tower; the king of Castile departed home. In this kings time were two Calls of Serjeant at Law: One in his eleventh yeere, in which were called nine Serjeants, Mordant, Higham, Kingesmill, Conisby, Butler, xely, Frowick, Oxenbridge, and Constable; who kept their feast at the Bishop of Ely's Place in Holborne, where the King, the Queen, and all the chiefe Lords dined. The other Call, in his twentieth yeere; in which were called ten Serjeants, Robert Brudnell, William revill, Thomas Marow, George Edgore, Lewis Pollard, Guy Palmes, and William Fairfax; who kept their feast at the Archbishos house in Lambeth. King Henry having gotten as much honour as the Estimation of neighbouring Princes could give him, began now to be intentive to getting of wealth; wherein he quickly found Instruments fit for his purpose, but specially two, Empson & Dudley both Lawyers; Dudley of a good family, but Empson the son of a Sieve-maker. These two persons being put in Authority, turned Law and Justice into Rapine. For first, their manner was, to cause divers Subects to be indicted of Crimes, and then pre∣sently to commit them; and not produce them to their answer, but suffer them to languish long in Prison; and by sundry artificiall devices and terrors, extort from them great Fines, which they termed Compositions and Mitigations. Neither did they (towards the end) observe so much as the halfe face of Justice, in proceeding by Indictment; but sent forth their Precepts to attach men, and convent them before themselves and some others at their private houses, and there used to shuffle up a Summary proceeding by examination, without tryall of Jury; asuming to them∣selves, to deale both in Pleas of the Crowne, and controversies Civill. Then did they also use to enthrall and charge the Subjects lands with Tenures in Capite, by finding false Offices; refusing upon divers pretexts and delayes, to admit men to traverse those false Offices, as by Law they might. Nay the Kings Wards, after they had accomplished their full age, could not be suffered to have livery of their lands, without paying excessive Fines, farre exceeding all reasonable rates. When men were outlawed in personall actions, they would not permit them to purchase their Charters of Pardon, except they paid great and intolerable summes; standing upon the strict point of Law, which upon Outlawries gives forfeiture of goods. Nay, contrary to all Law and colour, they maintained, the King ought to have the halfe of mens lands and rents during the space of full two yeeres, for a Paine in case of Outlawry. They would also ruffle with Jurors, and enforce them to finde as they would direct; and if they did not, then convent, imprison, and fine them. These and many other courss they had of preying upon the people: but their principall working was upon Penall Statutes; wherein they considered not whether the Law were obsolete, or in use; and had ever a rabble of Promoters and leading Jurors at their command, so as they could have any thng found, either for Fact or Valuation. There remaineth to this day a Report, that King Henry was on a time entertained very sumptuously by the Earle of Oxford, at his Castle of Heningham: and at the Kings going away, the Earles servants stood in their livery-coates with cognisances, ranged on both sides, to make the King a lane: Whereupon the King called the Earle to him, and said: My Lord, I have heard much of your Hospitality, but I see it is greater than is spoken; These handsome Gentlemen and Yeomen whom I see on both sides of me, are sure your Meniall servants. At which the Earle smiled, and said: It may please your Grace, that were not for mine ease; They are most of them my Retainers, and are come to doe me srvice at such a time as this, and chifly to
see your Grace. Whereat the King started a little, and said: By my faith (my Lord) I thanke you for my good cheere; but I may not endure to have my Lawes broken in my sight: my Attourney must speake with you about it. And it is part of the Re∣port, that it cost the Earle for a composition, fifteen thousand marks. And to shew further the Kings extreme diligence: I remember (saith Sir Francis Bacon Lord of Virula in his History) to have seene long since a Booke of Accompt of Empsons, that had the kings hand almost to every leafe, by way of signing; and was in some places postilled in the Margent with the kings owne hand likewise, where was this Remembrance: Item, Received of such a one five markes; for the Pardon to be procured; and if the Pardon doe not passe, the money to be repayd, except the party be some other way satisfied. And over against this Memorandm (of the kings owne hand,) Otherwise satisfied. This (saith he) I doe the rather mention, because it shewes in the king a Nearnesse, but yet with a kinde of Justnesse. In his three and twentieth yeere, there was a sharpe prosecution against Sir Wil∣liam Gapell now the second time, for misgovernment in his Majoralty: The great matter was, that in some payments he had taken notice of false monies, and did not his diligence to examine who were the Offenders: for which and some other things aid to his charge, he was condemned to pay two thousand pounds; whereof, being a man of stomack, he refused to pay a farthing; and thereupon was sent to the Tower, where he remained till the Kings death. Knesworth likewise, that had been lately Major of London, and both his Sheriffs, were for abuses in their offices questioned and imprisoned, and not delivered but upon payment of one thousand foure hun∣dred pounds. Sir Lawrence Ailmer, who had likewise been Major of London, and his two Sheriffs, were put to the Fine of one thousand pounds; and Sir Lawrence, for refusing to pay it, was committed to prison, where hee stayed till Empson himselfe was committed in his place. By these courses hee accumulated so great store of Treasure, that he left at his death, most of it in secret places, under his own key and keeping at Richmond, (as is reported) the summe of neer eighteen hundred thousand pounds sterling. But though by this course he got great store of Treasure, yet by it he lost the best treasure (the peoples hearts) but that he something qualified it by his last Testament, commanding that Restitution should be made of all such moneys as had unjustly been levied by his Officers. It seemes king Henry, after the death of his Queene the Lady Elizabeth, had an inclination to marry againe; and hearing of the great beauty & virtue of the young Queene of Naples, the widow of Ferdinando the younger; he sent three confident persons, Francis Marsyn, Iames Braybrooke, and Iohn Stile, to make two inquiries; one of her person and conditions, the other of her Estate: Who returning him an∣swer, that they found her Beauty and Virtues to be great, but her Estate to be onely a certaine Pension or Exhibition, and not the kingdome of Naples as he expected, he then gave over any further medling in that matter. After this, another Treaty of Mariage was propounded to the king, betweene him and the Lady Margaret Dutchesse Dowager of Savoy, onely daughter to Maximilian, and Sister to the king of Castile; a Lady wise and of great good fame: In which businesse was imployed, for his first piece, the kings then Chaplain, and after the great Prelate, Thomas Wool∣sey. It was in the end concluded, with ample conditions for the king, but with pro∣mise de Futuro onely. Which mariage was protracted from time to time, in respect of the Infirmity of the king; which held him by its till he dyed. He left Executours, Richard Fox Bishop of Winchester, Richard Fitz Iames Bishop of London, Thomas Bishop of Durham, Iohn Bishop of Rochester, Thomas Duke of Nor∣folk & Treasurer of England, Edward Earl of Worcester and Lord Chamberlaine, Iohn F. knight, chiefe Justice of the Kings Bench, and Robert R. knight chiefe Justice of the Common Pleas. A little before his death, he had concluded a marriage (in which negociation Foxe Bishop of Winchester was imployed) between his younger Daughter the Lady Mary, of the age of ten years; and Charles king of Castile, not
much elder: but though concluded, yet not solemnized; and she was afterward mar∣ried to Lewis the French king. Of his Taxations. IN his third yeer, there was by Parliament granted toward the maintaining an Army in Britaine; that every man should pay the tenth penny of his Goods: which Tax though at first withstood in Yorkeshire and Durham; yet was afterwad levied to the uttermost. In his seventh yeer, towards his warres in France, a Bene∣volence was by Parliament granted; by which great summes of money were collected of the richer sort only. In his eleventh yeer, a Subsidie of sixscore thousand pounds was granted him by Parliament, towards his was with Scotland, which caused after∣ward the insurrection in Cornwall. In his nineteenth yeer a Subsidie was granted him by Parliament. In his one and twentieth yeer, e raised great summes of money from offenders against Penall Statutes: the greatest, but the unjustest way for raising of money, that every any king of England used: and not content with this, he required and had at the same time a Benevolence both from the Clergie and Laity. To the Clergie was imployed Richard Fox, then Bishop of Winchester; who assembling the Clergie before him, exhorted them to be liberall in their contribution; but the Clergie being of two sorts, rich and poore, made each of them their severall excuses: The rich and such as had great livings, said, they were at great charges in keeping hospi∣tality and maintaining their families, and therefore desired to be spaed: The poorer sort alledged, that their means were small, and scarce able to finde them ne∣cessaries, and therefore desired to be forborne. But the Bishop answered them both with a pretty Dilemma, saying to the rich, It is true, you live at great charges in hospitality, in apparell and other demonstrations of your wealth; and seeing you have store to spend in such order, there is no reason but for your Princes service you should do it much more, and therefore you must pay. To the poorer sort he said, though your livings be small, yet your frugality is great, and you spend not in house∣keeping and apparell as other doe; therefore be content, for you shall pay. Of his Lawes and Ordinances. THIS King was the first that ordained a company of tall strong men, (na∣ming them Yeomen of the Guard) to be attending about the person of the king; to whom he appointed a Livery by which to be known, and a Cptaine by whom to be chosen. In his time, the authority of the Star-chamber, which subsist∣ed before by the Common Lawes of the Realme, was confirmed in certaine cases by Act of Parliament. In his time were made these excellent generall Laws: One, that from thenceforth sines should be finall, and conclude all strangers rights: Ano∣ther for admission of poore suitours, In forma paperis, without paying Fee to Coun∣sellour, Atturney or Clerke. Another, that no person that did assist by Armes or otherwise the King for the time being, should after be Impeached therefore or At∣tainted, either by course of the Law, or by Act of Parliament; and that if any such Act of Attainder did happen to be made, it should be void and of none effect. An∣other for the Benevolence, to make the summes which any had agreed to pay, and were not brought in, to be leviable by course of Law. Another, that Murtherers should be burnt on the Brawn of the left hand, with the letter M. and Theeves with the letter T. so that if they offended the second time, they should have no mercy, but e put to death; and this to each also to Clearkes Convict. In his fifth yeer, It was ordained by Parliament, that the Major of London should have Conservation of the river of Thames, from the bridge of Stanes, to the waters of Yendal and Md∣way. In his seventeenth Iohn Shaw Major of London, caused his brethren the Alder∣men to ride from the Guild-hall to the waters-side, when he went to Westminster to be presented in the Exchequer: e also caused the kitchins and other houses of office o be builded at the Guild-hall; where since that time, the Majors feast hah been
kept, which before, had been in the Grocers or Taylours-hall. In his eighteenth yeer king Henry being himselfe a brother of the Taylours Company, as divers kings be∣fore had been, namely, Richard the third, Edward the fourth, Henry the sixth, Hen∣ry the fifth, Henry the fourth, and Richard the second; also of Dukes 11. Earles 28. Lords 48. he now gave to them the Name and Title of Merchant Taylours; as a name of worship to endure for ever. Affaires of the Church in his time. IN the tenth year of his Raigne, Ioane Boughton widdow, was burnt in Smith∣field, for holding certain opinions of Iohn VVickliffe. In his seventh yeer, king Henry finding great inconvenience by the priviledge of Sanctuaries; wrote to Pope Alexander, desiring him by his authority, to adjudge all English men being fled to Sanctuary for the offence of Treason, to be Enemies to the Christian Faith; and to prohibite the priviledge of Sanctuary to all such as once had enjoyed it before: which request the Pope granted, to the great contentment of the king, and quiet of the Realme. In his sixteenth yeere being the yeer 1500. a Jubilee in Rome was cele∣brated; whereof Alexander the then Pope, by his messenger Gaspar Pons a Spanyard, gave notice to the king: offering withall, that those who could not come to Rome, should notwithstanding at a certaine price have Pardons, and as full a benefit of the Jubilee, as if they came; and to the end the king should not hinder his purpose, both offered part of his gaines to the king, and also promised to bestow it upon a warre against the Turke; by which course he gathered great summes, for which he had other use, than to spend it so idly. In the two and twentieth yeer of this king Pope Alexander the sixth dyed of Poyson, by this accident: He went to supper in a Vineyard neer the Vatican, where his sonne Valentionis meaning to poyson Adria Cardinall of Cornetta, sent thither certaine flaggons of Wine, infected with poyson, and delivered them to a servant of his, who knew nothing of the matter; comman∣ding him, that none should touch them, but by his appointment: It happened, the Pope comming in something before supper, and being very dry through the immo∣derate heat of the season, called for drinke, his own provision being not yet come: The servant that had the poysoned wine in keeping; thinking it to be committed to him as a speciall wine, brought of it to the Pope; and while he was drinking, his sonne Valentinois came in, and dranke also of the same; whereby they were both poysoned, but the Pope onely overcome of the poyson, died; his sonne by the strength of youth bare it out, though with long languishing. Workes of Piety and other structures by him and others. THIS King magnificently enlarged Greenwich, which Humfry Duke of Glo∣cester had formerly builded, calling it Placentia. In his sixteenth yeer, e new builded his Manour of Shee, and named it Richmond: He also new builded Baynards Castle in London. In his two and twentieth yeer, he finished the goodly Hospitall of the Savoy neere to Charing-crosse, to which he gave lands for the relie∣ving of two hundred poore people: This was first called Savoy place, built by Peter Earle of Savoy Father to Boniface Archbishop of Canterbury, about the nine and twentieth yeer of Henry the third, who made the said Peter Earle of Richmond. The house belonged since to the Duke of Lcaster; and at this time was converted to an Hospitall, reteyning still the first name of the Savoy. In this Kings time, Iohn Morton being Bishop of Ely, bestowed great cost upon his house at Hatfield in Hart∣fordshire, now the house of the Right Honourable the Earle of Salisbury; and at Wesbich Castle in Cambridgeshire, a house belonging to that See; all the Brick build∣ing was of his charge: Being afterward Bishop of Canterbury, he bestowed great sums in repairing and agmenting his houses at Midstone, Alington-Parke, Charing, Ford, Lmbeth, and specially at Knoll in Kent, where he dyed. King Henry also builded three houses of Franciscan Friers, which are called observants; one at Richmond,
n other at Greenwich, a third at Newark; and three other of Franciscan Friers, which are called Conventuals, one at Canterbury, another at Newcastle, and a third at South∣ampon. And drawing neer his end, he did these workes of charity: He granted a generall Pardon to all men, for any offence commited against any of his Lawes, Theeves and Murtherers only excepted: He paid also all Fees of all Prisoners in all Goales in and about London, abiding there for that cause only: He paid also the Debts of all such persons as lay in the Counters or Lud-gate for forty shillings or under, and some also for ten pounds. In his eighteenth yeer, the Chappell of our Lady, a¦boe the East-side of the high Altar at Westminster Church, with a Tavern called the White-rose neer adjoyning, was taken down; in which place a most beautifull Chap∣pell was then presently begun to be builded, by King Henry; the charges whereof a∣mounted to the summe of fourteene thousand pounds (as Stow witnesseth.) In his second yeer, the great Conduite in Cheape-side, at the charges of Thomas Ilm Alder∣man of London, was new made; and the Crosse also in Cheape was new builded, to∣ward the charges whereof, Thomas Fisher Mercer gave five hundred Markes. In his seventh yeer, the Conduite in Grace-street was begun to be builded by the Exe∣cutors of Sir Thomas Hill Grocer, late Major of London. Also this yeer, Hugh Clpton Major of London builded the great bridge of Stratford upon Ao, as likewise a faire Chappell toward the South end of that Town; and neer unto the same, a pretty house of Brick and Timber, where he lay and ended his life: Hee glazed also the  of the Parish Church in that Town; and made a Way of foure miles long,  miles from Alisbury towards London, and one mile beyond Alibury. In his nth yeer, Iohn Tle Major of London, builded the Church of Saint Anthoes, with a Free-schoole, and certain Almeshouses for poore men. In his time, his Mother the Lady Margaret Countesse of Richmond, builded two Colledges in Cambridge, one called Christs Colledge, the other St. Iohns; and endowed them with large possessins, for the maintenance of learning. Richard Fox Bishop of Winchester founded Corpus Chirsti Colledge in Oxford; and William Smith Bishop of Lincolne, Brazen-nose Col∣lge: He also builded at Liechfield an Hospitall, for a Master, two Priests, and ten poore men, as likewise a Free-schoole, with a Shoole-master and an Usher. Anne Aeling gave a hundred Marks towards the building of the Church in Cicester. In his time also Iohn Alcock Bishop of Ely, builded Iesus Colledge in Cambridge: and in his two and twentieth year, Thomas Knesworth Major of London, builded the Con∣duite at Bishopsgate at his own charge; and gave to the Fishmongers certaine Tene∣ments; for which they are bound to allow to foure Schollers, two at Oxford, and two at Cambridge, to each of them foure pounds a yeer: also to poore people and Prisoners in Ludgate something yeely. In his twentieth yeer, Sir VVilliam Capell Major of London, caused all Hounseditch to be paved over; which till that time, had  very noyously to all travellers that way. In his fourteenth yeer, all the Gardens without Mooregate (which had continued time out of minde) were destroyed; and of them was made a plaine field, for Archers to shoot in. In this Kings time also,  Savege Archbishop of Yorke, repaired the Castle of Cawood, and the Manour of , and founded the Chappell at Maclesfield in Cheshire, where he was borne. Also in his time, Stephen Granings Major of London, founded a free Grammr Schoole  VVolverhampton in Staffordshire where he was borne; and gave lands sufficient for a Master and an Usher, leaving the oversight to the Merchant-Taylours in London. Thi Town of VVolverhampton, commonly so called, is originally and rightly called -hampton, upon this occasion: The Town was antiently called Hampton, to which a noble woman named VVilfrune, a widdow, sometime wise of Athels Duke of Northampton; obtained of King Ethelred, to give lands to the Church there, whch she had founded; and thereupon the Town tooke the addition of the said VVil∣frune. In this Kings time also, Iohn Collt Deane of Pauls, founded Pauls Schoole in the Church-yard there.
Casualties happening in his time. IN his first yeere happened the Sicknesse called the Sweating-sicknesse, which though it continued not long, yet tooke away many thousands: and in his two and twentieth yeer, the like Sweating-sicknesse happened againe; but by reason of Remedies found in the former, took away fewer. In his second yeer, Wheat was sold for three shillings the Quarter, Bay-salt at the like price: In his seventh yeer, Wheate was sold at London for twenty pence the Bushell; which was counted a great dearth. In his tenth yeer, Wheate was sold at London for six pence the Bushell, Bay-salt for three pence halfe penny, Nantwichsalt for sixpence, white Herrings nine shillings the Barrell, red Herrings three shillings the Cade, red Sprats six pence the Cade, and Gascoigne wines for six pounds the T. In his fifteenth yeer, Gascoigne wine was sold at London for forty shillings the Tunne, a Quarter of Wheate foure shillings, and Bay-salt foure pence the Bushell. The two and twentieth of August 1485. the very day that King Henry got the vi∣ctory of King Richard; a great fire was in Bread-street in London, in which was burnt the Parson of Saint Mildreds, and one other man in the Parsonage there. In his tenth yeer, in digging to lay a new foundation in the Church of Saint Mary Hill in London, the body of Alice Hackney, which had been buried in the Church a hundred seventy five yeeres before, was found whole of Skin, and the joynts of her Armes pliable; which Corpes was kept above ground foure dayes without an∣noyance, and then againe buried. In his twelveth yeere, on Bartholomew day, at the Towne of Saint Nedes in Bedfordshire, there fell Hayle-stones that were measured eighteene Inches a∣bout. In his thirteenth yeer, on the one and twentieth of December; suddenly in the night brake out a fire in the Kings lodgings, being then at his Manour of Shee; by violence whereof, a great part of the old building was burnt, with hangings, beds, Apparell, Plate and mny Jewells. In his fifteenth yeer, the Town of Babra in Norfolke was burnt: Also this yeer, a great Plague happened; whereof many peo∣ple died in many places, but specially in London, where there died in that yeer thir∣ty thousand. In his twentieth yeer, Alum which for many yeers had been sold for six shillings a hundred, rose to five nobles a hundred, and after to foure marks. In his two and twentieth yeer, the Citty of Norwich was well neere consumed with fire. Also in the same yeer in Iuly, a gallery new builded at Richmond, wherein the King and the Prince his Sonne had walked not an houre before, fell suddenly downe, yet no man hurt. The great Tempest which drave king Philip into England, blew down the Golden Eagle from the Spire of Pauls; and in the fall, it fell upon a signe of the Black-Eagle, which was in Pauls Church-yard, in the place where the School-house now stand∣eth; and battered it, and brake it downe. This the people interpreted to be an o∣minous Prognostick upon the Imperiall House, as indeed it proved; for this king Philip being the Emperours sonne, arriving in Spaine, sickned soon after; and be∣ing but thirty yeeres of age, deceased: upon whose decease, his wife Queen Iohn out of her tender love to him, fell distracted of her wits. Of his wife and children. HE maried Elizabeth eldest daughter of King Edward the Fourth, being of the age of nineteene yeeres; whom two yeeres after his Mariage he caused to be
Crowned: She lived his wife eighteen yeeres, and dyed in Child-bed in the Tower of London, the eleventh of February, the very day on which she was borne; and is buried at Westminster, in the magnificent Chappell and rich Monument of Copper and Guilt, which her Husband had erected. He had issue by her, three Sonnes and foure Daughters: his eldest sonne Arthur was born at Winchester, the twentieth day of September in the second yeere of his Reigne; and dyed at Ludlow, at fifteen yeeres old and a halfe: and of this short life some cause may be attributed to his Nativity, being borne in the eighth moneth after conception: He was buried in the Cathe∣drall Church of St. Maries in Worcester, where in the South side of the Quire he lies enombed in Touch or Jet, without any remembrance of him by Picture. His se∣cond sonne Henry was borne at Greenwich in ent, on the two and twentieth day of Iune, in the seventh yeere of his Fathers Reigne; and succeded him in the king∣dome. His third sonne Edmund was borne in the tenth yeere of his Fathers Reigne, and dyed at five yeares of age, at Bishops Hatfield, and lyes buried at St. Peters in Westminster. His eldest daughter Margaret was born the nine and twentieth day of November, the fifth yeer of her Fathers Reigne; and at fourteen yeers of age was mar∣ried to Iames the fourth King of Scotland; unto whom she bare three Sons, Iames the fifth, Arthur and Alexander, and one Daughter, which three last dyed all of them young; and after the death of her husband king Iames, (slaine at Flodden field in  against the English) she was remarried to Archibld Dowglsse Earle of Augus, in the yeer 1514. to whom she bare Margaret, espoused to Mathew Earle of Lenox, Father of the Lord Henry, who died at the age of nine moneths, and lyeth interred in the upper end of the Chancell in the Parish Church of Stepney neer London: Her second Sonne was Henry Lord Dnley, reputed for personage the goodliest Gentle∣man of Europe; who married Mary Queen of Scotland, the Royall Parents of the most Royall Monarch Iames the first, King of great Britaine: Her third Sonne was Charles Earl of Lenox, Father to the Lady Arbella. King Henries second Daughter the Lady Elizbeth was borne in the yeere 1492. at three yeers of age, died; and was buried at Westminster: His third Daughter the Lady Mary, had been promised to Charles King of Castile; but was married to Lewis the twelveth, King of France; who dying three moneths after, she was then married to Charles Brandon Duke of Suffolke: His fourth Daughter, the Lady Katherine, was borne in the yeer 1503. in the eighteenth yeer of her Fathers Reigne, and dyed n Infant. Of his Personage and Conditions. HE was of Body leane and spare, yet of great strength; of statue somewhat higher than the common sort, his Eyes gray, his Teeth single, his Haire thinne, of a faire complexion and pleasing countenance. Concerning his Conditions, e had in him the virtue of a Prince, and of a private man; affable, yet reserved. We might say he was Politick; if not rather, that he was Wise: for though he used  of Cunning sometimes, yet solid Circumspection more. He loved not Warre, but in case of necessity; alwayes Peace, but with conditions of Honour. Never y Prince was lesse addicted to bodily pleasures of any kinde, than he. Three plea∣sures he had, but in three Cares; One for Safety; another for Honour; and the third for Wealth: in all which hee attained his end. His great respect of the Church, was seen by his great imployment of Church-men; for through the hands of Bishop Morton, Bishop Foxe, and his Chaplaine Vrswick, the greatest part of all his great negotiation passed. He was Frugall from his youth, not Covetous till an∣cient and sickly; and therefore what defect he had in that kinde, must be attributed to age and weaknesse. This City of London was his Paradise, for what good fortune  befell him, he thought he enjoyed it not, till he acquainted them with it. His Parliament was his Oracle; for in all matters of importance he would aske their
advice; and he put his very Prerogative sometimes into their hands. He was no great lover of women; yet all his great fortune both Precedent and Subsequent came by women: His own title to the Crown, was by a woman; His Confirmati∣on in the Crown, was by a woman; His Transmission of the Crowne to his Poste∣rity, was by a woman: The first by the Lady Margaret, descended from Ioh of Gaunt; the second by the Lady Elizabeth, eldest Daughter of King Edward the fourth; the third by the Lady Margaret, eldest Daughter of himselfe King of England, and maried to Iames the Fourth, King of Scotland; by meanes whereof, as he was the Prince that joyned the two Roses in one, so he was the Founder of joyning the two Kingdomes in one. And lastly, it may be said of him, as was said by one of August Caesar,—Hic ir hic est tii quem promitti saepius audis: for Cadwal∣loder last king of the Britaines, seven hundred yeeres before, had Prophesied of him; and of later time, King Hery the Sixth plainly fore-shewed him. Of his Death and Buriall. IN the two and twentieth yeer of his Reigne, he began to be troubled with the Goute; but a Defluction also taking into his Breast, wasted his Lungs, so that thrice in a yeer, and specially in the Spring, he had great fits and labours of the Tissick, which brought him to his end, at his Palace of Richmond, on the two and twentieth day of April in the yeer of 1508. when he had lived two and fifty yeers, Reigned three and twenty and eight moneths: Being dead, and all things necessary for his Funerall prepared; his Corps was brought out of his Privy Cham∣ber, into the great Chamber, where it rested three dayes; and every day, had there a Dirge and Masse sung by a Plelate, Mitred: and from thence it was conveyed in∣to the Hall, wherein it remained also three dayes, and had a like service there; and so three daies in the Chappell: Upon Wednesday the nineth of May, the Corps was put into a Chariot, and over the Corpes was a Picture of the late King, laid on Cu∣shions of Gold; and the Picture was apparelled in the Kings rich Robes, with a Crown on the head, and a Ball and Scepter in the hands: when the Chariot was thus ordered, the Kings Chappell and a great number of Prelates set forward, pray∣ing; then followed all the kings Servants in Black; then followed the Chariot, and after the Chariot nine Mourners, and on every side were carried Torches, to the number of six hundred, and in this order they came from Richmond to St. Georges field; where there met with it all the Priests and Religious men within the City and without; the Major and Aldermen, with many Commoners, all cloathed in Blacke, met with the Corpes at London-bridge; and so the Chariot was brought throught the City to the Cathedrall of St. Paul, where the Body was taken out and carried into the Quire, and set under a goodly Hearse of Wax; where after a solemne Masse, was made a Sermon by the Bishop of Rochester: The next day, the Corps in like manner was removed to Westminster; Sir Edward Haword bearing the kings Banner. In Westminster was a curious Hearse full of lights, which were lighted at the comming of the Corps; and then was the Corpes taken out of the Chariot by six Lords, and set under the Hearse, which was double railed: when the Mourners were set, Gartr king at Armes, cryed, For the Soule of the Noble Prince king Henry the seventh, late king of this Realme: The next day were three Masses solemnly sung by Bishops, and after the Masses was offered the kings Banner and Courser, his Coat of Arms, his Sword, his Target and his Helm, and at the end of the Masse, the Mourners offered up rich Palls of Choath of Gold and Bodkin; and when the Quire sang Liber me, the Body was put into the Earth; then the Lord Treasurer, Lord Steward, Lord Chamberlaine, the Treasurer and Comptroller of the kings houshold, brake their Staves and cast them into the Grave: Then Gartar cryed with a loud voice; Vive le oy, Henry le itiesme; Roy d'Angleterre & de France, syre d' Irlande: and thus ended the Funerall.
Of men of Note in his time. OF Men of Valour and Armes, they are to be seene in the History of this Kings Reigne. For men of letters in his time, of forreigners were Sancts Pagui∣s a great Hebrician; Leonicenus, Gattinaria, Cabellus and Optatus Phisitians; Augu∣stinus Niphus, Iacobus Faber, Stapulensis and Pighius Philosophers; Petrus Bembus and the famous Clerke Rheudin, who restored againe the knowledge of the Hebrew Tongue. Of our own Country, there lived in his time, George Rippley a Carmelite Frier of Boston, who wrote divers Treatises in the Mathematicks; and after his death was accounted a Necromancer. Iohn Erghom borne in Yorke, a Black-Frier, studi∣ous in Prophesies, as by the Title of the workes he wrote, may appeare. Thomas Mallorie a Welshman, who wrote of King Arthur, and of the round Table. Iohn Rouse borne in Warwickshire, a diligent searcher of Antiquities, and wrote divers Treatises of Historicall Argument. Thomas Scroope sirnamed Bradley, of the Noble family of the Scroopes, entred into divers orders of Religion, and after withdrew himselfe to his house, where for twenty yeeres he lived the life of an Anchorite; and after, comming abroad againe, was made a Bishop in Ireland, and went to the Rhodes in Ambassage; from whence being returned, he went bare-footed up and downe in Nrfolk, teaching the ten Commandements; and lived till neere a hundred yeeres old. Iohn Toneys an Augustine Frier in Norwich, who wrote certaine Rules of Grammar, and other things printed by Richard Pinson. Robert Fabian a Sheriffe of London, and an Historiographer. Edmund Dudley, the same man whom king Henry used to take the forfeitures of Penall Statues; who wrote a Booke intituled Arbor Re-publicae. Iohn Bockingham an excellent Schoole-man: and William Blackeney a Carmelite Frier, a Doctor of Divinity, and a Necromancer.
THE REIGNE OF KING HENRY THE EIGHT. KING Henry the seventh being deceased, his only sonne Prince Henry, Heire by his Father of the house of Lan∣caster, and by his Mother of the house of Yorke: by unque∣stionable right succeeded in the Crowne, at the Age of eighteene yeers, on the two and twentieth of Aprill, in the yeere 1509. who having been trained up in the study of good letters all his Fathers time he Governed at first, as a man newly come from Contemplation to Action, as it were by the Booke in so regular and fair a maner, that as of Neroes Goverment, there was said to be Quinquennium Neronis; so of this Kings, there might as justly be said, De∣cennium Henrici; and perhaps double so long a time, comparable with so much time of any Kings Reigne, that had been before him. How he came to alter, and to alter to such a degree of change as he did, we shall then have a fit place to shew, when we come to the time of his alteration. King Henry having lear∣ned by Bookes, that the weight of a Kingdome is too heavy to lie upon one mans shoulders, if it be not supported by able Councellours; made it his first care, to make choice of an able Councell; to which he called VVilliam VVar∣ham Archbishop of Canterbury, and Chancellour of England, Richard Fox Bishop of VVinchester, Thomas Howard Earle of Surry, and Treasurer of Eng∣land, George Talbot Earle of Shrewsbury, and Lord Steward of his Houshold, Charles Summerset Lord Chamberlaine, Sir Thomas Lovell Sir Henry VVyat, Doctor Thomas Ruthall, and Sir Edward Poynings; by advise of these Councel∣lours, his first Act after the care of his Fathers Funerall; was the care to per∣forme his Fathers Will, in marrying the Lady Katherine of Spaine, the Re∣lict of his Brother Prince Arthur; to which perhaps but in respect of filiall pierie, he had not the greatest devotion; and for relinquishing whereof, he might (no doubt) more easily have obtained a Despensation from the Pope, then his Father had done, for getting it to be allowed: but obsequiousnesse to his Fathers desire, and respect to his Councels advice, so far prevailed with him, that he would not be Crowned, till that were performed, that one Co∣ronation might serve them both: and so on the third day of Iune following, he married the said Lady, at the Bishop of Salisburies house in Fleetstreet; where of many great solemnities, I will remember but this one; that though the Bride were a Widdow, yet to shew she was a Virgin Widdow, she was at∣tired all in white, and had the haire of her head hanging-downe behinde at the full length: and then (having made in the Tower four and twenty Knights of the Bath) two dayes after being Midsomer day, he was Crowned at Westmin∣ster,
together with his Queene, by the hands of VVilliam VVarham Archbishop of Canterbury; with all Circumstances of State, in such cases usuall; and then all the Nobility Spirituall and Temporall, did him Homage; and the people being asked whether they would receive him for their King, they all with one voice, cryed, yea, yea. This done, his next Act was another part of performing his fathers Will, which was to proclaime Pardons for all offences, (Treason, Murder, and Fe∣lonie only excepted) and to have restitution made of all goods unjustly taken from any; and because the Instruments of such injustice, are alwayes most odious, and nothing gives the people so much contentment, as to see their Persecutours punished; he therefore caused Empson and Dudley the two chiefe Actours of the late unjust proceedings, to be committed to the Tower, and divers of their inferiour Agents, called Promoters, as Canby, Page, Smith, Derby, Wright, Simpson, and Stockton, to be set on the Pillory in Cornhill, with papers on their heads, and then to ride through the City, with their faces to the horse tailes; with the shame whereof within seven dayes after, they all di∣ed in Newgate. Shortly after a Parliament was called; whereof Sir Thomas Ingleby was chosen Speaker; and therein Empson and Dudley were attainted of High Treason, and after arraigned; Edmund Dudley in the Guildhall, on the seventeenth of Iuly, and Sir Richard Empson at Northampton in October fol∣lowing, and on the seventeenth of August the yeere following, they were both of them beheaded on the Tower Hill; and their Bodies and Heads buried, the one at the White Fryers, the other at the Black. On Midsomer Eave at night, King Henry came privily into VVestchester, cloathed in one of the Coats of his Guard, to behold the same: and this first yeer King Henry spent in Justs and Maskes, which were almost perpetuall, performed with great Magnificence alwayes; and sometimes with great Acts of Valour, on the Kings part specially. In February the same yeer, Embassadours came from the Kings Father in law, the King of Aragon; requiring Ayde against the Moores; in which service, the Lord Thomas Darcy, a Knight of the Garter, making suite to be imployd; he was sent thither, and with him the Lord Anthony Gray, brother to the Marquesse Dorset, Henry Guilford, Wolstan Browne, and William Sidney Esquires of the Kings House, Sir Robert Constable Sir Roger Hastings, Sir Ralph Elderton and others; who on the Mundy in the Rogation Weeke, departed out of Plimot Haven, with four ships Royall, and on the first of Iune, arrived at the Port of Cadis in south Spaine; of whose comming the King of Aragon hearing sent to bid them welcome, but advertising them withall, that he had now by reason of new troubles with France, taken truce with the Moores; and therefore they might returne againe into their owne Country, to whom yet he allowed wages for all his souldiers. Wereupon the Lord Darcy and all his men went aboord their ships, but Henry Guilford, Woltan Brwne, and William Sidney, desirous to see the Court of Spaine, went thither and were honourably entertained. Henry Guilford, and Wolstan Browne were made Knights by the King; who gave to Sir Henry Guilord a Canton of Granado; and to Sir Wolstan Browne an Eagle of Sicily on a Chiefe, to the augmentation of their Armes: William Sidney so excused himselfe, that he was not made Knight. After this they returned to their ships, and their ships into England. During the time that the Lord Darcy was in Spain, the Lady Margaret Dutch∣esse of Saoy, Daughter unto Maximilian the Emperour; and Governesse of Flandes and other the Low-countryes, pertaining to Charles the young Prince of Catile, sent to King Henry for fifteen hundred Archers, to aid her against the Duke of Gelders, which the King granted; and thereupon Sir Edward Poynings Knight of the Garter, and Comptroller of the Kings House appointed to goe, accompanid with his sonne in law the Lord Clinton, Sir Matthew Browne, Sir Iohn Digy, Iohn Werton, Richard Wetherill, and others, to the number of fifteen
hundred, took shipping at Sandwich, and passing over to the said Lady Regent, did her there great service; for which Iohn Norton, Iohn Fogge, Iohn Scott, and Thomas Lynde were knighted; and then with many thanks and rewards, re∣turned, not having lost in all the Journey, by warre or sicknesse, above an hun∣dred men. In the third yeer of King Henryes Reigne, one Andrew Barton a scottish Pirate, was grown so bold, that he robbed English-men no lesse then other Nations till the King sent his Admirall, Sir Edward Howard to represse him, who in a fight, so wounded the said Barton, that he died; and then taking two of his ships, brought the men prisoners to London; and though their offence deserved no lesse then death, yet the King was so mecifull as to pardon them all; provided, they departed the Realme within twenty dayes. The King of Scotts hearing the death of Barton, and taking of his ships; sent to King Henry, requiring restitution; but King Henry answered his Herauld, that he rather looked for thanks for spar∣ing their lives, who so justly had deserved death. In the third yeer also of King Henryes Reigne, the French King made sharpe Warre against Pope Iulius the second; whereupon King Henry wrote to the French King, requiring him to desist from his Warre against the Pope being his friend and confederate; but when the King of France little regarded his request, he then sent him word, to deliver him his Inheritance of the Dutchy of Nor∣mandie and Guyen, and the Countryes of Angiou and Mayne; as also his Crown of France, or else he would recover it by the sword. But when the King of France was not moved with this threatning neither; King Henry then joyning in league with the Emperour Maximilian, with Ferdinand King of Spaine, and with divers other Princes; resolved by advise of his Councell to make warre on the King of France, and to that end made preparation both by Sea and Land. This yeer the King kept his Christmas at Greenwich in a most Magnificent manner. On New-yeers day was presented one of his Joviall Devises, which one∣ly for a Patterne what his showes at other times were, I thinke fit to set downe at large. In the Hall was made a Castle, garnished with Artillery and weapons in a most warlike fashion, and on the Front of the Castle was written, la Forte∣resse Dangerense: within the Castle were six Ladies, clothed in russet Sattin, laid all over with leaves of gold: On their heads Coyfes and Caps of gold. Af∣ter this Castle had been carried about the Hall, and the Queen had beheld it; in came the King with five other, apparelled in Coates, one halfe of russet-Satten, with spangles of fie gold; the other halfe of rich cloath of gold: on their heads Caps of russet Sattin, embrodered with works of fine gold. These six assaulted the Castle, whom the Ladies seeing so lusty and couragious, they were contented to solace with them; and upon further communication, to yeeld the Castle; and so they came downe, and daunced a long space: after that the Ladyes led the Knights into the Castle, and then the Castle suddenly vanished out of their sights. On Twelfth day at night, the King with eleven more were disguised, after the maner of Italie, called a Maske; a thing not seen before in England. They were apparelled in garments long and broad, wrought all with gold, with Vysors and Caps of gold. And after the banket done, these Maskers came in, with six Gentlemen disguised in silke, bearing staffe Torches; and de∣sired the Ladyes to dance, and after they had danced and communed together; tooke their leave and departed. The five and twentieth of Ianuary began the Parliament, of which was spea∣ker Sir Robert Sheffield knight, where the Archbishop of Canterbury shewed the wrong which the King of France did to the King of England, in with-holding his Inheritance from him; and thereupon the Parliament concluded that Warre should be made on the French King and his Dominions. At this time King Ferdinand of Spaine, having Warre with the French King, wrote to his Sonne in law King Henry, that if he would send over an Army in∣to Biskey, and invade France on that side; he would aid them with Ordnance,
Horses, and all other things necessary; whereupon Thoms Gray, Marquesse Dorset was appointed to go, and with him the Lord Howard Sonne and heie to the Earle of Srry, the Lord Brooke, the Lord Willoughby, the Lord Ferrers, the Lords Iohn, Anthony, and Leonard Grey, all brothers, to the Marquesse; Sir Grisseth ap Ryce, Sir Maurice Barkeley, Sir William Sands, the Baron of Br∣ord, and Sir Richard Cornwall his brother, William Hussey, Iohn Melton, Willi∣am Kingstn Esquires, and Sir Henry Willoughby, with divers others, to the num∣ber of ten thousand, who taking ship at Southampton, o the sixteenth of Ma the third of Iune they landed on the coast of Biskey, whither within three dayes after their arrivall, came from the King a Marquesse and an Earle to welcome them; but of such necessaries as were promised, there came one; so as the English being in some want of victualls, the King of Navarre offered to supply them, which they accepted; and promised thereupon not to molest his Terri∣tories. After the Army had lyen thirty dayes, looking for aid and provision from the King of Spaine, at last a Bishop came from the King, desiring the to have patience a while, and very shortly he would give them full contentmet. In the mean time, the Englishmen forced to feed much upon Garlick, and  drink of hot Wines; fell into such sicknesse, that many of them dyed, at least eighteen hundred persons; which the Lord Marquesse seeing, he sent to the King to know his pleasure, who sent him answer, that very shortly the Duke of Alv should come with a great power, and joyne with him; and indeed the Duke of Alva came forward with a great Army, as if he meant to joyne with him as was promised; but being come within a dayes Journey, he suddenly tur∣ned towards the Realme of Navarre; and entring the same, chased out the King, and Conquered the Kingdom to the King of Spaines use. This Spanish policie pleased not the English, who finding nothing but words from the King of Spain, and being weary of lying so long idle; they fell upon some small Townes in the border of Guyen, but for want of Horses as well for service as draught; were un∣able to performe any great matter; at which time, being now October, the Lord Marques fell sick, and the Lord Howard supplied his place of General, to whom the King of Spaine once again sent, excusing his present coming, and requiring him, seeing the time of yeer was now past, that he would be pleased to break up his Army, and disperse his Companies into Townes thereabou, till the nex spring, when he would not faile to make good all his promises: Hereupon the Lord Howard and his Company went to Rendre, the Lord Willoughby to Gors∣chag, and Sir William Sands with many other Captaines to Fontarely. King Henry in the meane time, hearing what the King of Spaines intention was; sen his Herauld Windsor with Letters to the Army, willing them to tarry therefor that very shortly he meant to send them a new supply of Forces, under the conduct of the Lord Herbert his Chamberlaine; but this message so incense the Souldiers, that in a great fury they had slaine the Lord Howard if he had o yeelded presently to returne home; who thereupon was forced to hire shippe and in the beginning of December they landed in England; being taught y this experience what trust is to be given to Spanish promises. About the same time that the Marquesse went into Spaine, Sir Edward H∣ard Lord Admirall of England, with twenty great ships made forth toward Brttaine; where setting his men on land, he burned and wasted divers Town and Villages, and being threatned by the Lords of Brittaine to be encountred, to encourage his Gentlemen, he made divers of them Knights; as Sir Edwa Brook brother to the L. Cobham, Sir Grifeth Downe, Sir Thomas Windham, Sir Thomas Lucy, Sir Iohn Burdet, Sir William Pirton, Sir Henry Sherburne, and Sir Stephen Bull. The Brittains were tenne thousand, the English but five and twenty hundred; yet the Brittaines not contented with this advantage of num∣ber, would neds use policy besides, for by the advice of an old experienced Cap∣taine, their Generall commanded his men that asoone as Battels were joyned they should retire a little, meaning thereby to draw the English into some dis∣advantage;
but the common Souldiers not knowing their Generalls purpose, and supposing he had seen some present danger, instead of retyring tooke their heeles and fled; so giving the English by their Brittish policy, if not a Victory, at least a safety to returne to their ships. After which the Brittaines sued for truce, and could not obtaine it; for the English Admirall pursued his forraging the Countrey, till fearing there were many French ships abroad at Sea, he came and lay before the Isle of Wight. King Henry in the meane time followed his pleasures; and in Iune kept a solemne Just at Greenwich, where he and Sir Charles Brandon took up all cummers; and the King shewed himselfe no lesse a King at Arms, then in Estate. After this, King Henry having prepared men and ships ready to go to Sea; under the Governance of Sir Anthony Outread, Sir Edmund Ichingham, Wil∣liam Sidney and divers other Gentlemen; appointed them take the sea, and to come before the Isle of Wight, there to joyne with the Admirall; which al∣together made a Fleet of five and twenty faire ships: and to Portesmouth he wet himselfe to see them, where he appointed Captaines; for one of his chief∣est ships called the Regent, Sir Thomas Knevet master of his horse, and Sir Iohn Carew of Devonshire, and to another principall ship called the Soveraigne, he appointed for Captaines Sir Charles Brandon, and Sir Henry Guildford; and then making them a banke, sent them going. The French King likewise had prepared a Navy of nine & thirty ships in the Haven of Brest, whereof the chief was a great Carrick, called the Cordelyer, pertaining to the Queen his wife. These two Fleets met at the Bay of Brittaine, and there entred a tirrible fight; The Lord Admirall made with the great ship of Deepe, and chased her; Sir Charles Brandon and Sir Henry Guildford being in the Soveraigne, made with the great Carrick of Brest, and laid stemme to stemme to her but whether by negligence of the Master, or by reason of the smoake from the Ordnance, the Soveraigne was cast at the stere of the Carrick; whereat the Frenchmen shour∣ed for joy; which Sir Thomas Knevet seeing, suddenly he caused the Regent in which he was, to make to the Carrick, and to grapple with her a long boord; and when they of the Carrick perceived they could not get a sunder, they let slippe an Anchor, and so with the streame the ships turned, and the Carrick was on the Weather side, and the Regent on the Lee side; at which time a cruell fight passed between these two ships: but in conclusion the Englishmen entred the Carrick, which when a Gunner saw, he desperately set fire on the Gunpow∣der (as some say) though others affirmed, that Sir Anthonie Outhread following the Regent at the sterne, bowged her in divers places, and set her powder on fire; but howsoever it chanced, the Carrick and the Regent both were consumed by fire. In the Carrick was Sir Piers Morgan, and with him nine hundred men: in the Regent were Sir Thomas Knevett, and Sir Iohn Carew, and with them seven hundred men, all drowned and burnt. King Henry to repaire the losse of the Regent, caused a great ship to be made, such a one as had never been seen in England; and named it Henry Grace de Dieu. Though King Henry had hitherto followed his pleasures, as well agreeing with his youth and constitution; yet he neglected not in the meane time severer stu∣dies; for he frequented daily his Councell Table, and no matter of importance was resolved on, till he had heard it first maturely discussed: as was now a War wih France, which he would not enter into upon his owne head, nor yet upon advise of his private Councell, till he had it dbted and concluded in Parlia∣ment; whereupon he called his High Court of Parliament, wherein it was re∣solved; that himselfe in person with a Royall Army, should invade France; and towards the charges thereof, an extraordinary Subsidy was willingly granted. On May even this yeer, Edmund de la Poole, Earle of Suffolke, was beheaded on the Tower Hill: This was that Earle of Suffolke whom King Phillip Duke of Austria, had delivered up into the hands of King Henry the seventh, upon his promise that he would not put him to death; which indeed he performed, but
his sonne King Henry the eight was not bound by that promise, and by him he was; and shortly after, to bring another Lord in his place, Sir Charles Brandon was created Viscount Lisle. For all the great preparation for France, King Henry forbore not his course of Revelling, but kept his Christmas at Greenwich, with divers cuious devises, in most magnificent manner. In March following, the Kings Navy Royall, to the number of two and forty ships was set forth, under the conduct of Sir Ed∣ward Howard Lord Admirall, accompanied with Sir Walter Deveraux Lord Ferrers, Sir Wolston Browne, Sir Edward Ichingham, Sir Anthony Poynings, Sir Iohn Walloppe, Sir Thomas Windham, Sir Stephen Bull, William Fits Williams, Arthur Plantagenet, William Sidney esquires; and divers other Gentlemen, who sayling to Brittane, came into Bertram Bay, and there lay at Anchor in sight of the French Navie, wherof one Prior Iohn was Admirall, who keeping himselfe close in the Haven of Brest; the English Admirall intended to assaile him in the Haven, but because his ships were to great to enter the Bay; he caused cer∣taine Boaes to be manned forth, thinking thereby to toule out the French; but when this neither would draw them to come abroad, he then called a Councell, where it was determined, that first they should assayle Prior Iohn and his Gal∣lies, lying in Blankesable Bay, and after set upon the rest of the French Fleee in the Haven of Brest; and it was further appointed, that the Lord Ferrers, Sir Stephen Bull, and others should go on land, with a convenient number, to as∣sault the Bulworkes, which the French had there made; while the Admiall with Row Brges and little Gallies entred into the Bay, that so the Frenchmen might at once be assailed both by sea and land. But though this were determi∣ned by the Councell of Warre et, the Lord Admirall had a trick by himselfe, for by the advise of a Spanish Knight called Sir Alphonso Charunt, affirming that he might enter the Bay with little danger; he called to him William Fis-VVilliams, VVilliam Cooke, Iohn Colley, and Sir VVolston Browne, as his most trusty friends, making them privy to his intent, which was to take on him the whole enterprize with their assistance only; and so confident he was of successe, that he wrote to the King to come thither in person, to have the honour of the enterprize himselfe; but it seemes the King had better Fates, at least went not; and thereupon, on Saint Marks day the Admirall put himselfe in a small row Brge; and appointing three other small row Ships, and his own Ship∣boat to attend him: and therewith on a sudden rowed into the Ba, where Pryor Iohn had moored up his Gallies just to the ground; which Gallies with the Bulworks on the land shot most cruelly; yet the Admirall went on, and comming to the Gallies, drove out the French-men. The Bay was shallow, and the other ships by reason the Tide was spent, could not enter; which the French-men perceiving, they entred the Gallies againe with Morris Pikes, and began a new fight; whereupon the Admirall attempting to returne back into his row Brge; which by violence of the Tide, was driven downe the streame; with a Pike was throwne over boord, and drowned; the just issue of his head∣strong enterprize; the forenamed Alphonso was also there slaine: upon which sorrowfull accident, the Lord Ferrers with the rest, returned into England. After whose departure, Pryor Iohn came forth with his Gallies; and coasting over the borders of Sussex, burnt certaine poore Cottages but the King made suddenly a new Admirall, the Lord Thomas Howard, eldest Brother to him that was drowned; sonne and heire of the Earle of Surrey: who so skowrd the seas, that the French were no more to be seen on any coast of England. King Henry had hitherto performed Acts of Armes, though in Jest, yet with great magnificence; he will not performe them with lesse, being now in earnest and especially to deale with so potent aa adversary: and therefore when it was concluded by Parliament, that he should make a Warre in France himselfe in prson; he sent before to prepare the way for him, George Talbot, Earle of Shewsbury, high Steward of his Houshold; accompanied with the Lord Tho∣mas
Stanley Earle of Derby, the Lord Dowckeroy Pryor of Saint Iohns, Sir Robert Ratcliffe, Lord Fitswater, the Lord Hastings, the Lord Cobham, Sir Riceap Thomas, Sir Thomas Blunt, Sir Richad Sacheverell, Sir Iohn Digby, Sir Iohn Askew, Sir Lewis Bagot, Sir Thomas Cornwall and others, to the number of eight thousand; who arrived at Callice about the middle of May; after him in the end of May, followed Sir Charles Somerset, Lord Herbert, Lord Cham∣berline, accompanied with the Lord Percy Earle of Northumberland, the Lord Gray Earle of Kent, the Lord Stafford Earle of Wiltshire, the Lord Dudley, the Lord Delaware, Sir Edward Hussey, Sir Edward Dimmock, Sir David Owen, with others, to the number of six thousand: These Generalls joyning together, issued out of Callice, and on the two and twentieth day of Iune, sate downe be∣fore the strong Towne of Terwin, which City was strongly fortified; and in it was Governour the Lord Poultreny, who had with him six hundred Horse∣men, and five and twenty hundred Almans, besides the Inhabitants. Here at the very first happened two disasters to the English; one, that the Baron Ca∣rew was slaine with a shot from the Towne; the other, that Sir Nicholas Vax, and Sir Edward Belknappe coming from Guyses with four and twenty Carts of Provision, were set upon by the Duke of Vendosme, Lieutenant of Picardie, and many of the English slaine, and the Provision taken. In this state was the English Campe at Terwin; when King Henry the last day of Iune came him∣selfe to Callice, and on the one and twentieth of Iuly took the field, having in his Army of fighting men, not above nine thousand, but with Pyoners, and others that attended the Cariages, eleven thousand and three hundred men: His foreward was led by Charles Brandon Viscount Lisle, his maine Battaile by himselfe, and Sir Henry Guildford carried his Standard; and in this order he marched forward to the siege of Terwin, entring upon the French ground, the five and twentieth of Iuly. On the morrow after, by negligence of the Carters, that mistook the way, a great Gunne called the Iohn Evangelist, was over∣throwne in a deep Pond of water, aud could not at that time be recovered; but a few dayes after, the Master Carpenter taking with him a hundred labourers, went and weyed it up; but having carted it ready to bring away, was set upon by eight hundred French; and the most of his company slaine: the Gunne was taken by the French, and carried to Bulloyne. In the French Army were to the number of eleaven thousand footmen, and four thousand Horse; whereof were Captaines, the Lord De la Palyce, the Lord De Priennes, the Duke De Lon∣guevyle, the Earle of Saint Paul, the Lord of Floringes, the Lord of Clermont, and Richard De la Poole an English man, sonne to Iohn Duke of Suffolke. The Armies were come within two miles one of another, and some light skirmishes passed between them, specially one; on a day called the dry Wednesday, for the day was wonderfull hot, and the King with his Army stood in order of battaile, from six a clock in the morning, till three in the afternoone: after this, the King removed towards Terwyn; and as the Army marched, another of the Kings Bombards of Iron, called the Redde Gunne, was overthrowne in a lane, and there left; which the French understanding, went with a great power to fetch it away, as they had done the other; but the Lord Berners, Captaine of the English Pyoners, prevented them; and though set upon by the French, to the number of nine or ten thousand, yet by the valour of the Earle of Essex, and Sir Riceap Thomas, with the bold adventures of Sir William Tyler, and Sir Iohn Sharpe, they recovered it and brought it safe to the Campe. On the fourth of August K. Henry came before the city of Terwyn, where he strongly fortified his Tents with Ordance, and other Warlike defences. In which meane time, the Captaine of Bulloigne, knowing that many of the Garison of Callice were gone with the King, thought to take advantage of heir absence, and do some great exploit upon Callice; and therupon with a thousand men, came to New∣ha Bridge, and killing the watchmen, tooke it; but afterward some of his company going to fetch Booties, and coming so neere the walls of Callice, that
they were descried; about sixscore Coopers and other Artificers issued forth, and driving them back, recovered againe Newnham Bridge, and took divers of them prisoners; especially when the gate of Callice, called Bulloign gate was ope∣ned, & that Colepepper the under Marshal, with two hundred Archers issued forth, and joyned with them. The French prisoners were brought to Callice, and there sold in open Market; amongst others, a Cooper of the Town of Callice, bought a prisoner that dwelt in Bulloigne, and had of the prisoner for his rasome, a hun∣dred Crowns; when the mony was paid, the French man prayed the Cooper to see him safe delivered, and to conduct him out of danger; the Cooper was content, and went himselfe alone with the French man, till he came beyond the Cawsey, and there would have departed; but the French man perceiving that the Cooper was aged, and that no rescue was nigh by force tooke the Cooper prisoner, d caried him to Bulloigne; making him pay two hundred Crownes, before h was delivered. Whilst King Henry lay thus at the siege of Terwyn, on the eleventh of Au∣, the Emperour Maximilian was come to Ayre; which King Henry under∣standing, went and met him between Ayre and the Campe; where with great complements they saluted each other; but their complements were broken off, by e extreame foule weather which happened that day: the morrow after, the Emperour Maximilian came from Ayre to the Kings Campe, wearing a Crosse of Saint George, as the Kings Souldier, and receiving wages of him for service; an honour never done to any King of England before; and yet was no disparagement to the Emperour, for he was royally received, and lodged in a Tent of cloath of gold; that as no Emperour before, had ever been souldier to a King; so no souldier before was ever lodged in such a Tent. At this time the City of Terwyn, being in some distresse for want of victualls; the French King appointed all his horsemen to the number of eight thousand, to see victu∣alls by any means convoyed into it; the charge of which Convoy was commit∣ted to Monsieur De Priennes: but King Henry by advise of the Emperour Maximilian, had made Bridges to passe his men over the river, to the other side of the Towne, where was easiest accesse; in such sort, that when the French Convoy came with their victualls, and thought to have entred the Towne, they found the English Army there ready to resist them; whereupon a fierce battell was fought between them: but in conclusion the French were put to flight, and fled so fast, that from thence it was called the battell of Spurres, for that they used more their spurres in running away, then theit Launces in fighting. In this battell, the Duke of Longuevyle, the Lord of Clermont, Captaine Bayard, and others to the number of twelve score were taken prisoners, and all brought to the Kings presence; with six Standards that were likewise taken. After the battell, the King made Sir Iohn Pechye Banneret, and Iohn Carre Knight, who had both of them done great service in this encounter. King Henry having ob∣tained this victory against the French horsemen, and hindred the Towne of Ter∣wyn from reliefe of victualls, and withall plying his battery more fiercely then before; made the Townsmen soone fall to desire composition, and upon con∣dition that the souldiers might depart with Horse and Armour, they yeelded up the Towne into the Kings hands. This was done on the eighteenth of Au∣gust, and the Earle of Shrewsbury entred the Towne the same night; and set up the Banner of Saint George in the highest place of it, in signe of victory, and swore all the Townsmen to be true subjects to the King of England. The four and tweneth of August, the King himselfe entred the Towne, and dined in the Bishops Palace, where it was resolved, that the Walls and Fortifications of Terwyn should be raced, and the Towne burnt all but the Cathedrall Church and the Pallace, all the Ordnance was sent to Ayre, to be kept there to the Kings use. After this it was concluded, that the King should lay siege to the City of Tourney; whereupon he set forward in three battells, the Eeale of Shrewsbury
led the Vangard; the King and the Emperour, the Battaile; and the Lord Chamberlaine the Reeward. In this order the Kings Army marched forwards towards Tourney; by the way, he went and visited the yong Prince of Castile, and the Lady Margaret, Governesse of the Prince, in the Towne of Lisle, where with all Magificence; or rather indeed Reverence, he was entertained; and af∣ter he had staied there three dayes, he took his leave, and being gone a mile and somewhat more out of the towne, he asked where his Campe lay, and no man there could tell the way, and guide they had none; the night was so darke and mystie, by chance at last they met with a victualler comming from the Camp, who was their guide and conducted them to it. By which we may see, to what distresse a great Prince may be brought by a little over-sight. On the one and twentieth day of September, the King removed his Campe to∣wards Tourney; and being come within three miles of the towne, he sent Garter king of Armes to summon the towne; but they, though they had but few men of warre amongst them, yet stood upon their guard; whereupon the King be∣gin it on all sides, and made such firce batteries upon it, that though it were written on the gates of the towne, graven in stone, Iamais tu ne as perdu ton Pu∣cellege; thou hast never lost thy Maidenhead; yet now they were glad to loose it: and in conclusion, they sent a trumpet to require a Parley, and then sued for mercy, and yeelded it up, and paid ten thousand pounds sterling besides, for redemption of their liberties: and then Master Thomas VVoolsey the Kings Al∣moner, calling before him all the Citizens yong and old, swore them to the King of England; the number of whom was fourescore thousand. This done, the King entred into Tourney, and calling into his presence Edward Guildford, VVilliam Fitzwilliams, Iohn Dansie, VVilliam Tyler, Iohn Sharpe, VVilliam Hussey, Iohn Savage, Christopher Garnysh, and some other valiant Gentlemen; he gave to them the order of knighthood; and then remembring the great en∣tertainment the Prince of Castile and the Lady Margaret had given him at Lisle, he would not be behinde them in such courtesie; and thereupon inited them solemnly to his citie of Tourney, whom at their coming he brought into the towne in great triumph: during their abode in Tourney, amongst other compliments of entertainment, there was had a Justs, where the King and the Lord Lisle answered all comers: after the Justs, was a sumptuous Banquet; after the Banquet, the Ladies danced, and then came in the King, and eleven other in a Maske, all richly apparelled with Bonnets of gold: and when the had passed the time at their pleasures, the garments of the Maskers were cast off; amongst the Ladies take them that could. This was King Henries dispo∣sition, that he could not forbear Revelling in the midst of his Armes; and La∣dies must be entertained as well as souldiers. After this, finding the French not willing to come to a Battaile, and the winter drawing on, he left Sir Edward Poynings Governour of Tourney, and then returned to Callice, and from thence passed into England, and rode in post to Richmond to the Queene. Whilst King Herry was thus busied in his warre with France, the King of Scots, though his Brother in law, yet instigated by the French King, and taking advantage of King Henries absence, assembled his people to Invade England; but before his whole power could come together, the Lord Humes his Cham∣berlin, with seven or eight thousand men entred the borders; but as he was re∣turning with a great booty of Cattle, in a field overgrowne with Broome, cal∣led Milfield, he was encountred by Sir Edward Bulmer, having with him not above a thousand men; who lying in that field in ambush, broke out upon him, and put him to flight, with the slaughter of five or six hundred of his com∣pany, and foure hundred taken prisoners, the Lord Humes himselfe escaped by light, but his Banner was taken; and this, by the Scots was called, the ill Rode. In the meane time the whole power of Scotland was assembled, no fewer then one hundred thousand men; though Buchanan in favour of his Countrey, aith, not the fifth part of that number; and with these, King Iames approaching
the borders, and coming to Norham Castle, laid siedge unto it, which for want of Powder, was soone delivered up unto him. But by this time the Earle of Surrey, Lievtenant of the North parts, had assembled an Army of six and twen∣ty thousand men; to whom also soone after, his Sonne the Lord Admirall, with one thousand expert souldiers came and joyned and now having many great Lords and Knights in his Army, he appointed to every one their station; and then was informed, that King Iames being removed six miles from Norha, lay embattelling upon a great Mountain called Floddon, where it was impossible to come neere him, but with great disadvantage; for at the foot of the hill, o the left hand, was a great maish ground full of reeds and water, on the right hand was a river called Till, so swift any deepe that it was not possible; on the back-side were such craggie rocks and thick woods, that there was no assayling him on that part; the forepart of his Campe he had fenced with his great Ord∣nance. Being in such a hold, the Earle of Surry found there was no possibility of a Battaile, unlesse he could draw him from the hil; wherupon he called a coun∣ell, by which it was determined to snd Roug-Cross Pusuivant at Armes with a trumpet, to the K. of Scots, to let him know, that he was ready on Friday follow∣ing to give him Battaile, if he would abide it; wherunto the King of Scots by his Pursuivant Ilay, made answer, that at the day prefixed he should finde him rea∣dy for Battail as he desired, that he would willingly have come to such a mach if he had bin at Edenburgh; but though he made this answer, yet he would not leave the strong Hold he was in, but kept himselfe still upon the Hill; at last, Thomas Lord Howard, sonne and heie to the Earle of Surrey, having viewed the Countrey round about, declared to his Father, that if he would but fetch a smal compasse, and come with his Army on the back of his Enemies, he should en∣force the Scottish King to come down out of his strength, or else stop him from receiving of victuals o any other thing out of Scotland. This councell of the Lord Howard his Father followed, and King Iames perceiving what their mean∣ing was, thought it stood not with his honour to be forestalled out of his owne Realme, and thereupon immediately raised his Camp, and got to another Hill, but not so steepe as the other; which the Earle of Surrey perceiving, he deter∣mined to mout it, and to fight with the Scots, before they should have leisure to fortifie their Campe; and herewith making a short Speech, for encourage∣ment of his Souldiers, he divided his Army into Battailes; the Vanguard was led by the Lord Howard, to whom was joyned as a Wing, Sir Edward Howard; the middle-ward was led by the Earl himself, and the Rear-ward by Sir Edward Stanley; the Lord Dacres with a number of horsmen was set apart by himselfe, to succor where need should be; the Ordnance was placed in the Front, and in other places, as was thought most convenient: and in this order they March for∣ward, towerds the Scots. On the other side, King Iames reckoning upon the be∣nefit of the Hill, thought the English half mad, to venture a Battaile upon such disadvantage; and thereupon making a Speech to encourage his Souldiers, who were of themselves so forward, that they needed no encouraging. Hee divided his Battailes in this manner; the maine Battaile he led himself, to which he ap∣pointed two Wings; the right led by the Earls of Huntley, Crwford and Mount∣rosse; the left by the Earls of Lenox and Argyle, together with the Lord Hmes Lord Camberlain: and so confident they were of victory, that the King first, and after all the Lords and meane me, put away their Horses, as thinking they should not need them; which confidence was afterward their undoing; for when the Battaile being joyned, Sir Edward Howard in getting up the Hill, was so assaulted by the Earles of Lenox and Argyle, that he was left almost alone, and in manifest perill to be slaine; in comes the Lord Dacres with his Hors∣men, and trode under foot the Scottish Battaile of speeres on foot, which he could not have done, if they had kept their Horses. And this part of the Scot∣tish Amy being led by the Earles of Crawford and Mountrosse, they were both of them slaine, and the whole Battaile but to flight. In another part
also Sir Edward Stanley did the like, upon the Battaile led by the Earles of Lenox and Argyle, putting it to flight, with the slaughter also of these two Earles. King Iames notwithstanding, maintained the fight still, with great resolution, till Sir Adam Forman his Standard-bearer was beaten downe; and then not fainting, though despairing of successe, he rushed into the thickest of his Enemies, amongst whom he was beaten downe and slaine; and to make his death the more honourable, there dyed with him three Bishops (whereof one was Alexander, Archbishop of Saint Andrewes, the Kings base Sonne) two Abbots, twelve Earles, and seventeene Lords, of Knights and Gentlemen very many, in all about eight thousand, and almost as many taken prisoners (as Pau∣lu Iovius saith) amongst whom was Sir William Scot, Chancellour to the said King, and Sir George Forman his Sergiant Porter; the Lord Hume and the Earle Huntley got horses and escaped. Neither was the Battaile without blood to the English, for there was slaine at lest a thousand, and (that which in a De∣feat was strange) many also taken prisoners; for many in pursuing the Scots, went rashly so farre that they knew not which way o returne, and by Bands of Scots that had not fought that day, were set upon and aken. When the field was done, the Lord Generall called to him certaine Lords and Gentlemen, and made them Knights, as Sir Edward Howard his Son, the Lord Scroope, Sir Willi∣am Percy, Sir Edward Gorge, and others. This Battaile was fought on Friday the ninth of September, in the yeere 1513. called by some Bramston, by some, lodden Field. King Iames heere slaine was the same that had maried the Lady Margaret eldest Daughter of King Henry the seaventh; and sister to the pre∣sent King Henry; and might have enjoyed many happy dayes, if he had kept himselfe firme to his alliance, but being carried away with the inveterate spleen betweene the two Nations, and propension to France; he ended his life, though honorably, yet miserably under many wounds. It is a very memorable, but sarce credable thing; which, (from the mouth of a very credible person who saw it) George Buchanan relates concerning this King; that intending to make a warre with England; a certaine old man of venerable aspect, and clad in a long blew garment, came unto him, and leaning familiarly upon the chaire where the King sat, said, I am sent unto thee O King, to give thee warning, that thou proceed not in the warre thou art about; for if thou doe, it will be thy ruine: and having so said, he pressed thorow the company, and vanished out of sight; for by no inquiry it could be knowne what became of him. But the King was too resolute to be frighted with Phantosmes, and no warning could divert his Destinie, which had not been Destiny if it could have been diverted. The day after the Battaile, his Body, though disfigured with wounds, was knowne by the Lord Dacres and others, to be his; and thereupon bowelled, embalmed and wrapped in lead, was brought to the Monastery of Sheene in Surrey, and there interred; but at the dissolution of that House, was taken up and thrown into a waste roome amongst timber and stone; which Iohn Stow saith, he so saw; and further relateth, that the servants of Launcelot Young, Glasier to Queene Eli∣zabeth being at Sheene, in new Glazing the windowes, either upon a foolish pleasure, or desire of the lead, cut the head from the rest; but smelling the sweet perfums of the Balms, gave it to their Master; who opening the lead, found therin the head of a man, retaining favour, though the moisture were cleane dried up, whose haire both of head and beard was red: which afterward, he caused to be buried, at Saint Michaels Church in Woodstreet, where he dwelled. But not∣withstanding this relation of Stow; Iohn Lesly Bishop of Rosse affirmeth, that it was held for certaine, the Body thus found, was the Body of the Lord Bouchard slaine in that Bttaile. Buchanan saith, of Alexander Elfinston, who in countenance and statue was like the King; and that King Iames was seene alive the same night at Kelso, whence he passed to Hierusalem, and there spent the rest of his dayes in holy contemplation: but howsoever it was, he was never seen any more in Scotland.
King Henry being now returned from Tourney into England, and finding the great services done in his absence against the Scots; on the day of the Purifi∣cation of our Lady, at Lambeth he created the Earle of Surrey Duke of Nor∣folke, with an augmentation of the Armes of Scotland; Sir Charles Brandon Viscount Lisle, he created Duke of Suffolke, the Lord Howard high Admirall, hee made Earle of Surry, Sir Charles Somerset Lord Herbert his chiefe Cham∣berlaine Earl of Worcester, and shortly after Sir Edward Stanly he made Lord Monteagle; and in March following, Master Thomas Woolsey his Almoner, was made Bishop of Lincolne. Here before we goe further, it will be fit o ay something of this man, that he be not a rub afterward in the way of the Story: He was borne at Ipswich in Suffolke, the sonne of a Butcher, sent to Oxford by reason of his pregnancy of wit, so soone, that taking there the first degree of Art, he was called the Boy Batchelour; proceeding in learning, he was made Fellow of Magdalen Colledge in Oxford, and afterward Schoolemaster of the Schoole there, at which time the Marquesse Dorset committed three of his Sonnes to be Instructed by him; and having a Benefice fallen in his gift, sent for him one Christmas, and bestowed it upon him; whereof Woolsey going to take possession, at his being there, for what misdemeanour is not delivered, he was by Sir Amyas Pawlet set by the heeles, which afterward he remembred to Sir Iams his no small trouble, for he made him attend his pleasure five or six yeeres; all which time lying in the Middle-Temple, where he re-edified the Gate-house next the street very sumptuously, setting the Cardinals Armes up∣on it, to appease him. After this disgrace he went over-sea, where he fell in acquaintance with Sir Iohn Naphant treasurer of Callice, and by him was pre∣ferred to be King Henry the sevenths Chaplaine: and now being by this meanes in the Kings eye, he so diligently carried himselfe, that he soone got into the Kings heart. One time it happened, the King had occasion to send a Messenger to the Emperour Maximilian, about a businesse that required haste; for which imployment no man was thought more fit then Woolsey; whereupon, the King called him, gave him his Errand, and bad him make all the speed he could; Woolsey departed from the King at Richmond about noone, and by the next mor∣ning was got to Dover, and from thence by noone that day was come to Callice, and by night was with the Emperour; to whom declaring his Message and having a present dispatch, he rode that night backe to Callice, and the night following came to the Court at Richmond. The next morning he presented himselfe before the King, who blamed him for not being yet gone, the mater requiring haste; to whom Woolsey answered, that he had beene with the Empe∣rour, and had dispatched the businesse, and for proofe shewed the Emperours lines; the King wondred much at his speed, but then asked him if he met not his Pursuivant, whom he sent after to advertise him of a speciall matter hee had forgotten; whereto Woolsey answered, May it please your Grace I met him yester-day upon the way, but that businesse I had dispatched before, taking the boldnesse so to doe without commission, as knowing it to be of speciall consequence; for which boldnesse I humbly intreat our Graces pardon. The King not onely pardoned him, but bestowed presently upon him the Deanery of Lincolne, and soone after made him his Almoner. In this state King Hen∣y the eight found him, with whom also he grew into such favour, that he made him of his Councell; and having won Tourney, made him Bishop of that Ci∣tie; and returning into England, (the Bishopricke of Lincolne falling void by the death of Doctor Smith) made him Bishop of that Diocesse. And thus far the story hath now brought him, but soone after he was raised higher; for Do∣ctor Bambridge Archbishop of Yorke dying, he was translated from Lincolne to that See; and that he might not be inferiour to the Archbishop of Canter∣ury, he procured of the Pope to be made Cardinall, and Legat a Latere; and after, by the King was made Lord Chancellour of England: and being come to this height of dignity, he so carried himselfe in Expences of Houshold, in
number of Retinve, and in all circumstances of State, that no Subject before or since, hath in any degree come neere him. And if we may say it, he was the first Debaucher of King Henry; for to the end he might have the managing of all matters himself, he perswaded the King that he should not need trouble him∣selfe with frequenting the Councell Table as he did, but take his pleasure, and leave those things to his Councell, whereof himselfe would alwaes give him nie Information. This was plausible Councell, and no marvaile if it were embraced of a yong King, coming from the mouth of so great a Prelate. In this fifth yeer of the King, the Citizens of London finding themselves grie∣ved with the Inclosures of the common fields about Islington, Hogsdon and Shrdich, and other places adjoyning; went one morning, and threw downe all the Hedges, and filled up all the Ditches; whereat though the Kings Councell were at first offended, yet the Maior and City shewed them such reasos, that they rested satisfied, and the fields were never since hedged. On the nineteenth of May, this yeer Pope Iulius the second sent to King Henry a Cap of Maintenance and a Sword; and being angry with the King of France, transferred by Authority of the Lateran Councell, the title of Christi∣anissimo from him, upon King Henry, which with great solemnity was publish∣ed the sunday following, in the Cathedrall Church of Saint Paul; but this so∣lemnity must not passe without Revelling, Maskes, and Justs; wherein the King and the Duke of Suffolke were defendants against all commers; who ha∣ving the Duke of Longuevyle, and the Lord of Clermont to be specttours, spread the fame of their Chivalrie into forreigne Nations. And now the great love that had been long between King Henry and the Flemings, began to abate; upon this occasion, King Henry the seventh had con∣cluded a match between his daughter Mary, and Charles Prince of Spaine: but by reason of her young yeers, and for want of assurance of Joynture, the match was deferred during his time; but now King Henry the eight seeing his sister of convenient yeers, began to call upon it, and signified so much to the Councell of Flanders; but they, whether having other ends, or out of Spanish delayes, put him off with excuses, and at last sent him word plainly, they could doe no∣thing in it that yeer. The King of France had soone Intelligence how much King Henry distasted these Spanish dealings, and meant to make some good use of it, for the ends he began to propose to himselfe, which were, to get the Lady Mary for himselfe, and thereby procure peace with England, being now old, and weary of the War. And for this purpose he got the new Pope Leo the tenth to be his mediatour, and both of them send Embassadours to King Henry, the Pope to perswade him to have peace with France, the French King to treat about a Marriage with the Lady Mary: upon whose Embassages, King Henry partly to satisfie the Pope, and partly to advance his sister; did not unwillingly hearken to the motions: but whilst this was in working, Pryor Iohn (who knew nothing of these intentions) began again to play his Praks; and coming with his Gallyes on the coast of Sussex, burnt Bhighthem-steed, and took away the goods he found in the Village, whereupon the Lord Admirall sent Sir Iohn Walloppe to sea, with divers ships and eight hundred men, who for one Village that Pryor Iohn burnt in England, burnt one and twenty Villages and Townes in France, to the great honour of himselfe, and his countrey. And now King Henry by advice of his Councell, and specially of Woolsey Bishop of Lincolne, concluded both the peace with France, and the Marriage of his Sister the Lady Mary, with the French King; but yet it stuck a while up∣on some differences, King Henry demanding Bulloigne, and the King of France Tourney: in conclusion these demands were waved, and the principall conditions were first concerning the Ladies Joynture, that she should have two and thirty thousand Crownes of yeerly revenues if she survived the King; and then con∣cerning ths peace, that the French King should pay yeerly to King Henry for five yeers one hundred thousand Crownes, and the peace to continue between
them during their lives, and a yeer after, and bound reciprocally to assist each other with ten thousand foot, if the warre were by land, with six thousand if by sea. All things thus concluded, the Lady Mary was brought to Dover by King Henry and his Queen: and on the second of October taking shippig, was conducted by the Duke of Norfolke, the Marquesse Dorset, the Bishop of Dur∣ham the Earle of Surry, the Lord De la ware, the Lod Berners, the Lord Mont∣eagle, Sir Maurice Berkely, Sir Iohn Pechye, Sir William Sands, Sir Thomas Bul∣leyne Sir Iohn Carre, and many other Knights and Ladies; but being not past halfe way over the sea, their ships by tempest were dispersed, and the Lady with some jeoperdy landed at Bullen, where Sir Christopher Garnish was faine to stand in the water and take her in his armes, and so set her on shore, and there the Duke of Vendosme with a Cardinall and many other great States received her. From Bullen the eight of October, she came to Abbevyle where the Dolphyn received her: on the morrow being Saint Dennis day, she came to Saint Dennis, where the marriage between the King of France and her, was solemized (though some write it had been solemnized before at Abbevyle.) The fifth of November she was Crowned Queene of France, at which time the Dolphyn held the Crowne over her head, as being too massie for her to weare; and the day following she was received into Paris in most magnificent manner. In ho∣nour of whose Marriage and Coronation, the Dolphyn had caused a solemne Justs to be proclaimed, which should be kept in Paris the seventh of Novem∣ber. Upon report of this Proclamation in England, the Duke of Suffolke, the Marquesse Dorset and his four Brothers, the Lord Clinton, Sir Edward Nell, Sir Giles Capell, Thomas Cheiney and others, obtained leave of the King to be at the challenge, where they all behaved themselves with great valour, but spe∣cially the Duke of Suffolke; whose glory the Dolphyn so much envied, that he got a Dutch-man the tallest and strongest man in all the Court of France, se∣cretly as another person to encounter him, with a purpe to have the Duke foy∣led; but indeed it turned to his greater honour, for he foiled the Dutch-man in such sort, that when they came to the Barriers, the Duke by maine strength took him about the neck, and so prommeled him about the head, that he made the blood issue out at his nose: many other Princes and Lords did bravely; and after three dayes the Justs ended. King Henry was not long behinde to solemnize it in England also; for at Greenwich the Christmas following, on Newyeers night, and Twelfth night; he presented such strange and magnificent devices, as had seldome been seene; and the third of February following he held a solemne Justs, where he and the Marquesse Dorset answered all commers, at which time the King brake three and twenty speares, and threw to the ground one that encountred him both man and horse. At this time preparation was making for King Henry in person to go to Cal∣lice, there to meet with the French King and Queene, but death hindred the designe; for before the next spring, the first of Ianuary the French King dyed at the City of Paris, fourscore and two dayes after his marriage; teaching others by his example, what it is for an old man to marry a young Lady. King Henry hearing of the French Kings death, sent the Duke of Suffolke, Sir Rich∣ard Winkefield, and Doctor West, to bring over the Queene Dowager, accord∣ing to the Covenants of the marriage. Whereupon the Queene was delivered to the Duke by Indenture, who obtaining her good will to be her husband, (which was no hard matter, that had been her first love:) wrote to the King her brother for his consent; whereat the King seemed to stick a while, but at last consented; so as he brought her into England unmarried, and then marry at his return; but the Duke for more surety married her secretly in Paris, and after having received her Dower, Apparrell and Jewels; came with her to Callice, and there openly married her with great solemnity. At their coming into England, King Henry to shew his contenment with the marriage, in the com∣pany
of the Duke of Suffolke, the Marquesse Dorset, and the Earle of Essex, all richly apparelled; held a new kinde of Justs, running courses on horseback in manner Volant, as fast as one could follow another, to the great delight of the beholders. This yeer the King at his Mannour of Oking; Woolsey Archbishop of Yorke came and shewed him letters, that he was elected Cardinall; for which dignity he disabled himselfe, till the King willed him to take it upon him, and from thenceforth called him Lord Cardinall, but his Hat and Bull were not yet come: after which Doctor Warham Archbishop of Canterbury, and Lord Chancelour of England; finding Woolsey being now Cardinall, to meddle more in his office of Chancelourship, then he could well suffer resigned up the Seal, which the King presently gave to Woolsey. About this time, Cardinall Campejus was sent by Pope Leo to King Henry, to solicite him to a Warre against the Turke, with whom Cardinall Woolsey was joyned in Commission, who hearing of the ragged retinue of his fellow Cardinell; sent store of red cloath to Callice to make them fit followers of so great a Lord: and when Cam∣pejus was landed at Dover, Cardinall Woolsey caused the gentry of Kent to waite upon to Black-heath, where he was met and received by the Duke of Norfolk and many Prelates, & there in a Tent of cloath of gold shifted himself into his Car∣dinals robes. Eight Mules he had laden with necessaries; but Woolsey not think∣ing them enough for his honour, sent him twelve more. But now see the shame of pride, for in Cheap-side his Mules by some mischance overthrew their Carri∣ages and Coffers on the ground, whose lyds flying open, shewed the world what treasure it was they carried, old Breeches, Boots, and broken Shoos, broken Meat, Marybones and crusts of Bread; exposing him to the laughter of all the people: yet the Cardinall went joging on afore with his Crosses, guilt Axe and Mace, unto Pauls Church; and by the way had an Oration made him by Sir Thomas Moore, in name of the City, and then waited on with many Bishops, was conducted to Bath Place, where he was lodged for his own particuler: he got well by the Journey, for the King gave him the Bishoprick of Salisbury; but the errand he came about, which was to have Ayde by mony, for a Warre against the Turke, he could not obtaine, for it was well known to be but a de∣vise to get money, without any intention of what was pretended. In his seventh yeer, King Henry kept his Christmas at his Mannour of El∣tham; where on Twelfth night according to his custome, was a stately Maske of Knights and Ladies, with solemne Daunsing and a most Magnificent Banquet. It was now the eight yeer of King Henryes Reigne, when the new league be∣tween him and the French King was Proclaimed in the City of London: and this yeer Mageret Queene of Scots eldest Sister to King Henry, having before married Archibald Dowglasse Earle of Angus; by reason of dissention amongst the Lords of Scotland, was glad with her husband to flye into England, and to seek succour at her brothers hands; who assigned to her the Castle of Harbot∣tell in Northumberland to reside in; where she was delivered of a daughter na∣med Margaret. From thence the King sent for her and her husband to come to his Court; and thereupon the third of May, Queene Margaret riding on a white Palfrye (which the Queen of England had sent her) behinde Sir Thomas Parr, came through London to Baynards Castle, and from thence went to Greenwich: but her husband the Earle of Angus, was secretly before departed into Scotland; which when King Henry heard, he onely aid it was done like a Scot. And now in honour of his sisters coming, King Henry the nine and twen∣tieth of May, appointed two solemne dayes of Justs; where the King, the Duke of Sffolke, the Earle of Essex, and Nicholas Carew Esquire: took upon them to answer all commers, amongst others, the King and Sir William Kinston ran together, which Sir William though a strong and valourous Knight, yet the King overthrew him to the ground: all the rest was performed with no lesse
valour then magnificence. This yeer died the King of Aragon, Father to the Queene of England, for whom was kept a solemne Obsequie in the Cathedrall Church of Pauls; and Queene Margaret after she had been a yeer in England, returned into Scotland. In this yeer were sent twelve hundred Carpenters and Masons, with three hundred Labourers, to the City of Tourney in France, to build a Castle there, to keep the City in Awe. And now the Cardinall being weary of hearing so many Causes himselfe, as were daily brought before him; ordained by the Kings Commission (aftet the patterne of Mases, divers under Courts to hear complaints of Suitours: whereof one was kept in the Whitehall, another be∣fore the Kings Almoner Doctor Stokesley, a third in the Lord Treasurers lodg∣ing neere the Starre-chamber, and the fourth at the Roles in the afternoone: these Courts for a time were much frequneted; but at last, the people percei∣ving that much delay was used in them, and that sentence given by them bound no man by Law: they thereupon grew weary of them, and resorted to the com∣mon Law. By occasion of this Government of the Cardinall, who under co∣lour of Justice, did what he pleased: many great men withdrew themselves from the Court; as first the Archbishop of Canterbury, and the Bishop of Winchester, who went and lived in their Diocesses; then the Duke of Norfolke, and at length the Duke of Suffolke, who being run deep into the Kings debt, by reason of his many Imployments into France, and his great House-keeping since his marriage with the Kings Sister, hoped the King would have forgiven it, and would no doubt have done it, but that the Cardinall opposed it, to the end the Duke should be the more at his command. In October this yeer, Matthew Bishop of Sion commonly called the Cardi∣nall of the Swizzers came into England from the Emperour Maximilian; by whose soliciting, and Cardinall Woolseys perswasion, the King lent the Emperor a great some of money, for Woolsey being angry with the King of France, for detaining the revenewes of his Bishoprick of Tourney, perswaded King Henry that the best way to abate the French Kings power, was to furnish the Em∣perour money, the better to maintaine warre against him: and what Woolsey said, was in those dayes to King Henry an Oracle. This yeer the King kept his Christmas at his manner of Greenwich; where on Twelfth night according to his custome, rare devices with great magnifi∣cence were presented; after which time the King exercised himselfe much in Hawking, which was like to have proved no good sport to him; for one time following his Hawke, and leaping over a Ditch with a Pole, the Pole brake, so that if one Edmund Mody a foot-man had not leapt into the water and lift up his head which was fast in the clay, he had been drowned. In this yeer also there happened in the City of London, an Insurrection a∣gainst strangers, specially of Artificers, complayning that strangers were per∣mitted to resort hither with their Wares, and to exercise Handy-crafts, to the great hindrance and impoverishing the Kings own Subjects; and not onely so, but that they were borne out in many great Insolencies, and wrongs they offer∣ed to the English, as one time it happened, a Carpenter in London called Willi∣amson, had bought two Pigeons in Cheap-side and was about to pay for them, when a French-man tooke them out of his hand, saying, they were no meat for a Carpenter: well (said Williamson) I have bought them, and I will have them; nay (said the French-man) I will have them for my Lord Embassadour; here∣upon they grew to words, and complaint was made to the French Embassadour, who so aggravated the matter to the Major, that the Carpenter was sent to prison, and when Sir Iohn Baker sued to the Embassadour for him, he an∣swered, by the body of God, the English knave was worthy to loose his life for denying any thing to a French-man, and other answer he could have none. Ma∣try like and worse Insolencies were offered by changes; which one Iohn Lincoln a Broker drew into a Bill, and prevailed with Doctor Beale, Preacher on Easter
Tuesday at the spittle to reade it openly in the pulpit, which so stirred up many, that strangers could hardly passe the streets, but were strucken, and sometimes beaten downe. At last, one evening, many Prentises and others assembling, rifled some strangers houses, and much mischief was like to be done: but by the tare of the Maior and Aldermen and by the indstry of Robert Brook Recor∣der, and Sir Thomas Moore, hat had bin under shriefe of London; they were gotten to be quiet and many of the disturbers were sent to prison, whereof Lincolne and twelve other were hanged, foure hundred more in their shirts, bound in ropes and halters about their neckes (and thereupon called the black wagon) were brought to Westminster, where the King himselfe sate that day; and when the Cardinall had charged them with the greatnesse of their offence; they all cryed, mercy, mercy: and then the King by the mouth of the Cardi∣nall, pardoned them all which clemency purchased the Kig no small love a∣mongst the people. In this ninth yeere, in Iune King Henry had divers Embassadors at his Court; for whose entertainment he prepared a costly Justs; himselfe and twelve more against the Duke of Suffolke and other twelve. The King had on his Head a Ladies sleeve full of Diamonds, and perhaps something else of the Ladies in hes heart, which made him performe his courses with the applause of all be∣holdes. This yeere by reason of a sweating sicknesse, Michaelms Tearme was adjourned; and the yeere following, Trinity Tearme was held one day at Ox∣ford, and then adjourned againe to Westminster. About this time Cardinall Woolsey obtained of Pope Leo, authority to dispence with all Offences against the spirituall Lawes; by vertue whereof he set up a Court, and called it, The Court of the Legat; in the which he proved Testaments, and heard Causes, to the great hindrance of all the Bishops of the Realme; and to the debauching of Priests and Religious persons, who relying upon his greatnesse, tooke uch a liberty of licentiousnesse, to themselves, that none was more disorderly, then those that were in orders: and supposiig per∣haps, they might lawfully comit such sins themselves, as they forgave to others. And indede the Cardinalls carriage exceeded all boundes of moderation; for when he said masse, he made Dukes and Earles to serve him of wine, with a say taken, and to hold the bason at the Lauatory: and when the Archbishop of Canterbury, writing a letter to him, subscribed, your brother William of Can∣terbury, he tooke it in great dudgion, to be termed his brother. It was now the tenth yeere of King Henries Reigne, when the Kin of France, longing much, to have Turney restored to him: by great guifts and greater promises wonne he Cardinall Woolsey, to move the King in it; who upon his perswasions, was contented to be treated withall about it: to which the King of France sent the Lord Bonquet high Admirall of France: and the Bishop of Paris, who in there attendance, having above fourescore Gentle∣men, and with their servants and all above twelve hundred, arived in England; and on Munday the seaven and twentieth of September, were met at Black-heath by the Eale of Surrey high Admirall of England, attended likewise with above five hundred Gentlemen and others, who conducted them to London, where they were lodged at Marchantailors Hall: The last of September, the Embassa∣dours went to the King at Greenwich, where after long communication, an Agreement was at last concluded under pretence of a marriage to be had, betweene the Dolphin of France, and the Lady Mary Daughter to the King of England, that in name of her marriage money, Tourney should be deliveted to the French King: he paying to the King of England, for the Castle he had made in that Citty, six hundred Thousand Cownes in twelve yeeres, by fiftie Thousand Crownes yeerly: and if the marriage should chance not to take effect, then that Tourney should be againe restored to the King of England; for performance of which article, Hrstages shotld be delivered: namely, Monsiur de Memorancye, Monsieur de Monpesac, Monsieur de Moy, and Monsieur Morett,
and moreover the French King should pay to the Cardinall of England a thou∣sand markes yeerly, in recompence of his Revenewes, received before of his Bishoprick of Tourney: All things thus concluded, the Cardinall made to the Embassadours a solemne Banquet, and after presented them with a stately Mummery. The eighth of October, the King feasted them at Greenwich, and at night presented a stately Maske of Knights and Ladies, with reare devises and great magnificence: The next day, Sir Thomas Exmew Major of London, feast∣ed them at Goldsmiths-Hall, and then delivering their foure Hostages, they tooke their leave. At whose departure, the King gave to the Admirall of France, a Garnish of guilt vessell, a paire of covered Basons, gilt, twelve great guilt Bowles, fower paire of great guilt Pots, a standing Cup of Gold, garni∣shed with great Pearles, and to some other he gave Plate, to some other cheins of Gold, to some rich Apparell: to the great comendation of his liberality. Shortly after their departure, the Earle of Worcester Lord Chamberlaine, the Bishop of Ely, the Lord of Saint Iohns, Sir Nicholas Vaux, Sir Iohn Pechy, and Sir Thomas Bullen, as Embassadours from the King of England, accompanied with Knights, Gentlemen, and others, to the number of above foure hundred, passed over to Callice, and from thence went to Paris; where after Royall En∣tertainment by the King, with dierse Maskes and stately shewes, they tooke their leaves and rode to Tourney to see the Citty delivered to the French men, on the eighth of February to the great griefe of the English Garrison. After the English Embassadours were returned, King Henry to cheere up the foure French Hostages, left heere for performance of covenants, on the seaventh of May, presented a solemne and stately Maske, wherein himselfe, the Duke of Suffolke and the French Queene were Actors, and on the eight of March fol∣lowing was a solemne Just holden, and with great magnificence performed. In the eleventh yeere of King Henries Raigne died the Emperour Maximi∣lian, for whom, the King caused a solemne obsequie to be kept in Paules Church. After whose death the French King and the King of Spain, endeavoured by sundry plots, each of them to get the Empire, but in conclusion, Charles King of Castile, (afterwards called Charles the fifth) was elected Emperour; for joy whereof, a solemne Masse was sung at Pauls, the seaventh of Iuly, at which were present the Cardinall Campeius, the Cardinall of Yorke, the Duke of Buckingham, Norfolke and Suffolk, with the Embassadours of Spaine, France, Venice, and Scotland; and this yeere the King kept Saint Georges feast at Winsor, with great solemnity. At this time, diverse young Gentlemen that had been in France, after the manner of that Country, carried themselves so familiarly with the King; that the Lords of his counsell thought it a disparagement to him: and thereupon, with his leave first obtained, they banished them the Court: and in their places, brought in more staied aud graver men: namely, Sir Richard Winkefield, Sir Richard Ierningham, Sir Richard Weston and Sir VVilliam Kingston. In the summer of this yeere, the Queene lying at her Mannor of Havering in Essex, desired the King to bring thither the foure Hostages of France to whom shee made a Royall Banpuet and in September following the King lying at his Mannor of Newhall in Essex, otherwise called Beaulieu; where he had newly built a stately Mansion, invited the Queen and the French Hostages thi∣ther, where after a sumptuous Banquet, he presented them with an extraordinary Mask, for the Maskers were the Duke of Suffolk, the Earl of Essex, the Marquesse Dorset, the Lord Aburgaveny, Sir Richard VVinkfield, Sir Richard VVeston and Sir VVilliam Kingston, the youngest of whom was fifty yeeres old at least, that the Ladies might see, what force they had to make age young againe. At this time, the French King was very desirous to see the King of England with whom he had entred into such a league of alliance, and to that end made meanes to the Cardinall, that there might be an Enterview betweene them at some convenient place: to which the Cardinall, no so much to satisfie the
French King as to shew his owne greatnesse in France; esily condiscended, and thereupon perswaded King Henry, how necessary it was, that such an Enterview should be: and then were sent unto Guysnes, under the rule of Sir Edward Belknap three thousand artificers, who builded on the plaine before the Castle of Guysnes, a most stately Pallace of timber, curiously Garnished without and within: whither both the Kings in Iune next following, agreed o come and to answere all commers at the Tilt, Tournies and Barriers, whereof proclama∣tion was made in the Court of England, by Orleance King of Armes of France and in the Court of France by Clarentius, King of Armes of England: whilst these things were preparing on Candlemas Even, as the King and Queene were come from Even-song at their Mannour of Greenwich; suddainly there blew a Trumpet, and then entred into the Queenes Chamber, foure Gentlemen, who brought with them a waggon, in which sate a Lady richly apparelled; which Lady, acquainted the King, that the foure Gentlemen there present, were come for the love of their Ladies, to answer all commers at the Tilts on a day by the King to be appointed; which day was thereupon appointed on Shrovetuesday next nsuing, where they all behaved themselves with great valour, to the great delight of the King and Queene. By this time King Henry was ready for his journey into France, and so remo∣ving from his Mannour of Greenwich, on Friday the five and twentieth of May he with his Queene arived at Canterbury, where he ment to keepe his Whit∣sontide. At which time, the Emperour Charles returning ou of Spaine arrived on the coast of Kent, where by the vice Admirall of England, Sir William Fitz-Williams, he was conducted to land, and there met aud received by the Lord Cardinall in great state. After which the King himselfe rode to Dover, to welcome him: and on Whitsunday earely in the morning conducted him to Canterbury, where they spent all the Whitsontide in great joy and solace. The chiefe cause that moved the Emperour at this time, to come on land, was to have disswaded the King from any Enterview with the French King: but when he saw him o forward in that jourey, he then onely endeavoured to perswad him, that he should put no trust in the French Kings words, and with great guits and promises, prevailed with the Cardinall to joyne with him in this perswasion. The last of May, the Emperour tooke his leave, and the same day, the King made saile from Dover and landed at Callice, together with the Queen and many Lords and Ladies. The fourth of Iune the King and Queen removed from Callice to his Princely lodging beside the Towne of Guysnes, the most Royall Building that was eer seene; likewise Francis the French King had his lodging prepared close to the Towne of Ard, in a strange but most magnificent fashion. Both Kings had given authority and power to the Cardinall to affirme and confirme, o bind or unbind, whatsoever should be in difference betweene them; no lesse an honour to the Cardinall then a confidence in the Kings. On Thursday the seavenh of Iune, the Kings met in the vale of Andren so magnifi∣cently attired, both themselves, and all their followers, that from thence it was called he campe of cloath of Gold. Heere they spent that day in loving com∣plements; and at night departed, the one to Guysnes, the other to Ard. On Satureday the ninth of Iune were set up in a place, within the English pale two Trees of honour, with stately roomes and stages for the Queens, and thither the two Kings came, most Royally accompaned; wherein most magnificent man∣ner, they performed Acts of valour, both on fooe and horseback; and after them all the great Lords both of France and England did the like: this solem∣nity of Justs and Maskes was continued to the foure and twentieth day of Iune; at which time, the Kings and Queenes tooke leave of each other, the French King and Qeene removed to Ard; the King and Queene of England to Callice, where he remained till the tenth of Iuly, and then ridings oward Graveling, was by the way met by the Emperour, and by him conducted thithet, and there in most royall manner entetained; whereof when the French King heard, he be∣gan
from that day forward, to have King Henry in a kinde of jelousie, as though to love him and the Emperour both were inconsistent, and could not stand together. On Wednesday the eleventh of Iuly, the Emperor and his Aunt the Lady Marga∣ret, Dutchesse of Savoy, came with the King of England to the town of Callice, and there continued with Feasting, Dancing and Masking, till the fourteenth of Iuly. In which time, all the Articles of the league tripartito, betweene the Emperour and the Kings of England and France were reviewed; to which the King of France had so fully condiscended, that he had sent Monsieur de Roche to the Emperor with Leters of credence; that in the word of a Prince, he would inviolably observe and keepe them all: all which notwithstanding, he dispenced with his conscience af∣terward, in breaking them all. On Saturday, Iuly 14. the Emperor tooke his leave and went to Graveling; the King with his Queene returned into England. It was now the twelfth yeer of King Henries reigne; when being returned from Callice, he kept his Christmas at Greenwich with great magnificence; & on twelfth day he and the Earl of Devonshire maintained a solemn Justs against al commers. The Cardinal had long born a grudg against the Duke of Buckingham, for spea∣king certain words in his disgrace, and now hath made his way for reveng: for the Earl of Surrey, Lord Admirall, who had maried the Dukes daughter, the Cardi∣nall had caused to be sent Deputy into Ireland, and the Earle of Northumberland, the Dukes speciall friend he had caused upon certain suggested crimes to be Im∣prisoned; so as the Duke having his friends sequestred from him, he lay now open to accusations, and accusations shall not long be wanting; for the Duke having some time before put from him in displeasure, one Charles Knevet, that had been his Surveyar, and inward with him; him the Cardinall gets to him, to see what he could get out of him against the Duke. And whether it was out of desire of re∣venge, or out of hope of reward, or that the matter was so indeed, this Knevet con∣fessed to the Cardinall, that the Duke had once fully determined to make away the King; being brought into a hope to be King himselfe by a vaine Prophesie, which one Nicholas Hopkins (a Monke of an house of the Chartnar Order, besides Bristow, called Henton) somtimes his Confessor, had opened to him; and as for the Cardinall, that he had often heard the Duke sweare, he would punish him soundly for his manifold misdoings. And now had the Cardinall matter enough for Accu∣sation, which he so aggravated to the King, that the King bid him do with him ac∣cording to Law. Hereupon the Duke is apprehended and brought to the Tower by Sir Henry Marney, Captain of the Guard, the fifteenth of April, and shortly after in Guild-hal before Sir Iohn Brugge, then Lord Major, was indited of divers points of High-treason; the substance whereof was, that in the second yeer of the Kings reign, and at divers times before and after, he had imagined and compassed the Kings death at London and at Thornbery in Glocestershie; and that in the sixth yeer of the Kings reign, he went in person to the Priory of Henton, and there had conference with the foresaid Nicholas Hopkins, who told him he should be King; and that he had often said to the Lord Aburgayne who had maried his daughter, that if King Henry died without issue, he would look to have the Crown himself. Vpon these points hee was arraigned in Westminster-hall, before the Duke of Norfolk, sitting then as high Steward of Englad, the Duke of Suffolk, the Marquesse Dorset, the Earls of VVorcester, Devonshire, Essex, Shrewsbury, Kent, Oxford and Darby, the Lords of Saint Iohns de la ware, Fitz-water, Willoughby, Brook, Cobha Herbert & Morley. The Duke pleaded for himself til he swet again, but al booted ot, for by these Peeres he was found guilty and condemned, and so on Friday the seventeenth of May was led by Iohn Keyme and Iohn Skevington Sheriffes of Lon∣don to the scaffold on Tower-hill, and there beheaded. The Augustine Friers took his body and head and buried them. This Edward Bohun Duke of Buckingham was the last high Constable of England (the greatest place, next the high Steward in the kingdome) whose Power extended to restrain some actions of the King. He was also Earl of Hereford, Stafford and Northampton, he maried Elianor the daughter of Henry Earle of Northumberland, and had issue Henry Lord Stafford (Father to Henry Lord Stafford lae living) and three daughters, Elizabeth maried to Thomas
Hward Earl of Surrey, Katherine maried to Ralph Nevil Earl of Wesmerland, and Mary maried to George Nevill Lord of Abugaenie. In this meane while, a new Warre was begun between the Emperour and the King of France; for composing whereof, the Cardinall of Yorke was sent attended with the Earle of Worceter, Lord Chamberline, the Lord of Saint Iohns, the Lord Ferrers, the Lord Herbert, the Bishop of Duham, the Bishop of Ely, the Primate of Armagh, Sir Thomas Bullen, Sir Iohn Pechye, Sir Iohn Hussey, Sir Richard Winkfield, Sir Henry Guildord, and many other Knights, Gentlemen and Doctors. On the twelfth of Iuly he arrived at Callice, whether came to him the Chacellour of France, and the Count de Palice attended with four hundred horse, as Embassadours from the French King; and from the Em∣perour the like, with Commissions to treat and conclude of Peace. There were also Embassadours from the Pope, whom the Cardinall moved to have the Pope be a party also in their League, but they wanting Commission. Letters were presently sent to Rome about it, and in the time till answer might be had, the Cardinall went to Bruges, to speak with the Emperour, with whom having stayed thirteene dayes, after most Royall entertainment, he returned back to Cllice, and then fell presently to the treaty of Peace, with the French Com∣missioner, but was colder in the matter then he was before, as having had his edge taken off, by some dealings with the Emperour, so as nothing was conclu∣ded; but that Fishermen of both the Princes might freely Fish on the Seas without disturbance, till the end of February following; whereof he sent ad∣vertisement to both the Princes; to the Emperour by the Lord of Saint Iohns and Sir Thomas Bullen; to the French King by the Earle of Worcester and the Bi∣shop of Ely. During all which time of the Cardinalls stay in Callice, all Writs and Paents were there by him sealed, and no Sheriffe could be chosen for lack of his presence, having the Great Seal there with him, and full power in things, as if the King had been there in person. Before he returned he made a new League with the Emperour, and intimated to the French King, that he doubted the King of England would not hereafter be so much his friend, as heretofore he had been; whereat, though the King of France were much offended, yet he signifyed by his Letters (perhaps dissemblingly) that he would continue the King of Englands friend asmuch as ever: onely he enveighed against the Car∣dinall, as a man of no truth, & withdrew many Pensions which he had before gi∣ven to some English. Presently upon this, was Tourney besieged, by the Lord Hugh de Moncada a Spaniard; and though the French King sent great Forces to succour it; yet it was rendred up to the Emperour the last of November, in the thirteenth yeer of King Henries Reigne. This yeer Pope Leo died the first of December, suspected to be poysoned by Barnabie Malespina his Chamberlaine, whose office was alwayes to give him drinke. After whose death, Doctor Pace was sent to Rome, to make friends in behalfe of the Cardinall of Yorke; who was brought into a hope through the Kings favour to be elected Pope, but that hope was soon quailed; for before Do∣ctor Pace could get to Rome, Adrian the sixth was chosen Pope. This Doct. Pace was a very learned and religious man, yet thorow crosses in his imployment, fell mad and dyed; in whose place of Imployment succeeded Doct. Stephen Gardyner. On the second of February, King Henry being then at Greenwich, received a Bull from the Pope, whereby he had the Title given him to be defender of the Christian Faith, for him and his successours for ever; which Title was ascribed o him, for writing a Booke against Luther, of which Booke (saith Holing∣seard) I will onely say hus much, that King Henry in his Booke, is reported to rage against the Devill and Antichrist, to cast out his foame against Luther, to race out the Name of the Pope, and yet to allow his Law; which Booke Luther aswered with as little respect to the King, as the King had done to him. In this meane time, many displeasures grew between the two Kings of Eng∣land and France, specially two: one that French-men seized upon English ships
as they passed: for remedy whereof, one Christopher Cee an expert seaman, was sent with six ships to safeguard the Merchants. Another, that the Duke of Albanye was returned into Scotland, contrary to that which was Covenanted by the league, which though the King of France denied to be done with his privity, yet King Henry knew the Duke of Albanye had Commission from the French King to returne, which did the more exasperate him; and hereupon were Must∣ers made in England, and a note taken of what substance all men were. This yeere died the Lord Brooke, Sir Edwad Poynings Knight of the Garer, Sir Iohn Pechy, and Sir Edward Belknappe, all valient Captaines, suspected to have poysoned at a Banquet made at Ard, when the two Kings met last. At this time, Owen Dowglas Biship of Dunkell, fled out of Scolnad into Eng∣land, because the Duke of Albanye being come thither, had taken upon him the whole Government of the King and Kingdome; whereupon Clarentiaux the Herald was sent into Scotland, to command the Duk of Albany to avoid that Realm; which he refusing, the Herald was ommanded to defie him. Thereupon the, French King seized all English-mens goods in Burdeaux, and impisoned their persons; and retained not onely the money to be paid for the restitution of Tourney; but also with-held the French Queenes Dower: whereof when King Henry understood; he called the French Embassadour residing in England, to give account thereof; who though he gave the best reasons he ould to excuse it, yet was commanded to keep his house, and the French Hostages remayning here, for the money to be paid for the delivery of Tourney, were restrained of their liberty, and committed to the custody of the Lord of Sat Iohns, Sir Thomas Lovell, Sir Andrew Windsor, and Sir Thomas Nevyle; each of them to keep one; and withall, all French-men in London were committed to prison, and put to their Fines; and all Scots-men much more. There were then also sent to sea under the conduct of Sir William Fitz-Williams Viceadmirall, eight and twenty great ships, and seven more towards Scotland; who set fire on ma∣ny Scottish-ships in the Haven, and at length tooke many prisoners, and returned. King Henry hearing that the Emperour would come to Callice, so to passe into England, as he went into Spaine; appointed the Lord Marquesse Dorsett, to go to Cllice, there to receive him and the Cardinall to receive him at Da∣ver The Cardinall taking his Journey thither on the tenth of May, rode thorow London accompanied with two Earles, six and thirty Knights, and a hundred Gentlemen, eight Bishops, ten Abbots, thirty Chaplains, all in Velvet and Sattin; and Yeomen seven hundred. The five and twentieth of May being Sunday, the Marquesse Dorset with the Bishop of Chichester, the Lord de La∣wre and divers others, at the water of Graveling, received the Emperour, and with all honour brought him to Callice, where he was received with Procession, by the Lord Berners Lieutenant of the Towne. On Munday he tooke ship at Callice, and landed at Dover, where the Cardinall with three hundred Lords, Knights and Gentlemen received him, and in great State brought him to the Castle, where he was lodged. On Wednesday being Ascention Even, the King came to Dover, and there with great joy and gladnesse, the Emperour and he met. On Friday in the afternoone they departed from Dover, and came that night to Canterbury, and from thence next day to Greenwich, where the Queene received her Nephew with all the joy that might be. Here to honour the Em∣perours presence, Royall Justs and Turneys were appointed; where the King, the Earle of Dvonshire and ten Aydes, kept the place against the Duke of Suf∣folke, the Marquesse Dorset and other ten Aydes, on their part. On Friday the sixth of Iune, the Emperour and the King with all their companies went to London, where the City received them with Pageants, and other as rare device, as at a Coronation, and the Emperour was lodged at the Blackfyers, and all his Lords in the new Palaces of Bridewell. On VVhitsunday, the King and the Emperour rode to the Cathedrall Church of Saint Paul, where the Cardinall
sung Msse, and had his Traverse and his Cupboord. Before Masse, two Ba∣rons gave him water, and after the Gospel, two Earles, and at the last Lavato∣ry two Dukes, which pride the Spaniards much disdained. After many Feast∣ings in other places, at last they rode to VVindsor, where they stayed a whole weeke; and there on Corpus Chrisi day, the Emperour wore his Mantle of the Garte, and sate in his owne Stall. On the same day, both the Princes re∣ceived the Sacrament, and took their oathes to observe the League concluded betweene them. On the morrow after, they came to Winchester: before whose comming thither there was come to Hampton, the Earle of Surrey Admirall of England, with all the Kings Navy, and with him the Lord Fitz-Water, the Barron Curson, Sir Nicholas Carew, Sir Richard Winkeld Sir Richard Ierning∣am, Francis Brian, Sir William Barentine, Sir Adrian Foskew, Sir Edward Donne, Sir Edward Chamberlaine, Sir Richard Cornwall, Sir Antony Poynes, Sir Henry Shirborn, and the Viceadmirall, Sir William Fitz-Williams, Sir Edmund Bray, Sir Giles Capell, Sir William Pirton, Iohn Cornwallis, Sir Iohn Walloppe, Sir Edward Ichingham, Sir VVilliam Sidney, Anthony Browme, Giles Husey, Thomas Moore, Iohn Rusel, Edward Bray, Henry Owen, George Cobham, Thomas Oldall, Thomas Lovell, Robert Ichingham, Anthony Knevet, Sir Iohn Tremaile, Sir VVilliam Skevington, Master of the Ordinance, and Iohn Fabian Serjant at Armes, by whom chiefly a dissgne was moved, though now noised onely that it was but to scowre the seas for the safe conducting of the Emperour. For the Earle of Surrey having wafted the Emperour over to the cost of Biskay; upon his returne, made to the coast of Brittaine; and there landing seven thousand of his men, marched to the Towne of Morleys, and by assault took it: having onne this Towne, the Erle called to him certaine Gentlemen and made them Knights; as Sir Francis Brian, Sir Anthony Browne, Sir Richard Cornwall, Sir Thomas Moore, Sir Giles Husey, Sir Iohn Russell, Sir Iohn Rainsford, Sir George Cobham, Si Iohn Cornwallis, Sir Edward Ridgley, and some others; and after the Earle had lien a while on the Coast of Brittaine, he was commanded home by the Kings letters: who thereupon brought back his whole fleet, to a place caled the Cow under the Isle of Wight, and then went on land, leaving diverse of of his ships, under the Governace of the Vice-admirall Sir William Fitz-VVilliams. In this meane time, diverse exploits were atchieved between them of the Garrison in the marches of Callice, and the French men of Bulloigne, where the French commonly had the worst: but being of no great moment, may well be passed over without relating. Likewise at the same time the Lord Rosse, and the Lord Dacres of the North, appointed to keepe the Borders against Scot∣land, burnt the Towne of Kelsie, and fourescore Vilages, and overthrew eigh∣teene Towers of stone, withall their Bulwarkes. King Henry intending now to goe seriously on with his warres in France, levied an Army, which under the conduct of the Earle of Surrey, he sent over to Cllice; whither the Earle being come, he divided his Army into three bat∣tailes; the first was led by Sir Robert Ratcliffe Lord Fitz-water, the middle-ward by himselfe and his brother the Lord Edmund Howard, the reare-ward by Sir VVilliam Sands and Sir Richard VVinkfield, both of them Knights of the Gater: and Sir Edward Guildford was Captaine of the horsemen. In this or∣der the Earle entred the French ground the second of September, and took his Journey owards Hedring. By the way there came to him a great Power of rgognias, sent by the Lady Margaret, according to the Articles of the League. All the Townes, Villages and Castles, in the Countrey through which they passed, they burnt and sacked; as the Towne and Castle of Selloys, the Towne of Brunrigge, Senekerke, Botington and Manstier, with divers others. On the sixteenth of September, they came before the Castle of Heding, and laid siege unto it; but the Castle being wel fortified, & the Earle having not battering Ordnance, which by reason of the foule weather, he could not bring with him:
after eleven dayes he raised his siege, and passing from thence to Dorlens, burnt the Towne and raced the Castle, as also the Towne of Dortyer, and then the yeer being farre spent, came back to Callic the sixteenth of October. At this time, the Duke of Albany being established Governour of Scotland, raised an Army of fourscore thousand men, with which he approached the b∣ders, but made no Invasion, as thinking perhaps that the onely report of his great Army, would fright the English; but yet this stayed not the Lord Mar∣quesse Dorset, Warden of the east and middle Marches; to enter into Tividale, and so forward ten miles into Gallaway, burning all townes and Villages on eve∣ry side as he passed. All that night he tarried within the Scottish ground, and the next day being good-Friday, withdrew back into England, with a head of four thousand cattell; having burned Grimseley, Mowhowse, Donford, Myles, Ackforth, Crowling, and many other Townes and Villages. In King Henries fourteenth yeer, on the fifteenth of Aprill began a Parlia∣ment, which was holden at the Blackfryers, whither the King came, and there sate downe in his Royall Seate; at his feet on the right side sate the Cardinall of Yorke, and the Archbishop of Canterbury; and at the Raile behinde, stood Do∣ctor Tunstall Bishop of London, who making an Oration, told there the causes of calling this Parliament; which were (as he said) for remedying of mischiefs by the common Law, as Recoveries, Forraigne Vouchers and corrupt Trialls and for making new Lawes for the good of the Common-wealth: whereof not∣withstanding, no one word was spoken all the time of the Parliament, nor any other thing done, but a Subsedie granted; but howsoever, being commanded to chuse their Speaker, they chose Sir Thomas Moore, who at first disabling him∣selfe, at last made two Petitions to the King; one for himselfe, that if he should be sent by the Commons to the King on a Message, and mistake their inten, he might then with the Kings pleasure resort again to the Commons to know their meaning. The other, for the House of Commons, that if in communica∣tion and reasoning, any man should speake more largely then of duty he ought to do, yet all such offences should be pardoned, and that to be entred of Record. Which Petitions were granted, and then the Parliament began; where at first a Subsidie was demanded, but as there was much adoe in the House of Com∣mons about it, so there was no lesse amongst the Clergey in the Convocation House; for Richard Bishop of VVinchester, and Iohn Bishop of Rochester were much against it, but most of all, one Rowland Philips, Vicar of Croyden, and a Canon of Pauls, but the Cardinall taking him aside, dealt so with him, that he took him off, so as he came no more to the House and then the Bel-weather (as one saith) giving over his hold, the rest soon yelded; and so was granted the half of all their spiritual yeerly Revenues, to be paid in five yeers following. The Clergey being thus brought on, on the nine & twentieth of April, the Car∣dinall came into the House of Commons, to work them also; and there shew∣ing the great charges the King was necessarily to be at in his present Wars: de∣manded the sum of eight hundred thousand pounds, to be raised of the fifth part of every mans Goods and Lands, which was four shillings of every pound. This demand was enforced the day after by the Speaker Sir Thomas Moore; but the Burgesses were all against it, shewing that it was not possible to have it ga∣thered in money; for that men of Lands had not the fifth part thereof in Coyne. And further alleadged, that there be not many parishes in England one with another, able to spare a hundred Marks, except Cities and Townes; and seeing there were not above thirteen thousand Parishes in the Kingdome, (at this day there are but 9285.) how could such a summe be raised? Hereupon certaie of the House were sent to move the Cardinall, to be a meanes to the King to accept of a lesser summe, but the Cardinall answered, he would rather have his tongue plucked out of his mouth with a paire of Pinsors, then make to the King any such motion. Whereupon the Cardinall came again ino the House, and desired that he might reason with them that were against the demand; to
which it was answered, that the order of that house was to heare, and not to reason, except amongst themselves. When the Cardinall was gone, the Com∣mons after long debating the mtter; at last, agreed of two shillings in the pound, from twenty pounds upward, and from forty shillings, to twenty pounds; of every twenty shillings, twelve pence, and under forty shillings, of every head of sixteene yeeres and upwards, foure pence, to be paid in two yeeres: when this was told to the Cardinall, he was much offended; so that to please him, the Gentlemen of fifty pound Land and upward, by the motion of Sir Iohn Hus∣sey, a Knight of Lincolneshire, were charged with twelve pence more in the pound, to be paid in three yeeres. The Cardinall to move them to it, bore them in hand, that the Lords had agreed to foure shillings of the pound; which was untrue, for the Lords had granted nothing, but stayed to see what the Commons would doe; whereof when the King heard, he reproved the Cardinall for it; saying withall, that ere it were long he would looke to things himselfe, without any Substitute. Which speech of the Kings, though it dated the Cardinall for a while, yet he soone recovered his Spirits, and now as peremptory after∣wards as he had been before. After this, the Parliament was prorogued till the tenth of Iune; during with prorogation, the Common people said to the Bur∣gesses, we heare say, you will grant foure shillings of the pound, we advise you o doe so, that you may goe home; with many like threatnings. At this time, the Cardinall by his power Legant me, dissolved the Convocation at Pauls, con∣voked by the Archbishop of Canterbury, calling him and all the Clergy, to his Convocation at Westminster: which was never seene before in England (saith Hall.) The one and thirtieth of Iuly, the Parliament was adjourned to West∣minster, and there continuing till the thirteenth of August, was that day at nine of the clock at night dissolved. About this time, the Bishop of Durham died, and the King gave that Bi∣shoprick to the Cardinall; who resigned the Bishoprick of Bath to Doctor Iohn Clerke, Master of the Rolles, and Sir Henry Marney, that was Vice-chamberlain, was made Lord Privy Seale, and shortly after, was created Lord Marney: also during this Parliament, Sir Arthur Plantagenet, bastard sonne to King Edward the fourth at Bridewell, was created Vicount Lisle; in right of his wife who was wise before to Edmund Dudley, Beheaded. The fifteenth of Iune; in the fifteenth yeere of the Kings Reigne, Christian King of Denmarke with his Queene; driven out of his own Country, came into England, and was lodged at Bath place; who after, he had been feasted by the King and by the Citty of London, and received great guifts of both, returned again into Flanders, where he remained as a banished man: some yeers after, King Henry sent Doctor Henry Standish, Bishop of Saint Assaph, and Sir Iohn Baker Knight, into Denmarke, to perswade the people to receive him againe into his Kingdome; but they could not prevaile, he was so much hated for his cruelty. About this time, the Earle of Kildare having recovered againe the favour of the Cardinall, was sent Deputy into Ireland, as he had bin before, where he reduced the wilde Irish to indifferent conformity. All this while had Eng∣land warres both with the French and with the Scots. In Scotland the Mar∣quesse of Dorset threw downe the Castles of Wederborne, of Nesgate, of Blacka∣ter, of Mackwals, and burnt to the number of seven and thirty Villages, yet ne∣ver came to skirmish. In France, the Lord Sands, Treasurer of Callice, with twelve hundred men went before Bulloigne, where he skirmished with the Ene∣mie; and after taking divers Churches and Castles in the Enemies Coun∣tre, returned backe to Callice, with the losse onely of a dozen men. King Hen∣ry being advertised that the Duke of Albanie was providing of Forces in France, with which to returne into Scotland, sent forth his Vice-admirall Sir William Fitz-williams, with divers great Shippes to intercept him; but when he could not meet with him, he then landed in the Haven of Trepor; where with seaven hundred men, hee beat six thousand French that sought
to impeach his landing, took their Bulworks and much Ordnance in them bur∣ned the suburbs of the town of Treport, and all in five houres, and then returned. All this while King Henry had but played with the French, but ow he means to be in earnest, and therefore sends over the Duke of Suffolk with an Army, the foure and twentieth of August; attended with the Lord Montacute and his bo∣ther Sir Arthur Poole, the Lord Herbert, sonne to the Earle of Worceser, the Lord Ferrers, the Lord Marney, the Lord Sands, the Lord Barkley, the Lord owis, and the Baron Curson, Sir Richard Winkeld, Chauncellour of the Du∣chy of Lancaster, Sir Iohn Vere, Sir Edward Nevile, Sir William Kingson, Sir Richard Weston, Sir Andrew Winsore, Sir Robert Winkfield, Sir Anthony, Wink∣field, Sir Edward Guildford, Sir Edw: Grevile, Sir Edw: Chamberlaine, Sir Thomas Lucy, Sir Everard Digby, Sir Adrian Foskew, Sir Richard Cornwall, Sir William Courtney, Sir William Sidney, Sir Henry Owin, sand many other Knights and Gentlemen. In the whole Army were six hundred Demylaunces, two hundred Archers on Horsback, three thousand Archers on foo, and five thousand Bil∣men. Also seventeen hundred taken out of the Garrisons of Hammes, Guysnes, and Callice, in all, ten thousand and five hnndred, besides two thousand six hun∣dred labourers and Pioners. With this Army the Duke of Suffolk took the field, his vauntguard was led by the Lord Sands; Capaine of the right wing, was Sir William Kingston; of the left, Sir Everard Digby, Captain of all the Horsmen was Sir Edward Guildford, Marshall of Callice; the Duke himselfe led the Battaile, and Sir Richard Winkfield the Reareward. The Dukes first enterprise was the winning of Bell Castle, which the Lord Sands and the Lord Ferres assaulted, and had it yeelded to them: and then Sir VVilliam Skevington was placed Captaine in it. At this time, the Duke of Bourbon, high Constable of France, began to have his mind alienaed from the King of France, and o draw him the more on, the Duke of Suffolk sent Sir Iohn Russel (afterward created Duke of Bedford) to him, who passing in disguised apparell, so prevailed with him, that he professed to take part with the Emperour, and the King of England, who having ten thousand Almans in his pay: it was thought fit (for encourag∣ment of the English) to proclaime in the Army, the accesse of so powerfull an assistant: and therupon the Duke of Suffolk removed to Ard, and so forward into Picardie. At Cordes between Terwyn and Saint Omers, there came to him the Lord of Isilstyn, and with him of Spaniards, Almans and others, three thousand Foot-men, and five hundred Horse. With these forces, the Duke marching on, took first the rich Town of Anchor, then the Castle of Bounguard, and then by assault the Towne of Bray, though two thousand good men of war were in it. After this, the Towres of Cappe and Roy, Lihome and Davenker, and then came before he Towne of Mount-Dedyer, in which were a thousand foot and five hundred horse; yet upon Sir William Skevingtons Batteries, was yeel∣ded to him. From hence he removed to Roy, where he rested a while with hi whole Army: and there on Alholland-day, in the chiefe Church of Roy, made Knights, the Lord Herbert, the Lord Powis, Oliver Manners, Arthur Poole, Richard Sands, Robert Ierningham, Robert Salisbury, Edward Beningfield, Richard Corbet, Thomas Wentworth, William Storton, Walter Mantel, George Warram and Edward Seymour (that was after Duke of Somerset.) The day after, the Army removed to a place called Neele, from thence to Veane, and then o Beauford, where the Duke made Iohn Dudley, and Robert Vtreight Knights, and from thence on the eighth of November to a place called Mount Saint Martin; here the Welshmen began to murmure, that they might not returne home, the winter being so far spent; but there was to the number of a thousand per∣sons, under the leading of Sir Iohn VValloppe, who having no wages, but what they could got by booties, and were therefore called Adventurers, and by some Kreekers, and these had more desire to stay, then the VVelshmen had to be gon; for the great gaines they made, by the spoyles of so many Townes that were taken. The thirteenth of November, the Duke removed to a place within two
miles of Boghan Castle, defended by great Marishes, that lay before it, but the frost being at that time so great that many lost their fingers and toes with cold, and some died; Sir Edward Guildford acquainted the Duke, that he thought the marishes were hard enough frozen to beare great Ordnance; whereupon, the Duke bid him venture it then and goe on, which he resolutely did, and had the Castle presently delivered up to him. In this meane time, the King hearing in what state the Army stood, had prepared six thousand men to be sent to the Duke for a reliefe, under the leading of the Lord Montjoy; but before they could be put in order to passe the Sea, the Duke, partly by extremity of the weather, and partly by the murmuring of the Souldiers, was constrained to breake up his Army, and returne to Cllice. In this meane time, the Scots knowing that the strength of England was gone into France, tooke boldnesse to invade the Marishes; but then the Earle of Surrey, Treasurer and high Admirall of England, with six thou∣sand men, being sent against them, tooke divers of their Castles and Holds; and at Yedworth, skirmishing with a great Garrison of Scots, overthrew them, and tooke and burned both the Towne and Castle. And now the French King finding that the Scots did not worke any great trouble to the English, whereby to keepe them from molesting of France, and thinking it to be for want of the Duke of Albanies presence, whom they accoun∣ted their Governour; he therefore prepared a Navie of Ships to trans∣pot him into Scotland; but when the Duke of Albany heard that Sir Wil∣liam Fitz-williams was sent with a great Fleet to stop his passage, he brought his Ships into the Haven of Brest, and gave it out that he would not goe into Scotland that yeere; which being told to the King of England, he commanded that his Ships also should be laid up in Havens, till the next spring. And now see the cunning of the Scot; for when he saw the Kings Ships discharged, he then boldly tooke shipping himselfe, and sailed into Sctland; whither being come, he presently levied a great Army, and ap∣proached the English Borders; but when he heard the Earle of Surrey was coming against him with a mighty power, he then sent a Heruld to him promising of his honour, to give him Battaile; and if he tooke him pri∣soner, to give him good quarter. To whom the Earle answered, that he would not faile to abide his Battaile; but if he tooke him prisoner, the quar∣ter he would give him, should be to cut off hi head, and send it for a Pre∣sent to his Master the King of England. At this time, to the Earle of Sur∣rey being at Alnewicke, came the Earles of Northumberland and VVestmer∣land, the Lords Clifford, Dacres, Lumley, Ogle and Darcye, with many Knights, Gentlemen and other Souldiers, to the number of forty housand; and from the Court, came the Master of the Horse, Sir Niholas Ca∣rew, Sir Francis Bryan, Sir Edward Baynton, and others. The last of October, the Duke of Albonye sent two or three thousand men over the wa∣ter to besedge the Castle of VVarke; who by battery of their Ordnance won the ouermost Ward, called the Barnekins; and continuing their bat∣tery, won the second Ward; but then Sir William Lisle, that was Cap∣taine of the Castle, issuing forth with those few he had left, drove the Frnch-mn from the place, and slew of them to the number of three hun∣dred: a memorable service, and for which the Earle of Surrey afterwards gave him great thankes. The Earle would gladly have followed his enemies ino their owne Borders, but that his Commission was onely to defend England, and not to invade Scotland. Shortly after the Queee of Scots, Mother to the King, sent to her Brother the King of England, for an abstinence from Warre, till a further communication might be had; which being graed, the English Army brake up, and the Earle of Surrey returned to the Court.
And now for a while we must be coent to heare of pety Occurrances, be∣cause greater did not happen; which if it make us like the Story the worse, it may make us like the times the better; seeing they are ever the best times that afford lest matter to be talked of: but this time will las but a while; for short∣ly we shall come to hear Occurrances, that have been matter of talk to this day, whereof the like have never scarce been seen, and will hardly be beleeved, when they are heard; a Marriage dissolved after twenty yeeres cosummation; hou∣ses built in Piety; under pretence of Piety demolished; a King made a captive a Pope held a prisoner Queenes taken out of love, put to death out of loath∣ing; and the Church it selfe so shaken, that it hath stood in distraction e∣ver since. At this time, the Emperou Charles sent to the King of England two Mses trapped in crimson Velvet, richly embridered; also eleven goodly Jeits, trapped with russe Velvet, richly wrought; foure Speares and two Javelins of strange timber, and worke richly garnished; and five brace of Greyhond. To the Queene he sent two Mules richly trapped and high Chaies after the Spanish fashion: which Presents were thankfully received both of the King and Queene. At this time in the moneth of October, the Cardinall sent out Commissions, that every man being worth forty pounds, should pay the whole Subsedie before granted, out of hand; which he called an Anticipation: which fine new word, he thought would make them pay their money the more willingly; but they lo∣ved their money better then any words he could devise. In this yeere the King sent the Lord Morley, Sir VVilliam Hussey, knight, and Doctor Lee his Almoner, to Frdinand Archduke of Austria, with the Or∣der of the Garter; which he received in the towne of Norimberg, to his great contentment. In this yeere, through Bookes of Prognosticatons, foreshewing much hurt to come by waters and oods, many persons withdrew themselves to high grounds, for feare of drowning; specially one Bolton, Prior of Sain Bartho∣lmewes in Smithfield, builded him an House upon Harrow on the Hill, and thi∣ther wen and made provision for two moneths. These great waters should have fallen in February, but no such thi happenig, the Astronomers excused them∣selves, by saying, that in the computaion they had miscounted in their num∣ber an hundred yeeres. In this meane time, many enterpries were attempted, betweene the English∣men of Callice, and Guyes, and the Frenchmen of Bulloigne, and the Fro∣tiers of Picard, and still Sir VVilliam Fitz Williams, Captaine of Guysnes, Sir Robert Irningham, Captaine of Newnham Bridge, Sir Iohn Walloppe, and Sir Iohn Gage, were the men that did the French most hurt. This yeere, the first of September, was Docter Thomas Hannibell Master of the Rolles, receaved into London, by Earles, Bishops, and diverse Lords and Gentlemen, as Embassadours from Pope Clement: who brought with him, a Rose of gold for a present to the King & on the day of the Nativity of our Lad after a solemne Masse sung by the Cardinall of Yorke, the said present was delivered to the King, which was a Tree forged of fine Gold, and with branches, leaves, and flowers resembling Roses. About the beginning of Winter, the adventrers called Krekers, being not above two hundred; and of them, five and twenty horsmen, made an attempt to fetch some booty from a Village not farre from Mattrell, wherof the Earle of Dmmartine having notice, he set upon them with a far greater number, and slew most of them, and this was the end of the Kreekers, as brave men as ever served any Prince. In December this yeere, there came to London diverse Embassadours, out of Scotland, about a peace to be had and a mariage to be concluded, between the King of Scots, and the Lady Mary daughter to the King of England.
At this time, the Lord Leonard Gray, and the Lord Iohn Gry, brothers to the Lord Marquesse Dorset, Sir George Cobham sonne to the Lord Cobham, VVillia Carye, Sir Iohn Dudley, Thomas VVyat, Francis Poynts, Francis Sid∣y, Sir Anthony Browne, Sir Edward Seymor, Oliver Manners, Percivall Hart, Sebasti Nudigat, and Thomas Calen, Esquires of the Kings Household; made a challenge of Arms against the Feast of Christmas, which was proclaimed by Windsor the Herauld, and performed at the time appointed very Nobly; at Tilts, Trneys, Barriars, and the assault of a Castle erected for that purpose, i the Tilt-yard at Greenwich, where the King held his Christmas that yeer, with great State and magnificence. About this time, Iohn Iokyn Steward of the Household to the French Kings Mothe, came into England, and was received in secret maner into the House of one Doctor Larke, a Prebrendary of Saint Stephens; who oftentimes talked with the Cardinall, about a Peace to be concluded between the two Kings of ngland and France, of whose often meetings, Monsieur de Brate the Empe∣rours Embassadour, grew very jealous. The four and twentieth of Ianuary, Monsier Brynion President of Roan, came to London as Embassadour from the French King, and was lodged with the said Iohn Iokyn, which small things should not be related, but that they were preparatives to great matters afterward. On Sunday the fifth of March, were received into London Monsieur de Beuer Lod of Campher, Admirall of Flanders, Monsieur Iohn de la Coose President of , & Master Iohn de la Gache, as Embassadours from the Lady Margaret in the name of the Emperour, who required three things. First they demanded the Lady Mary the Kings only daughter, to be presently delivered, and she to be ned Empresse, and as Governesse take possession of all the Low-Countryes. Secondly, that all such summes of money as the King should give with her in mariage, should be paid incontinently. Thirdly, that the King of England should passe the sea in person, and make Warre in France the next Summer. The rst two demands were not agreed too for certaine causes; and as to the third, the King said, he would take time to advize. On Thursday the ninth of March, a Gentleman came in Post from the Lady Margaret, with Letters sig∣nifying, that whereas the King of France had long lyen at the siege of Pavia; he had now been forced to raise his siege, and was himselfe taken prisoner by th Imperialests for joy whereof, Bonfires and great Triumph was made in , and on the twentieth of March being Sunday, the King himselfe came to Pauls, and there heard a solemne Masse. But for all this shew of joy, it was thought if the King of France had not now been taken prisoner; that the King of England would have joyned in amity with him, as being angry with the Fle∣gs, for Inhauing his Coyne in Flanders, which caused much money to be conayed out of England thither. The King of France being taken prisoner, was after some time convayed into Spaine, and at last brought to Madrill, where he ell so sicke, that the Physitians had little hope of his life, unlesse the Emperour would be pleased speedily to visit him; upon whose visitation he re∣covered his health, though not presently his strength. In which time, many propositions were made for his delivery, but the Emperour would accept of one, without restitution of the Dutchy of Burgoigne. At last, the French King weary of imprisonment, and longing for liberty, was content to agree to any conditions the chiefe whereof were, that the French King by a certaine day should be set at liberty, and within six weeks after should resigne to the Em∣perour the Dutchy of Burgoigne, with all Members pertayning to it; and at the ame stant, should put into the Emperours hands, the Dolphyn of France, nd with him, either the Duke of Orleance his second sonne: or else twelve pricipall Lords of France, whom the Emperour should name; and that there should be between them a League and perpetall cofederation fo defence of their estates. Of whose attonement when King Henry heard, as before he had
expressed gladnesse, that he was taken prisoner, so now he sent Sir Thomas Chei∣ney to him, to expresse his joy for being set at liberty; so suddaine is the en∣terchange of love and hate amongst great Princes. The French King being thus delivered, the Emperour married the Lady Isabel, Daughter to Emanuel King of Portingal; and ad with her in Dower eleven hundred thousand Duckes though three yeers before being at Windsor, he had covenanted to take to wife the Lady Mary King Henries Daughter. At this time Cardinall Woolsey obtained licence of the King to erect a Col∣ledge at Oxford, and another at Ipswich; and towards the charge of them, got leave also, to suppresse certaine small Monasteries, to the number of forty; and after, got a confirmation of the Pope, that he might imploy the Goods and Lands belonging to those Houses, to the maintenance of those two Col∣ledges; a perniious president, and that which made the King a way afterward, to make a generall suppression of all religios Houses, though indeed there be great difference between converting of Monestaries into Colledges, and utter subverting them. In March King Henry sent Cuthert Tunstall Bishop of London, and Sir Rich∣ard Winkfield Chancelour of the Duchy of Lancster into Spaine, to conferre with the Emperour, about matters of great importance, and particularly about Warre to be made in France, and yet were these two Princes at this time in League: but he that shall observe the carriage of these three Princes towards one another, and how convertible their Leagues were into Warre, and their Warre into Peace; shall finde it a strange Riddle of Ragion di stat, and their Leagues to have been but meere complements, where the skale was turned with the least graine of a circumstance; and though they were bound by Oath, yet that Oath made the Leagues but little the firmer, seeing the League might be broken, and yet the Oath kept: for while one gave the occasion, and the other took it, though they were both accessaries, yet neither was principall; and where there is not a principall, the Oath remains inviolate. And upon those Hinges did the friend-ship of these Princes turne, as at this time; the Empe∣rour, though not long before, he had parted with the King of England, in the greatest kindnesse that could be; yet gave not the English Embassadours so kinde entertainment now, as he had formerly done; but for what cause was not apparent, unlesse upon some sinister report made to him, by Monsieur de Prate; who having been his Ligier with the King of England, was without taking leave of the King departed, and come to the Emperour before the English Embas∣sadours came. But howsoever, King Henry being determined to make Warre in France himselfe in person, his Councell fell into consideration how the charge of the Warre should be maintained: which care the Cardinall takes upon him; and thereupon appoints Commissioners in all Shiers, to sit and draw the people to pay the sixth part of every mans substance, in plate or money: but the people opposed it, alleadging that it was against the Law of the Realme, for any man to be charged with such payments, unlesse by Parliament: and as the Cardi∣nall continued to presse it, so the people continued to denye it; and when some for denying it were committed to prison, the Commons in many Countryes, made great assemblies for their defence: the report whereof at last came to the King, who thereupon came to VVestminster and protested openly, that it was done without his knowledge, and that it was never his meaning, to ask any thing of his Subjects but according to Law: and therefore desired to know by whose Authority it was done. Here the Cardinall excused himselfe and said, that it was the opinion of all the Judges, and of all his Councell, tha he might Lawfully demand any summe, so it were done by Commission, and thereupon it was done. But the King liked not to take advantage of a distinction to draw money from his Subjects; and thereupon gave warning for doing any such thing hereafter: and signified so much by his Letters into all the Shiers of Eng∣land
giving also a generall pardon to all that had offered to rise upon it; which though he did of his owne free grace, yet the Cardinall to win a good opinion in the Commons, gave out, that it was by his meanes the King granted the pardon. King Henries seventeenth yeer, was honoured with the advancing of many in honour, for on the eighteenth of Iune, at his Pallace of Bridewell, the Kings sonne (which he had by Elizibeth Blunt daughter to Sir Iohn Blunt Knight) called Henry Fitz-Roy, was created first Earl of Nottingham, and after on the same day Duke of Richmond and Somerset, Henry Courtney Earle of Devonshire was created Marquis of Excetur, the Lord Brandon, sonne to the Duke of Suf∣folke and the French Queene (a child of two yeers old) was created Earle of Lincolne, Sir Thomas Manners Lord Rosse, was created Earle of Rutland, Sir Henry Clifford, was created Earle of Cunberland, Sir Robert Ratcliffe Lord Fitz-Water, was created Viscount Fitz-VVater, and Sir Thomas Bullen Treasurer of the Kings Houshold, was created Viscount Rochord. At this time the French Kings mother, as then Regent of France, procured by her Embassadours, at first a Truce, and afterward a peace with England, which was proclaimed in London, the eighth of September. By the covenants of which peace, the King of England should receive at certaine dayes, twenty hun∣dred thousand Crowns, which in sterling money amounted to the summe of foure hundred thousand pound; whereof fifty thousand was to be paid in hand. Sir VVilliam Fitz-Williams and Doctor Talour, was sent to the Lady Regent, to take her corporall oath, and likewise King Henry the foure and twentieth of Aprill, at Greenwich, in presence of the Embassadours of France, Rome and Venice, tooke his corporall oath, to observe the peace betweene him, and his loving brother the French King, during his life, and one yeer after. In this winter was great mortality in London, so as the Terme was adjourned, and the King kept his Christmas at Eltham, with a small number, and was therfore called the still Christmas. At which time, the Cardinall comming to the Court, took order for altering the state of the Kings House: many officers and other servants were discharged, and put to their pensions, in which number were foure score and foure Yeomen of the Guard: who before having had twelve pence the day with check, were now allowed but six pence the day without check, and commanded to goe into their Countries. On Shrovetuesday this yeere, a solemne Justs was held at Greenwich, the King and eleven other on the one part, the Marques of Excetur and eleven other of the other part. In his nineteenth yeer, King Henry kept a solemne Christmas at Greenwich, with Revels, Maskes, disguisings, and Banquets, and the thirtieth of December and third of Ianuary were solemne usts holden, when at night the King and fifteen other with him, came to Bridewel, and there putting on masking apparel, took his Barge, and rowed to the Cardinalls place, where were at supper many Lords and Ladyes, who daced with the maskers, and after the dancing was made a great Banquet. This Christmas was a play at Grayes-Inne, made by one Master Roe a Sergiant at Law, the effect whereof was, that Lord Gouvernance was ruled by dissipation and negligence, by whose evill order Lady Publick-Weale was put from governance. This the Cardinall took to be meant by him, and therupon set the said Master Roe to the Fleet, though the Play were made long before the Cardinall had any authority: by which we may see how inse∣perable a companion suspition is to a guilty conscience. The fourteenth of Ianuary came to the Court Don Hugo de Mendoza, a Grande of Spaine, as Embassadours from the Emperour to the King, with a large commission, to make King Henry Judge; how just the conditions were, which the Emperour required of the King of France, and about this negotiation arried two yeers in England, so desirous the Emperour was to continue good correspondence with the King of England.
On Shrovetuesday the King and the Maquesse of Excester with others, in most sumptuous attire came to the Tilt, and ran so many courses, till two hundred fourescore and six Speares were broken; and then disarming themselves went into the Queenes Chamber, where a sumptuous Banquet was provided. But this Banquet was one of the last of the Queenes preparing; for hitherto there had been no exception taken to the lawfulnesse of her marriage, but now came over Embassadours from the King of France, requiring to have the Kings Daughter the Lady Mary, to be given in marriage to the Duke of Orleance se∣cond Sonne to their Master the French King, wherein they that were the suitors for it, were the hinderers of it; for amongst them was the President of Paris, who made a doubt, whither the marriage betweene King Henry and the Lady Katherin of Spaine, having been his Borthers wife, were lawfull or no: But howsoever, the French Embassadours at Greenwich on Sunday the fifth of May, in the name of their Master the French King, took their Othes to observe the League concluded betweene them during their lives. And shortly after were sent Sir Thomas Bullen Viscount Rochford, and Sir Anthony Browne Knight, as Embassadours to the King of France, to take his Oath in person for perform∣ance of the League. But enough of small Occurrances, and indeed there will be Occurrances now more worthy to be related, but more lamentable to be heard; for now the Duke of Bourbon Generall of the Emperours Army in Italie, was slaine by a shot from the Walls of Rome, as he was passing by; upon whose death, the Ar∣my entred and sacked the City, made the Pope flye to the Castle of Saint An∣glo, and there cooped him up; abused the Cardinals, and put them to grievous ransomes, spared neither Sacred places, nor Religious persons, but commit∣ed all manner of barbarous and inhumaine cruelty. These insolencies of the Emperours Army committed against the Pope; ogether with the hard con∣ditions the Emperour had imposed upon the King of France, for setting him at liberty; and the Emperours breach of promise, in not marrying the Lady Ma∣ry King Henries Daughter, were the apparent causes of King Henries breaking League with the Emperour Charles: but a more enforcing though concealed cause perhaps was the growing greatnesse of the Emperour, by his acquests in Italie and other places; enough to breed a jealousie in all neighbouring Princes; and indeed King Henry had some cause to thinke the Emperours spirits were grown higher with his Victories, seeing where before he was wont alwayes to write letters to King Henry with his own hand, and subscribe them, your son and faithfull friend, now after his Victories in Italie, he caused his Secretaries to write them, subscribing only Charles. And yet a more pressing cause though not avowed, might be the Cardinalls spleene against the Emperour, for deny∣ing him the Bishopricke of Toledo in Spaine. But which soever of these was the predominant cause, all of them together made a cause sufficient for King Hery to fall off from amity with the Emperour; and his falling off from the Empeour, cause sufficient o fall in with the King of France: and thereupon, the two Kings send their severall Heraulds to the Emperour: King Henry Cla∣rentiu, the French King his Herauld Guyen, to expostulate their grievances with the Emperour, and he refusing to returne a satisfactory answer, to defi him as their enemy. The Emperour heard the Heraulds with great temper, and answered Clarentius very mildely; that he knew his Masters grievance was grounded upon misinformation, wherein he would shortly rectifie him by his Letters, as desiring nothing more then to continue his friend; but uyen hee answered rougly, bidding him tell his Master that he had broken his faith, in not performing the Covenants agreed upon for his liberty; and with these an∣swers dismissed them, only Guyen not thinking it fit to deliver his answer, being in such termes by word of mouth, obtained to have it sent in writing. The He∣raulds being returned home, and delivering the answers; the King of France was so incensed, to be charged with breach of faith, that soone after he sent
another defiance to the Emperour, telling him in plaine tearmes, that he lyed in his throat; and thereupon challenged him the Combate, requiring him to appoint the field, and himselfe would the weapons. The Emperour accepted the chalenge, but other occurrances intervening, hindred the performance. In this meane time, the Cardinall was appointed to go Embassadour to the King of France; carrying with him twelve score thousand pounds, to be em∣ployed by the French King, and other the confederates; in a Warre against the Emperour, who the eleventh of Iuly took shipping at Dover, and landed that day at Callice; with whom was Cutert Tunsall Bishop of London, the Lord Sands Chamberlaine to the King, the Earle of Derby, Sir Henry Guild∣ord, Sir Thomas Moore, with other Knights and Gentlemen, in all to the num∣ber of twelve hundred horse. At Amynes he was received by the French King himselfe, and by his Mother, and by all the chiefe Peers of France. By whom it was agreed, that Articles of Accord should be offered to the Emperour; which if he refused, then the French King should marry the Lady Mary King Henries Daughter, and they both to be enemies to the Emperour. These things concluded, the Cardinall returned, and on the last of September came to the King at Richmond. In October following, there came Embassadours from the French King, to take King Henries Oath, for obseruing the League with the King of France: and on Sunday the tenth of November, King Henry at Greenwich received the Order of Saint Michael, by the hands of the Lord An∣ns de Memorancye great Master of the Kings Household; and Monsieur Hu∣mieres: as likewise the same day at Paris the French King received the Order of the Garter by the hands of the Lord Lile, Doctor Taylor Master of the Roles, Sir Nicholas Carew Master of the Kings horse, Sir Anthony Browne and Sir Thomas Wriothslye Knight, otherwise called Garter king of Armes, who were sent thither with the whole Habit, Coller and other habiliments of the Order. Upon King Henries defiance of the Emperour in the French Kings quarrell, English Merchant their ships and goods were attached in Spaine, and in the Low Countries, as likewise all Spanish & Flemish Merchants were attached here; which being very detrimentall to both Nations; at last, by mediation of Hugo de Mendoza, the Emperours Embassadour Legier, a reconcilement was made, and free traffique betweene the Nations was revived. In this twentieth yeer, on the two and twentieth of February: Sir Piers But∣ler of Ireland, was created Earl of Oscry. And now King Henry began to be trou∣bled in mind about his marriage with Queen Katherin, but whether his trouble of minde grew for scruple of conscience, or from desire of change, was by many men doubted; some thought he had set his affection upon the Lady Anne Bullen whom afterward he maried, and to make way for that mariage, moved his scru∣ple, that he might be divorced; but this is not likely, for he maried not the said Lady, til above three yeers after this doubt had bin moved; and three yeers was a long time to have affection be delaid, which comonly is impatient of any delay: if King Henries own protestation may be taken, it was very scruple of conscience that troubled his mind; but then by what meanes this scruple came first into his ead, is another doubt; some thought it was first moved by his confessor, Doctor Longland telling him, that the mariage with the relict of his Brother, could not be lawful; but neither is this likely, for Doctor Longland was not like to tel him so, who knew the mariage had been made by dispensation from the Pope, an au∣thority in that time beyond exception; some thought it was a plot of VVoolseis, thereby to make variance between King Henry and the Emperour, with whom he was at varience himself, and for spleen to the Nephew, he revenged upon the Aunt; but neither is this likely or els the Cardinall was much deceived in his plo; for though the Emperor laboured Milan and some other Vniversities, to forbeare giving sentence against the mariage, yet he continued amity with King Henry, as much afterward as before; if we wil beleeve the King himself, it was the President of Paris, comming Embassadour from the King of France, that irst
moved it, upon a proposition of mariage betweene the Lady Mary, King Hen∣ries daughter, and the Duke of Orleance, second sonne to the French King: but by what meanes his scruple had beginning, King Henries desire was now it should have an ending, and that the matter might be debated with indiffe∣rency; he allowed the Queene to make choyce of what councell she thought best; who thereupon chose William Warham Archbishop of Canterbury, and Nicholas West Bishop of Elye, Doctors of the Law; Iohn Fisher Bishop of Ro∣chester, and Henry Standish Bishop of Saint Assaph, Doctors of Divinity, with many other; and in the mean time, sent to all the Vniversities in Italie & France to have their opinions, but specially to the Court of Rome, desiring the Pope o send his Legat to hear the cause; who thereupon sent Cardinall ampeius, and joyned Cardinall Woolsey in Commission with him. The place appointed for the Cardinalls to sit and to heare the cause, was at the Black-friers: where in the great Hall preparation was made of seats, and all things necessary for such a ses∣sion. Amongst other Officers of the Court, Stephen Gardiner (afterward Bi∣shop of Winchester) ate as chiefe scribe. The Court being set, the Judges com∣mnded silence, whilst their Commission was read; which done, the Scribes com∣manded the Cryer to call the King, by the name of King Henry of England, come into the Court; who answered, Here: then called he the Queen, by the name of Katherine Queen of England, come into the Court: the Queen though present, yet answered not, but rising from her seat, went to the place where the King sat, and kneeling down, said in effect; Sir, I humbly desire you to take pity upon me, for I am a poor woman & a stranger, & have here no indifferent Councel, where all are your Subjects, and lesse assurance of friendship when they all depend up∣on your favour; I have bin your wife these twenty yeers, and have borne you di∣vers children, if you can charge me with dishonesty or undutifulnesse, I am con∣tent to depart from you to my shame; but if you cannot, I then desire you to do me justice, and to spare me untill I may know what councel my friends in Spain will give me; but if you will not, then your pleasure be fulfilled: and having so said, she rose up, and making a low cursie, departed. The King being advertised that she was going out of the House, commanded the Cryar to call her again; who there upon called her, saying, Katherine Queen of England come into the Court, which her Gentleman-usher Master Griffith hearing, told her, Madam, you are called; wel (said she) it makes no matter, I will not tarry, go your way: and thus she departed, and never after would appear in any Court, but appealed from the Cardinals to the Pope himselfe. The Queen being gone, the King said, I confesse she hath bin to me, the most dutifull and loving wife, that ever Prince had; and if it were ot for this scruple of my conscience, I would not leave her for any woman living: and having now referred the judgement of the cause to these Commissioners, I should be most glad they could finde the marriage be∣tween us to be in such sort lawfull, that with obedience to the Law of God, we might continue together; for I take God to witnesse, there is nothing I more de∣sire. This said, the King rose, and the Court was adjourned to another day; for notwithstanding the Queens Appeal (from which she would by no meanes be drawn) the Cardinals continued their Session weekly, & heard all of both sides: the Point that was chiefly stood on, was, whether Prince Arthur had ever had carnall knowledg of her, or no; the Kings Councell alleadged, he had, and proved it; first, by Prince Arthurs speech, the nex morning after his mariage, that e had bin that night in the midst of Spain; and then by the words of the last Dis∣pensation, Vel forsan Cognitam: the Queens Advocates alleadged the contrary; appealing to the Kings owne conscience; whom the Queene charged that he knew her to be a Virgin when he married her; (though, to say the truth, i were strange, Prince Arthur and she having lyen five moneth together, and hee no lesse then almost sixteene yeeres old.) But whilest Arguments were thus urged on both sides, and no certainty could appeare; the King sent the two Cardinals to the Queene, lying then in Bridewell, to
perswade her, she should submit her selfe to the Kings pleasure, and not stand so peremptorily to her Appeale. The Cardinals coming to her found her at work amongst her Maids, with a skaine of white thred about her necke: who having heard their message, answered, That in all other things she would willingly sub∣mit her selfe to the Kings will, but in this which concerned her honesty, and the legitimatenesse of her children, she durst not, but would relye upon the wisdom and pietie of both their Fathers, who (she knew) would never have assented to the marriage, if there had bin the least scruple of unlawfulnesse in it; and othe answer she would not give. Upon their returne to the King, when he perceived she could not be removed from her opinion; he commanded the Court to goe on; so that at last it came to judgement, which every man expected should be the next day. At which day the King came thither (but in so secret manner that he might heare and not be seene) where the Kings Councell at the Barre cal∣ling for Judgement; Cardinall Campeius, as being chiefe Commissioner, stood up and said; I finde the case very doubtfull, and the party Defendant standing to her Appeale, I will therefore give no Judgement, till I have conferred with the Pope; and therefore I adjoure the Court for this time, according to the order of the Court of Rome, which heares no Causes judicially from the last of Iuly till the fourth of October; at which protraction of time, King Henry was not a little angry, and the Duke of Suffolk being present, in a great rage said; it was never merry in England, since we had Cardinals amongst us. Soon after this, the Cardinall tooke his leave of the King, and returned to Rome: he was indeed commanded so to doe by the Pope, who would else most willingly have gratified King Heny, that had bestowed upon him the Bishoprick of Salisbu∣ry. Whilst these things were in acting, Cardinall Woolsey had an inkling of the Kings affection to Anne Bullen, daughter of the Viscount Rochford; and that the Divorce once passed, he ment to marry her; which Match, because for many reasons, he misliked; one perhaps, because she was a Lutheran, he sent privily to the Pope, that by no means he should give sentence for the Divorce, till he had framed the Kings minde another way; for his desire was, that the King should marry the Dutchesse of Alanson, the French Kings sister. This packing of Woolsey was not so closely carried, but that it soone came to the Kings knowledge; and the King finding him a rubbe in his way, whom he expected to have expedited his proceeding, began to thinke it necessary to re∣move him, and to take him off from that greatnesse which had made him so presuming; and indeed he made short worke with him; for soone after he sent the Dukes of Norfolke and Suffolke to him for the Seale, which yet he would not deliver to them, till they brought him a Warrant under the Kings owne hand. When the Seale was brought to the King, he delivered it to Sir Thomas Moore, Speaker then of the Parliament (the first Lay-man that bore that Office in any memory;) and in his roome was chosen Speaker Thomas Audley, Attourney of the Dutchie. Woolsey now removed from his Chaun∣cellourship; was in the Parliament then holden, charged with points of treason; but that charge was so cleerely taken off by his servant Thomas Crom∣well, who was then of the House, that the Cardinall was acquitted, to the great commendation of Cromwell, both for abilities in himselfe, and faithful∣nesse to his Master. After this, the King being informed, that all those things which the Car∣dinall had done by his power Legantine, were within the case of Praeme∣nire; he caused his Attourney Christopher Hales to sue out a Praemunire against him; and thereupon the two Dukes of Norfolke and Suffolke were sent unto him, to let him know, the Kings pleasure was, he should goe to Asher, a House neere to Hampton-Court, belonging to his Bishopricke of Winchester, and there to reside: whereupon, the Cardinall having first delivered up all his Moveables to the Kings use; (the greatest store and richest that was ever knowne of any Subject) went presently to Putney by
water, and from thence rode to Asher, where he and his Family continued three or oure weekes, without either Bed, Sheetes, Table-loathes or Dishes to eat their meat in, or money wherewith to buy any, but what he was forced to borrow of the Bishop of Carlile. After this, his matter for the Praemunire be∣ing called upon in the Kings Bench, his two Atturnies confessed the Action, and thereupon had Judgement to forfeit all his Lands and Goods, and to be out of the Kings protection; but the King of his clemency, sent him a sufficient Pro∣tection, and left him the Bishopricks of Yorke and Winchester, with Plate and stuffe convenient for his dignity. His Bishopricke of Duresme was given to Doctor Tunstall, Bishop of London; his Abbey of Saint Albans to the Prior of Norwich, and the Bishopricke of London to Doctor Stokestey, Embassadour then beyond the Seas. In this meane while, Margaret Dutchesse of Savoy, aunt to the Emperour, and the Lady Loyis Dutchesse of Angoulesme, Mother to the French King, met at Cambray to treat of a Peace between the Emperor, the Pope and the Kings of England and France, where were present Doctor Tunstall Bishop of London, and Sir Thomas Moore, then Chancelour of the Dutchie of Lancaster, Com∣missioners for the King of England: after long debating, through the diligence of the said Ladies, a Peace was concluded; and was thereof called, The Wo∣mans Peace; and was indeed as fickle as women, for it was soone broken, and neither of the Princes trusted the other ere the more for it. King Henry before this time had beene wholly ruled by the Cardinall and by the Clergie, but now growing sensible of that errour, he called his high Cour of Parliament; in which the Commons complained sharply of their grievan∣ces against the Clergie, specially in six things. The first, for that they exacted unreasonable summes of money, as due fees, for the probate of mens last Wils and Testaments: in so much, that Sir Hen∣ry Guildford Knight of the Garter, and Comptroller of the Kings House declared openly, that he and others being Executers to Sir William Comp∣ton; payed for the proate of his Will to the Cardinall, and the Archbishop of Canterbury a thousand markes. The second, the extreame exaction, which spirituall men used in taking of corps, or mortuaries. The third, that spirituall men became Farmours of great Granges and Farmes: to the prejudice of Husbandmen and Graziers. The fourth, because many Abbots, Pryors, and other spirituall men, kept Tan-houses, and bought and sold wooll, cloath, and other wares, as tempo∣rall Merchants. The fifth, because such Clergy men as had the best livings, would take the uttermost of their right, and yet live in the Court or in Noble mens or Bishops houses, where they spent nothing. The sixth, because diverse ignorant men amongst them, held ten or twelve Benifices to themselves severally, and yet lived not upon any one of them, but kept great schollers at small pension. These things before this time might not be touched, because the Bishops were Chancelours, and had all the rule about the King: but now the King looking better into he matter, gave way to these complaints: whereupon the Burgesses drew up three Bils; one of the probate of Testaments, another for Mortuaries: and the third, for Non-residence, pluralities, and taking of farmes by spirituall men. The bill of Mortuaries, passed first the House of Commons, and was sent up to the Lords: within two dayes after, was sent up the Bill of probate of Testaments, at which the Archbishop of Canterbury, and al the Bishops much frowned, but specially Iohn Fisher Bishop of Rochester who rose up and said; my Lords, you see what Bills come dayly from the Common House, and all is to the destruction of the Church, for Gods sake, consider what a realme Bohemia was, and when the Church went downe, then fell the glory of that Kingdome.
Now with our Commons is nothing but downe with the Church; and all this mee seemeth, is for lacke of faith onely. When these words were reported to the House of Commons, they tooke the matter very hainously, and thereupon sent their spaker Thomas Audeley, with thirty of the House, to the King, com∣playning what a dishonour to the King and to the whole Realme it was to say, that they which were elected for the wisest men of all Shires, should be charged to lack faith, which was all one as to say, they were Infidels and no Chrystians, so as what Acts or Laws soever they made should be taken as Laws made by Paynims and Heathen, and not worthy to be kept by Christian men. And ther∣fore humbly besought his Majesty, to call the said Bishop of Rochester before him, to give accompt of the words he had spoken. Wherupon within few daies after, the King sent for the Bishop, and acquainted him with the Commons complaint against him; who excused himselfe, by saying he meant the doings of the Bohemians was for lack of faith, and not the doings of the House of Com∣mons; of which excuse, the King sent word to the House by Sir William Fitz-Williams Treasurer of his houshold, but it pleased the Commons nothing at all. After divers meetings between the Lords and the Commons, about the Bils of probate of Testaments and Mortuaries, the temporalty laid to the spiritualty their owne lawes and constitutions, and the spiritualty defended them, by pre∣scription and usage; to whom a Gentleman of Grays-Inne made this answer, the usage hath ever been of theeves, to robbe on shooters hill; is it therefore lawfull? whilst these Bils were in debate, an Act was passed, which released to the King all such summes of money as he had borrowed at the Loane, in the fifteenth yeere of his Reigne; which Bill at first was much opposed, but the most part of the House being the Kings servants, it was at last assented to, which once knowne in the Country abroad, made much murmering, and the Parlia∣ment to be ill spoken of; for every man counted it as a sure debt, so as some made their Wils of the money, and some turned it over in satisfaction to their cre∣ditours. To qualifie which grievance, the King granted a generall pardon for all offences (certaine excepted) and was a meanes also to have the three Bils passed; one for probate of Testaments, another for Mortuaries; and the third, against plurality of Benefices; Non-residence, buying and taking of farmes by spiritual persons, though this last with some qualifying. During this Parliament, the King created Viscount Rochford, Earl of VVilt∣shire, the Vicount Fitz-VVater Earle of Sussex, and the Lord Hastings Earl of Huntington. By this time, the Lords of the upper House, had drawne certaine Articles a∣gainst the Cardinall, and sent them downe to the House of Commons, the chiefe wherof were these. First, that without the Kings assent, he hath procured himselfe to be made a Legat, by reason whereof he tooke away the right of all Bishops and spiri∣tuall persons. Secondly, that in all his writings which he wrote to Rome, or to any foraign Prince he wrote Ego et Rex meus, I and my King; so preferring himselfe before the King. Thirdly, that without the Kings assent, hee carried the great Seale of England with him into Flanders. Fourthly, that having the French-pox, he presumed to come and breath upon the King. Fifthly, that he caused the Cardinals-hat to be put upon the Kings Coyne. Sixthly, that he would not suffer the Kings Clerke of the Market to sit at Saint Albanes. Seventhly, that he had sent infinite store of treasure to Rome, for purchasing of his dignity. These Articles were read in the House, and if not otherwise proved, yet con∣fessed
afterward under the Cardinals owne hand, which added to the former Praemunire; all his Lands and goods were seized on to the Kings use. This Parliament being ended, the King removed to Greenwich, and there kept his Christmas with his Queene Katherine in great state; for though this mat∣ter of making void the marriage between them, was hotly pursued by the King; yet abstaining onely from her bed, he conversed with her still, and they kept Court together, in as loving manner as they had done before. And now King Henry understanding that the Pope and the Emperour was to meet at Bologna, he sent Embassadours thither, the Earle of Wiltshire, Doctor Stokesley Elect of London, and Doctor Lee, to declare both to the Pope and to the Emperour, the opinions of divers learned men in the matter of his Marriage; who all a∣greed that it was against the Law of God; and thereupon requiring the Pope to doe him Justice; and shewing to the Emperour, that the King moved this matter for discharge of his Conscience onely, and to no other end. To which the Pope answered, that when he came to Rome, he would heare the matter dis∣puted, and doe the King right. The Emperour answered, that he would in no case be against the Law of God, and if this marriage were Judged such by the Court of Rome, he would rest contented: with these Answers the Embassa∣dours returned. It was now the two and twentieth yeere of King Henries reigne, when the Emperour gave to the Master of Saint Iohns of Hierusalem the Island of Maltas, in supplying of the Island of Rodes, which the Turke sometime before had won from that Order. In this yeere, the New Testament having beene Translated into English, by Tindall, Ioy, and others, was forbidden to be read; and many for reading it, were sharply punished by command of the Bishops and Sir Thomas Moore then Lord Chancellour; but none was more violent in the matter then the Bishop of London, who caused all the Bookes to be brought into Pauls Church-yard, and there burned. King Henry having heard by good information, that when Campeius was sent Legat into England, he had brought with him a Bull of Diorce; but was after∣ward upon change of the Popes mind, commanded to burne it; saw plainly by this, that the Pope had no meaning of proceeding really in the matter, but to keepe it a foot for his owne ends; neither to displease the Empour by granting it, nor King Henry by not granting it, but promising expedition to keepe him in expectance; yet using delayes to keepe him in dependance; and therefore resolved now to take such a course, that he should not need to care whether the Pope granted it or no; and thereupon caused a Proclamation to be published, that no person of what estate or condition soever should Purchase, or at∣tempt to purchase from the Court of Rome, any thing prejudiciall to the Jurisdiction, or Prerogative of this his Realme, upon paine of imprison∣ment, and other punishments at his Graces pleasure; and shortly after an Act was made, that Bishops should pay no more Annats, or money for Buls to the Pope; for as much as it was proved, there had been paid for Bulls of Bi∣shops, since the fourth yeere of King Henry the seventh, an hundred and three∣score thousand pounds, besides what had been paid for Pardons and other dis∣pensations. Another Act was then also made, that no person, should appeale for any cause, out of this Realme to the Court of Rome, but from the Com∣missary to the Bishop, and from the Bishop to the Archbishop, and from the Archbishop to the King: and all Causes of the King, to be tried in the upper House of the Convocation. At this time, the Cardinall lying still at Asher, and his Adversaries doubting last lying so neare the King, he might one time or other get accesse to the Kings presence, and come againe into favour; they using meanes to have him sent further off, and thereupon the King appointed him to goe to his Diocesse of Yorke, and not to come Southward without speciall licence, whereupon
in Lent he made great preparation for his journey, and having in his train to the number of an hundred and threescore persons: by easie journeyes came to Pe∣terborrow, and there kept his Easter; the weeke after he went to Stamford then to Newark, and so to Southwell, where he continued most part of all that sum∣mer: and then rode to Seroby, where he staid till Michaelmas and then came to Cawood Castle, within seaven miles of Yorke where he kept a plentifull house for al commers: and repaired the Castle, being greatly in decay, having above three hundred Artificers in daily wages. At last, he determined to be installed at Yorke, the next Munday after Alhallan-day; against which time great pre∣paration was made, and the Cardinall sent to the King, to lend him the Miter and Pall, which he used to wear at any great solemnity. At which pesumption the King marvailed not a little; saying to those that were about him, what a thing is this, that pride should thus reigne in a man that is quite under foot? but before the day of Instalment came; he was arrested in this manner; Sir Walter Walsh one of the Kings Privy-chamber, was sent downe to the Earl of Northumberland, with whom he was joyned in Commission to arrest the Car∣dinall; whereupon they goe together to Cawood, where the Cardinall lay: and being entred into the house, it was told the Cardinall, that the Earle of Nor∣thumberland was come, and in the Hall; then (quoth the Cardinall) I am sorry wee have dined, for I doubt our Officers are not provided of any good cheere. With that, he went and brought the Earle up, welcomming him in a com∣plementall manner, as if he had come but onely to visit him: but being come into the Chamber, the Earle with a soft voyce, laying his hand upon the Car∣dinals arme, said; My Lord, I arrest you of high treason: the Cardinall some∣what astonied, asked to see his Commission, which the Earle denying to shew; then (saith the Cardinall) I will not obey your arrest; at that instant Master Walsh came in, and kneeled downe to the Cardinall; who asked him if he were joyned in Commission with the Earle; who answered, he was well then, said the Cardinall, I trow you are one of the Kings Privie Chamber, your name is Walsh; I am content to yeeld to you, but not to my Lord of Northumberland, unlesse I see his Commission: the meanest of the Kings Privie-chamber is suf∣ficient to arrest the greatest Peere of the Realme, by the Kings commande∣ment, without any Commission. Then the Earle took the Cardinals keyes from him, and put him in custody of his Gentlemen: some few dayes after, he was conveyed from Cawood to Pomfret, and after to Sheffield Parke, where he had kinde entertainment, and staid with the Earle of Shrewsbury and his Lady eigh∣teene dayes; till at last sitting one day at dinner, his colour was observed to change, and being asked how he did; not well (saith he) I have something sud∣denly at my stomacke, as cold as a whetstone, which I know is winde; I desire to have something from the Apothecary, to breake winde; which was brought, and the Earle seeing the say taken, he tooke it, and thereupon broke winde in∣deed; but whether it were he tooke it in too great a quantity, or that there was some foule play used, he fell soone after into such a loosenesse, that the night following he had above fifty stooles; yet the next day he rode to Nottingham, and the day after to Leicester Abbey; being so sicke by the way, that he was ready to fall off his Mule; comming to the Abby gates, the Abbot with all the Covent met him; to whom he said, Father Abbot, I am come hither to lay my bones among you; and then was led up into his chamber, and went to bed; where growing sicker and sicker; the next morning Master Kingston Liete∣nant of the Tower, who had beene sent to bring him up, comming to him, and aking him how he did; I doe but tarry (saith he) the pleasure of God, to ren∣der up my poore soule into his hands; for this is my case, I have a flux with a continuall feaver, the nature whereof is, that if there be no amendment with∣in eight dayes, either excoriation of the entrailes will ensue, or frenzie, or else present death; and the best of them is death; and (as I suppose) this is the eight day. Sir (said Master Kingston) you are afraid of that you have no cause;
for I assure you, the King commanded me to say unto you, that you should be of good cheere, for that he beareth you as much good will as ever he did; No, no (Master Kingston) said the Cardinall, I see how it is framed; but if I had served God as diligently as I have done the King, he would not have given me over in my gray hayres; but it is a just reward for my study to doe him service, not regarding the service of God, to doe him pleasure; and having so said, his speech failed, and incontinent the clock struk eight, and then he gave up the Ghost; which made some about him to remember, how he had said the day before: that at eight of the clock they should loose their master. Being dead, he was buried in the Abby of Leicester. This man held at once the Bishop∣ricks of Yorke, Winchester, and Durhan, the dignities of Lord Cardinall Lega and Chancelour of England, the Abbey of Saint Albans, diverse Priories, and sundry great Benefices in Commendum: he had also in his hands, as it were in Farme, the Bishoprick of Bath, VVorcester and Hereord, which having beene given by King Henry the seventh to strangers, that lived out of the Realme, they suffered Woolsey to enjoy them, receiving of him a Pension onely. The Reinue of this Preate is scarce credible, a thousand persons daily in his houshold, of whom many Knights and some Lords; all which greatnesse as it came by the Kings favou, so by the withdrawing of his favour, it was overthrowne: so true is that saying of Salomon, The Kings favour is as dew upon the grasse; but his wrath is as the roaring of a Lion, and as a messenger of death. After this the King removed from Hampton-Court to Greenwich, where with his Queene Ka∣therine he kept a solemne Christma, and on twelfth night he sat in state in the Hall, where was divers Enterludes; costly Masques, and a sumptuous Banquet. After Christmas he came to his Mannor of Westminster, which before was cal∣led Yorke Place; for the Cardinall had made a Feoffment of it to the King, which the Chapter of Yorke confirmed, and then it was no more called Yorke Place, but the Kings Mannor of Westminster, now VVhitehall. At this time the whole Clergie of England was charged by the Kings lear∣ned Councell, to be in a Praemunire, for supporting and maintaining the Car∣dinals Legatine power; and were thereupon called by Processe into the Kings Bench to answer; but before their day of Appearance came, they in their Con∣vocation concluded an humble submission in writing, and offered the King an hundred thousand pound to have their pardon by Parliament; which offer, af∣ter some labour, was accepted, and their pardon promised. In which submission the Clergie called the King supreame Head of the Church. This Pardon was signed with the Kings hand, and sent to the Lords, who assented to it; and then sent it to the Lower House: but here, divers of the House excepted against the Pardon, unlesse themselves also might be included in it; who (they said) having had something to doe with the Cardinall, might be brought into the same case as the Clergie were. Hereupon their Speaker Thomas Audeley, with a convenient number of the House, was sent to the King about it; to whom the King made answer, that he was their Soveraigne Lord, and would not be com∣pelled to shew his mercy; and seeing they went about to restraine him of his liberty, he would grant a Pardon to the Clergie, which he might doe by his great Seale without them; and for their Pardon, he would be advised before he granted it: with this Answer the Speaker and Commons returned, much grieved and discontented; and some said that Thomas Cromwell, who was new∣ly come into the Kings favour, had disclosed the secrets of the House, which made the King give this unpleasing Answer. But soon after the King of his own accord, caused their Pardon also to be drawn, and signed it which easily pas∣sed both Houses, with great commendation of the Kings judgement, to denie it at first when it was demanded as a right, and to grant it afterward, when it was received as of grace. In this Parliament time, on the thirtieth of March, Sir Thomas Moore Lord Chancellour, with twelve of the Lords, came into the Lower House, acquain∣ting
them, that though in the matter of the Kings Divorce, he might sufficiently rest upon the judgement of learned men in his owne Universities of Oxford and Cambridge, yet to avoid all suspicion of parciality, he had sent into France, Ita∣ly, the Popes Dominions, and the Venetians, to have their opinions; and then causing them to be read, Sir Bryan Tuke tooke out of a box certaine writings sealed, which were the determinations of the Universities of Orleance, of Pa∣ris, of Anjou, of Burges, of Bolonia, of Padua, and of Thoulouse: all which were peremptory in these two Points; that the Brother, by the Law of God, might not marry the Relict of his brother; and then, being against the law of God, that it is not in the power of the Pope to dispence with it: and now (said they) you may know, that the King hath not sought this Divorce for his pleasure; but for discharge of his conscience; and this said, they departed. The King him∣selfe, when he heard of these determinations, was so farre from rejoycing at it, that he rather mourned, as for the losse of so good a wife; yet he conversed with her as he had done before, in nothing altered but in abstaining from her bed. But being willing the Queene should know these Determinations; in Whitsonweeke after, he sent divers Lords to acquaint her with them; requi∣ing her thereupon to recall her Appeale, and to refer the matter to eight in∣different Lords; which she utterly refused, using her usuall Answer, that she was his lawfull wife, and would abide the Determination of the Court of Rome, but of no other. After Whitsontide, the King and Queen removed to Windsor, and there continued till the fourteenth of Iuly, on which day the King removed to Woodstocke and left the Queen at Windsor, where she remained a while, and after removed to Easthamsted, whither the King sent to her divers Lords, first to perswade her to be conformable to the law of God; which if they could not do, then to let her know, that his pleasure was, she should be at either of these three places, his Mannor of Oking, or of East-hamstead, or the Monastery of Bisham, and there to continue without further molesting him with her suits. And now came Cranmer in to play his part. It chanced that Doctor Ste∣phes, Doctor Foxe and he met at Waltham one day at dinner; where falling into discourse, about the case then in agitation, of the Kings mariage with Queene Katherine; the other Doctors thought the mariage might be proved unlawfull by the Civill Law: (but (said Cranmor) it may better be proved by the Law of God, and it is no hard matter to doe it; which words of his being made knowne to the King Cranmor is sent for, and commanded to set his reasons down in wri∣ting: which having done, and shewed them to the King; he was asked whether he would stand to that which he had written: who answered, he would, even be∣fore the Pope himselfe, if his Majesty pleased: marry (said the King) and to Pope you shall go; and thereupon sent him to the Court of Rome, and with him Thomas Bullen Earl of Witshire, Doctor Stokesley Elect of London, Doct. Lee the Kings Almoner, and others: who coming to Bolonia where the Pope was, had a day of audience appointed, but was hindred by a diculous accident; for the Pope holding out his foot for them to kisse his toe, as the manner is, a dog of the Earls, by chance in the room, ran and caught the Popes foot in his mouth, & made it for that time unfit to kisse. After this, when Cranmor had made his Propositi∣on, he was told, it should be answered when the Pope came to Rome: so the Em∣bassadors were dismissed, and Cranmor went to the Emperour Court; where in private conference he satisfied Cornelius Agrippa, the most learned at that time about the Emperour, and brought him to be of his opinion. Cranmor returning home, and giving the King this satisfaction; the Kings mariage with Queen Ka∣therine was soon after dissolved by Parliament, and the Bishop of Canterbury ac∣companied with Doctor Stokesley Bishop of London, Stephen Gardiner Bishop of Winchester, the Bishop of Bathe and Lincolne, and other learned men, rode to Dunstable where Queen Katherine then lay; where being cited to appeare, and making default fifteen dayes togethers, for lack of appearance, she was divorced from the King, and the mariage declared to be void and of none effect; and from
thenceforth it was decreed, she should no more be called Queen, but Princesse Dowager: after which time, the King never saw her more. At this time, being the foure and twentieth yeer of King Henries reigne, Sir Thomas Moore, after long suit, delivered up the great Seal, which was then delive∣red to Thomas Audeley Speaker of the Parliament; and he made first Lord Kee∣per, and shortly after Chancelour; in whose roome of Speaker, Hnfrey Wing∣eld of Grayes-Inne was chosen on the first of September this yeer: the King be∣ing at Windsor, created Anne Bullen Marchionesse of Pembrooke, giving her a thousand pounds land a yeere: and then being desirous to talke with the King of France in person, on the tenth of October, taking the said Lady with him, and di∣vers Lords, as the Dukes of Norfolke and Suffolke, the Marquesse of Dorset and Excester, the Earles of Arundell, Oxford, Surrey, Essex, Derby, Rutland, Sussex and Huntington, with divers Viscounts, Barons and Knights, he sailed over to Callice; and on the twentieth of October me with the King of France at Bol∣loigne, with whom he staid foure dayes; in which time, to doe him honour, the King of France honored the two Dukes of Norfolke and Suffolke with the Order of Saint Michael, and then both Kings went to Callice, where the French King stayed certain dayes; in which time to doe the King of France honor, King Henry honored two of his great Lords with the Order of the Garter, and then after great magnificence in revelling & feasting, on the twentieth of Ostob. the French King departed from Callice, and King Henry returned into England, where on the fourteenth of November following, he maried secretly the Lady Anne Bulle which mariage was not openly known till Easter after, when it was perceived she was with childe; at which time William Warham Archbishop of Canterbury dyed, Thomas Cranmor was elected Archbishop in his roome. After that the King perceived his new wie to be with childe, he caused all Officers necessary to be appointed to her; and so on Easter eave she went to her closet openly as Queen, and then the King appointed her coronation to be kept on Witsunday following; and writings were sent to all Sheriffes, to certifie the nams of men of forty pounds, to receive the order of Knighthood, or else to mak fine: the assesment of which ines was appointed to Thomas Cromwell Master of of the Jewel-house, and of the Kings Councell; a man newly come in the King favour, by whose industry great sums of money were by such fines gathered. In the beginning of May, the King caused Proclamation to be made, that all men who claimed to doe any service at the Coronation, by the way of tenure, gran, or prescription, should put in their claime three weekes after Easter in the Star-chamber, before Charles Duke of Suffolke, for that time high Steward of Eng∣land, the Lord Chancellour and other Commissioners. Two dayes before the Coronation were made Knights of the Bath, the Earle of Dorset, the Eale of Dery, the Lord Clifford, the Lord Fitzwater, the Lord Hastings, the Lord Monteagle, the Lord Vaux, Sir Iohn Mordant, Sir Henry Parker; Sir William Windsor, Sir Francis Weston, Sir Thomas Arundell, Sir Iohn Hurlson, Sir Thomas Poynings, Sir Henry Savill, Sir George itzwilliams, Sir Iohn Tindall, and Sir Tho: Irmey. On Whitsunday the Coronatio was kept in as great state &  for al circumstances as ever an was, and the day after a solem Just was olden. In May this yeer Pope Clement sent a messenger to King Henry, requiring him personally to appeare at the generall Councell, which he had appointed to be kept the yeer following; but when his Commission was shewed, there was nei∣ther time nor place specified for keeping of the said Councell; and so with an uncertain Answer to an uncertain Demand, the Messenger departed. It was now the five and twentieth yeere of the Kings reigne, when on Midso∣mer day, Mary the French Queene, and then wife to Charles Duke of Sufflke, dyed; and was buried at Saint Edmund-berry; and on the seaventh of September following, between three and foure a clocke in the afternoone, the Queene was delivered of a daughter that was named Elizabeth; the Godfather at the christ∣ning was the Archbishop of Canterbury; the Godmother the old Dutchesse of
Norfolke, and the old Marchionesse Dorset widow; and at the Confirmation, the Lady Marchionesse of Excester: the Christning was performed with ex∣ceeding great state, and great gifts were given by the Gossips. This yeere, one Pavier the Town-clerke of London hanged himselfe, (whom Hollinshead saith) he heard once sweare a great oath; that if he thought the thought the King would set forth the Scripture in English, rather then he would live to see that day, he would cut his owne throat: which I there∣fore relate, that the judgement of God may be seene upon such unhallow∣ed oathes. A little before this time one Elizabeth Barton, named the Holy Maid of Kent, came to be discovered; whose abettours were Richard Master a Priest, Parson of Aldington in Kent, Edward Bocking Doctor of Divinity, a Monke of Canterbury, Richard Deering a Monke, Edward Thwayts Gentleman, Henry Gold Parson of Aldermary, Hugh Rich a Fryar observant, Richard Risby and Thomas Gold, Centlemen. This Maid had learned to counterfeit falling in∣to Trances; in which she would deliver many strange things, and amongst others, said, that by Revelation from God and his Saints she was informed; that if King Henry proceeded to the Divorce, and married another, he should not be King of England one moneth after. And here we may see how credu∣lous oftentimes great Schollars are in beleeving Impostures, when VVarham Archbishop of Canterbury, and Fisher Bishop of Rochester were thought to give credit to this Counterfeit, that we need not wonder at Saint Austin; who though he gave credit to many lying Miracles, yet they were such as had more pro∣bability in them then this; which consisted in nothing but making of faces, as upon Examination of the Maide and her Abettours was confessed; and thereupon she and most of them were condemned, drawne to Tyburne and there hanged. In this meane time the Scots had beene troublesome, and made Intodes upon the Borders; till at last, Commissioners being sent to treat of agreement; a Peace was concluded, to continue both the Kings lives; which on the twentieth of May this yeer, was openly Proclaimed. About this time, at the suit of the Lady Katherine Dowage, a Bull was sent from the Pope, which cursed both the King and the Realme; which Bull was set up in the Towne of Dunkerke in Flanders, the Messenger not daring to come neerer: and because it was knowne that the Lady Dowager had procured this Curse to be sent, the Duke of Suffolke was sent to her, lying then at Bugden besides Huntington, to discharge a great part of her houshold servants; yet leaving her a convenient number, like a Princesse. It was now the six and twentieth yeer of King Henries reigne, when in a Par∣liament holden, an Act was made for establishing the succession in the Crown, upon the Lady Elizabeth; to which, first all the Lords, Knights and Burgesses were sworne; and after Commissioners were sent into all parts of the Realm, to take the oath of all men and women to the said Act. Another Act was also made, which authorized the King to be Supreame Head of the Church of Eng∣land, and the Popes authority to be utterly abolished. But Doctor Iohn Fish∣er, Bishop of Rochester, Sir Thomas Moore Knight, and Doctor Wilson Parson of Saint Thomas Apostles in London, expresly denied at Lameth, before the Archbishop of Canterbury, to take the Oathes; of whom Doctor Wilson recan∣ted, but the other two persisting in their opinion, were both of them beheaded. Of these two Bishop Fisher was much lamented, as reputed a man both of great learning and good life. The Pope had elected him Cardinall, and his Hat was come as farr as Callice, but before it could come into England his head was off. Sir Thomas Moore was both learned and very wise, but so given to a vaine of jest∣ing and merry scoffing, that he could not refrain it at the very time of his death: as when he was carried to the Tower, being demanded his upper garment (mea∣ning his Gowne) you shall have it, said he, and gave them his cap; saying, it
was the uppermost garment he had: also, when being upon the Scaffold, the Hangman kneeled downe and asked him forgivenesse; I forgive thee (said he) but I promise thee, thou wilt never have credit by cutting off my Head, my necke is so short: and when he was to lay his head downe upon the blocke, having a great gray beard, he stroked it out, and said to the Hangman, I pray you let me lay my beard over the blocke, lest you should cut it; for though you have Warrant to cut off my head, you have none to cut my beard. But his Devotion was no jesting matter, for he used to weare a shirt of haire next his skin, for a perpetuall penance; and oftentimes in the Church he would put on a Surplesse, and helpe the Priest to say Masse; which he forbore not to doe even when he was Lord Chancellour of England; as one time the Duke of Nor∣folke comming to the Church found him doing it. Two memorable things are recorded of him; one, which shewes his great integritie, and the small recko∣ning he made of riches; that having passed through so many great imploy∣ments, and borne so many great Offices; yet in all his time, e never Purchased above one hundred pounds land a yeere, nor left any great stocke of money be∣hinde him, when he died. The other, which shewes his filiall piety, that be∣ing Lord Chancellour of England, at the same time that his Father wa a Judge of the Kings Bench, he would alwayes at his going to Westminster, goe first to the Kings Bench and aske his Father blessing, before he went to sit in the Chancery. The ninth of Iuly, this yeere, the Lord Dacres of the North was arraigned at Westminster of high treason, before the Duke of Norfolke, as high Steward of England; his Inditement being read, he so answered every part and matter therein contained, that by his Peeres he was found Not guilty; a rare thing to stop a currant that ran with such violence. The one and twentieth of September Doctor Taylour Master of the Roles, was discharged of that Office; and the nin∣teenth of October following, Thomas Cromwell was sworne in his place. This yeere the King of Scots was installed Knight of Garter, by his Deputy the Lord Erskin and Stephen Gardiner, who after the Cardinals death, was made Bishop of Winchester, was sent Embassadour Legier, into France, where he remained three yeeres. Also in Ianuary, of this yeere, Katherine Princesse Dowage, fell into her last sicknesse; to whom the King sent the Emperours Embassadour Legier, desiring her to be of good comfort; but she finding her death to approach, caused onely one of her Gentlewoman to write a Letter to the King; commending to him her Daughter and his, and beseeching him to be a good Father to her; and then desiring him further, to have some conside∣ration of her Servants. On the eighth of Ianuary, at Kimbolton, she departed this life, and was buried at Peterborough. A woman of so vertuous a life, and of so great obsequiousnesse to her husband, that from her onely merit, is grown a reputation to all Spanish wives. Also the nine and twentieth of Ianuary, this yeere, Queene Anne was delivered of a childe before her time, which was borne dead. And now King Henry began to fall into thoe great disorders, which have been the blemish of his life, and have made him be blotted out of the Cata∣logue of our best Princes; for first, in October this yeer, he sent Dctor Lee and others, to isit the Abbeys, Priories, and Nunneries in England; who set at liberty all those Religious persons, that would forsake their habit, and all that were under th age of foure and twenty yeers; and in December following, a survay was taken of all Chantries, and the names of such, as had the guift of them. After which, in a Parliament holden the fourth of February, an Act was made, which gave to the King all Religious houses, with all their lands and goods, that were of the value of three hundred marks a yeere and under: the mber of which Houses, was three hundred seventy and six: the value of their lands yeerly, above two and thirty thousand pounds, their movable goods, one hundred thousand, the Religious persons put out of the same houses
above ten thosand. This yeere, William Tindall, was burnt at a Town in Flanders, betweene Brussels and Mechlyn, called Villefort, for translating into English the New Testament, and divers parts of the old; who having beene long imprisoned, was upon the Lord Cromwels writing for his Deliverance, in all haste, brought to the fire, and burnt. It was now the eight and twentieth yeere of King Henries Reigne, when on Munday, there were solemne Justs holden at Geeenwich, from whence the King suddainely departed, and came to Westminster, whose suddaine departure stroke great amazement into many, but to the Queene especially, and not without cause; for the next day, the Lord Rochford her brother, and Henry Norris were brought to the Tower of London, prisoners, whither also the same day at five a clock in the afternoone, was brought Queene Anne her selfe, by Sir Thomas Audeley Lord Chancelour, the Duke of Norfolke, Thomas Cromwell Secretary, and Sir William Kingston Leivtenant of the Tower, who at the Tower-gate, fell on her knees before the said Lords, beseeching God to help her, as she was innocent of that whereof she was accused: on the ifteenth of May, she was ar∣raigned in the Tower, before the Duke of Norfolke, sitting as high Steward of England. When her Inditement was read, she made unto it so wise and dis∣creet answers, that shee seemed fully to cleere her selfe of all matters laid to her charge: but being tried by her Peeres, whereof the Duke of Suffolke was chiefe; she was by them found guilty, and had Judgment pronounced by the Duke of Norolke; immeadiatly the Lord Rochford her brother, was likewise arraigned and condemned: who on the seaventeenth of May, together with Henry Norris, Marke Smeton, VVilliam Briorton, and Francis VVeston, all of the Kings Privy-chamber, about marters touching the Queen, were behede on the Tower-hill, Queen Anne her selfe on the nineteenth of May, on a Sca∣fold upon the Green within the Tower, was beheaded with the sword of Callice by the hangman of that Towne; her body with the head, was buried in the Quire of the chappell there. This Queen Anne, was the daughter of Thomas Bullen Earle of VViltshire, and of Lady Elizabeth daughter of Thomas Howard Duke of Norolke; the Earles Father was the sonne of Sir VVilliam Bullen, whose wife was Margaret the second daughter and Coheire of Thomas Butler Ealre of Ormond, and the said Sir VVilliam, was the sonne of Sir Godfrey Bullen, Lord Major of London, who lieth buried in Saint Leonards Church in the Iewry, whose wife was Anne eldest daughter & coheire to Thomas Lord Hoo and Hastings: and his discent was out of the house of the Bullens in the County of Norfolke; thus much for her Parentage: for her Religion, she was an arnest Professor, and one of the first Countenancers of the Gospell: in Almes-deeds so liberall, that in nine moneths space; It it is said, she distributed amongst the poore, to the value of fifteene thousand pounds: now for the crimes for which she died, (Adultery and Incest:) proofes of her guiltinesse there are none recorded: of her Innocency, many; first, her owne clearing of all objections, at the time of her arraignment: then Cromwels writing to the King, after full ex∣amination of the matter; that many things have been objected, but none con∣fessed, onely some circumstances had been acknowledged by Marke Smeton: (and what was Marke Smeton, but a meane fellow, one that upon promise of life, would say any thing; and having said somthing, which they took hold of was soone after executed least he should retract it:) lastly, they that were ac∣cused with her, they all denied it to the death: even Henry Norris, whom the King specially favoured, and promised him pardon if he would but confesse it. It was a poore proofe of Incest with her brother, that comming one morning into her chamber before she was up, he leaned down upon her bed, to say som∣thing in her eare; yet this was taken hold of for a proof: and it need be no mar∣vaile if we consider the many aduersaries she had; as being a Protestant, and perhaps in that respect, the King himselfe not greatly her friend: (for though he had excluded the Pope, yet he continued a Papist stil: and then who knowes
not, that nature is not more able of an Acorn to make an oake, then authority is able of the least surmise, to make a certainty. But howsoever it was, that her death was contrived: certain it is, that it cast upon King Henry a dishonourable Imputation; in so much, that where the Protestant Princes of Germany had resolved to choose him for head of their League; after they heard of this Queens death, in such a manner, they utterly refused him as unworthy of the honour: and it is memorable what conceit Queene Anne her selfe had of her death; for at the time, when shee was led to be beheaded in the Tower shee called one of the Kings Privy-chamber to her, and said unto him, commend me to the King, and tell him; he is constant in his course of advancing me, for from a private Gentlewoman, he made me a Marquesse, from a Marquesse, a Queen; and now, that he had left no higher degree of worldly honour for me, he hath made me a Martyr. Immediatly after her death, in the weeke before Whionide, the King maried Iane Seymour, daughter to Sir Iohn Seymour, who at Whitsontide was openly shewed as Queene: and on the Tuesday in the Whitson-weeke her brother Sir Edmund Seymour, was created Viscount Beauchamp, and Sir Walter Hangerford, was made Lord Hangerford. The eight of Iune, the Parliament began; during the which, the Lord Tho∣mas Howard, without the Kings assent, had affianced the Lady Margaret Dou∣glas, daughter to the Queen of Scots, and Niece to the King: for which he was attainted of treason, and an Act was made for like offenders hereafter; and so he died in the Tower, and shee long time remained there a prisoner; yet afterward was set at liberty, and maried Mathew Earle of Lenox, who by him had Henry, Father of Iames the first King of Great Brittaine. In the time of this Parliament, the Bishops and all the Clergy had a solemne Convocation at Pauls Church in London; where after much disputation and debating of matters, they published a book of Religion; intituled, Articles devised by the Kings Highnesse: in which booke are specially mentioned but three Sacraments: namely Baptisme, Eucharist, and Pennance; also certaine Injunctions were set forth, whereby many of the old Holi-dayes were abro∣gated, specially those that fell in Harvest time. The two and twentieth of Iuly, Henry Duke of Richmond and Somerset, base sonne of King Henry by Elizibeth Blunt, died at Saint Iames, and was buried at Thetsone in Norfolke. The nine and twentieth of Iune the King held a great Justs and Triumph at VVestminster, but a disastrous Sea-fight on the water; where one Gates a Gentlman was drowned in his harnesse, and by the breaking of a Gunne two Mariners were sore mained: in Iuly following, Thomas Cromwell, Secretary to the King, and Master of the Rolles, was made Lord Keeper of the Privy-seale: and the ninteenth of Iuly the Lord Fitz-Warren was created Earl of Bath; and the day after, the said Cromwell was made Lord Cromwell; and on the eighteenth of Iuly, Vicr Generall under the King over the Spiritualty; who sate diverse times in the Convocation House, amongst the Bishops as head over them: and now was the state of Religion in England come to a strange passe; because alwayes in passing, and had no consistance; for at first, the authority of the Pope was excluded in some cases onely, a while alter in all; but yet his Do∣ctrine was wholly retained. Afterward, his Doctrine came to be Impugned, but in some few points onely: a while after, in many more: that the fable of Proteu might no longer be a fable, when the Religion in England might be his true Morral: and indeed, it could be no otherwise; the distance between the two Religious being not possible to be passed Per saltum; but must be done by de∣grees, which degrees may be observed in the progresse of the story: for where at first, it was permitted onely to read the Bible in English, now it came to be permitted, to pray in English; for now in September, the Lord Cromwell set forth Injunctions, to have the Lords prayer, the Ave, the Creed, the ten Comman∣dements,
and all Articles of the Christian-faith translated into English, and to be taught by all Parsons and Curates to their Parishoners: which Innovation so stirred up the people, that in Lincolshire they assembled to the number of twenty thousand; against whom the King himselfe went in person, who win∣ng by perswasions their chief leaders, brought the rest upon pardon to submit themselves: but when he had himselfe done the work of mercy; he afterward sent the Duke of Suffolke, with Sir Francis Brian, and Sir Iohn Russell to doe the worke of Justice; who caused Nicholas Melton, and a Monke naming him∣selfe Captaine Cobler, and thirteen others (Ringleaders of the sedition,) to be apprehended, and most of them to be executed. But this Commotion was scarce appeased, when presently there rose another in the North-parts, where forty thousand were assembled, giving themselves out for an holy Pilgrimage, where on one side of their Ensignes, they had Christ hanging on the crosse, on the other side, the Cuppe and Bread of the Sacrament, as taking Armes onely for maintenance of the Faith of Christ, and deliverance of the holy Church now oppressed: but these were opposed by George Earle of Shrewsbury, who having raised an Army without Commission, though to resist the Rebels, yet began to be much troubled, whither in so doing he had not committed Treason, and was never quiet till he had set to the King for pardon and commission to proceed: at which time a rumour being raised amongst his souldiers, that the Earle so well liked the Rebels cause, that what shew soever he made, yet when it should come to the triall, he would not stick to joyne with them and take their parts: to remove which Opinion out of their mind, he caused all his souldiers to come before him, and made his Chaplaine give him an oath; by which he swore in their hearing, to be true to the Crowne, and never to be assisting to any Re∣bels: to his aide were sent the Duke of Norfolke, with the Marquis of Excetur the Earles of Huntington and Rutland: who with a mighty Army approachig the Rebels, beyond Doncaster, in the way towards York, attempted first to have pacified them without blood-shed; but when no perswasions would serve, it was resolved of both sides to come to a battell; but see here the great goodnesse of God, for the night before the day appointed for battel, it happened that a litle Brook called Dun, running betweene the two Armies, upon a small raine grew to such a height, that it was not passable by either foot or horse; so as the Ar∣mies having time to consider, and considering perhaps this miracle as sent of God, they came to agreement, and upon pardon disbanded and returned to their houses: but in the mean time they had besieged the Castle of Scarborough where the resolute carriage of Sir Ralph Evens is memorable; who held the Castle by onely his owne servants and Tennants, and that, when for twenty dayes together, he had no other sustenance but bread and water: but all Co∣motions were not yet appeased, for at this very time, there was another great Army assembled out of Cumberland, Westmerland, and the North-parts of Lan∣cashire, marching South-wards; but by the diligence of the Earl of Darby, to whom also the Earle of Sussex was sent, they were suppressed, and their chief Leader, as the Abbos of Wally, Sauly, and others, apprehended and hanged: but neither is there yet an end of comotions, for now in February Nicholas Mus∣grave, Thomas Tily, with ohers to the number of twelve thousand, began a Rebellion, and be sieged Carlile, but by the power of the City were first beaten back, and then were encountred by the Duke of Norfolke, who caused seventy foure of them, by Martiall-law o be hanged on the walls of Carlile: but nei∣ther was there yet an end of Comotions, for now in Setrington, Pickering, Ligh and Scarborough, began a new Rebellion, by procurement of Francis Bigot; who had rised a great power, and meant to have taken Hull, but by the industry of Sir Ralph Ellarker, and the Major of the Towne, threescore a the Rebels were taken and hanged, and the rest put to flight, and glad to be quiet: but neither yet was there an end of Commotions, for in the latter end of this eight and twentieth yeer, the Lord Darcy, the Lord Hussey, Sir Robert Constable Sir Iohn
Bulmer and his wife, Sir Thomas Percy brother to the Earl of Northumberland, Sir Stephen Hamilton, Nicholas Tempest Esquire, and others began to conspire, although each of them before had been pardoned by the King: but this as being but the fagge end of Commotion; was soon suppressed, the Lord Darcy was beheaded on the Tower-hill, the Lord Hussey at Lincole, Sir Robert Cnstable was hanged in cheins at Hull, Sir Iohn Balmers Paramout was burnt in Smith∣field, and most of the other were executed at Tyburne: Tantae molis erat, so great a matter it was to make the Realme be quiet, in so great innovations of Religion. This yeer on Saint Georges-feast, the Lord Cromwell was made Knight of the Garter, and on the twelfth of October, which is Saint Edwards-eve, at Ha∣ton-Court, the Queen was delivered of a sonne; (but with so hard a labour that she was faine to be ript) the child was named Edward, whose Godfathers at the Christning were the Archbishop of Canterbury and the Duke of Norfolke, his Godmother was his sister the Lady Mary: at his Bishoping, his Godfather was the Duke of Suffolk: on the eighteenth of October, he was made Prince of Wales, Duke of Cornwall and Earle of Chester: but the birth of his sonne brought not so much joy to the King, as the death of his Queene brought him sorrow; for within two dayes after she died, and was buried at Winsor, and o much was the Kings grief for her death, that he continued a widdawer two yeeres after. It is not unworthy the relating, what a miserable dissolation befell the fa∣mily of the Geraldynes or Fitz-Garrets, (Earle of Kildare in Ireland) about this time; for Gerald Fitz-Garret, who had been ten yeers Deputy in Ireland; upon complaint of some fault, was sent for over into England, where not making a satisfying answer, he was committed to the Tower; but before his commig over, had with the Kings leave, left Deputy there his own sonne, a Young-man of not above twenty yeers of age, but yet ripe of understanding and fit for the plae: this young Lord, hearing that his father was committed prisoner to the Tower; and soon after, as the rumour encreased, that he was put to death; in rage to be revenged, rose up in Armes; and having five Unckles in the Coutry (men of great estimatio) drew them (though some of them unwillingly) to take his part; amongst other outrages he committed, the Archbishop of Dub∣lin was slaine in his presence the Father in the Tower hearing hereof, with very griefe died; the Sonne and his Uncles, upon the Kings sending a Army, were all either taken or submitted; and being sent for over into England, those of his Unckles, that against their wils had been drawn into the Action, had good hope of their lives, till entring the ship of passage, which was called the Cow; they then presently dispaired, because of a Prophesie, that five sonnes of a cer∣taine Earl should be carried into England in the belly of a Cowe, and never after return: and indeed it fell out true, for through the malice of their adversaries, (exasperating the King against them and saying, there would never be quietnes in Ireland, as long as any of the Geraldines were left alive,) they were all put to death: one onely sonne of the family remained, a youth of thirteene yeers of age, who though at that time sick of the smal-pox, yet made shift to save him∣selfe by flight; fled first into France, and frighted from thence, afterwards into Flanders, and driven from thence, at last into Italy, where proected by Reginld Poole, ar that time made Cardinall, by Pope Iulie the third, he was afterward, by this meane, restored to his dignity and his patrimony. This yeere Edward Seymour, Viscount Beauchamp the Queens brother, was created Earl of Hartford, and Sir VVilliam Fitz-VVilliams Lord Admirall, was created Earl of Southamton, Master Paulet was made Vice Treasurer, Sir Iohn Russell was made Controller of the Kings House, and diverse Gentlemen were made Knights. In February diverse Roodes were taken downe by the Kings commandement, as the Roode of Boxeley, called the Rood of grace, which was made with vices to move the eyes and lips, also the Rood called Saint Saviour at Bermondsey
Abbey in Southwarke, ad diverse others: in May a Frier Observant, called Frier Forrest, who had taken the oath of Supremacy himselfe, yet privately per∣swaded others, that the King was not supreme head of the Church; was there∣upon examined, and for his defence said, that he took the oath with his outward man, but his inward man never consented to it; but this answer served not his turn from being condemned; and on a paire of Gallowes prepared for him, in Smith∣eld, he was hanged by the middle, and arme-holes, all quick, and under the Gallowes was made a fire wherewith he was consumed: a little before his exe∣cutio, a huge great Image was brought to the Gallowes, fetched out of Wales, which the Welch-men had in great reverence, called Darvell Gatheren, of which there went a Prophesie, that thi Image should set a whole Forrest on fire, which was thought to take effect, in erring this Frier Forrest on fire, and con∣suming him to nothing. In September, by the speciall motion of the Lord Cromwell, all the notable Images, unto which were made any speciall Pilgrimages and offerings, were taken downe and burnt; as the Images of Walsingham, Ipswic, VVorcester, the Lady of VVilsdon, with many other, and forthwith by meanes of the said Crom∣well all the orders of Friers and Nunnes, with theirs Cloysters and Houses were suppressed and put downe: also the shrines of counterfeit Saints; amongst o∣thers, the shrine of Thomas Becket in the Priory of Christ-church was taken to the Kings use, and his bones, scull and all which was there found, with a peece roken out by the wound of his death, were all burnt in the same Church by command of the Lord Cromwell: and the one and twentieth of October, the Church of Thomas Becket in London, called the Hospitall of Saint Thomas of Acres was suppressed: the sixteenth of November the Black-friers in London was suppressed; the next day the VVhite-friers, the Gray-friers, and the Monkes of the Charter-house, and so all the other immediately after,  three Ab∣bots resisted, the Abbot of Colechester, the Abbo of Reding, and the Abbot of Glastenbury, who therefore were all taken and executed. The foure and twentieth of November the Bishop of Rochester Preached at Pauls-crosse, and there shewed the blood of Hales, affirming it to be no blood, but honey clarifi∣ed and coloured with saron, as it had been evidently proved before the King and Councell. The number of Monasteries suppressed, were six hundred forty five, besides fourescore and ten Colledges, one hundred and ten Hospitals, and of Chantries and free Chappels two thousand three hundred seventy foure. But now to make amends for the suppressing of so many Monasteries, the King in∣stituted certaine new Bishoprickes, as at VVestminster Oxford, Peter∣borough, Bristow, Chester and Gloster; and assigned certaine Canons and Prebends to each of them. The third of November Henry Courtney Marquesse of Exceter, and Earle of Devonshire, Henry Poole Lord Montacute, Sir Nicholas Carew of Bedington, Knight of the Garter, and Master of the Kings Horse, and Sir Edward Nevill, brother to the Lord of Aburgeiney, were sent to the Tower, being accused by Sir Geoffry Poole, the Lord Montacutes brother, of high treason; the were in∣died for devising to promote and advance one Reinold Poole to the Crowne, and put downe King Henry. This Poole was a neere kinsman of the Kings (be∣ing the sonne of the Lady Margaret Countesse of Salisbury, daughter and heire to George Duke of Clarence) he had been brought up by the King in learning, and made Deane of Excetur; but being sent after, to learne experience by travaile, he grew so great a friend of the Popes, that he became an enemy to King Henry, and for his enmity to the King, was by Pope Iulius the third made Cardinall; for this mans cause, the Lords aforesaid being condemned, were all executed, the Lord Marquis, the Lord Montacute, and Sir Edward Neill, be∣headed on the Tower-hill, the ninth of Ianuary, Sir Nicholas Carew the third of March, two Priests condemned with them were hanged at Tyburn, Sir Ieoffry Poole though condemned also yet had his pardon.
About thi time one Nicholson alias Lambert, being accused for denying the Reall presence in the Sacrament, appealed to the King, and the King was co∣tent to heare him; whereupon a Thron was set up in the Hall of the Kings Pallace at Westminster, for the King to si: and when te Bishops had urged their arguments, and could not prevaile, then the King tooke him in hand, ho∣ping perhaps to have the honour of conerting an Hereticke, when the Bishops could not doe it, and withall promised him pardon if he would recant; but all would not doe, Nicholso remained obstinte, the King mist his honor, the de∣linquent mist his pardon; and shortly after was drawne to Smithfield and there burnt. About this time King Henry being informed that the Pope, by instigation of Cardinall Poole, had earnestly moved divers great Princes to invade Eng∣land; He as a provident Prince, endeaoured a arnstly to provide or de∣fence; ad to that end, rode himselfe to the Sa-coast  them fortifi, and in needfull places Bulwarkes to be erected: Hee cused hi Nae be rigged, and to be in readinesse at any short warning: he csed Musters  be raken in all sheees; and lists of all, able men in eery Count, in Ldon specially; where Sir William Forman the hen Mjor, ified the number of fifteene thousand; not that they were , but that so many were ready prepared; and these on the eight of May, the King himselfe saw Mustered in Iames Parke; where the Citizes ove in such sort to exceed each other in bravary of armes, and forwardnesse of service, a if the City had bin a Campe, and they not men of the gown, but all profest Souldiers; which they performed to their great cost, but greater comendion. It was now the one and thirtieth yeere of King Henris reigne, and the nine and fortieth of his age; when having continued a widdower two yeere, he began to thinke of marrying againe; and bee needed not be a suiour for a wife, for he was sued unto take one. The Emperour sollicited him to marry the Dutchesse of Milan; but to marry her he must first obtaine a Licence from the Pope, and King Henry was resolved rather to have no wife, then to have any more to doe with the Pope. Then the Duke of Cleve made suit unto him, to marry the Lady Anne hi Sister, and hee was a Protestant Prince; and so, though differing in points of Doctrine, yet in the maine Point of excluding he Pope, both of one mine. Ma∣ny about the King were forward for thi Mach, but the Lord Crowell specially; and indeed it concerned him more then any other, that the King should take a Protestant wife, seeing  actions hd beene such as none but  Protestant Queene would ever like; and if the Queene should not like them; the King, though done by his leave, would ot like them long. Here∣upon such meanes was used, that Embssaours came from the Duke of Cleve to conclude the March; and the, the elevnth of December, the La∣dy her selfe in grat state was brought, first to Callice, and then over to Do∣ver; and being come to Rochester, the King secretly came to see her, after∣ward she was conducted to London, me by the way in severall places, by all the great Lords and Ladies of the Kingdome. The third of Ianuary she was recei∣ved into London by Sir William Hollice, then Lord Major, with Oration, Pa∣geants, an all complements of Stae, the greatest that ever had beene seene. On Twelfth day the Marriage was olemnized, the Archbishop of Canterbury did the office, the Earle of Oversteine, a German Lord gae her. In Aprill fol∣lowing the Lord Cromwell, as though he had won the Kings heart for ever by making this march, was made Earle of Essex; for in March before, Henry Rourchie Earle of Essex and the ancientest Earle of England, had broken his necke by seeking to breake a yong Horse, leaving onely one Daughter, and the dying without issue, the Earldome came to the Family of Devereux, which yet enjoyed not the honour, till afterward in Queene Elizabeths time, and then made but not restored.
The ninth of March, the King created Sir William Paulet Treasurour of his House, Lord Saint Iohn, Sir Iohn Russell Controlour, Lord Russell, and shortly after Sir William Par was created Lord Par. The eight and twentieth of April began a Parliament at Westminster, in the which Margaret Countesse of Salis∣bury, Gertrude wife to the Marquesse of Exceter, Reynold Poole Cardinall, bro∣her to the Lord Montacute, Sir Adrian Foskew, Thomas Dingley Knight of Saint Iohns; and divers others were attained of high treason; of whom Foskew and Dingley the tenth of Iuly were beheaded, the Countesse of Salisbury two yeeres after: and in this Parliament the Act of the six Articles was establish∣ed, and Sir Nicholas Hare was restored to his place of Speaker in the Parli∣ament. It was now five moneths after the Kings marriage with the Lady Anne of Cleve; and though the King at the first sight of the Lady, did not like her per∣son; yet, whether as respecting the honour of Ladies, he would not disgrace her at the first meeting; or whether he ment to try how time might worke him to a better liking; or indeed, that he would not give distaste to the German Prin∣ces at that time, for sole ends he had a working, he dissembled the matter, and all things went on in a shew of contentment on all hands. But for all these shewes; the crafty Bishop of London Stephen Gardiner, finding how the world went with the Kings affection towards his Queene; and for her sake with Crom∣well; to neither of whom he was greatly affected (not to the Queene, as mi∣sliking her religion; not to Cromwell, as envying his greatnesse;) he so wrought upon the Kings inclination; what by suggesting, and what by aggravating, that the Lord Cromwell the ninth of Iuly, sitting in the Councell Chamber, was suddenly apprehended and committed to the Tower; and the ninteenth of the same moneth was attainted by Parliament, and never came to his Answer; by a Law, which (as some reported) he himselfe had caused to be made; and the eight and twentieth of Iuly was beheaded on the Tower-hill; for crimes (as ap∣peares in Record) of Heresie and Treason. This Lord Cromwell was borne at Ptney, a Village in Surrey neere the Thames side; sonne to a Smith, after whose decease, his Mother was married to a Sheereman; for the pregnancy of his wit he was first entertained by Cardinall Woolsey, and by him imploy∣ed in many great affaires; the Cardinall falling, the King tooke him into his service; and finding his great abilities, first advanced him for his worth, and then for his pleasure overthrew him. But the greatest part of Stephen Gar∣diners practice had beene done before; for at Midsomer before, the King cau∣sed the Queene to remove to Richmond, as for her health and pleasure; and and in the time of her absence, on the sixt of Iuly, sent certaine Lords to the Lower House of Parliament, who there declared certaine causes, for which the Kings marriage with the Lady Anne of Cleve, was not to be counted law∣full; and so carried the matter, that the Convocation cleerly determined, the King might marry any other; and so might she. Being thus Divorced; it was further Enacted, she should no more be called Queene, but the Lady Anne of Cleve. The fault for which this Divorce was decreed, is not expresly de∣livered some say, a precontract of the said Lady with a Lord of Germany was pretended; but it seems to have bin for some womanish defect in her body; as she spared not to afirme that she had never bin carnally known by the King in al the time of their lying together: and as it is said, when her Ladies, one time said unto her, that they looked now every day to hear of her great belly; she should answer, they might look long enough, unlesse, saying, how dost thou sweerest, God morrow sweet-heart, and suc like words, could make a great belly; for (said she) more then this, there never passed between the King and me. How ever it was, she willingly submitted to the Decree, whether out of fear, or perhaps as little liking the King as the King did her; and afterward led a private life here in England, wel respected of the King, and dying sixteen yeers after, in the fourth yeer of Quee Mary, was buried at Westminster.
About this time Leonard Gray Deputy of Ireland, was on the Tower-hill beheaded, for suffering his Nephew Gerald Fitz-Garret to escape, who had been declared an enemy to the state, and then also was Thomas Fines Lord Da∣cres, a young mn of foure and twenty yeers of age, hanged at Tyburne, or kil∣ing a meane peson upon a suddaine affray; also the fourth of Agust, Thomas Epson a Monke of Westminster, for denying to take his oath, to be true to the King, had his Monks garment plucked from his back, the last Monke that was seen in such habit in England till Queen Maryes dayes. The sixt of Iuly in the two and thirtieth yeere of his Reigne, King Henry had been divorcd from the Lady Anne of Cleve, and now the eighth of August fol∣lowing, the Lady Katherine Howard, Niece to the Duke of Norfolke and daugh∣ter to the Lord Edward Howard was shewed openly as Queene at Hampton-Court. On the tenth of Iune the yeere following, Sir Edmund Knevet of Norfolke, Knight, was arraigned before th Officers of the Green-cloath, for striking one Master Cleere of Norfolke, within the Tennis-court of the Kings House being found guilty, he had judgment to loose his Right hand, and to forfeite all his lands and goods; whereupon there was called to do execution, first, the Serjeant Surgion, with his Instruments pertaining to his office, then the Serjeant of the Wood-yard, with a mallet and a block to lay the hand upon, then the Kings Master-cooke with the knife o cut off the hand, then the Serjeant of the larder to set the knife right on the joynt, then the Serjeant Farrier with searingirons to seare the veines, then the Serjeant of the oultry with a Cock, which cock, should have his head smitten off upon the same block, and with the same knife; then the Yeoman of the Chandry with seare-cloaths, then the Yeoman of the Scullery, with a pan of fire to heare the irons, a chafer of water to coole the ends of the irons, and two formes for all Officers to set their stuffe on, then the Serjeant of the Cellar with wine, Ale and Beere, then the Serjeant of the Ewry, with Bason, Ewre, and towels: all things being thus prepared Sir William Pickering Knight Marshall, was commanded to bring in his prisoner, Sir Edmund Knevet, to whom the chiefe Justice declared his offence, which the said Knevet confessed, and humbly submitted himselfe to the Kings mercy, onely he desired, that the King vvould spare his Right hand and take his left, because (said he) if my right hand be spared, I may live to doe the King good service: of vvhose submission, and reason of his suite, vvhen the King vvas informed, he granted him to loose neither of his hands, and pardoned him also of his lands and goods. The summer of his three and thirtieth yeer King Henry with his Queene Katherine, made a progresse into the North-parts, and retrning at Alhallan∣tide to Hampton-court he was there informed, of the Queens dessolute life first before her mariage with one Francis Deerham, a Gentleman of Nrfolke, whom imployed afterward in Ireland; she had lately againe at Pomfret received into her service, and now since her mariage with one Thomas Colepepper, of the Kings Privy-chamber; whereupon the thirteenth of November, Sir Thomas VVriothsley Knight secretary to the King, was sent to the Queen at Hampton-Court, to charge he with these crimes, and discharging her houshold, to cause her to be convayed to Sion, there to remaine, till the Kings pleasure should be further knowne: the deliquents being examined, Deerham confessed, that be∣fore the King mariage with the Lady Katherine, there had been a pre-contract between himselfe and her; but when he once understood of the Kings liking towards her, he then waved and consealed it for her preforment: so the first of December, the Gentlemen being arraigned at the Guild-hall, they confessed the Indictment, a had Judgment to die, as in cases of treason: the tenth of December, they wee drawne from the Tower to Tyburne, where Colepepper was beheaded, and Deerham was hanged and dismembred; Colepeppers body was buried in Sepulchers Church in London, but both their heads were set on London-bridge:
the two and twentieth of December, there were arraigned at the Kings-bench, the Lord VVilliam Howard and the Lady Margaret his wife, Katherin Til∣ney and Alice Restwold Gentlewomen, Ioane Bulmer, wife to Anthony Bulmer Gentliman, Anne Howard wife to Henry Howard Esquire, and brother to the Queene, with divers others, who were all condemned for misprision of treason, for concealing the Queens misdemeanor, and adjudged to forfeit all their lands and goods during life, and to remaine in perpetuall prison. The sixteenth of Ianuary the Parliament began at VVestminster, where the Lords and Commons pitioned the King, that he wold not vex himselfe with the Queenes offence, and that both she and the Lady Rochford might be attainted by Parliament; and that to avoid protracting of time, he would give his royal assent uno it, un∣der the great Seale, without staying for the end of the Parliament. Also, that Derham and Colepepper having beene attained before by the Common-Law, might be attainted likewise by Parliament: all which was assented to by the King; and after, on the thirteenth of February, the Queen and the Lady Roch∣ord were beheaded on the-greene within the Tower, where they confessed their offences, and dyed penitently: yet something to take off the offences of this Queene; it is certainly said, that after her condemnation, she protested to Do∣ctor VVhite Bishop of VVinchester, her last Confessour, that as for the Act for which she was condemned, she tooke God and his holy Angels to witnesse, upon her soules salvation, that she died guiltlesse. Before this, on the three and twentieth of Ianuary, King Henry was proclai∣med King of Ireland; where as before this ime, the Kings of England were onely entituled Lords of Ireland: and this title was given him both by the Par∣liament here, and by the Parliament holden in Ireland, before Sir Anthony Seintleger knight, the Kings Deputy there. About this time Arthur Plantagenet Visconnt Lisle, base sonne to King Ed∣ward tha fourth; having beene imprisoned upon suspition of a practice, for be∣traying of Callice to the French, whilst he was the Kings Lievtenant there, was now found to be innocent of the Fact: and thereupon, the King to make him some reparation for his disgrace, sent him a Ring and a very gracious message, by Sir Thomas VVriothsley his Secretary; whereat the said Viscount tooke so great joy, that the night following, of that very joy he died: so deadly a thing is any passion, even joy it selfe, if it be extream. After his death Sir Iohn Dudley, his wives Sonne, was creaed Viscount Lisle. This Sir Iohn Dudley was sonne to Edmund Dudley, beheaded in the first yeere of this Kings reigne, and was made Viscount Lisle in right of his Mother. During this Parliament, one George Ferrers Gentleman, servant to the King and Burgesse for the town of Plimmouth in Devonshire, in going to the Parlia∣ment House, was arrested in London by a Processe out of the Kings Bench, for a Debt wherein he was late afore condemned, as surety for one Welden, at the suit of one White; which arrest being signified to Sir Thomas Moyle knight, peaker then of the Parliament, and to the Knights and Burgesses there; order was aken, that the Serjeant of the Parliament, called Saint Iohn, should be sent to the Counter in Bredstreet (whither the said Ferrers was carried) and there demand to have him delivered: but the Officers of the Counter not one∣ly refused to deliver him, but gave the Serjeant such language, that they fell at last to an affray; at which time the Sheriffes comming, they also tooke their Officers part; so as the Serjeant was faine to returne without the priso∣ner; which being signified to the Speaker and the Burgesses, they tooke the matter in so ill part, that they would sit o more without their Burgesse; and thereupon rising up, repaired to the Upper House, where the whole Case was declared by the Speaker, before Sir Thomas Audeley Lord Chancellour, and the Lords and Judges there assembled: who judgeing the contempt to be very grea, referred the punishment thereof to the House of Commons it selfe: whereupon returning to their places againe upon new debate of the Case, they
tooke order that teir Serjent shoud once more repire to the Sheriffe of London, and demand e prisoner, witout carryig any Writ or Warrant for the matter. It is tru the Lord Chancellour offered to grant a Writ, but the House of Common refused it; being of a clere opinion, that all Comman∣dements from the nether House were to be executed by their Serjeant with∣out Writ, onely by shewing his Mace, which is his Warrant: but before the Serjeants returne into London, the Sheriffes better advised, became more mild, and upon the second demand, delivered the prisoner without any deniall, but then the Serjeant had further in charge, to command the Sheriffs and Clerkes of the Counter, to appeare personally the next morning before the House of Commons: where appearing, they were charged by the Speaker, with their contempt, and compelled to make immediate answere, without being admited o any counsaile, Sir Roger Chomley Recorder of London, offered to speak in the cause, but ws not suffered, nor any other but the prties them∣selves: in conclusion, the Sheriffes and White who had caused the Arrest, were committed to the Tower, the Officer that did the Arrest, with foure other Of∣ficers to Newgate; but after two or three dayes, upon the umble suie of the Major, were set at liberty; and because the said Ferrers being in execution upon a condemnation of debt, and set at large by priviledge of Parlaiment, was not by law to be brought againe into execution; and so the creditour without remedy for his debt, against him as his principll debtour; therefore after long debate, by the space of nine or ten dayes together, they at last resolved to make an Act of purpose, to revive the execution of the said debt, against Wel∣den who was principall debtour, and to discharge Ferrers that was but surer: wherein notwithstanding, the house was devided, and the Act passed but by fourteen voyces: the King being adverised of this proceeding, called before him the Lord Chancelour and the udges, the Speaker and divers of the lower House, to whom he declaed his Opinion to this effect: first commending their widome, in maintaining the priviledges of teir house, (which hee would o have to be infringed in any point) he alleaged, that e being head of the Parlia∣ment, and attending in his owne person upon the businesse tereof, ought in reason, to have Priviledge for himselfe and all his servants attending upon him, so as if the said Ferrers had been no Burgesse, but onely hi servant; yet in that respect, he was to have the priviledge as well as any other: for I understand (saith he) that you, not onely for your owne persons, but also for your necessry servants, even to your Cookes and Hors-keepers injoy the sme piiledge i so much, as my Lord Chancelour here present, hath informed u, that whilst he was Speaker of the Parliament, the Cook of the Temple was Arrested i London, and in execution upon a statute of the Saple, and for so much, as the said Cook during all the Parliament served the Speker in tat office; he was taken out of execution by priviledge of Parliament; the Prerogative of which Court, (as our learned Counsaile informeth us) is so great, that all Acts and processes comming ou of any other Court, must for the time cese and give place to it: and touching the party himselfe, though for his presumption he was worthy to have lost his debt, yet I commend your Equity, that have re∣stored him to hi debt against him that was the principall: when the King had said this, Sir Edward Mountacute Lord chiefe Justice, rose up, and confirmed by many reasons, all that the King had said, as likwise did all the other Lord, none speaking any thing to the contrary. It was now the foure and thirtieth yeere of King Henries Reigne, when in May he took a loane of money of all such as were valued at fifty pounds and upward in the Subsidy book, the Lord Privy-seale, the Bishop of VVinchester, Sir Iohn Baker, and Sir Thomas Wriothsley were commissioners, that the loane in London, who so handled the matter, that of some chief Citizens they obtained a thousand makes in prest to the Kings use: for which Privie Seales were de∣livered to repay it againe within two yeeres.
At this time, were many complaints made by the glih, against the Scots, partly for receiving and maintaining diverse English Rebls,  into Scotland, and partly for invading he Englih Borders; but still wen the King of Eng∣lan was preparing to oppose them, the Scottish King would send Embassa∣dours to tret of reconcilement, till at last, fter mn delusory prankes of the Scots; the King of England, no longer ndurig such abuses, sent the Duke of Norfolke his Leivtena Generall, accompanied with the Earls of Shrewsbury, Darby, Cumberland, Surrey, Hartod, Aus, Rutland, the Lords of the North parts, Sir Anthony Browne Master of the Kings horse, and Sir Iohn Gage Con∣troller of the King House, with others, to the number of twenty thousand men; who on the one and twentieth of Ocober entred Scotland, where staying but eigt daye onely he burnt above eighteen Towne, Abbeys, and Castles, and then without aving bataile offered, for want of victuals returned to Barwick;  soon as e was returned, comes abrod the King of Scots, raiseth a power of fifteen thousnd men, and using great threatnings what he would doe, invaded the west Borders, but the edge of his threatning was soon taken off, for the ba∣stard Daes, with Iack of Musgrave setting upon them with onely an hundred Lighthorse, and Sir Thomas Wharton with three hundred, put them to flight; upon a concei, th the Duke of Norfolke with all his Army had beene come ito those part; where were taken prisoner of the Scots, the Earl of Cassill and Glencne, the Lord Maxwell Admirll of Scotland, the Lord Flemming, the Lord Soerwell, the Lord Olihat, the Lord Gray, Sir Oliver Sincleee, the Kings Minion, Iohn Rosse Lord of Gragy, Robert Erskin sonne to the Lord Ers∣kin, Car Lord of Gredon, the Lord Maxwells two Brothers, Iohn Lesloy bastard sonne to the Earl of Rothus, George Hame Lord of Hemetton, with divers other men of account, to the number of above two hundred, and more then eight hun∣dred of meaner calling; so as some one English mn, and some women also, had three or foure prisoner in their hands: at which overhrow, the King of Scots took such grief, that he fell into a burning Ague, and thereof died, leaving be∣hind him one onely daughter; and heere King Henry began to apprehend a greater matter then the victory, for he and his Counsile conceived, that hi daughter, would be a fit match for his sonne Prince Edward, thereby to make  perpetuall union of the two Kingdomes; and to his purpose they confered with the Lord whom they had taken prisoners, who exceeding glad of the pro∣position, and promising to further it by all the possible meane they could, were hereupon st at liberty, and suffered o return home. Comming into Scotland  acquainting the Earl of Arraine wih the motion, who was chosen Gover∣our of the young Queen and of the Realme; te matter with great liking was entertained, and in Parliament of the three esttes in Scotland, the marriage was confirme, and  peace between the two Relms, for ten yeer wa proclai∣med, and Embassdours sent into England, for sealing the conditions. But Beton Archbishop of Sint Andrews being Cardinall, and at the Popes devotion, and therefore an utter enemy to King Henry, so crossed the businesse that it came to nothing, but ended in a war between the two Kingdomes; so as in March the yeere following, the Lord Seymour Earle of Hartford, with an Army by Land and Sir Iohn Dudley Lord Lisle, with a Fleee by Sea, me at New-castle, and there joyned together, for invading of Scotland; with the Earl of Hartford, were the Earl of Shrewsbury, the Lords Cobham, Clinton, Conyers, Stinton, the Lord William Howard, with Knights and others, to the number of ten thousand, with Sir Iohn Dudley the Admirall, were two hudred sile of ships: on the fourth of May, the whole Army was landed two miles from the Towne of Lieth, at a place called Granther Crag; and there the Lord Lievtennant puting his men in order, mached toward the Towne of Lieth: the Lord Admirall led the foreward, the Lievtennant the Battell, and the Earl of Shrewsbury the Rear∣ward. Before they came to the Towne of Lieth, the Cardinal with six hundred orse, besides foot, lay in the way to impeach their passage; but they were so
assailed by the, Harqubutars, that they were glad to flye, and the first man that fled was the Cardinal himself, and then the Earls of Huntley, Murrey & Bothwel; hereupon the English made forward to Lieth, and entred it without any great resistance: the sixth of May they marched towards Edenbrough, and as they ap∣proached the Towne, the provost with some of the Burgers, came and offered the keyes of the Towen, to the Lord Lievtennant, upon condition they might depart with bag and baggage, and the Towne to be preserved from fire; but the Lord Livetennant told them, their falshood had been such, as deserved o faour, and therefore unlesse they would deliver the Towne absolutely with∣out any condition, he would proeed in his enterprise, and burne the Towne. Here wee may see, what it is to make men desperate, for to this the Provest answered, they were better then to stand upon defence, and so indeed they did, and made the English glad to retire, for the Castle shot so fiercely upon them, that having burnt onely a part of the Towne, they returned to Lieth; but whilst they lay there, they so wasted the Country, that within seaven mile every way of Edenbrough, there was not a Towne, nor Village, nor house tat was left un∣burnt: at Lieth, the eleveth day of May, the Lord Generall made Knights, the Lord Clinton, the Lord Conyers, Sir William Wroughton, Sir Thomas Holecraft, Sir Edward Dorrell, Sir Francis Hothome, and other, to the number of at least threescore: in Lieth Haven, they seized upon all the Scottish Ships; whereof two were of notable fairnesse, the one called the Salamander, given by the French King, at the mariage of his daughter into Scotland, the other called the Unicorne, made by the late Scottish King; the ballast of which two ships was Cannon-shot, whereof they found in the Towne, to the number of fourscore thousand. On the fifteeth of May, their Army and their Flee departed from Lieth, both in one houre, having first set the Towne on fire and burned it to the ground: from Lieth the English Army marched to Seaton, from thence to Haddington, from thence to Dunbar, from thence to Ranton, all which Towns and Castles with diverse others they burnt and utterly defaced; and on the eighteenth of May came to Barwick, not having lost in all the journey above fourteen men In the meane time, in King Henries five and thirtieth yeer, on Trinity sunday a new league was entred into and sworne, between the King and the Emperour at Hampton-court, to be both offensive and defensive. In this yeer, Proclamation was made, whereby the people were licensed to eate white meats in Let, but streightly forbidden the eating of flesh; where∣upon shortly after, the Earle of Surrey with diverse other Lords and Knights, were imprisoned for eating of flesh contrary to the proclamation. The third of Iune this yeer, there came ou of Ireland three Lord, of whom Obrine was here created Earle of Thonmod, (which hoour his posterity in∣joyeth to this day) Mack William a Bary, was created Eale of Clanrinckford, and Mack Gilparick, was made Barron of Ebranky. King Henry had already had five wives all of them Maides, and no good luck with any of them, he will now therefore try his fortune with a Widdow, ad therupon the twelveth of Iune, in the five and thirtieth yeere of his Reigne hee took to wife the Lady Katherine Par, widdow of the Lord Latimer late decea∣sed, who was then proclaimed Queen; but how lucky would this mach have proved, if the King had longer lived, God knowes, seeing in the short time of three yeers they lived together, it was no smal danger she escaped, which though it hapenned not till a yeer or wo after this time, yet will not unfitly be spoken of in this place, that so her story may come together; this Queen as being an arnest Protestant, had many great adversaries, by whom she was accused to the King, to have Hereticall books found in her closet; and this was so agra∣vated against her, that they prevailed with the King, to signe a warrant to com∣mit her to the Tower, with a purpose to have her burnt for Heresie; this war∣rant was delivered to Wriothsley Lord Chancelour, and he by chance, or rather
indeed by Gods providence, letting it fal from him, it was taken up and caried to the Queen; who having read it, went soone after to visit the King, at that time keeping his chamber, by reason of a sore leg; being come to the King, he present∣ly fel into talk with her, bout some points of Religion, demanding her resoluti∣on therin; but she knowing that his nature was not to be crost, specially conside∣ring the case she was in, made him answer, that she was a woman accompanied with many imperfections, but his Majesty was wise and judicious, of whom she must learne as of her Lord and Head; not so by Saint Mary (said the King) for you are a Doctor Kate to instruct us, and not to be instructed by us, as often we have seen heretofore: indeed Sir (said she) if your Majesty have so conceived, I have been mistaken, for if heretofore I have held talke with you touching Reli∣gion, it hath bin to learn of your Majesty some point, whereof I stood in doubt, and sometimes that with my talke, I might make you forget your present infir∣mity: ad is it even so Sweet heart (quoth the King) why then we are friends, and so kissing her, gave her leave to depart. But soon after, the day was appointed by the Kings warrant, for apprehending her; on which day, the King being dis∣posed to walk i the Garden, had the Queen with him, when suddenly the Lord Chancelour with forty of the Guard cme into the Garden, with a purpose to apprehend her: when as soon as the King saw, he stept to him, and calling him knave and foole, bid him avaunt out of his presence: the Queen seeing the King so angry with him, began to intreat for him, to whom the King said; ah poore soule, thou little knowest what it is he came about, of my word sweet heart, he hath bin to thee a very knave; and thus by God providen was this Queen pre∣served, who else had tasted of as bitter a cp, as any of his former wives had done. About this time King Henry and the Emperour sent Garter and Toyson dor, kings at Armes, to demand performance of certain Articles of the French King: which if he denied, they were then comanded to defie him: but the French King would not suffer them to come within his land, and so they returned: wherupon King Henry caused the sid demand to be declared to the French Embassadour at Westminster; aud in Iuly sent over six thousand men, under the leading of Sir Iohn Walloppe accompanied with divers Knights & Gentlemen, Sir Thomas Sey∣mour was Marshal of the Army, Sir Robert Bowes Treasuror, Sir Richard Cronwal Captain of the horse, and Sir George Carew his Lieutenant. There were likewise Sir Thomas Palmer, Sir Iohn Rainsford, Sir Iohn St. Iohn, and Sir Iohn Gascoigne Knights, that were Captains of the foot. Their Comission was to joyn with the Emperor, and together to mke war upon France. The third of August open wa was proclaimed in London, between the Emperor & the King of England on the one part, and the Fech King on the other, as mortal enemy to them both; and to all other christian Princes besides, as he that had confederated himselfe with the Turk. Sir Iohn Wallop marching forth of Callice with his Army, joyned with e Emperors Forces, who together went and besieged Landersey a Town lately fortified by the French, lying within the borders of the Emperors dominions: to raise this siege, the French King had raised a mighty army; with which he came on, as if he ment to give the Emperor battaile; and thereupon the Emperor rai∣sing his siedge, with a purpose to encounter him, the French King tooke the op∣portunity to put men and victuals into the town, which was the thing he inten∣ded: and having done this, the night following departed with his army; and then the Emperour seeing him gone, and finding the winter coming on, and no hope of sudden geting the Town, being now newly supplied, he also broke up his Ar∣my, and returned home. This yeer, the sunday before Christmas, the Lord William Parre, brother to the Queen, who had maried the daughter and heire of Henry Bourchier Earle of Essex, was at Hampton Court created Earl of Essex, & Sir William Parre knight unckle to them both, was made Lord Parre of Horton and Lord Chamberlin to the Queen; and on New-yeers-day Sir Thomas Wriothsley, the Kings Secretary, was made Lord Wriothsley of Tichfield.
In Iune this yeer, Matthew Earl of Lenox fled out of Scotland and came into England, whom King Henry received kindly, and gave him in marriage the Lady Margaret his Sisters daughter, by whom he had Henry, Father of our late King Iames of blessed memory. Thomas Audley Lord Chancellour, being lately dead, Thomas Lord Wriothsley succeeded him in the place; and now was an Army levied to goe for France; the Duke of Norfolke and the Lord Privie Seal, accompanied with the Earl of Sur∣rey the Dukes Son, the Lord Gray of Wilton, the Lord Ferrers of Cartley and his Son Sir Robert Devereux, Sir Thomas Chainey Lord Warden of the Cinque Ports, the Lord Montjoy, Sir Francis Byran, Sir Thomas Poynings Captaine of Guysnes, with many other Knights and Gentlemen, about Whitsontide passed over to Callice; and marching toward Muttrel, joyned with the Emperours for∣ces, under the leading of the Count de Buren; which two Armies laid siedge to Muttrel, wherof Monsseur de Bies, one of the Martials of France was Captaine, but being then at Bulloign, and hearing of the siedg of Muttrel, he left Bulloigne and with his forces came thither, which was the thing that was desired, to draw him from Bnlloign; and thereupon was the Duke of Suffolke appointed to passe over with the Kings army, accompanied with the Earl of Arundell. Marshall of the Field, the Lord St. Iohn, the Bishop of Winchester, Sir Iohn Gage Controlor of the Kings house, Sir Anthony Browne Master of the Kings horse, with divers others; who the ninteenth of Iuly came and incamped before Bulloigne; the four and twentieth of Iuly the King in person, accompanied with divers of the Nobility, came to Callice; and the six and twentieth incamped before Bulloign on the north side; many batteries and assaults were made, so long, till at last the Town upon composition yeelded, and the Duke of Suffolke entred and tooke possession, suffring six thousand French, as was agreed, with bag and baggage to depart. The eight of September King Henry entred the town himselfe, and then leaving the Lord Lisle Lord Admirall, his Deputy there, he returned into Eng∣land, landing at Dover the first of Otober. Many enterprises after this were made by the Dolphin of France, and by Monsieur de Bies for recovery of Bul∣loigne, but they were still repulsed, and the English kept the towne in spight of all they could doe; although at one time there came an Army of eighteene thousand foot, at another time an Army, wherein were reckoned twelve thou∣sand Lance-knights, twelve thousand French foot-men, sixe thousand Ita∣lians, foure thousand of Legionarie souldiers of France, a thousand men of Armes, besides eight thousand light Horse; great Forces certainly to come and doe nothing. Whilst these things were doing about Bulloign, the ships of the west Country and other places wated abroad on the Seas, and took above three hundred French ships; so that the Gray-friers Church in London was laid full of wine, the Au∣stin-friers and Black-friers full of herrings and other fish, which should have bin convayed in France. About this time the King demanded a Benevolence of his Subjects, towards his wars in France and Scotland, to which purpose, the Lord Chancelour, the Duke of Suffolke, and other of the Kings Counsaile sate at Baynards Castle, where they first caled before them the Major and Aldermen, and because Rich∣ard Read Alderman, would not agree to pay as they set him, he was commanded to serve the King in his wars in Scotland, which the obstinate man rather choose to doe, then he would pay the rate he was required, but being there, he was taken prisoner by the Scots, to his far greater damage, then if he had agreed to the Benevolence required. For at this time, Sir Ralph Evers Lord Warden of the Marches, after many fortunate Roades into Scotland, assembled four thousand men, and entring Scotland now againe, was encountred by the Earl of Arraigne by whom he and the Lord Oagle, and many other Gentlemen were slaine, and diverse were taken prisoners, of whom Alderman Read was one. It was now the seaven and thirtieth yeer of King Henries Reigne, when on
Saint Georges day Sir Thmas Wriothsley Lord-Chancelour, was made Knight of the Garter, also Trinity Tearme was adjourned, by reason of the warres but the Exchequer and the Court of the Tethes were open. At this time, the English fleet went before New-haven, but being there en∣countred by a farre greater fleet of French, they retrned; with whose retreate, the French Admirall emboldned, came upon the Coast of Sussex, where hee landed Souldiers, but upon firing of the Beacons was driven back, after which he landed two thousand men in the Isle of Wight, but was there repelled, though reported to have in his ships threescore thousand men. In Angust this yeer, died the valiant Captaine, the Lord Poynings, the Kings Lievtenant of his Towne of Bulloigne, and the same month also, died at Guild∣ford, the noble Duke of Suffolke, Charles Brandon, Lord great Master of the Kings House, whose Body was honourably buried at Windsore at the Kings cost. About this time, the Scots having received aide out of France, approached the English Borders, but durst attempt nothing, whereupon the Earle of Hert∣ford, Lievtenant of the North parts, raising an army of twelve thovsand men, En∣glish and strangers, entred Scotland and burnt a great part of Mers and Tivi∣dale, as Kelsay Abbey and the Towne, the Abbeys of Medrosse, Driborne, and Yedworth, with a hundred Townes and Villages more; when on the sixteenth of September, an Army of Scots and French attempted to enter into England on the East borders, but in a streight were set upon by the English, who slew and tooke of them to the number of seven score, amongst whom was the Lord Humes sonne, and a principall French Captaine; in another roade, which they made into the West Borders, the Lord Maxwels sonne, and diverse other were taken, but then at another time (such is the chance of war) five hundred English entring the West Borders of Scotland were discomfited, and the greatest part of them either taken or slaine. And now to revenge the presumptious attempts of the French upon the Isle of Wight, the Lord Admiral with his fleet approached the Coasts of Normandy landed six thousand men at Treport, burnt the Suburbs of that Towne with the Abbey, destoryed thirty ships there in the Haven, and then returned, not having lost above fourteen persons in the whole voyage. At this time the Earle of Hartford lying at Bulloigne, had in his Army a∣bove fourscore thousand men, and many skirmishes passed between him and the French, till at last, by mediation of the Emperour and diverse other Princes a meeting was appointed to treat of a peace, between the two Kings of England and France; hereupon there came to Guisnes for the King of England, the Earl of Hertford, the Bishop of Winchester, Sir Iohn Dudley Viscount Lisle, Baron of Mawpas and high Admirall of England, Sir William Paget the Kings Secre∣tary & Doctor Nicholas Wootton Dean of Canterbury. For the French King, there came to Ard, Claude Danebolt Admirall of France, the Bishop of Eureux, Monsieur Reymond chiefe President of Roan, and the Secretary Bouchetell. Di∣verse times they met betwixt Ard and Guisnes, and after long debating of mat∣ters, and diverse breakings off at length, the seventh of Iune, a Peace was con∣cluded, and proclaimed in the City of London on Whitsunday the thirteenth of Iune, by sound of trumpet; and the same day in like manner at Paris and Roan; the chiefe Article of which Peace was this; that the French King pay∣ing to the King of England eight hundred thousand Crownes, within the terme of eight yeeres, should have Bulloigne againe restored to him, which in the mean time should remain in possession of the King of England, as a pledge for assu∣rance of the said money; and now for a full establishment of this Peace, the Viscount Lisle Lord Admirall, with the Bishop of Duresme and divers other Lords, were sent into France to take oath of the French King and of the Dol∣phin; as likewise at the same time, divers Lords came from the French King to take oath of King Henry; who by the way were met by the yong Prince and many Lords, and conducted to the King at Hampton-Court.
In his seven and thirtieth yeere, the three and twentieth of November, a Par∣liament began at VVestminser, wherein was granted to the King, a Subsidie both of Spiritualty and Temporalty, and all Colledges, Chanteries and Hos∣pitalls were given to him to dispose of: the foure and twentieth of December the Parliament was prorogued, on which day the King comming to the Parlia∣ment House, the Speaker made to him an Oration, which the Lord Chance∣lour was used to answere, but at this time the King would answer himselfe, the effect whereof was, that where Master Speaker had commended him for many excellent qualities that were in him, he thanked him for it, not that he had them, but for putting him in mind, how necessary it was, he should have them; then he thanked the whole House for their Subsidie, and for giving him the Colleges and Chanteries, which hee promised to see bestowed, to the glory of God and good of the Realme; lastly, he ackowledged their love to himselfe, but found fault with want of love to one another; for what love, where there is not con∣cord? and what concord, when one calleth another Heretick and Anabaptist, and he againe calleth him Papist and Hipocrite: and this not onely amongst those of the Temporalty, but even the Clergy men themselves preach one a∣gainst another, inveigh one against another, without Charity or Discretion; some be so stiffe in their old mumpsimus, and others so curious in their new sumpsimus, that few or none Preacheth truly and sincerely the word of God; now therfore let this be amended, feare and serve God, be in Charity amongst your selves, to the which I as your supream Head and Soveraigne Lord, exhort and require you: and this said, the Acts were openly read, to some he gave his Royall assent, and to diverse assented not. Whilst oath for the peace was thus taken by both Kings, Bulloigne remaining still in King Henries possession, Monsieur de Chatillon Captain of Mont-pleasier began to make a new Bastillion at the very mouth of the Haven of Bulloigne naming it Chatillous Garden: hereof the Lord Gray of VVilton as then Depu∣ty of Bulloigne advertised the King by Sir Thomas Palmour, requiring to know his pleasure whither he should race it, as a thing very incommodious to the Town, or let it stand; the King asked advice of his Counsail, who all agreed, that the conditions of the peace ought in no wise to be infringed, and therefore to let the Bastillian stand; whereupon the King caused his Secretary the Lord Paget, to write a letter to the Lord Gray, to that purpose, but then called Sir Thomas Palmour secretly to him, bidding him tell the Lord Gray, that whatsoe∣ver he had written in his letter, yet with all speed possible, he should race the for∣tification to the ground; Sir Thomas Palmour replying that a message by word of mouth being contrary to his leter, would never be beleeved, wel (said the King) do you tell him as I bid you, and leave the doing it to his choice; upon the comming back of Sir Thomas Palmour, the Lord Gray called a counsaile, shewing them th King letter, and withall Sir Thomas Palmours message, and then asked their Advise, what in this case he should doe? who all agreed without any question, that the letter was to be followed, and not the message, to which the Lord Gray himselfe said nothing, but caused the message to be wtitten verbatim from Sir Thomas Palmours mouth, and those of the Counsaile, to set their hands to it: this done, the night following he issued forth with a company of Armed men and Pioners, aud overthrew the fortification to the ground, ad then sent Sir Thomas Palmour with letters to the King, who as soon as he saw him, asked a∣loud, what, will he doe it or no? Sir Thomas Palmour delivering his letter said, your Majesty shall know by these, but then the King halfe angry, nay tell me (saith he) wil he doe it or no? being then told it was done, and the fortification clean raced, he turned to his Lords and said, what say you my Lords to this, Chatillous Garden is raced to the loore; whereto one presently answered, that he that had done it, was worthy to loose his head, to which the King streightl replyed, that he would rather lose a dozen such heads as his was, that so Jdged, then one such servants as had done it, and therewith commanded the Lord Grays
pardon should presently be drawn, the which he sent vvith letters of great thanks, and promise of reward; the cause why the King took this course was this, lest if he written the racing of the Fortification, in his letter it might have come t the French-mens knowledge, before it could have been done, and so have been prevented, and by this may be taken a scantling of King Henries great Ca∣pacitie. It is now the eight and thirtieth yeere of his reigne, when about Michaelmas Thomas Duke of Norfolke, and Henry Earle of Surrey his Sonne and heire, up∣on certaine surmises of treason, were committed to the Tower of London; and the thirteenth of Ianuary, the King then lying at the point of death, the said Earle was arraigned in the Guild-hall, before the Lord Major, the Lord Chaun∣cellour, and other Lords there in Commission; the speciall matter wherewith he was charged, was the bearing of certaine Armes that were said to belong to the King and to the Prince; though the Earle justified the bearing of them, as belonging to divers of his Ancestours; affirming withall, that he had the opi∣nion of Heraulds therein: But this notwithstanding, being no Lord of the Par∣liament, he was tried by a common Jurie, and by them was found guilty, and thereupon had judgement of death; and the nineteenth of Ianuary was be∣headed on the Tower-hill. The Duke was attainted by Parliament and kept in prison, ill in the first yeer of Queen Mary the Attaindour was reversed. The death of this Earle might lay an imputation of cruelty upon King Henry, if a just jealousie growing from the many circumstances of the Earles greatnesse, in the tender age of his owne Sonne did not excuse him. Soone after the death of this Earle, the King himselfe died; having made his last Will, in which he tooke order, that his Sonne Edward should succeed him in the Crowne, and he dying without issue, his daughter Mary, and she dying without issue, his daughter Elizabeth; although another order of succes∣sion had passed before by Act of Parliament. The Executors of his last Will were these sixteene; Thomas Cranmor Archbishop of Canterbury, Thomas Wri∣othsley Lord Chancellour, Sir William Pawlet Lord Saint Iohn, and great Ma∣ster of the Houshold, Sir Edward Seymor Earle of Hartford and high Cham∣berlin of England, Sir Iohn Russell Lord Privie Seale, Sir Iohn Dudley Vis∣count Lisle, Lord Admirall Cutbert Tunstall Bishop of Durham, Sir Antho∣nie Browne Master of the Horse, Sir Edmund Montacute, Lord chiefe Justice of the Common-Pleas, Sir Thomas Bromley one of the Justices of the Kings Bench, Sir Edward North Chancellour of the Augmentation, Sir William Pa∣get Knight of the Order, Sir Anthonie Dennie, Sir William Herbert, Sir Edward Wootton Treasurour of Callice, and Nicholas VVootton Deane of Canterbury and Yooke. To whom were adjoyned as assistance these twelve, Henry Fitz Allan Earle of Arundell, VVilliam Par Earle of Essex, Sir Thomas Cheyney Treasu∣rour of the Houshold, Sir Iohn Gage Controlour, Sir Anthony VVingfield Vice-chamberlaine, Sir VVilliam Peter Principall Secretary, Sir Richard Rich, Sir Iohn Baker of Sissingherst in Kent, Chancellour of the Exchequer, Sir Ralph Sadler, Sir Thomas Seymour, Sir Richard Southwell and Sir Edward Peckham. And it was not without need to leave a full Councell Table, considering in what termes he left the Kingdome when he died. Abroad, in league with the Emperour, at Peace with the King of France; but whether these were not per∣sonall onely, and no longer binding then King Henry lived, might be doubted; with the Scots at deadly send; with the Pope at utter defiance; from both which coasts there could be expected but little faire weather: at home, the frame of Religion extreamly disioynted; and the Clergie that should set it in frame, out of frame themselves: the mindes of the people extreamly distracted; and the Nobility that should cyment them, scarce holding themselves together: And in this stare was the Kingdome when King Henry the eight dyed, in the yeer 1547. the fifty sixth of his life, and of his Reigne the eight and thirtieth.
Of his Taxations. IN his fourth yeer, in a Parliament at Westminster, was granted to the King, two Fifteens of the Temporalty, and two Tenths of the Clergie, and Head-money; of every Duke ten marke, an Earle five pound, a Barron oure pound, a Knight foure markes, and every man valued at eight hundred pounds in goods, to pay oure markes, and so after that rate till him that was valued at forty shil∣lings, and he paid twelve pence, and every man and woman of fifteen yeers & up∣ward four pence. In his sixth yeer, a Parliament was holden, wherin divers sub∣sidies were granted to the King, towards the charges of his wars in France: in his fourteenth yeer, order was taken by the Cardinall, that the true value of all mens substance might be knowne, and he would have had every man swom, to tell what they were worth, and required a enth part thereof, towards the Kings charges in his present wars, as the spiritualty had granted a fourth part: this the Londoners thought very hard, and thereupon were excused for taking oath, and were allowed to bring in their bils upon their honesties; but when all was done, after much labouring by the Cardinall, the Clergy granted one halfe of all their yeerly Spirituall Revenues, for five yeers, and the Temporalty two shillings in the pound, from twenty pounds upwards, and from forty shillings to twenty pounds, of every twenty shillings twelve pence; and under forty shil∣lings, of every head of sixteen yeers and upwards four pence, to be paid in every two yeers: in his sixteenth yeer, the Cardinall of his owne head, attempted by Comission, to draw the People to pay the sixth part of every mans substance in plate or monie; but this was generally opposed, and the People in many Coun∣tries rise upon it, so as comming to the Kings knowledg, e utterly disavowed it, and blamed the Cardinall exceedingly for attempting it. In his foure and twen∣tieth yeer in a Parliament then holden, a fifteenth was granted to the King, to∣wards his charges of making fortifications against Scotland. In his one and thirieth yeer, a Subsidie of two shillings in the pound of lands, and twelve of goods, with foure fifteenes were granted to the King, towards his charges of making Bulwarks. In his five and thirtieth yeer, a Subsidie was granted to be paid in three yeers, every English-man being worth in goods twenty shillings and upwards to five pounds, to pay four pence of every pound, and from five pounds to ten pounds eight pence, from ten pounds to twenty pound six pence from twenty pounds and upwards, of every pound two shilings; strangers as wel denizens as others, being inhabitants to pay double, and for lands, every English-man paid eight pence o the pound, from twenty shillings to five pounds, & from five pounds to ten pounds sixteen pence, and from ten pounds to twenty poud two shillings, and from twenty pounds and upwards, of every pound three shil∣lings, strangers double; the Clergy six shillings in the pound of Benefices, and e∣very Priest having no Benifice, but an Anual stipend, six shillings eight pence yeerly, during three yeers. Of Lawes and Ordinances in his time. IN a Parliament holden in his sixth yeere, diverse Lawes were made, but two most spoken of; one for Apparell, another for Labourers. In his twelvth yeere, he caused the Statutes against Inclosures to be revived, and Commanded that decaied houses should be built up againe, and that inclosed grounds should be laid open; which though it did some good, yet not so much as it might have done, if the Cardinall for his owne benefit, had not procured li∣berty for great men, to keep up their inclosures, to the oppression of poor men. In his seventeenth yeer, the King lying at Eltham, diverse ordinances were made b the Cardinall touching the Governance of the Kings House, and were long after called the Statutes of Eltham. In his eighteenth yeere, in the month of
May, Proclamation was made against all unlawfull games, so that in all places tables, dice, cards and Bowles, were taken and burnt; but this order continued not long, for young men being restrained from these Games, fell some to drinking, some to stealing of Conies and Deere, aud such other misdemeanours: also in this yeere, was an inhauncing of Coyne, for preventing the carrying it over to places where it went at higher rate, so that the Angell which went before but for seven shillings, should now goe for seven and six pence, and every ounce of Gold should be five ad forty shillings, which was before but forty, and other Coynes accordingly. In his twentieth yeer Sir Iames Spencer being Major of London, the watch used on Mid-somer night was laid downe. In his three and thirtieth yeer, in a Parliament then holden, an Act was made, that whosoevet should poyson any person should be boyled to death, by which Statute one Richard Roose, who had poysoned divere persons in the Bishop of Rochester place, was boyled to death in Smithfield, to the terrible example of all other. In his two and twentieth yeer, three Acts were made, one fo probate of Testa∣ments, another for Mortuaries, the third against plurality of benefices, Non-Residence, buying and taking of Farmes by spirituall persons. In his thirtieth yeer, it was ordained by Cromwel the Kings Vicar General, that in al Churches a Register should be kept of every Weddng, Christning, and buriall within the same Parish for ever. In his one and thirtieth yeer, the King first instituted and appointed fifty Gentlemen called Pensioners, to waight upon his person, as∣sighning to each of them fifty pounds a yeer, for the maintainance of thmselvs and two horses, in his six and thirtieth yeer, Proclamation was made for the in∣hancing of Gold, to eight and fort shillings, and silver to foure shillings the ounce, also he caused to be coyned base money, mingling it with brasse which was since that time called downe the fifth yeere of Edward the sixth, and called in the second yeer of Queen Elizibeth. In his seven and thirtieth yeer, the bro∣thell houses, called the Stewes on the Bank-side in Southwarke, were pt downe by the Kings Commandement, and was done by proclamation and sound of Trumpet. In his three and twentieth yeer, it was enacted, that Butchers should sell their meat by weight, Beef for a half-peny the pound, and Mutton for three farthings, also at this time forraigne Butchers were permitted, their flesh in Leadenhall-market, which before was not allowed; in his time also, the Go∣vernment of the President in the North was first instituted, and the first Presi∣dent there, was Tunstall Bishop of Durham. Affaires of the Church in his time. IN the yeer 1517. the eighth yeer of this Kings Reigne, Martin Luther of VVittemberg in Germany a Frier of the Order of the Hermisses, taking occa∣sion from the abuse of Indulgences, began to Preach against the Authority of the Pope, and to bring in a Reformation of Religion; for repressing of whom the Counsaile of Trent was called by Pope Paul the third, in the yeere 1542. which continued above forty yeers, but was never received in the Kingdome of France which Counsaile, by decreeing many things to be poins of faith, which were not so accounted before, hath made no small distraction amongst Ppists themselves: against this Luther, King Henry wrote a booke with great bitter∣nesse, and with as great bitternesse was answered; at the same time with Luther, there arose also in the same Country other Reformers of Religion, as Zuin∣gliu, Occloampadious, Melancthon, who differing from Luther in some few points, made the difference which is at this day of Lutherans and Protestants, so called at first Auspurg, for making a protestation in defence of their Doctrine, which soon after spread all Christendome over: King Henry in the sixth and twentieth yeer of his Reigne, had excluded the Popes Authority ou of his Realme; but thinking the worke not sufficiently done, as long as Abbeys and Prioies kept their station, which were, as it were his Forteresses and Pillars;
there ws not long after menes found to have them suppressed, for aspersios being lid upon them (and perhaps no more then truth) of Adulteries and Mur∣ther, they by Act of Parliment, in his eight and twentieth yeer, at lest neere foure hundred of them suppressed, and all their lands and goods conferred upon the King. In his one and thitieth yeer all the rest; and lastly, in his five and thirtinth yeer, all Colledge, Chantries and Hospitals; so as the hives being now all removed, there have never since any Bees or Drones been seen in the Coun∣try: in this Kings time, the Citty of Rome was taken and sacked by the Impe∣riall Army, forcing the Pope to fly to his Castle Saint Angelo, and there kept a prisoner, till he agreed to such conditions as his Adversaries propounded. In the two and twentieth yeere of this Kings reigne, a Proclamation was set forth that no person should purchase any thing from the Court of Rome, and this was the first blow given to the Pope in England. In his three and twentieth yeer the Clergy submitting themselves to the King, for being found guilty of a Praemu∣nire, were the first that called him supream head of the Church. In his foure and twentieth yeere a Parliament was holden, wherein one Act was made, that Bishops should pay no more Annats or money for their Buls to the Pope, and another that no person should appeale for any cause out of this Realm, to the Court of Rome, but from the Commissary to the Bishop, and from the Bishop to the Archbishop, and from the Archbishop to the King, and all causes of the King to be tried in the upper Hose of the Convocation. In his six and twentieth yeer in Iuly, Iohn Frith was burnt in Smithfield, ad with him at the same stake one Andrew Howet a Tailor, both for denying the Reall presence in the Sacra∣ment; and in a Parliament holden tis yeer, an Act was made which Authori∣zed the Kings Highnesse, to be supreame head of the Church of England, and the Authority of the Pope to be abolished, and then also was given to the King the first fruits and tenths of all Spirituall livings; and this yeer were many put to deah, Papists for denying the Kings Supremecy, Protestants for denying the Reall presence in the Sacrament; and it is incredible what numbers for thes two causes were put to death, in the last ten yeers of this Kings Reign, of whom if we should make perticular mention, i would reach a great way in the Book of Martyrs: in his eight and twentieth yeer, the Lord Cromwell was made Via General under the King, over the Spiritualty, and sate divers times in the Con∣vocation House amongst the Bishops as head over them; and in September thi yeere, he set forth injunctions, commandig all Parsons and Curates to each their Parishoners the Paer Noster, the Ae, and Creed, with the ten Com∣mandements and Articles of the Christian Fith in the English tongue. I his one and thirtieth yeer, was set forth by the Bishops, the Book of the six Arti∣cles, condemning all for Hereticks and to be burnt that should hold, 1. That the body of Christ was not Really present in the Sacrament after Consecration. 2. That the sacrament might not truly e Administred under one Kind. 3. That Priests entred into Holy Orders might marry. 4. That vowes of Chastity entred into upon mature deliberation, were not to be kept. 5. That private Masses were not to be used. 6. That Auricular Confession was not necessary in the Church. Tis yeere also the Religion of St. Iohns in England, commonly called the Or∣der of Knights of the Rhodes was dissolved; and on Assension day, Sir William We∣ston Knight, Prior of St. Iohns departed this life, for thought (as was reported) after he heard of the dissolution of his Order, for the King took all the lands that belonged to that Order into his owne hands; in his six and thirtieth eere, the Letany or Praecession was set forth in English, with commandement by the King, to be generally used in Parish Churches.
Workes of Piety done by him or others in his time. UPon the suppressing of Abbeys, King Henry instituted six new Bishopricks nd six Cathedrall Churches, endowing them with convenient mainte∣ance, he also gave competent Pensions during their lives, to such Riligious Persons as were turned out of their Cloysters; he also instiuted in both the Universities, Professors of the Hebrew and Greek tongues, of Divinity, Civil-law and Physick, allowing to each of them forty pound a yeer: he also founded a Colledge at Cambridge; he gave at his death a thousand markes to the poor, and to twelve poore Knights of Windsore, each of them twelve pence a day for ever, and every yeere a long gowne of white cloath: in the fifth yeer of this Kings reigne, George Monor Major of London, re-edified the decayed steeple of the Church of Waltham-stow in Essex, adding thereunto a side Isle with a Chap∣pel where he lieth buried; on the North side of the Church-yard there he foun∣ded a faire Alms-house, for a Priest and thirteen poor men and women, giving them a weekly maintenance; he also for the commodity of Travelours made a cawsey of timber over the marshes, from Waltham-stow to Lock-bridg towards Lon∣don. In this Kings eighth yeer Richard Foxe Bishop of Winchester founded Corpus Christi Colledge in Oxford, minding to have made it a house for Monkes, but Hugh Oldham Bishop of Exceter, perswaded him to make it rather a Colledge for Schollars, and joyned with him in it, contributing great sums of money to∣wards it, contenting himselfe with the name onely of a Benefactour. In his se∣venth yer King Henry builded the town of Greenwich. In this Kings time, Cardi∣nall Woolsey Founded two Colledges, one at Oxford, another at Ipswich; to his Colledge at Oxford he had given foure thousand pounds Land a yeere, but his Lands being all confiscate to the King, the King tooke the Lands, but yet gave to the Colledge a competent maintenance for a Deane, eight Prebends, and a hundred Fellowes; which Colledge is now called Christ-Church, and accounts King Henry for their Founder. His Colledge at Ipswich was demolished. This Cardinall also built Hampton-Court, the chiefest at this day of all the Kings houses, and built or enlarged White-hall, called then Yorke-Place. King Henry in his foure and twentieth yeer, built his Mansio House of Saint Iames, where also he made a faire Parke. This place before had eene an Hospitall of Sisters, with whom the King compounded, giving them Pensions during their lives. In his thirtieth yeere, Nicholas Gibson Groer, then Sheriffe of London, builded  Free-School at Ratcliffe nere London with maintenance for a Master and an Usher; e also builded an Alms-house there for fourteen poor and aged people. In his one and thirtieth yeer, Thomas Huntlow the then Sheriff of Lon∣don, gave certain tenements to the Haberdashers, for finding of ten Almes-men of the same company. In his six and thirtieth yeer, Sir Iohn Alln who had been twice Major  London, and of the Kings Counsaile, gave at his death, to the Citty of London, a rich Coller of Gold, to be worn by the Major: which Col∣lor was first wore by Sr William Laxton on Saint Edwards day, at the Electi∣on of the new Major, who gave to every Ward in London twenty pounds, to be distributed amongst poore Housholders, besides to sixscore persons, whereof threescore men to every one a gowne of broad-cloth and a black cap; and three∣score women, to every one a gowne of the like cloath nd a white Kerchiffe. In his eight and thirtieth yeer, King Henry gave to the Citty of London, for reliefe of poore people Saint Barthalomews Spittle, the Church of the Gray-Friers, and two Parish Churches, the one at Saint Nicholas in the hambles, the other Saint Ewins in Newgate-Marke, all to be made one Parish Church of the Gray-Fryers; and in Lands he gave for the maintenance of the same five hun∣dred markes a yeere for ever: and this Church to be named Christ-Church; foun∣ded by King Henry the eighth.
Casualties in his time. IN his ninth yeere happened a Sweaing-sicknesse, whereof infinite multi∣tudes in many parts of England dyed, specially in London; and was so vio∣lent, that in three and sometimes two houres, it tooke away mens lives, and spared neither rich nor poore; for in the Kings Court the Lord Clinton, the Lord Gray of Wilton, and many Knights, Gentlemen and Officers dyed of it. It began in Iuly, and continued to the midst of December. In his thirteenth yeere, was a great mortality in London, and other places of the Realme, and many men of Honour and Worship dyed; amongst others, Doctor Fitz-Iames Bishop of London, in whose place Doctor Tunstall succeeded. In his nineteenth yeere, by extremity of raine in seed-time, there followed a great dearth of Corne, which would have caused great calamity, but that it was re∣lieved in London by Merchants of the Styliard out of Germany, and a thousand quarters supplied out of the Kings owne provision. In his twentieth yeere, in the end of May, began in London another Sweating-sicknesse, which after∣wards infected all places of the Realme; by reason whereof the Tearme was adjourned, and the Cicuit of the Assizes also; many dyed in the Court, as Sir Fracis Poynts, Sir William Compton Knights, and William Carew Esquire of the Kings Privie-Chamber; the King himselfe for a space, removed almost e∣very day, till he came to Tittinhanger, a place of the Abbot of Saint Albones, where he with the Queene and a small number remained, till the sicknesse was past. In his thirtieth yeere, the manner of casting Pipes of Lead, for con∣veyance of water under-ground, without using of soder, was first invented by Robert Brocke Clerke, one of the Kings Chaplaines: a profitable inven∣tion, for by this, two men and a boy will doe more in one day, then could have beene done before by many men in many dayes: Robert Cooper Gold∣smith, was the first that made the Instruments, and put this Invention in pra∣ctice. In a Rebellion in the North, in this Kings time, when the Duke of Nor∣olke, was sent with an Army against the Rebels, and that a day o battaile be∣tweene them was appointed, it happened, that the night before a small Brooke called Dun, running between the two Armies, upon the fall of a small raie, swelled to such a height, that it was not passable by either foot or horse; a thing which had never happened before upon a great raine, and was then accounted (as indeed it was) no lesse then a Miracle. In his three and thir∣tieth yeere, was a great mortality in the Realme, by reason of hot Agues and Fluxes; and withall so great a drouth, that small Rivers were clean dryed, much cattell dyed for lacke of water, and the Thames were grown so shallow, that the Salt-water flowed above London-bridge, till the raine had encreased the fresh waters. In his five and thirtieth yeere, the first cast-Peeces of Iro that ever were made in England, were made at Buckstead in Sussex by Ralph Hge and Peter Bawde. In his six and thirtieth yeere, was a great Plague in London, so as Michaelms Tearme was adjourned to Saint Albones, and there kept. In his seven and thirtieth yeere, on Tuesday in Easter-weeke, Wil∣liam Foxley Pot-maker for the Mint of the Tower of London, fell asleepe, and could not b waked with pinching or burning, till the first day of the next Tearme, which was full fourteene dayes; and when he awa∣ked, was found in all points, as if he had slept but one night, and lived forty yeeres after. About is fifteenth yeere, it happened that divers things were newly brought int England, whereupon this Rime was made: Turs, Carps, Hoppes, Piccarell and Beere, Cae into ENGLAND all in one yeere.
Of his Wives and Children. KIng Henry had six Wives, his first was Katherine, daughter of Ferdinand King of Spain, the Relict of his brother Arthur, she lived his Wife above twenty yees, and then was divorced from him; after which she lived three yeers by the name of Katherine Dowager, she deceased at Kimbolton in the County of Huntington, the eighth of Ianuary in the yeere 1535. and lieth interred in the Cathedral Church of Peterborough, under a Hearce of black say, having a white Crosse in the midst. His second Wife was Anne second daghter of Sir Thomas Bullen, Earle of VViltshire and Ormond; shee was maried to him the five and twentieth day of Ianuary, in the yeere 1533. lived his wife three yeers, three months and five and twenty dayes, and then was beheaded, and her body buried in the Quire of the Chappell in the Tower: his third Wife was Iane daughter of Sir Iohn Seymour and sister to the Lord Edward Seymour, Earle of Hartford and Duke of Somerset, she was maried to him the next day after the beheading of Queen Anne, lived his Wife one yeer five months and foure and twenty dayes, and then died in Child-bed, and was buried in the midst of the Quire of the Church within the Castle of Windsor. His fourth Wife was Anne, sister to the Duke of Cleve, she lived his wife six moneths, and then was Divorced; she remained in England long after the Kings death, and accompanied the La∣dy Elizabeth through London, at the solemnizing of Queene Maries Co∣ronation. His fifth wife was Katherine, daughter of Edmund, and Neece of Thomas Howard his brother Duke of Norfolke; she was married to him in the two and thirtieth yeere of his reigne; lived his wife one yeere sixe moneths and foure dayes, and then was beheaded in the Tower of London, and buried in the Chancell of the Chappell by Queene Anne Bullen. His sixt wife was Katherine, daughter of Sir Thomas Parre of Kendall, and si∣ster to the Lord William Parre, Marquesse of Northampton; she was first married to Iohn Nevill Lord Latimer, and after his decease to the King at Hampton-Court, in the five and thirtieth yeere of his reigne: she was his wife three yeeres six moneths and five dayes; and then surviving him, was againe married to Thomas Seymour Lord Admirall of England, unto whom she bore a daughter, but died in her Childe-bed, in the yeere 1548. He had children by his first wife Queene Katherine, Henry borne at Richmond, who lived not full two moneths, and was buried at Westminster; also another Sonne, whose name is not mentioned, lived but a short time neither: then a daughter named Mary, borne at Greenwich, in the eighth yeere of his reigne, and came aferward to be Queene of England. By his second wife, Queene Anne Bullen, he had a daughter named Elizabeth, borne at Greenwich, in the five and twentieth yeere of his reigne; who succeeded her sister Mary in the Crowne: he had also by her a sonne, but borne dead. By his third wife Queene Iane, he had a Sonne named Edward, borne at Hampton-Court in the nine and twentieth yeere of his reigne, who succeeded him in the King∣dome. Besides these, he had a base Sonne, named Henry Fitz-roy, begot∣ten of the Lady Talboyse, called Elizabeth Blunt, borne at Blackamore in Essex, in the tenth yeere of his reigne; who was made Duke of Richmond and Somerset; married Mary daughter of Thomas Howard Duke of Nor∣folke; with whom he lived not long, but dyed at Saint Iames by Westmin∣ster, and was buried at Framingham in Suffolke. Of his Personage and Conditions. HEE was exceeding tall of statue, and very strong; faire of complexi∣on, in his latter dayes corpulent and burley: concerning his condition,
Hee was a Prince of so many good parts, that one would wonder he could have any ill; and indeed he had no many ill, till flattery and ill councell in his lat∣ter time got the upper hand of him. His cruelty to his wives may not onely be excused, but defended; for if they were incontinent, he did but justice; if they were not so, yet it was sufficient to satisfie his conscience, that he thought he had cuse to thinke them so; and if the marriage bed be honourable in all? in Princes it is sacred. In suppressing of Abbies he shewed not little Piety, but great providence; for though they were excellent things being rightly used, ye most pestilent, being abused; and then may the use be justly suppressed, when the abuse scarce possibly can be restrained. To thinke he suppressed Abbies out of covetousnesse and desire of gaine, is to make him extreamly deceived in his reckoning; for if we compare the profit with the charge that followed, we shall finde him certainly a great looser by the bargaine. He was so farre from Pride, that he was rather too humble, at lest he conversed with his Subjects in a more familiar manner then was usuall with Princes. So valiant, that his whole lie almost, was nothing but exercises of valour; and though performed amongst his friends in jest, yet they prepared him against his enemies in earnest, and they that durst be his enemies found it. It may be said, the complexion of his govern∣ment for the first twenty yeers, was sanguine and joviall; for the rest, collerick and bloody: and it may be doubted, whether in the former, he were more pro∣digall of his owne treasure, or in the latter of his Subjects blood; for as he spent more in Fictions, then any other King did in Realities, so in any distemper of his people, he had no other Physicke, but to open a veine: but we shall do him extreame wrong, to thinke that all the blood shed in his time, was of his shed∣ding; they were the Bishops that were the Draco to make the bloody Laws; the Bishops that were the Phalaris, to put them in execution: the King ofentimes scarce knowing what was done. Certain it is, when a great Lord put a Gentle∣woman the second time on the rack, the King hearing of it, exceedingly condem∣ned him for such extream cruelty. As for Religion, though he brought it not to a full Reformation; yet he gave it so great a beginning, that we may truly say of that he did, Dimidium plus toto. They who charge him with the vice of lust, let them shew such another example of continence as was seen in him to lye six moneths by a yong Lady, and not to touch her; for so did hee with the Lady Anne of Cleve: but this is to make Nosegayes, I like better to leave every flow∣er growing upon its staulke, that it may be gathered fresh; which will be done by reading the Story of his Life. Of his Death and Buriall. IT is Recorded of him, that in his later time he grew so fat and slothfull, that engines were made to lift and remove him up and downe; but howsoever in the six and fiftieth yeer of his age, whither a dropsie, or by reason of an ulcer in his leg, he fell into a langishing feaver, which brought him into such extrea∣mity, that his Physitians utterly despared of his life, whereof yet none durst speake a word to him, till Master Denny one of his Privy-chamber tooke the the boldnes to goe to him, telling him of the danger he was in, and withall put∣ting him in mind to thinke of his soules health; to which he answered, that hee confessed his sines to be exceeding great, yet had such confidence in the mercy of God through Christ, that he doubted not of forgivenesse though they had been much greater; and being then asked by Master Denny, if he would have any Divine brought to him with whom to confer, he answered he would willingly have the Archbishop Cranmer, but not yet a while, til he had taken a litle rest: whereupon the Archbishop being then at Croydon, was presently sent or, but before he could come, the King was growne speechlesse, onely seeming to retain a little memory, so as putting out his hand, and the Archbishop desiring him to shew some signe of his faith in Christ, he then wrung the Archbishop hard
by the hand, and immediately gave up the Ghost, the eight and twentieth of Ianuary, in the yeer 1547. the six and fiftieth of his age, and of his reigne the eight and thirtieth: his body with great solemnity was buried at Windsor under a most costly and stately Tombe, begun in copper and guilt, but never fiished. Men of note in his time. MEn famous for the sword were many in his time, and in a manner all, that it is hard making choice, without being partiall, unlesse we shal preferre Dukes of equal valour, before others of meaner caling, and then wil the Dukes of Norfolke and Suffolk hold worthily the place first, and next to them the yong Earl of Surrey, who had been more fortunate if he had been lesse valiant. Of men of letters in his time, there were whole Armies in forraigne parts, the most amous, were Budaeus, Ludovicus Vines, Iohn Revolin, Erasmus Roteradamu, Vrsinus, Cornarius, Sadolet, Martin Bucer; in England were Iohn Collet Deane of Pauls and Founder of the Schoole there, VVilliam Lilly borne a Odiham in Hamshire, first Scholmaster of Pauls-Schoole, Thomas Linaker a learned Phisitian, Iohn Skelton a pleasant Poet, VVilliam Horman Vice Provest of Eaten, who wrote divers workes, Sir Thomas Moore, William Tindall, Iohn Rastal a Citizen and Stationer of London, Christopher Saint-Germane an excellent Lawyer, Sir Thomas Elyot, Iohn Leland, a diligent searcher of Antiquities, Sir Iohn Bourchier Knight, Lord Berners, who translated he Chronocles of Froy∣sard out of French into English, Henry Standish Bishop of Saint Assaph, who wote a book against Erasmus traslation of the new Testament; Arnold of Lon∣don, who wrote certain Colections touching Historicall matters, Thomas Lup∣set a Londoner, who wrote sundry vertuous Treatises, Henry Bradshaw a black Monke, who wrote the life of Saint VVerborough, and also a certain Chronocle, Iohn Palsgrave a Londoner, who wrote instructions for the perfect understanding of the French tongue, Iohn Svish a Cornish-man, who wrote certaine abbre∣viations of Chronicles, with a Treatise of the wars of Troy, Anthony Fitz-Her∣bert a Judge, who wrote an Abridgment of the Law, Wilfride Holme who wrot a Treatise of the rebellion in Lincolnshire, Thoms Lanquet who wrote an E∣pitomy of Chronicles, and also of the winning of Bulloigne, Thomas Soulman of Gernsey, who wrote divers notes of History, Cutbert Tunstall Bishop of Durham, Robert VVhittington who wrote divers Treatises for the instruction of Grammarians, Iohn Russell, who wrote a Treatise entituled super jure Caesaris et Papae, also commentaries in Cantica, Simon Fish a Kentish-man, who wrote a book called the supplication of Beggars, George Bullen Lord Rochford brother to Queen Anne who wrote divers songs and sonets, Francis Bigod Knight born in Yorkeshire, who wrote a book against the Clergy, intitled de Impropriationibus, Henry Lord Morley, who wrote divers Treatises, as Comodies and Tragedies, as the life of sectaries, and certaine rimes, VVilliam Botevile alias Thynne, who re∣stored the works of Chawcer, Richard Turpin, who sering in the Garrison of Callice, wrote a Chronicle of his time, and died in the eer 1541. Sir Thomas VViat Knight, who wrote divers matters in English-meeter, and translted the seven Penitentiall Psalmes, and (as some say) the whole Psalter, he died of the pestilence, as he was going Embassadour to the Emperour, in the yeer 1541. Henry Howard Earle of Surrey, who wrote divers Treatises in English-meeter, Iohn Field a Londoner, who wrote a Treatise of mans Free-will, de Servo ho∣miis Arbitrio, and Collections of the common Laws of England, Robert Shin∣gleton borne in Lancashire, who wrote a Treatise of the seven Churches, and certaine Prophesies, William Parry a Welsh-man, who wrote a booke intitled speculum Iuvenam.
THE REIGNE OF KING EDWARD THE SIXTH. IT was now the yeere 1547. when on the eight and twentieth of Ianuary King Henry dying; Prince Ed∣ward his Sonne by his third wife, the Lady Iane Sey∣mour, and the onely Sonne he left behinde him, as well by right of Inheritance, as by his last Will, succeeded him in the Kingdome; to whom as being but nine yeers old, and therefore unripe for Government; hee had assigned eight and twenty Councellours; a fit num∣ber, if agreeing amongst themselves; too many, if at variance: and at variance they would soon fall, if there were not a moderatour to keep them in concord; the first worke therfore ne∣cessary to be done in this new world, was to make choice of such a man, as might be to the Counsailors a Moderator, a protectour to the King, and in his minority, to the Kingdome. To this place, by common consent of the King and Counsaile, Edward Seymour Earl of Hartford the Kings Unckle, was chosen to hold the place, untill the King should accomplish the age of eighteene yeeres. In which Office the first thing he did, was to make the young King Knight, who presently thereupon, made Henry Hobblethorne Major of London Knight, and then King Henries Obsequies being solemnly performed; on the seaventeenth of February, were raised in Honour the Earl of Hartford Protectour, to be Duke of Somerset, William Par Earle of Essex, to be Marquis of Northampton, Dudly Viscount Lisle, to be Earle of Warwick; Wriothsley Lord Chancelour, to be Earle of Southampton, Sir Thomas Seymour the Protectours brother, was made Lord of Sudeley, and Admirall of England, Sir Richard Rich was made Lord Rich, Sir VVilliam Willoughby was made Lord Willoughby, and Sir Edmund Sheffield was made Lord Sheffield of Butterwick: on the nineteenth of Febru∣ary, the King in great state rode from the Tower to the Pallace of Westmin∣ster, where the day following, he was Crowned by the Archbishop of Canter∣bury, with all rites accustomed, in great solemnity. At which time a generall pardon was Proclaimed for all offenders, six onely excepted, namely the Duke of Norfolke, Cardinall Poole, Edward Courtney eldest sonne to the Marquis of Excetur, Master Fortescue, Master Throgmorton, and Doctor Paes Bishop of VVorcester, who was fled to Rome, to avoid taking the oath of Supremcy, all which six continued unpardoed, till the first yeere of Queene Mary, and then were restored. A few dayes after, the Earle of Southampton Lord Chancelour for beng contumacious to the rest of the Lords in matters of Counsaile, was removed both from his Office of being Chancelour, and from his place in
Counsaile, and the great Seale was delivered to Sir William Pawlet, Lord Saint-Iohn, and Lord great Master of the Kings Huoshold. Within two months after the death of King Henry, died Francis King of France also, for whom solemne Obsequies were kept in Pauls Church, as hee likewise had kept before at Paris for King Henry: these two Kings were of so consenting natures, that they had certainly been great friends while they lived, if they had not been Kings, and that jelousie of state had not made them often∣times not to be themselves. King Henry before his death, had left in charge with the Lords of his Coun∣saile, by all meanes possible, to procure a proceeding in the mariage with the young Queen of Scots; and now in discharge therof the Lord Protectour him∣selfe, with an Army of twelve thousand foot, and six thousand horse, besides Labourers and Pioners thirteen hundred, entred Scotland the third of September, at which time also Edward Lord Clinton with a fleet of threescore saile assisted by sea, but before he would doe any hostile Act, he caused Proclamation to be made, that his comming was onely to have performance of the Articles hereto∣fore agreed on fo the mariage, tending to the good of both Kingdomes, if they would yeeld unto, he would then returne in peaceable manner, and the more to draw them on, were before it was demanded to have the Queen brought into England, and there to be brought up, the Protectour was content, she should remaine in Scotland till yeers of consent this demand, the more moderate sort of the Scots accouted very reasonable, but those of the French and Papal facti∣on, who were the greatest persons, and the greatest number strongly opposed; wherupon, the Lord Protectour, presently put his Army into Array, the Lord Gray and Sir Francis Brian, with eight hundred Light-horse, were sent before to provide lodging for the Army, and to give advertisement of the enemies ap∣proaches; then followed the Avant-guard, in number between three and foure thousand foot, one hundred men at Armes, and six hundred Light-horse, led by the Earle of VVarwick; then followed the maine Battaile, consisting of above six thousand foot, six hundred men at Armes, and one thousand Light-horse led by the Protecter himself lastly followed the Arrear, wherein were between three and foure thousand foot, one hundred men at Armes, and six hundred Light-horse, uder the conduct of the Lord Dacres, upon one wing the Artil∣lery was drawne, being sixteen pieces of great Ordinance; the other wing was made by men at Armes and Demilances; for the Avant-guard and halfe the battaile, ridig about two flight shoot from their side, the other halfe of the battaile, and th whole flanke of the Arrear was closed by the carraiges, being nine hundred arts besides Waggons; he rest of the men at Armes, and the Demilances marched behinde. In this order they marched two dayes, taking in three Castles s they went, with little resistance; where it is memorable, what a suddaine device the Defendants of one of them used to save themselves; for finding they wre no longer able to defend themselves, and that their obstinacy had excluded a hope of pardon; they made suite, they might not presently be slain, but have some time to commend their soules to God, and afterwards be hanged: which respite being obtained, thei pardon afterward did more easily ensue; so much doth the winning of time oftentimes prevaile, more then any other policy. Te Governour of Scotland, hearing of the Protectours approch and having no sufficient Army ready to resist him, sent his Heralds abroad, into all parts of the Ralm, and commanded the fire-crosse to be carried (an antient custome in cases of importance) which, was two firebrands set in fashion of a crosse, and pitched upon the point of a speare, and therewith Proclamation to be made, that all above sixteen yeers of age, and under sixty, should resort forthwith to Musselborough & bring convenient provision of victuals with them. By this meanes, having gotten a sufficient Army, he set forward towards the English who were now come to a River called Linne, and here the Earle of Warwick being too enterous, was like to have bin entrapped, but by his valour
came off bravely; and now the Scottish Horse-men began to hover about the English Army, and to come pricking towards them, sometimes within length of their staves, using provoking words, to draw the English from their strength, but the Protector, not moved with their provocations, maintained a close march till he came to Salt-presion by the Frith, where he incamped within two miles of the Scottish Army: and here the Scots having gotten the advantage of a Hill came upon the English with the number of twelve hundred Horse, besides five hundred foot that lay in ambush behind the Hill; at which time the Lord Gray and Sir Francis Brian, impatient of such bravaries, obtained leave of the Gene to encounter them, and so as they came scattered upon the spurre, within a stones cast of the English, and were beginning to wheele about, the Lord Gray with some troops of Light hors-men, charged them home, and was forthwith seconded by certaine numbers of Demilances, and both of them backed with a thousand men at Armes; yet the Scots resolutely maintained the fight three houres and more, but in the end, overlaid with number, they were put to flight and chased almost to the edge of their Camp. In this fight the chiefest force of the Scottish Hors-men was defeated, the Lord Hume, by a fall from his Horse lost his life, his sonne and Heire with two Priests and six Gentlemen were taken prisoners, and about fifteene hundred slaine: the next day, the Protectour and the Earle of Warwick, rode towards the place where the Scottish Army lay, to view the manner of their incamping. As they returned, an Herauld and a Trumpeter from the Scots overtook them; who having obtained Audience, the Trumpeter said, that the Lord Huntley his Master, to spare effusion of Chri∣stian blood, would fight upon the whole quarel, either with twenty against twen∣ty, or with ten against ten, or else try it between the Lord Generall and him∣selfe: the Protectour answered, that for number of Combatants, it was not in his power to conclude any bargaine; and as for himselfe, that being in publick charge, it was not fit he should hazard himselfe against a man of private Con∣ditions, which otherwise he would most willingly accept: here the Earle of Warwick intreated the Lord Generall, that he might accept the Challenge, and Trumpeter (saith he) bring me word, that thy Master will performe the Com∣bat with me, and thou shalt have an hundred Crownes for thy paines; nay ra∣ther (saith the Lord Generall) bring me word that thy Master will abide and give us battaile, and thou shalt have a thousand Crownes for thy paines: and thereupon, when no other agreement could be made, a generall battaile was resolved on: in the Army of the Scots, were five or six and thirty thousand men; in the Avant-guard, commanded by the Earle of Angus, about fifteen thousand; in the Battaile, over whom was the Lord Governour, about te thousand; and in the Arreare as many, led by the valiant Gourdon Earle of Huntley; Hack∣butters hey had none nor men at Armes, bur about two thousand Hors-men (Prickers as they terme them) the rest were all on foote we'l furnished with Jack and Scull, pikes, daggers, Bucklers made of boord, ad slicing swords broad and thin; every man had a long Kirchiffe, folded twic or thrice about his neck, and many of them had cheines of Lattin, drawne thee or foure times along their hoses and doublet-sleeves: they had also to affright the enemies Horses, great attles covered with parchment or paper, and small stones within put upon staves three ells long. And now both Armies joyned in battaile, where a long fight and much variety of fortune on both sides; at length, the victory fell to the English: in this fight, divers of the Nobility of Scotland were slain; of the inferior sort about ten, or as some say, forteen thousand: of the English were slain, onely one and fifty Horse-men ad on footmen, but many hurt; the Lord Gray was dangerously thrust with a pike in the mouth which struck two inches into his neck; the Scottish prisoners accounted by the Marshals booke, were about fifteene hundred, the chiefe whereof were, the Earle of Huntley, the Lords Yester, Hobley and Hamilton, the Master of San-Poole and the Lord of Wimmes; the Earle of Huntley being asked whilst he
was a prisoner, how he stood affected to the marriage; made this answer, that he liked the mariage wel enough, but he liked not this kinde of woing. This victory of Muskelborough against the Scots, was on the tenth of December, the very same day on which thirty yeers before a victory had bin had against them at Flodden field; so as it seems this day was fatall to the Scots, and confirms the opinion of Astologers, that there are dayes to some men fortunate & unfortunate to others if they could be known. This victory strook such a terror into many of the Scots, that the Earl Bothwel and divers chiefe Gentlemen of Tividale and Meers sub∣mitted themselves to the King of England, and were received by the Prorectour into his protection: after this, the English army took many towns and Castles, and then for want of Provision, returned into England, having not stayed above five and twenty dayes in Scotland, and not lost above threescore men. But not∣withstanding this great overthrow at Muskelborough, the Governour of Scotland would not yet be quiet; but assembling the people, made unto them a long Ora∣tion, exhorting them to defend the liberty of their Countrie, and not to be daun∣ted with any event of warre. In this mean time many distractions and troubles hapned in England; partly in matters of Religion, and partly about Inclosures: nd first for inclosures, the Lord Protector caused Proclamation to be set forth, commanding they who had Inclosed any Lands, accustomed to lye open, should upon a certain pain, before a day assigned, lay them open again: and then in mat∣ter of Religion, certain Injunctions were set forth, for removing of Images out of Churches; and divers Preachers were sent with Instructions to disswade the people from praying to Saints or for the dead; from use of Beads, Ashes & Pro∣cessions; from Masses, Durges, praying in any unknown tongue; and for defect of Preachers, Homilies were appointed publickly to be red in Churches: & many for offering to maintaine these Ceremonies, were either punished or forced to recant. Edmund Bonner Bishop of London, was committed to the Fleet, for refu∣sing to receive these Injuctions; Stephen Gardiner Bishop of Winchester, was like∣wise committed first to the Fleet and after to the Tower, for that he had preach∣ed; It were well, these changes in Religion should be stayed untill the King were of yeers to govern by himselfe: for the like causes Tunstall Bishop of Durham, Heath Bishop of Rochester, and Day Bishop of Chichester, were in like manner committed to prison, and all of them dispossessed of their Bishopricks; and that which was worse, the Bishopricks themselves were dispossessed of their Reve∣nues, in such sort, that a very smal pat remained to the Bishops that came after. And now a Parliament was held, in the first yeer of the King, and by Prorogati∣on in the second; wherein divers Chantries, Colledges, free Chappels, Fraterni∣ties and Guildes, with all their Lands and goods were given to the King; which being sold at a low rate, enriched many and ennobled some, and thereby made them firme in maintaining the change: also it was then ordered, that no man should speak against receiving the Eucharist in both kindes, and that Bishops should be placed by Collation of the King under his Letters Patents, without any election preceding, or confirmation insuing; and that all Processes Eccle∣siasticall should be made in the Kings name, as in Writs at the Common-Law; and that al Persons exercising Ecclesiasticall jurisdiction, should have the Kings Armes in the Seales of their Office: and further, the Statute of the six Articles and other Statutes concerning punishment of Lollards were repealed, and the Kings Supremacy over the Church of England was confirmed. All this while the warres in Scotland continued, and were managed by the Lord Gray of Wilton with variable successe; and now about this time was sent to him in aide, the Earle of Shrewsbury with fifteen thousand men; a∣gainst him, in aid of the Scots was sent the Rhinegrave with ten thousand French; who entring into consulation, how to remove the yong Queene out of the reach of the English; provided a Fleet, and sailing round about Scotland, not∣withstanding the English Fleet lay in wait to impeach their passage, yet con∣veyed her safely into France, being then but six yeers old; accompanied in the
journey with Iames her base brother, Iohn Erskin and William Leviston; and in April following was married to Francis the Dolphin of France. You heard before the alterations, now heare the troubles; for when the In∣junctions were sent abroad into the Countrey, and Commissioners appointed to see them executed; one Master Bodye a Commissioner, as he was pulling down Images in Cornwall, was suddenly by a Priest stabbed into the body with a knife. Hereupon the people flocked together in divers parts of the sheere, tak∣ing Armes, and beginning to commit outrages; and although the chiefe Of∣fendour was hanged and quartered in Smithfield, and many of his complices executed in divers parts of the Realme; and withall a Pardon proclaimed to all that would lay downe Armes, yet neither could that severity, nor this le∣nity restraine them from their insolencies; but in divers Countries, as Sus∣sex, Hampshire, Kent, Glostershire, Warwickshire, Wostershire, but specially in Semersetshire and Devonshire, great assemblies of people gathered to a head; whose chiefe Leaders were Humfrey Arundel, and about six others of inferiour note, but many Priests. Some of these (we may say) were Commonwealth muti∣ners; and some mutined for religion: they who were for the Common-wealth could agree upon nothing; some would have no Justices, some no Gentlemen, some no Lawyers, nor ordinary Courts of Justice, but above all Inclosures must down; but whether all, or which, or how to be imployed, none could tell. The re∣ligious Mutiners were not altogether so various in their voyces, as having some few amongst them by whom they were guided: these in name of the people ha∣mered up these Aricles following; upon granting of which, they proessed that both their bodies and goods should be at the Kings devotion. 1. That Curates should administer Baptisme at all times of necessity, a well o week-dayes as on holy-dayes. 2. That their children might be confirmed by the Bishop. 3. That the Masse might be celebrated, no man communicating with the Priest. 4. That they might have reservation of the Lords body in their Churches. 5. That they might have holy-bread and holy-water in remembrance of Christs precious body and blood. 6. That Priests might live unmarried. 7. That the six Articles set forth by King Henry the eight might be continu∣ed, at lest till the King should come to full age. Upon these demands, the King, although he knew that Reasons would little prevaile with unreasonable men; yet to discharge the place he held, he sent them in writing Answers to them all, and withall a generall pardon, if they would desist and lay downe armes. But the sedicious growing the more outra∣gious, the fairer they were intreated; and finding themselves unable to subsist with their owne estates, began to thinke upon the spoyle of Cities; and first they came to Excetour, and demanded entrance, which the Citizens refusing, they fell to set fire on the gaes; but the Citizens prevented this, by casting in wood and maintaining the fire, till they had cast up a halfe moone within; up∣on which when the Seditious attempted to enter, they were presently hewen and cut in peeces. After this they mined the wals, laid powder, and rammed the mouth; but the Citizens prevented this also, by making a countermine, where∣into they poured such plenty of water, that the wet powder could not be fi∣red. All this while, the Lord Russell Lord Privie Seale, who had beene sent downe to suppresse the Commotion, lay at Huntington, expecting more For∣ces; whilst these Citizens of Excetour, for twelve dayes together endured so great famine, that they were faine to eat horses, and make bread of course bran moulded in cloathes, for that otherwise it would not cleave together. At last the Lord Gray came to the Lord Russell with supply of Forces; who after many conflicts with the Rebels, forced them to raise their siedge at Excetour; and thereby freed the City from many miseries: to whom the King afterward, gave the Mannour of Evyland, in reward for their loyalty. After this, the Rebels rallying their Force, were againe set upon by the Kings Army, and the greatest
part of them slaine, the rest fled; many were taken and executed by Martiall Law; the chiefe Leaders were sent to London and there executed. The sedition being thus suppressed; it is memorable what sport Sir William Kingston the Provost Marshall made, by vertue of his Office, upon men in misery. One Boyer Major of Godmin in Cornwall, had bin amongst the Rebels, not willingly but en∣forced; to him the Provost sent word he would come and dine with him, for whom the Major made great provision; a little before dinner, the Provost took the Major aside, and whispered him in the eare, that an execution must that day be done in the town, and therefore required to have a paire of Gallows set up a∣gainst dinner should be done; the Major failed not of his charge, presently after dinner the Provost taking the Major by the hand, intreated him to lead him to the place where the Gallowes was, which when he beheld he asked the Major if he thought them to be strong enough; yes (said the Major) doubtlesse they are; well then (said the Provost) get you up speedily, for they are provided for you. I hope (answered the Major) you mean not as you speak: in faith (said the Pro∣vost) there is no remedy, for you have bin a busie Rebell; and so without respit or defence he was hanged to death:) a most uncurreous part, for a guest to offer his host. Neere the said place dwelled a Millar, who had bin a busie actor in that Rebellion; who fearing the approach of the Marshall, told a sturdy fellow his servant, that he had occasion to go from home, and therefore bid him, that if any man came to enquire after the Millar, he should not speak of him, but say that himselfe was the Millar, and had bin so for three yeers before. So the Provost came and called for the Millar, when out comes the servant, and saith, he was the man: the Provost demanded how long he had kept the Mill; these three yeeres answered the servant: then the Provost commanded his men to lay hold on him, and hang him on the next tree. At this the fellow cryed out, that he was not the Millar but the Millars man: nay Sir (said the Provost) I will take you at your word, and if thou beest the Millar thou art a busie knave; if thou beest nor, thou art a false lying knave, and howsoever thou canst never do thy Master better service then to hang for him; and so without more adoe he was dispatched. When this sedition in Devonshire was appeased, there rose another in Nor∣folke, and that specially upon a grievance for enclosures; the Rebels had got one Robert Ket a Tanner of Wimondham to be their Leader, and were growne to a body of twenty thousand, seating themselves at Monshold, neer Mount-Sur∣rey, where they carried a face as it were of Justice and Religion; for they had one Conyers an idle fellow to be their Chapleyne, who morning and evening read solemn Prayers, also Sermons they had often, and as for Justice they had a bench under a tree where Ket usually sate, and with him two of every hunded whence their Companies had been raised, to heare complints and to give Judg∣ment, and from hence were warrants sent in the Kings name, to bring in powder, shot, victuals, and all things necessary: which tree hath ever since been called the tree of Reformation; and now being grown to a heighth, they presented cer∣tain complaints to the King, requiring, he would send a Herauld to them, to give them satisfaction; the King though he tooke it for a great indignity, to have such base fellowes to capitulate with him, yet framing himselfe to the time, he returned this answer; that in October following he would cal a Parliament wher∣in their complaints should be heard, and all their grievances should be redressed, requiring them in the meane time, to lay downe Armes and returne to their houses, and therupon granting them a generall pardon: but this was so far from satisfying the seditious, that hereupon first, they assaulted the Town of Norwich tooke it, and made the Major attend them as their servant, and then retur∣ned again to their station at Manshold not long after William Parre Marquesse of Northampton, with the Lord Sheffield, the Lord Wentworth, divers Knights, and fifteen hundred Horse, with a small band of Italians was sent against them; whom the seditious so stoutly opposd, that much mischiefe was done on both
sides, the Lord Sheffield falling with his Horse in a ditch was taken prisoner, and as he pulled off his helmet to shew who he was, he was by a Butcher struck∣en downe with a club and slaine; so as the Marquesse with his forces not pre∣vailing, there was afterward sent the Earle of Warwick with six thousand oot, and fifteen hundred Horse, with whom were the Lords Willoughby, Powis and Bray his two sonnes Ambrose and Robert, and many Knights and Gentlemen of Name. When the Earl was come neere to the Camp of the seditious, he sent a Herauld to them, offering them the Kings pardon, if they would desist, but they were so far from accepting it, that a lewd Boy turned up his naked breech towards the Herauld and bid him kisse it; upon this, many skirmishes passed between the Earle and them, with losse sometimes to one side, and sometimes to another; at last they came to a Battaile, where the Rebels placed in the Frot, all the Gentlemen they had taken prisoners, meaning they should be the first slain, of whom yet very few were hurt, but of the Rebels were slain above two thou∣sand, and now once againe the Earle offered them pardon, if they would desist; but for all their losses, they continued obstinate still, at last the Eale sent to know if they would entertaine their pardon, in case he should come in person and assure them of it; this moved them much, and then they answered, they knew him to be so honourable, that from himself they would embrace it; wher∣upon the Earle riding to them, and causing their pardon to be read, they thre away their weapons, wishing all joy and prosperity to the King: nine of he principall Rebels were hanged upon the tree of Reformation; Ket himselfe flying away was taken and hanged in chaines upon Norwich Castle; the day of this defeat of the sedicious, was a long time after observed for a festivall day by the Inhabitants of Norwich, and thus ended the sedition in Norolke; whe at the same time another arose in Yorkshire, whereof the chiefe movers were William Ombler a Gentleman, Thomas Dale a Parish Clerk, and Stephenson a Post, to whom were assembled foure or five thousand, who tooke their encou∣ragement from a certain Prophesie, which did foretell, that the time should come, when there should be no King, when the Nobility and Genry should be destroyed, when the Realm should be ruled by foure Governours elected by the Commons, holding a Parliament in commotion, which should begin at the South and North Seas of England, and that time they understood to be the present, and that the Rebels of Devonshire, Norfolke and Yorkshire should draw together to accomplish this prophesie; but as soon as they heard that the tu∣mults of Devonshire and Norfolke were quieted, they found that they were de∣ceived in the understanding of the prophesie, and therupon presently upon the Kings pardon, they fell off and dispersed, their chiefe Leaders Ombler, Dale and foure others were executed at Yorke; and with this, the Spirit of sedition was quite laid in all places of the Kingdome. But the King of France, taking advantage of these sedicios, though he had been in treaty before of peace with England, yet now he brake off the treaty, Proclaimed war, and denounced it by his Embassadour to the King: hereupon all French-men in England, not Denizens, were taken prisoners, and all their goods seized for the King, which the French King understanding, he sent a fleet of Ships to surprise Gernsey and Iarnsey, but was repelled with the losse of a thousand men: after this, he levied an Army by land, and went himselfe in per∣son against Bulloigne, defended by the valiant Sir Nicholas Arnold, but being weary of the worke, he left his Lievtenant Chatillon to pursue the Siedge, who having made many fierce batteries, and at last assaults and no prevailing, hee then attempted to hinder the Towne from supply of victuals; and to this end, charged a Galley with gravell and stones, meaning to sinke it in the Haven, but the English took the Galley before it was sunke, and made use of the stones for their owne defence: after this, they made faggos of light matter, mixed with pich, tar, tallow, rosi powder and wild-fire, with intention to fire the ships in the Haven, but that enterprise was defeated by the Bulloignes, and the fag∣gots
taken from the French; and more then this, there was little done in those parts at this time. But in England in the meane time, an unfortunate accident happened, which beginning upon a very light occasion, produced afterward very heavy effects; whereof, though there were many concurrant circumstances, yet the originall cause was the pride of a woman, upon a point indeed, wherein the natures of women are commonly most tender, Precedency of place: the Protectour had maried Anne Stanhope, a woman of a haughty stomack, and the Lord Admirall his Brother the Queene Dowager, a Lady of great mildnesse: the neerenesse of the Husbands, gave occasion to the Ladies often meeting, where the Dutchesse would inwardly murmur, why shee being the wife of the elder brother and the better man, should give place to her, who was the wife of the younger brother, and the meaner man; this envy of hers toward the Queen, bred a malice in her towards the Admirall, as thinking the mischiefe she did to the husband, to be a part of revenge upon the wife, and though the Queene shortly after died in Child-bed, yet the mallice of the Dutchesse towards the Admirall lived still; (so hard a thing it is, for malice once setled in a womans heart, to be remo∣ved) out of this malice, she put divers surmises into her husband the Protectours head against his brother the Admirall, as though he went about to procure his death, to the end he might aspire to the place he held; but certainly as misliking his government being a Protestant, who was himselfe a Papist; in this case causes of jealousie against the Admirall was obvious enough, for it was knowne that in King Henries time, he had aimed at the mariage of the Lady Elizabeth King Henries second daughter; and now his wife the Queen Dowager being dead (and not without suspition of poyson) he fell upon that mariage a fresh, which could not be thought to tend, but to some very high aspiring end: the Protectour a plain man, and one that had not the cleerest insight into practises; whether too importunately provoked by his wife, or whither out of an honest mind, not willing to patronize faults though in a brother, gave way to accusati∣os brought against him, so as in a Parliament then holden, he was accused, for attempting to get into his custody the person of the King, and government of the Realm, for endeavouring to marry the Lady Elizabeth the Kings sister, for per∣swading the King in his tender yeers, to take upon him the rule and ordering of himselfe; upon which points (though perhaps proved, yet not sufficiently a∣gainst him, who was never called to his answere) he was by Act of Parliament condemned, and within few dayes after condemnation, a warrant was sent un∣der the hand of his brother the Protectour to cut off his head; wherein (as after it proved) he did as much, as if he had laid his own head downe upon the block; for whilst these brothers lived and held together, they were as a strong for∣tresse one to the other; the Admirals courage supporting the Protectours au∣thority, and the Protectours authority maintaining the Admirals stoutnesse; but the Admiral once gone, the Protectours authority as wanting support began to totter, and fell at last to utter ruine: besides there was at this time, amongst the Nobility a kind of faction; Protestants who favoured the Protectour for his owne sake, and other of Papall inclination, who favoured him for his brothers sake, but his brother being gone, both sides forsooke him, even his owne side; as thinking they could expect little assistance from him, who gave no more as∣sistance to his own brothe; and perhaps more then all this, the Earl of Warwick at this time, was the most powerfull man both in Courage and Counsaile a∣mongst all the Nobility, and none so neere to match him as the Admirall while he lived, but he being gone, there was none left that either was able and durst, or durst and was able to stand against him: however it was, not long after the Admirals death, the Protectour was invaded with sundry accusations, wherein h Earl of Warwick made not alwaies the greatest show, but yet had alwayes the greatest hand; one thing the Protectour had done, which though a private act, yet gave a publick distaste. To make him a Mansion house in the Strand (the same
which is now called Somerset-house) he pulled downe a Church, and two Bi∣shops houses by the Strand Bridge; in digging the foundation wherof, the bones of many who had been there buried, were cast out and carried into the fields; and because the stones of those houses and the Church suffised not for his work, the steeple ad most part of the Church of Saint Iohns of Ierusalem neer Smith∣field, was mined and overthrowne with powder, and the stones applied to this sparious building; and more then this, the Cloyster of Pauls on the North side of the Church, in a place called Pardon Church-yard, and the dance of Death ve∣ry curiously wrought about the Cloyster, & a Chapel that stood in the midst of the Churchyard; also the Charnal house, that stood upon the South side of Pauls (now a Carpenters yard) with the Chappell, timber and Monuments therin were beaten downe, the bones of the dead caried into Finsbury-fields, and the stones converted to this building. This Act of the Protectours, did something alienate the Peoples minds from him; which the Earle of Warwick perceiving thought it now a fit time to be falling upon him; and therupon drew eighteene of the Privy Counsaile to joyne with him, who withdrawing themselves from the Court, held secret consultations together, and walked in the Citty with many Servants weaponed, and in new Liveries; whereof when the Lord Pro∣tectour heard, he sent secretary Peter to them, to know the causes of their As∣sembly, requiring them to resort unto him peaceably, that they might comune together as friends; but in the meane time, hee Armed five hundred men, and removed the King by night from Hampton-court to Windsor: on the other side, the Lords at London having first taken possession of the Tower, sent for the Majo and Aldermen of the Citty, to the Earle of Warwicks lodging at Ely-house in Holburn; to whom the Lord Rich then Lord Chancelour made a long Oration wherin he shewed the ill government of the Lord Protector, and the many mis∣chifes that by it were come upon the Kingdome; and therupn requiring them to joyn with the Lords there assembled to remove him; and presently that day, a Proclamation was made in divers parts of the Citty to that purpose; to which the Lords and Counsailors that subscribed their names were these; the Lord Rich Chancelour, the Lord Saint-Iohn Lord great Master, the Marquesse of Northampton, the Earle of Warwick Lord great Chamberlaine, the Earle of Arundell Lord Chamberlaine, the Earle of Shrewsbury, the Earle of South∣ampton, Sir Thomas Cheyney Treasurer of the Houshold, Sir Iohn Gag Con∣staple of the Tower, Sir William Peter secretary, Sir Edward North Knight, Sir Edward Montague chiefe Justice of the Common-pleas, Sir Iohn Baker Chan∣celour of the Exchequer, Sir Ralph Sadler, Sir Edward Wootton, Sir Richard Southwell Knights: and Doctor Wootton Deane of Canterbury. In the afternoone of the same day, the Lord Major assembled a Common Counsaile in the Guild-hall where two letters arrived almost in one instant from the King and the Lord Protectour, for a thousand men to be Armed for defence of the Kings Person; another from the Lords at London for two thousand men to aide them in defence of the Kings person also; both pretending alike, and therefore hard how to please them both. The Recorder set forth the complaint of the Lords against the Protectour, in such sort, that he made many inclinable to fa∣vour that side, but one named George Stadlow better advised, stept up, and in a long Speech shewed, what mischiefes had come to the City by opposing the King; and therefore gave his opinion to suspend giving aide to the Lords, at lest for a time. His advice was harkened to, and thereupon the Court resolved onely to arme a hundred Horsemen and foure hundred foot, in defence of the City; and to the letters, returned submissive but dilatory answers. After some other passages betweene the Protectour and the Lords, Sir Edward Winkfield Captaine of the Guard, was sent from the Lords to Windsor; who so well perswaded the King of the Lords loyall affection towards him, and of their moderate intention towards the Protectour, that the King was contented to have him presently remvoed from him, and suffered him within two dayes af∣ter
to be carried to the Tower. In whose absence, seven Lords of the Councell and foure Knights were appointed by turnes to attend the Kings person; and for affaires of State, the government of them was referred to the whole body of the Councell: soone after were sent to the Protectour in the Tower, certain Lords of the Councell, with Articles against him, requiring his present Answer, whe∣ther he would acknowledge them to be true, or else stand upon his justificai∣on. The chiefe Article was this; That he tooke upon him the Office of Pro∣tectour, with expresse condition, that he should doe nothing in the Kings af∣faires, but by assent of the late Kings Executours, or the greaest part of them; and that contrary to this condition, he had hindered Justice, and subverted laws of his owne authority, as well by letters as by other command; and many other Articles, but all much to this purpose. The Protectour, whether thinking to speed better by submission then by contesting; or perhaps finding himselfe not altogether innocent, (for indeed in so great a place, who can beare himselfe with such sincerity, but he will commit errours, with which he may be taxed;) subscribed an acknowledgement with his owne hand; humbly submitting him∣selfe to the Kings mercy, and desiring their Lordships favour owards him. Upon this submission, three moneths after he had bin imprisoned, he was relea∣sed, entertained and feasted by the King, and swore again to be a Privie Coun∣cellour, but no more Protectour: at which time, betweene him and the Lords, a shew at lest of perfect amity was made; and to make it the more firme, the Dukes daughter was afterward married to the Lord Lisle, Sonne and heire to the Earle of Warwicke; at which marriage the King himselfe was present; and perhaps to honour their reconcilement and this marrige, the Earle of War∣wicke was made Lord Admirall of England, Sir Iohn Russell Lord Privie Seale was created Earle of Bedford, the Lord Saint-Iohn was created Earle of Wilt∣shire, and soone after made Lord Treasurour, Sir William Paget Controlour of the Kings House, was made Lord Paget, Sir Anthony VVinkfield Captaine of the Guard, was made Controlour, and Sir Thomas Darcye was made Captaine of the Guard. But of the other side, the Earle of Arundell, the Earle of South∣ampton, were put off from the Councell; of whom, the Earle of Southampton dyed shortly after at Lincolne-Place in Holborne, and was buried in Saint An∣drewes Church there. About this time a Parliament was held at Westminster, wherein one Act was made against spreading of Prophesies; another against unlawfull Assem∣blies: but for feare of new tumults, the Parliament was untimely Dissolved, and Gentlemen were commanded to retyre to their Countey-habitations; and or the same cause also Trinity Terme did not hold. About this time also, Pope Paul the third dyed; after whose death the Car∣dinals being divided about the election of a new Pope; the Imperial part, which was the greatest, gave their voyces for Cardinall Poole; which being told him, e disabled himselfe, and wished them to choose one that might be most for the glory of God, and good of the Church: upon his stop, some that were no friends to Poole, and perhaps looked for the place themselves, if he were put off, laid mny things to his charge; amongst other, that he was no withou suspi∣tion of Lutharisme, as having bin very conversant with Immanuell Tremellius and Anthonius Flaminius, great Lutherans, and not altogether without blemish of incontinency; there being a young Nunne that was thought to be his daugh∣ter. But of these criminations Poole so cleered himselfe, that he was afterward more importuned to take the place then he was before; and thereupon one night the Cardinals came unto him, being in bed; and sent him word they came to adore him (which is one special kind of electing the Pope) but he being awak∣ed out of his sleepe, and acquainted with it; made answer, that this was not a worke of darkenesse, and therefore required them to forbeare till the next day, and then to doe as God should put in their mindes. But the Italian Cardinals attributing this putting off, to a kinde of stupidity and sloth in Poole; looked
no more after him, but the next day chose Cardinall Montanus Pope, who was afterward named Iulius the third. And now the King of France, upon many just considerations, was growne de∣sirous to have a Peace with England; and thereupon sent one Guidoli a Floren∣tine ino England, to make some overture of his desire to the Lords of the Councell; who addressing himselfe to the Earle of Warwicke, whom he knew to be most prevalent; so prevailed, that it was concluded foure Embassadours should be sent from the King of England into Franee and foure from the French King, to treat with them. The Commissioners for the English were Iohn Earl of Bedford, William Lord Paget, Sir William Peter and Sir Iohn Mason, Secre∣taries of State. For the French were Monsieur Rochpot, Monsieur Chatillon, Guyl∣lart de Martyer and Rochetelle de Dassie: much time was spent to agree about a place of meeting; till at last the English to satisfie the French, were conten∣ted it should be before Bulloigne; where were many meetings and mny diff∣rences about conditions; but in conclusion, a Peace was concluded upon cer∣taine Articles; the chiefe whereof was, that Bulloigne and the places adjacent should be delivered up to the French within six weekes after the Peace Proclai∣med; and that the French should pay for the same two hundred thousand crownes, within three dayes after delivery of the Towne; and other two hu∣dred thousand crowes upon the fifth day of August following: hostages were on both sides given for performance; and to those Articles the French King was sworne at Amyens, and the King of England in London: the Lord Clinton who had been Deputy of Bulloigne was made Lord Admirall of England. Presently after this Agreement, the Duke of Brunswicke sent to the King of England, to offer his service in the Kings wars, with ten thousand men, and to intreat a marriage with the Lady Mary, the Kings eldest sister. To his offer of aide, answer was made, that the Kings warres were ended; and touching the marriage with the Lady Mary, hat the King was in speech for her marriage with the Infanta of Portugall, which if it succeeded not, he should then be fa∣vourably heard. Upon this, the Emperours Embassadour demanded of the King, that the Lady Mary might have free exercise of the Masse, which the King not onely constantly denied, but thereupon Sermons were exercised at Court, and order taken, that no man should have any Benefice from the King, but first he should Preach before him; and shortly after, under pretence of preparing for Sea-matters, five thouand pounds were sent to relieve Prote∣stants beyond the Seas. At this time also, an Embassadour came from Gustanu King of Sweden, to enter league with the King for entercourse of Merchants; and charge was then also given, that the Lawes of England should be admini∣stred in Ireland. About this time the Queene Dowager of Scotland, going from France to her Countrey, passed thorow England, having first obtained a safe Conduct, she arrived at Portesmouth, and was there met by divers of the English Nobili∣ty; conducted to London, she was lodged in the Bishops-Pallace: after four dayes staying, having beene feasted by the King at Whitehall, she departed; being waited on by the Sheriffes of Counries to the borders of Scotland. And now was one Steward a Scot apprehended in England, and imprisoned in the Tower, for intending to poyson the yong Queene of Scots, whom the King delivered to the French King upon the frontiers of Callice, to be by him justi∣ced at his pleasure. At his time certaine Ships were appointed by the Emperour, to transport the Lady Mary either by violence or by stelth out of England to Antwerpe; whereupon Sir Iohn Gates was sent with Forces into Essex, where the Lady lay; and besides, the Duke of Somerset was sent with two hundred men, the Lord Privie Seale with other two hundred, and Master Sentleger with foure hundred more, to severall coasts upon the Sea, and the Lord Chancellour and Secretary Peter were sent to the Lady Mary; who after some conference,
brought her to the Lord Chancellours house at Lyee in Essex, and from thence to the King at Westminster. Here the Councell declared unto her, how long the King had permitted her the use of the Masse, and considering her obstinacy, was resolved now no longer to permit it, unlesse she would put him in hope of some conformity in short time. To which she answered, that her soule was Gods; and touching her faith, as she could not change, so she would not dissemble it. Reply was made, that the King intended not to constraine her faith, but to restrain the outward profession of it, in regard of the danger the example might draw. After some like enterchange of speeches, the Lady was appointed to remain with the King, when there arived an Embassadour from the Emperor, with a threatning message of warre, in case his cousin the Lady Mary, should be denied the free exercise of the Masse: hereupon the King presently advised with the Archbi∣shop of Canterbury, and with the Bishop of London and Rochester, who gave their opinion, that to give licence to sin was sin, but to connive at sinne might be llowed so it were not too long, nor without hope of reformation: then answere was given to the Embassadour, that the King would send to the Em∣perour within a month or two, and give him such satisfaction as should be fit. And now the King being uncertaine of the faith, both of his Subjects and of his Confederates, intended by alliance to strengthen himselfe; and thereupon sent one Bartwicke, to the King of Denmarke with private instructions, to treat of a mariage, betweene the Lady Elizabeth the Kings youngest sister, and the King of Denmarks eldest son; but when it came to the point, this Lady could not be induced to entertaine mariage with any. After this, the Marquesse of Northampton was sent Embassadour to the French King, as well to present him with the Order of the Garter, as to treat with him of other secret affaires: with him were joyned in Commission the Bishop of Elye, Sir Philip Hobbie, Sir William Pickering, Sir Iohn Mason, and Master Smith Secritary of State; also the Earle of Worcester, Rutland, and Ormond were appointed to accompany them; as likewise the Lords Lisle, Fitzwater, Bray, Aburgavenie and Evers, with other Knights and Gentlemen of note, to the number of six and twenty; and for avoiding of immoderate traine, order was given that every Earle should have but foure attendants, eve∣ry Baron but three, every Knight and Gentlemn but two, onely the Com∣missioners were not limited to any number. Being come to the Court of France, they were forthwith brought to the King, being then in his Bedcham∣ber; to whom the Marquesse presented the Order of the Garter, wherewith he was presently invested: then the Bishop of Elye in a short Speech, declared, how the King of England, out of his love and desire of amitye, had sent this Order to his Majestie; desiring with all, that some persons might be autho∣rized to treat with them, about some other mtters of importance; where∣upon a Commission went forth to the Cardinall of Lorraigne, Chastillion the Constable, the Duke of Guysae, and others. At the first, the English de∣manded, that the yong Queene of Scots might be snt into England for perfect∣ing of marriage betweene King Edward and her. But to this the French answe∣red, That conclusion had beene made long before for her marriage with the Dolphin of France. Then the English proposed a marriage betweene King Ed∣ward and the Lady Elizaeth the French Kings eldest daughter: to this the French did cheerfully incline; but when they came to talke of Portion, the English demanded at first fifteen hundred thousand crownes, then fell to foure∣teene, and a last to eight hundred thousand: the French offered at first, one hundred thousand crownes, then rose to two hundred thousand, and higher they would not be drawne; saying, it was more then ever had bin given with a daugh∣er of France. Shortly after Monsieur the Marshall and other Commissioners were sent by the French King, to deliver to the King of England the Order of Saint Michael; and then was further treaty about the marriage; and because the French could be srued no higher then two hundred thousand crownes, it was at
last accepted, and the agreement was reduced into writing, and delivered under Seale on both sides. And now King Edward supposing his state to be most safe, when indeed it was most unsure; in testimoy both of his joy and love, advanced many to new titles of honou; the Lord Marquesse Dorset, who had maried the eldest daugh∣ter of Charles Brandon was created Duke of Suffolke, the Earle of Warwicke Duke of Northumberland, the Earle of Wiltshire was created Marquesse of Win∣chester, Sir William Herbert Lord of Cardisse and Master of the Horse, was cre∣ated Earle of Pembrooke; also William Cecill the Kings Secretary, Iohn Cheeke one of his Schoolmasters, Henry Dudley and Henry Nevill were made Knights, and (that which perhaps it had bin happy, if it had never bin) Sir Robert Dud∣ley one of the Duke of Northumberlands sons (the same who was afterward the great Earle of Leicester) was sworne one of the six orninary Gentlemen of the Kings Chamber; for after his comming into a place so neere about him, the King enjoyed his health but a while. The aspiring thoughts of the Duke of Northumberland, were now growne up to be put in execution: He was advanced in title of honour equall with the highest; in authority and power above the highest; he had placed his po∣liticke Sonne neere about the Kings person; the next thing was to remove the Duke of Somerset out of the way; and for this also he had prepared instru∣ments; Sir Thomas Palmer, Crane, Hamond, Cecill, and others; who brought severall accusations against the Duke; some trenching upon the King and Kingdome, but one specially against the Duke of Northumberlands person; whose practises when the Duke of Somerset found, and had cause to feare; he went one day Armed into the Duke of Northumberlands Chamber, with a purpose to kill him; but finding him in his bed, and being received with much kinde complement by him, his heart relened, and thereupon came a∣way without any thing done: at his comming out, one of his company asked him if he had done the deed? who answered, No: then said he, you are your selfe undone: and indeed it so fell out; for when all other Accusations were refel∣led, this onely stucke by him, and could not be denyed; and so on the first of December he was arraigned at Westminster; where the Lord William Palet Marquesse of Winchester and Lord Treasurour, sat as high Steward of Eng∣land, and with him Peeres to the number of seven and twenty; the Dukes of Suffolke and Northumberland, the Marquesse of Northampton, the Earles of Der∣by, Bedford, Huntington, Rutland, Bathe, Sussex, Worcester, Pembrooke and Hert∣ord; the Barons, Aburgaveuy, Audeley, Wharton, Evers, Laymer, Borough, Zouth, Stafford, Wentworth, Darcye, Sturton, Windsor, Cromwell, Cobham and Bray. The Lords being set, the Inditments were read, in number five, contai∣ning a charge, for raising men in the North parts of the Realme; and at his house, for assembling men to kill the Duke of Northumberland; for resisting his Attacment, for raising London, for assaulting the Lords, and devising their deaths. To all which he pleaded, Not guilty, and made a satisfactory Answer to every point, though the Kings learned Councell pessed them hard against him. This done, the Lords went together, where exception was taken by some, s a thing unfit, that the Duke of Northumberland, the Marquesse of Northampton, and the Earle of Pembrooke should be of the Jurie; seeing the prisoner was chiefely charged with practises against them. But to this, the Lawyers made answr, that a Peere of the Realm might not be challenged; so after much variation of opinions, the prisoner was acquit of Treasor, but by most voyees found guilty of Felony; and that by a Statute, lately by his owne pocuremet made; That if any should attempt to kill a Privie Councellour, although the Fact were not done, yet it should be Felonie, and be punished with death. But upon his being acquit of Treason, te Axe of the Tower was presently laid downe, which mde people conceive he had beene acquitted of all; who thereupon for joy, gave so great a
shout, that it was heard as farre as Charing-Crosse: but the Duke was little the better for being acquitted of Treason, seeing he was found guilty of Felonie; and had Judgement to dye. It is thought by some, he might have saved his life, if he had demanded his Clergie; but it is rather thought, that in that Statute Clergie ws denied. Two moneths after his condem∣nation; (much against the Kings will) Hee was brought to the Tower-Hill to execution; wher bing scended the Scaffold, hee entred into a Speech, wherein though he justified himselfe, for any matter tending to the hurt of the King or Kingdome; yet he confessed, he was justly by the Law brought to th dh; and thanked God, that had given him so large a time of repentance, speially that he had opened his eyes, to see cleerely the light of the Gospell; and going on in his Speech, a sudden noyse a∣rose, of some crying, away, way; which made some thinke a Pardon had beene come; but was indeede the voyce of some that had beene warned to be at the Execution, and were come somewhat late: but the tumult being appeased, the Duke went on with his Speech, and at last commending his soule to God, with a counenance not shewing a signe of feare or perturba∣tion, onely his cheekes a little redder then they use o be; he peaceably laid downe his head upon the blocke, and in a moment with one stroke of the Axe, had it strucken off. The death of this Duke, made the Duke of Nor∣thumberland more odious to the people then he was before; and there were some that dipped Hndkerchiffes in his blood, and kept them to upbraide the Duke of Northumberland withall, when he came himselfe afterward to the like end. After execution of the Duke, Sir Ralph Vane and Sir Miles Partridge were hanged at the Tower-hill, Sir Michael Stanhope and Sir Thomas Arundell were there beheaded. After the Dukes condemnation, it was thought fit to have something done for averting the Kings minde, from taking thought; and to that end, one George Ferrers, a Gentleman of Lincolnes-Inne, was appointed in the Christmas∣time, to be Lord of Misrule; who so carried himselfe, that he gave great delight to many, and some to the King, but not in proportion to his hea∣vinesse. About this time was a call of seven Serjeants at Law, who kept their Feast at Grayes-Inne; of whom, Master Robert Brooke Recorder of London, was the first; and the next Master Dyer, who was chosen Speaker the next Par∣liment. About this time also, the Lord Paget was committed to the Tower, or what cause is not certaine; and being a Knight of the Order, his Garder was taken from him by Garter king at Armes, upon this pretence, that he was said to be no Gentleman, either by Father or Mother; and the Garter was then bestowed on the Earle of Warwicke, the Duke of Norhumerlands eldest Sonne, and the Lord Rich Lord Chancellour, was put off from his Place, and the Seal then de∣livered to Doctor Thomas Goodricke Bishop of Elye. About this time also three great Ships were set forth at the Kings charge, for discovery of a passage to the East Indies by the North Seas; the chiefe Pilot and directour in this Voyage, was one Sebastian Gabato an Englishman, borne at Bristow, but the son of a Genoway: these Ships at the last arrived in the Coun∣trey of Muscovia, but not without losse of their Captain Sir Hugh Willoughby, who being tossed and driven by tempest, was afterward found in his Ship frozen to death, and all his people. At this time alo the Duke of Suffolks three Daughters, which he had by Frances, Daughter of Charles Brandon and Mary Queene of France, were married at Durham-House; the eldest Iane to the Lord Guildford Dud∣ley, fourth Soone of the Duke of Northumberland: the second Katherine, to Henry Sonne and heire to the Earle of Pembrooke; the yogest Mary, being somwhat deformed, to Martyn Keyes the Kings Gentleman-Porter. And then also
Katherine the Duke of Northumberlands yongest daughter, to the Lord Ha∣stings, eldest sonne of the Earle of Huntington. And now had the Duke of Nor∣thumberland gone a great way in his design; it remained to perswade King Ed∣ward to exclude his two sisters from succession in the Crowne; for that doe, his daughter in law the Lady Ian, would come to have a right; for as for pre∣tenders out of Scotland, or any other, he made no great matter. And now to worke the King to this perswasion, (being in a languishing sicknesse, not farre from death) he inculcates to him, how much it concerned him to have a care of Religion, that it might be preserved in purity, not onely in his owne life, but as well after his death; which would not be, if his sister the Lady Mary should succeed, and she could not be put by unlesse her other sister the Lady Elizabeth were put by also, seeing their rights depended one upon another; but if he plea∣sed to appoint the Lady Iane, the Duke of Suffolkes eldest daughter, and his owne next kinswoman to his Sisters, to be his successour, he might then be sure that the true Religion should be maintained, to Gods great glory, and be a wor∣thy Act of his owne religious Providence. This was to strike upon the right string of the yong Kings affection, with whom nothing was so deere as preser∣vation of Religion; and thereupon his last Will was appointed to be drawne (contrived chiefly by the Lord chiefe Justice Montague, and Secretary Cecill:) by which Will, as farre as in him lay, he excluded his two sisters from the suc∣cession, and all other, but the Duke of Suffolkes daughters; and then causing it to be read before his Councell, he required them all to assent unto it, and to subscribe their hands; which they all, both Nobility, and Bishops and Judges did; onely the Archbishop Cranmer refused at first, Sir Iames Hales a Judge of the Common-Pleas to the last, and with him also Sir Iohn Baker Chancellour of the Exchequer. And now remained nothing for the Duke of Northumberlands purpose, but that the King should dye; which soone after he did at Greenwich the sixth of Iuly, in the yeere 1553. One point of the Dukes policie must not be forgotten, that fearing what troubles the Lady Mary might raise after the Kings decease, if she should be at liberty; he therefore, seeing the King drawing on, used all meanes possible to get her within his power; to which end Letters are directed to her in the Kings name from the Councell, willing her forthwith to repaire to the King, as well to be a comfort to him in his sicknesse, as to see all matters well ordered about his person: whereupon, the Lady suspecting nothing, addressed her selfe with all speed to the journey; till being upon the way, she was advertised of the Dukes designe; and then she returned to her House at Hoveden, and so escaped the snare; by whose escape, the whole designe of the Duke of Northumberland was disappointed; as soone after will be seene. Of his Taxations. IN no Kings reigne was ever more Parliaments for the time, nor fewer Sub∣sidies; the greatest was in his last yeere, when yet there was but one Subsi∣die, with two fifteenes and tenths granted by the Temporalty, and a Subside by the Clergie. And indeed to shew how loath this King was to lay Impositions upon his people, this may be a sufficient argument; that though he were much in debt, yet he chose rather to deale with the Foulker in the Low-Countries for money upon loane, at the interest of fourteene pounds for a hundred, for a yeere. But his wayes for raising of money, was by selling of Chantrie Lands and Houses, given him by Parliament; and by inquiring after all Church∣goods, either remaining in Cathedrall and Parish-Churches, or embezeled a∣way, as Jewels, gold and silver, Chalices, ready money, Copes, and other Vest∣ments; reserving to every Church one Challice, and one covering for the Com∣munion-Table, the rest to be applied to his benefit. He also raised money by enquiring after offences of Officers in great places; in which inquirie, one Bea∣mont
Master of the Rolles, being convinced of many crimes, surrendred all his Offices, Lands and Goods into the Kings hands: also one Whalley Receiver of Yorkeshire, being found a delinquent, surrendred his Office, and payed a great fine besides: also the Lord Paget, Chancellour of the Dutchie, convinced, that he had sold the Kings Lands and Timber-woods without Commission, and had applied the Kings Fines to his owne use; for these and other offences, sur∣rendred his Office, and was fined at foure thousand pounds, which he payed in hand. One thing more was done in his time for raising of money; twenty thousand pounds weight of Bullion, was appointed to be made so much ba∣ser, that the King might gaine thereby a hundred and forty thousand pounds. Of his Lawes and Ordinances. IN his third yeere a Parliament was holden; wherein one Act was made a∣gainst spreading of Prophesies; another against unlawfull Assemblies. In his fourth yeere a Parliament was holden, wherein Priests children were made legitimate; and usury for the loane of money was forbidden. In his fifth yeer, it was ordained that the Lawes of England should be administred in Ireland; and a king at Armes named Vlster, was newly instituted for Ireland; whose Province was all Ireland; and he was the first fourth king of Armes, and first Herauld appointed for Ireland. Also in his fifth yeere, base monies former∣ly coyned, were cried downe; so as the shilling went but for nine pence, and shortly after but for six pence, the goat but for three pence, and shortly after but for two pence. Affaires of the Church in his time. IN the first yeee of this Kings reigne, Injunctions were set forth, for pulling downe ad removing all Images out of Churches; also certaine Homilies were appointed to be made by learned men, to be read in Churches, for the peo∣ples instruction: and at Easter this yeer, it was ordered, that the Sacrament of the Lords Supper should be ministred to the Lay-people in both kindes; also Marriage was allowed to Clergie men; Auricular Confession and prayer for the dead were forbidden: and it is observable, that the very same day that I∣mages were pulled downe at London, the great overthrow was given to the Scots at Mukleborough. Also at this time, by the Archbishop Cranmers means, divers learned Protestants came over into England, and had here entetainment, as Peter Martyr, Martin Bucer, and Paulus Fagius; of whom Peter Martyr was sent to read a Divinity Lecture in Oxford, Bucer and Fagius in Cambridge. In this Kings foutth yeer, all Altars in Churches were commaded to be taken downe, and Tables placed in their roomes. In his fifth yeer the Book of Com∣mon Prayer was established. Casualties happening in his time. IN his second yeere, Saint Annes Church within Aldesgate was burnt. In his ifth yeere, a sweating sicknesse infested first Shrewesbury, and then the north parts, and after grew most extreame in London, so as the first weeke there dyed eight hundred persons, and was so violent that it tooke men away in foure and twenty houres, sometimes in twelve, and somtimes in lesse: amongst other of account that dyed of this sicknesse, were the two Sonnes of Charles Brandon Duke of Suffolke, who dyed within an houre after one another, in such order that both of them dyed Dukes. This disease was proper to the English Nati∣on, for it followed the English wheresoever they were in foraigne parts; but seized upon none of any other Countrey. In this yeere, one Master Arden of
Kent, by procurement of his wife was murthered in his owne house; being dead, his body was carried out and laid upon the ground, in a close hard by; where this is memorable, that for two yeers after, the ground where his body lay, bore no grasse, but represented still as it were a picture of his body, onely in the space between his legges and armes there grew grasse, but where any part of his body touched, none at all. Yet this miraculous accident was not so much for the murther, as for the curses of a widow-woman, out of whose hands the said Master Arden had uncharitably bought the said close, to her undoing. And thus the divine justice even in this world oftentimes works miracles upon offenders, for a mercifull warning to men, if they would be so wise to take it. In his sixth yeer, the third of August, at Middleton-stony, eleven miles from Oxford, a woman brought forth a childe which had two perfect bodies from the navill upward, the legges for both the bodies grew out at the midst where the bodies joyned, and had but one issue for the excrements of them both: they li∣ved eighteen dayes, and were women children. This yeere also were taken at Quinborow three Dolphins, and at Black-Wall six more, the least of which was bigger then any horse. Works of Piety by him or other in his time. THis King gave three houses to the reliefe of the poor; first for the father∣lesse and beggers children, he gave the late Gray-Fryers in London, which i now called Christs Hospitall: then for lame and diseased persons he gave the Hospitall of Saint Thomas in Southwarke, and Saint Barthalomews in West Smith∣field: Thirdly, for riotous and idle persons, he gave his house of Bridwell; and for their maintenance, he took six hundred pounds a yeer land from the house of the Savoy (which had been long abused) and bestowed it upon these houses; to which he added four thousand marks a yeer more. By his example Sir William Chester Alderman of London, and Iohn Calthroppe Draper, at their owne costs made the Brickwalls and way on the backside that leadeth to the Hospitall of Saint Barthalomews; and also covered and vawted the Towne Ditch, which be∣fore was very noysome. In the second yeer of this King, Sir Iohn Gresham then Major of London, founded a free Schoole at Host in Norfolke; also at his de∣cease, he gave to every Ward in London ten pounds, to be distributed amongst the poor, and to maids marriages two hundred pounds. In his third yeer, Sir Rowland Hill the hen Lord Major of London, caused to be made a Cawsway commonly called Overlane pavement, in the high way from Stone to Nant∣wich, in length four miles, for the ease of horse and man. He caused also a Cawsway to be made from Dunchurch to Bransen in Warwickshiere, more then two miles in length; and gave twenty pounds towards the making of Roitton Bridge three miles from Coventry. He made likewise the high way to Kilborne neere to London. Also four Bridges, two of them of stone, containing eigh∣teen arches in them both; the one over the River of Severne called Acham Bridge, the other Terne Bridge; and two other of Timber at Stoke, where he built also a good part of the Church. A free Schoole likewise he builded at rayton in Shropshiere, with Master and Usher, and gave sufficient stipends to them both. Also he purchased a free fair to the said Towne, with a free Mar∣ket weekly; and every fourteen dayes a free Market for cartell. Besides all thi, he gave to the Hospitall of Christ-Church in London in his life time, five hundred pounds, and at his death, a hundred. In this Kings fourth yeer, Sir An∣drew Iud Major of London, founded a notable free Schoole at Tunbridge in Kent; he builded also an Almshouse for six poor people, nigh to the Parish Church of Saint Helens in Bishopsgate-streete; and gave threescore pounds land a yeer to the Skinners of London, for which be bound to pay twenty pounds to the Schoolemaster, and eight pounds to the Usher of his free Schoole at Tun∣bridge yeerly for ever; and four shillings weekely to the six poor Almspeople,
and something more yeerly. In his sixth yeer, Sir George Barnes Major of Lon∣don, gave a Windmill in Finsbury-field to the Haberdashers of London, the pro∣fits thereof to be destributed to the poor of that Company; also to Saint Bar∣tholamews the little, certaine Tenements to the like use. Of his personage and conditions. COncerning his personage, it is said, he was in body beautifull, of a sweete aspect, and specially in his eyes, which seemed to have a starry livelinesse and lustre in them. Concerning his conditions, in matter of fact, there is not much to be said; but in matter of disposition and inclination very much, even to admiration. For though his tree was not yet come to the maturity of bea∣ring fruit, yet it was come to the forwardnesse to bear plenty of buds and blos∣somes. For proofe of his mercifull disposition this one example may be suf∣ficient; when one Ioan Butcher was to be burned for blasphemy and heresie, all the Counsell could not get him to signe the Warrant, till the Archbishop Cranmer with much importunity perswaded him, and then he did it, but not without weeping. For his pregnancy of wit, and knowledge in all kindes of learning; we shall need but to hear what Cardan (who coming into England, had often conference with him) reporteth of him: that he was extraordinarily skilfull in Languages, and in the Politicks; well seen in Philosophy and in Di∣vinity, and generally indeed a very miracle of Art and Nature. He would an∣swer Embassadours somerimes upon the suddaine, either in French or Latine; he knew the state of forraigne Princes perfectly, and his own more. He could call all Gentlemen of account through his Kingdome by their names; and all this when he had scarce yet attained to the age of fifteene yeers; and died before sixteene; that from hence we may gather, it is a signe of no long life, when the faculties of the minde are ripe so early. Of his death and buriall. IN the sixth yeer of his reigne, which was the yeer before he died, he fel sick of the Measels, and being well recovered of them, he fell after soon into the smal Pox, & of them also was so well recovered, that the summer following he rode a progresse, with a greater magnificence then ever he had done before; having in his traine no fewer then four thousand horse. In Ianuary following, (whe∣ther procured by sinister practise, or growing upon him by naturall infirmity) he fell into an indisposition of body, which soon after grew to a cough of the Lungs. Whereupon a rumour was spread abroad by some, that a Nosegay had been given him at Newyeerstide, which brought him into this slow but deadly consumption; by others that it was done by a Glister: how ever it was, he was brought at last to so great extremity, that his Physicians despared of his life; and when Physicians could do him no good, a Gentlewoman (thought to be prepared for the purpose) tooke him in hand, and did him hurt; for with her applications his legges swelled, his pulse failed, his skinne changed colour, and many other symptomes of approaching death appeared. The hour before his death, he was overheard to pray thus by himselfe, O Lord God, deliver me out of this miserable and wretched life; O Lord, thou knowest how happy it were for me to be with thee; yet for thy chosens sake, if it be thy will send me life and health that I ma truly serve thee: O Lord God, save thy chosen people of England, and defend this Realme from Papistrie, and maintaine thy true Religion, that I and my People may praise thy holy Name, for thy Sonne Je∣sus Christs sake. So urning his face and seeing some by him, he said; I thought you had nor been so nigh: Yes, said Doctor Owens we heard you speak to your selfe; then said the King, I was praying to God: O, I am faint; Lord have mer∣cy upon me, and receive my spirit; and in so saying gave up the Ghost, the sixth
day of Iuly, in the yeer 1553. and in the sixteenth yeer of his Age when he had reigned six yeers, five moneths, and nine dayes. It is noted by some, that he died the same moneth, and the same day of the moneth that his father King Hen∣ry the eight had put Sir Thomas Moore to death. His body was buried upon the ninth of August in the Chappell of Saint Peters Church in Westminster; and laid neere to the body of King Henry the seventh his grandfather. At his fune∣rall which was on the tenth of August following, his sister Queen Mary shewed this respect to him, that though Doctor Day a Popish Bishop preached, yet all the service with a communion was in English. Men of note in his time. THis Kings reigne being short, and having but small warres, had not many sword-men famous for any acts they did; Gowne men there were some, as Edward Holl a Councellour in the Law, who wrote a notable Cronicle of the union of the two houses of Yorke and Lancaster; William Hugh a Yorkeshire∣man, who wrote a notable Treatice called The troubled mans medicine; Thomas Sternehold, borne in Southampton, who turned into English Meete seven and thirty of Davids Psalmes. The Interregnum betweene the death of King Edward and the proclaiming at London of Queene Mary. KIng Edward being dead, the Duke of Northumberland tooke upon him to sit at the Sterne, and ordered all things at his pleasure: so two dayes after he with others of the Councell, sent to the Lord Major that he with six Alder∣men and twelve principall Commons, should repaire presently to the Court; to whom when they came, it was secretly signified that King Edward was dead; and that by his last Will, to which all the Nobility and Judges had given as∣sent, he had appointed the Lady Iane, daughter to the Duke of Suffolke, to suc∣ceede him; his Letters Patents whereof were shewed them, and therupon they were required, to take their Oathes of Allegeance to the Lady Iane, and to secure the City in her behalfe; which whether dissemblingly, or sincerely; whe∣ther for love or fear, yet they did, and then departed. The next day the Lady Iane in great state, was brought to the Tower of London, and there declared Queene; and by edect with the sound of Trumpet proclaimed so through Lon∣don; at which time, for some words seeming to be spoken against it, one Gil∣bert Pot a Vinters servant, was set in the Pilory, and lost both his ears. Before this time, the Lady Mary having heard of her brothers death, and of the Duke of Northumberlands designes; removed from Hovesdon to her Mannour of Ke∣ninghall in Norfolke, and under pretence of fearing infection, (having lately lost one of her houshold servants of the plague) in one day she rode forty miles, and from thence afterward to her Castle of Framingham in Suffolke; where taking upon her the name of Queene, there resorted to her the most part of all the Gentlemen both of Norfolke & Suffolke, offering their assistance; but upon con∣dition she would make no alteration in Religion, to which she condiscended; and thereupon soone after came to her, the Earles of Oxford, Bathe and Sussex, the Lord Wentworth, Thomas Wharton, and Iohn Mordant Barrons eldest sonnes; and of Knights Cornwallis, Drury, Walgrave, Shelton, Beningfield, Ierningham, Suliard, Freston and many others. The Lady Mary being thus assisted, wrote her letters signed the ninth of Iuly to the Lords of the Councell, wherein shee claimed the Crowne, as of right belonging to her; and required them to pro∣claime her Queene of England in the City of London, as they tendred her dis∣pleasure. To this letter of hers, the Lords answered, that for what they did, they had good Warrant; not onely by King Edwards last Will, but by the Lawes of the land, considering her Mothers divorce, and her owne Illegitima∣tion;
and therefore required her to submit her selfe to Queene Iane, being now her Soveraigne. This Letter was written from the Tower of London, under the hands of these that follow, Thomas Archbishop of Canterbury, Tho∣ms Elye Chancellour, William Marquesse of Winchester, Iohn Earle of Bed∣ford, Henry Duke of Suffolke, Francis Earle of Shrewsbury, Iohn Duke of Nor∣thmberland, William Earle of Pembrooke, Thomas Lord Darcey Lord Cham∣berlin, Cobham, Rich, Huntington, Cheyney, Iohn Gates, William Peter, William Ceill, Iohn Clerke, Iohn Mason, Edward North and Robert Bowes. The qua∣rell on both sides being thus begun by Letters, is prosecuted by Armes; and the Lords for their Generall make choyce of the Duke of Suffolke, as a man most likely to be firme and sure in the imployment; but the Queen his daugh∣ter cannot misse his presence; and besides, is not willing to hazard his per∣son; and thereupon, she by intreaties and the Lords by perswasions prevaile with the Duke of Northumbrland to undertake the charge; who before his going having conference with the Lords, let them know how sensible he was of the double danger he under-went in this enterprize; both in respect of the La∣dy against whom he went, and in respect of them whom he left behinde him; for if they in his absence should by any accident be drawne to waver in their resolution, they might worke their owne safety with his destruction, and make themselves seeme innocent in his guiltinesse. To which one of the Lords re∣plied and said; Your Grace makes a doubt of that which cannot be, for which of us all can wash his hands cleane of this businesse? and therefore it behooves us to be as resolute as your selfe; and the Earle of Arundell, to testifie his re∣solution in the matter, said, he was sorry it was not his chance to goe with him, at whose feet he could finde in his heart to spend his blood. So the Duke with the Marquesse of Northampton, the Lord Gray, and divers other of account, on the fourteenth of Iuly set forward on the journey with eight thousand foot and two thousand horse; and passing through Shoreditch, the Duke said to the Lord Gray, see how the people presse to see us, but not one of them saith, God speed you. The Duke had every dayes march how farre he should goe, appointed him by Commission; which being very slow, whether it were done of pur∣pose, by some that favoured the Lady Maries side, was certainly a great helpe to her proceedings; for by this meanes she had the longer time to make her preparations; and indeed in this time two accidents happened, of great bene∣fit to her; one, that Edward Hastings the Earle of Huntingtons brother, hav∣ing an Army of foure thousand foot committed to him by the Earle of Nor∣thumberland, he now left his Party, and went to the Lady Mary: the other, that six great Ships which lay before Yarmouth to intercept the Lady Mary, if she shouly attempt to flye, now at the perswasion of Master Ierningham, came in to her aide: which two revolts so terrified the Londoners, that though Doctor Ridley Bishop of London, on the sixteenth of Iuly, at Pauls Crosse Preached a Sermon, wherein he invited the people to stand firme to Queene Iane, whose cause he affirmed to be most just, ye few or none were perswaded by him; so as the Lords themselves fell off from the side, who assembling at Beynards-Castle, first the Earle of Arundell, then the Earle of Pembrooke fell to inve∣ctives against the Earle of Northumberland; and then all the Lords joyning in opinion with them, they called for the Major, and in London Proclaimed the Lady Mary Queene; as likewise the Lord Windsor, Sir Edmund Peckham, Sir Robert Drurie and Sir Edward Hastings did in Buckinghamshire; Sir Iohn Williams of Tame, and Sir Leonard Chamberlaine in Oxfordshire, and Sir Tho∣mas Tresham in the County of Northampton. All this came soone to the know∣ledge of the Duke of Northumberland, being then at Burie; who thereby see∣ing how the world went, thought it his best course to turne with the streame, and thereupon returning to Cambridge, he tooke the Major of the Towne with him into the Market-place, and there himselfe for want of a Herauld, Pro∣claimed the Lady Mary Queene, and in signe of joy threw up his Cap; which
yet served not his turne, for the next morning Henry Fitz-Allen Earle of Arun∣dell, came into Cambridge from Queene Mary, who entring his Chamber, the Duke at his feet fell on his knees; desiring him for Gods love to consider his case, that had done nothing but by the Warrant of him and the Councell: My Lord (said the Earle) I am sent hither by the Queen to arrest you; and I (said the Duke) obey your arrest; yet I beseech your Lordship, to use mercy to∣wards him whose Acts have been no other then were injoyned by Commission: you should have thought of that sooner (said the Earle) and thereupon com∣mitted him to a Guard, and left him to the Queenes mercy. Thus ended all this great Dukes designes, in his owne destruction, and brought him to fall on his knees to them, who had often before bowed their knees to him; and the Earle, who at the Dukes going ou, could have beene contented to spend his blood at his feet, was now contented to be made an instrument of his fall: so sudden are the turnes of mens affections, and so unstable is the building upon their asseverations; at lest no man must looke to have his case be of any weight against him, who hath his owne case put in the Ballance. Together with the Duke his three Sonnes Iohn, Ambrose and Henry, the Earle of Huntington, Sir Andrew Dudley, the two Gates, Iohn and Henry, Sir Thomas Palmer and Do∣ctor Sands were conveyed towards London, and brought to the Tower; and the next day the Marquesse of Northampton, the Lord Robert Dudley and Sir Robert Corbet. Before which time, the Duke of Suffolke entring his daughters the Lady Ianes Chamber, told her, she must now put off her Royall Robes, and be contented with a private life: to which she answered, She would much more willingly put them off, then she had put them on; and would never have done it, but in obedience to him and her Mother. And this was the end of the Lady Ianes ten dayes Reigne.
THE REIGNE OF QUEEN MARY. THE Lady Mary having bin Proclaimed Queen in Lon∣don and other parts of the Realme; removed from her castle of Framingham towards London; and being come to Wanstead in Essex, on the thirtieth of Iuly, the Lady Elizabeth her sister, with a traine of a thousand horse, rode from her place in the Strand to meet her: on the third of August the Queene rode through Lon∣don to the Tower, where at her entrance were presented to her Thomas Duke of Norfolke, Edward Lord Court∣ney, Stephen Gardiner late Bishop of Winchester, and the Duchesse of Somer∣set; who all kneeling downe she kissed them, and said, These be my Prisoners, and then caused them presently to be set at liberty: the next day she restored the Lord Courtney to his Marchisate of Exceter; and the same day also she not onely restored Stephen Gardiner to his Bishopricke of Winchester, but a few daes after made him Chancellour of England; yet this was the man that had subscribed to her Mothers Divorce and had written Bookes against the law∣fulnesse of her mariage. The fift of August Edmund Bonner late Bishop of Lon∣don prisoner in the Marshalsey, and Cutbert Tunstall the old Bishop of Durham prisoner in the Kings Bench, had their Pardons and were restored to their Sees. Sortly aftr, all the Bishops which had been deprived in the time of King Ed∣ward the sixth, were restored to their Bishopricks and the new removed, as Rid∣ley was removed from London and Bonner placed, Skory from Chichester and Day placed, Miles Coverdale from Exceter and West placed, Iohn Hooper from Wor∣cester and Heath placed. Also all Beneficed men that were married, or would not renounce their Religion, were put out of their Livings, and other of a con∣trary opinion put in their rooms. On the thirteenth of August one Master Bourne a Canon of Pauls, preach∣ing at Pauls Crosse, not onely prayed for the dead, but also declared that Doctor Bonner Bishop of London, (late restored, and there in presence) for a Sermon by him made foure yeeres before, in the same place, and upon the same Text, had unjustly beene cast into the vile prison of the Marshalsey; which Speech so offended some of the Auditory, that they cried, Pull him downe, pull him downe; and had certainly done him violence (for a Dagger was throwne at him) if Master Bradford a Protestant Preacher, had not stept into his place and appeased the tumult, and Master Rogers another Protestant Minister (who were both afterward burnt for Religion) had not shifted away Bourne into Pauls Schoole.
Hitherto Queene Maries reigne had beene without blood, but now the Ca∣taracts of seventy will be opened, that will make it raine blood: for now on the eighteenth of August, Iohn Dudley Duke of Northumberland, VVilliam Parre Marquesse of Northamptn, and Iohn Earle of VVarwicke, sone and heire to the Duk, were arraigned at VVestminster-hall, before Thomas Duke of N∣folke as high Steward of England; where the Duke of Northumberland, after his Indictment read, required the opinion of the Court in two points; first, whither a man doing any Act by authority of the Princes Counsle, and by warrant of the great Seale of England, might for any such Act be charged with treason: secondly, whither any such persons as were equally culpable, and by whose commandements he was directed, might be his Judges and passe upon his triall: whereunto was answered, that concerning the first; the great Seale which he alleaged for his warrant, was not the Seale of the lawfull Queene of the Realm, but of an Usurper, and therfore could be no warrant for him: and as to the second, it was resolved, that if any were as deeply to be touched in the case as himself, yet so long as no Attainder were of record against them, they were persons able in law to passe pon his triall, and not to be challenged but at the Princes pleasure. After which answers, the Duke used few words, but con∣fessed the Indictment, and accordingly had judgment to dye. By whose example the other prisoners arraigned with him, confessed the Indictments, and therupon had judgment: the ninteenth of August, Sir Andrew Dudley, Sir Iohn, and Sir Henry Gates brethren, and Sir Thomas Palmer Knights, were arraigned at VVest∣minster, who cnfessing their Indictments, had judgment, which was pronoun∣ced by the Marquesse of VVinchester, Lord high Treasuer, sitting that day as chiefe Justice: after these condemnations, followed the executions; for on the two and twentieth of August Iohn Duke of Northumerland was brought to the Tower-hill, and there beheaded; being upon the scaffold in a gowne of green coloured damaske, he put it off and then made a long Speech, wherein he asked the Queen forgivenesse, whom he acknowledged to have grievously offended; and then making profession of his Faith, that he died a true Catholick (meaning a Papist) he said the Psalmes of Miserere and De Profundis, the Pater noster, and six of the first verses of the Psalme In te Domine speravi, ending with this verse, Into thy hands, O Lord, I commend my spirit; and this said, he looked about him, as looking for a Pardon, but none comming, he laid his head downe upon the blocke, and at one blow had it strucken off; his body with the head was bu∣ried in the Tower, by the body of Edward late Duke of Somerset (mortall ene∣mies while they lived, but now lying together as good friends) so as there lyeth before the high Altar in Saint Peters Church, wo Dukes between two Queens, namely the Duke of Somerset and the Duke of Northumberland between Queen Anne and Queene Katherine, all foure beheaded. Of what religion this Duke was may well be doubted, seeing at his death he professed himself a Papist, when lately before he had importuned King Edward to make the Lady Iane his suc∣cessour, lest the Papall religion should be restored; it seems he was not greatly of either but for other ends; a Protestant then when it was to make his daugh∣ter in law Queen; now a Papist, when it was to save his life (for it was thought he had Pardon promised, if he would recant. At the same time and place were beheaded Sir Iohn Gates and Sir Thomas Palmer, who were no such temporizers but persisted and dyed in the Protestant Religion, which they had alwayes pro∣fessed. After this, a sprinkling of mercy came from the Queene; for on the third of September the Lord Ferrers of Chartley, the two chiefe Justices, Sir Roger Cholm∣ley and Mountague, Sir Iohn Cheeke and others were delivered out of the Tower whether before they had been committed; but a shower of severity followed soon after, for on the fifteenth of September Master Latimer and Doctor Cran∣mer Archbishop of Canterbury were sent to the Tower, and on the third o No∣vember following, the said Archbishop Cranmer, the Lady Iane (late Queene)
and the Lord Guildford her husband, with the Lords Ambrose and Henry, sonnes to the late Duke of Northumberland, were all arraigned at the Guild-hall, found guilty and had judgement to dye. All this while Queen Mary had contented her selfe to be Queene by Procla∣mation; but now that things were something setled, she proceeds to her Coro∣nation: for on the last of September she rode in her Chariot through London towards VVestminster in this order; first rode a number of Gentlemen and Knights, then Doctors, then Judges, then Bishops, then Lords, then the Coun∣cell, after whom followed the Knights of the Bath, thirteene in number in their Robes, then the Bishop of VVinchester Lord Chancellour, and the Marquesse of VVinchester Lord high Treasurer, next came the Duke of Norfolke, and after him the Earle of Oxford who bore the sword, then the Major of Londn in a Gowne of Crimson Velvet, who bore the Scepter of Gold; after came the Queenes Chariot, and then followed another Chariot wherein sat the Lady Elizabeth her sister and the Lady Anne of Cleeve, and then came Ladies and Gentlewomen riding on horses, trapped with red velvet: &c. In this order they came through London to VVestminster; where in many places by the way, were Pagents and stately shewes, and many rich presents given to the Queene. The next day she went by water to the old Palace, and remained there till ele∣ven of the clock, and then went on foot upon blew cloth, being railed on either side to Saint Peters Church, where she was Crowned and Anointed by the Bishop of VVinchester, (the two Archbishops being then in the Tower) with all Rites and Ceremonies of old accustomed. After her Coronation, a generall pardon was published in her name, but in∣terlaced with so many exceptions of matters and persons, that very few tooke benefit by it; for after the pardon published, there were Commissioners as∣signed, to compound with such persons as were excepted: from some of whom they tooke away their Fees and Offices, some they fied, and some they depri∣ved of their estates and livings. About this time Sir Iames Hales one of the Justices of the Common Pleas, who in the time of King Edward had refused to signe a writing for disinheri∣ting the Lady Mary, and the Lady Elizabeth; (a fact worthy at least of a kinde remembrance from the Lady Mary now Queene) yet now, for that at a quarter Sessions in Kent, he gave charge upon the statutes of King Henry the eight, and King Edward the sixth, in derogation of the Primacy of the Church of Rome; he was first committed to the Kings Bench, then to the Counter, and lastly to the Fleet; where he grew so troubled in minde, that he attempted with a Pen-knife to kill himselfe; and being afterward recovered of that hurt, and brought to the Queenes presence, who gave him very comfortable words, yet could never come to be quiet in his minde; but in the end, drowned himselfe in a River not halfe a mile from his house, the River being so shallow, that he was faine to lye groveling before he could dispatch himelfe of life. And now another sprinkling of mercy came from the Queene; for the Mar∣quesse of Northampton, and Sir Henry Gates, lately before condemned to dye, were now pardoned and set at liberty. The Lady Iane also was allowed the liberty of the Tower, not without hope of life and liberty altogether; if her father the Duke of Suffolke had not the second time been cause of her de∣struction. About this time also a Synod was assembled, for consulting about matters of Religion; and the point specially of the reall presence in the Sacrament. The Prolocutour was Doctor VVeston; and of the Protestant side, were Iohn Almer and Richard Cheyney, both Bishops afterward in Queene Elizabeths time, also Iohn Philpo, afterward burnt, Iames Haddon and others. After long disputation, where reasons were not so much weighed as voyces numbred; the Papall side, as having most voyces, carried it; and thereupon was that Re∣ligion againe restored, and the Masse commanded in all Churches to be cele∣brated, after the ancient manner.
It was now the yeer 1553. when Queene Mary was come to the age of seven and thirty yeers, and therefore high time now to thinke of marriage, at least if she meant to have issue of her body; but a hard mater it was to finde a husband in all points itting for her, yet three at this time (in common fame at least) were taken into consideration: one was the Lord Courtney Mrquesse of Exceter, a goodly Gentleman and of Royall blood, but there was exception against him because inclining (as was thought) to Lutheranisme; another was Cardinal oole, of a dignity not much inferiour to Kings, and by his Mother descended from Kings; but there was exception against him also, because foure and fifty yeers old, (as old a Batchelour as Queen Mary was a maid) and so the lesse hope of issue betweene them: but the third (if he might be had) was with∣out exception, and this was Phillip Prince of Spaine, the Emperour Charles his eldest sonne, with whom being a Spaniard, she was the fitter matched, as being by the Mother a Spaniard her selfe. And now very oppertunely came in the be∣ginning of Ian. Embassadors into England about it; amongst others, the Cou of Egmond Admirall of the Lw Countryes; and Iohn of Memorancy Lord of Curryers; whose message was so kindely entertained, that the marriage in short time was absolutely concluded, though it seemed something strange to many, that she should now be wife to the sonne, who thirty yeers before should have been wife to the father. But so it is, Queenes are never old, so long as they are within yeers of bearing children. And indeede the match was concluded, with conditions of farre more advantage to Queee Mary, then they were to King Phillip, as on the fourteenth of Ianuary Stephen Gardiner Bishop of Win∣chester and Lord Chancelour of England, openly in the Presence Chamber at Westminster, declared to all the Lords and Gentlemen there present: for it was agreed, that after the mariage, King Phillip should have the Title of all the Queenes Dominions, and be assumed into fellowship of the government; but yet with reservation to the Queene, of all Priviledges and Customes of the Kingdome, and free disposition of all Offices and Honours, as likewise the Queene should be assumed into the fellowship of all the Kings Dominions, and surviving him, should have a Joynture of two hundred thousand Pounds a yeer. Then for the issue betweene them, if she had a Sonne, that he should in∣herit the Low Countryes and Burgundy; and King Phillips sonne Charles, which he had by a former wife, should inherit all his Dominions in Italie and Spaine; but if his sonne Charles should fail without issue, then the sonne he should have by Queene Mary, should inherit his Kingdomes of Italie and Spaine also. And the like good provision was also made for daughters. But notwithstanding these great dvantage of the mach, yet such was the precipitant rashnesse of some; that thinking themselves wiser then the Queene and the Councel, they sought by all meanes to oppose the match; giving out that it ended to bring England under the yoke of Spaine, and to make the Countrey a slave to strangers. This was the generall murmuring of people; but the first that shewed himselfe in Armes, was Sir Thomas Wyat of Kent; who having communicated the matter with the Duke of Suffolke the Lady Ianes father, with Peter Caroe a Knight of Devonshire, and divers others; intended onely to make secret provision, but not to stirre till Prince Phillip should be come, that so their cause of taking armes might have the better colour. On the fifteenth of Ianuary, Robert Dud∣ley sonne to the Duke of Northumberland, was arraigned at the Guildhall of high Treason, who confessed the indictment, and had judgement given by the Earle of Sussex, to be drawen, hanged, bowelled and quartered. But now in counsels communicated to many, it is a hard matter to have counsell kept, and Sir Peter Caroe finding that their plot was discovered, fled privily into France, where lurking for a time, he was afterward taken at Brux∣ells, and brought captive into England; as likewise at the same time and place Sir Iohn Cheeke King Edwards Schoolmaster was taken, who being drawne by terrours to embrace the Papall Religion, with very griefe after∣ward
of his errour pined away and dyed; Sir Peter Caroe lived many yeers af∣er, and dyed in Ireland; though it be falsely recorded, they were both burnt for Religion, in Iune of this yeer. Wyatt hearing of Sir Peter Caroes flight, and that all their purpose was discovered; was driven before his time to enter into armes, giving out for the cause that it was not to attempt any thing a∣gainst the Queene, but onely to remove ill Councellours, and chiefly to repell Prince Phillip; least by this mariage the Kingdome should come in subjection to the Spaniard. With Wyatt were joyned Sir Henry Isley, Sir George Harper, Anthony and William Knevet, and divers other Gentlemen of the County; a∣gainst him were the Lord Abuegaveny, Sir Thomas Cheyney Lord Warden of the Ports, Sir Sobert Southwell Sheriffe of Kent, Sir Warram Sentleger, Sir Tho∣mas Kempe Sir Thomas Moyle, Sir Thomas Finch with divers other; yet all these great men had such doubt of the people, that they durst not proceed but very warily. The five and twentieth of Ianuary, newes came to London of Wyats ri∣sing; against whom was presently sent the Duke of Norfolke, with Sir Henry erningham Captaine of the Guard, Sir Edward Bray, Sir Iohn Fogge, Iohn Co∣vert Roger Appleton Esquires, and five hundred souldiers out of London; ap∣pointed to go after him, under the leading of Captaine Brett. And now see in times of Sedition, how uncertaine a thing it is to trust to the people; for before Brett could overtake the Duke, Sir George Harper was secretly got to him, who so perswaded him that he and his five hundred souldiers left the Duke and went all to VVyatt; which made the Duke and those with him presently to flye, and put such boldnesse into VVyatt, that now he marched in great confidence towards London, with so great terrour to all sorts of people, that at VVestminster-Hall, the Serjeants and other Lawyers, pleaded in harnesse. In the meane time, the Duke of Suffolke was perceived in VVarwickshire, to be raising of Forces in assistance of VVyatt; against whom was presently sent the Earle of Huntington, and the Duke finding himselfe unable to make resistance, having with all his industry gotten together but onely fifty men; he betooke himselfe to a Tenant of his One, Vnderwood, with whom he hoped and had promise to remaine undiscovered, till he might have oppertunity to escape, as some say, as others to a Keeper of his Parke called Nicholas Law∣rence, who kept him in a hollow Oake in the said Park for two or three dayes: but whether Vnderwood or Lawrence, either out of fear, or out of hope of re∣ward, he betrayed him to the Earle, by whom he was taken, and under a strong guard carried to the Tower. Upon this, Queen Mary her selfe came into London, where calling the Major and chiefe of the City together, she made an Oration, wherein she shewed the insolency of VVyatt; who though he pretended the but onely the crossing of the marriage; yet was now grown to such presumption, that he required to have the custody of her person; and to have Councellours retained or removed at his pleasure. Ad as for her mariage, she there affirmed she had done nothing in it, but by advice of her Councell; and for her selfe, tha she was not so longing for a husband, but that if it were not more for the good of the Kingdome, then for her ownsatisfaction, she would never once think of entertaining it. Having by her speech confirmed the minds of the Citizens; Forces are presently raised, and placed about the Bridge, and other fit places of the City. The third of February, Wyatt with an Army of three or four thousand, came to London, hoping of present entrance, but finding the Bridge broken, and souldiers placed to resist him, after two dayes stay in Southwarke, he removed to Kingstone, where he found likewise the Bridge broken, yet with great industry suddenly repairing it, he passed over his men, and meant with all speed, to get to the Court, before the Queene should have notice of him coming; and had done so indeede, if a mischance, and an errour upon that mis∣chance had not hindred him. For being come within six miles of London, the carriage of one of his great Ordnance brake, in mending whereof so much
time was spent (and VVyatt by no perswasions would go forward without it) that the time was past, in which his friends at London expected his coming; which disappointment made many in those parts to fall off, and being percei∣ved by those about him, many of them also; so as one halfe of his Army was suddenly gone and left him; amongst other, Sir George Harper, the most inti∣mate of all his councell, went to the Queene and discovered all his purposes: whereupon the Earle of Pembrooke with a company levied upon the sudden was sent against him; which made VVyat slacke his pace, so as it was noone be∣fore he came to the suburbs of the City; and then placing his Ordnance upon a hill, and leaving there the greatest part of his Army, he onely with five En∣signes marched towards Ludgate, and being encountred at Charing-crosse by the Lord Chamberlin and Sir Iohn Gage, after a small fight put them to flight in such sort, that word was carried to the Queene, how neer VVyat approach∣ed, and how wonderfully he prevailed all the way he came: with which nothing dismayed; well then (said she) I will go in person against him my selfe; and was prepring to doe so indeed (so much was her Fathers valour running in her veines:) but it needed not; for by this time Sir Henry Ieningham Captaine of the Guard, Sir Edward Bray Master of the Ordnance, and Sir Phillip Paris, had given him battaile and slaine many of his men; and that which was more, comming o Ludgate, he was denied entrance; and then thinking to retyre, e heard the Earle of Pembrooke with his Forces was behinde at Chaing-crosse; so as neither able to goe forward nor yet backward, he was at a stand and in amaze∣ment, and then leaing a while upon a stall by the Bell-savage, after a little musing, he returned towards Temple-gate; where Clarentius the Herauld mee∣ting him, fell to perswade him, not to be a cause of more effusion of blood, nor by persisting in obstinacy to exclude all hope of the Queenes mercy. The Souldiers of VVyat were earnest with him to have stood it out; but Wyat as sillily ending, as he had unadvisedly begun; yeelded himselfe to Sir Maurice Berkeley, and getting up upon his horse behinde him, in that manner rode to the Court; where he had not the entertainment he expected, for without more adoe he was presently sent away to the Tower. The Captaine taken, the rest made no resistnce, few fled, and of the other many were taken and laid in pri∣son: and this was done the sixth of February. And now consultation was held what Delinquents should be punished; where the first that was thought on was the Lady Iane, in whom was verified, The Fathers have eaten sower grapes, and the childrens teeth are set on edge the innocent Lady must suffer for her Fathers fault; for if her Father the Duke of Suffolke, had not this second time made shipwracke of his loyalty, his Daughter perhaps had never tasted the salt-waters of the Queens displeasure: but now as a rocke of offence, she is the first that must be removed; and thereupon is Doctor Fecknam sent to acquaint her, that she must prepare her selfe to dye the next day: which Mes∣sage was so little unpleasing to her, that she seemed rather to rejoyce at it, as wherby she should at last be set at liberty; and the Doctor being earnest with her to leave her new Religion, and to embrace the old; she answered, She had now no time to thinke of any thing, but of perparing her selfe to God by Pray∣er: Fecknam thinking she had spoken this, to the end she might have some longer time of life, obtained of the Queene three dayes longer, and then came and old so much to the Lady Iane; whereat she smiling said, You are much deceived if you thinke I had any desire of longer life; for I assure you, since the time you went from me, my life hath beene so tedious to me, that I long for nothing so much as death, and since it is the Queenes pleasure, am mo willing to undergoe it. Before she was brought to Execution, her huband the Lord Guildford, had made suit, and obtained to see her and have some confe∣rence with her; but she refused it, saying, These were rather augmenters of griefe, then comfort of death she made no doubt, but they should shortly meet in a better place, and in a better condition of society: so on the twelfth
of February, her husband the Lord Guildford first, and then she an houre or two after, was beheaded within the Tower; where she acknowledged her selfe to have deserved death, not for seeking the Crown, but for not refusing it, being offered; and after prayers to God, unclothing her selfe, and putting a Hand∣carchiffe before her eyes, she laid her head downe upon the blocke, and pati∣ently suffered death, more grievous to the beholders, then to her selfe. This end had the Lady Iane Gray, a Lady of incomparable Pietie; and (for her yeers) of incomparable learning; for being not past seventeen yeeres of age, she un∣derstood perfectly the Greek and Latine tongues, and was so ready in all points of Divinity, as if she knew them by inspiration rather then by instruction; no lesse a miracle in this kinde then King Edward; and therefore no mervaile if he appointed her to succeed him in the Kingdome, who in the endowments of minde was so like unto him, that whilest she reigned, it might be thought he continued to reigne himselfe, at lest no more differing but onely the sex. It may not be forgotten, that Judge Morgan, who at her arraignement gave the sentence against her, shortly after fell mad, and in his raving, cri∣ed continually to have the Lady Iane taken away from him, and so ended his life. Two dayes after the execution of the Lady Iane, namely the fourteenth and fifteenth of February, twenty paire of Gallowes were set up in divers places of the City, whereon were handed fifty of Wyats faction; on the eighteenth of Fe∣bruary Bret was hanged at Rochester in chaines, Sir Henry Isle, who had beene taken in an old freeze coat and an old paire of hose, with his brother Thomas Isle and Walter Mantell were hanged at Maidstone, Anthony Knevet and his brother William, with another of the Mantels were executed at Sevenocke; but then on the twentieth of February a sprinkling of mercy came, for foure hun∣dred of Wyats followers, being brought before the Queene with halters about their necks, were all pardoned and set at liberty. But then severity soone after began againe, for on the three and twentieth of February the Lord Henry Gray Duke of Suffolke, and Father to the Lady Iane, who the weeke before had been attaigned and condemned, was on the Tower-hill beheaded, and on the eleventh of Aprill, in the same place was beheaded (the Author of all this mischiefe) Wyot himselfe, whose quarters were set up in divers places of the City, his head upon the Gallowes at Hay-hill, besides Hide Parke. This man, in hope of life, having before accused the Lord Courtney and the Lady Elizabeth the Queenes sister to be privie to his conspiracy, yet at his death he cleered them, and pro∣tested openly, that they were altogether innocent, and never had been acquain∣ted with his proceedings. Yet was this matter so urged against them by Ste∣phen Gardiner, Bishop of Winchester and Lord Chancellour, that both of them in March before had beene committed to the Tower, though in May follow∣ing they were both againe released, but yet confined, the Lady Elizabeth to Woodstocke, under the custody of Sir Henry Beningfield of Oxenborough in the County of Norfolke; the Lord Courtney to Foderingham, under the custody of Sir Thomas Tresam, who after some time was set at liberty, and going into Italie there dyed. It is memorable, what malice this Bishop Gardiner bore to the Lady Elizabeth, by whose onely procurement, not onely she was kept i most hard durance, but a Warrant was at last framed under certaine Coun∣cellours hands, to put her to death, and had beene done, but that Master ridges Levenant of the Tower, pitying her case, went to the Queene to know her pleasure, who utterly denied that she knew any thing of it; by which meanes here life was preserved. Indeed the Bishop would sometimes say, how they cut off boughes and branches, but as long as they let the root remaine, all was nothing: and it is not unworthy the remembring what raines were laid to ensare her. The common net at that time for catching of Protestants, was the Reall Presnce, and this net was used to catch her; for being asked one time, what she thought of the words of Christ, This is my Body; whether she thought
it the true body of Christ, that was in the Sacrament. It is said, that after some pawsing, she thus answered: Christ was the Word that spake it: He tooke the Bread, and brake it: And what the Word did make it, That I beleeve, and take it. Which though it may seeme but a slight expression, yet hath it more solid∣nesse then at first fight appears; at lest it served her turne at that time to escape the net, which by direct answering she could not have done. On the seventeenth of Aprill Thomas Lord Grey, the Duke of Suffolkes bro∣ther was beheaded, the last, and indeed the lest in delinquency, that suffered, for having any hand in Wyats conspiracy. There remained yet a fagge end, and was indeed but a fagge end, as nothing worth; for on the same day Sir Nichols Thrgmorton, being accused to have beene a party in Wyats conspiracy, was at the Guild-hall arraigned before Sir Thomas White Lord Maior, the Earles of Shrewsbury and Derby, Sir Thomas Bromley Lord chiefe Justice of England, Sir Nicholas Hare Master of the Roles, Sir Francis Englefield Master of the Wards, Sir Richard Southwell and Sir Edward Walgrave Privie Councellours, Sir Roger Chomley, Sir William Portman one of the Justices of the Kings Bench, Sir Edward Sanders one of the Justices of the Common Pleas, Master St∣ford and Master Dyer Serjeants at Law, Master Edward Griffin Atturney gee∣rall, Master Sendall and Peter Titchorne Clarkes of the Crowne, where the said Mster Nicholas Throgmorton so fully and discreetly answered all objecti∣ons brought against him, that he was found by the Jurie, Not Guilty, and was cleerly acquitted, but the Jury notwithstanding was afterward troubled for ac∣quitting him, and sent prisoners, some of them to the Tower, and some to the Fleet, and afterward fined to pay a thousand makes a peece at lest, and some 2000. l. though these sums were afterward something mitigated. More of Wyas complices had beene taken, arraigned and adjudged to dye, but in judgement the Queene remembred mercy, and gave them their Pardon; of which number were Master Rudston of Kent, Sir Iames a Crofts, the Lord Iohn Gray brother to the Duke of Sufolke, and some others. About this time, a little before and after, were advancements in honour, the Lord William Howard, Lord Admirall of England, was created Baron Hoard of Eingham, Sir Iohn VVilliams was created Baron of Tames, Sir Edward North was created Baon of Chartleigh, Sir Iohn Bridges was created Baron Chandowes of Sudeley, Gerrard Fitz Garret was created Earl of Kildare and B∣ron of Ophelley, and not long after Sir Anthony Browne Master of the Horse, was created Viscount Mountag. It is scarce worth remembring, that in the end of this fir yeer of he Queens reign, one Elizabeth Crot, a wench of eighteen yeeres old, was by prctice put into a Wall, and thereupon called the Spirit in the Wall, who with a whistle made for the purpose, whistled out many seditious words against the Queene, the Prince of Spaine, the Masse, Confession, and such other Points; for which she did Penance, standing upon a skaffold at Pauls Croe all the Sermon time, where she made open confession of her fault. There had beene good store of Laymens blood shed already, and now the times is comming to have Clergie mens shed, and for a preparative to it, on the tenth of Aprill, Cranmr Archbishop of Canterbury, Nicholas Ridley lae Bishop of London, and Hugh Latimer late Bishop of Worcester, are conveyed from the Tower to Oxford, there to dispure with Oxford and Cambridge men in points of Religion, but specially of the Eucharist; the Oxford men were Cole, Chascy, Pye, Harpsefield, Smith and Doctor Weston Prolocurour: the Cambridge men Young, Seaton, Watson, Atkinson, Fecknham and Sedgewicke: the Disputation ended, which (we may well thinke, as the matter was carried) went against the prisoners; on the twentieth of Aprill they were brought again
on the Stage; and then demanded, whether they would persist in their opini∣on, or else recant; and affirming they would persist, they were all three ad∣judged Hereticks, and condemned to the fire; but their execution we must not looke for till a yeere or two hence; but in the meane time we have Iohn Rogers, the first Martyr of these time, burnt at London the fourth of February; after whom the ninth of February, Iohn Hooper late Bishop of VVorcester, burnt at Glocester; after him, Robert Ferrar Bishop of Man, burnt at Carmarden; after him Iohn Bradford, with many others; and then the two famous men Ridley and Latimer, no lesse famous for their constant deaths, then their religious lives, both burnt at Oxford the sixteenth of October. This rising of VVyat had beene a Remora to the Queenes marriage, and now to avoid all such obstacles hereafter, the Queen in Aprill called a Parliament; wherein were popounded two things; one for confirmation of the Marri∣age, the other for restoration of the Popes Primacie. This latter was not assented to, but with great difficulty; for the six yeers reigne of King Edward had spred a plantation of the Protestnt Religion, in the hearts of many; but the Proposition for the marriage was assented to readily, but yet with the adding of some conditions, which had no beene thought of in the former Articles: First, that King Phillip should admit of no Stranger in any Office, but onely Natives secondly, that he should innovate nothing in the Lawes and Cu∣stomes of the Kingdome. Thirdly, that he should not carry the Queen out of the Realme, without her consent, nor any of her children without consent of the Councell. Fourthly, that surviving the Quee, he should challenge no right in the Kingdome, but suffr it to descend to the next heire. Fiftly, that he should carry none of the Jewels of the Realme out of the Kingdome, nor suffer any Ships or Ordnance to be removed out of the Realme: and lastly, that neither directly nor indirectly, he should cause the Realme of England to be in∣tangled with the warre betweene Spaine and France. All things being thus agreed on, the Earle of Bedford Lord Privie Seale, the Lord Fitzwaters, and divers other Lord and Gentlemen, are sent into Spaine to fetch over Prince Phillippe, who arrived at Southampton the twentieth of Iuly in the yeere 1554. and the three and twentieth came to VVinchester, where the Queene met him, and the five and twentieth, the marriage betweene them there was openly solemnized: (the desparity of yeeres, as in Princes, not much regarded, though he were then but seven and twenty yeeres of age, shee eight and thirty) at which time, the Emperours Embassadour being pre∣sent, openly declared; that in consideration of that mariage, the Emperour had given to Prince Phillippe his sonne, the Kingdomes of Naples and Hierusa∣lem; and thereupon (the solemnity of marriage being ended) Garter King of Heraulds openly in the Church, in the presence of the King, the Queene, and the Lords both of England and Spaine, solemnly proclaimed, the title and stile of these two Princes, as followeth: Phillip and Mary by the grace of God King and Queen of England, France, Naples, Hierusalem, and Ireland, Defenders of the Faith, Princes of Spaine and Scicily, Archdukes of Austria, Dukes of Mil∣lany, Burgandy, and Brabant, Counts of Habspurge, Flanders and Tyroll. After this the King and Queene by easie journeys came to Winsor Castle, where the King was instal'd Knight of the Garter, and the Earle of Sussex with him: The eleventh of August they removed to Richmond, the seven and twentieth to Suffolk-place in Southwark, and the next day to London (where the stately shews that were made, may well enough be conceived without relaring) from hence after foure dayes they removed againe to Richmond, where all the Lords had leave to depart into their Countries, and indeede so many departed, that there remained not an English Lord at the Court, but the Bishop of Winchester: from Richmond they removed to Hampton-court, where the Hall door within the Court was continually kept shut, so as no man might enter unlesse his errand were first known, which might perhaps be the fashion of Spain, but to English∣men seemed very strange.
About this time Cardinall Poole, sent for by the King and Queene, came over into England; and had come sooner, but that the Emperour fearing he might prove a corrivall with his sonne Phillip, had used meanes to stop his pas∣sage, but now that his Sonnes marriage was past, he was content to let him passe, who though he came from Rome with the great authority of a Legat  Latere, yet he would not but come privately into London, because his Attain∣dour was yet upon Record; an Act therefore was presently passed to take it off, and to restore him in blood; for passing of which Act, the King and Queene in person came to the Parliament house; whither a few dayes after, the Cardi∣nall came himselfe, which was then kept in the great Chamber of Whitehall, because the Queen by reason of sicknesse, was not well able to goe abroad; and here the King and Queene sitting under the cloath of Estate, and the Car∣dinall on their right hand, all the Lords, Knights and Burgesses being present, the Bishop of VVinchester Lord Chancellour, made a short speech unto them; signifying the presence of the Lord Cardinall, and that he was sent from the Pope as his Legate a Latere, to doe a worke tending to the glory of God, and the benefit of them all; which (saith he) you may better heare from his own mouth. Then the Cardinall rose up, and made a long solemne Oration, wher∣in he first thanked them for his restoring, by which he was enabled to be a mem∣ber of their society; then exhorting them to returne into the bosome of the Church, for which end he was come; not to condemne, but to reconcile; not to compell, but to call and require; and for their first worke of reconcile∣ment, requiring them to repeale and abrogate all such Lawes as had for∣merly beene made in derogation of the Catholicke Religion. After which Speech, the Parliament going together, drew up a Supplication, which with∣in two dayes after they presented to he King and Queene; wherein they shew∣ed themselves to be very penitent for their former errours, and humbly desired their Majesties to intercede for them to the Lord Cardinall and the See Apo∣stolicke, that they might be Pardoned of all they had done amisse, and be recei∣ved into the bosome of the Church; being themselves most ready to abrogate all Lawes prejudiciall to the See of Rome. This Supplication being delivered to the Cardinall, he then gave them Absolution, in these words; Wee, by the Apostolicke authority given unto us, by the most Holy Lord Pope Iulius the third (Christs Vicegerent on Earth) doe Absolve and deliver you and every of you, with the whole Realme and Dominions thereof, from all Heresie and Schisme, and from all Judgements, Censures and Paines for that cause incur∣red, and also Wee doe restore you againe, to the unity of our Mother the ho∣ly Church, The report hereof comming to Rome, was cause that a solemne Procession was made, for joy of the conversion of England to the Church of Rome. And now the Queene had a great desire to have King Phillip crowned, but to this the Parliament would by no meanes assent. In October this second yeere of her reigne, a rumour was spread of the Queenes being with childe, and so forward that she was quicke; and thereup∣on were Lettes sent from the Lords of the Councell: to Bonner Bishop of Lon∣don, that Prayers of Thanksgiving should be made in all Churches; and the Parliament it selfe was so credulous of it, that they entred into consideration of the education of the childe, and made an Act; desiring the King (our of  confidence they had in him) that if the Queene should faile, he would be pleased o take upon him the Rule and Government of the childe; but after ll this, in Iune following, it came to be knowne, that it was but a Tympany, r at lest the Queene so miscarried, that there came no childe, nor the Queene likely ever after to have any. But howsoever, in hope of the joy that was ex∣pected; in Ianury of this yeere, divers of the Councell, as the Lord Chan∣cellour, the Bishop of Elye, the Lord Treasurour, the Earle of Shrewsbry, the Controlour of the Queens house, Secretary Bourne and Sir Richard Soth∣well Master of the Ordinance, were sent to the Tower, to discharge and set at
liberty a great part of the Prisoners in the Tower; as amely, the late Duke of Northumberlands sonnes, Ambrose, Robert and Henry, also Sir Andrew Dudley, Sir Iames Crots, Sir Nicholas Throgmorton, Sir Iohn Rogers, Sir Nicholas Ar∣nold, Sir George Harper, Sir Edward Warner, Sir William Sentlow, Sir Gowen Carow, William Gybbs Esquire, Cutbert Vaughan, and some others. About this time, one William Fetherstone, a Millers sonne, of the age of eighteene yeeres, named and bruted himselfe to be King Edward the sixth; for which being apprehended and examined, he answered as one lunaticke; and thereupon was whipped at a Carts ayle, and banished into the North; but the yeere after, spreading abroad againe, that King Edward was alive, and that he had talked with him, he was arraigned and condemned of treason, and at Tyburn hanged and quartered. In the moneth of March, the Queene was taken with a fit of Devotion, and thereupon called unto her foure of her Privie Councell, namely, William Marquesse of Winchester Lord Treasurour, Sir Robert Rochester Comptrolour, Sir William Peter Secretary, and Sir Francis Englefield Master of the Wards, and signified unto them, that it went against her conscience, to hold the Lands and Possessions as well of Monasteries aud Abbeys as of other Churches, and therefore did freely relinquish them, and leave them to be disposed, as the Pope and the Lord Cardinall should thinke fit; and thereupon charged them to ac∣quaint the Cardinall with this her purpose. Ad shortly after in performance hereof, Iohn Fecknam late Deane of Pauls, was made Abbot of Westminster, and had possession delivered him, and with him fourteen Monkes received the Habit at the same time: and on the twentieth of November, Sir Thomas was instituted Lord of Saint Iohns of Hierusalem, and was put in possession of the Lands belonging unto it. And when it was told her that this would be a great diminution of the Revenues of her Crowne; she answered, she more valued the salvation of her soule, then a thousand Crownes: a most religious speech, and enough, if there were but this, to shew her to be a most pious Prince. The fourth of September this yeer, King Phillip waited on with the Earle of Arundell Lord Steward, the Earle of Pembrooke, the Earle of Huntington and others, went over to Callice, and from thence to Brussels in Brabant, to visit the Emperour his Father; who deliveing him possession of the Low Coun∣tries, in March following he returned into England; but then, on the sixth of Iuly following, by reason of wars with France, he passed again over to Callic and so into Flanders, from whence he returned not till eighteene moneths after; which made great muttering amongst the common people, as though hee tooke any little occasion to be absent, for the little love hee bore to the Queene. In the third yeere of the Queene dyed Stephen Gardiner Bishop of Win∣chester at his house in Southwarke; of whose death it is memorable, that the same day in which Bishop Ridley and Master Latimer suffered at Oxford, he would not goe to dinner till foure a clocke in the aternoone, thogh the old Duke of Norolke was come to dine with him; the reason was, because he would first heare of their being burnt, and as soon as word of that was brought him, he presently said, Now let us goe to Dinner; where sitting downe and ea∣ting merrily, upon a sudden he fell into such extremity, that he was faine to be taken from the Table and carried to his bed, where he continued fifteen dayes, without voyding any thing either by urine or otherwise, which caused his tsongu to swell in his mouth, and so dyed; after whose death, Nicholas Heath Archbi∣shop of Yorke was made Lord Chancelour. And now comes the time of Archbishop Cranmers execution, who the yeere before had beene condemned and degraded by Commission from the Pope; after which, being by the subtiltie of some, put in hope of life, out of frailty, he subscribed to a Recantation, which yet did him no good; for whether it were, that Cardinall Poole would no longer be kept from being Archbishop
(which he would not be as long as he lived) or that the Queen could ot be got∣ten to forget, his being the chief instrument of her Mothers diorce; his excu∣tion was resolved to be the 14. of Febr. in the same place at Oxford where Ridley and Latimer five month before had bin: before the execution Dct. le preach∣ed, who to make use of Cranmers Recantation, told the people, they doe well to harken to this learned mans confession, who now at his death, and with his death wold testifie which was the true religion, never thinking that Cranmer wold hae denied his former Recantation; but Cranmer being brought to the stake (contrary to expectation) acknowledged, that through frailty he had subscribed it, praying God hartily to forgive it; and now for a punishment, that hand which had done it should first suffer, and therewithall thrusting his right hand into the fire, he there held it, till it first and then his whole body was consumed; onely (which was no small miracle) his heart remained whole and not once touched with the fire. The same yeer also, no fewer then 84. of both sexes were burnt for Religi∣on; and it was a cruelty very far extended, that the bones of Bucer and Phgi some time before dead and buried, were taken up and publikely burnt in Cam∣bridge. No sooner was Cranmer dead, but the very same day was Cardinall Poole made Archbishop of Canterbury. In the fourth yeere of the Queene, exemplar Justice was done upon a great person; for the Lord Sturton, a man much in the Queens faour, as being an earnest Papist, was for a murther committed by him, arraigned and condem∣ned, and he with foure of his servants, carried to Salisbury, was there in the Mar∣ket-place hanged, having this favour to be hanged in a silken halter, his servants in places neere adjoyning to the place where the Murther was committed. The foure and twentieth of Aprill, Thomas Stafford second son to the Lord Stafford, with other, to the number of two & thirty persons (set on by the French King) attempted to raise Sedition against the Queen, for marrying with King Phillip, and comming out of France, arrived at Scarborough in Yorkeshire, where they tooke the Castle, but within two dayes were driven out by the Eale of VVestmerland, and then taken and arraigned: the eight and twentieth of May Stafford was beheaded on the Tower-hill, and the next day three of his associates Strelley, Bradford & Proctor were drawn from the Tower to Tyburne and there executed. The first of May Thomas Percy was first made Knight, after, Lord, and the next day was created Earle of Northumberland, to whom the Queene gave all the Lands that had bin his Ancestours. At this time the Queene intangled her selfe (contrary to her promise) in her husbands quarrell, sent a defiance to the French King, by Clarenti king at Armes; and after on the Munday in Whitsonweeke, by sound of trumpet, proclaimed open warre against him in Cheapside, and other places of the Ci∣tie; and shortly after, caused an Army of a thousand Horse, and foure thou∣sand foo, to be transported over, to the aid of her husband King Phillip, under the leading of the Earle of Pembrooke Captain Generall, Sir Anthony Brone Viscount Mountague Lievtenant Generall, the Lord Gray of VVilton Lord Marshall, the Earle of Rutland Generall of the Horse, the Earle of Lincolne Coronel of the Foot, the Lord Roert Dudley Master of the Ordnance, the Lord Thomas Howard, the Lord De la VVare, the Lord Bray, the Lord Chandowes, the or Ambrose Dudley, the Lord Henry Dudley, with divers Knights and Gen∣tement; who joyning with King Phillips Forces, they altogether et down be∣fore Sint Quintns, a town of the French Kings of great importance. To the re∣s whereof, the French King sent an Army, under the leading of the Constable  France, which consisted of nine hundred men at armes, with as many light , eight hundred Reystres, two and twenty Ensignes of Lancequenes, and  Ensigns of French footmen; their purpose was not to give battell, but to  more succours into the Town; which the Philippians perceiving, encountred them, and in the ight slew Iohn of Burbon Duk of Anghien, the Viscount of T∣rain, the Lo of Chdenier, with many gentlemen of account; they took prisoners the Duk of Memorancy Constable of France, the Duk of Montpensyer, Duk Lon∣guevile,
the Marshall of Saint Andrewes, the Lord Lewis brother to the Duke of Mantova, the Baron of Curton, the Rhinegrave Colonell of the Almaynes, Monsieur d'Obigny, Monsieur de Biron, and many others; and then pursuing the victory, under the government of the Earle of Pembrooke, on the seven and twentieth of August they tooke the towne of Saint Qintyns; in the assault whereof, the Lord Henry Dudley, yongest sonne to the Duke of Northum∣berland, was with a peece of great Ordnance slaine, and some other of account. The saccage of the Town King Phillip gave to the English, as by whose valour chiefly it was won. The joy was not so great for this winning of Saint Qintyns, but there will be greater sorrow presently for other losses. Many of the Garrison of Callice had beene drawne from thence, for this service of Saint Quintyns, and no new supply sent, which being perceived by the French King, a Plot is laid how to surprize it, which yet was not so secretly carried, but that the Officers of Callice had intelligence thereof; who thereupon signified it to the Councell of Eng∣land, requiring speedy succours, without which, against so great an Army as was raisd against them, they should not be able to hold out. But whether they gave no credit to their relations, or whether they apprehended not the danger so imminent as indeed it was, they neglected to send supplies till it was too late. For the Duke of Guyse, with no lesse speed then Policie, tooke such a course that at one and the same time, he set both upon Newnambridge and also Rice∣banke, (the two maine Skonces for defence of the Towne,) and tooke them both, and then fell presently to batter the Wals of the Castle it selfe, and that with such violence of great Ordnance, that the noyse was heard to Ant∣erp, being a hundred miles of. But having made the wals assaultable, the English used this stratagem, they laid traines of Powder to blow them up, when they should offer to enter, but this stratagem succeeded not; for the French in passing the Ditch, had so wet their cloathes, that dropping upon the traine, the Powder would take no fire, (so all things seemed to concurre a∣gainst the English) and thereupon the Castle was taken also, and with it the Towne also had beene taken, but that Sir Anthony Ager, with the losse of his owne life and his eldest sonnes, valiantly defended it, and for that time repelled the French, but their numbers increased so fast upon the Towne, that the Lord Wentworth the Deputy, seeing no other way of safty, demanded Parlee, where a composition was made, that the Towne should presently be yeelded to the French King, the lives of the Inhabitants onely saved, with safe conduct to passe away, saving the Lord Deputy with fifty other, such as the Duke should name. And here to be quit with the English for their hard usage at Saint Quintins, the Duke caused Proclamation to be made, that all and every per∣son of the Towne, should bring their money, jewels and plate; to the value of a groat, and lay it downe upon the high Altar of the Church; by which meanes an inestimable sum of treasure was there offered, enough o enrich an Army, which had before enriched a Towne: and now to make it appeare how unable the Towne was to hold out against so great an Army. It is said, there were in it but onely five hundred souldiers of ordinary, and scarce two hundred more of able fighting men; but of other people, men, women and children foure thousand and two hundred, all which were suffered to depart, saving the Lord Wetworth the Deputy, Sir Ralph Chamberlaine Captaine of the Castle, Iohn Huston Captaine of Ricebruke, Nicholas Alexnder Captain of Newham∣bridge, Edward Grimston the Controlour, Iohn Rogers the Surveyour, with o∣thers to the number of fifty, who were al caried prisoners into France. And thus Callice, which had bin in possession of the English above two hundred yeers, was won from the English in eight dayes, which King Edward the third had not won from the French in lesse then a yeer. The Lord Wentworth was suspected, and in Queen Elizabeths time arraigned for betraying it, was acquitted by his Peeres. Callice thus won, the Duke with his Army marched to Guysnes, five
miles distant, whereof was Captaine the Lord Gray of Wilton, who held out the siedge and batteries five or six dayes with so great valour and resolution, that he appeared in nothing inferiour to the Enemy but in multitude, yet a last overlaid with their numbers, and importunde by his souldiers, much again his owne will, he made composition, that the Towne and Castle should be wholly rendered, himselfe and all Officers remaine prisoners, all other to de∣part with their Armour and Baggage. The Lord Gray afterward ransomed for foure and twenty thousand crownes. And now the Duke of Guise considering that Guysnes would be too costly a Castle to be kept, and too dangerous a neigh∣bour to Callice, if it should be recovered, raced it with the Bulwarkes and For∣tifications to the ground. Guysnes thus won, there remained nothing within the English pale, but the little Castle of Hammes, whereof was Captaine the Lord Edward Dudley, who considering that though it were naturally strongly scituate, as being invironed with Fens and Marshes, yet it had but little helpe by Art of Fortifications, and being assured that the Duke of Guyse would spee∣dily come upon him, he secretly in the night with all his garrison, departed in∣to Flanders, so as the Castle was not won, but taken by the Duke of Guyse; and with the losse of this Castle, the English lost all their footing in Terra firma, and the Kings of England all the reality of their Title in France, having nothing left but nudum nomen. Presently after this, the French King caused the mariage between his eldest sonne Francis the Dolphin, and Mary Steward sole heire of Iames the fift King of Scotland to be solemnized: whereupon great wars insued soon after between England and Scotland. Queen Mary being infinitely troubled in minde for the losse of Callice, sent presently forth her Admirall the Lord Clinton, with a Fleet of more then a hundred sayle, to recover, at lest reparation in honour, by doing some exploit upon France, who not finding opportunity to set upon Brest, as he was appoin∣ted, fell upon the towne of Conquest, which he tooke and burt, and also divers Villages thereabouts, and then returned. In which meane time, many great conflicts having been between King Phillip and the King of France; at last, by mediation of the Dutchesse of Lorraigne, a treaty of Peace is agreed on, where all things seemed to be well accorded, but onely that King Phillip by all meanes required restitution of Callice, to which by no means the French would assent; but whilst they stood upon these termes, it happened that first the Em∣perour Charles King Phillips father dyed, and shortly after Queene Mary, and the day after her Cardinall Poole, and shortly after Sir Iohn Baker of Sissing∣herst in Kent, who had been a Privie Councellour to Henry the eight, Edward the sixth ad Queen Mary. And so our Story hath no further relation to either War or Peace, between the two Kings of France and Spaine. Of her Taxations. SHEE began with a rare Example; for in the first yeer of her Reign, wa pardoned by Proclamation, the Subsidie of foure shillings the pound of Land, and two shillings the pound of goods, granted in the last Parliament of King Edward the sixth. In her second yeer in a Parliament then holden, was granted to the King and Queen, a Subsidie of the Layitie, from five pounds to ten pounds, of eight pence in the pound; from ten pounds to twenty pounds, of twelve pence in the pound; and from twenty pounds upwards, sixteen pence in the pound; all Strangers double; and the Clergie six shillings in the pound. If this were all, then upon the matter, in all her time, there came to new charge upon her people; for one Subsidie rmited and one received, made but even. In her last yeer she borrowed twenty thousand pounds of the City of London, and paid twelve pounds a yeer interest for every undred poud.
Lawes and Ordinances in her time. IN her first yeere, on the fourth of September, were proclaimed certaine new Coynes of gold and silver, a Soveraigne of gold of thirty shillings; the halfe Soveraigne fifteene shillings; an Angell often shillings; the halfe Angell five shillings. Of silver, the groat, the halfe groat and penny; all these Coynes to be currant as before. In her second yeer, Proclamation was made, forbidding the shooting in Hand-guns and bearing of weapons. The yeer in which she was married to King Phillip, a straight charge was to all Victuallers, Taverners and Alehouse-keepers, that they should sell no Meat nor Drinke nor any kinde of Victuals, to any Serving-man whatsoever, unlesse he brought a testimoniall to shew whole servant he was. Also in a Parliament holden this yeere, amongst other Acts, the Statute Ex Officio, and other Lawes made for the punishment of Heresies, were revived; but chiefly the Popes Bull of Dispensation of Abbey Land was there confirmed. In her second yeere, on Michaelmas Eeven, the Prisoners that lay in the Counter in Bredstreet, were removed to a new Counter made in Woodstreet, of the Citie Purchase and building; the which re∣moving was confirmed by the Common Councell of the City. Affaires of the Church in her time. IN the first yeere of this Queenes reigne, all Bishops which had beene de∣prived in the time of King Edward the sixth, were restored to their Bishop∣riks, and the new removed; also all Benefized men that were married, or would not forsake their opinion, were put out of their Livings; and other of a con∣trary opinion put in their roomes. Also this yeere, on the seven and tweeti∣eth of August, the Service begun to be sung in Latine in Pauls Church. Also this yeere the Popes authority was by Act of Parliament restored in England; and the Masse commanded in all Churches to be used. In her second yeer, the Realme is Absolved, and reconciled to the Church of Rome, by Cardinall Poole; and first Fruits and Tenths are restored to the Clergy: but this was soone revoked, the Councell finding the necessity of it for the Queenes sup∣port. In her fourth yeere, Monasteries were begun to be reedified; of which number were that of Westminster, that of Sheene and Sion, that of the Black-fry∣ers, and the Fryers of Greenwich. Of the number of those that dyed for Reli∣gion in her time, there are recorded five Bishops, one and twenty Divines, and of all sorts of men and women, two hundred threescore and seventeene. Workes of Pietie done by her or others in her time. THis Queen restored a great part of Abbey-lands that were in her posses∣sion, and if she had lived longer, very likely she would have restored more. In her first yeer, Sir Thomas White then Major, erected a Colledge in Oxford, now called Saint Iohns Colledge, before, Bernard Colledge; he also
erected Schooles at Bristow and Reading, and gave two thousand pounds to the City of Bristow to purchase Lands, the profits whereof to be imployed for the benefit of young Clothiers for ten yeeres, and after that to be imployed in like manner, to the benefit of two and twenty other shires and Cities. In her third yeere dyed Sir Iohn Gresham, late Major of London, who founded a free School at Holt in Norolke, and gave to every Ward in London ten pounds, to be di∣stributed to the poore; also to Maids marriages two hundred pounds. Cutbert Tunstall Bishop of Duham, erected a goodly Library in Cambridge, storing it with many excellent both Printed and written Bookes: he also bestowed much upon building at Durham, at Alnewicke and at Tunbridge. Casualties happening in her time. IN her first yeere, on the seven and twentieth of August, the goodliest Ship in England, called The Great Harrye, being of the burthen of a thousand tun, was burnt at Woolwich by negligence of the Mariners. In her second yeer on the fifteenth of February, appeared in the skie a Rainbow reversed, the bowe turn∣ed downward, and the two ends standing upward: also two Sunnes shined at one time, a good distance asunder, which were taken for ill signes. This yeere also in the moneth of August, at a place in Suffolke by the Sea side, all of hard stone and pibble, lying betweene the Townes of Oxford and Alborough, where never grasse grew, not any earth was ever seene, there chanced suddenly to spring up without any tillage or sowing, so great abundance of Peason, that the Poore gathered above an hundred quarters, yet there remained some ripe, and some blossoming, as many as were before. In her fourth yeer, hot burning Agues and other strange diseases, tooke away much people; so as between the twen∣tieth of October and the last of December, there dyed seven Aldermen, namely, Henry Heardson, Sir Richard Dobs lae Major, Sir William Laxton late Ma∣jor, Sir Henry Hobblesterne late Majors, Sir Iohn Champneys late Major, Sir Iohn Aleph late Sheriffe, and Sir Iohn Gresham late Major. In her fourth yeer, before Harvest, Wheat was sold for foure Markes the quarter, Mault at foure and forty shillings the quarter, and Pease at six and forty shillings eight pence; where after harvest, Wheat was sold for five shillings the quarter, Malt at six shillings eight pence, Rye at three shillings foure pence the quarter. In the Countrey, Wheat was sold for foure shillings the quarter, Mault at foure shil∣lings eight pence, and in some places a bushell of Rye for a pound of Candles, which was foure pence. In her fift yeer, within a mile of Nottingham, so mer∣vailous a tempest of thunder happened, that it beat down all the Houses and Churches in two Towns thereabouts, cast the Bels to the outside of the Church∣yard, and some webs of Lead foure hundred foot into the field, writhen as if it had been leather; the rive of Trent running between the two Townes, the wa∣ter with the mud in the bottome was carried a quarter of a mile, and cast against trees; with the violence whereof the trees were pulled up by the the roots, and cast twelve score off; also a childe was taken forth of a mans hand and carried two speares length high, and then let fall two hndred foot off, of which fall it dyed; five or six men thereabouts were slaine, and neither flesh nor skin pe∣rished; also there fell some Hale-stones that were fifteen inches about. This yeer also in Harvest-time was great mortality, and specially of Priests, so as many Churches were unserved, and much corne was lost in the field for want of Workmen; whereupon ensued a great scarcity, so that corne was sold for fourteen shillings a quarter, and Wood sold in London for thirteen shillings a thousand of Billets, and Coles ten pence a sacke. Also this yeer on the last of September, fell so great store rain, that Westminster Hall was full of water, and Boats were rowed over Westminster-bridge into Kings-street.
Of her Personage and Conditions. OF her Personage we can make no particular description, only we may say, she was none of the most amiable, but yet without deformity; but of her Conditions we may say, she was not without deformity, and yet was very amia∣ble. If we account her Religion a deformity, yet her constancy and devotion in it, we must needs count a beauty: if it were a deformity to promise the Suffolke men, not to alter the Religion wich King Edward had established, yet it was certainly a Pious dissemling, Cretizare cum Cetensibus; and equivocation (will some say) was there a vertue, where she deceived them into truth, and did them good against their wils. And as for her sister Elizabeth, if she did not love her, it was but a quality hereditary in her; for their Mothers did not love one another before; and indeed not without some cause in both; for as those upbraided each others marriage, so these, each others birth. We shall not doe her right, if we deny her to be of a mercifull disposition, seeing oftentimes she pittied the person, where she shed the blood; she could have found in her heart to have spared the Lady Ianes life, if Ragion distato had not beene against it and she did spare her Father the Duke of Suffolkes life, till his second offence gave her just provocation. The goodnesse of her nature might be seene in the badnesse of her fortune; who tooke nothing so much to heart, as unkindnesse of friends; the revolt of Callice, and the absence of King Phillip, being the two chiefe causes that brought her to her end. Of her Death and Buriall. THE conceit of her being with childe, had kept Physitians to looke in∣to the state of her body; so as her distemper at first neglected, brought her by degrees into a Dropsie, to which was added a burning Feavour, brought upon her by a double griefe; one for the long absence of King Phillip (who had now beene away a yeer and a halfe;) the other, and perhaps the greater, for the losse of Callice; as she forbore not to say to some about her, that if they looked into her Heart, being dead, they should finde Callice there. She began to fall sicke in September, and dyed at her Mannour of Saint Iames the seven∣teenth of Novembr, in the eer 1558. when she had reigned five yeers four moneths and eleven dayes. Lived three and forty yeers. Her Body was inter∣red in a Chappell in the Minster of Saint Peters Church at Westminster, without any Monument or other Remembrance. Men of note in her time. OF Men of Valour in her time, there were many, as may be seen in the Sto∣ry of her Regne; but to name some for example, there was William Her∣bert Earle of Pembrooke, the chiefe assistant of King Phillip in the winning of Saint Quintins; there was William Lord Gray of VVilton, Captain of Guysnes, who though he yeelded the Town, yet more out of tendernesse to his Souldi∣ers, then out of feare of his Enemies, which he would never else have yeelded
up; and to speake of one of a meaner ranke, there was Sir Anthony Ager, who in defence of the Town of Callice lost his life, but not till he made the Enemie turne their backes and flye. O learned men also there were many, as Iohn Ro∣gers borne in Lancashire, who Translated the Bible into English with Notes, Richard Moryson Knight, borne in Oxfordshire, who wrote divers Treatises, Ro∣bert Record a Doctor of Physicke, who wrote a Booke of Arithmaticke, C∣bert Tunstall, of a worshipfull Family in Lancashire, though base borne, whoe Ancestours came into England with the Conquerour, as his Barbour, and here∣fore hath three Combs his Armes; Bishop first of London, and after of D∣ham, who wrote divers learned Workes: Richard Sampson, Bishop of Coven∣try and Lichfield, who wrote certaine Treases: Lucs Shephead borne a Colechester in Essex an English Poet: Iane Dudley, daughter o Henry Gray Duke of Suffolke, wrote divers excellent Treatises: VVilliam Thomas a VVlsh∣man, who wote the History of Italie, and other things: Iames Brookes and Iohn Standish, both of them writers in defence of the Popes Doctrine: VVilli∣am Peryn a black Fryer, who wrote in defence of the Masse, and also divers Ser∣mons: Henry Lord Stafford, sonne to Edward Duke of Buckingham, who a∣mongst other things which he wrote, Translated a Booke out of Latine into English, intituled Vtriusque Potestatis Differentia which Booke (as some thinke) was first compiled by Edward Foxe Bishop of Hereford: Iohn Hopkins who translated divers of Davids Psalmes into English Meeter, which are to be found amongst those appointed to be sung in the Church.
THE RAIGNE OF Queen Elizabeth. QUeen Mary dying on Thursday the seventeenth of No∣vember, in the Yeer 1558, her sister, the Lady Elizabeth, of the age of five and twenty yeers, the onely surviving childe of King Henry the eighth, by undoubted Right, succeeded Her in the Crown; which happened in a time of Parliament: Nicholas Heath, Arch-bishop of York, and Lord Chancellor, sent to the Knights and Burgesses in the Lower House, to repair immediately to the Lords of the Upper House; to whom he signified, That Queen Mary was that morning dead, and therefore required their Assents to joyn with the Lords in pro∣clayming Queen Elizabeth; which accordingly was done, by the sound of Trumpet, first at Westminster, and after in the City of London. The Queen was then at Hafield from whence, on Wednesday the three and twen∣tieth of November, she removed to the Lord North's house in the Charter-house, where she stayed till Monday the eight and twentieth of November, and then rode in her Chariot thorow London to the Tower; where she con∣tinued till the fifth of December; and then removed by water to Somerset-House in the Strand; from whence she went to her Pallace at Westminster; and from thence, on the twelfth of Ianuary, to the Tower; and on the fourteenth of Ianuary, to Westminster, to her Coronation where it is incre∣dible, what Pageants and Shews were made in the City, as she passed: On Sunday the five and twentieth of Ianuary, she was Crowned in the Abbey Church at Westminster, by Doctor Oglethorp, Bishop of Carlile, with all So∣lemnities and Ceremonies in such case accustomed. At this time, to ho∣nour her Coronation, she conferred more Honour, then in all her life after: William Parre, degraded by Queen Mary, she made Marquesse of Northamp∣ton; Edward Seymor, whose father had been Attaynted, she made Earl of Hertford; Thomas Howard, second son to Thomas Duke of Norfolk, she made Viscount Bindon; Sir Henry Carie, her Cousin German, she made Baron of Hunsdon; and Sir Oliver St. Iohn, she made Baron of Bletsho. And now the Queen, though she were her self very wise, yet would not
trust (and it was a great point of wisedome that she would not trust) to her own wisedome; and therefore she chose Counsellors to assist her: In which number she took Nicholas Heath, Arch-bishop of York; William Pawlet, Mar∣quesse of Winchester, L. High Treasurer; Henry Fitz Alan, Earl of Arundell; Francis Talbot, Earl of Shrewsbury; Edward Stanley, Earl of Derby; Wil. Herbert, E. of Pembroke; Edw. L. Clinton, L. Admirall; and William L. Howard of Effing∣ham; Sir Thomas Cheyney; Sir William Peter; Sir Richard Sackvyle; and Nicholas Wootton, Dean of Canterbury; all which had been Counsellors to Queen Ma∣ry, and were of her Religion: But then to make a counter-poyse of Coun∣sellors of her own Religion, she joyned with them William Parre, Marquesse of Northampton; Francis Russell, Earl of Bedford; Sir Thomas Parry; Sir Ed∣ward Rogers; Sir Ambrose Cave; Sir Francis Knolles; and Sir William Cecill, late Secretary to King Edw. the sixth; and a little after, Sir Nicholas Bacon, whom she made Keeper of the Great Seal. And having thus provided for her State at home, she seeks correspondence with Princes abroad: To the Emperour Ferdinand, she sent in Embassage Sir Tho. Chaloner; to the King of Spain in the Low-Countreyes the Lord Cobham; to the Princes of Germany Sir Henry Kil∣ligrew; Sir Aemygill Wad, to the Duke of Holst; and another Ambassadour to the King of Denmark. There were also Ambassadours sent to the Pope, to the State of Venice, and to the French King; with whom at this time there was a Treaty of Peace holden at Cambray, between the Kingdoms of France, England and Spain; where for England was employed, the Earl of Arundell; Thursbey, Bishop of Ely; and Doctor Wootton, Dean of Canterbury; with whom, William, Lord Howard of Effingham was joyned by a new Commission. As soon as King Philip heard of the death of his wife Queen Mary, pa∣ly out of considerations of State, and partly out of affection of love, he solicited Q. Elizabeth by his Ambassadour, the Earl of Feria, to joyni Mar∣riage with himself; which was no more for two sisters to have successively one husband, then was done before, for two brothers to have successively one wife; and for this he promised to procure a Dispensation from the Pope. To which motion the Queen, though she well knew, That to allow a Dis∣pensation in this case to be sufficient, were to make her own Birth Illegiti∣mate; yet to so great a Prince, and who in her sisters time had done her many favours, she would not return so blunt an Answer; but putting the Ambassadou off for the present in modest tearms: She conceived there would be no better way to take him off clean from further sute, then by bringing in an Alteration of Religion; which yet she would not do all at once, and upon the sudden (as knowing the great danger of sudden changes) but by little and little, and by degrees: as at first, she permitted onely Epi∣stles and Gospels, the Ten Commandments, the Lords Prayer, and the Creed to be read to the People in the English Tongue; in all other matters they were to follow the Romane Rite and Custome, untill order could be taken for establishing of Religion by Authority of Parliament; and a se∣vere Proclamation was set forth, prohibiting all Points of Controversie to be medled with: by which means, she both put the Protestants in hope, and put not Papists out of hope. Yet privately she committed the correct∣ing of the Book of Common Prayer, set forth in the English Tongue un∣der King Edward the sixth, to the care and diligence of Doctor Parker, Bill, May, Cox, Grindall, Whitehead, and Pilkington, Divines of great Learning; with whom she joyned Sir Thomas Smith, a learned Knight: but the matter carryed so closely, that it was not communicated to any, but o the Mar∣quesse of Northampton, the Earl of Bedford, and Sir William Cecile. The two and twentieth of March, the use of the Lords Supper in both kindes was by Parliament allowed: The four and twentieth of Iune, the Sacrifice of the Masse was abolished, and the Liturgy in the English Tongue
established, though, as some say, but with the difference of six voyces. In Iuly the Oath of Supremacy was propounded to the Bishops and others: And in August, Images were removed out of Churches, and broken or burnt. By these degrees the Religion was changed; and yet the change, to the wonder of the world, bred no disturbance: which if it had been done at once, and on the sudden, would hardly; at least not without dangerous opposition, have been admitted. During this time, a Parliament had been summoned to begin at Westmin∣ster, upon the fifteenth of Ianuary; and now the Queen, for satisfaction of the people, appointed a Conference to be held, between the Prelates of the Realm; and Protestant Divines now newly returned, who had fled the Realm, in the time of Queen Mary: for the Prelates were chosen Iohn White, Bishop of Winchester; Ralph Bayne, Bishop of Coventry and Lichfield; Thomas Watson, Bishop of Lincolne; Doctor Cole, Dean of Pauls; Doctor Langdell, Arch-deacon of Lewis; Doctor Harpsefield, Arch-deacon f Can∣terbury; and Doctor Chadsey, Arch-deacon of Middlesex: For the Protestant side were appointed, Doctor Scory, Doctor Cox, Doctor Sands, Doctor Whitehead, Doctor Grindall, Master Horne, Master Guest, Master Elmer, and Master Iuell. The place was prepared in Westminster Church; where, be∣sides the Disputants, were present the Lords of the Queens Councell, with other of the Nobility; as also many of the Lower House of Parliament. The Articles propounded against the Prelates, and their adherents, were these: First, That it is against the Word of God, and the Custome of the ancient Church, to use a Tongue unknown to the people, in common Prayer, and in the Administration of the Sacraments. Secondly, That every Church hath authority to appoint and change Ceremonies, and Ec∣clesiasticall Rites, so they be to edification: Thirdly, That it cannot be proved by the Word of God, that there is in the Masse a Sacrifice Propi∣tiatory for the living and the dead. For the manner of their Conference, it was agreed it should be performed in writing; and that the Bishops should deliver their Reasons in writing first. The last of March was the first day of their meeting; where, contrary to the Order, the Bishops brought no∣thing in writing; but said, They would deliver their mindes onely by Speech: This breaking of Order much displeased the Lords, yet they had it granted. Then rose up Doctor Cole, and made a large Declaration con∣cerning the first Poynt: when he had ended, the Lords demanded if any of them had more to say; who answered, No: Then the Protestant Party exhibited a written Book; which was distinctly read by Master Horne. This done, some of the Bishops began to affirm, they had much more to say in the first Article: This again much displeased the Lords; yet this al∣so was granted them, to do at their next meeting on Munday next: but when Munday came, so many other differences arose between them, that the Con∣ference broke off, and nothing was determined. But in the Parliament there was better Agreement; for there it was enacted, That Queen Elizabeth was the lawfull and undoubted Queen of England; notwithstanding a Law made by her Father King Henry the eighth, that excluded both her and her sister Mary from the Crown, seeing, though the Law be not repealed, yet it is a Principle in Law, That the Crown once gained, ta∣keth away all defects. Also in this Parliament, First fruits and Tenths were restored to the Crown; and the Title of Supreme Head of the Church of England was confirmed to the Queen, with so universall consent, that in the Upper House none opposed these Laws, but onely the Earl of Shrewsbury, and Sir Anthony Brown, Viscount Mountague: and in the Lower House, only some few of Papall inclination, murmured, saying, That the Parliament was packt; and that the Duke of Norfolk, the Earl of Arundel, and Sir Wil∣liam Cecill, for their own ends, had cunningly begged voyces, to make up their Party.
The Supremacie thus confirmed to the Queen, the Oath was soon after tendred to the Bishops and others; of whom, as many as refused to take it, were presently deprived of their livings. And that we may see, how incli∣ning the Kingdom at this time was to receive the Protestant Religion; It is said, that in the whole Realm (wherein are reckoned above Nine thousand Spirituall Promotions) there were no more that refused to take the Oath, but onely fourscore Parsons, fifty Prebendaries, fifteen Masters of Col∣ledges, twelve Archdeacons, twelve Deans, six Abbots, and fourteen Bi∣shops, (indeed all that were at that time, except Anthony Bishop of Landaff as Nicholas Heath Archbishop of York, Edmund Boner Bishop of London, Cutbert Tunstall Bishop of Durham, Thomas Thursby Bishop of Ely, Gilbert Bourn Bishop of Bath and Wells, Iohn Christopherson Bishop of Chichester, Iohn White Bishop of Winchester, Thomas Watson Bishop of Lincoln, Ralph Bayne Bishop of Coventry and Lichfield, Owen Oglethorp Bishop of Car∣lile, Iames Turbervile Bishop of Exeter, and David Pool Bishop of Peter∣borough: And with these Doctor Fecknam Abbot of Westminster: All which were at first committed to prison, but soon after delivered to the cu∣stody of private friends, excepting those two sawcie Prelates, Lincoln and Winchester, who threatned to excommunicate the Queen. Three onely, namely, Cutbert Scot Bishop of Chester, Richard Pate Bishop of Worcester, and Thomas Goldwel Bishop of Saint Assaph, changed their Religion of their own accord; as also did certain Noble Personages, namely, Henry Lord Morley, Sir Francis Englefield, and Sir Robert Peckham, (who had been Privie-Councellours to Q. Mary) Sir Thomas Shelley, and Sir Iohn Gage. In the seas of the Prelates removed, were placed Protestant Bishops, as Matthew Parker was made Archbishop of Canterbury, (who was consecrated by the Imposition of the hands of three that formerly had been Bishops; namely, William Barlow of Bath and Wells, Iohn Scory of Chichester, and Miles Coverdale of Exeter) and being consecrated himself, he afterward con∣secrated Edmund Grindall Bishop of London, Richard Cox Bishop of Ely, Edwyn Sands Bishop of Worcester, Rowland Merick Bishop of Bangor, Tho∣mas Young Bishop of Saint Davyes, Nicholas Bullingham Bishop of Lincoln, Iohn Iewell Bishop of Salisbury, Richard Davis Bishop of Saint Assaph, Edward Guest Bishop of Rochester, Gilbert Barkeley Bishop of Bath and Wells, Thomas Bentham Bishop of Coventry and Litchfield, William Alley Bishop of Exceter, Iohn Parkhurst Bishop of Norwich, Robert Horn Bishop of Win∣chester, Richard Cheyney Bishop of Gloucester, Edmund Scambler Bishop of Peterboough, William Barlow Bishop of Chichester, Iohn Scory Bishop of Hereford, Young Archbishop of York, Iames Pilkington Bishop of Dur∣ham, Iohn Best Bishop of Carlile, and William Downham Bishop of Chester. Whilest these things were done in England, the Treaty of peace at Cam∣bray continued still; Wherein King Phillip stood for the restitution of Calice to the English, as firmly as if it had been his own interest; and with∣out it would agree to no peace with France: But when by Messages he un∣derstood, that his suit for marriage with Queen Elizabeth was rejected; and that the Protestant Religion was established in the Kingdom, he then left Queen Elizabeth, seeing she would not be his, to her self; and though he be∣came not presently a Foe, yet he became presently lesse then a Friend, and forbore to do any more good offices in that businesse. Queen Elizabeth thus left to her self, agreed with the French King, to conclude her own peace apart; and thereupon, Delegates on both sides were appointed to meet at Cambray: For the Queen of England were, Thursby Bishop of Ely, the Lord Williams, the Lord Howard of Effingham, Chamberlain to the Queen, and Doctor Wootton Dean of Canterbury and York: For the King of France were, Charls Cardinall of Lorrain, the first Peer of France, Annas
Duke of Memorancy, Iames Albon Lord of Saint Andrews, Iohn Morvilliers Bishop of Orleance, and Claude Aubespine Secretary of the Privie Councel. The Commissioners meeting, the chief point in difference, was the restitu∣tion of Calice; for which, the English Commissioners by the Qeens ap∣pointment, offered to remit two Millions of Crowns, that by just accompt were due from France to England; but the Queen was not more desirous to recover Calice, then the French King was to hold it: And thereupon at last, it was concluded, that Calice should remain in possession of the French fo the term of eight yeers; and those expired, it should be delivered to the English, upon forfeiture of five hundred thousand Crowns for which, ho∣stages were given: But all this notwithstanding, though the Conditions were sealed and sworn to, and though hostages were assigned to remain in England, till one or other were performed; yet all was frustate, and came to nothing. About this time, Henry King of France married his daughter Isabell to Phillip King of Spain, and his sister Margaret to Emmanuel Phylibert Duke of Savoy; at the solemnity of which Marriages, he would needs be a Tiltor himself; and thereupon commended the Earl of Montgomery to run against him, who unfortunately breaking his Launce upon the Kings Cuyrasse, a splinter thereof (his Beaver being somewhat open) struck him so deep in the eye, that within few dayes he ended his life: After whose death, Francis his son at the age of sixteen yeers, succeeded him in the Crown, having by the marriage of Queen Mary the Title of Scotland, and upon ground thereof laying claim to the Crown of England also, and giving the Arms of Eng∣land, as properly belonging to him. And now begins the game of Faction to be play'd, wherein the whole estate of Queen Elizabeth lyes at stake, a game that will hold playing the most part of her Reign, and if not play'd well, will put her in jeoparey of losing all, seeing all about her are against her, Phillip King of Spain hath a quarrell to her, for being rejected in his suit; the King of France hath a quar∣rell to her in right of his wife, which is now his right. The Quen of Scots hath a quarrell to her for detaining her Inheritance: The Pope hath a quar∣rell to her, for excluding his Authority: The King of Sweden hath a quar∣rell to her, for slighting his son in the way of marriage: And all these be∣ing against her, whom hath she of her side, but onely her own Subjects, Papists yesterday, and to day Protestants, who being scarce setled in their Religion, how should they be setled in their Loyalty? And not being Loyall, where can she finde to cast Anchor for her safety? But it is a true saying, Nullum numen abest si sit prudentia; Wisdom is a spply for all de∣fects: And indeed, the Queen being very wise her self, and having a wise Councell about her, she passed all these difficulties, though not without danger, yet with little or no hazard. It happened (if at least it happened, and were not rather plotted of pur∣pose) that a Reformation of Religion was pretended in Scotland; but was indeed an incroachment upon the Princes Authority; for at the preaching of Iohn Knox, and other headstrong Ministers, not onely Images and Altars were cast down and burnt, the Monasteries of Saint Andrews, of Stone, of Stryveling, and of Lynlithew were overthrown; but it was further put into the heads of the Nobility, that it pertained to them, of their own Autho∣rity, to take away Idolatry, and by force reduce th Prince to the prescript of Laws: Whereupon there was presently a bandying of the Lords of Scotland, against the Queen Dowager, Regent of the Country; and in this case each of them ought for aid; The Queen Dowager had aid out of France, the Lords of Scotland sent for aid to the Queen of England: But this was matter for consultation; It seemed a bad Example, for a Prince to give aid to the rebellious Subjects of another Prince. On the other side, it
seemed no lesse then impiety, not to give Ayd to the Protestants of the same Religion; but most of all it seemed plain madnesse, to suffer adversa∣ries to be so neer neighbours, and to let the French nestle in Scotland, who pretend Title to England: upon such like considerations, it was resolved to send them Ayd; and thereupon an Army of six thousand Foot, and twelve hundred Horse, was sent under the Command of the Duke of Norfolk, the Lord Grey of Wilton his Lievtenant Generall; Sir Iames a Crofts, Assistant to him; the Lord Scroop, L. Marshall; Sir George Howard, Generall of the men at Arms; Sir Henry Percy, Generall of the Light-horse; Thomas Huggens, Provost Marshall; Thomas Gower, Master of the Ordnance; Master William Pelham, Captain of the Pyoners; and Master Edward Randoll, Serjeant Ma∣jor, and divers others. These coming into Scotland, joyned with the Scot∣ish Lords, and set down before Leith, where passed many small skirmishes, many Batteries, and sometimes Assaults: to whom, after some time, a new supply came of above two thousand Foot; whereof were Captains, Sir Andrew Corbet, Sir Rowland Stanley, Sir Thomas Hesbith, Sir Arthur Manwa∣ring, Sir Lawrence Smith, and others: yet with this new supply there was little more done then before; many light skirmishes, many Batteries, and sometimes Assaults; so long, till at last the young French King, finding these broyls of Scotland to be too furious for him to appease, he sent to the Queen of England, desiring that Commissioners might be sent, to reconcile these differences: whereupon were dispatched into Scotland, Sir William Cecill, her principall Secretary, with Doctor Wotton, Dean of Canterbury; who concluded a Peace between England and France, upon these Conditi∣ons, That neither the King of France, nor the Queen of Scotland, should thenceforth use the Arms or Titles of England or Ireland; And that both the English and the French should depart out of Scotland; And a generall pardon should be enacted by Parliament, for all such as had been actors in those stirs. This Peace was scarce concluded, when Francis the young King of France died, leaving the Crown to his younger brother Charles, who was guided altogether by the Queen-Mother, and molested with the Civill dis∣sentions between the Princes of Guise and Conde; for whose reconcilement, the Queen sent Sir Henry Sidney, Lord President of VVales; and shortly after an Army, under the leading of the Lord Ambrose Dudley, Earl of VVarwick; who arriving at Newhaven, was received into the Town; which having kept eleven months, he was then constrayned, by reason of a Pestilence, to surrender again upon Composition, and so returned. About this time when the Parliament was upon dissolving; it was agreed upon by the House of Commons, to move the Queen to marry, that she might have Issue to succeed her; to which purpose, Thomas Gargrave, Speak∣er of the House, with some few other chosen men, had accesse to the Queen who humbly made the motion to her, as a thing which the Kingdom in∣finitely desired; seeing they could never hope to have a better Prince, then out of her loyns: Whereunto the Queen answered in effect thus; That she was already marryed; namely, To the Kingdom of England: and behold (saith she) the Pledge of the Covenant with my husband; and therewith she held out her finger, and shewed the Ring, wherewith, at the time of her Coronation, she gave her self in Wedlock to the Kingdom: and if (saith she) I keep my self to this husband, and take no other; yet I doubt not but God will send you as good Kings, as if they were born of me; forasmuch as we see by dayly experience, That the Issue of the best Princes do often de∣generate: And for my self, it shall be sufficient that a Marble stone declare, That a Queen having Raigned such a time, lived and dyed a Virgin. In∣deed before this time, many Matches had been offered her: First, King Philip: and when he was out of hope of matching with her himself, he then dealt with the Emperor Ferdinand his Unkle, to commend his younger
Son Charles, Duke of Austria, to her for a husband. And when this suc∣ceeded not, then Iohn, Duke of Finland, second Son to Gustavus King of Sweden, was sent by his father, to solicite for his eldest Brother Erricus who was honourably received, but the Match rejected. Then Adolphus Duke of Holst, Unkle to Frederick King of Denmark, came into England, upon a great hope of speeding; but the Queen bestowed upon him the Honour of the Garter, and a yeerly Pension, but not her self. Then Iames Earl of Arran, was commended to her by the Protestants of Scotland; but neither the man nor the motion was accepted. Of meaner Fortunes there were some at home that pleased themselves with hope of her Marriage: First, Sir William Pickering, a Gentleman of a good House, and a good Estate; but that which most commended him, was his studiousnesse of good letters, and sweet demeanour. Then Henry, Earl of Arundel, exceeding rich, but now in his declining age. Then Robert Dudley, youngest son of the Duke of Northumberland, of an excellent feature of face, and now in the flower of his age: but these might please themselves with their own con∣ceit; but were not considerable in her apprehension: they might receive from her good Testimonies of her Princely favour; but never Pledges of Nuptiall love. About this time the Earl of Feria (who had married the daughter of Sir William Dormer) being denyed leave of the Queen for some of his wives friends to live out of England, grew so incensed, that he made means to Pius the fourth, then Pope, to have her excommunicate, as an Heretick and Usurper: but the Pope inclining rather to save then to destroy; and know∣ing that gentle courses prevail more with generous mindes, then roughnesse and violence; in most loving manner wrote unto her, exhorting her to re∣turn to the Unity of the Catholike Church; and as it is said, made her great offers, if she would hearken to his counsell; Particularly, That he would recall the Sentence pronounced against her mothers Marriage; con∣firm the Book of Common Prayer in English; and permit to her people the use of the Sacrament in both Kindes. But Queen Elizabeth neither ter∣rified with the Earl of Feria's practises, nor allured with the Popes great offers, according to her Motto, Semper Eadem, persisted constant in her resolution, To maintain that Religion, which in her conscience she was perswaded, to be most agreeable to the Word of God, and most consonant to the Primitive Church. Whilst these grounds of Troubles are sowing in England, France, and Scotland, it is not likely that Ireland will lie fallow; though indeed it be a Countrey that will bring forth Troubles of it self, without sowing: but howsoever, to make the more plentifull Harvest of troubles at this time, Iohn Oneal (whose father King Henry the eighth made Earl of Tyrone) to prevent the punishment of a private Out-rage upon a Brother, broke into open Rebellion against the Prince: and though his attempts were maturely made frustrate by timely opposition; yet this was he that in the beginning of the Queens Raign, sowed the seeds of that trouble in Ireland; which af∣terward took so deep root, that till the ending of her Raign it could never thorowly be rooted out: though this man a yeer or two after came into England, and casting himself at the Queens feet, acknowledged his fault, and obtained pardon. The Treaty of Edinburgh should by promise have been confirmed by Francis the French King while he lived: he not having done it, Queen Elizabeth requires his Dowager the Queen of Scots to confirm it: but she solicited often to it by Throgmorton the Queens Ligier in France; made al∣wayes answer, She could not do it without the counsell of her Nobility in Scotland: whereupon Queen Elizabeth suspecting that this answer was but to hold her in amuzement, while some mischief was practising against
her, sent Sir Thomas Randoll into Scotland, to perswade the Lords there to enter into a League of mutuall amity with her, and other Protestant Princes and further, by no means to permit their Queen, now a widow, to marry again to any forraign Prince; for which she alleadged many great reasons. In the mean while, the Queen of Scots, purposing to return into Scotland, sent before-hand D'Oysette a French Lord, to intreat Queen Elizabeth, that with her leave, she her self might passe by Sea into Scoland, and D'Oysette might passe by Land. But Queen Elizabeth openly denyed both the one and the other, unlesse she would confirm the Treaty of Edinburgh; saying, It was no reason she should do the Queen of Scots courtesie, if the Queen of Scots would not do her right. The Queen of Scots much troubled with this answer, expostulates the matter with her Ligier Throgmorton, and much complains of the unkindenesse: but in the mean time providing Shipping, she loosed from Calice; and under covert of a mist, notwithstand∣ing that Ships were laid to intercept her, she arrived safe in Scotland; where she intreated her subjects in so loving a manner, that she gave great con∣tentment to the whole Kingdom; as well to the Protestant Party, as the other: and then sent Letters to Queen Elizabeth, proferring all observance and readinesse to enter League with her; so she might by Authority of Parliament be declared her Successor; which was but her Right. To this Queen Elizabeth answered, That though she would no way derogate from her Right: yet she should be loth to endanger her own security, and as it were to cover her own eyes with a Grave-cloth while she was alive; but fell again to her old Admonition, requiring her to confirm the Treaty of Edinburgh: And now to shew the respect she bore her, when her Unkles the Dukes D'Amale, D' Albeufe, and other Lords of France that had brought her home, returned thorow England, she gave them most bountifull and loving entertainment. These two Queens indeed were both of great Spirits, and both very wise; but these grew such Jealousies of State between them; (the Queen of Scots doubting lest Queen Elizabeth meant to frustrate her Suc∣cession; Queen Elizabeth doubting lest the Queen of Scots meant to pre∣vent her succession) that it kept them more asunder in love, then they were neer in blood, and was cause of many unkinde passages between them: in all which, though the Queen of Scots were a very neer Match to the Queen of England in the abilities of her minde; yet in the favours of Fortune she was much her inferiour. But now for all the courtesie which Q. Elizabeth shewed to the Queen of Scots Unkles at their returning thorow England, yet new practises were again set on foot against her at Rome; the Duke of Guise especially labour∣ing to have her be Excommunicate; but Pope Pius still averse from such roughnesse, meant now to try the Queen another way; and thereupon sent the Abbot Martinengi and when he might not be admitted to enter Eng∣land, then caused the Bishop of Viterbo his Nuntio in France, to deal earnest∣ly with the Queens Ligier Throgmorton, that she (as other Princes had done) would send her Orators to the Councell of Trent, which he before had cal∣led. But the Queen nothing tender in this point, made peremptory an∣swer, That a Popish Assembly she did not acknowledge to be a Generall Councell; nor did think the Pope to have any more Right or Power to call it, then any other Bishop. This Answer not only exasperated the Pope, but so alienated also the King of Spain's minde from her, that he was never after so kinde a friend to her as he had been; and none of her Embassadours ever after had any great liking to be employed to him. And now at this time, as the Abbot Martinengi was the last Nuntio that ever was sent from the Pope into England, so Sir Edward Carne, now dying at Rome, was the last Ligie that was ever sent to the Pope from the Kings of England.
And now Queen Elizabeth knowing well that she had drawn many ill willers against her State, she endeavoured to strengthen it by all the means she could devise: She caused many great Ordnance of Brasse and Iron to be cast; She repaired Fortifications in the Borders of Scotland; She encrea∣sed the number of her Ships, so as England never had such a Navy before; She provided great store of Armour and Weapons out of Germany; she caused Musters to be held, and youth to be trayned in exercises of Artillery; and to please the people (whose love is the greatest strength of all) she gave leave to have Corn and Grayn transported; and called in all base Coyns and Brasse Money. It was now the Fifth yeer of Queen Elizabeths Raine: when diverse great persons were called in question: Margaret Countesse of Lenox, Neece to to King Henry the eight, by his eldest sister, and her husband the Earle of Lenox, for having had secret conference, by letters with the Queen of Scots, were delivered prisoners to Sir Richard Sackvile, Master of the Rolles, and with him kept a while in custody. Also Arthur Poole and his brother, whose great grand-father, was George Duke of Clarnce, brother to King Edward the fourth: Antony Fortescue, who had married their sister, and other, were arraigned, for conspiring to withdraw themselves to the Duke of Guise in France; and from thence to return with an Army into Wales; to Declare the Queen of Scots, Queen of England; and Arthur Poole Duke of Clearnce; which particulars they confessed at the Barre, and were thereupon condemned to die; but had their lives spared, in regard they were of the Blood Royall. Also the Ladie Katherine Grey, daughter to Henry Grey Duke of Suffolke, by the eldest daughter of Charles Brandon having formerly been married to the Earle Pembrookes eldest sonne; and from him soone after lawfull divorced, was some yeers after found to be with childe by Edward Seymoure Earl of Hertford: who being at that time in France, was presently sent for; and being examined be∣fore the Archbishp of Canterbury: and affirming they were lawfully married; but not being able within a limited time to produce witnesses of their marriage; they were both committed to the Tower: where she was brought to Bed: and after by the Connivence or Corruption of their Keepers, being suffered sometimes to come together: Shee was with childe by him again, which made the Queen more angry then before; so as Sir Edward Warner Lieutenent of the Tower was put out of his place, and the Earle was fined in the star-chamber, five thousand pounds, and kept in prison nine yeers after. Though in pleading of his Case; One Iohn Hles argued; They were lawfull man and wife, by virtue of their owne bare Consent, without any Ecclesicsticall Ceremonie. The Lady a few yeers after, falling through grief into a mortall Sicknesse, humbly desired the Queens Pardon, for having married without her know∣ledge, and commending her children to her clemency, dyed in the Tower. At this time (the King being under Age) dissentions amongst the Peeres grew hot in Erance; of which there were two Factions; Both pretending the cause of Religion: of the One the Duke Guise, a Paipst, was Head; of the other the Prince of Conde a Protestant: but while Delirant Reges Plectun∣ter Achiui: while these Princes are at variance, the people suffer for it: and chiefly, as being under the weaker protection, the Protestant Party: where upon Queene Elizabeth, having well learned the Lesson: Tum tua res agitur, partis cum proximus ardet and fearing least the flaim of their dissention, might kindle a fire within her owne Kingdome; sent over Sir Henry Sidney Lord Presiden of Wales into France, to endeavour by all possible means their reconcilement, which when hee could not effect,
(and perhaps it was never meant he should effect it, but onely to see what invitations would be made to the Queen for her assistance) she thereupon, at the moan of the afflicted Protestants, sent over an Army of six thousand Souldiers, under the Conduct of the Earl of Warwick, in assistance of the Prince of Conde, and other Protestant Lords, who delivered to him the Town of Newhaven, to hold in the King of France his name, untill such time as Calice were restored: But the Prince of Conde marching to joyn with the English Forces, was by the Duke of Guise interrupted and ta∣ken prisoner which had been a great disappointment to the English, but that the Duke of Colin joyned with him, besieged Caen in Normandy, and took it; togeher with Bayeux, Faleise, and Saint Lo. The French Hostages that were pledges for the payment of five hundred thousand Cowns, if Calice were not restored, were remaining still in England; who perceiving there was like to be War with France, prepared secretly to get away; but being ready to take Shipping, were discovered, and brought back again. In the mean while, the Prince of Conde drawn on with a hope, to marry the Queen of Scots, and to have the chief Government in France, during the Kings Minority, concluded a Peace with the King, and with the Gui∣ses; so as now, all French, as well Protestants as Papists, required to have Newhaven delivered up: But the Earl of Warwick perceiving the icklenesse of the French Protestants, First to make sue to draw him into France, and now upon so slight occasion to require him to be gone, he shutteth all rench, both Protestants and Papists, ot of the Town, and layes hold of their Ships; the French on the other side make ready to set upon the Town, saying, They fought not now for Religion, but for their Countrey; wherefore it was meet that both Protestants and Papists should joyn their Forces, seeing they had already concluded a Peace betwixt themselves. And hereupon the Duke of Memorancy sent a Trumpetter to the Earl of Warwick, commanding him yeeld the Town; who making an∣swer by Sir Hugh Pawlet, That he would never yeeld it without the Queens leave: he thereupon besieged the Town, and with great violence of Bat∣tery, sought to get it by force: Which Queen Elizabeth hearing, she sent a Commission to the Earl of Warwick to yeeld it up, if upon honourable Conditions; which soon after was accordingly done, after the English had held it eleven months; and then the Earl, without any dishonour for yeelding up a Town, which the Pestilence made him no lesse unwilling then unable to hold, he returned into England: but that which was more dolefull then the losse of Newhaven, he brought the Pestilence with him in∣to England. The recovery of this Town not onely made the French to triumph, but hereupon the Chancellor of France pronounced openly, That by this Warre, the English had lost all their Right to Calice, and were not to require it any more, seeing it was one of the Condi∣tions, That neither of the Nations should make Warre upon the other; which was the Point stood upon by the King of France and his mother, when Queen Elizabeth sent Sir Thomas Smith to demand Calice to be re∣stored. At this time there were such crosse designes amongst the Princes of Christendome, that a very good Polititian could hardly under∣stand their Ayms. The Duke of Guise being slain in the Civill Warre, the Queen of Scots Dowry was not paid her in France, and the Scots were put off from being the Kings Guard: This exceedingly displeased the Queen of Scots: but then to please her again and for fear lest hereupon she should apply her self to the friendship of the English, her Unkle the Cardinall of Lorrain solicites her afresh, to marry Charls Duke of
Austria, offering her for her Dowry the County of Tyroll. The Queen of Scots, to make use of her Unkles fear, and perhaps to bring Queen Eliza∣beth into an opinion of depending upon her, acquaints her with this moti∣on, and therein requires her advice. Queen Elizabeth not willing she should marry with any forraign Prince, perswades her to take a husband out of England, and particularly commended to her the Lord Robert Dudley (whose wife a little before had with a fall broke her neck) promising withall, that if she would marry him, she should then by Authority of Parliament, be declared her successour, in case she dyed without issue. But when her Unkles and the Queen-Mother were informed of this motion, they so much disdained the Marriage with Dudley, that so she would refuse that Match, and perseverein the friendship of the French, they offered to pay her the Dowry money that was behinde, and to restore the Scots to all their former liberties in France. And as for the King of Spain, he had indeed a Ligier Embassadour here in England; but rather by way of complement, and to watch advantages, then for any sincere love; which he began now to withdraw from the English, as suspecting them to intend a Trade to the West Indies. And now the French Protestants may see what they brought upon them∣selves, by leaving the English at Newhaven, and by trusting to their Coun∣try-men the French Papists; for their peace was but a snare, and the Mar∣riage of Henry of Bourbon, Prince of Navarre, with Margaret of Valois, the French Kings sister, was but a bait to entrap them; for upon the confidence of this Marriage, being drawn together into Paris, they were the readier for the slaughter; and a few dayes after the Marriage, which were all spent in Feasts and Masks, to make them the more secure, upon a Watch-word gi∣ven, the bloody faction fell upon the Protestants, and neither spared age, nor sex, nor condition, but without mercy, and sense of humani∣ty, slaughtered as many as they could meet with, to the number of many thousands. It was now the sixth yeer of Queen Elizabeths Raign, a yeer fatall for the death of many great Personages: First died William, Lord Grey of Welon, Governour of Berwick, a man famous for his great Services in War: then William, Lord Paget, a man of as great Services in Peace; who by his great deservings, had wrought his advancement to sundry dignities, and honour∣able places: and though zealous in the Roman Religion, yet held by Queen Elizabeth in great estimation to his dying day: Then Henry Mannors, Earl of Rutland, descended by his mother from King Edward the fourth: And lastly, Francis the Dutchesse of Suffolk, daughter to Charles Brandon Duke of Suffolk, and mother to Queen Iane. And now Queen Elizabeth finding how fickle the French Protestants had carryed themselves towards her, intended to make a Peace; and to that end sent Sir Thomas Smith into France, joyning Throgmorton in Commission with him; and in conclusion a Peace was agreed on; whereof, amongst o∣ther Articles, this was one, That the Hostages in England should be freed, upon the payment of six hundred thousand Crowns: and this Peace was ratified by the Oath both of the Queen of England, and the King of France. About this time the English Merchants were hardly used both in Spain and in the Netherlands, upon pretence of Civill differences, but indeed out of hatred to the Protestant Religion: whereupon the English removed the seat of their Trading to Embden in Freezland but Gusman the Spa∣nish Liegier, newly come into England, finding the great dammages that the Netherlands sustained by these differences, endeavoured by all means to compose them; and thereupon Viscount Mounta∣gue, Nicholas Wootton, and Walter Haddon, Master of the Requests,
were sent to Bruges in Flanders; who, after many interruptions, brought the matter at last to some indifferent agreement. It was now the seventh yeer of Queen Elizabeth; when making a Pro∣gresse, she went to see Cambridge; where after she had viewed the Colledges, and been entertained with Comedies, and Scholasticall Disputations, she made her self a Latine Oration, to the great encouragement of the Schol∣lars, and then returned. Presently after her return she made the Lord Ro∣bert Dudley Master of her Horse, first Baron of Denbigh (giving him Denbigh and all the Lands belonging to it) and then Earl of Leicester, to him, and the heirs males of his body lawfully begotten: which Honour was con∣ferred upon him with the greatest State and Solemnity that was ever known. And now Leicester, to endear himself to the Queen of Scots, ac∣cused Sir Nicholas Bacon, Lord Keeper, for being privy to the libell of Hales, who affirmed the Right of the Crown to belong to the Family of Suffolk, in case the Queen should die without Issue; and thereupon was Bacon cast into prison; till afterward, upon his purgation, and the mediation of Sir William Cecill, he was set at liberty, and restored to his place. And now for a while we must cast our eyes upon Scotland, for that was now the Stage where all the great businesses of State were acted: Matthew Steward, Earl of Lenox, who had marryed Margaret Dowglas, King Henry the eighth's Neece by his eldest sister, had been kept as an Exile in Eng∣land now twenty yeers; him the Queen of Scots invites to come into Scot∣land under pretence of restoring to him his ancient Patrimony; but indeed to conferre with him about a Marriage with his son the Lord Darlie, for being reputed heir to the Crown of England, next after her self; she thought by matching with his son, to strengthen her own title, and to prevent the hope of any other. Queen Elizabeth, upon sute made by his wife, gave the Earl leave to go; but soon after, suspecting what the Queen of Scots intent was in sending for him, she, to hinder the proceeding, sent Sir Thomas Randll to her, to let her know, That if she proceeded in this Mach, she would exceedingly wrong her self; for that it was a Match so much disli∣ked by all the English, that she was fain to prorogue the Parliament, lest upon dislike thereof, there should something be enacted against her Right of Succession: But if she would marry the Earl of Leicester, she should then by Parliament be declared her next Heir. Hereupon, in the month of November, the Earl of Bedford, and Sir Thomas Randoll for Queen Eliza∣beth the Earl of Murray and Lidington for the Queen of Scots at Barwick, entred into a Treaty concerning the Marriage with the Earl of Leicester. The English Commissioners urged the great benefits that by this Match would accrew both to the Queen of Scots her self, and to the whole King∣dom of Scotland: The Scotish on the other side, urged the great disparage∣ment it would be to the Queen of Scots, if refusing the offers made her of divers great Princes, she should match her self with so mean a person as the Earl of Leicester. This matter held long debate, partly for that the Eng∣lish Commissioners were so appointed by Queen Elizabeth; and partly for that the Scotish Commissioners had a good minde to hinder her from mar∣rying at all; and perhaps not the least; for that the Earl of Leicester, being verily perswaded he should at last obtain Queen Elizabeth her self, by secret Letters warned the Earl of Bedford not to urge the Marriage with the Queen of Scots too far; and was thought for this cause to favour Darly under hand. The matter being in this manner protracted for two whole yeers together, the Queen of Scots impatient of longer delay, and being resolved in her minde what she would do used means that the Lord Darly got leave of Queen Elizabeth to go into Scotland for three months onely, under colour to be put in possession of his fathers Lands (though it be strange, the Queen upon any tems would let him go, if she really intended to hinder the
Marriage: but such was the destiny, if there were not a plot in it) and o in Febrary he came to Edinburgh; who being a young man, of not above nineteen yeers of age, of a comely countenance, and most Princely Pre∣sence, the Queen of Scots as soon as she saw him, fell in love with him, yet in modesty dissembling it for the present; she sought to get a Dispens∣on from Rome, because of their neernesse in Consanguinity. And now, her inclination being grown so apparent, that there was no concealing it, she sent Lydington to Queen Elizabeth, desiring her consent. But she, through the suggestions of the Earl of Murray, being induced to believe that the Queen of Scots intention was, by this Marriage, to get the Crown of Eng∣land, and to bring in Popery, entred into consultation with her Privy Coun∣cell, what was fit to be done to hinder the Marriage; who all concluded, that these were the best wayes: First, To have a Company of Souldirs levyed for terrour ake, about the Borders towards Scotland; then to com∣mit to prison the Countesse of Lenox, the Lord Darlies Mother; and to re∣call from Scotland the Earl of Lenox and his on Darly, upon pain of the losse of all their goods in England: then that the Scots, who were known to be averse from the Marriage, should be relieved and assisted: and lastly, That Katherine Grey, with the Earl of Hertford, should be received into some grace; about whom onely (it was thought) the Queen of Scots was most solicitous, as being her Rivall to the English Crown. Hereupon Sir Ni∣cholas Throgmorton was sent to the Queen of Scots, to counsell her in the Queens name, not to proceed in this Marriage; and to shew her the many inconveniences that would accrew unto her by it. But she returned answer, That the matter was too far passed to be recalled; and that Queen Elizabeth had no cause to be displeased with i; seeing herein she followed her advice, Not to match with  stranger, but with an English man born. Queen Eli∣zabeth being informed of her answer, calleth home the Earl of Lenox, and the Lord Drly his son, commanding them upon their Allegiance to return: The Father modestly by Letters excueth himself; the son humbly intrea∣eth her not to be a hinderance to his preferment; which he vows to employ in her Majesties Service to the uttermost of his power. And now, to make him the fitter match for her, the Queen of Scots honoured him first with Knighthood; then with the Dignities of the Lord Armanack, Earl of Rosse, and Duke of Rothsay; which Dukedom by Birh, pertaineth to the eldest sons of the Kings of Scotland. After this, when he had not been above five months in Scotland, she marryed him, and with the consent of most of the Peers, declared him King. At this, the Earl of Mrray, and other whom he drew to his paty extremely fretted, and fell to moving of tur∣bulent questions, Whether it were lawfull to admit a Papist King? Whether the Queen of Scots might choose a husband at her own pleasure? and whe∣ther the Peers of the Kingdom might not out of their Authority, impose one upon her? But howsoever, they raised Arms, and had disturbed the Nuptialls, but that the Queen levyed an Army to encounter them; with which she pursued them so closely, that they were fain to fly into Engld for protection; where Queen Elizabeth made no cruple to receive them, seeing the Queen of Scots had received Yareby, Stadon, and Walsh, that were fled out of England; but the Eal of Murray especially, who had alwayes been found addicted to the English. Queen Elizabeth perhaps was not much troubled at this Marriage; partly as knowing the milde disposition of the Lord Darly, and how little accesse of strength it brought o he Queen of Scots; but most of all,  plainy eeing here wold ouble  in Scotland upon it; and the troubles of Scotland would be the qitnese of England; which, as a good Mother of her Corey, was the ark she aym∣ed at: yet she made  shew of being offended with it; but rather to coceal her aym, then that he was offended with it indeed.
At this time the Emperour Maximlian sent to Queen Elizabeth his Embas∣sadour, Adam Smiricote, renewing the former sute for his brother Charles of Austria; for which Marriage the Earl of Sussex was very earnest; the Earl of Leicester as much against it; so as it grew to a quarrell between them, and the Court was divided into factions about it: but the Queen, who ne∣ver liked the dissentions of her Peers (though it be a Rule with some, Divide, and Raign) made them friends, at least in countenance. We may now leave Scotland a while, and see the Honour done at this time to Queen Elizabeth, not much inferiour to the Honour done to Solo∣mon by the Queen of Saba; for now Cecile, the sister of Errick King of Sweden, and wife of Christopher Marquesse of Baden, being great with childe, came from the farthest part of the North (a long Journey) thorow Germa∣ny, of purpose to see her, for the great fame she had heard of her Wisedom: At her being here, she was delivered of a childe, to whom, in requitall of her kindenesse, Queen Elizabeth was God-mother, and named him Edwar∣ds Fortunatus; giving to her and her husband, besides Royall Entertain∣ment, a yeerly Pension. At this time also, for the great Fame of her wisedome, Donald mac Carty More, a great Potentate of Ireland, came and delivered up into her hands all his most ample Territories; and then recei∣ving them again from her, to hold them to him and his Heirs males law∣fully begotten; and for want of such Issue, to remain to the Crown of England. The Queen in requitall, invested him with the honour of Earl of Glenkarne, and Baron of Valence; and besides many Presents given him, paid the charges of his Journey. It was now the eighth yeer of Queen Elizabeths Raign; when Sir Nicho∣las Arnold, a Knight of Gloucestershire, Governing Ireland under the title of a Justice, was called home, and Sir Henry Sidney placed in his room. And here by the way it is to be noted, That the Governours of Ireland, after it came under the English, were at first called Justices of Ireland; afterwards, Lievtenants; and their Vice-gerents were called Deputies. Afterwards at the Princes pleasure, sometimes Deputies, sometimes Justices, and some∣times Lievtenants; which last Title, though it be of greatest honour, yet in power is in a manner but the same. Si Henry Sidney at his coming into Ireland, found the Province of Munster in much disorder by reason of strife between Gyrald Earl of Desmond, and Thomas Earl of Ormond: whereupon the Queen sending for the Earl of Desmond into England, ordained a new Government in that Province, appointing a President to administer Justice, together with an Assistant on the Bench; two Lawyers and a Notary: and the first President she made in this place, was Sir William Sent-leger. And now Queen Elizabeth in a Progresse went to Oxford; where she took pleasure in viewing the Colledges, in hearing Orations, in seeing of Come∣dies, till the Comedy of Palemon and Arcett turned to a Tragedy, for by the fall of a wall, through the multitude of people that pressed in to see it; three men were slain. At her coming away, she made an Oration in Latine to the Schollars, a sufficient recompence for all the Orations they had made to her. And this yeer, was a call of seven new Serjeants at Law, who kept their Feast at Grayes Inne in Holborn. Upon the Queens return from Oxford, the Parliament began, where they presently fell upon the mtter of succession; and moving the Queen to mar∣ry in which points some went so far, that they spared not to accuse the Queen, as one carelesse of Posterity to defame Cecill with libells and re∣proaches, as if he were her Counsello in this matter; but above all, to curse Doctor Huic her Physitian, who was thought to disswade her from Marriage, by reason of I know not what womanish insufficiency. At last in the Upper House it was agreed, That Sir Nichla Bacon, Lord Keeper, their Orator, should in all their names beseech the Queen to marry; and
withall, to declare a Successor in the Crown, if she should happen to die without Issue; for which he gave many reasons, declaring what mischiefs were likely to befall the Kingdom, if she should die before a Successor were designed. But in the Lower House there were some, amongst whom, were Bell and Mouson (two Lawyers of great account) Dutton, Sir Paul Went∣wort, and other, who grew to far higher tearms, disparaging the Queens Authority, and saying, That Princes were bound to designe a Successor; and that in not doing it, the Queen should shew her self no better then a parricide of her Countrey. The Queen was contented to bear with words spoken in Parliament; which spoken out of Parliament, she would never have endured: but not willing to expostulate the matter with the whole number, she commanded that thirty of the Higher House, and as many of the Lower, should appear before her, to whom she delivered her minde to this effect; That she knew what danger hangeth over a Prin∣ces head, when a Successor is once declared; she knew that even children themselves, out of a hastie desire of bearing Rule, had taken up Armes against their own fathers; and how could better conditions be expected from kindred? She had by reading observed, That Successors in a collate∣rall Line, have seldom been declared; and that Lewis of Orleance, and Fran∣cis of Angoulesme were never declared Successors, and yet obtained the Crown without any noyse. Lastly, she said, Though I have been content to let you debate the matter of Succession, yet I advise you to beware, that you be not injurious to your Princes patience. With these and the like reasons she gave so good satisfaction, that they never after troubled her with making any more such motion. And though she consented not in plain tearms to declare a Successor, yet soon after she gave some intimation of it; for one Thornton, a Reader of the Civill Law in London, who in his Le∣ctures, called the Queen of Scots Right in question, was clapped up in pri∣son for his labour. In the beginning of her ninth yeer, Charles the ninth, King of Frnc, sent his Ambassadour Ramboulet into England to the Queen, with the Robes and Ornaments of the Order of S. Michael, to bestow upon which two of her Nobility she pleased; and she making choice of the Duke of Norfolk, and the Earl of Leicester, they were by Ramboulet invested with them; an Ho∣nour that had never been conferred upon any English, but only K. Henry the eighth, King Edward the sixth, and Charls Brandon Duke of Suffolk, though afterward prostituted almost to any, without difference. And now to return to the Affairs of Scotland: The nineteenth of Iune last past, the Queen of Scots, in a happy hour, was at Edinborough Castle diliveed of a Son, that was afterward Iames the sixth of Scotland, and the first Monarch of Great Britain; whereof she presently sent word to Queen Elizabeth by Iames Melvyne; who thereupon sent Sir Henry Killigrew to congratulate her safe deliverance, and her young son, with all demon∣stration of love and amity. But now the love of the Queen of Scots to her husband the Lord Darly, was not so hot at first, but it was now grown to be as cold; and she had not heaped honour on him so fast before, but now as fast she taketh them off: for where before in all publike Acts, she had used to place her husbands name first, now she caused it to be placed last, and in the coyning of money began to leave it quite out. This unkindenesse between them was fomented by one David Rizie an Italian, whom the Queen had taken into her service, first, as a Musician, and then taking a liking to him, made him here Secretary for the French Tongue; by means whereof, he had oftentimes secret conference with her, when the King her Husband might not be admit∣ted. This indignity the King himself, being given to his pleasures of
Hunting and Hawking, resented not so much, as some Lords that were his frinds; who told him plainly, That it stood not with his Ho∣nour to suffer this fellow to live. By whose instigation the King drawn to plot his death; One day, taking with him the Earl of Reuven, and other, he rushed into the Queens Chamber at her Supper time, where finding David Rizie at a Cupboord, tasting some meat that had been taken from the Table, he seized upon him, dragged him forth into an outer Chamber, and there murthered him; the Queen at that time being great with childe, and like by that affright to have mis∣carryed: But the Fact being done, the King came in to her again, as∣suring her there was no hurt at all intended to her Person. The man that had animated the King to do this fact, was especially the Earl Murray, of whom it is necessary to say something, because his part will be the greatest of all the Scottish Actions of this time. He was the base sonne of King Iames the fifth, and so the base brother of the Queen; made at first, Prior of Saint Andrewes: But not liking that Religious Title, he affected rather some Temporall Honour; which when the Queen, being then in France, denyed him, then in an angry mood returned into Scotland, where, by the advice of Knox, whom he held for a great Patriark, brought the matter so to passe, that in an Assembly of the States, the Religion was altered, and the French were banished out of Scotland. Yet afterward, as soon as the Queen was a Widow, he posted into France, and so insinuated with her, that she created him Earl of Murray, and promoted him to an Honourable Marriage. Being thus exalted, he returned into Scotland; where, for the further growth of his ambitious designes, he sowed seeds of Se∣dition, affirming often, what a misery it was to be under the Com∣mand of a woman; and that Royalty was not to be tyed to any Stock or Kindred, but to Vertue onely, whether the parties were legitimaie or no; by this course making way to the Kingdom for himself. To this end, he used all the meas he could to keep the Queen from marrying again; which when he could not effect, he then sought wayes how to make discord between her and her Husband; for which cause he had caused the King to murther Rizie. Of the foulnesse of which Fact, when the King had a while grew sensible, he meant to be revenged of Murray, who had counselled him to do it: which Murray understanding, prevented it with causing the like to be done to him, as will presently be seen. For the Queen having been delivered of a Son, and the day ap∣pointed for the Christning being come; where the God-fathers were Charles King of France, and Philibert Duke of Savoy; Queen Elizabeth be∣ing requested to be God-mother, sent thither the Earl of Bedford as her Deputy, and a Font of Massie Gold for a Present, in value 1043 l. but gave him expresse Command, That he should not honour Darly with the Title of King. But before a month or two, after the Christning were passed, The King in a stormy and tempestuous night, was strang∣led in his Bed, and then cast forth into the Garden, and the house imme∣diately blown up with Gun-powder. The rumour of this murther being spread abroad, the common Fame laid it upon Murray and Morton, and their Confederates; Mur∣ray and Morton upon the Queen: But we must not here give ear to that which BUCHANAN writes; who to curry favour with the Earl MURRAY, layes most impudent scandalls upon the Queene; whereof, before his death, he repented himself ex∣tremely. The King thus murthered, and the QUEENE left alone to her self, she is counselled to marry with some, that might be able to assist her against all her opposites: IAMES
Hepburn Earl of Bothwell being then greatly in her favour, and of great eminencie for his valour: And though he were the man that had acted the murther, yet is he by Murray and his confederates, commended to the Queen; to which motion, as being destitute of friends, and not know∣ing whom to trust; she at last consents, but upon these conditions, That above all things, respect might be had to her yong Sonne; and that Bothwell might be legally quitted, both from the bond of his former marriage, and also of the Kings murther. Hereupon a course is plot∣ted, by which, Bothwell is called to the Barre; and Morton being his Advocate, by the Sentence of Judges he is cleerly acquitted. Upon this, he is created Duke of Orkeny, and by consent of many of the Nobility, is marryed to the Queen; which bred a suspition in many, that the Queen was conscious of the murther, which was the thing that by the marriage they intended: And the suspition once raised, they seek by all means to increase, that they may have the better colour against her; and so, the very same man who had absolved Bothwell, and consented to the marriage, now takes Arms against her, as a Delin∣quent in both; force him to flee, and then seize upon the Queen, whom, cld in a very homely garment, they thrust into prison in Loch-levyn, under the custody of Murray's mother, who had been the Harlot of King Iames the fifth; but boasting her self to have been his lawfull wife, and her son, his lawfull Issue. Queen Elisabeth having at length notice hereof, sent Sir Nicholas Throgmorton into Scotland, to expostulate with the Confederates, touching this insolent usage of the Queen; and to consult, by what means shee might be restored to her liberty. But Throgmorton coming into Scotland, found the Confede∣rates in more insolent terms then had been reported; being divided in opinion, what to do with the Queen, some would have her banished perpetually, into England or France; some would have her questioned before the Judges, committed to perpetuall custody, and her son pro∣claimed King: others, more inhumane, would have her at once depri∣ved of Princely Authority, of life and all; and this, Knox and some other Ministers thundred out of the Pulpits. Throgmorton on the other side, alleaged many passages out of the holy Scriptures, touching Obedience to the higher Powers; maintaining, That the Queen was subject to no Tri∣bunall, but that in Heaven; That no Judge upon Earth might call her in question; That there was no Office nor Jurisdiction in Scotland, which was not derived from her Authority, and revokeable at her pleasure. They again opposed the peculiar Right of the Kingdom of Scotland; and that in extraordinary cases, they were to proceed besides order, taking up Buchanans Arguments; who in those dayes, by instigation of Murray, wrote that damn∣ed Dialogue, De Iure Regni apud Scotos; wherein, against the verity of the Scottish History, he indeavours to prove, That the People have power, both to create, and to depose their King. After all their debating, all that Throg∣morton could get of them, was a Writing without any Subscription, wherein they protested, They had shut up the Queen for no other in∣tent, but to keep her apart from Bothwell, whom she loved so desperately, that to injoy him, she regarded not all their ruines; willing him to rest satisfied with this Answer, till such time as the rest of the Peers met together. And notwithstanding all he could say, they shut up the Queen daily, in more straight custody, though with tears she besought them to deal more mildly with her, and to let her but once have a sight of her son, which would not be granted her. At last when fair perswasions would not serve to make her freely give over the Kingdom, they threatned to question her o∣penly for incontinent living, for the Kings murder, and for Tyranny, so as through feare of death, they compelled Her, unheard, to set her
hand to three Instruments; In the first whereof, she gave over the King∣dom to her young son, at that time scarce thirteen Months old: In the se∣cond, she constituted Murray Vice-Roy during the minority of her son: In the third, in case he refused the charge, these Governours were nomina∣ted; Iames Duke of Chasteau, Herald, Giles Spike Earl of Argile, Matthew Earl of Lenox, Iohn Earl of Atholl, Iames Earl of Moton, Alexander Earl of Glencarn, and Iohn Earl of Mar. And presently she signified to Queen Elizabeth by Throgmorton, that she had made these grants by com∣pulsion through the counsell of Throgmorton, telling her that a grant extor∣ted from one in prison (which is a just fear) is actually void and of no effect. Five dayes after the Queen had made this Resignation, Iames the sixth, the Queens Son, was Anointed and Crown'd King, Iohn Knox preaching at the same time; but a Protestation was then put in by the Hamiltons, that all this ought to be no prejudice to the Duke of Chasteau Herald in his Right of succession against the Family of Lenox; but Queen Elisabeth had forbidden Throgmorton to be at the Action, that she might not seem by the presence of her Embassador, to approve their proceeding in displacing of the Queen. Fifteen dayes after this transaction, Murray himself returned ou of France into Scotland, and within three dayes went to the Queen with some other of the confederates, who charged her with many crimes, and wished her if she tendered her Life and Honor, to observe these prescrip∣tions: Not to disturb the peace of the Kingdom, nor desire to be at Li∣berty, not to stir up the Queen of England, or the King of France to m∣let Scotland with any War, not to think any more of Bothwells love, or meditate revenge upon Bothwells adversaries. Murray being now proclaimed Regent of Scotland, he bindeth himself under his Hand and Seal to do nothing which shall concerne War or Peace, the Kings Person or his marriage, or the Liberty of the Queen, without the consent of the confederaes; and then gives Throgmorton warning by Lydingon, not to make any further intercession for the Queens Liberty, for that he and the rest had rather run any hazard then to suffer it. Soon af∣ter he puts to death Iohn Hpburn, Daglish, and others that were Bothwells servants, for having a hand in the murther of the King: But they (which he little expected) when they were at the Gallows, ready to dye, protested before God and his holy Angells, that Bothwell had told them, that Morton and Mrray were the first authors of the murther. They freed the Queen from all suspition, like as Bohwell himself being prisoner in Denmark, both living and dying, often protested with deep asseerations, that the Queen was innocent. And fourteen yeers after, Morton going to execu∣tion, confessed that Bohwell dealt with him to consent to the murther of the King, which, when he refused utterly unlesse the Queen under her hand writing would allow of it; Bothwell made answer, that could not be, but the fact must be done without her knowledge. A little before this time, upon one and the same day, dyed two of the Privy Councell, Sir Iohn Mason Treasurer of the Queen Chamber, a grave and learned man, but a great Usurper and Encroacher upon Ecclesiasticall Livings; and Sir Richard acvile Vice-Treasurer of the Exchequer, a man both prudent and provident, and allyed to the Queen by her mother Ane Bol. In his room succeeded Walter Mildmay, a man of wisdom and inte∣grity; In Masons Office came Sir Francis Knowles, who married Katherine Care, the daughter of Mary Bolen, the Queens Mothers Sister. It was now the yeer 1567. And the tenth yeer of Queen Elizabeths Raign, when the Earl of Stolberg came into England from the Emperour Maxmillian, to treat of the mariage of the Queen with the Archduke Charls upon which very occasion the Queen a little before had sent the E. of Sussex
to the Emperor, with the Order of the Garter: But in the Treaty of mar∣riage, there fell out so many difficulties, about Religion, maintenance of the Duke, about the Royall Title, and concerning succession, that after it had been treated of seven whole yeers together, it came at last to nothing, and the Duke not long after marryed Mary daughter to Albert the fifth Duke of Bavaria; yet both he and the Emperour continued ever after a good corre∣spondence with the Queen. About this time, there came from Iohn Basil Emperour of Russia and Muscovia, Stephen Twerdic, and Theodore Pgorella, with a Present of rich Furs of Otter, Miniver, and the like, tendering all service and obsequious∣nesse to the Queen and the English. The Merchants by vertue of a Grant from Queen Mary, had combined themselves into a Society, which they called the Muscovie Company; and having large Priviledges granted them from the Emperour, went thither with a Navie yeerly, making a very gain∣full Voyage; but then it proved most gainfull, when for the Queens sake they obtained at the Emperours hands, in the yeer 1569. That none but the English of that Company, should Traffique in the North-parts of Russia. With these Russian Embassadours there returned into England, Anthony Ienkinson, who in his Travels had made curious Observation of Russia, set forth a Geographicall Description of it, and was the first of the English that sailed through the Caspian Sea. And this yeer, the 8. of June, Sir Thomas Sackvile was created Baron of Buckhurst, at Whitehall. We have seen before, the first Act of the Queen of Scots Tragedy: Now comes in the second, having been 11 Moneths kept a prisoner; at last, by the help of George Dowglas, to whose Brother she was committed, she made escape from Loch-levyn, to Hamiltons castle; where upon the testi∣monies of Robert Melvyn, and others, in a meeting of a great part of the Nobility, there was drawn a sentence declaratory, That the Grant extorted from the Queen in prison, (which is Iustus metus) was actually void from the beginning. Upon which Declaration, great multitudes locked to her, so as within a day or two she had gotten an Army of at least six thousand; but when they joyned battell with Murray, being but raw and unexpert Souldiers, they were soon defeated. In this case, the Queen sought to save her self by flight, journeying in one day threescore miles, and coming at night to the house of Maxwell Lord Heris, from thence she sent Iohn Beton to Queen Elisabeth with a Diamond Ring, which she had fomerly received from her, as a Pledge of mutuall Amity; intimating, that she would come into England, and implore her aid, if her Subjects offer∣ed to prosecute her any further. Queen Elisabeth returned answer, that she should expect from her, in abundant manner, all loving and friendly offices. But before the Messenger was returned, she, contrary to the advice of her friends, entred into a small Bark, & with the Lords, Heris, and Flemming, and a few others, landed at Wickinton in Cumberland, neer the mouth of the River of Decwent, the seventeenth day of May; and the same day wrote Letters to the Queen in French with her own hand, the effect whereof was, That having made an escape from the the hands of her insolent and rebellious Subjects, she was now come into England, upon certain hope of her approved clemencie; and therefore humbly desiring, she might forthwith be conducted to her presence. Queen Elisabeth sending Letters by Sir Francis Knolles, comforted her, and promised her aid and de∣fence, according to the equity of her cause; but denyed her accesse, for that she was held guilty of many crimes, giving command to have her brought to Carlile, as a place of better safety. The Queen of Scots receiving this an∣swer, and finding accesse to the Queen denyed her, maketh request again by Letter, that she might have leave, both to unfold the injuries she had received, and to answer the crimes objected, in her own presence;
humbly intreating her, that either she might be admitted to have conference and assistance, or else have free leave to depart out of England, to gain supply elswhere, and not be held a prisoner in the Castle at Carlile for s much as she came voluntarily into England, relying upon her love so often professed. Upon thes Letters, Queen Elisabeth exceedingly commiseraed her case, and could have fond in her heart to admit her to her presence, but that her Councellours conceived it to be matter for consultation, what to do in this case. To detain her in England, had many mischiefs attend∣ing on it; to send her into France; as many; to send her back into Scotland, many more; so as in conclusion, the most were of opinion, to have her de∣tained, as one taken by right of War, and not to be dismissed, till she had made satisfaction for assuming the Title of England, and for the death of Darly her husband, who was born one of the Queens Subjects. In this diversity of opinions, Queen Elisabeth out of her own judgement, sent word by Middemore, to the Regent of Scotland, that he should come him∣self in person, or else depute some fit persons to answer the complaints of the Queen of Scots against him and his confederates, and render sufficient reasons wherefore they had deprived her; otherwise she would forthwith dismisse her, and with all the forces she could, settle her in her Kingdom. To this Summons, Murray obeys, and comes to York, the place appointed for this Treaty, accompanied with seven more of his intimate friends, who stood Delegates for the Infant King, namely, Iames Earl of Morton, Adm Bishop of the Orkneys, Robert of Dunferm, Patrick Lord of Lyndsey, Iames Mac-gylly, and Henry adinary; and with these, Lydington the Secretary, and Gerge Buchanan. And the very same day came thither Thomas Howard Duke of Norfolk, Thomas Ratcliff Earl of Sussex, and Sir Ralph Saedler a Privie-Councellour, appointed Commissioners for Queen Elisabeth. For the Queen of Scots, (who took it hainously, that Queen Elisabeth would not hear the caus hr self, but refer hr to Subjects, being an absolute Prince, and not tyd to their procedings) there appeared Iohn Lesley Bishop of Ross, Wil∣liam Lord Levyngon, Robert Lord Boyde, Ga of Kilwynnin, Iohn Gurdn, and Iames Cockurn. Being met, Lydingto turning himself to the Scots, in a wondrous liberty of Speech, gave them this advice, Maturely to consider, what prejudice they should draw upon themselves, by accusing th Queen of Scots, and calling her Reputation in question publikely before the English, professed enemies of the Scottish Nation. Likewise, wha ac∣count they shall be able to give hereof to the King, when he shall grow to iper yrs, and shall see what an injury this was to the Kingdom, his Mo∣ther, and his own peron. Wherefor (said he) it seemeth requisite to for∣bear this businesse alogether, unlesse the Queen of England will enter into a uuall league of Offence and Defence, against all those, which under this pretenc, shall go about o molest us. Upon this Speech of his, the Dlgates of the Quen of Scots made Protestation, That although it pleased the Qun of Scots, to have the cause between her and her disloyall Subjects, dted befo the English, yet she being a free Prince, and ob∣noxious to no earthly Prince whatsoever, did not thereby yeeld her self subject to th Jurisdiction and command of any person. On the contrary, the English proestd, That they did in no wise admi that Protestation, in prjudice to the right which the Kings of England have anciently challen∣ged as superiou Lords of the Kingdom of Scoland. The day after, the Queen of Scos Delegates st forth at large the injurious dealing of Morton, Murray, Marre, Glecar, , and others, against the Queen; and how they had compelled hr, for fear of death, to resign her Crown; which there∣fore (they said) was of no or. Murray and his confederates make an∣swr, That they had done nothing, but by consent of the Peers in Parlia∣ment; and tha in proscuing o Bothwell, the author of the Kings mur∣ther,
whom the Queen protected; and as for her resignation, hat it was voluntarily and freely done. All this the Queen of Scots Delegaes an∣swered and confuted, affirming in particular, That where there are 100 Earls, Bishops and Barons, (more or lesse) that have voices in the Parlia∣ment of Scotland, there were not in that tumltous assembly they speak of, above four Earls, one Bishop, an Abbot or two, and six Barons; where∣fore their earnest request was, that the Qeen of England would be n∣sible of these indignities offered her; and take some course for a speedy re∣dnesse. After this, some new Commissioners from Queen Elizabeth were added to the former, to some of whom, the Queen of Scots took excepti∣on; unlesse the French and Spanish Embassadors might be taken in, and her self admitted into the presence of the Queen and them, publickly to de∣fend her own innocency; and that Murray might be detained and ited, whom she affirmed, she was able to prove to have been the chief Plotter of the murther of her husband Darley. This was held to be a just demand by the Duke of Norfolk, the Earls of Arundell, Sussex, Leicester, and the Lord Clinton: But Queen Elizabeth waxing somewhat angry, openly said, that the Queen of Scots should never want an Advocate as long as Norfolk lived: It was seen here, which is said, that the heart of the King is inscrutable; for how Queen Elizabeth stood affected in this case of the Queen of Scots, no man could well discern she detested the insolen∣cy of her Subjects in deposing her, and yet gave no assistance to restore her. After long agitation of this businesse, and nothing concluded, Mur∣ray a little before his return into Scotland, slyly propounded the mariage of the Queen of Scots to the Duke of Norfolk; which he with a modest answer rejected as a thing full of danger. But withall, Murray the more to alienate Queen Elizabeths mind from the Queen of Scots, gave ou, that she had passed away to the Duke of Andyn her Right to the Crown of Eng∣land, and that the transaction was confirm'd at Rome; he shewd Letters also which the Queen of Scots had written to some friends whom she trust∣ed; wherein she accused the Queen for not dealing with her according to promise, and boasted of succours she expected from some others. This last clause something troubled Queen Elizabeth, neither could she conje∣cture from whence any such succour should come; seeing both France with the Civill Wars, and the King of Spain in the Low-countries had enogh to do at home. But at last it brake out, that one Robert Ridolph a Florentine under the habit of a Merchant in London, was suborned by Pope ius the fifth, to make a secret commotion of the Papists in England against the Queen, which he performed indeed with a great deal of secrecy and much cunning; whereupon the Queen of Scots was removed from Bolton (a Castle of the Lord Scroops) where all the neighbouring people were Papists to Tutbury more toward the heart of the Country, under the custody of George Earl of Shrewsbury. About this time the Guises in France, and the Duke D'Alva in the Low-countries, began to endeavour the utter extirpation of the Protestant Reli∣gion. In France the Ministers of the Gospell are commanded within a limitted time to depart the Kingdom; when Queen Elizabeth forgetting the icklenesse of the Protestants at New-haven, once again takes upon her their protection; supplyes them with two hundred thousand Crowns in money, besides Munition in abundance, and with all humanity receives the French that fled into England; the rather, for that they made solemn pro∣testation they took not up Arms against their Prince; but only stood upon their own defence. In the Low-countries likewise, the Duke D'Alva, breathing nothing but slaughter and blood; made the Dutch come flock∣ing into England as into a Sanctuary, where with all courtesie they were received.
And here it will be fit to shew how the War in the Low-countries be∣gan first, which was thus: At which time the King of Spain brought in the Spanish Inquisition a small number of the meaner sort of people, in tumultuous manner cast the Images out of Churches and brake hem in pieces, and although that tumult was soon quieted, yet the King of Spain taking advantage at the rashnesse of a few, to charge the whole Nation with Rebellion: sent amongst them Ferdinando Alvarez, Duke D' Alva, a bloody and fierce man, (who contrary to the Ordinances and customes of the Country) took away all authority from the ordinary Courts of Ju∣stice; Erected new consistories; condemned and put to death the Peers, without tryall by their lawfull Judges; Placed Garrisons of Spaniards throughout all their Cities and Villages, and by force exacted the twenti∣eth part of the fruits of the Earth, and the tenth of moveables upon every Alienation. At that time, a mighty masse of money borrowed from the Genowayes, and other Italian Merchants was sent out of Spain into the Low-countries, there to be imployed to interest, which being brought by ship∣ping, was pursued by the French; and forced to fly for succour into the Havens of England, whom the Queen commanded to be succour'd; as conceiving the money to be the King of Spains as it was given out: But at the same time, Cardinall Odette coming out of France into England, and giving notice to the Queen that the money was not the King of Spains, but belonged to certain merchants of Geneva; from whence the Duke D' Alva had taken it against their will, with a purpose to imploy it to the ruine of the Protestants; and information also being given her by one that had a property in the money that it was so she determined to put in security, and to borrow the money of the merchants her self, which is an usuall thing with Princes when goods are taken in their Ports; and the King of Spain himself had lately done the like. The Duke D' Alva be∣ing informed of this dealing of thee Queens; by Gerard de Spese the King of Spains Embassador in England; seizeth presently upon all the goods of the English in the Low-contries, and kept the men prisoners; The Queen did the like with the Dutch merchants in England, Letters of Mart were granted on both sides, and this grew to such a quarrell between the Nations, that being nourished with other differences afterward, it brought forth in Eighty Eight, that Spanish Invasion, which is, and will be memo∣rable in all future Ages. Upon occasion of this Money detained, certain Peers of England, a∣mongst whom, were the Duke of Norfolk, the Marquesse of Winchester, the Earls of Arundell, Northumberland, Pembroke, Leicester, and others, Accused Sir William Cecill, for sending away money into France, making this their colour, but done indeed out of envying his great favour with the Queen, and suspecting him to incline to the house of Suffolk in the matter of succession. Hereupon they consult secetly how to get him be impri∣son'd; and Throgmorton (who envyed him as much as they) suggesting that if he were once clapp'd up, they might soon find out a way to crush him; But the Queen (by what means it is uncertain) coming to have no∣tice hereof, gave a check to their purpose, and protected Cecill against their combined practises. The Earl Murray being returned into Scotland, makes the Lords believe that he desires a meeting at Edinbourgh, to consult about restoring the Queen to her Liberty; but as Hamilton Duke of Chasteau Herald (appointed Vicegerent of the Kingdome by the Queen) and the Lord Heris were coming thither, he circumvented them, and before any of the rest came cast them into prison; and forthwith in an open War, oppresseth all her Favourers. It may be thought, the Earl Murray could have been content, the Queen should have been set at liberty; but that he knew,
her liberty could not be without his servitude; and Queen Elisabeth perhaps would willingly have had her restoe to her Kingdom, but that she doubted, her restoring would indanger her own security: And thus, while they regarded their own ends in the first place, and hers but in the second, she had the fortune to be pitied, but not the happi∣nesse to be relieved; and all she could do her self, was but to tye the knot of her bonds the faster; if she could have sate still, they would perhaps have loosened of themselves; but now, the more she stirred, the more she was intangled. And now the Destiny of the Duke of Norfolk began to work: It was in every ones mouth, that the Duke should marry the Queen of Scots; and it is true, there had been motions made; but the matter not so forward, as the Voice of the People, which commonly pre∣sageth what will follow. It had been motioned to the Duke at York, by the Bishop of Rose; and afterward (in pretence at least.) by Mur∣ray himself at Hampton-Court; but the Duke, before he would re∣solve in the matter, deliberated with the Earls of Arudell, Nor∣thumberland, Westmerland, Sussex, Pembroke, Southampton, and Leicester himself, who all judged it fit, he should acquaint the Queen with it first, and then leave the matter to her liking. Within a few dayes, Sir Nicholas Throgmorton meeting the Duke in the Pallace at Westminster, advised him, to move the Earl of Leicester himself to embrace the match, seeing he had formerly sued for it; but if he re∣fused it, then at least to take him along with him, for that himself a∣lone would hereby be able to procure the Queens consent. A day or two after, the Earl of Leicester propounded the matter to the Duke, and then communicateth it to the Earls of Arundell and Pembroke; who thereupon, together with Throgmorton, wrote Letters to the Queen of Scots, commending the Duke of Norfolk to her for a Husband; the Duke himself likewise writeth to her, tendering his singular Love and respect unto her. Upon this, Articles are drawn, written with Leicesters own hand, and sent to the Queen of Scots; to which if she consented, they then promised to procure, that Queen Elisabeth should give her assent, and that forthwith she should be reinvested in her Kingdom, and the Succession of England should be confirmed upon her. Wee may easily believe, the Queen of Scots was not hardly drawn to give consent to her own desire; but in the mean time, the Duke had imparted to the Lord Lumley the whole proceeding, and had much ado to get the Earl of Leicesters consent, that he might advise of it with some other of his Friends; yet a little after, he opened the matter to Cecill also. The rumour of this Marriage was soon come to the Queens ears; which the Duke understanding, hee dealt earnestly with the Earl of Leicester, to have the matter propounded to the Queen out of hand. Leicester makes delayes, and pretends causes to put it off which Cecill seeing, he adviseth the Duke, to go and acquaint the Queen with it himself. This councell Leicester opposed, promising to open it to the Queen as she went in Progresse. At length, at Farn∣ham, the Duke standing by as the Queen sate at Table, she gave him a tart Admonition, That he were best take heed, upon what pillow he rested his head. After this, at Tichfield, Leicester fell sick, or at least counterfeited; to whom the Queen coming, and bidding him be of good cheer; hee with sighs and tears craved pardon for his fault, and unfolded to her the whole story from the very beginning. Where∣upon, the Queen called the Duke into the Gallery, reproving him sharply, for going about the Marriage, without acquainting her; and commanding him, upon his Allegiance, to desist. The Duke made
her a free and hearty promise of obedience, and spared not to say (as if he lit∣tle regarded the Qu. of Scots) that his Revenues in England were not much lesse then hers in Scotland; and that when he was at his house in Norwich, he thought himself in a sort not inferior to some kings: but notwithstanding, finding the Queens anger by her countenance, and perceiving Leicester to be in a manner quite alienated, & most of the Nobility also, as scarcely saluting him when they met him, he grew extremely dejected, and prepared presently to leave the Court, meaning to stay at Norfolk, till by his friends intercessi∣on, and his own submissive Letters, the Queens heart might be mollified to∣wards him: Mean while, the Court was suspitously fearfull, lest he should raise Rebellion, and (they say) it was concluded, that if he did so, the Qu. of Scots should presently be made away. And now the Duke, who held secret commerce by Letters with the Bishop of Ross, Throgmorton and Leicester (for they were sent to and fro in bottles) being examined touching the marriage of the Qu. of Scots, and certain secret conferences with the Bishop of Rosse, confessed most of the Objections, and was thereupon committed to the Tower, under the custody of Sir Henry Nevill; within two dayes after the Bishop of Rosse likewise is examined, and together with the Florentine Robert Ridolph, is delivered to the custody of Sir Francis Walsingham, the Earl of Pembroke is confined to his house, and examined privately; but his confession was not committed to writing; It being his request because he could not write himself. At this time, the rumor of Insurrection in the North, begun in Autumne before, grew very strong, by reason of some frequent meetings of the Earls of Northumberland, Westmerland, and others, who thereupon being upon their Allegiance sent for to repaire pre∣sently to the Queen, they make delayes (for they stayed waiting for supplies, both from the Scots, and from the Duke D'Alva) when the Earl of Nor∣thumberland, doubtfull what to do, was frighted of purpose by his ser∣vants, telling him, that men in Arms were neer at hand to apprehend him; Who thereupon in a tempestuous night, riseth out of his bed, and in great fear gets into his Park at Topcliffe, and the night following to Branspith to the Earl of Westmerlands house, where a great many were met that were acquainted with the Enterprise: Here they brake forth into an open Rebellion, being pressed forward, by one Nicholas Morton a Romish Priest, sent by the Pope to pronounce Queen Elizabeth an Heretick; and therefore to have utterly lost all Right of Soveraignty: By and by they send forth a writting, wherein they declare that they had taken Arms for no other end, bt that the Religion of their fore-fathers might be restored, wicked Coun∣sellors removed from the Queen, the Duke of Norfolk, and others of the loyall Nobility relieved, who were now in disgrace; but towards the Queen, professing themselves most dutifull Subjects; withall they send Letters to the Papists all the Kingdom over, requiring them to come to their assistance but they were so far from joyning with them, that many sent both the Let∣ters and the bearers of them to the Queen, and afforded their aides and pur∣poses against them; no lesse then the best Protestants, even the Duke of Nor∣folk himself was not backward in it. These Rebells go first to Durham, where thy tear in pieces all the Bibles and Books of Common Prayer they could finde in Churches of the English tongue: when they had been twelve dayes in Rebellion, they numbered their Army, and could not reckon above 600 horse, and 4000 foot; wherupon being certainly informed, that the E: of Sussex with 7000, and the E: of Warwick with 12, were setting out against them, they betook themselves to Rabie, the chief house of the E: of West∣merld; going from thence they besieged Bernards castle, which for lack o provision, was yeelded to them. At which time, being proclaimed Traitors and hering afresh of the great forces that were coming against them, th two Earls with a small company, get presently into Scotland hard by,
where the Earl of Northumberland hid himself at Harclow; in a poor Cottage, amongst the Grayhams (famous Robbers) who afterwards betrayed him to the Earl Murray: Westmerland made a shift to get into the Low-Countryes, where he had a slender Pension from the King of Spain, and there lived even to old age. Of the rest, for terrour and examples sake, there were hanged at Durham, threescore and six of the chief; amongst whom, Plomtree, a noted Priest. At York were executed, Simon Digby, Iohn Fulthrop, Thomas Bishop, Robert Penyman; and at London a few months after, Christopher and Thomas; and some other in other places. After this, the heads of the Rebels being convict of High Treason, were proscribed; namely, Charles, Earl of Westmerland; Thomas, Earl of Northumberland; Anne, Countesse of Nor∣thumberland; Edward Dacres of Morton; Iohn Nevill of Leversege; Iohn Swinborn, Thomas Markenfield, Egremond Ratcliffe, brother to the Earl of Sus∣sex; Christopher Nevill, Richard Norton, Christopher Marmaduke, Robert and Michael Tempest, George Stafford, and forty others of good account. Out of the ashes of this Rebellion, a new fire was kindled at Naworth in Cumber∣land, by Leonard Dacres, second son to the Lord Dacres of Gyllisland; He was a Party with the Earls in their Rebellion; but they breaking forth sooner then he expected, and he at that time being at the Court, and there admitted to kisse the Queens hand, tendered his service to go against them; and to that purpose, was sent home: but in his Journey (branding himself with a double disloyalty) he consulted with the Rebels, and encouraged them to go on; and by vertue of Letters of Credence from the Queen, he surprised the Ca∣stle of Greystock, and other houses of the Dacres, and gathered together an Army of three thousand men: But being encountred by the Baron of Huns∣don, after a great fight, wherein, though he were crook-backt, he behaved himself valiantly, he was put to flight, and fled into Scotland, from whence soon after, he passed over into the Low-Countryes, and in great misery and poverty died at Louvayn. But though the Queen were thus entangled with Rebellions at home, yet she was not carelesse of the afflicted Protestants in France; for she stirred up the Protestant Princes to defend the common Cause; supplyed them with money, taking in pawn the Queen of Navar's Jewells; and gave leave to Henry Champernoon to lead into France a Troop of a hundred Horse, Gentle∣men all, and Voluntaries; amongst whom were Philip Butshed, Francis Bark∣ley, and Walter Raleigh, a very young man, who now began to look into the world. But as the Queen of England assisted the French, so in revenge there∣of, the King of France meant to assist the Scots, but that he was taken away by death; being slain by a shot, at the Siege of S. Iohn D'Angelo. There was at this time a Rebellion in Ireland also, raised by Edmund and Peter, brothers to Boteler Earl of Ormond; but after many out-rages by them committed: the Earl of Ormond first by perswasions, obtained of them to submit themselves; and when notwithstanding they were committed to pri∣son, he then obtained of the Queen they should not be called to the Barre, being exceedingly grieved that any of his Blood should be attaynted of Re∣bellion. The rest of the Rebells were pursued by Sir Humphrey Gilbert, and soon dispersed. And now the Earl of Murray, Regent of Scotland, when he had wrought all things to his hearts desire, and thought himself secure, at Lithquo, riding along the streets, was shot into the belly with a Bullet, beneath the Navill, and there fell down dead. The actor was a Hamilton, who did it upon a private revenge, for that Murray had forced him to part with a piece of Land which he had by his wife; who thereupon falling Lunatick, he in a great rage committed this slaughter. After Murrayes death, the Countrey being without a Regent, was cause of many disorders. Tho. Carre, and Walter Scot, two principall men amongst
the Scottish Borders, and devoted to the Queen of Scots, made Inodes into England; wasting all places with fire and sword, till by Forces sent out of England; under the command of the Earle of Sussex, and the Lord Hnsdon, they were defeated. In whose pusuit, three hundred villages were ired, and above fifty Holds were over-turned. For which service the Earl made many Knights, as Sir William Drury, Sir Thomas Manners, Sir George Carie, Sir Robert Constable and others, and then returned. And now to prevent further disorders, the Lords of Scotland being ready to assemble about the election of a new Regent, they asked counsell of Queen Elizabeth in the matter; but she making answer she would not meddle in it, because she would not be thought to work any thing prejudiciall to the Queen of Scots, whose cause was not yet tried they created Matthew Earl of Lenox Regent; which Queen Elizabeth did the better like, as conceiving he could not chuse out of naturall affection, but have a speciall care of the young King being his Grand-childe. But while Queen Elizabeth favoured the Kings Party in Scotland, the Earl of Hunley, the Duke of Castle-Hrald, and the Earle of Argyl, (the Queen of Scots Liuenants) imploy the Lord Seton to the Duke D'Alva, Re∣quiting him for many great reasons, to vindicate the Queen of Scots liberty alleadging how acceptable a work it would be to all Christian Princes and to the whole Catholike Church: whereunto the Duke made answer; They should finde him ready to the uttermost of his power to satisfie their Re∣quest. At which time also the French King dealt earnestly with Queen Elizabeth to the same purpose; and the Spanish Embassadour in his masters name urged it no lesse extremely; but Queen Elizabeth assaulted with all these Importunities, made answer, That as she would omit nothing that might serve for the Reconciling of the Queen of Scots and her subjects, so sh must have leave to provide for her own and her subjects safety; a thing which Nature, Reason, and her own Honor requires at her hands. And now when these Princes prevailed not with Queen Elizabeth to set the Queen of Scots at liberty, ou comes Pope Pius Quintus with his Bull Declaratory, which he caused to be fastened in the night time upon the gate of the Bi∣shop of Londons Palace, wherein all her subjects are absolved from their Oah of Allegiance, or any other dutie; and all that obey her, accursed with Anathem. He that fastned up the Bull was one Iohn Flton; who never fled for the matter, but as affecting Martyrdome, suffered himself to be ap∣prehended, confessed and justified the Fact, and thereupon arraigned, was condemned and hanged neer the place where he had fastened the writing. The same day that Felton was Arraigned, the Duke of Norfolk seeming now extremely pontitent for his fault, and utterly to abhorre the marriage, was delivered out of the Tower, and suffered to goe to his owne house, but yet to be in the custodie of Sir Henry Neuill still. Indeed Cecill being a good friend of the Dukes, had told the Queen, That the Law of 25 of Edward the third could not take hold upon him: And now being in a kinde of liberty, Cecill deales earnestly with him to marry speedily some other; thereby to take away all suspition in that behalf: yet some again thought that this li∣berty of the Dukes was granted him of purpose to bring him into greate danger. At this time died William Herbert Earl of Pmbook the grand-child of an Earl of Pmbrook, yet the son but of an Esquire, and grand-father to Phillip Earl of Pembrook and Mountgomery now living, who lieth buried in Pauls, un∣der a faire Monument of Marble, with an Inscription estifying his great de∣servings while he lived. Many conspiracies were at this time to set the Queen of Scots at liberty; amongst others, there conspired Thomas and Edward Stanley younger sonnes
of the Earl of Derby, with others; but the matter discovered, they were soon suppressed, and some of them executed. And now the Lords of the Queen of Scots Party continuing to protect the English Rebells, the Earl of Sussex once again, accompanied with the Lord Scroop, entereth Scotland, burneth the Villages all along the Valley of Anandale, and compasseth the Duke of Castle-Herald, and the Earls of Huntley and Argyle, under a Writing signed with their own Hands and Seals, to forsake the English Rebells. Whereupon the Earl of Sussex returned home, he made these Knights; Edward Hastings, Francis Russell, Valentine Browne, William Hilton, Ro∣bert Stapleton, Henry Carwen, and Simon Musgrave. Queen Elizabeths minde being now in great suspension, by reason of that Bull from Rome, and the late conspiracy in Norfolk, sent Sir William Cecill, and Sir Walter Mildmay to the Qeen of Scots, who was then at Chattesworth in Derby-shire, to consult with her by what means the breach in Scotland might best be made up, She re-invested in her former Dignity, and her son and Queen Elizabeth might be secured The Queen of Scots did little deplore her own afflicted condition, putting her self wholly upon the Queens clemency; when the Commissioners made unto her certain Propositions of Agreement: First, That the Treaty of Edinborough should be confirmed: then, That she should re∣nounce her Right and Title to England, during Queen Elizabeths life, or any children of her body lawfully begotten: then, That she should send her sonne for a Hostage into England, with other six Hostages; such as the Queen should nominate: then, That the Castles of Humes and Fast-castle should be held by the English for three yeers; with some other. To which Propositions the Queen of Scots for the present gave a provident answer; but referred the fuller Answer to the Bi∣ship of Rosse her Ambassadour in ENGLAND, and some other Dele∣gates; who afterwards allowing some of the Propositions, and not al∣lowing others; the Treaty came to nothing, but the matter rested in the state it was before. A this time Philip King of Spain had contracted Marriage with Anne of Austria, Daughter to the Emperour Maximilian, his own Neece by his Sister; who was now setting Sayl from Zealand towards Spain; when Queen Elizabeth, to testifie her love and respect to the House of Au∣stria, sent Sir Charls Howard with the Navy Royall, to conduct her thorow the Briish Sea. And now was the twelfth yeer of Queen Elizabeths Raign finished; which certain Wizards had made Papists believe should be her last: but contrary, as if it were but her first, a new Custome began, of celebrating the seventeenth day of November (the Anniversary day of her Raign) with ringing of Bells, Tiltings, and Bon-fires: which Custome, as it now began, so it was never given over as long as she lived, and is not yet forborn so long after her death. At this time in Ireland, Connagher ô Brien Earl of Towmond, no brook∣ing the severe Government of Edward Fitton, President of Connaght, entred into Consultation with some few to raise a new Rebellion; which, being at the point ready to break forth, was strangely discovered: for the day before they meant to ake up Arms, Fitton knowing not at all of the matter, sent h Earl word in friendly manner, That the next day he and a few friends with him, would be his Guests. The Earl con∣vinced by his own conscience, imagined that his Intendments were revealed; that Fitton would come as an enemy, rather then a Guest. Out of which feare he presently set Sayle into FRANCE; where repenting himselfe seriously of his fault, he confessed the whole busi∣nesse
to Norris, the Queenes Embassadour in France; and by his intercession, was afterward pardoned and restored. In Ianuary, the thirteenth yeer of her Raigne, Queen Elizabeth in royall pompe, entring the City of London, went to see the Burse which Sir Thomas Gresham had lately built, for the use of the Marchants; and with sound of trumpets, and the voice of a Herald, solemnly named it the Royall Exchange. A few dayes after, for his many great services, she made Sir William Cecill Baron Burgley. There were now about the Scottish affaires, in the name of the King of of Scots, the Earle Morton; Peruare Abbot of Dumformelin; and Iames Mac-Gray; whom when Queen Elizabeth required to shew more clearely, for what causes they had deposed the Queen; they exhibited a long and tedious Commentary; wherein with a certain insolent liberty, they en∣deavoured to prove, by the ancient Right of the Kingdom of Scotland, that the people of Scotland were above the King: and urged Calvins Authority also, That Popular Magistrates are constituted for the moderation of the Licentiousnes of Princes: and that it is lawfull for them, both to imprison Kings; and upon just causes, to depose them. This writing the Queen could not reade without indignation; but to the Delegates she gave this Answer; She saw no just cause yet, why they should handle the Queen in such manner; and therefore willed them to think upon some course out of hand, how to allay the dissentions in Scotland. Hereupon in Sir Nich. Bacons house, Keeper of the Great Seal, a Proposition was made to the Bishop of Rosse, the Bishop of Galloway; and Baron Levingston, delegates for the Queen of Scots, that for the security of the Kingdom, and the Qu. of England; it were requisite, that before the Queen of Scots should be let at libertie: The Duke of Castle-Herald the Earle of Huntley and Argyle, the Lord Humes, Heris, and another of the Barons should be delivered for Hostages, and the castle of Dumbriton and He yeelded up into the hands of the English, for three yeers. But they made Answer, that to yeeld up great personages, and such fortifications as were demanded; were nothing else; but to leave the miserable Queen utterly destitute of faithfull friends, and naked of all places, fit for guard and defence: yet they offered, to give two Earls and two Barons for Hostages, till two yeers were expired: which not being accepted, they straightway gathered, and spoke it openly; That now they plainly per∣ceived the English meant to keepe the Queen of Scots perpetually prisoner, and likewise to break off the Treay; seeing they rigorously demanded such securitie as Scotland was not able to make good. And now Queen Elizabeth seeing that nothing could be done, for her owne, the King and Queen of Scots safety, unlesse Both Factions in Scotland consented; she held it fit that the Lords of Scotland should themselves appoint some chosen persons to compound the matter. While matters in England, proceeded in this sort; the Queenes partie in Scotland was hardly used: Dumbtion Fryth the strongest castle in Scotland was taken: and I. Hamilton Archbishop of Saint Andrewes; the Duke of Castle-Heralds brother, as an accessary to the murder of Dlye, was hanged without being arraigned according to Law. In England, the Queen of Scots had all her servants taken from her, except Tenne only, and a Priest to say masse: with which indignities the Queen of Scots provoked, causeth a large Commentary of her Counsels, with certain love-letters to the Duke of Norfolk, to be carried to the Pope, and the King of Spain, by Ridolphu; which being brought first to the Duke, Higford (one that waited on the Duke in his bed chamber) had copyed out: but being commanded to burne them, he hid them under a Matt in the Duke Bed-chamber; and that (it should seeme) purposely. Ridolphus to daw on the Duke to be Head of the discon∣tented Partie in England, aggravated to him the wrongs he had suffered
how against all law he had been kept a long time in prison: and now, to his great disgrace, was not Summoned to the Parliament: he exhibited to him a Catalogue of such of the Nobilitie, who had vowed to Assist him: he shewed how the Pope, (so the Catholick Religion might be promoted) would himself undergo all the charge of the Warre, and had already layd down an hundred thousand Crownes; whereof himself had distributed twelve thousand amongst the English that were fled: he promised, that the King of Spain would send four thousand horse, and six thousand foot to his Assistance; to these reasons the Bishop of Rosse added, That it was an easie matter for him to surprize the Queen; whom, when he had in his hands, he might then set the Queen of Scots at liberty, and might easily obtain of Queen Elizabeth, a toleration of Religion. The former Reasons tooke somewhat with the Duke, but this point of surprizing the Queen, he abhor∣red, as an impious fact, and therefore rejected as pernitious and Dangerous. In France a little before this, was the mariage solemnized between Charles the ninth King of France, and Elizabeth of Austria daughter to the Emperor Maximilian; in gratulation whereof, Queen Elizabeth sent into France, Thomas Lord Buckhurst, who with great magnificence was received, and perhaps the more, in regard of a motion now intended to be made: for the Lord Buck∣hurst, having in his retinue, one Guydo Cavalcantius a noble man of Florence, the Queen Mother of France, as being a Florentine her self, had often conference with him, when she would many times say, what a happines it would be to both the Kingdoms, if a Match were made between the Queen of England and her sonne Henry Duke of Angiou; and at last desired him to commend the motion to the Queen of England, both from her, and from her son the King of France, as a thing they both exceedingly desired. The Lord Buckhurst returned, having for a present from the King of France a chayn weighing a thousand French crowns; and Cavalcantius at his return made the motion to the Queen, who seemed not unwilling to hearken to it; for by this Match, there should be added to the Kingdome of England, the wealthy Dukedoms of Angiou, Bourbon, Auverne, and in possibility, the Kingdome of France it self. Hereupon a Treaty was held, in which the French propounded three Articles, one concerning the Coronation of the Duke; another, concerning the Joynt Administration of the Kingdom; a third, concerning a Toleration of his Religion: to which it was answered, that the two first Articles might in some sort be composed; but the third, scarce possibly: for though a contrary Religion might be tolerated, between Subjects of the same King∣dome; yet between a wife and her husband, it seemed very Incongruous and inconvenient; yet the matter at last came to this conclusion, That if the Duke would afford his presence with the Queen at divine Service, and not refuse to hear and learn the doctrine of the Church of England; he should not be compelled to use the English Rites, but at his pleasure use the Romane; not being expresly against the word of God. But upon these Punctilis they could not accord: and so the Treaty, after it had continued almost a yeer, brake utterly off. It was indeed generally thought, that the Mach was never really intended of either side, but that they both pretended it, for onely their owne ends: for the Earle of Leicester (who knew more of the Queenes minde then any man) wrote at this time to Sir Francis Walsingham, the Queens Embassador in France, That he found the Queens inclination so cold in the matter, that though the Point of Religion were ully accorded; yet she would finde one point or other to breake it off. At this time the continuance of the Duke of Norfolkes affection towards the Queen of Scots, came to be discovered by a packet of Letters, sent by Ridolphus to the Bishop of Rose, and by Bayliffs confession (who brought the letters) being set upon the Rack; so as the Bishop of Rosse was confined to the Isle of Ely: Thomas Stanlie, Sir Thomas Gerard, and Rlton were cast into the
Tower: and Hnry Howard, who had an aspiring minde to be Arch-bishop, was committed to the Arch-bishop of Canterbury's keeping. At the same time the Queen of Scots sent money to her confederates in Scotland; which being by Higford delivered to one Browne to carry, and told it was Silver, when he found by the weight that it was Gold, he began to suspect some∣thing; and thereupon went and delivered both the money and Letters to the Lords of the Councell. Upon this, Higford being examined, confessed the whole matter; and withall gave notice of that Commentary also of the Queen of Scots which is mentioned before. Two dayes after, the Duke himself being examined, and knowing nothing what his servaus had con∣fessed, deyed every particular; and thereupon, was brought again to the Tower, by Ralph Sadler, Thomas Smith, Henry Nevill, and Doctor Wilson: And after him Bannester, who was the Dukes Counsell at Law: The Earls of Arunel and Southampton; the Lord Lumley, the Lord Cobham; Henry Percy, Lowder, Powell, Goodyer, and others, are committed to prison; who upon hope of pardon, confessed all they knew concerning the matter. When these things, and especially the Commentary, which the Duke thought had been burnt, were shewed him, he then cryed out, I am betray∣ed by my own servants; not having learned to be distrustfull, which is the very sinew of Wisedom. And then with all submission, he besought the Lords to mediate for him to the Queen; towards whom, he protested he never had the least thought of doing any hurt. And now seeing it appeared that the Bishop of Rosse had been the whole-contriver of the businesse, it was deliberated what to do with him, be∣cause he was an Ambassadour. Hereupon divers Civilians are called; as David Lewis, Valentine Dale, William Drury, William Auby, and Henry Iones; of whom these questions were asked: First, Whether an Ambassadour who raiseth Rebellion against that Prince o whom he is an Ambassadour, may enjoy the Priviledges of an Ambassa∣dour, and is not lyale to punshment? They answered, That such an Ambassadour hath forfeited the Privi∣ledges of an Ambassadour, and is liable to punishment. Secondly, Whether the Minister or Procter of a Prince, who is deposed by publike Authority, and in whose room another is Inagurated, may enjoy the Priviledges of an Ambassadour? They answered, That if such Prince be lawfully deposed, his Proctr cannot challenge the Priviledges of an Ambassadour, forasmuch as none but absolute Princes, and such as have-Right of Majesty, can ap∣point Ambassadours. Thirdly, Whether a Prince who is come into another Princs Countrey, and held in Custody, may have his Proctor; and if he shall be held an Am∣bassadour. They answered, If such a Prince have not lost his Soveraignty, he may have his Proctor; but whether that Proctor shall be reputed as an Ambas∣sadour or no, this dependeth upon the Authority of his Delegation. Fourthly, Whether if a Prince give warning to such a Proctor, and to hi Prince who is under custody, that this Proctor shall not from hencefrth be accounted for an Ambassadour; Whether that Proctor may by Law challenge the Priviledge of an Ambassadour? They answered, A Prince may forbid an Ambassadour to enter into hi Kingdome, and may command him to depart the Kingdome, if he ontain nt himself within his due limits; yet in the mean while he is to enjoy the Priviledges of an Ambassadour.
Upon these Answers, the Bishop of Rosse is warned by the Lords of the Councell, that he shall no longer be esteemed an Ambassadour, but be punished as his fault shall deserve. The Bishop alledged for himself, That he had not violated the Right of n Ambassadour Via Iuris, but V Fact, (to use his own words) and therefore adviseth them, not to use hard∣er measure to him, then was used to the English Ambassadours,  in France, Rndoll and Tmwoth in Scotland; who had raised Rebellions there, and were open Abettors of the same; and yet had no greater pu∣nishment, then to be gone at a time limitted. When they began to urge him what the English had testified against him, he lovingly requested them to give no credit to it forasmuch as by a received Custome, which hath the force of a Law, The Testimony of an English man against a Scot, or of a Scot against an English man, is not to be admitted: but after some other altercations, the Bishop is led away to the Tower, and kept close prisoner. At this very season, Matthew Earl of Lenox, Regent of Scoand, the Kings Grand-father was by the adverse party set upon at unawares; who having yeelded himself to David Spense of Wormester, (that was then very carefull to defend him) together with him, was slain by Bell and Culder; when with great industry he had governed the Kingdom for his Grand-childe about fourteen months. In whose room, Iohn Areskin, Earl of Mare, by common consent of the Kings Faction, was chosen Regent of Scotland; who being a man of a quiet disposition, through extreme grief of the mny troubles he sustained in the place, departed this life when he had governed thirteen months. And now a Parliament was held at Westminster; wherein, besides a Law for preventing of the treacherous endeavours of seditious subjects, ano∣ther Law was made, That if any one, during the Queens life, by Books written or printed, shall expressely affirm, That any i, or ought to be the Heir or Successor of the Queen (besides the naturall Off-sping of her Body) or shall to that purpose publish, print, or dispers any Book or Schedules; he, and his favourrs, shall for the first offence suffer a yeers imprisonment, and the losse of one half of his goods: and if they offend again, they shall be in a Prmunir. A Law also was made, by which to be reconciled to the Sea of Rome, was made Treason: and it was pro∣nounced against the Queen of Scots, That if she offended again against the Laws of England, it might be lawfull to question her, as the wife of a Peer of the Kingdom of England. But here the Queen interposed her Authority, and would not suffer it to be enacted. About this time, in May, a solemn Tilting was performed at Westminster; where th Challengers were Edward Earl of Oxford, Charles Howard, Sir Henry Lee, and Chri∣pher Hattn Esquire; who all did valiantly, but the Earl of Oxford best. Assoon as the Parliament was dissolved, a Consultation was held, Wheher Iohn Story, Doctor of the Laws, the Duke D'Alva's Searcher (who somtime before, was by a wile brought into England) being an Englishman born; and having in Braant consulted with a foraign Prince, about the invading of England, were to be held guilty of high Treason? It was resolved a∣firmatively: whereupon he is called to the Bar, and indicted of Treason That he had consulted with one Presall a Conjurer, to make away the Queen; That he cursed her dayly, when he said Grace at Table; That he shewed a way to the Secretary of Duke D'Alva how to invade England, &c. where he affirming, That the Judges had no power to meddle with him, for that he blonged not to the Queen of England, but was the King of Spain's sworn subject is neverthelesse condemned by the Fom of Nihil dicit (forasmuch as no man can renounce the Country wherin he was born, nor abjure his Prince at his own pleasure) and finally executed after the manner of Trayors.
Ireland at this time was indifferent quie; for Sir Iohn Perot, President of Munster had brought Iames Fitz Morris to submit himself, and crave par∣don. Sidney the Lord Deputy returned into England, and Sir William Fitz Williams, who had marryed his sister, succeeded in his room. It was now the fifteenth yeer of Queen Elizabeths Raign; when Thomas Howard, Duke of Norfolk, on the sixteenth day of Ianuary, was brought to his Tryall at Westminster-Hall; where sate as Commissioners, George Talbot, Earl of Shrewsbury (made High Steward of England for that day) Reynold Grey, Earl of Kent; Thomas Ratcliff, Earl of Sussex; Henry Hastings, Earl of Huntington; Francis Russell, Earl of Bedford; Henry Herbert, Earl of Pembrk; Edward Seymor, Earl of Hertford; Ambrose Dudley, Earl of Warwick; Robert Dudley, Earl of Leicester; Walter Devereux, Viscount of Hereford; Edward, Lord Clinton, Admirall; William, Lord Howard of Effingham, Chamberlain; William Cecill, Lord Burley, Secretary; Arthur, Lord Grey of Wilton; Iames Blunt, Lord Mountjoy; William, Lord Sands; Thomas, Lord Wentworth; Willi∣am, Lord Borough; Lewis, Lord Mordant; Iohn Pawlet, Lord St. Iohn of Bsing; Robert, Lord Rich; Roger Lord North; Edmund Bruges, Lord Chn∣dois; Oliver, Lord St. Iohn of Bltsho; Thomas Sackvile, Lord Buckhurst; and William West, Lord de la Ware. After silence bidden, Sir Owen Hopton, Liev∣tenant o the Tower, is commanded to bring the Duke to the Bar; and then the Clerk of the Crown said, Thomas, Duke of Norfolk, late of Keningale, in the County of Norfolk, Hold up thy hand; which done, the Clerk with a loud voyce readeth the crimes laid to his charge: That in the eleventh yeer of the Queens Raign, he had trayterously consulted to make her away, and to bring in forraign Forces for invading the Kingdom: Also, That he dealt with the Queen of Scots concerning Marriage, contrary to his promise made to the Queen under his hand writing: Also, That he relieved with money the Earls of Northumberland and Westmerland, that had stirred up Rebel∣lion against the Queen: Also, That in the thirteenth yeer of the Queens Raign, he implored Auxiliary Forces of Pope Pius the fifth, the Queens professed enemy, of the King of Spain, and the Duke D'Alva, for the free∣ing of the Queen of Scots; and restoring of the Popish Religion: And last∣ly, That he sent supply to the Lord Heris, and other the Queens enemies in Scotland. These Indictments being read, the Clerk demanded of the Duke, if he were guilty of these crimes, or not? Here the Duke requested he might be allowed to have Counsell. But Catiline, chief Justice, made answer, That it was not lawfull. Yet (saith the Duke) I have heard that Humphrey Stafford, in the Raign of K. Henry the seventh, in a Cause of Treason, had one assigned to plead for him. To which Dyer chief Justice of the Common-Pleas, made answer, That Stafford had Counsell assigned him concerning the Right of Sanctuary, from whence he was taken by force but in the Inditement of Treason he pleaded his own cause. After this, the Duke yeelding to be try∣ed by the Peers; first Barham, Serjeant at Law; then Gerard the Queens At∣turney; and lastly, Bromley, the Queens Solicitor, enforced the crimes ob∣jected against him: to all which the Duke made colourable answers; but most of them being proved by sufficient testimony, he asked upon occasion, Whether the subjects of another Prince, who is confederate, and in league with the Queen, are to be accounted the Queens enemies to which Catiline answered, They were; and that the Q. of England might wage War with any Duke of France, & yet hold firm Peace with the French King. When it grew towards night, the L. high Steward demanded of the Duke if he had any more to say for himself? who answered, I rely upon the equity of the Laws. After this, the Lords withdrawing a while, and then returning, the Lord Steward beginning at the lowermost, asked them, My Lord de la Ware, Is Thomas Duke of Norfolk guilty of these crimes of High Treason, for which he is called in question? He rising up, and laying his hand upon his
breast, answered guilty, in like manner they answered all. After this, the Lord Steward with teares in his eyes, pronounced sentence in forme as is used. A few dayes after were Barnes and Mather executed, who conspired with one Herle, to make away certaine of the Coun∣cellors, and to free the Duke; but Herle revealed the businesse pre∣sently, to whom Barnes (when hee saw his Accuser brought forth) smilingly said, Herle thou wert but one houre before mee; else I had beene in thy place for the accuser, and thou in my roome to be han∣ged: at the same time with them was hanged also Henry Rolfe, for counterfeiting the Queens hand. But though the Duke were now con∣demned, yet the Queen was so tender of his case, that it was foure Moneths after before he was executed, at last on the second of June at eight of the clock in the morning, he was brought to the Scaffold upon the Tower-Hill, and there beheaded. At this time and upon this occasion, a Parliament was Assembled, wherein amongst other Lawes, it were Enacted, that if any man shall go about to free any person imprisoned by the Queens expresse Com∣mandement for Treason or suspition of Treason, and not yet Arraign∣ed, he shall lose all his goods for his life time, and be imprisoned during the Queens pleasure, if the said person have beene Arraigned, the Rescuer shall forfeit his life; if condemned, he shall be guilty of Rebellion. In the time of this Parliament, the Queen created Walter Devereux Earl of Essex, being before but Viscount Hereford; because he was de∣scended by his Great-grand-mothers from the Bourchiers, and made the Lord Clinton (who had large Revenues in Lincolnshire) Earl of Lincoln; Also she called forth Iohn Paulet of Basing, the Marquesse of Winche∣ster's son, Henry Compton, Henry Cheyney, and Henry Morris for Barons by Summons. Within ten dayes after the Dukes death, William Lord De-la-ware, Sir Ralph Sadler, Thomas Wilson Doctor of the Laws, and Thomas Brumley the Queens Solicitour, were sent to the Queen of Scots, to expostulate with her; That shee had usurped the Title and Arms of the Kingdom of England, and had not renounced the same, according to the agree∣ment of the Treaty at Edinburgh, That shee had endeavoured the marriage of the Duke of Norfolke, without acquainting the Queene, and had used all forcible meanes to free him out of prison; had raised the Rebellion in the North, had relieved the Rebels both in Scotland and in the Low-Countries; had implored Aids from the Pope, the King of Spaine and others; had conspired with certaine of the English, to free her out of Prison, and Declare her Queen of England; Lastly, that she had procured the Popes Bull against the Queen, and suffered herself to be publikely named the Queen of England in Forreigne Countries: All which accusations she either absolutely denyed, or else fairly extenuated, and though (as she said) she were a free Queen, and not subject to any creature; yet she was content, and requested, that she might make her personall answer at the next Parliament. About this time, the King of Spain by his Embassadour here, com∣plained to the Queen, that the Rebels of the Netherlands were har∣boured and entertained in England, contrary to the Articles of the League; whereupon the Queen set forth a severe Proclamation, That all the Dutch, who could any wayes be suspected of Rebellion, should presently depart the Realm; which yet turned little to D'Alva's, or the King of Spains benefit: For hereupon, Count Vander-Mark, and other Dutch going out of England surprized the Brill first, then Flushing, and afterwards drew other Towns to Revolt, and in a short time excluded
the Duke D'Alva in a manner from the Sea. And this errour, to suf∣fer the Protestant party to get possession of the Sea-towns, hath been the cause they have been able to hold out, even all this long time, against the King of Spain. And now many military men having little to do at home, got them into the Netherlands, some to Duke D'Alva; but the far greater number to the Prince of Orenge: The first of whom, was Tho∣mas Morgan, who carryed three hundred English to Flushing; then follow∣ed by his procurement nine Companies more under the conduct of Humphry Gilbert; and afterward it became the Nursery of all our English Souldiers. At this time, Charls the French King setting his mind wholly (at least see∣ming so) upon the Low-Country War, concluded a peace and entred in∣to a league with Queen Elizabeth; which was to remain firm, not only du∣ring their two lives, but between their successors also, if the sccessor sig∣nifie to the surviver within a yeer that he accepteth it, otherwise to be at li∣berty. It was likewise agreed, what aid by Sea or Land, they should each of them afford to other upon occasion; and for ratification of this League, Edward Clinton Earl of Lincoln and Admirall of England was sent into France, with whom went the Lord Dacres, Rich, Talbot, Sands, and others. The French King likewise sent the Duke of Memorancy, and Paul Foix i∣to England with a great train; that the Queen in the presence of them, and the Embassador in Ordinary might sweare to the league, which she did at Westminster, the seaventeenth of May, in the yeer 1572. The day after she made Memorancye Knight of the Garter. Memorancye whilst he tarryed in England, made intercession in his Kings name, that what favour could be without danger, might be shewed to the Queen of Scots; and then made much a do again about the marriage with the Duke of Angiou; but being hopelesse to make conclusion thereof, by reason of the diversity of Religion he returned into France; for now was great provision making ready for the mariage, between Henry King of Na∣varre; and the Lady Margeret the French Kings Sister; to which solemnity with notable dissimulation, the Queen of Navarre and the chief of all the Protestants were allured, being born in hand that there should be a renova∣tion of love, and a perpetuall peace established: The Earl of Leicester likewise and the Lord Burleigh were invited out of England, and out of Germany, the sons of the Prince Elector Palatine under colour of honour: but indeed, that they might be intrapped, and they, and together with them the Protestant Religion at one blow, if not clean cutt off, yet receive deadly wound: For the marriage being celebrated, there presently followed that cruell Massacre at Paris, and the terrible slaughter of the Protestants throughout all the Cities of France; but to set a shew of equity upon the fact, Edicts and Proclamations were presently set forth, that the Prote∣stants had plotted a wicked conspiracy against the King, the Queen Mo∣ther, the Brethren, the King of Navarre, and the Princes of the blood Royall; and to keep the thing in memory, Coyne was presently stamped, upon the one side whereof was the Kings picture with this Inscription, Vir∣tus in Rebelles, on the other side; Pietas excitavit justitiam; But the King of France, notwithstanding all the shew hee made of Piety, escaped not the Divine revenge, for before the yeer came about, hee fell sick of a bloody Flixe, and afterwards with long and grievous torments ended his life. A little before this, Mota Fenell Embassador to the King of France, being in England, by vertue of an order from the Queen Mother of France, propoundeth to Queen Elizabeth at Kenelworth (two dayes before the Massacre in that Kingdome) the marriage of her youngest sonne Francis Duke of Alenson (for the Queen Mother had been told by some cunning men, that all her sons should be Kings, and she knew
no way for it but this) Bt Queen Elizabeth, by reaon of the disparity of age, modestly excused her self, (For he was scarce eventeen yeers old, and she was now past eight and thirty) yet she promised to consider of it, and Alenson did not leave to prosecute the it. At tis time, Thomas Percy Earl of Northmberland, who first Re∣belled, and afterwards fled into Scotland, was for a sum of money deli∣vered by the Earl of Morton, to the Lord Hunsdon Governour of Bar∣wick; and a while afer was beheaded t York. And now as these two great Personages, the Duke of Norfolk and the Earl of Northumberland were taken away by a violent death; so three other great Personages were at this time tken away by a naturall death: First Wllam Paulet, who from a private man came by degree; to be Marquesse of Winche∣ster: lived to the age of within three yeers of a hundred, and could reckon a hundred and three of his children, and his childrens issue, af∣ter he had held the pace of Lord Treasurer of England above twenty yeers; in whose roome succeeded Sir Wlliam Cecill, Lord Burleigh, then dyed Edmund Earle of Darby, famous as well for his hospitality and good house-keeping, as for his skill in Surgery and Bone-setting; then dyed Sir William Peter, who being descended from an honest stock at Exceter in Devonshire, was Privy Counsellor and Secretary to King Henry the Eight, Kig Edward the Sixth, Queen Mary, Queen Eliza∣beth; who plantd himself in Essex, where he purchased grea possessi∣ons; whose son Iohn was by King Iames made Baron of Writle in that Country. And now Qeen Elizabeth having formerly borrowed money o her Subjects, she thankfully repayd it, which wonne her no lesse love, then if she had given it, and more love she gained also at this time by two Proclamations; by one of which, she commanded Noble men to observe the Law of keeping Retiners; by the other, she restrained Informers, who, under colour of spying out Crown Land concealed by private persos, sacralegiosly seized upon the Lands of Parish-Churches, and Alms-Houses piously endowed by the Queens Ancestors. And more Love and Honour also she gained at this time by two acts of Justice; the one, that she satisfied the English Merchants out of the goods which were detined belonging to the Dutch, and restored the rest to the Duke D' Alva, and make a full transaction with the Merchants of Geneva for the mony intercepted; the other, that she freed England at this time of the debts which her Father and her Brother had run into in for∣raign part, and were increased by yeerly interest, and caused the obligati∣ons of the City of London, which had so often been renued to be given in, to the great rejoycing of the Citizens. The Spanish affairs growing now very turbulent in the Netherlands, Flu∣shing lost, the towns of Holland revolted, and the Spanish Navy vanquished by the Zelanders, Duke D'Alva against his will, began to shew more kind∣nesse towards the English, so as in the month of Ianuary, the trade which in Anno 1568. had been forbidden, was now allowed again between the Dutch and the English for two yeer; but those two yeers expired, the English remo∣ved their trading to the confederates State. The last yeer in the month of November, a daughter was born to the French King, to whom he requested Queen Elizabeth to be God-mo∣ther, who theeupon sent William Somerset Earl of Worcester into France with a Font of massy Gold to stand as her Deputy at the Christning. Hereupon, and for that the Queen promised to observe the League strict∣ly, the French King and the Queen mother began to affect her more and more, and the Duke D'Alenson wrote sundry love-letters to her, the French King and His Mother interceding for the mariage with all earnestnesse.
It is true, the Queen conceived divers reasons, why it was fit for her to marry; but the Courtiers for their own ends disswaded her as much from it: at last the Queen Mother of France was wonderfull importu∣nate, that her sonne Alenson might have leave to come and see her whereunto, being wearyed with continuall Letters and Messages, she gave her consent; but upon condition, that hee should not take it for any disgrace to him, if hee returned without obtaining his suit: But as soon as Queen Elizabeth had notice, that his brother Henry was elected King of Poland, and that the King of France was very sick, shee gave inti∣mation to Alenson, by Edward Horsey Governour of the Isle of Wight, that hee should not make too much haste into England; but should first procure a peace by some meanes or other in France, and declare by some notable Argument, his good will towards the Protestants, thereby to be the more welcome Ghest into England. Hereupon a peace was con∣cluded in France, and in certain places the Protestants were allowed to exercise their Religion: and then again the French King and the Queen Mother, used all their endeavour to have the marriage go for∣ward (for they were very desirous tht Alenson, who was of a crooked and perverse disposition, and prone to raise tumults) might bee removed out of France; and withall, they requested of Queen Elizabeth, that if the Duke of Angiou took his voyage into Poland by Sea; hee might have publike caution to sail through the British Ocean. To this last re∣quest, she not only consented with all alacrity, but also made offer of a Fleet to conduct him thither. In the mean while, Alenson fell sick of the Meazles, which his mother signified to Queen Elizabeth by Count Rhets, excusing him thereupon for not coming into England as he had determined: The Count found the Queen at Canterbury, where she gave him Royall inter∣tainment: and Matthew Parker Archbishop of Canterbury, Royall intertain∣ment to them both. All this while since the death of the Earl of Marre, there had been no Regent in Scotland, but now by the procurement of Queen Eliza∣beth chiefly; Iames Dowglas Earl of Morton, is made Regent; who, when his Authority in a Parliamentary Assembly was established, En∣acted many profitable Laws for the defence of Religion against Papists and Hereticks, in the name of the King: But the proection and keeping of the Kings Person, hee confirmed to Alexander Areskin Earl of Marre (to whom the custody of the Kings in their tender yeers, by spe∣ciall priviledge belongeth) though hee were himself in his Minority: Upon these conditions, That no Papists, nor factious persons should be admitted to his presence: An Earl should come with onely two ser∣vants attending him: A Baron, with onely one: All other, single: and every one unarmed. The French King in the mean time, sent his Embassadour Mounsier Vyriar, to corrupt the Earls of Atholl and Hnt∣ley with large promises, to oppose the Regent: Queen ELISABETH as much laboured to defend him: but though by the ministery of Kil∣ligrew, shee had drawn Iames Hamilton Duke of Castle-Herald, and George Gourdon Earl of Huntley, and the most eminent of that Faction, upon indifferent conditions, to acknowledge the Regent, yet VVilli∣am Krld, Lord Grange, (whom Murray when hee was Reget, had made Govenour of Edingborough Castle) The Lord Hums, Ly∣dington, the Bishop of Dunkeld and others, would by no meanes ad∣mit of the Regents Government, but held that Castle, and fortified it in the Queen of Scots name, having Lydington for their Counsellor here∣in, and trusting to the naturall strength of the place, and to the Duke D' Alva's and the Fech Kings promises, to send them supplies both of men and money. Now when these persons, could by no meanes
drawne to accept of conditions of peace, and to deliver up the Castle to the Regent, Queen Elizabeth (who could in no case endure the French in Scotland) suffered her self at length to be intreated by the Regent, to send Forces, Gunnes and Ammunition, for assaulting of the Castle upon certain conditions, whereof one was, that ten Hostages should be sent into England, to be security fo returning the men and Munition, un∣lesse by the common hazard of War they should chance to miscarry. The conditions being argued on; William Drury Marshall of the Gar∣rison at Barwick, with some reat Ordnance and Fifteen hundred Soul∣diers, (amongst whom were some noble Voluntiers, George Carie, Hen∣ry Carie, Thomas Cecill, Hery Lee, William Knolles, Sutton, Cotton, Kelway, VVilliam Killigrew, and others, entred into Scotland, and be∣sieged the Castle, which after three and thirty dayes siege, was delive∣red up to the Regent for the Kings use, with all the persons that were in it; amongst whom Kircald Lord Grange, and Iames his brother Mus∣man, and Cook gold-smiths (who had counterfeited Coyne in the Castle) were hanged; although to redeem Granges life, a hundred of the Fami∣ly of the Kircalds, offered themselves to be in perpetuall servitude to the Regent, besides an annuall Pension of three thousand Marks; and twen∣ty thousand pounds of Scottish money in present; and to put in caution, that from thence forth he should continue in duty & homage to the King; but it would not bee accepted. Humes and the rest were spared, through Queen Elizabeths mercifull intercession; Lydington was sent to Leith, where hee dyed, and was suspected to bee poysoned: A man of the greatest understanding in the Scottish Nation, and of an excellent wit, but very variable; for which, George Buchanan called him the Ca∣melion. And now from this time Scotland began to take breath, after long Civill Warres, and as well the Captaines of both parties, as the Soul∣diers, betook themselves into Swedeland, France and the Low-Coun∣tries, where they valorously behaved themselves, and wonne great com∣mendation. As for Iohn Lesle Bishop of Rosse he was now set at liberty, but commanded to depart presently out of England, and being beyond the Sea, he continued still to sollicite his Mistresse the Queen of Scots cause, with the Emperour, the Pope, the French King, and the German Princes of the Popish Religion; who all led him on with faire promi∣ses, but performed nothing: For indeed he in whom he had greatest confidence, which was the Duke D' Alva, was at that time called a∣way, partly out of Jealousie of State, as being thought to grow too great, and partly out of opinion, that by his cruelty he made the people to revolt; and therefore in his place was sent Ludovicus Zuinga, a man of great Nobility in Spain, ut of a more Peaceable disposition then D' Alva; & ow this man did all good Offices to win Queen Elizabeth to him, and minding his owne Affairs only, would not intermeddle with the Scottish or English matters. About this a frentick Opinion was held by one Peter Bourche a Gen∣teman of the Middle-Temple, that it was lawfull to kill them that op∣posed the truth of the Gospell; and so far was he possest with this o∣pinion; that he assaulted the famous Seaman Captain Hawkins, and woun∣ded him with a dagger, taking him for Hutton, who at that time was in great favour with the Queen, and of her privy Counsell, whom he had been informed to be a great Adversary to Innovations. The Queen grew so angry hereat, that she commanded Marshiall Law should be executed upon him presently, till her Counsell advised her that Marshiall Law was not to be used, but in the Field, and in turbulent times, but at home and in time of Peace, there must be Legall proceedings: Here∣upon
Bourchet was sent to the Tower, where taking a brand out of the fire, he strook it into the brains of one of his keepers named Hugh Long∣wroth and killed him, for which fact, he was condemned of murther, had his right hand cutt off, and nayled to the Gallows, and then himselfe hanged. After the violent death of this Varlet, we may speake of the natu∣rall death of two great persons; First, William Lord Howard of Ef∣fingham, Son of that warlike Thomas Howard Duke of Norfolk, by his second wife Agnes Tilney. This William was made a Baron by Queen Mary, and Lord High Admirall of England, and by Queen E∣lizabeth Lord Chamberlain, till such time that being taken with age, he yeelded up that place to the Earl of Sussex, and was then made Keeper of the Privy Seal, which is the fourth degree of honour in England. His Son Charles succeeded him in the Dignity of his Ba∣rony, who was after made Lord Chamberlain to the Queen, and then Lord High Admirall of England. A while after him, dyed Reginold Grey Earl of Kent, whom the Queen a yeer before of a private man had made Earl of Kent, when as that Title, from the death of Rich∣ard Grey Earl of Kent, who had wasted his Patrimony, and was el∣der brother to this mans Grand-father; had lyen asleep for fifty yeers together. At this time many particular Rebellions were in Ireland; The O C∣nors, and O Moors took Arms, and committed many outrages: In Mun∣ster, Iames Fitzmorris, and Fitz Edmund did the like; but by the in∣dustry of Sir Iohn Perrot, President of Munster, were suppressed. In Ulster, Bryan Mac Phelym burnt Knockfergus, and many other joyned in Rebellion with him. Against these, Walter Devereux, (whom the Queen had lately created Earl of Essex) desired leave to go; which Sir William Fitz-Williams Deputy of Ireland opposed, as fearing, that the glory of so great an Earl vvould ecclipse his light. But for this, the Queen findes a remedy, by appointing Essex, to take a Parent of the Deputy, whereby to be made Governour of Ulster. But this re∣medy for Fitz-Williams, might have made a sore in the minde o E∣sex; (to receive his Authority from his inferiour) but that the noble∣nesse of his minde, made him more to regard the vertue, then the glory. And so, in the end of August, hee landed at Knockfergus, having with him the Lords, Darcy and Rich, and Sir Henry Knowles and his four Brothers, Michael and Iohn Carves, Henry, William, and Iohn Norreses: At his landing, Bryan Mac Pheli welcomed him, ten∣dring unto him all manner of dutifulnesse and service; but presently a∣ter, falls from him, and joyns with Turlogh Leynigh. After this re∣volt, the Eal of Essex, finding many difficulties in the businesse, and himself not well provided of skilfull Souldiers, makes suit to the Queen for leave to come home; which the Earl of Leicester, (who liked his room better then his company) opposed; till after expence of a yeer time, and much treasure, hee at last obtained leave, and returned home. The next yeer, being 1574. and the seventeenth yeer of Queen Eli∣sabeths Raign, the Duke of Alenson grew more importunate in his suit, then at any time before; so as hee obtained of the Queen, to come into England, any time before the twentieth of May; and this she the rather did, because shee perceived him now to bee really bent against the Guyses her sworn Enemies. But before this Answer was brought him, Valentine Dale Doctor of the Civil Law, the Queens Embass∣dour in France, gave intimation to the Qeen, That Alenson and Na∣varre were in restraint, and committed to Keepers: For the Guyses had
suggested, that Alenson held intimate friendship with Admirall Colin, the chief Leader of the Protestants in France; and indeed, Alenson being examined, freely confessed, that hee had now for a good while desired the marriage of the Queen of England and conceiving, that good correspondence with Colin might be usefull to him to that end, hee had thereupon had conference with him thereabout, and concern∣ing the Low-Country Warre. In the mean time, Thomas Wlks, Dales Secretary, got cunningly to Alenson, and in the Queens name, made promise both to him, and to Navarre, that she would omit no oppor∣tunity of procuring their inlargement. For which, the subtle Queen-Mother so complained of him to Queen Elisabeth, that hee was fain to go into France, and there to crave pardon for his fault. But Navarre, not unmindfull of this kindnesse in Wilks, when about five and twenty yeers after, being King of France, hee saw him in Normandy, hee Knighted him. Hereupon the Queen sent Thomas Randoll into France, to the Queen-Mother, that if it were possible, hee might gain Recon∣ciliation for Alenson her sonne, and for the King of Navarre. But be∣fore hee was landed in France, Charles the then French King dyed, whose Funerall Rites were solemnly performed in Saint Pauls Church in London. Assoon as Henry the third, King of France, was come from Po∣land, Roger Lord North was sent into France, to congratulate his re∣turn, and his happy Inauguration into the Kingdom; who thereupon, together with the Queen-Mother, did forthwith send their joynt Let∣ters into England, strongly soliciting the businesse of marriage, be∣tween Alenson and the Queen. In the mean time notwithstanding, they used all possible devices, (and left no means unsought) to get the yong King of Scotland to bee sent into France, and to deprive Mor∣ton who was the Regent, of his Authority, whereof the Queen of Scots also was very desirous; shee being perswaded, that if her sonne were once gotten safely into France, shee and the Catholicks in Eng∣land should bee more mildly used. At which time, an aspersion was cast upon the Queen of Scots, as if she had made the match between Charles Unckle to the Queen of Scots (who had lately the Earldom of Lenox confirmed to him by Parliament) and Elizabeth Cavendish the Countesse of Shrewsburie's daughter by a former husband; upon which ground, both their mothers and some others also were kept in Prison for a time; and being doubted whereunto this marriage should tend: Henry Earle of Huntington, President of the Councell in the North, is authorized with secret Instructions to examine it. It will be fit here to say something of this place of Government in the North; which from small beginnings, is now become so eminent as it is at this day, whereof this was the Originall. When as in the Raigne of Henry the Eight, after that the Rebellion in the Northerne parts, about the subversion of Abbyes was quieted, the Duke of Norfolke tarryed in those quarters, and many complaints of injuries done were tendered unto him, whereof some he composed himself, and others hee commended under his Seale to men of wisdome to determine: Hereof when King Henry heard, he sent down a peculiar Seal to be used in these cases, and calling home the Duke, committed the same to Tunstall Bishop of Durham, and Constituted Assistants with Au∣thority to heare and determine the complaints of the poor, and he was the first that was called President; and from that time, the authority of his successours grew in credit. It was now the yeer One thousand five hundred seventy five, and the Eighteenth yeer of Queen Elisabeths Raign, vvhen Henry the third
King of France being returned from Poland, and Crowned at Rheims, was carefull to have the League of Blois confirmed; which, in the Yeer 1572. had been concluded betweene his Brother Charles and that most Illustrious Queen ELIZABETH; Now therefore hee con∣firmed it with His owne Subscription, and delivered it to Dale the Queen's Legier, as the Queen like wise ratified it at Saint-James neere Westminster: But a little after he demanded by Letters, whether the mutuall defence against all persons mentioned in the League, was in∣tended to comprehend the case of Religion also? Whereunto she an∣swering, that it did comprehend it; hee thereupon hearing this from the Queen, began presently to prepare Warre against the Protestants, and Alenson being drawne to the Adverse party, there was no speech of the marriage for a long time. In the Netherlands at this time, Lodovicke Zuinga who was suc∣cessor unto Duke D'Alva, was wholly bent to recover the Com∣mand of the Seas, which D'Alva had neglected; but not being suf∣ficiently provided of a Navy, he sent Boischott into England, that with the Queens leave, he might take up Ships and Marriners to goe against the Hollanders and Zelanders, but this she would not grant: Then hee made suite, that the Queen would please not to take it in evill part, if the banished persons of the English in the Low-Coun∣tries served the King of Spaine in a Sea-Fight against the Hollanders; and that they might have free accesse to the Ports of England, to buy provision for ready money; But this shee would not grant neither: Then he made request, that the Dutch, who were Rebels against the King of Spaine, might be put out of England; but neither would shee grant this, as being an Action voide of Humanity; and against the Lawes of Hospitality; yet because shee would not be thought to violate the old Burgundian Law, shee Commanded by Proclamation, that the Shipps of the Dutch which were made ready, should not go forth of the Haven; nor yet the Dutch, who had taken up Armes a∣gainst the King of Spaine, enter into the Ports of England, and by name, the Prince of Orenge, and Fifty other the prime of that Fa∣ction; and this shee did the more willingly, because Zuinga at the intercession of Wilson the English Embassador, had removed the Earle of Westmerland, and other English Fugitives out of the Dominions of the King of Spaine, and had also dissolved the English Seminary at Doway; though in stead thereof, the Guises through the procure∣ment of Pope Gregory the thirteenth, set up another Seminary at Rhemes. And at this time the Prince of Orenge, perceiving his Forces but small, and thinking himself too weake for the King of SPAINE, and little hope of ayde from England, he entered into Consultation with the Confederate States, to whose protection, they were best and in the most security to betake themselves: The Princes of Ger∣many they knew were not all of one minde, parted from money ve∣ry hardly, and did not every way, nor would not by no meanes pos∣sible accord and concurre with them in their Religion; and therefore they were not so fit. Then, the French they saw, were intangled in a Civill War, and so had enough of their owne to do; besides the old grudges and heart-burnings that vvere between the French and Dutch; and therefore neither were they so fit. There remained then the English, as the fittest of any (if it might be obtained) seeing they were Neighbouss, of the same Religion, and of a Language not much different, strong in shipping, and rich in Merchandize. Hereupon (con∣sidering the commodiousnesse of the English Nation) they send into
England, Philip Marnizie of S. Aldegond; Ianus Dowsa, William Ny∣vell, and Doctor Melsen; who in an honourable Ambassage, offer the Countries of Holland and Zealand to be possessed or protected by the Queen, forasmuch as she was descended from the Princes of Holland, by Philip wife of Edward the third, daughter of William of Bavaria, Count of Hanonia and Holland; by whose other sister, the hereditary Right of hose Provinces came to the King of Spain. To this offer, the Queen takes time to answer; and at last, having maturely advised of the matter, her Answer was this, That as yet she conceived not how with safety of her honour, and an upright conscience, she could receive those Pro∣vinces into her protection, much lesse assume them into her possession; but promised, She would deal earnestly with the King of Spain, that a well conditioned Peace might be concluded. Presently upon this, Zuinga, Governour of the Low-Countries died; after whose death, the States of Brabant, Flanders, and the other Provinces, took upon them the ancient Administration, and Authority in the Common∣wealth; which the King of Spain was fain to confirm to them, till such time as Iohn of Austria were come, whom he determined to make Governour there. In the mean time, Queen Elizabeth in behalf of the King of Spain, sent William Davyson in Ambassage to those Provinces, to ex∣hort them to be peaceable and quiet, which yet, by reason the Spanish Souldiers, were so outragious, little prevailed. In England all was calm and quiet for all this yeer, onely a differ∣ence fell out between Sir Iohn Forster, Governour of Berwick, and Iohn Cormichill, Keeper of Liddesdale in Scotland: In composing whereof, the Regent of Scotland, having given Queen Elizabth some discontentment, was fain to come unarmed before the Earl of Hun∣tington, appointed the Legate for England, at Bonderod, and so the matter was taken up, and the Regent ever after continued constant in observing the Queen, and to his great commendation, restrayn∣ed the Freebooters of the Borders, to the great good of both King∣domes. This yeer there died in Scotland, Iames Hamilton, Duke of Castle-Herald, and Earl of Arran, who was great Grand-childe to Iames the second, King of Scots, by his daughter, appointed Tutor to Mary, Queen of Scots, and designed Heir and Governour of the Kingdom, du∣ring her minority. At this time the Earl of Essex is come into Ireland again, whre ha∣ving done good services, and being in the midst of Victory, he was on a sudden commanded to resigne his Authority in Ulster; and as though he were an ordinary Commander, is set over three hundred Souldiers; which disgrace was wrought by his adversaries in Court, to the continuall pe∣plexing of his milde spirit. And now is Sir Henry Sidney the third time sent Deputy into Ireland; who going into Ulster, there came to him and sub∣mitted themselves Mac Mahon, Mac Guyre, Turlogh Leynigh, the O Conors and O Moors, the Earl of Desmond, and the rebellious sons of the Earl of Clan∣ricard, all whom he received into favour, and with great commendation administred the Province. At this time the Spaniard in the Low-Countries began to deal roughly with the people, and haryed the Inhabitants with all manner of spoyl and injury; Antwerp, the most famous Town of Traffick in all Europe, was miserably pillaged, the English Merchants houses rifled, insomuch that the States were enforced to take up Arms, and Messengers were sent to all neighbour∣ing Princes; and to Q. Elizabeth was sent Monsieur Aubigy, both to shew her upon how necessary and just causes they had taken up Arms, and also to borrow of her a great sum of money, the better to enable them to resist
the Spaniard. But she being certainly informed, That they first sued to the French King for help, denieth the request, yet promiseth to intercede earnestly with the King of Spain for peace. And in that imployment, she addressed into Spaine, Iohn Smith, cosen German to King Edward the sixth, a man of Spainsh behaviour: and well knowne to the King of Spaine, who was liberally received by the King; and with such wisdome retorted the contumelious speech, of Gasper Quiroga Archbishop of Toledo, and the Spanish Inquisitors, who would not admit in the Queenes Title, the Attribute of De∣fendor of the Faith; that he had gained great thankes from the King of Spaine himself, who requested him, not to speake of it to the Queen, and gave severe command, That the Title should be admitted. And now by this time was Iohn of Austria come into the Low-countries, with a large Commission: for he was the Naturall sonne of the Emperour Charles the fifth; to whom the Queen sent Edward Horsey, Governour of the Isle of Wight, to Congratulate his coming thither, and to offer help, if the States called the French into the Netherlands; yet at the same time, Sweving∣ham being exceeding importunate on the States behalfe, she sent them twenty thousand pounds of English mony; (so well she could play her game of both hands) upon condition, they should neither change their Prince nor there Religion, nor take the French into the Low-countries, nor refuse a Peace, if Iohn of Austria should condiscend to indifferent Conditions, but if he em∣braced a Peace, then the money should be paid back to the Spanish souldiers, who were ready to mutiny for lack of pay. So carefull she was to retaine these declining Provinces in obedience to the King of Spaine. At this time a Voyage was undertaken, to trie if there could be found any sea upon the North part of America, leading to the wealthy coast of Cathaia, whereby in one Comerce, might be joyned the riches of both the East and West parts of the worlde, in which voyage was imployed Martyn Frobysher, who set saile from Harwich the eighteenth of Iune, and the ninth of August, en∣tred into that Bay, or sea, but could passe no further for Snow and Ice. The like expedition was taken in hand, two yeers after, with no better successe. About this time died the Emperour Maximilian, a Prince that Deserved well of Queen Elizabeth and the English, who thereupon sent Sir Philip Sidney to his sonne Ridolphus King of the Romanes, to condole his Fathers death, and congratulate his succession: as likewise to doe the like, for the decease of the Count Electour Palatine, named Frederick the third, with her surviving sonne. And now Walter Deveruex Earl of Essex, who out of Leicesters envie, had bin recalled out of Ireland, was out of Leicesters feare, (as being threatned by him) sent back again into Ireland, but with the empty title of Earl Marshall of Ireland; with the grief whereof, he fell into a bloody Flux, and in most grievous torments ended his life. When he had first de∣sired the standers by to admonish his sonne (scarce tenne yeers old at that time) to have alwayes before his eyes, the six and thirtieth yeer of his age, as the utmost terme of his life, which neither himself, nor his father before him could out-go, and the sonne indeed attained not to it, as shall hereafter he declared. He was suspected to be poisoned, but Sir Henry Sidney, Deputie of Ireland, after di∣ligent search made, wrote to the Lords of the Counsell, That the Earl often said, It was familiar to him upon any great discontentment to fall into a Flux, and for his part, he had no suspition of his being poisoned, yet was this suspition encreased; for that presently after his death, the Earl of Leicester, with a great sum of money and large promises, put∣ting away Dowglasse Sheffield, by whom he had a son openly marryed Essex his widdow. For although it was given out, That he was privately marryed
to her, ye Sir Francis Knolles his father, who was well acquainted with Leicester's roving loves, would not believe it, unlesse he himself were present at the Marriage, and had it testified by a publike Notary. At this time also, died Sir Anthony Cook of Gyddy-Hall in Essex, who had been School-master to King Edward the sixth, and was no lesse School-master to his own daughters, whom he made skilfull in the Greek and Latine Tongues; marryed all to men of great Honour; one to Sir William Cecill, Lord Treasurer of England; a second, to Sir Nicholas Bacon, Lord Keeper of the Great Seal; a third, to Sir Thomas Hobby, who died Ambassador in France; a fourth, to Sir Ralph Lowlet; and the fifth to Sir Henry Killigrew. At this time, the sons of the Earl of Claricard, who scarce two months before had obtained pardon for their Rebellion, fell into Rebellion again; but were by the Deputy soon supprest; and William Drury newly made Pre∣sident of Munster, reduced the whole Provice to good Order, except on∣ly the County of Kerry, whither a number of Vagabonds were gotten, trusting to the Immunities of the place. For King Edward the third made Kerry a County Palatine, and granted to the Earls of Desmond all the Roy∣all Liberties which the King of England had in that County, excepting Wreckby Fyre, Forestall, and Treasure Troue. The Governour notwithstan∣ding, who wisely judged that these Liberties were granted for the better preservation of Justice, and not for maintenance of outragious malefactors, entred into it, and violently put to flight and vanquished the mischievous crew, which the Earl of Desmond had placed there in ambush. The Earl in the mean while made great complaints of Drury to the Deputy; and particularly, of the Tax which they call Ceasse, which is an exaction of pro∣vision of Victualls at a certain rate, for the Deputies Family, and the Soul∣diers in Garrison. This Tax, not he onely, but in Leinster also many Lords refused to pay, alleadging that it was not to be exacted but by Parlia∣ment; but the matter being examined in England, it appeared by the Records of the Kingdome, That this Tax was anciently imposed; and that, as a certain Right of Majestie, a Prerogative Royall, which is not subjected to Laws, yet not contrary to them neither, as the wise Ci∣vilians have observed. Yet the Queen commanded to use a moderation in exactions of this nature, saying, She would have her subjects shorn, but not devoured. It was now the yeer 1577, and the twentieth of Queen Elizabeths Raign, when Iohn of Austria, pretending to Queen Elizabeth no∣thing but Peace, yet is found to deal secretly with the Pope, to peprive her of her Kingdome, and himself to marry the Queen of Scots, and invade England: of which his practices the Prince of Orange gives Queen Elizabeth the first intelligence. Whereupon (finding his deep dissem∣bling) she enters into a League with the States, for mutuall defence both at Sea and Land, upon certain Conditions; but having conclu∣ded it (because she would not have it wrongfully interpreted, as though she meant to foster a Rebellion in the Netherlands) she sent Thomas Wilkes to the King of Spain with these Informations; That she had alwayes endeavoured o keep the Low-Countryes in obedience to the King of Spain; had perswaded (even with threatnings) the Prince of Orange to accept of Peace; but withall, if the King of Spain would have his Subjects obedient to him, she then requests him to restore their Priviledges, and to remove Ihn of Austria from the Government, who not onely was her deadly enemy, but laboured by all means to bring the Netherlands into utter servitude. If this be granted by the King of SPAIN, she then faithfully promiseth, That if the States perform not their Allegiance to him, as by their Promise to her they are engaged to doe, she will
utterly forsake them, and bend her self with all her Forces to compell them. While Wilkes in Spain unfoldeth thee matters, Iohn of Austria sendeth to Queen Elizabeth, in most grievous manner accusing the States for diso∣bedience, and making a large declaration of the causes for which he had taken up Armes again. Thus Queen Elizabeth (like a fortunate Princesse) sate as an Honourable Arbitresse between the Spanish, the French, and the States; insomuch that it was not untrue which one wrote, That France and Spaine were Ballances in the Scale of Europe; and England the Beame to turne them either way; for they still got the better, to whome she ad∣hered. About this time, when the Judges sate at the Assizes in Oxford, and one owland Inkes a Book-seller was questioned for speaking approbrious words against the Queen, suddenly they were surprised with a pestilent favour; whether rising from the noysome smell of the prisoners, or from the dampe of the ground, is uncertaine, but all that were there present, almost every one, within forty hours died, except Women and children; and the Contagion went no further. There died Robert Bell Lord chief Baron, Robert D'Oylie; Sir William Babington: D'Olye Sheriffe of Oxford-shire, Harcourt, Weynman, Phetiplace, the most noted men in this Tract; Barham the famous Lawyer; almost all the Jurours, and three hundred other, more or lesse. This yeer the title of the Lord Latimer, (which had flourished in the Familie of the Nevills, ever since the dayes of King Henry the sixth) was extinct in Iohn Nevill, who died without issue male, and left a faire estate to four daughters, whereof the eldest marryed Henry Earl of Northumber∣land, the second, Thomas Cecill, who was afterward Earl of Exceter; the third, Sir William Cornwallis; and the fourth Sir Iohn Daverse. In Ireland the O-Moores and O-Conors, and others, whose Ancestours the Earl of Sussex in Queen Maries dayes, had for their rebellion, deprived of their Patrimonie in Loyse and Ophli, did now break forth into a new Re∣bellion, under the conduct of Rori Oge, that is, Roderick the younger: set on fire the village of Naasse, assault Lchlin, from whence being driven back by the valour of George Care the Governour, he was afterward slain. Out of England at this time there went into the Low-countries, Iohn North, the Lord Norths eldest sonne Iohn Norris, second son to the Lord Norris, Henry Cavendish, and Thomas Morgan Colonells, with many voluntaries, to learn Militarie experience. Thither also came Caesamire the Elector Palatines sonne, with an Army of German Horse and foot, at the Queenes charges: upon thee Don Iohn, assisted by the Prince of Parma, Mondragon, and other the best Commanders of Spain, confident of victorie, flyeth furiously, before they expected him, yet after a long fight, was forced to retreat; but then turning again, and thinking to breake through the Hedges, and Brakes where the English and Scottish voluntaryes had placed them∣selves, was again repulsed; for the English and Scottish were so hot upon the matter, that casting away their garments, by reason of the hot weather, they fought in their shirts, which they made fast about them. In this battell N fought most valiantly, and had three horses sain under him, as also  the Scot, Bingham, and William Mrham. Now for comfort o the afflicted Provinces, there came at that me in∣to the Netherlands, the Count Swzenberg from the Emperour, Mnsie Bere from the French King, and from the Queen of England, the Lord Cobham and Walingham, with Commission to procure conditions of Peace, but returned without doing any thing, for that Don Iohn refused to admit the Proestan Religion, and the Prince of Orange refused to return into Hol∣land. About this time Egrmd Rcliffe, son to Henry Earl of Susse, by his second wife, who had been a prime man in the rebellion of the North, and
served now under Don Iohn, was accused by the English fugitives, that he was sent under hand to kill Don Iohn; which (whether true or false) he was thereupon taken and put to death. The Spaniards have affirmed, That Ratcliffe at his last end, confessed voluntarily, That he was freed out of the Tower of London, and moved by Walsinghams large promises, to do this Fact; but the English that were present at his death, deny that he confessed any such thing, though the English Rebells did all they could to wrest this confession from him. At this very time, Don Iohn, in the flower of his age, died of the Pesti∣lence, or (as some say) of grief, as being neglected by the King of Spain his brother; a man of an insatiable Ambition, who aymed first at the Kingdom of Tunis, and after, of England; and who, without the privity of the French King, or King of Spain, had made a league with the Guises, for the defence of both Crowns. Alanson, although very busie about the Belgick War, yet now began again to pursue the Marriage with Queen Elizabeth; for renewing of which suit, first was Bachervyle sent to the Queen; and soon after Ramboulet, from the French King; and within a month after that, Simier, a neat Courtier, and exquisitely learned in the Art of Love, accompanied with a great number of the French Nobility; whom the Queen at Richmond entertained in such loving manner, that Leicester began to rage, as if his hopes were now quite blasted. Certainly a little before, when Ashley, a Lady of the Queens Bed-chamber, mentioned the Earl of Leicester to her for husband, she, with an agry countenance, replyed, Dost thou think me so unlike my self, and so forgetfull of Majestie, as to prefer my servant, whom I my self have advanced, before the greatest Princes of the Christian world? But it is now time to return to the Scottish Affairs. The Earl of Mor∣ton, Regent of Scotland, though a man of great wisedome and valour, yet was now so overcome of covetousnesse, that he grew universally hated; and thereupon, with the joynt consent of the Nobility, the Administration of the Common-wealth was translated to the King, though he was yet but twelve yeers old, and twelve of the chief Lords were appointed to at∣tend him in Councell, three of them by course for three months; amongst whom, the Earl of Morton for one, that they might not seem to cast him quite off. The King having taken upon him the Administration, sent pre∣sently the Earl of Dumformelin to Queen Elizabeth, acknowledging her great deserts towards him, and requesting to have the Treaty of Edinburgh, agreed on in the yeer 1559, to be confirmed, for the more happy restrain∣ing the robbers about the borders; and withall, That his ancient Patrimo∣ny in England; namely, the Lands granted to his Grand-father Mahew, Earl of Lenox, and the Countesse his Grand-mother, might be delivered into his hands who was the next Heir. The Queen readily promised the former demands, but stuck a little at the last, concerning the Patrimony; For she would not grant, That Arbella, the daughter of Charles the King of Scots Unkle, Born in England, was the next Heir to the Lands in Eng∣land; neither would she grant the Ambassadours proof out of History, That the Kings of Scots, born in Scotland, did anciently (without question) hold the Earldome of Hntington by Right of Inheritance. Yet she com∣manded a Sequestration to be made of the Revenues of those Lands, by Brleigh Master of the Wards; and willeth the King, That out of the goods of the Earl of Lenox in Scotland, satisfaction might be made to his Grand-mothers Creditors here. For she too it in ill part, that the King had recalled the Inoment of the Earldom of Lenox (made to his Unkle Charl and his Heirs) after the death of Charles, to the prejudice (as was suggested to her) of Arbella; although indeed, it be a Priviledge of the Kings of Scotland, That they may recall Donations made in their minorty.
The Earl of Morton in the mean while, not enduring the disgrace to be outed of his Regency, regarded not the prescript Form of Government lately set down, but drew the Administration of all matters to himself, and kept the King in his own power, at the Castle of Sterling, admitting none to his presence, but whom he pleased. At this presumption, the Lords growing angry, made the Earl of Atholl their Captain, and in the Kings Name levyed a great Army, and were ready to encounter Morton; but by the intercession of Robert Bowes, the English Ambassadour, they were stayed from fighting; and Morton presently betook himself home, and the Earl of Atholl soon after died, not without suspition of being poy∣soned. At this time the King of Spain, and Pope Gregory the thirteenth, held se∣cret Consultation, to invade at once both England and Ireland, and to work the absolute ruine of Queen Elizabeth; The Pope to gain the Kingdom of Ireland for his son Iames Buen of Compagno, whom he had made Marquesse of Vincola. The King of Spain secretly to relieve the Irish Rebells, as Queen Elizabeth did the Dutch, while friendship in words was upheld on both sides: and being known, That the greatest strength of England consisted in the Navy Royall, and Merchants Ships, it was advised, that the Italian and DutchMerchants should hire these Ships for long Voyages; to the end that while they were absent, the Queens Navy might be surprized with a greater Fleet: and at that time Thomas Stukeley, an English fugitive, should joyn himself to the Irish Rebells with new Forces. For he making great boast, and promising the Kingdom of Ireland to the Popes bastard son, had so insmuated himself into grace with the ambitious old man, that he adorned him with the Titles of Marquesse of Leinster, Earl of Wexford and Caterlogh, Viscount Mrogh, and Baron of Rosse (the principall dignities of Ireland) and made him Commander over eight hundred Italian Souldi∣ers, to be employed in the Irish War. With which Forces Stuckeley setting Sayl from  Vecchia, arrived at length in Portingall, where he and his Forces were by the divine providence, diverted another way. For Sa∣ia King of Portigall (to whom the chief Command, in this Expedition against England was assigned) being first to dispatch a War in Africa, in Ayd of Mahomet Abdall, son to the King of Fesse, perswaded Stukeley to go along with him into Maureania, together with his Italian Souldiers; and then afterward they would go together against Ireland: To this motion Stukeley soon agreed, and therein agreed with his destiny; for in that memorable Battell where three Kings were slain, both he and Sebastian lost their lives. At this time Sir Henry Sidney (who had been Deputy of Ireland at severall times eleven yeers) delivered up his Deputy-ship to Sir William Drury, President of Munster: Such a Deputy, for good Government, that if any have equalled him, none have exceed him. It was now the yeer 1579, and the two and twentieth yeer of Queen Eli∣zabeths Raign; when Iohn Casimire, son of Frederick the third, Count Pa∣laine of the Rhyne, came into England; where, after he had been entertain∣ed with Tiltings and Justs, made Knight of the Garter (the Queen tying the Garter about his leg) and rewarded with a yeerly Pension, he returned. And now was Alexander rnise, Prince of Parma, made Governour of the Netherlands by the King of Spain: and Queen Elizabeth supplied the States with a great Sum of money; for which William Davyson brought into Eg∣land the ancient precious Habilliments of the Family of Burgundy, and their costly Vessells, laid to pawn by Matthew of Austria and the States. Siier in the mean time herein England, ceaeth not by all amorous de∣vices to perswade the Queen to marry Alanson; wherein he drew her so far, that the Earl of Leicester gave ou, He crept into the Queens affection by
love Potions and unlawfull Arts: and Simier on the other side endeavour∣ed by all means to cast down Leicester, discovering his mariage with the Earl of Essex widdow, whereat the Queen grew so angry, that she consined him to the Castle at Greenwich, and had meant to have him Committed to the Tower, but that the Earl of Sussex (though his greatest Adversarie) disswad∣ed her: telling her that none ought to be molested for contracting lawfull Matrimonie. But Leicester notwithstanding was so provoked for his con∣fining, that he was bent to revenge it, and if it be true, as some said he had suborned on Teudr a Yeoman of the Guard to murder Simier, sure it is the Queen by Proclamation commanded that no person should offer injury to the Embassadour or any of his servants. At which time it fell out that as the Queen, together with Simier, the Earle of Lincolne, and Hatton Vice-Chamberlaine were rowed in a barge to Greenwich, a young man shooting off a Harquebus out of a boate, shot one of the rowers in the Queenes Barge thorough the arme with a bullet, who was presently taken and ledde to the Gallowes, but upon solemne Protestation, that he did it unwillingly, and out of no malicious Intent, he was let go and Pardoned. Some would have perswaded the Queen that was purposely suborned to shoote either her or the French Embassadour: but she was so far from suspecting her Subjects; that she would often say, She would not believe any thing against them which a mother would not believe against her children. After a few dayes Alanson himself came privately into England with only on or two attendants, and came to the Queen at Greenwich, at a time when she thought not of it; they had secret conference together, all parties being sent away, after which, being seen of very few, he returned home; but within a moneth or two after the Queen enjoyned the Lord Burleigh treasurer, the Earle of Sussex, Leicester, Hatton and Walsingham, seriously to weigh both the dangers, and the Commodities likely to arise from the marriage with him, and to consult with Simier concerning the marriage Covenants. As in England there was some feare of this Frenchman: So in Scotland at this time of another Frenchman, called Esme Steward, Lord of Aubigny, who came now into Scotland to visit the King his cosen. He was the sonne of Iohn Steward brother to Matthew Steward Earle of Lenox the Kings grand∣father, and had denomination from Aubigny in France, which title Charles the seaventh King of France had antiently conferred upon Iohn Steward of the Familie of Lenox, who being constable of the Scottish Army in France, vanquished the English in one battile, and was slain by them in another: and from that time the title belonged to the younger descent of that house. This Esme Steward, the King embraced with exceeding great love, made him Lord Chamberlaine of Scotland, and Captain of the Castle of Dumbriton, and created him first Earle and then Duke of Lenox. The feare from this man was; because he was deuoted to the Guises and the Popish religion, and that which encreased the feare from this man; because he applied himselfe to Mortons adversaries, and mediated to have Thomas Carre Lord of Fer∣nishurst called home, who of all men was most addicted to the Queen of Scots. About this time Queen Elizabeth, at the request of William Harboune an Englishman, procured a grant from the Turkish Emperour for the English merchants to exercise free traffick in all places of his dominions, as well as Venetians, Polanders, and other neighbouring Nations; whereupon they set up first the Companie of Turkie Merchants, managing a most gainfull Trade at Constantinople, Alexandoria; Egypt, Aleppo, Cyprus, and other parts of Asia, bringing home Spices, Perfumes, unwrought Silks, Tapistry, Indico, Corrants, and the like. This yeer died Sir Nicholas Bacon, Lord Keeper of the Great Seal; but who, by vertue of an Act of Parliament, alwayes exercised the Jurisdiction of
Lord Chancellor; a very fat man, but singularly wise, and a chief prop of the Queens Privy Councell: In whose place succeeded Sir Thomas Brom∣ley, the Queens Solicitor, with the Title of Lord Chancellor of Eng∣land. In Ireland at this time, in the Province of Munster, Iames Fitz Morris kind∣led a new fire of Rebellion; for after his former submission upon his knees, vowing all Obedience to the Queen, he stole away into France, and promi∣sed the French King, if he would lend him assistance, to make him King of Ireland. But being by him slighted, he went into Spain, and made the like offer to the King there. The King of Spain sent him to the Pope, from whom (by means of Nicholas Sanders, an English Priest, and Alan an Irish∣man, both Doctors of Divinity) he obtained a little money, a Legats Authority for Sanders, a consecrated Banner, and Letters of Commenda∣tion to the Catholike King. And returning from Spain with those Di∣vines, three Ships, and a few men, he landed at Smerwick Kerry, a Demy Island in the West part of Ireland, about the first day of Iuly, where (the place being first of all consecrated by the Priests) he built a Fort, and brought the Ships close under it; but these were presently set upon and carryed away, by Thomas Courtney, and thereby the Spaniards deprived of their opportunity of coming thither by Sea. But now Iohn and Iames, brothers to the Earl of Desmond, gathering together a small number of Irish, joyn themselves presently with their kinsman Fitz Morris. Yet the Spaniards seeing that but a very few Irish, and those unarmed, came unto them, they began to distrust the estate they were in, and to cry out, That they were undone; whom Fitz Morris heartened the best he could, telling them that Supplyes were presently to come. And going himself to get more company, he passed thorow the Land of his Cosin William a Burgh, who though he had been a Rebell before, yet was now grown loyall, so as there fell out a Skirmish between them; in which Fitz Morris being strucken thorow with a Pike, and shot into the head with a Leaden Bullet, died in the place, and most of his Company with him; but withall, two of William Burghs sons were in that Skirmish slain also; when the Queen, to comfort him for the losse of his sons, adorned him with the Dignity of Baron of Castle Conell, and rewarded him with a yeerly Pension besides: which favours so overwhelmed him with joy, that he lived but a short while after. And now Sir William Drury the Deputy growing very sick, appointed Sir Nicholas Malby then Governour of Connaght, to be President of Munster, and Generall of the Army; at which time, the Earl of Des∣mond, who had all this while made a shew of Loyalty, breaks openly ou into Rebellion; when now Drury the Deputy dying at Waterford, and by his death Malbyes Authority ceasing, Sir William Pelham is by the Counsell chosen Justice of Ireland, with Authority of Vice-Roy, untill such time as a Deputy were appointed, and the Earl of Ormond is made President of Munster. Pelham goeth into Munster, and sendeth for the Earl of Desmond, who refusing to come, is thereupon proclaymed Traytor, and an enemy to the State; and this being published, the Justice committed the following the War to the Earl of Ormond, who slaying most of the Spaniards, and ad∣herents to Desmond, compelleth him to send his wife to the Justice, to beg his pardon. The Lord Justice Pelham now certified, that Arthur Lord Grey was landed with authority to be Deputy of Ireland, at Munster delivereth the Army to George Bourhier, the son of Iohn, second Earl of Bathe, of that name, and himself returneth to Dublin, to deliver up the Province to his Successor. The Lord Grey at his landing, before he received the Sword, hearing where the Rebells had their Randevouz, marcheth towards them, who presently betake themselves to Glandilough, a grassie Valley, and beset thick with
Trees, where they who dwell neer, scarce know the winding out; yet the Deputy (taking one Csbie an old man, well acquainted with the place, to be is leader) entred into it, where he lost divers of his men; namely, Peter Carew the younger, George Moore, Audeley, and Cosbie himself tht was his Leader. A short time after, there landed at Smerwick in Kerry, under the com∣mand of San Ioseph an Italian, about seven hundred Italian souldiers, who fortifie the place, and name it Fort del Or. Whereupon the De∣puty sent a Trumpetter to the Fort to demand who they were, what they had to do in Ireland, and who sent them; withall commanding them to depart immediately. But they replyed, That some of them were sent from his Holinesse, other from the Catholike King, upon whom the Pope had bestowed the Kingdome of Ireland, for that Queen Eliza∣beth (by reason of heresie) hath forfeited the Right unto her; and there∣fore what they had gotten, they would maintain. Upon this the Depu∣ty prepares for Battery, lets flie his Ordnance four dayes together; in which time the Spaniards once or twice make sallyes out, to their own losse much, but not an English-man slain, but onely Iohn Cheek, a couragious young Gentleman, son to Sir Iohn Cheek, a learned Knight. And now San Ioseph, who commanded the Fort, a white-liver'd souldier, terrified with the continuall Battery, and having no hope of relief, either from the King of Spain, or Desmond (contrary to the will of all his souldiers) he set up a White Flagge, and desired Parlee, but Parlee was denyed, because he had combined with Rebells, with whom it is not lawfull to hold Parlee. Then he demanded that his Company might passe away with their Baggage, but neither would this be granted. Then he required hat some of the chiefer sort might have leave to depart; but neither could this be obtained. At last, when they could prevail in nothing, they hanged out the white Flagge again, and submitted themselves absolutely, without any con∣dition, to the Deputies mercy, who presently consulteth how to deal with them, and this was the Case; Their number was well neer as great as the English; there was present fear of danger from the Rebells; and the English were so destitute of meat and apparell, that they were ready to mutiny, unlesse they might have the spoyl granted them; and besides, there were no ships neither to send them away if they were spared: For these Reasons it was concluded (the Deputy gain-saying, and letting tears fall) That onely the Leaders should be saved, the rest all slain, and all the Irish hanged up; which was presently put in execution; to the great disli∣king of the Queen, who detested the slaughter of such as yeelded themselves, and would accept of any excuses or allegations. And yet more cruelty then this was at that time committed in the Ne∣therlands; for Iohn Norris, and Oliver Temple, English Commanders, to∣gether with some Companies of Dutch, setting out early one morning, took Mechlyn a wealthy Town of Brabant, at an assault with ladders, where they promiscuously murthered both Citizens and Religious Persons, of∣fering violence even upon the dead, taking away Grave-stones, which were sent into England to be sold. About this time certain English Priests, who were fled into the Ne∣therlands, in the yeer 1568, by the procurement of William Allen, an Oxford Schollar, joyned themselves to study at Doway, where they en∣tred into a Collegiate Form of Government; to whom the Pope al∣lowed a yeerly Pension. But tumults arising in the Low-Countries, and the English Fugitives being commanded by the King of Spains Deputy to depart from thence, other the like Colledges, for the trayning up of the English youth, were erected, one at Rheims by the Guises, and another
at Rome by Pope Gregory the thirteenth, which alwayes afforded new upplyes of Priests for England, when the old fayled, who should spread abroad the seeds of the Romish Religion here amongst us; from whence, those Colledges had the name of Seminaries, and they called Seminary-Priests who were trayned up in them. In these Seminaries, amongst other Disputations, it was concluded, That the Pope hath such fulnesse of Power, by Divine Right, over the whole Christian world, both in Ecclesiasticall and Secular matters, that by vertue thereof, it is law∣full for him to excommunicate Kings, absolve their subjects from their Oath of Allegiance, and deprive them of their Kingdoms. From these Seminaries at this time, there came two into England, Robert Parsons, and Ed∣mund Campian, both of them English-men, and Jesuites. Parsons was born in Somerset-shire, a fierce and rough conditioned fellow; Campian was a Lon∣doner, of a milder disposition. They had been both brought up in Oxford; Campian a Fellow of St. Iohn's Colledge, and had been Proctor in the yeer 1569; and when he was made Deacon, counterfeited himself to be a Pro∣testant, till such time as he slipped out of England. Parsons was of Baylioll Colledge, where he made open profession of the Protestant Religion, till for dishonest carriage, he was expelled the House, and then fled to the Po∣pish Party. Both these came privily into England, in the disguise one while of Souldiers, another while of Noble-men; sometimes like English Ministers, and sometimes in the habit of Apparitors. Parsons, who was made the Superiour, brake forth into such open words amongst the Papists, about deposing the Queen, that some of themselves had a purpose to com∣plain of him to the Magistrates. Campian, though something more mode∣rate, yet in a Writing provoked the English Ministers to a dispue; and pub∣lished in Latine an Elegant Book of his ten Reasons, in maintenance of the Doctrine of the Romish Church; as Parsons in like manner, set forth another violent Pamphlet against Clark, who had written modestly against Campians Provocaion. But Doctor Whitaker soundly confuted Campian, who being after a yeer apprehended, and put upon the Rack, was afterward brought out to a Disputation; where he scarcely made good the great fame that went of him. In this yeer was the return of Captain Drake from his incredible Voyage round about the World (which Magellan had before attempted, but died in the Voyage) whereof to relae all particular accidents, would require a large Volume: It may suffice in this place, to deliver some speciall Passages. He was born of mean Parentage in Devon-shire, yet had a great man (Francis Russell, after Earl of Bedford) to be his God-father. His father, in K. Henry the eighth's time, being persecuted for a Protestant, changed his Soyl, and lived close in Kent. K. Henry being dead, he got a place amongst the Mar∣riners of the Queens Navy, to reade Prayers, and afterward bound his son Franis to a Ship-Master, who in a Ship which went to and fro upon the Coast with Commodities, one while to Zealand, another while to France, trayning him up to pains and skill at Sea; who afterward dying, took such a liking to him, that he bequeathed his Barque to him by his Will: This Barque Drake sold, and then in the yeer 1567, went with Sir Iohn Hawkins into America; in which Voyage, he unfortunately lost all he had. Five yeers after, having gotten again a good sum of Money by Trading and Pyracy, (which the Preacher of his Ship told him was lawfull) he bought a Ship of Warre, and two small Vessells, with which he set Sayl again for America, where his first Prize was great store of Gold and Silver, carryed over the Mountains upon Mules; whereof the Gold he brought to his Ships, but left the Silver, hiding it under ground: After this, he fired a great place of Traffique, called, The Crosse, at the River Chiruge, when roaming to and fro upon the Mountains, he espyed the South Sea;
where falling upon his knees, he craved assistance of Almighty God, to finde out that passage, which he reserveth for another Voyage; and for the present, having gotten much riches, he returned home. Afterwards, in the yee 1577, the thirteth day of November, with five Ships, and Sea-men, to the number of 163, he set Sayl from Plimmoth, for the Southern Sea, and within five and twenty dayes, came to Cantyne, a Cap in Babry, and then sayled along by the Isl of Fg, which sends forth emes of Sul∣phur; and being now une the Line, he let every one in his Ships blood. The sixteenth of Apl, entring into the mouth of the Plate they espy∣ed a world of Sea-Calves; in which place Iohn-oughty, the next to Drake in Authority, was called in question for raising Sedition in the Navy, wo being found guilty, was beheaded. Some report, That Drake had charge given him from the Earl of Leicester; to make away Doughty upon some preence or other, for that he had said, that the Earl of Essex was craftily made away by Leicester The twentyeth of August, two of his Ships he turneth off, and with the other three came to the Sea, which they call The Straight of Magelln. The sixth of September, en∣tring into the wide Southern Ocean, which they call The Pacifique Sea, he found it out of measure troublous, so that his Ships were here by Tempests dispersed; in one of which, Iohn Winter was Master, who returned back into England; Drake himself, with onely one Ship, coasted along the Shoe, till he came to the Isle Mocha, from whence loosing, he lighted upon a fellow fishing in a little Boat, who shewed him where a Spanish Ship laden with Treasure ay; Drake making towards it; the Spaniards thought him to be their owne Country man, and thereupon invited him to come on; but he getting aboord presently shut the Spaniards (being not above eight persons) under atches, and took the Ship, in which was four hundred pound weight of gold. At Taurapasa, going again on shoar, he found a Spaniard leeping by the Sea∣side who had lying by him twenty bars of masse Silver, to the value of four thousand Duckats, which he bid his follower take amongst them, the Spani∣ard still sleeping. After this, going into the Port of Africa, he found there three Vessels without any Marriners in them; wherein, besides other wares, were seven and fifty silver bricks, each of which weighed twenty pound; From hence, Tyding it to Lime, he found twelve Ships in one Road, and in them great store of Silks, and a Chest full of money coined, but not so much as a Ship-boy aboord; (such security there was in that Coast:) Then put∣ting to Sea with those Ships, he followed the rich Ship called Cacofoga and by the way met with a small Ship, without Ordnance or other Arms, out of which he took fourscore pound weight of gold, a golden Crucifix, and some Emaulds of a fingers length. The first day of March, he overtook the Ca∣cofoga, set upon her, and took her and in her, besides jewels, fourescore pound weigh of gold, thirteen Chests of silver ready coyned, and as much silver as would ballast a Ship. And now thinking he had gained wealth e∣nough, he resolved to return home and so on the third of November 1580. he landed at Plimmouth, having sayled round about the World, in the space of three years; to the great admiration of all that know what compasse the World is of. The Queen welcomed him home, but made a sequestration of the goods, that they might be ready if the King of Spain required them; and comman∣ded the ship to be drawn on shoar neer Detford for a monument (where the carkasse of it is ye to be seen) and her selfe feasted in it, at which time She Knighted Captaine Drke. But Bernardine Mndoz, the KING of Spaines Embassadour in ENGLAND began to rage; and earnestly demanded Restitution of the Goods, and complained, that the ENGLISH sayled upon the INDIAN Sea. To whom it was
answered, That the goods were sequestred, and ready to make the King of Spain satisfaction, although the Queen had expended against the Re∣bells, whom the Spaniard had excited in England and Ireland, more money then that which Drke brought home. And as for sayling on the Indian Sea that it was as lawfull for the Queens subjects as his, seeing the Sea and the Ayr are common for all to use. Notwithstanding, to Pedro Sa, the Kng of Spain's Agent in this businesse, a great sum of money was re-paid which was not estored to them o whom it belonged, but employed to the Spaniards Wars in the Low-Cories, as was known af∣ter when it was too late. But at this time, when Iackman and Pett, two skilfull Pilots, were sent forth with two Ships by the Londoners, to finde out  shorter cut to the East Indies, by the North-West Passage; they had not the like successe; for a few Leagues beyond the Isles of aygat, they met with such uncertain Tydes, so many Shallows, and such Mountains of Ice, that hey could go no further, and had much do to return home. About this time, Henry Fitz Allen, Earl of Arundel died, in whom the Sirname of a most Noble Family ended, which had flourished in this Honour for above three hundred yeers, from Richard Fitz Alan; who be∣ing descended from the Alanets (ancient Earls of Arundel and Sussex, in the Raign of King Edward the first) obtained the Title of Earl, by reso of the possession of Arundel Castle, without Creation. He had hree daughters by his wife Katherine, daughter to Thomas Grey, Marquesse of Dorset, all whom he out-lived; Hnry, a young man of great hope, who died at Brussells; Ioan, wife to the Lord Lumley; and Mary, who being mar∣ryed to Thomas Howard, Duke of Nfolke, brought forth Philip, in her Right, Earl of Arundel. In Ireland, Arthur Lord Grey the Deputy, going against the O Conors, who aised stirs in Ophalie, putteth to death Hugh O Moley, quieteth all that Quarter, even the Families of the Moghigns, and O Charles, and in the very beginning suppresseth a conspiracy which was breaking forth, by putting to death the Lord Ngn who being confident in his own inno∣cency, when the Deputy promised to save his ilfe, if he would but confesse himself guilty, chose rather to die and be held guiltlesse, then to live in in∣famy, by betraying his own Innocency. With whose death the Queen was extremely displeased, as by which she was made a Patronesse of cruel∣ty, to her great dishonour. But the Deputy knew with what kinde of peo∣ple he dealt, and by this example of severity, brought Turlgh Leymigh to accept conditions of Peace; and the O Bis, and Cavenaghs (rebellious Fa∣milies in Leinster) humbly to crave Peac also, and to offer Hostages. In Scotland at this time, great jealousie was ad of Lenox, Lord of Obig∣y, lest, being in so great favour with the King, he should allure him to marry into France, and bring into Scotland the Popish Religion. Where∣upon (although he purged himself by Letters to Queen Elizabeth, and proferred himself to be a Protestant) yet many courses were taken to se∣quester him from the King but so far from taking effect, That on the con∣trary, the Earl of Morton (who among all other was most addicted to the English) was soon after accused of Treason by the Earl of Arran, and cast into prison and not long after (notwithstanding all the means the Queen could use to save him) was beheaded, as convicted to be accessary to the murder of the Kings Father. Whereupon the Earl of Angus, and other, who laboured for Mrt, fled straightwayes into England. In the Low-Countries about this time, the Count Rheinberg proceeded victoriously for the King of Spain, and beleaguer'd Stnwick in Freezland; against whom the States sent Norris Generall of the Field, who put the einburghs Company to the worst and raised the Siege: but afterward
with Verdugo the Spaniard at Nrthone, even when the Vi∣ gotten (Roger Williams having put the enemies to flight)  of the War turned, Norris is vanquished, wounded, and a great  his men slain; amongst whom were Cotton, Fitz Williams, and  Commanders. Here it must not be omitted That the English  the dwellers in the Northern parts of the World, were hither∣ Drinkers, and deserved praise for their sobiety) in these Dutch  to be Drunkards; and brought the vice so far to over-spread  ome, that Laws were fain to be enacted for repressing it. whilst the States and the King of Spain conend about a few  the Low-Countries, he seizeth upon the whole Kingdom of Por∣  For the last yeer, Henry, King of Ptingall dying, many Compe∣allenge the Kingdom; as the Duke of Savoy; the Prince of Par∣ Natharine Bracant, and the Queen of France. But Philip King of  son of Henries eldest sister, putting the case to his Divines and  and adjuring them to pronounce to whom of Right it belonged, , For him: whereupon he sent Duke D'Alva, who put to  tonio, whom the people had elected King, and within seventy dayes  all Portingall. The Queen of France angry hereat, and enviously be∣ the King of Spain's Dominions thus enlarged (being now Master gall, the East Indies, and many Islands besides) adviseth, amongst  Pces, Queen Elizabeth, to bethink themselves in time, of restrayn∣ o excessive Dominions. Whereupon the Queen received Don , and lvingly relieved him, which she thought might be done without  breath of the League with Spain, seeing Don Antonio was descended of  Blood, and of the House of Lancaster; and that no Cauion was  eague; That the Portuger should  be admitted into England. And now the Queen-Mother of Frano, and the King her son, moe  then ever, pursue the Mach with Alanson, now Duke of Agio;  transacting whereof, they sent in Ambassage into England Francis , Prince of Daulphine; Arthur Csse Marshall of France, and many  Honorable Personages, who were entertained with great respect (a  being purposely built at Westminster for that use, Royally furnished; tings and Justs proclaimed, by Philip Earl of Arundel, Frederick Baron  Windsor, Sir Philip Sidney, and Sir Fulk Grevill, against all comes The gates that were to confer with the French concerning the Marriage,  Sir William Cecill Lord Treasurer; Edward, Earl of Lincoln, Lord Ad∣ll; Robert Dudley, Earl of Leicester; Sir Christopher Hatton, and Sir  Walsingham, Secretary by whom, Covenants of Marriage were at th agreed on; First, That the Duke of Angio, and the Queen of Eng∣, within six weeks after the ratification of the Articles, should contract trimony and the rest, most of them such as were before agreed on, in the arriage between Queen Mary and King Philip, chiefly consisting in confer∣ng Honour upon the Duke, but Power upon the Queen. It was also ar∣ed, That all paticulars should be ratified within two Months by the thfull Promise and Oath of the French King, for him and his Heirs, and eservation also was added apart, with the Hands and Seals of every   Delegates, That Queen Elizabeth is not bound to finish the Marriage, till she and the Duke have given each other satisfaction in some , and have certified the French King of the same within six weks Be∣ore those six weeks were expired, Simier, Secretary to the Coull, is  into France, to require the King of France his Confirmation The  will not hear him, but presseth to have the Marriage accomplished,  was contracted, and that nothing else was to be done. iier on the  side, sheweth by the Articles, That a League offene and defensive  first be concluded: This the French King disclaymeh: Whereupon
Wlsinghams is presently sent o compose this differane, who joyntly with Henry Cbham, the Embassour in ordina and Simier, alleadgeth to the French King these Particls, That Queen Elizabeth for no other reason was willing to marry, but for the atisfaction of he people; and seeing many Impediments were come in the way since the first Treaty, namely the Civill Warre in Franc and the Dukes engagement in a war with Spain, w makes the wiest of her subjects to be now against the Mach. This hath made her to deferre the accomplishment of it, although her affection be still constant toward the Duke For this cause the Queen would have no further Treaty to be held till the French Duke be freed from the Spanish warre, and a Leauge of mutuall offe and defence be agreed on. The French King willingly accepted of e Lagu defensive; but of the offensive he would heare no speech, till th marriage were finished. No long aftr the French Dk himself came into England, having with good successe raised the Sige of Cbray; he was here received with as great humanity as he cou wsh, and nothing omitted where by he might judge himsel to be truly welcome. Insomuch th in November, when the Anniver∣sari of the Qus Inauguration came to be solemnized, the Q. (while they were in Love conference) drew a Ring off from her finger, and put it upon his, upon some private conditions. The standers by imagined, that by this Ceremonie the Marriag was confirmed between them; and Alde∣gnd Governour of Antwerp being there, presently dispatched messen∣gers into the Low-Countries to give notice of it; and thereupon Bonfires were made, and all shewes of Rejoycing But the Earl of Leicester (who privly plotted to crosse the Mach) Hton the Vice-Chamberlain, and Secretary Walsingham, fr and are enraged, as if the Kingdom, the Queen and Religon, were now utterly ovthrowne. The Maids of Honour, and Ladis that were familiar wi th Queen, made grievous lamentation, and so  and daunted her, that she could take no rest that night. The nex day she calleth to her the French Duke, and causing all companie to go aside, they privately nerain a long discourse. At length the Duke re∣turning to his lodging, cast the Ring away from him, and after a while takes it up again, terribly exclayming against the Levity and inconstancie of Women. The Queen at this time was much troubled at a Book lately put forth, with this Title, The Gulph wherein England will be swallowed, by the French Marriage: whereof, conceiving that some Puritan was the Author, it made her highly displeased with the Puritans: whereupon within a few dayes, Iohn Stubbes of Lincolnes-Inne, a Zealous Professour, and the Author of this booke, (wose sister, Thomas Cartwright, the father of the Puritants, had married) William Page that dispersed the copies, and Singleto the Printer, were ap∣prehended against whom Sentence was pronounced, That their Right hand should be cut off by vertue of a Law made in the Raigne of Phillip and Maie, against the Athors and dispersers of Seditious Writings; (though the cheife Lawyers and Judges of the Kingdom could not agree concerning the fce of that Saue:) Hereupon Stubs and Page were brought to the Scaffld, made of purpose, in the Market place at Westminster, and their right hands, with a Butchers knife and a malle, cut off by the wrest; the Printer was pdoned At that time, Stubbs when his right hand was cut off, un∣covered his head with the left, and cried out, God save the Queen, to the great amazement of all the beholders. At this time the Queene, upon importunate suite of her Counsell, gave way, hat Edmund Campian, Ralph Sherwin, and Alexader Bryant, Priests, should be called to the arre, who being accused by vertue of a Law made in the five and twentieth yeare of King Edward the Third, to have plotted the ruine of the Queene and Kingdome; to be adhering to the Pope, the
Queens enemy, and coming into England, to raise Forces against the State, were then condemned of High-treason, and accordingly executed. Campian after he was convicted, being demanded; First, whether Queen Elizabeth wre a lawfull Queen? would make no answer; afterward, Whether he ould stand for the Queen, or for the Pope, if he should send an Army a∣gainst the Queen; he plainly professed, That he would be of the Popes side, nd witnessed so much under his hand. After this, some other Papists up∣on the like occasion were also put to death, which the Queen rather necessa∣ily, than willingly assented to, as being unwilling to force the conscience of any. These, and the like exorbitancies of Papists, were cause, that new d strict Laws were enacted against them the Parliament following, which began the next Ianuary. The French Duke after three moneths abode in England, took his jour∣ney in February, into the Low-Countries, whom the Queen her self brought on his way as far as Canterbury and then commanded the Earl of Leicester, the Lord Charles Howard, Hunsdon, Willoughby, Windsor, Sheffield, Sir Philip Sidney, Sir Francis Russell, Sir George Bourchier, and some other prime knights, to accompany him to Antwerpe, where he is made Duke of Brabant, Lim∣brg, and Lorraine; for the Dutch had long before removed the King of Spains Government, and quitted the people from their oath of Allegiance, that it might be in their power to choose any other Prince. Hee the Duke of Anjou gave free leave to exercise the Roman Religion, to as many as would swear Fealty to him, and abjure the King of Spains authority: but fter all, having spent a great masse of money, with which he was supplied from England; and observig, that only vain and empty titles were confer∣red upon him, while the States held all the Dominion in their own hands, he rashly enterprized an assault upon Antwerpe, and some other Towns, and shortly departed without any great matter performed. At this time Queen Elizabeth, as well to get her some friends, as she had procured her selfe many enemies; received into the Order of te Garter, Fredericke the Second King of Denmarke; to whom she employed Sir Pere∣grine Bertye (whom she had lately made Lord Willoughby of Eresby) to In∣vest him. But now to prevent the Duke of Guyses designe in Scotland, which was to make use of the Duke of Lenox favour with the King, to withdraw his affe∣ction from the English: William Reuthen, whom the King had lately made Earle of Gowry, endeavoured with others, by all means to remove Lenox, and the Earl of Arran from the King; and so, while Lenox was gone from Ferth (where the King at that time was) to Edinburgh, and Arran was also absent on a journey: The Earls Gowry, Marre, Lindsey, and other, taking the opportunity, invited the King to the Castle of Reuthen, and there detai∣ned him, not permitting him to walk abroad: All his trusty servants they removed from about him, Arran they cast in prison, enforced the King to call home the Earl of Angus, and to send away Lenox into France, who be∣ing a man of a soft and gentle disposition, for the Kings safety readily con∣sented; and not content with all this, they compelled the King by his Let∣ters to Queen Elizabeth, to approve and allow of this his thraldome. The Queen of Scots in the mean while, bewailing her own hard fortune, and the distresse of the King her Son, layeth open the same in a large letter, written to the Queen in French: With which letter, Queen Elizabeth being some∣what affected, sent unto her Robert Beale Clerk of the Councell, to expostu∣late with her concerning the querulous writing, and joyntly with the Earle of Shrewsbury, to treat of the setting her at liberty. And indeed, serious consultation was held at the Councell Table about it, and the most were of opinion that upon certain conditions she should have her liberty; but the Scottish of the English faction opposing it, nothing was effected.
Soone after this, the King sent Colonell William Steward, and Iohn Colvill to Queen Elizbeth, profering all manner of respect and observance, and requesting her advice for quieting the tumults in Scotland, and also for his contracting of marriage. At which time, news was brough, that the Duke of Lnox was dead in France, who departing this life t Paris, even at the very point of death, as oftentimes before, made open profession of the Pro∣stant Religion; thereby confuting those who had maliciously traduced him for a Papist. After whose death, when the surprizers of the King were lift up in their own conceits, as thinking they had him safe enough. He on a sudden (though scarce eighteen yeers of age) with some few others, conveyed himselfe to the Castle of St. Andrews, to whom the Nobility presently repaired, bringing Armed Bands with them, as fearing some dan∣ger might befall him. Afterwards, in fair words, he advised some of his surprizers to go from the Court, for avoyding of tumults, and promised them pardon, if they wold crave it. But Gowry only asked pardon, and sub∣mitted himselfe, using this distinction, That he had not offended in matter, bu in forme onely; and then the King sent for the Earle of Arran to the Court, and respected him as his intimate friend, imploying him to com∣pose the differenes amongst the Nobility, and to purge the kingdome and his own Court from civill dissensions. Whiles he is sedulous in these cares, comes Sir Francis Walsingham from Queen Elizabeth, to advise him not to be led away by evill Councellours, to the destruction of both kingdoms. He findeth the King accompanied with the flowr of the nobility, and beholdeth another maner of Majesty than he looked for in Scotland: Plaing Audience given him, he put the King in minde, of what the Queen out of Isocrates, in private Letters had formerly admonished him: That a Prince must be such a lover of Truth; that more credit may be given to his bare word, than to anothers oath; and in many words advised him, to beware now in his youth of evill Councellours, and alwayes to be like himselfe. The King answered, That he was an absolute Prince, and would not that others should appoint him Councellors whom he liked not; but that he had long since devoted the first-fruits of his amitie to the Queen of England, his deer Sister, and doth now willingly make profer of the same. Walsingham now dealt with him farther; not to lay to the Queens charge what broyls had lately fallen out in Scotland; sheweth, how benefi∣ciall to him, and to both kingdoms Amity had been hitherto, and would be in time to come also, so it were not neglected; and that the same might the better be confirmed, if the variance between the Nobility were layd asleep, by a Law of oblivion Enacted in Parliament, The Peers which now were removed from the Court called back again, Religion looked into, and a firm League concluded between both kingdoms. The King made answer, that he gladly embraced Amity with England, and that he would constantly defend the Religion already established: Afterward he lovingly dismissed Walsingham, though he held him no good friend to him and his Mother; and carefully looking to matters, with undestanding, even above his yeers, proposed and profered reconciliation to those that had surprized him, if within a limited time they asked Pardon; which they were so far from do∣ing, that the entred into new consultations to surprize him again; where∣upon they are commanded within a set time to leave the kingdom, of which number, Marre, Glames, Paslet and some other, betook themselves into Ire∣land; Boyde, Zester, Weeme, Lochlevin, into the Low-Countries; Dumfermilin into France, the Earle of Angus is confined to his Earldome, Gowry onely to his owne ruine stayeth behinde after the limited time, hatching new devises. About this time happened a difference, and thereupon a Warre, between the Emperors of Muscovia, and the King of Sweden; when Iohn King of
Sweden, doubting himself to be no fit Match for the Emperour, sent a Roy∣l Ambassage to Queen Elizabeth, requesting her to intercede for him to e Emperour; which she did without delay, and by her Ambassadour drew the Muscovian to a Peace upon reasonable Conditions. Bt the Muscovian ortly after dying, and Theodorus his Successor, granting free Traffique to rchants of all Nations that would come thither; the Queen importuned him to admit of none but English Merchants, requiring him to confirm the Priviledges which his Father had granted them: Whereto, by way of Answer, he demanded Free Trading for all the English, saying, It was not fit that a small Company should exercise a Monopoly, and all other be estrayned: But as for Customes, he promised to take lesse by one half of that Company, then of any other, because they first opened the way thither. The next Summer, Albertus Alasco, a Palatine of Poland, of a comely personage, and great learning, came into England to see the Queen, who was nobly entertained, both by her, and the Nobility, as also by the Schol∣lrs of Oxford, with learned Orations, and other Recreations: but having rryed here four Months, and run ito much debt, he secretly withdrew himself and departed. This man I saw my self afterward in Crakow, very bare, though it was reported of him, That he had in a Dowry with a wife, fify Castles of great value: but what Myne can bear the charges of pro∣digality? This yeer proved fatall to divers great men; for there died this yeer, st, Thomas Ratcliffe, the third Erl of Sussex of this Family; a man of grea spirit, and great faithfulnesse to his Countrey. There died also Hen∣ry Wriothsley Earl of Southampton; one exceedingly devoted to the Romish Religion, and a great favourer of the Queen of Scots, which cost him Queen Elizabeths displeasure, and imprisonment besides. There died also Sir Humphrey Gilbert, who was cast away at Sea, in his return from the North prt of America, whither he lately sayled with five Ships, having sold his Patrimony, in hope to plant a Colony tere. There died also Edmund Grin∣dall, Arch-ishop of Canterbury, being blinde through age, a grae and pious Pelate, who stood highly in the Queens favour for a long time, till he lost  last, by favouring (as was said) the Puritans Conventicles; but the ue cause indeed was, for disallowing the Marriage of Iuli an Italian Phy∣sitian, with another mans wife, against the Earl of Leicester's pleasure. Grin∣dll dying, Iohn Whiteguyft succeeded in the See of Canterbury, being transla∣ed thither from the See of Worcester. At this time, certain popish Books written against the Queen, and Princes Excommunicate, withdrew divers from their Allegiance, and particularly, so intoxicated one Somervile, an English Gentleman, that he went privately o the Court, and breathing out nothing but blood and death against all Protestants, set upon one or two by the way, with his drawn Sword. Be∣ing apprehended, he stuck not to say, That he would murder the Queen with his own hands. Hereupon he, and upon his intimation, Edwrd Arden is father in Law (a man of an ancient House in Warwick-shire) Ardens wife, their daughter; Somerviles wife, and Hall a Priest, were brought to the Bar, and all condemned; Somervile as principall, the rest as accessaries. Thee dayes after, Somervile was found strangled in the prison; Arden was cuted and quartered; the women and the Priest were spared. Many piied the old Gentleman Arden, as misled by the Priest, and (as it was ge∣nrally believed) brought to his end through the envy of Leicester, whom he used to call Whore-master, Upstart, and many such opprobrious mes. In the Netherlands, the English Garrison at Alost in Flanders being negle∣cted, the Governour Pigot, and the other Captains, for want of pay, upon
Composition, yeelded up the Town to the Spaniard, and then fearing dis∣grace at home, joyned themselves to the Prince of Parma; at whose hands finding themselves slighted, by degrees they stole all away, and came all to unlucky ends. In Ireland the famous Rebell, Gyrald-Fitz Gyrald, the eleventh Earl of Desmond of this Family, having a long time in lurking places escaped the English, was now by a common Souldier found out in a poor Cottage, and slain. His head was sent into England, and set upon London-Bridge. This end had this great Lord, descended from Marice, the son of Gyrald of Wnd∣sore, an English-man, famous amongst those who first set upon Ireland, in the yeer 1170. He possessed whole Countries, together with the Coun∣ty Palatine of Kerry, and had of his own Name and Race, at least five hundred Gentlemen at his command. All whom, and his own life also, he lost within the space of three yeers, very few of his House being left alive. And this disaster he fell into, by proving Trayterous to his Prince, at the instigation of certain Popish Priests. Of whom, the chief was one Nicholas Sanders an English-man, who at the same time died mi∣serably of Famine, being starved to death, when as being forsaken, and running mad upon his ill successe, he roamed up and down the Moun∣tains and Groves, finding nothing to sustain him. In his Scrip were found certain Orations and Letters, written to hearten the Rebells, and promising large rewards from the Pope and King of Spain. Up∣on the Rebells ill successe, Iames Fitz Eustace, Viscount Baltinglas, fled into Spain, where he pined away with grief. He out of zeal to the Romane Religion, a little before he had taken up Arms with the Re∣bells, and exhorting the Earl of Ormond his neighbour to do the like, (who drew his Linage from St. Thomas of Canterbury) he used these wrds to perswade him, That if Saint Thomas of Canterbury had not dyed for the Church of ROME, thou hadst never been Earl of Ormond, for King HENRY the second, to expiate the murther of THOMAS BCKET, gave large Lands in Ormond to his Prede∣cessors. The beginning of the next Spring, certain Scots, together with Gow∣ry, plotted again to surprize the King, pretending onely a care of Reli∣gion, and to remove ill Councellors from him: but the King having in∣telligence of their practise, used means by Colonell Steward, to have Gry taken and cast into prison: whereupon Marre, Glames, Angus, and other of the confederates, flie into England, and beseech the Queen to commiserate their estate, who had incurred the Kings displeasure, to do her and the Kingdom of England service. The King on the other side, ac∣cuseth them to the Queen of haynous crimes, and requires to have them delivered up into his hands. But Secretary Walsingham, who bore great good will to these men, sent Letters with a Command, That they should be safely admitted into Linds Ferme, otherwise called, The holy Island; where Husdon being Governou there, and great addicted to the King of Scots, resisted Walsinghams Command, alleadging he could not satisfie the Secretary in this point, unlesse the Queen gave expresse Command. Here∣upon grew a Dispute, Whether a Secretary of State might not transact a businesse of State, without speciall Commission from the Prince. How this Case was determined, is uncertain; but sure it is, the Scots came not thither, though some favour they had shewed them here in Eng∣land. In the mean time, Gowry was tryed by his Peers, at Seclyn; where, being accused of many Treasons, though he gave colour∣able answers to them all, yet was found guilty, condemed, and be∣headed; whose head his servants sewing to his body, committed to the Grave.
About this time were practises plotted against Queen Elizabeth, in behalf  the Queen of Scots, chiefly by Francis Throgmorton, eldest son of Iohn gmorton, Justice of Chester, who came to be suspected, by reason of etters sent to the Queen of Scots which were intercepted. Upon his ap∣hension, Thomas Lord Paget, and Charles Arundel, privately stole away  France, grievously complaining against Leicester and Walsingham, for ienating the Queen from them, and using such wiles, that scarce any mn was able to live in safety. Henry Earl of Northumberland, and Philip Earl of Arundel, were confined to their houses, his wife committed to the stody of Sir Thomas Shirley; William Howard, the Earls brother, and Hey Howard their Unkle, brother to the Duke of Norfolk, were exami∣ned about Letters from the Queen of Scots; and many Statagems were set on foot, dangerous to some particular persons, but necessary (as should ) for the Queens security. Certain it is, That now the malice of the Papists against the Queen, brake forth more violently than ever be∣fore; for in printed Books they stirred up the Queens own servants to ttempt the like upon her, that Iudith did on Olephernes. The Author of these Books could not be found, but the suspition lay upon one Gegory Martin, sometime of Oxford; and Carter a Statioer, who print∣ed the Books, suffered for it. And whereas the Papists every where aduced the Queen for cruelty, she desirous alwayes to leave a blessed membrance behinde her, grew extremely offended with the Com∣missioners for Popish causes, taxing them of too much cruelty, inso∣much that they were fain, in a printed Declaration, to cleer them∣selves, protesting; That they questioned no man for his Religion, but onely for dangerous attempts against the Queen and State and that Cpian himself was never so Racked, but that he could presently walk up and down. But all this gave not the Queen satisfaction, but she commanded the Commissioners to forbear tortures, and the Judges other uishments; and not long after, when seventy Priests were taken, and some of them condemned, and the rest in danger of the Law, she cau∣sed them all to be Shipped away, and sent out of England: The chief of whom: were Gaspar Heywood, the great Epigrammatist's son, the first esuite that ever set foot in England; Iames Bsgrave, Iohn Hart, and Ed∣d Rishton. At this time Mendoza the Spanish Ambassadour, was thrust out of England, for joyning with Throgmorton, in his Treason against the Queen; whereupon Sir William Waad was sent to the King of Spain, to satisfie him how ill Mendoza had discharged the Office of an Ambassadour here in England; who, when the King admitted him not to his Presence, but in a slighting manner, putting him off to his Councellors; Waad taking it in great disdain, boldly said, That it was a declared Custome among Princes (though in heat of War) to give Ambassadours audience, and thereupon stouly refused to clare his Ambassage, and so returned into England unheard. The greatest matters laid to Mendoza's charge, were got∣tn out of Throgmorton's Confession; for when he was in danger to be ap∣prehended, he sent to Mendoza a box of Writings; and when his Chsts were searched, there were found two Scrowls, one with the names of the Ports of England, and in the other the names of the Nobility and Gentry in England that favoured the Romish Religion. These, when Thogmorton saw brought forth, he said they were counterfeited, and tood to it upon the very Rack; but being brought to the Rack the second time he then con∣fessed all, That Morgan by Letters out of France, had given him information, that the Catholike Princes had decreed to invade England, and with the help of the Duke of Guise, to free the Q. of Scots; and that nothing was now want∣ing, but mony & ayd in England: and that for procuring of this, Charls Pae,
under the counterfeit name of Mope, was sent into Sussex, where the Duke of Guise intended to land; and that he had imported all this matter to Men∣doza, and intimated the names of the Ports, and of the Noble-men that should assist. But being arraigned at the Guild-hall, he denyed all this again, saying, He had spoken so, because he would not be Racked again. Yet be∣ing condemned to die, he flying to the Queens mercy, confessed in a manner all he had before related and then at the Gallows went about to deny it again. So false to it self is the minde of man when it is divided between hope and fear, and lies under the burden of a guilty conscience. Sir William Wade being returned from Spain, was employed to the Queen of Scots, about a Treaty begun two years before: To whom, the distres∣sed Queen sincerely professed, That she devoted her service and her selfe to the Queen of England; and made solemne promise, That if the former Trea∣ty might go on, she would mediate with the King her Son, to receive into favour the Earl of Angus, and the other Scottish Lords, and would charge the Bishops of Rosse and Glasco, her Agents in France, to have no further to do with the English Fugitives. These things Qeen Elizabeth heard glad∣ly, and thereupon sent Beale to the Queen of Scots, who joyntly with the Earl of Shrewsbery should signifie unto her, That if she continued still in the same minde, as she had delivered to Waad; Sir Walter Mildmay should come out of hand o her, and Treat concerning her liberty: but withall she commanded Mildmay and Beale to dive into her as well as they could, to know what practises the Duke of Guyse had on foot. To that which she had spoken to sir William Waad, the Queen of Scots made a wary answer; but to that concerning the Duke of Guyse, she plainly confesseth; That being sickly he selfe, and weak of body, she had committed her selfe and her Son, to the Protection of the Duke of Guyse, her dear Cosen, of whose intendments she knoweth nothing; nor if she did, would she disclose them, unlesse she might be sure of her own liberty. Lastly, she requesteth, That being a free and an absolute Prince, she may not be worse handled, than Queen Elizabeth her selfe was, when she was a subject, and kept in prison by her Sister. These things had a hearing, but no feeling, and the rather by a strange accident; for Creighton a Scottish Jesuit, sayling from the Lw-Countries, and taken by Dutch Pirats, had certain papers which he tore and thre away, which thrown over-boord, and by the winde blown back into the ship, miraculously (as Creighton himselfe sayd) they were brought to sir William Waad, who patching them together with much la∣bour and cunning, discovered by them some new intendments of the Pope, the King of Spain and the Guyse, about the Invading of England: Where∣upon, and upo divers other rumors, the better to provide for the safety of the Queen, a number of her Subjects (the Earl of Leicester being the fore∣most) men of all ranks and conditions, bound themselves mutually to each other, by their oaths and subscriptions, to persecute all those to the very death, that should attempt any thing against the Queen; which league of theirs, they called the Association. The Queen of Scos who presently apprehended, that this Association was entred into for her destruction; maketh this proposition by Nave her Secretary, to the Queen and the Councell That if she might have her liber∣ty granted, and be assured of the Qeen ove, she would enter a strict league and mity with her, and passing by all matters of offence, esteem and honor er, above all the Princes of the Christian World; yea, and (saving the an∣cient League betwixt Frace, and Sclad) she would her selfe be compre∣hended in te Association, and a League defensiv, against all that should go about to injure the Queen. Herewith Queen Eliabeth was wonderfully pleased, and at that time cernly had an inclination to grant her freedom. Bt see what malice can do; for many in England but specially the Scos of
dverse party, endeavoured by all means to hinder it; exclaiming, That  Queen could be no longer in safety, if the Queen of Scots were set at li∣berty, That both Kingdoms were utterly undone, if she were admitted into  oynt Government of the Kingdom of Scotland, and that the reformed gion lay a bleeding, if Papists were admitted within the Court walls;  was this all, but the Scottish Ministers in their Pulpits, loaded the  of Scots with all manner of contumelies, slandred the King himselfe, and  Councell in most bitter manner; and being cited to appear before him, , saying, That the Pulpits were exempted from all Regall Authority, and that Ecclesiasticall persons, were not to be censured by the Prince, but  their own Consistory (directly against the Laws made the year before in Paliament) whereby the Kings Authority over all persons, whether Eccle∣sicall, or Secular, was confirmed; and namely, That the King and his Councell, were Supream Judges in all Causes; and that whosoever refused  b tryed by them, should be holden guilty of High-treason; all Presby∣s and Lay-conventicles forbidden, Parity of the Clergy taken away,  the authority of Bishops restored, whose Calling the Presbyteries had condemned as wicked and Antichristian: And lastly, all scurrilous Libels inst the King and his mother, prohibited, namely, the Scottish History of George Buchanan, and his Dialogue, De Iure Regni apud Scotos. At this time, upon her adversaries suggestion, the Queen of Scots is taken from the Earl of Shrewsbery, and committed to the custody of sir Amis Pawlet nd sir Drue Drury, and that on set purpose (as some were perswaded) to drive her into abrupt and desperate attempts; and indeed upon this, she grew more importunate with the Pope and King of Spain, to hasten their in∣ndment, whatsoever became of her, as ill indeed was like to become of her, if it be true (as some sayd) that Leicester sent out assasinats to make her way, but that Drury detested the villany, and would grant them no cesse. And how to alienate Queen Elizabeth utterly from her; it is suggested to , That Allen for the Catholicks of the Clergy, Inglefield for the Layity, nd the Bishop of Rsse for the Queen of Scots, with consent of the Pope and the King of Spain, had joyntly combined to depose her, and to bar the King of Scotland from his hereditary Right to the Crown of England, and to marry the Queen of Scots to an English Noble-man of the Romish Re∣ligion, and him the English Catholikes should chuse King of England, and the Pope confirm the Election; and all this upon the credit of Hart the Priest: but who this English Noble-man should be that should marry the Queen of Scots, could not be found, though Walsingham were very busie to seacrh i out: the fame went upon Henry Howard, the Duke of Norfolks brother, ho was a single man, a great Papist, and of high estimation amongst the Catholikes. This yeer died in Exile and misery, Charles Nvill, who was in the Rebel∣lion of the North, the last Earl of Westmerland of this Family; a House from whence descended many Noble Personages, six Earls of Westmerland, wo Earls of Saliy and Warik, an Earl of Kent, a Maquesse Mountcut,  Duke of Bedford, Baron Ferrers of , the Lord Latymer, the Lord of , one Queen, and five Dutchesses (to let passe Countees and Baronneses) an Arch-bishop of York, and a numerous company of other Lords. In Eglnd died none of eckoning this yeer, but onely Plden the famous Lawyer; but in France, he Duke of Angi died of grief ad in Holland, William Prince of Orange, shot into the body with hree Bullets, by one Blthsr Gerard, a Burgundian. It was now the yeer 1585, and the eight and twentieth of Queen Eliza∣ Raign, when, to ti the French King more neerly to her, whom the  fore she had received into the number of the Knights of the arter,
she sent the Earl of Derby into France, to invest him with the Robes and Or∣naments, according to the due Solemnity; which he kindely accepted, and at Evening Prayer was invested with them. At this time a Parliament was assembled at Westminster, wherein William Parrie a Welsh-man, a Doctor of the Laws, when in the Lower House a Bill was read against the Jesuites, he alone stood up, and exclaimed that it was a cruell and bloody Law: and being asked his reason, he stoutly refused, unlesse he were required by the Lords of the Councell. Hereupon he was sent to the Gate-house, but upon submission, was received into the House again. Soon after, he was accused by Edward Nevill, for holding secret consultations about making the Queen away; Who thereupon apprehend∣ed, upon his examination, confessed in effect thus much, That out of dis∣content he went beyond the Sea, where, by the encouragement of Campe∣gio the Popes Nuntio at Venice, and grant of a plenary Indulgence from the Pope, he undertook to kill the Queen; but coming into England to that intent, he altered his minde, and disclosed to the Queen the whole matter. After this, he received a Letter from the Cardinall of Com, perswading him to go forward with the Enterprise; and this Letter also he shewed the Queen. After this, he chanced to see a Book of Doctor Allens, written contra Iustitiam Britannicam, wherein was declared, That Princes who were for heresie excommunicate, might lawfully be deprived of their life and Kingdom. This book wonderfully confirmed him, and he read it to Nevill; who, though he took an oath of secrecy, yet now upon a hope of the Earldom of Westmerland betrayed him. This was his confession, before Baron Hunsdon, Sir Christopher Hattn, and Sir Francis Walsingham: as like∣wise in his Letters to the Queen, to the Lord Burleigh, and the Earl of Lei∣cester, acknowledging his fault, and craving mercy. A few dayes after, he was called to the Bar in Westminster-Hall, where he confessed himself guilty, and thereupon was condemned. After the Sentence of death pro∣nounced, he furiously cited the Queen to Gods Tribunall: five dayes af∣ter he was laid upon a Hurdle, and dragged thorow the City to Westminster, where at the Gibbet he made a vain-glorious boasting of his faithfulnesse to the Queen, but not so much as in a word commended himself to God; and in the great Palace at Westminster was executed as a Traytor, the Nobi∣lity and Commons sitting then in Parliament. In this Parliament, the Association before spoken of, was universally ap∣proved, and enacted in this Form; That four and twenty, or more, of the Queens Privy Councell, and Peers of the Realm, should be selected and authorized, under the Great Seal of England, To make enquiry of all such per∣sons as shall attempt to  the Kingdom, or raise Rebellion, or shall attempt any evill against the Queens Person; fr whomsoeve, and by whomsoever, that layeth any claim to the Crown of England; and that person for whom, or by whom they shall ttempt ny such thing, shall be altogether uncapable of the Crown; and more to this purpose. Laws also for the Queens safety, were enacted against Jesuites and Popis Priests, and against all that shall receive or relieve them. These Laws terified many, and particularly out of fear of them, Philip Eal of Arundel; the Duke of Norflks eldest son, purposed with himself to travell beyond Seas for having been once or twice cited before the Lords of the Councell, and confined to his house, and after six months set at liberty, he hereupon wrot a Letter to the Queen, That for the Service of God, and hi souls health, he purposed to leave his Countrey, but not his loyall ffection towards her but as he was taking Shipping, by his own servants treachery he was discovered, apprehended, and laid in the Towr. At the same time lay in the Tower, Henry Percy Earl of Northumberland a man of a lofty spirit, being suspected by reaon of secret consultation
Throgmorton, the Lord Paget, and the Guises, about the invading of Eng∣ and freeing of the Queen of Scots (whose cause he ever highly favou∣d) but in the mneth of Iune, he was found dead in his bed, shot into the body with three bullets, under his right pappe, and the door bolted on the de: The Corroners Inquest examining the matter, found and pronoun∣d, that he had killed himselfe. Three dayes after, the Lords meeting in he Star-chamber, Bromeley Lord Chancellor, declared this fact of the Earls, nd then commanded the Atturney Generall to shew the causes of his im∣sonment, and the manner of his death; whereupon, Popham first, and then Egerton the Queens Solicitor, in long Orations, lay open all his Trea∣sons, and how for feare of the Law, he had layd violent hands upon him∣selfe. And now the Queen knowing that the seeds of these Treasons proceeded from the Duke of Guise, and his adherents, she sought for the strengthning of her selfe, to enter into League with the Princes of Germany; and to this end, she sent Sir Thomas Bdley to the King of Denmarke, to the Count Ele∣ctor Palatine of the Rhine, to the Duke of Saxony, Wittenberg, Brunswicke, Lceburg; the Marquesse of Brandenburg, and the Lant grave of Hessia; and into Scotland, she sent Sir Edward Wootton, to let the King understand how sincerely she was affected towards him, and withall to draw the King (if he could) into a League of mutuall defence and offence, and to commend to him the Match of the King of Denmarks Daughter. The King was very inclinable to the matter of the League, but for the present the businesse was interrupted, by the death of Francis Russell, Son to the Earl of Bedford, slain at a meeting to compound a difference between the Borderers, by a sudden tumult of the Scots, but who it was that slew him, was not known. The English layd it upon the Earl of Arran, and the Lord Fernihurst Governour of the middle Borders; whereupon, at the Queenes complaint, the Earl of Arran was confined, and Fernihurst committed to prison at Dundee, where he dyed; a man of great valour and resolution, and one that was alwayes frm for the Queen of Scots. But Queen Elizabeth not thus satisfied, gave leave by way of connivance to the Scottish Lords that were fled into England, namely, the Earl of Angus, the Hamiltons, Iohn and Cladius, the Earl of Mrre, Glames, and other, that they should steal away into Scotland (she sup∣lying them with money) there to master and subdue the Earl of Arran. For Maxwell, who was lately made Earl of Bothwell, Baron Humes, Colding∣knlls and other in Scotland, had already promised them their assistance, even n the very Court. Sir Patrick Grey (Arrans great Rivall for the Kings fa∣vour) Belenden, and Secretary Maitland (by Woottons craft) were made a∣gainst Arran. These men, upon their first entry into Scotland, command all persons in the Kings name, to ayd them for conserving the truth of the Gospell, for freeing the King from corrupt Councellors, and for main∣taining of Amity with the English, so as there presently joyned with them bout eight thousand men. The Earle of Arran hearing hereof, makes haste to the King, and accuseth Patricke Grey as author of this commotion: but whiles Arran was making provision for defence of the Town, the ene∣mies were ready to scale the Walls: whereupon, Arran being advised, that only his life was sought, gets secretly away with only one servant, the rest betook themselves to the King in the Castle. Then the Rebels get into the Market-place, and display their Banners against the Castle: the King sends Grey to know the reason of their comming; they answer, to submit themselves, and in humble manner to kisse the Kings hands: the King of∣fereth restitution of all their goods, if they would depart; They desire to be admitted to his Preence, which upon these conditions the King granted. That they should not attempt any thing against his lie, or those whom he should nominate, nor make any innovation in the Government. They
protest, They are ready to sacrifice their lives for the Kings safety, and of any Innovation they had not so much as a thought; onely they request to have their adversaries, and the Fortifications of Scotland delivered up in∣to their hands. Hereupon after a dayes Consultation, they are admitted in∣to the Kings Presence and forthwith the Earls of Mount Rosse, Crawford, and Rothsay; Colonell Steward, Downs, Arran's brothers, and others, were delivered to them: The Earl of Arran, who was fled into the Western Islands, is called home; the assaulters were pardoned, and pronounced good subjects. Hamilton is set over Dumbriton Castle; Goldingknolls over Edin∣burgh; the Earl of Angus over Tantallon; the Earl of Marre over Stelyn; and Glames is made Captain of the Guard. Upon this, all Proscriptions and Outlaries whatsoever against all persons, since the Kings Inauguration) saing some few proscribed for the murder of the Kings Father) are called in, and with an unanimous consent of all parties, the Treaty of a League with the Queen of England is agreed upon, and Delegates nominated to that purpose. In Ireland likewise was a Combustion this yeer; first the Burkes (descend∣ed of the ancient Family of the Burroughs in England) provoked by the severe Government of Richard Bingham, Governour of Connght, raise Rebellion; but this was soon suppressed, for Thomas Burk dyed fighting; Myler, and Theobald Burke, were taken and hanged. After this, the Clan-Gibbons, Clan-Donells, and Ioyes, combined together in great numbers, and say plainly, They will have a Mac-William of their own, one of the Burks to rule over them, or some other Lord out of Spain; they will admit of no Sheriff into their Countrey, nor appear before the English Courts of Ju∣stice; and thereupon harryed all the Countrey with Fire and Sword, and neither by the perswasions of the Arch-bishop Tuan, nor by the intreaties of the Earl of Clan-ricard (the chief of the House of the Burks) would be quieted, till Iohn Bingham the Presidents brother, following them into the Woods, drave away five thousand Head of their Cattell, so as after forty dayes, half starved, they came forth and submitted themselves. But this was not yet an end; for now the President understood, That two thousand Scottish Islanders were landed, and ready to break into Connaght; where∣upon he Musters his men to give them Battell; but they flying to Bogs and Woods, he retires back as though in fear, thereby to draw them from the Bogs to firm ground, and then with his whole Forces set upon them, slew three thousand of them (indeed all but fourscore) amongst whom were Donell Garmy, and Alexander Garmy, the sons of Iames Mac-Conell, who had long disquieted this part, and those Burkes who were the first authors of this Rebellion. This was a famous Victory, for the good of the present and future times; for hereby the name of the Mac-Williams in Connaght was utterly extinct, and the insolent attempts of the Scottish Islanders abso∣lutely crushed. In the Low-Countries at this time the States were very hard beset, so as they held a Consultation, Whether to flie for protection, either to the French King, or to the Queen of England. Monsieur Prunie the French Ambassa∣dour shewed many advantages, and gave many reasons why they should flie rather to the French King; the English on the other side, alleadged ma∣ny reasons why they should flie rather to the Queen of England: but in conclusion, they have first recourse to the King of France, and afterward being by him neglected, to the Queen of England. But then in England it was consulted, Whether it were meet to protect them; wherein the Coun∣cell was divided; some were of opinion, That it were good to receive and aid them, lest the Spaniard first conquering them, might have the better way to annoy England; other again thought, They were to be held no better then Rebells to their lawfull Soveraign, and therefore unworthy of assistance. After long debing the matter, the Queen refuseth to take into
protection, much lesse to exercise Soveraignty over them. Neverthe∣esse, to raise the Siege of Antwerp, which was then beleaguer'd by the Prince of Parma, she was content to supply them with four thousand Soul∣diers, so as the Town of Sluce, and the Ordnance belonging to it, were gi∣ven up into their hands: but while this matter was discussing the Town of Antwerp was fain to yeeld it self. But the Queen better bethinking herself, partly, as fearing the growth of the King of Spain's power, and partly, as commiserating the afflicted of her own Religion, at last resolves to undertake their protection, upon conditi∣on of her part, to supply them with five thousand Foot, and a thousand Horse, under a sufficient Generall, paying them during the War; And after∣ward the expences to be payed back, upon condition on their part, by way of Pledge, to deliver Flushing, and the Fort of Ramekyn, the Town of Brill, with the two neighbouring Forts: and for the justifying of this her action, he set forth a large Declaration. And knowing that herein she incensed the King of Spain, she thought best to turn his anger further from home, and thereupon sent out Sir Francis Drake, and Christopher Carlile, with a Na∣vy of one and twenty Ships (wherein were two thousand Voluntaries and Marriners) toward the West Indies; who first surprized the Town of St. ago, afterwards St. Dominick (where five and twenty thousand Crowns were given them, to spare the Town from burning) afterward Cartagena, which they held seven weeks, till the Spaniards redeemed it for a hundred and ten thousand Crowns. After this, the Calenture waxing hot, and di∣minishing their Forces, they returned homewards, passing by Virginia, a Colony which Sir Walter Raleigh had there planted; from whence Drake brings hom with him Ralph Lane, who was the first that brought Tobacco into England, which the Indians take against crudities of the Stomack. At this Expedition were lost about seven hundred men, who for the most part died of Calentures: their Booty amounted to the value of threescore thou∣snd pounds Sterling, besides two hundred and forty Brasse and Iron Pieces. These things were done under the Torrid Zone in America; when in the mean while, Captain Iohn Davis, with two Ships (at the charges of William Sanderson, and other Citizens of London) found out away to the East-Indies, y the higher part of America, under the Frigid Zone. At the end of this yeere, the Earle of Leicester is sent Generall of the Queenes Forces into Holland, accompanied with the Earle of Essex, the Lords Audley, and North, Sir William Russell, Sir Thomas Shirley, Sir Arthur Basset, Sir Walter Waller, Sir Gervase Clifton, and divers other Knights, besides five hundred Gentlemen. Landing at Flushing, he was first by Sir Philip Sidney the Governour his Nephew and after by the Townes of Zeland and Holland, entertained in most magnificent manner, nd comming to the Hague in Ianuary; the States by Patent committed to him the command and absolute authority over the united Provinces, with the Titles of Governour and Captain Generall of Holland, Zeland; and the Confederate Provinces: So as being now saluted with the Ti∣tle of his Excellency, he began to assume unto him Princely spirits. But the Queene tooke him soone off from further aspiring, Writing to him in most peremptory manner; That she wondred how a man whom he had raised out of the dust, could so contemptuously violate her commands, and therefore charged him upon his Allegiance, to put in xecution the Injunctions she sent him by HENNAGE her VICE-CHAMBERLAINE; Withall, in Letters apart, She expostulateth with the States, that to her great disparagement, they had cast upon the arle of Leicester her Subject, the absolute command over the united PROVINCES without her privity, which she her selfe had utterly refu∣sed; and therfore willeth them to Devest him of that absolute authority, to
whom she had set bounds, which he should not passe. The States returne Answer, That they are heartily sorry they should incurre her displeasure by conferring upon the Earle that absolute Authority, not having first made her acquainted, but they beseeched her to consider the necessity of it; seeing, that for avoyding of confusion, that Authority must needs be cast upon some one or other; Neither, was there any great matter in the word Absolute, seeing the Rule and Dominion resided still in the peo∣ple. By these Letters, and Leicesters own submissive writing, the Queen was soon satisfied; Leicester all this while receiveth Contributions and Re∣wards from all Provinces, maketh Martiall Laws, and endeavouring like∣wise to raise new Customs upon Merchandizes, incurred great dislike a∣mongst the common people. His first service was to relieve Grave, a Town in Brabant, which the Prince of Parma, by Count Mansfield had besieged: Hither he sent the Count Hohenlo a German, and Norris Generall of the English Foot; but notwithstanding all the great service they did there, the Town in the end was taken; but Hemart the Governor, for his cowardly yeelding it up, lost his head. From hence the Prince of Parma marched into Gelderland, and pitched his Tents before Venlow, where Skenkic a Friez∣lander, and Roger Williams a Welshman performed great service, yet that Town in a short time was taken also. But in the mean while, the Lord Willoughby Governor of Bergen ap Zome, cut off the enemies Convoyes, and took away their victualls; and Sir Philip Sidney, and Maurice the Prince of Oranges Son, upon a sudden on-set, took Axale a Town in Flanders. From Venl the Prince of Parma goes to Berke, where there were twelve thousand English, under the command of Colonell Morgan; he notwithstanding layd Siege to the Town, which the Earl of Leicester came to raise, but finding his Forces to weak to raise it, he seeks to divert it, by Beleaguering Duis∣bourgh; which before the Prince of Parma could come to relieve, he tooke. And now the Prince of Parma, fearing least Zutphin should come in danger, commandeth victualls to be carried thither, which the Spaniards carrying along in a fogge, the English by chance lighted on them, vanquished a Troop of their Horse, slew Hannibal Gonzaga, and divers other, bat then on the English side was one slain, more worth than all the English and Spaniards put together; Sir Philip Sidney, who having his horse slain under him, and getting upon another, was shot into the thigh, and 25 dayes after, in the loure of his age, dyed: A man of so many excellent parts of Art and Na∣ture, of Valour and Learning, of Wit and Magnanimity; that as he had equal∣led all those of former Ages, so future Ages wil hardly be able to equal him. His Funeralls were in sumptuous manner solemnized at St. Pauls Church in London. Iames King of Scotland made his Epitaph, and both Universities celebrated his death with Funerall Verses. After this, Leicester assaulteth Zutphen, where setting upon a Fort, he takes it in this manner; Edward Stanley (of the Stanlies of Elford) catching hold of a Spaniards Launce, which was brandished at him, held it so fast, that by it he was drawn into the very Fort; whereupon, the Spaniards being af∣frighted (as thinking all the enemies were comming up) forsook the place; Leicester knighted Stanly for this act, gave him forty pounds in present mo∣ney, and yeerly Pension of an hundred Marks during his life. And now though in this forwardnesse to winne the Town, yet winter being already come on, he thought it unseasonable to besiege it any longer (especially so many English Garrisons lying round about it, which were in nature of a siege) but returned to the Hge, where the States entertained him with com∣plaints, that their money was not carefully husbanded, that the number of the English supplies was not full, that forreign souldiers were levyed with∣out their consent, that the priviledges of the united Provinces were set at nought, and new devises for contribution invented; for all which evills,
they entreat him to provide some present remedy. To which complaints (having a purpose to go for England) he gave a friendly answer; but upon the very day in which he was to depart, he committeth the government of the Province, to the deliberation of the States; and the same day, made an∣other private instrument of writing, where he reserved to himself the whole authority over the Governours of the severall Provinces, Cities, and Forts; and more than this, taketh away the wonted jurisdiction rom the States Councell, and Presidents of the Provinces; and came into England the third day of December. And thus passed the affairs of the Nether-lands for this yeare. But in England, Philip Earle of Arundel, who had lyen in Prison a whole year, was at last brought to the Starchamber; and being charged with fostering of Priests, and having correspondence with Allen and Parsons the Jesuit, and offering to depart the Kingdom without licence, was fined ten thousand pounds, and imprisonment during the Queens peasure. At this time, the Queen, by Sir Horatio Palavicino, supplied with a large summe of money the King of Navarr; thorow whose side, the Guyses op∣posed the reformed Religion in Scotland, but her most intentive care was how to unite England and Scotland in a solid friendship: To which end, she sent Thomas Randoll into Scotland, who making Propositions to the King, touching a League offensive and defensive, though the King at first required some additions, and though the French Ambassador infinitely opposed it, yet at last he consented to it; and in Iuly following, there met at Barwick, Edward Earle of Rutland, William Lord Euer, and Thomas Randoll for the Queen of England; Francis Earl of Bothwell, Robert Lord Boyde, and Humes for the King of Scots, and there the League (which was called the League of strict Amity; for that the word offensive liked not the Scots) was upon certain points concluded: First, for the maintenance of the reformed Re∣ligion, and then other such Articles, as commonly in Leagues are usuall. The very same moneth that this League was agreed on, a most dangerous conspiracy against the Queen was discovered. For first, one Iohn Savage, was by the perswasions of Gifford, Doctor in Divinity, induced to believe, that it was a meritorious work, to take away the lives of Princes Excom∣municate, who thereupon vowed to kill Queen Elizabeth: but to make the Queen and her Councell secure, at the very same time they wrote a book exhorting the Papists in England, to attempt nothing against their Prince, and to use only the Christian weapons of Tears, Prayers, Watching, and Fasting. About Whitsuntide, one Ballard a Seminary Priest of Rheims, ac∣quainted with the vow of Savage (having dealt in France with Mendoza and Charles Paget, about invading of England) arrived here in a souldiers habit, and by a counterfeit name, called Captain Fos; with these matters he ac∣puaints one Anthony Babington, a gentleman of Darbyshire, who by the Bi∣shop of Glasco, the Queen of Scots Ambassador in France, had been com∣mended to her, as one worthy of her love; so, as between them, there pas∣sed often letters in unknown characters. In short time, Babington had drawn into the Plot, other gentlemen as zealous of the Romish Religion as himselfe; namely, Edward Windsor, brother to the Lord Windsor, Thomas Salisbery of a good Family in Devonshire, Charles Tilney one of the Queens Pensioners, Chydiock Tichburne of Hamshire, Edward Abington (whose fa∣ther was Coferer to the Queen) Robert Gage of Surrey, Iohn Travers, and Iohn Charnock of Lancashire, Iohn Iones Savage formerly spoken of, Barn∣well of a noble Family in Ireland, and Henry Dunne a Clerk in the Office of First-fruits and Tenths, one Pollie also serued himselfe into their company, a fellow throughly acquainted with the affairs of the Queen of Scots, who was thought to have revealed all their consultations to Walsingham day by day. To these Gentlemen, Babington communicateth his affairs, but not
every particular to every one, but to Ballard, Tichburne, and Dunn, he sheweth the Letters which passed between him and the Queen of Scots; with Tilney and the rest, he dealeth to be the Assassinates; of whom, some at first loth, at last consented, and in a foolish vaingloriousnesse, a picture of the Assas∣sinates was made to the life, and Babington in the midst, with these words; Quorsum haec alio properentibus? This Picture (they say) was gotten and privately shewed to the Queen, who knew none of them by face, but only Bernwell (who had oftentimes come to her in the causes of the Earl of Kil∣dare, whose servant he was) Certain it is, that the Queen one day walking abroad, spyed this Bernwell, and turning to Hatton sayd, Am not I well Guarded, that have not so much as one man in the company with a sword by his side? Thus much Bernwell himselfe told the rest of his confederacy, and how easie a matter it had bin to have dispatched her at that time, if the rest had been present. The chief discoverer of the Plot, was the afore∣sayd Gifford: This man was a gentleman of a good Houe at Chellington in Staffordshire, not far from Chartley, where the Queen of Scots was kept pri∣soner, and was now sent by the English fugitives in France, under the coun∣terfeit name of Luson, to put Savage in minde of the vow he had made, and to convey letters between them and the Queen of Scots. But he, whether pricked in conscience, or dismayed in minde, came to Walsingham privately, revealing who he was, and for what end, and by whom sent into England. Walsingham courteously entertained him, and sent him down into Stafford∣shire, to do the work he had undertaken. Here Gifford bribing the Brewer of the House, where the Queen of Scots lay, contrived the matter in such sort with him, that by a hole in the wall, in which a loose stone was put, he should give in, and receive forth Letters, the which by messengers purposely layd by the way, came evermore to Walsinghams hands, who broke them o∣pen, copied them out, and by the rare cunning of one Thomas Philips, found out the meaning of the private Characters, and by the singular Art of Ar∣thur Gregory, sealed them again so curiously, that no man would imagine them to have been opened, and ever sent them to the parties, to whom the superscription directed them. In like manner were the former letters from the Queen of Scots to Babington intercepted; as also, other letters written at the same time to Mendoza the Spanish Ambassador, Charles Paget, the Lord Paget, the Archbishop of Glasco, and Francis Englefield. The Queen as soon as she understood by these letters of the storm hanging over her head, both at home and abroad, commanded Ballard to be apprehended, who on a so∣dain is taken in Babingtons house. Babington hereupon goeth to Walsingham, with whom he had long been a suiter, for licence to go into France, promi∣sing to do great matters in discovering the practises of the Fugitives; Wal∣singham with fair promises drives him off from day to day; and now per∣swades him, that for a small space till he could get his license sealed, he would lodge at his house in London, where they might have secret conference with∣out suspition. This Web Walsingham himselfe had spun hitherto, and no other of the Queens Councell were made acquainted; and longer yet he would have drawn the thread out, but that the Queen was unwilling; least (as she sayd) by not avoyding danger when she might, she should seem ra∣ther to tempt God, than to trust in him. Whereupon, Walsingham sent a Note to his man Scudamore from the Court, to looke carefully to Babington: This Note was delivered in such manner, that Babington sitting by at Table when Scudamore read it, overlooked him, and read it likewise; Hereupon, suspecting that all was discovered, the next night he and Scudamore, and one or two more of Walsinghams servants supping at a Tavern, and being very merry, he made an excuse that he must needs step aside, and rose up, leaving his Cloak and his sword, and so made haste through the dark to Westminster, where Gage and he changed apparel, and then together withdrew themselves
S. Iohns wood neer the City, whether Barnwell also and Dun betook them∣ves. In the mean space they were proclaimed Traytors all England over Hereupon they lay lurking in Woods and by-places; they shave Babingtons , disfigure the beauty of his countenance (for he was of an extraor∣dary beauty) with the husks of green Wall-nuts; and when they were hal starved, went to the houses of the Bellamies, neer Harrow on the hill, who were great Papists; There they were hid in Barns, and put into a Coun∣ey habit: but notwithstanding all their shifting, within ten dayes after they were discovered and brought to London. The other Complices were soon after taken, most of them in the Suburbs of the Citie, Salisbury and Tra∣vse in Cheshire, and Iones in Wales, who harboured them in his house, after he knew they were Proclaimed Traitors, Windsor only was never heard of. Many dayes were spent in the examination of them, who cut one the others throats with their own confessions. All this while, the Queen of Soits and her servants are so narrowly looked to by Pawlet, that she knew nothing of all these passages: Assoon as they were apprehended, Thomas Gorge was sent to acquaint her with the whole matter, which yet he did not do, till she was got on horse-back to Ride a hunting, and was not then suffered to return, bu in shew of curtesie was carried up and down, to see the Houses of the Gentry thereabouts. In which mean while, Iohn Manners, Edward Acton, Richard Bagot, and Sir William Waad, took Nave and Curle the Queen of Scs Secretaries, and the rest of her servants, and delivered them to Keepers apart, that they might have no speech between themselves, nor with their Lady the Queen of Scots. Then they break open all doors, and such Desks and Boxes as they found with any papers in them, they set their seals upon, and sent them to the Court: In which, being broken open before the Queen, were found a number of Letters from Forreign parts, the copies likewise of Letters sent to severall persons, and threescore Alphabets at least of private Characters; as also, Letters to her from some of the English Nobility, containing great proffers of love and service, which the Queen notwith∣standing took no notice of, but passed over in silence, according to her Mot∣to, Video, & Taceo, I see, and say nothing, Gifford now, who had all this while served their turn, is sent into France; but ere he went hence, left an Indenture with the French Ambassador here in England, with instructions, that he should deliver no Letters to the Queen of Scots, or the Fugitives in France; but to him that exhibited an Indenture matching with that, the which he sent underhand to Sir Francis Walsingham. The twentieth o September, seven of the forenamed Conspirators were Arraigned, and pleading guilty, were condemned of High-treason. Two dayes after, seven other were called to the Bar, who pleaded not guilty, but notwithstanding were found guilty by their own confessions, and con∣demned; Pollie only, though he were privie to all passages, yet because he had disclosed many things to Walsingham, was not called in question. The twentieth day of the moneth, the first seven in St. Giles Fields, where they were wont to meet, were hanged, cut down instantly, their privy members cut off, and themselves yet living and beholding it, were in cruell manner bowelled and quartered; namely, Ballard, Babington, Savage (who, the roap breaking, fell dowd from the Gibbet, and was presently taken by the hang∣man, his privie members cut off, and bowelled, while he was perfectly living) Barnwell, Tichburne, Tilney, And Abbington. The next day, the other seven were drawn to the same place, and executed in the same fashion, but in a more gentle manner, by the Qeens speciall charge, who detested the former cruelty, for they were to hand till they were quite dead. Salisbery first, then Dun, then Iones, Chernok, Traverse, Gage, and with them Hierome Bellam, who had concealed Babington after he was Proclaimed Traytor (whose bro∣ther being guilty of the same fact, had strangled himselfe in Prison.
When these men were executed, Nave a Frenchman, and Curle a Scots∣man, Secretaries to the Queen of Scots, were examined concerning the Let∣ters, the copies of Letters, and priviate Characters found in the Queen of Scots Closet; who under their own voluntary subscriptions acknowledged, that they were their own hand writings, dictated in French by the Queen her self, taken by Nave; turned into English by Curle, and copied out in se∣cret Characters. Hereupon, Sir Edward Wootton was sent out of hand into France, to make known to the King, the order of the Treason, and to shew him the copies of the Queen of Scots Letters, confirmed by the testimony of sundry of the English Nobility, that the French King might see what dan∣gerous plots were by Charls Paget, and the English Fugitives contrived a∣gainst the Queen of England. And now, what should be done with the Queen of Scots, was a great con∣sultation, wherein the Councellours were not all of one minde; some con∣ceived, That it were not good to take any rigorous course against her, but only to hold her in fast custody; both for that she was not Authour of the Treason, but only conscious to it, and because she was crazie, and not likely to live long. Others, out of a care of Religion, were of opinion, To have her forthwith Arraigned and put to death according to the Law; Leicester thought it better to have her poisoned, and sent a Divine to Walsingham to prove it lawfull, but Walsingham protested against that course. A difference then arose amongst them, by what Law to proceed against her; Whether by the Law of the 25. of Edward the Third? (In which they are Pronoun∣ced guilty of Treason, who plot the destruction of the King or Queen, raise War in his Dominions, or adhere to his Adversaries.) Or else by the 27. of the Queen, Enacted a year since: Their opinion at last prevailed, who thought best to proceed against her by this latter Law, as being indeed in this case provided. Whereupon, divers of the Lords of the Privie Coun∣cell, and other of the Nobility, are Authorized by the Queens Letters, to enquire by vertue of that Law, and passe sentence against all such as raised Rebellion, Invaded the Kingdome, or attempted any violence against the Queen. These Commissioners therefore upon the 11. day of October, re∣paired to Fotheringay Castle in Northamptonshire, where the Queen of Scots was then held prisoner; and the next day, sent unto her VValter Mildmay, Pawlet and Edward Barker, publick Notary, who delivered her the Queens Letters; which, having with a setled countenance read, She sayd, It seems to me strange that the Queen should lay her Command upon me, to hold up my hand at the Bar; as though I were a Subject, seeing I am an absolute Queen, no lesse than her selfe; but howsoever, I will never do any thing prejudiciall to Princes of my degree, nor to my Son the King of Scotland. After many meetings, she standing still upon her innocency, and upon her exemption from answering, as being an absolute Prince, and specially for yeelding to be tryed by the English Laws; of which, One (she sayd) had lately been made of purpose for her destruction. It was at last told her plainly, by the Chancellour and Treasurer, That if she refused to answer to such crimes as should be objected, they would then proceed against her, though she were absent. Being brought at last, with much ado to consent, the Commissioners came together in the Presence Chamber; a Chaire of Estate was set for the Queen of England, in the upper end of the Chamber, under a Canopy; beneath over against it, was placed a Chair for the Queen of Scots; on both sides of the Cloth of Estate, stools were set, upon which on the one side sate the Lord Chancellor, the Lord Treasurer, the Earls of Oxford, Kent, Derby, Worcester, Rutland, Cumberland, Warwicke, Pembrooke, Lincolne, and Viscount Mountacute On the other side sate the Lords Abur∣gavany, Zouch, Morley, St. Iohn of Bletsho, Compton, and Cheyney; Next to these, sate the Knights that were Privie Councellors, Sir Iames Crofts, Sir
Christopher Hatton, Sir Francis Walsingham, Sir Ralph Sadler, Sir Walter Mild∣, and Sir Amis Pawlet; Foreward, before the Earls, sate the two Chiefe Justices, and the Lord chiefe Baron; on the other side, the two Barons, and the other Justices; Dale, and Foord, Doctors of the Civill Law, at a Table in the midst, Popham the Queens Atturney Generall, Egerton her Solicitor, die her Serjeant at Law, the Clerk of the Crown, and two Notaries. When the Queen of Scots was come, and had placed her selfe, silence be∣ing made, Bromely Lord Chancellor turning towards her, sayd; That the Queen had appointed these Commissioners, to hear what she could Answer to crimes layd to her charge, assuring her, that nothing would be cause of more joy to the Queen, then to hear, that she had proved her selfe innocent. Upon this, she rising up, sayd; That although, being an absolute Prince, she could not be compelled to appear before the Deegates, yet to manifest her innocency, she was now content to appear. Then Gawdie, opened every speciality of the Law lately made (against which she had taken excception) shewing, By Babingtons confession, by Letters passed between them, by the confessions of Ballard, and Savage, by the confessions of her Secretaries, Nave, and Curle, that she was privy to their Treasons, and consented to the Invasion of England, and destruction of the Queen. To which she answe∣red, That Letters might be counterfeited, her Secretaries might be corrup∣ted, and rest, in hope of life, might be drawn to confesse that which was not true: In this she stood peremptorily, That she never consented to any At∣tempt against the Queens Person; though for her own delivery, she con∣fessed she did. After many other charges by the Commissioners, and re∣plies by the Queen of Scots; At last, she requested, that she might be heard in a full Parliament, or before the Queen her selfe, and her Councell. But this request prevailed not; for on the 25. day of October following, at the Star-Chamber in Westminster, the Commissioners met again, and there pro∣nounced sentence against her; Ratifying by their Seals and subscriptions, that after the 1. day of Iune, in the seven and twentieth year of our Soveraign Lady Queen Elizabeth, divers matters were compassed and imagined in this Kingdom, by Anthony Babington, and others, with the privity of Mary Queen of Scots, pretending Title to the Crown of England, tending to the hurt, death, and destruction of the Royall Person, of our sayd Soveraigne Lady the Queen. After a few dayes, a Parliament was holden at Westminster, the which was begun by Authority from the Queen, derived to the Archbishop of Can∣terbury, the Lord Treasurer, and the Earl of Derby; and the same, not with∣out some Presidents. At this Parliament, the Proscriptions of the Lord Paget, Charls Paget, Francis Inglefield, Francis Throgmorton, Anthony Babington, Thomas Salisbury, Edward Iones, Chydock Tichburne, Charles Tilney, and the other complices, was confirmed, and their goods and possessions adjudged confiscate. Also the Peers of the Kingdom, with an unanimous consent, exhibit a Petition to the Queen by the Lord Chancellor, that for the pre∣servation of the true Religion, and safety of the Queen, of themselves, and their Posterity, the Sentence passed against Mary Queen of Scots, might ac∣cording to Law be presently Promulged: They put the Queen in minde of the fearfull examples of Gods Judgements extant in Scripture, upon King Saul, for sparing of Agag, and upon Ahab, for not putting Benhadad to death. But the Queen answereth them to this effect: First, acknowledg∣ing Gods miraculous preservation of her, and then their constant affections towards her, for whose sakes onely she desires to live: Otherwise, when she calls to minde things past, beholds the present, and expects what may happen in time to come, that she accounts them most happy, who go soonest hence. That the Law lately made, by which the Queen of Scots is con∣demned, was not made (as some maliciously have imagined) to ensnare her;
but contariwise, to forewarn and deterre her from attempting any thing against it, which though it had not been made, yet were there other ancient Laws enough to condemne her. Nothing could have been more grievous to me, than that a Prince, and one so neer Allied unto me, should deserve the Sentence pronounced against her; and seeing the matter is of rare example, and of a very weighty consequence, I hope you will not ex∣pect, that I should at this present determine any thing; Yet that there may be no danger in delay I will in due time signifie my minde unto you; and in the meane time, would have you to expect from me, whatsoever good Subjects may looke for, from a Gracious Prince. Twelve dayes after, having deeply weighed the matter in her minde, she sent the Lord Chancellor to the Peers, and Puckering to the Lower House, entreating them to advise more diligently concerning so weighty a matter, and to bethinke themselves of some wholesome remedy, by which the life of the Queen of Scots might be spared, and their security also provided for. They, when they had a long time in most serious manner deliberated hereof, Return at last this Verdict; That the Queenes life could not be in safety, while the Queen of Scots lived, unlesse she either repented and acknowled∣ged her crimes, or were kept in straight custody, or bound by her oath and obligations, or gave Hostages, or lastly, departed the Kingdome. And seeing none of these were likely to be remedies; It remained, that only her death would be a remedy. Repentance in her they could little hope for, who would not so much as acknowledge her self faulty: Close Imprison∣ment, Obligations, Oath, and Hostages they accounted as nothing, which all vanished, if the Queens life were once taken away; and if she departed the Kingdom, they feared she would straightway go about to Invade it again. These things the Lord Chancellor, and Puckering the Speaker of the Lower-House, declared to the Queen at large, and urged her in their names, to have the Sentence put in execution. Hereupon, the Queen af∣ter a short pawse, spake at last to this effect: I protest, my chief desire hath been, that for your security, and my own safety, some other way might be devised, than that which is now propounded; but seeing it is now evident and certain, that my safety without her destruction, is in a more deplorate estate, I am most grievously affected with inward sorrow; That I, who have pardoned so many Rebells, have neglected so many Treasons (either by connivance, or silence) should now at last exercise cruelty, upon a Prince so neerly Allied to me. As for your Petition, I beseech you to rest in an Answer, without an Answer: If I say I will not grant your Pe∣tition, I shall happily say what I mean not; I I should say, I will grant it, then cast I my selfe into destruction headlong, whose safety you so ear∣nestly desire, And that I know, you in your wisedoms would not I should doe. After this, the Parliament was Prorogued, and then were the Lords Buck∣hurst and Beale sent to the Queen of Scots, to let her understand that Sen∣tence was pronounced against her, and confirmed by Parliament, and that the execution of it was earnestly desired, by the Nobility and the Com∣mons; and therefore perswaded her, that before her death, she would make acknowledgement of her offences, against God and the Queen; Inti∣mating, That if she lived, the Religion received in England, could not sub∣sist. Hereupon, she was taken with an unwonted alacrity, and seemed to triumph for joy, giving God thanks, and gratulating her own felicity, That she should be accounted an Instrument, for establishing Religion in this Island; and therewith requested, She might have some Catholike Priest to administer the Sacrament to her; but was denied, which some deemed, not inhumane onely, but tyranicall and heathenish. The Bishop and the Dean, whom for this cause they commended to her, she utterly
rejected, and jeered at the English Nation, saying; The English were ever nd anon wont to murther their own Kings, and therefore, no mar∣ they should now thirst after her destruction. In Dcember following the Sentence against her was Proclaimed, in London first, and after, over all the Kingdom, wherein Queen Elizabeth seriously protested, that this Promulgation of the Sentence was extorted from her, to her great grief, by the importunity of the whole Body of the Kingdome. The Queen of Scots being told hereof, seemed not a whit dejected with it; but writing to the Queen, never maketh intercession for her self, nor ex∣postulateth her death, but onely makes three small requests, one, That she might be buried in France, by her Mother; another, That shee might not be put to death privately, but her servants to be present; the third That her servants might freely depart, and enjoy such Le∣gacies as she had given them. Of which Requests, she desireth the Queen to vouchsafe her an answer; but whether this Letter ever came to Queen Elizabeth, is uncertain. This condemnation of the Queene of Scots, as a thing strange, and scarce credible, was soone spread farre and neare; so as inter∣cessions came thicke in her behalfe to Queene ELIZABETH, but specially from the King of Scots, and the King of FRANCE, who sent their severall Ambassadors, using all the reasons that naturall af∣fection in the one, and likenesse of condition in the other, could urge, for sparing of her life; but when the necessity of the State, seemed to obstruct all wayes of clemency, the French Ambassador L' Aubespine, falls from reasons to action, and thinketh no way so effectuall for sa∣ving the Queen of Scots life, as to take away Queen ELIZABETHS life; and thereupon, First, he dealeth covertly with William Stafford, a young Gentleman, and prone to embrace hopes (whose Mother was of the Bed-chamber to Queen ELIZABETH, and his brother at that time, Ambassador Lieger in France) and afterward, more openly by Trappe his Secretary, to murther the Queen. Stafford, though not daring to act such a villany himselfe, yet commended one Moody to him, a resolute fellow, and one that for money would be sure to do it. Upon this, Stafford brings Trappe to Moody, being then in the common Gaole, who upon Trappes offers, undertakes it: But then the consul∣tation was, by what way it should be done? Moody propounded poi∣son, or else to lay a bagge of Gunpowder under the Queens Bed, and suddenly fire it. But Trappe liked of neither of these wayes, but would rather have it done, as was done to the Prince of Orange. But while they are thus consulting about the way of doing it; Stafford discovers all to the Lords of the Councell. Whereupon Trappe, who was now bound for France, was apprehended, and being examined, confessed the whole matter. Upon this, the Ambassador himself was sent for to Cecills house, the twelveth of Ianuary; where met him by the Queens appointment, Cecill Lord Treasurer, the Earl of Leicester, Sir Christopher Hatton Vice-Chamberlain, and Davyson one of her Se∣cretaries; who declare to the Ambassador every particular which Stafford, Moody, and Trappe his Secretary had confessed. Assoone as Staf∣ford was brought forth, and began to speake, the AMBASSADOR interrupted him, and revyling him, made asseveration, that Stfford first propounded it; when Stafford falling on his knees, made fearful imprecations, that the AMBASSADOR first propounded it himself. But whosoever propounded it (sayth BVRLEIGH) It appeares, that you were made acquainted with the matter. To which hee presently Replyed; That if hee had knowne of any such thing, yet, being he was an AMBASSADOVR, he oght not
to give notice of it, but to his own King. After much reasoning in this manner; The Lord Burleigh admonished him, to beware how he offen∣ded hereafter in this kinde; and let him know, That he is not quitted from the offence, though for this time the Queen be pleased to for∣bear him. But upon this Treason, the Queen of Scots Adversaries put many ter∣rors into Queen Elizabeths minde, giving out, That the Spanish Navy was come to Milford Haven, That the Scots were broken into England, That the Duke of Guyse with a great Army was landed in Sussex, That the Queen of Scots was escaped out of Prison, and had gotten a Company up in Arms, and many other such feigned suggestions; Through which, at length they drew the Queen to this: That she sealed Letters, for executing the Sentence against the Queen of Scots; and one of her greatest perswa∣ders to it (as the Scots reported) was one whom the King of Scots had sent to disswade her from it; namely, Patricke Grey, who sounded often in her ears, Mortua non mordet; when she is dead, she cannot bite. The Queen notwithstanding, began to weigh with her self, whether it were better to rid her out of the way, or else to spare her; and many great reasons offered themselves on both sides, but where only speculative reasons presented themselves for sparing her; many practicall reasons, and those pressed both by Courtiers and Preachers, were presented to her; so as long holden in suspence, she would oftentimes sit speechlesse, and her countenance cast down: At last, her fear prevayling, she delivered to Secretary Davyson, Letters under her hand and Seal, to get the Commission made under the Great Seal of England, for the Execution of the Queen of Scots, which might be in a readinesse upon any fear of danger; charging him not to disclose the matter, to any whomsoever. But the next day her minde was altered, and sent Sir William Killegrew to Davyson, to counter∣mand the making of the Commission. Whereupon Davyson goes to her, and lets her know, That the Commission was already made, and the Seal put to it; Whereat, the Queen extreamly angry, rebuketh him sharp∣ly for his hastinesse; yet Davyson imparteth the matter to Privy Coun∣cellors; and perswades them, That the Queen Commanded, the Com∣mission should be put in execution. Hereupon, Beale Clerk of the Coun∣cell, is sent down with Letters, wherein authority is deputed to the Earls of Shrewsbury, Kent, Derby, Cumberland, and others, that she should be put to death according to the Law; with which proceeding, the Queen was not once made acquainted; and more than this, Although she had intima∣ted to Davyson, That she would take some other order concerning the Queen of Scots, yet did not he stay Beale from going. And now comes in the last Act of the Queen of Scots Tragedy for assoon as the Earls were come to Fotheringay; They, together with Sir Amis Pawlet, and Sir Drue Drurie, with whom she was then in custody; go unto her, and reading the Commission, signifie the cause of their com∣ming; and in a few words, admonish her to prepare her selfe for death, for that she must dye the next day. Whereto, without any change of countenance or passion of minde, she made Answer; I had not thought that my Sister the Queen, would have consented to my death, who am not subject to your Laws; but since it is her pleasure, death shall then be to me most welcome. Then she requesteth that she might conferre with her Confessor, and Melvyn her Steward, which would not be granted: The Bishop or Deane of Peterborough they offered her, but them she refused. The Earles being departed, she gave or∣der that Supper should bee hastened, where shee eat (as she used to doe) soberly, and sparingly; and perceiving her men and women servants to lament and weepe, she comforteth them, and bid them rejoyce rather,
that she was now to depart out of a world of misery. After supper, she looketh over her Will, read the Inventory of her Goods and Jewells, and writ their names severally by them, to whom she gave any of them; at her wonted hour she went to bed, and after a few hours sleep, awaking; spent the rest of the night in her devotion. And now the fatall day being come, wich was the 8 of February, she getteth up, and makes her ready in her best Apparell, and then betook her self in her Closet to Almighty God, imploring his assistance with deep sighes and groans; untill Thomas Andrews Sheriffe of the County gave notice, that it was time to come forth, and then with a Princely Majesty, and chearfull conntenance, she came out, her head covered with a linnen Vayl, and carrying an Ivory Crucifix in her hand; In the Gallery the Earls met her, and the other Gentlemen, where Melvyn her servant upon his bended knees, deplored his own fortune, that he should be the messenger to carry this sad newes into Scotland; whom she comforted saying, Do not lament Melvyn, Thou shalt by and by see Mary Steward freed from all cares. Then turning her self to the Earls, She requested that her servants might stand by her at her death, which the Earl of Kent was very loath to grant, for fear of superstition; To whom she sayd, Fear nothing, these poor wretches desire only to give me my last farewell. I know the Queen my Sister, would not deny me so small a re∣quest. After this, the two Earls, and the Sheriff of the County leading the way, she came to the Scaffold, which was set up at the upper end of the Hall, where was a Chayre, a Cushion, and a Block, all covered with Mourning. Then the Dean of Peterborough going to Prayers, she falling upon her knees, and holding up the Crucifix in both her hands, prayed with her Servants in Latine, out of the Office of the blessed Vir∣gin. Prayers being ended, she kissed the Crucifix, and signing her self with the Sign of the Crosse, said, As thy arms, O Christ, were spread forth upon the Crosse, so embrace me with the open arms of thy mercy, and forgive me my sins. Then the Executioner asking her pardon, she forgave him. And now her women helping off her outer Garments, and break∣ing forth into shrikes and cryes, she kissed them, signed them with the Crosse, and willed them to leave lamenting, for now an end of her sor∣rows was at hand; and then shadowing her face with a Linnen Cloth, and lying down on the Block, she repeated the Psalm, In te Domine speravi, ne confundar in aeternum; at which words she stretching forth her Body, her head at two blows was taken off. Her Body was afterward Royally buried in the Cathedrall Church at Peterborough; but since that, her No∣ble Son Iames, King of Great Britain, erected a Royall Monument for her, in King Henry the seventh's Chappell at Westminster. This end had Mary Queen of Scots, in the six and fortieth yeer of her age, and of her Imprisonment in England the eighteenth; a Lady so compleat in all excellent parts of body and minde, that must needs have made her a hap∣py woman, if she had not been a Queen; and perhaps a happy Queen too, if she had not been Heir to the Crown of England: For why did all her endeavours want successe, but onely from the fear of that Succes∣sion; and no Innocency of heas could be a Defence, where the fury of Jea∣lousie made the Assault. Assoon as it came to the Queens knowledge, that the Queen of Scots was put to death, her countenance grew dejected, and her speech fayled her; insomuch that all in mourning weeds, she gave her self over to sorrow, Commanded her Councellors from her Presence, and caused Davyson to be cited to the Starchamber. And assoon as grief would suffer her, She wrote a Letter with her own hand to the King of Scots, and sent it by Sir Robert Cary, to this effect; That her minde was infinitely disquie∣ted, in regard of this lamentable event, against her meaning and intent;
entreating him to believe, That if she had commanded it, she would never have denyed it, and withall, Protesting her true affection towards him, and her assiduous watchfulnesse for the prospering of his affairs. While Carye was on his journey, Davyson is cited to the Star-Chamber before these Delegates, Sir Christopher Wray Chiefe Justice of the Kings-Bench, for that time made Lord Privy Seal, the Archbishop; of Canterbury and York, the Earls of Worcester, Cumberland, and Lincolne, the Lords Grey, and Lumley, Sir Iames Croft, Comptroller of the Queens House, Sir Walter Mildmay, Chancellor of the Exchequer, Sir Edmond Anderson, Lord Chief Justice of the Common Pleas, and Sir Roger Manwood, Lord Chief Baron (where note, That Bromely Lord Chancellor, Burleigh Lord Trea∣surer, Leicester, and Hatton, who were indeed more guilty of the fact, than Davyson, were none of the number.) Before these Delegates, Popham the Queens Atturney layeth to Davysons charge, Contempt of the Queen; Ma∣jesty, violating of his trust, and neglect of his duty, laying open all parti∣culars of his fact; which after Egerton the Queens Solicitor, Gawdy, and Puckering her Serjeants at Law, urged also against him with great aggraa∣tion: To which Davyson mildely answered, That he would not contest with the Queen; only protests, That if he had done any thing otherwise than he ought, it was out of ignorance and mistaking, and not out of any purpose to disobey her Majesty. It seems the Queen had carried her selfe, as one that would have it done, and yet was loth to do it, scarce knowing her one minde, and yet would have another know it; meaning to make it the work of mistaking, rather than of purpose, that so at least she might leave some place of satisfaction to her selfe, that it was not absolutely of her doing. The Pleadings ended, the Commissioners went to censure; Manwood began, and gave his opinion, That Davyson, for the inconsideratnesse of his fact should be fined ten thousand pounds, and Imprisonment during the Queens pleasure; the rest went on in that Sentence, only the Lord Grey ex∣cused Davyson so far, That he thoght him worthy of reward, rather than of punishment: The conclusion was, the first Sentence for his Fine and Imprisonment, was by Wray keeper of the Privy Seal confirmed; and Da∣vyson never after recovered the Queens favour, though she relieved him sometimes in his necessity. A man ingenious indeed, but not throughly acquainted with the wayes of the Court; and thought to have been raised to this place, of purpose to Act this part, and for nothing else. By this time Sir Robert Cary, Son to the Lord Hunsdon, who was sent to excuse the Queen, was come to the Borders; but being come thither, was not suffered to set foot in Scotland, The King would scarce hear him by another, and with much adoe received his Letters. He called home his Ambassa∣dor out of England, and thought of nothing but revenge. But the Queen still laying the fault upon Davyson, and the unadvised cre∣dulity of her Councellros, by little and little allayeth his passion; and expe∣cting, till time had somewhat asswaged his griefe, that it would endure to be touched, at length, by her Agents in Scotland; And soon after by the Lord Hunsdon Governor of Berwicke, She admonished him, How dange∣rous it would be for him, to break out into War against England, and what little help he could justly expect from either Spain or France, but if he persi∣sted in the amity with England, he might be sure the Queen of England, would most lovingly account him for her Son. And to the end, that he should assure himself, that the Queen his Mother was put to death without her privity, she sent him the Sentence against Davyson, under the Seals of all the Delegates, and attested under the Great Seal of England; and ano∣ther Instrument likewise signed with the hands of the Judges of England; in which they averre, That the Sentence against the Queen of Scots, could in no wise be prejudice to his right in the Succession.
Having now by these and the like courses, somewhat asswaged the King of Scots indignation; to prevent the War which they foresaw was immi∣nent from the King of Spain, they send forth Drake with four of the Queens ships and others, unto the Coast of Spain, to set upon their ships in the Ha∣ves, and to intercept their Munition. Drake entring into the Port of Cales, sunck, took, and fired, about an hundred ships, wherein was great store of Munition and Victualls: Then returning to the Cape of St. Vincent, he set up three Forts, and compelled them to yeild. Thence setting sayl towards the Western Islands, called Azores, under the great Meridian; by great good fortune he happened upon an huge and wealthy Carack, called St. Philip, returning from the East-Indies, and easily vanquished it; Wherupon the Mariners on both sides, from the name of Philp, portended no good luck to Philip King of Spain. At the same time, Thomas Cavendish of Suffolke, in the other part of the World, who two years before had set sayl from England with three ships, passing thorough the Straights of Magellan, in the Coast of Chily, Peru, and Nuva Hispania, fired a great number of Spanish Towns, took and pillaged ninteen great ships, and amongst them a wealthy ship of the Kings, nigh unto Caliphornia, in North America; and so by the Philippine Isles, the Mo∣lcce, the Cape de Bone Esperance, and the Island of St. Helene, returned home the next year, being the third after Magellan, that sayled about the World. As Drake and Cavendish at this time gained great fame and renown so two other men in the Netherlands (Stanley and Yorke) purchased as great in∣famy and disgrce: This Yorke was a Londoner, a bold fellow, and of loose behaviour; famous for bringing first into England, the manner of turning the point upon the Adversary in single Combats, whereas the English till this time, were wont to be armed with Bucklers and swords, and to strike with edge, and it was held no manhood to turn the point, or strike below the girdle. He suffering some affront from the Earl of Leicester, fled away, and for a time, served under the Spaniards in the Netherlands, till at length being reconciled to Leicester, he was sent over the Fort near Zutphen; but be∣ing bribed, he not only yeilded up the place to the Enemy, but drew to the like villany one Stanley, who with great valour had served in an Irish expe∣dition; to yeild up Daventry to the Spaniards, a wealthy and well Fortified Town. But what got they by their treachery, The Spaniards set Yorke and Stanley at variance, they poison Yorke and seize upon his goods, his carkasse was three years after digged up by the States commandment, and hanged up∣on a Gibbet till it rotted away Stanley went into Spain, where there was no credit given to him; for the Spaniards have a saying, It is lawfull to give honor to a Traytor sometimes, but never to trust him. These late treacheries, wrought the Earl of Leicester much envy with the Confederate Netherlands, because the Traytors were very intimate with him; whereupon the States in large letters to the Queen, accuse Lecester for his ill managing of the Weal-Publick, in the matter of money, Mer∣chandize, and Military affairs; and to his credulity, They impute the harm which accrewed by Yorke and Stanley. The Queen, for the narrow sifting of the matter, and composing it; sent thither Thomas Sackvile Lord Bucke∣hurst (lately taken ito her Privie Councell in Leicesters absence) Norris, and Bartholmew Clerke: Bt when as the officious diligence of Buckhurst, seemed to trench upon Leicesters reutation; his grace with the Queen pro∣ved so forcible, that Buckhurst at his return, was for certain moneths confi∣ned to his house. Afterward, Sluce being beleaguered by the Prince of Parma, Leicester was by the States sent for out of England, to succour it; the Town was furiously asaulted, with seventeen thousand great shot, and a mighty breach was
made into it; which neverthelesse, Roger Williams, Franis Vere, Nicholas Baskervile, with the Garrison of the English and Wallons, were valiantly defended for a while, but at last were enforced to yeild it up Leicester, that came to relieve it, finding himself too weak for the Besiegers, being gone away. And indeed, the States would not commit any great Army to his Command; who (they knew had a determination to seze Lyden, and some other Towns into his own hands, and had a purpose to surprize the absolute Government. Whereupon, the States used means, that Leicester was called home; gave up the Government to the States, and in his roome succeeded Maurice of Nassaw Son to the Prince of Orange, bing now but twenty years of age.) Peregrine Lord Willonghby, was by the Queen made Geneall of the English Forces in the Low-Countries, to whom she gave command to reduce the English Factions into the States obedience; the which, with the help of Prince Maurice, he easily effected. Leicester being now come home, and perceiving that an accusation was preparing against him by Buckhurst and others, for his unfaithfull managing of affairs in Holland; privately with tears he cast himself down at the Queens feet, entreating her, that she would not receive him with disgrace, at his re∣turn, whom she had sent forth with honor; and so far prevailed with her, that the next day being called to examination before the Lords, he took his place amongst them, not kneeling down at the end of the Table, as the man∣ner of Delinquents is; and when the Secretary began to read the heads of his Accusation, he interrupted him, saying; That the publick instructions which he had received, were limited with private restriction; and making his appeal to the Queen, eluded the whole crimination, with the secret in∣dignation of his Adversaries. This year was famous for the death of many great Personages: In the moneth of February, dyed Henry Nevill Lord of Aburgaveny, great Grand-childe to Edward Nevill, who in the Reign of King Henry the Sixth, got this Title in the right of his Wife, only Daughter and Heir to Richard Beauchamp Earl of Worcester, and Lord of Aburgaveny; In which right, when as the only Daughter of this Henry, Wife to Sir Thomas Fane, challenged the Ti∣tle of Baronesse of Aburgaveny; a memorable contention arose concerning the Title between her, and the next Heir Male, to whom by Will (and the same confirmed by Authority of Parliament) the Castle of Aburgaveny was bequeathed. This question being a long time debated; at last in a Parlia∣ment holden in the second year of King Iames, the matter was tryed by voyces; and the Heir Male carried the Lordship of Aburgaveny, and the Ba∣rony Le Dispencer, was ratified to the Female. This year also, in the moneth of Aprill, dyed Anne Stanhope Dutchesse of Somerset, ninety years old, who being the Wife of Edward Seymer Duke of Somerset, and Protector of England, contended for precedency, with Katherine Parre, Queen Dowager to King Henry the Eight. There dyed also, Sir Ralph Sadler, Chancellor of the Dutchy of Lancaster, the last Baneret of England, with which dignity he was adorned at the Battell of Musselborough in Scotland. After him dyed Thomas Bromley Lord Chancellor of England; and six dayes after, He, whom the Queen meant should have succeeded him, Edward Earl of Rut∣land; but he now fayling, Sir Christopher Hatton was made Lord Chancellor, who though he were a Courtier, yet the Queen knowing him to be an ho∣nest man, thought him not unfit for that place, where conscience hath, or should have more place than Law; although some were of opinion, That it was not so much the Queens own choice, as that she was perswaded to it by some that wisht him not well; both thereby to be a cause of absen∣ting him from the Court, and thinking that such a sedentary place, to a cor∣pulent man that had been used to exercise, would be a means to shorten his life, and indeed he lived not full out three years after.
This yeer Sir Iohn Perot was called home out of Ireland, and left all in  quiet to Fits Williams his Successor. For hitherto the English  it no hard matter to vanquish the Irish, by reason of their unskil∣ulnesse in Arms; eight hundred Foot, and three hundred Horse, was ld an invincible Army: but after that by Perots command, they were cised in Feats of Arms, and taught to discharge Muskets at a Mark,  had in the Low-Countries learned the Art of Fortification, they held the English better to it, and were not so easily overcome. And now we are come to the one and twentieth yeer of Queen Eliza∣s Raign, being the yeer 1588, long before spoken of by Astrologers,  be a wonderfull yeer, and even the Climactericall yeer of the World. And yet the greatest Wonder that happened this yeer, was but the wonderfull Fleet that Spain provided for invading of ENGLAND, if the defeat of that wonderfull Fleet were not a greater Wonder. It is true, there was at this time a Treaty of Peace between England and Spai; and the Earl of Derby, the Lord Cobham, Sir Iames Crofts, Dale and Rogers, Doctors of Law, Commissioners for the Queen: for the Prince of Parma, the Count Aurenberg, Champignie, Richardot, Mas, and Garvyer, Doctors, had many meetings about it neer to Ostend; but it seemed on the prt of Spain, rather to make the English secure, that they should not make provision for War, than that they had any purpose of reall proceeding, seeing they accepted not of any reasonable Conditions that were of∣fered, but trifled out the time, till the Spanish Navy was come upon the Coast, and the Ordnance heard from Sea, and then dismissed the Eng∣lish Delegates. The Spanish Navy consisted of one hundred and thirty Ships; where∣of Galeasses and Galleons, seventy two, goodly Ships, like to floating Towers; in which were Souldiers, 19290; Marriners, 8350; Gally∣slaves, 2080; Great Ordnance, 2630: For the greater holinesse of their Action, twelve of their Ships were caled, The twelve Apostles. Chief Commander of the Fleet, was Don Alphonso, Duke of Medina; and next to him, Iohn Martin Recalde, a great Sea-man. The twentieth of May they weighed Anchor from the River Tagus, but were by Tempest so mi∣serably disperst, that it was long ere they mt again: but then they sent before to the Prince of Parma, That he with his Forces, consisting of fifty thousand old Souldiers, should be ready to joyn with them, and with his Shipping conduct them into England, and to land his Army at the Thames Mouth. The Queens Preparation in the mean time, was this; The Lord Charles Howard, Lord Admirall, with all her Navy; and Sir Francis Drake, Vice-Admirall, to be ready at Plimouth; and the Lord Henry Seymor (second son to the Duke of Somerset, with forty English and Dutch Ships, to keep the Coasts of the Netherlands, to hinder the Prince of Parma's coming forth. Then for Land-Service, there were laid along the Southern Coast, twenty thousand souldiers, and two Armies besides of Trayned men were levyed; over one of which, consisting of a thousand Horse, and two and twenty thousand Foot, the Earl of Leicester commanded, and pitched his Tents at Tilbury, neer the Thames mouth: Over the other, ap∣pointed to Guard the Queens Person, and consisting of four and twen∣ty thousand Foot, and two thousand Horse, the Lord Hunsdon was Gene∣rall. Arthur Lord Grey, Sir Francis Knolles, Sir Iohn Norris, Sir Ri∣chard Bingham, Sir Roger Williams, and other Military men, were chosen to make a Councell of War, and consult how the Land-service should e ordered. These declared, amongst other things, That the places which lay fittest for the enemies landing, as Milford Haven, Flmouth, Plimouth,
Portland, the Isle of Wight, Portsmouth, the Downs, the Thames mouth, Harwich, Yarmouth, Hull, and such other, should be fortified with Works and Garrisons; the Trayned Souldiers of those Shires which lay neer the Sea Coast, should defend those places, and be ready at the Alarm to hinder the Enemy from Landing; but if he did land, then to spoyl the Countrey round about, that he might finde no food; and by continuall crying, Arm, Arm, give the Enemy no rest, but yet should not give Battell, till good store of Commanders were come together. At this time many fearing the Papists at home, no lesse than the Spaiards abroad, perswaded the Queen to take off the heads of some of te greatest of them; but she detesting such cruelty, took order one∣ly, That some few of them should be committed to custody in Wisbych Castle. And now all things on both sides prepared, the Spanish Navy set forth out of the Groyne in May, but was dispersed and driven back by weather. The English Navy set forth somewhat later out of Plimouth, bearing up towards the Coast of Spain; but partly by occasion of contrary windes, partly by advertisement that the Spaniards were gone back, and upon some doubt also that they might passe by towards the Coast of Eng∣land, whilest they were seeking them afar off, they returned to Plimouth; At which time, a confident (though false) advertisement came to the Admirall, That the Spaniards could not possible come forward that yeer: whereupon the Eglish Navy was upon the point of disbnding, and many of the men were gone on shore; when suddenly the invincible Armada (for so it was called in a Spanish ostentation) was discovered upon the Western Coast: whereof the Lord Admirall being informed, had much ado to get the Queens Navy out of the Haven (the winde being contrary) yet at length he haled it forth. The next day, the English beheld the Spanish Ships, in height like to Castles, sayling slowly along, whom they suffered peaceably to passe by, that they might have the benefit of the winde to follow after. The one and twentieth day of Iuly, the Admirall of England sent a Pinnace before, called, The Defianc, which by a great shot, challenged the Spaniards to fight, and by and by they fell to it. Then Drake, Hawkins, and Forbisher let fly against the outmost Squadron, which Recalde commanded, making him glad to fly to their main Navy for succour. The night following a mighty Biskayner of Oquenda's (in which the King of Spain's Treasure was) was by chance fired with Gun-powder, but was timely quench∣ed by other Ships sent to her succour; one of which Ships, was the Galleon of Don Pedro, whom Sir Francis Drake took prisoner, and sent him to Darthmouth. The Biskayner it self (the Treasure being taken out by the Spaniards) they left behinde them, which the English brought into the Haven at Weymouth. The three and twentieth day of this Month, they had a secod Fight, in which most of the Spanish Shot flew over the English Ships, and never hurt them; Onely Cock an English-man, being with his little Vessell in the midst of the enemies, died valiantly. The four and twen∣tieth day, they rested on both sides; in which time the Lord Ad∣mirall ranked his whole Fleet ito four Squadrons: The first he ruled himself, Drake the second, Hawkins the third, and Forbisher the fourth. The five and twentieth day (which was the Saint Iames day) they fell to it the third time; in which Fight, the English had again the better, so as after this time, the Spaniards would no more turne upon the English, but holding on their course, dispatched a Messenger to the
Prince of Parma; Requiring him forthwith to joyne himself to the Kings Fleet, and withall to send them Bullets. The day following, the Lord Admirall Knighted Thomas Howard, the Lord Shefield Roger Townsend, Iohn Hawkins, and Martin Frobisher; and holding a Councell of War, they decreed not to set again upon the Enemy, till they came to the streight of Calice, where the Lord Henry Seymor and Sir William Winter waited for their coming. And now so far were the Eng∣lish from being terrified with this invincible Navy, that many of the No∣bility and other of speciall note, hired Ships at their own charges and came to the Admirall; as the Earls of Oxford, Northumberland, Cum∣berland, Thomas and Robert Cecill, Henry Brook, Sir Charls Blunt, Sir Walter Raleigh, Sir William Hatton, Sir Robert Carie, Sir Ambrose Willoughby, Sir Thomas Gerard, Sir Arthur Gorge and others. The seaven and twentieth of July towards the Evening, the Spaniards cast Anchour neer unto Calis, and not far from them rode the English Ad∣mirall, within shot of a great Ordnance, to whom Seymor and Winter joyned themselve, so as by this time there were in the English Navy a hundred and forty Ships, nimble and serviceable for Fighting or Sayling, yet only Fifteen of them bore the stroke of the Battell. And now againe the Spa∣niards sent Post after Post to the Prince of Parma to send them forty Flye-boates, without which they were not able to skirmish with the English, by reason of the greatnesse and unweldinesse of their Ships, and impor∣tune him presently to put to Sea with his Army; But he was unprepaed, and his Flat-bottomed Boates were full of chinks and leaked, and besides, the Hollanders hovered before the Ports of Dunkerk and Newport, in such sort, that he durst not look forth. The eight and twentieth day; the Lord Admirall made ready eight of his worst Ships, on the out-side dawbed with wild-fire, Rozin and Brim∣stone, within, full of combustible matter, and under the conduct of Young and Prowse, sent them down with the winde in the silent time of the night towards the Spanish Fleet; the which when the Spaniards saw approach them, and the Sea as it were all on a light fire; imagining withall, that those Fire-ships might carry in them some murthering Engines, they made  hideous noise, took up Anchours, cutt Cables, spread Sayles, and betook themselves to their Oars, but more to flight: One of the Spanish Galleasses having lost her Rudder, and floating up and down, was held in fight by An∣nias Preston, Thomas Gerard, and Harvie, who lew Captain Hugh Moncada, cast the Souldiers over board, and carryed away a great deale of Gold, but the Vessell and Ordnance was wreck to the Governour of Calice. Drake and Fencz in the mean while perceiving the Spanish Fleet to gather togethea again before Graveling, set upon them with great violence, to whom strightwayes, Fenton, Southwell, Beeston, Crosse, and Riman joyne themselves, and soon after the Admirall himself, Sir Thomas Howard, and the Lord Sheffield, the Galleon called Saint Matthew, was sorely battered by Seymor and Winter, driven toward Ostend, and set upon again by the Zelanders, and at last was taken by the Flushingers. And now the Spanish Navy having want of many necssaries, and no hope of the Prince of Parma's coming, they resolved to returne North∣ward for Spain; in which passage they lost both many Ships and men, the English Navy still following them close, till they were faine to give them over for want of Powder. Whilest these things passed at Sea, the Queen n Person came to Tilbury to view the Army and Campe there, where she shewed such undaunted Courage and Resolution, that it wonderfully ani∣mated the spirits of them all. And thus this Navy, which was three whole Yeers in preparing, in the space of a month was often beaten, and at length put to flight, many of
their men being slain, more then halfe of their Ships taken and sunk (of the English not above a hundred at the most missing, nor so much as a Ship, but Cocks little Vessell) and Sayling about all Brittaine by Scotland, the Orkeneys and Ireland, they returned into Spain with as much disho∣nour as they came out with boasting, for indeed Mendoza in France by a Book in Print, Triumphed before the Victory. For the happy successe of this Action, Queen Elizabeth appointed pray∣ers and thanksgiving over all the Churches of England, and she (as it were in triumph) came in Person, attended with a great Troop of the Nobility into the City, and went into the Cathedrall Church of Saint Paul (where the Banners taken from the Enemy was placed in view) and there in most humble manner gave thanks to Almighty God. And hat which increased the publike joy, was the newes which Sir Robert Sidney brought out of Scotland, That the King had over-past all injuries, was lovingly affected towards the English, and desired to imbrace sincere and perfect amitie with the Queen. For as for the King of Spain, he wittily told the Embassa∣dour, that he expected no other courtesie from him, but such as Polyphemus promised Ulisses, that he should be the last whom he would devoure. And now dyed the great Earl of Leicester the fourth day of Septem∣ber, at his Mannor of Killingworth of a violent Feaver; I may well say the great Earl, considering the many great Honours he enjoyed, which are extant in the Story; yet one honour greater then any he had before, he effected even then when he was ready to go out of the world, and that was To be Vice-gerent in the high Government of England and Ireland, for which the Patent was already drawne, and had been sealed; but that Bur∣leigh and Hatton shewed the Queen how dangerous a thing it might prove, for so great Authority to reside in one Subject. He was while he lived in so great favour with the Queen, that some thought (and himselfe not the least) that she meant to marry him; yet when he dyed, his goods were sold at an Outcry to make payment of the debts he owed her. About this time Philip Earl of Arundell, who three yeers before had been cast in prison, was now cited in Westminster Hall, to the judgement of his Peers, and Henry Earl of Derby was made High Steward of Eng∣land for the time. The matters layd to his charge were these: That he had contracted friendship with Cardinall Allen, Parsons the Jesuite, and other Traytours, exciting divers both abroad and at home to restore the Romish Religion, promising his assistance thereunto: and for that reason had a purpose to depart the Kingdom. That he was privy to the Bull, in which Pope Sixtus Quintus had deposed the Queen, and given England to the Spaniard; that being imprisoned in the Tower he caused Masse to be said for the prosperous successe of the Spanish Fleet, and for that purpose had framed peculiar prayers for his own private use. Being demanded whether he were guilty of these things; turning himself to the Judges, he asked them these questions: First, whether it were lawfull to heap up so many crimes together in one Bill of Indictment? They answered that it was: Then whether Arguments taken from presumptions were of force? They answe∣red, that it was lawfull for him to interpose exceptions if he saw cause. Then again, if he might be Arraigned for those things which were Capitall, by the Law made the thirteenth yeer of the Queen, after that the time expres∣sed in the Act was expired? They promised, they would proceed against him by no Law; but the old Statute of Treason, made in the Raigne of King Edward the Third. But now again asked if he were guilty or not He pleaded not guilty, whereupon Puckening the Queens Sergeant at Law, Pop∣ham Atturney Generall, Shuttleworth Sergeant at Law, and Egerton the Queens Sollicitour, in their turnes, urged and proved the crimes objected; some whereof he denyed, some he extenuated; but in conclusion was by
his Peers found guilty and condemned; yet the Queen spared his life, and was content with thus much done in terror to the Papists. It was now the yeer 1589. And the two and thirtieth of Queen Eliza∣eths Raign; when to be in some sort revenged of the Spaniards for their invasion, she gave leave to Sir Iohn Norris and Sir Francis Drake to under∣ake an Expedition at their own private charges, requiring nothing of her but a few Ships of War, who took along with them Anthony the bastard, laying clayme to the Kingdom of Portingall, and of Souldidrs to the num∣ber of eleven thousand, of Sea-men about fifteen hundred: setting Sayle from Plimmouth the fifth day of Aprill, they arrived at the Groyne in Ga∣acia; whereof, with great valour they took first the Lower town, and af∣terward the Higher, and from thence sayling toward Portingall, they met Robert Earl of Essex, who without the Queens leave had put to Sea: Af∣ter two dayes they arrive at Penycha a Town of Portingall, which they took; and left the Castle to Don-Antonio, and from thence they march by land to∣wards Lisbon threescore miles off: The Foot Companies led by Norris, whom Drake promised to follow with the Fleet. Being come to the West Suburbs of Lisbon, they found no body there but a few poor disarmed Por∣tugalls who cryed out, God save King Antonio. The day following the Spaniards made a sayle out, in which Skirmish Bret, Caresley, and Carre, (stout Commanders) were slain; yet did the Earl of Essex drive the Spani∣ards to the very gates of the Citie. And now having tarryed here two dayes, and seeing no signe of the Portingalls revolting; which Don-Antho∣nio had assured them would be, finding fresh supplies come into the Town, their own Army sickly, Victualls and Powder failing; and that which most of all Sir Francis Drake not bringing the great Ordnance as he promised, they departed from the Suburbs of Lisbon towards Cascais, a little Town at the mouth of the River Tagus, which Town Drake had taken this meane while, who excused his not coming to Lisbon, by reason of the Flat he must have passed, and the Castle of Saint Julian, Fortified with fifty pie∣ces of great Ordnance. Neer this place they found threescore Hulke of the Hause towns of Germany, laden with corne and all manner of Muni∣tion, which they took as good prize towards their charges, in regard the Queen had forbidden them to carry Victualls or Munition to the Spaniard. From hence they set sayle toward Virgo, a forlorne Town by the Sea-side, and pillaging all along that Quarter, returned for England, having lost in the Voyage of Souldiers and Marriners about six thousand; yet not so much by the Enemy, as by eating of strange fruites and distemper of the Climate. It concerns the state of England, to look at this time into the state of France; for while those things were in doing between Spain and England, the Popish Princes of France, under pretext of defending the Catholike Re∣ligion, entred into a combination, which they called, The holy League: The purpose whereof was, to root out the Protestants, and to divert the Right of Succession to the Crown of France; For they bound themselves to each other by oath, to suffer no person but a Catholike to be King of France; which was directly to exclude the King of Navarre, and the Prince of Con∣de, if the present King, without issue male, should fail. The head of this League, was the Duke of Guise, who having given some overthrows to the German Forces, that came into France in aid of the Protestants, was immea∣surably extolled by the Clergie and others; and grew to such a height of re∣putation, that entring into Paris, he made the King glad to leave the City, and in an Assembly at Bloys, to make him great Master of the French Cava∣lery, and to consent by Edict, to the cutting off the Protestants. So as the King standing now in fear of him, used means at last, even in the very Court, to have him murthered; and soon after, the Cardinall his brother
to be strangled. Hereupon so great a confusion followed, that the people every where disobeyed the Magistrates, and spoiled the Kings very Pallace at Paris. Some Cities affected a Democrcie, others an Aristocracie, but few liked of a Monarchy. The Confederates in the mean while, made a new Seal, usurped the Royall Authority, seized into their hands the best fortified places, intercept the Kings Revenues, call in Spanish Souldiers, and in all places denounce war and violence against the King. And the King in this case being forced to flye to the Protestant for succour, they then most wic∣kedly, by one Iames Clement a Monk, made him away. The King being rea∣dy to dye, Declareth the King of Navarre to be his lawfull successor, but the Confederates would exclude him as an open Heretick; and yet whom to make choice of they cannot well agree, some would have the Duke of Lorraine, as being descended from the ancient Kings of France, some th Duke of Savoy, as borne of the French Kings daughter, a Prince Poet and Couragious; others would have the Duke of Guises brother that wa murthered others the King of Spain; but the greatest part gave thei voices for the Crdinall of Bourbon, who was one degree neerer alyed to the slain King, then the King of Navarre his Nephew. He therefore was presently proclaimed King of France, with the Title of Charls the Tenth; but he being a Priest, the King of Navarre also was at the same time proclaimed King of France, who abode at Diepe a Sea Town of Nor∣mandy, and doubted not to drive the Cardinall easily out of France. The King of Navarre being thus raised in Dignity, but weake in means, implored Aid of the Queen of England, offering to make a League Offen∣sive and Defensive; the Queen out of a pious respect to a King of her own Religion, sent him presently two and twenty thousand pound sterling in Gold (such a summe of Gold, as he professed he had never seen at one time before) and withall supplyed him with four thousand Souldiers, under the command of Peregrine Lord Willoughby; for Colonells, she appointed Sir Thomas Wilford, who was made Marshll of the Field, Iohn Boroghs, Si William Drury, and Sir Thomas Baskervyle, and gave them a months pay in hand. Hereupon the Confederates (whom the King had vanquished  little before at Arques beyond all expectation) began to quaile, and the day before the Arrivall of the English they vanished away, with this addition of Forces the King marcheth to Paris, and being ready to enter the Citie, causeth a retreat to be ounded, as loath to have spoile made of a Citie, which he hoped shortly should be his own. Afterwards by the assistance of the English he wonne many Towns, and then having marched at least five hundred miles on foot, he gave them leave after a long winters service, to returne into England. In which Voyage of men of note, dyed Cap∣tain Hunnings, but of a naturall death, also Stubbs (he whose right hand was cutt off for writing the book against the Queens marriage) and Sir William Drury slain by Master Boroghs in a single Combat, where the quar∣rell was, that he being but a Knight, would take place of Boroughs that was the younger son of a Baron, contrary to the Lawes of the Eng∣lish Gentry. About this time, Iames King of Scots (with Queen Elizabeths good li∣king) Espoused Anne the daughter of Frederick the second King of Den∣marke by his Deputy; but she afterward sayling for Scotland, was by tempest cast upon Norway, and there, through continuall stormes forced to stay, so as the King in the winter season set sayle thither, that the mar∣rige according to his vow might be accomplished within the yeer: some were of opinion that those stormes were caused by witch-craft, and was confirmed indeed by some witches taken in Scotland; who confessed they had raised those stormes to keep the Queen from landing in Scotland, and that the Earl of Bothwell had asked Counsell of them concerning the
Kings end; who was thereupon cast into prison, but in a short time breaking loose, occasioned new stirs in Scotland. This yeer, many Noble personages dyed; Frances Countesse of Sussex, sister to Sir Henry Sidney, Sir Walter Mildway, Chancellour and Vice-Trea∣surer of the Exchequer, William Somerset Earl of Worcester, so numerous in his off-spring, that he could reckon more children of both Sexes, then all the Earls of England. Also Iohn Lord Sturton, Henry Lord Compton, and at Bruxels the Lord Paget. At this time, the Queen who was alwayes frugall, strained one point of Frugality more then ever she had done before; for upon the information of one Caermarden, (though Burleigh, Leicester, and Walsingham were offended, that credit should be given to such a one, and themselvs negle∣cted) she raised Thomas Smith the customer from thirteen thousnd pounds yeerly, to two and forty thousand pounds, and at last to fifty thousand. It was now the yeer 1590. and the three and thirtieth of Queen Elizabeths Raigne, in which, the Earl of Cumberland made a Voyage to the Indies, where he laid levell to the ground the Fort of the Isle of iala, and brought away eight and fifty Pieces of great Ordnance. This yeer was fatall to many Noble personages; first dyed Ambrose Dud∣ley Earl of Warwick, (son to Iohn Duke of Northumberland) without is∣sue. After him Sir Francis Walsingham, Secretary, a man more skilfull in the Politicks, then in the Oeconomicks; more cunning in managing matters of the publick State, then of his own private estate, which he left so mean, and dyed so much indebted, that he was fain to be buryed by night, without ay Funerall pomp, in the Cathedrall Church of Saint Paul; leaving behinde him one onely daughter, famous for her three husbands, all of them the goodliest men of their time; the first, Sir Philip Sidney; the second, Robert Earl of Essex; the third, Richard Burgh Earl of Clanricard, by King Charls made Earl of Saint Albans. Within two Moneths after Wlsingham, dyed Sir Thomas Randol, who had been fourteen times sent in Embassage to seve∣rall Princes, yet was never rewarded with any greater dignities, then the Chamberlainship of the Exchequer, and the Postmastership of England. Soon after him dyed Sir Iohn Crofs, who had done good service in Scot∣land, in Edward the sixths time; in Queen Mary's time was condemned of high Treason; in Queen Elisabeths time set at liberty, and made Comptrol∣ler of her house. After him dyed George Talbot, the seventh E. of Shrewsbury of this house; he was made Earl Marshall of England, and left behinde him a memoriall of Wisdom and Integrity. Lastly dyed Thomas Lord Wentworth, the last of the English that had been Governour of Calice. In Ireland at this time Hugh Gaveloc (so called, because he had been long kept in Fetters) the naturall son of Shan O Neale, accused Hugh Earl of Tir-Oen, for holding private consultations with certain Spaniard, who in 88 were by Shipwrack cast upon the coast of Ireland: Tir-Oen to prevent the Accusation, took the said Hugh, and when others refused to do it, took a cord and with his own hands strangled him. Hereupon he was sent for into England, and came, and upon pardon obtained, solemnly undertook in presence of the Queen at Greenwich, to maintain the peace with Turlogh Leynigh; Not to usurpe the Title of O-Neale, nor any authority over the Gentry about him; to reduce the Territory of Tir-Oen to the form of a County, and civil behaviour, and many such matters; giving hostages for his true performance; and indeed for a time he observed all things very duly. This trouble allayed, another arose; for soon after this, Hugh Roe Mac-Mahon, a Potentate in the Territory of Monaghan, compelled those under his juris∣diction to pay him tribute; whereupon the Deputy caused him to be taken, and tryed by a Jury of common Souldiers, and then to be hanged up, divi∣ding his lands amongst certain English; and some of the Mac-Mahons, reser∣ving
a certain yeerly Rent to the Crown of England, by this means thinking to extinguish the Power and Title of Mac-Mahon. But hereupon, O-Rork, fear∣ing hee should be served in like manner, took up Arms against the Queen, whom Bingham President of Connacht soon distressed, and drave into Scot∣land, and at the Queens request, was by the King delivered up into his hands. It was now the yeer 1591. and the Four and thirtieth of Queen Elisabeths Raign, when she, carefull lest Britain should come into the Spaniards hands, sent Edmund York into France, to advertise the King to take care thereof; and promising to send him Forces to that end, if he would, some Towns, where they might be in safety. Hereupon he named Cherburg, Granvile, or Brest, as the fittest; and it was agreed, that Three thousand English should be sent into Brittainy and Picardy; but in the mean time, Henry Palmer was sent to Sea, with certain Ships, who seized upon Thirteen Spanish Ships, as they were returning from Nova Francia. And now Roger Williams, with a Company of Six hundred Souldiers, passeth over to Diepe in Normandy; and Sir Iohn Norris with the rest of the Forces, hasted into Britain soon after. Roger Williams, with his own Six hundred, and the help of Charter Governour of Diepe, put to rout the Confederates, that had blocked up the passages; whose valour, the French King in his Letters to the Queen, highly extolled. Whereupon growing more couragious, and not minding his charge, which was to stay at Diepe, he accompanyed the King to the very Suburbs of Paris, where in honour of his Nation, he sent a Challenge to the Spaniards, to encounter Two hundred Pikemen of the English, and a hundred Musque∣tiers, with as many Spaniards in open Field. After this, the King of France acquainted the Queen, that he had a pur∣pose to set upon Roan, or New-haven, before the Prince of Parma should come into France, and thereupon requested her, to send Four thousand Eng∣lish into Normandy, which upon certain conditions she willingly did, and sent them under the Command of Robert Earl of Esex, accompanyed with Sir Thomas Leighton, and Sir William Killegrew, as his Counsellours. When the Earl came into France, he found that the King was at Noyon, and in Normandy no preparation for the War at all, which seemed strange, and much troubled him; but by and by Sir Roger Williams comes to him from the King, requesting him to come to Noyon, that they might confer con∣cerning a course of War. Thither the Earl made a tedious journey, and be∣ing come thither; the King told him, he was now of necessity to go himself into Champaigne; but promiseth to send Marshall Biron, and the Duke of Montpensier forthwith to him, to lay siege to Roan. Hereupon the Earl re∣turned to his Tents, expecting their coming, but neither of thm me, which troubled the Earl more then before; so as being weary now  doing nothing, he made himself one approach to Roan, where hi Brother Wlt Devereux was unfortunately slain. Indeed the affairs of the ing of Frnce were at this time upon so uncertain terms, that before he could t  h had resolved, something still intervened, that diverted him; for which, by his Letters he excused himself to the Queen of England, and by the media∣tion of the Eal, and Mornay Lord du Plessie, whom to that end he sent into England, obtained new supplies, and then besieged Roan. At this time was memorable the prodigious cariage of one Hacket, born at Oundale in Northamptonshire, a mean fellow of no learning, whose first prank was this; That when, in shew of Reconciliation to one with whom he had been at variance, he imbraced him, he bit off his Nose, and the man de∣siring to have his Nose again, that it might be sowed on, while the wound was green, he most villanously eat it up, and swallowed it down before his face. After this, all on a udden, he took upon him a shew of wonderfull holinesse, did nothing but hear Sermons, and getting Scriptures by heart,
d counterfeting Revelations from God, and an extraordinary calling, and rew to be so magnified by certain zealous Ministers, and specially of one ard Coppinger, (a Gentleman of a good house) and one Arthington, a great admirer of the Geneva Discipline; that they accounted him as sent rom Heaven, and a greater Prophet then Moses or Iohn Baptist, and finally, that he was Christ himself, come with his fanne in his hand, to judge the world. And this they proclaimed in Cheapside; giving out that Hacket par∣ticipated of Christs glorified body, by his especiall Spirit, and was now come to propagate the Gospel over Europe, and to settle a true Discipline in the Church of England; and that they themselves were two Prophets, the one of Mercie, and the other of Judgement; with many other such in∣credible blasphemies; whereupon Hacket was apprehended and arraigned; and at last, hanged, drawn and quartered, continuing all the time, and at his death, his blasphemous Assertions. Coppinger a while after starved himself to death in prison, Arthington repented, and made his Recantation in a publike writing. Besides these, other also at this time opposed the established Government of the Church of England, crying down the calling of Bishops, with whom sided some Common-Lawyers also, affirming, that the Queen could not depute, nor these men exercise any such Ecclesiasticall Jurisdiction; and that the Oath Ex Officio was unchristian. But the Queen conceiving, that through the sides of the Prelates, she her self was shot at, suppressed them what she could, and maintained the Government formerly established. About this time, the Lord Thomas Howard, with six of the Queens ships, having waited at the Azores six whole Moneths, for the coming of the Spanish Fleet from America, was at last set upon by Alphonso Bassano, with three and fifty ships, sent out for the Convoy of the American Fleet, where Richard Granvile Vice-Admirall, being in the Revenge, and separated from his company, was so hemmed in by the Spanish ships, and so battered with great shot; that most of his men being slain, his Main-mast cut off, himself sore wounded in the head, he commanded to sink the ship, that it might not come into the Spaniards hands; but this being countermanded by most voi∣ces, it was agreed, to yeeld it to the Spaniards, upon condition that the men should be set at liberty. Granvile himself was carryed into the Spanish Ad∣mirall, where within two dayes he dyed, not without praise of his very ene∣mies: Thus the great ship called the Revenge, was yeelded, but had so many leaks in the Kel, that soon after it was cast away in a storm; and the losse of this one ship the English soon made good upon the Spaniards, by taking many of theirs. About this time also, Cavendish, who in the yeer 1578. had sailed round about the world, now with five ships bent his course toward the Magellan Straits, but by reason of foul weather, was not able to passe them, being dri∣ven to the coast of Brasile, was there cast away. And now, enmity increasing daily between Spain and England, two Pro∣clamations were set forth; one, prohibiting upon pain of high-Treason, to carry Victuals or Munition into any of the King of Spains dominions: An∣other, forbidding all persons to entertain any in their houses, till inquiry made, what they were, lest they might entertain Popish Priests, who at this time came swarming into England, by reason the King of Spain had lately founded a Seminary at Valledolid for the English. At this time dyed Sir Christopher Hatton, Lord Chancelour, whom of a mean Gentlemans house, the Queens favour had raised to this height of Dignity; a goodly personage of body, of Noble, but no aspiring spirits; the onely of all the Queens speciall Favourites, that dyed a Batchelour; and therefore left William Newport his sisters son his heir, who erected for him, in Pauls Church, a sumptuous Monument. After his death, the keeping
of the great Seal was for certain Moneths committed to the Lord Bur∣leigh Treasurer, Hunsdon, Cobham and Buckhurst: Afterward, Puckering the Queens Sergeant at Law was elected, not Chancelour, but Keeper of the great Seal. At this time also, Brian O-Rork, the Irish Potentate, was arraigned at Westminster; his Indictments were, For raising Rebellion against the Queen, for dragging her Picture at a horse tail, for giving the Spa∣niards entertainment; which things being told him by an Interpreter, (for he understood no English) hee said, Hee would not be tryed, un∣lesse the Queen her self in person sate to judge him. Yet being told, that it was the Law; hee onely said, If it must be so, let it be so; and so condemned, was executed at Tyburn as a Traitour, whereof hee seemed to make as little reckoning, as if it had but been in jest. And now this yeer, the Queen made the Colledge of Dublin in Ireland, an University, which was formerly the Monastery of All-Saints, endow∣ing it with power to confer Scholasticall Dignities. At this time, Sir Iohn Prot, who had been Deputy of Ireland, and done good service there, was yet by the malice of Adversaries, of whom Hatton was one, called in question, before the Baron Hunsdon, the Lord Buckhurst, Sir Robert Cecill, (lately made a Councellour) Sir Iohn For∣tescue, Sir Iohn Wolley, and some of the Judges: His Accusations were; first, that he had spoken opprobrious words against the Queen, saying, Shee was illegitimate and cowardly; secondly, that hee had fostered notorious Traitours, and Popish Priests; thirdly, that hee held corre∣spondence with the Prince of Parma, and the Queens enemies. To the first of which he confessed, that in his passion he had spoken of the Queen unadvisedly, for which hee was infinitely grieved; the rest hee denyed: And all men knew, he was never Popishly affected. His Ac∣cusers were, one Philip Williams, sometime his Secretary; Denys O-Rog∣han an Irish marryed Priest, whose life hee had saved; and one Wal∣ton, a fellow of no worth or Reputation. Yet the crimes being urged against him, by Popham and other Lawyers, till eleven a clock at night; hee was at last condemned of high Treason, but Sentence wa not pronounced till twenty dayes after; and yet was not put to death, but dyed a naturall death in the Tower; hee vvas a man of a goodly personage, stout and chollerick, and one whom (many thought) the Queen had the more reason to respect, for her father King Henry the Eighths sake. The Earl of Essx, after a tedious Winters siege in Normandy, chal∣lenged Monsieur Villerse Governour of Roan to a single combate, who refusing to meet him; hee then returned into England, being called home by the Queen, whose favour, by his long absence, might else have suffered prejudice. And now the King of France, hearing that the Prince of Parma was coming ito France, once again was fain to flye to the Queen for succour, to whom, upon certain conditions, she granted an Army of four thousand men, and some great Ordnance, with which Sir Iohn Norris was sent into France; whom yet the French King imployed not, as was agreed, to the great displeasure of the Queen. But as for the Prince of Parma's coming into France, hee was prevented by death, when hee had governed the Netherlands under the Spaniard fourteen yeers; a Prince of many excellent parts, and whom Queen Elisabeth never mentioned but with honour. And now Queen Elizabeth considering that the King of Spaines chiefe strength was in his Gold of America, sends forth Sir Walter Ralegh with a Fleet of fifteene Ships to meete with the Spanish Fleet; who
passing by a Promontory of Spain, received certain intelligence, that the Spa∣ish Fleet was not to come forth that yeare: Whereupon, dividing his Navy into two parts; whereof, the one he committed to Sir Iohn Bur∣ghs, the other to Sir Martin Forbysher; he waited other opportunities, when soon after, a mighty Caraque came in view, called The Mother of God, which from the Beake to the Sterne, was a hundred threescore and five foot long, built with seven Decks, and carrying six hundred men, besides rich Merchandize. This great Vessell they took, and in it, to the lue of a hundred and fifty thousand pounds sterling, over and above what the Commanders and Sea-men pilfered. This yeare, the Queene going in Progresse, passed through Oxford, where she was entertained by the Schollers with Orations, Stage-Plyes, and Disputations; and by the Lord Buckhurst Chancellor of the Uni∣versity, with a sumptuous Feast. At her departure, She made a Latine Oration, wherein she vowed a vow, and gave them counsell; Her vow was, That as she desired nothing so much, as the prosperity and flourishing estate of her Kingdome, so she as much wished to see the Universities and Schools of learning to flourish likewise. Her Counsell was, That they would serve God above all, not following the curiosity of some wits, but the Lawes of God, and the Kingdome, That they would not prevent the Lawes, but follow them, nor dispute whether better Lawes might be made, but observe those which were already Enacted. This year, dyed Anthony Browne Viscount Montacute, whom Queene Mary honored with this Title; because his Grandmother was Daughter, and one of the Heirs of Iohn Nevill Marquesse Montacute; who, though he were a great Roman Catholike, yet the Queen finding him faith∣full alwayes, loved him, and in his sicknesse went to visit him. There dyed at this time also, Henry Lord Scroope of Bolton, Knight of the Garter, and long time Governour of the Westerne Border toward Scotland. At this time Henry Barrow, and his Sectaries, condemning the Church of England to be no Christian Church, and derogating from the Queens Au∣thority in matters Ecclesiasticall; he the sayd Barrow, as Ring-leader of the rest, was put to death, in terror to all such disturbers of the peace of the Church. About this time, by reason of the Queens correspondence with the Turk, to the end, her Subjects might have free Trading in his Territories; It was maliciously given out by some, that she had excited the Turke to a War against the Christians; which caused the Queen to write to the Em∣perour, shewing him the falsenesse of this report, wherein she gave him full sasfaction. And now a constant report came into England, That the King of France had already embraced, or was ready to embrace the Romish Religion, which so much troubled the Queene, that she presently sent Thomas Wilkes into France; with reasons (if it were not too late) to divert him from it. But before Wilkes came, the King indeed had openly professed the Romish Religion, at the Church of Saint Denis in Paris; of which his Conversion, he declared the causes to Wilkes at large, shewing, the necessity of it, unlesse he would suffer himselfe to be utterly thrust out of the Kingdome. And the French AMBASSADOR signifying as much to the Queene, in great perplexity, She writ to him to this effect. Alas, what grief? what anxiety of minde hath befallen me, since I heard this news? was it possible that worldly respects should make you lay aside Gods feare? uld you thinke, That He, who had hitherto upheld and kept you, would now at the last, leave you? It is a dangerous thing to doe evill, that god
may come thereof. But I hope your minde may alter; In the meane while, I will pray for you, and beg of God, That the hands of Esau, may not hinder the blessing of Jacob. To this the KING Answered, That though he had done this in his owne Person out of necessity; yet, He would never be wanting to those of the Reformed Religion, but would take them into his speciall care and Protection. And now was Richard Hasket, condemned and executed for Treaso, be∣ing sent from the English Fugitives beyond Sea, to perswade Ferdinand Earle of Derby, Sonne to Henry newly deceased, to assume the Title of the Kingdome; by right of Descent from Mary, Daughter to Henry the Seventh; and threatning him, that unlesse he undertooke this enterprize, and withall, concealed him the Abettor, he should shortly dye in most wretched manner. But the Earle fearing a trap was layd for him, re∣vealed the matter; yet the fellows threating proved not altogether vaine, for the Earle within foure Moneths, dyed a most horrible death. This yeare, Death had his tribute payd him from the Nobility; for there dyed Henry Ratcliffe Earle of Sussex, and three renowned Barons, Arthur Grey of Wilton, Henry Lord Cromwell, and Henry Lord Went∣worth; besides Sir Christopher Carlile, whose Warlike Prowesse at Sea and land, deserves to be remembred. In IRELAND, at this time, divers great men in Connaght Rebel∣led; and Tulogh Leynigh being dead, Tir-Oen assumed to himselfe, the title of O-Neale, (which in IRELAND is more esteemed, than to be called EMPEROVR) But upon a sudden, dissembling his dis∣contet, hee submitted himselfe to the DEPVTY, and promised all obedience. I was now the yeare 1594, and the seven and thirtieth of Queen ELIZABETH Raigne; when the good correspondence betweene the King of Scots and Queen ELIZABETH, gave the Papists small hope that ever he would prove an Instrument to restore the Catholike Religion. Whereupon, they began to bethinke themselves of some English Papist, that might succeed the Queene; but finding none of their owne Sect, a fit person, they fixed their thoughts upon the Earl of Essex, who alwayes seemed a very moderate man; and him they devised to have some right to the Crowne, by Descent from Thomas of Woodstocke, King EDVVARD the Thirds Sonne. But the English Fugitives, were for the Infanta of Spaine, and desiring to set the King of Scots and the Earle of Essex at ods; they set forth a Book, which they Dedicated to Essex, under the name of Doleman, but was written indeed by Parsons (Dolemans bitter Adversary) Cardinall Allen, and Francis Englefield. The scope of which Booke was, to exclude from Succession, all persons whatsoever, and how near soever Allied to the Crowne, unlesse they were Roman Catholikes; Contending further, for the right of Isabella, Infanta of Spaine, as being descended from Constance, Daughter of WILLIAM the Conquerour; from Eleanor eldest Daughter to HENRY the Second, Married to Alphonso the ninth King of Castile; from Beatrix, Daughter to King HENRY the Third, Titles obsolete, and which exceed the bounds of Heraldry to discusse. This year, the nineteenth of February, was Henry Prince of Scotland born, to whom the Queen was Godmother, and sent Robert Earl of Sussex for her Deputy. But now greater matters were in hand, Plots were layd against the Queenes life; some Spaniards thinking to make her away by Poison, and not daring to trust any Englishman in such a businesse; they treat to that purpose, with Rodericke Lopes a JEV, and Phisitian to the Queen,
wih Stephen Ferreir, Emmanuel Loyfie, and other Portugalls; for divers of that Nation came into England at this time, in relation to Don Anthonio who being discovered by letters of theirs, that were intercepted, were Ar∣raigned at Guildhall, and by their own confessions convinced, to have con∣spied against the life of the Queen, they were all condemned, and Exe∣ed at Tiburne; LOPES professing that he loved the Queen, as well as Jesus Christ, which was cause of laughter to them that knew him to be a JEVV. The next day after them, was condemned Patrick Cllen an Irish Fencer, sent hither by the English Fugitives, to kill the Queen, who was straightway executed, though he were at that very time sick and ready to dye. About this time, Sir Iohn Norris having been in a hot conflict at sea a∣gainst the Spaniard, where Sir Martin Forbysher received his deaths wound, was now called home, with a purpose to send him into Ireland. In which mean while, Richard Hawkins, Sonne of Sir Iohn Hawkins the famous sea Captain, had been set forth a year since, with three of the Queens ships, and two hundred men in them; whereof, one of them at the Isle o St. Anne, was by chance fired, another of them seperated by tempest, returned into England; himself in the third, passed the Straights of Ma∣gellan, being the sixth man in the Spanish accompt, that had ever done it; and being now come into the wide Southern sea, he took five ships la∣den with Merchandize; one whereof he took away, the rest he suffered to redeeme themselves for two thousand Duckats: But at last, being set upon by Bertrandus a Castro, who was sent out by the Vice-Roy of those parts, with eight ships against him; after three dayes battery, he yeilded, and though upon composition, yet was neverthelesse sent into Spain, and there for divers years kept prisoner. But Iames Lancaster in another part of America, had better suc∣cesse; for being set forth by some London Merchants (whose goods the Spaniards had seized) with three Ships and a long Boat, Hee tooke nine and thirty Spanish Ships, and at Fernanbucke in Brasile, where the wealth of an East-Indian Caraque was lately unloden; hee desperately venturing upon the Shoare, Loaded Fifteene Ships with the wealth of the Indian Caraque; Sugar, Reed, Redwood called Brasill, and other Merchandize, and then safely and victoriously returned home. At ROME, about this time dyed Cardinall ALLEN, borne in Lancashire of an honest Family, brought up in Oxford, in Oriall Col∣ledge. In Queene Maries dayes he was Proctor of the University, and after Canon of the Cathedrall Church at YORKE. Upon the change of Religion in ENGLAND, he left the Kingdome, and was Divinity Professor at Doway in Flanders, and made Canon of the Church at Cambray. He procured a Seminary to be set up in Doway, for the Eng∣lish, another at Rheims, and a third at Rome; and through zeal of the Ro∣mish Religion, forgot whose subject he was born. At home, at this time, dyed Iohn Peers Archbishop of Yorke, in whose place, succeeded Matthew Hutton, translated from the See of Durham. There dyed also Ferdinand Stanley Earl of Derby, being in the floure of his age, miserably tormented, and vomiting tuffe of a darke rusty co∣lour, being thought to have been poysoned or bewitched. There was found in his chamber a little image of wax, with hairs of the colour of his hairs, thrust into the belly; which some thought was done of pur∣pose, that men should not suspect him to be poisoned; his vomit so stained the silver Andirons, that it could never be gotten out, and his body though put in searcloathes and wrapped in lead, did so tinck and putrifie, that for a long time none could endure to come neer where he was buried.
The Master of his Horse was much suspected, who the same day the Earl tooke his bed, took one of his best Horses, and fled away. About this time also dyed Gregory Fines Lord Dacres, a man somewhat crazed, the Son of Thomas Lord Dacres, hanged in the Raign of King Henry the Eight. And now Sir William Fitz Williams Lord Deputy of Ireland was called home, and William Russell youngest Son of Francis Earl of Bedford, was sent in his room; to whom presently came the Earl of Tir-Oen, and in hum∣ble manner craved pardon of his fault, that he had not presented himself at the call of the late Lord Deputy. Bagnall Marshall of the Irish Forces, exhibited many Articles against him, but he so pleaded for himself with promise of loyalty hereafter, that he was dismissed. But see the subdolous∣nesse of this man, for he would never after be gotten to come again, though the Deputy sent for him with many kinde messages. It was now the year 1595, and the eight and thirtieth year of Queen Elizabeths Raign; when Edond Yorke, and Richard Williams who were for∣merly apprehended, came to their tryall, and were executed at Tiburn, for being bribed to kill the Queen. At this time a constant rumor was blown abroad from all parts of Europe, that the Spaniards were coming again against England, with a farre greater Fleet than that in Eighty Eight, and that it was already under sayl; where∣upon, Souldiers were levyed, and placed on the Sea-coast. Two Navies were made ready, one to expect them at home in the Channell; the other, to go for America, under Hawkins and Drake; but when all came to all, it was but certain Spaniards, who loosed from the sea-coast of France, with four Gallies, which betimes in the morning landing in Cornwall, fired a Church standing alone in the fields, and three Villages of Fishermen, Neu∣lyne, Moushole, and Pensaus, and then presently retyred, not taking or killing any one person; And these were the first and last Spaniards, that in hostile manner ver set foot upon English ground. And now mischiefs growing daily in France, a great number perswaded the King, to conclude a Peace with Spain, and the Queen her self began to mistrust him; especially, having lately received intelligence out of the Popes Conclave; that he was received into the bosome of the Church of Rome, with the Popes Benediction, and that upon conditions prejudiciall to the Protestants. And therefore at this time, were divers undertakings of the English against Spain; Sir Walter Rawleigh Captain of the Guard, having defloured a Mayd of Honor (whom afterward he married) had lost the Queens favour, and was held in Prison for certain moneths; but afterward being set at liberty, though banished the Court. He undertook a Voyage to Guyana, setting sayl from Plimmouth in February, he arrived at Trinidada, where he took St. Io∣sephs Town, but found not a jot of money there: From hence, with Boats, and a hundred souldiers, he entred the vast River Orenoque, ranging up in Guyana four hundred myles, but getting little, but his labour for his travell. In like manner, Amyas Preston and Sommers, Pillaged sundry Towns of the King of Spains in the Western parts; and three ships of the Earl of Cum∣berland, set upon a huge Caraque, which by casualty was fired when they were in fight, and these were the enterprises of private persons: but the Queen being informed, that great store of wealth for the King of Spains use, was conveyed to Port Rico, in St. Iohns Island; sent thither Hawkins, Drk, and Baskervile with land Forces, furnishing them with six ships out of her own Navy, and twenty other men of War. They set sayl from Plimmoth the last of August, and seven and twenty dayes after, came upon the Coast of the great Canarie, which being strongly Fortified, they for∣bore to assault. A moneth after, they came to the Isle of St. Dominicke, where five Spanish ships being sent forth to watch the English, lighted upon
one of the small English ships which was strayed from the Company, and ting the Master and Marriners upon the Rack, understood by them, That the English Navy was bent to Port Rico; whereupon they make all possible speed to give notice thereof, that being fore-warned, they might accord∣ingly be armed. And thereupon, as soon as the English had cast Anchors  the Road at Port Rico, the Spaniards thundered against them from the shore; si Nicholas Clifford, and Brute Browne were wounded as they sate at upper, and two dayes after died. Hawkins also, and Drake, partly of dis∣se, and partly of grief for their ill successe, died soon after. At the end of eight months, the Fleet came home, having done the enemy little hurt, fired onely some few Towns and ships, but received infinite damage them∣slves; lost two such Sea-men, as the Kingdom, I may say, all Europe had ot their like left. For the Spaniards having of late yeers received great rms by the French and English, had now provided for themselves with Fortifications which were not easie to be won. At this time the Queen made known to the States in the Low-Countries, the great charges she had been at in relieving them ten yeers together; for which she requiteth some considerable recompence: The States again al∣leadge the great charges they were at in Eighty Eight, in repelling the Spa∣niards in her cause; yet (not to fall out about the matter) they were content to allow some reasonable retribution; but yet for the present, nothing was concluded. Likewise at this time, the Hanse Towns in Germany make com∣plaint to the Emperour, and the Princes of the Empire, That the Immuni∣ties from customes antiently granted them by the Kings of England, began to be Antiquated, and that a Monopoly of English Merchants was set up in Germany; to which, the Queen by Sir Christopher Perkins, first shewing the cause of the first Grant, and then the Reason of Queen Maries prohibiting it afterward, makes them so satisfactory an answer, that those very Hanse-Towns which complained, brought into England at this time, such store of Corne, that it prevented a mutiny, which thorough dearth of Corn, was like to have hapned in London. This yeer was famous for the death of many great Personages, Philip Earl of Arundel, condemned in the yeer 1589. The Queen had all this while spared, but now death would spare him no longer, having since that time been wholly given to contemplation, and macerated himself in a strict course of Religion, leaving one onely son, Thomas, by his wife Anne Dacres of Gillisand. He had two brothers, Thomas Lord Howard, whom Queen Elizabeth made Baron of Walden, and King Iames afterward Earl of Suffolk; and William Lord Howard of the North, who yet liveth; and one sister, the Lady Margaret, marryed to Robert Sackvile, afterward Earl of Drset, and father of Edward Earl of Dorset now living; a Lady so milde, so vertuous, and so devout in her Religion, that if her brother macerated himself being in prison, she certainly did no lesse, being at liberty; whom I the rather mention, because I had the happinesse to know her living, and the unhappinesse to be a Mourner at her Funerall. There died this yeer also, William Lord Vaulx, a zealous Papist, and Sir Thomas Hineage, Vice-Cham∣berlain, and Chancellor of the Dutchy of Lancaster, whose onely daughter marryed to Sir Moyle Finch of Kent, was no small advancer of that House. There died also William Whitaker, Master of S. Iohns Colledge in Cam∣bridge, and Divinity Professor: As likewise Sir Roger Williams, and Sir Tho∣mas Morgan; so as this yeer was honoured with the deaths of two great Lords, one exquisite Courtier, one great Schollar, and two famous Souldiers. In Ireland at this time, Russell the Deputy doubting a storm of War from Tir-Oen, sent into England, requiring to have some experienced souldier sent to him with Forces, who though he desired Baskervyle to be the man, yet
Sir Iohn Norris was sent, with thirteen hundred old souldiers, besides a further supply; whom Tir-Oen hearing to be coming, set presently upon the Fort of Blackwater, and in the absence of Edward Cornwall the Governour, took it. But now being doubtfull of his case, in a subdolous manner (as he was a double dealing man) he both offereth his help to the Earl of Kil∣dare, against the Deputies servants; and at the same time, maketh promise to the Earl of Ormond, and Sir Henry Wallope, of loyalty and obedience; but notwithstanding he was forthwith proclaimed Traytor, under the name of Hgh O Neal, bastard son to Con O Neal. There was at this time with the Rebells in Ulster, a thousand Horse, and 6280 Foot: and in Connaght, two thousand three hundred, all at Tir Oens command; and the Forces of the English under Norris, not much fewer, with whom the Deputy himself joyned, and marched together to Armagh; which so terrified the Rebels, that Tir Oen forsaking the Fort of Blackwater, began to hide himself. Whereupon the Deputy returned, leaving Norris to follow the War, with the Title of Generall of the Army. But this satisfied not Norris, and there∣fore out of emulation betwixt himself & the Deputy, he performed nothing worth the speaking of, and seemed to favour Tir Oen, as much as the De∣puty hated him; insomuch, as he had private conference with him (a thing not lawfull with proclaymed Traytors) and upon his submission, and Ho∣stages given, a Truce was granted both to him and Odonell, till the first of Ianary. When the Truce was expired, Tir Oen exhibited certain Petiti∣ons, protesting, if they were granted, he would then perform all duties of a loyall subject. In consulting about which Petitions, another Truce was concluded, till the first of April: during which Truce, Tir Oen dealt secret∣ly with the King of Spain for Ayd to be sent him, making neverthelesse a fair shew of willingnesse to obedience, so far, that by the procurement of Norris and Fenton, a pardon was granted him; the which he pretended to receive more joyfully, than the Instrument whicd conferred the Earldome upon him; yet all this was but dissimulation, to win the time for his own ends. In the midst of these Irish Affairs, Albertus Arch-Duke of Austria, and Cardinall, whom the King of Spain had newly set over the Netherlands, mustered together the Spanish Forces, upon pretence of raising the Siege of La Fere in Picardie; but upon a sudden turneth aside, and besiegeth Calice; and taking Newnham Fort, the very first day became Master of the Haven. The Queen informed hereof, forthwith, upon the very Sunday, in time of Divine Service, commandeth to leuy souldiers, whom she committeth to the Earl of Essex; but before they could be shipped, certain News came, That the Town and Fort were taken by the Spaniard: Whereupon, the Queens Army was dismissed, and onely some money lent to the French King. But a few dayes after, a far greater, and more select Army is raised in England, wherein many of Noble Houses served as Voluntaries: For the Queen, to divert the King of Spain from invading her Borders, thought it the best way to invade his: Whereupon a Navy of a hundred and fifty Ships was made ready; where were souldiers under pay, 6360; Volunta∣ries of the Nobility and Gentry, 1000; Marriners, 6772, besides the Dutch-men, who brought two and twenty ships. Robert Earl of Essex, and Charls Howard Lord Admirall of England, were made Generalls with equall Authority; but the Admirall to hold Prerogative at Sea, Essex at Land. To these, for a Councell of War, were joyned, the Lord Thomas Howard, Walter Raleigh, Francis Vere, George Carew, and Conyers Clifford. The whole Fleet was divided into four Squadrons; the Admirall commanded the first, Essex the second, the Lord Thomas Howard the third, and Raleigh the fourth. The Officers of the Army were Francis Vere, Serjeant Major Generall, or
Marshall; Iohn Winkfield, Quarter-Master Generall; George Carew, Master of the Ordnance; Conyers Clifford Serjeant Major. Colonells were, Ro∣bet Earl of Sussex, sir Christopher Blunt, sir Thomas Gerrard, sir Richard Winkefield; William Winkefild was Commander of the Vountaries, and Anthony Ashley, Secretary to the Councell of War, was to Register their Acts and Consultations. The Commission being drawn, the Queen gave them private Instructions, and withall, a Prayer of her own making, to be dily used in every Ship. This Feet set forth from Plimouth at the beginning of Iune. Nigh un∣o Cabo S. Vincent they lighted upon an Irish Barque, which told them, That at Cales they were secure, and that in the Haven there were at Anchor Gallies, ships of War and a great many Merchants Vessells. The twentieth of Iune, they cast Anchor on the West side of the Island; within two dayes they were agreed to set upon the Spanish ships, where∣at the Earl of Essex cast up his Cap for joy. This businesse was alot∣ed to the lesser ships, because the Road was too shallow for the great. The Gallyes quickly fled, and creeping along the shore, shifted away, but the Spanish ships that lay at Anchor at Puntall, turned their broad sides; so as the English Fight with them, lasted from break of day till noon; at which time, the Spaniards having their Gallons miserably tor, and many of their men slain, resolved to fire the the ships, or run them ashore. The Spanish Admirall, being fifteen hundred Tun of Burthen, was fired by a Moor, and two other ships which lay next her took the fire, and were lost likewise. When this Sea-Fight was ended, Essex landed eight hundred souldiers at Puntall, a league from the Town of Cales, when half a mile from the Town, the Spanish Horse and Foot shewed them∣selves, and presently gave back again; but straightway cometh forth a greater number: Then Essex commanded his Forces to make a fair Re∣treat; and having enticed forth their enemies, they turned upon them with such violence, that they forced them back into the Town. Then the Earl got up to a Bulwark newly raised, neer the Gate, where he spyed a pas∣sage into the Town but so high from ground, that they must leap a Spears length to get down. Yet Evans the Earl of Sussex his Lievtenant, Arthur Sa∣vage, and other, leaped down; and the mean while Sir Francis Vere broke the Gate, and rushed in, and the rest with him. In the Market place Iohn Winkfield was shot in the head, and with stones from the tops of the houses divers were wounded; amongst whom, Samuel Bagnall received eight wounds, and Arthur Savage was bloody all over; which two were Knighted in the place. The next day the Castle was yeelded, upon condition, That the Inhabitants might depart with the clothes on their backs, the rest to be left for spoyl. For five hundred and fourscore thousand Duckets the Castle was to be re∣deemed; and for the payment, forty of the chief Citizens to be sent Hosta∣ges into England. Now Raleigh was commanded to fire the Merchants Ships lying at Port Reall, when they promised two Millions of Duckets to redeem them: but this the Admirall would not hear of, saying, He was sent to de∣stroy Ships, not to dismisse them upon Composition. A world of Munition was found in the City, and great store of money privately carried away, eve∣ry one shifting for himself. It was thought by the wiser sort, That the Spa∣niard could not be damnified lesse by this Expedition, than twenty Millions of Duckets. None of note was slain amongst the English, but onely Wink∣field, who also slew a Spanish Captain; and now at last, threescore Military men were honored with Knight-hood. After this, having spoyled the whole Island and demolished the Forts they returned into England, much against the will of Essex, who would fain have bin attempting some other enterprise. The Queen received them home with much affability, giving many thanks to those of principall note, but extolling the Earl of Essex and the
Admirall, above the rest. And now bethinking her self of a fit man to be Governour of the Bryll, which was given by the States as a Caution Town for money due, she made choyce of Sir Francis Vere, although Essex com∣mended other to her for the place: but another thing he took with great in∣dignation, That in his absence she had made Sir Robert Cecill Secretary, whereas he had formerly with great instance commended Sir Thomas Bodley to her And now the King of Spain, to recover his honour lost at Cales, setteth forth a Navy for England and Ireland, with a great number of Irish Fugi∣tives but being at Sea, most of his ships were either run upon Rocks, or cast away in storms; so as this Expedition came to nothing. But the Queen at this time, for her better security, entred a League of Defence and Offence with the French King, against the Spaniard, upon cer∣tain Conditions; which League, she confirmed by Oath, in the Chappell at Greenwich, the nine and twentieth of August, laying her hand upon the hand of Henry de la Tour, Duke of Bulloign, and Marshall of France; the Bishop of Chichester holding forth the Evangelists, and a great company of the No∣bility standing round about. In September following, Gilbert Talbot, Earl of Shrewsbury, was sent on Ambassage into France, to take the French Kings Oath, and to present Sir Anthony Mildmay for the Queens Ambassadour in Ordinary, in the room of Sir Henry Unton lately there deceased, and to in∣vest the King with the Order of the Garter. Soon after, Baskervile wafted into Picardy with two thousand souldiers; for no more were by agreement to be sent this yeer. It was now the yeer, 1596, and the nine and thirtieth of Queen Eliza∣beths Raign, when Thomas Arundel of Warder returned into England, from the Wars in Hungary against the Turk; whom, for his good service done there the Emperour by his Letters Patents, had created Earl of the sacred Empire, and all and singular his Heirs and their Posterity, Males or Females, lawfully descended from him, to be Earls and Countesses of the holy Empire for ever. Those who are graced with this Title, have a Place and Voice in the Imperiall Diets, May purchase Lands in the Emperours Dominions, May take up voluntary souldiers, And are not bound to an∣swer any matter before any Judge, but onely in the Chamber of the Empire. At his return, a great Question came in agitation, Whether Titles of Honour given to the Queens subjects without her privity, ought to be accepted by them, or admitted by her. For this new Earl stuck in the stomacks of the English Barons, who inwardly grudged to give him place. The matter was long disputed on both sides, but what issue it had, or whether he were permitted this Honour here at home, I finde not: Certain it is, That Sir Nicholas Clifford, and Sir Anthony Shirley, whom the French King two yeers since received into the Order of S. Mi∣chael, were laid in prison at their coming home, and charged to resigne their Robes of the Order. This yeer many great persons died; Iohn Puckering, Lord Keeper of the Great Seal, whom Thomas Egerton succeeded; Richard Fletcher, Bishop of London; who for marrying the Lady Baker (as goodly a Lady as he was a Prelate) incurred the Queens displeasure; and to cure his cares, fell im∣moderately to drinking of Tobacco, and so expired. Henry Cary, Ba∣ron of Hunsdon, Lord Chamberlain of her Majesties House, and her Cousin German. Sir Francis Knolls, who marryed Hunsdons sister, in Queen Maries dayes an Exile in Germany for the Gospell, by Queen Elizabeth made first Vice-Chamberlain, then Captain of the Guard, afterward Trea∣surer of the Houshold, and Knight of the Garter. Henry Hastings Earl of Hutington, and President of the Counsell in the North, who spent his estate upon Puritan Ministers: Francis Lord Hastings, Nephew to him by his
brother George, who succeeded him in the Earledome, and Margaret Clifford Countesse of Derbie, (who descended of the blood Royall, from Charles Brandon) consulted with sorcerers and cunning men, and thereupon a little before her end, was in a manner excluded from the Queens favour. The Queen at this time was told, that the King of Spain was preparing a new Fleet against Ireland; whereupon to encounter him, she also prepa∣red a Navy of a hundred and twenty Ships, seventeene of the Queens, Three aud forty lesser Ships of Warre, the rest for the carriage of provision: They were parted into three Squadrons: Essex Commanded the first, who was also chiefe Commander in the expedition; The Lord Thomas Howard the second, and Raliegh the third. In this Fleet were sundry of the Nobility and Gentry, Charls Blunt, Lord Mountjoy, Vere, Carew, Sir Christopher Blunt, the Earles of Rutland and Sou∣thampton; the Lords, Grey, Crumwell, Rich, and many other. The ninth of July they weighed Anchour from Plimmouth and were to direct their course to Ferall and the Groyne, to sieze upon the Spanish Fleet in the Harbour, and towards the Isles called Azores, to intercept the Indin Fleet at their returne into Spaine; but this expedition was crossed and over∣throwne by Tempests, for they had not sayled forty Leagues from Plimmouth, when they were shaken with such a terrible Tempest for foure dayes together, that the Marriners themselves were at their witts end, and the Fleet had much a do to recover Plimmoth; the Na∣vy being mended, then hoise up sayle the second time, but the winde ell presently againe so crosse, that for a whole Moneths time they could not get out of the Haven, returning to Plimmouth the seven∣teenth of August they got out of the Haven; and now the third time, with a side wind hoyse up sayle, but before they came in view of Spaine, they were dispersed by another horrible Tempest wherein of the two great Ships which were taken at Calis, one was dashed in pieces, the o∣ther wandered no man knew whither. At the Island Flores the Fleet met againe, where Rawleigh being distressed for water, went on shore with∣out leave; and ere he had watered, had charge to follow Essex to Fay∣ll: but not finding him there, hee observed the Port, and calling a Councell, the Commanders wished him to set upon the place, and not let slippe so faire a booty. Upon this, Rawleigh with some of the prime Voluntaries, got to shoare, and wonne the Towne, but found no boo∣ty in it. The next day Essex came thither, whom Merrick informeth what Rawleigh had done, affirming spitefully, that he had done it on∣ly to prevent his Lordshippe in the honour of the exploite: where∣upon, some perswaded the Earle to call a Councell of Warre and than dplace him, others again? to take of his Head for going to Land, without the chiefe Commanders leave; saying, hee was never like for to have such another opportunity to bee rid of his Adversary; up∣on this, Sidney, Brett, Berry, and other of Rawleighs company were displaced, and layed by the heeles; Rawleigh himselfe was sent for, and entertained with a grimme looke by Essex and all his Party; Essex rebu∣keth him angerly, for landing his Forces, which none upon payne of death might do, without the Generalls command; Rawleigh made answer, that the Captaines indeed, Ship-masters & the rest were within the compasse of that Law; but not the Three prime Commanders, of whom himself was One: That he had a long time wayted his comming, and longer would have wayted, but that the Islanders provoked him to fight. And now the L. Thomas Howard mediated, that no severity might be used against Rawleigh, & perswa∣ded him to acknowledge his fault; which being done, all were friends, and the displaced Captaines were restored to their places, for the Earle was of a placable disposition; easily apt to take offence, and as easily ready to remit it.
From hence they saile to Gratiosa, where the Inhabitants crave mercy and obtained it; & here Essex would have tarried, in expectation of the Indian fleet; but that Graves the Pilot disswaded, because the harbour was not good: and now see the unluckinesse of ill counsell, for the English were not gone above an houre, or two, rom this place; when loe, the Ameri∣can fleete; (wherein were forty Ships, and seven of them loaden with treasure) cometh thither; which, hearing that the English were there abouts, directed their course to Tezcera, where they gained the ha∣ven, all but three ships, indifferent wealthy; which English tooke: and then were minded to set upon the rest, in the Port; but finding the attempt not forcible, they passed from hence, to Saint Michaells; where Southampton, Rutland, Evers, Bredon and Dockwray, were Knighted and then Essex landed within six miles of the Towne; nigh unto Villa Franca, a faire Towne, and well furnished with marchan∣dize; wine, wood, and corne; where they tarried six dayes: and the common souldiers found good booty. And now a Caraque was espied, coming out of the east Indies; which, by a warning peece shot off in a Dutch ship, perceiveing that the English were there; run herselfe a shoare, unloaded her merchandize, and then fiered herselfe. Thus the English had ill lucke every where in this expedition: And the ninth of October they hoysted sayle for England; but within two dayes, a ter∣rible tempest, from the northward dispersed them; and the Spanish Fleete also at the same time, so as they never came in view of one another: one Spanish shippe was cast upon Dertmouth, the Marriners and souldiers halfe starved in her; who intimated, that the Spanish fleete in∣tended to seize upon some haven in Cornwall, which being nigh the mouth of the channell; might be convenient to receive forces from Spaine: but the divine providence frustrated the designes both of the Spaniard and the English. But now at his returne, the Earle of Essex found that done in Eng∣land, in his absence, which infinitly discontented him: Sir Robert Cicill made Chancelour of the Dutchy of Lancaster; & which was more, Charles Lord Howard, created Earle of Nottingham, with relation in his patent to the Victory in eighty eight; and his good service at Cales: This glory he envyed him, and besides stomacked it; that he must now take place of him. It being enacted in the Raigne of Henry the eighth, that the chiefe Officers of the Kingdome, should have Presidence of all men of their degree. Whereupon the Queen, to give him content, was faine to create him Earle Marshall of England; by which he recovered his place againe. About this time, an Embassadour came into England, from the KING of Poland; who, when the Queen expected he should give her thanks for having procured a Peace between the King his Master, and the Turke, he cleane contrary expostulated unkindnesse, for breach of Priviledge in trading with Spaine, requiring a present remedy, or else the King would otherways right himselfe. The Queen not a little offended, suddenly replyed, ow was I deceived? I expected an Em∣bassadour, and behold a Herauld; such a speech I never heard in all my life time: And after some further checking of him for his boldnesse, she referred him to her Councell; and then retired into her Closett. The Embassadour afterward, in private conference with some of the Councell, excused himselfe, saying, that his speech was pen∣ned by others, and then given him in wrighting. To his Message, the Councell gave the like answer; as they had given before the Hanse-Townes, upon the like occasion: though now againe, the Hanse-Townes obtaine of the Emperour, to prohibite the English from trading
in Germany, which made the Queen to prohibit the Hause towns from tra∣ding in England, and put them out of the Stilyard till this difference was accorded. This yeer the Chancellor of Denmarke came into England to restore the Garter, which she had bestowed upon the Kings Father, and withall offering the Kings helpe, to make a peace for the Queen with the Spaniard. The Queen thanked him; but meant not to use his helpe for that which shee did not desire, and especially not now, when he had newly molested the King of France her Allye, and had taken Amyens the strongest Town of Picardie: Though why should the Queen be so tender of the French King, when now to get an aid of four thousand Souldiers from her, he fell to Devises; intimating unto her, that he was now offered by the Popes Nuntio a very commodious peace, if he would but forsake her. But while these things were in Treaty, Amyens was recovered a∣gaine by the valour of Baskervile (who dyed at the seige) and of Sir Arthur Savage, as the King in His Letters to the Queene thankful∣ly acknowledged. About this time a Parliament was holden at Westminster, where Subsidies were willingly granted; and to this Parliament was called the Lord La Ware and restored to his blood, which by Act of Parliament in the Raigne of King Edward the sixth was tainted; Also to this Parliament was called Thomas Lord HOVVARD, by the Title of Ba∣ron Howard of Walden. In Ireland at this time, a great part of Ulster, and almost all Con∣nacht was in Rebellion; Whereupon Russell the Deputy was called home, and Thomas Lord Burrough sent in his place, a man very stout and couragious, but no souldier: This infinitely discontented Norris, who thought himselfe sure of the place himselfe, and now to see his Rivall preferred before him, and himselfe to be under him, Presi∣dent of Munster, drave him into such a melancholly, that in a very short time, (and as he thought to himselfe with much disgrace) he en∣ded his life. And now the Farle of Tir-Oen craveth, and obtaineth a moneths Truce of the new Deputy, at the moneths end, the Deputy marcheth against the Rebels, and gaineth the Fort at Blackwater, when sudden∣ly the Rebells slw themselves upon a hill hard by, against whom the Earle of Kildare marcheth and puts them to flight; but yet with some losse of his owne side, as Francis Vaughan the Deputies brother in Law, Turner a Sergeant Major, and two Fosters, brothers of the Earle of Kildare, whole death hee tooke so heavily, that within a few dayes he dyed himself. As soon as the people had fortified the Castle at Blackwater and withdrawne his Army, the Rebels began to besiege it againe; (for this was the main place of their strength) which caused the Deputy with all possible speed to make thither, but unhappily dyed by the way. Whereupon the Rebells set upon the Fort more fiercely then before; but being still reppelled; they comforted themselves with this, that there was not many dayes provision left in the Fort; yet the admirable fortitude of Thomas Williams the Captain, and the Garrison Souldiers saved the place, who, when their horse-flesh was all spent, fedde upon weeds growing within the Trenches, and endured all kinde of mise∣ry. And now the Lord Burrough the Deputy being dead, the Army by direction from England, was committed to the Earle of Ormond, and the Government to two Lords Justices, Adam Lofthouse Arch∣bishop of Dublin and Chancellour, and Robert Gardyner: To this new Lieutenant, Tir-Oen exhibiteth a Bill of his oppressions and greivances
with request of pardon, and at the same time stirreth up Mac-Hugh to a new Rebellion in Leinster. In France at this time, the French King being importuned by the Pope, and by his own Subjects, began to incline to a Peace with Spain, which the Queen understanding, she sent into France, Sir Robert Cecill, Herbert and Wlks, (who dyed at his landing in France:) The States likewise sent thither, Iustine of Nassaw, and Barnevolt, and others likewise into England to dis∣swade the Peace: but notwithstanding all they could say, or do, the French King shortly after concluded a Peace, to the great discontentment of the Queen and the States, but to the great good, and establishment of the French Common-wealth. And now the Queen providing for her own and her peoples safety, sent Sir Francis Vere to the States, to know if they were willing to joyn in a Trea∣ty of Peace with the Spaniard; if not, what they would afford toward a Warre; and to deal earnestly with them, about repayment of money due to her from them. At home in the mean time, a great Consultation was holden, whither a Peace with Spain were convenient for England, or no; and many Reasons were on both sides alleaged. Burleigh Lord Treasu∣rer was for Peace, Essex for Warre, and so vehement in it, that the Treasurer, after a long debating, in a strange manner of Presage, rea∣ched forth the Book of the Psalms to him, pointing him to that Verse, The bloody minded man shall not live out half his dayes. Which made Es∣sex afterward to set forth an Apology, with Reasons for justification of his opinion. But now another Consultation was held, about a fit man to be Deputy of Ireland; The Queen intended to send Sir William Knolles, Essex his Uncle; but Essex was violent for Sir George Carew, whom hee had a minde to remove from the Court; and when hee could not by any means perswade the Queen to it, hee then, forgetting himself and his duty, uncivilly and contemptuously turned his back upon the Queen, mutter∣ig certain words. Whereupon shee growing impatient, gave him a box on the ear, and bid him be gone with a vengeance; Essex laid his hand upon his sword hilt, and swore a great oath, That he could not, nor would not put up such an Indignity; and that hee would not have taken it at King Henry the Eighth his hands; and so in a rage flun avvay from the Court. But aftervvard, admonished by the Lord Keeper, hee became more milde, and in a short time, returned into the Queens favour. About this time, William Cecill Lord Burleigh, and high Treasurer of Engand, finding himself to droop with age, (for hee was now three∣score and seventeen yeers old) sent Letters to the Queen, intreating her to release him of his publike charge; whereupon shee went to vi∣sit, and comfort him, but within a few dayes hee ended his life, af∣ter hee had been the principall stay of the English Commonwealth for many yeers together. One great good hee did to his country, a little before his death, that hee brought the States of the Low-Countries to a Composition, for the payment of Eight hundred thousand pounds, by Thirty thousand pounds yeerly; likewise, a new League to be con∣cluded with them. The King of Denmarks Subjects having lately seized upon some goods of the English as Prize, to the value of a hundred thousand Dollers; the Queen sent the Lord Zouch, and Christopher Perkins Doctor of Law, in Em∣bassage to the Dane, both to congratulate his late marriage with the Electors daughter of Brandenburg; and also to crave restitution of the English goods; who obtained, that in lieu thereof, Threescore thousand Dollers were repaid. And now George Clifford Earl of Cumberland, having with
a Navie of eleven ships, waited for Portingall Cariques, and the American Flet, till the season of the yeer was past (they not daring to stirre forth) he at last set upon Port-Rico and took it; but seaven hundred of his men falling sick of Calentures, and dying within forty dayes, he was faine to returne home with some honour, but little profit. About this time, one Edward Squire was Arraigned of high Treason, he had been at first an ordinary Scrivener, afterward a Groome in the Queen; stable, and going as a Souldier in Drakes last expedition, was taken pri∣soner and carryed into Spaine, there he came acquainted with one Wallpoole an English Jesuite, who caused him to be put into the Inquisi∣tion for an Heretick, and the fellow tasting of misery, was easily drawn to become a Papist, and afterward to attempt anything for the Catholique cause. His ghostly father perswaded him it were meritorious to make away the Queen and the Earl of Essex, and sent him into England with a cer∣tain poyson, wherewith to anoint the pommell of the Queens Saddle, and the chayre in which the Earl should sit, which he accordingly performed, but neither of them tooke effect, whereupon Wallpoole suspe∣cting Squires fidelity was bent to revenge it, and sent one into England, who in generall termes should lay this aspersion upon him; whereupon Squire is called in question, and never thinking that his Confessor would detect him, directly denyed all at first; but after seeing himself betrayed, confessed all the matter and was executed. This whole yeer the Rebellion was hot in Ireland; For Tir-Oen not∣withstanding his pardon lately obtined, all on a suddain besieged the Fort at Blackwater, to the raising of which siege, the Lieutenant Generall (for there was as yet no Deputy) sent 13 Companies under the command of the Marshall, Tir-Oens sworre adversary, him Tir-Oen slew, and put his whole Army to rout, and atchieved such a Victory, with so great losse to the Eng∣lish, as they had never elt the like since they first set footing in Ireland for thirteen valiant Commanders; and fifteen Hundred Common Souldiers were slain at this Skirmish, and soon after the Fort of Blackwater was yeelded up. And now Tir-Oens fame began to resound, as the Assertor of the Liberty of the Nation, and upon a suddain all Munster brake forth in∣to rebellion. For the cherishing whereof Tir-Oen sent thither Ony Mac-Rorye and Tyrell (who originally an Englishman, was growne a deadly enemie to the English Nation) with four hundred Kernes. Against these; Thomas Nor∣ris President of the Province, marcheth to Killmallock with a good force; but finding that the Irish Souldiers of his Company were ready to revolt, he was faine to disperse his Army and retire to Corke. Hereupon the Rebells grew insolent, spoyled the Countrey, and in cruell manner put all the English to the sword. Furthermore they declare Fitz Thomas to be Earl of Desmond but upon condition he should hold of O-Neal, that is, of Tir-Oen, who now dispatched Letters to the Spaniard, relating his victories to the full, and vowing to accept no termes of peace with the English, and yet at the same instant (after his wonted treacherous manner) proffe∣red some kinde of submission to the Lieutenant; but withall made un∣reasonable demands. The State of Ireland being thus in combustion, a serious consultation is holden whom to send to quench it, the Queen and most of the Counsell thought Sir Charls Blunt Lord Mountjoy the fittest man but Essex covertly in∣timated, that he had no military experience, and besides was too bookish to prove a good Commander, he seem'd to aym at the place for himself, though he made a shew modestly to refuse it, and yet still ready with his exceptions if any other were nominated many thought it dangerous to have an Army put into his hands, for his followers talked of great matters, that he (for∣sooth) was descended of the blood Royall of Scotland and England,
and had better Right to the Crown, then any other of the Competitors. In Conclusion, he is appointed Vice-Roy; with ample Authority, to make Warre or conclude Peace, and pardon all offenders, even Tir-Oen himselfe. An army is allotted him as great as he desired: Indeed greater then ever Ireland had seen before; Twenty Thousand Foot, and Thirteen Hun∣dred Horse: with these, and a great Retinue besides of the Nobility, he passeth into Ireland; where as soon as he had taken the Sword, contrary to his Commission (which was to go immediately against the arch-Rebell) he marcheth towards Munster, against the petty Rebels, taketh the Castle of Cahir, and driveth the Rebels into the Woods and Groves adjoyning. His Forces being now impaired, he tarrieth to make them up; but in the mean time sendeth directions to Sir Coniers Clifford, President of Connacht, to set upon the Rebels in one place, (thereby to sever their forces) while he as∣saulted them in another; Clifford marcheth toward Belike, with 1500. Souldiers, where the Rebels are upon them at unawares, under the conduct of O-Rorke, (his Sonne that was hanged here in England) The English re∣pell them at first with ease, and march along, but the Rebels finding they wanted Powder, set upon them againe, and put them to flight; in which Skirmish, Clifford and many of the old Souldiers were slain. Essex having by this time received new supplies out of England, and a check for neglecting the Queens Command, setteth forth at length toward the Borders of Ulster, with Thirteen hundred Foot, and five hundred horse, being come thither, Tir-Oen by a Messenger requesteth Parley, Essex refuseth saying, he might speake with him the next morning, between the two Ar∣myes; the next day, word is brought to Essex, that Tir-Oen craved the Queens mercy, and that he might onely be heard speake, appointing the shallow of Balla Clinch for a most convenient place; thither came Essex alone, with whom Tir-Oen (riding his horse up to the girts) had private conference a full houre; A while after, Con Tir-Oens base Sonne came to Essex, requesting in his Fathers name a second Parley, and that some of the chiefe on both sides might be present: Essex consented, so there came not more then six. At the day appointed, many words had not passed, but it was argued, that their Delegates should Treat the next day concerning a Peace: between them it was concluded, that a Truce should be held from six weekes to six weeks, till Mayday. By this time, the Qu. understanding that no more was done, after so much time and money spent, in a great anger taxeth the Earls proceedings, and I know not how, it fell from her to some others that stood by, that he had o∣ther thoughts in his mind, then the good of his Prince and Country: And thereupon dispatched very sharp Letters to him, blaming his delay, and letting slip every faire opportunity: with which Letters Essex was so net∣led and chiefely troubled, that the Queen had now made Cecill Master of the Wards, which he expected himselfe: that he beganne to cast strange Projects within his minde, and held private consultations of returning into England with part of his Forces, to surprize his Adversaries; But from this course, the Earl of Southampton, and Sir Christopher Blunt disswaded him, as being dangerous and wicked. Yet within a moneth, over he went, and came to the Court at Nonesuch; to informe the Queen of the State of Ireland. By the way, the Lord Gray of Welton crossed him, but salu∣ted him not; whom one of his followers offered to kill for his contempt: but Essex would not suffer him: And made such hast, that early in the Morning he was upon his Knees, before the Queen in the Privy Chamber. She enteriained him courteously, but not with the countenance She was wont: and after a little talke, bid him keepe in his Chamber; And soon after, Committed him to Custody, in the Lord Privy Seales House; where entring into Consideration of his case, he giveth himselfe
wholly to Divine Contemplation, and writeth wonderfull Letters to his friends, of the vanity of the things of this life. It was now the yeer one thousand six hundred, and the two and for∣tieth of Queen Elizabeths Kaign, when after the departure of the Earle of Essex, Tir-Oen began to carry himselfe as Monarch of Ireland, and sendeth Kernes to make spoyle in the possessions of such as continued in their loyalty to the Queene, under Mac-Guir their Captaine, who lighting casually upon Sir Warham Saint Leger, thrust him thorough with a speer, and was himself thrust thorough withall. Whereupon the Queen sent Sir Charls Blunt Lord Montjoy, to take upon him the Deputies place, who looseth no time, but first of all marcheth towards Ulster buildeth a fort, within eight miles of Armagh, which, in hononr of Sir Iohn Norris, under whom he had his first military schooling, he calleth by the name of Mount Nrris; there he placed Edward Blanye who kept the Rebels in awe in those pas, from thence back he goeth into Leynster, wherein the Glynnes he reduceth into order, Donell-Spaniah, Phelim Mac-Pheoph, and the Re∣belling Nation of the O-Tooles, taking hostages of them, then back into Ulster again, being victor wheresoever he cometh, and at Tradagh, receiveth into protection Mac-Henry, Mac-Cowly, and other rebels who fell at his feet for mercy. All this and more he did in his first yeer, and no lesse successefull was Carew President of Munster, who drave out of the County the Titular Earle of Desmond, and having found Munster a turbulent Province in Aprill, he overcomed and made it so quiet by December following, that the Rebels maintained not one Fort in it against the Queen. And now a new consultation was holden in England, touching a peace with the King of Spaine, the which he sought both by the French King, and by Albrtus the Archduke, who was now returned into the Netherlands out of Spain, where he was marryed to the Infanta. The Queen consenting to a Treaty, left it to the French King to nominate both the time and place for the meeting of the Delegates, who set down the Month of May, and Bulloigne in France; But now foreseeing that a question would arise a∣bout Precedency, some were appointed to search Ancient Records concerning that point. These men found in the Book of the Ceremo∣nies of the Court of Rome, which (according to the Canons) giveth Rule to the rest, as the Lady and Mistresse; that amongst Kings, the first place is due to the King of France, the second to the King of England and the 3. to the King of Castile; That the English quietly held this priviledge in the Generall Counsells of Basill Constance, and others, besides the Kingdome of Castile, which is the Spaniards first Title, is but an upstart in regard of England, which had Earles, but no Kings till the yeere one 1017. In like manner, that Pope Iulius the third, gave sentence for Henry the seaventh of England, against Ferdinand, who was then King of Castile. At the day appointed, the Delegates met at Bulloign, Sir Henry Nevyll, Legier Embassadour, Sir Iohn Herbert, Robert Beale, and Tho∣mas Edmunds for the English, and other fot the King of Spaine and the Archduke. The English had Instructions, first concerning Preceden∣cy, in no case to give way to the King of SPAINE; yet if they contended, to put the matter to the devision of Lots, rather then the Treaty should be dissolved; and for the rest, to propose and mention the renewing of the ancient Burgundian League, freedome of com∣merce, &c. At the meeting, when the had severally shewed their cōmissions; the Eng∣lish challenge the Precedency, the Spaniards do the like, and in soe peremptory a manner, that without it they would dissolve the Treaty:
hereupon the English made a proposition, to let passe the question of Precedency; and to transact the businesse by wrighting, and Messen∣gers between them: Or that the Treaty might be intermitted onely for threescore dayes, not quite brooken off; but all was to no purpose; And at three monthes end, they par∣ted. The States the meane while, were so farr from regarding a Peace, that at this time, they thought upon reducing the Sea Coast of Flanders into their command and thereupon they landed an Ar∣my there, of Fourteen thousand Foote, and three thousand horse under the conduct of Maurice of Nasaw; and Fifteen hundered of the English under the command of Sir Francis Vere, and his Brother Horatio: At which true happened the famous Bataile of Newport, against the Arch-duke, wherein nine thousand of the Spaniards were slaine; and the Victory by the valour of the English, fell to the Dutch, for so forward were the English in this Battaile, that of their fif∣teen hundred, eight hundred were slaine and sore wounded, eight Captaines killed, and of the rest every man hurt. All this year, and the year past, sundry quarells and complaints arose betweene the English and the French, touching reprisalls of goods taken from each other by Pirates of either Nation: Also touching Customes and Impositions, contrary to the Treaty of Bloys, and deceit in English Clothes, to the great infamy of our Nation. In Denmarke likewise arose controversies touching Commerce, and the Fishing of the English upon the coast of Island and Norway. The Queen also either time, for the in¦crease of Navigation and Commerce, Founded the Company of East-India Merchants, allowing them large Priviledges: but whether, thi hath proved beneficiall to the Common-wealth, (there having been by this meanes such a masse of mony and great store of other commodities crried out of the Kingdom, and so many Marriners lost every year) wise men make a question. About this time also, Pope Clement the eight, perceiving the Queen to be in her declining age, sent two Breeves into England, the one to the Popish Cergy. the other to the Layity, to suffer no person whatso∣ever, to take the Kingdome upon him after the Queenes death, but one that should promise by Oath to promote with all his might, the Ro∣man Catholick Religion, how neer soever otherwise, he were allyed to the Bloud Royall of the Kings of England. This year by reason of intemporate weather, happened a great scar∣city of Corne in England, and thereby many grievous complaints was occasioned. The common people cast out reprochfull slaunders, a∣gainst the Lord Treasurer Buckhurst, as the granter of Lycences for transportation of Corne; but he appealing to the Queene, shee forth∣with defended his Innocency, and made it knowne by open Proclama∣tion, imputed the fault, upon the Broggers of Corne, and Forestal∣lers of Markets, and gave order that the slanderers should be reprehended and punished. The Earle of Essex, who had now beene Prisoner six moneths in the House of the Lord Privie Seale he then began to repent in good earnest, resolving to put away his perverse Councellors, Cylly Merick and Henry Cuffe, and then he shewed so much patience and great submission, that the Queene then sent him to his owne house, and to bee there confined, alwayes protesting that shee would doe nothing that should bee for his ruine but onely that, which should bee for his amendment. Neverthelesse, when as the common people extolled his In∣nocency, she could not, for the removall of suspition of injustice, free her self
and her counsellors, but bring him to a tryall, not in the Star-Chamber, lest the Censure should fall too heavy on him; but in the house of the Lord Privie Seal, where the cause should have a plain hearing before the Lords of the Councell, four Earls, two Barons, and four Judges of the Realm. The objections were, That contrary to his Commission, he had made the Earl of Southampton, Generall of the Horse, had drawn his Forces into Munster, neglecting the Arch-Rebell Tir-Oen, entertained a Parlee with him, against the Dignity of the Queens Majesty, and the person of a Vice-Roy, which he represented; and that the sayd Parlee was suspitious, in regard it was private. Some aggravations the Lawyers added from ab∣rupt sentences, in his Letter to the Lord Privie Seal, written two years since, as these; No storme is more fierce than the indignation of an Impotent Prince. What? Cannot Princes erre? May they not injure their Subjects, and such like. He falling upon his knee at the end of the Boord, professed he would not contest with the Queen, nor excuse the faults of his young years, ei∣ther in whole, or in part, Protesting that he alwayes meant well, howso∣ever it fell out otherwise, and that now he would bid the World farewell, withall, shedding many tears, so as the standers by wept also. Yet could he not contain himself, but began to plead excuses, till the Lord Privy Seal interrupted him, advising him to proceed as he had begun, to flie to the Queens Mercy, who would not have him questioned for disloyalty, but only for a contempt; and that he did not well to pretend obedience in words, which in deeds he had not performed. At length, in the name of the rest, he pronounceth this Sentence against him; That he should be de∣posed from the office of a Privy Councellor, suspended from the functions of the Earl Marshall, and Master of the Ordnance, and be Imprisoned du∣ring the Queens pleasure. She had given expresse charge, not to suspend him from the office of Master of the Horse (minding to take him shortly into favor) and that his Censure in no case should be Recorded. Afer this, he made shew of wonderfull humility and mortification, which so affected the Queen, that shortly she removed Barkeley his keeper, and gave him leave to go at large; only admonishing him, To make his own dis∣cretion his keeper, and not to come at the Court, or in her Presence. After this Sentence, Cuffe, who alwayes perswaded the Earle to stand stoutly in his own defence, began so plainly to tax him of cowardize and pusillanimity; that the Earl in anger, commanded his name to be put out of the Rowl of his servants, yet Merrick the Steward did it not, as being of Cuffes minde himself. Essex, being now ready to go into the Countrey, remembred himself to the Queen, by the Lord Henry Howard, in these words; That he kissed the Rod, and the Queens hands, which had nely corrected, not overthrown him; yet he should never enjoy solid comfort, till he might see those blessed eyes, which had been his load-stars, whereby he had happily steered his course, whiles he held on his way at lawfull distance; But now he resolved to eat grasse with Nebuchad-nezzar, till it please the Queen to restore his senses. She being greatly joyed with these his speeches; Would to God (sayd she) his deeds might be answerable to his words; he hath long tried my patience, I must now make tryall of his humility. And now the Earl grew so confident of thee Queens favor, That he be∣came a suitor to her for the Farme of sweet Wines; but she to try his tem∣per, and with what minde he would bear a repulse, made him Answer; That she must first know what it was worth, and not give away things hand over head; and had oftentimes in her mouth, the Aphorisme of Phisitians, That foul bodies, the more you nourish them, the more you corrupt them. And indeed, this was the right way to finde, whether the ulcer of his minde were throughly cured or no; for being not throughly cured, it would en∣dure
no touching; and no more did his, but as though every denyall of a curtesie, were an injury that required revenge; his melancholy was pre∣sently turned into choller, and now began to hearken to Cuffe again; telling him, That it was now plain, the Queen determined to make him as poore as Iob, that he should live of the basket, and gather crums under the Ta∣e. Hereupon he returned to London, Southampton is sent for out of the Low-Countries, his doors are set open for all commers, Merricke his Steward receiveth to his own table decayed souldiers, discontented and audacious persons; Sermons are made there every day by Puritan Mini∣sters, to which the Citizens flock, and all signes of popularity appeared; which matters coming to the Queens ears, Alienated her affection from him daily more and more; but especially she was exasperated, that her Person was despised by him; for (not to say the worst) he had muttered, That the Queen was now old and decrepit, and withered as well in minde as body. And now again, he runneth upon desperate counsells, for the removall of his adversaries from the Court, seeketh to scrue himself into the King of Scots favour, to whom he traduceth his adversaries, by name Raleigh, Cobham, Carew, Cecill, and the Admirall, as inclined to the Spanish Faction, and at one and the same time, seeketh to win to him both Puritans and Pa∣pists. Many were of his party, but few of his counsell; and these were the Earl of Southampton, Sir Charls Davers, Sir Ferdinando Gorge, Captain of the Garrison of Plimmouth, Sir Christopher Blunt, and some other. With these he met privately in Drury House to avoyd suspition, where he first gi∣veth them a Catalogue of the Nobility and gentry that favoured him, to the number of a hundred and twenty. Then they consult, whether it were better to set upon the Tower of London, or the Queens Pallace; this latter they resolve upon, which should be done in this manner. Blunt should keep the great Gate, with a selected number of men, and Danvers seize upon the Pre∣sence Chamber: Then Essex with his company should come from the Mues, and present himselfe before the Queen. But now suspitions arising from divers circumstances, Secretary Herbert was sent to call him before the Councell, at the Treasurers House; but he doubting the matter, excu∣seth himselfe, that he was not very well. And now the Plot of seizing upon the Court, which had been four moneths in contriving, was by this means quite dashed, for they had ready at the present, neither Souldiers, nor muition, so as some speedier course must now be thought on; at which time very opportunely cometh one to them (set on no doubt by Essex his Adver∣saries) as if he had been sent on purpose from the Citizens, to promise him their Ayd, which made Essex to applaud his own great good fortune. And now were four of the Lords, namely the Lord Keeper, the Earle of Worcester, Sir William Knolles, and the Lord Chiefe Justice of England, sent by the Queen to Essex house, who could hardly be suffered to come, in, all their Attendants were kept out, save he that carried the Seal before the Kee∣per. In the Court, they found a confused number of people, and the Earls of Essex, Rutland, and Southampton in the midst of them. The Keeper tur∣ning himselfe to Essex, telleth him, The Queen had sent him and the rest to understand the cause of this concourse, promising Justice, if any person had done them wrong. Essex with a loud voice cryeth out, They lye in waite for my life, we are met to defend our selves. The Keeper urging Essex a∣gain to unfold some part of his grievance; the unruly multitude crieth out, Away, let us be gone, they come to betray you, Kill them, cast away that Great Seal. Essex retireth into the house, the Lords follow him, he char∣geth them to make the doors fast, and turning him to the Lords, Have pa∣tience for a while (saith he) I must go into the City, to dispatch a little busi∣nesse with the Maior and Sheriffs, I will return presently.
There the Lords are kept prisoners; Essex maketh haste into the City, with a Troop of 200 men at his heels; the E. of Bedford, the L. Cromwell, and her Lords meeting him by the way, joyn themselves: coming into London, e cryeth out aloud, For the Queen, for the Queen, they lay wait for my life. The Citizens came running to gaze, but not so much as one person took Arms to take his Part. Passing along the City, he came all in a sweat to the Sheriff Smith's house, who shifteth himself forth at a back door, and goeth to the Lord Maior. By this time, certain of the Nobility entred the City with a Herald, declaring Essex and his adherents Traytors. Hereupon, hearing also that the Lord Admirall made towards him with an Army, he began to be dishearned; Gorge taketh care for himself, requesteth he might be sent to re∣lease the Counsellors, and with them to crave the Queens mercy, whiles the issue was yet doubtfull. The Earl content, that Popham only should be freed; but he refused, unlesse the Keeper also might be dismissed. Then Gorge freeth them all, and goeth along with them to the Court by water. Now when Essex thought to return, he found a Chain fastened crosse the street, at the West end of Pauls, and men in Arms on the other side: then he began to draw his sword; and having once given the word, Blunt letteth fly at them, slew one of them incontinent, himself being sorely wounded and ta∣ken. Essex himself had his Hat shot thorow; whereupon retiring, he took Boat at Queen Hythe, and went to Essex House; where finding the Counsellors all dismissed, he grew extreme angry and dismayed, and cast certain papers into the fire, saying, They should tell no tales. By and by the Admirall be∣siegeth the house, commanding them to yeeld. Southampton offereth, if the Admirall would give Hostages to secure them, they would present them∣selves to the Queen. The Admirall answereth him by Sidney, That Rebells are not to profer Conditions. Within an hour, Essex finding the case despe∣rate, resolved to rush forth; and the Lord Sands (the most aged in the com∣pany) greatly urged it, saying, It were better to die valiantly, than by the hands of a Hang-man. But Essex his minde, upon a little deliberation alter∣ing, they fell upon their knees, and deliver their weapons to the Admirall, when it was ten a clock at night. Owen Salisbury, and one or two more were slain with Musket Shot, and as many of the Besiegers. The next day, Thomas Lea, Commander of a Company of Souldiers in Ireland, who to one Crosse a Sea-Captain (that detected him) intimated, how noble an exploit it were, for six stout fellows to go to the Queen, and compell her forceably to release Es∣sex and Southampton, was presently apprehended, examined, found guilty and executed. Essex and Southampton were carryed first to Lambeth, to the Arch∣bishops house, because it was a dark night; but anon were sent to the Tower, by the Queens direction; and with them, Rutland, Sands, Cromwell, Mounteagle, Danverse, and Bromley, the rest were put in common prisons. On the nineteenth of February, Essex and Southampton were called to their Arraignment, before their Peers in Westminster-Hall, where Buckhurst Lord Treasurer, was appointed Lord High Steward of England for that time. The Peers being severally called by their names, Essex demanded, If it were not lawfull for them to except against some of the Pees, as private persons might do against the Jurors. The Judges made answer, That the credit and fidelity of the Peers of England was presumed to be such, that in Tryalls they were not bound to take an Oath, nor are they lyable to any excepti∣on. Then were they joyntly indited of High Treason; namely, That they plotted to deprive the Queen of her life and Kingdom, To surprize her in her very Palace; And that they brake forth into open Rebellion, by imprisoning the Counsellors of the Kingdom, By exciting the Londoners to Re-bellion with vaine Fictions; By assaulting the Queens loyall Subjects in the City, and by defending of Essex House against the Queens Forces. Hereunto they pleaded, Not guilty.
Essex withall averring, That they had done nothing but of necessity, and the Law of Nature. Yelverton aggravateth the specialties; and Edward Cook Atturney, argueth, That the Earl could not excuse himself from the Law of Nature, seeing Majesty is not to be affronted for private revenge. The Earl of Essex with great confidence made answer, That to his Prince and Countrey, he alwayes had and would bear a loyall affection. The Francis Bacon (one that was little expected to speak against Essex, by whom he had been raised) in defence of Cobham, Cecill, and Raleigh, aggravateth his crying out, That the Crown of England was sold to the Spaniard: wherto Essex re∣plyed, that he heard indeed, that Cecill the Secretary should say to one of the Lords of the Councell, That the Right of the Infanta of Spain to the King∣dom of England, was as good as any of the Competitors. Upon this Cecill (who stood by as an Auditor) steppeth in, and falling upon his knees, be∣seecheth the Steward that with his good leave, he might quit himself from this foul aspersion: which leave being granted him, he provoked Essex, if he durst, to name the Counsellor; but he would not: therefore (saith Cecill) It is a Faction: still Essex averreth it. Then Cecill turning himself to South∣ampton, besought him, by all manner of Obtestations, to name the man. He referreth it to the Honorable Assembly, and to Cecill himself, if in Ho∣nour and good Reason he ought to do it: they affirming, He might, South∣ampton nameth Sir William Knolles, Essex his Unkle. He being sent for, at Cecills intreaty, said, That Cecill two yeers since told him, that one Dolman, in a Book, had asserted the Right of the Infanta, and had spoken no other∣wise than so. Now after the Judges had delivered their opinion what was Law in the matters alleadge, the Earls, by the Stewards direction, were taken aside: Then the Peers rose, and went apart, and having consulted about an hour, returned to their seats, and in their order, pronounced the Earls guilty of high Treason. Then the high Steward, advising Essex to implore the Queens mercy, giveth Sentence, and that done, brake his Staff and de∣parted. The next day, Sir Robert Vernon, Sir William Constable, Sir Edmund Bayn∣ham, Littleton, Cluff, Captain Whitlock, Iohn and Christopher Wright and Orell an old Souldier, were called to their Tryall: but the Queen (informed by Sir Fulk Grevill, That most of them were drawn unwittingly into the dan∣ger) commanded that onely Littleton, Baynham, and Orell should have their Tryall, the rest to be sent back to prison. These were all condemned, but their lives spared; which favour, Raleigh (for a good sum of money recei∣ved of Baynham) procured. Essex in the mean while, requested he might speak with some of the Counsellors, to whom he reconciled himself, and to Cecill especially; and then intimated, That the Queen could not be in safety while he lived; he requesteth he might be executed privately in the Tower: He grievously in∣veigheth against some of the Conspiracy, and wished to speak with some of them, but specially with Blunt and Cuffe; whom as soon as he saw, he brake forth into these words; O Cuffe, ask pardon of God and the Queen, for thou hast chiefly provoked me to this disloyalty. Also he intimated Sir Henry Nevill, ordinary Ambassadour in France, to have been acquainted with the Conspiracy; and that other in Scotland, France, the Netherlands, and the Lord Mountjoy, Deputy of Ireland, knew of his purpose, and other in Eng∣land; who being many in number, and the Lord Mountjoy ordering the Affairs of Ireland in good fashion, the Queen wisely would take no notice of it. The five and twentieth day of February, which was to be the fatall day, there were sent to the Earl divers Ministers, to give him ghostly com∣fort. The Queen now wavering in her self, one while remembring the
cint kindenesse she had shewed him, she commanded he should not be xecued; then again, thinking of his stubbornnesse, That he would not once ask her mercy, and had said openly, That he could not live, but she must perish; countermanding her former word, she gave order that he should e executed. Then was he brought forth into the Yard, where a Scaffold was erected, and sundry of the Nobility present, amongst whom Raleigh also; but being old, It was an inhumane thing to stand by and behold the death of his ad∣versary, he withdrew himself into the Armory, and from thence beheld the Tragedy. Essex being ascended the Scaffold, uncovered his head, cast up his eyes towards Heaven and cryed God mercy for the manifold sins of his youth, but this last specially, which he said was a bloody, crying, and contagious sin; craved pardon of the Queen and her Councellors, commended his Spirit into the hands of God, and had his head taken off at the third blow, though the first bereft him both of sense and motion. The fifth of March, Sir Christopher Blunt, Sir Charles Davers, Sir Iohn Davis, Sir Gyllie Merrick, and Cuffe, were brought to their Tryall in West∣minster-Hall, before the Queens Delegates. The Heads of their Indite∣ments, were the same which were objected to Essex and Southampton. The others said little in their defence, onely Cuffe stood upon these two Answers; Whereas (saith he) I am challenged of Treason, because I was in Essex house the day of the Rebellion; by the same Argument the Lion in the Celler might be indited; all that day I lamented the Earls Fortune, and dealt with him to flie to the Queens mercy. And as for the Consultation in Drury House, it is no more to be called High Treason, than an Embryon may be accounted a perfect man. The Lawyers on the other side demon∣strated, That no necessity lay upon him to tarry in the House; and that the Consultation in Drury House was it self a Treason, though it had never broke forth into act. Merrick said onely this, The Earl of Essex raised me, and he hath overturned me. The thirteenth of March, Merrick and Cuffe are drawn to Tyburn, where Cuffe entring into a long Speech, was by the Sheriff interrupted; and then, after prayers to God, and desiring God and the Queen to pardon him, he was cast from the Ladder: a man of great Wit and Learning, but of a boysterous and turbulent disposition. In the same manner died Merrick. The fifteenth of March, Sir Charles Davers, and Sir Christopher Blunt were beheaded on the Tower-Hill; albeit Davers offered ten thousand pounds to redeem his life, though with perpetuall Imprisonment. The Earl of Southampton, and the Sheriff Smith, were kept prisoners; though Smith, after some time, was upon sureties suffered to go at large. The eighth of Iuly, Sir Henry Nevill was cited before the Lords of the Counsell, where it was laid to his Charge, That he was present at the Consultation in Drury House, yet had not revealed their sinister purpoes; and had imparted to Essex the secrets of his French Ambassage. He confessed, That at the Earls intreaty, he shewed him the Commentaries of the French proceedings, was present at one of their Consultations onely, but contemned their counsells, yet durst not be an Informer against so great Personages. Hereupon he had a grievous check given him, and was committed to prison. One Act of the By, is not here to be omitted. Essex at his Arraignment had complained, That his hand-writing was counterfeited. It happened, the Countesse of Essex being fearfull in her husbands behalf, gave a Letter which she had received from him, to the custody of one Riove, a Dutch-woman that waited on her: this Dutch-womans husband, named Daniell lighted by chance upon the Letter, and perceiving some passages in it which might bring the Earl of Essex into danger, got a cunning fellow to draw a counterfeit Copy of the said Letter; with this he cometh to the fearfull
Lady, who was newly brought to bed, threatning to give the same to her husbands adversaries; unlesse she would presently give him three thousand pounds. She to shun the danger, paid him eleven hundred and seventy pounds at the very instant; yet did he deliver her the counterfeit Copy on∣ly meaning to make use of the true one, to get another sum of the Earls adversaries. This imposture being found out, he was censured to perpetu∣all Imprisonment, condemned in three thousand pounds (two of which were to go to the Countesse) and his ears nayled to the Pillory, with this Writing over his head; A notorious Cheater. Soon after, a Parliament was assembled, wherein grievous complaints being tendred to the lower House touching Monopolies; the Queen, by way of prevention, sendeth out Proclamations, declaring the said Licenses and Patents to be voyd in part, leaving some part to the discussion of the Laws: which thing was so acceptable to the Lower House, that they presently sent 80 selected persons; together with the Speaker, to give the Queen thanks; and she on the other side, gave them thanks, for being such faithfull Moni∣tors to her, to recall her from an errour, whereinto through ignorance, not wilfulnesse, she was fallen. In Ireland, the Deputy, at the entry of the Spring, draweth his Forces together and driveth Tir-Oen from where he had fortified himself; Carew, President of Munster, taketh the titular Earl lurking in a Cave, and receiveth intelligence, That the Spaniards, invited by Tir Oen, had a purpose to land in Munster, yet could not perswade the Deputy they had any designe for Ire∣land; but in the midst of September, certain news was brought, The Spa∣niards were in sight, who wanting winde to carry their Fleet to Cork, put in to Kinsale, the three and twentieth of September, and land their Souldiers without resistance. Richard Percy, having but few Souldiers to defend the Town, is commanded to come away, and leave Kinsale to the Spaniards, in∣to which they enter with Ensignes displayed, and by the Magistrates and Inhabitants, were bidden welcome. D'Aquila, who commanded the Spaniards, publisheth a Declaration, wherein he sheweth, That Queen Elizabeth was deposed from her King∣dom by sentence of the Pope, her subjects absolved from their Allegi∣ance; And that the Spaniards were now come to deliver Ireland from the Jaws of the devill. Tir Oen joyneth his Forces with them, so as they were now six thousand Foot, and five hundred Horse, and promised themselves assured Victory, the English being not neer so many. The four and twen∣tieth of December, a Battell is joyned; where, after a long Fight, the Victo∣ry inclined to the English. Tir Oen, O donell, and the rest, cast away their Weapons, and save themselves by flight. Alphonso O Campo, chief Leader of the Spaniards, together with three other Captains, was taken prisoner, and six Ensigne-bearers, twelve hundred were slain, nine Colours taken, whereof four belonged to the Spaniards: of the English not many were slain, but a great number wounded. After six dayes, D'Aquila sendeth Letters to the Deputy by a Drummer, requesting that some person of account might be sent to him, with whom to confer; Sir William Godolphine is sent, to whom he complained of cow∣ardise, and (he feared) treachery of the Irish; and therefore, although he wanted nothing to hold out the Siege, and did daily expect great Forces from Spain, yet was willing to make a Composition: whereupon, at last it was agreed, The Spaniards should yeeld up Kinsale to the Deputy, as al∣so the Castles and Forts at Baltimore, Bere-Haven, and Castle-haven, and should depart with life and goods, and Colours displayed. The English, at a reasonable price, should furnish them with Ships and provision into Spain; and that they should not carry Arms against the Queen of England, till they were arrived in Spain, &c.
And now the Spaniards being driven out of Ireland, the Queen, to pre∣vent their coming again, sendeth out Sir Richard Levison, and Sir William Mson, with eight Ships of her own, and some smaller Ships of War, to attempt something upon the Coast of Spain. On the nineteenth of March, Levisn hoyseth Sayl, and Monson afterward, having in vain tarryed behinde, for some Dutch Ships to joyn with them. Levison in the mean time light∣ed upon the Spanish Navy of eight and thirty Ships, which brought the Treasure from America, and set upon them, but to no purpose. When Monson was come with the rest of the Fleet, they had certain notice, That a mighty Indian Caraque of sixteen hundred Tun, and richly laden, was upon the Coast of Portugall. There indeed they found it, but it lay close under a Fort, attended with eleven Gallies; and the Caraque it self appear∣ed as big as a Castle; yet they resolved to fire it, if they could not take it. The next day, they thundered so violently against the Gallies, that within seven hours the Marquesse of St. Crosse, together with Portugall Gallies which he commanded, withdrew themselves; two of them were taken and fired; and in them was great store of Powder, which was going for the Low-Countries. And now Levison signified to the Captain of the Caraque, That the Gallies which they trusted to, were driven away, and therefore, if they now refused mercy, they must expect none hereafter. After much speech to and fro, it was at last agreed, That the Caraque, with the Ord∣nance and Merchandise, should be yeelded up. Thus the English, having a fair winde, returned homeward with a Booty, to the value of a Million of Duckets, by the Portugall account, and not past five of their men lost in the Voyage. At this time there arose a Contestation amongst the Popish Clergy here in England; for the Jesuites and the Secular Priests, made bitter Invectives in their writings, one against the other. The originall of the Priests quar∣rell was, That Blackwell, one wholly at the beck of the Jusuites, was set over them as Arch-Presbyter, who first of all despoiled them of their Fa∣culties; and when they appealed to the Pope, caused them to be declared Schismaticks and Hereticks. They in sundry Books extolled the Queen very highly, as one that dealt mildly alwayes with the Catholikes, till such time as they set all in a combustion in England; and by their Treasons, cau∣sed most severe Laws to be enacted against the Catholikes. Parsons they traduced, as a Bastard, an Equivocator, and a Traytor. Whether they contended thus in good earnest, or in jest only, is hard to say; but the Bishop of London politickly nourished the contention; and all he gained, was this, That the Queen and her Councell, finding them dangerous to the Com∣mon-wealth, both the one and the other, upon Penalty of the Laws, were by Proclamation commanded to depart out of the Kingdom pre∣sently. In France, the Marshall Biron, for entring into dangerous attempts against the publike Peace, was arraigned, and lost his head. His confession brought some other into danger; and amongst them, the Duke of Bulloign, of the Protestant Religion, that when he was cited, he durst not appear, but fled in∣to Germany. Hereupon the King of France sendeth to Queen Elizabeth, complaining that the Duke held his Marriage unlawfull, and the Popes Dis∣pensation nothing worth, pronouncing his son Illegitimate; had destined the Prince of Conde to the Succession of the Crown, and conspired the de∣struction of the prime of the Nobility. The Queen, by her Legier Ambas∣sadour, adviseth the King not too credulously to entertain those reports, as doubting these suggestions might proceed from some of the Spanish Facti∣on. Hereupon the King grew very angry, saying, The Queen held a better opinion of the Duke then he deserved, and that he was one of the chief Architects of Essex his Treason; and being questioned by the King about it,
was not able to deny it. About this time also, the Duke of Savoy, by cun∣ning slights, and open force, practised against the State of Geneva; and the Queen relieved them with a great sum of money, gathered amongst the Clergy and Laity all over England. And now the Earl of Tyrone, perceiving himself in a desperate estate, re∣solved to sue for mercy, and promised at last to submit his life and For∣tunes to the Queens pleasure, absolutely without condition. Hereupon, being admitted to the presence of the Deputy, at the very entry of the room, he fell on his knees; and then passing on a few steps, prostrated him∣self again, saying, I confesse and crave pardon for my great fault, against God, and a most bountifull Prince, my dread Soveraign: I fly to the Queens mercy, as a sacred Anchor, permitting her to dispose of my life and Fortunes at her pleasure. Upon this his submission, the Deputy com∣manded him to go aside, and the next day took him along to Dublin with him, meaning to bring him into England, that the Queen might deal with him according to her Royall pleasure: But before he could come into Eng∣land, the Queen died. Her TAXATIONS. IN a Parliament holden the first yeer of her Raign, a Subsidy was granted, of two Shillings eight pence the pound of Goods, and four Shillings of Lands, to be paid at two severall Payments, of every person Spirituall and Temporall. In her sixth yeer, in a Parliament holden at Westminster, one Subsidy was granted by the Clergy, and another by the Laity, together with two Fifteenths and Tenths. In her eighth yeer, in a Parliament then holden, there were offered to her four Subsidies, upon condition she would declare a Successor; but she refused their offer, and directly remit∣ted the fourth Subsidy, which they had granted, saying, It was all one, whether the money were in her Subjects Coffers, or in her own. In her thirteenth yeer, in a Parliament then holden, towards her charges of re∣pressing the Northern Rebellion, there was granted her by the Clergy, a Subsidy of six Shillings in the pound: and by the Temporalty, two fif∣teens, with a Subsidy of two shillings and eight pence in the pound. In her six and thirtieth yeer, a Parliament was holden, wherein was granted by the Clergy, two whole Subsidies, and by the Laity, three, besides six Fifteens and Tenths; but it was put into the Act, That this great Contribu∣tion, the like whereof had not been known in former Ages, should not be drawn into Example. In her fortieth yeer, in a Parliament at Westminster, were granted her by the Clergy, three entire Subsidies; and by the Laity, as many, with six fifteenths and Tenths. In her two and fortieth yeer, to furnish her self with money towards the Irish War, she delegated certain Commissioners, to confirm the Crown Lands to the possessors, that held any of controverted Titles, and to take money for the Confirmation, there∣by to take away the troubles by concealers, who at this time were very busie. Of her LAVVS and ORDINANCES. IN a Parliament holden in her first yeer, an Act was made, That every person should go to Divine Service upon Sundayes and Holy-dayes, or else pay twelve pence to the poor. Also it was enacted, That Bishops should not let the Lands of the Church, longer then for one and twenty yeers, or three Lives, except to the Queen or her Successors. In her third yeer, Proclamation was made, That the Teston, coyned for twelve pence, and in the Raign of King Edward embased to six pence, should not be currant but for four pence; the Groat, but for two pence; and the piece of two pence, but for a penny: And not long after, all the said base Moneyes were called in, and fine Sterling money was allowed for them, after the Rate.
For Ireland also, she coyned Sterling money; where nine pence in England, went for twelve pence there. The Queen was the first that brought cer∣tain Counties to deliver Provision at a certain rate, that so they might be freed from the Purveyors: Also the first that granted allowance to Judges for their Circuit. In her sixth yeer, in a Parliament then holden, it was made Treason to refuse taking the Oath of Supremacy; yet with this li∣mitation, That by it the blood should not be dishonoured, nor goods con∣fiscate; nor the Oath to be required of any Baron of the Kingdom. Also this yeer, by a Common Councell in London, It was enacted, That all such Citizens as from thenceforth should be constrained to sell their hous∣hold-stuff, Leases of houses, or such like, should first cause the same to be cried thorow the City, by a man with a Bell, and then to be sold by the common Outcryer appointed for that purpose, and he to receive one far∣thing upon the shilling for his pains. In her three and twentieth yeer, she represseth by Proclamation excesse in apparell, Gold Chayns, and Clokes which men wore down to their heels. The length of Swords was limit∣ted to three Foot, and Daggers to twelve Inches, besides the Hilts. Buildings likewise in the Suburbs were restrained, In-mates forbidden, and expresse charge set forth, That no dwelling house should be new built within three miles of any of the City Gates, under pain of imprisonment, and losse of the materialls. In her time was set on foot by Sir Thomas Smith, the Law made for the serving of Colledges with provision, to the great benefit of those Scholasticall Societies. In her two and fortieth yeer, she setteth forth Proclamations against the Transportation of Gold or Sil∣ver, wrought or unwrought, according to the former Acts of Parliament in that case provided. This yeer also she founded the Company of the East India Merchants, and allowed them ample Priviledges. In her three and fourtieth yeer, all Monopolies are called in by Proclamation. In her four and twentieth yeer, severe Laws are made against Papists, some inflict∣ing death, some fine and imprisonment. In her eight and twentieth yeer, a Proclamation was set forth, prohibiting to sow Wod within eight miles of any of the Queens Houses, and four miles off any Cities or Towns Corporate. AFFAIRS of the CHURCH in her time. ON Sunday the first of Ianuary, next after the Queens coming to the Crown, by vertue of her Proclamation, the English Letany was read accordingly as was used in her Graces Chappell, in all Churches thorow the City of London, and likewise the Epistle and Gospel of the day, begun to be read at Masse-time in the English Togue. Also in a Parliament holden in her first yeer, the first Fruits and Tenths were restored to the Crown, and the Supreme Government over the State Ecclesiasticall, and the book of Common-Prayer, and Administration of the Sacraments in the English Tongue was restored, and by degrees the Protestant Religion was esta∣blished. The Bishops that refused the Oath of Supremacy, were all remo∣ved, and Protestant Bishops placed in their room. It was enacted also, That all persons should go to Divine Service upon Sundayes and Holy-dayes, and a Fine of twelve pence imposed upon every one that should be absent, and the same to be given to the poor. In her fourth yeer, the Queen was solicited by Pope Pius, to send her Orators to the Councell of Trent, which she refused, as not acknowledging it a lawfull Councell. In a Parlia∣ment holden in her eighth yeer, it was enacted, and by a generall consent declared, That the Election of the Arch-bishops and Bishops in England, together with their Consecration, Confirmation, and Investiture (which some persons slanderously called in question) was lawfull and Canonicall, and that they were rightly, and according to the Acts and Statutes of the
Kingdom, chosen and consecrated. In her eleventh yeer, there arose in England two contrary factions in Religion: on the one side, Thomas Har∣ding, Nicholas Sanders, and other Divines that had fled out of England, began to exercise the Episcopall Jurisdiction upon the Queens Subjects, which they had derived from the Sea of Rome: On the other side, Col∣man, Burton, Hallingham, Benson, and other, making profession of the pure Religion, would allow of nothing but what was directly taken out of the Scriptures, openly condemning the received Discipline of the Church of England, together with the Church Liturgy, and the very Calling of Bishops, as savourig too much of the Romish Religion, protesting in the Pulpis, That it was an impious thing to hold any thing common with the Church of Rome; and used all diligence to have the Church of England reformed in every point, according to the Rule of the Church of Geneva. These, although the Queen com∣manded to be committed to prison, yet it is incredible how upon a sudden their followers encreased, known by the envious name of Pu∣ritans. This sect so mightily encreased, that in her sixteenth yeer, the Queen and Kingdom was extremely troubled with some of the Clergy, who breathing out nothing but Evangelicall parity, cryed down the Ecclesiasticall Form of Government (as a thing polluted with Romane drggs) and setting forth Books likewise, Intituled, The Admonition to the Parliament, and the Defence of the Admonition: they refused to resort to the Divine Service publikely in use, and framed to themselves other Rites. Whereupon, the Queen, to suppresse them, whom by no means she liked, commanded every where the severity of the Law touching the Uniformity of Common-Prayer, to be put in execution, and those books, upon pain of Imprisonment, to be delivered into the hands of the Bishops, or some of the Queens Councell. And this yeer were taken at Masse in their severall houses, the Lord Mor∣ley's Lady and her children, the Lady Guildford, and the Lady Browne, who being thereof indited and convicted, suffered the penalty of the Law in that case provided. Untill the twentieth yeer of Queen Eliza∣beths Raign, the Papists in England were mercifully connived at, while they solemnized their own Rites within their private houses (though that also were against the Laws) but when as that Thunder-bolt of excommunicating the Queen came abroad, then was the Law enacted against those who brought into the Kindome any Agns Dei, or hal∣lowed Beads, or reconciled any of the Queens subjects to the See of Rome; yet for six whole yeers together after this Law was made, it was not executed upon any Papist, till Cuthbert Mayne, a Priest, and an obstinate maintainer of the Popes Authority against the Queen, was ex∣ecuted at Launston in Cornwall, and the Gentlemans goods that harboured him confiscate, and himself adjudged to perpetuall Imprisonment. In her three and twentieth yeer, divers Priests and Jesuites came into England; amongst whom, Robert Psons, and Edmund Campian, English-men and Jesu∣ites, being now bound for England, to promote the Catholike Cause; at which time a Proclamation was set forth, That whosoever had any children beyond the Sea, should by a certain day call them home; and that no per∣son should receive or harbour any Seminary Priest or Jesuite. At this time also, there arose up in Holland a certain Sect, naming themselves, The Family of Lve, who perswaded their followers, That those only who were adopted into that Family, were elected, and no other could be saved, but were all re∣probates, and damned, and that it was lawfull for them to deny upon oath whatsoever they pleased, before any Magistrate or whomsoever, that were not of their Family. Many of their books were printed, under these titles, The Gospel of the Kingdom, The Lords Sentences, The Prophesie of the spirit of love,
The publication of Peace upon earth, by the Author H. N. but who this Au∣thor was, they would by no means reveal: at last) he was found to be Hen∣ry Nicholls of Leyden, who blasphemously preached, That he was partaker of the Divinity of God, and God of his humane Nature: all which books were by Proclamation commanded to be burnt. In a Parliament holden the eight and twentieth yeer of her Raign, some, out of a desire of a Re∣formation, began to pick quarrells at the Clergy, desiring to passe Laws for the restraint of Bishops in their granting of Faculties, conferring of holy Orders, Ecclesasticall Censure, and the Oath Ex officio. They com∣playned likewise of the non-residency of Ministers, and the like. But the Queen; who alwayes hated Innovation (which for the most part changeth for the worse) would give no ear unto them; conceiving besides, That these proceedings in Pariament in Ecclesiasticall Affairs, derogated from her Prerogative. In her six and twentieth yeer, the Queen gave a speciall charge to Whitgift Arch-bishop of Canterbury, to settle an Uniformity in the Ecclesiasticall Discipline, according to the Laws, which through the connivence of Bishops, and perversenesse of the Puritans, lay now almost gasping, Whreupon, he provided three Articles, to which every Minister should subscribe: The first, That the Queen had Supreme Authority over all persons born within her Dominions, of what condition soever they were; and that no other Prince, or Prelate, or Potentate, hath, or ought to have any Iurisdiction, Civill or Ecclesiasticall, within her Realms and Dominions. The second, That the Book of Common-Prayer, and of the Ordination of Bishops, Priests and Deacons, containeth nothing contrary to the Word of God, but may lawfully be used; and that they will use that, and none other. The third, That the Articles agreed on in the Synod holden at London, in the yeer 1562, and published by the Queens Authority, they did allow of, and believe them to be consonant to the Word of God. It is incredible, what reproaches the Arch-bishop incurred by setting forth these Articles, both from factious Ministers, and from some also of the Nobility; yet by his patience and constancy, he brought at last Peace to the Church, making this his Motto, Vincit qui patitur. Neither did these at home onely disturb the Peace of the Church, but others also from abroad, as Robert Brown, a young Student of Divinity in Cambridge; from whom came the Sectaries called Brownists; and Richard Harrison, a petty School-Master. These presuming to judge matters of Religion by their own pri∣vate spirit, by books set forth in Zealand, and dispersed at this time over England, condemned the Church of England for no Church, and ensnared many in the nets of their new Schism. Neither could they be restrayned, though their books were prohibited by the Queens Authority, and sound∣ly confuted by sundry learned men; and one or two of the Ring-leaders executed at S. Edmunds Berry. In her one and thirtieth yeer, these Puri∣tans flames brake forth again, Books are written by the names of Martin Mar-Prelate, and A Demonstration of the Discipline, by Penry ad dall, against the Government of Bishops; and nothing would please them, but the Di∣scipline of Geneva: Many Abettors they had, Knightly and Wigstone, Knights, besides Cartwright (the father of them) Snape, King, Pradlow, Payn, and others; who though called in question, fined and imprisoned, could ne∣ver be reclaimed. In her six and thirtieth yeer, the Queen caused the seve∣rity of the Laws to be executed upon Henry Barrow and his Sectaries, for di∣sturbing the Church, and the publike Peace, by scattering of their monstrous Opinions, condemning the Church of England as no Christian Church, and derogating from th Queens Authority in Causes Ecclesiasticall.
WORKS of Piety in her time. THis Queen converted Westminster Abbey into a Collegiate Church, and there ordained a Dean, twelve Prebendaries, a Master, Usher, and forty Schollars, Vicars, Singing-men, and twelve Alms-men. In her third yeer, the Merchant-Taylors, founded a notable Grammar-School, in the Parish of S. Lawrence Pountney in London. Also this yeer, William Harper, Maior of of London, founded a Free-School in the Town of Bedford, where he was born. In her seventh yeer, on the seventh of Iune, Sir Thomas Gresham laid the first stone of the Royall Exchange in Cornhill, which in November the yeer after, at his own charges was finished, being the yeer 1567. In her tenth yeer, the Citizens of London builded a new Conduit at Walbrook cor∣ner, neer to Dowgate, the water whereof is conveyed out of the Thames. Also this yeer, Sir Thomas Roe Maior of London, caused to be enclosed with∣in a wall of Brick, one Acre of ground, neer unto Bdlam, without Bishops-Gat, to be a place of Buryall for the dead of such Parishes in London as lacked convenient ground within their Parishes: He also builded a conveni∣ent room in Pauls Church-Yard, on the South side of the Crosse, to receive a certain number of Hearers at the Sermon time. Sir William Peter, having himself been born at Exceter in Devon-Shire, he gave to Exceter Colledge in Oxford, a hundred pounds Lands a yeer: He also builded at Ingerstone in Essex, Alms-houses for twenty poor people, and giving them some com∣petent maintenance. Sir Thomas Gresham had his dwelling house in Bread-stret London, which he dedicated to the profession of the Liberall Sciences, erecting there Lectures of Divinity, Civill Law, Physick, Geomitry, Astro∣nomy, Musick, and Rhetorick, alotting to the Professors very competent allowance. In her seventeenth yeer, died Matthew Parkr, Arch-bishop of Canterbury, who founded a Grammar School in Rochdale in the County of Lancaster: He also procured to Corpus Christi Colledge in Cambridge, thir∣teen Schollarships, and built two Chambers for Schollars, and the inward Library of the same Colledge, and procured to it the Patronage of S. Mary Abchurch in London, with many other works of like kinde. Sir Nicholas Bacon, Lord Keeper gave for six Schollars to be found in Bent Colledge in Cambridge, three pounds, six shillings and eight pence a piece for ever. Edmund Grindall Arch-bishop of Canterbury, founded a Free-School in Cum∣berland, where he was born, and gave many Pensions to both Universities. Frances, Countesse of Sussex, sister to Sir Henry Sidney, founded Sussex-Sidney Colledge in Cambridge: As likewise Sir Walter Mildmay, Chancellor of the Exchequer, founded Emmanuell Colledge in the same University. Sir Tho∣mas Bodley erected and furnished the famous publike Library at Oxford. Alexander Nowell Dean of Pauls, endowed Brasen nose Colledge in Oxford, where he was brought up, with two hundred pound per annum, and died in the yeer 1602. Sir Roger Manhood, chief Baron of the Exchequer, built seven Alms-houses in Canterbury, giving to every Alms-man four pounds yeerly: and our worthy Countrey-man William Lambard built an Alms-house at Grenwich, which he called, The Colledge for the poor of Queen Elizabeth. CASUALTIES in her time. IN the first yeer of her Raign, died Sir Thomas Cheyney, Lord Warden of the Cinque-Ports, of whom it is reported for certain, That his Pulse did beat more then three quarters of an hour after he was dead, as strongly as if he had been still alive. In her third yeer, there was found neer Keswrick in Cumberland, a most rich Veyn of pure and native Brasse, which had lain neglected a long time: Also the Stone called Lapis Calaminaris, which is of great use in Brasse Works, was first brought into England at this time, and that in most plentifull manner. Likewise this Queen was the first that caused Gun-Powder to be made in England, which before was had from forraign parts, and at dear rates. In her third yeer, the Spie of the Cathedrall
Church of Pauls, being five hundred and twenty foot from the ground, and two hundred and sixty from the square Steeple where it was placed, and was made of wooden materialls, but covered with Lead, was with light∣ning burnt down, together with the Roofs of that large Church, and that within the space of five hours; the Roofs were after re-edified, but the Spire is yet wanting. The Queen gave towards it a thousand Marks in money, and a thousand load of Timber; and the City granted a Benevo∣ce, and three Fifteens; and the Clergy also contributed towards it. Al∣so this yeer there were many monstrous Births: A Mare brought forth a Foal with two heads, and a long tayl growing out between the two Heads. A Sow farrowed a Pig with two Bodies, eight Feet, and but one Head. A man-childe was born at Chichester in Sussex, having arms and legs like to an Anatomy, the Brest and Belly monstrous big, about the neck a great coller of flesh and skin, growing like the ruff of a Shir. In her sixth yeer upon the returning of the Army from Newhaven, the Pestience war brought into England, but especially into London; where in oe yeer there died one and twenty thousand and five hundred. This yeer also, in the Month of December, was driven on the shore at Grimseby in Lincoln-shire a monstrous Fish, in length nineteen yards, his tayl fifteen foot broad, and six yards be∣tween the eyes. Twelve men stood upright in his mouth to get the Oyl. In her seventh yeer; on the one and twentieth of Deember began a Frost, so extreme, that on New-yeers Even people passed over the Thames on foot; some played at Foot-ball, some shot at pricks, as if it had been firm ground. Yet this great Frost, the third of Ianuary at night began to thaw, and by the fifth day, there was no Ice at all to be seen; which sudden thaw caused great Inundations. In her eighth yeer, within the space of ten Months, there died in London seven Aldermen, namely, Edward Banks, Richard Cham∣berlain, Sir Martin Bowes, Sir Richard Mallory, Sir William Hwet, Sir Tho∣mas White, and Richard Lambert, one of the Sheriffs for that yeer. The same yeer also, in the Town of Ossestry in Wales, two hundred houses, in the space of two hours, were consumed with fire. In her tenth yeer, were ta∣ken in Suffolk, at Downham Bridge neer to Ipswich, seventeen monstrous Fishes; some of them being seven and twenty foot in length: And in the same yeer, many Dutch flying into England, to avoid the persecution of the Duke D'Alva, were the first that brought into England the Art of making Bayes, Sayes, Serges, and such woven stuffs, both Woollen and Linnen. In her time a rich Veyn of Copper was found in the Earl of Norhumberlands Grounds, which she by her Prerogative seized upon. In her thirteenth yeer, a prodigious Earthquake happened in the East parts of Hereford-shire, at a little Town called Kinnaston. On the seventeenth of February, at six of the clock in the evening, the earth began to open, and a hill with a Rock under it (making at first a great bellowing noyse, which was heard a great way off) lifted it self up a great heighth, and began to travell, bearing along with it the Trees that grew upon it, the Sheep-folds, and Flocks of Sheep abiding there at the same time. In the place from whence it was first mo∣ved, it left a gaping distance forty foot broad, and fourscore Ells long; the whole Field was about twenty Acres. Passing along, it overthrew a Chap∣pell standing in the way, removed an Ewe-Tree planted in the Church-yard, from the West into the East: with the like force it thrust before it High∣wayes, Sheep-folds, Hedges and Trees, made tilled ground Pasture, and again turned Pasture into Tillage. Having walked in this sort from Saturday in the evening, till Munday noon, it then stood still. In her fifteenth yeer, in the Month of November, a new Star, or rather a Meteor (but that it was found to be above the Moon) was seen in Cathedra Cassiopeae, exceeding Iu∣piter in brightnesse, and in that place was carryed with the Diurnall motion of the Heavens sixteen Months together, though after eight Months it was
perceived to grow lesse and lesse. In her sixteenth yeer, was a great Dearth, so as Wheat was sold at five and six shillings the Bushell, and other things in proportion. In her seventeenth yeer, a vast mighty Whale was cast up∣on the Isle of Thanet in Kent, twenty Ells long, and thirteen foot broad from the belly to the back bone, and eleven oot between the eyes. One of his eyes being taken out of his head, was more then a Cart with ix horses could draw; the Oyl being boyled out of the head, was Parmasittee. This yeer also, the River Thames ebbed and flowed twice within an hour: and in the Month of November, the Heaven seemed to be all on fire. Also on the four and twentieth of February, being a great Frost, after a Flood which was not great, there came down the River of Severn such a swarm of Flyes and Beetles, that they were judged to be above a hundred Quarters; the Mills thereabout were dammed up with them for the space of four dayes, and then were cleansed by digging them out with Shovells. In her thre and twentieth yeer, in the beginning of April, about six a clock after noon, happened an Earthquake not far from York, which in some places, strook the very stones out of Buildings, and made the Bells in Churches to jangle. The night following, the earth trembled once or twice in Knt, and again the first day of May. In her six and twentieth yeer, being the yeer 1583, the like Prodigie happened in Dorset-shire, as in the yeer 1571 had happened in Hereford-shire; A field of three Acrees in Blackmore, with the Trees and Fences, moved from its place, and passed over anoher Field, travelling in the High-way that goeth to Herne, and there stayed. In her eight and twentieth yeer, Tobacco was first brought out of the West Indies into England, by Ralph Lane. In her five and thirtieth yeer, there was so great a Drouth, that not onely the Fields, but the Springs themselves were dried up, and many Cattell every where died for want of water. The River of Thames likewise did so fail, that a horse-man might ride over at London Bridge. In her six and thirtieth yeer, was a great Plague in London, so as there died this yeer, in London and the Suburbs, seventeen thousand eight hundred and ninety, besides the Lord Maior, and three Aldermen; and Michaelmas Term was holden at S. Albons. Of her PERSONAE and CONDITONS. SHe was of stature indifferent tall, slender and straight, fair of Comple∣xion, her hair inclining to pale yellow, her fore-head large and fair, her eyes lively and sweet, but short sighted; her nose somewhat rising in the midst; the whole compasse of her countenance somewhat long, yet of ad∣mirable beauty, but the beauty of her minde was far more admirable: She had been a subject, which taught her to rule; she had been in misery, which taught her to be mercifull; and indeed, never Prince ruled with more Ju∣stice, and with her Justice mingled more mercy. She had more Valour in her then was fit for a woman, but that she was a Ruler over men; and more Humility in her then was fit for a Prince, but that she meant to be a Presi∣dent to women. She delighted in nothing so much, as in the love of her Peopl, which she procured by ordaining good Magistrates, and forbearing Impositions. Her way not to need them, was frugality; and her way to have them when she needed them, was liberality. She made Honour in her time the more honourable, by not making it common; and indeed, know∣ing it to be an influence from her self, she kept it, as her self, a Virgin, and would not prostitute it to unworthy persons. She declined being a mother of children, to the end she might be a mother of her Countrey; and indeed, no mother ever loved her children more, then she did her people; and therefore never children loved a mother more, then her people did her. She coveed not so much to be an owner of riches, as of rich Subjects; for she thought money did as well in their Coffers, as in her own: and indeed,
he never wanted it, when they had it; and they alwayes had it, when she eded it. Never Prince had a wiser Counell then she, yet never Prince eeded it lesse; for she was her self a Counsellor to her Counsell. In sum, whatsoever may in flattery be said of a wise, just, mercifull, religious, and learned Prince, may truely be said of her; in all which, if ever she had an uall, yet she never certainly had a superiour. In playing her game of ortune, she loved not an after-game; for she liked Preventions, better then Remedies. She was admirable in expressing her minde, both by speech and writing: and if collection could be made of her Apophthegms, and extemporall Orations, it would certainly excell any thing extant in that kinde: And for her writing, Sir Henry Savile affirms, That he had seen some Translations of hers, which far exceeded the Originalls. Never Prince kept greater State with lesse statelinesse: Her Pensioners and Guard were alwayes the tallest and goodliest Gentlemen and Yeomen of the Kingdom: her maids of Honour, and other women about her, the fairest and most beautifull Ladies of the Realm; and yet her self a Diana amongst her Nymphes; insomuch that a great Lord of France being entertained at Court, and the Queen asking him how he liked her Ladies, made answer, It was hard to judge of Stars, in presence of the Sun. Of her DEATH and BURYALL. IT was now the yeer 1602, when she feeling some Infirmities of Old-age and Sicknesse, retired her self at the end of Ianuary, to Rihmond; at which time, in a sad Omen, she commanded the Ring to be filed off her fin∣ger, wherewith she was solemnly at the first inaugurated into the Kingdom, and since that time had never taken it off, it being grown into the flesh in such manner, that it could not be drawn off without filing. At the be∣ginning of her sicknesse, the Almonds of her Jaws began to swell, and her appetite by little and little failed her; withall she gave her self wholly to sadnesse and heavinesse, which some imputed to her care for the losse of the Earl of Essex; others, because she heard, That divers of the Nobility sought the favour of the King of Scots, adoring him as the Sun rising, and neglecting her: but howsoever, in March a kinde of benummednesse seized upon her, with a deep melancholly, so as she would sit silently, refrain her meat, and not admit of any conference, but with the Archbishop of Canter∣bury, with whom she prayed ervently, till such time as her speech failed her, which failed her a day before she died. She being in this case, it was thought fit the Admirall and Secretary should go to her, to know her minde concerning a Successor; to whom she gave this answer; My Throne hath been the Throne of Kings, I would not a mean person should succeed me. The Secretary requesting her to speak more plainly, I will (said she) have a King succeed me; and what King, but the King of Scots, my neerest Kins∣man? After this, the Arch-bishop exhorting her to think of God, That do I (said she) nor do my thoughts ever wander from him. And when her tongue no longer served her, it was evident by the lifting up of her hands and eyes, that her thoughts were fixed upon him. And so on the four and twentieth day of March, being the last day of the yeer 160, she yeelded up her soul to God, when she had lived threescore and nine yeers, six months, and se∣venteen dayes; Raigned four and forty yeers, four months, and seven dayes. Her Body was embalmed, wrapped in Lead, and brought to White-hall, from whence on the eight and twentieth of April following, in great solemnity, it was carried into the Collegiate Church of S. Peters at Westminster, and there interred in the Vault of her Grand-father, K. Henry the seventh, in his mag∣nificent Chappell, where our renowned Soveraign K. Iames hath built her a Princely Monument, inscribed with Epitaphs to her eternall glory. At her Funerall were said to be Mourners in black, to the number of on thousand and six hundred persons.
MEN of NOTE in her time. THe Ocean is not more boundlesse, then the number of men of note in her time; but though all of them cannot be reckoned, yet some of them must not be omitted. And to begin with Sates-men: An exquisite States-man for his own ends, was Robert Earl of Lèicester; and for his Coun∣tries good, Sir William Cecill, Lord Brleigh; as also Sir Francis Walsingham, that great underminer of Conspirators. Famous Sea-men, were the Earl of Cumberland, the Lord Thomas Howard, afterward Earl of Suffolk: and of meaner Rank, Sir Iohn Hawkins, Sir Martin Forbyser, Sir Walter Raleigh, Cavendish, Preston, Ryman; and, to name the worthiest last, Sir Francis Drake, who though he were but a short square bodied man, yet his great Acts have made the Spaniards believe that he was some goodly Personage. Great Commanders by Land, were Robert Earl of Essex, the Lord Willoughby, the Lord Grey of Wilton, Sir Francis Vere, Sir Roger Williams, Baskervile, Savage; and the Honour of his Family, and our English Nation, Sir Iohn Norris. Learned Gentlemen and Writers, were Sir Thomas Chaloner, employed by Queen Elizabeth as her Ligier in Spain, who wrote five books of the resto∣ring of the English Common-wealth, in elegant Verses, while (as he said) he lived in a Stove in Winter, and in a Barn in Summer: Roger Askam, born in York-shire, notably skilfull in the Greek and Latin Tongues, who had sometime been School-master to Queen Elizabeth, and her Secretary for the Latin Tongue; but taking too great delight in Gaming and Cock-fighting, he both lived and died in mean estate, yet left behinde him sundry Monuments of Wit and Industry. Sir Thomas Smith, born at Saffron Walden in Essex, sometime Secretary to K. Edward the 6, who wrote an imperfect Work of the English Common-wealth, a singular Book of the Orthography of the English Tongue, and another of the Pronunciation of the Greek; the first man that set on foot the Law for serving the Colledges with Provisi∣on. Sir Henry Savill, Provost of Eaton, and Reader to Queen Elizabeth, who set forth all S. Chrysostomes works in Greek, and by translating of Cornelius Tacitus,, deserved as much of the English Tongue, as he of the Latin: But above all, the admirable sir Philip Sidney, who by writing in a light Argu∣ment, shewed how excellently, and beyond all comparison he could have done in a grave. Learned Divines were Iohn Iewell, born in Devon-shire, a Student in Corpus Christi Colledge in Oxford, in Queen Maries time an Exile, by Queen Elizabeth made Bishop of Salisbury, who wrote an Apolo∣gie for the Protestant Doctrine, and died at scarce fifty yeers of age, in the fourteenth yeer of Queen Elizabeth. Iohn Whitaker, Master of S. Iohns Colledge in Cambridge, who learnedly answered all the books of Bellarmine. Bilson, Bishop of Winchester, sometimes Fellow of New Colledge in Ox∣ford, who, amongst his other learned Works, hath written notably of Christs descent into hell. Richard Hooker, Preacher at the Temple, who with too much meeknesse smoothered his great Learning, yet hath something disco∣vered it in his five Books of Ecclesiasticall Discipline, and died in the yeer 1599. Alexander Nowel, Dean of Pauls, who forbearing deeper Works, set forth a Catechism, according to the Doctrine of the English Church, and died in the yeer 1602. After such men, it might be thought ridiculous to speak so Stage Players; but seeing excellency in the meanest things deserves remembring, and Boscius the Comedian is recorded in History with such commendation, it may be allowed us to do the like with some of our Nation. Richard Bourbidge, and Edward Allen, two such Actors, as no age must ever look to see the like: and, to make their Comedies compleat, Richard Tarle∣ton, who for the Part called the Clowns Part, never had his match, never will have. For Writers of Playes, and such as had been Players them∣selves, William Shakespeare, and Benjamin Iohnson, have specially left their Names recommended to posterity.
THE RAIGNE OF King Iames. IAMES the fourth King of Scotland, marryed Margaret eldest daughter of Henry the 7 K. of England, by whom he had Iames the 5, who had one only child Mary Q. of Scots, who had one only son Iames the 6, who from Iames the fourth had undoubted right to the Kingdome of Scotland and from Margaret, King Henry the 7 eldest daughter (the male line being cleane extinct) unquestionable title to the Crown of England: whereupon Q. Eliz. being dead about 10 a clock in the morning, K. Iames the 6, K. of Scotland was the very same day (M. Secretary Cecill himself reading his Title, and Q. Eliz. Will) proclaimed K. of Eng. Scot. and Ireland, by sound of Trumpet, first at White-Hall, and then in Cheapside, in presence of all the Lords and the Counsell, and other of the Nobility, with a generall acclamation of all sorts of people, that we may truly say, sorrow was never more deceived than at this time; for where upon the death of Q. Eliz. It was expected there would be nothing for a long time but sorrowing and lamenting. Now that very sorrow was swallowed up of joy, her death bringing with it no other alteration but only of sex, in all other points in a manner the same, the like wisdome, the like learning, the like Iustice, the like religiousnesse in them both: only bettered in this, that we changed a Q. of 70 years old, whom we could not look to keepe long, for a K. of 36, whom we might well hope to enjoy many years. Q. Eliz. was not sooner dead but Sir Robert Cary a younger son of the Late L. Hunsdon, posted away unsent, to K. Iaes in Scotland, informing him of the ac∣cident for bringing which news, the K. afterwards rewarded him with making him a Baon of the Realm, and L. of Leppington. But though it were sufficient for the K. information that he heard the news by Sir Robert Carye; yet it was not sufficient for the Lords of the Counsell in discharge of their duty, if he heard it not from them, and therefore within a very few dayes, as soon as they could pro∣vide fit men, they sent first Sir Charles Percy and Mr. Thomas Somerset, and after them Sir Thomas Lake Clerk of the Signet, a man well acquainted with the State of the Kingdome, both to acquaint him with the generall applause of all the Re∣alme, to receive him for their Soveraigne, and also informe him in what termes the State of the Kingdom stood, that so he might not come altogether a stranger when he came into it. Q. Elizabeth indeed had left him not only a Kingdom, but a Kingdom without incombrance; No wars abroad, no sedition at home, and not only so, but a kingdom furnished with all the fruits of Peace, plenty of all things necessary, and of all necessary things; the chiefest a wise Cousell, for the left Sir Thomas E∣gerton L. Chanselor, Thomas L. Buckhurst, L. Treasurer: Charles E. of Nottingham, L. Admiral & Sir Rob. Cecill principall Secretary. Foure such men that the mean∣est of them were sufficient to sit at the Helme of any Kingdom. Yet to these
and  other besides (all wh the K. now by his letters authorizeth to ex∣erc eir severall places, s formerly they had done) he addeth certaine new ones of his own choosing, as namely the E. of Northumberland, and Cumberland the L. Th. Howard, and then after the L. Henry Howard; the one the brother, the other the son of the late D. of Norolk, who had suffered so much, that at last, he suffered for the Q. his mother. But although the calling of these two last to such place, was done (no doubt) out of avour to that house; yet one of them being known, the other doubted to be a Papist, it was presently apprehended, as a favour to that sid; and the Catholicks were not a little confident of his good in∣clination to them all in generall. And it was indeed but necessary they should at this time have such a conceit, for in the late Q. sicknes, a little before her death, Pope Clement the 8, had written two Brieves to the Catholicks in England, to ad∣mit of none to succeed in the Kingdom, when that miserable woman should hap∣pen to dye (so he plased to sil the most glorious Q. that ever lived) but such a one, of whose good inclination to the See of Rome, they should at least be well perswaded. And now K. Iames having setled the Government of his Kingdom of Scotland, and made convenient preparation for his journey: on the 5 of Aprill 1603, he set forward, and rode that day from Edinburgh to Dunglasse, and from then the next day to rwick; who having stayed two days the 8 of Aprill he rde to Withrington a house of Sir Robert Caries, from thence the 9 to Newcastle, whre he stayed Sunday and heard the Bish. of Durham preach, and so joyfull wre the Townsmen of his being there, that all the time of his stay they bore the charg o his houshold. The 13 of Aprill he set forward to Durham, and from thence the 14 to Waltorth, the 15 towards York, where his traine encreased to such a multitude, that he was faine to publish an inhibition of the peoples resort, and flocking to him. At York it was a question to whom it belonged to beare the sword before the K in that place, for both the E. of Cumberland claimed it, as he∣rditary to his House, and the President of the North claimed it as belonging to his place, but it was adjudged to George E. of Cumberland, who accordingly did it rom York the 18 day the K. rde to Grimston, to a house of Sir Edw. Stanhopes, the 19 to Pf and so to Duncaster, where he lodged at the signe of the Beare and Sun The 20 of Aprill e rode towards Worsuppc. a house of the E. of Shrews∣ris; from thence the 21 to Nerk upon Trent, where a Cutpurse being taken in the fact, was by the K. warrant hāged, a most unseasonable delinqēnt, who would force the K. to commit Iustice at a time when hee intended nothing but mercy, the as to Beaver Castle, a house of the E. of Rutlands, hunting all the way as he rode: From Beaver the 23 to Burleigh, who having stayd 2 or 3 days, the 27 he removed to Hitchinbrk, a house of Sir Oliver Cromwels, where the heads of the Vniversity of Cambridge met him From thence he rode towards Royston, and as he passed thorough Godmanchester a Town close by Huntington, the Bayliffes of Town presented him with 70 Teeme of horse, all traced to faire new Ploughs at which the K. wondring, they said, it was their ancient custome so to do, when any K. of England passed thorough their Town, and by which as being the K. te∣nants they held their Land. At Royston he lodged that night at M. Chesters house, at his own charge, which he had not done before, since his comming into Eng. The 0 of Aprill he rode to Stand, a house of S. Thomas Sadlers, where he stayd Sunday, and heard the Bish. of London preach. The 2 of May he removed to Bros∣bourne, a house of S Henry Cocks, cofferer to the late Q. and now to the K. where t him the L. Keeper, the L Treasurer, the L. Admirall & divers other Lords: The 3 of May he came to Theobalds, a house of Sir Robert Cecils; when all the Lords of th late Queenes most honorable Privy Counsell; presented themselves, and thr the Lord Keeper made a grave Oration. At this house, the fourth of , the King made diverse Noblemen of Scotland, of his Privy Coun∣sell here in England; namely the Duke of Lnx, the Earle of Marre, the Lord , Sir rg , Treasurer of Scotland, S. Iames Elphingston his Secretary
and the Lord of Kinlosse made afterward Mr. of the Rolles. Saterday the se∣th of May, he rode towards London, where by the way, the Sheriffe Swyner∣ and the Aldermen met him; and by their Oratour Mr. Richard Martin; made him an eloquent Oration; and then he rode on to the Charter-house neee Smithfield, a house belonging to the Lord Thomas Howard, where he stayed foure dayes: and at his departing from thence made the Lord Zouche and the Lord Burgley, of his privie Counsell. But wee must here omit, that from the Kings first setting forth of Scotland as hee was in all places received with most Royall entertainment and rich presents; so he againe carryed himselfe most af∣fable, and distributed his favours in most plentious manner: in some places, discharging all prisoners, but such as lay for Treason or murther: but specially in conferring the order of Knighthood, of which sort the first he made, was Mr. Iohn Peyton, son to Sir Iohn Peyton, Leiutenant of the Tower. After him divers Scots in sundry places at Theobalds, eight and twenty; (of which number the compiler of this worke, though the unworthiest was one;) at Charter-house above fourescore: and not many dayes after, no fewer than at least a hundred, and before the yeare went about, God knowes how many hundreds; that one would wonder what the King would doe with so many Milites, having no warre toard. But it wa indeed fit to give a vent to the passage of Honour, which during Queene Eliza∣beths Raigne had been so stopped, that scarce any County of England had Knights enow in it to make a Iury. Before we goe further, it will not be amisse, to shew what great men atten∣ded King Iames out of Scotland; as namely the Duke of Lenox, the Earle of Marre, the Lord Hame and many other great Lords: and many other whom he afterward made great Lords, as bring in his speciall favour; first Sir George Hame, made afterward Earle of Dunbarre: then Sir Thomas Erskin, made Earle of Kelly; then Sir Iohn Ramsey made Earle of Holdernesse; (which two last had the fortune to come first in to his rescue against the Gowries) then Sir Iames Hay, made afterward Earle of Carlile; and then Sir Richard Preston made Earle of Kil∣dare in Ireland; but whose great fortune by marrying the Heire of that Earle∣dome, was afteward the occasion of his great misfortune; for comming out of Ireland he was unfortunately cast away and drowned. But though King Iames was now safely come himselfe to London; yet he ac∣counted himselfe but halfe come, untill his Queene and children were come to him; and therefore there are now appointed to goe to conduct them, of Lords, and Earle of Sssex, the Earle of Lincolne, the Lord Compton, the Lord Norris, and Sir George Carow Knight, Lord President of Munster: of Ladies the Countesse of Worcester, the Countesse of Kildare, the Lady Anne Herberts daughter to Henry Earle of Pembrooke; the Lords Scroopes Lady, the Lady Rich wife to the Lord Rich, and the Lady Walsingham, one of the late Queenes bedchamber: But al∣though these only were appointed to goe, yet many other Lords and great La∣dies went of themselves to attend her Majesty, as the Countesse of Bedford, the Lady Hastings, the Lady Cecill, the Lady Hatton, the Lady Harington, and divers other: and with this Princely attendance, the Queene with two of her children, namely Prince Henry of the age of nine yeares, and the Lady Elizabeth on the eleventh of Iune came to Yorke: where resting themselves some few dayes, on the seven and twentieth of Iune they came to Easton in Northamptonshire, a house of Sir George Fermors, where the King met them at dinner: and afterward they rode together to a house of Sir Iohn Fortescue, and so to London. The Kings younger sonne, Charles Duke of Albany came not at this time, as being not three yeeres old, and therefore not thought able to endure such a journey, but the yeare following falling sick of a feavor, Doctor Atkins one of the Kings Physitions was sent to conduct him, who in six weekes cured him of his feavour; and the first weeke of October brought him safe to Windsor, where the King then lay; for which service he was so well rewarded, that together with the gayns of his usu∣all
practice hee grew to a greater wealth then was usuall for Physitions. King Iames had distributed the meaner Order of Knighthod very plentifully; now he thinks fit to raise his distributions to a higher degree, and therupon on the twentieth of May, he made Sir Robert Cecil Baron of Esindon; Sir Robert Sidney Ba∣ron of Penshurst; Sir William Knowles Baron of Greyes; and Sir Edward Wooten Ba∣ron of Morley: and not long after hee made the Lord Henry Howard Earle of North-Hampton; and Thomas Sackvile Lord Buckhurst, he made Earle of Dorset. The King had by this time found the love and affection of his own people; but the affection of neighbouring Princes towards him stood yet in suspence, when now to take away that doubt came first in the beginning of Iune, an Embassador from the Palsgrave of Rhyne; presently after another from the States of Holland and Zeland; another from the Arch-Duke of Austria; another from the King of Spaine; from the Seignory of Venice another; another from the Duke of Florence; and lastly on the eight of Iune, Monieur de Rhosny from the King of France: all congratulating his happy comming to the Crowne of England, for entertainment of which Embassadors, and all other that should come after; the King had erected an Office by the name of Master of the Ce∣remonies, allowing him two hundred pounds a yeer Fee, and the first that had the place was Sir Lewis Lewkenor: a Gentleman, who besides other good parts was very skilfull in the neighbouring languages. Vpon the seventeenth of May this yeere, were made fourteene Serjeants at Law: whereof eleven had received Writs the last yeare of Queene Elizabeth: namely, Thomas Coventry, Robert Haughton, Lawrence Tanfield, Iohn Crooke, Thomas Foster, Edward Philips, Thomas Harris, Iames Altham; Henry Hub∣bard; Augustine Nicholls; and Robert Perker; to whom the King added three new; Iohn Sherley; George Snygge; and Richard Hutton, who all kept their Feast together in the Middle Temple Hall One would thinke that by this time, all Offences against Queene Elizabeth had been forgotten: but King Iames more tender of wrongs done to her than to him∣selfe, would not suffer Valentine Thomas so to escape; who after he had lyen many yeeres prisoner in the Tower, was on the fourth of une arraigned at the Kings Bench-Barre; and for conspiracy against the late Queene and some of her Counsell, was on the seventh of Iune after six a clock at night, drawne to S Thomas Waterings, and there hanged and quartered. About this time the Honourable Charles Lord Montjy, returned out of Ireland; bringing alone with him Hugh O Neale, Earle of Teroen; at whose comming to the King, the Lord Montjoy was sworne of the Kings Privie Counsell, and the Earle of Teroen who had beene the cause of so much English bloud shed, was yet pardoned; and Proclamation made, that by all men he should be used with respect and honour. All this while the King had moved within his own Spheare, and had done no∣thing out of the Realme; his first Imployment abroad was now in Iune, to his brother the King of Denmark, to whom he sent in Embassage the Earle of Rut∣land upon two occasions: the one to be Godfather to his sonne, who was named Christianus, the other to present him with the Order of the Garer, upon the like imployment; soone after, he sent the Lord Spener to Frederick Duke of Wirtenberg; which Lords, saw the said Princes Invested with the Garter, and after honourable entertainment returned home. It was now a time that every man might sit under his Vine: and enjoy the happinesse of a peaceable Government: when suddenly like a storme in a faire Somers day, brake forth a Treason of a strange Composition: for where in all Treasōs commonly they are all of some one Faction in this, there were people of all sorts; Priests and Laymen, Papists and Protestants, Noblement, Knights and Genlement; that one would think it should be a well mannaged Treason, and yet was the shallowest that was ever set on foot; so shallow, that it could scarce
be observed, either what the Authors of it ayled, or what it was they would hve done. Indeed the great favour which King Iames at his first comming to the Crown, shewed to the Earle of South-Hampton, was like to breed no good blood in those that were his oposites; and it was said (how true I know not) that as the King had sent to enlarge the Earle of South-Hampton, and apointed him to meet him upon the way: So when he heard of an Intention that the Lord Cobham and Sir Walter Ralegh had to meet him; he sent them word they should spare their labour. But why there it were so or no, it seemes they found some ause of discontentment, and discontentment will never want Complyces; and by this meanes was the composition of this Teason made up, and thereupon were apprehended Henry Lord Cobham, and George Brook his brother, Thomas Lord Grey of Wilton, Sir Walter Ralegh, Sir Griffith Markham, and Sir Edward Parham Knights, Bartholmew Brookesby and Anthony Copley Gentlemen, William Watson and William Clerke Priests: But though they were apprehended in Iuly, yet they come not to their arraignment till November following; for by reason of the sicknesse, which was then hot in London, the Terme was put off till Crastino Martini, and then to be kept at Winchester in Hamp-shire, only the Courts of the Exchecker, Wards, Liveries and the Dutchy of Lancaster were kept in the Kings Mannour at Richmond in the County of Surrey; and so in the fourth of November following, all the foresaid Delinquents were removed from the Tower of London and other Prisons, by strong Guards to Winchester, and there arraigned; whose Indictment was for Conspiring, 1 To kill the King. 2 To raise Rebellion. 3 To alter Religion. 4 To subvert the State. 5 To procure Invasion by Strangers. Concerning the first Point, it was proved, that the Lord Grey intended to obtaine the levying of two thousand men, for defence of the Low-Countreyes, and with them to seize uon the King and Prince, and take the Lords of the Counsaile in their chambers. For the other Points, It was proved, that the Lord Cobham and Sir Walter Ralegh, met at S, Martins in the Fields; and there consulted about raising Sedition, mooving Rebellion, altering Religion, sub∣verting the State, and to set up the Lady Arbella. And particularly for the Point of subverting the State: It was proved, that Watson was designed to be Lord Chancellor, George Brooke Lord Treasurer, Sir Griffin Markham Secretary, and the Lord Grey to be Master of the Horse, and Earle Marshall of England, and for effecting of these Treasons, It was proved that Waston the Priest had de∣vised Oaths in writing, by which all parties were bound to keep them secret. And for the last point, It was proved, that Sir Walter Ralegh was appointed to treate with Count Aramberg for six hundred thousand Cowns, and the Lord Cobham to go to the Arch-Duke and to the King of Spaine, to perswade them to assist the Lady Arbella. These things being proved against them, on the dayes in which they were severally Indicted, the most which was replied in mitigati∣on of their fault, was first by Waston, who affirmed it could not be Treason, be∣cause the King was not yet Crowned; and then by the Lord Grey, that it was but a verbal matter and never took effect, and therfore could be no Treason, but these assertions being both refuted; they were al (except Sir Edw Parham, who only was acquitted) on their severall dayes of inditement, found guilty of Trea∣son; and had Iudgement accordingly. The Priests Watson and Clerk were execut∣de at Winchester, the nine and twentieth of November: George Brooke was behead∣ed the fift of Decemb. but then the hand of Iustice stayed and this was the course which the K. held in shewing mercy. After the death of the three before named he signed three other warrants for the execution of the late L. Cobham, the Lord
Gry; and Sir Griffin Markhm, on a certain day then following; but before that day came he privately framed another warrant, written with his own hand to the Sheriffe; (who was then Sir Benjamin Tichburne,) by which he countermanded the former Warrants: and that there might be no notice taken of it: he sent it by Mr. Iohn Gybbe: a Scotch-man: and one utterly unknown to all the company, appointing him to deliver it so, that it might not take effect, til after their severall confessions, and at the very point of their Execution, which was accordingly performed: At which time it was a wonderfull thing to see how the Delinquents falling on their knees, lamented their misdoings, and most of all how they extolled the Kings un∣speakable mercy. But though thus pardoned: yet were they carryed back to the Tower, where the L: Grey not long after dyed, and in him was extinct that Barony, which had formerly broght forth many valourous & worthy men. Sir Griffin Markhā after some time was set at liberty & passed beyond sea, wher he lived long after in meane account. The Lord Cobham likewise was afterward discharged of imprisonment, but deprived of his Estate, lived divers years after in great pennury; and in him ended that noble Family, which had flourished in great honor many Ages. Sir Walter Ralegh was kept in the Tower, where to his great honour he spent his time in writing, and had bin a happy man if he had never beene released. But such is our state, that no mans fortune is understood, whether it be good or bad, untill it be discovered by the Event. But in this meane time many things had passed for his Majesty having deferred the Feast of St. George untill his being at some of his owne houses: held now the said Feast at Windsor, the second of Iuly where the Prince was installed Knight of the Garter; as also the Duke of Lenox, the Earle of South-Hampton, the Earle of Mrre, and the Earle of Pembrooke; and at the same time were elected the King of Denmark, and the Duke of Wirtenberg: though their investing have been spoken off before. And now was preparation made for the Kings Coronation, and for a preparative unto it, h first restored the Earle of South-Hampton, and then raised in honor these following: Sir Thomas Egeron Lord Chancellour he made Baron of Elsemere; Sir William Russell, Baron of Thornugh; Sir Henry Grey Baron of Grobye; Sir Iohn Peter Baron of Writtle; Sir Iohn Harington, Baron of Exton; Sir Henry Denvers, Ba∣ron of Dasey; Sir Thomas Gerard Baron of Gerads Bromely in the County of Staf∣ford; and Sir Robert Spenser, Baron of Wormeleyton. After this he conferred inferiour Orders; and made Knights, all the Iudges and Serjeants at Law, all Civilians and Clerkes of the Signet: all his Gentlemen Vshers and divers other: and lastly made Knights of the Bathe threescore and two, most of them Noble mens sons, and the rest Gentlemen of speciall worth. These things done, on the five and twentieth of Iuly being St. Iames day; the King and Queen were together crowned, and anoynted at Westminster by the hands of Iohn Whitegift Arch-Bishop of Canter∣bury, in presence of the Nobility and other, namely Sir Robert Lee Lord Major of London, in a gowe of Crymson Velvet, his brethren the Aldermen in gownes of Scarlet, and twelve principall Citizens admitted to attend on them: all other Citi∣zens stayed from passing thither, either by water or by Land, by reson of the sick∣nesse; and the first of Agust following, all suitors were by Proclamation forbid∣den to repaye to the Count till the winter following. At this time the King forgot no a deliverance he had formerly had, which though it were had in Scotland, yet he would have notice of it taken in England, which was his deliverance from the conspiracy of the Gories, on the fift day of August three yees before, and thereupon Friday being the fift of August was by commande∣ment appoed to be kept Holy day with Morning Prayer, Sermons, and Evening Prayer tht day, and Bonfires t night which was then; and after during his life solemnely oerved. King Ia had in hi a it were two Persons; one as he was King of Scotland; and in this he was in perfect amity with he King of Spain, another as he was King
o England, and in this he had some difference with Spaine; but he, as Rex pa∣cific, oke the best from both, and was altogether for the Olive branch, and thereupon when at his comming into England, he found letters of Mart granted against Spaniards: he first caused them all to be called in, and then consnted to a Treaty of perit reconcilment: In which Treaty handled at London, the 18 o August 164: The Commissioners for the King of England were Thomas Earle of Dorset, Charles Earle of Nottingham, Charles Earle of Devonshire, Henry Earle of North-Hampton and Robert Viscount Cranbourne: For the King of Spaine, Iohn de Velasco Constable of Castile, Iohn de Tassis Earle of Villa Media∣a, and Alexander Robidius Professor of the Law in the Colledge of Millaine: For the Archdukes, Charles Count of Aramberg, Iohn Richardo President of the Privy Counsaile, and Lodowick Verreikin principall Secretary: by whom a Peace being concluded and contained in many Articles. The Somer follow∣ing, the King of Spaine sent Don Iohn de Velesco Constable of Castile and Duke of Fryas, also Pedraca de la Syerra, his great Chamberlaine: accompagnied with diverse Marquises, Earles and Barons, who comming into England, were by the Earle of Devonshire on the nineteenth of August brought to the Court, where the King in his Chappell in the presence of the ommissioners and other En∣glish Lords, (the Duke of Fryas holding the Kings hands between his) tooke his Oath upon the holy Bible, religiously to obserue and keep all the Articles of the Peace and League agreed upon, and in March following, being now the third yeare of King Iames, Charles Earle of Nottingham, Lord high Admirall of En∣gland was sent into Spaine to take in like manner the King of Spaine's Oath: who accompanied with three Barons, and many Knights, Gentlemen and other, to the number of six hundred and fifty, the fifteenth of Aprill arrived at Groyne, from whence he was conducted to Valledolid, three hundred miles off, where the King of Spaine then kept his Court, enterteined in all places as he passed, at the King of Spaine's charge, with so great provisions and such demonstration of love and gladnesse: that it plainly shewed the Spaniards were as glad of our friendship as we of theirs. The Lord Embassadour being come to Court: He caused Thomas Knoll Esquire, to deliver the presents sent from the King of Eng∣land, which were siz goodly Horses, with saddles and saddle cloaths very richly imbrodered, whereof three for the King, and three for the Queen: two crosse∣bows with sheafes of arrows foure fowling pieces, inlaid with plates of Gold: and a couple of Lyme hownds, of singular qualities: which the King and Queen in very kind manner accepted, and then on the thirtyth of May, the Lord Embassadour being sent for, the King came forth into a large room: where ha∣ving a little Table set before him, and a Bible very reverently laid upon it, to∣gether with a Crucifix: The Archbishop of Toledo read the Oath, at the read∣ing whereof, the Lord Embassadour held the Kings hands between his and the King kneeling down, layd his hands upon the Book, and after his Oath, subscri∣bed to the Articles formerly concluded. Whilst the E. of Nothingham was thus imployed in Spaine, the right honorable Edward Earle of Hartford, was likewise sent Embssador to Albertus and Isabella, Archdukes of Austria, to take their Oaths, for confirmation of the said Articles of Peace, which were taken at Bru∣xell the first of May with great State and solemnity: After which, as the Earle bestowed on the Archduks servants, to the full summe of three thousand pouns; So the Archduke at his departy, bestowed upon the Earle, a Iewell worth nine hundred pounds, and a suite of Arms worth three hundred, and bore his charges all the time of his stay at Bruxels. And now was King Iames, truly Rex Pa∣cificus, Peece and amity with all Princes of Christendome, which few of his Auncestors ever were A little before this, in the Month of August, in the yeare 1604, the strong Town of Ostend in Flanders, after above three years siege, and the slaughter of a hundred and twenty thousand men of both sides, and in defense whereof, Sir
Francis Vere Generall, and his brother Sir Horatio Vere had shewed great Va∣lour, was by the Marquis Spinola taken; for which Service, the King of Spaine made him Duke of Santa Severina, and Lord Generall of all his Forces in the Low-Countryes. It was now the third yeare of King Iames his Reigne, when he kept Saint Georges Feast at Grenwich, and there made two new Knights of the Garter; na∣mely, the High and Mighty Prince Duke Ulrick, heire of Norway, and brother to our gracious Queen Anne: and the right Noble Lord Henry Howard, Earle of North-Hampton. And upon the Saturday following, in the Hall at Grenwich, being richly hanged with Arras, he created three Earles, one Viscount and foure Barons: namely, Sir Robert Cecil Viscount Cranbourne, he created Earle of Sa∣lisbury: Thomas Cecil, Lord Burley his eldest brother, he created Earle of Ex∣ceter, and Sir Philipe Herbert, yonger brother to the Earle of Pembrooke, he cre∣ated Earle of Montgomery: then Robert Sidney Baron of Penshurst, Lord Cham∣berlaine to the Queen, he created Viscount Lisle: Sir Iohn Stanhope, Vice∣chamberlaine to the King, he made Lord Stanhope of Harington: Sir George Carew Vicechamberlaine to the Queen, he made Lord Carew of Clopton Ma∣ster Thomas Arundell of Devonshire, he made Lord Arundell of Wardez: and Master William Cavendish, he made Lord Cavendish of Hardwick. About this time a strange fancy possessed the braines of a professed Physiti∣on, one Richard Haidock of new Colledge in Oxford, who pretended to preach at night in his sleep, in such sort, that though he were called aloud or stirred and pull'd by the hands or feet, yet would make no shew of either hearing or feeling: And this he did often, in the presence of many honorable persons, that came to heare him; so as within a short time, his fame was spread thorough the land, by the name of the sleeping Preacher. At length the King commanded him to be brought to the Court, where his Majesty sate up the most part of a night to at∣tend the event: when at last, Haidock making a shew to bee a sleepe, began to Pray; then taking a Text, made his Division; applying it to his purpose, for in his Preaching his use was to Inveight against the Pope, against the Crosse in Baptism and against the last Canons of the Church of England; and having ended his Sermon seemed to continue sleeping. His Majesty having well observed the manner of his cariage; after a few days, cal∣led the said Haidock before him, and in Conference with him (as he had indeed an admirable sagacity in discovering of Fictions) made him confesse, that all he did was but imposture: and thereupon to fall upon his knees, and aske forgive∣nesse, which the King granted, upon condition, that in all places he should o∣penly acknowledge his offence; because many were brought into beliefe, that his nightly preaching was either by inspiration or by vision. We may not here think it unworthy the relating, seeing King Iames thought it not unworthy the seeing, thereby to observe the nature of the Lyon, and made a solemne matter of it: for on Munday the 3 of Iune (taking with him the Duke of Lenox, and diverse Earles and Lords) he went to the Lyons Tower and caused two Lyons a male and a female, to bee put forth, and then a live Cock to bee cast before them which they (as being their naturall ennemy) presently killed and sucked his bloud. Then a live Lambe to bee put downe to them, which the generous Lyons (as having respect to its Innocency) never offered to touch, though the Lamb was so bold to go close unto them. Then the King caused those Lyons to be taken away and another Lyon to be put forth, and two Mastifs to be put into him, who presently flew upon the Lyon and turned him upon his back, and though the Lyon were superior to them in strength, yet it seemes they were his matches in courage and so much superior, as that they were the first assailants, with whom otherwise, perhaps the Lyon would not have offered to meddle. On Friday the 4 of Ianuary in the Kings second yeare, Charles Duke of Albany
the Kings second son being then but 4 yeares old, was created Duke of Yorke; hich, because it was done with extraordinary solemnity, is not unworthy to hae the manner of it, here related. First were appointed Knights of the Bathe, the Duke of Albany himselfe, then the Lord Willowby, the Lord Chandois, the Lord Cmpton, the Lord Norris, William Cecill, sonne and heire to the Viscount Cranbourne, Allan Percy, brother to the E. of Northumberland, Thomas Somerset se∣cond son to the Earle of Worcester, Francis Manners brother to the Earle of Rut∣ld; Thomas Howard second son to the Earle of Suffolk, and Iohn Harington son and heire to the Lord Harington, the Earles of Oxford and Essex were Esquires to the Duke of Albany; all the Knights tooke their lodging that night in the first Gate-house going to Kings street; where they supped, and had Bathes pro∣vided for them. The next morning being Saturday, they went out into the Parke in their Hermits weeds, the Minstrels playing and the Heraulds going be∣fore them into the Court, and so into the Chappel, where every Knight with his Squires went to the Altar, and there offered (the Deane of the Chappell, in a rich Cope, holding the Bason. After this they went up into their lodgings, and here new attired themselves in robes of Crimsin Taffaty, with hats and white feathers, and so went back to the great Chamber: where by the King they were girded with the sword, and had gilt spurs put upon them. This done, they were solemnly served at dinner, and after went again to the Chappell, and there offered their swords. The next day being Sunday and Twelfe day in robes of purple Sattin with Doctors hoods on their shoulders and hats with white fea∣thers, they issued out of the Revestry, with the Duke of Albany (being then to be made Duke of York) into the Hall, where the King sate under the cloath of E∣state, and then the Heraulds going before, the Knights of the Bath followed, and then the Earle of Suffolk, Lord Chamberlain came alone, then followed Henry Howard Earle of North-Hampton and Charles Blunt Earle of Devonshire, carrying the robes of Estate, for the Duke of York, after whom Wriothsley Earle of South-Hampton carried the Coronet, George Clifford Earle of Cumberland, the Golden Rod, the Earle of Worcester the Cappe of Estate, and the Earle of Nottingham bore the Duke of Albany in his Armes, supported by the Earles of Dorset and Northumberland, who all comming in this order before the King; the Duke of Albany was after the Patent read Created Duke of York, with the Robes and Coronet put on him and the Golden Rod, delivered into his hand: all which performed, they went to dinner, and the solemnity ended. About this time on the fifteenth of Iune, Thomas Dowglas a Scotch-man, was committed to the Tower and had Irons put upon him, being sent hither, but three dayes before, from the Count Palatine of the Rhyne. His offence was, that he had counterfetted the Kings Privy Seale to divers Princes of Germany; One to the Archbishop of Cullen, another to the Archbishop of Tryer, another to the Duke of Cleve, another to the Archbishop of Moguntia, and a fifth to the Count Palatine of the Rhyne whereof being examined and convicted; he was drawn on a hurdle into Smithfield, and there hanged and quartered: And now was a second Parliament appointed to be held at Westminster, on the nineteenth of March following, when foure dayes before the day of sitting; The King, the Queen and Prince rode solemnly in great state thorough the City of London, where in diverse places were erected Pageants: Presents given, O∣rations made and all demonstrations of love and observance; and then the Parliament beginning, the King made a long and loving Speech to the House, wherein he signified the auses of his calling it; but in the time, when it should have proceeded, there was suddenly discovered a Plot of Treason (o damnable and foule, that posteriy will hardly thinke it true, when they shall heare it) the ot was, to blow up with Gun-powder, both Houses of Parliament at a time, whn the King, Prince and all the Nobility should be sitting in the upper House, and all the Knights and Burgesses in the Lower.
The principall contriver of this Plot was Robert Catesbie, a Gentleman of great account in Northampton-shire, descended from that Catesby who had been a speciall Counseller of King Richard the third, to whose family the Divine Providence had now ordained to give a disastrous period. This Catesby not able to performe the worke himselfe alone, drawes in many to assist him, as namely, Thomas Percie, Thomas Winter, Iohn Grant, Ambrose Rookwood, Iohn Wright, Francis Tresham, Guido Fawkes, and at last Sir Edward Digby, all earnest Papists, and all bound by Oath, and by receiving the Sacrament to be secret; For effecting of this plot, they hired a house close adjoyning to the Upper house of Parliament, where they were to dig thorow a Wall, for the fit placing of their Powder. About Candlemasse they had wrought the Wall halfe thorow: when suddainly they heard a noyse in the next room which made them feare they had beene discovered: but sending Guy Fawkes (who went now under the name of Iohn Iohnson, as Master Percies man) to see what the matter was, he brought word, that it was a Cellar where Sea-Coles had beene layd, and were now a selling, and the roome offered to bee let for a yearely rent. This roome therefore as most fit for their purpose, being right under the Parliament House, Master Percie presently went and hired, lay∣ing into it twenty barrells of powder, which they covered with Billets and Faggots, for being discovered. Thus the first part of the plot was put in a good readinesse. It now remained to consider what was to be done, when the blow should be given: for though the King and Prince might be slain, yet the Duke of York, and the Lady Elizabeth should still be safe, and so they should bee no nearer their end than now they were. This work therefore for surprizing the D. of Yorke, Percie undertook, and for surprizing the Lady Elizabeth, they agreed upon a match of huting neare to Dunchurch, under colour whereof they would draw company together, and surprize her at the Lord Haringtons house in War∣wick-shire, where she then lay, and then proclaime her Queen, and so be sure to have all things done, as they would themselves. Thus farre their bloudy plot went fairely on, and had perhaps gone on so still, if they had continued onely bloudy; but now a tendernesse of heart tooke some of them, lest their friends should perish together with the rest, and this tendernesse overthrowes them; for to prevent such promiscuous slaughter, a Letter was framed, and sent to the Lord Mounteagle, sonne and heire to the Lord Morley, brought him by one of his Foot-men, which hee received from an unknowne man in the street. The Letter was this. My Lord, out of the Love I beare to some of your friends, I have a care of your preservation; therefore I would wish you, as you tender your life, to forbeare your attendance at this Parliament; for God and man have con∣curred to punish the wickednesse of this time: And thinke not slightly of this Ad∣vertisement: for though there bee no apperce of any stirre; yet I say, they shall receive a terrible blow this Parliament, and yet shall not see who hurts them. This Councell is not to be contemned, because it may doe you good, and can doe you no harme; for the danger is past, as soone as you have burnt this Letter; and I hope you will make good use of it. My Lord having read the Letter, though much perplexed, yet went pre∣sently to the Court at White-hall (the King being then a hunting at Royston) ad delivered it to the Earle of Salisie, principall Secretary of State, and the Earle having read it, acquainted first the Lord Chamberlaine with it, and then the Lord Admirall, the Earle of Wrcester and Northampton, who as soon s the King was returned from Hunting acquainted him with it: the Earle of  telling hi, th he thought it must be written either by a foole, or by a mad , because of those words, for the dger is past as soone as you ave  thi Letter) or i the dagr-wre so sone past, what needed  warnig But th  considering it more deeply, apprehended presently some violent ; and tht it must be some suddaine danger
blowing up with powder; and thereupon commanded, than diligent search  be made in the Parliament house, and all other roomes and lodgings  adjoyning which search was made by the Lord Chamberlaine, accom∣ny with the Lord Mountgle, who entring the Cellar under the upper  found there great store of Faggots and Billets; which was answered to  Mr. Prcie's owne provision; but then (it being considered why such stoe  be laid in for Mr. Percie, who used to make but little stay in Towne and hereuon more diligent search being made, there was found under the Billets one of the Barrells of powder; and after that all the rest, being six and thirty; ogther with other instruments fit for their purpose, and then spying the  Fwkes to stand suspitiously, they apprehended him, and found in his pocket a peece of Touch-wood; a Tynder boxe to light the Touch-wood, and a Watch, which Mr. Percie had bought the day before, to trie the short and long burning of the Touch-wood, which he had prepared to give fire to the traine of powder. The plot being thus discovered, yet the most of the confederates met at Dunchurch, as they had agreed; where they divulged many detestable untruths against the King and State: signifying withall, that they were there met for advancement of the Catholike cause; hoping thereby to have drawne many to joyne with them in their Rebellion: but this availed them noing: for first Sir Richard Verney high Sheriffe of Warwick-shire chased them from thence; and then Sir Richard Welsh, Sheriff of Worcestershire, knowing them to be entred into Master Littleton's house at Walbach, beset them round, where Catei and Percie issuing forth, were both slaine with one shot of a Musquet; and after them, both the Wrights, Iohn and Christopher were likewise slaine out∣right; Thomas Winter was taken alive; all which time, Francis Tresham remained still about the Court, offering his service for their suppression: but being suspected, was examined, and sent to the Tower, where he confest all, and within a few dayes after dyed of the Stranguie. On the seven and twentieth of Ianuarie following, a Commission was directed to divers Lords and Iudges of both Benches, for tryall of the rest of the Confederates: namely, of Thomas Winter, Guydo Fawkes, Robert Keyes, Thomas Bates, Robert Wintr, late of Hooding∣ton in Warwick-shire Esquire, Iohn Graunt, late of Yorthbrook, in the Countie of Warwick Esquire, Ambrose Rookwood, late of Staningfield in Suffolk Esquire, Sir Edward Digby, late of Gotthurst, in Buckingham-shire, Knight, who were all condemned, and had judgement to dye, and on the thursday following Sir Edward Digbie, Robert Winter, Graunt and Bates, were accordingly drawn, hanged and quartered, at the west end of Pauls Church in London, and on the friday, the other foure; namely, Thomas Winter, Keyes, Rookwood, and Fawks were executed in the Parliament yard at Westminster. Of all whom, none was so much lamen∣ted as Sir Edward Digbie, and indeed worthily; for he was a goodly personage, and of excellent parts, and had it seemes beene cunningly drawne in, and bound to secresie by Oath, when he little thought of any such treason. The seventh of November the Earle Northumberland, upon suspition of being acquainted with the plots, was first commanded to keep his house, and after a while com∣mitted to the Tower. And thus was this great plot discovered, and the Plotters punished, to the great rejoycing of all people: insomuch, that even the King of Spain's and Arch-dukes Embassadors made Bonfires, and threw money amougst the people in token of joy. And at this time, on the fourth of Ianuarie, the Spanish Embassador delivered a Present to the King from the King his Master: namely six Iennets of Andalusia, with saddles very richly imbroydered, and saddle-cloathes of cloth of Tissue: One of which Iennets was snoe white, and had a Maine which reached to the ground. But this was a Present sent before any knowledge had of the Powder Treason: but as soone as that was knowne, there was presently another Present sent from the Queen of Spain to the Queen of England of purpose to congratulate the Kings happy delive∣ance
from the intended Powder Treason; and the Present was brought by D Ion de Mendosa, which was a Roave of Murrie Sattin, imbroydered all over with Amber leather; and upon the leather, in every same and skirt twice imbroydered about with gold; the fore-part whereof was set with eight and forty tagges three inches long of beaten gold, hollow within, and filled with Amber-greece; also two large Chaines of Amber-greece Two Carkanets of Amber-greece, a velvet Cappe with gold Buttons, curiously enammeled, and a girdle suteable to the Butons; all which were presented together in a large ves∣sell of gold, in forme of a ason, so as it seemes there was none rejoyced more for the overthrow of this plot for the Catholike cause, than the Catholike King himselfe. And now King Iames, not to be unmindfull to the Lord Monteagle, for being the meanes of discovering this treason, he gave unto him in Fee Farme of Crowne land 200 l. a yeare to him and his heires, and 500. l. a yeare besides, during his life: and not to be unthankfull to God for the deliverance, he caused the fifth of November, being the day of the discovery, to be kept holy, whith Prayers and Thanksgiving to God, which was then solemnly performed, and hath beene since, and is likely for ever to be continued. But in the midst of this great joy, there was suddenly spread a rumour of grea∣ter sorrow, for on Saturday the two and twentieth of March, newes was brought to the Court for certaine, that the King was slaine at Oking, twentie miles from London, stabbed with an invenomed knife; whereupon the Court gates were presently shut, and double guard set in all places about London, and all mens mindes were infinitely distracted; but within two houres all these clouds were cleane dispersed, and the Sun began to shine out againe; and it was certainly knowne, that the King was safe, and in perfect health: for which a Procla∣mation was presently set forth to signifie it to the people; and that afternoone the King came himselfe to White-hall, where thousands of people, ravished with joy, came flocking to see him; and so generall was the rejoycing, that the Spanish Embassador, gave Sir Lewis Lewkr, Mr. of the Ceremonies, a chaine of gold of good value for bringing him the newes: Though afterward it was thought by some, that this rumour was but politickly devised to make the Parliament and people more tender of the Kings safety, and by making them more sensible what a treasure they had of his life, to make them more willing to part with their trea∣sure for his living, as indeed this Parliament they did, giving more Subsidies then are usuall. The eight and twentieth of March following, Henry Garvet Provinciall of the English Iesuites, was arraigned in Guild-hall, for concealing the foresaid treason, where he had Iudgement to be hang'd, drawne, and quartered, and ac∣cordingly on the third of May, was drawne from the Tower to the west end of Pauls Church, and there executed. At his death, he confessed his fault, asked forgivenesse, and exhorted all Catholikes never to attempt any treason against the King or State; as a course which God would never prosper. On Tuesday the twentieth of May, were enstalled at Windsor Knights of the Garter, Robert Cecill, Earle of Salisburie, and Thomas Howard Viscount Byndon; both of them honourably attended, but the Earle of Salisburie beyond ordinary proportion. There was yet a Fag end of the late powder treason behind to be examined: whereupon two Barons of the Realms; namely, Henrie Lord Mordant, and Edw. Lord Sturton, were brought from the Tower, to the Star-Chamber: and there, not charged indeed with any poynt of the treason, but onely reflectingly, be∣cause they neglected to appeare at the Parliament, according to their summons, for which neglect onely, without any further charge, they were fined to pay to the King, the Lord Mordant ten thousand Marks, and the Lord Sturton six thousand, and to be prisoners during the Kings pleasure. But on the 27. of Iune Hrie Earle of Northmberlad was likewise brought from the Tower to the
Chamber, and more directly charged with circumstances concerning the , specially in regard of Thomas Percie, whom hee had admitted to bee  of the Kings Gentlemen Pentioners, without ministring unto him the Oath o Supremacy knowing him to be a Recusant; for which, and some misprisions, he was fined to pay to the King thirty thousand pounds, to forfit all his Offi∣, and to be kept prisoner during the Kings pleasure, as indeed hee continued mny yeares, and at last released, was yet confined. It was now the 4. yeare of King Iames his Reigne, and was a time of Princely iitation; for this Summer, the 17. of Iuly, Christianus King of Denmarke, bro∣ther to the Queen, having beene long expected, with eight ships came into the River of Thames, and Anchored before Graves-end; to whom the next day, King Iames, with Prince Henrie, and divers of his Lords went by Barge, and conducted him to London, where he stayed till the twelfth of August following: in which time, he was entertained with all the magnificence that could be devised; the King and he riding in great state thorow the City; where Pageants in many places were erected; and ater he had beene shewed the chiefe places about London as namely, the old Exchange, the Tower, the Monuments at West∣minster, and had gone up to the top of Pauls, had beene feasted by the King, by the Earle of Salisburie foure dayes together at Theobalds, had seene Tilting, Fen∣cing, wrastling, and many other pastimes, on the twelfth of August, conducted by the King, the Queen, and Prince, with many other great Lords, he departed to his ships, and in eight dayes arrived at home: A hapy thing when Princes can converse together like private persons, and are not kept asunder with jealou∣sies of State. After the King of Denmarks departure, on the 23. of September, arrived at Lon∣don Francis Prince of Vaudemount, third sonne to the Duke of Lorraine, accom∣panyed with seven Earles, ten Barons, forty Gentlemen of quality, and six-score common persons; who all the five and twentieth of September went by Coach to the King at Hampton Court, where foureteen dayes together they were feasted and royally entertained, and then returned. But these Festivalls were follwed with a little disturbance; for in May, the yeare after, great Assemblies were gathered together in Northampton-shire, Warwick∣shire, and Leicester-shire, throwing downe Inclosures, at first, without any parti∣cular head: but at last rose up a base fellow, called Iohn Reynolds, whom they named Captaine Pouch, because he had a great leather Pouch hanging by his side, who affirmed to the Company, that in that Pouch he had sufficient to de∣fend them against all cummers: but when hee was afterward apprehended, and his Pouch searched, there was nothing found in it but a piece of green Cheese. Proclamation was made, commanding them to surcease their dis∣order: But this prevailed nothing, till the King sent Henrie Earle of Hunting∣ton, Thomas Earle of Exceter, Edward Lord Zouch, and Sir Edward Coke Lord Chiefe Iustice of England to suppresse them by force of Armes, and to punish the Levellers according to the nature of their offences; some by Death, as for Treason; some by Fines, as for Routs: but Captaine Pouch was made exampler. On Friday, the twelfth of Iune, his Majesty attended with divers Lords, dyned with the Lord Major, Sir Iohn Wats, who after dinner presented him with a purse full of Gold, and humbly besought his Majestie, that he would be pleased to bee free of his Company, the Cloath-workers: To which, the KING graciously condiscended; and thereupon called to Sir William Stone, Master of the Company, and said, Stone give me thy hand; and now I am a Cloath-worker: And in token of my speciall favour to this fraternity, I doe here give to this Company a brace of Bucks yearely for ever, against the time of the Election of the Master and Wardens: at which time also many Lords and Gentlemen were made Free of the Cloath-workers.
On Thursday the 16. of Iuly, the King and Prince with many Lords, dined at Merchant Tlrs-Hall, where the Master and Warden of that Society, presented the King with a Purse of Gold, giving him humble thankes for gracing their Fraternity with his oyall presence and therewithall shewed him a Roll, wherein were Registred the names of seven Kings, one Queene, 17, Princes, and Dukes, two Dutchesses, one Archbishop; one and thirty Eearles, threescore and six Barons, seven Abbots, seven Pryors, with a great number of Knights and Esquires, who had been free of that Company; which His Majesty graci∣ously accepted, but told them, that he himselfe was already free of another Company: but the Prince his son should be free of theirs, and that he would see the Garland put on his head: whereupon the Master presented the Prince also with a purse of Gold, which he graciously accepted, and said, that not only Himselfe would bee free of the Merchant Tailors but the Lords also that were with him should do the like, all which was performed with great so∣lemnity. The fourth of Iuly this yeare, Sir Thomas nevet was called by Writ to the Parliament by the name of Baron of Estrick, the next day Sir Iulius Caesar, Chan∣celor of the Exchecker was sworne a Privy Counsellor; and the sixteenth of November fallowing Sir ervis Clyfton Knight, was called to the Parliament by Writ, by the name and title of Baron of Layton Brameswold, whose only daugh∣ter and heire, was soon after married, to Eysme Steward, Baron of Aubigny in France, sole brother of the Duke of Lnox; whom he afterward succeeded in that Dignity. About this time, Hugh Earle of Tervon, most ungratefully and utterly for∣getfull of the Kings great clemency to him, together with Terconell: Hugh Baron of Dungaunon, and divers other Irish Lords, fled into the parts beyond Sea, with a purpose to solicite forreign Princes against the King, and to offer the Kingdom of Ireland to the Pope, which was presently signified to the Realm by Proclamation. On the Eleventh of Aprill this year, George Iervis a Seminary Priest, and the three and twentieth of Iune following: Thomas Grnet a Iesuit, were both ex∣ecuted at Tybourn; Thom Garnet having the favour offered him to be pardoned, if he would but take the Oath of Allegeance, which he refused. The nineteenth of Aprill at Whitehall, died Thomas Earle of Dorset Lord Tre∣asurer, whose death (because he dyed suddenly as he sate at the Counsell-Table) was by some untowardly interpreted; but being dead and his head opened, there were found in it certain little bags of water, which whither by the strayning of his study the night before, in which he sate up till eleven a clock, or otherwise by their own maturity, suddenly breaking and falling upon his braine, caused his suddain death. So certain it is that death comes not always by determinate steps; but sometimes per saltum, and we all cary about us the causes of suddain death, though unsensible of them till we be unsensible. This Lord was of ex∣cellent parts, and in his place exceeding Industrious, and I have heard many Checker men say, there never was a better Treasurer, both for the Kings pro∣fit and the good of the subject. The twentith of May at Windsor, were made two Knights of the Gater, George Earle of Dunarre, and Philip Earle of Mogmery; but the Earle of Dunbarra, within a yeare or two after left both his honor and his life; but not his life with∣out honour, having been a faithfull servant, and a wise Counsellor to the King, and was honorably Interred in the Church at Westminster. About this time were many famous English Pirates that stuck not some of them to turne Turks and lived in great state at Tunis, of whom the chiefe were Wrd, Bishop, Sir Francis Verney and Glle, whom after many depredations and outragious acts at Sea, partly the King of Spaine suppressed, and partly the King of Eng. and 19 of their assocites being taken, were hanged a Wapping.
Also at this time, in the Strand on the North side of Durham house, where ood an old long stable: Robert Earle of Salisbury now Lord Treasurer of Eng∣d, caused to be erected a stately Building; which upon Tuesday the tenth of Aprill, in the yeare 1609, was begun to be richly furnished with wares; and the next day after, the King, the Queene, and Prince, with many great Lords and Ladies came to see it: and then the King gave it the name of Britteines urse. On the eight of May this year, the King by Proclamation prohibited all for∣reine Nations, that after August they should not fish upon any of the Coasts of England, Scotland or Ireland, nor the Isles adjacent, without the speciall Licence from the Commissioners in that behalfe Ordained. At this time the making of Allum, which heretofore with great charges, had been fetched from forreigne parts, was by diverse that laboured in it, and now lastly by Sir Iohn Burchier, brought to perfection in England, and therupon the King prohibited upon paine of confiscation, any Allum to be brought from beyond the Seas, and took the whole traffick therof to himself. And now the King according to an ancient custome, had ayde of His Sub∣jects thorough England: for making his eldest sonne Prince Henry Knight, which yet was Levied with great moderation, and the Prince to shew himselfe worthy of it: performed His first Feates of Armes at Barriers, with wonderfull skill and courage: being not yet full sixteene yeares of Age. It was now the eight yeere of King Iames His Reigne; being the yeare 1610, when Prince Henry being come to the age of seventeen yeares; It was thought fit, He should be Initiated into Royalty: and thereupon the thirtieth of May this yeare, He was Created Prince of Wales in most solemne manner; which was this; Garter King at Armes, bore the Letters Patents, the Earle of Sussex the Robes of Purple Velvet, the Earle of Huntington the Traine, the Earle of Cumberland the Sword, the Earle of Rutland the Ring, the Earle of Darby the Rod, the Earle of Shrewsbury the Cape and Coronet, the Earle of Nottingham and North-Hampton supported the Prince: being in His Surcoate only and bare-headed: and in this manner being conducted to the King, attended on by the Knights of the Bathe, five and twenty in number, all great men, and great mens sons: The Earle of Salisbury principall Secretary, read the Letters Pattents: the Prince kneeling all the while before the King: and at the words accustomed, the King put on him, the Robe, the Sword, the Cape and the Coronet, the Rod and the Ring, and then kissed him on the cheeke, and so the solemnity ended. After this, it was thought fit, he should keep his Court by himselfe: and there∣upon Sir Thomas Chaloner, a learned Gentleman, who had before been his Go∣vernour, was now made his Lord Chamberlaine, Sir Edw. Philips his Chancellor, and all other officers assigned him, belonging to a Princes Court: wherein he shewed himselfe so early ripe for Majesty, that he seemed to be a King, while he was yet but Prince: And all mens eyes began to fix upon him. King Iames had long since shut up the Gates of Ianus, and was in Peace with all Princes abroad; his only care now was how to keep Peace at home; and to this end, the three first dayes of Iune, in his own person he heard the differences between the Ecclesiasticall and the Temporall Iudges, argued tou∣ching Protections out of the KingsBench and Common-Pleas, to this end, the eight, ninth, & tenth of Iune, he heard the manifold complaints of the abuses of the Victualers, & other Officers of his Navy Royall; to this end, the 4 of Iune, 1610, he once again by Proclamation, commanded all Roman Priests, Semina∣ries and Iesuits, as being the chiefe Incendiaries of troubles, to depart this King∣dome by the 5 of Iuly next, and not to returne upon pain of severity of the Law: also all Recusants, to returne home to their Dwellings, and ot to ramaine
in London, o to come within ten miles of the Court, without speciall Licence; ar which Proclamation, the Oth of Allegeance was presently ministred to all sorts of people, and their names certified to the Lords of the Counsell, that refed to take it; and this Hee the rather did out of consideration of the bloudy fact, committed lately by one Revillck, upon the person of the renow∣ned K. of France, Henry the fourth, & whereas Queen Elizabeth in her 43 years had granted her Letters Pattents to continue for 15 years, to the East India Mer∣chants, now upon their humble petition, the King was pleased to enlarge their Pates, giving them a charter to continue for ever, enabling them thereby to be a body Corporate and Politick, which so encouraged the Merchants, that they built a ship of twelve hundred un, the greatest that was ever made in this King∣dome by Merchants; which the King and Prince honored with going to Dept∣ford to see it; and then named it, The Trades encrease: and at this time gave to Sir Thomas Smith, (Governour of that Company) a faire chaine of Gold, with a Iewell, wherein was his Picture. But this great Ship having been in the Read Sea, and returning to Banthem, was there lost and most of her men cast away. But then the King himselfe builded the goodliest Ship of War, that was e∣ver built in England, being of the burthen of 1400 tun, and carrying threescore and foure pieces of great Ordnance, which he gave to his son Prince Henry, who named it after his own dignity, The Prince. And now whereas a Parliament had been holden this year, and was Prorogued to a certain day; the King perhaps, not finding it to comply with his designes, or for some other cause known to himself, on the last day of December, under the grt Sale of England, dissolved it. Before this time, one Sir Robert Crre, a Gentleman of Scotland or of the bor∣d, being a hunting with the King, chanced with a fall off his horse to breake his leg; upon which mischance, he was forced for some days to keep his bed, in which time the King was sometimes pleased to come and visit him: and then it was first perceived that the King had begun to cast an eye of favour upon him: and indeed ro that time forward (as he was a very fine Gentleman and very wise) many great favours were heaped upon him: So as on Easter Munday, in the yeare 1611, he was Created Viscount Rochester. On the two and twen∣tieth of Aprill, 1612, was swone a privy Counsellor. On the fourth of No∣vember 1613, was Created Earle of Soerset, and the tenth of Iuly following, made Lord Chamberlaine. B this Sun-shine of Fortune lasted not long; yet not by any inconstancy in the King, but by the Earles own undeserving, which thus fell out: The Right Honourable Robert Earle of Essex, had before this time married the beautifull Lady Francis Howard, daughter of Thomas Earle of Suffolk, who upon cases u∣dicially heard, were afterward Divorced and left free to marry any other. Af∣te which Divoce, this great favorite (the Earle of Somerset) takes her for wife; th King gacing their marriage with all demonstrations of love and favour; and the Lords gracing it with a stately Masque that night, and a few dayes after, the Bride and Bridegroom, accompanied with most of the Nobility of the King∣dome were easted at Merchant Taylors Hall, by the Lord Major and Alder∣men. But see how soon this faire weher was overcast: For it hapned, that one Sir Thmas erbry, a very ingenious Gentleman, and the Earles speciall fd, who had written a witty Tretise of a Wife: and it seemes, not thinking th Lady in all points answerable to his description, had been an earnest dissw∣a of the M, and to rengthen his diwasion, layd perhaps some unjust  up the Ladyes , which so incensed them both against him; that  could not give them satiction, than to take away his life: So  saying: Improbe r, quid non mortalia pectora cogis?
this, they finde pretences to have the said Sir Thomas committed to the wer, and there by their Instruments effect their revenge: some say by a oned Tansey sent him to eat, some by a poysoned Glyster ministred unto , but howsoever effected it was for which Fact Sir Iervis Elvis then Lieu∣ of the Tower, and three or foue other of inferiour condition were put to death, the Lady and Earle themselves were arraigned and condemned: but horough the Kings great clemency had their lives spared, but in such a sort spa∣ed as was to them no lesse grievous than death it slf, being never after suffered to see the Kings face, nor to come neere his Court. This Favorite being thus out of favour, there was place made for entertain∣ing another; for indeed King Iames was of so sociable and loving a nature, that he could not be long well without an Alter idem; a bosome friend with whom to communicate his Internos sensus, and upon whose shoulders he might sometimes lay a burthen, which he was not willing to beate himselfe; and this new friend was Mr. George Villers, a Gentleman of a good House, but a younger brother, but of so delicate a composure of body, and withall of so excellent pats of mind, as if nature had framed him of purpose to be a Kings Favorite. And indeed never any man was partaker of the Royall Influence like to him, made first a Knight, and Gentleman of the Kings Bed-chamber, soone after made a Viscount and Master of the Horse; a while after erected Earle of Buck∣ingham, then Marquis of Buckingham, and made Lord Admirall: Lastly, made Duke of Buckingham, the greatest Title of Honour that a Subject is capable of and yet his Title not greater than his Power: for all matters of Grace passed from the King by him, and to grace him the more, his Mother (who after his Fa∣thers death) had marryed a younger sonne of the Lord Comptons, was created Countesse of Buckingham, his sister who had marryed a Gentleman of no ex∣raordinary Family: had her husband made Earle of Denbigh, his two bro∣thers were made, one of them Viscount Berbach; the other Earle of Anglesey; besides many other of his friends and kindred highly advanced; For this Lord affected not an advancement that should bee only personall, but rather bee in common to all his Family, and was not of the disposition of some, who like to great Oakes, love to keep all that are neer them underwood; though it be in truth both against Nature and Policy to stand alone, when they would be lesse sub∣ject to the violence of windes, if more stood together. And though never any man had juster cause to be envyed than hee, yet never any man was lesse envy∣ed; because though his Honours made him great, yet they made him not swell, but he retained the like temper of affable carriage after his advancement, as he had done before. But before all these favours were heaped upon him, many other great pas∣ages had intervened; for first, after the death of Thomas Earle of Dorset, Robert Earle of Salisbury had beene Lord Treasurer, and after him Thomas Earle of Suffolke. But this Lord, though of a most noble disposition: yet as having had his trayning up another way, seemed lesse ready in discharging the place, and whether for this, or for his Ladies taking too much upon her by his indulgence; the staffe was soone after taken from him; after whom there came in, such a se∣quence of Treasures as no Age before had ever seene all wise and able men indeed; but yet in whom the Office seemed an imployment, rather to ennoble the Officer than to enrich the King. For first Sir Henry Montague was taken from the Kings Bench: and on the fourth of December 1620. made Lord Trea∣surer, and presently upon it Earle of Manchester, and before the yeere went a∣bout put off. After whom Sir Lyonell Cranfield, from Master of the Wards was made Lord Treasurer, and shortly after, Earle of Middlesex: and then not only put off, but fined to pay the King fifty thousand pounds: After him Sir Iames Lee from chiefe Iustice of the Kings Bench was made Lord Treasurer, and soone after Earle of Marleborough; and then having made a good returne of his Place,
p i off himselfe. After him Sir Richard Wston, from Chancelour of the Ex∣her was made Lord Treasurer, and soone after Earle of Portland: so as with∣in the compasse of little more than foure yeares, foure Treasurer in a row were made four Earles; enough to make a praescription for all Treasurers hereafter, to clayme a Right of being made Earles, which yet I speake not as derogating from those worthy men whose memories I reverence, but as observing, Fa∣taqe Frtunasque Virum; so rare as that there was never any President of the like. Also the five and twenteth of Iune, 1612. the Lord Snquer a Nobleman of Scotland, having in a private revenge suborned Robert Carlile, to murther Iohn Tuner a Master of Fence, thought by his greatnesse to have borne it out; but th King respecting nothing so much as Iustice, would not suffer Nobility to be a shelter for villany, but according to the Law; on the nine and twenteth of Iune; the said Lord Sanquer having been arraigned and condemned by the name of Robert Cright Esquire; was before Westminster Hall gate executed, where he dyed very penitent. About this time, the King in speciall favour for the present Plantation of English Colonies in Virginia, granted a Lottery to be held at the West end of Pauls; whereof one Thomas Sharplys a Taylour of London had the chiefe Prize, which was foure thousand Crownes in faire Plate. At this time also the Corps of Mary late Queene of Scotland, the Kings Mo∣ther was translated from Peterborough, to St. Peters Church in Westminster, and from thence was carryed to the Chappell Royall there; where it was interred in a Royall Tombe, which the King had erected for her. About this time also Sir Robert Sherley, third sonne of Sir Thomas Sherley of Sussex Knight, who sixteene yeares past had betaken himselfe to travaile: and had served diverse Christian Princes for the space of five yeares; but chiefly Rodolphus the Roman Emperour; who for his service, made him an Earle of the Empire, hee afterward went into Persia, and served the Persian ten yeares, who made him Generall of the Artillery: and held him in so great account, that hee gave him the Lady Teresia in marriage, whose sister was one of the Queens of Persia, after which the Persian imployed him to sundry Princes of Europe; and set him in speciall Embassage into England to King Iames, to whom he delivered his Letters, and shewed his Commission, all which signified the Persians great love and affection to his Majesty: with franke offer of free Commerce to all his Highnesse Subjects, thorough all the Persians Dominions: After a yeares stay here, in which time his Lady lay in of a sonne, to whom the Queene was God-Mother, and Prince Henry God-Father; hee left the child here in England, and then with his Lady departed into Persia. It was now the yeare 1612. and the tenth of King Iames his Raigne, when the Illustrious Prince Frederick Count Palatine of the Rhyne; with whom a Treaty of marriage had been before, with the Lady Elizabeth: on the sixteenth of October arrived at Gravesend; to whom the Duke of Lenox and diverse o∣ther Lords were sent by the King, who conducted him to White-Hall, and from thence into the great Bquetting-House, where the King, the Queene, Prince Henry, and the Lady Elizabeth entertained him in all kind manner, and after by Barge conducted him to Essex House, appointed for his lodging. It was many yeres since any Kings Daughter had beene marryed in England; which now happening, and to so Illustrious a Prince; was just cause of Triumph and re∣joyceing but see the misery of Humane Affaires; joy can no sooner be setting forth, but sorrow will be sure to follow her at the heeles, as now indeed it hap∣pened: for on the nine and twentieth of October, the Prince Palatine, with all the great Lords of the Kingdome in most joviall manner, dining at Guild-Hall: Prince H who wa also invited and expected, could not come, being newly fallen exceding sick of a popular malignant feavour, which raigned that yeare
in most parts of this Land: whereof on the sixth of November, between seven nd eight a Clock at night, at his Court of St. Iames he dyed. But hee being infinitly beloved of the people, and one that had given great hope of pro∣ing an Heroick Prince. It caused suspition in many mens heads, that his death was not without violence offered to Nature; some said, by bunches of Grapes given him to eate: some by gloves of a poysoned perfume, given him or a present: but these were but idle rumours and conceits: It seemes the Divine Providence had ordained it should be said of him; Hanc tantum terris endent Fata nec ultra esse sinet: whose death would have given a great blow to the happinesse of this Kingdome, if there had not beene another Prince left of a milder spirit perhas, but so accomplished with all excellent endowments, that there could be no great want of Prince Henrie, as long as there was left Prince Charles. The Corps of Prince Henrie, who dyed at the age of eighteene yeares, eight moneths, and seventeene dayes, was drawne in a Chariot to the Abbey Church at Westminter, and there interred in the Chappell Royall on the seventh of December following. This Accident something appealed the generall joy, but yet triumphs went on. Vpon Saint Thomas day, the Palsgrave and Grave Maurice were Elected Knight of the Garter; and the seven and twentieth of December, the Palsgrave was betroathed to the Lady Elizabeth. On Sunday, the seventh of Februarie, the Palsgrave in person was enstalled Knight of the Garter at Windor, and at the same time was Grave Maurice enstalled by his Deputy, Count Lodwick of Nas∣saw. On the fourteenth of Februarie, being Shrove-Sunday, and Saint Valentines day, this happy marriage of the Palsgrave with the Lady Elizabeth was so∣lemnized in the Chappell at White-hall: The Bride was led to Church by two Batchellors, her brother Prince Charles, and the Earle of Northampton, Lord Privie Seale: she was attired all in white, having a rich Crowne of Gold upon her head, her haire hanging downe at length, curiously bee with Pearles and precious stones, her Train supported by twelve yong Ladies in white Garments: The King gave her in marriage, the Arch-Bishop of Canterburie married them, the Bishop of Bath and Wells preached the Bridall Sermon: which ended, the Bride was led home by two married men, the Duke of Lenox, and the Earle of Nttingham, Lord Admirall. This marriage was solemnized the first night with a stately Masque of Lords and Ladies: the second night with a magni∣ficent Masque of the Gentlemen of the middle Temple, and Lincolnes Inne: The third night with a sumptuous Masque of the Gentlemen of the Inner Temple, and Graees Inne, provided indeed then, but was not performed till the satturday night following, by reason the concourse of people was so great, it would have hindred the Show. After this, the Lord Major and Aldermen gave the Bride a Chain of Orientall Pearle, valued at two thousand pounds: and now when all things had beene done for honouring their marriage, which either love and observance could device, or Art and Magnificence could performe: On the tenth of April, the Bride-groome with his Bride tooke leave of the King and Queene at Rochester, (who had by Barge conducted them thither) and there taking Ship: On the nine and twentieth of April they arrived at Flshing; from whence the Duke of Lenox, the Earle of Arundell, the Viscount Lisle, and the Lord Harington, waited upon them to their chiefe City of Heydelburgh; in all places as they passed, being received with all State and magnificence: but then on the foureteenth of Iune, the English Lords returning home, the Lord Harington dyed by the way at Wormes, whose Corps was brought over, and buied in England And here it will not be amisse, to shew of what extent and largenesse the Palsgrave's Countrie is because of the iniquity of some that seeke to disgrace it. It is in length about two hundred English miles, taking the lower and upper Countrie. In the lower hee hath six and twenty walled Townes, besides an infinite number of faire Villages, and two and twenty
houses of residence. In the uper, not so many walled Townes, and hou∣ses, but those that are generally fairer than in the lower, especially Amberg, and New-market. But it is now time to looke home; in the yeare 1609. the King having care for the quietnesse of Ireland, had granted to the City of London the present possession and Plantation in the Province of Ulster: whereupon afterward in the yeare 1612. they sent thither about three hundred persons, of all sorts of handy-crafts men, chiefely to inhabite the two Cities of London-Derrie and Coleraigne: where they ordained Alderman Cockaine for their first Gover∣nour. And for the advancing of this, or the like Plantation in Ireland, King Iames about this time began a new Order of Knights, which are called Baro∣nes, because they take place next to Barons younger sonnes and hee ap∣poynted certaine Lawes, to make them capable that should be admitted. First that they should maintaine the number of thirty foot souldiers in Ireland, for three yeares, after the rate of eight pence a day, and to pay the wages of one whole yeare, upon the passing of their Patent: Then that they should bee Gentlemen of Bloud of three Descents; and lastly, should have land of In∣heritance, in possession or immediate Reversion, to the value of a thousand pounds per annum: And to keep the Order from swarming, he stinted it with∣in the number of onely 200. and as the issue should faile, the Order to cease. But he that will look, how wel the end of the Institution, and the Laws of it have bin observed shall perhaps find it to be here, as it was in the Order of St. Michael in France, into which at first there were none admitted, but Princes and Emminent persons: but afterward, all sorts of men, without any difference, were admitted, that it came almost to bee doubted, whether the Dignity of the Order did more grace the persons, or the meanesse of the persons disgrace the Order: and indeed, when the Lawes of an Institution are not in some measure observed, it seemes to make a kind of nullity in the collation. About this time, on Sunday the 4. of October, an exemplar pennance was imposed upon Sir Peckall Brkas Knight, which was to stand at Pauls Crosse in a white sheet, holding a stick in his hand, having been formerly convicted before the high Commissioners, for many notorious Adulteries with divers women. This yeare 1614. in the month of Iuly, Christianus King of Denmark, (out of his love to his sister, and King Iames) came the second time into England; but as being now secure of himselfe, privately, and with a small company, so as he came to the Queen at Somerset house unexpected, and before any knowledge was had of his comming; but K. Iames being then in progresse in Bedford-shire, and hearing of it, came presently back, and after he had entertained him here, with Hunting, Haw∣king, running at Ring, Bear-baiting, Plays, Fire-works and Fencing, on the first of August Prince Charles brought him aboard his Ship, who then took his leave, and returned home. In Octob. this yeare was a call of Sarjeants at Law, being 11. in number, namely, George Wild, Wil Towes, Rich Bawtrie, Henry Finch, Th Chamberlain, Francis Mor, Thomas Attow, Iohn More, Francis Harvie, Charles Chibbourn, and Tho. Richardson; and in Trenity Terme before there had two other been called, namely, Sir Randal Cre of Lincols Inne, and Sir Robert Hitcham of Grayes Inne, Knights. About this time an Embassador came from the young Emperour of Russia to King Iames, desiring his continuall love and amity, and to be a means of making attoneme, between him and the K. of Swethland, and withall presented him with a rich present of Furs: which was no smal honour to the K. of great Britain to have so great a Potentate as the Emperor of Russia a solicit him to be his mediator. Though King Iames out of all naturall goodnesse was addicted to peace, yet out of providence he neglected not to be prepared for war, and thereupon in the yeare 1610. had granted priviledges to a society called of the Millitarie
Garden; and this year 1614, caused a Muster of men to be presented before him, which was performed to his great liking, and to the great commendation of the City. About this time a memorable Act was performed by M. Hug. Middleton, Citi∣zen and Gold-smith of London, and borne in Denigh-shire, who having an Act of Parliament for his Warrant, with infinite cost and indefatigable labour, brought water to the City of London, from the two great springs of Chadwell and Am∣well in Hartfort-shire, having cut a Channell from thence to a place neere Isling∣ton, whither he conveyed it, to a large Pan, and from thence in pipes of young Elmes to all places of the City: for as the Poeth saith: . Nothing is so commodious for the life of man, as water. Another memorable Act was about this time done on the North side on Lon. called Moore-fields, which being before invironed with deep stinking ditches and noysome common showers, was now, not only made faire & sweet, but so level∣led into walkes and let with trees, that it is the pleasantest place of all the City. The next yeare being 1615, another memorable Act, for the benefit and beau∣ty of the City of London, was performed; for Smith-field, which was before a rude dirty place, was now paved all over, and strong railes sequestring the mid∣dle part of it, were set up, to make it a faire walking place, and fit for Market or any other use. The Lady Arbella a neare kinsewoman of the Kings, had sometime before, without the Kings privity, secretly married Master William Seymour, younger son of the Earle of Hartford, now Earle of Hartford himselfe; for which they were both committed to the Tower: and now this yeare, on the seven and twentieth day of Sep. she ended her lif there, and was buried in the Chappell Royall at Westminster. This yeare also in Iuly, were Enstalled Knights of the Garter, Francis Earle of Rutland, Sir George Villers Master of the Horse, and Sir Robert Sidney Vis∣count Lis: and in another kind of Honour, the Earle of Arundell, the Lord Carews, and Doctor Andrews Bishop of Ely, were sworne Privie Coun∣sellours. Wales by the death of Prince Henry, had been a good while without a Prince, and now to supply that place, Prince Charles is Created Prince of Wales: In Ioy whereof, the Town of Ludlow in Shropshire, and the City of London, performed great Triumphs: and the more to honour his Creation: There were made five and twenty Knights of the Bathe; all them Lords or Barons sons, and yet more to honour it, there were forty selected Gentlemen of the Innes of Court, that performed a solemne Iusts at Barries, with great magnificence. This yeare was a Censure of divers great Delinquents, for first Sir Edward Cook, was upon displeasure discharged from being Lord Chiefe Justice of the Kings Bench; and two dayes after his discharge, Sir Henry Montage the Kings Sergeant at Law, was placed in his room: Next to him the Lord Egerton, why∣ther disabled by sicknesse or age, to exercise the place, or upon displeasure also, had the Sele taken from him, which was delivered to Sir Francis Bacon the King's Attourney, he made first Lord Keeper; and the Lord Egerton dying soon after, Lord Chancellour. Not long after him Sir Henry Yelverton the Kings At∣tourney, for adding new priviledges to the Londoers Charter, without the Kings privity, was in displeasure put from his place; and in his room was pla∣ced Sir Thomas Coventry, the Kings Sollicitor. But awhile after, Sir Henry el∣verton, was made a puny Iudge of the Common Pleas; having indeed the re∣putation of an excellent Lawyer. And yet this work of Censuring stayed not here, for much about this time; Thomas Earle of Suffolk Lord Treasurer of England, had the staffe of his Office taken from him; which was soon after delivered to Sir Henry Montag Lord
Chiefe Iustice of the Kings Bech. If Sir Iohn Benet, Iudge of the Prerogative Court, had made a little more haste, he mihght have made one in this number of Delinquents: but he came short three or foure yeares; and then being char∣ged by his own servant with brybery, he was put from his place and censured in the Starre-Chamber to pay twenty thousand pounds: and in his roome was placed Sir William Byrde a man of more integrity. Though King Iames upon the death of Queene Elizabeth, came to reside in England, yet e forgot not that Scotland was his native Countrey; and there∣fore after he had spent some yeares in England, to acquaint himselfe with the State of the Kingdome. In March this yeare one thousand six hundred and sixteent, he made a Iourney into Scotland: for though he had left very able men to sit at the Helme there in his absence: yet he knew, that as it is the Ma∣sters Eye, that makes the Horse fat: So it is the Prince's presence sometimes that keeps out many distempers in a State, that would otherwise creep in and now, when in his staying six Months there, he had seen all things well setled, both in the Ecclesiasticall State and in the Temporall, and made it appeare, that he resided not in England out of any neglect of Scotland; but to the end, he migt be in the place of most conveniency to both Kingdoms: on the fifteenth of September, he returned to London, not more to the griefe of the Scots to leave him, than to the joy of the English to receive him, so much was King Iames as a just and wise Prince, beloved of both the Nations. Now comes to be related a matter of speciall observation; Sir Walter Rw∣legh had lived a condemned man many yeares in the Tower, and now his De∣stiny brought him to his end (by liberty) which it could not do by imprison∣ment, for out of a longing for liberty; he propounded a project to the King, up∣on which (as he was a well spoken man and of a great capacity) he set such cou∣lours of probability; especially guilding it over, with the Gold he would fetch from a Mine in Guyana; and that without any wrong at all to the King of Spane (if he might be allowed to go the Iourney) that the King, if he gave not credit that he could performe it, at least gave way that he should undertake it: and thereupon with diverse ships, accompanied with many Knights and Gent∣lemen of quality, he set forward on the Voyage; but when after long search, or shew of search, no such place of Treasure or no such treasure could be found, whether it were, that he thought it a shame, to returne home, with doing nothing: or that his Malus Genius thrust him upon the Designe: He fell upon Saint Thm, a Towne belonging to the King of Spaine: sacked it, pillaged it, and burnt it: and here was the first part of his Tragicall Voyage acted, in the death of his eldest son: the last part was Acted in his own death at his re∣turne. For Gundomore the Spanish Lieger, did so aggravate this fact of his to the King, against him; that it seemed nothing would give satisfaction but Raw∣legh's head, without which he doubted there would follow a breach of the League between the two Nations. Rawlegh excused it, by saying that he was urged to it by the Spaniards first assaulting of him; and besides, that he could not come at the Myne, without winning this Town: but Gundomor was too strong an Adversary for him; and the King preferring the publique Peace, be∣fore the life of one man, already condamned, gave way to have the Sentence of his former Condemnation executed upon him; and thereupon, brought to the Kings Bench Bae: he was not newly Arraigned or Indicted, as being already Mrtuus in Lege, but only hath the former Sentence averred against him, and so carryed to the Gate-house, and from thence the next morning to the Parlia∣ment Yard: a Scaffold was there erected, upon which after fourteen yeares reprivall, his head was cut off: at which time, such abundance of bloud issued from his vies, that shewed he had stock of Nature enough left to have conti∣ued him many yeares in life: hough now above threescore yeares old, if it had not been taken away by the hand of Violence.
And this was the end of the great Sir Walter Rawlegh: great sometimes, in the vour of Queene Elizabeth, and next to Drake the great scourge and hate of the Spaniard, who had many things to be commended in his life; but none more, than his constancy at his death, which he tooke with so undaunted a re∣solution that he might perceive, he had a certaine expectation of a better life af∣te it: so farre he was from holding those Atheisticall opinions; an aspersion whereof some traducing persons had cast upon him. About this time King Iames made a progresse to the Vniversity of Cambridge, who delighted with the Disputations and other scholasticall exercises: he stay∣ed three whole dayes, and could have been content to have stayed as many yeares: for next being a King, he was made to be a Scholler. In the yeare 1619. being the seventeenth yeere of King Iames his Raigne, that knot of love which above twenty yeares had beene tyed, betweene him and his Queene was by death dissolved; for on Tuesday this yeere the second of March, Queen Anne dyed at Hampton Court, whose Corps was brought to Denmark house, and from thence conveighed to Westminster: wherein the Roy∣all Chappell, with great solemnity it was interred: a Princesse very memora∣ble for her vertue, and not a little for her Fortune, who besides being a Queene, was so happy as to be Mother, of such admired children, as she brought into the World. But the dissolving of this knot cast the King into an extreame sick∣nesse; and after some recovery, into a Relaps: from which notwithstanding, it pleased God to deliver him, as having yet some great worke to doe. This yeare on Munday the third of May, one Mr. Williams a Barrister of the Middle Temple, was arraigned at the Kings Bench, for civilling, and for wri∣ting Bookes against the King: and upon Wednesday following was hanged and quartered at Charing Crosse. But an action of another nature was performed this yeare, the seventeenth of Iuly; not unworthy the relating, which was this; that one Bernard Calvert of Andover, rode from St. Georges Church in Southwarke to Dover, from thence passed by Barge to Calice in France, and from thence returned back to Saint Georges Church the same day, setting out about three a clock in the morning, and returned about eight a clock in the Evening, fresh and lusti. In the yeare 1621. a Parliament was holden at Westminster; wherein two great examples of Iustice were shewed; which for future terrour are not unfit to bee here related: One upon Sir Gyles Montpesson, a Gentleman otherwayes of good parts; but for practising sundry abuses in erecting and setting up new Innes and Alehouses, and eacting great summes of money of people, by pre∣tence of Letters Patents granted to him for that purpose, was sentenced to bee degraded; and disabled to beare any office in the Common-wealth, though he avoyded the execution by flying the Land; but upon Sir Erancis Michell, a Iu∣stice of Peace of Middlesex, and one of his chiefe Agents, the sentence of De∣gradation was executed: and he made to ride with his face to the horse tayle, thorough the City of London. The other example was of Sir Francis Bacon, Vis∣count, St. Albans Lord Chancelour of England, who for bribery was put from his place, and committed to the Tower: but after some few dayes enlarged: in whose place Doctor Williams Deane of Westminster was made Lord Keeper. The Count Palatine, being now strengthned with the allyance of the King of Great Brittaine, was thought a fit man to be King of Bohemia, and accordingly was elected, by the States of that Kingdome, but he was no sooner invested in the Crowne; but the Emperour with great Forces assaulted him in Prague, and not only drove him with his wife and children from thence; but tooke from him also his owne Patrimony the Palatinate: so as though now a King he was fayne to flye to the States of the Low Countries for a place of residence, King Iames though he had never given his consent to the Palsegraes taking upon him that Kingdome, as foreseeing in his great judgement what the event will bee: yet
in this distresse, he could no forbeare to take care of his daughter, and thereup∣on sent Sir Richard Weson the same that was after Lord Treasurer in Embassage to the Emperour to sollicite the restoring of the Palatinate to the Palsegrave; but he returning without successe; the King had then conference with Count Gundmar the King of Spaines Ligier in England, what course might bee taken to procure the restoring it: who made him answere, there could be no better course than to make a marriage, betweene his sonne the Prince of Wales, and the Infant of Spaine which he said would easily be effected, if the Prince might have leave to make a Iourny into Spaine. King Iames though he considered the inveterate grudges betweene Spaine and England, and as dangerous it might be to put the heire of the Kingdom into the Spaniards hands, yet grounding himself upon the saying: Fide lem si putaveris, facies: and drawne on by the insinuating speeches of Count Gundomar, not perhaps without some Indinction in the Marquis of Buckingham, was contented at last the Prince should goe. And so Prince Charles sending his ships about, and taking along with him only the Mar∣quis of Buckingham (who in the time of his being in Spaine was created Duke of Buckingham) Endymion Porter, and Mr. Francis Cottington: (two that were well acquainted with the Language and affaires of Spaine) he tooke his Iourney by the way of France, went to Paris, and secretly in disguise to the Court there, where he had the sight of that Lady, that might well have stayed him from going further, but yet on he went. In the meane time Gundomar a cunning man, and one that besides his Masters had ends of his owne, and could play his Game no lesse for his owne profit than his Masters Honour; as he had perswaded the King of the facility of the Match with Spayne, so he perswaded a certainty of it, especially amongst Ca∣tholick Ladies, by which meanes he brought no small store of Grists to his owne Mill, receiving from one Lady three hundred pounds to bee made Groome of the Stoole, when the Spanish Princesse should come; of another a good round summe to be made Mother of the Maydes, and of diverse other the like for other places. But the Prince being arrived in Spayne, was received indeed with all the de∣monstrations of love and kindnesse that could be devised, so as the charge of his entertainment was said to stand the King of Spayne in nine and forty thou∣sand Duckats; but yet his acquaintance with the Lady was much restrained, for in all the time of his staying in Spayne, which was no lesse than eight moneths, being from February to October) he saw her but very seldome, and that at good distances, never spake with her but twice, and that before company, besides that his speeches were limited, how much and what he should say, farre from any meanes of tying the knot betweene them which was pretended, what the cause should bee was much in obscurity; some thought that a difference betweene the Duke of Buckingham, and the Count Olivares, the King of Spayne's great Favorite was a great hinderance of the proceeding: but other, and more likely that the Spanyard indeed never really intended the Match at all, but had drawne the Prince into Spayne for other Ends: but what those ends were, was no lesse uncertaine; (one thought it was done to hold the Prince in a treaty of marriage with a Daughter of Spayne, till the Daughters of France should bee be∣stowed, thereby to keepe him from that allyance, but others and more likely, that the King of Spayne entertayned this Treaty with the King of great Brit∣tayne, meaning to spinne it out till he had compassed some designes in the Low-Countries, and the Palatinate, at least to make King Iames, most vigilant for those pats. But when much time had beene spent in protracting, upon pretence of dif∣ficultities in obtaining the Popes dispensation, King Iames partly wearied with delay, but chiefely angred with delusion, sent to the Prince, with all speed to returne into England; which the Prince presently signified to the King
of Spaine, and had his leave to depart; but upon promise to continue the treaty of the marriage still. Though it was said, the Prince was gone but a few dayes on his journey, when a Post was sent to have stayed him, if he had been over∣taken. But whether it was so or no, it was Gods providence that he came safe∣ly to his ships, and in them safely into England; arriving at Portsmouth, where he was beheld of the people, with no lesse gladnesse, than the Sunne after a long Eclipse: and now his safe returning did both justifie King Iames his judge∣ment in suffering him to goe, and the King of Spaines justice, in suffering him to come back: and was cause, that the people began to have a better opinion of the Spanish faith, than they had before. But now it presently brake out, that this match with Spaine could never take effect: for King Iames having re∣ceived Declarations of the Articles touching the marriage, found many very strict and large for exercise of the Catholike Religion: but none at all for re∣stitution of the Palatinate; which made him so much discontented, that he presently brake off all treaty of the marriage; and signified as much, not onely to the King of Spaine, but to divers other Princes of Christendome: Vpon which breach, two great Points were presently had in consultation: One for preparing forces, for recovering the Palatinate by way of Armes, which could not be done by a way of friendship: and for this purpose, a Councell of warre was called, and a proposition resolved on both of men and money, for undertaking the enterprise: as also a great contribution by way of benevo∣lence was collected; towards which, the compiler of this worke, gave himselfe fifty pounds: as many other farre greater summes, though the collection went not thorow the whole Land by reason there was hope given of a peace∣able reconcilement: so as many that were not over-hasty in their payments escaped without contributing at all. The other point was for providing a fit wife for the Prince, in some other place. It was said, the States of Holland offe∣red a very great portion in marriage to the Prince, if hee would match with some Lady of that Countrie: but matches are made in heaven, and there was a young Lady of France destined to his bed: and for this purpose, the Earle of Carlile, and the Earle of Holland were sent into France, to treat of a marriage with a younger daughter, of the Great Henrie the fourth, King of France decea∣sed, and sister to the present King Lewis; which marriage afterward took effect, but was not accomplished in King Iames his dayes; who dyed soon after the agreement. It was now the yeare 1623. in which in Michaelmas Terme, there was a Call of fifteene Sarjeants at Law, who kept their Feast in the Middle-Temple Hall. Some Passages of small moment I confesse are omitted by me, in this Raigne of King Iames, as whereof, for want of knowing the particulars, I dare not venture up∣on making the Relation: which if some men would have done, the truth of our Chronicles should not have been mingled with so many falsities. Of his TAXATIONS. IN his second yeare, in the moneth of September, he sent Privie Seales, to the wealthiest Citizens of London, for monies to bee borrowed of them: and in October following, the customes of Merchandises, both outward and inward were raised, and then were letten out to Farme. In a Parliament holden at Westminster, the third yeare of his Reigne, there were given him three entire Subsidies, and six fifteens by the Temporalty, and by the Clergie foure entire Subsidies. This yeare also Henry Lord Mordant, convicted in the Star-Chamber,
for divers misprisions, was fined to pay ten thousand Marks, and Edward Lord Sturtn for the like offence to pay six thousand Marks, and Henry Earle of Northumberland for offences laid to his charge, to pay thirty thousand pounds, and some yeares after Sir Iohn Bennet, Iudge of the Prerogative Court was fined to pay twenty thousand pounds. In his fourth yeare he repayed threescore thousand pounds to the Citizens of London, which the Londoners had lent to Queen Elizabeth, three yeares before her death; an act by which he got more love, than hee payed money. In his seventh yeare hee had ayd throughot England, for making his eldest Son Prince Henrie Knight: which though levied with great moderation, brought him in great summes of mo∣ney. In his eighteenth yeae, in a Parliament holden at Westminster, the Temporalty gave him two Subsidies, and the Clergie three: and in another Parliament, in the yeare 1623. the Temporalty gave him three subsidies; and three fifteens; the Clergy foure Subsidies. Besides these Subsidies hee sent abrod many great Privie Seales, and had also a benevolence throughout the Realme: not without some grudging, but without any just cause; for it should have been remembred, that he took it not out of covetousnesse to gather wealth, but out of very necessity to supply wants: For by his imploying many Embassa∣dours in Ordinary, many Extraordinarie, by his necessarie bounty to his fol∣lowers, and by his charge of keeping severall Courts; none of all which hee could avoyd: His expences were farre greater than any of his Predecessors had ever beene, Of his Lawes and Ordinances. THE day of his removing from Charter-house, at his first comming into Eng∣land, he caused Proclamation to be made, that all Monopolies and Pro∣tections should cease; as likewise all oppressions done by Salt-Peeter men, by Purveiers, and Carters. On the 26. of May following hee set forth a Procla∣mation, restraining all persons under great penalties from killing of Deere, or any kind of Fowle used for Hawking. The seventeenth of May, Proclamation was made against Robberies on the borders: and on the nineteenth of May, another for niting the people inhabiting about the borders of England and cland, to live in love nd quitnesse. In this first yeare, in a Parliament hen holden it was Enacted, that neither Arch-bishop, nor Bishop, should Alienate, Grant, or Demise, or in any sort convey, no not to the King him∣selfe y of the Honours, Lands, Tenements, or Hereditaments, being parcell of the possessions of his Arch-biop, or Bishoprick: and if any were, it should be utterly voyd, and of no effect, notwithstanding any former Law, Act, or Ordi∣nance to the contrarie. He then also, caused himself by Proclamation to be En∣styled King of Great Britaine, that the division of England and Scotland might be no more remembred. In his second yeare, by his Letters Patents he incorpora∣ted the Fel-makers of London, by the name of Master, Wardens, and Commu∣nalty of the Art or Mysterie of the Felt-makers, granting them divers privileges and liberties, for their good government of their Corporation. In Novem. of his second yeare, were Proclaimed in London certaine new pieces of coyne, both of gold and silver, with the true valuation and weights of them, according to the Mint of both Nations, English and Scottish. In a Parliamen holden the 3. year of his Reigne, the Oath of Allegiance was devised and ordained, and soon after mi∣ntred to all sorts of people. This yeere also hee mde Proclamation to redresse the misimployment of Lds, or goods given to  uses. Also this yeare, he set forth a Procla∣mation for bearig of  in Sips to be in this manner, that from thenceforth all the Subjects of gre ritt should beae in their mayne top, the Red-Crosse, comonly called the  Geges Crsse, and the  Crosse, common∣ly calld St. Andre Crsse joynd togeher, and the Subjects of South-Brit∣
should cay in their Foretop only the Red-rose as they were wont; and  ubjects of North-Briine only the White-Crose. In this ourth yeare on the  he set orth a Proclamation, commanding all Iesuis, Seminry  to depa the Realme before the first of August following and  returne upon pane of death, according to diverse Statutes in that  rovided. In his second yeare he had set forth a Proclamation against  increase of new buildings, which being little regarded; Now in his four yre he renewed the said Proclamation adding withall that the  and windowes of all new buildings should be either of Brick o stone  sobeying whereof, many were called in the Star-chamber, and there fined  yeare, he gave order for planting of Mulberry Trees; and breeding of  wormes, that England might be a Country as well of silke as Cloath: In his venth yeare, he instituted the Order of the Baronets, which hath much dege∣ated ince his institution, and thereby having been devised for the benefit of , hath caused but little contentment unto England. This yeare also the ing himselfe in person came to the Star-chamber, where he had appointed the -men to meet and there, for the better keeping of Coynes of Gold within  Realme he raised the prizes of them; ordayning the price called the Vnity, which went before but for twenty shillings, to bee curant now for tw and tweny, the double Crowne and all other peeces to encrease in the lke propor∣tion. in his fifteenth year, he granted to the Apothecaries of London to be a Cor∣poration for themselves, and their successours for ever; and by Letters Paens made them a Body Politick and corporate. In his time by his appointment  strict decree passed in the Star-chamber against Duells and single Combts, and a strict Law was made in Parliament against stabbing with a dagger o knife, making it to be wilfull Murther. Affayres of the Church in his time. THe King as a Religious Prince, desiring nothing so much as to settle Peace in the Church, and hearing of some dissensions of his Divines in points of Religion, in the very first yeare of his Raigne, appointed a Conference to bee holden before himselfe at Hampon Court, to which were called diverse Bishops, Deanes, and Doctors of one side, and of the other, foure eminent Divines; name∣ly, Doctor Reynolds, Doctor Sparkes, Mr. Knewstabbs, and Mr. Chadderton: who all meeting before the King the 14 day of Ianuary: the King first signified, the cause of his calling them together, and then told them he was there ready to heare, what they could object or say against the present Government of the Church, whereupon Doctor Reynolds being their Foreman, redued all matters disliked, or questioned to these foure Heads. 1. First that the doctrine of the Church might be preserved in purity, acco∣ding to Gods Word. 2. That good Pastours might be planed in all Churchs to preach the same. 3. That the Church Government might be sincerely administred, accord∣ing to the Word of God. 4. That the Book of Common Prayer might be fitted to more encreae of Piety. Out of these Heads, he drew and moved divers points: One that Confirmation might not be by Bishops only, but that every Pastour in his Parish might Con∣firme, but this was thought to trench too much upon the Iurisdiction of Bihop, and to be a step to bring in a Presbiterian government, which the King much misliked, and the Bishop of Winchester challenged Dr. Reynolds with a his lear∣ning to shew, where ever he had read, that Confirmation was at a used in anti∣ent times, by any other than by Bishops. Another motion of Doco Reynolds was; That there might be a new Translation of the Bible becase the pre∣sent
from sevenscore to two hundred, so he increased their Pensions, from two shillings a day, for three moneths in the summer, to seven groats a day for six moneths in the summer. Then, where at his comming, he found but only foure Iudges in the Courts of Law at Westminster, hee added a fifth, with the like allowance as the former had; besides many other Pensions of like nature. But the works of Piety done by others in his time, were very many: whereof we may justly set in the first place, the repairing of Pauls Church, begun in his time, though not finished till many yeares after; a worke of as great cost and labour, as the first founding it: towards the furtherance whereof, though many well devoted persons contributed liberally: yet none was more industrious, than the learned Doctor Laud, first Bishop of London, and after Arch-bishop of Canterburie; who also was a bountifull Benefactor to the Colledge of Saint Iohns in Oxford, where he had his Education. Next to him his Predecessor next before him, the worthy George Abbot, Arch-Bishop of Canterburie, foun∣ded a faire Almes-house at Croydon in Surrie: as likewise Robert the second Earle of Dorset, founded another in Sussex; to the maintenance whereof, hee gave Lands to the value of three hundred pounds a yeare. But of all the Almes-hou∣ses that were ever founded in Christendome, there is none I thinke can paral∣lell that of Thomas Sutton Esquire. This man borne at Snayth in Lincoln-shire, having alwayes lived a Batchelour, and by sundrie imployments, and parcimony, being growne to great wealth, bought of the right Honourable, Thomas Earle of Suffolk, his Mansion house, called the Charter-house, neare to Smithfield in London, and out of a pious mind converted it into an Almes-house, by the name of Suttons Hospitall, endousing the same with above three thousand pounds of yearely rent: wherein are maintained fourescore poore men, with convenient lodging, dyet, and allowance of money for apparell: also forty poore children with the like provision, and a Grammer Schoole, with a Master and Vsher to teach them: overall whom, hee ordained a learned man to bee Master of the houshold, and to be chosen by the Governours, whom he appoynted for the present, by the Authority of the Kings Letters Patents, to be George, Arch-Bi∣shop of Canterburie, Thomas Lord Elsmore, Lord Chancellour, Robert Earle of Salisburie Lord Treasurer, Iohn Bishop of London, Lancelt Bishop of Ely, Sir Edward Cook, chiefe Iustice of the Common Plas, Sir Thomas Foster, a Iudge of the Common Pleas, Sir Henrie Hubbard the Kings Atturney generall, Doctor Overall Deane of Pauls, Doctor Mountaine Deane of Wstminster, Henrie Thursby Esquire, Master of the Chancerie, Richard Sutton Esquire, Auditor of the Imprests, Ieffrie Nightingall Esquire, Iohn Low Gentleman, Thomas Browne Gentleman, and Master of the Houshold for the time being, to bee al∣wayes one: and as any of these sixeene Governours should dye, the Survi∣vers to make present addition of others. Next to this, was a faire Colledge in Oxford founded by Nicholas Wilbe Esquire, and called after his name. About this time also Edward Allin of Dulwich in Surrie, founded a faire Hospitall at Dulwich for six poore men, and six poor women, and for twelve poore children, from the age of foure or six yeares, to be there maintained and taught till the age of foureteen or sixteen, and to have a Schoolemaster with dyet, and a con∣venient stipend. This man may be an example, who having gotten his wealth by Stage-playing, converted it to this pious use not without a kind of repua∣tion to the Society of Players. In this Kings time also, William Cambden, King at Armes, founded an Historie Professor in Oxford, to which hee gave the Mannor of Bexley in Kent, which some yeares expired, will be worth foure hundred pounds a yeare. In his tenth yeare, Sir Baptist Hicks, one of the Iustices of Peace in Middlesex, who was after made Viscount Cbden, built a faire Sessions house of Brick and Stone in St. Iohns street, which by the Iustices was called after his name, Hicks Hall, a great convenience for the Iustices; who sate before in a common Inne, called the Castle. Hee also
founded a faire Hospitall of Free stone at Cambden in Gloucester-shire, for six men and six wowomen, allowing each of them a yearely Gowne, and two shillings six pence a week, with two roomes and a garden. In this Kings time, George Patyn Citizen and Grocer of London, gave to good uses, three thousand an six hundred pounds, whereof twelve hundred pounds to the two Vniversi∣ties, nine hundred pounds for an Almes-house, and a certaine summe of money to buy two Bells, and make a Chime in Bow-Church. Also Thomas Teasdale of Glympton in the Countie of Oxford Gentleman, gave five thousand pounds to purchase lands, for perpetuall maintenance of seven fellowes, and Six Scholars, to be placed in Baylyoll Colledge in Oxford, and to be chosen thither from time to time, out of the Free-Schoole of Abbington in Berk-shire: to which Schoole he also gave lands for maintenance of an Vsher. In this Kings time also, Sir Mermaduke Darrell, being Lord of Fulmer, a Town in Buckingham shire, where was an old ruinous Church, standing a mile distant from the Towne, pulled downe that old Church, and at his owne charge builded a faire new one in the Towne, and furnished it with a Font, a Pulpit, and all Ornaments necessarie. Also Thomas Watson of Halstead, in the County of Kent, Esquire, new builded a faire Chappell, on the North side of the parish Church of Halstead, of Free∣stone from the ground, and gave to the Church foure new Bells, and two Pul∣pits. In his time also Doctor Aylmer Bishop of London, and Elizabeth Countesse Doweger of Shrewesburie, gave certaine summes of money towards the better maintenance of Sermons hereafter at Pauls Crosse: As likewise Thomas Russell Draper gave ten pounds a yeare for ever, to be given to unbeneficed Ministers, that should preach there: and to the same use, George Bishop Stationer of Lon∣don, gave ten pounds a yeare more. In this Kings time also, the Citizens of London new builded Algate, where pulling downe the old Gate, they found many ancient Rma Coynes. On the fieenh of Iune, 1614. dyed Henrie Earle of Northampton, who built from the ground a house neare Charing-Crosse; and dying, was buried in the anient Chappll of Dovr Castle, who in his life time founded three faire Hospitlls, and endowed them with large maintenance for ever, one at Rysing in Norfolke for twelve poore women, and a Governesse, a second at Clun in Shrp-shire, for twelve poore men and a Governour The third at Greenwich in ent, for a Governour, and twenty poore Almes-men. In this Kings time also, Master Robert Dowes of London Merchant Tayler, give a competant main∣tenance for ever, unto Sepulchers parish, for the tolling of the great Bell, and for finding some Devine to come to the prison of New-gae, the mid-night be∣fore Execution, and there to ring a hand Bell, and put the prisoners in mind of their approaching death, with a Christian remembrance and exhortation; and the next morning to toll the great Bell, from sixe a Clock till ten, and then to ring it out when the Execution should be past. He also established a free singing Schoole, in Christs Hospitall: for the better education of the poore children there besides many other good deeds of Almes. About the same time, Ro∣bert Peake of London Gold-smith, gave to Sepulchers Church a Communion Table of two yards long, and three quarters and a halfe broad, richly guilded over, and at every corner imbost with plaes of silver. In this Kings foureteenth yeare, William Iones of London Merchant, gave about eight thousand pounds to found a Free-Schoole in Wals, where he was born, with Almes-houses and Pen∣sioner in London: and a hundred pounds a yeare for ever to a learned Preacher in London: ordyning all things to bee ordered by the Company of Haberda∣shers, whereof himselfe was free. This yeare also the old ruinous gate, called Aldersgat was qite taken downe, and new builded from the foundation, towads the bing whereof, William Paret, Merchant Taylor of London, gave a thousand pounds. In this Kings time also, was erected a building neare to Chel∣sy with a purpose to be a Colledge for Devines to study the Controversies of
Religion: but upon the second thoughts, the Cage indeed stands finished, but  Birds have ever yet beene brought to sing in it; and perhaps never will. If any other deeds of Almes, or publike benefit were done in this Kings time, as perhaps there were many, the Reader may be pleased both here and in o∣ther Kings Reignes to adde them, as hee meets with them: for partly to this end, I have digested this Chronicle into such severall Heads and Chapters. Of Casualties happening in his time. IN his first yeare, on the seven and twentieth of April, thirteen persons were slaine, by mis-fortune with Gun-powder, at the Gun-powder Mill in driffe, and much other hurt done in divers places. This yeare also, the plague in London was so great, that from the three and twentieth of December, 1602. to the two and twenieth of December following, there dyed in London, and the Liberties, eight and thrty thousand, two hundred and foure and forty, whereof the Plague thirty thousand, five hundred threescore and eighteen of them in one week, three thousand fourescore and tenne, where the next yeare after, though the City were encreased with great number of strangers, yet there dyed that yeare of all diseases, within London and the Li∣berties, but onely foure thousand, two hundred threescore and three persons. In the second yeare of his raigne, a strange accident happened, to the terrour of all bloudy murtherers, which was this; one Anne Waters enticed by a lover of hers, consented to have her husband strangled, and then buried him secretly un∣der the dung-hill in a Cow-house; whereupon the man being missing by his neighbours, and the wife making shew of wondring what was become of him: It pleased God, that one of the inhabitants of the Towne, dreamed one night, that his neighbour Waters was strangled, and buried under the dung-hill in a Cow-house; and upon declaring his dreame, search being made by the Con∣stable, the dead body was found, as he had dreamed: and thereupon the wife was apprehended, and upon examination, confessing the fact, was burned. And now what hope can murtherers have of being concealed, when they are subject to be discovered by any mans dreame. The nineteenth of Ianuarie in his third yeare, a great Porpus was taken at Westham; in a small Creek, a mile and a halfe within the Land: and within few dayes after, a Whale came up within eight miles of London, whose body was seen divers times above water, and judged to exceed the length of the largest ship in the River: but when shee tasted the fresh water, and scented the Land, she returned into the Sea. In his fourth yeare, being the yeare 1607. a mighty west wind brought in the sea in∣to the River of Severne, with such violence, that in some places of Somerset-shire and Glocester-shire, the waters in divers Towns and Villages, grew higher than the tops of their houses; so as (notwithstanding all courses that could be taken, there were drowned in Somerset-shire 80. Persons, and damages done to the va∣lue of twenty thousand pounds. At Coventrie also, the seventh of April so sud∣daine a flood came into the Suburbs and City, that in one houre it rose in some places above 3 yards in height, to the great damage and hurt of many, and that which is much strange, as it suddenly came, so it suddenly abated: so as in foure houres and a halfe, it both came and went away. In his 6. year, being 1608. a frost began in Decem. which continued till April following, with such violence that not onely the Thames was so frozen, that Carts loden were driven over as on dry land, but many fowles and Birds perished, as also much herbage in gardens, espe∣cially Artichoaks and Rosemarie were destroyed. This year also the 11. of April a Malt-house in the Town of St. Edmonds berry being by chance set on fire, con∣tinued burning till it had consumed 160. houses: but by the Kings boun∣tifulnesse, (giving 500. loads of timber) and the City of Londons reliefe, the
Towne was forthwith new builded, in a fairer manner than it was before. In the yeare 1613 on the seventeenth of April, in the parish of Stndish in Lancashire, a mayden child was borne, having foure legges, foure armes, two bellies joy∣ned to one back: one head with two faces, the one before, the other behind, like the picture of Ianus This year also on the 26. of Iune, in the parish of Christs-Church in Hampshire, on Iohn Hitchel a Carpenter, lying in bed with his wife & a yong child by them, was himself & the child both burned to death with a suddain lightning, no fire appearing outwardly upon him, and yet lay burning for the space of almost three dayes, till he was quite consumed to ashes. This yeare also on the seventh of August, the Towne of Dorchister was quite consumed with fire, begun on the house of a Tallow Chandler, destroying all the houses, except a few neare the Church, and all their wares and goods, to the value of two hundred thousand pounds, yet not any man or woman perished. About the same time also, the Play-house called the Globe upon the Banks side neare London, was quite consumed with fire, by discharging a Piece of Ordnance, and yet no man hurt: and about foure years after, a new built Play-house, neare Golding-lane, called the Fortune, was by negligence of a Candle, cleane burnt to the ground. In the year 1614. the Town of Statford upon Avon, was burned: and left the water should be behind in doing of mischiefe, so great Iundations were at this time in Norfolke and Lincoln-shire, that the sea entred twelve miles into the land. In the yeare 1612, on the 18. of Novemb. a Blazing star bgan to be seene in the South-east, about five a clock in the morning, the flame or streame whereof, enclined towards the west. This comet, in the opinion of D. Bmbridge, the great Mathematician of Oxford, was as far above the Moon, as the Moon is above the earth: what i portended is onely known to God: but the sequell of it was, that infinite slaughters and devastations followed upon it, both in Germany and other Countries. In the year 1622, on Friday the 24. of October, a Roman Catholike Priest preached in the after-noon, at Hunsdon house in the Black Friers in London, in an upper chamber where there were assembled above 300 men and women, when about the middle of the Sermon, a great part of the Floore brake, and fell down with such violence, that it brake down the next floor un∣der it: in the fall whereof, were slain the Preacher, and almost 100 of his Au∣ditors, besides as many more hurt. In this Kings time course paper, commonly cal∣led white brown paper was first made in Engl. specially in Surry, & about Winsor. Of his Wife and Children. HE married Anne, the daughter of Frederick, the second King of Denmarke, whose marriage was there solemnized in the yeare 1589. By whom he had borne in Scotland, two Sons, Henrie who dyed before him, and Charles who suc∣ceeded him in the Crown; and one daughter named Elizabeth, married to Fre∣derick the fith of that name, Count Palatine of the Rheine, by whom she had many children, both Sons and Daughters. King Iames had also by his wife Queen Anne, two other daughters borne in England, the Lady Marie, and the La∣dy Sophia, who both dyed young the Lady Marie at about three yeares old, the Lady Sophia the next day after she was borne, and were both of them buried with great solemnity, in the Chappell Royall at Westminster. Of his Personage and Conditions. HE was of stature somewhat higher than ordinary, of a wel compacted body, of an Ambourne haire, of a full and pleasing viage in his latter dayes en∣clining to be fat and buley of bodily exercises, he tooke most delight in hun∣ting which yet (some thought) hee used rather as a retiring himselfe
from the importunity of Stae affaires, than for any great pleasure hee took in it. It is said, he had such a fashion in riding, that it could not so properly bee said he rid, as that his horse carried him; for hee made but little use of his Bridle, and would say, a horse never stumbled, but when hee was reined. Hee was of an admirable pregnancie of wit, and that pregnancy much improved by continuall study from his child-hood: by which, he had gotten such a promptnesse in expressing his mind, that his extemporall speeches were little inferiour to his premeditated writings. Many no doubt had read as much, and perhaps more than he; but scarce ever any concocted his reading into judge∣ment as he did: by which hee became so judicious, that though hee could not Prophesie, yet he could presage; and his Conjectures were little lesse than Oracles. In all the Liberall Sciences, hee was (we may say) a Master of Arts: but in Divinity, a Doctor, as he made appeare in the Conference at Hampton Court, and is seene still by the learned Writings he hath let behind him. And as for that part of the Politicks, which concernes Monar∣chie, Regere Imperio populos, which himselfe used to call King Craft: in this he excelled. Hee knew how to take the inclinations of the people at their first bound, and never suffer them to rise higher, than hee could well reach them: nor to grow stronger, than he could either alter or divert them. He would be sure to keep his Subjects in a temper of contentment; which if he could not doe by preventives, he would by lenitives. He was so wise, that hee could dissemble, without seeming a Dissembler: be free in opening his mind, and yet keep counsaile. He was as a provident Pilot, that in a calme would provide for a storme: and you should never finde him committing the fault of Non ptaram. He was both Marti & Mercurio; but not tam morti quam Mercurio, as being of his temper who said, Cedant Arma Toga: and indeed, seeing peace is the end of both. It were not wisedome to seeke it by Armes, if it may be had by the Gowne, as it is in the Aphorisme, Consili omnia experiri prius, quam Armis sapientem Decet. That which was bountie in him being a King, would have beene frugality, if he had beene a private per∣son, there being of both, one radicall reason. Of all the Morrall vertues, he was eminent for chastity; in which the Poet seemes to include all vertu: where he saith; Nulli fas casto sceleratum in sistere limen. By nulli casto, meaning no vertuous person; it was a manifest argument of his, being an excellent Prince, that comming next to the admirable Queen Elizabeth, which was, in a manner to compare them together: yet there appeared no in∣equallity, that it might not untruely be said, King Iames was but the continuation of Queen Elizabeth, the same vertue, though different sexes: and now to expresse his Character in a word, which worthily might be matter for many volumes: He was to his wife a most loyall husband, to his children a most loving father, to his servants a most bountifull Master, to his Subjects a most just prince, to all Princes neare him a most peaceable neighbour; that more justly it may be said of him, than of whom it was said; Quaete tam laeta telerunt saecula? a Prince afe Plato's owne heart, for his learning, and which is infinitly more worth, after Gods owne heart, for his Religiousnesse and Piety. O his Death and buriall. OF his death, there were many scandalous rumours spread, and some were so impudent as to write that he was poysoned, as the Duke of Richmond, and the Marquis Hambleton had been before: but King Iames being dead, and his body opened, there was found no signe at all of poyson, his inward parts be∣ing all sound, but that his Spleen was a little faulty, which might bee cause enough to cast him into an Ague: The Ordinary high way,
especially in old bodies to a naturall death: Of this ague after a months angui∣shing, notwithstanding all the remedies that could be applyed, he departed this life a Thbalds, on the 27 of March, in the yeare 1625, in the 59 yeare of his age when he had Raigned two and twenty years compleat. His body for the greater Stae, was convayed by Torche light, from Theobalds to Denmark house; who having tested from the 23 of Aprill, to the 7 of May: it was carryed to Westminster, and there interred in the Chappell Royall with great solemnity, but with greater lamentation: there being scarce any of the infinite multitude that was present, of whom it might not be said, Multa gemens, largoque humectat flumine Vultum. Of Men of note in his time. MIlitary Men of Note, in a time of Peace, as the whole Raigne of King Iames was, we have no reason to expect; yet if we look amongst the Voluntaries that went to the Schoole of War in the Low-Countryes; we shall find a payre of brothers, that may stand in comparison, with the greatest Souldiers in the most Martiall times, S. Francis Vere, who as another Hanniball, who with his own eye, could see more in the Martiall Discipline, than common men can do with two; and Sir Horatio Vere; who as another Philopaemen, contained in a very little body, a very great, both skill and courage. But for Men of Note in Learning: as being in the time of a most learned Prince, there was never greater store; of whom these for example. In curiousnesse of Preaching, there was Doctor An∣drewes Bishop of Winchester; who hath left to posterity, a Century of such gol∣den Sermons, that shews, he as well deserved the name of Chrysostome, as he that had it. In multiplicity of Reading, there was Doctor Reynolds of Corpus Christi Colledge in Oxford; who seemed as it were, a living Library; and one would have thaught his Memory to be a perfect Index of all the Books had ever beene written. In knowledge of Law there was Sir Edward Cook, Chiefe Iustice of the Kings Bench; who hath written such excellent Commentaries of the Law, that he seemes as another Bartholus or Baldus amongst us. In Elegancy of writ∣ing, there was Sir Francis Bacon, Viscount Saint Albans; who besides his pro∣founder Books of Novum Organum, hath written the Reigne of K. Henry the 7, in so sweet a style, that like Manna, it pleaseth the tast of all palats. In the skil of An∣tiquities, there was William Camden, King at Armes; who hath set forth the De∣scription of Brittaine, and the life of Q. Eliz. in so lively colours, that he seems to have brought Brittaine out of darknesse into light, and to keep Q. Eliz. alive after her death. And to speake it in a word, the Trojan Horse was not fuller of He∣roick Grecians, than K. Iames His Raigne was full of men excellent in all kinds of Learning. And here I desire the Reader leave to remember two of my own old acquaintance, the one was Mr. Iohn Dunne, who leaving Oxford, lived at the In of Court, not dissolute, but very neat; a great visiter of Ladies, a great fre∣quener of Playes, a great writer of conceited Verses; untill such time as King Iames taking notice of the pregnancy of his Wit, was a meanes that he betooke him to the study of Divinity and thereupon proceeding Doctour, was made Deane of Paules; and became so rare a Preacher, that he was not only commen∣ded, but even admired by all that heard him. The other was Sir Henry Wootton (mine old acquaintance also, as having been fellow pupils, and chamber fellows in Oxford divers yeares together.) This Gentlemen was imployed by K. Iames in Embassage o Venice; and indeed the Kingdom afforded not a fitter man, for maching the Capriciousnes of the Italian Ws: a man of so able dexterity with his Pen, that he hath done himself much wrong and the Kingdom more, in lea∣ving no more of his Writings behind him.
Of the English Plantation in the Indies, that wre i King IAMES his time. AN now we are come to a time, wherein we may very neare say as much of King Iames, as was said of Agustus Caesar: Super & Garamantus & Indos profert Imperium. In this better, that where Augustus did it by the violent way of Armes, King Iames did it by the civill way of Plantations: for in his dayes began the great plantation of the English in the Indies; and must be acknow∣ledged the proper effect of his peaceable Government. The first Plantation of the English in the Indies, was that which is now called Virginia, in memorie of the Virgin Queen Elizabeth: but called before Wingandacoa. It was first dis∣covered by Sir Walter Rawlegh, in the yeare 1584; to whom the first Letters Patents were granted for making a Plantation there: but yet no Colony was sent thither, till the yeare 1606. It is a Countrie in America, between the de∣grees of 34, and 45, of the North Latitude: but that part of it which is plan∣ted by the English, is under the Degrees of 37, 38, and 39. It is no Island, as many have imagined, but a part of the Continent adjoyning to Florida. The first and chiefe Towne made here by the English, is called Iames Towne, in ho∣nour of the Kings most Eexcellent Majesty. It is a Countrie abounding with all sorts of Fish and Fowle; so fruitfull, that it yeelds thirtie and sometimes fortie Bushells of Corne upon an Acre: and that, (which to us is more strange) hath three harvests in a yeare, the Corne being sowed, ripe, and reaped, in little more than two moneths. Many Plantations had beene attempted here before, but came to nothing: the first to any purpose was in the yeare 1607. under the conduct of Captaine Gosnoll, Iohn Smith, and Mr. Edw. Maria Winkfield, who carried a Colonie thither of a hundred persons; but of these, many dying of sicknesse, or slaine by the Savages, a new supply came in the yeare 1608. of a hundred and twenty persons, under the Conduct of Captaine Nelsn. After which, was sent another supply of threescore and ten persons: and in the yeare 1609. a third supply came of five hundred persons, under a Patent granted to Sir Thomas West, Lord de la Ware, but conducted thither by Sir Thomas Gates, Gates, Sir George Sommers, and others. In the yeare 1611. was a fourth supply of three hundred men under the conduct of Sir Thomas Gates. In the yeare 2612. two other supplies were sent of forty men in each; and now was the Lotterie spoken of before granted by the King, for further supplies of this Plantation. After this Master Samuel Argall being appoynted Governour in in the yeare 168. the Lord De la Ware came thither with a supply of two hun∣dred people; but in his stay there, dyed. After this, in the yeare 1620. were sent thither eleven Ships, with twelve hundred and sixteene persons, and now they founded themselves into Corporations. In the yeare 1621. Sir Francis Wiat was sent thither Governour, with thirteene hundred men, women, and children, and now they founded Schooles, and Courts of Iustice; and the Plantation was extended a hundred and forty miles up, on the River of both sides. But now when the English were secure, and thought of nothing but peace, the Savages came suddenly upon them, and slew them, three hundrd and seven and forty men, women and children. For rpairing of which losse, the City of London sent presently over a supply of a hundred men. This massacre happened, by reason they had built their Plantations remote from one another, in above thirty severall places, which made them now, upon consulta∣tion, to reduce them all to five or six places, whereby they may better assist each other: since which time, they have alwayes lived in good security. And thu much for Virginia. Next was the Plantation of the Island called Barmudas, so called of a Spanish
ship, called Bermudas, which was there cast away, carrying Hogs to the West In∣dies, that swam a shoare, and there increased. The first Englishman that entred this Isle, was one Henry May in the yeare 1591: but in the yeare 1610, Sir George Smers was sent thither, who dying there, in memory of his Name, the Isles have ever since been called Somers Isles. In the yeare 1612. One Mr. Moore landed there with 60 persons, and then builded the chiefe Town there called S. Georges, together with 8 to 9 Forts. The same yeare a supply of 30 more persons was sent thither, and the yeare after 60 more, under one Mr. Bartlet; with a shew to survey the land; but with a purpose indeed to get from thence a great lump of Amber-greece, and no lesse than 80 pod weight, that had been found & taken up in the Island some yeares before, and was there still reteined. A while after this, came a Ship called the Blessing, with a hundred passengers; and two dayes after came the Star, with a 180 more; and within 14 dayes after that again came thi∣ther the Margaret and two Frigates, with 130 passengers: So as now they began to divide the Couny into Tribes, and the Tribes into shares. In the yeare 1616, Captain Dael Tuckard was sent from Virginia to be Governour there, and now it began indeed to be a Plantation; for now they began to build them houses: and now was sent from thence into England, a Ship fraighted with 30000 weight of Tobacco, valued there but at 2 s. 6 d. the pound, though sold here oftentimes for Vrinos at great rates. In the yeare 1619 Captain Nathaniel Butler was sent Governour, with new supplies; in whose time they build them a Church; held Assizes for Criminall Causes, twice a yeare; and began to have Parliaments as in England: and now in the Ship called the Magazin, came di∣verse Gentlemen of good fashion, with their wives and families: so as now their number, was no fewer then fifteen hundred people: Dispersed twenty miles in length. In the yeare 1622, came Governou M. Iohn Bernard, bringing with him a supply of a 140 persons; but he and his wife dying presently upon their comming: M. Iohn Harrison in the yeare 1623 was chosen Governour. These Isles of Bermudas are in 32 degrees of Northern latitude: So as they are distant from Virginia, at least 500 leagues, and from Egland above three thousand three hundred. This Country is of a most healthfull Ayre, abounding with all sorts of Fowles, Birds and Fish; and where great pieces of Amber-grce are oftentimes found, which is valued there at no lesse than three pounds an ounce. And thus much concerning the state of Bermudas, till the yeare 1624. Next comes the Plantation of New England, concerning which, we must first know, that King Iames in the yeare 1606, granted two Letters Patents for Plan∣tations in Virginia, one to the City of London; another to the City of Bristow, Exceter and Plimmouth; with power to plant Colonies any where between the Degrees of 38 and 44, provided there should be at least a 100 miles distance be∣tween the two Colonies. So as the first Colony was from the City of London, and is that which is called Virginia. The Second Colony was from Bristow and the other Towns, and is that which is now called New England, and is scituate between the Degrees of 41 and 45: the very meane betwixt the North Pole and the Line. And now to speak a little of the Country, there are on the Sea Coast, 25 excellent good Harbours, in some whereof there is Anchorage for 500 sayle of Ships of any burthen. The Earth as fruitful and the Ayre as health∣full, as any part of the World: abounding with all sorts of Grain, Fowles and Fish: Many of such kinds as ae to us unknown, yet excellent meat: Many Voyages had been made for the perfect discovery of the Countrey: Many At∣tempts for setling a Plantation there: Many Miscariages and Disasters in making the attempts: but all at last came to this, that in the yeare 1624 (which is the limit of ou Narration) there was a Plantation setled; though but a small one: but a few yeares after (by the sending forth of new supplyes) encreased to so many thousands, that if God continue to prosper it, as he hath begun: the New England in a few ages may prove as populous as the Old; and the King of Eng∣land
likely to have as many and greater Crowns in the Indies, than he had in His Realmes of Great Brittaine and Ireland. But seeing of these and all other English Plantations in the Indies, whereof there are many large discourses written by divers Authors; It should be more than supperfluous to speake more of them in this place: It is sufficient to have shewed, that King Iames had the honour, to have them setled in His time, and under the Influence of His peaceable Go∣vernment. Of the Earles and Barons made by King JAMES. IN former Kings Raignes, the making of Earles and Barons was but rare, and therefore they are fitly set down, at the severall times of their making; but in King Iames His Raigne, there were so many made, that it may not be unfit, to set them down in a Cathalogue together. In His first yeare were made foure Earles and nine Barons: namely, Henry Howard, yonger brother of the last Duke of Norfolk, was made Earle of North∣ampton: Thomas Sackvile Lord Buckhurst, was made Earle of Dorset; and shortly after Charles Blount Lord Montjoy, was made Earle of Devonshire, and Thomas Howard Baron of Walden, was made Earle of Suffolk: Henry Grey was made Lord Grey of Groby, (afterward by King Charles made E. of Stam∣ford) Henry Danvers was made Baron of Dansley, (afterwards by K. Charles made Earle of Danby) Sir Iohn Peter of Essex, was made B. of Writtle: Sir W. Russell was made Baron of Thornaugh: Sir Thomas Gerard was made Baron of Gerards Bromly in Stafford-shire: Sir Robert Spencer was made B. of Wormelay∣ton in the County of Warwick: Sir Thomas Egerton was made B. of Elesmore: and Sir Robert Cecill was created B. of Henden in Rutlandshire: and Sir Iohn Harington was made Baron of Exon. In His second yeare on the 20 of May were made foure Barons and one Viscount: Sir Robert Sidney was made Baron of Penshurst: Sir William Knowles, Baron of Grayes: Sir Edw. Wotton, Baron of Marley: and Mildmay Fanc, Lord de Spencer; and in August the same yeare, Sir Robert Cecill Baron of Essenden, was created Viscount Cranbourne. In His third yeare of the 4 of May, were created three Earles, and one Viscount, and foure Barons; namely, Sir Robert Cecill Viscount Cranbourne, was created E. of Salisbury Sir Thomas Cecill his elder brother L. Burghley, was created E. of Exeter; and Sir Philip Herbert, younger brother to the E. of Pembrok, was created E. of Montgomery: Robert Sidney Baron of Penshurst, was created Vis∣count of Lisle: Sir Iohn Stanhope, was made Baron of Harington: Sir George Carew, Baron of Clopton: Mr, Thomas Arundell of Devonshire Baron of Warder and Master William Cavendysh, Baron of Hardrick In his fourth yeare, on the fourth of Iuly, Sir Thomas Knevet, was called by writ to the Parliament, by the name of Bron of Estrick and was thereby Baron of that Title: and on the seventh of September, Sir Iervys Clifton was likewise called by writ to the Parliament, by the name of Baron of Layton Bromsensold, and was thereby Baron of that Title. In his ninth yeare, upon Easter-munday, Sir Robert Carre was created Viscount Rochester: and In his tenth yeare, an the fourth of November, was created Earle of Somersett. In his eleventh yeare, Lewis Steward Duke of Lenox, was made Earle of Rich∣mond, and after, Duke of Richmond.
In his thirteenth yeare, on the 29. of Iue, Sir Iames Hy of Scotland was created Baron of Sawley, and about three yeares after, was made Viscount Doncaster, and Sir obert Dorer was created Baon of Wyng, (afterward by K. Charles, made Earle of Cararvan.) In his fourteenth yeare, on the 9. of Iuly, Sir Iohn Hollis was created Baron of Haughton, and Sir Iohn Roper of Ken was made Baron of Tenham: and on the 17. of August, Sir George Villiers was created Baron of Whadden and Vis∣count Villiers, and on the 7. of November, Thomas Egerton L. Elsemore, was created Viscount Brackley (and he dying soon after, his sonne Iohn was created Earle of Bridgewater, William L. Knowles was created Viscount Wallingford; and Sir Philip Stanhope was created Baron of Shelford: On the 5 of Ianuary, the Viscount Villiers was created Earle of Buckingham, and on the third of March, Sir Edward Noell of Rutland-shire; was made Baron of Rydlington. In his fifteenth yeare, on New-yeares day, Sir George Villiers Earle of Buckingham was created Marquis of Buckingham, and on the 12 of Iuly, Sir Francis Bacon Lord Chancellour, of England, was created Baron of Verulam, and not long after, Viscount Saint Albans. Also in the Summer of this year, the King crea∣ted foure Earles and one Countesse: namely, the Viscount Lisle was made Earle of Leycester, the Lord Compton was made Earle of Northampton, the Lord Rich was made Earle of Warwick, the Lord Cavendish was made Earle of Devonshire, and the lady Compton wife to Sir Thomas Compton, and mother of the Marquis of Buckingham was created Countesse of Buckingham. In his sixteenth yeare, on the 25 of November, Sir Iohn Digby Vice chamberlaine to the King was created Baron of Shirbourne, by Patent to him and his heires Males. In his seventeenth yeare, in the moneth of Iune Esme steward Lord d' Aubigny; younger brother Duke of Lenox, was created Earle of March; Iames Marquis Hammilton was created Earle of Cambridge, and Sir Iohn Villiers brother to the Marquis of Buckingham was Baron of Stk and Viscount Purbeck. In his eighteenth yeare, William Cvendish was created Viscount Mansfield; (afterward by King Chrls mde Earle of Necastle) and on Munday the fourth of Decmber; Sir Henry Mtague, being first made Lord Treasurer, was created Baron of Kimbolton, and Viscount Mdevile, and not long after, Earle of Manchester, and Sir Iohn Ramsey Viscount Haddington of Scotland, was created Earle of Holdernesse, and William Fielding was created Baron of Newhen and Viscount Fielding. In his ninteenth yeare, Henry Cary was made Lord Cary of Lppington, (after∣ward by King Charles made Earle of Manmouth, Sir Edward Mountague elder Brother to the Viscount Mdevile was made Baron of Boulton, the Lord Darci of Essex, was created Viscount Colchester, (afterward by King Charles made Earle Rvers) the Lord Husdo was created Viscount Rochford, (after∣ward by King Charles, made Earle of Dver) Sir Lyonell Cranfield, Master of the Wardes, was created Baron of Cranfield in Bedford-shire, and Sir Thomas Howard second sonne to Thomas Earle of Suffolke was created Baron Chorle∣ton, and Viscount Andover, (afterward by King Charles made Earle of Barke-shire. In his twentyth yeare, in the moneth of September, the Viscount Doncaster, was created Earle of Carlile, the Viscount Fielding was created Earle of Denhigh, the Lord Digby was made Earle of Bristow, the Lord Cranfield, was created Earle of Middlesex, and Sir Henry Rich was made Baron of Kensington. In his one and twentyth yeare, the Marquis of Buckingham, being then in Spaine with Prince Charles, had his Patent sent him to be Duke of Buckingham, Wil∣liam Grey was created Baron of Warke, Elizabeth the widdow of Sir Moyle Fynch of Kent, was created Viscountesse Maidestone, (afterward by K. Charles made Countesse of Winchelsly.
his two and twentieth year, the Earle of Clanricard of Ireland, was created Vis∣count Tunbridge in Kent (afterward by King Charles made Earle of Saint Albans) Sir Iohn Hollis Baron of Haughton was created Earle of Clare, Sir  Rih Baron of Kensington was created Earle of Holland, the Lord  Baron of Say and Seale, was made Viscount Say and Seale: Sir  ane was created Earle of Westmerland, Oliver Lord St. Iohn of Blet∣  made Earle of Bullinbrook, Sir Christopher Villers brother to the Duke of Bckingham, was made Earle of Anglesey, and Sir Iames Ley was made  (afterward by King Charles made Earle of Marlborough.) Also this year Sir Francis Leak was made Baron of Deincourt, and Sir Richard Ro∣berts was made Lord Roberts of Truro in Cornwall. And this was the number of all the Earles and Barons made by King Iames but in his time also began another sort of Nobility to bee made in England, which had none of the Priviledges of English Barons, but had onely Title to bee called Lords, of some place either in Scotland or Ireland, although they possessed not a foot of Land in either: Of which ot, the num∣ber being great, I forbeare to rehearse them, lest I should be te∣dious, or otherwise bee thought to encroach too much up∣on the Heralds office. It is sufficient to have shewed, that King Iames advanced so many in honour, that in a kind it might be said of him, as was said of Au∣gustus Caesar, That he left Rome of Marble, which hee found built of Brick.
The beginning of THE RAIGNE OF KING Charles. KING Iames being deceased on the 27 day of March in the forenoon, the same day in the afternoone, Charles Prince of Wales His only son, then living, was Proclaimed King of Great-Brittain, France and Ireland, with the Generall ac∣clamation of all sorts of People, as being a Prince of admi∣rable endowments both of mind and body. He was now about the age of 25 yeares, whereof, the most part of one he had spent in Spaine; where, although he was frustrated of the end for which he went, yet it gave him a tincture of Travaile and Expe∣ience, more worth perhaps, then the end he went for: For by this meanes he attain to a greater degree of that, which made Ulysses so famous: Quod mores hominum multorum vidit & urbes. The first thing he did after his Coronation, was to proceed in the marriage agre∣ed upon in His Fathers time, with the beautiful & vertuous Lady Henrieta Maria, yonger daughter of the Great Henry the 4 K. of France; after which marriage, we have only to say, that he was happy in the Wife of His bosome: Happy in His hopefull Issue: Happy in the love of His people: Happy in the Peace and tran∣quility of his Kingdomes and Happy in the continunce of all these Happinesses, for 15 years together, and might have so continued still, if it had not been for, Discordia Demens Viperius crinem vitti innexa cruentis. But of that which happened afterward, I dare not take upon me to be a Regi∣ster: Neither is it indeed safe to begin a Narration, which I must be faine to breake off in amazment, as having nothing left me to say, but Omnia in malu ere; and so far from any apparance of humane remedy; that our only An∣chor must be this: In te Din sperm, non confundamur in aeternum: Quid enim nisi va supersunt Yet our hope is, It will be but a fit, and the storme once past,
faire weather again, and fairer perhaps than it was before, and then with Ioy we shall resume our stile. Laetumque choro Poeana canemus: In the meane time comforting our selves with the words of the Prophet David; Many are the troubles of the Righteous, but the Lord delivers him out of them all. Carolus en Rex magnus in armis, major in ermis. Quid mirum? Imperio magnus, amore magis. FINIS.
