C2219 12259605 57808
The Kings Majesties DECLARATION sent to the Speaker of the House of Peeres, Protempore, To be communicated to both Houses of Parlia∣ment, and His Majesties Subjects. Shewing the causes of His Majesties Retirement from Hampton Court. Dated 11. November 1647. By His Majesties especiall Command. London, Printed for Iohn Giles, to prevent false Copies. 1647.
Hampton Court, the 11. of November 1647. LIberty being that, which in all times hath beene, but especially now is, the com∣mon theame and desire of all men. Common reason shewes that Kings lesse then any should en∣dure Captivity, and yet I call God and the world to witnesse, with what patience I have endured a tedious re∣straint; which so long as I had any hopes, that this part of my sufferings might conduce to the Peace of my Kingdomes, or the hindring of more effusion of blood, I did willingly un∣dergoe. But now, finding, by too cer∣taine proofes, that this my continued Patience, would not onely turne to my Personall ruine, but likewise be
of much more prejudice, then furthe∣rance to the Publique good, I thought I was bound, as well by naturall, as po∣liticall obligations to seeke safety, by retiring my selfe for some time, from the publique view both of my friends and enemies; and I appeale to all in∣different men to judge, if I have not just cause to free my selfe from the hands of those, who change their Prin∣ciples with their Condition, and who are not ashamed openly to intend the destruction of the Nobility, by taking away their Negative Voice, and with whom the Levellers Doctrine is rather countenanced then punished. And as for their intentions to my Person, their changing and putting more strict Guards upon me, with the dischar∣ging most of those Servants of mine,
whom formerly they willingly admit∣ted to waite upon me, doth sufficient∣ly declare. Nor would I have this my retire∣ment misinterpreted, for I shall ear∣nestly, and uncessantly endeavour the settling of a safe and well grounded Peace, where ever I am, or shallbe; and that (as much as may be) without the effusion of more Christian blood; for which, how many times have I desired, and pressed to be heard, and yet no eare given to ue? And can any reasonable man thinke, that (according to the ordinary course of af∣faires) there can be a settled Peace without it? Or that God will blesse those who refuse to heare their owne King? Surely no: Nay, I must further adde, that (besides what concernes my selfe) unlesse all other chiefe interests have not only a hearing, but likewise just satisfacti∣on given unto them (to wit the Presbyterians,
Independents Army, those who have adhered to me, and even the Scots) I say there cannot, (I speake not of Miracles, it being in my opi∣nion a sinfull presumption in such cases to ex∣pect or trust to them) be a safe or lasting Peace: Now as I cannot deny, but my Personall secu∣rity is the urgent cause of this my retirement; so I take God to witnesse, that the Publique Peace is no lesse before my eyes, and I can finde no better way to expresse this my pro∣fession (I know not what a wiser man may doe) then by desiring and urging that all chiefe interests may be heard, to the end each may have a just satisfaction; as for example the Army (for the rest though necessary, yet I sup∣pose are not difficult to cotent) ought (in my judgement) to enjoy the liberty of their Con∣sciences, have an Act of Oblivion or Indemp∣nity (which should extend to all the rest of my Subjects;) And that all their Arrears should be speedily, and duely payd; which I will under∣take to doe, so I may be heard, and that I be not
hindered from using such lawfull, and honest meanes as I shall chuse. To conclude, let me be heard with free∣dome, honour and safety, and I shall instantly breake through this cloud of retirement, and shew my selfe really to be Pater Patriae. CHARLES REX. For the Speaker of the Lords pro Tempore, to be Communicated unto the Lords and Commons in the Parliament of England, at Westminster, and the Commissioners of the Parliament of Scotland, and to all my other Subjects, of what degree, condi∣tion, or calling, whatsoever. FINIS.
