C6369 R20901 12259537 57797
THE MUSES MISTRESSE: OR, A STORE-HOƲSE OF RICH FANCIES. By J. C. Written at Succidanious hours du∣ring the Action at NEWARK. With other high Rapsodies, extracted from the choicest Wits of our Age. LONDON, Printed in the Year. 1660.
The Lyons Tale; Occasionally grounded on our first Warrs, and in private Copies dis∣persed: with a great reward pro∣mised to whomsoever should discover the Author. THree witty Wags meeting by chance together, Resolv'd to Billet atA notable place for strong tiple. IT CƲTS A FEATHER: Where to allay the fury of their Ale, Each in his Order was to tell a Tale. The first a POET and a PROPHET too, Begun this Story without more adoe. In Libia a Lyon once there was, Who did in mildnesse Others farre surpasse; So meeke he was, and so indulgent too, Some made a doubt if he were One or no. While Others furnished their ravenous feasts Each day i'th' Week with severall Kinds of Beasts,
Now with a mountain Goat, or butting Ram, Now wth a wanton kid, or harmlesse Lambe, Now with a princely Stagge, or nimble Roe, A velve-headed Buk or bouncing Doe; Wherewith they stor'd, if we may trust the Fable, In various dishes their Vitellian Table. This curteous Lyon was so humble grown As he would scarce make usage of his owne. Others made booties of their Subjects, Hee Both for their votes and voices made them free. Others by their Projectors did devie New Impositions, Layes, Monopolies, And to inlarge their Purlue, found a feat To lay excise upon the meat they eat. No antient forrest Law but they were at it, To swinge th' infringer with a penal Statute. None were exempted; for they would alledge A Lyons will should be his priviledge. But these Examples could but little move This tender Lyon, who was made of love. Herds might securely graze, or chuse their way, His royal Spirit scorn'd to make a prey Of any Subject: nor stood they in danger: If he were mov'd, it was a Princely anger: And such as their submission quickly might Attemper well when it was at the height. But see how Lenity may be abus'd! Those wrong'd him most, whom he had kindl'est us'd. These ill-condition'd Beasts within a while By th' poysonous practise of the Crocodile,
Who for his subtile Councell might be well Styl'd 'mongst these Beasts the sole Achitophel, With one joynt voyce, vote and unite consent Begun to sleight their Soveraigns government; Whose sweet indulgence such contempt did bring As none amongst them but would play the king, Or represent his person, or else be As like unto a King in Majestie, Port, posture, presence, though by usurpation, As their poore Cricket physnomy could fashion. There might you see Bull, Tigre, Bore and Bear, ☞ The Cat a Mount, Pard, Dromodarie, Deare, The Griffin, Antilope, and Manticore, The Scythian Ounce, and Cretan Minotaure, The beak'd Rhinoceros and Porcupine, The Hybris, Hyene, Wolves of Erycine, The Libbard, Bugle, Camel, Elephant, Which of all Beasts they made their Presidant, For unto Him, they ought allegiance to, Their knees were grown so stiff, they could not bow. The Bever shew'd how he was in request VVith all degrees, both with the worst and best: But having found his Wool adulterate, It was not held fit staple for the State. The precious Bezer too would stand for one, And of his stones erect a royal Throne. The Horn'd-Beasts caus'd their Antlers to be sawne That they might stalk like Lyons ore the lawne. And that they might be held more fit to raign, Each got his curled front and braided maine.
These might you see rapt with Promethian heats, To act the parts of Kingly Counterfeats. Nor did these Great ones onely thus aspire, There sprung ambition in the Lower quire; All had desire in soveraignty to share, The Squirrell, Weasel, Ferret and the Hare, The wanton Monkey, active Marmosite, The shady Forrests dainty Catomite, The Reynald, Pollard, Vrchin and Baboun, All held in competition for the Crowne. The Dormouse needes would to a Scepter creep, Though he knew no vocation but sleep. The stone-blind Mole straight left his pioning, And though he saw no Court would act the King. Nay those who differ'd most from Lyons shape, The skudding Coney, Badger, Ermin, Apo, That in their Lawlesse Claimes they might prevail, Supplide their wants by purchasing a Taile. In this anarchicall Seate None but would rule, The Asse would be a King, the Queen a Mule. Nay, what was worst of all, the Lyons Jack, Who from revolting should have kept these back, Left his indeared Master, as if He Resolv'd with rest to stand for Soveraigntie. Unthankfull Mungrell! that a Prince so just Should in a Protean puffin place such trust. Nor had he worth to make him look so bigge, Onely sleek skin, and courtly Periwigge: A silken-civet-comfit-curtain-Sward, Who with his pawes a League contracted had.
The Elke likewise with his twice-branched head, As if he had of curtsies surfeted, Disloyall to his Soveraign Liege appear'd, By making head with that tumultuous Heard. For that Amphibian temporizing Otter, He gave but ayme, and shew'd himself a Nuter. These State-distractions bred so great a rent, The Forrest lost her face of government. None of them all did in opinion sute, One needs would sway the Empire absolute; Others more popular, desire to see The Monarchical State brought to Democracy; Aristocratick, None, th' or'e-voted Peers, Fear'd lest the Rout should have them by the ears. These having sought to force him from his throne, Stickt not to say, his Cave was not his own. Which to redress, and salve those wrongs were done him, The loyal quick-ey'd Linx, as did become him, Whose long experience politickly knew By these Events what might e're long ensue; Hyes to the Ʋnicorn with winged speed, And tells him how the Springs were poysoned; Wishing that these might by his hoofe be tride, Which were corrupt and which were purifide: For if his Art applide no remedie The Beasts would perish of a Lethargie; Having drunk so of their Lethpan Spring, As they'd forgot they ever had a King.
The Unicorn admitting no delay, To-Brooks, Wells, Rivers makes his speedy way: Where having dipt his Horn, He does restore And make those wholsome were corrupt before, Which brought this rare effect; those that were sick Of the Colts evill, or were Lunatick, Phrentrick, or Epileptick, or had knees They could not bend, a generall disease, Or Liver-grown, or what Physitians call Contagious or Epidemicall, All receiv'd speedy cure, and by this water Were quite transform'd into an other nature. Thus these Elpenors, who had lost their shapes, And chang'd their Habits with the Slough of Snakes, For by Circaean Spells they struck such shelves, They neither knew their Soveraign nor themselves, By th' expert Unicorns divinest skill, Were brought to spy and rectify their ill. The loyal Linx unwilling to neglect The issue of so glorious an effect, Which was but in his Embrio, as he thought, Till it to more perfection were brought; Awakes the Lyon, tells him roundly how His long indulgence had made this adoe; Wish'd him to shew himself, since his retire From State-affayres had caus'd them to aspire. Distinquish men (said he) He cannot strike With equal hand that guerdons all alike. "None with discretion ever him approv'd "Who lov'd where scorn'd, and scorn'd where he was lov'd.
Let the Malignant party streight receave What their licencious acts deserved have: These to give foment to their foul disease Threw on your Person such reports as these: "Hee and his Branches could no comfort be, "Nor merit th' Style of royall Majesty, "That Wicked Councel which upon him wait, "Were Agents to procure him all this hate. If such words do not high Allegiance break, It skills not much what saucy Subjects speak. Observe this Maxim then; it will behove you, For 't comes from him whose heart does truly love you: "He, who no difference makes 'twixt friend & foe, "Shall never know well how the world does goe. Nay, He shall sure before he see his end, Foster ten foes for one endeared friend. The well-condition'd Lyon hearing this, How they abus'd that Clemency of his, For now so weake were his revenues grown, He had no Laire nor Pasture of his own; Rous'd himself up, and to the Forrest goes T' inflict condigne punishment on those Who had usurp'd a Soveraignty of State; And that He might his Honour vindicate, From th' Elephant unto the silly Mouse All summon'd were to his Grand-Session-House. But these State-proselites were all prepar'd Before such time as they this Summons heard, With a submissive Loyalty to wait,
And begge for pardon at the Palace gate. Onely the Camel and some five with him For their bunch'd backs could no way enter in. The rare-compassionate Lyon straight appears, Regreets his Subjects both with threats and tears; And that He might with Power and passion woo them He thus imparts his royall mind unto them. O with what freedom (Sirs) could we forgive, If it might stand with our prerogative, Your Wild licentious factions! but since These on our high endeared Honour trench, Wee must extract some ill-digested blood, "Who spares the ill, he ever spoiles the good. Some of you held us such a worthlesse thing As we deserv'd not th' Title of a King. We must devested be of Style and Place; Now tell me, Sirs, if yee were in my case Would this admit your pardon? Nought held Ours But was deriv'd from that scrude power of yours. Pasquills and Libels fix'd on ev'ry Gate To make us hatefull to the eye of th' State. And these things past with all impunitie, As if Pens held their yeare of Jubilee. Lastly, How They so trecherously stout, From our own purlue kept our presence out. This Clause produc'd such passion, not an eye Of all those numerous Convertites was dry. The very Crocodile and Hyene seem'd Drilling down trickling tears, but they were feign'd; For by their private muttering below
All might collect this was a painted show; "For who is the (jeer they) would not rebell "When such attempts as these fall out so well? "Or who'l not dare t' aspire unto a Crowne, "VVhen Treason may be pardoned so soon? Which th' Prince perceiving, how no honest zeal Ingag'd their Hearts to Prince nor Common weal, But glozing faith, which at such restlesse times Might breed distractions in malignant minds, And nurse fresh furies; On these and ten mo Death was pronounced, and the rest let go, VVith this advertisement; that if from thence They ever swerv'd from their allegiance, Or like dis-loyall Subjects, did not give All freedom to his high prerogative, They should lose Lifes, lands, Liberties and State, With Commons curse, times brand, & Princes hate. This they subscibed to with joynt expression, VVhile Vive le Roy closed this High Session. When th'other wags should have their Tales be∣gun, They fell asleep before this Tale was don. Now what this Tell-tale told I dare tell you, "The Tale's a Tale, but th'Morall may be true. From NEWARK. I.C.
Upon the late Babel Parliament; no less pitifully then penitently Dissolv'd by the late last Protector, Inno∣cent Dick CROMWEL. Dissolve Grand Synod, while we make your House An Embleam of the Mountaine and the Mouse. Much was expected by East, West, South, North, And from your Teeming Birth ne're lesse brought forth Long Speches and small Sence; Those held the best And wisest Senatours that spake the least. One cryes up Monarchy; admires a Crown; Another Democratick votes it down. The third Aristocratick; Others be For none of these but Plato's Liberty, Or Oligarchall State.—Some side with time, Could wish a King, but none of Stuarts line; For that concerns their int'rest, and might fall Heavy, in paying use and Principall To their abused Creditor, whose wrong Transcends th' Expression of a mortall tongue. Thus some would crown a Prince, but when al's don They know not well what Head to put it on. Next starts up th' Fifth Monarchiall, whose pretence
Seems to pursue an Argument of Sence: "As Senses in accompt are Five in number, "States should be steer'd neither above nor under. But One replyed tartly: "Sir, you might "Account five Pottles that you drunk last night "For our State governors as well as these, "Since you insist on Numbers, if you please. Thus Judgment in distracted ranks appeares Till Union through dis-union fell by th' Eares; But it prov'd Climias and Dametas Fight, They challenged a Priviledge of Right, And that compos'd their Braule:—So th' Court broke up, For it grew early, and high time to Sup: Since which, when th' Synod higher Matters handles For more refreshing hours, they vote down Candles. Next Morne, when dewy Sleep had cheer'd their braine, Antaeus-like they enter'd Lists againe; Where with a vast expence of uselesse words, Their Sole debate was for an House of Lords. Some held it fit this Lordly House should sit, Not to direct but to improve their wit: And like Starrs in their Own Horizon fixt, To be with Antient Peers o'th' Kingdom mixt. But when These heard of Slingsby, Thimble by, With Others of thatSee the Eglogue of the Mushrome in Musaeus. Mushrome family, They vow'd they never would dishonour bring By Sitting with a Thimble and a Sling,
To their Extraction:—yet that Lower Fry Who YEA and NO knew well enough to Cry, That they might make some Act, took Speciall care, which They perform'd in th' OPERA; COMMON PRAYER; Both quite supprest; Small matter of the First, For 'twas contriv'd to quench a Poets thirst, A Malagasco knight: The last might be "They knew not what was ment by Liturgie, "Anthems, nor Antiphons:—impute this chance To no Schisme then but only Ignorance. But see how weake these Lordlings be! for yet The Opera stand: Drake with his painted Fleet Launceth amain like castles in the Ayre; Though th' vote hold firm for Stifling Common-Prayer, Which they Stand little need of, as Some say, Having so little leasure yet to Pray. The Cock-pit holds up still for all the cost Bestow'd on Drakes Fleet and the Savage roast; The Siege of Rhodes too, which presents more Scarrs Then this Knight felt in all our Civile VVars; Yet fought he with advantage we suppose, Having the French to supersede his Nose. But these be trifles; we must Scratch our pate And mould the Constitution of our state, And by the pencyle of an Artist show VVhether these Senatours look Blew or no. And now when th' Door's shut up, and all dismist, Our Consul—Colonels and Learned List
Of grave Justinians and Lapwings too, VVho never were taught more then Yes and No, And with thin shells on Head, could scare on high, Leaving their Nests before they learn'd to fly. This Pasquill was writ before the Proteors siple surprize.VVe poor Plebeians much desire to know VVhether we have PROTECTOR yet or no? How th' Navy stands provided? by what ground They steer their Course? what must be done at Sound? When must the Army have th' Arrears discharg'd? VVhen honest Cavaleers from Tower inlarg'd? Whether that Fine which is on BARKSTEAD laid, Must be remitted, or expresly paid? And if He has not lately lost his VVits By rendring his Lievetenancy to FITTS? VVhat posture of State policy? what Hand VVhether by mixt ot absolute Command Must govern this distracted Isle? what way, Or in what manner must we learn to pray? VVhat Clavis should informe us in the word (From th' leven of Assemblies blesse us Lord;) VVhether the Quaker or the Neuter must Lay Presbiteriall Principles in dust? VVhether th' Armenian or Socinian shall, If the world change, receive the higher call? Shall not the Swede in his declining Raign Lose our Esteeme for all Will Lillies Chaine? And falling now upon these dang'rous Shelves, Should you by aydig Him, not lose your selves?
Did not your joynt approv'd intelligence Conceive such Powr in your preeminence, This Devination needs no Oedipus, if it were wrapt up in a darker Ridle, Says deluded RICHARD.As to give your Authentick Strength it's due, Th' Protector ought more reverence to you Then you to Him: and in plaine terms aver Him no Essentiall Prince but Titular? Did your vote hold, th' Act of Adultery To be a Crime of that Mortality As it deserved Death?—Did't not appear That this was first enacted out of Fear Rather then Conscience; lest Some Ranter might By your Defects incroach upon your Right? But leaving these; How did your prudent Watch, Seek by prevention to divet that Match 'Twixt Spaine and France? an Act of Consequence, VVhich should you frustrate by your providence, It were a grand design, and such a feat, It might procure a Kingdom by Escheat To th' Heire apparent: But both Pates and States Must yeeld Submission to the will of Fates. "Your Power i'th' House was such, none could withstand it, "But there's an Upper House can countermand it. —BUT They'r dissolv'd; each hyes unto his home, Like Bees to Hives without an honey-Combe: For how were't possible They should bing more Sucking rank poyson from the Helebore? "Fury, Distraction, Envy, Discontent
"Brought up both Front and Reere i'th' Regiment. Now have we time t' imagin, if you please, The Burgess and his Bride being laid at ease, How they discours'd; wherein She clearly shews Her Native Appetite to forraign News. For Scarcely had he yet imployd a Sence, Or Consul, like pay'd due Benevolence, Which by a quick conception might incline To th' Member of a Parliament in time; Till she incounters her Endimion Hector VVith this familiar secret Curtain Lecture. "Tell me, my Dear, what may enacted be "Since your Addresses took a leave of me: And pinching him, quoth she, speak to me Slowthing, "What have you done? He snorting answer'd—Nothing. "What a State-Clod is this!—How sat those Scots "And Irish in your Senate-house?—like Scots. "VVhat a sad Consul's this! Speak, who must pay "The Army their arrears?—whom they obey. "VVho may that be; Protector, or the Senat? "—Pray thee no more, I was not there this sennet. "A carefull Commonwealths man, trust me; could "Your service to your Countrey be so cold? "Surely such Members stood in need of Curing: "—So did the HOVSE too, for a dangerous Murren "—Had influence ore the Consuls: for Some dyde "—(To their advantage) ere their witts were tryde, "A wise dispatch!—But why sat you so long? "—We sat indeed, till we had lost our tongue,
"—Our SPEAKER grew infirm, judicious CHUTE; "—How should we then hold out, when He stood mute? "—CHALLINER CHUTE, LISLEBONE LONG Recorder of LONDON, THOMAS BAMPFIELD Recorder of EXCETER. Yet one supply'd him, weaker farre though strong "—For CHUTE was pithy, but his Lungs were long; "—But One an other from their Office putts, "—For LISLEBONE LONG grew gangreen'd in his gutts: "—And BAMFIELD streight designed for the Chair, "—Heav'ns blesse Him from his Predecessors ayre; "—Lest He sink suddenly into his Tombe, "—As many of our Senatours have done. "—Nor skills it much if this Employment weare him, "—Being no flesh, nor fish, nor good red Hering. "How fares your grave Petition of Advice? "—Quite lost in reputation of the VVise. But for the Court—design, what votes have done it? "—The Irish trouses, and the Scottish bonnet. "—Though since our Protectorians lost that point, "—For their State-noses now are out of joynt. "But what Disolv'd you? I shall councell keep, "Resolve me this, I'l give thee leave to sleep. "Was it th' Protector, or the House of Lords! "—No; but a Regiment of daring swords. "—That did the work; so as, I hold it vaine "—For any Member to stand up againe "—And there was Reason for't, our sould say,
"—For by this means they may injoyne their pay. VVell; by my vote, Men shall no more be sent, Fenceforth let's have a Salique Parliament. For though the Masculine be th' worthier Gender; The Feminine may prove as sound a Member: Then to exclude us, were it not great pittie, Since wee'r held fittest for a Close Committee? Sleep Salique Burgesse; coople, coll and kisse, No Burgesse Place is either thine or His. Our Sessions nurture no such Cubbs as you, "New Consuls must bid VVestminster adue. The Good old Cause mounts now with Eagle wings, Lopping light Heads off as it did the Kings: And though their Number scarcely make a vote, Prynns prating must not make them change their Note. These two Poems, Intituled, THE LYONS TALE AND THE BRAINS-TRAP PARLIAMENT, Were composed by the pregnanst Fancies and clearest Judgements of our time. FINIS.
