C6599 11982055 51877
The Life of Monsr. Colbert.
THE LIFE Of the Famous John Baptist Colbert, LATE MINISTER and SECRETARY of STATE TO LEWIS XIV. THE Present French King. Done into English from a French Copy printed at Cologne this present Year 1695. LONDON,Printed for R. Bentley, in Covent-Garden; J. Tonson,at the Judge's-Head in Fleet-street; H. Bonwick, at the Red-Lion in St. Paul's Church-yard; W. Free∣man,at the Bible, against the Middle-Temple-Gatein Fleet-street; and S. Manship, at the Ship in Corn-hill, 1695.
THE Author's Preface. WHatever may be said of the Performance, there can be no Objections made against the Seasonableness of my present Ʋndertaking: For if the Publication of this lit∣tle Work had been longer de∣lay'd, it wou'd have been a hard Task for the Author to have acquir'd the Reputation of an exact Historian; and every Reader wou'd have pre∣tended a Right to dispute, or at least to suspect the Truth of his Relation. 'Tis an obvi∣ous
Remark, That the Me∣mory of even the most Publick Transactions is of a very ten∣der Constitution, and seldom or never retains its Integrity, if care be not taken to preserve it, while 'tis fresh and unfaded; in some measure resembling Summer Fruits that must be either hastily gather'd, or ea∣ten corrupted, if I may be al∣low'd to borrow the Thought of aHistory of Emeric Count of Tekeli, p. 2. Modern Historian. Be∣sides the Ʋndistinctness, which is the common Inconveniency of remote Views. They who under∣take to write an Account of a Mans Life, after a long Se∣ries of Years has in a man∣ner set him out of our reach,
are oblig'd to depend on the Cre∣dit of an uncertain Tradition, that confounds real with imagi∣nary Events, and not unfre∣quently suppresses the most re∣markable Actions of the Per∣son, whose Memory it pretends to preserve. In the midst of so much Confusion 'tis impossible to avoid Mistakes: For that which bears the nearest resem∣blance to Truth is frequently observ'd to be only a well-con∣triv'd Lye; and oftentimes a seeming Fable after a diligent Enquiry, is found to be a cer∣tain Truth. The Life of great Persons is full of Contradicti∣ons; and those Characters of em, and Judgments concerning
their Actions that are founded on the Idea they give of them∣selves on certain occasions, rare∣ly amount to more than false, or at best uncertain Conjectures. On the other side, if I had publish'd this History sooner, it might have been suspected of Flattery. The Ministers of great Princes are no less terri∣ble than their Masters, and if ever an impartial Historian runs the hazard of an unjust and rigorous Treatment, for a faithful Representation of the Management of Affairs, 'tis when he attempts to unskreen the Designs of those who are the present Dispensers of Re∣wards and Punishments. If
M. Colbert's Life had appear'd while his Sons were actually possess'd of the highest Posts in the Government, the Reader might have justly suspected me of a Design to make my Court to the Children, by writing a Panegyrick on the Father. But the present Posture of Affairs leaves no room for any suspici∣on of that Nature; and there∣fore I expect to be believ'd when I protest that the only Motive which engag'd me in writing the History of that Great Minister, was my desire to acquaint Posterity with the most memorable Actions of his Life. And as I began the Work without the least curb
upon my Sincerity, so in the pro∣secution of it I have confin'd my self to a scrupulous Observance of the Truth: Nor have I been less careful to expose his Faults, than to do Justice to his Per∣fections. The Reader will easily per∣ceive that I never take the li∣berty to wander from my Sub∣ject. For he must not expect to find in this Treatise a conti∣nu'd History of the Reign of Lewis XIV. but the Life of one of his Chief Ministers of State, who sustain'd not the en∣tire Burthen of the Govern∣ment, but was confin'd to the Management of certain parti∣cular Affairs: And I have en∣deavour'd
with all possible Ex∣actness, to trace him thro' the whole Course of his Life in the discharge of his peculiar Employments, without taking notice of those general Affairs that were not properly a part of his Province, any further than he had a share in 'em. I cou'd not forbear adorning my Work with large and exact Descriptions of his Majesty's principal Buildings, that were erected under the Inspection of this Minister: For besides that Relations of this Nature are extremely agreeable to the Cu∣rious and Ingenious part of Mankind, these admirable Works are so many convincing
Proofs of the Activity, Vigi∣lance, and indefatigable Dili∣gence of him to whose Care they were committed. The Discharge of so important a Trust might have been the en∣tire and glorious Occupation of an ordinary Genius; but it was the least part of M. Col∣bert's Task. For besides, he had the Management of Naval Affairs, and of the King's Re∣venue, which he still found means to encrease by some new Expedient. He was also en∣trusted with the Care of pro∣moting Trade, and of improving ingenious Arts: And 'tis the duty of every Frenchman to acknowledge that the Industry
and Politeness of our Artizans is an effect of the admirable Con∣duct of that Minister, and that he depriv'd our Neighbours of the Servile Tribute which our wasteful Luxury paid to the Arts that flourish'd among 'em. But our Gratitude to M. Colbert must not betray us in∣to a disingenuous partiality: Neither ought we to be so daz∣zled with the pleasing view of the shining part of his Life, as to forget or dissemble his Faults. For 'tis certain that he never scrupl'd to commit any Act of Injustice that might serve to enrich his Sovereign; and that notwithstanding his affected Probity, and seeming Neglect of
his own Interest, he omitted no Opportunity to fill his Coffers by indirect Methods. This is the dark and blemish'd Reverse of his Character; and the truth of these Assertions will appear evidently to the attentive Peru∣ser of the following Treatise. To the History of M. Col∣bert I have added that of his Eldest Son, the Marquess of Seignelay, who succeeded him in the Offices of Secretary of State, and of Commander and Great Treasurer of His Maje∣sty's Orders. At present there are none of his Sons alive but James-Nicholas, Archbishop of Rohan, and Lewis, Colonel of the Regiment of Champaign.
BOOKS lately Printed. THE Present State of Persia: With a faithful Account of the Manners, Religion and Go∣vernment of that People. By Monsieur Sanson, a Missionary from the French King. Adorn'd with Figures. Done into English. The Present State of the Empire of Morocco: With a faithful Account of the Manners, Religion and Government of that People. By Monsieur de S. Olon, Ambassador there in the Year 1693. Adorn'd with Figures. The Life of the Famous Cardinal-Duke of Rich∣lieu, Principal Minister of State to Lewis XIII. King of France and Navarre. in Two Volumes. 8vo. Letters, written by a French Gentleman; giving a faithful and particular Account of the Transactions of the Court of France, relating to the Publick Inte∣rest of Europe. With Historical and Political Re∣flections on the ancient and present State of that Kingdom. By the Famous Monsieur Vassor. The Roman History, from the Building of the City to the perfect Settlement of the Empire by Augustus Caesar: Containing the Space of 727 Years. Design'd as well for the Understanding of the Ro∣man Authors, as the Roman Affairs. By Laurence Echard, A. M. of Christ-College in Cambridge. A New Voyage to Italy: With a Description of the Chief Towns, Churches, Tombs, Libraries, Palaces, Statues, and Antiquities of that Country. Toge∣ther with useful Instructions for those who shall tra∣vel thither. By Maximilian Misson, Gent. Done into English, and adorn'd with Figures. In two Volumes. 8vo.
Now in the Press, and will be speedily Publish'd. A New Voyage to the Levant; Containing an Account of the most Remarkable Curiosities in Germany, France, Italy, Malta and Tur∣key: With Historical Observations relating to the present and ancient State of those Countries. By the Sieur du Mont. Done into English, and adorn'd with Figures. The Compleat Horseman: Discovering the surest Marks of the Beauty, Goodness, and Vices of Horses, and describing the Signs and Causes of their Dis∣eases; and the True Method both of their Preser∣vation and Cure. With Reflections on the Regular and Preposterous Use of Bleeding and Purging. To∣gether with the Art of Shooing, and a Description of several Kinds of Shooes, adapted to the various Defects of Bad Feet, and for the Preservation of those that are good; and the Best Method of Breed∣ing Colts; with Directions to be observ'd in Backing 'em, and Making their Mouths, &c. By the Sieur de Solleysell, one of the Heads of the Royal Academy. at Paris. The Eighth Edition, Review'd and me∣thodically Augmented; Done into English, and Adorn'd with Figures. Folio.
THE LIFE OF John Baptist Colbert, Minister, and Secretary of STATE. THere is something so singular and surprizing, both in the Quickness of Monsieur Colbert's Advancement, and the Grandeur of his Fortune, that After-Ages will hardly be induc'd to give Credit to that part of our Modern History, if they be not inform'd by what Steps and Me∣thods he rais'd himself to so high a Degree of Power. He was of a middle Stature, rather Lean than Fat; his Hair was black, and so thin, that he was oblig'd to begin very soon to
make use of a Cap. His Mien was low and de∣jected; he had a gloomy Air, and stern A∣spect. He spoke little, and would never return a present Answer, till he had first receiv'd a particular account in Writing of what was propos'd to him. He manag'd Business with unweary'd Application, and a surprizing Ex∣actness: the Clearness of his Judgment en∣abl'd him to expedite all sorts of Affairs spee∣dily, and without Confusion. He was of a slow Conception, but spoke judiciously of eve∣ry thing, after he had fully comprehended it. He was a Lover of Learning, tho' he never apply'd himself to the Study of it. He was a great Pretender to Probity; but tho' he endeavour'd to perswade the World that he neglected his own Interest, and seem'd re∣solv'd to owe his Riches merely to the King's Bounty, he scrupl'd not to fill his Coffers by indirect Methods. He affected a great deal of Moderation in the beginning of his Mini∣stery; but assoon as he saw his Fortune secur'd by great Offices and powerful Alliances, he gave a full Career to his vast Designs, and spar'd nothing to advance his Glory, tho' he manag'd his private Affairs with a great deal of Frugality. He sacrific'd Honour, Inte∣grity, Gratitude, and every thing else to the In∣terests of his Ambition. The Hardness and In∣flexibility of his Temper was altogether insup∣portable. He beheld without concern the Mi∣sery of an infinite number of Families, whom he had ruin'd to enrich his Master's Treasury. But though he never employ'd his Power for
the good of others, it must be acknowledg'd that he never shed the Blood of his Enemies. He was crafty and subtil: His outward Beha∣viour was modest, accompanied with a great deal of seeming Plainness and Simplicity. He lov'd, and was acquainted with ingenious Arts: He slept little, and was sober. Though he was naturally sowre and morose, he knew how to act the part of a Lover in the Com∣pany of those Ladies who had touch'd his Heart; but he always treated 'em in publick with his accustom'd Gravity, that he might not be thought capable of suffering himself to be govern'd by the fair Sex. He was the Son of Nicholas Colbert Sieur de Vandieres, and of Mary Pussort; and was born at Rheims in Champaigne,  in November 1625. His Grand-father was a Wine-Merchant, and his Father at first follow'd the same Occupati∣on; but afterwards he traded in Cloth, and last of all in Silk. Our future Minister was very young when his Father sent him to Paris, to be instructed in the Arts of Merchandi∣zing: From thence he went to Lyons, but falling out with his Master, return'd to Paris, where he was first Clerk to a Notary, and then to Biterne,  Attorney of the Chastelet, whom he left to serve Sabathier, Treasurer of the Money rais'd by the Sale of Offices, in the Quality of a Commissary or Deputy. In the Year 1648.  his Kinsman John Baptist Col∣bert, Lord of S. Poüange, preferr'd him to the Service of Michael le Tellier, Secretary of State, whose Sister he had marry'd; and the Youth
was quickly taken notice of for his Diligence, and Exactness in executing all the Commissi∣ons that were entrusted to his Care. One day his Master sent him to Cardinal Mazarin with a Letter written by the Queen-Mother, and order'd him to bring back the Letter after that Minister had seen it. Colbert arriving at Sedan, where the Cardinal then was, presented the Queen's Letter to him, with another from le Tellier, to his Eminency; and returning the next day for an Answer, he re∣ceiv'd only a seal'd Packet; but not seeing the Queen's Letter, he ask'd the Cardinal for it, who told him that all was in the Packet, and bid him return to his Master. The wary Messenger not satisfi'd with that Answer, broke up the Seal in the Cardinal's Presence, who being surpriz'd at his Boldness, chid him for his Sawciness, and snatch'd the Packet out of his hand; Colbert, not in the least daunted with so rough a Treatment, reply'd, That he believ'd his Eminency had entrusted the Care of closing the Packet to one of his Secretaries, who, proba∣bly, had forgotten to put in the Queen's Letter. The Cardinal pretending Business put him off till the next Day, but at last, after several Delays and Denials, seeing him always at the Closet-Door, he restor'd the Letter, which Colbert view'd very attentively, to see whether it was the same he deliver'd; and went away with∣out seeming to take notice of the Cardinal's Anger, who ask'd him whether he thought him capable of so much Baseness as to coun∣terfeit a Paper. Some time after the Cardi∣nal
returning to Court, and wanting one to write his Agenda, or Memorandums, desir'd le Tellier to furnish him with a fit Person for that Employment: and Colbert being presented to him, he had still some confus'd Remembrance of him, and was desirous to know where he had seen him. Colbert was afraid to put him in mind of Sedan, least the Remembrance of his Importunacy, in demanding the Queen's Letter, should renew the Cardinal's Anger; but his Eminency was so far from hating him for his Faithfulness to his late Master, that he receiv'd him on condition, That he should serve him with like Zeal and Fidelity. Colbert apply'd himself wholly to the Ad∣vancement of his Master's Interests, and gave him so many Marks of his Diligence and Skill, that after the Death of Joubert his Eminency's Intendant, he was chosen to suc∣ceed in that Post. He accommodated him∣self so dexterously to the Inclinations of that Minister, by retrenching his superfluous Ex∣pences, that he was entrusted with the Ma∣nagement of that gainful Trade of selling Be∣nefices and Governments. It was by his Coun∣sel that the Cardinal oblig'd the Governours of Frontier Places to maintain their Garri∣sons with the Contributions they exacted; and his Eminency was extremely pleas'd with that Advice. He was sent to Rome to negotiate the Reconciliation of Cardinal de Rets, for which the Pope had shew'd some Concern, and to per∣swade his Holiness to consent to the dis-inca∣merating of Castro, according to the Treaty con∣cluded
with his Predecessour Urban VIII. At his Return, to requite his good Services, he was made Secretary of the Queen's Dispatches, which Office he afterwards sold to Brisacier, Master of the Court of Accounts, and bought that of President in the same Company, who happily for him, but unhappily for them∣selves, would not receive him; for he became their greatest Enemy, and depriv'd 'em of the profit of the Debets of Accounts, for which he made a Bargain with Vilette, and afterwards with others, to the great Prejudice of the Chamber, tho' the King did not receive much Advantage by the Alteration. Assoon as he saw himself in Favour at Court, he began to think of a convenient Match, and took to Wife Mary Charon, Daugh∣ter of James Charon, Sieur de Menars, a Native of Blois, (who of a Cooper and Wine-Bro∣ker, was become Pay-Master of the Infan∣try), and of Mary Begon his Wife. Charon had higher Designs, for he look'd upon his Daughter as one of the Richest Matches in Paris, by reason of the great Legacies and In∣heritances that would fall to her: but at last he consented to this Proposal, that he might be exempted from a Tax with which he was threatned. The great Respect which Colbert shew'd to his Wife did not hinder him from gratifying in some measure his particular In∣clinations, and from yielding to the Charms of Frances de Godet, Widow of John Gravé Sieur de Launay, a Norman Lady, of a smooth and insinuating Temper, the usual Character
of those of her Country. She was of a graceful Stature, and Majestick Gate: Her Face was round, her Complexion white and clear, her Hair light, and her Eyes blue. Lau∣nay Gravé a rich Partizan marry'd her after the Death of his first Wife, whose Servant she had been, and left her a great Estate. Colbert took care to introduce his Mistress to the Queen and Cardinal Mazarin, with whom he made her play very frequently; and she made use of those Privileges for the Advan∣tage of him who procur'd 'em to her; for be∣ing of a quick and piercing Wit, she gave him notice of every thing she heard, that had any relation to his Interests: nor was he in∣grateful to one that had done him so conside∣rable Service; for he contriv'd a way to make her the Wife of Anthony de Broüille, Marquess of Piene, Knight of the Orders, and Gover∣nour of Pignerol. The Marchioness of Piene was not the on∣ly Person that touch'd the Heart of Colbert: for besides her, he made Love to Ann Marga∣ret Vanel, Wife of John Coissier, Master of the Court of Accounts, a young Lady of a low Stature, but extremely pretty, and adorn'd with all the Advantages of a gay Humour and lively Wit. His frequent Visits, and Sup∣ping at her House were ascrib'd to his inti∣mate Friendship with her Father-in-law, who had been Receiver of the Consignations with Betaut, and to the Lessons of Politicks he usu∣ally took from her Husband, who was per∣fectly well acquainted with all the Negotiations
and Intrigues of the Treaty of Munster, as having been Secretary to the Embassy under Abel de Servien, whose Deputy he still was in the Super-Intendancy. But our States-Man was soon weary of the Levity and Fickleness of that Lady, and resign'd his Pretensions to his Brother Edward Francis Colbert, whom he had made Captain of the Guards, to Rous∣serau Cardinal Mazarin's Secretary, and to the Commander of Gault, who had more time to bestow on their Amours. Ambition was the predominant Passion of John Baptist Col∣bert, and though he had not yet arriv'd to that eminent height of Grandeur, to which he af∣terwards attain'd, he had already advanc'd all his Brothers. For he had obtain'd the Inten∣dancy of Alsatia, with the Dignity of a Pre∣sident à Mortier in the Parliament of Paris, for Charles Colbert, and the Bishoprick of Luçon, with the Office of the King's Library-Keeper for his Brother Nicholas. Mazarin at his Death recommended Colbert to his Majesty, as a fit Person to regulate Af∣fairs relating to the Finances which stood much in need of Reformation: for Nicholas Fouquet, who was then Superintendant, had borrow'd such vast Summs, that he was above four Years behind-hand. He had rais'd Rents on the Third Peny and a Half, which nevertheless yielded no more than the Seventh Peny, because only two Quarters were paid, and even that was very much. He had also erected Offices without Charge, and had deliver'd blank Pa∣tents, which the Purchasers were to enjoy with∣out
supplying the Places, so that the King was depriv'd of his Right to Surrenders. And besides there was a Third Part remitted at each Bargain, which oppress'd the People without the least Advantage to the King. The Edicts were chang'd to Bills or Tickets, which were afterwards cut into so many Pieces, that 'twas impossible to know the Original: and he paid so excessive Rates of Interest for the Loans he receiv'd, that the Crown must have for ever remain'd unable to discharge the Summs, if a quick Stop had not been put to these Dis∣orders. The King resolv'd to entrust the Regu∣lation of his Revenue to Colbert, having already receiv'd some Marks of his Frugality: for he re∣member'd that he had sav'd him a considerable Summ of Money, by changing the fine Silver Edgings that were fitted to the Ribbons with which the Habits of the Hundred Switzers were adorn'd, to counterfeit Lace: And there∣fore his Majesty made him Intendant of the Finances, together with Breteuil, Marin, and Hervard; and erected a Chamber of Justice, compos'd of Six Counsellours of State, Six Masters of Requests, Four Counsellours of the Parliament of Paris, Two Counsellours of the Great Council, Two Masters of the Court of Accounts, Two Counsellours of the Court of Aids, and a Counsellour out of each of the other Parliaments, to call to an account, and arraign such Farmers as were guilty of Misdemeanors. The Chamber, for a Speci∣men of their Justice, and for an Example and Terrour to the rest of these Officers, caus'd
some of the meanest of 'em to be hang'd: and these Executions made way for the Im∣prisonment of the Superintendant, the Three Treasurers of the Exchequer, and the richest Partizans or Farmers. Before they proceeded to secure Fouquet, he was dexterously perswaded to resign the Office of Attorney-General of the Parli∣ament of Paris, lest he should claim the Pri∣vilege which that Dignity gave him of being try'd by the Chambers in a full Assembly. He was apprehended at Nantes on the Fifth of September, 1661. whither the Court was re∣mov'd to quiet some Disorders in Bretaigne:  he was afterwards carry'd from thence, and com∣mitted close Prisoner to the Castel of St. Angers, where he was seiz'd with a very dangerous Sickness. At the same time the Papers which he brought along with him were secur'd, and the Seal affix'd to his Houses at Paris, S. Man∣dé and Vaux, and to his Apartments at the Louvre. His Papers that were seiz'd at Nantes, with those of his Deputy Pelisson, were exa∣min'd for several days by Boucherat, Counsel∣lour of State, Pellot, Master of Requests, and Colbert; and afterwards transmitted to Fon∣tainbleau without taking an Inventory of 'em. The Seal was affix'd on his House at Paris by the Lieutenant-Civil, assisted by the King's Advocate of the Chastelet, for the Interest of the Publick, and in presence of the Prisoner's domestick Servants. The same Ceremonies were not observ'd at Fontainbleau; and be∣cause they mistrusted the Exactness of Poncet,
who was one of the Commissioners, they sent him to assist at the taking of the Inven∣tory of S. Mandé. Barin de la Galissoniere was substituted in his Place, but d' Aligre, Director of the Finances, and Colbert, manag'd the Af∣fair alone, and proceeded with so much Ea∣gerness and Diligence, that they spent even Sundays and Holydays in that Occupation. The greatest part of 'em were not subsign'd, and even they carried the Bundles to his Majesty's Closet without marking their Numbers. As for the Papers at S. Mandé, Poncet had brought 'em to Fontainbleau; but after he had ac∣quainted the King, that, according to the Forms of Justice, they ought to remain in the place where they were found, till the Person who own'd 'em was brought to an Account, his Majesty commanded 'em to be carry'd back to S. Mandé. The King had appointed the Lieutenant-Civil to affix the Seal to that House; but Colbert suppress'd a second Or∣der, which gave that Commission to Benard and l' Alleman, Masters of the Requests. By Virtue of this last Order, the Seal was af∣fix'd on the 8th of the same Month of Sep∣tember, by those Commissioners, in presence of Charles de la Nouë and Jacob Bezemont, the Prisoner's Servants. But Colbert suspecting 'em of Remissness and Neglect, obtain'd a new Commission for Lauzon and la Fosse, Counsellours of State, who with Poncet were appointed to take the Inventory: after which, the first Commissioners having own'd and re∣cogniz'd their Seal, deliver'd up the Keys of
the Doors, Trunks and Cupboards, to those who were appointed to succeed 'em, who affix'd a new Seal, though their Power did not reach so far, and put the Signet (which they ought to have kept) into the hands of Foucaut, Clerk to the Commission, and Colbert's Creature, who by this means be∣came Master of all the Papers, since the Keys were entrusted to his Clerk. And therefore assoon as he was inform'd that Foucaut was Master of all, leaving his Business at Fontain∣bleau, he went immediately to S. Mandé to be present at the taking of the Inventory, tho' he had no Authority to go thither. The Rea∣son that made him so desirous to seize on these Papers, was not only to deprive Fouquet of what might serve for his Defence, but al∣so to secure himself against all Accusations by suppressing those Papers which might have discover'd his Guilt. For, during the Life of Cardinal Mazarin, the Administration of three fourth Parts of the Charge of Superin∣tendant, and the Receipt and Disbursement of the best part of the Money in the King∣dom, was manag'd in that Minister's Palace, and according to his Orders, by Colbert, who, if his Bills had been inserted in the Inventory, would have been oblig'd to give an account of all that was contain'd in 'em. The Papers found in the House at Vaux were put in two Trunks, before any Inven∣tory was taken of 'em, and deliver'd to Fou∣caut, with Orders to bring 'em to the Castle of the Louvre: nor were they put in Order till
three Months after, when la Fosse and Poncet made a List of 'em with as little Regularity s they had observ'd at S. Mandé. In the mean me, while the Commissioners were employ'd n taking the Inventories, the Prisoner was emov'd from Angers to Amboise, and from hence to Vincennes, about the end of December, 661. Hitherto he had been kept in Prison, hough he could not be reputed a Criminal, ecause he had not yet been proceeded against according to the Forms of Justice. They be∣gan not to inform against him till in the Year 1662, by Virtue of an Order dated March 3. and no Decree pass'd against him till the 17th of June. The Order awarded that his Person should be secur'd, and committed during the King's Pleasure to the Inner Tower in the Castle of Vincennes. Fouquet was not only accus'd of Misdemea∣nour in the Management of the Finances: they also laid to his Charge, That he had drawn up in Writing the beginning of a Scheme, instructing his Friends and Relations what to do, in case he should be apprehend∣d; that he had fortify'd Belle Isle, and fur∣nished it with Cannon; that he had been pos∣sess'd of the Government of Concarnau; and had made several Persons by written Obligati∣ons, engage themselves to advance his Inte∣rest. As for his Cheating the Publick, or Embezling the Treasure of the Kingdom, 'twas pretended that he had taken interest un∣der the pretext of forg'd Loans; that he had advanc'd Money which he ought not to have
done, as being the Disposer of it; that he had confounded the King's Money with his own, and embezled it to his private Use; that he had acquir'd an Interest in the Farms, and made Bargains under borrow'd Names; tha he had purchas'd Rights and Estates of the King at under Rates; that he had taken Pen∣sions and Gratifications from the Farmers and Purchasers to let 'em have a cheaper Bargain of their Farms and Purchases; that he had reviv'd several expir'd Notes or Tickets bought at the Thirtieth Peny, and had made 'em pass at their full Value; that he had renew'd on certain Funds illegal Tickets, arising from Orders granted to Farmers for the Re-imburse∣ment of Treaties or Leases that were made void; and that he had made Treaties or A∣greements disadvantageous to the King, and wasted 'em in idle Expences. Colbert, who accus'd Fouquet for taking Pensions of the Far∣mers, had himself receiv'd one of fifty thou∣sand Livres a Year from Claude Girardin, in Consideration of which, and of a hundred thousand Livres paid to Cardinal Mazarin, Lease of the Aids was adjudg'd to Girardin for five hundred thousand Livres less than Forco and his Associates had paid for it, though there was no Pretext to dispossess 'em. To conceal that Bribe, Colbert rais'd the Cardinal's Benefices a hundred thousand Livres, which Girardin at the same time took to farm. Since Fouquet had no hand in that Affair, there was no mention made of it at his Trial, though it was a part of his Charge. 'Tis plain from
what happen'd on occasion of the Woods of Normandy, that Colbert was as much concern'd as Fouquet in Treaties of that Nature: For Berrier and Bechamel who farm'd 'em, seeing an Action brought against 'em in the Cham∣ber of Justice, threaten'd, That if he did not put a stop to the Prosecution, they would pro∣duce their Agreement of Partnership, in which his Share alone equall'd both theirs; after which the whole Business was hush'd up. On the 4th of March, 1662, Fouquet was examin'd the first time by Poncet, Master of Requests, and Renaud Counsellour in the Parliament of Paris, on Articles resulting from the Informations that were brought against him, and others alledg'd by Denys Talon, Ad∣vocate-General of the same Parliament, and Attorney-General of the Chamber. The Examination lasted above a Month, and they proceeded no farther till June. Fouquet had all along refus'd to own the Authority of the Chamber; and though the King's Council had by several Orders confirm'd its Jurisdiction, and comman∣ded him to submit and give in his An∣swer under pain of being proceeded against as Mute, he still persisted in his Plea, decli∣ning the Authority of the Court. Yet his Process was appointed by an Order of the Chamber, dated October 4. 1662. and refer∣red to le Fevre d' Ormesson, Master of Requests, and Cornier de Sainte Helene, Counsellour in the Parliament of Rhoan.
Fouquet was brought from Vincennes on the 14th of November, 1664. to the Chamber of Justice in the Arsenal, to be examin'd on the Criminals Seat; and the examination conti∣nu'd till the 4th of December, when d' Ormesson began to make his report, adjudging him to per∣petual Banishment, and his Estate to be forfei∣ted to the King, paying a Fine of a hundred thousand Livres. Sainte Helene, who was also empower'd to make the Report, voted for Death, adding, That though the Evidence was strong enough to convict him of Peculate or of Robbing and Embezelling the King's Treasure, which ought by the Law to be pu∣nish'd with Hanging; yet he was of Opini∣on that the Prisoner should only be beheaded. Sainte Helene was follow'd, and his Judgment confirm'd by Pussort, Colbert's Uncle, and Coun∣sellour in the great Council; Feriol, Counsel∣lour in the Parliament of Mets; Gisancourt, Counsellour in the great Council; Noguets, Counsellour in the Parliament of Pau; Heraut, Counsellour in the Parliament of Bretaigne; and de la Toison, Counsellour in the Parliament of Dijon. Roquesante, Counsellour in the Parliament of Provence, who voted next, was of Ormesson's Opinion; as were also du Verdier, Counsellour in the Parliament of Bourdeaux; de la Baume, Counsellour in the Parliament of Grenoble; Masenau, Counsellour in the Parliament of Tholouse; le Ferron, Counsellour in the Court of Aids; de Mousy, Master of the Court of Accounts; Catinat and Renard, Counsellours in the Parliament of Paris; Benard de Rezé,
Master of Requests; and Philip de Pontchar∣train, President in the Chamber of Accounts, Poncet and Voisin gave Judgment of Death, as well as the Chancellour; but it was car∣ry'd for Banishment by four Voices; after which Sentence was given on the 20th of December, 1664. according to d' Ormesson's Verdict. The King being inform'd of the Nature of the Sentence, and considering that it might be a thing of dangerous Consequence, to send a Per∣son out of the Kingdom, who was so particu∣larly acquainted with the most important Af∣fairs of the State, chang'd the Punishment to perpetual Imprisonment, and order'd him to be carry'd to Pignerol on the Frontiers of Piedmont, whither he began his Journey two days after, under a Guard of a hundred Mus∣quetiers, and there ended his Life in the Year 1680. Immediately after his Condemnation, his Mother and Wife receiv'd Orders to retire to Montluçon in Bourbonnois, with his Brother Fouquet, the King's first Gentleman of the Horse. His Son-in-law, the Marquess of Cha∣rôt, with his Wife, were order'd to Anceni in Bretaigne; and Bailly, Advocate-General of the Great Council, was commanded to retire to his Abbey of St. Thierry, because he pleaded for him with too much eagerness. The Difference between the Tempers of Colbert and Fouquet, appears plainly by their Carriage to the Author of the Burlesque Gazette, who besides a Pension of two hundred Livres from Mademoiselle de Monpensier, had another
of two hundred Crowns allow'd him by Fou∣quet. This Gazetteer after his unfortunate Be∣nefactour was apprehended, spoke advantage∣ously of him in his Gazette, protesting that though he would not meddle with Affairs of State, he cou'd not forbear expressing his Gra∣titude for the Obligations he had receiv'd. Colbert, knowing that he had a Pension, took it from him; which Fouquet, who was then in the Bastile, had no sooner heard, but he resolv'd to make up that Loss with Advantage, tho' he was depriv'd of all his Estate, and in a Condition that requir'd vast Summs of Money to defray his necessary Charges. For Made∣moiselle de Scudery, at his desire, sent fifteen hun∣dred Livres to Loret by a trusty Messenger, who after he had discours'd with him for a considerable time, took occasion to leave that Summ in a Purse without his Knowledge. Bruant des Carrieres, Master of the Court of Accounts, and Fouquet's first Deputy, made his escape out of the Kingdom, and retir'd to Liege assoon as his Master was secur'd. But the Chamber indited him for Contempt, and condemn'd him to be hang'd; after which his Office in the Court of Accounts was sup∣press'd. He had bought of Margaret Ranchin, Widow of Claude Vanel, a House in New-street in the Little Fields, for 150000 Livres, in the Name of Joan de Chaumont, Widow of Claude Girardin. This House stood very convenient for Colbert, who liv'd in another contiguous to it, which he had purchas'd of Batru: and the Temptation was so strong, that he us'd all his
Art to make himself Master of the House, without putting his hand in his Purse. At last he took advantage of several Orders or Sentences of the Chamber of Justice, by which the Widow and Heirs of Vanel were fin'd in 350000 Livres, and under that pretext procur'd Widow Girardin to be assign'd in a Declaration of Mortgage. But since these Proceedings were of no greater Force in Law than the Judgment of the same Chamber, by which a great Tax was already laid on Claude Girardin, the Son of Joan Chaumont, Colbert tax'd or assess'd the Inheritance of Claude Girardin, the Father, at a hundred and twenty thousand Livres, though he had never been concern'd in the King's Affairs, nor had ever enjoy'd any other Office than that of Comptroller of the Sallaries of the Officers of the Parliament at Rhoan, for which he was not at all liable to account. By Virtue of these Sentences a Decree was obtain'd, no less irre∣gular than the rest of the Proceedings, and the House was adjudg'd to Colbert, against the Heirs both of Vanel and Girardin, for a hun∣dred and twenty thousand Livres, deducting the Summs due to the King: but Colbert su∣specting the Validity of his Title, procur'd a Grant of it from his Majesty. During the Prosecution of Fouquet's Deputies and Far∣mers, Bruant stay'd at Liege, where he perfor∣med such considerable Services to the State in 1672, that he obtain'd a Pardon, and retur∣ned to Paris after Colbert's Death, thinking to be reinstated in the Possession of his
House: but he had only the Advantage of venting his Passion in his Writings, for the Council would not meddle with what had been decreed by the Chamber of Justice. Paul Pelisson had the good Fortune to escape the Fate of his Fellow-Deputy: For Colbert's Ambition to be thought Learned, and to ac∣quire the Esteem of those who were really so, prompted him not only to procure his Liber∣ty, but to take him into his own Service, af∣ter his late Master's Condemnation. Pelisson was the younger Son of a Counsellour in the Court of Judicature establish'd by the Edict of Castres: his Patrimony was inconsiderable, but his Learning and Politeness supply'd the Defects of his Fortune. His Elder Brother bought a Counsellour's Place in the Su∣preme Court of Bresse, which was afterwards united to the Parliament of Mets: and our Cadet went to Paris with Isarn, Brother to the Clerk of the above-mention'd Court, institu∣ted by the Edict. These two Adventurers were intimate Friends, and there was a great Affinity between their Tempers: they were both remarkable for Sweetness of Conversa∣tion, and could write as well in Verse as in Prose. But there was not the same Resem∣blance between their Faces; for the Small-pox had very much disfigur'd Pelisson's, (whose Fea∣tures were not very regular before,) by leaving Marks of its Fury on his Fore-head and Cheeks, and so distorting his Eye-lids, that the White was too much uncover'd. On the contrary, Isarn was form'd for Love, his Sta∣ture,
Complexion, Features, Hair (which was black, curl'd, and in great abundance), and every thing else were graceful and agreeable. They address'd themselves both together to Mademoiselle de Scudery, and endeavour'd to di∣vert her with the Productions of their Wit: Pelisson made Stanza's on a Linget that was her Favourite; and Isarn wrote the Louis d' Or, a small Miscellany of Prose and Verse. But at last she declar'd for the former, and preferr'd his Linget to the other's Louis d' Or. She de∣scrib'd in her Cyrus her Amours with Pelisson, under the Names of Sappho and Phaon; and to shew that her Passion was beyond the Reach of Matter, and would never make her throw her self into the Sea after the Example of that Learned Graecian Lady, she drew in her Clelia a Scheme of her Love, which she call'd Ten∣der Friendship. And even she could not for∣bear discovering to Pelisson her Inclination to∣ward him, in these Extemporary Verses. Enfin, Acanthe, il se faut rendre, Vôtre Esprit a charmé le mien; Je vous fais Citoyen de Tendre, Mais de grace n'en dites rien. At last, Acanthus, I must yield, Charm'd by the Beauties of thy Wit; But never let it be reveal'd, That I to Tender thee admit. This Union of Minds was so much taken notice of at Paris, and seem'd so pleasant an
Adventure, that it was made the Subject of a Song, which grew very common. L'Amour met tous sous son Empire, Et ce n'est pas une Chanson; Sapho même soùpire Pour le doctè Pelisson? What Man is he that dares defie The universal Monarch, Love; Who makes Platonic Sapho sigh, The Learn'd Pelisson's Heart to move? But that Learned Person had too great a Mind to be satisfy'd with such Trifles. The French Academy had so great an Esteem for him, that they admitted him into their Num∣ber, though there was no Place vacant. He wrote the History of that Society, enrich'd with an Account of its Institution and Statutes, and the Lives of its Members: The Subject he undertook is describ'd with a great deal of Exactness, and the Reader is sometimes divert∣ed with a pleasant Mixture of Praise and Sa∣tyr, as in the Account of Voiture. This Work was very much esteem'd, and rais'd the Re∣putation of its Author: Fouquet, who had read it, receiv'd very favourably the Proposal which Mademoiselle de Scudery made him, of making that Historian one of his Deputies; and from that time entrusted him with the Care of Framing the Draughts of all the Let∣ters of Importance, which he was oblig'd to write. He plac'd an entire Confidence in
him, and bestow'd on him a newly-erected Office in the Court of Accounts, Aids, and Finances at Montpelier, where he was receiv'd in November 1659, when the Court pass'd that way. He gave him a very signal Mark of his Affection, when, upon his bare Recom∣mendation, he protected de Mance, Farmer of the Gabels in Languedoc, with so much Zeal and Eagerness against the whole Province, who had conspir'd that Officer's Ruine. Nor was Pelisson an ingrateful Servant; for 'tis well known with what Vigour and Eloquence he vindicated his Master from the Crimes that were laid to his Charge. Colbert, who had seen the Collection of all those Pieces, prin∣ted in Holland in Six Volumes, conceiv'd so high an Esteem for the Author, that he re∣solv'd not only to set him at Liberty, but to gain him entirely, by bestowing Favours up∣on him: and Pelisson transferr'd all the Fidelity with which he had serv'd Fouquet, to his new Master. 'Twas he who inspir'd that Mini∣ster with a Desire to be admitted into the French Academy, into which he was receiv'd in the Place of Silhon, An. 1667. Colbert enter∣tain'd also in his Service des Chiens, another of Fouquet's Deputies, but for a different Rea∣son; for he thought he ow'd no less a Recom∣pence to one that had done him such accep∣table Service, by furnishing him with Instru∣ctions against his Master. But 'tis impossible to love a Traitour long, and Colbert shortly after turn'd away that unfaithful Servant.
Notwithstanding my Resolution to observe the Order of Time with as much Exactness as a Work of this Nature will admit, I thought fit to make an uninterrupted Relation of the Fall and Disgrace of Fouquet and his Deputies; I shall in the next place, give an Account of the new Regulation of the Finances, and the Advancement of Colbert on the Ruines of that unfortunate Officer. Immediately after Fouquet's Imprisonment, the Office of Superintendant was suppress'd, and a Council of the Finances establish'd, of which the Mareschal de Villeroy was declar'd the Chief. Colbert claim'd Admittance into that Council, not only as Intendant, but also by Vir∣tue of his Office of Comptroller-General, which he enjoy'd alone, though it was for∣merly divided between Bretenil and Marin▪ and the other three Intendants, with the two Directors of the Finances, d' Aligre and Mo∣rangis, were also admitted into the Council. Though Colbert had not the Name of Super∣intendant, he had all the Power and Autho∣rity that ever was enjoy'd by Fouquet, only with this difference, that all his Orders were presented to the King for his Approbation. They left off discharging the old Exche∣quer-Tickets, which pass'd Current in Trade, at the Rate of the Tenth Peny, because the Farmers gave them in part of Payment for their Taxes, after the full Pardon that was granted them on Condition of discharging the Tickets by an Edict publish'd in December, 1665, and verify'd by the Parliament on the
21st, of the same Month; after which the Price of these Tickets fell so low, that one of a hundred thousand Livres has been sold for fifty Pistols. Colbert took that occasion to buy up a great number of 'em, and by reco∣vering their full Value, made himself Master of those immense Summs, with which he purchas'd the Marquisates of Seignelay, and Blainville, and the Baronies of Monetau, Ches∣ny, Beaumont, and Sceaux, with several other considerable Estates. The new Rents which yielded excessive In∣comes were suppress'd, and the Proprietors ordain'd to deliver up their Contracts to be discuss'd, to de Seve Counsellour of State, com∣mission'd by the King for that Effect. The Reimbursement was intended for the Pay∣ment of the Taxes of those that were accoun∣table, their Heirs, Deputies, and Partners: and for those who had never been concern'd with the King's Affairs, the Possession was laid upon the actual Payment of the Finance, by which means the Proprietors recover'd very lit∣tle. Nor was this all, for even those were tax'd who in their Treaties had transferr'd Reim∣bursements of Rents or other Rights and Du∣ties held of the King. And there was a parti∣cular Office erected in the House of Pussort, Colbert's Uncle, for re-purchas'd Rents, in pur∣suance of an Edict dated January 1665, and verify'd or approv'd on the 14th of the same Month. The Suppression of the Rents procur'd a great Number of Enemies to Colbert: and
even one day going to visit Chancellour Se∣guier, he was besieg'd in the Court by the Te∣nants who held the Rents, some of whom had the Confidence to threaten him. He seem'd to hear their Reasons, but his Design was to learn the Names of the Mutiniers: and at night he inform'd the King of what had happen'd, who order'd 'em to be appre∣hended. He thought the Imprisonment of those who were most forward, would have impos'd Silence on the rest; but he was de∣ceiv'd, for some one or other appear'd every day to fright him. His Deputies, who were more fearful than he, endeavour'd to disswade him from proceeding in that Affair, but could not prevail. It happen'd one Night, that Picon, his chief Deputy, who had the Misfortune to love Wine too much, started out of his Sleep, imagining that the Tenants held him by the Throat. The Noise he made alarm'd the whole House, and Colbert among the rest, who being inform'd of the Occasion of the Disturbance, turn'd away the poor Drunkard next Morning; tho', at the Desire of some Persons whom he could not deny, and on the Assurance they gave him that the Man was reform'd, he receiv'd him again some Years after, and kept him till his Death. 'Twas not thought sufficient to take the Re∣imbursements for the Payment of the Taxa∣tions; but the Offices, Lands, Houses, and other immoveable Goods belonging to the Three Treasurers of the Exchequer, the two
Monerots, Languet and Bansse were seiz'd and adjudg'd to the King's Use. Several Courti∣ers made advantage of these Spoils: The House of Sevre de Monerot the Elder was given to the Duke of Orleans, to be united to his Park at S. Cloud; his House at Paris to the Duke of Luxemburg; and Monerot the Younger's House was bestow'd on the Mareschal de Gra∣mont. They did not content themselves with seizing the Estates of the actual Possessours; but the same Judgment was awarded against Children, even though they had renounc'd their Fathers Inheritance; and against Pur∣chasers, who had paid the Price of the Estates in Ready Money; nor could they prevent their Ruine, by sheltering themselves under the Authority of the Decree, which clears all Mortgages, and takes away all Encum∣brances. The Sons-in-law of those who had been concern'd in these Affairs, not only lost all the Immoveable or Real Estates they had receiv'd in Dowry with their Wives, but were forc'd to pay the Taxations that were impos'd on their Fathers-in law, without the least Regard to their Dignities; for Soldiers were quarter'd in the Houses ofSo called from a cer∣tain Cap they usually wear. Presidents a Mortier, merely because they had marry'd the Daughters of Farmers. Thus 'tis plain, that these Persons could no longer be call'd the King's Tutors, who attempted to usurp the Sovereign Authority during the King's Minority. The Offices of the Treasurers of the Exchequer were suppress'd; and Bartillac, who had been Treasurer to the Queen-Mo∣ther,
was made Keeper of the Royal Trea∣sure. These violent Proceedings interrupted the Trade of the Kingdom, without bring∣ing any considerable Summs into the King's Coffers, by reason of the great Charge which the Prosecution of the Design requir'd: and therefore Colbert perceiving that he had made himself the Object of the publick Hatred, agreed with Twelve of the richest Farmers, who undertook the Affair on Condition that they should be exempted from the Payment of their own Taxes; like Soldiers, who save themselves from the Gallows by performing the Office of Executioner upon their Compa∣nions. But in the midst of all those Trou∣bles, the Family of Launay Gravé remain'd free from all manner of Prosecutions: and Colbert, who still retain'd a Kindness for the Marchioness of Pienes, procur'd all her Re∣imbursements to be given her; a Favour which she ow'd to his delightful Remem∣brance of his old Amours. Hitherto I have shew'd Colbert on the most disadvantageous side, but now I must turn the Reverse of the Medal. France is oblig'd to this Minister for the Establishment of her Trade with the East and West-Indies: he con∣sider'd that the Dutch, who inhabit a barren Country void of all Conveniencies, owe their Power and Riches to their Trade; from whence he concluded, that the King, who possess'd in his own Dominions all that his Neighbours wanted, had a much fairer Pro∣spect of Success in such an Undertaking. He
form'd and brought together two Companies, one for the East, and another for the West-In∣dies, and the King declar'd himself Protector of both, granting 'em great Privileges, and obliging himself by Contract, to lend 'em Six Millions, without Interest. And besides, to encrease the Fund, his Majesty engag'd the Judges and Merchants in the same Design, who were tax'd proportionably to their E∣states. These Companies have since settl'd Factories in the Principal Cities of the Indies, and the King of Siam, who is one of the most powerful Princes of Asia, sent Ambas∣sadours to his Majesty in the Year 1686. On the 8th of January, 1664. Colbert bought of Ratabon the Office of Superinten∣dant of the Buildings, and from that time forward apply'd himself with so much Indu∣stry and Success to the Enlargement and Em∣bellishment of the Royal Houses, that they are at present so many Master-Pieces of Archite∣cture. He began with the Palace of the Tu∣illeries, to which he join'd the Garden that was separated from it by the Street. He or∣der'd a large Parterre or Flower-Garden to be made before the Building, with three Basons, dispos'd after the manner of a Triangle. By his Directions the Bird-house, Mademoiselle de Guise's Lodgings, and all the other Houses as far as the Gate of Conference, were beaten down, to make room for the Terrass that runs along the River, as there is another opposite to this, towards the Manage of the Great Stables. A large Alley was planted there with
Indian Chesnut-Trees, with two small ones on each side, reaching to Renard's Garden, which was taken in within the Inclosure of the Tu∣illeries, where the Terrass is cut through the Middle, to leave the Prospect of theThis name is given to publick pla∣ces of Re∣sort, (such as Hide-Park) where Per∣sons of Qua∣lity take the Air. Cours unobstructed, with a Passage to ascend thither on both sides, and a large Bason or Vase of a Fountain in the midst of the Garden, that takes up the greatest Part of it. On the right hand a Theatre was erected on a Grass-plot, for the Representation of Comedies, se∣parated by a kind of Parterre, from an Am∣phitheatre, which is capable of containing a∣bove a thousand Persons, who may from thence conveniently behold the Shows that are presented on the Theatre. 'Twould be an endless Labour to describe all the Curiosi∣ties that are to be seen in the Tuilleries; such as the Labyrinth, the Orange-house, and the Marble Statue that represents Time, treading on Envy and Falshood. In the Year 1665. Colbert sent to Rome for Cavalier Bernin, to frame the Design of the Louvre, and procur'd him a Pension of two thousand Crowns. That Illustrious Italian, whose excellent Skill extended equally to Scul∣pture and Architecture, made the Bust or Half-Statue of the King, that adorns his Ma∣jesty's Cabinet. That admirable Piece not only represents all the Features of that great Monarch to the Life, but discovers that state∣ly Mien which makes his Enemies tremble at the Head of his Armies, without losing the least Grace of that mild and sweet Air
which charms his Subjects: And besides it seems to express that vast and piercing Judg∣ment which was never guilty of an Over∣sight, and that Piety which excites him to leave nothing unattempted for the Defence of Religion. The same Minister repair'd the Royal Hou∣ses of S. Germain en Laye, Fontainbleau and Chambord. He caus'd four additional Build∣ings to be join'd to the first, which make that House a great deal more convenient than 'twas formerly: and he made use of Sir S. Moreland an English Mathematician, to em∣bellish it with Water-Spouts of so extraordina∣ry a height, that the chief of 'em is above 30. foot higher than the Dome that contains the Bell. As for Versailles it may be said that he rais'd it from the ground, as it were by En∣chantment: 'Twas formerly a Dog-kennel, where Lewis XIII. kept his Hunting-furni∣ture; and at present 'tis a Palace worthy of the great Monarch that lives in't. A long Avenue of four Rows of Trees leads to it, on the right hand of which is the Castle of Clagny, which his Majesty built for the Mar∣chioness of Montespan. 'Tis seated near the ancient Barony of Clag∣ny, at the side of a little and very old Build∣ing, the Beauty of which engag'd the King in this vast and chargeable Design. The Situ∣ation of this Castle is almost the same with that of Versailles; the Body of the Building has no separate Parts, but consists of a single Piece, with two double turning Wings, under
which there are two other single oblique Wings on the Fore-Front. The Court is 30. The Toise commonly contains six Feet. Toises broad, and 32. deep, without reckon∣ing a Half-Moon which encloses it before, and increases its Largeness. You ascend to the lower Story by five square Steps, which raise the Story between four and five Foot high. Here there is a large Gallery 35. Toi∣ses long, and 25. Foot broad, compos'd of three Halls, somewhat broader than the Spa∣ces left between 'em. The History of Aeneas is describ'd in several Pictures on the Vault, and above the Cornice that supports the Frames, there are some Complications of Fi∣gures in Basso relievo, representing several Dei∣ties, the Elements, Seasons, and Parts of the Earth, with their respective Qualities. The Vault of the great Hall in the middle, which is higher than the rest, is born by four Tromps: At the End of the Gallery you descend some Steps to an Orange-House pav'd with Marble, 24. Toises long, and 25. broad. The Chapel is at the other Corner on the right hand; its Ground-plot is round, and 30. Foot in Dia∣meter. The great Stair-Case is in the right wing at the Entry; 'tis of an unusual Stru∣cture, and the Stones are very ingeniously di∣spos'd: it leads to a Porch join'd to the great Hall that separates two Apartments contigu∣ous to two smaller ones; from whence in Tri∣bunes or rail'd Places, Mass may be heard in the Chapel. Mansard was the Designer and Architect of this Building. The great Pavi∣lion or Apartment in the Middle, is cover'd
with a Dome; the Ground-plot is square, and the rest of the Castle is cover'd with parted Roofs or Timber-work, after the Fashion introduc'd by Mansard. The principal Ornaments of the Garden are a Wood of high Trees, several Parterres in∣terwoven with Box into various Figures, Bowling-Greens of several Figures, Groves and Arbors of Lattice-Work embellish'd with Architecture. There are also very fair Hedge-Rows of Myrtles, which are full enough to contain Chests full of Orange-Trees, and o∣ther Shrubs, which seem to grow out of the Hedge-Rows, for the Chests are not seen. The Pond call'd de Clagny serves also for a Canal in sight of the Castle. The Orna∣ments with which Colbert beautify'd this House, are not at all comparable to those with which he embellish'd Versailles. The great Avenue terminates in a spacious Plot of Ground that contains 180. Toises in Front, and two other Avenues, which end in the same Place, form a kind of Figure resem∣bling a Goose's Foot. Here are the Great and Little Stables, where all the Officers have their Lodgings, and these Buildings are sepa∣rated from the Castle by the above-mention'd void Place. Each of the Stables consists of five Courts, the greatest of which is narrowest at the bot∣tom, being only enclos'd before by a Rail 32. Toises in Length, and the Pavilions or additi∣onal Buildings of 9. Toises, which flank the Wings that are 37. Toises long, and return to∣wards the Bottom of the Court, ending in a
Half-Moon made by two Arches of a Circle, which join a large outer Building in which is the Principal Gate. The two middle Courts are surrounded with Buildings 20 Toises long, and 12. broad. On each side without is a little Court for the Dung-hills, containing 20. Toi∣ses in Length, and 9. in Breadth, enclos'd be∣fore by a Partition-wall equal in Heigth to the first Story. These Buildings are contriv'd so low, as not to obstruct the Sight of the Castle; for the Level of the Tops answers within a little to the Marble Pavement of the little Court. From the great Arch at the Bottom of the little Court, and in the Middle of the outward Court, you enter into a large co∣ver'd Manage 20 Toises long, and 8 broad, at the sides of which are two Stables. Behind the Stable there is a great Manage for Justs and Turnaments, before which is the Dog-Kennel. As for the little Stables, the Coach-Houses are under the Arches of the Half-moon, at the Bottom of the Court: From the Gate of the Front-Building you enter into the largest Stable between two Ranks of Horses, 25. in each; and at the End there is a large Cop or Spherical Vault, containing 12. Toises in Dia∣meter, which separates the two other Stables. There is an Entrance into the Dog-Kennel on each side, where there is a Garden rail'd in with Balisters, that takes up all the Front of the Building. This Structure is compos'd of a Story next the Ground, and another above that, without any apparent Roof. The great Court is oblique, and the Passage to it lies thro' two other smaller Courts. A Draw-bridge
leads into a large outward Court, more long than broad, surrounded with Iron Rails, with two Apartments one on each side, to which you ascend by two Stair-Cases of Brick very large and uncover'd. Here the Cooks, the Officers of the Buttery, Pantry, Frui∣tery, and several other of his Majesty's Ser∣vants have their Lodgings. At the other End of the outward Court are two great Arch'd Gates, one on each side, which open into the Town overagainst the Church and Market-Place. From this Court you pass into ano∣ther square Court, pav'd with black and white Marble, with Fillets of another sort of white and red Marble: in the Midst of this Court there is a Vase of white Marble, with a Groupe or Complication of Figures of Brass, gilt. The Building consists of two Sides, and two Wings, which look into the Garden: The Chapel is on the right hand towards the King's Apartment, and all the Ministers are lodg'd below, on the two Sides. The Stair-Case that leads to the King's A∣partment is a Master-Piece of Architecture. 'Tis 11. Toises long, and 5. broad, compre∣hending the lower Steps, and those between the Stories or Resting-places. Three Arches in Front open an Entry into a Porch 39 Foot broad and 13 deep, which below is adorn'd with Compartments of Marble. On the up∣per part of the Stair and the Vault, there are Ornaments and Trophies in Basso relievo; from hence you ascend by three Steps, and three opposite Arches, to the first Landing-place
or broad Step, containing 15 Foot in Breadth, which is likewise overcast with Compartments of Marble. Facing these Ar∣ches, there is a Stair-Case in Pannels of eleven Steps of Marble: The broad, or Resting-place above is of eleven Steps square. In the Thick∣ness of the Wall there is a flat Nich, and in it a Marble Vase supported by two Dolphins of Brass: two Tritons which are above bear a double Scallop or Shell of Marble, adorn'd with a Head spouting Water into a Panier or Basket full of Shells, which forms a Nape that falls into the Marble Vase, and runs thro' another Head, and thro' the two Dolphins. The whole is of Brass. The Spaces between the Stories or Landing-places, are ten Foot broad, and consist each of twenty Marble Steps. The Buttresses are of the same Matter, supported by Balisters of Brass, cut into Flowers and gilt. The two Resting-places are also overlaid with Com∣partments of Marble, and ten Foot broad; on each of which are four Doors richly a∣dorn'd with Sculpture, that lead into the A∣partments. On the same Resting-places there are Marble Columns and Pilasters of the Ionic Order, with Bases and Chapitres of Brass, gilt. The Bust of the King is plac'd against the Wall, and accompany'd with several Or∣naments of the same Matter. The four massive or solid Places at the sides of the four Doors of the Apartments, be∣tween the Pilasters, are full of Ornaments and Figures on a Ground of Gold, resembling
Tapestry. In the four middle Spaces there are several Pictures representing his Majesty's Conquests. In the Intervals between the Mas∣sives and middle Spaces there are Galleries on each side of the same Ionic Order, and after the same Model, Pillars on which are re∣presented Persons of several Nations, as if they were going into the Galleries. There are also Galleries above the first Cornish, and two more in the length of the Faces support∣ed by Terms. On the Angles and at the End are large Sterns of Ships, bearing four Tro∣phies of Arms like to those of the four Parts of the World. These Sterns are supported with Brackets in the Form of arch'd Buttres∣ses, fortify'd with Horns of Plenty, and Scallops of Brass, at the Sides of which are Captives in Sculpture, and underneath Vi∣ctory. The Cieling is adorn'd with octangular Bas∣so Relievo's full of Figures suitable to the Sub∣ject; and the antique Pieces are cover'd with large Curtains, the strings of which are held by Terms. In this Stair-case they have also found room to place all the Muses, the Arts of Painting and Sculpture, Captives, the four parts of the World with their several Proper∣ties, all the Kings Actions, Poesie, History, Fame, and Mercury. All these Ornaments represent a Festival solemniz'd by the Deities of Parnassus, who are met together to receive the King at his return from the War. 'Tis suppos'd that the Painting is the Work of Ge∣nius's who appear in the Air adorning the
Vault and all the rest of this magnificent place with Festoons. His Majesty is plac'd in the middle, to denote that the Festival is kept for him: and the People of all Nations who seem to pass into the Galleries, being variously ha∣bited according to the fashion of their several Countries, take a view of all these Wonders, according to their respective Characters in their passage to see that great Prince whose Reputation has charm'd 'em. All the Pictures are by the hand of Le Brun, and the Design of the Stair-case by Mansard. The Great Hall leads into the Gallery which is 40 Toises long, and 36 Foot broad: here the History of the King is painted from the Peace of the Pyrenees to that of Nimeghen, where all his Majesties Actions are represented under Allegorical Figures, by the hand of Le Brun. Eight Niches in the Gallery contain the Antique Figures of Apollo, Venus of Savona, Diana of Ephesus, Venus of Arles, Bacchus, Sleep, and two Senatours. The three first were re∣pair'd by Girardin, who also fitted Draperies of Brass gilt after the manner of Busts, to twelve Heads of Porphyry that represent the Twelve Caesars, and to four others of Touch∣stone or Jett, which are the Heads of Illustri∣ous Men. Colbert took care not only of the Building of this Gallery, but of all its Orna∣ments and Furniture; as Vessels, Boxes of Orange-Trees, Cisterns, Rows of Stands for Tapers, Silver Stands garnish'd with Branches and Candle-sticks of the same Metal, Vessels of Porphyry plac'd above and under Tables
full of precious Stones, which are multiplied by the Glasses that surround the Place. And he caus'd all those Pieces of Silver-Work to be wrought and carv'd with inconceivable Care and Exactness. From this Gallery, the Way to the King's Apartment, lies through the Hall of Mars, which is full of Pictures, representing Bat∣tles and Sieges of Towns under Allegorical Figures. The Apartment contains a long Row of Pieces, and in the first Place the Throne, which is Silver, and eight Foot high. The Seat and Back are supported by Children carrying Baskets of Flowers: and on the highest Part of the Seat which forms the Back, stands Apollo holding his Lyre, and crown'd with Laurel. On each side are Ju∣stice and Strength sitting, and below two Silver Stools with Cushions: at the two Angles are Stands for Tapers eight Foot high; and four branch'd Candle-sticks supported by Silver Stands six Foot high adorn the four Corners of the Room. The next Chamber is that of Mercury, then those of Mars and Diana, and the Halls of Venus and Abundance. The last leads into the Cabinet of Knacks or little Cu∣riosities, so calld because 'tis full of 'em: 'tis of an octangular Figure, with Niches in the Angles; the Vault is fram'd Dome-wise, and the Light is in the Middle. All the Work in this Cabinet is of Sculpture, of which a great part is of Brass gilt: 'tis sur∣rounded with Glasses, and there are Degrees in the Niches before the Glasses. The rest of
the Cabinet is full of Brackets, which as well as the degrees in the Niches are full of Curio∣sities; as Agats of all sorts, and fram'd into a thousand different Figures; Crystals of great value for the Fashion in which they are cut; little antique Figures of Brass, Figures of Gold cover'd with Jewels, and a great number of curious works and precious Stones of several Fi∣gures. There is a very fine Ship of Gold (for a device to cover the King's Meat) on the Chim∣ney, and a large and rich Chest of Drawers in the Middle, full of an infinite number of ancient and modern Medals. There is also a Table eight Foot and a half long, and two and a half broad; the Ground is of White Marble, on which there is a Map of France, compos'd of inlaid Pieces of Marble, accord∣ing to the exactest and latest Astronomical Ob∣servations. Each Province is distinguish'd by a Piece of Marble of a peculiar Colour, and cut exactly according to the irregular Figure, which the Frontiers of the Provinces make by entering into one another. The Names of the Provinces are mark'd in Capital Letters of Gold, and those of the Principal Towns in Italick Characters. The most contrary Co∣lours are plac'd next each other, to heighten their Lustre: thus the Isle of France is of a clear blue, Champaigne of red Porphyry, Or∣leanois of Opal, and Beauce of a Fueille-mort Co∣lour. But the Curiousness of the Workman appears particularly in the Intersections which the Earth makes with the Sea, where all the Capes and Bays are observ'd with an uncon∣ceivable
Exactness; and in the Lakes and Ri∣vers that are preserv'd out of the Ground of the Table, notwithstanding the Smallness of the Lines which frequently exceed not the breadth of a Thread near the beginning of the Rivers, and their winding Course. In the Space of white Marble that denotes the Me∣diterranean, there is a Mariner's Compass of different Pieces of Marble curiously wrought; and in the other Space that stands for the Oce∣an, there are two Cartridges, in one of which is written Carte de la France, with those words borrow'd from Virgil, which make a kind of Devise of which France is the Body: Has tibi exerit Artes: The other Cartridge contains the Name of the Person who gave this Map to the King. The Ocean is bounded on the North with the nearest Parts of the Coast of England. The Border is compos'd of two Fillets of blue Marble (one of which is ac∣company'd with a Moulding or Edging) and one of black mark'd with the Degrees of Longitude and Latitude by little oblong Squares of white Marble, preserv'd out of the Ground of the Table. Above the King's Apartment is that call'd the Marble Apartment, which is furnish'd with Ornaments, and embellish'd with several Co∣lumns all of precious Marble. At the End of this is the Cabinet of Baths, where nothing appears but Gold, Marble, and very fine Pi∣ctures, with all the Ornaments and Conveni∣encies suitable to such a Place. The Dauphin's Apartment is on the left hand, opposite to
the King's, and compos'd of a like number of Chambers, which are all lin'd and over∣cast with the same sorts of Marble, but vari∣ously join'd and inlaid. The Cabinet of Knacks, or little Curiosities, that belongs to this Apartment, contains three Rooms and a Half-Room, and the Floor is inlaid. The Painting of the Cieling is by Mignard; and there is such a prodigious number of Ra∣rities in this Place, that the astonish'd Specta∣tour can hardly forbear concluding, that all the Kingdoms of the East were drain'd to adorn it. The Porch that fronts the Middle of the little Court, leads into the Park; and passing under vaulted Galleries you come to the great Terrass at the Entry of the Garden. And here it was that Colbert display'd and even exhaust∣ed all the most pleasant and magnificent Pro∣ductions both of Nature and Art. The vast Extent of this stately Edifice com∣prehending the Front and returning Wing on that side alone which faces the Garden, contains above three hundred Toises, and more than four hundred and twenty large cross∣barr'd Windows, twenty outer Buildings, with Columns surmounted with Figures, and over these, Trophies intermixt with Vessels plac'd along the Balisters that surround the whole Structure. The Figures that adorn the side which faces the Garden, are Apollo and Diana, the four Seasons, and twelve Months of the Year; along the Gallery there are twelve Figures of Rivers, and Nymphs of Fountains; the Nymph Echo, Narcissus, Thetis,
and Galataea, with Hebe and Ganymede in two Niches: on the Front of the King's great A∣partment, on that side where the Grotto was formerly, which faces the Northern Parterre, are Pomona, Vertumnus, one of the Nymphs Hesperides, the Nymph Amalthaea, Thalia, Momus, Terpsichore, Pan, Flora, Zephyrus, Hya∣cinthus, Clitia, and (in two Niches) Musick and Dancing. These Figures are on the Wing that belongs to the Dauphin: and that call'd the Prince's Wing is adorn'd with Deities and the Virtues, which are very numerous by rea∣son of the Length of that Wing, over-against which there is another built since the Death of Colbert. The first Piece that salutes those who de∣scend from the Terrass, is the Vase of Latona, in the midst of which that Goddess is repre∣sented with her Children Apollo and Diana: the Peasants metamorphos'd into Frogs are to be seen in several Parts of the Vase, and the Borders of it are adorn'd with several Figures of those Animals. In the Northern Parterre before the Terrass are two Vases with Tritons and Syrens supporting rich Crowns, and spout∣ing Water; and at the End of it there is a long Alley that leads to the Canal, fenc'd on both sides with Hedge-Rows, along which there are several Figures representing the four Seasons, four Parts of the World, four Ages, four kinds of Poesie, four Parts of Day and Night, and the four Elements. All these Fi∣gures were design'd by le Brun, and made after his Models.
There is another Alley, call'd the Water, or Cascade-Alley; in the middle of which there is another form'd by two Ranks of complicated Figures, representing Cupids, young Boys and Girls, little Tritons, and Terms, which are half-body'd Figures, with∣out Arms: Some of these carry on their Heads great Shells, in form of Basons, fill'd with Coral. and various kinds of Shells; and others bear Baskets full of Flowers, and se∣veral sorts of Fruit. The Water that flows out of these Baskets and Basons in form of a Nape or Table-Cloath, gave this Walk the Name by which 'tis usually known. At the end of this Alley, you enter into that of the Pyramide; the Fountain (so call'd) is compos'd of four Basons of white Marble, one above another, and decreasing gradual∣ly, according to their height. The first con∣tains twelve Feet in Diameter, and a Top or Cover of one Piece of Marble, being supported by four Tritons greater than the Life; and the rest differ only in the big∣ness of the Figures and Vessels. The whole Work is of white Marble, saving only the Pedestals, which are of coloured Marble: The Figures and Ornaments are of Brass; and altogether make a Water-work resem∣bling a Table-cloth, thro' which the Figures appear. The Water is receiv'd below in a great square Bason, adorn'd with a Basso-re∣lievo of eight or ten Nymphs bathing them∣selves, who may be seen thro' the Water that covers 'em in the form of a Table-cloth:
And besides, there are other Basso-relievo's, representing Rivers, Nymphs, and Children, all as big as the Life, and made by Girardon. On both sides of the Great Alley there are Groves, enclosed with Lattice-Work, which are distinguish'd by peculiar Names. The first that appears on the Right-hand is the Triumphal-Arch, so call'd from the repre∣sentation of one at the bottom: It contains three Portico's, with seven Basons above 'em, out of which arise as many Water-spouts that fall back into the same Basons, and from thence into several others on both sides, forming divers Napes, or Figures of a Table∣cloth: And in the midst of the Portico's three Water-Spouts arise out of high Basons, and make the same sort of Water-works. You ascend to the Portico's by several Steps, which are also full of Water-Spouts that fall into a great Bason below. On both sides of the Triumphal-Arch there are two Obelisks between as many Scabelons or Pedestals framd like Stools, on which there are Ba∣sons that spout forth Water. Returning from thence, you meet with two high Py∣ramids, consisting of several Steps or Degrees, and throwing up Water in a square Figure, which is divided into several Spouts. On both sides of these Pyramids are two other Pedestals or Stools, with Basons and Wa∣ter-Spouts: And besides, there are two Obe∣lisks, one on each side, between two Scabe∣lons, with Ornaments, Basons, and Water-Spouts, like the first.
The Fourth Front which faces the Trium∣phal-Arch is beautifi'd with a great number of Ornaments, tho' part of it is taken up with the Entrance into that place: For on both sides there are Pedestals, with Basons, Cascades, and Figures representing the Tri∣umphs of France; and the part that remains empty is fill'd with Water, which mounting up into those void Spaces, makes 'em appear like so many Works of Crystal, enrich'd with many Ornaments, where Gold is not spar'd. The whole was design'd by le Nostre, Intendant of the Garden of the Tuil∣leries. In your passage from the Triumphal-Arch to the Theatre of Water, you meet, in the first place, with the Fountain of the Dragon, in the midst of which there is a Dragon of Brass, that spouts Water from several parts of his Body; and then with the Bason of Neptune, in which the Figure of that Deity is plac'd, with all its Attributes or Proper∣ties. The Theatre of Water derives its Name from the various Figures represented by the Water-Spouts, of which 'tis full. First you perceive three Alleys of Water, in form of a Goose-Paw, border'd with a Trellis; they are on a rising Ground, and higher than the part where you stand to view 'em. The middle Alley is divided on each side from the other two, by a hollow place en∣clos'd, and surrounded with a Trellis; and before these Enclosures, there are two Ba∣sons containing other smaller and higher
Basons, disposed in such a manner, that the Water-Spouts which rise up from 'em, fall down again, and filling all the Basons, makes Napes of Water all around. There are like Works beyond the other two Al∣leys, so that each Alley has some of 'em on both sides. The middle Alley is high∣er than the rest, containing Cascades that make fourteen or fifteen Napes of Water one above another: And both the Cascades and Water-works are form'd by a great number of Water-Spouts, which running in five Rows along the whole Alley, di∣vide it into six little Alleys. At the end of it is a large Bason, which takes up the whole Front of the Cascades, and receives their Water; and below that another Ba∣son fill'd by six great Water-Spouts. The other two Alleys have each two Rows of Water-Spouts, which divide 'em into three Parts, or small Alleys. They are in a Ba∣son which is continu'd from one end of the Alleys to the other: And since their Si∣tuation is sloping, by stopping the Course of the Water in several places, there are Water-Works in form of a Table-Cloth, and Cascades form'd along the Alleys that accompany those of the middle Alley. Be∣tween the Trellises and the Water-Spouts of all the Three Alleys, there are six Rows of small Trees, variously cut, and representing several Figures: And since the Design of the Contrivers was to imitate the Embel∣lishments of Theatres; these Water-Spouts
undergo five several Changes; for they mount up streight at first, afterwards they bend into crooked Figures, and form Ar∣bors on the In-side, and then behind, and at last they form Circles before, which changing on a sudden, appear behind. The Marsh of Water is an oblong Square, eight Toises broad, and twelve long: In the middle there is a great Oak-Tree, en∣compass'd with the Representations of all the usual Productions of Fenny-Grounds; and the Banks are full of Reeds, among which there are Swans in the Corners. All the Branches of the Oak, the Herbs that surround it, with the Reeds and Swans cast∣ing forth Water together, give the Specta∣tor the pleasure of seeing a Million of Wa∣ter-Spouts at the same time, some higher, and others lower, which form as it were a Field of Water, and washing the Plants, make their greenness appear more natural. About the midst of the two Wings of the Marish, in two hollow places, there are two Marble Tables rais'd on some Steps, and a∣dorn'd with all the Furniture of a Cupboard: But since the greatest part of these Orna∣ments have only Circles, or other Pieces gilt, the use of 'em does not appear, 'till the Water begins to play. The Situation of this Grove is low, and the rising Grounds that surround it are adorn'd with Vessels of Porcelain, on several sorts of Pedestals before the Trellises, which make a very fine and Pleasant sight.
In the same part of the Garden there are two Basons which are not enclos'd; one is call'd the Fountain of Ceres, and the other has its Name from Flora. These Basons, with those of Bacchus and Saturn, which are on the other side, are call'd the Fountains of the Four Seasons. Ceres with her Sickle appears in the midst of a Hexagonal Bason, sur∣rounded with Ears of Corn gilt. Flora is in a leaning Posture, environ'd with eight large Water-Spouts, and several other small ones, in form of a Heron's Tuft. The Grove of the Mountain of Water, or of the Star, takes its Name from the Five Walks that represent a Star, meeting near the principal Fountain. The Water-Spouts that issue out of the Rock on both sides of the Alleys, fall into a little Ditch in form of a Shower, in the midst of which is the prin∣cipal Fountain surrounded with a Trellis, adorn'd with Architecture and Pilasters: And about it there are hollow parts, enclos'd after the manner of Portico's, and contain∣ing Barriers that keep the same Figure. The Top of the Trellises is adorn'd with Ves∣sels of several Figures, full of Flowers and green Herbs. The Water-Spouts of the chief Bason are unequal, and form a kind of Mountain of Water, from the top of which issues a large Water-Spout. At the two ends of the Grove of Apollo's Baths, there are two square Pavilions, equal∣ly rich and handsom, invented by Mansard, each of 'em containing eight Pannels, be∣tween
fourteen and fifteen Foot broad, and twenty foot high. They are of white Mar∣ble, each being adorn'd with eight Columns of colour'd Marble, and Pilasters cut out of the white Marble. The Ascents of the lit∣tle Pannels or Pieces in the Corners are full of Trophies of Brass, representing the Arms us'd by several Nations: And there are also like Trophies on the out-side, be∣tween the Pilasters. The Domes are en∣rich'd with several Metallic Ornaments, and end in a Vessel. Over-against the En∣try of the Grove, in the midst of the two sides, are the fine Marble Figures, made by Girardon, representing the Sun with Thetis, and her Nymphs washing his Feet, pour∣ing Water upon him, and wiping him: And in the hollow parts of the sides, there are complicated Figures of Tritons holding Apollo's Horses. This Grove is surrounded with a Terrass, adorn'd with Balisters of Brass gilt: And the Arms us'd in Battle by all the Nations of Europe are represented in eighty two Basso-relievo's about the Terrass. In the middle of the Spot of Ground en∣viron'd by the Terrass, there is an octangu∣lar Bason, surrounded with Balisters of Brass gilt, of a different Design from those of the Terrass: And every one of the Pede∣stals that are scatter'd up and down in this Place, spouts out Water, which makes a lit∣tle Ditch about the Balisters, from whence the Water spreading it's self, forms a Nape. There are also four large Pedestals adorn'd
with Marble Figures: On the first is the Break of Day, represented by a young Man holding a Flambeau, with Clouds at his Feet, an Owl flying away, and Zephyrus blowing. The Morning is on the Second, strewing Flowers, and alighting from her Chariot: On the Third Arion is represented, invoking the Gods, and mounted on a Dol∣phin: And on the Fourth Leucothoe, recei∣ving Offerings from the Mariners. In the midst of a Grove, adorn'd with Trel∣lis-Work, there is a large Bason, containing Enceladus almost buried under the Rocks he had pil'd up to scale Heaven. That which appears of him is four times bigger than the Life: He casts out of his Mouth a Water-Spout twenty four Foot high, and bigger than a Man's Arm; and an infinite num∣ber of smaller Streams gush forth among the Stones that over-whelm him. Besides these, several large Water-Spouts arise out of twelve Heaps of Stones that lie at some distance from the Giant, surrounding the Bason and Arbors of Trellis-Work: And on a sloping Grass-Plot, there are divers little Basons of pieces of Rocks, in each of which there is a Water-Spout. The Hall of Feasts, or of the Council, is more long than broad; it has a Grass-Plot in the middle, surrounded with Gravel-Walks, at the four Corners of which are round Ba∣sons, jutting out over a Ditch full of Wa∣ter that environs this Place. The Figure of the Borders of the Ditch is odd but plea∣sant;
for it comprehends in its Circumfe∣rence above thirty Angles, stretching outwards, and as many bending inwards. Over-a∣gainst the midst of each side, there is a Bason without the Ditch, so that the Hall seems encompass'd with Basons, comprehen∣ding also those in the Corners: And be∣sides the Water-Spouts in the Basons, the Ditch is full of 'em. Every Spout both in the Ditch and Basons, proceeds from a Com∣bination of gilt Figures of Children in va∣rious Postures. The Draw-Bridges by which you enter into the Hall, are remov'd, and drawn under-ground by a sort of Spring, so that you may be imprison'd in it. Between this Grove and the Colomnade, you meet on the out-side with the Foun∣tains of Saturn and Bacchus, opposite to those of Ceres and Flora. Saturn is in a round Ba∣son, accompany'd with several Children, carrying the old Man's Properties, which cast forth many Water-Spouts. He holds a Stone presented to him by his Wife, who makes him believe she was brought to Bed of it: This Bason represents Winter. That of Bacchus, which denotes Autumn, is of an octangular Figure, where that Deity appears, accompany'd with several Satyrs, and sur∣rounded with all his Attributes; and all to∣gether cast forth several Water-Spouts. Be∣sides, there are four other Satyrs at an e∣qual distance from him; and every one of 'em spouts out Water.
The Colomnade (or Range of Pillars) is in the Place where the Springs were for∣merly, on an Ascent which at present makes a part of that Grove. The Enclosure is an exact Square, twenty one Toises and a half in Diameter, environ'd with thirty two Co∣lumns of several kinds of Marble, of the Ionic Order, twenty Inches about, and four∣teen Foot high, comprehending the Attic Ba∣ses, and the quadrangular Chapiters of white Marble. These Columns are accompany'd with their Pilasters, which stand by them∣selves, about two Diameters and a half di∣stant from the Columns behind, they are both crown'd with Entablatures, which are only Cornices architrav'd, turning on each Pil∣lar, and leaning in form of a Plat-band on the Pilasters. The Columns and Pilasters are both plac'd on Marble Socles, somewhat higher than they are broad; and the first are join'd together by Arches, adorn'd with their Archivoltes, with Heads in their Keys, representing the Rural and Marine Dei∣ties, as the Nymphs, Naiads, Dryads, Hama∣dryads, Sylvans, &c. The whole is crown'd with a Corinthian Cornice, which turning into it-self, makes a perfect Circle. Above the Cornice is a Socle adorn'd with Gates in Bas-relief; and the Socle turning round a∣bove each Column, bears a Vessel of white Marble, carv'd, and ending in a Pine-Ap∣ple. The Triangular Tympans between the Arches are adorn'd with thirty two Bas-re∣liefs of Children, among whom the Sports
and Loves are represented. The whole Ma∣chine is plac'd in a round Bason or Ditch that runs quite round, and receives the Wa∣ter that falls in form of a Table-cloth from thirty one Water-Spouts, in a like number of Basons of white Marble, each plac'd on a Foot adorn'd with three Corbels. The En∣trance takes up the place of the thirty se∣cond Bason, which stands before it in a Nich of Trellis-Work, at the meeting of the two Walks that lead to the place. The Area in the middle is gravell'd, and shut up with five Steps distant about thirteen or fourteen foot from the side of the Ditch; and that Interval forms another gravell'd Walk. The whole Structure is built of so∣lid white Marble without Incrustation; the Wood that surrounds it, and the Trellis-Work which adorn the Twigs of the Trees, make an excellent Ground for the more distinct view of the Architecture; and this piece which was only design'd for Magni∣ficence, is no less admir'd for the neatness of the Work, than for the richness of the Matter. The Water-Gallery is full of Antick Sta∣tues, that form its Wings, at the side of which there are two Rows of Trees, so cut as not to obscure or hide the Figures. The Statues at the two Ends are not at all bigger than the Life; and the Trees are succeeded by two Rows of Water-Spouts. At each end of the Gallery there is a great broad Bason, into which the Water falls
back; and the Ends jut out at the middle. One of the Basons contains three large Wa∣ter-Spouts, and in the other a small high-rais'd Bason, that forms a Water-Work in form of a Table-Cloth. The Royal Island is a large Canal, in the midst of which there is an Island eight Foot deep, and one hundred and sixty foot long; and there is another less Canal at the end of this. In the place call'd the Branch'd Candlestick, the Figure of the Water-Works is exactly suitable to the Name. The Hall of Balls is Hexagonal; four ad∣vanc'd Stairs of four Steps each, open a Pas∣sage to it, and 'tis surrounded with a dou∣ble Ditch full of Water of the same Fi∣gure. The Banks of the Ditches are co∣ver'd with Shells, and there are several Ves∣sels of Porcelain round the third Enclosure that encompasses the Hall. Over-against the four Perrons, or advanc'd Stairs, there are two Cascades, and as many Entries: There are also six Benches for Seats, and this place is cover'd with a Trellis. Each of the Cascades consists of seventeen Rows of Basons of Shell-Work, rais'd with seven Ba∣sons one above another; but five of the Rows are compos'd of nine Basons. The tops of those that have no Water-Spouts, are adorn'd with Vessels of Metal, four of which represent the Bacchanalia on Sea and Land: These Representations are very suit∣able to the design'd use of the place; for the Dancing-Figures have so natural an Air,
that 'tis impossible to look on 'em without feeling some Motions of Joy. Under each Cascade there are large Taper-Candlesticks for the Conveniency of Illuminations in the Evening, for the Glittering of the Water contributes very much to please the Eye of the Spectatour. The Sides of the two En∣tries are adorn'd with Hatch'd-Work, and on the top with Vessels. The last, and one of the greatest of these Groves or little Woods, is the Labyrinth: it contains thirty eight Fountains, contriv'd to represent a like number of Aesop's Fables, and embellish'd with many Water-Spouts. Every Fountain has a Bason, in which its proper Fa∣ble is represented by Metallic Figures in Re∣lief, with Characters declaring the Subject. The Ornaments which resemble those of one of the Arches enclos'd in the Hedge-Rows, are half-cover'd and environ'd with Leaves and Reeds spouting Water. The greatest part of 'em are of Tin or some other convenient Matter, as well as the Branches thro' which the Water passes; and painted green with so natural a Verdure, that they seem to be re-really what they represent, till the spurting of the Water undeceives the Spectatour. The Name of this Place is a sufficient Indication that 'tis full of Windings, and variously in∣termingl'd Walks, which are so intricate, that those who are engag'd in 'em cannot without some difficulty avoid returning to the same Parts they had already visited.
The Orange-house is one of the finest Orna∣ments of Versailles: It was design'd by Man∣sard, and is so large and bold a Structure, that the World cannot produce a more finish'd Work of that Kind. On the left hand 'tis expos'd to the South, and supports the Earth that encloses a large Parterre, which fronts the lateral Face of the Castle, and that of the great Isle or Wing. This Building consists of a large Gallery 80. Toises long, accompany'd by two others turning inwards of 60. Toises each: the Breadth of these Galleries on the North-side of the Wall amounts to 38. Feet, and their Height to the Scutheon or Key, to seven Toises. The Vault is divided into as many Parts as there are Cross-works by Branches Ogiv'd or Semi-circular Arches, sup∣ported by little Buttresses that jut out the length of a Foot: and the lateral Galleries communicate with that at the End or Bottom of the Building, by two round Towers or Segments of a Circle jutting outwards, and of equal Breadth within to that of the Galle∣ries. On the Side next the great Isle, the Bo∣dy of the Wall at the inward Angle is adorn'd with two large Niches; and in the same place, at the other End, there are two Ar∣ches with advanc'd Stairs that lead into a Hall or round Porch, which is the principal Entry into the Orange-house from the Park. Besides those Niches there is one in the Mid∣dle of the main Gallery over-against the great Door; it contains a Statue of the King on Foot of white Marble, which was presented to
his Majesty by the late Duke de la Feüillade, who had caus'd it to be made with a Design to erect it in the Place of Victories, in the room of that which is there at present. These Niches are large enough to contain complica∣ted Figures of Colosses, such as those of the Baths of Thetis and Caracalla, where the Sta∣tues of Hercules and Flora stood. The largest Gallery receives Light thro' thirteen Win∣dows taken out of the Arches: the Inside is not adorn'd either with Architecture or Scul∣pture, as the Rules of that kind of Building require: its main Beauty consisting in the Ar∣tificial Contrivance of the Vault. The out∣ward Decoration consists only of Bossages of the Heighth of one Module, or half the Dia∣meter of the Columns which are of the Tuscan Order, containing four Feet and two Inches in Diameter, and their Thickness being the seventh part of their Heighth. There are but two outward or Front-Buildings, of which that in the Middle consists of eight Columns coupl'd together, and the other two of four Columns each: and there are also two Columns at the Royal Door of the Hall or Entry; being of the same Order, but of a less Diameter. These Columns are crown'd with a regular Entablature, and the Front-Buildings on the sides are contiguous to that part of the Level of the Terrass which leans on the Vaults; so that by two large Pair of Stairs, each ten Toises broad, you may descend to the lower Part of the Orange-house. The Steps are interrupted by two Landing-Places;
and there are low or creeping Ar∣ches under 'em to give light to the Vault. All this great Theatre encloses a Parterre of Com∣partments of Turf adorn'd with a Bason in the Middle: the Fore-part of the Parterre is rail'd in with Balisters on a sloping Wall, that makes one of the Sides of a little Ditch or Canal full of Water; the Counterscarp is much lower than the Wall, so that those who pass by on the High-way have a full and very pleasant View of the Building. The princi∣pal Entries are equal in Breadth to the Edges, and adorn'd with two great Jaums of a Wall, each of which is beautify'd with two distinct Tuscan Columns coupl'd together, and crown'd as well as the Columns with a regular Enta∣blature. The North part of the Jaums is co∣ver'd above with Bossages like to those of the Orange-house, and under the Columns is a So∣cle of a Medley of Figures between the Jaums, and from the hinder Part of 'em to the Foot of the Stairs. The Space between the Stairs and the principal Gates is inclos'd with an Iron Grate, so that you may go up to the Parterre above, without entering into the Orange-house. These Grates are kept firm by Stone Pillars on which are plac'd Vessels full of Flowers and Fruits: the Gates are crown'd with rich Iron-Work in two Divisi∣ons, with the King's Arms; and all the Or∣naments of the Locks are gilded. The Par∣terre is divided into six large Squares with Compartments of Turf, separated by Gravel of the same Heighth with the Walks: and in
the midst of the Squares, next the middle Gallery, there is a round Bason or Fountain border'd with Turf. In the Cross-Walk that separates these four Pannels or Squares from the other two, there is a great Complication of Figures of white Marble on a Pedestal, where Fame is represented writing the Histo∣ry of the King. In her left hand she holds his Majesty's Picture in Profile, in an Oval Medal, which she places on a Book denoting History: She is represented by a great wing'd Figure, magnificently apparell'd, and seated on Trophies: she tramples on Envy, who tears a Heart, and with her left hand pulls Fame by the Gown, to hinder her from Wri∣ting. Among the Trophies there are Medals with the Portraictures of the greatest Princes, such as Alexander, Caesar, and Trajan. This Mass of Figures stands by it self, and is boun∣ded on all sides, making a very fine and glori∣ous Sight: it was made at Rome by Dominico Guidi, of the Dutchy of Urbin, one of the most Famous Sculptors in Italy, and Disciple of Alexander Algondy, who was one of the best Artists of his Age. In this Parterre the Orange-Trees are plac'd, when the Season of the Year permits. The Kitchin-Garden is without the Limits of the Park that includes the Orange-house, being situated on the Side next the great Wing of the Castle and parallel to the Mall, from which 'tis separated by a large Bason of Wa∣ter: 'tis a quadrangular Enclosure a hundred and fifty seven Toises long, and a hundred
and thirty four broad, divided into thirty one little Gardens separated from each other, and enclos'd with Walls; which communicating together encompass a large Garden, contain∣ing 100. Toises in Length, and 84. in Breadth, with a round Fountain or Bason of Water in the Middle, of 20. Toises border'd with Turf. The King enters into this Place by a Gate, cal∣led the Royal Gate in the Walk parallel to the Mall. The Body of the Edifice almost to the corner of the Wall of the Enclosure, consists of two Sides or distinct Structures, join'd toge∣ther by two Galleries one above another, call'd the Figuerie, which is 25. Toises long, and the Garden usually known by the Name of Melo∣niere, or Melon-Garden, is also very large. All those Gardens are appointed for Fruit-Trees, and so artificially dispos'd, that each Row of Trees enjoys the Warmth of the Sun agree∣bly to their peculiar Natures, some more and others less, some at one time of the day, and some at another. Every Garden has also the Conveniency of a Fountain to furnish it with Water, and of a Terrass, under which are vaulted Arbours that serve for Fruit-Houses in Winter. The Pond that separates the Kitchin-Garden from the Mall, was dug by Switzers, from whom it took the Name that still it bears: 'tis very large and ought rather to be call'd a Lake or great Pond, than a Fountain or Bason of Water. Colbert did not content himself with em∣bellishing this Garden with all the Curiosities that Europe could furnish; he took care also
to replenish the Menagerie or Vivarium with the rarest Animals that were to be found in the Four Parts of the World. The great Canal leads to that Rural House on one side, and to Trianon on the other: and tho' the former is design'd only as a Lodge for Animals, as its Name imports, it has the stately Aspect of a magnificent Palace, and presents a love∣ly Prospect of four Pavilions and a Dome to the Eyes of the Beholder. The Passage to it lies thro' a large Avenue or Walk of Trees, and in the first Place brings you to a Court enclos'd with Iron-Rails, from whence you enter into another, at the opposite End of which there is an octangular Dome, that forms a Hall of the same Figure, whither you ascend by a few Steps to an Entry that leads into the Hall that is surrounded with se∣veral Chambers. Beneath these there is a Grotto with a wheeling Water-Spout in the Middle that besprinkles the whole Grotto; and the Floor is full of little Holes, from whence there arises a Shower of Water. The Hall is environ'd with an octogonal Court, surrounded with Iron Rails, in which you meet with seven Iron Doors at a convenient distance from each other, that open into a like number of Courts, some of which are appointed for Stables, some for Sheep-Houses, and others contain Stalls for several sorts of Animals. In one of these Courts there is a very fine Bird-House, for those Birds that must be kept in Cages or Coops; and a Fish-Pond in another for the use of Pelicans, and
several other sorts of Fowl that feed on Fishes. On the right hand in places enclos'd with Rails, such Animals are kept that they may be safely suffer'd to range about; for they may easily pass between the Rails: Here are to be seen in different Lodges, Ermins, Civet-Cats, Castors, Muscovia-Cats and Rats, and Bar∣bary Cats. The left side of the same Court is appointed for wild and voracious Animals, such as Lyons, Tygres, Leopards, Lynxes, Bears, and Wolves. Such Beasts as are made use of for Labour are lodg'd in another Court, and next to that are Mews for all sorts of Fowls. Trianon is seated on the other side of the Canal. Before that fine and pleasant House there is a Hollow or Bottom resembling a Half-Oval, with a Door on each Side, and one at the End, opposite to the Entry, which leads into the Principal Court, as those on each Side do into two other separate Courts, that reach along the Oval. At the End of these two Courts, following the Oval, you meet with two Doors that open into the Court, at the opposite End of which is the Principal Apartment consisting only of one Story, and adorn'd on the outside with so vast number of Vessels of several Figures repre∣senting Porcelane, that nothing else appears to the Eye. The Inside also is painted in Imitati∣on of Porcelane; the Walls are all cover'd with Looking-Glasses, and the Furniture is equally Rich and Genteel. The Sides of this Build∣ing are border'd with two Square Pavilions,
built and adorn'd after the same Fashion▪ And there are two other Pavilions lower down, which terminate the fore-part of the Structure. This place was design'd for a Magazine of all sorts of Flowers, which are preserv'd here both in Winter and Summer. All the Basons either are, or appear to be of Porcelain, and Water-Spouts arise out of the Urns. The Flowers and Shrubs are kept in Pots of Procelain, or in Boxes that re∣semble it; and there are long Walks of O∣range-Trees planted in the Ground, with Hedge-Rows of Jasmins and Myrtles under a Gallery of Timber that remains open du∣ring the Summer, but in Winter is cover'd with Dung, to preserve the Trees from the Cold. But Colbert thought there were still some finishing Strokes wanting to compleat the Beauty of Versailles. There was no other Water but what was pump'd out of a Pond, and from thence distributed by Canals, to the places that requir'd its Moisture; nor was it free from the usual defects of stag∣nating Water, Stench, and Muddiness. The Consideration of these Inconveniences made Colbert undertake to bring Water from the River Eure to Versailles, by an Aqueduct, which reaches from the Hill of Picardon to the Cisterns or Reservers of Water. Five large Basons contain both the Water of that River, and that which supplies the Ma∣chine of Marly: Four of 'em are oblong Squares, eighty five Toises loing, and fifty four
broad, with Pannels of eighteen Toises at the outward Angles; and in the midst of these, there is a little Bason of ten Toises in Diameter, call'd the Receptacle of Water, because it receives all the Water, and di∣stributes it to the great Basons at the Cor∣ners, which are hollow'd and fram'd into Arches of a Circle. These five Basons are separated by Walks of eighteen Foot in breadth, and surrounded with another of eight Toises, which reaches from the out∣ward Brink of the Basons to the Glacis of the Earth that is enclos'd with a Wall. The great Basons are eighteen Foot deep, and fill'd with Water to the height of twelve Feet; so that each of 'em contains 8000 Cubical Toises of Water, or 224000 Muids, amounting in all the four to 896000 Muids or Hogsheads of Water. To retain the Water, there is a Lay of Clay eighteen Inches thick, both at the Bottom, and round the Edges of the Basons or Reser∣vers, supported by a Wall four Foot broad above, and five below, founded on a Wood∣den Grate laid over the Clay with Plat∣forms; 'tis call'd The Wall of Douvre, and the Talus or Sloping is on the inside, by which it loses a Foot of its breadth. The Aqueduct is 500 Toises long, and its greatest height amounts to fourteen or fifteen. The Basis or Ground-Work extends to fourteen Feet, which are reduc'd to six on the top; and of that number the Canal takes up three, in which breadth it contains 648
Inches of Water. The River Eure is brought to Versailles from Pontgoin, seven Leagues from Chartres; the Canal between Pontgoin and Berchere la Margot, containing 20000 Toises. This Canal is brought along the Surface of the Earth according to its Level, and fifteen Foot downwards: Its height rises or falls, according to the situation of the Ground; and the Talus or Slopeness of the Banks is double of the depth. In the Bot∣tom or Valley of Berchere, where the Aque∣duct of Mason's-Work begins, there is a Bank or Aqueduct of Earth erected, which accompanies that of Stone-Work for the Space of 3607 Toises. The Canal of this Earthen Aqueduct is fifteen Foot broad at the bottom, and six, seven, or eight Foot broad at the top, the Talus being double the height. The Sides or Banks are sup∣ported by a Causey nine Foot broad, with a Talus double the height, to keep the Earth from falling. In the Valley of Ber∣chere, the height of the Earthen Bank a∣mounts to 100 Feet, in other parts to 70, 50, 40, and 20 Feet; and towards Main∣tenon, where 'tis joyn'd to the Stone-Aque∣duct, its height rises to 79 Feet. The Stone Aqueduct is 2960 Toises long, con∣sisting of 242 Arches: The breadth of the Arches amounts to forty Feet; their Piles are forty eight Foot long, and twenty four broad, with Buttresses reaching eleven Feet in breadth, and six in Projecture, or out∣bearing. In the deepest part there are three
Arches one over another, like those at Pont du Guard in Languedoc. Towards Berchere there are thirty three single Arches, seven∣ty one double, forty six treble; then seventy two double, and in the last place twenty single, which rejoin the Earthen Aqueduct coming from towards Versailles, at the height of sixty five Feet, which is gradually dimi∣nish'd for the space of 6055 Toises, till it be reduc'd even with the Terrasses, and from thence to Versailles 'tis brought along the Surface of the Ground, as between Pontgoin and Berchere, for the space of 25000 Toises, unless in some parts where there is a Stone Aqueduct hollow'd in the Ground. The greatest height of the Aqueduct in the Val∣ley of Maintenon, thro' which the Rivers of Eure and Gaillardon pass, and where the tre∣ble Arches are, amounts to 216 Feet and six Inches, to the Pavement of the upper Wreaths or Edges, without reckoning the Foundations, which are fifteen or sixteen Foot deep, or the Parapet of three Foot and six Inches. The height of the first or lower Arches to the top of the Concavity of the Vault, amounts to seventy six Feet, and to the Pavement of the second Arches eighty one Foot and six Inches. The Se∣cond Arches are seventy Foot high to the top of the Concavity, and eighty five to the Pavement of the Third, which are thir∣ty Foot and three Inches high to the Con∣cavity of their Vault, and nine Foot nine Inches more to the upper Wreaths, on which
there are Parapets of three Feet and six In∣ches. The Canal is seven Foot broad at the bottom, and widens by degrees till the breadth is encreas'd to seven Feet and se∣ven Inches at the height of four Feet, where the sides begin to bow inwards, af∣ter the manner of a Vault. On each side of the Canal there is a Corridore three Foot, and a Parapet seventeen Inches broad: The Piles of the Arches are perpendicular above the Ground on the inside, and both the sides. Thro' the whole Aqueduct every Toise of Work has an Inch of Talus or Sloping; but the Buttresses have more above the first or lower Arches; for on each side, the Reclination or Narrowing amounts to about seven Feet, and to almost six above the se∣cond Arches. There is a Door in the mid∣dle of each Pile, both in the second and third Arches, for the conveniency of pas∣sing along the Aqueduct; the Doors in the second Arches are four Foot broad, and those in the third three Foot six Inches broad, and seven Foot high. After the Description of the Castle of Versailles, it will not be improper to subjoin a short Account of the Church that Col∣bert caus'd to be new-built from top to bottom of hewn Stone, in the Ruë de Paris, facing Ruë Daufine, which leads to the Place or Square of the same Name. The Portal, comprehending the two Towers, is nineteen Toises broad, embellish'd with four Columns of the Doric Order in Front; over
which are four other Columns of the Ionic Order, crown'd with a Fronton. The Tow∣ers are adorn'd with the last-nam'd Or∣der, and the whole with Sculpture; the length of the Church without the Walls a∣mounts to forty Toises, and within, from the greater Altar to the great Door, to thirty. The Nave is thirty two Foot broad, and the Cross is seventeen Toises long. In the midst of the Cross, there is a Cupola vaulted with Stone, six Foot and a half high. The Lantern contains twenty Feet in Diameter, and leans on the out∣side on a great Square of Stone-Work eight Toises broad. The height from the Key of the Vault on the inside, amounts to nine Toises and a half; and from the Cope or Cupola of the Lantern to the Pavement of the Church, there are in all eighteen Toi∣ses. The inside is adorn'd with the Doric Order; and the great Altar is enrich'd with forty Corinthian Columns of Marble, con∣taining two Feet in Diameter, and crown'd with their Entablatures and Frontons; and besides, all the Altars are garnish'd with Pi∣ctures, by the best Hands. At the side of the Church Colbert caus'd a great Building to be erected, containing Lodgings for the Fathers of the Mission who serve here. It runs parallel to the side of the Church, reaching forty four Toises in length, and is contiguous to the Houses in the Street. It encloses a low Court, thirteen Toises square, and the thickness of the Building amounts
to six Toises and two Feet. Below it in∣cludes a great Corridore, forty three Toises in circumference, and twelve broad, with five great Halls on the out-side. The Refectory is at the Foot of the great Stair-case. The lowest and highest Story have each a great Corridore, and contain above sixty Cells, and ten small Apartments of two Rooms. The whole Building, including the Places or Rooms for the service of the House, contains above one hundred and fifty Rooms, or di∣stinct Places. Both the Church, and the rest of the Edifice were design'd by Man∣sard. The Machine to raise Waters gave Col∣bert occasion to embellish Marly, whither the King frequently retires from the Hurry of Affairs, attended only by those who are ca∣pable of Diverting him, and by his necessary Servants. 'Tis seated in the Park of Ver∣sailles, and enclos'd with another distinct Park on the Road that leads to St. Ger∣main: At the end of the bottom where it stands, there is a View open'd to the Ca∣stle of St. Germain, and the places about it, which makes one of the loveliest Prospects imaginable. The most considerable Charge of this Building was occasion'd by the drain∣ing and filling up of the Fenny-Grounds to clear a space for the Garden, and to make so extraordinary a Ground-Plot as that of the Situation of this House; for the Disposition of its Plan is wholly singu∣lar. Passing along the Road of St. Germain,
assoon as you come to Marly, you enter into a round Court of fifty Toises, with Courts of Guard, Coach-Houses, and Sta∣bles; and from thence you perceive the Ca∣stle at the end of a long Avenue or Walk, of one hundred and fifteen Toises in length, and ten in breadth, enclos'd with Walls on each side, to keep in the Earth, and planted with Trees. This Walk brings you to the outward Court. The Castle is a distinct Building, separated from twelve other Pa∣vilions, six on each side, as they also are from one another. The greatest of these Pavilions is twenty one Toises large in all its Dimensions, being a large and distinct Stru∣cture, with four equal Faces: You ascend to it by round Steps bow'd inwards on both Sides. The Lower Story is magnificent, con∣taining four Entries, which lead into a great Octangular Hall, and separate four large Apartments, call'd The Four Seasons. The Hall is the chief Room, consisting of eight Pannels, four great, and as many small; 'tis eight Toises broad, and adorn'd with chanell'd Pilasters of the Compound Order, with their Ornaments. The Doors of the four Entries are in the large Pannels; and in each of the small ones there is a Sta∣tue of Marble, plac'd on a jutting Pede∣stal. The Order is crown'd with its Enta∣blatures, fram'd after an unusual manner with Corbels. Above is an Attic adorn'd with half-body'd Statues of Women, sustain'd by Garlands of Flowers, and with their Hands
supporting over their Heads an Entablature consisting of an Architrav'd Cornice. The Hall receives the Light thro' four Windows in the Attic, under which, on the Com∣pound Cornice in the inside, are four Bal∣conies born by Eagles. The Vault that be∣gins above the Cornice of the Attic consists of eight Pannels, which meet, and are uni∣ted at a great round Moulding, cut by a rich Wreath of Flowers, that serves for a Cor∣nice, and a Spherical Vault. All the Orna∣ments of the Hall are ofA fine sort of Clay or Plaister. Stuc, curiously wrought; and in the midst of the Vault there hangs a prodigiously big Branch'd-Candlestick of Rock-Crystal, ten Foot high, and six broad, adorn'd with several Rows of Branches, supported by a large double Eagle of Crystal, and surrounded with eight other less Candlesticks, after the manner of a Crown. The four Entries are longer than broad, with relation to their depth, containing four Toises in one Dimension, and five and a half in the other, and are embellish'd with Architecture, Sculpture, and Marble Busts. In each Entry there are two great Tables of precious Marble, and two large Pictures by Vander-Meulen, eight Foot long, and five Foot high, representing the Sieges carry'd on, and Cities taken by His Majesty. Every one of these great Apart∣ments is compos'd of three Rooms, an Anti-Chamber, Chamber, and Closet; and the Upper Story to which you ascend by two Stair-cases, consists of four Halls, one in the
middle of every Face. They are sixteen Foot broad, and serve for Anti-Chambers to eight of the twelve little Apartments, which consist of two Rooms each. The Dome of the great Hall is surrounded with an Octangular Terrass twelve Foot broad, and little Corridores of half that breadth. The ex∣ternal Decoration consists in Pictures in Fresco, after the Italian manner, being a great Corinthian Order of Marble Pilasters, having only the Cornice in Relievo, to crown the Mass of the Building. On each Face a Fronton crowns the Front-Building, without any apparent Projecture, but what it bor∣rows from the Shadows of the Painting. Between the Windows of the first Story that are even with the Ground, there are Basso-relievo's, Trophies, and Devises: And the Angles are adorn'd with cleft Stones; because if the Cieling were Angular, the Projecture or jutting forth of the Bases and Chapiters would appear mutilated. The whole Edifice is terminated with Balisters, and has no apparent Roof: All the Scul∣ptures, Bases, Chapiters, and Balisters are of Brass gilt; and the Architecture is of Mar∣ble of several Colours. The other twelve Pavilions are adorn'd after the same manner; and six of 'em are of the Ionic Order: Each Pavilion contains two Apartments, one be∣low, and another in the first Story; every one of 'em has six Toises in Front, and they are thirty two Toises distant from each o∣ther. Besides these thirteen Pavilions, there
are two on the right side of the Castle that faces the Paterre, in one of which is the Chapel, embellish'd in the inside with Pila∣sters of the Corinthian Order; and in the o∣ther, even with the Ground, is the Guard-Chamber, and above that the Officers Lodg∣ings. To these Pavilions they have since added two Wings, which being joyn'd to two Walls built in form of an Arch of a Circle, form an outward Court, containing thirty five Toises in Diameter. At the foot of the Descent from the Avenue on the o∣ther side, and over-against these two Pavili∣ons, there are two others of the like Stru∣cture, which make one half of the Buil∣ding, and comprehend the Kitchens, and other Offices or Work-Houses, being thirty Toises in Front, and inclosing a Court for that use. These two Pavilions are adorn'd on the out-side like those that are opposite to 'em, and hide all that Building which is appointed for the service of the Pa∣lace: They are joyn'd together by a Wall painted by Rousseau in Perspective, which surprizes and charms the Beholder. All these Pavilions, both the twelve of equal bigness, and those last mentioned, commu∣nicate together by Trellis'd Arbours, fifteen Foot broad, which form a Half-Moon be∣hind the Castle, and all the Arches of a Cir∣cle that compose 'em, end in Pavilions of Trellis-Work. The Garden is so intermix'd with the Building, that the Coaches never pass beyond the Grate between the two Pa∣vilions
on the other side of the Descent. 'Tis to be observ'd, that the Disposition of the Garden is as new as unusual, consisting of several Falls of Terasses, supported by slo∣ping Turfs, with Ever-green Trees, such as Firs, Yews, &c. and you descend from one to another by Stone Steps of an extraordi∣nary bigness, and various Contrivance. The Parterres are enclos'd with Basons of divers Figures, adorn'd with several Water-Spouts: The Bason behind the Castle is most con∣siderable; 'tis in form of a Half-Moon, thirty eight Toises broad, and its Water-Spout rises one hundred Foot high. The Basons of the Parterre are in number seven; the first you meet with before the great Descent of Steps, has Three Water-Spouts, and contains twenty Toises in one Dimen∣sion, and forty in the other. The greatest containing five Water-Spouts, is one hun∣dred Toises long, and fifty broad; and the last consisting of Pannels below, is seventy Toises long, and thirty two broad, adorn'd with three Water-Spouts. The other four are round, of which two at the foot of the Castle are smaller, each of 'em containing ten Toises in Diameter; but the Diameter of those above contains sixteen Toises. Both the Terrasses and Pavilions run sloping, tho' they are all plac'd level as well as the Ba∣sons: And 'tis impossible to behold at a di∣stance without an agreeable Surprize, that unusual Scene of Buildings, Terrasses, and Ba∣sons, variously intermixt, without Confusi∣on,
like curious Works appearing distinct∣ly on an advantageous Ground. The Park of this House is enclos'd with a Wall, and divided by Cross-Walks, some eight, and others six Toises broad, where you have sometimes the Prospect of the Castle, and sometimes of the Iron Grates before its Entry: and that none of the Advantages of the Situation might be lost, there are Groves of divers Figures contriv'd in the Wood. The Park-Pale encloses several large Ponds, among which there are Three that have twelve Foot of Water; the greatest is in the Middle, and its superficial Extent a∣mounts to 18000. Toises of Water, whereas the other two together make but 2000: and besides there are two other larger Ponds, of a Regular Figure. The Surface of the Water in the first Pond is higher than that of the last Bason of the Parterre by thirty three Toises: and besides the Cross-ways for Coaches, there are Walks along the Walls of the Enclosure, which open a Passage thro' all the Parts of the Garden. The Con∣veniency Colbert had to make advantage∣ous Bargains with the Work-men that were employ'd in building the Royal Houses, because they were oblig'd to address themselves to him for Payment, gave him an Opportunity to make his House of Sceaux a magnificent Pa∣lace. I will not trouble the Reader with a particular Description of all its Beauties, but content my self with mentioning the finest Parts of the Garden. After you have pass'd
thro' several lovely Walks fenc'd with Hedge-Rows, you come to the Pavilion of the Morn∣ing, so call'd, either because the earliest Glim∣merings of the Light are discover'd there soo∣ner than in any other part, and that the Morning seems only to break forth with a design to shine upon so beautiful a Place, or be∣cause that Goddess is painted there by the hand of le Brun. This Pavilion has twelve Openings, reckoning that of the Door; and, since 'tis somewhat rais'd, there are two Stair-Cases opposite to one another, by which you ascend to it. Going from thence to the Hall of Ches∣nut-Trees, you meet with a fine Pond or Ca∣nal, at the Side of the Castle: there are five lovely Fountains in the Hall, four towards the Corners, and one in the Middle; and somewhat lower there is a little Wood, made after the fashion of a Labyrinth, and full of Water. Then you come to the Water-Walk, which is adorn'd on both sides with Busts, plac'd on small Pedestals like Stools, and Water-Spouts mounting as high as the Trellis. Each Water-Spout appears between two Busts, and every Bust between two Water-Spouts. On each Side of the Walk there is a little Ditch or Furrow, to receive the Water that falls from so great a number of Spouts; and at each of the four Corners there is a great Shell for the same use. Behind the Busts and Water-Spouts there is a green Wall form'd by large Trellisses; and, leaving this beautiful Place, you enter into the Pavilion of the four Winds, where you have a charming Prospect.
From thence you pass to the Canal, and de∣scending somewhat lower, you meet with a Piece of Water, containing about six Acres, which fronts a Cascade at the other End of the Garden. 'Tis on the Brow of a Hillock, forming three Water-Walks, and adorn'd with several Vessels of Brass between the Basons, out of which the Water-Spouts arise. It may be justly said to be altogether natural, for 'tis fill'd with Running Water. Colbert did not only design to make this Place a House of Plea∣sure; for he annex'd a great Revene to it, by transporting thither the Oxe-Market that was formerly kept at Long-jumeau, to the Pre∣judice of Trade, which was diminish'd by that Alteration. The Desire that Minister had to display in all Parts, the Grandeur and Magnificence of his Master, made him also form several De∣signs, to encrease the Beauty and Conveni∣ency of the Capital City. He began the Cours on Ramparts with four Rows of Trees, reaching from the Gate of S. Honoré to that of S. Anthony: and on the other side of the River 'twas thought sufficient to make the Descent of the Hill somewhat easier between the Gates of S. Marcel and S. Victor. He or∣der'd the Old Gates of S. Denis and S. Martin to be beaten down; and, instead of these, Triumphal Arches to be erected in Memory of his Majesty's Conquest of the greatest Part of the United Provinces, in 1672. He built the Key call'd Pelletier's, or the New-Key, with a Parapet, from Our Lady's Gate, to the
Greve or Place of Execution, which it en∣compasses on the side next the Seine: and he caus'd the Key to be lin'd with Stone, from the first Wicket of the Louvre, near the Wa∣tering-Place for Horses to the End of the Old Cours. The Streets were also enlarg'd by his Orders, which gave Occasion to the President de Fourcy to make two New ones, during the time of his Provostship or Mayoralty; one of 'em reaching from S. Anthony's Street to the Bridge that leads to Our Lady's Island, and the other continuing the Street des Pro∣vaires to Pont-Neuf. The Publick is oblig'd to the same Minister for the Establishment of the Academy for Painting and Sculpture, in 1664. The King's Painters and Sculptors, with some others of the most skilful Professours of those Arts, be∣ing prosecuted at Law by the Master-Painters of Paris, join'd together, and began to form a Society, under the Name of the Royal Aca∣demy for Sculpture and Painting. Their Design was to keep publick Exercises to improve those ingenious Arts, and to advance 'em to the highest Degree of Perfection. They put themselves under the Protection of Cardinal Mazarin, and chose Chancellour Seguier for their Vice-Protectour: after which they pre∣sented a Petition to the King, containing an Account of all the Prosecutions that were set on foot against 'em, to the great Prejudice of the Art of Painting and Sculpture, which their Enemies design'd to deprive of that No∣ble Liberty which is so natural to it, and to
make it subject to the Laws of a Mechanical and Servile Trade. This Petition was favou∣rably receiv'd, and by an Order of Council, bearing Date the 20th of January, 1648. all Persons were prohibited to disturb or mo∣lest the Academy in its Exercises. The So∣ciety was, in its Infancy, compos'd of twenty five Members; twelve Officers call'd Elders, who were oblig'd to attend monthly, and give publick Lessons; eleven Academicians, and two Syndics. The twelve Elders were le Brun, Erard, Bourdon, de la Hyre, Sarrazin, Corneille, Perrier, de Beaubrun, le Sueur, Juste d' Egtimont, Vanostad, and Guillemin: The eleven Academicians were du Garnier, Vanmol, Ferdinand, Boulogne, Montpecher, Hans, Terte∣lin senior, Gerard Gosin, Pinage, Benard, and de Seve senior; and the two Syndics, now call'd Ushers, were Bellot and l' Eveque. Not long after the Promulgation of the Order of Council, 'twas thought convenient to regu∣late the respective Duties of the Members of the Academy, and of the Students; and in the February following, the Society drew up Thirteen Articles of Regulation, which were approv'd and ratify'd by Letters-Patents granted the same Month. Five or six Years after 'twas found by Experience, that it was necessary for the Advancement of the Academy, to make some Additions to the former Statutes; and Twenty one New Articles were presented to the King, and ratify'd by Letters Patents in January 1655. Since that time his Majesty perceiving with Satifaction the Progress made by the
Academy in the Design of their Institution, granted 'em new Statutes much more ample than the first, supplying the Omissions, and correcting the Faults that were observ'd in the former Regulation. And these three Col∣lections of Statutes, with the several Patents in Confirmation of 'em, were register'd in the Parliament, Chamber of Accounts, and Court of Aids, notwithstanding all the Opposition of the Master-Painters. After Cardinal Ma∣zarin's death, in 1663, the Academy begg'd the Protection of Chancellor Seguier, and made Colbert their Vice-Protector; at whose solicitation they were finally establish'd by a Patent, containing new Privileges, in the Year 1664. They were first lodg'd in the Gallery of the Royal College of the Univer∣sity; but afterwards his Majesty granted 'em more spacious Lodgings near the Tuilleries, and after that another more convenient place, in the Gallery of the Louvre. From thence they were remov'd to the Palace Brion, be∣hind the Palace Royal; and after that House was annex'd to the Duke of Chartres's Lodg∣ings, they were placd in the Old Louvre. There was also a Fund settl'd by his Maje∣sty in the Register of the Royal Buildings, to raise a considerable Pension for the Of∣ficers of the Academy, and to defray the Charges of Models, and other necessary Expences of that Society. All Suits and Causes relating to their Functions, Works, and Publick Exercises, are to be examin'd by the Council of State, and the Academy it
self being assembl'd, is declar'd Judge of all differences that may arise about the Arts of Painting and Sculpture. He that presides in the Assemblies receives an Oath of those that are deem'd capable of being admitted Members of the Academy: And the Delibe∣rations agreed on in these Meetings, have the force of Statutes. The Academy alone is empower'd to lay down Models, issue out Advertisements, and give publick Lessons concerning the Arts of Painting and Scul∣pture, and what relates to, or depends upon 'em. And that none may be admitted to profess these Arts by any other way or Me∣thod, his Majesty prohibited all Persons whatsoever, to assume the Title or Quality of his Painters, or Sculptors, till they were receiv'd into the Academy; revoking and ma∣king void all Grants or Briefs that might have been obtain'd for that purpose: So that all those who were in that Post were oblig'd to enter into that Society, under pain of losing their Places. Besides, the Academy may keep publick Exercises in other Places of the City, and erect Academical Schools in all the Cities of the Kingdom, by Virtue of a Patent, and Order of Regu∣lation, granted by his Majesty, in Novem∣ber 1676. The same Monarch establish'd an Academy at Rome, where a Model is kept, and Pensions allow'd to young Students, who travel thither to study these Arts, after they have gain'd the Prize in the Academy; and that Society sends one of its Rectors to pre∣side
there. Those who are possest of the chief Places and Offices in the Academy, to the number of forty, are exempted from all Obligations whatsoever, to undertake the charge of Guardians or Curators, or to keep Watch and Ward, and have a right to the great Committimus, or special Privileges for that purpose. Those who are brought up in those Arts by any Member of the Aca∣demy, tho' they have not sufficient Merit to be receiv'd into that Society, are to be admitted to the Office and Dignity of a Master in any place of the Kingdom, by Virtue of a Certificate from the Person by whom they were educated, seen and ap∣prov'd by the Chancellor, and counter-sign'd by the Secretary; and that Certificate has in all respects the Force of a Brief, or Writ of Apprenticeship. And the Works of the Members of the Academy cannot be moulded or copied without their permission. The Of∣ficers that compose this Society are, first, a Director, call'd by the first Statutes the Head, who may be chang'd or continu'd e∣very Year; and the Company may choose either one of their own Members, or any other, whom they shall think fit to discharge that Office: It was first possest by Charmois, and in 1656 by Ratabon, Superintendant of the Buildings. A Chancellor, whose Office is for Life; he approves all Dispatches, and affixes the Seal, which has on one side, the Image of the Protector, and on the other, the Arms of the Academy: This Office was
first executed by le Brun, who not only as Chancellor, but also as his Majesty's Chief Painter, presided in all the Assemblies, and receiv'd the Oath. Four Rectors, also for Life; and two Adjuncts, to supply the Pla∣ces of those that are absent: Their Office is to serve quarterly, and to meet at the Aca∣demy with the Professor, who is in Waiting, to correct the Students, judge of those who excel their Fellows, and deserve some Re∣compence, and to dispatch all other Affairs. Twelve Professors, two of whom may be chang'd every Year by Lot; and Eight Ad∣juncts: The Professors are oblig'd to serve by turns Monthly, and during the time of Waiting, to give Daily Attendance at the Academy, to correct the Students, order the Model and Postures for designing, and to take care of other Affairs. There is also a Professor of Geometry, and another of Anato∣my, who read Lessons twice a Week. A Treasurer, who receives and distributes the King's Pensions, and is entrusted with the principal Care of the Pictures, Sculptures, Furniture, and Tools belonging to the Aca∣demy. Several Counsellors, who are divided into two Classes; the first consisting of those who have already discharg'd the other Of∣fices, and the second of Persons of Merit, who for their Love and Knowledge of those Arts, are receiv'd into the Academy, under the Title of Counsellors, Lovers of Art; but can never rise to any higher Post, because their Skill is confin'd to some part, and they
do not profess the Art in its full extent: All these Counsellors have a Deliberative Voice in the Meetings of the Society. The Se∣cretary takes care of Affairs, keeps the Regi∣sters, and counter-signs Dispatches. The A∣cademy may also have two Ushers to serve them on all Occasions, who are to enjoy the Privileges of that Society, if they be ei∣ther Painters or Sculptors. The Roman Aca∣demy that has its Name from St. Luke, be∣ing inform'd of the erection of that of France, and of the Merit of its Members, was de∣sirous to entertain a Correspondence with 'em, both by way of Friendship, and for the Improvement of the Arts they profess'd. And to engage the French to a Comply∣ance with her desires, she made the first Step by choosing le Brun for her Head two Years successively, tho' that Dignity is never bestow'd on any Person that lives out of Rome. This Advance gave the King Occa∣sion to grant Letters of Union of these two Societies, in November 1676, which were afterwards ratify'd by the Parliament. The Academy receives none into its Body but those whose Merit has rais'd 'em above the common Excellencies of Vulgar Artists: Those who profess the entire Art, may a∣spire to the highest Offices in that Society; but they who are only Masters of some particular Talents, and apply themselves wholly to Pictures, Landskips, Flowers or Fruits, tho' they may be admitted into the Academy, can never rise above the Degree of
Counsellors: And skilful Engravers are also receiv'd on the same Conditions. The Or∣der of their Reception is thus: Those who apply themselves to Figures and History, are oblig'd to work a whole Month after a Mo∣del, in presence of the Waiting-Professor: After which there is a Subject prescrib'd to 'em, describing the King's Heroical Actions in Allegorical Figures. The Piece being finish∣ed, is presented to the Academy, who deter∣mine by plurality of Voices, whether the Design ought to be receiv'd: And if the Can∣didate receive a favourable Sentence, he is order'd to draw a Picture of a certain big∣ness, and that being examin'd and approv'd by the Majority of Voices, he is sworn be∣fore the Chancellor, and admitted into the Academy. They who pretend only to some particular Talent, present their Works as the others, but are not oblig'd to draw from the Life. Colbert being made Protector of the Academy, after the Death of Chancellor Se∣guier, thought fit that there should be a Hi∣storiographer appointed, to collect all useful and curious Observations that were made at the Conferrences, and persuaded his Ma∣jesty to create one, with a Salary of 300 Livres. This Employment was bestow'd on Guillet de St. Georges, whom le Brun presented to that Minister; and he has since acquir'd a great deal of Honour by the Works he has communicated to the Publick; and a∣mong others, by his Ancient and Modern A∣thens, his Dictionary of Arts, and his History of
Sultan Mahomet II. He was receiv'd on the thirty first of January, 1682, and made a very fine Discourse in Praise of the Aca∣demy, and its Protector. Before I finish this Account of the Aca∣demy, it will not be improper to present the Reader with a Catalogue of the Works of le Brun, its first Director. He painted the Battle and Triumph of Constantine, the De∣sign of five Pieces of Tapestry, representing a like number of the most glorious Actions of Alexander, the Battle of Porus, the Fami∣ly of Darius, the Battle of Arbella, the Pas∣sage of the Granicum, and that Prince's Tri∣umph; the Angel's Crucifix, the King on Horse-back at large, a Representation of the same Monarch granting Peace, the Plat∣fonds of Vaux le Vicomté, and of Sceaux, the Massacre of the Innocents, the Fall of the Rebellious Angels, St. Stephen at Nôtre-dame, the Presentation of the Virgin at the Tem∣ple, Christ in the Garden of Olivet, a Cru∣cifix, a Magdalen, the Descent of the Cross, St. Austin, St. Anthony, the Twelve Apostles, the Martyrdom of the Jesuits in Japan, Christ in the Desert serv'd by Angels, the Cupola of Sceaux, St. Teresa, St. Charles, whose Picture is in his Chapel; St. Mary Magdalen at the instant of her Conversion, the Bra∣zen Serpent at the House of the Recollects of Picpus, the Pentecost at St. Sulpicius's, and the Sepulchre on the High Altar. There are four of his Pictures at the Carmelites; a Presen∣tation of the Virgin at the Capuchins Church
in St. James's Suburbs, and the Massacre of the Innocents, in the possession of du Mets, for∣merly Treasurer of the Money rais'd by the Sale of Offices. The President Lambert's Gallery, and that of Apollo in the Old Louvre, were also painted by him. And there are some Pieces begun by him at Ramboüillet, in the Guard-Chamber of the Palace-Roy∣al, at St. Germans en Laye, and at the House of the United Farms, where Chancellor Se∣guier then liv'd. The Learned World is also oblig'd to Colbert for the Erection of the Academy of Sciences, that meets twice every Week in one of the Halls of the King's Library in the Street Viviene, and had made so many curious and useful Discoveries. On Wednes∣days they treat of Natural Philosophy, and on Saturdays of Astronomy, and other parts of the Mathematicks. They have invented a Me∣thod to determine the Longitude of Places, which has been try'd in Denmark by his Majesty's Order; at Cayene in America, and in several Parts of the World, according to the Directions of the Astronomers. These Observations were made, and are still car∣ry'd on every Year by Picard, Richer, and de la Hyre, who are Members of that Body. And during the Voyages that are underta∣ken on this Occasion, Cassini remains still in the Observatory at Paris, to make like Ob∣servations at the same time with the Tra∣vellers. They are all so just and exact, that the Longitude may be certainly found
out at any Distance, without incurring an Error of above one hundred Toises, which bear no proportion to the greatness of the Terraqueous Globe. When the Academy was founded, Carcavy, Intendant of the King's Library, was made Moderator of it, who was succeeded by the Abbot de Lanion, and he by Thevenot. The present Moderator is the Abbot le Tellier, who presides in that Assem∣bly, tho' he is very young. Huguens, one of the Astronomers, discover'd the Ring of Sa∣turn, and one of that Planet's Satellites, and has oblig'd the Publick with a Treatise de Horologio Oscillatorio, which we call a Pendu∣lum: And it must be acknowledged, that 'tis one of the most Learned and Ingenious Pieces extant on that Subject. Blondel, Camp-Maréchal, and formerly Teacher of Mathema∣ticks to the Dauphin, has compos'd a Course of Architecture, with the Solutions of the four principal Problems of that Science. Cassini, who was esteem'd at Bologna the chief Astronomer of his Age, has publish'd several Treatises, and among the rest, one concern∣ing the Satellites of Jupiter, with their Ephe∣merides, the discovery of two Satellites of Saturn, different from that of Huguens, a Planisphere, and a Discourse of the Comet in 1680, and 1681. Picard wrote an Account of his Voyage to Uraneburg, enrich'd with all the Coelestial Observations he made in the same place where Tycho Brahé contemplated the Heavens. La Hyre compos'd two Treatises of Conics, containing an Explication of that
hardest part of Geometry, to which in 1679, he added new Elements of the Conic Sections, Geometrical Places, and the Construction of Ae∣quations. Roëmer invented two Machines with Wheels, the first representing in a mo∣ment the Motion of the Planets, and their Aspects, for any Year or Day; and the se∣cond shewing the Day and Hour in which Eclipses either have happen'd, or shall hap∣pen. He left Paris to return to the North, where he was born, the King of Denmark being desirous to see him again. Mariotte wrote three Books concerning the Organ of Vision, a Treatise of Libellation, another of the Collision of Bodies, an Essay of Logic, a Treatise of Colours, and three small Discourses or Physical Essays, of the Vegetation of Plants, the Nature of the Air, and of Heat and Cold. Duclos is the Author of two Treati∣ses, one of the Mineral Waters in France, and the other of Salts. Perrault translated Vitruvius, and illustrated his Author with learned An∣notations, and an Explication of the Terms of Art; besides which he publish'd three Di∣scourses, entituled, Physical Essays, of Noise, of Mechanics, of Animals, and the Circulation of the Blood. Dodard drew a Scheme of Plants. Bailly apply'd himself with extraordinary Success to the contriving of Objective-Glas∣ses for Telescopes, or large Prospective-Glasses; and among the rest, he made one seventy Foot long, which is at present to be seen in the Parisian Observatory. Du Verney labour'd to improve Anatomy; and Bourdelin has made
new Discoveries in Chymistry. The Abbot Gallois wrote the Journal des Savans, from the 4th. of January 1666, to the 17th. of De∣cember 1674. Du Hamel publish'd, in the Year 1670, a Treatise in Two Volumes, De Corporum Affectionibus; and another also in Two Volumes, De Corpore animato & de Mente humanâ: And in 1682, he communi∣cated to the Publick a Work in five Volumes, entituled, Philosophia vetus & nova ad usum Scho∣lae accommodata. Besides these Productions of some of the Members of the Academy, the Curious have been oblig'd with the Anatomi∣cal part of the History of Animals, publish'd in the Name of the whole Society. And to make this Foundation more useful to the Publick, Colbert caus'd an Observatory to be erected at the end of St. James's Suburbs, in the Year 1667. The Observatory is situated in the highest place in the City towards the South, that the Prospect of the Stars, and especially of the Planets which move towards that part of the Heavens, might not be obstructed by the Vapours of the River, or the Smoke that a∣scends from the Houses on the other side. 'Tis of a square Figure, containing about fifteen Toises on each side, with two Octan∣gular Towers, at the Corners of the South Front, of seven Toises in Diameter; and a∣nother square, and somewhat less Tower in the midst of the opposite Face, where the Entry is: And all the three Towers are of the same height with the rest of the Building. The Eastern Tower is open from the second Story; and its two opposite Faces that front
the South and North, are cleft or divided, to make way for Telescopes of above fifty Foot in length, for the conveniency of observing the Passage of the Planets thro' the Meridian, and on the North side to view the fix'd Stars, at their coming to the Meridian, both above and under the Pole, in order to the finding of the Latitude or Elevation of the Pole above our Horizon. The Tower in the North Front is cover'd with Flints by way of Plat-form, as is also the Body of the Edifice on the East side: And the Platform of the Nor∣thern Tower is open in the middle, that those who are employ'd in observing the Stars may be shelter'd from the Wind. The Building below comprehends two Stories vaulted with hewn Stone, the Walls being nine foot thick, and sixty six Foot high, comprehending the Rail'd Gallery on the Platform. The lower or half-Story of the whole Building, is on the South side, back'd with a Terrass rais'd more than twenty Foot high above the Field; so that the first Story lies almost le∣vel with the Terrass, where there is a Pole or Mast that carries a Telescope seventy Foot long, and a Tower of Timber-Work one hundred and thirty Foot high. The Build∣ing rises ten Toises and a half above the Ground, but reaches deeper under it, be∣cause of the Quarries on which 'tis built: And at the bottom of these there are wind∣ing Stairs, that seem to hang in the Air by the middle; where there is a void Place fourteen Toises deep. These Stairs are direct∣ly under the middle of the Building; and
there are round Holes about three Foot in Diameter, both in the Vault of the Ground-Floor, and in the Vaults of the two Stories, and also in the Platform. The Centres of these four Holes are perpendicularly over the Centre of the void place, in the wind∣ing Stairs: So that all together make, as it were, one continu'd Pit twenty four Toises and an half, or one hundred forty seven Foot deep; which was design'd, and has been made use of, for the Trial of several Experiments; as to examine whether the Stars in the Zenith might be seen in the Day from the bottom of this depth; to observe the Degrees of Acceleration in the descent and fall of Bodies in the Air, and the Vibrations of Pendulums under one hundred forty seven Feet in length, without danger of any Alteration from the Motion of the Air; to make Observations with Barometers above eighty Foot long, both with Mercury alone, and Water alone; and to try with Tin-Pipes of the same length, what height of Water is requir'd to break the Pipes, that it may be known how strong those Pipes must be made, that are made use of for the Conveyance of Water from a high place to another of like heighth. There were also Chambers dug out of the Quarries, that it might be observed whether Grains and Fruits cou'd be preserv'd in 'em. Besides there have been Enquiries made to discover the different Properties of the free and open Air, and that which is inclos'd un∣der-ground;
and a hundred Experiments have been try'd both with Thermometers and Hydrome∣ters, to observe the various Effects that proceed from the different Degrees of Moisture, Dri∣ness, Heat, and Cold both in Winter and Summer; which curious and instructive Im∣provements of natural Knowledge, may with excellent Success be apply'd to the Advance∣ment of Medicine. From the lower Apart∣ment you ascend to the first and second Sto∣ry, and even to the Platform of the whole Building, by a Stair-Case as large as 'tis bold and beautiful; 'Tis adorn'd with rich Iron Balisters, and seems to hang in the Air, ha∣ving a void Place in the middle. Since the Faces of the Building look directly to the Four Parts of the World, and the Windows of the second Story are each eight Foot broad, and twenty six Foot high, the inqui∣sitive Astronomer has a full Prospect of the whole Heavens, and enjoys the double Con∣veniency of fixing his Instruments in the Walls, and of satisfying his Curiosity in a cover'd Room, with Telescopes of fifteen or twenty Foot; for those Observations that re∣quire Instruments of a greater Length must be made on the Terrass. In this Edifice there is a Collection of all the Machines us'd by Artificers, and the Warlike Engines of the Ancients; so that here a Man may in a little time be sufficiently instructed, and fitted ei∣ther to serve as an Engineer, or to teach the Arts of Fortification and Navigation in an Aca∣demy. Here is also a Burning-Glass, that
melts Lead in an Instant, assoon as 'tis plac'd on its Focus; a Planisphere, containing all the Stars that are visible above the Horizon of Paris, and shewing their Situation in the Heavens; and a Copper Machine, compos'd of the Circles of the Sphere, carrying an Ob∣jective-Glass one hundred and forty Foot di∣stant from the Solar Focus, which by the Moti∣on of a Watch follows that of a Star, when 'tis only two or three Degrees elevated above the Horizon: The Engine must be rais'd to the heighth of six or seven Feet, till the Sur∣face of the Glass be parallel to the Disk of the Star; then retiring in a streight Line to the distance of one hundred and forty Foot, place the Eye-Glass, so that the four Centres of the Star, of the Surface of the Objective-Glass, of the Eye-Glass, and of the opening of the Ball of the Eye be in one streight Line: If the Star be considerably elevated about the Horizon, the Machine must be rais'd proportionably in the Air, by a Rope, towards the Angles or Corners of the above-mention'd woodden Tower, which is a hundred and fifty Foot high, and stands before the South-Front of the Observatory; but you must learn by several Trials, and a long continu'd Use, to follow the Star with the Eye-Glass, so that the Eye may describe a Circle of almost a hundred and forty one Foot of Rays, of which the Glass is the Centre. Here is also to be seen a large Astronomical Ring, that serves to find by the Sun, the Hour and Minute, as well as
the Declination of the Magnet,  for the Use of Navigation; a Level with a Prospective-Glass, that comes quickly to an Aequilibrium; and a very exact Figure of the Moon, with all the hollow and rising Parts that are ob∣serv'd in its Surface. And besides, there is a Machine for the Planets (fram'd according to Copernicus's System) which may be call'd a Speaking Ephemeris, to find the Position of the Heavens at any time propos'd, whether past, present, or to come; the Longitude and Lati∣tude of each Planet, and consequently its true Place in the Heavens at any time whatsover, only by turning a Handle, as in the above men∣tion'd Machine. It shews also the Swiftness and Slowness of each Planet, its Excentricity, and when it appears to us to stand still or move backwards; for the Machine is so contriv'd, that it must of necessity follow both the swift and slow Motion of every Planet, as it ap∣proaches to its nearest, or retires to its great∣est Distance from the Sun. There is also a Pneumatical Engine for the Experiments of Vacuum; a Machine to make Stuffs; one to wind a hundred Hanks of Thread at once, another to cleanse Sea-Ports, and a Catapulta of the Ancients. By what has been said the Reader will be easily convinc'd of the Useful∣ness of the Observatory, and that the Ingenious World is highly oblig'd to Colbert for employ∣ing his Interest with the King, and his own Care and Industry for the Foundation and Erection of that Edifice, according to the Directions of those great Men that are now lodg'd in it.
But these are not the only Obligations France has to that Minister:  She owes to him all the Advantages she receives by the Union of the two Seas. The Success of that Attempt is so much the more surprizing, that it was always before esteem'd impossible. The Glory of the Invention is due to Riquet, a Native of Beziers, a Person of a happy Genius, and an admirably quick and piercing Judgment; for 'twas he that found the Secret which had ne∣ver before enter'd into the Imagination of any Man. The several Offices he enjoy'd in that Part of the Country, gave him an oppor∣tunity to consider it with great Care and Atten∣tion; and the exact Knowledge he had of it convinc'd him, that the way that leads from Higher to Lower Languedoc was the only thing that render'd the Design practicable; since on both sides there are Mountains of a prodigi∣ous height, the Pyrenean Hills on one side, and on the other the Black Mountain, neither of which cou'd ever have been divided by the united La∣bors of the whole Kingdom. He discover'd also that there was only one place where the Water of the Rivers that fall into the Ocean cou'd be united to those that fall into the Mediterra∣nean. That place is call'd Naurouse, being a little Eminency or Rising-ground, bounded with two Valleys, one of which runs sloping from West to East, and is wash'd by a little River that falls into the Fresque, as that does into the River Aude above Carcassone: And the Aude empties it self on one side, by its natural Chanel, into the Lake of Vandres, that communicates with the Mediterranean;
and on the other, is convey'd by an Arti∣ficial Canal to Narbon, from whence it runs to the Sea. The other Valley that descends from East to West, is cross'd by the River Lers, which enters into the Garonne below Tholouse. Now the Springs of these two little Rivers of Aude and Lers, being at the Head of the two Valleys, about a quarter of a League distant from each other; Riquet con∣cluded that if they were Navigable, the Boats that past along their Chanels might be brought very near each other. All the difficulty was to know whether a Bason or Pond cou'd be dug on the Eminency of Naurouse, and two Canals made to descend on one side to the Head of the Lers, and on the other to the Source of the River Fresques, that falls into the Aude; and sup∣posing such a Pond cou'd be made, whe∣ther it were possible to gather and bring together a sufficient quantity of Water to fill the Canals, and make 'em Navigable. To clear these Doubts, he visited all the neighbouring Mountains, examin'd the height of the Sources of several Rivers that arise among 'em, run over all the Country, consider'd every part attentively, and mea∣sur'd the Ground so often, and so exactly, that he was at last convinc'd of the Easi∣ness of the Attempt, to gather together the Water of the little Rivers of Alsau, Bernas∣son, Lampy, Lampillon, Rieutort, and Sor, which fall from these Mountains into the Plain of Revel, and the other Countries of Laurageois. And besides, he concluded that
by digging a Canal along the side of the Hills, the Water of the Rivers might be convey'd down to the Hillock of Naurouse, which he consider'd as the Point of Divisi∣on from whence the Waters might be di∣stributed on both sides towards the Ocean and Mediterranean, to fill the Canals that might be made for the conveniency of Na∣vigation. These Considerations having en∣courag'd him to undertake the Project, and convinc'd him of a possibility of Success; he address'd himself to Colbert, with whom he prevail'd to mention the Design to the King. But that Minister being unwilling to engage his Majesty in an unprofiable Expence, propos'd that there might be a Tryal made with a little Ditch, which was accordingly begun in the Black Mountain, above the Town of Revel, and carry'd on so happily, that it brought the Water of the above-mention'd Rivers to Naurouse. So en∣couraging a Success of the first Essay, gave a reasonable Hope, or rather Assurance of the happy Accomplishment of the Main Design, which was undertaken and carried on with Vigour: And the little Ditch was turn'd to a Canal of a convenient large∣ness and depth, for the conveyance of a sufficient quantity of Water. It begins near the Forest of Ramondins, a little above the Head of the Alsau, and descending to the little Rivulets of Comberouge and Cou∣diere takes in the River of Bernasson, with a∣nother Brook of the same name a little
lower, after which it receives the Rivers of Lampy and Lampillon, with the Brook Costere, and empties all these Waters into the Sor above Campinase. The whole Course of the Canal is full of Windings, and contains 10761 Toises in length. That the Water of those Rivers might enter into the Canal, 'twas found necessary to to stop their won∣ted Course with several Banks or Dams of well-cemented Earth, which were built of so convenient a height, that when the Wa∣ter rises too high, it may run over the Banks, and fall into its natural Chanels. Nor was it design'd to leave the Beds of those Ri∣vers perfectly dry, after the Basons of Com∣munication were furnish'd with a sufficient Stock of Water; and therefore there were several Sluces made in the Ditch, call'd in that Country Escampadous. The Sor having receiv'd so considerable an Addition of Wa∣ters, carries 'em along with it for the space of 3449 Toises, to the Foot of the Moun∣tain, where its Course is stopt by Banks like to the former, to bring it into a new Ca∣nal; which, nevertheless, is only a Conti∣nuation of the Ditch, and creeps along the Hillocks to Naurouse, for the space of 19378 Toises. But least the Water of all those Ri∣vulets should not be sufficient to fill the Ditch, especially in the Summer when most of 'em are dry, 'twas judg'd convenient to seek out a fit place in the Mountain to make so considerable a Receptacle, that it might be in a readiness on all Occasions to
supply that defect. The place appointed for this purpose is a Valley, a quarter of a League be∣low the Town of Revel, call'd The Valley of S. Ferreol, from a great Farm of the same name in the Neighbourhood; and 'twas pre∣sum'd that it might be fill'd with the Wa∣ter of the Audaut that runs thro' it, together with that which proceeds from the Snow and Rains that happen very frequently in the Mountain. The Valley is 760 Toises long, and 550 broad, being very narrow at the Head, wide in the Middle, and contracted again at the End, by the approaching Moun∣tains that bound it on both sides; and to keep in the Water in form of a Lake, the Mountains are join'd by a Causey, which may be call'd a Third Hill, by reason of its great thickness and height. Its breadth a∣mounts to sixty one Toises, and its Base is a solid body of Stone-Work, founded on the Rock, and as it were mortais'd into it, having only one small opening or hole vaulted a∣bove, and level with the Ground, to let out the Water. 'Twas thought convenient to follow the Course of the Brook Audaut that runs thro' the Valley, and to contrive the Passage on that side whither the Stream na∣turally tends, to prevent the Ruines or Brea∣ches in the Work, that might have been oc∣casion'd by a violent alteration of its Course; and therefore the Passage was made nine Foot broad, twelve Foot high, and ninety six Toises long, in a crooked Line. On the Body of Stone-Work there is a thick Wall,
reaching in a streight Line from the Head to the Foot of the Dam, and exceeding by some Toises the height of the vaulted Aque∣duct. In the thickness of the Wall there is another Vault in form of a Gallery, the Entry of which is towards the Foot of the Causey; and its height as well as breadth is parallel to that of the former. The Galle∣ry growing insensibly narrow towards the bottom, contains but one Toise in breadth, and a Toise and a half at the Head of the Work: 'Tis only sixty one Toises long, because it runs in a streight Line; whereas the length of the Aqueduct amounts to nine∣ty four Toises. Above, or at the Head of the Causey, it answers perpendicularly to the Orifice of the Aqueduct; and below 'tis on the left side of its Mouth. Things be∣ing thus dispos'd, there were three Cross-Walls built from one end of the Causey to the other, being founded on the Stone-Work that makes the Basis of the Structure. They are not only interlac'd with the Stone-Work of the Gallery, thro' which they pass in form of a Cross, but are also inserted into the two Hillocks that surround the Valley. The first Wall at the Head of the Causey is seven Toises high, eight or ten broad, and twelve Foot thick at the end, being largest below, because of the slope∣ing. The second being the highest of all the three, is one hundred and eighteen Toises long, fifteen Foot thick, and sixteen Toises and two Foot high: 'Tis plac'd almost in
the midst of the Causey, at the distance of thirty three Toises from the first; and the length of it may be extended to two hun∣dred ninety nine Toises and more. The third makes the Foot of the Causey, and is thirty one Toises distant from the second: 'Tis eight Foot thick, and equal to the first in height and breadth. Of the two above-mention'd Vaults, the lower lets out the Waters of the Magazine; and the other serves for an Entry to those who go to o∣pen, or shut the Passage of the Water, by means of two Brazen Trap-Doors, plac'd horizontally in a Tower call'd The Drum, which is join'd to the first or inward Wall; the Openings of the two Vaults being in the third or outward Wall. As for the Ba∣son or Pond of Naurouse, whether the Wa∣ters of the Black Mountain, and of the Ma∣gazin of St. Ferreol, are brought by the Ca∣nal of Derivation; 'tis call'd The Point of Di∣vision, because from thence the Water is di∣stributed on both sides, to the Canals that convey it to the two Seas. The Figure of this Bason is an Octangular Oval, its great∣est Diameter containg 200 Toises, and its least 150: 'Tis lin'd with hewn Stone. It receives the Water of the Ditch by one of its Angles, and distributes it by two Ca∣nals, that issue out of the two other An∣gles. One of these Canals bends its Course towards the Ocean, and reaching the Valley of Lers, falls into the Garonne: It has eigh∣teen Sluces, both double and single, which
make twenty seven Bodies of Sluces in the space of 28142 Toises, or fourteen French Leagues. The other Canal, which runs to∣wards the Mediterranean, to the Lake of Thun, contains forty six Sluces, double, treble, qua∣druple, and octuple, in the length of 99443 Toises, or almost fifty French Leagues. Besides these, there are two other Canals, one to empty the Bason when 'tis too full, by discharging the superfluous Water into the River Lers: The second which is not united to the Ba∣son at its coming out of the Ditch, to drain away the foul and muddy Water, that the Bason or Pond receiving only pure and clean Water, may be freed from the usual Inconveniencies of other Ponds that are apt to be gorg'd with Mud, and must be cleans'd and hollow'd from time to time. The Ri∣ver Garonne contributed very much to pro∣mote the design'd Communication of the two Seas, by opening a free and commo∣dious Passage to the Ocean: But the same Conveniency was not to be found among the Rivers that fall into the Mediterranean, along the Coast of Languedoc; for the Aude was not Navigable above Narbon, and be∣sides it enters into the Sea by the Lakes of Bayes and Vandres, where the Road or Shoar is so shallow, that 'twas impossible to make a Haven. After an exact View of all the Coast, there was no place found but Cape de Sete, of a sufficient depth for Vessels of five or six hundred Tun; and therefore 'twas resolv'd to make a Harbour there. Sete is
a Promontory,  in the Neighbourhood of the little Town of Frontignan, famous for its Muscadine Wine. The Sea is on one side of it, and on the other it has the Lakes of Thun, Maguelone, and Peraut, border'd with the Plains of lower Languedoc; and on the Right and Left-hand 'tis bounded with the Strand, between those Lakes and the Sea. This Mountain thrusts a long Point into the Sea; and on the other side the Sea ad∣vances into the Land, making a Bay, where the above-mention'd Depth was found. The Shoar along the Strand is full of Sand, as are all the Coasts of Languedoc about the Gulf of Leon; the Cape sinks deeper, and all around the Depth amounts to twenty or twenty four Feet. Now these Lakes or Ponds have no Water but what they receive by the Inlets or Passages, which the Sea makes when it beats strongly against the Shore; and these Inlets that open a Communicati∣on between the Lakes and the Sea, are chang'd according to the various alterati∣ons of the Wind: So that there was only a Passage for small Vessels, by reason of the Shallowness of most of the Lakes, In∣lets, and parts of the Sea where they en∣ter: And therefore to accomplish the intended Communication of the Seas, 'twas necessa∣ry to make a fit Harbour for all sorts of Ships. In order to the Execution of that Design, the Lake of Thun was chosen, as being the largest and deepest of all those Lakes, and not far from the Cape of Sete: 'Tis
of great extent, and is twenty five or thir∣ty Foot deep in several places: 'Tis equally safe and commodious for sailing, and in case of necessity might serve for a Harbour. For these reasons 'twas thought fit to bring the Canals that come from Naurouse, and communicate with the Ocean, to the Lake on one side; and a Canal was also dug be∣tween the other side and the Mediterranean. The last Canal is two Toises deep, sixteen broad at the Surface, and eight at the Ba∣se, and about eight hundred in length. The whole Work was begun in 1666, after Riquet had undertaken to warrant the Success, and was finish'd before his Death, which hap∣pen'd in the beginning of October 1680. tho' it was not brought to the utmost de∣gree of Perfection, till afterwards, by the care of his Sons, Bonrepos, Master of the Re∣quests, and Caraman, Captain of the Guards; and his two Sons-in-Law, Grammont, Baron of Lanta, and Lombreil Treasurer of France at Tholouse. After so many and so useful Designs for the Publick Good so happily accomplish'd, Col∣bert thought he might justly aspire to some distinguishing Marks of Honour; and in that Design, on the 27th. of August 1665, he pur∣chas'd the Office of Treasurer of the King's Orders, vacant by the Death of Nouveau, Superintendant of the Post-Office. The Or∣der of St. Michael was instituted on the first of August 1469, by King Lewis XI. the num∣ber of the Knights being fixt to thirty six,
tho' it was afterwards encreas'd to one hun∣dred. All the Knights of the Holy Ghost are made Knights of St. Michael some days be∣fore they receive the Collar of their own Order. The Order of the Holy Ghost was instituted at Paris, on the first Day of the Year 1579, by Henry III. in memory of his having been advanc'd to the Crown of Poland, and afterwards to that of France, on the Festival of the Holy Ghost. The late King Lewis XIII. conferr'd it on fifty Lords, in the Year 1633. There were seventy created in 1662, and seventy four in 1669. The Badge of the Order is a Cross of Gold, fasten'd to a blue Ribban four Fingers broad, and one embroider'd with Silver, with the Holy Ghost in the middle, on the Justaucor. The four Officers are the Chan∣cellor, Master of the Ceremonies, Great Treasurer, and Secretary, who wear the same Badges that are used by the Knights, even after they have sold their Offices. The liberty which the Sons of the Far∣mers of the King's Revenue had obtain'd to possess Employments in the superior Courts, had rais'd the price of those Offices so high, that the Trade was considerably decay'd. The Office of Counsellor in the Court of Aids, was sold for 40000 Crowns, that of Coun∣sellor in the Great Council for 50000, of Coun∣sellor in the Parliament for 70000, of Master of the Court of Accounts for 80000, of Ma∣ster of Requests for 100000, and that of Pre∣sident à Mortier for 400000. The King by
Colbert's advice, publish'd an Edict in Decem∣ber 1665, by which the Rates of these Of∣fices were fixt; that of President à Mortier at 400000 Livres, of President in the Cham∣ber of Accounts at 300000, of President in the Court of Aids at 200000, of Master of Re∣quests at 150000, (but was afterwards en∣creas'd to 200000) of Counsellor in the Par∣liament at 100000, of Counsellor in the Great Council at 90000, of Counsellor in the Court of Aids at 80000 Livres, of President à Mortier in the other Parliaments, and President in the Chambers of Accounts at 40000 Crowns, of the Counsellors at 20000 Crowns, except those of Rhoan, that were rais'd to 70000, and of Mets, who were reduc'd to 36000. These Regulations were not at first attended with the desir'd Success; for the Purchasers elu∣ded the Force and Design of the Edict by private Bargains, which rais'd the Prizes ve∣ry high above the appointed Rates. And therefore Colbert perceiving that there was no other way to moderate the Prizes of those Offices, resolv'd to lessen their Jurisdiction. During the King's Minority, the Superiour Courts were ambitious of raising their Privi∣leges, in imitation of the Parliament of En∣gland, that claims a share in the Royal Au∣thority. The King himself carry'd his E∣dicts to the Parliament, and sent 'em to the Chamber of Accounts by his Uncle the Duke of Orleans, and to the Court of Aids by the Prince of Condé. The Edicts were order'd to be register'd in the King's Presence, af∣ter
which the Parliament examin'd 'em, and agreed to 'em with several Limitations; by that means assuming a kind of Sovereign Power, not much different from that of the Crown. 'Tis true, the Parliament of Paris according to its Original Institution, had a right to take Cognizance of all the Affairs of the Kingdom; and that Body being compos'd of the Three Orders, represented the States-General of France. At that time the Authority of the Parliament was both useful and innocent: Nor could the Power of the King be invaded by that Assembly, since they met only at a certain time of the Year, and their Session was confin'd to Six Weeks. But after Lewis Hutin had ren∣der'd the Parliament a perpetual and fixt Court, he reduc'd its Authority to a Right of judging the Differences of Private Per∣sons: And this Abridgement of its Jurisdi∣ction became still more necessary when Henry II. expos'd the Offices to Sale; for Merit was no longer a necessary Qualifi∣cation of the Members of that Assembly, and the Secrets of the State could not be safely entrusted to young and unexperienc'd Persons. Besides, 'tis certain that if the Power and Jurisdiction of the Sovereign Courts had not been restrain'd within their ancient Bounds, France had not been at present a Monarchical State, the Government wou'd have been reduc'd to an Aristocracy, and the King made a Doge of Venice. For 'tis only that unlimited Power he now en∣joys,
that has enabl'd him to execute those great Designs which make his Reign the Subject of our Admiration. The Abuses that crept into the Administration of Af∣fairs during the Regency, made the Govern∣ment subject to two Inconveniencies, that wou'd have infallibly ruin'd the best con∣triv'd Projects: Secrecy and Diligence are two necessary Qualifications in all those that are intrusted with the Management of great Attempts; neither of which cou'd have been expected, if the King had been oblig'd to take the Advice of the Parliament. For what Method cou'd have been taken to pre∣vent the divulging of those Deliberations that depended upon the Votes of so many Persons? nor had it ever been in the King's Power to take Advantage of any favourable Juncture, if he cou'd not have dispatch'd his Orders without summoning a Meeting of the Chambers. The Ease and Interest of the People on which these Innovations were pretended to be grounded, was a meer fri∣volous pretext; and never were they so mi∣serably oppress'd as in those unhappy Times. These were the convincing Reasons that Colbert urg'd to his Majesty, and in com∣plyance with which, that Monarch laid a∣side the usual Custom of keeping his Seat of Justice in the Parliament, and of send∣ing the Princes with his Edicts to the Chamber of Accounts, and the Court of Aids: And besides, he sav'd 100000 Livres which he must have given to the Duke of Orleans,
and 50000 to the Prince of Condé. All the Edicts pass'd without dispute: And the Par∣liament was afterwards humbl'd to such a degree, that Colbert contented himself with sending the Edicts to that Assembly by one of the Conmmissaries of his Nephew Desmarets: And by this means the Rates of Offices in that Company fell so low, that they are now sold for 70000 Livres. About the same time a stop was put to the Prosecution of the Farmers; and an Amnesty was granted 'em by an Edict in December 1665, on con∣dition they shou'd pay the Summs at which they were assess'd. But all these important Affairs of State cou'd not make Colbert forget the embellish∣ment of Versailles. The Architecture was already brought to perfection; there was no∣thing wanting to compleat that vast De∣sign but suitable Furniture, and the Orna∣ments of the inside; and these he resolv'd to make the Object of his next Care. He settl'd a Manufactory at the Gobelins, and committed the Management of it to le Brun, as the only fit Person for such an Employ∣ment: That place was already famous for dying of Scarlet, the Water of the River of Gobelins being endu'd with a peculiar qua∣lity to brighten the Colour, and give it that shining Lustre which dazzles the Eye of the Beholder. There Colbert order'd Tapestry-Hangings to be made for the King's use, after le Brun's Designs: And in the same place he employ'd Artists about Inlaid Stone-Work,
of such exquisite and costly contri∣vance, that a square Foot of it amounted to above 1000 Crowns. Only precious Stones were made use of in this Work, and some of 'em were cut so small, that 'twas almost impossible to discern 'em before they were put in their proper Places. This kind of Work is very tedious, by reason of the hardness of the Materials, and it requires se∣veral Years to finish one Square. There he also caus'd those vast pieces of Goldsmith's-Work to be made, that were since carry'd to Versailles; such as Tables, Stands, Pitchers, Bathing-Tubs, Boxes for Orange-Trees, and Candlesticks, which were equally admirable for their Largeness, and the Curiousness of the Sculpture. In the same place there was a Gondola built for the Canal of Ver∣sailles, and all the Ornaments were wrought for the great Gallery. The Pilasters, Cor∣nices, and generally all the parts of the Ar∣chitecture, and the Body of the Work is of Lapis Lazuli, garnish'd with Ornaments of Brass gilt, according to Mansard's Design. The great Pannels between the Pilasters are full of large Looking-Glasses, the Junctures of which are hid by Branches of Ornaments and Grotesque Figures, spread over the Glasses with so artful a Negligence, that twenty of the largest of 'em seem to be only one Piece. The difficulty of bringing those large Glasses from Venice, made Colbert set up a Glass-House in the Fauxburg of St. Anthony,
which he committed to the inspection of Ranchin, Secretary of the Council of Finances, Pecquot, Clerk of the Council of Casualties, and Poquelain. Thither the rough and un∣wrought Glasses are brought from Normandy; and there they are polish'd and sold. There also the Quicksilver is laid on those that are de∣sign'd for Looking-Glasses, which are less chargeable, and some of 'em much larger than those that are brought from Venice, tho' they are not so fine. At the same time he settl'd a Manufactory of French Point, to lessen the excessive chargeableness of the Point of Venice and Genoa, the price of which was risen so high, that one pair of  was sold for 7000 Livres. The Count of Marsan, youngest Son of the Count of Harcourt, having sent to Brussels for Mademoiselle du Mont his Nurse, with her four Daughters, Petronille, Manque, Lis∣bette, and Janeton: She intreated that Prince, for a Reward of the Care she had taken of him during his Infancy, to obtain a Privi∣lege for her to set up a Manufactory of French Point at Paris. The Count spoke to Colbert in her favour, who, liking the Pro∣posal, settl'd her in the Fauxburg of St. An∣thony, and gave her one of the King's Hun∣dred Switzers to guard her Door. Immedi∣ately she apply'd her self to the prosecution of her Project, and gather'd together above two hundred Young-Women, among whom were several Daughters of Persons of Qua∣lity, by whose assistance she made such
fine Work that the Venice-Point was generally slighted. The Manufactory was afterwards remov'd to St. Saviours-street, and at last to Chaumont-House, near St. Denis's-Gate. Ma∣demoiselle du Mont having marry'd her eldest Daughter to a Norman call'd Marsan, went to Portugal with Manque and Lisbette, and left the charge of her Manufactory to Made∣moiselle de Marsan. But as all Modes and Fashi∣ons are subject to frequent changes in France, People grew weary of this sort of Point, both because of the difficulty of blanching it, (for they were forc'd to raise the Embroidery at each Washing,) and because its thickness made it seem less becoming on the Face. There was Spanish Point made with little Flowers, which being very fine, was esteem'd more graceful by the Ladies: And at last the Mechlin-Lace coming in fashion, that Manufactory was entirely laid aside. Tho' Colbert had no reason to doubt of his Master's Favour, he thought fit to se∣cure his Fortune by powerful Alliances. On the 2d. of February 1667, he marry'd his Daughter Joan Mary Teresa to Charles Honoré d' Albert, Duke de Chevreuse, Peer of France, Knight of the King's Orders, Count of Mont∣fort, Baron of Chars, Lord of Marigni, Ma∣ran, &c. and Captain-Lieutenant of his Ma∣jesty's Light-Horse. The Duke de Chevreuse is the Son of Lewis Charles Albert, Duke de Luines, Marquess d' Albert, Count de Tours, Baron of Rochecorbon and Samblancey, Knight of the King's Orders, and Colonel of the
Regiment of Auvergne, who after the death of his first Wife, Louise Mary Seguier, the on∣ly Daughter of Lewis Seguier, Marquiss d'O, which happen'd on the 14th. of September 1651, took for his second Wife, in the Year 1661, Ann de Rohan Daughter of Hercules de Rohan Duke of Montbason, and of Mary d' A∣vaugour his second Wife. Charles Marquiss d' Albert, Grandfather of the Duke de Che∣vreuse, Favorite of Lewis XIII, and Consta∣ble of France, procur'd the Baronies of Luines, Rochecorbon, and Samblancey to be erected into a Dutchy and Peerage by the Title of The Dutchy of Luines. The great Charge the King was oblig'd to maintain during the War against Spain, had oblig'd him to alienate the greatest part of his Demaine: But Colbert being desirous to clear his Majesty's Revenues, persuaded him to re-unite the alienated Crown-Lands to the rest of his Demaine; which was put in execution by Virtue of an Edict set forth in April 1667, on condition to reimburse the Purchasers; but since most of 'em had been tax'd, the King had but little to pay. The same Minister undertook the Reformation of Justice; and the ill success of that Design was, perhaps, owing either to the Unskil∣fulness of Pussort, and the rest whom he em∣ploy'd in compiling the Code, or to their Unwillingness to remove the Foundations of Wrangling, lest the Officers of the Courts of Judicature shou'd remain without Em∣ployment. To demonstrate the Uselesness
of the new Regulation it must be observ'd, that the Litigious Wrangling of Lawyers pro∣ceeds from Four Causes; the various Degrees of Officers or Courts of Justice, the Contests about their Jurisdiction, frivolous Suits and Forms, and the confounding of Matter of Fact with Matter of Law, which makes it im∣possible to refer every Particular to its pro∣per Head. The first Inconveniency might have been easily remedy'd, by bringing the Appeals from the Sentences of the Judges of Signiories to the Presidial Courts, to which they are subordinate, where the Cause shou'd be finally judg'd without any further Appeal; and by bringing the Appeals from the Royal Jurisdictions immediately to the Parliament, without stopping at the Presidial Courts. And if it be objected, That the Parties wou'd by such a Regulation be engag'd in long and chargeable Voyages; it ought to be consi∣der'd, that there lies always an Appeal to the Parliament from the Sentence of the Presidial Courts, that have condemn'd or approv'd the Judgment of their subordinate Royal Courts of Justice. And besides the Jurisdiction or District of the Parliament of Paris, which is certainly too wide, might be divided into several Parts, by creating two other Parli∣aments, one at Lyons, and another at Poictiers; as likewise Lower Languedoc might be taken from the Parliament of Thoulouse, by erect∣ing another at Nîmes.
The Contests between Courts concerning their Jurisdictions, are chiefly occasion'd ei∣ther because the Court of Aids has a Right to cite before it, all the Causes in which the King's Farmers are concern'd, or by reason of the Audiences erected in the Courts of In∣quest; which, according to ancient Custom, belong only to the Great Chamber, as that alone has a Registry of Enrollments; for every Court reclaiming its Jurisdiction under Pretext of some incidental Controver∣sie, there are an infinite number of Di∣sputes occasion'd. And besides these, Contests are frequently owing to the Opposition a∣gainst Sentences or Decrees obtain'd for want of Appearance, or of defending the Farmer at the Great Chamber, tho' the Petitions were presented to one of the Chambers of Inquest. The Code requires these Cases to be judg'd at the Bar, which is the true way to make the Decision of the Incident or Bye-matter last longer than the Judgment of the Main Suit, because the Advocates cannot be made to confer; and there is always a Return in Law against the Sentences given accord∣ing to the Opinion of the Bar. The only way to redress these Inconveniencies is, with respect to the First, to restrain the Courts of Requests of the Palace, and other ordinary Jurisdictions, from taking Cognizance of Matters belonging to the Court of Aids; or else to hinder the Court of Aids from with∣drawing a Cause from the other Courts of which they are actually possess'd. And the
Second might be easily remedy'd, by reducing the Courts of Inquest to their Primitive State, and by ordering all Incidents to be judg'd in the Court call'd The Chamber of the Council, and all Petitions to be carry'd thi∣ther; and either join'd, if they have a Rela∣tion to the main Suit, or judg'd on the Ver∣bal Relation of the Reporter, if they be con∣ditional or include a Proviso. This Regulati∣on would also reddress another Abuse: for the Hearings at several Courts of Inquest falling out in one day; and there be∣ing also an Audience at the Court, call'd the Tournelle Civile, at the very same Hour, 'tis impossible for the Advocates or Counsellours at Law to be present in all those places at once, and therefore they are forc'd to incur the Penalty for want of Appearance, which might be prevented if there were no Audiences at the Courts of Inquest, for then they wou'd all remain at the Tournelle Civile. 'Tis true, there are Hearings at the same Hour at the Courts of Requests, in the Palace and in the Town-House; but that Inconveniency might be also regulated, by excluding the Advocates under Ten Years standing from the Superior Courts, and by restraining the old Advocates from pleading before the subaltern or inferior Courts. If we consider the idle and unprofitable Pleadings or Forms, it will appear that the Code ought to cut off the Contradictions, Re∣joinders, Replications, and all the New or Additional Proofs and Reviews, which only
make way for the Repetition of what had been urg'd a hundred times before. And be∣sides there is another great Abuse, concern∣ing the Defaults for want of timely Defence; for the Attorneys to gain time, demand in the general a Copy of all the Instruments or Pleadings, without mentioning particularly which are necessary to 'em, and after they have incurr'd the Default, they are receiv'd as Opponents, without any previous Exami∣nation, whether their Exceptions are well or ill-grounded. The only effectual way to redress this Abuse, is to ordain that the Cause shall be judg'd only by those Pieces or Instru∣ments of which Copies have been given, with an Express Prohibition to make use of any others; and this being suppos'd, if the Proctor or Attorney do not put in his De∣fence within the time limited by the Regu∣lation, that in that Case he may and shall be fin'd in his own Name; and that it shall not be in the Judge's Power to moderate the Fine. And besides the Attorneys ought to be restrain'd from withdrawing their Alle∣gations, and oblig'd to communicate 'em to the Reporter: for tho' the Regulation has made 'em liable to a Pecuniary Mulct, in∣stead of Bodily Restraint, they never pay any thing, tho' by this means they have gain'd a great deal of time. The last Article is of greatest Importance, since it relates to the Manifestation of the Truth, which the Advocates endeavour to disguise with their Forms and Pleadings, so
that 'tis almost impossible for the Judge to discover it. For 'tis their constant Practice to spend the time allow'd 'em in several Au∣diences in the Pleading of one Cause, which is often referr'd, and in the mean time the Claims are not dispatch'd; besides that, the Cause being put off from Week to Week, it becomes a hard Task to remember what has been already alledg'd. And therefore to prevent such an useless Waste of Time, the Plantiff ought to present an Account of the Matter of Fact, which the Defendant shou'd return corrected. And if the two Proctors or Attorneys cannot come to an Agreement concerning the Manner of Plead∣ing, the Advocates shou'd endeavour to agree at the Bar; or if they cannot reconcile their Differences, they shou'd sign a Referment, which ought to be indors'd, and no Cause brought to Hearing, till the Matter of Fact be unexceptionably clear, and only some Questions of Law remain to be decided: Then he that pleads first shou'd read the Ac∣count of the Matter of Fact, and afterwards alledge his Reasons, to prove his Claim in Law; expecting the Reply of the Opponent. Thus, only rare and nice Causes wou'd be pleaded, and the Audience being freed from the overwhelming Multitude of Suits, wou'd quickly dispatch all that came before 'em; nor wou'd there be any occasion for Rolls. Besides, the same Custom that is sometimes observ'd at the Chastelet, ought to be be introduc'd into the Subaltern Courts:
The Attorneys shou'd be oblig'd to regu∣late petty Affairs among themselves, and when they cannot agree, to referr the Case to an old Practitioner, endorsing the Re∣ferment, from whence an Appeal might be brought before the Tournelle Civile; and since 'tis to be suppos'd that only impor∣tant Cases wou'd be pleaded, a farther Ap∣peal might be made to the Great Cham∣ber. I shall, in the next place, proceed to some particular Instances, and consider the usual Practice with relation to Seizures, Arrests, Executions, and Decrees or Orders for Sale of Goods. As for Seizures and Attach∣ments, when a Man finds himself unable to pay his Debts, he is reduc'd to Beggary, with the seiz'd Goods in his possession; and during the time that is spent in the Valua∣tion, he becomes insolvent, or the Summs that were seiz'd are consum'd by the charge of the Distribution. This Abuse might be prevented, by ordaining that the Debtor should immediately consign, assoon as the Goods are seiz'd in his Possession; and that the Distribution be made by an old Attorney, without any other charge than six Deniers in the Livre. As for Executions, 'tis certain that the charge of the Sale consumes the greatest part of what it amounts to; whereas it might be enacted, that he who procures the Execution shall take the distrain'd Goods at the price set upon 'em by the Sergeant, and
that the Owner may claim and recover 'em, before a Month be expir'd, if he can find one who will allow him a greater Price. The case is still worse with respect to De∣crees for Sale of Goods, the charge of which amounts to excessive Summs: But this Grie∣vance might be also redress'd, by granting to the Attacher the Enjoyment and Possessi∣on of the seiz'd Goods, who shou'd be ob∣lig'd to restore the Over-plus of the Price, (after the satisfaction of his own Claim) to be distributed among the Opponents, on condition, that he may be cast by the same Opponents within a Year, reimbursing the principal Summ, Interest, and Charge. I could add many other Remarks on the Forms of Proceeding at Law, but I have already said as much on that Subject as the suc∣cinctness of my intended History will allow. About the same time Nicholas de la Regnie, then Master of Requests, and now Coun∣sellor of State, was made Lieutenant of the Polity or Government of the City of Paris, which would have certainly receiv'd great Advantages by this new-created Office, if a larger Jurisdiction had been annex'd to it; and if at the same time some ne∣cessary Regulations had been made for the security of the City and of Trade. 'Tis true, that new Magistrate has redress'd several Abuses, and in some measure suppress'd the Insolency of Robbers, which was grown so
intolerable, that 'twas not safe to walk in the Night without a Guard. But the City is not perfectly freed from that incon∣veniency; for the Watch-men are either Robbers themselves, or in League with o∣thers that are so; and the Commissaries of the Chastelet are too remiss in the perfor∣mance of their Duty in their respective Wards; either out of Carelesness, or for fear of hazarding their Lives Nevertheless there might be several Ways found out to put an entire stop to these Disorders. The First is, to oblige the Owners of Houses, or their principal Tenants, when the Land-lords do not live in their own Houses, to keep their Doors lock'd after Nine a-clock at night in Winter, and Ten in Summer, so that none can go out or come in without their know∣ledge; and to give notice to the Lieutenant of the Polity of those who are wont to go abroad too frequently in the Night, that he may proceed against 'em as he shall think fit. In the second place, the Land-lords or their chief Tenants, might be enjoin'd to seize on all the Fire-Arms that are in their Houses, and not to restore 'em to the Ow∣ners, till they take Horse to go into the Countrey. Thirdly, all Persons should be forbidden to go to the places whither the People resort to smoke Tobacco, under pain of being sent to the Galleys; for those pla∣ces are the Rendezvous of Rogues and Dis∣orderly Persons. The Fourth and surest way to prevent these Abuses, would be to put
the Government of the City into the hands of the Citizens, who are most concern'd, and wou'd consequently be most diligent in the preservation of its Peace and Security: And, for that effect, 'twou'd be expedient in all the Quarters or Wards of the City, to esta∣blish Captains with their Officers, who might be chang'd every three Years. These Captains might be oblig'd to keep Registers of all Persons in their respective Wards, of their Age, Profession, and Estate; whether they are Boys or Girls; in the state of Mar∣riage or of Widowhood: So that no Per∣son cou'd come to live in any part of the City without the knowledge and leave of the Captain of that Ward, who might be injoyn'd not to grant a permission to that effect, till a Certificate were produc'd from the Captain of the Ward, where the New∣comer had his last abode, testifying that there were no Complaints against him all the while he liv'd there, and showing the reason of his Removal. And if it be a Stranger new∣ly come to Town, he might be oblig'd to bring a Certificate to the same purpose, from the Magistrates of the City where he liv'd. In the mean time, since the Captain of the Ward cou'd not be in justice oblig'd to undergo so much trouble without some re∣ward, there might be a moderate Fee ap∣pointed to be given for every Certificate. And besides 'twou'd be convenient, in every publick place where Streets meet, to set up a Bell of a sufficient bigness to be heard at
the Captain's Lodging, and to ring an Ala∣rum on occasion of any Disorder or Tumult, whether by Night or by Day. And at the same time the Citziens listed in the Company of the Ward might be oblig'd to take Arms, and attend the Captain, who is to march with his Company to the Place where the Alarum was rung, to quiet the Tumult, se∣cure the Authors of it, and draw up an Information to be sign'd by all the Assi∣stants, and produc'd before the Lieutenant Criminal, as a sufficient Evidence for pas∣sing Sentence against the Rioteers. Besides, the Captain alone should be impower'd to cause any Citizen within the Bounds of his Ward, to be Arrested or Apprehended either for Debt or Crimes, and to serve Executions on Moveable Goods; which would be a means to prevent the Roguish Tricks of Sergeants, who are oftentimes wont to rob those Hou∣ses whither they are sent to serve an Exe∣cution, or arrest a Prisoner. And, finally, there might be a certain Day appointed in every Week, on which the Lieutenant of the Polity shou'd be inform'd of all Occurrences by the Captains of the Wards, and give 'em such Instructions and Orders as he shou'd judge fit to be executed. There is also another Abuse, no less in∣tollerable than those already mention'd, re∣lating to Women that make a Trade of De∣bauchery; who are treated either with too much Rigour or Indulgence on several Oc∣casions: For the Commissaries are brib'd
to connive at those infamous Practices; and if at any time they seize and imprison lewd Women, they are commonly such as retain some sence of Decency, whose Houses are best stor'd with Furniture, and their Persons may be apprehended with less danger; while common Prostitutes are suffer'd to live un∣molested, secur'd by their Poverty, and their Guard of Bullies. Nevertheless, 'tis certain that this Method is directly opposite to that which ought to be observ'd; neither ought the Officers to content themselves barely with dislodging those unhappy Creatures, since they only remove to another Street, where they set up the same Trade as be∣fore. The care of redressing those Abuses ought to be committed to the Captain of the Ward, who being inform'd of the lewd Practices of those Whores, and of the Women that procure 'em, shou'd either ba∣nish 'em out of the City, or shut 'em up for ever in the Hospital. This Regulation wou'd be attended with two very advanta∣geous Consequences; for Paris wou'd at once be freed from Debauchery, and dispeo∣pl'd of Ruffians, who are maintain'd by those Women. But those who make a considera∣ble Figure in the World, if they occasion no scandal in the Neighbourhood, and keep constant to one Man, ought not to be mo∣lested; and even they who take a greater Liberty, and are not willing to be confin'd to one Person, if they be rich, and receive none but civil Persons into their Houses,
shou'd only be oblig'd to wear some Marks of Distinction, as at Rome. Thus they might be order'd never to go abroad in Coaches or Chairs, and never to wear Hoods, Coifs, Scarves or Gloves, that their Character and Occupation might be known by their Dress; for that wou'd be the most effe∣ctual Method to lessen their Numbers in∣sensibly. The great Fines that are impos'd on those who play at forbidden Games, have in some measure produc'd the Effect for which they were design'd; yet there are still some Hou∣ses where Gaming is very frequent, and runs very high; and (which is worse) there are profess'd Rooks, who live on what they get by cheating, and are supported by their Confederate Hectors, with whom they share their dishonest Gain. To suppress those Abu∣ses, 'twou'd be convenient to limit the Summs that are hazarded, so that none might lose above Ten Pistoles at any sort of Game, con∣demning those that suffer higher Gaming in their Houses, to be fin'd 1000 Crowns, and those who cheat at Play, to the Gal∣leys; to be convicted by the Complaints of the bubbl'd Losers, and the Testimony of the Spectators. The Captain of the Ward might be empower'd and order'd to make di∣ligent Search after those who are guilty of these Disorders, and to make his Enquiry the more successful, the third part of the Fine might be given to the Informer; and since there wou'd be a Man out of
each House, in the Company, 'twou'd be impossible to conceal or disguise the Truth. There cannot be a more pernicious Pra∣ctice than the Usury of those who lend Mo∣ney on Pledges: But the care that is taken to punish Usurers, serves only to encrease the Abuse. For since they dare not drive their Trade openly, they make use of He and She-Brokers, who bring the Pledges, and carry away the Money. Now these Bro∣kers are mere pilferring Vagabonds, who, ha∣ving nothing to lose, assume a Privilege to commit any Villany. Thus they give but a part of the Money to the Borrowers, and make 'em pay more than they receiv'd, when they are desirous to redeem their Clothes, which are oftentimes utterly lost, because 'tis impossible for 'em to discover whither the Brokers carry'd 'em. So that 'twere certainly better to tolerate the lend∣ing of Money on Pawns; for then Peo∣ple wou'd give their Clothes to responsible Persons, who wou'd oblige themselves to re∣store 'em. There are also great Abuses committed in the retailing of Commodities, since the Pri∣zes are not fix'd, as they are in other Coun∣tries. Now the Price of Corn, and conse∣quently that of Bread, might be regulated immediately after Harvest. And there ought to be only two Prizes permitted to be ta∣ken for the Wine sold in Taverns, that is, from Three to Four Sous for Tradesmen,
and from Six to Eight for the better sort of Citizens: Nor shou'd these Vintners be suffer'd to escape unpunish'd, who mingle Drugs with their Wine, that are prejudicial to the Health of the Drinker. Besides, a∣bout Easter there ought to be a Price set for the whole Year on the Meat in the Shambles, by the Pound; and for the Pro∣visions in the Market, 'tis an useless Pre∣caution to restrain the Cooks from buying till after Nine a-clock, for the Peasants will sell nothing to private Persons till the Cooks are provided. To prevent these Abuses, the Cooks shou'd be order'd in the Morn∣ing to set a Price on each sort of Fowl, and a Bill with the several Prizes hung up at each End of the Market: and the the Country-People shou'd be oblig'd, under Pain of Forfeiting their Panniers, to let Pri∣vate Persons have their Goods for Two Pence more in the Pound Weight; and for the better Execution of these Regulations, a Commissary shou'd be appointed to inspect the Sale of Provisions till Eleven a Clock. 'Tis an asto∣nishing Effect of Luxury, to give 50 Crowns for aSome∣what more than a Pint. Litron of Green Pease, as some Persons have actually done; and therefore 'twou'd be convenient to regulate the Prizes of Pulse and Fruit, at their first coming into Season; and care shou'd also be taken to hinder the Country-People from filling their Baskets with Leaves, and putting only so much Fruit, as appears outwardly on the Top.
The Usurpation of Noble Titles was none of the least Abuses that crept into the Kingdom, during the Troubles. 'Twas the usual Practice of those who were scarce Gen∣tlemen, to assume the Title of Counts and Marquisses; and the Sons of Merchants had the Impudence to add a Coronet to their Coat of Arms, because they were possess'd of some Of∣fices. These Rhodomontado's occasion'd the Pun of one of our Comical Poets; Depuis que dans Paris on s' est emmarquisé On trouve à chaque pas un Marquis supposé. In order to the redressing of this Abuse, Colbert order'd the Claims of those counter∣feit Nobles to be examin'd: and all those who pretended a Right to the Privileges of the Nobility, were oblig'd to produc'd their Titles before the Intendants of the respective Provinces. And besides, they who had in publick Deeds assum'd the Title of Knight or Esquire, and were not able to prove their Claim to those Honours, were not only made liable to the common Taxes, but were for∣ced to submit to an extraordinory Assess∣ment. Thus you see how diligently Colbert apply'd himself to the Reformation of the State, but in the mean time he neglected not the Ad∣vancement of his Family. The King had declar'd War against Spain, in Pursuance of his Right to those Countries in the Nether∣lands that were laps'd and devolv'd to the
Queen; and had already made himself Ma∣ster of several Places, the Principal of which were Doüay, Tournay, Lille, Courtray, Oude∣narde, and Charleroy, with all the Franche-Comté. Clement IX. who was lately made Pope, had employ'd his Ministers to negoti∣ate a Peace between the two Crowns, and the Conferences were appointed to be held at Aix la Chapelle. Colbert procur'd the Dig∣nity of his Majesty's Plenipotentiary for his Brother Charles, who arriv'd at that City with a Magnificent Equipage, and was short∣ly after follow'd by the Baron de Bergeyk, sent in the same Quality by his Catholick Majesty; Franciotti, the Pope's Nuncio, Sir William Temple, the English Ambassador, and Beverning, Ambassador from the States-Gene∣ral, performing the Office of Mediatours. The French maintain'd that by Right of De∣volution, which takes place and is in force in the Dutchy of Brabant, the Lordship of Mechlin, the Marquisate of the Holy Empire, the County of Aloste, High Guelderland, of which Ruremond is the Capital City, the County of Namur, the Dutchy of Limburg, the Lordships of Dalem, Valquemburg or Fauque∣mont, Roder-le-Duc, and other places beyond the Meuse, the County of Arlon, the Dutchy of Cambray, Franche-Comté and the Dutchy of Luxemburg, the Daughters of the first Mar∣riage excluded the Males born in the second. To this Right the Spaniards oppos'd the Queen's Renunciation by her Contract of Marriage, of her Claim to the Inheritance
of the Estates belonging to her Father and Mother, pretending that her Renunciation was a Part of the Pyrenean Treaty. The French wou'd not allow of that Connexion, affirming that they were two separate Acts, and besides, that the Renunciation was void, as relating to an Inheritance that was not yet fall'n, and that she cou'd not abrogate the local Custom of those Provinces; especial∣ly since the Condition of the Renunciati∣on was not accomplish'd, the Dowry stipu∣lated by the Contract not being paid: and 'twas further alledg'd, that she never re∣nounc'd the Inheritance of her Brother, Prince Baltasar, who inherited the Dowry of Elizabeth of France his Mother. Tho' all these Reasons were more than sufficient to as∣sert the Queen's Right, and tho' the King was able to maintain her Title by his Arms, he chose rather to relinquish part of it for the Love of Peace. He offer'd to restore Franche-Comté, that belong'd to him both by Right of Succession and of Conquest, and to con∣tent himself with the Places he had taken in Flanders. Charles Colbert made the Spaniards and Mediators so sensible of the Reasons on which the King his Master's Claim was founded, that the Baron de Bergeyk receiv'd as a Favour the Offers of his most Christian Majesty. Thus the Treaty was sign'd on the second of May, 1668. and the Brother of our Minister by so successful a Negotiation, o∣pen'd a way to a higher Preferment.
Colbert had no reason to complain of the Ingratitude of his Master: He was made Se∣cretary of State in the room of Guene∣gaud, and was entrusted with the Manage∣ment of Affairs relating to the Sea; nor were his Performances in that Post unsuita∣ble to the Confidence his Majesty repos'd in him. For he was so industrious to augment the Naval Forces, that the King may style himself Master of the Sea; since in the time of Peace there is no Nation that dares refuse to salute his Flags. That Minister who made it his principal Care to enrich his Master, by suppressing all the Rights and Offices that might be charge∣able to him, began with the Parisis, and the Rents upon the Entries, that were cre∣ated on the Third Peny and a half, and yielded Interest at the Seventh Peny, there being only a Fund for two Quarters. The Duties on the Gabels of Languedoc, and the Offices of the King's Advocate and Attorney, for the Garners and Chambers of that Province, had the same Fate: and since he cou'd easily exact the Taxes impos'd on those who had been concern'd in publick Business, out of the Reimbursements that were due to 'em from the suppress'd Rights, Rents and Offices; he procur'd by the Edict that abrogated the Chamber of Justice, all those that were tax'd to be restor'd to their Lands or Immoveable Estates, that had been seiz'd, and even or∣der'd to be sold; contenting himself with retaining their Reimbursements. But he ex∣cluded
from receiving any Benefit by that Act of Grace, the three Treasurers of the Ex∣chequer, the Monerot's, Languet, Bance, and the Heirs of Girardin, for the Reasons alledg'd in the Beginning of his Life. In the mean time, perceiving the King's Zeal for the Extirpation of Heresie, he sup∣press'd the Chamber instituted by the Edicts of Paris and Rhoan, tho' they were not equal∣ly divided as those of Castres and Guien (which were abrogated some Years before), but admitted only one Huguenot, Counsellour, every Year. 'Tis true, there was also one of that Perswasion in each of the Courts of In∣quest, but afterwards as their Places became vacant, they were supply'd by Catholicks. At the same time there was a Tournelle Civile erected, to judge of all Causes under 1000 Crowns, to ease the Great Chamber and Courts of Inquest, whither all the Suits were transferr'd, that were depending in the Chamber of the Edict at the time of its Sup∣pression. And besides, the Form of the Court of Vacations was chang'd; for where∣as formerly each President à Mortier presided in it for the Space of a Week, and Affairs of small Importance were determin'd there, by a definitive Sentence: two Presidents were appointed every Year, one to preside in the others Absence, from the 9th of Sep∣tember to S. Simon and Jude's Day, and its Jurisdiction was confin'd to Matters imply∣ing a Condition or Proviso. These new Creations are of no great Importance, nor
do they afford Matter for Variety of Re∣flections: but 'twill not be improper to insist somewhat longer on the Examination of the Criminal Code, the Regulation of the Coun∣cil, and the Orders for the Committimus or Special Letters of Priviledge. The Criminal Code is as useless as the Civil: for Affairs of small Importance are oftentimes kept longer in Agitation, than Prosecutions for the most enormous Crimes; and the Judges neglect these Cases in which the Pub∣lick is most deeply concern'd, especially if there be no private Person to carry on the Pursuit at his proper Cost. These Abuses proceed from a twofold Cause: First, the Lieutenant Criminal of the Chastelet is over∣charg'd with Multiplicity of Business; for I mention only that Officer, because in other Courts of Justice, Affairs are dispatch'd with greater Expedition. Secondly, the Forms of Proceeding are too long, both at the first hearing, and after an Appeal. Now to en∣able the Lieutenant Criminal to use greater Expedition in the dispatching of all sorts of Affairs, and not to neglect those that are not manag'd by a private Person, I wou'd appro∣priate to the Courts of Request in the Pa∣lace, the Cognizance and Judgment of all Actions and Pursuits against Gentle∣men; and to restrain private Persons from entering their Accusations against Noble Per∣sons before the above-mention'd Officer; I would have the Courts of Request in the Pa∣lace abrogate and cancel all that is done at
the Chastelet to the Prejudice of their Juris∣diction; and if Gentlemen be not directly comprehended in the Accusation, but in∣volv'd in it by the Examination of others that are accus'd, in that Case the Lieutenant Criminal shou'd be oblig'd to remit the Process to the Courts of Request, and in Case of Failure shou'd be liable to be call'd in question, and even interdicted by those Courts if they think fit. I wou'd also ap∣propriate to the Provost of the Isle of France, and the Lieutenant of the short Robe, the Cognizance of all Causes and Criminal Acti∣ons against Persons that have no Habitation, in which number shou'd be comprehended all Pages or Valets de Chambre, Servants that wear Livery, and Vagabonds that have no other Employment than to wander about the Streets, tho' they lodge not in a furnish'd Room: One of these Officers might be ap∣pointed to judge and take Cognizance of all Crimes committed in the Country, and the other, of those that are committed in the Ci∣ty; with an express Prohibition to the Lieu∣tenant Criminal, and Commissaries of the Chastelet, to proceed against Persons of that Character. And to oblige the King's Attor∣ney and Lieutenant of the Short Robe not to suffer those to go unpunish'd who are not charg'd by a private Person; I wou'd have all those that are condemn'd to undergo corporal Punishment by the Lieutenant Criminal or Courts of Request, to be fin'd also in consi∣derable Summs; which shou'd remain as a
Fund in the Hands of the Receiver, never to be diverted to any other Use, but only for the Payment of the Charges and Damages of those who shall pursue these Vagabonds, who have nothing to lose, and can make no Reparation: for private Persons wou'd wil∣lingly become Prosecutors, if they were sure to recover their Damages. As for the Forms of Proceeding, 'twou'd be convenient to abo∣lish all Assignments or Appointments over, to be heard on a Personal Summons, and from the Summons on an Order for Corporal Seizure. If there be no cause to require a Warrant for Corporal Seizure, 'twou'd be sufficient to take out an Order of the Judge to cite the Person accus'd to appear before him, on such a Day and Hour, there to be examin'd and interrogated; and in case of Non-appearance, for the Profit of the Fai∣lure, the Reparations awarded by a defini∣tive Sentence might be adjudg'd to the King's Attorney and the Accuser, without leaving room for an Appeal. But the Judges ought to proceed with more Caution, in issuing out Orders of Corporal Seizure against Gen∣tlemen, and never to give any such Warrants but in case of Capital Crimes: whereas, on the contrary, the Prosecution of Vagabonds shou'd begin with Seizure of their Bodies, which shou'd be immediately follow'd with Examination on the Complaint made against 'em, and that with Information. Banish∣ment is, in my Opinion, a Punishment that ought never to be inflicted on those who
have no Reputation or Sense of Honour; for to what purpose shou'd a Sentence be given against a Criminal who is neither afraid of its Execution, nor will perform what it ordains. 'Tis plain then that 'twou'd be a great deal better to order the Men into the King's Ser∣vice, and the Women to be imprison'd, or (for great Offences) to be transported to the American Colonies: and the best way to punish those that are rich, is to drain their Purses. As for Prosecutions of Persons with∣out a particular Description of the Party ac∣cus'd, the Action ought never to be prepar'd for Hearing, nor proceed further than a bare Information; for under that Disguise a De∣sign may be carry'd on against Persons of Quality, to charge 'em with Crimes of which they were never guilty. And besides 'twou'd be highly convenient to regulate the Jurisdictions of Courts and Officers of Ju∣stice, that there might be no Contests be∣tween 'em, either by settling the Extent of their Authority, or by ordaining that every Action shou'd remain where 'twas first en∣ter'd, till it be determin'd by a definitive Sentence. As for the Council, I wou'd take away all Evocations or Removals of Causes from one Court to another, and the Rules of Judges, which put the Parties to a vast Charge, with∣out deciding the Main Suit; and create for that Effect a Court of Evocations, to sit at Lions or Poictiers, which shou'd be compos'd of a President à Mortier, and two Counsellours of the
Parliament of Paris, a President and two Coun∣sellers of the Great Council, a President and two Counsellours of the Court of Aids, and two Counsellours out of each Parliament and Court of Aids in the Kingdom, to be taken, one from the Seniors, and another from the Ju∣niors, and chang'd yearly. This Court shou'd judge all Causes remov'd or transferr'd from any other Court whatsoever; and to avoid troublesome Enquiries into contested Paren∣tages, all the Officers of each Company shou'd be oblig'd to remit their Genealogies into the hands of the Attorney-General, containing 16. Quarters, of which a Book shou'd be com∣pos'd and re-printed every Year, as the State of France, with all the Changes and Altera∣tions happening by Death, Marriage, or Sale of Office. Thus when a Cause shou'd hap∣pen to be transferr'd, the Book of the Gene∣alogies of the Company, where the Cause was in dependence, might be consulted for a Proof of the controverted Parentage; and without further Trouble, Letters might be granted under the Great Seal, importing a Re∣ferment to the Court of Evocations. As for the Rules of Judges, assoon as a Conflict is form'd, instead of taking out a Writ in pur∣suance of a Judge's Rule, Letters of Refer∣ment wou'd be dispatch'd to the Court of Evo∣cations. The same Court might also be im∣power'd to judge of Reviews or Appeals of Judgment; after the Council, upon a Petition communicated to the Party, and his Answer, without any other Instruction, shou'd con∣clude
that there was an Overture for a Re∣peal or Review. The Constitution of this Court wou'd be attended with one very con∣siderable Advantage, as being compos'd of Officers belonging to all the other Courts, so that they cou'd not be ignorant of the Cu∣stoms and Manner of Proceeding in the Companies from whence any Suit might happen to be transferr'd; which is the usual Inconveniency of the Removal of a Cause to another Parliament or Court of Aids, tho' next to that where the Cause was depending; since 'tis certain that the Parliament of Paris is not better acquainted with the Customs and Manner of Proceeding in the Parliament of Rhoan, than with those that are observ'd in the Parliament of Thoulouse; and the same Remark is equally applicable to the rest. As for the Reviews of Judgment, since they are remitted to the same Chamber, the Sentence formerly given is very rarely annull'd af∣terwards. It must be acknowledg'd that the New Re∣gulation of Committimus's, or Special Com∣missions in behalf of priviledg'd Persons to their proper Judges, has in a very considerable measure taken care to prevent the abusing of that Privilege, by depriving those who have a Right to it of the Power of making use of it for small Summs, or of lending their Name to their Friends, since they are oblig'd to signifie and give notice of the Assignments they have obtain'd, a Year before they can put in their
Claims at the Courts of Requests either in the Palace or Town-house, for the Payment of what is made over to 'em. But 'tis no less certain, that many important Additions might be made to that Regulation; for tho' the Officers of the King and Princes, and other priviledg'd Persons ought not to be di∣verted from giving personal Attendance, by going to manage Law-Suits in Places remote from the Court, yet their Privileges are at∣tended with this Inconveniency, that many Persons are forc'd to relinquish their undoubt∣ed Rights, merely to avoid a chargeable Jour∣ney to Paris. And therefore there ought to be a middle way found out to save the Pri∣vileges of one Party, and the Rights of the other. Thus the Intendants of the Place where such Differences arise, might take cognizance of those Cases, and endeavour to reconcile the contending Parties: but if the Agreement seem impracticable, the same Of∣ficers might transmit to one of the Masters of Requests, the respective Instructions and Claims of both Parties, with an Extract of 'em, and their own Opinion at the end of it: And a Report of those Pieces might be made to the Council without further Charge or other Writings, on which a Mandamus might be issu'd out. In the mean time, since the Courts of Request in the Palace ought not in Justice to be left without Employment, besides the Right of Judging in Criminal Cases, in which Gentlemen are concern'd, these Courts ought to have the first Hearing
of all Suits and Cases relating to Marriage, Se∣paration, Controversies about Estates, Re∣claiming of Vows, Testaments, Substitutions or Deputations, Deeds of Gift, and all o∣ther provisional Cases, whether the Parties concern'd have a Right to the Committimus or not. For 'tis not suitable to the Dignity of these Courts, that consist of Members of Par∣liament to determine Controversies concern∣ing Heirs, Seizures, Repairing of Houses, Conditions of Service, Servants Wages, and other petty Cases that ought not to be re∣mov'd out of the Chastelet. Besides since there are two of those Courts, they might by Turns, and from Month to Month, take cognizance of Civil and Criminal Cases: and 'twou'd be sufficient for the Courts of Request in the Town-House, to meddle on∣ly with those Cases which they are empow∣er'd to determine Sovereignly, and without Appeal. There were also Two Edicts publish'd in 1669, one for the Controllment of Warrants or Dispatches, and the other relating to the Fines that are to be consign'd for Appeals. The first is most certainly advantageous to the Publick, because it prevents Ante-dates, which were very frequent before; tho' at the same time 'twou'd be no less convenient to hinder the counterfeiting of Warrants, which might be easily done, by obliging the Sergeants to cause 'em to be sign'd by those on whom they are serv'd, or in case of Re∣fusal, by any other Persons, who might be
call'd for that purpose, and the Refusers might be fin'd on the Verbal Report of the Sergeant, attested by two Witnesses signing the same with him. But the same Character cannot be given of the other Edict, which augments the Charges of those who have the best Right; since they must advance the Fine before the Appeal can be judg'd. And there∣fore to make this Edict useful, it ought to be provided that the Sentence might be exe∣cuted without giving Bail, till the Appealer had consign'd the Fine, which wou'd be more effectual if it were augmented: And besides 'twou'd be convenient to oblige the Opponents to acquiesce in the Sen∣tence, and the rest to consign before they be admitted to oppone: for such a Regulati∣on wou'd lessen the Number of Judgments on Default. The Parliament of Thoulouse re∣solving to hinder the Execution of the Edict for the Controllment of Warrants, issu'd out an Order to oblige those who were appoint∣ed to levy that Duty, to restore a Horse, that had been sold for the Payment of the Fine awarded against Deficients. The first Presi∣dent was not accessory to the passing of the Order; but Colbert gave him to understand that 'twas expected the Parliament wou'd cancel it, unless they were resolv'd to draw a severe Punishment on the whole Body. The same Minister wrote also to the Sollicitor-Ge∣neral, and to the Advocates-General, ex∣horting 'em to a more diligent Performance of their Duties for the future. The Parlia∣ment
endeavour'd to ward the Blow, and propos'd several other Expedients; by which they thought to save their Honour, yet at last they were oblig'd to buy their Peace by cancelling the Order. But they were not the only Objects of Colbert's Severity; for the Lieutenant of the Polity met with a no less rigorous Treatment, for endeavouring to op∣pose the Lease of the little Shops that belong to the King's Domaine, under Pretext that it wou'd occasion a Mutiny among the Her∣ring-Sellers: nevertheless the Lease pass'd, and the Lieutenant was forc'd to truckle. The main Design of that Minister in re∣forming the Manner of Proceeding at Law, was to give the People more leisure to apply themselves to Trading; for the Advancement of which he procur'd an Edict, containing 29 Articles, to be register'd the same Year, importing the Creation of a Company or Office, for Ensuring the Adventurers of France in the City of Paris. Several Mer∣chants had found a way to avoid considera∣ble Losses, by paying moderate Rates for En∣suring their Vessels and Goods. And that all Traders might have the same Advantage, of lessening the Hazards they run in the ordi∣nary Course of their Trade, for their fur∣ther Encouragement to undertake and carry on considerable Adventures with more Ease and Security; Colbert caus'd a Company for a General Ensuring-Office, with Common Stock and Seals, to be incorporated and set∣tled in St. Martin's-Street, which being in the
Middle of the City, was the most conve∣nient place for all Parties concern'd. There a House was hir'd and Meetings held, to treat of the Affairs of the Society, with a Permission to the Merchants, Adventurers, and others of the Cities of Rohan, Nantes, St. Malo, Rochel and other Places, who were already engag'd in a like Project, to continue the same, as be∣fore. The Edict requires, that there be a Prin∣cipal Stock or Fund of 300000 Livres, and that the Company shall consist of Thirty Of∣ficers, Five of 'em to be elected by Plurality of Voices, to execute the Office of Directors for a limited Time; Two of the Five to be remov'd six Months after their Election, Three more after other six Months, and so every six Months successively, a like Number being always chosen to succeed 'em; so that there are still two or three Directors who cannot be continu'd for above two successive Electi∣ons, and in that Number there must always be three Traders. The Contract of the Society containing 43 Articles, was presented to the King by the thirty Associates: whose Names are here inserted; de Lagni, Director-General of Trade; Soulete Desvieus, le Fevre, Rousseau, le Javiel, Matry, de Vitri la Ville, T. de Lile, Charles le Brun, Chauvin, Tardif, Poquelin, He∣bert, P. Chauvin, Cl. le Brun, Pasquier, Paignon, A. Pelletier, Molliere, Barry, Cousinet, N. Soul∣let, Gaillart, de Loubert, Franchepin, Herson, de la Rivoire, de Meur, and Ceberet. Amidst such a vast multiplicity of Business Colbert was still mindful of his being a Parent of Children, as well as a Minister of State.
On the 21th of January, 1671. he marry'd his Daughter Henrietta to Paul de Beauvilliers, Duke of S. Aignan, Peer of France, Knight of the King's Orders, first Gentleman of his Majesty's Bed-Chamber, Governour and Lieu∣tenant-General of the Town and Cittadel of Havre de Grace, Camp-Master of the Regi∣ment of S. Aignan, Son of Francis de Beauvilliers, Count and afterwards Duke of S. Aignan, and of Antoinette de Servien, Daughter of Nicholas Servien, Counsellour of State, and of Mary Groulard. The Country of S. Aignan fell to the House of Beauvilliers, by the Mar∣riage of Emeri de Beauvilliers, Bayliff and Go∣vernour of Berry, with Loüise de Husson-Tonnere. Hitherto Colbert seem'd to have made it a main part of his Care to ease Pleaders, by abridging the tedious and wrangling Forms of Law, and preventing Abuses; but the bringing in of Mark'd Paper and Parchment rais'd the Charge of Suits to so prodigious a heighth, that it ruin'd most of those who were engag'd in 'em. If it had been only appoin∣ted to be us'd for writing the Instruments or Deeds of Notaries, and Sentences, it might have been look'd upon as an Invention to prevent Ante-dates, since by reason of the frequent Alteration of the Marks, 'twou'd be hard to find immediately any Paper or Parchment that was in use at the time of the false Date. But to what purpose shou'd Petitions, Inventories, and Replications be written on Mark'd Paper? And why shou'd the Grievance be made still more intolerable, by obliging Attorneys not to exceed a cer∣tain
Number of Lines in every Page, and even fixing the Number of Words that are to be contain'd in each Line? Colbert, who was desirous to obtain the Re∣version of the Office of Secretary of State for his Eldest Son, the Marquess de Seignelay, sent him abroad to visit the principal Courts of Europe, under the Inspection of Isarn, who was recommended to him by Pelisson. The Young Traveller took a View of Italy, Germany, and England, and on his Father's Account was receiv'd every where with ex∣traordinary Respect. His Tutor Isarn, had the Misfortune to die in an Inn at his Return to Paris; for the Door of his Chamber be∣ing double-lock'd, and the Key carry'd away by the Marquess's Servants, he was suddenly taken ill, and having in vain attempted to come forth, he fell down dead as he was endea∣vouring to call out for Assistance. The Marquess at his Return from his Tra∣vels, eas'd his Father of part of that prodigi∣ous Load of Business he was oblig'd to su∣stain; as being entrusted with the Care of all the Home-Affairs of the State. The earnest Desire he had to compleat the Reformation of Abuses, made him perswade the King to suppress the Courts of Justice that were kept by several Lords in Paris, because of the Contests that usually happen'd between the Chastelet and the Judges of those Courts, about their Authority and Jurisdiction; and besides, those Judges were apt to be corrupted, as knowing that they were only to execute
their Office, during the Life of their Masters. The Archbishop of Paris had his Bayliff, and King's Attorney at Fort l' Evêque, the Abbot of S. Germain in his Abbey, the Grand Prior of France at the Temple, and the Abbess of Montmartre at Ville-Neuve. The Chastelet be∣ing over-crowded with Affairs after the Sup∣pression of these Courts, was divided into two Parts, their Jurisdictions being separated by the River. The Lieutenant-Civil, Lieu∣tenant-Criminal, Lieutenant-Particular, and King's Attorney of the new Chastelet, were to serve by turns from Year to Year in the in the Old; and those of the Old to re∣move to their respective Places in the New. Peter Girardin was made Lieutenant-Civil of the New, Antony le Ferron Lieutenant-Crimi∣nal, Lewis de Vienne Lieutenant-Particular, Claude Robert King's Attorney, James Bri∣chard and Nicholas Meraut Advocates-General. The New Chastelet sate at the Abbey of S. Germain, in the Hall of the Bailiwick, till the Building began at the Old was finish'd: after which both Courts sitting in one Place, the Advocates and Attorneys cou'd with more Ease and Conveniency go from one Audience to plead at the other. While Colbert was busi'd in regulating the State at home, a War broke out between France and the House of Austria, occasion'd by several Actions of the Dutch, to the Pre∣judice of the Kings of France and England. A League was concluded between those two Monarchs by the Mediation of the Dutchess
of Orleans, and by Virtue of the Treaty which they sign'd, the United Provinces were to be divided between 'em. But the King of England growing jealous of his most Christi∣an Majesty's Victories, who in 40 Days con∣quer'd 4 Provinces, and took 40 Cities, with∣drew from the League, and became the Me∣diator of a Peace. The Conferences were begun at Cologn, and interrupted by the car∣rying away of William Egon of Furstemberg, Plenipotentiary of the Elector of that Name, the Marquess de Grana having arrested him by the Emperour's Order. But the Treaty was again set on foot by the Pope's Mediation, and all the Potentates concern'd in the War sent their Plenipotentiaries to Nimmegen, the Place appointed for the New Conferences. Charles Colbert went thither for France, with the Marechal d' Estrade, and the Count d' A∣vaux: and while he was at Nimmegen his Bro∣ther procur'd for him the Office of President à Mortier in the Parliament of Paris, vacant by the Resignation of Nicholas Potier, Lord of Novien, who was made first President. At the same time John Baptist Colbert was made Minister of State; and forgetting his Birth, and the Modesty he had till then affected, assum'd the Title of Grandeur. His Office of Counsellour of State in Ordinary, was given to Claude Pelletier, Counsellour of State de Semestre, or for six Months, and Bignon, formerly Advocate-General in the Parliament of Paris, was made Counsellour de Semestre. At the same time Colbert obtain'd the Rever∣sion
of the Office of Secretary of State for his Eldest Son, the Marquess de Seignelay, and that of the Superintendancy of the Buildings for his Younger Brother, Julius Armand Col∣bert, Marquess of Ormoy. This Marquess, who was no Enemy to Love, cou'd not resist the Charms of Made∣moiselle de la Sale, a Young Lady of Quality, but of small Fortune, and the Youngest of Three Sisters. She cou'd not boast a regular Beauty, for her Mouth was somewhat large, and her Complexion too ruddy, but she had the Advantage of a fine Sett of Teeth, and Sparkling Eyes; her Hair was of a lovely light Ash-colour; she sung prettily, danc'd with a becoming Grace, and her pleasant Humour made her Conversation very agree∣able. Her large Stature, and fine Shape ap∣pear'd with Advantage in the Habit of a Man, in which Dress the Marquess of Ormoy made her often come to Versailles, and even gave her a Key to the Park, that she might go there to wait for him. It happen'd one day, that she made use of her Key to intro∣duce her into that Place, when the King had given Orders to suffer no Person whatsoever to enter. Bontemps, Governour of the Park, perceiving her at a considerable distance, took her for a Man; and coming up to her, ask'd her how she came thither. So unexpected a Salutation put her out of Countenance, and not being able to conceal her Sex, she told him, that her Mother having attempted to force her Inclinations in the Choice of a
Husband, she came to beg his Majesty's Pro∣tection: and the Governour assur'd her, that he wou'd do her all the Service he cou'd, and speak to the King in her Favour. Nor was he unmindful of his Promise, for he acquainted his Majesty with the Adventure, whose Curi∣osity at the hearing of so rare an Accident, was so great, that he went along with Bon∣temps into the Park to discourse with her. She repeated to him the Story she had inven∣ted to conceal her Intrigue with the Mar∣quess, and he promis'd to enquire into the Matter, and to secure her from any Violence that shou'd be offer'd to her. In the mean time he told her that 'twas fit she shou'd have some regard to the Decency of her Sex, and desir'd her to go to Bontemps's House, who wou'd furnish her with a more suitable Dress, and after Dinner conduct her to a Convent, where she shou'd be safe from her Mother's Persecutions. In obedience to the King's Desire, the Governour carry'd her home with him; where having chang'd her Habit, she was put into one of his Majesty's Coaches, and conducted by two Soldiers of the Guard, to the Monastery of Benedictin Nuns, at Ar∣genteüil, where she liv'd two Years at the King's Charge; who being afterwards in∣form'd that the Relation she made him of her Fortune was a mere contriv'd Story, or∣der'd her to be set at Liberty; after which she return'd to her Mother. In the mean time, so long an Absence had wrought such a perfect Cure on the Marquess, that he
never thought of renewing his Intrigue; and she repair'd the Loss of that Lover with fresh Conquests. Colbert's Sister made a better use of the Company and Example of the Bernardin Nuns; for she was admitted into their So∣ciety at Port-Royal, a Convent of the same Order. Her own Piety and Modesty re∣commended her no less effectually than her Brother's Interest to his Majesty, who made her Abbess of Lys, near Melun. She receiv'd the Benediction at Port-Royal from the Arch∣bishop of Paris, in May 1667, and the whole Court assisted at the Ceremony. After Colbert had considerably augmented the number of the King's Vessels, his next Care was to furnish 'em with Artillery. About six Years before, there was a Manu∣factory of Iron-Guns set up in some Forges in Nivernois, those especially that are next to the City of Nevers, and River of Loire: But the hope of Success in that Underta∣king was much abated, after 'twas disco∣ver'd that the Metal of the Mines in that Country was so little fit for such an Use, that the cast Pieces were not able to abide the Tryals which the King's Commissioners requir'd to be made of 'em, before they wou'd receive 'em on Board. At last, in 1678,  two Strangers and a Man of Dau∣phine undertook to correct the Fault of the Metal; and for the accomplishment of their Promise, submitted to a Tryal, which was perform'd by Commissioner Du-Clos, with a
great deal of Exactness and Rigour. All the Guns that were made by the Strangers burst at the first Shot; and those that were cast by the Native of Dauphiné were thrice discharg'd without receiving any Damage. But this Trial did not satisfie Du-Clos, who cou'd hardly give credit to his own Eyes; he appointed two other Days, when they were charg'd, and shot off with the great∣est Exactness imaginable, and the same Suc∣cess as before: Yet he still suspected the E∣vent, till on the third Day he saw 'em bear the Shock of twenty Discharges that were made one after another, without suffering the Guns to cool. At last one and twenty of 'em were sent to Brest, to be put on board the Ships, and were there try'd by the Captains, with as much exactness as if they had never been discharg'd before: For most of the other Guns that were brought from Nivernois were so shatter'd and weak∣en'd by Du-Clos's Tryal, that they cou'd not endure a second at Brest without bursting to pieces. Prior Frantot was the Inventer of this Secret; he had four Brothers kill'd in the King's Service, and was a Soldier him∣self, till several Wounds he receiv'd in the Wars, oblig'd him to leave that Profession. Several other ingenious Persons came af∣terwards to assist him in his Work at Ne∣vers; and a Gentleman of his own Country brought thither a certain Powder, being a Secret of his Invention, to refine and purifie the Mines.
Nicholas Desmarets, the eldest Son of Ma∣ry Colbert, Sister of the Minister of that Name, had for some time serv'd his Uncle in the Quality of his Chief Commissary, tho' he was already one of the Masters of Re∣quests, and marry'd to the Daughter of Lewis Bechamel, Secretary to the Council. But Col∣bert resolv'd to raise his Nephew's Fortune higher, and procur'd him the Office of In∣tendant of the Finances, vacant by the Death of Claude Marin: And by the same Minister's Interest, James Desmarets, the Intendant's Brother, was made Agent of the French Cler∣gy, with the Abbot of Bezons; a Prefer∣ment that is usually a Step to a Bishoprick. James Nicholas Colbert, the Minister's second Son, Licentiate of the Sorbon, Abbot of Bec, and Prior of la Charité, was the same Year receiv'd into the French Academy in the room of Esprit,  and in the presence of several Per∣sons of Note. Anthony Martin Colbert, his third Son, who follow'd Arms, was admitted Knight of Malta very young, tho' 'tis plain by the Ac∣count of his Descent in the begining of this Work, that he cou'd produce but very slender Proofs of his Nobility; but his Father's Gran∣deur supply'd that Defect, and his Proofs were receiv'd without a rigorous Examination. Some time after he obtain'd the Commandery of Boncourt, and was afterwards made Colonel of the Regiment of Champaign. On the 12th. of February 1679, Mary Ann Colbert, the Minister's youngest Daughter, was marry'd at St. Germain en Laye, to Lewis
de Rochechoüart, Duke of Mortemar, and Peer of France, who had obtain'd a Right of Survivorship to the Office of General of the Galleys, and was the Son of Lewis Victor de Rochechoüart, Duke of Vivone, Peer and Ma∣reschal of France, and Governour of Cham∣paign and Brie, and of Antoinette Louise de Mesmes, Daughter of Henry de Mesmes, Lord of Roissy, second President in the Parliament of Paris, and of Mary de la Vallée-Fossez, Marchioness of Everly. Abbot Colbert was receiv'd Doctor of the Sorbonne, in the fol∣lowing April; and the Ceremony of giving him the Cap was perform'd by Francis de Harlay de Chanvalon, Archbishop of Paris. The Treaty of Nimmeghen having put an end to the War, Colbert gave Orders to du Mets, Keeper of the Royal Treasury, to re∣pay the Summs that were lent in 1674, by the Officers of the Civil Government to his Majesty, for supplying the necessities of the State: and those who were unwilling to receive their Reimbursements, had Rents assign'd 'em. The Archbishop of Paris perceiving that Colbert's Power, and Favour with his Master encreas'd daily, took occasion to ob∣lige him in the Person of his Nephew, the Abbot Desmarets, on whom he bestow'd a Canonship of Nôtre-Dame, vacant by the Death of the Abbot Salo, Counsellor in the Parliament of Paris. Charles Colbert at his return from Nimmeghen, took possession of his Office of President à Mortier in the Parlia∣ment
of Paris, in September 1679. The Mar∣quiss de Seignelay having had only one Daugh∣ter (who died in her Infancy) of his first Wife Mary Margaret, Marchioness of Alegre, was marry'd a second time, on the sixth of the same Month, to Catharin Teresa de Ma∣tignon, Daughter of Henry Count of Thorigny, his Majesty's Lieutenant-General in Nor∣mandy, and of Frances de Luthumieres. On the 11th. Colbert carry'd all the Compa∣ny that were present at his Son's Marriage, to Sceaux, and regal'd 'em with a magnifi∣cent Treat. The Family of Matignon is one of the most ancient Houses in Normandy; and the Count of Thorigny can reckon five or six Knights of the Order among his An∣cestors, since the time of Maréchal de Matig∣non, who was one of the greatest Men of his Age. His Mother Eleonora of Orleans, was a Princess of the House of Longueville, and Daughter of Mary or Margaret de Bour∣bon, Henry IV's Aunt. The Marquiss de Seig∣nelay, after a short stay with his Bride, took Post for Marseilles, where he arriv'd on the 25th. of the same Month; and having visi∣ted the Arsenal, took a Review of eight Galleys that were ready to depart; after which he proceeded on his Journey to Dau∣phiné, stopping at Toulon, and some other Places where his Presence was necessary; and having seen the above-mention'd Guns of a new Invention at St. Servais, above St. Marcellin, on the Banks of the Isere, he return'd to Paris by the way of Lyons.
During his abode at Toulon, he order'd two Companies, of one hundred Men each, by the name of Soldiers, Guardians of the Ships, to be levy'd under the command of the Captain of the Port, and of the Chevalier de Levy, Aid-Major of his Majesty's Naval Forces. The last of these Officers rais'd his Company of one hundred chosen Men, who had serv'd in the Marine, consisting of twenty five Sergeants, as many Corpo∣rals, and fifty private Centinels, all neatly cloath'd. At the same time the President Colbert took Journey for Munich, to treat of the Dauphin's Marriage with the Princess of Ba∣varia. Assoon as he had concluded the Match, he sent an Account of his Negotia∣tion to his Brother, who receiv'd it before that which was directed to his Majesty came to the Hands of Pompone, Secretary of State, who was gone into the Country, where he had order'd some Buildings to be erected. Colbert went immediately to Com∣pliment the King on the happy success of the Treaty, who was extreamly surpriz'd that he had not the first notice of it; and when Pompone came afterwards to give him an Account of it, his Majesty told him, that he might return home, since he was so full of Business; and that in the mean time he would take care to put another into his Place, who wou'd be more diligent in the performance of his Duty. 'Tis thought this Affair was concerted between the two
Brothers, and that a Courier was dispatch'd to Colbert before there was one sent to Pom∣pone; to lay a Snare for that Minister, that his Disgrace might be a step to the Ad∣vancement of the President's Fortune. How∣ever, 'tis certain that Colbert obtain'd the vacant Place for his Brother, and perform'd the Duties of it during his Absence. There was no need of this new Accession to that vast Load of Business he was oblig'd to sustain; for his Mind was so fatigu'd with such a multiplicity of Cares, that, notwithstanding his accustom'd Gravity, he chose rather to commit an Action that was equally incon∣sistent with his Dignity, and the Rules of Civility, than to bear the importunity of a Lady of great Quality, who was one Day urging him to do her a Piece of Service which he judg'd to be impracticable. The Lady perceiving his Inflexibility, threw her self at his Feet in the Hall of Audience, in the presence of above one hundred Per∣sons, and bursting forth into Tears, cry'd out, I beg Your Grandeur, in the Name of God, to grant me this Favour: And he kneeling down over-against her, reply'd in the same mournful Tone, I conjure You, Madam, in the Name of God, not to disturb me. Francis de Roxel de Medavy de Grancey, Archbishop of Roüen, having demanded a Coadjutor to assist him in the Government of his Diocess, Colbert obtain'd of the King the Nomination to that Dignity for his Son, the Abbot. And while that Prelate was
expecting his Bulls from Rome,  his Brother-in-Law, the Duke of Mortemar, began his Travels to Italy, with a resolution to visit all the Courts in that Countrey. He began with that of Savoy, and from thence pas∣sing to Parma and Modena, he went to Bo∣logna, where he was receiv'd with great Marks of Honour by the Cardinal Guastaldi, Legat of that place. Proceeding on his Journey, he visited the Great Duke at Florence, and arriving at Rome, met with a very fa∣vourable Treatment from Pope Innocent XI. in consideration of his Father, the Mare∣schal Duke de Vivone, who was Generalissimo of the Galleys of the the Holy See at Candy. The Marquess de Seignelay, immediately after his return from Provence, began ano∣ther Journey to Rochefort, Bourdeaux, and Bayonne; and after he had given some Or∣ders concerning those places, he accompany'd the King in his Progress to the Coast of Picardy. His Majesty began with the Port of Ambleteuse, the Situation of which he examin'd with the Marquess de Vauban, Ma∣reschal de Camp. From thence he went to the Port of Wissan, two Leagues from Am∣bleteuse; and after he had visited the Fort of Mulon, arriv'd at Calice, from whence he re∣turn'd to Versailles. Thus Colbert had the pleasure to see how well his Relations em∣ploy'd their time, and with how much Care and Success they made their Court; but his Joy was moderated by the News he re∣ceiv'd
of the Death of his Sister, the Abbess of St. Clare at Rheims, who was much lamen∣ted by all the Nuns that were under her Government. In the mean time the King persisted in his Resolution to extirpate Heresie, and by Colbert's advice, establish'd a Regulation con∣cerning the Royal Farms or Leases, ordain∣ing that none but Catholicks shou'd be after∣wards admitted to take either Farms, or Under-Farms; and that no Protestants shou'd be employ'd as Directors, Commissaries, or in any Office whatsoever, for the levying and collecting of Money. The Abbot Colbert having receiv'd his Bulls, was consecrated in the Church of the Sorbonne, Titulary Archbishop of Carthage, by the Archbishop of Rohan, assisted by the Bishops of Bayeux and Lizieux his Suffragans; after which he set forward to take possessi∣on of his Coadjutorship of Rohan, accompa∣ny'd by the Coadjutor of Arles, the Bishop of Lizieux, and the Abbot of Grignan, nam'd to the Bishoprick of Eureux, and arriving at Gaillon, was receiv'd with a great deal of Magnificence by the Archbishop of Rohan, to whom that House belong'd, and there complimented by Lewis le Blanc, Intendant of the Generality of Rohan, and Mascarany, Great-Master of the Waters and Forests. The next Day in the After-noon he departed with the Bishop of Lizieux, and arriving a∣bout five a-clock at Port St. Oüen, was at∣tended by above thirty of his Canons, with
several Persons of Quality: Proceeding fur∣ther, he was met by Claude Pelot, first Pre∣sident of the Parliament, and several of the most considerable Members of the other Companies, who made a Convoy or Ca∣valcade of above fifty Coaches, to conduct him to his Archiepiscopal Palace, where he arriv'd on the 28th. of September, 1680, and after he had given Audience to the Depu∣ties of the Chapter, went to St. Heibland, where he was receiv'd by the Curate of the Parish. There he put off his Shooes and Stockings, and clothing himself with a Ro∣chet and Camail, march'd barefoot towards the Cathedral, accompany'd with the Priors and Monks of the Abbey of St. Oüen, all in Copes, the Ancient and Reform'd Monks ha∣ving each their Prior. He found all the Way from that Parish to Nôtre-Dame matted, and was receiv'd at the Gate by Bretel de Gremonville, Dean of the Chapter, with all the Canons and Curates of the Chapel, in rich Copes. After the Dean had presented the Holy Water, and given the Cross to the Coad∣jutor to kiss it, the Prior of the Ancient Monks, addressing himself to the whole Chapter, We give you, said he, our Archbi∣shop alive, and you shall restore him dead. The meaning of that Expression depends on the usual Custom of exposing the Bodies of the dead Archbishops in State at this Monastery. That Ceremony being finish'd, the Dean presenting his Church to him, ask'd his Prote∣ction, and made him swear the usual Oath
on the Gospels. Then the Coadjutor put on his Shooes and Stockings at St. Peter's Al∣tar, after he had offer'd a Crown of Gold at the Altar of Vows. At last having been receiv'd into the Chapter as a Canon, and into the Pontifical Chair in the Choir as Archbishop, he heard Mass sung, and af∣terwards treated the whole Chapter at three Tables, which were serv'd with equal Deli∣cacy and Profusion. That Prelate's Father having accompany'd the King in his Journey to the Netherlands, was attack'd with a Fever, the Fits of which lasted fifteen Hours: He was cur'd with the Peruvian Bark, prepar'd by an English Physician; and so considerable a Success brought that Remedy into Vogue. About the same time the Marquess de Torsy, Son of Charles Colbert, Secretary of State, defended Theses dedicated to his Majesty, which he presented to the whole Royal Family, in magnificent Boxes. There that Monarch was represented, giving Peace with one hand to Europe, who was arm'd to denote Power, and accompany'd with a Tiara and Keys, to signifie that it was the Christian part of Europe. Discord, and the Fury of War, whom the King had vanquish'd, were under his Feet; and with his other Hand he stopp'd the Course of Victory, who was inciting him to new Conquests. Love and Peace held his Majesty's Thunder; and the latter was fol∣low'd by Abundance, Magnificence, and Tran∣quillity. Above the King was Glory setting
a Crown on his Head, and the Love of Immoratality holding another, and just ready to Crown him. Behind Glory appear'd Piety and Mildness, who was busy'd in shutting the Temple of Janus. On the other side was Fame displaying the Banner held by Victory, to expose the History of those Actions to be read which she had already publish'd with her Trumpet. Below, Philosophy was represented by a venerable Woman, to whom Nature imparted all her Secrets: Na∣ture appear'd under the Figure of another Woman, crown'd with the Zodiac, and ac∣company'd with a Lion for the Symbole of Fire; Fruits and fruitful Animals, represent∣ing Water; and a Vultur devouring a Bird, to signifie the perpetual Round of Things, which Nature re-produces by their Destru∣ction. All these Figures seem to be en∣lighten'd and discover'd to the Spectator by a Flambeau, held by the Love of Wisdom, who shew'd the King the Beauties of Philo∣sophy, and display'd her Mantle, the Folds of which were as so many Steps to ascend to the Top or Perfection of Wisdom: And the same Love represented the Genius of him who defended the Theses. Colbert continu'd still to apply himself with a great deal of Industry and Diligence to the management of Naval Affairs: And in pur∣suance of that Design, he employ'd some Persons at Versailles, under the inspection of the Chevalier de Tourville, now Mareschal of France, to build a Frigat after a new
Contrivance, which resembl'd the English way of Building, but was thought to ex∣ceed it, both with respect to the Materials, and the Frame of the Vessel, to make her carry her Sails well, and render her Light, tho' she were loaded with a great number of Guns. This Frigat being only thirty Foot in the Keel, cou'd nevertheless carry sixty Guns; and if that Design shou'd be brought to perfection, as it afterwards was, 'twas resolv'd that she shou'd serve as a Mo∣del for the Future. This Undertaking was attended with extraordinary Success; and Trade encreas'd so fast, that in the Year 1681, the Town of St. Malo alone set forth in one Month sixty five well-rigg'd Ships, the least of 'em being of 150 Tun, for the Fi∣shery of Cods at Newfoundland, without reckoning those that were employ'd in the Levant, Spanish, and West-India Trade, besides ten that were on the Stocks. St. Malo is a lit∣tle Town in Bretaign; its Situation is ad∣mirable, by reason of the Rock on which 'tis built; and the Inhabitants are entrusted with the Guard of the City, as a Privilege due to their unshaken Loyalty. The Ad∣vancement of Trade was not the only Ob∣ject of Colbert's Care and Application; for he made his Majesty's Arms as terrible at Sea, as they were already at Land. To make the Reader sensible of the Truth of this Assertion, 'twill be sufficient to put him in mind of the Duke of Mortemar's Expedition with his Majesty's
Galleys in June 1681. No sooner did he ap∣pear before Majorca, but the Pyrates of that Island deliver'd all their French Prisoners, according to the List drawn up by the De∣puties of Marseilles, and gave Money for those that cou'd not be found. Then the General returning to Marseilles, left the ten Galleys that were under his command, and immediately put to Sea again with a like number of others. He gave Chase to the Py∣rates, and having secur'd the Peace and Tran∣quillity of the Mediterranean, was returning from Corsica to Marseilles, when before Leghorn he fell in with a Fleet of 9 Dutch Merchant-Ships, from 25 to 40 Guns each, under the Convoy of two Men of War of 60 Guns, com∣manded by the Count of Stirum, Vice-Ad∣miral of Holland, who refusing to salute the Reale, the Duke resolv'd to bring him to reason; and having secur'd the Advantage of the Wind of all the Ships in the Road, he order'd his Men to take breath (who had row'd all the way from Porto-Ferrato to Leghorn) that they might be afterwards in a condition to attack and burn the Ves∣sels, and drive 'em foul of each other. But the Execution of his Design was pre∣vented by the Arrival of the Captain of the Port in a Felucca from the City, with advice that the Dutch were resolv'd to com∣ply: And after several Messages, 'twas a∣greed that the Count of Stirum shou'd sa∣lute the Reale with nine Guns, and only be answer'd with two, which was accordingly executed.
The Terror of the King's Flags was not confin'd to the Mediterranean: The Cheva∣lier de Bethune, Captain of a Frigat call'd the Mutine, set sail from Port-Lewis, on the 23d. of June, to rejoyn the Chevalier de Château-Regnaut, and rang'd the Coast to the Road of Cascais, about seven Leagues di∣stant from Lisbon, where he anchor'd July 1, and the next Day set sail again, on ad∣vice that Captain Bart, Commander of two Dunkirk Frigats, had taken a Vessel belong∣ing to the Pyrates of Salley; and that there was another of 16 Guns on the Coast of Portugal. The Vessel which Bart forc'd a∣shore, was mann'd with 103 Moors, who escap'd to Land, but were afterwards deli∣ver'd up to him by the Orders of the Prince-Regent: The Nephew of the Governour of Salley, and some of the most considerable Persons of that City, were found among the Prisoners; and eighteen Christians were set at liberty. The Chevalier de Bethune being inform'd of that Action, cruis'd on the Coast of Portugal till the fourth of the same Month, when about ten a-clock in the Morning, he descry'd a Ship at the height of 40 Degrees, five or six Leagues South-South-West of the Berlingues. He chas'd her till eight at Night, when being too near the Shore, he gave Orders to tack about for Sea-room: Next Morning about half an Hour after four, he perceiv'd the Py∣rate sailing close by the Shore, in Chase of a Portuguese Caravelle, whom she left when
she saw the Mutine stand in after her, and endeavour'd to escape; but finding that she cou'd not otherwise avoid fighting, she chose rather to run a-shore about half an Hour after two a-clock in the Afternoon. Before she took that Resolution, she fir'd ten or twelve Shot, without reaching the Frigat; and then tack'd towards the Shore, five Leagues South (declining a little towards the West) of Montaign. Assoon as the Ves∣sel struck a-ground, all the Men leap'd o∣ver-board except eighteen Christians, whom they had taken and made Slaves. Immedi∣ately the Frigat cast Anchor in seven Fa∣thom Water, and Denoy, one of the Lieute∣nants, with six or seven Soldiers of the Marine Guard, went in the Boat to see whether there were any Turks in the Ves∣sel; where they learn'd that there were 125 of 'em, and that they had all made their escape. After the Boat went off from the Frigat, the Baron des Adrets, Lieutenant, the Chevalier de Blenac, Ensign, and the Chevali∣er de la Barre, with some Soldiers, mann'd the Pinnace, and stood away to join Denoy, whom they found on board the Pyrate. Then they began to consider whether the Vessel cou'd be gotten off, but the Sea was so high, and she had receiv'd so violent a Shock, that they quickly lost all hope of saving her. Finding none but Christians in the Vessel, the Baron des Adrets, and the Chevalier de Blenac, with some Soldiers of the Marine Guard, went a-shore in pursuit of
the Turks, if perhaps they cou'd meet with any of 'em straggling: And in the mean time Denoy, and the Chevalier de la Barre en∣deavour'd to set Fire to the Ship; but find∣ing they cou'd not compass their Design, the Chevalier went back in the Pinnace with ten Frenchmen, to the Frigat, and re∣turn'd with the Master-Gunner to burn the Ship with artificial Fire-Works; but she was so over-set, that 'twas impossible to get on board; and immediately after she was bro∣ken to pieces with so much Violence, that nothing but her Flags cou'd be sav'd. De∣noy and six or seven more, who were with him in the Vessel, leap'd over-board, and got to the Shore; and the Chevalier de la Barre finding that he cou'd not approach so near as to take 'em in, return'd with the Pinnace to the Frigat. Two Days after, the Chevalier de la Bethune went to D. Pedro, the Prince-Regent, now King of Portugal, to demand the Turks who had thrown their Arms into the Sea, and made their escape a-shore: His Request was granted, and the Infidels were deliver'd to him. The Mar∣quess du Quêne, Lieutenant-General of his Majesty's Armies, chas'd some Tripolin Pyrates into the Port of Chio, where he Cannona∣ded 'em, and almost quite destroy'd the Fortress, because it fir'd some Guns at the Fleet under his Command. The Pyrates offer'd to buy their Peace at the rate of 300 French Slaves, to be restor'd without Ransom, and were at last constrain'd to deliver 'em
all to the Marquess. 'Twas stipulated by the Treaty with the Divan of Tripoli, that all the French that were to be found in their Squadron, or on board any Ship that had come out of their Port that Year, shou'd be set at liberty; that Captain Courcillier's Ship which had been taken under French Colours, and was at that time in the Port of Chio, with 16 Guns mounted, shou'd be re∣stor'd, with her Men, Arms, and Ammu∣nition; That the Ship call'd Europe, taken under the Colours of Majorca, and then in the Port of Chio, shou'd remain under the Authority and Protection of the Captain Basha, till it shou'd be decided whether she ought to be reckon'd a French Vessel; That no Tripolin Ships shou'd search any Vessel Trading under French Colours, nor injure or molest the Persons, Ships, or Goods of those who shou'd produce a Pass-port from the Admiral of France; That all Strangers who shou'd be found on board any Vessel bear∣ing French Colours, shou'd remain free and unmolested, both with respect to their Per∣sons and Goods; and likewise Frenchmen who shou'd happen to be embark'd on Ves∣sels under strange Colours, tho' Enemies to that State; That neither French Slaves, nor Prizes taken by the Enemies of that King∣dom, shou'd be permitted to be sold in the Ports of the Kingdom of Tripoli; that a French Consul shou'd be settl'd there; and that no Prize shoud be taken within ten Miles of the Coast of France.
Colbert was not unmindful of James Desma∣rets de Vauburgh, Brother to the Intendant and Abbot of that Name: for to recompense the care he took to ease him in the Discharge of his Ministry, he bought for him one of the Places of Master of Requests, vacant by the Death of Peter Forcoal. Desmarets was, by his Uncle's Interest, admitted to the Exer∣cise of that Office, tho' he was not above 25 Years old, as he had already been re∣ceiv'd into the Parliament as the Age of 22. He marry'd afterwards the Daughter of de Voisin, another Master of Requests, who had successively executed the Offices of Intendant of Picardy, Normandy, and Tourain. The Ce∣remony of the Marriage was perform'd in St. Bennet's Church, and the Feast of the Wed∣ding was kept in the House of Daniel Voisin, the Bride's Uncle, who had beenThe Pro∣vost of the Merchants may be cal∣led, in some sense, May∣or of Paris. Provost of the Merchants. Vousy, the Intendant's Fourth Brother, was first Lieutenant, then Captain of a Ship, and was now made Captain of the Guard. There were two other Brothers, one of whom di'd in Candie, and the other perish'd at Sea. And of the Three Sisters, Two are Nuns at Nôtre-Dame de Soissons, and the other was marry'd to Andrew Jubert de Bouville, Master of the Requests, who was since made Intendant of Limosin; but by reason of his indiscreet Zeal in the Defence of the Lieutenant-General of Limoges, who was accus'd of Bribery and Exaction, was suspected by the whole Province to have shar'd the Booty with him whom he pro∣tected.
On the 16th. of December, 1681. the King came to Paris, and visited the Orchard or Nursery of Fruit-Trees for the Use of the Royal Houses; from whence he went to the Louvre, where he saw his Cabinet of Pi∣ctures, and from thence to his Library in the Street Vivienne, where the Coadjutor of Rohan shew'd him the most curious Books, and the Cabinet of Ancient and Modern Medals, and engrav'd Agats. His Majesty went also to the Academy of Sciences, the Chymical Laboratory, and the Rolling-Press for Prints, and expressed a great deal of Sa∣tisfaction at the Sight of so many Marks of Colbert's Diligence in ordering all things that were committed to his Care. At the same the Marquess de Seignelay went to Dunkirk to be present at the Tryal of some newly-invented Machines, the Success of which gave a fair Prospect of great Advantages in time of War. The Frigat call'd Echole was set apart by his Order for the Instruction of the young Officers of his Majesty's Ships and the Marine Guards, and disarm'd by the Chevaler le Bret of Flacourt, who had com∣manded her, and cruis'd six Weeks on the Coast about Rochefort. And the same Officer was made Captain of the Marine Guards on that side. The Terrour which the King's Galleys had spread over all the Mediterranean, occasion'd an Embassy to his Majesty from Mula Ismael, King of Morocco, and Brother of Muley Axid, who was called King of Tafilet. That Coun∣try
is of a considerable Extent, being part of the ancient Numidia, at present call'd Bile∣dulgerit, and is situated between Fez and the Mediterranean. The above-mention'd King of Tafilet, who was one of the greatest Con∣querours in Afric, as he was one day ma∣naging his Horse, struck his Head against the Branch of a Fig-Tree, and receiv'd a mortal Blow, of which he died some days after; tho' others say he was poison'd by one of his Concubines. But whatever was the occa∣sion of his Death, 'tis certain that when he felt it approaching, he deliver'd his Sword as the Badge of Royalty to his Brother Mula Is∣mael, telling him that his two Sons, (the Eldest of whom was but 4, and the other 3 Years old) were incapable of sustaining the Weight of a Crown; and that he fore∣saw that all the Countries he had conquer'd wou'd revolt after his Death. Nor was he mistaken in his Prediction; for the People took Arms; and Mula at the Head of the Negro's and some other Troops, was oblig'd to re-conquer the Kingdoms of Fez and Morocco, the Principalities of Tetuan, Salley, and Arcassa, and a Part of the Kingdom of Sus. His Subjects are compos'd of several Nations, of which I shall only name some of the most remarkable. The Cities are in∣habited by the Moors, who are the Posterity of the ancient Saracens. The Barbarians live in houses conver'd with Stubble, on the vast Mountains of Atlas, which cross the whole Country. The Alarbs or Arabs possess the
Plains, and are divided into Tribes: The Head or Oldest Man of a Family, is the Commander, and is call'd the Checq or Cap∣tain. They pass their whole Life in Tents made of Wooll and Goat's Hair, and the Plains are strew'd with their Adoüards, which are a sort of Hamlets, consisting of 40 or 50 Tents, set up together in a round Figure: and some of the most numerous Tribes in∣habit 50 Adoüards. To all the Conquests I have already mention'd, Mula Ismael added that of Mammora on the Ocean, which he took from the Spaniards, and of Tangier, the Metropolis of Mauritania Tingitana, which the English were forc'd to abandon. He is of the Race of Mahomet surnam'd Cherif, whose Name he bears in his Signet in the Arabic Tongue, together with that of the Saviour of the World, whom the Moors call Cydy Nayssa, but only acknowledge that he was a great Prophet. In the same Signet is the Name of GOD, and of Mahomet, the Author of their Religion: for all other Coats of Arms are forbidden by their Law, which expresly pro∣hibits all sorts of Figures. They pretend to be the only Professors of the true Mahometan Religion, and affirm that 'twas begun by Christ, whom they make the First of all the Moors, and the Inventer of their usual Ha∣bit. They wear neither Gold, Silver, nor Silk, and are only cloath'd with a Piece of Stuff, wrapp'd two or three times about their Body, and leaving their Arms and Legs bare▪ They call this Garment a Hocque, and it
ought always to be made of White Stuff. Nor are they less Religious Observers of that Part of their Law which contains Regulations about Meat, for they eat no Flesh but of such Beasts as are kill'd by Persons of their own Sect. He who supplies the place of a Butcher, presents the Animal with its Throat towards Mecca, saying, My God, behold a Victim which I am going to sacrifice to thee, I pray thee that our Eating of it may be for thy Glory, and then cuts its Throat. They per∣form their Sala or Devotion, exactly five times every Day: first they wash their Feet and Legs up to the Knees, and their Hands and Arms to the Elbows; then seating them∣selves on the Ground, with their Face turn'd East-ward, they invoke their Cydy Mahomet, and afterwards Cydy Bellabec, (whom they in∣terpret to be St. Augustin) and several others. Among their Saints they reckon also Cydy Nayssa, for so they call the Saviour of the World, who, they believe was born of a Virgin, and conceiv'd by the Breath of GOD, but they cannot comprehend that Breath to be the Holy Ghost, and consequently that there are Three Persons who are One God. Mula Ismael perceiving that the Squadron of six Ships commanded by the Chevalier de Château-Reg∣naut, had quite ruin'd the Trade of his King∣dom by lying before his Ports, resolv'd to send an Ambassadour to his Majesty; and gave that Commission to Hagdi Mehemed Thum∣min, Governour of Tetuan, who embark'd on the Vessel commanded by la Barre in Château-Regnaut's
Squadron, and arriv'd at Brest, where he stay'd for his Majesty's Orders, who was then at Strasburg, and came afterwards to Paris, by the way of Vannes, Nantes, Angers, Saumur, Blois, and Orleans. His Wit was every-where admir'd, and convinc'd those who convers'd with him, that he was Master of all that Politeness for which the ancient Moors were famous. In every Town thro' which he pass'd, he made a Queen and an Ambassadress: One day a Lady, whom he had honour'd with the first of these Titles, seem'd to be jealous, and complain'd, that She whom he call'd Ambassadress engross'd all his Eloquence and Kindness: You are Queen, reply'd he immediately, and my Duty is to admire you in Silence; after which he con∣tinu'd his Discourse with the Ambassadress. Another Lady blaming the Custom of his Country Men who take a great Number of Wives. If our Women were as handsome as you, answer'd he, we wou'd never marry more than one. After the King had granted him Audience, Colbert de Croissy, Secretary of State, and the Marquess of Seignelay were appointed to hear his Poposals. At last he concluded a Treaty for Commerce, and left France, ex∣tremely pleas'd with the Country, and charm'd with his Majesty's Grandeur. We have already seen with what Zeal Col∣bert apply'd himself to the Advancement of some of his Relations; and he was not less mindful of his Brother Edward-Francis. In the Year 1658, he marry'd him to Mary-Magdalen
Bautru, Daughter to the Count of Serran, Chan∣cellor to Philip of France, Duke of Orleans, the King's Brother, and made him buy the County of Maulevrier. He procur'd him to be made Captain-Lieutenant of the Second Company of his Majesty's Musquetiers, Maréchal de Camp, and afterwards Lieutenant-General; and at last obtain'd for him the Government of Tournay, in May 1682. Tournay is a very strong Place, defended by a Castle, which is said to have been built by the English: 'tis seated on the Scheld, and is the Metropolis of a little Territory call'd Tournaisis. Besides the Cathe∣dral-Church of Nôtre-Dame, which is a very fine Structure; it contains Ten Parishes, Two Abbeys, and several other Religious Houses. In the Year 1521. the Emperour Charles V. took it from the French, who had seiz'd it Three Years before: It was again conquer'd by his Majesty in 1667. and yielded to him by the Treaty of Aix la Chapelle, as I intima∣ted before. This City is very ancient, and its Bishop is a Suffragan of the Archbishop of Cambray. The Insolence of the Pyrates of Algier, who wou'd not be taught Wisdom by the Example of those of Tripoli, provok'd the King to send thither the Marquess du Quêne with his Squadron. He sail'd from the Port of Thoulon, July 12. 1682. on the 18th. he join'd the Galleys that expected him at Yvica; and on the 23. anchor'd before Algier, where the Galleys stopp'd a Bark they had taken by the way, which was bound with Provisi∣ons
for the City. The Marquess du Quêne was join'd in the Road by some Men of War and Bomb-Vessels; so that the whole Fleet consisted of 15 Galleys, 11 Men of War, 5 Bomb-Vessels, 2 Fire-Ships, and 3 arm'd Barks, besides Tenders and other Vessels la∣den with Ammunition. The Coast of Afric makes a crooked Line in this place, and forms the Bay of Algier; the City is built on that part of the Shore that reaches from South to North, and looks towards the East. Its Situation on the Brow of a Hill yields a very pleasant Prospect to those who are at Sea; for they have a full view of all the Houses which are roof'd with Terrasses and whited without. 'Tis defended with strong Walls, and several irregular Works all of diffe∣rent Figures: besides, there is a Castle in the highest part of the City, and on the Fortifi∣cations which reach along the Shore there are above 50 Pieces of Cannon mounted. The Harbour is overagainst the Middle of the City, and cover'd on the Side next the Sea with a little Island fortifi'd with several Works, and about 50 Pieces of Cannon. At the North End of the Island is the Watch-Tower, furnish'd with 27 Piece of Cannon on three Batteries: On the North Sides the Har∣bour is cover'd by a Mole that joins the Island to the City, and shut up with a Chain to∣ward the South. About 1000 Paces without the City on the North side, there is a little Fort, call'd the Englishmens Fort, defended by 10 or 12 Pieces of Cannon; and nearer
the City is Fort Babaloüet with 15 Pieces of Artillery. On the South side of the City near the Shore, stands the Fort of Babassan, where there are 10 or 12 great Guns; and there is also another Fort on the top of the Hill call'd the Emperour's Fort, from Charles V. who encamp'd there at the time of his un∣fortunate Expedition in 1541. Thus 'twas impossible for the French to bombard Algier, without exposing themselves to the Fire of above 160 Pieces of Cannon, 80 of which carry'd from 24 to 60 Pound Ball. All the Forces of the State were in the City, and all the Vessels of the Pyrates, except one Galley, left the Sea assoon as the King's Ships appear'd, and got into the Harbour, where they were disarm'd, and the Chain drawn up. Besides the Road is very dangerous, and pester'd with a great number of Rocks: The Currents that run there almost perpetually, and the East, South-East, North, and North-West Winds, which usually reign there, make it very unsafe for Ships. But the Mar∣quess du Quêne was so far from being deterr'd from the Prosecution of his Design by the discouraging Prospect of so many Difficul∣ties, that he only waited the Conveniency of calm Weather to put it in execution. The Galleys were to tow in the Ships and Bomb-Vessels within half Cannon-shot on the North side of the City; and the greatest part of 'em were to draw up in a Line in Figure of a Half-Moon on the North-East, and the rest along the Shore to batter the Englishmens
Fort, and that of Babaloüet, while the former play'd on the City. On the 6th. of August the Weather was calm, and immediately the Marquess du Quêne gave Orders to prepare for the Cannonading of the City. But the Gal∣leys and Galliots had hardly weigh'd Anchor, when there arose such a fresh Gale, that they were oblig'd to defer the Attempt: and on the 13th. there happen'd so violent a Storm of Wind from the West-South-West, accompany'd with Thunder, that they cou'd not without a great deal of Difficulty, get clear of the Shoar. The Marquess seeing the Weather so rough, the Season of the Year so far advanc'd, and the Miseries with which the Galleys were threaten'd for want of Wa∣ter, sent 'em back to France on the 15th. and after their departure resolv'd to make use of the Galliots to throw Bombs into the City. And that they might stand in, and come off without danger, he commanded Forant, a Captain of a Ship, to cause five Anchors to be let down on the North-East side of the City, to which there were Cables fasten'd of 1500 Fathoms in length, their Ends being distributed among the Vessels call'd the Vigilant, Valiant, Prudent, Laurel, and Star, commanded by the Chevalier de Tourville, Lieutenant-General of the Navy, Captain Beaulieu, Lery, Commander of the Squadron, and the Captains, Forant and Bel∣lile. The first of these Officers was posted on the South, and the last on the North; and the Cables were appointed for the Con∣veniency
of sending in and bringing off the Galliots or Bomb-Vessels. While they were executing these Orders, the Algerines fir'd above a hundred Cannon-shot, of which the Ship call'd the Holy Ghost, receiv'd one in her Top-Mast, and the Assuré, two under Water, and one in her Sails. The 22th. in the Evening, the Weather proving fair, with a perfect Calm, the Five Ships stood in to come to an Anchor in their re∣spective Posts, and the Five Bomb-Vessels approach'd the Town till they were a-peak of their Anchors; the Cruel, commanded by Ponti, was posted on the South, and after her in order, the Menaçante, commanded by Goetton, the Bombard by de Combe, on which Comarin, Captain of the Bombardiers, was embark'd; the Thunderer by du Her∣bier, and the Brulante, by Beaussier. When all things were in a readiness, and the Bomb-Vessels were moor'd without the least opposi∣on from the Algerines, they threw some Bombs, to try the reach of the Mortars. But 'twas found by Experience that they were at too great a distance, since few of the Bombs reach'd the City; and therefore all the Ves∣sels came to an Anchor the same night in their usual Posts. Afterwards Lery and Bellile un∣dertook to carry the Anchors nearer the Town; the first caus'd the Anchor of the three first Bomb-Vessels to be dropp'd on the East side of the Harbour, and the second that of the two last on the North-East; tho' during the Execution of that Attempt, the
Enemy made a continual Fire with Cannon and Musquet-shot. The 30th. in the Even∣ing the Weather proving fair, the Marquess de Villefons, du Chalard, the Chevaliere d' Aire, and several Officers of the Marine Guards, besides Voluntiers, went on board the Bomb-Vessels which stood in to their Posts, and were by the Marquess du Quêne's Orders, supported by two Arm'd Barks, ten Pinnaces, and the Prize which he had order'd to be arm'd. The Bomb-Vessels being moor'd began to throw their Bombs with very good Success, for in four hours they threw in 120, which almost all reach'd the City. In the mean time the Enemy made a continual Fire with Musquet-shot, for the space of an hour, without doing the least Execution, because the Bomb-Vessels were at too great a distance; and besides they fir'd 1000 or 1200 Cannon-shot, taking their time to fire always when the Bombs were discharg'd, that the Flashing at the Touch-hole might serve 'em for a Mark to level at. About two hours before Day they were hal'd off, and there was not one Man kill'd or wounded in the whole Action. The Marquess du Quêne was not long ignorant of the successful Effects of the Bombs, for the Approach of the Fleet gave an opportunity to a considerable Number of Slaves to make their Escape; and those who came off the Day after the Action, among whom was an English Captain, whose Ran∣som was fixt at 6000 Crowns, related that the Bombs had kill'd several Persons, and
thrown down a great Number of Houses; that one of the Bombs falling into the great Mosque, where the People of the Town were at Prayers, kill'd above 100 Persons, and ruin'd one side of the Building; that the Town was in a great Consternation; that the Women and Children were sent away; that several Turks and Moors were retir'd to the Fields, and that a considerable Party in the Town had already declar'd for a Peace. The Night between the third and fourth of September, the Bomb-Vessels stood into their former Posts without any opposition, but they had scarce thrown two Bombs, when they begun to cry, A Galley, A Galley; and the Alarm proving true, all things were put in a fit Posture to receive the Enemy. The Galley follow'd by three Brigantines and some Barks, advanc'd towards the nearest Bomb-Vessel call'd the Cruel, on board of which were Renard and Landouillet, Commissioners of the Marine, and discharg'd a Broad-side of Cannon and Musquet-shot against her, which kill'd only one Soldier. In the mean time the Marquess de la Porte had got into the Cruel, and she gave the Galley so warm a Return with her Musquets and great Guns charg'd with Small-shot, that she stood off to attack the second Bomb-Vessel call'd the Menaçante, where she thought to meet with less Resistance. Immediately Beaulieu, Cap∣tain of the Valiant, who was order'd to sup∣port that Vessel, got on board with Major Raymundis and the Chevalier de Comenge, lea∣ving
his Pindace under the Command of his Lieutenant Isarn de Monclair. The Musquet-shot on both Sides lasted about a Quarter of an Hour, and the Patereroes and Cannons of the Bomb-Vessel play'd with very good Suc∣cess. Beaulieu himself levell'd a Cannon so exactly against the Galley, as she was closing with the Menaçante to board her, that he cover'd the whole Vessel with Small-shot con∣sisting of broken Pieces of Iron, kill'd and wounded a great number of her Men, and so shatter'd her, that she bore away as fast as she cou'd, without once tacking about. And she was even in so great a Disorder, that if the Bomb-Vessels cou'd have follow'd her, she might have been easily taken. She had not yet enter'd the Port, when the Bombs began to flie at the Town, which ve∣ry much surpriz'd the Enemy, who conclu∣ded that their Galley had at least brought off two of the Bomb-Vessels. They left off shooting till their Galley was got into the Harbour; but assoon as they saw her safe, they began to shoot from their Batteries, and fir'd five or six hundred Cannon-shot. This Night there were almost eighty Bombs thrown into the City, with no less Success than before: In the coming off, du Herbier receiv'd a Cannon-shot in his Poop, which burst one of his Guns, kill'd six Men, and wounded two: but in the whole Action there were only fourteen Men kill'd, besides some that were wounded. The next Day, being the 4th. of September, the Algerines sent to
the Admiral to desire a Peace: The Missio∣nary le Vacher was entrusted with that Com∣mission, who before the Rupture executed the Office of Consul of the French Nation in that City. He deliver'd his Message from the Divan, who had order'd him to desire a Cessation, and that some Person might be sent to treat of the Conditions of a Peace: To which the Marquess du Quêne made answer, That if they had any Proposals to make, he wou'd hear 'em on board his Ship, and that he was resolv'd to continue the Bombarding, and all other acts of Hostility against 'em, 'till they grew ta∣mer, and were willing to submit to reaso∣nable Conditions. Le Vacher added, that the Bombs had ruin'd above one hundred Hou∣ses, and kill'd above seven hundred Men; that several others were buried under the Ruines; and that the Shore was cover'd with dead Bodies, which were order'd to be laid there by the Dey, Baba Hassan, least, if they were brought into the City, the sight of 'em shou'd cause an Insurrection. The same Day in the Evening about se∣venty Bombs were thrown in, which were almost all levell'd at the Harbour with a design to burn the Ships. One of the Bombs sunk a Bark; and another falling be∣tween two Vessels, broke off a part of their Keels. But the Season of the Year being far advanc'd, the Marquess du Quêne return'd to Toulon, leaving Lery with the Ships com∣manded by St. Aubin, Bellile, and Bellefontaine,
to cruise before Algiers, and curb the Inso∣lency of the Pyrates. Nor did they alone disturb the Commerce of those Infidels; for a Vessel call'd the Regle, which they had seiz'd near Maromas, was retaken by Forant, Commander of one of his Majesty's Ships. They had sold her to two Jews, who mann'd her with Dutch Seamen, and sent her to Holland to be laden with War-like Ammunition, and other Furniture for Ships. In her Return she joyn'd in Company with a Fleet of thirty Dutch Merchant Ships un∣der the Convoy of three Men of War, and arriv'd in sight of Alicant about the be∣gining of November 1682. Forant and S. Aubin, who were cruising in those parts, had notice of her Arrival, and sent their Pinnaces to disco∣ver her with some Seamen of S. Malo, who found her ridingat Anchor between the Forts of Alicant and the Fleet. The Night between the 18 and 19th. of the same Month, they mann'd their two Pinnaces, and sent 'em under the command of Pallieres and Sainte Maure, with Orders to seize on the Vessel; which they exe∣cuted very happily, and without Noise, and tow'd her out thro' a Fleet of above fifty Vessels of divers Nations. The Comman∣ders of the Dutch Men of War sent to expo∣stulate with Forant, complaining that he had seiz'd on a Ship that carry'd the Colours of the Republick, and was under their pro∣tection: But he reply'd, that the Vessel be∣long'd to the Jews of Algiers; that she was bound thither, and had neither a Protection,
nor Bill of Lading. These Reasons were unanswerable, and the Commanders permit∣ted the Ship to be carry'd off. Colbert, who neglected nothing that might tend to the promoting of Trade, being in∣form'd that that there were very fine Hor∣ses in the Isles of Antilles, communicated that Advice to Coulon, Master of an Acade∣my in the Rue Ferou in the Fauxbourg S. Ger∣main, who in compliance with so advan∣tageous a Proposal, sent his Kinsmen, Pair, and du Cornet, two of his Majesty's Grooms, to the Islands of Bonaire, Curassol, and Rou∣bes, from whence they brought Horses of an admirable Beauty, and surprizing Fleet∣ness. Gabaret, Commander of a Squadron, was sent to the Antilles with three Ships, the Furious, Pearl, and Tempest, under the command of the Chevalier d' Arbouville, d' Amblimont, and Machaut: This Squadron sail'd from the River Charante, on the 8th. of May 1682, and anchor'd in the Road of Rochel, at the Point call'd Chef de Bois, from whence they set sail on the 25th. for Mar∣tinico, where after forty Days sailing, they arriv'd on the 5th. of July, and anchor'd at Fort-Royal, to salute the Marquess of Ble∣nac, General of the Isles. The Pearl sailing close by the Shore to get the Advantage of the Wind, touch'd on certain Rocks, from which she got clear by the help of her Anchors; but tho' she felt no dammage at present, she was afterwards sensible of the ill Effects of that Accident. Next Day they
weigh'd Anchor, steering towards Fort S. Pe∣ter, where they arriv'd betimes. This is a considerable Place with respect to its Inha∣bitants, but inferiour in strength to Fort-Royal. Martinico is the chief of all the A∣merican Islands that are inhabited by the French: 'Tis all over Mountainous, and full of Wood, but extremely fertil in Sugar-Canes, from which the Inhabitants draw their principal Revenue. It produces good Melons, and a most pleasant kind of Fruit call'd Anana; besides several other sorts of Fruit, as Gogaves, Potato's, Banana's, and Figs, which are different from those of France. The Squadron sail'd from hence on the 15th. of July, and arriv'd on the 17th. at Granada, an Island Inhabited by the French and the Wild Natives, abounding with Sugar-Canes, Tobacco, and Tortoises, and defended by a Fort of no great strength; from whence they continu'd their Course with a fore-wind to the Lee-ward (for the Land stretches Westerly, and the Eastern Winds reign perpetually in those Seas) and had so quick a Passage, that on the 24th. they descry'd Cape de la Velle in New-Spain, and afterwards discover'd at a great distance Mount St. Martha, call'd in that Country Sierra Neuada, or the Snowy Hill, which is the highest Mountain in the World. It lies in the Torrid-Zone, in the 303 Degree of Longitude, and 8 of Lati∣tude, containing about thirty or forty Leagues in circumference. 'Tis sixty Leagues from
the Sea, and yet may be distinctly percei∣ved from Cape S. Tiberin in Dominico, at the distance of 150 Leagues. Its perpendicular height from the top to the level of the Sea, is reckon'd to amount to two Leagues, tho' Geographers affirm, that there is not a Hill in the World half so high: But the Snow that covers its top, notwithstanding the excessive heat of the Climate, is a con∣vincing Proof of the Truth of this Com∣putation. Its Foot, and part of its Sides are inhabited by People of a very low Sta∣ture, who may pass for the Pigmies menti∣on'd by Pliny. They never venture their little Bodies beyond the Confines of their own Territory, nor entertain any corre∣spondence with their Neighbours; for the sight of a Man of ordinary Stature puts 'em to flight, and they run into their Holes at his approach. During the excessive Heats, they leave their usual Habitations, and live higher up in the Mountain; but assoon as the Weather begins to grow Cold, they re∣turn to their former Abodes. They live on a sort of Grain of which they make both Bread and Drink; and their Ouicou, or Drink is also made of the Root of a Shrub, af∣ter they have press'd out the poisonous Juice. Their Religion is only known to themselves, and never any Traveller cou'd hitherto di∣scover its Nature. On the 26th. the Squa∣dron rode an hour or two before Cartage∣na, bringing the Ships to a Lee without Cannon-shot of the Town, which is seated
in a Peninsula, the Harbour being on one of the Sides. 'Tis a City of indifferent big∣ness; and its Figure is as irregular as its Fortifications: 'Tis commanded by a rising Ground, where there is a Fort flank'd with four Bastions lin'd with Earth. It stands in 300. Degrees of Longitude, and 10 Degrees, 30 Minutes of North-Latitude. On the 29th. they set sail to discover the Coast of Nombre di Dios, and the same Day anchor'd before Portobelo. This is a little, but very fa∣mous City, and one of the most considera∣ble places of the Spanish Dominions in A∣merica, both for the Advantage of its Har∣bour, and the conveniency of its Situation: For 'tis but eighteen Leagues distant from Panama, where all the Peruvian Riches are unladed, to be afterwards transported on Mules to Portobelo, where they are embark'd for Havana, and from thence carry'd to Spain. The Harbour is very large and fair, and so clear of Sands or Rocks, that there is every where safe Anchorage for Ships of the greatest Burthen. When the French Squa∣dron arriv'd, there was a laden Ship in the Port ready to Sail, under the Convoy of a great Galeon, which cou'd not protect her from the Bucaniers, who took her in her Passage. 'Tis a surprizing Neglect of the Spaniards, that they take no care to fortify a place of so great importance; for the En∣try of the Harbour is defended only by a paltry Fort of a very irregular Figure, no∣where flank'd, and commanded by the Hil∣lock
at the Foot of which 'tis built. The Town which is at the bottom of the Bay, and appears not to those who are at Sea, till they come just before it, has no Walls, and is only cover'd with two small Works on the above-mention'd Hillock. 'Tis alto∣gether defenceless on the side next the Moun∣tain, and on the other two sides, by which it communicates with the Land. The side next the Sea is only flank'd with two small Bastions, containing about nine Foot in the Flank; and at the end of the Bay there is a Redoubt about twelve Toises square. I have nothing more to add to this succinct Description of Portobelo, but that the Spani∣ards pretend it will be quickly fortify'd with a Cittadel of six Bastions, between two Ri∣vers, half a Cannon-shot from the Forts. The Squadron anchor'd near the Fort that defends the Entrance into the Harbour, where the Spaniards keep always a Guard, which was doubled during the stay of the French. Gabaret, to discover the Humours and Inclinations of the Spaniards, immedi∣ately after his Arrival, sent Septeme, Major of the Squadron, who having spoken with the Commander of the Fort at the Entry, was sent forwards to the Governour. As he drew near to the City in his Boat, with his Colours display'd, he was met by a Pin∣nace with Spanish Colours, which came to receive him: And having had Audience of the Governour, he return'd to give Gabaret an account of his Negotiation. The Subject of
that Conference, and of those that were afterwards manag'd by other Deputies, was never perfectly known: Only 'twas given out that Septeme was sent to enquire after French Prisoners, and that he was told there were none in the Town. Nevertheless, the same Night very late, there came a Man swimming to D' Amblimont's Ship, which rode next the Shore; and that Offi∣cer receiving him into his Boat, sent him immediately to Gabaret, whom he inform'd that there were seventeen or eighteen French∣men in the Town, but said nothing of their being Prisoners. Next Morning the Com∣mander sent to discover the Truth of what he had learn'd, and to demand the French∣men of the Governour, who acknowledg'd that there were some of that Nation in the Town, who were not kept Prisoners, but serv'd for Wages; adding, that the Com∣mander might, if he pleas'd, carry 'em a∣long with him; and accordingly those rag∣ged, lean, and disfigur'd Creatures were restor'd and distributed among the three Ships. This Accident was not attended with the least disorder; for the Affair was transacted on both sides in the most amicable manner imaginable; and their only Contest seem'd to be to out-strip each other in Civility. The Gover∣nour made the first step, by sending a Pre∣sent to Gabaret of two fat Oxen, Spanish Wine, Sweet-meats, Oranges, and Citrons; and the French Officer in his turn present∣ed
the Spaniard with a Case of Pistols, a Castor, and other things of that Nature. The Deputies of the Squadron were regal'd on Shore, and those that were sent to the Commander were treated on board his Ship, where they drank several times to the Health of the two Kings of France and Spain with the usual Ceremonies, making a confus'd, but not unpleasant, Noise, by stri∣king a Knife against a Plate. The place where the French cast Anchor at their first coming into the Harbour being somewhat incommodious, the Governour very civilly sent 'em a Pilot to bring 'em farther in, to a place where they might Anchor more safely. Two Armadilla's that were unrigg'd, began to put themselves in a posture of De∣fence, assoon as the Squadron appear'd, but resolv'd to stay in the Harbour. On the Second of August the French left Portobelo, and were by contrary Winds carry'd in sight of the Cattives, which are above fifty inha∣bited Islands. On the 11th. they made the Isle of Rotan, in the Gulf of Honduras, which lies in 286 Degrees of Longitude, and 16 of Latitude, and is only inhabited by Pyrates, who land there for the conve∣niency of Refreshment. Here the French found a forsaken Ship, and concluded that her Men were either taken, kill'd, or drown'd, and that the Vessel was a Prize, taken by the Bucaneers from the Spaniards. For be∣sides a great number of Horse-Shooes that remain'd of her Cargo, there were several
Jars of Spanish Wine, and Letters in that Language, by which it appear'd that she set out in June, and consequently that she had been taken not long before. The 13th. they discover'd a small Pyrate cruising about that part, and wou'd have chas'd him, if the Booty cou'd have made amends for their trouble; for he wou'd not come near the Squadron, tho' the usual Signal by the firing of a Gun was made for him to approach. The Passage from Portobelo to Rotan is dan∣gerous, by reason of the Banks of Sand with which those Seas are pester'd; and the Wa∣ter is so shallow, that the Pilots are often∣times puzzl'd to find the Chanel. The 25th. they made the Isle des Pans, and the Capes of Las Corrientes, and Sant-Anton, at the Western end of the Island of Cuba, and were oblig'd to wait several Days for a fa∣vourable Wind, before they cou'd double the last of those Capes. The 3d. of Sep∣tember they past by Porto Cavano, in the same Island; and on the 6th. came before Hava∣na, which is the Metropolis of the Island, and the usual Residence of the Captain-Ge∣neral. The Spaniards have been very dili∣gent in improving the Fortifications of so considerable a Place: for its Harbour is the Rendezvous of all the Galeons that bring the Silver from the Indies, and of all the Ships that come from St. Martha, Cartagena, Nombre de Dios, Portobelo, Vera Cruz, Campe∣sche, and all the other Ports of Mexico. The 7th. they anchor'd at las Matanças in the
same Island, where they took notice of the Comet that appear'd in France, and was illustrated with several Observations: They perceiv'd it first in the Night between the 25th. and 26th. of August, its Head being North-North-East, and its Tail South and by West. Here they stood into the Bay to refresh themselves, and took in fresh Water, Wood, Flesh, Fish, and all other necessary Provisions. The Bay is large, but not eve∣ry-where fit for Anchorage; nor is that its only Inconveniency, for tis wholly destitute of Inhabitants; but those Defects are in some measure supply'd by the great abun∣dance of all sorts of Game, as Wild Oxen, Herons, Parrots, and a prodigious Number of other Fowls that are sit to be eaten. A∣mong other Animals, there are certain Rats much larger and thicker than our Cats, that sit on Trees along the Rivers, and are not scar'd at the sight of the Hunters. And for the Refreshment of those whose Stomachs are disorder'd after a tedious Voy∣age, there is a sort of Colewort that grows on the top of a very spongy Stem, from thirty to fifty Foot high, and may be eaten several ways, as in Sallads, Broth or Pottage. The Bay abounds with excellent Fishes, and those who take the Diversion of Fishing in the Rivers that fall into it, may gather as much Cresses as they please, which is like to that we have in Europe. And besides all those Marks of the bounty of Nature that appear in this place; it yields store of Salt,
and produces several kinds of Fruits, among which there are Plums call'd Mourbin, and two sorts of Grapes. This pleasant Coun∣try is, as I intimated before, a part of the Island of Cuba, which, according to the Ob∣servations of Geographers, contains 280 Leagues in length, and 40 in breadth, ex∣tending between 289 and 300 Degrees of Longitude, and from the 20 to the 22d. Degree of Latitude, its Northern side be∣ing 30 Leagues distant from the Tropic of Cancer. On the 19th. the French set Sail from Matanças, standing in to the Frith of Bahama, where the North-Wind being im∣prison'd between the Coast of the Main-Land, and that of the Islands, which bound the Straight on both sides, breaks forth with so violent an impetuosity, that the Ships which are engag'd in this dangerous Pas∣sage, run the hazard of being dash'd to pieces on one of the opposite Shores: And besides, the agitation of the Sea by those Tem∣pestuous Winds, is encreas'd by the Rapidi∣ty of the Currents, which are oftentimes fatal to such small Vessels as those that com∣pos'd this Squadron: Yet they had the good fortune to escape the Danger of this Ca∣nal, which is 60 Leagues long, and 25 broad, between 24 and 27 Degrees of Latitude; and afterwards sail'd along the Coast of Florida, to the height of the Ber∣mudas, where they met with a fair Wind for Martinico, which they discover'd on the 24th. of October, and Anchor'd the 26th. at
Fort S. Peter. The 2d. of November, they set sail for Granada, to bring the Governour of that Island, who was Gabaret's Brother, with his Wife, to Martinico, where she was desirous to Lie in. In their Passage they de∣scry'd a small Skiff, and made towards it by Gabaret's Orders, who was extremely sur∣priz'd at the sight of four or five Wretches, that cou'd hardly stir an Oar to approach the Ship, being starv'd, and quite spent with Hunger, Thirst, ill Weather, and the beat∣ing of the Waves. At last he receiv'd 'em on board, and learnt that they were En∣glishmen of the Isle of Tabago, where they were so cruelly us'd, that in a Fit of De∣spair, they resolv'd to commit themselves to the less-dreaded fury of the Waves; and that their small stock of Provision was con∣sum'd five Days before they were taken up. On the 5th. of December, Gabaret arriv'd at S. Christopher, where he left the Englishmen; and the next Day sail'd for France, direct∣ing his Course to the Port of Brest, where he landed. The favourable Treatment which Gabaret receiv'd from the Spaniards in America, was a glorious Effect of his Master's Power: And the kind reception of the French Ambassador at the Court of Morocco, is a convincing Proof of the Awe and Respect with which that great Monarch inspires the most bar∣barous Nations. The Count of S. Amand embark'd on the Valiant, a Ship of 60 Guns, commanded by Beaulieu, and came before
Algier, where he was present at that me∣morable Action I have already describ'd. From thence he set sail for Tetuan, where he arriv'd on the 2d. of October 1682, and sent some Persons a-shore in his Pinnace, who were inform'd by the Turks that were come to the Sea-side, that for two Months they had been daily expecting the Ambas∣sador's Arrival, and that they had Orders to intreat him not to Land, till they had heard from the Vice-Roy of the Province, because they cou'd not receive him accord∣ing to his Dignity, during the absence of that Alcayd. The 4th. Mehemed Thummin, who was formerly Ambassador in France, came on board, with the Lieutenant-Governour, and the Commander. They were saluted at their Entry with the firing of eleven Guns, and conducted to the Council-Chamber, where they were receiv'd by the Count of S. Amand, accompany'd with eight Officers of Ships, twelve of the Marine Guards, and several Gentlemen. After they had all taken their Places, the Ambassador began the Discourse with tel∣ling Mehemed Thummin, that at his return from the Campaign in Chio, he had heard of his being in France, and was a Witness of the Universal Acknowledgments that were paid to his Wit and Merit. Thummin reply'd, that he was oblig'd for so flattering a Compliment to that Candor which is so natural to the French Nation: And those mutual Returns of Civility were continu'd
for some time on both sides. Then the Ambassador took occasion to Discourse of the King of Morocco's Greatness, of his Con∣quests, and of the Titles of his Predecessors. The Moors were very attentive to what he said on that Subject, extolling their Prince's Valour, to whom they always gave the Title of Emperour. After they had been en∣tertain'd with a Collation, the Ambassador shut himself up with 'em, making use of la Croix for his Interpreter, with whose per∣formance he was very well satisfy'd. The Conference lasted an Hour and a half, and 'twas so late before they came out, that the Moors were forc'd to lie on board. They order'd a clean Table-Cloth to be spread on the Boards, and stepping upon it with their bare Feet, began to pray, crying often Alla, Alla, which signifies God; and kneeling thir∣ty times in the space of a quarter of an Hour. They sate upon their Heels, and from time to time stretch'd themselves on their left Side; and after they had remain'd a Moment in that Posture, they stroak'd their Forehead and Face with their Right-hand, which is the Badge of their Religion, as the Sign of the Cross is of Christianity. The next Day after Dinner, which was on∣ly a Banquet of Fruits, they visited la Gal∣lissoniere, who conducted 'em to the Shore, and at their Landing were saluted with e∣leven Guns. At the same time a Bark ap∣pear'd under Algerine Colours, without a Skiff, standing into the Mouth of the River; she
was known to belong to Salley, and had ta∣ken a French Vessel laden with Cod-Fish. The 6th. the Ambassador wrote to Mehemed, requiring Satisfaction for the Injury done to his Nation; and was answer'd, that the Master of the Bark was arrested, and that the Prize shou'd be restor'd. The 7th. a Mes∣senger was dispatch'd to Tetuan, which is situated two Leagues from the Shore, for the French Consul, who sent word that he cou'd not come without the Governour's Permission. The same Day Mehemed gave the Ambassador notice that he had receiv'd an Answer from the Alcayd, who had de∣sir'd him to carry his Son on board, and therefore he entreated the Pinnace might be sent a-shore next Morning. His desire was granted, and the Pinnace waited upon him at the time appointed; but he was forc'd to embark alone, for the Youth was afraid to venture on the Sea, which happen'd at that time to be very rough. In the mean time the Alcayd wrote to the Ambassador, to congratulate his Arrival, assuring him that he wou'd come with all possible haste to receive him, and that the Emperour his Master had com∣manded him to treat him with the highest re∣spect. The 9th. several Boats came to the Ship to Land the Ambassador's Retinue; and Me∣hemed went on board to compliment him in the Name of the Alcayd, who waited on the Shore to receive him: But 'twas so late that the Ambassador thought fit to put off
his Landing till the next Day, assuring Me∣hemed (who resolv'd to lie that Night on board) that at Sun-rising he wou'd give Orders to salute the Alcayd with thirteen Guns, and a triple discharge of Musquet-shot; and the same Evening he sent two Officers to compliment him. Next Morning the promis'd Salutation was perform'd; and after the Ambassador had heard Mass, and din'd with Mehemed, he embark'd with all his Retinue, besides several Officers of the Ship and Marine Guards, and Landed about nine a∣clock. He found the Shore lin'd with 400 Mus∣quetiers, and was met by the Alcayd and his Son, at the Head of 200 Horse. At their Meeting, he told that Officer, that he was glad he had the good Fortune to enter the Dominions of the Emperour of Morocco in a place that was under his Government. The Alcayd reply'd, That he was welcome, He and all his Company, and enquir'd con∣cerning his Health. He was cloath'd in Yellow, with a little Cowl or Hood of the same Colour on his Head, and a Lance of the length of a Pike in his Right-hand. One half of the Horsemen carry'd Lances, and the other Fire-locks, which they dis∣charg'd, and were follow'd by a Volley from the Infantry, Then the Squadron broke, and some of 'em gallop'd along the Shore, turning and managing their Horses with a considerable Dexterity. At the same time the Ambassador was conducted by Mehemed to the Alcayd's Tent, where there
was a large Table-Cloath spread on the Ground, with an Indian Cloth, and a Co∣verlet over all, of the same largeness. As∣soon as the Ambassador enter'd, he sat down on the Coverlet, and Cushions were brought to the Alcayd: Then the Ambassador rose up, saying, that Frenchmen were not accu∣stom'd to sit so low; but the Alcayd, who knew his meaning, reply'd, that this Enter∣view was not to be made a Precedent, and that he did not pretend to entertain him with all the Ceremonies of a formal Reception; in the mean time he order'd two Cushi∣ons to be laid one above another, and the Ambassador sate down upon 'em. After they had discours'd a quarter of an Hour, the Collation was brought in, consisting of March-panes, which were taken out of a Wicker-Basket, and laid upon a piece of Spa∣nish-Leather after the manner of a Table-Cloth, adorn'd with some Cyphers: Then they presented Nuts and Raisins, with very white, but very bad, Bread. All the Company drunk outof the same Pot or Dish, which was made of Wood in form of a Porringer, and adorn'd on the out-side with Silver-Gilt. The Banquet ended, they mounted on Horse-back, the Infantry march∣ing in the Wings, and the Horse in the Front, who, as often as they met with plain Fields, divided themselves into two Squa∣drons, representing the Moorish way of fight∣ing with Lances. Some of the bravest of 'em broke out of their Ranks, and having
darted their Lances into the opposite Squa∣dron, gallop'd back to their own, with some of the other Party at their Heels. Then the whole Squadrons engag'd without observing any Order, and after they had fir'd, the Commander, who march'd in the Front, fell back to the Rear, galloping, and calling on his Men, whom he rally'd, and put into Order: And sometimes one of the Squadrons kept their Ground, expecting the Assault of the Enemy. They engag'd after the same manner nine or ten times before they reach'd the Town, where the French arriv'd about four a-clock, and the Ambas∣sador was carry'd to a little and ill-furnish'd, but not unpleasant, House, which they told him was the King's. There is a Bason or Pond surrounded with Orange-Trees before the Gate; and the Garden is adorn'd with several Arbours of Fruit-Trees. The Alcayd sent to inform the King of the Ambassa∣dor's Arrival, and receiv'd an Answer on the 4th. of November; but the bad Weather which lasted till the 14th. and the Ambas∣sador's Indisposition retarded his Journey for some time. Mehemed brought the Horses that were prepar'd for him, magnifying the Care he had taken to procure so great a number: And when he was ready to de∣part, the Alcayd came to him on Horse∣back, and enquir'd whether he wanted any thing; after which he went to the Alcayd's House, and thank'd him for all his Civili∣ties; and that Officer not only return'd a
very obliging Answer, but offer'd the Am∣bassadour three or four Thousand Crowns, if he stood in need of such a Summ. Then the Company took Horse, and the Mus∣quetiers who were at the Gate, saluted the Ambassador, as he passd by, with a Volley of all their Musquets. The first Village they saw on the Road is call'd Dezutburg, where the Lord of the Place accommodates all Persons with Lodgings gratis, and has some∣times fed two hundred at one time. They travelld till the 14th. thro' a Mountainous and almost uninhabited Country, where there is no Water, but great abundance of Partridges. The 14th. they encamp'd near Alcaza, where the Ambassador was compli∣mented by the Alcayd, Brother to him of Tetuan. He wore a large Robe or Gown of black Velvet spangl'd with Gold, and rode on a very fine Horse, who was of a large size for one of Barbary, and magni∣ficently harnass'd with red Velvet, adorn'd with little Plates of Gold: Two Slaves held the Reins of his Bridle, and there was a great deal of massy Gold on the Head-Stall and Throat-Band. He was accompa∣ny'd with his Son, who was mounted on a Horse of the same kind; and his Train consisted of 100 Horse, and a like number of Foot. After some mutual Compliments he retir'd, wheeling, and managing his Horse, he and all his Horsemen, as his Brother and his Company did at Tetuan. The whole Journey to Salley was very trou∣blesome
to the Ambassadour's Retinue; the Ways were generally hard to be found, the Meat was bad, and they were forc'd to keep themselves always in a Posture of Defence, both because of the Robbers, who came very near their Tents in the Night, and the Lions with which that Country abounds. On the 20th. they were met by Midy Aly Manino, Lieutenant of the Polity or Civil Govern∣ment of Salley, and Brother of the Alcayd of that City, where they arriv'd in the Evening, and abode two days, their Tables being much better furnish'd than they were upon the Road. The Ambassadour, according to the usual Custom, receiv'd many Compli∣ments and Presents of Passara, Dates, and some Hens, and Sheep. The Inhabitants of most of the Villages thro' which they pass'd, receiv'd 'em with loud Acclamations of Joy, some of 'em shew'd their Dexterity in Leap∣ing, and Horse-Races were never omitted. They found neither Bridges nor Boats on the Rivers, but were forc'd to pass 'em on Lea∣thern Bags stuff'd with Wind. Two Days before they arriv'd in the Camp, they pass'd by a Place where there are 150 Wells or Pits, call'd in the Map, Centum Putei, which are of great use in a Country wholly destitute of Water, but that which proceeds from Rain, and is preserv'd in those Pits. The 9th. of December they pass'd by a paltry Fort, where the Grand Vizier lay, having been lately wounded with a Musquet-shot by a cer∣tain Moor, who fled to Muly Hamet, King of
Suz: and they observ'd a Guard of 150 Musquetiers at the Gate. The 10th. the King sent four Horse-Men for the Ambassadour, who immediately set forward, and arriv'd in the Camp on the Day of the Great Festival of the Bayran, which the Moors were cele∣brating with many Expressions of Joy, and Sacrifices of Camels and Sheep. As the French approach'd the Place of Sacrifices they perceiv'd four Men mounted on Mules full of little Bells, who were stain'd with the Blood of Victims which they had sacrific'd before the King. All the Alcayds of the Kingdom are oblig'd to be present at that Solemnity, and that Monarch sent to tell the Count of S. Amand, that he might advance further and take a nearer View of the Ceremonies. As∣soon as he approach'd, the King retir'd un∣seen, and put himself at the Head of 2000 Horse, with whom he attack'd a like Number of others: the Engagement lasted 3 Hours, and they fir'd their Musquets charg'd with Powder in one anothers Faces; after which the King sent an Alcayd to compliment the Ambassador, and to acquaint him that by rea∣son of the Solemnity of the Festival he cou'd not give him Audience till the next Day. Then the Ambassadour with his Train was carry'd to a Place 50 Paces distant from the Camp, where he was attended next Morn∣ing by an Alcayd, who conducted him to the Audience. All the Company took Horse, and alighted when they drew near to the King's Tent, who when he perceiv'd the Am∣bassadour
at the distance of 10 Paces, said to him thrice, Cayba, which signifies, You are welcome. Then all the Ambassadour's Atten∣dants put on their Hats; and the King sur∣priz'd at their Boldness, broke forth into this Expression, That the French were not Cow∣ards like those of other Nations: after which preventing the Ambassadour he said, That he was glad to see him in good Health; that the Country from whence he came was much more remote than Constantinople; that he was resolv'd to execute the Treaty of Peace concluded by his Ambassadours; and that the Mussulmans were always Religious Observers of their Word. Then he enter'd into a Discourse concerning Religion, say∣ing, There was only One God, the Lord of all things; and the Ambassadour answer'd, That the Christians were of the same Opinion. The King reply'd, That what he said was only in obedience to the Precepts of his Religion, which oblig'd him to advise all Men to em∣brace the Mussulman Faith, which he believ'd was the best: and the Ambassadour answer'd, That he was extremely oblig'd to his Majesty for his kind Intentions; but that he was resolv'd never to forsake that Religion in which he was educated. Then the King, insisting still on that Subject, ask'd the Reason, Why Chri∣stians believe that there is a God the Son: but the Ambassador being persuaded that 'twou'd be in vain for him to return a Formal An∣swer, reply'd, That he cou'd not pretend to so much Skill in Divinity, as to dispute
with his Majesty about those Controversies. He had prepar'd a Harangue, but the King always interrupted him with asking Questi∣ons, and at last told him, That he was sensi∣ble of the Difference between the Empe∣rour of France and other Monarchs, who do not govern by their own Authority. The Ambassador reply'd, That 'twas very rea∣sonable that two so great Emperours, who agreed in their Opinions, and observ'd the same Methods of Government, shou'd be link'd together by the mutual Ties of a per∣fect Friendship. Then he presented his Ma∣jesty's Letter, enclos'd in a Case of Lea∣ther brought from the Levant, embroider'd with Gold and Silver, together with the In∣terpretation in Arabic Characters. The King of Morocco receiv'd it smiling; and smelling the Case as he open'd it, after he had admir'd the Embroidery, he ask'd, whether they dress'd Leather with Amber-grise; and the Ambassador answer'd, That he was wholly ignorant of those Matters. Then the King call'd two English Renegado's, his Secretaries, and order'd 'em to read and interpret the French Letter, which he heard with a great deal of Pleasure, expressing his Satisfaction by the Motions of his Head, and spent some time in considering his Majesty's Subscripti∣on, and the Seal which was in a distinct Pa∣per, cut all around into the Figure of a Sun, and enclos'd in the Letter. After which he said, that he knew very well that the King was descended in a right Line from Heraclius,
and that never any Emperour before him, had advanc'd the Glory of the French Mo∣narchy to so great a Heighth. The Ambas∣sador answer'd, That he was not ignorant of his Majesty's Royal Descent, and that from Aly, who marry'd the Daughter of the Pro∣phet, all his Predecessors were the Off-spring of Kings. The King reply'd, That he was not of the Royal Family, but of the Race of the Prophet, adding that he sent into France Agy-Aly Manino, who was of one of the greatest Families in the West, without men∣tioning Agy Mehemed Thummin, who pass'd for the Ambassador. The Count of S. Amand was inform'd, that in the King of Morocco's Letter to his Majesty, the Name of Mehemed Thummin was put instead of Aly Manino, by the Interest of his Patron, the Alcayd Timur, who is the most powerful Subject in the Kingdom. The Ambassadour in Answer to the King's last Compliment assur'd his Majesty, that Mehemed Thummin was uni∣versally admir'd in France for his Politeness, and Skill in the Management of State-Affairs. Then they brought some Dates that were newly gather'd, and the King invited the Ambassador to eat; and after they had done eating he mounted his Horse, telling the Am∣bassador that he was going to run with Lances, and desiring him to keep his Eye upon him. These Exercises lasted about two Hours, tho' it rain'd all the while, after which he gave Orders to retire. Not long after the Pre∣sents were brought to him, consisting of two
Fusees very finely wrought, two Cases of Pi∣stols, two large Pendulums for a Closet, two dozen of Watches, twelve Pieces of Gold Brocard, as many Pieces of very fine English Cloth, and some Bottles embroider'd with Gold, of the same Leather with the Letter Case, which was brought from Constantinople. He admir'd above all a Cannon six Foot long, which was not mounted; and, kissing the ground, said, He perceiv'd by those Presents that the French were Men; for they call all other Nations Gyon, that is, a Nation less than Men. The Letter-Case was put into a Ju∣bira or little Bag of Mo-hair, and order'd to be safely preserv'd. The rest of the Day was spent in Discourses concerning the Rati∣fication of the Peace: and the Alcayd Aly, who was appointed Commissioner for that Pur∣pose, with Aly Manino and Mehemed Thummin went to the Ambassador's Tent, and confer'd with him till Two in the Morning: But they were so far from coming to any Conclusion, that they tore all that they had done, alledg∣ing that the Ambassador's Proposals did not tend to a Peace. On the 12th. the Alcayd Aly with his two Associates return'd to the Tent, and after they had spent two Hours in a pri∣vate Conference, took horse to attend the King, and know his Pleasure. Three hours after Aly Manino brought back word, that his Majesty was resolv'd to grant all that the Ambassadour shou'd desire, and even more if it was possible. The next day the Al∣cayd Aly return'd with Aly Manino, and concluded the Treaty with the Ambassador,
who, two hours after, went to receive his Au∣dience of Leave. He found the King on Horse-back, engag'd in his usual Exercises, which lasted till Night, after which his Ma∣jesty sent word to the Ambassador, that 'twas the Hour of Prayer, and that he wou'd speak with him at his coming out; and as∣soon as he came forth he sent the Alcayd Lu∣cas, who had been Ambassador in England, to acquaint him that he had granted all his Proposals. The Ambassador reply'd, that he had nothing more to desire of his Majesty, and that he esteem'd himself too happy in being an Eye-witness of so firm a Peace con∣cluded between two such potent Emperours: after which the Alcayd Lucas return'd with that Answer to the King, who order'd him to bring the Count of S. Amand before him. He found his Majesty standing in the midst of his Camp, who receiv'd him in a very kind and friendly Manner, and after the Ambassador had thank'd him for the favour∣able Treatment he had receiv'd in his Domi∣nions, that Monarch charg'd him to salute the Emperour of France in his Name, and to give him the Salutation of Peace, which is e∣steem'd a very eloquent Phrase in that Coun∣try to express a sincere Affection, nor do they ever use it in speaking to Christians. The King of Morocco is of a middle Stature, neither too great, nor too small; his Air is courteous and inspires Respect, his Gate lof∣ty, and his Mouth somewhat little; he has black Hair, sparkling Eyes, and a Hawk-Nose. He had on his Head a red Cap
wrapt about with a Muslin Turbant, a Da∣ra of a sort of very White Wooll,Which is a kind of Cloth. with another about it of Yellow Da∣mask. The Habit he wore consisted of a Cafetan of Nut-colour'd Cloth, a wide and sleeveless Coat of Gold and Silk, and under that a Haique of white Muslin girt round his Body like a Cloth, with a Shirt of Mail to secure him against private Attempts, a Piece of Caution that may be excus'd in one that has been three or four times in danger of As∣sassination; a green Wast-Coat, and then a Shirt with Sleeves like those of a Surplice. His Boots, or rather Buskins, were of red Leather plaited all over; and his Spurrs of Iron gilt, with a Prick as long as a Bodkin. He had about 200 Horses who were not very beautiful, but they were of a large Size, and seem'd to be very good. His Army consisted of between 40 and 50000 Men, encamp'd (as they fight) without any Order, on Mount Atlas. Sometimes he puts himself at the Head of 10000 Horse to enure 'em to War, for they are only a sort of undisciplin'd Mili∣tia. His usual Guard was then compos'd of 7000 Negro's, and 300 Renegado's cloath'd in Red and Green, besides 200 Pages both Moors and Blacks, who are his Slaves. The Ambassador in his Return was conducted by Bengaraya Son to the King of Talmenin, who provided much better Entertainment for him on the Road, than Mehemed Thummin did in his Journey to the Court, tho' he was treated with all possible Civility in France. It
happen'd by the way, that one of the Am∣bassador's Servants was slightly wounded by a Barbarian, with a Fire-Lock charg'd with Hail-shot: Immediately Bengaraya, without speaking a word, laid his Hand on his Horse, and drawing out his Scymitar, cut off the Heads of three Men, without once enqui∣ring who discharg'd the Piece, and ask'd the Ambassador whether he wou'd have him cut off Fifty Heads more, who reply'd that he was more than satisfi'd with what he had done already: then, said he, you must give me an Acquittance under your Hand, for, without that, if the King shou'd be inform'd that I have only cut off three Heads, he wou'd certainly take off mine. The Am∣bassador granted his Desire, and learn'd after∣wards that the Bassa of Morocco, who commands under the King's Brother, passing by the Place where the Accident happen'd, had caus'd 20 Barbarians to be beheaded, and sent 50 more to Morocco, where they were kept Prisoners. In most Places the Ambassa∣dor was receiv'd with extraordinary Respect, and even the Women came forth to meet him shouting for Joy, tho' that Honour is by Custom appropriated to the King. He arriv'd at Tetuan on the 19th. and the 22th. the Con∣sul of Salley, Aly Manino, Benachey, the Ad∣miral Ben Joseph, and the Alcayd Lucas, Kee∣per of the Seals, gave him the Letters direct∣ed to his Majesty, which were seal'd on the Out-side. And after he had receiv'd Satis∣faction for the Vessel taken by the Salley-Bark,
he went on board the Valiant,  and arriv'd at Toulon on the 14th. of April 1683, with twenty French Slaves, whom the Em∣perour of Morocco sent for a Present to his Majesty. At the same time that Colbert neglected no Opportunities of displaying his Master's Grandeur in foreign Countries, he apply'd himself with his usual Diligence to the Re∣gulation of Affairs at Home: He injoyn'd a rigorous Execution of the Orders that ex∣clude those who are not arriv'd at the Age appointed by Law, or have Relations in the prohibited Degrees already in Office, from being admitted into the Superiour Courts: But when he perceiv'd how much the Offices of Judicature were disregarded since their Prices were fixt, he thought fit, in some measure, to mitigate that Severity; and to facilitate the filling up of those pla∣ces, he persuaded the King to grant Dispen∣sations till the end of the Year 1686, at the rate of 1500 Livres for each prohibited Relation, and as much for the defect of Age. The same Minister being inform'd that the Money rais'd by the Duties grant∣ed to the Cities and Corporations for the payment of their Debts, was diverted to other uses, procur'd an Order of Council bearing Date the 13th. of March 1683, by which the Mayors, Echevins, Consuls, and other Officers who had receiv'd those Summs, were oblig'd to give an Account of 'em in three Months, before the Intendants of their
respective Generalities.  Colbert obtain'd also the Publication of another Edict, to restrain those that were possess'd of Offices in Courts of Judicature, from making use of their Au∣thority to defraud their Creditors: And the better to regulate the Distribution of the Valuation, 'twas ordain'd by the same E∣dict, that Opponents to the Seal shall be preferr'd before all other Creditors, tho' they be priviledg'd Persons, who have ne∣glected that Circumstance, and even before those who have obtain'd an actual Seizure of the Benefits of the Offices; and that of those Opponents such as are priviledg'd shall be first paid; that afterwards the Mortga∣gees shall be rank'd according to the or∣der of their respective Mortgages, and that the Overplus of the Valuation shall be shar'd among the Creditors that have only Bills or Notes for their Assurance. The same Edict ordains, that six Months after the seizure of the Benefits of Offices in Superiour Courts, and three Months in the Subaltern Courts, the Creditors may obtain an Or∣der, obliging the Titulary Possessor to constitute an Attorney ad resignandum, in default of which, the Judgment awarded shall have the force of a Warrant of At∣torney; and that three Years after the De∣claration of a Judgment, if it be confirm'd by a Sentence, or if there be no Appeal made from it, the Officer shall remain abso∣lutely prohibited and incapacitated to dis∣charge his Office.
Colbert being inform'd that the Pyrates of Algiers continu'd still to disturb his Maje∣sty's Subjects in the prosecution of their Trade, resolv'd either to destroy 'em irre∣coverably, or to force 'em to beg a Peace: And in order to the accomplishment of that Design, he sent his Son, the Marquess de Seignelay, to Provence, to hasten the depar∣ture of the Fleet. Immediately after his Arrival at Marseilles, he took a review of the Galleys, which he found in very good order, especially the sixteen that were fitted out by his Majesty's Orders. He visited al∣so the Harbour, Magazins, and Hospital, and then went to Toulon, to dispatch the Marquess du Quêne on the design'd Expedi∣tion, with the Galleys and other Vessels of his Majesty's Navy. After the departure of the Fleet, the Chevalier de Lery, by the way, took a Pyrate of Algiers, of eighteen Guns, and one hundred and fifty Men, in which he found thirty Christian Slaves, whom he set at liberty. And the Marquess d' Amfreville sunk a Bark belonging to the same Pyrates, and retook a Vessel laden with Marble, which they were sending to Algiers. The News of this Expedition drove all the Pyrates into their Harbour, except two Caravells, two Barks, and another Vessel, that were sail'd to Constantinople. The Marquess du Quêne set sail from Toulon, May 6th. 1683, with six Men of War, having order'd the Galleys, Bomb-Vessels, Pinnaces, and other Vessels, to meet at the Islands call'd Fromentieres,
near Yvica. Some Days after he met with a Storm, and was forc'd to spend some time in refitting his Ships; after which he set sail on the 18th. and arriv'd on the 4th. of June at the appointed Rendezvous, after he had scowr'd the Coast of Catalonia. He was joyn'd on the 9th. by the Bomb-Ves∣sels and Pinnaces, and proceeded on his in∣tended Voyage without the Galleys, who were not yet come up. On the 18th. he discover'd the Road of Algiers, where he found the Marquess d' Amfreville, who had lately retaken an English Ship from a Py∣rate that pretended to belong to Tetuan, but had a Commission from Algiers: And in the same place he was joyn'd by Sep∣teme, Vilette, du Merré, and S. Mars-Colbert. He order'd his Ships to Anchor as near the Port as they cou'd, but without Cannon∣shot, and posted nine of 'em at equal di∣stances, in a crooked Line, resembling the Figure of the Mole. These were the Fleu∣ron, Firm, Syren, Prudent, Amiable, Vigilant, Laurel, Sea-horse, and Star, commanded by the Count d' Etrées, the Chevalier de Tour∣ville, the Count de Sepville, the Chevalier de Lery, Septeme, the Marquess d' Amfreville, the Marquess du Quêne the Son, Bellile, and the Commander des Goutes. The seven first were order'd to carry each an Anchor, with mid∣dle-siz'd Cables, having one end fasten'd to the Ship, within 600 Toises of the Mole, to serve for the Towing of the Galleys to their respective Posts; and the Sea-horse and
Star had orders to carry their Anchors for Towing nearer the Town than the other seven, that advancing by the help of their Anchors, they might lie on the Wings and Flank, and support the Bomb-Vessels, if they shou'd be attack'd by the Enemy; for the Marquess du Quêne had receiv'd Advice, that the Algerines had prepar'd two arm'd Galleys, and other light Vessels for that pur∣pose; and besides, he order'd the Anchors to be cast nearer to each other than the distances between the Men of War, that their Front being contracted, they might be more easily supported by the Men of War post∣ed on the Wings, and that the Vessels might not be endanger'd by the changes of Wind and Tide. The Bomb-Vessels were the Ful∣minant, Thunderer, Brulante, Bombard, Cruel, Menaçante, and Ardent, commanded by Che∣vigny, Piaudiere, la Motte d' Eran, de Combes, de Poenti, Goestin, and du Quêne-Monier. Be∣sides the usual Complement of the Galleys, the Marquess order'd ten Soldiers of the Ma∣rine Guard, ten Granadiers, and as many chosen Soldiers to embark on each of 'em; and appointed two Pinnaces or arm'd Boats to attend each Bomb-Vessel, and two Corps de Guard of those Boats to support the rest. The 21st. and 22d. were spent in taking up the Posts, and other necessary Preparations. The 23d. the Captains of the Ships carry'd in their Towing-Anchors; the Chevalier de Tourville carry'd the Anchor of the Vessel that was to be posted next the North, and
the Marquess d' Amfreville the Anchor of that which was to be posted towards the South. The Chevalier de Lery carry'd the middle Anchor; and those of the Intervals were carry'd by the Commanders of the Ships to which the Cables were fasten'd. All these Orders were executed without the least Opposition from the Enemy, who imagin'd that the French made these Motions only to observe the Mole, and try the reach of their Guns; for the Work was carry'd on with so much exactness, that the Enemy saw neither the Anchors nor Cables. The rest of the Day was spent in preparing the Bombs and Mortars; and in the Evening Raymondis, Major of the Fleet, receiv'd Or∣ders to appoint a Guard of Pinnaces to prevent the Enemies from weighing the Anchors during the Night; but they kept close in the Port. The 24th. no Attempt cou'd be made, by reason of the bad Wea∣ther, which continu'd also on the 25th, but at Night was succeeded by a perfect Calm; and therefore the Marquess du Quêne gave the Signal for the Bomb-Vessels to advance in order; the Men of War took up their Posts on the Wings, and the Major sent part of the arm'd Boats towards the Ves∣sels on the North, and the rest towards those on the South. Each Bomb-Ves∣sel was accompany'd with two Boats, and two others were plac'd near the Entry of the Port, with two light Boats furnish'd with Matches and Trains, which they were
order'd to fire if the Enemy shou'd venture out of the Port, for a Signal to all the arm'd Boats on the Wings to advance to the relief of the Galleys. The Bomb-Vessels did not begin to play till one a-clock in the Morning, because the roughness of the Sea hinderd their Approach: They conti∣nu'd firing two Hours, and threw ninety Bombs, which fell (at least almost all of 'em) either in the Port, on the Mole, or in the City. In the mean time the Chevaliers de Tourville, and de Lery, with the principal Officers, went about in their Boats to give necessary Orders, with an extraordinary Bravery and Diligence. Assoon as the E∣nemy saw the Mortars planted, they play'd furiously with their Great Guns, and fir'd above 600 Shot. They had kindl'd great Fires on the Mole, to discover the Bomb-Vessels and Boats; and always when they perceiv'd the Fire of the Mortars, they im∣mediately discharg'd all their Guns, but without doing any Execution. The Bombs made a prodigious havock, as the Slaves afterwards related: Several arm'd Barks that were in the Port were sunk in an instant. Some of the Bombs falling on the Batte∣ries, dismounted several Pieces of Cannon; and those which fell into the City kill'd a great number of Persons. Several Hou∣ses were thrown down, and many of the Inhabitants buried under the Ruins. After the Bomb-Vessels had continu'd firing for two Hours with so great Success, the Mar∣quess
du Quêne thought fit to give the Sig∣nal of Retreat by firing two Guns, be∣cause there arose a Land-Wind which wou'd have endanger'd the Bomb-Vessels. The 27th. in the Evening, perceiving the Sea to be calm, he commanded the Bomb-Vessels to advance in the same Order as before; and they threw in about 120 Bombs with extraordinary Success, while the Enemy made a continual fire with their Cannon. The French lost only Choiseul d' Ambouville, En∣sign of the Prudent, who was kill'd, with two Soldiers in a Boat, by the same Shot. Some of the Enemy's Bullets reach'd the Bomb-Vessels, and the Ardent, commanded by du Quêne Monier, which lay next the Mole, receiv'd several Shot without any damage, by reason of the singlar Artifice with which she, as well as the rest, were contriv'd. At last there arose so furious a Land-Wind, and the Sea grew so rough, that the Bomb-Vessels were forc'd to retire to the Ships that supported 'em, because all the Towing-Anchors were set a-drift by the Storm. The Bombs that were thrown this Night did greater execution than before: For one of 'em falling upon the Watch-Tower, and rolling downwards, disorder'd the Batteries, and kill'd several Officers of the Artillery; and most of the rest fell ei∣ther into the City, or upon the Mole, which were very much shatter'd by 'em. Assoon as the Galleys retir'd, there arose a Mutiny in the Town, and a great number
of Women, not able to support the cruelty of their Disasters, went in a desperate man∣ner to the Bassa, Dey, and principal Officers, some carrying their mangl'd Children, and others the Arms and Heads of their Hus∣bands and Relations that were kill'd by the Bombs. The Soldiery were also accessory to the Mutiny, and accus'd Baba-Hassan in a threatning manner, as the Author of the Breach with France, and consequently of the Misery of Algiers: Their Commanders protested they were and wou'd always be ready to march against their Enemies, but added, that they wou'd not be thus kill'd in their Houses; and went boldly to the Bassa's House, requiring him to inflict a due Punishment on Baba-Hassan, and make a Peace with France. In compliance with their Desires, the Bassa, whose Office does not entitle him to an absolute Authority in the City, call'd a meeting of the Di∣van, on the 20th. early in the Morning, and after he had prepar'd their Minds with a pathetic Declamation against Baba-Hassan, he endeavour'd to convince 'em of the ne∣necessity of desiring a Peace from the Ge∣neral of the French Fleet, adding, that if they refus'd to take that Course, which was the only way to save the City from utter Destruction, he was resolv'd to retire to Tu∣nis, and write to the Grand Signior that Ba∣ba-Hassan had ruin'd Algiers, and made it incapable of paying the usual Tribute to his Highness. The Principal Members of the
Divan and Military Officers were so mov'd by these Remonstrances, that they agreed unanimously to follow his Advice: And in pursuance of that Resolution, they deputed a particular Friend of Baba-Hassan, whom they sent, with an Interpreter, in a Pinnace with a white Flag, and oblig'd the Missio∣nary le Vacher, to accompany him. They arriv'd about nine in the Morning, at the Admiral's Vessel, who without suffering 'em to come on board, order'd 'em to retire behind the Ship, where they might deliver their Proposals, and receive an Answer from the Deck: But being inform'd by le Vacher, of the Secret of the Message, he permitted the Deputy and his Interpreter to come on board, and answer'd 'em in Wri∣ting, to prevent both Mistakes and Misre∣presentations; that he wou'd not hearken to any Proposals of Peace, till they had free∣ly discharg'd and set at liberty all their French Slaves, and even those of other Na∣tions whom they had taken on board French Ships. At last, after several Comings and Goings, 141 Slaves were brought on board the Admiral, among whom was Beaujeu, a Captain of one of his Majesty's Ships, who was taken in a small Vessel, and sold for 11200 Piasters; and the Depu∣ty who accompany'd 'em, assur'd the Ad∣miral, that there was Orders given to ga∣ther together all the French Slaves, and those that were taken under the Banner of France, and to restore 'em without delay. He de∣manded
also (in Baba-Hassan's Name) the liberty of the Reys, and other Algerines that were taken by de Lery in his way to Algiers, but cou'd not obtain a favourable Answer. On the 30th. of June, and 1st. of July, he brought 276 Slaves more; and after several earnest Solicitations, obtain'd the liberty of the Reys. The remaining Slaves were also freed, and brought on board before the 5th. and among the rest, four Women, one of Marseilles, and three of Messina. Thus his Majesty humbl'd the Insolence of those haughty Pyrates, who imagin'd themselves to be secur'd from the danger of being at∣tack'd in their Port, after the unsuccessful Attempt of the Emperour Charles V. The Joy with which Colbert receiv'd the News of the happy Success of his Maje∣sty's Arms at Sea, and his desire to out∣strip the Marquess of Louvois, who for a long time had been the Object of his Jea∣lousie, made him strive with so much ea∣gerness to discharge the Duties of so many several Offices, that at last he sunk under that perpetual and insupportable Load of Cares, and the fatal violence of his last Di∣sease, occasion'd by a Stone in the Kidneys, which put an end to his Life on the 6th. of September 1683, at the Age of Sixty four Years. He was assisted at his Death by Cornoüaille, Vicar of St. Eustachius, and that ce∣lebrated Preacher, Father Bourdaloüe, the Je∣suit: And the Ceremony of his Interrment was perform'd in the Night, under a Guard
of the Soldiers of the Watch, to prevent the Fury of his implacable Enemies, the Inha∣bitants of Paris. His Children erected a stately Monu∣ment to his Memory, in the Church of St. Eustachius, where his Bust of White Mar∣ble is to be seen, of very curious Work∣manship. His Death was made the Subject of many Verses, of which those that follow are agreeable to the Account of his Birth, in the beginning of this History: Colbert's dead—I'm sure he's dead; I saw his breathless Body laid On a Bed of mournful State, With all the solemn Pomp of Fate. I softly walk'd, and often stood, And long the pleasing Object view'd. Each Room Death's Sable Liv'ry wore, And all the Marks of Sorrow bore; Splendid Sorrow reign'd o'er all; Sorrow cover'd every Wall. At last I spy'd a Fellow grinning, And heard him whisper out his meaning: Pray, Sir, what makes you look so sullen? D'ye grudge the waste of so much Woollen? Cou'd less be done, good Mr. Gaper, In honour of old Dad the Draper? The Manuscripts and most curious Pie∣ces of that numerous Collection of Books which he left, were taken out of Cardinal Mazarin's Library, who entrusted him with the Administration of that part of his Goods:
for he sent only the most common Pieces to the College of the Four Nations, contrary to the Will of his Benefactor, who left his Library for the Use and Instruction of the Students of that College. His Offices were divided after his Death: That of Comptroller-General of the Finances was given to Claude le Pelletier, Counsellour of State, who had formerly been Counsellour in the Parliament, President of the Court of Inquests, Provost of the Merchants, and was afterwards made Counsellour of State in Ordinary: He had also been Tutor to the Children of John-Baptist Gaston, Duke of Orleans, and acquir'd a great deal of Ho∣nour by his wise Management of that Trust. He was an exact and judicious Person, and a good Judge; but his unac∣quaintedness with the Affairs of the Finan∣ces made him so slow in dispatching 'em, that no less skilful a Successor than Pont∣chartrain, cou'd have prevented the ill con∣sequences of his Remissness. The Office of Superintendant of the Buildings was bestow'd on Michael-Francis le Tellier, Marquess of Lou∣vois, Minister and Secretary of State, with the Protectorship of the Academy of Painting; tho' Julius-Armand Colbert, Marquess of Blain∣ville, Son of the Deceas'd, had obtain'd the Reversion of the Office of Superintendant. So that of all his Places, only the Offices of Secretary of State, and of Commander and Great Treasurer of his Majesty's Orders re∣main'd in the Family, which were given
to the Marquess of Seignelay, whose Chara∣cter was perfectly opposite to that of his Father. For the Son's Magnificence was as remarkable as his Father's Frugality: His Table was sumptuous, and his Furniture splendid and rich: He had a Closet set round with Looking-Glasses, and another Wainscotted with Calamba-Wood, which was brought by his Orders from Siam: He bought of Alvarez a Collection of Italian Pictures and Statues, to the value of 300000 Livres, part of which he paid in Pass-ports, and in the Ships that he lent him. He was Master of a great deal of Learning and Politeness; but never any Man exceeded him in Vanity; and he was an immode∣rate lover of Pleasures. He was twice Mar∣ry'd, first with Mary Margaret, Marchioness of Alegre, whose Fortune amounted to above 60000 Livres, Yearly Revenue, and after her Death with Katharin Teresa de Matignen, Daughter of the Count de Thorigny, his Ma∣jesty's Lieutenant-General in Normandy, and of Frances de le Luthumiere. The Marchioness of Alegre cou'd not easily be persuaded to Marry a Husband of so mean birth, but Colbert had gain'd the Marquesses d' Alegre and d' Urfé, the Uncles and Guardians of that rich Heiress. In consideration of this Match, the Bishoprick of Limoges was be∣stow'd on the Count de Sommerive, the Son of the latter; and the Father obtain'd recommendatory Letters to the principal Officers in the Parliament of Bourdeaux,
where he had an important Suit depending, against his Nephew the Count de Mailly, about the Inheritance of the Dutchess of Crouy. The Marchioness de Seignelay's Con∣tempt of her Husband occasion'd frequent Quarrels between 'em; and the Marquess, who was naturally of a haughty Temper, was once so transported with Fury, that he gave her a Blow, which cost him a Drubbing that his Father bestow'd on him, for the Im∣provement of his Manners: But the Basti∣nadoe produc'd no other effect on him, than the Indian Root, with which Boccace's Joseph attempted to cure his Wife of her Sawciness. After that Lady's Death, the Duke of Bournonville offer'd his Daughter, who was also very rich, to supply her place; but Colbert refus'd the Match, knowing that the Duke (who was Fouquet's intimate Friend) hop'd by that means to be rein∣stated in the Government of Paris, which he injoy'd during Cardinal Mazarin's Life. The Marquess de Blainville having lost all hope of his Superintendantship, resolv'd to depend on his Sword for the Advancement of his Fortune, and contented himself at present with the mean Preferment of a Lieutenant's Place in the Regiment of Picardy. Anthony Mar∣tin Colbert, tho' scarce a Gentleman, was (as I hinted before) receiv'd Knight of Malta, during the Life of his Father; and a Com∣mander, to flatter both, said aloud at his coming out, that the young Pretender had
pass'd his Four Quarters. Moreri derives Colbert's Pedigree from an ancient Scotch Fa∣mily that settl'd in Champaign in the XIII. Age, according to that Author's Opinion, which he grounds on the Epitaph of Ri∣chard Colbert, at the Church of the Corde∣liers at Rheims, accompany'd with the Arms of that Family: But that Proof is of no force, for the alledg'd Inscription was pla∣ced there, when Colbert design'd to pro∣cure the Honour of the Maltese Knighthood for his Son, as appears by the Testimony of the old Inhabitants of that City, who affirm that formerly there was no Engra∣ving on the Tomb. Giles Menage, a pro∣fess'd Wit, and one of Colbert's Pensioners, attempted to squeeze some new Favours out of him by composing his Genealogy, which he deduc'd from the ancient Kings of Scotland; but that Minister perceiving the obvious grossness of the Flattery, in∣stead of rewarding his Zeal, depriv'd him of his Pension. A memorable Example for those designing Panegyrists, who over-act their Parts, and injure their Patrons by strain'd and fulsom Encomiums. The Che∣valier Colbert was so fortunate in his new Dignity, that he was made Grand Croix de Grace, and General of the Galleys of the Order: But that Preferment serv'd only to hasten his Disgrace, by discovering his Un∣fitness for the suitable Discharge of so great a Trust: For with seven Galleys that were under his command, he had not the
Courage to attack three Tripolin Vessels which he found becalm'd; and his Cowar∣dice wou'd have infallibly ruin'd him, if he had not been protected by the Autho∣rity of his Brother, the Marquess de Seignelay. After that Disaster he left the Sea-Service, and endeavouring to recover his Honour, lost his Life at the Head of the Regiment of Champaign, of which he was Colonel. James Nicholas Colbert, at present Archbishop of Rohan, tho' he had renounc'd the Fair Sex, by entring into the Episcopal Order, cou'd not forbear espousing the Quarrel of his old Mistress, la Certain, and even carry'd his Complaisance so high, as to punish the In∣constancy of her new Lover, Lully, who had forsaken her for the young Brunet, by making the Marquess de Seignelay give him a severe Reprimand, and causing him to be shut up in St. Lazarus's. The difference that happen'd shortly af∣ter between the King and the Republick of Genoa, gave the Marquess de Seignelay an opportunity of discovering the Extent and Variety of his Abilities. His Majesty com∣plain'd that the Genoese entertain'd a closer Correspondence with the Count de Melgar, Governour of Milan, than was consistent with the Neutrality they promis'd to ob∣serve between the two Crowns; that they were fitting out four new Galleys to join those they usually kept in his Catholick Majesty's Service, under the Command of the Duke of Tursis; that they sent Powder
and Bombs to the Algarins, for the burning of his Majesty's Galleys in the Port of Marseilles; That they refus'd to grant a Pas∣sage for the Transportation of the Salt, that by Virtue of an agreement with the Duke of Mantua, was to be carry'd thither from France, and wou'd not suffer him to settle Magazins at Savona; and that they wou'd not do Justice to the Count de Fiesque, by restoring to him the Inheritance of the Count de Lavagne's Estate. The Marquess de St. Olon, the French Resident at Genoa, re∣presented all those Injuries to the Senate, demanding Satisfaction in his Master's Name, and at last declar'd, That if they persisted in their Resolution to launch four new Gal∣leys, his Majesty wou'd interpret that as an Act of Hostility, and command his Sub∣jects to seize not only on these Vessels, but on all that belong'd to the Republick. But all his Remonstrances and Threaten∣ings were slighted by the Genoese, who wou'd not be persuaded to give his Ma∣jesty any Satisfaction; and therefore the Re∣sident took his Audience of Leave, and the Marquess de Seignelay was order'd to make necessary preparations for a Naval Expediti∣on, and even for the Landing of some For∣ces, if the Obstinacy of the Genoese shou'd constrain his Majesty to use 'em with the utmost Rigour. Assoon as the Marquess receiv'd these Orders, he wrote to Bonrepos, Intendant of the Marine, to put 'em in execution, with∣out
acquainting him with the Design; and not long after set forward for Toulon, where he arriv'd on the 26th. of April 1684, and took a Review of the Ships and Galleys. On the 5th. of May he embark'd for the Isles of Hieres, where the General Rendezvous of the Fleet was appointed; and set sail on the 12th. with fourteen Men of War, three light Frigats, ten Galiots or Bomb-Vessels, two Fire-Ships, eight Fly-Boats, se∣venteen Tartans, end twenty Galleys. The Men of War were the Ardent, Ferme, Vali∣ant, Vigilant, Amiable, Parfait, Assuré, Fortuné, S. Jacques, Fleuron, Aquilon, Indien, Capable, and Bizarre, commanded by the Marquess du Quêne, and the Chevalier de Tourville, Lieutenant-Generals; the Marquess d' Amfre∣ville, and the Chevalier de Lery, Comman∣ders of a Squadron, S. Aubin, the Comman∣der des Goutes, Belle-Ile-Erard, the Chevalier du Mené, Septeme, the Marquess de la Porte, the Chevalier de Bellefontain, Forant, la Motte, and Chaumont. The three light Frigats, the Vi∣pere, Trompeuse, and Subtile, were commanded by Clarier, Flôte, and Pelerin. The Galleys were the Reale, Patrone, Invincible, Forte, Vi∣ctoire, Reine, Valeur, Sirene, Grande, Belle, Françoise, Hardie, Amazone, Galante, Ferme, Dauphine, Fleur-de-lis, Couronne, and Perle; un∣der the Command of the Duke de Mortemar, General of the Galleys; the Chevalier de Noüailles, Lieutenant-General; the Chevalier de Bethomas, the Chevalier de Breteüil, the Che∣valier de Janson, Montaulieu, le Sornier, For∣ville,
Maubousquet, the Count de Beüil, the Chevalier de Pennes, the Chevalier de S. Herem, the Chevalier de Rochechoüart, Montfuron, the Chevalier du Cher, the Viscount de Lauzun, the Chevalier de la Fare, the Count du Luc, Bourse Ville, and the Chevalier de Tancour. The Fleet arriv'd before Genoa on the 17th. of May, and the ten Bomb-Vessels which car∣ry'd two Mortars each, were drawn up in a Line at the distance of Cannon-Shot from the Walls, stretching from the Watch-Tower on the Left, to the Fauxbourg de Bi∣sagno on the Right. The Men of War made another Line behind the Bomb-Ves∣sels, at the distance of 200 Toises, with the Galleys divided into two Squadrons. The Day after their Arrival, the Senate deputed six of their Body to offer Proposals, by way of Excuse, to the Marquess de Seigne∣lay, which he rejected, because there was no mention made of giving Satisfaction to his Majesty. And they were even so little in∣clinable to an Accommodation, that after the Deputies were return'd, they began to fire at the French Fleet; which was a sufficient Provocation to oblige the Marquess de Seig∣nelay, to begin the Bombardment, with the Success of ruining several Palaces, and o∣ther Buildings in the Prado. The 20th. some of the Bomb-Vessels were order'd to stand in nearer the Harbour, to play upon those parts of the City that had not yet receiv'd any Damage; and one of the Bombs that were thrown in after that Mo∣tion,
fell upon a Palace at a great distance, whither several Ladies of Quality had re∣tir'd; nor was the Havock they made in the Port less considerable, where several Barks were shatter'd to pieces. The French Bombs wou'd have quickly frighted the Ge∣noese into a Complyance with his Majesty's Desires, if they had not been animated by the Spaniards whom they had receiv'd into the City. And therefore the Marquess de Seignelay seeing that they persisted in their Obstinacy, resolv'd to make a Descent, in order to destroy the fine Palaces in the Fauxbourg of S. Pietro d' Arena. To execute this Design, 1500 Men were detach'd from the Men of War, and 2000 from the Gal∣leys, under the Command of the Duke de Mortemar, and the Chevalier de Tourville: And at the same time a false Attack was made with 700 Men, towards Bisagno, by the Marquess d' Amfreville, who executed his Commission with a great deal of Vigour, tho' in the beginning of the Engagement he receiv'd a Wound in the Thigh, which was very troublesome to him for a long time after. They who were appointed to carry on the true Attack, in the first place made themselves Masters of a Fort that might have cut off their Retreat, and after∣wards drove the Enemy from House to House, possessing themselves of the same Posts which they abandon'd. And after they had almost wholly ruin'd that Faux∣bourg, they retir'd on board the Ships, ha∣ving
lost the Chevalier de Lery, and four or five inferiour Officers. The 29th. of the same Month, the Fleet set sail, and arri∣ved at Toulon on the first of June. The Pope offer'd his Mediation for a Treaty of Peace, which was concluded on the 12th. of February 1685,  on the Terms pro∣pos'd by his Majesty. For to obtain an entire Cessation of all Hostilities, the Geno∣ese submitted to, (and afterwards punctual∣ly perform'd) these Conditions; That the Doge, accompany'd with four Senators, shou'd come in Person to give Satisfaction to his Majesty, and at their return, re-en∣ter into the Possession and Exercises of their Offices; That the Republick shou'd dismiss all the Spanish Troops, reduce the Galleys to their ancient Number, restore or make good all that they had taken from the French, and pay 100000 Crowns to the Count de Fiesque. The Marquess de Seigne∣lay was so pleas'd with the happy Success of this Expedition, that 'twas almost the only Subject of his Discourse; and he caus'd his Picture to be drawn, as he stood in the Reale-Galley, with a General's Batoon in his Hand. The first Office of State that he perform'd after his Return, was the giving Audience to the Ambassadors of Siam. For that Prince being inform'd that his first Ambas∣sadors to France were unfortunately lost at Sea, made choice of two Officers of his Houshold to undertake that Voyage in the
same Quality, and to settle a free Trade and Commerce between his Subjects and the French East-India Company. And the Confidence he repos'd in the Apostolical Missionaries that were in his Dominions, made him desire the Bishop of Metellopolis to appoint one of these Fathers to accom∣pany his Ambassadors in their Voyage to Siam. In complyance with so just a De∣sire, that Prelate made choice of Vachet, an old Missionary of Cochin-China, who, with the two Ambassadors, Okoane Pichey Vallite, and Khonne Pichise or Aiti, six other Siamese, and an Interpreter of the same Nation, em∣bark'd on an English Vessel January 13. 1684. which brought 'em to England, from whence they pass'd to Calice, where they were re∣ceiv'd by the Marquess de Seignelay's Order, and conducted to Paris at the King's Charge. Afterwards the Marquess sent two Coaches to bring 'em to the Audience he had grant∣ed 'em, and receiv'd 'em in his Closet. The Ambassadors at their Entry bowed thrice with their Faces to the Ground, and their Hands joyn'd and lifted up to the Crown of their Head, after the Fashion of their Country: Then they sate down on a piece of Tapestry, and having repeated the principal Articles of their Commission, re∣gulated some of the Articles with him; after which they had Audience of the Mar∣quess de Croissy, with whom they concluded the Treaty.
The Marquess de Seignelay, who succeed∣ed his Father in the Management of Af∣fairs relating to Trade, procur'd an Order of Council, bearing date January 6, 1685, by which his Majesty not only confirms the Licence granted to the Senega-Compa∣ny to Trade on the Coast of Afric, from Cape-Blanc to the River of Sierra-Leona; but expresly prohibits all other Persons whatso∣ever, to drive any Trade or Traffick in those Parts, under the pain of forfeiting their Ships and Commodities, and paying a Fine of 3000 Livres: Revoking, nevertheless, the Privilege granted to the same Company, to engross the whole Trade of the Coast of Guinea, to the Cape of Good Hope; and gi∣ving free leave and permission to all his Majesty's Subjects to Trade on any part of the Coast between the Cape and the Ri∣ver of Sierra-Leona. In February the Mar∣quess de Blainville purchas'd the Office of Great Master of the Ceremonies, of the Mar∣quess de Rodes, and took the usual Oath be∣fore Julius-Henry, then Duke d' Enguien, and now Prince of Condé, Great Master of the King's Houshold. About the same time the King call'd a Meeting of the Clergy at St. Germain en Laye, to conclude on the most proper Me∣thods for the utter extirpation of Calvinism out of his Dominions. His Majesty sent Lewis Boucherat, at present Chancellor of France, and Claude Pelletier, with the Mar∣quess de Seignelay, to communicate his De∣sign
to the Prelates and other Members of that Assembly; and on the 14th. of July the Clergy sent Deputies to acquaint his Majesty with their Resolutions, who were conducted to their Audience, by the Marquess. In pur∣suance of that Advice, the King set forth an Edict, revoking and abrogating the Edict of Nantes in 1698, that of Nimes in 1629, and all other Edicts and Declarations granted in favour of those of the Reformed Religion. The principal Traders of the City of Paris, professing that Religion, met according to the Edict, in the Marquess de Seignelay's House, and in the presence of Achilles de Harlay, then Attorney-General, and now chief President in the Parliament of Paris, and of Nicholas de la Reynie, Lieutenant of the Polity, promised to embrace the Catholick Faith; and their Example was follow'd by a great number of the Masters of the incorpo∣rated Companies of Trades-Men. The King resolving to sup at the Marquess de Seignelay's House at Sceaux on the 16th. of July, 1685. the Marquess prepar'd to Regale him with his usual Magnificence. His Ma∣jesty arriving about half an hour after Six, was receiv'd at his Coming out of his Coach by the Marquess, who conducted him to the Garden, where he with the Dauphiness, and the Dutchess of Orleans, took their Seats in a large Chair with four Places, and as many Umbrella's, carry'd by Men; and the rest of the Ladies of the Court took the Conveniency of other Chairs which they
found there, the Princes and Lords attending his Majesty on Foot. First they enter'd into the Pavilion of the Morning, where in a Cor∣ner there were some of the most able Masters of Instrumental Musick, who diverted the Court with their Consorts for a Quarter of an Hour, after which they continu'd their Walk. When his Majesty arriv'd at the Cas∣cade he heard the agreeable Noise of seve∣ral Haut-Boys mixt with the Murmuring of the Water; the Musicians walking behind the Hedge-Row, which kept them a long time from being perceiv'd, and the same Diversion was renew'd in several Places of the Garden, where the Flutes and Haut-Boys lay conceal'd in the Thickets; in the Orange-House his Majesty was Regal'd with a Consort of Musick pre∣par'd for that Occasion. The Seats were ta∣ken out of the Gallery that ends in the Orange-House, and was separated from it by large Pilasters of Marble, leaning on Façades to which five great Candlesticks were fasten'd, it being already dark. The same Order was observ'd throughout, and at the End of the Place there appear'd two Benches or Stools, on each side along the Declivity of an Am∣phitheatre, above which there was a Galle∣ry; All these Parts were lighted by an infi∣nite number of little Lamps. The Fronts and Pilasters were adorn'd with flat Pieces of Gold-Smiths Work, and Candlesticks for Ta∣pers; the rest of the Orange-House was hung with Tapestry representing a Hunting Match, and the twelve Months of the Year, and
embellish'd with two Rows of Lamps from one end to the other. The Consort being ended, his Majesty came forth at a great Door in the Middle of the Orange-House, and saw on his Right-hand several Walks of Orange-Trees, adorn'd with a great number of Lights plac'd before the Boxes; And after he had march'd about 30 Paces in in one of those Walks, he discover'd a Table in a Green Arbour. The Table was four Foot and three Inches broad, reaching quite round the Canal, but cover'd only in those places that were under the Arbours on the Banks of the Canal, to the Angles on those parts of the Flanks that were form'd into an Amphitheatre, descending by three Degrees towards the Water. The King took his Seat at the Table in the Midst of an Arbour, at one of the Ends of the Canal, and the Dauphin was plac'd in the opposite Arbour, so that there were 38 Foot of Water between 'em; the two sides of the Table were adorn'd with a Wreath of Baskets and Vessels of Porcelane full of Flowers, between the branch'd Candlesticks, and other Machines of Gold∣smiths-Work carrying 25 Tapers; besides which there were others somewhat lower. The Machines of Light were all of a diffe∣rent Contrivance, representing his Majesty's Actions under Allegorical Figures; and the other two Degrees were adorn'd after the the same Manner. The Arbours at each End of the Canal, which cover'd the two parts of the Table where his Majesty and the Dau∣phin
sate, were 18 Foot high, being arch'd after the manner of a Porch, and so artifi∣cially contriv'd, that the Cornices and other parts of the Architecture were easily distin∣guish'd. The Plafond of the place where the King sate was encompass'd with a rais'd Work, but those of the two Wings were flat, and all the Portico's were arch'd and adorn'd with his Majesty's Arms and Cyphers in the Middle. Several Busts and Garlands of Flowers hung also in the Middle of the Arches, and the King's Arbour was cover'd with the like Ornaments. All the Cornices were border'd with 150 branch'd Candle∣sticks, bearing six Tapers each, with a silver Basket full of Flowers between every two Candlesticks. All the Arches were furnish'd with Damask Curtains, ty'd back to the Pi∣lasters, to preserve the Company from Rain, if there shou'd be occasion; and over-against the sides of the Table there were two Cup∣boards of State, supported by great Arches, and crown'd with Arbours, containing 20 Foot in Front, and rising by three Degrees, adorn'd with Multiplying-Glasses, besides seve∣ral Curious Pieces of Gold and Silver-Work, among which there was a great number of branch'd Candlesticks, carrying several Ta∣pers, and besides they were border'd with Boxes of Orange-Trees. The Entertainment consisted of five Courses of the rarest Kinds of Meat and Fruit which cou'd be procur'd in that Season. The King was serv'd by the Marquess de Seignelay, the Dauphiness by le
Bailly Colbert, and the Duke of Orleans by the Marquess de Blainville; and at the other end the Dauphin, and Madam by the Mar∣quess de Maulevrier, During the Repast, they were by turns diverted with the Har∣monious Sounds of Trumpets, Violins, Flutes, Hautboys, and Kettle-Drums; and at the same time there were two Tables prepar'd in the Castle, with twenty or thirty cover'd Places at each, for Persons of Quality at∣tending on the Court; and several others were plac'd in the Garden and Court for the Officers, not forgetting even the Foot-men. Whilst the Marquess de Seignelay was di∣splaying his Magnificence at Home, his Brother-in-Law the Duke de Mortemar, gave illustrious Proofs of his Vigour and Conduct in the Treaty which he concluded with the Pyrates of Tripoli. He arriv'd before that Place the 28th. of July, 1686, and sent such a peremptory Letter to the Dey, that he assembl'd the Divan the same Day; where 'twas resolv'd to grant all that the Duke demanded, excepting only the entire Payment of the 60000 Crowns, being part of the Summ which they were oblig'd to pay by the Treaty concluded in 1685: For they were not then able to advance so con∣siderable a Summ, by reason of their bad Harvest, and of the Civil War that had ha∣rass'd their Country since that time, and was just then terminated by the Death of the Dey, whom the Moors endeavour'd to make Sovereign of the Country. In the
mean time they laded one of the King's Ships with orn; and since they cou'd not restore seven of the Frenchmen that were ask'd of 'em, whom they had sold in se∣veral parts of the Levant, from whence they cou'd not possibly bring 'em back, they deliver'd thirty Strangers instead of the twenty French Slaves that were demanded of 'em, with eleven young Ship-Boys of Provence, whom they had forc'd to renounce Christianity, which they had never before granted by any Treaty whatsoever. The Duke de Mortemar at his Arrival, found five Venetian Men of War and Fly-Boats that were come to Land the Garison and Inhabi∣tants of Navarrens and Modon, which were surrenderd on Articles to the Generalissimo Morosini. The Commander of this Squa∣dron had retain'd some Women, under pre∣text that they were willing to embrace the Christian Faith; and the Dey of Tripoli, on the Complaints made to him by the Husbands and Relations of those Women, had, by way of Reprizal, seiz'd on the whole Crew of a Pinnace belonging to the Venetians. But the Difference was accommodated by the Duke's Mediation, the Women being restor'd to the Turks, and the Mariners of the Pinnace to the Venetians. After which the Duke wrote to the Dey of Tunis, who sent in the Vessel call'd the Granade▪ the rest of the Slaves that were taken un∣der the Banner of France. The next Year the Dey, Divan, and Soldiery of Tripoli sent
to France, Khelyt Aga the Bassa's Deputy, and Hector Aga, a Naval Officer, to present to his Majesty, by way of Tribute, two Dromedaries, six of the finest Horses in the Country, and some Ostriches. These En∣voys arriv'd at Toulon on the 3d. of May, 1687, where they were receiv'd by Vauvre, Intendant of the Marine, and maintain'd at the King's Charge, with their eight Atten∣tendants, during the forty Days they re∣main'd in that Place, to repose themselves and those Animals who had suffer'd very much in the Voyage. At last they set forward by an Order from the Court, ac∣company'd by de Magrie, a Marine Officer in the Toulon Division, and Antonio Boyer, a Native of Malta, to perform the Office of an Interpreter on the Road. On the 10th. of August they came to Charenton, and de Magna went immediately to inform the Marquess de Seignelay of their Arrival. The 22d. they were brought to Versailles, and introduc'd to his Majesty's Presence by the Marquess. After they had made their Com∣pliment in Turkish, which was interpreted by Dipy, they presented the Animals to the King; after which a Moor about eighteen Years old, of a very large Stature both for height and thickness, mounted one of the Dromedaries, harness'd after the Mode of the Country, and galloping about the Court, he rais'd himself with wonderful agility on the Back of that Animal, and having made several whirling Turns, fell back into his
former Posture. Some Days after the Am∣bassadors went to see the Marquess de Seig∣nelay's House, where they were regal'd by his Officers, tho' they had receiv'd neither Orders for the Entertainment, nor so much as Notice of their coming. At their de∣parture the Marquess gave each of 'em in the King's Name, a Gold Chain and Medal, with his Majesty's Picture. In October 1689, the Marquess de Seigne∣lay was made Minister of State; but he did not long enjoy that Dignity, for he dy'd the next Year, three Months after the Dauphiness, as his Father deceas'd some Days after the Queen. His Death was believ'd to be occasion'd by his Debauches, and especially by the Excesses he committed with Women. He was extremely in Love with one of his Mistresses, but did not take care to raise her Fortune, tho' it was not suitable to her Birth. When she was inform'd that there was no hope of his Recovery, and that he suffer'd no Ladies to be brought into his Presence, she dis∣guis'd her self in the Habit of a Courier, and pretending that she had a Pacquet con∣cerning some important Affair to deliver to the Marquess. She was introduc'd into his Chamber, where she discover'd her self to him, and told him, that hearing he was about to undertake a long Journey, she cou'd not forbear bidding him adieu before his departure; and withal, intreated him to remember her Condition. He easily under∣stood
her meaning, but having more pres∣sing Debts to pay, sent her away with a Promise that he would think of her. The Abbot de Fenelon gave him notice of his ap∣proaching Death; and he was so much the more surpriz'd with so unwelcom a Message, that two Days before he had spent eight Hours in doing Business with his Commis∣saries. His Body being open'd, there were found twelve small and very hard Glands in his Breast, and the Rudiments of some others in his Kindneys; his Lungs were found sticking to his Sides, all his Blood was congeal'd, and his Stomach so hard, that they cou'd not open it without some difficulty. The Inventory of his Estate a∣mounted to 1700000 Livres, and might have been much greater, if his Expences had been less extravagant. He left five Boys, of whom the eldest, call'd the Mar∣quess de Loure, being then about seven or eight Years old, some time after obtain'd the Reversion of the Office of Master of the Wardrobe, at present in the possession of the Marquess de la Sale. Lewis Phelippeaux, Count of Pontchartrain, was made Minister and Secretary of State, in room of the Marquess de Seignelay. He had already pass'd thro' the Offices of Coun∣sellor in the Court of Requests in the Par∣liament of Paris, Master of Requests, First President in the Parliament of Bretaign, and Intendant of the Finances, and was then (as he is still) Comptroller-General of the
Finances. The Marquess de Louvois had the Titles of Governour of the Fortifications of Maritime places, and of the ancient Forti∣fications; Great Master of the Races, and Director of the Cloth-Manufactory. And the Office of Commander and Great Trea∣surer of the King's Orders, formerly in the possession of the Marquess de Seigdelay, was given to his Uncle, the Marquess de Croissy, Minister and Secretary of State. Of all Colbert's Sons, at present there are only two remaining, James Nicholas, Archbishop of Rohan, and Lewis, formerly Abbot of Bon∣port, and Prior of Nogent le Rotru, who after the Death of his Brother Charles Count de Sceaux, who was kill'd in Flanders at the Head of the Regiment of Champaign, left a Religious for a Military Life, and was made Commander of the same Regiment which the Marquess de Blanville had com∣manded before him. The END.
THE TABLE OF THE CONTENTS. COlberts's Character Page 1 His Birth and Education 3 His Advancement to the Service of le Tellier, Se∣cretary of State ibid. An Instance of his Exactness and Fidelity to his Master 4 Cardinal Mazarin receives him into his Service 5 His Marriage and Mistresses 6, 7 He is made Intendant of the Finances 9 An Account of the Proceedings against Fouquet, Superintendant of the Finances 10, &c. Fouquet's Kindness to the Burlesque Gazettier 18 Colbert's Avarice ibid. Pelisson comes to Paris 20 His Amours with Mademoiselle de Scudery 21 He writes the History of the French Academy 22 He serves Fouquet ibid. And afterwards Colbert 23 The Council of the Finances erected 24
The New Regulation of the Finances Page 24 Colbert hated and affronted 26 His violent Proceedings against the Officers and Farmers of the Revenue 27 He settles the East and West-India Companies 29 Enlarges and beautifies the Tuilleries ibid. A Description of the King's Statue made by Cava∣lier Bernin 30 Colbert repairs S. Germain, and other Royal Houses 31 The Castle of Clagny describ'd ibid. An Account of Versailles 33, &c. —of Trianon 63 —of the Aqueduct of Versailles 64, &c. —of a Church built by Colbert 68 —of Marly 70, &c. —of Colbert's Palace at Sceaux 76 Colbert's Care to adorn the City of Paris 78 The Academy of Painting and Sculpture erected by his Interest 79 Of the Origin, Constitution, and Progress of that Society 80, &c. A Catalogue of le Brun's Pieces 87 An Account of the Academy of Sciences, with the Works and Inventions of its Members 88, &c. A Description of the Parisian Observatory 91, &c. The uniting of the two Seas undertaken 97 An exact Account of that Work 98, &c. Colbert purchases the Office of Treasurer of the King's Orders 106 Of the Institution of the Orders of S. Michael, and of the Holy Ghost 106, 107 The Prices of Offices regulated 108
The Authority of the Parliaments lessen'd Page 108, &c. Several fine Pieces of Workmanship made by Col∣bert's Order for the Embellishment of Ver∣sailles 111, 112 He sets up a Glass-House 112 And establishes a Point-Manufactory 113 His Daughter marry'd to the D. of Chevreuse 114 He undertakes the Reformation of Courts of Justice, but without Success 115 The Causes of the Litigious Wrangling of Lawyers, and other Inconveniencies relating to the Civil Code, with their proper Remedies 116, &c. Proposals concerning the Government of the City of Paris, and the Redressing of several Abuses that are usually committed there 123, &c. Of lewd Women 125, 126 Of Gaming 127 Of Lending Money on Pledges 128 Of Regulating the Prices of Bread, Wine, Flesh, &c. 128, 129 Colbert examines the Usurpation of Noble Ti∣tles 130 Of the Treaty at Aix la Chapelle 131, 132 Colbert made Secretary of State 133 Suppresses several Offices ibid. Excludes Protestants from the Courts of Justice 134 Proposals for several New Regulations concerning Criminal Courts 135, &c. Reflexions on two Edicts 142 Colbert's Severity to the Parliament of Tho∣louse 143
He procures the Erection of an Ensuring-Office Page 144 Another of his Daughters marry'd to the Duke of S. Aignan 146 The Inconveniencies of Mark'd Paper ibid. Colbert sends his Son, the Marquess de Seignelay, to travel 147 He suppresses Private Courts of Justice ibid. Of the Treaty of Nimmeghen 149 Colbert made Minister of State ibid. An amorous Adventure of the Marquess d' Ormoy Colbert 150, 151 Colbert's Sister made an Abbess 152 An Account of the Casting of Great Guns for the Navy ibid. Colbert's Care to advance his Family 154 He marries his Youngest Daughter to the Duke de Mortemar ibid. The Marquess de Seignelay twice marri'd 156 Colbert's Brother negotiates and concludes the Treaty of Marriage between the Dauphin and the Princess of Bavaria 157 And is made Secretary of State 158 Colbert's Incivility to a Lady ibid. The Marquess de Seignelay accompanies the King to Picardy 159 Colbert excludes Protestants from the Royal Farms 160 His Son, the Abbot, made titulary Archbishop of Car∣thage, and Coadjutor to the Archbp. of Roan ib. The Ceremonies of his Reception at Rohan 161 Theses dedicated to his Majesty, and presented in magnificent Boxes, adorn'd with Emblematical Figures 162
A Frigat built after a New Model Page 163 Encrease of Trade at S. Malo 164 The Duke of Mortemar's Expedition with his Majesty's Galleys 165 The Chevalier de Bethune takes a Pyrate of Salley 166 The Marquess du Quêne chases some Vessels of Tri∣poli into the Port of Chio 168 The Articles of the Treaty of Peace between the French and the Divan of Tripoli 169 Colbert's Kindness to his Nephew Desmarets 170 Of Colbert's Three Sisters ibid. The King views several Curiosities at Paris 171 The Marquess de Seignelay goes to Dunkirk ib. A brief Account of the present King of Morocco's Accession to the Throne, his Wars and Conquests 172 The various Customs and Habits of his Subjects 172, 173 Some of their Religious Rites, with their Opinion concerning Christ 174 The King of Morocco sends an Ambassador to France ibid. Some Instances of the Wit and Politeness of that Envoy 175 Colbert promotes his Brother Edward Francis ib. A short Description of Tournay 176 The Marquess du Quêne's Expedition against Al∣gier ibid. An Account of the Fortifications of the Town and Port 177 An exact Relation of the Bombarding of that Ci∣ty 178, &c.
An Algerin Ship taken by the French Pag. 185 Fine Horses brought from the American Islands 186 Gabaret's Voyage to Martinico ibid. A Description of that Island, and Granada 187 Of Mount S. Martha, the highest Hill in the World ibid. Of the Nation of Pigmies that inhabit the Skirts of the Mountain 188 Portobelo describ'd 189 Description of Havana 193 Of the Bay of las Matanças in the Island of Cuba 194 Of the Streight of Bahama 195 A desperate Action of 4 or 5 Englishmen 196 The French King sends the Count of S. Amand Ambassadour to the King of Morocco ibid. His Arrival and Reception at Tetuan 197 He sets forwards to Alcazan 203 And arrives at Salley 204 Of the Manner of Rejoicing, and Sacrifices of the Moors 205 A particular Relation of the first Audience, and of the Discourse that pass'd between the King and the Ambassadour 206 An Account of the Presents 209 Of the Audience of Leave, and the Conclusion of the Treaty 210 The King of Morocco's Person and Habit de∣scrib'd 210, 211 Of his Forces and Guard 211 An Instance of Moorish Severity 212 The Ambassadour returns to Tetuan ibid.
Colbert regulates some Abuses Page 213 And procures an Edict about the Payment of Debts 214 The Marquess du Quêne's second Expedition a∣gainst Algiers, with a particular Account of the Bombarding of that City 215, &c. The Algerines beg a Peace, and restore the French Slaves 222 Colbert's Death and Burial 223 His Monument 224 Verses on that Occasion ibid. His Library ibid. How his Offices were divided after his Death 225 The Marquess de Seignelay's Character 226 His first and second Marriage ibid. He beats his Wife 227 Of Colbert's pretended Descent from a Scotch Family 228 The Preferment, Disgrace, and Death of one of his Sons, who was made a Knight of Malta 228, 229 An Instance of the Archbishop of Rohan's Affection to his Mistress 229 The Causes of the French King's quarreling with the Republick of Genoa 229, 230 An Account of the Bombarding of that City ibid. &c. The Conditions impos'd on the Genoese 234 Of the Arrival and Negotiation of the Ambassa∣dors of Siam 235 The New Regulation of the African Trade 236 The Revocation of the Edict of Nantes 237
The King is magnificently Regal'd by the Mar∣quess de Seignelay Page 237, &c. The Duke de Mortemar compels the Tripolins to restore their French Slaves 241, 242 An Embassy from Tripoli to France 243 The Marquess de Seignelay made Minister of State 244 His Death ibid. A Story of one of his Mistresses ibid. Of the Dissection of his Body 245. Pontchartrain made Minister of State ibid. The Marquess de Louvois's Offices 246 Of Colbert's Children, who are alive at pre∣sent ibid. The END of the TABLE.
