D129 R11949 12254476 57291
DIDASCALOCOPHUS Or The Deaf and Dumb mans Tutor, To which is added A Discourse of the Nature and number of Double Consonants. Both which Tracts being the first (for what the Author knows) that have been published upon either of the Subjects. By GEO. DALGARNO. printer's device of the University of Oxford, featuring the Sheldonian Theatre Printed at the THEATER in OXFORD, Anno Dom. 1680.
Imprimatur, TIMO. HALTON Vice-Cancel Oxon. Errata. Read Didascalocophus for Cheiralogy, p. 96. l. 7. and p. 104. l. 22. Read use for use, p. 27. l. 1. Read most for least. p. 128. l. 8.
THE INTRODUCTION, With a KEY to the following discourse. ABOUT 20 years agoe, I published, Latiali but rudi Minerva, a Syno∣psis of a Philosophical Grammar and Lexicon; thereby shewing a way to remedy the difficulties and absurdities which all languages are clogg'd with ever since the confu∣sion, or rather since the fall; by cutting off all Redundancy, rectifying all Anomoly, taking a∣way all Ambiguity and Aequivocation, contra∣cting the Primitives to a few number, and even those not to be of a meer arbitrary, but a ratio∣nal Institution; enlarging the bounds of deri∣vation and Composition, for the cause both of Copia and Emphasis. In a word, designing not only to remedie the confusion of Languages, by giving a much more easie medium of communi∣cation then any yet known; but also to cure even Philosophy it self of the disease of Sophisms, and
Logomachies; as also to provide her with more wieldy and mannageable. Instruments of opera∣tion, for defining, dividing, demonstrating, &c. What entertainment this design may meet with in following ages, I am not solicitous to know; but that it has met with so little in this present age, I could give several good reasons, which at present I forbear; intending, if God bless one with life, health, and leisure to do this in a more proper place. To me 'tis enough to have the Testimony of some of the learned men of this present age Dr. Seth Wind now Lord Bishop of Sarum, Dr. John Wilkins late Lord Bishop of Chester, Dr. John Wallis, Dr. William Dittingham. who are best a∣ble to judge in things of this nature, that I have there discovered a secret of Art, which by the learn∣ed men of former ages, has been reckoned among the Desiderate of Learning: To which I may add, that this discovery is made from more ra∣tional, easy, and practicable principles, than e∣ver they imagined to be possible. To this treatise I gave the title of Ars Si∣gnorum, which in compliance with the Dialect of the present Scene, I may properly enough
change to Sematology. This soon after be∣came a fruitful Mother of two Sister-Germans, Didascalocophus, and a Discourse of double Consonants; which having lyen as twins in the womb for many years, at last two severe fits of sickness did midwive them into the world, the latter here in order being Senior to the other by the space of full 7 years. That the argument I have in hand is worthy to be treated of, will readily be confessed by all; but how worthily I have handled it must be judged by a few, to whose candor (passing by all apologies) I freely submit. The former treatise of Sematology had the Universality of all mankind for its object, but had nothing to recommend it but conveniency; This of Di∣dascalocophus, is restrained (at least in its most proper ends and principal effects) to a small number of mankind; but comes recommended with the strongest arguments of Charity and Ne∣cessity. But at present I will dismiss the Mo∣ther, and betake my self to put the Daughter in a proper dress for the following Scene of action. The Soul of Man in this state of union depen∣ding
in its operations upon the bodily Organs; when these are vitiated it must needs follow, that the Soul it self is so far affected, as at least to be hindred in her external functions. Being therefore to treat of a way to cure a weak∣ness that follows humane nature, equally affect∣ing both: I will leave it to the skilful Physician, to discourse of the causes and cure of the Disease, as it concerns the Body, and will apply my self to consider of the means, to cure the better part of the Man, which is the proper work of a Gram∣marian. And because the subject I have in hand is , and more particularly one branch of it, which for what I know, has been hitherto ex professo treated of by no Author: I will first mention all the several wayes of Interpre∣tation, whereby the Soul either doth, or may e∣xert her powers: In doing of which I will be o∣bliged to take the liberty of coyning some new words of Art, which hereafter I will explain. It is true that all the Senses are Intelligen∣cers to the Soul less or more; for tho they have their distinct limits, and proper Objects assigned them by nature; yet she is able to use their ser∣vice
even in the most abstracted Notions, and Arbitrary institution: But with this difference, that Nature seems to have fitted two, Hearing and Seeing, more particularly for her service; And other two Tasting and Smelling, more gross and material, for her dull and heavy con∣sort the Body: whereas the fifth of Touching is of a midle nature, and in a manner equally fitted for the service of both, as will appear in the progress of the following discourse. Wherefore being here to speak of the Interpre∣tation of arbitrary Signs, imprest by the Ratio∣nal Soule (and by it alone) upon the Objects of the Senses, most fitted for that use: I will take notice of the most usual, or at least of the most easy and practicable wayes of Interpretation which either are, or may be. Here reflecting upon Aristotles , and , I expected both his help and Authority, in Analysing the several kinds of Interpretation: But finding little or nothing to this purpose in him, neither indeed in any other Author of old or new Philosophy (as wee now distinguish) that I have happened to look in, I was forced to adventure upon the fol∣lowing
Analysis, for clearing my way, and en∣abling me to discourse the more distinctly on the Subject Argument. Interpretation then in its largest sense, is an act of cognitive power, expressing the inward motions, by outward and sensible Signs: Of this there are three kindes, 1. Su∣pernatural, 2. Natural, 3. Artificial or Insti∣tutional; to which I give the names of Chre∣matology, Physiology, and Sematology. Chre∣matology, is when Almighty God reveals his will by extraordinary means, as dreams, visions, apparitions &c. and this in the division of Arts falls under Divinity. Physiology is when the internal passions, are expressed by such external Signs, as have a natural connexion by way of cause and effect with the passion they discover; as laughing, weeping, frowning, &c. And this way of Interpretation being common to the Brute with Man, belongs to Natural Philosophy: And because this goes not far enough, to serve the Rational Soul, therefore Man has invented Sematology; that is, an Art of impressing the conceits of the mind upon sensible and material Objects, which have not the least shadow of affi∣nity
to the images of the things they carry imprest upon them. And this is Interpretation, in the strictest and most proper sense; and to reduce this wonderful effect of Reason to such Rules of Art as the nature of it requires, is the proper Subject of Ars Signorunt; which according to the commonly recieved distribution of Arts, is nothing else but a Rational Grammar. Sematology then being a General name for all Interpretation by Arbitrary Signs, or (to fol∣low the most usual aims of Art) voces ex in∣stituto; to any of the Senses; It may from the three Senses of Hearing, Seeing, and Touching, whose service the Soul doth chiefly make use of in Interpretation, be divided into Pneumatology; Schematology, and Haptology. Pneumatology, (or if any think Ethology more proper) is Interpretation by Sounds con∣veied thro the Ear; Schematology by Figures to the Eye; and Haptology by a mutual contact, skin to skin. Pneumatology again is divided into Glossology and Aulology: Glossology is a term proper enough for Interpretation by the Tongue, which is the first, and most common Organ of Interpretation at least in Society, and
face to face; for Man in these circumstances —effert animi motus interprete Lingua. Aulology so styled by an easy Trope, interprets by a Musical Instrument; which is fully capable of as much, and manifest distinction as the Tongue, but not so natural and ready an Organ. Schematology is divided into Typology or Grammatology, and Cheirology or Dactylology. By Typology or Grammatology, I understand the impressing of permanent Figures upon solid and consisting matter, which may be done two wayes; either by the Pen and Hand, or by the impression of Stamps prepared for that use; which makes only an accidental difference between Gramma∣tology and Typology. Cheirology or Dactylolo∣gy, as the words import, is Interpretation by the transient motions of the Fingers; which of all other wayes of Interpretation comes nearest to that of the Tongue. Haptology admitting of no Medium, nor distinction of Act and Object, but being body to body, doth therefore admitt of no subdivision. Tho I will not warrant all these Terms from Acyrology; yet I am sure that they will both save me the labour of Periphrasis, and also from using words less proper.
CHAP. I. A Deaf man as capable of understanding and expressing a Language, as a Blind. THO the Soul of man come into the world, Tabula Rasa; yet is it withal, Tabula Cerata; capable thro study and discipline, of having ma∣ny fair, and goodly images, stampt upon it. This capacity is actuated, by the mi∣nistry of bodily Organs. The Organs of the Body, serving the Soul in exerting her powers, in this state of union are four; the Eye and the Ear; the Hand and the Tongue: the first pair fitted for taking in, the other for giving out; Both the one and the other, equally necessary for com∣munication, and society. That the Ear and the Tongue alone, secluding the other two, can perfect a man in knowledge (excepting of some few things which are the proper Objects of seeing) and enable him to express what he knows in Vocal Signs, or a Language
spoken, is known by daily experience in blind people. That an equal degree of knowledge is attainable by the Eye, and expressible by the Hand in Characters, or a Language written, is no less evident in the Theory, for the reasons following. All signs, both vocal, and written, are equally arbitrary and ex instituto. Nei∣ther is there any reason in Nature, why the mind should more easily apprehend, the images of things imprest upon Sounds, than upon Characters; when there is no∣thing either natural, or Symbolical, in the one or the other. Therefore that blind people should come sooner to speak, and understand, than Dumb persons to write, and under∣stand, is not, because there is any more discerning faculty in the Ear, than in the Eye; nor from the Nature of Sounds and Characters, that the one should have a greater fitness then the other to conveigh those Notions imprest upon them, thro the respective doors of the Senses into the Soul; neither that pronounciation of ar∣ticulate words is sooner, or, more easily learned, then written Characters; neither
yet, that the Ear is quicker in perceiving its object then the Eye: But it is from o∣ther accidental causes, and circumstan∣ces, which give the Ear many consider∣able advantages, in the matter of Com∣munication, above the Eye. And yet, e∣ven in this particular, the Eye wants not its own priviledges; which if rightly used, may perhaps outweigh the advantages on the other side. For illustrating this, I will compare a Deaf man with a Blind. 1. The blind man goes to School in his cradle; this so early care is not taken of the Deaf. 2. The blind man is still learn∣ing from all that are about him; For e∣very body he converses with, is a Tutor, and every word he hears, is a lecture to him; by which he either learns what he knew not, or confirms what he had. The Deaf man not being capable of this way of discipline, has no teacher at all: and tho necessity may put him upon contriving, & using a few signs; yet those have no affi∣nity to the Language by which they that are about him do converse amongst them∣selves, and therefore are of little use to him. 3. The Blind man goes thro the
discipline of Language in the best of his time, Childhood, and under the best of Teachers, women and children: The Deaf man is deprived of both these op∣portunities. 4. The blind man learns his Language by the by, and aliud agens; the Deaf cannot attain a language without instruction, and the expence of much time and pains. 5. The deaf man is con∣fined to the circumstances of light, di∣stance, posture of body, both in himself, and him he communicates with: the blind man is free from these streightning cir∣cumstances. Lastly, all the advantages the Ear has above the eye, may be summed up in these two. First, more opportunities of time; secondly, quicker dispatch, or doing more work in less time: Both which may be in a great measure remedied by skill and care; by which if there were a timely applica∣tion made to Deaf persons, I conceive they might be more improved in knowledge; and so their condition be much more happy than that of the blind: which will appear by the following advantages that the Deaf man has above the Blind.
First, the Deaf man has greater advan∣tages of acquiring Real knowledge, than the blind; because the Eye has greater variety of objects then the Ear. 2. The Deaf man has a greater certainty of that knowledge he attains by the Eye, than the Blind can have of that he receives by the Ear; for Pluris est oculatus testis unus, quam auriti decem. 3. As he has the bet∣ter of the other in the knowledge of Na∣ture; so also he exceeds him much, in Speaking and Reading the Language of Nature. For besides reading the Glory, and wisdom of God, in the book of the Creation; he is able also to read much of the minds of men, in the Book of their Countenance; which, seconded with the postures, gestures, actions of the whole body; more particularly, the indications of the hands, feet, fingers, and other cir∣cumstances; laies open much of their in∣side to him: And he, by the same Dumb eloquence is able to notifie his desires to others. Of which way of communication, the blind mans condition renders him wholly uncapable. So that the one is a∣ble to prove himself a man, in any society
of Mankind, all the world over: The o∣ther, take him from the company of his country-men, has little else left him wherewith to difference himself from a brute, but the childish Rhetorick of De∣mocritus, and Heraclitus. But fourthly, to come closer to our purpose with the com∣parison. The Deaf man learns a Lan∣guage by Art, and exercising his rational faculties; the Blind man learns by Rote; so that he gets a language and he himself knows not how. There is therefore as great difference in the point of language between a Deaf and a Blind man (sup∣posing both to have made an equal pro∣gress,) as between one bred in the Uni∣versity, and a Clown that knows not a letter. Fifthly, tho the Blind man have the start of the Deaf, yet the deaf man will be too hard for him at the long run: For he, after he has once got a compe∣tency of language, will be able to help himself, and direct his own course in the further pursuit of all Real knowledge. On the contrary, the blind man who in learning a language needed no particular Guide, because every body was his Guide;
now he is at a stand, and cannot so much as advance one step, without one to lead him. Sixthly, the Deaf man has this great advantage above the Blind, which weighs heavier then all that can be laid in the Scales against it: That he is able to write down his notions, and reflect upon them as often as he will. And now the advan∣tage of having much time for study, and doing much work in little time is as much the Deaf mans, as at first setting out it was the Blind mans. Seventhly, in the su∣perfetation of language the Deaf man will sooner be impregnate with a 2d, or 3d, language then the Blind; insomuch as one language learned by study and Art, is a greater step to facilitate the learning of another, then the mother Tongue which comes by meer use and Rote.
CHAP. II. A Deaf man capable of as Early Instruction in a language as a Blind. TAking it for granted, That Deaf peo∣ple are equal, in the faculties of ap∣prehension, and memory, not only to the Blind; but even to those that have all their senses: and having formerly shewn; that these faculties can as easily receive, and retain, the Images of things, by the conveiance of Figures, thro the Eye, as of Sounds thro the Ear: It will follow, That the Deaf man is, not only, as capa∣ble; but also, as soon capable of Instru∣ction in Letters, as the blind man. And if we compare them, as to their intrinsick powers, has the advantage of him too; insomuch as he has a more distinct and perfect perception, of external Objects, then the other. For the Blind man has no certain knowledge of things without him; but what he receives, from the informa∣tion of the gross sense of Feeling; which,
tho it be a sure intelligencer; yet is its in∣telligence very scanty: For what he re∣ceives by the Ear, is but a second-hand knowledge, depending upon testimony, and the credit of others. So that the ad∣vantages I gave the blind man, at first set∣ting out, are not in his own faculties, but from extrinsick and adventitious helps. Therefore I conceive, there might be succesful addresses made to a Dumb child, even in his cradle; when he begins —risu cognoscere matrem: if the Mother, or, Nurse had but as nimble a hand, as commonly they have a Tongue. For instance, I doubt not but the words, hand, foot, dog, cat, hat, &c. written fair, and as often pre∣sented to the Deaf childs Eye, pointing from the words to the Things and vice versa; as the blind child hears them spo∣ken, would be known, and remembred assoon by the one, as the other. And as I think the Eye to be as docile, as the Ear; so neither see I any reason, but the Hand might be made as tractable an Organ, as the Tongue; and assoon brought to form, if not fair, at least legible Characters, as
the tongue to imitate, and Echo back, ar∣ticulate Sounds. Here it may be doubted; whether it were more advisable, to train up the deaf child in Typology, or Dactylology. For the first, it may be said, That tho the in∣stitution is equally arbitrary in both, and therefore equally easy to the learner: yet, writing is permanent, and therefore gives the young Scholar time to contemplate, and so makes the deeper impression: whereas, pointing to the fingers is tran∣sient, and gone before it can be appre∣hended. This made me at first incline more to writing: But upon further con∣sideration, I judge the other way much more expedient. For tho it cannot be de∣nied, but the permanency of the Chara∣cters is in it self an advantage, if well improved; yet, transient motions, if of∣ten repeated, make as great an impressi∣on upon the memory, as fixt and immov∣able objects. A clear proof of this we have from young ones learning to understand a Language, from the Transient moti∣ons of the tongue: and which is yet more difficult; to imitate the same transient
motions; where, neither can the distin∣ctions be so manifest, nor the formati∣on so easy, as in the Hand-language. Which, as it confirms me; That pointing to the Hand, would be the better way of teaching, so it makes me think: That if closely followed, it might be easier at∣tained, by young ones, then speaking; in∣somuch as the motions of the Hand, are much more easy then those of the tongue. If here it should be objected; That words written are more distinct, and easy to be apprehended; for tho consisting of seve∣ral distinct letters; yet being joyned, they pass in this rude discipline, for one indi∣vidual Sign, for our Scholar is supposed as yet, to understand nothing of the di∣stinction of letters: whereas in pointing to the Fingers; The distinct motions to make up a word, will be more manifest; and so will be a hinderance to the Scho∣lars weak intention, to apprehend that, which is represented by many touches so distinctly, under the Notion of one word. To this I answer. If we compare the action of writing, with pointing to the Fingers, this is much more simple then
that; and therefore less amusing. But secondly, if we compare words written with pointing; this is still not only more simple, and therefore more easily appre∣hended; But also it is as easy to represent a word as one Compositum with a continu∣ed action of the Hand, tho there be ma∣ny distinct pointings, as to make One Word by an aggregate of many distinct letters. Add to this, that pointing to the Hand is capable of more Emphasis; for frequent repetition accompanied with si∣gnificant gestures, will come near to the way of teaching viva voce, which incul∣cates more then the beholding of a stand∣ing object. But here there is need of cau∣tion; That we follow the conduct of Na∣ture; That is, to begin with Words most simple and easy. For we see that young children when they begin to speak are not able to pronounce long words, nor yet all letters. But here the only care to be taken is, to chuse short words; for all let∣ters are equally easy. Now before I pro∣ceed I think it will be very proper to add some thing of the easiness of the whole Task; both to remove prejudices in o∣thers,
and more particularly to encourage the careful Mother the more cheerfully to undertake it. There are many mothers who (to their great praise) do teach their children to Read, even almost before they can speak. And yet (I hope) it will appear from the following considerations; That to read and write upon the Fingers, is much ea∣sier to the learner, than to read and write in Books; there being many difficulties in the one, which are avoided in the other. For, 1. in reading, single letters must be learned; which are very remote, and ab∣stracted from sense, as being but parts of a Signs Sign, e. g. H. is the 4th part of the word Hand, which word written is a sign of the vocal sound, the vocal sound is the immediate sign of the thing it self. 2. Next to this difficulty is the learning to name the same letters in the precise abstracted notion of them a, b, c, d, &c. without bor∣rowing names to them from other things; contrary to what the first fathers of let∣ters have taught us, as appears by their naming the simple elements Aleph, Beth, Gimel, Daleth, &c. And here by the by I
cannot but observe; That we Europeans have been so dull Sholars, as not to take out the lesson: Yea our wise Masters the Grecians in this particular, are the great∣est Dunces of the rest; For others have been truants and taken out no lesson; and they have taken it out false. For they have named them by Barbarous and insignifi∣cant words corrupted from the Hebrew; which is worse then to name them by their own powers alone. Which halluci∣nation of theirs has a remarkable provi∣dence in it; For thereby they have given a convincing proof, and openly confes∣sed (tho they neither designed, nor own∣ed any such thing) that the Doctors of Athens have learned their a b c at the feet of Gamaliel. And here amongst our selves and neighbouring Nations, it is observ∣able, that in this point of discipline, our Dames are wiser than our Doctors: for they find a necessity of bringing home these abstracted notions to young ones senses, by borrowing names from known and familiar things. But if there were one way of naming the simple Elements agreed upon, and this put in all Primers
and Horn-books, it would not only be of good use to children and unskilful Dames; but also the thing being celebrated would give occasion to ingenious allusions and Metaphors, an instance whereof we have in A and Ω in the Greek. But to return to our purpose. A third difficulty in read∣ing is true pronounciation of the simple letters. And 4. joyning them in syllables is yet more difficult; the single letters of∣ten times either quite loosing, or, chang∣ing their powers. And 5. the dividing syl∣lables a right, and joyning them to make words. All which are such difficulties that one may justly wonder how young ones come to get over them: And how late, and with how great pains they are over∣come by some, I appeal to those that know what belongs to the breeding of youth. Now the Deaf child under his Mothers tuition, passes securely by all these Rocks and Quick-sands. The distin∣ction of letters, their names, their powers, their order, the giving them true shape or figure (which answers to others pro∣nouncing true,) the dividing words into Syllables, and of them again making
words, to which may be added Tone, and Accent. None of these puzling niceties hinder his progress. All the teacher has to do, is, to go with one continued mo∣tion over all the points that make up the word, pointing withal to the things. And at first it will be convenient to ini∣tiate the young Scholar with words of few letters. and a near affinity; as, Hat, Cat, Hog, Dog, Hand, Sand. It is true, after he has past the discipline of the Nursery, and comes to learn Grammatically, then he must begin to learn to know letters writ∣ten, by their figure, number, and order. But the rest of the difficulties I have but now mentioned, are proper to the Ear, and therefore do not concern him. And because the advantages the Blind man hath over the Deaf, are more consi∣derably such, in the time of childhood; It cannot be denied, but the blind child, is in a greater capacity of learning the Mother-Tongue then the Deaf: yet so, as skill and care might advance the Deaf child in a vocabulary of the names of vi∣sible Objects, much above what the other can be supposed to get from the common
use of the Mother-Tongue. For the one is still running the same round, in a narrow circle, hearing the same words redun∣dantly: the other might be in a constant progressive motion. And tho I perswade my self, that some time or other, there may be a mother found, who by her own care, and such directions as I am treating of, will lay a good foundation of Language in her Deaf child, even in the first stage of his Minority; yet seeing this is like to be but rara avis, I will advance our blind and deaf Scholars to a higher Form, and place them under a severer discipline then that of the Nursery; which I suppose none will deny them now able to bear: for I will suppose them entred in the 7th year of their age. Together then with this e∣quality of age, let us suppose them every other way equal, in their natural parts, both faculties and inclinations, under Tu∣tors equally both skilful and careful: And to make their capacities every way equal; the Deaf boy to write as fair and quick a hand, as can be expected from that age. In these circumstances, they are
both of them to begin to learn a Lan∣guage: the blind boy Latin, the deaf boy his Mothers Tongue. The case being thus stated, It is my own opinion, that the Deaf boy would come to read & write the Mother-Tongue both much better and sooner then the blind boy to understand and speak the Latin. For reasons of my so thinking, be∣side what may be gathered from chap. 1. I will here carry on the comparison be∣tween the blind boy and the deaf in some particulars coming closer to our present case. 1. The Blind boy has the advantage of knowing a language already, which is a great help to the learning any second language. For tho there be no affinity between the words of some languages; yet there is something of a Natural and Universal Grammar runs thro all Lan∣guages, wherein all agree. This contra∣dicts not what I have said to the deaf mans advantage Chap. 1. Num. 6. Because there the blind and deaf are supposed both to understand the Mother-Tongue when they begin to learn a second lan∣guage.
Here the deaf is supposed to have no language, and the blind to have the Mother-Tongue; which tho by him learn∣ed, not by Rule, but by Rote; yet is it an advantage over him that has none. 2. Beside this notion of Natural and Uni∣versal Grammar, which the blindboy hath got with the Mother-Tongue; he not be∣ing to learn Words for Things, but Words for Words; and it falling out so, that often∣times there is a great affinity between the words to be learned, and the words for which they are to be learned; this makes that he learns with less pains then the deaf boy, who learning words for Things, it can never happen, that a combination of Alphabetical Characters making up a word, should have any affinity to, or re∣semblance of the thing for which it is sub∣stituted. 3 Onomatopoeia is a great help to the blind Scholar, for Example, grunnitus, hinnitus, rugitus, ululatus, &c. are easier to be learned by the blind man, then the deaf; because as they pass in Sounds thro the Ear, they are of a mixt Institution, partly Natural, partly Arbitrary; But
these same words written in Characters are of a meer arbitrary Institution, whether they be considered with relation to the immediate, or mediate Signatum. So that our dumb Scholar has nothing to trust to, but diligence and strength of memory: Reason can do him no service at all, at least so far as either Primitive words, or words of an irregular inflexion from them extend; which make up the body of all languages. Neither can fancy help him much, which oftentimes is of great use by working a connexion between a strange and a known word, because as yet we suppose most words to be strangers to him. The reason of this difference between words spoken and written is. Because speaking being before writing, has more of Nature and less of Art in it. For all languages guided by the instinct of Na∣ture, have more or less of Onomatopoeia in them, and I think our English as much as any: For beside the naming the voices of Animals, and some other Musical Sounds, which for the most part is done by this Figure in other languages, we ex∣tend
it often to more obscure, and in∣distinct sounds. Take for example, wash, dash, plash, flash, clash, hash, lash, slash, trash, gash, &c. So grumble, tumble, crum∣ble, jumble, fumble, stumble, humble, mum∣ble, &c. of which kind of words, The Learned and my worthy friend Dr Wallis has given a good account in his English Grammar. In all these and such like words there is something Symboliz∣ing, and Analogous to the notions of the things; which makes them both more Emphatic, and easy to the memory. But in words literally written, and of a meer arbitrary Institution, there can be no∣thing Symbolical. But to draw something out of this digression to our present stated case. Tho Onomatopoeia gives our blind Scholar some advantage over his Deaf Schoolfellow; yet is it short of what it would be if he were learning English. This is all that at present comes into my thoughts to say for maintaining the Para∣dox of a blind guide. I will now offer my reasons for giving him the precedency, that has two Eyes open in his head, which seems to be the more plausible opinion.
1. The Deaf mans mind is like clean pa∣per, and therefore takes the impression the more easily, fair and distinct: where∣as the scriblings and blottings upon the Table of the Blind mans memory, as they leave little room for new impressions, so they breed confusion, and makes him rea∣dy to mistake, when he comes to read them. 2. Words laid up in the deaf Boyes me∣mory, are like Characters engraven in Steel or Marble: The blind boyes words are but chalked out, or, nigro carbone No∣tata, and therefore easily defaced. For the deaf boy having but one word for e∣very thing he knows, is therefore obliged to reflect upon it, as often as he has occa∣sion to think, or speak of the thing it self: And it is this frequency of recognizing words, and using them upon all occasions that makes a man master of a Language: Whereas the blind boy having two words for one thing, the one an intimate and old acquaintance, even a teneris unguicu∣lis, the other a stranger to him; upon all occasions he loves to converse with his old crony, and keeps at a distance from
the stranger; unless it be at set times, when force or fear commands his attendance. So that this consideration alone (speci∣ally if it be seconded with the care and diligence of those that are about him, in forbearing all other Signs with him but letters) may seem to outweigh all that can be said for the blind Boy. 3. The deaf boy can conn a lesson by himself, for litera scripta manet; The Blind boy can do nothing without one prompting him for vox perit. Lastly, I think none will deny but that it stands with reason, That a deaf Scholar must be exact in Orthography. But for the blind I know it by experience, that it will be a hard matter to make him spel true.
CHAP. III. Of a Deaf mans Capacity to speak. THAT a Deaf man may be taught to speak, is no more a doubt to me, then that a Blind man may be taught to write: Both which I think not only possi∣ble, but also not very difficult; I will carry on the comparison in several parti∣culars. First, both have the respective Organs, the Tongue, and the Hand, e∣qually entire, and in a capacity to act. 2. Both are equally destitute of their proper guids, the Ey, and the Ear, to di∣rect them in acting: and therefore, 3. both must be equally obliged to the sense of of Feeling for direction. And yet so Magisterial are the Senses of Hearing, and Seeing; that tho the Sense of Feeling alone may guide the Tongue, and Hand, in speaking, and writing, af∣ter a habit is acquired yet for introducing this habit, directions from the Eye, and Ear are necessary. And which is observ∣able
in this point of discipline: The eye and ear seem to act out of their own Sphere, and to exchange their stations, and powers; for the Blind man learns to write by the Ear, and the Deaf man to speak by the Eye: From which to infer that community of Senses, which some Philosophers, and Physicians speak of, I think would be absurd; the external ob∣jects still remaining distinct: But the true inference from this will be. That the soul can exert her powers, by the ministry of any of the Senses. And therefore when she is deprived of her principal Secreta∣ries, the eye, and the ear; then she must be contented with the service of her Lac∣queys, and Scullions, the other Senses; which are no less true and faithful to their Mistress, then the eye, and the ear; but not so quick for dispatch. But to go on with the comparison. 4. It will be hard to teach the deaf man to ob∣serve tone, accent, and Emphasis in speak∣ing; so will it be as hard to bring the blind man to write a fair hand, or diverse hands, yet the one may speak so as to be under∣stood, and the other write so as what he
writes may be read. 5. As there may be more simple, and therefore more easy Characters to be written, contrived for the use of the blind man; So may there sounds of an easier pronounciation than any in common use, be invented for the use of the Deaf, 6. They are equally un∣capable the one of singing, the other of flourishing and painting. 7. As the Deaf man has this advantage above the Blind, that speaking in common commerce, and business is of more frequent and greater use than writing: So the Blind man comes even again with him in this. That there is one way of writing, and that of great use too, to the Deaf man; which the blind can learn both assoon and to as great a degree of perfection, as the deaf; whereas the deaf man cannot learn to speak without much time, and pains; and yet can never come to perfection in speak∣ing. This way of writing is, by an Alpha∣bet upon the fingers. 8. As to any direct tendency of improving either of them with knowledg, or dispatch of business and converse in vita communi, I judge them both equally useless, or at least of
no very great use; because I think scarce attainable to that degree of perfection, as to be ready for use upon all occasions. That there may be cases wherein they may be of great use I do not deny. And of several that offer themselves, I will single out that of a blind Master, and deaf Servant, for stating of which the more clearly; I will premise. 1. That to read and write is a commendation in a ser∣vant. 2. It recommends him the more if he be to serve a blind Master. And 3. if his blind Master be a man of much busi∣ness or learning, this enhanses his service yet the more. These things premised; let our case be this. Blind Homer hearing of an ingenious, but Deaf slave, called Aesop, who was train∣ed up in all the forementioned waies of Sematology, and he himself being expert in Dactylology, he resolved to purchase Aesop at any rate. The first service he puts him upon, was to write out his Ilias fair, from his own blotted Copy: And because Aesop could scarce read his hand, he was alwaies present himself, correcting the faults of his Pen, upon his fingers. And
here I leave them for a while till I have resolved another material doubt: That which is my main design in this Treatise (to teach how to come to un∣derstand a language by reading and writ∣ing) suggests to me here to resolve this question. How a blind person might com∣municate with a dumb? The cause of doubting being upon the dumb mans part. I answer. The defect of his Tongue must be supplied with a musical Instru∣ment, having the letters equally distin∣guished upon the Keys, or Strings, both to the Eye of the Dumb, and in the sounds to the Ear of the Blind; which I take for granted might produce the same effects with Oral speech. And here it is observ∣able that that same action would very pro∣perly be, both Writing and Speaking; writing from the hand of the dumb touch∣ing the Keys, or Strings; speaking to the Ears of the Blind man from the sound of the Instrument. After this short enterlude, let us bring Homer and Aesop upon the stage again. The old man was mightily pleased with Aesop, till unfortunately on a certain
time, the stuttering of his Tongue gave Homer occasion to suspect him of a ly: for which, in a sudden passion, he cuts out his Tongue: But afterwards repenting what he had done, resolved not to put him away; for he considered that he was yet as capable of serving him as ever; and perhaps more, the other waies of inter∣pretation that he was skilled in, being more distinct than Glossology could be in a Deaf man. It happened soon after that Homer had invited some friends to din∣ner, commanding Aesop to provide the greatest rarities the Market did afford. Aesop made a show of great preparation; but set nothing upon the Table, beside the tip of his own Tongue, in a large dish; upbraiding his Master with his pipe, that he did not tear his blotted papers when he could not read them; but had pati∣ence till he himself corrected them upon his fingers. Homer not enduring this af∣front before strangers throws Aesops pype in the fire. Aesop fearing worse to follow, throws himself at his Masters feet taking him by the hand, and by the rules of Hap∣tology begs his pardon, promising if he
would have patience, to make amends for his fault. Homer startled at this, to find both a Tongue, and a Pype, in Aesops fingers; was transported from wrath to fear, and admiration, concluding for cer∣tain, That Aesop was a conjurer, and that he deserved to be thrown in the fire after his pype. Yet resolving once more to try his wit and honesty: and for making sa∣tisfaction to his friends who had lost their dinner, he invites them to return to mor∣row, charging Aesop to provide the oldest, and leanest carrion, he could find. The night following, Aesop serves his blind Master with lex talionis tongue for tongue, and repeated the same dinner to his friends the next day; excusing the mat∣ter, that he had from first to last obeyed his Masters commands, to the best of his judgment. Homer taking it ill, to be so o∣ften outwitted by a slave, by Dactylology begs of his provoked friends, to revenge him upon Aesop, by plucking out his Eyes; that his condition might not be more comfortable than his own. After this old age and a fit of sickness deprived Homer of his Hearing. This reconciled him again to
Aesop; for he judged him the fittest com∣panion he could find, with whom to be∣moan his folly, and misery. After this, they lived good friends, passing the time in telling old stories; some times upon their fingers ends, and sometimes with hand in hand, traversing the Alphabeti∣cal Ilias. This Drama being acted according to the Rules of Art, if there be any certain∣ty in Art, that the promised effects will follow, is no less true than it seems to be strange. And from this we may learn two things. 1. That tho hearing and seeing be the Principal, yet are they not the only Senses of Knowledg. 2. That the Hand is, (or at least is capable of being made) a more serviceable organ of in∣terpretation to the Soul than the tongue. For it has access to its Mistress's presence, by the door of 3 Senses. 1. Of hearing by Aulology. 2. Of seeing, by both Species of Schematology, to wit, Typology and Dactylology. 3. Of Feeling, by Haptolo∣gy. Whereas the Tongue can only enter by the door of one Sense, and do its mes∣sage only by one kind of interpretation, Glossology.
CHAP. IV. Of a Deaf mans Capacity to understand the speech of others. I Come now to the Deaf mans capacity of understanding the speech of others. That words might be gathered, and read from the transient motions, and configu∣rations, of the mouth (if all the several distinctions of letters, were no less mani∣fest and apparent to the Eye, than to the Ear form the speakers face) as readily as from permanent Characters upon paper, is not to be doubted: But that all the di∣stinctions that are perceived by the Ear in speaking, cannot equally be perceived by the Eye; I will prove by an argument, which tho it be à Posteriori; yet I hope it will be of evidence and force sufficient, to effect what is thereby intended. If the same distinctions of letters and words did appear to the Eye from the motion of the speakers mouth, which are discernable to the Ear from the articulation of his voice;
Then it would follow; That the capacity of a Deaf man, would be equal to that of a Dumb (but not Deaf) for learning a Lan∣guage, so far at least as to understand it. But the capacity of a Deaf man is not e∣qual to that of a Dumb, for learning a lan∣guage from speaking. Therefore all the distinctions of letters, are not manifest to the Deaf, man from the speak∣ers mouth. The sequel of the Major is, I think, clear from what has been said before; there being nothing in sounds to the Ear either Natural, or Symbolical, more than in motion and figures to the Eye. And if any should say; That it is not so easy to read transient motions of the lips, even supposing them sufficiently distinct (which must alwaies be supposed) as permanent Characters. To this first, I oppose reading from poynting to a finger Alphabet; which is nothing but motion. 2. All reading from whatsoever immovable object, is as proper∣ly motion as hearing; for if there be no motion in the object, then it must be in the Organ of the Eye: which alters not our case, more than the Earths motion, or rest,
alters the Phaenomena of Astronomy. If here it should be urged; that granting Signs to the Eye to be as fit for teaching, as signs to the Ear; and therefore, that a Deaf person must be supposed to be in as great a capacity of learning to under∣stand a language spoken, as a blind, when the distinctions to the Eye and Ear are the same; yet, that the blind man learns to understand a language from hearing others speak, when the Deaf man learns not to understand from seeing others speak; is from the advantages the Ear hath above the Eye. To this I answer, that all the advan∣tages the Ear hath over the Eye, will be consistent enough with the Deaf mans ca∣pacity of learning to understand a lan∣guage from speaking. It is true here, that the Eye is still at the loss of equal oppor∣tunities of time with the ear; but the other advantage I gave the ear over the eye, of doing more work in less time, is here quite taken away: and yet the Deaf man will still have as much opportunity of time (if there were no other defect) if his Nurse and all that are about him be
not Dumb, as sufficiently to inculcate the common Notions of Language: For tho young people learn a Language by hear∣ing others speak; yet the greatest part of what they hear is redundant, and like rain falling into a full conduit, runs over. So that a deaf man tho he have not so much opportunity of learning as a blind; yet has he opportunities enough, and to spare, for learning the common notions of language. Now for the minor so far as concerns the Deaf man, it is known by sad experience, that he learns no language from his Mo∣ther or Nurse. And for the Dumb person, tho I can bring no instance; yet the case seems to me so clear, that I think no body doubts of it, and therefore I will not en∣large to prove it. But tho the Deaf man be not able to perceive all the distinctions of letters, nei∣ther indeed is it possible for him, the va∣rious motions by which some of them are differenced not appearing outwardly; yet if he be ingenious, I judge that he per∣ceives a great many; and therefore I doubt not but Deaf persons understand
many things, even without teaching, fur∣ther than what they have from their Nurse. Tho here I must add: That they could understand but very little from the motion of the lips, which when most di∣stinct must be full of ambiguity, and aequi∣vocalness to them, without other circum∣stances concurring. For when dumb peo∣ple make it appear, that they understand many things that pass in discourse where they are present, Children and fools can∣not be perswaded but they Hear: Super∣stitious and ignorant people think they have a familiar Spirit: others despising the folly of the one, and impiety of the other, do judge, that they are able by the Eye, as distinctly to receive words from the speakers mouth, as others by the Ear. But the truth is, what they understand, is from a concurrence of circumstances, ma∣ny of which are often as material, as the motion of the speakers lips; such as, his eyes, countenance, time, place, persons, &c. To determine what, or how many di∣stinctions of letters, the eye is able to di∣scover in the speakers face; There can be no man so fit to resolve this doubt, as the
Deaf man. And if there be no mistake in that well known passage of Sir Kenelm Digby; A Spanish Deaf Lord hath alrea∣dy resolved it so, as to refute and destroy all that I have said. What is there said of him, will amount to this. That the Eye can perceive all the distinctions of letters, in the speakers face, which the Ear can do in his voice. I let pass that which increaseth the wonder: That this Spanish Lord should be able not only to know strange letters, in strange languages, instantly; but also to be able to imitate them, tho he had ne∣ver been taught. To neglect the Testimony of a person both of Honor, and Learning, who was an ear and eye-witness of all he relates, and had nothing to byass him from what he judged to be exact truth; and which is more, calling to witness to that relation a person much greater than himself, and beyond all exception for veracity; This would not only be disingenuous, but also arrogant. Therefore I will say what seems most probable to me for reconciling that relation to the truth. I will then first sup∣pose, That Sir Kenelm Digby had not
much considered this weakness of human Nature, nor of the way to remedy it; and therefore might be the more credulous (for I find nothing of suspition or cauti∣on, that he might not be imposed upon) and ready (as we are all in strange things) to magnify this rare and wonderful Art, which, 'tis like, he had never seen nor heard of before; and perhaps had even judged such performances impossible. Se∣condly, I will suppose that the Priest the Lords Tutor was ambitious to set off his Art, with all the advantages possible, be∣fore so great a Personage as the Heir of the Crown of England. These things being supposed, I take it for granted that the Priest has used artifi∣ces of Leger-de-main, in these passages that seem most strange. What these have been (supposing the matter of fact to be true) tho I was not there an eye-witness; yet, without conjuring, I can tell as cer∣tainly, as if I had been a spectator, or, an Actor in that Scene. 1. His keeping up discourse with others, has been done in set forms, to acting of which he has been trained up before hand. 2. For returning
any words that came from the mouth of another; this he has been prompted to by his Tutor, or any other standing by, with a finger Alphabet. 3. As for his Echo∣ing back Irish and Welsh words, two things may be said. First, that he might have been taught to sound these guttural let∣ters; which occur often in these languages, and were as easy to him as any other let∣ters whatsoever: Or secondly, Because it is there said that the Priest affirmed, that he performed some things which were be∣yond the Rules of his Art; I know nothing can be said, but that he might perhaps chance upon the true found of these let∣ters, or something near them; which the relator thought good to represent with all his other performances (because in∣deed wonderful to those that never had seen, or heard of the like, or knew by what art they were performed) to the greatest advantage. As for his returning words whispered at the distance of the breadth of a large room, there is no new wonder in this; for whispering and speak∣ing loud were all one to him: But I su∣spect that this as well as other things, has
been a set lesson, or, the Priest did micare digitis. I am not ignorant that many of Sir Ke∣nelms relations, are looked upon, as fa∣bulous and Hyperbolical. Well, be it so, and let this be as fabulous as any of them. It is not the esse, but the posse of the story, that I concern my self to maintain. That several passages related there, are impos∣sible, and other circumstances very hy∣perbolical; in that sense, in which he un∣derstands them, I think, I have sufficient∣ly proved: And yet, that the whole rela∣tion might be true, in that sense I have put upon it, I hope I have made no less evident.
CHAP. V. Of the most effectual way to fill a Deaf mans capacity. HItherto I have been taking measures of the Deaf mans capacity. I come now to consider of the way to fill it. And here my design is not to give a Methodi∣cal Systeme of Grammatical Rules; But only such general directions whereby an industrious Tutor may bring his deaf Pu∣pil to the vulgar use and  of a language; That so he may be the more capable of receiving instruction in the  from the Rules of Grammar, when his judgment is ripe for that study. Or more plainly; I intend to bring the way of teaching a deaf man to Read and Write, as near as possible, to that of teaching young ones to speak and understand their Mother-tongue. I will begin with a Secret, containing the whole Mystery of the Art of instru∣cting deaf persons. That is, I will de∣scribe
such a powerful Engine, as may be able to fill his head as full of the Image∣ry of the world of words of mans mak∣ing, as it is of the things of this visible world created by Almighty God: which Engine shall have one property more, that it shall not fail of success, even sup∣posing both Master and Scholar to be the next degree to Dunces. Here methinks, I see the Reader smil∣ing at this Fortunam Priami; and hear him whispering to himself, Parturiunt Montes, &c. But I hope before I have done with my Notion, to reconcile him so far to it, as to bring him to judge that there is something considerable in it: And tho at first he meet not with all that this hia∣tus may seem to have promised; yet at last he may meet with something more than he expected. This powerful and succes∣ful Engine, is not the Tongue of the Learned, but the Hand of the DILI∣GENT. The Hand of a diligent Tutor will not fail to make a Rich Scholar, if Copia verborum may deserve the name of Riches. Diligence will be that same virtue in our Deaf scholars Tutor, that Demo∣sthenes
makes Action to be in his Eloquent Orator. Let the deaf child then have for his Nurses, not the 9 Muses, but the 9 Magpyes: Let him be sent to School, not to , but to . Diligence you will say is powerful in all Arts. True it is; yet as a Handmaid: But here I think, that without a Catachresis, I may call it the principal point of Art. This with very few directions from Art, will do the work effectually; all the fine Tricks of Art, which the wit of man can contrive, will be ineffectual without this. The only point of art here is, how to make an application to your deaf Scho∣lar, by the same distinction of letters and words to his Eye, which appear to the Ears of others from words spoken; That is to know his letters, and to write them readily; Diligence will do the rest. For Example: Let the same words be seen, and written as often by the Deaf man, as they have been heard and spoken by the Blind; if their faculties of memory and understanding be equal, the measure of knowledge also will be equal. But here it will be necessary that I explain what I mean by Diligence.
By Diligence I understand two things. 1. That which is properly so called, both in the Master and Scholar. This Sir Ke∣nelm Digby calls much patience, and con∣stancy in the experiment upon the Spanish Lord. 2. Many other adventitious helps. I summed up the advantages the Ear hath above the Eye into these two. 1. Having more opportunities of time; 2. Doing more work in less time. Here I will shew how Diligence, with a few directions from Art, may in a good measure remedy this inequality. It is a received Maxim amongst those who have employed their thoughts, in that succesless enquiry, about a perpetual motion. Reconcile time and strength, and this will produce a perpetual motion. The application is easy from what I have said before, comparing the Deaf man with the Blind. Let them have equal time, and force of acting, and their proficien∣cy will be equal. That care and dili∣gence both in the general, and the parti∣culars following, may remedy this in∣equality, in a great measure, I think no body will doubt. Neither ought this to
be any discouragement, that the recon∣ciling time and strength, as to a Geome∣trical equality, is not possible: For it is not here, as in the perpetual motion. There, if you fail of a minute, or a Dram, all your labour is lost: Here nothing is lost, but just so much as you come short of him you compare with. How much this is, we will see by the particulars following. 1. If the deaf Scholar could be brought to speak readily, this would lessen the in∣equality of Force, by one half: and if it were possible, that he could read the Speakers words from his face, this would make a Geometrical equality of force, in the Eye and Ear; so that the only inequa∣lity would be then, in time; the eye be∣ing confined to light, bodily posture, and distance; and out of these circumstan∣ces, the deaf and dumb man were per∣fectly cured. But because I am distrust∣ful of this cure for which I have given my reasons chap. 4. I will confine my self to reading, and writing, most properly so called, as both the more certain and per∣fect cure. Here the first piece of diligence must
be, frequens excercitatio Styli, that is, as I understand it in this place, using the pen and fingers much. If this be so necessary for forming an Orator, (as Cicero teaches us in his de Oratore, inculcating it with ut saepe jam dixi) who has the use of the two principal Organs of Eloquence entire; how much more must it here be necessa∣ry, where the Pen must be both pen, and tongue. Great care therefore must be taken, to keep your Scholar close to the practice of writing; for until he can not only write, but also have got a quick hand, you must not think to make any conside∣rable progress with him. It is true, that it were possible to teach a deaf man to read, without teaching him to write; as one may learn to understand a language spoken and not to speak it: But this would be but a half cure, and leave your Scholar uncapable of Society. And because the conveniency of writ∣ing cannot alwaies be in a readiness, an∣other great help will be, to have Tabulae deletiles, of stone or black wood, hanging up for expedition, in several convenient places. A third help will be, to have some
common forms written in those Tables, there to continue, and to be filled up as accasion requires, like Virgils. Sic vos non vobis, &c, such as, where is? I pray give me? who? when? what? &c. These may serve not only for expedition, but by them also, your Scholar may be taught to vary. Pocket Table books may sometimes be more ready then these. 4ly when neither of these is in a readiness, then practice by an Alphabet upon the fingers; which by frequent practice, as it is the readiest, so it may become the quickest way of inter∣course and communication with dumb persons. But I shall have occasion to en∣large more on this, chap. 8. 5ly. another piece of useful care will be, to keep him from any other way of Signing, than by Letters. 6ly, Add to this; that his fa∣miliars about him be officious in nothing, but by the intercourse of letters, that is, either by Grammatology, or Dactylo∣logy. If now lastly, I can make it appear that Diligence out-weighs wit in our prsent case; I hope my former Flash will not be thought to have ended in smoke. And
this, methinks, is easily understood from obvious and daily instances: Do not we see that young ones, tho of very weak parts for understanding Grammar, yet come assoon, and some of them sooner, to understand and speak a language by use, without art, than those of stronger parts. One Boy has gone to School 7 years, and yet understands not the common ac∣cidents of Grammar; another in the half of that time, is able to expound an Au∣thor, and resolve all the Grammaticati∣ons that occur to a Title: take the same two at play, or in things where there is no occasion to shew their learning, you will often find, that the slow boy, for the nimbleness of his Tongue, and Copia ver∣borum, may seem to exceed the other, as far as he doth him in art. Hence it will seem to follow; That the principal point of Art in teaching a slow Scholar, is, to use no other art but that of Diligence: and if so, a second infe∣rence will be: That there is none so fit to teach a slow Scholar, as a slow Master; That is, one Dunce to teach another. This I know will seem ridiculous and absurd to
many; yet I declare, that I am much of this mind in earnest, in our present case, where Grammar is excluded. For an acute man will be impatient, and not able to stoop so much as the other. And to clear this further; I think it will be easily as∣sented to, that a pratling Nurse, is a bet∣ter Tutrix to her foster-child, than the most profoundly learned Doctor in the University. My last instance therefore shall be. Take Master and Scholar qualified as be∣fore, adding Diligence, as I have describ∣ed it, and let a liberal reward be propos∣ed to the Master; if the work be not effe∣ctually done, let me be the Dunce for them both. If therefore this cure may so easily be performed; what a reproach is it to man∣kind, that so little compassion is shewn to this infirmity of human nature; these wretched impotents being not only neg∣lected in the point of education, like brutes; but also, as if this were not un∣kindness enough, the laws of men do most inhumanly deprive them of many privi∣ledges wherein the comfort of life con∣sists.
As for former ages, I confess they are to be excused: For tho (as I have been proving) Diligence be the principal point of Art; yet was this a secret to them: But in this knowing age, in which proofs have been given both at home and abroad, that this weakness is cureable in a good measure; and if the reasons contained in these papers have any weight, curable e∣ven to perfection; so far at least as con∣cerns the better part of the man. That is, these impotents may not only be instruct∣ed in the common Notions of Language, which is the bond of human Society; but also from this foundation may be raised the superstructure of all other arts, which are either for use or ornament to human Nature. I say then; for us to neglect so worthy and noble an experiment, and so great an object of charity and compassi∣on; were at once to degenerate from the charity of our Ancestors, and to make their ignorance preferable to our know∣ledge.
CHAP. VI. Of a Deaf Mans Dictionary. THO a Diligent inculcating of the common Forms of a Language, fol∣lowing no other Rule or Method but that of the Nursery, would undoubtedly bring the Deaf man to understand, and write it, so as the Vulgar understand and speak it. Yet some directions from Art (specially if your Scholar be ingenious) will both facilitate the work, and do it much better. That is, it will make him understand the nature of words better, and so prepare him for the study of Gram∣mar; as also the nature of things, for which he sees words substituted, and so prepare him for the pursuit of other Arts. I will therefore give a few such directi∣ons, whereby the Teacher abstaining from Rules and words of Art, may be en∣abled to produce the proper effects of Art in his Scholar. But first I will resolve two preliminary Queries. 1. What language
is easiest to be learned? 2. And what lan∣guage will be the most useful? For the first, a language of a Philoso∣phical Institution, or a real Character, would be by much the most easy; as be∣ing free from all anomoly aequivocal∣ness, redundancy and unnecessary Gram∣matications: and the whole institution being suited to the nature of things; this verbal knowledge, would not only come more easily; but also bring with it, much real knowledge. 2dly, The language of greatest use to be learned, will be that of the place where he lives, and of the people with whom he is to converse. And here with us, the Deaf man has several advantages above other Nations. First, that our En∣glish is freer from anomoly, and aequivo∣calness (at least in writing, which is e∣nough for him) than many other lan∣guages. 2. It is not so much clogged with inflexions, as other languages, and 3. our words are for the most part Monosylla∣bles, and therefore more easy to be re∣membred. I come now to the promised directions.
I will make way for particulars, by ob∣serving first in General; that the way of teaching here, must be something mixt, and as it were middle between the Gram∣matical way of the School, and the more rude discipline of the Nursery. The first initiation must be purely grammatical; But when your Scholar is got over this difficulty of knowing and writing his let∣ters readily; Then imitate the way of the Nursery. Let utile and jucundum, varie∣ty and necessity, invite and spur him on; specially if he be young or of a lache tem∣per. You must not be too Grammatical in teaching, till you find his capacity will bear it: He must not be dealt with as School-boyes, who are often punished for not learning what is above their capaci∣ty. It is enough for him to understand the word, or sentence proposed, without parsing every word and syllable: For this is all the use of language that not only children, but even people of age that are illiterate have: They understand the meaning of what is spoken; but can nei∣ther tell how many words, syllables, or
letters came from the speakers mouth. So that the having the vulgar use of a lan∣guage and the understanding it Gram∣matically, are very different things. And this preposterous way of learning the learned languages, first Grammar, & then the language, is the cause of so slow pro∣gress in those that apply themselves to the study of them. The first exercise you must put your Scholar upon, is to know his letters writ∣ten, or printed, and upon his fingers, and to write them himself; and when he comes to joyn, let his copies be of such words as he may be taught to understand; so that at once, he may be learning both to write and understand the meaning of what he writes. When you have got him to write fair, keep him to constant pra∣ctice, that you may bring him to write a quick hand; which his condition re∣quires. Let him begin to learn the Names of Things best known to him, how Hetero∣geneous soever; such as the Elements, Minerals, Plants, Animals, Parts, Utensils, Garments, Meats, &c. and generally the
names of all such corporeal Substances, Natural or Artificial; not only absolute, but Relative, as Father, Brother, Master, Servant; as also names of offices, and pro∣fessions, as Cook, Butler, Page, Groom, Tay∣lor, Barber, &c. For all these will be as easily apprehended as the most distinct Species of natural Bodies. Let his Nomen∣clature be written down fair, and careful∣ly preserved; not only in a book, but on one side of a sheet of Paper, that it may be affixt over against his eye in conveni∣ent places. And let this his Dictionary be sorted three waies. 1. Alphabetically, 2. following the order of double Conso∣nants, both in the beginning and the end of a word. 3. Reducing it to several heads, or Classes, with respect not to the words, but the things, as in Junius Nomenclator, for every one of these Methods will be of good use to him. After he has got a good stock of these concrete Substantives, then proceed to Ad∣jectives; namly, Sensible Qualities, Quan∣tity, with some Metaphysical Notions; which all of them almost admit of pro∣per contraries; which illustrate one an∣other,
and therefore will be of great use to the learner. Let him be made to un∣derstand Adjectives by joyning them to their proper subjects, taken out of his vo∣cabulary of Substantives already under∣stood; as Hard Iron, Stone, Bone, &c. Soft Silk, Wool, Cloth, &c. And sometimes instance the two contraries, in that same Subject; as Iron hot, cold: And thus he will make a further advance to complex Notions. Observe here. That by the help of an Almanack and Watch, it will be easy to make your Scholar understand all the dif∣ferences and words of that difficult Noti∣on of Time. After he has practised sufficiently upon complex notions of Substantives, and Ad∣jectives; let him proceed to words of Acti∣on, whether bodily or Spiritual, which Grammarians call Verbs, as, break, cut, hold, take, laugh, affirm, deny, desire, love, hate, &c. And thus much shall be enough to have been said of his Dictionary, in this rude discipline under which we suppose him as yet to be. Here I would have it well observed: That tho in applying my self to the deaf
mans Tutor, I have followed something of Method, docendi Causa; yet I do not advise him, to take this course with his Scholar: But as I said before, That the names of things best known to him, how heterogeneous soever, were to be first learned: So here I say, that there is no regard to be had to the cognation, or Grammatical affinity of words. In a word, occasion will be the best Mistress of Me∣thod, till he have made a considerable ad∣vance; And then when his Dictionary begins to be numerous, it will be necessa∣ry to draw it up in rank and file. Nay fur∣ther, I am so far from advising to follow any method at first, but what is occasio∣nal (excepting only the stated, and fixt order of letters in the Alphabet) that if your Scholar be not very young, you may propose sentences as early to him as single words; especially interrogatives and im∣peratives, as, where is your hat? whose hat is this? who gave you this apple? Rise up, sit down, give me the cup, shut the door, &c. And these may be easily varyed Indica∣tively, infinitively, affirmatively, nega∣tively, &c.
And yet for all this, I cannot deny but the Teacher may, and must contrive some method for himself, even of those things which he has taught, following occasion and his Pupils capacity; that he may know the better to take the mea∣sures of his progress, and to make the best use of occasions offered.
CHAP. VII. Of a Grammar for Deaf Persons. HAving dispatcht the Deaf mans Di∣ctionary, I come in the next place to speak of his Grammar. I should con∣tradict the principles I have formerly laid down, if I should insist much upon Grammar; neither indeed doth our En∣glish Tongue require or afford much to be said by him, who would be ambitious to shew himself . I shall there∣fore only make some few reflexions upon Etymology and Syntax, supposing Or∣thography to belong to Lexicography, of which already: And for Prosody, our Scholar is no more able to receive its pre∣cepts, than a blind man is to judge of co∣lors. I shall only take notice of 5 Etymolo∣gical Grammatications, and do but name them; for I judge that these and all o∣ther points of Grammar are to be dif∣ferred, at least as to an accurate explain∣ing
of them, until he be fitted for the study of Grammar, in manner as I have said before. The first is the plural number for which the Rule is but one and easy. Add s to the singular, pen, pens, and the exceptions are not many, which here I pass by. 2. The Comparative, and Superlative degree, al∣most as easy as the other. They are form∣ed by adding the terminations er and est, or by the auxiliary words, more, most, as hard harder hardest, or more hard most hard. The exceptions are not many. 3. The Participle Active or Neuter in ing, from which I think there is no exception: And the Participle passive, which is often∣times the same with the preterimperfect Tense, without an Auxiliary word, as, I loved; or the preterperfect Tense, with an auxiliary word; as I have loved: But from this rule are a multitude of excepti∣ons; which is the greatest irregularity in the English Tongue. 4. The adverb of the manner ends in ly. This also hath its exceptions, but not many. 5. The ab∣stract ending in ness, generally. These things you need not teach your
Scholar by Rule, for a little practice will enable him to make a Rule for himself, and to bring the exceptions too under his Rule; as, we hear Outlandish men, and children saying often: mans, womans foots, for men, women, feet. As for that ambiguity, that almost e∣very concrete Substantive in English is used verbaly, as pen, hand, foot, &c. This adds much to the Copiousness, Emphasis and Elegancy of the language; and yet gives very little cause of mistake; the con∣struction of the words determining the si∣gnification. But the Verbal significati∣on of these words being Metonymical, it will be best to leave them to their own place. So much for Etymology shall serve in this place, now for Syntax. The Learned languages make two ge∣neral parts of Syntax, agreement and go∣mernment; whereas it seems to me that with them, Syntax requires a distribution antecedent to this. To wit, that the Syntax of words is either per se or per ali∣ud, i. e. The Grammatical coherence and connexion of words, is made by the Ter∣minations of the words themselves, or,
by auxiliary words, called Particles. But neither the one nor the other of these di∣stributions does our language require, or admit of, being freed from all incum∣brances of inflexions, by genders, and ca∣ses (except a few pronouns) and conse∣quently from the Rules of Agreement, and Government: All our Syntax con∣sisting in the cement of auxiliary Parti∣cles. To treat of Syntax then in English, is to shew the use of the Particles, in form∣ing words into Sentences. For, to explain these Notions separately, were to build Castles in the Air; and to form sentences without them, were to make ropes of sand. Here I will not insist upon explaining every single particle, as if I were dealing with a Dumb Scholar; But remembring that the present address is more to the Master then the Scholar; I will instance only in some few, which may serve for a Clew to guide any ingenious adventurer thro the whole Labarynth. As I would advise the dumb Scholar to be often put to practice upon verbs of bo∣dily action, varying the circumstances
by the Particles; so will I single out the verb Cut, to be the Principal verb in the following Examples, for explaining the Particles. I begin with Pronouns, which accord∣ing to the Notation of the word, are words put for other words. Let therefore these things be present, for whose names the pronouns are the provocabula: and then it will be easy to make your Scholar un∣derstand the use of these pronominal words. I will instance, first in the Demon∣stratives, I, thou, he, we, ye, they. Let there be six persons present, as many more as you will. Write down. I cut, thou cut, he cut, we cut, ye cut, they cut. Let the Master take his Scholar by him, and place a third person over against him, all of them pre∣pared with a knife, and apple, or stick, &c. Let the Master Cut first, pointing to the words I cut, 2. let the Scholar cut, the Master pointing to the words thou cut; 3. let the third person cut, pointing to he cut. And for the Plural number: let the Master and his Scholar stand first together, placing two more near them, and two o∣ver against them. Then let the Master
and Scholar cut, pointing to we cut; let the two by them cut, pointing to ye cut; 3. let the two over against them cut, pointing to they cut. The possessives, mine, thine, his, ours, yours, theirs, may be taught after the same manner; my apple, thy apple, his apple, our apple, your apple, their apple, mutatis mutandis. In short, all pronominal words after the same man∣ner, all cut, none, or no body cut, this boy cut, that boy cut, the same boy cut, another boy cut, &c. Let him practice much upon this and other Verbs till you find that he is able to make these distinctions of him∣self. When he can distinguish persons, it will be easy from many examples, cuttest, cut∣teth, breakest, breaketh, holdest, holdeth, to make him understand, that the 2d and 3d person singular are distinguished by termination from the other persons. For the Signs of Tenses, do, dost, doth, have hast hath, was wast were, shall will: write down, I have cut the pen, I do cut the apple, I will cut the stick: cut accordingly pointing to your Scholar; or, write, I have stood, I do stand, I will stand, do accord∣ingly.
I have walked, I do stand, I will sit, do accordingly. Do not trouble your Scho∣lar with too nice distinctions of words, such as shall and will, did and have; it is enough for him, as yet, that he under∣stand the use of words in the common forms of speech, as illiterate persons do. Let him practice much upon the Pro∣nouns, and Signs of Tenses, with Verbs of Action, adding other circumstances of time, place, manner, &c. and that with all the variety possible, of familiar, plain, easy, most common, and most frequently occurring circumstances. The copula will be easily understood, be∣cause of its frequent use, both affirma∣tively and negatively; fire is hot, water is not hot; water is cold, fire is not cold; So in all its inflexions; as, I am tall, thou art short, he is thick, I am sitting, thou art standing, he is walking. The Particles OR and, AND, with the adjectives Same and diverse, are to be di∣ligently inculcated, as being words of fre∣quent use, and useful for explication, and declaring the sense of other words. Or in the explicative sense of it coming be∣tween
words signifying the same thing; And between words signifying diverse things. It may be good to write down ma∣ny examples of Synonymous words, and phrases which your Scholar understands, joyning them with, or, as The same I stand or I do stand or I am standing the same to go or to walk the same wide or broad So for the Copulative, AND, give such examples as these. Diverse Hand and Foot diverse Pen and Ink diverse Sun and Moon. But the frequent recurring of these and many such like in common, familiar, and necessary forms of speech, will soon make them to be understood. As for Particles signifying Motion, as to, from, thro, by, into, out of, hither, thi∣ther, hence, thence, &c. whether prepositi∣ons or adverbs: so Distance, as, far off, near, at, hard by, close by, &c. Position, as, before, behind, above, upon, beneath, about, up, down, beyond, on this side, &c. Their use and meaning is so plain and obvious, that
there needs no more but choice of fit ex∣amples to make them understood. The Table is before your face; The Chair is behind your back; The book is upon the Table; My hand is above the Table; the nose is between the Eyes; the Eyes are a∣bove the mouth; the mouth is under the eyes; the tongue is in the mouth; to put out the tongue; to rise up; to sit down; go to the door, from the door, come hither, go thither, &c. These and such like words signifying circumstances perceivable by sense, are as easily apprehended, as words signifying bodily substance or sensible Quality. Even the Particles of a Metaphysical extraction, and more remote from sense, may be easily understood, if the Teacher be not too Metaphysical in his applicati∣on. I will mention here only two To∣picks of this kind of Particles; The cau∣ses and the Comparates, which are the two principal sinews of discourse. The particles from the causes are diverse, from, of, with, by, wherefore, therefore, because, why, &c. Use examples such as these. This Pen was made by the Master, of a Goose∣quil,
for to write after my Copy. Ex∣plain why, wherefore, what is the cause, by expostulations, and interrogations, with your Scholar himself or others, and Be∣cause in answer to these. Observe here, that many of these Par∣ticles being very equivocal, it will not be prudence to represent this difficulty all at once, lest it a maze and discourage your Scholar. For example, you have made him understand the causal particle with, in such examples as these, to cut with a knife; to write with a Pen: do not im∣mediatly put him upon the Particle of Society with, as, go with me; but explain the various use of such particles, as they offer themselves occasionally in practice, and as you find his capacity is able to re∣ceive: For, improving of occasions, and complying with the Scholars capacity, will be the Masters greatest commendati∣on. Not but that he may be put upon learning many set forms for exercise of memory; tho he understand them not perfectly. But do not put his understand∣ing to the rack, by an undiscreet pressing upon his apprehensive faculty, Notions
either simple or complex, which you find he receives not readily. But make a col∣lection of such words, and watch oppor∣tunities of explaining them: I can give no better Rule for explaining words hard to be understood; then that which Ho∣race has given, in a case not much unlike ours. Dixeris Egregie notum si callida verbum Reddiderit junctura novum. — Where the principal Verb of a sentence is clearly apprehended, it brings great light to other circumstantiating words. So that the skilful chusing of verbs of A∣ction, well understood by your Scholar; and the like dexterity in placing a hard word, which you would have him to un∣derstand, amongst other words of circum∣stance already well understood, in constru∣ction with the verb; every word of the sen∣tence will reflect some light upon this dark word. The second classis of Metaph: (or perhaps more properly Logical) parti∣cles, are those that owe their Origine to the Topick of the Comparates; such as, than, much, more, most, less, least, by so
much, &c. explain these also by many fit examples, in which the several degrees of comparrison may be demonstrated to the senses. This water is as hot as that; This cheese, apple, egg, is greater or more great than that; This apple is the greatest, or most great of all the apples; by how much this stick, paper is longer than that, by so much that is broader than this; let the proportion be fitted and measured. It will be necessary to make a collecti∣on of such forms of sentences as he un∣derstands, one or two examples of every form, that upon occasion he may have recourse to them as to rules, and prece∣dents in the like cases: and amongst o∣ther forms, forget not imperatives and interrogatives, for which he will have ear∣ly and frequent use. Gather up all the forms of interrogation; when? who? what? where? whose? whence? whether? how long? many? great? &c. Form sentences upon every one of these interrogations, in things familiar; and subjoyn proper an∣swers; as, whose book is this? A. mine, thine, his, thy brothers, the Masters, &c. When shall we go to bed? A. by and by, at ten a
clock, an hour hence, &c. Imperative forms. I pray give me the book, take up the pen, lay down the paper, sit down, rise up, put on your hat, open the door, shut the door, &c. For exercise, you may find great varie∣ty for him; such as, to vary the circum∣stances proposed; to describe things from their causes, from their contraries, by comparing them with other things; To form a narration of things seen, to write Epistles. Let him be put much upon the exercise of memory; and that not only in loose words, and incoherent sentences; But let him bestow much time and pains, in learning by heart, in the first place for his Lectiones sacrae upon the Lords day, and Holy-dayes, the Lords Praier, the Creed, and ten Commandements, with the Church-Catechism. The solemnity and frequency of Di∣vine Service, would have good effects upon him, being placed conveniently op∣posite to the Minister, with a book before him, and one to direct him, till custome enable him to direct himself. This would not only excite him to piety and devoti∣on; but in progress of time, he would come
both to understand, and have by heart, the greatest part of Divine Service. Some other select passages of Scripture might be recommended to him, as the first Chap. of Genesis, the History of our Savi∣ours Nativity, and sufferings. The most proper books among profane Authors for him to practice on (I think) of many, were Aesops Fables, and some playes where there is much of Action. In the application of all I have said, re∣spect is to be had to the quality of the person to be taught; whether young or old, dull or docile: How to comply with these circumstances, must depend upon the prudence of the Teacher. When his progress is so considerable that it may be said of him; He understands the English tongue tolerably well: He may then be put upon the study of Grammar; which will be the more easy to him; because the course of study he was in before had a mixture of Grammar in it, as I have said. Afterwards (or before if you please) he may be taught Arithmetick and some∣thing of Geometry.
CHAP. VIII. Of an Alphabet upon the Fingers. BEcause the conveniency of writing cannot alwaies be in readiness; nei∣ther yet tho it could, is it so proper a me∣dium of interpretation between persons present face to face, as a Hand-language: It will therefore be necessary to teach the Dumb Scholar a Finger-Alphabet; and this not only of single letters, but also for the greater expedition, of double and triple Consonants, with which our En∣glish doth abound. After much search and many changes, I have at last fixt upon a Finger, or Hand∣alphabet according to my mind: For I think it cannot be considerably mended, either by my self, or any other, (without making Tinkers work) for the purposes, for which I have intended it; that is, a distinct placing of, and easy pointing to the single letters; with the like distinct, and easy abbreviation of double and tri∣ple Consonants.
I deny not but there may be many more abbreviations than I have provided for, namely of initial Syllables, and Ter∣minations; but these I have past by at present, for two reasons. First, I think there will be little need of them; For I doubt not but that with the provision I have made, an habit equal to that in those who write a quick hand, may very near make the Hand as ready an Interpreter, as the Tongue. 2ly. If they should be judged needful, I have taken care, that with a few Rules they may be added, without altering any thing of the institution of this present Scheme. The Scheme (I think) is so distinct and plain in it self, that it needs not much ex∣plication, at least for the single letters, which are as distinct by their places, as the middle and two extremes of a right line can make them. The Rules of pra∣ctice are two. 1. Touch the places of the Vowels, with a cross touch with any finger of the right hand. 2. Poynt to the Conso∣nants with the Thumb of the right Hand. This is all that I think to be needful for explaining the Scheme so far as concerns
diagram of a hand with the letters of the alphabet assigned to each part of it
the single letters: and for the double Con∣sonants, I have made provision for abbreviating a threefold combination of them: I shall here only give the Rules of abbreviation of the several combinations I have made choice of, referring the reader for the reasons of my choice, to the following Treatise of double Consonants. The first combination of double Con∣sonants I make provision for is, when h, l, r, s, come in one syllable with other Con∣sonants; and that two waies, either be∣fore or after another Consonant, as in these Examples. 1. H. light the 2. L. salt title 3. R. heart trie 4. S. hast hats 1. When these 4 letters are prefixt to other Consonants, as in light, salt, heart, ast; the Rule is; point skin to skin with the four fingers of the other Hand respective∣ly to the Capital letter (which in the pre∣sent example is T) to which they are pre∣fixt; which by Institution designs the dou∣ble
Consonants ht, lt, rt, st. 2. When the same four letters follow another Conso∣nant as in, the, title, trie, hats; then, point (as before) to T with nail to skin, which gives, th, tl, tr, ts. A second combination of double Con∣sonants worthy of this care of abbrevia∣tion, because of their frequent use in En∣glish, is when the Liquids m, n, come be∣fore the Mutes and Semimutes, b. p, d, t, g, k, or c, That is, m before b, p and n before d, t, g, k, c. The Rule is. Touch the place of these Mutes and Semimutes with the first and second finger joyned; and this by in∣stitution gives the Liquid and the respe∣ctive Mute or Semimute following, as in lamb, lamp, hand, hunt, anger, ink, France. The third abbreviation is of Trible Consonants in the beginning of a word or syllable, where s is alwaies the first; as in, schism, skrew, shrine, spread, strong, scrag, sphinx, sosthenes, splinter, justle, &c. The Rule is, Joyn the thumb to the finger point∣ing to the other two Consonants. And so much for abbreviation of double and trible Consonants. But observe here, that as School-boyes
are to learn a mavisse, before a masse, and  before ; and to write words at length, before they learn short-hand; so let your Dumb Scholar, and others that would practice Dactylology, first know, and practice upon the single letters, be∣fore they come to practice upon the Rules of abbreviation. Now tho this way of short-hand, or ab∣breviation of words be distinct, easy, quick, and comprehensive; yet is there another way of practising, which comes nothing short of this in other respects, and in one respect seems to be preferable: That it supposes nothing necessary to be known for practising, but the places of the single letters, without making new Rules for distinguishing double and trible Conso∣nants, from the single. The Rule is; Point to all the single letters of the double or trible Consonant, simul & semel: which will be found to be as easy as poynting by the former institution with one single touch, as will appear in these examples; when, which, the, light, blunt, brand, grunt, plaster, spread, strong, &c. If here it should be objected, that this
will breed confusion, leaving the Reader doubtful what letter to begin with. To this I answer. 1. For double Consonants in the beginning of a syllable, this obje∣ction can never be of any force; for there is no English word found wherein their order is inverted, as will appear from the following Treatise of double Conso∣nants. 2. For double Consonants in the end of a word, so far as concerns the se∣cond combination formerly mentioned, there can never be any mistake; for scarce (I think) is there any example occurs wherein their order is inverted; or if there did then the rule will be in that case, point to the single letters distinctly. So that the objection is of no force, ex∣cept only against the first combination of double Consonants, and that only in the end of a Syllable: For there are some, but not many examples, where the order is inverted as, salt title, hast hats. But to this it may be answered: That in a con∣tinued sentence, the sense will easily de∣termine the case, and take away all am∣biguity: as here lies one hat, there lie two hats. But if you have occasion to di∣stinguish
the word hats, from hast, then you must point to all the letters distinctly. And this compendious and expeditious way of Cheirology may be extended fur∣ther, than this abbreviation of double and trible Consonants: For they that are Masters of a Language, and have got a considerable readiness of practising, by distinct touches of single letters, will find it as easy, as it is useful, to express whole syllables, and whole words that are Mo∣nosyllables (specially in words of com∣mon use) with one multiplyed touch, si∣mul and semel. My meaning by this mul∣tiplyed touch simul and semel is, not to touch distinctly all the letters of a sylla∣ble or word, by the Index or any one sin∣gle finger of the other Hand successively, making so many distinct motions from place to place, as there are letters in the syllable: But so to order the matter, that an equal number of the fingers of the other Hand may be used for a simultane∣ous touch to make the word or syllable, according to the number of letters it shall happen to consist of. This way of ex∣pressing syllables and words Monosylla∣bles,
with one multiplied touch, after a little practice, will be as easy and quick, as pointing to one single letter with a single touch; it will be also as distinct as pointing to every letter successively, with one finger. But let it be well observed here, that tho I would have a whole syllable expres∣sed with one single action, and motion of the whole Hand; yet let not the distinct touches be so simultaneous, but that it may appear where the word begins, and where it ends. Here I think will be a proper place to give a Rule, how to know when a word is ended, and it is this. Let there be a continued actual touch of more fingers, or one at least, till the word be ended; or if this happen (as it may in some words) to be uneasy, then make a quick motion from the place of the last letter of the word: But this difficulty after a little practice will vanish away. Now because this discourse may fall into the hands of some that have trifling Heads like my own, to whom it will be acceptable to know what other waies of
Dactylology I have had under considera∣tion: I will, for satisfying their curiosity, and perhaps saving them the expence of vain labour, mention some other waies which I have considered, and after exami∣nation rejected. The first way is to make the figures of the letters upon the Hand, which differs only from writing in this; that the one is transient, and the other permanent. It is true, that this is more ready upnn all occasions than writing; but neither di∣stinct nor quick enough to be taken no∣tice of here. A second way is the forming of the let∣ters Symbolically; as to make an X by crossing two fingers; a cross touch upon the end of the thumb for a T; three fin∣gers joyned for M, two fingers joyned for N, &c. This Symbolical way I reject, as being defective in two respects: First, it is defective in the point of symbolizing; for it will not be easy with the fingers to re∣present the shapes of all letters. This way of expressing the letters Symbolically, is somewhat like the conceit of a symbolical Character, and a Language of Nature,
which some have talked much of; but without any foundation in Nature, and therefore all attempts of Art must be in vain. But secondly, this way is too labo∣rious, and so defective in answering one of the principal ends for which Cheirolo∣gy is desirable, and deserves the name of an Art: That is, a quick and ready ex∣pression, and interpretation of the con∣ceits of the mind, coming as near as possi∣ble to that of the Tongue. The third way is to design every single letter by a single touch; which I judge much the better way, than either of the other two; as being more simple, distinct, easy, and of quick dispatch. Having therefore resolved upon this, that the most proper way to express the simple Ele∣ments of the Alphabet would be, by a sin∣gle touch; it remained that they should be distinguished amongst themselves by their places. And here again, after con∣sideration and tryal, I have rejected seve∣ral waies of distinguishing the letters by places. First, I provided places on both Hands, back and fore; but finding this laborious and intricate, and perceiving
that there might be distinction enough found in one hand, I placed the whole Alphabet upon one Hand; yet so as to make use of an equal number of places on both sides of the Hand: But at last find∣ing that all the necessary distinctions could be provided for, on one side of the Hand, I fixt upon the institution of the present Scheme; which I think is done with that consideration and care, that as I said before, it cannot be much im∣proved. Here I thought to have kept one secret of Art to my self; at least till I should see how other things I had discovered should please: But I must confess my own weak∣ness, that in things of this Nature, I am plenus rimarum. I know not how consi∣derable this secret will seem to others; But I declare (that I may confess another weakness) that I was much affected with it: For after a long and tyresome chase, and having pursued my Notion, as I thought, to a nil ultra; when I was set down, and pleasing my self with my pur∣chase; on a sudden I fancied my self to see an one-handed deaf man coming to me,
and asmuch as I could read in his eyes and countenance, expostulating with me thus? What? Have you done? Is there no help for me? Shall one Eye serve in Schematology? & one Ear in Pneumatology? one tongue in Glossology? yea one hand in Typology? and shall not one Hand serve in Dactylo∣logy? With this fixing my Eyes stedfast∣ly on his Hand stretched out, I thought with my self, that I could discern a Mouth and a Tongue in his Hand: the Thumb seemed to represent the Tongue, the Fin∣gers and the hollow of the Hand the lips, teeth, and cavity of the Mouth. Upon this I made Signs to him to try to follow me, as I pointed to the letters on my own Hand; which he did so exactly that the surprise put me in a maze for some time. But when I had overcome my passion, re∣flecting upon this wonder both of Na∣ture and Art, I observed that of the 24 letters, he pointed to 16 with his Thumb. Thus I dismissed my Deaf and lame pati∣ent, bidding him be of good courage, and live in hopes of an effectual and speedy cure. But after he was gone, I began to con∣sider
with my self. What? shall I magnify this as a mystery and wonder of Nature and Art, to find a way, to Metamorphize a Chymaera into a Man, or, to make a black Swan white? This will be magno conatu magnas nugas agere. As I was thus thinking, it happened that I was smok∣ing a pype of Tobacco; and having a present occasion to dispatch a speedy message; I was unwilling to let my Pype go out, and so at that present was depriv∣ed both of the use of my Tongue and one Hand: wherefore reflecting upon the lesson which I had lately taught the one∣handed Deaf man, or shall I rather say, which he taught me; I call a boy to me, whom I had trained up in Dactylology, and delivered my message to him with one Hand. He staring in my face with a smiling countenance (for I had never spoken to him before that time with one Hand) performed the message very rea∣dily, and returned me a speedy answer, using the same Organ of Interpretation (for I surprised him eating an Apple) to me, which I had done to him. This gave me occasion to think, that this point of
Art had not only one-handed Deaf men for its Object; but that there might be many other cases wherein it might be useful to speak with one hand: as to speak to a Dumb man riding on Horse-back, holding the reins with one hand, and with the other asking him. How do you do? or sitting at Table; holding the Cup with one hand, and with the other saying, Sir my service to you. Or, with one hand holding the knife, and with the other asking; what will you be pleased to have? &c. And if any man could be supposed to have that readiness and presence of mind which is said to have been in J. Caesar he might at once keep up discourse with 3 several persons, upon several subjects, talk∣ing to two with his two hands, and to a third with his Tongue. And here by the by, it is observable, that without any di∣straction of mind one may speak both to a Deaf and Blind man at once, expres∣sing the same words by the Tongue to the Blind man, and by the hand to the Deaf. Nay further I declare, that as much as I have as yet been able to discover by pra∣ctice, I judge the way of speaking with
one hand preferable to the other of using both, and that in all respects, unless it be in this one; That it is not capable of distinction enough for all the necessary abbrevations of double Consonants, which perhaps (after a readiness and habit ac∣quired) may not be needful; or if it were, yet I know that one hand is capable of many more distinctions than I have as yet made use of: but at present I think it not tanti to make use of them, for I foresee, that the conveniency will scarce ballance the inconveniencies. Now tho the practising of this Hand-language be so plain and easy from the following Scheme, and the preceding explication of it, that any one who can but read (without knowing to write) may become his own Teacher; yet seeing the nature of all skill and cunning deserving the name of an Art is such, that some∣thing of instruction viva voce, is, if not necessary, at least useful; So here some∣thing of direction from one well skilled in the practice of this Art, either viva voce, or (which is the same thing, and as Emphatick a way of teaching if it were
practiced) digito demonstrante, will be of good use to young practitioners. I will add one help more, for enabling young beginners to practice more easily and readily: Let a pair of Gloves be made, one for the Master, and another for the Scholar, with the letters written upon them in such order as appears in the fol∣lowing Scheme. To practice with these, will be easy for any that do but know their letters and can spell; and a short time will so fix the places of the letters in the Memory, that the Gloves may be thrown away as useless. Having laid open the whole progress of my thoughts in this discovery of Cheiro∣logy, it remains that I make good my promise in the Title-page of shewing, that it is useful both in cases of necessity and conveniency. First then I think none will deny, but that it is necessary for persons Deaf or Dumb; and therefore I shall spare my self the labour of proving it any other way, than by referring the Reader to the Se∣ries and scope of this whole discourse. But here it will be very proper to add some∣thing
how it may be made most useful to the Deaf man, and in order to this let it be considered. That the nature of Chei∣rology is such, that it is only useful in society and converse with others: So that if the Deaf man be trained up in this Art, and have no body about him skilled in it but himself, it is of no use to him at all: As on the contrary, if all people were as ready in this Hand-language, as he may rationally be supposed to be; then the Hand between him and others, would be of the same use that the Tongue is to o∣ther people amongst themselves. But seeing (according to the received way of training up youth hitherto, by which no care is taken of teaching them Cheirolo∣gy) he can have none, or very few to converse with him in this way: It will be the concern of the Deaf persons friends (beside the influencing all his familiars to acquaint themselves with this Art for his cause) to chuse some fit person to be a constant companion to him, and to be his Interpreter upon all occasions a∣mongst strangers. And which is yet a more weighty concern: It would be their
wisdom to project a match for the Deaf person, man or woman betimes; that the person they are to match with, may be trained up in Cheirology, which would add very much to the comfort of their life; they being thereby able to express and communicate their sentiments intel∣ligibly, not only by Dactylology in the light, but also by Haptology in the dark. In the second place I am obliged to shew the general usefulness and conveni∣niency of this Art to all mankind. The particular cases wherein it may be conve∣nient, are many more than can be expe∣cted, that I should instance in: I shall therefore mention only three generals. 1. Silence. 2. Secrecy. 3. Pleasure. In ca∣ses of necessary Silence, it may be useful to inferiors in the presence of Great per∣sons; to those that are about sick peo∣ple, as near relations, Nurses, &c. So for Secrecy, if people be in company, but not so near as to whisper one another in the Ear, it performs the office of whispering; it delivers, and receives secret messages, &c. And lastly for pleasure; it may be an ingenioius and useful divertisement
and pass-time for young people. Here it may be objected, That all the conveniency will not ballance the pains that must be taken in learning this Art. This objection puts me in mind of another, and that a very considerable Convenien∣cy; and therefore I answer. The pains that is taken about learning a Hand-lan∣guage, if it were learned in due time, that is, in Childhood, would be so far from hindring, that it would contribute much to the Childs progress in learning to read, if he were taught both to know his letters, and to spell upon his fingers. This would please the Childs fancy, and imprint the letters the sooner upon his memory, having his Book alwaies open before his Eyes. So that I look upon this as the greatest conveniency of Cheirology, That it would be of so great use, and learned with so little pains. And this consideration put me upon thinking of a more adviseable way of training up young ones, than any yet practised, that is: To begin children to know their letters upon an Hand-book instead of an Horn-book; or at least to
have a Hand-book upon the backside of their Horn-book: For I make no doubt but before they could come to know the names and Figures of the letters, they would know their places upon the Hand, and be able to point to them with the o∣ther, or the same Hand, as readily as to pronounce them with the Tongue. And who will not acknowledg that it were a thing desirable, and deservedly to be esteemed as a peice of liberal educa∣tion; to be able to speak as readily with the Hand as with the Tongue? And therefore who would not think it worth the while, to train up young children from their a bc in Glossology and Chei∣rology, pari passu? specially seeing the one is no hinderance but a considerable help to the other, for I may truly say in the Poets words, — Alterius nam Altera poscit opem res, & conjurat amice. I thought for the use of children, to have given some directions for facilitat∣ing the Elementary Discipline of know∣ing the letters, spelling, and reading; whereby not only the old way might be
made much smoother, but also by one and the same labour, a considerable accession of useful knowledge might be attained by the young Scholar: That is, together with reading in Books, reading on the Hand; and as a necessary appendage of this, writ∣ing upon, or speaking with (call it which you will) the Hand: whereas writing with the Hand according to the common use of the word is by it self a distinct and laborious Art. But I fear lest some may think that I have already stuft this di∣scourse too much with trifles, and pedan∣try.
AN APPENDIX TO CHEIROLOGY. Containing Some Critical observations upon the Nature and number of Double and Trible Consonants. MUCH hath been said by many learned men to describe the na∣ture and causes of Simple Sounds, which are the first Elements of Speech; as also of Diphthongs and Triphthongs (if any such be) coalescing of 2 or 3 Vowels into one Syllable: But of the coa∣lition of two or more Consonants into one Syllable, little or nothing (for what I know) hath been said by any. And yet this composition of Consonants deserves as much to be explained, or rather more
than the other of vowels, because of its greater variety and use; Especially by him who would treat of a Philosophical Language or a Grammar for Deaf per∣sons: So that my first Treatise of Ars Si∣gnorum or Sematology with this second of Cheirology which is a legittimate off∣spring of that, obliged me to this enquiry. If the Question should be put: whether in framing of words it were a more ratio∣nal institution, that a single Consonant, and a single Vowel should alwaies succeed one another alternatly; or that there should be a mixture of Syllables allowed, made partly of Diphthongs, partly of double consonants? My own judgment in the case is. That both Nature and Art would make their first choice of an alter∣nate succession of single Vowels and Con∣sonants, and that their next choice would be, of such compounded vocal sounds, as are commonly called Diphthongs, and described by Grammarians; and such compounded close sounds, as are most natural, and of an easy pronounciation, for describing of which this discourse is intended.
But that such a Language could de∣rive its origine from blinded Nature, and not from Art, or a Divine institution, is no waies probable: For I conceive that there is now no Language upon the face of the Earth in common use, but admits of a mixt composition of Diphthongs, and Double Consonants. And the more rude and uncivilized the people are, the more frequent this composition is with them, and the sounds the more harsh and un∣pleasant. That roughness of speech wears out with roughness of Manners, and smoothness of the one is a natural conse∣quence of the smoothness of the other, the English Language and Nation is a sufficient proof. And if this be granted it is argument enough to prove; that Na∣ture without Art or some more powerful assistance, would never bring forth a lan∣guage in which there should be no Diph∣thongs or, Double Consonants. Nature, I say, as it is now in its degenerate estate: How she would have decided this Questi∣on in her primitive integrity and perfe∣ction, or rather how she did actually de∣cide it, as we are assured from Gods word
she did, cannot be otherwaies known to us, than by some probable conjectures. It is generally thought by the learned, that Adam was the Author both by Inven∣tion and Practice of the Hebrew Tongue; not as we have it now in any of its Dia∣lects; yet if it be granted that the He∣brew had for its mother that Language which Adam did invent and speak; we may with good reason conclude, that cor∣rupted as it is, it still retains the substance and Genius of its Mother; There being some indelible Characters upon all Lan∣guages which common accidents cannot deface. For tho the tract of time from Adam to Moses, was longer than that from Augustus, or Alexander the Great, to this present age; yet the common ac∣cidents which are known to change a lan∣guage could not be so many and effectu∣al, for changing the first language to that which is now called Hebrew, as they have been known to be for changing the pure Greek, into that which now is used by a remnant of the Grecians, and called Mo∣dern Greek; or for changing the pure Latin tant in Classick Authors, into
that which is now called Italian; which languages notwithstanding keep still so manifest Signatures of their origine, that it is easy to discern what Stem they are branches of. Now amongst several other defaced re∣liques of that first and Divine language remaining not only in the Hebrew, but also to be found in many other of the Ea∣stern Languages, this seems to be very considerable. That the Hebrew admits of no composition either of Vowels or Consonants in that same Syllable; But all their Radical words consist generally of a single consonant, and a single vowel, succeeding one another alternatly; which cannot well be supposed to be the effect either of degenerate Reason or Chance. There are two things more in that an∣cient language which seem to me unac∣countable without referring them to a supernatural cause. One is, that their radical words consist generally of 3 con∣sonants, and for the most part are Dissyl∣lables; and these Radical words how dif∣ferent soever in their consonants, yet have still the same points, Cametz and Pa∣thach;
which in oral prolation make the same vocal sound with א, which, as it is the first letter of their Alphabet, and from them in all other Languages; so is it the first vocal sound in Nature. And that originally all their words were Dissylla∣bles (as some conjecture) is not impro∣bable: whereas in all other Languages their Radicals are generally Monosylla∣bles, and I think originally have all been so; yea so far so, that there are many Monosyllables found to be Composita, and Decomposita, as the Learned Doctor Wallis has ingeniously observed in his English Grammar. Another thing is, that the Hebrew does often contract a whole sentence into one word, incorporating not only pronouns both prefixt and suffixt, but also preposi∣tions and conjunctions with the radical word. And this compendium did first ex∣cite me to do something for improving the Art of Short-hand; That drove me before I was aware upon a real Character; That again after a little consideration re∣solved it self into an Effable language. This at last has carried on my thoughts to
consider of a way how a language may be attained by Reading and Writing, when it cannot be attained by Speaking and Hearing. So that this Series and chaine of thoughts has for its first link an Hebrew Grammatication. I take notice of three things more in the Hebrew, which are considerable upon the account of a rational Institution, which is not to be found in the common usage of other Languages; but not so mysterious as the other three which I have already mentioned. The first is their se∣parating the Vowels from the Conso∣nants, both by place and Character; which has something Natural, and Symbolical in it: For there is something in the stru∣cture and composition of the words, ana∣lagous to Man the Author of them; the Characters of the consonants being of large dimensions, and divisible into ma∣ny parts, represent the gross and material part of Man, the Body: The Vowels be∣ing exprest by indivisible pricks or points, do answer to that which is more properly indivisible, the Soul. This, together with a more accurate distinction of Vowels into
long and short; as also a more accurate division of Consonants from their Physi∣cal causes, that is, the Organs of forma∣tion, tho of late use (according to some later writers) in that most ancient lan∣guage; yet it shows (at least) how the Genius of the Tongue is fitted not only to comply with such an Institution; but also that from all Antiquity there have been some vestigia of that Primitive and Di∣vine, or purely rational Sematology, taught by Almighty God, or invented by Adam before the fall (unless any should have the confidence to affirm, that this among many other unhappy consequen∣ces of the fall, was one; that it did not only in part deface, but totally wipe out all former impressions, leaving our first Parent as the blind Heathens would have him, Mutum & turpe pecus. That is, hav∣ing his Soul as much Tabula rasa, as ours is when we come into the world) which have given occasion to Grammarians of later times to bring that part of Grammar to the present establishment. But what∣ever be the decision of that grand con∣troversy about the Antiquity of the He∣brew
points, the observation I have made here will still be considerable. Wherefore I pass to a second thing considerable, which without all controversy is more ancient and of longer standing than some would have the points to be. It is agreed upon all hands that there are three prin∣cipal and cardinal Vowels א י ו of as anci∣ent a date as the first invention of letters; which without giving offence to those that are for, or advantage to those that are against the Antiquity of Points, may sano sensu, be styled Matres Lectionis; Be∣cause all other Vowels are but intermedi∣ate sounds and as it were the Proles or of spring of these three. Wherefore, with∣out interposing as to the main state of that so momentous question; That which I take notice of here as considerable, is this: That it has been a thing done with great care and judgment, the establish∣ing these three letters for the Cardinal vowels or Matres Lectionis; For they are the three most distinct vocal Sounds that are in nature; even as distinct as the two extremes and the middle of any thing that has dimensions can be; all other
Vowels being but intermediate Sounds to, and gradually differing from them. א is a Guttural Sound, and of all other Vowels the most apert; ו is Labial and of Vocal Sounds the most contracted, י is Palatine and equally distant from both. And as it is possible that there might be a Lan∣guage copious enough, allowing only the use of three Vowels, and secluding dou∣ble Consonants in that same syllable, pro∣vided that the Radical words were Dis∣syllables; which some think to have been the Institution of the pure and uncor∣rupted Hebrew: So would such an insti∣tuion be much more easy and distinct than any language in being; the inter∣mediate sounds to these three radical vowels being less distinct, and therefore oftentimes giving occasion of mistakes. I have had occasion to mention the third thing considerable in the preceding Treatise of Cheirology; to wit, Their naming the simple Elements of letters by significant words; Aleph, Beth, Gimel, &c. which without doubt is as ancient as the use of letters, or at least as Moses; The truth of this the Grecians have confirmed
by a very convincing, but withal a very inartificial argument in naming the let∣ters corruptedly after them, Alpha, Beta, Gamma, &c. as I have noted before. Tho I have in Ars Signorum given such an Analysis of simple Sounds, both Vowels and Consonants, as seemed to me most natural and proper upon that occasion; yet I must here repeat what has been said there of the nature and number of simple Consonants; otherwise the Rules of com∣position I am to give, cannot be under∣stood. Consonants then are first to be divided into, close: semiclose. 1. Close, when the appulse of the Organs stops all passage of breath thro the mouth; and they are in number 9, m, b, p, n, d, t, ng, Γ, K, This clo∣sure again is threefold. 1. A perfect shut∣ting of the lips and this produces m, b, p, 2. the fore part of the Tongue with the Palate, hence n, d, t, 3. the hinder-part of the Tongue with the Palat hence, ng, Γ, K. Tese nine Consonants are capable of another threefold division, upon the account of a threefold accident which
equally happens to the foresaid closure of the Organs respectively. For, 1. if the breath and voice be simul and semel stopt with the closure of the Organs, like the throwing of a stone against a Rock; this produces the 3 mutes aP, aT, aK, 2. If after the closure of the organs, a conatus of breathing be continued, and the re∣percussion of the breath from the passage stopt, making an inward murmuring like the breaking of a wave against a Rock, which is quickly spent and husht into si∣lence; the same closure of organs produ∣ces the 3 Semimutes, aB, aD, a. 3. If upon the closure of the organs, there be a free passage of breath and voice thro the Nose, like the sounding of an Organ∣pipe, when the key is touched; this pro∣duces a third distinction of Sonorous let∣ters from the same closure, aM, aN, a G, (by ng I mean that sound which is heard in anger, hunger not in danger, hinge.) And these 3 sounds may be continued af∣ter the closure of the Organs, as long as one will. I have placed a vowel before these consonants, because their power ap∣pears more distinctly, than when the vowel follows.
Hence I infer, that the number of close consonants is 9, neither more nor less; not more I say, because I find that some add 3 more, hm, hn, hng, calling them Mutes, making only this difference be∣tween them and, m, n, ng, that the one is uttered vocally, the other whisperingly: But if a whispering and a vocal breath make distinct letters, there will be more distinctions of letters than the Authors of this opinion seem to approve: and if this be reason enough to multiply letters, I know not but soft speaking, and crying about the Streets may have the same pow∣er. That certain other distinctions in the forming of these, or any other letters, may be fancied by curious and Musical ears, from the modes and degrees of shut∣ting the organs, the intention and remis∣sion of the voice, the Tone being more grave, acute, &c. I readily grant: But how to make more distinctions from these 3 closures, plain and easy to be discern∣ed, and worthy to be so far taken notice of, as to be placed in the Alphabet, is a thing I could never reach. Again, I said no less than 9, because
common custome has made one of these a double Consonant, writing it with two letters ng the sound of neither of which is to be heard in pronounciation; but a perfectly distinct simple sound from the power of both, as in sing, ring, long, and from all letters whatever. And it is ob∣servable that our English is very uncon∣stant in expressing the power of this let∣ter: sometimes by ng in the end of a word, as sing, hang, long; where nothing of the sound either of n, or g is heard; Sometimes by n alone before its brother consonants, k, g, before k every where; as ink, rank, drunk, before g in the middle of a word, as longer, hunger, tho not alwaies so, for in danger, stranger, &c. n keeps its own power. If any be so far prejudiced with the use of the Latin (which alwaies expresses the power of this letter by n) and other mo∣dern Languages; let him look a little higher to the Greek, where he will find three things considerable of this letter. 1. That it is no double consonant, but ex∣prest with one single Character, Υ. 2. That it is exprest not by a letter of a distinct
tribe (as in the Latin) but by one of its own fraternity, that is, by a letter form∣ed with the same closure of the organs with it self. 3. That it never goes before any other consonant in that same Sylla∣ble, but those of its own tribe Υ π Χ ξ; which is according to the true reason and Rules of compounding consonants in the end of a syllable, as I shall make appear by and by. The Romans finding that it was a sonorous letter, reject Υ as being a Semi∣mute, and substitute for it n agreeing with it formally in that same analogy of sound, but differing from it materially, as being formed by a distinct closure of Organs. Great Vossius may excuse my being so long upon this one letter: For he after spending a whole Chapter upon it, con∣cludes with a profest uncertainty of judg∣ment, whether to make it a single letter, a Sesquilitera, or a double consonant. I thought once I had been singular in my opinion about it; But afterwards meet∣ing with Doctor Wallis's English Grammar, I perceived that he had given the same ac∣count of it long before me.
The Semiclose sounds are of two sorts, some of them are formed from the whole∣close sounds and are called Aspirats, be∣cause they are formed by a partial open∣ing of the Organs, and sending forth the breath thro the mouth; hence the num∣ber of them are six, f, th, Χ from p, t, k, and v, th (as in that) gh, from the Semi∣mutes b, d, g; for there can be no aspirats from m, n, ng. 2. That nimble instru∣ment of articulate voice, the top of the Tongue brings forth three more semiclose sounds l, r, s, and so doubles the number of letters formed by the other organs. 1. L is formed by a close appulse of the top of the Tongue to the palat, the sides not touching, but leaving an open pas∣sage, which distinguishes it from, n, where the appulse makes a perfect closure. 2. The appulse is from the sides of the Tongue the top not touching, but leaving an o∣pen passage to force out the breath; hence is formed the letter S. 3. A repeated or multiplyed appulse of the tongue to the palat, by a quick motion of trepidation which produces R. S, has affinity to the close mutes p, t, k, and therefore admits
of being raised to a semimute, Z, both of which are capable of aspiration, as the close mutes and semimutes Sh, Zh. These seem to me to be all the simple conso∣nants in nature perfectly distinct, and to be made use of in a Philosophical Lan∣guage for which this was first intended. And I think that this Analysis of them from their Physical causes is plain & easy, for to pursue all the minute differences of sounds, as it were endless, so were it use∣less. I come now to speak of compounding two or more consonants into one syllable, and that two waies, either in the begin∣ning or end of it; a thing well to be con∣sidered by him who undertakes to frame a language by Art from the principles of Nature, and of no small use in fit∣ting a Grammar for Deaf persons. That I may proceed the more distinct∣ly in this enquiry, I will begin with the definition of a Syllable, and passing by several other descript ons, I will keep to that of Priscian and approved by Vossius; as being most full and apposite to my pur∣pose. Syllaba est vox literalis, que sub
uno accentu, & uno spiritu indistanter pro∣fertur. Where I suppose by sub uno ac∣centu, and uno spiritu, there can be no more than one Vowel or Diphthong in a Syllable; which as a terminus communis unites the extreme consonants on each side; Even as the copula units the Subject and the Predicate making one Proposi∣tion. My first Rule shall be: To speak pro∣perly and in a strict sense, There can be no composition of Consonants amongst themselves, either in the beginning or end of a Syllable, but what is preternatu∣ral and inconsistent with the definition of a Syllable. Who does not perceive, that even in the composition of Mutes and Li∣quids in the beginning of a syllable as prat, plot, which of all compositions of consonants is most common, and also judged most easy, as not making the pre∣ceding Vowel long by position; yet I say even in those it is easy to perceive a distan∣tia terminorum, and that they are united by a rapid spirit, as a terminus communis; and cannot possibly be otherwise, seeing they are formed by distinct closures of the
organs; and therefore there must be a Transitus from the one to the other; which appears yet much more evident in the end of a Syllable; with which kind of composition our English abounds very much as, Table, ridle, sadle, little, &c. It is true in some compositions of con∣sonants the transitus not being from or∣gan to organ, but from one degree of vo∣cality to another, as in lamp, hand, ink, the transitus here is so quick, that it may be said to deceive the Ears; much like the colours of the Rainbow to the Eye, as it is in that ingenious description of A∣rachnes Web. Ovid. Lib. 6. Met. In quo diversi niteant cum mille colores, Transitus ipse tamen spectantia lumina fallit: Ʋs{que} adeo quod tangit idem est; tamen ultima distant. But passing by the dictates of right rea∣son and Art, which certainly have not been followed in the primary Institution of any language unless it be of the He∣brew alone; let us look to Use which is the Sovereign Lawgiver to all languages. And more particularly to the usage of the Greek, which gives laws of Orthography to all the Occidental Languages: and
first for the compounding of Consonants in the beginning of a Syllable. Had the Grecians been as careless of Euphony and polishing their words in the terminations, as they have been in the initial Syllables, their language had been as much inferior to some others in Eu∣phony, as now it is esteemed more plea∣sant and graceful. What more rude sounds, uneasy to be pronounced, and harsh to the Ear, than , &c. What cause to ascribe this to I am uncertain, whether to the rudeness of their language together with others, in its first origine; or to some modish affectation of times and humors, or more particularly to a Poetical humor of Syncopizing and contracting their words, which seems to me most probable. But this we see is certain, that they have taken to themselves such a liberty of com∣pounding Consonants in the beginning of a Syllable, that their greatest admirers the Romans have forsaken them in this; there scarce being any such double con∣sonants, as any in the fore-mentioned
examples in the beginning of a word, in all the Latin Tongue; unless it be in some few words, which are manifestly of a Greek origin. They have gone so far, that al∣most no Rule can be formed for their ini∣tial Syllables, but Quidlibet cum Quoibet. Howbeit will endeavor to reduce the u∣sage of the Greek in this particular to some General Rules. First, There is no double consonant to be found in the beginning of a Greek word, but one of them is a Lingual: these are, n, d, t, l, r, s, z, th, θ, sh, zh. Hence I observe that Vossius goes too far, when he bids in imi∣tation of the Greek to divide a-gmen, te-gmen; unless he could have produced authority for a short vowel before this position, or a word beginning with gm, neither of which I think can be found. 2. The liquids (commonly so called) l, m, n, r, add, ng, never come before other conso∣nants, or one another in the beginning of a word, except . 3. None of the close Consonants
Labials p, b, m, Linguals t, d, n, Gutturals. ng, r, k, Or their aspirats. Labials φ, v, Linguals θ, th, Gutturals. χ, gh, If they be of the same Organ, can be com∣pounded with one another. Except  as , as . In these negatives the Latin, and I think other modern lan∣guages do agree with them. For affirmative Rules the first shall be. The liquids L, R, come frequently after the Mutes and Semimutes, with their aspirats as, . The Rule is universally true de jure, tho not de facto; or, it is true de generibus sin∣gulorum,
tho not de singulis generum. Hence tho there be no , yet analogy would bear it as well as  or  So in Latin, tho there be no words beginning with tl, yet tlarus would be as Analogical, as clarus or planus. So in English tlash were as Eu∣phonick as plash, clash. 2. S, in the beginning of a word comes before all kinds of Consonants in that same Syllable; i. e. it is compounded with Ge∣neral singulorum, tho not with Singula Ge∣nerum. 1. For the Mutes p, t, k, and their a spi∣rats φ, θ χ, it is compounded with them all; as, . 2. The Semimutes β, δ, r, it is only found with β, as ; and by the Dorick Dialect with δ, as  for . 3. Of the Sonorous or Nasales μ, r, , it is found only with μ, as . S. is not to be found before any of these three consonants in Latin, un∣less it be in words taken from the Greek; and yet our English abounds with exam∣ples both of sm, and sn, as small, smooth, smite, snatch, snow. Except from the former Rule, its two sister-semiclose linguals, r, l, before which
it never comes in Greek or Latin; Tho sl frequently in English, as sleep, slow; and tho s it self come not before r yet its aspi∣rate sh is found with r as shrine, shrewd. 3. S in the beginning of a word comes after some both of the Mutes and Semi∣mutes, de facto, and therefore might come after them all eodem jure, ψ, Z, ξ, i. e. ps, ds, ks. Here it comes after two Mutes, k, p, and one Semimute, d. The reason in Nature were the same for bs, gs ts, in the beginning of a Syllable; but s after any other Consonant in the beginning of a Syllable sounds harsh, and layes a force upon nature. What could induce the Grecians to single out these three double Consonants ψ, Z, ξ, contracting them into one single Character, and placing them in the Alphabet amongst the simple Ele∣ments of letters, is not easy to guess. Had they made a more soft and melting sound than other double consonants, this might have past for a tolerable Reason: But the case is quite contrary; for they make a stronger position after a short vowel than many other donble consonants do: or if frequency of use had been the induce∣ment
this also had been tolerable; but e∣ven in this they must give place to many other double consonants: unless perhaps it may be thought, that the frequency of ψ and ξ in the future tenses of Verbs might have occasioned this abbreviation. Vossius guesses at the Origin of ψ, that it has been an imitation of the Hebrew צ. If he had made z and ξ to be of the same ori∣gine, his conjecture had been by much the more probable; for there is fully as great reason for these as for that. The affinity of ξ to צ is all one with ψ to צ; for both of them are compounded of S fol∣lowing a Mute. Again the affinity of z to צ is no less, for tho the one be mute, the other Semimute; yet they belong both to one organ of formation, which the He∣brews take notice of as the greater affini∣ty: So that if an imitation of the He∣brew may pass for a probable reason of this Grammatication, it is much more likely, that a threefold abbreviation would induce them to this imitation, sooner than a single one; specially consi∣dering that s never follows another con∣sonant in composition in the beginning
of a word, but in these three. I might add that the Hebrew Grammarians will scarce allow צ to be a double Consonant, tho I dare not undertake to defend them in this. My next Rule shall be for trible Conso∣nants in the beginning of a word. 1. There can no word begin with three consonants but where s is one. This is not only true in Greek and Latin, but I think also in our vulgar Europaean Languages. 2. S, never makes a triple consonant in the beginning of a word, but with a mute and liquid follow∣ing; And this but rarely in Greek, as ; so in Latin, as scrib, spretus, stratus; Tho the composition of s with any either single or double conso∣nant in the beginning of a word, seems to be of no difficult pronounciation. And now I come to double and Triple conso∣nants in the end of a Syllable. I think our English Tongue with its Mother Saxon, abounds more with this kind of closure or ending of words, with double and triple Consonants, than any other common Language; which makes us censured by neighboring Nations, by comparing our pronounciation to the
barking of Dogs: For our words being for the most part Monosyllables, and of∣ten ending with a harsh collision of dou∣ble and trible consonants, and admitting no Apostrophe; this makes us take the more time, and use the more force to ut∣ter them. 1. The most natural and easy composition of Consonants, either in the beginning or end∣ing of a Syllable, is that of the Mutes and Semimutes, following the Sonorous letters of their own respective organs of formation; as in these examples. mb Lamb, dumb, comb, mp lamp, imp, lump, nd hand, blind, round, nt Ant, hint, hunt, ngg thing, long, dung, ngk think, rank, drunk. 2. The composition of two consonants next for facility to the former, is when the three semiclose linguals, l, r, s, come before other consonants in the end of a syllable. Exam∣ples in English are obvious: It is true, not of these three coming before all other letters; yet the reason is the same for all, tho use be not.
3. S in the end of a word, according to the use of our English, makes a double consonant after any other letter, unless it be after q, z. Other double consonants there are in the end of a word; but being very ir∣regular and of a harsh sound. I pass them by; such, as, soft, length, right, apt, &c. 4. For trible Consonants in the end of a syllable there is none found in any language but where S makes one. I know the Dutch write Handt, but I suppose they must pronounce either hand or hant; for a mute and semimute of that same organ are inconsistent sounds. And as for our strength, and length; 1. Tho they be writ∣ten with four consonants; yet we sound but two neither of which can be written in English, but with two Characters; But 2ly, I think the most genuin pronouncia∣tion of these two words is, as if they were written strenth and lenth according to the Northern Dialect. 5. And lastly, allowing two ss in two di∣stinct places (which often happens) there may be, and are de facto, in English four consonants after a Vowel in that same sylla∣ble, as in firsts, thirsts.
This doctrine of double and trible con∣sonants, so far as concerns the ending of words, has but little place in the learned languages; yet examples are found both in Greek and Latin, even of Trible con∣sonants; as , stirps. Where observe that there are no words in Greek ending either in double or trible consonants, but where s either virtually or expressly is the last; and but very few in Latin ending in other double Consonants; Some in nt as amant sunt, some few in nc, as hinc hunc, in st, as est post. My last enquiry about double Conso∣nants shall be. How many may come to∣gether in one syllable? To which I answer. First, If we follow reason & the Authority of the ancientest language, there can come no more than two, one before and ano∣ther after the vowel. 2ly If we follow the usage of the other two learned languages Greek and Latin; secluding the letter s, there can be no syllable of above four consonants, two before, and two after the Vowel. 3ly Admitting s, which comes both before and after most letters, there may be a syllable of six consonants, three
before and three after the vowel. I grant there is no example found either in Latin or Greek of above five consonants; yet there are many examples in both of three consonants in the beginning, as , cri∣bo; so of three in the end, as , stirps, what∣ever is above this, is harsh and Barbarous. I have heard learned men of the Polish Nation affirm, that there is a Monosyl∣lable of nine letters in that Language, the Orthography of which I took from the hand of a person of Honor of that Nation, thus Chrzaszcz, This word I have often heard pronounced by Natives, and have my self been commended by them for my imitation: But to strangers it seems a barbarous sound, and reaches not the expressing of the power of all the let∣ters with which it is written. Vossius af∣firms as much of the Dutch. The word he instances in is, t'strengst. But I am sure if this be allowed for a Monosyllable, there may be a monosyllable of eleven letters, according to the Analogy both of the Dutch and English; or rather I may say, that there can be no bounds set to the Tongue in this particular. For first
if t'strengst, why not st'strengst; for it is clear even from the same instance, that s may come before t in that same sylla∣ble. If it be said that the letter s cannot be repeated thrice, in distinct places of that same syllable. First, I answer by re∣torting; much less can t be repeated thrice, as here; for laying this one word aside, I think it will be hard either to prove by reason, or to bring another in∣stance out of any language whatever, where a word consisting of three ttt dis∣joyned from one another by the inter∣vention of other letters is esteemed a mo∣nosyllable. 2ly The Analogy of the En∣glish allows of such a Monosyllable, as Spasms, Schisms. Again if ststrengst why not ststrengsts, and so in infinitum. That s after t is con∣sistent in the end of a syllable, our English abounds with Examples, as Tasts, fasts. But here it is observable that this compo∣sition we admit of, s coming both before and after another Consonant in the end of a syllable, is very harsh and uneasy, and scarce to be found in any other language. The French make many shifts to avoid
the harshness of s either before or after another consonant, and chiefly in the end of a syllable: if s go before, they leave it out, as in haste, viste; if it come after they leave out the consonant that goes before it; as in loups, animaux. Another thing observable of s with its affinis l; when they come alone without the implication of other consonants: they are of an easy and graceful pronounciation. Homer seems to have loved them, as in these, — — That the Press should have stript these broken ends of Verses of the unnecessary and troublesome luggage of Spirits and Accents, is neither the Compositor nor the Correctors fault: I am obliged to ex∣cuse them and take the fault, if there be any, upon my self; or rather lay it over upon the Author; who were he alive, he would excuse both me and himself, by the Use of the times he lived in: And use we know is the supreme Law in all languages. But if all this do not satisfy the Critical Hellenist; Then I must add further, that Ʋse in the present case, will even dare to
appeal to right Reason: For what ever may be said for the cumbersome tackling of Spirits and Accents in Prose; yet in a Verse, Accents are down-right non-sense, unless it be tollendae ambiguitatis causa in aequivocal words. That all other Appendages beside the letters are unnecessary and troublesome, I shall instance only in one word, which is so overgrown with the Rickets, that the Head is much greater than the whole Bo∣dy; for whereas the letters of the word are but three, the other appurtenances of it are five: And had it all that swelling furniture about it in the Glossology, which it hath in the Typology, it would choke one to pronounce it. But he must have more critical Ears than mine, that can perceive five distinctions in  which are not to be heard in our English ERR. That this is not a word either made or sought by me, appears by this passage of a com∣mon Epigram. — And here I shall take the liberty to go one step further out of my road, by taking
notice that the Grecians have lasht out a little too far, in that which is thought to be the greatest grace of their language: That is, their words ending much in Vowels and Diphthongs; and these frequently mak∣ing pure syllables, one, two, or more, with∣out the intervention of a Consonant. One, two, or at least three, one would think were enough for Euphony; but four, five, or sometimes six in the end of a word, I think is too much; specially, if they make so many syllables,  sounds well;  is yet more soft and melting; and  sounds high and lofty from the mouth of a Poet, and Symbolizeth with the more Symbolical Hemistich pre∣ceding it. . But , and by a Dialysis , is too soft and lushious. And for  and , I know not what other censure to pass on them, but that they are childish and ridi∣culous Traulisms. It is true that  in the Typology of the word, has its Sylla∣bles distinct enough; but the best can be said of it will leave them too identical in the Glossology. Again for Ae Ae Ae, which
is the word of the greatest number of vow∣els without a Consonant, that I have hap∣pened to meet with; tho it be manifestly of a Greek origin, yet I know not where to father it upon any Greek Author, toti∣dem literis & syllabis: which makes me strange the more to see the grave and Manly Roman, who in his imitation of the effeminate Greculus, hath with a won∣derful judgment, shall I say or happiness, equally avoided the extremes of too much harshness in the beginning of his words, and too much softness and delicacy in the end of them; yet in this one word to have outdone him in number of vowels, tho not of syllables. Ovid, is my Author for this. Metamorph. lib. 4. Nec tenet Ae Ae Ae genetrix pulcherrima Circes. But to return from this digression to another observation upon the letters, L, and S. These two letters seem to me to make a great impression upon the body of the French Tongue (as the particles and chiefly the pronouns do in all languages) because of their so frequent use in the pro∣vocabula of that language. I have often been pleasantly affected to hear two talk∣ing
French, when the pronominal words recurred often; such as, ce, cett, c'est cettui, cettuici, cettuila, lui, celui, icelui, elle, icelle, celleci, cellece, &c. and many such like de∣scending from the fruitful stock of ca & la: for these words comming from a French mouth, make a pretty soft whispering noise affecting the Ear pleasantly. Our own English pronominal words are none of the most graceful pronounciation, chiefly because of the so frequent use of th as thou, thy, that, the, this, those, their, &c. This makes Outlandish men call us blaesi, the sound of th never being heard a∣mongst them, but by lispers; who pro∣nounce s vitiously by the power of this letter. I will conclude with rectifying an Universal mistake of all that have writ∣ten of Grammar, for want of considering the Nature of double consonants. It has past for currant amongst all Grammari∣ans, that we are to divide words in all o∣ther Languages, following the use of double Consonants among the Grecians; as, ma-gnus, do-ctus, le-ctus, a-ptus, and not mag-nus, doc-tus, lec-tus, ap-tus, Vossius goes yet further (as I have had occasion to
mention before) and bids us divide se∣gmen a-gmen; tho their be no precedent for this in Greek. One Ancient Gram∣marian goes yet a step further, and bids follow this Rule even in compounded words; as o-bruo, o-bligo, which notwith∣standing others do except. But Priscian does well refute this Authors opinion by this argument, That Poets never used these syllables short: So that for the very same reason, we must not divide le-ctus, do-ctus, because they are used stil long by position. Tho this reason be convincing enough; yet there is another reason worthy to be mentioned in this place, which also illu∣strates and confirms what I have said be∣fore: that the primitive words of other languages (excepting the Hebrew) are for the most part Monosyllables. In all primitive words I distinguish between ra∣dical and servile letters: the radical part of the word generally both in Greek and Latin is effable in one syllable, amo, do∣ceo; am and doc are the radical letters, o in the one and eo in the other being ser∣viles; and so changeable in the oblique
inflexion of the words, therefore I think it were reasonable in dividing the word to distinguish between what is radical, and what is servile. Post-Script. Tho I make no question, but I have said as much as may enable any person of ordinary capacity, with extraordinary diligence, to become if not a Didasca∣locophus, at least a Hypodidascalus to some more ex∣pert Master; yet my main design being not so much to make every Grammaticaster a Didascalocophus, as to satisfy learned men, that Cophology is none, ei∣ther of the , or ; This has made me the shorter in the practical part. So that any pra∣ctitioner in this Art, not more Master of it than my self, must be beholding to me for some more particular directions. Wherefore if any Philocophus should challenge my self, to make good the Title of my book: let him bring a Subject ducly qualified, male or female, the younger the better; and he shall find me ready to answer his challenge, either personally or by proxy. FINIS.
