D293 12240546 56752
THE HISTORY OF THE Thrice Illustrious Princess HENRIETTA MARIA de BOURBON, QUEEN OF England. LONDON, Printed by E. C. for Philip Chetwind, 1660.
TO THE Paragon of Vertue and Beauty, her Grace, The Dutchesse of AUBEMARLE, &c. May it please your Grace, IN imitation of the In∣scription of the gol∣den Apple that Paris had to distribute a∣mong the Goddesses, which was, Let it be given to the fairest, as a gift which only the greatest beauty was worthy of; I humbly present to your Grace this small Mirror of Feminine yet He∣roick Vertues, as a glasse where∣in none but the most vertuous
are capable to dresse themselves: A pattern not to be imitated by the Vulgar. Your Grace may herein see briefly, yet fully displayed, the frailty and inconstancy of hu∣mane greatness, and the heighth of goodness. A Princesse of the greatest Extract, the greatest Alliance, the greatest Vertue, that this Western World hath for many years boasted of; re∣duced to the utmost of those miseries wherewith an adverse Fortune could afflict her; yet in all of them bearing her self up with an unbyassed soul. 'Tis easie, Madam, whilest our Fortunes are constant to us, to be constant to our Vertues. That Pilot must certainly be very unskilled, who with a fair and prosperous gale, shall steer an indirect course. Afflictions are the greatest tryal of a Noble
Spirit; and patience in them the chief of Vertues. Yet was it not the greatest of this Queens unhappinesses, that she was unhappy, but that some men by malicious Scan∣dals strove to make her guilty of somewhat they thought de∣serving so great Afflictions; as if to be miserable, must like∣wise include being wicked. But were happiness, Madam, alwayes appropriate to good∣ness, or did Vertue continually carry it's reward along with it, we might have just reason to suspect and believe that some horrid wickednesses lately per∣petrated amongst us, were ra∣ther Pieties in the highest de∣gree. But her goodness and pa∣tience have overcome all scan∣dals; and as she hath lived the Mirror of the latter to all the
World, so she may be a pattern of the other to succeeding gene∣rations. In the mean time, that the Rising Sun of your GRACES Vertues and Honours may still soar higher, but never know a declension, is the earnest prayer of Your GRACES Most Humble And Most devoted Servant, IOHN DAUNCY.
TO THE READER. THIS late Age hath had so infinite Exam∣ples of Vices made Vertues, and Vertues Vices, that a clear display of actions in their true and genuine co∣lours will hardly finde credit: So long hath scandal had the predominancy over mens minds, that the continual reiterating of them, hath grounded in them (as it were) a serious opinion of their truth, whilest they were Zealous to believe what was represented, rather then what really and truly was.
This Illustrious and thrice Noble Princess hath not had the least share in this ill hu∣mour of the times, whilest the basely imployed industry and disingenuity of some men hath endeavoured to represent her under a black Cloud of guilt, who never knew how to wear other then a pure, white and Angel-like Vest of Innocen∣cy. Yet so powerfull were those scandals which were thrust upon this serene Queen, that none durst adventure to con∣vince them of falsity, by de∣monstrating that the purity of all her actions were above the reproach of the blackest tongue, for fear of running himself on Scilla or Charybdis, of hazard∣ing himself on the Rock of an Arbitrary Power, or plunging himself in the gulf of a dis∣credit;
so firmly had scandal rooted an ill opinion of her Majesty in the mindes of most people. I need not now fear to fall upon the Rock, and doubting not but that I shall escape that other inconvenience: I have endeavoured to represent her as she is (that is) barely by her actions, by which if I can∣not perswade men to a belief of her goodness; yet let them at least believe that character which was given her by him, who of all men must needs know her best, her Royal Hus∣band. Reader, 'tis the greatest un∣charity in the world to give credit to that evil which ma∣licious tongues would per∣swade us to be in any person, and never inquire into those goodnesses wherewith they are
really endowed: For most cer∣tain it is, Qui causam statuerit, parte in audita altera, Aequum licet quod statuerit haud aequum est. Who judges ere he hear ano∣ther tell His cause, may judge right, but shall nere judge well. And that makes me the more confident, that this small piece will finde a clearer reception, whilest like the Welcome Sun it clears light out of darknesse, and makes that appear truly fair (as it is) which was be∣fore spitefully beclouded.
THE HISTORY OF Henrietta Maria, QUEEN of ENGLAND. THat Philosopher certainly was either Foolish or Frantick, who deter∣mined (or at least started it as a question) that
there could be no Heroick vertue in Women, no Age in the world having been deficient of some of that sex, compleatly fur∣nished both with Magna∣nimity, and all other Ver∣tues, which might adorn the most Noble spirits; some illustrious women having in all times left their precedents to the world, of Valour, Wis∣dome, Chastity, Courage, and Magnanimity: All Histories, even the Holy Writ it self, bearing wit∣ness of the Vertues of some of that sex, whose Fames have endured, and
are to this present age re∣corded with honour and admiration. Nor hath our age it self been wanting in ex∣amples of that nature; but more particularly in that Phoenix of our times (whose life I intend to treat of) Henrietta Maria de Bourbon, a Princess, as of incomparable Vertues and endowments, so of a mighty Birth and Alli∣ance, having been Daugh∣ter, Sister, Wife, Aunt and Mother to Kings: Daughter to the thrice Illustrious and renowned Prince Henry the Great,
King of France, and Sister to his Son Lewis the Thirteenth: Wife to Charles the First, King of Great Britain and Ire∣land: Aunt to Lewis the Fourteenth now King of France: And Mother to our present most Gracious So∣veraign Lord King Charls the Second. To so ma∣ny Kings hath she been so nearly allied. But before we proceed to our story of her, it will not be impertinent to touch something of her Fathers Vertues (though not alwayes) being often inherent to Posterity. A
Prince he was in whom nothing of worth was wanting, a pattern of all that Heroick Nobleness which could accomplish either a Man or a King: Not known to be sub∣ject to any Vice, except that which overcame the strongest, holyest and wisest of men, too great a love to Women. His wonderfull acts, both in time of Peace and War, had deservedly gained him the Title of GREAT: By the first he enriched France with a greater proportion of Silk and Wooll, (by aug∣menting
and encouraging a Foraign Traffique) then ever before she was Master of, besides adorning her with many famous Stru∣ctures, and accommoda∣ting her by cutting Na∣vigable Sluces from River to River; by the last he cured her distempers, and by his Valour quieted those Civil Wars which had for neer twenty years distracted and disturbed that Kingdome, having been victorious in Four main Battels against the Guisan Faction; and at length rooted out all those whose affections were
more swayed to the Spa∣niard then to their natu∣ral Prince: Yet was he in the end (see the instabi∣lity of humane Glory and Greatnesse) by an obscure Villain in one of the prin∣cipal streets of his chief City of Paris, stabbed to death in his Coach, in the midst of those tri∣umphs which were pre∣pared for his Queen, the Illustrious Maria di Me∣dices, who then newly had her brows begirt with the Royal Diadem of France, and when he had lyen in readiness a Potent Army in perfect
Equipage, and composed of stout and able old souldiers, which made his Neighbours round about to tremble (none know∣ing on whom the effects of so potent a Force would fall) his intended design continuing a riddle to this day. He was at his first coming to the Crown very much enclined to the Protestant Profession, in which he had for the most part been nurtured; but the necessity of his affairs, and the strength of the Papists enforced him to make a publique
Confession of the Roman Catholique Religion, and condescend to them in Ecclesiastical affairs; not∣withstanding which he was soon after by a young Jesuite (who after the fact, confessed he did it because he thought him not yet well setled and grounded in the Catho∣lique Faith, but too much wavering towards the Hugonots) stabbed in the mouth with a knife: Which made one of his Confidents prophetically to tell him: Sir, You may see how just and punctual GOD ALMIGHTY is
in his Judgements: For I hope you have denyed the Religion you were first nur∣tured in, but from the teeth outwards, so he hath struck you there, but take heed your heart go not from it, for he will strike you there the next time: Which proved exactly true. The Villain which murthered him could by no extremity of Torments be induced to confess any other then himself abettor of his Crime, which he did (as he said) out of an inward motion he had, that King Henry was not yet fully confirmed in
the Roman Faith, a be∣lief whereof he gathered out of the great benefits and Liberties still con∣tinued to the Prote∣stants. 'Twas but a very short time before his violent death,The Queen born. that his youngest Daughter and last Childe the Princesse Henrietta Maria was born: So that she had neither the felici∣ty to be an eye-witness of those extraordinary Ver∣tues wherewith her Fa∣ther was endowed, nor the means to imitate them, otherwise then as by an everlasting fame
they were left to Poste∣rity. Yet falling under the care of the Illustrious Ma∣ria di Medices her Mother, (a Princess of most rare endowments, to whom likewise the Charge of Government was com∣mitted till the succeeding King Lewis the Thir∣teenth should come to age) she was educated suitable to her birth and greatness, and those Ver∣tues cherished in her, which seemed to be in∣nate, as appearing almost in her very Cradle. Nor was she less ac∣complished
in that other adorner of Women, beau∣ty, which though it out∣shone not her Vertues, yet it made them shine with the greater lustre, whilest they likewise seemed to set it forth, and blazon it like a cleer and unclouded Sun. She was about the age of Fifteen years when Prince Charles first taking that Adventurous,Prince Charls his Voyage to Spain. and therefore Renowned Jour∣ney into Spain, to endea∣vour the conclusion of a Match between himself and the Royal Infanta, in his passage through
Paris, he incognito beheld this Paragon of Vertue and Beauty, and though he were then going about a business which must necessarily obstruct his in∣clinations towards her, yet he seemed very much to like her, nor was she in her affections lesse pro∣pense to him, being re∣ported to have said after she had heard about what business he was gone in∣to Spain, That he need not have gone so far for a Wife. So that it seemed that this Match was concluded on in Heaven, which no worldly endeavours could obstruct.
For after the fruitless endeavours of Prince Charles in Spain,His re∣turn. to re∣gain the Palatinate (with∣out which he could not accept of the Infanta for his Wife, King James al∣wayes saying, That there should be no Match un∣less that were likewise re∣stored, for he would not marry Prince Charles in joy, and leave his Daugh∣ter the Princess Elizabeth in tears) was with safety to the great joy of the People returned into Eng∣land, and in stead of an Al∣liance, a War proclaimed with Spain; Lewis the
Thirteenth King of France sent two Letters fraught with extraordinary expres∣sions and strains of Prince∣ly love, tacitely inviting some overtures of a Match with France, to which King James re∣turned answer thus.
MOst High,K. James his Letter to the K. of France. most Ex∣cellent, and most puissant Prince, Our most dear and loving good Bro∣ther and Cousin, and anci∣ent Ally: Although his late Maje∣sty of happy memory was justly entituled the Great, for having in effect re-con∣quered by Arms his King∣dome of France, although it appertained to him as his proper Inheritance; never∣thelesse you have made a greater Conquest: For the Kingdome of France, al∣though
it was regained by the Victorious Arms of the King your Father, yet be∣longed to him by Right, and he therefore subjugated no∣thing but what was his own. But you have made a greater conquest, having by your two last Letters, so full of true Cordial courtesie, overcome your good Brother and an∣cient Allie, and all the King∣doms appertaining to him. For we acknowledge Our selves so overcome by your brotherly affection, that We cannot render you the like; Only We can promise and assure you upon the Faith of an Honest man, that
you shall have power not only to dispose of Our Forces and Kingdoms, but of Our Heart, Our Person, and the Person of Our Son, if there be cause. Praying you to rest assured, that We shall be so far from think∣ing to cherish, or give any countenance to any of your Subjects, of what profession of Religion soever, that shall forget their natural De∣voirs towards you, and if We can get the least light of any thing, you shall be most faithfully advertized: And you may promise your self in like case, or in any other that may tend to the
honour of your Crown, that you shall have power to dispose freely of Our assi∣stance, as if the cause were your own, and upon this truth that our Interests shall alwayes be common, We pray God, Most high, most excellent and most puissant Prince, Our most dear and most loving Brother, Cousin and ancient Allie, to have you alwayes in his protection.
This Letter was soon after followed by Letters both from King James,Letters sent to the Princess Henrietta Maria. and Prince Charles, to the Princess Henrietta Maria, which she refused to read, till she had her Mothers leave, which granted, she put King James his in her Cushion or Cabinet, but Prince Charles his she pla∣ced in her bosome; which made King James say, That though he would denounce War against her for not reading the Let∣ters without her Mothers approbation, yet he must return her thanks for her
after ordering them; in∣timating thereby, That she would rely and rest upon him, but lodge his Son in her heart. But before the Con∣clusion of this Treaty,King James his Death. it pleased the Almighty to put an end to King James his dayes; a Prince who all his life had kept this Kingdome in a continual Peace and quietness, and had often been an Um∣pire in the difference of Neighbouring Princes, who were in as conti∣nued Combustions about him, whilest himself was never plunged in any War,
till now lately in one with Spain for the Resti∣tution of the Palatinate. Prince Charles upon the death of his Father is immediately declared his lawfull Heir and undoubt∣ed Successor,Prince Charles succeeds. whereof by his several Ambassadors he immediately acquaints all the neighbouring Prin∣ces: But to the King of France he sends over the Earls of Carlisle and Hol∣land, not only to acquaint him with his Fathers death, but to treat of an Alliance with the Princess Henrietta Maria; which Negotiation was con∣cluded
in fewer months then Spain had spent years in her Treaty. And soon after Letters of Procuration (or Proxie) were sent to the Duke of Chevereux of the House of Guise for espousing his Mistress and making her his Consort,Letters of Proxie to the Duke of Cheve∣reux. the Ceremo∣ny of which was celebra∣ted on Sunday the First of May according to our stile, but the Eleventh ac∣cording to theirs, in the Church of Nostre-dame at Paris, with a great deal of pomp and magnifi∣cence, she being given to the Duke of Chevereux in
behalf of the King of Eng∣land by her two Brothers the King and Mounsieur. About a fortnight af∣ter the Duke of Bucking∣ham put in Commission with the English Ambassa∣dours there,Bucking∣ham and others sent to fetch the Queen. is with a train of the best quality to ac∣company him sent to at∣tend the Queen, and to bring her over to her Spouse in England,K. James his Fune∣rall. whilest in the mean time, King James's Funeral on the 14 of May, was magnifi∣cently solemnized at West∣minster, King Charles him∣self contrary to the old
custome attending the Ob∣sequies. On the second of June,The Qu. sets for∣ward. the now Queen of Eng∣land set forward from Pa∣ris, and at the Town of Amiens staid fourteen days, by reason of the Queen her Mothers sickness, and in∣disposition, who would willingly have accompa∣nyed her to the Sea side, but at length was forced to leave her here, and so with her Brother the Mounsieur, she set forward towards Bulloigne, a longer passage by sea to England then that of Calais; but
the infection there forced them to accept of this. Here the Queen re∣ceived the Duke of Buc∣kinghams Mother (with a Train of very many La∣dies of quality from Eng∣land) whom Mounsieur so much honoured as to condescend to give her a visit at her Lodging, for no other reason but her being Mother to the King of Englands chief Favou∣rite, and the Dutchess of Chevereux that great Prin∣cess both of Match and Blood was forced to give her the precedency.
The King had com∣manded a good part of his Navy Royal,The Queen puts to sea. one and twenty Ships to attend the Queen, on which she imbarques, but in her passage findes the same rough and tempestuous weather which Mary Queen of Scots found when she was wafted over from Calais: This some interpreted as an ill omen, and have since taken it as a token of the succeeding tempests of her life. Yet on Trinity Sunday the 13/23 of June,Arrives at Dover. she ar∣rives
at Dover about se∣ven a Clock at night, his Majesty the next Morn∣ing coming from Canter∣bury to meet her, with joy received her at the top of the Stairs, whilest she on her knee endea∣vouring to kiss his hand, he seeming as it were sur∣prized, takes her up in his arms and salutes her with reiterated kisses. And so conducting her into an inner Chamber, after his congratulation of her safe arrival, and expression of the sad fears of her danger at Sea, (finding her some∣what
surprized, and to let fall some tears to see her self now in the hands of a stranger, whom she had never before seen) he tells her, That she was fallen into the effects of Gods Divine Providence, to forsake her Kindred and cleave to her Spouse, professing that he would be no longer Master of himself, then he was a ser∣vant to her. The Ceremony here was accomplished,The King and Queen set for∣ward to Londen. and the Duke of Chevereux having rendred her up to his Majesties bosom here,
and to his bed the same night at Canterbury, they the next day set forward towards Gravesend, the whole way being laned with millions of people, who made the very air thunder with renumera∣ted Ecchoes of God save their Majesties; they were likewise accompanyed with a most gallant Train of the English Gentry, who came from all parts of the Kingdom to wait upon their Majesties at so great a Solemnity. At Gravesend on the Thursday after, their Ma∣jesties
entred into the Barge of State, and ac∣companyed with an infi∣nite number of other Barges and Boats, went by water to Somerset-house, whilest the Ships all the way being placed in ranks on both sides the River, did volly out wellcomes to these two Princes. The Third after their arrival at London,The Mar∣riage pro∣claimed. their Majesties appeared in State to the Nobility, both having seated themselves upon their royal Thrones. And soon after the Mar∣riage was publiquely pro∣claimed
with excessive joy to all: And from thence their Majesties by reason of the great infection then in and about London, re∣moved to Hampton-Court: Where, and in all other places, they for many years lived in the greatest con∣tent and enjoyment of conjugal love that possibly could be: The King most singularly indulgent of his Royal Consort, and she correspondent with him, not only in personal af∣fection, but also in bring∣ing him forth a Progeny of Royal Princes and Prin∣cesses:
The best for Alli∣ance and Stock that ever the Earth had, being im∣mediately descended from the blood Royal of Eng∣land and France, allied to the Emperour, Kings of Spain and Denmark, and all the most potent Princes of the Western World. So that if ever any, these might most properly be said to be sprung de semi∣ne Divûm, of the seed of the Gods. Yet there happened an accident on the first of July,Occasion of discon∣tent be∣tween the King and Queen. in the year 1626. which not only created a diffe∣rence
betwixt Lewis the thirteenth King of France, and his Majesty of Eng∣land, but might likewise have caused a breach be∣tween him and his dearly beloved Queen and Con∣sort, had not her incom∣parable prudence taught her how to submit to her Husbands pleasure. The King had several times been informed of misdemeanours commit∣ted by some of the Queens Domestiques,The Qu. Servants dismissed. towards her person, and his Maje∣sty; and therefore on the first of July, having the
same day sent a Message, commanding all the Queens Servants to be there in readiness, he came to Somerset-house attended by the Duke of Bucking∣ham, the Earls of Holland and Carlisle, and other principal Officers, and tells them, Gentlemen and Ladies, I Am driven to that ex∣tremity, as I am perso∣nally come to acquaint you, that I very earnestly desire your return for France: True it is, the deportment of some amongst you, hath been
very inoffensive unto Me, but others again have so dallyed with my patience, and so highly affronted Me, as I cannot, I will not longer endure it. This accusation (though not determined to any particular) made all guilty,Bishop of Menes & Madam St. George, offer a defence of them∣selves. and every single person was concerned to clear himself: Whereupon the Bishop of Menes answe∣red, Sir, If this accrimination be levelled at me, let me, I beseech you, know my fault, while I am here to make de∣fence.
And Madam St. George said, Sir, I make no question but the Queen will give me a fair Testimonial to your Majesty. But the King replyed no more then, I name none: and so commanded their speedy return to France. This suddain action of the Kings,The Qu. extreamly disturbed at the sending away of her ser∣vants. overwhelmed the Queen (whose tender years were not yet fit for so harsh an encounter) with a great deal of impe∣tuous passion against the King, she at first taking it as the greatest extremity
of unkindness, that having so small a company of her native friends and servants to attend her, they should in an instant be all ca∣shiered, and in lieu of them she to expect, not a Train of Honour, but a Guard of disaffected persons, not so much to attend her as her actions, whereby she should be treated more like a Prisoner then a Princesse: That there could not be a high∣er affront put upon a Daughter of France, or Queen of England.
The King observing her transportation,The Kings endeavour to pacifie her. endeavou∣red by all sweet and gentle perswasions to pacifie her, but finding her inexora∣ble, he resolves to be so too, and therefore the begin∣ning of the next Month the French were all sent pack∣ing, having their Salaries paid them to a penny, and some of them large Gra∣tuities given them con∣trary to that scandal of a Modern French Historian, who writes, That they were dismissed without their Wages and appointment. Yet the doom fell heavy upon
some of them, who ha∣ving sold all they had in France, out of hopes to raise themselves Fortunes under the Queen in Eng∣land, were by this cashier∣ment almost totally rui∣ned. Their misdemeanours were of several sorts:The French misdemea∣nours. The Ecclesiasticks stood charg∣ed with imposing several unhandsome and unbe∣coming Penances upon the Queen, as particularly, the forcing her to make a Progress bare-foot to Ty∣burn, there to present her Devotions, which action
(the King said) could have no greater invective then the Relation. The Bishop of Mends was bla∣med likewise for con∣testing with the Earl of Holland, about the Stew∣ardship of those Mannors which were setled upon the Queen as her Joyn∣ture, that Office being conferred on the Earl by the King, whilest the other claimed a Grant from the Queen. Madam St. George was accused for having en∣deavoured by cunning in∣sinuations to beget a dis∣affection
between the King and Queen, where∣in she had gone so far, that whatever she sug∣gested, found more cre∣dence with the Queen, then whatsoever the King could alleadge; an affront not to be comported. And it appeared clearly after their departure, that the Queens frowardness pro∣ceeded not from any na∣tural disposition or incli∣nation of her own, but from their evil counsels, and the products of their malicious spirits; for ever after the Queen com∣ported
her self with so loving a complacencie and complyance, that the whole world could not afford a couple more mu∣tually endeared to one a∣nother. Yet notwithstanding,King of France re∣sents the sending a∣way of his Sisters servants. the Majesty of France highly resented the sending away of his Sisters Ser∣vants and Domestiques, who filled his ears with many lyes and scandals, one of which was the a∣forementioned, That they were sent away without their Salary: Whereas they had not only their full Deben∣ters
paid them, but large Rewards besides. Yet King Lewis his ears were so open to their com∣plaints,Ambassa∣dours sent to demand their resti∣tution. that he dispatches the Marshal de Bassompiere extraordinary Ambassador to the King of England, to demand the restitution of the Queens Domestiques, taxing our King with breaking the 14th Article of the Matrimonial part, by which it was agreed, That all the Domestique Servants which the Queen should bring over into Eng∣land should be naturall French, and Catholiques,
chosen by the most Christian King: And in case of death she to choose other Catholiques of France, provided the King of Great Britain should assent. Yet this Embassage proved vain and ineffectu∣al;But in vain. for it could not be ex∣pected, but that although by the Articles the King of France was to choose the first set of Servants for the Queen, yet they could not binde the King not to turn them away in case of misdemeanour; for if so, his power was so restrained, that those
Servants might take upon them to contradict his Majesty. In sum, their re-admission was utterly refused: Whereupon King Lewis proceeded to an utter breach of the peace be∣tween both Kingdoms, by seizing and securing the English Merchants Ships in the River of Bourdeaux, and by employing the Vantguard and the other six Ships (formerly lent to the French) against Ro∣chell, contrary to Articles, and their first Predesti∣nation.
This War proved un∣fortunate to the English,War with France un∣successe∣full. for their first, second, and third attempts were all un∣successefull; and the Great Duke of Buckingham, who commanded in chief, in the first Expedition for re∣lief of Rochell, being to set forth again upon the same design, was by one John Felton an obscure fellow, stabbed to death at Ports∣mouth. The Qu. in the Spring of the year 1629. was delive∣red of a Child,The Queen brought to bed before her time. which com∣ing somewhat before its time lived not much above
an hour, yet having some life in it, the Priests which attended the Qu. were ve∣ry earnest to baptize it, but the K. stepping in prevent∣ed them, and commanded Dr. Web, one of his Chap∣lains, to officiate, and name him Charls; which imme∣diately after he had done, the Childe expired. But on the 29th of May in the Year ensuing,Prince Charles born. was her Majesty delivered of a Son both living and lively, to the surpassing joy and exultation both of the Court and whole King∣dome, Heaven it self seeming to rejoyce: For at
the time when the King rode to St. Pauls Church to give thanks to God for the Queens safe delivery of a Son, though it were then neer Noon-day, there visibly appeared a Star in the Firmament, upon which these Verses were presented. Rex ubi Paulinas accessit gratus ad aras, Immicuit medio lucida stella Polo. Dic divina mihi tractans aenigmata coeli, Haec oriens nobis quid sibi stella velit? Magnus in occiduo princeps modo nascitur orbe, Moxque sub eclipsi regna Orientis erunt.
Thus Englished by Mr. Sanderson. When to Pauls-cross the grateful King drew (near, A shining Star did in the Heavens appear: Thou that consults with Divine Mysteries, Tell me what this bright Comet signifies: Now is there born a valiant Prince i'th West, That shall Eclipse the Kingdoms of the East. On the 27 of June following was the Prince baptized at St. James's,The Prince baptized. with most refulgent pomp and Princely Ceremony, and named CHARLS: the Godfathers and Wit∣nesses at his Christning,
were the King of France, and Prince Elector Palatine, represented by the Duke of Lenox and Marquess Hamilton: The Godmo∣ther was the Queen Mo∣ther of France, whose Sub∣stitute was the Dutchess of Richmond. But the more to binde the affections of this Pair Royal,Princess Mary born, to a firm tie of Conjugal love, on the fourth of November she blessed his Majesty and this Nation with the birth of her eldest Daughter, the Princess Mary, where∣by she gave him pledges
of both sexes, which after∣wards she encreased to a more numerous Issue. For on the Thirteenth of October,And Duke of York. 1633. she was delivered of her second Son, Christned James, and by the Kings command styled Duke of York, and so afterwards created by Letters Patents. And on the 28 of De∣cember, in the year 1635. was the Queen delivered of her second Daughter, the Lady Elizabeth, whose birth was congratulated by the United States of the Netherlands, with a pre∣sent
of a massie piece of Amber-greece, two fair and almost transparent China Basons, a rare Clock of very excellent Art, and four very admirable pieces of painting, the Originals of Tintinet and Titian, those incomparable Artists. Thus farre had this Queen lived in all peace and prosperity, enjoying the full and endeared love of her Royal Consort, which there were no out∣ward obstructions to hin∣der; they enjoying all things wherewith peace and prosperity could che∣rish
them, besides a blessed Issue, the delight of their eyes; so that Fortune seem∣ed to blow a gale upon them beyond their desires or expectations; till un∣constant as she is; she turned the scale, and in∣volved them in as great a gulf of sorrow and misery, as they had before been in the height of glory and greatness. Yet the hard Fortunes they were subjected to, did but the more illustrate and set forth those vertues, which whilest their brows were encircled with pro∣sperity
were scarce discern∣able to vulgar eyes and judgements. For though to bear ones self with even and noble spirit in the height of happiness and greatness, be praise-wor∣thy and admirable, yet afflictions are the only trial of a great and mag∣nanimous soul. And that this Queen was a person of so great and magnanimous spirit, none can doubt, who shall consider with what a setled spirit she waded through those Afflictions with which God was pleased
to chastize her and her Royal Consort. The first time that she had occasion to shew her¦self ready and willing to endure a part of her Hus∣bands afflictions,The Queen raises a Benevo∣lence a∣mongst the Ca∣tholiques. was when his Majesty by rea∣son of the Scots second Rebellion, in 1639. (not∣withstanding his gracious Pardon and Pacification granted them but the year before) was constrained by force of Arms to seek a course to reduce them to Obedience, but by reason of the unwillingness of Parliaments to supply his
extraordinary wants then, and the great Charge which would accrue by his raising an Army to oppose them, who were then ready to enter his Kingdom of England, was forced to desire a Benevo∣lence of those his Loyal Subjects of the Nobility and others, who were wil∣ling to contribute towards his Necessities. The Queen out of her meer motion, and free will, by her Substitutes, Sir Kenelme Digby, and Mr. Walter Montague, negotiated with the Catholiques, for a
free and hearty Contri∣bution. And so free were those (who though they were termed Recusants in point of Religion,The Ca∣tholiques free sup∣plyes. yet were not so, but rather examples to others in point of loyalty) few Catholiques then in the Kingdom, that almost as great a sum was gathe∣red from them, as from the more numerous Pro∣testants, many of them proportioning their affecti∣ons beyond their abilities. Yet those InstrumentsThe Col∣lectors of her Maje∣sties Be∣nevolence questioned▪ which she had employed for the raising of those free
and voluntary Contribu∣tions, were after question∣ed by the House of Com∣mons, and their Collecti∣ons, though voluntary, adjudged illegal; there being a Law in England, restraining all publique Collections, but only what were made according to such and such Forms and Commissions, which were to issue forth in Cases of such a general nature, and though those Collections (as was alleadged) were rather Free Gifts then Col∣lections, yet the Collectors were like to have been
punished. Which toge∣ther with the scandal cast upon her Majesty, That she had been an Incendia∣ry betwixt the King and his People, and objections taken at the residence of the Popes Legate in Eng∣land; she by Letter ac∣quainted that House, That she had alwayes used her best endeavours for the removing of all misunder∣standings betwixt the King and his People:The Qu. message to the House of Com∣mons. That she had effectually, both by Letters and expresse Messages perswaded him to
convoque that great Assem∣bly. That whereas there were exceptions taken at the resi∣dence of the Popes Legate in England, she would take care to remove him speedily, though he were here meerly for her own Conscience. That touching the Col∣lection, if any thing were illegal in it, it must be im∣puted to her ignorance of the Law, being carried thereunto out of a dear and tender affection to his Majesty, her Royal Spouse, in so pressing an occasion, but she would be more cautious hereafter,
not to do any thing but what might stand with Law. That she was desirous to employ all the power she had, to unite the King and Peo∣ple: Therefore she desired them to look forwards, and passe by such mistakes and errors of her Servants: which respect of theirs should be repaid with all good Offi∣ces, whereby they should finde real effects. This complacent and gentle Message of the Queen mitigated the Par∣liaments resentments a∣gainst her Collectors, and
upon further considerati∣on all proceedings against them were suspended. At the beginning of those second roubles in Scotland,The Qu. Mother arrives in England. the Queen Mo∣ther of France, who by the over-reaching power of the Cardinal Richelieu, by her means and pow∣er, advanced to that height wherewith he then swayed, was not only expulsed out of her Do∣minion of that King∣dome, but being likewise ignominiously led about the French Army, in the manner of a Prisoner, was
after suffered to escape thence, which she did, first to the Cardinal d'Infanto Governour of Flanders, and afterwards to the Prince of Orange, from whence she was by our Queen her daughter, com∣passionate of her miseries, invited over into England, where she arrived on the last of October, 1638. just before the beginning of our sad and miserable troubles, her coming over being upon unknown grounds imputed as a presage of all our future distractions, she being ac∣counted
ominous to what place soever she came, till the middle of the year 1641. (when we began more visibly to be invol∣ved in our troubles) she staid here, when accom∣panyed with the Earl of Arundel, she took her leave, and journeyed through Zealand to Collen in Germany,Her death. where soon afterward overwhelmed with age and miseries, in a melancholy condition to see that Cardinal Riche∣lieu, whom she had raised from almost nothing, to the whole administration
the affairs of France, this mighty Princesse expi∣red. During the being here of that Illustrious Princess,Duke of Glocester born. the Queen was brought abed of a third Son, who entred into the world on the twentieth of July, 1640. and was Christned Henry, and after created Duke of Glocester. She had before been delivered of her third Daughter on the 17th of March, 1636. who was Christned Anna, and died before her Father. And shortly after the Duke of Glocesters birth,
in the same year,The Mar∣riage of the Prin∣cess Mary with the Prince of Orange. the Am∣bassadour Leiger of Hol∣land made some overtures of a Marriage between the young Prince, William of Nassau Prince of Orange, and the Kings eldest Daughter the Lady Mary: Which Overtures were willingly assented to by the King, and likewise a∣greed upon by the Parlia∣ment, who expressed much joy at the Kings inclina∣tions to marry his Daugh∣ter to a Protestant Prince, though somewhat inferior to her in birth and noble∣ness. So on Sunday the
second of May, the Mar∣riage was with a great deal of Solemnity per∣formed in the Kings Chappell at White-hall. Notwithstanding the Parliaments former su∣spension of all proceedings against the Kings servants who collected the Bene∣volence amongst the Ca∣tholiques,The Qu. accused of High trea∣son. for the Kings necessary supply in his Expedition against the Scots; yet a strange report after there was, of the Par∣liaments intentions to draw up Articles of High Treason against her. And
indeed some resolutions there were of the Parlia∣ments, (upon a fond conceit that the Queen had so much power with the King, as to misadvise him) either to perswade her to withdraw her self aside, by some fears where∣with they would possess her, or else to drive her away perforce; which the King finding, and think∣ing the first the surest course, thought it better to have her go as it were voluntarily, and therefore acquainted the Parlia∣ment,
That he was pressed by the States Ambassadours, to send the Princesse Maria into Holland, to her late Espoused Husband, and that the Queen desiring it, he had given her leave to goe with her. And so the good Queen was got out of their Clutches,The Queen goes for Holland. the King ac∣companying her and the Princess to the Sea-side at Dover, and she carrying with her all the Jewels belonging to the Crown, the Pawn of which after∣wards (with some addi∣tional supplyes from the
Prince of Orange, assisted the King in his extreamest necessities. The King was extream∣ly troubled at the Queens departure, which made him fall into this rare Soliloquie of her, in which because he (who knew her best) gives the best Characters of her that possibly can be given, I shall here insert it.
ALthough I have much cause (says the King) to be troubled at my Wives departure from me, and out of my Dominions; yet not her absence, so much as the scandal of that necessity which drives her away, doth afflict me. That she should be compelled by my own Subjects, and those pretend∣ing to be Protestants, to withdraw for her safety: This being the first example of any Protestant Subjects, that have taken Arms against
their King, a Protestant. For I look upon this now done in England, as ano∣ther act of the same Tragedy which was lately begun in Scotland; the Brands of that fire being ill quenched, have kindled the like flames here. I fear such motions, so little to the adorning of the Protestant Profession, may occasion a further alie∣nation of minde, and divorce of affections in her, from that Religion wherein we only differ. Which yet God can, and I pray he would in time take away, and not suffer
these practices to be any obstruction to her judgement; since it is the motion of those men (for the most part) who are yet to seek and settle their Religion for Doctrine, Government and good man∣ners, and so not to be im∣puted to the true English Protestants, who continue firm to their former setled Principles and Laws. I am sorry my relation to so deserving a Lady, should be any occasion of her danger and affliction, whose merits would have served her for a protection amongst the savage Indians, whilest their rude∣nesse
and barbarity knows not so perfectly to hate all vertues, as some mens sub∣tilty doth, among whom I yet think few are so malicious as to hate her for her self, the fault is, she is my Wife. All justice then, as well as affection, commands me to studie her security, who is only in danger for my sake. I am content to be tossed weather-beaten and shipwrackt, so as she may be in a safe harbour. This comfort I shall enjoy by her safety in the middest of my personal dangers,
That I can perish but half, if she be preserved, to whose memory and hopefull Poste∣rity I may yet survive the malice of mine enemies, al∣though they should be satia∣ted with my blood. I must leave her and them to the love and loyalty of my good Subjects, and to, his protection who is able to punish the faults of Prin∣ces, and no lesse severely to revenge the Injuries done to them, by those who in all duty and Allegiance, ought to have made good that safe∣ty which the Laws chiefly provide for Princes.
But common civility is in vain expected from those who dispute their Loyalty: Nor can it be safe for any Relation to a King to tarry among them who are shaking hands with their Allegiance, under pretence of laying faster hold on their Reli∣gion. 'Tis pity so noble and peacefull a Soul, should see, much more suffer the rude∣nesse of those, who must make up their want of Justice with inhumanity and impudence. Her sympathie with me in affliction will make her
Vertues shine with greater lustre, as Stars in the darkest nights, and assure the envious World, That she loves me, not my For∣tunes. Neither of us but can easily forgive, since we do not much blame the unkind∣nesse of the generality and Vulgar; for we see God is pleased to trie both our Patience, by the most self∣punishing sin, the ingrati∣tude of those who having eaten of our Bread, and being enriched by our bounty, have scornfully lift up them∣selves against us, and those
of our own Houshold are become our enemies. I pray God lay not their sin to their charge, who think to satisfie all Obligations to duty by their Corban of Religion, and can lesse endure to see, then to sin against their Benefactors as well as their Soveraigns. But even that policy of mine enemies is so far venial, as it was necessary to their designs, by scandalous Ar∣ticles, and all irreverend de∣meanour, to seek to drive her out of my Kingdoms, lest by the influence of her example, eminent for Love
as a Wife, and Loyalty as a Subject, she should have converted to, or retained in their Love and Loyalty, all those, whom they had a purpose to pervert. The lesse I can be blest with her Company, the more I will retire to God and mine own Heart, whence no malice can banish her. Mine Enemies may envy, but they can never deprive me of the enjoyment of her Vertues, while I enjoy my self.
Let the world then judge by this noble cha∣racter given her by him who of all men in the world best knew her, how ill she deserved those many scandals and re∣proaches upon her, which even malice it self could hardly be induced to be∣lieve. The Parliament had before the Queens de∣parture endeavoured to clear themselves from any intention of drawing up any Articles against her,The Par∣liaments endeavour to clear them∣selves. and that it was only a scandal put upon them
by some malicious Incen∣diaries: To which ex∣cuse of theirs, the Queen mildely returned answer, That there was a gene∣ral report thereof,The Qu. answer to their ex∣cuse. but she never saw any Articles in writing, and having no certain Author for either, she gave little credit thereto; nor could she believe that they would lay any aspersions upon her, who had ever been very unapt to miscon∣ster the actions of any one person, and much more the proceedings of Parliament: And should at all times wish a happy Union and under∣standing
between the King and his people. However the King thought it the best course to send her out of the way. During the Queens ab∣sence,The breach betwixt the King and Par∣liament. broke out those irreconcilable discontents between the King and Parliament: The first endeavouring to main∣tain the Fundamentall Laws of the Land, the true professed Protestant Religion, and his own due and proper Rights and Prerogatives; whilest
the latter endeavoured to subvert all of them, by infringing and eclipsing that Royal Prerogative, which had for above three hundred years adorned this Monarchy, endea∣vouring to settle an arbi∣trary Power in themselves, by subverting and over∣turning at pleasure the fundamental Laws of the Land, making new ones according as their designs served them; taking away from the King all power over the Militia, his un∣doubted and inherent right, surprizing and en∣garrisoning
his Forts and Castles, robbing him of his Ships and Navies, denying him entrance into one of his own Towns, and disposal of his Magazine of Arms and Ammunition there, though bought with his own Money, and inten∣ded to be imployed in reducing the Irish then in Rebellion, for the gene∣rall good of these King∣doms, and all this under the large pretences of Reformation of Religion, removing the King from (such as they pleased to
call) evil Counsellours, making him a happy and glorious King; whilest indeed in stead of him, as the event proved, they intended to constitute themselves so many petty Athenian Kings, to Rule and Domineer at plea∣sure over these three Kingdoms. And to this effect they first raise Arms,The Par∣liament raise Arms. perswa∣ding the People, That their intentions were only to bring the King again to his Parliament, from whence by the violent pro∣ceedings of some Members
in the Commons House, (who suggested jealousies and fears into the Sub∣urbian Rabble of the City of London, and induced them to come to his Court, in tumultuous manner, and threaten him at his very Palace-gate) he was forced in honour to go away, and retire himself to York, where (after many messages and sollicitations to the Parlia∣ment to come to an ac∣cord and agreement) he likewise endeavoured to put himself into a posture of Defence.
But the Parliament ha∣ving both the Magazine of Men,The King likewise arms. Money and Am∣munition (the City of London) in their hands, were extreamly before∣hand with him; though the Queen used her utmost endeavours in Holland, by the assistance of the Prince of Orange, and those Jewels she carried over with her, to raise him both supplyes of Money, Arms and Ammunition, by means of which, and the Contributions and assistance of those Subjects which still continued loyal
to him, he gathered such an Army as was able for some time to oppose his enemies. And on the sixteenth of February, 1642.The Queen comes to England. the Queen her self imbarques for England, but was the first time by contrary windes and foul weather beaten back again into Holland: But fearing no storms for her dear Con∣sorts sake, puts to sea a∣gain, and on the nine∣teenth, she with some hazard anchors at Bur∣lington Bay, and safely lands, the two and twen∣tieth,
with some supply of Officers, Munition and Money. But though she got safely to shore, yet she endured there as great a Tempest, if not worse then any she had done at Sea, of which she thus by Letter acquaints the King.
THE next night after we came to Burling∣ton,The Qu. Letter to the King about her escape at Burlington. four of the Parliament Ships arrived without being perceived by us, and about Five a Clock in the Morn∣ing they began to ply us so fast with their Ordinance, that it made us all to rise out of our Beds, and leave the Village, (at least the Women.) One of the Ships did me the favour, to flank upon the House where I lay, and before I was out of my Bed, the Cannon
Bullets whistled so loud a∣bout me, that all the Com∣pany pressed me earnestly to goe out of the House, their Cannon having totally bea∣ten down all the neighbour∣ing houses, and two Cannon Bullets falling from the top to the bottom of the House where I was; so that (cloa∣thed as I could be) I went on foot some little distance out of the Town, under the shelter of a Ditch, (like that of New-market) whither before I could get, the Ca∣non Bullets fell thick about us, and a Serpent was killed within twenty paces of me;
We in the end gained the Ditch, and stayed there two hours, whilest their Canon plaid all the while upon us: The Bullets flew for the most part over our heads, some few only grazing on the Ditch, covered us with Earth, &c. Yet, notwithstanding their strenuous endea∣vours, it pleased God to preserve this Illustrious Princess from their dis∣loyal violence, which they had not yet given over, had not the ebbing of the Tide, and some
threats from the Admiral of Holland, forced them to desist in the further pursuance of it. The Queens Majesty was at Burlington met by the Earl of Montrose,The Qu. goes to York. and the Lord Ogilby, who with two Troops of Horse, conveyed her to York, where she uses her utmost diligence in promoting his Majesties affairs, and in a short time raises a pretty considerable force, which with an Amazonian courage she undertakes to command in person.
And with these Forces thus raised,Advances to Newark. she first ad∣vances to Newark, from thence to Weston, and so to Ashby, where she resolves to think upon what might most conduce to the be∣nefit of his Majesties af∣fairs, having received in∣telligence that the Enemies Forces from Nottingham were retreated into Lei∣cester-shire and Derby-shire, to joyn with a greater force to oppose or inter∣cept her Majesties passage, which she endeavoured to make towards the King, to conjoyn their powers.
But yet before she goes forward, she takes a pru∣dent care of preserving those Countries which she left behinde her, and there∣fore she leaves Sir Charls Cavendish brother to the Earl of Newcastle, with the command of three thousand Foot, Arms for five hundred and twenty Troops of Horse, to secure Lincolnshire and Notting∣ham-shire, the better to preserve those who were already loyal, from the enemies violence, and to keep subject such whose volatile spirits were too
subject to flie from their Allegiance, as likewise to keep in awe those thou∣sand Foot which the ene∣my had left engarrisoned in Nottingham. And so her self marches forward,Her Ma∣jesties Forces. accompanyed with three thousand Foot, thirty companies of Horse and Dragoons, six pieces of Cannon, two Mortar-pieces, and one hundred and fifty Waggons of Money, Provision and Ammunition. Mr. Jermin (now Earl of St. Albans) as Coll. of her Majesties Regiment of guards, com∣manded
in Chief over the whole Squadron, Sir Alex∣ander Lesley (who since, & indeed ever proved himself a traiterous, murderous, perfidious and cowardly Scot) had the ordering of the Infantry, and Sir John Gerrard commanded the Horse, Capt. Leg the Ar∣tillery, and her Majesties self Generalissima, with an undaunted and more then Womanlike resolution in the head of her Army. But let us look a little into her Majesties native Countrey,Card Richelieu his death. where that fa∣mous or rather infamous
Politician, Cardinall Ri∣chelieu, having by his Po∣licies dipped his hands in the blood of so many in∣nocent Peers of France, is forced at length himself, fato succumbere, to yield to that Fate from which no subtilty could reprieve him. He was born at Paris,His birth, extract & Character. of Noble extraction, and took his Orders at Rome, where Pope Paul the fifth then sitting in the Pontifi∣cal Chair, & looking with earnestness upon his phy∣siognomy told him, That he should become the greatest Cheat in the World.
He was by the Queen Mother first preferred to be Bishop of Larone, and then to the Kings Counsel, whom she afterwards commended to the Pope, who sent him the Cap, and after the famous siege and forcing of Rochell, by his policy and industry be∣came the prime Minister of State in the Kingdome of France, and the King growing up to age, insi∣nuated so much into his favour, that he postponed filial duty and brotherly affection to his love to∣wards him, so his Policy
taught him to be ingrate∣full in the highest degree to those breasts which had first cherished and advan∣ced him. His minde was esteem∣ed by most to be of the same colour with his habit, wholly sanguine, and much of the temper of that Spanish Cardinal, who affirmed, That Gunpowder in the field gave as sweet a perfume as Incense at the Altar. He was observed to be of an irreconcileable na∣ture, where he once hated he hated ever, pardoning
none from whom he either had or judged he might receive an injury. The Marshal of Marillacks, and many other prime Peers of France, are ex∣amples of his revenge. Yet his Counsels have been by many great Poli∣ticians esteemed of high conducement to the affairs of France; for by them the Hugonots were suppressed, who were looked upon as one of the greatest Weak∣nesses of France; for by them either Forain Prin∣ces cherished their Inva∣sions, or potent Peers
their Rebellions: A great scourge he was to the Spaniard, but greater to the Duke of Lorrain, whom he chased out of his Coun∣trey to seek another habi∣tation. He was looked upon as the greatest Incendiary and Fomenter of the Scottish and English Rebellions and Disturbances. A man he was of an infinite contri∣ving and sedulous spirit, as solid as subtile, a thing rare under the Gallick Clime, insomuch that many have termed him the wonder and Prodigy of Prudence.
A mighty Change there was expected to follow in the Government of France upon his death, but he had so well instructed his Pu∣pil Mazarine, that things went on still in their for∣mer frame. This Mazarine who suc∣ceeded in that grand em∣ployment was a Sicilian by birth,Mazarine succeeds him. (and are a wily sub∣tile generation) of mean Parentage, but an highly extended Genius; he was first servant to a German Count at Rome, who much frequenting Plays, (at which he was an ex∣cellent
Artist) his servant Mazarincs quick spirit soon learned the Trade, and Fortune likewise fa∣vouring him, in a short time he raised himself to a Stock of a thousand Crowns, when leaving his Master, he gets into the service of Cardinal Barbe∣rino, then chief in the Court of Rome, by whom being soon observed to be of a nimble wit and tena∣cious judgement, he was first employed in a small Legateship in Italy, which place he performing, even to admiration, and the
Court of Rome wanting a person whose cunning po∣licies might circumvent Ri∣chelieu's designs in France, he is by the Cardinal Bar∣berino's means chosen and sent Legat thither, but finding himself outwitted here, he thought it better to joyn with Richelieu, and become his Pupil, to learn more, then lose that opini∣on already had of his judgement. And under him he so perfected his experience, that it will be a hard que∣stion to determine, whe∣ther his Predecessor before
him, or he since, have ma∣naged the affairs of that Kingdom with greater subtilty. Not long after the death of his Royal Favourite,Lewis 13. dies. Lewis the 13th (brother to the Queen of England) and surnamed the just, return∣ing out of Catalonia, ex∣treme sad and melancholy, bid adieu to the World, having yet left behinde him two Heirs Males, Children, born (to the wonder of the world) after twenty three years barren∣ness in his Royal Queen, and Consort, Infanta once
of Spain, when he despair∣ed to have seen a Childe of his own Heir to the Crown of France. He was a Prince, of himself of a very quiet and peaceable temper, by which means Richelieu had the greater opportu∣nity to carry on affairs of State as he pleased. At his death he declared the Queen Regent or Gover∣ness of his young Son the King, till he came to age, recommending the Cardi∣nal Mazarine (whom she had long before received) to her for counsel.
But let us return to the Queen,The Qu. and King meet at Edge hill whom we left marching towards the King, and whom we may now expect to have met him at Edge-hill: The first time which his Majesty had had the happiness (for so I dare affirm he accoun∣ted it) to see her, since her forced departure to Hol∣land; what joy and congra∣tulations there was at this meeting, I leave the Rea∣der to judge. In the mean time,Ambassa∣dour from France. Mon∣sieur Harcourt came over Ambassador from France, to treat of an accommo∣dation between the King
and Parliament; but his Negotiation was by many rather looked upon as a flourish from the Policy of Cardinal Mazarine, to pry into the actions of this great difference, he being likely rather to widen that breach which was the Master-piece of Cardinall to make, then any way endeavour to close it. The Queen being by the King conveyed to Ox∣ford,The Qu. at Oxford. stayed there till the beginning of the next year, whilest the Kings affairs went on in a very hopefull posture; for the same day
that the Queen entred Triumphantly into Ox∣ford,Sir William Waller routed. was Sir William Waller the City Generall totally routed at Roundaway down, and no Army in the field to oppose him, had he not unadvisedly set down be∣fore the siege of Glocester, whilest in the mean time Essex raised another Army, and Sir William was re∣cruited by the City, the Scots invited in to assist their Brethren of England against the King, when had his Majesty directly marched up towards Lon∣don, he had found no force
to oppose him, and so might have utterly quasht the Rebellion, which had been better policy then the in vain attempting that beggerly and disloyal City. The Queen now draw∣ing neer her time,The Qu. intends to journey to the West. and it being generally believed, that the Earl of Essex with his Forces had some aim at Oxford, as the Seat Royal of the King, the residence of his Court and Council, and the Sanctuary of a considerable part of the Nobility, Gentry and Cler∣gy, it was thought fit that the Queen should remove
to Exceter (lately taken in by Prince Maurice) as a place more free from the power of the Enemies; and not far from the Sea, by which she might take shipping for France as occasion served. Yet was it not fear that perswaded her magnani∣mous spirit to depart from Oxford,Queen proclaim∣ed traitor. (though the Par∣liament at Westminster had proclaimed her Traytor, and belched forth many scandalous falsities against her,) but over-perswaded by those who had a greater care of her safety then her self, she went.
And on the sixteenth of April she began her jour∣ney towards Exceter,Sets for∣ward to∣wards the West. con∣ducted by the King, Prince, Duke of York, and most of the chief Nobility and Gentry as far as Abingdon, where she took her last leave of the King, though neither of them without doubt had the least presage that that parting kisse should be the last that ever they were like to give each other. Being parted from the King, she was Convoyed on her journey by a suffi∣cient strength of Horse
purposely appointed for her security, and at her arrival at Exceter was re∣ceived by that City with all possible magnificence, where soon after she was safely delivered of her fourth Daughter,Delivered of a daughter. who was christned Henrietta. The weakness and sick∣nesses incident to Childe∣bearing being passed over, the young Princess was committed to the charge of the Lady Dalkeith, Daughter to Sir Edward Villiers, one of the half-brothers of the Duke of Buckingham, and Wife to
the Lord Dalkeith, eldest Son to the Lord Morton; which having done, she took Shipping at Pendennis Castle, on the fifteenth of July, 1644. and so passed into France,Queen passes into France. there to nego∣gotiate, according to in∣structions received from his Majesty, for some sup∣plyes of Money, Arms and Ammunition for the ad∣vance of his service; in which if she could not prevail, yet however to continue in the Court of the King of France, till his his Majesties Affairs here might be brought into
such a capacity, that she might return again both with honour and safety. In the mean time the Kings affairs in England went on with a great deal of seeming prosperity;Waller and Essex routed. for not long after the Queens departure, he gained a signal Victory over Sir William Waller at Cropedy-bridge, and then marching after Essex, who was with the other part of the Parliaments Army gone into the West, to reduce those Counties to their obedience, he fol∣lowed him so close at the
heels, that at last he brought him into that straight, that himself with Sir Philip Stapleton, and some others escaped away in a Cock-boat, leaving the whole Army to his Majesties mercy: The Horse taking the occasion of a dark night, made their way through and escaped, but the foot came to Capitulation, and had liberty to march away, but their Arms, Artillery, Baggage & Ammuntion, were left to his Majesties dispose. Severall other successes the King had by
taking in of Garrisons, &c. and several Messages not∣withstanding his success he sent to the Parliament, for peace and accommo∣dation, but could not be hearkened unto. But a hard destiny at∣tended this pious King,Nazeby fight the Kings ruine. for whilest he solicites the Parliament with continual Messages of Peace, they make all possible prepara∣tions for War, and the next year, viz. 1645. on the 14 of June, at Nazeby, gave the King his fatal and final overthrow, making them∣selves masters of his Camp,
Carriages and Cannon, & amongst the rest, of his Majesties Cabinet of pri∣vate Letters which had passed between him and the Queen, which to their own disgrace they publish∣ed in Print: A barbarity which very Heathens would be ashamed to be guilty of. The King saved himself by flight from this battell, and gathered together as many of his scattered Troops as he could, but was never after able to make head against the conquerors, but still losing one place after another,
was at last reduced to have Oxford only for his shelter, where finding himself not safe without a Field Army,The King disguised leaves Ox∣ford. on the 27 of April, 1646. he in disguise leaves the City, and throws himself upon the Scots Army at Newark, who having ta∣ken that Town, carryed him to Newcastle, where they kept him in restraint. The Queen after her de∣parture from England,The Qu. desires to procure Lorrain to assist the King. had long time, and with great industry laboured to bring a design to effect, which was the procuring of the Duke of Lorrain, who being at leisure with a
rambling Army, and Mo∣ney in his Purse, was in a capacity to assist any body who stood in need of him. The Queen of England therefore treated with him for his assistance: Many Debates there were, which way his Forces (which were then neer Collein) should pass to the water∣side, through France or Holland, and where they should land in England, Westward or Northward; but all came to nothing, though there were hopes of his aid, till the very time that the Kings ruine was consummate, by his
trusting himself with the Scots, who had before been so basely treacherous to him. And now the Parlia∣ment make their Victories over the King and his friends absolute.Oxford ta∣ken. Oxford is yielded up to the Parlia∣ments Generall, Fairfax, and in it the Great Seal, Privy Seal and Signet, as likewise the Duke of York, and the Princess Henrietta, who were both sent to Westminster, but both short∣ly after escaped, the last conveyed by the Lady Dalkeith into France, and the first by Capt. Bampfield,
in Womans apparel, into Holland, the Prince having before escaped thither from the Scillies. The next design of the Parliaments was to get the King into their hands,The Scots sell the King. which Money was like∣ly enough to effect; three hundred thousand pounds does the feat, and so his Majesty is delive∣red up into the hands of the English Parliaments Commissioners, and with a strong party of Horse hurried from Newcastle to Holmby, and so about from Prison to Prison betwixt Army and Parliament, till
at length the Independent Army having selected a choice Juncto of their own Gang, and by force thrust those who accorded not with their murderous de∣signs out of dores, instruct these to vote, That a High Court of Justice should be erected, to try the King, as a Rebell and a Traitor: A design so horribly traite∣rous, as not to be parallel'd in all preceding ages. The Queen at Paris,The Qu. Letter to the King. hearing of their wieked determinations, writes to the King, and with much diligence gets her Letter conveyed to him by one
Wheeler, servant to Major Boswell: Wherein she ex∣presses, The deep sence and sorrow which she had of the Kings miserable condition, in which the bonds of nature and affection enforce her to bear more then an equal share, wishing with all her heart, if it pleased God, that she might die for him, without whom she cannot, nor will not live, yet in the mean time will use her ut∣most power and interest by all ways imaginable to help him. She likewise sends ano∣ther Letter to the French Ambassadour resident,And to the Lord Fairfax. to be delivered to the L. Gen. which she directs, To her
Trusty & well-beloved, Tho. Lord Fairfax, Generall of the Parliaments Forces: Therein imploring his aid and assi∣stance, to come over to the King her Husband, to see him before he should be pro∣ceeded against by any Tryall or Charge; and to have a Passe for her secure coming and returning. This Letter was by the L. Gen. Fairfax sent to the House of Com∣mons, but they not so much as deigning to take it into consideration, laid it aside. And on they proceed in their intended traiterous design against the King her Husband,The King beheaded condemning
him by their pretended High Court of Justice, to be murdered, by severing his head from his bo∣dy, before his own Palace-gate of White-hall; which accordingly they executed on that black day, (for ever to be rased out of the Kalender) Tuesday the 30 of Jan. to the astonishment of the whole World, and grief of all good men. But with what unexpressible grief and sorrow to his Royal Consort, must be left to imagina∣tion, no pen being able to express that black cloud of distractions which so sad an accident must ne∣cessarily involve her in: & certain∣ly had she been of the same Reli∣gion that those noble Roman Wo∣men were, who scorned to survive
their Husbands, her magnani∣mous spirit had certainly follow∣ed their example. But since her Religion (though it could not re∣strain her sorrow for her murdered King and Husband) restrained her from following him in death,The Qu. goes into a Monastery at Challons. she is resolved to spend the rest of her time in Re∣ligion, and therefore retired her self to the Monastery of Challons, where she ceased not daily to la∣ment both his and her own hard Fortune, his in coming to so un∣timely an end by the treachery of his Subjects, and her own in sur∣viving him. Till at length over∣come by the importunities of the King and Qu. Mother of France,
she came to keep Court (though with the most obscurity that could be) in Pallace Royal, a Pallace built by Cardinal Richelieu at Pa∣ris, yet never interposing in any matters of Estate, except what might be for the Promoting of the interest of her Son King Charles the Second, who not only lost his Father, but was deprived of his Kingdoms by his Fathers Mur∣derers, till it pleased God of late to restore him, which sure does in a great measure comfort this disconsolate Princesse, though Worlds cannot repair the loss of such a Husband. A Prince he was of an incom∣parable piety, and so rare a pattern of Conjugal love, that he com∣manded
the Princess Elizabeth, the day before his death, to tell her mother, That his thoughts had never strayed from her, and that his love had been the same to the last. Nor were her Vertues less re∣splendant, which should I un∣dertake to Characterize, I should wrong what King Charles him∣self hath done. I therefore only conclude with this Wish: May England ever be happy in such Princes, but may never Princes of England be so unhappy in their Governments, as the Ma∣lice and Rebellion of some men made Them to be. FINIS.
