F2073 12861579 94683
A SERMON AT THE FUNERAL OF THE HIGH & MIGHTY PRINCE, HENRY De La TOUR D' AUVERGNE, Vicount of TURENNE, Mareschal General of FRANCE; Colonel General of the LIGHT HORSE, and Governour of the Upper and Lower LIMOSIN. Preach'd December 15, 1675. By CLAUDE FRANCIS, MINISTRIER. Englished out of FRENCH. LONDON, Printed by W.G. and are to be Sold by Moses Pitt at the Sign of the Angel in S. Paul's Church-Yard. 1677.
2 Sam. 3.32, 33, 38. —And all the People wept. And the King lamented, and said, Died he as a Fool dieth? —Know ye not that there is a Prince and a Great Man fallen this day in Israel?'Tis the Death of Abner Ge∣neral of the Army, whom David lament∣ed so. 'Tis in the Heb.  which signifies the Princpal Man; and in the Greek , the great Captain. WHen I observe these Walls hung with Mourning, and the pro∣found silence which attends this mournful Ceremony, I see plainly, Gentlemen, that you are assembled here to mix your tears with the tears of all France, and I con∣ceive my self to be but the interpreter of your grief. But when I cast my eyes upon the Tro∣phies which attend the Corps, and upon those marks of Grandeur which present to our sight a kind of Triumph in the midst of the very Shades of Death, I am sensible that you come not here barely to weep at the remembrance of a Hero
we so lately lost; the memory of Heroes re∣quires somewhat more than this. To the de∣monstrations of an universal affliction, we should add publick Elogics, and apparent signs of our particular veneration; a weak, but a due acknowledgment of what they merit of us. How happy should I be, Gentlemen, if be∣ing chosen this day to publish the Encomiums of so great a man, I was but able to express one part of your thoughts, and but in some measure to represent an Idea of what you your selves conceive of his worth! But how is it possible, but to omit something in the infinite number of matters which offer themselves in a croud to my Fancy? How can I confine with∣in the narrow Bounds of a Discourse, the Elo∣gium of a Person whose Glory fills the whole Earth? 'Tis rare to see a mans Wit upon such an occasion, to reach the Sentiments of his Mind: And this am I most abundantly sensible of, being now to speak the Elogium of Monsieur de Turenne. When I call to mind the wonderful number of great Actions which he has done, my eyes are dazled, and my Fancy is at loss. As I know not where for to begin, I see not where to end. If his Military Virtues surprize me, his
Christian Virtues ravish me.An non propri∣us virtutum ni∣tor splendorem armorum illu∣stravit? Cassi∣od. ep. 5. var. If I contemplate him as a Great Hero in War, I look upon him likewise as Great a Hero in Christianity; and in the midst of that admiration, which so many Virtues, so many Great Actions, so many Mira∣cles both of Wisdom and Valour, occasion, I must say with the Prophet, Know ye that he whom we lament, was one of the greatest and wisest Captains in his Age? Num ignoratis quoniam Princeps & Maximus cecidit? Great by the splen∣dor of his Birth, and his Immortal Actions; but greater yet in the sight of God, by the Inno∣cence of his Life. 'Tis this last Virtue, which makes the Praises of Heroes to be allowed of in Holy Places; for without it, methinks, Custom could not have introduc'd Funeral Ce∣remonies to any other end,Mors mater moeroris usurpa∣tur ad gloriam. Bern. Serm. 26. in Cant. but to flatter the li∣ving by the Elogiums of the dead. But a thought so little Christian-like,The Cardi∣nal of Bouil∣lon. Non tam clari sanguinis colore, quam virtutum succo hujus ve∣stimenta purpu∣rascunt. D. Am∣br. in Hexant. could never possess the mind of that Prince, who has caus'd the paying of these Devoirs to the Memory of his Uncle, and who is now as No∣ble by the Purple with which the Church hath honoured him, as by the Splendor of his Birth. He designs not here, to shew how great he was born, but to testifie his Piety. Let us endea∣vour then to imitate him in so holy a Design, and let us not so much admire all the other
Virtues of Monsieur de Turenne, as that alone, which is able to render him acceptable in the eyes of the Sovereign Lord of all things. If true it is, that Nature gives in the Blood the first dispositions to Courage, who ever had by Birth greater dispositions to Virtue, than the Prince whom we are now speaking of? The glorious Blood which descended to him from his Ancestors, was, as 'twere, the original Source of his Heroick Valour. He is descended from a House, whose Royal Alli∣ances have communicated to his Ancestors by fifteen Princesses all the Greatness of all the Soveraign Powers in Europe. He is descended in a direct and Male Line from the Ancient Sovereign Counts of Auvergne,Justel's Hist. of the House of Auvergne. Dukes of Aqui∣tane, true Heir both to the Virtue and Glory of those Princes, who were the Wonders of their several Ages. A Birth so advantageous did inspire into him from his very Infancy a strong desire to imitate,Penè adolescens Glorie maturi∣tatem occupa∣vit. Plin. epist, 1.4. nay, to surpass the great examples, which they had left him. He began to bear Arms at an Age when he had not as yet strength to manage them. The memory only of so many Glorious actions which those of his Fa∣mily had done, did put him upon great things; but the reputation in Arms, which the Prince
of Orange, his Unkle by the Mothers side, had gained, did yet more vigorously excite him to deserve a share in his Conquests. He made the first Essayes of his Valour under that Prince, and learning there to obey, he was soon qualified to command. 'Twas his own desire to pass all the degrees before he arriv'd to that great Command of a General; in all which different Employes, he acquitted him∣self most honourably. To gain that profound understanding, in which he did outvie all other Captains, he was in person in threescore seve∣ral Sieges, and six set Battels, before that he commanded in Chief His Majesties Armies. What he did upon every of those occasions, do very well merit Elogiums; but his Actions since he was a General, carry so much of Splendor and Glory with them, that a man cannot fix his eyes upon what preceded. Let us omit then all the testimonies of Va∣lour and Prudence, which he gave before Ca∣sal, at Turin, at Quiers, at the passage of the Po near Montcallier, at Rousillon, in Lorrain, and in many other places, which I do not mention, because I would not distract your Fancy with the almost infinite multitude of his private actions. Let us make a little stop at the marvel∣lous effects of his Courage, when being
sent to command the Army of the Mareshal de Guebriant, which the Death of so sage a Commander had dissipated, he re-established it in a very little time, and put it in so good a condition, that soon after it made that fa∣mous Conquest of Fribourg, to which he him∣self did in no small measure contribute; if you will take the judgment of that great Prince, who then commanded the French Troops.The Prince of Conde, then Duke d' En∣guien. He so well knew how to improve this Success of our Arms, that all the neigh∣bouring parts had a perfect dread of him; and in one Campagne only, what by the swiftness of his Victories, what by the defeating of four great Generals, and what by the taking of Eight or Ten Towns, he did constrain the Emperor to conclude at Munster that Peace which was so much for the Glory of France, and did secure the repose and quiet of our Al∣lies. But scarce had these great Successes gi∣ven us hopes of forcing Spain to comply with this Peace, but those hopes were entirely bla∣sted by a Civil War, which was near tearing the very Bowels of our Kingdom, in that ve∣ry instant that 'twas rising to the highest pro∣sperity. Is it not possible to bury these troubles in oblivion? Why should the Glory of our
Heroe be mixt with our misfortunes? But We should do wrong to his memory, if in taking no notice of our Disorders, we should omit to mention the most important Services which he then performed for his Prince, and his immor∣tal Actions at Villeneuve, S. George, at Gergeau, at Bleneau, and many other places, where both his Valour and Prudence did appear with the greater splendor, for that he had to deal with the greatest Captains in that Age; for without hazarding any thing, in a Conjuncture so pe∣rilous to the State, he knew (if a man may say so) how to force Victory to follow him, and to attend upon the honest party: Which did oblige one of the bravest Queens that France ever had, to say of him what is higher than all our Panegyricks, to wit, that Monsieur de TURENNE had three several times preserved the Crown to the King her Son. These very Services occasioned the greatest Monarch in the world, as he was passing by one of those places not long since, to say, Here is that place where Mon∣sieur de TURENNE sav'd both my State and my Person. Is there any Subject that can boast of a Glory which parallels this? What satisfa∣ction is it to a man, to see his Merit crown'd by the acknowledgment of a King, who is himself the wonder of the World? A recom∣pence
worthy of so matchless fidelity. How often have we seen him, with the Remains of an Army that has been either defeated or dissi∣pated, to repair the faults of others, to revenge himself of Fortune, to make up to the Enemy victoriously, and to force from them those Spoils which they but just before had taken? A General should of himself see all things, and penetrate into Futurities, while his Army discerns nothing but what is present and direct∣ly before their eyes. If he be not a Soul to that great Body, if he doth not regulate their Movings, if he be not at the same time every where, and if he understands not how to re∣trieve the most unfortunate Accidents, he runs the Risque of losing entirely his Reputation, how successful soever he hath been in prece∣ding Campagnes. But observe upon such occa∣sions, the Air, the Disposition and the Man∣ners of the Hero we now are speaking of. He had not only Courage and Wisdom himself, but he could inspire them into others. Those that were under his Conduct, he could make them both wise and valiant. His Souldiers never counted the number of their Enemies; they out-brav'd the illness of Seasons, Fatigues, and Dangers. Equally bold and wise in all that he undertook; he was never mistaken in
his apprehensions, never at a loss in his Con∣duct or Commands. In one of his actions, you might see all that Parts, Courage, Ex∣perience and Resolution could contribute; conducting all things to their ends, with as much Judgment, as Address and Vigor. All his Orders, all his Words, all his Steps were so many admirable Lessons both of Wisdom and Valour. In the midst of the mightiest Successes, suspecting Dame Fortune, he fore∣saw every thing, and provided against all things, reflections upon things past never di∣minishing his Valour. As soon as ever he ad∣vanc'd into his Enemies Territories, he was thoughtful to secure his retreat upon occasion, but never declin'd any thing which in pru∣dence could have been executed. By his wise Conduct, how oft hath he shewn, that the number of Souldiers was not always the main strength of an Army, that the advan∣tage of ground was not at all times an ad∣vantage; that there was an art to conquer numerous Armies with but a small handful of men; that Ingenuity might render the ve∣ry incommodiousness of places useful? How many times have we seen him by his presence only, keep off a Deluge of Nations, which were coming thundering upon our Frontiers?
He was acquainted with the art of disap∣pointing all their Projects, and would re∣trieve affairs in such Conjunctures where you would judge him abandon'd of all manner of succor: For though his Wisdom never trusted Fortune with any thing where he could be secure, yet never did man dare more, or push his Enterprizes farther, when he found a necessity of relying upon Chance, and of betaking himself to rash attempts, which are often attended with great Successes, and some∣times are the effect both of Wisdom and Conduct. By this means, he did acquire so much esteem and reputation amongst his Sol∣diers, that he found them not only full of obedience, but full of desire, of zeal, of passi∣on, of transport to follow his Orders. When he undertook any great thing, they who were engag'd in it with him, did submit them∣selves with all manner of respect to his Com∣mands, and never doubted the event under the Conduct of that Chief, whose reputati∣on alone had no few times effected greater things than the strength of Armies. 'Twas of him, that the great King, whose Conduct and Valour at this day are most justly admir'd by all Europe, the true Heir of the Charlemagnes and Holy Lewis, did de∣sire
to learn the great Art of War. What progress did so marvellous a Scholar make presently under such a Master! He was soon able to dictate to himself Lessons, how to con∣quer and subdue the most renowned Cap∣tains. In a little time, had he need of no∣thing but his own Genius, to overthrow his Enemies, to pass Rivers, take Towns, and give Laws to every thing. Monsieur de TU∣RENNE knew well how to second him in that glorious swiftness. Victory never left him; his Winter-quarters were Marches and Attaques, his Encampments Fights and Bat∣tels, his Retreats Victories, his Delays Enter∣prizes, his very Repose Action. Triumph succeeded Triumph; he did that in one Cam∣pagne, which another would have found hard to do in a great many Ages. Let Greece and old Rome spend their Titles and Elogiums in favour of those Worthies they gave birth to; Pausan. Duo Fulmina Belli Scipiadas. 6 Aeneid. Liberatori Rei∣publicae, Fun∣datoríque quie∣tis. Inscript. in arcu Con∣stantini. let them stile them the Terror of Kings and Nations, Thunderbolts, and Gods of War, Takers of Towns, Pillars of the State, Defenders of their Liberty. All these Elogiums are due to the Glory of Monsieur de TURENNE; and we are obliged to engrave them upon his Tomb, as the just Monuments of our acknowledg∣ment. His Troops had a general confidence
in him, which could not have been acquired by an Understanding less profound than his. That Virtue never deserted him in the midst of the greatest dangers. He judged of all the E∣vents of War with that penetrating eye, and with that certainty, that at the opening of a Campagne, he would make you a Model of all his own Designs, and would foresee to all those of his Enemies. He knew all the Posts that they could take. He prevented their Motions, he divin'd all their Wiles and Stra∣tagems, and pretending to be ignorant of them, he caught them in the very Snares they laid for him. This has he done several times in these two last Campagnes, when all the Powers of the Empire in Arms against us, having made an imaginary Division of our Provinces, did cross the Rhine with seventy thousand men, thinking to swallow up with their multitude the small number of Troops we had in Alsa∣tia, for the securing our Frontiers. But Mon∣sieur de Turenne was at the Head of that small handful. What does that great man do? He presently takes Posts so advantageous, that the Enemies did never dare to attaque him: He lets that puissant Army consume it self, partly by the misunderstanding among the
Commanders, and partly by its want of be∣ing well disciplin'd. He makes a sudden March, and falls upon them with so much surprize and vigour; that he forceth them shamefully to repass that Ri∣ver, upon whose Banks they had form'd the empty projects of their Conquests. River, so many times a witness of his Glory, was it not hard that thou shouldst be so near when he died? And that a fatal Shot should in thy sight snatch him away from the Arms of Victory? If the just re∣gret at a loss so considerable, did but permit me to give you a Relation at large of the Actions of this last Campagne, 'twould be ea∣sie for me, Gentlemen, to shew you the Va∣lour and Wisdom of our Hero to be like the shining of those Stars, which do cast the more glittering Light the nearer they are to their Setting. What could I not say of the Industry and Patience with which he has confounded the Art, the Wiles, and the Un∣derstanding of the General of the Imperial Forces? All his Atchievements were at∣tended with Glorious Events. If he did but enter into Alsatia, he drove the Enemies from thence, and retook all the Towns; if he pass'd the Rhine, he created a terror through∣out
Suabia and Franconia; if he mov'd towards the Palatinate, he secur'd Philipsburgh and the Neighbouring Towns; if he came to the right, he clear'd Brisac; he assur'd us the Passage and Commerce of Strasburg; when he went to the left, he every where victori∣ous, every where wise, every where success∣ful himself, did observe the Generals of the Imperial Troops and Confederate Forces fear∣ful, trembling, dismayed, and unresolv'd. In fine, our Enemies astonish'd at his wise Con∣duct, could not think of him but with a ter∣ror mixt with admiration; and they were forc'd to own that he alone was as formi∣dable as his whole Army. The same that S. Ambrose said of that Valiant Machabee, who dying in the midst of a Victory, which was due to him alone, was buried among his Triumphs.Lib. 1. de Offic. c. 40. Tanto virtutis spectaculo defixi hostes sic trepidaverunt, ut impares se omnes unius virtuti arbitrarentur. You were near seeing of him to have tri∣umph'd over all the Forces of the Empire. That glorious day was at hand: He himself prevented it. But just when that Victory which he step by step had manag'd, could not possibly have escap'd him, your eyes,
your mournful eyes did see him, and in him our hopes, with one chance shot cut off. Nevertheless, afflicted as you are, with the extreamest grief, at the thought of so direful an Accident, remember that you have learn'd from this great Man, and from the example of all your Ancestors, that no mans condi∣tion is more glorious, than his, who dies shedding his Blood for the Service of his King, and the Honour of his Countrey; more especially when his Death is attended with all those Circumstances, which Religi∣on and a sincere Piety require of a Christian Hero. For then we may according to the Gospel, say, that it is not barely honourable, but happy. This is, Gentlemen, the most proper Sub∣ject of Consolation that we can propose to our selves, in case of so universal a Misfor∣tune. In vain have Valour and Wisdom rais'd the Reputation of those, whose Me∣mory we honour, if Piety and all Christian Virtues do not attract the Eyes of Heaven to behold those persons with favour. The admiration which they get, let it come from what other cause it will, is but like a false Light which glitters, dazles, disappears, and
is lost for ever in the eternal shades of Death. 'Tis Piety, Gentlemen, which comprehends in it all other Virtues; and it is upon that Commendation of Monsieur de Turenne, that the Character I now bear, the Place I now speak in, and the great things that I have to say, do permit me to enlarge. There is nothing, Gentlemen, so opposite to the Life of a Christian, as a Court-Life, and the noise of War. One must have a great command of himself, if declining the En∣chantments of the one, and the Violences of the other, he preserves his own Inno∣cency; and 'tis that just government of a mans self, which makes your true Heroes. 'Tis a kind of Prodigy,Psal. 70. Nulla fides pietasque viris qui castra sequuntur. Exeat Aulâ qui vult esse pi∣us. saith the Sacred Ora∣cle, to find Piety there; nay, the very Hea∣thens themselves have been of opinion, that the conversation of either Court or Camp was enough to infect all Virtues. Upon these Considerations, I cannot but admire the Hero, whose Funeral Rites we are now so∣lemnizing, as a person much the more ex∣traordinary, in regard he was educated in the midst of the Vanities of the Court, and had spent his whole Life in the exercise of War, but yet had inviolably preserved an
invincible sincerity, amongst the Intrigues of one, and the Chances of the other. His Reason alone, always sage, always Mistress of his Inclinations, as well as his Thoughts, began to effect in him, what Grace does in the most Holy and most Religious Souls. Let me behold what part of him I will, I find in him nothing but Prodigies; but up∣on an equal observation, of his Military and Christian Virtues, I discover in the latter a greater fond of Light, and much a more solid Glory. How fondly men deceive them∣selves,Filii hominum úsque quò gravi corde? ut quid diligitis vanita∣tem & quaeritis mendacium? Psal. 4. who seek a counterfeit glory in the apparences of your imaginary Grandeurs? Know ye that 'tis Christian Virtue only, which makes our Glory real; that upon the sight of such Virtue, all other disap∣pears as the Shadows of the Night before the Light of the Day; and that in the pre∣sence of God none of the Grandeurs of the World remain, but what this Virtue com∣municates to us. These happy impressions were so far advanc'd into the Heart of our Hero, that he was an Enemy to those vain Passions of Interest and False Glory, which are Masters almost of all men: The Glory of his King, the Good of the State, and
how faithfully to pay his Devoirs, were the only Objects of his thoughts. The Devoirs which men render to Prin∣ces, proceed ordinarily from two Sources; either from a disinteressed respect, where Noble Souls consider their Prince as the I∣mage of God, whose Authority he holds and exercises over his Subjects; or from a loose Principle, which puts Mercenary Souls upon sacrificing of every thing to the making of their private Fortunes, and to make use of Ju∣stice and Religion purely to serve their own Interest. How far was Monsieur de Turenne from these dissolute Artifices? He made his Duty a kind of Religion; he never appear'd greater, than by contemning all things that Fortune and Interest were able to supply him with? He contenting himself to merit eve∣ry thing, never ask'd any thing; being of opinion that the esteem of his Prince, the testimony of his Conscience, and the Glory of having done well, were sufficient recom∣pences of Virtue. Not knowing how to be idle, he scorn'd to flatter Fortune; so far was he from offering Incense to her, like a great many Mercenary Souls, who make her a Divinity, that he thought it beneath him to
court her. If she offered to leave him, he forced her to follow him, and to accompany him every where; and shew'd that he who has Wisdom and Courage united, is above her reach. The love of Truth and Justice so regulated his Actions, his Conduct, and his Thoughts, that he only advis'd with Rea∣son and Honour. In fine, I find him in eve∣ry thing just, wise, generous, honourable, ob∣liging to his very Enemies, whom he would prefer before his Friends to Offices and Em∣ploys, if he judg'd them more worthy. You, Gentlemen, who have been faithful companions to him in his Labours, and are undeniable witnesses of his Equity, do know, that as sensible as he was of the Amity and Services that were paid him, yet when it was left to him to dispose of the Charges and Pre∣ferments, he thought no farther than to per∣form His Majesties intentions, and to give Merit its due. His hands were so pure and so clean, that refusing the most allowable and most lawful advantages that War could offer, he never reserv'd to himself any other fruits of his Conquests, than the Glory of having done well. He freely gave to his Souldiers, all that a successeful Campagne could put into their
hands; and loading them with Spoils which he took from the Enemies, he made of them so many living Trophies of his Li∣berality and brave Actions. He was better pleas'd with the Title of a Father to his Sol∣diers, than with that of a Conqueror; being more satisfied to be seen in the midst of them as a partaker of their Fortune, than the anci∣ent Triumphers were amongst all their pomp, on those festival Days when they made their Entry into Rome like so many Divinities. Our Allies often confiding more in the Faith of his Word, than on the most solemn Treaties, have continu'd faithful to our Interests, without being jealous of our prosperities; for they did assure themselves, that this great man would make use of the highest advantages for no o∣ther purpose but the publick good, and that in the most lucky successes he would have a sincere moderation. Arist. c. 1. Mag. Moral. For sure, Gentlemen, true Valour is not an unbridled Passion of domineer∣ing over every body. 'Tis a Virtue which has its Rules and Motives grounded upon Justice, and which follows in every thing the Conduct of Reason. 'Tis this moderation, which puts a man upon wise Enterprizes, and judicious Wars; without it, the greatest of men are
but rash, though they chance to be successeful. What if they fill the whole world with the noise of their Name? What if they conquer Provinces? What if they subdue whole Na∣tions? Have they done any more than those Tyrants did, who insolently attributed to them∣selves the Name of the Scourges of the Almigh∣ty, after that they had ransackt the whole Earth? The Successes which attend those lucky rashnesses, are more due to the Fanta∣stick Caprichio of Fortune, than to their Va∣lour. If that love of Reputation which em∣boldens men, if that heat which sets men a fighting, be not tempered with the love of Justice, if it be not regulated by the Laws of Equity, 'tis but a barbarous thirst after hu∣mane Blood, more proper to make Usur∣pers than just Conquerors. 'Tis that love of Justice, which has made our Generous and disinteressed Prince appear to you so moderate amidst the most fortunate Successes. You, Gentlemen, are all well satis∣fied of that great Truth, which a Sacred O∣racle hath pronounced, that the noblest of Victories is that which a man gains over him∣self; if he would know how to triumph over his Enemies, first he should learn how to rule
his Passions;Melior est pa∣tiens viro forti, & qui domina∣tur animo suo, expugnatore ur∣bium. Prov. 18. Miaus est, quod ili bellious labor quàm quod Pax Christiana sub∣jecit. S. Leo, Serm. in Nat. Apost. and that 'tis more glorious to sub∣due his own Pride, than to pull down Walls and take Towns. So may I say, that he did never gain a more glorious Victory, than that which rendred him Master of all his Passions, and has so often in the midst of the noise of War, afforded him all the sweetnesses of an inward Peace. He, at the Head of Armies, in the midst of his Conquests, at his return from those wonderful Campagnes where he struck astonishment and terror into the re∣motest parts, did appear humble and modest, and far from adding to the greatness of his Exploits, or suffering it in Sycophants, would scarce endure to hear his true and just praises. When he observ'd others seiz'd with admirati∣on at so great Events, not being able to les∣sen them in his Discourse without doing wrong to Truth, he would give all the Glory of it to him who is the Author of all good, using these Christian words, That on such occasions he ought to think of doing his Duty, and 'twas the God of Ar∣mies that made a fortunate or unfortunate Success to attend it. Will ye not say, Gentlemen, that I speak the Elogium rather of a Saint than of a Prince or a General of an Army? But what will ye say,
when I add, that all this is but a shadow of his Christian Virtues; and that this Piety, which was the Soul and Principle of all his Actions, was the pure effect of his own natural disposi∣tion? Before that he was sensible of the im∣pressions of Grace, he acted thus. We can very rarely observe in the world per∣sons advanc'd above others, whether by For∣tune, or their own Merit, to be generally beloved, till that they are dead: As if there was a necessity to cease to be, or else to be un∣fortunate, for to avoid the aspersions of Envy. Nevertheless, we may say, that Monsieur de Tu∣renne has conquer'd even Envy it self, in the last part of his Life. His Glory was mounted to so high a pitch, that one might compare it to the Sun, which when at the highest, hardly leaves any shadow upon the Earth. He was the object of the Esteem, of the Love, and of the Veneration of all Europe. He was lookt upon as the Prodigy and the Wonder of his Age. Every body seem'd transported when they talk'd of the greatness of his Genius, his Labours, his Exploits, his wonderful Successes, and his wise Conduct. The Princes both of Germany and Italy coveted his Picture, and Tra∣vellers that came amongst us, went home sa∣tisfied,
when they had seen that great man. Who can sufficiently express that ardent zeal with which he burn'd for the interest of Reli∣gion? In the midst of his Victories, he would be thinking of the Conquests of Faith; he form'd the Models and the Designs of it; he employed for that purpose all his Estate, Care and Credit. This man, in whom the whole State repos'd the care of their Frontiers, and the publick safety, was as industrious in pro∣moting the progress of Faith and Religion, as in advancing the progress of his Masters Arms. Shall I be afraid after this, to say, that we have not seen more zealous or more pure Faith in Israel? I mean not at Court, where 'tis rare to meet with that sincere submission to the light of the Gospel. I mean not in Armies, where Piety does so seldom appear. I mean in the Sanctuary, amongst the most Holy and Reli∣gious Souls.Matth. 8. Amen, dico vobis non inveni tantam fi∣dem in Israel. And, Gentlemen, if the Son of God hath thought the Faith of a Captain a fit Subject for his Elogiums and Admirations, sure we have no reason then to refuse the paying of the just tribute of Praise to the Piety and Zeal of Monsieur de Turenne, which is the only recom∣pence that he can receive from us.
The Reputation and Glory of his Arms, never made him forget his Duty to God. He worshipped him as the only Author of his Triumphs; and duly every Morning offered to him his Spirit and his Heart, as the Vi∣ctims of his Faith and Obedience. The Sa∣crifices of the Spirit and the Heart are the most agreeable Sacrifices that we can make to the Almighty. We discharge our selves of these Duties by Faith and Religion. Faith is the Sacrifice of the Spirit, and Piety the Sa∣crifice of the Heart; and if one of these Sa∣crifices be a sincere resignation of our Spirit to the Spirit of God, who is the Soveraign Understanding, and the primitive Truth; the other is a voluntary offering of all the Moti∣ons of our heart to the orders of his Provi∣dence. 'Tis to the Piety and to the Faith of Monsieur de Turenne, that we owe these great Successes, which so many persons have attri∣buted to his Valour and his prudent Conduct.Exod. 27. He was at the same time both the Moyses and the Joshua of his Army; he both charged the Enemy in the Field, and pray'd to Heaven too to bless his party with Victory. One might say of his Camp, as of those Heavenly Troops which came to the succor of Jacob, that 'twas
the Camp of God;Castra Dei sunt bec. Gen. 32.2. for he had purged his Army of those Debaucheries that are committed in others; and had established there a due Wor∣ship and publick Prayers. He was in his Tent, as those ancient Patriarchs, who en∣camping under their Pavilions, look'd upon this Life but as a place of passage, which they were always ready to leave. In the midst of his Victories, and his greatest Successes, he would be vehemently desiring of Heaven, and solitary in his Tent, after that he had gi∣ven his Orders for the securing his Camp, he in the midst of the noise of his Army would be making of his inward peace, and conver∣sing with the Almighty. 'Tis thou alone, Great God! that canst effect in the World such surprizing Prodigies. They are the effects of thy Grace and thy Mercy.Christus milites suos quos in per∣sonam Ducis, attollit inter aci∣es quaerit. En∣nod. orat. di∣cenda Maximo. Thou selects Souls brought up in the tumults of War, to make them patterns of Virtue and Holiness. Thy Goodness makes them sensible of the Divine beams of Grace, to confound the dissolute Notions of those who think War and Piety to be inconsistent. This man, who always liv'd at Court, and in Armies, where Virtue is so little acquainted, and holy matters so much slighted, did die the best of Christians. 'Tis
the thought of this, Gentlemen, which removes all our fears. Though his Death was sudden, yet he was not unprovided; and I may say of him, what the Divine Apostle said of an anci∣ent Patriarch who was snatch'd away in a Whirlwind,Gen. 5. that his Conscience and his Piety bore him witness that he was acceptable to God. Ante translationem enim testimonium habuit placuisse Deo.Ad Heb. 11. But how can a man keep from shedding of tears at the remembrance of so direful a death? Our Hero now ceases to be, and there remains with us nothing but empty Ashes, and a Name pleasing in our Ears. Glory, Grandeur, Au∣thority, Esteem, Reputation, are ye all so in∣considerable, as not to be able to prevent Heroes from dying like the most vulgar sort of men? Methinks, Gentlemen, this is the Fatal Mo∣ment that we receiv'd the News of the Death of that great man. The Consternation then was universal, and our Grief was a long while before it had power to break its silence, and open a passage for our Sighs. The general Astonishment which such doleful Tidings did disperse throughout all France, made us sensible of the greatness of our loss, before we had leisure to think of the mischievous Con∣sequences
it might make us dread. The tears of the whole Army, the cries and mourning of the Souldiers, and the concern they shew'd to revenge his death, though at the expence of their own lives, did sufficiently demonstrate that they had lost their Father as well as their General. Ye sad, but glorious Remains of that great man, Ashes of his Body half burnt with that Thunderbolt which snatcht him from amongst his Triumphs, go ye and receive the last Honours, and the just Marks of the grief, of the esteem, and of the sense of the greatest of Kings. The Tomb which is to enclose you, what glorious Titles does it bear of so many brave Actions? Go and divide this Ho∣nour amongst those great Captains, whom Va∣lour,Alphonse de Brenne. Bertrand du Queseline. Lewis de San∣cerre, Lewis de Evereux, Ar∣naud de Barba∣ran, Guillaume du Chastel, bu∣ried at S. De∣nis. Wisdom and Piety did so much distin∣guish in their Life-times, that they remain yet distinguished since their Deaths, by those proud Monuments, which the Magnificence of our Monarchs has caus'd to be erected for them, in the Temple appointed for the Burial of Kings. But, Gentlemen, might not this Prince hope for a more solid recompence of his La∣bours, than the Glory of a vain Tomb? So many wonderful Actions, are they not able to procure him a further advantage, than a cold
Marble deck'd with the Adornments of Vani∣ty? Then he might say with the most affli∣cted and the wisest of Kings; that nothing would remain of him but a Magnifick Silence, a vain Ostentation of Elogiums and Specious Titles to co∣ver the emptiness of his Tomb.Job 3.14. Dormiens silerem & somno meo requiescerem cum Regibus & Con∣sulibus Terrae, qui aedificant sibi Solitudines. They are but Solitudes, that the Powers of the Earth build in erecting of Tombs, since that their Glory and Grandeur accompany not the Persons, and there remains nothing of them but dumb Shadows. Monsieur de Turenne has thought of a more solid Glory. He entred so often into the bosom of Eternity in his wise reflections, he was so often rais'd above the pitch of those foolish Idea's with which vain men are pleas'd, that I date to say, that his Soul has acquir'd an eternal happi∣ness, by the Innocence of his Life, and the Holiness of his Manners. He might have lived longer for the Glory of France, for the Repose of the People, for the Reputation of our Arms, and for the Security of our Frontiers. But what could he have added to his own Glory? Go then, Generous Soul! go, and enjoy that profound peace which you
have so vehemently desired. You have sought it already in the midst of the great successes of a Campagne so glorious, and you have made haste to secure the repose of France, that you might entirely apply your self to the thoughts of Eternity in the peaceable repose of a more quiet Life.Pretiosa Mors haec quae emit immortalitatem pretio sanguinis Cypr. Epist. 9. But in the very instant that your wishes were upon being perfectly fulfill'd, you met with Death in the bosom of Glory. Our Enemies themselves did commend you, at the same time that we lamented you. Both Rome and Vienna paid you the Devoirs of Esteem and Piety, when Paris rendred you the Devoirs of their Acknowledgments. Our Churches,Quam opinio∣nem nemo un∣quam mortali∣um assequi potu∣it sine eximia virtutis gloria. Aug. l. 3. De Civ. Dei. c. 15. our Sanctuaries, the Tribunals of Justice, the Circles, the Academies, and the Publick Oratories have rung with your Praises; both Prose and Verse have con∣secrated the remembrance of your glorious Actions in all the polite Languages. They have said the very same things of you throughout all Europe, as have been said throughout all France. From the moment of his Death, all our Joys have been changed into Torrents of Tears; our publick Acclamations, into a sor∣rowful Silence; and our Songs of Victory and Triumph, into most lamentable Sighs. To
conclude, the People have mourn'd, and the King Himself hath shed tears, and that incom∣parable Monarch did make the best Elogium that could be made of your Glory, when he publickly said, that we had lost the wisest Captain, and the Chief man in this Age. Flevit omnis Popu∣lus, plangénsque Rex, & lugens ait, Nequaquam ut mori solent ignavi mortuus est. Num ignoratis quo∣niam Princeps, & Maximus cecidit? Not being able to add to this Elogy, which has proceeded from the mouth of Two great Kings, I hold my peace, and leave to History the care of ma∣king the Panegyrick, and communicating to Posterity the Wonders of this Heroe. FINIS.
