G1558 12425804 61844
ΜΝΗΜΟΨΟΡΟΠΑΙΚΤΗΣ THE Brainbreakers-Breaker: OR, The Apologie of Thomas Grantham, for his Me∣thod in teaching; dwelling in Lothbury, London. Herculeâ cecidisse manu tot monstra negamus, Quot methodo & calamo jam peil tuo. Wee do deny Herculean arme did ere such monsters slay, As have thy method and strong pen, already tain away. Joh. Nisby, Professor of the Greek, Latin, and French Tongues, in Ivle Lane, London. . Ingenieida, tenebro, fungus, cluniferitor, Impos Granthamo cum fit obesse, latrat. Braine-breaker, Lout, Sot, and Bumbeater, you Cannot bite Grantham, only bark you do. . Printed at London, 1644.
Encomium DNI. Granthami, Ludimagistri Londinensis extraordinarii. Granthamum celebrat Trinobantum Augusta Scholarcham, Promethodo facili, Grammatic âque brevi. Hellada namque docet Latias resonare Camaenas, Nectare dum pueros pascit & Ambrosia. ALIUD Ex tripode Apollinis, loco strenae. Granthamo calathis Tamesinae applaudite Nymphae, Auspiciis vestrum promovet ille chorum. J. S.
The Brainbreakers-Breaker. WHen I consider the misery that youth groans under, in common Schooles, their pains great, the severity of the Master intolerable, Schooles more like Bridewell then Seminaries of learning, the Master many times whips his Scholars for making false Latin, when hee never taught them cleerly and plainly how to make true, What is this but to expect Brick, where no straw is allowed? When I consider also, the great expence of time, expence of many yeer, and very seldom to any purpose, may bee a little smattering of Latin, and lesse of Greek: After all these considerations, pity to Youth, and indig∣nation against these furious whipsters, conspired in mee, to redeem those tender yeers from this great captivity: Would it not pity any man who had the bowels of compassion, to see those cheeks, may bee such as our Saviour kist, when hee took the little children up in his arms, to see thm torn, lug'd, tug'd, pul'd, and cuft, by a rude unhallowed hand? Hee that hath seen this, as I my self have seen a great part, although nature had deny'd him the happinesse of his pen, yet indignation it self would make him write. In this Treatise you may not only see the cruelty of the Master, but the folly of him. I will undertake to prove by learned Authors & reason,  Free-schooles, & other common Schooles, do make their Scholars spend their prime and choycest time, in that which is to no purpose at all, in that which is so farre from doing good, it doth a great deale of  Let any man read Ascham, Tutor to Queen Elizabeth, hee shall see how hee con∣demns this lip-labour, this learning word by word without book, which is the Diana of the common Schooles, O how great is this Diana of the common Schooles! hee and others shew, it is a heavy and grievous bur∣den, which is imposed meerly out of ignorance, or knavery, to make one go his journey with a great deale of sorrow and grief, and dis-hearten thousands from being Scholars. Ascham, in his first book, hath these words: So as the Grammar Book bee alwaies in the Scholars hand, and also used of him as a Dictionary, for every pre∣sent use, this is a lively and perfect way for teaching of Rules, where the common way used in common Schooles, to read the Grammar alone by it self, is tedious for the Master, hard for the Scholar, cold and uncomfortable for them both. Now you see according to Ascham, Grammar must bee used as  Dicti∣onary, and hee that knows any thing, knows that a Dictionary is not
to bee learned word by word without book, therefore not a Grammar; hee tells you in this place that it is tedious to the Scholar, let any man consider, who hath not the patience of an Asse, what a tedious thing it is to have all the Grammar, or most of it, lapt up in his head word by word, and presently to apply every rule word by word, or else up hee goes, if hee were as good as George a Greene. Read Ascham, in his second book these are his words; I remember when I was young in the North, they went to the Grammar Schoole little Children, they came from thence great Lubbars, alwayes learning and little profiting, lear∣ning without booke every thing, understanding within book little or nothing; their whole knowledge by learning without the book was tied onely to their tongue and lips, and never ascended up to the braine and head, and therefore was soone spit out of the mouth againe; They were as men alwayes going; but ever out of the way, and why? for their whole labour or rather great toyle without order was even vaine idlenesse without profit; indeed they tooke great paines about learning, but im∣ployed small labour in learning, when by this way, prescribed in this booke, being straight, plaine and easie, the Scholar is alwayes labouring with pleasure, and ever going on forward with profit. Heer this Scholar famous all over Christendome, and the glory of his kingdome for Languages, tels you learning without book was vaine idle∣nesse without profit; hee tels you they took great pains about learning; but imployed small labour in learning. Erasinus the restorer of the Fathers, Greek and Latin, the greatest wri∣ten of his time, incomparable for wit, learning, and eloquence, hath the same words; Some make it their greatest care to learne the rules word by word without book, which thing saith hee, I allow not of, for it is great paines to no purpose nor profit at all. Brinsley, a famous Schoolmaster, in his book called A Consolation for our Grammar Schooles, writes of one Mr. Tovey a Schoolmaster equall to the best, that teaching Aschams way, that is, onely the sense of the rules, brought a Nobleman to a perfection beyond all expectation. Comenius, a man admired for his quicknesse in teaching the Languages, hath writ sharpely against this dogbolt way. Innumerable are the lear∣ned men who have sought to take away the servitude and slavery that youth hath undergone, some Authors I have quoted in my Animadver∣sions upon Cambdens Greeke Grammar, made for the use of Westminster Schoole, and I have shewed, and will shew more hereafter, that it is a false, obscure, imperfect Grammar, abounding with above twelve grosse errors, besides many little ones; and those who are Schoolmasters of great Schools and make men beleeve they know much, when alaffe it is very little they know, they might blush if they had any shame, to let so
many errors go uncorrected in a Grammar which is the foundation  Language: If foundations be false and rotten, what will the build ? I need not spend much time upon this point, because I have repre∣sented in a Comedy often acted by my Scholars, the crueltie, folly and nonsence of common Schoolmasters, which I intend to print as soone as I can. Looke upon Aschams successe in this way in his first book hee speakes thus of Queene Elizabeth; It is your shame, I speake to you all (you young Gen∣tlemen of England) that one maid should goe beyond you all in excellency of learning, and knowledge of divers tongues; point forth six of the best given Gentlemen of this Court, and all they together shew not so much good will, spend not so much time, bestow not so many houres daily orderly, & constantly for the increase of learning and knowledge, as doth the Queenes Majesty herself. Yea I beleeve that besides her perfit readinesse in Latin, Italian, French and Spanish; she readeth heer now at Windsor more Greeke every day, thn some Proendary of this Church doth read Latin in a whole weeke. And that which is most praise worthy of all, within the walls of her privy Chamber shee hath obtained that excellency of learning to un∣derstand, speak and write both wittily with head, and fuire with hand, as scarce one or two rare wits in both the Ʋniversities have in many yeares reached unto. Amongst all the benefits that God hath blessed me withall, next the knowledge of Christs true Religion, I count this the greatest, that it pleased God to call mee to bee one poore Minister in setting forward these excellent gifts of learning in this most excellent Prince. Looke upon his successe, in his second book, amongst many others, one Whitney, a most accomplished Gentleman; these are his words, I gave him a translation to turne into Latin, which he did so obsely, so orderly, with∣out any great misse in the hardest points of Grammar, that some in seven yeares in Grammar. Schools, yea and some in the Ʋniversitie too cannot do halfe so well. And this perfection hee obtained from Christmas to Alhollantide, and this Scholar was altogether Ignorant of the Latin tongue, and the rules before. Now briefly take some few reasons against this way of saying word by word without book. All Arts, as Geometry, Arithmetick, Logick, Navigation, men attaine to, and never learne rule word by word without book, and what offence hath Grammar done that it must bee cuft into a boy word by word without book? If learning without book word by word bee necessary for the under∣standing of a thing, then it is before a boy understands, or after hee un∣derstands. Now for a boy to learne without book like a Parret that hee understands not, is very laborious and ridiculous, and to learne with∣out book after hee understands, that is to no purpose; for the Mr. un|
derstanding himselfe the sense of the rule, neglects saying word by word without book, and whips Scholars for that hee cannot do himselfe. If saying without book word by word bee profitable to the under∣standing then hee that saith best without book understands best, but this is false; there are many that can say much scripture without book, but understand not so well as those that can say none. I have had boyes come from common Schools could say all the Gram∣mar word by word without book, and yet could not make halfe a line of true Latin; and that which is most absurd of all, they teach a boy to make Latin by the Latin rules, when a boy understands not Latin; Just as if a man should teach one an Art in French, when he understands not French. Then there are many boyes can say without book to their compa∣nions, or by themselves, but the Master strutting with the rod in his hand, and his imperious looke, and threatning, puts a boy cleere out. As for a Master to talke thus to a boy, Sirra I'le smoak you, I'le make your buttocks blush, I'le make you feare me; These words confound a boy, and fright him out of all; If a boy bee to say this rule, Adjectives that signifie fulnesse, emptinesse, plenty, &c. if hee misplace a word, although the sense bee the same, presently the Master fels him all along, whereas some Grammars have the first words last, and the last first, the sense being still the same. Observe Doctor Webbes words in his Appeale to Truth; Now if Gram∣mar should be the best course to languages, and Kings may have their choyce of best courses, I wonder what choice of Grammars was made by Mithridates. And that that makes mee wonder more, wee that have no businesse but a language, spend all our life and are not perfect in one, and bee that had a kingdomes affaires to looke unto, had two and twenty compleat languages. Now if a language cannot bee got but by learning word by word without book, then Mithridates who had a kingdomes affaires to look to, must learne two and twentie Grammars word by word without book, and to learne a Grammar in this manner will take up five yeares, to bee compleate in a language as he was, will take up at least five yeares, more, which reckoned makes up two hundred and twenty yeares: Now Mi∣thridates lived not a quarter of the time. Doctor Webbe in that learned work quotes above one hundred learned men, who inveigh bitterly against Grammarians; And he undertakes to prove by learned Authors that a language may be learned without a Grammar, which needs no proofe at all to men that have common sense; How many are there can speak French and Latin that never saw a Grammar? many young Gentlemen and Gen∣tlewomen have learned to speake French in halfe a yeare who never knew any Latin.
Doctor Webb names many Noble men who spake Latin excellent well at five yeares of age, having nothing but Latin spoken to them before. And I have knowne many who have spoke Latin and French admira∣ble well and understood Greeke very well in a twelve moneth, and this is easily done by joyning Doctor Webbs way with Aschams. I have boyes that have beene but a yeare at most with me; and in these foure points we will contend with any Schoole in England: First, who understands the Greeke and Latin Grammars best, in Accents and Dialects and all things necessary. Secondly, who understands a Greeke or Latin Author best. Thirdly, who can prove a Greeke or Latin verse best. Fourthly, who can make a Greeke or Latin Oration, or a Greeke and Latin verse best and soonest: And the highest of my Scholars is but thir∣teene yeares of age, and another in my highest Seat is but Ten. Some I have, I confesse, cannot doe a quarter so much, which is no fault of mine, for I often tell them, if they be carelesse and will not minde, and will not learne without cuffing, pulling, lugging, and whipping, they must goe to Masters that delight in this way of teach∣ing, they may be taught in may places very reasonably this way, as for a Noble or seaven shillings a quarter, at some free Schooles they may have it for nothing. Some Schoolemasters thinke they pay me home when they say I make Scholars unfit for other Schooles; truly I confesse it, I teach without any correction, and they teach with great correction, and in this we differ. Wee teach to understand the Rules first, and they teach to learne with∣out booke first, In this we differ; Our Scholars understanding the rules and often applying them, the rules come without booke whether they will or no. Then we differ in severity. Some keepe their Scholars so strictly for foure or five houres that they allow them not so much as a mouthfull of fresh ayre, not so much as to ease nature. I have read and heard many Scholars speake against this severity; let a boy bee tyed three or foure houres to that game hee likes best, and let him be soundly cuft and whipt when hee doth not play his game well, you shall see this boy as weary of his play as his booke, and the reason is because of great severity. Socrates the wisest man of his time, and many who have writ concern∣ing the instruction of youth, often say, learning must be taught with love; and some Scholars I have, being thus taught, seriously professe, they had rather come to Schoole then goe about any pleasure or delight. What fruits I have here to shew in London, any man may come and see, and what fruits I have shewed in other places these subscriptions may testifie.
A Letter from Master Foucks belonging to Sir Jervis Clifton in Nottinghamshire. Good Mr. Grantham, I Never thought to have been so happy in this world as you have made mee in little Henry; you have created him an Infant-Grecian, which is a miracle at London, for here they are onely known by their long beards. Sir, your Letter was delivered to Sir Thomas Huthinson, & hee did promise to examine him, but his imployment at the Parliament diverted the businesse; I got some others to do it, and hee came off with good applause both to you and himself; I could not have parted with him so soon, but by reason of a journey to the Bath, and I durst not trust him in this place of iniquity in my absence. Sir, Mr. Cliffords going to the Uni∣versitie is not yet this three Moneths, which I hope will not be the worse for Henry because of his Zachean stature, which by that time may bee increa∣sed. Good Sir except of a poore token from him which can bee no other∣wise then your most affectionate Servant, London this 6 of June, 1642. Ralph Foucks. Wee whose names are here subscribed, do witnesse that Thomas Gran∣tham, Curat of East Neston, hath a very ready and credible way of profit∣ing Scholars in learning; and although wee fully conceive not his me∣thod in teaching, yet wee highly commend him in this, that his Scholars are able to give a rule out of the Latin and Greek Grammar for every thing they doe. William Farmar, Knight Baronet. Charles Stafford, Esquire. Ha Farmor, Esquire▪ Eusehy Wyrley, Gent. William Buncher, Rector de Tiffield. William Curlis, Rector de Saxton. Thomas Arundel, Rector de Stoak. Henry Hall, Cler. de Easton magna. Jo. Barradale, Vicar de East Neston. John Lockwood, Vic de Towester. E. Johnson, Rctor de Paules Perry. Benjamin Austen, Rector de Bradden. Guliel. Bland, Mag. in Aihus. Guliel. Thornton, Art. . Tho. Bayley, Rector de Colhigham. Superiora testor, Joseph Bernard. FINIS.
