G487 R14469 12938832 95834
A GENERAL AND COMPLEAT LIST MILITARY OF Every Commission-Officer of HORSE and FOOT Now Commanding His Majesties Land-Forces OF ENGLAND: (Excepting the Un-Regimented Companies.) AS ALSO The Proper Distinctions of their Cloathings, Badges of Honour, and Colours of each Troop and Regiment. The Names of the Chief Officers of the Ordnance, and other Officers belonging to the Army. WITH A LIST Of the Royal Band of Gentlemen-Pentioners and Yeomen of the KING'S Guard of his Body. Of the Governours, Lt. Governours, and Deputy-Governours, throughout the Kingdom. A Establish't at the time of the Revew upon PUTNEY-HEATH, the First of October, 1684. As also an ACCOUNT of the said Revew, &c. LONDON, Printed by J. Gain, for Nathan Brooks,  Thomas Knapton's, next Door to the Flying-Horse in Upper Moor-Fields, 1684.
TO THE READER. FOr fear these Essays of Military Lists, after all the unspeakable Drud∣geries undergone to Collect and digist them into those Methods they are now publish't with, should nevertheless in the first place not afford their managing Reader Drums and Trumpets enough for his Money, nor in the second place afford their happy Author a ratling round vent enough of the whole Impression for his Pains, which comes all to one Reckoning: Are you Gentlemen, who had perhaps rather read Men then Books, without any further cutting upon good Nature, bid most heartily welcome to make the Meal up with a Treat from Putney-Heath, whose Camp, and manner of Encamping described by an Eye Witness on the first of October, 1684, is here over and above served up Gratis; when but pleased to pay for the Dish you have it in: That way endeavouring rather to give you all your Bllys-full, if possible, in the stead of some Meagre Advertisement, garnish't with an hun∣dred small Peccavi's to no purpose, for unavoidable great Faults in all under∣takings of this Nature; indeed of all our standing Dish, the most nausous, whose craving sort of Rosemary some few may chan to look at, but tasted of by no Body. The major part then of those his Majesties Forces, not moving from their Posts of present Duty, of whom these scattering Sheets attempt to give the World some little light, The remaining part quartered near hand En∣camped the first of October upon Putney-Heath, Officer and Souldier parading there, not in less Gay and Splendid, then in a Martial Equipage. The Horse that day consisted of the three Troops of Guards, and of their three of Granadiers, of the Earl of Oxford's Regiment of Horse-Guards, and the Lord Churchil's Regiment of Dragoons. The Foot of two Battalions, form'd from the Royal Regiment of Guards and their Granadiers; of one Battalion from the Cole-stream Regiment of Guards and Granadiers; of one Battalion from the Earl of Dunbarton's and their Granadiers; and lastly of one from the Admiral Regiment. The Horse and Foot imbodied, and drawn in a continued Line, took their proper Post upon a rising Ground, in length from Right to Left near a Mile and half, viz. from the Red House near the Bowling-Green, ex∣tended cross the Heath, and fronting to the River. The Horse at their usual depth made four Squadrons vpon the Right Wing, of which the Troops of Guards made three, and their Granadiers one. Th Left Wing of Horse in the like manner made four Squadrons,
whereof my Lord of Oxford's Regiment formed two, and my Lord Chur∣chil's Dragoons the other. The three Troops of Guards flanking in that Figure upon the Right of the main Body. My Lord of Oxford's, and my Lord Churchil's Regiments flanking it on the Left: in all of Horse eight Squadrons, each consisting of two Hundred. The Admiral's Battalion, as youngest in the Field, took their Post in the Centre of the Line. The two Battalions of the Royal Regiment of Guards and Grana∣diers being drawn upon the Admiral's Right, were immediately Flanck't by the right Wing of Horse; my Lord Dunbarton's Battalion and Granadiers being Posted on the Admiral's Left, and upon my Lord Dunbarton's Left was drawn the Colestream Battalion of Guards and Granadiers, which the Left Wing of Horse immediately Flanck't. All the Foot at their Order drawn four deep, consisted of five Battalions, each of eight Companies. The Colestream, my Lord Dunbarton's, and the Admiral's Battalions successively Exercised all three by Beat of Drum, the Military Postures of Pike, Sword, and Musket; every man dexterously discharging their Duties with an ex∣act and general Readiness, to the great Delight and Satisfaction of their Ma∣jesties and Royal Highnesses, vouchsafing all the time of Exercise to grace their Arms with the Honour of their Presence. The other two Battalions of the Royal Regiment had not fell short of the like Performance, if Illness of Weather, when they just intended it, had not prevented: The Day proving wet and showry, was a general Impediment from proceeding at that time to any other Motions, Customary upon the like Revews. All Decampt sooner than otherwise they would have done. The total Horse and Foot which then Rendivouz'd, were above four Thousand advantagiously Trained, and well clad Men. Commanded in the Field for that days Generalship, by the Right Honourable the Earl of Craven. ERRATA. Page 5. l. 31. for differec't, read differenc't. p. 6. l. 20. f. Tho. Slingsby, r. Sir Tho. Slinsy▪ p. 12. l. 2. f. Laudstream, r. Cauldstream. p. 16. l. 14. f. Baton, r. Payton. Both Author and Printer will mend their Hands, should Encouragement be given for a Second Edition, and the Un-Regimented Companies supplied.
A List of the ROYAL BAND of GENTLEMEN-PENTINOERS, by the Right Honourable THEOPHILUS, Earl of HUNTINGTON, Commanded in Chief. Theophilus Earl of Huntington, Captain. The Honourable Francis Vilars, Lieutenant. Sir Tho. Bloodworth, Bar. Standard-bearer. William Thomas, Clerk of the Cheque. Gentlemen Pentioners. Thomas Hales, Sir Tho. oe. Knight, Anthony Gawdy, Hugh Teient, Sir Robert Dacrees, Knight, Roger Conisby, Abraham Clark, John Hubbard, John West, William Ashton, John Barnard, Walter Baker, George Farington, Edward Courthrop, Charles Gostwick, Edward Glynn, Sir Gerard Fleetwood, Knight, David Vivian, Thomas Frances, Charles Cludd, Sir Tho. Knivefton, Baronet, Chistopher Turner, William Rowley, Edward Mainard, Peter Lock, John Estcourt, Lancelot Lake, Richard Willis, Thomas Manning, William Morgan, Bernard Turner, Ambrose Sycom, Sir Theop. Janson, Baronet. John Cooper, Charnock Heron, Abraham Duplex, Henry Bynn, Thomas Orme, Mils Marsh, John Hastings, Richard Child, Gent. Harbinger. The Royal Band of Gentlemen-Pentioners, consists of Forty Gentlemen besides Officers; the usual Arms they do Duty with, are gilt Battle-Axes; Their Standard is St. Georges Cross, in a Field-Argent, with four Bends. The Captains pay is One Thousand Pound yearly, The Lieutenants Five Hundred Pound, Standard-bearers Three Hun∣dred and Ten Pound, Clerk of the Cheques One Hundred and Twenty Pound: To each Gentleman of the Band One Hundred Pound yearly.
A List of the Commission-Officers and Yeomen of his Majesties Guard of his Body, commanded by the Right Honourable George, Lord Viscount Grandison. George, Lord Grandison, Captain. Thomas Howard, Lieutenant. Henry Dutton, Colt. Ensign. Exempts William Houghton, Sir Herbert Whaly, Thomas Orme, Robert Sares, The Honourable Charles Villars, Clerk of the Cheque. Yeomen. Richard Dewel, Yeomen-Ushers. William Sherloc, Yeomen-Ushers. Richard Roiston, Matthew Leper, Edward Finch, Thomas Skelton, William Blackford, Thomas Worth, Daniel Jenings, Richard Bowman, Charles Webb, William Crosier, senior. William Ford, John Earling, Edw. Brisco, senior, Yeomen-Ushers. William Finch, Yeomen-Ushers. William Dover, Thomas Nicolas, William Woodrof, John Smith, William Attlee, Nicholas Hawkins, Daniel Lambert, Ja. Trumble, William Harvey, junior. Thomas Winstaley, Isaac Snelling, John Hebborn, John Millart, Yeomen-Ushers. Dubble Brook, Yeomen-Ushers. Edward Hargrave, Robert Stone, Jonas Price, Thomas Banister, James Morgan, John Ferrers, Henry Harwar, John Lambert, Robert Norman, Philip Willis, Thomas Scott, Richard Palmer, Christo. Sanders, Yeomen.Ushers. John Sares, Yeomen.Ushers. John Millart, Abraham Story, John Holmden, Thomas Gilpin, Henry Crow, Joseph Collier, Robert Fowler, John Kiton, Edward Ellis, Jervis Thwaits, Jo. Scorer, John Tendring Jo. Templer. Yeomen-Ushers. Tho. Nicols, Yeomen-Ushers. Thomas Lambert, John Inge William Crosier, junior. George Bulloc, William Hobbs, Ambrose Tooth, William Wheatly, John Beter, James Palmer, John Webster, James Hassel, William Green, Tho. Bishop, late Yeo∣men Usher. Nicholas Lane, Robert Thomson, John Franks, Edward Brisco, junior. William Jones, Joseph Troit, Yeomen-Usher. Anthony Clark, Thomas Thackam, Thomas Frye, Daniel Coyes, Richard King, Robert Parsons, Yeomen.Usher. Robert Kidwell, Richard St. Peire, Henry Winchester, Robert Radford, Eleazer Coates, Will. Harvey, senior, Yeomen-Usher. Thomas Roberts, Nicholas Caple, William Bastian, William Harrison, Tho. Evans, Yeomen-Usher. Peter Hickman. Tristram Thomas, Thomas Smith, Henry Meyson, John Brayfield. Ja. Evans, Roger Jakson, Chamber-keepers. Thomas Coleman, Deputy-Clerk of the Cheque. This Guard cosists of one hundred Yeomen, besides Officers; of those, Fifteen are appointed Sub-altern Officers, or Yeomn-Ushers, with some additional Pay, exceeding their fellow-Yeomen, which to each is 30 l. yearly. To a Yeomen-Usher, 37 l. They wear large-skirted Scarlet Coats, guarded with black Velvet, badged with a Rose crown'd upon their Backs and Breasts; Fifty of them armed with Haonebuziers; Fifty with Partizans. The Captains yearly pay 1000 l. The Lieute∣nants 500 l. Ensigns 300 l. Exempts 150 l. Clerk of the Cheque 200 l.
A List of all Commission & Staff-Officers in the Kings own Troop of Horse-Guards, and Troops of Gra∣nadiers, by his Grace, Christopher Duke of Albemarle; Knight of the most noble Order of the Garter, commanded in Chief, as eldest Colonel of Horse in his Majesties Kingdom of England. Christopher Duke of Albemarle, Captain, Commanding as Colonel. The honourable Edward Villars, Lieutenants, Commanding as Lieutenant Colonels Edmond Ashton, Lieutenants, Commanding as Lieutenant Colonels Edward Griffin, Lieutenants, Commanding as Lieutenant Colonels Richard Binns, Lieutenants, Commanding as Lieutenant Colonels Sir Walter Clarges, Cornet, Commanding as Majors, The Right Honourable Jo. Ld. Berley,Guidon, Commanding as Majors, Stephen Dyer, Quarter-master, Commanding as Captain, Lewis Billingsley, Brigadiers, Commanding as Lieutenants, Robert Nowell, Brigadiers, Commanding as Lieutenants, John Baynes, Brigadiers, Commanding as Lieutenants, Edward Smms, Sub Brigadiers, commanding as Assistants to the Brigadiers. Tho. Wlford, Sub Brigadiers, commanding as Assistants to the Brigadiers. Jo. Brailsford, Sub Brigadiers, commanding as Assistants to the Brigadiers. George Nailor, Sub Brigadiers, commanding as Assistants to the Brigadiers. The State-Major, or Staff-Officers belonging to this Troop. Dr. Ja. Gardiner, Chaplain. William Chapman, Clerk, Tho. Hobs, Chirurgeon. Hugh Fisher, Trumpets. Ben. Ragois, Trumpets. Michael Mear, Trumpets. John Basset, Trumpets. Robert Mawgridge, Kettle Drum. Granadiers attending this Troop of Guards. John Parker, Lieutenants, Tho. Guy, Lieutenants, two Sergants, two Corporals, Hautbois 4. Drums 2, Private men 64. This Troop of Guards consists of 200, besides Officers, distinguish't by their Carbine Belts of Velvet, laced with Gold and Silver, by their red Hooses and Holster-Caps, em∣broidered with the Royal Cypher and Crown, Coated and Cloaked in Scarlet, lined with Blew; The Standard Crimson, with the Royal Cypher and Crown, the Guidon diffe∣renced only from the Standard by being rounded and slit at the end. The Captains pay of this Troop, per diem, 01 l. 10 s. The Lieutenants 15 s. The Cornets 14 s. The Guidons 12 s. Quarter-masters 9 s. Brigadiers 7 s. Sub-briga∣diers equal with the Kings pay of a private man, which is daily 4 s. The Granadiers of this Troop have blew Loops, tufted with Yellow upon Red Coats, lined Blew, with Granadier Caps, lined the same, and a Blew round mark on the out∣side, armed with Bayonets and Harquebuzes. The Lieutenants pay, per diem, of Gra∣nadiers to this Troop, 8 s. Serjents 4 s. Corporals 3 s. Private men, Hautbois and Drums 2 s. 6 d.
A List of all Commission and Staff-Officers in the Queen's Troop of his Majesties Horse-Guards and Troop of Granadiers, Commanded by the Honou∣rable Sir Philip Howard. Sir Philip Howard, Captain, Commanding as Colonel. Sir George Hewyt, Bar. Lieutenants, Commanding as Lieutenant Colonels. Sir John Fenwick, Bar. Lieutenants, Commanding as Lieutenant Colonels. Charles Orby, Cornet, Commanding as Majors. The Honourable John Darcy, Guidon, Commanding as Majors. William Upcott, Quarter-Master. Commanding as Captain. Gorge Collingwood, Brigadiers, Commanding as Lieutenants. John Staples, Brigadiers, Commanding as Lieutenants. John Chittam, Brigadiers, Commanding as Lieutenants. Sir Richard Brown, Bar. Brigadiers, Commanding as Lieutenants. Richard Beale, Sub-Brigadiers, Commanding as Assistants to the Brigadiers. Richard Barham, Sub-Brigadiers, Commanding as Assistants to the Brigadiers. George Howard, Sub-Brigadiers, Commanding as Assistants to the Brigadiers. Mich. Stadholm, Sub-Brigadiers, Commanding as Assistants to the Brigadiers. The State-Major, or Staff-Officers belonging to this Troop of Guards. Benj. Barnet, Chaplain, Philip Aires, Clerk, Richard Mills, Chirurg. William Bounty, Trumpets. William Bull, Trumpets. Thomas Barnwell, Trumpets. Mat. Shoar, Trumpets. Francis Breban, Kettle Drum. Granadiers Attending this Troop of Guards. Richard Potter, Lieuts. Robert Dixon, Lieuts. two Serjts. Two Corpor. Four Hautbois, Two Drums, 64 Private Men. The Queen's Troop of Horse-Guards has but two Lieutenants, otherwise consist∣ing of equal number with that of the King's, distinguish'd by Carbine Belts of Green Velvet, Laced with Gold, green Hooses, and Holster-Caps, Embroidered with the same Cypher and Crown, Coated and Cloaked as the King's, Standard and Guidon the same as the King's. The Captain's Pay of this Troop, per diem, is 10 s. less than that of the King's, all the other Officer's Pay alike with the King's Troop, excepting the Brigadiers, who has but 6 s. The Granadiers Pay'd, Clad, and Armed as the King's, differenc't by green Loops, with yellow Tufts upon their Coats.
A List of all Commission and Staff-Officers in the Dukes Troop of his Majesties Horse-Guards, and Troop of Granadiers, commanded by the Right Honble. LOUIS, Earle of FEVERSHAM. Louis, Earle of Feversham, Captain, Commanding as Colonel. Robt. Werden, Lieuts. Commanding as Lt. Colonels. Theophilus Oglethorp, Lieuts. Commanding as Lt. Colonels. Philip Darcy, Cornet. Commanding as Majors. Edmund Main, Guidon, Commanding as Majors. Ferdinand Stanhop, Quartermaster, Commanding as Cpt. William Springall, Brigadiers, Commanding as Lieuts. Ambrose Norton, Brigadiers, Commanding as Lieuts. George Hastings, Brigadiers, Commanding as Lieuts. Jenken Morgan, Brigadiers, Commanding as Lieuts. Hen. Rimborn, Subbrigadiers, Commanding as Assistants to the Brgadiers. Hen. Griffith, Subbrigadiers, Commanding as Assistants to the Brgadiers. Sam. Harison. Subbrigadiers, Commanding as Assistants to the Brgadiers. Sam. English, Subbrigadiers, Commanding as Assistants to the Brgadiers. The State-Major, or Staff-Officers belonging to this Troop, &c. William Roles, Chaplain, James Bridgeman, Clerk, Gabriel Jones, Chirurg. Jo. Seignior, Trumpets. Pet. Lefever, Trumpets. Rich. Phillips, Trumpets. Moses Phillips, Trumpets. Cornet Vanderend, Kettle Drum. The Granadiers attending this Troop of Guards. Anthony Heyford, Leuts. John Vaughan, Leuts. two Serjts. two Corpls. four Hautbois two Drumbs. The Duke's Troop and Granadiers, the same in Pay and Number with the Queen's, the Guards only distingush't by their Carbine-Belts, laced with Silver upon yellow Velvet. Hooses and Holdster-Caps embroidered upon Yellow, with the same Cypher and Crown as the King's: The Standard and Guidon yellow Damask, with his Royal Highnesse's Cypher and Coronet. The Granadiers paid and clad as the King's, differec't by their Coat-Loops of Yellow upon their Breasts.
A List of all Commission and Staff-Officers in the Royal Regiment of Horse-Guards, Com∣manded by the Right Honble. AUBERY, Earle of OXFORD, Kt. of the most noble Order of the Garter. Aubery, Earl of Oxford, Colonel. The Honble. Sir Fran. Compton, Major. Captains. Lieutenants. Cornets. Quarter-masters. Captain William Leg commanding the King's own Troop. Lt. William Wind, Cor. Rowland Selsby, Quar. Richd. Wise, Capt. Lt. Hen. Cornwell commanding the Co∣lonel's Troop. Lt. Hen. Cornwell, Cor. Edward Scot, Quar. George Cary, The Major's Troop, commanded by Lt. Cha. Adderly, Cor. Hen. Norris, Quar. Cha. Duncom▪ Sir Cha. Windham, Capt. Lt. Edmund Harris, Cor. David Lloid, Quar. Robert Bourg, Edw. Sandys, Capt. Lt. Edmund Turner, Cor. Oldld, Quar. Vernam, The. Lucy, Capt. Lt. Davenport Lucy, Cor. Leigh, Quar. Tho. Conisby, Tho. Slingsby, Capt. Lt. John Lehunt, Cor. Edw. Andrews, Quar. John Tuck, Walter Littleton, Capt. Lt. Phil. Munocks, Cor. Will. Carew, Quar. Walter Chetwyn, The State-Major, or Staff-Officers belonging to this Regiment. David Lloid, Adjutant. Syssom, Chirurgeon. This Regiment of Horse-Guards consists of eight Troops, each of them having, besides those Commissioned-Officers above named, three Corporals, two Trumpets, forty five private Men, distinguish't by their Carbine-Belts laced with Gold upon Buff with a red edging, Hooses and Holdster-Caps with the Royal Cypher, embroidered upon Blew, Coated and Cloaked Blew, lined Red. The Colonels pay per diem, as Col. and Capt. 1 l. 14 s. The Majors, as Major and Captain 17 s. A Captains 11 s. A Leiutenants 10 s. Cornets 9 s. Quarter-masters 6 s. Corporals 03. Trumpets 3. A private mans pay 2 s. 6 d. The King's Troop has only a Kettle Drum, which none of the other Troops have, with a Standard, Crimson, and the Imperial Crown embroidered: The Colonel's Colours flyes the Royal Cyher, Crimson: The Major's Gold Streams, Crimson. The first Troop, the Rose Crown'd; The second, a Thistle Crown'd; The third, the Flower-Deluces Crown'd; The fourth, the Harp Crown'd; The fifth, the Royal Oak, embroidered upon their Crimson Colours.
A List of all Commission and Staff-Officers in the King's own Royal Regiment of DRAGOONS, Commanded by the Right Honble. JOHN Lord CHURCHIL. The Right Honble. John Lord Churchil, Col. Edward Ld. Cornbury; Lt. Col. Hugh Sutherland, Maj. Capts, Lieuts. Cornets. The Colonels Troop, Commanded by Capt. Lieut. Thomas Hussy. Thomas Hussy. C. William Hussy. The Lt. Colonels Troop, Commanded by Lt. Charles Ward. C. Piercy Roche. Alx. Mackenzie, Capt. Lt. Hugh Windham. C. John Cole. Charles Neatby, Capt. Lt. John Williams. C. George Clifford. John Coye, Capt. Lt. Charles La Rue. C. Will. Staniford. Tho. Langston, Capt. Lt. Fran. Langston. C. Tho. Pownel. The State-Major, or Staff-Officers of the Regiment of Dragoons. Thomas Crawly, Adjutant, Theobald Churchil, Chaplain, Hen. Hawker, Quart. Master, Peregrine Yewel Chirurg. This Royal Regiment of Dragoons consists of six Troops, besides the Officers above∣named: each has 1 Quarter-Master, 2 Serjeants, 3 Corporals, 2 Hautbois, 2 Drums, and 50 Private Men; Armed with Muskets and Bayonets, Coated and Cloaked red lined blew; Hooses embroidered with blew and yellow upon red, with the Royal Cypher; Caps the same, with R. Cypher. The Colonels Pay of Dragoons per diem, as Col. and Capt. 1 l. 6 s. Lieut. Cols. Pay as Lt. Col. and Capt. 1 l. Capt. Pay 11 s. Lieut. Pay 6 s. Cornets 5 s. Quart. Mast. 3 s. Serjts. 2. s. 6 d. Corpl's 2 s. Haut∣bois and Drums 2 s. Private Men 1 s. 6 d. per Diem. The Colours to each Troop thus distinguish't—The Colonel's, the Royal Cypher and Crown embroidered upon Crimson: the Lieut. Col. the Rays of the Sun proper Crown'd, issuing out of a Cloud proper, and is a Badge of the Black Princes. The first Troop has for Colours the top of a Beacon crown'd ore with flames of Fire pro∣per, and is a Badge of Henry V. The second Troop, two Estreages Feathers crown'd, argent; a Badge of Henry VI. The third a Rose and Pomgranate impaled, leaves and stalk vert. a Badge of Henry VII. The fourth Troop a Phenix in flames proper, a Badge of Queen Elizabeth: Each embroidered upon Crimson. Capt. John Staples Adjutant, General of the Horse, Peter Smith, Marshal of the Horse.
A List of the chief Officers of the Ordnance, and other General Officers belonging to the Army. The Right Honourable George Lord Dartmouth, Master General of the Ordnance. Sir Charles Musgrave, Bar. Lieut. General of the Ordnance. Sir Bern. De Gomi, Surveyer & Ingeneer General of the Ordinance. Captain Richard Leake, Master-Gunner of England. The Honourable Charles Bertie, Treasurer of the Ordnance, Sir Edward Sherburn, Clark of the Ordnance, William Bidges, Esq; Store-Keeper, —Gardiner, Esq; Clerk of the Deliveries. Other General Officers belonging to the Army. Charles Fox, Esq; Pay-Master General of all the Land-Forces, The Honourable Henry Howard, Commissary General of the Musters, David Crawford, Esq; Deputy Commissary General of the Musters, To whom belong eight Provincial Commissaries. William Blathwait, Esq; Secretary at War, George Clark, Esq; Judge Advocate, Col. James Hassel, Scout-Master General, James Pierce, Esq; Chirurgeon General,
A List of all Commission and Staff-Officers in the Royal Regiment of Foot-Guards, Commanded in chief by his Grace, HENRY, Duke of GRAFTON, Knight of the most noble Order of the Garter. The Duke of Grafton, Colonel. John Strode, Lieutenant Colonel. William Eyton, Major. Captains. Lieutenants. Ensigns. The honourable Sackville Tuffton, commanding the King's own Com∣pany as Capt. Lt. Gilbert Talbot, Ens. William Seymor, The Colonel's Company, com∣manded by Capt. Lt.— Edward Rouse, Ens. Hen. Bennet, The Leutenant Colonels Company, commanded by— Lt. John Headly, Ens. Giles Spicer, The Major's Company, comman∣ded by— Sir William Queristan, Bar. Lt. Ens. Fran. Edwards, Sir Roger Manly, Capt. Lt. Robert Baxter, Ens. Robert Knott. The honourable John Berckley, Capt. Lt. Edmund Harris, Ens. Tho. Rawly, Thomas Stradling, Capt. Lt. John Leake, Ens. Jo. Berckley, Ralph Delavall, Capt. Lt. John George, Ens. Jo. Gibbons, John Skelton, Capt. Lt. Hen. Colyer, Ens. Tho. Dring, Edmond Rerersby, Capt. Lt. Stint Duncome, Ens. Jo. Throgmorton, Knivet Hastings, Capt. Lt. Hen. Sandys, Ens. Edmund Wyndam, Hen. Saville, Capt. Lt. William Richards. Ens. Hen. Wigmore, William Selwyn, Capt. Lt. James Hancock, Ens. Oliver St. John, Charles Lloid, Capt. Lt. Corbet Hen, Ens. William Aston, Tho. Throgmorton, Capt. Lt. Charles Robinson, Ens. William Cornwallis, Arthur Corbet, Capt. Lt. Mat. Palmer, Ens. Stephen Bellieu, John Seymour, Capt. Lt. William Chumley, Ens. James Harison, Ferdin. Hastings, Capt. Lt. David Taylor, Ens. Hen. Hodson, Philip Kirk, Capt. Lt. Gilbert Primrose, Ens. John Delavalle, Francis Wheeler, Capt. Lt. Richard Woodward, Ens. Charles Gost, Lenthal Warcup, Capt. Lt. Andr. Pitcarn, al. Wheeler, Ens. Charles Wolseley, Charles Proier, Capt. Lt. Duncan Abercromy, Ens. David Eaton, Charles Midleton, Capt. Lt. William Smith, Ens.  orister,
A List of all Commission and Staff-Officers in the Royal Regiment of Foot-Guards and Granadiers, Com∣manded by his Grace HENRY, Duke of GRAFTON, Captains. Lieutenants. Ensigns. Wil. Parsons, Capt. Lt. John Byns, Ens. Richard Dalby, Francis Hawly, Capt. of a Company of Granadiers Lt. Chevalier De'meziere,     Lt.  Dolmain,   The State-Major, or Staff-Officers of the Royal Regiment of Foot-Guards. Henry Sands, Adjutant, Chavalier de Meziere, 2d. Adjutan, Tho. Jones, Quar. Mast. & Marshal, Dr. Morrice, Chaplain, John Noad, Chirurgeon, Franckin & Belemay, Chir. Mates, Edward Skirrum, Drum-Major. This first Regiment of Foot-Guards has 24 Companies establish't, two Serjeants, three Corporals, and two Drums in each, the King's own Company having a Sergeant more than the other Companies; ditinguish't by red Coats lined blew, blew Stockings, blew breeches and white Sashes with blew fringe. The Pay of all his Majesties Commission-Offieers of Foot in every Regiment and Company, alike: That of Private Centinels, 8 d. per diem; excepting in the two Regiments of Foot-Guards, which is per diem 10 d. Attended by a company of Granadiers, armed with Muskets and Bayonets, with∣out Swords, having besides the Commssion'd Officers, 2 Serjeants, 3 Corporals, and 2 Drums: Upon Caps lined blew, tufed blew and red, their Granadiers bear the R. Cy∣pher crown'd, for their distinction: This Regiment flyes St. George's Cross in a white Field, Viz. The King's own Company, the Standard all Crimson, Cypher and Crown embroidered with Gold.—The Colonel's, whie, wih the red Cross, the Crown or.—The Lt. Colonels. the same Cross, with C. R. cown'd or.—The Major's with C. R. and Crown or, with a Blaze crimson.—The first Company with the King's Crest, which is a Lyon pssant gardant, crown'd or, standing on a Crown or.—II. Comp. a Rose and Crown or.—III. Flower-de-luce and Crown or.—IV. Portcullis and Crown or.—V. A white Rose in the Rays of the Sun, and Crown or. VI. Thistle and Crown or.—VII. Harp and Crown or.—VIII. A Dragon passant and Crown.—IX. A Greyhound passant argent colour'd and Crown or.—X. Sun and Crown.—XI. Ʋnicorn passant, argent, armed ungled, and lined and Crown or.—XII. Antelope, argent, arm'd, ungled, and lined or, gorg'd wih a Ducal Crown, and Chain circumflex'd or.—XIII. A Stag standing at gaze, and Crown or.—XIV. A Falcon rising argent within a Fetterlock or, crown'd or.—XV. Rose and Crown or, Stalk and Leaves vert.—XVI. A Swan argent, membered and beak or, gorged with a Collar and Chain circumflex't or.—XVII. A Falcon argent membred, beak't, bells, and jesses, and ground, holding in the dexter Foot a Scepter all o, Crown or.—XVIII. The Stump of a Tree eraced or, Leaves vert, a Crown or.—XIX. A Sword and Scepter in Saltier or, the Blade proper.—XX. The Royal-Oak and Crown or.—Each Colours has a white Field, the Kings own excepted, with a red Cross, with these Badges in the Center of the Crosses.
A List of all Commission and Staff-Officers in the Cole-Stream, al. Laud-Stream Regiment of Foot-Guards, Commanded by the Right Honouble. WILLIAM Earl of CRAVEN. The Earl of Craven Colonel, Edward Sackvile, Lt. Colonel, John Huitson, Major. Captains. Lieutenants. Ensigns. The Colonels Company commanded by Capt. Lt. Henry Cope, Ensign George Wyth, The Lt. Colonel's Com∣pany commanded by— Lt. Edmond Steukly, Ensign Wil. Wakefield, The Majors Company, commanded by— Lt. Henry Wharton, Ensign John Drake, John Miller, Capt. Lt. Thomas Seymour, Ensign Adrian Moor, Antho. Markam, Capt. Lt. Robert Wilkins, Ensign Francis Marshal, James Kendal, Capt. Lt. Wil. Gibbons, Ensign Wil. Mathews, Wm. Wakelin, Capt. Lt. Edward Braddoc, Ensign Gamal. Chitwynd, Wm. Cholmely, Capt. Lt. John Clark, Ensign James Wynd, Cha. Cotton, Capt. Lt. Wil. Hewyt, Ensign Char. Wakelyn, Richard Pope, Capt. Lt. Wil. Rigg, Ensign Bozoon Symons, Heneage Finch, Capt. Lt. Edward Jones, Ensign John Wyberd, Dudly Rupert, Capt. Lt. John Hope, Ensign Allen Cotton, Jam. Bridgeman, Capt. of a Company of Gra∣Granadiers. Lt. Edw. Skelton,   Lt. James Ward,   The State-Major, or Staff-Officers of the Cole-stream Regiment, &c. Robert Wilkins, Adjutant, Mat. Ingram, Quarter-Master, Dr. John Price, Chaplain, John Treutbeck, Chirurgeon, John Brown, Chirurgeon's Mate, Thomas Goodman, Drum-Major. This Regiment of Foot-Guards, establish't as the former, consisting of twelve Com∣panies, distinguish't by red Coats lined green, red Stockings, and red Breeches, and white Sashes fringed green, attended by a Company of Granadiers, as the Duke of Grafton's: Their Caps lined green, with green Tassels, for their distinction: Flyes, St. George's Cross, bordered with white in a blew Field.
A List of all Commission and Staff-Officers in the Royal Regiment of Foot and Granadiers, Gommanded by the Right Honourable GEORGE, Earl of DUNBARTON. The Earl of Dunbarton, Colonel, Sir James Hacket, Lt. Colonel, Archibald Duglas, Major. Captains. Lieutenants. Ensigns. The Colonel's company commanded by Capt. Lt. James Eastland, Capt. Lt. John Ackmooty, younger Lt. Ens. Charles Arnott, The Lt. Colonels com∣pany commanded by— Robert Drury, Robert Hacket, younger Lt. Ens. Alex. Gawn, The Majors company commanded by— Murdo Mackenzie, James Lawe, younger Lt. Ens. Tho. Davison, Patrick Melvin, Capt. John Sterling, Henry Car, younger Lt. Ens. Pet. Robinson, Robert Duglas, Capt. David Clark, John Murray, younger Lt. Ens. Adam Bell, Andrew Monro, Capt. Robert Gordon, And. Rutherford, younger Lt. Ens. Alex. Monro, Robert Lawder, Capt. William Deans, John Chittam, younger Lt Ens. Roth. Makenzie Archibald Roll, Capt. John Mouat, Tho. Ogleby, younger Lt. Ens. Collen Camel, Sir James Moray, Capt. Andrew Scot, John Straghan, younger Lt Ens. Cha. Moray, Ld. Geo. Hamilton, Capt. Sir John Johnston, Bar. Jo. Leeds, younger Lt. Ens. Joh. Alexander. James Moncrife, Capt. George Graham, John Leviston, younger Lt. Ens. John Lundy, Of Granadiers, Robert Hodges, Capt. James Stuart, George Griffin, younger Lt.   Char. Barclay, Capt. George Stuart, Andrew Barclay, younger Lt. Ens. Wm. Robinson, Charles Murray, Capt. Walter Murray, Thomas Scot, younger Lt. Ens. Thomas Bruce, John Ruthen, Capt. Fredrick Hamilton, David Garioch, younger Lt. Ens. M. Mackentoch John Car, Capt. James Mackcrakin, Ja. Moultray, younger Lt. Ens. Wm. Magil, Thomas Forbes, Capt. Robert Leviston, Matthew Smelt, younger Lt. Ens. Jo. Bannerman, John White, Capt. Robert Car, William White, younger Lt. Ens. Ja. Poor, George Murray, Capt. Adam Cunningham, Wm. Owen, younger Lt. Ens. Jo. Mackultoch Ld. Geo. Murray, Capt. Wm. Barclay, Dav. Mac Adam, younger Lt. Ens. Ja. Grant, Alex. Cunningham, Capt. Alex. Person, John Maxwell, younger Lt. Ens. Geo. Hamilton, The State-Major, or Staff-Officers of this Regiment of Foot, Rotheric Mackenzie, Chaplain, Murdo Mackenzie, Adjutant, J. Broomer, Quar. Mast. & Mar. Franc. Beaulieu, Chirurgeon, Chir. Mate, Char. Price, Drum. Major, One Piper belonging to the Colone'ls Company. This Regiment of Foot consists of 21 Companies, has 2 Lieutenants to each Company, 3 Serjeants, 3 Corporals, and 2 Drums establish't, distinguish't by red Coats lined white, Sashes white, with a white Fringe, Breeches and Stocking light grey; Granadiers distinguish't by Caps lined white, the Lions face proper crown'd: Flys St. Andrews Cross, with Thistle and Crown, circumscribed in the centre, Nemo me impune lacesset.
A List of all Commission and Staff-Officers, in the Queen's Regiment of Foot, commanded by the Honble. PIERCY KIRK. Piercy Kirk, Colonel, Marmaduke Bointon, Lieutenant Colonel, Sir James Lesley, Major Captains. Lieutenants. Ensigns. The Colonel's Company commanded by Capt. Lt. William Berry, Capt. Lt. Ens. Samuel Atkins, The Lt. Colonels Company, commanded by— Lt. George Westcomb, Ens. Mountague, The Major's Company, commanded by— Lt. Henry Withers, Ens. John Fairborne. John Giles, Capt. Lt. Jenken Thomas, Ens. Jo. Mortimore, Thomas St. John, Capt. Lt. William Webster, Ens. Jo. Synhouse, Brent. Ely, Capt. Lt. John Wingfield, Ens. David Roach, Henry Rowe, Capt. Lt. Charles Gerard, Ens. Antho. La Pinitiere, George Wingfield, Capt. Lt. James Adams, Ens. John Fitzgerald, Thomas Barbour, Capt. Lt. Richard Law, Ens. Ewald Tusteen, William Mathews, Capt. commanding the Granad. Lt. Rich. Billin, Lts. of Granad.   Lt. George Kirk, Lts. of Granad.   The State-Major, or Staff-Officers of the Queen's Regiment. William Stauton, Adjutant, William Powny, Quarter-Master, Edward Hughs Chaplain, John Wylye, Chirurgeon. The Queens Regiment consists of ten Companies exclusively, besides the Granadiers, flyes a red Cross, bordered white, and Rays as the Admiral's, in a green Field, with her Majesties Royal Cypher in the Centre.
A List of all Commission and Staff-Officers in the Lord High Admiral of England's, His ROYAL HIGHNESS the Duke of YORK and Al∣bany's Marittime Regiment of Foot, commanded by the Honble. Sir CHARLES LITTLETON. Sir Charles Littleton, Colonel. Oliver Niclas, Lt. Colonel. Richard Bagett, Major. Captains. Lieutenants. Ensigns. The Colonels Company commanded by Capt. Lt. Robert Craford, Capt. Lt. Ens. Philomon Powell, The Lt. Cols. Company commanded by— Lt. Edmond Yarbourg, Ens. Antho. Townsend. The Major's Company commanded by— Lt. Theophilact Blechenden, Ens. William Person, George Littleton, Capt. Lt. Edmond Wilson, Ens. Ja. Man, Sir Tho. Cutler, Capt. Lt. Robert Lloid, Ens. John Hll, Edw. Nott, Capt. L. Fran. Hoblin, Ens. Alex. Erwin, Fran. Ezord, Capt. Lt. Fra. Butler, Ens. Tho. Man, Edw. Harris, Capt. L. John Thorn, Ens. William Somer, Sam. Scudamore, Capt. Lt. George Rook. Ens. Gilbert Simons, Chichester Wray, Capt. Lt. Hen. Hewys, Ens. George Littleton, Cha. Herbert, Capt. Lt. Tho. Whaly, Ens. Fra. Ezord, Edmond Plowden, Capt. Lt. William Oglethorpe. Ens. Jo. Whaley, State-Major, or the Staff-Officers of the Admiral-Regiment. Richard Beauvoir, Adjutant, Tobias Legrose Quart-master, Samuel Tatham, Chirurg. John Tatham, Chirurgmate. The Admiral's Regiment consists of twelve Companies, without Granadiers, coated yellow, lined red, flyes the red Cross, with Rays of the Sun issuing from each angle of the Cross or.
A List of all Commission and Staff-Officers in the Holland Regiment of Foot, commanded by the Right Honourable JOHN, Earl of MULGRAVE, Knight of the most noble Order of the Garter. John, Earl of Mulgrave, Colonel. Sir Tho. Ogle, Lt. Colonel. James Sterling, Major. Captains. Lieutenants. Ensigns. The Colonel's Company commanded by Capt. Lt. John Bristow, Capt. Lt. Ens. John King, The Lt. Col. Company, commanded by— Lt. Hen. Holt, Ens. Jo. Skrimpton, The Major's Company, commanded by— Lt. Francis Sterling, Ens. Fra. Rogers. Sir John Berry, Capt. Lt. Fran. Williamson, Ens. Richard Moore, Hen. Boade, Capt. Lt. Hen. Bayton, Ens. Jo. Meules, Cha. Manwaring, Capt. Lt. Tho. Sanders, Ens. Ehud Boad, Ewd. Fitz Patrick, Capt. Lt. Bernard Boutell, Ens. Antho. Alix, Fran. Collingwood. Capt. Lt. Edw. , Ens. Jo. Prideux, Sir William Wheeler, Capt. Lt. Hen. Feilding, Ens. Tho. Smith, Herbert Throgmorton, Capt. Lt. John Martin, Ens. Mich. Richardson, Andrew Birch, Capt. Lt. Richard Boulton, Ens. Fra. Foster, Humphry Barington, Lt. George Pilkinton, Ens. Oliver Luke, The State-Major, or Staff-Officers of the Holland Regiment. Jrvas Rouse, Adjutant. John Wormal, Quart-mast. and Marshal. Ja. Peirce, Chirurg Chirurg. Mate he Holland Regiment consists of twelve Companies, without Granadiers; Coated , lines with a Flesh Colour; flies the Red Cross, bordered White in a Green d.
A List of all Commission and Staff-Officers in her Royal Highnesses, the Dutches of YORK and AL∣BANYS Regiment of Foot, commanded by the Honble. CHARLES TRELAWNY. Charles Trelawny, Colonel. Charles Churchil, Lt. Colonel. Zachariah Tiffen, Major. Captains. Lieutenants. Ensigns. The Colonel's Company com∣manded by Capt. Lt. William Davis, Capt. Lt. Ens. John Bedford, The Lt. Cols. Company com∣manded by— Lt. Gerge Bynn, Ens. William Wharton, The Major's Company com∣manded by— Lt. Hen. Paget, Ens. Hen. Tiffin, Hen. Trelawny, Capt. Lt. John Malham, Ens. Wolfern Cornwall, Charles Fox, Capt. Lt. John Cole, Ens. Peircy Kirke, Edw. Griffin, Capt. Lt. Stephen Hobson, Ens. Sam. Arnott, Edw. Hastings, Capt. Lt. Tho. Atkinson, Ens. La Bruce, John Strode, Capt. Lt. Fran. Nicolson, Ens. John Avery, Edw. Saville, Capt. Lt. Tho. Lucy, Ens. Emmanuel Hobbs, Hayman Rook, Capt. Lt. John Hedger, Ens. Fra. Wyvitt, Charles Johnson, Capt. of a Company of Granadiers. Lt. Hen. Davis,   Lt. William Ghames,   The State-Major, or Staff-Officers of the Dutchesses Regiment. Charles Carole, Adiutant. Sam. Rich, Quarter-Master. Henry Muslo, Chirurg. John Bynn, Chirurg. Mate. Consists of ten Companies exclusively, besides the Company of Granadiers, which attends this Regiment; It flies a Red Cross in a Yellow-Field, bordered White, with Rays, as that of the Admiral's, with her Royal Highnesses Cypher in the Center.
A List of all Governours, Lieutenant Governours, and Deputy Governours, &c. Governours. Lt. Governours, & Deputy-Governours. His Grace, Henry, Duke of New-Castle, Governour of Berwick. The Honourable Raph. Widdrington, De∣puty-Governour of Berwick. Sir John Fenwick, Baronet, Gover∣nour of Holy Island.   The Right Honourable, Edw. Lord Morpth, Governour of Carlislle.   The Right Honourable Tho. Earl of Plimouth, Governour of the Block-houses, Town and County of Hull. Captain Lionel Coply, Lieutenant-Governour of the Block-Houses and Town of Hull. Sir John Reresby, Baronet, Gover∣nour of York, and Cliffords Tower.   Sir Tho. Slingsby, Governour of Scarborough Castle.   Sir Ewd. Villars, senior, Gover∣nour of Tinmouth Castle. Captain Hen. Miller, Deputy-Governour of Tinmouth Castle. His Grace, the Duke of Beaufort, Grvernour of Chepstow.   Peter Shakerly, Esq; Governour of Chester Castle.   The Right Honourable John, Earl of Bath, Governour of Plimouth, and St. Nicolas Island. Sir Hugh Piper, Deputy-Governour of Plymouth. The Right Honourable Edward, Earl of Gainsbourough, Gover∣nour of Portsmouth. Major Hen. Slingsby, Deputy-Governour of Portsmouth. The Right Honourable Lord Camb∣den, Governour of Gosper, near Portsmouth.   The Right Honourable Richard, Lord Arundel of Trerise, Gover∣nour of Pendennis Castle.   Sir Robert Holmes, Governour of the Isle of Wight, Cowes, Sandham-Fort, West-Yarmouth, and Carrisbrook.  
Sir William Godolphin, Governour of Scilly Islland, Capt. Godolphin, Depuny Gover∣nour of Scilly. The Right Honourable Christopher Lord Viscount Hatton, Governour of the Isle of Guernsey. Capt. George Littleton, Deputy Go∣vernour of the Isle of Guernsey. The Right Honourable Thomas Lord German, Governour of Jer∣sy Island. Capt. Henry Boad, Deputy Gover¦nour of Jersy-Island. Captain Henry Holmes, Gover∣nour of Hurst-Castle.   Capt. Freeman, Governour of Sandown, Castle.   Col. John Strode, Governour of Dover and Cinque Ports.   Sir Thomas Daniel, Governour of one of the Forts under Dover-Castle.   Capt. Rich. Noadward, Gover∣nour of another Fort under Do∣ver Castle.   Sir Char. Littleton, Governour of Sheerness. Capt. Robert Crawford, Deputy Go∣vernour of Sherness. Sir Roger Manly, Governour of Languard Fort.   The Honourale Sackville Tufton, Governour of Tilbury  Gravesend. Capt. Robert St. Clair, Lt. Governour of Tilbery and Gravesend. Capt. Robert Minors, Governour of Ʋpner Castle.   Sir Edmund Seymour Bar. Gover∣nour of Dartmouth.   The Right Honble. Wm. Lord Allington, Const. of the Tower.   Capt. Tho. Check, Lieutenant of the Tower.   Hia Grace, Henry Duke of Norfolk Governour and Constable of his Majesties Castle of Windsor. Capt. Charles Potts, Deputy Gover∣nour of his Majesties Castle of Windsor.
