G511 23292441 109532
A General SUMMONS for those belonging to the Hen-Peckt-FRIGAT, To appear at Cuckolds Point, on the 18th, of this Instant October. This may be Printed, R. P. Prepare for Horn-Fair. Your presence is required, and are hereby lawfully Summoned (as belonging to the Hen-Peckt-Frigat) to appear at Cuckolds-Point (being the antient Place of our Randezvous) on the 18th. of this Instant October, precisely by Seven of the Clock in the Morning, well sitted with a Basket, Pit-Axe and Shovel, there to give your Attendance, till the List of your Brethren, the Knights of the Forked Order, is called over, and then at the Word of Command, to march in good Order to the Gravel Pits, there to Dig Sand and Gravel for Repairing the Foot-Ways;that your Wives with their Friends may have pleasure and delight in walking to Horn-Fair, whereof you are not to fail, under the Penalty of a Garret-Correction, and the Forfeiture of all your Goods and Chattels, except your Masters Joynture. Thomas Can't-Be-Quiet Beadle: A New SONG on Horn-Fair. Tune is, Ladies of LONDON. HEre is a Summons for all honest Men, belonging to the Hen-peckt Frigat; And I will tell you the place where and when, both Gravel and Sand for to dig it; To mend the ways, 'tis no idle tale, remember your Foreheads adorning, At Cuckolds-Point you must meet without fail, by seven a Clock in the morning. Shovels and Pit-Axes you must provide, it is but in vain for to cavel, You must bring with you a Basket beside, in order to carry the Gravel That your sweet Wives may walk to the Fair, with Gallants that dotes on their Beauty, See that you do it with diligent care, consider it is but your Duty. Taylors with Turners and Coblers too, also Barbers, ipers and Scrapers; Nay, and besides there's a notable Crew, a thousand or two of Ale-Drapers: All must appear and patiently wait, while they have receiv'd their Direction, And if our Laws you shall here violate, beware of a Garret-Correction. But if you do it with perfect delight, that Woman that finds you regard her, She to requite you will sure Dub you Knight, and one of the old Forked-Order; For there was some last Year were made so, and one was kind Robin my Neighbour, This may encourage you freely to go, as knowing you shan't lose your labour. Doing of this you may lead a sweet life, as long as you flourish together; Can any Man be too kind to his Wife, I pray you now do but consider? Therefore I pray be sure to attend, and be not of labour too sparing, When they return you will find in the end, They'l bring you a HORN for a Faring Printed for J. Deacon.
