H1706 12413935 61619
Examen Historicum: OR A DISCOVERY AND EXAMINATION OF THE Mistakes, Falsities, and Defects In some Modern Histories OCCASIONED By the Partiality and Inadvertencies of their Severall Authours. By Peter Heylin. In Two Books. Tacit in Vit. Jul. Agric.Vitium parvis magnisque Civitatibus commune, ignoratio Recti & invida. Horat. De Arte Poet. —non ego paucis Offendor maculis, quas non incuria fudit Aut humana parum, cubit natura— LONDON, Printed for Henry Seile and Richard Royston, and are to be sold over against S. Dunstans Church in Fleetstreet, and at the Angel in Ivy-lane. 1659.
A Generall PREFACE to the Whole. IT is affirmed of History by the famous Orator, that it is Testis temporum, the Witnesse and Record of time, by which the actions of it are transmit∣ted from one age to another. And therefore it concerns all those who ap∣ply themselves to the writing of Histories, to take speciall care that all things be laid down exactly, faithfully, and without deviation from the truth in the least particular. For if the Witnesses be subor∣ned, the Record falsified, or the Evidence wrested, neither Posterity can judge rightly of the actions of this present time, or this time give a certain judge∣ment of the Ages past. It is therefore a good di∣rection which Iosephus the Historian gives us, and which he followed as it seems in his Iewish Antiqui∣ties, not only to be carefull that the stile be pleasing, but that the whole Work be framed by the Levell and Line of Truth. Nam qui Historiam & rerum pro∣pter
Antiquitatem obscurarum expositionem, &c. They (saith he) who make profession to write Histories, and to recite such things as are obscured by Anti∣quity, ought not only studiously to conform their stile, but also to beautifie the same with ornaments of Eloquence, to the intent the Reader may con∣verse in their Writings with the more delectation. But above all things they must have an especiall care so exactly to set down the truth,Antiq. Iad. Lib. 14. cap 1. that they who know not how those things came to passe may be the more duely and fitly in∣formed. There is another Rule, which he bound himself to. that is to say, Neither to omit any thing through ignrance, nor to bury any thing in forgetful∣nesse; and all these cautions well observed make a pefct History. But on the contrary, there are some who do spend themselves on the stile and dresse, as if their businesse rather were to delight the ear then inform the judgement; Others so byassed by self-ends and private interesse, that they seem rather Advocates to pleade for some growing party, then true Reporters of affairs as they be before them. Some who endeavouring to be copious, clap all to∣gether in a huddle which is offered to them, with∣out relation to the Ornaments and Attire of Lan∣guage; and others with like carelesnesse as unto themselves, but greater inconvenience as unto the Reader, examine not the truth and certainty of what they write, so they write somewhat which they think may inform the Reader. Betwixt these truth is oftentimes irrecoverably lost, the Reader led a∣side from the waies of Verity into the crooked lanes
of Errour▪ and many times conducted to such dan∣gerous praecipices as ma prove destructive to him∣self, and of ill consequence to all those which are guided by him. The errours of the understanding in matters which may possibly be reduced to pra∣ctice, are far more mischievous then those which do consist in the niceties of speculation, and advance no further, which moved the Orator not only to ho∣nour History with the Attribute of Testis temporum, but to stile it also by the name of Magistra vitae. These things considered as they ought, have made me wonder many times at the unadvisednesse of some Late Writers in this kinde, whose Histories are composed with so much partiality on the one side, and so much inadvertency on the other, that they stand more in need of a Commentator to ex∣pound the Truth, and lay it clear and open to the view of the Reader, then either the dark words of Aristotle, or any other obscure peece of the ancient Writers. I speak of Histories here, not Libels, of which last sort I reckon Weldons Pamphlet, called, The Court of King James, and Wisons most ifamous Pasquill of the Reign of that King; in which it is not easie to judge whether the matter be more false or the stile more reproachfull in all parts thereof. Certain I am we may affirm of them,Tacit. An∣nal. lib, 4. as Cremutius Cordus doth of the Epistles of Antonius, and the Orations of Brutus, falsa quidem in Augustum probra, se multa cum acerbitate habent, that is to say, that they contained not only many false and disgracefull passages against the honour of Au∣gustus, but were apparelled in all the bitternesse of a
scurrilous language. With such as these I shall not meddle at the present, leaving their crimes unto the punishment not of an Index, but an Ignis expurgato∣rius, as most proper for them. But as for those whom either the want of true intelligence or inad∣vertency in not weighing seriously what they were to do, or the too much indulgence to their own af∣fections have made more capable of being bettered by correction, I have thought it more agreeable to the Rules of justice, to rectifie their mistakes, and reform their Errours, then absolutely to condemn and decry their Writings. At this time I have two before me whom I conceive to stand in need of such Observations, by which the truth may be preserved, and the clear face of things presented to the Readers eye; the one of them an Authour of Ecclesiasticall, the other of some Civil Histories. In both I finde the Truth much injured, and in one the Church. The Errours of the one tend not to the subversion of any publick interesse, but, being Errours, may misguide the Reader in the way of his knowledge and discourse, and therefore I have rectified him with some Advertisements (not taking notice of such passages as have been made the subject of some Ob∣servations from another hand) that so he may be read with the greatest profit. The other (besides errours of this kinde too many) hath intermingled his Discourse with some Positions of a dangerous na∣ture, which being reduced into practise, as they ea∣sily may not only overthrow the whole power of the Church as it stands constituted and established by the Laws of the Land, but lay a probable foun∣dation
for the like disturbances in the Civil State. And therefore I have fitted him with some Animad∣versions in the way of an Antidote, that so he may be read, if possible, without any danger. I know well how invidious a task I have underta∣ken, and that it will be charged upon me at the first apprehensions of it, that I have rather chosen to finde fault with the Writings of others, then to write any things of this kinde which may be subject to the like partialities and mistakings. Carpere vel noli nostra, vel ede tua, might come in seasonably here, if I had not somewhat to alledge for my justification. But when the Reasons which indu∣ced me to the first Adventure (mentioned in the Introduction following) be seriously considered, as they ought to be; I hope I shall be capable of excuse at the least, if not of pardon. And for my venturing on the other, I shall say nothing more at the present, but that as well my love to Truth as to doe right unto the Authour (whom I would willingly look on as a man well principled, and of no ill affections to Church or State) hath invited me to it. Truth is the Mistresse which I serve, and I presume that none will be offended with me because I tell them of their Errours in a modest way, and beare witnesse for them to that Truth of which they doe professe themselves such espe∣ciall Lovers. In that great Disputation between the Esquires of the body of King Darius, whe∣ther the King, Wine, Women, or the Truth were of greatest power,1 Esdr. cap. 4. ver. 41. the whole Assembly cryed out in behalf of Truth,
Magna est Veritas, & praevalet, that is to say, Great is Truth, and mighty above all things. So that in standing for the Truth, without conside∣ration unto the recompence of reward, I hope, though I mee some Adversaries, I shall finde more Friends: If not (for I am at a reasonable passe for that) it shall be no small comfort to me that the weak Candle of my Studies hath given light to othrs, whereby they may discern some Histo∣ricall Truhs even in the darkest Mists of Errour, which either partiality or incogitancy hath cast before the eyes of unwary Readers. Which said, I shall now adde no more, but that having two Ptients under cure of different tempers, it is not to be thought that I should administer unto both the same kinde of Physick▪ an ordinary purge being sufficient for the one, whereas the foule body of the other doth require a Fluxing; as some wounds may be healed with Balm, when others more corrupt and putrified doe exact a Lancing. But so it happeneth many times, that some men are more impatient of the Cure, then sensible of their Diseases, and that in stead of giving thanks to the Physician, for the great pains he took about them, they pay him with nothing but displeasures. Which being the worst that can befall me, I am armed against it. If by the ha∣zrd of my peace, I shall procure this benefit to the present and succeeding times, that men may prove more carefull of what they write, and not obtude upon the Reader (either through ig∣norance, inadvertency, or somewhat worse) such
and so many Falsities, Mistakes and Errours, as have been lately put upon him in some Mo∣dern Histories, it is that I aimed at; and ha∣ving gained that Point, I have gained my pur∣pose. Non partis studiis agimur, sed sumpsimus Arma Consiliis inimica tuis, ignavia fallax. Peter Heyliu.
Examen Historicum: OR A DISCOVERY AND EXAMINATION OF THE Mistakes, Falsities, and Defects, In some Modern HISTORY. Part. I. CONTAINING Necessary ANIMADVERSIONS ON THE Church-History of Britain. AND The History of Cambridge. Publisht by Thomas Fuller. For vindication of the Truth, the Church and the injured Clergy. 2 Corinth. 13. 8. Non possumus aliquid adversus veritatem: sed pro veritate. Minut. Foel. in Octavio. Et Veritas quidem obvia est, sed requirentibus.
A Necessary Introduction To the Following ANIMADVERSIONS ON THE CHURCH-HISTORY OF BRITAIN. Touching the Title of the Book, and the Preface to it. 1. INtending some short Animadversions on the Church Hstory of Britain, for Vindication of the Truth, the Church, and the injured Clergy, I have thought good to prepare the way unto them by a plain, but necessary In∣troduction, touching the Quality and Nature of the Book which I have in hand. Concerning which the Reader is to understand that in the Year 1642. M. Fuller publisht his Book called The Holy State, in the Preface whereof he lets us know, that he should count it freedom to serve two Ap∣prentiships (God spinning out the thick thread of his life so
long) in writing the Ecclesiasticall History from Christs time to our daies. And so much time it seems he had spent upon it (except some starts for recreation in the Holy Land) be∣fore he had finisht and expos'd it to the publike view; the Book not coming out until the Year 1655. whether agree∣able to his promise and such a tedious expectation, we are now to see. For first, The Reader might expect by the former pas∣sage, that he designed the Generall History of the Church, from the first preaching of Christ, and the calling of the twelve Apostles to the times we live in: whereas he hath restrained himself to the Church of Britain, which he con∣ceives to be so far from being founded in the time of Christ, that he is loth to give it the Antiquity of being the work of any of the Apostles, of any of the Seventy Disci∣ples, or finally of any Apostolicall Spirit of those eldest times. And secondly, Though he entitle it by the name of the Church-History of Britain, yet he pursues not his Designe agreeable to that Title neither: there being little said of the affairs of the Church of Scotland, which certainly makes up a considerable part of the Isle of Britain, and lesse (if any thing at all) of the Church of Ireland, which ancient∣ly past in the account of a British Island. Nor is it thirdly, a Church-History rightly and properly so called, but an aggregation of such and so many Hetero∣geneous bodies, that Ecclesiasticall affairs make the least part of it. Abstracted from the dresse and trimming, and all those outward imbelishments which appear upon it, it hath a very fit resemblance to that Lady of pleasure of which Martial tels us, Pars minima est ipsa puella sui, that the wo∣man was the least part of her self. The name of a Church-Rhapsody had been fitter for it, though to say truth (had it been answerable thereunto in point of learning) it might have past by the old Title of Fullers Miscellanies. For such and so many are the impertinencies, as to matters of Histo∣ricall
nature, more as to matters of the Church, that with∣out them this great Volume had been brought to a narrow∣er compasse, if it had taken up any room at all. So that we may affirm of the present History as one did of the Wri∣tings of Chrisippus an old Philosopher,Diog. Laert. in vit Chry∣sippi. viz. Si quis tollat & Chrysippi, Libris quae aliena sunt, fa∣cil illi vacua relinquerentur, Pergamena, that is to say, that if they were well purged of all such passages as were not pertinent to the businesse which he had in hand, there would be nothing left in them to fill up his Parch∣ments. 2. The first of this kinde which I am to note, is a meer extrinsecall and outside unto those impertinences which are coucht within; consisting of Title-Pages, Dedicatory Epi∣stles, and severall intermediate Inscriptions unto every Se∣ction. A new way, never travelled before by any, till he found it out, & such wherein he is not like to finde many fol∣lowers, though the way be opened. I know it is no unusu∣all thing for works of different Arguments, publisht at seve∣rall times, and dedicated to severall persons, to be drawn together into one Volume; and being so drawn together, to retain still those particular Titles and Dedications which at first they had. But I dare confidently say, that our Hi∣storian is the first who writing a Book of the same Argu∣ment, not published by peece-meal, as it came from his hand, but in a full and intire Volume, hath filled his Sheets with so many Title-leaves and Dedications, as we have be∣fore us. For in this one Book, taking in the History of Cam∣bridge, which is but an Appendix to it, there are no fewer then 12 particular Titles, beside the generall; as many parti∣cular Dedications, and no fewer then fifty eight or sixty of those By-Inscriptions which are addrest to his particular Friends and Benefactors, which make it bigger by fourty Sheets at the least, then it had been otherwise. Nay, so am∣bitious he is of encreasing the Number of his Patrons, that having but four Leaves to come to the end of his History,
he findes out a particular Benefactress to inscribe it to: Which brings into my minde the vanity of Vitellius in be∣stowing, and of Roscius Regulus for accepting the Con∣sular Dignity, for that part of the day on which Cecina, by Order and Decree of the Senate, was degraded from it: Of which the Historian gives this Note, that it was, Magno cum irrisu accipientis tribuentisque, a matter of no mean disport amongst the People for a long time after: But of this Argu∣ment our Author heard so much at the late Act in Oxford, that I shall say no more of it at this present time. 3. In the next ranck of Impertinencies, which are more intrinsecal, part of the substance of the work, I account his Heraldry, Blazons of Arms, Dscenis of noble Families, with their Atchievements intermingled as they come in his way, not pertinent, I am sure, to a Church-Hstorian, unless such persons had been Founders of Episcopal Sees, or Religious Houses, or that the Arms so blazoned did belong to ei∣ther. Our Author tells us, lib. 5. fol. 191. that knowledge in the Laws of this Land, is neither to be expected or required in one of his profession; and yet I trow, considering the great influence which the Laws have upon Church-matters, the knowledge of the Law cannot be so unnecessary in the way of a Clergy-man, as the study of Heraldry: But granting Heraldry to be an Ornament in all them that have it, yet is it no ingredient requisite to the composition of an Ecclesiastical History: The Copies of Battle-Abbey Roll fitter for Stow and Hollingshed, where before we had them, can, in an Histo∣ry of the Church, pretend to no place at all, though possi∣bly the names of some may be remembred as their Founda∣tions or Endowments of Churches give occasion for it. The Arms of the Knights-Errant, billeted in the Ise of Ely, by the Norman Conqueror, is of like extravagancy. Such also is the Catalogue of those noble Adventurers, (with their Arms, Issue and Atchievements) who did accompany King Richard the first to the War of Palestine, which might have
better serv'd as an Appendix to his History of the Holy War then found a place in the main Body of an History of the Church of England: Which three alone, besides many in∣tercalatious of that kinde, in most parts of the Book, make up eight sheets more, inserted onely for the ostentation of his skill in Heraldry, in which notwithstanding he hath fal∣len on as palpable Errors, as he hath committed in his Histo∣ry: For besides those which are observed in the course of this work, I finde two others of that kinde in his History of Cambridge, to be noted here. For fol. 146. he telleth us, That Alice Countess of Oxford was Daughter and sole Heir of Gilbert Lord Samford, which Gilbert was Hereditary Lord Chamberlain of England: But by his leave, Gilbert Lord Samford was never the Heriditary Chamberlain of the Realm of England, but onely Cham∣berlain in Fee to the Queens of England, betwixt which Offices how vast a difference there is, let our Authour judge. And secondly, The Honor of Lord Chamberlain of Eng∣land, came not unto the Earls of Oxford by that Marriage, or by any other, but was invested in that Family, before they had attained the Title and Degree of Earls: Conferred by King Henry the first on Aubrey de Vere, a right puissant Person, and afterwards on Aubrey de Vere his Son, together with the Earldom of Ox∣ford,Cambd. in Oxf. fol. 389. by King Henry the second; continuing Hereditary in that House, till the death of Robert Duke of Ireland, the ninth Earl thereof, and then bestowed for a time at the Kings discretion, and at last setled by King Charls in the House of Lindsey. But because being a Cambridge Man, he may be better skild in the Earls of that County, let as see what he saith of them; and we shall finde, fol. 162. That Richard Plantagenet, Duke of York, was the eighth Earl of Cambridge. Whereas first, Richard Duke of York was not Earl of Cambridge.
And secondly, If he had been such, he must have been the seventh Earl, and not the eighth: For thus those Earls are marshalled in our Catalogues of Honor, and Books of He∣raldry, viz. 1. William de Meschines. 2. Iohn de amalt. 3. William Marquess of Iuliers. 4. Edmond of Langley, D. of York. 5. Edward D. of York. 6. Richard de Conisburgh, yonger Brother of Edward. 7. Iames Marquess Hamilton, &c. No Richard Duke of York to be found amongst them, his Father, Richard of Konisburgh, having lost that Title by Attainder, which never was restored to Richard his Son (though most improvidently advanced to the Dukedom of York) nor unto any other of that Line and Family. 4. Proceed we in the next place to Verses, and old ends of Poetry, scattered and dispersed in all parts of the History, from one end to the other; for which he hath no prece∣dent in any Historian, Greek or Latine, or any of the Na∣tional Histories of these latter times: The Histories of He∣rodotus, Xenophon, Thucydides and Plutarch, amongst the Greeks; of Caesar, Livy, Salust, Tacius, and Sueonius, amongst the Latines, afford him neither warrant nor exam∣ple for it: The like may be affirmed of Eusbius, Socrates, Szomen, Theodoret, Russin and Evagrius, Church Histori∣ans all; though they had all the best choice, and the most ex∣cellent Poets of the world to befriend them in it: And he that shall consult the Histories of succeeding times, through all the Ages of the Church, to this present day, will finde hm all as barren of any incouragements in this kinde, as the ancients were: Nay, whereas Bishop Godwin in his Annals, gives us an Epitaph of two Verses onely made on Queen Iane Seymour, and afterwards a Copy of eighteen verses on the Martyrdom of Arch Bishop Cran∣mer;Annal R. Mariae. he ushers in the last with this short Apolo∣gy, Contra morm storiae liceat quaeso inserere, &c. Let me, (saith he, I beseech you) insert these following verses, though otherwise against the Rule and Laws of Hi∣story▪ But what alass! were eighteen or twenty verses com∣pared
with those many hundred (six or seven hundred at the least) which we finde in our Author; whether to shew the universality of his reading in all kinde of Writers, or his faculty in Translating (which when he meets with hard Co∣pies, he knows how to spare) I shall not determine at the present: Certain I am, that by the interlarding of his Prose with so many Verses, he makes the Book look rather like a Church-Romance, (our late Romancers being much given to such kinde of Mixtures) then a well built Ecclesiastical Hi∣story. And if it be a marter so inconvenient to put a new piece of cloth on an old garment; the putting of so many old patches on a new pie of cloth, must be more unfashon∣able. Besides that, many of these old ends are so light and ludicrous, so little pertinent to the business which he has in hand, that they serve onely to make sport for Children, (ut pueris placeas & Declamatio fias) and for nothing else. 5. This leads me to the next impertinency, his raking in∣to the Chanel of old Popish Legends, writ in the daker times of Superstition, but written with an honest zeal, and a good intention▪ as well to raise the Reader to the admi∣ration of the person of whom they write, as to the emula∣lation of his vertues: But being mixt with some Monkh dotages, the most learned and ingenious men in the Church of Rome have now laid them by; and it had been very well if our Author had done so to, but that there must be some∣thing of entertainment for the gentle Reader, and to inflame the reckoning which he pays not for. But above all things, recommend me to his Merry Tales, and scraps of Trencher jests, frequently interlaced in all parts of the History; which if abstracted from the rest, and put into a Book by themselves, might very well be serv'd up for a second course to the Ban∣quet of Iosts, a Supplement to the old Book, entituled, Wits, Fits and Fancies; or an Additional Century to the old Hun∣dred Merry Tales, so long since extant. But standing as they do, they neither do become the gravity of a Church-Historian, nor are consistent with the nature of a sober Ar∣gument.
But as it seems, our Author came with the same thoughts to the writing of this present History, as Poets anciently addrest themselves to the writing of Comedies, of which thus my Terence. Poeta cum primum animum ad scribendum appulit, Id sibi negtii credidit solum dari, Populo ut placerent quas ecisset fabulas. That is to say, Thus Poets, when their minde they first apply In looser verse to frame a Comedy, Think there is nothing more for them to do, Then please the people, whom they speak unto. 6. In the last place proceed we to the manifold excursi∣ons about the Antiquity of Cambridge, built on as weak Authoritie as the Monkish Legends, and so impertinent to the matter which he hath in hand, that the most Reverend Mat. Parker, (though a Cambridge Man) in his Antiquitates Britanicae, makes no business of it: The more impertinent, in regard that at the fag-end of his Book there follows a distinct History of that University, to which all former pas∣sages might have been reduced: But as it seems he was re∣solved to insert nothing in that History but what he had some probable ground for; leaving the Legendary part thereof to the Church-Romance, as mst proper for it. And certainly he is wondrous wise in his generation: For fearing lest he might be asked for those Bulls and Chartularies which frequently he relates unto, in the former Books; he tells us in the History of Cambridge, fol. 53. That they were burnt by some of the seditious Townsmen in the open Market place, Anno 1380. or thereabouts: So that for want of ote an∣cient evidence, we must take his word, which whether those of Cambridge will depend upon, they can best resolve. For my part, I forbear all intermedling in a controversie so clear∣ly
stated, and which hath lain so long asleep, till now a∣wakened by our Author to beget new quarrels: Such pas∣sages in that History as come under any Animadversion, have been reduced unto the other, as occasion served, which the Reader may be pleased to take notice of as they come before him. 7. All these extravagancies and impertinencies (which make up a fifth part of the whole Volumn) being thus discharged, it is to be presum'd that nothing should remain but a meer Church History, as the Title promiseth; But let us not be too presumptuous on no better grounds: For on a Melius inquirendum into the whole course of the Book wch we have before us, we shall finde too little of the Church, and too much of the State, I mean too little of the Ecclesi∣astical, and too much of the Civil History: It might be rea∣sonably expected, that in a History of the Church of Eng∣land, we should have heard somewhat of the foundation and enlargement of Cathedral Churches, if not of the more eminent Monasteries and Religious Houses; and that we should have heard somewhat more of the succession of Bishops in their several and respective Sees, their personal Endowments, learned Writings, and other Acts of Piety, Magnificence, and publick Interess, especially when the times afforded any whose names in some of those respects deserv'd to be retain'd in everlasting remembrance; it might have been expected also, that we should have found more frequent mention of the calling of National, and Provincial Synods, with the result of their proceedings, and the great influence which they had on the Civil State, sparingly spo∣ken of at the best, and totally discontinued in a maner, from the death of King Henry the fourth, until the Convocation of the year, 1552. of which no notice had been taken, but that he had a minde to question the Authority of the Book of Articles which came out that year, though publisht as the issue and product of it, by the express Warrant and Command of King Edward the sixth: No mention of that
memorable Convocation in the fourth and fifth years of Philip and Mary, in which the Clergy taking notice of an Act of Parliament then newly passed, by which the Sub∣jects of the Temporaliy, having Lands to the yearly value of five pounds, and upwards, were charged with finding Horse and Armour, according to the propertion of their yearly Revenues and Possessions, did by their sole Authori∣ty, as a Convocation, impose upon themselves and the rest of the Clergy of this Land, the finding of a like number of Horses, Armour, and other Necessaries for the War, accord∣ing to their yearly income, proportion for proportion, and rate for rate, as by that Statute had been laid on the Tem∣poral Subjects: And this they did by their own sole Autho∣rity, as before was said, ordering the same to be levyed on all such as were refractory, by Sequestration, Deprivation, Suspension, Excommunication, Ecclesiastical Censures all; without relating to any subsequent confirmation by Act of Parliament, which they conceiv'd they had no need of: Nor finde we any thing of the Convocations of Queen E∣lizabeths time, except that of the year 1562. (and that not fairly dealt with neither, as is elsewhere shewed) though there passed many Canons in the Convocation of the year 1571. and of the year 1585. and the year 1597. all Print∣ed, and still publickly extant; besides the memorable Con∣vocation of the year, 1555. in which the Clergy gave the Queen a Benevolence of 2. in the pound, to be levyed by Ecclesiastical Censures, without relating to any subsequent confirmation by Act of Parliament, as had accustomably been used in the Grant of Subsidies. It might have been expected also that we should have found in a Church History of Britain, the several degrees and steps by which the Heterodoxies and Superstitions of the Church of Rome did creep in amongst us; and the de∣grees by which they were ejected and cast out again, and the whole Reformation setled upon the Doctrine of the A∣postles, attended by the Rites and Ceremonies of the Pri∣mitive
times; as also that some honorable mention should be found of those gallant Defences which were made by Dr. Bancroft, Dr. Bilson, Dr. Bridges, Dr. Cosins, and di∣vers others, against the violent Batteries and Assaults of the Puritan Faction in Queen Elizabeths time; and of the learned Writings of B. Buckeridge, B. Morton, Dr. Sucliff, Dr. Burges, &c. in justification of the Rites and Ceremo∣nies of the Church of England, against the remnants of that scattered (and then broken) Faction in the time of King Iames; of which we have Negry quidem, not a word de∣livered: Nor could it stand with his design (which will dis∣cover it self in part in this Introduction, and shall more fully be discovered in the Animadversions) that it should be o∣therwise▪ All which together, make it clear and evident that there is too little of the Church or Ecclesiastical History in our Authors Book: And that there is too much of the State or Civil History, will be easily seen, by that unneces∣sary intermixture of State-Concernments, not pertinent to the business which he hath in hand: Of this sort to look back no further, is the long Will and Testament of King Henry the eighth, with his Gloss or Comment on the same, taking up three whole sheets at least, in which there is not any thing which concerns Religion, or which relates unto the Church, or Church-affairs; although to have the better colour to bring it in, he tells us that he hath transcribed it, not onely for the rarity thereof, but because it contained ma∣ny passages which might reflect much light upon his Church-History. Lib. 5. ol. 243. Of this sort also is his description of the pomp and order of the Coronation of King Charls, which though he doth acknowledge not to be within the Pale and Park of Ecclesiastical History, yet he resolves to bring it in, because it comes within the Purlews of it, as his own words are: But for this he hath a better reason then we are aware of, that is to say, That if hereafter Divine Providence shall assign England another King, though the transactions herein be
not wholly precedential, something of state may be chosen out grateful for imitation. Lib. 11. fol. 124. As if the Pomp and order of a Coronation were not more punctually preserved in the Heralds Office (who have the ordering of all things done without the Church, and are eye-Witnesses of all which is done with∣in) then in our Authors second-hand and imperfect Colle∣ctions: The like may be said also of the quick and active Reigns of King Edward the sixth, and Queen Mary, in which the whole Body of the reformed Religion was di∣gested, setled, and destroyed; sufficient of it self to make a competent Volumn, but contracted by our Author (like Ho∣mers Iliads, in the Nut shell) into less then 25 sheets: And yet in that small Abstract we finde many Impertinencies, as to the work he hath in hand, that is to say, The great profi∣ciency of King Edward, in his Grammar Learning, exempli∣fied in three pieces of Latine of his making, when he was but eight or nine years old; the long Narrative of Sir Ed∣ward Mountague, chief Iustice of the Common Pleas, to vindicate himself from being a voluntary Agent in the busi∣ness of the Lady Iane Gray; the full and punctual relation of Wats Rebellion, and the issue of it, though acted upon some false grounds of Civil Interess, without relating to Religion or to Church Affairs: Infinitum esset re per singula, It were an infinite labor to look into all particulars of this nature, which are found in our Author, make up a great part of the Book; but we may guess by this brief view, (as Ex pede Hereulem) that his diversion upon Civil Matters and Affairs of State, which neither have relation to, nor any influence at all upon those of the Church, do make up a considerable part of the rest of the Book: Which Civil Matters and State-Concernments being discharg'd also (as in all reason they ought to be) we next proceed to the Church-History it self: In which, if we should make the like defalkation, and expunge every passage which is either positively false, or ignorantly mistaken by him, there would be very little left
to inform the Reader, as by the following Animadversions will appear sufficiently. 8. But well it were, if onely Abberrations from Historical truth were to be met with in our Author: In whom we find such a continual vein of Puritanism, such dangerous grounds for inconformity and Sedition to be raised upon, as easily may pervert the unwary Reader, whom the facetiousness of the stile (like a hook baited with a painted Fly) may be apt to work on. Murthering of Kings avowed for necessary pru∣dence, as oft as they shall fall into the power of their Sub∣jects Lib. 4 fol. 109. The Coronation of the Kings, (and con∣sequently their succession to the Crown of England) made to depend upon the suffrage and consent of the People, Lib. 11. fol. 122. The Sword extorted from the Supream Magistrate, and put into the hands of the common People, whensoever the Reforming humor shall grow strong amongst them, Lib. 9. fol. 51. The Church depriv'd of her Autho∣rity in determining controversies of the Faith, and a dispute rais'd against that clause of the Atticle, (in which that Au∣thority is declared) whether forg'd or not: Lib. 9. f. 73. Her power in making Canons every where prostituted to the lust of the Parliament, contrary both to Law and constant pra∣ctice; the Heterodoxies of Wickliff Canoniz'd for Gospel, and Calvins Opinions, whatsoever they were, declar'd for Orthodox; the Sabbatarian Rigors, published for Divine and Ancient Truths, though there be no Antiquity nor Di∣vinity in them; the Hierarchy of Bishops so coldly pleaded for, as shews he had a minde to betray the cause, whilst all things pass on smoothly for the Presbyterians, whom he chiefly acts for: And this is that which we must look for, par my & par tout, as the Frenchmen say. Nor deals he otherwise with the persons which are brought before him, then he doth with the Causes which they bring. No profest Puritan, no cunning Non-conformist, or open Separatist, comes upon the Stage, whom he follows not with Plaudites and some fair Commends, when as the Fathers of the Church,
and the conformable Children of it are sent off commonly in silence, and sometimes with censure: The late Arch-Bishop of Canterbury, so eminently deserving of the Church of England, must be rak'd out of his Grave, arraigned for many misdemeanors, of which none could accuse him when he was alive; all his infirmities and weaknesses mustered up together, to make him hateful to the present and succeeding Ages; when Mr. ov's Treasonable practices and seditious Speeches, must needs (for footh) be buried in the same Earth with him. The University of Oxford frequently quar∣relled and exasperated, upon light occasions, the late Kings party, branded by the odious Title of Malignants, not bet∣ter'd by some froth of pretended Wit in the Etymology. The regular Clergy shamefully reproached by the Name of covetous Confomsts, Lib. 9. fol. 98. And those poor men who were ejected by the late long Parliament, despitefully called Baals Priests, usavory sal, not i to be thrown upon the Dung hill; though he be doubtful of the proofs which were brought against them. Lib. 11. fol. 207. So many of all sorts wronged and injur'd by him, that should they all study their personal and particular Revenges, he were not able to abide it: And therefore we may jstly say in the Poets Language. Si de to  Namin  quisue Deorum in  unus erit. Which may be Englisht in these words, Should all wrong'd  seek t' avenge their same, were not enough to bear the shame. 9. But nothing does more evidently discover his unfaith∣ful dealing, then his repot of the proceedings in the Isle of gh, between his Majsty and the long Parliament Di∣vines; of which he tells us, Lib. 11. fol. 235. That his anwledged their
great pains to inform his iudgement, according to their perswa∣sions, and also took especial notice of thir civilities of the Ap∣plication both in the beginning and body of their Reply; and having cleer'd himself from some mis-understanding about the Writ of Partition which they speak of, puts an end to the business. The man who reads this passage, cannot choose but think that his Majesty being vanquisht by the Argu∣ments of the Prebyterians, had given over the cause; and therefore as convicted in his Conscience, rendreth them thanks for the Instruction which he had receiv'd, and the Civilities they used towards him in the way thereof: But he that looks upon his Majesties last Paper, will finde that he had Learnedly and Divinely refe'd all their Arguments: And having so done, puts them in minde of three questions which are propos'd in his former Paper, acknowledg'd by themselves, to be of great importance in the present con∣troversie; without an Answer whereunto, his Majesty de∣clar'd that he would put an end to that conference: It not being probable (as he told them) that they should work much up∣on his Iudgement, whil they are arful to declare their own, nor possible to relive his conscience, but by a free dlaring of theirs: But they not able, or not daring, (for fear of dis∣pleasing their great Masters) to return an Answer to those Questions, his Majesty remain'd sole Master of the field, a most absolute Conqueror: For though the first blow com∣monly does begin the Quarrel, it is the last blow always that gets the Victory: But Regium est, cum benefeceris male au∣dire: It hath been commonly the fortune of the greatest Princes, when they deserve best, to be worst reported. 10. Nor deals he better with the Church, then he does with the King; concealing such things as might make for her justification, and advocating for such things as disturb her order. In the last Book we finde him speaking of some heats which were rais'd in the Church, about placing the Com∣munion-Table Altar-wise, and great fault found for the want of Moderation in those Men, who had the managing of that
business. But he conceals his Majesties Determination in the Case of St. Gregories, Novem. 3. 1633. by which all Bishops and other Ordinaries, were incouraged to proceed therein, and consequently those of inferior rank to defend their act∣ings. The Chappel of Emmanuel Colledge in Cambridge is built North and South, contrary to the usage of the Primi∣tive times, and the Church of England, with which King Iames being made acquainted, he answered (as our Author tells us) That it was no mater how the Chappel stood, so the heart stood right: Which Tale being told by him, and belie∣ved by others (& populum qui sibi credit habet, Ovid. in Ep. Hypsiphil.) as he is like enough to finde many Believers, farewel to all external Reverence in the Service of God: What need we trouble our selves or others with standing, kneeling, bowing in the acts of Worship; it is no mat∣ter in what posture the Body be, so the Heart be right. What need we put our selves or others to the charge of Surplices and Hoods, of Gowns and Cassacks, in the officiating of Gods Service; It is no matter in what habit the Body be, so the heart be right. There is another Chappel in Cambridge which was never consecrated,Hist. of Camb. (whether a Stable or a Dormitory, is all one to me.) At which when some found themselves grieved, our Author tells them, That others of as great Learning and Religion (himself especially for one) dare defend, that the continued Series of Divine Duties,Hist. Camb. fol. 155. publickly pra∣cticed for more then thirty years (without the least check or controul of those in authority) in a place set apart to that purpose, doth sufficiently consecrate the same: Stables and Barns by this Argument, shall in some tract of time become as sa∣cred as our Churches; and if the Brethren think it not e∣nough for their ease to be pent up in so narrow a Room, tis but repairing to the next Grove or Coppise, and that in a like tract of time shall become as holy as Solomons Temple, or any consecrated place whatsoever it be: Churches may well be spared, pull'd down, and their Materials sold for the use
of the Saints; a Tub by this our Authors Logick, will be as useful as the Pulpit unto Edification: And that we may perceive that nothing is more precious with him then an ir∣regular, unconsecrated, and unfurnished Chappel. Mel∣vins infamous Libel against the Furniture of the Altars in the Chappels Royal, (for which he was censur'd in the Star-Chamber) must be brought in by head & shoulders, out of time and place, for fear least such an excellent piece of Pu∣ritanical Zeal should be lost to posterity: These things I might have noted in their proper places, but that they were reseru'd for this as a taste to the rest. 12. Et jam finis erat, and here I thought I should have end∣ed this Anatomy of our Authors Book, but that there is an∣other passage in the Preface thereof, which requires a little further consideration: For in that Preface he informs us by the way of caution, That the three first Books were for the main written in the Reign of the late King, as appeareth by the Passages then proper for the Government: The other nine Books were made since Monarchy was turned into a State. By which it seems, that our Author never meant to frame his History by the line of truth, but to attemper it to the palat of the present Government, whatsoever it then was, or should prove to be, which I am sure agrees not with the Laws of History. And though I can most easily grant, that the fourth Book, and the rest that follow, were written after the great alteration and change of State, in making a new Commonwealth out of the ruines of an ancient Monarchy; yet I con∣cur not with our Author in the time of the former: For it appears by some passages, that the three first Books, either were not all written in the time of the King, or else he must give himself some disloyal hopes, that the King should ne∣ver be restored to his place and Powe, by which he might be called to a reckoning for them. For in the second Book he reckons the Cross in Baptism for a Popish Trinket, by which it appears not, I am sure, to have been written in the time of the Kingly Government, that being no expression
sutable unto such a time. Secondly, speaking of the prece∣dency which was sixt in Canterbury, by removing the Ar∣chiepiscopal See from London thither, he telleth us that the is not muh, which See went first, when living, seeing our Age ath laid them oth alike level in in their Graves: But certainly the Government was not chang'd into a State or Commonwealth, till the death of the King; and till the death of the King, neither of those Episcopal Sees, nor any of the rest, were laid so level in their Graves, but that they were in hope of a Resurrection; the King declaring him∣self very constantly in the Treaty at the Isle of Wight, as well against the abolishing of the Episcopal Government, as the alienation of their Lands. Thirdly, In the latter end of the same Book he makes a great dispute against the high and sacred priviledge of the Kings of England, in curing the dis∣ease commonly called the Kings Evil, whether to be imputed to Magick, or Imaginan, or indeed a Miracle; next brings us in an old Wives Tale about Queen Elizabeth, as if she had disclaimed that power which she daily exercised; and finally, manageth a Quarrel against the form of Prayer used at the curing of that Evil, which he arraigns for Super∣stition and impertinencies, no inferior Crimes: Are all these Passages proper to that Government also? Finally in the third Book he derogates from the power of the Church, in making Canons giving the binding and concluding Power in matters which concern the Civil Rights of the Subjects, not to the King, but to the Lay-people of the Land assem∣d in Parliament; which game he after followeth in the ighth and last: And though it might be safe enough for him in the eighth & last to derogate in this maner from the Kings supremacy in Ecclesiastical affairs; yet certainly it was neither safe for him so to do, nor proper for him so to write in the time of the Kingl Govrnment, unless he had some such wretched hopes as before we spke of. I must need; say that on the reading of these Passages, an the rest that follow, I found my self possest with much
indignation, and long expected when some Champion would appear in the lists against this Goliah, who so reproachfully had defiled the whole Armies of Israel. And I must needs confess withal, that I did never enter more unwillingly upon any undertaking, then I did on this: But being ollicited thereunto by Letters, Messages, and several personal Addres∣ses; by men of all Orders and Dignities in the Church, and of all Degrees in the Universities, I was at last overcome by that importunity which I found would not be resisted: I know, that, as the times now stand, I am to expect nothing for my Pains and Travel, but the displeasure of some, and the censure of others: But coming to the work with a single heart, abstracted from all self-ends and private Interesses, I shall satisfie my self with having done this poor service to the Church, my once Blessed Mother, for whose sake onely I have put my self upon this Adventure. The party whom I am to deal with, is so much a stranger to me, that he is neither beneficio, nec injurià notus, and therefore no particu∣lar respects have mov'd me to the making of these Animad∣versions, which I have writ (without relation to his person) for vindication of the truth, the Church, and the injured Clergy, as before is said: So that I may affirm with an honest Conscience: Non lecta est operi sed data causa meo, That this imploment was not chosen by me, but im∣pos'd upon me; the unresistable intreaties of so many friends having something in them of Commands: But howsoever, Iacta est alea, as Caesar once said when he passed over the Rubicon, I must now take my fortune whatsoever it proves, so God speed me well.
Errata on the Animadversions. PAge 10. line 17. for Melkinus r. Telkinus, p. 20. l. 21. for Queen of▪ r. Queen of England, p. 27. l. 6. for Woode poir r. Woodensdike,s p. 42. l. 1. for inconsiderateness, r. the inconsiderateness of children, p. 121. l. 28. for ter r. better, p. 145. l. 2. for statuendo r. statuendi, p. 154. l. 22. Horcontnar, r. cantuur, p. 154. l. 17. for Dr. Hammond r. D. Boke, p. 160. l. 1. for his r. this, p. 163. l. 28. for Jesuites r. Franciscans, p. 189. l. ult. for contemn r. confession, p. 221. in the Marg. for wether r. with o∣ther, p. 228. l. 2. for Den r. Dean, p. 239. l. 29. for Commons r. Ca∣non, p. 271. l. ult for culis r. occulis.
ANIMADVERSIONS ON The Church History OF BRITAIN. LIB. I. Of the Conversion of the Britans to the Faith of Christ. IN order to the first Convesion o  Bitish Nations, our Author takes beginning at the sad condition they were in beore the Chrisian Faith was preached unto them. And in a sad condition they were indeed as being in the estate of Gentilism, and consequently without the true knowledge of the God that made them; but yet not in a worse condition then the other Gentiles, w were not only darkned in their understandings, b o deprav'd also in their Affections, as to work all maner of uncleanness, even with greediness. Not o in their Conversation as the Asiatiks, no o as the Greeks; nor branded wih thse fithy and ∣natural lusts which St. Paul chargeth on the Rmans,
nd were in ordinary practice with most Eastern Na∣ns. And tgh they were Idolaters, yea and foul Idlatrs, as our Atho hath it, yet neither were their os of so brtish and impue a nature, as the Priapus, Clcina, and Sterutia amongst the Romans; or as the Venus, , common Harlots all: of whih nd such like other Gods the old Fathers tell us, tht they were not Nmina colendorum, sed cri∣ira clentium. No were they so immodest and bscene in their  and Ceemonies, as were the Greks and Romans in the sacrifices of their Cybele or Bereynthia, whom they call the Mother of the Gods; decibed by Arnobius, Lactan∣, and others of the ancient Witers, in uh lively colours, as no chast eye can look upon them without detestation. Ad for the number of their Gods, they fell extremely shot of that inite mltitude which St. Augustine findes amongst the Romans; our Author naming only thee (which he cals Gods Paramount) that is to say, Belnus, Andat and Diana, though whthe this last wee a British Deity may be more then questioned. When theefoe Gilas tels us of the ancients Britans, that in the numbe of their Gods they had almost exceeded gypt (Prtenta paene numero Aegyptiaca vinentia, in that athors language) he must be un∣destood with reerence to the times in which he lived, when all the Roman Rabble had been thrust upon them, and not as speaking of the times of their first conveson: But whether they were more, o  our Author is resolv'd on Diana for one, whose Temple was built in or neer the place where St. Pauls now stands, as our learned Antiquaries do acknowledge; Fo. 1. Which (saith he) rendreth their conceit not altogether unikely, who will have London so called
from Llan-Dian which signifieth in British the Temple of Diana.] A conceit, whosesoever it was, not altoge∣ther so likely neither as our Author makes it. For though the Britans being well stor'd with woods and Venison, possibly might have a hunting Goddess amongst the rest, yet certainly she was not call'd by the name of Diana, till the Roman Conquest and Plantations, before which time this City had the name of London (or Londinum) as we read in Tacitus. The name and sacrifices of Diana were not originally British, but of Roman race; as the great Temple in or near the place where St. Pauls now stands was of their foun∣dation. The Britans worshipping Apollo, by the name of Belinus, as both Camden and our Author say they did, must be suppos'd to have another name for Diana also; and were more likely to have call'd her by the name of Artemis, her old Grecian name, or by some other of as neer a remembrance to it, as Belinus was to that of Bel in the Eastern Countries. Assuredly if that great City had received this name from Dianas Temple, the Welch, being so tenacious of their ancient language, would have had some remembrance of it, who to this day call it Lundayn,Camdn in  and not Llan-dian according to the new conceit which our Author speaks of. But of this enough. Now to facilitate this great work of their conver∣sion, Camden and Godwin, two great Antiquaries, have alledg'd one reason, which is not allowed of by our Au∣thor; and our Author hath alledged another reason which none can allow of but himself. The reason alledged by the two great Antiquaries is that the Druides did the Britans in the knowledge of one only God; which questionless was a great step towards their Conversion. Druides unum esse Deum semper inculcarunt, saith our Authors margin. But this he reckoneth a  and charitably wisheth thereupon, viz.
Power, whom generally they entituled by the name of Iupiter, yet they did well enough agree in giving him the Supreme power over all the World. Et qui Iovem Principem volunt falluntur in nomine, sed de una potestate consentiunt,Mi u. bid. as my Author hath it. Nor did thoe old Philosophos kep the great Truth nto themselves like a Candle in a dark Lanthorn, or hid under a Bushell, but plac'd it like a great light on the top of a Mountain, tht all the people might discen it; who theeupon liting their hands unto the Heavens, did frequently make their addresses but to one God only, saying in common speech unto one another, that God was great, and God was true, and if God permit. Of which my Author (the same Chistian Advocat) seems to make a question,Idem ibid. Vulgi iste naturalis srmo est, an Christiani confitentis cratio? That is to say, whether those expressions avoured not rather of the Christian then the vulgr Heathn. And heepon I may conlude in the behalf of the Druides, (o ather of those leaned Pens who affirm it of them) that being Philosophers in study, ad Divines by Oice, and very eminent in their times, i both capacities they might as well instruct the Peope in the knowledge of one only God, as any other of the Heathen Sage ei∣ther Greks or Romans. The reason alledged by these great Antiquaries being thus made good, we next po∣ceed to the Examination of that which is poduced by our Author, who telleth us that Fol. 3. It facilitated the entrance of the Gospel ither, that lately the Roman cnquest had in part civilized th of this Island, by transorting Clnis, and erecting of there.] Then which thee cold not any thing be more diffeent from the  the time of that conersion which we as all  amongst thm
our Author himself) have armed fom  (who liv'd in the fourth Century of the Chriian Church) tmpore  Tiberii Caesaris, toward the latter end of e Reign of Tiberius Caesar, that is to say, about seven years after , at what time Romans had neither erected any one City, nor any one Colony in the South paris of the Island. or though Iulius Caesar in pursance of his Gallick , had attempted this Island, crossed the Thmes, and pierced as far as erulamium in the Countrey of the Cattieuchlani (now Hartfordshire) yet either finding hw dfficult a work it was like to prove, or having bsiness of more moment, he gave over the enterprize, with the honor of the first discovery, quam tradidisse, as we read in Taci∣ after this in order to the conquest till the time of Claudius. Augustus would by no means be pewaded to the undertaking, and much les iberius, in whose last years the Gospel ws first preach in Britain, as before wa said. Consilium id Divs Au∣ Tibeius praecipue. And though was once reolv'd on the expedition, yet be∣ing never constant to his resotions, he soon gave it : ving the honor of this conquest to his Uncle , who next succeeded in the Empire, and be∣ing invited into Britain by a discontented Party amongst the Natives, reduc'd some part thereof into the form a Roman Province. Of this see Tacitus at large in the life of Agricola. By which it will appear most clly, that there was neither City of the Roman ee∣cion, nor Colony of their Plantation till the time of Claudius; and conequently no such facilitating of the wo by either of those means which our Author dreams B from the time, proceed we to the Authors of this first Conversion, of which thus our Author.
Ibid. Paon the  mainly sticklth for the Apo∣stle Peter to have first preached the Gospel here.] And our Author doth as mainly stickle against it. The rea∣son which induced Parsons so to stickle in it, was as our Author thinks, and telleth us, Fol. 4. To infer an obligation of this Island to the See of Rome; and to ex∣empt this Island from that Obligation, our Author hath endevoured to disprove the Tradition. Whereas indeed St. Peters preaching in this Island (if he were the first that Preacht hee) in the time of Tiberius must be be∣fore his Preaching in the City of Rome, to which he came not till the Reign of the Empror Claudius. And thereup∣on it followeth by the Iesuites Logick, that the Britans by sparing their Apostle to peach at Rme, did lay an obligation upon that City, but receiv'd none fom it: or granting that St. Peter had first preacht at Rome, yet would this draw upon us no such engagement to the Pope and the Church of Rome, as our Atho fears; and other German Nations by Boniace, Willibald, Willibrod, and Swibert, English Saxons all, might did draw the like dependence of those Chrches pon this of England. So that this fear being ove blown, we will consider somewhat further of St. Peters fst Preaching in this Island, not as deive'd by Tradition from the Church of Rome, which is suspected to hve pleaded their own Interess in it; but as affimed poi∣tively by the Greek Menologies, and in the woks o Simeon Metaphrastes and appoved Greek Au∣thor.Camd B it. fol. 6. Of the Menologies (though vouched by Camden to this purpoe) our Author takes no notice at all, bt lets the weight of his di∣pleasure fall on Metaphrastes, of whom he telleth us that Ibid. Metaphrastes is an Author of no credit as B∣ronius himsel doth confess. Bt fist Baonius makes no such confession; that which or Autho tells us from him being only this, In aliis multis
ab ipso positis errare eum certum est; that is to say, that h hath er'd in many things by him delivered. if to erre in many things delivered in so great a , as that of Simeon Metaphrastes, may forth∣with be conceiv'd sufficient to make an Author of no cei, God bless not only our Histoians, but Baronius himself from being held Authors of no credit, in both whom there are many errors not possible to be recon∣cled to the truth of story. But secondly, as Baronius did not, so he could not say, that Metaphrastes was an Athor of no credit; the man being not only pious, bt learned alo for the times in which he liv'd, honored as a Saint in the Grek Menologies on the 27. of November, and grac'd with a Funeral Oration by Michael Psellus a renowned Scholar,Ex. apud Suium.  highly extoll'd by Balsamon for his pains and industry in this pre∣sent work, and no less magnified by the Fathers in the Councel of Florence, Anno 1436. All which had never set such an estimate upon him in their seveal times,Sss. 7. had he been an Athor of no cre∣dit as  Author makes him. I had now ended with St. Pter, but that I finde him appear in a Vision to King Eward the Confesso, and telling him that he had preach'd the Gospel in Britain (occasioning there∣by the fondation of the Abby of St. Peter in West∣minstr) to which our Author makes this Answer; Ibid. To this vision pretended of Peter, we oppose the certain words of St. Paul, 1 Tim. 1. 4. Neither give heed to tables.] What pity is it that this Apparition was no mde, and the same tale told over again to Thomas Fuller of Hammersmith, that so it might have found some credit with our Author, though with no body else. For of this Thomas Fuller our Author telleth us (and telleth it in confirmation of some miracles done by King Henry the sixth, after his decease) that being a
very honest man he had hapned into the company of some who had stolen some Cattle, for which he was condemned and executed; and being on the top of the Ladder K. Harry the sixth appear'd unto him, and so ordered the matter, that he was not strangled with the rope, but preserved alive; and finally that in gratitude for so great a benefit, he repaired to that Kings Tombe in Chertsey Abby, and there presented his humble thanks unto him for that great deliverance. There being as good Authors for that Apparition of St. Peter as for this of St. Henry. Vel neutrum ammis ure, vel ure duos. Either let both be burnt for false, or be∣lieved for truths. Lesse opposition meets the preaching of St. Ioseph of Arimathea, though it meeteth some. For notwith∣sanding that this Tradition be as generall, as univer∣sally received, as almost any other in the Christian Church; yet our Author, being resolved to let fly at all, declares it for a piece of Novel superstition disguis'd with pretended Antiquity. Better provided (as it seems) to dispute this point, then the Ambassadors of Castile when they contended for precedency with those of England in the Councel of Basil▪ who had not any thing to object against this Tradition of Iosephs preaching to the Britans, although the English had povoked them by confuting their absurd pretences for St. Iames his preaching to the Spaniards. For first our Author does object in the way of scorn, that Fol. 6. The relation is as ill accotred with tackling as their ship, in which it is affimed that St. Philip, St. Ioseph and the rest were put withot either Sails or Oaes, with a purpose to drown them.] No such strange piece of Errantry (if we mark it well) as to reder the whole truth suspected. For first we finde it in the Monuments of the elder times that Acrisius King of Argos exposed his daughter Danae with her
young Son Perseus, in such a vessell as this was, and as ill provided of all necessaries, to the open Seas; who notwithstanding by the divine Providence, were safely wafted to those parts of Italy which we now call Puglia. And secondly for the middle times we have th like story in an Author above all exception, even our Author himself, who telleth us, Lib. 6. Fol. 265. of our present History, that King Athelstane put his Brother Edwine into a little wherry or Cock-boat, without any tackling or furniture thereunto, to the end, that if the poor Pince perished, his wickedness might be imputed to the waves. Our Author objecteth in the next place, that Ib. No Writer of credit can be produced before the Con∣quest, who mentioneth Josephs coming hither.] For An∣wer wheeunto it may first be said, that where there is a connt uncontrol'd tradition, there is most com∣monly the lesse care taken to commit it to writing; secondly that the Charters of Glassenbury relating from the Norman to the Saxon Kings, and from the Saxons to the Britns, being all built upon St. Iosephs coming hither, and peaching here, may serve in stead of many Authors bearing witness to it; and thirdly, that Fryer Bale, as great an enemy to the unwarrantable Traditions of the Church of Rome as our Author can deire to have him, hath vouch'd two witnesses hereunto, that is to say, Melkinus Avalonius, and Gildas Albanus, whose writings, or some fragments of them, he may be be∣lieved to have seen, though our Autho hath not. As for some circumstances in the stoy, that is to say, the dedicating of Iosephs first Church to the Virgin Mary, the burying of his body in it, and the inclosing of the same with a large Church-yard; I look upon them as the products of Mnkish ignorance, accom∣modated uno the fashion of those times which the writers liv'd in. Thee is scarce any Saint in all the
Calendar, whose History would not be subject to the like misconstructions if the additaments of the middle and darker times should be produced to the disparage∣ment of the whole Narration. But such an enemy our Author is to all old tradi∣tions, that he must need have a blow at Glassenbury Thorn, though before cut down by some Souldies as himself confesseth; like Sir Iohn Falstaffe in the Play, who to shew his valour, must thrust his sword into the bodies of those men which wee dead before. The budding or blossoming of this Thorn he accounts un∣true (which were it true, &c. fol. 8.) affirming fom I know not whom, that it doth not punctually and criti∣cally bud on Christmas day, but on the dayes near it or about it. And were it no otherwie then so, the mi∣racle were not much the lesse, then if it budded citi∣cally upn Christmas day, as I have heard from per∣sons of great worth and credit dwelling near the place, that indeed it did: though unto such as had a minde to decry the Festival, it was no very hard mtter to bely the miracle. In fine, our Author either is unwilling to have the Gospell as soon preacht here as in other places, or else we must have Preachers for it from he knowes not whence. Such Preachers we must have as either drop down immediately from the heavens, as Dianas Image is said to have done by theAct. 19 35. Town-lerk of Ephesus; or else mst sud∣denly rise out of the earth, as Tages the first Sooth∣sayer amongst the Thuscans, is reported to have done by some antient Writers. And yet we cannot say of our Author neither, as Lactantius did of one Acesilas (if my memory fail not) Recte hic aliorum sustulit disciplinas, sed non rectè sundavit suam; that is to say, that though he had laid no good grounds for his own opinion, yet he had solidly confted the opinions of
others. Our Athor hath a way by himself, neither well skill'd in pulling down, nor in building up. From the first conversion of the Britans, proceed we now unto the second, as Parsons cals it, or rather from the first Preaching to the Propagation. The Christi∣an faith here planted by St. Peter or St. Ioseph (or perhaps planted by the one, and watered rather by the other, in their severall times) had still a being in this Island till the time of Lucius. So that there was no need of a new conversion, but only of some able La∣bourers to take in the harvest. The Miracles done by some pious Christians induced King Lucius to send Elvanus and Meduinus (two of that profession) to the Pope of Rome, requesting principally, that some Prea∣chers might be sent to instruct him in the faith of Christ. Which the Pope did accoding to the Kings desie, sending Faganus and Derwianus, two right godly men, by whom much people were converted, the Temples of the gods converted into Christian Churches, the Hierarchy of Bishops setled, and the whole building raised on so good a foundation, that it continued un∣demoisht till the time of the Saxons. And in the summing up of this story, our Author having refted some peti Arguments which had been answered to his hand (though much mistaken by the way in taking Diotarus King of Galatia, for a King of Sicilie, fol. 10.) gives us some other in their stead, which he thinks un∣answerable▪ First he obects against the Popes anwe to the King, that Fol. 11. It relates to a former letter of King Lcius wherein he requested of the Pope to send him a Copy or Collection of the Roman Lawes, which being at that time in force in the  if Britain, was but actum agere.] But certainly thogh those parts of Britain in which Lucius reign'd, were governed in part (and bt in part) by the Lawes of Rome, yet were the Lawes
of Rome, at that time more in number, and of a far more generall practice, then to be limited to so narrow a part of their Dominions. Two thousand Volumes we finde of them in Iustinians time, out of which, by the help of Theophilus, Trebonianus,Platina in vita. and many other learned men of that noble faculty, the Emperor compos'd that Book or body of Law which from the universality of its compehension, we still call the Pandects. So that King Lucius being desirous to inform himself in the Lawes of that Empire, whether in force or out of use, we regard not now, might as well make it one of his desires to the Pope of Rome; as any great person living in Ireland, in Queen Elizabeths time, might write to the Archbishop of Canterbury to pro∣cure for him all the Books of Statutes, the Year∣books, Commentaries, and Reports of the ablest Lawyers, though Ireland were governed at that time by the Lawes of England. For though Pope Eleu∣therius knew better how to suffer Martyrdom for Christs cause (as our Author hath it) then to play the Advo∣cate in anothers; yet did not that render him un∣able to comply with the Kings desires, but that he thought it better to commend the knowledge of Gods Law to his care, and study. In the next place it is objected, that This letter mounts King Lucius to too high a Throne, making him the Monarch or King of Britain, who nei∣ther was the Supreme nor sole King here, but partial and subordinate to the Romans.] This we acknowledge to be true, but no way prejudiciall to the cause in hand. Lucius both was and might be call'd the King of Bri∣tain, though Tributary and Vassal to the Roman Em∣perors, as the two Baliols Iohn and Edward were both Kings of Scotland, though Homagers and Vassals to Edward the first, and third, of England, the Kings of
Naples to the Pope, and those of Austria and Bo∣hemia to the German Emperors. Nor doth the next objection give us any trouble at all, that is to say, That The Scripture quoted in that Letter is out of St. Hie∣roms Translation, which came more then a hundred years after:] Unless it can be prov'd with all (as I think it cannot) the Hierom followed not, in those texts, those old Translations, which were before receiv'd and used in the Western Churches. Less am I mov'd with that which follows, viz. That this letter not appearing till a thousand years after the death of Pope Eleutherius, might probably creep out of some Monk Cell, some four hundred years since] Which allegation being admitted (the Monks Cell excepted) it makes no more to the discredit of the letter which we have before us, then to the undervaluing of those excellent Monuments of Piety and Learning, which have been recovered of late times from the dust and moths of ancient Libraries. Such Treasure like money long lockt up, is never thought less profitable when it comes abroad. And from what place soever it first came abroad, I am confident it came not out of any Monks Cell; that generation being then wholly at the Popes devotion, by consequence not likely to divulge an Evidence, so mnifestly tending to the overthrow of his pretensions. The Popes about four hundred years since were mounted to the height of that power and Tyranny which they claimed as Vicars unto Christ. To which thee could not any thing be more plainly contrary then that passage in the Popes letter, where he tells the King, That he was Gods Vicar in his own Kingdom (vos estis Vicarius De in Regno vestro, as the Latine hath it) Too geat a secret to proceed from the Cell of a Monk, who would have rather forg'd ten De∣cretals to phod the Ppis  over Sove∣rain
Princes, then published one only (whether true or false) to subvert the same. Nor doth this Letter only give the King an empty Title, but such a Title as imports the exercise of the chief Ecclesiastical Power within his Dominions. For thus it followeth in the same; The people▪ and the folk of the Realm of Britain be yours; whom if they be divided, ye ought to¦gather in concrd and peace, to call them to the faith and law of Christ, to cherish and maintain them, to rule and govern them, so as you may reign everlastingly with him whose Vicar you are. So far the very words of the let∣ter, as our Author rendereth them, which savour far more of the honest simplicity of the Primitive Popes, then the impostures and suppostitious issues of the at∣ter times. Our Author tells us fol. 9. that he had ventured on this story with much aversness; and we dare believe him. He had not else laboured to discredit it in so many particulars, and wilfully (that I say no worse) suppressed the best part of the Evidence in the words of Beda; who being no friend un∣to the Britans,Beda Hist. Eccles. ib. 1. cap. 4. hath notwithstanding done them right in this great business. And from him take the story in these following words; Anno ab icarnatine Domini, 156, &c. In the 156. year after Christs Nativity, Marcus Antonius Verus together with Aurelius Commodus his Brother, did in the fourteenth place from Augustus Caesar, undertake the govenment of the Empire. In whose times when as Eleutherius a godly man was Bishop of the Church of Rome, Lucius King of the Britans▪ sent unto him, Ob∣secrans ut per ejus mandatum Christianus essiceretur, in∣treating by his means to be made a Christian; whose vertrious desire he ein was granted; and the faith of Christ being thus received by the Britans, was by them kept inviolate and undefiled until the time of Dioctian.
This is the substance of the story, as by him delivered, true in the main, though possibly there may be some mistake in his Chronology, as in a matter not so canvas∣sed as it hath been lately. Now to proceed unto our Author, he tells us fol. 10. out of Ieffery of Monmouth, That at this time there were in England twenty eight Cities, each of them having a Fla∣men or Pagan Priest; and three of them, namely London, York, and Caer-Lion in Wales, had Archflamens, to which the rest were subjected: and Lucius placed Bishops in the room of the Flamens, and Archbishops, Metropo∣litans in the places of Archflamens; concluding in the way of scorn, that his Flamines, and Archflamines seem to be Flams and Archflams, even notorious falshoods.] And it is well they do but seem so, it being possibly enough that they may seem Falshoods to our Author, even notorious Falshoods, though they seem true enough to others, even apparent truths. And first though Ief∣fery of Monmouth seem to deserve no credit in this particular, where he speaks against our Authors sense; yet in another place where he comes up to his desires he is otherwise thought of, and therefore made the Fore∣man of the grand Inquest against Augustino the Monk, whom he enditeth for the murther of the Monks of Bancor. And certainly if Ieffery may be believ'd when he speaks in passion, when his Welch bloud was up,Lib. 2. fol. 63. as our Author words it, as one that was concerned in the cause of his Countrey∣men; he may more easily be believ'd in a cause of so re∣mote Antiquity, where neither love nor hatred, or any other prevalent affection had any power or reason to di∣vert him from the way of truth. And secondly, though Ieffery of Monmouth be a Writer of no great credit with me, when he stands single by himself, yet when I finde him seconded and confirmed by others, I shall not brand a truth by the name of falshood, because he re∣ports
it. Now that in Britain at that time there were no fewer then eight and twenty Ci∣ties is affirmed by BedaBeda. Hist. Ecclesiast. Ang. l. 8. cap. 1.. Henry of HuntingtonHist. l 1. in initio. not only agrees with him in the number, but gives us also the names of them, though where to finde many of them it is hard to say. That in each of these Cities was some Temple dedicated to the Pagan Gods, that those Temples afterwards were im∣ploy'd to the use of Christians, and the Revenues of them assign'd over to the maintenance of the Bishops and other Ministers of the Gospel, hath the concurrnt testimony of approved Authors; that is to say, Mathew of Westminster out of Gildas, Anno 187. Rodolph de Di∣ceto cited by the learned Prima of Armach in his Book De Primordiis Eccles. Brit. cap. 4. Gervaso of Tilbury, ibid. cap. 6. And for the Flamines, and Archflamines, they stand not only on the credit of Ieffery of Mon∣mouth, but of all our own Writers, who speak of the foundation of the antient Bishopricks, even to Polydor Virgil. Nor want there many forain Wri∣ters who affirm the same,Mart. Polon. in Chron. bginning with Martinus Polonus, who being esteemed no friend to the Popedom (because of the Story of Pope Ione which occurs in his Writings) may the rather be believ'd in the story of Lucius. And he agrees with Ieffery of Monmouth in all parts of the story, as to the Flamines and Archflamines, as do also many other of the Roman Writers which came after him. But where both our Author and some others have rais'd some objections against this part of the History, for An∣swer thereunto I refer the Reader to the learned and laborious Work of Francis Ma∣son late Archdeacon of Norfolk, De Mini∣storio Anglicano,Lb. 2. cap. 3. the sum whereof in brief is this, Licet in una urbe multi Flamines, that though there were many
Flamines in one City, yet was there only one which was called Pontifex or Primus Flaminum; the Pope or principal of the Flamines; of which kinde one for every City, were those whom our Historians speak of. And for the Archi-Flamines or Proto-Flamines, though the name occurre not in old Roman Writers, yet were there some in power and Authority above the rest, who were entituled Primi Pontificum (as indeed Coifi by that name is called in Beda) which is the same in sense with Arch-flamines al∣though not in sound.Beda Hist. Ecclesi st. l 2. c. 13. All I shall further add is this, that if these 28 Cities were not all furnished with Bishops in the time of Lucius for whom it was im∣possible to spread his armes and expresse his power over all the South parts of the Iland; yet may the honour of the work be ascribed to him, because begun by his encouragement, and perfected by his example; as Ro∣mulus is generally esteemed for the Founder of Rome, although the least part of that great City was of his Foundation. Our Author has not yet done with Lucius. For ad∣mitting the story to be true, he disallowes the turning of the Pagan Temples into Christian Churches, which he censureth as the putting of new Wine into old Vessels, which afterwards savour'd of the Cask, Christianity hereby getting a smack▪ of Heathen ceremonies. But in this point the Pimitive Christians were as wise as our Author, though they were not so nice. Who without fearing any such smack, accommodated themselves in many ceremonies to the Gentiles, and in some to the Iewes; that being all things to all men, they might gain the more, as in fine they did: which notwithstanding our Author hereupon inferreth; Fol. 13. They had better have built new Nests for the holy Dove, and not have lodg'd it where Schriech-owls
and unclean Birds had formerly been harboured.] A pety piece of new Divinity, and such as favours strongly of the Modern Anabaptist; such as not only doth e∣proach the practise of most pious Antiquity, but layes a sure ground for the pulling down of all our Chuches (as having been abus'd to Popish Superstitions in the former times) if ever that encreasing faction shld be∣come predominant. What pity is it that our Athor had not liv'd and preacht this Doctrine in King Ed∣wards time, that the Parochiall Churches and Cthe∣drals being sent after the Abbies, new Nests might have been built for the Dove in some tree or othe, uner the shade whereof the people might assemble to their de∣votions: and not new Nests provided only, but new feathers also, the vestments prescribed to the Miniers by the Church of England, being condemned and disallowed by the Puritan party, because in use for∣merly with the Priests of the Church of Rome. More of this stuff, but of a more dangerous con∣quence to the publick peace, we shall see here∣after. We have now done at last with the story of Lcius, and must next follow our Author unto that of Amphiba∣lus, in prosecution whereof he elleth us of a great slaughter of Christians in or near the City of Litch∣field, from thence so denominated, of which thus saith he; Fol. 19. This relation is favoured by the name of Litchfield, which in the British tongue signifies a Gol∣gotha, or a place bestrewed with skls.] It's true indeed that Litchfield, or Licidfield, as Beda calleth it, is made by Iohn Rosse to signifie Cadave∣rum Campus,Cmd. in Staff shire. or the field of dead bodies. But that it doth so signifie in the British language, I do more then doubt, the termination of the word
being meely Saxon, as in Hfenfield, Cock-field, Camps∣d, and many others. As little am I saisfied in the Etymon of the name of Maiden-head, which he ascribes unto the worshipping of the head of one of those many Maidens which were martyred with Vrsula at Colen, fol. 36. For which though he cite Camden for his Author (following therein,Camden in  sh. but not ap∣proving the old Tradition) yet when I finde in the same Camden, that this Town was for∣ery called Maidenhith, that anciently there was a ferry near the place where the town now stands, and that Hith in the old Saxn tongue, did signifie a Whrse, Haven, or landing place, I have some reason to believe, that the Town took this name from the Wharse or Ferry belonging at that time to some neigh∣bouring Nunnery, or to some private Maidens dwelling thereabout, who then received the profits of it. Just so Queen-Hith in London took that appella∣tion,Sowes because the profits of that Wharf were antiently accompted for to the Queens of England; and Maiden-bradly in Wilshire was so deno∣minated because belonging to one of the inheretrices of Manasses Basset,Camden in Wshire, fol. 243. a most noble personage in his time, who founded a House here for Maiden Lepers. But to return again to Litch-field, It must needs seem as strange to my judi∣cious Reader, that one part of it should be borrowed from the Britans, and the other from the Saxons; as it seems strange unto our Author, and that justly too, that Cern in Dorcetshire should anciently be called Cernel, from the Latine word Cerno, which signifies to see, and the Hebrew word El signifying God, fol. 67. Fol. 20. I fear that learned pen hath gone too far, who makes him founder of a Bishoprick at York, and styleth him an Emperor surpassing in all virtue and Christian iety.] The learned pen here spoken of is that of
judicious Camden, whose character of Constantius Chlo∣rus our Author in this place will not let passe without some censure. That he did found (or rather reound) a Bishoprick in the City of York, I am confident Cam∣den had not said without very good grounds, though on what grounds he said it, I am yet to seek. A Bishop∣rick and a Bishop of York we finde on good Record within few years after; Eborius the Bishop of that City subscribing to the Councill of Arles in the time of Constantine, the Son and next succeor of Constan∣tius Chlorus. And that he was a Prince of supassing vertue, is generally agreed upon by all Historians, both Pagans and Christians. The Question then will be only this, Whether he did surpass also in Christian piety, which our Author will not otherwise grant, bt by our Saviours Argument only, concluding those to be on our part who are not against us; Constantius doing no other good unto Christianity, but that he did not do it harm. A censure not agreeable to so good an Emperor, who though he were no through-paced Christian, yet did he both favor their Religion, and protect their persons, as Eusebius testifies de vita Constantini, lib. 1. cap. 1. And not so only, but as our Author himself confes∣eth, he bth permitted and preserved them who would re∣build the decayed Christian Churches. If o the persons of Christians in the exercise of their Religion, to have them near unto him in places of greatest trust and eminence, to suffer them to rebuild their Churches and defend them in it, be not the of some good unto Christianity, more then the harm, let our Author carry it, and Camden  the blame of his needless Courtship. But this is not the first time, in which our Author hath clash with , and I see it will not be the last, by that followeth. For speaking on the by how Wolve entred into England, considering that Merchants would
not bring them, and that they could not swim over them∣seves, he addes these words, viz. Fol. 25. Which hath prevailed so far with some, as to  this now an Iland, originally annext to the Con∣tent.] It seems that though some so coneive it, ye  Author doh no. And yet he cannot chuse but know that thoe whom he doth passe so slightly over by the name of some (as if not wothy to be notified by proper names) are the most eminent and re∣nowned Antiquaries of these latter times. Amongst which if I reckon Camden for one, and a chief one too, I shold but do him right, and not wrong the rest. Whose arguments to pove the point, he that lists to see, may finde them at large laid down in his descri∣ption of Kent; which when our Author can confute (as I dobt he cannot) he may then slight it over as a thing conceived and conceived only by some men not woth the naming Till then I shall behold it as a matter not coceived but prov'd, and so must he. I should here end this Chpter and this Book to∣gethe bt tha I finde a trifling errour not worth our notice, ut that I would set all things right as they come beore me▪ which is the placing of the Empe∣ro Costantine in the Catalogue of those who common∣ly uder the name of the nine Worthies, and this aith he, Fol. 39. Is more then comes to the proportion of Bri∣tin; that amongst but nine in the whole World, two should prove Natives of this Iland, Constantine and . That Arthur goes for one of the Worthies, I shall esily grant, and I shall grant too, that in the opinion of some witers this Iland gave birth unto aother of them, namely Guy of Warwick. His Knight Sir Guy one of the nine, we touch but by the way, saith Warner in his Albions England. But in the common estimate they are reckoned thus; that is to say,
three Iewes, 1. Ioshua, 2. David, 3. Iudas Maccabaeus; three Gentiles, 4. Hector of Troy, 5. Alexander the great, and 6. Iulius Caesar; three Christians, 7. Ar∣thur of Britain, 8. Charlemain of France, and 9. God∣fry of Bovillon. But I condemn my self for mingling this poor piece of Errantry with such serious matters, though the necessity of following my Leader as he goeth may excuse me in it.
ANIMADVERSIONS ON The Church History OF BRITAIN. LIB. II. Of the Conversion of the Saxons, and that which followed thereupon till the Norman Conquest. IN order to the Conversion of the Saxons, our Author begins (as he had done before in that of the Britans) with the unhappy condition of that People in the state of Gentilism; in the description whereof he omitteth that which was indeed their greatest unhappiness, that is to say, their barba∣rous and inhumane sacrifices of men and women unto two of their Idols. For Camden telleth us of their God called Wooden,Camd. in Brit. fol. 135. that they used to procure his favour by sacrificing un∣to him men alive; and I have read in Ver∣stegan (if my memory fail not) a man inferiour to none in the Antiquities of this Nation, that at their return
from any conquest they us'd to sacrifice the noblest of their Captives to their Idol Thur. In this not much in∣ferior to the Palestinians in their sacifices to Moloch, or to the Carthaginians in the like abominable sacrifices to Saturn, or to the Scythians in the like to Diana Taurica,Lactant. lib. 16. cap. 21. or inally to the Galls in theirs to Haesus and Teutaes their own National Deities. But not to lay at our Authors charge these small sins of Omission, we must next see whether he be not guilty of some sin of Commission also. For making a general muster of the Saxon Gods, and shewing how they were dispos'd of in relation to the days of the week, he concludes it thus: Fol. 55. And thus we see the whole week bescattered with Saxon Idols, whose Pagan Gods were the God-fathers of the days, and gave them their names.] Not the whole week, though the greatest part thereof was thus bescat∣tered. Sunday and Munday being so call'd in reference to the Sun and Moon, or else in correspondence to the the names of Dies Solis, and Dies Lunae, which they found given by the Romans at their entrance here. For either the Sun and Moon were worshipped by the anti∣ent Saxons, and then might think themselves neglected in having no place assigned them amongst the rest; or else the Saxon Pagan Gods were not the Godfathers to all the days of the week, as our Author telleth us. As much he seems to be mistaken in their God called Woden, of whom thus he telleth us. Fol. 54. Woden, that is wood, fierce or furious, giving the denomination to Wednesday, or Wodens∣day,In Brit. fol. 135. Armed cap a pe with military Coronet on his head; he was the God of Battail, by whose aid and furtherance they hoped to obtain victory; correspondent to Mars.] But Camden sings another song, telling us that Wooden was not worshipped for Mars but Mercury. Above all other Gods, saith he, they wor∣shipped
Mercury, whom they called Wooden, whose fa∣vour they procured by sacrificing unto him men alive, and to him they consecrated the fourth day of the week, whereupon we call it at this day Wednesday. Thus also in another place, Wansdike in the Saxon tongue called Wodenepoic,Id. in Wish. fol. 241. that is to say, the Ditch of Wooden or Mercury, and as it should seem of Woden that false imagined God and Father of the English-Saxons. And herein I shall rather subscribe to Camdens then our Authors judgement. For certainly had the Saxons worshipped Wooden as the God of Battail, or correspondent unto Mars, they would have given him the third day of the week, or the day of Mars, and not the fourth day of the week, or the day of Mer∣cury; as they gave Sunday and Munday unto Sol and Lu∣na, and Thursday unto Thur, whom they worshipped in the place of Iupiter, ascribing unto him (as the Greeks and Romans did to Iupiter) the power of bearing rule in the Air, governing Thunder, Lightnings, Windes, Showres, fair weather, &c. as Adam Bremensis a good Writer doth inform us of them. And though it may be true, which our Author telleth us, that by his aid and furtherance they hoped to obtain victory, yet this entitleth him not to the place of Mars; as many victories being gotten by wit and stratagem (the known Arts of Mercury) as by strength and valour. But from our Authors failers in recount∣ing the superstitions of our Saxon Ancestors, let us next see how he behaves himself in laying down the story of their conversion. In which though he ascribe something unto Austin the Monk, yet he will by no means allow him to be their Apostle. Fol. 54. The Papists (saith he) commonly call Augustine the English Apostle, how properly we shall see hereafter. And after fol. 68. The Papists brag that he was the Apostle of the English.] In these few words there are two things to be considered, whether he is called the Apostle of the
English, by the Papists only, and secondly, whether he were not so both in fact and title. Not call'd so by the Papists only, I am sure of that; but called so commonly by as good Protestants as our Author himself. Thus Camden a right English Protestant,Camd. Brit. fol. 136. Af∣ter this Augustine, whom commonly they call the Apostle of the English men, being sent hither by Gregory the Great, having abolished these mon∣strous abominations of Heathenish impiety, with most happy success planting Christ in their hearts, conerted them to the Christain faith. Nor doth he speak this only in the voice of the common people, but in another place more plainly as his own opinion. A place there is about this Shire called Austins Oke,Id. in Worcest. fol. 578. at which Augustine the Apostle of the English men, and the Bishops of Britain met, &c. Dr. Philemon Holland of Coventry, a good Protestant also, making an Index unto Camden, speaks the self same language; Augustine the Apostle of the English; which is short, but full. Gabriel Richardson of Brazen Nose, an honest Protestant, in his laborious piece called the State of Europe,Richardsons state of Europe. lib. 3. telleth us of Canterbury, that the Archbishops See was founded by King Ethelbert in the person of St. Austin the Apostle of the English. More of this kinde might be produc'd, were it not given us for a Rule in the holy Scripture, Ex ore duorum testium vel trium, that two or three witnesses were sufficient to confirm a truth. The next thing here to be considered is, whether Austin were not the Apostle of the English, both in fact and title. In order whereunto, we must first take no∣tice, that the word being meerly Greek, doth signifie in its natural and original sense a Messenger, a Legat, an Em∣bassador, from whom, to whomsoever sent; and though appropriated to the twelve as by way of excellence,
yet not improperly communicated unto others in suc∣ceeding times, with reference to the Nations whom they had converted. So Boniface an English man the first Archbishop of Ments is called by Dr. Holland, (as by many others) the Apostle of Germany, Pal∣ladius styled by Camden the Apostle of the Scottish Nation;Camd. in Scot∣land, fol. 45. and the Irish would not think themselves to be fairly dealt with, if their St. Patrick should not be honoured with that Ti∣tle also. In this sense Austin may be call'd, and that not improperly, the Apostle of the English Nation; though a derivative Apostle, an Apostle (as our Author calls him in the way of scorn, fol. 68.) at the second hand, though others propagated the Gospel further then he liv'd to do. It was enough to entitle him to this Apostleship, that he first publickly preacht the Gospel, and brought the glad Tiding of Salvation amongst the English, though he neither converted all the Nation, nor travelled into all parts of the Land to attempt the same. Neither St. Paul could be entituled the Apostle of the Gentiles, St. Thomas of the Indians, nor St. Mat∣thew of the Ethiopians; if it were necessarily required to their Apostleships, that all the Nations of the Indians must be converted by the one, or the vast Countries of the Ethiopians must be conveted by the other; or finally, if St. Paul to save them a labour, must have reduced all the Gentiles to the faith of Christ. And this the Em∣bassadors for the King of England at the Council of Basil, understood right well, when they contended for prece∣dency with those of Castile. For when the Castilians had objected, that although Ioseph of Arimathea had preacht in England, it was but in a corner thereof, the grand body of Britain remaining Pagan many hundred years after: the English Embassadors wisely answered, that the Allegation was impertinent to the present purpose, it being not the Universality, but the first Preaching
of the Christian Faith which gained the name of an Apo∣stle; there being no Disciple (as they truly urged it) that ever converted a Kingdom totally and entirely to Christianity, for which consult our very Author, Lib. 4. fol. 181. And yet the pains in preaching of Austin were not so limited and restrain'd to one Kingdom only, but that he travel'd into most parts of the Saxon Heptarchy, preaching the Gospel in all places to which the Spirit did conduct him, or his business lead him. Our Author grants him to have converted the Kingdom of Kent, fol. 7. and to have taken care for planting the Gospel in the Kingdom of the East-Saxons, and for that end or∣daining Mellitus the first Bishop of London, fol. 67. From hence he carries him to a conference with the British Bishops in the Countrey of the Wiccians (now Worce∣stershire) then part of the Kingdom of Mercia, fol. 60. From thence to Richmondshire in the Kingdom of Nor∣thumberland, where he is said to have baptiz'd above ten thousand in one day, fol. 66. And finally to Cern in Dor∣setshire, part of the Kingdom of the West-Saxons, where he destroyed the Idol of Heale or Aesculapius. By which we see, that he visited no fewer, then five of the seven Kingdoms in the Saxon Heptarchie, not only doing in each of them that particular work which he went about, but preaching in all fit places as he passed along. And this considered as it ought, with reference to the distance of those several places to which our very Author brings him, gives him just title to that honor which our Author would so willingly deprive him of, when telling us how the Papists called him the English Apostle, he adds these words, how properly (so called) we shall see here∣after. I have spent more time then I intended in defence of this Title, and therefore think it seasonable to proceed from the Person to his Acts. Of which the first we meet
with is▪ the fixing of the Archiepiscopal See at Canterbu∣ry, for which our Author amongst many other Reasons, gives us this for one, viz. That London by reason of the receipt thereof was like∣ly to prove the residing place for the English Monarch, and it was probable that the Archiepiscopal dignity would there be eclipst, and otsined by the Regal Diadem.] But here I must needs aske our Author, whether he thinks, that this was really one of those many mo∣tives which occasioned Austin to resolve of Canter∣bury for his seat of residence. If yea, then must our Author grant him to be endued with the spirit of Pro∣phesie, which I think he will not; if not, then a con∣tingency so remoe could not be taken by him into consideratior, as indeed it was not. For first, London at that time was the chief City of the Kingdom of East-sex, one of the weakest of the seven, and so not likely to prevail over all the rest. Secondly, if any of the greater Kingdoms of Mercia, West-sex, or Northum∣berland, should in fine prevail, it was not not probable that the Conquerors would remove the Seat Royal from their own Dominions into any of the conquered Countries. And thirdly, though the Kings of the West-Saxons, who prevailed at last, and became Mo∣narchs of the whole, setled the Royal Seat in Lon∣don, yet was it not till Winchester their own Regal City was destroyed by fire, and made unable to receive them. Fol. 60. The first cast of his office was to call a Coun∣cel for the Saxon and British Bishops to come together in the confines of the Wiccians and West-Saxons.] Our Au∣thor placeth this meeting within few lines after in the confines of Worcester and Herefordshire, and more rightly there; Worcestershire, or the Countrey of the Wiccii confining on the County of Hereford, but borde∣ring in no place on the Kingdom of West-sex, the
whole County of Glocester being interposed. So that our Author being mistaken in the place of the meeting, it is no wonder if he stumble at the Monu∣ments and Records thereof. Of one of which he tel∣leth us, Fol. 61. That we can part with it without any losse to our selves, and therefore bids it to make shift for its own Authenticalness, fol. 60.] The Record slighted thus is a Memorial of the Answer of the Abbot of Bancor to Archbishop Austins proposition, communicated by Peter Moston a Welch Gentleman to that learned and industrious Antiquary Sir Henry Spelman, and by him placed in his collection of the British and Saxon Councils. Which honour he had never given it, had he not conceived it worthy to deserve that place; nor had the Papists used such violence to wrest it from us without the hope of gaining somewhat to themselves. But to proceed, this conerence being ended with∣out success, there followed not long after the great slaughter of the Monks of Bancor, for which our Au∣thor in a merrier humor then becomes the sadness of the matter, or the gravity of an Ecclesiastical History, hath caused Austin to be indited, impanelling a Jury, and producing his evidence. Amongst which Matthew Parker the learned Archbishop of Cantrbury, and Iohn Iewel, the renowned Bishop of Salisbury, must be re∣ected by the Jury as incompetent witnesses; partly because of their known opposition to the Romish Church; and partly because of their modern writing, almost a thousand years after the matter in fact, fol. 64. And all this done to add the greater honour to Mr. Fox, as Mo∣dern as either of the two, and as averse as either of them from the Church of Rome. But Mr. Fox was Mr. Fox, no friend unto the Rites and Ceremonies of the Church of England, whereas the other two were Bishops and great
sticklers for them. This maes our Author magnifie Fo for his moderation, whose moderate testimony (saith he) much moved the whole Court; and as much to con∣demn the others for the sharpeness of their expressions against Austin (whom our Author himself reproach∣eth often for his pride and haughtines; fol. 62.) which made them of lesse credit amongst the Jury. A thread of which fine spinning we shall finde frequently inter∣woen in the whole web of this History, and towards the latter end thereof, not a few whole pieces made of no better yarne. And let the Reader take this with him for a taste of our Authors good affections to the severall parties, that it is bare M. Parker and plain Bishop Iewel, without welt or guard, but reve∣rent Mr. Fox by all means, and so let him passe. And let us passe also to the residue of the Acts of Austin. Fol. 66. Who all this while was very industrious, and no lesse successfull in converting the Saxons to the Chisti∣an faith. Insomuch that a certain Author reporteth, how in the River Swale near Richmond in Yorkshire, be in one day baptized above ten thousand.] The certain Au∣thor▪ whom he means, is an old fragment of a name∣lesse Author, cited by Camden, fol. 136. who rels the story otherwise then our Author doth. For though the Fragment tell us, that the River was calld Swale, yet that it was the River Swale near Richmond in York-shire, is the addition of our Author. That there is a River of that name neer Richmond is affirmed by Camden,Cmden in Rchmond∣she, sol. 70▪ who withall telleth us, That it was reputed very sacred amongst the antient English, for that in it, when the English-Saxons first embraced Christianity, there were in one day baptized with Festival joy by Pauli∣nus the Archbishop of York, above ten thousand Men besides Women and little Children. Of Au∣stins
baptizing in this River, not one word saith he. Neither doth Beda touch upon it, as cetainly he would have done, had thee been ground for it. And therefore if I may have leave to venture my opinion, I shall con∣cur with the old fragment, as to the name of the Ri∣ve, and yet not carry Austin ou of Kent, and much lesse into Richmondshire to performe that office.Camen in Kt, fol 33. For when we finde in Camden that the Medway alling into the Thames, is divided by the Isle of Sheppey into two great branches, of which the one is called East-Swale, the other West-Swale, I see no reason why we should look any where fo that River Swale mentioned in the old frag∣ment, which before we spake of. But herein I must submit y self to more able judgements. The place agreed on, e should next inquire into the numbers, but that our Author seems to grant as much as the fragment craveth. Only he telleth us that Fol. 66. If so many were baptized in one day, it ap∣pears plainly, that in that age the Administration of that Sacrament was not loaded with those superstitious Cere∣monies, as essential thereunto, of crossing, spittle, Oyl, Cream, Salt, and such like Trinkets.] Our Author here recko∣neth the sign of the Crosse in Baptism amongst the trinkets, and superstitious Ceremonies of the Church of Rome, and thereby utterly condemneth the Church of England, which doth not only require it in her Rubricks, but also pleads for it in her Canons. Not as essential to that Sacrament (the Papists not making Spit∣tle, Oylream, Salt, &c. to be essential thereunto, as our Author saith) but only for a Sign significative in token that the party signed shall not be ashamed to confess the faith of Christ crucified, and man∣fully to fight under his Banner, against sin, the world, and the Devil, and to continue Christs faithful Souldier and servant unto his lives end. A Ceremony
not so new, as to be brought within the compass of Popish Trinkets, though by them abused. For when the point was agitated in the Conference at Hampton Court,Conserce pag. 71. and that it was affirmed by some of the Bishops, that the Crosse in Baptism was used in the time of Constantine; Dr. Reynolds the most able Man of the opposie party, who had before acknowledged it to have been in use in other cases, from the very times of the Apostles, had not one word to say against it. And to say truth, no man of modesty and Learning, could have spoke against it, when it was proved so clearly by Dr. An∣drews then Dean of Westminster ot of Tertullian, Cyprian, Origen, (each of which died long time befoe Constantines Birth) to have been used in immortali La∣vacro, in that blessed Sacrament. That good old say∣ing of Tertullian, Caro signetur ut anima muniatur, may serve once for all. And therefore when our Au∣thor telleth us in the following words, that in that age nothing was used with Baptism, but Baptism, it must be considered as a smack of that old Leaven which more and more will soure the lump of his whole di∣scourse. We have already had a taste of it in the very first Book, we finde a continuance of it hee▪ and we shall see more of it hereafter; Our Autho not being coy in shewing his good affections not only to the Persons of the Non-conformists, but their inconfor∣mity; not to the men only, but their Doctrines and Opinions also. And this is that which we must trust to in the whole course of this History. Having now done with the Acts of Austin, we shall not keep our selves to so continued a dicourse as before we did, but take our Authors Text by piecemeal, as it comes before us, and making such Animadversions on the same, as may best serve
to rectifie the story, and maintain the truth; as namely, Fol. 65. Thus the Italian, Spanish, and French, Daughters or Neeces to the Latine, are generated from the corrption thereof.] This is (I grant) the common and received opinion, but yet, me thinks, our Author who loves singularities, should not vouchsafe to travel on the publick Road. For in my minde it is affirmed with better reason by our learned Brere∣wood,Berewood Enqu. cap. V. That those tongues have not sprung from the corruption of the Latine, by the inundation and mixture of Barbarous people in those Pro∣vinces, but from the first imperfect impression and receiving of it in those forein Countries. For the Latine tongue was never so generally received in any of the con∣quered Provinces out of Italy, as to be spoken ordi∣narily by the common people; the Gentry and No∣bility might be perfect in it, for the better dispatch of their Affairs with the Roman Magistrates, who had the Government and Lieutenancy in their several Coun∣tries. And some  of it might be found with the vulgar also, who having continual intercourse with the Roman Souldiers, and some recourse for Trade to the Roman Colonies, could not but get a smattering of the Latine tongue. Just so the Gentry and Nobility both in Wales and Ireland, are trained up for the same rea∣sons in the English tongue; which notwithstanding could never get the mastery of the natural Languages, much ground on those of inferior quality. Secondly, had these National Languages proceeded from the depravation of the Latine tongue by the mixture of the babarous Nations, it must needs fol∣low, that the Italian had not now been the language of all people in Italy, nor the French of all the Nati∣ons which inhabit France: & sic de caeteris. My reason is, because the Heruli, being setled in those parts, which
we now call Piedmont, the Longobards more towards the East, the Goths about the middle parts, the Saracens and Greeks in the Realm of Naples, there must needs be as many distinct languages in that one Continent, as there were Barbarous Nations planted in it, or at the least such different Dialects, as could be scarse intelligible unto one another. Whereas it is certainly and most plainly known, that there is only one Language spoken in all that Countrey, equally understood by all, without so much as any sensible difference in pronunciation; more then is usuall in all places between the Countrey Vil∣lages and the neighbouring Citizens. The like may be affirmed of the antient Gallia, planted on the Eastside of the Loyre by the Burgundians, on the West side of that River, and towards the Mediterranean, the Pyrenies and the Aquitan Ocean by the Gothish Nations, in most other parts of it by the Franks; and yet all speaking (with very little difference) the same one Language, which from the most predominant People we now call the French. More to which purpose might be said, were not this sufficient. Ibid. The Hebrew the common Tongue of the whole world before it was inclos'd (that is to say, divided) into several Languages.] An Opinion as common as the other, and as weakly grounded, such as I marvel at in our Author, who having travel'd over all the Holy-Land, should have been better studied in the true nature and original of the Holy-Tongue. Nor is it the opinion only, that this Tongue was spoken universally before the Flood, and even in Paradise it self in the state of innocency; but that it shall be spoken in the Celestial Paradise, the language of the Saints in glory: in somuch that some good women of my old acquaintance, were once very ea∣gerly bent to learn this Language for fear (as I conceive) they should not chat it handsomely when they came to
heaven. Now for the ground thereof, it is no other then an old Iewish Tradition, importing, that this be∣ing the common Language of all people before the Flood, was afterwards appropriated unto Phaleg (the son of Heber) and to his Posterity, because not present with the rest a the building of Babel, and consequently not within the curse of conounded Languages. But against this it is disputed; first that it is but a Tradition, and therefore of no sure foundation to build upon. And secondly, that it is such a Tradition, as holds no good coherence with the truth of Story; it being a most clear and demonstrative truth, that the Hebrew Tongue was not the Language which Abraham brought with him out of Chaldea and Mesopota∣mia, but that which he found spoken in the Land of Ca∣naan t his coming thither, to which both he and his posterity did conform themselves. Or had it been the Language of Heber, as they say it was, (but most un∣doubtedly was not) yet, thirdly, had this been a privi∣ledge conferred on Heber, that he and his posterity should speak the Original Language without alteration or cor∣ruption, it must have been extended to all those of the House of Icktan which descend from him; as also to the House of Laban in Padan-Aram, and to the Moabites, and the Ammonites, as the seed of Lot; and finally to the Madianites, Ishmaeelites, and Idumaeans, descended of Abra∣ham and Esau; and not be limited and confined only to the House of Iacob. Now that the language which af∣terwards was, and still is called by the name of the He∣brew, was spoken vulgarly in the land of Canaan before the coming of Abraham thither, is not affirmed by Brere∣wood only, but by Scaliger, Grotius, Vossius, Bochartus, (all of them men of great renown for their learned stu∣dies) and by many others of this Age. By most of which it is affirmed also, that the name of Hebrews was given
unto them by the people of Canaan, not in regard of their descent from Heber the father of Phaleg, but from Abrahams passing over the River Euphrates, when he came out of Chaldaea with his Family to dwell amongst them; that name in the Canaanitish language signifying as much as trajiciens or transfluvialis; and therefore not un∣fitly given by them to Abraham at his first coming thither. And if the Hebrew (as we now call it) was that Holy Language which was spoken in Paradise, continued by the Patriarchs before the Flood, and after to the building of Babel; it must needs seem infinitely strange, that it should be reserv'd only amongst the Canaanites, accursed in the person of Canaan (their common Parent) by his Grandfather Noah, and so abominated by God for their filthy wickednesses, that he resolv'd to spew them out of their Native Countrey, as in fine he did. Or if Abra∣ham brought it with him also, when he came into the Land of Canaan, he must needs leave it behinde him al∣so amongst the Chaldees, where he was born, and where his Ancestors had dwelt before their emoval unto Ha∣ran. And yet we know that the Hebrew Tonge was so different from the Chaldean, that when the Iews retun∣ed from the Captivity of Babylon, where they had been accustomed to, and bred up for the most part in the Chaldean Language, they could not understand the very words of the Hebrew Text without an Interpreter, as is apparent in the eighth Chapter of Nehemiah, vers. 7, 8. But of this Argument enough, let us now goe for∣ward. Fol. 69. As Pitseus a Catholick Writer would have it.] A Roman Catholick if you will, but no Catholick Wri∣ter. And much I wonder, that an Author so averse from the Church of Rome, should give the Title of Catholick to a stickler in the Romish Quarrell; though others of less zeal and prudence do commonly but inconsiderately bestow it on them. A Title which they take with joy,
and from thence suck unto themselves no small advantage.Parenes. ad Svtos p. 99 Adeo probanda est Ecclesia ostra a nomine Catholici, quod extorquet etiam ab invitis Haereticis, as is bragged by Barclay. But as Pope Gregory pleading against the Patriarch of stantinople, who had then assum'd unto himself the name of Oecumenical Bishop, advertiseth all the rest of that sacred Order;Grg. M. Epst. 70. Si ille est Univer∣salis, restat ut vos non sitis Episcopi: so may I say with reference to the present case. By gra∣cifying these men with the name of Catholicks, we doe unwittingly confess our selves to be no Christians, or at least but Hereticks. Fol. 76. Oxford lays claim to the Antiquities of Creke∣lade and Lechlade, two ancient Schools of Greek and La∣tine, as some would have it, remov'd afterwards to Ox∣ford, &c.] The like we finde fol. 117. where our Au∣thor telleth us of two Towns or the banks of the Isis, the one call'd Greekelade in which the Greek, the other Lechlade, or Latinlade in which the Latine Tongue was taught by Philosopher.Camden. in Wilts 141. Most mi∣serably mistaken in both places. For though Crekelade, of Grekelade may import a study of Greek Philosophers, as some are ready to believe, yet cetainly Lechlade in no Language will signifie the like study of the Latine Tongue. The Countrey people (as it seems) do better understand themselves then our Au∣thor doth. Amongst whom there is a common Tradi∣tion, that Crekelade, was a University of Greek Philoso∣phers, Lechlade of Leches, or Physitians, as the name doth intimate; and Latten a small Village betwixt both to be the place of study for the Latine tongue. But though the people are mistaken in the Etymon of the name of Lechlade, yet are they not so far out as our Author is, in making Lechlade or Latinlade, to be both the same place and of the same signification; whereas in truth that
Town is so denominated from the River Lech, which ari∣sing in the Hils of Cotswold, passeth first by Northlech, from thence to Eastlech, and finally falleth into the Thames neer S. Iohns-bridge in this Parish of Lechlade. As for the University of Oxford, which from hence took begin∣ning, as our Author hath it, and the Antiquity thereof, I shall not meddle at the present, though our Author forgetting the Subject which he was to write of, takes all occasions to hook in every old Tradition (though less probably grounded) to justifie the seniority of the younger Sister. Fol. 78. Deira, whence, say some, Deirham or Dur∣ham, lay betwixt Tees and Humber.] More out of this then in his Lechlade or Latinlade, which before we had. For first Durham is not so called quasi Deirham. Our learned Antiquary gives us a better and more certain de∣rivation of it. The River (saith he) as though it pur∣posed to make an Island, compasseth almost on every side the chief City of this Province, standing on a Hill, whence the Saxons gave it the name of Dunholm. For as you may gather out of Bede, they called an Hill Dun, and a River-Island Holme. Hereof the Latine Writers have made Dunelmum, the Normans, Duresme; but the common people most corruptly Durham▪ But secondly, (which mars all the matter) the Bishoprick of Durham was not in the Kingdom of Deira, as being wholly situate on the North side of the Tees, and conse∣quently part of the Realm of Bernicia, which makes our Author mistake in another place, fol. 51. the more re∣markable, where speaking of the Kingdom of Deira, he gives us this Comment in the Margin (viz.) What this day is the Bishoprick of Deirham or Durham. But as long as some say so, all is well, though who those some are (except our Author) I can no where finde. Only I finde that as it is held necessary for a Nobody to be in all great Houses, to bear the blame of such mischances as by the
carelesness of servants and inconsiderateness, do too often happen; so is it no less necessary, that there should be a some-body also in all great undertakings to bear the blame of such mis-fortunes as our Adventurers at wit do as of∣ten meet with. And such a some-body as this our Author hath found out to be the Father of another conceit of his concerning Teyburn (that I may take in this also whilest it is in my minde) of which he tells us lib. 4. fol. 168. That some have deduced the Etymologie of Teyburn from Ty and Burn; because forsooth the Lord Cobham was there hang'd and burnt. Whereas indeed it was so named from the Tey, or Teybourn, a small Brook passing neer unto it in the former times. Which Brook or Bourn arising not far from Padington, hath since been drawn into seve∣ral Conduits for the use of the City. Fol. 69. A place so marked, being foretold fortunate to Aeneas to found Alba (since Rome) therein.] A passage as well stor'd with Errors as the rest before, and such a piece of fine new learning, as never any Antiquary had found out till now. For first, Aeneas was not the foun∣der of Alba, though that the place design'd unto him for the fear of his Kingdom. The building of that City was the work of Ascanius, as we finde in Virgil. At puer Ascanius—Regnum{que} à sede Lavini Transferet, & longam multa vi muniet Albam. That is to say; Ascanius from Lavinum shall translate To Alba strongly fenc'd the Regal State. And secondly Alba was not built in the place where Rome since stood, but duodecimo ab urbe Lapide, about twelve miles off. For though the River Tiber in some ancient Writers hath the name of Albula, yet I never
found many Writer either old or new (till I incounter'd it n our Author) that Rome was anciently called Alba. Fol. 104. It is admirable to consider what Sholes of People were formerly vented out of Cimbrica Chernonesus, take it in the largest extent, for Denmark, Norway, and Swedeland.] And in the largest extent it is taken indeed, such as no Author ever gave it before this time. The Cimbrick Chersonese truly and properly so call'd com∣prehended only those parts of the Kingdom of Denmark, which we now call Iuitland, divided by the River Ey∣dore, from the Dukedom of Hostein. Ortelius, and some Geographers make it to take up all that Languel, or piece of Land on the North of Germany, extended from the River Albis in the South, and stretching Northward to that part of the Ocean which leads into the narrow Strait, or passage now called Sundt. But never any till our Author extended this name over those great Kingdoms of Denmark, Norway, and Swedeland, or unto any part of either beyond the Sundt. And yet he had need stretch it a great deal further before he can finde place in it for his Huns, and Vandals: of which the first inhabited in Asia, beyond the Fens of Maeotis; the last upon the Coast of the Baltick Sea in Germany, now the Dukedom of Mecklenburg. Fol. 125. Datum in Grantecestria, Anno ab incar∣natione Domini 915. venerabili Fratri Frithstano, Civi∣tatis Scolaium Cantabrig. Cancellario, & Doctori per suum, &c.] These words are the conclusion of an anci∣ent Charter, suppos'd to have been given to the Scho∣lars of Cambridge by King Edward the elder; against which our Author fancies one objection which he thinks easie to be answered, but utterly leaves out another, which I think upanswerable. The objection which our Author makes against it, is the barbarous style and lan∣guage of it; which if it be a good objection against this Charter, will be as strong against all the Charters of
this age, as some ages following in which there but little of the Elegancies of the Latine tongue. An therefore this objection might have well been spared but that our Author would be thought to deal ver equally in the business, by saying all that might b said against himself. But yet I have another objection which he takes no notice of, because not so easi to be answered; which is, that Frithstan (whatsoever he was) is here honored with the degree of Doctor, and the title of Chancellor. But first I would fain know where Frithstan took the degree of Doctor, and i what faculty he took it; that title in those early daies being so unusual, as hardly to be found amongst the Attributes of the learnedest men. Secondly, I con∣ceive it to be very hard, I had almost said impossible, for him to prove, that the chief Officer of Cambridge (ad∣mitting it at that time for a place of learning) had the name of Chancellor. When I shall see some proof o this, and some satisfaction, I shall give some credit to the Charter, till then none at all. Fol. 139. Cambridgeshire men claim an ancient (new antiquated) priviledge to lead the Van in all Battels.] Zealous alike not only for the Vniversity, but the County of Cambridge, his zeal in both transporting him beyond his knowledge into dark adventures. Some Authors he pretends to for the University, for this priviledge none▪ telling us only that he hath read it, though he know not where. But I can tell him when and where I have read the contrary, that is to say, in learned Camden, who ascribes this honour to the Kentish. For this he cites not only the authority of a nmelesse Monk, but the words of Iohannes Sarisburiensis in his Polycratiaeon,Camd. in Kent, 324. which are these that follow, For good desert (saith he) of that notable valour which Kent shewed so puissantly and patiently against the Danes, it
retaineth still unto these daies in all Battails the honour of the first and foreward, yea and of the first conflict with the Enemy. And if this priviledge was given the Ken∣ish for their valour shew'd against the Danes, it could either be given to the men of Cambridge-shire, as our Author would, nor on the same occasion as he saith it was. Fol. 141. It did not afterwards embolden him to the anticipation of the Crown, attending till it descended upon him.] He speaks this of King Edward the Confesor, who had he tarryed till the Crown had descended on him, might possibly have found a place amongst the Confes∣sors, but not amongst the Kings of England. For the truth is, the right title to the Crown was at that time in Edward surnamed the Outlaw, the eldest Son of Edmund Ironside, who flying into Hungary to avoid the fury of the Danes married the Kings sister of that Countrey, and was by her the Father of Edgar Athe∣ling, and of Margaret wife to Malcolm Conmor King of the Scots. But these being absent at that time, Emma the Mother of Prince Edward, and Widow to Canutus the Dane, took the opportunity to set her Son upon the Throne, as being not only half-brother to King Edmund Ironside, but also half-brother, and con∣sequently earest kinsman to Canutus the second; which if it were a good descent, will plead almost as strongly for King Harald, as it did for him. But by what means soever he got the Crown, he deserved to wear it, our Author telling us Ibid. That whereas formerly there were manifold Laws in the Land, made, some by the Britains, others by the Danes, others by the English, &c. He caused some few of the best to be selected, and the rest as captious and un∣necessary, to be rejected; from whence they had the name of the Common Lawes.] That the Common-Law was so call'd because compounded of the Saxon, British,
and Danish Lawes, which were before of force only in such places where the Danes, Britans, and Saxon▪ had the greatest sway; though it be easie to be said, will be hard to be proved. The Britans at that time liv'd under their own Princes, and were governed by their own Lawes, and so they were for a long time after; so that King Edward having no dominion over them could not impose a Law upon them. Not was it probable that he should borrow any of their Lawes, or impose them on his natural subjects, consi∣dering the Antipathy and disaffection betwixt the Na∣tions. There were indeed at that time in England three kinds of Lawes. The first called Dane-lage or the Danish Lawes, prevailing for the most part in the Kingdom of the East-Angles, and that of Northumber∣land; secondly Saxon-lage, used generally in the Kingdoms of the West-Saxons, East-Saxons, South-Saxons, and that of Kent; and thirdly, Merce-lage, extending over all the Provinces of the Kingdom of Mercia. As for the Britans of Cornwal and Cumberland, they had no distinct Law for themselves (as had those of Wales) but were gover∣ned by the Lawes of that Nation unto which they were subject. By these three sorts of Laws were these Nations governed in their several and respective limits, which being afterwards reduced into one body, and made common equally to all the subjects, did worthily deserve the name of the Common-Law. But second∣ly I dare not give the honour of this action to King Edward the Confessor. The great Iustinian in this work was another Edward, called, for distinctions sake, King Edward the elder, who began his Reign Anno 900. al∣most 150 years before this Confessor, to whom our Au∣thor hath ascribed it. But the truth is, that these Lawes being suppressed by the Danish Kings who governed either in an arbitrary way, or by the Lawes of their own Countrey, they were revived and reinforced in
the time of this Edward, from whence they had the name of Edward the Confessors Lawes, and by that name were sued and fought for in the time succeeding, of which more hereafter. Now as this work may be ascribed to his love to justice, so from his piety, his successors derive as great a benefit of curing the dis∣ease which from thence is called the Kings evill, which some impute (as our Author tels us) to secret and hid∣den causes. Fol. 145. Others ascribe it to the power of fancy and an exalted imagination.] Amongst which others, I may reckon our Author for one. He had not else so strongly pleaded in defence thereof. But certainly what effect soever the strength of fancy and an exalted imagination as our Author cals it, may produce in those of riper years, it can contribute nothing to the cure of children. And I have seen some children brought before the King by the hanging sleeves, some hanging at their Mothers breasts, and others in the armes of their Nurses, all touch'd and cur'd without the help of any such fan∣cies or imaginations as our Author speaks of. Others lesse charitably condemn this cure as guilty of superstiion, quarrelling at the Circumstances and Ceremonies which are used; and this they do (Saith he ibid.) either displeased at the Collect, consisting of the first nine verses of the Gospell of St. John, as▪ wholly improper, and nothing relating to the occasion, &c.] Our Au∣thor tels us more then once, lib. 11. 167. of his being a Clerk of the Convocation, but I finde by this, that he never came so high as to be Clerk of the Closet. Which had he been, he would not have mistaken the Gospel for a Collect; or touched upon that Gospel which is lesse material, without insisting on the other, which is more pertinent and proper to the work in hand; or suffered the displeased party to remain unsatisfied about the sign of the Crosse made by the Royall hands on the place▪
infected (as it after followeth) when there is no such cros∣sing used in that sacred Ceremony, the King only gently drawing both his hands over the sore at the reading of the first Gospel. But that both he and others may be satisfied in these particulars, I have thought fit to lay down the whole form of prayers and readings used in the healing of that malady in this manner following. The form of the Service at the healing of the Kings-evill. The first Gospel is exactly the same with that on Ascension day. At the touching of every infirm person, these words are repeated, They shall lay their hands on the sick, and they shall recover. The second Gospell begins the first of St. Iohn, and ends at these words, Full of grace and truth. At the put∣ting the Angell about their necks were repeated, That Light was the true light which lighteth every man that cometh into the world. Lord have mercy upon us. Christ have mercy upon us. Lord have mercy upon us. Our Father which art in Heaven, hallowed be thy Name, &c. Min. O Lord save thy servants. An. Which put their trust in thee. Min. Send unto them help from above. An. And evermore mightily defend them. Min. Help us, O God our Saviour. An. And for the glory of thy name sake deliver us, be merciful unto us sinners for thy names sake. Min. O Lord hear our Prayer. An. And let our cry come unto thee.
The Collect. Almighty God, the eternal health of all such as put their trust in thee, hear us we beseech thee on the behalf of these thy servants, for whom we call for thy mercil help, that they receiving health may give thanks nto thee in thy holy Church, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen. The peace of God, &c. This is the whole form, against which nothing is ob∣jected, but the using of the words before mentioned at the putting on of the Angel; the pertinency whereof may appear to any who consider that the Light which was the true Light, and lighteth every man which cometh into the world, did not shine more visibly, at the least moe comfortably upon the people, then in the healing of o many sick, infirm, and leprous persons, as did from time to time receive the benefit of it. But it is time I should proceed. Fol. 148. These chose Harald to be King▪ whose Titl to the Crown is not worth our deriving of it much  his r∣lying on it.] A Title not so depicable as our Author makes it, nor much inferior unto that by which hi Pre∣decessor obtain'd the Kingdom. Harald being on to Earl Godwin, (the most potent man of all the Sxons) by Theyra the natural Daughter of Canutus the fist, was con∣sequently Brother by the whole bloud to Harald Hara∣gar, and Brother by the half bloud to Canutus the e∣cond, the two last Danish Kings of England. In which respect being of Saxon Ancery by his Faher, and of the Danish Royal bloud by his Mother, he might be look'd on as the fittest person in that conjncture to con∣ent both Nations. But whatsoever his Title was, it was undoubtedly better then that of the Norman, had either his success been answerable, or his sword as good.
Upon occasion of which Conquest our Author telleth us that Ibid. This was the fifth time wherein the South of this Island was conquered; first by Romans, secondly by Picts and Scots, thirdly by Saxons, fourthly by the Danes, and fifthly by the Norman] But this I can by no means yeeld to,  Scots and Picts not being to be nam'd amongst those Nations who subdued the South part of this Island. That they did many times harass and depopulate the South part of it, I shall easily grnt; but to the subduing of a Contrey there is more reqired then to waste and spoil it: that is to say, to fix their dwelling and abode (for some time at least) in the Countey conquered; to change the Laws, alter the language, or new mould the Government; or finally to translate the Scepter from the old Royal Family to some one of their own. None of which things being done in the Invasions of the Scots and Picts, they cannot properly be said to have subdued the South parts of the Island, as our Author (out of love per∣haps to the Scots) would perswade the Reader.
ANIMADVERSIONS ON The Third and Fourth Books OF The Church History OF BRITAIN. From the time of the Norman Conquest, to the time of King Henry the Eighth. WE are now come unto the times of the Nr∣man Government, when the hurch begn to settle on a surer bottom, both fo and polity; the Bishops lesse obnoxious to the Ki then fomerly, because elected by the Monks and C∣nons of their own Cathedrals▪ their Conistories free the intermixture of Lay-assistance, and their Syns m∣nag'd by themselves. Wherein thogh the  power of making such Synodicall Consitions facto binde all paties, yet our Author is resolv'd to have otherwise.
Fol. 19. The Prceedings (saith he) of the Canon Law were never wholly received into practice in the Land; but so as made subject in whatsoever touched temporals, to Se∣cular Lawes, and National Customs. And the Laity at limited Canons in this behalf.] How false this is, ow contrary to the power and practice of the Church beore the ubmission of the Clergy to King Henry the ei; and inally how dangerous a gound is hereby to weaken the Authority of Convocations, will appear by ying down the sum of a Petition pre∣ed by the House of Commons to the same King Hnry, together with the Answer of the Pelates and in∣ferior Clergy, then being Synodically assembled, to the said Petition. The substance of the Petition was as followeth, viz. THat the Clergy of this your Realm, being you▪ Highness Subects, in their Convocation by thm holden within this your Realm, have made and dayly make divers Sanctions or Laws concening Temporal things,Acts  Ano 532. and some of them be epgnant to the Lawes and Statue of your Realm, not having  requirin your most Royall assent to the same Lawes so by them made, nother any assent or know∣ledge of your Lay Subjects, is had to the same, nohe to them published and known in their Mother tongre alit dives and sundry of the said Lawes extend in certain causes to your excellent Peson, your liberty and Preogative Royall, and to the intediction your Lawes and Possessions, and so likewise to the Good and Possessions of your Lay Subects, declain the inringers of the same Lawes so by them mae
not only to incur the terrible censure of Excommunica∣tion, but also to the detestable crime and sin of Here, by the which divers of your humble and obedient Lay Subjects be brought into this Ambiguity, whether they may do and execute your Laws according to your Juris∣diction Royal of this Realm, for dread of the same Censures and pains comprised in the same Lawes so by them made in their Convocations, to the geat trouble and inquietation of your said humble and obedient Lay subects, &c. the impeachment of your Jurisdiction and Prerogative Royal. The Answer thereunto was this.TO this we say, that forasmuch as we  and take our Authority of making Lawes to be grounded upon the Scripture of God, and the deter∣mination of holy Church, which must also be rule and squier to try the justice and righteousness of all Lawes, as well Spiritual as Temporal; we verily trust that considering the Lawes of this Realm be such as have been made by most Christian, religious and devout Princes and People, how both these Lawes proceeding from one fountain the same being sincerely interpreted, and after the good meaning of the makers, there shall be found no repugnancy, nor contrariety, but that the one shall be found as aiding, maintaining and supporting the other. And if it shall otherwise appear, as it is our duty (where∣unto we shall alwayes most diligently ourselves) to reform our Odinance▪ to Gods Commis∣sion, and to conform our Statutes and Lawes; and those of our predecessors, to the determination of Scripture and holy Church; so we hope in  and shall dayly pray for the same, that your Highness will,
came why, with the assent of your temper your Graces Lawes accordingly. shall  a most happy and perfect and agreement, as God being Lapis angula∣ to agree and conoyn the same. And as concer∣ning of your Highness Royall assent to the  of such Lawes as have been by our , or shall be made by us in such points and as we have by God authority to rule and by such Provisions and Lawes; we knowing your Highness wisdom, and vertue, and learning, no∣thing doubt but the same perceiveth how the granting hereunto dependeth not upon our will and liberty. And that we your most humble Subjects may not the execution of our charge and duty certain∣ly prescribed by God, to you Highness assent, although in very deed the same is most worthy for your most Noble, Princely, and excellent vertues, not only to give yo Royall assent, but also to devie and com∣mnd what we should fo good order and Statutes and Lawe provide in the Church, ne∣vertheless consideing we may not so ne in such sort refrain the doing of our office in the eeing and ruling of  people your Graces Subjects; we most humbly desiring your Grace as the same hath heretofore, so from hence forth to shew your Graces  and opinion unto us, what your high Wisdom shall think convenient, which we shall most gladly hear and follow i it shall please God to in∣ is so to do, with all submission and humility beech the same, following the step of your most Noble Progenitors, and conformably to your our own Acts do maintain and defend such Lawes, and Ordinance, as we according to our cal∣ling and by Authority of God, shall for his honour make, to the diication of vertue, and maintaining
Christs faith, of which your Highness is named De∣fender, and hath been hitherto indeed a special Pro∣tector.Furthermore whereas your said Lay Subjects say, that sundry of the said Laws extend in certain causes to your excellent Person, your Liberty and Prerogative Royal, and to the interdiction of your Land and Pos∣sessions: To this your said Orators say, that having submitted the tryal and examining of the Laws made in the Church by us and our Predecessors, to the just and straight Rule of Gods Laws, which giveth measure of Power, Prerogative, and Authority to all Emper∣ors, Kings, Princes, and Potentates, and all other; we have conceiv'd such opinion, and have such estimati∣on of your Majesties goodness and vertue, that what∣soever any persons not so well learned as your Grace is would pretend unto the same, whereby we your most humble Subjects may be brought in your Graces dis∣pleasure and indignation, surmising that we should by usupation and presumption, extend our Laws to your most noble Person, Prerogative and Realm, yet the same your Highness being so highly learn'd, will of your own most bounteous goodness facilly discharge and deliver us from that envy, when it shall appear that the said Laws are made by us, or our Predecessors conformable and maintenable by the Scripture of God, and determination of the Church, against which no Laws can stand or take effect. Somewhat to this pur∣pose had been before endevoured by the Commons in the last Parliament of King Edw. 3. of which, because they got nothing by it, but only the shewing of their teeth without hurting any body; I shall say nothing in this place, reserving it to the time of the long Par∣liament, in the Reign of King Charles, when this point was more hotly followed, and more powerfully prose∣cuted than ever formerly.
What says our Author unto this? Findes he here any such matter, as that the Laity at their pleasure could li∣ the Canons of the Church? Or that such Canons in whatsoever tuched temporals were subject unto secular Laws and National Customs? And hereof I desire the Reader to take special notice, as that which is to serve for a Catholicon, of general Antidoe against those many venomous insinations, which he shall meet with up and down in the course of this History. As for the case in which our Author grounds this pestilent Position, it was the Canon made in a Synod at Westminster, in the time of Anselm, Anno 1102. prohibiting the sale of men and women like brute beasts in the open Market. Which Canon not finding presently an universal obedi∣ence over all the Kingdom (as certainly ill customs are not easily left, when they are countenanced by profit) occasioned our Author to adventure upon this bold asser∣tion. Fol. 24. Indeed St. Davids had been Christian some hundred of years, whilest Canterbury was yet Pagan. Not many hundred years I am sure of that, nor yet so many as to make a plural number by the Latin Grammar; Kent being conquered by the Saxons, who brought in Pae∣nism, Anno 455. Converted unto Christianity by the preaching of Austin, An. 569. Not much more then 140 years betwixt the one and the other. Fol. 29. To whose honor he (viz. King Stephen) erected St. Stephens Chappel in Westminster neer the place whero lately the Court of Requests was kept.] Our Author is here , and will not parler le tout, as the French men say. For otherwise he might have told us that this Chappel is still standing, and since the endry of it to King Edward the sixth, ha been  for a Parliament House, im∣plyed to that purpose by the Common, as
be thus reserved, I can hardly tell; unless it be to prevent such inferences and observations, which by some wanton wits might be made upon it. Fol. 40. By the same title from his Father Jeffery Plantagenet, he possessed fair lands in Anjou and Maine. I had thought he had possessed somewhat more in An∣jou and Maine, then some fair Lands only, his Father Ieffery Plantagenet being the Proprietary Earl of Anjou, Maine, and Toureine, not aitular only, succeeded in the same by this King Henry and his two sons, Richard, and Iohn, till lost unhappily by the last with the rest of our Estates on that side of the Sea. From this Ieffery descended fourteen Kings of the name of Plantagenet, the name not yet extinguished, though it be impoverished: our Au∣thor speaking of one of them, who was found not long since at the Plow. Lib. 2. p. 170. Another of that name publishing a Book about the Plantation of new Albion, An. 1646. or not long before. Fol. 53. King John sent a base, degenerous and unchri∣stian Embassage to Admiralius Murmelius a Mahometan King of Morocco, then very puissant, and possessing a great part of Spain.] This Admiralius Murmelius, as our Au∣thor and the old Monks call him, was by his own name called Mahomet Enaser, the Miramomoline of Morocco; to whom if King Iohn sent any such Message, it was as base, unchristian and degenerate as our Author makes it. But being the credit of the ale depends upon the credit of the Monkish Authors, to which bood of men that King was known to be a professed Enemy haing and hated by one another it is not to be esteemed so highly as a piece of Apocrypha, and much less to be held for Gospel Pos∣sible it is, that being overlaid by his own subjects, and distressed by the  he might send unto that King for aid in his great extremities. And doing this  this were a) he did no  and in ignation, and
so much as was done afterwards upon far weaker grounds by King Francis the first, employing the Turks Forces both by Sea and Land against Charles the fifth. But the Monks coming to the knowledge of this secret practise, and consting his actions to the worst, improv'd the Molehil to a Mountain, rendring him thereby as odious to posterity, as he was to themselves. Fol. 63. I question whether the Bishop of Rochester (whose Countrey house at Brumly is so nigh) had ever a House in the City.] There is no question but he had, Stw finding it in Southwark by the name of Rochester adioyning on the South side to the Bishop of Win∣chesters, minons, and out of eparation in his time (as possibly not much frequented since the building of Bromly House) and since converted into Tonements for private persons. But since our Author hath desired others to reco∣ver the rest from oblivion, I shall help him to the know∣ledge of two more, and shall thank any man to finde out the third. The first of these two is the Bishop of Lin∣colns House, situate neer the old Temple in Holborn, first built by Robert de Chesney Bishop of Lincoln, Anno 1147. Since alien'd from that See to the Earls of Southampton, and passing by the name of Southampton House. The second is the Bishop of Bangors, a fair House situate in Shoo-lane neer St. Andrews Church, of late time Leased out by the Bishops, and not long since the dwelling of Dr Smith Doctor in Physick, a right honest and inge∣nuous person, and my very good Friend. Of all the old Bishops which were founded before King Harry the eight, there is none whose House we have not found but the Bishop of Aaph▪ to the finding whereof, if our Author, or any other will hold forth the Candle, I shall follow the the best I can, and be thankful for it. Fol. 67. And though some high Royalists look on it as the product of subjects,  themselves on their  Our Author tells us in his
Brerewood upon a diligent enquiry hath found it other∣wise then our Author doth▪ letting us know, That the first Countrey in Christendom, whence the Jews were expelled without hope of return,Brevewoods nq. cap 13. was our Countrey of England, whence they were banished, Anno 1290. by King Edward the first; and not long after out of France, Anno 1307. by Phiippus Pulcher. Not out of France first, out of England afterwards, as our Author would have it. Fol. 100. Thus men of yesterday have pride too much to remember what they were the day before.] An observation true enough, but not well applyed. The two Spen∣rs whom he speaks this of, were not men of yesterday, or raised out of the dirt or dunghill to so great an height;Camden in Monmouthsh. but of as old and known Nobility as the best in England: insomuch that when a question grew in Parliament, whether the Baronesse de Spencer, or the Lord of Abur∣gaveny were to have precedency, it was adjudg'd unto de Spencer, thereby declar'd the antientest Barony of the Kingdom at that time then being. These two Spencers, Hugh the Father was created Earl of Win∣chester for term of life; and Hugh the Son by marrying one of the Daughters and co-heirs of Gilbert dt Clre, became Earl of Gloster. Men more to be commended for their Loyalty, then accused for their pride, but that the King was now declining, and therefore it was held fit by the prevalent faction to take his two supporters from him, as they after did. Fol. 113. The Lord Chancellor was ever a Bishop.] If our Author by this word ever understands , most commonly, or for the most part, he is right enough; but then it will not stand with the following words, viz. as if it had been against equity to employ any other .  he take the word
ever in its proper and more natural sense, as if none but Bishops had ever been advanced unto that office, he doth not only misinform the Reader, but confute himself, he having told us fol. 31. of this present book, that Thomas Becket being then but Archdeacon of Can∣terbury, was made Lord Chancellor, and that as soon as he was made Archbishop, he resign'd that office. But the truth is, that not only men in holy Orders, but many of the Laity also had attained that dignity, as will appear to any who will take the pains to  the Catalogue of the Chancellors and  of the Grat Seal, in the Glossary of Sir Henry : in which appear not only some of inferior dignity, as Deans, Archdeacons, House-hold Chaplains; but ma∣ny also not dignified with any Ecclesiasticall ∣or Notification, and therefore in all probability to be looked on as meer Laymen, Counsellors, and Ser∣vants to the Kings in whose times they lived, or otherwise studied in the Lawes, and of good affection, and consequently capable of the place of such trust and power. Fol. 116. This year viz. 1350. as Authors gene∣rally agree, King Edward instituted are Order of the Garter.] Right enough as unto the time, but much mistaken in some things which relate unto that an∣tient and most noble Order: our Author taking up his Commodities at the second hand, neither con∣sulting the Records, no dealing in this business with men of credit. For first there are not  Ca∣nons resident in the Church of Winor, but thirteen only with the Dean: it being King Edwards purpoe when he founded that Ode, consisting of twenty Knights, himself being one, to  as many greater and lesser Canons, and as many old Souldiers commonly called poor Knights to be pensioned there. Though in this last the number was
up to his first intention. He tels us secondly, that if he be not mistaken (as indeed he is) Sir Thomas Row was the last Chancellor of the Order; whereas Sir Iames Palmer one of the Gentlemen Huishers of the Privy Chamber succeeded him in the place of Chancellor af∣ter his decease, Anno 1644. He tels us thirdly, that there belongs unto it one Register being alwayes the Dean of Winsor, which is nothing so. For though the Deans of late times have been Registers also, yet ab initio non suit sic, it was not so from the begin∣ning; The first Dean who was also Register, being Iohn Boxul, Anno 1557. Before which time, beginning at the year 1414. there had been nine Registers which were not Deans; but how many more before that time I am not able to say, their names not being on Record. And sothly he tels us, that the Garter is one of the extraordinary Habiliments of the Knights of this Order, their ordinary being only the blew Ribbon about their necks, with the picture of St. George appendant, and the Sun in his glory on the left shoulder of their Cloak; whereas indeed the Garter is of com∣mon wearing, and of such necessary use, that the Knights are not to be seen abroad without it,Hist. of St George L. 3. cap. 3, 8. upon pain of paying two Crowns to any Officer of the Order who shall first claim it, unless they be to take a journey; in which case it is sufficient to wear a blew Ribbon under their Boots to denote the Garter. Lastly, whereas our Author tels us, that the Knights heeof do wear on the left shoulder of their Cloaks a Sun in his glory, and attributes this wearing, as some say, to King Charles; I will first put him out of doubt, that this addition was King Charles his; then shew him his mistake in the matter it self. And first, in the first year of that King, Ap. 26, 1626. it was thus enacted at a publick Chapter of the Oder, viz. That all Knights and Companions
of the Order, shall wear upon the left part of their Cloaks, Coats, and riding Cassacks, at all times when they shall not wear their Roabs, and in all places of Assembly, an Escocheon of the Armes of St. George, id est, a Crosse within a Garter, not en∣riched with Pearls or Stones: in token of the ho∣nour which they hold from the said most noble Order, instituted and ordained for persons of the highest worth and honour. Our Authour, secondly, may perceive by this Act of the Kings, that St. Georges Crosse within the Garter is the main device injoyned to be worn by all the Knights of that noble Order; to which the adding of the Sun in his glory served but for ornament and imbellishing, and might be either used or not used (but only for conformities sake) as they would themselves. So many errors in so few lines one shall hardly meet with.
The Fourth Book. From the first Preaching of Wickliffe, to the beginning of the Reign of King Henry the Eighth. OUR Author begins this Book with the Story of Wickliffe, and continueth it in relating the suc∣cesses of him and his followers, to which he seems so much addicted, as to Christen their Opinions by the name of the Gospel. For speaking of such in∣couragements and helps as were given to Wickliffe by the Duke of Lancaster, with other advantages, which the conditions of those times did afford unto him, he addeth that Fol. 129. We must attribute the main to Divine Pro∣vidce blessing the Gospel.] A name too high to be be∣stowed upon the Fancies of a private Man, many of whose Opinions were so far from truth, so contrary to peace and civil Order, so inconsistent with the Government of the Church of Christ, as make them utterly unworthy to be look'd on as a part of the Gospel. Or if the Do∣ctrines of Wickliffe must be call'd the Gospel, what shall become of the Religion then establisht in the Rel of England, and in most other parts of the Western wold? Were all but Wickliffes Followers relaps'd to , were they turn'd Jews, or had embrac'd of Mahomet? If none of these, and that they in the faith of Christ, delive ed to them
in the Gospels of the four Evangelists, and other Apo∣stolical Writers, Wickliffes new Doctrines could not challenge the name of Gospel, nor ought it to be given to him by the pen of any. But such is the humor of some men, as to call every separation from the Church of Rome, by the name of Gospel, the greater the separa∣tion is, the more pure the Gospel. No name but that of Evangelici would content the Germans when they first separated from that Church, and reformed their own; and Harry Nichols, when he separated from the German Churches, and became the Father of the Familists, be∣stows the name of Evangelium Regni on his Dreams and Dotages. Gospels of this kinde we have had, and may have too many, quot Capita tot fides, as many Gospels, in a manner, as Sects and Sectaries, if this world go on. Now as Wickliffes Doctrines are advanc'd to the name of Gospel, so his Followers (whatsoever they were) must be called Gods servants, the Bishops being said fol. 151. to be busie in persecuting Gods servants; and for what crime soever they were brought to punishment, it must be thought they suffered only for the Gospel and the service of God. A pregnant evidence whereof we have in the story of Sir Iohn Oldcastle, accused in the time of King Harry the fifth for a Design to kill the King and his Brethren, actually in Arms against that King in the he of 20000 men, attainted for the same in open Parliament, and condemn'd to die, and execu∣ted in St. Giles his Fields accordingly, as both Sir Roger Acton his principal Counsellor,Stow in Hen. 5. and 37 of his Accomplices had been before. For this we have not only the Authority of our common Chronicles, Walsingham, Stow, and many others; but the Records of the Tower, and Acts of Parliament, as is confessed by our Author, fol. 168. Yet coming out of Wickliffes Schools, and the chief Scholar questi∣onless
which was train'd up in them, he must be Re∣gistred for a Martyr in Fox his Calender. And though our Author dares not quit him, (as he says himself) yet such is his tenderness and respect to Wickliffes Gospel, that he is loath to load his Memory with causless Crimes, fol. 167. taxeth the Clergie of that time for their hatred to him, discrediteth the relation of T. Walsingham, and all later Authors, who are affirm'd to follow him as the Flock their Belweather; and finally leaves it as a special verdict to the last day of the Revelation of the righteous Iudgements of God. From the Scholar pass we to the Master, of whom it is reported in a late Popish Pamphlet, that he made a recantation of his Errors, and liv'd and dyed confomable to the Church of Rome. This I behold as a notorious falshood, an imposture of the Romish party, though the argument used by our Autho, be not of strength suffici∣ent to inforce me to it. If, saith he, Wickliffe was suf∣ficiently reconcil'd to the Roman faith, why was not Rome sufficiently reconciled to him? Vsing such cruelty to him ma∣ny years after his death, fol. 171. But this, say I, is no reason, of no force at all. Wickliffe might possibly be reconcil'd to the Church of Rome, and yet the Minsters of that Church, to strike a terror into others, might▪ exe∣cute that vengeance on him after his decease, which they had neither power nor opportunity to do when he was alive. Quam vivo iracundiam debuerant, in corpus morti contulerunt. And hereof we have a fair example in Marcus Antonius de Dominis Archbishop of Spalato, who coming into England, 1616. did manifestly oppose the Doctrines of the Church of Rome, in some learned Vo∣lumes. But being cunningly wrought on by some Ems∣saries of the Romish party in the year 1622. he went bak to Rome, was reconcil'd to that Church, and writ the e most reproachfully of the Church of England; which notwithstanding, he was kept prisoner all the rest of his
life, and his body burnt to ashes after his decease. So then it is no such new matter for a dissenting Christian, such as Wickliffe and de Dominis were, though branded by the nme of Hereticks, to be admitted to a reconci∣liation with the Church of Rome, and yet that Church to carry a revengeful minde towards them when occa∣sion serves. And all this while we have expected that our Author would have given us a brief summary of Wickliffes Do∣ctrines, that by seeing the Piety and Orthodoxie of his Opinions, we might have thought more reverently both of him and his Followers. But therein our expectation must remain unsatisfied, our Author thinking it more a∣greeable to his Design to hold the Reader in suspense, and conceal this from him: dealing herein as the old Germans did with those of other Nations, who came to wait upon Valeda a great Queen amongst them; not suffering any to have a sight of her, to keep them in a greater admiration of her parts and Per∣son. Arcebantur aspectu quò plus venerationis inesset,Hist. Lib. 4. as it is in Tacitus. The wheat of Wickliffe was so soul, so full of chaffe, and intermin∣gled with so many and such dangerous Tares, that to ex∣pose it to the view, were to mar the market. And therefore our Author having formerly honored his Opi∣nions by the name of Gospel, and his followers with the Title of Gods servants, as before was noted; had reason not to shew them all at once, in a lump toge∣ther, that we might think them better and more Or∣thodox then indeed they were. But the best is (to save us the trouble of consulting Harpsfield, and others who have written of them) our Author hath given them us at last on another occasion, Lib. 5. fol. 208. many of which the Reader may peruse in these Ammadversions, Numb. 113. Thus having laid together so much of this present Book as relates to Wickliffe and his fol∣lowers,
I must behold the rest in fragments as they lye before me. Fol. 152. He lies buried in the South Isle of St. Peters Westminster, and since hath got the company of Spencer and Drayton.] Not Draytons company I am sure, whose body was not buryed in the South-Isle of that Church, but under the North wall thereof in the main body of it, not far from a little dore which openeth into one of the Prebends houses. This I can say on certain know∣ledge, being casually invited to his Funeral, when I thought not of it; though since his Statua hath been set up in the other place which our Author speaks of. Fol. 153. The Right to the Crown lay not in this Henry, but in Edmund Mortimer Earl of March, descended by his Mother Philippa, from Lionel Duke of Clarence, elder son to Edward the third.] I shall not now dispute the Title of the House of Lancaster, though I think it no hard matter to defend it; and much less shall I venture on the other controversie, viz. whether a King may Legally be depos'd, as is insinuated by our Author in the words foregoing. But I dare grapple with him in a point of Heraldry, though I finde him better studied in it, then in matter of History. And certainly our Author is here out, in his own dear Element. Edmund Mortimer Earl of March not being the Son,Camdn in Rd∣nor. 624, but Husband of the Lady Philippa Daughter of Lionel, Duke of Clarence, and Mother of Roger Mortimer Earl of March, whom Ri∣chard the second (to despite the House of Lancaster) declared Heir apparent to the Kingdom of England. 'Tis true, this Edmond was the son of another Philippa, that is to say, of Philip Montacute, wife of a former Roger Earl of March, one of the founders of the Garter. So that in whomsoever the best Title lay, if lay not in this Edmond Mortimer as our Author makes it.
. 154. This is one of the clearest distinguishing the Tempora and Spiritual Lords that be tryed per pares, by their Peers, being .] No shall I here dispute the point, may not challenge to be tryed by his wheer the Bishops were not Barons and of the Realm. Our Author intimates that they were not, but I think they were, and this I think on the authority of the learned Selden, in whom we finde, that at a Parliament at Northampton Henry the 2. the Bishops thus challenge their own ee age, viz. Non sedemus hi Episcopi, sed Ba∣rones, Nos nes, vs Barones; Pares hi sumus: that is to We  not  as Bishops only but as Barons; We are Ba∣rons, and you are Barons; here we sit as Peers. Which last is al∣so in terminis, by the words of a Statue Act of Parliament, wherein the Bishops are acknowledged to e Peers of the Land. And for further proof he eo, Ihon tratford Arch∣bishop of Canterbury (if I remember it aright) being fallen into the displesure of King Ed∣ward the third, and denyed entrance into the House of made his Protest, that he was Primus  Regni, the  Peer of the Realm, and therefoe not to be from his place and Suffrage. But of this Argu∣ment enough, i not too much as the case now stands▪ thing, to consider what they have what they are at this preent.
Reign thee pa an Act of Paliament, by which it was enacted, That the Countrey of Wales should be, stand and continue for ever from thenceforth incor∣poaed, united, and annexed to and with this Realm of England. And that all and singular person and per∣sons born and to be born in the said principality, countrey or dominion of Wales▪ shall have, inoy, and inhe it all and singular Freedoms, Liberties, Rights, H. 8. c. 26. Priviledges, and Lawes within this Realm, and other the Kings Dominions, as other the Kings Subjects naturally bon with∣in the same, have, and injoy, and inhe it. And third∣ly, between the time which our Author speaks of, being the 14 year of King Henry the fourth, and the making of this Act by King Henry the eighth, there passed boe an hunded and twenty years, which inti∣mates a longer time then some years after, as out Author words it. Fol. 168. I will not complain of the dearness of this Univesity, where seventeen weeks cost me more then seventeen years in Cambridge▪ even all that I had.] The odinary and unwary Reder might collect from hence, that Oxford is a chargeable place, and that all commodities there are exceeding dear, but that our Author lets him know, that it was on some occasion of distbance. By which it seems our Author doth to the time of the War, when men from all did repair to Oxford, not as a University, but a place of safety, and the fear Royall of the King; at time notwithstanding all provisions were so plen∣ull and at such cheap rates, as no man had reason to complain of the  of them. No better argu∣ment of the  of the soil and richness of the in which Oxford standeth, then that the on the accession of such at that  and on
that occasion.  Author therefoe  be thought to relate unto somewhat else then is here expessed, and possibly may be, that his being at Oxford at that time,  him within the compass of Delinquency, and consequently of Sequestration. And hath  son to complain of the Vniversity, or the dearness of it; but rather of himself, for coming to a place so chargeable and destructive to him. He might have tarryed where he was (for I never heard that he was sent fo) and then this great complaint against the dearness of that Vniversity would have found no place. Fol. 175. Surely what Charles the fifth is said to have said of the City of Florence, that it is pity  should be seen save only on holy-dayes, &c.] Our Author is somewhat out in this, in fachering that saying on Charles the fifth, Emperor and King of Spain, which Boterus and all other Authors ascribe to Charles Archduke of Austria; that is to say, to Charles of Inspruch, one of the younger sons of the Emperor Ferdinand the first, and consequently Nephew to Charles the fifth. Not is or Author very right in taking Aquensis for Aix in Provence; Fol. 178. Especially (aith he) if, as I take it, by Aquensis Aix be meant scited in the frthermost parts of Provence, though even now the English power in France was a waning.] For first, the English never had any power in Provence, no interest at all therein, nor pre∣tentions to it: as neither had the French Kings in the times our Author speaks of. Provence in thoe dayes was independent of that Crown, an absolute Estate and held immediately of the Empire, as being a part and member of the Realm of Burgundy, and in the actual possession of the Dukes of njou: on the expiring of which House, by the last will and Testament of Duke Rene the second, it was bequeathed to Lewis the eleventh
of France, by him and his successors, to be enjoyed upon the death of Charles Earl of Maine, as it was ac∣cordingly. And secondly, that Bernard, whom the Latine cals Episcopus Aquensis is very ill taken by our Author to be Bishop of Aix. He was indeed Bishop of Acqus or Aux in Guienne called antiently Aquae Au∣gustae from whence those parts of France had the name of Aquitaine; and not of Aix (which the antient wri∣ters called Aquae Sextiae) in the Countrey of Provence. Now Guienne was at that time in the power of the Kings of England, which was the reason why this Bernard was sent with the rest of the Commissioners to the Councell of Basil; and being there amongst the rest maintained the rights and preheminences of the English Kings. In agitating of which controversie as it stands in our Author, I finde mention of one Iohannes de Voragine a worthless Author, fol. 181. Mistook both in the name of the man, and his quality also. For first, the Author of the Book called Legenda aurea related to in the former passage, was not Iohannes, but Iacobus de Vora∣gie. In which Book, though there are many idle and unwarrantable fictions; yet secondly was the man of more esteem, then to passe under the Character of a Worthless Author, as being learned for the times in which he lived, Archbishop of Gena a chief City of Italy, & moribus & dignitate magno precio, as Philippus Bergomensis telleth us of him, Anno 1290. at what time he liv'd; most eminent for his translation of the Bible into the Italian tongue (as we read in Vossius) a work of great both difficulty and danger as the times then were,Vossig de Lat. Hist. sufficient (were there nothing else) to free him from the ignominious name of a worthlesse Author. A greater mistake then this, as to the person of the Man, is that which followes, viz.
Fol. 185. umphy Duke of Goue son to King Henry the fifth.] This though I cannot look on as a fault of the Presle, yet I can easily consider it as a slip of the pen; it being impossible that our Author should be so far mistaken in Duke Humphry of Gloster, who was not son but bothe to King Henry the fifth. But I cannot think so charitably of some other errors of this kinde which I finde in his History of Cambridge, fol. 67. Where amongst the English Dukes which carryed the title of Earl of Cambridge, he reckoneth Edmund of Langly fifth son to Edward the third, Edward his son, Richard Duke of York his brother, father to King Edward the fourth. But first this Richard whom he speaks of, though he were Earl of Cambridge by the consent of Edward his elder brother, yet was he never Duke of York; Richard being executed at South-Hampton for treason against King Harry the fifth, before that Kings going into France, and Edward his elder bro∣ther slain not long after in the Battail of Agincourt. And secondly, this Richard was not the Father, but Grandfather of King Edward the fourth. For being marryed unto Anne, sister and heir unto Edmund Mor∣timer Eal of March, he had by her a son called Richard, improvidently estored in bloud, and advanced unto the Title of Duke of York by King Henry the sixth, Anno 1426. Who by the Ldy Cecely his wife one of the many Daughters of Ralph Erl of Westmerland, was father of King Edward the fourth, George Duke of Clarence, and King Richard the third. Thirdly, as Richard Earl of Cambridge was not Duke of York, so Richard Duke of York was not Earl of Cambridge; though by our Author made the last Earl thereof (Hist. of Cam. 162.) before the restoring of that title on the House of the Hamiltons. If our Author be no better at a pedegree in private Families, then he is in those of Kings and Princes, I shall not give him mh
for his Art of Memory, for his History less, and for his Heraldry just nothing. But I see our Author is as good at the succession of Bishops, as in that of Princes. For saith he, speaking of Cardinal Beaufort, Fol. 185. He built the fair Hospital of St. Cross neer Winchester, and although Chancellor of the University of Oxford, was no grand Benefactor thereunto, as were his Predecessos Wickam and Wainfleet.] Wickam and Wain∣fleet are here made the Predecessors of Cardinal Beaufort in the See of Winchester, whereas in very deed, though he succeeded Wickam in that Bishopick, he preceded Wainfleet. For in the Catalogue of the Bishops of Win∣chester they are marshalled thus, viz. 1365. 50. William of Wickham, 1405. 51. Henry Beaufort, 1447. 52. Wil∣liam de Wainfleet, which last continued Bishop till the year 1486. the See being kept by these three Bishops above 120. years, and thereby giving them geat Advan∣tages of doing those excellent works, and founding those famous Colledges, which our Author rightly hath ascribed to the first and last. But whereas our Author telleth us also of this Cardinal Beaufort, that he built the Hospital of St. Crosse, he is as much out in that as he was in the other;Camd. in Hun. fol. 267. that Hospital being first built by Henry of Blais, Brothe of King Stephen and Bishop of Winchester, Anno 1129. augmented only, and perhaps more liberally endowed by this Po∣tent Cdinal. From these Foundations made and en∣larged by these three great Bishops of Winchester succes∣sively, poeed we to two others raised by King Henry the sixth, of which our Author telleth us Fol. 183. This good precedent of the Archbishops bounty (that is to say, the foundation of All-Souls Colledge by Archbishop Chcheley) may be presumed a Spur to the speed of the Kings liberality; who soon after founded Eaton Colledge, &c. to be a Nursery to Kings Colledge in Cambridge, fol. 184.] Of aton Colledge, and the condition of the same,
our Author hath spoken here at large, but we must look fo the foundation of Kings Colledge, in the History of Cambridge, fol 77. where I finde some thing which re∣quireth an Animadversion. Our Author there chargeth Dr. Heylyn for avowing something which he cannot justi∣fie, that is to say, for saying, That when William of Wainfleet Bishop of Winchester (afterwards founder of Magdalen Colledge) perswaded King Henry the Sixth to erect some Monument for Learning in Oxford, the King returned, Imo potius Cantabrigiae, ut duas (si fieri possit) in Anglia Academias habeam. Yea rather (said he) at Cambridge, that (if it be possible) I may have two Universities in England. As if Cambridge were not re∣puted one before the founding of Kings Colledge there∣in. But here the premises only are the Doctors, the infe∣rence or conclusion is our Authors own. The Doctor in∣fers not thereupon, that Cambridge was not reputed an Vni∣versity till the founding of Kings Colledge by King Henry the sixth; and indeed he could not: for he acknowledged before out of Robert de Reningtn that it was made an Vniversity in the time of King Edward the second. All that the Doctor says, is this, that as the Vniversity of Cambridge was of a later foundation then Oxford was, so it was long before it grew into esteem, that is to say, to such a measure of esteem at home or abroad (before the building of Kings Colledge, and the rest that followed) but that the King might use those words in his Discourse with the Bishop of Winchester. And for the Narrative, the Doctor (whom I have talked with in this business) doth not shame to say, that he borrowed it, from that great Treasury of Academical Antiquities Mr. Brian Twine, whose learned Works stan good against all Opponents; and that he found the passage justified by Sir Isaack Wake in his Rex Platonicus. Two Persons of too great wit and judgement, to relate a matter of this nature on no bet∣ter gound then common -talk, and that too spoke
in merriment by Sir Henry Savil. Assuredly Sir Henry Savil was too great a Zealot for that University, and too much a friend to Mr. Wake, who was Fellow of the same Colledge with him, to have his Table-talk and discourses of merriment to be put upon Record as grounds and arguments for such men to build on in that weighty Controversie. And therefore when our Au∣thor tells us, what he was told by Mr. Hubbard, Mr. Hubbard by Mr. Barlow, Mr. Barlow by Mr. Bust, and Mr. Bust by Sir Henry Savil; it brings into my minde the like Pedegree of as true a Story, even that of Mo∣ther Miso in Sir Philip Sidney, telling the young Ladies an old Tale, which a good old woman told her, which an old wise man told her, which a great learned Clerk told him, and gave it him in writing; and there she had it in her Prayer-book; as here our Author hath found this on the end of his Creed. Not much unlike to which, is that which I finde in the Poet; Quae Phoebo Pater omnipotens, mihi Phoebus Apollo Praedixit, vobis Furiarum ego maxima pand. That is to say; What Iove told Phoebus, Phoebus told to me, And I the chief of Furies tell to thee. But to proceed, Fol. 190. This was that Nevil, who for Extraction, Estate, Alliance, Dependents, Wisdom, Valour, Success, and popularity, was superior to any English Subject since the Conquest.] Our Author speaks this of that Richard Nevil, who was first Earl of Warwick, in right of Anne his Wife, Sister and Heir of Henry Beauchamp, the last of that Family, and after Earl of Salisbury by descent from his Father; a potent and popular man indeed, but yet not in all or in any of those respects
to be match'd with Henry of Bullenbrook son to Iohn of Gaunt, whom our Author must needs grant to have lived since the time of the Conquest. Which Henry after the death of his Father was Duke of Lancaster and Hereford, Earl of Leicester, Lincoln, and Darby, &c. and Lord High Steward of England. Possessed by the donation of King Henry the third of the County Pa∣latin of Lancaster, the forfeited Estates of Simon de Montfort Earl of Leicester, Robert de Ferrars Earl of Darby, and Iohn Lord of Monmouth; by the compact made between Thomas Earl of Lancaster, and Alice his Wife, of the Honor of Pomfret, the whole Estate of the Earl of Lincoln, and a great part of the Estates of the Earl of Salisbury; of the goodly Tertitories of Ogmore and Kidwelly in Wales, in right of his descent from the Chaworths; of the Honor and Castle of Hart∣ford by the grant of King Edward the third, and of the Honor of Tickhill in Yorkshire by the donation of King Richard the second; and finally of a Moity of the vast Estate of Humphry de Bohun Earl of Hereford, Essex and Northampton in right of his Wife. So royal in his Extraction, that he was Grandchilde unto one King, Cousin german to another, Father and Grand∣father to two more. So popular when a private per∣son, and that too in the life of his Father, that he was able to raise and head an Army against Richard the Second, with which he discomfited the Kings Forces, under the command of the Duke of Ireland; so fortunate in his successes, that he not only had the better in the battail mentioned, but came off with Honor and Renown in the War of Africk▪ and finally obtained the Crown of England. And this I trow, renders him much Superior to our Authors Nevil, whom he exceeded also in this particular, that he dyed in his bed, and left his Estates unto his Son. But having got the Crown by the murther of his Predecessor,
it stay'd but two descents in his Line, being unfortunately lost by King Henry the sixth, of whom being taken and imprisoned by those of the Yorkish Faction, our Author telleth us, Fol. 190. That States-men do admire how blind the Po∣licy of that Age was in keeping King Henry alive, there being no such sure Prison as a Grave for a Captive King, whose life (though in restraint) is a fair mark for the full Aim of mal-contents to practise his enlargement.] Our Author might have spr'd this Doctrine so frequently in practise amongst the wordly Politicians of all times and ages,Ovid. Met. Lib. 2. that there is more need of a Bridle to hold them in, then a Sput to quicken them. Parce precor stimulis, & fortiùs utere loris, had been a wholesom Caveat there, had any friend of his been by to have advis'd him of it. The muthering of depos'd and Captive Princes, though too often practised, never found Advocates to plead for it, and mh less Preachers to preach for it, until these latter times. First made a Maxim of State in the School of Ma∣chiavel,History of Floence. who lays it down for an Aphorism in point of policy, viz. that great Persons must not at all be touched, or if they be, must be made sure from taking Revenge; inculcated afterwards by the Lord Gray, who be∣ing sent by King Iames to intercede for the life of his Mother, did unde-hand solicit her death, and whispered nothing so much in Queen Elizabeths ears,Camdens Annals An. 1586. as Mortua non mordet, if the Scots Queen were once dead, she would never bite. But never prest so home, never so punctually apply'd to the case of Kings, as here I finde it by our Author; of whom it cannot be ffirm'd, that he speaks in this case the sene of others, but positively and plainly doth declare his own. No such Divinity peach'd in the Schools of Igna∣tius, though fitter for the Pen of a Mariana, then of a Divine or Minister of the Church of England. Which
whether it passed from him before o since the last sad ac∣cident of this nature, it comes all to one; this being like a two-hand-sword made to strike on both des, and if it come too late for instruction, will serve abundantly howsoever for the justification. Another note we have within two leaves after as derogatory to the Honor of the late Archbishop, as this is dangerous to the Estate of all Soveraign Princes, if once they chance to happen into the hands of their Enemies. But of this our Author will give me an occasion to speak more in another place, and then he shall hear further from me. Now to go on. Fol. 197. The Duke requested of King Richard the Earl∣dom of Hereford and Hereditary Constableship of England.] Not so, it was not the Earldom, that is to say, the Title of Earl of Hereford, which the Duke requested, but so much of the Lands of those Earls as had been formely enjoy'd by the House of Lancaster. Concerning which we are to know, that Humphry de Bohun the last Earl of Hereford, left behinde him two Daughters only, of which the eldest called Eleanor was married to Thomas of Wood∣stock Duke of Gloster, Mary the other married unto Henry of Bullenbrook Earl of Darby. Betwixt these two the E∣state was parted, the one Moiety which drew after it the Title of Hereford falling to Henry Earl of Darby, the other which drew after it the Office of Constable to the Duke of Glocester. But the Duke of Glocester being dead, and his estate coming in fire unto his Daughter who was not able to contend, Henry the fifth forced her unto a sub-division, laying one half of her just partage to the other Moiety. But the issue of Henry of Bullenbrook being quite extict in the Person of Edward Prince of Wales Son of Henry the sixth, these three parts of the Lands of the Earls of Here∣ford, having been formerly incorporated into the Duchy of Lancaster, remained in possession of the Crown, but were conceiv'd by this Duke to belong to him as being the direct Heir of Anne Daughter of Thomas Duke of
Glocester, and consequently the direct Heir also of the House of Hereford. This was the sum of his demand. Nor do I finde that he made any suit for the Office of Consta∣ble, or that he needed so to do, he being then Constable of England, as his Son Edward the last Duke of Buckingham of that Family, was after him. Fol. 199. At last the coming in of the Lord Stanley with three thousand fresh men decided the controversie on the Earls side.] Our Author is out in this also. It was not the Lord Stanley, but his Brother Sir William Stanley, who came in so seasonably, and thereby turn'd the Scale, and chang'd the fortune of the day. For which service he was afterward made Lord Chamberlain of the new Kings Houshold, and advanc'd to great Riches and Estates, but finally beheaded by that very King, for whom, and to whom, he had done the same. But the King look'd upon this action with another eye. And therefore when the merit of this service was interposed to mitigate the Kings displeasure, and preserve the man, the King remembred very shrewdly, that as he came soon enough to win the Victory, so he staid long enough to have lost it.
ANIMADVERSIONS ON The Fifth and Sixth Books OF The Church History OF BRITAIN. Relating to the time of King Henry the Eighth. WE are now come to the busie times of King Henry the Eighth, in which the power of the Church was much diminisht, though not reduced to such ill terms as our Author makes it. We have him here laying his foundations to overthrow that little which is left of the Churches Rights. His super∣structures we shall see in the times ensuing more sea∣sonable for the practice of that Authority which in this fifth Book he hammereth only in the speculati∣on. But first we will begin with such Animadversions as relate unto this time and story as they come in our way, leaving such principles and positions as concern
the Church, to the close of all; where we shall draw them all together, that our discourse and observations there∣upon may come before the Reader without interruption. And the first thing I meet with is a fault of Omissi∣on; Dr. Newlen who succeeded Dr. Iackson in the Presdentship of Corpus Christi Colledge in Oxford, Anno 1640. by a free election, and in a statuteable way being left out of our Authors Catalogue of the Presidents of C. C. C. in Oxford, fol. 166. and Dr. Stan∣ton who cme in by the power of the Visitors above eight years after being placed therein. Which I thought fit (though otherwise of no great moment) to take notice of, that I might do the honest man that right which our Author doth not. Fol. 168. King Henry endevoured an uniformity of Grammar all over his Dominions; that so youths though changing their School-masters might keep their learning.] That this was endevoured by King Henry, and at last enoyned, I shall easily grant. But then our Authour should have told us (if at least he knew it) that the thereof poceeded fom the Convocation in the yea 1530. in which complaint being made. Quod mul∣tiplex & varius in Scholis Grammaticalibus modus esset &c. That the multiplicity of Grammars did much him to learning; it was thought meet by the Prelates and Clergy then assembled, Vt una & eadem edatur formula Auctoritate singula Schola Grammaicals per Acta Convoca∣tions 1530. that is to say that one on∣ly
that within few years after, it was enjoyned by the Kings Proclamation to be used in all the Schools thoughout the Kingdom. But here we are to note withall, that our Author anticipates this business, pla∣cing it in the eleventh year of this King Anno 1519. whereas the Convocation took not this into conidera∣tion till the eighth of March, Anno 1530. and cetainly would not have medled in it then, if the King had setled and enjoyned it so long before. Fol. 168. Howsoever it is probable, some other ardiner gathered the Flowers (made the Collections) though King Henry had the honour to wear the Posie.] I am not igno∣rant that the making of the Kings Book against Martin Luther, is by some Popish writers ascribed to Dr. Iohn Fisher, then Bishop of Rochester. But this Cav was not made till after this King had reected the Popes Su∣premacy, and consequently the lesse credit to be given unto it. It is well known, that his Father King Henry the seventh designed him for the Arch-bishoprick of Canterbury, and to that end caused him to be trained up in all parts of learning, which might inable  for that place. But his elder Brother Prince Arthur ding, and himself succeeding in the Crown, though he had laid aside the thoughts of being a Priest, he could not but retain that Learning which he had acquired, and reckon it amongst the fairest Flowers which adorned his Diadem. Too great a Clerk he was to be called Beauclerk junior, as if he were as short in learning of King Henry the first (whom commonly they called Beauclerk) as he was in time; though so our Author would fain have it, Hist. Cam. p. 2, 3. A little learning went a great way in those early dayes, which in this King would have made no shew in whose me both the Arts and Languages began to flourish. And if our Author doth not suspect this Kings lack of learning, he hath no reason to suspect his lack of  the work be∣ing
small, the glory great, and helps enough at hand if he wanted any. But of this enough. Fol. 196. Which when finished (as White-hall, Hampton-Court, &c.) he either freely gave to the King, or exchanged them on very reasonable considerations.] That Hampton Court was either freely given by Wolsey, or otherwise exchanged on very reasonable terms, I shall grant as easily; but Whitehall was none of his to give, as belonging to the Archbishop in the right of the See of York, and then called York place. But the Kings Palace at Westminster being lately burnt, and this House much beautified by the Cardinal, the King cast a longing eye upon it; and having attainted the Cardinal in a Praemu∣nire, he seised upon this house with all the furniture there∣of as a part of the spoil. Which when he found he could not hold, as being the Archbishops and not the Cardinals, he sent an Instrument unto him to be signed and sealed for the surrendry of his title and estate therein; and not con∣tent to have forc'd it from him, (the Cardinal honestly declaring his inability to make good the grant) he caused the Dean and Chapter of York to confirm the same unto him under their Common Seal in due form of Law, which being obtained and much cost bestowed upon the House, he caused it to be called Whitehall; gratifying the Archbishops of York with another House, belonging then to the See of Norwich, and now called York-house. Fol. 170. So that lately there were maintained therein one Dean, eight Canons, three publick professors of Divi∣nity, Hbrew and Greek, sixty Students, &c.] Our Au∣thor tels us Lib. 4. that the spent seventeen weeks in this Vniversity, but he that looks on this and some other passages will think he had not tarryed there above seventeen hours. For besides his omitting of Dr. Newlin spoken of before, and his giving of the name of Censors to the Deans of Magdalen, which I finde afterwards, Lib. 8. . 7. he is very much mistaken in the matters
of Christ Church. For first the three Professors of Divi∣nity, Hebrew, and Greek are no necessary parts of that foundation, nor can be properly said to be founded in it. Till of late times they were and might be of other Colledges, as they are at this present, this Colledge being only bound to pay them for their annual Pensions fourty pounds apiece. In after times King Iames an∣nexed a Prebends place in this Church to the Pro∣fessor of Divinity, as King Charles did another to the Hebrew Reader. But for the Greek Reader he hath on∣ly his bare pension from it, and hath no other relation to it, but by accident only; the last Greek Reader of this House being Dr. Iohn Perin who died in the year 1615. And secondly, he is very far short in the number of Students, diminishing them from an hundred to six∣ty, there being an Hundred and one of that foun∣dation by the name of Students, equivalent to the Fellowes of most other Colleges in the Revennes of their place and all advantages and incouragements in the way of learning. But this perhaps hath somewhat in it of design, that by making the foundations of Oxford to seem lesse then they are, those in the other Vniver∣sity, might appear the fairer. Fol. 171. And here Wolsey had provided him a second Wife (viz.) Margaret Countesse of Alanzon, sister to Francis King of France.] As much ou in his French, as his English Heraldry. For first the Lady Margaret here spoken of was never Countess, though sometimes Dutchess of Alanzon, as being once wife to Charls the fourth Duke thereof. And secondly, at the time when King Henries divorce from Queen Katherine was first agitated, this Lady was not in a capacity of being projected for a Wife to King Henry the eighth, being then actually in the bed of another Henry, that is to say, Henry of Albret King of Navarre, as appears plainly by the Articles of Pacification which were to be propounded for the re∣storing
of King Francis the first (being then Prisoner in Spain, Anno 1525.) to his Realm and Li∣berty.Hollinshead in Henry 8. In which it was propounded amongst other things, that Francis should not send any Aid to the said Henry of Albret (for the recovery of his Kingdom) notwithstanding that he had marryed the Kings Sister, and other Sister that King had none but this Margaret only. Fol. 178. Yet had he the whole Revenues of York Arch∣bishop ick (worth then little lesse then four thousand pounds yearly) besides a large Pension paid him out of the Bishop∣rick of Winchester.] And a large Pension it was indeed (if it were a Pension) which amounted to the whole Revenue. But the truth is, that Wolsey having gotten the Bishopick of Winchester, to be holden by him in Commendam with the See of York, was suffered to enjoy it till the time of his death, Anno 1631. After which time as Dr. Edward Lee succeeded him in the Church of York, so then, and not before, Dr. Stephen Gardiner principal Secretary of State, was made Bishop of Win∣chester, by which name, and in which capacity I finde him active in the Convocation of the following year. Fol. 184. The Clergy of the Province of Canterbury alone bestowed on the King One hundred thousand pounds, to be paid by equall portions in the same year, say some; in four years say others, and that in my opinion with more probability.] Here have we three Authors for one thing, some, others, and our Author himself, more knowing then all the est in his own opinion. But all out alike. This great sum was not to be paid in one year, nor in four years neither, but to be paid by equall portions (that is to say, by twenty thousand pound per annum) in the five years following. And this appears plainly by the Instrument of Grant it self. Where having named the sum of an hundred thousand pounds by them given
the King, they declare expresly, Ad usum Majestatis ejusdem intra quinquiennium ex nunc proxime & immediate sequens per quiq, aequales portiones solvend' &c. The first payment to be made the morrow after Michaelmas day then next ensuing after the day of the date thereof, which was the 22 of March 1530. Fol. 186. But he might have remembred, which also produced the peerless Queen Elizabeth, who perfected the Reformation.] Either our Author speaks not this for his own opinion, as in that before, or if he do, it is an opinion of his own, in which he is not like to finde many followers. The Puritan party whom he acts for in all this work, will by no means grant it; compa∣ring that most excellent Lady in their frequent Pasquils to an idle Huswife, who sweeps the middle of the house to make a shew, but leaves all the dirt and rubbish be∣hinde the door. The grand Composers of the Directo∣ry do perswade themselves, that if the first Reformers had been then alive they would have joyned with them in the work,Pref to the Directory. and laboured for a further Reformation. And what else hath been clamoured for during all her Reign, and by the Ring-leaders of the Faction endevoured ever since her death, but to carry on the work of Reformation from one step to another, till they had brought it unto such a perfection as they vainly dreamt of, and of which now we feel and see the most bitter consequences? And as for the Prelatical party, the high Royalists, as our Author cals them, they conceive the Reformation was not so perfected in the time of that prudent Queen, but that there was somewhat left to do for her two Succes∣sors; that is to say, the altering of some Rubricks in the Book of Common-prayer, the adding of some Collects at the end of the Letany, the enlargement of the common Catechism, a more exact translation of the Bible then had been before, the setling of the
Church upon the Canons of 603. and finally, a stricter and more hopeful course for suppressing Popery, and for the maintenance both of conformity and uniformity by the Canons of 640. Fol. 187. And now I cannot call King Henry a Batchelor, because once marryed; nor a marryed man, because having no wife; nor properly a Widower, because his wife was not dead.] Our Author speaks this of Henry the eighth immediately after his divorce, but is much mistaken in the matter. King Henry was so averse from living without a Wife, that he thought it more agreeable to his constitution to have two Wives to∣gether then none at all. To that end while the busi∣ness of the Divorce remained undecided,Hollinsh. pag. 129. he was marryed privately to the Lady Anne Bol∣len, on the 14 of November (Stow puts it off till the 25 of Ianuary then next following) by Dr. Rowland Lee his Chaplain, promoted not long after to the Bishoprick of Coventry and Lichfield; the Divorce not being sentenced till the Aprill following. And whereas our Author tels us in the following words, that soon after he was solemnly marryed to the Lady Anna Bollen, he is in that mistaken also. King Henry though he was often marryed, yet would not be twice maryed to the same Woman; that being a kinde of Bigamy, or Anabaptistry in marriage, to be hardly met with. All that he did in order to our Authors mea∣ning is, that he avowed the marriage openly which be∣fore he had contracted in private; the Lady Anne Bollen being publickly shewed as Queen on Easter Eve,Stow in H. 8. pag. 562. and solemnly crowned on Whitsunday being Iune the second. Assuredly unlesse our Author makes no difference between a Coronation and a Marriage, or between a mar∣riage solemnly made, and a publique owning of a Marri∣age before contracted: King Harry cannot be affirmed
to have marryed Anne Bollen solemnly after the Divorce, as our Author telleth us. Fol. 208. Though many wilde and distempered Expres∣sions be found therein, yet they contain the Protestant Re∣ligion in Oare, which since by Gods blessing is happily re∣fined.] Our Author speaks this of a paper containing many erroneous Doctrines presented by the Prolocutor to the Convocation: some few of which as being part of Wickliffs Gospel and chief ingredients in the Com∣position of the new Protestant Religion lately taken up, I shall here subjoyn. 1. That the Sacrament of the Altar is nothing else but a piece of bread or a little predie round Robin. 2. That Priests have no more Authority to minister Sa∣craments then the Lay-men have. 3. That all Ceremonies accuestomd in the Church, which are not clearly expressed in Scripture, must be taken away, because they are Mens inventions. 4. That the Church commonly so called is the old Syna∣gogue; and that the Church is the Congregation of good men only. 5. That God never gave grace nor knowledge of holy Scripture to any great Estate or rich man, and that they in no wise follow the same. 6. That all things ought to be common. 7. That it is as lawful to Christen a childe in a Tub of water at home, or in a Dirch by the way, as in a Font-stone in the Church. 8. That it is no sin or offence to eat White-meats, Egges, Butter, Cheese or flesh in Lent, or other Fasting dayes commanded by the Church, and received by consent of Christian people. 9. That it is as lawful to eat flesh on Good-Friday, as upon Easter day, or other times in the year. 10. That the Ghostly Father cannot give or enjoyn any penance at all.
11. That it is sufficient for a Man or Woman to make their confession to God alone. 12. That it is as lawfull at all times to confesse to a Lay-man, as to a Piest. 13. That it is sufficient that the sinner do say, I know my self a sinner. 14. That Bishops, Ordinaries, and Ecclesiastical Iudges, have no Authority to give any sentence of Excommunication or censure; ne yet to absolve or loose any man from the same. 15. That it is not necessary or profitable to have any Church or Chappel to pray in, or to do any divine ser∣vice in. 16. That buryings in Churches and Church-yards be unprofitable and vain. 17. That the rich and costly Onaments in the Church are rather high displeasure then pleasure or honour to God. 18. That our Lady was no better then another Woman, and like a bag of Pepper or Saffron when the spice is out. 19. That Prayers, Suffrages, Fasting, or Alms-deeds do not help to take away sin. 20. That Holy-dayes ordained and instituted by the Church, are not to be observed and kept in reverence, in as much as all dayes and times be alike. 21. That Plowing and Cating, and such servile work may be done in the same as on other without any offence at all as on other dayes. 22. That it is sufficient and enough to believe, though a man do no good works at all. 23. That seeing Christ hath shed his bloud for us and Redeemed us, we need not to do any thing at all, but to believe and repent if we have of∣fended. 24. That no humane Cnstitutions or Laws do binde
Christian man, but such as be in the Gospels, Pauls Epistles, or the New Testament: and that a man may break them without any offence at all. 25. That the singing or saying of Mass, Mattens, or Even song, is but a roring, howling, whistling, mumming, tomring, and jugling, and the playing on the Organs a foolish vanity. This is our Authors golden Oare, out of which his new Protestant Religion was to be extracted. So happily refin'd, that there is nothing of the Old Chri∣stian Religion to be found therein. Which though our Author doth defend as Expressions rather then Opinions, the Careers of the Soul, and Extravagancies of humane infir∣mity, as he doth the rest, yet he that looks upon these points, and sees not in them the rude draught and linea∣ments of the Puritan Plat-form, which they have been hammering since the time of Cartwright, and his Asso∣ciates, must either have better eyes then mine, or no eyes at all. I see our Author looks for thanks for this dis∣covery for publishing the paper which contain'd these new Protestant truhs, and I give him mine. Fol. 239. At this time also were the Stews suppressed by the Kings command.] And I could wish that some com∣mand had been laid upon our Author by the Parliament to suppress them also, and not to have given them any place in the present History, especially not to have pro∣duc'd those arguments by which some shameless persons endeavoured to maintain both the conveniency and necessity of such common Brothel houses. Had Bishop Iewel been alive,Defence of the Apolog. and seen but half so much from Dr. Harding pleding in behalf of the common women permitted by the Pope in Rome, he would have thought that to cal to him an Advocate for the Stews had not beeen enough. But that Doctor was nor half so wise as our Author is, and doth not fit each Argument with a several Antidte as our Author doth▪ hoping there∣by
by, but vainly hoping, that the arguments alleadged will be wash'd away. Some of our late Criticks had a like De∣sign in marking all the wanton and obscene Epigrams in Martial with a Hand or Asterism, to the intent that young Scholars when they read that Author, might be fore-warn'd to pass them over. Whereas on the contrary it was found, that too many young fellows, or wanton wits, as our Author calls them, did ordinarily skip over the rest, and pitch on those which were so mark't and set out un∣to them. And much I fear that it will so fall out with our Author also, whose Arguments will be studied and made use of when his Answers will not. Fol. 253. Otherwise, some suspect, had he survived King Edward the sixth, we might presently have heard of a King Henry the ninth.] Our Author speaks this of Henry Fitz Roy, the Kings natural Son by Elizabeth Blunt, and the great disturbance he might have wrought to the Kings two Daughters in their Succession to the Crown. A Prince indeed whom his Father very highly cherished, crea∣ting him Duke of Somerset and Richmond, Earl of Not∣tingham, and Earl Marshal of England, and raising him to no small hopes of the Crown it self, as appears plainly by the Statute 22 H. 8. c. 7. But whereas our Author speaks it on a supposition of his surviving King Edward the sixth, he should have done well in the first place to have inform'd himself whether, this Henry and Prince Edward were at any time alive together. And if my Books speak true, they were not; Henry of Somerset and Richmond dying the 22. of Iuly, Anno 1536. Prince Edward not being born till the 12. of October, An. 1537. So that if our Author had been but as good at Law or Grammar, as he is at Heraldry, he would not have spoke of a Survivor-ship in such a case, when the one person had been long dead before the other was born.
These incoherent Animadversions being thus passed over, we now proceed to the Examination of our Au∣thors Principles, for weakning the Authority of the Church, and subjecting it in all proceedings to the power of Parliaments. Concerning which he had before given us two Rules Preparatory to the great business which we have in hand. First that the proceedings of the Canon Law were subject in whatsoever touched temporals to secular Laws and National Customs. And the Laitie at pleasure limited Canons in this behalf, Lib. 3. n. 61. And secondly, that the King by consent of Parliament directed the pro∣ceedings of the Ecclesiastical Court in cases of Heresie. Lib. 4. n. 88. And if the Ecclesiastical power was thus curbed and feered when it was at the highest, there is no que∣stion to be made, but that it was much more obnoxious to the secular Courts, when it began to sink in reputation, and decline in strength. How true and justifiable, or ra∣ther how unjustifiable and false these two principles are, we have shewn already, and must now look into the rest, which our Author in pursuance of the main Design hath presented to us. But first we must take notice of another passage concerning the calling of Convocati∣ons or Synodical meetings, formerly called by the two Archbishops in their several Provinces by their own sole and proper power, as our Author grants, fol. 190. to which he adds, Fol. 190. But after the Statute of Praemunire was made (which did much restrain the Papal power, and subject it to the Laws of the Land) when Archbishops called no more Convocations by their sole and absolute command, but at the pleasure of the King.] In which I must confess my self to be much unsatisfied, though I finde the same position in some other Authors. My reasons two, 1. Because there is nothing in the Statute of Praemunire to restrain the Archbishops from calling these meetings as before; that
Act extending only to such as purchase or pursue, or cause to be purchased or pursued, in the Court of Rome, or else∣where any such translatations, Processes, Sentences of Ex∣communication, Bulls, Instruments, or any other things what∣soever which touch the King, against him, his Crown and his Regality, or his Realm; or to such as bring within the Realm or them receive, or make thereof notification, or any other Execution whatsoever within the same Realm, or with∣out, &c. And 2. because I finde in the Statute of the sub∣mission of the Clergy, that it was recognized and acknow∣ledged by the Clergie in their Convocation, that the Convocation of the said Clergie is,Stat. 25 H 8. c. 19. always hath been, and ought to be assembled always by the Kings Writ. And if they had been always call'd by the Kings Writ, then certainly before the Statute of Praemunire; for that the whole Clergy in their Convocation should publickly declare and avow a notorious falsehood, especially in a matter of fact, is not a thing to be imagined. I must confess my self to be at a loss in this intricate Labyrinth, unless perhaps there were some critical difference in those elder times between a Synod and a Convocation: the first being call'd by the Archbishops in their several and respective Provinces, as the necessities of the Church; the other only by the King, as his occasions and affairs did require the same. But whether this were so or not, is not much material, as the case now stands, the Clergie not assembling since the 25 of King Henry the eighth, but as they are convo∣cated and convened by the Kings wit only. I only adde that the time and year of this submission is mistook by our Author, who plceth it in 1533. whereas indeed the Clergy made this acknowledgement and submission in their Convocation, Anno 1532. though it pass'd not into an Act or Statute till the year next following. Well then, suppose the Clergy call'd by the Kings Authority, and all their, Acts and Constitutions ratiied by the Ryal
assent, are they of force to binde the Subject to submit and conform unto them? Not, if our Author may be judge, for he tels us plainly Fol. 191. That even such Convocations with the Royal assent, subject not any (for recusancy to obey their Canons) to a civil penalty in person or property, untill confirmed by  of Parliament.] I marvel where our Author took up this opinion, which he neither finds in the Registers of Convocation, or Records of Parliament. Himself hath told us, fol. 190. that such Canons and Constitutions as were concluded on in Synods or Con∣vocations, before the passing of the Statute of Praemu∣nire, were without any further Ratification, obligatory to all subjected to their jurisdiction. And he hath told us also of such Convocations as had been called between the passing of the Statute of Praemunire, and the Act for Submission, that they made Canons whiche were binding, although none other then Synodical Authority did confirme the same. Upon whi remisses I shall not fear to raise this Syllogism, viz▪ That power which the Clergy had in their Convocations before their submission to the King to binde the subject by their Canons and Constitutions without any further Ratification then own Synodicall Authority, the same they had when the Kings power signified in his Royal assent was added to them; but the Clergy (by our Au∣thors own confession) had power in their Convoca∣tions before their submission to the King to binde the Subject by their Canons and Constitutions without any further ratification then their own Synodical Au∣thority; Ergo they had the same power to binde the Subjects when the Kings power signified by the Royal assent was added to them. The Minor being granted by our Author, as before is shewed, the Major is only to be proved. And for the proof hereof, I am to put the Reader in minde of a Petition or Remonstrance exhi∣bited
to the King by the House of Commons, Anno 1532. in which they shewed themselves agrieved, that the Clergy of this Realm should act Authorita∣tively and Supremely in the Convocations, and they in Parliament do nothing but as it was confirmed and ra∣tified by the Royal assent. By which it seems that there was nothing then desired by the House  om∣mons, but that the Convocation should be brought down to the same level with the Houses of Parliament; and that their Acts and Constitutions should not binde the Subject as before in their Goods and Possessions, untill they were confirmed and ratified by the Regal power. The Answer unto which Remonstrance being drawn up by Dr. Gardiner then newly made Bishop of Winchester, and allowed of by both Houses of Convocation, was by them presented to the King. But the King not sa∣tisfied with this Answer solves to bring them to his bent, let else perhaps they might have acted some∣thing to the hindrance of his divorce, which was at that time in agitation; and therefore on the 10 of May he sends a paper to them by Dr. Fox (after Bishop of Hereford) in which it was peremptorily required, That no Constitution or Ordinance shall be hereafter by the Clergy Enacted, Promulged, or put in Execution unlesse the Kings Highness do approve the same by his high Au∣thority and Royal assent; and his advice and favour be also interponed for the execution of every such constitution among his Highnesse Subjects. And though the Clergy on the receipt of this paper remov'd first to the Chap∣pel of St. Katherines, and after unto that of St. Dunstan to consult about it, yet found they no Saint able to inspie them with a resolution contrary to the Kings desires; and therefore upon the Wednesday following, being the 15 of the same Moneth, they made their absolute submission, binding themselves in Verbo Sacer∣dotii not to make or execute any Canons or other
Synodical Constitutions, but as they were from time to time enabled by the Kings Authority. But this submis∣sion being made unto the King in his single person, and not as in conjunction with his Houses of Parlia∣ment, could neither bring the Convocation under the command of Parliaments, nor render them obnoxious to the power thereof, as indeed it did not. But to the con∣trary hereof it is said by our Author, that Fol. 194. He (viz. the King) by the advice and con∣sent of his Clergy in Convocation and great Councel in Par∣liament, resolved to reform the Church under his inspection from grosse abuses crept into it.] To this I need no other Answer then our Author himself, who though in this place he makes the Parliament to be joyned in Com∣mission with the Convocation, as if a joynt Agent in that great business of Reforming the Church; yet in another place he tels us another tale. For fol. 188. it will appear, saith he, (and I can tell from whom he saith it) upon serious examination, that there was nothing done in the Reformation of Religion, save what was acted by the Clergy in their Convocations, or grounded on some Act of theirs precedent to it, with the Advice, Counsel and Consent of the Bishops and most eminent Churchmen; confirmed upon the Postfact, and not otherwise by the Civill Sanction, according to the usage of the best and happiest times of Christianity. So then the Reformation of the Church was acted chiefly by the King with the advice of the Clergy in their Convocation; the confirmation on the post-fact by the King in Parliament: and that (by his leave) not in all the Acts and Particulars of it, but in some few only, for which consult the Tract en∣tituled, The Way and Manner of the Reformation of the Church of England. Now as our Author makes the Par∣liament a joynt Assistant with the King in the Reforma∣tion, so he conferreth on Parliaments the supreme
Power of ratifying and confirming all Synodicall Acts. Fol. 199. The Parliament (saith he) did notifie and declare that Ecclesiasticall power to be in the King, which the Pope had formerly unjustly invaded. Yet so that they reser∣ved to themselves the confirming power of all Canons Ec∣clesiastical; so that the person or property of Refusers should not be subjected to temporal penalty without consent of Parliament.] But certainly there is no such matter in that Act of Parliament, in which the submission of the Clergy and the Authority of the King grounded there∣upon is notified and recorded to succeeding times; nor any such reservation to themselves of a confirming power as our Author speaks of in any Act of Parliament (I can knowingly and boldly say it) from that time to this. Had there been any such Priviledge, any such Reservation as is here declared, their power, in confir∣ming Ecclesiastical Canons had been Lord Paramount to the Kings; who could have acted nothing in it but as he was enabled by his Houses of Parliament. Nor is this only a new and unheard of Paradox, an Hetero∣doxie (as I may call it) in point of Law, but plainly contrary to the practice of the Kings of England from that time to this; there being no Synodical Canons or Constitutions (I dare as boldly say this too) confirmed in Parliament, or any otherwise ratified, then by the superadding of the Royal assent. For proof whereof look we no further then the Canons of 603 and 640 confirmed by the two Kings respectively, and without any other Authority concurring with them in these fol∣lowing words (viz.) We have therefore for Us, our Heirs, and lawful Successors, of our especial Grace, certain knowledge, and meer motion, given, and by these pesents do give our Royal assent according to the fom of the said Statute or Act of Parliament aforesaid, to all and every of the said Canons, Orders,
Ordinances, and Constitutions, and to all and eve∣ry thing in them contained. And furthermore, we do not only by our said Prerogative Royall, and Supreme Authority, in causes Ecclesiasticall, ratifie, confirme, and establish by these our Let∣ters Patents the said Canons, Orders, Ordinances, and Constitutions, and all and every thing in them contained, as is aforesaid, but do likewise propound, publish, and straightly enjoyne and command by our said Authority, and by these our Letters Pa∣tents, the same to be diligently observed, execu∣ted and equally kept by all our loving Subjects of this our Kingdom, both within the Province of Canterbury and York, in all points wherein they do or may concerne every or any of them accor∣ding to this our Will and Pleasure hereby signi∣fied and expressed. No other Power required to confirme these Canons, or to impose them on the people but the Kings alone. And yet I row there are not a few particulars, in which those Canons do ex∣tend to the property and persons of such Refusers as are concerned in the same; which our Author may soon finde in them if he list to look. And having so done, let him give us the like Precedent for his Houses of Par∣liament (either abstractedly in themselves, or in co∣operation with the King) in confirming Canons; and we shall gladly quit the cause, and willingly submit to his er judgement. But if it be Obected, as perhaps it may, That the Subsidies granted by the Clergy in the Convocation are ratified and confirmed by Act of Parliament, be∣fore they can be levied either on the Granters them∣selves, or the rest of the Clergy. I answer, that this makes nothing to our Authors purpose, that is to say, that the person or property of Re∣fusers should not be subjected to temporal penalty without
consent of Parliament. For first, before the submission of the Clergy to King Henry the 8. they granted Subsidies and other aids unto the King in their Convocations, and levied them upon the persons concerned therein by no other way then the usuall Censures of the Church, especi∣all, by Suspension and deprivation, if any Refuser prove so refractary as to dispute the payment of the sum imposed. And by this way they gave and levied that great sum of an Hundred thousand pounds in the Province of Canter∣bury only, by which they bought their peace of the said King Henry, at such time as he had caused them to be attainted in the Praemunire. And secondly, there is a like Precedent for it since the said Submission. For whereas the Clergy in their Convocation in the year 1585. being the 27 year of Queen Elizabeth, had given that Queen a Subsidy of four shillings in the pound confirmed by Act of Parliament in the usual way; they gave her at the same time (finding their former gift too short for her present occasions) a Benevolence of two shillings in the pound to be raised upon all the Clergy by vertue of their own Synodical Act only, under the penalty of such Ecclesiastical Censures as before were mentioned. Which precedent was after followed by the Clergy in their Con∣vocation. an. 1640. the Instrument of the Grant being the same verbatim with that before; though so it hapned (such influence have the times on the actions of men) that they were quarreld and condemned for it by the following Parliament in the time of the King, and not so much as checkt at, or thought to have gone beyond their bounds in the time of the Queen. And for the ratifying of their Bill by Act of Parliament, it came up first at such times (after the Submission before mentioned) as the Kings of England being in distrust of their Clergy, did not think fit to impower them by their Letters Patents for the making of any Synodical Acts, Canons, or Constitutions whatsoever, by which their Subsidies have been levied in
former times, but put them off to be confirmed and made Obligatory by Act of Parliament. Which being after∣wards found to be the more expedite way, and not con∣sidered as derogatory to the Churches Rights, was fol∣lowed in succeeding times without doubt or scruple; the Church proceeding in all other cases by her tive power, even in cases where both the person and property of the Subject were alike concerned, as by the Canons 1603, 1640. and many of those past in Q. Elizabeths time (though not so easie to be seen) doth at full appear. Which said we may have leisure to consider of another passage relating not unto the power of the Church, but the wealth of the Churchmen. Of which thus our Autho. Fol. 253. I have heard (saith he) that Queen Elizabeth being informed that Dr. Pilkington Bishop of Durham had given ten thousand pounds in marriage with his Daughter; and being offended that a Prelates daughter should equal a Princesse in portion, took away one thousand pounds a year from that Bishoprick, and assigned it for the better maintenance of the Garrison of Barwick.] In telling of which story ou Author commits many mistakes, as in most things ele. For first to justifie the Queens displeasure (if she were displeased) he makes the Bishop richer, and the Portion greater then indeed they were. The ten thousand pounds Lib. 9. fol. 109. being shrunk to eight; and that eight thousand pound not given to one Daughter (as is here affirmed) but divided equally between two: whereof the one was married to Sir Iames Harrington, the other nto Dunch of Berk-shire. Secondly, this could be no cause of the Queens displeasure, and much lesse of the Couries envy; that Bishop having sat in the See of Durham above seventeen years. And certainly he must needs have been a very ill Husband if our of such a great Revenue he had not saved five hundred pounds per annum to prefe his Children; the income being as great, and the charges of Hospitality lesse then they have been since. Thirdly,
the Queen did not take away a thousand pound a year from that Bishoprick, as is here affirmed. The Lands were left to it as before, but in regard the Garrison of Barwick preserved the Bishops Lands and Tenants from the spoil of the Scots; the Queen thought fit, that the Bishops should contribute towards their own defence, imposing on them an annuall pension of a thousand pound for the better maintaining of that Garrison. Fourthly, Bishop Pilkington was no Doctor, but a Batchelor of Di∣vinity only; and possibly had not been raised by our Author to an higher Title and Degree then the Univer∣sity had given him, but that he was a Conniver at Non∣conformity, as our Author telleth us Lib. 9. fol. 109. Lastly, I shall here add that I conceive the Pension above mentioned not to have been laid upon that See after Pilkingtons death, but on his first preferment to it, the French having then newly landed some forces in Scotland, which put the Queen upon a necessity of doubling her Guads and increasing her Garrisons. But whatsoever was the cause of imposing this great yearly payment upon that Bishoprick, certain I am, that it continued and the money was duly paid into the Exchequer for many years, after the true cause thereof was taken away; the Queens displeasure against Pilkington ending either with his life or hers, and all the Garrisons and forces upon the Borders being taken away in the beginning of the Reign of King Iames. So true is that old saying, Quod Christus non capit fiscus rapit, never more fully verified then in this particular.
The Sixth Book. Containing the History of Abbeys. THis Book containing the History of Abbeys seems but a Supplement to the former, but being made a distinct book by our Author, we must do so likewise. In which the first thing capable of an Animadversion, is but meerly verbal, viz. Fol. 266. Cistercians so called from one Robert living in Cistercium in Burgundy.] The place in Burgundy from whence these Monks took denomination, though call'd Cistercium by the Latins, is better known to the French and English by the name Cisteaux; the Monks thereof the Monks of Cisteaux by the English, and Lesmoines de Ci∣steaux by the French, and yet our Author hath hit it bet∣ter in his Cistercians, then Ralph Brook York Herald did, in his Sister-senses, for which sufficiently derided by Au∣gustin Vincent, as our Author being so well studied in He∣raldry, cannot chuse but know. Fol. 268. But be he who he himself or any other pleaseth brother if they will to St. George on Horseback.  Our Au∣thor not satisfying himself in that Equitius, who is sup∣posed to be the first Founder of Monks in England, makes him in scorn to be the Brother of St. George on Horse∣back; that is to say, a meer Chimera, a Legendary Saint, a thing of nothing. The Knights of that most noble Order are beholding to him for putting their Patron in the same Rank with St. Equitius; of whose existence on the Earth he can finde no Constat. But I would have him
know, how poorly so ever he thinks of St. George on Horseback, that there hath more been said of him, his Noble birth, Atchievements with his death and Martyr∣dom, then all the Friends our Author hath, will or can justly say in defence of our present History. Fol. 270.—So they deserve some commendation for their Orthodox judgement in maintaining some Contro∣versies in Divinity of importance against the Jesuites.] Our Author speaks this of the Dominicans or preaching Fry∣ers, who though they be the sole active managers of the Inquisition, deserve notwithstanding to be commended for their Orthodox judgement. How so? Because forsooth in some Controversies of importance, that is to say, Prede∣stination, Grace, Free-will, and the rest of that link, they hold the same opinions against the Iesuites and Franci∣scans, as the Rigid Lutherans do against the Melanchthoni∣ans, and the Rigid or Peremptory Calvinists against the Remonstrants. As powerful as the Iesuites and Franciscans are in the Court of Rome, they could never get the Pope to declare so much in favour of their Opinion, as here our Author (out of pure zeal to the good Cause) declares in favour of the Dominicans. It was wont to be the pro∣perty or commendation of Charity, that it hoped all things, believed all things, thought no evill, and in a word covered a multitude of ins. But zeal to the good cause having eaten up Charity, so far ascribes unto it self the true qua∣lities of it, as to pass over the sins and vices of such who have engaged themselves in defence thereof. And he that favours the good cause, though otherwise heterodox in Doctrine, irregular in his Conversation, as bloudy a Butcher of the true Protestants as these Preaching Fryers, shall have his imperfections covered, his vices hidden under this disguise, that he is Orthdox in judgement, and a true Professor. Otherwise the Dominicans had not ound such favour from the hands of our Author, who would have drawn as much bloud into their cheeks with
his pen, as they have drawn from many a true Protestant by their persecutions. Fol. 300. We will conclude with their observation (as an ominous presage of Abbies ruine) that there was scarce a great Abbey in England, which once at least, was not burnt down with lightning from Heaven.] Our Author may be as well out in this, as he hath been in many things else; it being an ordinary thing to ascribe that to Lightning or fire from Heaven, which happened by the malice or carelesness of Knaves on Earth, of which I shall speak more hereafter, on occasion of the firing of St. Pauls seeple in London, lib. 9. Now only noting by the way, that scarse any, and but thirteen (for our Author names no more which were so consumed) hang not well toge∣ther. If only thirteen were so burnt (and sure our Author would have nam'd them if they had been more) he should have rather chang'd his style, and said that of so many Religious Houses as suffered by the decayes of time and the fury of the Danish Ws, or the rage of accident I fires, scarse any of them d been striken by the hand of Heaven. Fol. 313. Hence presently arose the Northern Rebellion, wherein all the open undertakers were North of Trent, &c.] Not all the open undertakers, I am sure of that our Au∣thor telling us in the words next following, that this com∣motion began first in Lincolnshire, no part whereof except the River-Isle of Axholm, lies beyond the Trent. Con∣cerning which we are instructed by Iohn Stow,Stow in Hen. 8. fol 573. that at an Assise for the Kings Subsidie kept in Lincolnshire, the people made an in∣surrection, and gathered nigh twenty thousand persons, who took certain Lords and Gentlemen of the Country, causing them to be sworn to them upon certain Articles which they had devised. For which Rebellion, and some other practises against the State 12 of that County,Id. fol. 54. that is to say, 5 Priests, and 7
Lay-men were not long after drawn to Tyborn, and there hang'd and quarteed. By which we see, that all the open undertakers in the Northern Rebellion were not North of Trent▪ nor all the principal undertakers neither; some Lords and Gentlemen of that County (though against their wills) appearing in it,Camden in Lincolnshire fol▪ 535. and amongst others Sir Iohn Hussey created Baron not long before by King Henry the eighth, and shortly after punisht by him with the loss of his head, for being one of the Heads of this Insurrection. Fol. 316. Where there be many people, there will be many offenders, there being a Cham amongst the eight in the Ark, yea a Cain amongst the four Primitive Persons in the beginning of the world.] In this, our Authors Rule is better then his Exemplification. For though there where but eight persons in the Ark, whereof Cham was one, yet in all probability there were more then four persons in the world at the Birth of Abel, reckoning him for one. For though the Scripture doth subjoyn the Birth of Abel unto that of Cain, yet was it rather in re∣lation to the following story wherein Abel was a prin∣cipal party, then that no other children had been born between them. The world had peopled very slowly, and never increased to such vast multitudes in so short a time, if Eve had not twinned at least at every birth, and that some other children had not intervened between Cain and Abel. Not was Cain in relation to the time of his brothers birth to be accounted of as Cain in our Authors sense, that is to say, a Malefactor, an Offender, a murtherer of his innocent brother; or if we take him in that sense, there must be then some scores of per∣sons at the least, if not many hundreds, and consequent∣ly no such Cain amongst the Four Primitive Persons in the beginning of the world, as our Author would. Fol. 338. Such who are Prelatically affected, must ac∣knowledge these new Foundations of the Kings for a worthy
work, &c.] So then the Foundation of six Bishopricks, with the Capitular Bodies, Schools, Alms-houses and other Ministers and Officers subservient to them, is to be thought a worthy work (with reference to the work it self) by none but such as are Prelatically affected. The Preferment of so many men of Learning, the Education of so many children, the maintenance of so many Quire∣men, the relief of so many decay'd and impotent per∣sons, the provision made for so many of all sorts, who had their being and subsistence in the said Foundations, had nothing in it which might Signifie a worthy work▪ un∣less there be somewhat of a Prelatical perswasion in them, who put that value and esteem upon it. If any of a con∣trary judgement do approve the same, it is not to be attributed to the worth of the work, but to the accidental use which the unhappiness of this Age hath put them to, that is to say, by selling all the Lands which severally belong'd unto them to supply the present necessities of of the Common-wealth, as our Author telleth us. Assuredly such as are now founded in Colledges, or possest of Tithes, have good cause to thank him for this Discourse, which by this Rule and Reason are to be approved of by none but those who are interessed and concerned in thm; except it be with reference to some subsequent sal, when the pretended exigencies of the Common-wealth, or of any prevailing party in it shall require the sme. Fol. 340. It was in those days conceived highly inju∣rious, to thrust Monks and Nuns out of House and Home, without assigning them any allowance for their subsistence.] Our Author says very well in this, there being few Re∣ligious persons thrust out of their Houses, (except those that suffered by the first act of dissolution) who either were not prefer'd in the Church, (as Wakeman the last Abbot of Tewksbery, was by the King made the first Bi∣shop of Glocester) or otherwise provided of some liberal
pension, according to their age, wants, and quality; insomuch as Sir William Weston Lord Prior, of the order of St. Iohns, had an yearly Pension of a thousand pounds; Rawson the Subprior of a thousand Marks, some of the Brethren of two hundred pounds per annum, and thirty pounds per annum he that had least. Not did the King only give them such competent Pensions as might yeeld them a subsistence for the future, but furnisht them with ready money beforehand (their viaticum or advance mo∣ney as it were) toward their setting up in the world, which commonly amounted to a fourth part of their year∣ly Pension. The like honest care to which I finde in our Authors History of Waltham Abbey, fol. 8. where he tel∣leth us, that the Canons founded there by King Harold, were not remov'd thence by King Henry the second, (notwithstanding the scandalous conversation which was charg'd upon them) and Augustinian Fryers brought in∣to their place, done praedictis Canonicis sufficienter pro∣visum fuisset, till the said Canons were other ways pro∣ided of sufficient maintenance. And this may serve for the instruction (I will not say the reproach) of the present times, in which so many Bishops, Deans, and Preben∣daries no was obnoxious to any such scandalous accusa∣tions, have been thrust out of their Cathedrals without the allowance of one penny towards their subsistence▪ The like may be said also in the case of the sequestred Clergy. For though by an Order of the House of Com∣mons, their wives and children were to enjoy a fifth part of the yearly profits of their Benefices, yet the unconsci∣onable Intruders found so many shifts to evade that Order, that very few enjoy'd the just benefit of it, and they that did, found their attendance on the Committee for plundred Ministers so troublesome and chargeable to them, that it did hardly quit the cost. One man I know particularly, who after above twenty Orders pro and con and the riding of above a thousand miles backward and forward, be∣sides
a chargeable stay in London to attend the business; was fain at last to make a private agreement with the ad∣verse party, and take a tenth part in stead of a fifth. The like may be said also of the late Bill, by which the Presbyte∣rian Intruders are setled in the Beneces of the sequetred Clergy for term of life. For though it be thereby provi∣ded, that the Commissioners for rejecting of scandalous Ministers, shall have power to grant a fifth part, toge∣ther with the arrears thereof, to the sequestred and eect∣ed Clergy; yet is the Bill clog'd with two such circum∣stances, as make it altogether unuseful to some, and may make it little beneficial unto all the rest. For by the first it is declar'd, that no man shall receive any benefit by it, who hath either thirty pound per annum in Real, or five hundred pounds in Personal Estate; by means whereof many who have had some hundreds of pounds yearly to maintain their Families, are tyed up to so poor a pittance as will hardly keep their chilren from begging in the open streets. By the other, there is such a power given to the Commissioners, that not exceeding the fifth part, they may give to the poor sequestred Clergy as much and as little as they please, under that proportion. And one I know particularly in this case also, who for an Arrear of twelve years out of a Benefice rented formerly at 250 l. per annum, to my certain knowledge could obtain but 3 l. 6 s. 8 d. (the first Intruder being still living, and possest of that Benefice) and no more then 20 Marks par annum for his future subsistence, which is but a nineteenth part in stead of a fifth. And this I have observ'd the rather, that if these ppers should chance to come into the hands of any of those who have the conduct of affairs, they would be pleas'd to cause the said Bill to be review'd, and make the benefit thereof more certain and extensive then it is at the present. Our Author might have sav'd me the greatest part of this Application, had he been minded to do the poor Clergy any right, as he seldom doth. For
proof whereof we need but look upon a passage in his very Book, fol. 283. which is this that followeth. Once (saith he) it was in my minde to set down a Catalogue (easie to do, and useful when done) of such Houses of Cistercians, Templers, and Hospitallers, which were founded since the Lateran Council, yet going under the general notion of Tithe-free, to the great injury of the Church. But since on second thoughts, I conceived it better to let it alone, as not sure on such discovery of any blessing from such Ministers which should gain, but certain of many curses from such Lay-men who should lose thereby. So he. But I have heard it for a usual saying of King Henry the fourth of France, That he that feared the Popes curse, the reproaches of discontented people, and the frowns of his Mistress, should never sleep a quiet hour in his bed. And so much for that. Fol. 357. But this was done without any great cost to the Crown, only by altering the Property of the place from a late made Cathedral to an Abbey.] Our Author speaks this of the Church of Westminster, which though it suffer∣ed many changes, yet had it no such change as our Author speaks of; that is to say, from a Cathedral to an Abbey, without any other alteration which came in between. For when the Monastery was dissolved by King Henry the eighth, An. 1539. it was made a Deanry, Will. Benson being the first Dean. In the year 1541. he made it an Episcopal See, or Cathedral Church, and placed Thomas Thurlby the first Bishop there. But Thurlby being remov'd to Norwich, Anno 1550. the Bishoprick was suppressed by King Edward the sixth, and the Church ceased from be∣ing Cathedral, continuing as a Deanry only till the 21. of November, 1557. at what time Dr. Hugh Weston the then Dean thereof, unwillingly remov'd to Win∣sor, made room for Feckna and his Monks, and so re∣stor'd it once again to the State of an Abbey, as our Au∣thor telleth us.
Fol. 359. Nor can I finde in the first year of Queen Elizabeth any particular Statute wherein (as in the rign of King Henry the eighth) these Orders are nominatim suppressed, &c.] But first, the several Orders of Religious Persons were not suppressed nominatim, except that of St. Iohns, by a Statute in the time of King Henry the eight. Secondly, if there were no such Statute, yet was it not because those Houses had no legal settlement, as it after followeth; Queen Mary being vested with a power of granting Mortmains, and consequently of founding these Religious Houses in a Legal way. Thirdly, there might be such a Statute, though our Author never had the good luck to see it; and yet for want of such good luck, I finde him apt enough to think there was no such Statute. Et quod non invenit usquam, esse putat nusquam, in the Poets language. And such a Statute as he speaks of there was indeed, mentioned and rela∣ted to in the Charter of Queen Elizabeth for founding the Collegiate Church of St. Peter in Westminster. But being an unprinted Statute, and of private use, it ea∣sily might escape our Authors diligence, though it did not Camdens; who being either better ighted,Camd. n Midle∣sex, fol 49. or more concern'd, had a view thereof. For telling s how the Monks with their Abbot had been set in possessi∣on again by Queen Mary, he after addeth, that they within a while after being cast out by Authority of Par∣liment, the most vertuous Queen Elizabeth converted it in∣to a Collegiate Church, or rather into a Seminary or Nurse Garden of the Church, &c. Fol. 369. Jesuits the last and newest of all Orders.] The newest if the last, there's no doubt of that, but the last they were not; the Oratorians (as they call them) being of a later brood. The Iesuites founded by Ig∣natius Loyola, a Spaniard▪ and confirmed by Pope Paul
the thid, Anno 1540. The Oratorians founded by Philip Meri a Florentine, and confirmed by Pope Pius the fourth, Anno 1564. By which accompt these Oratorians are younger Brethren to the Iesuites by the space of four and twenty years; and consequently the esuites not the last and newest of Religious Or∣ders.
ANIMADVERSIONS ON The Seventh and Eighth Books OF The Church History OF BRITAIN. Containing the Reigns of King Edward the sixth, and Queen Mary. WE are now come unto the Reign of King Edward the sixth, which our Author psseth lightly over, though very full of action and great alterations. And hee the first thing which I meet with, is an unnecessary Quaere which he makes about the Injunctions of this King. Amongst which we finde one concerning the religious keeping of the Holy-dayes, in the close whereof it is declared, That it shall be lawful for all people in time of Harvest to labour upon Holy and Festivall dayes, and save that thing which God hath sent, and that scrupulosity to abstain from woking on
those dayes doth grievously offend God. Our Author heupon makes this Quaere, that is to say, Fol. 375. Whether in the 24 Injunction labouring in time of Harvest upon Holy-dayes, and Festivals, rela∣teth not only to those of Ecclesiastical Constitution (as dedicated to Saints) or be inclusive of the Lords-day also.] Were not our Author a great Zelot for the Lords-day-Sabbath, and dious to intitle it to some Antiquity, we had not met with such a Quaere. The Law and Pra∣ctice of those times make this plain enough. For in the Statute of 5 and 6 of Edward the sixth, c. 3. the names and number of the Holy-dayes being first laid down, that is to say, All Sundayes in the year, the Feasts of the circumcision of our Lord Iesus Christ, of the Epiphany, &c. with all the rest still kept, and there named particular∣ly, it is thus enacted, viz. That it shall and may be lawful to every Husbandman, Labourer, Fisherman, and to all and every other person and persons of what Estate, Degree, or Condition he or they be, upon the Holy-dayes afore∣said in Harvest, or at any other times in the year, when necessity shall so require, to labour, ride, fish, or work any kinde of , at their free-wils and pleasure: any thing in this Act to the contrary notwithstanding. The Law being such, there is no question to be made in point of practice, nor consequently of the meaning of the Kings injunction. For further opening of which truth we finde in Sir Iohn Haywoods History of this King, that not the Countrey only, but the Court were indulged the liberty of attending but ness on that day; it be∣ing ordered by the King amongst other things, That the Lords of the Councell should upon Sundayes attend the publick Affairs of the Realm,Hist. Edward 6. pg 353. dispatch Answers to Letters for good order of the State, and make full dispatches of all things concluded the week before: Provided that they be pesent at Common Prayer.
And that on every Sunday night the Kings Secretary should deliver him a memorial of such things as are to be debated by the Privy Councell in the week ensing. Which Orders had our Author read and compared with the Statute, he had not needed to have made this Qere about the true intent and meaning of the Kings In∣junction. Fol. 386. In the first year of King Edward the sixth, it was recommended to the care of the most grave Bishops and others (assembled by the King at his Castle at Wind∣for) and when by them compleated, set forth in Print 1548. with a Proclamation in the Kings name to give Authority thereunto, being also recommended unto every Bishop by especiall Letters from the Lords of the Councel to see the same put in execution. And in the next year a penalty was imposed by Act of Parliament on such who should dprave or neglect the use thereof.] Our Author here mistakes himself, and confounds the business; making no dif∣ference between the whole first Liturgy of King Edward the sixth, and a particular form of Administration. For the better understanding whereof, he may please to know, that in the first Parliament of this King there past a Statute,1 E. 6. c. 1. Entituled, An Act against such as speak against the Sacra∣ment of the Altar; and for the receipt thereof in both kindes. Upon the coming out whereof, the King be∣ing no lesse desirous (as Fox relates it) to have the form of Administration of the Sacrament reduced to the right Rule of the Scriptures, and first use of the Pri∣mitive Church, then he was to establish the same by Authority of his own Regal Lawes, appointed certin of the most grave and learned Bishop and others of his Realm to assemble together at his Castle of Windsor,Acts and Mon. pag. 658. there to argue and intreat of this matter, and conclude upon and set forth one perfect and uni∣form
Order, accoding to the Rule, and use afore∣said; which Book was printed and set out March 8. 1548. (which is 1547. according to the accompt of the Church of England) with a Proclamation of the Kings befoe, as by the Book it self appea∣. But this Book thus set out and publisht, contained nothing but a Form and Order of Admi∣nising the Holy Communion under both kinds, in pursunce of the Statute before mentioned; and ser∣ved but as a preamble to the following Liturgy, a Be fast (as it were) to the Feast insuing. The Liturgy came not out till near two years after, con∣firmed in Parliament Anno 2. 3. Edw. 6. cap. 1. and in that Parliament cryed up as made by the immedi∣ate aide and inspiration of the holy Ghost. Which not∣withanding some exceptions being taken at it (as our Author notes) by Calvin abod, and some Zea∣lots at home, the Book was brought under a Review; much altered in all the parts and offies of it, but whethr nto the better, or unto the worse, let some others judge. Fol. 404. At last the great Earl of Warwick deserted his Chaplain in open field to shift for himself. Indeed he had higher things in his head, then to attend such trifles.] A man may easily discern a Cat by her claw, and we may finde as easily by the scratches of our Authos pen to what party in the Church he stands most inclined. He had before declared for the Domi∣nicans and Rigid Calvinists in some points of Do∣ctine, and now declares himself for the Non-Confor∣mists in point of Ceremony. He had not else cal∣led the Episcopal Ornaments, particularly the Rochet, Chimere and Square-cap by the name of trifles; such trifles as were not worth the contending for, if Re∣slute Ridley had been pleased to dispense therein. The truth is, that Hoopers opposition in this parti∣cula,
gave the first ground to those Combustions in the Church which after followed; Calvin ex∣tremely stickling for him, and writing to his party here to assist him in it. And this I take to be the rea∣son why our Author is so favourable in his censure of him fol. 402. and puts such Answers in the mouthes of the Non-Conformist fol. 404. as I can hardly think were so well hammered and accommodated in those early dayes. Such as seem rather fitted for the tem∣per and acumen of the present times after a long debating of all particulars and a strict search into all the niceties of the Controversie, then to the first be∣ginnings and unpremeditated Agitatious of a new-born Quarrel. Fol. 406. Yet this work met afterwards with some Frowns even in the faces of great Clergy-men, &c. be∣cause they concoived these singing Psalms erected in Cor∣rivality and opposition to the reading Psalms, which were formerly sung in Cathedral Churches.] And thoe great Church-men ad good reson for what they did, wisely foreseeing that the singing of those Psalms so transla∣ted in Rythme and Meeter would work some alterati∣on in the executing of the publique Liturgy. For though it be exprest in the Title of those singing Psalms that they were set forth and allowed to be sung in all Churches before and after morning and evenig Prayer; and also before and after Sermons; yet this al∣lowance seems rather to have been a Connivence then an approbation: no such allowance being ny whee found by such as have been most industrious and con∣cerned in the search thereof. Secondly, whereas t was intended that the said Psalms should be only before and after morning and evening Prayer; and also before and after Sermons (which shews they were not to be intermingled in the publique Liturgy) in very little time they pevailed so far in most Parish Churches, as to
thrust the Te Deum, the Benedictus, the Magnificat, and the Nunc dimittis, quite out of the Church. And thirdly, by the practices and endevours of the Puritan party, they came to be esteemed the most divine part of Gods publique service; the reading Psalms together with the first and second Lessons being heard in many places with a covered head, but all men itting bare∣headed when the Psalm is sung. And to that end, the Parish Clerk must be taught when he names the Psalm to call upon the people to sing it to the praise and glory of God, no such preparatory Exhortation be∣ing used at the naming of the Chapters of the dayly Psalms. But whereas our Author seems to intimate that the Reading Psalms were formerly sung only in Cathdral Churches, he is exceedingly mistaken both in the Rubriks of the Church, and the practice too: the Rubricks lving them indifferently to be said or sung, according as the Congregation was fitted for it, the practice in some Parish Churches with∣in the time of my memory being for it also. And this our Author (as I think) cannot chuse but know, if he be but as well studied in the Rules of the Church, as in some Popish Legends and old ends of Poetry. Fol. 407. Let Adonijah and this Lords example deterr Subjects from medling with the Widows of their Soveraigns, lest in the same match they espouse their own danger and destruction.] I see little reason for this Rule, lesse for his examples. For first Abishag the Shunamite, whom Adonijah desred to have to wife, was ever marryed unto David; and therefore cannot properly be called his Widow. And secondly, Queen Katherie Parr the Widow of King Henry the eighth, and wife unto Sir Thomas Seimor (the Lord here mentioned) is generally charactered for a Lady of so meek a nature, as not to contribute any thing to∣wards
his destruction. Had the Dutchesse of Somer∣set been lesse impetious then she was, or possest but of one half of that aequanimity which carryed Queen Katherine off in all times of her troubles, this Lord might have lived happily in the armes of his Lady, and gone in peace unto the grave. We finde the like match to have been made between another Kathe∣rine the Widow of another Henry, and Owen Tudor a private Gentleman of Wales, prosperous and com∣fortable to them both; though Owen was inferior to Sir Thomas Seimor both in Birth and Quality, and Katherine of Valois Daughter to Charles the sixth of France, far more superiour in her bloud to Queen Katherine Parr. The like may be said also of the marriage of Adeliza Daughter of Geofry Earl of Lvain and Duke of Brabant, and Widow to King Henry the first, marryed to William de Albeney a noble Gentleman, to whom she brought the Castle and Honour of Arundel, conerred upon her by the King her former Husband, continuing in the possessi∣on of their posterity, though in severall Families, to this very day; derived by the Heirs general from this House of Albeney to that of the Fitz-lans, and from them to the Howards the now Earls thereof. Many more examples of which kinde fotunate and succesful to each party might be easily ound, were it worth the while. Fol. 421. This barren Convocation is entituled the Parent of those Articles of Religion (forty two in num∣ber) which are printed with this Preface, Articuli de quibus in Synodo Londinensi, &c.] Our Author here is guilty of a greater crime then that of Scandalum Magnatum, making King Edward the sixth of pious memory, no better then an impious and leud Im∣postor. For if the Convocation of this year were barren (as he saith it was) it could neither be
the Parent of those Articles nor of the short Catechisme which was Printed with them, coun∣tenanced by the Kings Letters Patents preixt before it. For First, the Title to the Articles runneth thus at large, viz. Articuli de quibus in Synodo Londinensi Anno 1552 inter Episcopos & alios eruditos viros convenerat ad tol∣lendam opinionum dissensionem, & consensum verae Religionis firmandum Regia Authoritate in lucem editi. Which title none durst have adventured to set before them, had they not really been the products of that Convoca∣tion. Secondly, the King had no reason to have any such jealousie at that time of the major part of the Clergy, but that he might trust them with a power to meddle with matters of Religion (which is the only Argument our Author bringeth against those Articles) This Convocation being holden in the sixth year of his Reign when most of the Episcopal Sees and Parochial Churches were filled with men ageeble to his desies, and generally conformble to the form of worship the by Law established. Thidly, the Church of England for the first five years of Queen Elizabeth retained these Articles and no othe as the publick tendries of the Church in poins of Doctrine, which cetainly she had not done, had they been reommended to her by a lesse Authoity then a Convocation. Fourthly and lasly, we have the testimony of our Author against himself, who telling us of the Cate∣chisme above mentioned, that it was of the sane extraction with the Book of Articles, addes afte∣wards, that being first composed by a single person, it was perusd and allowed by the Bishops and other learned men (understand it the Convocation) and by Royall Au∣thority commended to all Subjec, and cmmaned to all
School-masters to teach it their Scholars. So that this Catechism being allowed by the Bishops and other learned men in the Convocation, and the Articles be∣ing said to be of the same extraction; it must needs follow thereupon, that these Articles had no other Parent then this Convocation. The truth is, that the Records of Convocation, during this Kings whole Reign, and the first years of Queen Mary, are very im∣perfect and defective; most of them lost, and amongst others those of this present year; and yet one might conclude as strongly that my Mother died childless, be∣cause my Christning is not to be found in the Parish Register; as that the Convocation of this year was barren, because the Acts and Articles of it are not entred in the Journal Book.
The Eighth Book; OR The Reign of Queen MARY. WE next proceed unto the short, but troublesome Reign of Queen Mary; in which the first thing occurs, is, ol. 1. But the Commons of England who for many yes together had conn'd Loyalty by-heart, out of the Sta∣e of the succession, were so perfect in their Lesson, that they would not be put out of it by this new started design.] In which I am to note these things; first that he makes the Loyalty of the Commons of England not to depend upon the primogeniture of their Princes, but on the Statute of Succession, and then the object of that Loyalty must not be the King, but the Act of Parliament, by which they were directed to the knowledge of the next suc∣cessor: and then it must needs be in the power of Par∣liaments to dispose of the Kingdom as they pleas'd; the Peoples Loyalty being tyed to such dispositions. Se∣condly, that the Statutes of Succession had been so many, and so contrary to one another, that the common peo∣ple could not readily tell which to trust to; and for the last it related to the Kings last Will and Testament, so lately made and known unto so few of the Commons, that they had neither opportunity to see it, nor time to con the same by heart. Nor thirdly, were the Commons so perfect in this lesson of Loyalty, or had so fixt it in their hearts, but that they were willing to forget it
within little time, and take out such new lessons of dis∣obedience and disloyalty, as Wiat and his Partizans did preach unto them. And finally they had not so well conn'd this lesson of Loyalty in our Authors own judgement, but that some strong pretender might have taught them a new Art of Oblivion: it being no improbable thing (as himself confesseth) to have heard of a King Henry the ninth, if Henry Fitz-Roy the Duke of Somerset and Richmond, had liv'd so long as to the death of King Edward the sixth. Fol. 11. Afterwards Philpot was troubled by Gardiner for his words spoken in the Convocation. In vain did he plead the priviledge of the place, commonly reputed a part of Par∣liament.] I cannot finde that the Convocation at this time, nor many years before this time, was commonly reputed as a part of the Parliament. That antiently it had been so, I shall easily grant; there being a clause in every letter of Summons by which the Bishops were re∣quired to attend in Parliament, that they should warn the Clergy of their several and respective Dioceses, some in their persons, and others by their Procurators to attend there also. But this hath been so long unpractic'd, that we finde no track of foot-steps of it since the Parliaments of the time of King Richard the second. It's true indeed, that in the 8. year of King Henry the sixth, there passed a Statute by which it was enacted, That all the Clergy which should be called thenceforth to the Convocati∣on by the Kings Writ, together with their servants and Families, should for ever after fully use and enjoy such liberty or immunity in coming, tarrying, and return∣ing, as the great men & Commonalty of the Realm of England, called or to be called to the Kings Parliament, have used, or ought to have, or enjoy. Which though it make the Convocation equal to the Parliament,Rostl Abrid f. 423. as to the freedom of their Persons; yet can it not from hence be reck∣oned, and much less commonly reputed for a part thereof.
Fol. 14. Indeed the Queen bare Poole an unfeigned af∣fection, and no wonder to him that considereth, 1. their Age, he being about ten years older, the proportion allowed by the Philosopher betwixt Husband and Wife, &c.] In Queen Ma∣ries afection unto Poole, and the reasons of it, I am very well satisfied, better then in the explication which he adds unto it. For if by the Philosopher, he means Aristotle, as I think he doth, he is very much out in making no more then ten years to be the proportion allowed by him betwixt the Husband and the Wife. For Aristotle in the seventh Book of his Politicks having discoursed of the fittest time and age for marriage both in men and women,Arist. Pol. l. 7▪ cap. 16. concludes at last, that it is expedi∣ent that maidens be married about the age of eigh∣teen years, and Men at seven and thirty, or there∣abouts. His reason is, ▪that is to say, Because they shall then be joyned in wedlock, while their bodies be in full strength, and shall cease from procreation in fit time. Whether so great a dispoportion were allowed of then, or that it was a matter of Speculation only, and not re∣ducible to practice, I dispute not now. Only I note that it is twenty years, not ten, which the Philosopher requires in the different ages of the Man and Wife. Fol. 19. Lincoln Diocess the largest of the whole King∣dom, containing Leicester, &c. with parts of Hatford and Warwickshires.] That the great. Diocess of Lincoln containeth the whole Counties of Bedford, Buckingham, Huntington, Leicester, and Lincoln, with part of Hartford∣shire is confessed by all; but that it containeth also some part of Warwickshire, I doe very much doubt. Certain I am,Antiquit. Bitan. that Archbishop Parker, a man very well skilled in the jurisdiction of his Suf∣fragan Bishops, assigns no part of Warwickshire to the See of Lincoln; dividing that County between
the Bishop of Coventry and Lichfield, and the Bishop of Worcester. I see by this our Author is resolved to play at all games, though he get by none. Fol. 27. The Letany, Surplice, and other Ceremonies in Service and Sacraments they omitted, both as superfluos and superstitios.] Our Author speaks this of the Schismati∣cal Congregation at Franckford, who trn'd the publick Church Liturgy quite out of their Church, fashioning to themselves a new form of Worship, which had no war∣rant and foundation by the laws of this Realm. And first (saith he) the Letany, Surplice, and other Ceremonies they omitted both as superfluous and superstitious. Super∣fluous, and superstitious, in whose opinion? In that of the Schismaticks at Franckford, our Authors, or in both alike. Most probably in our Authors as well as theirs, for otherwise he would have added some note of qualifi∣cation, such as they thought, they judg'd, or they suppos'd them: according as he hath restrain'd them to their own ense in the clause next following, viz. in place of the English Confession, they used another, adjudged by them of more effect. Adjudged by them in this, not the former sentence, makes me inclinable to believe that the Letany, Surplice, and other Ceremonies are both superfluous and supersti∣tious in our Authors judgement, not in theirs alone. Se∣condly, our Author (as we have noted formerly on the second Book of this History) reckons the Cross in Bap∣tism, used and required to be used by the Church of Eng∣land, among the superstitious Ceremonies and such like Trinckets with which that Sacrament is loaded. And if he durst declare himself so plain in this second Book written as he affirms, in the Reign of the late King, when he might fear to be call'd to an account for that expression, there is little question to be made, but since Monarchy was turn'd into a State, he would give his pen more li∣berty then he did before, in counting the Letany, Surplice, and other Ceremonies is superfluous and superstitious, as the
Cross in Baptism. Thirdly, having laid down an abstract of the form of worship contriv'd by the Schismaticks at Franckford, he honoreth them with no lower Title then that of Saints; and counts this liberty of deviating from the Rules of the Church for a part of their happiness. For so it followeth, fol. 28. This, saith he, is the Com∣munion of Saints, who never account themselves peaceably possest of any happiness, untill (if it be in their power) they have also made their fellow-sufferers partakers thereof. If those be Saints, who separate themselves schismatically from their Mother Church; and if it be a happiness to them to be permitted so to do; our Author hath all the reason in the world to desire to be admitted into their Communion, and be made partaker of that happiness which such Saints enjoy. And if in order thereunto he counts the Letany, Surplice, and other Ceremonies of the Church to be both superstitious and superfluous too, who can blame him for it? Fol. 39. Trinity Colledge built by Sir Thomas Pope. I shall not derogate so much from Sir Thomas Pope, as our Author doth from Trinity Colledge, naming no Bishop of this House, as he doth of others. He tells us that he liv'd in this University about 17 weeks, and all that time D. Skinner the Bishop of Oxford liv'd there too. Dr. Wright the Bishop of Lichfield, pobably was then living alo, (for he deceased not till after the beginning of the year 1643.) but living at that time in his own House of Eccle∣sal Castle. Both of them Members of this Colledge, and therefore worthily deserving to have found some place in our Authors History. And because our Author can finde no learned Writers of this Colledge neither, I will supply him with two others in that kinde also. The first whereof shall be Iohn Slden, of the Inner Temple, , that renown'd Humanitian and Philologer, sometimes a Commoner of this House, and here initiated in those Studies in which he aferwards
attain'd to so high an eminence. The second William Chillingworth, an able and acute Divine, and once a Fel∣low of this Colledge; whose Book entituled The Reli∣gion of Protestants a safe way to Salvation, written in de∣ence of Dr. Potters Book called Charity mistaken, com∣mended by our Author, Lib. 3. fol. 115. remains unan∣swered by the Iesuites, notwithstanding all their brags beforehand, to this very day. Which Book though most ridiculously buried with the Author at Arundel (get thee gone thou accursed Book &c.) by Mr. Francis Cheynel, the usu fructuary of the rich personage of Peworth, shall still survive unto the world in its own just value, when the poor three-penny commodities of such a sorry Haber∣dasher of Small Wares shall be out of credit. Of this Pa∣geant, see the Pamphet call'd Chillingworthi Novissima, printed at London, Anno 1644. Fol. 41. But now it is gone,Ca∣lice. let it go; it was but a beg∣gerly Town, and cost England ten times yearly more then it was worth in keeping thereof.] Admit it be so, yet cer∣tainly it was worth the keeping, had it cost much more. The English while they kept that Town, had a dore open into France upon all occasions, and therefore it was commonly said that they carried the Keyes of France at their Girdles. Sound States-men do not measure the benefit of such Towns and Garrisons as are maintain'd and kept in an Enemies Countrey, by the profit which they bring into their Exchequer, but by the opportunities they give a Prince to enlarge his Territories. Of this kinde was the Town of Barwick situate on the other side of the Tweed, upon Scottish ground; but Garrison'd and maintain'd with great charge by the Kings of England, because it gave him the same advantage against the Scots, as Calice did against the French. The government of which last Town is by Comines said to be the goodliest Cap∣tain ship in the world, so great an Eye-sore to the French, that Mounsieur de Cordes (who liv'd in the time of Lewis
the eleventh) was used to say, that he would be content to lie in Hell seven years together, upon condition that Ca∣lice were regain'd from the English; and finally judged of such importance by the French, when they had re∣gain'd it, that neither the Agreement made at the Treaty of Cambray, nor the desire to free New-haven from the power of the English, nor the necessities which Henry the fourth was reduc'd unto, could ever prevail upon them to part with it. But it is dry meat said the Coun∣trey fellow, when he lost the Hare; and so let Calie pass for a Beggerly Town, and not worth the keeping, be∣cause we have no hope to get it.
ANIMADVERSIONS ON The Ninth Book OF The Church History OF BRITAIN. Containing the Reign of Queen Elizabeth. THe short Reigns of King Edward the sixth, and Queen Mary being briefly past over by our Author, he spends the more time in setting out the affairs of the Church under Queen Elizabeth; not so much because her Reign was long, but because it was a busie Age and full of Faction. To which Faction how he stands affected he is not coy to let us see on all occasions, giving us in the very first entrance this brief but notable Essay, viz. Fol. 51. Idolatry is not to be permitted a moment; the first minute is the fittest to abolish it: all that have power have right to destroy it by that grand Charter of Religion, whereby every one is ound to advance Gods glory. And if
Soveraigns forget, no reason but Subjects should remember their duty] Our Author speaks this in behalf of some forward Spirits, who not enduring the lainesse of Au∣thority in order to the great work of Reformation, fell beforehand to the beating down of superstitious Pictures and Images. And though some others condemned their indiscretion herein, yet our Author will not, but rather gives these Reasons for their justification; 1. That the Popish Religion is Idolatry. 2. That Idolatry is to be destroyed by all that have power to do it. 3. (Which is indeed the main) that if the Soveraigns do forget, there is no reason but Subjects should remember their duty. This being our Authors Master-piece, and a fair gndwork for Seditious and Rebellious for the times ensuing, I shall spend a little the more time in the examination of the popositions, as before we had them. And 1. It will be hard for our Author to prove that the Romish Religion is Idolatry, though possible it is that some of the members of that Church may be proved Idolaters. I know well what great pains Dr. Reynolds took in his laborious work entituled, De Idololatria Ec∣clesiae Romanae; and I know too that many very lear∣ned and moderate men were not thoughly satisfied in his proofs and Arguments. That they are worshippers of Images, as themselves deny not, so no body but themselves can approve them in it. But there is a very wide difference betwixt an Image and an Idol, betwixt the old Idolates in the state of Heathenism, and those which give religious worship unto Images in some pats of Chrisendom. And this our Author being well stdied in Antiquity, and not a stranger to the of the present times, cannot chuse but know; thogh zeal to the good cause, and the desire of being costan to himself, drew this page from him. The Chistian faith delivered in the hly Gospels suc∣ceeded
over the greatest part of the then known wod in the place of that Idolatrous worship, whih like a Le∣prosie had generally overspread the whole face thereof. And therefore that the whole Mass of Wickliffes Hee∣rodoxies might be Christned by the name of Gospel, our Author thinks it necessary that the Popish Mass, and the rest of the Superstitious of that Church should be call'd Idolatry. 2. That Idolatry is to be destroyed by all them that have power to do it, I shall easily grant. But then it must be understood of a lawful power, and not permit∣ted to the liberty of unlawful violence. Id possumus, quod jure possumus, was the rule of old, and it held good in all attempts for Reformation in the elder times. For when the Fabrick of the Jewish Church was out of order, and the whole Worship of the Lord either de∣filed with superstitions, or intermingled with Idolatries, as it was too often: did not Gods servants carry and await his leisure, till those who were supreme both in place and power, were by him prompted and inflamed to a Reformation? How many years had that whole people made an Idol of the Brazen Serpent, and burnt cense to it, before it was defaced by King Hzekiah? How many more might it have longer stood undefced▪ untouched by any of the common people, had not the King given order to demolish it? How many years had the seduced Israelites adored before the Altar of Bethel, before it was hewn down and cut in peces by the good King Iosiah? And yet it cannot be denyed but that it was as much in the power of the Iews to destroy that Idol, and of the honest and religious Isralites to break down that Altar; as it either was, or could be in the power of our English Zealots to beat down superstiti∣ous Pictures and Images, had they been so minded. Solo∣mon in the Book of Canticles compares the Church unto a Army, Acies Castrorum ordinaa, as the Vulgar hath it,
an Army terrible with Banners, as our English reads it. A powerful Body out of doubt, able which way soever it moves, to waste and destroy the Countrey, to burn and sack the Villages through which it passeth. And que∣stionless too many of the Souldiers knowing their own power, world be apt to do it, if not restrained by the Authority of their Commanders and the Laws of war.Tacit. Hst. l 1. Ita se Ducum Authoritas, sic Rigor Disciplinae habet, as we finde in Taci∣tus. And if those be not kept as they ought to be, Con∣fusi Equites Pedites{que} in exitium ruunt; the whole runs on to a swift destruction. Thus is it also in the Church with the Camp of God; If there be no subordination in it, if every one might do what he list himself, and make such uses of that power and opportunity as he thinks are put into into his hands, what a confusion would en∣sue, how speedy a calamity must needs fall upon it? Courage and zeal do never shew more amiably in infe∣rior powers, then when they are subordinate to good directions, especially when they take directions from the right hand, from the Supreme Magistrate, not from the interests and passion of their fellow subjects. It is the Princes office to command, and theirs to execute. With which wise caution the Emperor Otho once represt the too great forwardness of his Souldiers, when he found them apt enough to make use of their power in a matter not commanded by him, Vobis Arma & Ani∣mus,Tacit. Hit. l. 1. mihi Consilium & virtutis vestrae Regi∣men relinquites as his words there are. He understood their duty, and his own authority, allows them to have power and will, but regulates and restrains them both to his own command. So that whe∣ther we behold the Church in its own condition, pro∣ceeding by the warrant and examples of holy Scripture, or in resemblance to an Army (as compared by Solomon) there will be nothing left to the power of the people
either in way of Reformation or Execution▪ till they be vested and intrusted with  lawful power deriv'd from him whom God hath plac'd in Authority over them. And therefore though Idolatry be to be destroy'd, and to be destroyed by all which have power to do it, yet must all those be furnisht with  lawful power, or otherwise stand guilty of as high a crime as that which they so zealously endeavour to condemn in others. 3. But our Author is not of this minde, and there∣fore adds, That if the Soveraign do forget, the Subjects should remember their duty. A lesson which he never learn'd in the Book of God. For besides the examples which we have in demolishing the Brazen Serpent, and the Altar of Bethel, not acted by the power of the peo∣ple, but the command of the Prince; I would know where we shall finde in the whole coure and cur∣rent of the holy Scriptures, that the common people in and by their own authority, removed the high places, and destroyed the Images, or cut down the Goves, those excellent Instruments of Superstition and Idolatry; or that they did attempt any such thing till warranted and commissionated by the Supreme Powers. Where shall we finde that any of the seven thousand person: which had not bowed the knee to Baal, did ever go about to destroy that Idol? Or that Eliah or Elisha (two men as extraordinary for their calling, as their zeal and courage) did excite them to it? Where shall we finde the Primitive Christians, when living under the command of Heathenish Emperors busied in destroying Idols, or defacing the Temples of those Gods whom the Pagans worshipped; thogh grown in those times to such infinite multitudes, that they filled all places of the Em∣pire, & Vestra omnia implevim, Cities, Illes, Castles, Burroughs, your places of Assembly, Camps, Tribes, Palaces, yea the very Senate and common Forum, as Tertullian pleads it. No other Doctrine  eard
of till either the new Gospel of Wickliffe, or the new Lights shining from Geneva, gave beginning to it: when the Genevians were resolv'd on a Reformation, and could not get the consent of their Bishop, who was also their immediate Prince, they resolv'd to take the work into their own hands, and proceed without him. And that the presence of their Bishop might not be a hinderance unto their designs, they rais'd a tumult, put themselves in to a posture of war, and thereby force him and his Clergy to forsake the City. And this being done, they did not only order matters of Religion as they pleas'd themselves, but took the Soveraignty of the City into their own hands, changing the Government thereof to the form of a Common-wealth. Eo ejecto Genevates Mo∣narchiam in popularem Statum commutarunt, as Calvin hath it in his Epistle unto Cardinal Sadolet. The practice of these men drawn afterwards into example by Knox, and others, became at last to be the standing Rule and Measure of all Reformations. For when the King and Queen of Scots, refus'd to ratifie two Acts which were sent unto them concerning the abolishing of the Mass, and the Popes supremacy,Hist. of Q. Mary s. 25. Knox, Winram, and the rest of that gang without more ado de∣vised, and set up a new form of Discipline, ingrossing that power unto the Kirk, which formerly had been usurped by the Popes of Rome. Af∣terwards when the Queen was return'd into Scotland, and that some of their importunate Petitions were neglected by her, it was concluded by the Ministers in as plain terms as might be, that if the Queen will not, then we must, ibid. fol. 33. According to this Rule the Netherlands proceeded also, not only driving on the design which they had in hand (as the French Hugonots also did) without the Kings Authority, but against it also. Finally, from a mat∣ter practical it came at last to be delivered for a point of
Doctrine, that if the Prince or Supreme Magistrate did not reform the Church, then the people might. For this I finde in Clesselius, one of the Contra-Remonstrants of Roterdam. If saith he, the Prince and Clergy do neg∣lect their duties in the Reforming of the Church, Necesse est tumid facere plebeios Israelitas, that then, it doth be∣long to the common people. And it is with a Necesse too, if you mark it well▪ they might not only do it, but they must be doing. Not in the way of Mediation or Petition, by which the dignity of the Magistrate might be preserv'd, but by force and violence, Licet ad san∣guinem us{que} pro eo pugnent, even to the shedding of their own bloud, and their brethrens too. Our Author preach∣eth the same Doctrine, whether by way of Application or Instruction, it comes all to one; for, Qui Parentes laudat filios provocat, as Lactantius has it, Posterity is too soon taught to follow the ill examples of their Pre∣decessors. And though he press it not so home as Clesse∣lius did, yet when the gap is once set open, and the Hedge of Authority torn down, bloodshed and war, and other acts of open violence will come in of course. So that we may affirm of this dangerous Doctrine, as the Sorbonists once did of the Iesuites, viz. Videtur in negotio sidei periculosa, pacis Ecclesiae perturbativa, & magis ad destructionem quàm ad aedificationem. But I have staid too long upon these first Notes, I now proceed unto the rest. Fol. 54. This Parliament being very active in matters of Religion, the Convocation (younger Brother thereunto) was little employed and less regarded.] Our Author fol∣lows his design of putting matters of Religion into the power of Parliaments though he hath chosen a very ill Medium to conclude the point. This Parliament as active as he seems to make it, troubled it self so little with matters of Religion, that had it done less, it had done just nothing. All that it did, was the Repealing of
some Acts made in the time of Queen Mary, and setling matters in the same State in which she found them at her first coming to the Crown. The Common Prayer Book being reviewed and fitted to the use of the Church by some godly men, appointed by the Queen alone, receiv'd no other confirmation in this present Parliament then what it had before in the last years of King Ed∣ward. The Supremacy was again restor'd, as it had been formerly; the Title of Supreme head which seem'd of∣fensive unto many of both Religios, being changed in∣to that of Supreme Governor, nothing, in all this done de novo, which could entitle this Parliament to such acti∣vity in matters of Religion, but that our Author had a minde to undervalue the Convocation, as being little im∣ployed, and less regarded. I grant indeed, that the Con∣vocation of that year did only meet for forms sake, with∣out acting any thing; and there was very good reason for it. The Bishops at that time were so enaciously ad∣dicted to the Church of Rome, that they chose all (ex∣cept Anthony Kitchin of Landaffe) rather to lose their Bishopricks then take the Oath of Supremacy. So that there was little or no hope of doing any thing in Con∣vocation to the Queens content in order to the Refor∣mation of Religion, which was then design'd, had they been suffered to debate, treat, and conclude of such parti∣culars as had relation thereunto. But we shall see when things are somewhat better setled, that the activity of the next Convocation will make amends for the silence and unsignificancy of this. In the mean time I would fain know our Authors Rea∣son, why speaking of the Convocation, and the Parlia∣liament in the notion of Twins, the Convocation must be made the younger Brother. Assuredly there had been Convocations in the Church of England some hundreds of years before the name of Parliament had been ever heard of; which he that lists to read the collection of Councils
published by that learned and industrious Gentleman Sir Henry Spelman, cannot but perceive. Fol. 71. This year the spire of Poles-steeple covered with lead strangely fell on fire.] More modestly in this then when he formerly ascribes the burning of some great Abbeys to Lightning from heaven. And so this steeple was both reported and believed to be fired also, it being an ordinary thing in our Common Al∣manacks till these latter times, to count the time (among the other Eoches of Computation) from the year that St. Paul-steeple was fired with Lightning. But afterwards it was acknowledg'd (as our Author truly notes) to be done by the negligence of a Plummer carelesly leaving his Coles therein; nce which acknow∣ledgement we finde no mention of this accident in our yearly Almanacks. But whereas our Author finds no other Benefactors for the repairing of this great Ruine but the Queens bounty, and the Clergie Bene∣volence, I must needs tell him that these were only accessories to the principall charge. The greatest part hereof, or to say better, the whole work was by the Queen imposed on the City of London, it being affir∣med by Iohn Stow, that after this mischance the Queens Majesty directed her Letters to Sow Suve the Maior, willing him to take order for the speedy repairing of the same.Sow Suve of Lond. p. 623. And in pur∣suance of that order (besides what issued from the pub∣lick stock in the Chamber of London) the Citizens gave first a great Benevolence, and after that three Fifteens to be speedily paid. What the Queen did in the way of furtherance, or the Clergy of the Province of Canterbu∣ry in the way of help, is to be lookt upon as their free voluntary Act, no otherwise obliged thereto, but as the publick Honour of the Church and State did invite them to it. The Maior and City were the parties upon whom the command was laid, as most concerned
in the Repair of their own Cathedal▪ Which I thought good to put our Author in minde o as a fault of omissi∣on only, leaving such use as may be made of the Obser∣vation to the  of others. Fol. 71. Here I would fain be informed by some lear∣ned men in the Law, what needed the restoring of those Children whose ather was condemned and died only for Heresie, which is conceived a personal crime, and not tainting the blnd. The Parliament this year had pas∣sed an Act for the Restitution in bloud of the children of Thomas Cranmer late Archbishop of Canterbury, for which our Author as it seems can see no reason, in regard he was condemned and died only for Heresie. For though (saith he) this Archbishop was first accused of High-Treason, yet it afterward was waved, and he tryed upon Heretical opinions But in this our Author is mistaken. For though Cranmer was condemned and died for He∣resie, yet he was not condemned for that only; nor was the accusation for Treason wav'd, as he saith it was, but the conviction of him as an Heretick superadded to it. Being accused of High-Treason for subscribing (though unwillingly) to the Proclamation of the Lady Iane, he was committed to the Tower on the 15. of September,Sow An. fol. 617. and on the 13. of No∣vember following arraigned at the Guildhall in London, and there convicted and condemned, together with the said Lady Iane, the Lord Guilford Dudley her Husband, and the Lord Ambrose Dudley her Husbands Brother. Of which four the Lady Iane and her Husband only suffered death on that condemnati∣on; the Lord Ambrose Dudley being reprieved for a better fortune, and the Archbishop reserved for a moe cruell death. For the Queen finding it more satisfacto∣ry to the Court of Rome to have him burnt for an He∣retick then hanged for a Traytor, and being impla∣cably bent against him for his activeness in the Divorce;
thought good to wave her first proceeding, and to have him put to death for Heresie. But the Attainder holding still good at the Common-Law, there was great rea∣son why his Children should desire a restitution in bloud, not otherwise to be obtained but by Act of Parliament. And so without troubling the learned in the Law for our information, I hope our Author will be sa∣tisfied, and save his Fee for other more necessary uses. Fol. 72. In the Convocation now sitting, the nine and thirty Articles were composed, agreeing for the main with those set forth in the Reign of King Edward the sixth, though in some particulars allowing more liberty to dissen∣ting judgements.] This is the active Convocation which before I spake of, not setling matters of Religion in the same estate in which they were left by King Ed∣ward; but altering some Articles, expunging others, addingsome de novo, and fitting the whole body of them unto edification; Not leaving any liberty to dissenting Iudgments, as our Author would have it, but binding men unto the literal and Grammatical sense. They had not othewise attained to the end they aimed at which was ad tollendam opinionum dissensionem, & consensum in vera Religione firmandum; that is to say, to take away diversity of Opinions, and to establish an agreement in the true Religion. Which end could never be ef∣fected, if men were left unto the liberty of dissenting, or might have leave to put their own sense upon the Articles. But whereas our Author instances in the Article of Christs descent into Hell, telling us that Christs preaching unto the Spirits there (on which the Article seemed to be grounded in King Edwards Book) was left out in this; and thereupon inferreth that men are left unto a latitude concerning the cause, time, manner of his descent; I must needs say, that he is very much mista∣ken. For first the Church of England hath alwayes con∣stantly
maintained a locall Descent, though many which would be thought her Children, the better to comply with Calvin and some other Divines of forain Nations, have deviated in this point from the sense of the Church. And secondly, the reason why this Convo∣cation left out that passage of Christ preaching to the Spirits in hell; was not that men might be left unto a latitude concerning the cause, time, and manner of his Descent, as our Author dreams; but because that passage of St. Peter being capable of some other interpretati∣ons, was not conceived to be a clear and sufficient evi∣dence to prove the Article. For which see Bishop Bil∣sons Survey, p. 388, 389. Fol. 74. In a word, concerning this clause whether the Bishops were faulty in their addition, or their opposites in their substraction, I leave to more cunning Arithmeticians to decide.] The Clause here spoken of by our Author is the first Sentence in the twentieth Article entituled De Ecclesiae Authoritate, where it is said that the Church hath power to decree Rites and Ceremonies, and Authority in Controversies of the Faith. Which being charged up∣on the Bishops as a late addition, the better to support their power and maintain their Tyranny; the late Archbishop of Canterbury in his Speech▪ in the Star-Chamber, Iune the 15▪ 1637. made it appear that the said Clause was in a Printed Book of Articles published in the year 1563. being but very few moneths after they had passed in the Convocation, which was on the 29. of Ianuary 1562. in the English account. And more then so, he shewed unto the Lords a Copy of the twentieth Article exemplified out of the Records, and attested by the hands of a publick Notary, in which that very Clause was found, which had been charged upon the Bishops for an innovation. And thus much I can say of mine own knowledge, that having occasion to cont the Records of Convocation, I found this
controverted Clause verbatim in these following words, Habet Ecclesia Ritus statuendo jus, & in fidei Controversis Authoritatem. Which makes me wonder at our Author, that having access to those Records, and making frequent use of them in this present History, he should declare himself unable to decide the doubt, whether the addi∣tion of this Clause was made by the Bishops, or the sub∣straction of it by the opposite party. But none so blinde as he that will not see, saies the good old proverb. But our Author will not so give over. He must first have a fling at the Archbishop of Canterbury upon this occasion. In the year 1571. (the Puritan Faction be∣ginning then to grow very strong) the Articles were again Printed both in Latin and English, and this Clause left out; publisht according to those copies in the Harmony of Confessions Printed at Geneva, Anno 1612. and publisht by the same at Oxford (though soon after rectified) Anno 1636. Now the Archbishop taking notice of the first alteration, Anno 1571. declares in his said Speech, that it was no hard mat∣ter for that opposite Faction to have the Articles Printed and this clause left out,Archbishops Speech, p. 71. considering who they were that then governed businesses and rid the Church almost at their pleasure. What says our Author to this? Marry, saith he, I am not so well skilled in Historical Horsemanship as to know whom his Grace de∣signed for the Rider of the Church at that time, fol. 74. Strange that a man who undertakes to write an History should professe himself ignorant of the names of those who governed the businesse of the times he writes of. But this is only an affected ignorance, profest of purpose to preserve the honour of some men whom he beholds as the chief Patrons of the Puritan Faction. For af∣twards (this turn being served) he can finde out who they were that then governed businesses, and rid the Church almost at their pleasure, telling us, fol. 138▪ that
the Earl of Leicester interpos'd himself Patron-general to the non-subscribers, and that he did it at the perswasion of Roger Lord North. Besides which two we finde Sir Francis Knollys to be one of those who gave countenance to the troubles at Frankfor▪ at such time as the Faction was there hottest against the Liturgy,Lib. 8 fol 35. and other Rites and eremonies of the Church of England. Who being a meer kinsman of the Queens and a Privy Counsellor, made use of all advantages to pursue that project, which being  on foot beyond sea, had been driven on here, and though Leicester was enough of himself to rid the Church at his pleasure, it being fitted with such helps, Sir Francis Walsingham and many more of that kind which the times then gave him, they drove on the faster, till he had almost plung'd all in remedilesse Ruine. But our Au∣thor hath not done with these Articles yet, for he tels us of this Clause, that it was Ibid. Omitted in the English and Latin Arti set forth 1571 when they were first ratified by Act▪ Our uthor doth so dream of the power of Parliaments in matters of Religion, that he will not suffer any, Canon or Act of Convocation to be in sorce or obligatiory to the subject, till confirmed by Parliament. But I would fain know of him where he finds any Act of Parliament (except it be in his own dreams) to confirm these Ar∣ticles; or that the Parliament of the 13 of the Queen (being that he speaks of) appointed any Committee for Religion to examine the Oxthodoxy of those Articles and make report unto the House. All that was done was this, and on this occasion. Some Ministers of the Church too stiffly wedded to their old Mumpsimus of the Masse, and some as furiously prosecuting their new Sumpsimus of Inconformity, it was thought fit, that between these contending parties, the Doctrine of the Church should be kept inviolate. And thereupon
it was Enacted, That every person under the degree of a Bishop, which did or should pretend to be a Priest or Minister of Gods holy word and Sacra∣ments in the Church of England,13 El. . 12. should before Christmas then next following, in the presence of his Diocesan Bishop testifie his assent, and subscribe to the said Articles of the year 1562. Secondly, that after such subscribing before the Bishop he should on some Sunday in the forenoon in the Church or Chappel where he served, in time of Divine Service read openly the said Articles on pain of being deprived of all his Ecclesiastical promotions, as if he were then naturally dead. Thirdly, that if any Eccle∣siastical person should maintain any Doctrine contrary to any of the said Articles, and being convented by his Bishop, &c. should persist therein, it should be just cause to deprive such person of his Ecclesiastical promotions. Fourthly, that all persons to be admitted to any Benefice with Cure, should likewise subscribe to the said Articles, and publickly read the same in the open Church within two moneths after their inducti∣on, with declaration of their unfaigned assent to the same, on the pain aforesaid, in all which there was nthing done to confirm these Articles, but only a pious care expressed for reformation of such disorders as were like to rise amongst the Ministers of the Church, by requiring their subscription and assent unto them under such temporal punishments, which at that time the Ca∣nons of the Church had not laid upon them. So that our Author very well might have spared this Flourish, that the Obligatoriness of these Articles as to temporal punishments beares not date nine years before, from their composition in Convocation, but henceforward from their confirmation in Parliament. And here I must crave leave to fetch in another passage relating to the Acts of this Convocation fol. 102. in which he telleth us that
till the year 1572. The Bishops had been more sparing in pssing, and others more daring in denying subscription, because the Canons made in the Convocation, Anno 1563. were not for nine years after confirmed by Act of Parlia∣ment &c. In which on Autho shews much zeal, and but little knoledge, thee being no Canons mad in the Convoation of 1562. (1563. in our Authors reckoning) no any thing at all done in it more then the setling of the Articles, and passing a bill for the granting of a Subsidie to the Queen, as by the Records thereof may be easily seen. But rather then the Parlia∣ment shall not have the power of confirming Canons, our Author will finde our some Canons for them to con∣firm which never had a being or existence but in his brains only. From the Articles our Author proceeds unto the Hoilies approved in those Articles, and of them he tels us, Fol. 75. That if they did little good, they did little harm.] With sco and insolence enough. Those Ho∣milies were so composed, as to instruct the people in all positive Doctrines necessary for Christian men to know, with reference both to Faith and Mannes; and being penned in a plain style, as our Author hath it, were tter for the edification of the common people then either the strong lines of some, or the flashes of  wi in others, in these latter times. And well it had been for the peace and happiness of this Church, if they had been more constantly read, and nor discredited by those men who studied to advance their own inventions, above those grave and solid pieces composed by the joynt counsels and co-operations of many godly lear∣ned and religious pesons. But it is well howsoever, that by reading these (so much viified) Homilies, the Ministe though they did little good, did but little harm; it being to be feared that the precommant humor of Sermonizing hath on the contrary done much
harm, and but little good. But our Author hath not yet done with this Convocation, for so it followeth: Fol. 76. The English Bishops conceiving themselves im∣powered by their Canons, began to shew their authority, in urging the Clergy of their Dies to subscribe to the Litur∣gie, Ceremonies and Discipline of the Church, and such as refused the same, were braaded with the odious name of Pu∣ritans.] Our Author having given the Parliament a power of confirming no Canons, as before was shewed, he brings the Bisops acting by as weak Authority in the years 1563. & 1564. thee being at that time no Canons for them to poceed upon for requiring thir Clergy to subscribe to the Liturgie, Ceremonies, and Di∣scipline of the Church. And therefore if they did any such thing, it was not a tey were impowered by their Canons, but as they were in bd by that Authoity whih was inherent naturally in their Epicopal Office. But where∣as he tells us in the following words, tht the name of Puritan in that notion began this year, viz. 154. I fear he hath anticipated the time a little, Genebrard a right good Chronologer placing it (ortos in Ang Puri∣tans) about two years after, Anno 1566. And so far I am of our Authors minde, that the grief had not been great if the name had ended that year, upon condition tht the occasion for which it was given them had then ended al∣so▪ But when he tells us that the name of Puritans was given to the opposers of the Hierary and Church-Service and signifeth a Non-conformist; as often as I meet such Opposers, and such Non-conomists in the coe of this Hiory, I have warrant good enough to call them by the name of Puritans. If any did abuse the nms as ∣leth us afterwards, (lib. x. fol. 100.) to asperse the most Or∣thodox in Doctrine, and religious in Conversation; they wee the moe to blame, let them answer for it: But if those Orthodox and religious persons were Orthodox only in his sense, and under the colour of Religion did secretly
with those who oppos'd the Hierarchy and the eblisht Orders of the Church; it might be a disgrace, but no wong unto them to be called Puritans. And if it  extended further to denote such men also, as mainned any of the private Opinions and Doctrines of  against the tendries of the Church; I see no reason why our Author should complain of it so much as he does in the place afoesaid. The practices of some men are many times Doctrines to others: and the Cal∣vinia. being built upon Calvins practices, and those btted and confirm'd by his following Doctrines: the name of Puritan, though first found out to denote such as followed Calvin, in dissenting from the Hierarhy in Disciplin and Church-government, might not unfitly be applyed to such as maintain'd his Doctrines also. But of this Argument enough, I shall adde only, and so proceed to other businesses, that Mr. Fox is broug in as re∣quired to subscribe to the Canons by Archbishop Parker; whereas there were at that time no Canons to subscribe unto, nor is it the custom of the Church to require sub∣scription unto Canons, but unto those only who consented to the making of them. Fol. 9. John Felton who fastned the Popes Bull to the Palace f London, being taken and refusing to fly, was hanged on a Gibbet before the Popes Palace.] The Bull here mention'd was that of Pope Pius the fifth, for excom∣municating Qeen Elizabeth, which this Iohn Felton (a Papist) had hang'd up at the Gates of the Bi∣shop of Londs House, that the Subjects might take no∣e of it; and for that fact was hang'd neer the same he had offended. But why our Author should call the Bishop of Londons House by the name of the Popes , I do very much wonder; unless it were to hold with the style of Martin Mar-Prelate, and the Faction. Amongst whom nothing was more common then to call all Bishops Petty-Popes▪ & more par∣ticularly
to call the Archbishop of Canterbury the Pope of Lambeth, and the Bishop of London, Pope of London. But I hope more charitably then so, being more willing to impure it to the fault of the Printers, then the pen of our Author. I only adde, that to make even with this Iohn Felton (a zealous Papist) another Iohn Felton of the next age, a zealous Puritan, committed that execrable murther on the Duke of Buckingham. Fol. 98. Against covetous Conformists it was provided, that no Spiritual Person, Colledge, or Hospital, shall let lease other then for twenty one years, or three lives, &c.] No mention in the Statute of Covernous Conormists, I am sure of that; and therefore no provision to be made against them, the Coverous Conformist is our Authors own. I finde indeed that long and unreasonable Leases had been by, Colledges, Deans, and Chapters, Parsons, Vicar, and other aving Spiritual promotions; which being found to  the causes of Dilapidations, and the decay of all Spiritual Livings and Hospitality,13. Eliz. c. 20. and the utter impoverishing of all Successors incumbents in the same, the Parliament thought it high time to provide against it. In all which Bedroll, it were strange if we should finde no Non-conformists, who had by this time got a great part of the Church Preferments, and were more likely to occasion those diapidations then the regular and conformable Clergy: these la looking▪ on the Church with an eye to succession, the former being intent only on the present profit: And if we mark it well, we shall finde that Coverousness and Non∣conformity are so married together, that it is not easie to divorce them: though here the crime of coverous∣ness be wrongfully charg'd on the Conformists, to make them the more odious in the eye of the vulgar Reader. High Royalists in one place, Covetous Conformists in another, are no good signs of true affections to Con∣formity, and much less to Royalty.
Fol. 121. These Prophesyings were founded on the Apo∣stles Precept; For ye may all Prophesie one by one, that all may learn and all be comforted; but so as to make it out, they were fain to make use of humane prudential Additions.] Not grounded, but pretended to be grounded on those words of St. Paul; the Prophesying there spoke of not being be drawn into example in the change of times, when of the Spirit were more restrain'd and li∣mited then they had been formerly. For were they gnded on that Text, it had been somewhat sawcily done, to adde their own prudential Additions to the di∣rection and dictamen of the holy Spirit. A course much favoured as it seems by Archbishop Grindal, whose Let∣ter to the Queen is recommended to the welcom of the pious Reader. fol. 122. But both the Queen and her wise Councel conceiv'd otherwise of it, looking upon these Prophesyings as likely to prove in fine the ane of the Common-wealth, as our Author hath it. No did King Iames conceive any better of them,Cofer p. 80. as appeareth by the conference at Hampton Court, in which it was mov'd by Dr. Reynolds, (chief of the Millenary party) That the Clergy might have meetings once every three weeks, and therein to have phesying, according as the Reverend Father Arch∣bishop Grindall, and other Bishops desired of her late Majesty. No, said the King, (looking upon this mo∣tion as a preamble to a Scottish Presbytery) then Iack, and Im, and Will, and Dick, shall at their pleasures, cere me and my Councel, and all our proceedings: then Will shall stand up and say, It must be thus; then Dick shall reply and say, Nay, marry, but we will have it thus: And therefore stay I pray you for one 7 years before you demand that of me: and then if you finde me and fat and my windepipes stuffed, I will perhaps hearken to you: for if that government be once up, I am sure I shall be kept in breath, then shall we all of
us have work enough, both our hands full. But let King Iames and Queen Elizabeth conceive what they will, our Author hath declared it to be Gods and the Churches cause, fol. 130. And being such, it is enough to make any man consident in pleading for it, or appear∣ing in it. Fol. 135. A loud Parliament is always attended with a silent Convocation, as here it came to pass. The Acti∣vity of the former in Church matters left the latter nothing to do.] A man would think by this, that the Parliament of this year, being the 23. of the Queen, had done great feats in matters of Religion, as making new Aticles of Faith, or confirming Canons, or something else of like importance. But for all this great cry we have little wool; our Author taking notice of nothing else which was done this Parliament, but that it was made eason for the Priests or Jesuites to seduce any of the Queens Subjects to the Romish Religion, and for the Subects to be reconciled to the Church of Rome, with other matters nor within the power and cognizance of the Convoca∣tion. But he conceals another Statute as necessary to the peace and safety of the Church and State as the other was.29 Eliz. c. 2. By which it was En∣acted, that if any person or persons should advisedly devise, or write, print, or set orth any man∣ner of Book, Rime, Ballade, Letter, or Writing, con∣taining any false, seditious and sanderous matter, to the defamation of the Queens Majesty, or to the in∣couraging, stirring, or moving of any Inrection or Rebellion within this Realm, &c. or that shall pro∣cure, or cause such Book, Rime, Ballade, &c. to be written, printed, published, or set forth, &c. The of∣fenders to suffer such pain of death, and forfeiture as in case of Felony. A Statute made of purpose to re∣strain the insolencies of the Purin Faction, and by which many of them were adjudged to death in the times
ensuing: some as the Authors, and others as the pub∣lishers of seditious Pamphlers. But being made with limitation to the life of the Queen, it expired with her; And had it been reviv'd (as it never was) by either of the two last Kings, might possibly have prevented those dreadful mischiefs, which their posterity is involved in. Fol. 157. Sure I am, it is most usual in the Court of Marches (Arches rather) whereof I have the best experience.] This is according to the old saying, to correct Magni∣ficat. Assuredly Archbishop Whitgift knew better whan he was to write, then to need any such critical emenda∣tions. And therefore our Author might have kept his Arches for some publick Triumph after his conquest of the Covetous Conformists and High Royalists which be∣fore we had. It was the Court of the Marches which the Bishop speaks of, and of which he had so good ex∣perience; he being made Vice-Precedent of the Court of the Marches by Sir Henry Sidney, immediately on his first coming to the See of Worcester, as Sir George Paul tel∣leth us in his life. Fol. 163. By the changing of Edmond into John Cont∣nar, it plainly appears, that as all these letters were written this year, so they were indited after the sixth of July (and probably about December) when Bishop Grindal deceased. I grant it for a truth, that Grindal died on the sixth of Iuly, and I know it also for a truth, that Whitgift was translated to the See of Canterbury on the 23. of Septem∣ber then next following. But yet it follows not there∣upon, that all the Letters here spoken of (being 12 in number) which are here exemplified, were writ in the compass of one year, and much less in so narrow a time as about December. Nay the contrary hereunto appears by the Letts themselves. For in one of them written to the Lord Treasurer, fol. 160. I finde this passage viz. Your Lordship objecteth, tha it is said I took this curse for
the better maintenance of my Book. My Enemies say so in∣deed, but I trust my friends have a better opinion of me: what should I look after any Confirmation of my Book after twelve years, or what should I get thereby more then already? Now the Book mentioned by the Bishop, was that entituled, The Defence of the Answer to the Admoni∣tion against the Reply of T. C. printed at London, An. 1574. To which the 12 years being added, which we finde men∣tioned in this Letter, it must needs be, that this Letter to the Lord Treasurer was written in the year 1586. and consequently not all written in the year 1583. as our Author makes them. The like might be collected also from some circumstances in the other Letters, but that I have more necessary business to imploy my time on. Fol. 171. The severe inforcing of Subscription here∣unto, what great disturbance it occasioned in the Church, shall hereafter by Gods assistance be made to appear, leaving others to judge, whether the offence was given or taken thereby.] Our Author tells us fol. 143. that in the business of Church government he would lie at a close guard, and offer as little play as might be, on either side. But for all that he cannot but declare himself for the stronger party. He had not else left it as a matter doubtful, whether the disturbances which insued on the Archbishops inforcing of Subscription, and the scandal which did thence arise, were to be imputed to the Imposer who had Authority on his side (as himself confesseth) or the refusers, carried on by self ends and untractable obstinacy. As for the Articles to which subscriptions were required, they were these that follow, viz. 1. That the Queen only had Supreme Authority over all persons bon within her Dominion. 2. That the Book of Common-Prayer and Ordination of Bishops, Priests, and Deacons, containeth nothing contrary to the Word of God.
3. That the Articles of Religion agreed on in the year 1562. and publisht by the Queens Authority, were consonant to the word of God. All which being so expresly built on the Lawes of the Realm, must needs lay the scandal at their doores who refused subscription, and not at his who did require it. But love will creep (they say) where it cannot go. And do our Author what he can, he must discover his affecti∣on to the Holy cause pon all occasions. No where more mnifestly then where he telleth us, Fol. 187. That since the High-Commission and this Oath (it is that ex Officio which he meaneth) were taken away by the ct of Parliament, it is to be hoped, that (if such swearing were s great a grievance) nihil analogum, nothing like unto it (which may amount to as much) shall hereafter be substituted in the room thereof.] What could be said more plain to testiie his disaffections one way, and his zel another? The High-Commission and the Oath repoched as Grievances, because the greatest curbs of the Puritan party, and the strongest Bulwarks of the Church, a congratulation o the times for abolishing both, though as yet I nde no Act of Parliament a∣gainst the Oath except it be by consequence and illa∣tion only; and finally a hope exprest that the Church never shall revert to her fomer power, in substituting any like thing in the place thereof by which the good people of the Land may be stopt in their way to the fifth Monarchy so much fought after. And yet this does not speak so plain as the following passage, viz. Fol. 193. Wits will be working, and such as have a Satyrical vein, cannot better vent it then in lashing of sin.] This spoken in defence of those scurrilous Libels which Iob Throgmorton, Penry, Fenner, and the rest of the Puritan Rabble published in Print against the Bishops, Anno 1588. thereby to render them ridiculous both
abroad and at home. The Qeen being  exclaimed against, and her Honorable Councell scandalously cen∣sured for opposing the Gospel, they fall more foully on the Bishops, crying them down as Antichristian, Petty∣popes, Bishops of the Devil, cogging and cozening knaves, dumb dogs enemies of God, &c. For which cause much applauded by the Papists beyond Sea (to whom nothing was more acceptable then to see the English Hierarchy reproach and vilified) and frequently red by them as unquestioned evidences. For if our Authors rule be good, fol. 193. That the fault is not in the writer, if he truly cite what is false on the credit of another, they had no reason to examine punctually the truth of that which tended so apparently to the great advantage of their cause and party. But this Rule whether true or false cannot be used to justifie our Author in many passages though, truly cited, considering that he can∣not chuse but know them to be false in themselves. And he that knowing a thing to be false, sets it down for true, not only gives the lie to his own consci∣ence, but occasions others also to believe a falshood. And from this charge I cannot see how he can be acquitted in making the Bishops to be guilty of those filthy sins, for which they were to be so lashed by Saty∣rical wits, or imputing those base Libels unto wanton wits, which could proceed from no other fountain then malicious wickedness. But I m wery and ashamed of taking in so impure a kennel, and for that cause also shall willingly passe over his apology for Hacket that blasphemous wretch, and most execrable miscreant, justly condemned and executed for a double Treason, against the King of Kings in Heaven, and the Queen on earth. Of whom he would not have us think, fol. 204. that he and his two Companions (his two Prophets, for so they called them∣selves) were worse by nature then all others of the English
Nation, the natural corruption in the hearts of others being not lesse headstrong, but more bridled: And finally, that if Gods restraining grace be taken from us, we shall all run unto the same excesse of Riot. Which Plea if it be good for Hacket, will hold good for Iudas; and pity it is, that some of our fine wits did never study an apo∣logy for him. From Hack he goes on to Travers, a man of an unquiet spirit, but not half so mischievous, of whom he saith, Fol. 214. At Antwerp he was ordained Minister by the Presbytry there, and not long after that, he was put in Orders by the Presbytery of a forain Nation.] Here have we Ordination and putting into Orders ascribed to the Prebytery of Aterp; a Mongrel company consisting of two blew Aprous to each Cruel night-cap: and that too in such positive terms, and without any the least qualification, that no Presbyterian in the pack could have spoke more plainly. The man hath hitherto stood distracted betwixt shame and love; love to the cause, and shame to be discovered for a party in it, drawing several wayes. Pudor est qui suade illinc, Hinc dissuadet Amor, in the Poets language. And in this fit he thought it good to withdraw himself or stand by a a silent Spectator, that his betters might have room to come forth and speak in the present controversie of Church Govern∣ment, fol. 143. But here love carries it away, and he de∣clares himself roundly for the Presbyterians, by giving them the power of Ordination, and consequently of Ecclesiastical censure in their several Consistories. Had he used the words of the Certificate, which he grounds upon, and told us that Travers was admitted by that Presbytery to the Ministery of the holy word (in sacr verbi Dei Ministerio institutus, a their words there are) he had done the part of an Historian. They may make Ministers how and of whom they list, and put
that Heavenly treasure into what vessels they please. Scripturarum ars est quam omnes passim sibi vindicant, as St. Ierom complained in his time. Let every Trades∣man be a Preacher, and step from the shop-board to the Pulpit, if they think well of it. This may be cal∣led a making of Ministers in such a sense as Phoebe is said to be a Minister of the Church of Cenchrea, to mi∣nister to the necessities of their Congregations. But to ascribe unto them a power of Ordination or of giving Orders which they assume not to them∣selves, savours too strong of the party, and contradicts the general Rules of the ancient Fathers. At this time I content my self with that saying of Ierom, because esteemed no friend to Bishops, viz. Quid facit Episcopus, excepta Ordinatione, quod Presbyter non fa∣ciat? and for the rest refer the Reader to the learned Treatise of Dr. Hammond, Entituled, Observations upon the Ordinance of the Lords and Commons at Westminster for the Ordination of Ministers pro tempore, Printed at Oxford 1644. Only I shall make bold to quit my Au∣thor with a merry tale (though but one for an hundred) and tis a tale of an old jolly popish Priest, who having no entertainment for a friend who came to him on a Fasting day, but a piece of Pork, and making consci∣ence of observing the appointed Fast, dipt it into a tub of water, saying down Porke up Pike. Satisfied with which device (as being accustomed to transubstantiate, he well might be) he caused it to be put into the pt and made ready for dinner. But as the Pork for all this suddain piece of wit, was no other then Pork; so these good fellowes of the Presbytery by laying hands upon one another, act as little as he: the parties so impos'd upon (impos'd upon indeed in the proper no∣tion) are but as they were, Lay-brethren of the bet∣ter stamp, Ministers if you will, but not Priests nor Deacons, nor any wayes Canonically enabled for
divine performances. But fearing to be chidden for his levity, I knock off again, following my Author as he leads me; who being over shooes, will be over boots also. He is so lost to the High Royalist and covetous Con∣formist, that he cannot be in a worse case (with them) then he is already. And therefore having declared himself for a Presbyterian in point of Government, he will go thorough with his work, shewing himself a profest Calvinist in point of Doctrine, and a strict Sab∣baarian too in that single point, though therein diffe∣ring (as the rest of that party do) from their Master Calvin. First for the Sabbath (for the better day the better deed) having repeared the chief heads of Dr. Bounds book published Anno 1595. in which the Sabbatarian Doctrines were first set on soot, he addes, that learned men were much divided in their judgements about the same. Fol. 228. Some (saith he) embraced them as ancient truths consonant to Scripture, long disused and neglected, now seasonably revived for the encrease of piety.] Amongst which some, he that shall take our Author for one, will not be mch mistaken either in the man, or in the mat∣ter. For that he doth approve Bounds Doctrines in this particular, appears; First, By a passage, fol. 165. where he connts with him in reckoning the casual falling of the Scaffolds at Paris-Garden on the Lords-day, Anno 1583. for a di∣vine judgement upon those who perished by it, as they were beholding that rude pastime. Secondly, By his censure of the proceedings of Arch∣bishop Whitgift against these Doctrines, of whom he tel∣leth us, fol 229. That his known opposition to the pceed∣ings of the Brethren, rendred his actions more odious, as if out of envy he had caused such a pearl to be con∣cealed.
Thirdly, by making these Sabbath Doctrines to be the Diamond in the Ring, of those Catechisms and Con∣troversies which afterwards were set out by the stricter Divines. And Fourthly, by the sadnesse which he findes in re∣counting the grief and distraction occasioned in many honest mens hearts by the several publishings of the Declaration about lawful sports, lib. o. fol. 74. But leaving him to stand or fall to his own Master, I would fain know what text of Scripture, ancient Writer, or approved Councel can be brought to justifie Bounds Doctrines which he affirms for ancient truths and consonant to holy Scripture. But more particularly where he can shew me any ground for the third Positi∣on, viz. That there is as great reason why we Christians should take our selves as straightly bound to rest upon the Lords day as the Jewes were upon their Sabbath; it being one of the moral Commandements, whereof all are of equall authority. This if it be a truth is no ancient truth; and whensoever it be received and allowed for truth, will in conclusion lay as heavy and insupportable Burthens upon the consciences of Gods people as ever were im∣posed upon the Jewes by the Scribes and Pharisees. And secondly, I would fain know the meaning of the fol∣lowing words, in which it is said, that others conceived them grounded on a wrong bottom, but because they tended to the manifest advance of Religion, it was pity to oppose them. I would fain know I say, considering that the foundation of the Christian faith is laid on the Doctrine of the Prophets and Apostles, Christ himself being the chief cor∣ner stone; how any thing which is not built upon this foundation, but grounded on a wrong bottom (as this see∣med to be) could tend to the manifest advance of the true Religion. That it tended to the manifest advance of some Religion I shall easily grant; and if our Author mean no otherwise, we shall soon agree. But sure I
am, no part of the true Religion was ever grounded upon alshood, and therefore is  Doctrine were grounded on so ill  bottom a they say it was, it might on∣ to the advancement of a Faction and mens private , but to the true Religion it was likely to contribute nothing but disgrace and scandal. Lstly, I am to minde our Author, that he makes Mr. Greenhams Treatise of the Sabbath to be published in pursuance of Bounds opinions, which could not be till in or after the year 1595. Whereas he had laid him in his grave above two years before, telling us that he died of the Plugue in London, Anno 1592. fol. 219. By which it seems that Greenham either writ this Treatise after his decease; o else our Author hath done ill in giving the fst ho∣nour of these new Doctrins unto Dr. Bound. In the next place we shall see our Author engage himself in defence of the Calvian Doctrins about Predestation, Grace, &c. of which he telleth us, that Fol. 229. Having much troubled both the Schools and Pupit, Archbishop Whitgift, out of his Christian care to propogate the truth, and suppress the opposite errors,  used a solemn meeting of many grave and learned  at Lanibth.] The occasion this. The controvers a∣bout Predestination, Grace, &c. had been long in the Schools between the Dominicant on the one side and the Francisans on the other  the Dominicans groun∣ding their opinion on the Authority of St. Augustin, Prosper, and some others of the following  the Franciscans, on the general current of the  Fa∣thers, who lived ante mot certamina Pelagiana▪ before the rising of the Pelagian Hereies.  disputes be∣ing after taken up in the  Churches,  mo∣derate Lutherans (as they  them) followed the Do∣ctrine of Melanchhon, conformable to the those particulars: The others whom they or rigid Lutherans, of whom  Illyricus was the
chief, go in the same way with the Dominicans. The au∣thority of which last opinion, after it had been entertai∣ned and publishe in the works of Calvin, for his sake found admiance in the Schools and Pulpits of most of the Reformed Churches. And having got footing here in England by the preaching of such Divines as had fled to Geneva in Queen Maries time, it was defended in the Schools of Cambridge without opposition, till Peter Bar a French man came and setled there. Who being the Lady Margarets Pofessor in that University, and liking better of the Melanchthonian way, then that of Calvin, defended it openly in the Schools; many of parts and qality being gained unto his opinion. Which gave so much displeasure to Dr. Whitaker, Dr. Tyndall, Mr. Per∣kins, and some other leading men of the contrary judge∣ment, that they thought best to use the Argument ab Authoritat to convince their Adversaries; and com∣plained thereof to the Archbishop, and in the end pre∣vailed with him to call that meeting at Lambeth which our Author speaks of: in which some Articles (com∣monly called the Nine Articles of Lambeth) were a∣greed upon, and sent down to Cambridge in favour of Dr. Whitaker and his Associates. But our Author not content to relate the story of the Quarrel, must take upon him also to be a judge in the Controversie. He had before commended the Dominicans for their Or∣thodoxie in these points of Doctrine as they were then in agitation betwixt them and the Iesuits. He now pro∣ceeds to do the like between the two parties (men of great piety and learning appearing in it on both sides) disputing the same points in the Church of England: honouring the opinion of Dr. Whitaker and his Associates with the name of the truth; and branding the other with the Title of the opposite error. And yet not thinking that he had declared himself sufficiently in the favour of the Calvinian party, he telleth us not long after of these
Lambeth Articles, fol. 232. that though they wanted the Authority of Provincial Acts, yet will they readily be re∣ceived of all Orthodox Christians for as far as their own puri∣ty bears conformity to Gods word. Which last words (though somewhat perplextly laid down) must either in∣timate their conformity to the word of God, or else signi∣fie nothing. But whatsoever opinion our Author hath of these Nine Articles, certain it is that Queen Eliza∣beth was much displeased at the making of them, and commanded them to be supprest, which was done accor∣dingly; and with such diligence withall, that for long time a Copy of them was not to be met with in that Uni∣versity. Nor was King Iames better pleased with them then Queen Elizabeth was▪ Insomuch that when Dr. Renalds mov'd (in the Conference of Hampton-Court) that the Nine Articles of Lambeth might be superadded to the 39. Articles of the Church of England; King Iames upon an information of the true stae of the businesse, did absolutely refuse to give way to it. But of this more at large elsewhere. I only add a Memorandm of our Authors mistake in making Dr. Richard Bancroft Bishop of London, to be one of the Bishops which were present at the meeting at Lambeth, whereas indeed  was Richard Fletcher, Bishop elect of London, and by that name entituled in such Authors as relate this story; Dr. Bancroft not being made Bishop of London or of any place else till the year 1597. which was two years after this Assembly. Alike mistake relating to this business also, I finde in the History of Cambridge, about Dr. Baro of whom our Author tels us thus: Fol. 125. Hist. Cam. The end of Dr. Peter Baro (the Margaret Professor) his triennial Lectures began to draw neer, &C. And not long after, the Vniversity intended to cut him off at the just joint, when his three yars should be ex∣pired.] This shews our Author, though well travelled in other Countries, to be but peregrinus domi, a stranger in
his own University; in which the Margaret Professor is not chosen for three years, but for two years only. And this appears plainly by the Statutes of that Foundation, the precise words whereof are these, viz. Et volumus insuper quod de caetero quolibet biennio ultimo die cessationis cujustibet termini ante magnam vacationem Vniversitatis praedictae, una habilis, apta & idonea persona in lectorem le∣cturae praedictae pro uno biennio integro, viz. a festo Nativita∣tis B. Mariae virginis tunc proximè sequente duntaxat du∣rature, eligatur, fol. 105. in nigro cedice. For this I am beholding to the Author of the Pamphlet called the Ob∣servator observed, and thank him for it. Which said we shall close up this ninth Book with some considerations on these following words, which our Author very inge∣nuously hath laid before us, viz. Fol. 233. If we look on the Non-conformists, we shall finde all still and quiet, who began now to repose themselves in a sad silence, especially after the execution of Udal and Penry had so terrified them, that though they might have secret dsigns, we meet not their open and publick motions.] And to say truth, it was high time for them to change their course in which they had so often been foil'd and worsted. The learned works of Dr. Bilson, (after Bishop of Winchester) in defence of the Episcopal Government, of Dr. Cousins Dean of the Arches, in mintenance of the proceedings in ourts Ecclesiastical; with the two Books of Dr. Bancroft, the one discovering the absurdities of the Pretended holy Discipline, the other their practices & Positions to advance the same, gave the first check to their proceedings at the push of pen. All which being publisht, An. 1593. were se∣conded about two years after by the accurate & well stu∣died Works of Ric. Hooker, then Master of the Temple, and Prebend of Canterbury; in which he so asserted the whole body of the English Liturgy, & laid such grounds to found her politie upon, that he may justly be affirmed to have struck the last blow in this Quarrel. But it was not so
much the Arguments of these learned , as the sea∣sonable execution of some principal sticklers, which oc∣casioned the great calm both in Church and State, not only for the rest of the Queens time, but a long time after. For besides, that Cartright, and some other of the principal and most active Leaders, had been imprison'd and proceeded against in the Court of Starchamber; the edge of the Statute 23 Eliz. c. 2. which before we spake, of, had made such terrible work amongst them, that they durst no longer venture on their former courses. Copping and Thacker hang'd at St. Edmondsbury in Suffolk, Bar∣row and Greenwood executed at Tyburn, and Penry at St. Thomas of Waterings, Vdal, Billot Studley, and Bouler condemned to the same death, though at last reprieved, (not to say any thing of Hacke, with Coppinger, and Ar∣thington his two Prophes, as more mad then the rest) could not but teach them this sad lesson, that,  is no safe dallying with fire, nor jesting with edge tools. But there are more wayes to the Wood then one, and they had wit enough to cast about for some other way, snce the first had fail'd them, Hac non successit, aliâ tentandum est, , had been learn't in vain, if not reducible to practice. So that it is no marvel, if after this we finde them not in any publick and open motion; when wearied with their former blusterings, and terrified with the sad remembrnce of such executions, they betook themselves to secret and more dark designs. Occultior Pompeius Caesare, non mesior, as it is in Tacitus. Pompeys intentions were not less mis∣chievous to the Common-wealth then Caesars were, but more closely carried. And bcause closely carryed, the more likely to have took effect, had any but Caesar been the head of the opposite party. The Fort that had been found impregnable by open batteries, hath been took at last by undermining. Nor ever were the Houses of Parli∣ament more like to have been blown up with gunpowder, then when the Candle which was to give fire to it was
carried by  in a dark . Henceforward therefore we shall finde the Brethren  anoth ward, practising their party underhand, working their business into a State-faction, and never so dangerously carrying on the  as when least observed. Fill in the end when all preventions were let slip, and the danger grown be∣yond prevention, they brought their matters to that end which we shall finde too evidently in the end of this History. To which before we can proceed, we must look back upon a passage of another , which with∣out the coherencies of the former Observati∣ons could not be taken notice of and rectifed in its pro∣per place, and is this that followeth▪ Fol. 179. Queen Elizabeth coming to the Crown, sen for Abbot Fecknam to come to her, whom the Messenger found setting of Elms in the Orchard of Westminster Abbey: But he would not follow the messenger, till first he had finished his Plantation. The tale goes otherwise by Tradition then is here delivered; and well it may. For who did ever hear of my Elms in Westminster Orchard, or to say truth, of any Elms in any Orchard whatsoever of a late Plantation? Elms are for Groves, and Fields, and Forests, too cumber∣som and over-spreading to be set in Orchards. But the tale goes that Abbot Feckan being busied in planting Elms near his Garden wall in the place now  the Deas-yard was encountred with one of his acquaintance, saying, My Lord you may very well save your labour the Bill for dissolving of your Monastery being just now passed. To which the good old man, unmoved, returned this answer, that he would go forwards howsoever in his plantation; not doubting, though it pleased not God to continue it in the state it was, but that it would be kept and used as a  of Lear∣ning for all times ensuing. Which said, our  need not trouble himself with thinking how his this day, as he seems to do; he knows where to finde them.
ANIMADVERSIONS ON The Tenth Book OF The Church History OF BRITAIN. Containing the Reign of King James. THE Puritan clamors being hush'd, and the Papists giving themselves some hopes of better dayes, afforded King Iames a quiet entrance to the Crown. But scarce was he warm upon the Throne, but the Puritans assaulted him with their Petitions, and some of the Papists finding their hopes began to fail them, turned their private discontents into open practices, en∣deavouring to settle their Religion by the destruction of the King, and the change of Government. And first be∣ginning with the Papists, because first in time. Fol. 5. Watson with William Clark (another of his own profession) having fancied a Notional Treason, imparted it to George Brooks.] To these he after adds the
Lord Cobham a Protestant, the Lord Gray of Whaddon a Puritan, and Sir Walter Rawleigh an able Statesman, and some other Knights. In the recital of which names our Author hath committed a double fault, the one of omis∣sion, and the other of commission. A fault of omission in leaving out Sir Griffith Markham, as much concerned as any of the principal actors, design'd to have been Secre∣tary of Estate, had the Plot succeeded, and finally arraign'd and condemn'd at Winchester, as the others were. His fault of commission is, his calling the Lord Gray by the name of the Lord Gray of Whaddon (a fault not easily to be pardon'd in so great an Herald) whereas indeed though Whaddon in Buckinghamshire was part of his Estate, yet Wilton in Herefordshire was his Barony and antent Seat; his Ancestors being call'd LL. Gray of Wilton, to diffe∣rence them from the Lord Gray of Reuthen, the Lord Gray of Codnor, &c. Having thus satisfied our Author in this particular, I would gladly satisfie my self in some others concern∣ing this Treason▪ in which I finde so many persons of such different humors, and Religions, that it is very hard to think how they could either mingle their interefles, or unite their counsels. But discontentments make men fuel fit for any fire, and discontents had been on purpose put upon some of them, the more to estrange them from the King, and the King from them. And though I am not Oedipus enough for so dark a Sphinx, yet others who have had more light into the businesses of that time, have made their discontents to grow upon this occasion; Sir Robert Cecil then principal Secretary to the Estate, fearing the great abilities of Rawleigh, and being wearied with the troublesome impertinencies of Gray and Cob∣ham, all which had joyned with him in design against the Earl of Essex their common Enemy; had done their errand to Kings Iames (whose counsels he desired to in∣gross to himself alone) before his coming into England.
And the Plot took so good effect, that when the Lord Cobham went to meet the King as he came towards Lon∣don, the King checked him (being then Warden of the Cinqne Ports) for his absence from his charge in that dangerous time. The Lord Gray, was not look'd upon in the Court, as he had been formerly, there being no longer use of his rashness and praecipitations. And the better to discountenance Rawleigh, who had been Captain of the Guard to Queen Elizabeth, the King be∣stowed that Office on Sir Thomas Erskin, then Vicount Fenton, and Captain of his Guard in Scotland. All which being publickly observ'd, it was no had matter for George Brook, to work upon the weak spiits of Gray and Cob∣am, of which the last was his brother, and the first his brothers special friend: and by such Artifices as he us'd in laying before them their disgraces, and shewing them a way to right themselves, to draw them into the confe∣deracy with Clark and Watson. And it is possible, that they not being substantive enough to stand alone, might acquaint Rawleigh with the Plot, whose head was able to do more then all their hands. But of his actings in it, or consenting to it, when the paties were brought unto their Tryal, there appear'd no proof, but that Cobham in his confession taken before the Lords had accus'd him of it; and that not only as an accessary, but a principal actor. But Cobham not being brought into the open Court to justifie his accusation face to face, as the custom as, it was thought a good argument by many, that Raw∣leigh was not so criminal in this matter as his Enemies made him. And though found guilty by the Jury on no other evidence, then a branch of Cobhams, confession, not so much as subscribed by his hand, yet all men were not satisfied in the manner of this proceeding: it being then commonly affirm'd that Cobham had retracted his accusation, as since it hath been said and printed, that in a letter written the night before his Tryal, and then sent
to the Lord he cleared Rawligh from all manner of Trea∣sons against the King or State, for which consult the Ob∣servations upon some particular Persons and passages, &c. printed Anno 1656. But from the practices of the Papists, which have led me thus far out of my way, it is now time that I proceed to the Petition of the Puritans, presented to the King much about that time. Fol. 7. This called the Millenary Petition.] And it was called so, because given out to be subscribed by thousand hands, though it wanted a fourth part of thi number. More modest now then they had been in P∣ries time, when in stead of one thousand, they threatn to bring a Petition which should be presented by the hands of a hundred thousand. More modest also in the style and phrase of their Petition, and in the subject M∣ter of it, then they had been when Martin Mar, Pr∣rul'd the Rost, and would be satisfied with nothing the ruine of the English Hierarchy. Which notwith∣standing the King thought fit to demur upon it, and commended the answering of their Petition to the U∣versity of Oxford, and was done accordingly. The An and Petition printed not long after, gave the first stop this importunity; represt more fully by the Confer at Hampton-Court, of which it is told us by our Auth how some of the Millenary party complained that Fol. 21. This Conference was partially set forth only Dr. Barlow Dean of Chester, their professed Adversa to the great disadvantage of their Divines.] If so, did it come to pass, that none of their Divines th present, no any other in their behalf did ever manife the world the partialities, and falsehoods of it? The was printed not long after the end of the Conference publickly passing from one hand to another, and ne convicted of any such crime as it stands charged with, any one particular page to this very day. Only
pleas'd some of the Zealos to scatter abroad some tri∣ing Papers, not amounting to half a sheet amongst them, which tended to the holding up of their sinking Party; and being brought by Dr. Barlow, were by him put in Print, and publisht at the end of his Book, Vt deterrim & comparatione gloriam sibi compararet, in the words of Tacitus. He could not better manifest his own abili∣ties, then by having those weak and imperfect Scribbles for a foil unto them. And here before I leave this con∣ference, I must make a start to fol. 91. for rectifying a mistake of our Authors, which relates unto it. Where speaking of Dr. King, then Bishop of London, and reci∣ting the course both of his preferments and imploy∣ments, he telleth us, that soon after the Kings coming to the Crown he was made Dean of Christ-Church in Oxon, and chosen one of the four Preachers in the Confe∣rence at Hampton-Court. But first Dr. King was not Dean of Christ-Church at the time of the Conference at Hampton-Court; that Conference being held in Ianuary, An. 1603. and Dr. King not coming to the Deanry of Christ-Church till the year 1605. Secondly, he was none o the fou Preachers in the Conference at Hampton-Court, there being no such Preachers chosen for the ime of that Conference. But as it is a true and old say∣g, that Omnis fabula fundatur in Historia; so I may y, that there was something true and real, which might arry him inadvertently upon this Error. For in Sep∣mber, Anno 1606. it pleased King Iames to call before im at Hampton-Court the Melvins, and some other of he principal sticklers for Presbytery of the Scottish Na∣ion. For information of whose judgement, and re∣ucing them, if possible, to some conformity, he caused four Sermons to be there preached in their heaing, by our of his most able Divines, that is to say, Dr. An∣drews then Bishop of Chichester, Dr. Barlow (before mentioned) then Bishop of Rochester, Dr. King, then
Dean of Christ-Church, after Bishop of London, and Dr. Buckeridge, who after succeeded in the See of Rochester and dyed Bishop of Ely. Which four Sermons being afterwards printed, and bound together, though they gave very good satisfaction to most persons else, could get no ground upon those refractary Scots, who were resolved aforehand, not to hear the voice of those Charmers, charmed they never so sweetly. Fol. 27. Indeed a Statute had formerly been made th 13. of Queen Elizabeth, which to prevent final of Church Land, did disable all Subjects from them: but in that Statute a liberty was left unto the Crown to receive the same.] Our Author speaks this on occasion of a Statute made in the first Parliament of King Iam by which the King and his Successors were made un∣capable of receiving any Grants or Leases of Lands, from any Archbishops, or Bishops, for longer then 21 years, or three lives. But he is much mistaken in the grounds of it. For first the Statute he relates unto, was not made in the thirteenth year of the Queen, that Statute extending only unto Deans and Chapters, Masters of Colledges and Hospitals, as also unto Parsons and Vi∣cars, who by long Leases had dilapidated the publick Patrimony of the Church, and their several Houses, Not a word in it, which concerns Archbishops and Bishops, or any Leases by them made. And secondly, that Sta∣ute, whatsoever it be, doth not disable all Subjects from accepting such Leases, Grants, and Alienations, but dis∣ableth the said Archbishops, and Bishops, from making such Grants unto the Subjects. But the truth is, that Statute which our Author means, is an unprinted Sta∣tute made in the first year of Queen Elizabeth. By which it was enacted, That it should be lawful for the said Queen, as often as any Archbishoprick or Bishoprick should be vacant, to take unto herself any of the Castles, Mannors, Lans, Tenements, and Here ditaments to the
same belonging, and to pay the said Archbishop, or Bi∣shop, in Impropriations, Tithes, and Portions of Tithes. And this is that Statute which our Author relates unto, lib. 9. fol. 70. where it is said, That a Bill passed for the assurance of certain Lands assumed by the Queen from some Bishoprick during their Vacation. And secondly, it was enacted in the said unprinted Statute, that it should not be lawful for any Archbishop, or Bishop, to grant any Lands, Leases, or Estates for more then 21 years, or three lives to any person whatsoever, except it were unto the Queen  Heirs and Successors; which last words opened such a gap to sacrilege and rapine, that what the Queen thought fit to leave unto the Church vacante sede, the Couiers would finde some way to divest it of by making use of this last clause, first in obtaining such a to be made to the Queen, and then from the Queen unto themselves: So that our Author might have sav'd his Advocating for this clause of that Act, considering that he saw the ill consequents and effects thereof. Fol. 54. Some of the greatest Prelates (how much Self is there  all men!) though seemingly forward, really re∣mi in the matter.] This spoken in relation to Chesey Colledge, the stop whereof must be imputed to some great Prelaes, fearing to grow less, both in esteem, power and jurisdiction, if that work went fowards. Contrary whereunto he elleth us of Archbishop Bancroft, fol 57. That he was very forward in founding Chelsey Coedge, which as a two edged Sword, was to cut on both sides, to sup∣press Papists and Sectaries. Upon which grounds there is no question to be made, but that the work was fur∣thered also by the rest of the Bishops, at the least not hindered. Our Author hath indeed afforded us this Mar∣ginal Note, viz. This obstruction signifies nothing of dis∣creet men, how ever it must pass for company sake. But it had argued more discretion in him (as I conceive) to have left this obstruction, as he calls it, out of his
Discourse, then first to break the Bishops heads and then give them this plaister. Howsoever he (viz. Mr. Nicholas uller) left behinde him the reputation of an honest man. No question of it. It is a thing so incident to the name, that whatsoever they do or say, they are honest still. Before we had the story of Thomas Fullr of Hammersmith condemn'd for felony, but still so honest, and to entirely beloved by King Harry the sixth, after his decease, that he appear'd to him on the top of the Gallows, incourag'd him, and so clam'd the Rope, that it did not strangle him, lib. 4. 154. Afterwards we meet with Iohn Fuller, Doctor of the Laws (a better then he) a Persecutor in Queen Maries dayes, but a pitiful man, as the Index telleth us. Here we have Nicholas Fuller a Counsellor, (the best of the three) de∣crying openly the Authority of the High Commission, and thereby giving a legal advantage to Archbishop Ban∣croft, by whom imprison'd, and there dying, but dying with the reputation of an honest man. And then another Thomas Fuller a Minister, (the best of all the company) and an honest man too, so well deserving of the Church, and all good Church-men (both alive and dead) by this notable History, as not to doubt of the like favour at their hands (should there be occasion) as Thomas of Ham∣mersmith receiv'd of King Harry the sixth. Fol. 57. I am credibly informed from a good hand, how in the days of King James, a Scotch-man, and a preva∣lent Courtier, had swallowed up the whole Bishoprick of Durhm, had not this Archbishop seasonably interposed his power with the King and dashed the design.] Credible though the information were, yet it was not true; there being no such prevalent Courtier, not no such Design. 'Tis , the stomack of the Scots were sharp set, still cry∣ing Give, give, but never satisfied; King Iames as boun∣ful and open handed towards them, as they could desire. But neithe were they to impudent as to crave, nor the King to impotent as to give a whole Bishopick  one,
especially so rich a Bishoprick as this of Durham. But the truth is, that George Hume, Earl of Dunbar, Lord Treasurer of Scotland, and highly favour'd by the King, having procur'd a grant of all the batable grounds, as they then called them, upon the Borders of both King∣doms, began to cast his eye upon Norham-Castle and the Lands about it, belonging to the See of Durham, con∣ceiving it a fit place to command the rest. But being a well principled man, and a great Minister of that Kings, in restoring the Episcopal Government to the Church of Scotland, he acquainted Bishop Bancroft with his de∣sires; who knowing what great use might be made of him for the good of this Church, and being sure enough of the consent of Dr. Matthews, then Bishop of Durham, he thus ordered the business. Whereas the Revenue of Norham-Castle, and the lands adjoyning were valued at one hundred twenty pounds per annum in the Bishops Rental, it was agreed that the Earl should procure of the King an abatement of sixscore pounds yearly out of the annual pension of a thousand pound which had been said upon that Bishoprick by Queen Elizabeth, as before is said. Secondly, that he should obtain from the King for the said Dr. Matthews, and his Successors a restitution of his House in the Strand called Durham-House, with the Gardens, Stables, and Tenements thereto appertaining, which had been alienated from that Bishoprick ever since the dissolving of it by King Edward the sixth. Thirdly, that in consideration hereof Bishop Matthews should make a grant of Norham-Castle, and the Countrey adjoyning in Feefarm to the King, by him immediately to be convey'd to the Earl of Dunbar. And fourthly, that his own being thus serv'd, the said Earl should joyn with Bishop Bancroft, and his friends, for obtaining from the King an Act of Parliament, whereby both he and his suc∣cessors should be made uncapable of any the like Grants and Alienations for the time to come; which as it was
the  Marke that ever Toby Matthews was at, so was it the best bargain which was ever driven for the Church of England; so ar from swallowing up that Bishoprick, that it was the only means to save that, and preserve the rest. And yet perhaps the credible information which our Author speaks of, might not relate unto the Bisop∣rick, but the Deary of Durham, bestowed by that King (being then not well studied in the Composition of the Church of England) on Sir Adam Newton, a Courtier pre∣valent enough, as having been Tutor to Prince Henry the Kings eldest Son. And possible it is, that the Scots might have kept it in their hands from one generation to another, if Dr. Hunt (not otherwise to be remembred) had not bought him out of it, and put himself into the place. Fol. 59. And as about this time some perchance overva∣lud the Geneva Notes, out of that especial love they bare to the Authors, and place whence it proceeded, so on the other side, some without cause did slight, or rather without charity did slander the same. I trow, our Author will not take upon him to condemn all those who approve not of the Genevian Notes upon the Bible, or to appear an Advocate for them, though he tells us not many lines before, that they were printed thirty times over with the general liking of the people. I hope he will not do the first for King Iames his sake, who in the Conference at Hampton-Court, did first declare, that of all the Translations of the Bible into the English Tongue, that of Geneva was the worst; and se∣condly, that the Notes upon it were partial, untrue, sedi∣tious, and savouring too much of dangerous and traiterous conceits. For poof whereof his Majesty instanced in two places, the one on Exod. 1. vers. 19. where disobedience to Kings is allowed of; the other in  Chron. 8. 15▪ 16. where Asa is taxed for deposing his Mothr only, and not killing her. A Note, wheeof the Scottish Presbyterians made special use, not only deposing Mary their lawful
Queen from the Regal Thone, but prosecuting er openly and under hand, till they had took away her life. These instances, our Author in his Summary of that Conference, hath passed over in silence; as loath to have such blemishes appear in the Genevians, or their Anno∣tations. And I hope also that he will not advocate for the rest. For let him tell me what he thinks of that on the second of St. Matthews Gospel, v. 12. viz▪ Promise ought not to be kept, where Gods honour and preaching of his truth is hindered, or else it ought not to be broken. What a wide gap, think we, doth this open to the breach of all Pro∣mises, Oaths, Covenants, Contracts, and Agreements, not only betwixt man and man, but between Kings and their Subjects? Wht Rebel ever took up Arms with∣out some pretences of that nature▪ What Tumults and Rebellions have been rais'd in all parts of Christendom, in England, Scotland, Ireland, France, the Netherlands, Germany, and indeed where not? under colour that Gods honour, and the preaching of the truth is hindered? If this once pass for good sound Doctrine, neither the King, nor any of his good Subjects in what Realm oever, can live in safety. Gods Honour, and the preaching  his Truth, are two such pretences, as will make void all Laws, elude all Oathes, and thrust our all Covenants and Agreements, be they what they will. Ne I would have our Author tell me, what he thinks of this Note on the ninth of the Revelation, ver. 3. where the which came out of the smoak, are said to be  teach∣ers, Hereticks, and worldly subtil relates, with Fiers, Cardinals, Patriarchs, Archbishops, Bishops, , Batchelors, and Masters. Does not this note fasten the name of Locusts on all the Cley of Realm, that is to say, Archbishops, Bishops, and all as are graduated in the University, by the name of Do∣ctors, Batchelors, and Masters? And doth it not as plainly yoak them with Fiers, Monk, and Cardinals▪
pincipal instruments in all times to advance the Pope∣com? I know the words which follow after are alleadged by some, to take off the envy of this Note, viz. who for∣sake Christ to maintain false doctrines. But the enume∣ration of so many particulars makes not the Note the lets invidious, the said explication notwithstanding; be∣cause the Note had been as perfect and significant, had it gone thus in generals only, that is to say, by Locusts here are meant false Teachers, Hereticks, and other worldly subtil men, that seduced the people, perswading them to fosake Christ, to maintain false Doctrine. But the Genevians, who account Archbishops, and Bishops, to be limbs of the Pope, resolved to joyn them with the rest of his members, Fryers, Monks, and Cardinals; and our Author, being a great favourer of the Presbyterians, must not take notice of this scandal: especially considering that Papacy and Praelacy are joyn'd together, in the lan∣guage of the present times, and therefore fit to go toge∣ther in this Annotation. Fol. 68. In this Parliament Dr. Harsnet Bishop of Chichester, gave offence in a Sermon preached at Court, pres∣sing the word, Reddite Caesari quae sunt Caesaris, as if all that was levied by Subsidies, or paid by Custom to the Crown, was but a redditum of what was the Kings before.] This Parament is plac by our Author in the year 1613. but Parliament, in the sitting whereof Bishop Haet the Sermon above mentioned, was held by Pro∣ogation in the year 1609. and afterwards dissolved by Proclmation in December of the year next following. Concerning which Sermon, King Iames gives this ac∣count to the Lords and Commons assembled before him at White-hall, March 23. (and therefore sith he) That Reverend Bshop here amongst you, though I hear by divers he was miaken, or not well understood, yet did he preach both learnedly and  ancient this point concerning the power o a King▪ for what he
spake of a Kings power in abstracto, is most true in Divinity; for to Emperors or Kings, that are Monarchs, their Subjects bodies and goods are due, for their de∣fence and maintenance. But if I had been in his place, I would only have added two words which would have cleared all: for after I had told as a Divine, what was due by the Subjects to their Kings in general, I would then have concluded as an English man, shewing this people, that as in general all subects were bound to relieve their King, so to exhort them, that as we lived in a setled state of a Kingdom that was governed by his own fundamental Laws and Or∣ders, that according thereunto they were now (be∣ing assembled for this purpose in Parliament) to con∣sider how to help such a King as now they had, and that according to the antient form and order, establish∣ed in this Kingdom, putting so a difference between the general power of a King in Divinity, and the setled and established state of this Crown and Kingdom: and I am sure that the Bishop meant to have have done the same, if he had not been strained by time, which in respect of the greatness of the present Preaching befoe us and such an Auditory he durst not presume upon. that the doctrine of the Bishop being thus justified and explained by King Iames, and the Parliament continuing undissolved till December following, we have no reason to believe that the Parliament was dissolved upon this occasion; and much less on the occasion of some words spoken in that Parliament by Bishop , of which thus our Author. Ibid. Likewise Dr. Neile Bishop of Rochester, ut∣tered words in the House of Lords, interpreted to the dispa∣ragement of some reputed zealous Patriot in the House of Commons. In this passage I have many things to excep against: As 1. That this Patriot is not nam'd, to whoe disparagement the words are pretended to be uttered.
And 2. that the words themselves are not here laid down, and yet are made to be so hainously taken, that to sve the Bishop from the storm, which was coming owards him, the King should principally be occasion'd to ssolve that Parliament. 3. That Dr. Neile is here call'd Bishop of Rochester, whom twice before, viz. sel. 64. & 67. he makes to be Bishop of Coventry and Leihfield. And 4. That the words here intimated, should be spoken in Parliament, Anno 1613. whereas by giving Dr. Neile the Title of Rochester, it should ra∣ther be referred to the Parliament holden by proroga∣tion till the last of December, Anno 1610. when it was dis∣solved, and then dissolved as appears by the Kings Procla∣mation, for not supplying his necessities, and other rea∣sons there expressed, whereof this was none. Fol. 70. Some conceive that in reveng Mr. John Selden soon after set forth his Book of Tithes, wherein he Histori∣cally proveth, that they were payable jure humano, and not therwise.] Whether the acting of the Comedy called Ignoramus, might move Mr. Selden at the first to take this revenge, I enquire not here, though it be probable it might; that Comedy being acted before King Iames, Anno 1614. and this Book coming out about two years after, Anno 1616. But here I shall observe in the first place our Authors partiality, in telling us that Mr. Selden in that book hath proved Historically that Tithes are paya∣ble humano, and not otherwise; whereas indeed he undertook to prove that point, but proved it not; as will ppear to any which have read the Answers set out against him. I observe secondly, our Authors ignorance in the Book it self, telling us within few lines after, that the first part of it is a meer Iew, of the practice of Tithing amongst the Hebrews, the second a Christian, and chiefly an English man; whereas indeed that part thereof which precedes the manner of Tithing amongst Christians, hath as much of the Gentil as of the Iew, as much time spent
upon examining of the Tithes paid by the Greeks and Romans, as was in that amongst the Hebrews. Thirdly, I must observe the prejudice which he hath put upon the Cause, by telling us in the next place, that though ma∣ny Divines undertook the Answer of that Book, yet sure it is, that never a fiercer storm fell on all Parsonage Barn; since the Reformation, then what this Treatise raised up. And so our Author leaves this matter without more ado, telling us of the Churches danger, but not acquainting us at all with her deliverance from the present storm; neither so violent, not so great, nor of such continuance, as to blow off any one Tile, or to blow aside so much as one Load of Corn from any Parso∣nage barn in England. For though this History gave some Countrey Gentlemen occasion and matter of discourse against paying Tithes, yet it gave none of them the audaciousness to deny the payment; So safe and speedy a course was took to prevent the mischief: which since our Author hath not told us (as had he plaid the part of a good Historian he was bound to do) I will do it for him. No sooner was the Churches Patrimony thus called in question, but it pleased God to stir up some in∣dustrious and learned men to undertake the answering of that History, which at the first made so much noise a∣mongst the people. Dr. Tillesly Archdeacon of Roche∣ster first appeared in the Lists, managing that part of the Controversie, which our Author cals a Christian, and an English-man, relating to old Chartularies and Infeodations. The three first Chapters which Dr. Tillesly had omitted concerning the payment of Tithes by the Iews and Gentiles, were solidly, but very smartly, examined and confuted by Mr. Mntague, at that time Fellow of Eaton Colledge, and afterwards Lord Bishop of Chichester; as finally the two first Chapters about the Tihing of the Iews were learnedly reviewed by
Mr. Nettles a Countey , but excellently well skilled in Talmudical Learning. In which encounters the Historian was so gall'd by Tillesly, so gagg'd by Montague, and stung by Nettles, that he never came off in any of his undertakings with such losse of credit. In the Preface to his History, he had charged the Clergy with ignorance and lazinesse; upbraided them with having nothing to keep up their credit but beard, habit and title; and that their Studies reache no fur∣ther then the Breviary, the Postils, and the Polyanthea. But now he found by these encounters, that some of the ignorant and lazie Clergy were of as retired studies as himself, and could not only match, but overmatch him too in his own Philoogi. But the Governours of the Church went a shorter way, and not expecting till the Book was answered by particular men, resolv'd to seek for reparation of the wrong from the Author himself, upon an Infor∣mation to be brought against him in the High Commis∣sion. Fearing the issue of the business, and understan∣ding what displeasures were conceived against him by the King and the Church, he made his personal appearance in the open Court at Lambeth on the eight and twentieth day of Ianuary, Ann 1618. where, in the presence of George L. Archbishop of Canterbury, Iohn L. B. of London, Lancelot L. B. of Winchester, Iohn L. B. of Rochester, Sir Iohn Benet, Sir William Bird, Sir George Newman Doctors of the Laws, and Thmas Mothershed Notary and Register of that Cout, he tendred his submission and acknowledge∣ment, all of his own hand-writing, in these following words. My go Lords, I most humbly acknowledge my error whic hae committed in publishing the History of Tithes, and especially in that I have at all by shewing
any interpretation of Holy Scriptures, by medling with Councels, Fahers, or Cnons, or by whatsoever occurs in it, offered any occasion of argument against any right of Maintenance ure divino of the Ministers of the Gospel; beseeching your Lordships to receive this ingenu∣ous and humble acknowledgement, together with the unfeigned protestation of my grief, for that through it I have so incurred both his Majesties and your Lordships displeasure conceived against me in behalf of the Church of England. IOHN SELDEN Which his submission and acknowledgement being re∣ceived, and made into an Act of Court, was en∣tred into the publick Registers thereof by this Title following, viz. Officium Dominorum contra Joh. Sel∣de de inter. Templo London. Armigerum. So far our Author should have gone (had he plaid the part of a good Historian) but that he does his work by halfs in all Church-concernments. Fol. 72. James Montague Bishop of Winchester a potent Courtier, took exceptions that his Bishoprick in the marshalling of them was wronged in method, as put after any whose Bishop is a Privy Counsellour.] The Bishop was too wise a man to take this (as our Au∣thor hates it) for a sufficient ground of the proceeding against Dr. Mocket, who had then newly translated into the Latin tongue, the Liturgy of the Church of Eng∣land, the 39. Articles, the Book of the Ordination of Bishops, Priests, and Deacons, and many Doctrinal points extracted out of the Book of Homilies. All which with Bishop Iewels Apology, Mr. Noels Cate∣chism, and a new Book of his own entitled Politi Ecclesiae Anglicanae he had caused to be Printed and bound up together. A Book which might have been of great honour to the Church of England amongst forain Nations, and of no lesse use and esteem at home, had
there not been somewhat else in it which deserved the fire then this imaginary Quarrel. For by the Act of Parliament 31 H. 8. 6. 10. the precedency of the Bi∣shops is thus Marshalled; that is to say, the Archbishop of Canterbury, the Archbishop of York, the Bishop of London, the Bishop of Durham, the Bishop of Winchester, the rest according to the order of their Consecrations; yet so, that if any of them were Secretary to the King, he should take place of all those other Bishops to whom otherwise by the Order of his Consecration he had been to give it. If the Doctor did mistake himself in this particular (as indeed he did) the fault might easily have been mended, as not deserving to be expi∣ated by so sharp a punishment. The following reason touching his derogating from the Kings power in Ecclesiastical matters, and adding it to the Metropoli∣tan whose servant and Chaplain he was, hath more reason in it (if it had but as much truth as reason) and so hath that touching the Propositions by him gathered out of the Homilies, which were rather framed according to his own judgement, then squared by the Rules of the Church. But that which I conceive to have been the true cause why the Book was burned, was, that in pub∣lishing the twentieth Article concerning the Authority of the Church he totally left out the first clause of it, viz. Habet Ecclesia Ritus sive Ceremonias statuendi jus & in Controversus ides Authoritatem. By means where∣of the Article was apparently falsified, the Churches Authority disvowed, and consequently a wide gap opened to dispute her power, in all her Canons and Determinations of what sort soever. And possible enough it is, that some just offence might be taken at him, for making the Fasting dayes appointed in the Liturgy of the Church of England to be commanded and observed ob Politi is solum rationes, for Politick Considerations only, as insinuated pag. 308. whereas those Fasting-dayes
were appointed in the first Liturgy of King Ed∣ward the sixth Anno 1549. (with reference only to the primitive Institution of those several Fasts) when no such Politick considerations were so much as thought of. But whatsoever was the true cause, or whether there were more then one, as perhaps there was, certain I am it could not be for derogating any thing from the Kings Power, and enlarging that of the Archbishop in con∣firming the election of Bishops, as our Author tels us. For though the Doctor doth affirm of the Metropolitans of the Church of England, pag. 308. Vt Electiones Episcopo∣rum suae Provinciae confirment, that it belongs to them to confirm the Electios of the Bishops of their several Provinces, and for that purpose cites the Canon of the Councel of Nice, which our Author speaks of; yet afterwards he declares expresly, that no such confirma∣tion is or can be made by the Metropolitans, with∣out the Kings assent preceding, Cujus  electi comprobantur, comprobati confirmantur, confirmati con∣secrantur, pag. 313. which very fully clears the Doctor from being a better Chaplain then he was a Subject, as our Author makes him. Fol. 77. At this time began the troubles in the Law-Countries about matters of Religion, heightned between two opposite parties, Remonstrants, and Contra-Rmon∣strants; their Controversies being chiefly  to five points, &c] Not at this time, viz. 1618. which our Author speaks of, but some years before. They were now come unto their height, and had divided the whole body of the united Belgick Provinces into two great Factions: that of the Remonstrants (whom in reproach they call their Minions) being headed by Iohn Olden Bar∣nevelt, a principal Counseller of State and of great Au∣thority in his Countrey: the other of the Calvinists or Contra-Remonstrants, being managed by Maurice Prince of Orange, the chief Commander of the Forces of the
States united both by Sea and Land. But the troubles and divisions were now come to their full growth, they began many years before; occasioned by a Remonstrance exhibited to the States of Holland by the followers of Dr. Iames Harmin, who liked better the Melanchthoni∣an way, then that of Calvin, Anno 1610. and that Re∣monstrance counterballanced by a Contra-Remonstran made by uch Divines who were better pleased with Calvins Doctrine in the deep Speculations of Predesti∣nation, Grace, Freewil, &c. then with that of Melanchthon. Hence grew the names of Remonstrants, and Contra-Remonstrants, occurring frequently in the Writings on both sides, till the Remonstrants were condemned in the Synod of Dort, and either forced to yield the Cause, or quit their Countrey. Each party in the mean time had the opportunity to disperse their Doctrines, in which the Remonstrants gained exceedingly upon their Adversaries, especially after they had been admitted to a publick Confeence at the Hague, Anno 1611. in which they were conceived to have had much the better of the day, and so continued in encrease of their power and credit, till the Quarrels and Animosities between the Prince and Barnevelt put a full period to the busi∣nesse by the death of the one, and the Authority of the other. Fol. 82. Hereby the equal Reader may judge how can∣didly Mr. Montague in his Appeal dealeth with our Di∣vines, charging them that the Discipline of the Church of England is in this Synod held unlawfull. And again the Synod of Dort in some points condemneth upon the by even the Discipline of the Church of England.] Assredly Mr. Montague deals very candidly with our Divines,Appell. Caesaram. cap. 7. pag. 69. professing that he doth re∣verence them for their places, worth, and learning; though not obliged (as he conceived) to all or any of the Conclusions of the
Synod at Dort. And he might very well declare, as indeed he doth, that the Discipline of the Church of England in that and other Dutch Synods was held unlawfull, and by them condemned upon the by. For whereas in the Con∣fession of the Belgick Churches ratified and confirmed in the Synod of Dort, it is declared and maintained, that all Ministers are by the word of God of equall power, it must needs follow thereupon, that the Superiority of Bishops over other Ministers is against Gods word. Quantum verò attinet Divini verbi Ministros,Coes. Belg. Art. 31. ubicun{que} locorum sint, ean∣dem illi Potestatem & Authoritatem habent, ut qui omnes sint Christi unici illius Episcopi universalis, unici{que} Capitis Ecclesiae Ministri. These are the words of that Confewon, as it stands ratified and recorded in the Acts of the Synod of Dort, as before was said. In which and by which if the Discipline of the Church of England be not made unlawful in terminis ter∣minantibus, as they use to say; I am sure it is condem∣ned upon the by, which is as much as Mr. Montague had affirmed of it. And howsoever Dr. Charleton then Bi∣shop of Landaffe, as well to vindicate his own dignity, as the honour of the Church of England, tendred his Protestation of that Synod in behalf of Episcopacy; yet was it made to signifie nothing, nor so much as hono∣red with an Answer; our Author noting at the end of this protestation, Britannorum interpellationi responsum ne gru qdem, viz. to this interpellation of the British Di∣vines, nothing at all was answered. There might be some wrong done to our Divines by the rest of that Synod; but no wrong done by Mr. Montague, neither to our Di∣vines nor unto that Synod. Fol. 89. Now whilest in common discourse some made this Iudge, others that Sergeant Lord Chancellor, King James made Dr. Williams, lately (and still) Dean of Westminstet, and soon after Bishop of Lincoln.] In this
and the rest which followes touching the advancement of Dr. Williams to the place and dignity of Lord Keeper, there are three things to be observed. And first it is to be observed, that though he was then Dean of Westmin∣ster when the custody of the Great Seal was committed to him; yet was he not then and still Dean of that Church, that is to say, not Dean thereof at such time as our Author writ this part of the History. For fol. 80. speaking of Dr. Hals return from the Synod of Dort, Anno 1618. he addes that he continued in health till this day thirty three years after, which fals into the year 1651. And certainly at that time Dr. Williams (then Archbishop of York) was not Dean of Westminster, that place having been bestowed by his Majesty upon Dr. Steward Clerk of the Closet, An. 1645. being full six years before the time which our Author speaks of. Secondly, whereas our Author tells us, that the place was proper not for the plain but guarded Gown; I would ain know how it should be more proper for the guarded Gown then it was for the plain. There was a time when the Chancellors (as our Author telleth us elsewhere) were always Bishops; and from that time till the fall of Cardinal Wolsey, that Office continued for the most part in the hands of the Prelates; at what time that great Office was discharged with such a general contentment, that people found more expedition in their Suits, and more ease to their Purses then of later times. By which it seems, that men who are never bred to know the true grounds and reasons of the Common Law, might and could mitigate the Rigour of it in such difficult cases as were brought before them; the Chancery not having in those days such a mixture of Law as now it hath, not being so tyed up to such intricate Rules as now it is. But thirdly, whereas our Author in advoca∣ting for the Common Lawyers, prescribeth for them a Succession of six Descents, he hath therein confued himself, and aved me the trouble of an Animadvesion,
by   Note; in which netelle us, that Sir Ch. Hatton was not bred a Lawyer. If so, then neither was the Title  strong, nor the Poscriptions so well grounded as ou Author makes i; the intposition of Sir Christopher Hatton▪ between Sir Tho. Bromley and Sir Iohn Puckering, it to three descents, and but thirty years, which is too short a time  a Prescription to be built upon. Fol. 93. He had 14 years been Archbishop of Spalato, &c. Conscience in shew, and covetousness indeed caused his coming hither. This is a very hard sying, a censure, which enenches too much upon the Piviledges of Al∣mighty God, who alone knows the secrets of the heart of man. Interest tenebris, interest cogitationibus nostris, quasi alteris tenebris, as Minutius hath it. The man here mention'd had been in the Confesion of our Athor himself, Archbishop of Spalato in Dalmatia,  dignity of great power and reputation, and consequently of a fair Revenue in propotion to it. He could not hope to mend his Fortunes by his coming hither, or to advance himself to a more liberal entertainment in the Church of England, then what he had attain'd unto in the Church of Rome. Covetousness therefore could not be the mo∣tive for leaving his own estate, of which he had been possessed 14 years in our Authors eckoning, to betake himself to a strange Countrey, where he  promise himself nothing but protection and the eedom of con∣science. Our Author might have said with more probabili∣ty, that covetousness, and not consience,  cause of his going hence; no bit of prot or preferment being laid before him to invite him  s they were both, by those which had the managing him hence. He had given great  to the Pope by his defection from that Church, and no  counce∣nance to the Doctrine of the  Churches by his coming oer unto ous. The  of o great a of that
Church was not like to stand. And yet he gave greater blows to them by his Pen, then by the defection of his Person; his learned Books entituled De Republica Eccle∣siasticâ, being still unanswered. In which respect, those of that Church bestird themselves to disgrace his person, devising many other causes by which he might be mov'd or forc'd to forsake those parts, in which he durst no longer tarry. But finding little credit given to their libellous Pamphlets, they began to work upon him by more secret practises: insinuating, that he had neither that respect, nor those advancements which might in∣courage him to stay; that the new Pope Gregory the fif∣teenth, was his special friend; that he might chuse his own preferments, and make his own conditions, if he would return. And on the other side, they cunningly wrought him out of credit with King Iames by the arts of Gondomar; and lessened his esteem amongst the Clergy by some other Artifices: so that the poor man, being in a manner lost on both sides, was forc'd to a ne∣cessity of swallowing that accursed bait by which he was hook'd over to his own destruction. For which and for the rest of the story, the Reader may repair for sa∣tisfaction to this present History. Fol. 96. Besides the King would never bestow an Epi∣scopal charge in England on a foreiner, no not on his own Countrey-men the Scots.] This must be understood with reference to the Church of England, King Iames be∣stowing many Bishopricks upon his Countrey-men the Scots in the Realm of Ireland. And if he did not the like here (as indeed he did not) it neither was for want of affection to them, nor of confidence in them; but be∣cause he would not put any such discouragement upon the English, who looked on those preferments, as the greatest and most honourable rewards of Arts and In∣dustry. Quis enim virtutem exquireret ipsum, Proemia si ollin?
Fol. 100. All mens mouthes were now  with dis∣course of Prince Charles his match with Infanta of Spain. The Protestants grieved thereat, fearing that this marriage would be the Funerals of their Religion, &c.] The buness of the match with Spain ath already been sufficiently agitated between the Autho of the Hi∣story of the Reign of King Charles and his Observator, And yet I must adde somehing to let our Author and his Reader to understand thus much, that the Protestants had no cause to fear such a Funeral▪ They knew they liv'd under such a King, who lov'd his Soveraignty too well to quit any part thereof to the Pope of Rome; espe∣cially to part with that Supremacy in  mat∣ters, which he esteemed the fairest Flower in the Roy∣al Garland. They knew they liv'd under ch a King, whose interest it was to preserve Religion in the same state in which he found it; and could not fear but that he would sufficiently provide for the  of it. If any Protestants eared the funeral of their Religion, they were such Protestants as had been frighted out as you know who us'd to call the Puritans; under the name of Protestants had ontriv'd themselves into a Faction not only against Episcopacy, but even Mo∣narchy also. And to these nothing was more then the match with Spain▪ fearing (nd perhaps fearing) that the Kings  with that Crown might am him both with power and counsel to suppress those practices which have since prov'd the Funeral of the Church of England. But as it seems, they fear was our Author telling us fol. 112. that the State had no minde or meaning of a match: and that this was quickly discovered by Prince Charles at his coming . How so? Because saith he Fol. 112. They demanded in education of the English Papists, &c▪]
nothing. For thus the argument seems to stand, viz. The Spaniards were desirous to get as good conditions as they could for themselves and their Party, Ergo they had no minde to the match. Or thus, The demands of the Spa∣niards when the business was first in Treaty, seem'd to be unreaonable, Ergo they never really intended that it should proceed. Our Author cannot be so great a stran∣ger in the shops of London, as not to know that Trades-men use to ask many times twice as much for a commodity as they mean to take; and therefore may conclude as strongly, that they do not mean to sell those wares for which they ask such an unreasonable at the first demand. Iniquum petere ut aequum obti∣neas, hath been the usual practice (especially in driving Sae-bargains) of all times and ages. And though the Spaniards at the first spoke big, and stood upon such points as the King neither could▪ nor would in honour or conscience consent unto: yet things were after brought to such a tem∣perament, that the marriage was agreed upon, the Arti∣cles by both Kings subscrib'd, a Proxie made by the Prince of ales to espouse the Infanta, and all things on her part prepared for the day of the wedding. The beach which ollowed came not from any aversness in the Court of Spain, though where the fault was, and by what means occasioned, need not here be said. But well are our Author for all that; who finally hath absolv'd the Spaniard from this breah, and laid the same upon King Iames, despairing of any restitution to be made of the Palatinate, by the way of Treaty. Ibi▪ Whereupon King James not only broke off all Treaty pain▪ but also called the great Councel of his Kingdom together.] By which it seems, that the breaking off of the Treaty did precede the Parliment. But multa apparent quae non sunt, Every thing is not as it seems. The Parlia∣ment in this cae came before, by whose continual im∣portunity and , the breach of the Treaties
followed after. The King lov'd peace oo well to lay aside the Treaties, and engage in War before he was de∣sperate of success any other way then by that of the Sword, and was assur'd both of the hands and hearts of his subjects to assist him in it. And therefore ou Au∣thor should have said, that the King not only called to∣gether his great Councel, but broke off the Treaty, and not have given us here such an Hysteron Proteron, as nei∣ther doth consist with reason, not the truth of story▪
ANIMADVERSIONS ON The Eleventh Book OF The Church History OF BRITAIN. Containing the Reign of King Charles. THis Book concludes our Authors History, and my Animadverons. And  the end be unto the beginning, it is like to enough; our Author stumbling at the Threshold, mogst superstitious people hath been presage. Having placed King Charles upon he goes on to tell us that Fol. 117. On the fourtenth James his Funerals were Collegiat Church at but the fourth, saith the Reign of King Charls; and was on the
venth of May on which those solemn Obsequies were Westminster. Of which if he will not take my word se him consult the Pamphle called the (ol. 6.) and he shall be satisfied. Our mu keep time better, or else we shall neve know how the day goes with him. Fol. 119. As for Dr. Preon, &c. His party would us that he might have chose his own Mitre.] And his party would perswade us, That he had not only large parts of suicient receipt to manage the broad , but that the Seal was proffered to him, fol. 131. But we are not bound to believe all which is said by that party, who look'd vpon the man with such a reverence as came near Idolay. His Principles and engagements were too well known by those which governed Affairs, to vente him nto any such great trust in Church or State; and his activity so suspected, that he would not have been long suffered to continue Preacher at Lincolns Inn. As for his intimacy with the Duke (too violent to be long lasting) it proceeded not from any good pinion which the Duke had of him, but that he found how instrumental he might be to manage that prevai∣lg party to the Kings advantage. But when it was that he had more of the Serpent in him then of the , and that he was not tractable in steering the of his own Party by the Court Compass; he was discountenanc'd and aid by, as not worth the keeping. He seemed the Court Mreor for a while, to a sdden height of expectation, and having and blaz'd a , went out again, and was as sud∣dnly ogotten. ol. 119. Next day the King coming from Canterbury, with all solemnity she was in London, where a Chappel her Devtion with a Covent to the Articles of her
; how ame he to be suffered to be pre∣sent at  in the capacity of Lord Keeper? For that he did so, is affirmed by our Author, saying, That the King took a Srole of Parchment out of his bosom, and gave it to the Lrd  who read it to the Commons four se∣vra times, East-West, North, and South, fol. 123. Third∣ly the Lord Keeper, who read that Scrole, was not the  Keeper Williams, but the Lord Keeper Coven∣try; Seal being taken from the Bishop of Lincoln, and  to the custoy of Sir Thomas Coventry, in October before. And therefore fourthly, our Author is much ou in placing both the Coronation and the follow∣ing Parliament befoe the change of the Lord Keeper; and sending Sir Iohn Suckling to fech that Seal at the end of a Parliment in the Spring, which he had brought away with him before Michaelmas Term. But as our Author was willing to keep the Bishop of Lincoln in the Deay of Westminster, for no less then five or six years after it was confer'd on another; so is he as desirous to continue him Lord Keeper for as many months after the Seal had been entrusted to another hand. Fol. 122. The Earl of Arundel as Earl Marshal of and the Duke of Buckingham as Lord High Con∣stble of England, for that day went before his Majesty in that great Solemnity.] In this passage and the next that follows ou Author shews himself as bad an Herald in marshalling a Royal shew, as in stating the true time of the ceation of a Noble Peer. Here in this place he plaeth the Earl Marshal before the Constable; whereas by the  31 H. 8. c. 10. the Constable is to have before the Marshal. Not want there Prece∣dents to shew that the Lord High-Constable did many times direct his Mndats to the Earl Marshal, as one of the Miniers of his Court, willing and requiring him to perform such and such services as in the said Precepts were expessed. In the next place we are informed that
Ibid. That the Kings Train being six yards long of Purple Velvet, was held up by the Lord Compton, and the Lord Viscount Dorcester.] That the Lord Compton was one of them which held up the Kings Train, I shall easily grant; he being then Master of the Robes, and thereby chllenging a right to pefom this service. But that the Lord Viscount Dorcester was the other of them, I shall never grant, there being no such Viscount at the time of the Coronation. I cannot , but that Sir Dd∣ley Carleton might be one of those which held up the Train, though I am not sure of it. But sure I am, that Sir Dudley Carleton was not made Baron of Imber-Court till towards the latter end of the following Parliament of An. 1626 nor created Viscount Dorcester until some years after. Fol. 122. The Lord Archbishop did present his Ma∣jesty to the Lords and Commons, East, West, North, South, asking their mindes four several times, if they did consent to the Coronation of King Charles their lawful overaign.] This is a piece of new State-doctrine never known before that the Coronation of the King (and consequently his Succession to the Crown of England) should depend on the consent of the Lords and Commons who were then assembled; the Coronation not proceeding (as he after elleth us) till their consent was given four times by c∣clamations. And this I call a piece of new State-doctrine never known before, because I finde the contrary in the Coronation of our former Kings. For in the form and manner of the Coronation of King Edward 6. described in the Catalogue of Honor, et orth by Tho. Mills of Canterbury, Anno 1610. we finde it thus: The King being carried by certain Noble Courtiers in another Chair nto the four sides of the Stage, was by the Arch∣bishop of Canterbury declared unto the people (stand∣ing round about) both by Gods and mans Laws, to be the right and lawul King of England, France, and
Ireland, and proclaimed that day to be crowned, con∣secrated and anointed, unto whom he demanded, whe∣ther they would obey and serve, or not? By whom it was again with a loud cry answered; God save the King, and ever live his Majesty. The same we have in substance, but in sewer words in the Coonation of King Iames, where it is said, that The King was shewed to the people, and that they were required to make acknowledgement of the allgiance to his Majesty by the Archbishop; which they did by acclamations. Assuredly, the difference is exceeding vat betwixt obey∣ing and consenting, betwixt the peoples acknowledging their allegiance, and promising to obey and serve thei law∣ful Soveraign, and giving their consent to his Coronation, as if it could not be peformed without such consent. Nor had the late Archbishop been repoacht so gene∣rally by the common people, (and that reproach pub∣lisht in several Pamphles) for altering the Kings Oath at his Coronation, to the infringing of the Libeies and diminution of the Rights of the English Subjecs; had he done them such a notable piee of service, as freeing them from all promises to obey and erve, and making the Kings Coronation to depend on their consent. For Bishop Laud being one of that Committee, which was appoint∣ed by the King to review the form and oder of the Coronation, to the end it might be fitted to some Rites and Ceremonies of the Church of England, which had not been observ'd befoe; must bear the greatest blame in this alteration (if any such alteration had been made, as our Author speaks of) because he was the principal man whom the King reed on in that business. But our Author tels us in his Preface, that this last Book with divers of the rest were written by him, when the Mo∣narchy was turn'd into a State, and I dare believe him. He had not ele so punctually conform'd his language to the new State-doctrine, by which the mking (and con∣equently
the unmaking) of Kings is wholly veted in he people, according to that Maxim of Buchannan, opulo jus est, imperium cui velit deferat; then which here is not a more pestilent and seditious passage n his whole Book De jure Regni apud Scotos, though here be nothing else but Treason, and Sedition n it. Fol. 123. Then as many Earls and Barons as could onveniently stand about the Throne, did lay their hands n the Crown on his Majesties head, protesting to spend their blouds to maintain it to him and his lawful Hers.] A promise faithfully performed by many of them, some losing their lives for him in the open field, others exhausting their Estates in defence of his, ma∣ny more venturing their whole fortunes by adhering to him to a conscation; a Catalogue of which lat we may finde subscribed to a Letter sent from the Lords and Commons of Parliament assembled in Ox∣ford, to those at Westminster, Anno 1643. And by that Catalogue we may also see what and who they were who so ignobly brake faith with him, all those whose names we finde not in that sbscription, or presently superadded to it, being to be reckoned a∣mongst those who in stead of spending their bloud to maintain the Crown to him, and to his lawful successors, concurred with them either in opere, or in , who despoiled him of it. And to say truth, they were rewarded as they had deserved, the first thing which was done by the House of Commons (after the King, by their means, had been brought to the fatal Block) being to tune them out of power, to dissolve their House, and annul their priviledges, reducing them to the same condition with the ret of the Sub∣jects. Fol. 127. And it had not been amiss, if such who would be accounted his friends and admirers had followed him in the
footsteps of his Moderation, content with the enjoying with∣out the enjoyning their private practises and opinions others.] This comes in as an inference only on a forme passage, in which it is said of Bishop Andrews, that in Wh place soever he came, he never pressed any other Ceremonie upon them, then such as he found to be used there before coming, though otherwise condemned by some o∣many superstitious Ceremonies, and superluous Orna∣ments, in his private Chappel. How true this is, I am not able to affim, lesse able (if it should be true) to commend it in him. It is not certainly the office of a carefull Bishop only to leave things as he found them▪ but to reduce them, if amiss, to those Rules and Ca∣nons, from which by the forwardness of some to inno∣vate, and the connivence of others at the innovations, they had been suffered to decline. And for the infe∣rence it self, it is intended chiefly for the late Arch-bishop of Canterbury against whom he had a fling be∣fore in the fourth Book of this History, not noted there, because reserved to another place, of which more hereafter. Condemned here for his want of mode∣ration in enjoyning his private practises and opinions on other men. But  our Author had done well to have spared the man, who hath already reckoned for all his errors, both with God and the world. And secondly, it had been bette if he had told us what those private practises and opinions were which the Archbishop with such want of moderation did enjoyne on others. For it is possible enough that the opinions which he speaks of, might be the publick Doctrines of the Church of England, main∣tained by him in opposition to those private opinions which the Calvinian prty had intended to obtrude upon her. A thing complained of by Spalato, who well observed that many of the opinions, both of Luther and Calvin, were received amongst us as part of the Do∣ctrine and Confession of the Church of England, which
therwise he acknowleged to be capable of an Oxtho∣x sense. Praeter Anglicanam Confessionem uam mihi ut modestam praedicabant) multa Lutheri & Calvini dogmata obtinuisse,Consil. re∣dundi. he there objects. And it is possible enough at the practises, which he speaks of, were not private either, but a reviver of those ancient and publick ages, which the Canons of the Church enjoyned, nd by the remisness of the late Government had been iscontinued. He that reads the Gag, and the Appello aesarem of Bishop Montague, cannot but see, that those inions, which our Author condemned for private, were he true Doctrine of this Church professed and held forth n the Book of Articles, the Homilies and the Com∣mon-Prayer-Book. But for a justification of the Pra∣ises (the private practises he speaks of) I shall direct im to an Author of more credit with him. Which thor first tels us of the Bishops generally, That be∣ing of late years either careless or indul∣gent,History of K. C. fol. 143. they had not required within their Dioceses that strict obedience to Ec∣clesiastical Constitutions which the Law expected; upon which the Liturgy began totally to be laid aside, and in conformity the uniform practise of he Church. He tels us secondly, of Arch∣bishop Abbot in particular,Fol. 131. That his extra∣ordinary reminess in not exacting a strict conomity to the prescbed Orders of the Church in point of Ceremony, seemed to dissolve those legall ceerminations to their firs principle of indifferency, nd led in such an habit of inconformity, as the future edcation of those tender concienced men too long discontinued obedience, was interpreted an innovation. And finally he tels of Arch∣bishop Laud,Fl. 143. who succeeded Abt in that See, that being of another minde an mettle, he did
not like that the externall worship of God should follow the fashion of every private fancy; and what he did not like in that subject, as he was in State, so he thought it was his duty to reform. To which en in his Metropolitical visitation, he cals upon all both Clergy and Laity to observe the Rules of the Church. And this is that, which our Author cal the enjoyning his private practices; private perhaps i the private opinion of some men, who had decla∣red themselves to be professed enemies to all public Order. Fol. 127. A Commission was granted unto five Bishop (Whereof Bishop Lad of the Qorum) to suspend Arch∣bishop Abbot from exercising his Authority any longer because uncanonical for casual Homicide.] Had our Au∣thor said, that Bishop Laud had been one of the num∣ber, he had hit it right, the Commission being granted to five Bishops, viz. Dr. Montain Bishop of London Dr. Neil Bishop of Durham, Dr. Buckeridge Bishop o Rochester, Dr. Howson Bishop of Oxford, and Dr. Lau Bishop of Bathe and Wels; or to any four, three, two of them▪ and no more then so. Had Bishop Laud been of the Quorum, his presence and consent had been so necessary to all their Consultations, Conclusions▪ and dispatch of Businesses, that nothing could be done without him; whereas by the words of the Commissi∣on, any two of them were impowered, and conse∣quently all of them must be of the Quorum, as well as he; which every Iustices Clerk cannot chuse but laug at. Nor is there any such thing as a Casual Homicid mentioned, or so much as glanced at in that Commi∣sion, the Commission only saying, That the sai Archbishop could not at that pesent in his own person attend those services which were otherwie proper for his , and Jurisdiction, and which as Archbishop of Canterbury he might and ought in
his own person to have performed and executed. I am loth to rub longer on this sore, the point having been so vext already betwixt the Historian and the Observa∣tor, that I shall not trouble it any further. Only I must crave leave to rectifie our Author in another passage relating to that sad Accident, for which saith he, Ibid. It would be of dangerous consequence to condemn him by the Canons of forain Councels, which were never allowed any Legislative power in this Land.] Which words are very ignorantly spoken, or else very impro∣perly. For if by Legislative power, he means a Power of making Laws, as the word doth intimate, then it is true, That the Canons of forain Councels, had never any such power within this Land. But if by Legisla∣tive power he means a Power or Capability of passing for Laws within this Kingdom; then (though he use the word improperly) it is very false that no such Ca∣nons were in force in the Realm of England. The Canons of many forain Councels, General, National, and Provincial, had been received in this Church, and incorporated into the body of the Canon-Law, by which the Church proceeded in the exercise of her juridiction, till the submission of the Clergy to King Henry the eighth. And in the Act confirmative of that Submission, it is said expesly, That all Ca∣nons, Contitutions, Ordinances, and Synodals Pro∣vincial, as were made befoe the said Submission, which be not contrary or repugnant to the Laws, Stutes and Cusoms of this Realm, nor to the dammage or hurt of the Kings perogative Royal, wee to be used and executed as in ormer times. 25 H. 8. c. 19. So that unlesse it can be proved, that the proceedings, in this case, by the Canons of forain , was either contrary or repuant to the Lawes and  of the  or to the dammage of the
Kings prerogative Royal; there is no dangerous conse∣quence at all to be ound therein. But whereas our Author addes in some following words, that ever since (he means ever since that unhappy accident) he had ex∣ecuted his jurisdiction without any interruption; I must needs add, that he is very much mistaken in this parti∣lar; Dr. Williams Lord elect of Lincoln, Dr. Carew Lord elect of Exceter, and Dr. Laud Lord elect of St. Davids, and I think some others refusing to receive piscopal Consecration from him upon that accompt. Far more mistaken in the next, in which he telleth us, that Fol. 128. Though this Archbishop survived some years after, yet henceforward he was buried to the world.] No such matter neither. For though for a while he stood confined to his house at Ford, yet neither this confine∣ment, nor that Commission were of long continuance. For about Christmas in the year 1628, he was restored both to his liberty and jurisdiction, sent for to come unto the Court, eceiv'd as he came out of his Barge by the Archbishop of York, and the Earl of Dorset, and by them conducted to the King, who giving him his hand to kisse, enoyned him not to fail the Councel Table twice a week. After which time we finde him sitting as Archbishop in the following Parliament, and in the full exercise of his Jurisdiction, till the day of his death, which hapned upon Sunday August 4. 1633. And so much for him. Fol. 137. My pen passing by them at present, may safely salute them with a God speed, as neither seeing nor suspecting any danger in the design.] Our Author speaks this of the Feoffees appointed by themselves for buying in such Impropriations as were then in the hands of Lay-persons. I say appointed by themselves, because not otherwise authorized, either by Charter from the King, Decree in Chanery, or by Act of Parliament, but only by a secrt combination of the Brothrhood
to advance their projects. For though our us, fol. 136. that they were legally setled in trust to make such Purchaces; yet there is more required to a legal settlement, then the consent of some few persons mongst themselves: for want whereof this combintion ws dissolved, the Feoffees in some danger of sentence, and the impropriations by them purchased adjudged to the King on a full hearing of the cause in the Cout of Exchequer, Anno 1632. Howsoever our Author them good speed, as neither seeing nor suspecting any dan∣ger in their design; but other men as wie as he, did not only suspect, but see the danger. And this our Author might see also, if zeal to the good cause had not darkened the eyes of his under∣standing. For first, the Parties tusted in the managing of this Design were of such affections, as promised no good unto the peace and happiness of the Church of England. Their names our Author truly gives us . 36. four Ministers, four Common Lawyers, and four Citizens, men not unknown to such as then lived▪ and observed the conduct of Affairs, to be averse unto the Discipline of the Church then by law establisht. And f such publick mischiefs be presaged by Astrologers rom the conjunction of Iupiter and Saturn, though the first of them be a Planet of a most weet and gentle ; what dangers, what calamities might not be eared from the conjunction of twelve such persons, of which there was not one that wished well to the pe∣ent Government? And therefore I may say of them Domitius Aenobarbus said unto his Friends when they came to congratulate with him or the birth of Nero, Nihil nisi detestabile & malo public ,
, this will uther appear by their pro∣dings in the business, not laying the impopriati∣on by them purchased to the Church or Chappelry o they had antiently belonged, nor etling them on the  of the place, as many hoped they would. That had been utterly destructive to their main , which was not to advantage the Regular and etablished Clergy, but to set up a new body of in convenient places, for the promoting of the cause. And therefore having bought an impro∣iation, they parcelled it out into annual Pensions of 40 or 50l. per annum, and therewith alared some in such Market Towns where the people had commonly lesse to do, and consequently were more apt to action and Innovation, then in other places. Our Author notes it of their Predecessors, in Cart∣wights dayes, that they preached most diligently in places; it bing observed in England, that those wo hold the Helm of the Pulpit, alwayes steer peoples harts as they please, Lib. 9. fol. 195. And he notes it alo of these eoffees, that in conformity hereunto, they set up a Peaching Ministery in places of greatest need, not in such Paish-Churches, to which the Tithes pro∣ely belonged) but where they thought the Word was most wanting, that is to say most wanting to ad∣vance their poect. Thidly, if we behold the men whom they made choice of and employed in peaching in such Market Towns as they had an eye on, either beause most po∣pulous, o because capable of electing Burgesses to serve in , they were for the most part Non-con∣, and sometime such as had been silenced by , or the High-commission, for their . And  an one was placed by Town of
by the Archbishop of Canterbury, out of in Middlesex by the Bishop of London, Yorkshire by the Archbishop of York▪ Hartfordshire by the Bishop of Lincoln, and finally ∣pended from his Ministry by the High-Commission; yet thought the  man by Geering (as indeed he was) to begin this Lecture. Fourthly and finally, these Pensions neither were so setled, nor thee Lecturers so well establisht in their several places, but that the one might be withdrawn and the other removed, at the will and pleasure of their Patrons, if they grew slack and negligent the holy cause, or abred any thing at all and fury they first brought with them. Examples of which I know some, and have heard of more. And now I would fain know of our Author whether there be no danger to be seen or suspected in this these Feoffees in short time would not  had more Chaplains to depend upon them, then all the Bi∣shops in the Kingdom; and finally whether such needy fellowes depending on the will and pleasure of their gracious Masters, must not be forced to Preach such Doctrines only as best please their humours. And though I shall say nothing here of their giving under hand private Pensions, not only unto such as had been silenced or suspended in the Ecclesiastical Courts but many times also to their Wives and Children after their decease, all issuing from this common-stock: yet othes have beheld it as the greatest piece of Wit and both to encourage and encrease their could be possibly devised. If as our Design was generally men were as because they neither the mischiefs, which crush in tim.
ol. 148. However▪ there was no express in this Decla∣rtion that the Ministers of the Parish should be pressed to the .] Our Author doth here change his style. He had  told us, that on the  publishing of the De∣claation about lawful Sports on the Lords day, no Mini∣er was de facto enjoyned to read it in his Parish, lib. x. fol. 76. and here he tells us, that there was no express Orde in the Declaration (when reviv'd by King Charls) that the Minister of the Parish should be prest to the of it; adding withall, that many thought it a moe proper work for the Constable or Tithing-man, then it was for the Ministers. Bu if our Author mark it well▪ he may easily finde that the Declaration of King Iames was commanded to be published by order from the Bishop of the Diocess through all the Parish Churches of his Jurisdiction; and the Declaration of King Charles to be published with like order from the se∣veral Bishops through all their Parish Churches of their several Dioceses respectivly.Ibid▪ p. 17. The Bishop of the Diocess in the singular number in the Declaration of King Iames, because it principally related to the County of Lancaster: the Bishops in the plural number in that of King Charles, because the benefit of it was to be ex∣tende over all the Realm. In both, the Bishops are commanded to take Order for the publishing of them in their several Parishes; and whom could they require to publish them in the Parish Churches, but the Ministers only? The Constable is a Lay-Officer meerly, bond by his place to execute the Warrants and com∣mands of the Iustices, but not of the Bishop. And though the ihing man have some relation to Church matters, and consequently to the Bishop, in the way of pres∣ents; yet was he not bound to execute any such com∣mands because not tyed by any Oath of Canonical were. So that the Bishops did no
tha  conceive he will not ofte to gainay him. It is the Author of the Book called the Holy Table, Name and Thing, Table,  4 . 68. who resolves it thus: All the commands of the King (saith he) that are not upon the first inference and illation (with∣out any Prosyllogisms) contrary to a clear passage in the Word of God, or to an evident Sun∣beam of the Law of Nature, are precisely to be obey∣ed. Nor is it enough to finde a remote and possible in∣convenience that may ensue therefrom; (which is the ordinary obection again the Book of Recreations) for every good ubject is bound in consiene to be∣lieve and rest assued, that his Prince (environed with Councel) will be more able to discover, and as to prevent any ill sequel, that may come of it, as himself possibly an be. And therefore I must not by obeying my Pince commit a certain in, in pre∣venting a pobable but contingent inconveniency. This if it were good Doctine then, when both the Author and the Book wee cred up even to admiration, is not to be reted as fale Doctine now; truth being constant to , not varying nor altering with the change of times. Bt or Author will not sop here, he goes on and saith▪ Ibid. My moderate men are of opinion, that this abuse of the Lord-day was a principal procurer of Gods anger, poured out on this Land, in a long and bloudy Civil And moderate pehaps they may be in apparel, the like civil acts of life and conversation; but moderate enough in this Observation. For who hath kwn the minde of the Lord? or who hath been his Coun∣sll the great Apostle. But it is as common with some men of the newest Religions, to adscribe judgements to some special Reasons, as the Key which opens into his Cabinet as i they were admitted to all in the  Heaven, before that dread∣ful
o the year 1562. and 1565. the constant of the Chappels in his Majesties Houses, most the Cathedral, and some of the Paochial Churches, and inally a Declaration of the King, Anno 1633. ommending a Conormity in the Parish Churches to their own Cathedrals. They on the other side stood chiefly upon disontinunce, but urged withall, that some Rubks in the Common-Prayer-Book seemed to make for them. So that the Question being redu∣ced to a matter of act, that is to say, the Table must this way, or it must stand that way, I would fain know how any condescension might be made on either to an accommodation, or what our Mode∣rat would have done to at one the differences. Sup∣poe him tting in the Chair, the Arguments on both , nd all the Audience full of expectation would carry it. The Moderator Fuller of old Mey-Tales then ordinary, thus resolves the busi∣nesse, that he had heard it commended for a great piece of wisdom in Bishop Andrews, That wheresoever he was a Parson, a Dean, or a Bishop, he never troubled Parish, Colledge, or Diocess, with pressing o∣ther Ceremonies upon them, then such which he found used there before his coming thither; that King Iames finding the Archbishop of Spalato in a resolution of eioning all such Leases as had been made by his in the Savoy, gave him this wise Coun∣sell, Relinque res sicut eas invenisti, That he should leave things as he found them; that the sid King being told by a great person of the invertd situation of a Chappel in Cambridge, nswer that it did not matter how the stood so their hearts who go thither were in Gods service. But for his part he liked  of the Resolution of Dr. Prideaux
when wearied with the Businesses of the Councel-Table, and the High Commission. But as he was soon hot, so he was soon cool'd. And so much is observed by Sir Edward DeeringCollection of Speeches, p 5. though his greatest adversary, and the first that threw dirt in his face in the late long Parliament; who telleth us of him, that the roughness of his uncourtly Nature, sent most men discontented from him; so, that he would often (of himself) inde wayes and means to sweeten many of them again when they least looked for it. In this more modest then our Author, who gives us nothing of this Pelate but his wants and weaknesses. But of this Reverend Prelate he will give cause to speak more hereafter. Let us now on unto ano∣ther of a different judgement, his proest enemy Mr. Prin; of whom thus our Author. Fol. 57. Mr. William Prinne was borne about Bath in Glocestershire, &c. and began with the writing of some Orthodox books.] In this story of Mr. Prinne and his suffe∣ings, our Author runs into many errors, which either his love unto the Man, or zeal to the good cause, or carelesness of what he writes, have brought upon him. For first, Bath is not in Glostershire, but a chief City in the County of Somerset. Secondly, though I look on Mr. Prinne (so far forth as I am able to judge by some Books of his not long since published) as a man of a far more moderate spirit, then I have done formerly; yet can I not think his first Books to have been so Orthodox as our Author makes them. For not to say any thing of his Perpetuity, his Books entituled, Lame Giles his Haltings; Cozens Cozening Devotions, and his Appendix to another, have many things repugnant to the Rules and Canons of the Church of England. No Champion against bowing at the name of Iesus, nor greater enemy to some Ceremonies here by Law . In whic paiculars i our Author tik him
to be Orthodox, he declares himself to be no true Son of the Church of England. Thirdly, the Book called Histrio-Mastix was not writ by Mr. Prinne about three years before his , as our Author telleth us, for then it must be wit or publisht Anno 1634. whereas indeed that Book was published in Print about the latter end of 1632. and the Author censur'd in Sar-Chamber for some pssges in i, abou the latter end of the year 1633. Othewise had it been as our Author telleth us, the punishment the offence, and he must suffer for  Book which was not publisht at that ime, and pehaps not witten. But our Author hth a special faclty in this kinde▪ which few writers . For s he post-dateth this Histrio-Mastix, by making it come into the after it did; so he ante- a Book of D. White then Lord Bishop of Ely, which he makes to be publisht two yeas sooner then indeed it ws. Tht book of his en∣tituled A Treatise of the Sabbath, came no ut ill Micha∣elmas Anno 1635. though placed by ou Autho as then written Anno 1633. for which see fol. 144. Next unto Mr. Prinne, in the cose of his Censure, comes the Bishop of Lincoln, the  whereof we have in our Author, who having left a  some∣what which he thinks not it to make known to all gives some occasion to suspect that the matter was far wose on the Bishops side then perhaps it was. And therefore to prevent all further misconstructions in thi , I will lay down the story as I finde it thus, viz. The Bishops purgation depending chiefly upon the testimony of one Prideon, it hapned hat the  after▪ one Elizabeth Heaon was delivered of aHist of K. base childe, and laid to this Prideon. The Bishop finding his great witness charged with such a load of filth  would invalidate all his
valid, the Bishop could easily prognosticate his own ruine; therefore he bestirs himself amain, and though by order of the Justices at the publick Session at Lincoln, Prideon was charged as the reputed father, the Bishop by his two Agents Powel and Owen procured that order to be suppressed, and by subornation and menacing of, & tam∣peing with Witnesses, at length in May 10. Car. pro∣cured the childe to be fathered upon one Boon, and Pri∣deon acquit. Which led practises for the supportation of his Favorites credit cost the Bishop, as he confest to Sir Iohn Munson and others, twelve hundred pounds, so much directly, and by consequence much more. But to proceed, the cause being brought unto a censure, Fol. 157. Secretary Windebank motioned to degrade him; which (saith he) was lustily pronounced by a Knight and a Lay-man, having no precedent for the same in former ages.] But first it is not very certain that any such thing was moved by Sir Francis Windebank. A manuscript of that dayes proceedings I have often seen, containing the Decree and Sentence, with the substance of every Speech then made, and amongst others, that of Sir Francis Winde∣bank, in which I finde no motion tending to a Degrada∣tion, nor any other punishment inflicted on him then Fine, Suspension, and Inprisonment, in which the residue of the Lords concurred, as we finde in our Author. Secondly, it had been more strange if the Knight had not been a Lay-man, the Church of England not acknow∣ledging any Order of Spiritual Knighthood. Knights in Divinity, are greater strangers in this Land, then Lay-Divines; these last being multiplied of late, even ad infinitum, the first never heard of. And thirdly, had it been so mov'd, and so lustily mov'd, as our Author makes it, the Knight and Lay-man might have found a precedent for it in the former ages. Which last clause is to be understood (as I suppose) with refeence to the times since the Reformation: For in
the former times many precedents of like nature might be easily found. And being understood of the times since the Reformation, it is not so infallibly true, but that one pre∣cedent of it at the least may be found amongst us. Marma∣duke Middleton advanced to the Bishoprick of St. Davids Anno 1567. after he had sat in that See three and twenty years, was finally condemned (for many notable misde∣meanors) not only to be deprived of his Bishoprick, but degraded from all holy Orders. Which sentence was ac∣cordingly executed by and before the High Commis∣sioners at Lambeth house, not only by reading it in Scriptis, but by a formal devesting of him of his Episcopal Robes and Priest∣ly vestmentsWhether Ceremonies used at his bringing in¦to the Court, and his thrusting out of it., as I have heard from a person of good credit who was present at it. And somewhat there is further in the story of this Marmaduke Middleton which concerns the Bishop now before us. Of whom our Author telleth us further, that being prest by two Bishops and three Doctors to answer upon Oath to certain Arti∣cles which were tendred to him in the Tower; he utterly refused to do it, claiming the priviledge of a Peer, fol. 159. Which Plea was also made by the said Bishop of St. Da∣vids, offering to give in his Answer to such Articles as were fram'd against him, on his Honour only, but refusing to do it on his Oath. Which case being brought before the Lords then sitting in Parliament, was ruled against him; it being ordered that he should answer upon Oath, as in fine he did. To this Bishop let us joyne his Chaplain Mr. Osbolstone, who being engag'd in the same Bark with his Patron suffered shiprack also, though not at the same time, nor on the same occasion. Censured in Star-Cham∣ber not only to lose his Ecclesiastical Promotions, but to corporal punishments. Fol. 166. But this last persnal penalty he escaped by going beyond Canterbury, conceived sasonably gone beyond
the Seas, whilst he secretly concealed himself in London.] And he had scapt the last penalty, had he staid at home. For though Mr. Osbolston at that time conceived the Archbi∣shop to be his greatest enemy, yet the Archbishop was resolved to shew himself his greatest friend, assuring the Author of these Papers (before any thing was known of Mr. Osbolstons supposed flight) that he would cast himself at the Kings eet for obtaining a discharge of that cor∣poral punishment unto which he was sentenced. Which may obtain the greater credit; First, in regard that no course was taken to stop his flight, no search made after him, nor any thing done in Order to his apprehension. And secondly, by Mr. Osbolstons readiness to do the Arch∣bishop all good Offices in the time of his troubles, upon the knowledge which was given him (at his com∣ing back) of such good Intentions. But of these private men enough; passe we now to the publick.
Lib. XI. Part. II. Containing the last 12. years of the Reign of King Charles. ANd now we come to the last and most unfortu∣nate part of this Kings Reign, which ended in the loss of his own life, the Ruine of the Church, and the Alteration of the Civil Government. Occa∣oned primarily, as my Author saith, by sending a new Liturgie to the Kirk of Scotland, for he thus proceeds. Fol. 160. Miseries caused from the sending of the Book of Service, or new Liturgie thither, which may sadly be termed a Rubrick indeed, died with the bloud of so many of both Nations slain on that occasion.] Our Athor speaks this in relation to the Scottish tumults, Anno 1637. In telling of which story he runs (as commonly elsewhere) into many Errors. For first those miseries, and that bloud-shed was not caused by sending the Liturgy thither, the Plot had been laid long before upon other grounds, that is to say▪ questioning of some Church Lands then in the hands of some great Persons, of which they feared a Revocation to the Crown; And secondly, the Ma∣nu-mitting of some poor subjects from the Tyranny and Vassalage which they liv'd under in respect of their Tithes, exacted with all celty and inutice by those whom they call the
for raising of a tumult first, a Rebellion afterwards; and this occasion they conceiv'd they had happily gain'd by sending the new Liturgy thither, though ordered by their own Clergy first, as our Author tells us, at the As∣sembly of Aberdeen, Anno 1616. and after at Perth, Anno 1618. and fashioned for the most part by their own Bi∣shops also. But of this there hath so much been said be∣tween the Observator and his Antagonist, that there is no∣thing necessary to be added to it. Secondly, there was no such matter as the passing of an Act of Revocation for the restoring of such Lands as had been aliened from the Crown in the Minority of the King Predecssors. Of which he tells us fol. 192. The King indeed did once intend the passing of such an Act, but finding what an insurrection was likely to ensue upon it, he followed the safer counsel of Sir Archibald Acheson, by whom he was advis'd to sue them in his Courts of Justice. Which course succeeding to his wish so terified many of those great Persons, who had little else but such Lands to maintain their Dignities; that they never thought themselves secure, as long as the King was in a condition to demand his own. Thirdly, though it be true enough, that some Persons of Honour had been denied such higher Titles as they had desired, fol. 163. Yet was it not the denying of such Titles unto Men of Honour, which wrote these terrible effects, but the de∣nying of an Honorary Title to a Man of no Honour. If Colonel Alexander Lesley an obscure fellow, but made rich by the spoils and plunder of Germany, had been made a Baron, when he first desired it, the rest of the Male-contents in Scotland might have had an heart, though they had no head. But the King not willing to dishonor so high a Title by conferring it on so low a person, de∣nyed the favour: which put the man into such a heat, that presently he joyned himself to the faction there, drove on the Plot, and finally undertook the command o their Armie. Rewaded fo which notable service
with the Title of Earl of Levin by the King himel, he could not so digest the injury of the first refusal, but that he afterwards headed their Rebellions upon all oc∣casions. Fol. 163. Generally they excused the King in their writings as innocent therein, but charged Archbishop Lad as the princi∣pal, and Dr. Cousins for the instrumental compiler thereof.] This is no more then we had reason to expect fom a former passage, lib. 4. fol. 193. where our Author telleth us, that the Scottish Bishops withdrew themselves from their obedience to the See of York, in the time when George Nevil was Archbishop. And then he adds, Hence forwards no Archbishop of York medled more with Church matters in Scotland; and happy had it been, if no Arch∣bishop of Canterbury had since interessed himself therein. His stomach is so full of choler against this poo Pre∣late, that he must needs bring up some of it above an hundred years before he was born. Hence is it that he rakes together all reports which make against him, and sets them down in rank and file in the course of this Hi∣story. If Archbishop Abbot be suspended from his Juris∣diction, the blame thereof was laid on Archbishop Laud, as if not content to succeed, he endeavoured to su∣plant him, fol. 128. The King sets out a Declaration about lawful sports, the reviving and enlarging of which must be put upon his accompt also, some strong pemptions being urged for the proof thereof, fol. 147. The of the Church to her antient Rules and publick Doctrines, must be nothing else but the enjoyning of his own private practices and opinions upon other men, fol. 127. And if a Liturgy be compos'd for the use of Church of Scotland, who but he must be charged to be the Compiler of it? But what proofs have we for all this? Only the  or his Enemies, or our Authors own , or some common fame. And if it once be shall pass for truth; and as a truth
Authors History, though the greatest false∣hood.Minut. Fel. Tam facilis in mendaciis fides, ut quic∣quid famae liceat fingere, illi esset libenter audire, in my Authors language. But for the last he brings some poof, (he would have us think so at the least) that is to say, the words of one Bayly, a Scot, whom it concern'd to make him as odious as he could, the better to comply with a Pamphlet called The Intentions of the Army; in which it was declared, that the Scots entred England with a purpose to remove the Archbishop from the King, and execute their vengeance on him. What hand Dr. Cousins had in assisting of the work, I am not able to say. But sure I am, that there was nothing done in it by the Bishops of England, but with the counsel and co-operation of their Brethren in the Church of Scotland, viz. the Archbishop of St. Andrews, the Archbishop of Glasco, the Bishop of Murray, Ross, Brechin, and Dun∣blane, as appears by the Book entituled Hidden Works of Darkness, &c. fol. 150, 153, 154, &c. And this our Au∣thor must needs know (but that he hath a minde to quarrel the Archbishop upon every turn) as appears plainly, 1. By his Narrative of the Design in King Iames his time, from the first undertaking of it by the Archbi∣shop of St. Andrews, and the Bishop of Galloway then be∣ing▪ whose Book corrected by that King with some additions, expunctions, and accommodations, was sent back to Scotland. 2. By that unsatisfiedness which he seems to have when the project was resum'd by King Charles, whether the Book by him sent into Scotland, were the same which had passed the hands of King Iames, or not: which he expresseth in these words, viz. In the Reign of King Charles, the project was resumed, but whether the same Book or no, God knoweth, fol. 160. If so, if God only knoweth whether it were the same or no, how dares he tell us that it was not? and if it was the same (as it may be for ought he knoweth) with what conscience can he
charge the making of it upon Bishop Laud. Besides (as afterwards he telleth us fol. 163.) the Church of Scotland claimed not only to be Independent, and free as any Church in Christendom, a Sister, not a Daughter of England. And consequently the Prelates of that Church had more rea∣son to decline the receiving of a Liturgy impos'd on them or commended to them by the Primate of England, for fear of acknowledging any subordination to him; then to receive the same Liturgy here by Law establisht, which they might very safely borrow from their Sister Church without any such danger. But howsoever it was, the blame must fall on him who did least deserve it. Fol. 167. Thus none, seeing now foul weather in Scot∣land, could expect it fair Sun-shine in England.] In this I am as little of our Authors opinion as in most things else. The Sun in England might have shined with a brighter beam, if the clouds which had been gathered to∣gether, and threatned such foul weather in Scotland, had been disperst and scattered by the Thunder of our English Ordi∣nance. The opportunity was well given, and well taken also, had it not been unhappily lost in the prosecution. The Scots were then weak, unprovided of all necessaries, not above three thousand compleat Arms to be found amongst them: The English on the other side making a formidable appearance, gallantly Horst, complealy arm'd, and intermingled with the choicest of the Nobi∣lity and Gentry in all the Nation. And had the Scots been once broken, and their Countrey wasted (which had been the easiest thing in the world for the English Army) they had been utterly disabled from creating trouble to their King, disturbances in their own Chrch, and destruction to England. So true is that of the wise Histoian, Conatus subditorm irritos imperia ∣per promovere; the Insurrections of the people when they are supprest, do always make the King stronger, and the Subjects weaker.
Fol. 167. The Sermon ended We chose Dr. Stewart Den of Chichester Prolocutor, and the next day of sitting We met at Westminster in the Chappel of King Henry the seventh.] Had it not been for these and some other passages of this nature, our Author might have lost the hono of being took notice of, for one of the Clerks of the Convocation; and one not of the lowest fourm, but passing for some of those wise men, who began to be fear∣ful of themselves, and to be jealous of that power by which they were enabled to make new Canons. How so? Because it was feared by the judicious (himself still for one) lst the Convocation whose power of medling with Church matters, had been bridled up for many years before, shuld now enabled with such power, over-act their parts, espe∣cially in such dangerous, and discontented times, as it after followeth. Whly fore-seen. But then why did not WE, that is to say, our Author, and the rest of those wise and judicious Persons, fore-warn their weak and unad∣vised Brethren of the present danger; or rather why did they go along with the rest for company, and follow those who had before out-run the Canons by their additional Conformity? How wise the rest were I am not able to say. But certainly our Author shew'd himself no wiser then Walthams Calf, who ran nine mile to suck a Bull, and came home a thirst, as the Proverb saith. His running unto Oxford, which cost him as much in seventeen weeks, as he had spent in Cambridge in seventeen years, was but a second Sally to the first Knight-Errantry. Fol. 168. Next day the Convocation came together, &c. when, contrary to general expectation, it was motioned, to improve the present opportunity, in perfecting the new Canons which they had begun.] I have not heard of any such motion as our Author speaks of from any who were present at that time, though I have diligently labour'd to inform my self in it. Not is it probable, that any such motion should be made, as the case then stood.
The Parliament had been diolv'd on Tuesday, the 5 o May. The Clergy met in Convocation on the morrow after, expecting then to be dissolved, and licenced to go home again. But contrary to that general expectation, in stead of hearing some news of his Majesties Writ for their dissolution, there came an Order from the Archbishop to the Prolocutor, to adjourn till Saturday. And this was all the business which was done that day, the Clergy generally being in no small amazement when they were required not to dissolve, till further Orde. Sa∣turday being come, what then? A new Commission saith he was brought from his Majesty, by vertue whereof WE were warranted still to sit not in the capacity of a Convoca∣tion, but of a Synod. I had thought our Author with his wise and judicious Friends had better hearkened to the e∣nor of that Commission, then to come out with such a gross and wilde absurdity, as this is, so fit for none as Sir Edward Deering, nd for him only to make sport with∣in the House of Commons. At the beginning of the Convocation, when the Prolocutor ws admitted, the Archbishop produc'd his Maesies Commission under the Great Seal, whereby the Clergy was enabled to consult, treat of, & conclude such Canons, as they conceiv'd most expedient to the pece of the Church, and his service. But this Commission being to expire with the end of the Parliament, it became void, of no effect assoon as the Parliament was dissolved. Which being made known unto the King, who was resolv'd the Convoca∣tion should continue, and that the Clergy should go on in compleating those Canons which they had so happily began; he caus'd a new Commission to be sent unto them in the same words, and to the very same effect as the other was, but that it was to continue durante beneplacito only, as the other was not. It follows next that Ibid. Dr. Brownrig, Dr. Hacket, Dr. Holdsworth, &c.
with others, to the number of thirty six, earnestly protested against the continuance of the Convocation.] It's possible enough, that Dr. Brownrig, now Lord Bishop of Excester, Dr. Hacket, and the rest of the thirty six, our Author be∣ing of the Quorum, (in his own understanding of the word) might be unsatisfied in the continuance of the Convocation, because of some offence, which as they conceiv'd would be taken at it. But if they had protested, and protested earnestly, as our Author tells us, the noise of so many Voes concurring must needs be heard by all the rest which were then assembled; from none of which I can lean any thing of this Protestation. Or if they did protest o earnestly as he sayes they did, why was not the Protestation reduced into writing, subscibed wih their hands in due form of Law, and so delivered to the Register to remain upon Record (among the other Acts of that House) for their indemnity? Which not being done, rendreth this Protest of theirs (if any such Protest there were) to signifie nothing but their dislike of the continuance. But whereas our Author tells us, that the whole ouse consisted but of six score per∣sons, it may be thought that he diminisheth the number of  purpose to make his own party seem the greater. For in the lower ouse of Convocation for the Province of Canterbury i all paties summon'd do appear, there are no fewer then two and twenty Deans, four and twenty Prebendaries, fifty four Archdeacons, and forty four Cleks, representing the Diocesan Clergy, amounting in the total to an hundred foty four persons, whereof the thirty six Protestors (if so many they were) make the fourth part only. Howsoever all parties being not well satisfied with the lawfulness of their continuance, his Majesty was advertis'd of it, who upon conference with his Judes, and Councel learned in the Laws, caus'd a short Writing to be dwn and subscribed by their se∣veral hands in these following words, viz. at White-hall,
May the 10. 1640. the Convocation being called by the Kings Writ, is to continue till it be dissolved by the Kings Writ, notwithstanding the dissolving of the Parliament. Sub∣scribed by Finch Lord Keeper, Manchester Lord Privy Seal, Littleton chief Justice of the Common Pleas, Banks Attourney General, Whitfield, and Heath, his Majeis Serjeants. Which writing (an Instrument our Author calls it) being communicated to the Clergy by the Lord Arch∣bishop on the morrow after, did so compose the mindes of all men, that they went forwds very cheerfully with the work in hand: the principal of those whom or Author calls Dissenters, bringing in the Canon o preach∣ing for conformity (being the eighth Canon in the Book as now they are plac'd) which was received and allowed of, as it came from his hand without alteration. Howsoever our Author keeps himself to his former folly, shutting up his extravagancie with this conclusion: Fol 169. Thus was an old Convocation converted into a new Synod.] An expression borrowed from the speech of a witty Gentleman, as he is called by the Author of the History of the Reign of King Charles, and since by him de∣clar'd to be the Lord George Digby now Earl of Bristow. But he that spent most of his wit upon it, and theeby gave occasion unto others for the like mistakings was Sir Edward Deering in a Speech made against these Canons, Anno 1640. where we finde these flourishes, Would you confute the Convocation? They were a Holy Synod. Would you argue against the Synod?Collection of Spees, p 26. Why they were Commissioners. Would you dispute the Commission? They will mingle all powers together, and answer that they were some fourth thing, that neither we know nor ima∣gine; that is to say (as it follows aftrwrds▪ p. 27.) a Con∣vocational-Synodical-Assembly of  More of this fine stuffe we may see hereafte. In the mean time we may judge by this Remnnt of the whole Piece,
and  i upon proof to be very light, and not worth the wering. For first the Gentleman could not, & our Author cannot chuse but know, that a Convocation and a Synod (as in England of late times) are but the same one thing under dives names, the one borrowed from a Grecian, the other from a Latin Original: the Convocation of the Cler∣gy of the Province of Canterbury being nothing but a Pro∣vincial Synod, as a National Synod is nothing ele but the Convocation of the Clergy of both Provinces. Secondly, our Athor knows by this time, that the Commission which seems to make this doughty difference, changed not the Convocation into a Synod (as some vainly think) but only made that Convocation active in order to the making of Canons, which otherwise had been able to proceed no ur∣ther then the grant of Subsidies. Thirdly, that nothing is more ordinary then for the Convocations of all times since the Reformation, to take unto themselves the name of Sy∣nds. For the Articles of Religion made in the Convocation, An. 1552. are called in the Title of the Book Articuli de quibus in Synodo Londinensi convenit, &c. The same name given to those agreed on in the Convocation, An. 1562. as appears by the Title of that Book also in the Latin Editi∣n. The Canons of the year 1571. are said to be concluded and agreed upon in Synodo inchoat â Lond. in aede Divi Paul, &c. In the year 1575. came out a Book of Articles with this title following, viz. Articles whereupon it was agreed by the most Reverend Father in God, the Archbishop of Canterbu∣ry, and other the Bishops, & the whole Clergy of the Province of Canterbury in the Convocation or Synod holden at Westmin∣ster. The like we finde in the year 1597. (being the last active Convocation in Q. Elizabeths time) in which we mee with a Book entituled, Constitutiones Ecclesiasticae, &c. in Synodo inheata Londini vicsimo quinto die Mensis Octobris. Our Author finally is to know, that though the members of the two Convocations of York and Canterbury did not mee in person, yet they communicated their
ounsels, the Reults of the one being dispatch'd unto the other, and there agreed on, or rejected, as they saw for it. Which laid together shews the vanity of ∣ther passage in the Speech of Sir Edward Deering, where he vaporeth thus, viz. A strange Commission, wherein no one Commissioners name is to be found; a Convocation, that lived when the Parliament was : a strange Holy Synod, where one conferred with the other. Lastly, Si Edward Deerig seems to marvel at the Title of the Book of Cano then in question, expressing that they were treat∣ed upon in Convocation,. p. 2. agreed upon in Synd. And this, saith he, is a new Mould to cast Canons in never us'd before. But had he looked upon the  of the Book of Canons, An. 160. he hd found it othewise. The Title this viz. Constitutions and Canons by the Bishop of London, President of the Convocation for the Province of Canterbury, &c. and agreed upon with the Kings Majesties Licence in their Synod  at London, An. 1603. And so much for the satisfaction of all such per∣sons, whom either that gentleman, or this or Autho hve mis-informed, and consequently abed in this particular. Ibid. Now because great Baies mve . it was thought fit to contract the of some 26, beside the Prolocutor.] No ch contracting of the Synod as our Author speaks of. There was in∣deed a Committee of twenty ix, or thereabouts ap∣pointed to consider of a Canon for uniformity in some Rites and Ceremonies, of which number were the prin∣cipal of those whom he calls dissenters, and our Author too amongst the rest: who having agreed upon the Ca∣non, it was by them presented to the rest of the Clergy in Convocation, and by them appov'd. And possible it is, that the drawing p of some other Canons might be refer'd also to that Committee  as is accustomed in such cases) without contracting the whole Hose into
that small body, or excluding any man from being pre∣sent at their consultation. But whereas our Author afterwards tells us, that nothing should be accounted the Act of the House till thrice (as he takes it) publickly voted therein; It is but as he takes it, or mistakes it rather, and so let it goe. But I needed not to have signified that our Author was one of this Committee, he will tell it himself. And he will tell us more then that, publishing himself for one of the thirty six Dissenters, the better to ingratiate himself with the rising side. The next day (so he lets us know) We all subscribed the Canons, suf∣fering our selves (according to the Order of such meetings) to be all concluded by the majority of votes, though some of US in the Committee privately dissented in the passing of many particulars. So then our Author was content to play the good fellow at the last, and go along hand in hand with the rest of his company; dissenting pri∣vately, but consenting publickly, which is as much as can be looked for. Ibid. No sooner came these Canons abroad into a publick view, but various were mens censures upon them.] Not possible that in such a confusion both of Affections and Opinions, it should otherwise be. Non omnibus una vo∣luntas, was a note of old, and will hold true as long as there are many men to have many mindes. And yet if my information deceive me not, these Canons found great approbation from the mouths of some, from whom it had been least expected; particularly from Justice Crook, whose Argument in the case of Ship-mny was printed afterwards by the Order of the House of Com∣mons. Of whom I have been told by a person of great worth and credit, that having read over the Book of Canons, when it first came out, he lifted up his hands, and gave hearty thanks to Almighty God, that he had liv'd to see such good effects of a Con∣tion. It was very well, that they pleased him;
but that they should please all men was not to be hoped for. Fol. 171. Many took exception at the hollowness of the Oath in the middle thereof, having its Bowels puffed up with a windy &c. a cheveral word, which might be stretched as men would measure it.] Of this &c. which has made so much noise in the world I shall now say nothing. Somewhat is here subjoyn'd by our Author in thereof, the rest made up by the Observator. Only I shall make bold to ask him, why he observ'd not this &c. when the Oath was first under consideration; or why he signified not his dissent when it came to the vote, and shewed some reasons which might move him to object against it. It had been fitter for a wise and judi∣cious man to signifie his dislike of any thing when it might be mended, then to joyn with others in con∣demning it when it was past remedy. But Mala mns malus animus, as the saying is. The Convocation had no ill intent in it when they passed it so, though some few, out of their perverseness and corrupt affections, were willing to put their own sense on it, and spoil an honest-meaning Text with a factious Gloss. But let us follow our Author as he leads the way, and we shall finde that Ibid. Some Bishops were very forward in pressing this Oath even before the time thereof. For whereas a liberty was allowed to all, to deliberate thereon, until the Feast of Michael the Arch-angel, some presently pressed the Ministers of their Diocesses for the taking thereof.] It seems by this that our Author was so far from taking notice of any thing done in the Convocation, when the Canon for the Oath was framed, that he never so much as looked into the Canon it self, since the Book came out. He had not else deamt of a liber∣ty of Deliberation, till the Feast of St. Michael the Arch-angel, which I am sure the Canon gives not.
The Synod did indeed decree, that all Arch∣bishop,Canon. 7. 1640. and Bishops, and all other Priests and Deacons, in places exempt or not ex∣empt, should before the second day of November next en∣suing, take the following Oath against all innovation of Do∣ctrine or Discipline. By which we see, that the Oath was to be given and taken before the second of November, but no such thing as Liberty of Deliberation till the Feast of St. Michael. And therefore if some Bishops did press the Clergy of their several and respective Diocesses, as∣soon as they returned home from the Convocation; they might well doe it by the Canon, without making any such Essay of their Activity, if providence (as our Author most wisely words it) had not prevented them. If any of the Bishops did require their Clergy to take the Oath upon their knees (as he says they did) though it be more then was directed by the Canon, yet I con∣ceive that no wise man would scruple at it, considering the gravity and greatness of the business which he was about. But then Ibid. The Exception of Exceptions was, because they were generally condemned as illegally passed to the prejudice of the fundamental Liberty of the Subject, whereof we shall hear enough in the next Parliament.] Not generally condemned, either as illegally passed, or as tending to prejudice of the Subjects Rights, I am sure of that. Scarse so much as condemned by any for those respects, but by such whom it concern'd (for carrying on of their Designs) to weaken the Authority of the Church, and advance their own. But because our Author tells us, that we shall finde enough of this in the following Parliament, we are to follow him to that Parliament for our satisfaction. And there we finde that Mr. Maynard made a Speech in the Committee of Lords against the Canons,Church Hist. fol 180. made by the Bishops in the last Convocation, in which he endeavoured to prove,
that the Clergy had no power to make Canons, without common consent in Parliament, because in the Saxon times Laws and Constitutions Ecclesiastical had the confir∣mation of Peers, and sometimes of the People, to which great Councels our Parliaments do succeed. Which Argument if it be of force to prove, That the Clergy can make no Canons without consent of the Peers and people in Par∣liament; it must prove also that the Peers and People can make no Statutes without consent of the Clergy in their Convocation. My reason is, because such Coun∣cels in the times of the Saxons were mixt Assemblies, consisting as well of Laicks, as of Ecclesasticks, and the matters there concluded on of a mixt nature also; Laws being passed as commonly in them in order to the good governance of the Common-wealth, as Canons for the Regulating such things as concern'd Religion. But these great Councels of the Saxons being divided into two parts in the times ensuing, the Clergy did their work by themselves without any confirmation from the King or Parliament, till the submission of the Clergy to King Henry the eighth. And if the Parliaments did succeed in the place of those great Councels (as he sayes they did) it was because that antiently the Pro∣curators of the Clergy, not the Bishops only, had their place in Parliament, though neither Peers nor People vo∣ted in the Convocations. Which being so, it is not much to be admired that there was some checking (as is said in the second Argument) about the disuse of the ge∣neral making of such Church Laws. But checking or re∣pining at the proceeding of any superior Court makes not the Acts thereof illegal. For if it did, the Acts of Parliaments themselves would be reputed of no force, or illegally made, because the Clergy for a long time have checkt (and think they have good cause to check) for thei being excluded. Which checking of the Com∣mons apears not only in thos antint Authors which
the Gentleman cited, but in the Remonstrance tendred by them to King Henry the Eighth, exemplified at large in these Animadversions, lib. 3. n. 61. But because this being a Record of the Convocation, may not come with∣in the walk of a common Lawyer, I shall put him in minde of that memorable passage in the Parliament 51. Edw. 3. which in brief was this: The Commons fnding themselves aggrieved, as well with certain Constitutions made by the Clergy in their Synods, as with some Laws or Ordinances which were lately passed, more to the advantage of the Clergy then the common people, put in a Bill to this effect, viz. That no Act nor Ordi∣nnce should from thenceforth be made or granted on the Petition of the said Clergy, without the consent of the Commons; and that the said Commons should not be bound in times to come by any Constitutions made by the Clergy of this Realm for their own advantage, to which the Commons of this Realm had not given consent. The reason of which is this (and 'tis worth the marking;) Car eux ne veulent estre obligez a nul de vos Estatuz ne Ordinances faitz sanz leur Assent, because the said Clergy did not think themselves bound (as indeed they were not in those times) by any Sta∣tute, Act, or Ordinance, made without their Assent in the Court of Parliament. But that which could not be obtain'd by this checking of the Commons in the de∣clining and last times of King Edw. 3. was in some part effected by the more vigorous prosecution of King Hen. 8. who to satisfie the desires of the Commons in this particular, and repress their checkings, obtained from the Clergy, that they should neither make nor exe∣cute any Canons without his consent, as before is said; so that the Kings power of confirming Canons was grounded on the free and voluntary submission of the Clergy, and was not built, as the third Argument ob∣ecteth, on to weak a foundation as the Popes making
Canons by his sole power: the Pope not making Canons here, nor putting his Rescripts and Letters decretory in the place of Canons, but only as a remedy for some pre∣sent exigency. So that the Kings power in this parti∣cular not being built upon the Popes, as he said it was, it may well stand, That Kings may make Canons with∣out consent of Parliament, though he saith they cannot. But whereas it is argued in the fourth place, that the clause in the Statute of Submission, in which it is said, that the Clergy shall not make Canons without the Kings leave, doth not imply that by his leave alone they may make them; I cannot think that he delivered this for Law, and much less for Logick. For had this been looked on formerly as a piece of Law, the Parliaments would have check'd at it at some time or other, and been as sensible of the Kings encroachments in executing this power without them, as antiently some of them had been about the disuse of the like general consent in the making of them. Fol. 180. In the next place our Author tells us that Mr. Maynard endevoured also to prove, that these Canons were against the Kings Prerogative, the Rights, Liberties, and Properties of the Subject.] And he saith well, tht it was endevoured to be proved, and endeavoured only, nothing amounting to a proof being to be found in that which follows. It had before been voted by the House of Commons, that the Commons are against fundamental Laws of this Realm,Hist K Charls. fol. 208. against the Kings Prerogative, prop of the Subject, the Right of Parliament, and do tend to faction and sedition; and it was fit that some endeavours should be used to make good the Vote. But this being but a general charge, requires a general answer only, and it shall be this. Before the Canons wee subscribed, they were imparted to the King by the Archbishop of Canter∣bury, and by the King communicated to the Lords of
the Councel; who calling to them the assistance of the Judges, and some of the Kings Councel learned in the Laws of this Realm, caus'd the said Canons to be read and considered of, the King being then present. By all which upon due and mature deliberation the Canons were approv'd, and being so approv'd, were sent back to the Clergy in the Convocation, and by them subscribed. And certainly it had been strange that they should pass the approbation of the Judges and learned Lawyers, had they contained any thing against the fundamental Laws of the Land, the property of the Subject, and the Rights of Par∣liament; or been approv'd of by the Lords of his Maje∣sties Conncel, had any thing been contained in them de∣rogatory to the Kings Prerogative, or tending to Faction and Sedition. So that the foundation being ill laid, the superstructures and objections which are built upon it, may be easily shaken and thrown down. To the first therefore it is answered, that nothing hath been more ordinary in all former times, then for the Canons of the Church to in∣flict penalties on such as shall disobey them; exemplified in the late Canons of 603. many of which extend not only unto Excommunication, but even to Degradation and Ir∣regularity, for which see Can. 38. 113. &c. To the second, That there is nothing in those Canons which determineth or limiteth the Kings Authority, but much that makes for and defendeth the Right of the Subject, for which the Convocation might rather have expected thanks then censure from ensuing Parliaments. To the third, That when the Canon did declare the Government of Kings to be founded on the Law of Nature, it was not to condemn all other Governments as being unlawful, but to com∣mend that of Kings as being the best. Nor can it Logi∣cally be infer'd, that because the Kingly Government is not received in all places, that therefore it ought not so to be: or that the Govenment (by this Canon) should be the same in all places, and in all alike; because some
Kings do and may lawfully pt with many of Rights for the good of their Subject, which others do may as lawfully retain unto themselves. o the fourth, That the Doctrine of Non-Resistance is the words of St. Paul, Rom. condemn the Canon in that behalf, Word of God upon which it is fifth and last, That the Statute that the dayes there mntion dayes and no other, reltes only to the some other Festivals whih had been formerly in the Realm of England, and not to the Church from ordining any other Holy causes) in the times to come. Assuredly Lawyer would have spoke more home could the cause have born it. Floquentm in the Oraos language. And therefore on the heads of the Arguments s our them to us) I must needs think that they were fitted to the sense of the House, then they were own. What influence these arguments might have on the House of Peers, when reported by the Bishop of I am not able to affirm: But o far I our Author, that they lost neither came from his moth, (who as our Author sayes) back friend to the Canons▪ because made and durance in the Tower. A piece of I did not look for. The power of thus shaken and endangered, that of and the Bishops Courts was not one being taken away by Act of other much weaened in the a clause in that Act, of which Fol. 182. Mr.
should so supinely suffer themselves to be surprised in their power.] And well might Mr. Pim triumph, as having gain'd the point he aim'd at in subverting the coercive power, and consequently the whole exercise of Ecclesiastical Jrisdiction. But he had no reason to impute it to the inger of God, or to the carelesness of the Bishops in suf∣feing themselves to be so supinely surpris'd. For first e Bishops saw too plainly, that those general words by which they were disabled from inflicting any pain or penalty, would be extended to Suspension, Excommunica∣tion, and other Ecclesiastical censures. But secondly, they saw withall that the stream was too strong for them to ive against, most of the Lords being wrought on by the popular party in the House of Commons, to pass the Bill. Thirdly, they were not without hope, that when the Scots Amy was disbanded, and that Nation satisfied, by the Kings condescensions to them, there might be such an explication made of those general words, as to restrain them unto temporal pains and civil penalties, by which the censures of the Church might remain as formely. And fourthly, in order thereunto they had procured a Proviso to be entred in the House of Pas, That the general words in this Bill should extend only to the High Commission Court, and not reach other Ec∣clesiastical jurisdictions, for which consult our Author▪ fol. 181. aving thus passed over such matters as con∣cern the Chch, we will now look upon some few things which relate to the Parliament. And the first is that Fol. 174. D. Pocklington, and Dr. Bray were the tw first that felt the displeasures of it, the former for preach∣ing and printing, the later for licencing two Books, one cal Sunday no Sabbh, the other the Christian Altar.] No other way to  the hig displeaures of the Bishop of Lincoln, but by uch a Sacrifice, who therefore is in∣trusted to gather such Propositions out of those tw
Books as were to be recaned by the one▪ and for which the other was to be depriv'd of all his preferments. And in this the Bishop serv'd his own turn, and the peoples too: his own turn first in the great controversie of the Altar, in which he was so great a ickle, and in which Pocklington was thought to have provoked him to take that revenge. The Peoples turn he serv'd next, in the con∣demning and recanting of some points about the Sab∣bath, though therein he ran cross to his former practice. Who had been not long since so far from thoe Sabbata∣rian rigors (which now he would fain be thought to countenance) that he caus'd a Comedy to be acted be∣fore him at his house at Bugden, not only on a Sunday in the afternoon, but upon such a Sunday also on which he had publickly given sacred Orders both to Piests and Deacons. And to this Comedy he invited the Earl of Manchester, and divers of the neighbouring entry, though on this turning of the tide, he did not only cause these Doctors to be condemned for some Opini∣ons which formerly himself allowed of, but mov'd at the Assembly in Ierusalem Chamber, that all Books should be publickly burnt, which had disputed the Morality of the Lords-day-Sabbath. Quo teneam nodo, &c. as the Poet hath it. But whereas our Author tells us in the following words, that soon after both the Doctors deceaed for grief, I dare with some confidence tell him, there was no such matter; Dr. Pocklington living about two years, and Dr. Bray above four years after, with as great chearfulness and courage as ever formerly. How he hath dealt with Dr. Cousen, we shall see more at large hereafter in a place by it self, the discourse thereof be∣ing too long and too full of particulars, to come with∣in the compass of an Animadveon. In the mean time proceed we unto Bishop  of whom thus as followeth.
Fol. 182. A Bill was sent up by the Commons against Matthew Wren Bishop of ly, containing 25 Articles, &c.] That such a Bill was nt up from the House of Com∣mons is undoubtedly true. And no less true it is, that many impeachments of like nature were hammered at and about the same time against many other Clergy men of good note, though inerior Order; the Articles whereof were printed and exposed to open sale to their great disparagement. And therefore I would fain know the reason, why this man should be singled ou amongst all the rest to stand impeached upon Record in our Au∣thors History; especially considering that there was no∣thing done by the Lords in pursuance of it, the impeach∣ment dying in a manner assoon as born. Was it beuse he was more criminal then the others were the  was better prov'd, or for what ? Well, since our Author will not, I will tell you . And I will tell it in the words of King , in the Conference at Hampton-Court, upon occasion of a exception taken by Dr. Reynolds at a passage in Ecclesisti∣cus. What trow ye, said the King, makes these men so agy with Ecclescus? By my Sal, I think he was a Bishop or else they would never use him so. And so much for tha. Fol. 174. About this time was the first motion of a new Protestatin to be taken all over England, which some months ter was generally performed.] What time this was ou Atho tells us in the margin, pointing to Feb. 4. about which time there was no mention of the Protestation, nor occasion for it. The first mention which was made of the Ptestation was upon Munday, May the third, on which day it was mentioned, fram'd, and taken by all the Membes of the House of Commons, excepting the Lord George Digby (now Earl of Bristol) and an Uncle of . The occasion of it was a Speech made by the King in the House of Peers in favour of the Earl of upon the Saturday before; which mov'd them
to unite themselves by this  bringing to condign punishment all such as all either by orce, practice, plots, councels, conspiracies, or otherwise do any thig to the contrary of any thing in the same Prtestation contain'd. Which Proestation being carried into the  of Peers, was after some few dyes generally taken by that House also. But te prevalent party in the  of Commons having fther aims then such as our Author pleaseth to take notice of, first cas'd  to be  by an Order of the fifth of May▪ that they down to the Sheriffes and Isices of Peace in the se∣veral Shires; to whom the intimaed, that as they the taking of it in themselves▪ so they culd not but ap∣prove it in all such as should take i. But fnding that this did not much edifie with the Count , they desired the Lords to concur with them the same. Failing thereof, by an Order of their own House only, Iuly 30. it was declared, that the Protsta∣tion made by them was fit to be taken by every Person that was well affected in Religion, and to the good f the Com∣mon-wealth; and therefore what Person ever  not tak the same, was unfit to bear Office in the Church or Common-wealth. Which notwithstaning many refus'd to take it, as our Athor telleth us, not knowing bt use might be made thereof: as afteward by those Pikes and Protestations, whih conded some of the five Members to the House of Commons. Fol. 183▪ About this time came forth the Lrd Book his Book against Bishops, accusing them in respect of their Parentage to be de faece populi, of the  of the peple; and in respect of their Studies no way fi for Government, or to be Barons in Parliamet:] A passage mis-beoming no mans pen so much as his  whose Father neither was of a better Extraction then some, no better let as in the way of his subsisence then any of the Bi∣shops (whom he thus upbraideth) had been left by their
Fathes. From the first part of which calumny the Bi∣shops freed themselves well enough, as appears by our Author. And from the second, since they were too mo∣dest to speak in their own commendations, our Author might have freed them with one of the old tales which are in his budget. And the tale is of a Nobleman in King Harry the eighths time,Camd. Rem. pag. 286. who told Mr. Pac one of the Kings Secretaries, in contempt of Learning, that it was enough for Noblemens sons to winde their horn, and carry their Hauk fair, and to leave study and learning to the children of mean men: to whom the aforesaid Mr. Pace replyed; then you and other Noblemen must be content, that your children may winde their horns, and keep their Hauks, while the chil∣dren of mean men do mannage matters of Estate. And cer∣tainly there can be no reason why men that have been verst in Books, studied in Histories, and thereby made ac∣quainted with the chief occurrences of most States and Kingdomes, should not be thought as fit to manage the affairs of State, as those who spend their time in Hauk∣ing and Hunting, if not upon some worse employments. For that a Superinduction of holy Orders should prove a Supersedeas to all civil prudence, is such a wilde extrava∣gant fancy as no man of judgement can allow of. Fol. 188. The next day the 12 Subscribers were voted to be committed to the Tower, save that Bishop Morton of Durham, and Hall of Norwich found some favour.] Our Author speaks this of those twelve Bishops who had subscrib'd a Protestation for preserving their Rights and Votes in the House of Peers during the time of their involuntary absence, to which they were compelled by threats, menaces, and some open acts of violence com∣mitted on them. But in the name of one of the Bi∣shops, who found the favour of not being sent unto the Tower, he is much mistaken; it not being Dr. Hall Bi∣shop of Norwich, but Dr. Wright Bishop of Coventry and
Lichfield, who found that favour at their hands. The like Misnomer I finde after, fol. 193. where he speaks of William Earl of Bath; the Earl of Bath of whom he speaks being nam'd Henry, and not William, unless he chang'd his name when he succeeded in that Earldom, as I think he did not, & I am sure our Author will not say he did. As much he is mistaken also in point of time, leaving the Bishops in prison for eighteen weeks, whereas they were scarce detained there for half that time. For being committed to the Tower in the end of December, they were released by an Order of the House of Peers on the fifteenth of February, being the next day after the Bill for taking away their Votes had passed in Parliament. But then the Commons looking on them, as devested of their Right of Peerage, and consequently (as they thought) in the same rank with themselves, return'd them to the Tower again▪ and having kept them there some few weeks (long enough to declare their power) dis∣charged them upon Bail, and so sent them home. Fol. 195. About this time the word Malignant was born (as to common use) in England, and first as a nte f disgrace on the Kings Party, and (because one had had as good be dumb as not speak with the volge) possibly in that sense it may occur in our ensuing History.] Nothing more possible then that our Author should make use of any word of disgrace with which the Kings party was r∣proached. And if he calls them formerly by the name of Royalists and High Royalists, as he ometimes it was not because he thought them worthy of no woe a Title, but because the name of Malignant hd not then been born. He cannot chuse but know, that the name of Round-head was born at the same time also, and that it was as common in the Kings Party to call the Parliamentarians by the name of Round-heads, as it was with those of the Parliament Party, to call the Kings Adherents by the name of Malignants. And yet I
, that the word Round-head, as it was fixed as a  of disgrace on the Parliament party, doth not occur, on any occasion whatsoever, in our Authors History. But kissing goes by favour, as the saying is, and therefore let him avour whom he pleases, and kiss where he favoueth. Fol. 196. By this time ten of the eleven Bishops formerly their Protestation to the Parliament, were after sme moneths durance (upon good Bail given) released, &c.] Of the releasing of these Bishops we have spoke al∣ready. We ae now only to observe such mistakes and errors as relate unto it. And first they were not re∣leased at or about the time which our Author speaks of, that is to say, after sch time as the word plunder had be∣gun to be us'd amongst us. Plunder both name and thing was unknown in England, till the beginning of the war; and the war began not till September, Anno 1642. which was some moneths after the releasing of the Bishops. Secondly, he telleth us, that ten of the eleven which had subscribed, were released, whereas thee were twelve which had subscrib'd, as appears fol. 187. whereof ten were sent unto the Tower, and the other two committed to the cusody of the Black-Rod, fl. 188. And if ten only were releast, the other two must be kept in custody for a longer time: whereas we finde the Bishop of Norwich at home in his Diocess, and the Bishop of Durham at liberty in London; they being the two whom he makes so far favour'd by the Parliament, as they sapt the Tower. Thirdly, he tel∣leth us, that when all others were releast, Bishop Wren detain'd in the Tower, which is nothing so. That Bishop was releast upon bail when the other were, re∣turn'd into his  as the othes did, and there con∣tinued for a time, when on a sudden he was snatched his  at  in the Isle of Ely, carryed the Tower, and there imprisoned, never being
brought unto a hearing, nor any cause shewn  his im∣prisonment to this very day. Fourthly, Achbishop Williams after his restoring unto liberty went not into the Kings Quarters, as our Autho saith, but unto one of his own houses in Yorkshire, where he continued till the year 1643. and then came to Oxrd: not that he found the North too cold for him, o the , but to solicit for renewing of his Cmmndam in the Deary of Westminster, the time for which he ws to hold it drawing towards an end. Fol. 196. Some of the aged Bishops had their tongues so used to the language of a third Estate, that more then once they ran on that (reputed) Rock in their speches, for which they were publickly sen, and enjoyned an ac∣knowledgement of their mistake.] By whom they were so publickly shent, and who they were tht so ingenr∣ously acknowledged their mistake, as my Author telleth us not, so neither can I say whether it be  or false. But I must needs say, that there was small ingenity in acknowledging a mistake in that wherein they not been mistaken; or by endeavouring to avoid a re∣puted Rock, to run themselves on a certain Rock, even the Rock of scandal. For that the English Bishops had their vote in Parliament as a third , and not in the capacity of temporal Barons, will evidently appear by these reasons following. For first the Clegy in all other Christian Kingdoms of thee Nothwest prts make the third Estate; that is to say, in the German Empire, as appears by Thuanus the Historian, lib. 2. In France, as is affirmed by Paulus Aemilius, lib. 9. in Spain, as testifieth Bodinus in his De Bepub. lib. 3. Fo which consult also the General History of Spain, as in point of practice, lib. 9, 10, 11, 14. In Hngry, as witnesseth Bonfinius, Dec. 2. l. 1. In by Thuanus also, lib. 56. In Denmark as  tel∣leth us in Historia
observing antiently the same form and order of Go∣vernment as was us'd by the Danes. The like we finde in Camden for the Realm of Scotland, in which anti∣ently the Lords Spiritual, viz. Bishops, Abbots, Priors, made the third Estate. And certainly it were very strange, if the Bishops and other Prelates in the Realm of England, being a great and powerful body, should move in a lower Sphere in England, then they doe elsewhere. But secondly, not to stand only upon pro∣bable inferences, we finde first in the History of Titus Li∣vius, touching the Reign and Acts of King Henry the fifth, that when his Funerals were ended, the three Estates of the Realm of England did assemble together, and declared his Son King Henry the sixth, being an Infant of eight moneths old, to be their Soveraign Lord as his Heir and Successor. And if the Lords Spiritual did not then make the third Estate, I would know who did. Secondly, the Petition tendred to Richard Duke of Glocester, to accept the Crown, occurring in the Parliament Rolls, runs in the name of the three Estates of the Realm, that is to say, The Lords Spiritual, and Temporal, and the Commons thereof. Thirdly, in the first Par∣liament of the said Richard lately Crowned King, it is said expresly, that at the request and by the consent of the three Estates of this Realm, that is to say, the Lords Spiritual, and Temporal, and Commons of this Land assembled in this present Parliament, and by Authority of the same it be pronounced, decreed, and declared, That our said Soveraign Lord the King, was, and is the very and undoubted King of this Realm of England, &c. Fourthly, it is acknowledged so in the Sta∣tute of 1 Eliz. cap. 3. where the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and the Commons in that Parliament assembled, being said expresly, and in terminis, to represent the three Estates of this Realm of England, did recognize the Queens Majesty to be their true,
lawful and undoubted Soveraign Liege Lady, and Queen. Adde unto these the Testimony of Sir Ed∣ward Cooke, though a private person, who in his Book of the Jurisdiction of Courts (published by order of the long Parliament) chap. 1. doth expresly say; That the Parliament consists of the Head and Body; that the Head is the King, that the Body are the three Etates, viz. the Lords Spiritual, and Temporal, and Commons. In which words we have not only the opinion and tesi∣mony of that learned Lawyer, but the Authority o the long Parliament also, though against it self. Thoe aged Bishops had been but little studied in their own con∣cernments, and betray'd their Rights, if any of them did acknowledge any such mistake in chllenging to them∣selves the name and priviledges of the third . Fol. 196. The Convocation now not sitting and mat∣ters of Religion being brought under the cognizance of the Parliament, their Wisdoms adjudged it not only conveni∣ent, but necessary, that some prime Clergy men might be consulted with.] It seems then, that the setting up o the new Assembly, consisting of certain Lords and Gentlemen, and two or more Divine out of every County, must be ascrib'd to the not sitting of the Convocation. Whereas if that had been the reaon, the Convocation should have been first waned to re∣assemble, with liberty and safe conducts given them to attend that service, and freedom to debate such mat∣ters as conduced to the Peace of the Church. If on those terms they had not met, the substituting of the new Assembly might have had some ground: though being call'd and nominated as they were by the Hose of Commons, nothing they did could binde the Clergy, further then as they were compellable by the power of the sword. But the truth is, the Convocation was not held fit to be trusted in the present Designs; there be∣ing no hope that they would
change of the Goverent, or to the abrogating of the Liturgy of the Church of England, in all which the Divines of their own nomination were presum'd to serve them. And so accordingly they did, advancing their Presbyteries in the place of Episcopacy, their Di∣rectory in the room of the Common Prayer Book, their Confession to the quality of the Book of Articles: all of them so short liv'd, of so little continuance, that none of them past over their Probationers year. Final∣ly having sev'd the turn, amus'd the world, with do∣ing nothing, they made their Exit, with far fewer Plau∣dites then they expected at their entrance. In the Re∣cital of whose names, our Author craves pardon for omitting the greatest part of them, as unknown to him: whereas he might have found them all in the Ordinance of the Lords and Commons by which they were called and impowered to be an Assembly. Of which par∣don he afterwards presumes in case he hath not mar∣shalled them in their Seniority; because saith he Fol. 198. It avours something of a Prelatical Spirit to be offended about Precedency.] I ee our Author is no Changeling, Primus ad extremum similis sibi, the very same at last as he was at the first. Certainly if it a∣vour of a Prelatical Spirit to contend about Preceden∣cies, that Spirit by some Pythagorean Metempsycho∣sis hath passed into the bodies of the Presbyterians, whose pride had swell'd them in conceit above Kings and Princes. Nothing more positive then that of Tra∣vers (one of our Authors shining Lights, for so he cals him, Lib. 9. fol. 218.) in his Book of Discipline; Huic Discipline omnes Principes submittere Fasces suos necesse est, as his words there are. Nothing more proud and arrogant then that of the Presbyterians in Queen Eli∣zabeths time,Rg in Praef. to the Artic. who used frequently to say, That King and Queens must lay down their Scepters, and lick up the very dust of the
Churrches feet, that is, their own. And this, I trow, doth not savour so much of a Prelatical as a Papal Spi∣rit. Diogenes the Cynick affecting a vain-glorious po∣verty, came into Plato's Chamber, and trampled the Bed and other furniture thereof under his feet, using these words: Calco Platonis fastum, that he trampled on the pride of Plato. To which Plato very gravely an∣swered, Sed majori fastu, intimating that the Cynick shewed more pride in that foolish action, then all the Ornaments of his Chamber could accuse him of. Our Author need not travel far for the application, it comes home unto him. Fol. 203. We listen not to their fancy who have reckoned the words in the Covenant, six hundred sixty six, &c.] I must confess my self not to be so much a Pythago∣rean, as to nde Divinity in Numbers, nor am taken with such Mysteries as some fancy in them. And yet I cannot chuse but say, that the Number of Six hundred sixty six words, neither more nor less, which are found in the Covenant, though they conclude nothing, yet they signifie something. Our Author cannot chuse but know what pains were taken even in the times of Irenaeus to finde out Antichrist by this number: Some think∣ing then that they had found it in  with reference to the▪ persecuting Roman Emperors. Some Prote∣stants think that they had found it in a Dedication to Pope Paul the fifth, which was Paulo Vto Vice-Deo; the numeral letters whereof, that is to say D. C. L. V. V. V. I. amount exactly unto six hundred sixty six, which is the Number of the Beast in Revelation. The Papists on the other side finde it in the name of Luther, but in what language or how speld, I remember not. And therefore whosoever he was, which made this Observation upon the Covenant, he deserves more to be commended for his wit, then con∣demned for his idleness. But much less is our Author
pleas'd with their parallel, who finding this Covenant to consist of six branches, compare it to the terrible Statute of the six Articles made by Harry the eighth. And not compar'd so without cause. For though I cannot say, that the Ordinance which enjoyn'd the Covenant did draw so much bloud from the poor Pro∣testants as that Statute did; yet I may warrantably say, that there were moe Families undone by the one, then lives lost by the other. And secondly, it may be said (I fear too truly) that though the Cove∣nant were writ in ink, it was seal'd with bloud; many thousands of true English Protestants having lost their lives by the coming in of the Scottish Armies drawn into England, in pursuance of this Band or Covenant. So that the Lashes of each Whip being equal in num∣ber, or Author hath no reason to be displeas'd with them that made that Parallel, though he may have some reason to himself not to applaud them. Fol. 207. Now began the great and general purgation of the Clergy in the Parliaments Quarters, &c. Some of whose offences were so foul, it is a shame to report them, crying to justice for punishment.] And it was time that such a purgation should be made, if their offences were so foul as our Author makes them. But first our Au∣thor might have done well to have satisfied himself in all particulars before he rais'd so foul a scandal on his Chriian Brethren, and not to have taken them up upon hearsay, or on no better grounds then the cre∣dit of the first Century, which he after mentions. Which modesty he might have learnt, 1. From the Author of that scandalous and infamous Pamphlet (whatsoever he was) desisting from the writing of a second Century, as being sensible, that the Subject was generally odious. And certainly if it were odious in that party to write the same, it must be much more odious in our Author to defend the writing. He might have learnt it 2. from
the most excellent Master in the Schools of Piety and Morality which this Age hath given us, even the King himself; who as our Author telleth us, fol. 208. would not give way that any such Book should be witten of the vicious lives of some Parliament Ministers, when such an undertaking was presented to him. But if their Offences were so foul, the Writer of the Century had some reason for what he did, and our Author hath some reason for what he saith, especially if the putting in of one Herb had not spoil'd all the Pot of Pot∣tage. But first, Qui alterum incusat probri seipsum in∣tueri oportet, is a good rule in the Schools of Prudence, and therefore it concerns our Author to be sure of this, that all things be well at home, both in his own Per∣son and in his Family, before he throw so much foul dirt in the face of his Brethren. In which respect Ma∣nutius was conceived to be the unfittest man in Rome (as indeed he was) to perform the Office of a Censor, though most ambitiously he affected and attain'd that Dignity; of whom it is affirmed by Velleius Paterculus, Nec quicquam obicere pouit Adolescentibus quod non agnosceret Senex, that is to say, that he was able to object no crime to the younger sort, of which him∣self being then well in years, was not also guilty. And secondly, Non temere de fratre mali aliquid credendum esse, was antiently a Rule in the Schools of Charity; which our Autho either hath forgotten, or else never learned. He would otherwise have examin'd the Proofs, before he had pronounced the Sentence; and not have positively condemned these poor men for such foul of∣fences as cryed to justice for punishment; and of such scan∣dalous enormities, as were not fit to be covered with the Mantle of Charity. But he takes himself up at last with a doubt, that there might want sufficient proof to convict them of it. Nothing (saith he) can be said in their excuse, if (what was the main matter
crimes were sufficiently proved. And if they were not sufficiently proved, as indeed they were not, (no wit∣ness coming in upon Oath to make good the Charge) our Author hath sufficiently prov'd himself an unrighte∣ous Iudge, an Accusator fratrum, as we know who is, in accung and condemning them for scandalous enormi∣ties and foul offences, branding them by the name of Baal, and calling them unsavoury Salt, not fit to be thrown upon the dunghil, yet all this while to be unsatisfied in the sufficiency of the proof. Decedis ab Officio Religiosi Iudicis,Minut. Fael. is the least than can be said here, and I say no more. Only I note, what sport was made by that Century then, and may be made hereafter of this part of the History in the Court of Rome; to which the libellous Pamphlets of Martin-Mar-Prelate publisht in Queen Elizabeths time serv'd for Authentick Witnesses, and sufficient evidence to disgce this Church. Nor have they spar'd to look upon this whole business as an act of divine Retaliation in turning so many of the Regular and Orthodox Clergy out of their Benefices and Preferments by our new Re∣formers, under colour of some Scandalous Enormities by them committed; under pretence whereof so many poor Monks and Fryers were (as they say) turn'd ou of their Cells with like inhumanity by those which had the first hammeing of the Reformation here by law establisht. But to say truth, it is no wonder if he concur with othes in the condemnation of particular persons, since he concurs with others in the condemnation of the Chrch it self. For speaking of the separation made by Mr. Goodwin, Mr. Nye, &c. fol. 209. he professeth, that he rather doth believe, that the sinful corruptions of the worship and government of this Church taking hold on their consciences, and their inability to comport any longer therewith, was rather the true cause of their deserting of their Countrey; then that it was for Debt, or Danger
as Mr. Edwards in his Book of his had suggested of them. What grounds Mr. Edwards had for his suggesti∣on, I enquire not now; though coming from the Pn of one who was no friend unto the Government and Liturgy of the Church of England, it might have met with greater credit in our Author. For if these men be not allowed for witnesses against one another, the Church would be in worse condition then the antient Borderers: Amongst whom though the teimony of an English man against a Scot, or of a Scot against the English (in matters of spoil and depedation) could not finde admittance; yet a Scots evidence against a Scot was beyond exception. Lege inter Limita∣neos cautum, ut nullus nisi Anglus in Anglum,Annal Eliz. nullus nisi Scotus in Scotum testis admittatur, as we read in Camden. We see by this, as by other passages, which way our Authors Bowl is biassed, how constantly he declares himself in favour of those, who have either separated from the Church, or appear'd against it. Rather then such good people shall be thought to forsake the Land for Debt or Danger, the Church shall be accus'd for laying the heavy burthen of Conformity upon their Consciences, which neither they, nor their fore-fathers (the old English Puritans) were resolved to bear. For what else were those sinful Corruptions of this Church in Government and Worship, which laid hold of their Consciences, (as our Author words it) but the Go∣vernment of the Church by Bishops, the Rites and Ce∣remonies of the Church here by law establisht; which yet must be allowed of by our Author as the more true and real cause of their Separation, then that which we finde in Mr. Edwards. Nor can our Author save him∣self by his parenthesis, in which he tells us, that he uses their language only; for using it without check or censure, he makes it his own as well as theirs, and ustifies them in the action, which he should have condemn'd.
Fol. 214. Here Mr. Christopher Love gave great of∣fence to the Royalists in his Sermon, shewing the impossi∣bility of an Agreement, &c.] This happen'd at the Trea∣ty at Vxbridge, where he had thrust himself (as the Commissioners affirm'd) upon that attendance. And for the words at which the offence was taken, they were these, viz. That the Kings Commis∣sioners came with Hearts full of bloud,Treaty at Vx∣bidge, p. 31. and that there was as great distance between that Treaty and Peace, as between Heaven and Hell. For which, though some condemn him for want of charity, and others for want of discretion; yet our Author seems more willing to have mens censures fall lightly on him, because since he hath suffered, and so sa∣fied here for his faults in this, or any other kinde. This Rule I both approve, and am willing to practise, and could wish our Author were so minded; who will not let the Archbishop of Canterbury be at rest in his grave after all his sufferings, notwithstanding the great dif∣ference between the persons, and the impulsives to their deaths. But Mr. Love was Mr. Love, and Bishop Laud was but a Bishop, to whom now we come. Fol. 216. As appears by his own Diary, which if evi∣dence against him for his faults, may be used as a witness of his good works.] The Diary which our Author speaks of, was the Archbishops practical Commentary on those words of David, viz. Teach me O Lord so to num∣ber my days, that I may apply my heart unto wisdom. No memorable passage hapned in the whole course of his life, till the end of May, 1633. (when his Papers were seis'd on by Mr. Prin) which he had not book'd in a Memorial by the way of a Diary or Journal. Out of which, though Mr. Prin excerpted nothing but that which he conceiv'd might tend most visibly to his dis∣grace and disadvantage, and publish'd it to that end in pint; yet when it came to the perusal of equal and
indifferent men, it was so far from serving as an evi∣dence of his faults, (as our Author words it) that it shew'd him to be a Man of Exemplary Piety in himself, un∣mov'd fidelity to his friend, of most perfect loyalty to his Master, and honest affections to the Publick. He that shall look upon the list of the things projected to be done, and in part done, by him, fol. 28, 29. will finde, that both his heart was set on, and his hand en∣gag'd in many excellent pieces of work, tending to the great honour and benefit both of Church and State; not incident to a man of such narrow comprehensions, as some of his profest Enemies were pleas'd to make him. Certain I am, that as Mr. Prin lost his end, so he could not get much thanks for that piece of service. Fol. 217. He is generally charged with Popish inclina∣tions, and the story is commonly told and believ'd of a Lady, &c.] Here is a charge of the Archbishops inclination unto Popery, and the proof nothing but a tale, and the tale of a Lady, Quid vento? Mulier; Quid Muliere? Nihil. The substance of the tale is this, that a certain Lady (if any Lady may be certain) who turning Papist, was askt by the Archbishop the cause of her changing; to which she answered, that it was because she alwayes ha∣ted to go in a croud. And being askt the meaning of that expression, she replyed again, that she perceiv'd his Lordship, and many others making haste to Rome, and therefore to prevent going in a press, she had gone befoe them. Whether this tale be true or false, though he doth not know, yet he resolves to set it down, and to set it down also with this Item, that it was generally believ'd. Be it so for once. For not being able to disprove it, I shall quit our Author with one story, and satisfie the equal Reader with another. First for my Author, I have head a
tale of a Lady too, to whose Table one Mr. Fuller was a welcome though a frequent guest; and being asked once by her whether he would please to eat the wing of a Woodcck, he would needs put her to the question, how her Ladyship knew it was a Woodcock, and not a Woodhen. And this he pressed with such a troublesome impotunity, that at last the Lady answered with some shew of displeasure, that the woodcock was Fuller headed, Fuller breasted, Fuller thighed, and in a word, every way Fullr. Whether this tale be true or false, I am not able to sy; but being generally believ'd▪ I have set it down also. Bt my other story is more serious, intended for the satisfaction of our Author, and the Reader both. It was in Nobember, Anno 1639. that I receiv'd a message from the Lord Archbishop, to attend him the next day at two of the clock in the afternoon. The Key being tun'd which opened the way into his Study, I found him sitting in a chair, holding a paper in both hands, and his eyes so fixt upon that paper, that he observ'd me not at my coming in. Finding him in that posture, I thought it fit and manners to retire again. But the noise I made by my retreat, bringing him back unto himself, he recall'd me again, and told me after some short pawse, that he well remembred that he had sent for me, but could not tell for his life what it was about. After which he was pleas'd to say (no without tears standing in his eyes) that he had then newly receiv'd a letter acquainting him with a Revolt of a Person of some Quality in North-Wales, to the Church of Rome; that he knew that the increase of Popery by such fre∣quent Revols, would be imputed unto him, and his Brethren the Bishops, who were all lest guilty of the same; that for his part he had done his utmost, so far forth as it might consist with the Rules of Prudence, and the Peservation of the Church to suppress that party, and to bring the chief sticklers in it to condign punish∣ment,
to the truth whereof (lifting up his wet eyes to Hea∣ven) he took God to witness; conjuring me (as I would answer it to God at the day of Judgement) that if ever I came to any of those places, which he, and his Brethren by reason of their great age were not like to hold long, I would imploy all such abilities as God had given me in suppressing that party, who by their open undeta∣kings, and secret practices were like to be the ruin of this flourishing Church. After some words of mine upon that occasion, I found some argument to divert him from those sad remembrances, and having brought him to some reasonable composedness, I took leave for the present; and some two or three dayes after wait∣ing on him again, he then told me the reason of his sending for me the time before. And this I deliver for a truth on the faith of a Christian; which I hope will over-ballance any Evidence which hath been brought to prove such Popish inclinations, as he stands generally charg'd with in our Authors History. Fol. 217. However most apparent it is by many passages in his life, that he endeavoured to take up many controver∣sies betwixt us and the Church of Rome.] And this in∣deed is Novum Crimen, that is to say, a crime of a new stamp, never coyn'd before. I thought, that when our Saviour said Beati Pacifici, it had been sufficient warant unto any man to endevour Peace, to build up the breache in the Church, and to make Ierusalem like a City which is at Vnity in it self; especially where it may be done not only salva charitare, without breach of charity, but salvâ fide too, without wrong to the faith. The greatest part of the Controversies betwixt us and the Church of Rome, not being in the Fundamentals, o in any Essential Points in the Christian Religion; I cannot otherwise look upon it, but as a most Christian pious work, to endeavour an atonement in the Sperstructures. But hereof our Author seems to doubt, first whether
endeavours to agree and compose the differences be law∣ul or not; and secondly, whether they be possible. As for the lawfulness thereof, I could never see any reason produc'd against it, nor so much as any question made of it till I found it here: against the possibility thereof, it hath been objected, that such, and so great is the pride of the Church of Rome, that they will condescend to no∣thing. And therefore if any such composition or agree∣ment be made, it must not be by their meeting us, but our going to them. But as our Author sayes, that many of the Archbishops equals adjudg'd that design of his to be impossible; so I may say (without making any such odious Comparisons) that many of our Authors betters have thought otherwise of it. It was the petulancy of the Puritans on the one side, and the pragmaticalness of the Iesuits on the other side, which made the breach wider then it was at the first; and had those hot spirits on both sides been charm'd a while, moderate men might possibly have agreed on such equal terms, as would have said a sure Foundation for the Peace of Christen∣dom. Now that all those in the Church of Rome are not so stiffly wedded to their own opinions as our Au∣thor makes them, appears, first by the testimony of the Archbishop of Spalato declaring in the High Commission a little before his going hence, that he acknowledged the Articles of this Church to be true, or profitable at the least, and none of them Heretical. It appears secondly, by a Tractate of Franciscus de Sancta Clara (as he calls himself) in which he putteth such a gloss upon the nine and thirty Articles of the Church of England, as rendreth them not inconsistent with the Doctrines of the Church of Rome. And if without prejudice to the truth, the Controversies might have been compos'd, it is most probable, that other Protestant Churches would have sued by their Agents to be included in the Peace: if not, the Church of England had lost nothing
by it, as being hated by the Calvinists, and not lov'd by the Lutherans. But our Author will not here desist (so soon hath he forgotten his own rule made in the case of Mr. Love) and therefore mustereth up his faults, viz. 1. Passion, though an human frailty. 2. His severity to his prede∣cessor, easing him before his time, and against his will, of his Iurisdiction. 3. His over-medling in State-matters. 4. His imposing of the Scottish Liturgy. Of all which we have spoke so much upon other occasions, that is to say, num. 246. 251. 289. 259. and therefore do not count it necessary to adde any thing here. And so I leave him to his rest, in the Bosom of Abraham, in the land of th Living. From the Archbishop of Canterbury, I should pro∣ceed to Dr. Williams, Archbishop of York; but that I must first remove a Block which lies in my way. Our Author having told us of the making and printing the Directory, is not content to let us see the cold entertain∣ment which it found when it came abroad, but let us see it in such terms as we did not look for. Fol. 222. Such (saith he) was, call it constancy, or obsti∣nacy, love, or doating, of the generality of the Nation, on the Common Prayer, that the Parliament found it fit, yea necessary, to back their former Ordinance with a second. Assuredly the generality of the people of England is much beholding to our Author, for making question, whe∣ther their adhering to the Liturgy then by Law esta∣blished, were not to be imputed rather unto obstinacy and doating, then to love and constancy. The Liturgy had been lookt on as a great blessing of God upon this Nation by the generality of the people, for the spce of fourscore years and upwards, they found it estlist by the Law, seal'd by the bloud of those that made it, confirm'd by many godly and religious Pinces; and
had almost no other form of making their ordinary ad∣dresses to Almighty God, but what was taught them in the Book of Common-Prayer. And could any discreet man think, or wise man hope, that a form of Prayer so univesally receiv'd, and so much esteem'd, could be laid by without reluctancy in those who had been so long accustom'd to it, or called obstinacy or doating in them, if they did not presently submit to every new nothing, which in the name of the then disputable Authority should be laid before them. And though our Author doth profess, that in the agitating of this Controvesie pro and con, he will reserve his private opinion to himself; yet he discovers it too plainly in the present passage. Quid verba audiam, cum facta videam? is a good rule here. He must needs shew his private opinion in this point, say he what he can; who makes a question, whether the adhesion of the people gene∣rally to the publick Liturgy, were built on obstinacy and doating, or on love and constancy. But if it must be obstinacy or doating in the generality of the people to adhere so cordially unto the Book of Common-Prayer, I marvel what it must be called in Stephen Marshall of Essex (that great Bel-weather for a time of the Pres∣byterians) who having had a chief hand in compiling the Directory, did notwithstanding marry his own Daughter by the form prescrib'd in the Common-Prayer Book; and having so done, paid down five pound immediately to the Church-wardens of the Pa∣rish, as the fine or forfeiture for using any other form of Marrige, then that of the Directory. The like to which (I have credibly been infomed) was done by Mr. Knightly of Fawsley, on the like occasion, and proba∣bly by many others of the same strain also. With like favour he beholds the two Universities as he de; the Liturgy, and hard it is to say, which he injureth
most. And first beginning with Oxford, he lets us know, that Fol. 231. Lately certain Delegates from the Univer∣sity of Oxford, pleaded their priviledges before the Com∣mittee of Parliament, that they were only visitable by the King, and such who should be deputed by him. But their Allegations were not of proof against the Paramount power of Parliament, the rather because a passage in an Article at the rendition of Oxford, was urged against them, where∣in they were subjected to such a Visitation.] Our Author here subjects the Vniversity of Oxford to the power of the Parliament, and that not only in regard of that Pa∣ramount power, which he ascribes unto the Parliament, that is to say, the two Houses of Parliament (for so we are to understand him) above all Estates; but also in re∣gard of an Article concerning the surrendry of Oxford, by which that Vniversity was subjected to such Visi∣tations. I finde indeed, that it was agreed on by the Commissioners on both sides touching the Surrendry of that City; That the Chancellor, Masters and Scho∣lars of the University of Oxon, and the Governors and Students of Christ-Church of King H. 8. his Fondation, and all other Heads and Go∣vernors,Artic. 13. Masters, Fellows, and Scholars of the Colledges, Halls, and Bodies Corporate, and Socie∣ties of the same University, and the publi Profes∣sors and Readers, and the Orator thereo, and all other persons belonging to the said University, or to any Colledges or Halls therein, shall and may, accor∣ding to their Statutes, Charters and Customs, enjoy their antient form of government, subodinate to the immediate Authority and power of Parliament. But I finde not, that any of the Heads or Delegates of that University were present at the making of this Article, or consented o it, or thoght themselves oblig'd by any
thing contained in it. Nor indeed could it stand with reason, that they should wave the patronage of a graci∣ous Soveraign, who had been a Nursing Father to them, and put themselves under the arbitrary power of those who they knew minded nothing but destruction toward them. And that the University did not think it self ob∣lig'd by any thing contained in that Article, appears even by our Author himself, who tells us in this very pas∣sage, that the Delegates from the Vniversity pleaded their priviledges before the Committee of Parliament, that they were only visitable by the King, and such as should be de∣puted by him; which certainly they had never done (un∣less our Author will conclude them to be fools or mad∣men) had they before submitted to that Paramount pow∣er, which he adscribes unto the Houses. Nor did the Houses of Parliament finde themselves impowered by this clause of the Article, to obtrude any such Visitation on them. And therefore when the Delegates had plea∣ded, and prov'd their priviledges, a Commission for a Visitation was issued by the two Houses of Parliament in the name of the King, but under the new broad Seal which themselves had made; which notwithstanding, the University stood still on their own defence, in re∣gard that though the Kings name was us'd in that Com∣mission, yet they knew well, that he had never given his consent unto it. Whereupon followed that great altera∣tion both  the Heads and Members of most Colledges which our Author speaks of. Nor deals he much more candidly in relating the proceedings of the Visitation, which was made in Cam∣bridge; the Visitors whereof (as acting by the Paramount power of Parliament) he more sensibly favoureth, then the poor sufferers, or malignant members, as he calls them, of that Vniversity. For whereas the Author of the Book called Querela Cantabrigionsis, hath told us of an
Oath of Discovery, obtruded by the Visitors upon several persons, whereby they were sworn to de∣tect one another,Hist. of Cam, fol. 168. even their dearest friends; Our Author who was out of the storm, seem∣ing not satisfied in the truth of this relation, must write to Mr. Ash, who was one of those Visitors, to be inform'd in that which he knew before; and on the reading of Mr. Ash his Answer, declares expresly, that no such Oath was tendred by him to that Vniversity. But first, Mr. Ash doth not absolutely deny, that there was any such Oath, but that he was a stranger to it, and possibly he might be so far a stranger to it, as not to be an Actor in that part of the Tragedy. Secondly, Mr. Ash only saith, that he cannot call to minde, that any such thing was mov'd by the Earl of Manchester; and yet I row, such a thing might be mov'd by the Earl of Man∣chester, though Mr. Ash after so many years was willing not to call it to minde, or else if no such Oath was ten∣dred by him, as our Author is assur'd there was not, that part of the Tragedy might be acted by Mr. Good the other Chaplain, without communicating his Instructi∣ons to his fellow Visitor. And therefore thirdly, I would know why Mr. Good was not writ to also, that having from him the like Certificate, our Author might have had the better grounds for his unbelief, before he had pronounc'd so positively against the Author of that Querela. Fourthly, and finally, it is not easie to be thought, that the Author of that Book should have vented sch a manifest falshood, especially in a matter so derogatory to all Christian charity, and that neither the Earl of Manchester, nor either of his two Chaplains, or any friend of theirs, should in the space of ten years and more, endeavour to wipe off such an odious imputation, till our Author out of pure zeal to the Paramount power, played the Advocate in it.
But to return again to Oxford, one of the first effects which followed on the alteration before remembred (though mentioned by our Author in another place) was the risling of the Treasury in Magdalen Colledge, of which he tells us, lib. 9. fol. 234. That a considera∣ble sum of gold, being by Dr. Humphry (who had been Master of that Colledge) left in a Chest, not to be opened, except some great necessity urged thereunto, was lately shar'd between Dr. Wilkinson (who then held the place of President by the power of the Visitors) and the Fel∣lows there. But first our Author is mistaken in Dr. Hum∣phry, though he be willing to entitle him (whom he calls a moderate Non-conformist) to some benefaction. The sum there found amounted to above twelve hundred double Pistolets, the old Doctor having no fewer then one hundred for his part of the spoil, and every Fellow thirty a piece for theirs; each Pistolet exchang'd at six∣teen shillings six pence, and yet the Exchanger got well by the bargain too. Too great a sum for Dr. Humphry, who had many children, and no provident woman to his wife, to leave behinde him to the Colledge, had he been so minded. The money (as the Tradition went in that Colledge) was left there by the Founder, to remedy and repair such uines as either the casualty of fire, or the ravages of a Civil war might bring upon it; to which the nature of the Coin being all French pieces (remember that the English at that time were Masters of a great part of France) gives a further testimony. Secondly, I would have our Author observe, that those whom he accuseth of this act of Rapine, were neither high Royalists, nor Covetous Conformists, as we know who words it, but men agreeable to the times, and of the same temper and affections which himself is of, the Conformists never being so covetous as to cast an eye to∣wrs it, nor the high Royalists so ignoble in their greatest
extremities, as to lay hands on it. And thirdly, I must needs charge our Author with some partiality in aggravating this fact (which indeed cannot be excused) with so many circumstances, and passing over the like at Cambridge, as a thing incredible; I cannot believe, saith he, Hist. Camb. fol. 38. what I have read in the Querela Cantabrigiensis, That three or four hundred pounds worth of Timber brought to Clare-hall for the repair of that House, was lately taken away; that is to say, inver∣ted to the use of some private persons, whom our Au∣thor hath beriended with this incredulity. Nay so ex∣tremely favourable he is to his friends in Cambridge, as to proess, that had he seen it, he would nt have be∣lieved his own eyes; which is the highest point of partia∣lity, and most invincible unbelief that I ever met with. There remains nothing now to conclude these Animad∣versions, but some passages relating to Archbishop Williams: in which I must confess my self not willing to meedle, but that I think it is as much against the Rule of distributive Justice to give one man to much, as to give another man too little. Let us see therefore what he saith of this Prelate, and how far he saith truth, the whole truth, and nothing but the truth. And first saith he, Fol. 227. He sueth to the Parliament for favour, and obtained it, whoseGeneral in a manner he becomes in lay∣ing siege to the Town and Castle of Abercon-way, &c.] This is the truth, but whether it be the whole truth, o not, I do more then doubt. His suing for and obtaining pardon from the Parliament, precedeth in the order o time, his being their Gneral; and thereore it is not to be thought, but that he had done some special service to the Parliament to prepare the way for such a fa∣vour. Before his commitment to the Tower about the Bishops Protestation, he was grown as odious to the
Commons, as before he had been honoured by them. He had liv'd some time with the King at Oxford, and is said to have done him good services in Wales; and (which is most) he had a fair temporal Estate, able to yeeld some thousands of pounds for Composition in Goldsmiths-hall. So that there must be somewhat in it more then ordinary, which occasioned that he neither came under Fine nor Ransom, as the rest of the Kings Party did. But what that was, whether he serv'd them with intelligence when he was at Oxford, or by inhibiting his Tenants and neighbours to pay their ac∣customed Taxes to the Kings Forces when he liv'd in Wales, I determine not. Certain it is, that before his redintegration with them, he had been in a man∣ner besieged in his House of Penrin by the Lord By∣ron, for the prohibiting of sending in such provisions as had been required; and that observing with what carelesness the Kings Souldiers did attend that service, he caus'd a sally to be made out of the House, and slew many of them. Upon the merit of which service, and the promise of greater, it is no wonder if such Mi∣nisters and Sollicitors of his as were imploy'd in that business, compounded for him without fine, though not without money. That which our Author tells us of his being their General, seems to have been fore-signified some five or six years before the siege of Conway Ca∣stle. For I remember that about such time as he was Prisoner in the Tower with the rest of the Bishops, his picture was sold commonly in black and white, in his Episcopal Roabs, with a square Cap on his head, a Rest in his hand, a Musket on his shoulder, and a Bandeleir about his neck. For which fancy at that time I could learn no reason, though he came up to it at the last. But he goes on.
Ibid. He was very chast in his Conversation.] And I hope so too, notwithstanding the scandalous reports of Weldon the nameless Author aim'd at (in the following words) in his Pamphlet called the Court of King Iames, and some vulgar fames or hear-says too much credited by a late Historian.Hist▪ of King Char. ol 21. But I must needs say, that I am not satisfied in the arguments which are brought to prove it. Wilson in his unworthy History of the Reign of King Iames, make him to be Eunuchus ab utero, an Eunuch from his Mo∣thers womb. The Author of the Pamphlet called the Observator observed, conceives that Wilson went too far in this expression, and rather thinks, that he contracted some impotency by falling on a stake when he was a Boy, fol. 10. Our Author here seems to incline unto this last, as∣suring us from such who knew the Privacies and casualtis of his infancy, that this Archbishop was but one degree remov'd from a Misogynist, though to palliate his infirmity to nble Fe∣males he was most compleat in his Courtly Addresses. But first, the falsity and frivolousness of these Deences leave the poor man under a worse suspicion then they oun him in. His manly countenance, together with his masculine voyce, shewed plainly that he was no Eunuch; and the agreeableness of his conversation with the fe∣male Sex, did as plainly shew, that he was no Misogynist, or woman-hater. And secondly, admitting these sur∣mises to be true and real, they rather serve to evidence his impotency, then to prove his chastity; it being no chastity in that man to abstain from women, who either by casualty, or by nature is disabled from such copulati∣ons. The vertue of chastity consisteth rather in the inte∣grity of the soul, then the mutiation of the body; and therefore more to be ascrib'd to those pious men, Qui salvis olis foemiam videntAnimo adversus libidinem aeco. Apol. c. 21., in Tertullians
language, then to the old Philosopher, who put out his eyes to avoid temptations of that nature. So that if this be all which they have to say for the Bishops chastity, these Advocates had shewed more wisdom in saying no∣thing, then speaking so little to the purpose. Ibid. Envy it self cannot deny, but that whither soever he went, he might be traced by the foot-steps of his benefa∣ction.] Amongst which benefactions it was none of the least, that in both the Universities he had so many Pensi∣oners; more (as it was commonly given out) then all the Noble-men and Bishops in the Land together: some of which receiv'd twenty Nobles, some ten pounds, and other twenty Marks per annum. And yet it may be said without envy, that none of all these Pensions came out of his own purse, but were laid as Rent-charges upon such Benefices as were in his disposing, either as Lord Keeper or Bishop of Lincoln, and assign'd over to such Scholars in each University as apply∣ed themselves to him. And because I would not be thought to say this without Book, I have both seen and had in my keeping, till of late, (if I have it not still) an Acquittance made unto a Minister in discharge of the payment of a Pension of twenty Nobles per an∣num, to one who was then a Student in Christ-Church. The names of the parties I forbear, he that receiv'd it, and he for whom it was receiv'd, (and perhaps he that paid it too) being still alive. And possible enough it is, that this Pensioning of so many Scholars had not been past over in silence by our Author, if he had not known the whole truth as well as the truth. Ibid. Much he expended on the Repair of Westminster Abbey-Church, &c The Library at Westminster was the effect of his bounty.] This though it be true in part, yet we cannot say of it, that it is either the whole truth, or nothing but the truth. For the plain truth is, that
neither the charge of repairing that Church, nor urnish∣ing that Library, came out of his own private Coffers, but the Churches rents: For at such time as he was made Lord Keeper of the great Seal; he caused it to be signified unto the Prebendaries of that Church, how inconvenient it would be both to him and them to keep up the Com∣mons of the Colledge; and gaind so farre upon them that they pass'd over to him all the rents of that Church, upon condition that he should pay the annual pensions of the Prebendaries, School-masters, Quire-men, and inferiour Officers, and maintain the Commons of the Scholars. The rest amounting to a great yearly value, was left wholly to him upon his honourable word and promise to expend the same for the good and honour of that Church. The surplusage of which expenses receiv'd by him for four years and upwards, amounted unto more than had been laid out by him on the Church and Library; as was offered to be proved before the Lords Commissioners at the visitation Anno. 1635. And as for the Library at St. Iohns, it might possibly cost him more wit than money; many books being dayly sent in to him (upon the intimation of his purpose of founding the two Libraries) by such as had either suits in Court, or business in Chancery, or any ways depended on him, or expected any favours from him, either as Bishop of Lincoln, or Dean of Westminster. Fol. 228. He hated Popery with a perfect hatred.] But Wison in his History of great Britain sings another song, whether in tune, or out of tune, they can best tell who liv'd most neere those times, and had opportunities to observe him. There is a mutering of some strange offer which he made to K. Iames at such time as the Prince was in Spain, and the Court seemed in common apprehension to warp towards Popery, which declared no such erfect hatred (as our Author speaks of) unto that Religion.
Nor was he coy of telling such whom he admitted unto privacies with him, that in the time of his greatness at Court, he was accounted for the Head of the Catholick Party, not sparing to declare what free and frequent ac∣cesses he gave the principal Sticklers in that cause both Priests and Iesuits, and the special services which he did them: And it must be somewhat more than strange if all this be true that he should hate Popery with a perfect atred; yet not more strange then that he should so stickle in the preferment of Dr. Theodore Price to the Arch-Bi∣shoprick of Armagh in Ireland, who died a profest Catholick, reconciled to the Church of Rome, as our Authour hath it, fol. 226. But if there be no more truth in the Bishop of Lincolns hating Popery, then in Dr. Prices dying a pro∣fessd Papist, there is no credit to be given at all to that part of the Character. Dr. Price, though once a great Favourite of this Bishop, and by him continued Sub-Dean of Westminster many years together, was at the last suppos'd to be better affected to Bishop Laud, than to Bishop Williams; Bishop Laud having lately appeared a Suitor for him for the Bishoprick of St. Asoph. And therefore that two Birds might be kild with the same bolt; no sooner was Dr. Price deceased, but the Bishop of Lincoln being then at Westminster, cals the Prebend together, tels them that he had been with Mr. Sub-Deane before his death, that he left him in very doubtful termes about Religion, and consequently could not tell in what orme to bury him; that if the Dr. had died a profest Papist he would have buried him himself, but being as it was, he could not see how any of the Prebendaries could ither with safty or with credit performe that office. But the Artifice and design being soon discovered, took so little effect that Dr. Newel one of the Senior Prebenda∣ies performed the Obsequies, the rest of the whole Chapter attending the body to the grave, with all due solmnitie.
Fol, 228. He was so great an honourer of the English that of his own cost he caused the same to be translated into Spa∣nish, and fairly printed to confute their false concept of our Church, &c.] If this be true, it makes not onely to his honour, but also to the honour of the English Liturgy translated into more languages then any Liturgy in the world what∣soever it be; translated into Latine by Alexand. Alesius, a lear∣ned Scot in King Edwards time; as afterward by Dr. Wal∣ter Haddon in the reign of Queen Elizabeth, and his transla∣tion mended by Dr. Mocket in the time of King Iames: tran∣slated into French by the command of that King, for the Isles of Guernsey and Iersey, into Spanish at the charge of this Bishop (as our Author telleth us) and finally into Greek by one Mr. etly by whom it was dedicated and presented to the late Arch Bishop of Canterbury the greatest Patron and Advancer of the English Liturgy. But 2. I have some reason to doubt, that the Liturgy was not translated at the charges of Bishop VVilliams. That it was done by his procurement I shall easily grant: but whosoever made the Bill of Charges, the Church paid the eckoning; the Dominican Fryer who translated it being ewarded with a Benefice and a good Prebend, as Cab▪ p. 7. he Bishop himself did signifie by letter to the Duke of uckingham. And as for the printing of the book, I cannot hink that it was at his charges neither, but at the char∣es of the Printer; it not being usual to give the Printers oney and the copy too. And 3. Taking it for grant∣d, that the Liturgy was translated and printed at this ishops charges, yet does not this prove him to be so reat an honourer of it as our Authour makes him, for d he been indeed a true honourer of the English Liturgy would have been a more diligent attendant on it then shewed himself: never repairing to the Church at Westminster (whereof he was Dean) from the 18. o bruary 1635. when the businesse of the great ew
was judged against him till his Commitment to the Tower in Iuly 1637. Nor ever going to the Chappell of the Tower (where he was a Prisoner) to attend the Divine Service of the Church, or receive the Sacrament, from Iuly 1637. when he was committed, to November 1640 when he was enlarged. A very strong Argument that he was no such Honourer of the English Liturgie, as is here pretended: A Liturgy most highly esteemed in all places wheresoever it came, and never so much vilified, despis'd, con∣demn'd as amongst our selves; and those amongst our selves who did so vilifie and despise it, by none more countenanced then by him, who is here said to be so great an Honourer of it. But for this Blow our Author hath his Buckler ready, telling us that Ibid▪ Not out of Sympathy to Non-conformists, but Anti∣pathy to Arch-bishop Laud, he was favourable to some select Persons of that Opinion. An Action somewhat like to that of the Earl of Kildare, who being ac∣cused before Henry the Eighth,Camd. Rem. for burning the Cathedrall Church of Cassiles in Ire∣land, profess'd ingeniously, That he would never have burnt the Church, if some body had not told him that the Bishop was in it. Hare to that Bishop, and Arch-Bishop of Irland, incited that mad Earle to burn his Cathedrall Church: and hate to Bishop Laud, the Primate and Metropolitan of all England, stird up this Bishop to raise a more unquenchable Combuion in the Church of England. So that we may affirm of him as Tertullian (in another case) of the Primitive Christians, Viz. Tanti non est bonum, quanti est odium Christianorum. But are we sure that hee was favourable to the Non-Conformists out of an antipathy to Bishop Laud only? I believe not so. His antipathy to the King did at strongly biass him that way, as any thing else. For
which I have the Testimony of the Author of the History of King Charls, publisht 1656. who telleth us of him, That being malevolently inclin'd (about the loss of the great Seale) he thought he could not gratifie beloved Revenge better then to endeavour the supplanting of his Soveraign.Hist. of King Ch. fol. 151. To which end finding him declining in the Affection of his People, he made his Apostrophe and Applications to them, fomenting popular discourses tending to the Kings dishonour, &C. And being once set upon that Pin (flectere si nequeo superos, Achronta moveb, as we know who said) it is no mr∣vell if he shewd himself favourable to the Nn Confor∣mists, as being Enemies to Kings an a Kingly Govern∣ment, and therefore likeliest to provide Fuell for a publick Fire: and yet besides these two there was a third impressive which might move a strongly on his Nature, as either of them. Our Author frmerly told us of him, that he was A bck Friend to the Canons, because he had no hand in the making of them. And for the same reason also I conceive, that he might shew himself a back Friend to the Church a Patron to the Non Conformists, of purpose to subvert those Coun∣sells, and ruinate those Designs for uniformity which had been resolved and agreed on without his Advice. Consilii omnis cujus ipse non Au∣thor esset,Tacit. Hist. L. . inimicus, as we know who said. In order whereunto he had no sooner heard that there was a purpose in some great Bishops of the Court to regulate the standing of the Communion Table, according to the Pattern of the Mother Cathedrall, and the royall Chappels; but he presently set himselfe against it, dispercing Copies of a Letter pretended to be writen y him to the Vicar of Grantham on that occasion, and publishing his Book called the Holy Table, ull of quotations, but more in number then in weight.
An this he did out or a meer Spirit of Contradiction, directly contrary to his own practice in all places where he had to do; that is to say, not only in the Collegiate Church at VVestminster, whereof he was Dean, and in the Cathedrall Church of Lincoln where∣of he was Bishop, but in his own private Chappell at Bugden also, where there was no body to act any thing in it but himself alone. And so I take my leave of this great Prelate, whom I both reverence for hi Place, and honour for his Parts, as much as any. And yet I cannot choose but say, that I find more reason to condemn, then there is to commend him; so that we may affirm of him as the Historian doth of Caiu Csar, Son of Agrippa, and Nephew to the great Augustus, viz. Tam varie se gessit, ut nec lau∣daturum magna nec vituperaurum mediocri materia deficiat, Hist. l. 2. as my Author hath it. And with the same Character, accommodated to our Au∣thor, and this present History I conclude these Notes; subjoyning only this old Saying as well for my com∣fort as defence, viz. Truth, though it may be blam'd, can never be sham'd.
AN APPENDIX To the fore-going ANIMADVERSIONS; CONTAINING THE APOLOGY OF Dr. IOHN COSINS, Dean of PETER BVRROVGH: In Answer to some Passages in the Church-History of BRITAIN; In which He finds himself concerned
AN APPENDIX To the fore-going ANIMADVERSIONS; &c. TIS well known to some in London, that the fore-going Animadversions were finished, and fitted for the Press before Michaelmas, Anno 1657. the reasons why they have lain so long unpub∣lished were these two especially: First, A Report that the Task was undertaken by a Cambridge man, who had more knowledge of the Author whom I had to deale with then I can pretend to; and I desired rather that the burthen of it the publick, satisfaction to all parties intrusted, should be born by any then my self. Secondly, There was a generall opinion spred abroad in all pla∣ces (to what ends I know not, nor much care) that the Church Historian was in hand with a Review of the Work before us, in which he was resolved to make some fair amends to Truth, to correct the errors of his Pen, and to make reparation to the injured Clergy, and, to say truth, there was none fitter then himself for that undertaking, none fitter to give Plaisters for the broken
head, then the man that break them. The Poet wa right enough in this, —m qui mihi vuler Solus Achilleo tollere more potest. That is to say, None but the man who gave the Wound, Achilles like, could make it sound. But the Reports being thought at last to have somewhat in them of design, or artifice, to stave off the business, I was sollicited with greater importunity to pblish the fore-going Animdversions, then I was at fir to undertake them. The Reader notwithstanding will be no looser by this delay. For first, It gave me leasure and opportunity of bestowing my second thought upon the Animadverons, (adding here and there some Observations, which before were wanting.) And secondly, It brought into my hands the Aplogie o Doctor Iohn Cosens, Dean of Peterburrough, in answer to some passages of our present History, directed in the way of a Letter to one Mr. VVarren, now deceased, with a desire to have them communicated to the Author of some Animadversions upon that History (which he was credibly informed, by what intelligence I know not) to be then in readiness. I shall therefore do him so much right as to communicate his Papers to publick view; First laying down Mr. Fers word they lye in his Hiory, and then leaving Dr. Cosns to speak for himself. So doing, I shall keep my self from engaging upon either ide, and leave the Reader to judge indifferently between the prti as h  occsion.
Mr. Fullers Charge on Dr. Cosens Lib 11. fol. 173. DR. Cosens soon after was highly ac∣cused for Superstition and unjust proceedings against one Mr. Smart on this occasion;Supestition chaged on Dr. Cosens The Doctor is charged to have set upon the Church of Durham, a Mrble Altar with Cherubins, which cost two thousand pounds, with all the Appur∣tenances thereof, namely, a Cope, with the Trinity, and God the Father in the Figure of an old man, ano∣ther with the Crucifix and Image of Christ, with a red Bewd and blew Cap; besides, he was accused for light∣ing two hundred Wax Candles about the Altar on Candlma day, for forbidding any Psalmes to be sung before or after Sermon, though making an Antheme to be sung of the three Kings of Colen (by the names of) Gasper, Balthazar, and Melchior, and for procuring a consecrated Knife, only to cut the Bread at the Com∣munion. 35. Mr. Smart a Prebendary of the Church,Crull usage of Mr. Smart. one of grave Aspect and reve∣rend Presence sharply inveighed, in a Sermon against these Innovations, taking for his Text, I hate all those that old superitios Vanities, but thy Law I love. 36. Hereupon he was kpt Prisoner foure Months by the High Commission of York, before any Articles were exhibited against him, and five Months before any Proctor was allowed him, hence was he carried to th High Commission at Lambth, and after long trouble re∣manded to York, fined five hundred pounds, committed to Prison, ordered to recant, and for neglect thereof,
fined again, Excommunicated, Degraded, and Deprived, his Damage (as brought in) amounting to many thousand pounds. 37. But now Mr. Rows of the House of Commons, bringing up the Charge to the Lords against Dr. Cosens, termed Mr. Smart the Protomartyr of England in these latter daies of Persecution, and large reparation was allowed to him, though he lived not long after to enjoy them. Now though none can excuse and defend Dr. Co∣sens his carriage herein,Dr. Cosins Praise. yet this must be repor∣ted to his due commendation; some yeares after getting over into France, he neither joyned with the Church of French Protestants at Charen Town nigh Paris, nor kept any Communion with the Papists therein, but confined himself to the Church of English Protestants therein, where, by his pious living, constant praying and preaching, he reduced some Recusants to, and confirmed more Doubters in, the Protestant Reli∣gion; Many were his Encounters with Jesuits and Priests, defeating the suspicions of his Foes, and ex∣ceeding the expectacion of his Friends in the success of such Disputes. PARIS, April 6. 1658. The Answer of Dr. Cosins to the Charge foregoing. Sir, I Am glad to hear from you of your safe Arrivall in England: and I am to thank both you and other of my Friends, that intend to vindicate me from the Inju∣ry done, no less to Truth then to my self, by a passage in Mr. Fullers History, which I beleive he inserted there
(as he doth many things besides) upon the false Re∣ports and Informations of other men, that were loath to let an old malicious Accusation dye, as it might well enough have done, if he had not kept it up still alive, and recorded it to Posteity; whereof he is so sensible already himself, that by his own Letter directed to me (more then a year since) he offered to make me a∣mends in the next Book he write; but he hath not done it yet. Having never been acquainted with him more then by his Books, which have many petulant, light, and indiscreet passages in them, I know not how to trust him; and therefore if the Authors of the intended Animadversions (which you mention) will be pleased to do me right, you may assure thm there is no∣thing but Truth in this ensuing Relation. Mr. Smart, who had been Schoolmaster, and after became Prebendery of Durham, was an old man of a most froward fierce, and unpeaceable Spirit, &c. Upon a sdi∣tious Sermon which he preached in that Church, (where contrary to his duty he had neglected to preach for seven years together before) he was first questioned at Durham, from whence he was called to the High Com∣mission Court at Lond. and afterward at his own desire remitted to the same Court at York; where being sen∣tenced to recant, and refusing so to do with great scorn, he was at last, upon his obstinacy degraded from his Ecclesiasticall Function; and that Sentence was not long after judicially confirmed by Judge Damport at the publick Assises in Durham, where he was by publick sentence also at the Common Law put out of his Pre∣bend, and his Benefices that he formerly held in that County. Many years following he procured a large Mainte∣nance for himself and his Family, to the summ of 400 l. per ann. (more worth to him then his Chuch-profis,
ever were) out of the peculiar Contributions at London, and elsewhere gathered up for silenced Ministers. But when the Parliament began in the year 1640, upon project and hope of getting more, he preferred a Bill o Complaint there against thirty severall persons at the least, that is, against the High Commissioners at Lon∣don, the same Commissioners and Prebends Residentia∣ry at York, the Dean and Chapter of Durham, with dives others, whereof I was but One, though he was pleased to set my Name in the Front of them all. From all these together he expected to recover and receive a greater summ of money (for Money was his project) pretending that he had lost by them no less then thirty thousand pounds (though he was never known to be worth one.) After his Bill of Complaint was carried up by a Gentleman of the House of Commons to the House of Lords among the rest of those persons that were accu∣sed by him (some for Superstition, and some for Perse∣cution) I put in my full Answer upon Oath, and decla∣red the truth of the whole matter; whereof Mr. Fuller taketh not any notice at all, and therein dealeth most unfaithfully both with me and the Reader of his Hi∣story; for that Answer of mine is upon Record, among the Rolls of Parliament, and was justified before the Lords both by my self, and by the very Witness that Mr. Smart and his Son-in-law produced there against me; whereupon his own Lawyer (Mr. Glover) openly at the Bar of that honourable House forsook him, and told him plainly, that he was ashamed of his Com∣plaint, and could not in Conscience plead for him any longer: Mr. Smart in the mean while crying out aloud and beseeching their Lordships to appoint him another Lawyer, and to take care of his fourteen thousand pound damages, besides other demands that he had to
make, which arose to a grater summ. But after this (which was the fifth day of pleading between u) the Case was heard no more concerning my particular, and many of the Lords said openly, that r. Smar had abused the House of Commons, with a caus∣ess Complaint against me, whereupon my Lord the Earl of Warwick, was pleased to bring me an Order of he Lords House, whereby I had liberty granted me to eturn unto my places of Charge in the University, or lsewhere, till they sent for me again, which they never id. The Answers that I gave in upon Oath, and justified efore their Lordships, were to this effect, all contrary Mr. Fullers groundless reports. 1. Tat the Communion-Table in the Church of Dur∣am (which in the Bill of Complaint and M. Fullers Hist. said to be the Marble Altar with Chrubins) was not up by me, but by the Dean and Chapter there of Mr. Smart himself was one) many years be∣re I bcame Prendary of that Church, or ever saw Country. 2. That by the publick Account which are there gistred, it did not appear to have cost above the tenth rt of what is pretended, Appurtenance and all. 3. That likewise the Copes used in that Church ere brought in thither long before my time, and when r. Smart th Complainant was Prebndary there, who so allowed his part (as I was ready to prove by the -Book) of the money that they cost, for they cost t little. 4. That as I never approved the Picture of the Tri∣y, or the Image of God the Father in the Figure of old Man, or otherwise to be made or placed any ere at all: So I was well assured that there were none ch (nor to my knowledge or hear-say ever had been)
put upon any Cope that was used there among us; One there was that had the Story of the Passion embroi∣dered upon it, but the Cope that I used to weare when at any time I attended the Communion-Service, was of plain white Sattin only without any Embroidery upon it at all. 5. That hat the Bill of Complaint called the I∣mage of Christ, with a blew Cap, and a golden Beard, (Mr. Fullers History sayes it was red, and that it was set upon one of the Copes) was nothing else but the top of Bishop Hafields Tomb (set up in the Church under a sie-Arch there, two hundred years before I was born) being a little Portraiture not appearing to be above ten Inches long, and hardly discernable to the eye what Figure it is, for it stands thirty Foot from the ground. 6. That by the locall Statutes of that Church (wher∣uno Mr. Smart was sworn, as well as my selfe) the Treasurer was to give Order, that the provision should every year be made of a sufficient number of Wax-light for the Service of the Quire, during all the Winter time; which Statute I observed when I was chosen into that Office, and had order from the Dean and Chapter by Captular Act to do it: yet upon the Communion Table they that used to light the Candles (the Sacrits, and the Virgers) never set more then two fair Candle with a few small Sizes neer to them, which they put there, of purpose that the people all about might have the better use of them, for singing the Psalmes, and rea∣ding the Lessons out of the Bibles: But two hundred was a greater number then they used all the Church over, either upon Candlems Night or any other, and that there were no more (sometimes many less) lighted at that time, then at the like Festivalls in Christmas-Holy∣daies, when the people of the City came in greater com∣pany to the Church, and therefore required a greater store of lights.
7. That I never forbad (nor any body else that I know) the singing of the (Meeter) Psalms in the Church, which I used to sing daily there my self with other company at Morning Prayer. But upon Sundaies and Holy-daies in the Quire, before the Sermon the Creed was sung (and sung plainly for every one to understand) as it is ap∣pointed in the Communion Book, & after the Sermon we sung a part of a Psalm, or some other Antheme taken out of the Scripture, and first signified to the people where they might find it, 8. That so far was I from making any Atheme to be sung of the three Kings of Colen, as that I mae i when I first saw it to be torn in pieces, and I my sel cut it out of the old Song Books belonging to the Choristers School, with a Penknife that lay by, at my very first coming to reside in that Colledge. But sure I was, that no such Antheme had been sung in the Qire, during all my time of attendance there, nor (for ought that any the eldest persons of the Church and Town could tell, or ever heard to the contrary) for fify or three∣score years before, and more. 9. That there was indeed an ordinary Knife I confess, provided and laid ready among other things belonging to the Administration of the Communion, for the cutting of the Bread, and divers other uses in the Church Vestry; that when the under Officers there had any occasion to use a Knife, they might not be put to go to seek one abroad. But that it was ever consecra∣ted, or so called, otherwise then as Mr. Smart and some of his Followers had for their pleasure put that appel∣ltion upon it, I never heard, nor I believe any body lse that lived here among us. [There were divers other Articles of this nature in the Bill of Complaint, whereof Mr. Smart could not prove any one to which I gave the like
Answers, as I did here to these; but Mr. Fullers History makes no mention of them] 10. Touching Mr. Smarts Sermon, I made answer, and submitted his censure to the prudent and religious consideration of the Lords, whether he was not justly condemned to be scandalous and seditious by his preaching thereof; and I represented many passages in it, disagreeable to the Laws of God and his Church, and repugnant to the publick Statutes of Parlia∣ment. 11. For which after we had begun o question him in the High Commission Court at Durham (where we endeavoured to reduce him to a better mind, and to an unity with the Church, against which he had so injuriously and intemperatly declaimed;) I had no further hand or meddling with the prosecution of this mater in other Courts against him, more then that I wrote (at the speciall instance of Judge Yelverton) a Letter in his behalf to the Archbishop of York, and the Commissioners there, which I procured the Dean and most of the Prbendaries of Durham to sign and sub∣scribe with me, earnestly intreating for him, that upon any due sence of his ault, he might be quietly sent back to us again, in hope that he would hereafter live in better peace and concord with us (as he promised both judge Yelverton and us to do) then he had done be∣fore. 12. The cruell usage and imprisonment that he suffered (whereof Mr. Fuller taketh speciall notice, and makes a Marginall mark at it) was, as I have been credible assured, nothing else but a faire and gentle treatment of him in an Officers House at York, to whom he was committed for a while, and paid little for it. I is the Historians mistake here to say, he was carryed rom York to Lambeth; for he was at his own request
sent from Lambeth to York, the Fine tht was se up him he never paid, and by his own wilfull loss of his Church-livings, he gained a larger maintenance, living at his ease and pleasure, by the contribution that he got as a suspended and silenc'd Peacher; though the truth was, that having had a Prebend and a Benefice many years together in the Bishoprick of Durham, and being alwaies in health, he neglected preaching so much at them both, and elsewhere besides, that he was seldom noted to preach above two Sermons in a year; who, though he demanded many thousand pound at the Parliament, yet by Mr. Fullers leave, the Parliament gave him none; nor ordered either my self, nor any other that he impeacht ever to pay him a Groat: only upon Doctor Carrs death (who had ben put into hi Prebend place) he was sent by the Lords t his Vic∣rage, and his Prebend again, which he had little ill to take, because he ound but little profit in compariso of what he hoped to be had by them, in the mean while he took up divers great summ of mony from some of his Partisans in London, and made them believe that the Parliament would pay them all with advantage. 13. There is another Marginall Note in Mr. Fuller, referring▪ as he saith, to my due praise and commen∣dation, whereof he makes one part to be▪ that I joyned not with the French Proestants at Charnton, since. I got over hither into France: but I would that he and all the World should know it▪ I never refused to joyn with the Protestants either there, or any where else, in all hings wherein they joyn with the Church of England. Many of them have been here at our Church, and we have been at theirs. I have buried divers of our peope at Chrenton, and they prmit us to make use of their pecuiar and decent Saeeerie here in Paris for ht purpose▪ which if they did not, we hould be orced to
bury our Dead in a Dich. I have Baptized many of their Children at the request of their own Ministers, with whom I have good acquaintance, and find them o be very deserving and learned men, great Lovers nd Honoures of our Church, notwithstanding the loss which She hath lately received in externall Mat∣ers, wherein we are agreed that the Essence of true Religion doth not consist. Many of their people (and of the best sort and quality among them) have frequented our publick Prayers with great reverence, and I have delivered te holy Communion to them, according to our own Order which they observed religiously. I have Married divers persons of good Condition among them: and I have presented some of thir Shllars to be ordained Deacons and Priests by our own Bishops (whereof Monsieur De Ta∣renne's Chaplain is one, and the Duke De la Force's Chaplain another) and the Church at Charenton ap∣ved of it) and I preached here publickly at their Ordination. Besides I have been (as often a I had are time from attending our own Congregation) to pray and sing Psalmes with them, and to heare both the Weekly and the Sunday Sermons at Charenton, whi∣ther two of my Children also (pensioned here in a Protestant Family at Paris) have daily repaired for that purpose with the Gentlewoman that governed them. All which is abundantly enough to let the World know and see here (as it doth) what a vain and rash man Mr. Fuller is in his History: wherein he hath done Injury to many more besides me, some dead and some alive, who I hope will represent his unfaithful∣ness in his own Country, both to himself and to others. I am only beholden to him for telling the tuh of me in one particular, which is, that I have
by Gods blessing reduced some, and preserved many others from communicating with the Papists; defen∣ding the Truth of our own Religion (as I have al∣waies done) where ever I am; and therein I pray God still to bless us and preserve us all. And now out of all this which I have faithfully related, I trust that those who intend their ANIMADVERSIONS upon his History, will have enough to say and insert in their own Stile for the vindication of, SIR, Your Affectionate, & most humble SERVANT J. C.
You know Monsieur Dallê to be one of the greatest account, and the best Deserts amongst the reformed Church-men in France: It will not be amiss to let you know upon thi occsion, what he wrote to a Schollar, a Friend of his, and an University-man in Cambridge, for these were the words in his Letter; Tuus Cosins, imò noster (intercedit enim nobis cum illo suavis amicitia atque familiari∣tas) mihi admodùm probatur. Bestiae sunt & quidem fanatici qui eum de Papismo suspectum habent, à quo vix reperias qui sit magis alie∣nus, &c. Thus having laid before the Reader both the Bill and Answer, I leave him to make Judgment of it by the Rule of Equity; remembring him of that old Saying, Videlicet▪ Qui statuit aliquid, parte in audita altera; Equum licet statuerit, haud Equus fuit. FINIS.
Examen Historicum: OR, A DISCOVERY AND EXAMINATION OF THE Mistakes, Falsities, and Defects, In some Modern HISTORIES. Part. II. Containing some Advertisements on these following HISTORIES. Viz. 1. The compleat History of Mary Queen of Scots, and her Son and Successor, King James the sixth. 2. The History of the Reign and death of King James of Great Britain, France and Ireland, the first. 3. The compleat History of the Life and Reign of King Charls, from his Cradle to his Grave. Terent. in Andr. Act. 1. Obsequium amico, veritas caium pari. LONDON. Printed for Henry Seal, and R. Royston, and are to be sold over against St. Dunstans Church in Fleet-street, and at the Angel in
The PREACE to the follovving ADVERTISEMENTS. THe former Animadversions, being brought to an end, I am in the next place to encounter with an easier Adversary: In whom though I finde wor enough as o mat∣ter of Historical Falshoods; et  finde no ma∣licious and dangerous untruths, destructive to the Church of England, or to the ame and o nor of the Prelates, or the reular Cler have therefore given the Tul o Advertise∣ments to the second part of this Emen, that eing as a gentler so a itter term , which is not onely to correct such inde differing from the ruth, but the defects of our Author in which I conceive his care or might have led him to. Betwixt us both, I ope the Rader will be  in the tru nduct of Aurs as thy come bore im.
And if the Author of the three Histories which I have in hand▪ bring no less ingenuity and candor with him to the perusal of these Papers, then I did to the writing of them; there will be no need of any such surrilous & unhandsom expressions▪ as his Post-haste Reply, &c. is most guilty of; but whether he do or not, is to me indifferent, being prepared before I under∣took the business, o endure chearfully all such Censures, as my desires to vindicate the injured Truth, and truly to inform the Iudgement of the equal Reader should expose me to. And herewith I shall put an end to my cor∣recting of the Errors in other mens Writings, though I confess I might finde work enough in that kinde, if I were so minded; most of our late Scripturients affecting rather to be doing, then to be punctual and exact in what they doe; as if they were of the same mind with the ApeCarrier in the History of Don-Quixot, who eared not if his Comedis had as many Errors in them, as there are motes in the Sun, so he might stuff his Purse with Crowns, and get mo∣ney by tem: The small remainder of my lie will be better spent in looking back upon those
Errors which the infirmities of nature, and o∣ther humane frailties have made me subject to, that so I may redeem the time, because my former days were evil: I shall hereafter be onely on the defensive side, and study my own preservation, if I shall causelesly be assaulted without provoking any by a fresh encounter; and doing no otherwise, I hope I shall be held excusable both by God and man: Viribus u∣tendum est quas fecimus, was Caesars reso∣lution, when oppressed by an unjust Faction and may without offence be mine, when I shall be necessitated thereunto by an unjust Adver∣sary. With the like hope I also entertain my self, in reference to some freedom which I have made use of, in laying down the conduct of such ffairs, as may concern posterity to be truly informed in: For though I neither hope nor wish to live under such a Government, ubi & entire quae velis, & quae sentias loqui liceat, in which it may be lawful for any man to be of what Opinion he will, and as freel to publis his Opinions; yet on the other ide, I hope t may be lawful for me, in  to memory
the actions of the present or preceding times, to make use of such a modest freedom, as with∣out partiality and respect of persons, may represent the true condition of affairs in their proper colours: For I conceive it no less ne∣cessary in a just Historian, not to suppose that which he knoweth to be true (ne quid veri non audeat, as the old Rule was) then it is for him to deliver any thing which he knows to be false, or in the truth whereof he is not very well in∣formed. The present times had reaped no bene∣fit by the Histories of the Ages past, if the Miscarriages of great Persons, and the errors by them committed in the managery and trans∣action of publick business, had not been repre∣sented in them; which having said, I shall no longer detain the Reader from reaping that com∣modity which these Advertisements may afford him; his satisfaction being the cause, and his content the recompence of these undertakings.
ADVERTISEMENTS ON 1. The compleat History of MARY Queen of Scots, and of her Son and Successor King James the sixth. AND 2. The History of the Reign and Death of King James of Great Britain, France and Ireland, the first. Enniusap. Tll. de Offic▪ Homo qui rranti comiter monstrat viam, Quasi lumen de lumine suo accndat, facit.
ADVERTISMENTS On the Compleat HISTORY OF Mary Queen of Scotland, AND King Iames the sixth. IN the Preface to the following History we are told, that on the composing of the French quarrels by King Hny the eighth, there followed the surrendry of Tourney, and Over∣tures of a match between the Dolphin and Henries Sister.] To Rectifie which errour we are to know that betwixt he taking and surrendry of Tourney, there were two ac∣ords made with the French: The first between King Henry nd Lewis the twelfth, in which it was conditioned amongst ther things, that the French King should marry the La∣y Mary King Henries Sister. But he deceasing within few onthes aftter on the first of Ianuary, the widow Queen as married in May next following Anno 1515. to Charles andon Duke of Suffolk. The next accord, which seemes be hear ment by the Historian, was made between the King Henry and King Francis the first, Anno 1518. which the surrendry of Tourney was agreed uon, and a pitulation made for marrying the young Dolphin of rance with another, Mary being the daughter (and not the
Sister) of King Henry, then beig about two years old, which is the marriage here intended, thogh misook in the party. fol. 2. Iames the fift the 108. King of Scotland.] Which may come some what neer the truth, allowing the successi∣on of the Scottih Kings, 39. in number from the first Fergus to the second. But that succession being discarded by all knowing Antiquaries, King Iames the fift must fall so much short of being the 108. King of the Scottish Na∣tion. Nor can it hold exactly true as unto that number, if that succession were admitted; King Iames the first Mo∣narch of great Britain, and the Grandchild of this Iames the fift, pretending onely to an hundred & six Predecessors in the throne of Scotland, as appears by this inscription which he somewhere used viz. —Nobis haec invicta tulerunt Centum Sex Proavi. Ibid. To palliat such potency, he procures an interview with him at Nice a Maritine Town in the Confines of Pro∣vence.] A worse mistake in place and persons then we had before. For if the interview procured was between King Hen∣ry and the Pope (as by the Grammar of the Text must be un∣stood) then is the Author much mistaken in the place and Persons; but if he mean it of an interview between K. Hy and King Francis, it is true enough as to the Persons, but not to the place. An interview there was between the two Kings at Ardes in the Marches of Calice, far enough from the connes of Provence; and a like interview there was be∣tween King Francis and the Pope at Nice here mentioned, for enough from the borders of King Henries Dominions, at which he neither was present nor desired to be. fol. 8. Prelate Bishops brought in by Palladius.] The Author speaks not this as his own opinion, but as the opi∣non of some of the Scos, who ground themselves on the Athority of Bchanan a fiery Presbyerian, and consequn
a profest enemy to Bishops,Buch. l. 5 and his words are these, Nam ad id nsque temus Ecclesiae, asqu Episcopis, per Monachos regebur: that is to say, the Church unto that time was governed by Mnks without Bishops, But Bu∣chanan perhaps might borrow this from , another Writer of that Nation, and of greater Credit, who tells us this, per Sacerdotes &  hos, sine Episcopis, Scoti in ide erudiebantar. The Scots (he said) were instructed in the Christian faith by Priests and Mnks without Bishops. But I trow, teaching and governing are two sveral Of∣fices. And though it may be true that some particlar per∣sons of the Scotish Nation might be instrusted in  Gos∣pel by Priests and Monks, withour help of Bihops, as is said by Major; yet doth it not follow thereupon that their Churches were governed in the same manner as is said by Buchannan. And yet upon these faulty grounds it is infered by the  with great joy and tri∣umph, that in some places of the world, the government by Bishops was never received for many years together.Smym. p. 16. For say they, we read that in antient times the Scots were instructed in the Christian faith by Priests and Monks, and were without Bishops 290. years. In∣structed possibly at the first without Bishops by such Prists and Monks as came thither out of Ireland, or the  of Man, or the more Southern parts of Bitain; but not so governed when they were increased, multiplied into several Chur∣ches and Congregations. And so it is affirmed by Arh-Bi∣shop Spotswood, who tellth u ut of , that antiently the Priests of Scotland, whom they then called , were wont for their better government to elect some one of their number by Common suffrage to be chief and principal amongst them,Hist of Scotland fol. 4. without whose knowledge and connt nothing was done in any matter of importance; and that the Per∣son so elected was called Scotorum Episcopus the Scots Bishop, or a Bishop of Scotland. By which it doth appear most plain∣ly,
first that the Prelate Bishop was not first ordained here by  as the Scotish say, and secondly, that that Church was not so long a time without Bishops (if it were at all) as the English Presbyterians would fain have it. fol. 15. Iohn Calvin a Frehman of Aquitain. Not so, but a Native of Noyo  City of Picardie, far enough from Aquitain, as is affirmed by all others which have writ∣ten of him. The like mistake to which we finde fol. 9. where it is said, that the Lords of Abygny take name frm Aubygny village in Aquitain Whereas indeed the Castle and Sig∣neury of Aubygny (from whence the younger house of Le∣n takes their denomination) is not within the Province of Aquitam, but the Country of Berry. fol. 20 And therefore to strike in with his Son and  his Fathers obsequies with magnifient Solemn∣ly in Pauls Church.] This spoken of the Obsequies of King Henry the second of France performed by Queen with great Magnificence; not so much on the parti∣cular ground which I finde here mentioned, as to preserve her Reputation, and the Reputation of this Church by such Rites and Ceremonies, with all forrain princes. To which end she did Solemnize the Obsequies of such Kings and Emperors as died during her Reign in as great pomp and splendor as she did this Kings: for before this in very Prince∣ly manner were performed solemn Obsequies for the fift, a rih all of gold laying upon the Herse, the Em∣perours Embassador being chief Mourner accompanied with many Princes and Peers of England▪ And after this did the like for many others, with no great difficulty to found in our commn Chronicles. By means whereof, did not onely maintain her own Estimation, but caused th Church of England to be looked on with greater veneratio and  popish Princes, then it hath been since th leaving off  due observances. fol. 27. And y copute of their own Lods of the Cong∣gation
a hundred marks a year was then sufficient for a single Minister.] Understand not here an hundred marks sterling at the rate of 13. s. 4. d. to the Mark as the English count it, amounting to 66 l. 13. s. 4. d. in the total ; but an hundred Marks Sctish, each Mark containing no more then thiteen pence halfe penny of our English money, which make but 5. l. 13. s. upon our accompt. A sorry pittance in it self, though thought enough by their good Masters for their pains in preaching. Fol. 53. Three of our Kings severally chalenged that Trial against the French King; and by Charles of Arragon and Pe∣ter de Taacone for the  of Sicilie.] Either the Au∣thor or the Printer is much mistaken here. The title to the Realm of Sicilie was once indeed intended to be tried by Combat, not between Charles of Arragon, and Peter of Tarracone, as is here affirmed, but between Peter King of Arragon, and Charles Earl of Anou, pretending severally to that Kingdom. (10.) Such another mistake we have Fol. 55. Where it is said, that there were some preparations in King James his time intended betwen two Scotch mn, the Lord Ree, and David Ramsey:] Whereas indeed those pre∣parations were not made in King Iames, but King his time; Robert Lord Willoughby Earl of , and Lord great Chamberlain of England being made Lord Constable pro tempore to deside that Controversie. Fol. 83. Katherine de Medices, Pope Clements Brothers Daughter and Mother of King Charles &c.] (11) Katherie de medices was indeed wife to Henry the second, and mother to Charles the ninth, Frnch Kings, but by no means a ∣thers daughter to Pope Clement the seventh. For first, Pope Clement being the natural son of  (who was killed young and unmarried) had n brother at all. And secondly, Katherine de Medeces was Daughter of Duke of Vrbin, son of Peter de Medees▪ and Grnd∣son of Laurence de Medics, the brother of  before mentioned. By which account the father of that Pope and
the great Grandfather of that Queen were Brothers, and so that Queeu not Brohers Daughter to the Pope: Of nearer ki she was to Pope Leo the tenth, though not his Brothers Daughter neither, Ppe Leo being Brother to Peter de Me∣dices, this great Ladies Grand-father. Fol. 84. This yr took away James Hamilton Earl of Ar∣ran, and Duke of Castle-herauld, at Poictures a Province in France.] The name of the Province is Poictou, of which Poictires is the pcipal City, accounted the third City next to Paris and  ll that Kingdom. And such anothr slight mistake we have fol. 96. where we finde mention of the absnce of the Duke of Arran: Whereas indeed the chief of the Hamiltons was but Earl of Arrar, as he after calls him; the Title of Duke be∣ing first conf'd by King Charls, upon Iames Marquess of Hmilon, created Duke Hmilon of Arran, Anno 1643. The like mnomers we have after fol. 139. Where we finde mention of the History of Q. Elizabeth, writ by , whereas  writ no further then King Henry 8. the rest which follows, being clapt to by the publisher of it, and possibly may be no other then Camdes Annals of that Queen, in the English Tongue: The like I frequently observe in the name of Metallan, (Metellanus he is called by their Latine Writers) whom afterward he rightly calleth by the name of , fol. 149. Fol. 156. The Leagures, with some iustice in Rebellion, elect , a degree nearer to the Crown then Navar.] Not so, but one degree at the least further off the Car∣dinal of , (called harls) being the yongest Son of harls Duke of ; whereas Henry King of Navar, was the onely Son and Heir of Anhoy the eldest Brother: So that not oely the King of Navar, but the Princes of the Huse of , deriv'd from Francis Duke of Anghein, the second Brother, had the precedency in Title before this ▪ But being of the Catholick party, and of the Royal Huse of Bourbon, (in which the Rights of the Crown
remained) and withal, a man of great Age, and small Abi∣lities, he was set up to serve the turn, and screen'd the main Plot of the Laguers from the eyes of the people. Fol. 161. Sir Thomas Randolph, bred a Civilian, was taken from Pembroke Colledge in Oxford.] Not other∣wise to be made good (in case he were of that House in Ox∣ford, which is now called Pembroke Colledge) but by Antici∣pation: Lavinaquevet Littora, as in the like case the Poet has it; that which is now called Pembroke Colledge, was in those times call'd Broadgates Hll, not changed into a Col∣ledge, till the latter end of the Reign of King Iames, and then in Honor of William Earl of Pembroke, Chancellor of that University, and in hope of some endowment from him, called Pembroke Colledge. Fol. 189. The other Title was of the Iant of Spain] In laying down whose several Titles, the Author leaves out that which is most material, that is to say, the direct and li∣neal Succession of the Kings of Spain, from the Lady Kathe∣rine, Daughter of Iohn of Gaunt Duke of Lancaster, mar∣ryed to Henry the third, King of Castile, and Mother to King Iohn the second, from whom descend the Kings of Ca∣stile to this very day. Fol. 191. Hawkins, Drake, Baskervile, &c. Fie sne Towns in the Isle Dominica, in the West Indies.] They fired indeed some Towns in Hispanol. and amongst others, that of Dominica, or St. Domngo: But they attempted no∣thing on the Isle of Dominica, which is one of the Chrybes, and they had no reason; that Island being governed by a King of its own, at deadly enmity with the , an conseqently, more likely to be aydd, then annyed, by those Sea Adventurers. A like mistake we had before in the name of Cmrdin, fol. 157. That party who discovered unto Queen Elizabeth the Estate of the Customs, not being named , but Carwrdin. Fol. 229. Sr. Thomas Erskin created Earl of Kelly, and
by degrees Knight of the Garter.] Not so: Knight of the Garter first, by the name of Thomas Viscount Fenton, (as appeares by the Registers of the Order) and then Earl of Kelly. Thus afterwards we finde Sr. Iohn Danvers for Sr. Charles Dnvers, fol. 238. And Iohn Lord Norris, for Sr. Iohn Norris, fol. 243. And some mistakes of this nature we finde in the short story of the Earle of Essex; in which it is said first, that Fol. 233. He was eldest son to Waltar Devereux &c. created by Queen Elizabeth Earl of Essex and Ewe.] Not so; but Earl of Essex onely, as appears by Camden in his Bri∣tannia, fol, 454. If either he, or any of his Descendants have taken to themselves the Tittle of Earl's of Ewe, they take it not by vertue of this last Creation, but in right of their descent from William Borchier created Earl of Ewe in Normandy by King Henry the fift, and father of Henry Bourchier created Earl of Essex by King Edward the fourth. Secondly, it is said of Robert Earl of Essex the son of this Waler, that in 89. he went Commander in chief in the ex∣pedition into Portugal; Fol. 233. whereas indeed he went but as a Voluntier in that expedition, and had no command. And so much our Author hath acknowledged in another place, saying, that, Ambitious of common fame, he put him∣self to Sea, and got aboard the Fleet, conceiting that their respect to his bith and quliy, would receive him their chief, but was mistaken in that honou, Fol. 155. Thirdly, it is said of this Earl of Essex, that he went Deputy into Ireland, Fol. 234. Whereas indeed he was not sent over into Ireland with the Title of Deputy, but by the more honourable Title of Lord Levienant, having power to create a Lord Deputy under him, when his occasions or the the necessities of the state should require his absence. Fol. 21. The 26. of February 100. was born the Kings third son, and Christn Charles at Dunferling.] The Kings third son, and afterwards his Successor in the Crown
of England, was not born on the 26. of February, but on the 19. of Noveer, as is averred by all others who have writ∣ten of it, and publickly attested by the annual ringing of Bells upon that day in the City of London during the whole time of his pwer and prosperity. The like mistake we finde in the tie and day of the Birth of Queen Elizabeth of whom it is id, Fol. 261. (25.) That she gave up the Ghost to Gd o that day of her Birth, from whom she had it; intimating tha she died on the Eve of the same Lady-day on which she was born. But the truth is, that she was born on the Eve of the Nativity of the Virgin Mary being the seventh day of September, and died on the Eve of the An∣nuntiation, being the 24. of March. And so much for the History of the Reign of Queen Mary, and King Iames her Son, as to the Realm of Scotland onely; both of them Crowned (as) Iames the fift had also been) in their tenderest infancy. But whereas our Author tells us Fol. 8. that Q Mary  the kingdom to her son, who was born a King; I can by no means yeild to that. I finde in∣deed, that our Saiour Christ was born King of the Iews, and so proclaimed to be by the Angel Gabriel at the very time of his Conception. And I have read that Sapores, one of the Kings of Persia, was not onely born a King, but crowned King too before his birth; for his Father dying withou ue (as the story saith) left his wife with child, wch child the Magi▪ having signified by their Art to be a Male, the Persian Prin∣ces caused the Crown and Royal Ornaments to be set upon his Mothers Belly; acknowledging him there by for their King and Sovaraign. But so it was not with King Iames, who was born on the 19 of Iune Anno. 1566. and Crowned King on the 24. of Iuly (being the 5. day after his Mothers resignation of the Crown and Government) Anno. 1567.
ADVERTISEMENTS ON THE REIGN & DEATH OF KING IAMES, Of GREAT BRITAIN, FRANCE and IRELAND, the first. WE are now come unto the Reign of King Iames▪ as King of England, or rather as King of England and Scotland, under the notion of Great Britain, of whose reception, as he passed through Godmanchestr, the Historian telleth us, that, Fol. 270. At Godmanchester in the Couny of Notthamp∣tonshire, they presented him with 70 Teem of Horses, &c. be∣g his Tenants, and holding their Land by that Tenure.] But first, Godachester is not in Northampton, but in Hun∣tigtonshire. And secondly, Though it be a custom for those in Godmanchster, to shew their Bravery to the Kings of Eng∣land in that rustical Pomp, yet I conceive it not to be the Te∣nure which they hold their Lands by: For Camden, who is very punctual in observing Tenures, mentions not this as a Tenure, but a Custom onely, adding withal, that they make their boast, That they have in former time received the Kings of England, as they passed in their progress this way, with ninescore Ploughs brought forth in a rustical kinde of Pomp for a gallant shew:Camden Brit. l. 510. If onely for a gallant shew, or a rustical Pomp, then not observed by them as their Tenure, or if a Tenure, not  from
ninescore to 70. all Tenures being ixt, not variable at the will of the Tenants. Fol. 273. This most honorable Order of the Garter, was instituted by King Edward the third, &c.] So far our Author, right enough as unto the ounder, and rig e∣nough as to the time of the institution, which he placeth in the year, 1350. But whereas he telleth us withal, that this Order was founded by King Edward the third,  John of France, and King James of Scotland, being then Prisners in the Tower of London, and King Henry of Castile, the Ba∣stard expulst, and Don Pedro restored by the Prince of Wales, called the Black Prince; in that he is very much mistaken. For first, It was David King of the Scots, not Iames, who had been taken Prisoner by this Kings Forces, there being no Iames King of the Scots, in above fifty years after. Se∣condly, Iohn of France was not taken Prisoner till the year 1356. nor Henry of Castile expulsed by the Prince of Wales, till ten years after, Anno 1366. By consequence, neither of those two great Actions could precede the Order: But worse is he mistaken in the Patron Saint, of whom he tells us, that, Fol. 273. Among sundry men of valor in ancient days, was Geo. born at Coventry in England, &c.] This, with the rest that fol∣lows, touching the Actions and Atchievements of Sir George of Coventry, is borrowed from no better Author, then the doughty History of the Seven Chmpions of Christendom, of all that trade in Knighthood-errant, the most empty Bable: But had our Author look'd so high as the Records of the Order, the titles of Honor writ by Selden, the Catalogue of Honor, pub∣lisht by Mills of Canterbury, Camdens Britannia, or any other less knowing Antiquary, he might have found, that this most noble Order was not dedicated to that fabulous Knight, S. George of Coventry, but to the famous Saint and Soldier of Christ Jesus, St. George of Cappadocia: A Saint so univer∣sally received in all parts of Christendom, so generally attest∣ed to by the Ecclesiastical Writers of all Ages, from the time
of his Martyrdom, till this day; that no one Saint in all the Calender, (those mentioned in the holy Scriptures excepted onely) can be better evidenced: Nor doth he finde in Mat∣thew Parts, that St. George fought in the air at Antioch in be∣half of the English (the English having at that time no such ieress in him) but that he was thought to have been seen figting in behalf of the Christians. Fol. 275. Earldoms without any place are likewise of two kindes, either in respect of Office, as Earl-Morshal of England, or by Birth, and so are all the Kings Sons.] In the Au∣thority and truth of this I am much unsatisfied, as never ha∣ving met with any such thing in the course of my reading; and I behold it as a diminution to the Sons of Kings to be born but Earls, whereby they are put in an equal rank with the eldest sons of Dukes in England, who commonly have the Title of their Fathers Earldoms. since it is plain they are born Princes, which is the highest civil Dignity next to that of Kings: It was indeed usual with the Kings of England, to bestow upon their yongest Sons some Earldom or other, un∣til the time of Edward the third; after which time, they were invested with the Title of Dukes, as appears evidently to any who are studied in their Chronologies: But that they, or any of them, were Earls by Birth, is a new piece of learn∣ing, for which if the Historian can give me any good proof, I shall thank him for it. Fol. 278. Henry the eight thus cousened into some kindness, both by his own power and purse, makes Charls Emperor, and the French King his Prisoner, 1519.] Neither so, nor so: For first, though King Henry did contribute both his power and purse to the taking of the French King Prisoner, yet to the making of Charls Emperor, he contributed neither the one nor the other. And secondly, though Charls were cre∣ated Emperor, Anno 1519 yet the French King was not ta∣ken Prisoner till six years after, Anno 1525. Fol. 31. Oswald united the Crowns of England and Scot∣land, which were  afterwards for many Ages.] (3) That
Oswald King of Northumberland here mentioned, was a Pu∣iant Prince (as being the ninth Monarch of the English) I shall easily grant; but that he united the two Kingdoms of England and Scotland, is not any where found: Our Author therefore must be understood, of his uniting the two Realms of Dera and Pernicia, (part of which last, hath for long time been accounted part of Scotland) which after his de∣cease were again divided. Fol. 317. Whose Results, notwithstanding, are not to be ob∣truded on the Sculars, to be obsrved with the Authority of Laws, until they be allowed by assent of the King and both Houses.] An error far more pardonable in our present Author, to whom the concernments of the Church are not so necessary to be known or studied, then in our Church Hi∣storian, where before we had it, and which hath had a full Conutation in our Animadversions, to which, for brevity sake, I shall now refer. Fol. 320. Rory Duke of Solia from France.] Either the Printer or the Author are mistaken here: The Ambassa∣dor who was sent from France, was neither called Rory, nor Duke of Solia, but Marquess of Rhosney, created afterward Duke of Sully, and Lord High Treasurer of that Kingdom, by King Henry 4. A Protestant, and therefore purposely se∣lected for that imployment: Of whom it is reported in the conference at Hampton-Court, that having observed the or∣der and gravity of our Church Service, in the Cathedral Chuch at Cnerbury, he was heard to say, that if the like had been used in France, there would have been many thou∣sands of Protestants more then were at that present. Fol. 329. Ceil fo his good Service was created Earl of Sa∣lisbury,] That is to say, (for so it must be understood) for his activity and diligence in discovering the Powder-Treason: But he was Earl of Salisbury before that Discove∣ry, call'd so by the Historian himself, in the course of tha Narative, and made so by King Iames in the My fore∣gong, at what time also, his Brother, Thomas Lord
Burley was made Earl of EXCESTER. The like mistake I finde in the advancement of Thomas Lord Buckhurst to the Earldom of Dorcet, plac'd by the Au∣thor, fol. 342. in the year 1605. whereas indeed he was crea∣ted Earl of Dorcet in the first year of King Iames, March 13. Anno 1603. Fol. 333. The Earl of Flanders, &c. being by Storm cast upon our Coast, &c. was fain to yield to all the Kings demands, in delivering up the Countess of Warwick, and other Fugitives resident in Flanders.] This story is well meant, but not right∣ly told, there being at that time no Earl of Flanders (com∣monly so called) to be cast upon the Coast of England, nor any such Woman as a Countess of Warwick, whom King Henry the seventh could be afraid of; the truth is, that the person here meant, was Philip King of Castile, Duke of Bur∣gundy, Earl of Flanders, &c. who in his return from Spain, was driven by Tempest on the Coast of England, and being Royally Feasted by King Henry the seventh, was detained here till he had delivered into the Kings hands the Earl of Suffolk, who had fled into the Nether-lands for protection, and began to work new troubles against his Soveraign: The story whereof we have at large in the History of King Henry the seventh, writ by the Lord Viscount St. Alban, from fol. 222. to 225. Fol. 334 The fate of that Family evermore false to the crown] This spoken of the Piercies, Earls of Northumberland, too often false to the Crown, though not always so: For Hen∣ry, the second Earl of this Family, lost his life fighting for King Henry the sixth, in the Battle of St. Albans, as Henry his Son and Successor also did at the Battle of owton: And so did Henry the fifth Earl, in the time of King Henry the se∣venth, for his Fidelity to that King, in a tumultuous Insur∣rection of the Common People; not to say any thing of his Son and Successor, who dyed without any imputation of such disloyalty. Fol. 362. Zutphen and Gelders did of right belong to the
Duk Arnold, who being Prisoner with the last Duke of Bur∣gundy, who died before Nancy, that Duke intruded upon his Possession, &c.] (40.) Not so, it was not Arnold Duke of Gelders, that was Imprisoned by Charls Duke of Burgundy, but his Son Adolphus, who having most ungratiously Impri∣son'd his aged Father, was vanquished by Duke Charls, and by him kept Prisoner, and the old Duke restored again to his power and liberty: In a grateful acknowledgement of which favor, he made a Donation of his Estates to Duke Charls and his Heirs, to commence after his decease; though it took no effect, till Conquered under that pretence by Charls the fifth, uniting it unto the rest of his Belgick Provinces, Anno 1538. Fol. 423. Sir William Seymour, Grandchilde to the third Son and the Heir of the Earl of Hertford, created by Henry the eighth, whose sister he marryed, &c. And being thus near the Crown, &c.] In this business of Sir William Seymer, now Marquess of Hertford, there are two mistakes. For first, the Earl of Hertford from whom he derived his discent, mar∣ried not any of the Sisters of King Henry the eighth, he ha∣ving but two Wives in all, the first, the Daughter of Filol of Woodland, from whom comes Baronet Seymer of the West; the second, Anne Daughter of Sir Edward, and Si∣ster to Sir Michael Stanhop, from whom discends the House of Hertford, still in being: Its true, King Henry married a Sister of Sir Edward Seymer, by him created Earl of Hert∣ford, but not é contra; the Earl of Hertford married not with a sister of his. Secondly, The nearness of this House to the Crown of England, came not from any such Marriage of this first Earl with that Kings Sister, but from the Marriage of Edward the second Earl, with a Neece of that Kings, that is to say, with , Daughter of Henry Duke of Suffolk, and of Faces his Wife, one of the Daughters of Charls Brandon Duke of Suffolk, and of Mary the French Queen, King Sister.
Fol. 427. The late French King, Henry the fourth, had three Daughters, the one married to the Duke of Savoy, &c] This Marriage, both for the time and person, is mistaken also. First, for the time, in making it to precede the match with Spain; whereas the cross Marriages with Spain, were made in the year 1612. and this with Savoy not trans-acted till the year 1618. Secondly, for the Person, which he makes to be the eldest Daughter of Henry the fourth, and Elizabeth married into Spain to be the second, whereas Elizabeth was the eldest Daughter, and Christienne married into Savoy the second one∣ly: For which, consult Iames Howels History of Lewis the 13. fol. 13. & 42. Fol. 428. The story was, that his Ancestors at Plough, lew Malton, an High-land Rebel, and dis-comfited his Train (u∣sing no other Weapon but his Geer and Tackle.] But Cam∣den, whom I rather credit, tells us, That this was done in a great fight against the Danes: For speaking of the Earls of Arrol. he derives the Pedigree from one Hay, a man of ex∣ceeding strength, and excellent courage; who, together with his Sons, in a dangerous Battle of Scots against the Danes, at Longcarty, caught up an Ox Yoak, and so valiantly,Camden in Scot. fol. 42. and fortunately withal, what with fighting, and what with exhorting, re-infor∣ced the Scots at the point to shink and recoyl, that they had the day of the Danes, and the King, with the States of the Kingdom, adscribed the Victory and their own safety to his valor and prowess. Ibid. But to boot, he sought out a good Heir (Gup my Lady Dorothy) sole Daughter to the Lord Denny.] This spoken of Sir Iames Hay, afterwards Viscount Doncaster and Earl of Car∣sle, who indeed married the Daughter and sole Heir of the L. Denny of Waltham: But he is out for all that in his Gup my Lady, her name being Honora and not Dorothy, as the Author makes it. And for his second Wife, one of the Daughters of Henry Piercy, E. of North-Humberland; she was neither a Do∣rothy,
nor an Hei: And therefore we must look for this Gup my Lady in the House of Huntington, that bald Song being made on the Marriage of the Lady Dorothy Hastings, Daugh∣ter of George Earl of Huntington, with a Scotish Gentleman, one Sir Iames Steward, slain afterward at ington by Sir George Wharton (who also perisht by his Sword) in a single Combate. Fol. 429. Amongst many others that accompanied Hays expe∣dition, was Sir Henry Rich, Knight of the Bath, and Baron of Kensington▪] Knight of the Bath at that time, but not Baron of Kensington; this Expedition being plac'd by our Author in the year 1616. and Sir Henry Rich not being made Baron of Kensington till the 20 year of King Iames, Ann 1622. Fol. 434. The chief Iudge thereof, is called Lordchief Iu∣stice of the Common Pleas, accompanied with three or four As∣sistants, or Associates, who are created by Letters Patents from he King.] But Doctor Cowel, in his learned and laborious work, called The Interpreter, hath informed us otherwise: This Iustice, saith he, (speaking of the chief Justice of the Kings Bench) hath no Patent under the Broad-Seal: He is made onely by Writ, which is a short one to this effect: Regina Iohanni Popham Militi salutem: Sciatis quod constituimus Istciarium nostrum Capitalem, ad Placita coram nobis ter∣nandum, durante bene placito nostro, Teste, &c. For this he citeth Crompton, a right learned Lawyer, in his Book of the Iurisdiction of Courts: And what he saith of that chief Ju∣stice, the practice of these times, and the times preceding▪ hath verified in all the rest. Fol. 450. She being afterwards led up and down the King Army, under oversight as a Prisoner, but shewed to the people if reconiled to her Son, &c.] Not so, for after the deat of the Marquess D'Aucre, she retired to Blois, where liv'd for some years under a restraint, till released by the Du of Eprnon, and prtly by force, prtly by treaty, restor again into power and favor with her Son, which she improv
afterwards to an omne-regeny, till Richeleu her great Assist∣ant, finding himself able to stand without her, and not en∣during a Competitor in the Affairs of State, mde her leave the Kingdom. Fol. 45. By his first Wife he had bt one Sn, risg no high∣er in Honor then Kight and Baronet: Yet aferwds he had preferment to the Govrnment of Ulster Povince in Ireland.] This spoken, but mistakingly spoken of Sir George Vlliers, Father of the Duke of Buckingham, and his eldest son. For first, Sir George Villiers had two sons by a former Wife, that is to say, Sir William Villiers Knight and Baronet, who preferred the quiet and repose of a Countrey life, be∣fore that of the Court; and Sir Edward Villiers, who by a Daughter of Sir Iohn St. Iohn of Lidiard, in the County of Wilts, was Father of the Lord Viscount Gradson, now li∣ving. And secondly, It was not Sir William, but Sir Edward Vil∣liers, who had a Government in Ireland, as being by the Power and Favor of the Duke his half Brother, made Lord President of Mnster, (not of Vlster) which he held till his death. And whereas it is said, fol. 466. that the Dke twite himself and his Issue, by inter-marriges with the best and most noble: If the Author, instead of his Issue, had said his n∣dred, it had been more properly and more truly spoken: For the Duke liv'd not to see the Marriage of any one of his chl∣dren, though a Contract had passed between his Daughter Mary and the Heir of Pembroke; but he had so disposed of hs Female Kindred, that there were more Countesses and onorable Ladies of his Relations, then of any one Family the Land. Fol. 458. Henry the eighth, created Anne Bullen of Pembroke, before he marryed her.] The Author here eaks of the Creation of Noble Women, and maketh that of nne Bullen to be the first in that kinde, whereas indeed it as the second, if not the third. For Margaret, Daughter
Fol. 44 And that Comt at Chists birth was  But first the Star which appeared at the birth of our , and conducted the wise men to Ierusalem, was of condition too ubime and supernatural to be called a Comet: and so resolved to be by alllearned men who have written of it. And secondly, had it been a Comet, it could not possibly have portended the death of Nero; there passing between the bth of Chrst, and the death of that Tyrant about year, too long a time to give unto the influences of th strongest Comet. So that although a Comet did presage th death of Nero, as is said by Tacitus; yet could not that Co∣met be the  which the Scriptures speak of. Fol. 48 Ferdinand meets at Franckford, with the three , Men, Colen, and Trevours; the other three Silesia▪ Moravia, and Luatia, failing in their persons, senttheir I more admire at this gross pie of ignorance then at all the rest, Silesia, Moravia, and incorporated with the Realm of
being nver qualified with sending any Electors or th choice of the Emperour. The three Electors which he mean∣eth, were the Count Palatine of the Rne, the Duke of Saxony, and the Marquess of Brandenburg, and they not coming in Person to the  at Frackford, appeared there by their Embassadors as at other times. A like mistake, but far more pardonble, ocurreth Fol. 484. Where Damstal is said to be a Town of Bohemia; whereas indeed it is a Town of the Land of Hssen, the whole Territories of the Duke of Saxony being interposed be∣twixt this Town and the nearest parts of that King∣dom. Fol. 489. The Lord Marchers after the Conquest were rei∣dent upon the Confines and borders of the Welch, and other places not subdued; men of valour, of high blood of the Normans, with the name and priviledges of the Earls of Chester] That the Lord Marchers on the Borders of Wales were at first many in number as it after followeth, is a truth undoubted. But their power being contracted into fewer hands, one of them (Roger Mortimer by name) was by King Edward the third made Earl of March. The Earldome of Chester was of ano∣ther foundation; conferrd by William the Conqueror upon Hugh sirnamed Lupus, Son to the Viscount of Auranches in Normandy, with all the Rites and Privileges of a County Palatine to him and to his Heires for ever. So that this honour being appropriated to the Heirs of that House, was not Com∣municable unto any of the rest of the Marchers, nor could those Marchers claim the stile and privileges of Earles of Chester. Fol. 490. Sir. Edward Montague had three sons, Edward the eldest Knight of the Bath &c.] The Author here is much mistaken in the House of the Montagues. For first, that Edward Montague▪ who was &c. was not Brother to Iames Bishop of Winchester, ad Henry Earl of Manchester, but their Brothers Son, that
is to say, the Son of another Eward their eldest Bro∣ther. Secondly, besides that, Edward, Iames, and Henry, there was another Brother whom the Author names not, though he could not chuse but know the man, viz. Sir Sidney Mon∣, one o the Masters of the Requests to the late King . Thefore to set this matter right, I am to let both him and his Reaers know, that Sr. Edward Montague chief Justice n the time of King Edward the sixth▪ was father of another Edward who lived peaceably and nobly in his own Country. To whom succeeded a third Edwrd, who in the Wars, and gained the reputation of a good Commader▪ the elder Brother of Iames, Henry, and  before mentioned, and the father of a fourth Ed∣ who was made Knight of the Bath, at the Corontion Anno 103 and afterwards created Lord of Boughon in the ninteenth year of that King Anno 1621. which honourable Title is now enjoyed by his Son (anothe Edward) Anno. 1658. And thirdly thgh  grant that Dr. Iames Montage Bi∣shop of Winchster (the second Brother of the four) was of great power and favour in the time of King Iames, and might have free accesse into the Bed-chamber of that King when∣soever he pleased▪ ye that he was of the Bed chamber (as the Author saith) that i to say, admitted formerly there∣unto and one of that number, I do more then doubt. Fol. 506. Then comes Iohn Howard &c. created by Richard the  Duke of Northfolk, but not Earle Marshal] In this and in the st that follows, touching the succession of the Earls Mrshls, there ae many mistaken. Fr first tis Iohn Lord Howard was by Richard the third ot onely created Duke of North-folk, but Earl Mar∣ll also as appears by Camdn Fol 483. Secondly, as well Thomas Earl of Surrey the son of this , as anthr Thomas, the son of that Thomas, were both advand  the ffice of Earl Marshal as is affirmed
by such as have writ the Genealogies of this noble fa∣mily Thirdly, that Thomas Howard, whom queen Mary re∣stored unto the Office of Earl Marshl, was not the Grand-cilde of Thomas Mwbray, ut the Grand-child of the Grand-child of the Daughter of that Thomas Mowbray, as will ap∣pear to any who shall search that Pedigree. But this per∣haps may be an error of the Printer in giving us the name of Thomas Mowbray for Thomas Howard. Fourthly, though Robert Devrux Earle of Essex is by our Author placed next after this last Thoms Hward in the Of∣fice of Marshal; yet sure it is, that Georg Talbot Earl of Shrewbury came in between them, advanc'd unto that Dig∣nity by Queen Elizabeth Anno 157. Fol. 507. He  the eminet Struture of the Library of St. Iohns in Cambridge where he had been Master for many years.] This spoken of Dr. Williams then Bishop of Lincoln and Lord Keeper, who certainly was never Master of that Colledge; though by his power and and party in that So∣ciety he advanced Dr. Gwin who had been his Tutor, unto that place, as is affirmed in the Church History of Bitain. Lib. 11. fol. 225. It may be Mr. Williams was at that time of the same minde with harles Martl, of whom it is affirmed that he chose rather to make a King then to be a King. Non word regnre, sed Rgibus  as the old verse hath it. Or else perhaps we may say of him as Tcitus does of Muti∣ans. Cui facilus ert ; that is to say, that it was easier for him to procure the mastership for another, then to obtain it for himslf. But howsoever it was, it seemes to have been carried by strong  canvas, of which Nation both the Pupil and the Scholer were, as ap∣peareth by these Hxameters following, in which the four Competitors are thus laid before us.
Fol.  Th  of that Protestation  me Regni negotiis, but left out Quibusdam, particular cases as the King ] This spoken of a Protestation entred b ome of the House of Commons Anno 1621. concerning of their pretended Rights and Privileges; in which they mistaen, (and I wonder the Author did not see it) in the vey grounds on which they built it. For by the writ of summons the Commons were not called to consult of any thing either great of little, difficult or not difficult, whatsover it was; but onely  consentiendum, & faciendum, to con∣sent to and perfom such things as by the great Councel of the Realm consisting of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, should be then ordained, as by the very writ it self doth at large appear. By which it seems that the Commons assem∣bled in Parliament, were of themselves so far from being any o that supreme Cout, that they were not to be coun∣ted for a part of the Kings great Councel. So that the foun∣daion being , the Superstructure could not stand which was built upon it. But for the Protestation which gave the first hint to those bold demands, which afterwards were made by some of the Commons, it was this that followeth. The Protestaion of the Commos. Ia. 19. 1621. THe Commons now assembled in Parliament, being justly occasioned thereunto, concern∣ Lbrties, Franchises, and Priviledges among others here mentioned, do Protestation following: That the Liber∣ Priviledges, and Jurisdiction of
Parliament, are the Ancient and undoubted Birth∣right, and inheritance of the Subjects of England, and that the arduous and urgent affaires concerning the King, State, and defence of the Realm, and of the Church of England, and the maintenance and making of Laws, and redresse of mischief and grievances, which daily happen within this Realm, are proper subjects, and matter of Counsel, and debate in Parliament: And that in the handling and proceeding of those businesses, every member of Parliament hath, and of right ought to have Freedom of Speech, to propound treat, reason, and bring to conclusion the same: And that the Commons in Parliament have likewise Liberty and freedom to treat of the matters, in such order as in their judgements shall seem fittest: And that every Member of the said house hath like Free∣dom from all impeachment, imprisonment, and molestation, (other then by censure of the house it self) for or concerning any speaking, reasoning or de∣claring any matter, or matters touching the Parlia∣ment or Parliament businesses. And that if any of the said Members be complained of, and questioned for any thing done or said in Parliament, the same is to be shewed to the King by the advice and assent of all the Commons assembled in Parliament▪ before the King give credence to any private In∣formation.
Fol. 523. Hereupon the Members became Subjects again.] This I conceive to have been spoken by the Author in the way of Irony, as in the same way of Irony, the Members of the House of Commons were sometimes called by King Iames the Five hundred Kings: For otherwise, our Author knows, as well as any, that the Members are as much Subjects in the time of their sitting, as they are or can be after the time of their Dissolution. Fol. 527. And though Tiberius beheaded Cremutius for words onely.] That Cremutius Cordus was impeached in the Se∣nate for words onely, is affirmed by Tacitus: But that he was beheaded for it by Tiberius, is affirmed by none; that Author telling us, that having made his Defence in the open Senate, and returning home, Abstinenti vitam finivit: He ended his life by a wilful abstinence from food: Nor was sentenced by the Senate to any other punishment, then that his Books should be publickly burnt, (Libros per Aediles cremandos censuere Patres) which was done accordingly, the shame & grief whereof, made him end his life as before is said. Fol. 528. But in a word, their great Wealth was one notable ba to the Popes, and the Gulf of other Orders, Hospitallers, Knights of the Rhodes, and St. Johns: All these together smack this Order, and swallowed their Riches at one time; by consent of all the Princes in Christendom, where they had their Habitations.] Where were our Authors Wits when these words fell from him? Hospitallers, Knights of Rhodes, and of St. Iohns, all these together; and yet all these toge∣ther make one Order onely, as Marcus Tullius Cicero, made one onely Orator: Called by these several names, for several reasons; called Hospitallers, because they had the charge of the Hospital at Ierusalem, erected for relief of Pilgrims to that holy place. Secondly, Knights of St. Iohns, because founded in the Church of St. Iohn in Ierusalem, and dedicated unto him as their Patron Saint. Thirdly,  of the Rhodes, from the setled place of their
abitation (after their expulsion out of Palestin) from the year 09. till the year 1522. when forc'd to leave that Island by Solman the Magnificent, they retired unto the Isle of Malta, from whence now denominated. Fol 529. From whom Digby had knowledge of that Kings Progess towards he North of Spain, to Lerma, a Town in Bis∣ay.] That Lerm is scituate towards the Northern parts of Spain, I shall reaily grant; and yet not as a Town of Bis∣ay, but of old Castile, scituate not far from Burgos, the chief of that Province. So also by a like error in Topography, St. Andrews, (Saint Anderos the Spaniards call it) is made to be a part of Biscay, 530. whereas indeed it is a well known Haven of the Realm of Leon and Ovido, neighboring on the Sea to Bisay, ut no part thereof. And now we are thus fallen on the Coast of Spain, I should ake notice of the Procuration which is said by our Author o be left with the Earl of Bristol, for impowring him to Espouse the Infant, within ten days after the Dispensation came from Rome, fol. 552. But hereof thre hath so much been said by the Observator on the History of the Reign of King Charls, published by Haimon L'Strange Esq and the defence of those Observati∣ns against the Pamphleter, that nothing needs be added here on that occasion. Fol. 567. Indeed the Savoy Ambassador there said, That the ntention of the King of Spain was, for a cross match with France for himself. It is not to be doubted, but that the Spa∣niard tryed all ways, and used all Artifices to divert the Treaty of a Marriage between the Prince of Wales and a Daughter of France: But I cannot look upon it as a thing conceivable, that he should pretend to any such cross Alli∣ance for himself, as is here alledged. He had before married the eldest Sister, who was still alive, and therefore could not pretend to the yonger also: And if it was not for himself (as indeed it was not) it cannot be imagined that he could give
himself any hopes of it for any of his yonger Brethren; there being so vast a disproportion between the Heir apparent of England, and any yonger Brother of the House of Austria▪ The Ambassador of Savoy might act something in order to the service and Designs of the Catholick King, which could not be advanced by any such suggestion as is here laid downs▪ And therefore our Author might have done very well to have spared his pains in giving us such a reason for the Interruption▪ which was made in the Treaty of this Marriage by the Agents of the King of Spain, as indeed cannot stand with reason. And thus far have I gone in running over the most materia errors and defects of Mr. Sandersons Compleat History, (as he calls it) of Mary Queen of Scotland, and King James her Son▪ the sixth of that name in Scotland, and the first in England▪ before the coming out of that large and voluminous piece, entituled, A compleat History of the Life and Reign of King Charls, from his Cradle to his Grave; in the doing whereof, I proposed unto my self no other ends, then first to vindicate the truth, and next to do some right to the Author himself, whom I looked on as a man well principled, and of no ill af∣fections to the Church or State: And having finished it with as much brevity as I could, it was intended onely as an Ap∣pendix to the work precedent, though now upon the coming out of the other piece, it serves as a preamble to that, as ha∣ving the precedence of it both in time and method; what mo∣ved me to the undertaking and examination of the following History, I have declared at large in the Preface unto those Advertisements which are made upon it, wherein I have carried my self, with more respect unto his person, and far less Acrimony in the Phrase and garb of my Expressions, there he hath reason to expect. His most unhandsome dealing with me in the Book it self; seconded by a more ridiculous manifestation of his Spleen and Passion in his post hase Reply, &c. might well
have sharpned one of a duller edge to cry quittance with him: But I consider rather what is fit for me to do, then for him to suffer, and have not yet forgot the Lesson which I learn'd in one of the Morals of my Aesops Fables, where I was taught to imitate those generous Horses, Qui latrantes ca∣viculos cum contempt praetereunt, which said, I pass'd on with a quiet and pacifick minde to the rest that follows.
ADVERTISMENTS On a Book Entituled THE COMPLETE HISTORY OF THE LIFE and REIGN OF KING CHARLES From his CRADLE to his GRAVE. Horat. De Arte Poet: Nec sic incipies, ut scripsit Scythicus olim, Fortunam Priami cntabo, & nobile Bellum! Quid dignum tanto quaerit hic promissor hiatu?
A SHORT SURVEY OF Mr. SANDERSONS long HISTORY OF THE Life and REIGN of King CHARLES. AS ALSO Of the Motives which induced the Au∣thor of these Advertisments to engage in this businesse. THere are two things as necessary to the writing Histories, as to the Composing of Orations, or any other Philosophical, Civil, or Divine discour∣ses; that is to say, clearnesse of Method, and per∣spicuity of Language. For if the Method be irre∣gular and inartificial, the Reader will soon find him∣self in a wood, in which he can neither travel with pleasure, nor stand still with profit. Or if the Lan∣guage be unpleasing, or rendred lesse intelligible to the vulgar Reader, either by new affected words, not to be understood without the help of a Dictionary, or by obscure expressions which require a Comment; he stands deprived of that contentment which other∣wise would beguile him to the end of the work, be∣fore he thinks he is half way in it. In which respect a perspicuous comlinesse of words, and a regular
Nr stand I singly by my self in this opinion of that Htory, but finde it seconded by others of good and quaity. A judicious and learned friend mine having read it over, gave me this judgement of without my seeking, and as such time as I am sure never dreamt of my engaging in this businesse. I spent some houres (saith he) upon his other two Histories of May Queen of Scos, and King her on, wherein though I finde not many untruthes, yet much stealing from  and
Camden, and methinks he  nothing like a Historian either  Compo  en∣tences many time , and his Digreons e∣dious and impertiment. But this being a private Adverment, and but laely given, could not come time enough to the ares of this Autor (had it been so meant) that he might thereby have rectified any thing which was observed to be  or method. And thereore I rfer him to a passage Book entituled Obvatio upon some particular pesos and passages in the Complea History o May Queen of Scots &c. which I am sure came to  and, be∣cause he returned an Answer to it. The Auhor of which observations tells us; That his whole Book is but a rapsody of notes and  papers other men collected without either Order or Me∣thod, being exceedingly defective both in time, place and nominations, and written in so unseemly and disjointed a stile, that we may easily perceive he hath taken up other mens words without under∣standing their matter; and unlesse it be where he raileth on persons of Honour, (which he doth plain∣ly and often, though omeimes very falsly) his Language is dark, harsh, and unintelligible. According to this last censure, the Author of this History stands not onely charged with want of are in the digesting of his matter, and the well languaging of the same (as was observed in the private Let¦ter before mentioned) but with railing on Persons of Honour without ground or truth. So that being publickly forewarned, it might have been pre∣sumed that in  he would have
and amended whatsoever was observed to be de∣fective in the other, or condemned in it. But some there are, who hae to be reformed in the Psalmists Lan∣guage; others, who think it an acknowledgement of their wants and weaknesses, if they persist not in the same way which before they walked in. I am so charitable to the Author of the present History, as not to rank him with the first, though I have rea∣son to beleeve that he is willing to be reckoned a∣mongst the second. We might have otherwise ex∣pected such a Reformation in those particulars as might very well have stood with ingenuity, and without disparagement. But on the contrary, the Earl of Aundel, my Lord Finch, and Sr. Francis Windeanck, persons of eminence and Honour are brought under the Lash; two of them being unjust∣ly condemned for profest Papists, and the third for doing somewhat, but he knows not what, which had lost his head if he had not saved it by his heels. His Method as perplexed and confused, his Language as rugged and uneven as before it was. It seemes it did concern him in the point of Decorum to make the History of this King alike both in form and matter, unto those of his Ancestors, and that his picture should not be laid with better colours then the o∣thers were; facies not omnibus una—Nec diversa amen, as we know who saies. I know some who affect Brevity, do many times fall into Obscurity. Brevis esse laboro, Obscurus io, as in his Book de Arte poe ica. But in a peice of such proixity as this is, the Author had room and scope enough to expresse himself clearly and intelligibly
even to an ordinary Reader, which renders him the more inexcusable amongst knowing men: His Hi∣story made much longer by Incorporating into it his late Majesties most excellent Meditations and Divine Discourses (those Menis aureae ) com∣prised in the Book called , or, The Portraiture of his sacred Majesy in his Soludes and Suf∣ferings, A Book which rather ought to have been pre∣served by its self, like Apples of Gold in Pures of Sil∣ver, &c. to be ingraven on Pillars of Marble, with a Pen of Diamond, then to be buried in the Grave of an obscure Writer, like a Pearl in an Oister-shell, or to be sowed like a piece of the richest purple cloth (purpureus late qui splendeat, in the Poets expression) to such a sorry Web of home-spun. Yet these defects might the more easily have been pardoned, if he had either been more careful in the choice of his matter, or diligent in searching for the truth of those things which he hath delivered: But on the contrary, his matter is many times taken up without care or Judgement, witout consideration of the fitness or unfitness of it; as if an History, which is to be the Store-house of time, were to be stowed with things unnecessary, unprofitable, and of no use at all: And yet his failings in the truth of that which he delivers to us, are more to be condemned, beaue more dangerous in themselves, and of worse conse∣quence in respect of the Reader, then his neglect in the choice of his matter: For he that comes unto the reading of an History, comes with a coidence that he shall finde nothing b the truth, though possibly the
Ad it might have been presumed the rather, because was rsolved before and o to provoke the or his Alter  (e he who he will) as might him that his Errors were not like to be con∣ad from the eyes of other, if such a provocaion should be banded to his . But however he goes o, and lays down many things for truth, which either have been proved to be false by the osrvator, or are contradicted by himself, or easily discenable for Errors by a vulgar Reader, not studied  then  Chronice, or the weekly Mruries: And this he does with so great confidence, not giving th least acknowledgement of any Eraa, eiter rom the Press, or from the Pen; that if the wilful  an Error may reat an Heresie, our Author may deserve to be enro for the first Heretick in point of History: And why t Heresies n History; as well as Heresies in Law; with which last crime Iohn  stands accused in Print by Mr. Justice German, for saying that the Ju∣rors were Judges in point of Law, and not onely n a matter of fact: Errare pssm, Here icus ess , was esteemed a piou resoluion in a Case of Div∣nity, and may be held for a good rule in any matter of History, Philosophy, Law or Physick, or any o∣ther Art or Faculty of what ort soevr. But to reduce these several items to a as in the History it self, considering the length, (I not say the tediousness) of it, there is much which deserves to be laid up in the Registers of succeeing Ages; so there are many Errors it to be , and many unnecessary passages which might ve∣ry
judiciously have been spared & suffered to pass by without remembrance: His Hist. in this respect, may be compared to the French Army at the battle of A∣gincourt, of which it was merrily said by old Captain Gam, who took a view of it from an Hill, That there were men enough in it to be killed, enough to be taken and kept alive, and enough to be permitted to run away; or to the draw-net in the Gospel, which gathered of every kinde of Fishes, out of which the good ones being culled and preserved in Vessels, the rest were onely good enough to be cast aside. I cannot but acknowledge, that he hath done more right to the King and the Church of England, then could be expected in these times: Vinam sic semper err asset, as the learned Cardinal said of Calvin in the point of the Trinity: And had he took but any ordi∣nary care in performing those things whereof he had been before advertised, or diligence in avoiding those Errors which he so often falls into, it might have de∣served the name of a Compleat History, by which he hath been pleased to call it: But coming to us as it is, it is no other then a Forest of Oaks, or a Quary of Marble, out of which materials may be hewen for a perfect Fabrick; a Moles indigesta like the ancient Chaos, which being without Form it self, afforded Matter to the making of the most excellent Crea∣tures: Or if he will, it is an History of Ore, which being purged of the Dross, and refined in the Lan∣guage, may pass for currant amongst the best pieces of this kinde. Which said in reference to the Author and the pre∣sent History, I must say somewhat of my self, and
my ingaging in the survey and correction of it: Con∣cerning which, the Reader may be pleased to know, that about Midsummer last, Mr. Sanderson found me out at my lodging in London, where after some ordi∣nary Civilities passed between us, he told me that he had undertaken the History of King Charls, and that he was required by the Lord Primate of Ireland, to do him some right in the business of the Earl of Straf∣ford, which he resolved so to do, and with such re∣spect unto my person, that I should finde no just cause to be offended at his writing: I answered, that I was resolved to have nothing to do in the Quarrels of the Observator, and therefore he might use his pleasure: I had a purpose thereupon of perusing the History, and taking notice of such Errors and Mistakes (if any such were) as possibly I might chance to meet with, and having so done, to send them to him, with my Conceptions and Corrections in a private way, that he might do himself the right of rectifying them in a short Review, and joyning that Review to as many of the Books as remained unsold: And this he might have done with great advantage to the Reader, and without disparagement to himself; two as great Clerks as any of the age they lived in having done the like, viz. St. Austin in his Retralations, and Bellarmin in his Book of Recognitions: But when I came to that part of it, which concerned the Lord Primate and the Earl of Strafford, I saw my self so coursly hand∣led, and so despightfully reproached, that I found good cause to change my purpose, & not to take such care to save his credit, who had so little care of his own, and less of mine: Seipsum deserentem omnia dese∣runt,
is an old Observation, but as true as ancient. He gives me rost-mea and besprinkles me with a little Court Holy-water in the end of his Preface; but beat me with the spit, and basles me all over with gall and vineger in that part of the History, which made me change my first purpose and intentions towards him. And yet I cannot chuse but say, I was never at a greater conflict within my self (in any matter of this kinde) then in the publishing or not publishing of these following papers. I had before justified my self against his Calumnies and charges in an Appendix to my answer to the part of Dr.  Book, entituled The udgment of the late Primate &c. in which I found my self concerned, which was intended to come out in Print before Easter last. And thereupon I thought it best to stand aloof, without ingaging further a∣gainst this Author, in hope that I might have some sa∣tisfaction from him either publick or private. But un∣derstanding that notice had been given unto him of some just cause for my dislike, & no acknowledgement or reparation following o it▪ I conceived that it con∣cerned me in point of Credit to let him see, that I knew as well how to offend an unjust Adversary, as to defend my self. In the pursute whereof I have carried on the work with that sobriety in it self, and such re∣spect unto his person, as cannot be displeasing to the Author, or any discerning friend of his, or unto any equal and impartial Reader. His Errors I have corrected, rectified his Mistakes, and aded here and there some Observations in the way of a Supplement. For which cause I have called
these papers by the name of Adversments, that I might use such honest freedom as well in the last as in the first, as might conduce uno the bnefit of such as should pcale to read them. Hi History is not mae the wore, nor the sale thereof retarded by such Additionals and Corrective as are here pre∣ented. Which though he may not thank me for, yet I am apt to flattr my self that I may receive some thanks from others. Howsoever I shall comfort my self with this, that I have not trespassed against good manners or the truth, the vindicating of which last, hath been the main impulsive to this underaking. And being comortd in that, I shall the better indure such censures either of pragmaticalnesse, or the love of revenge, which may perhaps be laid upon me by such as do not understand me. Deleait tamese Conscientia, quod est Aimi paulum incredibili jucundi∣ate persusum, as Lactantius hath it. With which I shut up this Survey, and proceed to the businesse.
ADVERTISEMENTS ON A BOOK Intituled A Compleat HISTORY OF THE LIFE and REIGN OF KING CHARLES From his CRADLE to his GRAVE. THE Author of the History which we have be∣fore us entitles it, A compleat History of the Life and Reign of King Charles from his Cradle to his Grave. By which the Reader might expect a com∣pleat Account of all the passages of his life, not onely from his coming to the Imperial Crown of this Realm, but from his first coming into the world; In which intervall, be∣sides the nature and condition of his education, First, under Mr. Thomas Murrey, and afterwards under the immediat care of King Iames his Father; he had the conduct of one of the most weighty Affaires of State that ever was managed by any prince in his fathers life time. And if Iames Howel in writing the life of Lewis 13. thought fit to begin his Histo∣ry with the acts of his Daulphinage, which could afford no great variety of matter, considering he came unto the Crown at ten years of age; assuredly the first part of the life of King
rash assuming of the Crown of  and that it gave the Spniards a free passe for his Italin forces to march towards the Netherlands▪ I shall adventure to lay down the first cause of that Quarrel. It was about the year 115. that a designe was put into the head of the Bishop of Spires, being an Homager and Feudatory of the Prince Elector Palate, to forfie the Town and Castle of Vdenheim; which by om little help of Art, added unto the natural strength of the sitation, might be made impregnable. In Order wherunto the Bishop invite the Prince and the Princesse Elizabeth his wie to a so∣lemn feast: and after Dinner shewes him from the top of one of the urrets of the Castle the prospect of the own and Country adjoning, telling him, that if that Town were for∣tified by Art as well as by nature, it wuld be a very strong Bulwark, not onely to the States of his Highnesse, but unto all the rest of his Neighbours in thoe parts of Ger∣may; and that he had a great desire to proceed to the acting of those thoughts, if his Highnesse were but pleaed to give way unto it. The Prince considering very wisely, that he was now in his power, returned this answer, that if the for∣tifying of that place did startle no other jealousies in the minds of the Neighbouring Princes then it did in his, he might go on with it when he pleased; which words being taken by the Bishop for a permission and encouragement to proceed in the work, it went on accordingly. But scarce were the works half finisht, when the Duke of , the Marquesse of Baden, and other of the Neighbouring Princes amazed to see such preparations for a war in a time of peace, dispatcht their Agents to the Prince, desiring to know the reason why he suffered the Bishop to entrench that place, which might in te be made use of to their com∣mon . The Prince made answer, that the Bishop had no permission from him, and that he would send a servant of his to  the prosecution of the work, and to com∣and the casting dwn of that which was .
And though he did perform this promise, yet the work went forward, the Bishop having secretly obtained license from the Emperor, (as the Lord Paramount of all) to proceed therein. The Princes hereupon muster up their Forces, which under the command of Colonel Obrrad, a servant of the Prince Electors, came before the Town, and sent a Trumpet to the Bishop, requiring him to give present order for the dismant∣ling of the place, or to give them leave to do it for him: The Bishop returns no other Answer, but that they should go to such a post, where they should find a copy of the Empe∣rors Placard, in justification of his act touching those Intrench∣ments: But the Souldiers, taking notice of no other authority then that which they received from their several Princes, made themselves masters of the place (the Ports and Circumvalla∣tions of it being unfinisht) without any resistance; and ha∣ving made all level again, disbanded, and went home to their several Countries: For this contempt of the Imperial Au∣thority, the Prince Elector, who had the chief conduct of this Action, was cited to the Chamber of Spires, where the cause went on so fast against him, that he was at the point to be Proscribed, when the unfortunate Crown of Bohemia was offered to him, of which more hereafter. But through that spot, the Spaniard had free Passage with his Forces of Italy, and other parts, to pass into the Netherlands, to reduce them to obedience.] No freer passage thorow that Spot, (if so fair and large a Countrey may be called a Spot) then he had before; the Spanish Armies finding an uncon∣troll'd March from the Alps to the Netherlands, without touching on any part of the lower Palatinate. And so it will be found by any who shall follow the tract of the Duke of Alva, conducting an Army of old Souldiers, both Horse and Foot, some Germn and Burgundian Forces being taken in by the way, from the Dukedom of Millain into Flan∣ders: So that if there had not been some other reason why the Spaniards engaged themselves in the Conquest of this Countrey, then the opening a free passage for their Armies,
to march out of Italy into the Netherl. it might have remain∣ed unconquered by them to this very day: But the truth is, that both the Emperor and the Duke of Bavaria, being whol∣ly acted by the Counsels of the Jesuits, resolv'd upon some compulsory courses, to bring all Germany under the obedience of the Pope of Rome; and to that end, thought fit to begin with the Prince Elector Palatine (as appears by several Let∣ters exemplified in the Book, entituled, Cancellaria Bavarica, as being the chief head of the Calvinian party in the Empire, and having made himself doubly obnoxious to a present pro∣scription, which Proscription being issued out, the Executi∣on of it was committed to the Duke of Bavaria, who was to have the upper Palatinate, together with the Electoral Dignity, the better to enable him to carry on the Design▪ and to the King of Spain, as best able to go thorow with it, who was to have the lower Palatinate wholly to himself, that his Forces might be always in readiness to carry on the War from one Prince to another, till the Emperor had made himself the absolute Master of them all. From Germany we pass into Scotland, where we finde the busie Arch-Bishop, (so he calls him) in a time of high discon∣tentment, pressing a full conformity of the Kirk in Scotland, with the English Discipline: So here, and hereupon the credit of hear-say onely; but in another place, where he rather acts the part of an Historian, then of one that is to speak in the Pro∣logue, he relates it thus: King Iames had a Design, not once, but always after his coming into England, to reform that deformity of the Kirk of Scotland into a decent Disci∣pline, as in the Church of England, which received Oppo∣sition and Intermissions, till the year 1616. Where at Aber∣dine their General Assembly of Clergy made an Act, au∣thorizing some of their Bishops to compile a form of Litur∣gy, or book of Common Prayer; first, for the King to approve, which was so considerately there revised and returned▪ for that Kingdom to pactice, which same Service Book was now sent for by this King, and committed to some Bishops
here of their own, to review, and finding the difference not much from the English, he gave command in Scotland to be read twice a day, in the Kings Chappel at Holy-Rood House at Einburgh, that the Communion should be admini∣stred in that form, & taken on their knees once a Moneth the Bishop to wear his Rochet, the Minister his Surplice, and so to inure the people by president of his own Chappel, there first, and afterwards in all parts for the publick: The Scotch Bishops liked it reasonable well for the matter, but the maner of imposing it from hence upon them, was con∣ceived somewhat too much dependancy of theirs on our English Church, and therefore excepting against the Psalms, Epistles and Gospels, and other Sentences of Scripture in the English Book, being of a different Translation from that of King Iames, they desired a Liturgy of their own, and to alter the English answerable to that, and so peculiar to the Church of Scotland, which indeed was more like to that of King Edward the sixth, which the Papist better approved, and so was the rather permitted by the King, as to win them the better to our Church: And so had it been accustomed to the Scotish several Churches, for some years without any great regret, and now particularly proclaimed to be used in all Churches, &c. fol. 221. In all which Narrative, we finde no pressing of the Book by the busie Arch-Bishop, how busie soever he is made by the Author in the Introdu∣ction. None having power to carry away his nine parts, or any part, until the propritry had set out his tenth part.] Our Author speaks this of the miserable condition of the poor Scotish Husbandman, under the Lords of new erection, as they com∣monly called them, who on the dissolution of Abbies, and other Religious Houses, to which almost all the Tithes in Scotland had been appropriated, igrost them wholly to themselves: And were it no otherwise with the poor Hus∣bandman then is here related, his condition had been miser∣able enough; it not being permitted unto him, in default of
the Parsone, or his Bailyff, to set apart the Tythes, in the pre∣sence of two or three sufficient Neighbors, as with us in Eng∣land: But their condition, (if I remember it aright) was far worse then this, not being suffered to carry away their own Corn, though the Tithes had been set out in convenient time, before the Impropriator had carried his, by means whereof, they were kept in a most intollerable slavery by these their Masters, who cared not many times for losing the tenth part, so they might destroy the other nine: By means whereof, the poor Peasants were compell'd to run, swear, fight, to kill, and be killed too, as they were commanded. From which being freed by the Grace and goodness of King Charls, they prov'd notwithstanding the most base and disloyal People, that the Sun ever shined on. This Bishop (John Maxwell) Minister of Edinburgh, was set up by Laud, then Bishop of London, who finding him Elo∣quent and Factious enough, placed him a Bulwark against ad∣verse Forces.] This Bishop, (the Bishop of Ross he meaneth) was by the King preferred to great Offices of Trust, both in Church and State: That he was Eloquent, is confessed by our Author, and that he was a learned man, appears by his judicious and elaborate Treatise, entituled. Sacro-sancta Re∣gum Majestas, in which he hath defended the Rights and So∣veraignty of Kings, against all the Cavils of the Presbyterian or Puritan Faction: But that he was also Factious, was never charged upon him, but by those who held themselves to the Assembly at Glasco; by whom he was indeed lookt on as a Factious person, for acting so couragiously in defence of his own Episcopal Rights, the publick Orders of the Church, and the Kings Authority: According to which Rule or No∣ion, the generality of the Bishops in all the three Kingdoms, might be called a Faction, if Tertullian had not otherwise stated it, by saying this, viz. Cum pii, cum boni coëunt, non factio dicenda est, sed Curia. The like unhandsome Character he gives us of Sir Archi∣ Atchison, of whom he tells us, That he was of such a
(he means his first coming out of  to all thse afer-Seditions: But cetainly, the pay whom he speaks of, was of no such temper. For being of a udge in , made the Kings Sollicitor or Procurato for the Realm of Scotland, he diver∣d the King from  the intended Act of Revoca∣ton, which indeed  have brought more fuel to the fire, then could be suddenly extinguisht, advising rather that he should enter his Action in the Courts of Iustice a∣gainst some of the  of those who had possest themselves of the Crown ands in his athers Minority, in which course he might hope to finde good success, without noise or dan∣ge▪ And f this may be called the adding of fuel to the fie of  King will finde a safe way to recover his own, from him by power and pride, unless he do strong hand which findes no resistance: For which good serice, if he were afterwards Knighted, and made se∣cond Secretary of Estate (the principal being called Lord Se∣cretary in the stile of that Kingdom) it was no more then he had worthily deserv'd for his sound Advice. rom the Title and the Introduction, proceed we next unto the History it self, in which the first mistake we meet with, the placing of the uneral of King Iames on the 14 of May, which Mr. H. L. in his History of the Reign of King Chals, had  on the fourth, in both erronously alike: But the of the ormer History hath corrected his error by the , and placed it rightly on the seventh, which the Historian might have done also, having so thorowly all the Passages in those Observations.
land had nothing but foul weather (triste & lugubre Coe∣lum) when she was at the Sea, and the worst of foul wea∣thers from the time of her landing to the very minute of her death▪ The like tempestuous landing is observed to have happened to the Princesse Catharine daughter of Ferdinand and If bell Kings of Spain, when she came hither to be married to Prince Arthur eldest Son to King Henry 7▪ which afterwards was lookt on as a sad presage of those Calaities, which hapned to that pious, but unfortunate Lady in the last part of her life. And certainly such presages are nei∣ther to be rejected as superstitious, nor too much relied on as infallible; such a middle course being to be stee'd in such conjecturals as is advised to be held in Prophetical or pre∣saging dreams, not wilfully to be slighted, nor too much re∣garded. ol. 6. The Parliament to be subordinate, not coordinate with the Prince &c. though King Charles unadvisedly makes him∣self a member of the house of Peers, which the Parliament would never acquit him. A passage which the Author likes well e∣nough, (and hopes the Reader will do the like) as it comes from himself, but will not let it go uncensured in the Oserva∣tor. It is noted in the Observations p. 62. that the King having passed away the Bishops votes in Parliament, did after by a strange improvidence, in a Message or Declara∣tion sent from York the 17. of Iune reckon himself as one of the three Estates, which being once slipt from his pen and taken up by some leading men in the Houses of ∣ament, it never was let fall again in the whole agitatin of those Controversies which were bandied up and down be∣tween them. Our Author says the same thing though in fewer words, and yet corrects the Observator, for taing no∣tice of the Kings strange impovidence in a message Iune 17. where he reckons himself as one of the member of the House of Peers. Fol. 10. for which he to call him to a further account in  and
so perhaps he may in a second edition of his History, there being no such thing to be found in this. Councels are privy and publick, his Privy Councel by his own  election: publick, his Parliament, Peers and peo∣ple. In these words there are two things to be enquired after, first, why the Bishops are not named as Members of this publick Councel, and secondly, why the people are admit∣ted art thereof. That the Bishops are to be accounted of as ne∣cessay members of this publick Councel, appeareth by the writ of Summons, by which they are severally and re∣spectively called to attend in Parliament. In which it is de∣clared, that the King by the advice of his Privy Councel, hath called a Parliament unto this end, ut cum Pralatis, Reg Colloquium haeret; that he for his part might confer with the Prelat, Peers, and great men of the Realm, and that they for their parts super dictis Ne∣gotiis tractaren & coilium suum impenderent, should de∣bate of all such difficult matters concerning the preservation of the Church and State, as the King should recommend unto them, and give their faithful Counsel in them accord∣ingly▪ So that the Author dealt not well with the Bishops, in excluding them from being a part of the Kings publick Coun∣cel, and putting the people in their room, who never were beheld as members of it, till so made by our Author: the Commons being called to Parliament to no other purpose, but ad conseniendum & faciendum, to give consent and yield obedience to all such things as by the great Councel of the Kingdom ( communi Concilio Regni nostri) shall be then ordained. But if our Author say that he includes the Bishops in the name of Peers, though I allow his meaning, and am able to defend him in it; yet I must still except against his expres∣sion, because not plain and full enough to the vulgar Rea∣der. Ibid. But  Iames altered that course a best able of any
his Predecessors to speak for him self.] It was indeed the common usage of the Kings of England to speak to their people in arliament by the mouth of the Chancellors; not that they were not able to tell their own tales and express their own mening, but that it was held for a point of State not to descend so much beneath themselves as to play the Orators. Yet somtimes as they saw occasion they would speak their own mindes in Parliament, and not trouble their Chancellors; as appears by that speech of King Henry 7. when he resolved to engage himself in a war with France, a copy whereof we have in the History of his Reign writ by the Lord Viscount St. Alban, which he thus beginneth. My Lords and you the Commons; when I purposed to make a war in Britain by my Lieutenant, I made declaration thereof to you by my Chancellor. But now that I mean to make war up∣on France in person, I will declare it to you myself &c. Fol. 96. But King Iames thinking himself an absolute Master in the Art of speaking, and desirous that his people should think so too, in the opening of all his Parliaments, and the beginning of each Session, and many occasions on the by used no tongue but his own. Which though it might seem necessary at the opening of his first Parliament to let the Lords and Com∣mons see how sensible he was of that Affection wherewith the whole body of the Nation had imbraced his coming to the Crown; yet the continual use thereof made him seem cheaper in the eyes of the People then might stand with Majecty. Nor was this all the inconvenience which en∣sued upon it, for first, it put a necessity upon his son and ∣cessor of doing the like, to whom it would otherwise have been imputed for a Defect, that he was not able, or for a Crime, as if he thought himself too great to speak to his people; and secondly, it put the Commons on a og of fol∣lowing the Kings example, not onely in making long speeches, but of printing them also, of which more hereafter. Ibid. His place being
of King William Rufus, where he is to  totius Regni . Our  speaks this of the Speaker of the house , but he speaks without Book; the Commons no being called to Parliament in the time of Rusus, as all our agree oyntly. He that was called might be a speaker of the Parliament, though not of in regard h delivered the kings minde to the  and Peers of that great Counsil, and theirs to him. Which office was commonly perfor∣med by the lord Chancellor of the Kingdom, who is there∣fore the Speaker of the house of Peers. And when the Commons had the Honour to be called to Parlia∣ments▪ they also had their Spak to perform the same Offices betwix the King and them, as the Lord Chan∣cellor performed between the King and the Peers; who thefor was (as still he is) at the Kings Nomination and appointment, admitted rather then elected on that nomination by the house of Commons. It was not pro∣perly and Originally the Speakers Office to sit still in the Chair and earken to those trim Oratios which the Gen∣tlemen of the House were pleased to entertain the time and themselves with all▪ but to signifie to the people the Command  th King, and to present unto the King the desire of his people. It s from speaking not from hearing that he take his name, though none have spoken lesse in tha House since the time of King Iames, then the Speaker himself▪ as if he were called Speaker by that figure in Rheto∣rick by which Lucus is said to take its name a non lu∣cen. Fo.   in the Prince Elector to Bohemia; so no ustice in the House of to  Palatinate from him] Neither so, not so  Prince. Elector had no coulour to accept of th Kingdom of  at our Author plainly saies he had not then was i no inustice in the House of Austa to
ade, conquer, and detain the  from him, as our Author plainly saies it was▪ In the last of these two propositions the Author shall con∣fute himself, and save me the Labour; he telling us within few lines after that, an . Then for the first of the two propositions, I must needs tell him, that the Prince E∣lector had not only some colour to accept the Crown of ∣mia, but a fair one too. The kingdom of Bohemia, according to the fundamental constitutions of it, was elective meerly. And though the Electoused constantly to keep them selves to the royal family, (except onely in the case of George Pogi∣brachio) yet they reserved a latitude unto themselves of chusing one rather then another, many times pretermitting the eldest son of the former King, and pitching on a youn∣ger brother, and sometimes on some other more remote from the Crown. But Mathias the Emperor being childlesse, a∣dopted Ferdinand of Gats the next Heir male of the House of Austria for his Son and successor, and caused him with∣out any formal election (as the Bohemans did pretend) to be Crowned King of that Kingdom, and put him into the actual possession of it in his own life time. But after his de∣cease, the Bohemians rejecting Ferdinand as not lawfully chosen, elected Frederick the fift Prince Palatine of the Rhene for their King and Soveraign, as lineally decended from Ladislaus 2. King of Poland and Bohemi, from whom the House of Astria also do derive their Claim. o that his Action was not so precipitae, and his ground more justifiable in accepting that Crown, then our Author hath been pleased to make it Fol. 163. And had King Iames, espoused that quarrel, (as all generally did expect he would have done▪ he might with far lesse charges have assured the possession of that Crown, or at the least have preserved the from the hand of Ruin, then he did put himself unto by
sending Embassadors to excuse the one, and mediate the re∣stitution of the other. In which last point I grant him to have been for some years deluded, not onely by the Emperour but the K. of Spain; but that he was deluded by the Spaniards also in the businesse and treaty of the Match, I by no means grant, and could sufficiently prove the contrary, if it had not been already done in the Observations on the former Histo∣ry. But our Author hath not yet done with the Spaniard, tel∣ling us, that. Ibid The Crown of Spain hath enlarged her bounds these last 60. years more than the Ottoman. Not so neither. The House of Austria within sixty years from the time that our Author writ this part of the History hath been upon the losing hand, the Kingdom of Portugal with all the appendixes thereof be∣ing revolted from that Crown, as also are the Countries of Catalonia, and Rousillon in the Continent of Spain it self; the lower Palatinate surrendred to its lawful Prince accord∣ing to the Treaty at Munster, and many of his best Towns, if not entire provinces in the Netherlands extorted from him by the French; besides the seven united Provinces, which within the compasse of that time have made themselves a free state, and are now rather confederates with that King then Subjects to him; whereas upon the other side the Ottomans within that compasse of time have regained Babylon and all the Countrey there about from the hands of the Persians, and conquered a great part of the Isle of Candy from the State of Venice. Ibid. The Kings Mercer infected and fled, no purple velvet to be had on the suddain, and so the colour of his Robes was changed by necessity.] This passage is brought in out of sea∣son as not relating to the Parliament but the Coronation. The Author of the former History had told us out of Mr. Prinne, that the King upon the day of his Coronation was arraied in white Sattin contrary to the custom of his Pre∣decessors who were clothed in purple, which change al∣though the King affected to declare the innocency of his
heart, or to expresse that Virgin purity wherewith he came unto the marriage betwixt him and his Kingdoms; yet our Au∣thor would fain have it to be done upon necessity and not upon designe or choice. How so? Because (saies he) the Kings Mercer being infected and fled there was no purple velvet to be had on the suddain. But first, though the Kings Mercer was infected, and fled, yet there were other Mercers in the City who could have sup∣plied the King with that commodity. Secondly, at the time of the Coronation the infection had been much abated, the Air of London being generally cor∣rected by a very sharp winter, and most of the Citizens re∣turned again to their former dwellings; amongst which the Kings mercer might be one for any thing which our Author can assure us to the contrary. Thirdly, it appears by another passage in our Author him∣self, that there was Purple velvet enough to be had for this occasion, he telling us out of Mr. Fullers Church History, (out of whom he borrows his description of the Coronation) that the train of the Kings vest or Royal Robe consisted of six yards of purple velvet. Some purple velvet then was to be had at the Coronation, though the Kings Mercer were infected and had left the City. And finally there was no such need that any such provisi∣on should be made on a suddain neither, there being ten moneths from the Kings coming to the Crown and his Co∣ronation, and as much time for providing a few yards of pur∣ple, as for preparing all the other royal necessaries which con∣cerned that day. Fol. 11. And so accounting to them the disbursmen of his Land and Naval Forces with a clear and even auc of the charge and expence to come, they were so candid, that the Lay gave him, without Conditions, two Subsidies from Protestants, and four from Papists.] And candid they had been indeed, if on so fair an auditing of the Kings Account for all expences, as well past as to come, they had given unto him such a pre∣sent
supply, as would have equalled that account toward the carrying on of the War which themselves projected, and gi∣ven those two Subsidies over and above as a Testimony of their good Affections to his sacred Person: But these two Subsidies from Protestants, and four from Papists, were so short from carrying on that work, that there was nothing of ngenuity or Candor in it. The particular of the Kings Account stood thus, viz. 32000 l. for securing of Leland, 47000 l. for strengthning the Forts 37000 l. for the repair of the Navy, 99000 l. up∣on the four English Regiments in the States Countrey, 62000 l. laid out for Count Mansfield, total 287000 l. Besides which, he sent in a Demand of 200000 l. and upwards, upon the Na∣vy, 48000 l. upon the Ordnance, 45000 l. in charges of the Land-men, 20000 l. a moneth to Count Mansfield, and 46000 l. to bring down the King of Denmark; the total of which latter sum amounts to 339000 l. both sums make no less then 626000 l. to which the grant of two Subsidies from Protestants, and four from Papists, hold but small proporti∣on, especially considering to how low a pitch the Book of Subsidies was fallen. Our Author tells us somewhere in this present History, that in Queen Elizabeths time a single Subsidy amounted to Ninety thousand pound, and that in these times, whereof he writes a single subsidy of four shillings in the pound, amounts but to fifty six thousand only▪ and I am able to tel our Author, that in the time of King Henry the eighth, a single Subsidy of four shillings in the pound, amounted to eight hundred thousand pound sterling, as appears by this passage in I. Stow In which we find that the Cardinal, (he means Cardinal Wol∣se) accompanied with divers Lords, both Spiritual and Tem∣poral, acquainted the House of Commons with the Kings ne∣cessity of waging war against the Emperor Charls the fifth, & thereupon required a Subsidy of 800000 l. to be raised by 4. in the pound out of every mans Estate throughout the King∣dome;
and that it was accorded by the Commons after a long and serious debate upon the matter to give two shillings in the pound, which by his calculation did amount to 400000 l. But then he is to know with all that in the raising of Subsidies in that Kings time, there was not one∣ly an oath prescribed to the Assessors to give a perfect valu∣ation of all mens estates as far as they could understand them, but an oath imposed also on the subjects who were to pay it, to bring in a true and just account of their Estates, and se∣veral penalties injoyn'd if they did the contrary, as of late times upon Delinquents, (as they call them) when they were admitted to compound at Goldsmiths and Haberdashers Halls; which course held also all the time of King Edwards Reign, but being intermitted in Queen Mary and Queen Elizabeths time, on good reasons of State, the Subsidies were brought so low by little and little, that before the death of the last Queen, they came not up to an hundred thousand, and sunk so sensibly in the time of King Iames, that they came not to above sixty thousand or thereabouts; so that al∣though the Parliament, in the one and twentieth of that King, bestowed upon him three Subsidies and three Fifteens, when they first ingaged him in this War, yet King Charls told them in his first Speech to this very Parliament, that those supplies held no Symmetry or proportion with the charge of so great an enterprize: And though the charges of the En∣terprize which he was in hand with, much exceeded his Fa∣thers (as much as the addition of a Navy of an hundred and twenty sail could amount unto) and that he prest them ear∣nestly at Oxford to a further grant; yet nothing more could be obtained, but that sorry pittance, sufficient onely for ad∣vance money for ingaging those Sea and Land Forces which he had provided, by means whereof the Expedition proved dishonorable to the King and Kingdom: Nor came these two Subsidies so clearly and so candidly from them, but that the King was fain to gratifie them in two points which they mainly drove at; that  to say, the granting them a publick
Fast to begin their Parliament, and laying some restraints on the Lords Day, which never could be obtain'd from any of his Predecessos. For when such Fasts had first been moved in Queen Eliza∣beths time, and afterwards in all the Parliaments of King Iames, till the 21 of his Reign; it was answered, that there were somany ordinary Fasting-days appointed by the Laws of the Land, on which they might humble themselves before the Lord, that there was no necessity or use of any such ex∣traordinary Fasts as they desired: Such Fasts in those times were conceiv'd to have too much in them of Aerius, an old branded Hereick, by whom it was held forth for good Ca∣tholick Doctrine, Non celebrand▪ esse jejunia Sta∣tuta,Augustin de Haeres. sed cum quisque voluerit jejunandm. And when the Commons in the 23 of Elizabeth, find∣ing no hopes of gaining any such Fast by the Queens Autho∣thority, had voted one to be solemniz'd at the Temple Church, for such of their own Members as could convenient∣ly be present at it, upon notice thereof, the Queen sent a Message to them by Sir Thomas Henneage, then Vice-Cham∣berlain, declaring with what admiration she beheld that in∣croachment on her Royal Authority, in committing such an apparent innovation without her privity or pleasure first known: On the receit of which sharp Message, the House desired Mr. Vice-Chamberlain to present their submission to the Queen, and to crave her pardon, for which Consult the Book entituled, The Free-holders grand Inquest, pag. 57. No news of any such attempt in all the rest of her Reign, nor of any Parliament Fasts (as far as I can remember) till the 21 of King Iames, when they first engaged him in this War; whose ex∣ample followed by King Charls, who indeed was not in a con∣dition to dispute the point, gave such incouragement to the Commons, that no Parliament could begin without them, and gave them such an head at last, as to appoint and conti∣nue Fasts by their own Authority, not onely without the Kings consent, but against the very express words of his
Proclamations: How well this Fast was kept by some lead∣ing Members when they had procured it, that is to say, with a good neck of Mutton and broath in the Morning, a Colla∣tion of sweet Meats between the Sermons, and a Sabbatari∣an Supper in the Evening; I could make known by a very memorable story, had I list and leisure: And what ill use was made of another in the Pulpits, Prayers and Sermons, of many seditious Lectures, to stir up and continue the War rais'd against this King, appears by his Proclamation of the fifth of Octo∣ber, Anno 1643. by which he endeavored to translate the then Monethly Fast, from the second Wednesday to the se∣cond Friday in every Moneth, but without success: Of this indulgence of the Kings, our Author takes no notice, as he doth of the other, viz. the laying of such a restraint from Recreations on the Lords day, as never had been known in this Kingdom since the Reformation: Concerning which, he telleth us that, Fol. 13. These Lawes are enacted this Sessions viz against A∣buses committed on Sundayes &c.] Now it appeareth by the Act that the Abuses (as he calls them) which were prohi∣bited at that time, were first the Concourse of people out of their own Parishes on the Lords-day for any sports or Pastims whatsoever; and secondly the use of Bull-baiting, Bear-baiting, Enter ludes common plaies and other unlawful exercises and pa∣stimes used by any person or persons within their own parishes. In the composure of which Act, the first clause made against the concourse of people out of their own Paishes on that day was purposely intended for a counterballance to the Decla∣ration of King Iames about lawful sports: and was afterwards made use of by some publick ministers of Justice, to suppresse the Annual feasts of the dedication of Churches, commonly called and known by the name of Wakes. Such feasts of love, and entertainments of good Neighbour-hood, though they drew some People out of their own Parishes, were no abuses in themselves, though so called by our Author. And as for Bull-baiting, Bear-baiting, and the rest there mentioned,
they had been all prohibited by a Proclamation of King Iames bearing date the 7. of May, in the first year of his Reign Anno 1603. Nor were they used upon that day (for ought that I am able to call to mind) in all the time of my Boy∣age. So that this Parliament by interdicting those rude Sports did but actum agere, save that they gained unto themselves the reputation of more then ordinary Zeal to the day of wor∣ship, and laid the first foundation of those many Rigor which afterward they imposed upon it. For in the next Parli∣ament of this King, they passed an Act that no Carrier with any horse or horses, no Waggon men with any waggon or wag∣gons, nor Carmen with any Cart or Carts, nor Wain-men with any wain or waines, nor any Drovers with Cattle should fourty dayes next after the end of that Session by themselves, or any o∣thers travel upon the said day, upon pain that every person or persons so offending should forfeit 20.s. for every such offence com∣mitted; and that no Butcher after the said time should kill or sell any Flesh upon that day, on the forfeiture of 6s. 8 d. toties quo∣ties: Matters whith had been moved in Parliament, in the 18 year of K. Iames, but without success, the Lords unani∣mously opposing the Bill, when sent up by the Commons, as tending to the disturbance of the Trade of the Kingdom, and some inconveniencies to the Poor: But having brought the King to a condition of denying nothing, they obtain'd this also of him as they had done the other, and at last became their own Carvers; imposing since the first beginning of the long Parliament, by their Orders and Ordinances, so many several restraints on that day from all kindes of lawful plea∣sure, and civil businesses, that greater never were imposed on the Jews by the Scribes and Pharisees, nor by some Ca∣suits on the Papists, nor by Dr. Bound, (the first Broacher of these Sabbath-speculations in the Church of England) on his Puritan Proselytes. But notwithstanding these condescensions of the King to the desires of the Commons, the Commons were resolv'd to condescend in nothing to the desires of the King, unless as
they had moved the war so they might also be made acquain∣ted with the Kings Design in the conduct of it, which point they prest with such importunity that the King commanded M. Glanvil. to serve as Secretary to the Navy for that Ex∣pedition, that knowing all the secrets and intentions of it when he was at Sea, he might acquaint the members with it at his coming back. Fol. 20. For Mansel was vice-Admiral of the Narrow Seas, thats his Office, and there indeed he succeeds to the Admiral:] Our Author is as much out in this particular, as the Mari∣ners had been in another. The Mariners thought (if Mr. H. L. report them rightly) that Sr. Robert Mansel the then vice-Admiral had an unquestionable right to the chief conduct of that Enterprise upon the Dukes default. The Mariners in this point sailed without their compasse, as is proved by the Observator. And this our Author building upon the Obser∣vator calls a Monstrous Error, although not half so Mon∣strous as that Error which himself committeth in making this, Sr. Robert Mansel, to be no other then the vice-Ad∣miral of the Narrow seas and restraining his Office and Au∣thority to those Seas alone. But had he consulted with the Sailers (as Mr. H. L. may be thought to have done) they would have told him that Sr. Robert Mansel was vice Ad∣miral of England, and that it belonged unto his Office next under the Admiral, to see the Royal Navie kept in good reparation, the wages of the Mariners and shiprights to be duly paid, and that the ships should be provided of all things necessary for any occasionall expedition. They could have told him also that there is no such Officer as a Vice-Admiral of the narrow Seas, but that those narrow Seas are commanded by two several Admirals, which hold their pla∣ces from the King, and not by grant or patent from the Lord Admiral of England; and that one of these Admirals commandeth in the East and the other in the Western part of those Seas: And finally, that at the time of his Expedi∣tion Sr. Henry Palmer was Vice-Admiral of the Eastern parts
of those Seas, and a Westcountry Gentleman (whose name I call not now to minde) of the Western parts. Our Au∣thor may be good for land service, but we have some cause to fear by this experiment, that if he should put forth to Sea he would easily fall into Scylla by avoiding Charybdis. Fol. 18. This Gentleman was second Son of Thomas Cecil Earl of Exeter. &c.] Our Author speaks this of Sr. Edward Cecil, created by King Charles in the first year of his Reign Lord Cecil of Putney, and Viscount Wimbleton, and by the King made Commander General of his first Fleet against the Spaniards; concerning whom he falls into several Er∣rours. For first, Sr Edward Cecil was not the second, but the third son of Thomas Earl of Exeter, the second Son being Sr. Richard Cecil of Walkerly in the County of Rutland, the Father of that David Cecil who succeeded in the Earldom of Exeter, after the death of Earl William, eldest Son of Tho∣mas aforesaid. Secondly, this Sr. Edward Cecil was not of a Colonel made General of the English forces in the unhappy war of the Pala∣tinate. He was indeed made General of the English forces in the war of Cleve, Anno 1610. the power which his Un∣cle Sr. Robert Cecil Earl of Salisbury had with King Iames advancing him to that imployment. But that he was not General of the English forces in the Palatinate war, I am ve∣ry confident; Sr. Horace Vere, one of a more noble extracti∣on, and a far better Souldier being chief Commander in that service of the English forces. Thirdly, admitting this for true, yet could not the mis∣effects of that war be charged on him or any other of the En∣glish Commanders; the English forces being inconsiderable for their number, in reference to those which were raised for that war by the German Princes, all of them under the Command of the Marquesse of Oalsback as their Genera∣lissimo, to whose either cowardize or infidelity, the mis-effects
of that war (as our Author calls them) were imputed com∣monly. And fourthly, it was not 27. years since his imployment there, when he was called home to be Commander of this fleet, there being not above five years from the beginning of the war in the Palatinate and his calling home, and not above fifteen from his being made General of the English in the war of Cleveland. Fol. 24. Dr. Williams outed of the Seal, but kept his Bishop∣rick of Lincoln and the Deanry of Westminster which indeed he had for his life.] Our Author is as much out in this, as in that before; for though the Deanry of Westminster was given at first to Dr. Williams for terme of Life, yet when he was made Bishop of Lincoln that Deanry fell again to the King, and by the king was regranted to him to be holden in Commendam with that Bishoprick. After which being made Arch-Bishop of York, in the year 1641. he obtained it in Commendam for three years onely, which term expired, he was a Sutor to the King at Oxford for a longer term, and on denial of that Suit, retired into Wales, and openly be∣took himself to the Parliament-party, concerning which con∣sult our Author in the latter part of his History. Nor did he only keep the Bishoprick of Lincoln, and the Deanry of West∣minster, but also a Residenciaries place in the Church of Lin∣coln, the Prebend of Asgarve, and Parsonage of Walgrove; so that he was a whole Diocesse within himself, as bing Par∣son, Prebend, Dignitary, Dean, and Bishop, and all five in one. Fol. 25. All setled and reposed: the Arch-Bishop of Can∣terbury presented his Majesty to the Lords and Commons, East, West, North, and South, asking them if they did consent to the Coronation of K. Charles their lawful Soveraign.] Our Author takes this whole Narrative of the pomp and order of the Kings Coronation, out of the Church History of Britain, endeavoured (and but endeavoured, by Mr. Fuller of Waltham and takes it all upon his credit without so much as start∣ling
at that dangerous passage which is now before us: That Author, and this also following him, conceive the peoples consent so necessary to the Coronation of the King, that it was askt no less then four times by the Arch-Bishop of Can∣terbury, before he could proceed any further in that solemni∣ty. But if we look into the form used in the Coronation of King Edward the sixth, we shall finde it thus, viz. That be∣ing carried by  noble Couriers in another Chair unto the four sides of the Stage, he was by the Arch-Bishop of Canterbu∣ry declared unto the People (standing round about) both by Gods and Mans Laws, to be the right and lawful King of England, France, and Ireland, and proclaimed that day to be Crowned, Cosecrated, and Anoited, unto whom he demanded whether they would obey an serve, or not? By whom it was again with a loudery answered, God save the King, and ever live his Ma∣jesty. And in the Coronation of King Iames, more briefly thus; The King is shewed to the people, and they are required to make acknowledgement of their Allegiance to his Majesty by the Arch-Bishop, which they do by Acclamations: Which being so, it cannot possibly be supposed, that instead of requiring the peoples obedience to the Kings Authority, the Arch-Bishop shoud crave their consent to his Coronation; as if the Co∣ronation were not strong and valid, nor his succession good in Law without their consent. But though our Author follow Mr. Fuller in one Error, yet he orrects him in another, though in so doing he require some correction also: Master Fuller tells us, that the Kings Tra was held up by the Lord Compton (as belonging to the Robes and the Lord Vicount Dorchester, lib. 11. fol. 122. Mr. Sanderson knowing that there was no such man then being as a Viscount Dorchester, must play the Critick on the Text, and instead of Viscount Dorchester, gives us Viscount Doncaster, whom he makes Master of the Wardrobe, and both true alike, fol.  5. The Master of the Wardrobe at that time was the Earl
of Dbgh, and the Lord Viscount Doncaster, (now Earl of Carstile) was then too yong to perform any Service in this solemnity; which had he done, Mr. Fuller, who hath some dependence on him, would not have robb'd him of the honor of performing that service, which none but persons of place and merit could pretend unto. Fol. 25. The Sermon being done, the Arch-Bishop invested in a rich Cope, goeh to the King, kneeling upon Cushions at the Communion Table, and asks his willingness to take the Oath u∣sually taken by his Predecessors, &c.] The form and maner of wh Oath, as having afforded much matter of discourse in these latter times; I will first subjoyn, and afterwards observe what descants have been made upon it: The form and maner of the Oath as followeth, Sir, (says the Arch-Bishop) will you grant and keep, and by your Oath confirm to the People of Eng∣land, the Laws and Customs to them granted by the Kings of England, your Lawful and Religious Predecessors, and namely the Laws, Customs, and Franchises granted to the Clergy, by the glorious King St. Edward your Predecessor, according to the Laws of God, the true profession of the Gospel establihed in this Kingdom, and agreeable to the Prerogative of the Kings there∣of, and the ancient Customs of this Land. The King answers, I grant and promise to keep them. Arch-Bishop, Sir, Will you keep Peace and godly agreement entirely, (according to your power) both to God, the holy Church, the Clergy, and the People? Rex, I will keep it Arch-Bishop, Sir, Will you (to your power) cause Iustice, Law, and discretion in Mercy and Truth, to be executed in all your Iudgements? Rex, I will▪ Arch-Bishop, Sir, Will you grant to hold and keep the Laws and rightful Customs which the Commonalty of this your King∣dom have; and will you defend and uphold them to the Hnor of God, so much as in you lieth?
Rex, I grant and promise so to do. Then one of the Bishops reads this admonition to the King before the People, with a loud voice, Our Lord and King, we beseech you to pardon, and to grant, and to preserve unto us, and to the Churches committed to our charge, all Canonical Priviledges, and due Law and Iustice, and that you would pro∣tect and defend us, as every good King in his Kingdom ought to be a Protector and Defender of the Bishops, and the Churches under their Government. The King answereth, With a willing and devout heart I promise and grant my Pardon, and that I will preserve and maintain to you, and the Churches committed to your charge, All Canonical Priviledges, and due Law and Iustice; and that I will be your Protector and Defender to my power, by the assistance of God, as every good King ought in his Kingdom, in right to protect and defend the Bishops, and Churches under their Go∣vernment. Then the King ariseth, and is led to the Communion Ta∣ble, where he makes a solemn Oath, in sight of all the People, to observe the premises; and laying his hand upon the Book, saith, The things which I have before promised, I shall perform and keep, So help me God, and the contents of this Book. Such was the Oath taken by the King at his Coronation, a∣gainst which I finde these two Objections. First, That it was not the same Oath which anciently had been taken by his Predecessors, and for the proof thereof, an Antiquated Oath was found out, and publisht in a Remon∣strance of the Lords and Commons, bearing date the twenty sixth of May, 1642. And secondly, It was objected in some of the Pamphlets of that time, that the Oath was falsified by D. Laud, Arch-Bishop of Canterbury, to make it more to the Kings advan∣tage, and less to the benefit of the Subject then it had been formerly.
For answer whereunto, the King remits the Lords and Commons to the Records of the Exchequer, by which it might be easily prov'd that the Oath was the very same ver∣batim, which had before been taken by his Predecessors, Kings and Queens of this Realm. And to the Pamphleters, it is answered by Mr. H. L. the Author of the former History, That there was no variation from the old forms, but the addition of a clause to a Prayer there mentioned; and that this varation was not the solitary act of Laud alone, but of a Committee: And this (saith he) I posi∣tively assert, as minding the reformation of a vulgar Error thrown abroad in loose Pamphlets, that Bishop Laud altered the Coronation Oath; whereas the Oath it self was precisely the same, with former precedents: More candidly in this, then the Au∣thor of the present History, how great a Royalist soever he desires to be reckoned. Fol. 31. This necessary Message produced no other supply then this insolency from a Member, Mr. Clement Cook, It is better (says he) to dye by a foreign Enemy, then to be destroyed at home.] And this seditious speech of his, was as seditiously seconded by one Dr. Turner, of whom the King complain'd to the House of Commons, but could finde no remedy, nor was it likely that he should: He that devests himself of a Na∣tural and Original power, to right the injuries which are done him, in hope to finde relief from others, (especially from such as are parcel-guilty of the wrong) may put up all his gettings in a Semtress thimble, and yet never fill it▪ But thus King Iames had done before him, one Piggot, a Mem∣ber of the House of Commons, had spoken disgracefully of the Scots, for their importunity in begging, and no less scorn∣fully of the King, for his extream profuseness in giving, ad∣ding withal, that it would never be well with England, till a Sicilian Vesper was made of the Scotish Nation: For which seditious Speech, when that King might have took the Law into his own hands, and punisht him as severely by his own Authority, as he had deserv'd, yet he past it over, and thought
that he had done enough in giving a hint of it in a Speech made to both Houses at White-Hall, on the last of March, Anno 1607. I know (saith he) that there are many Pigots a∣mongst them, I mean a number of Seditious and discontented particular persons, as must be in all Commonwealths, that where they dare, may peradventure talk lewdly enough; but no Scotish man ever spoke dishonorably of England in Parliament: It be∣ing the custom of those Parliaments, that no man was to speak without leave from the Chancellor, (for the Lords and Com∣mons made but one House in that Kingdom) and if any man do propound or utter any seditious Speeches, he is straightly in∣terrupted and silenced by the Chancellors Authority. This said, there was an end of that business for ought I can learn; and this gave a sufficient encouragement to the Commons in the time of King Charls, to expect the like: From whence they came at last to this resolution, not to suffer one of theirs to be questioned, till themselves had considered of his crimes: Which (as our Author truly notes) kept them close together, imboldned thus, to preserve themselves to the last, fol. 35. This Maxim as they made use of in this present Parliament, in behalf of Cook, Diggs, and Eliot, which two last had been Imprisoned by the Kings command; so was it more violently and perti∣naciously insisted on in the case of the five Members, Im∣peacht of High Treason by the Kings Attorney, on the fourth of Ianuary, Anno 1641. the miserable effects whereof, we still feel too sensibly. Fol. 40 And though the matter of the Prologue may be spa∣red, being made up with Elegancy, yet rather then it shall be lost, you may please to read it at this length.] Our Author speaks this of the Eloquent Oration made by Sir Dudly Diggs, to usher in the Impeachment of the Duke of Buckingham, which be∣ing amplified and prest in six tedious Speeches, by Glanvil, Pim, Selden, Wansford, Herbert, and Sherland, was Epilogued by Sir Iohn Eliot: A vein of Oratory not to be found in the Body of the English Parliament, till the time of King Iames. Its true, that on the Petition of the Commons, in the be∣ginning
of each Parliament, the King was graciously pleas'd to indulge them a freedom of reasoning and debate upon all such points as came before them, and not to call them to ac∣count, though they delivered their opinions contrary to his sence and meaning: But then it is as true withal, that they used not to waste time in tedious Orations, nor to de∣claim against the proceedings of the King, and the present Government; or if they did, the Speaker held it for a part of his Office to cut them short, and to reminde them of their duty, besides such after-claps as they were sure to finde from an injured and incensed Soveraign. But of this, take along with you this short passage, as I finde it in a letter written, ab ignoto, to King Charls, in this very business of the Duke, May it please your excellent Ma∣jesty to consider, That this great opposition against the Duke of Buckingham, is stirred up and maintained by such who either maliciously, or ignorantly and concurrently seek the debasing of this free Mnarchy, wch because they finde not yet ripe to attempt against the king himself, they endeavor it through the dukes sides: These men, though agreeing in one mischief, yet are of divers sorts and humors, Viz. 1. Medling and busie persons, who took their first hint at the beginning of King Iames, when the Vnion was treated of in Parliament: That learned King gave too much way to those popular Speeches, by the frequent proof he had of his great Abilities in that kinde. Since the time of H. 6. these Par∣liamentary Discourses were never suffered, as being the certain Symptoms of subsequent Rebellions, Civil Wars, ad the dethro∣ning of our Kings: But these last twenty years, most of the Par∣liament Men seek to improve the reputation of their Wisdoms by these Declamations, and no honest Patriot dare oppose them, lest he incur the imputation of a Fool or a Coward in his Countries cause. But which is more, the pride they took in their own supposed Eloquence, obtain'd another priviledge for them, that is to say, The liberty for any man to speak what he list, and as long as he list, without fear of being interrupted; whereof King Iames takes notice in his said Speech to both the Houses
at White-Hall. Nor did they onely take great delight in these tedious speeches, but at first disperst Copies of them in writing, and afterwards caused them to be printed, that all the people might take notice of the zeal they had to the common liberty of the Nation, and the edge they hed a∣gainst the Court and the Kings Prerogative. But to pro∣ceed. Fol. 47. To ballance the Dukes enemies, three persons his con∣federates were made Barons, to compeer in the Lords house, the Lord Mandevil, the eldest son to the Earl of Manchester, cre∣ated by Patent Baron Kimbolton, Grandison Son to the created Baron Imbercourt, and Sr Dudly Carl∣ton made Baron Tregate.] In which short passage there are as many mistakes as lines. For first, the Lord Mandevil was not created by Patent Lord Kimbolton, that title together with the tite of Vi∣count Mandevil, having been conferred upon his father by letter Patents, in the 18. year of King Iames Anno 1620. whom afterwards King Charles in the first year of his Reign made Earl of Manchester. The meaning of our Author is, that Sr. Edward Montague, commonly called Lord Mande∣vil was summoned to the Parliament by the Title of Lord Kimbolton, as is the custom in such cases when the eldest sons of Earls are called to Parliament by the stile and Title of their Fathers Barony. Secondly, there never was any such Baron as the Baron Tregate. Thirdly, Sr. Dudly Carlton was not created Baron Tregat, but Baron of Imbercourt, that being the name of a Mannor of his in the County of Surry. But fourthly, Grandison son to the cre∣ated Baron Imbercourt, is either such a peece of negligence in not filling the blanks, or of ignorance in not knowing that noble Person, as is not often to be met with. And therefore to inform both our Author and his Reader also, I must let them know that William de Grandson a noble Burgundian
Lord, allied to the Emperour of Constantinople, the King of Hungary, and the Duke of Bavaria, was brought into Eng∣land by Edmond Earl of Lancaster, second son to King Henry the 3. by whose bounty he was endowed with fair possessi∣ons, and, by his power advanced unto the dignity of an En∣glish Baron. The estate being much encreast by the Marriage of the Daughter and Heir of the Lord Tregoz, fell by the Heir general to the Pateshuls of Bleso in the County of Bedford, and by a Daughter of that house to the house of the Beauchamps By Margaret the daughter and Heir of Sr. Iohn Beauchamp of Bletso, the whole estate came by Marriage to Sr. Oliver St. Iohn, from whose eldest son descended that Sr. Oliver St. Iohn whom Queen Elizabeth (descended from the said Margaret by Iohn Duke of Somerset her second hus∣band) made Lord St. Iohn of Bletho in the first year of her Reign. From Oliver St. Iohn the second son of the said Mar∣garet (estated by his mother in the Mannor of Lydiard Tre∣goz neer Highworth in the County of Wilts,) descended a∣nother Oliver St. Iohn, the second son of Sr. Iohn St. Iohn of Lydiard Tregoz; who having in defence of his Fathers Ho∣nour killed one Captain Best, in St. Georges fields neer South∣wark, was fain to passe over into France, where he remained untill his friends about the Queen had obtained his pardon. To merit which, and to avoid the danger which might hap∣pen to him by Bests acquaintances he betook himself to the wars of Ireland; where he performed such signal service a∣gainst the Rebels, that passing from one command to another, he came at last to be made Lord Deputy of Ireland, at what time he was created viscount Grandison, with reference to the first founder of the greatnesse of his House and family. That dignity entailed on him, and the heires males of his body, and for want of Such Issue on the Heires males of Sr. Edward Villers begotten on the body of Mrs. Barbara St. Iohn, the new Viscounts Neece; according unto which remainder, that Honnurable Title is enjoyed by that branch of the house of Villers. But being the Title of Viscount Grandison was li∣mited
to the Realm of Ireland, to make him capable of a place in this present Parliament, he was created Lord Tregoz of Highworth to him and to the heires males of his body without any remainder. Fol. 62. Carlton gone upon this Errand, and missing the French King at Paris, progressed a tedious journey after that Court to Nantes in Bohemia.] And here we have as great an Error in Geography, as before in Heraldry, there being no such Town as Nantes in Bohemia, or if there were, it had been too farre off, and too unsafe a place for a Summers progress. It is Nantes in Bretaigne which he means, though I am so cha∣ritable as to think this to be a mistake rather of the Printer than our Authors own. With the like charity also I behold three other mistakes, viz. the Emperor of Vienna fol. 137. and the Archdutchesse of Eugenia fol. 139. & Balfoure Caselie, for Bolsovey Castle fol 192. By which the unknowing Reader may conceive, if not otherwise satisfied, that Balfour Castle was the antient seat of the Balfours from whence Sr. William Balfour Lieutenant of the Tower (that false and treacherous Servant to a bountifull Master) derives his pedigree; Euge∣nia (which was a part of that Ladies Christian name) to be the name of some Province, and Vienna (the usual place of the Emperors residence) to be the name of an Empire. But for his last I could alledg somewhat in his excuse, it being no unusual thing for Principalities and Kingdomes to take De∣nomination from their principal Cities. For besides the Kings of Mets Orleans and Soissons in France, we finde that in the Constitutions of Howel Dha, the Kings of England are call∣ed Kings of London, the Kings of South-Wales Kings of Dy∣neuor, and the King of North-Wales Kings of Aberfraw, each of them from the ordinary place of their habitation. For which defence if our Author will not thank me, he must thank himselfe. The mention of Nantes conducts me on to Count Shally's Treason against the French King, who was beheaded in that City; of which thus our Author. Fol. 63. The Count upon Summons before the Privy Councel
without more adoe, was condemned and forthwith beheaded at Nantes: the Duke Momerancy then under Restraint suffered some time after.] But by his leave the Duke of Monmorency neither suffered on the account of Shalley's Treason, nor ve∣ry soon after his beheading, which was in the year 1626. as our Author placeth it. For being afterwards enlarged, and joyning with Mounsier the Kings Brother in some designe a∣gainst the King, or the Cardinal rather, he was defeated and took prisoner by Martial Schomberg (created afterwards Duke of Halwyn) and being delivered over to the Ministers of Justice, was condemned and beheaded at Tholouse, Anno 1633. Ibid. Our Wine-Merchants ships were arrested at Blay-Castle upon the Geroud returning down the River from Burde∣aux Town by order of the Parliament of Rouen.] That this Arrest was  by Order of the Parliament of Rouen] I shall hardly grant, the jurisdiction of that Parliament being con∣fined within the Dukedome of Normandy, as that of Renes within the Dukedome of Bretaigne; neither of which, nor of any other of the inferior Parliaments, are able to doe any thing Extra Sphaeram Activitatis suae, beyond their several Bounds and Limits. And therefore this Arrest must either be made by Order from the Parliament of Burdeaux, the Town and Castle of Blay, being within the jurisdiction of that Court, or of the Parliament of Paris, which being Para∣mount to the rest, may, and doth many times extend its power and execute its precepts over all the others. Fol. 92. At his death the Court was suddenly filled with Bi∣shops, knowing by removes, preferments would follow to many, expected advancements by it.] Our Author speaks this of the death of Bishop Andrews, and of the great resort of Bi∣shops to the Court, which ensued thereupon, making them to tarry there on the expectation of Preferment and Re∣moves, as his death occasioned, till they were sent home by the Court Bishops, with the Kings Instructions: But in this our Author is mistaken, as in other things: The Bishops
were not sent home with the Kings Instructions till after Christmas, Anno 1629. and Bishop Andrews dyed in the latter end of the year 1626. after whose death, Dr. Neil, then Bishop of Durham, being translated to the Sea of Win∣chester, Febr. 7. 1627. Dr. Houson, Bishop of Oxon, succeed∣ed him in the Sea of Durham, in the beginning of the year 1628. Doctor Corbet, Dean of Christ-church, being conse∣crated Bishop of Oxon the 17 day of October of the same year, so that between the filling up of these Removes, and the sending the Bishops home with the Kings Instructions, there happened about 15 Moneths, so that the great resort of Bishops about the Court, Anno 1627. when they were sent back with the Kings Instructions, was not occasioned by the expectation of such Preferments and Removes, as they might hope for on the death of Bishop Fol. 105. In Michaelmas Term the Lady Purbeck, daugh∣ter and heir to the Lady Hatton, by her former Husband, and Wife to the Viscount Purbeck Brother to the Duke, passed the tryall for adultery, &c.] Our Author is here out again in his Heraldry, the Lady Purbeck not being Daughter to the Lady Hatton by her former Husband, but by her second Hus∣band Sr. Edward Coke, then Attorny Generall, and after∣wards successively Chief Justice of either Bench. Yet I de∣ny not but that she was an Heir and a rich marriage, as it after followeth. For being Daughter to Thomas Cecil Earl of Exeter, she was married by the care and providence of her Grandfather, the Lord Burleigh, to Sr. William Newport, who being the adopted sonne of the Lord Chancellor Hatton, succeeded in his name as well as in his Lands. In ordering of which marriage it was agreed on, that the vast Debt which the Chancellor owed unto the Crown, should be estalled to small Annual payments; and that in lieu thereof, Sr. William in defect of issue, should settle on his wife and her Heires, by any Husband whatsoever, the Isle of Purbeck, and some other of the out parts of his Estate. By means
whereof her Daughter Frances which she had by Sr. Edward Coke was heir to Corse Castle in the Isle of Purbeck, and so much of the rest of the Lands of Hatton, as the mother (being a woman of great expence) did not sell or a∣liene. Fol. 106. The King for all his former Arrears of loan, was put to it to borrow more: of the Common Councel of London 120000. l. upon Mortgage on his own land of 21000. l. per an.] And here I think our Author is Mistaken also, the Citizens not lending their money upon Mortgage, but laying it out in the way of purchase. Certain I am, that many goodly Man∣nors lying at the foot of Ponfract-Castle, and appertaining to the Crown in right of the Duchy of Lancaster, were sold out-right unto the Citizens at this time; and therefore I conclude the like also of all the rest. But whether it were so or not, I cannot chuse but note the sordid basenesse of that City in refusing to supply their King in his great Necessities, without Sale or Mortgage; especially when the mony was to have been expended in defence of the Rochellers, whose cause they seemed so much to favour. But for this and other refusals of this nature, the Divine vengeance overtook them within few years after; the long Parliament draining them of a Million of pounds and more, without satisfaction, for every hundred thousand pound which the King desired to borrow of them upon good security, so peny wise, and so pound foolish was that stubborn City. Fol. 107. Which we shall refer to the subsequent time and place fitting. But of those in their due place hereafter.] Our Author had found fault with the Observator, for saying that the King had not done well in excluding the Bishops from their Votes in Parliament; and that there was some strange improvidence in his Message from York, June 17. where he reckons himself as one of the three Estates, a Member of the House of Peers: But why he thus condemneth the Observa∣tor, we must seek elsewhere, which is a kinde of Hallifax
Law, to hang him first, and afterwards to put him upon his Tryal: Seek then we must, and we have sought (as he com∣mandeth) in subsequent time and place fitting, in their due place hereafter, as the phrase is varied: But neither in the latter end of the year, 1641. when the Bishops were deprived of their Votes in Parliament, nor in all the time of the Kings being at York, Anno 1642. can we finde one word which re∣lates to either of those points: In which our Author deals with the Observator, as some great Criticks do with their Au∣thors, who when they fall on any hard place in Holy Scri∣pture, or any of the old Poets or Philosophers, which they cannot master, adjourn the explication of it to some other place, where they shall have an opportunity to consider of both Texts together: Not that they ever mean to touch up∣on it, but in a hope that either the Reader will be so negli∣gent, as not to be mindeful of the promise, or else so charit∣able, as to think it rather a forgetfulness, then an inability in the undertaker. Fol. 115. To these he was questioned by a Committee, and in reason ustly sentenced.] The party here spoken of is Doctor Manwaring, then Vicar of the Parish of St. Giles in the Fields; his Crime, the preaching of two Sermons, in which he had maintained that the King might impose Taxes and Subsidies on the Subject, without consent in Parliament, and that the people were bound to pay them under pain of Dam∣nation; his Sentence (amongst other things) that he should be Imprisoned during the pleasure of the Parliament, pay a thousand pound Fine unto the King, and be made uncapable of all Ecclesiastical Preferments for the time to come, which heavy Sentence our Author thinks to have been very justly inflicted on him, though the Doctor spake no more in the Pulpit, then Serjeant  in Queen Elizabeths time had spoke in Parliament: By whom it was affirmed in the Parli∣ament of the 43 of that Queen, that He marvell'd the House
stood either at the granting of a Subsidy, or time of payment, when all we have is her Majesties, and she may lawfully at her pleasure take it from us, and that she had as much right to all our Lands and Goods, as to any Revenue of the Crown, and that he had presidents to prove it: For which, see the Book called, The Free-holders grand Inquest, pag. 62. But some may better steal a Horse, then others look on, as the saying is; the Serjeant being never questioned, and the poor Doctor sentenced (and justly, as our Author makes it) to an absolute ruine, if the King had not been more merciful to him then the Commons were. From Dr. Manwaring, our Author proceeds to the Ob∣servator, for saying, that Doctrinal matters delivered in the Pulpit, are more proper for the cognizance of the Convoca∣tion, or the High Commission, then the House of Commons, which though it may consist most times of the wisest Men, yet it consists not many times of the greatest Clerks: For, saith he, Fol. 116. That the Preacher is Jure Divino, not to be cen∣sured but by themselves, smells of the Presbyter or Papist.] But Sir, by your good leave, neither the Presbyter nor the Papist stand accused by our Orthodox Writers, for not submitting themselves, their Doctrines and Opinions to the power of Parliaments, who neither have, nor can pretend to any Au∣thority in those particulars: That which they stand accused for is, that they acknowledge not the King to be the supream Governor over all persons in all causes, as well Ecclesiastical as Civil, within his Dominions; and consequently decline his Judgement as incompetent, when they are called to answer unto any charge which is reducible to an Ecclesiastical or Spi∣ritual nature: How stiff the Papists are in this point, is known well enough by their refusing to take the Oath of Supre∣macy. And for the peremptoriness of the Presbyterians, take this story with you: One David Blake, at a Sermon preached at
St. Andrews, in the time of King Iames, had cast forth divers Speeches full of spight,Hist. of the Church of Scor. . 41. &c. against the King, the Queen, the Lords of Councel and Session, and among the rest, had called the Queen of England an Atheist, a Woman of no Religion: For which, being complained of by the English Ambassador, he was cited to appear before the King and his Councel, on the tenth of November, Ano 1596. Which being made known to the Commissioners of the last general Assembly, it was concluded, that if he should submit his Doctrine to the Try∣al of the Councel, the liberties of the Church, and Spiritual Government of the House of God, would be quite subvert∣ed, and therefore that in any case a Declinator should be used, and Protestation made against these Proceedings: This, though it was opposed by some moderate men, yet it was car∣ried by the rest, who cryed out it was the cause of God, to which they ought to stand at all hazards; & thereupon a Decli∣naor was formed to this effect▪ That howbeit the Conscience of his Innocency did uphold him sufficiently against the Ca∣lumnies of whomsoever, and that he was ready to defend the Doctrine uttered by him, whether in opening the Words, or in Application; yet seeing he was brought thither to be judged by his Majesty and Councel for his Doctrine, and that his answering to the pretended Accusation, might im∣port a prejudice to the Liberties of the Church, and be ta∣ken for an acknowledgement of his Majesties Iurisdiction in matters meerly Spiritual, he was constrained in all hu∣mility to decline udicatory: Which Declinator being sub∣scrib'd by the Commissioners, and delivered by Blake, he referred himself to the Presbytery as his proper Iudges: And being interrogated whether the King might not judge of Treason, as well as the Church did in matters of Heresie, i said, That speeches delivered  Pulpis, albert alledged to be , could not be judged by the King, till the Church therof What became after of this may inde it in Arch-Bishop Spots∣woods
History of the Church of Scotland: Had Dr. Man∣waring done thus, and the Observator justified him in it, they had both favored of the Presbyter or Papist, there's no que∣stion of it: But being the Observator relates onely to the proceedings in Parliament, and incroachments of the House of Commons, in matters Doctrinally delivered, without the least diminution of the Kings Authority in Ecclesiastical Causes, there is nothing of the Presbyter or the Papist to be charged upon him; as the Historian, to create him the great∣er odium, would fain have it to be. Fol. 115. But how suddenly the Commons House upon the Lors liberties, excluding the words, the Lords Spiri∣tual and Temporal, in the very grant of the Bill of Subsidies, &c.] And to say truth, the Lords were but serv'd in their own kinde, who having so unworthily joyn'd with the Com∣mons, in devesting the King (from whom they deriv'd all their Honors) of his just Prerogatives, are now assaulted by those Commons, and in danger of losing their own Rights, which by the favor of the King, or his Predecessors, were conferr'd upon them; which might have given them a suffi∣cient warning, (but that there was a Spirit of Inatuation over all the Land) not to joyn with them any more in the like De∣signs against the King, whose Authority could not be di∣minisht without the lessening of their own, nor any Plot carried on toward his Destruction, by which they would not be reduc'd to the same condition, with the rest of the People. But Quos Iupiter vult perdere, dementat prus, so it prov'd with them. Fol. 123. His body brought to York House, and after sump∣tuously intombed at Westminster in St. Edwards Chappel.] The Church of Westminster was indeed founded by King the Confessour, whom they called sometimes by the name of St. Edward the King;  that part of it that lies be∣twen the crosse Isle and the Chappel of King Henry best known by the name of the Chappel of  by rea∣son of the many Kings and Queens which are there ,
In a side Isle or inclosure whereof the Dukes body was Sumptuously interred with this glorious Epitaph which in honour of his invincible fidelity to his gracious Masters, (for I am otherwise a meer stranger to all his Selatious) I shall here Subjoyn. P. M. S.Vanae multitudinis improperium hic jacet, Cujus tamenHispania Prudentiam,Gallia Fortitudinem,Belgia Industriam,Tota Europa mirata est Magnanimitatem. QuemDaniae & Sweciae Reges integerrimum,Germaniae Transilvaniae &
Nassautiae Princip: Ingenuum,Veneta Reipublica Philobasileia, Sahaudiae & Lotharingiae Duces Politicum,Palatinus Comes Fidelem,Imperator Pacificum, Turca Christianum, Papa Protestantem,Experti sunt. Quem Anglia Archithalassum Cantabrigia Cancellarium Buckinghamia: Ducem habuitVerùm siste viator, & quid ipsa Invidia Sugillare nequt, audi.Hic est ille Calamitosae virtutis Buckinghamius. Maritus redamatus, Pater amas Filius obsequens, Frater amicissimus, Affinis Beneficus, Amicus perpetuus,
Dominus Benignus, & Optimus omnium servus. Quem Reges adamarunt, optimates honorarunt, Ecclesia deflevit, Vulgus Oderunt. Quem Iacobus & Carolus Regum perspicacissimi, intimum habuerunt. A quibus Honoribus auctus, & negotiis onustus, Fato succubuit Antequam par animo periculum invenit. Quid jam Peregrine? Aenigma mundi moritur; Omnia fuit, nec quidquam habuit, Patriae parens & hostis audiit. Deliciae idem & querela Parliamenti. Quidum Papistis bellum infert, insimulatur
Papista,Dum Protestantium partibus consulit, Occiditur à Protestante. Tesseram specta rerum humanarum, At non est quòd serio triumphet malitia, Interimere potuit, laedere non potuit. Scilicet has preces fundens expiravit, Tuo ego sanguine potiar (mi Iesu) dum mali pascuntur meo. Fol. 127. But the Religious Commons must reform Gods caus before the Kings nor would they be prescribed their Consul∣tations, but resolved to remit the Bill of Tunnage and Pound∣age at pleasure.] This is another new incroachment of the House of Commons, that is to say, the poasting off of the Kings businesse, and the publick concernments of the State, till they had either lessened his prerogative, weakned the Au∣thority of the Church, or advanced the interest of the peo∣ple. Which resolution of not being prescribed, their Conslta∣tions became at last so fixt amongst them, that when the King had frequently recommended to them his Message of the 20. of Ianuary, Anno 1641. So necessary for the setling of the peace of the Kingdome, they returned answer at the last, that it was an infringing of their Priviledges to be pest with any such Directions. Fol. 128. And King Iames commended them over to the Sy∣nod of Dort, and there asserted by suffrage of those Doctors, and were afterwards commended to the Convocation in Ireland. Our Authour takes this Errour from the former Historian, but takes no notice of the correction of it by the Observa∣tor
though it ppears by his citation in the margin, that he had consulted with those Observations in this very point. And therefore I must let him know, since otherwise he will not take notice of it, that this is a strange Hysteron Prote∣ron, setting the Cart before the Horse as we use to phrase it. The Convocation in Ireland, by which the Articles of Lam∣beth were incorporated into the Articles of that Church, was holden in the Year 1615. the Synod of Dort not held till three years after anno 1618. and therefore not to Drt first, and to Ireland afterwards. The like mistake in point of time we finde in our Authour fol. 134. where speaking of that wilde distemper which hapned in the House of Commons on the dissolving of the Parliament Anno 1628. he telleth us, That the effects of those Malignities flew over Seas, and infect∣ed the French Parliaments about this time, where that King discontinued the Assemblies of the three Estates upon farre lesse Provocations. Whereas he lets us know from the Observa∣tor, within few lines after, that those Assemblies of the three Estates in Franc were discontinued by King Lewis th 13. and a new form of Assembly instituted in the place thereof Anno 1614. So that the malignity of those distempers which happened in the Parliament of England Anno 1628. could not about that time passe over the Seas and infect the French Parliaments, which had been discontinued and dissolved 14. years before. Fol. 133. This was ratiied by the Contract of this Nation, which the Conquerour upon his admittance, had declared and confirmed in the Laws which he published.] Our Author speaks this of an hereditary Freedom which is supposed to have been in the English Nation, from paying any Tax or Tallage to the King, but by Act of Parliament. And I would fain learn so much of him as to direct me to some creditable Au∣thour, in which I may finde this pretended contract between the Norman Conquerour and the English Subject, and in what Book of Statutes I may finde these Laws which were publisht by him to that purpose. The Norman Conquerour knew his
own strength too well to reign precariò, to ground his Title on his admittance by the people, or to make any such con∣tract with them, by which he might more easily win them to that admittance. He won the Kingdome by his sword▪ and by that he kept It. 'Tis true, that the people did peti∣tion him for a Restitution of the Laws of Edward the Con∣essor, in which such an immunity from extraordinary Taxes might be granted to them. But I cannot finde that either he or William Rufus who succeeded, did ever part with so much of their powet as not to raise money on the Subject for their own occasions whensoever they pleased. And it is true also, that both King Hen. 1. and K. Steven, who came to the Crown by unjust or disputable Titles, did flatter the people, when they first entred on the Throne, with an hope of resto∣ring the said Laws; but I cannot finde that ever they were so good as their words, nay, I finde the contrary. The first of our Kings which gave any life to those old Laws, was King Hen. 2. the first granter of the Magna Charta; which notwithstanding he kept not so exactly as to make it of any strength and consequence to binde his Heirs. But the Com∣mons having once tasted the sweetnesse of it, and with the Lords in a long war against King Iohn, from whom they extorted it by strong hand, and had it confirmed unto them at a place called Running Mead near Stanes, Anno 1215. Con∣firmed afterward in more peaceable times by King Hn. 3. in the Ninth year of hi Reign. But so, that he and his Suc∣cessors made bold with the Subject notwithstanding in these money matters, till the Statute de Tallagio non concedendo was past by Edward of Carnarvon eldest Son to King Ed∣ward the third, at such time as his Father was beyond the Seas in the war of Flanders: which being disllowed by the King at his coming home, seems to have been taken off the File, to the intent it might not passe for a Law for the time to come; nor is it to be found now in the Records of the Tower amongst the Laws of that Kings time, as are all the rest. But from the generall position touching the hereditary
freedom of the Eglish subject from Taxes and Tallage, not granted and confirmed by Parliament, our Authour passeth to such Rtes and Impositions as are laid on Merchandize, of which he telleth us, that Ibid. Moly these upon Merchandise were taken by Parlia∣ment six r twelve per pound fr time and years, as they saw cause, for defence of the Sea, and afterwards they were grant∣ed to the King for life, and so continued for divers descents:] Our Authour had before told us, that the Merchant in ormer times usually gav consent to such taxes, but limited to a time t the ratification of the next following Parliament to be can∣celled r confirmed. By which it seems that the Kings hands were so tied up, that without the consent of the Merchant, or Authority of the Parliament, he could impose no tax up∣on ny Merchandise either exported or imported. But cer∣ainly whatever our Authour saies to the contrary, the King might impose rates and taxes upon either by his sole prero∣gative, not troubling the Parliment in it, nor asking the leave of the Merchant whom it most concerned; Which Taxes being accustomably paid, had the name of Customes, as the Officers which received them had the name of Custo∣mers. Concerning which we finde no old Statute or Act of Parliament, which did enable the King to receive them, though some there be by which the King did binde himself to a lesser rate then formerly had been laid upon some commodities: as appears by the Statute of the 14. of King Edward 3. where it is said that neither we nor our Heirs shall demand, assesse, nor take, nor suffer to be taken more cu∣stome for a Sack of Wool of any English man, but half a mark only. And upon the Woolfels and Lether the old Custome. And the Sack ought to contain 26. stone, and every stone 14. pound. By which it seems that there had been both Customes and old Customes too, which the Kings of England had formerly imposed on those commodities, now by the goodnesse of this King abated to a lesser summe, and deduced to a certainty. The like Customes the Kings of
England also had upon forreign Commodities,  namely, upon that of wine, each Tun of Wine which lay before the Mast, and behinde the Mast bing du unto the King by C∣stome; receiv'd accordingly, & sic de cteris. But being these old Customes were found insufficient, in the times of open hostility betwixt u and France, both to mintain the Kings Port, and to enable him to guard the Seas and secure his Merchants; a Subsidie of Tnnage and Poundage impos'd at a certain rate on all sorts of Merchandize was granted rst by Act of Parliament to King Hen. 6. and afterward to King Edw. 4. in the 12. Year of his Reign, and finally to all the Kings successively for term of life; Never denied to any of them till the Comons begn to think of lessening the Au∣thority Royall in the first Yar of King Charles, whom they had engaged in a War with the King of Spain, and men o make use of the advantage by holding him to hard meats, till they had brought him to a necessity of yeelding to any thing which they pleased to ask. For in the first Prliament of his Reign, they past the Bill or one Year only, which for that cause was rejected in the House of Lords. In the Parliament they were too busie with the Duke to do any thing in it: And in the first Session of the third, the drew up a Remonstrance against it, as if the King by passg Petition of Right, had parted with his Interest in that Impo∣sition. Nor staid they there, but in the umultuous end of the next Session, they thundred out their Aathema's ot only against such of the Kings Ministers as should act any thing in the levying of his Subsidie of Tunnage and Poun∣dage, but against all such as voluntarily should yield or pay th same not being granted by Parliament, as betrayers of the Li∣berties of England, and enemies to this Common-wealth. And though the King received it (but not without some losse and difficulty) from the first year of his Reign to the sixteenth current; yet then the Commons being backt with a Scottish Army, resolved that he should hold it not longer but as a Tenant at will, and that but from three Moneths to three
Moneths neither. And then they past it with this clogge' which the King (as his case then stood) knew not how to shake off, viz. that it must be declared and enacted by the Kings Authority, nd by the Authority of the Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament. Tht it is and hath been the ancient Right of the Subjects of this Realm, that no Subsidy, Custome, Impost, or other charge whatsoever, ought or may be laid or imposed upon any Merchandise ex∣ported or imported by Subjects, Denizen, or Aliens, with∣out common consent in Parliament. As for the Imposition raised on Crrans by Queen Elizabeth, it was done, as our Authour tels us to cry quits with the Ve∣netians, who had rais'd the Customes of our Clth. And this was done, saith he, without regret or complaint, the generall prosperity of the Reign overshadowing, and her power com∣manding, fol. 133. Here then we have an Imposition raised upon some Commodities, by the sole will an power of the Queen, not only without Act of Parliament, but without any regret or complaint of the Merchants, as our Authour tels us. And in the first he tels us true, but not so in the last. For the Merchants having fee'd some Members of the House of Commons to befriend them in it, it was moved that some course might be taken by the House to ease the Merchants in tht Point. When presently M. Secretary Cecil addressing him∣self unto the Speaker, desired that that businesse might pro∣ceed no further; affirming that it was a Noli me tangere, part of the Queens prerogative Royall, and therefore not to be disputed within those wals; adding whal, that if  proceed∣ed any further, he must (as he was in duty bound) acquaint her Majesty with the matter, of whose displeasure they would quickly finde themselves to be very sensible. And so the bu∣sinesse stopt for that time, though it broke out afterwards, but little to the benefit of the Merchant, as in fine it proved. It seems by this story that the Commons challenged no such priviledge in Queen Elizabeths time, as they did afterwards in the time of King Charles, that is to say, that neither the
King nor Queen was to take notice of any thing which was said or done within those Walls, until it was communicated to them by the consent of the House: For whereas the King in a Speech made to both Houses, on the 14 of December, 1641. took notice of some dispute which had been raised in that House, about the Kings power in pressing Soldiers for his Wars, the Commons voted this for a breach of Priviledge, and gain'd so far upon the Lords, that they joyn'd together in this Declaration to his Maesty, viz. That amongst other priviledges of Parliament, it was their ancient and undoubted right, that his Majsty ought not to take notice of any matter in Agitation and debate in either House of Parliament, but by their Information and Agreement: But yet as ancient as it was, the yongest man present had seen the beginning; and as un∣doubted as it was, the oldest man there sitting liv'd to see the end of it: And so much for that. Fol. 136. But they were all ten committed to several Prisons, and on the first of May, Attorney-General Noy sent Process out against them, to appear in the Star-Chamber, and answer his Information there.] Our Author speaks this of those ten per∣sons who had been guilty of that most unparallel'd Ryot, which was committed in the House of Commons, at the dissolving of the last Parliament, at what time Mr. Noy was not Attorney-General, nor in three years after, and there∣fore could not send out Process, or make any Infomation a∣gainst them, as is here affirmed: The Attorney-General was at that time Sir Robert Heath, who not long after entred the like Information against the Earls of Bedford, Somerset, and Clare, Sir Robert Cotton, Master Selden, Mr. St. Iohn, for dispersing a Manuscript, containing sundry projects for rai∣sing money on the Subject without the help of Parliaments; as if it had been some Design of the King or his Councel to enslave the Nation: Concerning which, our present Author tells us one thing, and an absent Author tells us another; That which our present Author tells us, is, That
Fol. 140. It was contrived at Florence by Sir Robert Dud∣ley, who descended from the Dudlies, Earls of Warwick, and so he stiled himself.] That this Book of projects was contrived by Sir Robert Dudley, I am well assured; and I am well as∣sured also, that he neither descended from the Dudlies Earls of Warwick, nor ever call'd himself by that Title: There were but three that held the Titles of Warwick, viz. Iohn, the first Baron of that House, created Earl of Warwick and Duke of Northumberland, by K. Edward the sixth. Secondly, Iohn his eldest surviving Son, commonly cal∣led Earl of Warwick (as the custom is) after his Father was made Duke, who dyed without Issue. And thirdly, Ambrose the fourth Son of the first Ion, created Earl of Warwick by Queen Elizabeth, Anno 1552. who deceased without Issue also; so that there was but one Dudley Earl of Warwick, from whom this Robert could de∣scend, and from him he did, as being the base or natural Son of Robert Dudley, Earl of Leicester, the fifth Son of the said Iohn Dudly Earl of Warwick, and Duke of Northumber∣land. Secondly, This Sir Robert Dudley, who contriv'd the Ma∣nuscript, did not stile himself by the name of Earl of War∣wick, that being too low a title to content his Ambition: For looking on himself as the onely remaining branch of this House of the Dudlies, he took upon himself the Stile of Duke of Northumberland, and was commonly called so by all sorts of People in the State of Florence: But to proceed, our Author tells us of this Manuscript of Sir Robert Dudlies, That, Ibid. It was a Rhapsody of several proects for increase of the Kings Revenue▪ and somewhat in prejudice of proceedings in Parliament; sundry copies whereof were dispersed, &c.] And so disperst, that there were few or none who were inquisitive into matters which conerned the publick, that got not Copy of thse Paper: Which being found in the Study of
the Earl of Strafford (as it might have been in thousnds more) gave an occasion to E. H. an obscure fellow, com∣pos'd of Ignorance and malice, to publish it in Print, with this following Title, viz. Straffords Plt discovered, and th Parliament vindicated in their Iustice executed upon him, by the late discovery of certain Propositions delivered to his Majesty by the Earl of Strafford, a little before his tryal, with this In∣scription, Propositions for the bridling of Parliaments, and for the increasing of his Majesties Revenue much mre then be∣fore, &c. And so much for the harmless Errors of my present, and the malicious falshood of my absent Author: Amongst which harmless Errors of my present (but not to be excused in any) Author, I reckon his naming of King Charls to be the Uncle of Frederick Prince Elector Palatine, fol. 143. and within few lines after, his Brother-in-law, as indeed he was, his making alcedon to be a City in Greece, fol. 151. whereas it was a City of Bithynia in Asia minor, on the other side of the Sea: But leaving these, I proceed to matters of more moment, and of greater conseqence. Fol. 148. And therefore draws a Pedigree of his right and title from King James the first, &c.] Our Author speaks this of the Pedigree by which the Marquess of Hamilton pretend∣ed a Right and Title to the Crown of Scotland, a Title which had so many flaws, that if all the Issue of King Iames the sixth were utterly extinguishe, cold not serve the turn: For first, the Lady Katherine Stuart, Daughter to Iames the se∣cond, from whom, (and not immediately from Iames the first) he must fetch his pedigree, was first Marryed to Robert Lord Boide Earl of Arran, from whom being forcibly taken by her brother King Iames the third, and marryed in her said Husbands life time, Sir Iames Hamilton, the especial favo∣rite of that Kig, she carryed with her for her Dower the Earldom of Arran: The Children born of this Adulterous bed could pretend no Title to that Crown, if all the Issue of Iames the first, second and third, should have chanc'd to fail: And yet there was another flaw as great as this, For Iames▪
the Grand childe of this Iames, having first marryed a Wife of one of the Noble Houses of Scotland, and afterwards considering that Cardinall Betn, Arch-Bishop of St. An∣dews, was the only man who managed the affairs of that King∣dome, put her away, and married a Neece or Kinswoman of the Cardinals (his first Wife still living) by whom he was the Father of Iohn the first Marquesse of Hamilton, whose Grandchilde Iames by vertue of this goodly Pedigree pre∣tended to the Crown of Scotland. Fol. 149. M. Rogers in his Preface to the 39. Articles, saith, That since the suppression of Pritns by the Arch-Bishops, Par∣ker, Grindal, and Whitgift, none will seems to be such.] That Archbishop Grindal was a suppressor of the Puritan Faction is strange to me, and so I think it is to any who are verst in the actions of those times; it being the generall opinion of our Historians, that he fell into the Queens displeasure for being a chief Patron and promoter of it. Certain it is, that he wrote a large Letter to the Queen in defence of their pro∣phesyings, then which there could be nothing more dange∣rous to Church and State. Nor does M. Rogers in his Preface to the 39. Articles, tell us, that he had any hand in the sup∣pression of the Puritans; it being affirmed by him on the con∣trary, that they continued multiplying their number, and grow∣ing strong; even head-strong in bldnesse and schism, till the dying day of this most Reverend Archbishop. Fol. 151. But wy to a forreign Title, and not at as easie a rate to English, as in Ireland he had t all Sees there?] Our Authour makes a Quaery, Why the Bishop appointed by the Pope to govern his party here in England, should rather take his Title from Chalcedon in Greece, then from any one of the Episcopal Sees in this Kingdom, as well as they do in that of Ireland? In answer whereunto, though he gives us a very sa∣tisfactory reason, yet I shall adde something thereunto, which perhaps may not be unworthy of the Readers knowledge. And him I would have know, that at such time as Prince arles was in Spain, and the Dispensation passed in the
Court of Rome, it was concluded in the Conclave, that some Bishops should be sent into England by the Name of the Bi∣shops of Salisbury, Glocester, Chester, Durham, & sic de cae∣teris; the better to manage and improve their encreasing hopes; Intelligence whereof being given unto the Iesuites here in England, who feared nothing more then such a thing, one of them who formerly had free accesse to the Lord Kee∣per Williams, acquaints him with this mighty secret; assu∣ring him that he did it for no other reason, but because he knew what a great exasperation it would give the King, and consequently how much it must incense him against the Ca∣tholicks. Away with this Intelligence goes the Lord Keeper to the King, who took fire thereat as well as he, and though it was somewhat late at night, commanded him to go to the Spanish Embassadour, and to require him to send unto the King his Master to take some course that those proceedings might be stopt in the Court of Rome, or otherwise that the Traty of the Match should advance no further. The Lord Keeper findes the Embassadour ready to send away his pac∣kets, who upon hearing of the News commanded his Car∣rier to stay till he had represented the whole businesse in a Letter to the King his Master. On the receiving of which Letter, the King imparts the whole businesse to the Popes Nuncio in his Court, who presently sends hi dispatches to the Pope, acquainting him with the great inconveniences and unavoidable dangers of this new designe, which being stopt by this devise, and the Treaty of the Match ending in a Rup∣ture not long after, the same Jesuite came again to the Lord Keepers Lodging, and in a fair and facetious manner thanked him most humbly for the good office he had done for that Society, for braking the bearing off which blow all the friends they bad in Rome could finde no Buckler, which Story as I heard from his Lordships own mouth (with no small contentment) so seemed he to be very well pleased with the handsomenesse of the trick which was put upon him.
Fol. 162. The German war made by Gustavus a pretension (and but a pretension) for liberty to the oppressed Princes. Which Proposition as it stands is both true and false, with reference to the beginning, progresse, and successe of his war. For when he first undertook the conduct of it, on the solli∣citation of the Kings of England, France, and Denmark, and many of the afflicted and disinherited Princes; he cannot be supposed to entertain any other thoughts then to restore the Princes and free Cities to their former Rights, for doing whereof his Army was defraid by the joynt charges and ex∣pence of the Confederates: In order whereunto he caused the Inhabitants of all the Towns and Provinces which he had forced from the Emperours Forces before the overthrow of Tilly at the valley of Lipsick, to take an Oath to be true un∣to the Liberty and Empire of Germany. And hitherto his in∣tents were reall, not pretentionall only. But after that great victory, and the reducing of all Franconia, and the lower Palatinate under his absolute command; though he continu∣ed his pretensions, yet he changed his purpose, swearing the people of all degrees and ranks, which submitted to him to be true from thenceforth to the King and Crown of Sweden. This as it first discovered his ambition of the first designe which brought him over; so was it noted that his affairs ne∣ver prospered after; receiving first a check from Wallenstein at the Siege of Noremberg, and not long after his deaths wound and the battel of Lutzen. Fol. 174. And now they revive the Sabbatarian controver∣sie which was begun five years since, Bradburn on the Sabbath day, and directed to the King.] In this Discourse about the Sabbatarian Quarrels, our Authour hath mistook, himself in several particulars. The businesse first is not rightly limn'd, the coming out of Bradburns Book being plac'd by him in the year 1628. whereas it was not publisht until five years after: But being publisht at that time, and directed to the King, as our Authour words is, it gave the King occasion to consider of the generall tendency of the Puritan doctrine
in this point unto downright Iudsme; and thereupon to quicken the reviving of his Fathers Declaration about Law∣full sports, in which the signification of his pleasure beareth date the 18. of October, in the 9. year of his Reign▪ Anno 1633. A remedy which had been prescribed unseasonably to prevent, and perhaps too late to cure the disease, if Brad∣burns Book had been publisht six years before, as our Au∣thour makes . Our Authour secondly, relating this very businesse of Bradburnes Book (or rather of Barbarous Books, as he cals them there, fol. 196.) must either be confest to speak Vn∣grammatically, or else the coming out of these Barbarous Books must be one chief motive for setting out that Decla∣ration by King Iames, Anno. 1618. Thirdly, This Bradbuu was not made a Convert by the High Commission Cout, bt by a private conference with some Learned Divines, to which he had submitted himself, and which by Gods blessing so far prevailed with him, that he became a Converts and freely conformed himself to the Orthodoxall Doctrine of the Church of England, both concerning the Sabbath day, and likewise concerning the Lords day. So Bishop White relates the Story in his Epistle Dedicatory before his Book to the Ach-Bishop of Canter∣bury, Anno 1635. Fourthly, Whereas our Authour tels us, fol. 175. That the Declaration was not  on the Ministers to publish more proper for a Lay-Officer or a Constable; I must needs grant that the publishing of this Declaration was not prest on the Minister by any expresse command of the King. But then I would fain know withall how the Bishops could take Order that publication thereof be made in all the Parish Churches of their severall Diocesses, according to his  will and pleasure, but by the mouth of the Ministers. The Constable and other Lay-Officers, whom our Authour thinks more proper for that Employment, were not under the Bishop command as to that particular, and therefore as he ad n
Authority, so he had no reason to require any such duty from them. And as for the Church-Wardens, which are more liable to the power and command of the Odinary, it happeneth many times, especially in Countrey-Villages, that they cannot reade, and theefore no such publication of the Kings pleasure to be laid on them. The Ministers who had take an Oath o Canonicall Oedience to their severall and respective Bishops, must consequently b the fittest men for that Employment, implicitly intended, though not explicitly named in the Declaration. As many mistakes there are concerning the decay and re∣pair of S. Pauls Church in London. For first, the high Spire was not burnt down by accident of Lightning in the time of Queen Elizbeth, as our Authour tels us, fol. 176. That vulgar Errour hath been confuted long agoe, and no such thing as the burning of Pauls Steeple by Lightning hath for these twenty years and more occurred in the Chronolo∣gies of our common Almanacks; that dreadfull accident not happening by the hand of Haven, but by the negligence of a Plumber, who leaving his pan of Coals there when he went to Dinner, was the sole occasion of that mischief; Second∣ly, The Commission for the Repair of this Church, issued in the time of King Charles, came not out in the year 1632. where our Authour placeth it, but had past the Seal, and was published in Print the year before, Anno 1631. Third∣ly, The Reparation of the Church began not at the West end, as our Authour tels us, fol. 177. the Quire or Eastern part of the Church being fully finisht, before the Western part, or the main body of the Chuch had been undertaken. Fourthly, The little Church called S. Gregories, was not wil∣lingly taken down to the ground, the Parishioners oppo∣sing it very strongly, and declaring as much unwillingnesse as they could or durst in that particular; and fiftly the Lord Mayor for the time then being, was not named Sir Robert (as our Authour makes it) but Sir Robert Ducy, ad∣vanc'd by is ajesty to the dgree of a Baronet, as by the
Commission doth appear; so many mistakes in so few lin are not easily met with in any Author but our present Histrian: But we proceed. Fol. 179. he Turk hve Auxiliry friendhip of the Tartar Chrim, from whose Ancestors Tamberlain proceeded. A Proposition strangely mixt of truth and falshood; it being most true, that the Turks have Auxiliary Forces from the Tar∣tar Chrim, and no less false that Tamberlain dcended from him: All who have written of that great Prince, make him the son of Og, or Zain-Cham, the Cham of Zagathey, a Pro∣vince some thousands of miles distant from the dwellings of the Tartar-Chrim; which Og or Zin-Chm was the Grand∣childe of another Zin-Cham, the third great Cham of the Tartars, and he the Grand-childe of Cingis the first great Cham, who laid the foundation of that mighty, and (for a time) most terrible Empire: Whereas the Chrim-Tartar, (or the Tartar-Chrim, as our Authr calls him) derives from Lochtan-Cham, descended from one Bathu or Roydo, a great Commander of the Tartars, who during the Reign of Hoccata the second great Cham, subdued these Countries: But this mistake I shall more easily pardon in our Author, then another of like nature touching Vladislaus King of Po∣land, of whom he tells us, that being the furth of that name, he succeeded his Brother Sigismund in that Kingdom: Vla∣dislaus the frth (saith he) was after the death of his Brother Sigismund, by the consent of the States preferred to the hroe, fol. 182. In which few words, there are two things to be cor∣rected. For first, Vldislus who succeeded Sigsmund, was not his Brother, but his Son. And secondly, he succeeded not by the name of Vladislaus the fourth, but of Vladslus the sevenh. Adde herein his making of Smolensko a Town of Pland, ibd. which most of our Geograpers have placed in Rssia, A Town whch sometime; by the chance of War, or other∣wise,
hth been in possession of the Pole, though properly belonging to the great Duke of Muscovy, which can no more entitle it to the name of a Polish Town, then Calice may be now said to be an English Colony, because once a Colony of the English. Nor does our Author spek more properly (I will not say more understandingly) of the Affairs of Ireland, then of those of Poland. For first, He tells us, fol. 185. That the Conquest of it was never perfected, till its subjection to King Charls, whereas there was no other subjection tendred by that People to King Charls, then by those of his other two Kingdoms of Eng∣land and Scotland. Secondly, Forgetting what he had said before, he tells us, fol. 186. That Mountoy made an end of that War in the Reign of King James; and yet he says not true in that neither: or the War was ended by Mountjoy at the Battle of Kingsale, by which that great Rebel, the Earl of Tirone, who had the con∣duct of that War, was forced to submit unto him upon con∣dition of his Pardon, which not without great difficulty was obtain'd of the Queen: After whose death, the Lord Mountoy returned into England, brought the said Earl of Tyrone with him, and presented him unto King Iames; who by this means reaped the fruit of that Victory, and setled Ireland upon a better foundation of Peace and Happiness, then all the Kings which had Reign'd before him. Thirdly, There was never any such Lord Deputy of Ire∣land as Sir William Fitzers, mentioned within few lines after; Sir William Fitz-Williams was once Deputy there, whom I think he means. Nor ourthly, was Sir George Cary, whom he brings in by Head and shoulders to be the Governor of Ireland, f. 187. ever advanced unto that Honor; and our Author being as much mistaken in the name of the Man, as of his Office: Sir George Cary never had Command in Ireland, Sir George Ca∣ew had, made by the Queen Lord President of Muster,
(which place he worthily discharg'd) but not the Governor of that Kingdom. Fol. 192. The Queen was delivered of her second Son, the 13 of October, 1633. (and not upon the 14 of November▪ 1634.) he was  ten days  James, and created Duke of York by Letters Patents, &c.] Our Author here corrects the former Historian, for making the Kings se∣cond Son to be born on the 14 of , and deerves himself to be corrected, for making him to be created Duke of York by Letters Patents, on  day after his Birth. For though he was by the King dsigned to be Duke of York, and that it was commanded that he should be called so ac∣cordingly; yet was he not created Duke of York by Letters Patents until ten years after, and aove, those Letters Patents bearing date at Oxfod, Inuary 7. Anno 1643. The like mistake to that which he corrects in the former Historian, he falls int himelf, fol. 312. whee he makes Henry Duke of Glocester, the Kings yongest Son, to be born on the twentieth day  Iuly, Ano 1640. whereas it ap∣pears by the Arch Bishops Brevit, that he was born on Wednesday the eighth day of that Moneth, being the day of the solemn Fat. And by this rule we may correct a passge in the sot view of this Kings life, pag. 3. wher he is  born on the seventeenth of this Moneth, though rightly, . 46. on the eighth day of it, he is said to be brn upn the eighth. And thus he fails, fol. 232. in making Edwrd the onely Son of George Duke of Clarence, to be Duke of Warwick, whom all our Heralds and Earl of Warwick. The like mistake I finde in the name of a Town, near unto which a great Battle was fought between the and the Swedes: The Town near which that Battle was fought, being named Norlinghen▪ a City of that part of Svevia which is called North-schwhn, misakingly by
Author called the Battle of Norlington: The loss of which Battle, drew after it the loss of the Palatinate, restored to the Electoral Family but the year before. Fol. 209. And that Story (of truth) that John of Orleans of this Family, like a second Judith, saved France from the Oppression of Strangers.] Not now to quarrel the ungram∣maticalness of this passage, nor the mistake of Iohn of Or∣leans for Iohane; I would fain know by what Authority our Author makes this Iohn or Ioane to be descended of this Illustrious Family of the Dukes of Lorrein: Most of the French, who have written the Story of her life, report her to be a poor mans daughter of Ocolieur, a Town in that Dukedom, instructed by the Earl of Dunois, (commonly called the Bastard of Orleans) to pretend to some Divine Revelations, the better to incourage that dejected Nation, and to take upon her the Conduct of the French Armies a∣gainst the English, in which she sped fortunately at the first, but in the end was taken Prisoner, and burnt at Rouen. Nor does the paralel between her and Iudish hold so well as our Author would have it, that Lady adventuring into the Tent of Holophernes, accompanied onely with her Maid, this Da∣mosel Errant never looking on the face of an Enemy, but when she was backt by the best Commanders and united For∣ces of the French; that Lady carrying back with her the head of her Enemy, which occasioned the total overthrow of all his Amy, this Damosl not being able to save her own Head from the power of the Conqueror; that Lady dying ho∣norably in the Bed of Peace, and this ingloriously in a Ditch. Fol. 219. A severe eye had been upon the Roman Catholicks, and their numerous rsorts, &c. to the ancient Chappel at Den∣mark House.] An ancient Chappel questionless, of not much above twenty years continuance, when our Author writ this part of his History, and then built for the devotions of a small Covent of Capuchins, whom the Queen had got leave o sttle there for her personal comfort.
No Chappell anciently belonging to that House which our Au∣thour cals by the name of Denmark, but is more commonly called Somerset House; It having been observed of Edward Duke of Somerset the first Founder of it, that having pull'd down one Parish Church and three Bishops houses (each of which had their several Oratories) to make room for that Palace for himself; he could not finde in his heart to build a Chappell to it for the Service of God: And though some Room was afterward set apart in it for Family-duties and devotions, by the name of a Closet; yet so uncapable was that Closet of admitting any numerous resort of Catho∣liques out of other places, that it was not able to con∣tain the Queens Domesticks at her first coming hither. But perhaps our Authour will hit it better in the affairs of Scot∣land, and therefore passe we on to them, where first we finde That He makes Sir Iohn Stewart Earl of Traquair, to succeed the Earl of Marr in the Office of Lord Treasurer of Scotland, fol. 193. Whereas it is most undoubtedly true (and acknow∣ledged by himself in another place) that he succeeded in that Office to the Earl of Morton: the Earl of Morton being made Captain of the guard in the place of the Earl of Hol∣land, and the Earl of Holland made Groom of the Stool up∣on the death of the Earl of Carlile; His making of Sir Iohn Hay of Scotland o be the Master of the Robes for that King∣dom, fol. 237. in stead of Master of the Rolls (Clerk-Regi∣ster they call him there) I look on as a mistake of the Prin∣ter only, though such mistakes condemn our Authour of no small negligence in not reviewing his own work Sheet by Sheet, as it came from the Presse, and making an Errata to it, as all Authours carefull of their credit have been used to do. Fol. 230. And because the Earl of Strathern a bold man, and had the Kings ear, and deservedly too, being faithfull and true; these men set on John Scot (Director of the Chancery) a busie person, to inform against his Descent:] In the story of this Earl, not only as to his Original and descent, but as to
his being Earl of Menteith our Authour is not to be faulted; but on the other side, not to be justified in making him to be Earl of Strathern by the power of Buckingham (that Duke being dead some years before) though by his power made Lord President of the Council for the Realm of Scotland. Therefore to set this matter right, and to adde something to our Authour that may not be unworthy of the Readers knowledge, I am to let him understand, that after the death of David Earl of Strathern second Son to King Robert the third, this Title lay dormant in the Crown, and was denied to the Lord Dromond (created afterwards Earl of Perth) when a Suitor for it. But this Gentleman Sir William Gra∣ham Earl of Menteith descended from an Heir General of that David, a man of sound abilities and approved affections, was by the King made Lord President of the Councill of Scotland, as before is said; In which place he so behaved him∣self, and stood so stoutly in behalf of the King his Master, upon all occasions, that nothing could be done for advance of Hamiltons designs, till he was removed from that place. In order whereunto it was put into his head by some of that Faction, that he should sue unto the King to be created Earl of Strathern, as the first and most honourable Title which belonged to his House; that his merits were so great as to assure him not to meet with a deniall, and that the King could do no lesse then to give him some nominall reward for his reall services. On these suggestions he repaired unto the Court of England, where without any great difficulty he obtained his Suit, and waited on the King the most part of his Summers progresse; no man being so openly honoured and courted by the Scottish Nation as he seemed to be. But no sooner was he gone for Scotland, but the Hamiltonians terrified the King with the dangers which he had run into by that Creation, whereby he had revived in that proud and ambitious person the Rights which his Ancestors pretended to the Crown of Scotland, as being derived from David Earl of Strathern before mentioned, the second Son of Robert the
Second by his lawfull Wife: that the King could not chuse but see how generally the Scots slockt about him (after this Creation) when he was at the Court, and would do so much more when he was in Scotland: And finally that the proud man had already so farre declared himself as to give it ou, that the King held the Crown of him. Hereupon a Commissi∣on was speedily posted into Scotland, in which those of Ha∣miltons Faction made the greatest Number) to enquire into his life and actions, and to consider of the inconveniences which might redound unto the King by his affecting this New Title: On the Return whereof, the poor Gentleman is removed from his Office, from being one of the Privy Council, and not only deprived of the Title of Earl of Stra∣thern, but of that also of Menteith, which for a long time had remained in his Ancestors. And though he was not long af∣ter made Earl of Airth, yet this great fall did so discourage him from all publike businesses, that he retired to his own house, and left the way open to the Hamiltonians, to play their own game as they listed. Faithfull for all this to the King in all changes of Fortune, neither adhering to the Co∣venanters, nor giving the least countenance to them, when he might not only have done it with safety, but with many per∣sonal advantages which were tendered to him. Fol. 238. The Marquesse now findes this place too hot for him, and removes to Dalkieth, without any adventuring upon the English Divine Service, formerly continully used there for twenty years in audience of the Council, Nobility, and Iudges.] Compare this passage with another, and we shall finde that our Authour hath mis-reckoned no lesse then fifteen years in twenty. For in the year 1633. he puts this down after the Kings return from Scotland, agreeable to the truth of story in that particular. What care (saith he) King Iames took heretofore to rectifie Religious worship in Scotland, when he returned from his last visiting of them, the like does King Charles so soon as he came home. The oul undecent Dis∣cipline he seeks to reform into sacred worship, and sends
Articles of order to be observed only by the Dean of his private Chappell there, as in England. That Prayers be per∣formed twice a day in the English manner. A monethly Com∣munion to be received on their knees. He that officiates on Sunday and Holydaies, to do his duty in his Surplice. No publick reading of the English Liturgy in Scotland, since the year 1562. but only during the short time of King Iames his being there Anno 1617. therefore not read continually twen∣ty years together, as our Authour states it; But twenty years is nothing in our Authours Arithmetick. For telling us that the sufferers, viz. Dr. Bastwick, Mr. Prinne, and M. Burton obtained an order for satisfaction to be made them out of the Estates of those who imposed their punishments; that none of those Judges being left but Sir Henry Vane the Elder, it was ordered that satisfaction should be given by him to one of their Widows, and thereupon it was observed for a blessed time when a single Counsellour of State after twenty years opi∣nion should be sentenced by Parliament to give satisaction for a mis-judgement, acted by a body of Counsell, fol. 867. But the punishment inflicted on those sufferers, was in the year 1637. and this order made about eight years after, Anno 1645. be∣ing but twelve years short of our Authours twenty, which is no great matter. Fol. 282. As for Sir John Finch Chief Iustice of the Com∣mon Pleas, who succeeded him (in the place of the Lord Kee∣per) he could not hold out so many moneths as he did years from being in hazard to have forfeited his head.] But first, this Gen∣tleman was somewhat more then Sir Iohn Finch, he being cre∣ated Lord Finch of Forditch in the beginning of the April before. Secondly, If he were in any hazard, it was not for any thing he had done in the place of Lord Keeper, but only for his zeal to the Kings service in the case of Ship money, or to his actings under the Earl of Holland in Forrest businesses, before he came uno that place; neither of which could have extended to the losse of his head, though he thought not fit to trust that head to such mercilesse Judges. With like pru∣dence
did Sir Francis Windebank, principal Secretary of E∣state, withdraw into France; of whom our Author telleth us, That he remained there to his death a profest Roman Ca∣tholick, fol. 338. But first, Sir Francis Windebank remained not there until his death, for he came over to the King when he was at Ox∣ford, about the latter end of the year 1643. But finding his sufferings unregarded, and his Person neglected (as not being suffered to appear as a Member of the House of Commons, when the Parliament was summoned thither) he retired a∣gain into France to his Wife and Children. And secondly, He dyed not a profest Catholick, but con∣tinued to the last a true Son of the Church of England; re∣proacht in his best fortunes by the name of a Papist, because preferr'd by the Arch-Bishop, a faithful servant to the Queen, and a profest enemy to the Puritan Faction: For which last reason, the Earl of Arundel must be given out to be a Pa∣pist (though I have seen him often at Divine Service in the Kings Chappel) and is so declared to be by our Author also; who tells us further, That finding his native Countrey too hot for him to hold out, he went with the Queen Mother unto Co∣len, fol. 428. as if the Land had been hotter for him, or his Zeal hotter then the place (had he been a Papist, as he was not) then for any other Noble Man of that Religion. Fol. 320. The English proposed a Cessation of Arms, but the Scots, as they would obey his Majesties command not to ad∣vance, so they could not return till they had the effects of their Errand.] And all this while I would fain know what became of the Irish Army, which had been raised in so much haste by the Earl of Strafford, with the beginning of the Spring: An Army consisting of 10000 Foot, and 1500 Horse, kept ever since in constant pay and continual Exercise, by which the King might have reduced the Scots to their due obedi∣ence, as the Earl of Strafford declared openly at the Councel Table, immediately on the dissolving of the former Parlia∣ment; yet now this Army lies dormant, without acting any∣thing
thing toward the suppressing of the Scots, exprest in their invading England, their wasting the Northern parts of the Kingdom, and their bold Demands: Which Army, if it had been put over into Cumberland, (to which from the Port of Carick-Fergus in Ireland, is but a short and easie passage) they might have got upon the back of the Scots, and caught that wretched People in a pretty Pit-fall; so that having the English Army before them, and the Irish behinde them, they could not but be ground to powder, as between two Mill-stones: But there was some fatality in it, or rather some over-ruling providence, which so dulled our Coun∣cels, that this Design was never thought of for ought I can learn; but sure I am that it was never put into Execution: An Army, of which the prevailing Members in both Hou∣ses stood in so much fear, that they never left troubling the King with their importunities, till they had caus'd him to Disband it; the Scots in the mean time nesting in the Nor∣thern Counties, and kept at most excessive charges to awe the King, and countenance their own proceedings. Fol. 334. The Book, whilst in loose Papers (re it was com∣pleat) and secured into his Cabinet, and that being lost, was sei∣zed by the enemy at Naseby fight, &c.] Our Author here, up∣on occasion of his Majesties most excellent Book, called (which he hath wholly Incorporated part per part in this present History) gives a very strange Pedigree of it, that being composed before Naseby fight, it was there taken with the rest of the Kings Papers, and coming to his hands again, was by the King committed to the hands of one Mr. Symonds, and by him to the Press: In all which, there is nothing true but the last particular. For first, That Book, and the Meditations therein contain∣ed, were not composed before Naseby fight, many of them relating to subsequent Passages, which the King, without a very hgh measure of the Spirit of Prophecy, was not able to look so far into as if past already. Besides, that Book being called, The Porraiure of his Maesty in his Solitudes
and Sufferings, must needs relate unto the times of his Soli∣tude, and therefore could not be digested before Naseby fight, when he had been continually exercised in Camp or Counsel, and not reduc'd to any such Solitude as that Title intima∣teth. Secondly, These Papers were not found with the rest in the Kings Cabinet; or if they were, there must be somewhat in it above a miracle that he should get them again into his hands. Assuredly those men who used so much diligence to sup∣press this Book when it was published in print, and many thousand Copies disperst abroad, would either have burnt it in the fire, or use some other means to prevent the printing of it, to their great trouble and disadvantage. Thirdly, These papers were not delivered by the King to Mr. Symonds, who had no such near access to him at that time: For the truth is, that the King having not finisht his Conceptions on the several Subjects therein contained, till he was ready to be carried away from Carisbrook Castle, com∣mitted those papers at the time of his going thence, to the hands of one of his trusty Servants, to be so disposed of, as might most conduce to the advancement of his Honor & In∣terest: By which trusty Servant (whosoever he was) those papers were committed to the care of the said Mr. Symons, who had shewed himself exceeding zealous in the Kings Af∣fairs, by whom there was care taken for the publishing of them, to the infinite contentment of all those well affected Subjects who could get a ight of them. Fol. 372. The loss of his place, (viz. the City of Arras] animated the Portugueses to revolt from the Spanish Yoke, and to submit themselves to the right Heir, Duke John of Bragan∣za.] Our Author is out of this also: For first, it was not the loss of the City of Arras, but the secret practices and solli∣citations of Cardinal Richelieu, which made the Portuguez to revolt.
And secondly, if the King of Spains Title were not good (as the best Lawyers of Portugal, in the Reign of the Car∣dinal King Don Henry, did affirm it was) yet could not the Duke of Braganza be the right Heir of that Kingdom; the Children of Mary Dutchess of Parma, the eldest Daughter of Prince Edward, the third Son of Emmanuel, being to be preferr'd before the Children of Katherine Dutchess of Braganza, her younger Sister: He tells next of Charls, That, Fol. 373. The Soveraignty of Utrick, and Dutchy of Gel∣ders, he bought; that of William he won by Arms, with some pretence of right.] But first, the Soveraignty of Vtreckt came not to him by purchase, but was resigned by Henry of Bavaria, the then Bishop thereof, who being then warred on by the Duke of Gelders, and driven out of the City by his own Subjects, was not able to hold it: Which resigna∣tion, notwithstanding he was fain to take the City by force▪ and to obtain a confirmation of the Grant, not onely from Pope Ciement the 7. but also from the Estates of the Coun∣trey. Secondly, he bought not the Dutchy of Gelders neither, but possest himself of it by a mixt Title of Arms and Con∣tract: The first Contract made between Charls the Warlike Duke of Burgundy, and Arnold of Egmond▪ Duke of Gel∣ders, who in regard of the great Succors which he received from him (when deprived and Imprisoned by his own ungra∣cious son) passed over his whole Estate to him for a little mo∣ny: But this alienation being made unprofitable by the death of Charls, the intrusion of Adolph, the son of Arnold, and the succession of Charls the son of Adolph, this Emperor re∣viv'd the claim, and prest Duke Charls so hotly on all sides with continual Wars, that he was forc'd to yield it to him, upon condition that he might enjoy it till his death, which was afterwards granted. Thirdly, if he had any right to the Dukedom of William, it accrued not to him by discent as King of Spain, but as a
ief forfeited to the Empire, for want of Heirs male in the House of Sforsa; which not being acknowledged by the French, who pretended from the Heir, General of the Ga∣leazzo's, he won it by his Sword, and so disposed thereof to his Son and Successor King Philip the second, and his Heirs, by another right then that of Conquest. The proceeding of the short Parliament, and the surviving Convocation, have been so fully spoken of in the Observa∣tions on the former History, that nothing need be added here: But the long Parliament, which began in November follow∣ing, will afford us some new matter for these Advertisements not before observ'd. And first we finde, That Fol. 336. There came out an Order of the Commons House, that all Projectors, and unlawful Monopolists, that have or had tely any benefit from Monopolies, or countenanced, or issued out any Warrants in favor of them, &c. shall be disabled to sit in the House.] A new piece of Authority which the Com∣mons never exercised before, and which they had no right to now, but that they knew they were at this time in such a con∣dition, as to venture upon any new Incroachment, without control: For anciently and legally the Commons had no power to exclude any of their Members from their place in Parliament, either under colour of false elections, or any o∣ther pretence whatsoever: For it appears on good Record, in the 28 year of Queen Elizabeth, that the Commons in Par∣liament, undertaking the examination of the chusing and returning of Knights of the Shire for the Couny of Nor∣folk, were by the Queen sharply reprehended for it; that being (as she sent them word) a thing improper for them to deal in, as belonging onely to the Office and Charge of the Lord Chancellor, from whom the Writs issue, and ae re∣turned. And if they may not exclude their Members under colour of undue Elections and false Returns, much less Au∣thority have they to exclude any of them for acting by ver∣tue of the Kings. Letters Patents, or doing any thing in or∣der to his Majesties Service: For if this power were once al∣lowed
them, they might proceed in the next place to shut out all the Lords of the Privy Councel, his Counsel learned in the Laws, his Domestick Servants, together with all such as hold any Offices by his Grant and Favor; because forsooth, having dependance on the King, they could not be true unto the Interest of the Commonwealth: And by this means they might so weed out one another, that at the last they would leave none to sit amongst them, but such as should be all in∣gag'd to drive on such projects as were laid before them. But whereas our Author tells us in the following words, that it was Ordered also, That Mr. Speaker should issue out new Warrants for electing other Members in their places; he makes the Commons guilty of a greater incroachment then indeed they were: All that they did or could pretend to in this case, was to give order to the Speaker, that intimation might be given to his Majesty of the places vacant, and to make humble suit unto him to issue out new Writs for new Elections to those places: But the next Incroachment on the Kings Authority, was far greater then this, and comes next in order. Fol. 360. The Bill for the Trienial Parliament, having ps∣sed both Houses, was confirmed with the Kings Royal Assent, Febr. 16. And then also he past the Bill of Subsidies, fol. 361.] The Subsidies here mentioned, were intended for the relief of the Northern Counties, opprest at once with two great Armies, who not onely liv'd upon Free Quarter, but raised divers sums of money also for their present necessities; the one of them an Army of English, rais'd by the King to right himself upon the Scots; the other being an Army of Scots, who invaded the Kingdom, under colour of obtaining from the King what they had no right to: So that the King was not to have a peny of that Money, and yet the Commons would not suffer him to pass the one, till he had before hand passed the other; which the King, for the relief of his poor Subjects was content to do, and thereby put the power of calling Parliaments into the hands of Sheriffs and Constables,
in case he either would not, or should not do it at each three years end: But the nex incroachment on the Power and Prerogative Royal was worse then this, there being a way left for the King to reserve that Power by the timely calling of a Parliament, and the dissolving of it too, if called with∣in a shorter time then that Act had limited. But for the next sore, which was his passing of the Bill of Tonnage and Poundage, there was no Plaister to be found; the King being for'd (remember that the Commons had an Army of Scots at their devotion) to pass away all his Right unto it, before he could obtain it but for three Moneths one∣ly, as was said before: In which Bill it is to be observ'd, that as they depriv'd the King of his Right to Tonnage and Pound∣age, so they began then to strike at the Bishops Rights to their Vote in Parliament: For whereas generally in all for∣mer Acts, the Lords Spiritual and Temporal were distinctly named, in this that distinction was left out, and the Bill drawn up in the name of the Lord and Commons; which being disputed by the Bishops, as well fore-seeing what the Commons intended by it, was notwithstanding carried for the Commons by the Temporal Lords, who thereby made a way for their own exclusion, when the Commons were grown as much too strong for them, as they were for the Bishops: The secular Lords knew well, that the Lords Spiritual were to have the precedence, and therefore gave them leave to go first out of the House, that they themselves might follow after as they ought to do. Proceed we next to the business of the Earl of Strafford, a whose Tryal our Author tells us, That Fol. 376. The Earl of Arundel was made Lord High Steward, and the Earl of Lindsey Lord High Constable. Our Author borrows this Error (as he does some others) from the former History, and makes it worse by an addition of his own. For first, The Earl of Lindsey was not made High Consta∣ble upon this occasion, nor did he act there in that capacity
He had been made High Constable to decide the difference between the Lord Rey and David Ramsey; which being an extraordinary case was likely to be tried by battle. But in this case there was no need of any such Officer, the Triall being to be made by proofs and Evidences, the verdict to be given by the Lords of Parliament, and sentence to be pro∣nounced by the Lord High Steward, all  things being to be carried and transacted in due form of Law. Secondly, The Court being broken up, which was before the passing of the Bill of Attainder in the end of April, the Office of Lord High Steward expired also with it. And therefore when our Authour speaks of a Request which was made unto the King in Parliament, that the Earl of Pembroke should be made Lord High Steward, in the place of the Earl of Arundel then ab∣sent, fol. 430. he either speaks of a Request which was never made, or else mistakes the Lord Steward of the Kings hous∣hold (which place might possibly be desired for the Earl of Pembroke not long before turn'd out of the Office of Lord Chamberlain) for the Lord High Steward of the King∣dome. And now we are fallen on his mistakes touching these great Officers, I shall adde another, It being said in our Au∣thours unfigured Sheets, that the King having signed the Bill of Attainder, sent Sir Dudly Carlton Secretary of State to acquaint him what he had finished. An errour too grosse and palpable for our Authour to be guilty of, considering his Ac∣quaintances in the Court and relations to it; which may perswade me to beleeve that these unfigured Sheets, patcht in I know not how, between fol. 408. and 409. should be none of his. But whether they be his or not, certain I am that there was no Secretary at this time but Sir Henry Vane, Windebank being then in France, and his place not filled with the Lord Falkland till the Christmas after Sir Dudly Carlton, Lord Imbercourt, and Vicount Dorchester, was indeed Secre∣tary for a while; but he died upon Ashwednesday in the year 1631. which was more then nine years before the sending
of this message, and I perswade my self the King did not raise him from the grave (as Samuel was once raised at the instance of Saul) to go on that unpleasing errand. Sir Dudly Carlton whom he means (being Brothers son unto the for∣mer) was at that time one f the Clerks of the Councel, but never attained unto the place and honour of a principall Se∣cretary. Our Authour having brought the businesse of the Earl of Strafford toward a Conclusion, diverts upon the Au∣thour of the Observations on the former History, to whom he had been so much beholden for many of the most mate∣riall and judicious Notes in the former part of his Book; and he chargeth thus. Fol. 406. I conceive it convenient in more particular to clear two mistakes of our Authours concerning the Articles of Ir∣land, and the death of the Earl of Strafford, reflecting upon the late most Reverend Prelate, the Archbishop of Armagh, Primate of all Ireland, whilest he was liuing, and worse pursu∣ed since his decease, somewhat too sharp also upon D. Bernard.] What Fee or Salary our Authour hath for this undertaking, I am no able to determine, but if he be not well paid by them, I am sure he hath been well paid by another; who in his Answer to D. Bernards Book entituled, The udgement of the late Primate of Ireland, Ac. hath fully justified the Ob∣servator against all the exceptions, which either our Authour or D. Bernard, or the Lord Primate himself have made against him in these two points. Which being extrinsecall as to the matter of this History, shall not be repeated; the Reader be∣ing desired, if he want any further satisfaction, to look for it there. All I shall here observe is this, that our Authour grounds himself in his whole Discourse of that businesse up∣on somewhat which he had in writing under the hand of the said Lord Primate, and more which he hath took verbatim out of the said Book of D. Bernards, who being both parties to the Suit, ought not to be admitted for Witnesses in their own behalf. And yet our. Authour having driven the matter to as good a conclusion as he could from such faulty Premi∣ses,
conceives an hope, that by the ight of those Testimo∣nies, he will be of more moderation, notwithstanding he hath there shewn much disaffection to the Primate, in endeavouring to his utmost, to evade divers of those particulars, either in giving the worst sense of them, or turning them to other ends. But as I can sufficiently clear the Observator, from bearing any disaffecti∣on to the Lord Primates person, and the equal Reader may defend him from the imputation of giving the worst sense of any thing which he found in the Pamphlet called, The Obser∣vator observed, or turning it to other ends then was there in∣tended; so am I no more satisfied by this tedious nothing, touching the Articles of Ireland, or the death of the Earl of Strafford, as they reflect upon the Archbishop of Armagh, then I was before. As little am I satisfied with the follow∣ing passage in the last Folio of the unfigured Sheets, viz. That D. Iuxon Bishop of London resigned his Office of Treasurer of England into the hands of five Commissioners more sufficient then he could be,] Our Authour might have spared these last words of disparagement and diminution, and yet have left his Proposition full and perfect. But taking them as they come before me, I must first tell him, that the Lord Bishop of London resigned not his Office of Treasurer into the hands of any Commissioners, but only into the hands of the King, who not knowing at the present how to dispose of it for his best advantage, appointed some Commissioners under the great Seal of England to discharge the same. And next I would have him tell me, what great sufficiency he found in those Commissioners, which was not to be found in the Bi∣shop of London, how many of his debts they paid, what improvement they made of his Revenue, what stock of mo∣ney they put him into toward the maintaining of the Warre which not long after followed. In all which particulars the Bishop of London had very faithfully performed his part (though not as to the Warre of England) to the great ho∣nour of the King and content of the Subject.
But to look back upon some passages in the businese of the Earl of Strafford, which are not toucht at by the Observator or his alteridm, the first we meet with is a very pretty de∣vise of the Bishop of Lincoln, to cheat the poor Gentleman of his head by getting a return of the promise which the King is said to have made him of not consenting to his death. The sum of the story is briefly this, viz. That the King had promised the Earl of Strafford under his hand that his prerogative should sav him, that he would never passe the Bill, nor consent to the acting of any thing to take away his life; that being satisfied in all other scruples he rested in this only, affirming that in regard of this promise he could not passe the Bill, though the Earl were guilty; the Bishop of Lincoln finding him harping on that string, assured him, that he thought that the Earl was so great a Lover of his Ma∣jsties peace, so tender of his conscience, and the Kingdoms safety, that he would willingly acquit the King of that pro∣mise; that though the King received this intimation with a brow of anger, yet the said, Bishop in pursuance of the Earls destruction, sends a Message to him to that purpose by the Lieutenant of the Tower, or some other person whom he found attending near the place; that as the devil and he would have it the Earl received that intimation with great disdain, saying, that if that were all which bound the King, he would soon release him, and thereupon opening his Cabinet, drew out that Paper in which the Kings promise was contain∣ed, and gave it to the said Lieutenant or that other person (but whether sealed or unsealed that he cannot tell) by whom it was delivered to the Bishop of Lincoln; and finally that the Bishop of Lincoln finding no other scruple to remain in the Kings Conscience, but the respect he had to that pro∣mise, he put the fatall paper into the Kings hands, which as it seems gave a full end to the conference and the Kings per∣plexities. This is the substance of the Legend, and in all this there is nothing true, but the names of the parties mentioned in it.
And first I would fain know from what Authour he recei∣ved this fiction, unlesse it were from say I, and say some (as his own words are) that is to say, either from himself, or from some body else, but he knew not whom. Most certain∣ly he had it not from any of the Bishops then present, the Lord Primate affirming in the end of his first Narrative, that neither he nor the rest of his Brethren knew what was con∣tained in that Paper; and no lesse certain it is that the Bi∣shop of Lincoln was too wise to accuse himself of such a pra∣ctise, if he had been really guilty of it. And then as for the thing it self. no man of reason can imagine, that the King would either make such a proviso to the Earl, or that the Earl would so far distrust his own integrity as to take it of him. If the Kings knowledge of his innocence, of his signal me∣rits, and the declaration which he made in Parliament to the Lords and Commons, that he could not passe the Bill with a good Conscience, were not sufficient to preserve him, there was no help to be expected from such Paper-promises. Such a Romance as this we finde in Ibrahim the Illustrious Bas∣sa, who is said to have obtained the like promise from Soly∣man the Magnificent; which notwithstanding the Mufti or Chief Priests of the Turks devised a way to discharge the Em∣perour of that promise, and to obtain from him an unwilling consent to the Bassa's death, as the Bishop of Lincoln is said to do for the Earl of Straffords. Secondly, There was no such scruple of conscience pro∣pounded to the Bishops in the morning conference as the ob∣ligation which that promise laid upon him; there being no other question propounded at that time, but whether he might in justice passe the Bill of Attainder against the Earl; To which the Bishops gave their Answer when it was again renewed in the Evening (as appears by the Lord Primates first Narrative) that if upon the Allegations on either ide (at the hearing whereof the King was present) he did not con∣ceive him guilty of the crime wherewith he was charged he could not in justice condemn him; and by this answer it appears that
no such scruple as the obligation of that Paper-promise had been before tendred to the Bishops. Thirdly, Admitting that the Bishop of Lincoln might be so bold as to make that overture to the King, forgetting a re∣lease of that promise from the Earl of Strafford, yet was he too carefull of himself, too fearfull of the Kings everlasting displeasure, to pursue that fatall project, when he perceived his Majesty to entertain it with a brow of anger. Fourthly, Admitting this also, that the Bishop was so thir∣sty of the Earls bloud, as to neglect his own safety in pur∣suance of it, yet cannot our Historian tell us, whether that intimation were sent by the Lieutenant of the Tower or some o∣ther person. And certainly, as the Lieutenant of the Tower was not so obscure a person, but that he might easily be known from another man; so is it most improbable that he should go on such an errand without speciall order from the King, or that the Earl should admit of such an intimation from any other, who was like to run on the Bishops bidding, but only from the Lieutenant himself. Fifthly, It cannot be beleeved, that the Earl should fall in∣to such a passion when the Tale was told him, considering that he knew, that by a Letter sent unto the King on the Tuesday before, he had set the Kings Conscience at liberty, most humbly beseeching him for the prevention of such mischief as might happen by his refusall to passe the Bill. So that the passing of the Bill could be no News to him, which he had reason to expect, because it was a thing so much prest by his enemies, and so humbly and affectionately desired by him∣selfe. Sixthly and finally, Though our Historian make it doubt∣full whether that Paper-promise were sent back sealed or un∣sealed, yet no man can suspect the Earl to be so imprudent in his actions, so carelesse of his own honour, and so untrusty to the King in so great a secret, as to send it open, by which it must needs come first to the eyes of others before it came unto the Kings. And if it were not sent unsealed, how came
our Authour to the knowledge that that paper contained the Kings promise, as he saies it did? But nothing more betrays the vanity and impossibility of this fiction, then the circumstance in point of time, in which this promise must be made, which must needs fall between the passing of the Bill of Attainder and the Kings conference with the Bishops sent to him for the satisfaction of his Con∣science by the Houses of Parliament. Our Authour tels us that at the conference with the Bisops, the King being satis∣fied in all other scruples, started his last doubt, If in his Conscience he could not passe the Bill, although the Earl were guilty; having promised under his hand that his prerogative should save him, never to passe that Bill, nor to consent to the acting of any thing to take away his life. By which it needs must follow▪ if the Bill of Attainder was first passed (or at the least in probability to be passed) in the House of Peers, before the King had given any such promise under his hand; for the words are that the King had given him a promise un∣der his hand, never to passe that Bill. Now that Bill was not taken into consideration in the House of Lords till Sa∣turday the 24. of April, in which considering their own dan∣ger, and the little satisfaction they are able to give them∣selves; M. St Iohn the Kings Sollicitor Generall was appoin∣ted by the House of Commons to open the Bill before their Lordships, and to give them information in it, which was done upon Thursday the nine and twentieth of the same Moneth. On the next day some of the Lords began to stag∣ger in their resolutions, and to incline unto the Commons; which moved the King to declare himself before both Hou∣ses on the first of May, That he could not with a good Consci∣nce condemn the Earl of High Treason (which he must needs do if he passe that Bill) and therefore hoped that they would not expect that from him, which neither fear, nor any other re∣spect whatsoever should enforce him to. Other assurance then this of not passing the Bill, as the King never made the Earl, so indeed he could not; the Earl being a close Prisoner, and
so narrowly watcht (especially after his Majesties said De∣claration of the first of May) that no such Paperpromise under the Kings hand could be sent unto him, if either the King had thought it necessary to make any such promise, or the Earl to seek it; Adeo mendaciorum natura est, ut cohere∣re non possint, as Lactantius hath it. This point thus cleared, and the King discharged from making any such promise un∣der his hand, there must some other way be found out to pre∣serve the Earl by devising some means for his escape; and to this plot the King must be made a party also, our Authour tel∣ling us positively, That Some Designe there was no doubt of delivering the Earl of Strafford by escape; in order whereunto Sir William Balfour Lieutenant of the Tower must be commanded by the King to receive one Captain Billingsley with an hundred men to secure the place.] If so, how durst Balfour refuse to yeeld obedience to the Kings command? Marry forfooth, because three good Women of Tower-street, peeping into the Earls Gallery through the Key-hole, could by the Spectacles of their eyes, discern him talking with this Captain, and by the Otocosticon of their ears, could hear them talk of some Desige for this escape; The Summe of their Discourse being this, that a Ship of Captain Billingsleys Brothers should be in readinesse, which was fallen down on purpose below in the River, that they three might be there in twelve hours, that if the Fort were but secur'd for three or four Moneths, there would come aid enough, and that there was nothing to be thought upon but an escape, and much more broken speech to that purpose. It seems the womens ears must be very long, and the tongues both of the Earl and Billingsly must be very loud; or else how could a practise of such a close and dangerous nature be so plainly heard; Assuredly by the same means by which the Zealous Brother in More, fields, discovered a dangerous plot against the Parliament, discoursed of by some who were pas∣sing by (but he knows not who they were) as he was sunning himself under an hedge. Of whom as creditable an Authour
as Sir William Balfour, hath told me this, That while he was contriving some Querpo-cut of Church-Government, by the help of his out-lying ears, and the Otocousticon of the Spirit, e discovered such a Plot against the Parliament, that Selden intends to combat Antiquity, and maintain it was a Taylors Goose that preserved the Capitol. But in good earnest, I would fain know of our Author, or of Sir William Balfour, or of both together, whether the three Good-Wives of Tower-street, did hear these Passages in discourse, by their eyes or their ears: Not by their Eyes, for the Eye is not the sense of hearing; nor by their Ears, for it is not said that they laid their Ears to the Key-hole, but that they peeped thorow it. And next I would fain know, whther they peep'd or hearkned all at once, or one after another: If all at once, the Key-hole must be wondrous wide (as Heavenly-wide as Mopsus mouth in Sir Philip Sidney) which could admit of three pair of hearing Eyes, or of three single seeing Ears, at one time together: And if they peep'd or hearkned one after another, they must needs have both very quick Wits, and strong Comprehensions, that could make up so much of a set Discourse from such broken Speeches, though they with∣in spake never so loudly. Letting this pass therefore with a Risum teneatis Amici▪ we have next a more serious discovery of this Design, by the Conference which the Earl of Strafford had with Sir William Balfour, offering him but four days before his death, no less then Twenty thousand pounds, and a Marriage of his Daughter to Balfours Son, if he would assent to his Escape: And for this also, as well as for the tale of the three Good-Wives of Tower-Street, and the command of admitting Billingsley, with an hundred men, to secure the Tower; we must take Sir Wil∣liams bare word (for he gave it not in upon his Oath) in the House of Commons: And what the bare word of a Scot, a perfidious Scot, and one that shortly after took up▪ Arms a∣gainst his Master, will amount unto, we all know too well:
Nor was the Earl so ignorant of the hatred which generally the Scotish Covenanters bare unto him, or of the condition of this man particularly, as to communicate any such design unto him, had he been so unprepar'd for death, as our Au∣thor makes him: And so this second Romance of Sir Wil∣liam Balfour, and the three Women Good-Wives of Tower Street, being sent after that of the Bishop of Lincoln; we leave the Earl of Straffords business, and go on with our Author to some other. Fol. 418. Then follows King Henry the fourth, &c. whom the Lords combined to depose, for there were living of the House of larence Title to precede that of Mortimer.] That some of the Lords combined to depose this King, I shall easily grant, though not upon those grounds which our Author mingles with the Speech of one Mr. Thomas, (a Member of the House of Commons) against the Bishops: For though the Title of Clarence did precede that of the King, yet was not the Kings Title derived from Mortimer, the Title of Mortimer and Clarence being one and the same. The Title of King Henry the fourth, came by his Father, Iohn Duke of Lancaster, the fourth Son of King Edward the third; the title of Mortimer came by Philip the sole Daugh∣ter and Heir of Lionel Duke of Clarence, the third son of the said King Edward, and Wife to Roger Mortimer Earl of March, from whom the House of York laid their claim to the Diadem. But our Author is as good at the Pedigree of the House of the Beauforts, as of that of Mortimer, telling us, That Car∣dinal Beaufort was not onely great Uncle to King Henry the sixth, but Son to John of Gaunt, and his Brother Cardinal of York. The first two parts whereof are true, but the last as false: Cardinal Beaufort, I am sure, had no such Brother as our Author gives him (for so he must be understood, though the Grammar of the words will not bear so much sense) name∣ly, a Cardinal of York, unless it were King Henry the fourth, whom Iohn of Gaunt had by Blanch of Lancaster,
his first Wife, Iohn Earl of Somerset, or Thomas Duke of Ex∣cester, which two, together with this Cardinal Beaufort, he had by his last Wife Katherine Swinfort: More Sons then these, none of our Heralds or Historians give to Iohn of Gaunt, and therefore no such Brother as a Cardinal of York to be found out any where for this Cardinal Beaufort, except onely in our Authors Dreams. Fol. 419. That in Anno 37. of Henry the eighth, Letters Patents were granted to Lay-men, to exercise all maner of Ec∣clesiastical Iurisdiction, as the Kings Officers, not the Bishops.] These are the words of Mr. Thomas in his Invective against the Bishops before mentioned, and these our Author swal∣lows without chewing, not searching whether Mr. Thomas had rightly given the sense of that Act of Parliament or not, but telling his in his gloss upon it, That no Reason or Iustice are to be deduc'd from that Kings Actions, more like an Atheist then a Christian, either Ecclesiastical or Temporal: But by the leave of good Mr. Thomas, there can be no such matter ga∣thered from that Statute of King Henry the eighth, viz. That Letters Patents were granted to Lay-men to exercise all maner of Ecclesiastical Iurisdiction, as the Kings Officers, not the Bishops: Before this time no man could be admitted to the Office of a Chancellor, Vicar-General, Commissary, or Official in any Ecclesiastical Court, or exercise any Ecclesi∣astical Jurisdiction, except he were a single person, and in Holy Orders: To take away which curb, and thereby to give the better incouragement to Students in the Civil Laws, it was Enacted by this Statute, that all such Ecclesiastical Of∣ficers, whether made by the Kings Letters Patents as in the case of Sir Thomas Cromwel, the Kings Vicar General) or by any Arch-Bishop, Bishop, or Arch-Deacon, within this Realm, might from thencforth lawfully execute and exercise all maner of Iurisdiction, commonly called Ecclesiastical Iuris∣diction, and all Censures and Coercions appertaining, or in any wise belonging unto the same, albeit such person or persons be Lay, married or unmarried, so that they be Doctors of the Civil Law,
lawfully created and made in any Vniversity: Out of which premises, if Mr. Thomas can conclude, that such Lay-men, so quallified to exercise Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, were the Kings Officers, and not the Bishops; he must have some new piece of Sandersons Logick, which never was read in any of the Universities, in which those lay persons did receive the Degree of Doctors. Fol. 419. She was the right Heir apparent to her Brother, and the onely right Issue to the Crown, begotten no donbt in law∣ful Matrimony.] I dare not take upon me to dispute of Ti∣tles to the Crown, but I dare take upon me to tell our Au∣thor, that there was some doubt made by the most learned men of that time, whether Queen Mary, (of whom he speaks) were begotten and born in lawful Marriage: All the Bishops in this Realm, by a publick Writing under their Hands and Seals, declared the Marriage of King Henry the eighth, with Queen Maries Mother, to be unlawful; and so did the most eminent Divines in both the Universities, as also in the Cathedrals, Monasteries, and other Conventual Bodies within this Realm: The like declared also by several Universities in France and Italy, under their publick Seals: And so it was declared finally by the Lords Spiritual and Tem∣poral, and the Commons assembled in  full and free Parlia∣ment, in which it was pronounced, That the Marriage be∣tween the King and the Lady Katherine of Spain, the Relict of his Brother, was null and void: to that it seems there was some doubting in this case, though our Author makes no doubt of it at all: Nor is it very certain, neither that Queen Mary was the right Heir apparent to her Brother: For if the Law of the Crown diffr not from the Law of the Land in this particular (which I leave unto our learned Lawyers) she could not be the Heir to her Brother King Edward the sixth, as being born of another Venter, and consequently his Sister by the half blood onely. Now as he makes no doubt of Queen Maries Title to the Crown, so he makes the Title of Queen Elizabeth to be subject unto some dispute, which all
the Estates of the Realm convened in her first Parliament, de∣clared in the way of Recognition, to be past disputing: But I leave these inviduous Arguments, and proceed to some other. Fol. 429. Doctor Wren, Bishop of Ely, and Dean of the Kings Chappel, had been accused of Misdemeanors in his Dio∣cess, amounting to Treason: And being committed to the Tower, there he hath lain ever since.] But fitst, no misdemeanors, how great soever, can amount to a Treason, nor ever was it so adjudged, but onely in the Case of the Earl of Straf∣ford. Secondly, There was no Evidence taken upon Oath to prove any of the misdemeanors which were charged upon him; our Author confessing, that after he had been Voted in the House of Commons unworthy and unfit to hold and ex∣ercise any Office or Dignity in Churh or Commonwealth, there was no further speech of him or his Crimes. Thirdly, He was not committed to the Tower for any misdemeaners charged against him by those of his Diocess but for subscribing to the Protestation with the rest of the Bishops, in the end of Dcember, 1641. who were com∣mitted at the same time also. Fourthly, He hath not remain'd there ever since his com∣mitment neither, but was discharged with the other Bishops about the end of February then next followng, and about three or four Moneths after brought back again, Anno 1642. without any Accusation brought against him either then or since. Fol. 430. And then they adjourned until the twentieth of October, and a standing Committee of the House of Commons, (consisting of fifty Members) appointed, during the Recess.] Of this Committee, Mr. Iohn Pim was the principal Man, without whom, all the rest were Ciphers, of no significa∣tion: And by him there issued out an Order against Innova∣sions, extended, and intended also, for taking down the Rails before the Communion-Table, levelling the ground on
which the said Table stood, and placing the said Table in the middle of the Church or Chancell. In which it is to be admired how eagerly this Order was pursued by the Church-Wardens generally in all the Parishes of the Kingdom; not∣withstanding they were told, that the Lords had never gi∣ven their consent unto it, and that it would be safest for them to suspend their proceedings till the Parliament was again assembled. But so mighty was the name of Pym, that none of them durst refuse Obedience unto his Commands. Nor did the Lords ever endeavour to retrench this Order, but suffered their Authority and priviledge to be torn from them peece-meal by the House of Commons; as formerly in imposing the Protestation of the third of May, so now in this great Alteration in the face of the Church. Fol. 432. The late Irish Army raised for the Assistance of the Kings Service against the Scots, was disbanded, and all their armes brought into Dublin.] This though our Authour reckoneth not amongst the grounds and reasons of the Irish Rebellion, yet was it really one of the chief encouragements to it. For when the King was prest by the Commons in Parlia∣ment for the disbanding of that Army, a Suit was made unto him by the Embassadour of Spain, that he might have leave to List three or four thousand of them for his Masters Service in the wars. The like Suit was made also by the Embassa∣dour of France, and the King readily condescended to their severall motions, and gave order in it accordingly. But the Commons never thinking themselves safe, as long as any of that Army had a sword in his hand, never left importuning the King (whom they had then brought to the condition of denying nothing which they asked) till they had made him eat his word and revoke those Orders to his great dishonour; Which so exasperated that Army consisting of 10000 Foot and 1500 Horse, that it was no hard matter for those who had the managing of the Plot to make sure of them. And then considering, that the Scots by raising of an Army had gain'd from the King an Abolition of the Episcopall Order,
the recinding of his own and his Fathers Acts, about the re∣ducing of that Church to some Uniformity with this, and setled their Kirk in such a way as best pleased their own hu∣mours: why might not the Irish Papists hope, that by the help of such an Army ready raised to their hands, or easily drawn together, though disperst at that present, they might obtain the like indulgences and grants for their Religion, Tan∣tum Religio potuit suadere Malorum, as true on the one side as the other. Fol. 443. The next Morning the Vpper house sent them down to the House of Commons by the Lord Marshal, Privy Seal, &c. the Lords Goring and Wilmot.] Our Authour speaks this of the first Letter sent from Ireland, touching that Rebellion, but is mistaken in the last man, whom he makes to be sent down with these Letters. The Lord Wilmot at that time was no Peer of England, and therefore had no place in the English Parliaments. The honour of an English Baron being first conferred on his Son the Lord Henry Wilmot by Letters Patents bearing date 29. of Iune, Anno 1643. And as I am sure that the Lord Wilmot was not of that number, so I am doubtfull whether the Lord Marshall were or not. Our Au∣thour not long before tels us, that his Office of Lord High Steward was like to be begg'd from him in regard of his Ab∣sence, which is to be understood of his absence out of the Realm; and if he were then absent out of the Realm, he could not now be present in the House of Peers. Either not absent then, or not present now, is a thing past questi∣oning. Fol. 462. The King returns from Scotland, magnificently easted by the City of London.] But while the Citizens at one end of the Town, were at their Hosanna, some of the Commons at the other end were as busie at their Crucifige, intent on hammering a Remonstrance, which they entitled, A Remonstrance of the State of the Kingdom, in which they ript up all the actions which they had complained of in the King, and sum'd up all those services which they had done
for the common people. The whole so framed that it served for a pair of Bellows to blow that fire which afterwards fla∣med out, and consumed the greatest part of the Kingdom. In the presenting whereof to the King at his coming from Scot∣land, though the Lords refused to joyn with them in it, yet was it presented to the King by some of their Members, an Order made for the publishing and dispersing of it, and the Lords brought at last to justifie what they had condemned. Nor did the Citizens continue long in their good Affections: For though they gave him Rost-meat now, yet they beat him with the Spit in the Christmas following, of which our Au∣thour tels us, saying, Fol. 471. The loose people of the City, and the Mechanick sort of Prentices were encouraged by the Ministers and Lectu∣rers, and other Incendiaries in tumultuous manner, to come down to Westminster, and by the way at Whitehall to be insolent in words and actions.] And insolent they were indeed both in words and actions, some of them crying out as they past by▪ that the King was not fit to live, others that the Prince would govern better; all of them with one voice, that they would have no Porters lodge between them and the King▪ but would come at him when they pleased, using some other threatning words, as if they meant to break open the Gates: But so it happened, that some of the Officers of the Kings late Army being come to the Court, some of them to receive the Arrears of their pay, and others to know the Kings Commands, before they returned into the Low Countries, to their severall Charges, and observing the unsufferable In∣solencies of this Rascal Rabble, sallied upon them with drawn swords, in which scuffle some of that tumultuous Rabble were slightly hurt, and others dangerously wounded. To these men being profest Souldiers, was the Name of Cavaliers first given, communicated afterwards to all the Kings party and Adherens though never in Arms, or otherwise appearing for him then in the Loyalty of their Affections. Fol. 477. This fell out as many would have it, a ling case
to their confusion.] How so? Because, saith he, at a conference desired by the Lords with the House of Commons, they were told by the Lord Keeper, that this Petition and Protestation of the twelve Bishops was extending to the deep intrenching upon the fundamentall priviledges and beings of Parliaments, &c. Upon which Declaration the Bishops were voted to be guilty of High Treason, committed first to the custody of the black rod, and from thence to the Tower. But first the Au∣thour is to know, that the Lord Keeper at that time was not altogether so rectus in Curia, as might have been wished, and therefore having received that Petition and Protestation from the hands of the King (to whom in the first place it was addressed) he communicated it privately to such of both Houses as were like to make the worst use of it; and the more to ingratiate himself with the prevalent party, he aggravated the supposed offence to the very utmost; And the supposed offence was this, that the Bishops having been frequently reviled, pursued, and violently kept from the House of Peers, protested by a Writing under their hands, That they durst not sit or Vote in the House of Peers, untill his Majesty should secure them from all affronts, indignities and dangers; and therefore that all Laws, Orders, Votes, Resolutions, and Determinations should be reputed null and of none effect, which in their ab∣sence had passed or should passe in the said most Honourable House, during the time of their forced and violent absence. Which Petition and Protestation being  Re∣cords of Parliament, was thought to be a good  of their place and right suffrage in the House of  with∣standing the Subsequent Act of Parliament▪  deprived them of it. But how that Protestation could amount to Treason (in the newest construction of the word) was so impossible to be proved, that they who  so voted it, ha∣ving served their turns by the imprisonment of the Bishops for depriving them of their place and vote in Parliament, and divesting the King of his power and prerogative in pressing
Souldiers for his wars, at once released them of the impion∣ment and accusation under which they suffered. Adde here∣unto that when the Members of the House of Commons were seized upon and kept in custody by the Officers of the Army, under the command of Sir Thomas Fairfax on the sixt and se∣venth daies of December, 1647. they made a Protestation to this effect, viz. that all Acts and Ordinances, Votes and pro∣ceedings of the House of Commons made after the said sixt and seventh of December, or after to be made, during their restraint and forcible seclusion from the House and the conti∣nuance of the Armies force upon it, should be no way obliga∣tory, but void and null to all ntents and purposes whatsoe∣ver. Which protestation though it toucht the Officers of the Army to the very quick, yet had they so much modesty as not to count it for high Treason. And when the Mem∣bers which were left remaining in that House for the present turn, had scanned over every particular of that protestation, they only ventured so far as to Vote it to be scandalous and se∣ditious, as tending to destroy the present visible Government; and that all that had a hand in it were unworthy of trust; for which consult Mercurius Pragmaticus, Numb. 38. By which we see that which was counted Treason in the Bishops, was not conceived to be such in these Members of the House of Commons; No more then farre worse crimes then those which  for Treason in the Earl of Strafford, could  to be Treason in the Case of the Five Lord of Kimbolton. So true is that which Horace  Book De Arte Poetica, viz. Coecilio Plauto∣qe dabit  Virgilio Varioque, which cannot be englished more nificantly then by this old Proverb, that is to say, that  better steal a Horse then others look on. Fol. 478. The City taking hart and hands with the House of Commons, summon a Common Councel, where they debate their jealousies and fears.] The constitution of the Common Councell of the City, was of great concernment at this time, and therefore it behoved the Commons (in order to the pro∣secution
of their designe) that it should be new moulded, most of the old ones laid aside, and creatures of their own elected into their places. And by their Emissaries and Agents, they prevailed so far, that on S. Thomas day, when the Com∣mon-Councell-men were to be chosen for every Ward, in stead of those grave, sober, and substantiall men, which be∣fore they had, they chose a company of factious and indi∣gent persons, known only by their disaffections to Monar∣chical and Episcopal Government. And whereas by the an∣cient custome of the City, the Common-Councell-men then elected were not admitted unto Councell till the Munday af∣ter Twelfthday, when their Elections were returned and en∣rolled by the Town-Clerk; these men well knowing how much the Designe of the Commons did depend upon them, would not stay so long. And therefore when the King had appointed a Common-Councell to be called on the last day of December for the prevention of such tumults as had happened a few daies before, they thrust themselves in amongst the rest. The like they did, when the King gave a meeting to a Common Councel, appointed by him on the fifth of Ianu∣ary, wherein he acquainted them with the reason of his pro∣ceedings against the five impeached Members, desiring that they might not have any retreat or harbour within the Ci∣ty. At what time Fowke one of these Common-Councell men, as being the Bell-weather to the rest, made a sawcy and insolent speech unto the King, concerning fears and ∣lousies, touching the Members accused, the Priviledges of Par∣liament, and that they might not be tried but in a Parlia∣mentary way. To which, though the King returned a very milde and gracious Answer, yet the Rabble being once in∣flamed by their seditious Orator, would not so be satisfied, but at his coming out of the Hall, and as he past in his Coach thorow the Streets, there was nothing ecchoed in his ears but Priviledges of Parliament, Priviledges of Parliament. By the help and vote of these men also was that Petition framed▪ and delivered to the King on the morrow after, which fol∣lows
immediatly in our Authour. And by the help of these men did they extort the Militia of the City out of the hands of the Mayor and Aldermen, and put it into the power of inferiour persons, such as the Faction in the House of Com∣mons might best confide in. And for their Iealousies and Fears which were to be debated in the Common Councell, they were of no lesse nature then the blowing up of the Thames to drown the City, or the beating it down about their ears by Col. Lunsford from the Tower, or the sacking it by the King and the Cavaliers. Horrible Gulleries, but such as were generally disperst, and no lesse generally belee∣ved by fools, women and children. Fol. 482. Vpon information of Troops of Horse to be ga∣thered by the Lord Digby and Colonell Lunsford at Kingston, where the County Magazine is lodged, they order that the She∣riffs of the severall Counties, &c. shall suppresse all unlawfull Assemblies. &c.] Most true it is, that such an order was made by the House of Commons, the better to amaze the people, and keep them in continuall Fears and Iealousies of the Kings proceedings. But nothing is more false, then that any Troops of Horse had been rais'd by the Lord Digby or Colonel Luns∣ford, or that they had any such designe as to seize the Maga∣zine at Kingston; which they might easily have done, had they been so minded, before it could have been prevented. But the truth is, that the King not knowing what the Lon∣don Tumults might amount unto, commanded the Officers of the late Army before-mentioned, to attend his pleasure, till he saw some issue of the practices which were held against him. On which command they followed him to Hampton Court, Ianuary the tenth, 1641. at his Removall from White∣hall, for avoiding such fresh Insolencies, as the people in their triumphant conducting of the accused Members to the Houses of Parliament, might have put upon him. These Officers now known by the Name of Cavaliers, were lodged at Kingston, and upon them the Lord Digby, accompanied with Col. Lunord in a Coach with six Horses, intended to
bestow a visit; no Troops of Horse being raised by him, nor any other appearance of Horse at all, except those six only. His Majesties Declaration of the 12. of August, hath so clea∣red this businesse, that I marvell our Authour could let it passe by without Observation. Fol. 485. And so the breach between the King and Parlia∣ment was stitcht up.] That is to say, that great breach of pre∣tended priviledge, in the Kings coming to the House of Commons to demand the five impeached Members. And yet this breach was not stitcht up now, nor in a long time after. For fol. 495. we finde the Parliament again at their five Mem∣bers, insisted on in the preamble to the Ordinance about the Militia, fol. 498. and prest in their Petition delivered to the King at Royston, fol. 501. and finally made one of the Pro∣positions presented to the King at Oxford, fol. 599. So far was this breach from being stitcht up in the end of Ianuary, Anno 1641. that it was not made up in the Ianuary follow∣ing, at what time those Propositions were brought to Oxford. From the five Members passe we to the Militia, of which he telleth us, That Fol. 496. The Parliament having now the Militia, the se∣curity of the Tower and City of London, Trained Bands of the Kingdom, and all the Forces out of the Kings hands.] Our Au∣thour placeth this immediatly after the Kings coming back from Dover, whither he went with the Queen, and the Princesse Mary, there shipped for Holland; at what time the Parliament had neither the command of the Tower, nor of the Trained Bands in the Countrey, or of any Forces whatso∣ever but their City-guards. For fol. 498. we finde his Majesty sticking at it, especially as to the Militia of London, or of Towns incorporate, and after fol. 502. when they petitioned him about it, being then at New-Market (and not as our Authour saith at Royston) he answered more resolutely then before, that he would not part with it for a minute, no, not unto his Wife and Children. After which time, finding the King too well resolved not to part with such a principall
flower of his prerogative, they past an Ordinance for enti∣tuling themselves unto it, and did accordingly make use of it in the following war against the King. Nor was the Pe∣tition any thing the better welcome for the men that brought it, viz. the Earls of Pembroke and Holland, both of them sworn Servants to him, both of them of his Privy Councell, both in great favour with him when he was in Prosperity, and both peridiously forsaking him when his Fortunes changed unto the worse. Particularly our Authour tels us of the Earl of Holland, That Fol. 501. He was raised and created to become his most secret Counsellour, the most intimate in affection, the first of his Bed-chamber, his constant companion in all his Sports and Recreati∣ons.] Yet notwithstanding all these favours, this Earl as much promoted the Puritan affairs of the Court, but secret∣ly and under-hand, as his Brother the Earl of Warwick more openly and professedly did in the Countrey. Of which thus Viscount Conway in a Letter to the Archbishop of Can∣terbury, dated at Newcastle, Iune 8. 1640. I assure my self (saith he) that there is not any lesse your friend then my Lord of Holland, and I beleeve that at all times you ought to take heed to your self with him, &c. My Lord of War∣wick is the temporal head of the Puritans, and my Lord of Holland is their spirituall Head, or rather the one is their visible Head, the other their invisible Head: Peradven∣ture not because he means to do either good or hurt, but because he thinks it is a Gallantry to be the principall pillar on which a whole Caball must rely. Fol. 511. And taking only a guard for his person of his Do∣mesticks and Neighbour Gentry, went in person the 23. of April, but contrary to his expectation the Gates were shut upon him, the Bridges drawn up, and Hotham from the Wals flatly denies him entrance.] Of this Affront (Hotham being first proclaimed Traitor under the Wals of the Town) the King complains to the Houses of Parliament, but he had more reason to com∣plain of some about him. For in his Answer to their Peti∣tition
about the Magazine of Hull, delivered to him in the beginning of April, he had let them know, how confident he was that place (whatsoever discourse there was of private or pub∣lick Instructions to the contrary) should be speedily given up, if he should require it:Husband Collect. pag. 139. Being thus fore∣warn'd, it was no wonder that they were fore∣arm'd also against his Intentions, or that he was epulst by Hotham at his coming thither: For which good Service, as Hotham was highly magnified for the present, so he had his Wages not long after: For being suspected to hold intelligence with the Marquess of Newcastle, he was knockt down on that very place on which he stood when he refused the King admittance into the Town, sent Prisoner un∣to London, together with his eldest Son, and there both be∣headed▪ the Son confessing, that he had deserv'd that un∣timely death for his Disloyalty to the King; the Father whining out his good affections to the Parliament, and still expecting that reprieve which was never intended. Fol. 512. All which (that is to say, the Kings going to Hull) being by the King a high breach of Priviledge, and violation of Parliaent, they think fit to clear, by voting it and Hotham justifea, and send a Committee of Lords and Commons to re∣side there, for the better securing Hull and him, April. 28.] The breach of priviledge objected was, the Kings endeavor to possess himself of the Town of Hull, (his own Town) and to get into his hands a Magazine of Arms and Ammunition which he had bought with his own money: To hinder which, and to justifie Hotham, the Lord Fairfax, Sir Philip Staple∣ton, Sir Henry Cholmny, and Sir Hugh Cholmnly, were sent by the House of Commons as a standing Committee to reside at York: And had they come thither on no other business then what was openly pretended, it had been such an extent of Priviledge (making the House of Commons as wide as the Kingdom) as never was challenged before: But they were sent on another errand, that is to say, to be as Spies on all the Kings Actions, to undermine all his Proceedings, and to
insinuate into the people, that all their hopes of Peace and happiness, depended on their adhering to the present Parlia∣ment: And they applyed themselves to their instructions, with such open confidence, that the King had not more meet∣ings with the Gentry of that Country, in his Palace called the Manor House, then they had with the Yeomanry and Free-holders, in the great Hall of the Deanry: All which, the King suffered very strangely, and thereby robb'd him∣self of the opportunity of raising an Army in that County, with which he might have marcht to London, took the Hen sitting on her nest before she had hatched, and possibly pre∣vented all those Calamities which after followed. To omit many less mistakes, as Sheffield for Whitfield, fol. 306. and Kit the Taylor, for Ket the Tanner, fol. 540. Our Au∣thor gives unto Sir William Neve, the title of Garter-Herald, which was more then ever the King bestowed upon him; he having at that time no other title then Norroy the third King, Sir Iohn Burroughs being then Garter-Herald, and Sir Hen∣ry St. George the second King of Arms, by the name of Clarenceux, to whom Sir William Neve succeeded in that Of∣fice, at such time as he the said Sir Henry succeeded Sir Iohn Burroughs (who dyed sometime after this at Oxford) in the place of Garter: But we must now return to matters of greater consequence; and first, we encounter with the Bat∣tle of Edge-Hill, of which our Author tells us, That Fol. 586. The question will be who had the better.] But the Parliament put it out of question, by sending the Earl of Pembroke, the Earl of Holland, the Lord Say, the Lord Wharton, and Mr. Strode, on the 27 of October, to declare to the Lord Major, Aldermen, and Citizens, the greatness and certainty of their Victory, how God had own'd his own work, their Speeches being eight in all, harping upon this String, That as the Cause had been undertaken with their Purses and with their Persons, so they would crown the work, by following it with the same zeal, love, care, nobleness, and Alacrity: And the better to keep up the Hearts of the Peo∣ple,
the Commons voted to their General a present of 5000 l▪ which he kindely accepted, to the no small commendation of his modesty, in taking so small a reward for so great a Vi∣ctory, or of their Bounty, in giving him so great a sum for being vanquished: And yet this was not all the Honor which they did him neither, a Declaration being past by both Hou∣ses of Parliament, on the 11 of November then next follow∣ing, Concerning the late valorous and acceptable Service of his Excellency Robert Earl of Essex, to remain upon Record in both Houses, for a mark of Honor to his Person, Name, and Family, and for a Monument of his singular vertue to poste∣rity: In which they seem to imitate the Roman Senate, in the magnificent reception which they gave to Terentius Var∣ro, after his great defeat in the Battle of Cannae, the People being commanded to go forth to meet him, and the Senate giving him publick thanks, Quod de salute Reipub. non despe∣rasset, because he despaired not of the safety of the Common∣wealth: Which whether it were an Argument of their Gallantry, as Livy telleth us, or rather of their fear, as Sir Walter Raleigh is of opinion, I dispute not now? Certain I am, that by this Artifice they preserved their Reputation with the People of the City of Rome, which otherwise might have been apt to mutiny, and set open their Gates to the Vi∣ctor. And to say the truth, the care of the Earl of Essex deserv'd all this, though his Fortune did not: For having lost the Battle, he hasted by speedy marches thither, to se∣cure that City and the Parliament, which otherwise would not have been able to preserve themselves. But on the contrary, our Author lays down many solid and judicious Arguments, to prove that the King had the better of it, as no doubt he had: And for a further proof hereof, we cannot have a better evidence then an Order of the Lords and Commons, issued on the 24 of October, being the next day after the Fight, in which all the Citizens of London and Westminster, &c. were commanded to shut up their Shops, and put themselves into a readiness to defend the
City and the Parliament: Which Order they had never made, if their fear of the Kings suddain coming upon them with his Conquering Army, before their broken Forces could reach thither, had not put them to it: And though the King might have come sooner then he did, the taking in of Ban∣bury, Oxford and Reading, (being all possessed in the name of the Parliament) spending much of his time; yet we finde him on the 12 of day November, beating up their Quarters at Brentford, where they had lodged two of their best Regi∣ments to stop him in his march towards London; some other of their Forces being placed at Kingston, Acton, and other Villages adjoyning: In the success of which Fight, our Au∣thor tells us, That Fol. 594. The King took 500 Prisoners, &c. and so unfought with, marched away to Oatlands, Reading, and so to Oxford.] By this we are given to understand, that the King retreat∣ed toward Oxford, but we are not told the reasons of it, it being improbable that he should march so far as Brentford, in his way towards Lond. without some thoughts of going fur∣ther. Accordingly it was so resolv'd, (if my intelligence and memory do not fail me) & order given for the advancing of the Army on the morning after, which being ready to be put in Execution, News came, that at a place called Turnham-Green, not far from Brentford, both the Remainders of the Army under the command of the Earl of Essex, and the Auxi∣liaries of London, under the conduct of the Earl of Warwick, were in readiness to stop his march: And thereupon it was consulted, whether the King should give the charge, or that it might be thought enough in point of Honor, to have gone so far. On the one side it was alledged, that his Army was in good heart, by reason of their good success the day before, that the Parliament Forces consisted for the most part of raw and unexperienced Souldiers, who had never seen a War before▪ and that if this bar were once put by, his way would be open unto London, without any resistance.
On the other side it was Objected, That the King had no other Army then this, that there was nothing more uncer∣tain then the fortune of a Battle, and that if this Army were once broken, it would be impossible for him to raise another; which last consideration turn'd the Scale, that Counsel be∣ing thought most fit to be followed, which was judged most safe, id gloriosius quod tutissimum, said the old Histo∣rian. And as for the five hundred Prisoners which our Authour speaks of, they were first mov'd to enter into the Kings pay, and that being generally refused, they were dismist with life and liberty, having first taken their Corporal Oaths not to serve against him: But the Houses of Parliament, being loth to lose so many good men, appointed Mr. Stephen Marshal to call them together, and to absolve them from that Oath; which he did with so much confidence and Authority, that the Pope himself could not have done it better: The King was scarce setled in Oxford, the fittest place for his Court and Counsel to reside in, When Fol. 597. The noble Lord Aubigny, Brother to the Duke of Richmond, dyed, and was buried at Oxford.] This Lord Au∣bigny, was the second Son of Esme Duke of Lenox, and Earl of March, succeeding his Father both in that Title and Estate, entail'd originally on the second Son of the House of Lenox: he receiv'd his deaths wound at Edge-Hill, but dyed, and was solemnly interr'd at Oxford, on the 13 of Ia∣nuary then next following; the first, but not the last of that Illustrious Family, which lost his life in his Kings Service. For after this, in the year 1644. the Lord Iohn Stewart lost his life in the Battle of Cheriton, near Alresford in the county of South-Hampton: And in the year 1645. the Lord Bernard Stewart, (newly created E. of Litchfield) went the same way in the fight near Cester: The Duke of Richmond, the constant follower of the King in all his Fortunes, never injoying him∣self after the death of his Master, languishing and pining from time to time, till at length extremity of Grief cast him
into a Fever, and that Fever cast him into his Grave: A rare example of a constant and invincible Loyalty, no paralel to be found unto it in the Histories of the antient or latter Ages: Philip de omines, telleth us, of a Noble Family, in Flanders that generally they lost their lives in the Wars and Service of their Prince: And we finde in our own Chronicles, that Edmond Duke of Summerset lost his life in the first Battle in St. Albans, Duke Henry following him, taken in the Battle of Hexam, and so beheaded; a second Duke Edmond, and the Lord Iohn of Somerset, going the same way in the Battle near Texbury, all of them fighting in the behalf of King Henry the sixth, and the House of Lancaster: But then they heapt not Funeral upon Funeral in so short a time, as the first three Brothers of this House; in which, as those of the House of Somerset did all short of them, so those of that Noble House in Flanders, fell short of the House of So∣merset. Fol. 601. In this time the Queen in Holland now Imbarques for England, the sixteenth of February, and with contrary winds and foul Weather, was forced back again, and thereafter with much hazzard anchored at Burlington Bay the nineteenth, and Lands at the Key the two and twentieth.] In this our Au∣thor tells the truth, but not the whole truth, the Queen in∣during a worse Tempest on the Shore, then she did upon the Sea. Concerning which, the Queen thus writes unto the King, viz. The next night after we came unto Burlington, four of the Parliament Ships arrived without being perceived by us, and about five of the clock in the Morning, they began to ply us so fast with their Ordnance, that it made us all  rise out of our Beds, and to leave the Village, (at least the Women) one of the Ships did me the favor to flank upon the House where I lay, and before I was out of my Bed, the Cannon Bullets whistled so loud about me, that all the Company pressed me earnestly to go of the House, their Cannon having totally beaten down all the neighboring Houses, and two Cannon Bullets falling from the top to the bottom of the House where I was: So that clothed
(as I could be) I went on foot some little distance out of the Town under the shelter of a ditch (like that of New-mar∣ket) whither before I could get; the Canon-Bullets fell thick about us, and a Sergeant was killed within twenty paces of me. We in the end gained the Ditch, and staied there two hours, whilest their Canon plaied all the time upon us; the Bullets flew for the most part over our head, some few only grazing on the Ditch, covered us with Earth: Nor had they thus given over that disloyal violence, if the ebbing of the Sea, and some threatnings from the Admiral of Holland, who brought her over, had not sent them going. Fol. 603. The next day the Prince marches to Glocester, his hasty Summons startled them at these strange turnings.] So saies our Authour, but he hath no Authour for what he saith. The Prince marched not the next day to Glocester, nor in many moneths after, having businesse enough to do at Cirencester where he was; upon the taking of which Town, the Souldiers Garrison'd for the Parliament in the Castles of Barkly, Sudely, and the Town of Malmsbury deserted those places, which presently the Prince possessed and made good for the King: Which done, he called before them all the Gentry of Cotswold, and such as lived upon the banks of Se∣vern betwixt Glocester and Bristol; who being now freed from those Garisons which before had awed them, were easi∣ly perswaded by him to raise a Monethly contribution of 4000. pound toward the defence of the Kings person, their Laws and Liberties. It was indeed generally beleeved, that if he had marched immediatly to Glocester, while the terrour of sacking Cirencester fell first upon them, the Souldiers there would have quitted the place before he had come half way unto it. the affrightment was so generall, and their haste so great, that Massey had much adoe to perswade the Towns∣men to keep their Houses, and the Souldiers to stand upon their Guard (as I have often heard from some of good qua∣lity in that City) till the Scouts which he sent out to disco∣ver
the Motions of the Prince were returned again: But whatsoever they feared at Glocester, the Prince had no rea∣son to march towards it, his Army being too small, and ut∣terly unfurnisht of Canon and other necessaries for the at∣tempting of a place of such a large circumference, so well mann'd and populous as that City was; Contented therefore with that honour which he had got in the gaining of Ci∣rencester, and feeling the Kings affairs in that Coun∣trey, he thought it a point of higher wisedom to re∣turn towards Oxford, then hazard all again by attempting Glocester. Fol. 604. The Scots Army marched Southwards, and cros∣sed Tine, March 13.] If so, it must be in a dream, not in A∣ction; the Scots not entring into England till December fol∣lowing, when the losse of Bristol, Exceter, and generally of all the West compelled the Houses of Parliament, to tempt the Scots to a second invasion of the Kingdome. And this appears most clearly by our Authour himself, who tels us, fol. 615. 'That Sir William Amin was sent to Edinburgh from the Parliament to hasten the Scots Army hither, having first sworn to the Solemn League and Covenant, each to other. Before which Agreement as to the taking of the Solemn League and Covenant by all the Subjects of both Kingdoms, and the payment of Advance-Money beforehand to the Sum of an hundred thousand pounds, the Scots resolv'd not to stir a foot in their way towards England. They knew in what necessity their dear Brethren in England stood of their Assistance, and therefore thought it good to make ay while the Sun shid, and husband that necessity to their best Ad∣vantage; So that there was no Marching over Tine on the 13. of March Anno 164. where our  it, we must look for it in the Year next following, if we mean to finde it. And finding them there, we shall finde this of them. Fol. 669.
with a party of Horse to assault them in such places where they lay most open to advantage, not doubting but to give a good account of his undertakings: In all which and desires, he is said to have been crossed by General ; an old experienced Soldier, but a Scot by Nation, whom hi Majesty had recommended to the Marquess of Newcastle as a fit man to be consulted with in all his Enterprizes, and he withal took such a fancy to the man, that he was guided whol∣ly by him in all his Actions. Had this man been imployed in the Kings own Army, he might have done as good Service as any other whatoever But being in this Army to serve against the Scots,  own dear Countrey-Men, he is said to have discouraged and dis∣swaded all Attempts which were offered to be made against them, giving them thereby opportunity of gaining ground upon the English, till the Marquess his retreat towards York: And those affections he is reported to have carried also with him in the Battle of Marston-Moor, near York, where he is said to have charged so faintly, that he not onely lost all thse Advantages which the Prince had gotten, but gave the Ene∣my my opportunity to make head again, to the loss of all; which brings into my minde the politick Conduct of Eumenes, once one of Alexanders meanest Captains, but afterwards a great Commander in Asia-minor: He had an Army compounded of the Greek and Barbarous Nations, and being to fight with Craterus, Alexanders great Favorite whilst he lived, who had an Army made up of the like Ingredients▪ he plac'd Asiatick Soldiers against the .
Fol. 604. ] Our Author speaks this of the Di∣vines asembled at Westmster, by an Odin. of the Lords and Commons, to be advis'd withal in matters which concerned Religion, for the establishing whereof, there was much pre∣tended by them, but little done: These men, besides their four per diem, were either gratified with Lectures in and about London, or  in the Universities, or the best Sequestred Benefices in the Countrey; holding their own preferment still, without sticking at such Pluralities in them∣selves, which before they had condemn'd in others: But though they did little work for their Wages, yet they did moe then our Author speaks of. Cetain I am, that they rose not without  their intended Directory, publisht in Print, and Authorized by an Ordinance of both Houses of Parliament: The itle of the Book runs thus, viz. A Di∣rectory for the publick Worship of God, throughout the three Kingdoms of England, Scotland, and Ireland, &c. Printed at London for the Company of Stationers: The Ordinance bears Dae on the third of January, Anno, 1644. and is thus Enti∣tuled, viz. An Ordinance of Parliament for the taking away of the Book of Common Praer, and for the establishing and put∣ting in Execution of the Directory for the publick Worship of God: By which we see that their intended Directory was not onely finished, but also Authorized and published before they roe. Though our Author speaking again of these Divines, fol. 974. and in the year 1647. telleth us, That the Prince Ele∣ctor was  by the Commons to sit amongst them, for his in the Composure of the Directory, which will come out one day: The Directory was come out before, and if the Prince  sat not with them till 1647. as our Author it, he must needs come too late to give them any as∣sistance in that Composure. , Felding was questi∣oned
and committed at Oxford▪ and by a Councel of War sen∣tenced to  his Head, &c.] But this I look upon as a Court Pageant, onely to entertain the People, and take off their edge against the man; who certainly was a person of too much Honor, Vaor and Fidelity, to betray the Town, if he could possibly have held it: Although the King knew well enough, and knew withal how unable he was at that time to give him any it supplies, or to aise the iege, though it conern'd him for the reputaton of his Cause, to march in Person unto Reading, and shew his willingness to relieve it: But so great a fear fell on all those that were in Oxford, and such a gene∣ral Report there was of Fieldings Treachery, that to appease their murmuings, and compose their thoughts, Fielding was called in question, and condemned to die, a Scaffold set up in the Castle Green for his Execution, and a day appoint∣ed on which he was to be Beheaded: Before which time, the Earl of Essex not advancing, and the it being over, the Ex∣ecution was eprieved till a further time, and Fielding by de∣grees recovered as much estimation amongst those at Oxord, as formerly he had attained to in the Court or Camp: And to say truth, the fear at Oxford was not , when the News came of the taking of Reing, the Town being o unfortified on the North side of it, the King so  at that time of necessary Ammunition to make good the place, that it could not possibly have been deended, i  had marched directly towards it, and
Fol. 615. And brought to bed at Exceter of a Daughter the 16. of June, named Henrietta Maria] Not so, but Henrietta only, Maria is added by our Authour, who was none of the Gossips, and therefore should not take upon him to name the childe. But such Misnomers are so frequent in him, as might make a sufficient Errata at the end of his History, were there none else in it. Fol. 622. And so a New one was framed, engraven thereon the picture of the House of Commons and Members sitting; Re∣versed the Arms of England and Ireland, rosse and Harp pale. If so, this new Seal could not so properly be called the Great Seal of England, but the great Seal of the House of Commons represented in it, who are so far from being the High Court of Parliament (though were they such they could have no Authority for a Great Seal of their own) that they are not so much as Members of the Great Councell. Most true it is, that the prevailing party in both Houses of Parliament conceived it necessary to have a Great Seal lying by them, as well for the dispatch of such Commissions as they well to speed in in reference to the present War, as for the sealing of such Decrees and processes as were to be issued out of the Chancery, which they still kept open. But when it came to be debated in the House of Commons, it was al∣ledged by some sober men, that the counterfeiting of the Great Seal was made High Treason by the Statute of the 25. of King Edward the third. To which it was very learnedly replied by Sergeant Wilde, that they intended not to coun∣terft the Old Great Seal, but to make a new one. On which ridiculous Resolution of this Learned Sergeant (whose great Ruff had as much Law in it as his little head) the designe went forward; but not with any such alteration in the Im∣presse as our Authour speaks of. The Impresse of this New Seal was the same with that in the old, the Feathers or Prin∣ces Arms being only added in a void place of it, to Shew the difference between them; that so their Followers might distiguish beween such Commands as came from his Ma∣jesty,
and such as came immediatly from themselves in his Majesties Name. But whereas our Authour speaks in some words fore-going of a Legislative Power which he conceives to be in the Parliament, he shews himself therein to be no better a Lawyer then M. Sercant. The Legislative power was only in the King himself, though legally he was restrained in the exercise of it to the consent of the Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament. Fol. 623. lin. l. , the one a Cripple, the other somewhat like a Lunatick.] Our Authour speaks this of the Children of M. Iohn Hambden, one of the five Mem∣bers so much talked of (the principal Member of the five, as our Authour cals him) but on what ground he speaks it, as I do not know, o neither is it worth enquiry. And though I might leave the Children of M. Hambden under this re∣proach, as an undoubted signe of Gods judgements on him, for being a principall Incendiary in that fire which for a long time consumed the Kingdom; yet so far do I preferre truth before private interesse, that I shall do him that right in his postity, which our Authour, either out of ignorance, ea∣sinesse of belief or malice, hath been pleased to deny him. And therefore the Reader is to know that the surviving chil∣dren of that Gentleman, are not only of an erect and come∣ly stature, but that they have in them all the abilities of wit and judgement, wherewith their Father was endued, though governed with a more moderate spirit, and not so trouble∣somely active in affairs of state. Fol. 626. The five and twentieth of August the Earls of Bedford and Holland went from London towards Oxford, &c. That the said two Eals came to Oxford to tender their sb∣mission to the King, is a Truth undoubted (sooner then our Authour speaks of) but that they were received with favour and forgivenesse, may be very well questioned; not as in reference to forgivenesse (which considering the Kings good nature may be asily granted) but in relation unto Favour. A point wherein our Authour hath confuted himself, telling
us, fol. 639. of the Earl of Holland, that he had but slender Re∣ception, though he put himself in a posture of Arms with the King in the Field. And  this slender Reception he com∣plain'd in a Letter to the Lod Iermn after his departure, wherein he did relate, that the King did not shew so much countenance to him as he had seen hm do at the same time to some Cmmon Souldiers who had fled from the Enemy to come to him. There came to Oxford also at or about the same time the Earl of Clare, and found the like cold enter∣tainment. It was conceived, and by some reported, that if the King had shewed good countenance to these three Lords, most of the rest would have left the Parliament, and repair∣ed unto him. But the King considered well enough, that not so much the sense of their duty, as his successes in the West, had brought them thither; and that if five or six only of the Lords should be left in Westminster, those five or six only would be thought sufficient to constitute a House▪ of Peers (as many times there were no more present) fo the passing of any Ordinance, which the Commons should be pleased to commend unto them. Fol. 630. And now was the King drawn down before the Town, attended by Prince Charles, and the Duke of York, Prince Rupert, and Generall Ruthen, &c.] For the Kings sitting down before Glocester, and laying a formal Siege unto it, there was given this reason, viz. that by the taking of this Town all Wales would be preserved in the Kings Obedience entirely united unto Egland, and free passage given, on all occasions and distresses to assist each other. And so far the design was not to be discommended. But on the contrary, it was said, that the Kings unhappy sitting down before that Town, lost him the opportunity of marching directly to∣wards London, and attering the Faction in the Parliament; both which by reason of the affrightments which fell upon them by the taking of Bristol and othr places in the West, were ready to give up themselves, even to desperation. And so much was affirmed by the Earl of Holland when he was
at Oxford, assuring Sir Iohn Heydon Lieutenant of the Ordi∣nance (from whose mouth I have it) that the prevailing Members of both Houses were upon the point of trussing up of Bagge and Baggage, but that they hoped (as some of them told him) that N. N. one of great nearnesse to the King, an especiall confident of theirs, would prevail with him at the last to lay siege to Glocester, and not to leave that Town at his back to infest the Countrey. Fol. 633. Two Spies sent out, long since returned from War∣wick, giving them News of the March of the Earl of Essex, but was not assured, he lodging then nder a Cloud of disgrace, being beaten out of the West.] But certainly the Earl of Essex could not be under a cloud at that time, for being beaten out of the West; his preparing to raise the Siege of Gloce∣ster, happening in the end of August, Anno 1643. and his being beaten in the West, not happening till the beginning of September, Anno 1644. But we must think the Houses were indued with the spirit of prophecy, and frowned upon the man before-hand, for that which was to happen to him a Twelve moneth after. Nor was it any fault of his that Bri∣stol, Exceter, and so many places of importance, had been lost in the West; he having no Forces able to act any thing against the King, till the Pulpit-men in London preacht him up an Amy for the Relief of Glocester. An Army which came time enough to do the work (the siege being very slack∣ly followed) and having done the work, were as desirous to return back to their own Houses. But see what hapned by the way. Fol. 636. From Cirencester he marches to Chilleton, the Cavaliers facing them on Mavarn Hills.] If so, then First, The Earl of Essex must be the Ianus of this Age, and be presumed to have two faces, with the one looking to∣wards London, for which he was upon his march, with the other on Malvarn Hills, where the Cavaliers faced him. And secondly, We must think the Cavaliers to be very
Cowards that durst not face him (supposing still that he had two faces) at a nearer distance then from Malvarn Hills, distant from Cirencester thirty miles at the least, and how far from Chilleton, let them tell me who have searcht the Maps. But though he makes the Cavaliers to keep out of danger, yet he brings the Queen neer enough unto it, whom we finde at Newley Fight, fol. 648. placed by him with the King on the top of an Hill to behold the battle. But herein his in∣telligence fail'd him, the Queen being at that time safe in Oxford, and the King venturing his most sacred person with the rest of his Army. Mercurius Aulicus one of his best Au∣thours for a great part of the War, could have told him so, had he consulted him in this as in other places. Fol. 639. The Irish Forces coming under the command of Sir Michael Ernly, an experienced Souldier, and landing in Wales, &c.] The Forces which our Authour speaks of, were not Irish but English, sent over in the beginning of the War to defend the South-parts of Ireland against the Rebels. But being forced (for the Reasons mentioned in our Authour) to come to a cessation with them, four thousand of them put themselves into a body under the command of Sir Michael Ernly above-named, and came over into England to serve the King against the Houses of Parliament, by which they had been so unhandsomely handled. Had they been kept toge∣ther in a Body, and serv'd under their old known Comman∣ders, there is no question to be made, but that they might have much advanc'd his Majesties Service. But Prince Ru∣pert who was all in all in the Councell of War, caused them to be divided from one another, distributed them into seve∣rall Regiments of his Majesties Armies, and placed them un∣der new Commanders, which gave the Souldiers great dis∣pleasure, and their Offiers more, rendring their Service less honourable to themselves, and of small advantage to the King. Of these Officers Col. Monk was one, descended from a Daughter of Arthur Plantaginet, Vicount Lisle, the Naurall Son of King Edward the fourth, who afterwards
falling off to the Houses of Parliament, much advanced their affairs, defeating a great Fleet of the Hollanders, Anno 1653. and at this day Commander in chief over the English Forces in Scotland. Fol. 661. In all the Western Countries the Parliament had not a Souldier, but at Plymouth and Pool. What think we then of Lime a Sea-Town in Dorsetshire, and consequently in the West? Had there not been some Souldiers in it of the Parlia∣ment party, and good Souldiers too, it could not have held out so long against Prince Murice; who wasted there the greatest part of the Cornish Army, which had serv'd so for∣tunately under the Command of Sir Raph Hopton, and yet could not take it. But Lime was a Sea-Town, as before was said, and Prince Maurice had only a LandArmy, which ren∣dred the Design not more impossible then imprudent; the besieging of a Haven-Town without a Navy to prevent all relief by Sea, being like the hedging in of Cucko, or the drowning of a quick Ele by the Wise men of Gotham. Fol. 662. The Marquesse of Newcastle for the King went into Darbyshire, where he listed fifteen hundred Voluntiers, assisted by Sir John Gell his Interest thereabouts, and Sir John Harpers.] Worse and worse still: The Earl of Newcastle as∣sisted by Sir Iohn Gell were brave News indeed. That Sir Iohn Harper might do his best in it, I shall easily grant. But Sir Iohn Gell was all along a principall stickler for the Hou∣ses of Parliament, and spent his whole stock of Interesse in that Countrey to advance their Service. In the pursuit where∣of he was observed to be one of their first Commanders, which issued out Warrants to the Tenants of the Lords and Gentry, who did adhere unto the King, to bring in their rents, and be responsall for them for the time to come to the Com∣mittee at Darby, one of which Warrants Dated in March 1642. was brought to Oxford, and is this that followeth.
To the Constable of Acmanton. WHereas these unnaur all Wars at this present are smen∣ted and maintained by `Papists and Malignants, to the utter undoing of many honest men, and the ruine of the whole Commonwealth; for the better preventing of which misery, and to do the best we can to put a speedy end to these distractions ac∣cording to the trust reposed in us by the Ordinance of Parlia∣ment, we think sit to command you; that presently upon receipt hereof, you give notice to all the Tenants within your Constablery named in a Schedule herewih sent you, that henceforward they pay all their Rens due to any of those persons, or to any other that contribute or bear Arms against the Parliament, to the Committee here at Darby, or to such other person or persons as the said Committee shall nominate. And we all promise that such of those Tenants who shew their forwardnesse to bring in their Rents to the Committee at Darby by our Lady day next, or with∣in four daies aftrwards, shall have a discharge against their Landlords of the whole rent, and shall have a fourth part abaed them. And those Tenants that are refractory, and come not wil∣lingly to us, shall not only be forced to pay their whole Rents, but also shall be pocceded against as malignant persons, and such as endeavor the continuance of these troubles. Given under our hands March 1642. The Names of the Persons contained in the Sche∣dule above-mentioned amout to the number of 46. viz. the Earl of Shrewsbury, the Earl of Devonshire, the Earl of New-ca∣stle, (whom our Authour makes so much befriended by Sir John Gell) the Earl of Chesterfield, the Lord Maltravers, Sir John Harper of Caulk, and Sir John Harper of Swarstone, Sir Wil∣liam Savill, Sir John Fitz Herbert of Norbury, Sir Edward Mosely, &c. All men of very great Estates, and therefore like to send in the more grist to the Mill at Darby. So farre did Sir John Gell act for the Houses of Parliament.
And he continued in those actings till the end of the War: After which, falling into some suspition to have changed his Affections, he was committed to the Tower, in no small danger of his life, and came not off but with the loss of for∣mer Actings. Fol. 712. This, no question, caused their General Essex early the next day to quit his glorious Command, and in a small Boat to shift away by Water.] If that were it which caused him to shift away in a small Boat, he must needs play the part of a Cowardly Soldier, whilst every one of the Soldiers stood ready to act the part of a brave Commander: And there∣fore it is probable that there was somewhat more in it then a Consideration of the straits he was driven unto by the King, which he might easily have prevented, by keeping himself in the more open Country of Devonshire, where he might have had Elbow room enough on both sides, and a Countrey rich enough to furnish him with all sorts of Provisions: His Ar∣my was every way equal to the Kings, if not superior, he drawing after him no fewer then 50 Brass Pieces of Ordan∣ces, and 700 Carriages; and it appears by the number of Arms delivered up by Composition, amounting to 8000 in all, that his Foot could not consist of less then ten or twelve thousand: And for his Horse, no fewer then 2500 made a clear escape▪ So that he might have kept the Field, and put the King to it in a Battle, if there had not been somewhat more in it then our Author speaks of. It was therefore thought by some knowing men which understood the state of Affairs, that knowing his Horse were gone off without any danger, and that his Foot might save themselves by a Composition, he was willing to keep the Seas even as before was intimated: For partly being discourag'd from pursuing the War by his first success at Edge-Hill, and partly coming to know more of the Intentions of such as managed the design, then had been first imparted to him, he begn to grow more cold in carry∣ing things on unto the utmost, then befoe he was. Upon
which ground, as he had neglected the opportunity of march∣ing directly towards Oxford, when he had removed the Kings Forces out of Reading; so on the defeat of Waller at Lands-Down, he writ unto the Houses to send Petitions to the King for Peace, as appears by this History, fol. 625. For which coldness of his, so plainly manifested, it was not onely mo∣ved by Vassal in the House of Commons, that he should lay down his Command, but many jeers were put upon him, and some infamous Pictures made of him to his great dishonor: Considering therefore, that on the defeat of Prince Rupert at Marston-Moor, all the North parts were like to be regain'd to the Houses of Parliament; he was willing to let the King remain as absolute in the West, as they were like to be in the North, which since he could not do with Honor, by heark∣ning to the Kings fair proffer, seconded by a Letter from all the chief Officers of his Army, he cast himself into such ne∣cessities, as might give him some colour to shift for him∣self, and leave his Foot to some Agreement with the King: No way but this, (as he conceiv'd) to bring the leading Mem∣bers of both Houses unto such a Temper, as might induce them to meet the King half way in the Road to peace; and if this could not do it, the coming on of Winter might per∣haps cool them into some conditions which the King might be as willing to hearken to as they to offer. This I remember to be the summe of such Discourses as were made at that time in and about the Court, by men of the best knowledge and understanding in the state of businesses; but whether they hit upon the right string or not, I am not able to affirm. This I am able to affrm, that cur Authour is mistaken in telling us that the Earl of Essex did quit his glorious Command upon this occasion. For afterwards we finde him in his glorious Command at the fight near Newbery, and he continued in it till the Spring next following; when by the Ordinance of Self-deniall, and the new modelling of the Army under the Command of Sir Thoms Fairfax he was quitted of it. All that he did at this time was to qit his Army, for which the
Houses of Parliament cried quits with him, as before is said. Fol. 714. The King regains Monmouth, and returns to Oxford, the 23 of November.] That Monmouth was regain∣ed for the King, is undoubtedly true, but that it was regain'd by the King, is undoubtedly false. Our Author in some lines before, had left him at Hungerford, in the County of Berks, and now he brings him thorow the ayr to the taking of Mon∣mouth: But the truth is, that Monmouth having been be∣trayed to Massey, then Governor of Glocester, by Major Kyrl, a Garrison of 600 Soldiers was put into it; who ha∣ving a Design to surprize Chepstow, left the Town so naked, that the Lord Charls Somerset (one of the yonger Sons of the Marquess of Worcester) taking with him 150 Horse from Ragland-Castle, and assisted by some Foot from the Neigh∣boring Garrisons which held for the King, fell on the Town on Tuesday morning, the 19 of November, Anno 1644. and makes himself master of the place, before our brave Adven∣turers at Chepstow heard any thing of it. Fol. 719. Next Morning, July 2. the Prince advances af∣ter them, resolving to give them Battle by Noon, &c.] The Battle hear meant, is that of Marston-Moor near York, be∣tween Prince Rupert for the King, the Earls of Manchester and Leven, (better known by the name of Colonel Lesly) and the Lord Ferdinando Fairfax, commanding over their seve∣ral Forces fot the Houses of Parliament. Concerning which, our Author tells us, That at first Prince Rupert got the Ground, that those in the main Battle were so hard put to it, that they ell on the Reserve, of Scots which were behinde them; that the right Wing of the Ene∣mies Horse being as hard put to it by the Princes left Wing, committed the like Disorder on the Lord Fairfax his Foot, and the Scotch Reserves, and were pursued very fiercely by their Conquerors▪ and finally, that no Horse being sent to make good the Ground, which those who followed the Chace had left, the broken Army of the Enemy rallied a∣gain,
and got the better of the day▪ But the Gentlemen of York  who liv'd nar the place, tell us more then this, viz., That Prince Ruprt had not onely got ground at the first, and the right Wing of the Enemies Horse, but so disor∣dered the main Battle, that he postest himself of the Canon, the three Generals reting out of the field with more haste then Honor. And so the News came flying to Oxford, re∣ported in divers places by such of the nemies Soldiers as had fled out of the field, and at Oxford it was entertained with Bells and Bone-res, and the shooting off of all the Ordnance about the Town. But Prince Rupert better knowing how to get then pursue Advantages, and his oldiers busie upon Pillage, gave oppor∣tunity to Colonel Cromwel, who commanded the Earl of Manchesters Horse, and who onely had made a fair retreat in the heat of the fight, to put new life into the Battle, and having put the broken Foot into some good order, first gave a check unto the Prince, and after pressing hard upon him, tun'd the whole fortune of the Day: For which good ser∣vice, Cromwel is cryed up by his party to be the Saviour of three Kingdoms, of which the Scots who had done very well that Day, and bore the greatest part of the brunt, did after∣wards very much complain in a Pamphlet of theirs, which they call  Manest: How faintly General King car∣ried himself in this Battle, hath been shewn already, and what became afterwards of Prince Rupert, how he squan∣dered away his great Body of Horse, the surrendry of York, and what ee happened in that Country after this Fight, is re∣ferred to our Author. I onely adde that I have heard from some Gentlemen of that County, who had command to bu∣y the dead, that they found no fewer then the Bodies of Eight thousand Men, wch had been killed in that Fight, the greatst number which were slain in any one Battle in
Fol. 802. To Blackington-House, where Colonel Winde∣bank kept a Garrison for the King.] But by his leave, Winde∣bank never kept a Garrison at Blechington (not Blackington) House, but onely was commanded to remain there with a par∣ty of Horse, and a few Foot-Souldiers, the better to keep o∣pen the Markets till Woodstock House was fortified and made fit to be garrison'd. So far was Blechington House from being held like a Garison, that it had not so much about it as a woo∣den Pale. And when Major Windebank (the second Son of Sir Francis Windebank) had cut down two Trees to make Pallisadoes for defence of the place, upon complaint made by the Lady Coghil to Col. William Legg then Governour of Ox∣ford, he was commanded to restore them. Which notwith∣standing he was called before a Court of War, for giving up an undeenced place, which was impossible to be made good; and partly by the eager pursuit of Col. Legg (whose Con∣tributions were diminished by Windebanks quartering in that House) and some back friend which he and his Father had at Court, he was condemned to be shot to death (his Fa∣thers Services and Sufferings being qite forgotten) which death he suffered on Saturday the 1. of May, with much Christian courage. Fol. 719. And having leave to go to the King, they cause him &c. But the King knew their mindes not to engage for him, and so they returned.] It may be collected from these words that this message was a matter of Lip businesse only, the Em∣bassadors not having instructions to engage their Superiours for him, nor the King any opinion of the reality of their in∣tentions toward him. But in the processe of the businesse we shall finde it otherwise. For first, Our Authour tels us, that they were both Kights and Barons by the King, fol. 804. Not both made Knights and Baros, I am sure of that, but the one of them a Baron, and the other a Knight Baronet, that is to say, Iohn de Remsworth of Urecht, desded from the Noble Family De Rede in Cleveland, created by Let∣ters
Patents bearing date the 24. of March Anno 1644. and William de Boreel created Baronet on the 22. of March in the same year. And secondly, This appears more plainly by a Letter of Complaint sent from our New States in England to the old States of Holland; In which they tell them how their Mini∣sters had abused their Trust to their prejudice▪ shewing them∣selves rather interessed persons then publick Agents, no satisfied to reproach them to their faces, but to glory in it. Certainly nether had the King conferred those Honours on the Em∣bassadours, nor the Houses complain'd so much against them; if they had been sent hither to no other end but to settle Trade, and to see how the Game went, which our Authour makes the only reason of their coming. And thogh the King obtained not such helps from the tates of the Nether∣lands, as their Embassadours had engaged for, yet so much he effected by their mediation, that the Houses had not such Assistances from those parts as they had before, a matter of no small advantage to the Kings affairs. Fol. 806. Whilest Rupert and Maurice with the Horse, and some seect Foot, fetcht off the King from Oxford.] By which words the Reader cannot but conclude that Oxford was in no small danger, and the Kings person in as much, which must necesstate the two Princes with all their Horse, and a select number of Foot to fetch him off. But at that time there was no Enemy near the one, nor any danger appearing toward the other. The King was at that time in a gallant Condi∣tion, and had drawn his Souldiers out of their Winter Ga∣risons, ready to march into the field; attending only till the other part of his Army which was employed about Glo∣cestershire was in readinesse also. News whereof beig brought unto him, he went out of Oxford, accompanied by the sad two Princes in a more glorious and magnificent man∣ner then ever fomerly. The precise time whee of being no∣ted by George Wherton a profesed Asologer, he erected a Scheme according to the Rules of Art. And finding the
Houses well disposed, and the Aspects of the Planets and Constellations to be very favourable, he prognosticated that this expedition should prove very fortunate to the King, his Successes glorious, and his return to Oxford as magnificent as h going out. Which being published in Print▪ and dispro∣ved by the sad events which followed, gave great occasion unto Lilly, Culpepper, and others of that faculty to deride him for it; Men every way as faulty in that kinde themselves, as he had been unfortunate in his predictions. Witnesse those terrible presagings which they gave us of the Ecclipse, hap∣pening in the end of March 1652. to the great terrour of of poor people, but without any visible effects. But above all things, witnesse that Observation of M. Culpepper, in the end of his Dotages on the Moneths of February foregoing, in which he signifieth, that if the Emperour died that moneth, we must remember who told us of it. But for all his great insight into the Stars, the Emperor neither died that moneth nor in six years after. Thus Augur ridet Augurem, as the Proverb is: the people in the mean time being deceived and abused by both whilest they make sport with one an∣other. Glocester Association in much want received three hundred and fourty Auxiliries from the Grand Garison, Newport pan∣nell▪ ot of Buckinghamshire.] No such grand Garison nei∣ther, as to be worthy of that name. A Garison had been formed there for the King, at the request of Sir Lewis Dives, the better to secure his Rents and Tenants in Bedfordshire▪ But bing found to be too far off to receive Relief, if any distresse should fall upon it, the Ordnance and Souldiers were removed to owcester, seven miles from Northampton, to restrain the nsolencies of that Garison, but at the open∣ing of the Srng brought back to Oxford, and mingled with the rest of the Army. On which deserting of Newport-Pa∣gnell by the Kings Kings Souldiers,  Garison was put in∣to it for the Houses of Parliament, till the Kings Souldiers were removed to Towcester, to counter-ballance which, this
Garison had been made at Newport, of which there being then no longer use, and Glocester standing in need of supply, the Ordnance being drawn off, and the Works slighted, the men were sent away to Glocester▪ And these were the three hundred and fourty Auxiliaries which were sent from the grand Garison of Newport Pagnel, the Town being small, and consequently not capable of receiving any great number of Souldiers, or to give those Souldiers the name of so grand a Garison. Fol. 809. About five a Clock in the morning, June 13. the King drew off from Burrough Hill towards Harborough and Pomfrait. He might as well have said that the King drew toward  and Orkney in the North of Scotland, as that he drew oward Harborough and Pomfrait, both lying Northward from the place of his remove. For though it would be thought by any ordinary Reader who is not well studied in the Maps, that Harborough and Pomfrait towards which the King is said to remove, did lie very near to one an∣other▪ yet Harborough and Pomfrait are at least eighty miles asunder; the one a Town of Leicestershire remarkable for a great Fair of Horse and attle, the other a Town of great Note in Yorkshire, renowned for a fair and ancient Castle; which being anciently part of the possessions of the Lacies Earls of Lincoln, by Marriage and Capitulation descended on the Earls of Lancaster, and is now part of that great Dutchy. Fol. 811. Naseby the fatall battle to the King and his par∣ty. Fatall indeed whether we look upon the Antecedents or the Consequents of it. For if we look on the Antecedents, there could be nothing but some unavoidable fatality in it, that the King having taken Leiceser, and thereby put his affairs into a more hopefull way (as he writ to the Queen) then thy had been in at any time since the Rebellion; should come back to Daventry, and there spend eight or ten daies without doing any thing. If it be said, that he returned back upon the noise that Oxford was besieged by Fairfax, his stay∣ing
so long at Daventry, was not the way to raise that siege. Nor was the Town in any such danger (but that the Ladies wanted fresh Butter for their Pease) as to bring him back from the pursuit of his Successes; and thereby to give time to Cromwell, without whom Fairfax could do little to come with 600 fresh Horse to the rest of the Army. And yet be∣ing come, they had not made so fast after the King as to re∣solve on ighting with him when they did, if they had not Intercepted a Letter the night before, sent from Col. oring to the King, in which he signified that he was upon his march towards him, desiring his Majesty to keep at a distance, and not to engage with the Enemy till he came to him. For which intelligence I am beholding to Hugh Peters, who in one of his Thanks-giving Sermons hath informed me in it. Upon the reading of this Letter, it was concluded to fall on with the first opportunity, before these new supplies should be added to the rest of the Kings Forces. And it was as fa∣tall in the Consequents as it had been in the Antecedents; neither the King no his party being able after that time to make any considerable opposition, but losing battle after bat∣tle, and place after place, till there was nothing left to lose but their Lives or Liberties. Ibid. The Kings Coaches, his Cabinet of Letters and Papers.] In the loss of his Coaches there was no great matter, nor so much in the loss of his Cabinet of Letters and Papers, as his Enemies did conceive it was: A Cabinet▪ in which were many Letters and Paper, most of them written to the Queen; but they, together with the rest, publisht in Print by Order of the Houses of Parliament. The Design was to render the King odious in the sight of the People, by giving license to the Queen to promise some favors for the Catholick party here in England, if she could obtain any succour for him from the Catholicks there: But they lost more by it then they got. For first, They drew a general obloquy on themselves, by publishing the secret passages betwixt Man and Wife, con∣trary
to the rules of Humanity and common honesty. And secondly, They gave the People such a representati∣on of the Kings Abilities, his Piety, Prudence, and deep foresight into Affairs, as rais'd him to an high degree of E∣stimation with all sorts of men; as Mr. Pryn had done be∣fore of the Arch-Bishop of Canterbury, in printing the Bre∣viat of his Life, though intended otherwise. An errour which the Houses were soon sensible of, and thereupon gave Order that in the publishing of the great Volume of Ordi∣nances, &c. by Edward Husbands, in which were many passa∣ges also betwixt them and the King, these intercepted Letters should be left out; though the Letters in the Lord Digbies Cabinet which was taken at Sherburn were printed there a∣mong the rest. So wise are men upon the post fact, when it is too late. Fol. 826. But the same night at the very noise of the Kings coming from Worcester, they prepared for flight, and the next morning not a Scot to be seen, felt, or heard of; they were all fled.] The Scots had lain before Hereford from the 30. of Iuly to the first of September, and had so well entrencht themselves that there was no fear of being beaten up by the King, who since the fatall blow at Naseby had never been the Master of such Forces as to give Battell to the Scots, and much lesse to assault them in their Trenches. So that the noise of the co∣ming of the Kings Forces from Worcester, might be the pre∣tence, but it could not be the reall cause of his hasty raising of the Siege. Lesly (unworthily made Earl of Leven at the Kings being in Scoland, An. 1641.) had received Letter after Letter out of Scotland, touching the successes of Montrosse. And now there comes the lamentable News of the taking of Edinburg, and consequently the losse of all, if he hasted not to∣wards their Relief. On the receiving of which Letters he was willing to take the noise of the Kings coming from Worcester, with all his Forces for an occasion to be gone; and being gone march'd directly Northwards till he came neer enough to Scotland to dispatch David Lesly with all his Horse, and with∣out
any noise to set upon the Marquesse of Montrosse at the first opportunity; By reason of whose sudden coming, and coming with no lesse then 6000 Horse, the Noble Marquesse by the treachery of the Earls of Roburgh and Traquair (who were acquainted with the plot) the Marquesse was almost surprized, and the greatest part of his Forces routed, him∣self escaping with the rest, and making an orderly mach to the North-parts of Scotland; where he continued in some strength till he was commanded by the King to lay down his Commission and disand his Forces. I adde here only by the way, that the Scos had pretty well scoured the Coun∣trey who came in but with two thousand Horse, and had now raised them to six thousand, besides such as they had lost in the course of the War. Fol. 828. Nor would they budg from the North parts, though they are called Southwards for the Kingdoms security and ser∣vice.] But just before we found the Scots at the Siege of He∣reford, a City beyond the Severn, on the borders of Wales; and here we finde thm so fast rveed in the Northern oun∣ties, that they would not budge a foot Southwards for the Kingdoms safety Reconcile these differences he that can, for my part I dare not undertake it. The like irreconcileable∣nesse I finde within few lines after, in which he teleth us▪ that being entreated to march to the Siege of Nwark, they staed not long there, but marched in a pet Northwads to Newcastle, where they stuck till they got the King into their clutches, sold him, and so went home again. But first, If the Scots marched towards Newark (whether upon entreaty or not is not much materiall) they must needs budge Southward; the whole County of York, and part of Nottinghamshire lying between Newark and the Scots Quar∣ters. Secondly, The Scots did not go from Newark in such a pet as to leave the Siege, for aftewards we finde fol. 892. that Lsly only went away in a pt, but left his Army there to at∣tend the continuance of the Siege till the Town was taken.
Secondly, he did not force the Town by firing one of the ates, but had it surrendred to him by Composition; the Capitulations being made on the Sunday night, and his Soul∣der entring into it on the Munday morning. Thirdly, the Souldiers of the Garrison were not forced by him into the Castle, who had time enough all that night to retire into it▪ or otherwise to leave the Town, as all the Horse and many of the Foot had leave to do. And fourthly, there was no such difficulty in the businesse, a to bring God upon the Stage in the taking either of the Town or Castle, which the Governour (Sir William Ogle wa resolved beforehand not to hold out long. He had bragg'd times, that he had so stored that Castle with Victuals, Arme and Ammunition, that he durst bid defiance for six to all the Armies in England. But when the news am o the taking of  and Bridgewaer, he changed his afrming frequently that it could be no dishonour to
affirmed expresly (being desired to shew the truth in this par∣ticular) that there were about 80. Women in it at that time when the House was stormed. So that our Authour in this point was extremely out, as much as the difference can a∣mount to between a Company of 80. and one single person. The words to be explained are these, viz. a Godly Divine Pro∣testant, for protection mixt with some Popish Priests Profession; Which words have neither sense nor Grammar, as they be be∣fore us, and therefore must be taught to speak English be∣fore the ordinary Reader can understand them. And if the words were put into proper and Grammaticall English, we must reade them thus, viz. A Godly Protestant Divine mixt for protection with some Priests of the Popish profession. Which being the Grammar of the words, will give a Logical dispute about the party to whom the Character is given. I think our Authour would not have it understood of D. Griffiths Daughter (who though a very vertuous and godly Gentle∣woman) cannot be called a Godly Protestant Divine, in the common notion of the phrase; and yet the current of the words does import no lesse. For it is said, that there was but one woman amongst so many men: D Griffiths Daughter a Godly Protestant Divine, &c. Nor can it properly be under∣stood of D. Griffith, though a Godly Protestant Divine, the following words depending on those before D. Griffiths Daughter, and not relating literally and grammatically to the Doctor himself. Had the tenour of the words run thus, The Daughter of D. Griffith a Godly Protestant Divine, the ad∣junct of a Goly Protestant Divine must have related to the Father, but as they he before us it relates to the daughter; With what propriety of speech or sense let the Reader judge, and make himself as mery at it as he plea∣seth. Fol. 836. For Digby was sometimes Secretary of State.] And so he was at this time also, when he was discomfited at Sherburn in Yorkshire, when he lost that Cabinet and those Letters which our Authour speaks of. He had been made
principall Secretary of Estate in the place of the Lord Falk∣land, about the beginning of October, Anno 1643. And con∣tinued in that office till his Majesties death; though by rea∣son of the Kings restraint and his own enforced absence, he was not able to act any thing in it, as neither could M. Se∣cretary Nicholas; who notwithstanding neither lost the Of∣fice nor name of Secretary. I trow Sir Francis Walsingham, or Sir Robert Cecl were not the lesse Secretaries of Estare to Queen Elizabeth because she employed them sometimes in forreign Embassies; nor was Digby sometimes only, but at that time Secretary of Etate, when he took upon him the Command of a Body of Horse in his Masters Ser∣vice. Fol. 871. And the West being cleared Fairfax returns back again to the Siege of Bristol.] The west so far from being clear'd, that except Bridgewater in Somersetshire, and Sher∣burn- Castle in Dorsetshire, little or nothing was done in or∣der to it. The Counties of Devon and Cornwall still remain∣ed untoucht, in which the Prince had not only a conside∣rable Army under brave Commanders, but many strong Towns and Garisons well stored with Souldiers; so as at this siege of Bristol it was conceived that two great Errors were committed, the first by Fairfax in sitting down before a Town in which were so many able men well armed and com∣manded by the General of his Majesties Forces; and leaving an Army at his back, which might have charged him in the Rear, while those within sallied out upon him, and assailed him in the very front. The second Errour was in Rupet, in that being Generall of the Kings Forces, he shut himself up within a Town, when it had been more proper for him to have been abroad, ga∣thering together the Kings old Souldiers, and raising new from severall places, by which he might have put himself in∣to a Condition to raise the Siege. But Fairfax knew well what he did, making no doubt to have the Town delivered to him before the Prince could be inform'd of the danger in
which it was. For the delivery of which City so strongly fortified, so well mann'd, so furnisht with all sorts of neces∣sary provisions, Prince Rupert incurr'd the suspicion of Dis∣loyalty both with the King and all his party. He had before sent certain Letters to the King, in which he pressed him (somewhat beyond good manners) to come to a speedy con∣clusion with his Parliament, without relating either to point of honour or conscience; with which the King seemed more displeased as appeareth by his answer to him, fol. 841. then was agreeable unto his ordinary temper. And so much was the King startled when he heard of the giving up of that Ci∣ty with the Fort and Castle, and that too in so short a time, that he posted away a Messenger to the Lords at Oxford to displace Col. Legg (a well known Creature of Prince Ruperts) from the Government of that City and Garison, and to put it into the hands of Sir Thomas Glenham; which was accor∣dingly done, and done unto the great contentment of all the Kings party, except that Prince and his Dependents. But Legg was sweetned not long after by being made one of the Grooms of his Majesties Bed-chamber, a place of less com∣mand, but of greater trust. Fol. 891. And now the Parliament consider of a Term or Ti∣tle to be given to the Commissioners intrusted with their Great Seal, and are to be called Conservators of the Common-wealth of England.] Not so, with reference either to the time or the thing it self. For first, The Commissioners of the Great Seal were never called the Conservators fo the Common-wealth of England. And Secondly, If they ever had been called so, it was not now, that is to say, when the Kings Seals were broken in the House of Peers, which was not long after Midsummer, in the year 1646. But the truth is, that on the 30 of Ianua∣ry 1648. being the day of the Kings most deplorable death, the Commons caused an Act or Order to be printed, in which it was declared that from thenceforth in stead of the
Kings Name in all Commissions, Decrees, Processes, and In∣dictments, the tle of Custodes Libertatis Angliae, or the Keepers of the Liberties of England, as it was afterwards englished (when all Legall Instruments were ordered to be made up in the English-Tongue) should be alwaies used. But who these Keepers of the Liberties were, was a thing much questioned, some thought the Commissioners for the great Seal were intended by it, whom our Authour by a mistake of the Title cals here the Conservators of the Common-wealth; others conceiv'd that it related to the Councel of State, but neither rightly: For the truth is, that there were never any such men to whom this Title was appliable in one sense or other▪ it being onely a Second Notion, like Genus and Species in the Schools, a new devised term of State-craft to express that trust which never was invested in the persons of any men, either more or fewer. Fol. 892. o then the eldest Son, and the yongest Daughter, are with the Qun in France; the two Dukes of York and Glocester, with the Princess Elizabeth at St. James's: The Prince in the Wet with his Army. This is more strange then all the rest, that the Kings eldest Son should be with his Mother in France, and yet that the Prince at the same time should be with his Army in the West of England: I always thought, till I saw so good Authority to the contrary, that the Prince and the Kings eldest Son had been but one person: But finding it otherwise resolved, I would fain know which of the Kings Son is the Prince, if the eldest be not: It can∣not be the second, or third, for they are here called both one∣ly by the name of Dukes, and made distinct persons from the Prince: And therefore we must needs believe that the Kings eldest Son, Christned by the name of Charls-Iames, who dy∣ed at Grenwich, almost as soon as he was born, Anno 1629. was raised up from the dead by some honest French Conjurer, to keep company with the yong Princess Henrietta, who might converse with hm as a Play-Fellow, without any terror, as not being able to distinguish him from a Baby of Clouts;
That he, and all that did adhere unto him, should be safe in their Persons, Honors and onsciences, in the Scotish Army, and that they would really and effectually joyn with him, and with such as would come in unto him and joyn with them for his preser∣vation, and should employ their Armies and Forces to assist him to his Kingdom, in the recovery of his ust Rights: But on the contrary, these jugling and perfidious , declare in a Letter to their Commissioners at London, by them to be communicated to the Houses of Parliament, that there had been no Treaty nor (apitulation betwixt his Mesty and them, nor any in their names, &c. On the receit of which Let∣ters, the Houses Order him to be sent to Warwick Castle▪ But Lesly, who had been us'd to buying and selling in the time of his Pedlry, was loth to lose the benefit of so rich a Commodity; and thereupon removes him in such post-haste, that on the eighth of May we finde him at Southwel, and at Newcastle on the tenth, places above an hundred Miles di∣stant from one another; and he resolv'd before-hand how to dispose of him when he had him there: o Scotland he never meant to carry him, though some hopes were given of it at the first; for not onely Lesly himself, but the rest of the Co∣venanters in the Army, were loth to admit of any Competi∣tor in the Government of that Kingdom, which they had ingrossed whoy to themselves; but the  in an Assembly of theirs, declare expresly against his coming to live amongst them, as appears, fol▪  So that there was no other way left to dispose of his person, but to ell him to the Houses of Parliament, though at the first they made  of it, and would be thought to stand upon Terms or Honor▪ The Eal of Lowdon, who lov'd to hear himslf speak more hen ny man living, in some Speches made beore he Houses, pro∣tested strongly against the dlivery of their Kings Person in∣to their Power,  what in  amy would lie upon them and the whole Nation, f  hould to . But this was but a coy of their Countenance onely,  ∣vice to raise the Mare, and make is uch money
as they could. At last they came to this Agreement, that for the sum of Two hundred thousand pounds, they should deliver him to such Commissioners as the Houses should Au∣thorize to receive him of them, which was done according∣ly. For Fol. 939. The Commissioners for receiving the Person of the King, came to Newcastle, Iune 22. &c.] Not on the 22 of Iune, I am sure of that, the Commodity to be bought and sold was of greater value, and the Scots too cunning to part with it, till they had raised the price of it as high as they could: The driving of this Bargain took up all the time be∣twixt the Kings being carried to Newcastle, and the middle of the Winter then next following, so that the King might be delivered to these Commissioners (that is to say, from Pri∣son to Prison) on the 22 day of Ianuary, but of Iune he could not. And here it will not be amiss to consider what loss or benefit redounded to those Merchants which traded in the buying and selling of this precious Commodity. And first, The Scots not long before their breaking out a∣gainst their King, had in the Court two Lords High Stew∣ards, and two Grooms of the Stool successively one after an∣other: And at their taking up of Arms, they had a Master of the Horse, a Captain of the Guard, a Keeper of the privy Purse, seven Grooms of eight, in his Majesties Bed-Chamber, and an equal number, at the least, of Gentlemen Ushers, Quarter-Waiters, Cup-Bearers, Carvers, Sewers, and other Officers attending daily at the Table: I speak not here of those which had places in the Stables, or below the Stairs; or of the Servants of those Lords and Gentlemen, which either lived about the Court, or had Offices in it: All which together, made up so considerable a number, that the Court might well be called an Academy of the Scots Na∣tion, in which so many of all sorts had their Breeding, Main∣tenance, and Preferment: Abroad they had a Lieutenant of the Tower, a Fortress of the most consequence in all the
Kingdom; and a Master-unner of the Navy, an Office of as great a trust as the other; and more of those Monopolies, Suits, and Patents, which were conceiv'd to be most grie∣vous to the Subject, then all the English of the Court. In the Church they had two Deanries, divers Prebendaries, and so many Excclesiastical Benefices, as equalled all the Revenue of the Kirk of Scotland: All which they lost, like Aesops Dog catching after a shadow: For what else were those em∣pty hopes of ingrossing to themselves all the Bishops Lands, and participating equally with both Houses in the Govern∣ment of this Kingdom (which drew them into England the second time) but an airy shadow? And yet by catching at that shadow, they lost all those Advantages which before they had, both in Court and Countrey; and that not onely for the present, but in all probability for the times to come. The Presbyterians laid their Heads and Hands together to embroil the Realm, out of a confidence, that having aliena∣ted the greatest part of the Tribes from the House of David, they might advance the golden Calves fo their Presbyteries in Dan and Bethel, and all other places whatsoever within this Land: And for the maintenance thereof, they had devoured in conceit all Chapter Lands, and parcelled them amongst themselves into Augmentations: But no sooner had they driven this Bargain, but a Vote passed for selling those Lands, towards the payment of the Debts of the Commonwealth. Nor have they lived to see their dear Presbytery setled, or their Lay-Elders entertained in any one Parish of the King∣dom; for the advancement whereof, the Scots were first in∣couraged to begin at home, and afterwards to pursue their work by invading England. Others there were who labored for nothng more then the raising of a New Commonwealth out of the Ruins of the old Monarchy, which Plot had been a carrying on from the first coming of this King to the Crown, till they had gotten him into their hands; these being like the Husbandmen in Saint Matthews Gospel, who said among themselves, this is the Heir▪
come let us kill him, and let us seize on his Inheritance, Matth. 21. 38. A Commonwealth which they had so modelled in their Brains, that neither Sir Thomas Moors Vtopia, nor the Lord Verulams new Atlantis, nor Plato's Platform, nor any of the old Idaeas, were equal to it; the Honors and Offices whereof they had distributed amongst themselves, and their own Dependents: And in pursuance of this project, they had no sooner brought the King to the end they aimed at, but they pass an Act, (for so they called it) prohibiting the Pro∣claiming of any Person to be King of England, &c. That done, they passed another for the abolishing the Kingly Office in England, &c. dated the 17 of March, One thousand six hun∣dred forty eight. A third, for declaring and a constituting the People of England to be a Commonwealth and Free State, dated May 19. 1649 which last they solemnly proclaimed by their Heralds and Serjeants, in the most frequented parts of London, and made themselves a new Great Seal, with the Arms and Impress of their new Commonwealth ingraven on it. And yet these men that had the purse of all the King∣dom at command, and Armies raised for defence of their Authority, within the space of six years were turned out of all: And this was done so easily, and with so little noise, that the loss of that exorbitant Power did not cost so much as a broken Head, or a Bloody Nose, in purchasing whereof, they had wasted so many Millions of Treasure, and more then an Hundred thousand Lives: So that all reckonings be∣ing cast up, it will appear, that all were losers by the Bargain, as it happens commonly to such men as love to traffick in the buying and selling of prohibited Commodities, and thereby make themselves obnoxious to all such forfeitures, as the se∣verity of the Laws, and the King Displeasure▪ shall impose upon them. How he was carried by those Commissioners to HoldenbyHouse, and from thence by a party of Horse to the Head-Quarters of the Army, our Author hath inform'd us in the course of this History▪ But being there, he tells us, that
he was permitted to give a meeting to his Children. Fol. 995. And accordingly they met at Maidstone, where they dined together. Well boul'd Vincent! as our Authour knows who says in another place: He gives us the Copy of a Letter in the very same fol. from the King to the Duke of York, dated at Casam, Iuly 4. 1647. in which he de∣clares his hope that the Duke might be permitted with his Bro∣ther and Sister, to come to some place betwixt that and London, where he might see them; adding withal, that rather then h might not see them, he would be content they should come to some convenient place to dine, and go back at night: So then, the place for this joyful meeting must be some convenient Town or other betwixt Casam and London: But Casam is a Village of Berkshire, distant about thirty Miles from Lon∣don, Westward; and Maidstone, one of the chief Town of Kent, is distant about thirty Miles from London, towards the East; so that London may be truly said to be in the middle betwixt Maidstone and Casam, but Maidstone by no means to be in any position betwixt Casam and London: Perhaps our Author in this place mistakes Maidstone for Madenhith, from Reading ten, and from London two and twenty miles distant, and then he may do well to mend it in his second E∣dition. And then he may correct also another passage about Judge Ienkins, whom fol. 836. he makes to be taken Prisoner in the City of Hereford; and fol. 976. at Castle in Wales. So strangely does he forget himself, that one might think this History had several Authors, and was not written nor digested by any one man. Fol. 96. Nay, did not Heraclius the Greek Emperor, call for aid of the Rke-hell rabble of Scythians to assist him against the Saracens. I believe he did not: For as I remember not to have read, that he called in any of the Scyhick Nations to assist him against the Saracens, so there was no reason why he should: The Saracens in his time had neither extended their Conquests, nor wasted his Empire so far Northwards,
as to necessitate him to invite any such Rake-Hll Rabble of Scythans to oppose their proceedings: By doing whereof, he must needs expose as great a part of his Dominios to the spoil of the Scythians, as had been wasted, (and in part conquered) by the Saracens. I read indeed, That Cosos, one of the Kings of Persia, the better to annoy Herlius, in those parts of the Empire which were dearest to him, hired a compounded Army of Slaves, Avares, Gepid, and others, neighboring near unto them, to invade Thrace, and lay siege unto Constantinople, the Imperial Seat; to curb whose Insolencies, and restrain their further progress into the heart of that Countrey, Hera∣clius hired another Army, compounded of the like Scythick Nations, which in those days passed under the common name of the Chasnari, and it was very wisely done: For by that means he did not onely waste those Barbarous Nati∣ons (all of them being his very bad Neighbors) in warring one against another, but reserved his own Subjects for some o∣ther occasions: And as it was done wisely, so was it done as lawfully also, there being no Law of God or Man which pro∣hibits Princes, when they are either invaded by a foreign E∣nemy, or overlaid by their own Subjects, to have recourse to such helps as are nearest to them, or most like to give them their Assistance. Which point our Author prosecutes to a very good purpose, though he mistake himselfe in the instance before laid down. The Irish were then upon the point of calling the French unto their aid, under pretence that their own King was not able to protect them against the Forces of those men who had coniscated their Estates, and were resolved upon their final extermination: And had the King upon the first rising of the Scots, poured in an Army of the Danes to waste their Countrey, and fall upon them at their backs, (as Heraclius poured in the Csnari upon the Selaves, Avares, and the rest of that Rabble) he had done his work, and he had done it with half the charge, (but with more security) then the bare
ostentation of bringing an English Army to the Borders of Scotland, did amount unto: Which as he might have done with less charges, so I am sure he might have done it with far more security: The Danes being Lutherans, fear nothing more then the grouth of the Calvinian party, and therefore would have fought with the greater Zeal and the fiercer Courage, on the very merit of the cause; And having no confederacies or correspondencies with the Scots, in order to Liberty or Religion, as the Scots had with too many of the people of England, the King might have relied upon them with a greater confidence, then he could do on a mixt Body of his own, in which the Puritan party being more pragma∣tical, might have distempered all the rest: Such aids were offered him by his Uncle of Denmark, when the two Houses had first armed his people against him: But he refused them then for fear of justifying a Calumny which cunningly had been cast upon him, of admitting Foreign Nations into the Kingdom, to suppress the Liberties of the people, and to change their Laws: Afterwards when he sought for them, then the could not have them, the Houses no less cunning, hiring the Swedes to pick a Quarrel with the Danes, the bet∣ter to divert that King from giving assistance to his Nephew in his greatest needs. But the consideration of this mistake in my Author about the Scythians, hath ingaged me fur∣ther in this point then I meant to have been. I go on a∣gain. Fol. 1002. But the Members were not well at ease, unlsse some settlement were made for them by Orders and Ordinan∣ces, &c. Nor were they at ease till they had made the like settlement for some others beside themselves. Some seque∣stred Divines, conceiving that all things were agreed on be∣tween the King and the Army, had unadvisedly put them∣selves into their Benefices, and outed such of the Presbyteri∣ans as had been placed in them by the Committee for Plan∣dered Ministers, or the Committees in the Countrey. And on the other side divers Land-holders in the Countrey con∣ceivig
that those Ministers who had been put into other mens livings could not sue in any Court of Law for the Tythes and Profits of those Churches for want of a Legall Title to them, did then more resolutely then ever refuse to make payment of the same. For remedy of which two mis∣chiefs the Independent Members having setld themselves by Orders and Ordinances, concur with the Presbyterian Mem∣bers, to settle their Brethren of the Clergy in a better con∣dition then before. And to that end they first obtained an Ordinance dated the 9. of August Anno 1647. in which it is declared, That every Minister put, or which shall be put into any Parsonage, Rectory, Vicarage, or Ecclesiasticall Living, by way of Sequestration or otherwise, by both or either the Houses of Parliament, or by any Committee or other person or persons by Authority of any Ordinance or Order of Parliament, shall and may se for the Recovery of his Tythes, Rents and other duties, by vertue of the said Ordinance in as full and ample manner to all intents and purposes; as any other Minister or other person what∣soever. This being obtain'd to keep in awe the Landholders for the time to come, they obtained another Ordinance dated the 23▪ of the same Moneth for keeping the poor sequestred Clergy in a far greater awe then the others were, by which i was Ordered and Ordained: That all Sheriffs, Mayors, Bayliffs, Justices of the Peace, Deputy Lieutenants, and Committees of Parliament in the several Counties, Cities, and places within this Kingdom, do forthwith apprehend, or cause to be apprehended all such Minister as by autho∣rity of Parliament have been put out of any Church or Chappell within this Kingdom, or any other person or persons who have entred upon any such Church or Chap∣pell, or gained the possession of such Parsonage Houses, ithes, and profits thereunto belonging, or have obstruct∣ed the payment of Tithes and other profits due by the Pa∣rishioners to the said Ministers there placed by Authority of
Parliament, or Sequestrators appointed, where no Mini∣sters are setled to receive the same, and all such persons as have been Aiders, Abettors, or Assisters in the Premises, and commit them to prison, there to remain until such sa∣tisfaction be made unto the severall Ministers placed by the said Authority of Parliament for his or their damages su∣stained, as to the said Sheriffs, Mayors, &c. shall appear to be just, &c. So little got the Sequestred Clergy by their Petition and Addresse to Sir Thomas Farfx, that their condition was made worse by it then it was before, in that the Acts of the Committees in the Countrey as well as that at London, were confirmed by Ordinance. For though the Generall and the Army passed a Declaration upon this Petition on the 22. of Iuly, That the Estates of all persons, of what rank or con∣dition soever, whether rall or personall, under any Seque∣stration, howsoever or to whomsoever disposed, shall re∣main in the hands of the Tenants, Parishioners, or any o∣ther persons from whom they are legally due, until the Ge∣nerall peace be setled, and then to be restored and account∣ed for to those to whom they shall be justly and legally due; yet on their piecing with the Presbyterian Members in the House of Commons, they did nothing in it but left the poor Clergy as before, if not in a worse condition then they found them. Fol. 929. His Funerall Herse remining in Westminster Abbey Church▪ a spectacle for the people, some bold Maligna; on the 27. of November at night most hamefully handlea his Effigies. That is to say, by breaking off his head, disfiguring the face, tearing away his Sword and Spurs, and renting down his Arms and Escucheons, as it after followeth. That such an outrage was committed on the Herse of the Earl of Essx, is most notoriously true; and that it was committed by some bold Malignant (that is to say, some person disaffected to that Earl) is as true as that▪ But who that bold Malignant was, whether of the Royall party, or any other who ma∣ligned
his Estate and Honour, our Authour should have done well to have told more clearly, and note to have left him under the generall notion of a bold Malignant, by which name those of the Kings party were most commonly brand∣ed. It seems by our Authour that they were no poor knaves who made this deacement, conidering they left all behinde them silk and velvet to boot. And it is more then probable that the Nobility and Gentry who made up the greatest and most considerable number of the Royal Party, were such as had too much sense of Honour to injure and deface the mo∣nument of a Noble man, whom they had never otherwise beheld then as an honourable Enemy in the course of the Wars. The conduct of which war, when he first undertook for the Houses of Parliament, they published a Resolution in a Declaration of theirs, August 4. 1642. that they would live and die with him in pursuit of that quarrell; But after∣ads finding that he did not prosecute the war with so much ernesse and passion as by some desired, he was not only posed to the publick scorn by scandalous jeers, Pictures, nd Pamphlets, while he was in the head of his command, ut finally divested of all that power which he had in the Army, and reduc'd to the Estate of a private person▪ And whether some of those who had so reproachfully treated him when he was alive, might not commit this outrage on his Essigies when he was deceased, I leave to be considered by he equall and impartial Reader ol. 1056. M. Palmer made D. of Physick at Oxford] The making of new Doctors was one of the first works of the arl of Pembroke, at his Visitation of the University of Ox∣ford, that so they might enter on their intended Headships with the greater honour. But Palmer the designed Warden or All soul was not at that time to be made a Doctor. He taken that Degree before in Cambridge; and by the name Plmer I finde him in a Reference from the Commit∣ of Plundred Ministers to settle a difference betwixt a Incumbent and the intruding Minister, about tho
fifths. Incorporated he might be at Oxford (as the custome is) but not then made or created Doctor, as our Authour would have it. That which comes next touching the eject∣ing of many of the Commons of Christ-Church gives us two mistakes; whereof I conceive the one to be the Printers, and the other our Authors. The mistake of the Printer is the putting down of the Common of Christ-Church for the (a∣nons of Christ-Church, unlesse perhaps the meaning be that the old Canons were put out of Commons▪ that the new ones might have the fuller Diet when they came into their places. The mistake of our Authour is in saying that many of the Ca∣nons of Christ-Church were ejected, whereas they were all of them ejected, not a man excepted; the Earl of Pembroke be∣ing so impartiall in the executing of his Office, that he would not spare D. Hammond though he were his God-son. And though D. Iohn Wall, partly by the mediation of Friends, but chiefly by his humble submission to the power of the Visi∣tors, was again admitted into the number of the Canons▪ yet was he ejected with the rest, and came not into his own place at this new admission, but into the place of some of the o∣ther Canons, to shew that he stood not on his old Right but this new Admission. The Earl of Pembroke having done the businesse which he came about, returns to the Parliament, was first thanked for his wonderful wisedom, and then they Vote, That all such Masters, Fellows, and Officers there as re∣fused to submit to the power, should be expelled the Vniver∣sity.] According to which Vote, a generall purge was given to all the Colleges in the same, working upon them more or lesse, as they found the humours more or lesse Ma∣lignant; on none so strongly as on Christ-Church and Mgdalne ollege, in which last they descended so low as to the Choristers, and lower then that also to the very Cook. And yet the storm fell not so heavy on those at Oxford, as the Earl of Manchesters Visitation had done at Cambridge; For he not only cut off the heads, and skinned the Fellows and Scholars of most Colledges, but in Queens Colledge
cut off all the members from the head to the heel, leaving not one of the old Foundation to keep possession for the new Comers; as if the House it self, and all the lands belonging to it had been designed to an Escheat, as a forfeited and dis∣solved Corporation; or like a Wrecca Mar to be seiz'd on by the Lord Paramount of the shore adjoyning, as having no living creature in it to preserve the possession of it for the proper owner. But the Scholars at Oxford howsoever made themselves merry with their misfortunes, publishing some unhappy Papers, and amongst them a Speech made by the Earl of Pembroke (with some additios of their own) which afterwards drew on two or three others of the same strain, though on other occasions to the great manifestation and applause of his wonderfull wisedom. Fol. 1034. Yet not long after some one so well affected to the Kings Service, that whilest he is a Prisoner, takes upon him the Kings Cause, and published an Answer such as it is, which we submit to censure.] And being submitted unto Censure, I conceive it deserves not such a diminution or disparagement, as to call it an Answer such as it is. The Answer I never saw before, and cannot now possibly conjecture at the Authour of it. But upon the best judgement which I am able to make, I conceive it to be so full, so punctuall and satisfactory, that our Authour, calling all the Doctors of his own making to his assistance is not able to mend it. Fol. 1068. Some of these mutinied against each other, and in the dissention a rumour was rais'd there of a Designe to im∣poyson the King, &c.] Our Historian makes very slight of this matter, disparaging both the Informer and the Infor∣mation. The Informer he disparageth by telling us, that he was but an ordinary man, though Osburn himself in a Letter to the Earl of Manchester takes on himself the Title of Gen∣tleman, which is as much as our Authour (though he take upon himself the name of an Esquire) can pretend unto. The Information and the Evidence which was brought to prove it, he censures to be disagreeing in it self, and irregular in
Law, of which more anon. In the mean time take here the whole Information word for word, as Osburn published it in print, as well for his own justification as the satisfaction of all loyall and wellaffected Subjects. But not to leave your Lordship unsatisfied with this ge∣nerall account, the Intelligence I speak of concerning his designe, I received from Captain Rlfe, a person very inti∣mate with the Governour, privy to all Counsels, and one that is very high in the esteem of the Army; he (my Lord) informed me, that to his knowledge the Governour had received severall Letters from the Army, intimating they desired the King might by any means be removed out of the way either by pson or otherwise: And that another time the same person perswaded me to joyn with him in a de∣igne to remove the King out of that Castle to a place of more secrecy, profering to take an Oath with me, and to do it without the Governours privity, who (he said) would not consent for losing the allowance of the House. His pre∣tence for this attempt was that the King was in too publike a place, from whence he might be escued, but if he might be conveighed into some place of Secrecy, he said, we might dispose of his person upon all occasions as we thought fit; and this he was confident we could effect, without the Go∣vernours privity. This Nrrative he inclosed in a Letter to the Lord Whar∣ton, dated Iue 1. 1648. But finding that the Lord Wharton had done nothing in it, the better (as he conceived) to give those time that were concerned in it to think of some stratagem to evade the discovery; He inclosed it in another Letter to the Earl of Manchester, by whom it was communicated to the House of Peers on the 19. of Iune. But they in stead of sending for him to make good the Information on his corpo∣rall Oath, as he earnestly desired in the said Letters, com∣mitted both him and Rolfe to prison, there to remain till the next Assizes for the County of Southhampton, and not the Southhampton Assize, as our Authour makes it. At what
time M. Sergeant Wilde, a man for the nonce (as we poor Countrey folks use to say) was sent to manage the proceed∣ings; who so cunningly intangled the evidence, and so lear∣nedly laid the Law before the Jurors, that Rolfe was ac∣quitted, and Osburn left under the disgrace of a salse Infor∣mer. But the best is (I should rather have said the worst) though M. Sereant could finde no Law to condemn Rolfe for an attempt to poison the King; he could finde Law enough within few moneths after to condemn and execute Captain Burleigh, for an intent to free him from the hands of those, who were suspected to have no good intentions towards him, as it after proved. Fol. 1069. The Earl of Holland is sent Prisoner to Warwick Castle, where he continued until his Arraignment and execu∣tion at Westminster the 9. of March. Of this Earl we have said somewhat already, enough to shew with what disloy∣alty and ingratitude he forsook the King his Master in the time of his greatest need: To which I shall adde nothing now but this generall Note, viz. that none of those, who had prov'd disloyall to the King, or acted openly against him in the Wars, or otherwise had ever so much blessing from Heaven as to prevail in any thing which they under∣took either for the re-establishment of his person or the re-stauration of his posterity, witnesse in the first place Sir Iohn Hotham, accursed in his mothers belly, as himself confessed in an intercepted Letter brought to Oxford, witnesse the fruitlesse attempts of Lougnern, Powell, and Poier, not only in Pembrokeshire, but other Counties of Southwales, which they had made themselves Masters of in order to his Maje∣sties Service, witnesse the unfortunate expedition of Mar∣quesse Hamilion (of which more anon) and the unseason∣able rising of the Earl of Holland, of whom now we speak; witnesse the frequent miscarriages of the Lord Willoughby of Parham (a man whom the King had courted to Loyalty be∣yond all example) in his attempt to head a New Army a∣gainst the old, to employ some part of the Kings Navy a∣gainst
the rest, and to make good the Barbador in despight of the Houses: I take no notice ere of the miscarriages of such who had at first declared against him in set Speeches in the Houses of Parliament, none of which prospered, either in their persons or their actings, when they returned to their own duty, and endeavored the Advancement of the Kings Affairs. And that I may not contain may self within England onely, or be thought perhaps to partial in this Observation, we have the Examples of the Lord Inchequin in Ireland, and of the gallant Marquess of Montross in Scotland: Of which the first, (for the actings of the other are known well enough) was one of the first, if not the very first of all, who openly read any Protestation at the Market-Cross in Edin∣burgh against the Kings Proceedings in the Book of Com∣mon Prayer, and other subsequent Actions, which concern∣ed the happiness of that Kingdom. Fol. 1071. The Estates of Scotland had formed a Commit∣tee of Danger, who had of themselves Voted to raise Forty thou∣sand Men. But the Vote was bigger then the Army, though the Army were much bigger then our Author makes it, by whose calculation, it amounts not to above Ten thousand five hundred men, besides such additional Forces as were ex∣pected out of England and Ireland: An Army gallantly ap∣pointed both for Horse and Arms, which they had plunder∣ed out of England in the long time of their Service there for both Houses of Parliament, the like being never set so out by that people since they were a Nation: And it was big enough also to do more then it did, had it been under a more foru∣nate Commander then the Marquess of Hamilton, who brought from Scotland a greater Enemy within him, then he was like to finde in England: And possibly that inward E∣nemy might spur him on to a swift destruction, by rendring him impatient of tarrying the coming of Monroe, an old experienced Commander, with his three thousand old and experienced Scots, train'd up for five or six years then last past in the Wars of Ireland: By whose assistance, it is possible e∣nough,
that he might not have lost his first Battle, & not long after his Head, which was took from him on the same day with the Earl of Hollands: But God owed him and that Na∣tion both shame and punishment, for all their reacheries and Rebellions against their King▪ and now he doth begin to pay them, continuing payment after payment, till they had lost the Command of their own Countrey, and being redu∣ced unto the form of a Province under the Commonwealth of England, live in as great a Vassalage under their new Ma∣sters, as a conquered Nation could expect or be subject to. Fol. 1078. This while the Prince was put aboard the re∣volted Ships, &c. and with him his Brother the Duke of York, &c. the Earls of Brentford and Ruthen, the Lord Cupepper, &c.] In the recital of which names, we finde two Earls, that is to say, the Earls of Brentford and Ruthen, which are not to be found in any Records amongst our Heralds in either Kingdom: Had he said General Ruthen Earl of Brentford, he had hit it right. And that both he and his Reader also may the better understand the Risings and Honors of this Man, I shall sum them thus: Having served some time in the Wars of Gustavus Adolphus King of Sweden, he was Knight∣ed by him in his Camp before Darsaw, a Town of Pomerella, (commonly counted part of Prussia) and belonging to the King of Poland, Anno 1627. at what time the said King re∣ceived the Order of the Garter, with which he was invested by Mr. Peter Yong, one of his Majesties Gentlemen Huishers, and Mr. Henry St. George, one of the Heralds at Arms, whom he also Kinghted. In the long course of the Ger∣man Wars, this Colonel Sir Patrick Ruthen, obtain'd such a Command as gave him the title of a General, and by that title he attended in a gallant Equipage on the Earl of Mor∣ton, then riding in great pomp towards Windsor, to be in∣stalled Knight of the Garter. At the first breaking out of the Scots Rebellion, he was made a Baron of that Kingdom, and Governor of the Castle of Edinburgh, which he defended very bravely, till the Springs which fed his Well were broken
and diverted by continual Batteries. Not long ater he was made Earl of Forth, and on the death of the Earl of Lind∣sey, was made Lord General of his Majesties Army; and finally, created Earl of Brentford by Letters Patents, dated the 27 of May, Anno 1644. with reference to the good Ser∣vice which he had done in that Town for the fist hanselling of his Office: So then we have an Earl of Brentford, but no Earl of Ruthen, either as joyn'd in the same Per∣son, or distinct in two: Not much unlike is that which follows. Ibid. His Commissions to his Commanders were thus stiled, Charls Prince of great Britain, Duke of Cornwal and Alba∣ny.] Here have we two distinct Titles conferred upon one Person, in which I do very much suspect our Authors Intel∣ligence: For though the Prince might Legally stile himself Duke of Cornwal, yet I cannot easily believe that he took upon himself the Title of Duke of Albany. He was Duke of Cornwal from his Birth, as all the eldest Sons of the Kings of England have also been since the Reign of King Edward the third, who on the death of his Uncle, Iohn of Eltham, E. of Cornwal, invested his eldest Son Edw. the Black Prince into the Dukedom of Cornwal, by a Coronet on his head, a ring on his finger, and a silver Verge in his hand: Since which time, (as our learned Camden hath observed) the King of Englands eldest Son is reputed Duke of Cornwal by Birth, and by vertue of a special Act, the first day of his Nativity is presumed and ta∣ken to be of full▪ and perfect age, so that on that day he may sue for his Livery of the said Dukedom, and ought by right to ob∣tain the same, as well as if he had been one and twenty years old: And he hath his Royalties in certain Actions, and Stannery Matters, in Wracks at Sea, Customs, &c. yea, and Divers Officers or Ministers assigned unto him for these or such like mat∣ters: And as for the Title of Duke of albany, King Charls, as the second Son of Scotland, receiv'd it from King Iames his Father, and therefore was not like to give it from his se∣cond Son; the eldest Son of Scotland being Duke of Roth∣say
from his Birth, but none of them Dukes of Albany, (for ought ever I could understand) either by Birth or by Crea∣tion. Fol. 1094. And so the dignity of Arch-Bishops to fall, E∣piscopal Iurisdiction also.] Our Author concludes this, from the general words of the Kings Answer, related to in the words foregoing; viz. That whatsoever in Episcopacy did ap∣pear not to have clearly proceeded from Divine Institution, he gives way to be totally abolished. But granting that the Dig∣nity of Arch-Bishops was to fall by this Concession, yet the same cannot be affirmed of the Episcopal Iurisdiction, which hath as good Authority in the holy Scripture as the calling it self: For it appears by holy Scripture, that unto Timothy the first Bishop of Ephsus, St. Paul committed the power of Ordination, where he requires him to lay hands hastily on no man, 1 Tim. 5 22 And unto Titus the first Bishop of Crete, the like Authority for ordaining Presbyters (or Elders, as our English reads it) in every City, Tit. 1. v. 5. Next he commands them to take care for the ordering of Gods pub∣lick Service, viz. That Supplications, Prayers, Intercessions, and giving of Thanks be made for all men, 1 Tim. 2. 1. which words relate not to the private Devotions of particular per∣sons, but to the Divine Service of the Church, as it is affirm∣ed, not onely by St▪ Chrysostom, Theophylact, and Ocumenius, amongst the Ancients, and by Estius for the Church of Rome, but also by Calvin for the Protestant or Reformed Churches. Next, he requires them to take care, that such as painfully labor in the Word and Doctrine, receive the honor or re∣compence which is due unto them, 1 Tim. 5. 17. as also to censure and put to silence all such Presbyters as preached any strange Doctrine, contrary unto that which they had recei∣ved from the Apostles, 1 Tim 1. 3. And if that failed of the effect, and that from Preaching Heterodoxies, or strange Do∣ctrines, they went on to Heresies, then to proceed to Ad∣monition, and from thence (if no amendment followed) to a rejection from his place, and deprivation from his Function,
1 Tit. 3. 10. as both the Fathers and late Writers understand the Text. Finally, for correction in point of Manners, as well in the Presbyter as the people, St. Paul commits it wholly to the care of his Bishop; where he adviseth Timo∣thy, not to receive an Accusation against a Presbyter (or Mi∣nister of the Gospel) but before two or three Witnesses: but if they be convicted, then to rebuke them before all that o∣thers also may fear, 1 Tim. 5. 19, 20. And on the other side, he invests him with the like Authority upon those of the La∣ty, of what age or sex soever they were; old men to be handled gently, not openly to be rebuked, but entreated as Fa∣thers, 1 Tim. 5. 1. the like fair usage to be had towards the Elder Women, also v. 2. The younger men and Women to be dealt withall more freely, but as Brethren and Sisters, v. 1, 2. A more ample jurisdiction then this, as the Bishops of Eng∣land did neither exercise nor challenge, so for all this they had Authority in holy Scripture; those points of jurisdi∣ction not being given to Timothy and Titus only, but to all Bishops in their persons, as generally is agreed by the ancient Writers. So then Episcopall Iurisdiction fell not by this concession, though somewhat more might fall by it then his Majesty meant. That the Dignity of Archbishops was to fall by it, is confest on all sides; and that the King made the like con∣cession for the abolishing of Deans and Chapters (though not here mentioned by our Authour) is acknowledged also▪ And thereupon it must needs follow (which I marvell the Learn∣ed Lawyers then about the King did not apprehend) that the Episcopal Function was to die with the Bishops which were then alive, no new ones to be made or consecrated after those concessions. For by the Laws of this Land, after the death of any Bishop, his Majesty is to send out his Writ of Cong d'Eslier to the Dean and Chapter of that place to elect ano∣ther. Which election being made, signified under the Chap∣ters Seal, and confirmed by the Royall assent; the King is to send out his mandat to the Arch-Bishop of the Province, to
proceed to Consecration or Confirmation, as the case may vary. And thereupon it must needs be, that when the Church comes unto such a condition that there is no Dean and Cha∣pter to elect, and no Arch-Bishop to consecrate and confirm the person elected, there can be legally and regularly no suc∣cession of Bishops. I speak not this with reference to una∣voidable Necessities, when a Church is not in a capacity of acting according to the ancient Canons an establisht Laws; but of the failing of Episopall Succession, according to the Laws of this Land, if those concessions had once passed into Acts of Parliament. Fol. 1099. The Head-Quarters were at Windsor, where the Army conclude the large Remonstrance, commended by the Ge∣nerals Latter, and brought up to the Parliament by half a dozen Officers. But by the heads of that Remonstrance, as they stand collected in our Authour it will appear, that he is mistaken in the place, though not in the Pamphlet That terrible Re∣monstrance (terrible in the consequents and effect thereof) came not from Windsor but S. Albans, as appears by the print∣ed Title of it, viz. A Remonstrance of his Excellency Thomas Lord Fairfax, Lord Generall of the Parliaments Forces, and of the General Councel of Officers held at S. Albans the 16. of November, 1648. Presented to the Commons assembled in Par∣liament the 20. instant, and tendred to the consideration of the whole Kingdom. Which Remonstrance was no sooner shew∣ed unto his Majesty, then being in the Isle of Wigh, but pre∣sently he saw what he was to trust unto, and did according∣ly prepare himself with all Christian confidence. For that he had those apprehensions both of his own near approaching dangers, and of their designes, appeareth by the ad farewell which he took of the Lords at Newport, when they came to take their leaves of him at the end of this Treaty, whom he thus bespake, viz. My Lords, You are come to take your leave of me, and I beleeve we shall scarce ever see each o∣ther again, but Gods will be done, I thank God, I have made my peace with him, and shall without fear undergoe
what he shall be pleased to suffer men to do unto me. My Lords, you cannot but know that in my fall and rune you see your own, and that also near to you; I pray God you better Friends then I have found. I am fully informd of the whole carriage of the Plot against me and mine, and nothing so much afflicts me as the sense and selg I have of the sufferings of my Subjects, and the miseries that hng o∣ver my three Kingdoms, drawn upon them by those, wh (upon pretences of good) violently pursue thir own Inte∣rests and ends. And so accordingly it proved, the honour o the peers, and the prosperity of the people suffring a very great (if not a totall) Ecclipse for want of that light where∣with he shined upon them both, in the time of his glories. But before the day of this sad parting the Treaty going for∣wards in the Isle of Wight, his Majesties Concessions were esteemed so fair and favourable to the publike Interesse, that it was voted by a  or party in the House of Commons, that they were  of the Kingdom, 12. Voting in the affirmative, and 84. only in the Negative; Which Vote gave sch offnce to those who had composed this Remonstrance, that within two daies after viz. Wednesday the 6. of Dcemr But first, I would fain know why those imprisoned Mem∣bers are said to be all of the old stmp, considering those who were kept under custody in the Queens and the Court of Wards, there was not one man who e∣ther had not served in the War against the King▪ or other∣wise declare his disaffection to the authoized Liturgy and Government of the Church of England, as appears by the Catalogue of their names in , Nm▪ 36. 37. And scondly, I would fain know why he restrains the
number to 40 or 50 when the imprisoned and secluded Mem∣bers were three times as many. The imprisoning or secluding of so small a number would not serve the turn; Non gaudet tenuisanguine tanta sitis, as the Poet hath it. For first, the Officers of the Army no sooner understood how the Votes had passed for the Kings concessions, but they sent a Paper to the Commons, requiring that the Mem∣bers impeached in the Year 1647. and Major General Brown (who they say invited in the Scots might be secured and brought to justice; and that the 90 odd Members who refused to vote against the late Scottish Engagement, and all those that voted the recalling the Votes of Non-addresses, and voted or the Treaty, and concurred in yesterdaies Votes, &c. may be suspended the House. And such a gene∣ral purge as this, must either work upon more then 40 or 50. or eleit had done nothing in order to the end intended. Secondly, t appears by these words of the protestation of the imprisoned Members bearing date the 12. of Deember, that they were then above an hundred in number, vz. We the Knights, Citizens, nd Burgesses of the Common  of Parliament (al ove one hundred in number) forcibly sze▪ upon violently kept out of and driven from the House by the Officers and Souldiers of the Army under Thomas Lord Fair∣fax, &c. And thirdly, We finde after this that Sir Iohn Temple, Sir Martin Lumley, Cl. Booth, M. Waller, M. Middleton, and others were turned back by such Souldiers as were appointed to keep a strict guard at the doors of the House. So that the whole number of those who wee imprisoned and kept under restraint, or otherwise were debarred and turned back from doing their service in the House, wa reckoned to amount to an hundred and fourty, which comes to thrice as many as the 40 or 50 which our Author speaks of. But to proceed, the Officers of the Army having thus made themselves Masters of the House of Commons, thought fit to make themselves Masters of the City also. To which end they ordered two
Regiments of Foot and some Troops of Horse to take up Quarters in Pauls Church and Black-fryers on Friday the 8. of the same moneth; and on the unday following sent di∣verse Souldriers to be quartered in the Houses of private Citi∣zens, which notwithstanding such was their tender care not to give any diturbance to them, that lbid. Not to fighten the City, the General writes to my Lord Mayor, that he had snt Col. Dean to seize the Treasuries of Haberdashers, Goldsmiths, and Weavers, Halls (where they seize on 20000.l.) that by the Monies he may pay his Armies Arrears.] The Authour whom our Historian followeth in all these late traverses of State, relates this businesse more distinctly and inteligently then we finde it here, viz. That two Regiments of Foot and some Troops of Horse took up Quarters in Pauls and Black-frier, and seized upon 20000.l in Weavers Hall, which they promised to repay when the Lord Mayor and Common Councell please to bring in the Arrears due from the City. They secured like∣wise the Treasures of Haberdashers and Goldsmiths Hall. Here we have first a seizure of the 20000.l in Weavars Hall for the use of  Army, and a securing of the Treasures in the other two, that they might not be employed against it. The 20000l. which they found in the first was the remain∣der of the 200000l. which was voted to be brought in thi∣ther, for the raising of a New Presbyterian Army, under the command of the Lord Willoughby of Parh as Lord Ge∣nerall, and Sir Iohn Maynard as Lieutenant Generall, to re∣duce that Army to conformity, which had so successively served under the command of Sir Thomas Fairfax. But the other two being hard names and not very easie of digestion, require somewhat which may make them lighter to the un∣derstanding of the vulgar Reader. Concerning which we are to know, that severall Ordinan∣ces were made by the Lords and Commons for sequestring the Estates of all such who had adhered unto the King, whom (to distinguish them from their own party) they called De∣linquents;
and a severe couse was taken in those sequestra∣tions as well in reference to their personall as reall Estates; to make them the more considerable in the purse of the Hou∣se. But finding no such great profit to come in that way (when every Cook who had the dressing of that dish had lickt his fingers) as they did expect, they were contented to admit them to a Composition. These Compositions to be ma∣nagd at Goldsmiths Hall, by a select Committee consisting of severall Members of the House of Commons, and some of the most pragmaticall and stiff sort of Citizens, the parties to compound had 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. or 7. years purchase according as they either offered themselves voluntarily, or came in up∣on Articls, or were forced to submit to mercy. What infi∣nite summes of money were brought in by these compositi∣ons, he that list to see, may finde them both in the severall Items and the summa toals in their printed Tables. And yet the payment of these Sums was the least part of the grie∣vance compared unto those heavy clogs which were laid on their Consciences. For first, No man was admitted to treat with the Com∣mittee at Goldsmiths Hall, till (unlesse he was priviledged and exempt by Articles) he had brought a Certificate that he had taken the Negative Oath either before the Committee for the Militia of London, or some Committee in the Countrey where he had his welling. And by this oath he was to swear, that he would neither directly nor indirectly adhere unto, or wil∣gly assist the King in that War, or in that cause against the Parliament, nor any Forces raised without the consent of the two Houses of Parliament in tht cause or War; for which consult the Ordinance of the Lords and Commons bearing date April 5. 1645. And secondly, It was Ordered by the said Lords and Com∣mons on the 1. of November 1645. That the Committee of Goldsmiths Hall should have power to tender the Solemn League and Covenant to all persons that come out of the Kings Quar∣s to that Committee to compound, and to secure such as should
refuse to take it until they had conformed thereunto. And by that Covenant they were bound to endeavour the extirpation of Popery and Prelacy (that is, Church-government by Arch-Bishops and Bishops, &c. and to defend the Kings Person and Authority, no otherwise then in order to the preservation and defence of the true Religion and Liberties of the Kingdoms. And if the party to compound were a Ro∣mane Catholick there was an Oath of Abjuration to be taken also before any such Sequestration could be taken off, if once laid upon him. By which he was to swear, That he abjured and renounced the Popes Supremacy, that he beleeved not there was any Transubstantiation, nor Purgatory, nor any worship to be given to the consecrated Host, Crucifix, or Images, and that salvation could not be merited by works, renouncing and abjuring all Doctrines in defence of thse points. To such a miserable necessity had they brought many of that party, that they thought if safer (as they use to say) to trust God with their souls, then such unmercifull men with their Lives, Fortunes, and Estates. And yet this was not thought to be a sufficient punishment to them, but they must first passe through Hberdashers Hall (which is the last of my hard words) before they could be free of the Goldsmiths. And in that Hall, they were to pay the fifth and twentieth parts of their Estates as well real as personall in present money; all men being brought within the power of the Committee, not only who were called Delin∣quents, but such as had not voluntarily contributed to the Par∣liament in any place whatsoever, as appears by the Order of the Commons bearing date August 25. 1646. By which last clause more Grist was brought unto that Mill, then can be ea∣sily imagined; their Agents being very eager in that pur∣suit. So that it was accounted a great benefit, as indeed it was, to them who came in upon the Articles of Oxford, Faring∣ton, Wallinford, Exceter, and some other places, not only that they were discharged from the payment of the fifth and twentieth parts of their Estates at Haberdashers Hall, and
admitted to compound at Goldsmiths Hall for two years pur∣chase; but that they were exempted also from all Oaths an Engagements, and consequently from that accursed Covenant, and that Negative Oath, by which the Consciences of so ma∣ny distressed men had been most miserably entangled. Fol. 1138. Thus fell Charles, and thus all Britain with him. And by this fall there fell so generall an Oppression on the Spirits of all sorts of people, that the generality of those who plaied the principall parts in this sad Tragedy, became asha∣med of their actings in it. The Scots who plaied the parts of Iudas, and sold their naturall King and most bountifull Master for a peece of money, when they saw he was like to be condemned, repented, saying, that they had sinned in be∣traying innocent bloud. For in their Letter to the Prince da∣ted August the 10. they do acknowledge in plain words, that nothing did more wound and afflict them then his Majesties sad condition and Resraint. But yet we finde not that they came to such a degree of compunction, as to bring back the money for which they had sold him, and to cast it down before the chief Priests and Elders, as Iudas did. Or if they had there had been no such purchase to be made with it, as was made with that; both Kingdomes having been already an Aceldama, or Field of bloud. The Presbyterians of both sorts as well the Members of the House as those of the Assembly, and their confederates in the City, who personated the chief Priests and Elders amongst the Jews, had armed a great mul∣titude with swords and staves (as well the Souldiers as the Clubmen) for his apprehension. They reviled him in most shamfull manner▪ and spit upon him all that filth which could be spposed to proceed from such foul stomacks, They buffeted him and smote him with the palms of their hands, as∣saulting him with all the Act, of violent hostility; and ha∣ving pasd a Vote amongst themselves, they put him over to be sentenced and condemned by Pontius Pilate. But when the worm of conscience began to bite them, some of them laboured before hand by their Protestations to acquit them∣selves,
and to redeem the King from that inevitable danger into which they had thrown him Others moreouly clamo∣red both from the Pulpit and the Presse, crying out that they were innocent from the bloud of that just peron, and casting all the guilt and obloquy of it on the Independents The Indepen∣dents who sate as udges on the Bench, and plad the part of Pontius Pilate, alledged that they had nothing to do with him, but as they were pusht forward by the unresistible importuni∣ty of the Priests and Elders. And these men also took water and washed their hands before the multitude, affirming positively that the KING had been murthered long since by the Pres∣byterians, as appears by M. Milons Book called Iconoclaste; where the case is stated and determined for the Independent; and therefore as Pilue did not say of Christ our Saviour, when he brought him before the people, Behold the , but only Ecce homo, or Behold the mn; So might the Inde∣pendents say, when they brought the King before the people to receive the heavy sentence of death, Behold the man, the man whom these of the Presbytery had before . But it was neither shame nor sorrow which could rcall him from the dead. All the favour which they now could shew hm was, that some good  of Aimathea, who had begged his body, were permitted to burr it, not n a Tomb where ne∣ver man had lin before, but as it happened in the same Vault with King Hen. . and Queen ne Symor. And yet it pro∣ved but an half favour neither, as the matter was carried, the Governour of the place not suffering him to be interred ac∣cording to the Form prescribed in the Book of Common-Prayer, whereof he had been a most constant Observer to the very last. And here I am to leave our Authour, who hath brought this great King to the grave, though he hath not followed him to it from the Cradle, as the Title promised. And here I shall leave him to consult that passage in Horac, against he puts forth next to Sea on the like Adventures, which stads thus recommended to him in the Book
Sumite materiam vestris qui scribitis aequam Viribus, & versate diu quid ferre recusent, Quid valeant humeri; cui lecta potenter erit res Nec sacundia deseret hunc nec lucidus Ordo. Which may be englished to this purpose. Elect such matter you that love to write, As with your Bark may bear an equall Sail; For he which on such Subjects doth indite, Of Phrase, and Method fit, shall never fail.
AN APPENDIX TO THE ADVERTISEMENTS ON Mr. Sandersons HISTORIES. In Answer to some PASSAGES In a scurrulous PAMPHLET CALLED A Post-Haste, A Reply, &c. Ovid. Metam. Lib. 1. —pudet haec opprobria nobi, Et dici potuisse, & non potuisse reflli.
AN APPENDIX To the former ADVERTISEMENTS, In answer to some PASSAGES In a scurrulous PAMPHLET CALLED The Post-haste Reply, &c. WHen I first heard of Mr. Sandersons Post-haste Reply, &c. and had caused the same to be read over, It was not in my thoughts to discend so much beneath my self, as to make any Answer to it; such scurrulous Pamphlets dying soonest, when there is less notice taken of them: Patience and contempt (& tulere ista & reliquere, as we know who did) are commonly the most approved remedies against all such Calumnies, as for the most part do pro∣ceed from a petulant malice: But being there is in it some matter of charge and Crimination, I have been advised by some friends to acquit my self of the least, otherwise I might be thought to confess my self guilty of the crimes objected, and wrong my innocence by an obstinate and affected silence: I have therefore yielded so far unto their desires, as to return an Answer to so much of the Pamphlet as contains matter of accusation, which I shall ever from
the rest, leaving the rif-raf and scurrilities of it (which make up the greatest part of that two penny trifles, either unto some further consideration, or to none at all. But first I must remove a doubt, which otherwise may trouble the Gent whom I am to deal with, who possible may think himself to be over-matched, not in regard of any difference in such personal abilities as either of us may pre∣tend to, but in relation to those many hands which are joyn∣ed against him in this quarrel, for if it were too much for Hercules to contend with two, ne Hercules contra duos, as the proverb hath it) good reason hath he to complain of being pressed and put to it by so many Helpers as he is plea∣sed to joyn unto me: He tells me indifinitely of my Help∣ers, page 5. of the charitable Collections of my numerous Helpers, pag. 23. Helpers import a plural number, and nu∣merous Helpers signifie a multitude; and who can stand a∣gainst so many when they joyn together? But I would not have my Squire affright himself with these needless terrors: my helpers are but few in number, though many in vertue and effect; for though I cannot say that I have many help∣ers, yet I cannot but confess in all humble gratitude, that I have one great Helper, which is instar omnium, even the Lord my God: Aurilium meum a domino, my help cometh even from the Lord which hath made heaven and earth, as the Psalmist hath it. And I can say with the like humble ac∣knowledgements of Gods mercies to me, as Iacob did, when he was askt about the quick dispatch which he had made in preparing savery meat for his aged Father: Voluntas Dei suit ut tam cito occurreet mihi quod volebam, Gen. 27. 20. It is Gods goodness, and his onely, that I am able to do what I do: And as for any humane helpers, as the French Couriers use to say of King Lewis the XI. That all his Councel rid upon one Horse, because he relyed upon his own Judgement and Abilities onely: So may I very truly say, That one poor Hackney-horse will carry all my Helpers used, be they never so numeous. The greatest help which
I have had, (since it pleased God to make my own ight unuseful to me, as to writing and reading) hath come from one whom I had entertained for my Clerk or Amanuensis, who though he reasonably well understood both Greek and La∣tine, yet had he no further Education in the way of Learn∣ing, then what he brought with him from the School, A poor Countrey School: And though I have no other helps at the present but a raw young fellow, who knows no Greek, and understands but little Latine, yet I doubt not but I shall be able to do as much reason to my Squire, as he hath reason to expect at my hands: My stock of Learning, though but small, hath been so well husbaded, that I am still able to winde and turn it to the vindication of the truth never reputed such a Banckrupt (till I was made such by my Squire) as to need such a charitable Collection to set me up again, as is by him ascribed to my numerous help∣ers. Thus singly armed and simply seconded, I proceed to the examination of those personal charges, which defect he is pleased to lay upon me; and first he tells us how gladly Dr. Heylyn would take occasion to assume fresh credit of copeing with he deceased now at rest, whom he hath endeavored to di∣sturb even the most Rverend Name and living Fame, of that approved Learned Prelate, the late Arch-Bishop of Armagh, Primate of all Ireland, pag. 5. And still he might have been at rest, without any dsturbance either unto his Reverend Name or Living Fame, if Dr. Barnd first, and after∣wards Squire Sanderson, had not rated him out of his Grave, and brought him back upon the Stage from which he had made his Exit with so many Plaudites: And being brought back upon the Stage, hath given occasion to much discourse about his advising or not advising the King, to consent unto the Earl of Straords death; and his distinction of a per∣sonal and political conscience, either to prepare the King to give way unto it, or to confirm him in the justice and ne∣cessity of it when the deed was done: Both these have been
severally charged on the Observator by Dr. Barnard and his Partakers, Pag. 18. and both of them severally disclaimed by him, both in the Book called the Observator rescued, pag. 296, 297, 349. and in the Appendix to the Book called Re∣spond Petrus, &c. p. 143, 144, and 152. Nay, so far was the Ob∣sevator of his aler idem, from disturbing the reverend Name & living Fame of that learned Prelate, that in the Book cal∣led Extraes vpulans, he declares himself unwilling to revive that question: Whether the Lord Primate had any sharp tooth against the Lord Lieutenant or not, in regard the parties were both dead, and all displeasures buried in the same grave with them, page 292. And in the Book cal∣led Respondit Petrus, he affirms expresly, That having laid the Lord Primate down again in the Bed of Peace, he would not raise him from it by a new disturbance; and that having laid aside that invidious argument, he was resolved upon no pro∣vocation whatsoever to take it up again, pag. 124. Had not this promise tyed me up, I could have made such use of these provocations, as to have told the Doctor and his Squire to boot, that the Lord Primate did advise the King to sign that destructive Bill, by which that Fountain of Blood was opened, which hath never been fully shut up again since that ebolishion, for which I have my Author ready, and my witness too. And as for the distinction of a political and a personal con∣science ascribed to the Lord Primate by the Author of the Vocal Forest, as Mr. Sanderson in his History saith nothing to acquit him of it, so neither doth the Squire affect to act any thing in it (if he speaks sence enough to be understood) in this Post-Haste Pamphlet; for having told us that Petrus fancied him to act for Dr. Barnard, in acquitting the Lord Primate from the distinction of a poliical and a personal conscience, page 18. he adds, That it is confessed by him∣self (the self-same Perus) to have been done to his hand by Mr. Howels attestation of his History, who was concerned in those words: In which passage, if there be any sence in
it, it must needs be this, that it appeareth by the attestati∣on which Iames Howell gave unto his History, that he had acted nothing toward the discharge of the Lord Primate, from the fatall distinction which D. Bernard had ascribed in his Funerall Sermon to the Vocall Forrest; So that the Respondent may conclude as before he did, pag. 144. of the said Appendix, that as well the errour of that distinction as the fatall application of it must be left at the Lord Primte door, as neither being removed by D. Bernard himself, or by any of his undertakers. The next Charge hath relation to the Lord Primate also in reference to the Articles of the Church of Ireland, which he will by no means grant to be abrogated, an those of Eng∣land setled (inserted in his own word) in the place thereofp. 17 How so? Because the Respondent hath prevented any further confirmation of either, by his own confessing of his being too much edulous in beleeving, and inconsiderate in publishing such mist then intelli∣gence,Ibid. which are his own words, fol. 87. And his own words they are indeed, but neither spoken nor applied, as the Squire would have it, who must be thought to be in very great Post-haste, when he read them over. For if the Squire had markt it well, he might have found that the Respondet did not confesse himself to be guilty of publishing any mistaken intelligence, in saying that the Articles of Ireland were abrogated, and those or England setled in the place thereof, but for saying that this altera∣tion was confirmed in the Parliament of that Kingdome, Anno 1634. were as it was not done in Parliament but in Convocation; For which mistake (as the Resondent hath observed in the place before-cited;) though it be only in the circumstance not in the substance of the Fact▪ he stands accused by the Lord Primate of no lesse then , and that by M. Snderson is thought to be but a gentle pen∣nance for so presumptuous an assertionIbid.: An which hath no presumption in it, if you mark it well.
For if it can be proved (as the Respondent answereth in his Appendix, pag. 88.) that the Articles of Ireland were cal∣led in, and those of England were received in their place; then, whether it were done by Parliament or Convocati∣on is not much materiall. And for the proof of this, that the Aticles of Ireland were repealed, and the Articles of the Church of England (as in the way of a super-induction) were setled in the place thereof: there hath been so much offered in the Book called The Observator Rescued, and in that called The Respondit Petrus, as may satisfie any ratio∣nall and impatiall Reader. So that the Squire might very well have saved the labour of taxing the Respondent for want of ingenuity (which he makes to be a great rarity in himibid.) and much more in defaming a whole Nati∣onp. 18., with a matter of truth, in saying the Articles of the Church of England were not only appoved but revived in the Church of Ireland, and consequently by that reception they were virtually at the least, if not also for∣mally substituted in the place thereof; Against which, though the Lord Primate have said something, he hath proved just nothing, and both the Doctor and the Squire prove as little as he, And here again I do desire, that this reverend Pre∣late may not have his Name tost like a Tennis ball between two Rackets, but that he may be suffered to rest with quiet in his grave for the time to come, Et placida compost, mor∣te quiesa, as the Poet hath it. But were the Respondent guilty of no other crime then by trespassing on the reverend name and living ame of this deceased but learned Prelate, (to shew his malice to the dead) there had not needed any thing to be added to his justification. The Panmphleter will not suffer him to go ff so quietly, and therefore tels us, that it is no news for D. Heylin to be a disturber of pious and men while they are living.p. 5.. It seems by this that D. Heylyn is a man of a troublesome nature, nei∣ther in charity with the dead, no at peace with the living, I specially if they come under the name and notion of eminent
and pious men. but though it be no news in the judge∣ment of Squire Sanderson, yet I can confidently say, that it is Novum crimen, & anie hoc tempus in auditum, a crime which never was charged before upon D. Heylin, who hath hitherto appeared an Advocate for the dead and living, as of∣ten as they have come under the unjust censures of some mo∣dern Writers. And this the former Observations together with these Animadversions and Advertisements (when he hath any grounds of truth to proceed upon) do most clearly evidence. Against which Declaration, the Squire is able to instance only in one particular, whereas indeed he hath but one particularIbid to make instance in; his instancing in no more but that particular being not so much an argu∣ment of his super-abundant charity towards the Respondent, as of his little store of matter wherewithall to charge him. And yet this one and onely instance touching D. Prideaux hath so little truth in it, that it is only one degree removed from a sander. For first (omitting that D. Heylin took his degree An. 1633. and not in 1635. as the Pamphleter makes it, the said Doctor never scandalized him at Court to the late King being then at Woodstockp. 6.: the said Doctor ne∣ver making any such information to the King against D. Prideaux, either at Woodstock or elsewhere. Secondly, The said Doctor never made any such information to any other person or persons (if every thing which is delivered in the way of discourse may not be brought within the com∣passe of an information) by whom it might be carried to his Majesties ear. And for the proof hereof, since I can∣not raise men from the dead to bear witnesse to it, I shall only say, First, That the Squire himself doth seem to give no cre∣dit to that Paper, For if he did, it would have found some place in that part of his History where it might properly have been inserted, as well as he hath told us of the whole Story of some bustles in Oxon, Anno 1631. occasioned by M. Thorne of Balol Colledge, and M. Ford  Magdaline
Hall, in which D. Prideaux was concerned, and for which he received a check from the King at Woodstock; In rela∣ting whereof though the name of D. Prideaux be not men∣tioned but couched only under the generall name of other of their partakers who received a check; yet M. Fller (from whom he borrowed the whole relation) is more punctual in it, and reports it thus, viz. 1. The Preachers complained of were expelled the Vniuer∣sy. 2. The Proctors were deprived of their places for accepting their appeal. 3. D. Prideaux and D. Wilkinson were throughly checkt for engagig in their behalf. The former of these two Doctors in∣gen  to the King, that Nemo motalium omni∣bs hois sapit, which wrought more on his Maesties affecti∣os if he had harangued it with a long Oration in his own . Church-Hist. lib. 11. fol. 141. 142. The Respondent hereupon inferreth, That if M, Sanderson had then given so much credit to that paper (in publishing whereof he ascri∣beth so much merit to himself) as he now seems to do, he would have given it some place in his History, to shew with what credit D▪ Prideaux came off from that econd en∣counter at Woodstock, and what discredit the Respondent got by his false Information. And secondly, The Respondent saith, that he was then one of his Majestes Chaplains in ordinary for the Moneth of August, preaching before him at Ot lands on Sunday the 18 of that Moneth, and officiating the Divine Service of the Church in the great Hall of Woodstock-Mannor on the Sunday following, during which intervall either upon the Thursday or Friday this businesse of D. Prideaux was in a∣gitation; to which there is no question but he had been cal∣led, if he had been so much concerned in the information as the Pamphlet makes him. And if he had been called to i, it is not probable that the Doctor had gone off so clearly with those evans, which he had put upon the Articles in
charge against him, or with those touches on the by, which are given to the Defendant in the Doctors Answer, suppo∣sing that the Paper exemplified in the Pamphlet (never be∣fore publishtp. 7.) (as the Authour tels us) contain the substance and effect of that which he delivered to the King for his justification, as indeed it doth not. For the truth is that this Paper was digested by D. Prideaux as soon as he returned to Oxon, coppied out and disperst a∣broad by some of his own party and perswasions, to keep up the credit of the cause. And though at first it carried the same Title which the Pamphlet gives it, viz. The Answer of D. Prideaux to the Information given in against him by D. HeylinIbid.; yet afterwards upon a melius inquirendum he was otherwise perswaded of it, and commonly im∣puted it to one of Trinity Colledge, whom he conceived to have no good affections to him. And here I might conclude this point touching the tra∣ducing and disturbing of D. Prideaux, did I not finde that by the unseasonable publishing of that Antiquated and for∣gotten Paper, the Respondent had not been disturbed and traduced in a far courser manner then he was, the Doctor had those passions and infirmities which are incident to o∣ther men of lesse ability, and having twice before exposed the Respondent to some disadvantages in the point of same and reputation, he was the more easily inclined to pursue his blow, and render him obnoxious (as much as possibly he could) to the publike censure: The story whereof I shall lay down upon this occasion, and hope that I may safely do it without the imputation of affecting the fresh credit of coping with the deceased, or purposing any wrong at all un∣to the reverend name and living fame of that Learned man, Proximas egomt sum mihi, as the Proverb hath it, my own credit is more dear to me then another mans. And where I may defend my self with truth and honesty, I have no reason to betray both my name and fame by a guilty si∣lence.
Know then that on tht 24. day of April Anno 1627. I answered in the Divinity Schools at Oxon upon these two Questions, viz. An Ecclesia unquam ferit invisibilis, And 2. An Ecclesia possit errare; Both which I determined in the Negative. And in the stating of the first I fell upon a different way from that of D. Prideaux in his Lecture de vi∣sibilitate Ecclesiae, and other Tractates of and about that time, in which the visibility of the Protestant Church (and con∣sequently of the renowned Church of England, was no o∣therwise proved, then by looking for it into the scattered conventicles of the Berengarians in Italy, the Waldenses in France, the Wicklifists in England, & the Hssites in Bohemia, which manner of proceeding not being liked by the Respon∣dent, as that which utterly discontinued that succession in the Ecclesiasticall Hierarchy, which the Church of England clai∣meth from the very Apostles; he rather chose to look for a continual visible Church in Asia, Aethiopia, Greece, Italy, yea, and Rome it self, as also in all the Western Provinces then subject to the power of the Popes thereof; And for the proof whereof he shewed, First, That the Church of England received no successi∣on of doctrine, or government from any of the scattered Conventicles before remembred. Secondly, That the Wicklifsists together (which the rest be∣fore remembred) held many Heterodoxes in Religion, as dif∣ferent from the established doctrine of the Church of Eng∣land, as any point which was maintained at that time in the Church of Rome. And thirdly, That the Learned Writers of that Church, & Bellarmine himself amongst them have stood up as cordial∣ly and stoutly in maintenance of some fundamental Points of the Christian Faith against the Socinians, Anabaptists, Anti-Trinitarians, and other Hereticks of these last ages, as any of the Divines and other learned men of the Protestant Chur∣ches; Which point I closed with these words, viz. Vtinam,
quod ipse de Calvino ic semper errasset nobilissimus Cardina∣lis, and this so much displeased the Doctor, that as soon as the Respondent had ended his determination, he fell most heavily upon him, calling him by the odious names of Pa∣picola, Bellarminianus, Pontificius, and I wot not what, and bitterly complaining to the younger part of his Audients (to whom he made the greatest part of his addresses) of the unprofitable pains he had took amongst them; if Bellarmine, whom he laboured to decry for so many years, should now be honoured with the Title of Nobilissimus; The like he also did (tantaene animis caelestibus irae?) at another time when the Respondent changed his Copy, and acted the part of the Prior Opponent, loding the poor young man with so many reproaches that he was branded for a Papist before he understood what Popery was. And because this report should not get footing in the Court before him, in his first Sermon preached before the King, which was in November next following, on the words Ioh 4. viz▪ Our Fathers worship∣ed on this mountain, he so declared himself against some er∣rours and corruptions in the Church of Rome, that he shew∣ed him to be far enough from any inclinations to the Romish Religion, as afterwards in the Year 1638. when that clamour was revived again, he gave such satisfaction in his third and fourth Sermon upon the Parable of the Tares, that some of the Court (who before had been otherwise perswaded of him) did not stick to say, That he had done more towards the subversion of Popery in those two Sermons, then D. Pideaux had done in all the Sermons which he had ever preached in his life. But to proceed, the Respondent leaving Oxon within few years after, the heat of these reproaches began to cool, he had reason to conceive that the Doctors might in so long a tract of time as from 1627. to 16 cooled also, but it happened otherwise, For the being to answer for his degree of Doctor in the insisted then on the Authority of the Church
he had done on the infallibilty and visibility of it. His Questions these, viz. An Eccleia habeat authoritatem in determinandis idei controverss? 2. Interpretandi Scripturas. 3. Discernendi ritus & ceremonias. All which he held in the Affirmative, according to the plain and positive doctrine of the Church of England, in the 20. Article, which runs thus interminis viz, habet Ecclesiae ritas sive ceremonias statuendi∣us, & in idei controverss authoritatem, &c. but the Doctor was as little pleased with these Questions, and the Respon∣dent stating of them, as he was with the former. And there∣fore to create to the Respondent the greater odium, he openly declared that the Respondent had falsified the publike Do∣ctrine of the Church, and charged the Article with that sentence, viz. Habet Ecclesia ritus sive Ceremonias, &c. which was not to be found in the whole body of it; And for the proof thereof he read the Article out of a Book which lay before him beginning thus, Non licet Ecclesia quicquam in∣stituere quod verbo Dei scripto adversetur, &c. To which the Resondent readily answered, that he perceived by the big∣nesse of the Book which lay on the Doctors Cushion, that he had read that Article out of the Harmony of Confessions, publisht at Geneva, Anno 1612. which therein followed the Edition of the Articles in the time of King Edward the sixth, Anno 1552. in which that sentence was not found; but that it was otherwise in the Articles agreed on in the Convocation, Anno 156. to which most of us had subscribed in our severall places, but the Doctor still persisting upon that point, and the Respondent seeing some unsatisfiednesse in the greatest part of the Auditory, he called on one M. Westly (who formerly had been his Chamber-Fellow in Magdalen College) to step to the next Booksellers Shop for a Book of Articles: Which being observed by the Do∣ctor, he declared himself very willing to decline any further prosection of tat particular, and to go on directly to the
Disputation. But the Respondent was resolved to proceed no further, Vs{que} dum liberaverit animam suam ab ist a calumnia, as his own words were, till he had freed himself from that odious Calumny, but it was not long before the coming of the Book had put an end to that Controversie, out of which the Respondent read the Article in the English Tongue, in his verbis, viz. The Church hath power to decree Rites and Ceremonies, and authority in Controversies of faith, &c. which done he delivered the Book to one of the standers by, who desired it of him, the Book passing from one hand to another till all men were satisfied. And at this point of time it was, that the Queens Almoner left the Schools, po∣fessing afterwards that he could see no hope of a fair Dispu∣tation from so foul a beginning, and not as being tired with the tedious Preface of the Respondent before the Disputations begun, which whether it were tedious or impertinent or not, may perhaps be seen hereafter upon this occasion.) But to proceed, upon the breaking of this blow, the Do∣ctor fell on roundly to his Argumentation, and in the heat thereof insisted upon those extravagant expressions (with∣out any such qualification of them as is found in the Paper) which made the matter of the Information which is now be∣fore us, and for which, if he received any check from the King at Woodstock, it is no more then what he had received at the same place but two years before, as afore is said. Which notwithstanding the Book of Articles was printed the next Year at Oxon in the Latine tongue, according to the Copy in the said Harmony of Confessions, or to a corrupt Edition of them, Anno 1571. in which that clause had been omitted, to the great animation of the Puritan party, who then began afresh to call in question the Authority of the Church in the points aforesaid: For which, as D. Pride∣aux (by whose encouragement it was supposed to have been done) received a third check from the Arch-bishop of Can∣terbury then Chancellor of that University; So the Printers were constrained to re-print the Book or that part of it at
the least, according to the genuine and ancient Copies. And here I should have parted with D. Prideaux, but that there is somewhat in the Paper (as it is now publisht to the world by M. Sanderson) which is thought fit to have an answer though not held worthy of that honour when it was secretly disperst in scattered Copies. The Paper tels us of a Hiss which is supposed to have been given (and makes the Doctor sure that such a Hisse was given, When the Re∣spondent excluded King and Parliament from being parts of the Churchp 29.. But first, The Respondent is as sure that he never excluded King and Parliament from being parts of the Church, that is to say of the diffusive body of it, but denied them to be members of the Convocation, that is to say, the Church of England represented in a Nationall Councel, to which the power of decreeing Rites and Cere∣monies, and the Authority of determining Controversies in faith as well as to other Assemblies of that nature, is ascri∣bed by the Articles: Which as it did deserve no Hisse, so the Respondent is assured no such hisse was given when those words were spoken. If any hisse were given at all, as per∣haps there was, it might be rather when the Doctor went about to prove that it was not the Convocation but the High Court of Parliament which had the power of ordering mat∣ters in the Church, in making Canons, ordaining Ceremo∣nies, and determining Controversies in Religion, and could finde out no other medium to make it good but the Autho∣rity of Sir Ed. Cooke (a learned but meer common Lawyer) in one of the Books of his Reports. An Argument (if by that name it may be called) which the Respondent thought not fit to gratifie with a better answer then Non credendum esse quo∣quo extra artem suam. Immediatly whereupon the Doctor gave place to the next Opponent, which put an end unto the heats of that Disputation: In which if the Doctor did affirm that the Church was Mera Chimaerap. 6., as it seems he did, what other plaister soever he might finde to salve that sore, I am sure he could not charge it on the in∣sufficiency
of the Respondents answers, who kept himself too close to the Churh-Representative, consisting of Arch-Bishops, Bishops, and other of the Clergy in their severall Councels, to be beaten from it by any argument which the Doctor had produced against him. And thus we have a full relation of the differences be∣tween D Prideaux and the Respondent, forgotten long agoe by those whom it most concerned, and now unseasonably revived; revived as little to the honour of the reverend name and living fame of that learned Doctor, as D. Bernards pub∣lishing the Lord Primates Letters (never intended for the Presse) hath been unto the honour of that eminent and pi∣ous Prelate. But the Squire will not so give over, he hath another peece in store, which must now be printed, though written as long since as any of the Lord Primates Letters, or the Doctors Paper, and must be printed now to shew what slender account is to be made of his (that is to say the Res∣pondents) language that waysp. 12., in reference namely, to such eminent persons as he had to deal with. For this he is beholden to some friend or other, who helpt him to the sight of a Letter writ by D. Hawell in the year 1633. in which speaking of M. Heylyn (since Doctor) whom he stiles, The Parton of that pretended Saint George, he hath these words of him, vizp. 13.. In the second Impression of his Book where he hath occasion to speak of the Romane Writers, especially the Legendaries, he magnifies them more, and when he men∣tions our men he vilifies them more, then he did in his first Edition, But the matter is not much what he saith of one or the other, the condition of the man being such as his word hardly passeth either for commendation or a slander. Never was man so haunted with apparitions (simulacra mo∣dis volitantia miris) as the present Respondent, this being the third ghost which hath been raised to disturb his quiet. But being he is conjured up, we must lay him down again as well as we can. First, passing by the Squires Absurdity, in
making D. Hackwell to be Arch-deacon of Surrey, and of Exeter College at if he had been Arch-Deacon of Exeter College as well as of Surrey, but such ungrammaticall expressions are no rarities in him, and so let it go. But con∣cerning D. Hackwell of Exeter College, and Arch-Decon of Surrey, the Reader may be pleased to know that in the year 1630. the Respondent set himself about the Assering of the History of the famous Saint and Souldier S. George of Cap∣pado the Patron-Saint, in the estimation of those times of the Renowned Order of the Garter. In prosecution of which Argument he was encountred with two contrary O∣pinions, the one of them headed by M. Calvin, who made S. Geoge to be a Fiction, a Noens, a meer Chimaera, the other set up by D. Reynolds, who made him to be the very same with George the Arian, once Patriarch of Alexandria, a bloudy tyrant, and a great persecutor of the Orthodx Chri∣stians. Amongst the Followers of whic last, he brings in D. Hackwell for one in these words following, viz. In the next place, take the assent of D. Hackwell in his examination of the common errour touching the decay of nature: The first whole Chapter of which work is em∣ployed in this, That there are many of those Opinions which are commonly received, both in ordinary speech, and in the Writings of learned men, which notwithstand∣ing are by others manifestly convinced of falshood, or at least wise suspected justly of it. And in particular, In Hi∣story Ecclesiasticall (saith he) it is commonly received, that S. George was an holy Martyr, and that he conquer∣ed the Dragon, whereas D. Reynolds proves him to have been both a wicked man and an Arian, by the testimony of Epiphanius, Ahanasius, and Gregory Nazianzen. And Bonius himself in plain terms affirmeth, Apparet totam illum de actis Georgii abulam, fuisse commentum Arian∣rum. It appears that the whole story of S. George is nothing else but a forgery of the Aians; Yet was he received (as we know) as a canonized Saint, through Christendome,
and to be the Patron both of our Nato, and of the most honourable Order of Knighthood in the world; Which being all that had been said of D. Hackwell in the first Editi∣on of that Book (and more ther was not spoken of him in the second neither) it is a wonder what should move the good old man unto such a pet, as to speak so disgracefully of one who had never wronged him, and had been alwayes held as free from that odious crime of ndering others, as D. Hackwell sheweth himself to be guilty of it. For so it was that D. Hackwell finding himself concerned (but no otherwise concerned then as before) in the first Edition bestirred himself in making a confutation of that Book, and having finished it, commended it to the perusal of D. Prideaux (whom he knew to be none of the Respon∣dents best friends) to be by him approved of and so passed to the Presse, but it passed through so many hands before it could come unto the Press, that at last it came to the Re∣spondents, who found himself therein more uncivilly hand∣led, then either by the Squire himself, or any of those nu∣merous Libellers, which exercised the patience of the state for 7. years together: D. Hackwell neither treating him with that ingenuity which became a Scholar, nor that Charity which became a Christian. But on the reading of the Book, the Respondent found his Arguments and Allegations, though many in number, to have been summed up by M. Pryn in his Histyomastix. which he had ormerly perused, and without taking notice of either adversary returned so full an answer to them, that he heard no more from M. Pryn as to that particular. Not heard he any thing further from D. Hackwell upon that Argument, more then the noise of some such Letters as M. Sanderson hath met with, purposely spread abroad (as D. Prieux his Paper was at the same time also) to digrace the Respondent, and ep on foot those animosities which they had against him. But as we reade in  D. Hckwll having thus wronged
the Respondent, conceived he had not satisfied his desired eveng, if he could not crush him at the last: And there∣ore at suh time as the Respondent was under the displea∣sue of the house of Commons, on the complaint of M. Pryn (which was about the beginning of the late long Parlia∣ment) he publisht a Discourse against him in answer to some pssges in the Book Entituled, An idotum Lincolniense, &c. which he entituled by the name of A Diertation with D. Heylyn. Whether th Euchrist be a sacrifice properly so ermed, and that arding o the Dotrine and practise of the Chrh of England. One of which Books being brought to the Rspondent as soon as it was come from the presse, he found it no such knotty peece, but that it might have been easily elft asunder without wedge or beetle, and had re∣turned an answer to it, if some of D. Hackwell Friends see∣ing how weakly it was pen'd, and how unseasonably it was published, had not took order to suppresse it; And they supprest it with such care and friendly diligence, that within three or four dayes after the first coming of it out, there was not a book of them to be had for love or money. The Narrative being thus laid down, the Respondent is to make an answer to the charges in D. Hackwels Letter, as he hath done before to those in D. Prideaux his Paper. For first, he saith, that in his book of Saint George, he no where viliies any of the eminent Divines or other of the Proestant and Reformed Churches (our men as D. Hackwell cals them) unlesse to differ in opinion from them be a vilifyig of them And if it be, then D. Hackwell may as well be said to vilifie Calvin, Chemnitius, Chamier, Tilenus, Per∣kin, Boys, and Crakanthorpe, beside many others, both of the forreign Churches, and the Church of England, who make S. George to be a fiction, a Non-ens or a meer Chimae∣ra, from whom he differeth in opinion in making him to be a wiced man, and an Arian, and therefore not a fiction nor a meer Cymaera. Assuredly the Respondent can see no reason why he might not as well differ in this particular from
D. Reynolds, D. Hackwell, and the est of that Gng as they from Calvin, and Chemnitius, and the  heir ollow∣ers; or as all of them differed in that pint  ha hich D. Hackwell hath onest to have  received in Ecclesiasticall History. touching S. Geor, being a man and an holy Maryr. And secondly, he Respondent aith, that as he villifies our men D. Hckwell hould rater have said our Masters, so he magn fies  Romane Writers, especially, he legenda∣ries, that is to say, by concurring with them in some oints of S. George History, in which he findes them secnded by the testimonies of more approved Writers then themselves. And if at any time he speaketh favourably of any of the Le∣gendaries, as sometimes he doth (and for the credit of the cause he was bound to do) he did it not in his own words, and speaking his own sence of them only, but in the words and sence of such ancient and modern Authours as are of most unquestioned credit amongst the Learned: Thus speaking of Simeon Metaphrastes he tels us what a high e∣steem was had of him in the Greek Minlogies, and what high commendation had been given him by Michael Psel∣lus a man of great Learning in those times; and speaking of Iacobus de Voragine, he lets the Reader know what had been said of him by Iohanno Gerrard, Voscius, a man of too great parts for D. Hackwell to contend with, & sic de cteris; But whereas D. Hackwell tels his friend in that Letter that the condition of the man that is to say, the Respondent) was such as his word hardly passeth either for commendation or a slander; The Respondent thereunto replyes. that he looks no other∣wise on those words then as the extravagances of a proud and passionate weaknesse. The Respondent stood at that time in as good a condition for reputation and esteem with the generality of the Nation, as D. Hackwell could pretend too; and would not have refused an encounter with him upon any argument, either at the sharp or at the mooth, as the Pamphleter words it. I am sory to have said thus
much, but the indignity of the provocation hath enforced me to it, for which D. Hackwells Friend is to thank M. San∣drson, o condemn himself, in publishing those passages in cold blou (five and twenty years after they were written) which escaped the Doctor in his heats. And so I leave my three great Names (those Magni nominis Vmbras in the Poets Language) with a Tria sunt omnia, not looking for a Tria sequunur tria, though the Squire should once a¦gain play the School boy, and rather fall upon small games then none at all. But the Pampleter will not leave the Respondent so. The Lord Primate in a Letter to an Honourable friend had ac∣cused him of Sophstry, and the Pamphleter is resolved to make good the charge, assuring us, That in the judgement of divers he made it good throughout his bookp. 18.▪ and di∣vers they may be, though they be but two, Squire Sanderson and D. Bernard, which are so many (so it follows) that they would finde as much work for an Observator, as he saith my History will afford him. Never was Lillies head so bro∣ken as it is by this Squire, who is so far from keeping the Rules of Grammar, that he hath forgotten his very Acci∣dence, he would not else give us two Adjectives, viz. which and many, which he knows cannot stand by themselves with∣out another word to be added to them for shewing of their sence or signification; Substantive I am sure there is none to owne them, and therefore we must take his meaning by his gaping only; Which though it be not wide enough to speak out, doth import thus much, That the Errours in the Book cal∣led Respondent Petrus, are so great and many, that they would finde as much work for an Observator, as the Pamphleters Hi∣story. It seems that the Respondent Helpers being many in number (for he cals them by the Name of his Numerous helpers) and all of them as subject unto errour as the Squire himself, each of them hath committed one mistake at the least which will affod as much matter for an Observator as the History doth, what work the History hath found for
an Observator hath been seen by this time; And if ther so many in the Book called Respondet Petrus, as he there are, why hath not he or D Bernard presentd them to the view of the world in so long a time? But yet wll fare the Authour for his wonderfull chaity, who thugh he meet with many errours and mistakes throughout the book (for such Helper on) yet is pleased to satisfie himself with instancing in one, but such a one in such gret Chcters that he who rides Post (the Squire is alwaies in ) may reade it without stoppingp. 18.. Parturiunt montes. You have shewed us the mountain, gentle Sir, but pray you, Where is the mouse? Marry, sayes he, we finde it pag. 63. where he reping a quotation of th Lord Primate (in the end of his Letter to D. Twisse) orrw∣ed from Gregory the Great, he had blindely mistaken the copu∣lative And for the Disjunctive Orp. 19.. Had it been so, a man of any ordinary candor would have looked upon it as an errour rather of the Presse then the Pen. Bt the Squire who hath a quicker sight, quam aut qila serpens Epidaurius in the Poets Language, hath in this shown himself more blinde then he makes the Respondent, for in pag. 63. which the Pamphlter cites, we finde the whole passage to be thus, viz. The next Authority is taken from Gregry the Gret, who telleth us, that it is the Doctrine of the Preachers of Anti∣christ, qui veniens, diem Dominicum & Sabbatum ab omni opere faciet custodiri, who at his coming shall cause both the Lords day and the Sabbath to be kept or celebrated with∣out doing any manner of work. Now let the Suire who can see further ito a mill-stonep. 5. then the Rspondent and his Helpers are affirmed to do) resolve me when he next sets out, whether the word & in S. Gegory be turned into▪ or by the Rspondent; and if it be not, as it is not, what is become of that mistake so grosse, and written in such gret characters that any one who rides Post may reade it. Our Squie for this deserves the Spurs, and to be made a Knight of the
advice then the nature of the offence required. What fol∣lowed upon this Appeal we are informed by both our Au∣thours: In the relating of which story from the first to the last M. Snrson hath dealt more ingenuously then the For fit, M. Sadersn telleth us, that the occasion of the Dicontnts which encreased at Oxon, An. 1631. arose from tis, iz. Many  that the Renovations reducing times, was now no lesse then Innovation, in their Pulpits and . But M. Fuler, according to his wonted manner of re∣porting all things favourably for the Puritan party, will have the occasion to be this, viz. That many conceived that Innovations ( by others for Renovations, and now in the Primitive times) were multiplyed in  whereat they in their Sermons into (what was interpreted) bitter invectives. Lib. 11. Fol. 141. which puts a great difference in the Case, seeming to justifie the Offendors, in that which was repu∣ted (and but reputed) to be bitter Invectives, and to con∣demn the Church for multiplying Innovations in the Service of God. Secondly, M. Sanderson tels us , That their very Texts ga just cause of offence and mutiny, and many such reflecting upo the most emnent in the (urch, and violating the Kings De∣laration for the depressing of Armini Controversies. But M. Fller must needs mince the matter. And though he tell us That their Texts gave sme (and but some) offence, and that they had some tart relexion on some eminent persons in the Curch, addes next, that they are apprehended to violte the Kings Declaration: Not that the Kings Declaration for (as his own words are) had been violt by them, but that it was apprehendd so to
might be better Scholars then Lawyers, yet Law and Lear∣ning must submit when power is pleased to interpose, which inti∣mates that the Archbishop carried this businesse by the hand of power, against Law and Learning. Finally M. Sandersn subjoyning the death of Archbishop Harsnet to the end of the differences in Oxon, hath told us of him, that he was a discreet assertor of these necessary and usefull Ceremonies: M. Fuller relating the same story hath told us only that he was a zealous assertor of Ceremonies, but whether usefull or un∣usefull, necessary or unnecessary, he determineth not: which shews more candour in the State then the Church-Historian, so farewell to both.
Errata on the Advertisements. PAge 30. line 13. for queint r. texit. p 34. l. 17. for by the History r.by the Authour of the History. p. 36. l. 29. for facies not. r. facies non. r. facies non. p. 40. l. 27. for of ore r. in ore. p. 41. l. 3. for midsummer last, r. Midsummer 1657. p. 70. l. 30. for D. Lawd Archbishop of Canterbury, r. D. Lawd then Bishop of S. Davids, and aferward Archbishop of Canterbury. p. 75. l. 15. for Bleth or. Blso. p. 78. l. 12. for 1627. r. 1629. p. 84. l. 16. for Nassautiae, r. Nassoni. p. 94. l. 7. for but three, r. but three of the Dudlys, p. 98. l. 14. for at the valley r. at the battle. p. 98. l. 2. for of the fist. of his changing of the first designe. p. 106. l. 10. for Willain, r. Millain. p. 120. l. 12. for priso. pomise. p. 15. l. 29. fo seas r. sales. p. 163. l. ult. for Toucester, r. from Tucester▪ p. 19. l. 11. for the first, r. the last. p. 205. l. 2. for the east, r. them, least.
