H2476A 11889926 50424
THE SPEECH OF DENZELL HOLLES Esquire. Delivered at the Lords Barr, Wednesday the 15th. of Iune. Vpon the Impeachment of the Earles of North-hampton, Devon-shire, Mon∣mouth, and Dover, and of the Lords Rich, An∣dever, Grey of Ruthen Coventry and Capell, for their contempt in departing from the PARLIAMENT, and not re∣turning upon Summons. Ordered that this speech shall be forthwith printed, and that none shall print it, but who M. Holles shall appoint. H. Elsynge Cler. Parl D. Com. I appoint that none shall print this but Thomas Vnderhill. Denzell Holles. LONDON, Printed for Thomas Vnderhill at the Signe of the Bible in Wood-street, 164.
THE SPEECH OF DENZELL Holles Esquire, Delivered at the Lords Barr, Wednesday the 15th, of Iune. Upon the Impeachment, &c. My Lords, BY the Command of the Knights, Citizens and Burgesses of the House of Commons, I come hither unto your Lord•p• in the behalfe of the Parliament, or rather in the behalfe of the whole Kingdome, labouring with much distraction, many feares, great apprehensions of evill and mischiefe intended against it, and now hatching and preparing by that Malignant party, which thirsts af∣ter the destruction of Religion, Laws and Liberty, all which are foulded up, cherished, and preserved in the carefull bosome of the Parliament. My Lords, The Parliament is the Foundation and Basis of Govern∣ment, and consequently of the Peace and Happinesse of the Kingdome. As it creates the Law by which we are ruled and governed in Peace and quietnesse, so it preserves the Law in Power and Authority: It watches over our Religion, that it be not supplanted and changed by superstitious Innovations; the truth and substance of it eaten up with Formality, vaine Pompe, and unnecessary Ceremonies; the grosse Errors of Popery and Arminianisme imposed upon us, as the Doctrine of our Church; A way opened to all licentiousnesse; And occasion hereby taken to oppresse and persecute all religious and conscientious men that shall oppose these Proceedings (as hath been used of late.) It is the Conservative of the Rights and Liberties of the Subject, and the Corrective of Injustice and Oppres∣sion; whereby equall Right is distributed to all, and every Man hath that
benefit and protection of Justice, which is due unto him. It is that, by which alone, common Necessities can be provided for, and publike Feares prevented: So that I may say, not onely the Peace, and Happinesse, and well-being, but the very Being of this Kingdome, can have no other bot∣tome to stand upon, but the Parliament, it being the foundation upon which the whole Frame of the Common-wealth is built. Therefore those who would destroy the Building, apply themselves to undermine the Foundation, If they can take away Parliaments, or but weaken the Power and Authority of Parliament, which is all one (For if it once have no Power, it will soone have no being) they know then all will be at their mercy, nothing will stand in their way to oppose them, but a floud of violence will run over, and cover the whole Surface of the Kingdome; and carry away all, both present Enjoyment, and future Hope of Religion, Liberty, and whatsoever else is precious and deare unto us. And accordingly, it hath ever been the Policie of evill Counsellors (who are the greatest Enemies we have in the World, or can have) to strike at Parliaments, keepe off Parliaments, breake Parliaments, or divide Parliaments, by making Factions, casting in Diversions, and Ob∣structions, to hinder and interrupt Proceedings of Parliament: All against the Parliament. Your Lordpps have had experience of this Truth this Parliament; A Succession of Designes upon it: First to awe it, and take away the Free∣dome of it by the terrour of an Army; Then to bring Force against it, actually to assault it, and with the Sword cut in sunder this onely Band, which tyes and knits up King and People, the People among them∣selves, and the whole Frame of this Government in one firme, and I hope indissoluble Knot of Peace and Vnity. God diverted those Designes, did blow upon them; presently another is set upon, which was, to obstruct and hinder our Proceedings, That in the meane time the flame of Rebellion might consume the Kingdome of Ireland, and Distempers, Distractions, and Jealousies be fomented here at home, to teare out the Bowels of this Kingdome, the Parliament being disabled from helping it, by occasion of so many Diversions, so much businesse cut out unto it, many Obstructions and Difficulties, espe∣cially that great one, from which all the rest receive Countenance and Support, his Majesties absenting himselfe, not concurring with us, and so with-drawing both his Presence and Influence, by which meanes such Remedies could not be applyed, as were necessary, and what was done, was done with infinite trouble to the Parliament, and excessive
charge to the Subject, double, trebble, what otherwise would have ser∣ved the turne: So the Subject is grieved and oppressed with charge, and the blame of all is laid upon the Parliament, and the Parliament unjustly said to be the cause of all those evils, which the Authors of them had made so great, and so confirmed and secured by the frequent interruptions of the Parliament, that they could not suddenly, nor easily be suppressed or remo∣ved. Well, but by Gods infinite blessing the Parliament was in a faire possi∣bility to wade through this likewise; And though the Night had been blacke and stormy, some day began to appeare: Miraculously our Armes have prospered in Ireland, and God be praised, the malevolent Practises of these Vipers at home, as they appeared, were in some sort mastered; And the Parliament began to act and operate towards the setling of the great Affaires both of Church and State, and providing for the Defence and Safe∣ty of this Kingdome, against either forrain Invasion, or any stirring of the disaffected Party among themselves. Then three wayes are together assayed for the weakening and invali∣dating the Proceeding and Power of the Parliament, and making way for the utter subversion of it. One, Force is gathered together at Yorke, under pretence of a Guard for his Majesties Person, to make an opposition against the Parliament, and by a strong hand to support and protect Delinquents, so as no Order of Parliament can be obeyed, but on the other side is sleighted and scorned, to make the Parliament of no reputation, to be but Imago Parliamenti, a meere shadow, without substance, without efficacy. An other, To send out in his Majesties Name, and as Declarations and Messages from Him, bitter Invectives against the Parliament, to perplexe it, and engage it in the expence of time to answer them: And besides, cunningly to insinuate and infuse into the People by false Colors and Glos∣ses, a disopinion and dislike of the Parliament, and if it be possible, to stir up their spirits to rise against it, though to the ruine of themselves, their Wives and Children. The third Plot is, The Members are drawne away, and perswaded to forsake their duty and attendance here, and goe downe to Yorke; thereby to blemish the Actions of both Houses, as done by a few, and an inconsi∣derable number, and rather a Party, then a Parliament, and perhaps, to raise and set up an Anti-Parliament there. My Lords, This is now the great Designe, whereby they hope by little and little, the Parliament shall even bleed to death and moulder to no∣thing, the Members dropping away, one after another. A desperate and
dangerous practise, and as your Lordships well observed (when you were pleased to communicate this businesse to us) an effect of the evill Coun∣cels now prevailing, and tending to the dissolution of the Parliament, of this Parliament, which under God must be the Preserver of three King∣doms, and keep them firme and loyall to their King, subject to his Crown, save them from being turned into a Chaos of disorder and confusion, and made a spectacle of misery and desolation. This Parliament, which is the last hope of the long oppressed, and in o∣ther Countries even almost wholy destroyed Protestant Religion: This Par∣liament which is the only meanes to continue us to be a Nation of free∣men and not slaves, to be owners of any thing: that we may call our wives, children, our estates, nay our bodies our owne: In a word, which must stand in the gapp to prevent an in let, an inundation of all misery and con∣fusion. My LORDS, This Parliament they desire to destroy, but I hope it will destroy the destroyers, and be a wall of fire to consume them, as it is a wall of brasse to us, to defend King and Kingdom, us, and all we have. Your Lordships wisely fore-saw this mischiefe, and as wisely have in∣deavoured to prevent it, by making your Orders, to keepe your Mem∣bers here, as that of the 9th. of Aprill, and severall other Orders en∣joyning them all to attend; thereby restraining them from repayring to Yorke, where the Clouds were observed to gather so fast, and threa∣ten a storme, and such preparations to be made against the Parliament, that it necessitated both House to passe a Vote: That the King sedu∣ced by wicked Councell, intended to make warre against the Parliament, and all who shall serve or assist in such warres are declared to bee Traitors, which Vote pa the 20th. of May: so setting a marke upon that place, and their opinion concerning thse who should at this time resort thi∣ther. Yet now, in such a coniuncture of time, when the Kingdome had ne∣ver more need of a Parliament, and the Parliament never more need of all the helpe and assistance of the best indeavour and advise of eve∣ry Member, the safety and even being of three Kingdomes depending upon it; after such Orders and Commands of your Lordships House to the contrary; such a Vote of both Houses: and expressely against their Duty, being called thther by Writ under the great Seale, which is the Kings greatest and highest Command, and not controulable nor to be disperced with by any other Command from him whatsoever; and called, to treat and consult de arduis Regni, the great urging and pressing a faires of the Kingdome, never more urgent, never more pressing; notwith∣standing
all this, these Lords, the Earles of Northampton, Devonshire, Dover, Mounmouth, and the Lords Rich, Andever, Grey, Coventry and Capell have left their stations, withdrawne themselves and are gone to Yorke, and being summoned to appeare by an Order of the 30. of May, instead of obedience, returne a refusall, by a slighting and scornefull Let∣ter, which hath bin so adjudged, both by your Lordships and the House of Commons. MY LORDS, The House of Commons hath likewise upon the consideration and debate of this businesse, finding it so much to con∣cerne the safety of the Kingdome, and the very being of the Parliament, passed this Vote, That the departing of these nine Lords from the Parliament, without leave, after such time as both Houses had declared, That the King seduced by wicked Counsell intended to make warre against the Parliament, and their still continuing at Yorke, notwithstanding their Summons and Com∣mand, is a high affront and contempt of both Houses, And that the said Lords therin, did as much as in them lay, that the Service of Parlia∣ment might be deserted, and are iustly suspected to promote a warre against the Parliament. And the House in further prosecution of their Duty in this particu∣lar, and in pursuance of their Protestation, which obliges them to indeavour to bring to condigne punishment all such high Offenders against, not on∣ly the Priviledges, but the very essence of Parliament, have sent me up to impeach these Lords, and desire that speedy and exemplary Justice may be done upon them. And accordingly, I doe here in the Name of the Knights, Ci∣tizens and Burgesses of the Commons House assembled in Parlia∣ment, and in the Name of all the Commons of England, Impeach SPENCER Earle of Northampton, WILLIAM Earle of Devon∣shire, HENRY Earle of Dover, HENRY Earle of Mounmouth, CHARLES Lord HOVVARD of Charlton, ROBERT Lord RICH, CHARLES Lord GREY of Ruthen, THOMAS Lord COVENTRY, and ARTHUR Lord CAPELL, for these high Crimes and Misdemeanours following, viz. For that, contrary to their duty, they being Peeres of the Realme, and summoned by Writ to attend the Parliament, and contrary to an Order of the House of Peeres of the 9th. of Aprill last, and severall o∣ther Orders requiring the Attendance of the Members of that
House, and after a Vote past in both Houses the 0th. of May last, That the King seduced by wicked Councell, intended to make warre against the Parliament, and that whosoever served or assisted him in that Warr, was adjudged a Traitor, did notwithstanding after∣wards in the same month of May, contemptuously, having notice of the said Votes and Orders, with draw themselves from the said House of Peeres, and repaire to the City of Yorke where the Pre∣parations of the said warre were, and yet are▪ in contrivance and a∣gitation, they knowing of such Preparations: And being by an Order of the 30th. of May duly summoned by the House of Peeres, to make their appearance before that House upon the 8. day of June last past, they refused to appeare, and returned a scornefull. An∣swer by a Letter under their hands, directed to the Speaker of the Lords House and remaining there upon record. For which Crimes and Misdemeanors to the interruption of the procee∣dings of Parliament, and great affaires of the Kingdome, and tending to the dissolution of the Parliament, and disturbance of the Peace of the Kingdome, I am commanded in the Name of the said Commons, to de∣mand of your Lordships, That the said Lords may be forthwith put to their Answer, and receive speedy and exemplary punishment, according to their demerits. The Commons saving to themselves liberty at all times hereafter, exhibit any other or further Impeachment or Accusation against the said Lords or any of them. FINIS.
