I265 R7574 13513567 99868
THE INTEREST OF ENGLAND CONSIDERED: IN AN ESSAY UPON WOOLL, Our Woollen-Manufactures, and the Improvement of Trade. With some Remarks upon the Conceptions OF Sir Josiah Child. LONDON, Printed for Walter Kettilby, at the Bishop's-Head in St. Paul's Church-yard. 1694.
THE EPISTLE TO THE READER. Friendly Reader, MY Curiosity led me to an Expence for my Infor∣mation, in the new dis∣course of Trade, that lately appear'd in the World, under the Hand of the Honoured Sir Josiah Child; where the dissatisfaction in my Pen∣nyworth, hath occasioned the like Trap for others, but shall make no Apology, because great part of the Substance of his, with this Addition, will come cheaper into Hand, tho' still a dear Pennyworth.
Trade is a thing in it self that deserves Paper as well as a Play, ha∣ving never been more neglected than these late Years; and this foollish shot may be a means to beget a wiser, or at least put abler Heads upon think∣ing. Finding this Gentleman measuring the affairs of the whole Nation by the Splendor that he observed in the great City, in the noise of the Whip, the ratling of the Wheels, prancing of the Horses, and jumping Chari∣ot, to his famous Country House. And my livelihood leading me into several Counties where I have obser∣ved many Out-Houses unthatcht, the Brew-Houses belonging to many ancient Mansion Houses of Free-Stone, untiled, and the Timber rot∣ten, and as great an Emblem of Po∣verty,
which seems Face to Face to answer each other, I could do no less than offer this Balance to his Ca∣reer, being a true part of the Ac∣count. But that which chiefly incouraged me to this attempt, was the clear sence of the ill Consequence of his levelling design, in laying open all our Privileges, setting our Doors wide open to all our native Commodi∣ties, permitting Strangers to Co-ha∣bit, trade, and purchase Lands a∣mongst us upon as easie terms as the Dutch do, Pag. 44. Destroying all Rule and Order in Trade; a Wea∣ver to be a Tucker, or a Mercer a Clothier, and all Goods to be made at the choice of the Ma∣ker, &c.
In the Consequence of which, some designing Politick Persons will in∣gross the greatest part of Trade in∣to their Hands, and grow vastly rich by the poverty of those that have less Foresight and Cunning; whereas Laws kept in due Execution, and publick Markets strictly observed, will encrease the number of Mer∣chants, will keep distinct Stations and good Order in Trade, and there∣by preserve our Reputation, by the goodness of our Commodities, which alone can keep up the Price of Goods, and give incouragement to the Breeder, who ought chiefly to be considered from his honest La∣bour. What the Gentleman observes more than once, That there is no mating the Dutch in Trade without Samp∣sons
and Goliahs, I humbly con∣ceive is a mistake, and there is no Advantage to the Publick by a Stock of Twenty thousand Pounds in one Merchant's Hands, more than if it were in three; I am sure less when imployed in Ingrossing. To give a little allay to our pre∣sent vogue of a Free-Trade, I have herein endeavoured, to the best of my Judgment, to set forth the Value and Excellency of our Wool∣len-Manufactures, the command∣ing Commodity of our Nation, and those Advantages in Trade that we are capable to secure unto our selves, being English-Men, and have mo∣destly toucht upon the tender Concep∣tions of my Honoured Author; all which I submit to the Candor of the Friendly Reader, in this sa∣tisfaction
to my self, That the chief aim of my design herein was the Publick Good, how far distant so∣ever I fall short of the Mark.
THE INTEREST OF ENGLAND Considered. THE good Genius of our pre∣sent Government discovering a fair Prospect and good Dis∣position to a settlement of the Affairs of Trade upon the just Basis of the Publick good of our own Nation; and no less presumption and confidence, upon the other Hand, in defending the plausible Title of Foreign and Private Interest, got in possession: My willingness to add the least Mite to so generous an undertaking, (having thro' my Education and Pra∣ctice gained some Experience in the Woollen-Manufacture, the master Wheel of Trade) hath induced me to appear
in this little Essay; the Practick part of which Subject, (being not well known) may be likely to give some light to the good Patriots of our Country, who are to weigh the matter: However so com∣prehensive an excellency in it self, that were those Advantages which Provi∣dence hath herein afforded this Island but industriously improved, we must ne∣cessarily become the most flourishing Na∣tion in the whole World. Let the product of our Lands be ne∣ver so abounding in its Fertile and exceeding comprehensive Effects, (not to be equalled by any other part of the World, and the surest foundation of Trade.) were we but diligent in secu∣ring the Manufacture of our English and Irish Wooll, improving of it according to its natural Excellencies, and those Advantages we enjoy, and afterwards in disposing of it to the best advan∣tage abroad, and securing the Benefit of the Merchandize to our own Nati∣on; those Effects would still give a good price, and we should come to an equal Balance in a populous and glo∣rious People. So great a dependance hath the Trade of this Nation upon the Wool∣len-Manufacture, that, according to the
judgment of famous Coke, Nine parts in Ten of our Exported Commodities doth come from the Sheep's Back, and from hence alone is the Spring of our Ri∣ches. When the Advantages of Trade were not rightly understood, before the days of Edward the Third, and our Wooll was carried into Flanders to be manu∣factured, fourteen Pounds of Clothing Wooll was sold in England at Eighteen Pence, as appears by the Statute vicesi∣mo quinto Hen. VIII. cap. 13. which quantity of Wooll, by the diligent im∣provement of Trade, in a regular ma∣nagement of the Manufacture in the Reign of Queen Elizabeth, was currant∣ly sold at twelve Shillings, and conti∣nued upon advance until about Forty Years since, which is well in memory. And the value of Lands proportio∣nably advanc'd as Trade encreas'd; and since all government in Trade hath been laid aside, the privilege of English Merchants destroyed for twenty Years past, in a free currant of Trade with all the World, Fourteen Pounds of Clothing Wooll hath been currantly sold at seven Shillings, and all other Effects of Land in great measure fallen.
As we exceed any other part of the World in the quality of our Wooll, so likewise in quantity, growing from the good temper of so moderate a Climate, and security of our Sheep from Beasts of prey: Providence hath herein accom∣modated us to the exact usefulness of all Mankind; and it is no small advantage in trade to be fitted with a compleat sortment of Goods, abounding in a middle sort of Wooll, excellent in its kind, and suitable to a middle sort of People, which are far the greater num∣ber, and most, considering their pen∣nyworths. And herein is chiefly our strength; not that we in the least fall short in the merit of our fine Wooll, our Herefordshire and Shropshire Wooll not to be equalled in its kind, by any part of the World, and suitable to al∣most any degree; and altho' we must submit to Spain in the utmost curiosity of fineness, yet upon the account of our Bays, Serges, Perpetuanaes, &c. which are so agreeable to the Spaniards use, we stand fairest for the procuring those Woolls; and being the immediate Effects of our own, after we have had the benefit of the Manufacture, it dou∣bles the advantage to our Nation: The Manufacture of Spanish Wooll is much
more than the prime cost of the Wooll, great part of which being made into Cloth, is sent to Turkey, where we contend with the Dutch, and by means of other sortments, have gained much upon them in Fine Cloth; and had we twice as much Fine Wooll of our own growing, what we could spare from our own use, and Flanders, would be taken off by the Turks. Nay farther, to add to these Benefits, (to shew that this Golden Fleece is the distinguishing favour of Providence) we are likewise blest with other advantages peculiar to our selves, as Fullers-Earth, incouraging Waters for Dying, and quick Rivers for Milling and Rowing our Cloth, which is a great advantage we have upon the Dutch who are our chiefest Competitors. And to aggravate the unreasonable∣ness of the fall of the price of Wooll upon us, we have evidently made a very great progress in the curiosity of our Cloth these late Years, having quite van∣quish'd the Dutch in their last effort up∣on us with their thin Blacks, and not to be equalled by any part of the World, in the real merit of our Cloth, lustre in Colour, and variety of Fancy. Not above forty Years past we were
served from Holland with most of our Fine Cloth for our Nobility and Gen∣try, and the great complaint of those days was, That our Cloth was not fully Manufactured in England: both which points are now gained. So comprehensive an excellency is our English Wooll, that it may be im∣proved to the thickest Felt, which will secure from the most violent Storms of Wet; and be likewise drawn to the thinnest Crape, and still carrying a me∣rit with it, and thereby rendering it self an acceptable Commodity both in hot and cold Climates: And the resi∣dence of our English Merchants abroad to dispose of our Manufacture in for∣mer days was always courted, as is clear by the many privileges granted to us at Hamburgh; and the English Merchant that can thus furnish his Warehouse abroad with suitable Goods for all degrees of People, must needs hereby have an ad∣vantage of the Dutch and French, who are much wanting herein, unless by the assistance of our Markets and Wooll. So that whosoever doth calmly consi∣der the Trade of the whole World, the ground of its dependance, (Man being born naked) and the Beauty as well as Usefulness of our Woollen-Manufacture,
must own, That those that are Masters in this Golden Fleece must be Masters in Trade, if they are not wanting to themselves, and that the Woollen-Manu∣facture brought to its perfection is the commanding Commodity of the whole World, as was illustrated by the simile of one Man's keeping Sheep, and the other digging for Treasure, the Riches by degrees centring in his Hands that kept the Sheep. And if we of this Na∣tion are not Masters in Trade, how can we excuse our selves from the imputati∣on of Solomon, of a Price in the Hands of—is to me unaccountable. The truth of this being too plain to admit of Objection, I proceed accord∣ing to my purpose, and the best of my judgment briefly to shew the causes of our decay of Trade in this particular, how we have lain open to France and Holland in their attempts upon us thro' the neglect of our own preservation, and ill management of Trade amongst our selves; whether the neglect hath been willful or inadvertent, I shall not determine. 1. The chief cause of the decay of our Trade hath been the Exportation of our English and Irish Wooll into France and Holland, the truth of which
practice hath been evident by visible demonstrations. It is thus exprest by the Eminent Sir Josiah Child, pag. 128. That, notwith∣standing the severity of our Laws, we see that English and Irish Wooll goes o∣ver so plentifully that it is within a ve∣ry small matter as cheap in Holland as in England; and if it hath been so in Holland, much more in France: And so long as we do not effectually preserve our own Wooll, it is in vain to value our selves in the least upon the excel∣lency of the Commodity; the carriage of our Wooll by Sea rendering it cheaper in France from Sussex and seve∣ral other considerable places of Wooll in England, than by Land carriage to the nearest place of Manufacture in our own Nation; and their workmanship in France being so much cheaper than ours, there can be no withstanding its force at our foreign Markets, but must be beat with our own Weapons: Their great advantage upon us herein hath been in our long Worsted Wooll, where the workmanship is trebble the value of the Wooll, as in Druggets, Worsted-Hose, &c. where the loss of each Pack of such Wooll is above fifty Pounds loss to our own Nation in the Manufacture;
hereby they have advanc'd their Spanish Trade, and made themselves great Mer∣chants, and increas'd their Shipping, have brought their Manufacture to be able to work up Spanish Wooll, (which is but a new thing) for the use of their own Nation; and what is urg'd by some, That there is no fear of the French in the Woollen Manufacture, that they only murder the Commodity, to my own knowledge is a great mistake; and on the contrary they have made a very great improve∣ment in Fine Cloth, which is impossible to be otherwise, so long as they had the freedom of all our assistance. About ten Years since, we had a great Trade for our best Spanish Cloth in France, which was occasioned by the thriving and flou∣rishing condition of that Nation, that so many were able to wear the best Spanish Cloth, contrary to former time, which the King of France soon percei∣ved, and laid an imposition of twenty Five per Cent. upon our Manufacture, and went smoothly on with his own, by the increase of his Spanish Trade. It is true we can't hinder them from Spanish Wooll, but if the dependance of their Spanish Trade is upon our long Wooll, the freedom of our Markets for Bays, Serges, Perpetuana's, &c. which
ever since 25 Caroli II. they have had a free liberty to send hence upon equal terms with the English Merchants. I hope we are able to incorporate our Spanish Trade, and to put on aliens Duties again, and then they must send for Spanish Wooll with their Money, which in former time was not so plen∣ty with them, nor yet Spanish Cloth so much for their wear. Were their Ad∣vantage and our Loss summ'd up in this particular, it would be a compre∣hensive Summ; and the sudden growth of France (which hath been by no mi∣raculous means) is confirmation that there would be no mistake in the Fi∣gures. I shall not spend time in look∣ing back upon a lost Gain, (our Ne∣cessities having pretty well opened our Eyes) no more than in considering the Statute of 14 Caroli II. that made the Exportation of Wooll, by Principle, Aiders, or Assisters, to be Felony, when the Statute of 12 Careli II. had provi∣ded as likely a remedy to prevent it as was then thought upon, and the latter Statute doth no way express it's design to corroborate the former, and in that little time there could not be a clear discovery of its operation, and Acts of Parliament springing from the sincere
good of the Publick did not grow in Clusters in our late Reigns: From which, and the consideration of the Nature of the last Statute, I can't but think the first year too great a check to the practice of Exportation of Wooll, and that the latter was procured by the French Interest, and only a shelter to the former; for who would occasion a great deal of trouble to himself in prosecuti∣on to take away the life of his Bro∣ther in this case; nay the severity of the Act it self begets a scruple with some People; and where are the in∣stances of Fact in so many Years upon the Statute. If the sixth part of our Wooll should be carried away unmanufactured, how must this affect the value of our Lands, when the livelihood of so many Peo∣ple is taken away, who by degrees be∣sure must follow or remain as a burthen upon our own Nation: The clear sense of this grievance put the worthy Sir Matthew Hale upon a new proposal for the imployment of the Poor, urging, That our populousness, which is the greatest blessing a Kingdom can enjoy, is become the burthen of our Nation; but it proved ineffectual, whilst nothing but a natural means that can relieve us here∣in.
As soon as there is encouragement in Trade, the Labourers that can promote it, will be sought after. The uneasiness of this burthen upon us these late years, hath occasioned many unusual remedies and attempts, many new Acts of Parliaments, contrary to the clear sence of our Ancestors. Be∣ing once mis-led, our uneasiness made way for a farther design upon us; as a Man once out of his way will be rea∣dy to listen believingly unto almost a∣ny Direction. After this Act to let our Wooll go, in 15 Caroli II. there was an Act made for the encourage∣ment of Trade in its Title, whilst the Body of the Act was no more than to encourage the Exportation of Corn, and to give a liberty to carry away our Bullion, which helpt one step forward. In the next place followed the Act a∣gainst importing Cattle from Ireland; which was a Cure like the rest that led to farther inconveniencies, in 17 Ca∣roli II. After which a free liberty was given to Export Leather in 20 Ca∣roli II. directly contrary to former Sta∣tutes, successively. And to compleat the whole design, in 25 Caroli II. there was an Act made to take off Aliens du∣ties upon all Commodities of the growth
product, and manufacture of our Nati∣on, except Coals; which fully answer∣ed their end, our Spanish Trade being wholly open, and our Flanders and Ger∣many in great measure, and our Hol∣land Trade free; all the Privileges of England were given away by whole sale, whilst all these Acts proved but turn∣ings in a Fever, which gave ground to the Distemper upon us, no way affect∣ing the true Cause; and this not matter of choice, if any other way proposed, the Country Air was soon thought best. Could we but effectually prevent the Exportation of our Wooll, many of these Acts of Parliament of free Expor∣tation of our Corn and Leather will be thought needfull to be repealed, and we should sooner want those Commodities than People to take them off. As we of this Island are infinitely en∣gaged to Providence for many Excel∣lencies secured to us on all sides by a River, so likewise in our Negligence we are hereby the more liable to foreign attempts upon us: Was there no way to lose our Wooll but by twenty Miles Land-carriage, it would be easily prevented; but whilst we are liable to the Easy and Cheap Carriage by Wa∣ter on all sides, it gives Life to un∣cessant
attempts, and our difficulty to secure our selves is the greater. Whether Ovid alluded to our great great Grandfathers care in this particular, when Jason sailed to steal the Golden Fleece, assisted by Medaea's Charms to fortify him against the never sleeping Dragon, and whose Bulls with their Steel tipt Horns, that were to guard it with their watchfulness, I am not Anti∣quary enough to determine. However, the fence of our security herein, I am satisfied, can't be fortified with too great a care; which, I hope, will be speedily considered by the most judicious Patri∣ots of our Country: So shall we draw back, as in the days of Edward III. those Artificers in the Woollen Manufacture that we have lost, and possibly some of foreign Nations, if our wants require, and our own People will be thorowly imploy'd. I shall not presume to prescribe in this important affair, only humbly of∣fer my weak opinion. I must confess I differ in my Judgment from the last Expedient provided in this Case, where the Execution of the Laws against Exportation of Wooll, were to receive their Life from Commissioners appointed, who should maintain Offi∣cers
to attend it, argues his being so easily dazled with a white Mist, as the World now goes. I am fully perswa∣ded that if there be not an Act made that will operate it self by vertue of a Reward of the Goods seized, it will prove ineffectual. By this means all Eyes will be open; for the encouragement of which, I think the full reward of the Wooll, and the benefit of the confisca∣tion of the Ship, the Cattle that are found to be assisting; the Estate of Principle and Assistants should go by the easiest means that can be contrived, to the Seizer or Discoverer, a quarter part of which should be divided amongst the Poor of the Parish where it is di∣scovered and siezed; hereby there will be assistance, and whatsoever Wooll is discovered in any Out-House, packt up within ten Miles of the Sea, shall be adjudged for this design, and liable to be siezed: Nay, if we did moreover allow a Reward out of the Exchequer for these years, as was allowed in 25 Caroli II. to those that should then Ex∣port Corn, I think it would be altoge∣ther as agreeable to the publick good, and be a good means to help to break the course of it. I doubt not but the late Act in this kind to discover High-way-Men
will prove a very good Act for our security in that particular. And for a corporal punishment, which will be likewise needful, I think we can't do better than to follow the Act of Queen Elizabeth against exportation of live Sheep, where the offender is lia∣ble to one years Imprisonment, without either Bail or Mainprize, and at the end of the year to be brought out in the Market-place, at the fullest time of the Market, and there to have his left Arm cut off, and nailed up in the sight of the People. A few such instances would be a lively remembrance of the pe∣nalty, and would give a great check to the Practice, and that the Act of Parliament should be lodged in some publick place in every Parish in England and Ireland, and read once every year to the People. There are many in England that are wholly ignorant of this matter, that possibly by this means may be serviceable. And to prevent the Resettor, which in this Case is as bad as the Thief, the reviving the Statute of Edward VI. an∣no quinto & sexto, cap. 7. would be an effectual means: Whosoever bought Wooll, that did not spin it into Yarn, or make it into some sort of Manufa∣cture,
forfeited double the value of the Wooll by that Statute, which kept out Broggers of Wooll, who are the only forwarders of this Practice; the Statute remained in force seventy years, and deserves upon several other good Con∣siderations to be revived. The time that that Statute was made being a parallel with our foreign In∣terest by the Merchants of the Stillyard, and private Interest by debasing our Cloth, as is sufficiently made out by the Preamble of the foregoing Statute to this. I doubt not but there was great debate about making the Act, the dis∣advantage by some colour being likely to fall upon those that had Wooll to sell in remote places from its Manufa∣cture, (tho in it self but a Shadow) which fixt the matter with so great caution, that the Act was not left pro∣bationary, as is usual in doubtful mat∣ters, but that the King by his Procla∣mation should give liberty to these Men to buy Wooll again; but the visible ad∣vantage to the Publick preserved the Statute seventy Years, notwithstanding Appeals that were made against it in about five Years after it was made; which I humbly submit to Considerati∣on.
2. The next hinderance to the Con∣sumption of our Woollen-Manufacture and grievance to Trade, hath been the ill Management of that Wooll that we have had remaining, especially the low∣er and middle sort, which is chiefly for Exportation, which hath been wholly occasioned thro' want of due execution of those good Laws that were made to prevent this great abuse to the Publick, and letting in Aliens into the benefit of the Merchandize of our Cloth. There is certainly as much need of Government in Trade to preserve the publick Good, as of Laws to secure one Man's right from being invaded by ano∣ther; and those Acts of Parliament from Edward III. down to the Twenty first of King James, (successively approved of) to preserve the goodness and repu∣tation of our Cloth abroad were cer∣tainly grounded upon good reason; the ill effect of the neglect of which was never more visible in any time than at present. Our Woollen-Manufacture for Exportation, for the most part, is come to perfection in Deceit and fals∣hood, made as thin and slight as possi∣ble can be contrived, (securing the name of Cloth) that it may thereby become the fitter subject for excessive straining.
If any Marks of honest and good ma∣king Cloth be sought after abroad, that advantage is soon swallowed up by pri∣vate interest, and false Cloth presently sent over in those Marks, not in dis∣guise, but barefac'd, which loudly crys for Reformation upon the score of pub∣lick justice, did it no way concern the publick: This hath grown upon us as private Interest in Trade hath got the sway, the Merchandize of most of our Cloth being fallen into the Hands of foreign Merchants who have a nearer Interst of their own to preferr, and ve∣ry well knew the check we always had upon them by the goodness of our English Cloth, in which particular they have been so successful that there are now sent hither out of Flanders some particular Dutch Lists that the Hollanders make upon their Cloth, distinct from the English, which we are put upon to imitate, and some of the Materials fetcht from Holland to make them withal, that we may the better sell our Cloth under their credit, whilst possibly the Cloth is made in Holland with our Wooll. The Honourable Sir Josiah Child very well observes (in his new Discourse of Trade) the exact care of the Dutch in making all their native
Commodities, that the repute of the said Commodities continues always good, and the buyers will accept of them by the Marks, without opening, which, I suppose, springs from the care of the Government, (otherwise private Interest would spring up in that soil too) and very much recommends it to our imi∣tation, Pag. 2. as one chief ground of their Riches, very much condemning our negligence, where Seals may be bought by the Thousands, and put up∣on what Cloth the Makers please. Falshood and Deceit in Trade may set out briskly, like a Cockneigh, upon a Gallop in a Morning, but it always flags in the Afternoon; and it is cer∣tainly the Interest of England to secure our Trade with foreign Nations by a just and friendly usage; no Person in the World loves to be Cheated; to strain our Cloth one Yard in five, when it evidently destroys the good Dres∣sing of Cloth, takes up time in doing it, and draws along with it several o∣ther inconveniencies to our selves, and the Buyers abroad in shrinking it, is, I think, an unaccountable, foolish, and dishonest practice. The Worthy An∣thor before mentioned, proposeth a very fair Question, Pag. 151.
What is to be done in England, says he, to improve the Trade thereof to such a degree as to equalize or over-balance our Neighbours in our Natio∣nal profit by our Foreign Trade? And I think answers it as well, Pag. 161. Publick Justice and Honesty will make it the Interest of other Nations to trade with us; the Publick Faith of the Nation being concerned in our commerce a∣broad, tho' a private Person may car∣ry on a Trade abroad with false over∣strained, cheating Goods, and thereby put a cheat upon the Subjects of Fo∣reign Nations, yet this doth certainly reflect upon the publick Justice of that Nation from which the Goods come, especially so good a Government that we live under, and the Religion we profess. The first breaking of bounds and entering upon this deceitful Pra∣ctice, which was about the Year 1663. I am assured from a worthy Merchant that lived abroad, made a very great alarm in Germany, and he then soretold the Effect of it, and very much urged for Redress to his friends in England, which we now very well see. The Statute of 21 Jacobi that provi∣ded so well to preserve the reputation of our English Broad Cloth in foreign
parts, by a penalty of Five Pounds for eve∣ry Broad Cloth that was made of Pinions and Noyles, or any other worse Com∣modity than Fleece-Wooll, was certain∣ly a good Statute, and had it been du∣ly executed, the credit of our Cloth a∣broad had not been at this low ebb; notwithstanding Sir Josiah Child who tells us, Pag. 63. that there was never a good Law made that was not duly executed, the fault of the Law causing a failure of execution If One Cloth in Ten be made of false materials, it will very much dis∣parage the other Nine. The complaint of one Man abused with English Cloth, will make a greater noise against us than several that are well used will re∣trieve, the latter being no more than is fairly expected. The general Objection is, That if we do not serve Markets abroad with cheap Cloth, the Dutch and other Nations will carry the Trade from us: To answer this Objection, I will only give the dif∣ference in a low priz'd Merchants Cloth of the value of five or six Shillings a Yard, between a well made Cloth, and one that is slight and deceitful, the va∣lue being chiefly in saving a few pounds of Yarn in your first allowance, whilst
the charge of Milling, Dressing, Co∣louring, Freight, Custom, and after∣wards Trimming and Making, (which many times is as much as the cost of the Cloth) is in every particular the same; so that in this matter the saving or adding the value of nine Pence or one Shilling at most, in a Suit of Clothes to a labouring Man, shall make him ei∣ther disparage or commend our English Cloth, whilst the French and Dutch are ready at hand to offer some Drugget, or Cloth of theirs; and these are the People that consider their Pennyworths by the service, in a laborious converse with each other. The loss of our Trade in Germany and Flanders from Eighty Thousand Cloths a year to less than Twenty, and as great a proportion in Russia, Dantzick, and the East Country, is no small a∣batement in Trade, which continued so long as our Cloth was kept to a Stan∣dard goodness, and hath evidently aba∣ted as it hath been made more slight and falsified. Nothing but a new Law can redress this Grievance upon us; the lengths of Cloths being so much altered from for∣mer allowances, the best ground of which, in my weak opinion, will be
certain lengths and weight, duly pro∣portioned by the best advice that can be had in the several Manufactures, the execution of the Law to be encoura∣ged by an allowance to the Finder of so much for every Pound that is want∣ing, which will make all goods be weigh∣ed, as it was in the Statute of Edward VI. anno quinto & sexto, cap. 6. and in 4 Jacobi. Altho' some places require thick∣er Cloth than other some, yet the Ad∣vantage herein will be the well striking the Cloth in the Loom, and the other may be well enough add'd in giving a little bet∣ter breadth in the Milling. 3. I proceed farther to shew the most unreasonable and groundless alteration in Trade, the solly of which, I think, no age can parallel, which hath brought an unnecessary charge of at least Eight per cent. upon the greatest part of our Cloth, besides innumerable other incon∣veniencies that it will be too tedious to relate, without the least colour of solid Advantage to the Publick. The care of the City of London pro∣vided a considerable Market called Black∣wel-Hall, at a considerable expence, for the accommodation of the Clothiers of all Counties to lodge and sell their Cloth.
The Rules of this Market were ex∣actly setled for the accommodation of the Clothiers as well as the Merchants; many good Laws successively made by the Corporation of the City of London for the benefit of English Merchants; and after Factors had got some sooting in the Hall, they made an Act of Com∣mon-Council that they should take no Apprentices to the hinderance of the Clothier; and the Trade was mana∣ged in this open and publick Market, time out of Mind, and began at last to dispense with our Laws. Factors that are Freemen now sell Cloth in this Market to Freemen, con∣trary to the ancient Rules of Law and Reason, took as many Apprentices as they saw fit, in despight of Act of Com∣mon-Council, took possession of the Hall, and no Cloth to be sold there but must come thro' their Hands, whilst the Pack∣ers drew another part into their pri∣vate Houses, where they kept a free and open Market upon any day of the week, where an Alien was as free to buy Cloth as the English Merchant, and the Clothier nothing to do in the sale of his own Cloth: Hereby Foreig∣ners have beat out the English Merchants, the Factors have brought on long Cre∣dit
with Cloth, thereby to necessitate the Clothiers to buy their Wooll of them, which hath forc'd such ill pay to Work-People, that the Country is almost starved. Many Freemen go on in a perjur'd practice, in buying Cloth for Aliens, in open defiance of the Ancient Corporation Oath: and to speak plain, the greatest dispensation of Laws have been on this side. This being so known and notorious a grievance upon the Country, I hope our good Patriots will consider of some ease, whilst, whatsoe∣ver is this way got from the Clothier in beating down the price of Cloth, which hath been a third part, is in great measure made good by the Coun∣try Gentleman's Estate, and nothing can preserve the publick Good in Trade, but a publick and open Market. 4 I come now to the most conside∣rable part of our Woollen-Manufacture, the Merchandize of it to foreign Na∣tions. And as I have been hitherto shewing, upon good grounds, our natu∣ral Excellencies from providence, in the Commodity it self, so I think the same good Providence hath been no less bountiful to us in the natural abi∣lities of the English Merchant, who by the Advantage of a good Education,
must needs come to a better apprehen∣sion in the management of Trade for the Publick, than when the last dispo∣sition of the commanding Commodity of our Nation is left in this manner to a poor Illiterate maker, managed by the private design of some Factor or Packer. If the Clothier in former days sold too good a pennyworth, it fell in∣to the Hands of the Merchant, which would take better care than to give it away to a Foreigner; but now the Fo∣reigner hath the Factor and Packer to make as good a pennyworth as they can for him, and what this bewildered Clothier brings down into the Country, is the gage of living there. When all is done and said of the balance of Trade, it centers in a wise disposal of our own native Commodities, well brought to Market, and afterwards in buying the Commodities of foreign Nations, that our occasion requires, at the best Hand, which being well done, would make us the most glorious Nation in the whole World. Notwithstanding what hath been said by Sir Josiah Child in praise of the Dutch, and lessening the English, Pag. 23. That they are the Wonder of the World, Master of the Field in Trade, not unfit∣ly
to be termed Sons of Anack, and Men of Renown; and the English in Trade are Dwarfs, and Pigmies in Stocks and Experience; the younger Sons of Gentle∣men, of not above a Thousand Pounds Stock to begin withal. I think we have yet one Instance of Trade (thro' good Providence) remaining, that will shame this Gentleman, being an English-Man, that is managed by the younger Sons of our Gentry, our Turky Trade, where the Dutch had formerly the Possession in Fine Cloth, and now are become Pigmies in those parts: And were but the other parts of our Trade as well preserved in English Mens Hands at home and abroad, as in Justice and Prudence it ought to be, the applauded Excellen∣cies of the Dutch would chiefly appear in curing their Herrings. And I think it reflects upon our great Goliah in Trade, as he is pleased to express it, so much to magnify the Dutch, when he hath been the chief Competitor with them, (in that considerable part of the World) upon the English side, where he himself is pleased to give a large Ca∣talogue of our Losses. Had his care for the Publick been as signal as in advancing the East-India Actions, for those many Broad Pieces of
Silver sent hence, he might have grati∣fied the Nation with a Bark or two of Cinnamon, or a few Nutmegs from the East-Indies, or at least furnished those parts so far, with the native Commodi∣ties of our own Nation, that we had not spent time in gazing upon the Na∣tives of those parts that are forc'd to come and fetch them; but I proceed to the matter in hand. The great and weighty Question upon this point to be considered is, Whether it be the gene∣ral Interest of England to confine the Merchandize of our native Commodi∣ties to English Merchants, or to give a general freedom to Aliens to come and buy as they please, upon equal terms with the English Merchants? To illu∣strate this weighty matter in Trade, I will first examine the practice of for∣mer times, with the greatest Care and Candor that possible I can, which may give some light to the right solution of the Question. The Hance Towns in Germany having assisted Henry the Third in his Wars, ob∣tains for a recompence great privileges in England, to be made a Corporation of Merchants, to have a separate parcel of ground assigned them for their Habi∣tation, called the Still-yard, near the
Bridge in London: The chief ground of their Merchandice in those days, was our English Wooll, which they bought, and sent to Antwerp and other places, to be Manufactured, paying a conside∣rable Toll out of the Wooll, which in those days was the chief support of the Government, and afterwards they brought part of it back again in Cloth for our service in England, with the native Com∣modities of those parts. Edward the Third, (who was the first projector for the good of England in Trade) percei∣ving the advantage that those foreign parts did make by our Wooll, endea∣vours by Prudent and Successful means to bring it to a Manufacture in England; the method he took to effect it was this. In decimo quarto of his Reign, cap. 1. he made it Felony to carry any Wooll out of his Realms. Cap. 2. he made an Act that none should wear any Cloth but such as was made in England. Cap. 3. he made a strict Act that no Merchant, Foreigner, nor Denizon, nor none o∣ther, should bring in any Cloth, by him∣self or any other, upon forfeiture of the Cloth, and farther to be punished at the King's Will. Cap. 4. he put a restraint upon the wearing of Furrs. And cap. 5. Decimo quarto, he made an
Act that the Cloth-workers of strange Lands, of whatsoever Countrey they be, should come into England safely and surely, and be under his Protection and safe Conduct, should choose what place they would to dwell in; and to the in∣tent the same Cloth-workers should have the greater will to come over, he granted them Franchises, such, and as many as would suffice them. In the next place, to shew the sincerity of his Intentions, and that his design was just∣ly laid, he took care that Cloth should be true and honestly made; and in order hereunto, vicesimo quinto cap. 1. he set up an Aulnager for the exact measure of Cloth in bredth and length, which was to be sworn to do his Office; and to compleat the bravery of his Design, and shew the strength of his Judgment, he establish'd the Company of Merchant-Adventurers of England. There could be no fear now of success from this good Foundation: But there appears no vigo∣rous footsteps of its promotion until Ed∣ward the Fourth, in whose Reign there were several good Statutes made for the encouragement of the Goodness and true making of Cloth; but that which is most observable, he farther endeavou∣red to corroborate the English Merchants,
and questions the Charter of the foreign Merchants of the Still-yard, who had got the great command of our Trade, and were look'd upon with an ill Eye by the English, most that was Imported or Exported coming in their Bottoms: But they got off at this time by the pay∣ment of a good Summ of Money, and upon this condition likewise, that they should colour no Foreigner's Goods. Henry the Seventh in the first Year of his Reign, cap. 2. to favour the Mer∣chant-Adventurers of England, made an Act that Aliens made Denizons should pay the same duties as if they were A∣liens, adding for a reason in the Statute, that when they had gained great Ri∣ches, they conveyed themselves into their own Countries where they were naturally born, to the great impove∣rishing of this Realm; which said Sta∣tute was corroborated anno undecimo Hen. VII. cap. 14. where these Merchants of the Still-yard were no ways except∣ed. And in tertio Hen. VII. cap. 7. there was an excellent Act made, that no Denizon or Stranger should enter any Goods but in the Name of the true ow∣ner of the Goods, upon forfeiture of the Goods, and Imprisonment, and to
be fined at the King's pleasure: Which Act of Parliament was renewed primo Eliz. cap. 11. and I think its Execution would be of excellent Service to this Nation. But in the long Reign of Henry the Eighth, our Native Interest of England began to lose ground again; and in the 22d. Year of his Reign, cap. 8. there was an Act made, that Denizons should pay the same duties that Aliens did; but the Merchants of the Still-yard were exempt, as appears by the provisoe of the Statute. After this point was gain'd upon the English Merchants by their Bribes to the Ministers of State, they prevail'd farther, and in the 32d. year of Henry VIII. cap. 16. by that Act Ali∣ens were bound by and unto all the Laws of the Realm; but Aliens duties were destroyed for a time by the King's Proclamation, as appears by that Sta∣tute; which had by this time so far pre∣vail'd, that these Merchants of the Still-yard shipt off Fourty four Thousand Cloths, and our Merchants not two Thousand, and other Circumstances of the Nation were very much out of or∣der, a parallel of our present times. Our Affairs being at this low ebb, the na∣tive interest of England receiveth life a∣gain
by the happy succession of Ed∣ward the Sixth, who with great diffi∣culty did much in turning the Scale of Affairs, and setling of Trade upon its right Basis. The Merchant-Adventu∣rers of England begin now to take cou∣rage, (the Bribes of the Still-yard Mer∣chants finding no admission in this Go∣vernment) and in the beginning of the Year 1552. in the fifth year of Ed∣ward the Sixth, they put in their Com∣plaint to the Counsel against them, to which the Merchants of the Still-yard put in their Answer upon the Eighteenth day of January in the same Year, and upon the Twenty fifth the Answer was delivered to some Learned Counsel to look and over-see it: Upon the Eigh∣teenth day of February, the Merchant-Adventurers put in their Replication to the Still-yard's Answer; and upon the Twenty third a Decree was made by the Board, That upon Knowledge and Information of their Charters they had found, First, that they were no sufficient Corporation. Secondly, that their Numbers, Names, and Nations were unknown. Thirdly, that when they had forfeited their Liberties, King Edward the Fourth did restore them, on this condition, That they should colour no Strangers
Goods, which they had done: For these considerations, Sentence was given that they had forfeited their Liberties, and were to be no more than Strangers. Upon the Twenty eighth (losing no time in this important Affair) there came Ambassadors from Hamburgh, Lu∣beck, and the Regent of Flanders, to speak upon the behalf of the Still yard Merchants, so unwilling were they to part with this Interest: And upon the Second of March the Answer for the Ambassadors of the Still-yard was com∣mitted to the Lord Chancellor, the two Secretaries, Sir Robert Bowes and Sir John Baker, Judge Montague Griffith, Solicitors Gosnold, Goodrick, and Brookes; by which it is evident that it was thought a mat∣ter of weight. It remain'd under con∣sideration untill the First day of May, and then the Still-yard Men received their Answer, which was to confirm the former Judgment of the Counsel, as is verbatim exprest in the Journals of Edward the Sixth, in the History of the Reformation. So now the Merchant-Ad∣venturers of England, (having stemm'd the Tide against this Foreign Interest) goes chearfully on in the management of the Cloth Trade: And in October the Third following, it is thus exprest
by the Hand Writing of Edward the Sixth; Because I had a Pay of 48000 l. to be paid in December, and had as yet but 14000 l. beyond Sea to pay it withall, the Merchants did give me a loan of 40000 l. to be paid by them the last of De∣cember, and to be repaid again by me the last of March. The manner of levying the Loan was of the Cloths, after the rate of twenty Shillings a Cloth; for they carried off at this Shipping 40000 broad Cloths: This Grant was confirm∣ed the Fourth day of this Month, by a Company assembled of 300 Merchant-Adventurers. After the Reign of this good Prince Edward, when Philip came to the Crown, these Still-yard Merchants made their Application again, and were seconded by the endeavours of King Philip, not∣withstanding all which, they could ne∣ver prevail to set up this Company a∣gain; which was evident demonstration that it was against the true Interest of England. The Company of Merchant-Adventurers encreas'd the Cloth Trade so far that Sir Walter Raleigh tells you in his time that they shipp'd of Eighty thousand Broad Cloths a year, and the value of Fifty thousand in Cottons, Ker∣sies, &c.
The first alteration (that I find) from this good Foundation laid in the Reign of Edward the Sixth, was in the twen∣tieth of King James, where the Statute anno quinto & sexto Edw. VI. cap. 7. was repealed, which gave a free liberty for buying of Wooll: And as our Civil-Wars grew on, the Execution of Law ceas'd, and I think, in the year sixty the Compa∣ny of Merchant-Adventurers were inva∣ed in their Liberties, and Interlopers let in to Trade, which by degrees prevailed farther, (as in the days of Henry the Eighth) and in 25 Caroli II. Aliens duties were destroyed, which gave a full pow∣er to foreign Interest; so that at this time there are not above four or five of that Company that deal in Cloth; as it here appears by experience and plain matter of Fact, that these foreign Merchants in the enjoyment of the like Privileges in Trade with the En∣glish, by degrees got the whole into their Hands, as likewise by our Turky Trade, that where the English Merchants are supported, we out-do the Dutch. Upon a near consideration of the matter, it will appear to be impossible to be otherwise; it must be owned that the native Subjects of any place by se∣veral little ties of Relation, Obligations
of Friendship, Experience of their own course of Trade, and the natural Kind∣ness that all places have for their own Fraternity more than Strangers, the ad∣vantage of fresh Goods in little parcels upon every opportunity, will have an advantage upon Foreigners when they stand upon equal Terms. Besides, many that send for Goods over this way, have the benefit of retailing them a∣broad; But the greatest advantage is in their own Goods sent hither, which are sold in a kind of Retail way, and at the utmost advantage of our Mar∣kets, under colour that they are En∣glish Men's Goods, who as heartily con∣tend for their Interest as their own, the increase of their Commissions arising from that consideration. The Argument that was used in for∣mer times against the Merchants of the Still-Yard was, that most of the Goods Imported and Exported came in their Bottoms; and so long as the Merchan∣dice of our native Commodities is ma∣naged by Aliens, many Merchants ha∣ving Interest themselves in Shipping, little of it will be carried in our own Bottoms, which is not the least amongst many losses to our own Nation.
I might here give many reasons for securing the privileges of our own na∣tive Commodities to our own Subjects, upon the score of Justice, Prudence, and Interest; the right of the Golden-Fleece doth admit of no dispute, being limited to us by the distinguishing bounds of a River. If there is a necessity of an English Merchant, in prudence he ought to be supported; as in France the younger Sons of the Gentry depend upon the Army, so in England upon the Law and Merchandice, a more noble and independent Imployment. Our late management, I must confess, discove∣red another Judgment, as if we had a mind to alter the Scene from Merchan∣dice to Soldiery. Upon the score of Interest, it can't be less advantage to the Nation than Twenty per cent. in keeping up the price of our own Goods, the benefit of the Merchandice of our Cloth, and its Ef∣fects at home in Goods, besides the lessen∣ing the Honour and Esteem of our Nation in carrying on our Trade in so mean and servile a manner. The right method to be taken to re∣trieve our losses and secure our Privi∣leges, I think, ought to be the great
and speedy care of the best Patriot of our Country; to the effecting of which I will give my weak opinion, in sub∣mission to better Judgments, following the Practice of our Ancestors. The first thing that I humbly pro∣pose is, the repealing the Statute of 25 Caroli II. that destroyed double Duties, which by the Statute of Hen. VII. anno primo, cap. 2. and 12 Caroli II. were to be paid by Aliens and Denizons. And for the good Execution of those Statutes, and to secure the Customs to the King, as likewise to give light which way the Trade of the Nation is carri∣ed. A strict observation of the Sta∣tutes of Hen. VII. anno 3. cap. 7. and primo Eliz. cap. 11. Statutes I think in force, which enjoyn the entry of all Goods in the name of the true Proprie∣tor of the Goods, upon forfeiture of the Goods, and Imprisonment, and to be Fined at the King's pleasure in the one Statute, and the forfeiture of the Goods in the other, would be of excellent use and advantage in many particulars to our Nation: It is a vain thing to seem rich when we are not so. In the next place the Incorporating the Company of Merchant-Adventurers of England by Act of Parliament in the
strictest manner that possibly can be contrived to keep out Aliens in the Woollen-Manufacture, and comprehend∣ing as many English Merchants as our own Nation will afford, putting it out of the power of the Government of the Company to limit the Shipping of our Woollen Manufacture, from at least four of our chief Cities in England, or more if the wisdom of the Parliament shall think fit. And in the last place, which is most material, to incorporate the Spanish and Portugal Trade; this Trade was incorpo∣rated in the beginning of King James the First, but soon altered again, as appears by the Statute 3 Jacobi, cap. 6. but in those days our Trade thither in the Woollen-Manufacture was inconsidera∣ble, and the payment of Aliens Duties was check enough upon Foreigners, but now it is become the most considera∣ble place we have in Bays, Serges, Per∣petuana's, Sayes, and all our new Dra∣pery, which our Statutes make no men∣tion of, and from hence hath sprung the great plenty of Money these late Years; tho' we have got the least share, there is twenty Thousand Pounds a week turned at Exceter, as I am credi∣bly told, in Serges, vast quantities of
Bays made at Colchester, and other places, Norwich Stuffs, abundance of Hose in all parts of the Nation, the greatest part of which depend upon this Trade, and the Returns altogether as excellent, Pieces of Eight, Bars of Silver, Spanish Wooll, Cocheneel, Jorne, &c. no whiffling Commodities. Our Nation hath not lost less than five hundred Thousand Pounds a Year this twenty Years, by not Incorporating that Trade; which I hope the English are yet able to manage. We have hereby in great measure set up France in Merchandice, and enricht Holland. A Merchant in France hath had a free li∣berty to send over to an Agent of his in Landon, (whose service was readily courted by an English Man) French-Wines, Bran∣dy, Sils. Druggets, Linnens, Paper, Thread, Ribbons, Gawzes, &c. which shall be sold off at the best advantage of our Merkets, and as the Moneys come in, shall send over, by order, to another Servant or Apprentice of his in Sam, Bays, Serges, Perpetuana's, &c. as cheap as any English Merchant can send, and from thence he shall receive in France Pieces of Eight, Spanish Wooll, Cochenl, Jorne, &c. And hath not
this been a Platform of a good Trade? His Agent in London, to gratify his Ma∣ster, will send him over some Packs of long Wooll, (which is easily done by a little private discourse with a Wooll-Brogger) to be Manufactured so much cheaper in France, whilst this English Merchant, in the high float of his Spi∣rits, in promoting the sale of his Cla∣rets, is many times as rich in his own fancy as if all the Goods that went through his Hands were his own. And tho' our Manufacturers by this means have come to be impoverish'd, yet once a day they have brought themselves to a habit of Riches too, at the expence of a Noggin of Brandy. And thus we have jogg'd on, turning our Wooll into Wine and Brandy, and the Pieces of Eight center'd in France. The Dutch Merchant sends over his Spicery, Hollans, Madder, Whalebone, &c. and as it is sold off under English colours, and the Money received, such Goods as London best affords, shall be sent directly back, and what Serges Ex∣ceter affords, the Tuckers there, for their little advantage of three Shillings a Serge in Tucking, and less vanity to be thought Merchants, adventure them over to Holland, white, and as soon as
received, and liked, Bills come away presently upon their Correspondents in London, whilst the advantage of Dying, Tilletting, Packing, &c. go to their own Nation, and then sent for Spain, or the East-Indies. How can an English Merchant sup∣port himself in his Station in this Con∣test with the cheap workmanship of France, and the frugal living, and low Interest of Holland; whilst he meets his own Goods, which are divided into three Squadrons, contending which shall out do each other in cheapness? whilst their native Mother England, (by this unhappy contest abroad, and divided In∣terest of her Sons at home) tho' natu∣rally very Rich, is become very Poor. 5. I come now, in the last place, to consider our Woollen-Manufacture in its Effects from abroad, the more or less Consumption of which, is, in many par∣ticulars either the forwarding or the retarding of the Consumption of our Cloth abroad, wherein, I think, we have been very much wanting to our selves. Sir Josiah Child tells us, Pag. 161, If we will engage other Nations to Trade with us, we must receive from them the Commodities of their Countries, as well as send them ours;
where I take it, he makes the Con∣sumption of our own native Commo∣dities to be our chiefest care, as in∣deed it is; which is to be forwarded by the encouragement of its proper ef∣fects at home; which is a position di∣rectly contrary to the Gentleman's pra∣ctice, and enough of it self, if well considered, to destroy the East-India Company. This matter falls under consideration chiefly in these two particulars; First, in laying our Customs, and then in governing our Habits and Fashions. The prudent proportioning our Im∣positions upon foreign Commodities is a nice point in the Interest of Trade, and ought to be well weighed and di∣gested. I shall here only offer to considerati∣on (for brevity's sake) the Linnens of Flanders and Germany, which I take to be the most natural and useful Effects of our Woollen-Manufacture, too great a part of the revenue of the Nation being at this time spent upon Linnens, as I fear. Woollen and Linnen are the two Master Wheels in Trade. The Company of Merchant-Adventurers shipt off to Flanders and Germany Eighty thousand Broad Cloths a year, in the
beginning of King James the First, du∣ring which time, I am assured by good evidence, that our Consumption of their Linnens bore an equal propor∣tion. If you discourse an ancient Mer∣cer, he will tell you that where he now cuts an ll of sine Flanders. Hol∣lan, he then cut twenty. England and Flanders are nearest of Kin in a fertile, rich Soyl of any two places, and thereby able to bear the greater number of Manufacturers, which makes the Consumption the one as natural to Linnens, as the other to Woollen, and both Commodities of e∣qual use and service. The Duty paid upon any Commodity is an addition to its price; where one Half-penny in a Shilling unequally laid is enough to turn the Seale, and beat one Commodity out of use that comes in a near competition with another of the same kind: No consideration to wary Buers but the merit and the cheapness of the Commodity. The Fine Linnens of Flanders and Ger∣many in this particular hath come in competition these many years with the Callicoes and Mzlings of the East-Indies, and the sine Dowlass and Gawzes of France, the miding Linnens of Germany,
with the narrow Dowlass and Canvas of France, the one the Effect of our Manufacture, the other of our Bullion: Which of these ought to be preferred in the Leviathan of our Customs seems no question. And yet you will find up∣on our Book of Rates all the Linnens of Flanders stand like a Beakon upon a Hill, above all the rest, charged with Five Pence an Ell Custom, and the Fine Dowlass of France not at full one Half-penny, and the Callicoes of the East-Indies but at Ten Pence a Piece; which hath continued ever since 12 Ca∣roli II. as if at that time we had been in the Confederacy with the King of France, for the impoverishing of Flan∣ders, we to put a stop to their Commerce, thereby to encourage the other to buy the better penny worths in their Towns, (which, I think, hath had a fair stem at that rate) we ought in Justice to change the Scale; which possibly may be so lucky to put the Land Marks right again. Nee Lex est justior ulla, &c. The other disadvantage in this par∣ticular hath been the government of our Fashions, the force of which is not to be withstood with our Ladies. How far we have run after the Modes of France, when some of our own Artifi∣cers
in Druggets have been forc'd to employ some French Merchant to put them off, which is true in Fact, I need not set forth. The French King was well enough in his Politicks when he sent over the pleasant Shooe-Horn to draw on his Interest in this particular, and as remarkable too, that a Govern∣ment that dealt so much in Linnens, should be yet wanting in preserring that sort that promoted its own Interest. Habits in former days were governed by Laws, in the days of Henry the Eighth, which received no alteration until the first of King James the First, and then repealed. But I perswade my self there is a more Easy and Generous way that may effect it, and that a fine Hollan Night-rayle will not be mis∣becoming our Ladies, which will bear a good piece of Needle-work Lace of their own making, without quarrelling at its weight; or if foreign be more ac∣ceptable, nothing will shew better than a good piece of Flanders; and I hope its service will not be its prejudice, whilst it will out-wear three of Muzling, and afterwards be a discreet and sub∣stantial piece of Charity, with a little of the Lady's contrivance and good huswifry; whilst the other discovers its
leanness and uncharitableness at its first Muster, and there is no foundation for Charity, were the disposition of the Lady never so much inclined. Alas! our poor Widows Tears spring now from their Nakedness, instead of Grief for their Loss in good Dorcas that made them Garments; and many of our great La∣dies Names are of no longer duration than these East-India Commodities they deal in. Having now been very tedious in my design, I will leave the farther incou∣ragement of this noble Commodity of ours to the Winter Thoughts of our La∣dies, since its late improvement in va∣riety of Fancy may fairly court their favour.
SOME CONSIDERATIONS UPON THE New Discourse OF TRADE. Quaere de novis— HAving troubled the World in this kind, from an apprehen∣sion to my self that this Gen∣tleman was imposing upon the Nation a new belief in Trade, as our present Socinians are in Religion, I thought it farther incumbent upon me to consider the strength of his Argu∣ments; wherein I will proceed with all possible submission to the greatness of the Author, and brevity in favour of the Reader.
He tells us in the end of his Pre∣face, that he hath expos'd his Concepti∣ons to the publick Censure, with a con∣sidence that they will be received, and honoured with a publick Sanction, and past into Laws; and thus begins his Book. The prodigious Increase of the Nether-Lan∣ders, in their domestick and foreign Trade, Riches and multitude of Shiping, is the Envy of the present, and may be the Wonder of all future Generations. Quid dignum tanto fecit hic promissor— He here sets out the Riches of Holland in ample and extensive Demonstrations, and backs it on with an addition, in se∣veral subsequent Expressions in his Book: They are Samsn's and Goliah's in trade; Sons of Anach, Masters of the Field; like a prevailing Army that scorns to build Castles, and Fortresses as we do by our Act of Navigation; and to advance their Glory herein, he tells us that we are but Dwarfs, and Pigmies in Stocks and Experience, &c. And from this, he very much incourageth the practice of Holland amongst us; to have Mer∣chants in our greatest Counsels of State, and War; Law-merchants to decide dif∣ferences in Trade; the law of Gavelkind
that all Children may have a like Por∣tion, &c. and Pag. 46, recommends the throwing open all our Privileges, to set our Doors wide-open to all our Native Commodities, Coals, &c. without the least Duty, destroying the Liberties of Corporations, where Artificers have a greater privilege than Strangers: The Sta∣tute of the fifth of Elizabeth, where an Ap∣prenticeship is a Privilege, throwing open all Companies that do not Trade in Joint-Stock, and giving free Liberty in all Corporations, leveling all Bounds that our Ancestors set up, who were Soul∣diers, Hunts-men, and Herds-men, and knew not Trade; which is but a new thing in England, all this to make way for an Act of Naturalization, which seems to be ready drawn, to make us Tenants in Common, in Trade; herein sweetning his design with these good Ef∣fects, that we shall keep the Mansion-House, and have Thirty or Forty Years Purchase for the Grainge; and this is the design he drives at. I must confess, considering the remisness of our late Reigns, how we have lain o∣pen, in our Spanish Trade, Flanders, and Germany; and been so kind, to make no Difference between an English Merchant, and a Dutch, only the latter living frugal∣ly
in Holland: I am of the Gentleman's Opinion, that they are vastly Rich in Treasure, and are desirous of an Act of Naturalization, to make some Purchases in Land, and the more confirm'd from the many Brokers in the City of Lon∣don, that are zealously solicitous, to bring the matter to bear; of which City, as once of Rome, it may be truly said, Abi, venalis civitas, mox peritura si empto∣rem invenias. All run into Commission, omnia Roma cum pretio. The Gentleman tells us in his Preface, that were they freed from their French Fears, they would be worse than Taskmasters over us in Trade: considering their Treasure, I can't blame their Fears, being so near at Hand to the French, and all that staggers my Belief in the vastness of their Riches, is the smallness of their quota of Men of War, and their Forces in Flanders, which by this Account should be so much more than ours: And should I endeavour to conceal our own Poverty, the four Years Votes of Parliament, will condemn my Folly, which hath been made up with Petitions to cut of Entails to pay Debts, and raise Portions for younger Children; considering with my self, the multitudes of Entails that have been cut off, my Melancholy, leads me
to a Doubt, where there would be buy∣ers, all those being considerable Estates, that would bear the Charge of an Act of Parliament, to part with them, not in the least thinking then of the Bank of Amster∣dam: But my Inclination still leads me to set about Good husbandry, which will en∣crease our Flock, to maintain our own Privileges, which will make more of our Wooll: to put a stop to our extravagant Expence in the East-India Commodities, and Flood of Claret; and we may yet save the Grainge for the eldest Son, which was the design of his Ancestors, at least secure it from Strangers. To have a Neighbour so near the Mansion House will be very incommodious; and if it fall into the Hands of Aliens, it will be an aggravation. The Gentleman, as I apprehend the Matter, hath a Woolf by the Ear in his Argument, of our Poverty; he can't well hold it, nor yet dares he loose it; it is very necessary to be argued, to intro∣duce his Design, upon one Hand; but upon the other, it may be a means to put us upon Enquiry after the true Cau∣ses of our Poverty; and that will lead to the East-India-Company, the warm wast of Mussings, and Callicoes, bought with our Bullion; so that in his Preface
having given a true Catalogue of our Losses in Trade in fifteen Particulars, and then told us, that he knew a great many more that we have lost, which he forbears telling, fearing his Porch would be too big; and for other Reasons: In six Leaves farther, in the same Porch, he tells us, We have now much more Mo∣ney in England, than we had twenty Years past. This, like the answer of the Oracle, bears a double Construction; but the way that he would have it understood, is ve∣ry plain, because he fortifies the belief of it with somany Convincing Argu∣ments, which I doubt are a little fallaci∣ous too, which I will here give the Rea∣der the trouble to Consider. 1. We give generally now one third more Money with Apprentice, than we did twenty Years past. There are many Instances of the Truth of this, to Turkey Merchantst, who give considerable Advantages to their Ap∣prentices abroad; where in a plentiful Employment, it is in part made good by the end of their Time; and what the Gentleman observes, Pag. 87, that many Merchants that are Free of no Companies, can have as much Money with Apprentices, as any that are Free of Companies, I humbly conceive is a
mistake. But I think there's a greater Reason, which bespeaks the Poverty of the Nation, that this comes from, which is the scarcity of good Places for Ap∣prentices; and the Turkey Merchants make their Prices according to the Plenty of their Offers, as in all other Affairs. If two thirds of the Merchandice of our Native Commodities, be got into the Hands of Aliens, managed by Commis∣sion, out of this here is little room for Apprentices, and less Incouragement: If there were Three Hundred Merchant-Adventurers, that met together, the whole Society was much greater, where now we have scarce Ten that deal in Cloth; this must needs make an Odds in this Affair, whilst the younger Sons of our Gentry of England, are still growing up, and then the management of the East-India Trade, is too secret to be taught to an Apprentice, tho' they have carried off too many young Men, to manage their Affairs in that hot Climate, that never came back. 2. We Ship off one third Part more of the Manufactures, than we did twen∣ty Years past, which is a Cause, as well as a Proof, of our Increase of Mo∣ney.
The Gentleman tells us, Pag. 128, that thro' the plenty of our Wooll car∣ried into Holland, it is as Cheap there within a small Matter, as in England. And if our Manufactures are shipt off in great plenty, upon the Account of Foreigners, which was formerly wholly upon English Mens Accounts; I think this bespeaks our Poverty, but I am sure it's a mistake in the General. 3. Houses new built in London, yield twice the Rent as they did before the Fire. The Truth of this is only secur'd by the Taverns, and Coffee-houses; which seems to me by the great resort, to have a greater tendency to Poverty, than Riches. 4 The Speedy and costly Buildings of London, is a convincing, and to Strangers an amazing Argument of the plenty, and late Increase of Money in England. The Gentleman I am sure in this Par∣ticular, will be so Ingenious to own his Mistake; as to the strength of his Ar∣gument, he proves that we have now much more Money in England than we had twenty Years past, and brings the fine Houses of London, that were built five and Twenty, and eight and Twen∣ty Years past to prove it; but I will take no Advantage of the Mistake.
As to the speed, I think they made more hast than good speed; for near the Exchange, there lately fell down a con∣siderable House into the Street. The Cost and Glory of Brick Build∣ings, was the Scorn of Former Times; come let us pull down our Bricks, and build with hewn Stone, and he that stands amaz'd at the Charge, must be a Stranger indeed to the way of doing it. 5. We have now more than double the Quantity of Merchants Shiping, we had twenty Years past. But it may be a little doubted, that they are wanting in Quality, whilst they are shipping off Aliens Goods. 6. The course of our Trade, from the increase of our Money, is strangely alter∣ed, within these twenty Years most Pay∣ments from Merchants, and Shopkeep∣ers, being made with ready Money, whereas Formerly the course of our gene∣ral Trade run at Three, Six, Nine, Twelve, and Eighteen Months Time: I think this is laid so wide, that it is impossible to be reconcil'd; and I shall make a dif∣ference between the Preface and the Book. Pag. 7 and 8, in the first Book, in recommending the transferring Bill of Debt from one Man, to an other; to
prove the need of it, he tells us that ha∣ving sold our Goods, it is Six, Nine, and Twelve Months time, before the Money can be recovered, and that if it is con∣siderable, it is a good Mans work all the Year to follow Vintners and Shopkeepers for Money: and I think the East-India-Company to advance ready money for Goods allows Six Months discount to be Equal with other Trades, so that to my own Knowledge, nothing but inverting the words, can set this right. And since the last bequeath of a Will, by Law, shall take place of the former, when the same thing is given twice, the Book in this case must likewise take place of the Pre∣face, tho' we are poorer by it. Pag. 11. He goes on in the Proof of the increase of our Riches, from a longer time; and if this be doubted, let us ask the Aged whether Five Hundred Pounds Portion with a Daughter Sixty Years past, was not esteem'd more than Two Thousand Pounds now; and if there are not more Men upon the Exhange worth Ten thousand Pounds, than were then worth one Thousand Pounds. That there is a greater plenty of Mo∣ney in England, than there was Sixty Years past, is not to be doubted: and we may have more Money than we had
Twenty Years past, and yet compar'd with the Dutch, may be poor; for the in∣crease of the new Drapery, hath brought home far greater quantities of Treasure these late years from the West-Indies, than we had Thirty Years Past. But I am fully satisfied, that our late great Portions, and prodigious Estates, got by some particular Men, is no Proof of our Riches in the General; and that, where there is one small Portion given now, there was Ten given Forty Years past; and twice as many Merchants worth Two or Three Thousand Pounds, than we have now; and if these great Portions, have swallowed up the Small, we may be Poorer in the General, tho' Rich in Particulars. Pag. 12. We have now one Hundred Coaches, for One we had formerly, which is a convincing Argument of Riches. I think I can balance this Argument. A∣bout Twenty or Thirty Years past you could scarce meet a man in the City, but had a Knot of Ribbons upon his Shoulder, which was an undeniable Argument of an excrefeence of Riches, and an over∣plus of Money in the Pocket; and now you shall scarce see one Man in a Thou∣sand that hath any Ribbon upon his Coat, which I think as plainly argues our Po∣verty:
One Hundred to One, I must confess is a little large. Whilst the multi∣tude in London make, an Admiration; the rareness of a Coach in the Country, doth the same. In the Journals of Edward the Six, I find it thus advis'd by him, that after the Parliament was up, except some few that should wait upon him, that all the rest of the Nobility should go into the Country, and see the Laws put in Execution, and Justice done; whose good and great Example, would have a great influence towards a regular Nation. The Fashion of Coach keeping sprang up about Forty Years past, when the old course of Trade was altered, that main∣tain'd a Credit and Goodness in our Na∣tive Commodities; when Interlopers got in, and by false over-strain'd Goods, un∣der the shelter of our old Reputation, got a little extraordinary Profit upon a sud∣den, Bodice-makers, and Glovers turn'd Merchants, in our Common-wealth Go∣vernment; and Cloth-drawers soon be∣came our Capital Merchants by Commis∣sion, and upstart Pride being always most aspiring (according to our Proverb) this lead into Coaches. Our old substantial Merchants being laid up in their Winter Quarters, their Stocks gave a Foundation to Bankers, and
Scriveners. Our new traders by their ex∣traordinary Profit, at first drove on in Trade answerable to their new Wheels, and soon wanted Money to answer Oc∣casions; by which our Bankers and Scri∣veners, had soon got most Grease to their Wheels, being favoured by the necessity of the Court, which a little o∣ver run, and carried some of their Ma∣sters into the Mint and White-friars, which hath unhappily perplext our Gazettes with the repeated Summons of the Creditors of Backwell, Vinor, and Benjamin Hinton, and a multitude of others. To this sprung up a Coach in the Air from Stockjobbing, one hundred Pounds Principal swell'd to seven: these Horses out-run the Interlo∣per and Banker, and thought it impos∣sible to keep down this swelling Profit. And to make good the weight of the Gentleman's Reason; up starts the Cloth∣factor with his Equipage, and Splendor, not inferior to the rest, having brought his Masters the Clothiers, to come part of the way to London on Foot, and the rest in a Waggon; and yet more show than Substance, I doubt, in this Reason. The Gentleman further pursueth his Point, by telling us, that there are now more Keys, and Wharfs, for landing of Goods in London, in his own Remem∣brance,
by one third Part. I am well satisfied in the Truth of this, that the greatest Part of the Trade of England, is drawn to London, and being so it is no true Argument of our Riches in the gene∣ral. In Sir Walter Raleigh's time, the Mer∣chants of Ipswich, were the great buyers of Cloth, and doubtless many other pla∣ces were greater Places of Trade, which are now the more Impoverish'd for want of it; and I think this is a Point that deserves the most serious Conside∣ration. I am not against keeping up the greatness of the City of London, as our Metropolitan City, but yet we are all equal Subjects of the same Government: I am likewise as well satisfied, that there is a necessity of a Company of Merchants, to preserve our own Privileges, but still the more Comprehensive the better; and that it is a great Injustice to the Publick, that Companies shall have a Power to restrain the shipping of our own Native Commodities, to those Places that they please. The Strength of our Nation is not in the City of London, but it, vast Bigness. One of our misfortunes, in the first place is being supply'd with People from the Country; it is too much depopulating; it likewise harbours so many factions from
all Parts, that it will be always uneasie to Monarchy; and if a Sickness should come, it is an amazing Consideration. The Gentleman in the whole drift of this Design, endeavours to shew that the Life of our Trade, is from the Government of the Interest of our Money, this is his causa cau∣sans. He tells us Pag. 9, that if Interest of Money was reduc'd with us to Three per Cent. as it is in Holland, it would in a short time render us as Rich, and considerable in Trade as they now are: and to make good his Argument from experience, he suggests the low Condition of our Na∣tion, before there was any Law to limit Interest, before the Year 1545, that limit∣ed it to Ten per Cent. at which time the Merchants were mean and few; and that afterwards in the Year 1635, within Ten Years after, Interest was brought down to Eight per Cent. there were more Mer∣chants to be found upon the Exchange worth each one Thousand Pounds and upwards, than were in the former Days, viz. before the Years 1600, to be found worth One Hundred Pounds each: I think I am able to prove a mistake upon the Gentleman, in this particular; in the Year 1553, which was Forty Seven Years before 1600, there met together Three Hundred Merchant-adventurers
and lent King Edward the Sixth Forty Thousand Pounds, and rais'd the Mo∣ney by a Leavy of Twenty Shillings a Cloth, for every Cloth that was then shipt off, which amounted to Forty Thou∣sand Cloths; now if you divide these Cloths equally, I think it is one Hundred Twenty Five Cloths each, which were not less Worth in those Days than Twelve Hundred and Filty Pounds, and it can't be reasonably suppos'd that a Merchant should adventure above half his Estate at one shipping; so that here visibly ap∣pears Three Hundred Merchants in those Days in the Cloth Trade, worth Two Thousand Pounds and upwards; which was but seven Years after the first Law about Interest of Money. And in those Days when Interest was so rare and not reckoned Lawful, it is very strange it should have so great an effect. This Gentleman's private Interest is so great in the East-India Trade (where one Hundred Pounds Principal, shall reap the Benefit of Five Hundred Pounds at In∣terest) that I doubt he is no competent Judge of the publick interest of the Na∣tion, and no wonder that he presses so hard to gain the Pass.
I shall not spend time in a long Dis∣course upon this Subject, being very much of Opinion with the Honourable Author, that the paying Interest for so much Mo∣ney in Trade, as we now do, is very pre∣judicial to the publick Good of the Na∣tion; that where there was One Hun∣dred Pounds in Trade Forty Years past at Interest, there is now one Thousand, as may be fairly grounded upon the late Growth of our Bankers, and Scriveners: And I think it may be said of Interest as was well said of Pleasure, commendat rarior usus. But the Attempt that was made to put a stop to it by a Law, in quinto & sex∣to Edwardi VI. Cap. 20. prov'd to be pre∣judicial, and was repeal'd in 13 Eliz. Cap. 8. and the Matter referr'd back to 37. Hen. VIII. Cap. 9. that limited it to Ten per Cent. It is much better in some Cases to pay Interest for Money and com∣mand the buying of Commodities, than to take them at a long Day of Payment, which I take to be the Case of those times: I think likewise that the pre∣sent Limitation of our Laws, doth ve∣ry well answer the Commands of the Scriptures, against biting Interest, five per Cent. bearing an equal Porportion to Twenty Years Purchase in Lands, at which Rate upon good Security, Money
is easily procur'd; nay, as my Author says, at four, by a Security. That I much doubt. That the Trade of our Nation is in very bad Circumstances, is plainly seen, by all thinking Men: This Gentleman prescribes in a Mountebank-manner this Pan pharmacon, for curing all Distempers in Trade, even Exportation of Wooll, Pag. 128. I must confess, that if all was done in Trade, that he prescribes, nay, if we continue Trade as this three or four Years past, with all our Privileges thrown open to Holland, there is a neces∣sity of lowering the Interest of Money, or our Trade will be gone; for if one Man hath a free Liberty to trade, paying but three per Cent. with another that pays five or six, the low Interest will in time get the Trade from the high; but if we make up our Bounds, and preserve our own Privileges, we need not lower the Price of Money by a Law, or fear the Dutch taking the Trade from us, if we have a great plenty of Money more than is absolutely needful in Trade; its plen∣ty will fall its Price, without a Law, and low Interest is certainly the effect of Riches, and not the Cause. I am well assured that there is a great Stock of Mo∣ney in our Trade of England, belonging
to Foreigners; but I think it the safest Way to recover out of this Distemper by degrees, which hath been growing upon us these Thirty Years, to take away the radical Causes of the Distemper; what ever the Gentleman suggest of the advan∣tage of Five or Six per Cent. to make Merchants of a middle Age grow Lazy; I appeal to the Judgments of those very Merchants, and am well assur'd it's a Mistake, and that it grows from want of being preserv'd in their Privileges as English-Men; and from the prevailing Power of Foreigners and private Interest in over-powering the old Rules, and Go∣vernment, in the Corporation of the Ci∣ty of London; that brought the Dispo∣sal of the Native Commodities, of our Nation, into the Hands of our Factors and Packers in private Houses, who to promote their own private Advantage hath Incouraged Aliens, but I proceed to the Gentlemans Conceptions; but in the way, I can't but observe his Remark, Pag. 27. where he tells us we are not Half so much given to Hospitality, and good House-keeping (as it is call'd) as in Former Days, when our greatest Expence was upon our Bellies. The most destru∣ctive Consumption that can happen to a Nation, and tending only to nourish
Idleness, Luxury, and Beggary: Whereas that other kind of Expence, which follows Trade, incourageth La∣bour, Arts, and Invention: For my own part I had much rather gratifie my Pa∣late, than my Eye, and therefore enter my Protest against the flourishes of Pride: I am sure we are exhorted to Hospitality; after the Example of Elijah for the accom∣modation of the Sons of the Prophets, to put on the great Pot: But I never read of any Incouragement to Pride. I find this Gentleman is a Stranger in the Country, and thinks Husbandry is car∣ried on without Labour. What Advan∣tage doth the Callicoes of the East-Indies, to our Imployment in England: It is the Policy of the City to cry down this Pub∣lick and Hospitable Expence in the Coun∣try, thereby the better to maintain that which is more secret in old Fish-Street; where one Dinner with Fish and Wine, shall cost more than keeping a Gentle∣mans Kitching not with Roast beef in the Country the whole Christmas Holidays, and entertain double the Number, with our own growth; which is like soiling the Land for another Crop, which kept a good understanding between Land∣lords and Tenants; and since all hath been carried to London, Lands are Impo∣verish'd,
which makes an uneasiness on both sides, in lowering of Rents, to which being added a greater Burthen of Taxes thro' encrease of Poor, which begets a difference at last between the Gentleman and his Estate even to part∣ing Terms. To starve the Kitchin, to have the Parlor set out with East-India Silks and Muslings (like Flower-pots) looks like the Reign of Sardanapalus, and that the whole Body of Government is sway'd by the Rib, which must needs lead into crooked paths. The Gentleman wisely begins his Con∣ceptions, Cap. 2. with a New Expedient for the Relief of the poor, giving so pa∣thetical an Account of their sad and wretched Condition, some famished for want of Bread, others starved with cold and Nakedness, Languishing, Unhealthy Bodies, subject to loathsome Diseases, that it can't but spring from a lively sense of his own tender Compassions, all which he is pleas'd to tell us, comes from the defect of our Laws, that oblige each Parish to maintain their own Poor. Many Parishes that Forty Years since paid nothing to the Relief of their Poor, are now charg'd Considerably; and many others that paid then but one Groat in the Pound, now pay one Shilling, whilst
their Laws were the same with ours: But whilst the Gentleman gives an Ac∣count of some that are Eminently Poor; he himself is a good Remembrance of some that are become Eminently Rich these late Years. Whether these Extreams don't answer each other, I will leave to better Judgments. My Honourable Au∣thor tells us, Page 46. That no Persons are more beneficial to Trade in a Nation than Ingrosters, which I profess is a My∣stery beyond my Apprehension. When the Callicoes were ingross'd, it might make a Sampson or a Goliah; but the ad∣vantage to those that wore out the Com∣modity, which were the greater number, I can't perceive. The New Platform that he prescribes is this: That the Cities of London, and Westminster, and the Burrough of South∣wark by Act of Parliament shall be As∣sociated into one Province, or Line of Communication, for Relief of all Poor that come, which he tells us are the Vi∣tals of the Body Politick, which being once made sound, the Care of the other will not be difficult, Page 65 And that they shall Receieve and Relieve all that come, after the mode of Holland, with∣out enquiring what Nation, much less what Parish they are of: This Eminent
Charity is to be transacted by an Assem∣bly of Seventy Citizens, that are to be chosen by the People, most part of Non∣conformists, who are Excellent Instru∣ments for this Work. I thought the Gentleman was a Favourer of that Party, by the length of his Arguments, in which he seldom misseth Sixteenthly and Lastly. These are to be incorporated by Act of Parliament, with perpetual Succession by the Honourable and Signi∣ficant Titles of Fathers of the Poor, to sit de Die in Diem, wearing some Honou∣rable Medal, to appoint Deputies under them who shall have full Power to As∣sess and Receive into their Common Treasury so much Money from every Parish, as they Yearly paid to that pur∣pose any of the three Years preceding this Constitution, and compell the pay∣ment thereof, to have the Patent for farthings in their Charter, and a Pow∣er to Collect the Charity of all People once every Lord's Day, as likewise Week∣days at the Play-house Doors, and to receive all other Charity of well-disposed Christians: And that these Honourable Fathers of the Poor shall admit any one into their Societies, upon the Payment of one 100 l. for the use of the Poor, to be fully impowered to send what Poor
they see fit to his Majesties Plantations, and employ the rest at home as the uni∣ted Wisdom of so Grave an Assembly shall think fit. The Treasure is to be accounted Sa∣cred, but not to be fenced with any man∣ner of Oaths, or other Tests in Tender∣ness to the Nonconformists, which I think in this Case are none but Qua∣kers: I will not undertake to censure the frame of this Excellent Project, only of∣fer my own Scruples. I can't but a little Object at the pompous management of the Affair, with the Honourable and Significant Titles and Medals, whilst true Charity always runs in a more private and secret Chanel, the Left-hand not to know what the Right-hand doth, and can't but doubt there is a little of the Pharisee in the Composition, in this Age where we drive so much at a shew with∣out Substance. In the next place the select number of Seventy puts me in mind of the seventy Priests that attend∣ed upon the famous Image of Bell; and I am afraid that the great Retinue of this Honourable Court of Charity will be like the private Attendants upon that famous Image, that eat up the Sacrifi∣ces, having provided so good a back∣door by Exportation of our Poor, whose
Leanness could never discover the Cheat. Daniel had been at a loss here with his Ashes. The management of it by Citi∣zens, makes me farther doubt, that if our present Laws for relief of the Poor were destroyed, there would be an Ad∣dition of Supplicants attending with the Orphans of the City of London petition∣ing for new Laws again. As the World now goes, there is just ground of Uncha∣ritableness in Charity its self, and pri∣vate Designs lurk under the most speci∣ous pretences; how cool are our hot Zea∣lots against Popery, now their private Designs are not fully answered, and the Model of Government not exact to their Splenetick Fancies. The sense of our Tax∣es outweigh that of Popery. But since this Gentleman hath disco∣vered so generous a Motion in himself to Charity, which he tells us shall appear upon his part in visible and apparent de∣monstrations, Page 79. And farther assu∣red us, that it is no accidental Motion, but came by Succession, Charity running in the Blood, that his Deceased Father studied the same Work. I doubt not if this Conception should prove Abortive, but we shall see a discreet piece of Cha∣rity; there can be no stiffing of so good a Design, whilst he is known to be so
great a Master of Invention, and hath declared his good Opinion of Hospitals, where there can be no Jealousie in a plen∣tiful Endowment, and never could any Man command more agreeable Objects; if his Designs are not very Extensive, he may find poor Widows enough that lost their Husbands in the War against the Great Mogul. The Gentleman in his next Chapter fa∣vours us with his Judgment of Compa∣nies of Merchants, following his Levelling Design, which he tells us are of two sorts, those that Trade with Joynt-stock, as the East-India Company, or those that Trade separate, as the Hamborough. To carry on the East-India Trade a Compa∣ny he tells us is needful, but gives his Judg∣ment against other Companies who Trade separate, from the Example of Holland, who thrive best in Trade without Com∣panies. The parallel of which is no more, than that one Gentleman that hath a large Cir∣cumference of Ground, and Deer to stock it, shall not impale it, because ano∣ther doth not, that hath neither Ground nor Deer: He tells us there is no pretence of good to the Nation by Companies, but order and regulation of Trade. This I confess is Ratio una, but not Unica; For
as I humbly Conceive, the chief Ground of Incorporating Trade, is to secure the Privileges of our own Native Commo∣dities to our own Subjects, in those pla∣ces where they are most acceptable, and advantageous: As I think is plain from the practice of our Ancestors, in incorpo∣rating the Flanders and Germany Trade in the Hands of the Merchant-Adventurers, the Russia, Turkey, and East-land Trade, which are the only proper places for Cloth. Having had Occasion to speak of Com∣panies of Merchants already in the Ge∣neral, I will here only consider the East-India Company, which he tells us, Page 144. is the most Beneficial Trade that this Nation drives at present, where I will first consider the Constitution of the Com∣pany, how far that is National, and then its Operation for the good of the Publick in its Effects. The principal Stock is much less than the Old East-India Company, as he tells us, by which it is plain that the Trade is chiefly carried on by Money at Interest, which makes the more for the principal, the Company paying no more than four per Cent. so no Advantage to the Publick. This Stock being small, is evidently got into few Hands. This Trade is managed
by a Committee, which is every Year to be chosen, where every Five Hundred pounds principal Stock adds a Vote, so some few of the Principees joyning together, by the multitude of their Votes, sway the Election; and a Ne∣cessity of some of the Chief Actors to be continued, which I take to be the Cabinet Counsel of the Trade; o∣thers of the Committee, being every Year changed, as the Lot falls, is a means to preserve the constant Station of the others. The Commodities that are bought, are managed by the chosen Committee, and they Act at the Sale to decide Differences by the hand. The low∣er Form of this Company is Stock job∣bing, into which any one may come that will buy an Action, and pay the Com∣pany five pounds for Admission, and live well enough if his Wits be sharp: These are sweetned with a Dividend as oft as the Cabinet thinks fit, but live by Crede quod habes & habes. Here is a subtile trade drove in this Form, when two Sharpers meet with a Cully. And if you think you are in a Noose, you dare not speak, because it will make your Stock worse; and when you have got out at a loss, the briskness of the new Chapman will make you think you have
sold too good a Penniworth. This Cabi∣net likewise Governs the sales of their Goods, they only knowing the whole of their Occasions; where sometimes the necessity of Affairs, hath required a private Sale of Goods, for a speedy advance of Money; and then the extraordinary Pro∣fit may be well enough divided: some∣times Goods have been put up in large Lots, which can't be bought but by few, who are well enough agreed amongst themselves: this is a kind of blind Hot∣cockles, which is managed as often as their Affairs will admit of Ingrossing; so that the greatest part of the real Pro∣fit of this Company, hath been carried away, by less than twenty Families. He tells us that the Company takes no Money at Interest, but for a certain time, but doubts not, but that generous Company doth many times pay before it is due, to gratifie any Gentleman. Here I must ob∣serve, that, when Arbitrary Power be∣gan to be the Mode, this Honourable Company was early in the Fashion; and upon a certain Time, they wrote over their Door, That the East India-Company would pay no Money, until such a time; which was as high a Touch upon our Laws, as any we had, having so many Bonds upon them; no Man I must con∣fess
can pay Money before he hath it, which I suppose was the Case then; but because Solomon tells us, the borrower is Servant to the lender, this at best lookt a little Saucy, whilest we liv'd under Laws, and there might have been a more civil Answer. This stop of Cash which made their Ships go away light Freighted (if I am not misinformed) begot a War with the great Mogul, their Commodities be∣ing made ready in dependance upon the usual Supply; and the Goods got into Hand, and shipt off without Payment, could do no less than work upon an In∣dian Spirit, who are peaceable enough in fair Dealing. But that which is most material to be considered, is the Com∣modities they furnish us with, and how they are procur'd. The Gentleman tells us, Pag. 143. that the East-India Com∣pany carry out Quantities of Gold and Silver annually, to purchase their Goods; and bring us Home painted Stuffs, Calli∣coes, Pepper, Salt-petre, Indico, Druggs, Couries. I will pass by the painted Stuffs, because the Butcher beat his Boy, for paying too dear for a specked Calf, and consider the Callicoes, which I take to be the Strength of the East-India Trade, from their being become the general
Wear in England. He tells us Pag. 146. that were it not for this Trade, the Use of Callicoes in England, would be sup∣ply'd with foreign Linens, at greater Prices. This is a Point, that deserves serious Consideration: For my part I am well satisfied, that five Shillings for∣merly, in fine Hollans, went farther than ten Shilings do now in these Cotton Commodities; but will intermeddle no more with Particulars, in this kind, fearing a resentment. We had a hot Discourse lately, of car∣rying on the white Paper Trade, in En∣gland; a very useful Project, and well said, had we not unluckily wanted Ma∣terials to work upon. The ancient So∣ciety of Rag-gatherers, are totally de∣stroyed; which in former times carried on a pretty Trade, and furnish'd the good Women in the Country with Pins: But as the East-India-Company flourish'd, they faded, a more numerous Society. He tells us, Page 90. that the first East-India Company setled, upon that narrow limi∣ted Interest, although their Stock was much larger than this, decay'd, and fi∣nally came to Ruine and Destruction: Whereas on the contrary this being setled on more Rational, and consequently upon more Just, as well as upon more profitable
Principles, hath increa'd to treble their first Stock. As to the first Company and This, there is no compare, for there was no liberty given to export Foreign Coin, and Bullion, until the 15 of Caro∣li II. which he owns is the Strength of this Company, which I take to be a very pernicious Act to this Nation. The time of its making is just ground of Suspicion. The Turkey Company likewise here∣by took liberty, to send Silver to Turkey, where we might vend twice the Cloth we now do, could we dispense with their Silks, and the growth of those Parts. The carrying our Bullion to this hot Cli∣mate, to procure Callicoes (which hath been a visible hinderance to those Li∣nens which were the mediate Effect of our own Manufacture) is a double Loss. It hath evidently increas'd our Expence in Linens, and lessen'd the Price of our Wooll, that we are less able to buy. The Gentleman supports his Compa∣ny by a sarther plausible Consideration, That the Commodities that they bring from the East-Indies, are the support of other Foreign Trades, and mentions the Turkey Trade, which is so great a mi∣stake and Imposition, that if there was an Act made, that nothing should be
carried to Turkey but the growth of our own Nation, it would be the Interest of the Publick. As to the other Commodities of Salt-Petre, Pepper, Indico, &c. I am well assur'd, that these Commodities would be cheaper to the Nation in a ge∣neral Trade to the East Indies, in which Trade there would be a Necessity of carrying out our Manufactures of Cloth and Serges, for when Ships go out at no certain Mark, they must take Commo∣dities to work upon. The circumstan∣ces of our present Affairs, thro' the great danger of the Streights, seems to press hard, to find out what vent we can for our Manufactures by way of the East-Indies; and the searcity of Money in Trade urges no less for the Repeal of the Act for Exportation of our Bullion. In receiving One Hundred pounds in Lon∣don, you shall scarce see one Five Shil∣ling piece of Large Money, and if you weigh this Hundred pounds, it shall want five pounds in weight, which I doubt not but is gone the same way to buy Callicoes, and what comes from the West-Indies, is all gone to its opposite point, for it is a Rarity to see any New Coyn. The Gentleman prettily observes, That one Reason of the Complaint of
the scarcity of Money in the Countrey, was the bringing it up in Waggons, which was for no other purpose but to have the Large Money pick'd out for this End, which made him so readily hit upon the reason, being of solid weight. A general liberty of Trade to the East-Indies is in my weak Opinion the Inte∣rest of the Publick, our Merchants be∣ing lessened in the Flanders Trade, and a Necessity of more to manage our Spa∣nish Trade, should here be a large Sub∣scription at this time, it might be want∣ed, where we are sure of a Profit to the Nation: But this in submission to bet∣ter Judgments, and only an inferiour Judgment offer'd to a superiour. Had the Gentleman left out the word just in his applauded Constitution, it had been well, for I can't but judge that the pra∣ctice of Stock-jobbing is the greatest Nur∣sery of Deceit and Cheating as any we have going. I will pass by his Act of Navigation which he commends, but by the multi∣tude of Discourse upon it, I can't tell whether he hath been Plaintiff or Defen∣dant, and come to his next Conception, Cap. 5. which is the transference of Debts. This Project he tells us will en∣crease the useful Stock of the Nation a
third part: The Gentleman's Talent leads him very much to an Artificial Advance of Riches, whilst the Old Rule is safest, Quantum quisque sua nummorum servat in Arca Tantum habet & fidei; less resort in those days to the Mint and White-Friars. The Project is this: That by Act of Parliament all Persons that buy any Goods for time, above the value of ten pounds, shall be obliged to give Bills for the same under their Hands and Seals, which Bills by Assignment from one Man to another for other Goods, shall be full payment. I am of Opinion, that this is not practicable in England, where the bulk of Trade is ma∣naged between the Countrey and the Ci∣ty at a great distance. Supposing for Example that a Clothier should bring his Goods one hundred miles to London, and here should be offer'd for it Bills from an unknown Hand, he hath no way to inform himself any thing in the matter but by Londoners, who are usually very tender of each others Credit; or a Shopkeeper at York should buy Goods of a Linen-Draper in London, and give his Bills, what satisfaction could this be to a Merchant in London to accept this Bill as full payment? Here would be many Cheats acted. Paper (as we
understand Trade now) doth not pay Debts; and what the Gentleman sug∣gests of Goldsmiths Notes, that by no means doth answer this Matter, that be∣ing only a speedy passage to save an im∣mediate pains, and this a considerable time to act any cheat, the Credit of great Persons would hereby get an ad∣vantage of those of less Note in Trade. And as to his Second Answer, That no Man can be cheated but with his own Consent, and we commonly say, Caveat Emptor, I think his Reason ought to be more refin'd before he is fit to make a Judge; why should any Person be put upon a Temptation to part with a certainty for an uncertainty, and how can a Countreyman and a Londoner be upon equal ground in dealing in this way, and where is the impartial Justice? But whatsoever Difficulties and Con∣tests do hereby arise, he hath concei∣ved a Remedy at hand, by a Law Mer∣chant, in his next Chapter, which shall speedily decide the Controversie. He hath shew'd himself a compleat Interlo∣per, and left but one step that he hath not attempted. I will not here answer for his Thoughts, Merchants to be Privy Counsellors, Judges, Fathers of the Poor, by Election of the People. His Model
is this: That it be Enacted, That in the City of London there shall be a Court-Merchant, consisting of twelve able Mer∣chants, (answerable to our twelve Judg∣es) to be chosen by the Livery-Men the Monday before Michaelmas, to be Autho∣rized to hear and determine all differen∣ces and demands that arise between Mer∣chants, Tradesmen, Artificers, Masters, and Owners of Ships, Seamen, Boatmen, Freighters of Ships, or Money due for the sale of Goods, or any other thing re∣lating to Trade or Shipping, to extend to all Actions done in the City of Lon∣don, or ten Miles adjacent; to be a Court of Record as the Judges are, that they, or any three of them shall have Power to Convene all Persons before them, and to have as full power as the Judges: An Appeal from three to a greater number, but afterwards to no lower Court than the House of Lords: That they take nothing for their pains, directly or indirectly, but Six-pence each for signing every small Order, if the Money do not exceed ten pounds; Twelve-pence, not exceeding One Hun∣dred pounds; and two Shillings for eve∣ry Sum above, and they themselves are to make a Table of Fees for their Offi∣cers. These are to be Elected anew eve∣ry
Year, and six of the old Judges to be cast off. The Gentleman hath omitted, (thro' forgetfulness I suppose) to Name Coun∣sel and Attorneys, which I humbly con∣ceive will be absolutely needful accord∣ing to the Ancient Rule, to implead each other, fearing otherwise there might be swallowing without chewing, and too great a Croud at the Door of the House of Lords. And to strengthen the Pro∣ject, I humbly recommend our Brokers for Counsel, and our Factors for Solici∣tors. The Court I must confess is cheap enough, were we secure from the word indirectly, many Merchants having been us'd so long to private Commission for doing of business; and then to have six New ones every Year, not a Merchant in a little time but hath been a Judge, and the Station so slippery, only the sense of the People, it will be thought by some to be a Harvest. The Honourable Gentleman tells us, P. 31. Nee Naturaaut Lex operantur per Saltum. To turn a Merchant into a Judge, seems to me to be an Act per saltum; and how it will be digested by a second Brother, that hath spent his whole time in unfold∣ing the Mysteries of the Law, and resi∣ning his Reason, when he shall see his
Younger Brother acting in this Station. There are greater Qualifications need∣full to make a Judge, than this Gentle∣man at present thinks upon. There can be no doubt of the fitness of the Propo∣ser to make one of the Twelve himself: And yet I find this very Gentleman quar∣relling, Page 45. against two Laws (that he would have repeal'd) that were never made, viz. one against Inn-mates in Towns and Cities, which is against Reason, and excepted in the Statute 31 Eliz. Cap. 7. against Inn-mates in private Places in the Countrey; the other that oblige Parishes to maintain their own Poor only, whilst our Laws are more reasonable, and impower the Justices of Peace to charge the next Parish to as∣sist, or the Hundred, where one Parish is overcharged with their Poor. I doubt it will be hard upon our Li∣very men to keep a due Temper, (being Naturally hot) in all these Elections, Common Council-men, Lord Mayor, Sheriffs, Law-Merchants, Fathers of the Poor, and as oft as any Die, to be fill'd up by Election; having sogreat a Con∣cern of the Government upon their Hands, I fear they will be ready to ma∣nage the whole by Election.
But I proceed to his next Concepti∣on, Chap. 7. which is an Act of Natura∣lization; the Necessity of which Act he tells us is so generally own'd and as∣sented to by all degrees of Men, that he no way doubts but a short time will pro∣duce it, and only takes care like a Har∣binger, to make way for its effectual Operation, by laying aside the privi∣leges of Encorporated Cities, the So∣cieties of Artificers that have greater pri∣vileges in some Corporations than Stran∣gers; the Branch of the Statute 5. Eliz. which Enacts, That none shall use any Manual Occupation, that hath not served an Apprenticeship thereunto. The Statutes of Eliz are an Eye-sore to him tho' the whole Design. I profess, consi∣dering the Gentleman's Confidence, I wonder he don't speak his Opinion of the Statute of Westminster, De donis Con∣ditionalibus, that unlucky Prop of Mo∣narchy. He gave it a broad-side in his Law of Gavel kind, that he recommen∣ded; and another touch in despising one thousand pounds left to a Young Son of a Gentleman to make a Merchant. The force of this Statute to his Bosom Friend, the Rich Milliner, is like the intense Sword, that hang'd by a Horse∣hair over Damocles's Head at the Dain∣ties
of Dionysius's Table, which a little palls his Thoughts, when for his Diversion he takes a Walk into his large Folio of Debts, to view his Extravagant Profit, where he hath a kind of secret Converse, with most of the Considerable Gentle∣men of the County; and altho' he hath never a Park of his own, he can there find where he can command a piece of Venison at any time, by drawing out an Account of the oldest Date. But I Cor∣rect my self here, being sensible that this Gentleman is a greater Master of Design, well knowing that he that foo∣lishly attempted to pull off the Horse∣tail at once, sat down in a Disappoint∣ment, whilst he that pull'd leech by leech at first, soon brought it into his power, and effected his Design. The only Difficulty he finds, is with the Jews, because they can't intermarry with us: which I profess with me is the greatest inducement, being very tender of having our English breed spoil'd. I am here methinks ready to ask the Gentleman whether he is fully satisfied that our Tempers will agree; or whe∣ther these great Merchants that are to be Naturalized, who have been always us'd to a Common-wealth Government, will be easie under Monarchy: This I
am assur'd of by Experience, that the Merchants of the Still-yard that were in∣dulged by Henry III. were a great hin∣derance to our English Merchants in Trade, and it was a great Difficulty to get rid of them again. The Gentleman seems to foresee some such doubts, and lays down a principle or two. 1. That all Men by Nature are alike, and takes Mr. Hobbs for his Voucher; there is a particular Quality amongst our true Britains, a kind of Magnetick force in their Fingers, whether it come from the soil that they are bred in, or how, I can't determine, and it is said, that Clum non anims mutant qui trans mare currunt: But this is too deep for my understanding. 2. Fear is the cause of Hatred, and Hatred of Separation, in which he seems to press as hard for a toleration in Religion, as if there was nothing done in it. The advantage that offers to Consi∣deration in this particular, is the en∣crease of Hands in Trade, and the en∣course of Stock, Edward the IIId. in the ancy of Trade recover'd Manufa∣ctures enough by the slop of our English Wooll from Exportation; and the Cae can't be much alter'd in the other, if we
secure our own Privileges; for the same Dutch Money that now buys our Na∣tive Commodities at home, will be brought to our Merchants Ware-houses at Hamborough, Rotterdam and Dort, or where they are fixt for the best Accom∣modation, which will soon come over, and that Merchant that hath an equal Privilege in England, and a better Inte∣rest abroad, will be sure to carry the Trade: So that by this Act we give a∣way the Privilege of the Merchandice of our Native Commodities to Aliens, if not Monarchy too. I come now to his 8 Chap. where he toucheth upon Wooll, and Woollen Ma∣nufactures, which he tells us is eminent∣ly the foundation of our English Riches. He first complains of Exportation of Wooll, and then tells us he doubts not but we shall see some more effectual Laws to prevent it; but in a Page farther puts us out of Hope again, by telling us the Dutch will be able to give a better Price for our Wooll, and they that can give the best Price for a Commodity, shall ne∣ver fail to have it, by one means or o∣ther, notwithstanding the opposition of any Law, or interposition of any Power by Sea or Land, after which he puts this material Question: What will improve
our Woollen Manufacture in quality and quantity, which he tells us is a very great Question, that he hath many Years con∣sidered, not solitarily, but by converse with the skillfullest Men, in the Woollen-manufacture; and indeed speaks like a Philosopher to the Point. To advance the Quality of it, he first condemns all Laws that held it to a Goodness, and then gives a Liberty to any Person, to make it as he pleases, to strain it as much as he sees fit, and makes a Confusion in all Trades; a Weaver to be a Tucker, Fuller, or Dyer; and tells us, Pag. 132. that straining of Cloth, is absolutely ne∣cessary for the Trade of England; if we did not do it, the Dutch would buy our unstrain'd Cloth, and carry it into Hol∣land, and strain it six or seven Yards in a Piece in Length, and make it look a little better to the Eye, and carry it to Turkey, and out sell us. The Gentleman hath here discovered himself to be a per∣fect East-India Merchant, and that he knows nothing in the Woollen Manu∣facture; for all People know that strain∣ing of Cloth, doth spoil the Looks of it: He then puts a Question to himself, Whe∣ther it would be the advantage of En∣gland to leave all Men to a Liberty, to make what Cloth and Stuff they please;
how they will, where, and when they will, of any Lengths and Sizes. I Answer, Yes, except Colchester Bayes, Perpetuanaes, Cheanys, which should be allowed the Honour of the publick Seal, to be bought, and sold here, and beyond Sea, as if it were upon the publick Faith of England. These Commodities that he names are the most inconsiderable in the Wool∣len-Manufacture. I doubt he is here in a delirium, and I hope I shall be able to set him Right. By his better Thoughts, Pag. 3. he recommends to us, the Pra∣ctice of Holland, in their exact making their Native Commodities, that the buy∣ers will accept them by the Marks, with∣out opening; and as much condemns our Practises, that ours prove Deceitful; that our Business of the Awinage, which our Fore-Fathers design'd for a scrutiny of the Goodness of the Commodity, is now of no signification, and Seals may be bought by the Thousands, and put up∣on what the Buyers please. I would here ask the Gentleman, whe∣ther this exactness in Holland, doth come from the care of the Government, or from giving a free Liberty, as he here adviseth. For further satisfaction in this Point, I will give you his Opinion. After he tells you this, Pag. 161. upon the same Subject he
tells us, that publick Justice, and Honesty, will make it the Interest of other Na∣tions, to trade with us; that is, when our Commodities pass under a publick common Seal, which is the publick Faith of the Nation; they may be exact in Breadth, and Nature, according to what they ought to be by their Seals; so that this being but a Parenthesis, I will give no farther Trouble. In his next Chapter, he treats of the Balance of Trade, in which he first tells us in the Study of Trade, there is an infi∣nite not to be fathom'd; he takes notice before of his Majesty's recommending the Balance of Trade to the Parliament; a worthy and prudent Consideration. But I think in his treatise upon the Point, he hath gone so far from the Scope of his Theam, that had he been under Discipline, he must have undergone the Correction. He would have us to under∣stand, by the Balance of Trade, an Ac∣count made up for the whole Nation, in the particulars of Profit, and Loss; in which I must confess, there is an infinite: And first makes an assay to∣wards it by the value of Exchange from Foreign Parts, but is there at a Loss: But at last centers in a satisfaction on our side, that all is well from the mul∣titude,
and increase of Shipping, which I think is the greatest uncertainty imagina∣ble, it being always intermixt with o∣ther Nations; a greater part of Trade drawn to London than formerly, and more Shipping at home, at some Seasons than other, had his Majesty's Gracious Recommendation, for the good of his laborious Subjects, been answered by an Account how Exchange did govern from all Foreign Parts, or that he had a mul∣titude of Shipping in the River, there had been need of an Expositor in the Matter. The true Balance of Trade, (in submis∣sion to better Judgments) I understand to be in the first place, to make Trade equal to all their Majesties Subjects in their Sta∣tions, that some by private Ingrossing, and Intriguing ways, may not oppress others, in a strict care of preserving publick Markets. In the next place, that Com∣panies of Merchants shall not deferr their Shippings, to advance Goods to an Ex∣traordinary Price abroad, and likewise the returns home; this concerns the Pub∣lick. And then upon the other Hand, in a prudent laying of our Customs upon foreign Commodities, to the advance∣ment of our Trade; where Commodities
for our Service come in competition, which ought to be a well studied Point, and I think is the just Balance of Trade. And were our Care in these Particulars, but answerable to the benign Favour of Providence, we should soon appear to be the most Glorious Nation in the whole World. I find little remarkable in this Chapter, more than Pag. 149. where he gives us an Account of the No∣ble Society he keeps. Oh nummi! vobis hunc praestat honorem: Vos estis fratres. I shall give the Gentleman no di∣sturbance in his Discourse of the Plan∣tations, having taken so good a Care to furnish them with People: And had he not been conscious to himself of the weakness of his own Arguments, to reduce Interest of Money, he had never troubled the World with old Reasons, that were given to bring it from Ten to Eight, whilst we are already at Six. And thus much for the Conceptions of the Honourable Sir Josiah Child; where, in my weak Opinion, parturiunt montes, he hath conceived much, and brought forth little. And yet a Matter of greater De∣sign, than can be easily fathomed: He
hath laid down a great many things Ambiguously, where he hath a Sense, that he can save himself: First, that we have now much more Money in England, than we had Twenty years past; which may be, and one Quarter belonging to Aliens. Pag. 23. he tells us, if Interest of Money was reduced to Three or Four per Cent. our Nobility, and Gentry, whose Estates be mostly in Lands, may presently, upon all they have, instead of Fifty, write one Hundred: The Gentle∣man by long use, in multiplying the East-India Actions, hath brought himself to a Habit of large Speaking; but suppose they wrote Two hundred, what then? Pag. 145. he tells us, that the East-India Goods Exported hence, do produce, in Foreign Parts, to be return∣ed to England, six times the Treasure in specie, that the Company exports from hence; which by its Face seems to im∣ply, That for every Shilling carried hence, by the East-India Company, they lodge six with us from other Parts, which hath no shadow of Truth; but he can save himself by the return in Goods. There is a remarkable sort of cunning in the Lapwing: If you come into a Field, in which is her Nest, she will ex∣press the greatest Concern, by her loud
crying, when you are farthest from it, to put you upon the more diligent search, where she is most secure; and seems unconcern'd when you are nearest, to make you the more remiss. This Gen∣tleman hath a warm Nest of these Cot∣ton Commodities, that hath hurt many a Gentleman in his Estate, when he hath not been well sensible of it; which doubtless he is willing to continue: And farthermore the Opinion of so great a Person in a doubtfull Point, will go far with those, that do not give themselves the trouble, closely to examine Matters. Ipse dixit, put an end to all Controver∣sies amongst I Pythagoras's Scholars. FINIS.
